
# Virus-Induced Abl and Fyn Kinase Signals Permit Coxsackievirus Entry through Epithelial Tight Junctions

Carolyn B. Coyne${}^{1,2}$ and Jeffrey M. Bergelson${}^{1,2,*}$

${}^{1}$ Division of Infectious Diseases, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia  
${}^{2}$ Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania  
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA  

*Contact*: bergelson@email.chop.edu  
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.035

## SUMMARY

Group B coxsackieviruses (CVBs) must cross the epithelium as they initiate infection, but the mechanism by which this occurs remains uncertain. The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) is a component of the tight junction and is inaccessible to virus approaching from the apical surface. Many CVBs also interact with the GPI-anchored protein decay-accelerating factor (DAF). Here, we report that virus attachment to DAF on the apical cell surface activates Abl kinase, triggering Rac-dependent actin rearrangements that permit virus movement to the tight junction. Within the junction, interaction with CAR promotes conformational changes in the virus capsid that are essential for virus entry and release of viral RNA. Interaction with DAF also activates Fyn kinase, an event that is required for the phosphorylation of caveolin and transport of virus into the cell within caveolar vesicles. CVBs thus exploit DAF-mediated signaling pathways to surmount the epithelial barrier.

## INTRODUCTION

Many viruses initiate infection by crossing the respiratory or intestinal epithelium, where they face a number of barriers to entry: glycocalyx impedes virus access to the cell surface, polarized epithelial cells sort many receptor molecules to the basolateral cell surface where they are inaccessible to viruses, and specialized cellular junctions render the epithelium impermeable. Group B coxsackieviruses (CVBs), common human picornaviruses that cause meningitis and myo-

carditis (Pallansch, 2001), are transmitted by the fecal-oral and respiratory routes and must cross the epithelium to initiate infection.

How CVBs breach the epithelial barrier remains uncertain. The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR; Bergelson et al., 1997; Tomko et al., 1997), which mediates attachment and infection by all CVBs (reviewed in Bergelson [2002]), is absent from the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells, such as those that line the airway and intestine, and is thus inaccessible to virus approaching from the apical (i.e., lumenal) surface. CAR is a component of the tight junction (TJ; Cohen et al., 2001), a structure that regulates the flow of ions and macromolecules, including viruses, across the intact epithelium (reviewed in Schneeberger and Lynch [2004]). Once TJs have formed, polarized epithelial cells resist infection by those CVBs that bind only to CAR (Cohen et al., 2001; Shieh and Bergelson, 2002), just as they resist infection by CAR binding adenoviruses (Pickles et al., 1998).

Many CVB isolates—including some patient isolates—also interact with a second receptor, the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein decay-accelerating factor (DAF; reviewed in Bergelson [2002]). A number of other DAF binding picornaviruses have also been identified; because phylogenetically distinct viruses interact with distinct domains within the DAF molecule, it has been proposed that these viruses have evolved independently to bind DAF. Unlike CAR, DAF is abundant on the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells and is thus accessible to pathogens in the intestinal lumen. DAF binding CVB isolates efficiently infect polarized epithelial monolayers, and passage of a CAR-specific CVB3 isolate on polarized cells results in emergence of DAF binding variants (Shieh and Bergelson, 2002). The need to interact with polarized epithelium may thus account for the evolution of CVB and other picornaviruses to bind DAF.

However, the role of DAF in promoting virus entry into cells remains uncertain. Attachment to CAR (Milstone et al., 2005) induces formation of structurally altered virions (termed “A particles”) that are believed to be essential for the uncoating process that culminates in release of viral RNA into the cytoplasm (reviewed in Hogle [2002]). In contrast, interaction with DAF does not induce A particle formation (Milstone et al., 2005), and it is unclear how virus attachment to DAF
on the epithelial cell surface could lead to uncoating and infection.

We have examined the process by which DAF binding CVBs enter polarized epithelial cells. The results indicate that DAF, in addition to providing an initial attachment site, performs an equally important and unexpected function. Virus attachment to DAF triggers two independent intracellular signals required for virus entry: activation of Abl initiates events that deliver virus to the TJ, where an obligatory interaction with CAR results in A particle formation; in parallel, activation of Fyn initiates signals that lead to internalization of A particles from the TJ and permit subsequent events in uncoating and replication. CVBs have thus evolved an intricate mechanism to overcome the barrier presented by the epithelial TJ (Figure 7).

**RESULTS**

### CVB Enters through the Tight Junction

We used confocal fluorescence microscopy to follow the entry of virus into polarized epithelial cells, and specific inhibitors (pharmacological agents, siRNAs, dominant-negative mutants) to confirm that the pathway of entry observed by immunofluorescence was indeed responsible for infection. CVB3-RD, a DAF binding isolate, was permitted to attach to Caco-2 monolayers at 4°C. The temperature was raised to 37°C and, at various times, monolayers were fixed and stained with antibody specific for the viral capsid protein VP1 (Figure 1A). At 4°C (0 min), virus was detected in a diffuse pattern along the apical surface. Between 20 and 30 min, virus concentrated at the tight junction, where it colocalized with CAR, as well as with the tight junction marker ZO-1 (Figure 1B). At 60 min, virus was detected in vesicles within the cytoplasm; at no time was virus observed to colocalize with the adherens junction protein β-catenin on the basolateral cell surface (Figure 1B). At 90 min, virus had localized to a perinuclear structure, where it colocalized with markers of the endoplasmic reticulum (data not shown). DAF and CAR were not observed to enter the cell and remained within the tight junction at 90 min (Figures 1A and 2B). The same sequence of events was observed with another DAF binding virus, CVB5 (data not shown). These results suggested that virus was rapidly transported from the apical cell surface to the tight junction, and then moved to the endoplasmic reticulum before replication occurred (as evidenced by production of new viral RNA and protein at 4–5 hr postinfection [p.i.]).

A drop in transepithelial resistance (R<sub>T</sub>; Figure 1C) and a parallel increase in paracellular diffusion (P<sub>app</sub>; see Figure S1A in the Supplemental Data available with this article online) were evident within 15 mi p.i., suggesting a transient partial loss of junctional integrity during early stages of virus entry. Exposure of monolayers to a viral isolate that binds CAR but not DAF (CVB3-Nancy; reviewed in Bergelson [2002]) had no effect on R<sub>T</sub> or P<sub>app</sub>.

### DAF Clustering Initiates Virus Relocalization to the Tight Junction

CVB3-RD and CVB5 bind to DAF on the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells (Shieh and Bergelson, 2002). Early during the entry process, virus and DAF were observed to colocalize, first in a diffuse pattern, and then (10 min p.i.) within punctate clusters along the apical membrane (Figure 2A). By 30–60 min, DAF moved from the apical membrane to the TJ (as did virus), where it colocalized with CAR (Figure 2B) and ZO-1 (data not shown). DAF and other GPI-anchored membrane proteins are concentrated in small lipid raft domains (Brown and London, 1998), but can be induced to form larger raft patches upon lateral crosslinking. In the absence of virus, an anti-DAF mAb (IA10) induced the formation of DAF clusters on the apical surface (data not shown), as well as the rapid relocalization of surface DAF to the tight junction (Figure 2B, bottom row). Taken together, these results suggest that virus interaction with DAF results in DAF clustering, and that the movement of clustered DAF is responsible for virus delivery to the TJ.

Lipid raft destabilizing agents such as methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) inhibit antibody-induced clustering of GPI-anchored proteins (Friedrichson and Kurzchalia, 1998). When cells were exposed to MβCD, which acts by depleting membrane cholesterol (Figures 2C and 2D), and other lipid raft destabilizers (data not shown), CVB3-RD did not induce clustering of DAF and failed to relocalize to the TJ; viral particles remained bound to DAF along the apical membrane at 90 min p.i., in contrast to the perinuclear localization in control cells; infection was inhibited by ≥80%.

### CAR-Dependent A Particle Formation Is Required for Virus Entry

To determine whether CAR was required for conversion of virions to A particles in Caco-2 cells or whether interaction with DAF was sufficient, we permitted <sup>35</sup>S-labeled CVB5 to attach to cells transfected with a control or a CAR-specific siRNA that inhibited CAR expression by 80%–90% (Figures S1B and S1C). Cells were washed to remove unbound virus, incubated for 90 min at 37°C, and lysed with detergent; cell lysates were then analyzed by velocity sedimentation in linear sucrose gradients. Viral particles isolated from cells exposed to control (CON) siRNA showed the reduced sedimentation velocity characteristic of A particles (135S) and empty capsids from which RNA had been released (80S; Figure 1D, left). In contrast, virus recovered from monolayers exposed to CAR siRNA cosedimented with intact 160S virions (Figure 1D, right).

In cells transfected with a control siRNA, virus moved from the apical surface to a perinuclear location by 90 min (Figure 1E), as had been observed in untreated cells (Figure 1A); in contrast, in cells exposed to CAR siRNA, virus did not enter the cytoplasm (Figure 1E) and remained localized at the TJ with ZO-1 (Figure S1D) for up to 8 hr postinfection. Whereas 95% ± 6% of control siRNA-transfected cells became infected (as determined by expression of viral antigen at 7 hr p.i., Figure 1F), only 11% ± 5% of CAR siRNA-transfected cells became infected. Taken together, the results observed with CAR siRNA indicate that although CAR is not required for virus attachment and movement to the TJ, CAR-dependent A particle formation is required for the internalization of virions and for subsequent infection.
Figure 1. CVB Enters through the Tight Junction

(A) Caco-2 monolayers exposed to CVB3-RD (MOI 100) were stained with anti-CAR pAb and anti-VP1 mAb at the indicated times and examined by confocal microscopy. Areas of colocalization appear as yellow.

(B) Virus (VP1, green) colocalizes with ZO-1 (red, left) but not β-catenin (red, right).

(C) Monolayers on transwell membranes were exposed to viruses, and electrical resistance (R<sub>T</sub>) was measured at the indicated time points (mean ± SD for nine monolayers).

(D) Monolayers transfected with either control or CAR siRNA were incubated with <sup>35</sup>S-labeled CVB5-RD; unbound virus was washed off, and the temperature was raised to 37°C. Detergent lysates were analyzed by sucrose gradient centrifugation.

(E and F) Monolayers transfected with control (CON) or CAR siRNAs were exposed to CVB (100 PFU/cell, [E]) or (1 PFU/cell, [F]), and stained for VP1 (green) at 90 min to assess virus entry (E) or at 7 hr to assess productive infection (F). Nuclei (blue) were visualized with DAPI.

(Figure 2D). Clustering of DAF and functional lipid rafts are thus required for virus delivery to the TJ and for subsequent infection.

### Abl Activity Is Required for CVB Relocalization to the TJ

As described above, we found that between 10 and 20 min p.i., virus and DAF formed clusters on the apical cell surface

(Figure 2A). These clusters stained brightly for filamentous actin and for the activated form (pTyr<sup>412</sup>) of cellular Abl (Figure 3A), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that mediates actin remodeling in response to growth factor and extracellular matrix signals (reviewed in Woodring et al. [2003]). In vitro kinase assays demonstrated that Abl became activated by 10 min p.i. (Figure 3B), coincident with the formation of DAF clusters. Crosslinking of DAF with mAb IA10 in the absence

Figure 2. CVB Clusters DAF

(A) Monolayers exposed to CVB3-RD were stained with anti-VP1 mAb (red) and anti-DAF pAb (green).

(B) Top panels: Monolayers exposed to CVB were stained for DAF and CAR. Bottom panels: Monolayers were exposed to FITC-conjugated anti DAF mAb IA10 (with no virus) for 60 min at 37°C, then stained with CAR pAb.

(C) Monolayers treated with methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) or DMSO (control) were exposed to CVB (100 PFU/cell) and stained for VP1 and CAR at 90 min.

(D) Monolayers treated with the indicated dose of MβCD were exposed to CVB and stained for VP1 at 7 hr to detect infection (mean ± SD for 3 monolayers, *p < 0.05) or lysed for cellular cholesterol assay as described in Experimental Procedures.

Figure 3. The Actin Cytoskeleton and Abl Activity Are Required for CVB Entry and Infection

(A) Monolayers exposed to CVB were stained at 0 or 10 min with anti-VP1 mAb (green) and Alexa Fluor 594 phalloidin (red, left) or at 10 min with anti-Abl-pTyr⁴¹² pAb (red, right). Arrows indicate areas of colocalization in CVB clusters.

(B) Activation of Abl by CVB3: monolayers exposed to CVB were lysed at the indicated times, lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-Abl pAb, and kinase activity was measured as described in Experimental Procedures. Some monolayers were treated with latrunculin A (LatA) or PP2 for 60 min prior to CVB exposure. The graph indicates the mean activity (relative to control uninfected monolayers), ±SD for six monolayers.

(C) STI571 (Gleevec), NSC23766, and latrunculin A prevent CVB relocalization to the TJ: monolayers treated with STI571 (top) or NSC23766 (middle) or Latrunculin A (bottom) were exposed to CVB and stained at 60 min with VP1 mAb (green) and CAR pAb (red).

(D) Rho family GTPase and Rac inhibitors, actin destabilizing agents, and STI571 block CVB infection: monolayers treated with toxin B, NSC23766, LatA, cytochalasin D (cytoD), or STI571 were exposed to CVB (1 PFU/cell) and stained for VP1 at 7 hr. Results are shown as the mean percentage of infected cells (±SD for three monolayers; *p < 0.05).

(E) STI571 (Gleevec) blocks Abl-induced Rac activation. GTP bound Rac1 levels in cells treated with DMSO (no inhibitor control) or STI571 were determined at the indicated times (10 min in no virus controls) as described in Experimental Procedures. Data are representative of three independent experiments.

Rac-induced alterations in the actin cytoskeleton are required for virus movement to the TJ

Because actin was required for movement of CVB to the TJ, we investigated the role of Rho GTPases in CVB entry. The levels of activated (GTP bound) Rac1 (Figure 3E), RhoA, and

Cdc42 (Figure S2A), increased substantially at 10–20 min p.i. Clostridium difficile toxin B, which inactivates Rho, Rac, and Cdc42, appeared to trap virus in apical clusters (data not shown), similar to those seen with LatA and STI571, and inhibited infection by ~70% (Figure 3D). The specific

Cell 124, 119–131, January 13, 2006 © 2006 Elsevier Inc. 123

Figure 4. CVB Colocalizes with Caveolin-1 and Requires Functional Caveolin-1 for Infection

(A) Caco-2 monolayers exposed to CVB were stained for caveolin-1 (red) and VP1 (green) at 60 min.

(B) Monolayers expressing dominant-negative or wild-type forms of caveolin-1, dynamin II, or Eps15 were exposed to CVB (1 PFU/cell) and stained for VP1 at 7 hr. The graph shows the number of transfected cells expressing VP1 (mean % ± SD for six monolayers; *p < 0.05).

(C) Monolayers expressing GFP-tagged wild-type (WT) or dominant-negative (DN) caveolin-1 (green), were exposed to CVB and stained for VP1 at 90 min.

(D) Immunoblot of CVB3-RD probed with VP1 mAb or VP4 pAb.

(E) Monolayers were exposed to CVB and stained for caveolin (red), VP1 (green), and VP4 (blue) at 60 min. Colocalization of VP1 and VP4 appears as aqua and colocalization of caveolin-1, VP1, and VP4 appears as white.

Rac inhibitor NSC23766, which exhibits no effect on either Rho or Cdc42 (Gao et al., 2004), had a similar inhibitory effect on infection (~60% inhibition; Figure 3D) and trapped virus in clusters along the apical membrane (Figure 3C). CVB also triggered more global actin rearrangements at later time points (Figure S2D). These data suggest that activation of Rac GTPase is required for actin reorganization and virus movement from the apical membrane to the TJ.

Abl has been implicated in actin remodeling (Woodring et al., 2003) and is known to act upstream of Rac (Melo, 1996; Renshaw et al., 1996; Skorski et al., 1998). STI571 abolished the CVB-induced activation of Rac (Figure 3E), but not of RhoA or Cdc42 (Figure S2B). DAF clustering induced by mAb IA10 also led to Rac activation (Figure S3C), and this activation was prevented when cells were treated with STI571 (data not shown). We conclude that Abl, activated in response to virus-induced DAF clustering, initiates Rac-dependent changes in the actin cytoskeleton that result in virus delivery to the tight junction.

**Virus Internalization Requires Caveolin Function**

Within 60 min p.i., CVB had entered the cytoplasm, where it appeared concentrated in vesicular structures (Figure 1A). Immunofluorescent staining revealed that these structures contained caveolin-1 (Figure 4A) but not clathrin or endosomal markers (data not shown). These structures varied in size and are likely to represent caveolae (Palade, 1953; Yamada, 1955) as well as caveosomes (Pelkmans et al., 2001). Internalized CVB particles colocalized with cholera toxin (data not shown), which enters in caveolae and traffics
to caveosomes (Orlandi and Fishman, 1998; Pelkmans et al., 2001).

In cells transfected with a dominant-negative caveolin mutant (Pelkmans et al., 2001), infection was markedly inhibited (Figure 4B), as was virus internalization, with virus remaining at the tight junction at 90 min p.i. (Figure 4C). In contrast, virus infection (Figure 4B) and internalization (data not shown) were not inhibited by dominant-negative forms of either Eps15 (Benmerah et al., 1998), a protein required for formation of clathrin-coated vesicles, or of dynamin II, a GTPase involved in budding of both clathrin-coated (Damke et al., 1994) and caveolin-containing (Henley et al., 1998; Oh et al., 1998) vesicles (Figure 4B); as expected, both of these dominant-negative mutants inhibited endocytosis of transferrin (data not shown). These results demonstrate that, once virus has reached the tight junction, functional caveolin-1, but not dynamin or Eps15, is required for internalization and infection.

During A particle conversion, VP4 is released from the viral capsid and is inserted into the cell membrane, where it forms pores that have been proposed to be important for the movement of viral RNA into the cytoplasm (Hogle, 2002). Although A particles formed at the TJ, VP4 did not remain at the TJ but entered the cell in association with VP1 and caveolin (Figures 4D and 4E). It thus appears that VP4 remains in close proximity to the A particle after entry, as might be expected if RNA release occurs only after internalization.

### Src Kinases Are Required for Virus Entry and Infection

Pretreatment of cells with genistein, a nonspecific tyrosine kinase inhibitor, or with PP2, a specific inhibitor of Src family kinases (Hanke et al., 1996), significantly reduced CVB infection (Figure 5A). In cells treated with PP2, viral particles moved from the apical surface to the TJ (Figure 5B), where they colocalized with CAR and ZO-1 (data not shown); however, virus was not seen to enter the cell and appeared to be retained at the TJ. Src kinase activity is thus required for virus to enter the cell from the TJ. Virions recovered from PP2-treated cells were trapped at the 135S A particle stage, whereas virions from control cells sedimented faster than 135S (Figure 5C). The results indicate that Src kinase activity is not required for A particle formation and that A particle conversion is not sufficient for virus to enter the cell from the TJ. In addition, these results suggest that uncoating events subsequent to A particle formation, including release of viral RNA and formation of 80S empty capsids, occur only after virus has entered the cell. When cells were transfected directly with infectious viral RNA—thus bypassing the need for entry and uncoating—PP2 inhibited infection (data not shown), suggesting a possible role for Src family kinases in replication events following RNA release.

### Virus-Induced DAF Clustering Activates Src Family Kinases

Because PP2 treatment prevented the internalization of TJ-localized viral particles, we stained infected monolayers with an antibody specific for the activated form (pTyr⁴¹⁸) of Src family kinases. A dramatic increase in the level of activated kinase was seen by 10 min p.i., with pTyr⁴¹⁸-Src most evident at the apical TJ complex, where it colocalized with CAR (Figure 5D) and ZO-1 (data not shown). Activated Src kinases were also detected in apical CVB-DAF clusters (data not shown).

Two Src family kinases, Src and Fyn, were activated and phosphorylated on Tyr⁴¹⁸ within 10 min of virus exposure (Figure 5E); Src, but not Fyn, exhibited a second wave of activation 30 min p.i. Downstream effectors of activated Src kinases—including pTyr³¹ paxillin and pTyr³⁹⁷ focal adhesion kinase (FAK; Schaller et al., 1999)—were also increased within 10–20 min (data not shown). Although Yes protein was abundant in Caco-2 cells (data not shown), no Yes activation was observed in response to CVB (Figure 5E). Cross-linking of DAF with mAb IA10 induced activation of Fyn and Src similar to that observed in response to virus, indicating that crosslinking of DAF by virus is sufficient to initiate signaling by Src family kinases (Figure S3A).

#### Fyn Is Specifically Required for Virus Internalization

The preceding experiments demonstrated that Src and Fyn were activated during virus infection and that Src family kinases were required for virus entry and infection. To examine the roles of specific kinases, we examined virus entry and infection in cells transfected with specific siRNAs; as determined by immunoblotting, expression of Fyn protein was reduced by >90% (Figure 5F), and expression of Yes and Src by 80% and 40%, respectively (data not shown). As expected, in cells transfected with control siRNA, CVB3-RD particles colocalized with caveolin-1 in the peripheral cytoplasm and exhibited a perinuclear localization at 90 min p.i. (Figure 5F). In contrast, in cells transfected with Fyn siRNA, virus remained localized to the TJ (Figure 5F) and infection was significantly inhibited (Figure 5A). CVB entry was unchanged in cells transfected with either Yes or Src-siRNAs (data not shown).

Although Src was activated at 10 and 30 min p.i. (Figure 5E), Src siRNA did not inhibit virus entry; similarly, entry was not inhibited in cells transfected with dominant-negative Src (K296R/Y528F; data not shown). However, both Src siRNA and dominant-negative Src inhibited CVB infection (Figure 5A and data not shown). The insufficient reduction of Src kinase levels by Src siRNA prevents our drawing a firm conclusion regarding the requirement for Src in virus entry. However, it appears that Src is important for a post-entry step in infection.

#### Fyn-Dependent Caveolin Phosphorylation Is Required for Virus Entry

Phosphorylation of caveolin-1 (on tyrosine residue 14) is mediated by Src kinases and has been associated with the formation and fusion of caveolin-derived vesicles (Aoki et al., 1999). In particular, Fyn has been implicated as the Src family kinase required for the phosphorylation of caveolin-1 in response to cellular stress (Sanguinetti et al., 2003). Immunoblot analysis revealed an increase in caveolin Tyr¹⁴ phosphorylation at 10 min p.i. (Figure 6A). Confocal microscopy

Cell 124, 119–131, January 13, 2006 © 2006 Elsevier Inc. 125
Figure 5. Activation of Src Kinases Is Required for CVB Entry and Infection

(A) Kinases are required for CVB infection: monolayers treated with genistein or PP2 or transfected with Fyn or Src siRNAs were exposed to CVB (1 PFU/cell) then stained for VP1 at 7 hr (mean % infected ±SD for six monolayers; *p < 0.05).

(B) PP2 blocks CVB internalization: monolayers treated with PP2 or control medium were exposed to CVB and stained for VP1 (green) at 90 min.

(C) PP2 prevents CVB uncoating: control or PP2-treated monolayers were exposed to ${}^{35}$S-labeled CVB5, and detergent lysates were analyzed by sucrose gradient centrifugation.

(D) Activation of Src kinases and localization to the TJ: monolayers exposed to CVB were stained with anti-Src-pTyr${}^{418}$ mAb and anti-CAR pAb.

(E) In vitro kinase measurement: monolayers exposed to CVB were lysed and immunoprecipitated with antibodies specific for Fyn, Src, or Yes. In separate experiments, kinase activity was measured by phosphorylation of Src substrate peptide (top), and immunoblotting with mAbs specific for Src family-pTyr${}^{418}$ and for total Src kinases (bottom). Data represent results for six samples in two separate experiments (top; mean kinase activity ±SD; *p < 0.05) or three samples in three separate experiments (bottom).

(F) Fyn siRNA blocks CVB internalization: monolayers transfected with control (CON) or Fyn siRNA were exposed to CVB and stained for caveolin-1 (red) and VP1 (green) at 90 min. Bottom, cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with Fyn-specific pAb, and precipitates were immunoblotted with a Src family-specific mAb.

revealed that pTyr${}^{14}$-caveolin-1 was localized to the apical TJ complex, where it colocalized with CAR (Figure 6B) and ZO-1 (data not shown), and to focal adhesions where it colocalized with paxillin (data not shown).

To determine whether caveolin phosphorylation was required for CVB entry and infection, we produced a GFP-tagged caveolin-1 mutant in which Tyr${}^{14}$ was mutated to phenylalanine (Y14F), thereby preventing phosphorylation

Figure 6. Caveolin Phosphorylation Is Required for CVB Entry and Infection

(A) Monolayers were exposed to CVB and lysed at the indicated times; lysates were immunoblotted with mAb specific for pTyr¹⁴cav-1 or with anti-caveolin-1 pAb.

(B) Monolayers exposed to CVB were stained for pTyr¹⁴cav-1 and CAR.

(C) Monolayers pretreated with PP2 or STI571 or transfected with Fyn or CAR siRNAs were exposed to CVB and lysed at 30min p.i.; lysates were immunoblotted with mAb specific for pTyr¹⁴cav-1 or with anti-caveolin-1 pAb.

(D) CVB infection is blocked by Y14F-caveolin-1: monolayers transfected with wild-type or Y14F caveolin-1-GFP were exposed to CVB (1 PFU/cell); at 7 hr, transfected cells were identified by green fluorescence, and infection was detected by staining for VP1 (mean ± SD for three monolayers; *p < 0.05).

(E), Monolayers expressing wild-type or Y14F caveolin-1-GFP (green) were exposed to CVB, and stained for VP1 (red) at 60 min.

of this residue. CVB infection was significantly reduced in cells transfected with Y14F caveolin-1 (Figure 6D). In cells expressing wild-type caveolin-1-GFP, virus was internalized and colocalized with caveolin-1-GFP in the cytoplasm and around the nucleus (Figure 6E). In contrast, in cells expressing Y14F caveolin-1, virus was trapped at the TJ and did not enter (Figure 6E). Furthermore, GFP-tagged Y14F caveolin localized to the TJ less efficiently than did wild-type in response to virus infection (data not shown). Treatment with PP2 abolished the CVB-induced phosphorylation of caveolin-1, as did transfection with Fyn siRNA, but STI571 or CAR siRNA had no effect (Figure 6C). These data indicate that Fyn is required for caveolin phosphorylation, which is in turn essential for virus entry from the TJ.

DISCUSSION

As they invade the gastrointestinal or respiratory tracts, viruses must overcome or bypass the barrier presented by epithelial cell TJs. In the experiments reported here, we found that coxsackieviruses trigger two distinct intracellular signals to enter polarized epithelial cells (Figure 7): activation of Abl permits virus to move to the tight junction, where interaction

with CAR leads to conformational changes in the capsid that are needed for entry; activation of Fyn leads to virus entry within caveolin-associated vesicles, and activation of Src may contribute to postentry events in infection.

Both Abl and Fyn signals were triggered directly by DAF crosslinking. The mechanism by which DAF (Shenoy-Scaria et al., 1992) and other GPI-anchored proteins (Brown and London, 1998) transduce signals is not well understood. Both GPI-anchored proteins and many signaling molecules are associated with cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains (lipid rafts), and aggregation of small rafts into larger patches may initiate signals by concentrating critical molecules. Consistent with this view, we found that DAF cross-linking by virus or antibody led to formation of large clusters containing activated Src kinases and Abl. It is interesting that crosslinking of another GPI-anchored protein, CD59, did not cause its relocation to the TJ or activate Abl and Fyn (Figure S4).

Although tyrosine kinase activity has been associated with caveolae-mediated virus internalization, downstream targets and effectors of these kinases have not been described in detail (Chen and Norkin, 1999; Pelkmans et al., 2005; Pelkmans et al., 2002), and phosphorylation of caveolin has not

phosphorylation of this residue in response to CVB-induced
DAF clustering, and inhibition of phosphorylation by PP2
(data not shown), PP2 did not block Abl activation as measured by kinase activity (Figure 3B) and did not prevent virus
movement to the TJ. In addition, PP2 did not block the CVB-
induced activation of Rac1 (Figure S2C), RhoA, or Cdc42
(data not shown). Thus, activation of Abl by CVB, and
Abl’s role in virus infection, are independent of Src kinases.

At least three viruses are now known to initiate infection by
attaching to receptors within the junctional complex of epithelia. Like CVB and adenoviruses (Barton et al., 2001) and members of the herpesvirus family (Geraghty et al., 1998) interact with receptors that are normally sequestered within junctions and thus not readily available
to viruses at the apical cell surface. We observed an increase
in junctional permeability during CVB infection at 15 min,
when virus had formed DAF clusters and was beginning to
relocalize to the TJ. Transepithelial resistance did not drop
when DAF was crosslinked with mAb IA10 in the absence
of virus, indicating that neither signals induced by DAF clustering nor DAF relocalization to the junction were sufficient to
disrupt the junction. By binding to the CAR extracellular
domain, CVB may interfere with CAR-CAR interactions that
are thought to contribute to junctional stability (reviewed in Coyne and Bergelson [2005]); adenovirus fibers, which also
bind to CAR, initiate disruption of the TJ (Walters et al.,
2002). It is also conceivable that modulation of the junction
depends on a signal, initiated either by virus attachment to
CAR or by membrane perturbations that are known to occur
during formation of the hydrophobic A particle (Tosteson and
Chow, 1997).

The cell biology of picornavirus uncoating remains poorly
understood. Our experiments suggest for the first time that
two major events in virus uncoating—formation of the A particle and release of RNA into the cytoplasm—occur at different sites within the cell and in response to different stimuli. A particles formed at the TJ, and their formation required virus
interaction with CAR. In contrast, 80S empty capsids were
seen only when virus was permitted to enter the cell. Because CAR and DAF remained within the TJ as virus was
internalized, and did not accompany virus into the cell, we
infer that these molecules are not required for formation of
80S capsids and release of RNA. The experiments described here do not precisely define the site at which RNA
is released, but other data (C.B.C. and J.M.B., unpublished
data) suggest that uncoating is completed only after virions
have reached the endoplasmic reticulum. Although CAR
and DAF are left behind as virus enters, VP4—released during A particle conversion—remains in close association with
A particles in caveolar vesicles. It remains to be determined
how the membranes that contain DAF and CAR are segregated from the caveolae with which A particles and VP4
are associated.

Although DAF has been known to serve as a virus attachment site on the epithelial surface, the results reported here
indicate that DAF also transduces signals that are required
for virus internalization and infection. Other DAF binding
viruses are likely to exploit DAF signals during infection, and

Figure 7. Signaling Pathways Activated by CVB Interaction
with DAF
Broken lines indicate agents that disrupt signaling or entry events.

been known to be important for virus entry. Another Src kinase, Lck, has previously been shown to be important for induction of CVB-induced myocarditis, but the mechanism of
its effect has not been determined (Liu et al., 2000).
Caveolin-1 was first identified as a protein phosphorylated
in cells transformed by Rous sarcoma virus (Glenney, 1989),
and both Src and Fyn activation can lead to caveolin-1 phosphorylation (Sanguinetti et al., 2003; Volonte et al., 2001). In
a recent study, several cellular kinases, including Src, were
found to be involved in the formation and internalization of
caveolae, although their specific cellular targets were not
identified (Pelkmans and Zerial, 2005). We found that phosphorylated caveolin was associated with virus-DAF clusters
and became highly concentrated at the TJ. Other investigators have observed that caveolin-1 is present within tight
junctions (Nusrat et al., 2000). Our experiments with Y14F
caveolin indicate that phosphorylation of caveolin is important for virus internalization. We do not know whether phosphorylation occurs after caveolin has associated with virus-
DAF clusters, where it is in close proximity to activated Src
kinases, or whether caveolin phosphorylated elsewhere in
the cell is recruited to these clusters.
We found that Abl was required for the movement of virus
to the tight junction. Abl activation depends on the action of
both receptor and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (Woodring
et al., 2003); activation in response to clustering of DAF or
other GPI-anchored proteins has not been reported. Src kinase has been reported to activate Abl by phosphorylation of
Tyr412 (Brasher and Van Etten, 2000). Although we observed
DAF binding bacterial pathogens may do so as well. Both CAR and DAF have been implicated in neutrophil migration from the basal to the luminal surface of polarized epithelium (Zen et al., 2005). It is thus conceivable that mechanisms by which by pathogens cross the epithelium may be related to physiologic processes involved in host defense.

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Cells and Viruses
Caco-2 cells, cultured as described (Coyne et al., 2004), were plated in collagen-coated chamber slides at a density of \(4 \times 10^4\) cells/well for immunofluorescence microscopy and in 12 mm Transwell-Col inserts (0.4 μ pore size; Costar) at a density of \(5 \times 10^5\) cells for permeability studies. CVB3-Nancy and CVB3-RD (Reagan et al., 1984) were originally obtained from Dr. Richard Crowell (Hahnemann University). CVB5-88-0578 (Shieh and Bergelson, 2002) was originally obtained from Dr. John Modlin (Dartmouth Medical School). A plasmid encoding infectious CVB3-GFP RNA (Feuer et al., 2002) was provided by Dr. J. Lindsay Whitton (Scripps Research Institute). Viruses were expanded by growth in HeLa cells and concentrated by ultracentrifugation through a sucrose cushion, and titers were determined by plaque assay on HeLa cells. Immunofluorescence experiments tracking virus entry or biochemical experiments examining kinase activation were performed at a multiplicity of 100 PFU per cell. Experiments measuring productive virus infection were performed with 1 PFU/cell. The typical picornavirus particle/PFU ratio is approximately 200 (Rueckert, 1996). Unless otherwise specified, all experiments were performed with CVB3-RD.

#### Antibodies
Affinity-purified CAR-specific rabbit antibody has been described (Shieh and Bergelson, 2002). Polyclonal antibody specific for enteroviral VP4 was provided by Dr. Marie Chow. Antibodies from commercial sources are listed in the Supplemental Data.

#### Pharmacological Inhibitors
Inhibitors, concentrations, and suppliers are listed in the Supplemental Data. Monolayers were pretreated with inhibitors for 1 hr at 37°C, washed, and incubated with CVB at a multiplicity of 100 PFU/cell (viral entry studies) or 1 PFU/cell (viral infection studies) in virus binding buffer (DMEM supplemented with 1 mM HEPES) containing inhibitor for 1 hr at 4°C. Following washing, virus entry/infection was initiated by shifting cells to 37°C in medium containing inhibitor.

#### Plasmids, siRNAs, and Transfections
Wild-type GFP-caveolin-1 and dominant-negative caveolin-1-GFP (Pelkmans et al., 2001) were provided by Drs. Ari Helenius and Lukas Pelkmans (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology). HA-tagged wild-type or dominant-negative dynamin (van der Bliek et al., 1993) were provided by Dr. Sandra Schmid (Scripps Research Institute). Eps15-GFP and Eps15EΔ95-295-GFP (Benmerah et al., 1998) were provided by Dr. Alice Dautry-Varsat (Institut Pasteur, Paris). GFP-tagged Y14F caveolin-1 was generated by splice overlap extension PCR (Horton et al., 1990) using the caveolin-1-GFP construct described above. Double-stranded siRNAs targeted against human CAR and a control have been described previously (Coyne et al., 2004). Fyn, Src, and Yes SMARTpool siRNA reagents were obtained from Upstate Biotechnology. Transfection of Caco-2 cells with siRNAs and plasmids was performed using the Nucleofector System (Amaxa, Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Following transfection, cells were plated at a density of \(2.5 \times 10^4\) cells/well in collagen-coated chamber slides, and used for virus infection 48 hr later. Transfection efficiencies with plasmids (as determined by GFP expression) were 60%–80%, and transfection with Cy5-labeled siRNA was 80%–100%.

---

#### Immunofluorescence Microscopy
Monolayers were exposed to CVB in virus binding buffer for 1 hr at 4°C then washed, and virus entry was initiated by shifting cells to 37°C. In all experiments, cells were fixed and permeabilized before staining with ice-cold methanol/acetone (3:1) for 5 min at room temperature (RT). Cells were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies for 1 hr at RT, washed, incubated with fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies for 30 min at room temperature, washed, and mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured with an Olympus fluorescence microscope (Melville, NY) or a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica, Exton, PA). Scale bar in figures is 10 μm.

#### Paracellular Permeability
Transepithelial resistance (\(R_{\mathrm{T}}\)) measurements were performed with an ohmmeter (EVOM; World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) on cells grown on T-col inserts. Permeation of \({}^{3}\)H]mannitol (MW: 182 Da; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and \({}^{14}\)C]dextran (MW: 10 kDa and 2,000 kDa; Sigma) across Caco-2 cells exposed to virus (MOI = 100) was measured for 1hr at 37°C following virus binding at 4°C for 1hr. \({}^{3}\)H]Mannitol (5 μCi) and \({}^{14}\)C]dextran (5 μCi) were added to the apical compartment, and samples (10 μl) were removed from the basolateral compartment. Radioactivity in each sample was counted, and the apparent permeability (\(P_{\mathrm{app}}\)) coefficient was calculated (Stutts et al., 1981).

#### Measurement of Cellular Cholesterol
Caco-2 cells were extracted with chloroform and methanol (2:1) and cellular cholesterol was determined using a commercial kit (Biovision Incorporated, Mountain View, CA).

#### Src and Abl Kinase Assays
Specific buffers are listed in the Supplemental Data. All immunoprecipitations and washes were performed at 4°C. Cells were lysed in kinase lysis buffer and 200 μg of lysate protein was subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-Fyn, -Src, -Yes, or -Abl antibodies for 2 hr followed by protein G Sepharose for 1 hr. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and twice with kinase reaction buffer (SRB or ARB) then resuspended in reaction buffer containing 150 μM Src substrate peptide (KVEKIGEGTYGVVYK, Upstate Biotechnology) or Abl substrate peptide (EAIYAAPFAKKK, Upstate Biotechnology), and 10 μCi of \({}^{32}\)P]ATP. Kinase activity was determined according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Upstate Biotechnology).

#### Sucrose Gradient Centrifugation
Because CVB3-RD is somewhat heat labile, sucrose gradient analysis was performed with CVB5, labeled by growth on HeLa cells in the presence of \({}^{35}\)S]methionine, and purified by cesium gradient centrifugation as described elsewhere (Milstone et al., 2005). \({}^{35}\)S-labeled virus particles at various stages of internalization were recovered by lysis of cells with 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (DOC), 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 1% Triton X-100; these conditions release both surface bound and intracellular viral particles (Milstone et al., 2005). Cell lysates were overlaid on linear 15% to 30% sucrose gradients and centrifuged at 39,000 rpm for 100 min at 4°C in a Beckman SW41Ti rotor. Fractions (250 μl) were collected from the top of the gradient, and radioactivity was measured.

#### Immunoblots
Cell lysates were prepared with RIPA buffer, and insoluble material was cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 4°C. Thirty micrograms protein was loaded onto 4%–15% Tris-HCl gels (Bio-Rad) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Membranes were blocked overnight in TBSTM, probed with monoclonal antibodies, and developed with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibody to mouse immunoglobulin (Jackson ImmunoResearch), and ECL reagents (Amersham Biosciences).

---

Cell 124, 119–131, January 13, 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc. 129
Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 Activity Assays
Assays were performed with reagents obtained from Upstate Biotechnology (Rho and Rac/Cdc42 Activation Assay kits) as detailed in the Supplemental Data.

Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SD. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni's correction for multiple comparisons were used to determine statistical significance (p < 0.05).

Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data include four figures and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/124/1/119/DC1/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Drs. Ari Helenius, Lukas Pelkmans, Sandra Schmid, J. Lindsay Whitton, Alice Dautry-Varsat, and Marie Chow for generous gifts of reagents. We thank John Seykora for helpful discussions and Mark Drinker, Jason Newland, and Ashleigh Hahn for assistance in experiments. Gary Cohen, Keith Solomon, and Robert Doms provided valuable comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the NIH (R01AI5228 and T32AI07324) and American Heart Association (0525484U).

Received: July 28, 2005  
Revised: September 7, 2005  
Accepted: October 19, 2005  
Published: January 12, 2006

REFERENCES
Aoki, T., Nomura, R., and Fujimoto, T. (1999). Tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin-1 in the endothelium. Exp. Cell Res. 253, 629–636.
Barton, E.S., Forrest, J.C., Connolly, J.L., Chappell, J.D., Liu, Y., Schnell, F.J., Nusrat, A., Parkos, C.A., and Dermody, T.S. (2001). Junction adhesion molecule is a receptor for reovirus. Cell 104, 441–451.
Benmerah, A., Lamaze, C., Begue, B., Schmid, S.L., Dautry-Varsat, A., and Cerf-Bensussan, N. (1998). AP-2/Eps15 interaction is required for receptor-mediated endocytosis. J. Cell Biol. 140, 1055–1062.
Bergelson, J.M. (2002). Receptors for Coxsackieviruses and Echoviruses. In Molecular Biology of Picornaviruses, B.L. Semler and E. Wimmer, eds. (Washington, DC: ASM Press), pp. 107–113.
Bergelson, J.M., Cunningham, J.A., Droguett, G., Kurt-Jones, E.A., Krishivas, A., Hong, J.S., Horwitz, M.S., Crowell, R.L., and Finberg, R.W. (1997). Isolation of a common receptor for Coxsackie B viruses and adenoviruses 2 and 5. Science 275, 1320–1323.
Brasher, B.B., and Van Etten, R.A. (2000). c-Abl has high intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that is stimulated by mutation of the Src homology 3 domain and by autophosphorylation at two distinct regulatory tyrosines. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 35631–35637.
Brown, D.A., and London, E. (1998). Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 111–136.
Chen, Y., and Norkin, L.C. (1999). Extracellular simian virus 40 transmits a signal that promotes virus enclosure within caveolae. Exp. Cell Res. 246, 83–90.
Cohen, C.J., Shieh, J.T., Pickles, R.J., Okegawa, T., Hsieh, J.T., and Bergelson, J.M. (2001). The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor is a transmembrane component of the tight junction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 15191–15196.
Coyle, C.B., and Bergelson, J.M. (2005). CAR: a virus receptor within the tight junction. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 57, 869–882.
Coyle, C.B., Voelker, T., Pichla, S.L., and Bergelson, J.M. (2004). The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor interacts with the multi-PDZ domain protein-1 (MUPP-1) within the tight junction. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 48079–48084.
Damke, H., Baba, T., Warnock, D.E., and Schmid, S.L. (1994). Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation. J. Cell Biol. 127, 915–934.
Feuer, R., Mena, I., Pagarian, R., Slifka, M.K., and Whitton, J.L. (2002). Cell cycle status affects coxsackievirus replication, persistence, and reactivation in vitro. J. Virol. 76, 4430–4440.
Friedrichson, T., and Kurzchalia, T.V. (1998). Microdomains of GPI-anchored proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking. Nature 394, 802–805.
Gao, Y., Dickerson, J.B., Guo, F., Zheng, J., and Zheng, Y. (2004). Rational design and characterization of a Rac GTPase-specific small molecule inhibitor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 7618–7623.
Geraghty, R.J., Krummenacher, C., Cohen, G.H., Eisenberg, R.J., and Spear, P.G. (1998). Entry of alphaherpesviruses mediated by poliovirus receptor-related protein 1 and poliovirus receptor. Science 280, 1618–1620.
Glenney, J.R., Jr. (1989). Tyrosine phosphorylation of a 22-kDa protein is correlated with transformation by Rous sarcoma virus. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 20163–20166.
Hanke, J.H., Gardner, J.P., Dow, R.L., Changelian, P.S., Brissette, W.H., Weringer, E.J., Pollok, B.A., and Connelly, P.A. (1996). Discovery of a novel, potent, and Src family-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Study of Lck- and FynT-dependent T cell activation. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 695–701.
Henley, J.R., Krueger, E.W., Oswald, B.J., and McNiven, M.A. (1998). Dynamin-mediated internalization of caveolae. J. Cell Biol. 141, 85–99.
Hogle, J.M. (2002). Poliovirus cell entry: common structural themes in viral cell entry pathways. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 56, 677–702.
Horton, R.M., Cai, Z.L., Ho, S.N., and Pease, L.R. (1990). Gene splicing by overlap extension: tailor-made genes using the polymerase chain reaction. Biotechniques 8, 528–535.
Liu, P., Aitken, K., Kong, Y.Y., Opavsky, M.A., Martino, T., Dawood, F., Wen, W.H., Kozierradzki, I., Bachmaier, K., Straus, D., et al. (2000). The tyrosine kinase p56lck is essential in coxsackievirus B3-mediated heart disease. Nat. Med. 6, 429–434.
Melo, J.V. (1996). The diversity of BCR-ABL fusion proteins and their relationship to leukemia phenotype. Blood 88, 2375–2384.
Milstone, A.M., Petrella, J., Sanchez, M.D., Mahmud, M., Whitbeck, J.C., and Bergelson, J.M. (2005). Interaction with coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor, but not with decay-accelerating factor (DAF), induces A particle formation in a DAF-binding coxsackievirus B3 isolate. J. Virol. 79, 655–660.
Nusrat, A., Parkos, C.A., Verkade, P., Foley, C.S., Liang, T.W., Innis-Whitehouse, W., Eastburn, K.K., and Madara, J.L. (2000). Tight junctions are membrane microdomains. J. Cell Sci. 113, 1771–1781.
Oh, P., McIntosh, D.P., and Schnitzer, J.E. (1998). Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP-driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium. J. Cell Biol. 141, 101–114.
Orlandi, P.A., and Fishman, P.H. (1998). Filipin-dependent inhibition of cholera toxin: evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae-like domains. J. Cell Biol. 141, 905–915.
Palade, G.E. (1953). An electron microscope study of the mitochondrial structure. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 1, 188–211.
Pallansch, M.A., and Roos, R.P. (2001). Enteroviruses: Polioviruses, Cox-sackieviruses, Echoviruses, and Newer Enteroviruses, 5 Edition (Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins).
Pelkmans, L., and Zerial, M. (2005). Kinase-regulated quantal assemblies and kiss-and-run recycling of caveolae. Nature 436, 128–133.
Pelkmans, L., Kartenbeck, J., and Helenius, A. (2001). Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two-step vesicular-transport pathway to the ER. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 473–483.

Pelkmans, L., Puntener, D., and Helenius, A. (2002). Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40-induced internalization of caveolae. Science 296, 535–539.

Pelkmans, L., Fava, E., Grabner, H., Hannus, M., Habermann, B., Krausz, E., and Zerial, M. (2005). Genome-wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin- and caveolae/raft-mediated endocytosis. Nature 436, 78–86.

Pickles, R.J., McCarty, D., Matsui, H., Hart, P.J., Randell, S.H., and Boucher, R.C. (1998). Limited entry of adenovirus vectors into well-differentiated airway epithelium is responsible for inefficient gene transfer. J. Virol. 72, 6014–6023.

Reagan, K.J., Goldberg, B., and Crowell, R.L. (1984). Altered receptor specificity of coxsackievirus B3 after growth in rhabdomyosarcoma cells. J. Virol. 49, 635–640.

Renshaw, M.W., Lea-Chou, E., and Wang, J.Y. (1996). Rac is required for v-Abl tyrosine kinase to activate mitogenesis. Curr. Biol. 6, 76–83.

Rueckert, R.R. (1996). Picornaviridae: the viruses and their replication. In Fields Virology, B.N. Fields, D.M. Knipe, and P.M. Howley, eds. (Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven), pp. 609–654.

Sanguinetti, A.R., Cao, H., and Corley Mastick, C. (2003). Fyn is required for oxidative- and hyperosmotic-stress-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin-1. Biochem. J. 376, 159–168.

Schaller, M.D., Hildebrand, J.D., and Parsons, J.T. (1999). Complex formation with focal adhesion kinase: a mechanism to regulate activity and subcellular localization of Src kinases. Mol. Biol. Cell 10, 3489–3505.

Schindler, T., Bornmann, W., Pellicena, P., Miller, W.T., Clarkson, B., and Kuriyan, J. (2000). Structural mechanism for STI-571 inhibition of abelson tyrosine kinase. Science 289, 1938–1942.

Schneeberger, E.E., and Lynch, R.D. (2004). The tight junction: a multifunctional complex. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 286, C1213–C1228.

Shenoy-Scaria, A.M., Kwong, J., Fujita, T., Olszowy, M.W., Shaw, A.S., and Lublin, D.M. (1992). Signal transduction through decay-accelerating factor. Interaction of glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor and protein tyrosine kinases p56lck and p59fyn 1. J. Immunol. 149, 3535–3541.

Shieh, J.T., and Bergelson, J.M. (2002). Interaction with decay-accelerating factor facilitates coxsackievirus B infection of polarized epithelial cells. J. Virol. 76, 9474–9480.

Skorski, T., Nieborowska-Skorska, M., Wlodarski, P., Wasik, M., Trotta, R., Kanakaraj, P., Salomoni, P., Antonyak, M., Martinez, R., Majewski,

M., et al. (1998). The SH3 domain contributes to BCR/ABL-dependent leukemogenesis in vivo: role in adhesion, invasion, and homing. Blood 91, 406–418.

Stutts, M.J., Boucher, R.C., Bromberg, P.A., and Gatzy, J.T. (1981). Effects of ammonium and nitrate salts on ion transport across the excised canine trachea. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 60, 91–105.

Tomko, R.P., Xu, R., and Philipson, L. (1997). HCAR and MCAR: the human and mouse cellular receptors for subgroup C adenoviruses and group B coxsackieviruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3352–3356.

Tosteson, M.T., and Chow, M. (1997). Characterization of the ion channels formed by poliovirus in planar lipid membranes. J. Virol. 71, 507–511.

van der Bliek, A.M., Redelmeier, T.E., Damke, H., Tisdale, E.J., Meyerowitz, E.M., and Schmid, S.L. (1993). Mutations in human dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation. J. Cell Biol. 122, 553–563.

Volonte, D., Galbiati, F., Pestell, R.G., and Lisanti, M.P. (2001). Cellular stress induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin-1 (Tyr(14)) via activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Src kinase. Evidence for caveolae, the actin cytoskeleton, and focal adhesions as mechanical sensors of osmotic stress. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 8094–8103.

Walters, R.W., Freimuth, P., Moninger, T.O., Ganske, I., Zabner, J., and Welsh, M.J. (2002). Adenovirus fiber disrupts CAR-mediated intercellular adhesion allowing virus escape. Cell 110, 789–799.

Woodring, P.J., Hunter, T., and Wang, J.Y. (2001). Inhibition of c-Abl tyrosine kinase activity by filamentous actin. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 27104–27110.

Woodring, P.J., Litwack, E.D., O’Leary, D.D., Lucero, G.R., Wang, J.Y., and Hunter, T. (2002). Modulation of the F-actin cytoskeleton by c-Abl tyrosine kinase in cell spreading and neurite extension. J. Cell Biol. 156, 879–892.

Woodring, P.J., Hunter, T., and Wang, J.Y. (2003). Regulation of F-actin-dependent processes by the Abl family of tyrosine kinases. J. Cell Sci. 116, 2613–2626.

Yamada, E. (1955). The fine structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 1, 445–458.

Zen, K., Liu, Y., McCall, I.C., Wu, T., Lee, W., Babbin, B.A., Nusrat, A., and Parkos, C.A. (2005). Neutrophil migration across tight junctions is mediated by adhesive interactions between epithelial coxsackie and adenovirus receptor and a junctional adhesion molecule-like protein on neutrophils. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 2694–2703.