
# γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase in the putrescine utilization pathway of Escherichia coli K-12

Shin Kurihara, Shinpei Oda, Hidehiko Kumagai & Hideyuki Suzuki

Division of Integrated Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan

---

**Correspondence:** Hideyuki Suzuki, Division of Integrated Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Oiwake-cho, Kitashirakawa, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. Tel.: +81 75 753 9233; fax: +81 75 753 6275; e-mail: hideyuki@lif.kyoto-u.ac.jp

**Present address:** Hideyuki Kumagai, Research Institute of Agricultural Resources, Ishikawa Prefectural University, Nonoichi-cho, Ishikawa-gun, Ishikawa 921-8836, Japan.

Received 21 November 2005, revised 22 December 2005, accepted 4 January 2006. First published online February 2006.

doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00137.x

Editor: Robert Gunsalus

## Keywords
putrescine degradation; γ-glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate dehydrogenase; γ-aminobutyrate; γ-glutamyl compound; Escherichia coli.

---

## Abstract
γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase (PuuD) was purified and the properties of the enzyme were characterized. The active center of PuuD was identified as Cys-114 by site-directed mutagenesis. The expression of PuuD was induced by putrescine and O₂ (substrates of the Puu pathway), while the addition of succinate or NH₄Cl (products of the Puu pathway) to the medium reduced the expression of PuuD. The findings that the *puuD*-deficient strain accumulated γ-glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate (γ-Glu-GABA) and could not grow on putrescine as a sole nitrogen source indicate that PuuD is physiologically important as a γ-Glu-GABA hydrolase.

---

## Introduction
Putrescine is one of polyamines that are found in a wide range of organisms from bacteria to plants and animals, especially when these cells are proliferating or under stressful conditions (Tabor & Tabor, 1984). Polyamines can modulate the functions of RNA, DNA, nucleotide triphosphates, proteins, and other acidic substances, and they contribute to stimulate cell growth and viability (Igarashi & Kashiyagi, 2000). Polyamines are ubiquitous and important compounds for living cells, and especially in *Escherichia coli* cells, the concentration of putrescine is very high (estimated to be 32.2 mM) (Igarashi & Kashiyagi, 2000).

We previously reported a novel ‘Puu pathway’: putrescine utilization pathway involves γ-glutamylated intermediates of *E. coli* (Fig. 1) (Kurihara *et al.*, 2005). The γ-glutamylation in this pathway contributes to stabilize the aldehyde intermediates (Kurihara *et al.*, 2005): γ-aminobutyraldehyde, the intermediates in the other putrescine degradation pathway of *E. coli*

without γ-glutamylation (Samsonova *et al.*, 2005), spontaneously cyclizes to Δ¹-pyrroline. In the Puu pathway, PuuD hydrolyzes γ-glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate (γ-Glu-GABA) to glutamate and γ-aminobutyrate. Here, we report the expression pattern, the properties and the physiological role of PuuD.

---

## Materials and methods

### Strain and plasmid construction
Strain SH639 is a GGT-deficient strain as described previously (Suzuki *et al.*, 1989). To avoid detecting the γ-glutamyl linkage hydrolysis activity of GGT as a background level of PuuD activity, all strains used in this study had an SH639 genetic background (Δ*ggta*-2).

A DNA fragment of Kohara clone #257 (Kohara *et al.*, 1987) containing the *ycj* gene cluster was cloned onto high copy number plasmids. Genes were disrupted as described previously (Datsenko & Wanner, 2000).

γ-Glutamyl-GABA hydrolase of Escherichia coli

NH₂-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-NH₂  Put  
PuuP  
Glu + NH₂-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-NH₂  Put  
ATP  
ADP+Pi  
γ-Glu-CO-NH-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-NH₂  
O₂  
H₂O₂+NH₃  
γ-Glu-CO-NH-CH₂-CH₂-CHO  
NAD(P)⁺+H₂O  
NAD(P)H+H⁺  
γ-Glu-CO-NH-CH₂-CH₂-COOH γ-Glu-GABA  
H₂O  
PuuB  
γ-Glu-Put  
PuuC  
γ-Glu-γ-aminobutyraldehyde PuuR  
PuuD  
Glu + NH₂-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-COOH GABA  
α-KG  
Glucose  
PuuE, GabT  
OHC-CH₂-CH₂-COOH Succinate semialdehyde  
NAD(P)⁺+H₂O  
NAD(P)H+H⁺  
?, GabD  
HOOC-CH₂-CH₂-COOH Succinate  
to TCA cycle  

Fig. 1. γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase pathway for the degradation of putrescine to succinate semialdehyde involves γ-glutamylated intermediates by *Escherichia coli*. The detail of this pathway is described elsewhere (Kurihara et al., 2005). GabD is encoded by *gabD* included in the *gabDTPC* operon (Schneider et al., 2002).

[W salts minimal medium (Bueno et al., 1985) containing 0.4% glucose as a sole carbon source and 0.2% putrescine as a sole nitrogen source (Schneider et al., 2002)] was used. To estimate the influence of another nitrogen source in the medium on *puuD* expression, 0.2% NH₄Cl was added to the W-put medium (W-Put+NH₄Cl) or was added instead of putrescine (W-NH₄Cl). For cell selection, kanamycin and chloramphenicol were used at 30 μg mL⁻¹.

### Analysis of amino-acid derivatives

The amounts of amino-acid derivatives in the samples were measured as described previously (Kurihara et al., 2005).

### Assay for PuuD activity

γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase was purified as described previously (Kurihara et al., 2005). The cell-free extract was prepared as follows. The 60 mL of culture was pelleted and resuspended in 6 mL of cold buffer, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.7) and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol. The suspension was sonicated for 5 min on ice, and centrifuged to prepare the cell-free extract. The PuuD activity was determined by measuring the γ-GpNA hydrolysis activity as described previously (Suzuki et al., 1989).

### Results

#### Effect of the growth phase and O₂ on the expression of *puuD*

The expression of *puuD* was measured along the growth phase of *Escherichia coli*. *puuD* was not expressed in exponential phase but was expressed most highly in early stationary phase (Fig. 2). The expression of *puuD* was dramatically repressed when *E. coli* was grown up with low aeration (Fig. 3a).

#### Effect of addition of carbon sources on the expression of *puuD*

To determine the influence of additional carbon sources on the expression of *puuD*, M9-tryptone was supplemented with three carbon sources, glucose, succinate, and putrescine. M9-tryptone contains 0.2% NH₄Cl as a rich nitrogen source, so the addition of putrescine allows *E. coli* to utilize putrescine as a carbon source. We could not perform experiments using putrescine as a sole carbon source because *E. coli* could not grow on putrescine as a sole carbon source. The culture was harvested at different growth stages and the PuuD activity was measured (Fig. 3b). Putrescine dramatically induced the expression of *puuD*, and succinate strongly repressed it while glucose repressed it weakly.

pBR322-*puuD*<sup>C114A</sup> was constructed with the QuikChange technique (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), using *puuD*-1 (5′-CCCCATTTCGCCATCGCCGGGGTTTACAAG-3′) and *puuD*-2 (5′-CT TGTAAACCCCGGGCGATGGCGAAAATGG GG-3′) as primers and KOD-plus-DNA polymerase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan).

### Media and reagents

In all experiments unless otherwise stated, strains were grown at 37°C with reciprocating shaking at 140 rpm (high aeration) or at 60 rpm (low aeration) in 60 mL of medium in a 300 mL Erlenmeyer flask.

M9-tryptone [M9 minimal medium (Miller, 1992), except that 1% Bacto tryptone was used instead of 0.2% glucose] was used in the determination of enzyme activities or overexpression of proteins. Putrescine, succinate, and glucose were added at 0.2% to M9-tryptone to compare the *puuD* expression in the media supplemented with the various carbon sources. To accumulate γ-glutamyl-putrescine (γ-Glu-Put) or γ-Glu-GABA in cells, M9-tryptone was supplemented with 5 mM putrescine.

To determine the ability of various strains to utilize putrescine and to estimate enzyme activities, W-Put medium

FEMS Microbiol Lett **256** (2006) 318–323
© 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved

Effect of nitrogen source on the expression of $puuD$

To observe the influence of the nitrogen source added as the sole or limited source of nitrogen to the medium, *E. coli* was grown in three W-salts-based media, W-Put, W-NH₄Cl, and W-Put+NH₄Cl. The culture was harvested at different growth stages and the PuuD activity was measured (Fig. 3c). Putrescine as the sole source of nitrogen induced the expression of $puuD$; however, NH₄Cl as the sole source of nitrogen did not induce it at all. The addition of NH₄Cl to W-put (W-Put+NH₄Cl) repressed the expression of $puuD$.

### Properties of PuuD

The optimal pH of purified PuuD for γ-GpNA hydrolysis activity was pH 8.5–9. The native molecular weight of PuuD was estimated to be 57 000 by gel filtration on a Superdex-200 HR10/30 FPLC column (GE Healthcare Biosciences Corp., Piscataway, NJ). This result suggests that the native enzyme exists as a homodimer because the molecular weight of PuuD monomer is expected to be 28 500 according to the N-terminal amino-acid sequence of purified PuuD and the

Fig. 2. The relationships between growth phase and the expression of γ-glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase ($puuD$) in *Escherichia coli* SH639 was grown in M9-Tryptone and harvested at the different growth stages to determine the expression of $puuD$. $\blacklozenge$ indicate the activity of PuuD. $\diamondsuit$ indicate Abs$_{600\text{nm}}$ of cells.

Fig. 3. (a) Induction of the expression of γ-glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase ($puuD$) by aeration of the culture strain SH639 was grown in M9-Tryptone with high (140 rpm) or low (60 rpm) aeration and harvested at different growth stages to determine the expression of $puuD$. ▲ and ■ indicate the activity of PuuD of cells grown with high and low aeration, respectively. △ and □ indicate Abs$_{600\text{nm}}$ of cells grown with high and low aeration, respectively. (b) Influences of additional carbon sources on the expression of $puuD$ Strain SH639 was cultivated in M9-Tryptone medium supplemented with 0.2% putrescine (■), 0.2% glucose (▲), 0.2% succinate (◆), or control (no addition) (●), and harvested at different growth stages to measure the activity of PuuD. (c) Influences of the sole source of nitrogen on the expression pattern of $puuD$ Strain SH639 was cultivated in W-Put, W-NH₄Cl, or W-Put+NH₄Cl medium. ■, ●, and ▲ indicate the activity of PuuD in cells grown in W-Put, W-NH₄Cl, and W-Put+NH₄Cl, respectively. □, ○, and △ indicate Abs$_{600\text{nm}}$ of cells grown in W-Put, W-NH₄Cl, and W-Put+NH₄Cl, respectively. (d) Summary of the influences of various chemicals on the expression of $puuD$.

information of the whole amino-acid sequence of PuuD from the database.

# Identification of a cysteine residue as the active center of PuuD

γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase has the amino-acid signature sequence of a G-type glutamine amidotransferase (Zalkin, 1993). G-type glutamine amidotransferases have a cysteine residue, whose SH group functions as a nucleophile, in the active center (Zalkin, 1993). In PuuD, Cys-114 was expected to be the active center, as indicated by the signature sequence. Two SH reagents, 0.1 mM *p*-chloromercuribenzoic acid and 5 mM iodoacetic acid, decreased the PuuD activity by 70% and 85%, respectively. Therefore, site-directed mutagenesis to construct *puuD*<sup>C114A</sup> was performed. The cell-free extract of SK140 (*pBR-puuD*<sup>C114A</sup>/Δ*puuD*) completely lacked the PuuD activity while the control strain SK139 (*pBR-puuD*/Δ*puuD*) overexpressed the activity (data not shown). The expression level of PuuD<sup>C114A</sup> was determined to be similar to that of PuuD<sup>WT</sup> by sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis (data not shown). This indicated that Cys-114 was in the active center of PuuD. The result is consistent with the stabilization of PuuD activity by β-mercaptoethanol (data not shown).

# The physiological role of PuuD

To make it clear that PuuD is essential to hydrolyze γ-Glu-GABA in the Puu pathway (Fig. 1), in which putrescine is utilized as a nutrient source by *E. coli*, several experiments were performed (Fig. 4). pBelo-*puuDRCBE* and pBelo-*puuD*<sup>C114A</sup>*RCBE*, and the Δ*puuDRCBE* strain (SK247) were constructed and SK247 was transformed with each of these plasmids separately. SK306 (pBelobac11/Δ*puuDRCBE*) lost the PuuD activity and the activity was restored in SK303 (pBelo-*puuDRCBE*/Δ*puuDRCBE*) to a level equal to that of SK308 (pBelobac11/*puuD*<sup>+</sup>*R*<sup>+</sup>*C*<sup>+</sup>*B*<sup>+</sup>*E*<sup>+</sup>), while the activity was not restored by pBelo-*puuD*<sup>C114A</sup>*RCBE* (Fig. 4a). There was no accumulation of amino-acid derivatives in the cell-free extract of SK308 (pBelobac11/*puuD*<sup>+</sup>*R*<sup>+</sup>*C*<sup>+</sup>*B*<sup>+</sup>*E*<sup>+</sup>), while γ-Glu-Put was accumulated in the cell-free extract of SK306 (pBelobac11/Δ*puuDRCBE*) because PuuB (which may catabolize γ-Glu-Put) and enzymes downstream of PuuB were disrupted in this strain (Fig. 4b). The accumulation of γ-Glu-Put was eliminated by transforming SK247 (Δ*puuDRCBE*) by pBelo-*puuDRCBE*, and the profile of amino-acid derivatives in SK308 (pBelo/*puuD*<sup>+</sup>*R*<sup>+</sup>*C*<sup>+</sup>*B*<sup>+</sup>*E*<sup>+</sup>) and in SK303 (pBelo-*puuDRCBE*/Δ*puuDRCBE*) show the same pattern (Fig. 4b). In SK307 (pBelo-*puuD*<sup>C114A</sup>*RCBE*/Δ*puuDRCBE*), the peak of γ-Glu-Put decreased and a peak of γ-Glu-GABA appeared (Fig. 4b). These results suggest that γ-Glu-Put was catabolized to γ-Glu-GABA by PuuB and PuuC, but γ-Glu-GABA was not hydrolyzed and accumulated because PuuD<sup>C114A</sup> lost the hydrolysis activity for γ-Glu-GABA. This result strongly suggests that PuuD hydrolyzes γ-Glu-GABA generated from putrescine by other enzymes in the Puu pathway.

The four strains used in Figs 4a and b were grown on W-Put plates that contain putrescine as a sole nitrogen source (Fig. 4c). SK308 (pBelobac11/*puuD*<sup>+</sup>*R*<sup>+</sup>*C*<sup>+</sup>*B*<sup>+</sup>*E*<sup>+</sup>) and SK303 (pBelo-*puuDRCBE*/Δ*puuDRCBE*) could grow on W-Put plates because these two strains have all the enzymes of the Puu pathway. SK306 (pBelobac11/Δ*puuDRCBE*) could not grow on W-Put plates because this strain does not have PuuB, PuuC, PuuD, and PuuE, which are important to catabolize putrescine. SK307 (pBelo-*puuD*<sup>C114A</sup>*RCBE*/Δ*puuDRCBE*), in which only the function of PuuD is disrupted, could not grow on W-Put plates. These results clearly indicate that PuuD is essential for growth on putrescine as a sole source of nitrogen.

## Discussion

The expression of *puuD* was repressed at the exponential phase and induced at the stationary phase. Some regulatory system of the *puu* gene cluster may repress its expression when nutrients in the medium are rich (exponential phase), and may induce its expression when nutrient starvation and the accumulation of putrescine in the medium are progressing (early stationary phase) (Schiller *et al.*, 2000). The *puuD* expression is induced in aerobic condition, while it is repressed in anaerobic condition. O<sub>2</sub> is assumed to be utilized in the step involving PuuB, γ-Glu-Put oxidase. If there is no enough O<sub>2</sub> available in the medium, γ-Glu-Put cannot be metabolized further by PuuB and the expression of *puuD* would be repressed. This idea is consistent with the finding that the deletion of the *puuB* resulted in the repression of *puuD* (Kurihara *et al.*, 2005). Another possibility is that some regulator senses the O<sub>2</sub> concentration in the cells and regulates the expression of *puuD*. However, according to the microarray study of OxyR (Zheng *et al.*, 2001), which is responsible for the gene regulation involved in defense against oxidative stress, *puuD* is not regulated by OxyR. Recently, it was reported that the expression of *puuD* is repressed in an anaerobic environment (Yisheng *et al.*, 2005); however, FNR, the major regulatory protein that responds to a decrease in O<sub>2</sub> levels in *Escherichia coli*, does not regulate the expression of *puuD* (the old name is *ycjL*) and there is no FNR recognition site upstream of *puuD* (Yisheng *et al.*, 2005). Also, according to a report that described ArcA, another major regulator that responds to low O<sub>2</sub> levels in *E. coli*, *puuD* is not included in the ArcA regulon (Liu & Wulf, 2004). Putrescine as both carbon and nitrogen source, and the substrate of the Puu pathway (Fig. 1), which include PuuD, induced the expression of *puuD*, while succinate and NH<sub>4</sub>Cl, the product of the Puu pathway,

Fig. 4. (a) γ-Glutamyl-γ-aminobutyrate hydrolase (PuuD) activity of various strains (p- in the figure means plasmid vector pBelobac11). (b) Amino-acid profile of various strains detected by high-performance liquid chromatography. The numbers under the charts indicate the elution time in minutes (p- in the figure means plasmid vector pBelobac11). (c) Physiological role of PuuD in Escherichia coli cells grown on W-Put plates (minimal medium containing 0.2% putrescine as a sole nitrogen source) (p- in the figure means plasmid vector pBelobac11).

and glucose repressed the expression of *puuD* (Figs 3b–d). There is no CRP-binding site upstream of *puuD*. Thus, it is suggested that the weak repression of *puuD* caused by glucose is not caused by cAMP-mediated catabolite repression, but rather caused by the effect of succinate catabolized from glucose through the glycolytic pathway and the tricarboxylic acid cycle (Figs 3b and d). The putative promoter of *puuD* is expected to depend on σ⁷⁰. The expression of *puuD* is not regulated by NtrC, which activates σ⁵⁴-dependent genes to minimize slowing of growth under nitrogen-limiting conditions, according to the microarray experiment

(Zimmer et al., 2000). There is another regulator, Nac (Pomposiello et al., 1998), which activates σ⁷⁰-dependent genes to adapt to nitrogen starvation. However, *puuD* is not thought to be under Nac control because there is no consensus sequence of Nac recognition site upstream of *puuD*.

There is no known regulator, which involves in the expression of *puuD*. However, PuuR repressed the expression of *puuD* (Kurihara et al., 2005). It is suggested that PuuR is one of the regulators for *puuD*, which responds various environmental change described above. Further

γ-Glutamyl-GABA hydrolase of Escherichia coli

study to clarify the relationship of *puuD* and PuuR is now progressing.

* gabD* is included in the *gabDTPC* operon (Schneider et al., 2002). GabD and GabT make up GABA metabolic pathway; GabT catalyzes the formation of succinate semialdehyde from GABA, and GabD oxidizes succinate semialdehyde to succinate. PuuE, the second GABA amino-transferase included in Puu pathway, catalyze the same reaction as GabT (Fig. 1). Both the Δ*gabT* strain and the Δ*puuE* strain could grow on medium containing putrescine as a sole nitrogen source, while Δ*gabT* Δ*puuE* double deletion mutant could not (Kurihara et al., 2005). This result indicated that GabT and PuuE complement each other. PuuE activity was induced by putrescine (unpublished data), but the expression of *gabDTPC* is not induced by putrescine (Schneider et al., 2002). It was suggested that there is the second succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase induced by putrescine (Schneider et al., 2002). This second succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase is thought to function more expeditiously than GabD in the putrescine utilization.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research, No. 15580061, from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan. S. K. and S. O. are supported by the 21st century COE Program of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan.

## References

Bueno R, Pahel G & Magasanik B (1985) Role of *glnB* and *glnD* gene products in regulation of the *glnALG* operon of *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 164: 816–822.

Datsenko KA & Wanner BL (2000) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 97: 6640–6645.

Igarashi K & Kashiyagi K (2000) Polyamines: mysterious modulators of cellular functions. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 271: 559–564.

Kohara Y, Akiyama K & Isono K (1987) The physical map of the whole *E. coli* chromosome: application of a new strategy for rapid analysis and sorting of a large genomic library. *Cell* 50: 495–508.

Kurihara S, Oda S, Kato K, Kim HG, Koyanagi T, Kumagai H & Suzuki H (2005) A novel putrescine utilization pathway involves γ-glutamylated intermediates of *Escherichia coli* K-12. *J Biol Chem* 280: 4602–4608.

Liu X & Wulf PD (2004) Probing the ArcA-P modulon of *Escherichia coli* by whole genome transcriptional analysis and sequence recognition profiling. *J Biol Chem* 279: 12588–12597.

Miller JH (1992) A short course in bacterial genetics. *A Laboratory Manual and Handbook for Escherichia coli and Related Bacteria*, pp. 263–274 and 437. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

Pomposiello PJ, Janes BK & Bender RA (1998) Two roles for the DNA recognition site of the *Klebsiella aerogenes* nitrogen assimilation control protein. *J Bacteriol* 180: 578–585.

Samsonova NN, Smirnov SV, Novikova AE & Ptitsyn LR (2005) Identification of *Escherichia coli* K12 *YdcW* protein as a γ-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase. *FEBS Lett* 579: 4107–4112.

Schiller D, Kruse D, Kneifel H, Kramer R & Burkovski A (2000) Polyamine transport and role of *potE* in response to osmotic stress in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 182: 6247–6249.

Schneider BL, Ruback SA, Kiupakis K, Kasbarian H, Pybus C & Reitzer L (2002) The *Escherichia coli gabDTPC* operon: specific γ-aminobutyrate catabolism and nonspecific induction. *J Bacteriol* 184: 6976–6986.

Suzuki H, Kumagai H, Echigo T & Tochikura T (1989) DNA sequence of the *Escherichia coli* K-12 γ-glutamyltranspeptidase gene, *ggt*. *J Bacteriol* 171: 5169–5172.

Tabor CW & Tabor H (1984) Polyamines. *Annu Rev Biochem* 53: 749–790.

Yisheng K, Weber KD, Qiu Y, Kiley PJ & Blattner FR (2005) Genome-wide expression analysis indicates that FNR of *Escherichia coli* K-12 regulates a large number of genes of unknown function. *J Bacteriol* 187: 1135–1160.

Zalkin H (1993) The amidotransferases. *Adv Enzymol Relat Area Mol Biol* 66: 210–214.

Zheng M, Wang X, Templeton LJ, Smulski DR, LaRossa RA & Storz G (2001) DNA microarray-mediated transcriptional profiling of the *Escherichia coli* response to hydrogen peroxide. *J Bacteriol* 183: 4562–4570.

Zimmer DP, Soupene E, Lee HL, Wendisch VF, Khodursky AB, Peter BJ, Bender RA & Kustu S (2000) Nitrogen regulatory protein C-controlled genes of *Escherichia coli*: scavenging as a defense against nitrogen limitation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 97: 14674–14679.
