
mini review

http://www.kidney-international.org

© 2006 International Society of Nephrology

# Coordinated control of renal Ca²⁺ handling

TT Lambers¹, RJM Bindels¹ and JGJ Hoenderop¹

¹Department of Physiology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Ca²⁺ homeostasis is an important factor, which is underlined by the numerous clinical symptoms that involve Ca²⁺ deficiencies. The overall Ca²⁺ balance is maintained by the concerted action of Ca²⁺ absorption in the intestine, reabsorption in the kidney, and exchange from bone, which are all under the control of the calciotropic hormones that are released upon a demand for Ca²⁺. In the kidney, these calciotropic hormones affect active Ca²⁺ reabsorption, which consists of TRPV5 as the apical entry gate for Ca²⁺ influx, calbindin-D₂₈K as an intracellular ferry for Ca²⁺ and, NCX1 and PMCA1b for extrusion of Ca²⁺ across the basolateral membrane. This review highlights the action of hormones on renal Ca²⁺ handling and focuses on the coordinated control of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Parathyroid hormone stimulates renal Ca²⁺ handling by regulating active Ca²⁺ reabsorption on both the genomic and non-genomic level. Estrogens harbor calciotropic hormone characteristics positively regulating the expression of TRPV5, independently of vitamin D. Besides having a strong regulatory effect on the expression of the intestinal Ca²⁺ transport proteins, vitamin D contributes to the overall Ca²⁺ balance by enhancing the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport machinery in the kidney. Dietary Ca²⁺ is involved in regulating its own handling by controlling the expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Thus, the magnitude of Ca²⁺ entry via TRPV5 controls the expression of the other Ca²⁺ transport proteins underlining the gatekeeper function of this Ca²⁺ channel in the renal Ca²⁺ handling.

Kidney International (2006) **69**, 650–654. doi:10.1038/sj.ki.5000169; published online 11 January 2006

KEYWORDS: Ca²⁺ homeostasis; TRPV5; PTH; vitamin D; estrogens

Ion homeostasis in our body is tightly regulated and disturbances in its balance may lead to pathogenesis. The kidney plays a vital role in this process by balancing the dietary intake with the reabsorption from the pro-urine. One of these ions is Ca²⁺ that plays a key role in many physiological processes like hormone secretion, muscle contraction, bone formation, nerve conduction, exocytosis, and (in)activation of enzymes. The body, therefore, carefully regulates the plasma concentration of Ca²⁺ within a narrow range by the concerted action of intestinal Ca²⁺ absorption, exchange of Ca²⁺ from bone and renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption. An intrinsic physiological mechanism is sensing the Ca²⁺ demand by a specialized Ca²⁺-sensing receptor that activates a cascade of pathways, eventually leading to the synthesis and release of calciotropic hormones, including 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ (1,25(OH)₂D₃), parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcitonin. These hormones act in a paracrine fashion, efficiently regulating the above-described Ca²⁺ transport processes. In the kidney, Ca²⁺ can re-enter the blood by paracellular (passive) as well as transcellular (active) Ca²⁺ reabsorption and the latter is the main target for the calciotropic hormones. Active Ca²⁺ reabsorption comprises a sequence of processes restricted to the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and the connecting tubule (CNT). At the cellular level, Ca²⁺ enters the renal epithelial cell via the highly Ca²⁺-selective channel TRPV5 because of a steep inward electrochemical gradient across the apical membrane. In the cell, Ca²⁺ is bound to calbindin-D₂₈K that ferries Ca²⁺ from the apical side to the basolateral side where the Na⁺/Ca²⁺-exchanger (NCX1) and the plasma membrane ATPase (PMCA1b) extrude Ca²⁺ into the blood compartment (Figure 1). In the intestine, a similar mechanism for transcellular Ca²⁺ absorption occurs with TRPV6 as the gatekeeper, calbindin-D₉K as intracellular ferry of Ca²⁺ and PMCA1b as the extrusion mechanism. This review highlights the hormonal regulation of Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney and focuses on the coordinated expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, NCX1, and PMCA1b as the underlying mechanism contributing to the Ca²⁺ balance.

---

Correspondence: JGJ Hoenderop, Department of Physiology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands. E-mail: j.hoenderop@ncmls.ru.nl

Received 27 October 2005; revised 27 October 2005; accepted 7 November 2005; published online 11 January 2006

---

## RENAL Ca²⁺ HANDLING AND PTH

Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by PTH levels that are inappropriate to the level of plasma Ca²⁺ and is one of the endocrine disorders that underline the importance of

Kidney International (2006) **69**, 650–654

TT Lambers et al.: Coordinated control of renal Ca²⁺ handling

familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism (inactivating mutations), and autosomal-dominant hypocalcemia (activating mutations). From the clinical symptoms of these PTH-related disorders, including hypo- or hypercalciuria and renal stone formation, it is evident that renal Ca²⁺ handling is also affected. PTH receptors have been detected throughout the nephron including DCT and CNT, thus enabling the body to directly control active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney via PTH. In addition, genetic ablation of Ca²⁺-sensing receptor resulted in hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia, accompanied by an upregulation of TRPV5 and TRPV6 in the kidney and intestine, respectively (Table 1). To understand the molecular regulation of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins by PTH, parathyroidectomy was performed in rats. The effectiveness of this treatment was evident from the marked reduction of PTH levels and hyperphosphatemia, a well-known symptom in hypoparathyroidism. Moreover, parathyroidectomy reduced the expression of TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, and NCX1. This decline in expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins resulted in decreased active Ca²⁺ reabsorption and the development of hypocalcemia. PTH supplementation in these parathyroidectomized rats resulted in normalization of the renal Ca²⁺ transport protein expression levels and increased the plasma Ca²⁺ concentration. In addition, the regulation by PTH was investigated in primary cultures of rabbit CNT and cortical collecting duct (CCD) cells. PTH

Figure 1 | Transcellular Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney.
Integrated model of active transcellular Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney that consists of TRPV5 as the apical entry gate for Ca²⁺, calbindin-D₂₈K as an intracellular ferry protein for Ca²⁺ and, NCX1 and PMCA1b as Ca²⁺ extrusion systems across the basolateral membrane to the blood compartment. See text for details.

Table 1 | Coordinated regulation of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins

| Kidney          | Intestine       |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| TRPV5           | TRPV6           |
| Calbindin-D₂₈K  | Calbindin-D₉K   |
| NCX1            | PMCA1b          |
| PMCA1b          | Reference       |

| PTH             |                 |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| CaSR            | ↑               |
| Parathyroidectomy | ↓              |
| Parathyroidectomy+PTH replacement therapy | ↑               |
| PTH supplementation | ↑               |

| Estrogens       |                 |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| Estrogen receptor-α⁻/⁻ | ↓               |
| Ovariectomy      | =               |
| Ovariectomy+replacement therapy | ↑/=            |
| Estrogen supplementation in 1α-OHase⁻/⁻ | ↑               |
| Estrogen supplementation in ovariectomized VDR⁻/⁻ | ↑               |

| Vitamin D       |                 |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| Vitamin D deficiency | ↓               |
| 1α-OHase⁻/⁻     | ↓               |
| VDR⁻/⁻          | =               |
| 1,25(OH)₂D₃ supplementation in vitamin D deficiency | ↑               |

| Ca²⁺            |                 |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| Ca²⁺ supplementation in 1α-OHase⁻/⁻ | ↑               |

| Miscellaneous   |                 |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| TRPV5⁻/⁻        | ND              |

Overview of the different studies investigating the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins in the kidney and intestine. Genetic ablation, dietary, and hormonal Ca²⁺ alterations demonstrated a concomitant regulation in expression of the renal and intestinal Ca²⁺ transport proteins.
↑, upregulation; ↓, downregulation; =, no change in expression; NM, not measured; ND not detectable; PTH, parathyroid hormone; CaSR, Ca²⁺-sensing receptor; 1α-OHase, 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1α-hydroxylase.

³Genetic ablation of the CaSR resulted in a severe hyperparathyroidism. See text for details.

Kidney International (2006) 69, 650–654

resulted in an elevated expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, NCX1, and PMCA1b in these renal cultures. Taken together, these results indicate that PTH stimulates renal Ca²⁺ handling by co-regulating the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins.

Regulation of expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins, however, is a relatively slow process whereas a fast non-genomic response operates on a time scale that is sufficient for an immediate increase of Ca²⁺ reabsorption. An established pathway for short-term PTH-stimulated active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney is activation of adenyl cyclase, accumulation of cyclic adenosine 3′,5′ monophosphate and subsequent stimulation of protein kinase A. PTH addition to perfused rabbit CNT and primary cultures of rabbit CNT and CCD resulted in a rise of cytosolic cyclic adenosine 3′,5′ monophosphate levels accompanied by an increase in the cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration and transcellular Ca²⁺ transport.⁶,⁷ Moreover, protein kinase A inhibitors reduced the PTH-mediated rise of cytosolic Ca²⁺, which suggests that cyclic adenosine 3′,5′ monophosphate-dependent phosphorylation is an essential step in short-term PTH stimulation. In addition to cyclic adenosine 3′,5′ monophosphate, a prominent role for protein kinase C was demonstrated in the short-term PTH response.⁸ Thus, besides a genomic effect, PTH can stimulate Ca²⁺ reabsorption directly via a short-term mechanism involving protein kinase A and protein kinase C. Taken together, these studies reveal that PTH-dependent stimulation of transcellular Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney occurs via both genomic and non-genomic pathways.

of the other Ca²⁺ transport proteins remained unaltered.³ In the intestine, estrogens regulate the expression of TRPV6 in a vitamin D-independent manner, which became clear from estrogen supplementation in vitamin D receptor and 1α-OHase knockout mice. This resulted in an upregulation of duodenal TRPV6, whereas the expression of calbindin-D₉K and PMCA1b was not altered.³ Thus, estrogens harbor calcitropic hormone characteristics regulating the expression of TRPV5 and TRPV6 in the kidney and intestine, respectively.

### RENAL Ca²⁺ HANDLING AND VITAMIN D

The active form of vitamin D, 1,25(OH)₂D₃, is an important hormone in the body Ca²⁺ homeostasis. This is reflected by several vitamin D-related disorders with symptoms like rickets and hypercalciuria. Inactivating mutations in 1α-OHase are associated with vitamin D-deficiency rickets type I¹⁰ and mutations in the vitamin D receptor are associated with hypocalcemic rickets.¹¹ Active Ca²⁺ reabsorption is a main target for 1,25(OH)₂D₃, as illustrated by 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated Ca²⁺ transport in primary cultures of rabbit CNT and CCD cells and human intestinal Caco-2 cells.⁶,¹² Strikingly, microarray analysis of 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated carcinoma cells revealed TRPV6 as one of the most highly vitamin D-responsive genes.¹³

Evidence for 1,25(OH)₂D₃-controlled expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins came from rats that were raised on a vitamin D-deficient diet. This diet decreased the renal expression of TRPV5, which was accompanied by a marked drop in plasma Ca²⁺ levels. In addition, genetic ablation of 1α-OHase in mice resulted in severe hypocalcemia, hyperparathyroidism, bone abnormalities, and retarded growth.¹⁴ In line with the development of hypocalcemia is the diminished Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney, presumably as a result of the downregulated expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, and NCX1.³ Supplementation of 1,25(OH)₂D₃ restored the expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins and normalized the hypocalcemia.³ Thus, vitamin D is of fundamental importance for the regulation of renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins and the maintenance of a normal Ca²⁺ balance.

Mice lacking TRPV5 display robust renal Ca²⁺ wasting because of impaired Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the DCT and CNT.¹⁵ In addition, elevated 1,25(OH)₂D₃ plasma levels, intestinal Ca²⁺ hyperabsorption, and reduced bone thickness were demonstrated. Besides the decreased storage of Ca²⁺ in bone, compensatory hyperabsorption of Ca²⁺ in the intestine prevented hypocalcemia in these knockout mice. The underlying mechanism of this compensatory hyperabsorption is hypervitaminosis D, which increases the expression of the intestinal Ca²⁺ transport proteins TRPV6, calbindin-D₉K, and PMCA1b.¹⁵ This finding indicates that a renal Ca²⁺ leak because of the absence of TRPV5 triggers a rescue mechanism resulting in an increased production of vitamin D stimulating intestinal Ca²⁺ absorption. The absence of hypervitaminosis D in the recently developed

### RENAL Ca²⁺ HANDLING AND ESTROGENS

An increased risk for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women is associated with estrogen deficiency. Furthermore, estrogen deficiency is associated with renal Ca²⁺ wasting and intestinal Ca²⁺ malabsorption that can be restored by estrogen replacement therapy.⁹ From these findings, the physiological relevance of estrogens in maintaining the Ca²⁺ balance is feasible. In addition, this suggests that estrogens can comply with the action of the calcitropic hormones, regulating the expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Estrogen receptors have been detected in DCT and CNT, thus enabling the body to directly regulate active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney by estrogen.³ Estrogen replacement therapy in ovariectomized rats revealed an increase in the expression of TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, NCX1, and PMCA1b in the kidney suggesting an important role for this hormone in regulating Ca²⁺ reabsorption.³ In addition, genetic ablation of the estrogen receptor-α in mice decreased the expression of the aforementioned renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. In principle, these effects could be explained by estrogen-dependent vitamin D activation. This possibility was investigated in vitamin D-deficient animal models. Estrogen supplementation in 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1α-hydroxylase (1α-OHase) knockout mice increased the expression of TRPV5 in the kidney, whereas the expression

1α-OHase and TRPV5 double knockout (1α-OHase⁻/⁻/TRPV5⁻/⁻) mice, resulted in hypocalcemia and thus suggests that the elevated level of 1,25(OH)₂D₃ in the TRPV5⁻/⁻ mice is responsible for the upregulation of intestinal Ca²⁺ transport proteins and the resulting Ca²⁺ hyperabsorption.¹⁶ The absence of hyperabsorption in 1α-OHase⁻/⁻/TRPV5⁻/⁻ mice generated in a more aggravated phenotype compared to TRPV5 ablation. Thus, 1,25(OH)₂D₃ is crucial to compensate for the renal Ca²⁺ leak and to maintain normal plasma Ca²⁺ levels in TRPV5⁻/⁻ mice. Importantly, PTH levels in these knockout models are comparable to wild-type littermates, indicating that the observed regulation is not because of altered PTH levels.

### RENAL Ca²⁺ HANDLING AND DIETARY Ca²⁺

Hereditary hypocalcemic vitamin D-resistant rickets, which are caused by a genetic defect in the VDR gene, are treated with a high dietary Ca²⁺ load.¹⁷ This suggests that dietary Ca²⁺ can act as an additional regulatory mechanism of Ca²⁺ handling independent of vitamin D. From a molecular point of view, dietary Ca²⁺ affects the Ca²⁺ balance by regulating the expression of the renal and intestinal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. This is evident from high dietary Ca²⁺ supplementation in mice which, among others, resulted in a decreased TRPV5 and TRPV6 expression.³ This decline in expression is likely mediated by the accompanied decrease in 1,25(OH)₂D₃ levels. However, in 1α-OHase knockout mice a high dietary Ca²⁺ load normalized the plasma Ca²⁺ concentration as well as the expression of TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, NCX1, and PMCA1b.³ Likewise, in mice that lack vitamin D receptor an increased dietary Ca²⁺ intake upregulates the expression of TRPV5 in the kidney.¹⁷ In addition, the expression of TRPV6 in the intestine was increased. Taken together, dietary Ca²⁺ regulates the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins, independent of 1,25(OH)₂D₃.

### COORDINATED CONTROL OF RENAL Ca²⁺ HANDLING

Various studies exploring the regulatory role of 1,25(OH)₂D₃, estrogens, PTH, and dietary Ca²⁺ revealed a concomitant regulation of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Additional evidence for 1,25(OH)₂D₃- and PTH-independent regulation of the Ca²⁺ balance was obtained from TRPV5 knockout mice. Downregulation of the vitamin D-dependent Ca²⁺ transport proteins calbindin-D₂₈K and NCX1 in kidneys of these knockout mice despite elevated levels of 1,25(OH)₂D₃ suggests that TRPV5 is primarily involved in the regulation of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins expression in the kidney independent of 1,25(OH)₂D₃. An interesting question is how the expression of TRPV5 specifically coordinates the Ca²⁺ transport machinery. Because TRPV5 is the gatekeeper controlling the apical Ca²⁺ influx, it is feasible that the magnitude of Ca²⁺ influx through TRPV5 determines the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins. This hypothesis was recently investigated using primary cultures of rabbit CNT and CCD.⁵ Long-term exposure to PTH stimulated transepithelial Ca²⁺ transport in these epithelial cells, and concomitantly elevated the expression of TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, and NCX1. Blockage of TRPV5 channel activity by ruthenium red eliminated PTH-stimulated transepithelial Ca²⁺ transport, which was accompanied by a reduction in NCX1 and calbindin-D₂₈K expression. These findings support the hypothesis that the magnitude of the Ca²⁺ influx through TRPV5 controls the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins. This implicates an efficient regulation of Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney where Ca²⁺ regulates its own transport activity. An important question that remains to be answered is how the flux of Ca²⁺ through TRPV5 adjusts the expression of the Ca²⁺ transport proteins.

Previous studies have indicated that Ca²⁺ is important for gene transcription. A Ca²⁺-responsive element has been identified in the promoter sequence of calbindin-D₂₈K that partly underlies the Purkinje cell-specific expression of calbindin-D₂₈K.¹⁸ However, it is not known whether this element is active in the kidney and/or additional intracellular signaling molecules are involved. An established pathway for Ca²⁺-dependent signaling to the nucleus is via the ubiquitously expressed Ca²⁺ sensor calmodulin that can stimulate gene expression via distinct pathways. Nuclear calmodulin-dependent kinase IV and the transcription factor CREB (cyclic adenosine 3′,5′ monophosphate response binding protein) are among the calmodulin-regulated proteins that affect gene expression.¹⁹ Besides calmodulin, the Ca²⁺-binding protein calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells signaling pathway can also stimulate gene expression upon a rise of intracellular Ca²⁺ and recently this pathway has been shown to be essential for the expression of the sodium-phosphate co-transporter (NaPi) in the kidney.²⁰ Currently, it is not known whether these pathways are involved in renal TRPV5-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling.

To further identify gene products in the kidney that are regulated by high dietary Ca²⁺ and/or 1,25(OH)₂D₃, cDNA microarray analysis was performed on kidneys from high dietary Ca²⁺ or 1,25(OH)₂D₃-treated 1α-OHase knockout mice. In this study, 1,25(OH)₂D₃ induced a significant regulation of ~1000 genes, whereas dietary Ca²⁺ supplementation of the 1α-OHase knockout mice revealed ~2000 controlled genes.³ Importantly, Ca²⁺ transport proteins including NCX1 and calbindin-D₂₈K were among the dietary Ca²⁺ regulated genes. This confirms previous findings that besides vitamin D, dietary Ca²⁺ regulates the expression of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Furthermore, intracellular signaling molecules, including calmodulin, were identified that might be part of the signaling pathway that underlie the Ca²⁺ regulated expression in the kidney. Further research is, however, needed to establish a comprehensive molecular mechanism underlying the Ca²⁺-dependent genomic regulation of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins.

### CONCLUSION

Regulation of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins TRPV5, calbindin-D₂₈K, NCX1, and PMCA1b, which determine the

net active flux of Ca²⁺ to the blood compartment, is of physiological importance to maintain the Ca²⁺ balance. We have presented an overview of the current knowledge concerning the hormonal regulation of renal Ca²⁺ handling and focused on the mechanism of coordinated control of the renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins. These findings constitute the mechanism of regulating active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney via TRPV5. Once the activity of the gatekeeper TRPV5 is altered, the complete Ca²⁺ transport machinery will be affected accordingly, as the magnitude of the Ca²⁺ flux that enters the cell via TRPV5 coordinates the expression of the other Ca²⁺ transport proteins. The underlying molecular signaling pathway, however, remains to be identified. Future studies like promoter analysis in the Ca²⁺ transporter genes to identify Ca²⁺-responsive elements, and experiments focusing on the different Ca²⁺-dependent signaling pathways will bring further knowledge about the Ca²⁺-regulated coordinated control of renal Ca²⁺ transporters. From a clinical point of view, these findings reveal an efficient way to regulate overall renal Ca²⁺ handling by compounds that specifically stimulate or inhibit the gatekeeper TRPV5.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported by the Dutch Organization of Scientific Research (Zon-Mw 016.006.001, NWO-ALW 805.09.042), Human Frontiers Science Program (RGP32/2004), and the Dutch Kidney Foundation (C03.6017).

**REFERENCES**

1. Pollak MR, Brown EM, Chou YH *et al.* Mutations in the human Ca²⁺-sensing receptor gene cause familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. *Cell* 1993; **75**: 1297–1303.
2. Pollak MR, Brown EM, Estep HL *et al.* Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia caused by a Ca²⁺-sensing receptor gene mutation. *Nat Genet* 1994; **8**: 303–307.
3. Hoenderop JG, Nilius B, Bindels RJ. Calcium absorption across epithelia. *Physiol Rev* 2005; **85**: 373–422.
4. Kos CH, Karaplis AC, Peng JB *et al.* The calcium-sensing receptor is required for normal calcium homeostasis independent of parathyroid hormone. *J Clin Invest* 2003; **111**: 1021–1028.
5. van Abel M, Hoenderop JG, van der Kemp AW *et al.* Coordinated control of renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins by parathyroid hormone. *Kidney Int* 2005; **68**: 1708–1721.
6. Bindels RJ, Hartog A, Timmermans J *et al.* Active Ca²⁺ transport in primary cultures of rabbit kidney CCD: stimulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ and PTH. *Am J Physiol* 1991; **261**: F799–F807.
7. Lau K, Bourdeau JE. Evidence for cAMP-dependent protein kinase in mediating the parathyroid hormone-stimulated rise in cytosolic free calcium in rabbit connecting tubules. *J Biol Chem* 1989; **264**: 4028–4032.
8. Hoenderop JG, De Pont JJ, Bindels RJ *et al.* Hormone-stimulated Ca²⁺ reabsorption in rabbit kidney cortical collecting system is cAMP-independent and involves a phorbol ester-insensitive PKC isotype. *Kidney Int* 1999; **55**: 225–233.
9. Prince RL, Smith M, Dick IM *et al.* Prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis. A comparative study of exercise, calcium supplementation, and hormone-replacement therapy. *N Engl J Med* 1991; **325**: 1189–1195.
10. Kitanaka S, Takeyama K, Murayama A *et al.* Inactivating mutations in the 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃ 1alpha-hydroxylase gene in patients with pseudovitamin D-deficiency rickets. *N Engl J Med* 1998; **338**: 653–661.
11. Hughes MR, Malloy PJ, Kieback DG *et al.* Point mutations in the human vitamin D receptor gene associated with hypocalcemic rickets. *Science* 1988; **242**: 1702–1705.
12. Fleet JC, Eksir F, Hance KW *et al.* Vitamin D-inducible calcium transport and gene expression in three Caco-2 cell lines. *Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol* 2002; **283**: G618–G625.
13. Wang TT, Tavera-Mendoza LE, Laperriere D *et al.* Large-scale in silico and microarray-based identification of direct 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ target genes. *Mol Endocrinol* 2005; **19**: 2685–2695.
14. Dardenne O, Prud'homme J, Arabian A *et al.* Targeted inactivation of the 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1(alpha)-hydroxylase gene (CYP27B1) creates an animal model of pseudovitamin D-deficiency rickets. *Endocrinology* 2001; **142**: 3135–3141.
15. Hoenderop JG, van Leeuwen JP, van der Eerden B *et al.* Renal Ca²⁺ wasting, hyperabsorption and reduced bone thickness in mice lacking TRPV5. *J Clin Invest* 2003; **112**: 1906–1914.
16. Renkema KY, Nijenhuis T, van der Eerden BC *et al.* Hypervitaminosis D mediates compensatory Ca²⁺ hyperabsorption in TRPV5 knockout mice. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 2005; **16**: 3188–3195.
17. van Cromphaut S, Dewerchin M, Hoenderop JG *et al.* Active duodenal calcium absorption in vitamin D receptor-knock out mice: functional and molecular aspects. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001; **98**: 13324–13329.
18. Arnold DB, Heintz N. A calcium responsive element that regulates expression of two calcium binding proteins in Purkinje cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1997; **94**: 8842–8847.
19. Ashby MC, Tepikin AV. Polarized calcium and calmodulin signaling in secretory epithelia. *Physiol Rev* 2002; **82**: 701–734.
20. Moz Y, Levi R, Lavi-Moshayoff V *et al.* Calcineurin Abeta is central to the expression of the renal type II Na/Pi co-transporter gene and to the regulation of renal phosphate transport. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 2004; **15**: 2972–2980.
