
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, July 1996, p. 2257–2263  
0099-2240/96/$04.00+0  
Copyright © 1996, American Society for Microbiology  

# Reduction and Acetylation of 2,4-Dinitrotoluene by a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* Strain  

**DANIEL R. NOGUERA*** AND DAVID L. FREEDMAN**  
*Department of Civil Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801*  

Received 16 February 1996/Accepted 18 April 1996  

Aerobic and anoxic biotransformation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) was examined by using a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain isolated from a plant treating propellant manufacturing wastewater. DNT biotransformation in the presence and absence of oxygen was mostly reductive and was representative of the type of cometabolic transformations that occur when a high concentration of an easily degradable carbon source is present. *P. aeruginosa* reduced both nitro groups on DNT, with the formation of mainly 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene and 2-amino-4-nitrotoluene and small quantities of 2,4-diaminotoluene. Acetylation of the arylamines was a significant reaction. 4-Acetamide-2-nitrotoluene and the novel compounds 2-acetamide-4-nitrotoluene, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene, and 2,4-diacetamidetoluene were identified as DNT metabolites. The biotransformation of 2,4-diaminotoluene to 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene was 24 times faster than abiotic transformation. 2-Nitrotoluene and 4-nitrotoluene were also reduced to their corresponding toluidines and then acetylated. However, the yield of 4-acetamidetoluene was much higher than that of 2-acetamidetoluene, demonstrating that acetylation at the position *para* to the methyl group was favored.

The presence of nitrotoluenes in the environment is primarily the result of their use in the manufacture of pesticides and dyes and as explosives and propellants (12). There are two general mechanisms for the biological transformation of nitroaromatic compounds, namely, oxidation and reduction (28). In oxidative reactions, molecular oxygen is a required reactant, and oxygenase (32) or peroxidase (34, 36) enzymes mediate the cleavage of the aromatic ring, resulting in mineralization of the compounds. A more common reaction affecting nitroaromatic compounds is their reduction to arylamines (15), which can occur under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Further transformation of the arylamines is also possible through mechanisms such as hydrolytic deamination (4), acetylation (9, 23, 29), reductive deamination (23, 35), and cyclization (11, 23).

During aerobic bioremediation and treatment of nitroaromatic-contaminated wastewaters and soils, competition between oxidative and reductive transformations is of paramount importance in determining the success of the treatment. While in some cases reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to the corresponding arylamines is a required initial step before oxidative biotransformation and mineralization take place (5, 10, 36), reduction can also result in the formation of more refractory by-products, diminishing the extent of mineralization. For example, during the degradation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) by *Phanerochaete chrysosporium*, a portion of the original DNT is transformed to 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene (4Am2NT) and 2,4-diaminotoluene (DAT), which are not intermediates in the mineralization pathway (36). This may partially explain the low mineralization yields observed.

Competition between reductive and oxidative transformations is of particular importance in the aerobic treatment of DNT-contaminated wastewaters from propellant manufacturing, where high concentrations of an easily degradable organic source such as ethanol (17, 24, 31) appears to favor the co-

---

metabolic reduction of DNT. Freedman et al. (7) illustrated this effect in cultures enriched from the biological treatment system at the Radford Army Ammunition Plant (RAAP). When cultures were grown on DNT as the only source of organic carbon, 100% of the DNT was oxidatively transformed, but when the same culture was incubated with ethanol as the main organic carbon source, only 59% of the DNT was directly oxidized, and reduced products such as 2-amino-4-nitrotoluene (2Am4NT) and 4Am2NT accumulated transiently (7). In addition, 2Am4NT and 4Am2NT are frequently detected during routine analysis of the wastewater effluent from RAAP (20). Because the treatment plant at RAAP receives high concentrations of easily degradable organic substrates (in addition to DNT), it facilitates the growth of microorganisms with a variety of metabolic capabilities, and therefore, the fate of DNT and the efficiency of treatment depend on (i) how efficiently DNT-oxidizing microorganisms compete with other organisms that reductively transform DNT and (ii) the ability of organisms in the culture to transform and mineralize the reduced products of DNT.

Our primary objective was to investigate the fate of the portion of DNT that is reductively transformed during aerobic treatment at RAAP. We have reported previously (7) on the development of aerobic cultures enriched from the RAAP treatment plant that are able to oxidize 2Am4NT, 4Am2NT, and DAT, which are the usual products of the reductive transformation of DNT (19, 36). More recently, we reported the identification of mononitrotoluenes, acetylated aminotoluenes, and 6-nitroindazole as products from the reductive transformation of DNT in an anoxic culture enriched from RAAP (23). In this paper, we report on the aerobic reduction and acetylation of DNT and several DNT metabolites by a strain of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* isolated from the anoxic enrichment culture. This activity is important in understanding the overall fate of DNT during aerobic treatment of munition wastes at RAAP.

---

*MATERIALS AND METHODS*

Chemicals. All of the commercially available aromatic compounds purchased were of the highest purity possible. Solvents such as methanol, ethanol, and

2257

The headspace of the bottles was flushed with helium or nitrogen gas before the bottles were sealed. The absence of oxygen was confirmed by gas chromatographic (GC) analysis of the headspace (described below). Ethanol and nitrate (as HNO₃) were added each time they were depleted. The pH was maintained between 6.5 and 7.8. The cultures were incubated quiescently, in closed glass bottles, in an anaerobic glove box. Prior to the addition of DNT, bacterial dry weight was 1.75 g/liter, with an optical density of 0.25 (fourfold dilution).

**Isolation and identification of *P. aeruginosa*.** Samples from the anoxic enrichment cultures were grown in solid plates (mineral medium plus 17.8 g of agar per liter). Nitrate was added as the nitrogen source and electron acceptor during anoxic incubations. DNT (0.274 mM) and ethanol (34 mM) were added aseptically (from a stock solution containing 25 g of DNT per liter of ethanol) immediately after autoclaving. The plates were incubated at 35°C, either aerobically or anoxically (in an anaerobic glove box with an atmosphere of 99% N₂ and 1% H₂).

After purification of the fastest-growing microorganisms from the aerobic and anoxic plates, they were identified by GC-FAME and Biolog analyses (Microbe Inotech Laboratories, Inc., St. Louis, Mo.) as *P. aeruginosa*. Microscopic observations indicated agreement between the aerobic and anoxic plate analyses: a rod-shaped, motile, gram-negative bacterium that grew as single cells was found.

**Analytical methods.** The quantitative analysis of nitroaromatics and aminoaromatics was performed by GC on a DB-1 column with a flame ionization detector (22). Sample preparation for GC analysis included mixing equal volumes of culture and methanol prior to filtration to minimize solute losses (14), followed by extraction with methylene chloride (22, 23).

HPLC gradient separations of nitroaromatics and aminoaromatics were made on a reversed-phase column (Hi-Pore RP-318; Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, Calif.) with an aqueous buffer-methanol eluent and detection by UV at 254 nm (22).

Identification of methylene chloride-extractable DNT metabolites was performed with the following two GC-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) systems: (i) a Hewlett-Packard 5971 Series mass selective detector connected to a Hewlett-Packard 5890 Series II GC, equipped with an HP-1 capillary column (12 m by 0.2 mm by 0.33 μm); and (ii) a VG 70-VSE connected to a Hewlett-Packard 5890 GC, equipped with a DB-5 capillary column (J&W Scientific).

The concentration of ethanol in cultures was quantified by transferring a 5-ml sample to a 12-ml serum vial, sealing with a gray butyl rubber septum, allowing the ethanol to equilibrate between the aqueous and gaseous phases, and then analyzing a headspace sample by GC (22). Nitrate was determined by ion-exchange chromatography with an IC-Pak A column (Waters, Milford, Mass.) at 25°C, with detection by UV at 214 nm (22). The presence of oxygen in the headspace of cultures incubated in sealed glass bottles was monitored by GC, with an 80/100 mesh Molecular Sieve 5A column (3.2 mm by 2.4 m, stainless steel) on a Series 580 GC (Gow-Mac Instruments Co., Bridgewater, N.J.) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector. Bacterial density was determined gravimetrically by filtering samples (0.2-μm-pore-size filter; Millipore) and drying them overnight at 103°C and by determining the optical density at 600 nm. Samples were diluted fourfold with distilled water before measurement of optical density. Analysis of radiolabeled samples was made with Tri-Carb liquid scintillation analyzer (Packard Instruments Co., Downers Grove, Ill.). Ecoscint scintillation cocktail (National Diagnostic, Manville, N.J.) was used.

**RESULTS**

**Biotransformation of DNT by *P. aeruginosa*.** The ability of *P. aeruginosa* to biotransform DNT was tested under aerobic and anoxic (nitrate-reducing) conditions. Figure 1a presents a typical aerobic result. After 4 days of incubation, 96% of the initial DNT was transformed, with 4Am2NT, 2Am4NT, and DAT accounting for 53, 32, and 3% of the DNT by-products, respectively. Very little subsequent transformation of 2Am4NT occurred. In contrast, 4Am2NT and DAT were completely transformed, coincident with the accumulation of 4Acm2NT and traces of acetamide-aminotoluene. This novel acetylated product of DAT was identified by GC-MS (Fig. 2a; the mass spectrum was similar to that of DAT, with the exception of the M⁺ at 164). No accumulation of 2Acm4NT or 2,4-diacetamidotoluene was observed. After 15 days of incubation, only 43% of the original DNT was accountable, mainly as 4Acm2NT and 2Am4NT.

The anoxic fate of DNT was similar to that under aerobic conditions. As shown in Fig. 1b, there was an initial reduction of DNT to 2Am4NT, which then persisted, and 4Am2NT, which was acetylated to 4Acm2NT. Accumulation of DAT or acetamide-aminotoluene was not observed. After 13 days of incubation, all of the DNT was biotransformed, with 2Am4NT

FIG. 1. Biotransformation of DNT by *P. aeruginosa* under aerobic (a) and anoxic (b) conditions. Error bars indicate 1 standard deviation of duplicate samples. Symbols: ●, DNT; ○, 4Am2NT; ■, 2Am4NT; △, 4Acm2NT; □, DAT.

methylene chloride were all high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade. 2-Acetamide-4-nitrotoluene (2Acm4NT), 4-acetamide-2-nitrotoluene (4Acm2NT), 2-acetamidetoluene, 4-acetamidetoluene, and 2,4-diace tamidetoluene were synthetically produced by reacting the corresponding aminotoluenes with acetic anhydride by the procedure of McCormick et al. (18) for the synthesis of acetamidenitrotoluenes. Purification of the products was carried out by recrystallization with mixtures of ethanol and water (30).

Uniformly labeled \[^{14}C\]DNT with a specific activity of 7.0 mCi/mmol and a purity greater than 97.8% was purchased from NEN Research Products (Boston, Mass.). A stock solution containing \(4.4 \times 10^6\) dpm/ml (52.6 mg of DNT per liter) was prepared by dissolving the tracer in 500 ml of water. The purity of the radiotracer was evaluated by injection into the HPLC and collection of the eluent at 0.5-min intervals. The radioactivity corresponding to the DNT peak accounted for 99.2% of the total tracer recovered. Total recovery (amount collected relative to amount injected) was 98.0%.

**Culture conditions and media.** An initial anoxic (nitrate-reducing) enrichment culture was developed with inoculum from the rotating biological contactors at RAAP as described previously (23). DNT is the main nitroaromatic compound in their waste stream (1, 13), so the inoculum was well acclimated. The purpose of the enrichment was twofold: first, to evaluate the biotransformation and possible mineralization of DNT under anoxic conditions (23), and, second, to select for microorganisms capable of cometabolic DNT reduction but with limited ability to oxidatively transform DNT, since oxidation requires molecular oxygen (33).

Microorganisms were grown in a mineral medium that contained 70 mM K₂HPO₄, 10 mM NaH₂PO₄, 24 mM NaHCO₃, 0.41 mM MgSO₄, 68 μM CaCl₂, 50 μM FeCl₂, 12.6 μM CoCl₂, 10 μM Na₂MoO₄, 10 μM Na₂SeO₃, 10.1 μM MnCl₂, 6.3 μM NiCl₂, 1.5 μM ZnCl₂, and 0.8 μM H₃BO₄.

*P. aeruginosa* was grown aerobically at 35°C in mineral medium amended with NH₄Cl (117 mM) and ethanol (34 mM). Ammonia was supplied in excess to allow several additions of ethanol in a single experiment. Atmospheric oxygen served as the electron acceptor. At the point when DNT was added, the optical density (600 nm) of the culture was 0.56 (samples diluted fourfold), corresponding to a total dry weight of 2.3 g/liter. Anoxically, *P. aeruginosa* was grown at 35°C in mineral medium amended with ethanol (34 mM) as the electron donor and carbon source and nitrate (71 mM) as the electron acceptor and nitrogen source.

time between 5 and 10 min and an efficiency of extraction in methylene chloride of 45%; DAT corresponded to this group, but GC measurements indicated no significant accumulation of this compound. (iii) The third subgroup included 2Am4NT. GC measurements indicated a concentration of 2Am4NT of 27% ± 2% of the original DNT, which is in good agreement with the ${}^{14}$C results. (iv) The fourth subgroup included 4Acm2NT and DNT, which coeluted in the HPLC with a retention time of 13 min. GC measurements indicated that most of the DNT was already transformed and that the accumulation of 4Acm2NT corresponded to about 33% of the original DNT. Therefore, it appears as though an unidentified metabolite coeluted with 4Acm2NT and DNT. (v) The last subgroup included very hydrophobic metabolites with retention times greater than 15 min. This retention time corresponded to that of azoxynitrotoluenes. However, their presence in the cultures could not be confirmed by GC-MS.

Biotransformation of reduced DNT metabolites. DAT, an important metabolite from the reductive transformation of DNT (2, 23), was found only in small concentrations in the experiments with *P. aeruginosa*. Nevertheless, traces of a novel acetylated product of DAT were identified from the aerobic cultures. To confirm that transformation of DAT was biologically mediated, *P. aeruginosa* was incubated with DAT as the only aromatic substrate and ethanol as the main electron donor. Figure 3 shows that DAT was acetylated rapidly. No other metabolites were detected during the transformation.

A sterile control with DAT dissolved in mineral medium (Fig. 3) confirmed that *P. aeruginosa* mediated the acetylation of DAT. In this experiment, DAT was very slowly transformed (2.7% disappearance in 5 days). After 5 days, the headspace of the control bottle was replaced with pure oxygen. This resulted in an increased transformation rate, and after 5 more days, the bottle had a noticeable change in color, from clear to dark brown, and a dark precipitate started to be visible. In the absence of oxygen (sealed bottles flushed with nitrogen gas), DAT was not abiotically transformed and the bottle contents remained colorless.

It was not possible to directly determine which acetamide-aminotoluene isomer was produced during the acetylation of DAT by *P. aeruginosa*. We were able to chemically synthesize both isomers but were not able to purify them. Indirect evidence such as the formation of 4Acm2NT but not 2Acm4NT from DNT suggested that acetylation preferentially occurs at the para position. To evaluate this hypothesis, experiments with 2-nitrotoluene and 4-nitrotoluene were conducted. Figure 4 shows that both compounds were rapidly reduced to the corresponding toluidines but only 4-acetamidetoluene was produced in significant amounts. 2-Acetamidetoluene was also

and 4Acm2NT accounting for 44 and 36% of the original DNT, respectively, and 20% not accounted for.

Since the accumulation of products in the aerobic and anoxic cultures did not account for 100% of the initial DNT added, uniformly labeled [${}^{14}$C]DNT was added (20,800 dpm/ml) to determine the fate of the unaccounted DNT. Table 1 summarizes the results after 32 days of aerobic incubation with the ${}^{14}$C tracer. Losses by volatilization accounted for only 3.7% of the original tracer. The possibility of ${}^{14}$CO₂ formation was evaluated with filtered samples by lowering the pH, stripping with nitrogen gas, and then comparing the radioactivity remaining with the ${}^{14}$C in the initial samples. The decrease in ${}^{14}$C following acidification and stripping was statistically insignificant, indicating that minimum mineralization of DNT occurred. Losses during filtration of samples accounted for 7.5% of the total tracer. After rinsing the filters three times with a phosphate buffer, only 20% of this fraction still remained with the filter.

The soluble fraction of the DNT by-products (soluble materials recovered from the filters by washing were excluded to avoid dilution of the samples) was characterized by HPLC and scintillation counting of the column effluent, collected at 0.5-min intervals. The ${}^{14}$C recovery (disintegrations per minute in all fractions relative to disintegrations per minute of the filtered sample) was always greater than 90%. The eluent fractions were separated into the following five subgroups (Table 1), depending on the relative hydrophobicity and their retention times. (i) The first subgroup included unretained hydrophilic metabolites, which were poorly extracted in methylene chloride and could not be identified by GC-MS. (ii) The less hydrophilic subgroup included compounds with a retention

FIG. 2. Mass spectra of the metabolites identified as 4-acetamide-2-amino-toluene (a) and 2,4-diacetamidotoluene (b).

TABLE 1. Mass balance on metabolites from aerobic biotransformation of DNT

| Metabolite fraction (group and subgroup) | % ${}^{14}$C (mean ± SD) |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Lost by volatilization                   | 3.7 ± 0.4               |
| Lost by filtration                       | 7.5 ± 2.5               |
| Soluble                                  | 88.7 ± 2.4              |
| (i) Unretained                           | 7.6 ± 0.2               |
| (ii) Less hydrophilic                    | 8.7 ± 1.1               |
| (iii) 2Am4NT                             | 29.9 ± 2.2              |
| (iv) 4Acm2NT                             | 42.0 ± 2.6              |
| (v) Very hydrophobic                     | 3.2 ± 1.4               |

${}^{\mathrm{a}}$ Mean ± standard deviation of duplicate samples.

2260 NOGUERA AND FREEDMAN

RAAP contains organisms able to utilize these compounds as sole sources of carbon and energy (7), and presumably, a fraction of them is degraded in that way. *P. aeruginosa* also transforms these compounds in a variety of ways. 4Am2NT is rapidly acetylated to 4Acm2NT, while 2Am4NT is very slowly transformed to DAT and 2Acm4NT. Formation of DAT from 4Am2NT by *P. aeruginosa* also occurs (Fig. 6) but with a very low yield (Fig. 5).

Complete reduction of polynitrated toluenes to the corresponding aminotoluenes usually requires a low redox potential (26), and therefore, high DAT yields are not typically expected under aerobic conditions. Accordingly, only small amounts of DAT were detected in the aerobic *P. aeruginosa* cultures. Additional reasons why there was no significant accumulation of DAT include the following: first, *P. aeruginosa* rapidly acetylated DAT, resulting in the formation of 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene (Fig. 3); second, transformation of 2Am4NT by *P. aeruginosa* was very poor; and third, acetylation of the amine group in 4Am2NT occurred much faster than reduction of the nitro group. 4-Acetamide-2-aminotoluene was also transformed, as evidenced by the identification of 2,4-diacetamidetoluene in the cultures that received 4Am2NT (Table 2). Detection and identification of 2,4-diacetamidetoluene were difficult because it eluted very late on the GC column used (retention time, greater than 30 min), and as a result of band broadening in the column, it required molar concentrations much higher than the initial DNT concentrations used in the experiments before it could be detected (22). We were able to

FIG. 3. Biotransformation of DAT by *P. aeruginosa*. Error bars indicate 1 standard deviation of duplicate samples. Symbols: ○, DAT, sterile medium bottle; □, DAT, live culture; ▼, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene, live culture.

formed but at a much lower rate. On this basis, there is a reasonably high degree of certainty that the acetylated product of DAT was 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene.

Additional experiments were set up with 4Am2NT or 2Am4NT as the only aromatic substrate (Fig. 5). The rapid acetylation of 4Am2NT was confirmed. In addition, a small yield of DAT was observed, indicating that reduction of the nitro group occurred; however, reduction was not as efficient as acetylation. 4Acm2NT was further reduced to 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene, which persisted in the culture. 2,4-Diacetamidetoluene, the product of complete reduction and acetylation, was also detected in trace amounts (Fig. 2b). 2Am4NT was transformed very slowly. During its degradation, only traces of 2Acm4NT, DAT, and 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene were detected.

Table 2 summarizes the results obtained with transformation of various substrates by *P. aeruginosa* along with metabolites identified by GC-MS. DNT, DAT, and 4Am2NT were transformed an order of magnitude faster than were 2Am4NT and the mononitrotoluene isomers.

## DISCUSSION

The biological treatment process at RAAP contains organisms capable of oxidizing and mineralizing DNT (7). Oxidation results in the stoichiometric release of nitrate (7), possibly following the pathway previously described for a strain of *Pseudomonas* sp. (33). However, the presence of high concentrations of ethanol in the wastewater alters the extent of oxidation in two ways, namely, (i) it allows the growth of other organisms that utilize ethanol as the main carbon source and reductively transform DNT by cometabolism and (ii) organisms able to oxidize DNT may choose alternative pathways, since DNT is not the only source of carbon and energy available. The overall result is that a significant fraction of the DNT is cometabolically reduced rather than directly oxidized (7).

The strain of *P. aeruginosa* reported here grows very rapidly in the presence of high concentrations of ethanol and is very effective at reducing DNT. Its presence in the RAAP treatment plant explains earlier results by Freedman et al. in which aerobic enrichments from RAAP directly oxidized DNT in the absence of additional carbon sources but transformed DNT by a combination of oxidative (59%) and reductive (41%) pathways when ethanol was supplied as the main carbon source (7). The initial products of DNT transformation by *P. aeruginosa* were 4Am2NT and 2Am4NT (Fig. 6). The microflora at

FIG. 4. Biotransformation of 2-nitrotoluene (a) and 4-nitrotoluene (b) by *P. aeruginosa*. Error bars indicate 1 standard deviation of duplicate samples. Symbols: ○, 2-nitrotoluene; ●, 2-aminotoluene; △, 2-acetamidetoluene; □, 4-nitrotoluene; ■, 4-aminotoluene; ▽, 4-acetamidetoluene.

associated with insoluble compounds. The rest was washed out of the filters after rinsing with a phosphate buffer. This insol- uble ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ fraction may be the result of either the formation of insoluble compounds due to conjugation and polymerization reactions (28) or the binding of DNT metabolites (e.g., hydrox- ylamine and nitroso compounds) to cellular components (3). Assimilation of ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ for cell synthesis was unlikely since there was no evidence of DNT mineralization or its use as a carbon source.

The majority of the ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ in the soluble fraction was associated with the accumulation of 2Am4NT and 4Acm2NT (Table 1). However, about $25 \%$ of the ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ tracer included unidentified soluble metabolites with diverse HPLC retention times. Pro- duction of hydrophilic materials from degradation of nitroaro- matics has often been reported (6, 8, 23), but none of these metabolites has been identified thus far. The small fraction of very hydrophobic materials (3.2\%) may be related to the for- mation of azoxynitrotoluene compounds. A preliminary eval- uation of the HPLC retention times of three possible azoxyni- trotoluene compounds formed from DNT indicated retention times similar to those of the very hydrophobic fraction. How- ever, GC-MS analyses of this fraction did not confirm the HPLC results. Finally, the difference between ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ and GC measurements indicated the possibility of unidentified ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ me- tabolites coeluting with 4Acm2NT and DNT.

The coelution of DNT with 4Acm2NT and possibly other metabolites has a practical implication, since HPLC is the method of choice when analyzing the quality of treatment at RAAP (20). Current regulations have set a DNT discharge limit of $0.113 \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{litter}$ (2). Routine measurements of effluent quality indicate that the current treatment facility is unable to consistently meet this limit (16, 17, 20). However, if 4Acm2NT is produced from the reductive transformation of DNT, it is possible that effluent DNT concentrations determined by HPLC are overestimated.

The biotransformation of DAT to 4-acetamide-2-aminotolu- ene, and ultimately to 2,4-diacetamidetoluene, deserves special attention, since the fate of the by-products of complete reduc- tion of nitrotoluenes is still an open question. 2,4,6-Triamino- toluene, the product of complete reduction of 2,4,6-trinitrotol- uene, is unstable in the presence of oxygen (28). It rapidly undergoes polymerization reactions. Although not as reactive as 2,4,6-triaminotoluene, DAT is also abiotically transformed. In sterile controls with DAT dissolved in mineral medium, the rate of DAT transformation was accelerated when the oxygen concentration was increased. In the absence of oxygen, DAT was not abiotically transformed. The rate of acetylation of DAT by $P$. aeruginosa was 24 times faster than the abiotic transformation, indicating that biological acetylation is a likely mechanism involved in the transformation of polyaminotolu- enes. Biological acetylation could explain the transformation

FIG. 5. Biotransformation of 2Am4NT (a) and 4Am2NT (b) by $P$. aerugi- nosa. Error bars indicate 1 standard deviation of duplicate samples. Symbols: $\nabla$, 2Am4NT; $\bullet$, 4Am2NT; $\bigcirc$, 4Acm2NT; ■, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene; [ ], DAT.

detect the compound only after extraction and concentration of the organic phase and the use of a shorter GC column (a 12-m HP-1 capillary column instead of a 30-m DB-1 mega- bore).

2-Acetamide-4-aminotoluene was never detected in the cul- tures, probably because acetylation is much more efficient at the para position, and most of the DAT formed would have been transformed to 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene. 2-Acet- amide-4-aminotoluene could also be formed from the reduc- tion of 2Acm4NT, but since this compound was only produced in very small amounts from 2Am4NT, any further transforma- tion would not have been measurable in our experiments.

Analysis of ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$-labeled metabolites from ${ }^{\left[{ }^{14} \mathrm{C}\right]} \mathrm{DNT}$ (Table 1) provides some insight into the characteristics of the still- unidentified by-products. A small fraction of the ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ label was retained during filtration (7.5%). Only $20 \%$ of this fraction was

TABLE 2. Products detected during the aerobic transformation of nitroaromatics and aminoaromatics by $P$. aeruginosa and maximum transformation rates

| Aromatic substrate | Maximum rate ($\mu \mathrm{M} / \mathrm{day}$) | Specific rate ${ }^{a}$ ($\mu \mathrm{M} / \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{day}$) | Product(s) |
|---------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------|
| DNT                 | 160                                | 0.042                                  | 2Am4NT, 4Am2NT, DAT, 4Acm2NT, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene |
| DAT                 | 190                                | 0.086                                  | 4-Acetamide-2-aminotoluene |
| 4Am2NT              | 210                                | 0.054                                  | DAT, 4Acm2NT, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene, 2,4-diace tamidetoluene |
| 2Am4NT              | 15                                 | 0.0027                                 | DAT, 4-acetamide-2-aminotoluene, 2Acm4NT |
| 4-Nitrotoluene      | 30                                 | 0.0070                                 | 4-Aminotoluene, 4-acetamidetoluene |
| 2-Nitrotoluene      | 42                                 | 0.011                                  | 2-Aminotoluene, 2-acetamidetoluene |

${ }^{a}$ Specific rate was calculated by using the average biomass concentration during the degradation experiment.

the fate of the reduced products from nitrotoluenes. Whether acetylation of arylamines improves or decreases the chances for aerobic remediation of nitroaromatic-contaminated soils and wastewaters depends on the fate of the acetylated compounds, which needs further investigation.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by grant DAAH04-94-G-0264 from the U.S. Army Research Office. Special thanks to Roderick Mackie for helpful comments and suggestions and to Juan L. Ramos, who graciously supplied us with the samples of azoxynitrotoluene compounds.

# REFERENCES

1. Berchtold, S. R., M. T. Suidan, and S. W. Maloney. 1993. Treatment of propellant production wastewater using anaerobic fluidized-bed GAC bioreactors, p. 157–167. *In* 66th Annual Conference and Exposition of the Water Environment Federation. Water Environment Federation, Anaheim, Calif.
2. Berchtold, S. R., S. L. VanderLoop, M. T. Suidan, and S. W. Maloney. 1995. Treatment of 2,4-dinitrotoluene using a two-stage system: fluidized-bed anaerobic granular activated carbon reactors and aerobic activated sludge reactors. Water Environ. Res. **67**:1081–1091.
3. Corbett, M. D., and B. R. Corbett. 1995. Bioorganic chemistry of the arylhydroxylamine and nitrosoarene functional groups, p. 151–182. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.), Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.
4. Crawford, R. L. 1995. Biodegradation of nitrated munition compounds and herbicides by obligately anaerobic bacteria, p. 87–98. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.), Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.
5. Duque, E., A. Haidour, F. Godoy, and J. L. Ramos. 1993. Construction of a *Pseudomonas* hybrid strain that mineralizes 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene. J. Bacteriol. **175**:2278–2283.
6. Fernando, T., J. A. Bumpus, and S. D. Aust. 1990. Biodegradation of TNT (2,4,6-trinitrotoluene) by *Phanerochaete chrysosporium*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **56**:1666–1671.
7. Freedman, D. L., R. S. Shanley, and R. J. Scholze. Aerobic biodegradation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene, aminonitrotoluene isomers, and 2,4-diaminotoluene. J. Hazard. Mater., in press.
8. Funk, S. B., D. J. Roberts, D. L. Crawford, and R. L. Crawford. 1993. Initial-phase optimization for bioremediation of munition compound-contaminated soils. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **59**:2171–2177.
9. Gilcrease, P. C., and V. G. Murphy. 1995. Bioconversion of 2,4-diamino-6-nitrotoluene to a novel metabolite under anoxic and aerobic conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **61**:4209–4214.
10. Haigler, B. E., and J. C. Spain. 1993. Biodegradation of 4-nitrotoluene by *Pseudomonas* sp. strain 4NT. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **59**:2239–2243.
11. Hallas, L. E., and M. Alexander. 1983. Microbial transformation of nitroaromatic compounds in sewage effluent. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **45**:1234–1241.
12. Hartter, D. R. 1985. The use and importance of nitroaromatic chemicals in the chemical industry, p. 1–14. *In* D. E. Rickert (ed.), Toxicity of nitroaromatic compounds. Hemisphere Publishing Corp., Washington, D.C.
13. IT Environmental Programs. 1991. Removal of DNT from wastewaters at Radford Army Ammunition Plant. Final report CETHA-TS-CR-91031. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD.
14. Jenkins, F., C. F. Bauer, D. C. Leggett, and C. L. Grant. 1984. Reverse-phase HPLC method for analysis of TNT, RDX, HMX, and 2,4-DNT in munitions wastewater. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers CRREL report 84-29. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md.
15. Kaplan, D. L. 1996. Biotechnology and bioremediation for organic energetic compounds, p. 373–416. *In* P. Marinkas (ed.), Organic energetic compounds. Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New York.
16. Maloney, S. W., E. R. May, M. T. Suidan, S. R. Berchtold, and J. James G. Heffinger. 1993. DNT abatement in propellant production wastewater on-site using expanded bed granular activated carbon anaerobic reactors, p. 304–309. *In* Federal Agency Environmental Vision-2000 DOD/DOE/EPA/USGC: Can Current Technology Get Us There? American Defense Preparedness Association, Washington, D.C.
17. Maloney, S. W., M. T. Suidan, and S. R. Berchtold. 1992. Treatment of propellant production wastewater containing DNT using expanded bed granular activated carbon anaerobic reactors. Report no. CETHA-TS-CR-92063. *In* 16th Annual Army Environmental R&D Symposium, Williamsburg, Va.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency,  
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md.

18. McCormick, N. G., J. H. Cornell, and A. M. Kaplan. 1978. Identification of  
    biotransformation products from 2,4-dinitrotoluene. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **35**:945–948.

19. McCormick, N. G., F. E. Feeherry, and H. S. Levinson. 1976. Microbial  
    transformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and other nitroaromatic compounds.  
    Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **31**:949–958.

20. McDaniel, L. H. 1992. Sampling and analysis of low levels of DNT at RAAP.  
    Final report of Process Engineering Project PE-912. Hercules, Inc., Radford,  
    Va.

21. Naumova, R. P., S. Y. Selivanovskaya, and I. E. Cherepneva. 1986. Conversion  
    of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene under conditions of oxygen and nitrate respiration  
    of *Pseudomonas fluorescens*. Prikl. Biokhim. Mikrobiol. **24**:493–498.

22. Noguera, D. R. 1996. Biological transformation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene under  
    denitrifying conditions. Ph.D. thesis. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

23. Noguera, D. R., and D. L. Freedman. Characterization of products from the  
    biotransformation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene by denitrifying enrichment cultures.  
    Water Environ. Res., in press.

24. Patterson, J. W., N. I. Shapira, and J. Brown. 1976. Pollution abatement in  
    the military explosives industry, p. 385–394. *In* Proceedings of the 31st  
    Industrial Waste Conference, Purdue University, Lafayette, Ind. Ann Arbor  
    Science Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich.

25. Preuss, A., J. Fimpel, and G. Diekert. 1993. Anaerobic transformation of  
    2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT). Arch. Microbiol. **159**:345–353.

26. Preuss, A., and P.-G. Rieger. 1995. Anaerobic transformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and other nitroaromatic compounds, p. 69–86. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.),  
    Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.

27. Rhys-Williams, W., S. C. Taylor, and P. A. Williams. 1993. A novel pathway  
    for the catabolism of 4-nitrotoluene by *Pseudomonas*. J. Gen. Microbiol. **139**:1967–1972.

28. Rieger, P.-G., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1995. Basic knowledge and perspectives  
    on biodegradation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and related nitroaromatic compounds in contaminated soil, p. 1–18. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.), Biodegradation of  
    nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.

29. Schackmann, A., and R. Müller. 1991. Reduction of nitroaromatic compounds by different *Pseudomonas* species under aerobic conditions. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. **34**:809–813.

30. Shugar, G. J., R. A. Shugar, L. Bauman, and R. S. Bauman. 1981. Chemical  
    technicians' ready reference handbook. McGraw Hill Book Co., New York.

31. Smith, L. L., J. Carrazza, and K. Wong. 1982. Biological treatment for waste streams from propellants and explosives manufacturing. J. Hazard. Mater. **5**:277–296.

32. Spain, J. 1995. Bacterial degradation of nitroaromatic compounds under aerobic conditions, p. 19–36. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.), Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.

33. Spanggord, R. J., J. C. Spain, S. F. Nishino, and K. E. Mortelmans. 1991. Biodegradation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene by a *Pseudomonas* sp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **57**:3200–3205.

34. Stahl, J. D., and S. D. Aust. 1995. Biodegradation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by the white rot fungus *Phanerochaete chrysosporium*, p. 117–134. *In* J. C. Spain (ed.), Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. Plenum Press, New York.

35. Tschech, A., and B. Schink. 1988. Methanogenic degradation of anthranilate (2-aminobenzoate). Syst. Appl. Microbiol. **11**:9–12.

36. Valli, K., B. J. Brock, D. K. Joshi, and M. H. Gold. 1992. Degradation of 2,4-dinitrotoluene by the lignin-degrading fungus *Phanerochaete chrysosporium*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **58**:221–228.
