
J Pharmacol Sci 100, 315–322 (2006)

Review

Cardiac Myocytes Ca²⁺ and Na⁺ Regulation in Normal and Failing Hearts

Donald M. Bers¹,* and Sanda Despa¹

¹Department of Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch School of Medicine,  
2160 South First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA

Received January 5, 2006

Abstract. Ca²⁺ is a central player in the excitation-contraction coupling of cardiac myocytes, the process that enables the heart to contract and relax. Mishandling of Ca²⁺ is a central cause of both contractile dysfunction and arrhythmias in pathophysiological conditions such as heart failure (HF). Upon electrical excitation, Ca²⁺ enters the myocytes via voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels and induces further Ca²⁺ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). This raises the free intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i), activating contraction. Relaxation is driven by [Ca²⁺]i decline, mainly due to re-uptake into the SR via SR Ca²⁺-ATPase and extrusion via the sarcolemmal Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange, NCX. Intracellular Na⁺ concentration ([Na⁺]i) is a main regulator of NCX, and thus [Na⁺]i plays an important role in controlling the cytosolic and SR [Ca²⁺]. [Na⁺]i may have an even more important role in HF because NCX is generally up-regulated. There are several pathways for Na⁺ entry into the cells, whereas the Na⁺/K⁺ pump (NKA) is the main Na⁺ extrusion pathway and therefore is essential in maintaining the transmembrane Na⁺ gradient. Phospholemman is an important regulator of NKA function (decreasing [Na⁺]i affinity unless it is phosphorylated). Here we discuss the interplay between Ca²⁺ and Na⁺ in myocytes from normal and failing hearts.

Keywords: Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange, heart failure, sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ content, Na⁺/K⁺ pump, phospholemman

---

Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling

Contraction of the heart is a complex process initiated by the electrical excitation of cardiac myocytes (excitation-contraction coupling, ECC). The wave of depolarization initiated in the sino-atrial node propagates through the atrium and atrio-ventricular node to the ventricle. When the wave of depolarization reaches a ventricular myocyte, voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels open (Fig. 1), which results in a rapid cell depolarization (the upstroke of the action potential, AP). Na⁺ channels inactivate rapidly (within a few milliseconds) at positive potentials, which limits the gain in intracellular Na⁺ ([Na⁺]i) to 6–15 μmol/L (1).

During depolarization, Ca²⁺ enters the cell via voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channels (mainly L-type channels) generating an inward current (Ica) that is responsible for the plateau phase of the AP (2). L-Type Ca²⁺ channels are located primarily at sarcolemmal-sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) junctions where the SR Ca²⁺ release channels (or ryanodine receptors: RyRs) exist (Fig. 1). Ca²⁺ entering through Ica locally increases [Ca²⁺] near RyRs, which triggers Ca²⁺ release from the SR (via Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release, CICR). This raises the free intracellular [Ca²⁺] ([Ca²⁺]i), allowing Ca²⁺ to bind to the myofilaments and trigger contraction.

For relaxation to occur, [Ca²⁺]i must decline, allowing Ca²⁺ dissociation from the myofilaments. This requires Ca²⁺ transport out of the cytosol, mainly via the SR Ca²⁺-ATPase (SERCA), which takes Ca²⁺ back into the SR, and the sarcolemmal Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange, NCX (2). NCX transports one Ca²⁺ ion in exchange for three Na⁺ ions (3), and thus Ca²⁺ extrusion from the cell leads to an

*Corresponding author. dbers@lumc.edu  
Published online in J-STAGE: March 18, 2006  
DOI: 10.1254/jphs.CPJ06001X  
Invited article

Fig. 1. Ca²⁺ and Na⁺ transport in ventricular myocytes. Inset shows the time course of an action potential (AP), Ca²⁺ transient, and contraction measured in a rabbit ventricular myocyte at 37°C. NCX, Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange; ATP, ATPase; PLB, phospholamban; PLM, phospholemman; SR, sarcoplasmic reticulum. Modified from ref. 2 with permission.

increase in [Na⁺]i (by approximately 32 μmol/L during each AP, which is required to extrude the approximately 10 μmol/L Ca²⁺ that enters via Ica; ref. 1). This excess Na⁺ is then extruded by the Na⁺/K⁺ pump (NKA) to keep [Na⁺]i constant (Fig. 1). Thus, the ubiquitous second messenger Ca²⁺ is essential in ECC and [Na⁺]i plays an important role in regulating [Ca²⁺]i, via NCX. Mishandling of Ca²⁺ is a central cause of both contractile dysfunction and arrhythmias in pathophysiological conditions such as heart failure (HF).

NCX can operate in both Ca²⁺ efflux and Ca²⁺ influx (or reverse) mode, depending on the internal and external concentration of both Na⁺ and Ca²⁺, as well as on the membrane potential. NCX exhibits a reversal potential ENa/Ca = 3ENa − 2Eca, where ENa and Eca are equilibrium potentials for Na⁺ and Ca²⁺. The exchanger will extrude Ca²⁺ as long as the membrane potential is more negative than ENa/Ca. In other words, high [Ca²⁺]i favors Ca²⁺ efflux, whereas positive membrane potential and high [Na⁺]i favor Ca²⁺ influx. In normal myocytes, under physiological conditions NCX works almost exclusively in the Ca²⁺ extrusion mode, driven mostly by the high subsarcolemmal Ca²⁺ transient (2). However, when [Na⁺]i is elevated, the amount of Ca²⁺ influx through NCX can increase greatly. This will raise the cellular and SR Ca²⁺ content, resulting in larger Ca²⁺ transients and therefore enhanced contractility. Indeed, the inotro-

pic effect of increasing [Na⁺]i is well known. In cardiac Purkinje fibers, the developed tension doubles with a 1 mM increase in Na⁺ activity (4). The effect is smaller but still prominent in ventricular myocytes (5).

Ca²⁺ fluxes in myocytes from control and failing hearts

In cardiac myocytes, Ca²⁺ influx is almost entirely through L-Type Ca²⁺ channels. Four pathways mediate Ca²⁺ removal from the cytosol during relaxation: the SR Ca²⁺-ATPase, sarcolemmal NCX, mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uniporter, and sarcolemmal Ca²⁺-ATPase and their quantitative importance varies between species (6). In rabbit ventricle, SR Ca²⁺-ATPase removes 70% of the activator Ca²⁺ and NCX removes 28% (Fig. 2A), leaving only 2% for the mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uniporter and sarcolemmal Ca²⁺-ATPase (known collectively as “slow” Ca²⁺ extrusion pathways). In rat ventricle, the activity of SR Ca²⁺-ATPase is higher than in rabbits and Ca²⁺ removal through the exchanger is lower. This results in 92% of cytosolic Ca²⁺ being taken back into SR by the Ca²⁺-ATPase and only 7% being extruded via NCX (Fig. 2B). The balance of fluxes in mouse ventricle is quantitatively like rat, whereas in dog, cat, guinea pig, and human ventricle, it resembles the rabbit (2).

How is the balance of Ca²⁺ fluxes altered in HF?

Interplay Between Ca²⁺ and Na⁺ in the Heart

in HF, although the extent of phosphorylation is reduced (8, 9). Therefore, the PLB:SERCA ratio is generally increased and the PLB that is there is more inhibitory. Both factors lower SR Ca²⁺-ATPase function in HF. In a non-ischemic HF model in rabbits (pressure and volume overload), where SR Ca²⁺-ATPase is only slightly depressed, SERCA and PLB expression and PLB phosphorylation were not significantly reduced (10). However, PLB phosphorylation at Ser16 (PKA site) was decreased, whereas phosphorylation at Thr17 (CaMKII site) was increased (10), effects that might cancel each other functionally.

The decreased SERCA activity in HF (typically between 24%–50%) coupled with an increased NCX activity (typically 50%–100%) allows NCX to compete better with the SR Ca²⁺-ATPase in extruding Ca²⁺ from the cytosol during relaxation. This brings the overall Ca²⁺ transported by the SR Ca²⁺-ATPase and NCX closer to equal in HF. For example, the 100% increase in NCX and 24% decrease in SERCA function in a non-ischemic, arrhythmogenic rabbit heart failure model (11) results in equivalent extrusion by SR Ca²⁺-ATPase and NCX (each removes 49% of activator Ca²⁺, Fig. 2C). In human end stage HF, Piacentino et al. (12) found a 40% reduction of SERCA function, but unaltered NCX extrusion, resulting again in more equal Ca²⁺ extrusion via NCX and SERCA in HF. Hasenfuss et al. (13) found a spectrum of increase in NCX and decrease in SERCA 2 expression in individual HF patients, suggesting that there is individual variation as to how much the decrease in SR Ca²⁺ load in HF is due to increased NCX and decreased SERCA function.

Another factor that may contribute to lower SR Ca²⁺ content in HF is an increased diastolic SR Ca²⁺ leak (Fig. 3). Marx et al. (14) reported that RyRs are hyper-phosphorylated by PKA in HF and this leads to an increased SR Ca²⁺ leak. However, the situation may be more complex since not all studies agree about hyper-phosphorylation (15) and because PKA-dependent RyR phosphorylation in control myocytes does not enhance Ca²⁺ sparks frequency (a measure of diastolic Ca²⁺ leak via RyR) at constant SR Ca²⁺ load (16). Shannon et al. (17) found that SR Ca²⁺ leak is higher in myocytes from rabbits with pressure and volume overload-induced HF, but this enhanced SR Ca²⁺ leak could be prevented by CaMKII blockade, but not PKA inhibition (10). Since CaMKII expression and activity and association with RyR are increased in HF, and CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of RyR enhances spontaneous diastolic SR Ca²⁺ leak (and Ca²⁺ spark frequency, ref. 18), this pathway may contribute to lower SR Ca²⁺ content and arrhythmogenesis in HF. However, this RyR phosphorylation (and leak) may not contribute much to systolic

Most heart failure models, including human HF, are characterized by a decrease in functional SR Ca²⁺-ATPase expression and/or an upregulation of NCX expression and function (Fig. 3), while Ica is generally unchanged (for reviews, see refs. 2 and 7). SR Ca²⁺-ATPase is under reversible regulation by phospholamban (PLB). Dephosphorylated PLB inhibits SERCA activity by reducing its apparent Ca²⁺ affinity, with no effect on the maximum pumping rate. Phosphorylation of PLB by either cAMP dependent- (PKA) or Ca²⁺-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII) relieves the SERCA inhibition. Relief of the inhibitory PLB effect on SERCA is a major contributor to the overall positive inotropic and lusitropic effect of sympathetic stimulation. PLB expression level is typically unaltered

DM Bers and S Despa

Sarcolemma

Ca → Ica

RYR
Ca
SR
Ca

PLB
ATP

NCX
3Na

↑ NCX,
↓ SR Ca²⁺-ATPase
& ↑ SR Ca²⁺ leak
net SR Ca²⁺ loss

↑ [Na⁺]i, ↑ NCX,
↓ Δ[Ca²⁺]i
& ↑ APD

↓ SR Ca²⁺ Load &
Systolic Dysfunction

↑ Ca²⁺ entry via
NCX during AP

Fig. 3. Cartoon showing the main factors that alter the SR Ca²⁺ content in HF.

dysfunction because the increased RyR Ca²⁺-sensitivity
that causes the leak also enhances the fractional SR Ca²⁺
release during ECC (19). Indeed, blocking CaMKII
prevented the SR Ca²⁺ leak in HF myocytes and restored
SR Ca²⁺ content, but had little effect on systolic function
(10). Thus, reduced SERCA function, enhanced NCX
function, and greater SR Ca²⁺ leak can all contribute
to reduced SR Ca²⁺ content in HF, but the SERCA
and NCX effects dominate to reduce systolic function,
while the NCX and SR Ca²⁺ leak effects may contribute
more directly to arrhythmogenesis via delayed after-
depolarizations.

Reduced SR Ca²⁺ load directly decreases the amount
of Ca²⁺ available for release, but also reduces the fraction
of SR Ca²⁺ that is released for a given Ica trigger (2), due
to the effect of intra-SR free [Ca²⁺] on the open
probability of RyRs. However, in our rabbit HF model
and human HF, fractional SR Ca²⁺ release is unchanged
despite lower SR Ca²⁺ content (11, 12). We suspect
that the relatively maintained fractional release is due to
the sensitizing effect of CaMKII on the RyR in HF
because HF induced by CaMKII overexpression results
in enhanced fractional SR Ca²⁺ release, despite reduced
SR Ca²⁺ content (18).

NCX function during the cardiac cycle

The balance of Ca²⁺ fluxes in HF is further compli-
cated by alterations in other parameters (such as AP
duration and [Na⁺]i) that affect NCX activity. A
ubiquitous finding in HF is a prolongation of AP

duration, particularly prominent at low heart rates.
In hypertrophy, myocyte [Na⁺]i is increased (for a
review, see ref. 20). In HF, [Na⁺]i is about 3 mM
higher, both at rest and during stimulation, in ventricular
myocytes from an arrhythmogenic, non-ischemic HF
rabbit model (21, 22). Data in human HF suggest a
comparable increase in [Na⁺]i (5). However, a slight
decrease in [Na⁺]i was found in myocytes from rabbits
with pacing-induced HF (23). This latter HF model
differs from most HF models in that NCX current
density was not enhanced but decreased.

Figure 4 shows how the longer AP duration and
higher [Na⁺]i affect the NCX current (INCX) and the net
Ca²⁺ transport by NCX (∫INCX) in a rabbit HF model (21).
In normal myocytes, as already discussed, Ca²⁺ influx
via NCX (outward INCX) is only expected for a very brief
period early during the AP. The rise in submembrane
[Ca²⁺]i ([Ca²⁺]sm) quickly favors inward INCX (Ca²⁺
efflux). In HF, INCX is shifted in the outward direction
because of: 1) higher [Na⁺]i, 2) prolonged AP, and 3)
smaller Ca²⁺ transients, with increased [Na⁺]i appearing
to have the largest impact on NCX function (21). Thus,
in this HF model, outward INCX seems to produce Ca²⁺
entry for about 150 ms, in agreement with data suggest-
ing that Ca²⁺ influx via outward INCX may occur during
the AP in human HF (24). The greater Ca²⁺ influx and
lower Ca²⁺ efflux though NCX would tend to load the
cell (and SR) with Ca²⁺ making it more available for
contractile activation. Therefore, by favoring Ca²⁺ influx
via NCX, higher [Na⁺]i may limit the contractile dys-
function in HF. We could even speculate that NCX

binding sites for ATP, Na⁺, K⁺, and cardiac glycosides, and β, which is important in the proper membrane insertion of the pump. Four α (α₁–α₄) and three β (β₁–β₃) subunits of NKA have been identified. Multiple NKA isoforms exist in cardiac cells from most species, and they might differ functionally because of differential specific intracellular localization, regulation, or kinetic characteristics.

Decreased NKA expression and/or isoform shifts have been found in several, but not all HF models (for a review, see ref. 20). Part of the disagreement may reflect differences in species, HF models, and differences in the human HF population. Most of these studies were performed in tissue homogenates and might reflect changes in non-myocytes. Indeed, Bossuyt et al. (25) found that NKA α₃ expression was increased in left ventricular tissue homogenates but reduced in isolated myocytes from rabbit failing hearts, suggesting a marked upregulation of α₃ expression in non-myocytes in the failing heart. Moreover, such measurements cannot differentiate between internalized vs. sarcolemmal NKA nor between functional and inactive pumps. Thus, it is difficult to correlate such biochemical findings to cellular function.

There are few functional NKA studies in HF myocytes, with somewhat contradictory results. Decreased maximal Na⁺ extrusion rate and unchanged [Na⁺]i-affinity has been found in rats with HF following myocardial infarction (26). On the contrary, myocytes from dogs with chronic atrioventricular block and hypertrophy have unaltered maximal NKA pump current and reduced [Na⁺]i-affinity (27). We measured the rate of NKA-mediated Na⁺ extrusion as a function of [Na⁺]i in myocytes from rabbits with pressure and volume overload induced HF (21) and found that both the maximal Na⁺ transport rate and the NKA affinity for internal Na⁺ were not altered.

Elevated [Na⁺]i in HF could also be due to a larger Na⁺ influx. Our data (21) indicate that this is indeed the case in rabbit HF, where Na⁺ influx, determined as the initial slope of [Na⁺]i rise upon NKA inhibition, was twice as large as in myocytes from normal hearts. Most of this elevated Na⁺ entry was tetrodotoxin (TTX)-sensitive, suggesting a role for Na⁺ channels. Indeed, an increased slowly inactivating Na⁺ current was found in ventricular myocytes from a canine ischemic model of HF (28) and more recently in dogs with pacing-induced HF (29). The latter study also reports an increased slowly inactivating Na⁺ current in human HF.

Baartscheer et al. (22) also found elevated Na⁺ influx to explain elevated [Na⁺]i in myocytes from HF rabbits (using essentially the same animal model we used). However, in their case, the enhanced Na⁺ influx was

Fig. 4. Simulations showing that more Ca²⁺ influx via NCX is expected to occur in HF. Simulations are based on data in the pressure and volume overload-induced HF model in rabbits that our lab is studying and account for prolongation of the AP (A), decreased amplitude of Ca²⁺ transients (also inferring local [Ca²⁺] near sarcolemma, [Ca²⁺]sm) (B), the increased NCX expression, and the higher [Na⁺]i. Shown are the NCX current (C) and the cumulative Ca²⁺ fluxes through NCX (D). Modified from ref. 21 with permission.

upregulation is compensatory in allowing NCX to still extrude the greater amount of Ca²⁺ that enters during the AP (to maintain the steady-state).

Na⁺ fluxes in myocytes from control and failing hearts

We have discussed above that [Na⁺]i is elevated in heart failure. There are two possible explanations for this: 1) decreased Na⁺ extrusion and 2) increased Na⁺ influx in HF. Na⁺ enters the cell through various pathways, including NCX, Na⁺ channels and Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger (NHE), whereas NKA is the main route for Na⁺ efflux. Na⁺ can also be extruded by NCX working in the reverse mode (Ca²⁺ influx, Na⁺ efflux). However, as discussed above, throughout the cardiac cycle there is net Na⁺ influx via NCX.

NKA transports three Na⁺ ions out and two K⁺ ions into the cell using the energy of one ATP molecule, and thus moves out one net charge per cycle. The Na⁺/K⁺ ATPase has two major subunits: α, which contains the
inhibited by cariporide, suggesting an important role for NHE, which was upregulated. NHE has been suggested to play a prominent role in hypertrophy and HF and Baartscheer et al. (30) found that chronic NHE inhibition with cariporide prevents the onset of HF in rabbits with pressure and volume overload. Although cariporide at the concentrations used might also inhibit slowly inactivating Na<sup>+</sup> channels (31), this raises another potential explanation for elevated [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> in HF. The close interplay between Na<sup>+</sup> and Ca<sup>2+</sup> in heart (via NCX) makes it especially important to understand this point better.

### NKA regulation by phospholemman in normal and failing hearts

We found reduced NKA expression in ventricular myocytes from HF rabbits (25); however, the characteristics of NKA-mediated Na<sup>+</sup> extrusion were unchanged (21). One possible explanation for an unaltered function despite fewer pumps might be that NKA is regulated differently in HF.

The FXDY protein family has emerged as tissue-specific modulators of NKA. The FXDY proteins are single membrane-spanning proteins containing a conserved Pro-Phe-X-Tyr-Asp motif in the extracellular N-terminus domain (32). There are seven FXDY proteins (FXDY-1 to -7), including phospholemman (FXDY-1), the NKA γ-subunit (FXDY-2), and the regulator of renal Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase (FXDY-4, or CHIF). All family members, but FXDY-6, have been shown to co-immunoprecipitate with NKA α subunits and to modulate NKA function. Among the FXDY proteins, FXDY-1, known also as phospholemman (PLM), is very highly expressed in the heart. PLM, a 72 amino acid sarcolemmal protein, is unique in the FXDY family in having multiple phosphorylation sites at its cytosolic carboxyl terminus. Indeed, PLM is a major cardiac target for α- and β-adrenergic agonist mediated phosphorylation in myocytes. Quantitatively PLM phosphorylation by PKA or PKC is comparable to that of troponin I and PLB (33, 34). PKA and PKC share a common phosphorylation site (at position Ser 68), and PKC has an additional site (at Ser 63).

Crambert et al. (35) showed that PLM associates specifically (almost stoichiometrically) and stably with rat α<sub>1</sub>- and α<sub>2</sub>-Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase when co-transfected in oocytes and that PLM reduces the apparent affinity of both isoforms for [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> (K<sub>m(Na)</sub>) was increased from 9.3 to 16.5 mM [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> for the α<sub>1</sub>β<sub>1</sub> subunit) and to a lesser extent [K<sup>+</sup>]<sub>o</sub> (K<sub>m(K)</sub> increased from 0.49 to 0.67 mM). Using myocytes from PLM-KO mice vs wild-type littermates we found that PLM inhibits NKA, mainly by

reducing its affinity for internal Na<sup>+</sup> (K<sub>m(Na)</sub>) increases from 14.2 to 18.8 mM, ref. 36).

During sympathetic activation, the larger Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx via more frequent and larger I<sub>Ca</sub> must be balanced by enhanced Ca<sup>2+</sup> extrusion via NCX that is driven by larger Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients. This increases Na<sup>+</sup> influx at each beat, along with more frequent and larger Na<sup>+</sup> current, resulting in increased [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub>. To limit the rise in [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub>, the greater Na<sup>+</sup> influx must be compensated for by an enhanced Na<sup>+</sup> extrusion via NKA. Indeed, many early studies indicated stimulation of the Na<sup>+</sup>-pump by β-adrenergic agonists. However, there has been controversy because some NKA pump current measurements in myocytes found stimulation, inhibition, or no change upon β-adrenergic stimulation (for a review, see ref. 37). Controversy extends also to the molecular target of PKA on the NKA. The NKA α subunit can be phosphorylated by PKA, but only in the presence of detergents, while *in situ* the phosphorylation site may be inaccessible to the kinase (38).

Since PLM regulates NKA and is a major phosphorylation target in cardiac myocytes, we investigated whether PLM phosphorylation mediates the β-adrenergic agonists effects on NKA (36). In myocytes from wild-type mice, β-adrenergic stimulation activated NKA function, mainly by reducing the K<sub>m(Na)</sub>, both in non-dialyzed myocytes (using the [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub>-dependence of pump-mediated [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> decline upon abrupt NKA reactivation) and in cells under voltage clamp (simultaneous pump current and [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> decline measurements). β-Adrenergic agonists had no effect on NKA function in myocytes from PLM-KO mice. Furthermore, β-adrenergic stimulation of wild type myocytes made the [Na<sup>+</sup>]<sub>i</sub>-dependence of NKA similar to that found in the PLM-KO mice. These data suggest that PLM affects NKA function in a manner similar to the way PLB affects SERCA, a P-type pump closely related to NKA (i.e., inhibition, relieved by phosphorylation, see Fig. 5A).

Interestingly, the association between PLM and α-subunit of NKA, as determined by co-immunoprecipitation experiments, appears to be unaffected by PKA phosphorylation (25, 39). Thus phosphorylation may change the PLM-NKA interaction but does not necessarily result in a complete dissociation (Fig. 5A). In the analogous PLB-SERCA system, it was long thought that PLB phosphorylation caused it to dissociate from SERCA, but more recent results show that PLB remains bound to SERCA even after phosphorylation and abolition of SERCA inhibition (40).

Is NKA-PLM interaction changed in HF? In myocytes from our rabbit HF model, PLM expression is reduced by 42% (25). This reduction is more extensive than
also be perturbed in pathophysiological situations such as heart failure and are involved in contractile dysfunction and arrhythmogenesis.

Acknowledgments

Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health HL-81526 and HL-64724 (DMB).

References

1. Bers DM, Barry WH, Despa S. Intracellular Na⁺ regulation in cardiac myocytes. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;57:897–912.
2. Bers DM. Excitation-contraction coupling and cardiac contractile force. 2nd ed. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press, 2001; p. 427.
3. Hinata M, Kimura J. Forefront of Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger studies: stoichiometry of cardiac Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger; 3:1 or 4:1? J Pharmacol Sci. 2004;96:15–18.
4. Lee CO, Dagostino M. Effect of strophanthidin on intracellular Na⁺ ion activity and twitch tension on constantly driven canine cardiac Purkinje fibers. Biophys J. 1982;40:185–198.
5. Pieske B, Maier LS, Piacentino V3rd, Weisser J, Hasenfuss G, Houser S. Rate dependence of [Na⁺]i and contractility in nonfailing and failing human myocardium. Circulation. 2002;106:447–453.
6. Bassani JWM, Bassani RA, Bers DM. Relaxation in rabbit and rat cardiac cells: species-dependent differences in cellular mechanisms. J Physiol. 1994;476:279–293.
7. Hasenfuss G, Pieske B. Calcium cycling in congestive heart failure. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002;34:951–969.
8. Dash R, Frank KF, Carr AN, Moravec CS, Kranias EG. Gender influences on sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-handling in failing human myocardium. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001;33:1345–1353.
9. Schwinger RH, Munch G, Bolck B, Karczewska P, Krause EG, Erdmann E. Reduced Ca²⁺-sensitivity of SERCA2a in failing human myocardium due to reduced serin-16 phospholamban phosphorylation. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1999;31:479–491.
10. Ai X, Curran JW, Shannon TR, Bers DM, Pogwizd SM. Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase modulates cardiac ryanodine receptor phosphorylation and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ leak in heart failure. Circ Res. 2005;97:1314–1322.
11. Pogwizd SM, Schlotthauer K, Li L, Yuan W, Bers DM. Arrhythmogenesis and contractile dysfunction in heart failure: roles of sodium-calcium exchange, inward rectifier potassium current, and residual beta-adrenergic responsiveness. Circ Res. 2001;88:1159–1167.
12. Piacentino V III, Weber CR, Chen X, Weisser-Thomas J, Margulies KB, Bers DM, et al. Cellular basis of abnormal calcium transients of failing human ventricular myocytes. Circ Res. 2003;92:651–658.
13. Hasenfuss G, Schillinger W, Lehnart SE, Preuss M, Pieske B, Maier LS, et al. Relationship between Na⁺-Ca²⁺-exchanger protein levels and diastolic function of failing human myocardium. Circulation. 1999;99:641–648.
14. Marx SO, Reiken S, Hisamatsu Y, Jayaraman T, Burkhoff D, Rosemblit N, et al. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor): defective regulation in failing hearts. Cell. 2000;101:365–376.

15 Jiang MT, Lokuta AJ, Farrell EF, Wolff MR, Haworth RA, Valdivia HH. Abnormal Ca²⁺ release, but normal ryanodine receptors, in canine and human heart failure. Circ Res. 2002; 91:1015–1022.

16 Li Y, Kranias E, Mignery G, Bers DM. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor does not affect calcium sparks in mouse ventricular myocytes. Circ Res. 2002;90:309–316.

17 Shannon TR, Pogwizd SM, Bers DM. Elevated sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca leak in intact ventricular myocytes from rabbits in heart failure. Circ Res. 2003;93:592–594.

18 Maier LS, Zhang T, Chen L, DeSantiago J, Brown JH, Bers DM. Transgenic CaMKIIδC overexpression uniquely alters cardiac myocyte Ca²⁺ handling: reduced SR Ca²⁺ load and activated SR Ca²⁺ release. Circ Res. 2003;92:904–911.

19 Li L, Chu G, Kranias EG, Bers DM. Cardiac myocyte calcium transport in phospholamban knockout mouse: relaxation and endogenous CaMKII effects. Am J Physiol. 1998;274:H1335–H1347.

20 Pogwizd SM, Sipido KR, Verdonck F, Bers DM. Intracellular Na⁺ in animal models of hypertrophy and heart failure: contractile function and arrhythmogenesis. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;57:887–896.

21 Despa S, Islam MA, Weber CR, Pogwizd SM, Bers DM. Intracellular Na⁺ concentration is elevated in heart failure, but Na/K-pump function is unchanged. Circulation. 2002;105:2543–2548.

22 Baartscheer A, Schumacher CA, van Borren MM, Belterman CN, Coronel R, Fiolet JW. Increased Na⁺/H⁺-exchange activity is the cause of increased [Na⁺]i and underlies disturbed calcium handling in the rabbit pressure and volume overload heart failure model. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;57:1015–1024.

23 Yao A, Su Z, Nonaka A, Zubair I, Spitzer KW, Bridge JH, et al. Abnormal myocyte Ca²⁺ homeostasis in rabbits with pacing-induced heart failure. Am J Physiol. 1998;275:H1441–H1448.

24 Weber CR, Piacentino V 3rd, Houser SR, Bers DM. Dynamic regulation of sodium/calcium exchange function in human heart failure. Circulation. 2003;108:2224–2229.

25 Bossuyt J, Ai X, Moorman RJ, Pogwizd SM, Bers DM. Expression and phosphorylation the Na⁺-pump regulatory subunit phospholemman in heart failure. Circ Res. 2005;97:558–565.

26 Semb SO, Lunde PK, Holt E, Tonnessen T, Christensen G, Sejersted OM. Reduced myocardial Na⁺, K⁺ pump capacity in congestive heart failure following myocardial infarction in rats. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998;30:1311–1328.

27 Verdonck F, Volders PG, Vos MA, Sipido KR. Increased Na⁺ concentration and altered Na⁺/K⁺ pump activity in hypertrophied canine ventricular cells. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;57:1035–1043.

28 Undrovinas AI, Maltsev VA, Sabbah HN. Repolarization abnormalities in cardiomyocytes of dogs with chronic heart failure: role of sustained inward current. Cell Mol Life Sci.

29 Valdivia CR, Chu WW, Pu J, Foell JD, Haworth RA, Wolff MR, et al. Increased late sodium current in myocytes from a canine heart failure model and from failing human heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005;38:475–483.

30 Baartscheer A, Schumacher CA, van Borren MM, Belterman CN, Coronel R, Opthof T, et al. Chronic inhibition of Na⁺/H⁺-exchanger attenuates cardiac hypertrophy and prevents cellular remodeling in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res. 2005;65:83–92.

31 Chattou S, Coulombe A, Diacono J, Le Grand B, John G, Feuvray D. Slowly inactivating component of sodium current in ventricular myocytes is decreased by diabetes and partially inhibited by known Na⁺-H⁺ exchange blockers. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2000;32:1181–1192.

32 Sweadner KJ, Rael E. The FXDYD gene family of small ion transport regulators or channels: cDNA sequence, protein signature sequence, and expression. Genomics. 2000;68:41–56.

33 Presti CF, Jones LR, Lindemann JP. Isoproterenol-induced phosphorylation of a 15-kilodalton sarcolemmal protein in intact myocardium. J Biol Chem. 1985;260:3860–3867.

34 Lindemann JP. Alpha-adrenergic stimulation of sarcolemmal protein phosphorylation and slow responses in intact myocardium. J Biol Chem. 1986;261:4860–4867.

35 Crambert G, Fuzesi M, Garty H, Karlish S, Geering K. Phospholemman (FXYD1) associates with Na⁺, K⁺-ATPase and regulates its transport properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:11476–11481.

36 Despa S, Bossuyt J, Han F, Ginsburg KS, Jia LG, Kutchai H, et al. Phospholemman-phosphorylation mediates the beta-adrenergic effects on Na⁺/K⁺ pump function in cardiac myocytes. Circ Res. 2005;97:252–259.

37 Glitsch HG. Electrophysiology of the sodium-potassium-ATPase in cardiac cells. Physiol Rev. 2001;81:1791–1826.

38 Sweadner KJ, Feschenko MS. Predicted location and limited accessibility of protein kinase A phosphorylation site on Na-K-ATPase. Am J Physiol. 2001;280:C1017–C1026.

39 Fuller W, Eaton P, Bell JR, Shattock MJ. Ischemia-induced phosphorylation of phospholemman directly activates rat cardiac Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase. FASEB J. 2004;18:197–199.

40 Asahi M, McKenna E, Kurzydlowski K, Tada M, MacLennan DH. Physical interactions between phospholamban and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPases are dissociated by elevated Ca²⁺, but not by phospholamban phosphorylation, vanadate, or thapsigargin, and are enhanced by ATP. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:15034–15038.

41 Zhang XQ, Moorman JR, Ahlers BA, Carl LL, Lake DE, Song J, et al. Phospholemman overexpression inhibits Na⁺-K⁺-ATPase in adult rat cardiac myocytes: relevance to decreased Na⁺ pump activity in post-infarction myocytes. J Appl Physiol. 2006; 100:212–220.
