
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

Life Sciences 79 (2006) 717–722

Current topics

Post-opioid receptor adaptations to chronic morphine; Altered functionality and associations of signaling molecules

Alan R. Gintzler *, Sumita Chakrabarti

Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center, 450 Clarkson Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA

Received 25 November 2005; accepted 15 February 2006

---

### Abstract

Opioid desensitization/tolerance mechanisms have largely focused on adaptations that occur on the level of the μ-opioid receptor (MOR) itself. These include opioid receptor phosphorylation and ensuing trafficking events. Recent research, however, has revealed additional adaptations that occur downstream from the opioid receptor, which involve covalent modification of signaling molecules and altered associations among them. These include augmented isoform-specific synthesis of adenylyl cyclase (AC) and their phosphorylation as well as augmented phosphorylation of the Gβ subunit of Gβγ. The aggregate effect of these changes is to shift μ-opioid receptor-coupled signaling from predominantly Giα inhibitory to (Gi-derived) Gβγ stimulatory AC signaling. Most recently, chronic morphine has been shown to enhance the association (interaction) between MOR and Gs, which should provide an additional avenue for offsetting inhibitory MOR signaling sequelae. The unfolding complexity of chronic morphine-induced sequelae demands an evolving broader and more encompassing perspective on opioid tolerance-producing mechanisms. This should facilitate understanding tolerance within the context of physiological plasticity that is activated by chronic exposure to drugs of abuse. Additional research is required to integrate the various tolerance-producing adaptations that have been elucidated to date. Specifically, the relative contribution to opioid tolerance of identified adaptations is still unknown as is the extent to which they vary among different regions of the central nervous system.

© 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Opioid; Tolerance; Adenylyl cyclase; Gβγ; Gs

---

### Introduction

The use of morphine and related opiates in the pharmacological management of pain continues unabated. Nevertheless, a remaining predominant impediment to their medicinal usefulness is the occurrence of analgesic tolerance. This underscores the need for a more complete elucidation of neurochemical targets for novel pharmacotherapies that would minimize or even eliminate tolerance development. Investigating the mechanistic underpinnings of opioid tolerance requires differentiation between those adaptations that are causally associated with opioid tolerance versus those that are epiphenomena. The ultimate viability and medicinal usefulness of models of opioid tolerance will depend on the extent to which such models embrace unique aspects of acute and chronic opioid pharmacology. Working models of opioid tolerance should not only emphasize similarities but also differences between mechanisms that underlie opioid tolerance versus the ‘desensitization’ that is characteristic of virtually all G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). It is also important to keep in mind that the mechanistic underpinnings of tolerance to a particular opioid action may not necessarily generalize to the development of tolerance to other opioid effects or the same opioid effect in different experimental paradigms. This perspective should prove helpful in the ultimate and essential task of integrating the myriad of molecules and mechanisms that have thus far been and undoubtedly will be implicated in opioid tolerance development.

#### Loss of opioid receptor functionality

Most adaptations that have been postulated to be causally associated with opioid tolerance are those that result in the actual loss of specific opioid receptor-mediated signaling (opioid receptor desensitization). These would include the diminution of

* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +1 718 270 2129.
E-mail address: alan.Gintzler@downstate.edu (A.R. Gintzler).

0024-3205/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2006.02.016
spare opioid receptors (Chavkin and Goldstein, 1984), altered opioid receptor density/internalization (Bohn et al., 2000; Chakrabarti et al., 1995a) and altered G protein content (Ammer and Schulz, 1995).

Acute opioid receptor activation has mostly been associated with hyperpolarization of nerve cells via either an increase in specific membrane K⁺ conductances (μ and δ opioids (Duggan and North, 1984; Ikeda et al., 1995) or the inhibition of voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels (κ-opioids) (Gross and Macdonald, 1987; Tallent et al., 1994). Additionally, of particular relevance to hypothesized tolerance mechanisms, activation of opioid receptors, like all GPCRs, promotes their phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of opioid receptors is a prelude to its forming a complex with β-arrestin. Arrestin binding to GPCRs has dual consequences. It sterically hinders interaction with G proteins resulting in the uncoupling of opioid receptors from them. This blunts opioid receptor signaling, which is manifest as opioid receptor desensitization. β-arrestin also targets GPCRs to clathrin-coated pits thereby initiating opioid receptor internalization and trafficking to other subcellular compartment such as lysosomes where receptor degradation can occur. These events directly parallel those that have been extensively described for the β₂-adrenergic receptor (Zhang et al., 1996) and are shared by most, if not all GPCRs.

Agonist-induced opioid receptor phosphorylation occurs primarily, but not exclusively, via G protein receptor-coupled kinases (GRKs) (Pei et al., 1995; Zhang et al., 1996; Appleyard et al., 1999). Furthermore, multiple laboratories have contributed data suggesting a causal association between (GRK-mediated) opioid receptor phosphorylation and opioid agonist-induced desensitization. For example, desensitization of DOR and KOR can be dramatically modified by overexpression of GRK or its dominant negative mutant or mutation of the putative phosphorylation sites within KOR and DOR (Pei et al., 1995; Kovoor et al., 1997; McLaughlin et al., 2004). Additionally, the time course and dose–response relationships for phosphorylation of MOR parallel its agonist-induced desensitization (Zhang et al., 1996).

murine κ-opioid receptors do not internalize (Schulz et al., 2002) but do display analgesic tolerance (McLaughlin et al., 2004; Xu et al., 2004); (d) opioid receptor endocytosis has been associated with protection of opioid receptor functionality, i.e., it results in the diminution of receptor desensitization and opioid tolerance (Whistler et al., 1999; Finn and Whistler, 2001; Koch et al., 2005); (e) chronic morphine increases the content of Gᵢα in the guinea longitudinal muscle myenteric plexus (LMMP) (Lang and Schulz, 1989), and locus coeruleus (Nestler et al., 1989); (f) opioid receptor/effecter coupling is increased following chronic morphine in both the LMMP tissue (Wang and Gintzler, 1997) and periaqueductal gray (Ingram et al., 1998); and (g) chronic morphine has been shown to induce δ-opioid receptor (DOR) function in the midbrain (Hack et al., 2005). An important role of receptor internalization/desensitization in morphine tolerance formation is certainly suggested by reports that tolerance formation is markedly blunted in β-arrestin knockout animals (Bohn et al., 2000; Bohn et al., 2002). However, conclusions drawn from such observations should be tempered by the knowledge that β-arrestin can also function as a scaffolding molecule that is essential for the membrane recruitment of a wide spectrum of signaling molecules. For example, β-arrestin is crucial for the activation of a receptor–src kinase complex through which β₂-adrenergic receptors activate the MAP kinases Erk1/2 pathway (Luttrell et al., 1999). Other examples of signaling components that are recruited to GPCRs via β-arrestin include components of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase 3 and ERK1/2 MAP kinase cascades, the E₃ ubiquitin ligase mdm2 and the phosphodiesterase 4D3 and 4D5 isoforms of cAMP (Shenoy and Lefkowitz, 2005; Shenoy et al., 2006; Lefkowitz and Shenoy, 2005; Shenoy et al., 2001). Notably, chronic morphine increases (45–50%) levels of JNK3 mRNA in frontal cortex (Fan et al., 2003) as well as the number of cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons expressing phosphorylated ERK and c-jun N-terminal kinase (Ma et al., 2001). This suggests that these signaling molecules, which are recruited by β-arrestin to the membrane, contribute to opioid tolerance formation. This underscores the potential relevance of β-arrestin to tolerance-producing sequelae, independent of receptor internalization per se. Thus, the observed diminution of tolerance formation in β-arrestin knockout animals is consistent with multiple mechanistic inferences and does not necessarily indicate the central importance to tolerance of opioid receptor internalization.

Epitomizing the perspective that the opioid receptor desensitization hypothesis is not sufficient to explain opioid tolerance is the massive withdrawal that is precipitated following the acute administration of opioid receptor antagonists to chronic morphine-treated animals. This underscores that the orders of magnitude diminution in analgesic potency following the sustained clinical administration of opioids cannot result solely from opioid receptor inactivation. In addition to adaptations that occur on the level of opioid receptors themselves, which ‘acutely’ reduce effector coupling, long-term adaptations occur at the cellular, synaptic, and network levels that contribute to the reestablishment of normal cellular function despite the continued presence of opioids. In the remainder of this chapter,

Need for additional contributions to tolerance

A critical question, however, is whether or not mechanisms that underlie short-term opioid desensitization that is common among most GRCRs reflect adaptations that are responsible for reductions in opioid agonist potency observed over prolonged time periods, such as occurs clinically. In fact, multiple considerations suggest that additional modifications of the signal transduction system contribute to tolerance formation. This makes it unlikely that ‘loss of opioid receptor functionality’ can account for the totality of opioid tolerance. Disparate observations that bolster this perspective include: (a) profound physiological tolerance to morphine is frequently not accompanied by opioid receptor downregulation (Simantov et al., 1984; Lenoir et al., 1984); (b) morphine, which is very tolerant producing, results in little or no opioid receptor internalization (Sternini et al., 1996; Kovoor et al., 1997; Whistler et al., 1999; Blanchet and Luscher, 2002; Finn and Whistler, 2001); (c)
discussion of post-receptor opioid tolerant-producing strategies will be confined to those we have observed on a cellular level.

**Post-receptor adaptations to chronic morphine; duality of G protein signaling**

One category of post-opioid receptor adaptations to chronic morphine recently uncovered makes use of the duality of G protein signaling that results from the signaling activity of both the \(G_{\alpha}\) as well as \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) subunits. Since the same effector, e.g., adenylyl cyclase (AC), can be differentially regulated by \(G_{\alpha}\) and \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) subunits (Sunahara et al., 1995), alterations in their relative signaling capabilities can be a significant determinant of the consequences of GPCR activation. We have found that this is also an important underpinning of changes in opioid receptor-coupled signaling following chronic opioid treatment (Fig. 1).

In opioid naïve tissue, opioid receptors predominantly signal via the \(G_{\alpha}\) subunits generated from \(G_{i} / G_{o}\), to inhibit AC activity. However, following sustained exposure to morphine, inhibitory opioid receptor signaling is greatly diminished and in many cases, excitatory effects emerge. We have observed this on both the level of transmitter release (Gintzler et al., 1987; Xu et al., 1989; Gintzler and Xu, 1991) and AC activity (Wang and Gintzler, 1995; Wang and Gintzler, 1997; Szucs et al., 2004). Such a shift would result in the manifestation of opioid tolerance since the persistent opioid inhibition of AC activity via the sustained generation of \(G_{i \alpha}\) would be mitigated by the emergence of opioid receptor-coupled stimulation of AC activity that resulted from \(G_{i} / G_{o}\)-derived concomitant generation of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\).

The chronic morphine-induced qualitative change in opioid receptor signaling results, in part, from a shift from predominantly \(G_{i \alpha}\) inhibitory to \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulatory AC signaling (Chakrabarti et al., 1998a). Notably, the chronic morphine-induced emergence of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulatory AC signaling results from changes in signaling molecules downstream from the opioid receptor, e.g., AC, as well as the \(G_{\beta}\) subunit of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\). Chronic morphine-induced changes in AC are comprised of augmented synthesis of those AC isoforms that are stimulated by \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) (Rivera and Gintzler, 1998; Gintzler and Chakrabarti, 2000; Chakrabarti et al., 1998a) as well as the augmented protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated phosphorylation of these isoforms (Chakrabarti et al., 1998b). This would produce an additional increment in \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulation of AC (Zimmermann and Taussig, 1996; Tsu and Wong, 1996; Watson et al., 1994).

In addition to the above changes in effector molecules for \(G_{\beta \gamma}\), chronic morphine also augments the PKC-mediated phosphorylation of \(G_{\beta}\) itself (Chakrabarti et al., 2001; Chakrabarti and Gintzler, 2003; Chakrabarti et al., 2005b). This has several consequences. \(G_{\beta}\) phosphorylation roughly doubles the potency of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) to stimulate ACII (Chakrabarti and Gintzler, 2003). Additionally, phosphorylation of \(G_{\beta}\) diminishes the interaction of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) with G protein receptor kinase 2/3 (Chakrabarti et al., 2001), which would free up more \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) for interaction with AC. Importantly, the consequences of chronic morphine-induced alterations in both AC and \(G_{\beta}\) molecules on AC stimulation by \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) is multiplicative. In other words, the aggregate enhancement in opioid receptor-coupled \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulation of AC would be much larger than the increment resulting from each perturbation separately. Demonstration that chronic morphine enhances PKC phosphorylation of AC and \(G_{\beta}\) and their presence in a complex with PKCγ (Chakrabarti et al., 2005b) provides a biochemical basis and identifies a substrate for the well-documented relevance of PKC (PKCγ) to opioid tolerance-producing mechanisms (Mao et al., 1995; Mayer et al., 1995; Granados-Soto et al., 2000).

**Opioid receptor pleiotropy**

Another more recently discovered post-opioid receptor adaptation to chronic morphine involves altering the relative coupling of opioid receptors to specific G proteins such as \(G_{s}\). Like other GPCRs, MOR interacts with multiple G proteins. These include \(G_{i \alpha 3}\), \(G_{i \alpha 2}\), and \(G_{o \alpha 2}\) (Chakrabarti et al., 1995b) and \(G_{q}\) (Ho et al., 2001). There is also pharmacological evidence that MOR couples to \(G_{s}\). Such data include demonstrations of excitatory MOR-coupled effects that are resistant to pertussis toxin (PTX; and are thus not mediated via \(G_{i} / G_{o}\)) but are sensitive to cholera toxin (CTX) (Xu et al., 1989; Wang and Gintzler, 1997; Gintzler and Xu, 1991; Shen and Crain, 1990; Szucs et al., 2004). There are also pharmacological data indicating that the ability of MOR to enhance transmitter release and AC activity is markedly augmented following chronic systemic morphine (Gintzler et al., 1987; Wang and Gintzler, 1997), which can be blocked by CTX (Wang and Gintzler, 1997). In the aggregate, these observations underscore putative coupling of MOR to \(G_{s}\) and its enhancement following chronic morphine. Nevertheless, the inability to demonstrate the presence of \(G_{s \alpha}\) in immunoprecipitate (IP) obtained using anti-MOR antibodies (Chalecka-Franaszek et al., 2000; Burford et al., 1998) has been largely responsible for excluding formulations of enhanced MOR–\(G_{s}\) coupling from models of tolerance-producing mechanisms.

Recently, we were able to resolve the discrepancy between pharmacological indications of MOR \(G_{s}\) coupling versus the lack of biochemical evidence for such interactions by demonstrating the presence of MOR in \(G_{s \alpha}\) immunoprecipitate (\(G_{s \alpha}\) IP) obtained from spinal cord and Chinese Hamster Ovary cells stably transfected with MOR (Chakrabarti et al., 2005a) as well as from the longitudinal muscle myenteric plexus preparation (unpublished observations). Of particular relevance to opioid tolerance producing mechanisms, in both MOR–CHO cells as well as rat spinal cord, chronic morphine treatment substantially increased the magnitude of MOR that was present in the \(G_{s \alpha}\) IP (\(\approx 375\%)\) in the absence of any alterations in the magnitude of the \(G_{s \alpha}\) that was immunoprecipitated (Chakrabarti et al., 2005a). Moreover, while the magnitude of MOR that co-immunoprecipitates with \(G_{s \alpha}\) increases following chronic morphine, the opposite pertains to the magnitude of MOR that co-immunoprecipitates with \(G_{i \alpha}\), which decreases by \(\approx 39\%\) (Chakrabarti et al., 2005a). Other studies have reported that following chronic morphine, enhanced \(G_{s}\) signaling ensues, albeit non-opioid receptor-coupled (Ammer and Schulz, 1998; Ammer and Schulz, 1995). Demonstration of enhanced

A.R. Gintzler, S. Chakrabarti / Life Sciences 79 (2006) 717–722

Acute Treatment

Opioid Receptor

AC Isoforms
Other GPCRs

Chronic Treatment

Opioid Receptor

AC II/IV/VII
Other GPCRs

PKA/PKC

Fig. 1. Post-opioid receptor adaptations to chronic morphine. Chronic morphine initiates a mosaic of integrated convergent adaptations downstream from the opioid receptor. These make use of G protein signaling via \(G_{\alpha}\) and \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) subunits as well as opioid receptor pleiotropy. The key adaptations identified to date are AC isoform-specific synthesis and phosphorylation in combination with phosphorylation of the \(G_{\beta}\) subunit of G proteins. 1: Up-regulation of AC isoforms IV and VII, which are \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulated. 2: augmented PKC-mediated phosphorylation of AC. PKC phosphorylation of AC II/VII increases stimulation by \(G_{\beta \gamma}\). 3: Phosphorylation of AC II and VII also increases stimulation by \(G_{s \alpha}\). 4: Increased MOR-coupled AC stimulation would also be mediated via \(G_{s}\) since MOR associates with \(G_{s}\), which is augmented following chronic morphine. 5: increased PKA and PKC phosphorylation of GRK/2,3 and \(G_{\beta}\). These signaling molecules are present in a multi-molecular signaling complex. \(G_{\beta}\) phosphorylation decreases the association of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) with GRK, increasing the availability of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) to interact with AC. Phosphorylation of \(G_{\beta}\) by PKC (PKCγ) increases the potency of \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) to stimulate AC. 6: The above noted changes in effector enzymes and signaling molecules elicited by chronic morphine would also be expected to alter responsiveness to other (non-opioid) neurotransmitters that signal via \(G_{i}/G_{o}\), \(G_{s}\) and AC, enhancing the stimulatory effects of generated \(G_{s \alpha}\) and \(G_{\beta \gamma}\).

interaction of MOR with \(G_{s \alpha}\) following chronic morphine is the first direct indication that increased \(G_{s}\) activity is, in part, MOR-coupled.

In our formulation, MOR signaling via \(G_{s}\) would occur concomitantly with the adaptations described above that underlie augmented MOR-coupled \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) stimulatory AC signaling following chronic morphine, i.e., AC isoform-specific synthesis and phosphorylation, \(G_{\beta}\) phosphorylation, etc. (Rivera and Gintzler, 1998; Chakrabarti et al., 1998a,b). The relative contributions of enhanced opioid receptor-coupled \(G_{s \alpha}-\) and \(G_{i}\)-derived \(G_{\beta \gamma}\) signaling most likely varies among cells in different regions of the central nervous system depending on the local milieu of components in micro signaling domains. In the aggregate, elucidation of post-opioid receptor adaptations to chronic morphine underscores that chronic morphine elicits

complex adaptations on multiple neurochemical levels of signaling. Opioid receptor pleiotropy and duality of G protein subunit signaling are pillars of signaling plasticity and underlie much of the richness and diversity of signaling that is characteristic of GPCRs. Thus, it should not be surprising that they also enable many of the adaptations required for cell survival in the face of continued opioid exposure.

The relationship between opioid tolerance-producing mechanisms and addiction (physical dependence) has long been debated and is beyond the scope of this mini-review. This notwithstanding, it should be noted that the functional consequences of the post-receptor adaptations to chronic morphine described above would not, necessarily, be restricted to opioid receptor-coupled systems. Phosphorylation and altered activity of effector enzymes and \(G_{\beta}\) (\(G_{\beta \gamma}\)), molecules that are central to

cell signaling pathways, could alter responsiveness to a myriad of neurotransmitters that signal via GPCRs. An opioid antagonist would prevent opioid receptor activation of all opioid receptor-coupled cascades (via Gi/Gs, Gs, etc.). However, it would leave unchecked the expected consequences of long-term opioid exposure on the activation of other GPCRS that are coupled to AC, e.g., stimulatory AC signaling via the Gi-/Go-derived generation of (phosphorylated) Gβγ and the increased presence of Gβγ-stimulated (phosphorylated) AC isoforms. This, in combination with contribution from ‘AC superactivation’, another post-receptor adaptation to chronic morphine (Sharma et al., 1977) could be a basis for acute precipitated withdrawal, which is always observed following opioid antagonist administration to chronic morphine-treated animals.

Altered opioid receptor trafficking and G protein coupling are undoubtedly points of regulation by chronic morphine whose contribution to opioid tolerance, although significant, is not exclusive. Ultimately, medicinally relevant models of opioid tolerance will have to functionally integrate these dimensions of opioid tolerance with other putative post-opioid receptor contributors to tolerance such as RGS proteins (Gold et al., 2003) and deltafosB (Zachariou et al., 2006). The complexity of tolerant-producing adaptations demands a broad and flexible perspective if models of opioid tolerance are to fully encompass the rich mechanistic landscape and thus facilitate our ability to understand tolerance within the context of physiological plasticity that is activated by chronic exposure to drugs of abuse.

### References

Ammer, H., Schulz, R., 1995. Chronic activation of inhibitory δ-opioid receptors cross-regulates the stimulatory adenylate cyclase-coupled prostaglandin E₁ receptor system in neuroblastoma X glioma (NG108-15) hybrid cells. Journal of Neurochemistry 64 (6), 2449–2457.

Ammer, H., Schulz, R., 1998. Adenylyl cyclase supersensitivity in opioid-withdrawn NG108-15 hybrid cells requires Gs but is not mediated by the Gsalpha subunit. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 286, 855–862.

Appleyard, S.M., Celver, J., Pineda, V., Kovoor, A., Wayman, G.A., Chavkin, C., 1999. Agonist-dependent desensitization of the kappa opioid receptor by G protein receptor kinase and beta-arrestin. Journal of Biological Chemistry 274, 23802–23807.

Blanchet, C., Luscher, C., 2002. Desensitization of mu-opioid receptor-evoked potassium currents: initiation at the receptor, expression at the effector. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99, 4674–4679.

Bohn, L.M., Gainetdinov, R.R., Lin, F.T., Lefkowitz, R.J., Caron, M.G., 2000. Mu-opioid receptor desensitization by beta-arrestin-2 determines morphine tolerance but not dependence. Nature 408, 720–723.

Bohn, L.M., Lefkowitz, R.J., Caron, M.G., 2002. Differential mechanisms of morphine antinociceptive tolerance revealed in (beta)arrestin-2 knock-out mice. Journal of Neuroscience 22, 10494–10500.

Burford, N.T., Tolbert, L.M., Sadee, W., 1998. Specific G protein activation and mu-opioid receptor internalization caused by morphine, DAMGO and endomorphin I. European Journal of Pharmacology 342, 123–126.

Chakrabarti, S., Gintzler, A.R., 2003. Phosphorylation of Gβ is augmented by chronic morphine and enhances Gβγ stimulation of adenylyl cyclase activity. Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research. 119, 144–151.

Chakrabarti, S., Law, P.-Y., Loh, H.H., 1995a. Neuroblastoma neuro2A cells stably expressing a cloned mu-opioid receptor: a specific cellular model to study acute and chronic effects of morphine. Molecular Brain Research 30, 269–278.

Chakrabarti, S., Prather, P.L., Yu, L., Law, P.Y., Loh, H.H., 1995b. Expression of the mu-opioid receptor in CHO cells: ability of mu-opioid ligands to promote alpha-azidoanilidof[32P]GTP labeling of multiple G protein alpha subunits. Journal of Neurochemistry 64, 2534–2543.

Chakrabarti, S., Rivera, M., Yan, S.-Z., Tang, W.-J., Gintzler, A.R., 1998a. Chronic morphine augments Gβγ/Gsa stimulation of adenylyl cyclase: relevance to opioid tolerance. Molecular Pharmacology 54, 655–662.

Chakrabarti, S., Wang, L., Tang, W.-J., Gintzler, A.R., 1998b. Chronic morphine augments adenylyl cyclase phosphorylation: relevance to altered signaling during tolerance/dependence. Molecular Pharmacology 54, 949–953.

Chakrabarti, S., Oppermann, M., Gintzler, A.R., 2001. Chronic morphine induces the concomitant phosphorylation and altered association of multiple signaling proteins: a novel mechanism for modulating cell signaling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98, 4209–4214.

Chakrabarti, S., Regec, A., Gintzler, A.R., 2005a. Biochemical demonstration of mu-opioid receptor association with Gsalpha: enhancement following morphine exposure. Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research. 135, 217–224.

Chakrabarti, S., Regec, A., Gintzler, A.R., 2005b. Chronic morphine acts via a protein kinase Cγ-Gβ-adenylyl cyclase complex to augment phosphorylation of Gβ and Gβγ stimulatory adenylyl cyclase signaling. Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research. 138, 94–103.

Chalecka-Franaszek, E., Weems, H.B., Crowder, A.T., Cox, B.M., Cote, T.E., 2000. Immunoprecipitation of high-affinity, guanine nucleotide-sensitive, solubilized mu-opioid receptors from rat brain: coimmunoprecipitation of the G proteins G(alpha o), G(alpha i1), and G(alpha i3). Journal of Neurochemistry 74, 1068–1078.

Chavkin, C., Goldstein, A., 1984. Opioid receptor reserve in normal and morphine-tolerant guinea pig ileum myenteric plexus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 81 (22), 7253–7257.

Duggan, A.W., North, R.A., 1984. Electrophysiology of opioids. Pharmacological Reviews 35, 219–281.

Fan, X.L., Zhang, J.S., Zhang, X.Q., Ma, L., 2003. Chronic morphine treatment and withdrawal induce up-regulation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase 3 gene expression in rat brain. Neuroscience 122, 997–1002.

Finn, A.K., Whistler, J.L., 2001. Endocytosis of the mu opioid receptor reduces tolerance and a cellular hallmark of opiate withdrawal. Neuron 32, 829–839.

Gintzler, A.R., Chakrabarti, S., 2000. Opioid tolerance and the emergence of new opioid receptor-coupled signaling. Molecular Neurobiology 21, 21–33.

Gintzler, A.R., Xu, H., 1991. Different G proteins mediate the opioid inhibition or enhancement of evoked [5-methionine]enkephalin release. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 88, 4741–4745.

Gintzler, A.R., Chan, W.C., Glass, J., 1987. Evoked release of methionine-enkephalin from tolerant/dependent enteric ganglia: paradoxical dependence on morphine. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 84, 2537–2539.

Gold, S.J., Han, M.H., Herman, A.E., Ni, Y.G., Pudiak, C.M., Aghajanian, G.K., Liu, R.J., Potts, B.W., Mumby, S.M., Nestler, E.J., 2003. Regulation of RGS proteins by chronic morphine in rat locus coeruleus. European Journal of Neuroscience 17, 971–980.

Granados-Soto, V., Kalcheva, I., Hua, X., Newton, A., Yaksh, T.L., 2000. Spinal PKC activity and expression: role in tolerance produced by continuous spinal morphine infusion. Pain 85, 395–404.

Gross, R.A., Macdonald, R.L., 1987. Dynorphin A selectively reduces a large transient (N-type) calcium current of mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons in cell culture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 84, 5469–5473.

Hack, S.P., Bagley, E.E., Chieng, B.C., Christie, M.J., 2005. Induction of delta-opioid receptor function in the midbrain after chronic morphine treatment. Journal of Neuroscience 25, 3192–3198.

Ho, M.K., Yung, L.Y., Chan, J.S., Chan, J.H., Wong, C.S., Wong, Y.H., 2001. Galpha(14) links a variety of G(i)- and G(s)-coupled receptors to the stimulation of phospholipase C. British Journal of Pharmacology 132, 1431–1440.

Ikeda, K., Kobayashi, T., Ichikawa, T., Usui, H., Kumanishi, T., 1995. Functional couplings of the delta- and the kappa-opioid receptors with the

G-protein-activated K⁺ channel. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 208, 302–308.

Ingram, S.L., Vaughan, C.W., Bagley, E.E., Connor, M., Christie, M.J., 1998. Enhanced opioid efficacy in opioid dependence is caused by an altered signal transduction pathway. Journal of Neuroscience 18, 10269–10276.

Koch, T., Widera, A., Bartzsch, K., Schulz, S., Brandenburg, L.O., Wundrack, N., Beyer, A., Grecksch, G., Holtt, V., 2005. Receptor endocytosis counteracts the development of opioid tolerance. Molecular Pharmacology 67, 280–287.

Kovoor, A., Nappey, V., Kieffer, B.L., Chavkin, C., 1997. Mu and delta opioid receptors are differentially desensitized by the coexpression of beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 2 and beta-arrestin 2 in Xenopus oocytes. Journal of Biological Chemistry 272, 27605–27611.

Lang, J., Schulz, R., 1989. Chronic opiate receptor activation in vivo alters the level of G-protein subunits in guinea pig myenteric plexus. Neuroscience 32 (2), 503–510.

Lefkowitz, R.J., Shenoy, S.K., 2005. Transduction of receptor signals by beta-arrestins. Science 308, 512–517.

Lenoir, D., Barg, J., Simantov, R., 1984. Characterization and down-regulation of opiate receptors in aggregating fetal rat brain cells. Brain Research 304, 285–290.

Luttrell, L.M., Ferguson, S.S., Daaka, Y., Miller, W.E., Maudsley, S., Della Rocca, G.J., Lin, F., Kawakatsu, H., Owada, K., Luttrell, D.K., Caron, M.G., Lefkowitz, R.J., 1999. Beta-arrestin-dependent formation of beta2 adrenergic receptor–Src protein kinase complexes. Science 283, 655–661.

Ma, W., Zheng, W.H., Powell, K., Jhamandas, K., Quirion, R., 2001. Chronic morphine exposure increases the phosphorylation of MAP kinases and the transcription factor CREB in dorsal root ganglion neurons: an in vitro and in vivo study. European Journal of Neuroscience 14, 1091–1104.

Mao, J., Price, D.D., Phillips, L.L., Lu, J., Mayer, D.J., 1995. Increases in protein kinase Cγ immunoreactivity in the spinal cord of rats associated with tolerance to the analgesic effects of morphine. Brain Research 677, 257–267.

Mayer, D.J., Mao, J., Price, D.D., 1995. The development of tolerance and dependence is associated with translocation of protein kinase C. Pain 61, 365–374.

McLaughlin, J.P., Myers, L.C., Zarek, P.E., Caron, M.G., Lefkowitz, R.J., Czyzyk, T.A., Pintar, J.E., Chavkin, C., 2004. Prolonged kappa opioid receptor phosphorylation mediated by G-protein receptor kinase underlies sustained analgesic tolerance. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279, 1810–1818.

Nestler, E.J., Erdos, J.J., Terwilliger, R., Duman, R.S., Tallman, J.F., 1989. Regulation of G proteins by chronic morphine in the rat locus coeruleus. Brain Research 476, 230–239.

Pei, G., Kieffer, B.L., Lefkowitz, R.J., Freedman, N.J., 1995. Agonist-dependent phosphorylation of the mouse delta-opioid receptor: involvement of G protein-coupled receptor kinases but not protein kinase C. Molecular Pharmacology 48, 173–177.

Rivera, M., Gintzler, A.R., 1998. Differential effect of chronic morphine on mRNA encoding adenyl cyclase isoforms: relevance to physiological sequelae of tolerance/dependence. Molecular Brain Research 54, 165–169.

Schulz, R., Wehmeyer, A., Schulz, K., 2002. Visualizing preference of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 3 for the process of kappa-opioid receptor sequestration. Molecular Pharmacology 61, 1444–1452.

Sharma, S.K., Klee, W.A., Nirenberg, M., 1977. Opiate-dependent modulation of adenylate cyclase. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 74 (8), 3365–3369.

Shen, K.F., Crain, S.M., 1990. Cholera toxin-A subunit blocks opioid excitatory effects on sensory neuron action potentials indicating mediation by Gₛ-linked opioid receptors. Brain Research 525, 225–231.

Shenoy, S.K., Lefkowitz, R.J., 2005. Seven-transmembrane receptor signaling through beta-arrestin. Science STKE (308) cm 10.

Shenoy, S.K., McDonald, P.H., Kohout, T.A., Lefkowitz, R.J., 2001. Regulation of receptor fate by ubiquitination of activated beta 2-adrenergic receptor and beta-arrestin. Science 294, 1307–1313.

Shenoy, S.K., Drake, M.T., Nelson, C.D., Houtz, D.A., Xiao, K., Madabushi, S., Reiter, E., Premont, R.T., Lichtarge, O., Lefkowitz, R.J., 2006. Beta-Arrestin-dependent, G Protein-independent ERK1/2 activation by the beta2 adrenergic receptor. Journal of Biological Chemistry 281, 1261–1273.

Simantov, R., Lotem, J., Levy, R., 1984. Selectivity in the control of opiate receptor density in the animal and in cultured fetal brain cells. Neuropeptides 5, 197–200.

Sternini, C., Spann, M., Anton, B., Keith, D.E., Bunnett, N.W., von Zastrow, M., Evans, C.J., Brecha, N.C., 1996. Agonist-selective endocytosis of μ-opioid receptor by neurons in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 93, 9241–9246.

Sunahara, R.K., Dessauer, C.W., Gilman, A.G., 1995. Complexity and diversity of mammalian adenyl cyclases. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 36, 461–480.

Szucs, M., Boda, K., Gintzler, A.R., 2004. Dual effects of Tyr-d-Ala-Gly-(NMe) Phe-Gly-ol (DAMGO) and d-Phe-Cys-Tyr-d-Trp-Arg-Thr-Pen-Thr-NH₂ (CTAP) on adenyl cyclase activity; implications for μ-opioid receptor Gₛ coupling. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 310, 256–262.

Tallent, M., Dichter, M.A., Bell, G.I., Resine, T., 1994. The cloned kappa opioid receptor couples to an N-type calcium current in undifferentiated PC-12 cells. Neuroscience 63, 1033–1040.

Tsu, R.C., Wong, Y.H., 1996. Gᵢ-mediated stimulation of type II adenyl cyclase is augmented by Gq-coupled receptor activation and phorbol ester treatment. Journal of Neuroscience 16 (4), 1317–1323.

Wang, L., Gintzler, A.R., 1995. Morphine tolerance and physical dependence: reversal of opioid inhibition to enhancement of cAMP formation. Journal of Neurochemistry 64, 1102–1106.

Wang, L., Gintzler, A.R., 1997. Altered μ-opiate receptor-G protein signal transduction following chronic morphine exposure. Journal of Neurochemistry 68, 248–254.

Watson, P.A., Krupinski, J., Kempinski, A.M., Frankenfeld, C.D., 1994. Molecular cloning and characterization of the type VII isoform of mammalian adenyl cyclase expressed widely in mouse tissues and in S49 mouse lymphoma cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry 269, 28893–28898.

Whistler, J.L., Chuang, H.H., Chu, P., Jan, L.Y., von Zastrow, M., 1999. Functional dissociation of mu opioid receptor signaling and endocytosis: implications for the biology of opiate tolerance and addiction. Neuron 23, 737–746.

Xu, H., Smolens, I., Gintzler, A.R., 1989. Opioids can enhance and inhibit the electrically evoked release of methionine-enkephalin. Brain Research 504, 36–42.

Xu, M., Petraschka, M., McLaughlin, J.P., Westenbroek, R.E., Caron, M.G., Lefkowitz, R.J., Czyzyk, T.A., Pintar, J.E., Terman, G.W., Chavkin, C., 2004. Neuropathic pain activates the endogenous kappa opioid system in mouse spinal cord and induces opioid receptor tolerance. Journal of Neuroscience 24, 4576–4584.

Zachariou, V., Bolanos, C.A., Selle, D.E., Theobald, D., Cassidy, M.P., Kelz, M.B., Shaw-Lutchman, T., Berton, O., Sim-Selle, L.J., Dileone, R.J., Kumar, A., Nestler, E.J., 2006. An essential role for DeltaFosB in the nucleus accumbens in morphine action. Nature Neuroscience 9, 205–211.

Zhang, L., Yu, Y., Mackin, S., Weight, F.F., Uhl, G.R., Wang, J.B., 1996. Differential mu opiate receptor phosphorylation and desensitization induced by agonists and phorbol esters. Journal of Biological Chemistry 271, 11449–11454.

Zimmermann, G., Taussig, R., 1996. Protein kinase C alters the responsiveness of adenyl cyclase to G protein α and βγ subunits. Journal of Biological Chemistry 271, 27161–27166.
