
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

International Journal for Parasitology 36 (2006) 529–540

Invited Review

Harbouring in the brain: A focus on immune evasion mechanisms and their deleterious effects in malaria and human African trypanosomiasis

S. Bisser${}^{a,c,*}$, O.N. Ouwe-Missi-Oukem-Boyer${}^{a}$, F.S. Toure${}^{a}$, Z. Taoufiq${}^{b}$, B. Bouteille${}^{c}$, A. Buguet${}^{d}$, D. Mazier${}^{b}$

${}^{a}$ Centre International de Recherches Médicales de Franceville, Unité de parasitologie médicale, BP 769 Franceville, Gabon  
${}^{b}$ INSERM U 511, Immuno-Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire des Infections Parasitaires, Centre Hospitalier-Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France  
${}^{c}$ EA 3174 Neuroparasitologie et neuroépidémiologie tropicale, Université de Limoges, 12, rue du Dr Marcland, 87025 Limoges cedex, France  
${}^{d}$ EA 3734 Neurobiologie des états de vigilance, Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France  

Received 9 November 2005; received in revised form 27 January 2006; accepted 2 February 2006

---

### Abstract

Malaria and human African trypanosomiasis represent the two major tropical vector-transmitted protozoan infections, displaying different prevalence and epidemiological patterns. Death occurs mainly due to neurological complications which are initiated at the blood-brain barrier level. Adapted host-immune responses present differences but also similarities in blood-brain barrier/parasite interactions for these diseases: these are the focus of this review. We describe and compare parasite evasion mechanisms, the initiating mechanisms of central nervous system pathology and major clinical and neuropathological features. Finally, we highlight the common immune mediated mechanisms leading to brain involvement. In both diseases neurological damage is caused mainly by cytokines (interferon-gamma, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and IL-10), nitric oxide and endothelial cell apoptosis. Such a comparative analysis is expected to be useful in the comprehension of disease mechanisms, which may in turn have implications for treatment strategies.

© 2006 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

### Keywords: Cerebral malaria; Late stage trypanosomiasis; Blood-brain barrier; Central nervous system; Plasmodium; Trypanosoma

---

### 1. Introduction

Malaria and human African trypanosomiasis (HAT or sleeping sickness) are two major killers in tropical countries. Every year, more than 1 million people, primarily children, die from malaria due to severe anaemia, multi-organ system failure or cerebral complications (Anonymous, 2000). The figures are more difficult to evaluate in African trypanosomiasis since people die from opportunistic infections, meningoencephalitis or drug-related encephalopathy. This disease, affecting remote rural populations, is often misdiagnosed and under-diagnosed, as out of the total of 500,000 suspected cases, only 40,000 are detected yearly (Anonymous, 1998). Malaria affects tropical populations worldwide and consequently is 200 times more frequent than HAT. On the other hand, using the disability-adjusted-life years lost (DALY) estimations from the World Bank, trypanosomiasis represents 10 million DALY, placing it second only to malaria in the global burden of parasitic diseases (Anonymous, 1993).

The geographic range of these vector-transmitted diseases (mosquito for malaria and tsetse fly for HAT) overlap in sub-Saharan African countries and clinical signs may be confused in those regions. Fever, headaches, polyarthralgia, dizziness are common signs at the onset of both infections, as are psychiatric symptoms and coma at the stage of CNS involvement. In malaria, the rapid onset of symptoms and the presence of numerous parasites on a blood smear make diagnosis easier than in sleeping sickness. Malaria progresses in acute attacks with progressive development of premunition and cerebral malaria (CM) occurs mainly in children (0–5 years) and in previously non-immune subjects from areas of low endemicity. Clinical patterns vary widely around the world

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 05 55435820; fax: +33 05 55435821.
Current address: EA 3174 Neuroparasitologie et neuroépidémiologie tropicale, Université de Limoges, 12, rue du Dr Marcland, 87025 Limoges cedex, France.
E-mail address: sylviebisser@yahoo.fr (S. Bisser).

0020-7519/$30.00 © 2006 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.02.001
because of strain variations in parasite pathogenicity and/or differences in patient immune status (Turner, 1997; Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 2003b). Recent immunological studies confirm similar variability for trypanosomiasis (MacLean et al., 2004; Sternberg, 2004), however acquired immunity has not been studied properly in HAT (Khonde et al., 1995). It is common practice to avoid co-infection of sleeping sickness patients with malaria (via systematic pre-treatment of patients with anti-malarial drugs) but the reasons for this are not clearly documented and the details of the interactions between the two protozoan diseases (exacerbation/attenuation of symptoms or pathogenicity) are not yet known.

In both diseases, research has been conducted in human and diverse animal models: mouse and monkey in malaria (Lou et al., 2001; de Souza and Riley, 2002), mouse, rat, sheep and monkey in HAT (Bouteille et al., 1999). Animal models are, of course, imperfect in representing the human diseases. However, they allow studies on basic mechanisms involved in the development of immune and neuropathological reactions.

This review deals with *Plasmodium falciparum* and *Trypanosoma brucei gambiense/Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense* as they interact with the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Our aim was to focus on the strategies utilized by both parasites to escape the host's immune system and the resulting neuro-pathological differences and similarities during host-BBB interactions, using both man and animal studies to help piece together the fragmentary data (see Table 1). Dissecting the mechanisms of those interactions offers insights into the dynamics of host membranes and intracellular trafficking that could potentially lead to the development of new control strategies.

### Table 1
Mechanisms leading to cerebral malaria and human African trypanosomiasis meningoencephalitis

| Mechanisms of parasite survival in the host | Malaria | African trypanosomiasis |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Hiding sites | Red blood cells | Surface coat |
| Sequestration in brain microvessels | Neurotropism (Brain/ECs) |
| Antigenic variation | PfEMP-1var genes | VSG genes |
| Other immune evasion mechanisms | Non specific B cell production |
| Haemozoin | Other immune evasion mechanisms |
| pRBC adhesion to dendritic cells | Antigenic mimicry (autoantibodies) |
| Translationally controlled tumour protein | Trypanin |
| Prostaglandins $D_2E_2F_{2\alpha}$ | Metabolic deviation (L-arginine, NOS, arginase) |
| Cytoadherence to ECs | Macrophages activation (GPI) |
| Activation of ECs | Paracellular migration associated with the presence of laminin $\alpha$4 and IFN-$\gamma$ |
| Apoptosis of ECs | Activation of ECs |
| Aspecific: Headache, agitation, prostration, psychosis, seizures, impaired consciousness, coma | Aspecific: Psychiatric, motor and sensory abnormalities, sleep disturbances |
| Aspecific: Related to occlusive signs | Aspecific: Infiltrates of mononuclear inflammatory cells, astrogliosis, microgliosis, demyelinization |

### Abbreviations used:
- ECs, endothelial cells;
- GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol;
- NOS, nitric oxide synthase;
- PfEMP-1, *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte membrane protein 1;
- pRBC, parasitized-red blood cells;
- VSG, variant surface glycoproteins.
Scherf et al., 1998; Deitsch et al., 2001). The switching mechanisms involved are not yet fully elucidated and that switching rates, previously estimated at 2% per generation, remain controversial (Paget-McNicol et al., 2002; Gatton et al., 2003). This mechanism results in clonal antigenic variation, which exposes highly polymorphic epitopes on the RBC surface, thus permitting the parasite to evade the host's immune response.

*P. falciparum* is also able to produce various substances that interfere with host defences and favour its own growth through host immune suppression. The pigment haemozoin, released through parasite metabolism, has been recently shown to affect both the antigen processing and the immunomodulatory functions of various immune cells (Scorza et al., 1999; Urban and Roberts, 2002). The parasite can secrete prostaglandins (D2, E2 and F2α) and a functional histamine-releasing factor homolog, the translationally controlled tumour protein, all of which may affect host immune responses in vivo (Kilunga Kubata et al., 1998; MacDonald et al., 2001). Cytoadherence of parasitized RBCs (pRBCs) to dendritic cells can suppress their ability to induce allogenic as well as primary and secondary antigen-specific T cell response, thus suppressing pro-inflammatory response to the parasite, an outcome that would favour both parasite and host (Urban et al., 1999; Sacks and Sher, 2002; Urban and Roberts, 2003).

### 2.2. African trypanosomiasis

Conversely, the extracellular African trypanosomes are directly exposed to the host immune system. The plasma membrane is completely surrounded by a thick coat, which is impermeable to macromolecules and protective against lytic elements in the host’s serum. This surface coat is composed of a repeat of 10 million single species of variant surface glycoprotein (VSGs) copies fixed to the outer membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. These molecules are so tightly packed that hidden epitopes and invariant proteins are protected from immune recognition.

The highly immunogenic VSG undergoes antigenic variation, enabling the parasite to escape immune reactions. Antigenic variation in trypanosomes is extremely sophisticated and potentially unlimited, in contrast to the limited range for *Plasmodium* (reviewed in Cross, 1996; Donelson et al., 1998; Pays, 1999). The VSGs have two functions. First, they elicit an efficient antibody response that reduces the number of parasites, allowing prolonged extracellular parasite survival in the blood compartment. Second, they allow some parasites to escape destruction through periodic variation of surface epitopes where VSG gene expressions switch from one VSG to another. Moreover, endocytosis activity is very high in trypanosomes, enabling the whole VSG coat to be turned over within only 12 min. Consequently, antibody/VSG complexes are internalized quickly into the parasite and digested in lysosomes, whereas VSGs are recycled on the cell surface. Such an exceptional rate of intracellular membrane trafficking has been identified as a new role of the VSG in immune system evasion (Morgan et al., 2002; Engstler et al., 2004; Pays, 2005). The highly immunogenic VSG molecules also stimulate polyclonal B cell proliferation, particularly IgM class clones. This overwhelming production of immunoglobulins, only partially directed against trypanosome antigens, added to the release of VSG fragments in the blood, contributes to disease immunopathogenicity. For example, autoantibodies directed against CNS components may be produced. Whether autoantibodies are produced through non-specific stimulation of B cells or through molecular mimicry, is not clear. However, under the latter hypothesis, they may represent a further mechanism of immune evasion linked to potential hiding sites localized beyond the BBB (Mhlanga et al., 1997) or even in endothelial or glial cells (Abolarin et al., 1982; Stoppini et al., 2000). Thus neurotropism may also represent another means of immune evasion and explain the occurrence of relapses, since most trypanocidal drugs are ineffective in these hiding sites.

Finally, trypanosomes produce substances that interfere with the host immune system in a very subtle way. Trypanosomes can activate macrophages directly, through endotoxin-like substances of the family of coat lipopolysaccharides and the GPI anchor of VSG (reviewed by Rhind and Shek, 1999). This activation is enhanced by interferon-γ (IFN-γ). Interestingly, T cells are triggered to produce IFN-γ by a microtubule-binding protein trypanin (Hill et al., 2000; Hutchings et al., 2002), which, in turn, could be a growth promoting signal for trypanosomes (Bakhiet et al., 1993). Activated macrophages produce IL-1 and prostaglandins that can stimulate host immune responses but also contribute with IFN-γ to the progressive acquisition of a suppressive phenotype on T cells (Sternberg and McGuigan, 1992; Darji et al., 1993; Lucas et al., 1993; Schleifer and Mansfield, 1993; Vincendeau et al., 1999). Other major macrophage products are tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and nitric oxide (NO), both having direct trypanostatic and trypanocidal properties (Daulouede et al., 2001). Interestingly, trypanosomes evade NO-induced trypanocidal effects. In the host’s blood macrophages, the L-arginine substrate metabolism is preferentially shifted from the production of NO and derivates (through the enzyme NO synthase, NOS) to that of ornithine and derivates (through arginase), the latter being used for the parasite’s own growth (Gobert et al., 2000; Buguet et al., 2002; Vincendeau et al., 2003).

## 3. Mechanisms initiating CNS invasion in CM and HAT meningoencephalitis

*P. falciparum* and *T. brucei* parasites interact with the BBB, the physical and metabolic barrier between the CNS and the periphery. Two different structures separate the blood from the CNS: the BBB and the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier (BCSFB). The BBB is composed of specialized capillary ECs. This endothelium differs from others through the presence of intercellular tight junctions, the presence of pericytes within the capillary basement membrane and the fact that astrocyte foot processes surround the capillaries. The BCSFB is localized at the choroid plexuses that ensures

production of CSF and active transport of metabolites out of the CNS into the blood. They contain fenestrated capillaries close to the basal layer of CSF-secreting ECs. Although, tight junctions are also present, the BCSFB is slightly more permeable than the BBB (Strazielle and Ghersi-Egea, 2000). Secreted or released factors in the CSF may represent important markers to evaluate disease physiopathology; several have been proposed as diagnostic tools, although they only partially reflect brain pathology. A schematic overview of the mechanisms of CNS invasion, induced cerebral pathology and main mediators released in CSF is proposed in Fig. 1 for CM (a) and HAT (b) in humans.

### 3.1. Cerebral malaria

The sequence of events leading to CM is still poorly understood. Sequestration of pRBCs has been studied extensively (reviewed in Gachot and Vachon, 1995; Dondorp et al., 2000, 2002, 2004; Grau et al., 2003; Wassmer et al., 2003). Although, it represents a necessary condition, it is not sufficient to explain the CM syndrome as sequestration is observed in all malaria cases but only 1% develop CM. There is increasing evidence that accumulation of intravascular cell infiltrates such as leukocytes and platelets contributes to pathogenic BBB interactions that trigger neurological damage, either directly or through secreted mediators (Pino et al., 2005; Schofield and Grau, 2005). Cytoadherence to ECs is mediated through adhesive foci on the pRBC surface called ‘knobs’ (Pongponrtn et al., 2003). PfEMP-1 is probably the most important ligand implicated in this attachment and *P. falciparum* strains associated with severe malaria preferentially express proteins encoded by a specific group (group A) of *var* genes (Jensen et al., 2004). On the EC side, the major specific receptor is the inducible intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) (Chakravorty and Craig, 2005). Cytoadherence induces endothelial activation, phosphorylation of intracellular proteins and modifications at the cytoskeleton and junctional levels. Such changes may also occur through non-adhesion-dependent circulating mediators such as TNF-α or transforming growth factor (TGF)-β (Dobbie et al., 1999; Deining et al., 2000; Pino et al., 2003). More recently, in vitro adhesion of pRBCs to ECs has been shown to induce apoptosis in ECs, which contributes to BBB disruption (Fig. 1a) but also upregulates normal ECs, resulting in hyperadhesiveness (Hebert et al., 1998; Pino et al., 2003). However, other potential EC activators have now been described which also make an important contribution to pathogenesis. Platelets, together with other cell types, can modulate the expression of adhesion molecules, such as ICAM-1, as well as the production of cytokines by ECs, such as IL-6, through the release of IL-1. Platelet-derived microparticles modulate EC metabolism by regulating the production of cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandins, thus increasing the adhesiveness of leukocytes to EC (Schofield and Grau, 2005). Moreover, activated ECs or ECs which have internalized infected erythrocytes, may attract cytotoxic CD8 T lymphocytes, thus enhancing BBB dysfunction and initiating brain inflammation through activation of

CNS cells, such as astrocytes, pericytes and microglia. These cells may in turn release several metabolites and bioactive molecules and enhance the process through chemokine recruitment (Pino et al., 2005).

### 3.2. Trypanosomiasis

Trypanosome entry into the brain has been subject to long-term controversy. In vitro studies on a human BBB model have recently demonstrated that human-infective *T. b. gambiense* strain IL1852 crosses the BBB far more readily than the animal-infective *T. b. brucei* 427 strain (Grab et al., 2004). The penetration of trypanosomes occurred at or near intercellular junctions (Fig. 1b). A decrease in electrical resistance of BBB inserts was also observed when cultivated with the Gambian strain. Furthermore, it is likely that trypanosomes enter the CNS more rapidly through regions where the BBB is reduced and thus more fragile. These areas are localized at the choroid plexuses but also at the trigeminal and dorsal root ganglia and the circumventricular organs, including the pineal gland, median eminence and the area postrema (Schultzberg et al., 1988; Philip et al., 1994). These localizations can explain the initial clinical manifestations in HAT (sleepiness, endocrinological disturbances and deep pain). Parasite passage through the barrier, even at specific localizations, cannot be due to physical properties, the parasite being huge (2 μm in diameter) when compared with low molecular weight substances. It seems that trypanosomes are able to cross the BBB without a generalised loss of tight-junction proteins (Mulenga et al., 2001).

The BBB crossing is certainly multifactorial, involving diffusion of signalling substances originating from parasites (mainly VSGs, hydrolases, proteases, saturated fatty acids and aromatic amino acid derivatives) or from the host (endotoxins, prostaglandins, NO, TNF-α, IFN-γ), which promote parasite entry (Tizard et al., 1978; Pentreath, 1999; Lonsdale-Eccles and Grab, 2002). The inflammatory process initiated in the blood may also enhance BBB permeability. The BBB itself may play an active role in the mediation of the neuro-immune response, either by production of inflammatory mediators or by expression of adhesion molecules (Mulenga et al., 2001; Viswambharan et al., 2003). A parasite-derived protein (trypanosome apoptotic factor) has been shown to induce apoptosis in human brain ECs and may be a key step in parasite entry into the brain (Girard et al., 2003; Stiles et al., 2004). Alternatively, as for lymphocyte penetration into the brain, parasite entry into the CNS may be triggered by IFN-γ production. Indeed, the endothelial membrane of the BBB is thought to be permissive for parasites and T cells when presenting laminin α4 chains and when acting in synergy with IFN-γ (Masocha et al., 2004). In the latter authors’ experimental mouse model, *T. b. brucei* clustering was observed around laminin α4-containing vessels but not around vessels expressing laminin α5. As a consequence of such mechanisms, parasites can be detected in the CSF (Fig. 1b). Whether CSF is suitable for parasite proliferation is still debated (Pentreath et al., 1992), nevertheless CSF reactions may have a role in diagnosis and

(a)

| EC | Lumen | Microvascular obstruction | Cytoadherence/Sequestration of pRBCs | Hypoxic ischemia |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | ↑ Pro-inflammatory cytokines | (TNF-α, IFN-γ...) | Mo |
|  | apoptosis |  | activation | BBB |
|  | ↑ junctional permeability | Pericyte |  |  |
|  | Astrocyte |  |  |  |
|  | Microglia cell | BRAIN | CSF |  |
|  |  | Activated CNS cells | BCSFB mildly impaired | Intrathecal IgG synthesis |
|  | NEURONAL DAMAGE, | ↑iNOS, ↑ NO ↑ TGF-β | TNF-α, TGF-β, NO | Autoantibodies |
|  | COMA, DEATH | TNF-α, IL-1β, | ↓ glucose, ↑ lactate |  |
|  |  | IFN-γ, IL-10 | ↑ QA, ↑ PA, ± KA |  |
|  |  | Anaerobic glycolysis | Leukocyte count ± |  |
|  |  | Increased catabolism of tryptophan |  |  |
|  |  | Excitotoxicity |  |  |

(b)

| EC | Lumen | Trypanosome | ↑ Pro-inflammatory cytokines | Mo |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | (TNF-α, IFN-γ...) | BBB |
|  | apoptosis |  | activation |  |
|  | Pericyte | transmigration |  |  |
|  | Astrocyte |  | BRAIN | CSF |
|  | Microglia cell | Activated MØ | BCSFB impaired | Intrathecal IgM synthesis |
|  |  | Activated CNS cells | ↑ IL-6, ↑ IL-8, ↑ IL-10 | Autoantibodies |
|  | NEURONAL DAMAGE |  | TNF-α, NO, Chemokines, | (α-GalC, α-NF) |
|  | DEMYELINIZATION, | Astrogliosis | ↑ GFAP, PGs | Neurofilaments |
|  | COMA, DEATH | Neuronal degeneration | ↑ Leukocyte count | Trypanosomes & |
|  |  |  | Trypanosome released | mediators |

Fig. 1. Overview of the mechanisms of CNS invasion, induced cerebral pathology and main mediators released in brain or CSF in cerebral malaria (a) and human African trypanosomiasis (b). Only relevant markers for pathogeny or prognosis found in humans are reported here. BBB, blood-brain barrier; BCSFB, blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EC, endothelial cell; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; KA, kynureninic acid; MØ, macrophage; Mo, monocyte; NO, nitric oxide; PA, picolinic acid; PGs, prostaglandins; pRBCs, parasitized red blood cells; QA, quinolinic acid; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-beta; Tjs, intercellular tight junctions; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-alpha; α-GalC, anti-galactocerebroside; α-NF, anti-neurofilament.

particularly for treatment decisions since trypanosomes may change their metabolism according to the environment and thus modify their sensitivity to drugs (Enanga et al., 2002).

The initial cerebral pathological reactions in trypanosomiasis may be due to infiltrating macrophages but resident cells, especially astrocytes and microglia, soon take over through the production of local mediators. The major role of cytokines, and more recently chemokines, mainly produced by microglia, has been identified in HAT (Brenier-Pinchart et al., 2001; Lejon et al., 2002) (Boda et al., unpublished results). A complex network of cytokine–brain interactions occurs and it is clear that, even in the brain, the parasite may be able to use host immunological reactions to bypass the immune response and favour its own growth. Molecular mimicry between parasite components and host brain structures is a good example. Autoantibodies directed against myelin (galactocerebrosides), L-tryptophan (a precursor of the neurotransmitter serotonin) and neurofilament proteins have been identified (Amevigbe et al., 1992; Okomo-Assoumou et al., 1995; Ayed et al., 1997). Molecular mimicry has been proven for anti-neurofilament antibodies which recognize a common epitope expressed by neurons and flagellar components of trypanosomes (Ayed et al., 1997). These autoantibodies can induce pathological lesions in the brain and enhance inflammatory mechanisms leading to demyelination.

### 4. Major neurological aspects of CM and HAT meningoencephalitis

#### 4.1. Malaria

Neurological manifestations of malaria include headache, agitation, prostration, frank psychosis, seizures and impaired consciousness (Newton and Warrell, 1998). Cerebral malaria is the most severe neurological complication and is defined as an acute encephalopathy with seizures and loss of consciousness in an individual with *P. falciparum* infection in whom other causes of coma have been excluded (Anonymous, 2000). CM is defined on the Glasgow coma scale ≤9 or Blantyre coma scale ≤2, for adults and children, respectively (Turner, 1997; Anonymous, 2000; Newton et al., 2000; Imbert et al., 2002). Although mostly reversible, post-treatment neurological sequelae are present in 25% of children and 5% of adults with CM (Carter et al., 2005). The clinical picture and outcome of CM differs with age and time of exposure to malaria. The recently introduced multi-organ dysfunction score (MODS) therefore seems more useful than coma scales alone, when describing the level of severity and prognosis of malaria (Helbok et al., 2003; Gitau and Newton, 2005; Helbok et al., 2005).

#### 4.2. Cerebral trypanosomiasis

Cerebral trypanosomiasis is a chronic meningoencephalitis that develops over months or years, with a broad spectrum of neurological signs and symptoms depending on the main localization of lesions. The reported signs can be grouped into four categories: psychiatric, motor abnormalities, sensory abnormalities and sleep disturbances (Kennedy, 2004). Psychiatric disturbances can be subtle and include confusion, mood swings, agitation, aggressive behaviour, euphoria, absent gaze, mutism and indifference. Motor system involvement may include abnormal movements, limb hypertonia and pyramidal weakness, cerebellar ataxia and polyneuritis. Sensory involvement can present as painful hyperaesthesia and diffuse pruritus. The sucking reflex and palmar–mental reflexes may also be present. The characteristic sleep–wake syndrome is made of a complete circadian (24 h) disruption added to a major disturbance of sleep structure (Buguet et al., 2005). Although classically described, most of these signs are not specific to HAT, since other CNS affections may give similar symptoms. At the terminal phase of the disease, disturbances in consciousness and dementia develop with incoherence, incontinence and epileptic fits. At this irreversible state the patient will die in a state of cachexia and physiological misery even if treatment is administered (reviewed in Dumas and Bisser, 1999).

### 5. Neuropathology in CM and HAT meningoencephalitis

The cerebral pathology of the two diseases differs, as trypanosomes penetrate the CNS while malaria parasites induce pathology through contact with cerebral ECs (Fig. 1a and b). However, the diseases are similar, in that they cannot be distinguished by identification of systematic brain lesions capable of explaining clinical signs and evolution. Cerebral malaria leads to very poorly defined pathological lesions, while African trypanosomiasis does not show any specific alteration.

#### 5.1. Cerebral malaria

Post-mortem studies of CM cases reveal a high proportion of sequestrated pRBC and a swollen brain without herniation. The pRBC sequestration is not uniform, occurring preferentially: (i) in the white versus grey matter; and (ii) in the cerebellum versus the cerebrum cortex (Nagatake et al., 1992; Sein et al., 1993). The modified grey colour of the cortex is presumed to be due to haemozoin deposition, while the white matter, particularly the cerebellum, appears scattered with petechial and ring haemorrhages (Mturi et al., 2003).

CM is sometimes accompanied by some cellular reactions but only in the mouse model (Nitcheu et al., 2003). However in humans, the sequestration process dominates and leads to vessel occlusion initiating lesions, such as necrosis and pRBCs remain in the lumen of the capillaries, which may be surrounded by a few exfiltrated inflammatory cells. Glial proliferation and demyelination may develop in patients surviving at least 10 days. At this stage, haemorrhages may be observed surrounding necrotic capillaries and arterioles (Kaiser et al., 2006). At the BBB level, electron microscopic studies have revealed several morphological changes suggestive of endothelial activation (MacPherson et al., 1985). More recently, the attachment of pRBCs to the endothelial

plasmalemma and the formation of pseudopodia that interact with invaginations of pRBCs have been demonstrated (Pongponratn et al., 2003). Immunochemistry showed altered distribution of intercellular junction protein (occludin, vinculin, ZO-1) in vessels containing pRBCs (Brown et al., 1999a). Plasma protein may leak across the cerebral endothelium, indicating that the BBB may be focally disrupted (Fig. 1a) (Brown et al., 2001; Adams et al., 2002).

### 5.2. HAT

In HAT meningoencephalitis, anatomo-pathological findings are consistent with leucoencephalitis and signs of cerebral or cerebellar herniation are rarely described (Kristensson and Bentivoglio, 1999). A diffuse, perivascular, non-specific cell infiltration (lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages) is marked in the white matter but identical changes can also be observed in the spinal cord and the peripheral nervous system, which may explain some specific neurological manifestations (Dumas and Bisser, 1999). In addition, there is an infiltration of Mott’s morular cells which have been shown to contain immunoglobulins of the IgM class in large intracellular vacuoles (Greenwood and Whittle, 1980). A consistently marked astrocyte (astrocytosis or astrogliosis) and microglia cell activation is observed (Kristensson and Bentivoglio, 1999). Signs of demyelinization occur in the white matter at an irreversible stage but the cerebral cortex remains well preserved.

### 6. Common immune mediated mechanisms of brain pathology

The CNS is no longer considered an ‘immune-privileged’ site: constant immune interactions occur with the blood compartment, with the intact CNS regularly containing small numbers of T cells (Ransohoff et al., 2003). Protein antigens in the CNS can readily access lymphoid tissues through the CSF and cervical lymphatics and, after appropriate processing and presentation, can stimulate antigen-specific responses of naïve or memory T cells that express cognate receptors. The CSF may be considered as a partially functional equivalent of the lymph for the CNS, the latter being a site of selective and modified immune reactivity. The CNS has the capacity to develop innate immune responses through CNS resident glial cells triggered by Toll-like receptor signalling (Owens et al., 2005). Such innate glial responses are required for subsequent protective and/or inflammatory immune participation in the processes of repair and regeneration in the CNS. Further, during systemic inflammatory or infectious stimuli, the blood ‘talks’ to the brain parenchyma and the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and represents the first line regulator of homeostasis during systemic immunogenic challenges (Rivest et al., 2000). Bearing these mechanisms in mind, BBB activation by pRBCs or trypanosome-derivatives may lead to common and/or distinct mediators and common or distinct neuropathogenesis. Knowledge of these similarities and/or differences may enhance our understanding of possible inhibitory pathways.

Among pro-inflammatory cytokines, IFN-γ is probably the earliest to be involved and has major although contradictory implications in both diseases. It controls parasitemia at an early stage of infection, mainly due to the activation of macrophages. This cytokine is produced by infiltrating T cells, but resident cells are also implicated and may play a role in the pathogenesis of pain, which is clinically documented in HAT (Kristensson et al., 2002). In CM, natural killer cells are the earliest producers of INF-γ, once activated by cytokine-mediated signal and by physical contact with pRBCs (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 2003a). INF-γ has been localized in the brain of fatal cases (Udomsangpatch et al., 1997; Maneerat et al., 1999) and INF-γ receptor knockout mice are resistant to CM (Amani et al., 2000). INF-γ is the main inducer of indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase, the enzyme that catalyses the first step of tryptophan catabolism and the rate limiting enzyme in the kynurenine pathway, which is another possible pathogenic mechanism in CM: the neurotoxin quinolinic acid (QA), resulting from the catabolism of tryptophan, is thought to have pathogenic effects as it is an endogenous agonist of glutamate receptors (Mackintosh et al., 2004). Hence, both molecules (QA and glutamate) may compete for N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) Ca²⁺ channels, inducing ionic disturbances and overstimulation of nerve cells. This autarcic cascade of events is also known as ‘excitotoxicity’ and leads to reversible or permanent neuronal injury (Dobbie et al., 2000; Sanni, 2001). Excitotoxicity markers can be found in the CSF of children with CM (see Fig. 1a) (Dobbie et al., 2000; Medana et al., 2003).

TNF-α has been particularly studied in malaria and HAT and has been shown to be a major component in the pathogenesis of both diseases (Brown et al., 1999b; Rhind and Shek, 1999; Gimenez et al., 2003). In the late stage of infection, it may contribute to alteration of the BBB and to the infiltration of the brain by cellular and humoral elements of the immune response. Overproduction of TNF-α is down-regulated by the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, which has been found in the brain of CM cases (Udomsangpatch et al., 1997; Maneerat et al., 1999) and in the CSF of HAT patients (MacLean et al., 2001; Lejon et al., 2002). TNF-α and IL-10 have opposite effects in the two parasitic infections. The blood IL-10: TNF-α ratio could be used as a marker of CM (May et al., 2000) and IL-10 as a stage determination tool in the CSF of HAT patients (Lejon et al., 2002). However, the complex interactions occurring within the cytokine network are not clearly understood in parasitic diseases. The impact of immune-mediated mechanisms on the severity of neurological manifestations is obvious in both diseases. The neurological signs are mainly reversible when specific treatment is given at the right time. In a given individual, persistence or overproduction of pro-inflammatory mediators (TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1β and/or deficiency of host-protective mechanisms mediated by anti-inflammatory molecules
(mainly IL-10) can lead to a fatal outcome (Rhind and Shek, 1999; Hunt and Grau, 2003).

Increased NO occurs in both diseases, through the expression of inducible NOS (iNOS) and plays a dual role with both toxic and protective effects (Buguet et al., 1999, 2002; Brunet, 2001; Kaiser et al., 2006). Increased expression of iNOS has been reported in brain tissues from fatal cases of CM, particularly in ECs, neurones, astrocytes and microglial cells (Maneerat et al., 2000) and has also been observed in experimental trypanosomiasis (Keita et al., 2000). Whereas constitutive neuronal NOS-generated NO exerts a variety of normal neurological functions, continuous production of iNOS-generated NO induces toxic effects and contributes to pathological disorders (Clark and Cowden, 1999). The iNOS-generated NO acts at the synapse level, inhibiting NMDA Ca²⁺ channels, preventing the influx of Ca²⁺ into the neuron and generating focal damage. In CM, it may interfere with the metabolic pathway of QA and prevent its accumulation in the brain (Sanni, 2001), whereas in HAT it may induce apoptosis in brain inflammatory cells, thus regulating immune response and favouring parasite survival (Reist et al., 1998). NO synthesis requires extracellular arginine and there is an association between hypoargininaemia and severe malaria and death in children (Lopansri et al., 2003). Systemic arginine supplements may represent a beneficial adjunctive therapy in the management of severe malaria (Mackintosh et al., 2004).

Apoptosis of ECs has been shown to be a key mechanism in both diseases. A soluble factor has been identified in trypanosomiasis (Girard et al., 2003; Stiles et al., 2004), whereas in malaria the apoptotic pathway is mediated through cytoadherence of specific pRBCs (Pino et al., 2003; Touré et al. unpublished results). Apoptosis leads to BBB disruption and up-regulation of the expression of cellular adhesion molecules on normal ECs, which may in turn amplify the pathological process. Moreover, both parasites can be internalized by ECs, with the possibility of activating cytotoxic CD8 T lymphocytes via processing and antigen presentation in malaria and yet unstudied mechanisms in HAT (Abolarin et al., 1982; Pino et al., 2005).

Strikingly, malaria and trypanosomiasis parasites can directly activate macrophages through GPI-anchored components (Magez et al., 1998; Schofield and Grau, 2005). These bioactive parasite products can induce the expression of many genes implicated in pathogenesis, such as pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1), iNOS, expression of adhesion molecules or activation of ECs (Schofield et al., 1996; Girard et al., 2005). Symptoms such as transient pyrexia, hypoglycaemia and TNF-induced pathology may be explained by presence of GPI alone and contribute in turn to similarities in pathogenic features in the two diseases. Similarly, metacaspases have been identified for both parasites (Szallies et al., 2002; Wu et al., 2003). These metacaspases are likely to be the primordial form of 14 subfamilies of vertebrate caspases which have prone-to-apoptosis properties. Hence, identifying common structures

and/or activation mechanisms provides new inhibitory targets.

## 7. Concluding remarks

Understanding cross-talk between BBB and CNS in health and different disease states provides important insights to explain neuropathogenesis and develop new treatment options. Cerebral malaria is an acute partially ischemic-related pathology whereas HAT meningoencephalitis is a neurodegenerative-type pathology. The latter may be used as a model for studies on neurodegenerative processes. Recent findings concerning laminin α4 and treatment strategies for multiple sclerosis open the field to new therapeutic strategies which could also be applied to HAT (Engelhardt and Ransohoff, 2005).

## Acknowledgements

This work benefited from several grants or funding sources: (i) Programme PAL + (2002) du Ministère de la Jeunesse, de l’Education Nationale et de la Recherche ‘Analyse du rôle des molécules de transduction du signal dans la pathogenèse du neuropaludisme humain. Application à la compréhension de la pathogénicité des isolats de *P. falciparum* et à l’identification de nouvelles cibles thérapeutiques’ (ii) Contrat d’objectif 03CO001 08 de la Délégation ministérielle pour l’armement ‘Lutte contre le risque ‘B’ naturel et provoqué (Physiopathologie du paludisme; MC T. Fusai, Institut de Médecine Tropicale du Service de Santé des Armées, Le Pharo, Marseille); (iii) the Ministère de l’Education Nationale, de la Recherche et de la Technologie, Paris, France, that financially support Z. Taoufiq and (iv) the Centre International de Recherches Médicales de Franceville, Gabon, which is funded by Total Gabon, the Gabonese government, and the Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Paris, France.

The authors wish to express their gratitude to Dr Joanna Setchell and Laurie Louis for correcting the English text.

## References

Abolarin, M.O., Evans, D.A., Tovey, D.G., Ormerod, W.E., 1982. Cryptic stage of sleeping-sickness trypanosome developing in choroid plexus epithelial cells. Br. Med. J. 285, 1380–1382.

Adams, S., Brown, H., Turner, G., 2002. Breaking down the blood–brain barrier: signaling a path to cerebral malaria? Trends Parasitol. 18, 360–366.

Amani, V., Vigario, A.M., Belnoue, E., Marussig, M., Fonseca, L., Mazier, D., Renia, L., 2000. Involvement of IFN-gamma receptor-mediated signaling in pathology and anti-malarial immunity induced by *Plasmodium berghei* infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 30, 1646–1655.

Amevigbe, M.D., Jauberteau-Marchan, M.O., Bouteille, B., Doua, F., Breton, J.C., Nicolas, J.A., Dumas, M., 1992. Human African trypanosomiasis: presence of antibodies to galactocerebrosides. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 47, 652–662.

Anonymous, 1993. World Development Report 1993—Investing in Health. Commun. Dis. Rep. CDR Wkly 3, 137.

Anonymous, 1998. Control and surveillance of African trypanosomiasis. Report of a WHO Expert Committee. World Health Organ. Tech. Rep. Ser. 881 (I–VI), 1–14.
Anonymous, 2000. Severe falciparum malaria. World Health Organization, communicable diseases cluster. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 94 (Suppl. 1), S1–S90.

Artavanis-Tsakonas, K., Eleme, K., McQueen, K.L., Cheng, N.W., Parham, P., Davis, D.M., Riley, E.M., 2003a. Activation of a subset of human NK cells upon contact with *Plasmodium falciparum*-infected erythrocytes. J. Immunol. 171, 5396–5405.

Artavanis-Tsakonas, K., Tongren, J.E., Riley, E.M., 2003b. The war between the malaria parasite and the immune system: immunity, immunoregulation and immunopathology. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 133, 145–152.

Ayed, Z., Brindel, I., Bouteille, B., Van Meirvenne, N., Doua, F., Houinato, D., Dumas, M., Jauberteau, M.O., 1997. Detection and characterization of autoantibodies directed against neurofilament proteins in human African trypanosomiasis. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 57, 1–6.

Bakhiet, M., Olsson, T., Edlund, C., Hojeberg, B., Holmberg, K., Lorentzen, J., Kristensson, K., 1993. A *Trypanosoma brucei* brucei-derived factor that triggers CD8+ lymphocytes to interferon-gamma secretion: purification, characterization and protective effects in vivo by treatment with a monoclonal antibody against the factor. Scand. J. Immunol. 37, 165–178.

Bouteille, B., Keita, M., Enanga, B., Mezui Me Ndong, J., 1999. Experimental models for new chemotherapeutic approaches to human African trypanosomiasis. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 289–300.

Brenier-Pinchart, M.P., Pelloux, H., Derouich-Guergour, D., Ambroise-Thomas, P., 2001. Chemokines in host-protozoan-parasite interactions. Trends Parasitol. 17, 292–296.

Brown, H., Hien, T.T., Day, N., Mai, N.T., Chuong, L.V., Chau, T.T., Loc, P.P., Phu, N.H., Bethell, D., Farrar, J., Gatter, K., White, N., Turner, G., 1999a. Evidence of blood-brain barrier dysfunction in human cerebral malaria. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 25, 331–340.

Brown, H., Turner, G., Rogerson, S., Tembo, M., Mwenechanya, J., Molyneux, M., Taylor, T., 1999b. Cytokine expression in the brain in human cerebral malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 180, 1742–1746.

Brown, H., Rogerson, S., Taylor, T., Tembo, M., Mwenechanya, J., Molyneux, M., Turner, G., 2001. Blood-brain barrier function in cerebral malaria in malawian children. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 64, 207–213.

Brunet, L.R., 2001. Nitric oxide in parasitic infections. Int. Immunopharmacol. 1, 1457–1467.

Buguet, A., Vincendeau, P., Bouteille, B., Burlet, S., Cesplugio, R., 1999. Nitric oxide in murine malaria: divergent roles in blood and brain suggested by voltametric measures. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 93, 663–664.

Buguet, A., Banzet, S., Bouteille, B., Vincendeau, P., Tapie, P., Doua, F., Bogui, P., Cesplugio, R., 2002. NO is a cornerstone in sleeping sickness: voltametric assessment in mouse and man. In: Moravec, J., Takeda, N., Singal, P.K. (Eds.), Adaptation Biology and Medicine, vol. 3. Narosa Publishing House, New Dehli, India, pp. 222–230.

Buguet, A., Bisser, S., Josenando, T., Chapotot, F., Cesplugio, R., 2005. Sleep structure: a new diagnostic tool for stage determination in sleeping sickness. Acta Trop. 93, 107–117.

Carter, J.A., Ross, A.J., Neville, B.G., Obiero, E., Katana, K., Mung’ala-Odera, V., Lees, J.A., Newton, C.R., 2005. Developmental impairments following severe falciparum malaria in children. Trop. Med. Int. Health 10, 3–10.

Chakravorty, S.J., Craig, A., 2005. The role of ICAM-1 in *Plasmodium falciparum* cytoadherence. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 84, 15–27.

Chen, Q., Fernandez, V., Sundstrom, A., Schlichtherle, M., Datta, S., Hagblom, P., Wahlgren, M., 1998. Developmental selection of var gene expression in *Plasmodium falciparum*. Nature 394, 392–395.

Clark, I.A., Cowden, W.B., 1999. Why is the pathology of falciparum worse than that of vivax malaria? Parasitol. Today 15, 458–461.

Cross, G.A., 1996. Antigenic variation in trypanosomes: secrets surface slowly. Bioessays 18, 283–291.

Darji, A., Sileghem, M., Heremans, H., Brys, L., De Baetselier, P., 1993. Inhibition of T-cell responsiveness during experimental infections with *Trypanosoma brucei*: active involvement of endogenous gamma interferon. Infect. Immun. 61, 3098–3102.

Daulouede, S., Bouteille, B., Moynet, D., De Baetselier, P., Courtois, P., Lemesre, J.L., Buguet, A., Cesplugio, R., Vincendeau, P., 2001. Human macrophage tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha production induced by *Trypanosoma brucei gambiense* and the role of TNF-alpha in parasite control. J. Infect. Dis. 183, 988–991.

de Souza, J.B., Riley, E.M., 2002. Cerebral malaria: the contribution of studies in animal models to our understanding of immunopathogenesis. Microbes Infect. 4, 291–300.

Deininger, M.H., Kremsner, P.G., Meyermann, R., Schluesener, H.J., 2000. Differential cellular accumulation of transforming growth factor-beta1, -beta2, and -beta3 in brains of patients who died with cerebral malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 181, 2111–2115.

Deitsch, K.W., Calderwood, M.S., Wellem, T.E., 2001. Cooperative silencing elements in var genes. Nature 412, 875–876.

Dobbie, M.S., Hurst, R.D., Klein, N.J., Surtees, R.A., 1999. Upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression on human endothelial cells by tumour necrosis factor-alpha in an in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier. Brain Res. 830, 330–336.

Dobbie, M., Crawley, J., Waruiru, C., Marsh, K., Surtees, R., 2000. Cerebrospinal fluid studies in children with cerebral malaria: an excitotoxic mechanism? Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 62, 284–290.

Dondorp, A.M., Kager, P.A., Vreeken, J., White, N.J., 2000. Abnormal blood flow and red blood cell deformability in severe malaria. Parasitol. Today 16, 228–232.

Dondorp, A.M., Nyanoti, M., Kager, P.A., Mithwani, S., Vreeken, J., Marsh, K., 2002. The role of reduced red cell deformability in the pathogenesis of severe falciparum malaria and its restoration by blood transfusion. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 96, 282–286.

Dondorp, A.M., Pongponratn, E., White, N.J., 2004. Reduced microcirculatory flow in severe falciparum malaria: pathophysiology and electron-microscopic pathology. Acta Trop. 89, 309–317.

Donelson, J.E., Hill, K.L., El-Sayed, N.M., 1998. Multiple mechanisms of immune evasion by African trypanosomes. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91, 51–66.

Dumas, M., Bisser, S., 1999. Clinical aspects of human African trypanosomiasis. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 215–234.

Enanga, B., Burchmore, R.J., Stewart, M.L., Barrett, M.P., 2002. Sleeping sickness and the brain. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 59, 845–858.

Engelhardt, B., Ransohoff, R.M., 2005. The ins and outs of T-lymphocyte trafficking to the CNS: anatomical sites and molecular mechanisms. Trends Immunol. 26, 485–495.

Engstler, M., Thilo, L., Weise, F., Grunfelder, C.G., Schwarz, H., Boshart, M., Overath, P., 2004. Kinetics of endocytosis and recycling of the GPI-anchored variant surface glycoprotein in *Trypanosoma brucei*. J. Cell Sci. 117, 1105–1115.

Gachot, B., Vachon, F., 1995. Physiopathology of cerebral malaria. Presse Med. 24, 642–646.

Gatton, M.L., Peters, J.M., Fowler, E.V., Cheng, Q., 2003. Switching rates of *Plasmodium falciparum* var genes: faster than we thought? Trends Parasitol. 19, 202–208.

Gimenez, F., Barraud de Lagerie, S., Fernandez, C., Pino, P., Mazier, D., 2003. Tumor necrosis factor alpha in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 60, 1623–1635.

Girard, M., Bisser, S., Courtioux, B., Vermot-Desroches, C., Bouteille, B., Wijdenes, J., Preud’homme, J.L., Jauberteau, M.O., 2003. In vitro induction of microglial and endothelial cell apoptosis by cerebrospinal fluids from patients with human African trypanosomiasis. Int. J. Parasitol. 33, 713–720.

Girard, M., Giraud, S., Courtioux, B., Jauberteau-Marchan, M.O., Bouteille, B., 2005. Endothelial cell activation in the presence of African trypanosomes. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 139, 41–49.

Gitau, E.N., Newton, C.R., 2005. Review article: blood-brain barrier in falciparum malaria. Trop. Med. Int. Health 10, 285–292.

Gobert, A.P., Daulouede, S., Lepoivre, M., Boucher, J.L., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A., Cesplugio, R., Veyret, B., Vincendeau, P., 2000. L-Arginine availability modulates local nitric oxide production and parasite killing in experimental trypanosomiasis. Infect. Immun. 68, 4653–4657.

Grab, D.J., Nikolskaia, O., Kim, Y.V., Lonsdale-Eccles, J.D., Ito, S., Hara, T., Fukuma, T., Nyarko, E., Kim, K.J., Stins, M.F., Delannoy, M.J., Rodgers, J., Kim, K.S., 2004. African trypanosome interactions with an in vitro model of the human blood–brain barrier. J. Parasitol. 90, 970–979.

Grau, G.E., Mackenzie, C.D., Carr, R.A., Redard, M., Pizzolato, G., Allasia, C., Cataldo, C., Taylor, T.E., Molyneux, M.E., 2003. Platelet accumulation in brain microvessels in fatal pediatric cerebral malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 187, 461–466.

Greenwood, B.M., Whittle, H.C., 1980. The pathogenesis of sleeping sickness. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 74, 716–725.

Hebert, M.J., Gullans, S.R., Mackenzie, H.S., Brady, H.R., 1998. Apoptosis of endothelial cells is associated with paracrine induction of adhesion molecules: evidence for an interleukin-1beta-dependent paracrine loop. Am. J. Pathol. 152, 523–532.

Helbok, R., Dent, W., Nacher, M., Treeprasertsuk, S., Krudsood, S., Wilairatana, P., Silachamroon, U., Looareesuwan, S., Schmutzhard, E., 2003. Use of the multi-organ dysfunction score as a tool to discriminate different levels of severity in uncomplicated *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 68, 372–375.

Helbok, R., Dent, W., Nacher, M., Lackner, P., Treeprasertsuk, S., Krudsood, S., Wilairatana, P., Silachamroon, U., Looareesuwan, S., Schmutzhard, E., 2005. The use of the multi-organ-dysfunction score to discriminate different levels of severity in severe and complicated *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 72, 150–154.

Hill, K.L., Hutchings, N.R., Grandgenett, P.M., Donelson, J.E., 2000. T lymphocyte-triggering factor of african trypanosomes is associated with the flagellar fraction of the cytoskeleton and represents a new family of proteins that are present in several divergent eukaryotes. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39369–39378.

Hunt, N.H., Grau, G.E., 2003. Cytokines: accelerators and brakes in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. Trends Immunol. 24, 491–499.

Hutchings, N.R., Donelson, J.E., Hill, K.L., 2002. Trypanin is a cytoskeletal linker protein and is required for cell motility in African trypanosomes. J. Cell Biol. 156, 867–877.

Imbert, P., Gerardin, P., Rogier, C., Ka, A.S., Jouvencel, P., Brousse, V., Guyon, P., 2002. Severe falciparum malaria in children: a comparative study of 1990 and 2000 WHO criteria for clinical presentation, prognosis and intensive care in Dakar, Senegal. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 96, 278–281.

Jensen, A.T., Magistrado, P., Sharp, S., Joergensen, L., Lavstsen, T., Chiuchiuini, A., Salanti, A., Vestergaard, L.S., Lusingu, J.P., Hermsen, R., Sauerwein, R., Christensen, J., Nielsen, M.A., Hviid, L., Sutherland, C., Staalsoe, T., Theander, T.G., 2004. *Plasmodium falciparum* associated with severe childhood malaria preferentially expresses PfEMP1 encoded by group A var genes. J. Exp. Med. 199, 1179–1190.

Kaiser, K., Texier, A., Ferrandiz, J., Buguet, A., Meiller, A., Latour, C., Peyron, F., Cesplugio, R., Picot, S., 2006. Recombinant Human Erythropoietin prevents the death of mice during cerebral malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 193 (7), 987–95.

Keita, M., Vincendeau, P., Buguet, A., Cesplugio, R., Vallat, J.M., Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., 2000. Inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitrotyrosine in the central nervous system of mice chronically infected with *Trypanosoma brucei*. Exp. Parasitol. 95, 19–27.

Kennedy, P.G., 2004. Human African trypanosomiasis of the CNS: current issues and challenges. J. Clin. Invest. 113, 496–504.

Khonde, N., Pepin, J., Niyonsenga, T., Milord, F., De Wals, P., 1995. Epidemiological evidence for immunity following *Trypanosoma brucei gambiense* sleeping sickness. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 89, 607–611.

Kilunga Kubata, B., Eguchi, N., Urade, Y., Yamashita, K., Mitamura, T., Tai, K., Hayaishi, O., Horii, T., 1998. *Plasmodium falciparum* produces prostaglandins that are pyrogenic, somnogenic, and immunosuppressive substances in humans. J. Exp. Med. 188, 1197–1202.

Kristensson, K., Bentivoglio, M., 1999. Pathology of African trypanosomiasis. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 157–182.

Kristensson, K., Mhlanga, J.D., Bentivoglio, M., 2002. Parasites and the brain: neuroinvasion, immunopathogenesis and neuronal dysfunctions. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 265, 227–257.

Lejon, V., Lardon, J., Kenis, G., Pinoges, L., Legros, D., Bisser, S., N'Siesi, X., Bosmans, E., Buscher, P., 2002. Interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and IL-10 in serum and CSF of *Trypanosoma brucei gambiense* sleeping sickness patients before and after treatment. Trans R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 96, 329–333.

Lonsdale-Eccles, J.D., Grab, D.J., 2002. Trypanosome hydrolases and the blood–brain barrier. Trends Parasitol. 18, 17–19.

Lopansri, B.K., Anstey, N.M., Weinberg, J.B., Stoddard, G.J., Hobbs, M.R., Levesque, M.C., Mwaikambo, E.D., Granger, D.L., 2003. Low plasma arginine concentrations in children with cerebral malaria and decreased nitric oxide production. Lancet 361, 676–678.

Lou, J., Lucas, R., Grau, G.E., 2001. Pathogenesis of cerebral malaria: recent experimental data and possible applications for humans. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 14, 810–820.

Lucas, R., Magez, S., Songa, B., Darji, A., Hamers, R., de Baetselier, P., 1993. A role for TNF during African trypanosomiasis: involvement in parasite control, immunosuppression and pathology. Res. Immunol. 144, 370–376.

MacDonald, S.M., Bhisutthibhan, J., Shapiro, T.A., Rogerson, S.J., Taylor, T.E., Tembo, M., Langdon, J.M., Meshnick, S.R., 2001. Immune mimicry in malaria: *Plasmodium falciparum* secretes a functional histamine-releasing factor homolog in vitro and in vivo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 10829–10832.

Mackintosh, C.L., Beeson, J.G., Marsh, K., 2004. Clinical features and pathogenesis of severe malaria. Trends Parasitol. 20, 597–603.

MacLean, L., Odiit, M., Sternberg, J.M., 2001. Nitric oxide and cytokine synthesis in human African trypanosomiasis. J. Infect. Dis. 184, 1086–1090.

MacLean, L., Chisi, J.E., Odiit, M., Gibson, W.C., Ferris, V., Picozzi, K., Sternberg, J.M., 2004. Severity of human African trypanosomiasis in East Africa is associated with geographic location, parasite genotype, and host inflammatory cytokine response profile. Infect. Immun. 72, 7040–7044.

MacPherson, G.G., Warrell, M.J., White, N.J., Looareesuwan, S., Warrell, D.A., 1985. Human cerebral malaria. A quantitative ultrastructural analysis of parasitized erythrocyte sequestration. Am. J. Pathol. 119, 385–401.

Magez, S., Stijlemans, B., Radwanska, M., Pays, E., Ferguson, M.A., De Baetselier, P., 1998. The glycosyl-inositol-phosphate and dimyristoylglycerol moieties of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor of the trypanosome-specific surface glycoprotein are distinct macrophage-activating factors. J. Immunol. 160, 1949–1956.

Maneerat, Y., Pongponrtn, E., Viriyavejakul, P., Punpoowong, B., Looareesuwan, S., Udomsangpatch, R., 1999. Cytokines associated with pathology in the brain tissue of fatal malaria. Southeast Asian J. Trop. Med. Public Health 30, 643–649.

Maneerat, Y., Viriyavejakul, P., Punpoowong, B., Jones, M., Wilairatana, P., Pongponrtn, E., Turner, G.D., Udomsangpatch, R., 2000. Inducible nitric oxide synthase expression is increased in the brain in fatal cerebral malaria. Histopathology 37, 269–277.

Marsh, K., Marsh, V.M., Brown, J., Whittle, H.C., Greenwood, B.M., 1988. *Plasmodium falciparum*: the behavior of clinical isolates in an in vitro model of infected red blood cell sequestration. Exp. Parasitol. 65, 202–208.

Masocha, W., Robertson, B., Rottenberg, M.E., Mhlanga, J., Sorokin, L., Kristensson, K., 2004. Cerebral vessel laminins and IFN-gamma define *Trypanosoma brucei* penetration of the blood–brain barrier. J. Clin. Invest. 114, 689–694.

May, J., Lell, B., Luty, A.J., Meyer, C.G., Kremsner, P.G., 2000. Plasma interleukin-10:Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha ratio is associated with TNF promoter variants and predicts malarial complications. J. Infect. Dis. 182, 1570–1573.

Medana, I.M., Day, N.P., Salahifar-Sabet, H., Stocker, R., Smythe, G., Bwanaisa, L., Njobvu, A., Kayira, K., Turner, G.D., Taylor, T.E., Hunt, N.H., 2003. Metabolites of the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism in the cerebrospinal fluid of Malawian children with malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 188, 844–849.

Mhlanga, J.D., Bentivoglio, M., Kristensson, K., 1997. Neurobiology of cerebral malaria and African sleeping sickness. Brain Res. Bull. 44, 579–589.

Morgan, G.W., Hall, B.S., Denny, P.W., Carrington, M., Field, M.C., 2002. The kinetoplastida endocytic apparatus. part I: a dynamic system for nutrition and evasion of host defences. Trends Parasitol. 18, 491–496.

Mturi, N., Musumba, C.O., Wamola, B.M., Ogutu, B.R., Newton, C.R., 2003. Cerebral malaria: optimising management. CNS Drugs 17, 153–165.

Mulenga, C., Mhlanga, J.D., Kristensson, K., Robertson, B., 2001. *Trypanosoma brucei* crosses the blood–brain barrier while tight junction proteins are preserved in a rat chronic disease model. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 27, 77–85.

Nagatake, T., Hoang, V.T., Tegoshi, T., Rabbége, J., Ann, T.K., Aikawa, M., 1992. Pathology of falciparum malaria in Vietnam. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 47, 259–264.

Newton, C.R., Warrell, D.A., 1998. Neurological manifestations of falciparum malaria. Ann. Neurol. 43, 695–702.

Newton, C.R., Hien, T.T., White, N., 2000. Cerebral malaria. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 69, 433–441.

Nitcheu, J., Bonduelle, O., Combadiere, C., Tefit, M., Seilhean, D., Mazier, D., Combadiere, B., 2003. Perforin-dependent brain-infiltrating cytotoxic CD8+T lymphocytes mediate experimental cerebral malaria pathogenesis. J. Immunol. 170, 2221–2228.

Okomo-Assoumou, M.C., Geffard, M., Daulouede, S., Chaugier, C., Lemesre, J.L., Vincendeau, P., 1995. Circulating antibodies directed against tryptophan-like epitopes in sera of patients with human African trypanosomiasis. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 52, 461–467.

Owens, T., Babcock, A.A., Millward, J.M., Toft-Hansen, H., 2005. Cytokine and chemokine inter-regulation in the inflamed or injured CNS. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 48, 178–184.

Paget-McNicol, S., Gatton, M., Hastings, I., Saul, A., 2002. The *Plasmodium falciparum* var gene switching rate, switching mechanism and patterns of parasite recrudescence described by mathematical modelling. Parasitology 124, 225–235.

Pays, E., 1999. Antigenic variation in African trypanosomes. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 31–52.

Pays, E., 2005. Regulation of antigen gene expression in *Trypanosoma brucei*. Trends Parasitol. 21, 517–520.

Pentreath, V.W., 1999. Cytokines and the blood–brain-barrier in human and experimental African trypanosomiasis. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 105–118.

Pentreath, V.W., Owolabi, A.O., Doua, F., 1992. Survival of *Trypanosoma brucei* in cerebrospinal fluid. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 86, 29–34.

Philip, K.A., Dascombe, M.J., Fraser, P.A., Pentreath, V.W., 1994. Blood–brain barrier damage in experimental African trypanosomiasis. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 88, 607–616.

Pino, P., Vouldoukis, I., Kolb, J.P., Mahmoudi, N., Desportes-Livage, I., Bricaire, F., Danis, M., Dugas, B., Mazier, D., 2003. *Plasmodium falciparum*-infected erythrocyte adhesion induces caspase activation and apoptosis in human endothelial cells. J. Infect. Dis. 187, 1283–1290.

Pino, P., Taoufiq, Z., Nitcheu, J., Vouldoukis, I., Mazier, D., 2005. Blood–brain barrier breakdown during cerebral malaria: suicide or murder? Thromb. Haemost. 94, 336–340.

Pongponrtn, E., Turner, G.D., Day, N.P., Phu, N.H., Simpson, J.A., Stepniewska, K., Mai, N.T., Viriyavejakul, P., Looareesuwan, S., Hien, T.T., Ferguson, D.J., White, N.J., 2003. An ultrastructural study of the brain in fatal *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 69, 345–359.

Ransohoff, R.M., Kivisakk, P., Kidd, G., 2003. Three or more routes for leukocyte migration into the central nervous system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 569–581.

Reist, M., Marshall, K.A., Jenner, P., Halliwell, B., 1998. Toxic effects of sulphite in combination with peroxynitrite on neuronal cells. J. Neurochem. 71, 2431–2438.

Rhind, S.G., Shek, P.N., 1999. Cytokines in the pathogenesis of human African trypanosomiasis: antagonistic roles of TNF-α and IL-10. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, p. 119.

Rivest, S., Lacroix, S., Vallières, L., Nadeau, S., Zhang, J., Laflamme, N., 2000. How the blood talks to the brain parenchyma and the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus during systemic inflammatory and infectious stimuli. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 223, 22–38.

Sacks, D., Sher, A., 2002. Evasion of innate immunity by parasitic protozoa. Nat. Immunol. 3, 1041–1047.

Sanni, L.A., 2001. The role of cerebral oedema in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. Redox Rep. 6, 137–142.

Scherf, A., Hernandez-Rivas, R., Buffet, P., Bottius, E., Benatar, C., Pouvelle, B., Gysin, J., Lanzer, M., 1998. Antigenic variation in malaria: in situ switching, relaxed and mutually exclusive transcription of var genes during intra-erythrocytic development in *Plasmodium falciparum*. Eur. Mol. Biol. Org. 17, 5418–5426.

Schleifer, K.W., Mansfield, J.M., 1993. Suppressor macrophages in African trypanosomiasis inhibit T cell proliferative responses by nitric oxide and prostaglandins. J. Immunol. 151, 5492–5503.

Schofield, L., Grau, G.E., 2005. Immunological processes in malaria pathogenesis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 722–735.

Schofield, L., Novakovic, S., Gerold, P., Schwarz, R.T., McConville, M.J., Tachado, S.D., 1996. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol toxin of plasmodium up-regulates intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, and E-selectin expression in vascular endothelial cells and increases leukocyte and parasite cytoadherence via tyrosine kinase-dependent signal transduction. J. Immunol. 156, 1886–1896.

Schultzberg, M., Ambatsis, M., Samuelsson, E.B., Kristensson, K., van Meirvenne, N., 1988. Spread of *Trypanosoma brucei* to the nervous system: early attack on circumventricular organs and sensory ganglia. J. Neurosci. Res. 21, 56–61.

Scorza, T., Magez, S., Brys, L., De Baetselier, P., 1999. Hemozoin is a key factor in the induction of malaria-associated immunosuppression. Parasite Immunol. 21, 545–554.

Sein, K.K., Maeno, Y., Thuc, H.V., Anh, T.K., Aikawa, M., 1993. Differential sequestration of parasitized erythrocytes in the cerebrum and cerebellum in human cerebral malaria. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 48, 504–511.

Sherman, I.W., Eda, S., Winograd, E., 2003. Cytoadherence and sequestration in *Plasmodium falciparum*: defining the ties that bind. Microbes Infect. 5, 897–909.

Sternberg, J.M., 2004. Human African trypanosomiasis: clinical presentation and immune response. Parasite Immunol. 26, 469–476.

Sternberg, J., McGuigan, F., 1992. Nitric oxide mediates suppression of T cell responses in murine *Trypanosoma brucei* infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 22, 2741–2744.

Stiles, J.K., Whittaker, J., Sarfo, B.Y., Thompson, W.E., Powell, M.D., Bond, V.C., 2004. Trypanosome apoptotic factor mediates apoptosis in human brain vascular endothelial cells. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 133, 229–240.

Stoppani, L., Buchs, P.A., Brun, R., Muller, D., Duport, S., Parisi, L., Seebeck, T., 2000. Infection of organotypic slice cultures from rat central nervous tissue with *Trypanosoma brucei brucei*. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 290, 105–113.

Strazielle, N., Ghersi-Egea, J.F., 2000. Choroid plexus in the central nervous system: biology and physiopathology. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 59, 561–574.

Szallies, A., Kubata, B.K., Duszenko, M., 2002. A metacaspase of *Trypanosoma brucei* causes loss of respiration competence and clonal death in the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. FEBS: Fed. Eur. Biochem. Soc. Lett. 517, 144–150.

Tizard, I., Nielsen, K.H., Seed, J.R., Hall, J.E., 1978. Biologically active products from African trypanosomes. Microbiol. Rev. 42, 664–681.

Turner, G., 1997. Cerebral malaria. Brain Pathol. 7, 569–582.

Udomsangpetch, R., Chivapat, S., Viriyavejakul, P., Riganti, M., Wilairatana, P., Pongponratin, E., Looareesuwan, S., 1997. Involvement of cytokines in the histopathology of cerebral malaria. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 57, 501–506.

Urban, B.C., Roberts, D.J., 2002. Malaria, monocytes, macrophages and myeloid dendritic cells: sticking of infected erythrocytes switches off host cells. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14, 458–465.

Urban, B.C., Roberts, D.J., 2003. Inhibition of T cell function during malaria: implications for immunology and vaccinology. J. Exp. Med. 197, 137–141.

Urban, B.C., Ferguson, D.J., Pain, A., Willcox, N., Plebanski, M., Austyn, J.M., Roberts, D.J., 1999. *Plasmodium falciparum*-infected erythrocytes modulate the maturation of dendritic cells. Nature 400, 73–77.

Vincendeau, P., Jauberteau-Marchan, M.O., Daulouede, S., Ayed, Z., 1999. Immunology of African trypanosomiasis. In: Dumas, M., Bouteille, B., Buguet, A. (Eds.), Progress in Human African Trypanosomiasis, Sleeping Sickness. Springer, Paris, pp. 137–156.

Vincendeau, P., Gobert, A.P., Daulouede, S., Moynet, D., Mossalayi, M.D., 2003. Arginases in parasitic diseases. Trends Parasitol. 19, 9–12.

Viswambharan, H., Seebeck, T., Yang, Z., 2003. Enhanced endothelial nitric oxide-synthase activity in mice infected with *Trypanosoma brucei*. Int. J. Parasit. 33, 1099–1104.

Wassmer, S.C., Combes, V., Grau, G.E., 2003. Pathophysiology of cerebral malaria: role of host cells in the modulation of cytoadhesion. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 992, 30–38.

Wu, Y., Wang, X., Liu, X., Wang, Y., 2003. Data-mining approaches reveal hidden families of proteases in the genome of malaria parasite. Genome Res. 13, 601–616.
