
From Growth Hormone-Releasing Peptides  
to Ghrelin: Discovery of New Modulators of  
GH Secretion  

---

**ABSTRACT**

Growth hormone (GH)-releasing hormone and somatostatin modulate GH secretion. A third mechanism has been discovered in the last decade, involving the action of GH secretagogues. Ghrelin is a new acylated peptide produced mainly by the stomach, but also synthesized in the hypothalamus. This compound increases both GH release and food intake. The relative roles of hypothalamic and circulating ghrelin on GH secretion are still unknown. Endogenous ghrelin might amplify the basic pattern of GH secretion, optimizing somatotroph responsiveness to GH-releasing hormone. This peptide activates multiple interdependent intracellular pathways at the somatotroph, involving protein kinase C, protein kinase A and extracellular calcium systems. However, as ghrelin induces a greater release of GH *in vivo*, its main site of action is the hypothalamus. In this paper we review the available data on the discovery of ghrelin, the mechanisms of action and possible physiological roles of GH secretagogues and ghrelin on GH secretion, and, finally, the regulation of GH release in man after intravenous administration of these peptides. (Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab 2006;50/1:17-24)

Keywords: Ghrelin; GH; Growth hormone secretagogues; GHS

---

**RESUMO**

Dos Peptídeos Liberadores do Hormônio de Crescimento (HC) à Ghreli- na: Descoberta de Novos Moduladores da Secreção de HC  

A secreção de hormônio de crescimento (HC) é modulada pelo hormônio liberador de HC e pela somatostatina. Na última década foi descoberto um terceiro mecanismo de controle, envolvendo os secretagogos de HC. A ghrelina é um peptídeo acilado, descoberto recentemente, que é produzido no estômago, porém também é sintetizado no hipotálamo. Este peptídeo é capaz de liberar HC, além de aumentar a ingestão alimentar. A ghrelina endógena parece amplificar o padrão básico de secreção de HC, ampliando a resposta do somatotrófo ao hormônio liberador de HC. Este peptídeo estimula múltiplas vias intracelulares interdependentes no somatotrófo, envolvendo a proteína quinase C, proteína quinase A e sistemas moduladores de cálcio extracelular. Entretanto, como a liberação de HC induzida pela ghrelina *in vivo* é mais acentuada que *in vitro*, seu local de atuação predominante é no hipotálamo. Nesse artigo apresentamos uma revisão sobre a descoberta da ghrelina, os dados existentes sobre os mecanismos de ação e possível papel fisiológico dos secretagogos de HC e da ghrelina na secreção de HC e, finalmente, os efeitos da administração endovenosa destes peptídeos sobre a secreção de HC no homem. (Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab 2006;50/1:17-24)

Descritores: Ghrelina; GH; Secretagogos de hormônio de crescimento; GHS

---

Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006

# Growth Hormone Secretagogues and Ghrelin
Lengyel

## Historical review

Before the identification of the growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), Bowers et al. (1) discovered a group of synthetic compounds with growth hormone (GH)-releasing properties (for review see ref. 2). These substances were developed from the met-enkephalin molecule, through theoretical calculations, computer modeling, chemical alterations and studies of biological activity. These small peptides were able to induce a weak GH release initially. Further chemical changes led to the synthesis of more potent compounds, including peptides such as GH releasing peptide-6 (GHRP-6), GHRP-2, hexarelin, and non-peptides, as MK-0677, which could be administered orally (2). In the last decade several studies were performed with these growth hormone secretagogues (GHS), especially with GHRP-6, and the obtained data have suggested that these compounds are modulators of GH release (3). It was shown that GHS enhance GH secretion by different mechanisms than those activated by GHRH (for reviews see ref. 2,3), and these substances act through different receptors than those of GHRH, somatostatin or opioid peptides. In 1996 Howard et al. cloned the GHS receptor (GHS-R), which was mainly found in the anterior pituitary and in the hypothalamus, and also in other areas of the central nervous system (4). In 1999 Kojima et al. discovered the endogenous ligand for these orphan receptors in the stomach, and this new hormone was denominated ghrelin (from *ghre*, the Indo-European root of the word grow) (5). Ghrelin is also present in small amounts in the hypothalamus and is able to stimulate GH release in a potent manner (5,6). This peptide is a new member of the brain-gut peptide family, and it acts in the control of appetite, an effect that is independent of GH release (for review see ref. 7,8). Ghrelin might have other actions, which are currently being investigated (7,8). The discovery of ghrelin is an example of reverse pharmacology: the chemical synthesis of compounds, such as GHS, led to the discovery of the endogenous orphan receptor and, finally, to the isolation of its natural ligand.

## GHS receptor

Howard et al. cloned the GHS receptor in 1996 and found that it belongs to the G-protein family. The GHS receptor has seven transmembrane spanning segments and three intracellular and extracellular loops (4). Two subtypes of receptors were discovered, GHS-R1a, which is active, and GHS-R1b, a shorter isoform, which apparently does not have biological activity (4). It is likely that other subtypes might exist. The human

GHS-R1a has 366 amino acids and is highly conserved in evolution. The active receptor was found in the anterior pituitary and in the hypothalamus, as well as in other regions of the central nervous system (4). GHS-R1a is present in several hypothalamic areas, including the arcuate, ventromedial and paraventricular nuclei (2,4). GHS-R might modulate biological rhythms, memory, mood, learning and appetite (2). In the pituitary GHS-R was found exclusively in somatotrophs (2). In knockout mice for GHS-R1a ghrelin fails to increase both GH release and food intake, indicating that both actions of ghrelin are dependent on this type of receptor. (9). GHS-R1a was also found in other tissues such as pancreas, heart, adrenal gland and the thyroid (10). It is interesting that GHS-R1b, the inactive form, has a widespread distribution in peripheral tissues but its function has not been elucidated (10).

### Ghrelin

In 1999 Kojima et al. surprisingly found a major increase in intracellular calcium concentrations with the addition of stomach extracts to an *in vitro* system of cells, which expressed GHS-R1a (5). Further studies led to the isolation of a 28-aminoacid peptide with a fatty acid chain modification (n-octanoic acid), in the serine 3 residue. This hydrophobic compound, which is the first known natural bioactive peptide modified by an acyl acid, was called ghrelin. It was also found that ghrelin and the GHS, such as GHRP-6, have no structural similarity, which is quite intriguing (5). The post-translational fatty acid chain modification (n-octanoyl residue) is essential for the biological activity of ghrelin, including GH release and appetite stimulation. Shorter fragments, with the first four to five residues, are also able to stimulate signal transduction of GHS-R1a *in vitro* when they have an intact acylated serine (7). However, the main circulating form is nonacylated ghrelin, which might have non-endocrine actions (5). Circulating nonacylated ghrelin levels are reduced by 80% after gastrectomy or gastric bypass in humans, demonstrating that this peptide is mainly produced in the stomach (11). It was recently shown that ghrelin crosses the blood brain barrier, and this transport occurs in both directions, from the central nervous system to blood and from blood to brain (12). It has also been shown that the acyl residue is important for this transport (12). The gene that encodes ghrelin is located on chromosome 3 in men and encodes a precursor of 117 aminoacids, with an 82% homology within species (5). Two isoforms of mRNA of prepro-ghrelin are produced by the same gene, by alternative splicing, in the stomach (5). One encodes

Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006

the ghrelin precursor while the other encodes des-
Gln14 ghrelin precursor, which has no glutamine on
position 14 (5). This latter peptide has 27 aminoacids
and is biologically active, but is present in small
amounts. Therefore, the main active form is ghrelin.
Ghrelin is found in the submucosal layer of the stom-
ach fundus, in endocrine oxyntic cells (X/A), and also,
in lower concentrations, in the gastrointestinal tract
(7). Both ghrelin and its mRNA are present in the
arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and in the pitu-
itary gland (5,10). At pituitary level it might act in
autocrine or paracrine manner. It has been recently
shown that ghrelin is expressed in lactotrophs, soma-
totrophs and thyrotrophs, cells that are dependent, for
differentiation, on Pit1 gene expression (8). Ghrelin is
also able to modulate Pit-1 transcription. Ghrelin has
a widespread distribution and has been found in the
lung, kidney, ovary, testis, placenta, among others, but
its physiological role in these tissues remains to be elu-
cidated (10). Because the localization of the biological
active receptor (GHS-Rla) is not the same as the pep-
tide, it is likely that other receptor subtypes might exist
(10). Ghrelin is found in considerable amounts in cir-
culation and this peptide has several actions apart from
its modulatory role on GH release (7,8). Ghrelin
enhances food intake, by activation of NPY/AGRP
(agouti-related protein) neurons in the hypothalamus,
while leptin has the opposite effect (7,8). Ghrelin is
able to increase GH release both in animals and in
men, and it also induces PRL, ACTH, cortisol and
aldosterone secretion in vivo (5,6,13,14). Ghrelin
causes a slight increase in glucose levels and a reduc-
tion of circulating insulin (14). The discovery of ghre-
lin reinforced the concept of a third pathway of GH
regulation (2,3,7,8). However, the physiological role
of this potent endogenous GH-releasing peptide
remains to be elucidated.

**GHS and Ghrelin: mechanism of action and**
**possible physiological role on GH release**

GHS and ghrelin act both at hypothalamic and pitu-
itary levels to modulate GH secretion (for reviews see
ref. 3,7,8). These peptides stimulate the GHS-R in
pituitary cells in vitro to induce GH release (5). When
GHRH is associated to GHS or ghrelin in vitro, an
additive response is observed in most studies. Howev-
er, when these peptides are administered together with
GHRH in vivo, a synergistic effect on GH release is
observed. This indicates that GHS and GHRH act
through different mechanisms and suggests a main
hypothalamic site of action of GHS (6,14-16). This is
confirmed by the lack of GH release after GHRP-6 or

ghrelin in hypothalamic pituitary disconnection, both
in animals and in men (17,18). It has been shown that
an intact GHRH system is necessary for these actions
to occur. Both GH pulsatility and GH responsiveness
to ghrelin and GHS are decreased by the administra-
tion of antibodies against GHRH in rats (19). GHS-
induced GH release is also blunted by a GHRH antag-
onist (20). GHS are not able to increase GH release in
the lit/lit mouse, which has a GHRH receptor muta-
tion, but they enhance hypothalamic c-fos expression,
which is a marker of neuronal activity (21). GH
response to GHS is inhibited in humans with GHRH
receptor mutations, but the ACTH and PRL releasing
effects are maintained, which suggests that the latter
actions are mediated by the hypothalamus (22). The
arcuate nucleus is the main target of ghrelin action,
where it may bind and activate the GHS-R. GHS and
ghrelin act centrally increasing electrical activity and c-
fos expression in a subpopulation of cells in the arcuate
nucleus, some of which are GHRH producing neu-
rons (21). Moreover, one fourth of these GHRH neu-
rons express the GHS-R, suggesting a direct effect of
GHS in these cells (19). Ghrelin increases GHRH
release from hypothalamic tissue in vitro, but this was
not observed with GHS (23,24). It has also been
shown that GHS increase GHRH release into the pitu-
itary portal system in sheep (25). GHS and ghrelin do
not influence hypothalamic somatostatin release in
most studies, both in vivo and in vitro (23-25). How-
ever, GHS act as functional somatostatin antagonists
(19,26). GHS increase the number of cells secreting
GH and cause depolarization of the somatotroph,
while somatostatin has opposite effects (26). There-
fore, a model of action of GHS/ghrelin has been sug-
gested, which would involve: 1) activation of GHRH
producing neurons in the arcuate nucleus, with an
increase in GHRH release; 2) amplification of the
effect of GHRH at the somatotroph; 3) functional
antagonism of somatostatin (2). GHS/ghrelin and
GHRH bind to different pituitary receptors, and there
is cross-talk between these receptors (for review see
ref. 7). These peptides also stimulate different intracel-
lular transduction pathways at the somatotroph.
GHRH activates intracellular cyclic AMP and protein
kinase A (PKA), while GHRP-6 stimulates protein
kinase C (PKC), via inositol triphosphate signal trans-
duction, with increase in intracellular calcium concen-
trations (figure 1) (2,4). Interestingly, it has been
recently shown that ghrelin activates multiple, interde-
pendent, intracellular pathways in porcine soma-
totrophs, involving PKA, PKC and extracellular calci-
um systems. This effect is broader than the action of

Growth Hormone Secretagogues and Ghrelin
Lengyel

(37). Nevertheless, recent studies with ghrelin knock-out animals failed to show a major effect on GH regulation (38). In contrast to predictions, these animals were not anorexic dwarfs (38). However, in transgenic models with decreased GHS-R mRNA expression in the arcuate nucleus, reduced GH and IGF-I levels were observed (39). Also, GHS-R knockout mouse had lower body weight and IGF-I values (40). These effects were only moderate, which is intriguing, as these peptides are quite potent GH stimulators. It has been previously suggested that the role of ghrelin on GH secretion might become more relevant during states of negative energy balance (30). However, further studies will be necessary to elucidate the physiological role of these peptides on GH secretion.

Modulation of GH release by GHRP-6 and Ghrelin in man

GHRP-6 and ghrelin increase GH release in a dose dependent manner, both *in vivo* and *in vitro* in several species, including man (1,5,6,13,16). The GH releasing activity of ghrelin is similar to that of GHRH *in vitro* (5). However, *iv* ghrelin administration at a dose of 1 μg/kg increases GH release potently in man, and this response is higher than that obtained with GHRH, hexarelin and GHRP-6 (13,14,41). This effect is not specific as an increase in PRL, ACTH, cortisol and aldosterone levels is also observed (14). Glucose levels increase and insulin values decrease after *iv* administration of this peptide (14). These latter effects and the aldosterone stimulation are not seen with other GHS. When ghrelin or GHRP-6 are administered together with GHRH a synergistic effect is seen, but this is better observed with injections of ghrelin at low doses (0.08 and 0.2 μg/kg) (14,16). The administration of GHRP-6 together with GHRH is an excellent test to diagnose GH deficiency in adults, but its usefulness in children is less clear (42). There is a highly reproducible response for GHS in normal subjects, studied in different occasions, differently than that observed for GHRH. There are no gender differences in the GH response to GHRP-6 and ghrelin (3,15,43), but an age related decrease of responsiveness has been reported for both peptides (3,15,43). It has been shown that obese subjects have blunted GH responses to GHRP-6 and ghrelin (44,45). Ghrelin-induced GH release is decreased by 55% in women with visceral adiposity and BMI of 362 kg/m² (45). Hyperglycemia, free fatty acids and somatostatin decrease GHRP-6 and ghrelin-induced GH response (46,47). Arginine was not able to alter GH responsiveness to ghrelin (48). The effect of cholinergic ago-

Figure 1. Schematic model of the possible interactions between GHRH, ghrelin/GHS and SRIF at hypothalamic and pituitary level.

most GHS, but similar to that described for GHRP-2 in this species (27). These results reinforce the possibility of cross-talk between these transduction pathways. However, the physiological role of these potent GH stimulators is still unclear. Controversial issues are how the hypothalamic peptide participates in GH modulation and whether circulating ghrelin has a role on pituitary GH secretion. In the rat ghrelin secretion occurs in a pulsatile manner, but has no correlation with GH pulses and is associated to food and sleep cycles (28). Circulating ghrelin levels are similar during GH peak and trough periods in the rat (29). Ghrelin immunoneutralization does not interfere with GH pulsatility, while GHRH antibodies block endogenous pulsatile GH release (30). In humans GHRH antagonist administration strongly inhibits 24h GH secretion, but fails to affect circulating ghrelin levels (31). However, in rats, intracerebroventricular or peripheral administration of GHSR-1A antagonists attenuates spontaneous GH secretion, due to a decrease in pulse amplitude and mean GH levels (32-34). Interestingly, a missense mutation in the GHS receptor, which severely impaired ghrelin binding, was associated with a case of familial short stature (35). It has also been shown in healthy volunteers that circulating ghrelin is related to GH pulses, suggesting that ghrelin participates in the pulsatile regulation of GH secretion or that the two hormones are regulated in parallel (36). Therefore, endogenous ghrelin might amplify the basic pattern of GH secretion (32-34). This peptide may also have a physiological role in GH release by optimizing somatotroph responsiveness to GHRH

Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006

hexarelin is either normal or enhanced, demonstrating that hyperglycemia is unable to decrease GH release induced by these peptides, differently than in normal subjects (60). It has recently been shown that ghrelin-induced GH release is decreased in anorexia nervosa, which is an unexpected finding as these patients have high GH levels and enhanced responses to GHRH and GHS (61). GH-releasing compounds could represent an alternative treatment in GH deficient states. However, these substances have failed to show benefit over GH therapy, despite the fact that they are more physiological, as they induce endogenous pulsatile GH release.

## CONCLUSION

Ghrelin is a novel hormone secreted from the stomach to the circulation. This peptide is also produced in the hypothalamus and other tissues, with both endocrine and paracrine effects. The acyl modification of its molecule is essential for enhancement of GH release and stimulation of food intake. Several questions remain to be answered concerning the roles of circulating and hypothalamic ghrelin on GH release. Ghrelin might have a physiological role on pulsatile GH secretion, but further studies are necessary to clarify its precise role on GH modulation.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am grateful to the postgraduate students who contributed to this work, to Prof. Dr. José G.H. Vieira for the constant laboratory support and to Aparecida Filomena Machado and Walkiria Miranda for assistance with the assays. Ana Maria J. Lengyel is a Senior Scientist of Conselho Nacional de Pesquisa (CNPq). This work was supported by FAPESP (97/07689-0, 02/03508-0, 02/14118-9) and CNPq (300550/87-1).

## REFERENCES

1. Bowers CY, Momany FA, Reynolds GA, Hong A. On the in vitro and in vivo activity of a new synthetic hexapeptide that acts on the pituitary to specifically release growth hormone. *Endocrinology* 1984;114:1537-45.
2. Smith RG, Van der Ploeg LHT, Howard AD, et al. Peptidomimetic regulation of growth hormone secretion. *Endocr Rev* 1997;18:621-45.
3. Korbonits M, Grossman A. Growth hormone-releasing peptide and its analogues - novel stimuli to growth hormone release. *Trends Endocrinol Metab* 1995;6:43-9.

Growth Hormone Secretagogues and Ghrelin
Lengyel

---

4. Howard AD, Feighner SD, Cully DF, et al. A receptor in pituitary and hypothalamus that functions in growth hormone release. *Science* 1996;273:947-77.

5. Kojima M, Hosoda H, Date Y, Nakazato M, Matsuo H, Kangawa K. Ghrelin is a growth-hormone-releasing acylated peptide from stomach. *Nature* 1999;402:656-60.

6. Arvat E, DiVito L, Broglio F, Papotti M, Muccioli G, Dieguez C, et al. Preliminary evidence that ghrelin, the natural GH secretagogue (GHS)-receptor ligand, strongly stimulates GH secretion in humans. *J Endocrinol Invest* 2000;23:493-5.

7. Korbonits M, Goldstone AP, Gueorguiev M, Grossman AB. Ghrelin—a hormone with multiple functions. *Front Neuroendocrinol* 2004;25:27-68.

8. van der Lely AJ, Tschop M, Heiman ML, Ghigo E. Biological, physiological, pathophysiological, and pharmacological aspects of ghrelin. *Endocr Rev* 2004;25:426-57.

9. Sun Y, Wang P, Zheng H, Smith RG. Ghrelin stimulation of growth hormone release and appetite is mediated through the growth hormone secretagogue receptor. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004;101:4679-84.

10. Gnanapavan S, Kola B, Bustin SA, Morris DG, McGee P, Fairclough P, et al. The tissue distribution of the mRNA of ghrelin and subtypes of its receptor, GHS-R, in humans. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2002;87:2988-91.

11. Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, Breen PA, Ma MK, Dellinger EP, et al. Plasma ghrelin levels after diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery. *N Engl J Med* 2002;346:1623-30.

12. Banks WA, Tschop M, Robinson SM, Heiman ML. Extent and direction of ghrelin transport across the blood-brain barrier is determined by its unique primary structure. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* 2002;302:822-7.

13. Takaya K, Ariyasu H, Kanamoto N, Iwakura H, Yoshimoto A, Harada M, et al. Ghrelin strongly stimulates growth hormone release in humans. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2000;85:4908-11.

14. Arvat E, Maccario M, DiVito L, Broglio F, Benso A, Gottero C, et al. Endocrine activities of ghrelin, a natural growth hormone secretagogue (GHS), in humans: comparison and interactions with hexarelin, a nonnatural peptidyl GHS, and GH-releasing hormone. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2001;86:1169-74.

15. Peñalva A, Carballo A, Pombo M, Casanueva F, Dieguez C. Effect of growth hormone (GH)-releasing hormone (GHRH), atropine, pyridostigmine, or hypoglycemia on GHRP-6-induced GH secretion in man. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1993;76:168-71.

16. Hataya Y, Akamizu T, Takaya K, Kanamoto N, Ariyasu H, Saijo M, et al. A low dose of ghrelin stimulates growth hormone (GH) release synergistically with GH-releasing hormone in humans. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2001;86:4552-5.

17. Popovic V, Damjanovic S, Micic D, Djurovic M, Dieguez C, Casanueva FF. Blocked growth hormone-releasing peptide (GHRP-6)-induced GH secretion and absence of the synergic action of GHRP-6 plus GH-releasing hormone in patients with hypothalamo-pituitary disconnection: evidence that GHRP-6 main action is exerted at the hypothalamic level. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1995;80:942-7.

18. Popovic V, Miljic D, Micic D, Damjanovic S, Arvat E, Ghigo E, et al. Ghrelin main action on the regulation of growth hormone release is exerted at hypothalamic level. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2003;88:3450-3.

19. Tannenbaum GS, Bowers CY. Interactions of growth hormone secretagogues and growth hormone-releasing hormone/somatostatin. *Endocrine* 2001;14:21-7.

20. Pandya N, Mott-Friberg R, Bowers CY, Barkan AL, Jaffe CA. Growth hormone (GH)-releasing peptide-6 requires endogenous hypothalamic GH-releasing hormone for maximal GH stimulation. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1998;83:1186-9.

21. Dickson SL, Doutrelant-Viltart O, Leng G. GH-deficient dw/dw rats and *lit/lit* mice show increased Fos expression in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus following systemic injection of GH-releasing peptide-6. *J Endocrinol* 1995;146:519-26.

22. Maheshwari H, Rahim A, Shalet S, Baumann G. Selective lack of growth hormone (GH) response to the GH-releasing peptide hexarelin in patients with GH-releasing hormone receptor deficiency. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1999;84:956-9.

23. Wren AM, Small CJ, Fribbens CV, Neary NM, Ward HL, Seal LJ, et al. The hypothalamic mechanisms of the hypophysiotropic action of ghrelin. *Neuroendocrinology* 2002;76:316-24.

24. Korbonits M, Little JA, Forsling ML, Tringali G, Costa A, Navarra P, et al. The effect of growth hormone secretagogues and neuropeptide Y on hypothalamic hormone release from acute rat hypothalamic explants. *J Neuroendocrinol* 1999;11:521-8.

25. Guillaume V, Magnan E, Cataldi M, Dutour A, Sauze N, Renard M, et al. Growth hormone (GH)-releasing hormone secretion is stimulated by a new GH-releasing hexapeptide in sheep. *Endocrinology* 1994;135:1073-6.

26. Goth MI, Lyons CE, Canny BJ, Thorner MO. Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide, growth hormone (GH)-releasing peptide and GH-releasing hormone stimulate GH release through distinct pituitary receptor. *Endocrinology* 1992;130:939-44.

27. Malagon MM, Luque RM, Ruiz-Guerrero E, Rodriguez-Pacheco F, Garcia-Navarro S, Casanueva FF, et al. Intracellular signaling mechanisms mediating ghrelin-stimulated growth hormone release in somatotropes. *Endocrinology* 2003;144:5372-80.

28. Tolle V, Bassant MH, Zizzari P, Poindessous-Jazat F, Tomasetto C, Epelbaum J, et al. Ultradian rhythmicity of ghrelin secretion in relation with GH, feeding behavior, and sleep-wake patterns in rats. *Endocrinology* 2002;143:1353-61.

29. Okimura Y, Ukai K, Hosoda H, Murata M, Iguchi G, Iida K, et al. The role of circulating ghrelin in growth hormone (GH) secretion in freely moving male rats. *Life Sci* 2003;72:2517-24.

30. Tannenbaum GS, Epelbaum J, Bowers CY. Interrelation-ship between the novel peptide ghrelin and somatostatin/growth hormone-releasing hormone in regulation of pulsatile growth hormone secretion. *Endocrinology* 2003;144:967-74.

31. Barkan AL, Dimaraki EV, Jessup SK, Symons KV, Ermolenko M, Jaffe CA. Ghrelin secretion in humans is

Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006

sexually dimorphic, suppressed by somatostatin, and
not affected by the ambient growth hormone levels. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:2180-4.
32. Halem HA, Taylor JE, Dong JZ, Shen Y, Datta R, Abizaid
A, et al. Novel analogs of ghrelin: physiological and
clinical implications. Eur J Endocrinol 2004;151 (suppl.
1):S71-5.
33. Zizzari P, Halem H, Taylor J, Dong JZ, DattaR, Culler MD,
et al. Endogenous ghrelin regulates episodic growth hor-
mone (GH) secretion by amplifying GH pulse amplitude:
evidence from antagonism of the GH secretagogue-
R1a receptor. Endocrinology 2005;146:3836-42.
34. Tannenbaum GS, Samia M, Chen Q, Bowers CY. Antag-
onism of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor
 unmasks a role for ghrelin in maintaining high GH pulse
amplitude under physiological conditions. Endo Soc
87th Ann Meet 2005; San Diego, USA, June 4-7.
35. Pantel J, Cabrol S, Nivot S. Familial short stature associ-
ated with a mutation in the growth hormone secreta-
gogue receptor (GHSR). Endo Soc 86th Ann Meet 2004;
New Orleans, USA, June 16-19.
36. Koutkia P, Canavan B, Breu J, Johnson ML, Grinspoon SK.
Nocturnal ghrelin pulsatility and response to growth hor-
mone secretagogues in healthy men. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab 2004;287:E506-12.
37. Kamegai J, Tamura H, Shimizu T, Ishii S, Tatsuguchi A, Sug-
ihara H, et al. The role of pituitary ghrelin in growth hor-
mone (GH) secretion: GH-releasing hormone-depen-
dent regulation of pituitary ghrelin gene expression and
peptide content. Endocrinology 2004;145:3731-8.
38. Sun Y, Ahmed S, Smith RG. Deletion of ghrelin impairs
neither growth nor appetite. Mol Cell Biol 2003;
23:7973-81.
39. Shuto Y, Shibasaki T, Otagiri A, Kuriyama H, Ohata H,
Tamura H, et al. Hypothalamic growth hormone secret-
agogue receptor regulates growth hormone secretion,
feeding, and adiposity. J Clin Invest 2002;109:1429-36.
40. Sun Y, Wang P, Zheng H, Smith RG. Ghrelin stimulation of
growth hormone release and appetite is mediated
through the growth hormone secretagogue receptor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:4679-84.
41. Peino R, Baldelli R, Rodriguez-Garcia J, Rodriguez-
Segade S, Kojima M, et al. Ghrelin-induced growth hor-
mone secretion in humans. Eur J Endocrinol 2000;
143:R11-4.
42. Popovic V, Leal A, Micic D, Koppeschaar HPF, Torres E,
Paramo C, et al. GH-releasing hormone and GH-releas-
ing peptide-6 for diagnostic testing in GH-deficient
adults. Lancet 2000;356:1137-42.
43. Broglio F, Benso A, Castiglioni C, Gottero C, Prodam F,
Destefanis S, et al. The endocrine response to ghrelin as
a function of gender in humans in young and elderly
subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:1537-42.
44. Cordido F, Peñalva A, Dieguez C, Casanueva FF. Mas-
sive growth hormone (GH) discharge in obese subjects
after the combined administration of GH-releasing hor-
mone and GHRP-6: evidence for a marked somatotroph
secretory capability in obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1993;76:819-23.
45. Tassone F, Broglio F, Destefanis S, Rovere S, Benso A, Got-
tero C, et al. Neuroendocrine and metabolic effects of

Growth Hormone Secretagogues and Ghrelin
Lengyel
acute ghrelin administration in human obesity. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:5478-83.
46. Maccario M, Arvat E, Procopio M, Gianotti L, Grottoili S,
Imbimbo BP, et al. Metabolic modulation of the growth
hormone-releasing activity of hexarelin in man. Metabo-
lism 1995;44:134-8.
47. DiVito L, Broglio F, Benso A, Gottero C, Prodam F, Papot-
ti M, et al. The GH-releasing effect of ghrelin, a natural
GH secretagogue, is only blunted by the infusion of
exogenous somatostatin in humans. Clin Endocrinol
2002;56:643-8.
48. Broglio F, Benso A, Gottero C, Prodam F, Grottoili S, Tas-
sone F, et al. Effects of glucose, free fatty acids or argi-
nine load on the GH-releasing activity of ghrelin in
humans. Clin Endocrinol 2002;57:265-71.
49. Maier C, Schaller G, Buranyi B, Nowotny P, Geyer G,
Wolzt M, et al. The cholinergic system controls ghrelin
release and ghrelin-induced growth hormone release in
humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:4729-33.
50. Gertz BJ, Sciberras DG, Yogendran L, Christie K, Bador K,
Krupa D, et al. L-692,429, a nonpeptide growth hormone
(GH) secretagogue, reverses glucocorticoid suppression
of GH secretion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;79:745-9.
51. Arvat E, DiVito L, Gianotti L, et al. Mechanisms underly-
ing the negative growth hormone (GH) autofeedback
on the GH-releasing effect of hexarelin in man. Metabo-
lism 1997;46:83-8.
52. Leal-Cerro A, Pumar A, Garcia-Garcia E, Dieguez C,
Casanueva FF. Inhibition of growth hormone release
after the combined administration of GHRH and GHRP-
6 in patients with Cushing's syndrome. Clin Endocrinol
1994;41:649-54.
53. Borges MH, DiNinno FB, Lengyel AM. Different effects of
growth hormone releasing peptide (GHRP-6) and GH-
releasing hormone on GH release in endogenous and
exogenous hypercortisolism. Clin Endocrinol 1997;
46:713-8.
54. Leal-Cerro A, Torres E, Soto A, Dios E, Deghenghi R, Arvat
E, et al. Ghrelin is no longer able to stimulate growth hor-
mone secretion in patients with Cushing's syndrome but
instead induces exaggerated corticotropin and cortisol
responses. Neuroendocrinology 2002;76:390-6.
55. Correa-Silva SR, Nascif SO, Silva MR, Senger MH, Miran-
da WL, Machado AF, et al. Decreased GH secretion
and enhanced ACTH and cortisol release after ghrelin
administration in Cushing's disease: comparison with
GHRP-6. Proc 12th Intern Congr Endocrinol 2004. Lisbon,
Portugal, August 31-September 4.
56. Arvat E, Giordano R, Ramunni J, Arnaldi G, Colao A,
Deghenghi R, et al. Adrenocorticotropin and cortisol
hyperresponsiveness to hexarelin in patients with Cush-
ing's disease bearing a pituitary microadenoma, but not
in those with macroadenoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1998;83:4207-11.
57. Pinto AC, Silva MR, Martins MR, Brunner E, Lengyel AM.
Effects of short-term glucocorticoid deprivation on
growth hormone (GH) response to GH-releasing pep-
tide-6: studies in normal men and in patients with
adrenal insufficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2000;85:1540-4.
58. Ramos-Dias JC, Pimentel-Filho F, Reis AF, Lengyel AM.
Different growth hormone (GH) response to GH-releas-
Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006
23

Growth Hormone Secretagogues and Ghrelin
Lengyel

ing peptide and GH-releasing hormone in hyperthy-
roidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:1343-6.

59. Nascif SO, Correa-Silva S, Silva MR, Senger MH, Lengyel
AM. The effects of ghrelin on GH, ACTH and cortisol
release in thyrotoxicosis. Proc 12th Intern Congr
Endocrinol 2004. Lisbon, Portugal, August 31-Septem-
ber 4.

60. Weffort RFVB, Ramos-Dias JC, Chipoch C, Lengyel AM.
Growth hormone (GH) response to GH-releasing pep-
tide-6 in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mell-
itus. Metabolism 1997;46:706-10.

61. Broglio F, Gianotti L, Destefanis S, et al. The endocrine
response to acute ghrelin administration is blunted in

patients with anorexia nervosa, a ghrelin hypersecretory
state. Clin Endocrinol 2004;60:592-9.

Endereço para correspondência:

Ana Maria J. Lengyel
Div. Endocrinology, UNIFESP/EPM
R. Pedro de Toledo 910
04039-002 São Paulo, Brazil
Fax: (11) 5574-8432
E-mail: amlengyel@rocketmail.com

Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab vol 50 n° 1 Fevereiro 2006
