
Cross-talk towards the response regulator NtrC controlling nitrogen metabolism in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*

Thomas Drepper${}^{1}$, Jessica Wiethaus${}^{2}$, Daphne Giaourakis${}^{2}$, Silke Groß${}^{2}$, Britta Schubert${}^{2}$, Markus Vogt${}^{2}$, Yvonne Wiencek${}^{2}$, Alastair G. McEwan${}^{3}$ & Bernd Masepohl${}^{4}$

${}^{1}$Institut für Molekulare Enzymtechnologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Jülich, Germany; ${}^{2}$Lehrstuhl für Biologie der Mikroorganismen, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany; and ${}^{3}$Department of Microbiology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld, Australia

---

**Correspondence:** Bernd Masepohl,  
Lehrstuhl für Biologie der Mikroorganismen,  
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44780 Bochum,  
Germany. Tel.: +49 0 234 32 25632; fax: +49 0 234 32 14620; e-mail: bernd.masepohl@ruhr-uni-bochum.de  

Received 6 December 2005; revised 13 February 2006; accepted 6 March 2006. First published online 3 April 2006.

doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00228.x

Editor: Dieter Jahn

**Keywords**  
*Rhodobacter capsulatus*; two-component regulatory system; NtrB; NtrC; urease; nitrogenase.

---

**Abstract**  
*Rhodobacter capsulatus* NtrB/NtrC two-component regulatory system controls expression of genes involved in nitrogen metabolism including urease and nitrogen fixation genes. The *ntrY–ntrX* genes, which are located immediately downstream of the *nifR3–ntrB–ntrC* operon, code for a two-component system of unknown function. Transcription of *ntrY* starts within the *ntrC–ntrY* intergenic region as shown by primer extension analysis, but maximal transcription requires, in addition, the promoter of the *nifR3–ntrB–ntrC* operon. While *ntrB* and *ntrY* single mutant strains were able to grow with either urea or N₂ as sole nitrogen source, a *ntrB/ntrY* double mutant (like a *ntrC*-deficient strain) was no longer able to use urea or N₂. These findings suggest that the histidine kinases NtrB and NtrY can substitute for each other as phosphodonors towards the response regulator NtrC.

---

**Introduction**  
Two-component systems (TCS) are widespread regulatory proteins, found in Bacteria, Archaea and Eukaryotes, involved in signal sensing and transduction. TCS consist of a sensory histidine kinase (HK) and a response regulator (RR). Typically, a membrane-associated domain of the sensor HK monitors an environmental signal, and in response to this signal, autophosphorylates a conserved His residue. The His-bound phosphoryl group of the HK is transferred onto a specific Asp residue on the cognate RR. The phosphorylated RR, in turn, activates transcription of genes whose products enable the cells to react to the environmental signal. In addition to the transphosphorylation between the cognate HK/RR pairs, some RRs receive a phosphoryl group from noncognate HKs, by a process called ‘cross-talk’ (Chang & Stewart, 1998). Furthermore, small metabolites such as acetyl phosphate may serve as phosphodonor for some RRs (Pioszak & Ninfa, 2004, and references therein).

*Escherichia coli* and many other proteobacteria contain a TCS, the NtrB/NtrC system, which responds to the nitrogen status of the cell (Hakenbeck & Stock, 1996; Xu & Hoover,

© 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved
serve as a substrate for autophosphorylation of NtrC (Cullen *et al.*, 1996). *Rhodobacter capsulatus* NtrC is the transcriptional activator of a number of genes directly or indirectly involved in nitrogen fixation and assimilation (*glnB-glnA, glnK-amtB, nifA1, nifA2, anfA* and *mopA-mod-ABCD*; Bowman & Kranz, 1998; Masepohl *et al.*, 2002) and urea utilization (*ureDABCEFG*; Masepohl *et al.*, 2001). As demonstrated by footprint analyses, NtrC binds to tandem binding sites upstream of the respective transcription units including the *ure* operon. Phosphorylation of NtrC by NtrB increases DNA binding to the *ureD* promoter by at least eightfold (Masepohl *et al.*, 2001).

Although *R.* *capsulatus* NtrC has long been known to be absolutely required for nitrogen fixation and urea utilization as demonstrated by mutational analysis (Kutsche *et al.*, 1996; Masepohl *et al.*, 2001, 2002; and references therein), the exact role of NtrB has not been genetically characterized until now. The results obtained in this study indicate that NtrB and another putative HK, NtrY, can substitute for each other as phosphodonors for NtrC.

### Materials and methods

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids, and growth conditions

The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. As a basis for construction of *R.* *capsulatus* *ntrB* (YWRUB11), *ntrY* (DG7-I, DG7-II) and *ntrX* (DG9) mutant strains, appropriate restriction fragments from the *ntr* gene region were cloned into mobilizable vector plasmids, which cannot replicate in *R.* *capsulatus*. The respective *ntr* genes were disrupted by either a gentamicin (Gm) or a kanamycin (Km) cassette (Fig. 1a). Methods for conjugal plasmid transfer between *Escherichia coli* and *R.* *capsulatus*, and the selection of mutants, growth media, growth conditions, and antibiotic concentrations were as described previously (Masepohl *et al.*, 1988, 2001; Klipp *et al.*, 1988).

#### DNA biochemistry

DNA isolation, restriction enzyme analysis, agarose gel electrophoresis, and cloning procedures were performed using standard methods (Sambrook *et al.*, 1989). Restriction enzymes and T4 DNA ligase were purchased from MBI Fermentas (St Leon-Rot, Germany), and used as recommended by the supplier.

#### β-Galactosidase assays

To determine β-galactosidase activities of *R.* *capsulatus* wild-type and mutant strains carrying a chromosomal *ntrY-lacZ* fusion (based on plasmid pDG10) or the broad host range plasmid pNIRUB35 (*ureDA-lacZ*), cultures were grown in RCV minimal medium containing either 9.5 mM serine [nitrogen-limiting (−N) conditions] or 20 mM ammonium [nitrogen-sufficient (+N) conditions] as described previously (Masepohl *et al.*, 2001). Following growth in the respective media to late exponential phase, β-galactosidase activities were determined by the sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-chloroform method (Miller, 1972).

#### RNA isolation and primer extension

*Rhodobacter capsulatus* wild-type cultures were grown in RCV minimal medium containing either 9.5 mM serine

### Table 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics | Reference or source |
|-------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|
| **Strains**       |                          |                     |
| *Escherichia coli* |                          |                     |
| JM83              | Host for cloning and plasmid amplification | Vieira & Messing (1982) |
| S17-1             | RP4-2 (Tc::Mu) (Km::Tn7) integrated into the chromosome | Simon *et al.* (1983) |
| *Rhodobacter capsulatus* |                          |                     |
| B10S              | Spontaneous Sm<sup>r</sup> mutant of *R.* *capsulatus* B10 | Klipp *et al.* (1988) |
| PBK2              | *ntrC*::[Ω-Km<sup>r</sup>] | Kutsche *et al.* (1996) |
| TD50              | *ntrC*::[Gm<sup>r</sup>>] | Masepohl *et al.* (2001) |
| **Plasmids**      |                          |                     |
| pDG7-I            | pSUP202 derivative carrying *ntrY*::[Km<sup>r</sup>>], Sp<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pDG7-II           | pSUP202 derivative carrying *ntrY*::[< Km<sup>r</sup>], Sp<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pDG9              | pSUP401 derivative carrying *ntrX*::[Gm<sup>r</sup>>], Sp<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pDG10             | pSUP202 derivative carrying *ntrY-lacZ*, Tc<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pJW39             | pK18 derivative carrying the *ntrY* promoter region, Km<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pNIRUB35          | pPHU235 derivative carrying *ureDA-lacZ*, Tc<sup>r</sup> | Masepohl *et al.* (2001) |
| pYWRUB11          | Mobilizable pACYC184 derivative carrying *ntrB*::[Gm<sup>r</sup>>], Tc<sup>r</sup> | This work |

Gm<sup>r</sup>, gentamicin resistance; Km<sup>r</sup>, kanamycin resistance; Sm<sup>r</sup>, streptomycin resistance; Sp<sup>r</sup>, spectinomycin resistance; Tc<sup>r</sup>, tetracycline resistance.

FEMS Microbiol Lett **258** (2006) 250–256 © 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved
(a)


nifR3 ntrB ntrC ntrY ntrX nrfA hflX



PstI PstI Xhol BclI BamHI EcoRI



YWRUB11 Gm>
TD50 Gm>
PBK2 ΩKm
DG7-I Km>
DG7-II <Km
DG9


(b)


ntrc stop -35 -10 +1
TAAATGGGCCACAGGTAATTGTGGCAAATCCACCTCACGGGATTCGCCCCGGGAGAACCGGGGACCCGTCGTGTCCATG
ntrY start


Fig. 1. Mutational analysis of the *Rhodobacter capsulatus* *ntr* gene region. (a) The physical map shows only those restriction sites used for mutant construction. The gentamicin (Gm) and kanamycin (Km) resistance interposons used to disrupt the respective *ntr* genes are not drawn to scale. The direction of transcription of the resistance genes is symbolized by arrowheads, indicating polar and nonpolar insertions. (b) The DNA sequence of the *ntrC-ntrY* intergenic region is shown, and the experimentally determined transcription start site (Fig. 2) is marked by (+1). Putative (-35) and (-10) promoter elements are marked.

(−N) or 20 mM ammonium (+N) before isolation of total RNA using the Micro-to-Midi Total RNA Purification System (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Primer extension was carried out as described previously (Babst et al., 1996) using a synthetic oligonucleotide primer, GSP4 (5′-CCCCAAAAGGCCCGAGCACGAG-3′), to map the transcription start site of *ntrY*.

### Results and discussion

#### Genetic organization of the *Rhodobacter capsulatus* *ntr* gene region

DNA sequence and genetic analyses suggest that the *R. capsulatus ntr* (nitrogen regulation) gene region (Fig. 1a) consists of three transcriptional units, namely *nifR3-ntrB-ntrC* (Cullen et al., 1998, and references therein), *ntrY-ntrX* (this study), and *nrfA-hflX* (Drepper et al., 2002). The gene pairs *ntrB-ntrC* and *ntrY-ntrX* code for two-component regulatory systems, namely the well-characterized NtrB/NtrC system controlling nitrogen metabolism, and the NtrY/NtrX system, the function of which is less certain for *R. capsulatus*. In contrast to the cytoplasmic protein NtrB, the putative sensor kinase NtrY contains an N-terminal extension, which might act as a membrane anchor.

Similar to *R. capsulatus*, the *ntrB, ntrC, ntrY,* and *ntrX* genes are also clustered in several other bacteria including *Azorhizobium caulinodans* (Pawlowski et al., 1991) and *Azospirillum brasilense* (Ishida et al., 2002). Both NtrC and

© 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved

Cross-talk towards NtrC in Rhodobacter capsulatus

Table 2. Expression of *ntrY-lacZ* in Rhodobacter capsulatus wild-type and *ntrC* mutant strains

| Strain* | Relevant characteristics | $\beta$-Galactosidase activity $^{\dagger}$ |
|---------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
|         |                          | +N                        | –N           |
| B10S    | Wild-type, *ntrY-lacZ*   | 443 ± 4                   | 469 ± 36     |
| TD50    | *ntrC::[Gm >]*, *ntrY-lacZ* | 301 ± 20                  | 361 ± 17     |
| PBK2    | *ntrC::[ΩKm]*, *ntrY-lacZ* | 260 ± 13                  | 283 ± 9      |

* *Rhodobacter capsulatus* strains contained plasmid pDG10 (*ntrY-lacZ*) integrated into the chromosome via single recombination.
$^{\dagger}$ Results represent the means and standard deviations of three independent measurements.
+N, nitrogen-sufficient conditions; –N, nitrogen-limiting conditions.

formed colonies on rich-medium plates which were significantly smaller than wild-type colonies. Similar results were obtained for *ntrY* mutant strain DG7-II carrying an interposon insertion acting polar on *ntrX* expression. This apparent growth defect of strain DG7-II compared with normal growth properties of *ntrY* mutant DG7-I (carrying a nonpolar Km cassette) strongly suggests that *ntrY* and *ntrX* form part of a transcriptional unit.

In contrast to mutant strains defective for *ntrX* (DG9 and DG7-II), a *ntrC* mutant strain containing a strictly polar omega cassette (PBK2, Fig. 1a; Table 1) formed colonies of wild-type size on rich-medium plates. Furthermore, doubling times of PBK2 (8.9 h) were comparable to those of the wild type (9.2 h) in minimal medium with ammonium as an N-source. This was the first hint, that transcription of the *ntrY-ntrX* operon starts from a promoter located downstream of *ntrC*. To verify this assumption, we compared expression of a chromosomal *ntrY-lacZ* fusion in the wild-type and two *ntrC* mutant strains carrying either a polar (PBK2) or a nonpolar (TD50) interposon cassette (Table 2). *Rhodobacter capsulatus* strains were grown phototrophically under either nitrogen-sufficient conditions [with ammonium as an N-source (+N)] or under nitrogen-limiting conditions [with serine as an N-source (–N)] before determination of lacZ-derived β-galactosidase activity. The results shown in Table 2 may be summarized as follows. (i) A strictly polar mutation in *ntrC* (PBK2) did not abolish *ntrY-lacZ* transcription, confirming that transcription of *ntrY* starts from an NtrC-independent promoter located downstream of the insertion site of the Ω cassette within *ntrC*. (ii) As *ntrY* expression was significantly lower in the mutant strain carrying a polar *ntrC* mutation (PBK2) compared with the wild type, one might speculate that a second promoter upstream of *ntrC* contributes to maximal expression of *ntrY*. The most likely candidate is a promoter upstream of *nifR3*, which drives expression of the *nifR3-ntrB-ntrC* operon with levels of transcript equivalent under [+N] and [–N] conditions (Cullen et al., 1998). (iii) Transcription of *ntrY-lacZ* was not regulated by the nitrogen source, thus demonstrating that *ntrY* does not belong to the NtrC regulon. (iv) Expression of *ntrY-lacZ* was higher in the mutant strain containing a nonpolar *ntrC* mutation (TD50) compared with the mutant carrying a polar *ntrC* mutation (PBK2). This finding shows that transcription initiated from the gentamicin cassette in TD50 was not terminated downstream of *ntrC*, but instead contributed significantly to *ntrY* expression.

To further confirm the presence of a *ntrY*-specific promoter downstream of *ntrC*, we determined the transcription start of *ntrY* by primer extension analysis. Two independent sets of experiments were carried out leading to essentially the same results, and the result of one experiment is shown in Fig. 2. Total RNA isolated from *R.* *capsulatus* wild-type cultures grown either under [+N] or [–N] conditions were used as templates for reverse transcription with primer GSP4 (Materials and methods), complementary to the 5′ end of *ntrY*-mRNA. Reverse transcripts based on RNA isolated either from [+N] or [–N] cultures were of identical length and comparable intensity (Fig. 2) confirming that *ntrY* transcription is not regulated by the nitrogen source (Table 2). As expected from *ntrY-lacZ* expression studies, the transcription start mapped within the *ntrC-ntrY* intergenic region (Fig. 1b). Putative –10/–35 promoter elements were identified at corresponding positions upstream of the transcription start.

Fig. 2. Transcription start site mapping of *Rhodobacter capsulatus ntrY*. Primer extension was carried out with total RNA from *R.* *capsulatus* cells grown either under nitrogen-limiting [–N] or nitrogen-sufficient [+N] conditions. Primer GSP4 (binding to the 5′ region of *ntrY* mRNA) was used for reverse transcription. The corresponding sequencing reactions (A, C, G, T) with plasmid pJW39 carrying the *ntrC-ntrY* gene region served as length standard, and the start of the reverse transcript is marked by (+1).

as sole nitrogen source under phototrophic growth conditions (Fig. 3b). To avoid diazotrophic growth, the gas atmosphere in the culture tubes was changed against argon. As expected from earlier studies (Masepohl et al., 2001), the *ntrC* mutant strain TD50 did not grow with urea (Fig. 3b). Surprisingly, although biochemical studies strongly suggest that NtrB is the cognate phosphodonor for NtrC (Cullen et al., 1996), the *ntrB* mutant strain grew like the wild-type as did the *ntrY* mutant strain DG7-I (Fig. 3b). In contrast to these single mutants, the *ntrB/ntrY* double mutant YWRUB11/DG7-I did not grow at all with urea as sole N-source (like the *ntrC* mutant TD50). These results demonstrate that either NtrB or NtrY must be present for urease-dependent growth, strongly suggesting that NtrB and NtrY can substitute for each other as phosphodonors for NtrC. Furthermore, these data indicate that, at least under the conditions tested in this study, no further HK is involved in cross-talk towards *R.* *capsulatus* NtrC.

Several RRs, such as NtrC and PhoB from *Escherichia coli*, are phosphorylated by acetyl phosphate both *in vivo* and *in vitro* (Feng et al., 1992; Wanner & Wilmes-Riesenberg, 1992; McCleary et al., 1993). Acetyl phosphate has also been discussed to activate expression of *R.* *capsulatus* DMSO reductase by direct phosphorylation of the transcriptional activator DorR (Kappler et al., 2002). However, since no growth with urea as sole N-source was observed for the *ntrB/* *ntrY* double mutant, acetyl phosphate does not seem to play a significant role in phosphorylation of *R.* *capsulatus* NtrC, at least under the conditions tested in this study. This is in line with the finding that acetyl phosphate did not serve as a phosphodonor for *R.* *capsulatus* NtrC *in vitro* (Cullen et al., 1996).

To rule out that the phenotype of the *ntrB/ntrY* double mutant was specific for urease-dependent growth (Fig. 3b), we examined nitrogenase-dependent diazotrophic growth of the corresponding mutant strains (Fig. 3c). For this purpose, *R.* *capsulatus* wild-type and mutant strains were grown in minimal medium without a source of fixed nitrogen under an atmosphere of pure dinitrogen gas. As expected from earlier studies (Masepohl et al., 2002, and references therein), the *ntrC* mutant strain was not able to grow with N₂ as sole nitrogen source. Single mutant strains defective for either NtrB or NtrY grew diazotrophically albeit at slightly reduced levels compared with the wild type. Most importantly, as shown for the *ntrC* mutant, no diazotrophic growth at all was observed for the *ntrB/ntrY* double mutant, thus proving that either NtrB or NtrY must be present for transcriptional activation of NtrC-dependent target genes.

To analyze the role of NtrB and NtrY in transcriptional activation of NtrC-dependent genes in more detail, we examined *ure* gene expression in *R.* *capsulatus* wild-type and selected mutant strains carrying a *ureDA-lacZ* fusion (pNIRUB35; Masepohl et al., 2001). For this purpose, *R.*

**Fig. 3.** Growth of *Rhodobacter capsulatus* wild-type and selected mutant strains with ammonium (a), urea (b) or N₂ (c) as sole nitrogen source. *Rhodobacter capsulatus* strains were grown phototrophically in minimal medium containing either 7.5 mM ammonium or 2 mM urea as an N-source or under a pure N₂ atmosphere. B10S (wild-type), TD50 (*ntrC*), YWRUB11 (*ntrB*), DG7-I (*ntrY*), YWRUB11/DG7-I (*ntrB*, *ntrY*).

**NtrB and NtrY can substitute for each other**

In contrast to *R.* *capsulatus* NtrC, which is essential for N₂ fixation and urea utilization (Kutsche et al., 1996; Masepohl et al., 2001, 2002), nothing was known about the *in vivo* role of its cognate HK, NtrB. In this study we analyzed *ntrB* mutant strain YWRUB11 (Fig. 1a) for its ability to activate NtrC-dependent genes. Based on the close proximity of the *ntrC* and *ntrY* genes and clear similarity between the sensor kinases NtrY and NtrB (28% identity and 50% similarity over a stretch of 322 amino acids representing more than 90% of the NtrB protein), we included *ntrY* mutant DG7-I in our studies on NtrC-dependent gene activation. We first analyzed growth of *ntrB* and *ntrY* mutant strains with urea

Cross-talk towards NtrC in Rhodobacter capsulatus

Table 3. Expression of ureDA-lacZ in Rhodobacter capsulatus ntrB and ntrY mutant strains

| Strain* | Relevant characteristics | β-Galactosidase activity† |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | +N | −N |
| B10S | Wild-type, ureDA-lacZ | 384±35 | 2971±179 |
| TD50 | ntrC, ureDA-lacZ | 0±0 | 0±0 |
| YWRUB11 | ntrB, ureDA-lacZ | 198±33 | 391±89 |
| DG7-I | ntrY, ureDA-lacZ | 772±100 | 3593±83 |
| YWRUB11/DG7-I | ntrB, ntrY, ureDA-lacZ | 0±0 | 0±0 |

*Rhodobacter capsulatus* strains contained the broad host range plasmid pNIRUB35 (ureDA-lacZ).

†Results represent the means and standard deviations of four independent measurements.

+N, nitrogen-sufficient conditions; −N, nitrogen-limiting conditions.

capsulatus strains were grown phototrophically under either [ +N ] or [ −N ] conditions prior to determination of lacZ-derived β-galactosidase activity. The results shown in Table 3 may be summarized as follows. (i) As described previously (Masepohl et al., 2001), maximum expression of the ure genes occurred under [ −N ] conditions. Expression of the ureDA-lacZ fusion was clearly down-regulated under [ +N ] conditions, but significant expression remained in the presence of ammonium. NtrC was essential for ure gene expression under both [ −N ] and [ +N ] conditions. (ii) As expected from mutational analysis described above (Fig. 2b), no ure gene expression was observed in the ntrB/ntrY double mutant strain. (iii) Despite the fact that the ntrB single mutant strain exhibited no growth defect compared with the wild type with urea as sole N-source (Fig. 3b), expression of the ureDA-lacZ fusion was strongly reduced in this mutant background. Therefore, although NtrB was not essential for ure gene expression, it was required for maximal NtrC-mediated transcriptional activation underlining its role as the cognate phosphodonor for NtrC. However, since lower levels of ure gene expression in the ntrB mutant did not affect growth with urea as sole nitrogen source, one has to assume that the basal urease activity was still high enough to produce sufficient amounts of NH₃ from urea allowing the ntrB mutant to grow at wild-type rates. (iv) Interestingly, expression of ureDA-lacZ was enhanced in ntrY mutant strain DG7-I, indicating that NtrY, in addition to its role as a phosphodonor for NtrC, may counteract phosphorylation of NtrC. This might be explained by a role of NtrY in dephosphorylation of NtrC, or alternatively, of NtrB, thereby indirectly affecting phosphotransfer to NtrC.

### Acknowledgements

The authors thank Franz Narberhaus (Ruhr-Universität Bochum) and Ulrike Kappler (University of Queensland) for critically reading the manuscript. This work was supported by financial grants from the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Germany.

### References

Babst M, Hennecke H & Fischer HM (1996) Two different mechanisms are involved in the heat-shock regulation of chaperonin gene expression in Bradyrhizobium japonicum. Mol Microbiol 19: 827–839.

Bowman WC & Kranz RG (1998) A bacterial ATP-dependent enhancer binding protein that activates the housekeeping RNA polymerase. Genes Dev 12: 1884–1893.

Chang C & Stewart RC (1998) The two-component system. Plant Physiol 117: 723–731.

Cullen PJ, Bowman WC & Kranz RG (1996) In vitro reconstitution and characterization of the Rhodobacter capsulatus NtrB and NtrC two-component system. J Biol Chem 271: 6530–6536.

Cullen PJ, Bowman WC, Foster-Hartnett D, Reilly SC & Kranz RG (1998) Translational activation by an NtrC enhancer-binding protein. J Mol Biol 278: 903–914.

Drepper T, Raabe K, Giaourakis D, Gendrullis M, Masepohl B & Klipp W (2002) The Hfq-like protein NrfA of the phototrophic purple bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus controls nitrogen fixation via regulation of nifA and anfA expression. FEMS Microbiol Lett 215: 221–227.

Feng J, Atkinson MR, McCleary W, Stock JB, Wanner BL & Ninfa AJ (1992) Role of phosphorylated metabolic intermediates in

### Conclusions

In summary, genetic data obtained in this study strongly suggest cross-talk towards the R. capsulatus RR NtrC, with the HKs NtrB and NtrY being able to substitute for each other as phosphodonors. NtrB perceives the nitrogen status of the cell via direct interaction with the PII-like signal transduction protein GlnB as previously shown by yeast two-hybrid studies (Pawlowski et al., 2003). In contrast, the

FEMS Microbiol Lett 258 (2006) 250–256

© 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved
the regulation of glutamine synthetase synthesis in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 174: 6061–6070.

Foster-Hartnett D, Cullen PJ, Monika EM & Kranz RG (1994) A new type of NtrC transcriptional activator. *J Bacteriol* 176: 6175–6187.

Hakenbeck R & Stock JB (1996) Analysis of two-component signal transduction systems involved in transcriptional regulation. *Methods Enzymol* 273: 281–300.

Hübner P, Willison JC, Vignais PM & Bickle TA (1991) Expression of regulatory *nif* genes in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. *J Bacteriol* 173: 2993–2999.

Ishida ML, Assumpcao MC, Machado HB, Benelli EM, Souza EM & Pedrosa FO (2002) Identification and characterization of the two-component NtrY/NtrX regulatory system in *Azospirillum brasilense*. *Brazil J Med Biol Res* 35: 651–661.

Kappler U, Huston WM & McEwan AG (2002) Control of dimethylsulfoxide reductase expression in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*: the role of carbon metabolites and the response regulators DorR and RegA. *Microbiology* 148: 605–614.

Klipp W, Masepohl B & Pühler A (1988) Identification and mapping of nitrogen fixation genes of *Rhodobacter capsulatus*: duplication of a *nifA-nifB* region. *J Bacteriol* 170: 693–699.

Kutsche M, Leimkühler S, Angermüller S & Klipp W (1996) Promoters controlling expression of the alternative nitrogenase and the molybdenum uptake system in *Rhodobacter capsulatus* are activated by NtrC, independent of σ<sup>54</sup>, and repressed by molybdenum. *J Bacteriol* 178: 2010–2017.

Masepohl B, Klipp W & Pühler A (1988) Genetic characterization and sequence analysis of the duplicated *nifA/nifB* gene region of *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. *Mol Gen Genet* 212: 27–37.

Masepohl B, Kaiser B, Isakovic N, Richard CL, Kranz RG & Klipp W (2001) Urea utilization in the phototrophic bacterium *Rhodobacter capsulatus* is regulated by the transcriptional activator NtrC. *J Bacteriol* 183: 637–643.

Masepohl B, Drepper T, Paschen A, *et al.* (2002) Regulation of nitrogen fixation in the phototrophic purple bacterium *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. *J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol* 4: 243–248.

McCleary WR, Stock JB & Ninfa AJ (1993) Is acetyl phosphate a global signal in *Escherichia coli? J Bacteriol* 175: 2793–2798.

Miller JH (1972) *Experiments in Molecular Genetics*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

Pawlowksi K, Klose U & de Bruijn FJ (1991) Characterization of a novel *Azorhizobium caulinodans* ORS571 two-component

regulatory system, NtrY/NtrX, involved in nitrogen fixation and metabolism. *Mol Gen Genet* 231: 124–138.

Pawlowski A, Riedel K-U, Klipp W, *et al.* (2003) Yeast two-hybrid studies on interaction of proteins involved in regulation of nitrogen fixation in the phototrophic bacterium *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. *J Bacteriol* 185: 5240–5247.

Pioszak AA & Ninfa AJ (2004) Mutations altering the N-terminal receiver domain of NRI (NtrC) that prevent dephosphorylation by the NRII-PII complex in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 186: 5730–5740.

Sambrook J, Fritsch EF & Maniatis T (1989) *Molecular Cloning. A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

Schmehl M, Jahn A, Meyer zu Vilsendorf A, *et al.* (1993) Identification of a new class of nitrogen fixation genes in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*: a putative membrane complex involved in electron transport to nitrogenase. *Mol Gen Genet* 241: 602–615.

Simon R, Priefer U & Pühler A (1983) A broad host range mobilization system for in vivo genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in Gram negative bacteria. *Bio/Technology* 1: 784–791.

Verhamme DT, Arents JC, Postma PW, Crielaard W & Hellingwerf KJ (2002) Investigation of *in vivo* cross-talk between key two-component systems of *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiology* 148: 69–78.

Vieira J & Messing J (1982) The pUC plasmids, an M13mp7-derived system for insertion mutagenesis and sequencing with synthetic universal primers. *Gene* 19: 259–268.

Wanner BL & Wilmes-Riesenber MR (1992) Involvement of phosphotransacetylase, acetate kinase, and acetyl phosphate synthesis in control of the phosphate regulon in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 174: 2124–2130.

Xu H & Hoover TR (2001) Transcriptional regulation at a distance in bacteria. *Curr Opin Microbiol* 4: 138–144.

Yamamoto K, Hirao K, Oshima T, Aiba H, Utsumi R & Ishihama A (2005) Functional characterization *in vitro* of all two-component signal transduction systems from *Escherichia coli*. *J Biol Chem* 280: 1448–1456.

Zimmer DP, Soupene E, Lee HL, *et al.* (2000) Nitrogen regulatory protein C-controlled genes of *Escherichia coli*: scavenging as a defense against nitrogen limitation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 97: 14674–14679.