
Plant Physiol. (1989) 90, 1071–1076  
0032-0889/89/90/1071/0/$0.100/0  

Received for publication November 8, 1988  
and in revised form March 7, 1989  

# Hydroxamic Acid Glucosyltransferases from Maize Seedlings¹

**Bryan A. Bailey* and Russell L. Larson**

Department of Biochemistry (B.A.B.) and Department of Agronomy, and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (R.L.L.), University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211

---

## ABSTRACT

Hydroxamic acids occur in several forms in maize (*Zea mays* L.) with 2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-2H-1,4-benzoxazin-3(4H)-one (DIMBOA) being the predominant form and others including 2,4-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one (DIBOA) being found at lower concentrations. Two enzymes capable of glucosylating hydroxamic acids were identified in maize protein extracts and partially purified and characterized. The total enzyme activity per seedling increased during the first 4 days of germination and was concurrent with the accumulation of DIMBOA. Purification of the enzymes by ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by Sephadex G-200 and Q-Sepharose gel chromatography resulted in a 13-fold increase in specific activity. The enzymes are initially separated into two peaks (peak 1 and peak 2) of activity by Q-Sepharose gel chromatography. The peak 1 glucosyltransferase had 3.6% of the DIMBOA glucosylating activity when DIBOA was used as substrate, whereas this percentage increased to 57% for the peak 2 enzyme. The enzyme in peak 2 has a *K*ₘ of 174 micromolar for DIMBOA and a *K*ₘ of 638 micromolar for DIBOA; the enzyme in peak 1 has a *K*ₘ of 217 micromolar for DIMBOA and its activity on DIBOA was too low to determine a *K*ₘ. The identification of two glucosyltransferases capable of glucosylating hydroxamic acids *in vitro* serves as an initial step in the characterization of the enzymes involved in production of hydroxamic acids in maize.

which differs from DIMBOA by a methoxyl group, is present at a lesser concentration (Fig. 1) (27). DIMBOA has been implicated in resistance to several diseases (3, 16) and insects (17) in maize although many of these relationships have not been substantiated. By far the most extensively characterized biological function proposed for DIMBOA in the developing maize plant is its resistance effect on the first brood of the European corn borer, *Ostrinia nubilalis* (Hbn.) (11–13, 21). The concentration of DIMBOA in young maize plants can be closely correlated with resistance to the European corn borer.

Investigation of the pathway involved in hydroxamic acid production has been limited. The precursors of the hydroxamic acids, like many other secondary metabolites, are products of the shikimic acid pathway (20). Anthranilic acid and phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate have been shown to serve as the immediate precursors in hydroxamic acid synthesis in maize (23). Subsequent modifications of the hydroxamic acid structure include hydroxylation, methylation, and glucosylation. The present study concerns identification of two enzymes that are capable of catalyzing the addition of a glucose moiety at the 2-position of DIMBOA (Fig. 1). The extraction and characterization of these glucosyltransferases is seen as an initial step in the ultimate understanding of DIMBOA synthesis in maize.

---

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Chemicals

The chemicals used were commercially available except DIMBOA, DIBOA, and their glucosides, which were extracted from seedlings of the maize inbred CI31A and Frederick rye, respectively.

### Seedling Culture

Seed of the maize (*Zea mays* L.) inbred CI31A was placed in aluminum pans lined with plastic wrap and one sheet of Whatman No. 1 filter paper. Thirty mL of 1.0 mM CaSO₄ was added to each pan with vermiculite being used to absorb

---

¹ Supported in part by funds to B. A. B. from the Food for the 21st Century fellowship program of the University of Missouri, Columbia. Cooperative investigations, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and Missouri Agricultural Experiment Station, Columbia, Missouri 65211. Journal Series No. 10485.

² Abbreviations: DIMBOA, 2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-2H-1,4-benzoxazin-3(4H)-one; DIBOA, 2,4-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one; ε₂₆₂, extinction coefficient at 262 nanometers; *k'*, capacity factor; UDPG, uridine 5'-diphosphoglucose; NEM, *N*-ethylmaleimide.

---

Figure 1. Glucosylation of hydroxamic acids utilizing UDPG as a glucose donor. DIBOA (R═H); DIMBOA (R═O—CH₃).

1071

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on February 5, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org  
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

excess moisture. The pans were covered with aluminum foil and incubated at 30°C for up to 5 d.

### Purification of Standards

DIBOA, DIMBOA, and their respective glucosides were purified using modifications of established methods. Aglycones were purified (7) by grinding seedling tissue in a mortar in distilled water and allowing the mixture to stand for 1 h after which the debris was removed by centrifugation at 26,000g for 20 min. The resulting supernatant was acidified to pH 2.0 with 6 N HCl and heated to 65°C, cooled on ice for 10 min, and centrifuged (26,000g, 20 min). This supernatant was extracted with 2.5 volumes of ethyl acetate, and the ethyl acetate was collected and evaporated under reduced pressure. The resulting brown residue was resuspended in 1 mL of acetone, to which hexane was added until it became cloudy. Amber colored crystals formed on standing overnight in the cold. At this point the isolation procedures diverged as follows: DIBOA crystals were quickly washed with a small volume of acetone, resuspended in acetone, and precipitated a second time with hexane. The resulting crystals were collected and resuspended in methanol to which activated charcoal was added to remove impurities. The charcoal was removed by centrifugation leaving the purified DIBOA in methanol which was stored at –20°C. DIMBOA crystals were collected and washed with a small volume of a chloroform:methanol mixture (9:1 v/v), suspended in acetone, and precipitated again by hexane. The fine white crystals were resuspended in methanol and stored at –20°C.

Glucosides were purified (1) by freezing the tissue with liquid nitrogen in a mortar and grinding it to a powder from which the glucosides were extracted with acetone. The debris was removed from the extract by centrifugation (26,000g, 20 min), and the supernatant evaporated leaving a thick yellow suspension in water. This suspension was spotted on freshly prepared silica gel G thin layer plates and developed in ethyl acetate:methyl ethyl ketone:formic acid:water (50:30:5:10, v/v/v/v). A portion of the chromatogram was sprayed with 10% (w/v) ferric chloride in methanolic HCl (1%) after which DIBOA glucoside (R<sub>f</sub>: 0.25) and DIMBOA glucoside (R<sub>f</sub>: 0.30) were identified as intense blue bands. Silica gel at corresponding unstained portions of the plate was removed, and the glucosides were extracted with methanol and stored at –20°C.

### Assay of Standards and Enzyme Products

A Waters<sup>3</sup> model 244 high-performance liquid chromatograph equipped with a C<sub>18</sub> μBondapak column and a model 440 absorbance detector was used to quantitate standards and reaction products. Samples were applied to the HPLC in methanol or the upper phase (methanol:water) of the Folch extraction solvent mixture (5). Samples containing DIBOA and its glucoside were eluted from the column with methanol:acetic acid:water (15:10:75) and samples containing

<sup>3</sup> Mention of trademark, proprietary product, or vendor does not constitute a guarantee or warranty by the U.S. Department of Agriculture or the University of Missouri and does not imply approval to the exclusion of other products or vendors that may also be suitable.

DIMBOA and its glucoside were eluted from the column with methanol:acetic acid:water (20:10:70). Column eluants were monitored at 280 nm.

Aglycone concentrations were determined using established extinction coefficients of ε<sub>254</sub> = 8500 for DIBOA and ε<sub>262</sub> = 10,000 for DIMBOA (9, 26). DIBOA glucoside concentrations were determined using an extinction coefficient of ε<sub>255</sub> = 8500 (9). DIMBOA glucoside was quantitated by converting it to the aglycone with β-glucosidase and quantitating the aglycone (10) as described above.

### Enzyme Extraction and Purification

CI31A seedling tissue (50–60 g) was homogenized 60 s in a precooled Waring blender with the addition of added Polyclar AT (0.3 g/g tissue) and 200 mL of extraction buffer (50 mM Hepes, 5 mM DTE [pH 7.5]). The debris was removed by filtering through Pellon followed by centrifugation (26,000g, 10 min). A portion of the crude fraction was retained for assay and the remainder precipitated with ammonium sulfate (30–60% saturation). The precipitate was collected by centrifugation (26,000g, 10 min) and resuspended in 3 mL extraction buffer.

The ammonium sulfate fraction was initially passed over a Sephadex G-200 superfine column (1.5 × 20 cm) which had been equilibrated in 20 mM Hepes, (pH 7.5) at 8°C. The protein was eluted with the equilibration buffer at a flow rate of 15 mL/h and fractions of 2.3 mL were collected and assayed for activity as described below.

Active fractions from the Sephadex G-200 were pooled and loaded onto a Q-Sepharose ion exchange column (1 × 10 cm) which had been equilibrated and washed in 20 mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.5). The protein was eluted from the column with a 0.10 to 0.25 M KCl gradient at a flow rate of 40 mL/h and fractions of 2.4 mL were collected and assayed for activity as described below.

### Mol Wt Estimation

The G-200 column previously described was standardized for mol wt determination using the marker proteins gamma globulin (160,000), albumin (67,000), and myoglobin (17,800). The ammonium sulfate fraction was applied to the column and total glucosyltransferase activity was determined for each fraction (1 mL).

### Enzyme Assay

Unless otherwise specified, the assay mixture included 20 μg of protein, 1.06 mM UDPG, 372 μM DIMBOA, and Hepes buffer (50 mM, 5 mM DTE [pH 8.2]) in a volume of 200 μL. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 5 min, at which time reactions were terminated by the addition of 0.8 mL of chloroform:methanol (2:1, v/v) + 1 % HCl. This Folch partitioning (5) extracted almost 100% of the glucoside into the upper phase as determined by HPLC analysis.

The ammonium sulfate fraction was used to determine optima for pH, temperature, and incubation time for the reaction. The pH optimum for enzyme activity was determined using a mixture of Hepes, Ches, Mes, Bicine, each at

50 mm plus 5 mm DTE. The pH was varied by 0.5 units from 6.5 to 10.0 with additional samples at pH 8.25 and 8.75. The temperature optimum was determined by assaying enzyme activity over a range of 25 to 55°C. Assay mixtures were preincubated for 5 min before initiation of the reaction by the addition of UDPG. A suitable time of incubation was determined by varying incubation time from 0.5 to 10 min. The inhibitory effect of NEM (1 mM) and EDTA (5 mM) on the DIMBOA glucosyltransferase was assayed using the ammonium sulfate fraction. N-Ethylmaleimide was added to the assay mixture with and without added DTE and EDTA without added Ca²⁺.

The effects of the reducing agents DTE, ascorbate, glutathione, and 2-mercaptoethanol and the divalent cations Ca²⁺, Cu²⁺, Fe²⁺, Mg²⁺, and Zn²⁺ on glucosyltransferase activity were determined using the Sephadex G-200 fraction. Enzyme assays were of 1 min duration and included 10 μg of protein and 5 mM reducing agent and added cation.

The hydroxamic acids DIMBOA and DIBOA, the flavonoid quercetin, and the coumarin derivative esculatin were considered as possible substrates for glucosylation using the Q-Sepharose fractions. DIMBOA, DIBOA, quercetin, and esculatin were included in the assays at concentrations of 1.08, 0.97, 0.83, and 1.0 mM, respectively. Isoquercetin, the glucoside of quercetin, was identified and quantitated as previously described (6), and esculin, the glucoside of esculatin, was identified and quantitated using the same system as previously described for DIBOA.

Michaelis-Menten constants (Km) were determined by the intercept replot method (18) where UDPG was used as the glucose donor with either DIBOA or DIMBOA using the Q-Sepharose fractions. The substrate levels for UDPG, DIMBOA and DIBOA ranged from 0.067 to 1.0 mM. The initial intercepts were plotted against the reciprocal of the substrate concentrations to determine the respective Km values.

### Developmental Curve

Glucosyltransferase activity and DIMBOA concentrations were determined for the inbreds CI31A, Mo17, and OH43 using dry seed and 1 to 5 d old seedlings. A seedling consisted of the developing roots and shoots minus the scutellum. Individual seedlings were ground in a mortar in Hepes buffer (50 mM, 5 mM DTE [pH 7.5]) and filtered and centrifuged to yield a supernatant that contained the enzyme and the DIMBOA glucosides. One portion of the supernatant was permitted to stand for 15 min to allow hydrolysis of the DIMBOA glucoside by in situ β-glucosidases. This latter portion of the supernatant was then acidified to pH 2.0 with HCl and extracted with 5 mL of ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate was evaporated in a boiling water bath under nitrogen and the residue suspended in methanol and the DIMBOA concentration determined by HPLC.

Enzyme activity is expressed as nmol of product formed per min and specific activity as nmol of product formed per min per mg of protein, or per seedling in the developmental experiments. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method (2) using bovine serum albumin (fraction V) as a standard.

---

### RESULTS

#### Identification of Standards

The identity of DIBOA and DIMBOA was verified by several criteria including reaction with FeCl₃ to produce a blue complex and the UV spectra observed. The spectra for DIBOA, λmax(H₂O) 253 and 280 nm, and for DIMBOA, λmax(H₂O) 262 nm and a shoulder at 285 nm, are comparable to published data (9, 22). When subjected to HPLC, one major peak was observed for DIBOA yielding a k′ of 1.33 and one for DIMBOA with a k′ of 2.01. Heating DIMBOA at 100°C for 15 min resulted in the production of a compound which eluted at the same time as commercially available MBOA which is the breakdown product of DIMBOA. When the major peaks were collected and exposed to direct probe mass spectrometry analysis, the ionization patterns were as follows: DIBOA m/e 181 (36%), 135 (57%), 108 (42%), and 79 (100%), and DIMBOA m/e 211 (10%), 195 (42%), 193 (9%), 165 (100%), and 150 (40%), which correspond to the expected respective structures.

The glucosides were identified based on their reaction to form a blue complex with FeCl₃ on TLC, their UV spectra which are similar to the aglycones, and our ability to react the compounds with β-glucosidase to release the aglycones. The glucosides of DIBOA and DIMBOA eluted from the HPLC column just prior to their aglycones having capacity factors of 1.0 and 1.7, respectively.

#### Enzyme Extraction and Purification

Column chromatography resulted in a 13-fold purification of the enzyme (Table I). The Sephadex G-200 column maintained activity while increasing the specific activity five-fold, whereas the Q-Sepharose column doubled the specific activity but only half of the applied activity was recovered. The activity eluted from the Q-Sepharose column in two peaks (peak 1 at 0.17 M and peak 2 at 0.22 M KCl) that were of near equal total activity (Fig. 2).

#### Mol Wt Estimation

The coefficient of determination for the mol wt standard curve was 0.996. In repeated determinations the glucosyltransferase activity was consistent.

---

### Table I. Purification of Uridine Diphosphoglucose:DIMBOA Glucosyltransferase from Maize Seedlings

| Purification         | Total Activity | Specific Activity | Enrichment | Yield |
|----------------------|----------------|--------------------|------------|-------|
|                     | units          | units/mg protein   | X-fold     | %     |
| Crude               | 9660           | 96.0               | 1.0        | 100   |
| Ammonium sulfate    | 8460           | 132.0              | 1.4        | 88    |
| Sephadex G-200      | 7020           | 510.0              | 5.3        | 73    |
| Sepharose Q         |                |                    |            |       |
| Peak 1 (0.17 M KCl) | 1740           | 1028.0             | 11.4       | 18    |
| Peak 2 (0.22 M KCl) | 1680           | 1362.0             | 14.1       | 17    |
| Peak 1 + peak 2     | 3420           | 1218.0             | 12.7       | 35    |

* A unit of activity is equal to the transformation of 1 nmol of substrate per minute.

Figure 2. Q-Sepharose chromatography. KCl gradient (A); Elution profile (B), (O—O), glucosyltransferase activity; (……), protein concentration.

ferase activity eluted as a single peak from Sephadex G-200 with an estimated mol wt of 50,000 (Fig. 3).

### Optimum Assay Conditions

The pH optimum for the transferase was found to be 8.5 and to decrease to 70% of optimum as the pH was adjusted to 8.0 and 9.0. Activity was 10% of optimum at pH 6.5 and 30% of optimum at pH 10.0. The temperature optimum for enzyme activity was 45°C and decreased to 88% of optimum for 37 and 55°C and 60% of optimum at 25°C. Activity responded linearly with time for 5 min (activity = 2.0 nmol/min) and showed only a slight decrease at 10 min (activity = 1.7 nmol/min).

Enzyme extracted without reducing agent was totally inactive. The inclusion of NEM (1 mM) in the assays minus DTE resulted in a 96% decrease in activity (Table II), but when DTE was included in the assay, the inhibitory effect of NEM was totally alleviated. Addition of the cation scavenger, EDTA resulted in a decrease of 16% in activity.

The addition of Mg²⁺ or Ca²⁺ to the assay enhanced enzyme activity approximately 30% (Table II). The optimum concentration for Ca²⁺ was determined to be 7.5 mM. The remaining metal cations reduced activity with Fe²⁺ and Cu²⁺ showing almost total inhibition of the activity. All the reducing agents that were assayed enhanced activity with DTE providing the greatest benefit (96%) and ascorbate the least (42%).

Enzyme eluting from the Q-Sepharose column in peak 1 had activities of 8.08, 0.29, 0.21, and 0 nmol/min for the substrates DIMBOA, DIBOA, quercetin, and esculetin, re-

---

Figure 3. Mol wt determination by Sephadex G-200 filtration. A, Mol wt (MW) estimation; a, γ-globulin (160,000); b, albumin (67,000); c, glucosyltransferase (estimated MW 50,000); d, myoglobin (17,800). B, Elution profile; (●—●), glucosyltransferase activity; (——), protein concentration.

| Addition          | Concentration (mM) | Activity (% control) |
|-------------------|--------------------|----------------------|
| EDTA (–CaCl₂)     | 5.0                | 83                   |
| NEM (+DTE)        | 1.0                | 102                  |
| NEM (–DTE)        | 1.0                | 4                    |
| CaCl₂             | 5.0                | 131                  |
| CuCl₂             | 5.0                | 3                    |
| FeSO₄             | 5.0                | 5                    |
| MgCl₂             | 5.0                | 130                  |
| ZnCl₂             | 5.0                | 45                   |
| Ascorbate         | 5.0                | 142                  |
| DTE               | 5.0                | 196                  |
| Glutathione       | 5.0                | 192                  |
| β-Mercaptoethanol | 5.0                | 179                  |

respectively. Enzyme eluting in peak 2 had activities of 6.41 and 3.67 nmol/min on DIMBOA and DIBOA, respectively, and had no detectable activity on quercetin and esculetin.

### Enzyme Kinetics

The *K*ₘ values for DIMBOA were similar for the enzymes

from the two Q-Sepharose peaks. The \( K_m \) values for DIMBOA were 217 and 174 \(\mu\)M for peak 1 and peak 2, respectively, and the \( K_m \) values for UDPG were 286 \(\mu\)M for peak 1 and 200 \(\mu\)M for peak 2. The peak 2 enzyme had a \( K_m \) of 638 \(\mu\)M for DIBOA and 280 \(\mu\)M for UDPG when DIBOA was the hydroxamic acid substrate. The activity of peak 1 on DIBOA was too low to determine a valid \( K_m \) value.

### Developmental Curve

The enzyme activity and DIMBOA accumulation patterns were similar in all three inbreds evaluated; such results for the inbred OH43 are presented in Figure 4. Total activity per seedling increased steadily reaching a high of 154 nmol/min at 4 d. DIMBOA accumulated steadily from 2 through 5 d, whereas seedling fresh weight increased at a progressively higher rate beginning with imbibition and continuing through the 5 d study.

---

### DISCUSSION

The presence of DIMBOA and its contribution to resistance to the corn borer in the young maize plant is a long-established fact (13). The existence of DIMBOA in the glucosidic form was established in 1959 (25). However, little information about the biosynthesis of these compounds has been established since that time. This report is concerned with the extraction and partial purification and characterization of enzymes that catalyze the addition of glucose at the 2-position of DIMBOA. Two distinct enzymes are identified based on their separation by Q-Sepharose chromatography and substrate specificity differences. Our data confirm the presence of DIMBOA and its glucoside in the maize plant and relate the accumulation of these compounds to the development of the young maize plant. Assay of the enzymes was complicated by the instability of DIMBOA at the optimum pH and temperature for the reaction and also by the breakdown of DIMBOA in the presence of reducing agent (19, 26). These problems were alleviated by adjustment of the temperature and pH to 8.2 and 37°C and using short incubation times. The properties of the DIMBOA glucosyltransferases are quite similar to those of glucosyltransferase from other plant species (4, 15), yet the enzymes described here are different from those transferases. The enzyme eluting initially from the Q-Sepharse column had a small amount of activity on the flavonoid quercetin. In subsequent experiments three separate transferase activity peaks were detected when the Q-Sepharose eluate was assayed with DIMBOA and quercetin as substrates. The first and last peaks were the result of glucosylation of DIMBOA and an intermediate peak was the glucosylation of quercetin. There was minimal overlap between the three peaks (our unpublished data). This information suggests that the DIMBOA transferases are different from the flavonoid glucosyltransferases.

The isolation of DIMBOA glucosyltransferases marks the first enzymic activity in the biosynthesis of DIMBOA glucoside to be studied in a cell-free preparation. This should open the way to further elucidation of this pathway and perhaps to the utilization of modern day molecular biology methods to prolong and/or increase synthesis of DIMBOA in the maize plant and reduce crop losses due to corn borer and other insect damage.

---

### LITERATURE CITED

1. Baker EA, Smith IM (1977) Antifungal compounds in winter wheat resistant and susceptible to *Septoria nodorum*. Ann Appl Biol 87: 67–73
2. Bradford M (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 72: 248–254
3. Corcuera LJ, Woodward MD, Helgeson JP, Kelman A, Upper CD (1978) 2,4-Dihydroxy-7-methoxy-2H-1,4-benzoxain-3(4H)-one, an inhibitor from *Zea mays* with differential activity against soft rotting *Erwinia* species. Plant Physiol 61: 791–795
4. Ebel J, Hahlbrock K (1982) Biosynthesis. In JB Harborne, TJ Mabry, eds, The Flavonoids. Chapman & Hall, London, pp 641–679
5. Folch J, Less M, Sloane-Stanley GH (1957) A simple method for the isolation and purification of total lipids from animal tissue. J Biol Chem 26: 497–509
6. Gerates A, Bussard J, Coe E Jr, Larson R (1984) Influence of B and Pl on UDPG:Flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase in *Zea mays* L. Biochem Genet 22: 1161–1169
7. Gutierrez C, Guerrero A, Castanera P, Torres JV (1982) A high performance liquid chromatographic method for quantitation of DIMBOA and MBOA in maize plant extracts. J Agric Food Chem 30: 1258–1260
8. Hamilton RH (1964) Tolerance of several grass species to 2-chloro-s-triazine herbicides in relation to degradation and content of benzoxazinone derivatives. J Agric Food Chem 12: 14–17
9. Hietala P, Virtanen A (1960) Precursors of benzoxazolinone in rye plants. II. Precursor I, the glucoside. ACTA Chem Scand 14: 502–504
10. Hofman J, Hofmanova O (1969) 1,4-Benzoxazine derivatives in plants sephadex fractionation and identification of a new glucoside. Eur J Biochem 8: 109–112
11. Klun JA (1970) Relation of chemical analysis for DIMBOA and visual resistance rating for first-brood corn borer. Proc Corn Sorghum Res Conf 24: 55–60
12. Klun JA, Robinson JF (1969) Concentration of two 1,4-benzoxazinones in dent corn at various stages of development of the

---

**Figure 4. Comparison between glucosyltransferase activity (O—O), DIMBOA accumulation (□---□), and seedling fresh weight (●—●) in maize seedlings.**

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on February 5, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org  
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

plant and its relation to resistance of the host plant to the
European corn borer. J Econ Entomol 62: 214–220

13. Klun JA, Tipton CL, Brindley TA (1967) 2,4-dihydroxy-7-meth-
oxy-1,4-, in benzoxazin-3-one (DIMBOA), an active agent in
the resistance of maize to the European corn borer. J Econ
Entomol 60: 1529–1533

14. Klun JA, Tipton CL, Robinson JF, Ostrem DM, Beroza M
(1970) Isolation and identification of 6,7-dimethoxy-2-benzox-
azolinone from dried tissues of Zea mays (L.) and evidence of
its cyclic hydroxamic acid precursor. J Agric Food Chem 18:
663–665

15. Larson RL (1971) Glucosylation of quercetin by a maize pollen
enzyme. Phytochemistry 10: 3073–3076

16. Long BJ, Dunn GM, Routley DG (1975) Relationship of hydrox-
amic acid content in maize and resistance to northern corn
leaf blight. Crop Sci 15: 333–335

17. Long BJ, Dunn GM, Bowman JS, Routley DG (1977) Relation-
ship of hydroxamic acid content in corn and resistance to the
corn leaf aphid. Crop Sci 17: 55–58

18. Mahler HJ, Cordes EH (1966) Enzyme kinetics. *In* Biological
Chemistry. Harper and Row, New York, pp 219–277

19. Niemeyer HM, Corcuera LJ, Perez FJ (1982) Reaction of a
cyclic hydroxamic acid from Gramineae with thiols. Phyto-
chemistry 21: 2287–2289

20. Reimann JE, Byerrum RU (1964) Studies on the biosynthesis

of 2,4-dihydroxy-2H-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one. Biochemistry 3:
847–851

21. Scriber JM, Tingey WM, Gracen VE, Sullivan SL (1975) Leaf-
feeding resistance to the European corn borer in genotypes of
tropical (low DIMBOA) and U.S. inbred (high DIMBOA)
maize. J Econ Entomol 68: 823–826

22. Tipton C, Klun J, Husted R, Pierson M (1967) Cyclic hydroxamic
acids and related compounds from maize. Isolation and char-
acterization. Biochemistry 6: 2866–2870

23. Tipton CL, Wang M-C, Tsao FH-C, Tu C-L, Husted RR (1973)
Biosynthesis of 1-4-benzoxazin-3-ones in *Zea mays*. Phyto-
chemistry 12: 347–352

24. Virtanen AI, Hietala PK, Wahlroos O (1957) Antimicrobial
substances in cereals and fodder plants. Arch Biochem Biophys
69: 486–500

25. Wahlroos O, Virtanen AI (1959) The precursors of 6-methoxy-
benzoxazolinone in maize and wheat plants, their isolation
and some of their properties. ACTA Chem Scand 13: 1906–
1908

26. Woodward MD, Corcuera LJ, Helgeson JP, Upper CD (1979)
Decomposition of 2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-2H-1,4-benzoxa-
zin-3(4H)-one in aqueous solutions. Plant Physiol 61: 796–802

27. Woodward MD, Corcuera LJ, Helgeson JP, Kelman A, Upper
CD (1979) Quantitation of 1,4-benzoxazin-3-ones in maize by
gas-liquid chromatography. Plant Physiol 63: 14–19
