
J Gastroenterol 2006; 41:185–192  
DOI 10.1007/s00535-006-1801-6  

**Review**

# Colorectal cancer: genetics of development and metastasis

**TETSUJI TAKAYAMA, KOJI MIYANISHI, TSUYOSHI HAYASHI, YASUSHI SATO, and YOSHIRO NIITSU**

Fourth Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, School of Medicine, South-1, West-16, Chuou-ku, Sapporo 060–8543, Japan

It has been well documented that there are two major pathways in colorectal carcinogenesis. One is the chromosomal instability pathway (adenoma-carcinoma sequence), which is characterized by allelic losses on chromosome 5q (APC), 17p (p53), and 18q (DCC/SMAD4), and the other is a pathway that involves microsatellite instability. Recent progress in molecular biology, however, has shown that colorectal carcinogenesis is not necessarily clearly divided into these two pathways, but is in fact more complicated. Other routes, including the transforming growth factor-β/SMAD pathway, the serrated pathway, and the epigenetic pathway, have been reported. Cross talk among these pathways has also been reported. In the invasion and metastasis steps of colorectal cancers, many more genes have now been identified as being involved in proteolysis, adhesion, angiogenesis, and cell growth. Recently accumulated evidence indicates that colorectal cancer is a genetically heterogeneous and complicated disease.

Key words: colorectal cancer, chromosomal instability, microsatellite instability, metastasis

---

## Introduction

It is now generally accepted that colorectal cancer develops by genetic alterations. Analysis of the molecular mechanism makes it possible to develop a more targeted approach to prevention and treatment of this cancer. There are two major pathways in colorectal carcinogenesis. One is the chromosomal instability pathway (adenoma-carcinoma sequence), which is characterized by allelic losses, and the other is a pathway involving microsatellite instability (MSI). However, recent studies have suggested that colorectal carcinogenesis is not necessarily clearly divided into these two pathways. Other routes, including the serrated and epigenetic pathways, have been reported. There is also some cross talk among these pathways. Moreover, in the progression and metastasis steps of colorectal cancers, many more gene alterations are involved.

In this review, we describe the latest molecular biology of carcinogenesis and metastasis in colorectal cancers.

### Chromosomal instability pathway

Fearon and Vogelstein<sup>1</sup> proposed a multistep model of colorectal carcinogenesis, in which mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene occur early during the development of polyps, *K-ras* mutations arise during the adenomatous stage, and mutations of p53 and deletions on chromosome 18q occur concurrently with the transition to malignancy. This pathway is characterized by allelic losses on chromosome 5q (APC), 7p (p53), and 18q (DCC/SMAD4), and is therefore called the chromosomal instability (CIN) pathway. One of the cornerstones of the CIN pathway is the model represented by familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), in which multiple small adenomas form as a result of initiation of tumorigenesis, namely, two hits in the APC gene, followed by mutations of *K-ras*, and subsequently mutations of p53 and deletion on chromosome 18q. It has been surmised that this same mechanism is also applicable to sporadic colorectal carcinogenesis. The genes that have been reported to be involved in this pathway are listed in Table 1.

#### APC/β-catenin

APC is a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 5q whose germline mutation is responsible for FAP.<sup>2,3</sup> APC

Table 1. Oncogene genes and tumor suppressor genes in colorectal cancers

| Gene                     | Chromosomal location | Prevalence of mutation (%) | Function of Gene product                                                                 | References |
|--------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| Tumor suppressor genes   |                     |                           |                                                                                         |            |
| APC                      | 5q21                | 34–72                     | Inhibition of cell growth via β-catenin degradation                                       | 8–11       |
| P53                      | 17p12               | 40–50                     | G1 cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis induction                                                | 18–21      |
| SMAD                     | 18q21               | 16–25                     | Growth arrest via p15 and p21 induction                                                 | 53–55      |
| DCC                      | 18q21               | 6                         | Binding to netrin                                                                      | 34         |
| Oncogenes                |                     |                           |                                                                                         |            |
| K-ras                    | 12p12               | 40–65                     | Growth promotion via RAF/MAPK, JNK, and PI3-K                                           | 15, 23–24  |
| β-catenin                | 31q21               | 5                         | Transcription of growth promoting genes (cyclin D1, c-myc, etc.)                          | 12         |

APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; DCC, deleted in colorectal cancer

T. Takayama et al.: Genetics of colorectal cancer

heterozygous for \( DCC \) have been reported to lack the tumor predisposition phenotype. \({ }^{33}\) Moreover, other tumor suppressor genes, including \( SMAD4/2 \), have been reported on 18q. \({ }^{34,35}\) In particular, \( SMAD4 \) is currently a candidate gene because the inactivation of \( SMAD4 \) has been causally associated with progression of cancers. The detailed role of \( DCC \) in colorectal cancers needs further study.

### Microsatellite instability pathway

Microsatellite instability (MSI) is characterized by expansions or contractions in the number of tandem repeats of simple DNA sequences (microsatellites). MSI has been identified in colorectal cancer associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome, \({ }^{36-38}\) and DNA mismatch repair (MMR) enzymes, including hMSH2, hMLH1, hPMS1, hPMS2, and hMSH6, have since been shown to be responsible for MSI. \({ }^{39-43}\) Moreover, mutations in microsatellites of target genes such as the transforming growth factor-β (\( TGF-\beta \)) gene (Table 2) have also been identified in MSI positive tumors. \({ }^{44-50}\) Interestingly, MSI is also present in sporadic colorectal cancers: MSI-H (high-frequency MSI) is present in 10%–20% and MSI-L (low-frequency MSI) in 5%–50% of such cancers. In approximately 80% of MSI-H sporadic colorectal cancers, hypermethylation of the \( hMLH1 \) promoter is observed. \({ }^{51}\) Sporadic cancers with the MSI-H phenotype demonstrate distinct clinicopathological features compared with MSS (microsatellite stable) or MSI-L tumors, occurring predominantly in the proximal colon and more frequently in women than in men. \({ }^{52}\) These cancers are also characterized by distinct histopathological features, including mucinous or signet-ring cell differentiation, medullary features, and excess lymphocyte infiltrations. However, neither MSI-L nor MSS tumors demonstrate such characteristic features. Moreover, MSI-L and MSS tumors more frequently have \( K-ras \) and \( p53 \) mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 5q, 19p, and 18q. Therefore, it is still controversial whether MSI-L and MSS tumors are really different from each other. There is a possibility that MSI-L tumors develop and progress in association with both the MSI and CIN pathways. In addition, approximately 30%–40% of sporadic MSI-H cancers have \( APC \) mutations. Similarly, approximately 36% of sporadic MSI-H cancers have \( p53 \) mutations. Thus, a subset of colorectal cancers develop in association with both MSI and \( APC \) or \( p53 \) mutations.

#### TGF-β/SMAD signaling pathway

The TGF-β/SMAD signaling pathway is composed of TGF-β receptor type I (TGFβRI) and type II (TGFβRII) and SMAD proteins. When TGF-β binds to TGFβRII, which then complexes with TGFβRI, TGFβRI phosphorylates SMAD2, which binds to SMAD4. This complex translocates into the nucleus and induces the Cdk inhibitors, p15 and p21, leading to growth arrest. Mutations leading to the inactivation of the \( SMAD4 \) gene have been found in 16%–25% of colorectal cancer cases. \({ }^{53-55}\) Alterations of SMAD2 have been identified in 6% of cases. \({ }^{34}\) In contrast, a \( TGF\beta RII \) mutation is frequently identified in the 10-bp polyA tract in MSI-positive tumors. \({ }^{44}\) In MSI-positive tumors without the \( TGF\beta RII \) mutation, mutations of the IGF-II receptor have been frequently identified. \({ }^{45}\) Both \( TGF\beta RII \) mutation and SMAD mutation are reported to occur with the same timing during carcinogenesis, at the transition from adenoma to carcinoma.

Recently, studies suggesting cross talk between the TGF-β and Wnt signal pathways have attracted much attention. A direct physical interaction between TGF-β and Wnt pathway components has been reported. That is, the TGF-β and Wnt pathways synergistically promote carcinogenesis of colorectal cancers through direct interaction of SMAD proteins and LEF-1. \({ }^{56}\) Moreover, in heterozygote mice of both \( APC \) and

---

**Table 2. Target genes of MSI in colorectal cancer**

| Gene      | DNA repetitive sequence (nucleotides) | HNPCC | Sporadic MSI positive tumor | Function of the gene products | References |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|-------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------|------------|
| \( TGF\beta RII \) | \( (A)_{10} (709-718) \)          | 75–83 | 80–90                       | Inhibition of cell growth     | 44         |
| BAX       | \( (G)_{8} (114-121) \)              | 50–55 | 11–50                       | Induction of apoptosis        | 45         |
| IGFIIR    | \( (G)_{8} (4089-4096) \)            | 13    | 9                            | Growth promotion              | 46         |
| \( hMSH6 \) | \( (C)_{8} (3049-3056) \)           | 33    | 25–36                       | Mismatch repair enzyme        | 47         |
| \( hMSH3 \) | \( (A)_{8} (1141-1148) \)           | 50–58 | 35–46                       | Mismatch repair enzyme        | 48         |
| PTEN      | \( (A)_{6} (795-800) \)              | —     | 18.8                        | Inhibition of cell growth     | 49         |
| E2F-4     | \( (CAG)_{13} (918-956) \)           | 71    | 42–57                       | Progression of cell-cycle     | 50         |

TGFβRII, TGF-β receptor II; IGFIIR, IGF-II receptor; MSI, microsatellite instability; HNPCC, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer

Table 3. Gene alterations in serrated and classical adenoma

| Gene       | Serrated adenomas (%) | Classical adenomas (%) | References |
|------------|-----------------------|------------------------|------------|
| K-ras      | 15–20                 | 15–68                  | 58, 60     |
| APC        | 0–20                  | 30–70                  | 58         |
| p53        | 5–8                   | 0–25                   | 58, 60     |
| MSI        |                       |                        |            |
| MSI-H      | 17–21                 | 5                      | 58, 59     |
| MSI-L      | 5–50                  | 11                     | 58, 59, 62 |

MSI-H, high-frequency microsatellite instability; MSI-L, low-frequency microsatellite instability

SMAD4 genes, intestinal polyps develop into more malignant tumors compared with those of APC alone. Thus, one signaling pathway is coordinately associated with another signaling pathway in the process of carcinogenesis.

### Serrated pathway

Recently, the potential role of serrated adenomas and hyperplastic polyps in the genesis of colorectal cancer has gained considerable attention. Serrated adenomas are histologically defined as adenomas that have the morphological features of hyperplastic polyps but which also contain cytological features of conventional adenomas. It has been reported that 30%–50% of serrated adenomas display MSI, mostly at a low level (MSI-L), whereas they show a low rate of K-ras and APC mutations (Table 3). In serrated adenomas with the MSI-H phenotype, aberrant methylation [CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)] of the hMLH-1 gene, and loss of its expression have been frequently noted. Moreover, mutations of the same target genes as those in MSI-H cancers, for example, TGFβRII, BAX, and IGFIIIR, have also been reported. The genetic alterations of p53 are still controversial. However, several recent studies have shown low incidences of p53 mutations, similar to those in classical adenoma. Thus, evidence of the MSI-H serrated pathway in colorectal cancers has accumulated. Regarding serrated adenoma with the MSI-L phenotype, expression of the DNA repair gene O-6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) has been reported to be lost by methylation. However, details remain unclear.

### Epigenetic mechanism of colon carcinogenesis

Recent molecular biology studies have revealed that an epigenetic mechanism plays an important role in colorectal carcinogenesis. CpG-rich regions located at the 5′ end of coding sequences can undergo hypermethylation, leading to the silencing of the gene.

Cancers demonstrating methylation and silencing of multiple genes are described as CIMP positive. The hMLH1 gene is a frequent target of hypermethylation, which leads to the MSI-H phenotype, as described above. Many genes other than hMLH1, including p16INK4A, MGMT, estrogen receptor (ER), APC, and COX-2, have been reported to undergo hypermethylation and silencing in human colorectal cancers. Recently colorectal adenomas, in particular, villous and tubulovillous adenomas as well as cancers, have been reported to show CIMP.

#### Genes related to invasion and metastasis

The conventional paradigm of invasion and metastasis of colorectal cancer consists of a complex series of steps, including proteolysis of the local extracellular matrix (ECM), adhesion, angiogenesis, dissemination, and cell growth. Many gene alterations are complexly involved in these processes (Table 4).

#### Genes for proteolysis

In the proteolysis step, proteinases, which are produced by cancer cells or fibroblasts, degrade ECM components and enable cancer cells to detach from the primary site. Of the many kinds of proteinases, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which currently are known to comprise more than 25 enzymes, appear to exert a dominant effect. MMPs are collectively able to degrade virtually all ECM components, that is, collagens, laminin, fibronectin, enactin, and proteoglycans. In particular, MMP-7 (matryllysins) is reported to play an important role in the degradation of ECM. Matryllysins is overexpressed in the majority of colorectal cancers, and its expression is positively correlated with metastatic potential. MMPs other than matryllysins, including collagenases, gelatinases, and stromelysin, are also reported to be involved in proteolysis of ECM. On the other hand, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase (TIMP) in colorectal cancer tissues protect against ECM degradation.

T. Takayama et al.: Genetics of colorectal cancer

Table 4. Genes related to invasion and metastasis in colorectal cancers

| Genes | Characters of gene products | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Genes for proteolysis** |  |  |
| MMP-7 (matrylisin) | Digestion of fibronectin, laminin, collagen IV, and proteoglycans | 65, 71 |
| MMP-2, -9 (gelatinases) | Digestion of gelatins and collagen IV | 66, 68 |
| MMP-1, -8, -13 (collagenases) | Digestion of collagens I, II, III, IV, VI, IX, X, and XI | 66, 67 |
| MMP-3 (stromelysin-1) | Digestion of fibronectin and laminin | 70 |
| TIMP-1 | Tissue inhibitors of MMP | 72 |
| uPAR | Activation of plasmin-plasminogen system | 73 |
| **Genes for adhesion** |  |  |
| Integrins | Binding to laminin, collagen, fibronectin, and vitronectin | 74, 75 |
| Cadherins | Cell-cell adhesion | 76, 77 |
| CD44 | Binding to hyaluronan | 78 |
| CEA | Binding to a receptor on Kupffer cells | 79–81 |
| **Genes for angiogenesis** |  |  |
| VEGF | Angiogenesis, MMP-9 induction | 82, 84–88 |
| PD-ECGF | Angiogenesis | 83 |
| **Genes for cell survival and others** |  |  |
| TRAIL-R | Binding to TRAIL to induce apoptosis | 89–93 |
| CXCR4 | Binding to SDF-1 to enhance migration and invasiveness | 94, 95 |
| Drg-1 | Cell differentiation | 96 |
| c-Met | Binding to HGF to enhance motility and invasiveness | 97, 98 |

MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase; uPAR, urokinase plasminogen activator receptor; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; PD-ECGF, platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor; TRAIL, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand; TRAIL-R, TRAIL receptor; SDF, stromal cell-derived factor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor

plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) is another factor that has been implicated in this process. ${ }^{73}$

**Genes for adhesion**

Many adhesion molecules, including integrins, cadherins, selectins, CD44, ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), have been identified in colorectal cancers. ${ }^{74-82}$ For example, integrins can bind many ECM molecules, such as laminin, collagen, fibronectin, and vitronectin. Cancer cells expressing these adhesion molecules are more likely to adhere to the ECM, leading to subsequent invasion and metastasis.

E-cadherin is a cell-cell adhesion molecule that participates in a homotypic, calcium-dependent interaction to form an epithelial adherens junction. The invasive-ness and metastatic potential of a broad range of cancers are often associated with downregulation of E-cadherin expression. ${ }^{76}$ Previously, we also reported that expression of E-cadherin is inversely correlated with tumor aggressiveness. ${ }^{77}$ CEA, a well-known human tumor marker, has also been reported to function as an intercellular adhesion molecule. ${ }^{79-81}$ It is well documented that CEA expression is positively correlated with liver metastasis. However, the CEA receptor molecule and the mechanism of their binding are not yet clarified.

**Genes for angiogenesis**

Angiogenesis is an important step in the outgrowth of a primary tumor and also provides a source for hematogenous dissemination, progression, and metastasis. Many potential angiogenic factors have been characterized, including VEGF and platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PD-ECGF). ${ }^{82,83}$ Of these factors, VEGF is the most important, and it has been well examined for its role in the invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Currently, six VEGF molecules (VEGF A-F), are known, and they induce angiogenesis by acting as highly specific mitogens for endothelial cells. Signal transduction involves binding to tyrosine kinase receptors (VEGF receptors; VEGFR) and results in endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and new vessel formation, as well as increased vascular permeability. ${ }^{84,85}$ This process is also closely associated with other signal transductions such as mitogen-activated protein kinase. ${ }^{86}$ Colorectal cancers with increased VEGF expression are well known to be associated with a poor prognosis. ${ }^{87,88}$

**Genes related to cell growth and evasion of the immune system**

Only a small population of tumor cells lodged in distant organs have the ability to survive, grow, and evade the immune system. Many molecular factors are involved in this process (Table 4). For instance, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), a mem-

ber of the TNF family, is known to be expressed in human hepatic NK cells. 89,90 Recent studies have revealed that a tumor cell that expresses TRAIL receptor 1 (TRAIL-R1) or 2 (TRAIL-R2) is destroyed by NK cells through apoptosis in the liver, whereas a tumor cell expressing TRAIL receptor 3 (TRAIL-R3) or 4 (TRAIL-R4) can survive by resisting apoptosis. 91,92 Patients with colorectal cancers with high TRAIL-R1 expression have been reported show a significantly poorer prognosis than those with low TRAIL-R1 expression. 93

The gene for chemokine receptor CXCR4, whose ligand is the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor (SDF-1) has also been reported to be involved in metastasis of colorectal cancers. 94 There is growing evidence that CXCR4 and SDF-1 regulate migration and metastasis of cancer cells. Zeelenberg et al. 95 reported that CXCR4-deficient colon cancer cells did not proliferate but stayed as single cells in the liver, although the control cells grew there, indicating that CXCR4 plays an important role after the cancer cells colonize the liver. It has also been reported that other genes such as Drg-I and c-Met play a role in this process of metastasis. 96–98

The gene alterations involved in invasion and metastasis occur by various mechanisms, including chromosomal instability, MSI, and promoter methylation.

### Epilogue

Rapid advances are being achieved in the understanding of the molecular genetics and epigenetics of colorectal cancers. Accumulating evidence has shown that colorectal cancer is heterogeneous and complex. However, we believe that detailed genetic and molecular biological analyses of colorectal cancer will contribute to its prevention and diagnosis and to effective therapeutics in the future.

### References

1. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759–67.
2. Nishisho I, Nakamura Y, Miyoshi Y, Miki Y, Ando H, Horii A, et al. Mutations of chromosome 5q21 genes in FAP and colorectal cancer patients. Science 1991;253:665–9.
3. Kinzler KW, Nilbert MC, Su LK, Vogelstein B, Bryan TM, Levy DB, et al. Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 1991;253:661–5.
4. Su LK, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Association of the APC tumor suppressor protein with catenins. Science 1993;262:1734–7.
5. Rubinfeld B, Souza B, Albert I, Muller O, Chamberlain SH, Masiarz FR, et al. Association of the APC gene product with beta-catenin. Science 1993;262:1731–4.
6. Behrens J, Jerchow BA, Wurtele M, Grimm J, Asbrand C, Wirtz R, et al. Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with beta-catenin, APC, and GSK3beta. Science 1998;280:596–9.
7. Miyaki M, Konishi M, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, Enomoto M, Igari T, Tanaka K, et al. Characteristics of somatic mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in colorectal tumors. Cancer Res 1994;54:3011–20.
8. De Filippo C, Luceri C, Caderni G, Pacini M, Messerini L, Biggeri A, et al. Mutations of the APC gene in human sporadic colorectal cancers. Scand J Gastroenterol 2002;37:1048–53.
9. Diergaarde B, van Geloof WL, van Muijen GN, Kok FJ, Kampman E. Dietary factors and the occurrence of truncating APC mutations in sporadic colon carcinomas: a Dutch population-based study. Carcinogenesis 2003;24:283–90.
10. Powell SM, Zilz N, Beazer-Barclay Y, Bryan TM, Hamilton SR, Thibodeau SN, et al. APC mutations occur early during colorectal tumorigenesis. Nature 1992;359:235–7.
11. Cottrell S, Bicknell D, Kaklamani L, Bodmer WF. Molecular analysis of APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis and sporadic colon carcinomas. Lancet 1992;340:626–30.
12. Sparks AB, Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Mutational analysis of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:1130–4.
13. Umetani N, Sasaki S, Masaki T, Watanabe T, Matsuda K, Muto T. Involvement of APC and K-ras mutation in non-polypoid colorectal tumorigenesis. Br J Cancer 2000;82:9–15.
14. Takayama T, Katsuki S, Takahashi Y, Ohi M, Nojiri S, Sakamaki S, et al. Aberrant crypt foci of the colon as precursors of adenoma and cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1277–84.
15. Takayama T, Ohi M, Hayashi T, Miyanishi K, Nobuoka A, Nakajima T, et al. Analysis of K-ras, APC and β-catenin in aberrant crypt foci in patients with adenoma and cancer, and familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology 2001;121:599–611.
16. Otori K, Konishi M, Sugiyama K, Hasebe T, Shimoda T, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, et al. Infrequent somatic mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in aberrant crypt foci of human colon tissue. Cancer 1998;83:896–900.
17. Iacopetta B. TP53 mutation in colorectal cancer. Hum Mutat 2003;21:271–6.
18. Beroud C, Soussi T. The UMD-p53 database: new mutations and analysis tools. Hum Mutat 2003;21:176–81.
19. Baker SJ, Fearon ER, Nigro JM, Hamilton SR, Preisinger AC, Jessup JM, et al. Chromosome 17 deletions and p53 gene mutations in colorectal carcinomas. Science 1989;244:217–21.
20. Hamelin R, Laurent-Puig P, Olschwang S, Jego N, Asselain B, Remvikos Y, et al. Association of p53 mutations with short survival in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1994;106:42–8.
21. Russo A, Bazan V, Iacopetta B, Kerr D, Soussi T, Gebbia N, TP53-CRC Collaborative Study Group. The TP53 colorectal cancer international collaborative study on the prognostic and predictive significance of p53 mutation: influence of tumor site, type of mutation, and adjuvant treatment. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:7518–28.
22. McLellan EA, Owen RA, Stepniewska KA, Sheffield JP, Lemoine NR. High frequency of K-ras mutations in sporadic colorectal adenomas. Gut 1993;34:392–6.
23. Ando M, Maruyama M, Oto M, Takemura K, Endo M, Yuasa Y. Higher frequency of point mutations in the c-K-ras 2 gene in human colorectal adenomas with severe atypia than in carcinomas. Jpn J Cancer Res 1991;82:245–9.
24. Delattre O, Olschwang S, Law DJ, Melot T, Remvikos Y, Salmon RJ, et al. Multiple genetic alterations in distal and proximal colorectal cancer. Lancet 1989;2:353–6.
25. Capella G, Cronauer-Mitra S, Pienado MA, Perucho M. Frequency and spectrum of mutations at codons 12 and 13 of the c-K-ras gene in human tumors. Environ Health Perspect 1991;93:125–31.
26. Toyooka S, Tsukuda K, Ouchida M, Tanino M, Inaki Y, Kobayashi K, et al. Detection of codon 61 point mutations of the K-ras gene in lung and colorectal cancers by enriched PCR. Oncol Rep 2003;10:1455–9.

T. Takayama et al.: Genetics of colorectal cancer

27. Ishii M, Sugai T, Habano W, Nakamura S. Analysis of Ki-ras gene mutations within the same tumor using a single tumor crypt in colorectal carcinomas. J Gastroenterol 2004;39:544–9.

28. Rodriguez-Viciana P, Warne PH, Dhand R, Vanhaesebroeck B, Gout I, Fry MJ, et al. Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase as a direct target of Ras. Nature 1994;370:527–32.

29. Sodhi A, Montaner S, Miyazaki H, Gutkind JS. MAPK and Akt act cooperatively but independently on hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha in rasV12 upregulation of VEGF. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001;287:292–300.

30. Downward J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:11–22.

31. Fearon ER, Cho KR, Nigro JM, Kern SE, Simons JW, Ruppert JM, et al. Identification of a chromosome 18q gene that is altered in colorectal cancers. Science 1990;247:49–56.

32. Cho KR, Oliner JD, Simons JW, Hedrick L, Fearon ER, Preisinger AC, et al. The DCC gene: structural analysis and mutations in colorectal carcinomas. Genomics 1994;19:525–31.

33. Fazeli A, Dickinson SL, Hermiston ML, Tighe RV, Steen RG, Small CG, et al. Phenotype of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal cancer (Dcc) gene. Nature 1997;386:796–804.

34. Eppert K, Scherer SW, Ozcelik H, Pirone R, Hoodless P, Kim H, et al. MADR2 maps to 18q21 and encodes a TGFbeta-regulated MAD-related protein that is functionally mutated in colorectal carcinoma. Cell 1996;86:543–52.

35. Hahn SA, Schutte M, Hoque AT, Moskaluk CA, da Costa LT, Rozenblum E, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 1996;271:350–3.

36. Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, Shibata D, Perucho M. Ubiquitous somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences reveal a new mechanism for colonic carcinogenesis. Nature 1993;363:558–61.

37. Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science 1993;260:816–9.

38. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Leach FS, Sistonen P, Pylkkänen L, Mecklin JP, et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:812–6.

39. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Garber J, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1993;75:1027–38.

40. Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT, Warren G, Smith LG, Lescoe MK, et al. Mutation in the DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associated with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;368:258–61.

41. Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, Wei YF, Carter KC, Ruben SM, et al. Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;371:75–80.

42. Nicolaides NC, Carter KC, Shell BK, Papadopoulos N, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Genomic organization of the human PMS2 gene family. Genomics 1995;30:195–206.

43. Papadopoulos N, Nicolaides NC, Liu B, Parsons R, Lengauer C, Palombo F, et al. Mutations of GTBP in genetically unstable cells. Science 1995;268:1915–7.

44. Markowitz S, Wang J, Myeroff L, Parsons R, Sun L, Lutterbaugh J, et al. Inactivation of the type II TGF-beta receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 1995;268:1336–8.

45. Rampino N, Yamamoto H, Ionov Y, Li Y, Sawai H, Reed JC, et al. Somatic frameshift mutations in the BAX gene in colon cancers of the microsatellite mutator phenotype. Science 1997;275:967–9.

46. Souza RF, Appel R, Yin J, Wang S, Smolinski KN, Abraham JM, et al. Microsatellite instability in the insulin-like growth factor II receptor gene in gastrointestinal tumours. Nat Genet 1996;14:255–7.

47. Malkhosyan S, Rampino N, Yamamoto H, Perucho M. Frameshift mutator mutations. Nature 1996;382:499–500.


48. Akiyama Y, Tsubouchi N, Yuasa Y. Frequent somatic mutations of hMSH3 with reference to microsatellite instability in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;236:248–52.

49. Guanti G, Resta N, Simone C, Cariola F, Demma I, Fiorente P, et al. Involvement of PTEN mutations in the genetic pathways of colorectal cancerogenesis. Hum Mol Genet 2000;9:283–7.

50. Yoshitaka T, Matsubara N, Ikeda M, Tanino M, Hanafusa H, Tanaka N, et al. Mutations of E2F-4 trinucleotide repeats in colorectal cancer with microsatellite instability. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996;227:553–7.

51. Cunningham JM, Christensen ER, Tester DJ, Kim CY, Roche PC, Burgart LJ, et al. Hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter in colon cancer with microsatellite instability. Cancer Res 1998;58:3455–60.

52. Kim H, Jen J, Vogelstein B, Hamilton SR. Clinical and pathological characteristics of sporadic colorectal carcinomas with DNA replication errors in microsatellite sequences. Am J Pathol 1994;145:148–56.

53. Thiagalingam S, Lengauer C, Leach FS, Schutte M, Hahn SA, Overhauser J, et al. Evaluation of candidate tumour suppressor genes on chromosome 18 in colorectal cancers. Nat Genet 1996;13:343–6.

54. Takagi Y, Kohmura H, Futamura M, Kida H, Tanemura H, Shimokawa K, et al. Somatic alterations of the DPC4 gene in human colorectal cancers in vivo. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1369–72.

55. Ando T, Sugai T, Habano W, Jiao YF, Suzuki K. Analysis of SMAD4/DPC4 gene alterations in multiploid colorectal carcinomas. J Gastroenterol 2005;40:708–15.

56. Labbe E, Letamendia A, Attisano L. Association of Smads with lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1/T cell-specific factor mediates cooperative signaling by the transforming growth factor-beta and wnt pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:8358–63.

57. Hamamoto T, Beppu H, Okada H, Kawabata M, Kitamura T, Miyazono K, et al. Compound disruption of smad2 accelerates malignant progression of intestinal tumors in apc knockout mice. Cancer Res 2002;62:5955–61.

58. Konishi K, Yamochi T, Makino R, Kaneko K, Yamamoto T, Nozawa H, et al. Molecular differences between sporadic serrated and conventional colorectal adenomas. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:3082–90.

59. Iino H, Jass JR, Simms LA, Young J, Leggett B, Ajioka Y, et al. DNA microsatellite instability in hyperplastic polyps, serrated adenomas, and mixed polyps: a mild mutator pathway for colorectal cancer? J Clin Pathol 1999;52:5–9.

60. Sawyer EJ, Cerar A, Hanby AM, Gorman P, Arends M, Talbot IC, et al. Molecular characteristics of serrated adenomas of the colorectum. Gut 2002;51:200–6.

61. Hawkins NJ, Ward RL. Sporadic colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability and their possible origin in hyperplastic polyps and serrated adenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 2001;93:1307–13.

62. Makinnen MJ, George SM, Jernvall P, Makela J, Vihko P, Karttunen TJ. Colorectal carcinoma associated with serrated adenoma—prevalence, histological features, and prognosis. J Pathol 2001;193:286–94.

63. Jass JR, Iino H, Ruszkiewicz A, Painter D, Solomon MJ, Koorey DJ, et al. Neoplastic progression occurs through mutator pathways in hyperplastic polyposis of the colorectum. Gut 2000;47:43–9.

64. Lind GE, Thorstensen L, Lovig T, Meling GI, Hamelin R, Rognum TO, et al. A CpG island hypermethylation profile of primary colorectal carcinomas and colon cancer cell lines. Mol Cancer 2004;3:28–38.

65. Ishikawa T, Ichikawa Y, Mitsuhashi M, Momiyama N, Chishima T, Tanaka K, et al. Matrilysin is associated with progression of colorectal tumor. Cancer Lett 1996;107:5–10.

66. Zucker S, Vacirca J. Role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in colorectal cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2004;23:101–17.
67. Leeman MF, McKay JA, Murray GI. Matrix metalloproteinase 13 activity is associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancer. J Clin Pathol 2002;55:758–62.
68. Poulson R, Pignatelli M, Stetler-Stevenson WG, Liotta LA, Wright PA, Jeffery RE, et al. Stromal expression of 72 kda type IV collagenase (MMP-2) and TIMP-2 mRNAs in colorectal neoplasia. Am J Pathol 1992;141:389–96.
69. Murray GI, Duncan ME, O’Neil P, Melvin WT, Fothergill JE. Matrix metalloproteinase-1 is associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancer. Nat Med 1996;2:461–2.
70. Nagase H, Woessner JF Jr. Matrix metalloproteinases. J Biol Chem 1999;274:21491–4.
71. Yoshimoto M, Itoh F, Yamamoto H, Hinoda Y, Imai K, Yachi A. Expression of MMP-7 (PUMP-1) mRNA in human colorectal cancers. Int J Cancer 1993;54:614–8.
72. Lu XQ, Levy M, Weinstein IB, Santella RM. Immunological quantitation of levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 in human colon cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:6231–5.
73. Ganesh S, Sier CF, Heerding MM, Griffioen G, Lamers CB, Verspaget HW. Urokinase receptor and colorectal cancer survival. Lancet 1994;344:401–2.
74. Ohtaka K, Watanabe S, Iwazaki R, Hirose M, Sato N. Role of extracellular matrix on colonic cancer cell migration and proliferation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996;220:346–52.
75. Ebert EC. Mechanisms of colon cancer binding to substratum and cells. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41:1551–6.
76. Mareel M, Vleminckx K, Vermeulen S, Bracke M, Van Roy F. E-cadherin expression: a counterbalance for cancer cell invasion. Bull Cancer 1992;79:347–55.
77. Matsuura K, Kawanishi J, Fujii S, Imamura M, Hirano S, Takeichi M, et al. Altered expression of E-cadherin in gastric cancer tissues and carcinomatous fluid. Br J Cancer 1992;66:1122–30.
78. Takeuchi K, Yamaguchi A, Urano T, Goi T, Nakagawara G, Shiku H. Expression of CD44 variant exons 8–10 in colorectal cancer and its relationship to metastasis. Jpn J Cancer Res 1995;86:292–7.
79. Wagner HE, Toth CA, Steele GD Jr, Thomas P. Metastatic potential of human colon cancer cell lines: relationship to cellular differentiation and carcinoembryonic antigen production. Clin Exp Metastasis 1992;10:25–31.
80. Benchimol S, Fuks A, Jothy S, Beauchemin N, Shirota K, Stanners CP. Carcinoembryonic antigen, a human tumor marker, functions as an intercellular adhesion molecule. Cell 1989;57:327–34.
81. Wagner HE, Toth CA, Steele GD Jr, Thomas P. Metastatic potential of human colon cancer cell lines: relationship to cellular differentiation and carcinoembryonic antigen production. Clin Exp Metastasis 1992;10:25–31.
82. Leung DW, Cachianes G, Kuang WJ, Goeddel DV, Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth factor is a secreted angiogenic mitogen. Science 1989;246:1306–9.

83. Takahashi Y, Bucana CD, Liu W, Yoneda J, Kitadai Y, Cleary KR, et al. Platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor in human colon cancer angiogenesis: role of infiltrating cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1146–51.
84. Dvorak HF, Brown LF, Detmar M, Dvorak AM. Vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor, microvascular hyperpermeability, and angiogenesis. Am J Pathol 1995;146:1029–39.
85. Nicosia RF. What is the role of vascular endothelial growth factor-related molecules in tumor angiogenesis? Am J Pathol 1998;153:11–6.
86. Senger DR, Galli SJ, Dvorak AM, Perruzzi CA, Harvey VS, Dvorak HF. Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeability factor that promotes accumulation of ascites fluid. Science 1983;219:983–5.
87. Takahashi Y, Kitadai Y, Bucana CD, Cleary KR, Ellis LM. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor, KDR, correlates with vascularity, metastasis, and proliferation of human colon cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:3964–8.
88. Takebayashi Y, Aklyama S, Yamada K, Akiba S, Aikou T. Angiogenesis as an unfavorable prognostic factor in human colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1996;78:226–31.
89. Kashii Y, Giorda R, Herberman RB, Whiteside TL, Vujanovic NL. Constitutive expression and role of the TNF family ligands in apoptotic killing of tumor cells by human NK cells. J Immunol 1999;163:5358–66.
90. The receptor for the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL. Science 1997;276:111–3.
91. Pan G, Ni J, Wei YF, Yu G, Gentz R, Dixit VM. An antagonist decoy receptor and a death domain-containing receptor for TRAIL. Science 1997;277:815–8.
92. Sheridan JP, Marsters SA, Pitti RM, Gurney A, Skubatch M, Baldwin D, et al. Control of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by a family of signaling and decoy receptors. Science 1997;277:818–21.
93. Strater J, Hinz U, Walczak H, Mechtersheimer G, Koretz K, Herfarth C, et al. Expression of TRAIL and TRAIL receptors in colon carcinoma: TRAIL-R1 is an independent prognostic parameter. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:3734–40.
94. Ben-Baruch A, Michiel DF, Oppenheim JJ. Signals and receptors involved in recruitment of inflammatory cells. J Biol Chem 1995;270:11703–6.
95. Zeelenberg IS, Ruuls-Van Stalle L, Roos E. The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is required for outgrowth of colon carcinoma micrometastases. Cancer Res 2003;63:3833–9.
96. Guan RJ, Ford HL, Fu Y, Li Y, Shaw LM, Pardee AB. *Drg-1* as a differentiation-related, putative metastatic suppressor gene in human colon cancer. Cancer Res 2000;60:749–55.
97. Singh RK, Tsan R, Radinsky R. Influence of the host microenvironment on the clonal selection of human colon carcinoma cells during primary tumor growth and metastasis. Clin Exp Metastasis 1997;15:140–50.
98. Herynk MH, Stoeltzing O, Reinmuth N, Parikh NU, Abounader R, Laterra J, et al. Down-regulation of c-Met inhibits growth in the liver of human colorectal carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2003;63:2990–6.
