
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63 (2006) 1523–1537  
1420-682X/06/131523-15  
DOI 10.1007/s00018-006-6010-1  
© Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2006  

---

**Review**

**Neurotrophin signaling: many exciting surprises!**

J. C. Arévalo* and S. H. Wu

Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine Lab 5-14, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016 (USA), Fax: +1 212 263 8214, e-mail: arevalo@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Received 12 January 2006; received after revision 1 March 2006; accepted 24 March 2006  
Online First 15 May 2006

**Abstract.** Neurotrophins are growth factors implicated in the development and maintenance of different neuronal populations in the nervous system. Neurotrophins bind to two sets of receptors, Trk receptor tyrosine kinases and the p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor, to activate several different signaling pathways that mediate various biological functions. While Trk receptor activation has been well-studied and triggers the well-characterized Ras/Rap-MAPK, PI3K-Akt, and PLCγ-PKC cascades, p75<sup>NTR</sup> signaling is more complex, and its *in vivo* significance has not yet been completely determined. In the last few years, p75<sup>NTR</sup> has received much attention mainly due to recent findings describing pro-neurotrophins as new ligands for the receptor and the ability of the receptor to form different complexes with other transmembrane proteins. This review will update the neurotrophin signaling pathways known for Trk receptors to include newly identified Trk-interacting molecules and will address surprising new findings that suggest a role for p75<sup>NTR</sup> in different receptor complexes and functions.

**Keywords.** Neurotrophin, Trk, p75<sup>NTR</sup>, signaling, neuron, survival.

---

**Introduction**

Neurotrophins are growth factors implicated in several different functions in the nervous system, including survival, proliferation, differentiation, myelination, apoptosis, axonal growth, and synaptic plasticity. The history of neurotrophins started 50 years ago when Levi-Montalcini, Cohen, and Hamburger discovered nerve growth factor (NGF), the prototypical neurotrophin, as a factor required for axonal growth from explants. The other neurotrophins, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and neurotrophin-4 (NT-4), were identified 30 years later. Neurotrophins mediate their effects through binding to two different receptors – tropomyosin-related kinase (Trk) receptors and the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75<sup>NTR</sup>). The p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor belongs to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily and was the first identified receptor for NGF [1, 2]. The first Trk receptor was originally discovered as a rearrangement of non-muscle tropomyosin and a then unknown tyrosine kinase. This tyrosine kinase was referred to as TrkA and subsequently identified as a receptor for NGF [3–6]. The identification of TrkB and TrkC, based on their similarity to TrkA, followed thereafter [7–10].

For a long time, neurotrophins were believed to bind preferentially to specific Trk receptors: NGF to TrkA, BDNF and NT-4 to TrkB, and NT-3 to TrkC. However, some promiscuity exists, as NT-3 can also bind to TrkA and TrkB receptors that contain an additional short insert in the extracellular domain [11, 12]. All neurotrophins bind to p75<sup>NTR</sup> with equal affinity. Recently, the precursors of the neurotrophins, the pro-neurotrophins, have been identified as high-affinity ligands for p75<sup>NTR</sup> in complex with a co-receptor, sortilin [13–15].

In this review, we will first update the signaling pathways mediated by the Trk neurotrophin receptors to integrate new players that have been recently described. Then, we will focus on the pan-neurotrophin p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor and its interacting molecules. We will conclude by addressing different modes of regulation of Trk signaling.

* Corresponding author.

J. C. Arévalo and S. H. Wu

Signaling mediated by neurotrophin receptors

Figure 1. Neurotrophins and their receptors: Trk and p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptors. Neurotrophins are dimers that bind with equal affinity to p75<sup>NTR</sup> and preferentially to specific Trk receptors. Neurotrophins are synthesized as pro-proteins that bind exclusively to p75<sup>NTR</sup>. Trk receptors are prototypical receptor tyrosine kinases that dimerize and become active upon neurotrophin ligand binding. p75<sup>NTR</sup> belongs to the TNF receptor superfamily.

Trk receptor structure and neurotrophin binding

Trk receptors are prototypical receptor tyrosine kinases that contain an extracellular domain composed of three leucine-rich motifs flanked by two cysteine clusters, two immunoglobulin-like C2 type domains (Ig-C2), a single transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic region with a kinase domain (Fig. 1). Binding of neurotrophins to Trk receptors occurs mainly through the Ig-C2 domains, as described using chimeras between different Trk receptors, deletions, and point mutation analyses, with the domain closer to the transmembrane region playing a more prominent role [16–20]. The leucine-rich motifs and the cysteine clusters may also be involved [21].

In addition to ligand binding, the Ig-C2 domains can also stabilize the monomeric form of the Trk receptor to prevent spontaneous dimerization and activation in the absence of neurotrophins (Fig. 2). Deletions, chimeric receptors, or point mutations that disrupt the structure of the first or second Ig-C2 domains allow receptor activation independent of ligand [18, 19]. Also, a TrkA receptor iso-

form that lacks the first Ig-C2 domain in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells has the potential to signal and transform fibroblasts in the absence of ligand [20].

The structures of NGF alone and in complex with the second Ig-C2 have been resolved [22, 23]. Future resolution of the structure of NGF in complex with the entire extracellular domain of the TrkA receptor will provide important data about the involvement of other domains in the binding as well as the conformational changes which may occur upon binding of NGF to TrkA.

The affinity of neurotrophins to TrkA and TrkB receptors is modulated by the presence of p75<sup>NTR</sup>, which enhances specificity for their primary ligands NGF and BDNF, respectively [24]. Formation of high-affinity binding sites for NGF requires the presence of a correct ratio of full p75<sup>NTR</sup> and Trk receptors, as mutations of the cytoplasmic or transmembrane domains of either TrkA or p75<sup>NTR</sup> abolish the configuration of high-affinity binding sites [25, 26]. At the same time, p75<sup>NTR</sup> reduces the ability of NT-3 to activate TrkA, and NT-3 and NT-4 to activate TrkB [11, 27, 28]. This effect has been recently demonstrated

Figure 2. Functions of Trk receptor extracellular domains. The extracellular domains of Trk receptors are implicated in ligand binding and also in the prevention of the spontaneous dimerization of the receptor in the absence of ligand. The second Ig-C2 domain plays a prominent role for both processes. Size of the font indicates relative contribution to the designated function.

in vivo in sympathetic neurons, where NT-3 can signal locally via TrkA receptors in the absence of p75<sup>NTR</sup>. Once axons reach their final target and receive NGF, TrkA retrograde signaling upregulates p75<sup>NTR</sup>, and the cells no longer respond to NT-3 [29].

Recently, a p75<sup>NTR</sup> neurotrophin-related homolog-2, NRH2, has been identified, which contains a transmembrane and intracellular domains similar to that of p75<sup>NTR</sup> but lacks the cysteine-rich repeats in the extracellular domain [30]. NRH2 is expressed in neuronal populations that also express p75<sup>NTR</sup> and Trk receptors and, like p75<sup>NTR</sup>, can interact with TrkA receptors to form high-affinity binding sites for NGF [31].

## Neurotrophin signaling mediated by Trk receptors

The signaling pathways activated by neurotrophins through Trk receptors result in many neuronal functions, such as cell survival, differentiation, dendritic arborization, synapse formation, plasticity, axonal growth, and axonal guidance. Binding of neurotrophins to Trk receptors leads to dimerization, phosphorylation in trans of the receptors, recruitment of different adaptors and enzymes, and activation of several signaling pathways. These events are shared by other receptor tyrosine kinases, but the unique combination of Trk receptor docking sites, recruitment of different adaptors and enzymes, and regulated receptor trafficking elicits specific responses for neurotrophins.

Two tyrosines in Trk receptors, Y490 and Y785 in the human TrkA receptor and their corresponding tyrosines in TrkB and TrkC receptors, are phosphorylated in response to neurotrophins and serve as the major docking sites for binding of adaptor proteins and enzymes. Y490 and Y785 primarily recruit Shc and phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ), respectively [32]. The phosphorylated tyrosines located at the kinase domain, Y670, Y674, and Y675, can also engage adaptor proteins, including SH2B, APS, and Grb2 [33, 34].

Among the signaling pathways activated by Trk receptors in response to neurotrophins, the Shc-Ras-MAPK, Rap-MAPK, PI3K-Akt, and PLCγ-protein kinase C (PKC) pathways are the most studied (Fig. 3). Most of the work describing these signaling pathways has been performed in PC12 cells, a rat adrenal pheochromocytoma cell line that responds to NGF and resembles sympathetic neurons, but also differs from neurons in many aspects. These pathways have also been studied largely in the context of NGF activation of TrkA and extrapolated to the other Trk receptors. In the last few years, several new proteins downstream of Trk receptors have been described that may contribute to the biological functions elicited by neurotrophins. Due to space constraints, these new proteins are summarized in Table 1. Some of these

**Figure 3.** Trk receptor-mediated signaling pathways. Neurotrophin binding to Trk receptors leads to their activation and to the recruitment of different proteins that associate with specific phosphorylation residues in the cytoplasmic domain of Trk receptors. These interactions trigger the activation of various signaling pathways, such as the Ras, Rap, PI3K, and PLCγ pathways, which result in survival, neurite outgrowth, gene expression, and synaptic plasticity. Tyrosine residue nomenclature is based on the human sequence of TrkA. Additional proteins implicated in neurotrophin signaling are documented in Table 1.

molecules have been linked to specific pathways and will be described later on.

### Ras-MAPK

Activation of the small GTPase Ras in response to neurotrophins has been linked to signaling and transcriptional regulation implicated in neuronal survival and differentiation. The first evidence that Ras is important for neurotrophin signaling came from microinjection of antibodies against Ras in PC12 cells, which inhibited neurite formation and resulted in temporary regression of partially extended neurites after NGF treatment [35]. Expression of mutant Ras proteins also showed a marked inhibition of morphological differentiation induced by NGF [36]. Ras is induced rapidly, but transiently, by NGF in PC12 cells [37]. Since Ras proteins cycle between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states, the biological activity of these GTPases is controlled by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and guanosine triphosphatase-activating proteins (GAPs). TrkA receptor stimulation by NGF engages Shc and Grb2 to activate the GEF SOS, which then activates Ras [32] (Fig. 3). Raf-1 and B-Raf activation downstream of Ras subsequently triggers the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases/mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK/MAPK, referred hereafter

Table 1. New Trk-interacting/signaling molecules.

| Protein         | Trk interaction | Signaling pathway                  | Function                          | Reference       |
|-----------------|----------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------|
| rAPS            | yes            | Grb2-Ras-MAPK                    | neurite outgrowth                | 33, 166         |
| SH2-B           | yes            | Grb2-Ras-MAPK                    | neurite outgrowth                | 33, 166, 167    |
| FRS2            | yes            | CrkII-Rap-MAPK                   | neurite outgrowth                | 46              |
| CHK             | yes            | MAPK                             | neurite outgrowth                | 168             |
| TRPC3           |                | intracellular Ca²⁺ release      | growth-cone turning              | 143, 145        |
| Neurofibromin   | no             | Ras-MAPK                         |                                   | 42              |
| Calmodulin      | yes            | Raf-1                            | Trk intracellular location/cleavage | 169, 170        |
| Abl             | yes            |                                   | channel sensitization            | 171, 172        |
| TRPV1           | yes            |                                   |                                   | 73, 144         |
| ARMS/Kidins 220 | yes            | CrkL-Rap-MAPK                    | neurite outgrowth                | 49, 51, 52, 173 |
| GIPC            | yes            |                                   |                                   | 174             |
| Erk5            | no             |                                   | retrograde signaling             | 155             |
| Pincher         | no             |                                   | macroendocytosis/retrograde signaling | 175, 176        |
| Grit            | yes            |                                   | neurite outgrowth                | 177             |
| Rin             | no             | MAPK/p38                         | neurite outgrowth                | 178, 179        |
| Rit             | no             | MAPK                             | neurite outgrowth/survival       | 180, 181        |
| GSK-3β          | no             | PI3K-Akt                         | axonal growth                    | 67              |
| Nesca           | no             |                                   | neurite outgrowth                | 182             |
| FAIM            | yes            | Ras-MAPK/NF-kB                   | neurite outgrowth                | 183             |
| TID1            | yes            |                                   | neurite outgrowth                | 184             |
| STAT5           |                |                                   | transcription                    | 185             |
| SAP             | yes            |                                   | negative regulator/signaling     | 186             |
| RasGrf1         | yes            |                                   | neurite outgrowth                | 187, 188        |
| PPARγ           | no             |                                   | transcriptional activity         | 189             |
| Dbs             | yes            | Cdc42                            | Schwann cell migration           | 190             |
| Tiam            | no             | Ras-Rac1                         | Schwann cell migration           | 191             |

as MAPK) [38, 39]. Stimulation of Ras through this pathway promotes only transient activation of MAPK [40]. Modulation of Ras signaling can be achieved by a negative feedback loop, as activation of MAPK can stop the signaling of this pathway by phosphorylating SOS to disrupt the Grb2-SOS complex [41]. Moreover, neurofibromin, a GAP for Ras, negatively regulates Ras signaling in developing neurons that depend on neurotrophins for their survival [42]. Whether neurofibromin activity is modulated by neurotrophins remains to be addressed.

Rap-MAPK

Neurotrophins stimulate two different phases of MAPK activation. A transient one, described above, involves Shc-Grb2-SOS-Ras-B-Raf/Raf1-MAPK, while a prolonged MAPK activation requires the adaptor CrkII/CrkL, the GEF C3G, the small GTPase Rap1, and B-Raf [43, 44] (Fig. 3). NGF activation of TrkA leads to activation of C3G by CrkII/CrkL. C3G then activates Rap1 to signal further downstream through B-Raf, resulting in the sustained activation of MAPK. This pathway requires internalization of the Trk receptor into the endosomal compartment [44, 45].

Although the NGF-mediated activation of Rap1 by C3G is generally accepted, how the TrkA receptor signals to CrkII/CrkL remains controversial. Under one proposed model, the adaptor fibroblast receptor substrate-2 (FRS2) can serve as the link. In vitro, FRS2 can bind to residue Y490 of TrkA upon phosphorylation to compete with Shc binding and can also interact with the SH2 domain of CrkII [41, 46]. However, signaling through the Y490 site does not fully account for the MAPK activation of neurotrophin action in vivo. Mice bearing Y490F mutations in TrkB and TrkC receptors retain the ability to induce sustained MAPK activation, suggesting the presence of Y490-independent mechanisms [47, 48].

Recently, an ankyrin repeat-rich membrane-spanning protein (ARMS/Kidins 220, referred hereafter as ARMS),
a new substrate of Trk receptors and protein kinase D, has been identified that may provide another possible link between TrkA and CrkII/CrkL [49, 50]. ARMS becomes rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated in response to neurotrophins, remains active for a long time, and associates with Trk receptors using transmembrane-transmembrane regions [49, 51]. Additionally, an interaction between ARMS, CrkL, and C3G increases upon NGF treatment and modulates the activation of Rap1. Disruption of ARMS expression, or its interaction with either Trk or CrkL, impairs Rap1 activation and prolonged MAPK [51, 52]. Furthermore, ARMS phosphorylation at Y1096 in response to neurotrophins modulates CrkL binding, to work as a switch to trigger prolonged MAPK activation [52]. The involvement of ARMS in the Rap1-MAPK pathway is compatible with the previous *in vivo* results from the TrkB/TrkC knock-ins that eliminate signaling from the Y490 site and binding of Shc/FRS2 but maintain a certain level of MAPK activation [47, 48]. Further experiments with these adaptor proteins *in vivo* will be required to provide new insights into the sustained MAPK activation elicited by neurotrophins.

Phosphorylation of MAPK leads to activation of several downstream targets that mediate gene transcription, such as Rsk and MSK1. These two kinases can phosphorylate and activate the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein (CREB), which controls expression of genes essential for the survival and differentiation of neurons [53–55]. The regulation of BDNF expression by CREB suggests that a positive feedback loop may potentiate neurotrophin actions [56]. For additional information about CREB targets and functions see the review by West et al. [57].

### PI3K-Akt

Neurotrophins play an important role in the survival of several neuronal populations during development, and signaling through the PI3K-Akt pathway is critical for this function. Active Trk receptors engage Shc, which associates with Grb2 and Gab1 to activate PI3K and, subsequently, Akt (Fig. 3). PI3K binding to Gab1 is required for PI3K activation, as disruption of this association decreases the NGF-dependent survival of PC12 cells [58]. The role of PI3K-Akt signaling in survival has also been shown in primary neurons and in the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y [59, 60].

Several different pro-apoptotic and pro-survival effectors downstream of Akt can mediate the survival actions of neurotrophins. For example, Bad phosphorylation by Akt leads to additional phosphorylation of Bad by other kinases, which prevents the pro-apoptotic effects of the protein [61]. Similarly, the forkhead transcription factor, FKHRl1, which regulates the expression of several pro-

apoptotic proteins, is phosphorylated by Akt in response to neurotrophins, preventing its transcriptional activity [62]. Moreover, the NF-κB pro-survival pathway is activated via Akt phosphorylation of the inhibitor IκB, targeting it for degradation [63, 64]. PI3K-Akt can also exert a positive effect on the retrograde signaling that modulates neuronal survival [65].

Signaling through PI3K-Akt mediates functions other than survival. Active Akt at the growth cone causes axonal growth and increases axon caliber and branching in sensory neurons by phosphorylating and inactivating GSK-3β locally, leading to microtubule assembly that promotes axonal growth [59, 66, 67]. These mechanistic data support the activation of PI3K downstream of neurotrophins in growth cone chemotropism reported in Xenopus spinal neurons [68].

### PLCγ

The first reports indicating that neurotrophin actions result in activation of PLCγ showed serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation of PLCγ, directly mediated by the Trk receptor kinase [69, 70]. Trk receptor phosphorylation at Y785 leads to PLCγ recruitment and activation, which results in the hydrolysis of PtdIns(4,5)P₂ to generate inositol tris-phosphate (IP₃) and diacylglycerol (DAG) [71]. IP₃ and DAG cause the activation of different PKC isoforms. The effect of IP₃ is mediated by release of Ca²⁺ from internal stores that additionally stimulate Ca²⁺-calmodulin-regulated protein kinases (CaM kinases). PKC subsequently activates the Erkl signaling pathway via Raf [72]. PLCγ activation in response to neurotrophins has been implicated in growth cone chemotropism and in the potentiation of thermal sensitivity by VR1, a heat-activated ion channel on sensory neurons [68, 73]. Moreover, the prolonged activation of PLCγ by a brief pulse of NGF induces transcription of a sodium channel gene [74, 75].

PLCγ signaling may be important for TrkB signaling in response to BDNF that is involved in synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus [76–78]. TrkB-targeted mice with a mutation at the PLCγ-binding site Y816 show an impairment of hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) in response to BDNF, probably mediated by decreased activation of CaM kinase and CREB [79]. Whether additional proteins which bind to the same tyrosine residue as PLCγ, such as Csk homologous kinase, contribute to the LTP mediated by TrkB remains to be addressed.

### p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor structure and neurotrophin binding

The p75<sup>NTR</sup> integral membrane protein is the founding member of the TNF family of receptors, and contains a cy-
teine-rich domain and a cytoplasmic death domain (Fig. 1). The nuclear magnetic resonance structure of the intracellular p75<sup>NTR</sup> region shows a flexible juxtamembrane region and a death domain that consists of two perpendicular sets of three helices packed into a globular structure [80]. Surprisingly, unlike the TNF receptor, p75<sup>NTR</sup> does not exhibit trimerization [81]. The lack of self-association of the intracellular region of p75<sup>NTR</sup> differentiates the activation of this receptor from that of TNF and Fas receptors, which require aggregation for proper signaling.

The crystal structure of NGF in complex with the extracellular domain of p75<sup>NTR</sup> has been recently solved, revealing a surprising 2:1 NGF:p75<sup>NTR</sup> stoichiometry that is unlike the trimeric ligand-receptor complexes of the other TNF receptor family members [82]. Binding of an NGF dimer to one molecule of p75<sup>NTR</sup> induces conformational changes in the NGF protein that prevents the association of a second p75<sup>NTR</sup> molecule [82]. The observed 2:1 NGF:p75<sup>NTR</sup> ratio may allow other receptors to be recruited to form higher-order complexes. Indeed, p75<sup>NTR</sup> can form high-affinity sites with Trk receptors [7]. Additional crystal structures, including that of a Trk-NGF-p75<sup>NTR</sup> ternary complex, would provide further insights into the stoichiometry and the conformational changes that modulate neurotrophin receptor function.

### Neurotrophin signaling mediated by the p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor

Functions ascribed to the p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor are diverse, complex, and sometimes contradictory. p75<sup>NTR</sup> has been implicated in both promoting survival and inducing apoptosis, enhancing neurite outgrowth and facilitating growth-cone collapse, and mediating differentiation and enhancing proliferation. Moreover, p75<sup>NTR</sup> may also play a role in myelination [83–85].

Several of the functions previously described for p75<sup>NTR</sup> were originally observed *in vivo* using a knock-out mouse in which exon III was targeted (p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon III --) [86]. Another genetic mouse model in which exon IV was targeted (p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon IV --) was developed by von Schack et al. in an attempt to eliminate an alternatively spliced protein that was generated in the p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon III -- animals [87]. The p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon IV -- mice displayed several nervous system defects similar to exon III -- mice as well as an unexpected abnormality in the formation of blood vessels. However, a p75<sup>NTR</sup>-truncated protein was found to be expressed in the p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon IV -- mice which was not observed in the p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon III -- animals and which exhibits pro-apoptotic activities *in vitro* due to c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and caspase activation [88]. Therefore, the p75<sup>NTR</sup> exon IV -- mouse phenotypes may reflect a gain-of-function mutation rather than loss of p75<sup>NTR</sup> function [88]. To clarify these discrepancies,

additional studies should be performed with both targeted mice.

Neurotrophins are synthesized as precursor proteins that undergo proteolytic cleavage to generate mature neurotrophins. Recently, a milestone was achieved with the discovery of pro-NGF as a ligand for p75<sup>NTR</sup>, which provided several answers to many long-standing questions [13]. Compared to mature NGF, pro-NGF binds with higher affinity to p75<sup>NTR</sup> in A875 cells and triggers cell death at much lower concentrations [13]. *In vivo*, pro-NGF causes oligodendrocyte cell death through p75<sup>NTR</sup> in a spinal injury model and apoptosis of adult corticospinal neurons in a brain injury model [89, 90]. These discoveries have shed light on the inconsistent data obtained from experiments investigating the apoptotic function of neurotrophins, as reagents used in previous studies contained variable amounts of pro-neurotrophins. Additionally, the pro-region of the NGF precursor protein contains two novel bioactive peptides that may induce the rapid phosphorylation of the Trk receptor protein [91]. Thus, pro-NGF may also activate TrkA receptor in a weaker way than mature NGF does [92].

Another important advance in the field of p75<sup>NTR</sup> signaling has been the discovery that sortilin, a member of the Vps10p-domain receptor family, binds to pro-NGF and works as a co-receptor with p75<sup>NTR</sup> to mediate apoptosis [14]. The apoptotic effect mediated by p75<sup>NTR</sup> and sortilin is not exclusive to pro-NGF, as pro-BDNF has similar consequences in cells expressing both receptors [15]. Thus, the presence or absence of sortilin at the cell surface will affect the way p75<sup>NTR</sup>-expressing cells will ultimately respond to pro-neurotrophin molecules.

#### p75<sup>NTR</sup>-interacting molecules

The lack of catalytic activity in the cytoplasmic domain of p75<sup>NTR</sup> suggests that the signaling of this receptor is carried out by interacting proteins that are either constitutively associated with or are recruited to the receptor in response to neurotrophins (Fig. 4). One of the first indications that p75<sup>NTR</sup> signals independently of Trk receptors was the demonstration that neurotrophin binding to p75<sup>NTR</sup> causes sphingomyelin hydrolysis and ceramide production [93, 94]. In mature oligodendrocytes, NGF binding of p75<sup>NTR</sup> leads to the activation of JNK and to apoptosis, which can be counteracted by the presence of TrkA [95, 96]. JNK activation may occur through interaction of the TNF receptor-associated factor-6 (TRAF6) with p75<sup>NTR</sup> [97, 98].

The apoptotic effects mediated by p75<sup>NTR</sup> may depend on the orchestration of several downstream molecules of neurotrophins in addition to TRAF6. Several other p75<sup>NTR</sup>-interacting proteins — NRIF, NRAGE, NADE, and SC-1 — will be described individually.

NADE

The p75<sup>NTR</sup>-associated cell death executor (NADE) protein may induce cell death upon NGF binding to p75<sup>NTR</sup>, but not BDNF, NT-3, or NT-4/5 binding [109]. Expression of p75<sup>NTR</sup>, NADE, and NGF is upregulated in response to zinc, and NGF secretion leads to a p75<sup>NTR</sup>/NADE-dependent apoptosis that may be modulated by an interaction between NADE and 14-3-3ε protein [110, 111].

SC-1

A yeast two-hybrid screen using the cytoplasmic domain of p75<sup>NTR</sup> as bait identified Schwann cell-1 (SC-1), a protein with an SET domain and six Krüppel-type zinc fingers that was originally implicated in growth arrest [112]. Subsequent studies defined SC-1 as a transcriptional repressor which may function by forming a complex with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to regulate the levels of cyclins E and B in response to NGF [113].

p75<sup>NTR</sup> function

Depending on the cellular context, the p75<sup>NTR</sup> protein can promote pro-survival as well as pro-apoptotic effects in response to neurotrophins. An important pro-survival signaling pathway activated by NGF, but not BDNF or NT-3, through p75<sup>NTR</sup> is the NF-κB pathway [114]. The activation of NF-κB requires several proteins, including TRAF6, p62, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK), and receptor-interacting protein-2 (RIP2) [65, 97, 98, 115, 116]. Production of reactive oxygen intermediates may also be important for NF-κB activation [117]. Upon activation in response to neurotrophins, NF-κB translocates to the nucleus and triggers the expression of Hes1/5 to modulate dendritic growth [118]. This pro-survival pathway, unlike JNK activation, is not abolished by the expression of TrkA and is more likely to be activated when the cells have been previously exposed to stress conditions, as with addition of TNF or serum deprivation [95, 119, 120].

Among other functions, p75<sup>NTR</sup> can also modulate axonal growth with different outcomes depending on the molecule that binds to the receptor. Neurotrophin binding leads to axonal growth whereas myelin-derived growth inhibitors (MDGIs) evoke growth-cone collapse. These opposite effects are obtained by the regulation of the small GTPase RhoA, a member of the Rho family of proteins that have been shown to control the organization of the actin cytoskeleton in many cell types [for an extensive review see ref. 121]. In the absence of neurotrophins, a constitutive interaction between p75<sup>NTR</sup> and RhoA maintains RhoA activation and inhibition of axonal growth. Neurotrophin binding to p75<sup>NTR</sup> causes dissociation of RhoA from the receptor, blocking RhoA activity and leading to axonal growth [122]. Neurotrophins can also promote length-

ing of filopodia through p75<sup>NTR</sup> by decreasing local RhoA activity in retina and dorsal root ganglion neurons [123, 124].

Modulation of axonal growth through p75<sup>NTR</sup>-RhoA pathways is not exclusive to neurotrophins. In the last few years several reports have implicated p75<sup>NTR</sup> as a part of a receptor complex with the Nogo receptor (NgR) that mediates the axonal outgrowth inhibitory signals of MDGI, such as Nogo66, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), and oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (OMgp) [125, 126]. LINGO-1, a nervous system-specific transmembrane protein, also binds NgR1 and p75<sup>NTR</sup> and is a functional component of the NgR1/p75<sup>NTR</sup> signaling complex. In non-neuronal cells, co-expression of human NgR, p75<sup>NTR</sup>, and LINGO-1 conferred responsiveness to OMgp, as measured by RhoA activation [127]. The signal transduction mechanism may involve the displacement of Rho-GDI from RhoA, resulting in its activation and the consequent axonal growth inhibition [128]. Additionally, a positive feedback loop occurs upon spinal cord injury where p75<sup>NTR</sup> expression is upregulated through a RhoA-dependent mechanism, with a subsequent further increase in RhoA activation [129]. All the above data indicate a convergence point in MDGI signaling to p75<sup>NTR</sup> to modulate RhoA activity. It will be interesting to investigate the putative therapeutic potential of p75<sup>NTR</sup> inhibition in injury models to promote axonal regeneration.

### p75<sup>NTR</sup> cleavage

Proteolytic shedding of the p75<sup>NTR</sup> extracellular domain was reported a long time ago, but not much attention has been paid to this phenomenon until recently, when the proteolytic processing of p75<sup>NTR</sup> was related to the process of regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) described for other proteins [130, 131]. RIP is a new way of receptor processing that has been recently described for Notch, β-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and ErbB4, which involves two sequential cleavages of a given transmembrane protein. The first cleavage occurs in the extracellular part of the protein and is mediated by the metalloproteinase α-secretase, while the second cleavage occurs in the intramembrane region and is mediated by γ-secretase. The final result is the release of the intracellular domain (ICD), which often traffics to the nucleus and acts as a transcriptional regulator [for a review see ref. 132]. Additionally, intramembrane p75<sup>NTR</sup> proteolysis may play a role in the assembly/disassembly of a receptor complex containing p75<sup>NTR</sup> and Trk receptors [131]. The TNF-α-converting enzyme (TACE/ADAM17) is responsible for the α-secretase activity that sheds the extracellular region of p75<sup>NTR</sup> [133]. Chimeric receptors containing swapped extracellular regions of the p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptor and the RIP-resistant Fas receptor showed that

the p75<sup>NTR</sup> stalk domain plays a critical role in the α-secretase processing [134]. The biological function of p75<sup>NTR</sup> cleavage has been addressed in a growth inhibition paradigm in response to myelin inhibitor molecules. The p75<sup>NTR</sup> ICD is produced in response to MAG in cerebellar granule neurons [135]. Additionally, p75<sup>NTR</sup>/Fas chimeras resistant to cleavage by α- and γ-secretase act as dominant-negatives that block MAG-induced growth inhibition when expressed in NG108 cells and in dorsal root ganglia sensory neurons [135].

The exciting discovery that p75<sup>NTR</sup> undergoes sequential cleavage through α- and γ-secretase activities has opened a surprising new area of investigation for the function of this receptor. p75<sup>NTR</sup> cleavage has been postulated to generate an ICD fragment that might translocate into the cell nucleus [136]. Whether neurotrophins can modulate the proteolytic cleavage of the receptor and whether the p75<sup>NTR</sup> ICD does translocate to the nucleus to regulate gene expression in a way similar to the Notch receptor remains to be seen.

Although many functions have been described for p75<sup>NTR</sup>, the verification of the signaling pathways has been a difficult enterprise due to the weakness of signaling transduction and the lack of genetic systems to verify protein-protein interactions. With the recent findings that (i) pro-neurotrophins are more potent effectors than mature neurotrophins for p75<sup>NTR</sup> activation, (ii) sortilin forms a co-receptor complex with p75<sup>NTR</sup> to promote apoptosis, (iii) p75<sup>NTR</sup> undergoes α- and γ-secretase cleavage, and (iv) p75<sup>NTR</sup> acts as a signaling co-receptor with NgR for MDGI, p75<sup>NTR</sup> now has a new and more promiscuous life than anybody would have predicted a few years ago.

## Neurotrophin cross-talk with other signaling pathways

Receptor tyrosine kinases are usually activated upon binding of their cognate ligands, but they can also be transactivated in response to G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. This type of activation has been previously described for the receptors for epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and insulin-like growth factor 1 [137–139]. Transactivation of TrkA receptors in PC12 cells and TrkB in hippocampal neurons has been observed after treatment with adenosine or PACAP neuromodulators, both of which act through GPCRs [140, 141]. Interestingly, in contrast to other receptor transactivation events, Trk receptor transactivation by adenosine or PACAP requires a longer time course. The increase in Trk activity can be inhibited by the use of K252a, a Trk receptor inhibitor, and PP1, a Src family-specific inhibitor [140, 141]. Transactivated Trk receptors lead to activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway, which results in increased cell survival after NGF or BDNF withdrawal in PC12 cells and
hippocampal neurons, respectively. Surprisingly, most of the transactivated Trk receptors are found in intracellular locations, particularly associated with Golgi membranes [142]. The effects of adenosine- and PACAP-dependent activation of Trk receptors raise the possibility that small molecules may be used to elicit neurotrophic effects for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

Just as Trk receptors are activated by GPCRs, other receptors and channels can be activated as a result of Trk receptor stimulation by neurotrophins. For example, members of the TRP family of cation channels, like TRPC3 and TRPV1, are stimulated through Trk receptors [73, 143]. TRPV1 sensitization in response to NGF may involve PLCγ activity for those channels already present in the membrane, as well as phosphorylation and new insertion of intracellular channels mediated by Src and PI3K activities, respectively [73, 144]. Additionally, TRPC channels may contribute to the BDNF-induced elevation of Ca²⁺ at the growth-cone and are required for BDNF-induced chemo-attractive turning [145]. Similarly, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor open-probability and glutamate-evoked currents are augmented by BDNF-activated TrkB receptor, which phosphorylates the specific NMDA receptor subunit NR2B [146, 147]. Trk receptors also have the capacity to activate the Ret51 receptor tyrosine kinase in postnatal superior cervical ganglion (SCG) neurons [148]. The mechanism of Ret activation does not depend upon PI3K or MAPK pathways and occurs with a very slow kinetics, similar to GPCR activation of Trk receptors. Interestingly, cultures from *ret*⁻/⁻ neurons have a smaller soma size in the presence of NGF compared with wild-type neurons [148]. The previous data indicate that cross-talk between neurotrophins and other signaling pathways may play an important role in the modulation of different molecules required for proper functioning of the nervous system.

### Regulation of neurotrophin signaling by retrograde transport

The signals of activated Trk receptors by neurotrophins at the growth-cone are sent to the cell body to trigger the transcriptional programs that mediate the neurotrophin-dependent survival of the neuron. The identification of a transported retrograde signal from the distal part of the neurons in response to neurotrophins has been the focus of many studies performed in the last few years. Knowing that NGF treatment evoked a massive endocytosis of the activated receptors, Grimes et al. proposed that the retrograde transport of activated receptors in endocytic vesicles could be the way to transmit this signal [149]. Support for this hypothesis has been provided by several reports. An active complex of NGF-TrkA transported to the cell body of sympathetic neurons mediated a regulated phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB, which elicited the expression of the pro-survival molecule Bcl-2 [150, 151]. The internalization and transport of a ligand-receptor complex are required to initiate cell body responses to target-derived neurotrophins, as demonstrated by dynamin mutants that block the internalization of the receptor and the involvement of dynein motor machinery to retrogradely transport Trk receptors [152–154]. Additionally, the neurotrophin-retrograde signaling activates Erk5, but not Erk1/2, to phosphorylate CREB [155]. The identity of the endosomes implicated in the retrograde transport of active Trk receptors has been addressed by several other studies [156–158].

Another possibility that has been postulated to mediate the neuronal survival by neurotrophins is a mechanism of propagation of the signaling that does not require the internalization or transport of the active receptor, as reported for EGF [159, 160]. However, there is no doubt that TrkA together with NGF is transported to elicit a signal in the cell body of the neuron. Extensive information about neurotrophin retrograde signaling can be found in several reviews [161–163].

### Regulation of neurotrophin receptors by ubiquitination

Neurotrophin signaling should be tightly regulated to elicit the correct cellular response, and once neurotrophin receptors are activated, they should signal in the proper location and to the proper extent to avoid undesirable effects for the cells. Downregulation of the neurotrophin signal can be achieved by degradation of the receptors, as occurs with other transmembrane proteins. Recently, two reports have suggested that Trk receptors undergo ligand-dependent ubiquitination which may be modulated by the presence of p75<sup>NTR</sup> [164, 165]. However, there are big discrepancies between the two reports. Makkerh et al. [164] suggest that co-expression of p75<sup>NTR</sup> negatively regulates the ubiquitination of Trk receptors, impairing their internalization and degradation, while Geetha et al. [165] suggest that p75<sup>NTR</sup> positively regulates the ubiquitination of TrkA. Future experiments should address the controversy about the role of p75<sup>NTR</sup> in the ubiquitination of Trk receptors as understanding how neurotrophin receptor activation is downregulated will be an important step in the comprehension of neurotrophin signaling and biology.

### Perspectives

Neurotrophins not only mediate several different functions in the nervous system during development and adulthood but have also been implicated in different hu-
man pathologies, such as depression, eating disorders, Huntington’s, Parkinson’s, and Alzheimer’s diseases. In the last 15 years, much effort has been invested to try to understand the signaling pathways elicited by these versatile and pleiotropic molecules. The recent identification of several new proteins downstream of Trk and p75<sup>NTR</sup> receptors has provided many more insights into the intricate functions and mechanisms of neurotrophin actions. Future studies should attempt to (i) address the role of these new proteins in the neurotrophin signaling not only in PC12 cells, but also in different neuronal populations, (ii) use genetically modified animals to verify their function related to neurotrophins, (iii) identify new signaling molecules, mechanisms, and regulators of p75<sup>NTR</sup> that can explain such a diversity of functions, and (iv) investigate further the role of neurotrophins in human pathologies. In conclusion, neurotrophins remain mysterious growth factors that can provide many exciting surprises for years to come.

**Acknowledgements.** We thank M. Chao, P. Pérez, N. Zampieri, R. Rajagopal and H. Yano for insightful comments on this manuscript. We apologize to those colleagues whose work could not be discussed here due to space constraints. J. C. Arévalo has been supported by postdoctoral fellowships from the Spanish Education Ministry and from the Laurie Deierlein/American Brain Tumor Association. S. H. Wu has been supported by the Medical Scientist Training Program.

1. Chao, M. V., Bothwell, M. A., Ross, A. H., Koprowski, H., Lahanan, A. A., Buck, C. R. and Sehgal, A. (1986) Gene transfer and molecular cloning of the human NGF receptor. Science 232, 518–521.
2. Radeke, M. J., Misko, T. P., Hsu, C., Herzenberg, L. A. and Shooter, E. M. (1987) Gene transfer and molecular cloning of the rat nerve growth factor receptor. Nature 325, 593–597.
3. Martin-Zanca, D., Hughes, S. H. and Barbacid, M. (1986) A human oncogene formed by the fusion of truncated tropomyosin and protein tyrosine kinase sequences. Nature 319, 743–748.
4. Martin-Zanca, D., Oskam, R., Mitra, G., Copeland, T. and Barbacid, M. (1989) Molecular and biochemical characterization of the human trk proto-oncogene. Mol. Cell. Biol. 9, 24–33.
5. Kaplan, D. R., Martin-Zanca, D. and Parada, L. F. (1991) Tyrosine phosphorylation and tyrosine kinase activity of the trk proto-oncogene product induced by NGF. Nature 350, 158–160.
6. Klein, R., Jing, S. Q., Nanduri, V., O’Rourke, E. and Barbacid, M. (1991) The trk proto-oncogene encodes a receptor for nerve growth factor. Cell 65, 189–197.
7. Hempstead, B. L., Martin-Zanca, D., Kaplan, D. R., Parada, L. F. and Chao, M. V. (1991) High-affinity NGF binding requires co-expression of the trk proto-oncogene and the low-affinity NGF receptor. Nature 350, 678–683.
8. Klein, R., Nanduri, V., Jing, S. A., Lamballe, F., Tapley, P., Bryant, S., Cordon-Cardo, C., Jones, K. R., Reichardt, L. F. and Barbacid, M. (1991) The trkB tyrosine protein kinase is a receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3. Cell 66, 395–403.
9. Klein, R., Parada, L. F., Coulier, F. and Barbacid, M. (1989) trkB, a novel tyrosine protein kinase receptor expressed during mouse neural development. EMBO J. 8, 3701–3709.
10. Lamballe, F., Klein, R. and Barbacid, M. (1991) trkC, a new member of the trk family of tyrosine protein kinases, is a receptor for neurotrophin-3. Cell 66, 967–979.
11. Clary, D. O. and Reichardt, L. F. (1994) An alternatively spliced form of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA confers an enhanced response to neurotrophin 3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 11133–11137.
12. Strohmaier, C., Carter, B. D., Urfer, R., Barde, Y. A. and Dechant, G. (1996) A splice variant of the neurotrophin receptor trkB with increased specificity for brain-derived neurotrophic factor. EMBO J. 15, 3332–3337.
13. Lee, R., Kermani, P., Teng, K. K. and Hempstead, B. L. (2001) Regulation of cell survival by secreted proneurotrophins. Science 294, 1945–1958.
14. Nykjaer, A., Lee, R., Teng, K. K., Jansen, P., Madsen, P., Nielsen, M. S., Jacobsen, C., Kliemann, M., Schwarz, E., Willnow, T. E., Hempstead, B. L. and Petersen, C. M. (2004) Sortilin is essential for proNGF-induced neuronal cell death. Nature 427, 843–848.
15. Teng, H. K., Teng, K. K., Lee, R., Wright, S., Tevar, S., Almeida, R. D., Kermani, P., Torkin, R., Chen, Z. Y., Lee, F. S., Kraemer, R. T., Nykjaer, A. and Hempstead, B. L. (2005) ProBDNF induces neuronal apoptosis via activation of a receptor complex of p75NTR and sortilin. J. Neurosci. 25, 5455–5463.
16. Perez, P., Coll, P. M., Hempstead, B. L., Martin-Zanca, D. and Chao, M. V. (1995) NGF binding to the trk tyrosine kinase receptor requires the extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 6, 97–105.
17. Urfer, R., Tsoulfas, P., O’Connell, L., Shelton, D. L., Parada, L. F. and Presta, L. G. (1995) An immunoglobulin-like domain determines the specificity of neurotrophin receptors. EMBO J. 14, 2795–2805.
18. Arevalo, J. C., Conde, B., Hempstead, B. I., Chao, M. V., Martin-Zanca, D. and Perez, P. (2001) A novel mutation within the extracellular domain of TrkA causes constitutive receptor activation. Oncogene 20, 1229–1234.
19. Arevalo, J. C., Conde, B., Hempstead, B. L., Chao, M. V., Martin-Zanca, D. and Perez, P. (2000) TrkA immunoglobulin-like ligand binding domains inhibit spontaneous activation of the receptor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 5908–5916.
20. Tacconelli, A., Farina, A. R., Cappabianca, L., Desantis, G., Tessitore, A., Vetuschi, A., Sferra, R., Rucci, N., Argenti, B., Screpanti, I., Gulino, A. and Mackay, A. R. (2004) TrkA alternative splicing, a regulated tumor-promoting switch in human neuroblastoma. Cancer Cell 6, 347–360.
21. MacDonald, J. I. and Meakin, S. O. (1996) Deletions in the extracellular domain of rat trkA lead to an altered differentiated phenotype in neurotrophin responsive cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 7, 371–390.
22. McDonald, N. Q., Lapatto, R., Murray-Rust, J., Gunning, J., Wlodawer, A. and Blundell, T. L. (1991) New protein fold revealed by a 2.3-Å resolution crystal structure of nerve growth factor. Nature 354, 411–414.
23. Wiesmann, C., Ultsch, M. H., Bass, S. H. and de Vos, A. M. (1999) Crystal structure of nerve growth factor in complex with the ligand-binding domain of the TrkA receptor. Nature 401, 184–188.
24. Benedetti, M., Levi, A. and Chao, M. V. (1993) Differential expression of nerve growth factor receptors leads to altered binding affinity and neurotrophin responsiveness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 7859–7863.
25. Mahadeo, D., Kaplan, L., Chao, M. V. and Hempstead, B. L. (1994) High affinity nerve growth factor binding displays a faster rate of association than p140trk binding: implications for multi-subunit polypeptide receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 6884–6891.
26. Esposito, D., Patel, P., Stephens, R. M., Perez, P., Chao, M. V., Kaplan, D. R. and Hempstead, B. L. (2001) The cytoplasmic

and transmembrane domains of the p75 and Trk A receptors regulate high affinity binding to nerve growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 32687–32695.

27 Bibel, M., Hoppe, E. and Barde, Y. A. (1999) Biochemical and functional interactions between the neurotrophin receptors trk and p75NTR. EMBO J. 18, 616–622.

28 Mischel, P. S., Smith, S. G., Vining, E. R., Valletta, J. S., Mobley, W. C. and Reichardt, L. F. (2001) The extracellular domain of p75NTR is necessary to inhibit neurotrophin-3 signaling through TrkA. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 11294–11301.

29 Kuruvilla, R., Zweifel, L. S., Glebova, N. O., Lonze, B. E., Valdez, G., Ye, H. and Ginty D. D. (2004) A neurotrophin signaling cascade coordinates sympathetic neuron development through differential control of TrkA trafficking and retrograde signaling. Cell 118, 243–255.

30 Kanning, K. C., Hudson, M., Amieux, P. S., Wiley, J. C., Bothwell, M. and Schecterson, L. C. (2003) Proteolytic processing of the p75 neurotrophin receptor and two homologs generates C-terminal fragments with signaling capability. J. Neurosci. 23, 5425–5436.

31 Murray, S. S., Perez, P., Lee, R., Hempstead, B. L. and Chao, M. V. (2004) A novel p75 neurotrophin receptor-related protein, NRH2, regulates nerve growth factor binding to the TrkA receptor. J. Neurosci. 24, 2742–2749.

32 Stephens, R. M., Loeb, D. M., Copeland, T. D., Pawson, T., Greene, L. A. and Kaplan, D. R. (1994) Trk receptors use redundant signal transduction pathways involving SHC and PLC-gamma 1 to mediate NGF responses. Neuron 12, 691–705.

33 Qian, X., Riccio, A., Zhang, Y. and Ginty, D. D. (1998) Identification and characterization of novel substrates of Trk receptors in developing neurons. Neuron 21, 1017–1029.

34 MacDonald, J. I., Gryz, E. A., Kubu, C. J., Verdi, J. M. and Meakin, S. O. (2000) Direct binding of the signaling adapter protein Grb2 to the activation loop tyrosines on the nerve growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase, TrkA. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 18225–18233.

35 Hagag, N., Halegoua, S. and Viola, M. (1986) Inhibition of growth factor-induced differentiation of PC12 cells by microinjection of antibody to ras p21. Nature 319, 680–682.

36 Szeberenyi, J., Cai, H. and Cooper, G. M. (1990) Effect of a dominant inhibitory Ha-ras mutation on neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 5324–5332.

37 Qiu, M. S. and Green, S. H. (1991) NGF and EGF rapidly activate p21ras in PC12 cells by distinct, convergent pathways involving tyrosine phosphorylation. Neuron 7, 937–946.

38 Troppmair, J., Bruder, J. T., App, H., Cai, H., Liptak, L., Szeberenyi, J., Cooper, G. M. and Rapp, U. R. (1992) Ras controls coupling of growth factor receptors and protein kinase C in the membrane to Raf-1 and B-Raf protein serine kinases in the cytosol. Oncogene 7, 1867–1873.

39 Thomas, S. M., DeMarco, M., D’Arcangelo, G., Halegoua, S. and Brugge, J. S. (1992) Ras is essential for nerve growth factor- and phorbol ester-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of MAP kinases. Cell 68, 1031–1040.

40 Marshall, C. J. (1995) Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. Cell 80, 179–185.

41 Kao, S., Jaiswal, R. K., Kolch, W. and Landreth, G. E. (2001) Identification of the mechanisms regulating the differential activation of the mapk cascade by epidermal growth factor and nerve growth factor in PC12 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 18169–18177.

42 Vogel, K. S., El-Afandi, M. and Parada, L. F. (2000) Neurofibromin negatively regulates neurotrophin signaling through p21ras in embryonic sensory neurons. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 15, 398–407.

43 York, R. D., Yao, H., Dillon, T., Ellig, C. L., Eckert, S. P., McCleskey, E. W. and Stork P. J. (1998) Rap1 mediates sustained MAP kinase activation induced by nerve growth factor. Nature 392, 622–626.

44 Wu, C., Lai, C. F. and Mobley, W. C. (2001) Nerve growth factor activates persistent Rap1 signaling in endosomes. J. Neurosci. 21, 5406–5416.

45 York, R. D., Molliver, D. C., Grewal, S. S., Stenberg, P. E., McCleskey, E. W. and Stork, P. J. (2000) Role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase and endocytosis in nerve growth factor-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation via Ras and Rap1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 8069–8083.

46 Meakin, S. O., MacDonald, J. I., Gryz, E. A., Kubu, C. J. and Verdi, J. M. (1999) The signaling adapter FRS-2 competes with Shc for binding to the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA: a model for discriminating proliferation and differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 9861–9870.

47 Minichiello, L., Casagranda, F., Tatche, R. S., Stucky, C. L., Postigo, A., Lewin, G. R., Davies, A. M. and Klein, R. (1998) Point mutation in trkB causes loss of NT4-dependent neurons without major effects on diverse BDNF responses. Neuron 21, 335–345.

48 Postigo, A., Calella, A. M., Fritzsch, B., Knipper, M., Katz, D., Eilers, A., Schimmang, T., Lewin, G. R., Klein, R. and Minichiello, L. (2002) Distinct requirements for TrkB and TrkC signaling in target innervation by sensory neurons. Genes Dev. 16, 633–645.

49 Kong, H., Boulter, J., Weber, J. L., Lai, C. and Chao, M. V. (2001) An evolutionarily conserved transmembrane protein that is a novel downstream target of neurotrophin and ephrin receptors. J. Neurosci. 21, 176–185.

50 Iglesias, T., Cabrera-Poch, N., Mitchell, M. P., Naven, T. J., Rozengurt, E. and Schiavo, G. (2000) Identification and cloning of Kidins220, a novel neuronal substrate of protein kinase, D. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 40048–40056.

51 Arevalo, J. C., Yano, H., Teng, K. K. and Chao, M. V. (2004) A unique pathway for sustained neurotrophin signaling through an ankyrin-rich membrane-spanning protein. EMBO J. 23, 2358–2368.

52 Arevalo, J. C., Pereira, D., Yano, H., Teng, K. K. and Chao, M. V. (2006) Identification of a switch in neurotrophin signaling by selective tyrosine phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 1001–1007.

53 Ginty, D. D., Bonni, A. and Greenberg, M. E. (1994) Nerve growth factor activates a Ras-dependent protein kinase that stimulates c-fos transcription via phosphorylation of CREB. Cell 77, 713–725.

54 Xing, J., Ginty, D. D. and Greenberg, M. E. (1996) Coupling of the RAS-MAPK pathway to gene activation by RSK2, a growth factor-regulated CREB kinase. Science 273, 959–963.

55 Deak, M., Clifton, A. D., Lucocq, L. M. and Alessi, D. R. (1998) Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK1) is directly activated by MAPK and SAPK2/p38, and may mediate activation of CREB. EMBO J. 17, 4426–4441.

56 Finkbeiner, S., Tavazoie, S. F., Maloratsky, A., Jacobs, K. M., Harris, K. M. and Greenberg, M. E. (1997) CREB, a major mediator of neuronal neurotrophin responses. Neuron 19, 1031–1047.

57 West, A. E., Griffith, E. C. and Greenberg, M. E. (2002) Regulation of transcription factors by neuronal activity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 921–931.

58 Holgado-Madruga, M., Moscatello, D. K., Emlet, D. R., Dieterich, R. and Wong, A. J. (1997) Grb2-associated binder-1 mediates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation and the promotion of cell survival by nerve growth factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 12419–12424.

59 Atwal, J. K., Massie, B., Miller, F. D. and Kaplan, D. R. (2000) The TrkB-Shc site signals neuronal survival and local axon growth via MEK and P13-kinase. Neuron 27, 265–277.

60 Encinas, M., Iglesias, M., Llecha, N. and Comella, J. X. (1999) Extracellular-regulated kinases and phosphatidylinositol 3-ki-

nase are involved in brain-derived neurotrophic factor-mediated survival and neuritogenesis of the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y. J. Neurochem. 73, 1409–1421.

61 Datta, S. R., Dudek, H., Tao, X., Masters, S., Fu, H., Gotoh, Y. and Greenberg M. E. (1997) Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. Cell 91, 231–241.

62 Zheng, W. H., Kar, S. and Quirion, R. (2002) FKHRL1 and its homologs are new targets of nerve growth factor Trk receptor signaling. J. Neurochem. 80, 1049–1061.

63 Foehr, E. D., Lin, X., O’Mahony, A., Geleziunas, R., Bradshaw, R. A. and Greene, W. C. (2000) NF-kappa B signaling promotes both cell survival and neurite process formation in nerve growth factor-stimulated PC12 cells. J. Neurosci. 20, 7556–7563.

64 Wooten, M. W., Seibenhener, M. L., Mamidipudi, V., Diaz-Meco, M. T., Barker, P. A. and Moscat, J. (2001) The atypical protein kinase C-interacting protein p62 is a scaffold for NF-kappaB activation by nerve growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 7709–7712.

65 Kuruvilla, R., Ye, H. and Ginty, D. D. (2000) Spatially and functionally distinct roles of the PI3-K effector pathway during NGF signaling in sympathetic neurons. Neuron 27, 499–512.

66 Markus, A., Zhong, J. and Snider, W. D. (2002) Raf and akt mediate distinct aspects of sensory axon growth. Neuron 35, 65–76.

67 Zhou, F. Q., Zhou, J., Dedhar, S., Wu, Y. H. and Snider, W. D. (2004) NGF-induced axon growth is mediated by localized inactivation of GSK-3beta and functions of the microtubule plus end binding protein APC. Neuron 42, 897–912.

68 Ming, G., Song, H., Berninger, B., Inagaki, N., Tessier-Lavigne, M. and Poo, M. (1999) Phospholipase C-gamma and phosphoinositide 3-kinase mediate cytoplasmic signaling in nerve growth cone guidance. Neuron 23, 139–148.

69 Kim, U. H., Fink, D. Jr, Kim, H. S., Park, D. J., Contreras, M. L., Guroff, G. and Rhee S. G. (1991) Nerve growth factor stimulates phosphorylation of phospholipase C-gamma in PC12 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 1359–1362.

70 Vetter, M. L., Martin-Zanca, D., Parada, L. F., Bishop, J. M. and Kaplan, D. R. (1991) Nerve growth factor rapidly stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of phospholipase C-gamma 1 by a kinase activity associated with the product of the trk protooncogene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 5650–5654.

71 Obermeier, A., Halfter, H., Wiesmuller, K. H., Jung, G., Schlessinger, J. and Ullrich, A. (1993) Tyrosine 785 is a major determinant of Trk-substrate interaction. EMBO J. 12, 933–941.

72 Corbit, K. C., Foster, D. A. and Rosner, M. R. (1999) Protein kinase Cdelta mediates neurogenic but not mitogenic activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in neuronal cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 4209–4218.

73 Chuang, H. H., Prescott, E. D., Kong, H., Shields, S., Jordt, S. E., Basbaum, A. I., Chao, M. V. and Julius, D. (2001) Bradykinin and nerve growth factor release the capsaicin receptor from PtdIns(4,5)P2-mediated inhibition. Nature 411, 957–962.

74 Toledo-Aral, J. J., Brehm, P., Halegoua, S. and Mandel, G. (1995) A single pulse of nerve growth factor triggers long-term neuronal excitability through sodium channel gene induction. Neuron 14, 607–611.

75 Choi, D. Y., Toledo-Aral, J. J., Segal, R. and Halegoua, S. (2001) Sustained signaling by phospholipase C-gamma mediates nerve growth factor-triggered gene expression. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 2695–2705.

76 Kang, H. and Schuman, E. M. (1995) Long-lasting neurotrophin-induced enhancement of synaptic transmission in the adult hippocampus. Science 267, 1658–1662.

77 Patterson, S. L., Abel, T., Deuel, T. A., Martin, K. C., Rose, J. C. and Kandel, E. R. (1996) Recombinant BDNF rescues

deficits in basal synaptic transmission and hippocampal LTP in BDNF knock-out mice. Neuron 16, 1137–1145.

78 Minichiello, L., Korte, M., Wolfer, D., Kuhn, R., Unsicker, K., Cestari, V., Rossi-Arnaud, C., Lipp, H. P., Bonhoeffer, T. and Klein, R. (1999) Essential role for TrkB receptors in hippocampus-mediated learning. Neuron 24, 401–414.

79 Minichiello, L., Calella, A. M., Medina, D. L., Bonhoeffer, T., Klein, R. and Korte, M. (2002) Mechanism of TrkB-mediated hippocampal long-term potentiation. Neuron 36, 121–137.

80 Liepinsh, E., Ilag, L. L., Otting, G. and Ibanez, C. F. (1997) NMR structure of the death domain of the p75 neurotrophin receptor. EMBO J. 16, 4999–5005.

81 Huang, B., Eberstadt, M., Olejniczak, E. T., Meadows, R. P. and Fesik, S. W. (1996) NMR structure and mutagenesis of the Fas (APO-1/CD95) death domain. Nature 384, 638–641.

82 He, X. L. and Garcia, K. C. (2004) Structure of nerve growth factor complexed with the shared neurotrophin receptor p75. Science 304, 870–875.

83 Cosgaya, J. M., Chan, J. R. and Shooter, E. M. (2002) The neurotrophin receptor p75NTR as a positive modulator of myelination. Science 298, 1245–1248.

84 Yamauchi, J., Chan, J. R. and Shooter, E. M. (2004) Neurotrophins regulate Schwann cell migration by activating divergent signaling pathways dependent on Rho GTPases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 8774–8779.

85 Du, Y., Fischer, T. Z., Clinton-Luke, P., Lercher, L. D. and Dreyfus, C. F. (2005) Distinct effects of p75 in mediating actions of neurotrophins on basal forebrain oligodendrocytes. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 31, 366–75.

86 Lee, K. F., Li, E., Huber, L. J., Landis, S. C., Sharpe, A. H., Chao, M. V. and Jaenisch, R. (1992) Targeted mutation of the gene encoding the low affinity NGF receptor p75 leads to deficits in the peripheral sensory nervous system. Cell 69, 737–749.

87 von Schack, D., Casademunt, E., Schweigreiter, R., Meyer, M., Bibel, M. and Dechant, G. (2001) Complete ablation of the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR causes defects both in the nervous and the vascular system. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 977–978.

88 Paul, C. E., Vereker, E., Dickson, K. M. and Barker, P. A. (2004) A pro-apoptotic fragment of the p75 neurotrophin receptor is expressed in p75NTRExonIV null mice. J. Neurosci. 24, 1917–1923.

89 Beattie, M. S., Harrington, A. W., Lee, R., Kim, J. Y., Boyce, S. L., Longo, F. M., Bresnahan, J. C., Hempstead, B. L. and Yoon, S. O. (2002) ProNGF induces p75-mediated death of oligodendrocytes following spinal cord injury. Neuron 36, 375–386.

90 Harrington, A. W., Leiner, B., Blechschmidt, C., Arevalo, J. C., Lee, R., Morl, K., Meyer, M., Hempstead, B. L., Yoon, S. O. and Giehl, K. M. (2004) Secreted proNGF is a pathophysiological death-inducing ligand after adult CNS injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 6226–6230.

91 Dicou, E., Pflug, B., Magazin, M., Lehy, T., Djakiew, D., Ferrara, P., Nerriere, V. and Harvie, D. (1997) Two peptides derived from the nerve growth factor precursor are biologically active. J. Cell. Biol. 136, 389–398.

92 Fahnstock, M., Yu, G., Michalski, B., Mathew, S., Colquhoun, A., Ross, G. M. and Coughlin, M. D. (2004) The nerve growth factor precursor proNGF exhibits neurotrophic activity but is less active than mature nerve growth factor. J. Neurochem. 89, 581–592.

93 Dobrowsky, R. T., Werner, M. H., Castellino, A. M., Chao, M. V. and Hannun, Y. A. (1994) Activation of the sphingomyelin cycle through the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor. Science 265, 1596–1599.

94 Brann, A. B., Tcherpakov, M., Williams, I. M., Futerman, A. H. and Fainzilber, M. (2002) Nerve growth factor-induced p75-mediated death of cultured hippocampal neurons is age-dependent and transduced through ceramide generated by neutral sphingomyelinase. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 9812–9818.

95  Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Carter, B. D., Dobrowsky, R. T. and Chao, M. V. (1996) Death of oligodendrocytes mediated by the interaction of nerve growth factor with its receptor p75. Nature 383, 716–719.

96  Yoon, S. O., Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Carter, B. and Chao, M. V. (1998) Competitive signaling between TrkA and p75 nerve growth factor receptors determines cell survival. J. Neurosci. 18, 3273–3281.

97  Yeiser, E. C., Rutkoski, N. J., Naito, A., Inoue, J. and Carter, B. D. (2004) Neurotrophin signaling through the p75 receptor is deficient in traf6−/− mice. J. Neurosci. 24, 10521–10529.

98  Khursigara, G., Orlinick, J. R. and Chao, M. V. (1999) Association of the p75 neurotrophin receptor with TRAF6. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 2597–2600.

99  Casademunt, E., Carter, B. D., Benzel, I., Frade, J. M., Dechant, G. and Barde, Y. A. (1999) The zinc finger protein NRIF interacts with the neurotrophin receptor p75(NTR) and participates in programmed cell death. EMBO J. 18, 6050–6061.

100 Gentry, J. J., Rutkoski, N. J., Burke, T. L. and Carter, B. D. (2004) A functional interaction between the p75 neurotrophin receptor interacting factors, TRAF6 and NRIF. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 16646–16656.

101 Linggi, M. S., Burke, T. L., Williams, B. B., Harrington, A., Kraemer, R., Hempstead, B. L., Yoon, S. O. and Carter, B. D. (2005) Neurotrophin receptor interacting factor (NRIF) is an essential mediator of apoptotic signaling by the p75 neurotrophin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 13801–13808.

102 Geetha, T., Kenchappa, R. S., Wooten, M. W. and Carter, B. D. (2005) TRAF6-mediated ubiquitination regulates nuclear translocation of NRIF, the p75 receptor interactor. EMBO J. 24, 3859–3868.

103 Salehi, A. H., Roux, P. P., Kubu, C. J., Zeindler, C., Bhakar, A., Tannis, L. L., Verdi, J. M. and Barker, P. A. (2000) NRAGE, a novel MAGE protein, interacts with the p75 neurotrophin receptor and facilitates nerve growth factor-dependent apoptosis. Neuron 27, 279–288.

104 Tcherpakov, M., Bronfman, F. C., Conticello, S. G., Vaskovsky, A., Levy, Z., Niinobe, M., Yoshikawa, K., Arenas, E. and Fainzilber, M. (2002) The p75 neurotrophin receptor interacts with multiple MAGE proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 49101–49104.

105 Kuwako, K., Taniura, H. and Yoshikawa, K. (2004) Necdin-related MAGE proteins differentially interact with the E2F1 transcription factor and the p75 neurotrophin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 1703–1712.

106 Kuwako, K., Hosokawa, A., Nishimura, I., Uetsuki, T., Yamada, M., Nada, S., Okada, M. and Yoshikawa, K. (2005) Disruption of the paternal necdin gene diminishes TrkA signaling for sensory neuron survival. J. Neurosci. 25, 7090–7099.

107 Kendall, S. E., Goldhawk, D. E., Kubu, C., Barker, P. A. and Verdi, J. M. (2002) Expression analysis of a novel p75(NTR) signaling protein, which regulates cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Mech. Dev. 117, 187–200.

108 Barrett, G. L., Greferath, U., Barker, P. A., Trieu, J. and Bennie, A. (2005) Co-expression of the P75 neurotrophin receptor and neurotrophin receptor-interacting melanoma antigen homolog in the mature rat brain. Neuroscience 133, 381–392.

109 Mukai, J., Hachiya, T., Shoji-Hoshino, S., Kimura, M. T., Nadano, D., Suvanto, P., Hanaoka, T., Li, Y., Irie, S., Greene, L.A. and Sato, T. A. (2000) NADE, a p75NTR-associated cell death executor, is involved in signal transduction mediated by the common neurotrophin receptor p75NTR. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 17566–17570.

110 Park, J. A., Lee, J. Y., Sato, T. A. and Koh, J. Y. (2000) Co-induction of p75NTR and p75NTR-associated death executor in neurons after zinc exposure in cortical culture or transient ischemia in the rat. J. Neurosci. 20, 9096–9103.

111 Kimura, M. T., Irie, S., Shoji-Hoshino, S., Mukai, J., Nadano, D., Oshimura, M. and Sato, T. A. (2001) 14-3-3 is involved in p75 neurotrophin receptor-mediated signal transduction. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 17291–17300.

112 Chittka, A. and Chao, M. V. (1999) Identification of a zinc finger protein whose subcellular distribution is regulated by serum and nerve growth factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 10705–10710.

113 Chittka, A., Arevalo, J. C., Rodriguez-Guzman, M., Perez, P., Chao, M. V. and Sendtner, M. (2004) The p75NTR-interacting protein SC1 inhibits cell cycle progression by transcriptional repression of cyclin, E. J. Cell. Biol. 164, 985–996.

114 Carter, B. D., Kaltschmidt, C., Kaltschmidt, B., Offenhauser, N., Bohm-Matthaei, R., Baeuerle, P. A. and Barde, Y. A. (1996) Selective activation of NF-kappa B by nerve growth factor through the neurotrophin receptor p75. Science 272, 542–545.

115 Mamidipudi, V., Li, X. and Wooten, M. W. (2002) Identification of interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinase as a conserved component in the p75-neurotrophin receptor activation of nuclear factor-kappa, B. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 28010–28018.

116 Khursigara, G., Bertin, J., Yano, H., Moffett, H., DiStefano, P. S. and Chao, M. V. (2001) A prosurvival function for the p75 receptor death domain mediated via the caspase recruitment domain receptor-interacting protein 2. J. Neurosci. 21, 5854–5863.

117 Burke, M. A. and Bothwell, M. (2003) p75 neurotrophin receptor mediates neurotrophin activation of NF-kappa B and induction of iNOS expression in P19 neurons. J. Neurobiol. 55, 191–203.

118 Salama-Cohen, P., Arevalo, M. A., Meier, J., Grantyn, R. and Rodriguez-Tebar, A. (2005) NGF controls dendrite development in hippocampal neurons by binding to p75NTR and modulating the cellular targets of Notch. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 339–347.

119 Bhakar, A. L., Roux, P. P., Lachance, C., Kryl, D., Zeindler, C. and Barker, P. A. (1999) The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) alters tumor necrosis factor-mediated NF-kappaB activity under physiological conditions, but direct p75NTR-mediated NF-kappaB activation requires cell stress. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 21443–21449.

120 Cosgaya, J. M. and Shooter, E. M. (2001) Binding of nerve growth factor to its p75 receptor in stressed cells induces selective IkappaB-beta degradation and NF-kappaB nuclear translocation. J. Neurochem. 79, 391–399.

121 Jaffe, A. B. and Hall, A. (2005) Rho GTPases, biochemistry and biology. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 21, 247–269.

122 Yamashita, T., Tucker, K. L. and Barde, Y. A. (1999) Neurotrophin binding to the p75 receptor modulates Rho activity and axonal outgrowth. Neuron 24, 585–593.

123 Gallo, G. and Letourneau, P. C. (2004) Regulation of growth cone actin filaments by guidance cues. J. Neurobiol. 58, 92–102.

124 Gehler, S., Gallo, G., Veien, E. and Letourneau, P. C. (2004) p75 neurotrophin receptor signaling regulates growth cone filopodial dynamics through modulating RhoA activity. J. Neurosci. 24, 4363–4372.

125 Wang, K. C., Kim, J. A., Sivasankaran, R., Segal, R. and He, Z. (2002) P75 interacts with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG and OMgp. Nature 420, 74–78.

126 Wong, S. T., Henley, J. R., Kanning, K. C., Huang, K. H., Bothwell, M. and Poo, M. M. (2002) A p75(NTR) and Nogo receptor complex mediates repulsive signaling by myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 1302–1308.

127 Mi, S., Lee, X., Shao, Z., Thill, G., Ji, B., Relton, J., Levesque, M., Allaire, N., Perrin, S., Sands, B., Crowell, T., Cate, R. L., McCoy, J. M. and Pepinsky, R. B. (2004) LINGO-1 is a component of the Nogo-66 receptor/p75 signaling complex. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 221–228.

128 Yamashita, T. and Tohyama, M. (2003) The p75 receptor acts as a displacement factor that releases Rho from Rho-GDI. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 461–467.

129 Dubreuil, C. I., Winton, M. J. and McKerracher, L. (2003) Rho activation patterns after spinal cord injury and the role of activated Rho in apoptosis in the central nervous system. J. Cell Biol. 162, 233–243.

130 DiStefano, P. S. and Johnson, E. M. Jr (1988) Identification of a truncated form of the nerve growth factor receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 270–274.

131 Jung, K. M., Tan, S., Landman, N., Petrova, K., Murray, S., Lewis, R., Lewis, R., Kim, P. K., Kim, D. S., Ryu, S. H., Chao, M. V. and Kim, T. W. (2003) Regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the p75 neurotrophin receptor modulates its association with the TrkA receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 42161–42169.

132 Landman, N. and Kim, T. W. (2004) Got RIP? Presenilin-dependent intramembrane proteolysis in growth factor receptor signaling. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 15, 337–351.

133 Weskamp, G., Schlondorff, J., Lum, L., Becherer, J. D., Kim, T. W., Saftig, P., Hartmann, D., Murphy, G. and Blobel, C. P. (2004) Evidence for a critical role of the tumor necrosis factor alpha convertase (TACE) in ectodomain shedding of the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR). J. Biol. Chem. 279, 4241–4249.

134 Zampieri, N., Xu, C. F., Neubert, T. A. and Chao, M. V. (2005) Cleavage of p75 neurotrophin receptor by alpha-secretase and gamma-secretase requires specific receptor domains. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 14563–14571.

135 Domeniconi, M., Zampieri, N., Spencer, T., Hilaire, M., Mellado, W., Chao, M. V., Filbin MT. (2005) MAG induces regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the p75 neurotrophin receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Neuron 46, 849–855.

136 Frade, J. M. (2005) Nuclear translocation of the p75 neurotrophin receptor cytoplasmic domain in response to neurotrophin binding. J. Neurosci. 25, 1407–1411.

137 Daub, H., Weiss, F. U., Wallasch, C. and Ullrich, A. (1996) Role of transactivation of the EGF receptor in signalling by G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 379, 557–560.

138 Fischer, O. M., Hart, S., Gschwind, A. and Ullrich, A. (2003) EGFR signal transactivation in cancer cells. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31, 1203–1208.

139 Luttrell, L. M., Daaka, Y. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1999) Regulation of tyrosine kinase cascades by G-protein-coupled receptors. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11, 177–183.

140 Lee, F. S. and Chao, M. V. (2001) Activation of Trk neurotrophin receptors in the absence of neurotrophins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 3555–3560.

141 Lee, F. S., Rajagopal, R., Kim, A. H., Chang, P. C. and Chao, M. V. (2002) Activation of Trk neurotrophin receptor signaling by pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptides. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 9096–9102.

142 Rajagopal, R., Chen, Z. Y., Lee, F. S. and Chao, M. V. (2004) Transactivation of Trk neurotrophin receptors by G-protein-coupled receptor ligands occurs on intracellular membranes. J. Neurosci. 24, 6650–6658.

143 Li, H. S., Xu, X. Z. and Montell, C. (1999) Activation of a TRPC3-dependent cation current through the neurotrophin BDNF. Neuron 24, 261–273.

144 Zhang, X., Huang, J. and McNaughton, P. A. (2005) NGF rapidly increases membrane expression of TRPV1 heat-gated ion channels. EMBO J. 24, 4211–4223.

145 Li, Y., Jia, Y. C., Cui, K., Li, N., Zheng, Z. Y., Wang, Y. Z. and Yuan, X. B. (2005) Essential role of TRPC channels in the guidance of nerve growth cones by brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Nature 434, 894–898.

146 Levine, E. S., Crozier, R. A., Black, I. B. and Plummer, M. R. (1998) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor modulates hippocampal synaptic transmission by increasing N-methyl-D-as-

147 Lin, S. Y., Wu, K., Levine, E. S., Mount, H. T., Suen, P. C. and Black, I. B. (1998) BDNF acutely increases tyrosine phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor subunit 2B in cortical and hippocampal postsynaptic densities. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 55, 20–27.

148 Tsui-Pierchala, B. A., Milbrandt, J. and Johnson, E. M. Jr (2002) NGF utilizes c-Ret via a novel GFL-independent, inter-RTK signaling mechanism to maintain the trophic status of mature sympathetic neurons. Neuron 33, 261–273.

149 Grimes, M. L., Zhou, J., Beattie, E. C., Yuen, E. C., Hall, D. E., Valletta, J. S., Topp, K. S., LaVail, J. H., Bunnett, N. W. and Mobley WC. (1996) Endocytosis of activated TrkA, evidence that nerve growth factor induces formation of signaling endosomes. J. Neurosci. 16, 7950–7964.

150 Riccio, A., Pierchala, B. A., Ciarallo, C. L. and Ginty, D. D. (1997) An NGF-TrkA-mediated retrograde signal to transcription factor CREB in sympathetic neurons. Science 277, 1097–1100.

151 Riccio, A., Ahn, S., Davenport, C. M., Blendy, J. A. and Ginty, D. D. (1999) Mediation by a CREB family transcription factor of NGF-dependent survival of sympathetic neurons. Science 286, 2358–2361.

152 Zhang, Y., Moheban, D. B., Conway, B. R., Bhattacharyya, A. and Segal, R. A. (2000) Cell surface Trk receptors mediate NGF-induced survival while internalized receptors regulate NGF-induced differentiation. J. Neurosci. 20, 5671–5678.

153 Yano, H., Lee, F. S., Kong, H., Chuang, J., Arevalo, J., Perez, P., Sung, C. and Chao, M. V. (2001) Association of Trk neurotrophin receptors with components of the cytoplasmic dynein motor. J. Neurosci. 21, RC125.

154 Heerssen, H. M., Pazyra, M. F. and Segal, R. A. (2004) Dynein motors transport activated Trks to promote survival of target-dependent neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 596–604.

155 Watson, F. L., Heerssen, H. M., Bhattacharyya, A., Klesse, L., Lin, M. Z. and Segal, R. A. (2001) Neurotrophins use the Erk5 pathway to mediate a retrograde survival response. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 981–988.

156 Howe, C. L., Valletta, J. S., Rusnak, A. S. and Mobley, W. C. (2001) NGF signaling from clathrin-coated vesicles, evidence that signaling endosomes serve as a platform for the Ras-MAPK pathway. Neuron 32, 801–814.

157 Delcroix, J. D., Valletta, J. S., Wu, C., Hunt, S. J., Kowal, A. S. and Mobley, W. C. (2003) NGF signaling in sensory neurons, evidence that early endosomes carry NGF retrograde signals. Neuron 39, 69–84.

158 Ye, H., Kuruvilla, R., Zweifel, L. S. and Ginty, D. D. (2003) Evidence in support of signaling endosome-based retrograde survival of sympathetic neurons. Neuron 39, 57–68.

159 MacInnis, B. L. and Campenot, R. B. (2002) Retrograde support of neuronal survival without retrograde transport of nerve growth factor. Science 295, 1536–1539.

160 Verveer, P. J., Wouters, F. S., Reynolds, A. R. and Bastiaens, P. I. (2000) Quantitative imaging of lateral ErbB1 receptor signal propagation in the plasma membrane. Science 290, 1567–1570.

161 Howe, C. L. and Mobley, W. C. (2004) Signaling endosome hypothesis: a cellular mechanism for long distance communication. J. Neurobiol. 58, 207–216.

162 Howe, C. L. and Mobley, W. C. (2005) Long-distance retrograde neurotrophic signaling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 15, 40–48.

163 Zweifel, L. S., Kuruvilla, R. and Ginty, D. D. (2005) Functions and mechanisms of retrograde neurotrophin signaling. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 615–625.

164 Makkerh, J. P., Ceni, C., Auld, D. S., Vaillancourt, F., Dorval, G. and Barker, P.A. (2005) p75 neurotrophin receptor reduces ligand-induced Trk receptor ubiquitination and delays

Trk receptor internalization and degradation. EMBO Rep. 6, 936–941.

165 Geetha, T., Jiang, J. and Wooten, M. W. (2005) Lysine 63 polyubiquitination of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA directs internalization and signaling. Mol. Cell 20, 301–312.

166 Qian, X. and Ginty, D. D. (2001) SH2-B and APS are multi-meric adapters that augment TrkA signaling. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 1613–1620.

167 Suzuki, K., Mizutani, M., Hitomi, Y., Kizaki, T., Ohno, H., Ishida, H., Haga S. and Koizumi S. (2002) Association of SH2-B to phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the activation loop of TrkB. Res. Commun. Mol. Pathol. Pharmacol. 111, 27–39.

168 Yamashita, H., Avraham, S., Jiang, S., Dikic, I. and Avraham, H. (1999) The Csk homologous kinase associates with TrkA receptors and is involved in neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 15059–15065.

169 Egea, J., Espinet, C., Soler, R. M., Peiro, S., Rocamora, N. and Comella, J. X. (2000) Nerve growth factor activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway is modulated by Ca(2+) and calmodulin. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 1931–1946.

170 Llovera, M., de Pablo, Y., Egea, J., Encinas, M., Peiro, S., Martin-Zanca, D. Rocamora N. and Comella J. X. (2004) Trk is a calmodulin-binding protein: implications for receptor processing. J. Neurochem. 88, 422–433.

171 Yano, H., Cong, F., Birge, R. B., Goff, S. P. and Chao, M. V. (2000) Association of the Abl tyrosine kinase with the Trk nerve growth factor receptor. J. Neurosci. Res. 59, 356–364.

172 Koch, A., Mancini, A., Stefan, M., Niedenthal, R., Niemann, H. and Tamura, T. (2000) Direct interaction of nerve growth factor receptor, TrkA, with non-receptor tyrosine kinase, c-Abl, through the activation loop. FEBS Lett. 469, 72–76.

173 Chang, M. S., Arevalo, J. C. and Chao, M. V. (2004) Ternary complex with Trk, p75, and an ankyrin-rich membrane spanning protein. J. Neurosci. Res. 78, 186–192.

174 Lou, X., Yano, H., Lee, F., Chao, M. V. and Farquhar, M. G. (2001) GIPC and GAIP form a complex with TrkA, a putative link between G protein and receptor tyrosine kinase pathways. Mol. Biol. Cell 12, 615–627.

175 Shao, Y., Akmentin, W., Toledo-Aral, J. J., Rosenbaum, J., Valdez, G., Cabot, J. B., Hilbush, B. S. and Halegoua, S. (2002) Pincher, a pinocytic chaperone for nerve growth factor/TrkA signaling endosomes. J. Cell Biol. 157, 679–691.

176 Valdez, G., Akmentin, W., Philippidou, P., Kuruvilla, R., Ginty, D. D. and Halegoua, S. (2005) Pincher-mediated mac-roendocytosis underlies retrograde signaling by neurotrophin receptors. J. Neurosci. 25, 5236–5247.

177 Nakamura, T., Komiya, M., Sone, K., Hirose, E., Gotoh, N., Morii, H., Ohta, Y. and Mori, N. (2002) Grit, a GTPase-acti-vating protein for the Rho family, regulates neurite extension through association with the TrkA receptor and N-Shc and CrkL/Crk adapter molecules. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 8721–8734.

178 Spencer, M. L., Shao, H., Tucker, H. M. and Andres, D. A. (2002) Nerve growth factor-dependent activation of the small GTPase Rin. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 17605–17615.

179 Shi, G. X., Han, J. and Andres, D. A. (2005) Rin GTPase couples nerve growth factor signaling to p38 and b-Raf/ERK

pathways to promote neuronal differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 37599–37609.

180 Spencer, M. L., Shao, H. and Andres, D. A. (2002) Induction of neurite extension and survival in pheochromocytoma cells by the Rit GTPase. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 20160–20168.

181 Shi, G. X. and Andres, D. A. (2005) Rit contributes to nerve growth factor-induced neuronal differentiation via activation of B-Raf-extracellular signal-regulated kinase and p38 mito-gen-activated protein kinase cascades. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 830–846.

182 MacDonald, J. I., Kubu, C. J. and Meakin, S. O. (2004) Nesca, a novel adapter, translocates to the nuclear envelope and regu-lates neurotrophin-induced neurite outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 164, 851–862.

183 Sole, C., Dolcet, X., Segura, M. F., Gutierrez, H., Diaz-Meco, M. T., Gozzelino, R., Sanchis, D., Bayascas, J. R., Gallego, C., Moscat J., Davies, A. M. and Comella, J. X. (2004) The death receptor antagonist FAIM promotes neurite outgrowth by a mechanism that depends on ERK and NF-kappa B signaling. J. Cell Biol. 167, 479–492.

184 Liu, H. Y., MacDonald, J. I., Hryciw, T., Li, C. and Meakin, S. O. (2005) Human tumorous imaginal disc 1 (TID1) associ-ates with Trk receptor tyrosine kinases and regulates neurite outgrowth in nmr5-TrkA cells. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 19461–19471.

185 Klein, M., Hempstead, B. L. and Teng, K. K. (2005) Activ-a-tion of STAT5-dependent transcription by the neurotrophin receptor Trk. J. Neurobiol. 63, 159–171.

186 Lo, K. Y., Chin, W. H., Ng, Y. P., Cheng, A. W., Cheung, Z. H. and Ip, N. Y. (2005) SLAM-associated protein as a poten-tial negative regulator in Trk signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 41744–41725.

187 MacDonald, J. I., Verdi, J. M. and Meakin, S. O. (1999) Ac-tivity-dependent interaction of the intracellular domain of rat trkA with intermediate filament proteins, the beta-6 protea-somal subunit, Ras-GRF1, and the p162 subunit of eIF3. J. Mol. Neurosci. 13, 141–158.

188 Robinson, K. N., Manto, K., Buchsbaum, R. J., MacDonald, J. I. and Meakin, S. O. (2005) Neurotrophin-dependent tyro-sine phosphorylation of Ras guanine-releasing factor 1 and associated neurite outgrowth is dependent on the HIKE do-main of TrkA. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 225–235.

189 Fuenzalida, K. M., Aguilera, M. C., Piderit, D. G., Ramos, P. C., Contador, D., Quinones, V., Rigotti, A., Bronfman, F. C., Bronfman, M. (2005) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma is a novel target of the nerve growth factor signaling pathway in PC12 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 9604–9609.

190 Yamauchi, J., Chan, J. R., Miyamoto, Y., Tsujimoto, G. and Shooter, E. M. (2005) The neurotrophin-3 receptor TrkC di-rectly phosphorylates and activates the nucleotide exchange factor Dbs to enhance Schwann cell migration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 5198–5203.

191 Yamauchi, J., Miyamoto, Y., Tanoue, A., Shooter, E. M. and Chan, J. R. (2005) Ras activation of a Rac1 exchange factor, Tiam1, mediates neurotrophin-3-induced Schwann cell mi-gration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 14889–14894.
