
International Journal of Cardiology

ELSEVIER International Journal of Cardiology 112 (2006) 142–152 www.elsevier.com/locate/ijcard

Review

Roles of cardiac ryanodine receptor in heart failure and sudden cardiac death

Arintaya Phrommintikul ${ }^{a,c}$, Nipon Chattipakorn ${ }^{b,c,*}$

${ }^{a}$ Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand  
${ }^{b}$ Cardiac Electrophysiology Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand  
${ }^{c}$ Cardiac Electrophysiology Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand  

Received 23 August 2005; received in revised form 17 November 2005; accepted 17 November 2005  
Available online 15 May 2006

---

### Abstract

Calcium ($\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$) plays an important role as a messenger in the excitation–contraction coupling process of the myocardium. It is stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and released via a calcium release channel called the ryanodine receptor. Cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) controls $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release, which is essential for cardiac contractility. There are several molecules which bind and regulate the function of RyR2 including calstabin2, calmodulin, protein kinase A (PKA), phosphatase, sorcin and calsequestrin. Alteration of RyR2 and associated molecules can cause functional and/or structural changes of the heart, leading to heart failure and sudden cardiac death. In this review, the alteration of RyR2 and its regulatory proteins, and its roles in heart failure and sudden cardiac death, are discussed. Evidence of a possible novel therapy targeting RyR2 and its associated regulatory proteins, currently proposed by investigators, is also included in this article.

© 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Calcium; Heart failure; Ryanodine receptor; Sudden death

---

### 1. Introduction

Heart failure and sudden cardiac death are escalating major health problems worldwide. The prevalence of heart failure in the general population is $3-20$ cases per 1000, and even higher at $40-100$ cases per 1000 in the elderly [1,2].

Despite the availability of several treatment modalities, heart failure patients still have high morbidity and mortality. Worsening heart failure and sudden cardiac death have been shown as a main cause of death in these patients [3]. A growing body of evidence indicates the important role of intracellular calcium ($\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$) in the pathogenesis of cardiac diseases, including heart failure and sudden cardiac death [4–6].

In cardiac myocytes, electrical depolarization of the sarcolemmal membrane normally leads to an increase in the intracellular calcium and eventually causes contraction of the myofilaments. This process is called excitation–contraction coupling (E–C coupling). $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ plays a major role as a second messenger in this process that converts electrical to mechanical energy [7]. $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ is released from an intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ storage/release organelle (i.e. sarcoplasmic reticulum, SR) via a calcium release channel known as the ryanodine receptor (RyR). $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ released via RyR normally produces a change in the level of cytoplasmic calcium [8]. It has been demonstrated that RyR dysfunction is involved in

---

**Abbreviations:** $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, Calcium; CaM, Calmodulin; CaMKII, Calmodulin kinase II; CICR, $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ induced–$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release; CPVT, Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachyarrhythmia; CRU, $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release unit; DAD, Delayed afterdepolarization; EAD, Early afterdepolarization; E–C coupling, Excitation–contraction coupling; $I_{\text {Ca }}$, Calcium current; $I_{\text {ti }}$, Transient inward current; LTCC, L-type $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ channel; NCX, $\mathrm{Na}^{+}-\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ exchanger; PKA, Protein kinase A; PLB, Phospholamban; Po, Opening probability; PP, Phosphatase; RyR, Ryanodine receptor; SERCA2a, SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ ATPase; SR, Sarcoplasmic reticulum; SOICR, Store-overload-induced $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release.

* Supported in part by Thailand Research Fund grants (NC).
* Corresponding author. Cardiac Electrophysiology Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand. Tel.: +66 53 945362; fax: +66 53 945365.
* E-mail address: nchattip@mail.med.cmu.ac.th (N. Chattipakorn).

0167-5273/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.11.106

several cardiac diseases, including heart failure and sudden cardiac death. Although extensive investigations on the role of RyR and its regulatory proteins have been reported, the results from these studies are not always in agreement. In this review, current knowledge as well as debate on the normal and abnormal structure and function of RyR and its role in heart failure and sudden cardiac death is discussed. Novel therapeutic strategies targeting RyR, as proposed by investigators, are also included.

2. Calcium regulation during excitation-contraction coupling in the normal heart

Depolarization that occurs during the cardiac action potential is known to activate voltage-gated L-type Ca²⁺ channel (LTCC) in the sarcolemmal membrane. A relatively small Ca²⁺ influx via the LTCC then triggers a thousand-fold greater calcium release from SR via RyR. This process is known as the Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release (CICR) process [7] that can elevate cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ from 100 nM during diastole to about 1 μM during systole [4]. Additional Ca²⁺ may enter the cell via the T-type Ca²⁺ channel (TTCC) as well as the Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger (NCX) [9,10]. The increasing cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ concentration, which can be measured as Ca²⁺ transients, results in an actin-myosin cross-bridge formation. This process is activated by Ca²⁺ binding to troponin C, causing a rearrangement of troponin complex. In turn, the latter causes a change in the position of tropomyosin on actin, releasing the inhibition of the actin-myosin cross-bridge. Translocation of the myosin heads along the actin filaments results in the shortening of

A SYSTOLE

[Diagram: Systole]

B DIASTOLE

[Diagram: Diastole]

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the excitation-contraction coupling. In systole, Ca²⁺ enters LTCC and triggers Ca²⁺ release from SR through RyR2 (CICR process). The increasing cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ concentration results in actin-myosin cross-bridge formation. In diastole, the majority of cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ is shunted into the SR by SR-Ca²⁺ ATPase (SERCA2a). Some Ca²⁺ are extruded from the cardiomyocyte via the NCX. SERCA2a activity is regulated by the inhibitory effect of phospholamban (PLB), whereas phosphorylation of PLB reverses the inhibition. The decreasing cytoplasmic concentration allows troponin I to attach to actin and inhibit actin-myosin cross-bridge.

sarcomere. For each excitation, numerous repetitive cross-
bridge cycles occur and the sum of total shortening of
sarcomere causes ventricular contraction, leading to an
expulsion of the blood through the cardiac valve.

During diastole, the myocardial relaxation process is
initiated by a decreased cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ level, leading to
the dissociation of Ca²⁺ from troponin C, and reposition-
ing of tropomyosin that inhibits the actin–myosin cross-
bridge. The majority of cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ is shunted into
the SR by SR-Ca²⁺ ATPase (SERCA2a) [8]. Some Ca²⁺
is extruded from the cardiomyocyte via the sarcolemmal
NCX and a modest amount of Ca²⁺ is removed by the
Ca²⁺ pump [8]. SERCA2a activity is regulated by the
inhibitory effect of phospholamban (PLB), whereas
phosphorylation of PLB reverses the inhibition [11].
Fig. 1 illustrates the excitation contraction coupling
process.

# Role of RyR in CICR

The role of RyR in SR-Ca²⁺ release in CICR is well
documented. However, there are still debates about the
negative control of CICR. Several mechanisms have been
proposed to explain the phenomenon of CICR termination,
including Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation of RyR, Ca²⁺-depen-
dent adaptation of RyR or RyR modal gating and SR-Ca²⁺
depletion [12]. The two candidate mechanisms are Ca²⁺-
dependent inactivation and RyR adaptation [13].

Fabatio was the first to propose the Ca²⁺-dependent
inactivation of SR-Ca²⁺ release, based on his finding that a
high free-Ca²⁺ level inhibited SR-Ca²⁺ release, which was a
negative feedback to SR-Ca²⁺ release channels [14]. Although later studies demonstrated various responses
[15,16], Laver and colleagues demonstrated that this
mechanism could be observed at a very high Ca²⁺
concentration (>1 mM) [16].

RyR adaptation in CICR was investigated using a single
channel recording. With this technique, various features of
Ca²⁺ modulation such as activation, inactivation, deactiva-
tion and adaptation were demonstrated. Gyorke and Fill
demonstrated that the fast Ca²⁺ stimuli rapidly activated a
single RyR channel in the planar bilayer to a high opening
probability (Po), which then slowly and spontaneously
decayed without any evidence of Ca²⁺ dependent RyR
inactivation, since the channel could be reactivated again
with a second Ca²⁺ stimulus instead of staying in the
refractory period [17]. They called this manner the RyR
adaptation. Later, Fill et al. demonstrated 3 distinct gating
modes of RyR including high Po mode, low Po mode and
inactivated mode [18]. Each single channel fluctuated
spontaneously between modes with different capacities to
respond to a Ca²⁺ stimulus. This model demonstrated that
Ca²⁺-dependent transitions involved RyR activation, model
gating, and inactivation [18]. Due to a different model of
studies and different findings, all of these proposed

mechanisms of RyR may play an important role in Ca²⁺
regulation in CICR.

## 4. RyR family, structure and its regulatory proteins

RyRs are a family of Ca²⁺-release channels found on SR.
There are 3 isoforms of RyRs from 3 different encoding
genes. RyR1 and RyR2 were first found in mammalian
skeletal and cardiac muscle. RyR2 is the major isoform
found in cardiac muscle and the brain [19]. RyR1 is the
major isoform in skeletal muscle, whereas RyR3 is the
major isoform in the brain and skeletal muscle [20]. All
three isoforms have the same size. RyR1 and RyR2 have
~66% homologous amino acid sequence [4]. RyR1
responds to voltage-induced Ca²⁺ release, RyR2 and RyR3
responds to Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release, but with lower Ca²⁺
sensitivity in RyR3 [19–21]. Munch et al. demonstrated that
all RyR isoforms exist in human myocardium, with different
quantities in different cardiac chambers [21].

The phylogenetic tree of the RyR family generated from
the RyR sequence has shown that nonmammalian verte-
brates have 2 isoforms, RyR alpha and RyR beta, which are
homologous to RyR1 and RyR3, respectively in mamma-
lians [19]. Protein sequence analysis has shown that RyR2
in human and rabbit cardiac muscle has a high level of
identity (98.6%) [19].

The majority of RyR2 is distributed in the SR membrane
that lies in proximity to the transverse tubule (T-tubule)
invagination of the sarcolemmal membrane. In the cardiac
myocyte, the intracellular junction between the sarcolemmal
membrane containing LTCCs, and the SR terminal cisternae
containing RyR2, is called the “dyad”. Within the dyad, 1
LTCC associates with 5–10 RyR2 channels, forming an
organized structure known as the “Ca²⁺-release unit
(CRU)” [22]. Although no direct protein–protein interac-
tion between LTCC and RyR2 is necessary in CICR [4,23],
Dulhunty et al. demonstrated that parts of LTCC and RyR2
can interact with each other under appropriate conditions
and may play different role in the modification of RyR2
activity in each condition [23]. However, the significance of
this physical interaction needs to be further investigated.

RyR2 is a macromolecular complex of 2.5 MDa
molecular weight composed of four identical RyR2 mono-
mers. Each RyR2 protomer contains a large N-terminal
regulatory region that protrudes into the cytoplasm and a C-
terminal that forms a transmembrane pore channel. The N-
terminal domain serves as a scaffold for proteins that
modulate RyR2 function [4]. The cytoplasmic domain of
each subunit has a binding site for several molecules such as
calstabin, protein kinase A, protein phosphatases 1 and 2A
(PP1 and PP2A), calmodulin, and sorcin as illustrated in
Fig. 2. These RyR2 binding proteins function as RyR2
regulatory proteins, which regulate RyR2 activity [24]. On
the luminal side of SR, the RyR2 interact with calsequestrin,
triadin and junctin [4]. In this review, RYR2 binding

A. Phrommintikul, N. Chattipakorn / International Journal of Cardiology 112 (2006) 142–152

**Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of RyR2 complex of normal heart (A), heart failure (B) and RyR2 mutants (C). In heart failure, calstabin2 depletion leads to an increased opening probability of RyR2 and diastolic Ca²⁺ leak. In mutants RyR2, no diastolic Ca²⁺ leak at rest but exaggerated dissociation of calstabin2 in response to PKA-phosphorylation is found. See text for details.**

proteins that are broadly accepted as major regulatory proteins and their clinical significance regarding heart failure and sudden cardiac death are discussed.

### 5. Calstabin2 as RyR2 regulatory protein

Calstabin2 is formerly known as FKBP12.6 or FK506-binding protein. FKBP's are a family of cis-trans isomerase proteins that are named according to their molecular mass such as FKBP 12, FKBP12.6, and FKBP13 [25]. FKBP12 (also known as calstabin1) binds tightly to RyR1, while FKBP12.6 (also known as calstabin2) preferentially binds to RyR2. Jeyakumar et al. demonstrated the difference in the affinity of RyR2 for both calstabin1 and 2 among species. While the affinity of calstabin1 was 8-fold lower than calstabin2 in humans and mice, it was 500-fold lower in dogs [26]. In the cardiac myocyte, the tissue concentration of calstabin1 is higher than that of calstabin2. However, the preferential interaction is driven by a higher affinity of RyR2 to calstabin2 compared to calstabin1 [27]. Calstabin2 binds tightly, one-to-one, to each RyR2 monomer on the outer surface of the cytoplasm domain. The binding and interaction site, however, is still controversial. Masumiya et al. localized the binding site at the N-terminal domain [28], whereas Zissimopoulos and Lai suggested the C-terminal, proximal to the channel pore as a binding site [29]. This tight binding stabilizes the RyR2 channel in the closed state during the resting phase of the heart, and
dilated cardiac chamber, diminished fractional shortening as well as some cardiac anomalies like ventricular septal defect. However, no evidence of skeletal muscle abnormality was found [37]. Single channel recording also demonstrated the increased Po in the subconductance state of RyR1 and RyR2 in calstabin1 knockout mice compared to that in wild type mice. Cardiac hypertrophy has also been demonstrated in male calstabin2 knockout mice, and female mice received an estrogen receptor antagonist [35].

## 6. Protein kinase A and protein phosphatases as RyR2 regulatory proteins

Protein kinase A (PKA) binds to RyR2 via an A kinase anchoring protein (AKAP), specifically mAKAP, at the leucine zipper of RyR2 [38]. The target site of PKA-mediated RyR2 phosphorylation is serine-2809 (Ser-2809) of RyR2. There are some controversies regarding the effect of PKA-dependent RyR2 phosphorylation. Marx et al. found that PKA-dependent RyR2 phosphorylation dissociated calstabin2 from RyR2 and enhanced steady state Po [39]. However, Xiao et al. demonstrated that calstabin2 still bound to RyR2 after this phosphorylation [40]. The reasons for this discrepancy in the results may be due to the difference in their study protocols, since the concentration of calstabin2 was much higher in the study that failed to demonstrate calstabin2 dissociation during RyR2 phosphorylation. Ginsburg et al. demonstrated that at a fixed SR-Ca²⁺ load and \(I_{\text{Ca}}\), the PKA-dependent phosphorylation had no effect on the amount of SR-Ca²⁺ release. However, it increased the rate of release and the rate of turn-off release. In the complex physiological status, PKA activation increases \(I_{\text{Ca}}\)-triggered CICR and SR-Ca²⁺ load due to PLB phosphorylation. As a result, the amount of SR-Ca²⁺ release during E–C coupling is greatly enhanced [41].

The protein phosphatases 1 and 2A are bound to RyR2 via spinophilin and PR130, respectively. The definite effect of phosphatases is still unclear. It has been shown that phosphatases reduce the Po of RyR2 [42,43]. However, a recent study by Terentyev et al. demonstrated that at a single channel level, the direct effect of phosphatases on RyR2 is to; 1) increase the Po of RyR2; 2) transiently increase the SR-Ca²⁺ release; and 3) deplete the SR-Ca²⁺ [10]. Further studies are required to warrant the definite effect of phosphatases on RyR2.

## 7. Calmodulin and Calmodulin kinase II as RyR2 regulatory proteins

Calmodulin (CaM) is a calcium binding protein. The functional role of CaM to RyR2 is still under investigation. Under physiological conditions, calcium-bound CaM inhibits the Po of RyR2 and alters Ca²⁺-dependent activation of

RyR. However, Ca²⁺-free CaM (apoCaM) may partially be an agonist for RyR function [44,45].

Although it is known that calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) binds to RyR2, the exact binding mechanism has not been identified [4]. The phosphorylation activity of CaMKII is partially autoinhibited normally. When Ca²⁺ binds to CaM, this complex displaces the autoinhibitory domain and exposes the catalytic activity site of CaMKII. CaMKII also can be autophosphorylated and partially active in the absence of Ca²⁺–CaM [46]. There are up to six-consensual phosphorylation sites on the RyR2 such as Ser-2809 and Ser-2815 [4,24]. Wu et al. found that CAMKII mediated RyR2 phosphorylation could reduce SR-Ca²⁺ release [47]. However, a recent study by Wehrens et al. demonstrated that CAMKII mediated RyR2 phosphorylation increases SR-Ca²⁺ release [44]. They found that the CAMKII-dependent RyR2 phosphorylation increases the Po of RyR2 and activates SR-Ca²⁺-release during diastole and systole. However, contrary to PKA phosphorylation, it does not dissociate calstabin2 from RyR2 [44]. The reason for this discrepancy in the results could be due to the difference in the amount of SR-Ca²⁺ load between the two studies. Since the former study did not measure SR-Ca²⁺ load as a control, the phosphorylation could deplete SR-Ca²⁺ store and calcium transient despite the enhanced fractional calcium release, resulting in reduced SR-Ca²⁺ release.

## 8. Sorcin and calsequestrin as RyR2 regulatory proteins

Sorcin is a 21.6 kDa Ca²⁺-binding protein in the Penta-EF hand family, enriched in cardiac Z line. It is in a soluble form in the cytoplasmic component during low cytoplasmic calcium state but has a conformational change and translocates to membrane-bound target proteins in the high cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ state [13]. Sorcin binds to RyR2 with high affinity and completely inhibits both spontaneous channel and \(I_{\text{Ca}}\)-triggered activity [13]. Due to the location of sorcin and its effect on RyR2, there is a high possibility of its role in terminating the positive feedback loop of CICR. In single cell studies, sorcin shortened the duration, decreased the amplitude, and enhanced the decay rate of Ca²⁺ transient [13,48]. However, in the study using adenovirus-mediated overexpression of sorcin cardiomyocyte, the amplitude Ca²⁺ transient, maximal rate of Ca²⁺ rise, SERCA2a activity as well as the contractility were shown to increase [48,49]. In the study using transgenic mice with a cardiac-specific overexpression of sorcin, a significant reduction in cardiac contraction and relaxation properties was observed [50]. The discrepancy of the sorcin effects could be due to the different methodology used in those studies such as different exposure time to sorcin as well as the concentration of sorcin used in each study. With various results obtained from studies using different models and methods, the definite effects of sorcin on RyR2 are to be further investigated.Calsequestrin is a major intra-SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-binding protein localized at the junctional face membrane in the SR. It is coupled to the RyR2 by anchoring proteins called Triadin and Junctin. In addition to its function as an intra-SR calcium store, calsequestrin has been demonstrated as possibly responsible for RyR2 regulation as a luminal $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ sensing of RyR2 [51, 52]. An increase in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ sensed by calsequestrin can lead to an opening of RyR2. Rat cardiomyocyte infected with a calsequestrin mutation gene showed the compromising ability of calsequestrin to form high capacity $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ binding oligomer, leading to abnormal storing and releasing SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, and abnormal $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transient [53].

### 9. Regulation of RyR2 activity

RyR2 activity is known to determine the cytoplasmic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transient and cardiac contractility sequentially. There are several factors affecting RyR2 activity including $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$, ATP and nitric oxide as a physiologic modulator, direct modulation of RyR2 by phosphorylation, pharmacological agents such as caffeine and ryanodine, immunosuppressive agents such as rapamycin, and FK506.

$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ regulates RyR2 activity from both the cytoplasmic and luminal sides of SR [24]. $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ entry via LTCC is the physiological trigger for the systolic SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release. When SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ is elevated, it can also trigger SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release without cell membrane depolarization. This process is known as store-overload-induced $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release (SOICR) [54]. Intracellular $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$ can inhibit RyR2 gating. However, this inhibition is modest at a physiologic condition with normal ATP level, since ATP acts as a buffer for $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$. Depletion of ATP during ischemia as well as the increase in free intracellular $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$ can lead to the reduction of RyR2 sensitivity to $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ [55, 56].

Nitric oxide interacts with multiple cardiac channels in different ways. NOS1 (neuronal NOS) resides in the SR and NOS3 (endothelial NOS) resides in caveolae of the sarcolemmal and T-tubules [57]. NO synthesis by NOS1 increases the Po of the RyR2. However, NO synthesis by NOS3 inhibits RyR2 [58]. Barouch et al. demonstrated a reduction of response to $\beta$-adrenergic stimulation in NOS1 knockout mice, whereas NOS3 knockout mice showed enhanced response [59]. Since NOS3 has a negative effect on LTCC activity, NOS3 knockout mice demonstrated an enhanced contractility in responding to $\beta$-adrenergic stimulation. In this study, NOS1 knockout mice also developed cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure phenotype due to $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-cyclic abnormality [59].

While in a hyperadrenergic state such as during exercise or stress, a high amount of catecholamines are released. These catecholamines bind to a $\beta$-adrenergic receptor ($\beta$-AR) and activate adenylyl cyclase, causing an increase in intracellular adenosine $3^{\prime}, 5^{\prime}$-monophosphate (cAMP) concentration, which in turn activates c-AMP dependent protein kinase A. PKA-mediated phosphorylation of RyR2 at RyR2-

serines (Ser) 2809 leads to a partial dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2 [39]. The dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2 increases the Po of RyR2, allowing an increase in SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release and causing an increase in intracytoplasmic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, thus augmenting cardiac contractility. In normal cardiomyocyte, RyR2 phosphorylation does not increase the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ spark frequency during diastole when RyR2 should be tightly closed [60]. Thus, healthy subjects do not develop SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ leaks and arrhythmias during exercise [61].

In a hyperadrenergic state, PKA also phosphorylates LTCC, PLB and NCX along with RyR2, resulting in an increased activity [4]. In association with increasing heart rate, intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ is increased, which in turn activates CAMKII. This activated CAMKII phosphorylates RyR2 and results in an increase in the Po of RyR2. An increase in CAMKII activity also results in phosphorylation of LTCC and PLB [44, 62]. The functional effects of this $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ handling includes increased $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release from the SR and enhanced reuptake of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, thus facilitating diastole in cardiomyocytes.

### 10. Role of RyR2 in heart failure

An alteration in E–C coupling is one of the possible factors in the pathogenesis of heart failure. Impaired calcium transient is a key factor for an alteration of E–C coupling, leading to contractile dysfunction and the development of ventricular arrhythmias [4, 6]. Characteristics of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ cycling in heart failure include a decreased amplitude of the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transient, a slow rate of diastolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ decay, and an increased diastolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ [5, 6]. Several mechanisms have been proposed for the alteration of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transients. These include a decreased SR-$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ uptake, due to a down regulation of the SERCA2a protein [5, 63]; functional upregulation of the inhibitory function of PLB owing to hypophosphorylation of PLB [64]; upregulation of NCX protein expression and activity [65]; and the abnormal RyR2 function [39, 66]. Changes that lead to maladaptive responses are the result of a chronic hyperadrenergic state, which is the hallmark of chronic heart failure. Most studies have demonstrated that in heart failure hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 causes the dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2 and a decreased level of calstabin2 in the RyR2 macromolecule as demonstrated in Fig. 2 [39, 64–68]. However, one study could not demonstrate the hyperphosphorylated state of RyR2 in this condition [5]. In this study, the phosphatase activity was not inhibited during the quantification of the phosphorylation level. It is possible that the hyperphosphorylation state could not be demonstrated, due to the dephosphorylation of phosphatase [64]. Therefore, the discrepancy in the results could be due to the different methodologies used in the studies.

The animal model of pacing-induced heart failure showed RyR2 hyperphosphorylation and a progressively decreased ratio of calstabin2 to RyR2 over a 4-week period
[69]. The anatomical and functional changes from an echocardiogram paralleled the molecular changes. PKA-mediated hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 has been shown to cause the dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2 macromolecular complex and a conformational change of RyR2. These changes result in a leftward shift of Ca²⁺ sensitivity of RyR2 to CICR. As a result, RyR2 can be triggered by only a small amount of Ca²⁺ as well as diastolic Ca²⁺ [69]. Chronic Ca²⁺ leakage from SR combined with decreased SERCA2a activity can lead to a partial depletion of the Ca²⁺ store. Dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2 can also lead to functional uncoupling of RyR2 in the CRU. All of these abnormalities eventually result in a decreased systolic calcium transient, impaired E-C coupling, and decreased cardiac contractility [63,70–74].

Chronic activation of the sympathetic nervous system found in heart failure also causes maladaptive changes within the β-adrenergic receptor system. These include downregulation of β-AR number and function, desensitization and uncoupling of stimulatory Gs subunit by receptor kinases, upregulation of the inhibitory Gi subunit, downregulation of adenylyl cyclases, and depressed intracellular cAMP synthesis [4]. Although cAMP-dependent signaling is downregulated in heart failure, it appears that chronically increased sympathetic stimulation sustains PKA phosphorylation of specific intracellular targets such as RyR2 [39,64,67]. In addition, downregulation of phosphatase activity of PP1 and PP2A levels in the RyR2 complex has been shown to involve a significant increase in the PKA phosphorylation level [24]. Apart from the changes in the RyR2 macromolecule, remodeling of the dyad microarchitecture has been reported to alter intracellular Ca²⁺ cycling. This change leads to an alteration in spacing between LTCC and RyR2, thus decreasing the ability of Ica to trigger Ca²⁺ release from the SR. These changes contribute to reduced synchrony of SR-Ca²⁺ release [4,71].

Although a number of studies have indicated that alteration of structure and function of RyR2 plays an important role in heart failure, Jiang et al. reported otherwise. They found that in a canine model of tachycardia-induced heart failure and clinical human heart failure, an abnormal Ca²⁺ release occurs, but RyR2 functions normally [5]. This finding proposed the possible role of another molecule involved in Ca²⁺ handling in heart failure pathogenesis, such as SERCA2a. This hypothesis is supported by several studies that used knockout mice. In calstabin2 knockout mice studies, ventricular contraction abnormality was not observed even though these mice were completely depleted of calstabin2 in RyR2 macromolecular complex [5,60,75]. The reason could be due to the role of another protein involved in calcium handling such as SERCA2a which still functions normally in these mutant mice, resulting in normal SR-Ca²⁺ levels and normal E-C coupling, thus maintaining contractility.

Diastolic leaking of Ca²⁺ also predisposes heart failure subjects to cardiac arrhythmia. Intracellular Ca²⁺ overload from Ca²⁺ leakage can activate transient inward current (Iti), causing membrane depolarization resulting in delayed afterdepolarization (DADs) and triggered arrhythmia [76]. Iti may also result from forward mode NCX net Na⁺ influx [77] or from Ca²⁺ activated Cl⁻ current (Ica/ICI) [78]. Cardiac arrhythmia in heart failure patients can be triggered by early afterdepolarization (EADs). Reduced SR-Ca²⁺ release leads to slow inactivation of Ica through LTCC, resulting in action potential prolongation [79]. The prolongation of action potential provides a substrate for EAD triggered cardiac arrhythmias [80].

### 11. RyR2 as a target for novel therapy in heart failure

Currently, there are many options available for heart failure treatment including medications, surgical therapy and device therapy. Several therapies have been proven to prolong survival rate such as beta-blocker [81], angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor [82], aldosterone antagonist [83] and cardiac resynchronization therapy with or without an implantable cardiac defibrillator [84]. Beta-blocker, an old drug that came into a new standard therapy, reduces mortality and reverses cardiac remodeling in heart failure patients [85]. There are studies in human and animal models demonstrating that beta-blockers can prevent as well as reverse PKA-mediated phosphorylation of RyR2, restore stoichiometry of RyR2 and calstabin2 complex, and normalize RyR2 function [86,87]. In heart failure induced by rapid ventricular pacing in dogs, the benefit of propanolol given during rapid ventricular pacing has been demonstrated [67]. It could prevent the dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2, thus reducing SR-Ca²⁺ leakage. These findings were consistent with the preserved left ventricular systolic function and prevention of ventricular remodeling in the propanolol treated group in this study. The phosphorylation of RyR2 was also lower in the propanolol treated group. A recent report by Reiken et al. also demonstrated that heart failure patients treated with beta-blocker have a normal RyR2 stoichiometry and function as well as improvement of the left ventricular function [86]. These effects of propanolol on RyR2 function might underlie the benefit of some beta-blockers in preventing and reversing cardiac remodeling as well as cardiac arrhythmia in heart failure patients [85].

Although several modalities of therapy are available, heart failure patients still have high mortality, due to progressive cardiac pumping failure and sudden cardiac death [3]. In the past decade, JTV519, a benzothiazepine derivative, has been investigated by many investigators as a possible new therapeutic approach for heart failure targeting the RyR2 macromolecule. In pacing-induced heart failure in dogs, Kohno et al. found that JTV519 could correct the defective channel gating of RyR2 in isolated cardiomyocytes [88]. They also demonstrated that the effect of JTV519 on SR-Ca²⁺ release in failing myocardium was similar to
that of reconstitution of calstabin2 into FKB506-induced calstabin2-dissociated RyR2. Therefore, JTV519 exerts a calstabin2-like channel stabilizing effect. However, it did not affect SERCA2a activity [88].

A recent study from Yano et al. showed that JTV519 infused during pacing induced heart failure prevented the dissociation of calstabin2 from RyR2, thus inhibiting conformational change, spontaneous Ca²⁺ leakage and left ventricular remodeling in dogs [89]. This study also demonstrated the effect of JTV519 on increased SERCA2a activity, and increased phosphorylation of PLB, resulting in increased Ca²⁺ uptake capacity of SR. The RyR2 phosphorylation was also lower in the JTV 519 treated group. This low RyR2 phosphorylation cannot be explained by the action of JTV519, which increases the binding affinity of calstabin2 to RyR2. It is plausible that the effect of JTV519 on the SERCA2a phosphorylation level could be secondary to the protective effect against heart failure, which induced hyperphosphorylation and deleterious effects on several proteins.

### 12. Role of RyR2 in sudden cardiac death

Although ventricular arrhythmias leading to sudden cardiac death are commonly associated with structural heart disease such as heart failure, they also occur in young, healthy individuals without structural heart disease [90]. DADs are the common triggered arrhythmia leading to ventricular tachyarrhythmias in both normal and structural diseased hearts [4,75]. Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) are the cause of sudden cardiac death that has been found to associated with RyR2 mutation [91,92].

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachyarrhythmia (CPVT), also known as familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (FPVT), is a rare disease that manifests as exercise-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in the absence of resting electrocardiographic or anatomical abnormality [93]. In this group of patients, there is the inheritance of more than 20 autosomal dominant inheritance of missense mutations in the RyR2 gene [94,95]. Wehrens et al. demonstrated that CPVT mutant RyR2 channels have a decreased binding affinity for calstabin2 [75]. Although the channels exhibit a low activity during the resting state, similar to those of wild type RyR2, they exhibit exaggerated calstabin2 dissociation from RyR2 in response to PKA-mediated phosphorylation [75]. Excessive calstabin2 dissociation increases RyR2 function, causing more SR-Ca²⁺ release and diastolic Ca²⁺ leak. Lehnart et al. also demonstrated that RyR2 mutations in FPVT are partially resistant to the inhibitory effect of Mg²⁺, the important endogenous channel modulator, and not inhibited by the physiological range of Mg²⁺ concentration [96].

Using calstabin2 knockout (calstabin2−/−) mice, Wehrens et al. demonstrated that they had a normal resting ECG [60]. However, they developed polymorphic ventricular tachycardia followed by sudden death during exercise and epinephrine injection. This was not observed in wild type mice. They also demonstrated DADs, which was found only in knockout mice during exercise [60]. In another study from this group, they found that after exercise, the calstabin2 deficient (calstabin2+/−) mice had more depletion of RyR2 bound calstabin2 than the wild type mice for the same level of RyR2 phosphorylation [75].

Unlike the findings from Wehrens et al., George and colleagues found that CPVT mutant RyR2 channels had augmented SR-Ca²⁺ release, but similar calstabin2 interaction in both wild type and mutants RyR2 [97]. The reason for the discrepancy in the results could be due to the fact that there are many types of mutations in CPVT mutant RyR2. Thomas et al. demonstrated the functional heterogeneity of Ca²⁺ release through these RyR2 mutants [98]. For example, the N²³⁸⁶ mutation of RyR2 exhibited enhanced sensitivity to channel activation, whereas the L⁴³³P mutation exhibited a marked reduction in sensitivity. Regardless of their functional heterogeneity, all mutations resulted in an increased duration of elevated cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ levels following channel activation [98]. Thus, different findings from transgenic mice suggest that the mechanistic basis of RyR2 activation in sudden cardiac death is complex and needs more comprehensive studies for each mutation.

Recently, Jiang et al. proposed a model of an RyR2 mutant in CPVT associated with SOICR [54]. They found that the CPVT mutant RyR2 had an increased sensitivity to SR luminal Ca²⁺ or lower threshold of SOICR. In this model, during resting state, the SR free-Ca²⁺ could be lower than this threshold, thus no Ca²⁺ leakage was seen. However, in conditions of hypercatecholamines or stresses, the SR-free Ca²⁺ was increased to a level above the threshold and led to SR-Ca²⁺ leakage. They proposed that this model of abnormal RyR2 threshold to Ca²⁺ activation may underlie the ultimate outcome of CPVT mutant RyR2, regardless of calstabin2 involvement [54].

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy is an autosomal dominant cardiomyopathy. There are about 6 mutations reported of a RyR2 mutation in ARVD type 2. All of these mutations are located in the N-terminal and central domain. These are different from CPVT-mutations in which these mutations are located mainly at C-terminal domain and central domain [92]. Since some patients with CPVT and ARVD2 have sudden cardiac death as a first presenting symptom, the detection of RyR2 mutations that causes CPVT and ARVD2 allows the way to detect carriers of the disease as well as the means for appropriate monitoring and treatment.

Although both PKA-phosphorylated CPVT-mutant RyR2 and wild type RyR2 channels from failing hearts exhibit increased activity of RyR2, which may promote SR-Ca²⁺ leak, there is a distinction between these two molecules. The CPVT-mutant RyR2 has a reduced affinity
for calstabin2 and an impaired ability of the channel to close during diastole. No diastolic SR-Ca²⁺ leak was observed at rest in these mutants [75]. However, in heart failure the RyR2 macromolecules are depleted of calstabin2, due to chronic PKA-phosphorylation, and diastolic SR-Ca²⁺ leak occurs at rest [39]. The difference in the resting channel gating property of calstabin2-deficient RyR2 between mutant RyR2 and heart failure remains to be determined.

13. RyR2 as a target for novel therapy in sudden cardiac death

It has been shown that RyR2 mutation carriers have a high morbidity and mortality rate, ranging from 30% to 50% at 35 years old [93,96]. Despite the use of beta-blocker, they still have an incomplete protection from recurrent syncope and sudden cardiac death. Lehnart et al. showed that JTV519 significantly increased the calstabin2 level in the RyR2 mutant channel and normalized the Po of RyR2 [96]. Wehrens et al. demonstrated that JTV519 had the protective effect in partially calstabin2 deficient (calstabin2+/−) mice, but not in completely deficient (calsabin2−/−) mice [60]. They reported that exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmia (sustained and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia) and sudden cardiac death were observed in both completely calstabin2 deficient (calstabin2−/−) mice and partially deficient (calstabin2+/−) mice. In calstabin2+/− mice, JTV519 infusion did not alter RyR2 phosphorylation, but increased calstabin2 binding and prevented the dissociation from RyR2 complex as well as reduced the Po of RyR2. However, JTV519 did not change the opening probability of RyR2 in calsabin2−/− mice. These findings indicated that the protective effect of JTV 519 required calstabin2, as shown by the benefit of increased calstabin2 binding observed only in calstabin2+/− mice, but not in calstabin2−/− mice.

Different effects of JTV519 on the phosphorylation level has been shown between heart failure mice and calstabin2 knockout mice. JTV519 has no effect on the phosphorylation level in the calstabin2 knockout mouse model for ventricular arrhythmia [60]. However, in pacing-induced heart failure mice, JTV519 treated mice had lower phosphorylation levels compared to untreated mice. This difference could be due to the phosphorylation level of the model. The pacing-induced heart failure mice had relatively higher PKA-phosphorylated RyR2 channels than mice treated with JTV519 and normal mice. JTV519 increased the affinity of calstabin2 binding to RyR2 and prevented ventricular remodeling, thus reducing catecholamine-induced hyperphosphorylation compared with untreated mice. In calstabin2 knockout mice, there was no chronic hyperphosphorylation. Therefore, it is possible that the effect of JTV519 to phosphorylation level could not be seen in these knockout mice.

14. Conclusion

RyR2 is a macromolecule, which is important in cardiac E–C coupling. It is regulated by many RyR2 binding proteins. Alterations of these macromolecules or associated proteins can lead to cardiac diseases such as heart failure and sudden cardiac death. Although much information has been gained regarding RyR2 function and the roles of its regulatory proteins, our understanding of the definite mechanisms involved in heart failure and sudden cardiac death are still unclear. Further studies are needed to understand its role on E–C coupling in heart diseases. Novel therapies targeting this macromolecule may provide better strategies in prevention and treatment of these cardiac diseases and their complications.

Acknowledgement

The authors wish to thank Kate Sreenan for her editorial assistance during manuscript preparation.

References

[1] Majeed A, Williams J, de Lusignan S, et al. Management of heart failure in primary care after implementation of the National Service Framework for Coronary Heart Disease: a cross-sectional study. Public Health 2005;119:105–11.

[2] McMurray JJ, Stewart S. Epidemiology, aetiology, and prognosis of heart failure. Heart 2000;83:596–602.

[3] Cleland JG, Clark AL. Delivering the cumulative benefits of triple therapy to improve outcomes in heart failure: too many cooks will spoil the broth. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:1234–7.

[4] Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Marks AR. Intracellular calcium release channels and cardiac disease. Annu Rev Physiol 2005;67:69–98.

[5] Jiang MT, Lokuta AJ, Farrell EF, et al. Abnormal Ca²⁺ release, but normal ryanodine receptors, in canine and human heart failure. Circ Res 2002;91:1015–22.

[6] Yamamoto T, Yano M, Kohno M, et al. Abnormal Ca²⁺ release from cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum in tachycardia-induced heart failure. Cardiovasc Res 1999;44:146–55.

[7] Fabiato A. Calcium-induced release of calcium from the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum. Am J Physiol 1983;245:C1–14.

[8] Bers DM. Cardiac excitation–contraction coupling. Nature 2002;415: 198–205.

[9] Sipido KR, Carmeliet E, Van de WF. T-type Ca²⁺ current as a trigger for Ca²⁺ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in guinea-pig ventricular myocytes. J Physiol 1998;508(Pt 2):439–51.

[10] Terentyev D, Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Gyorke I, et al. Protein phosphatases decrease sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium content by stimulating calcium release in cardiac myocytes. J Physiol 2003;552:109–18.

[11] Simmerman HK, Jones LR. Phospholamban: protein structure, mechanism of action, and role in cardiac function. Physiol Rev 1998;78:921–47.

[12] Stern MD, Cheng H. Putting out the fire: what terminates calcium- induced calcium release in cardiac muscle? Cell Calcium 2004;35: 591–601.

[13] Farrell EF, Arrieta MI, Reuda A, et al. Sorcin inhibits calcium release and modulates excitation–contraction coupling in the heart. J Biol Chem 2003;278:34660–6.

[14] Fabiato A. Time and calcium dependent of activation and inactivation of calcium-induced release of calcium from a sarcoplas

reticulum of a skinned canine cardiac purkinje cell. J Gen Physiol 1985;85:247–89.

[15] Nabauer M, Morad M. Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release as examined by photolysis of caged Ca²⁺ in single ventricular myocytes. Am J Physiol 1990;258:189–93.

[16] Laver DR, Roden LD, Ahen GP, et al. Cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ inhibits the ryanodine receptor from cardiac muscle. J Membr Biol 1995;147:7–22.

[17] Gyorke S, Fill M. Ryanodine receptor adaptation; control mechanism of Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release in heart. Science 1993;260:987–8.

[18] Fill M, Zahradnikova A, Villalba-Galera CA, et al. Ryanodine receptor adaptation. J Gen Physiol 2000;116:873–82.

[19] Tunwell RE, Wickenden C, Bertrand BM, et al. The human cardiac muscle ryanodine receptor-calcium release channel: identification, primary structure and topological analysis. Biochem J 1996;318(Pt 2):477–87.

[20] Giannini G, Sorrentino V. Molecular structure and tissue distribution of ryanodine receptors calcium channels. Med Res Rev 1995;15:313–23.

[21] Munch G, Bolck B, Sugaru A, et al. Isoform expression of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ release channel; (ryanodine channel) in human myocardium. J Mol Med 2000;78:352–60.

[22] Franzini-Armstrong C, Protasi F, Ramesh V. Shape, size, and distribution of Ca²⁺ release units and couplons in skeletal and cardiac muscles. Biophys J 1999;77:1528–39.

[23] Dulhunty AF, Karunasekara Y, Curtis SM, et al. The recombinant dihydropyridine receptor II–III loop and partly structured ‘C’ region peptides modify cardiac ryanodine receptor activity. Biochem J 2005;385:803–13.

[24] Bers DM. Macromolecular complexes regulating cardiac ryanodine receptor function. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2004;37:417–29.

[25] Chelu MG, Danila CI, Gilman CP, et al. Regulation of ryanodine receptors by FK506 binding proteins. Trends Cardiovasc Med 2004;14:227–34.

[26] Jeyakumar LH, Ballester L, Cheng DS, et al. FKBP binding characteristics of cardiac microsomes from diverse vertebrates. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001;281:979–86.

[27] Timerman AP, Onoue H, Xin HB, et al. Selective binding of FKBP12.6 by the cardiac ryanodine receptor. J Biol Chem 1996;271:20385–91.

[28] Masumiya H, Wang R, Zhang J, et al. Localization of the 12.6-kDa FK506-binding protein (FKBP12.6) binding site to the NH2-terminal domain of the cardiac Ca²⁺ release channel (ryanodine receptor). J Biol Chem 2003;278:3786–92.

[29] Zissimopoulos S, Lai FA. Interaction of FKBP12.6 with the cardiac ryanodine receptor C-terminal domain. J Biol Chem 2005;280:5475–85.

[30] Marx SO, Gaburjakova J, Gaburjakova M, et al. Coupled gating between cardiac calcium release channels (ryanodine receptors). Circ Res 2001;88:1151–8.

[31] Brillantes AB, Ondrias K, Scott A, et al. Stabilization of calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) function by FK506-binding protein. Cell 1994;77:513–23.

[32] Xiao RP, Valdivia HH, Bogdanov K, et al. The immunophilin FK506-binding protein modulates Ca²⁺ release channel closure in rat heart. J Physiol 1997;500(Pt 2):343–54.

[33] Prestle J, Janssen PM, Janssen AP, et al. Overexpression of FK506-binding protein FKBP12.6 in cardiomyocytes reduces ryanodine receptor-mediated Ca²⁺ leak from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and increases contractility. Circ Res 2001;88:188–94.

[34] Loughrey CM, Seidler T, Miller SLW, et al. Over-expression of FK506 binding-protein FKBP 12.6 alters excitation–contraction coupling in adult rabbit cardiomyocyte. J Physiol 2004;556:919–34.

[35] Xin HB, Senbonmatsu T, Cheng DS, et al. Oestrogen protects FKBP12.6 null mice from cardiac hypertrophy. Nature 2002;416:334–8.

[36] Su Z, Sugishita K, Li F, et al. Effects of FK506 on (Ca²⁺)i differ in mouse and rabbit ventricular myocytes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;304:334–41.

[37] Shou W, Aghdasi B, Armstrong DL, et al. Cardiac defects and altered ryanodine receptor function in mice lacking FKBP12. Nature 1998;39:489–92.

[38] Marx SO, Reiken S, Hisamatsu Y, et al. Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of ryanodine receptors: a novel role for leucine/isoleucine zippers. J Cell Biol 2001;153:699–708.

[39] Marx SO, Reiken S, Hisamatsu Y, et al. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor): defective regulation in failing hearts. Cell 2000;101:365–76.

[40] Xiao B, Sutherland C, Walsh MP, et al. Protein kinase A phosphorylation at serine-2808 of the cardiac Ca²⁺-release channel (ryanodine receptor) does not dissociate 12.6-kDa FK506-binding protein (FKBP12.6). Circ Res 2004;94:487–95.

[41] Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. Modulation of excitation–contraction coupling by isoproterenol in cardiomyocytes with controlled SR Ca²⁺ load and Ca²⁺ current trigger. J Physiol 2004;556:463–80.

[42] duBell WH, Lederer WJ, Rogers TB. Dynamic modulation of excitation–contraction coupling by protein phosphatases in rat ventricular myocytes. J Physiol 1996;493(Pt 3):793–800.

[43] Hain J, Onoue H, Mayrleitner M, et al. Phosphorylation modulates the function of the calcium release channel of sarcoplasmic reticulum from cardiac muscle. J Biol Chem 1995;270:2074–81.

[44] Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Reiken SR, et al. Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II phosphorylation regulates the cardiac ryanodine receptor. Circ Res 2004;94:e61–70.

[45] Currie S, Loughrey CM, Craig MA, et al. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIdelta associates with the ryanodine receptor complex and regulates channel function in rabbit heart. Biochem J 2004;377:357–66.

[46] Meyer T, Hanson PI, Stryer L, et al. Calmodulin trapping by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. Science 1992;256:1199–202.

[47] Wu Y, Colbran RJ, Anderson ME. Calmodulin kinase is a molecular switch for cardiac excitation–contraction coupling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:2877–81.

[48] Matsumoto T, Hisamatsu Y, Ohkusa T, et al. Sorcin interacts with sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase and modulates excitation–contraction coupling in the heart. Basic Res Cardiol 2005;100:250–62.

[49] Frank KF, Block B, Ding Z, et al. Overexpression of sorcin enhances cardiac contractility in vivo and in vitro. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2005;38:607–15.

[50] Meyer MB, Fischer A, Sun Y, et al. Sorcin regulated excitation–contraction coupling in the heart. J Biol Chem 2003;278:28865–71.

[51] Szegedi C, Sarkozi S, Herzog A, et al. Calsequestrin: more than ‘only’ a luminal Ca²⁺ buffer inside the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Biochem J 1999;337(Pt 1):19–22.

[52] Kubalova Z, Gyorke I, Terentyeva R, et al. Modulation of cytoplasmic and intra-sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium waves by calsequestrin in rat cardiac myocytes. J Physiol 2004;561.2:515–24.

[53] Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Terentyev D, Gyorke I, et al. Abnormal calcium signaling and sudden cardiac death associated with mutation of calsequestrin. Circ Res 2004;94:471–7.

[54] Jiang D, Xiao B, Yang D, et al. RyR2 mutations linked to ventricular tachycardia and sudden death reduce the threshold for store-overload-induced Ca²⁺ release (SOICR). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:13062–7.

[55] Murphy E, Steenbergen C, Levy LA, et al. Cytosolic free magnesium levels in ischemic rat heart. J Biol Chem 1989;264:5622–7.

[56] Xu L, Mann G, Meissner G. Regulation of cardiac Ca²⁺ release channel (ryanodine receptor) by Ca²⁺, H⁺, Mg²⁺, and adenine nucleotides under normal and simulated ischemic conditions. Circ Res 1996;79:1100–9.

[57] Hare JM. Nitric oxide and excitation–contraction coupling. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2003;35:719–29.

[58] Zahradnikova A, Minarovic I, Venema RC, et al. Inactivation of the cardiac ryanodine receptor calcium release channel by nitric oxide. Cell Calcium 1997;22:447–54.

[59] Barouch LA, Harrison RW, Skaf MW, et al. Nitric oxide regulates the heart by spatial confinement of nitric oxide synthase isoforms. Nature 2002;416:340.

[60] Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Reiken SR, et al. Protection from cardiac arrhythmia through ryanodine receptor-stabilizing protein calstabin2. Science 2004;304:292–6.

[61] Li Y, Kranias EG, Mignery GA, et al. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor does not affect calcium sparks in mouse ventricular myocytes. Circ Res 2002;90:309–16.

[62] Dzhura I, Wu Y, Colbran RJ, et al. Calmodulin kinase determines calcium-dependent facilitation of L-type calcium channels. Nat Cell Biol 2000;2:173–7.

[63] Hasenfuss G, Reinecke H, Studer R, et al. Relation between myocardial function and expression of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase in failing and nonfailing human myocardium. Circ Res 1994;75:434–42.

[64] Reiken S, Gaburjakova M, Guatimosim S, et al. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of the cardiac calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) in normal and failing hearts. Role of phosphatases and response to isoproterenol. J Biol Chem 2003;278:444–53.

[65] Hasenfuss G. Alterations of calcium-regulatory proteins in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res 1998;37:279–89.

[66] Lehnart SE, Wehrens XH, Kushnir A, et al. Cardiac ryanodine receptor function and regulation in heart disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1015:144–59.

[67] Doi M, Yano M, Kobayashi S, et al. Propranolol prevents the development of heart failure by restoring FKBP12.6-mediated stabilization of ryanodine receptor. Circulation 2002;105:1374–9.

[68] Ono K, Yano M, Ohkusa T, et al. Altered interaction of FKBP12.6 with ryanodine receptor as a cause of abnormal Ca²⁺ release in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res 2000;48:323–31.

[69] Yano M, Ono K, Ohkusa T, et al. Altered stoichiometry of FKBP12.6 versus ryanodine receptor as a cause of abnormal Ca²⁺ leak through ryanodine receptor in heart failure. Circulation 2000;102:2131–6.

[70] Gomez AM, Valdivia HH, Cheng H, et al. Defective excitation–contraction coupling in experimental cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Science 1997;276:800–6.

[71] Gomez AM, Guatimosim S, Dilly KW, et al. Heart failure after myocardial infarction: altered excitation–contraction coupling. Circulation 2001;104:688–93.

[72] Hasenfuss G, Mulieri LA, Leavitt BJ, et al. Alteration of contractile function and excitation–contraction coupling in dilated cardiomyopathy. Circ Res 1992;70:1225–32.

[73] Pieske B, Maier LS, Bers DM, et al. Ca²⁺ handling and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ content in isolated failing and nonfailing human myocardium. Circ Res 1999;85:38–46.

[74] Schlotthauer K, Schattmann J, Bers DM, et al. Frequency-dependent changes in contribution of SR Ca²⁺ to Ca²⁺ transients in failing human myocardium assessed with ryanodine. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1998;30:1285–94.

[75] Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Huang F, et al. FKBP12.6 deficiency and defective calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) function linked to exercise-induced sudden cardiac death. Cell 2003;113:829–40.

[76] Matsuda H, Noma A, Kurachi Y, et al. Transient depolarization and spontaneous voltage fluctuations in isolated single cells from guinea pig ventricles. Calcium-mediated membrane potential fluctuations. Circ Res 1982;51:142–51.

[77] Giles W, Shimoni Y. Comparison of sodium–calcium exchanger and transient inward currents in single cells from rabbit ventricle. J Physiol 1989;417:465–81.

[78] Zymunt AC. Intracellular calcium activates a chloride current in canine ventricular myocytes. Am J Physiol 1994;267:H1984–95.

[79] Adachi-Akahane S, Cleemann L, Morad M. Cross-signaling between L-type Ca²⁺ channels and ryanodine receptors in rat ventricular myocytes. J Gen Physiol 1996;108:435–54.

[80] Tanskanen AJ, Greenstein JL, O’Rourke B, et al. The role of stochastic and modal gating of cardiac L-type Ca²⁺ channels on early after-depolarizations. Biophys J 2005;88:85–95.

[81] Hjalmarson A, Goldstein S, Fagerberg B, et al. Effects of controlled-release metoprolol on total mortality, hospitalizations, and well-being in patients with heart failure: the Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized Intervention Trial in congestive heart failure (MERIT-HF). MERIT-HF Study Group. JAMA 2000;283:1295–302.

[82] Garg R, Yusuf S. Overview of randomized trials of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on mortality and morbidity in patients with heart failure. Collaborative Group on ACE Inhibitor Trials. JAMA 1995;273:1450–6.

[83] Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, et al. The effect of spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure. Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 1999;341:709–17.

[84] McAlister FA, Ezekowitz JA, Wiebe N, et al. Systematic review: cardiac resynchronization in patients with symptomatic heart failure. Ann Intern Med 2004;141:381–90.

[85] Bellenger NG, Rajappan K, Rahman SL, et al. Effects of carvedilol on left ventricular remodelling in chronic stable heart failure: a cardiovascular magnetic resonance study. Heart 2004;90:760–4.

[86] Reiken S, Wehrens XH, Vest JA, et al. Beta-blockers restore calcium release channel function and improve cardiac muscle performance in human heart failure. Circulation 2003;107:2459–66.

[87] Reiken S, Gaburjakova M, Gaburjakova J, et al. Beta-adrenergic receptor blockers restore cardiac calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) structure and function in heart failure. Circulation 2001;104:2843–8.

[88] Kohno M, Yano M, Kobayashi S, et al. A new cardioprotective agent, JTV519, improves defective channel gating of ryanodine receptor in heart failure. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2003;284:H1035–42.

[89] Yano M, Kobayashi S, Kohno M, et al. FKBP12.6-mediated stabilization of calcium-release channel (ryanodine receptor) as a novel therapeutic strategy against heart failure. Circulation 2003;107:477–84.

[90] Zipes DP, Wellens HJ. Sudden cardiac death. Circulation 1998;98:2334–51.

[91] Tiso N, Stephan DA, Nava A, et al. Identification of mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene in families affected with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 2 (ARVD2). Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:189–94.

[92] Yano M, Yamamoto T, Ikemoto N, et al. Abnormal ryanodine receptor function in heart failure. Pharmacol Ther 2005;107:377–91.

[93] Priori SG, Napolitano C, Memmi M, et al. Clinical and molecular characterization of patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Circulation 2002;106:69–74.

[94] Laitinen PJ, Brown KM, Piippo K, et al. Mutations of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gene in familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Circulation 2001;103:485–90.

[95] Priori SG, Napolitano C, Tiso N, et al. Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Circulation 2001;103:196–200.

[96] Lehnart SE, Wehrens XH, Laitinen PJ, et al. Sudden death in familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia associated with calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) leak. Circulation 2004;109:3208–14.

[97] George CH, Higgs GV, Lai FA. Ryanodine receptor mutations associated with stress-induced ventricular tachycardia mediate increased calcium release in stimulated cardiomyocytes. Circ Res 2003;93:531–40.

[98] Thomas NL, Christopher H, George FAL. Functional heterogeneity of ryanodine receptor mutations associated with sudden cardiac death. Cardiovasc Res 2004;64:52–60.
