
NEWS AND VIEWS

1. Kuersten, S. & Goodwin, E.B. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 4, 626–637 (2003).
2. Kim-Ha, J., Kerr, K. & Macdonald, P.M. *Cell* 81, 403–412 (1995).
3. Nakamura, A., Sato, K. & Hanyu-Nakamura, K. *Dev. Cell* 6, 69–78 (2004).
4. Wilhelm, J.E., Hilton, M., Amos, Q. & Henzel, W.J. *J. Cell Biol.* 163, 1197–1204 (2003).
5. Nelson, M.R., Leidal, A.M. & Smibert, C.A. *EMBO J.* 23, 150–159 (2004).
6. Chekulaeva, M., Hentze, M.W. & Ephrussi, A. *Cell*
7. Richter, J.D. & Sonenberg, N. *Nature* 433, 477–480 (2005).
8. Stebbins-Boaz, B., Cao, Q., de Moor, C.H., Mendez, R. & Richter, J.D. *Mol. Cell* 4, 1017–1027 (1999).
9. Spirin, A.S. *Curr. Top. Dev. Biol.* 1, 1–38 (1966).
10. Coller, J. & Parker, R. *Cell* 122, 875–886 (2005).
11. Moore, M.J. *Science* 309, 1514–1518 (2005).
12. Wilhelm, J.E. & Smibert, C.A. *Biol. Cell.* 97, 235–252 (2005).

13. Braat, A.K., Yan, N., Arn, E., Harrison, D. & Macdonald, P.M. *Dev. Cell* 7, 125–131 (2004).
14. Stefani, G., Fraser, C.E., Darnell, J.C. & Darnell, R.B. *J. Neurosci.* 24, 7272–7276 (2004).
15. Olsen, P.H. & Ambros, V. *Dev. Biol.* 216, 671–680 (1999).
16. Spahn, C.M. *et al.* *Cell* 107, 373–386 (2001).
17. Marcotrigiano, J., Gingras, A.C., Sonenberg, N. & Burley, S.K. *Cell* 89, 951–961 (1997).
18. Deo, R.C., Bonanno, J.B., Sonenberg, N. & Burley, S.K. *Cell* 98, 835–845 (1999).


---

## No mercy for messages that mess with the ribosome

Sandra L Clement & Jens Lykke-Andersen

A recent study describes a novel mRNA-surveillance pathway called ‘no-go decay’ that triggers the endonucleolytic cleavage of yeast mRNAs with translation-elongation stalls. This adds to the repertoire of mRNA-decay processes in which abnormal translation may activate mRNA degradation through proteins recruited to the ribosomal A site.

Cells have evolved several quality-control mechanisms for maintaining the fidelity of all levels of gene expression. In eukaryotes, pathways exist whereby mRNAs that undergo abnormal translation are targeted for destruction by proteins that recruit various components of the mRNA-decay machinery. These mRNA-surveillance pathways include nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD)¹,², which recognizes mRNAs with premature translation-termination codons, and non-stop mRNA decay (NSD)³,⁴, which targets mRNAs lacking termination codons. A new study by Doma and Parker has unveiled yet another mechanism by which the cell identifies potentially aberrant mRNAs in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*⁵. This novel surveillance pathway, termed ‘no-go decay’ (NGD), targets mRNAs with translation-elongation stalls. Surprisingly, unlike most mRNA-decay pathways in yeast, NGD does not initiate mRNA decay by decapping or deadenylation. Instead, NGD results in an endonucleolytic cleavage of the mRNA in the vicinity of the stalled ribosome by an unidentified nuclease.

Doma and Parker demonstrate that the insertion of a stem-loop structure, which is known to stall translating ribosomes, accelerates the decay of a normally stable mRNA in yeast⁵. The decay of this transcript is resistant to the deletion of both decapping and de-adenylation enzymes as well as Ski7p and

---

The authors are in the Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.  
e-mail: jens.lykke-andersen@colorado.edu

Figure 1 A proposed model for NGD. A ribosome stalled in translation elongation owing to rare codons, secondary structures, premature termination codons or inhibiting nascent peptides is recognized by Dom34p and Hbs1p, a pair of evolutionarily conserved proteins that are homologous to eRF1 and eRF3, respectively. This complex, which may bind the A site of the stalled ribosome, triggers endonucleolytic cleavage of the mRNA by an unknown endonuclease followed by exonucleolytic decay of the mRNA fragments by the exosome and Xrn1p.

Upf1p, central components of NSD and NMD, respectively. However, upon blocking the 5′→3′ exonuclease, Xrn1p, or the 3′→5′ exonuclease complex, the exosome, they were able to detect the accumulation of 3′ and 5′ fragments of the reporter mRNA, respectively. This suggests that NGD is initiated by an endonucleolytic cleavage followed by exonucleolytic decay of the two mRNA fragments (Fig. 1). The sizes of the accumulated mRNA fragments suggest that the endonucleolytic cleavage event occurs in the vicinity of the stalled ribosome. However, the precise location and nature of the cleavage remain to be determined.

NGD, like other known mRNA-surveillance pathways¹⁻⁴, requires a translating ribosome to recognize the target mRNA. Insertion of a stem-loop in the 5′ untranslated region of the reporter mRNA, which prevents translation initiation, or the insertion of an upstream premature termination codon, which prevents the ribosome from reaching the stall site,

NEWS AND VIEWS

protects the mRNA from endonucleolytic cleavage⁵. Two proteins identified by Doma and Parker as having roles in NGD, Dom34p and Hbs1p, may hint at the link between the ribosome and NGD. Intriguingly, these proteins are related to the eukaryotic translation release factors eRF1 and eRF3, respectively.

The link to translation termination provides a striking similarity to the two other mRNA-surveillance pathways (Fig. 2). In the NMD pathway, the Upf proteins, Upf1p, Upf2p and Upf3p, are believed to trigger degradation of target mRNAs through their interaction with eRF1 and eRF3 in the A site of a ribosome stalled at a premature termination codon (Fig. 2a)⁶⁻⁸. In the NSD pathway, which targets mRNAs lacking termination codons, the ribosome is believed to translate through the 3′ untranslated region and stall at the end of the poly(A) tail. Rather than recruiting proteins that interact with eRF3, NSD involves an eRF3-like protein, Ski7p, which is hypothesized to bind the empty A site of the ribosome and recruit the exosome to degrade the mRNA from the 3′ end (Fig. 2b)³,⁴. An outstanding question is whether eRF1 or an eRF1-like protein is also required for NSD. Proteins with similarity to translation release factors have a role in NGD as well. Given their homology to eRF1 and eRF3, it is tempting to speculate that Dom34p and Hbs1p also act at the A site of the stalled ribosome (Fig. 2c). Although Doma and Parker demonstrate that Dom34p is required for NGD, deletion of Hbs1p does not completely abolish this process⁵. Given the similarity of Hbs1p to Ski7p, the authors hypothesize that Ski7p may be able to substitute for Hbs1p. It thus seems that the recruitment of release factors or release factor-like proteins to the ribosomal A site is a common strategy in mRNA-surveillance pathways, but that each pathway subsequently uses different means to activate the mRNA-decay machinery (Fig. 2).

Doma and Parker go on to demonstrate that NGD is not restricted to the artificial reporter construct in which translation elongation is blocked by a stem-loop structure in the coding region of the mRNA⁵. Although NGD is most pronounced on these transcripts, it also occurs at other types of translation stalls, including those induced by rare codons and pseudoknots. Even premature stop codons that normally trigger NMD can induce endonucleolytic cleavage at low temperatures. This is particularly interesting in light of earlier observations from Gatfield and Izaurralde that NMD in *Drosophila melanogaster* S2 cells triggers endonucleolytic mRNA cleavage⁹. However, unlike NGD, the endonucleolytic cleavage in *Drosophila* NMD requires the NMD factor Upf1. It would be interesting to know whether the *Drosophila* homologs of Dom34 and Hbs1p are also involved.

Figure 2 mRNA-surveillance pathways are thought to recruit similar proteins to the ribosomal A-site but trigger mRNA decay via distinct mechanisms. (a) In nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), the translation release factors eRF1 and eRF3 recognize a premature termination codon in the ribosomal A site and recruit the Upf proteins, which in yeast initiate decay primarily through decapping by Dcp2p¹⁶,¹⁷ and to a lesser extent through deadenylation¹⁶,¹⁸. (b) In nonstop decay (NSD), the ribosome is believed to translate through the end of the poly(A) tail and recruit an eRF3-like protein, Ski7p, to the A site to trigger mRNA decay by the exosome³,⁴. It is not known whether an eRF1-like protein is also recruited (indicated by question mark). (c) In no-go decay (NGD), the eRF1 and eRF3 homologs Dom34p and Hbs1p are thought to be recruited to the A site of a ribosome stalled on an mRNA to initiate mRNA decay by an unknown endonuclease⁵.

One intriguing possibility is that NGD is not only a quality-control mechanism, but also a means by which the cell could regulate gene expression. In *Arabidopsis thaliana*, endonucleolytic cleavage of the CGS1 mRNA helps to downregulate methionine biogenesis as a result of a translational stall induced by the interaction of a downstream metabolite with the nascent CGS1 peptide¹⁰. It is unknown whether Dom34 and Hbs1 have a role in this event, but both are conserved in the *Arabidopsis* genome. Interestingly, Dom34p and its homolog in *Drosophila*, pelota, have also been implicated in cell-cycle progression, in a mechanism that seems to involve translation¹¹⁻¹³. NGD may therefore be regulated in conjunction with translational stalls to modulate cell-cycle progression. Alternatively, Dom34p and pelota could be involved in translational processes other than NGD.

Another exciting question yet to be answered about NGD is the identity of the nuclease that cleaves the stalled mRNA. Although Dom34p is predicted to be an RNA-binding protein, it does not contain any known nuclease motifs. Does the Dom34p–Hbs1p complex recruit a novel nuclease or perhaps stimulate an intrinsic mRNA-cleavage property in the ribosome? Is the endonuclease in NGD identical to that involved in *Drosophila* NMD? Are there other accessory proteins that help modulate the function of Dom34–Hbs1p? The cellular location at which NGD occurs also remains to be determined. Many mRNA-decay enzymes are localized to discrete foci in the cytoplasm, termed processing bodies¹⁴,¹⁵. However, the specific relationship between mRNA-decay pathways and processing bodies is currently poorly understood. It would be informative to determine whether NGD substrates are targeted to these foci. Moreover, as with the NMD and NSD pathways, the fate of the aberrant protein product and the stalled ribosome remains unknown.

The eukaryotic cell spends a considerable amount of energy to safeguard the accuracy of gene expression. mRNAs that interfere with translation are identified and targeted for degradation by at least three distinct but overlapping mRNA-surveillance pathways. Different types of translational delays seem to be recognized by similar proteins at the A site of the stalled ribosome and recruit distinct mRNA-decay enzymes. By patrolling the A site of the ribosome, the cell can monitor the status of translation and target a given mRNA

for translation reinitiation or decay. Thus, the ribosome is central in scrutinizing the integrity of mRNAs in eukaryotic cells, and messages that meddle with the ribosome are shown no mercy.

1. Conti, E. & Izaurralde, E. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **17**, 316–325 (2005).
2. Maquat, L.E. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 1773–1776 (2005).
3. Frischmeyer, P.A. *et al.* *Science* **295**, 2258–2261 (2002).

4. van Hoof, A., Frischmeyer, P.A., Dietz, H.C. & Parker, R. *Science* **295**, 2262–2264 (2002).
5. Doma, M.K. & Parker, R. *Nature* **440**, 561–564 (2006).
6. Amrani, N. *et al.* *Nature* **432**, 112–118 (2004).
7. Czaplinski, K. *et al.* *Genes Dev.* **12**, 1665–1677 (1998).
8. Wang, W., Czaplinski, K., Rao, Y. & Peltz, S.W. *EMBO J.* **20**, 880–890 (2001).
9. Gatfield, D. & Izaurralde, E. *Nature* **429**, 575–578 (2004).
10. Onouchi, H. *et al.* *Genes Dev.* **19**, 1799–1810 (2005).
11. Adham, I.M. *et al.* *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **23**, 1470–1476

12. Davis, L. & Engebrecht, J. *Genetics* **149**, 45–56 (1998).
13. Eberhart, C.G. & Wasserman, S.A. *Development* **121**, 3477–3486 (1995).
14. Cougot, N., Babajko, S. & Seraphin, B. *J. Cell Biol.* **165**, 31–40 (2004).
15. Sheth, U. & Parker, R. *Science* **300**, 805–808 (2003).
16. Cao, D. & Parker, R. *Cell* **113**, 533–545 (2003).
17. Muhlrad, D. & Parker, R. *Nature* **370**, 578–581 (1994).
18. Mitchell, P. & Tollervey, D. *Mol. Cell* **11**, 1405–1413 (2003).


# Synaptotagmin: fusogenic role for calcium sensor?

Joshua Zimmerberg, Sergey A Akimov & Vadim Frolov

Two recent studies focusing on synaptotagmin-1’s role in synaptic vesicle fusion suggest that it may be key in bringing vesicle and target membranes together and in promoting SNARE assembly. The highly positive electrostatic potential of the synaptotagmin surface could catalyze fusion.

One of the abiding mysteries in biology is the great speed of synaptic transmission, where synaptic vesicles laden with neurotransmitter fuse to the presynaptic membrane and release their content to the synaptic cleft. The Ca²⁺-triggered release of neurotransmitter begins some tens of microseconds after Ca²⁺ floods the presynaptic intracellular release site¹. Thus, the mechanism of membrane fusion must account for how Ca²⁺ triggers the extremely fast formation of a fusion pore linking vesicular and plasma membranes that were hitherto stable and not leaky. The current paradigm for exocytotic fusion sets the trans-SNARE complex², composed of proteins localized in vesicular and plasma membranes, as the minimal fusion machine. The calcium dependence of fusion is believed to be regulated by proteins such as synaptotagmin-1 (syt), which acts as both a ‘calcium sensor’ mediating Ca²⁺ triggering and a regulator of fusion-pore dynamics during neurotransmitter release³,⁴. Two recent studies⁵,⁶, including one on page 323 of this issue⁶, suggest that syt may have a more central role in mediating fast synaptic fusion.

Syt is a member of a family of transmembrane proteins that sit in the vesicular membrane. Its Ca²⁺ sensitivity arises from its two cytoplasmic C2 domains, C2a and C2b, attached by a long linker to its transmembrane domain. C2a and C2b have three and two Ca²⁺-binding sites, respectively, located in distal loops of the domains. Upon Ca²⁺ binding, the electrostatic potential around each C2 domain becomes highly positive for a large part of the domain surface, extending far beyond the Ca²⁺-binding loops⁷,⁸. As a result, both domains bind negatively charged lipids, such as phosphatidylserine (PS)⁹,¹⁰. Arac *et al.*⁵ now show two important aspects of this syt-membrane interaction. Using highly purified C2a and C2b domains of syt, they find that membrane adsorption induced by Ca²⁺ is not accompanied by any domain aggregation, previously hypothesized to facilitate fusion¹¹. Instead, they find that the C2b domains make extensive interactions with liposomal membranes that involve not only Ca²⁺-binding loops, but also other positively charged regions (such as the polybasic region), located on the

The authors are at the Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biophysics, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, US National Institutes of Health, 10/10D14 MSC 1855, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1855 USA. email: joshz@helix.nih.gov


**Figure 1** Synaptotagmin as a catalyst for fusion. Side (a) and top (b) views of stalk and fusion pore surrounded by six C2b domains show that synaptotagmin can energetically favor formation of both stalks and fusion pores, and may attract charged lipids in the stalk-pore membrane area. The radius, \( r \), is drawn from the center of the stalk or pore laterally outward to the neutral plane of the outer monolayer. (c) Hypothetical decreases of the elastic energy of stalk and pore formation by synaptotagmin. Black, energies of the stalk and pore formed between two flat bilayers (as shown in a) separated by ~3 nm. Elastic energy of each lipid monolayer was calculated analytically using the Hamiltonian from ref. 23, assuming the stalk and pore shapes drawn in a²². Blue, stalk and pore energies when synaptotagmin electrostatically compensates the bending energy of the bound monolayer. Red, stalk and pore energies when synaptotagmin assists bending by changing the spontaneous curvature of PS (lipid composition of 30% PS and 70% PC; PC spontaneous curvature of –1/8.7nm⁻¹ is assumed⁵). Dotted curves indicate the transition state explicitly calculated in ref. 22.
