
# Pushing the envelope: extracytoplasmic stress responses in bacterial pathogens

**Gary Rowley**\*,†, **Michael Spector**‡, **Jan Kormanec**§ and **Mark Roberts**\*

---

### Abstract | Despite being nutrient rich, the tissues and fluids of vertebrates are hostile to microorganisms, and most bacteria that attempt to take advantage of this environment are rapidly eliminated by host defences. Pathogens have evolved various means to promote their survival in host tissues, including stress responses that enable bacteria to sense and adapt to adverse conditions. Many different stress responses have been described, some of which are responsive to one or a small number of cues, whereas others are activated by a broad range of insults. The surface layers of pathogenic bacteria directly interface with the host and can bear the brunt of the attack by the host armoury. Several stress systems that respond to perturbations in the microbial cell outside of the cytoplasm have been described and are known collectively as extracytoplasmic or envelope stress responses (ESRs). Here, we review the role of the ESRs in the pathogenesis of Gram-negative bacterial pathogens.

The ability to perceive changes in the internal and external environment and modify the activity of genes or metabolism is important for most life forms. Bacterial pathogens need to sense their proximity and location within the host. This allows them to modulate the appropriate production of virulence factors. Bacterial pathogens also need to defend themselves against stress that originates from within the infected host as well as from the external environment between hosts. The surface of bacterial pathogens is the first point of contact with the host and is a major target for the antibacterial armament of the host. Many different stress-response systems have now been described, and several have been studied in detail. However, most of these studies have been performed on laboratory strains, and the importance of the stress responses to bacteria has largely been studied *in vitro*. This article reviews a group of stress responses known collectively as extracytoplasmic (or envelope) stress responses (ESRs) and discusses their importance to Gram-negative bacterial pathogens. The role of ESRs in the biology of Gram-negative bacteria has received the most attention, but analogous responses have also been identified in Gram-positive and acid-fast bacteria. In Gram-negative bacteria, these responses target stresses that affect components of the cell envelope, including periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins\(^1\). The best characterized of these responses are those mediated by the alternative sigma factor σ\(^E\) (*RpoE*)\(^{2-5}\) and the two-component regulator CpxAR\(^{6-9}\). However, Gram-negative bacteria have two additional ESRs: the BaeSR-regulated response\(^{10}\) and the phage shock response\(^{11-14}\).

### Extracytoplasmic-function sigma factors

The extracytoplasmic function (ECF) family of alternative sigma factors controls the expression of genes, the products of which function outside of the cytoplasm\(^{15,16}\) (TABLES 1,2). The best-studied ECF sigma factor is the *Escherichia coli rpoE* gene product, σ\(^E\). In laboratory strains of *E. coli*, σ\(^E\) is an essential sigma factor\(^2\) but this is not the case for most bacteria\(^{17-20}\). Membership of the *E. coli* σ\(^E\) regulon has grown significantly over the past few years\(^{21-23}\) (TABLE 1). In addition to itself (*rpoE*) and the downstream genes in the same operon (*rseABC*, see below), many other genes have been shown to be regulated by σ\(^E\). These include genes that encode proteins involved in the folding or degradation of polypeptides in the periplasm, such as proteases, peptidyl-prolyl isomerases (PPIases), chaperones and thiol:disulfide oxido-reductases (for example, protein disulfide isomerase II, which is involved in disulfide-bond formation), as well as genes involved in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biogenesis and/or modification, and several genes of unknown function\(^{22-26}\) (TABLE 1, Supplementary information S1 (table)). Interestingly, σ\(^E\) also positively regulates

---

*NATURE REVIEWS MICROBIOLOGY*  
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

Table 1 | Selected members of the $\sigma^{E}$ regulon in *Escherichia coli*

| Gene | Gene function |
| --- | --- |
| $\sigma^{E} / \sigma^{E}$ regulation and other $\sigma$ factors |  |
| $rpoD$ | Housekeeping sigma factor D ($\sigma^{D}$ or $\sigma^{70}$) |
| $rpoE$ | ECF sigma factor E |
| $rpoH$ | Heat-shock sigma factor H ($\sigma^{H}$ or $\sigma^{32}$); cytoplasmic branch of heat-shock response |
| $rpoN$ | Nitrogen metabolism sigma factor D ($\sigma^{54}$) |
| $rseA$ | Anti-sigma factor that binds and sequesters $\sigma^{E}$ (IMP) |
| $rseB$ | Binds to RseA; minor negative regulator of $\sigma^{E}$ activity (PP) |
| $rseC$ | Minor positive regulator of $\sigma^{E}$ activity (IMP); has a role in thiamine biosynthesis; negative control of SoxR-dependent response |
| $rseP$ ($yaeL/ecfE$) | IMP; metalloprotease/carboxypeptidase that cleaves RseA at cytoplasmic site |

| Primary metabolism, sensory-regulatory functions |  |
| --- | --- |
| $cca$ | tRNA nucleotidyl transferase |
| $clpX$ | ATP-dependent specificity component of ClpP protease |
| $cutC$ | CP involved in copper tolerance and sensing |
| $dnaE$ | $\alpha$-subunit of DNA polymerase III |
| $ftsZ$ | Cell-division protein |
| $fusA$ | Elongation factor G |
| $greA$ | Transcription elongation factor |
| $lhr$ | ATP-dependent helicase |
| $malQ$ | 4-$\alpha$-glucanotransferase |
| $mdoGH$ | Osmoregulated periplasmic glucan synthesis |
| $pioA$ | Putative general secretion pathway protein A |
| $prfB$ | Peptide chain release factor RF-2 |
| $recJ$ | Exonuclease; DNA repair |
| $rnkB$ | Ribonuclease III |

| PPs — proteases/chaperones/folding enzymes |  |
| --- | --- |
| $asnB$ | Periplasmic L-asparaginase |
| $dsbC$ | Thiol:disulfide oxido-reductase/protein disulfide isomerase II |
| $fkpA$ | FKBP-family PPIase |
| $htrA$ ($degP$) | Serine protease and chaperone |
| $skp$ | Chaperone involved in OMP assembly and folding; in operon with $lpxDA$ ($skp lpxDA fabZ$) |
| $surA$ | Parvulin-family PPIase and chaperone |

| Phospholipid and LPS biogenesis/modification |  |
| --- | --- |
| $ahpF$ | Alkyl hydroperoxide reductase; lipid detoxification |
| $fadD$ | Acyl-coenzyme A synthase |
| $lpxA$ | UDP-N-acetylglycosamine acetyltransferase involved in lipid A biosynthesis; in operon with $lpxD$ ($lpxDA fabZ$) |
| $lpxD$ | UDP-3-O-(3-hydroxymyristoyl)-glucosamine N-acyltransferase involved in lipid A biosynthesis; in operon with $lpxD$ ($lpxDA fabZ$) |
| $lpxP$ ($ddg$) | Cold-shock-induced palmitoleoyl transferase; adds palmitoleate to nascent lipid A of LPS |
| $plsB$ | Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase |
| $psd$ | Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase; converts phosphatidylserine to phosphatidylethanolamine |
| $rfuD$ ($htrM$) | ADP-L-glycerol-D-mannoheptose-6-epimerase; first gene of $rfuDFCL$ operon involved in LPS biosynthesis |

| IMPs — transport, unknown function |  |
| --- | --- |
| $bacA$ | Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase; involved in bacitracin A resistance |
| $ptsN$ | Phosphotransferase system enzyme IIA |
| $sbmA$ | Putative transporter protein possibly involved in microcin B17 and J25 uptake; homologues in Sinorhizobium meliloti and Brucella abortus are involved in intracellular survival; in operon with $yaiW$ ($sbmA yaiW$) |

For the listed genes, the $\sigma^{E}$-dependent promoter has been identified, details are given in REFS 21–23. CP, cytoplasmic protein; ECF, extracytoplasmic function; IMP, inner-membrane protein; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; OMP, outer-membrane protein; PP, periplasmic protein; PPIase, peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase.

Table 2 | Examples of known or putative extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factors in bacteria

| Bacteria | ECF sigma factor | Reported associated functions/mutant phenotypes* |
|----------|------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| **Gram-negative bacteria** |  |  |
| Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae | $\sigma^E$ | Possible role in porcine pleuropneumonia |
| Azotobacter vinelandii | AlgT (AlgU) | Reduced alginate biosynthesis |
| Escherichia coli | $\sigma^E$ | High- and low-temperature sensitivity; ethanol sensitivity; abnormalities in lipopolysaccharide; defective biofilm formation |
| Haemophilus influenzae | $\sigma^E$ | In non-typeable strains, expressed intracellularly and required for survival within murine macrophages |
| Myxococcus xanthus | CarQ | Defective light-induced carotenoid biosynthesis |
| Pseudomonas spp. | AlgU (AlgT, $\sigma^{22}$) | Reduced alginate biosynthesis; reduced resistance to high temperature, reactive oxygen species; defective biofilm formation; important for respiratory but not systemic infection |
| Pseudomonas syringae | HrpL | Attenuated virulence in plant hosts; defective biofilm formation |
| Salmonella enterica | $\sigma^E$ | Reduced long-term C-starvation-survival/C-starvation-inducible cross-resistance to $H_2O_2$, acid pH, high temperature, polymyxin B; defects in diauxic shifts from glucose to certain alternative C sources; reduced survival in macrophages; attenuated mouse virulence |
| Vibrio cholerae | $\sigma^E$ | Attenuated infant mouse virulence; sensitivity to 3% ethanol |
| Vibrio angustum | $\sigma^{28}$ | Reduced survival during starvation and exposure to high temperature, reactive oxygen species, detergents |
| Yersinia enterocolitica | $\sigma^E$ | Activated in vivo; defective osmotic stress response to high levels of non-metabolizable sugars |
| **Gram-positive bacteria** |  |  |
| Bacillus subtilis | $\sigma^X$ | High-temperature sensitivity; impaired resistance to reactive oxygen species |
|  | $\sigma^W$ | Defective alkaline-pH-shock response |
|  | $\sigma^M$ | Decreased resistance to acid pH, ethanol, cell-wall active antimicrobials, superoxide ions |
| Deinococcus radiodurans | Sig1 | Reduced survival during heat stress and ethanol stress |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | $\sigma^E$ | Altered peptidoglycan; hypersensitivity to muramidases; overproduction of actinorhodin; requirement of high levels of Mg$^{2+}$ for growth and sporulation |
|  | $\sigma^R$ | Sensitivity to $H_2O_2$ and diamide (thiol-specific oxidant) |
| **Acid-fast bacteria** |  |  |
| Mycobacterium leprae | $\sigma^C$ | Homologue of M. tuberculosis ECF sigma factor $\sigma^C$; no reported phenotypes |
|  | $\sigma^E$ | Homologue of M. tuberculosis ECF sigma factor $\sigma^E$; no reported phenotypes |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | $\sigma^C$ | Increased sensitivity to $H_2O_2$ and diamide; attenuated mouse virulence |
|  | $\sigma^E$ | Hypersensitivity to detergent surface stress, high temperature and reactive oxygen species; attenuated macrophage growth and survival; attenuated virulence in mouse model systems |
|  | $\sigma^H$ | Increased sensitivity to $H_2O_2$ and diamide; attenuated lung immune/ inflammatory responses in mouse model systems |

*See text for further explanation and references.

the expression of the genes that encode the housekeeping sigma factor **RpoD** and the heat-shock sigma factor **RpoH** (TABLE 1).

The activity of $\sigma^E$ is negatively controlled by its cognate membrane-bound anti-sigma factor **RseA**, which binds $\sigma^E$, rendering it inactive. The activation and regulation of $\sigma^E$ in *E. coli* has recently been reviewed ${}^{24}$ and is illustrated in FIG. 1. The release of $\sigma^E$ from RseA allows it to bind to core RNA polymerase and redirect the RNA polymerase holoenzyme to $\sigma^E$-dependent promoters (consensus sequence: 5′-ggAACtt-N${}_{16}$-TCnaA-3′, REFS 22,23,27), enabling $\sigma^E$-dependent gene expression (TABLE 1; FIG. 1, **Supplementary information S1** (table)). One such promoter lies upstream of the *rpoE rseABC* operon ${}^{4,28}$. Increased transcription from this promoter not only leads to increased levels of $\sigma^E$ but also of the regulator RseA, which will function homeostatically to switch off the $\sigma^E$ response once the activating stimulus is removed.

REVIEW S

Outer membrane

Periplasm
Misfolded protein
COOH
DegS PDZ
RseB
RseA
RseP
σE
Inner membrane

Cytoplasm

Figure 1 | Model for regulation of σE activity by regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) in Escherichia coli. The major mechanism for σE activation in response to extracytoplasmic stress is the degradation of RseA by the successive action of two proteases, DegS and RseP. In the absence of misfolded proteins, the PDZ domain of DegS prevents degradation of RseA at periplasmic cleavage sites. In the presence of misfolded outer-membrane proteins (OMPs), the PDZ domain of DegS interacts with a motif in the carboxyl end of the OMPs (a). This activates DegS protease activity, which leads to RseA cleavage at a periplasmic site (b). In turn, the RseP protease can then cleave RseA at a cytoplasmic cleavage site (c), resulting in release of a σE–RseA inhibitory complex into the cytoplasm, where it binds to SspB (d), which directs this complex to ClpXP (e). ClpXP specifically degrades the RseA portion, leading to release of σE (f). This allows σE to bind to core RNA polymerase with transcription of σE-dependent genes (g)24,117.

σE and its homologues, to varying degrees, control bacterial functions that are required both for their pathogenesis (as discussed below) and for their development of maximal resistance to various environmental stresses. For example, in S. typhimurium, σE is required for maximal protection against reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antimicrobial peptides, for survival in stationary phase, for long-term carbon-starvation survival and for carbon-starvation-inducible cross-resistance to H2O2, acidic pH, high temperature and polymyxin B18,33,34. The role of σE in bacterial pathogenesis is complex, varies from pathogen to pathogen and could also be important for infection at one host site but not another. These complexities are discussed below.

Role of σE in bacterial pathogenesis

Pseudomonas aeruginosa. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is a Gram-negative bacterium that is ubiquitous in the environment and is an important opportunistic pathogen of humans, animals and plants. The importance of σE to bacterial pathogenesis first became apparent from the study of its orthologue, AlgU (AlgT), in P. aeruginosa35. σE of E. coli and AlgU are functionally equivalent, and the organization of the algU operon is identical to that found in enteric bacteria — algU mucA mucB mucC are equivalent to rpoE rseA rseB rseC36,37.

P. aeruginosa is a major cause of respiratory infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF)35. P. aeruginosa isolated from CF patients is usually mucoid owing to constitutive overproduction of the extracellular polysaccharide, alginate35. AlgU directly regulates the production of alginate by directing transcription of the alginate-biosynthesis operon (first gene algD) from an AlgU-dependent promoter, and also indirectly, by upregulating the expression of genes that encode transcriptional activators of the algD operon, including algR and algZ35,38,39. Conversion of non-mucoid strains to mucoid strains (constitutive alginate production) occurs predominantly owing to mutations in mucA (rseA), resulting in constitutive activation of AlgU40.

Several roles for alginate in the pathogenesis of respiratory P. aeruginosa infection in CF patients have been proposed, including promotion of adhesion and biofilm formation, inhibition of leukocyte phagocytosis and the respiratory burst, and salvaging of ROS35. Environmental strains of P. aeruginosa (believed to be the source of infection for CF patients) and isolates from other sites of infection are not normally mucoid. This indicates that the environment of the CF respiratory tract selects for mutants in which AlgU regulon expression, and in particular alginate production, is constitutive35.

Surprisingly, algU mutants of P. aeruginosa are not attenuated in murine models of systemic P. aeruginosa infection41. Also, earlier studies showed that mucoid strains (that presumably have constitutive AlgU activation) have reduced systemic virulence42. One possible explanation for these findings is the negative effect of AlgU on expression of the type III secretion system (TTSS), which is an important virulence determinant43. However, in contrast to the systemic-infection model, mucoid

PDZ domain
Protein domain found in signalling proteins of bacteria and eukaryotes. The PDZ domain consists of 80–90 amino acids typically arranged as 6 β-strands and 2 α-helices. The PDZ domain recognizes peptide sequences typically in the C terminus of the target protein. Most proteins with PDZ domains are located in the plasma membrane.

Regulated intra-membrane proteolysis (RIP). A conserved mechanism for controlling several important signalling pathways in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It normally involves the release of a cytoplasmic membrane-bound transcription factor, which in this context is a sigma factor.

Type III secretion system (TTSS). Used by many pathogenic bacteria to inject virulence proteins directly into host cells through needle-like structures. Also used by the bacteria to export flagellum-protein subunits.

strains of *P. aeruginosa* were cleared less efficiently from the respiratory tract of aerosol-infected mice<sup>40</sup>. Therefore, AlgU and AlgU-regulated genes seem to be important for respiratory but not systemic *P. aeruginosa* infection.

Does AlgU contribute to the pathology of *P. aeruginosa* infection in CF patients as well as promoting the respiratory survival of *P. aeruginosa*? Long-term persistence of *P. aeruginosa* in the respiratory tract of CF patients is characterized by chronic inflammation with high levels of neutrophils and inflammatory cytokines/chemokines<sup>44,45</sup>. Alginate itself stimulates the production of IL-1 and **TNF-α**<sup>35</sup>. Also, lipopeptides corresponding to the N terminus of two AlgU-regulated lipoproteins (LptA and LptB) stimulate production of the proinflammatory chemokine **IL-8** by human macrophages<sup>46</sup>. The *lptA* gene is essential for *P. aeruginosa* pulmonary infection in rats<sup>47</sup>. Finally, production of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is a virulence factor for *P. aeruginosa* in the **Caenorhabditis elegans** nematode infection model<sup>48</sup>, and (through **AlgR**) AlgU positively regulates the HCN-synthesis genes (*hcnAB*)<sup>49</sup>.

**Table 3 | Examples of stresses and conditions proposed or known to activate envelope stress responses (ESRs) in bacteria**

| ESR               | Stress/condition                          | Bacteria                                                                 |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ECF σ-mediated    | Heat shock                                | Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium), Pseudomonas spp., Vibrio angustum, Bacillus subtilis, Deinococcus radiodurans, Mycobacterium tuberculosis |
|                   | Cold shock                                | E. coli, S. typhimurium                                                  |
|                   | Oxidative stress                          | E. coli, S. typhimurium, Pseudomonas spp., V. angustum, B. subtilis      |
|                   | Ethanol exposure                          | Streptomyces coelicolor, D. radiodurans, M. tuberculosis, E. coli, Vibrio cholerae, B. subtilis |
|                   | Exposure to detergents                    | V. angustum, M. tuberculosis                                           |
|                   | Hyperosmolarity, osmotic stress           | E. coli, Yersinia enterocolitica                                        |
|                   | Carbon-energy-source starvation           | S. typhimurium, V. angustum                                             |
|                   | Glucose to maltose, citrate or succinate shifts | S. typhimurium                                                        |
|                   | Stationary phase (LB medium)              | E. coli, S. typhimurium                                                 |
|                   | Biofilm formation                         | E. coli, Pseudomonas spp.                                              |
|                   | Overexpression of OMPs                    | E. coli, S. typhimurium                                                |
|                   | Overexpression of OmpC-like terminal peptides | E. coli                                                              |
|                   | Growth in vivo (pathogenesis)             | S. typhimurium, P. aeruginosa, V. cholerae, Haemophilus influenzae (non-typeable), Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae |
|                   | Light                                     | Myxococcus xanthus                                                    |
| CpxRA-mediated    | Presence of abiotic surfaces, adhesion    | E. coli                                                               |
|                   | Alkaline pH                               | E. coli                                                               |
|                   | Overproduction of OM lipoproteins (for example, NlpE) | E. coli                                                             |
|                   | Increased expression of certain pili (for example, P pili) | E. coli (UPEC, EPEC)                                               |
|                   | Pathogenesis                              | E. coli (UPEC, EPEC), S. typhimurium, Shigella sonnei, Legionella pneumophila |
| BaeRS-mediated    | Unknown                                   | E. coli                                                               |
| Phage shock response | Infection with filamentous phage (for example, f1) | E. coli                                                             |
|                   | Dissipation of proton-motive force        | E. coli, Y. enterocolitica, S. typhimurium                             |
|                   | High temperature                          | E. coli, Y. enterocolitica, S. typhimurium                             |
|                   | Osmotic stress                            | E. coli, Y. enterocolitica                                             |
|                   | Ethanol/organic-solvent exposure          | E. coli, Y. enterocolitica                                             |
|                   | Stationary phase (LB medium) at alkaline pH | E. coli                                                               |
|                   | Pathogenesis                              | Y. enterocolitica, S. typhimurium, Shigella flexneri                     |

ECF, extracytoplasmic function; EPEC, enteropathogenic *E. coli*; OMP, outer-membrane protein; UPEC, uropathogenic *E. coli*.

Salmonella: a model intracellular pathogen. Salmonella spp. are important pathogens of humans as well as domestic and wild animals. They can cause infections ranging from localized enteritis (Salmonella food poisoning) to systemic infections such as typhoid fever in humans. In a few individuals, Salmonella spp. can persist for long periods in host tissues.

Salmonellae are invasive pathogens and can promote their own uptake into various eukaryotic cell types and then proliferate and/or survive within a modified membrane-bound vacuole. The *rpoE* gene is upregulated and is crucial for survival of S. typhimurium in macrophages *in vitro* and in host tissue *in vivo* [18,34,50–52]. For S. typhimurium, there is a good correlation between intra-macrophage survival and virulence in mice, and this holds true for S. typhimurium *rpoE* mutants [18,53]. Inactivation of *rpoE* significantly reduces the ability of S. typhimurium to cause disease by either oral or parenteral (intravenous or intraperitoneal) routes of infection [18,34,52].

Lack of RpoE renders S. typhimurium more sensitive to killing by several antimicrobial agents that the bacteria are likely to encounter *in vivo*, including ROS and antimicrobial peptides [18,34]. The capacity of an S. typhimurium *rpoE* mutant to cause lethal infection in mice through the intraperitoneal route is greatly increased if the phagocytes of the infected mice are unable to generate ROS (owing to mutations in genes encoding the phagocyte NADPH oxidase) [34]. When given orally, however, the S. typhimurium *rpoE* mutant remains attenuated, which has been attributed to the inability of this mutant to defend itself against host antimicrobial peptides [52].

The first σ<sup>E</sup>-regulated gene found to be important for Salmonella pathogenesis was *htrA* [53,54]. The HtrA protein is active in the bacterial periplasm and can function as either a serine protease or a chaperone [55]. S. typhimurium *htrA* mutants exhibit increased sensitivity to killing by ROS and reduced survival and/or replication within macrophages [18,53,54]. These mutants are also highly attenuated in the murine model of systemic Salmonella infection [18,56]. Surprisingly, when given orally to calves, an S. typhimurium *htrA* mutant was not attenuated (although it was attenuated when administered parenterally) [57]. In cattle, S. typhimurium infection presents predominantly as enteritis [57]. These findings indicate that HtrA is dispensable for the enteric phase of Salmonella infection but is necessary for growth at systemic sites. In support of this hypothesis, *htrA* mutants of S. typhimurium can efficiently colonize intestinal lymphoid tissue of mice but are unable to survive and proliferate in the liver and spleen [18,56]. Since these seminal studies in Salmonella, HtrA has been found to be important for the virulence of a wide range of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial pathogens [18,54,58–65].

SurA and FkpA are σ<sup>E</sup>-regulated proteins that are involved in the process of protein folding in the periplasm of S. typhimurium [6,21,66]. Both proteins are PPIases that catalyse the normally slow cis-trans isomerization around proline residues in polypeptides [67]. Like HtrA, they can also function as chaperones independent of their enzymatic activity [68,69]. *surA* mutants of S. typhimurium are defective in both invasion and intracellular survival within eukaryotic cells *in vitro*, are attenuated in a mouse model of infection and make efficacious live vaccines [66,70]. Null mutations in *fkpA* were also expected to attenuate Salmonella, as an *fkpA* mutant of a particular biotype of S. typhimurium (Copenhagen) was reported to be defective for intracellular replication, and FkpA homologues are important for infection of host cells by other intracellular pathogens, including *Legionella pneumophila* and *Chlamydia trachomatis* [67,71,72]. However, contrary to these expectations, *fkpA* mutants of two different S. typhimurium strains were not attenuated in mice [66]. It is probable that there are other σ<sup>E</sup>-regulated S. typhimurium genes that are important for Salmonella pathogenesis, and identification of these genes is under active investigation.

S. typhimurium *rpoE*, *surA* and *htrA* mutants are completely attenuated in mice infected through the oral route of infection. Interestingly, whereas S. typhimurium *htrA* and *surA* mutants function as excellent live oral anti-Salmonella vaccines, S. typhimurium *rpoE* mutants do not [18,56,69]. This is probably because S. typhimurium *rpoE* mutants are too attenuated to illicit a significant host immune response; they survive significantly less well in murine tissues than S. typhimurium *htrA* or *surA* mutants.

Other organisms. The role of σ<sup>E</sup> in the pathogenesis of several other organisms has been investigated. Non-typeable *Haemophilus influenzae* (NTHi) causes various infections in humans, including otitis media, sinusitis, bronchitis and pneumonia. In NTHi strains, *rpoE* is highly expressed in murine macrophages and is required for intracellular survival in these cells [17]. *Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae* is related to *H. influenzae* and causes pleuropneumonia in pigs, a severe and often fatal infection. Interestingly, in this organism, inactivation of *rseA* (*mlcA*) but not *rpoE* was attenuating in porcine lungs [73]. The absence of σ<sup>E</sup> compromised the ability of both classical and El Tor strains of *Vibrio cholerae* to colonize the intestinal tract of infant mice [19]. A *degS* mutant of uropathogenic *E. coli* (UPEC) was attenuated in murine systemic and urinary-tract infection models [74]. It was assumed that this phenotype was due to the *degS* mutation preventing activation of the σ<sup>E</sup> regulon.

Two-component regulatory systems and the ESR Two-component signal-transduction systems are commonly used by bacteria to sense and respond to extracytoplasmic conditions. These systems are composed of a (transmembrane) sensor kinase and a (cytoplasmic) response regulator. The prototypic two-component regulator involved in combating envelope stress is the CpxAR (Cpx) system [8,75–77]. In *E. coli*, the Cpx system is believed to control the expression of more than 100 proteins in response to certain envelope stress conditions, some of which overlap with the σ<sup>E</sup> regulon [77,78]. Members of the Cpx regulon (TABLE 4) include HtrA, the periplasmic thiol:disulphide oxido-reductases or protein disulphide isomerase DsbA, the periplasmic PPIases PpiA and PpiD, as well as the CpxR, CpxA and CpxP proteins that

Table 4 | Known or putative members of the Cpx regulon in Escherichia coli

| Type of regulation | Gene | Function of gene product* |
|---|---|---|
| Positive regulation |  |  |
| Cpx proteins and regulation | cpxP | Negative regulator of CpxA kinase activity (PP) |
|  | cpxRA | Response regulator (CP)/sensor kinase (IMP) components of Cpx two-component system |
| PPs—proteases/ chaperones/folding enzymes | dsbA | Thiol:disulfide oxido-reductase/protein disulphide isomerase II |
|  | htrA (degP) | Serine protease and chaperone |
|  | ppiA | Cyclophilin-family PPIase |
|  | ppiD | Parvulin-family PPIase and chaperone |
|  | skp | Chaperone involved in OMP assembly and folding; in operon with lpxDA (skp lpxDA fabZ) |
|  | spy | PP induced by spheroplasting and oxidative stress; also controlled by BaeSR system |
| Protein secretion | secA | Preprotein translocase; ATPase secretion component |
| Phospholipid and LPS biogenesis/modification | psd | Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase; converts phosphatidylserine to phosphatidylethanolamine |
| Virulence loci or adherence factors | bfp | Type IV bundle-forming pili of EPEC |
|  | mviM | Proposed virulence factor (exact function unclear) |
|  | pap | P pili subunit components, biogenesis (see below) |
| OMPs | ompC | Major outer-membrane porin 1 protein |
| Other loci of known and unknown function | aroK | Shikimate kinase I; aromatic-amino-acid biosynthesis |
|  | ung | Uracil-DNA glycosylase |
| Negative regulation |  |  |
| Sigma factors and regulation | rpoD | Housekeeping sigma factor D ($\sigma^D$ or $\sigma^{70}$) |
|  | rpoE | ECF sigma factor E |
|  | rpoH | Heat-shock sigma factor H ($\sigma^H$ or $\sigma^{32}$), cytoplasmic branch of heat-shock response |
|  | rseA | IMP; anti-sigma factor that binds and sequesters $\sigma^E$ |
|  | rseB | PP; binds to RseA; minor negative regulator of $\sigma^E$ activity |
|  | rseC | IMP with roles as a minor positive regulator of $\sigma^E$ activity; some role in thiamine biosynthesis; negative control of SoxR-dependent response |
| Virulence loci or adherence factors | csgBAC | Curli fimbriae subunit and production proteins |
|  | pap | Phase variation; inhibits transition from OFF to ON phase |
| Chemotaxis and motility | aer | Aerotaxis sensor receptor; senses cellular redox state or proton-motive force |
|  | motABcheAW | Proton conductor component of motor/flagellar rotation; chemotactic sensory His kinase; positive regulator of CheA |
|  | tsr | Serine chemoreceptor |
| Cell division | minCDE | Cell-division inhibition; control of FtsZ ring formation |

*See text for further explanation and references ${}^{78}$. CP, cytoplasmic protein; ECF, extracytoplasmic function; EPEC, enteropathogenic $E.\ coli$; IMP, inner-membrane protein; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; OMP, outer-membrane protein; PP, periplasmic protein; PPIase, peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase.

REVIEW S

Escherichia coli. There are several studies showing that Cpx affects the expression of different types of pili/fimbriae in E. coli — Curli (negative regulation)⁸⁷, P/PAP pili of UPEC (positive or negative regulation)⁸⁴,⁸⁸ and type IV bundle-forming pili (BFP) of enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC; positive regulation)⁸⁹. As well as directly regulating pili/fimbrial genes, Cpx-regulated genes such as *dsbA* and *ppiA* might assist in the assembly of pili/fimbriae. There is only one report that disruption of Cpx regulation of pili expression affects the ability of *E. coli* to adhere to eukaryotic cells; an EPEC *cpxR* mutant produced less BFP and was less able to adhere to eukaryotic cells *in vitro*⁸⁹.

Salmonella serovars. The Cpx system affects the invasiveness of Salmonella in a pH-dependent fashion. Invasion of eukaryotic cells is mediated by effector proteins that are delivered by the TTSS encoded by the Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI-1). *HilA* is a positive regulator of the SPI-1 TTSS genes, and CpxA (but not CpxR) is required by *S. typhimurium* for expression of *hilA* at pH 6.0 but not pH 8.0 (REF. 90). At pH 6.0, the invasiveness of an *S. typhimurium cpxA* mutant is reduced. Conversely, at alkaline pH (pH 8.0), *S. typhimurium cpxA* and *cpxR* null mutants are slightly (but significantly) more invasive than wild-type strains for reasons that are unknown⁸⁵,⁹⁰. Also, a transposon (*TnphoA*) insertion in *cpxA* of *S. typhi* reduced the ability of the strain to adhere to, and invade, epithelial cells *in vitro*⁹¹. In-frame deletions in the region of *cpxA* that encodes the periplasmic sensor domain render CpxA signal blind and constitutively activate the Cpx pathway, a so-called *cpxA*⁺ mutation⁸. A *cpxA*⁺ mutation greatly reduced the ability of *S. typhimurium* to adhere to — and as a consequence invade — eukaryotic cells *in vitro*⁸⁵. Survival and replication of *S. typhimurium* within macrophages *in vitro* does not require the Cpx system⁸⁵.

In mice, *S. typhimurium cpxA* and *cpxA*⁺ mutants are attenuated when administered by both the oral and parenteral routes of infection but, interestingly, a *cpxR* mutant is not⁸⁵. This indicates that CpxA and CpxR can function independently⁷⁵,⁹⁰. Constitutive activation of the Cpx pathway had a much greater effect on *S. typhimurium* virulence than the loss of *cpxA*⁸⁵. Salmonella serovars, including *S. typhimurium*, have the potential to express a diverse number of pili/fimbriae, most of which have only been shown to be expressed *in vivo*⁹². Preliminary evidence suggests that *S. typhimurium* CpxAR negatively regulates expression of Curli and possibly other pili (M.R., unpublished observations), and this could contribute to the reduced adhesiveness and/or virulence of the *S. typhimurium cpxA*⁺ strain. However, as Cpx can repress the expression of *rpoE*, it is possible that the attenuation of the *S. typhimurium cpxA*⁺ strain results (at least partially) from interference with *rpoE* expression²⁸,⁷⁸,⁸⁵.

Shigella spp. Shigella spp. are the causative agents of bacillary dysentery. Shigella spp. are invasive pathogens and their entry into eukaryotic cells is mediated by a virulence-plasmid-encoded TTSS. Similar to Salmonella spp., the Cpx system is involved in pH-dependent

negatively regulate the σᴱ pathway²¹,²²,²⁸,⁷⁸,⁸⁵. Interestingly, periplasmic accumulation of one P pili subunit (*PapG*) activates both the σᴱ and Cpx pathways, whereas another (*PapE*) activates only the Cpx pathway⁸⁶. A major role of the Cpx system seems to be regulating the production of macromolecular surface structures (see below).

The Cpx pathway and pathogenesis. The Cpx regulon has been implicated in the virulence of several bacterial pathogens. In particular, the Cpx system regulates the expression of surface structures that are associated with bacterial virulence, including pili/fimbriae and TTSSs. However, for most organisms, the role of the Cpx system during infection has not been investigated.

Figure 2 | Model for regulation of the CpxRA pathway. Signals generated by some form of envelope stress (pH stress; surface adhesion; overproduced, aggregated or misfolded proteins) are somehow sensed and transduced, presumably through the periplasmic domain of CpxA. This activates CpxA kinase, which triggers autophosphorylation of a conserved histidine residue in its cytoplasmic domain. Phosphorylated CpxA then transfers the phosphate group to an aspartate residue in the N-terminal domain of the response regulator CpxR. CpxR-P then binds to specific sites on DNA. CpxP-R binding activates (and in some cases represses) the transcription of genes in the Cpx regulon⁷⁷. Similar to the σᴱ regulon, the *cpxRA* genes are positively autoregulated by CpxR-P, enabling amplification of the response. However, CpxR-P also upregulates *cpxP*, which encodes a small periplasmic protein, CpxP, that binds to CpxA, inhibiting its kinase activity and providing feedback inhibition. This inhibition would then be relieved by envelope stresses that cause CpxP to dissociate from CpxA. Other negative regulators of CpxA activity, represented by a question mark, also seem to be involved⁷⁵.

Pili/fimbriae  
Filamentous surface structures that are more rigid, but thinner and shorter, than flagella. They mediate adhesion to both biotic and abiotic surfaces.

Curli  
A type of fimbriae that mediate binding to components of the extracellular matrix, often implicated in biofilm formation.

Type IV secretion system (TFSS). Used to deliver proteins or DNA across the bacterial cell envelope.

regulation of *Shigella* TTSS invasion genes. Expression of the TTSS genes is tightly controlled by the virulence-plasmid-encoded *virF* and *invE* (*virB*) genes⁹³. *VirF* activates transcription of *invE* and, in turn, *InvE* switches on transcription of the TTSS genes⁹³. In response to external pH, Cpx activates expression of *virF* and *invE* and, consequently, expression of the TTSS genes⁹⁴⁻⁹⁶. Furthermore, the Cpx system also enhances post-transcriptional production of InvE⁹⁴.

*Legionella pneumophila*. *L. pneumophila* is the cause of Legionnaire’s disease in humans. The organisms can live within phagocytic cells such as macrophages in humans and amoebae in the environment. The *L. pneumophila icm-dot* genes are necessary for infection of amoebae, macrophages and animals⁹⁷,⁹⁸. They encode a type IV secretion system (TFSS) that translocates effector proteins into host cells to modulate the intracellular environment and facilitate intracellular survival⁹⁷,⁹⁸. CpxR positively affects transcription of several of the *icm-dot* genes⁹⁹. However, neither *cpxR* nor *rpoE* are required for *L. pneumophila* infection, survival or growth within macrophages or amoebae⁹⁹. It is not known if *L. pneumophila htrA* is regulated by σᴱ or Cpx; however, *htrA* is required for infection of mice and replication in macrophages and epithelial

cells but, interestingly, the gene is not necessary for infection of amoebae⁶³.

In summary, Cpx is involved in regulating the expression of surface virulence factors such as pili/fimbriae, TTSSs and TFSSs. Control of expression of these structures is complex, involving several transcriptional regulators. However, so far, no virulence factor has been shown to absolutely require the Cpx system for expression. The Cpx pathway been shown to have an *in vivo* role in only one organism, *S. typhimurium*.

**BaeSR.** A second two-component system that consists of BaeS, the sensor kinase, and BaeR, the response regulator, was recently reported to represent a third envelope-stress signal-transduction pathway¹⁰. Clues to the physiological function(s) of the Bae system in *E. coli* have come from studies showing that overexpression of BaeR increases resistance to β-lactam antibiotics, novobiocin and bile salts (for example, deoxycholate)¹⁰⁰⁻¹⁰². So far, there are no reports showing the involvement of the BaeSR system in bacterial pathogenesis, and this system will not be considered further here.

**Phage-shock-protein response and ESR**

A proposed fourth ESR system is the phage shock protein (PSP) response originally described for its induction in bacteria following infection with filamentous phage¹⁰³. In *E. coli*, the PSP response is mediated by the *pspABCDE* operon. The *pspA* gene (the first gene in the operon) is also induced by several environmental stress conditions¹¹,¹⁴,¹⁰³⁻¹⁰⁷ (TABLE 3). In fact, the *psp* operon is required for long-term stationary-phase survival at pH 9 (REF. 14).

A model for the PSP response system is illustrated in FIG. 3. The physiological function of the *psp* operon is only beginning to be elucidated. Based on the various stresses and conditions that lead to *pspA* induction as well the observed phenotypes of *pspA* mutants in *E. coli*, *S. typh-imurium* and *Yersinia enterocolitica*, the PspA protein (or PSP response system in general) is proposed to function in the maintenance of the proton-motive force (PMF) across the inner membrane¹³,¹⁰⁵,¹⁰⁸. Recently, it was found that σᴱ, as well as PSP, is necessary for maintenance of PMF, and that PSP compensates for the absence of σᴱ in an *S. typhimurium rpoE* mutant during stationary phase. Again, this is an excellent example of how the individual ESR pathways interact with each other¹⁰⁹.

**The PSP regulon and virulence.** Little is known about the role of the PSP regulon in bacterial virulence. The only studies so far have focused on *Y. enterocolitica*. *Y. enterocolitica psp* mutants are attenuated in mice¹¹⁰⁻¹¹². The *psp* genes of *Y. enterocolitica* are induced and necessary for normal growth when the plasmid-encoded Ysc TTSS is expressed *in vitro*. *Y. enterocolitica psp* mutants are thought to be attenuated because of growth inhibition when the Ysc TTSS is expressed *in vivo*¹¹⁰⁻¹¹². There is generally a good correlation between the effect of overexpression of the TTSS secretin gene *yscC* on the growth of different *Y. enterocolitica psp* mutants *in vitro* and their level of attenuation¹¹¹,¹¹².

Figure 3 | Model for phage shock protein (PSP) response regulation. Signals generated by protein-secretion defects, hydrophobic organic solvents, proton ionophores, filamentous phage infection/f1 protein pIV, stationary-phase at alkaline pH and high temperature are somehow sensed and transduced intracellularly to increase the expression of the *pspABCD* operon. In this model based on *Escherichia coli*, PspB and PspC are positive regulators of PspA. PspA has a role in maintenance of the proton-motive force (PMF) and also negatively controls PspF activity as an enhancer-binding protein activator, which enhances σ⁵⁴-dependent transcription of the *pspABCD* operon and *pspG*. The roles/functions of PspE (which is not present in all organisms), PspD and/or PspG in this system have yet to be defined. LZM, leucine zipper motif; RNA-P, RNA polymerase.

REVIEW S

Conclusions
Pathogens need to respond to various insults to survive in the environment of the host and for infection to be successful. Integration of the signals generated into coherent messages, which the organism can counter with both transcriptional and post-translational responses, is paramount. These responses involve several global regulatory systems, including ESRs. This also applies to survival of pathogens in the environment. Interestingly, the clinically relevant environment of a biofilm requires the ESR to integrate signals. A transcriptome analysis of *E. coli* revealed that many ESR genes belonging to the $\sigma^{E}$, CpxAR and PSP regulons are upregulated during biofilm formation$^{113}$.

A great deal has been learned about the ESRs but, so far, most studies have focused on organisms that are incapable of surviving outside of the lab. As such, it is crucially important to determine if the findings obtained in the laboratory also pertain to the ‘wild’. Although the involvement of ESRs in bacterial pathogenesis or environmental survival has only been investigated in a small number of pathogens, it is already apparent that a particular regulator or regulon member can be important for the biology of one pathogen but not another, and can have a role in one stage of an infection cycle but not another. It is therefore also important to use appropriate model systems to study the role of ESRs (or other stress responses) in pathogenesis.

Despite the huge advances in our knowledge of the ESR over the past 10 years, there is still much to learn, including completing the role call of each ESR regulon and determining the functional role of each member. In the case of pathogens, determining which ESR genes have a role in pathogenesis, and the nature of that role, is an important aim. This goal is of practical as well as fundamental interest. ESR genes and their products could be exploited to develop new vaccines and chemotherapeutic agents. For example, *S*. enterica *htrA* mutants (alone or in combination with other mutations) are safe, effective live oral vaccines, and immunization with purified HtrA provides partial protection against otitis media in several animal models of NTHi infection$^{56,114,115}$. As many of the known members of ESR regulons are enzymes, they are also potential targets for novel antibacterial strategies. Furthermore, the ESR might also have a significant role in the development of antibiotic resistance, as studies have shown that inhibition of particular ESR pathways can lead to increased sensitivity to specific antibiotics, and overexpression of $\sigma^{E}$ in *E. coli* greatly increases the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of several novel antibiotic agents$^{116}$. The clinical relevance of these findings, and whether activation of the ESR could help pathogens resist the action of antibiotics, has not been investigated but is clearly an area worthy of study.

1. Ruiz, N., Kahne, D. & Silhavy, T. J. Advances in understanding bacterial outer-membrane biogenesis. Nature Rev. Microbiol. **4**, 57–66 (2006). A thorough and interesting review of the biogenesis of the bacterial outer membrane, combined with an overview of the techniques involved in achieving this understanding.
2. De Las, P., Connolly, L. & Gross, C. A. $\sigma^{E}$ is an essential sigma factor in *Escherichia coli*. J Bacteriol. **179**, 6862–6864 (1997).
3. Erickson, J. W. & Gross, C. A. Identification of the $\sigma^{E}$ subunit of *Escherichia coli* RNA polymerase: a second alternate sigma factor involved in high-temperature gene expression. Genes Dev. **3**, 1462–1471 (1989). A seminal paper for those interested in the ESR of enterics. The first study to identify the $\sigma^{E}$ subunit through its role in *E. coli* high-temperature regulation. This same group then began to map the *E. coli rpoE* operon and dissect its regulation.
4. Rouviere, P. E. *et al.* $rpoE$, the gene encoding the second heat-shock sigma factor, $\sigma^{E}$, in *Escherichia coli*. EMBO J. **14**, 1032–1042 (1995).
5. Raivio, T. L. Envelope stress responses and Gram-negative bacterial pathogenesis. Mol. Microbiol. **56**, 1119–1128 (2005).
6. Danese, P. N. & Silhavy, T. J. The $\sigma^{E}$ and the Cpx signal transduction systems control the synthesis of periplasmic protein-folding enzymes in *Escherichia coli*. Genes Dev. **11**, 1183–1193 (1997).
7. Raivio, T. L., Popkin, D. L. & Silhavy, T. J. The Cpx envelope stress response is controlled by amplification and feedback inhibition. J. Bacteriol. **181**, 5263–5272 (1999).
8. Raivio, T. L. & Silhavy, T. J. Transduction of envelope stress in *Escherichia coli* by the Cpx two-component system. J. Bacteriol. **179**, 7724–7733 (1997).
9. Snyder, W. B., Davis, L. J., Danese, P. N., Cosma, C. L. & Silhavy, T. J. Overproduction of NlpE, a new outer membrane lipoprotein, suppresses the toxicity of periplasmic LacZ by activation of the Cpx signal transduction pathway. J. Bacteriol. **177**, 4216–4223 (1995).
10. Raffa, R. G. & Raivio, T. L. A third envelope stress signal transduction pathway in *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. **45**, 1599–1611 (2002). This group identified the BaeSR two-component system as a third member of the ESR which shares some overlap with the CpxRA pathway in regulating certain genes.
11. Jones, S. E., Lloyd, L. J., Tan, K. K. & Buck, M. Secretion defects that activate the phage shock response of *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **185**, 6707–6711 (2003).
12. Darwin, A. J. The phage-shock-protein response. Mol. Microbiol. **57**, 621–628 (2005). An excellent overview of the PSP response in enteric bacteria, discussing signal induction and transduction combined with possible physiological roles.
13. Maxson, M. E. & Darwin, A. J. Identification of inducers of the *Yersinia enterocolitica* phage shock protein system and comparison to the regulation of the RpoE and Cpx extracytoplasmic stress responses. J. Bacteriol. **186**, 4199–4208 (2004).
14. Weiner, L. & Model, P. Role of an *Escherichia coli* stress-response operon in stationary-phase survival. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA **91**, 2191–2195 (1994).
15. Helmann, J. D. The extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factors. Adv. Microb. Physiol. **46**, 47–110 (2002).
16. Lonetto, M. A., Brown, K. L., Rudd, K. E. & Buttner, M. J. Analysis of the *Streptomyces coelicolor sigE* gene reveals the existence of a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase sigma factors involved in the regulation of extracytoplasmic functions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA **91**, 7573–7577 (1994).
17. Craig, J. E., Nobbs, A. & High, N. J. The extracytoplasmic sigma factor, final $\sigma^{E}$, is required for intracellular survival of nontypeable *Haemophilus influenzae* in J774 macrophages. Infect. Immun. **70**, 708–715 (2002).
18. Humphreys, S., Stevenson, A., Bacon, A., Weinhardt, A. B. & Roberts, M. The alternative sigma factor, $\sigma^{E}$, is critically important for the virulence of *Salmonella typhimurium*. Infect. Immun. **67**, 1560–1568 (1999). A seminal paper discussing the $\sigma^{E}$ regulon in a pathogen showing that an $rpoE$ mutant is viable in *S. typhimurium*, but is highly attenuated in a mouse model. This study led the way for later work in *S. typhimurium* and other organisms.
19. Kovacikova, G. & Skorupski, K. The alternative sigma factor $\sigma^{E}$ plays an important role in intestinal survival and virulence in *Vibrio cholerae*. Infect. Immun. **70**, 5355–5362 (2002).
20. Martin, D. W., Holloway, B. W. & Deretic, V. Characterization of a locus determining the mucoid status of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: AlgU shows sequence similarities with a *Bacillus* sigma factor. J. Bacteriol. **175**, 1153–1164 (1993).
21. Dartigalongue, C., Missiakas, D. & Raina, S. Characterization of the *Escherichia coli* $\sigma^{E}$ regulon. J. Biol. Chem. **276**, 20866–20875 (2001). Until this publication, relatively few genes were known to be under the control of RpoE. Using promoter-fusion libraries, 20 RpoE-regulated promoters in *E. coli* were identified from various functional categories.
22. Rezuchova, B., Miticka, H., Homerova, D., Roberts, M. & Kormanec, J. New members of the *Escherichia coli* $\sigma^{E}$ regulon identified by a two-plasmid system. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **225**, 1–7 (2003).
23. Rhodius, V. A., Suh, W. C., Nonaka, G., West, J. & Gross, C. A. Conserved and variable functions of the $\sigma^{E}$ stress response in related genomes. PLoS Biol. **4**, e2 (2005).
24. Alba, B. M. & Gross, C. A. Regulation of the *Escherichia coli* sigma-dependent envelope stress response. Mol. Microbiol. **52**, 613–619 (2004).
25. Dartigalongue, C., Loferer, H. & Raina, S. EcfE, a new essential inner membrane protease: its role in the regulation of heat shock response in *Escherichia coli*. EMBO J. **20**, 5908–5918 (2001).
26. Duguay, A. R. & Silhavy, T. J. Quality control in the bacterial periplasm. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1694**, 121–134 (2004).
27. Skovierova, H. *et al.* Identification of the $\sigma^{E}$ regulon of *Salmonella enterica* serovar 1 Typhimurium. Microbiology (in the press).
28. Miticka, H. *et al.* Transcriptional analysis of the $rpoE$ gene encoding extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor $\sigma^{E}$ in *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **226**, 307–314 (2003).
29. Ehrmann, M. & Clausen, T. Proteolysis as a regulatory mechanism. Annu. Rev. Genet. **38**, 709–724 (2004).
30. Grigorova, I. L. *et al.* Fine-tuning of the *Escherichia coli* $\sigma^{E}$ envelope stress response relies on multiple mechanisms to inhibit signal-independent proteolysis of the transmembrane anti-sigma factor, RseA. Genes Dev. **18**, 2686–2697 (2004).

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

31. Kenyon, W. J., Thomas, S. M., Johnson, E., Pallen, M. J. & Spector, M. P. Shifts from glucose to certain secondary carbon-sources result in activation of the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor σE in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Microbiology 151, 2373–2383 (2005).

32. Rowley, G., Stevenson, A., Kormanec, J. & Roberts, M. Effect of inactivation of degS on Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium *in vitro* and *in vivo*. Infect. Immun. 73, 459–463 (2005).

33. Kenyon, W. J., Sayers, D. G., Humphreys, S., Roberts, M. & Spector, M. P. The starvation-stress response of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium requires σE-, but not CpxR-regulated extracytoplasmic functions. Microbiology 148, 113–122 (2002).

34. Testerman, T. L. *et al.* The alternative sigma factor σE controls antioxidant defences required for Salmonella virulence and stationary-phase survival. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 771–782 (2002).

35. Govan, J. R. & Deretic, V. Microbial pathogenesis in cystic fibrosis: mucoid *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and *Burkholderia cepacia*. Microbiol. Rev. 60, 539–574 (1996).

36. Kunst, F. *et al.* Deduced polypeptides encoded by the *Bacillus subtilis sacU* locus share homology with two-component sensor-regulator systems. J. Bacteriol. 170, 5093–5101 (1988).

37. Weber, R. F. & Silverman, P. M. The cpx proteins of *Escherichia coli* K12. Structure of the cpxA polypeptide as an inner membrane component. J. Mol. Biol. 203, 467–478 (1988).

38. Gacesa, P. Bacterial alginate biosynthesis — recent progress and future prospects. Microbiology 144, 1133–1143 (1998).

39. Wozniak, D. J., Sprinkle, A. B. & Baynham, P. J. Control of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa algZ* expression by the alternative sigma factor AlgT. J. Bacteriol. 185, 7297–7300 (2003).

40. Boucher, J. C., Yu, H., Mudd, M. H. & Deretic, V. Mucoid *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* in cystic fibrosis: characterization of *muc* mutations in clinical isolates and analysis of clearance in a mouse model of respiratory infection. Infect. Immun. 65, 3838–3846 (1997).

41. Yu, H., Boucher, J. C., Hibler, N. S. & Deretic, V. Virulence properties of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* lacking the extreme-stress sigma factor AlgU (σE). Infect. Immun. 64, 2774–2781 (1996).

42. Luzar, M. A. & Montie, T. C. Avirulence and altered physiological properties of cystic fibrosis strains of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Infect. Immun. 50, 572–576 (1985).

43. Wu, W., Badrane, H., Arora, S., Baker, H. V. & Jin, S. MucA-mediated coordination of type III secretion and alginate synthesis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 186, 7575–7585 (2004).

44. Hutchison, M. L. & Govan, J. R. Pathogenicity of microbes associated with cystic fibrosis. Microbes Infect. 1, 1005–1014 (1999).

45. Stotland, P. K., Radzioch, D. & Stevenson, M. M. Mouse models of chronic lung infection with *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: models for the study of cystic fibrosis. Pediatr. Pulmonol. 30, 413–424 (2000).

46. Firoved, A. M., Boucher, J. C. & Deretic, V. Global genomic analysis of AlgU (σE)-dependent promoters (sigmulon) in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and implications for inflammatory processes in cystic fibrosis. J. Bacteriol. 184, 1057–1064 (2002). The first study to use a global genomic approach to characterize a σE homologue outside of *E. coli*. Particularly interesting as it is directly relevant to a known clinical condition.

47. Potvin, E. *et al.* In vivo functional genomics of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* for high-throughput screening of new virulence factors and antibacterial targets. Environ. Microbiol. 5, 1294–1308 (2003).

48. Gallagher, L. A. & Manoil, C. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 kills *Caenorhabditis elegans* by cyanide poisoning. J. Bacteriol. 183, 6207–6214 (2001).

49. Carterson, A. J. *et al.* The transcriptional regulator AlgR controls cyanide production in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 186, 6837–6844 (2004).

50. Eriksson, S., Lucchini, S., Thompson, A., Rhen, M. & Hinton, J. C. Unravelling the biology of macrophage infection by gene expression profiling of intracellular *Salmonella enterica*. Mol. Microbiol. 47, 103–118 (2003).

51. Rollenhagen, C., Sorensen, M., Rizos, K., Hurvitz, R. & Bumann, D. Antigen selection based on expression levels during infection facilitates vaccine development for an intracellular pathogen. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 8739–8744 (2004).

52. Crouch, M. L. *et al.* The alternative sigma factor σ is required for resistance of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium to anti-microbial peptides. Mol. Microbiol. 56, 789–799 (2005). An interesting study showing that an *S.* typhimurium *rpoE* mutant is still attenuated after oral infection in mice that lack an oxidative burst. The study indicates a role for σE in defence against known antimicrobial peptides, and investigates the susceptibility of this mutant to these peptides. Although the peptides used are distinct in their mechanisms, both led to induction of RpoE.

53. Baumler, A. J., Kusters, J. G., Stojiljkovic, I. & Heffron, F. *Salmonella typhimurium* loci involved in survival within macrophages. Infect. Immun. 62, 1623–1630 (1994).

54. Johnson, K. *et al.* The role of a stress-response protein in *Salmonella typhimurium* virulence. Mol. Microbiol. 5, 401–407 (1991).

55. Spiess, C., Bel, A. & Ehrmann, M. A temperature-dependent switch from chaperone to protease in a widely conserved heat shock protein. Cell 97, 339–347 (1999).

56. Chatfield, S. N. *et al.* Evaluation of *Salmonella typhimurium* strains harbouring defined mutations in *htrA* and *aroA* in the murine salmonellosis model. Microb. Pathog. 12, 145–151 (1992).

57. Villarreal-Ramos, B. *et al.* Susceptibility of calves to challenge with *Salmonella typhimurium* 4/74 and derivatives harbouring mutations in *htrA* or *purE*. Microbiology 146, 2775–2783 (2000).

58. Bringer, M. A., Barnich, N., Glasser, A. L., Bardot, O. & Darfeuille-Michaud, A. HtrA stress protein is involved in intramacrophagic replication of adherent and invasive *Escherichia coli* strain LF82 isolated from a patient with Crohn’s disease. Infect. Immun. 73, 712–721 (2005).

59. Cortes, G., de Astorza, B., Benedi, V. J. & Alberti, S. Role of the *htrA* gene in *Klebsiella pneumoniae* virulence. Infect. Immun. 70, 4772–4776 (2002).

60. Ibrahim, Y. M., Kerr, A. R., McCluskey, J. & Mitchell, T. J. Role of HtrA in the virulence and competence of *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. Infect. Immun. 72, 3584–3591 (2004).

61. Jones, C. H., Bolken, T. C., Jones, K. F., Zeller, G. O. & Hruby, D. E. Conserved DegP protease in Gram-positive bacteria is essential for thermal and oxidative tolerance and full virulence in *Streptococcus pyogenes*. Infect. Immun. 69, 5538–5545 (2001).

62. Pallen, M. J. & Wren, B. W. The HtrA family of serine proteases. Mol. Microbiol. 26, 209–221 (1997).

63. Pedersen, L. L., Radulic, M., Doric, M. & Abu, K. Y. HtrA homologue of *Legionella pneumophila*: an indispensable element for intracellular infection of mammalian but not protozoan cells. Infect. Immun. 69, 2569–2579 (2001).

64. Rigoulay, C. *et al.* Comparative analysis of the roles of HtrA-like surface proteases in two virulent *Staphylococcus aureus* strains. Infect. Immun. 73, 563–572 (2005).

65. Williams, K. *et al.* Investigation into the role of the serine protease HtrA in *Yersinia pestis* pathogenesis. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 186, 281–286 (2000).

66. Humphreys, S. *et al.* Role of periplasmic peptidylprolyl isomerases in *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium virulence. Infect. Immun. 71, 5386–5388 (2003).

67. Hacker, J. & Fischer, G. Immunophilins: structure-function relationship and possible role in microbial pathogenicity. Mol. Microbiol. 10, 445–456 (1993).

68. Arie, J. P., Sassoon, N. & Betton, J. M. Chaperone function of FkpA, a heat shock prolyl isomerase, in the periplasm of *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. 39, 199–210 (2001).

69. Behrens, S., Maier, R., de Cock, H., Schmid, F. X. & Gross, C. A. The SurA periplasmic PPlase lacking its parvulin domains functions *in vivo* and has chaperone activity. EMBO J. 20, 285–294 (2001).

70. Sydenham, M. *et al.* *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium *surA* mutants are attenuated and effective live oral vaccines. Infect. Immun. 68, 1109–1115 (2000).

71. Horne, S. M., Kottom, T. J., Nolan, L. K. & Young, K. D. Decreased intracellular survival of an *fkpA* mutant of *Salmonella typhimurium* Copenhagen. Infect. Immun. 65, 806–810 (1997).

72. Horne, S. M. & Young, K. D. *Escherichia coli* and other species of the Enterobacteriaceae encode a protein similar to the family of Mip-like FK506-binding proteins. Arch. Microbiol. 163, 357–365 (1995).

73. Sheehan, B. J. *et al.* Identification of *Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae* genes important for survival during infection in its natural host. Infect. Immun. 71, 3960–3970 (2003).

74. Redford, P., Roesch, P. L. & Welch, R. A. DegS is necessary for virulence and is among extraintestinal *Escherichia coli* genes induced in murine peritonitis. Infect. Immun. 71, 3088–3096 (2003).

75. DiGiuseppe, P. A. & Silhavy, T. J. Signal detection and target gene induction by the CpxRA two-component system. J. Bacteriol. 185, 2432–2440 (2003).

76. Pogliano, J., Lynch, A. S., Belin, D., Lin, E. C. & Beckwith, J. Regulation of *Escherichia coli* cell envelope proteins involved in protein folding and degradation by the Cpx two-component system. Genes Dev. 11, 1169–1182 (1997).

77. Raivio, T. L. & Silhavy, T. J. The σE and Cpx regulatory pathways: overlapping but distinct envelope stress responses. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2, 159–165 (1999).

78. De Wulf, P., McGuire, A. M., Liu, X. & Lin, E. C. Genome-wide profiling of promoter recognition by the two-component response regulator CpxR-P in *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 26652–26661 (2002). The authors used a bioinformatic rather than a genetic approach to identify putative CpxR-P-binding sites in the *E. coli* genome. By constructing a weighted promoter screen, they predict that ~100 operons are under the control of CpxR-P.

79. De Wulf, P., Kwon, O. & Lin, E. C. The CpxRA signal transduction system of *Escherichia coli*: growth-related autoactivation and control of unanticipated target operons. J. Bacteriol. 181, 6772–6778 (1999).

80. De Wulf, P. & Lin, E. C. Cpx two-component signal transduction in *Escherichia coli*: excessive CpxR-P levels underlie CpxA*-phenotypes. J. Bacteriol. 182, 1423–1426 (2000).

81. Miyadai, H., Tanaka-Masuda, K., Matsuyama, S. & Tokuda, H. Effects of lipoprotein overproduction on the induction of DegP (HtrA) involved in quality control in the *Escherichia coli* periplasm. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 39807–39813 (2004).

82. Mileykovskaya, E. & Dowhan, W. The Cpx two-component signal transduction pathway is activated in *Escherichia coli* mutant strains lacking phosphatidylethanolamine. J. Bacteriol. 179, 1029–1034 (1997).

83. Danese, P. N. *et al.* Accumulation of the enterobacterial common antigen lipid II biosynthetic intermediate stimulates *degP* transcription in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 180, 5875–5884 (1998).

84. Hung, D. L., Raivio, T. L., Jones, C. H., Silhavy, T. J. & Hultgren, S. J. Cpx signaling pathway monitors biogenesis and affects assembly and expression of P pili. EMBO J. 20, 1508–1518 (2001).

85. Humphreys, S. *et al.* Role of the two-component regulator CpxAR in the virulence of *Salmonella enterica* serotype Typhimurium. Infect. Immun. 72, 4654–4661 (2004).

86. Jones, C. H., Danese, P. N., Pinkner, J. S., Silhavy, T. J. & Hultgren, S. J. The chaperone-assisted membrane release and folding pathway is sensed by two signal transduction systems. EMBO J. 16, 6394–6406 (1997).

87. Jubelin, G. *et al.* CpxR/OmpR interplay regulates curli gene expression in response to osmolarity in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 187, 2038–2049 (2005).

88. Hernday, A. D., Braaten, B. A., Broitman-Maduro, G., Engelberts, P. & Low, D. A. Regulation of the Pap epigenetic switch by CpxAR; phosphorylated CpxR inhibits transition to the phase ON state by competition with Lrp. Mol. Cell 16, 537–547 (2004).

89. Nevesinjac, A. Z. & Raivio, T. L. The Cpx envelope stress response affects expression of the type IV bundle-forming pili of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 187, 672–686 (2005).

90. Nakayama, S. *et al.* Activation of *hilA* expression at low pH requires the signal sensor CpxA, but not the cognate response regulator CpxR, in *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium. Microbiology 149, 2809–2817 (2003).

REVIEWS

91. Leclerc, G. J., Tartera, C. & Metcalf, E. S. Environmental regulation of *Salmonella typhi* invasion-defective mutants. *Infect. Immun.* **66**, 682–691 (1998).

92. Humphries, A. D. *et al.* The use of flow cytometry to detect expression of subunits encoded by 11 *Salmonella enterica* serotype Typhimurium fimbrial operons. *Mol. Microbiol.* **48**, 1357–1376 (2003).

93. Tobe, T., Yoshikawa, M., Mizuno, T. & Sasakawa, C. Transcriptional control of the invasion regulatory gene *virB* of *Shigella flexneri*: activation by *virF* and repression by H-NS. *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 6142–6149 (1993).

94. Mitobe, J., Arakawa, E. & Watanabe, H. A sensor of the two-component system CpxA affects expression of the type III secretion system through posttranscriptional processing of InvE. *J. Bacteriol.* **187**, 107–113 (2005).

95. Nakayama, S. & Watanabe, H. Involvement of *cpxA*, a sensor of a two-component regulatory system, in the pH-dependent regulation of expression of *Shigella sonnei virF* gene. *J. Bacteriol.* **177**, 5062–5069 (1995).

96. Nakayama, S. & Watanabe, H. Identification of *cpxR* as a positive regulator essential for expression of the *Shigella sonnei virF* gene. *J. Bacteriol.* **180**, 3522–3528 (1998).

97. Roy, C. R. The Dot/Icm transporter of *Legionella pneumophila*: a bacterial conductor of vesicle trafficking that orchestrates the establishment of a replicative organelle in eukaryotic hosts. *Int. J. Med. Microbiol.* **291**, 463–467 (2002).

98. Cianciotto, N. P. Pathogenicity of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Int. J. Med. Microbiol.* **291**, 331–343 (2001).

99. Gal-Mor, O. & Segal, G. Identification of CpxR as a positive regulator of *icm* and *dot* virulence genes of *Legionella pneumophila*. *J. Bacteriol.* **185**, 4908–4919 (2003).

100. Hirakawa, H., Inazumi, Y., Masaki, T., Hirata, T. & Yamaguchi, A. Indole induces the expression of multidrug exporter genes in *Escherichia coli*. *Mol. Microbiol.* **55**, 1113–1126 (2005).

101. Baranova, N. & Nikaido, H. The *baeSR* two-component regulatory system activates transcription of the *yegMNOB (mdtABCD)* transporter gene cluster in *Escherichia coli* and increases its resistance to novobiocin and deoxycholate. *J. Bacteriol.* **184**, 4168–4176 (2002).

102. Hirakawa, H., Nishino, K., Hirata, T. & Yamaguchi, A. Comprehensive studies of drug resistance mediated by overexpression of response regulators of two-component signal transduction systems in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* **185**, 1851–1856 (2003).

103. Brissette, J. L., Russel, M., Weiner, L. & Model, P. Phage shock protein, a stress protein of *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **87**, 862–866 (1990).

104. Kobayashi, H., Yamamoto, M. & Aono, R. Appearance of a stress-response protein, phage-shock protein A, in *Escherichia coli* exposed to hydrophobic organic solvents. *Microbiology* **144**, 353–359 (1998).

105. Model, P., Jovanovic, G. & Dworkin, J. The *Escherichia coli* phage-shock-protein (*psp*) operon. *Mol. Microbiol.* **24**, 255–261 (1997).

106. Bergler, H., Abraham, D., Aschauer, H. & Turnowsky, F. Inhibition of lipid biosynthesis induces the expression of the *pspA* gene. *Microbiology* **140**, 1937–1944 (1994).

107. Lloyd, L. J. *et al.* Identification of a new member of the phage shock protein response in *Escherichia coli*, the phage shock protein G (PspG). *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 55707–55714 (2004).

108. Kleerebezem, M., Crielaard, W. & Tommassen, J. Involvement of stress protein PspA (phage shock protein A) of *Escherichia coli* in maintenance of the protonmotive force under stress conditions. *EMBO J.* **15**, 162–171 (1996).

109. Becker, L. A., Bang, I. S., Crouch, M. L. & Fang, F. C. Compensatory role of PspA, a member of the phage shock protein operon, in *rpoE* mutant *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium. *Mol. Microbiol.* **56**, 1004–1016 (2005).

110. Darwin, A. J. & Miller, V. L. Identification of *Yersinia enterocolitica* genes affecting survival in an animal host using signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis. *Mol. Microbiol.* **32**, 51–62 (1999).

111. Darwin, A. J. & Miller, V. L. The *psp* locus of *Yersinia enterocolitica* is required for virulence and for growth *in vitro* when the Ysc type III secretion system is produced. *Mol. Microbiol.* **39**, 429–444 (2001).

112. Green, R. C. & Darwin, A. J. PspG, a new member of the *Yersinia enterocolitica* phage shock protein regulon. *J. Bacteriol.* **186**, 4910–4920 (2004).

113. Beloin, C. *et al.* Global impact of mature biofilm lifestyle on *Escherichia coli* K-12 gene expression. *Mol. Microbiol.* **51**, 659–674 (2004).

114. Loosmore, S. M. *et al.* The *Haemophilus influenzae* HtrA protein is a protective antigen. *Infect. Immun.* **66**, 899–906 (1998).

115. Tacket, C. O. *et al.* Safety of live oral *Salmonella typhi* vaccine strains with deletions in *htrA* and *aroC aroD* and immune response in humans. *Infect. Immun.* **65**, 452–456 (1997).

116. Yang, S. W. *et al.* Two novel antibiotics, Sch 419558 and Sch 419559, produced by *Pseudomonas fluorescens*: effect on activity by overexpression of RpoE. *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* **12**, 3333–3338 (2004).

117. Flynn, J. M., Levchenko, I., Sauer, R. T. & Baker, T. A. Modulating substrate choice: the SspB adaptor delivers a regulator of the extracytoplasmic-stress response to the AAA+ protease ClpXP for degradation. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 2292–2301 (2004). An elegant study that elucidates the final regulatory step in the activation of σ<sup>E</sup>. The authors implicate ClpXP and SspB in performing the final cleavage of RseA, allowing free σ<sup>E</sup> to bind to the core RNAP.

118. Cascales, E. & Christie, P. J. The versatile bacterial type IV secretion systems. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **1**, 137–149 (2003).

**Competing interests statement**

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

**DATABASES**

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Genome Project: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=genomeprj

Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae | Caenorhabditis elegans | Chlamydia trachomatis | Escherichia coli | Haemophilus influenzae | Legionella pneumophila | Pseudomonas aeruginosa | Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium | Vibrio cholerae | Yersinia enterocolitica

UniProtKB: http://ca.expasy.org/sprot

AlgR | AlgU | BaeR | BaeS | CpxA | CpxP | CpxR | DegS | DsbA | FkpA | HilA | HtrA | IL-8 | InvE | PapE | PapG | PpiA | PpiD | PspA | RpoE | RseA | RseB | SurA | TNF-α | VirF | YaeL

**FURTHER INFORMATION**

Mark Roberts’ homepage: http://www.gla.ac.uk/vet/resesarch/iandi/bacteriology/salmonella.html

**SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION**

See online article: S1 (table)

Access to this links box is available online.
