
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (motor neuron disease): proposed mechanisms and pathways to treatment

Emily F. Goodall and Karen E. Morrison

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterised by loss of motor neurons. The cause of disease is unknown other than in the rare cases of familial disease arising from mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 gene. Many theories for pathogenesis have been proposed – including oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction and abnormal protein aggregation – based on studies of human post mortem tissue, research on animal models, and in vitro work. Here we review the evidence for the main pathogenic mechanisms and outline how they might interact to cause motor neuron death. Clinical trials have as yet failed to identify any truly effective therapies in ALS, with only riluzole providing a modest improvement in survival. Ongoing trials are exploring the value of antiglutamatergic agents, including the cephalosporin antibiotic ceftriaxone, as well as antioxidants, mitochondrial enhancers and anti-apoptotic drugs. It is likely that effective therapy will involve combinations of agents acting on different mechanisms. Gene therapy with neurotrophic factors will soon be in clinical trials, while work on stem cell therapy remains preclinical. In addition to finding effective therapies, research also needs to identify early disease markers because therapy is likely to be of most benefit when given early in the course of disease.

---

Emily F. Goodall  
Postgraduate Student, Division of Neurosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B152TT, UK. Tel: +44 (0) 121 414 3943; Fax: +44 (0) 121 414 4509; E-mail: efg355@bham.ac.uk  

Karen E. Morrison (corresponding author)  
Professor of Neurology, Division of Neurosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B152TT, UK; and Honorary Consultant Neurologist, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust. Tel: +44 (0) 121 414 3943; Fax: +44 (0) 121 414 4509; E-mail: k.morrison@bham.ac.uk  

Institute URL: http://www.neuroscience.bham.ac.uk/clinicalneuroscience/molneuro-grp.htm

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

The most common adult-onset disorder of motor neurons, and the focus of this review, is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) – better known in the UK as motor neuron disease (MND) and in the USA as Lou Gehrig’s disease. Symptoms typically start in middle life and progress rapidly, leading to death from respiratory failure within 2–5 years. Clinical subtypes of ALS are defined according to the main site of weakness and whether upper or lower motor neurons are primarily involved (Fig. 1). Some features, such as onset at a young age (below 40 years) or presentation with purely upper or purely lower motor neuron features, are associated with longer survival. As many as 10% of patients with ALS survive for more than 10 years, suggesting that certain individuals harbour some form of protective factor. For details of clinical aspects of ALS and its management, the reader is referred to recent reviews (Refs 1, 2).

Despite the heterogeneous clinical findings, the pathological features in ALS are fairly homogeneous and usually restricted to the motor system (Table 1; Fig. 2). Reports of post mortem studies on patients who have received full respiratory support via invasive ventilation, and consequently survived with ALS for many years, have described typical ALS pathological features in areas of the brain other than the well-recognised motor system (Refs 3, 4). This suggests that the motor system is involved in ALS because it is particularly sensitive to the underlying pathological process rather than the disease being solely selective for motor neurons. The concept that ALS is a multisystem neurodegenerative disease is also supported by the observation that cognitive impairment is common in the disease, with nearly a third of ALS patients showing features compatible with frontotemporal lobar dementia (Ref. 5).

Many theories of ALS pathogenesis have been proposed, including oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction, defective axonal transport and abnormal protein aggregation. The weight of evidence at present favours mitochondrial dysfunction acting with excitotoxicity to cause abnormal protein precipitation as key steps towards the final common path of neurodegeneration via an apoptotic mechanism. The aetiology is likely to be multifactorial, involving interplay of several mechanisms to initiate disease and propagate the spread of motor neuron cell death. In this review, we summarise the main theories, discuss some of the recent work

---

**Upper motor neurons**  
in motor cortex  

Brain  

Brain stem lower  
motor neurons  
controlling speech  
and swallowing  

Corticospinal  
tract from upper  
motor neurons  

Spinal  
cord  

Lower motor  
neurons controlling  
limb and respiratory muscles  

Outline of the human motor system  

Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press  

---

Figure 1. Outline of the human motor system. Upper motor neuron cell bodies are situated in the motor cortex and project axons via the corticospinal tracts to the spinal cord. There they synapse in the anterior horn with lower motor neurons, which project axons via peripheral nerves that then contact muscle fibres at the neuromuscular junction. Lower motor neurons originating in the brain stem that control speech and swallowing (bulbar motor neurons), and lower motor neurons that originate in the spinal cord that control limb and respiratory muscles, may both be affected. Damage to various combinations of upper and lower motor neurons occurs in human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

aimed at identifying effective therapies and outline current areas of intense research activity.

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

Table 1. Pathological features seen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Feature                      | Description/location                                                                 |
|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Loss of motor neurons        | Evident in cortex, brain stem and spinal cord                                      |
| Axonal spheroids             | Neurofilament aggregates in proximal axons of motor neurons                        |
| Bunina bodies                | Eosinophilic bodies found in the soma of anterior horn cells; these are unique to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis |
| Ubiquitinated inclusions     | Predominantly found in lower motor neurons                                         |
| 'Skein-like' inclusions      | Threads/filamentous bodies                                                        |
| 'Lewy body-like' inclusions  | Compact, dense bodies                                                             |
| Hyaline inclusions           | Large aggregates containing neurofilaments and other entrapped proteins in the soma of motor neurons |

### Genetics

Between 5 and 10% of people with ALS have a history of the disease in first-degree relatives, most often compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance. The majority of familial cases are clinically and pathologically very similar to sporadic cases, leading to the hypothesis that they share common pathogenic mechanisms. Much current research involves studies of genetic factors in ALS, to seek loci and genes responsible for mendelian forms of the familial disease (FALS) and to identify genetic polymorphisms as risk factors in the more common sporadic ALS (SALS) (summarised in Table 2).

#### SOD1 mutations in FALS

A key discovery in the field was the identification of mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene as the cause of approximately 20% of FALS and therefore 2% of all cases (Ref. 6). SOD1 is part of the cellular defence against oxidative stress; it catalyses the conversion of superoxide anions into hydrogen peroxide, which is then further metabolised. More than 100 mutations in SOD1, distributed throughout the gene, have been found in FALS patients (Ref. 7). An updated database of these can be found at http://www.alsod.org.

It is still not known why the mutant form of this abundant and ubiquitously expressed enzyme should be particularly toxic to motor neurons and cause ALS. Over a decade of extensive study has provided strong evidence for a toxic 'gain of function' rather than a loss of enzymatic function of the mutant enzyme. SOD1 enzymatic activity varies greatly depending on

---

**Figure 2. Ubiquitinated inclusions in a motor neuron cell body from a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Part of a section through the ventral horn of the cervical spinal cord, obtained post mortem, is shown. The section is stained with anti-ubiquitin immunoperoxidase and counterstained with haematoxylin. Original magnification, 400x. (Photograph courtesy of Dr Martyn Carey, University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.)**

which mutation is present and does not correlate with disease severity, with some mutant forms maintaining full activity (Ref. 7). Mice with the SOD1 gene knocked out do not develop overt ALS (Ref. 8), while transgenic mice overexpressing mutant forms of the SOD1 protein (mSOD1) develop an adult-onset progressive motor neuropathy phenotype (Ref. 9). They have become

Accession information: DOI:10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

Table 2. Genetic factors in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Disease         | Locus       | Gene            | Inher. | Onset      | Features                                      | Refs |
|-----------------|-------------|-----------------|--------|------------|-----------------------------------------------|------|
| ALS 1           | 21q22.21    | SOD1            | AD/AR  | Adult and juvenile | ALS phenotype; varies depending on mutation | 6    |
| ALS 2           | 2q33        | Als in          | AR     | Juvenile   | ALS and PLS; slow progression                | 15   |
| ALS 3           | 18q21       | Unknown         | AD     | Adult      | ALS phenotype                                | 145  |
| ALS 4           | 9q34        | Senataxin       | AD     | Juvenile   | Slow progression                              | 18   |
| ALS 5           | 15q15.1-q21.1 | Unknown         | AR     | Juvenile   | No pseudobulbar signs; slow progression       | 146  |
| ALS 6           | 16q12       | Unknown         | AD     | Adult      | Short duration                               | 147, 148 |
| ALS 7           | 20ptel      | Unknown         | AD     | Adult      | Short duration                               | 148  |
| ALS 8           | 20q13.33    | VAPB            | AD     | Adult      | Slow progression                              | 149  |
| ALS-FTD         | 9q21-22     | Unknown         | AD     | Adult      | ALS with fronto-temporal dementia             | 150  |
| ALS with Parkinsonism and dementia | 17q21 | MAPT | AD | Adult | ALS disorder with Parkinsonism and dementia | 151  |
| Progressive lower MND | 2q13 | DCTN1 | AD | Adult | Lower motor neuron disorder | 78   |
| Sporadic ALS    | 6q12        | VEGF            | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 22   |
|                 | 22q12.1-q13.1 | Neurofilament heavy chain | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 19, 20, 21 |
|                 | MtDNA       | Deletions       | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 23, 24 |
|                 | 6q21.3      | HFE             | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 25   |
|                 | 14q11.2     | Angiogenin      | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 26, 27 |
|                 | 19q13.2     | ApoE(e4)        | Risk factor | ALS | Risk factor                                  | 152  |

a Loci for mendelian forms of ALS are listed followed by genes in which polymorphisms have been identified as risk factors in sporadic ALS.

Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; AR, autosomal recessive; DCTN1, dynactin p150 subunit; FTD, fronto-temporal dementia; HFE, haemochromatosis gene (involved in iron metabolism); Inher., inheritance; MAPT, microtubule-associated protein Tau; MND, motor neuron disease; MtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; PLS, primary lateral sclerosis; SOD1, superoxide dismutase 1; VAPB, vesicle-associated membrane protein; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.
(components of neurosecretory granules) and is  
secreted extracellularly by motor neurons from  
where it triggers microgliosis and neuronal cell  
death (Ref. 14). Other proposed roles of mSOD1  
in disease pathways and mechanisms are  
discussed in the relevant sections below.

### Other FALS disease loci and genes

Genetic linkage studies in pedigrees in which  
motor neuron disorder phenotypes are  
segregating have identified various other disease-  
causing loci and genes. For example, mutations  
in alsin cause autosomal recessive juvenile-onset  
forms of ALS and the upper motor neuron variant  
primary lateral sclerosis, and mutations in  
senataxin cause a slowly progressive autosomal  
dominant disorder. Alsin encodes a protein with  
three putative guanine-exchange factor domains  
that may activate small GTPases and have a role  
in signal transduction (Ref. 15). Several groups  
have now generated alsin knock-out mouse  
models, but only mild neurological changes have  
been reported in these animals to date (Refs 16,  
17). Senataxin contains a DNA/RNA helicase  
domain, which may suggest mutations cause a  
defect in RNA processing (Ref. 18).

### Genetic association studies in ALS

Genetic association studies in ALS have provided  
important clues as to the principal pathways  
affected by disease. Examples of genetic  
polymorphisms that have been associated with  
ALS include deletions or insertions in the  
neurofilament heavy chain gene, deletions in the  
promoter of vascular endothelial growth factor  
(VEGF), mitochondrial DNA deletions, a  
polymorphism in the haemochromatosis gene  
HFE and, very recently, mutations in the  
angiogenin gene (see Table 2 and Refs 19, 20, 21,  
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27). These are discussed in more  
detail below. As with all genetic association  
studies in complex disease, there is the potential  
for identifying spurious associations, for  
example because of small study sizes, population  
stratification and mis-matching of cases and  
controls (Ref. 28). The studies detailed above have  
generally been performed with large numbers  
of patients and appropriately matched controls,  
and have been reproduced in independent  
populations. In addition, there are plausible  
functional hypotheses, with some experimental  
evidence, to support the identified polymorphisms  
having roles in ALS pathogenesis.

---

### Exogenous factors in ALS

Figure 3 summarises some of the mechanisms  
considered to be important in ALS pathogenesis.  
As with other complex diseases, the aetiology  
of ALS is likely to involve both genetic and  
environmental factors. The only risk factors for  
ALS that have been consistently identified in  
epidemiology studies are increasing age, male sex  
and smoking (Ref. 29). Other agents implicated  
in some studies include agricultural work,  
exposure to lead or mercury, athletic activity, milk  
ingestion, work in the textile or plastic industries,  
mechanical trauma and exposure to welding or  
soldering (Ref. 30). Recently, military service in  
the Gulf and playing top-level Italian professional  
football have been investigated as risk factors but  
the evidence for either of these having a role  
remains controversial (Refs 31, 32).

Rare geographical foci of disease have  
previously been cited as providing supporting  
evidence for external factors in ALS pathogenesis,  
such as the neurotoxin beta-methylaminoalanine  
(BMAA), derived from cycad nuts, in the ALS  
Parkinsonism dementia complex (ALS-PDC) of  
Guam (Ref. 30). However, this ALS-PDC disorder  
shows pathological features consistent with a  
tauopathy rather than those typical of ALS, and  
the relevance of extrapolating environmental  
aetiologies based on this disorder to standard ALS  
has been questioned (Ref. 33).

Another exogenous factor for ALS that has  
received attention in the past is viral infection,  
given the selective vulnerability of motor neurons  
to certain viruses such as the poliovirus (Ref. 34).  
Recently, the existence of ALS-like syndromes in  
a small number of human immunodeficiency  
virus (HIV)-infected patients, and the discovery  
of enteroviral and retroviral sequences in ALS  
patients, have reopened the debate (Refs 35, 36,  
37). The evidence for viral involvement remains  
contradictory, but more-sensitive technologies  
may yet find a place for it in ALS pathogenesis.

---

### Proposed pathogenic mechanisms in ALS

#### Oxidative stress

Motor neuron damage as a result of oxidative  
stress is a key hypothesis in ALS. Oxidative  
damage increases with age so fits in with the  
middle-life onset of the disease. Several studies  
have confirmed the presence of elevated oxidative  
metabolism in ALS, such as the detection of  
increased biochemical markers of oxidative injury  
in post mortem samples from patients (Ref. 38).

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press  
Exogenous factors
- toxins
- viruses
- metals

Genetic factors
- SOD1
- Alsin and senataxin
- Genetic risk factors

Astrocyte

Neuroinflammation

Microglial cell

Excitotoxicity

Mitochondrial dysfunction

Abnormal protein aggregation

Impaired axonal transport

Oxidative stress

Motor neuron

Apoptosis

Overview diagram summarising some of the theories of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis

Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine © 2006 Cambridge University Press

Figure 3. Overview diagram summarising some of the theories of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis. It is likely that different mechanisms act in different patients, with both genetic and exogenous factors being important. The final mechanism of motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is likely to be via a process resembling apoptosis.

mSOD1 has the capacity to catalyse the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anions, peroxynitrite and hydroxyl radicals. mSOD1 transgenic mice show elevated levels of protein and lipid oxidation at both pre-and post-symptomatic stages (Ref. 39). Oxidative stress might also link with other proposed disease mechanisms such as excitotoxicity and axonal transport defects. Excitotoxicity leads to increased intracellular calcium, which in turn leads to increased nitric oxide formation. Peroxynitrite, generated by the reaction of superoxide anions and nitric oxide, can subsequently lead to oxidative damage (Ref. 40). Nitration may target neurofilament proteins, disrupting their phosphorylation and affecting axonal transport (Ref. 41).

Excitotoxicity
Glutamate excitotoxicity is another mechanism implicated in ALS pathogenesis, via mechanisms that include disruption of intracellular calcium homeostasis and free radical production (Ref. 42). Sodium-dependent glutamate transporters tightly control glutamate levels in the synapse, particularly the glial cell excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2) (Fig. 4a). Glutamate levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are elevated in at least a subset of ALS

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

http://www.expertreviews.org/

expert reviews  
in molecular medicine

---

**Figure 4. Glutamatergic transmission in the central nervous system. (a) A glutamatergic synapse under normal physiological conditions. Glutamate is released from the presynaptic nerve terminal and diffuses into the synaptic cleft. It acts on several glutamate receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. The action of glutamate in the cleft is terminated by its rapid reuptake via glutamate transporter proteins. EAAT1 and EAAT2 are expressed on glial cells; EAAT3 is mainly on presynaptic motor neurons. EAAT2 is responsible for most glutamate reuptake in the human brain. Under normal physiological conditions postsynaptic activation of glutamate receptors results in a small rise in intracellular calcium that can be buffered in the cell. (b) A glutamatergic synapse under conditions of excitotoxicity. When excess glutamate is present, there is a greater elevation in intracellular calcium postsynaptically. This triggers mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which then inhibit glial EAAT2 function. This leads to further increases in glutamate concentrations in the synapse and further rises in postsynaptic calcium levels.**

The oxidative stress evident in ALS might also promote increased excitotoxicity, as glutamate transporters are particularly susceptible to disruption by oxidants, and oxidative modifications to the transporter have been reported in ALS and the mSOD1 mouse model (Refs 40, 51) (Fig. 4b).

**Abnormal protein precipitation/aggregation**  
Abnormal protein aggregates, including Bunina bodies, ubiquitinated inclusions and neurofilament-rich hyaline inclusions are pathological hallmarks of ALS (Ref. 52) (Table 1). There is ongoing debate as to whether these aggregates play a key role in pathogenesis, are harmless by-products of the degeneration process, are beneficial (via the sequestration of toxic proteins), or are harmful (via the sequestration of proteins essential to normal cellular function) (Ref. 53).

mSOD1 misfolds and forms aggregates, evident in FALS cases and in transgenic mSOD1 mice (Ref. 54). Other proteins, such as the copper chaperone for SOD1 (CCS), neuronal glutamate transporters, and heat shock proteins (HSPs) 70 and 40, co-immunoprecipitate with mSOD1 in these aggregates, lending weight to a harmful sequestering effect (Refs 55, 56). Partial inhibition of the proteasome in mSOD1 animals triggers large-aggregate formation, and the overexpression of chaperone proteins enhances survival (Refs 57, 58).

---

**Glutamatergic transmission in the central nervous system**  
Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

---

**Figure 4. Glutamatergic transmission in the central nervous system. (See next column for legend.)**

patients (Refs 43, 44). This elevation may be attributed to loss of EAAT2 function, as decreased levels of the transporter have been found in some post mortem ALS brains (Ref. 45). It is not clear how EAAT2 disruption occurs in ALS. mRNA levels of the transporter are normal and there are no genomic DNA sequence changes in EAAT2 in ALS patients (Refs 46, 47, 48). Reports of aberrant RNA processing of EAAT2 specifically in ALS patients have not been confirmed (Refs 49, 50).

---

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

Mitochondrial abnormalities

In addition to providing energy through oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondria have roles in calcium homeostasis, free radical production and cell death pathways. These features, as well as an age-related decline in their function, have led to the hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunction is important in ALS (Ref. 59). Mitochondria from ALS patients show abnormal morphology, elevated calcium levels and decreased activity of respiratory chain complexes I and IV (Ref. 60). One patient with an ALS-type disorder was found to have a mutation in cytochrome c oxidase, a complex IV subunit gene, encoded on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) (Ref. 61). There are also reports of multiple mtDNA deletions, diminished total mtDNA levels and a high frequency of mtDNA mutations in ALS (Refs 23, 24).

Cell culture studies seeking to determine the functional significance of mtDNA changes in ALS have been conducted using cytoplasm hybrid (cybrid) cell lines. Patient and control platelets (containing no nucleus) were fused with neuroblastoma cells (with depleted mitochondria) to create cybrid cells differing only in their mtDNA. The ALS cybrid cells had several defects including altered mitochondrial ultrastructure, decreased complex I activity and decreased calcium storage by the mitochondria (Ref. 62).

Vacuolated mitochondria are a striking and early feature of disease in some strains of mSOD1 mice, including the most commonly used G93A model. The degree of vacuolation correlates with the decline in muscle strength (Ref. 63). Studies using in vitro cellular models have also shown that mSOD1 disrupts mitochondrial morphology and function (Refs 64, 65).

Cytoskeletal defects

As mentioned above, abnormal protein aggregation is a pathological hallmark in ALS. Neurofilament proteins (neuron-specific intermediate filaments) are the most abundant structural protein in mature motor neurons, and aggregates of neurofilament proteins in the cell body and proximal axons of motor neurons are commonly seen in ALS.

Experiments in transgenic mice have revealed a key role for neurofilaments in normal motor neuron function. Mice overexpressing human wild-type or mutant neurofilament protein develop motor neuropathies and undergo massive motor neuron cell death (Refs 66, 67, 68). Further experiments using the mSOD1 mouse model have produced some intriguing results. Increased expression of the neurofilament heavy chain delays disease onset and increases the survival of G37R SOD1 mice by as much as six months (Ref. 69). The reason for this remains unclear but two theories have been proposed. First, the accumulated neurofilament protein might provide a buffer for other deleterious processes such as increases in intracellular calcium from excitotoxicity or aberrant protein modification caused by oxidative stress (Refs 69, 70). Second, trapping neurofilament protein in the cell body might reduce the burden on axonal transport (Ref. 71).

Neurofilament heavy chain gene deletions are found in 1% of SALS cases (Refs 19, 20, 21). Mutations in the neurofilament light chain have been associated with forms of hereditary motor neuropathy (Refs 72, 73).

Peripherin and α-internexin are two other intermediate-filament proteins that co-localise with neurofilaments and form part of the axonal inclusion bodies in ALS. Overexpression of peripherin or α-internexin in transgenic mice causes motor neuron degeneration (Refs 74, 75). Peripherin is encoded by a single gene and has splice variants of 56, 58 and 61 kDa. Peripherin 61 is toxic to primary motor neuron cultures, even at low levels, and has been detected in the spinal cord of SALS patients (Ref. 76).

Axonal transport

Axonal transport, both retrograde and anterograde, is especially important in motor neurons because of their large size. The mSOD1 mouse shows axonal transport defects as one of the earliest pathological features, and recent reports suggest this may even occur in embryonic development (Ref. 77).

The dynein-dynactin complex is involved in fast retrograde transport. Mutations in the p150 subunit of dynactin have been reported in a family with an unusual lower motor neuron disorder that begins with vocal cord paralysis (Ref. 78). Neuronal expression of this p150 'glued' dynactin mutant in transgenic mice causes a progressive motor neuron disorder with up to 60% of motor neurons lost by the end stage of disease (Ref. 79). Furthermore, mice overexpressing the p50 subunit of dynactin have reduced axonal transport and develop progressive motor neuron degeneration (Ref. 80). The 'legs at odd angles' (LOA) mouse model also shows defects in axonal transport and motor neuron degeneration, caused by mutations in the dynein heavy chain (Ref. 81). Interestingly,

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

crossing this mouse with the mSOD1 mouse results in amelioration of the disease, later onset and increased survival (Ref. 77), an effect similar to that seen when the neurofilament heavy chain gene is overexpressed in mSOD1 mice, as mentioned above (Ref. 69).

The kinesin proteins are important components of anterograde axonal transport. Mutations in the genes encoding kinesin proteins have been found in human cases of hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG10) and in forms of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy but have not yet been described in any ALS cases (Refs 82, 83).

### Neuroinflammation

Microglia are the immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS) and have a complex relationship with neurons as they can be both protective and cytotoxic. In the healthy brain microglia exist in a resting state, defined by small cell bodies and minimal expression of surface antigens. Upon injury they are rapidly activated, releasing a range of factors such as glutamate, nitric oxide, ROS, proinflammatory cytokines and prostaglandins (Ref. 53). Studies of post mortem ALS brain and spinal cord tissue suggests potent activation and proliferation of microglia in the areas of the CNS affected by disease (Ref. 84). The same is true for the mSOD1 mouse model, with prolonged and sustained microglial activation before symptom onset and throughout the course of disease (Ref. 85). Mediators released by activated microglia also have effects on astrocytes, causing them to down-regulate expression of neurotrophic factors and release additional neuroinflammatory mediators that further activate microglia, thus creating a potentially lethal cycle (Ref. 86).

Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) is a crucial enzyme in the production of prostaglandins and thus has an important role in neuroinflammation. Elevated levels of COX-2 and one of its key downstream products, prostaglandin E₂ (PGE₂), have been measured in ALS post mortem tissue and mSOD1 mice (Refs 87, 88). Several studies have shown a link between glutamate and increases in neuronal COX-2 levels. Glutamate receptor antagonists inhibit COX-2 activation in neurons and COX-2 inhibitors can attenuate glutamate-stimulated prostaglandin production (Ref. 89). Transgenic mice overexpressing COX-2 in neuronal cells show increased sensitivity to excitotoxicity (Ref. 90). In addition, COX-2 can produce ROS as a by-product of prostaglandin production, contributing to oxidative stress (Ref. 91).

In summary, although there is increasing evidence for a role of neuroinflammation in ALS, it is unclear whether this is a primary cause or a consequence of neurodegeneration. A function of such inflammation in the propagation of disease via the release of various mediators is an attractive hypothesis.

### Abnormalities in hypoxia-regulated genes

Recent research has highlighted the potential involvement of hypoxia-regulated genes in ALS pathogenesis. This stems from an unexpected discovery in transgenic mice with a targeted deletion of the hypoxia-response element of the VEGF gene. Researchers studying the relevance of hypoxic regulation of VEGF-dependent angiogenesis found that these mice developed a late-onset, progressive neurological disorder with ALS-like neuropathology (Ref. 92). A large genetic study subsequently revealed associations between polymorphisms in the promoter and leader sequences of the VEGF gene and increased risk of developing ALS in Belgian, Swedish and UK (Birmingham) populations (Ref. 22). Other studies have not replicated these findings, due in part to differences in the frequency of the 'at risk' haplotype in the controls from the different populations (Refs 22, 93, 94). VEGF is thought to influence motor neurons via direct neurotrophic effects and via its action to maintain blood flow to highly metabolically active motor neurons (Ref. 22). The reduced vascular perfusion of neurons that occurs with age, the increased frequency of ALS in males (about 1.6:1), who are more likely to develop vascular disease compared with premenopausal females, and the increased risk of ALS developing in smokers compared with non-smokers provide circumstantial support for this mechanism (Refs 29, 95).

Angiogenin is another hypoxia-induced angiogenic factor with similar functions to VEGF. Very recent studies have revealed that mutations in this gene are risk factors in SALS, particularly in patients of Scottish and Irish descent, and are causative in some FALS cases (Refs 26, 27).

### Apoptosis

Most evidence points to the final mechanism of cell death in ALS being by a programmed cell-death pathway with features resembling apoptosis (Ref. 96). Apoptosis is an energy-dependent

process characterised by cell shrinkage, condensation of the cytoplasm and nucleus, membrane blebbing, DNA fragmentation and the maintenance of organelle integrity. While morphological studies in post mortem spinal cords and motor cortex from ALS patients have shown many of these features, not all are found in all studies (Ref. 96). This may be because, although motor neurons are dysfunctional for long periods in the disease, cell death occurs very rapidly once apoptosis is activated, leaving only a short time frame for detection of apoptotic markers (Ref. 97).

Apoptosis can be triggered by three mechanisms: activation of cell-surface receptors of the tumour necrosis family such as Fas; cytochrome c release from the mitochondria; and stress to the endoplasmic reticulum. These are all tightly controlled via a wide range of proteins including the caspase family of cysteine proteases, the Bcl-2 family of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins, and inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). Members of these key protein families have been intensely studied in the mSOD1 models and in human ALS.

In mSOD1 mice there is sequential activation of at least two caspases, and broad-spectrum caspase inhibitors extend survival (Refs 98, 99). Motor neurons from the mice show increased susceptibility to Fas signalling (Ref. 100). There are increases in the pro-apoptotic Bax and Bad proteins and a decrease in the protective Bcl-2 protein (Ref. 101). Increased expression of Bcl-2 in the model slows disease progression and extends survival (Ref. 102). Furthermore, mSOD1 protein, but not wild type, binds and aggregates Bcl-2 in the spinal cord mitochondria of transgenic mice, providing a direct link between mitochondrial apoptotic pathways and mSOD1 toxicity (Ref. 103). IAPs suppress caspase activity and protect cells from apoptosis. Levels of mRNA for X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), one of the most potent apoptosis inhibitors, are reduced in symptomatic mSOD1 mice and the protein is inactivated in end-stage disease (Ref. 104). When expressed in the spinal motor neurons of mSOD1 mice, XIAP delayed the onset of disease and slowed progression (Ref. 105).

In human ALS spinal cord tissue, increases in caspase-1 and -9 activation have been detected (Refs 98, 105). Alterations in the balance and subcellular compartmentalisation of pro-and anti- apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family in a

direction favouring apoptosis have also been detailed (Refs 106, 107).

### Selective vulnerability

Understanding why motor neurons are particularly vulnerable in ALS may be important for deciphering pathogenic mechanisms and finding treatments. Significant features are likely to include the extreme size of motor neurons, their high metabolic activity, their sensitivity to mitochondrial dysfunction, their elevated neurofilament content and their reduced capacity to buffer calcium (Ref. 108).

Motor neurons contain a large number of calcium-permeable AMPA glutamate receptors and lack the calcium-binding proteins pvalbumin and calbindin V28K, making them susceptible to excitotoxic damage (Ref. 108). AMPA channels are composed of several different subunits. The GluR2 subunit, which blocks calcium permeability, is not present in most motor neurons. This means that calcium can rapidly enter the cell through these channels, increasing the intracellular concentration and inducing ROS production by the mitochondria (Ref. 109). As discussed above, glutamate transport proteins may be damaged by oxidative mechanisms and this can lead to a feed-forward hypothesis of disease propagation. Excess glutamate causes increased ROS production and oxidative stress that in turn damages the glutamate transport proteins, resulting in even more extracellular glutamate and oxidative stress (Ref. 40) (Fig. 4b).

Recent work has also suggested a specific role for mitochondria in calcium buffering in motor neurons. Mitochondrial preparations from motor neurons take up large amounts of calcium in response to high intracellular calcium concentrations. This reaction is not seen in mitochondrial preparations from other cell types such as forebrain GABAergic neurons that are well-calcium-buffered, and are unaffected in ALS (Ref. 110).

### Clinical implications and trials

Clinical trials have been performed in ALS for many years, with over 20 trials reported in the last decade (Ref. 111). As yet, the only agent that has been shown to confer improved survival in ALS is riluzole (Rilutek®; Aventis Pharma SA, France) (Refs 112, 113). The benefit is modest, prolonging life for an average of about 3 months if the drug is taken for 18 months. Riluzole does
not represent a cure, nor even a very effective treatment, and the search for better therapeutic agents continues.

Clinical trials in ALS are difficult and expensive to perform. Trials must involve many sites to allow enrolment of sufficient numbers for statistical validity. Various modifications to trial design have been proposed to try to maximise the power of information obtained with the minimum number of patients, including the recently suggested use of futility or non-superiority tests for Phase II studies (Ref. 114). The disease is fortunately fairly rare, but this means the incentive for large pharmaceutical companies to direct resources to ALS is not great. Advances in patient care, such as assisted ventilation via nasal intermittent positive-pressure ventilation, care in multidisciplinary teams and tube feeding have improved survival such that historical controls are not valid (Refs 1, 2). Survival or the requirement for assisted ventilation are now generally agreed as the most robust end-points in trials, rather than functional measures of muscle strength, which can be difficult to standardise. There is still no reliable surrogate marker for early disease in ALS. Most researchers believe that therapeutic agents will be of most benefit if given early in the disease. Various neuraxis imaging modalities [magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), diffusion MRI, functional MRI, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)] have been examined, but no specific and sensitive imaging features to allow early diagnosis have been identified (Ref. 115). Likewise, no serum or CSF markers of early disease have yet been found (Ref. 116).

Use of data from mouse and cell models of ALS

Many of the agents undergoing clinical trials in ALS have shown good effects in the mSOD1 mouse model, both in reducing the rate of disease progression and in prolonging survival. However, the benefits in the mouse have translated into clinically efficacy only in the case of riluzole. Possible reasons for this have recently been reviewed (Ref. 117). These include (1) difficulties in extrapolating equivalent doses from mouse to man, (2) species differences in the anatomy of the motor system, the permeability of the blood-brain barrier, the ratio of neurons to glial cells and in the immune response, and (3) the fact that the mSOD1 rodent models involve huge overexpression of the human mSOD1 gene [17-fold

overexpression in the G85R mSOD1 mouse and 40-fold overexpression in the G93R mouse according to a recent paper (Ref. 118)] compared with the single gene dose effect in human mSOD1-mediated FALS. There is clearly scope for developing further animal models that more closely resemble the human disease. Many of the drug trials in the mouse model report results on giving the agents early, before the mice develop clinically apparent weakness, which is of questionable relevance in human ALS in the absence of an early identified surrogate marker for disease. We recommend that human trials should be performed only when agents have shown benefit in animal models when given after disease onset and when such benefit has been replicated in different laboratories.

The Neurodegeneration and Drug Screening Consortium was recently established in the USA by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) to screen compounds of potential benefit in various neurological diseases, including ALS (Ref. 119). Twenty-six laboratories tested 1040 compounds in 29 different in vitro and in vivo assays, some of which assessed pathogenic pathways of potential relevance in ALS such as oxidative stress and excitotoxicity (Ref. 119). One promising result from this screen was the identification of beta-lactam antibiotics, including penicillin and certain cephalosporins, to stimulate expression of rat glutamate transporter GLT-1 (equivalent to human EAAT2) mRNA in neuronal tissue (Ref. 120). Clinical trials of ceftriaxone, the longest-acting beta-lactam antibiotic, are now under way in ALS (see http://www.alsa.org).

Previous and ongoing trials

Some of the compounds assessed in completed and ongoing clinical trials are listed in Box 1. Trials of cocktails of therapies – combining agents that act on different proposed mechanisms, such as minocycline, riluzole and nimodipine – have given excellent results in the mouse model (Ref. 121). It seems likely that successful therapy in ALS will similarly involve a mix of agents, acting synergistically on various mechanistic pathways to interrupt the final common pathway of motor neuron degeneration.

Antioxidants and mitochondrial agents

Many antioxidants, such as vitamin E, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and catalase, have shown benefit

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press
in the mSOD1 mouse model, but not unfortunately
in human ALS clinical trials (Ref. 122) (Box 1).
Creatine, an agent that promotes glutamate
uptake into synaptic vesicles and stabilises the
mitochondrial energy transfer complex through
inhibiting the opening of the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore, showed great
promise when administered orally to mSOD1
mice, with even greater improvement in survival
to that seen with riluzole (Ref. 123). Unfortunately,
three large, placebo-controlled trials in human
ALS have recently reported no benefit of the agent
(Refs 124, 125, 126).

Coenzyme Q10 is a co-factor of the electron-
transport chain and functions as a free radical
scavenger in mitochondrial membranes. It also
prolongs survival in mSOD1 mice, and a double-
blind controlled trial in ALS patients is now under
way (see http://www.alsa.org).

Antiglutamatergic agents
The beneficial effect of riluzole in ALS is thought
to be due to its antiglutamatergic effects – by
inhibiting glutamic acid release, by non-
competitive blocking of NMDA (N-methyl-D-
aspartate) receptor-mediated responses, and via

**Box 1. Trialled therapies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis**

Therapeutic agents previously trialled in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Antioxidants | Immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory agents |
| --- | --- |
| Vitamin E | Cyclophosphamide |
| N-Acetyl-L-cysteine | Cyclosporine |
| Selegiline | Celecoxib |
| D-Penicillamine | Azathioprine |
| Total lymphoid irradiation |
| Intravenous immunoglobulin |

| Antiglutamatergic agents | Neurotrophic agents |
| --- | --- |
| Riluzole<sup>b</sup> | Ciliary neurotrophic factor |
| L-Threonine | Glial derived neurotrophic factor |
| Branched chain amino acids | Brain derived neurotrophic factor |
| Dextromethorphan | Insulin-like growth factor |
| Lamotrigine | Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone |
| Gabapentin | Xaliprodene |
| Topiramate |

| Calcium regulators | Antiviral therapies |
| --- | --- |
| Verapamil | Guanidine |
| Nimodipine | Guanidine and amantadine |

| Mitochondrial enhancers | Interferon-α |
| --- | --- |
| Creatine | Isoprinosine |

Agents currently undergoing clinical trials in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Antiglutamatergic/anti-excitotoxic agents | Anti-apoptotic agents |
| --- | --- |
| Ceftriaxone | Minocycline |
| Talampanel | Sodium phenylbutyrate |
| Tamoxifen | Arimoclomol |

| Antioxidants | Immunomodulatory/anti-inflammatory agents |
| --- | --- |
| AEOL 10150 | Glatiramer acetate |
| Thalidomide |

| Mitochondrial enhancers | Proteasome inhibitors |
| --- | --- |
| Coenzyme Q10 | Ritonavir |

a Data from Refs 111, 122, 126 and 128, and websites http://www.alsa.org and http://www.alscenter.org.
b Riluzole is the only agent that has been shown to prolong survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trials.

Accession information: DOI:10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006
© 2006 Cambridge University Press
a direct action on voltage-dependent sodium channels (Ref. 127). Several other trials of agents targeted against glutamate excitotoxicity have sadly been disappointing. Such agents have included gabapentin, topiramate, verapamil, lamotrigine and dextromethorphan (Ref. 128). The identification of beta-lactam antibiotics in increasing EAAT2 expression is intriguing and the results of the recently begun clinical trial of ceftriaxone are keenly awaited (see above).

### Anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic agents

Much current interest is focused on the tetracycline antibiotic minocycline, as this has been the most effective agent in prolonging life in the rodent mSOD1 model (Ref. 129). The exact mechanism is unclear but thought to be via inhibiting microglial activation and modulating apoptosis (Ref. 130). The antibiotic has good CNS penetration when taken orally, and clinical trials in various neurodegenerative disorders, including ALS, are now underway (see http://www.alsa.org).

A trial of Copaxone (glatiramer acetate), widely used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, has recently begun. In the mSOD1 model administration of the drug improved survival by almost 25% via the proposed mechanisms of increased T-cell derived interferon γ and enhanced glutamate transporter expression (Ref. 131).

Arimoclomol is one of a novel family of 'smart drugs', co-inducing the expression of HSPs only under times of cellular stress. Treatment with arimoclomol after symptom onset in mSOD1 mice delayed disease progression and increased survival, suggesting that chaperone induction may be a good target for effective therapy in humans (Ref. 132). Human trials are currently underway in the USA (see http://hedwig.mgh.harvard.edu/alsconsortium/trials.html).

### Growth factors

As the striking pathological feature in ALS is motor neuron loss, another key therapeutic strategy has been treatment with various nerve growth factors. Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) all showed good effects in mSOD1 models, but trials in human ALS have been disappointing. IGF-1 showed a modest effect to slow progression of functional impairment and decline in health-

related quality of life in an American trial, but this result was not confirmed in a subsequent European study (Refs 133, 134). A third large study is currently underway (see http://www.alsa.org). The disappointing results with neurotrophic factors may be due to their low bioavailability and poor delivery to motor neurons, factors that will potentially be overcome with new gene therapy approaches.

### Gene therapy

Gene therapy holds promise for ALS, as it has the potential to deliver treatments to damaged motor neurons and overcome the difficulty of crossing the blood-brain barrier. Many strategies are under investigation, including the delivery of genes encoding neurotrophic factors, anti-apoptotic drugs and antioxidants using a range of viral vectors administered by direct injection into the affected areas of the CNS, or remotely via intramuscular injection and retrograde transport to motor neuron cell bodies, or by ex vivo gene transfer (Ref. 135). At present, gene therapy approaches are directed to preclinical studies in the mSOD1 model. Retrograde adeno-associated virus (AAV) delivery systems for IGF-1 and GDNF have shown benefits in the mSOD1 mice (Refs 136, 137). Intramuscular injections of lentiviral-tagged VEGF have also proved successful in this rodent model (Ref. 138), and proof of principle studies to establish delivery of VEGF via this route in primates are underway. Intramuscular injection of an AAV vector containing the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 gene has also been effective in the mSOD1 mouse (Ref. 139).

An alternative approach with gene therapy is to 'knock down' genes that might be causing degeneration, such as mSOD1. There are now successful reports, again in mSOD1 mice, of amelioration of disease using small interfering RNAs (RNAi) targeted to SOD1 (Refs 140, 141). While this method may prove valuable in treating mSOD1-mediated FALS, other targets will have to be found to treat the much more common, non-SOD1-mediated, sporadic disease.

### Stem cell therapy

Stem cell therapy in ALS has recently received a lot of publicity. There have been media reports of rapid beneficial effects in ALS patients of controversial treatments using fetal olfactory ensheathing cells in China, but none of these 'successes' has been confirmed (Ref. 142). A UK

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press
Astrocyte

- Glutamate
- EAAT2 glutamate transporter
- Glutamate receptor

Presynaptic nerve terminal

Ca²⁺

Inflammatory mediators

Oxidative stress

Mutant SOD1

Microglial cell

Mitochondrial damage

Neurofilament damage

Abnormal protein precipitation → Abnormal proteasome function

Abnormal axonal transport

Motor neuron

Model to show how some of the proposed mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis could interact to cause motor neuron degeneration

Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine © 2006 Cambridge University Press

Figure 5. Model to show how some of the proposed mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis could interact to cause motor neuron degeneration. Normal superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) functions as a detoxification enzyme, catalysing the conversion of superoxide ions to hydrogen peroxide, which is then converted to water by catalase and glutathione. Mutant SOD1, as seen in some familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) cases, may be toxic because it is unstable, forming aggregates in the motor neuron cytoplasm, axoplasm and mitochondria. These aggregates may interfere with normal proteasome function, and also with other cellular processes, such as neurofilament function, leading to impaired axonal transport and further toxic aggregation. Mutant SOD1 can also trigger oxidative reactions by various means including by increasing levels of peroxynitrite, which can then cause damage through the formation of hydroxyl radicals or via nitration of tyrosine residues on proteins. Mutant, but not normal, SOD1 has also been recently reported to be secreted extracellularly, from where it can trigger microglial activation. Oxidative stress impairs mitochondrial function and inhibits the function of EAAT2, the main glial glutamate transporter protein, responsible for most of the reuptake of synaptically released glutamate. Glutamate excess causes neurotoxicity by increasing intracellular calcium, which enhances oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage. Mitochondrial damage in turn leads to further oxidative stress, enhancing the pathogenic cascade. Microglial activation is seen in both familial and sporadic ALS. Inflammatory mediators released by activated microglia cause additional release of neuroinflammatory proteins from astrocytes causing further inflammation and oxidative stress. Ultimately, neuronal cell death in ALS is thought to occur via a programmed cell-death pathway with features resembling apoptosis.

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

licence for therapeutic human cloning in ALS research has been granted, but this is for work in cell culture to identify mechanistic pathways rather than for direct therapy using stem cells [see R0158 at http://www.hfea.gov.uk/ Research/HFEAresearchlicences/]. Human embryonic stem cells can be coaxed to express key motor neuron genes in vitro but this is still a long way from showing that such stem cells can integrate into the central and peripheral nervous system to reconstitute damaged motor neuron pathways (Ref. 143). A more realistic prospect for stem cell therapy in human ALS may be to focus on glial stem cells, using them to deliver neurotrophic or other factors to modulate disease progression. Stem cell research, while exciting, is firmly in the realm of preclinical studies at present.

**Outstanding research questions**

This review has highlighted various possible pathogenic mechanisms in ALS. Figure 5 summarises some of the main proposed mechanisms and outlines how they might interact. Their relative importance in initiating and then propagating the disease is not clear. Potentially effective therapeutic compounds are being identified from studies of pathogenic pathways and from high-throughput cell-culture and other model-system screens. While ALS is pathologically fairly homogeneous, different mechanisms are likely to be involved in individual patients. It is anticipated that successful therapy will involve combinations of agents acting on these different mechanisms, hopefully synergistically. The success of translating promising results from the best available animal model to patients with ALS has been limited to date, and more research towards better animal and cell models of the disease is encouraged. Therapy is likely to be most successful if started early in the disease and identification of early surrogate markers of ALS should be a research priority. Stem cell therapy is still a way off, and should remain so until appropriate preclinical studies have been performed.

In conclusion, as judged by the increasing numbers attending conferences such as the 16th International ALS Symposium, scientists and clinicians interested in ALS are working together to further research into this dreadful disease (Ref. 144). We predict that therapies that make a difference will be available within the next 10 years.

Our patients deserve better than the few months of improved survival that riluzole offers.

**Acknowledgements and funding**

We acknowledge the many clinicians who have referred individuals to us, and patients and family members who have contributed samples to our work on motor neuron diseases. We thank the peer reviewers for their constructive comments on this article. Our work is funded by the Motor Neurone Disease Association UK, the Medical Research Council, the Wellcome Trust and the Midlands Neuroscience Teaching and Research Fund.

**References**

1. Leigh, P.N. et al. (2003) The management of motor neurone disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74 Suppl 4, iv32-iv47, PubMed: 14645465
2. Morrison, K.E. (2004) Diagnosis and management of motor neurone disease. In Horizons in Medicine 16 (Franklyn, J. ed.), pp. 99-108, Royal College of Physicians of London, UK
3. Hayashi, H. and Kato, S. (1989) Total manifestations of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS in the totally locked-in state. J Neurol Sci 93, 19-35, PubMed: 2809628
4. Sasaki, S. et al. (1992) Sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with extensive neurological involvement. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 84, 211-215, PubMed: 1523976
5. Rippon, G.A. et al. (2006) An observational study of cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol 63, 345-352, PubMed: 16533961
6. Rosen, D.R. et al. (1993) Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362, 59-62, PubMed: 8446170
7. Borchelt, D.R. et al. (1994) Superoxide dismutase 1 with mutations linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis possesses significant activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91, 8292-8296, PubMed: 8058797
8. Reaume, A.G. et al. (1996) Motor neurons in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase-deficient mice develop normally but exhibit enhanced cell death after axonal injury. Nat Genet 13, 43-47, PubMed: 8673102
9. Gurney, M.E. et al. (1994) Motor neuron degeneration in mice that express a human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase mutation. Science

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

264, 1772-1775, PubMed: 8209258

10 Nagai, M. et al. (2001) Rats expressing human cytosolic copper-zinc superoxide dismutase transgenes with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: associated mutations develop motor neuron disease. J Neurosci 21, 9246-9254, PubMed: 11717358

11 Howland, D.S. et al. (2002) Focal loss of the glutamate transporter EAAT2 in a transgenic rat model of SOD1 mutant-mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99, 1604-1609, PubMed: 11818550

12 Pramatarova, A. et al. (2001) Neuron-specific expression of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 in transgenic mice does not lead to motor impairment. J Neurosci 21, 3369-3374, PubMed: 11331366

13 Clement, A.M. et al. (2003) Wild-type nonneuronal cells extend survival of SOD1 mutant motor neurons in ALS mice. Science 302, 113-117, PubMed: 14526083

14 Urushitani, M. et al. (2006) Chromogranin-mediated secretion of mutant superoxide dismutase proteins linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Neurosci 9, 108-118, PubMed: 16369483

15 Yang, Y. et al. (2001) The gene encoding alsin, a protein with three guanine-nucleotide exchange factor domains, is mutated in a form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet 29, 160-165, PubMed: 11586297

16 Cai, H. et al. (2005) Loss of ALS2 function is insufficient to trigger motor neuron degeneration in knock-out mice but predisposes neurons to oxidative stress. J Neurosci 25, 7567-7574, PubMed: 16107644

17 Hadano, S. et al. (2006) Mice deficient in the Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor ALS2/alsin exhibit age-dependent neurological deficits and altered endosome trafficking. Hum Mol Genet 15, 233-250, PubMed: 16321985

18 Chen, Y.Z. et al. (2004) DNA/RNA helicase gene mutations in a form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS4). Am J Hum Genet 74, 1128-1135, PubMed: 15106121

19 Figlewicz, D.A. et al. (1994) Variants of the heavy neurofilament subunit are associated with the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 3, 1757-1761, PubMed: 7849698

20 Tomkins, J. et al. (1998) Novel insertion in the KSP region of the neurofilament heavy gene in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Neuroreport 9, 3967-3970, PubMed: 9875737

21 Al-Chalabi, A. et al. (1999) Deletions of the heavy neurofilament subunit tail in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 8, 157-164, PubMed: 9931323

22 Lambrechts, D. et al. (2003) VEGF is a modifier of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice and humans and protects motoneurons against ischemic death. Nat Genet 34, 383-394, PubMed: 12847526

23 Dhaliwal, G.K. and Grewal, R.P. (2000) Mitochondrial DNA deletion mutation levels are elevated in ALS brains. Neuroreport 11, 2507-2509, PubMed: 10943712

24 Vielhaber, S. et al. (2000) Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in skeletal muscle of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 123 (Pt 7), 1339-1348, PubMed: 10869047

25 Goodall, E.F. et al. (2005) Association of the H63D polymorphism in the hemochromatosis gene with sporadic ALS. Neurology 65, 934-937, PubMed: 16186539

26 Greenway, M.J. et al. (2004) A novel candidate region for ALS on chromosome 14q11.2. Neurology 63, 1936-1938, PubMed: 15557516

27 Greenway, M.J. et al. (2006) ANG mutations segregate with familial and ‘sporadic’ amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet 38, 411-413, PubMed: 16501576

28 Hattersley, A.T. and McCarthy, M.I. (2005) What makes a good genetic association study? Lancet 366, 1315-1323, PubMed: 16214603

29 Armon, C. (2003) An evidence-based medicine approach to the evaluation of the role of exogenous risk factors in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuroepidemiology 22, 217-228, PubMed: 12792141

30 Strong, M.J. (2000) Exogenous neurotoxins. In Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (Brown, R.H.J., Meininge, V. and Swash, M., eds), pp. 279-287, Martin Dunitz, London, UK

31 Armon, C. (2004) Excess incidence of ALS in young Gulf War veterans. Neurology 63, 1986-1987; author reply 1986-1987, PubMed: 15557542

32 Chio, A. et al. (2005) Severely increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis among Italian professional football players. Brain 128, 472-476, PubMed: 15634730

33 Schmidt, M.L. et al. (2001) Spinal cord neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer disease and Guam Parkinsonism-dementia complex. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 60, 1075-1086, PubMed: 11706937

34 Jubelt, B. and Berger, J.R. (2001) Does viral disease underlie ALS? Lessons from the AIDS

pandemic. Neurology 57, 945-946, PubMed: 11571314

35 Moulignier, A. et al. (2001) Reversible ALS-like disorder in HIV infection. Neurology 57, 995-1001, PubMed: 11571323

36 Berger, M.M. et al. (2000) Detection and cellular localization of enterovirus RNA sequences in spinal cord of patients with ALS. Neurology 54, 20-25, PubMed: 10636120

37 Steele, A.J. et al. (2005) Detection of serum reverse transcriptase activity in patients with ALS and unaffected blood relatives. Neurology 64, 454-458, PubMed: 15699374

38 Simpson, E.P., Yen, A.A. and Appel, S.H. (2003) Oxidative Stress: a common denominator in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 15, 730-736, PubMed: 14569202

39 Strong, M.J. (2003) The basic aspects of therapeutics in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Pharmacol Ther 98, 379-414, PubMed: 12782245

40 Rao, S.D. and Weiss, J.H. (2004) Excitotoxic and oxidative cross-talk between motor neurons and glia in ALS pathogenesis. Trends Neurosci 27, 17-23, PubMed: 14698606

41 Torreilles, F. et al. (1999) Neurodegenerative disorders: the role of peroxynitrite. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 30, 153-163, PubMed: 10525172

42 Heath, P.R. and Shaw, P.J. (2002) Update on the glutamatergic neurotransmitter system and the role of excitotoxicity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Muscle Nerve 26, 438-458, PubMed: 12362409

43 Shaw, P.J. et al. (1995) CSF and plasma amino acid levels in motor neuron disease: elevation of CSF glutamate in a subset of patients. Neurodegeneration 4, 209-216, PubMed: 7583686

44 Spreux-Varoquaux, O. et al. (2002) Glutamate levels in cerebrospinal fluid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a reappraisal using a new HPLC method with coulometric detection in a large cohort of patients. J Neurol Sci 193, 73-78, PubMed: 11790386

45 Rothstein, J.D. et al. (1995) Selective loss of glial glutamate transporter GLT-1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 38, 73-84, PubMed: 7611729

46 Bristol, L.A. and Rothstein, J.D. (1996) Glutamate transporter gene expression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis motor cortex. Ann Neurol 39, 676-679, PubMed: 8619555

47 Aoki, M. et al. (1998) Mutations in the glutamate transporter EAAT2 gene do not cause abnormal

EAAT2 transcripts in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 43, 645-653, PubMed: 9585360

48 Jackson, M. et al. (1999) Polymorphisms in the glutamate transporter gene EAAT2 in European ALS patients. J Neurol 246, 1140-1144, PubMed: 10653305

49 Lin, C.L. et al. (1998) Aberrant RNA processing in a neurodegenerative disease: the cause for absent EAAT2, a glutamate transporter, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuron 20, 589-602, PubMed: 9539131

50 Flowers, J.M. et al. (2001) Intron 7 retention and exon 9 skipping EAAT2 mRNA variants are not associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 49, 643-649, PubMed: 11357955

51 Trotti, D., Danbolt, N.C. and Volterra, A. (1998) Glutamate transporters are oxidant-vulnerable: a molecular link between oxidative and excitotoxic neurodegeneration? Trends Pharmacol Sci 19, 328-334, PubMed: 9745361

52 Strong, M.J., Kesavapany, S. and Pant, H.C. (2005) The pathobiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a proteinopathy? J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64, 649-664, PubMed: 16106213

53 Bruijn, L.I., Miller, T.M. and Cleveland, D.W. (2004) Unraveling the mechanisms involved in motor neuron degeneration in ALS. Annu Rev Neurosci 27, 723-749, PubMed: 15217349

54 Silverstone Valentine, J., Doucette, P.A. and Zittin Potter, S. (2005) Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Annu Rev Biochem 74, 563-593, PubMed: 15952898

55 Watanabe, M. et al. (2001) Histological evidence of protein aggregation in mutant SOD1 transgenic mice and in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis neural tissues. Neurobiol Dis 8, 933-941, PubMed: 11741389

56 Shinder, G.A. et al. (2001) Mutant Cu/Zn-super oxide dismutase proteins have altered solubility and interact with heat shock/stress proteins in models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Biol Chem 276, 12791-12796, PubMed: 11278741

57 Hoffman, E.K. et al. (1996) Proteasome inhibition enhances the stability of mouse Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase with mutations linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 139, 15-20, PubMed: 8836967

58 Takeuchi, H. et al. (2002) Hsp70 and Hsp40 improve neurite outgrowth and suppress intracytoplasmic aggregate formation in cultured neuronal cells expressing mutant SOD1. Brain

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

Res 949, 11-22, PubMed: 12213295
59 Menzies, F.M., Ince, P.G. and Shaw, P.J. (2002) Mitochondrial involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurochem Int 40, 543-551, PubMed: 11850111
60 Manfredi, G. and Xu, Z. (2005) Mitochondrial dysfunction and its role in motor neuron degeneration in ALS. Mitochondrion 5, 77-87, PubMed: 16050975
61 Comi, G.P. et al. (1998) Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I microdeletion in a patient with motor neuron disease. Ann Neurol 43, 110-116, PubMed: 9450776
62 Swerdlow, R.H. et al. (1998) Mitochondria in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp Neurol 153, 135-142, PubMed: 9743575
63 Kong, J. and Xu, Z. (1998) Massive mitochondrial degeneration in motor neurons triggers the onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice expressing a mutant SOD1. J Neurosci 18, 3241-3250, PubMed: 9547233
64 Carri, M.T. et al. (1997) Expression of a Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase typical of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induces mitochondrial alteration and increase of cytosolic Ca2+ concentration in transfected neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. FEBS Lett 414, 365-368, PubMed: 9315720
65 Kruman, II et al. (1999) ALS-linked Cu/Zn-SOD mutation increases vulnerability of motor neurons to excitotoxicity by a mechanism involving increased oxidative stress and perturbed calcium homeostasis. Exp Neurol 160, 28-39, PubMed: 10630188
66 Cote, F., Collard, J.F. and Julien, J.P. (1993) Progressive neuronopathy in transgenic mice expressing the human neurofilament heavy gene: a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cell 73, 35-46, PubMed: 8462101
67 Xu, Z. et al. (1993) Increased expression of neurofilament subunit NF-L produces morphological alterations that resemble the pathology of human motor neuron disease. Cell 73, 23-33, PubMed: 8462100
68 Lee, M.K., Marszalek, J.R. and Cleveland, D.W. (1994) A mutant neurofilament subunit causes massive, selective motor neuron death: implications for the pathogenesis of human motor neuron disease. Neuron 13, 975-988, PubMed: 7946341
69 Couillard-Despres, S. et al. (1998) Protective effect of neurofilament heavy gene overexpression in motor neuron disease induced

by mutant superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95, 9626-9630, PubMed: 9689131
70 Nguyen, M.D., Lariviere, R.C. and Julien, J.P. (2001) Deregulation of Cdk5 in a mouse model of ALS: toxicity alleviated by perikaryal neurofilament inclusions. Neuron 30, 135-147, PubMed: 11343650
71 Williamson, T.L. et al. (1998) Absence of neurofilaments reduces the selective vulnerability of motor neurons and slows disease caused by a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked superoxide dismutase 1 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95, 9631-9636, PubMed: 9689132
72 Mersiyanova, I.V. et al. (2000) A new variant of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 is probably the result of a mutation in the neurofilament-light gene. Am J Hum Genet 67, 37-46, PubMed: 10841809
73 De Jonghe, P. et al. (2001) Further evidence that neurofilament light chain gene mutations can cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2E. Ann Neurol 49, 245-249, PubMed: 11220745
74 Beaulieu, J.M., Nguyen, M.D. and Julien, J.P. (1999) Late onset of motor neurons in mice overexpressing wild-type peripherin. J Cell Biol 147, 531-544, PubMed: 15132161
75 Ching, G.Y. et al. (1999) Overexpression of alpha-internexin causes abnormal neurofilamentous accumulations and motor coordination deficits in transgenic mice. J Neurosci 19, 2974-2986, PubMed: 10191315
76 Robertson, J. et al. (2003) A neurotoxic peripherin splice variant in a mouse model of ALS. J Cell Biol 160, 939-949, PubMed: 12642616
77 Kieran, D. et al. (2005) A mutation in dynein rescues axonal transport defects and extends the life span of ALS mice. J Cell Biol 169, 561-567, PubMed: 15911875
78 Puls, I. et al. (2003) Mutant dynactin in motor neuron disease. Nat Genet 33, 455-456, PubMed: 12627231
79 Laird, F.M. et al. (2005) Neuronal expression of an ALS-associated mutation dynactin P150 glued in mice causes motor neuron disease. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 6 (Suppl 1), 22-23
80 LaMonte, B.H. et al. (2002) Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34, 715-727, PubMed: 12062019
81 Hafezparast, M. et al. (2003) Mutations in dynein

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

link motor neuron degeneration to defects in
retrograde transport. Science 300, 808-812,
PubMed: 12730604
82 Reid, E. et al. (2002) A kinesin heavy chain
(KIF5A) mutation in hereditary spastic
paraplegia (SPG10). Am J Hum Genet 71, 1189-
1194, PubMed: 12355402
83 Zhao, C. et al. (2001) Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 2A caused by mutation in a
microtubule motor KIF1Bbeta. Cell 105, 587-597,
PubMed: 11389829
84 Kawamata, T. et al. (1992) Immunologic reactions
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis brain and spinal
cord tissue. Am J Pathol 140, 691-707, PubMed:
1347673
85 Hall, E.D., Oostveen, J.A. and Gurney, M.E.
(1998) Relationship of microglial and astrocytic
activation to disease onset and progression in a
transgenic model of familial ALS. Glia 23, 249-
256, PubMed: 9633809
86 Dong, Y. and Benveniste, E.N. (2001) Immune
function of astrocytes. Glia 36, 180-190, PubMed:
11596126
87 Yasojima, K. et al. (2001) Marked increase in
cyclooxygenase-2 in ALS spinal cord:
implications for therapy. Neurology 57, 952-956,
PubMed: 11571316
88 Almer, G. et al. (2001) Increased expression of the
pro-inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 49,
176-185, PubMed: 11220737
89 Minghetti, L. (2004) Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
in inflammatory and degenerative brain diseases.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63, 901-910, PubMed:
15453089
90 Kelley, K.A. et al. (1999) Potentiation of
excitotoxicity in transgenic mice overexpressing
neuronal cyclooxygenase-2. Am J Pathol 155, 995-
1004, PubMed: 10487857
91 Kaufmann, W.E. et al. (1996) COX-2, a
synaptically induced enzyme, is expressed by
excitatory neurons at postsynaptic sites in rat
cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93,
2317-2321, PubMed: 8637870
92 Oosthuyse, B. et al. (2001) Deletion of the
hypoxia-response element in the vascular
endothelial growth factor promoter causes motor
neuron degeneration. Nat Genet 28, 131-138,
PubMed: 11381259
93 Gros-Louis, F. et al. (2003) Absence of mutations
in the hypoxia response element of VEGF in ALS.
Muscle Nerve 28, 774-775, PubMed: 14639597
94 Brockington, A. et al. (2005) Screening of the

regulatory and coding regions of vascular
endothelial growth factor in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Neurogenetics 6, 101-104, PubMed:
15776280
95 Riddle, D.R., Sonntag, W.E. and Lichtenwalner,
R.J. (2003) Microvascular plasticity in aging.
Ageing Res Rev 2, 149-168, PubMed: 12605958
96 Sathasivam, S. and Shaw, P.J. (2005) Apoptosis in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis—what is the
evidence? Lancet Neurol 4, 500-509, PubMed:
16033692
97 Mattson, M.P. (2000) Apoptosis in
neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 1, 120-129, PubMed: 11253364
98 Li, M. et al. (2000) Functional role of caspase-1
and caspase-3 in an ALS transgenic mouse
model. Science 288, 335-339, PubMed: 10764647
99 Pasinelli, P. et al. (2000) Caspase-1 and -3 are
sequentially activated in motor neuron death in
Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase-mediated familial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 97, 13901-13906, PubMed: 11095709
100 Raoul, C. et al. (2002) Motoneuron death
triggered by a specific pathway downstream of
Fas. potentiation by ALS-linked SOD1 mutations.
Neuron 35, 1067-1083, PubMed: 12354397
101 Vukosavic, S. et al. (1999) Bax and Bcl-2
interaction in a transgenic mouse model of
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J
Neurochem 73, 2460-2468, PubMed: 10582606
102 Kostic, V. et al. (1997) Bcl-2: prolonging life in a
transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Science 277, 559-562, PubMed:
9228005
103 Pasinelli, P. et al. (2004) Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis-associated SOD1 mutant proteins bind
and aggregate with Bcl-2 in spinal cord
mitochondria. Neuron 43, 19-30, PubMed:
15233914
104 Ishigaki, S. et al. (2002) X-Linked inhibitor of
apoptosis protein is involved in mutant SOD1-
mediated neuronal degeneration. J Neurochem
82, 576-584, PubMed: 12153481
105 Inoue, H. et al. (2003) The crucial role of caspase-
9 in the disease progression of a transgenic ALS
mouse model. Embo J 22, 6665-6674, PubMed:
14657037
106 Mu, X. et al. (1996) Altered expression of bcl-2
and bax mRNA in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
spinal cord motor neurons. Ann Neurol 40, 379-
386, PubMed: 8797527
107 Martin, L.J. (1999) Neuronal death in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is apoptosis:

Accession information: DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

possible contribution of a programmed cell death
mechanism. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58, 459-
471, PubMed: 10331434
108 Shaw, P.J. (2005) Molecular and cellular
pathways of neurodegeneration in motor
neurone disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
76, 1046-1057, PubMed: 16024877
109 Van Damme, P. et al. (2002) GluR2-dependent
properties of AMPA receptors determine the
selective vulnerability of motor neurons to
excitotoxicity. J Neurophysiol 88, 1279-1287,
PubMed: 12205149
110 Carriedo, S.G. et al. (2000) AMPA exposures
induce mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload and ROS
generation in spinal motor neurons in vitro. J
Neurosci 20, 240-250, PubMed: 10627601
111 Morrison, K.E. (2002) Therapies in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis-beyond riluzole. Curr Opin
Pharmacol 2, 302-309, PubMed: 12020475
112 Bensimon, G., Lacomblez, L. and Meininger, V.
(1994) A controlled trial of riluzole in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS/Riluzole
Study Group. N Engl J Med 330, 585-591,
PubMed: 8302340
113 Lacomblez, L. et al. (1996) Dose-ranging study of
riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/Riluzole Study
Group II. Lancet 347, 1425-1431, PubMed: 8676624
114 Levy, G. et al. (2006) A two-stage design for a
phase II clinical trial of coenzyme Q10 in ALS.
Neurology 66, 660-663, PubMed: 16534103
115 Kalra, S. and Arnold, D. (2003) Neuroimaging in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral
Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 4, 243-248,
PubMed: 14753658
116 Shaw, P.J. and Williams, R. (2000) Serum and
cerebrospinal fluid biochemical markers of ALS.
Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron
Disord 1 Suppl 2, S61-67, PubMed: 11464944
117 Rothstein, J.D. (2003) Of mice and men:
reconciling preclinical ALS mouse studies and
human clinical trials. Ann Neurol 53, 423-426,
PubMed: 12666108
118 Jonsson, P.A. et al. (2006) Disulphide-reduced
superoxide dismutase-1 in CNS of transgenic
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis models. Brain 129,
451-464, PubMed: 16330499
119 Heemskerk, J., Tobin, A.J. and Bain, L.J. (2002)
Teaching old drugs new tricks. Meeting of the
Neurodegeneration Drug Screening Consortium,
7-8 April 2002, Washington, DC, USA. Trends
Neurosci 25, 494-496, PubMed: 12220871
120 Rothstein, J.D. et al. (2005) Beta-lactam antibiotics

offer neuroprotection by increasing glutamate
transporter expression. Nature 433, 73-77,
PubMed: 15635412
121 Kriz, J., Gowing, G. and Julien, J.P. (2003)
Efficient three-drug cocktail for disease induced
by mutant superoxide dismutase. Ann Neurol 53,
429-436, PubMed: 12666110
122 Orrell, R.W., Lane, R.J. and Ross, M. (2005)
Antioxidant treatment for amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis / motor neuron disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev CD002829, PubMed: 15674899
123 Klivenyi, P. et al. (1999) Neuroprotective effects
of creatine in a transgenic animal model of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Med 5, 347-
350, PubMed: 10086395
124 Groeneveld, G.J. et al. (2003) A randomized
sequential trial of creatine in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Ann Neurol 53, 437-445, PubMed:
12666111
125 Shefner, J.M. et al. (2004) A clinical trial of
creatine in ALS. Neurology 63, 1656-1661,
PubMed: 15534251
126 Rosenfeld, J. et al. (2005) Multi-centre clinical
trial of creatine monohydrate in patients with
ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor
Neuron Disord 6 (Suppl 1), 13-14
127 Doble, A. (1996) The pharmacology and
mechanism of action of riluzole. Neurology 47,
S233-241, PubMed: 8959995
128 Choudry, R.B. and Cudkowicz, M.E. (2005)
Clinical trials in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: the
tenuous past and the promising future. J Clin
Pharmacol 45, 1334-1344, PubMed: 16291708
129 Kriz, J., Nguyen, M.D. and Julien, J.P. (2002)
Minocycline slows disease progression in a
mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Neurobiol Dis 10, 268-278, PubMed: 12270689
130 Yong, V.W. et al. (2004) The promise of
minocycline in neurology. Lancet Neurol 3, 744-
751, PubMed: 15556807
131 Angelov, D.N. et al. (2003) Therapeutic vaccine
for acute and chronic motor neuron diseases:
implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 4790-4795,
PubMed: 12668759
132 Kieran, D. et al. (2004) Treatment with
arimoclomol, a coinducer of heat shock proteins,
delays disease progression in ALS mice. Nat Med
10, 402-405, PubMed: 15034571
133 Lai, E.C. et al. (1997) Effect of recombinant
human insulin-like growth factor-I on
progression of ALS. A placebo-controlled study.
The North America ALS/IGF-I Study Group.


**Accession information:** DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006  
© 2006 Cambridge University Press

Neurology 49, 1621-1630, PubMed: 9409357
134 Borasio, G.D. et al. (1998) A placebo-controlled trial of insulin-like growth factor-I in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. European ALS / IGF-I Study Group. Neurology 51, 583-586, PubMed: 9710040
135 Federici, T. and Boulis, N.M. (2005) Gene-based treatment of motor neuron diseases. Muscle Nerve 33, 324-333, PubMed: 16228969
136 Kaspar, B.K. et al. (2003) Retrograde viral delivery of IGF-1 prolongs survival in a mouse ALS model. Science 301, 839-842, PubMed: 12907804
137 Wang, L.J. et al. (2002) Neuroprotective effects of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor mediated by an adeno-associated virus vector in a transgenic animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci 22, 6920-6928, PubMed: 12177190
138 Azzouz, M. et al. (2004) VEGF delivery with retrogradely transported lentivector prolongs survival in a mouse ALS model. Nature 429, 413-417, PubMed: 15164063
139 Azzouz, M. et al. (2000) Increased motoneuron survival and improved neuromuscular function in transgenic ALS mice after intraspinal injection of an adeno-associated virus encoding Bcl-2. Hum Mol Genet 9, 803-811, PubMed: 10749988
140 Ralph, G.S. et al. (2005) Silencing mutant SOD1 using RNAi protects against neurodegeneration and extends survival in an ALS model. Nat Med 11, 429-433, PubMed: 15768029
141 Raoul, C. et al. (2005) Lentiviral-mediated silencing of SOD1 through RNA interference retards disease onset and progression in a mouse model of ALS. Nat Med 11, 423-428, PubMed: 15768028
142 Watts, J. (2005) Controversy in China. Lancet 365, 109-110, PubMed: 15643702
143 Li, X.J. et al. (2005) Specification of motoneurons

from human embryonic stem cells. Nat Biotechnol 23, 215-221, PubMed: 15685164
144 Swash, M., ed. (2005) Abstracts from the 16th International Symposium on ALS/MND. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 6 (Suppl 1), Taylor and Francis, Basingstoke, UK
145 Hand, C.K. et al. (2002) A novel locus for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, on chromosome 18q. Am J Hum Genet 70, 251-256, PubMed: 11706389
146 Hentati, A. et al. (1998) Linkage of a commoner form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 15q15-q22 markers. Neurogenetics 2, 55-60, PubMed: 9933301
147 Abalkhail, H. et al. (2003) A new familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis locus on chromosome 16q12.1-16q12.2. Am J Hum Genet 73, 383-389, PubMed: 12830400
148 Sapp, P.C. et al. (2003) Identification of two novel loci for dominantly inherited familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Hum Genet 73, 397-403, PubMed: 12858291
149 Nishimura, A.L. et al. (2004) A mutation in the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB causes late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Hum Genet 75, 822-831, PubMed: 15372378
150 Hosler, B.A. et al. (2000) Linkage of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia to chromosome 9q21-q22. Jama 284, 1664-1669, PubMed: 11015796
151 Hutton, M. et al. (1998) Association of missense and 5'-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature 393, 702-705, PubMed: 9641683
152 Drory, V.E. et al. (2001) Association of APOE epsilon 4 allele with survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 190, 17-20, PubMed: 11574101


**Accession information:** DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press

Further reading, resources and contacts

Publications
Good reviews concerning pathogenic mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:
Rowland, L.P. and Shneider, N.A. (2001) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. N Engl J Med 344, 1688-1700, PubMed: 11386269
Cleveland, D.W. and Rothstein, J.D. (2001) From Charcot to Lou Gehrig: deciphering selective motor neuron death in ALS. Nat Rev Neurosci 2, 806-819, PubMed: 11715057

Two fairly recent books that detail clinical features, epidemiology, mechanisms and potential therapies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:
Leigh, P.N. and Swash, M. (1995) Motor neuron disease, Springer-Verlag, London, UK
Brown, R.H.J., Meininge, V. and Swash, M., eds (2000) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Martin Dunitz, London, UK

Websites
The website of ALSA, the largest US national health organisation dedicated solely to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, provides clinical information on the disease and updates of current research funded by the association and other organisations. It is particularly useful for up-to-date information on current US clinical trials:
http://www.alsa.org

The website of the MND Association, the main national UK organisation dedicated to the support of people with motor neuron disease and their carers, provides clinical and care information, summarises current and previous clinical trials, and provides updates of current research:
http://www.mndassociation.org

The Washington University website provides a frequently updated resource on clinical and research aspects of many neuromuscular diseases, including motor neuron diseases:
http://www.neuro.wustl.edu/neuromuscular/index.html

Features associated with this article

Figures
Figure 1. Outline of the human motor system.
Figure 2. Ubiquitinated inclusions in a motor neuron cell body from a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Figure 3. Overview diagram summarising some of the theories of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis.
Figure 4. Glutamatergic transmission in the central nervous system.
Figure 5. Model to show how some of the proposed mechanisms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis could interact to cause motor neuron degeneration.

Tables
Table 1. Pathological features seen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Table 2. Genetic factors in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Citation details for this article

Emily F. Goodall and Karen E. Morrison (2006) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (motor neuron disease): proposed mechanisms and pathways to treatment. Expert Rev. Mol. Med. Vol. 8, Issue 11, 24 May, DOI: 10.1017/S1462399406010854

Accession information: DOI:10.1017/S1462399406010854; Vol. 8; Issue 11; 24 May 2006 © 2006 Cambridge University Press
