
# LKB1-Dependent Signaling Pathways

**Dario R. Alessi, Kei Sakamoto, and Jose R. Bayascas**

Medical Research Council, Protein Phosphorylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland; email: d.r.alessi@dundee.ac.uk, k.sakamoto@dundee.ac.uk, j.bayascas@dundee.ac.uk

---

### Key Words
AMPK, cancer, cell growth, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, polarity, tuberous sclerosis, mTOR, tumor suppressor

---

### Abstract
This review focuses on remarkable recent findings concerning the mechanism by which the LKB1 protein kinase that is mutated in Peutz-Jeghers cancer syndrome operates as a tumor suppressor. We discuss evidence that the cellular localization and activity of LKB1 is controlled through its interaction with a catalytically inactive protein resembling a protein kinase, termed STRAD, and an armadillo repeat-containing protein, named mouse protein 25 (MO25). The data suggest that LKB1 functions as a tumor suppressor by not only inhibiting proliferation, but also by exerting profound effects on cell polarity and, most unexpectedly, on the ability of a cell to detect and respond to low cellular energy levels. Genetic and biochemical findings indicate that LKB1 exerts its effects by phosphorylating and activating 14 protein kinases, all related to the AMP-activated protein kinase. The work described in this review shows how a study of an obscure cancer syndrome can uncover new and important regulatory pathways, relevant to the understanding of multiple human diseases.

Contents
INTRODUCTION ..... 138
EVIDENCE THAT LKB1 FUNCTIONS AS A TUMOR SUPPRESSOR ..... 139
POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS OF LKB1 ..... 143
LKB1:STRAD:MO25 COMPLEX ..... 144
ROLE OF PSEUDOKINASES ..... 146
ACTIVATION OF THE AMP-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE BY LKB1 ..... 146
TUMOR SUPPRESSOR PROPERTIES OF LKB1 AND AMPK ..... 149
MEDICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF PJS AND OTHER CANCERS ..... 151
LKB1 FUNCTIONS AS A MASTER UPSTREAM KINASE ..... 152
MARK AND BRSK KINASES: ROLE OF LKB1 IN REGULATING CELL POLARITY ..... 154
OTHER AMPK-RELATED KINASES ..... 156
REGULATION OF AMPK-RELATED KINASES ..... 156
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE ..... 157

INTRODUCTION

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) was first described in 1922 by Dr. Johannes Peutz, a Dutch physician working in Utrecht (1), and further characterized in the 1940s by Dr. Harold Jeghers and coworkers (2, 3). This disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Patients with PJS develop benign hamartomatous polyps (overgrowth of differentiated tissues), especially in the gastrointestinal tract, as well as marked cutaneous pigmentation of the mucous membranes. Another key feature of PJS is a greatly increased risk of developing malignant tumors in multiple tissues (4–6); it has been estimated that 93% of PJS patients develop malignant tumor(s) by the age of 43 (7). Estimates for the incidence frequency of PJS vary greatly—from 1 in ~10,000 to 120,000 live births—perhaps because of its rarity and the difficulty in accurately diagnosing this condition (4, 8). Although the majority of patients have a family history of PJS, 10% to 20% of PJS cases result from spontaneous germ line mutations in the *LKB1* gene (9).

In 1997, groundbreaking genetic linkage analysis undertaken by Akseli Hemminki, a graduate student in Lauri Aaltonen’s laboratory in Helsinki, revealed that the locus responsible for PJS was located on chromosome 19p13.3 (10). This claim was followed by a frantic multigroup effort in which the cDNAs of 29 genes located in this chromosomal region were sequenced from well-characterized PJS families. This work culminated in 1998 in the discovery that 11 out of the 12 PJS families studied had diverse mutations in a gene encoding a protein kinase that Jun-ichi Nezu, of Chugai Pharmaceuticals, had identified in 1996 in a screen aimed at identifying new kinases and that was termed *LKB1* (11). Nezu deposited the sequence in the database without writing a research paper. *LKB1* is highly related to XEEK1, a kinase also identified in 1996 that is expressed in early *Xenopus* embryos and found to be a substrate of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) (12). In parallel studies, another group, which had originally collaborated with the Aaltonen laboratory, also reported mutations in the *LKB1* gene in PJS subjects and called this enzyme serine threonine kinase 11 (STK11) (13).

There is only a single isoform of the *LKB1* gene in the human genome, which spans 23 kb and is composed of ten exons, nine of which are coding. The gene is transcribed in the telomere-to-centromere direction. Human *LKB1* comprises 433 residues (mouse, *LKB1* 436), and its catalytic domain (residues 49–309) is somewhat more distantly related to other protein kinases, explaining why it is

localized within the center of the human kinome dendrogram (14). The N-terminal and C-terminal noncatalytic regions of LKB1 are not related to any other proteins and possess no identifiable functional domains. LKB1 is expressed at varying levels in all fetal and adult tissues examined (11, 13). Patients with sporadic cancers have also been screened for mutations in the *LKB1* gene, and although their occurrence is relatively rare, an increasing number of mutations are being identified, which are listed in Figure 1. Recently, it has been demonstrated that one third of lung adenocarcinomas harbor somatic *LKB1* mutations, supporting a role for LKB1 in the origin of some sporadic tumors (15–17). To date, 144 different mutations in LKB1 have been identified in PJS patients and sporadic cancers, and these are summarized in Figure 1. The majority of these mutations result in substantial truncations of the catalytic domain and should impair LKB1 catalytic activity. However, there are also a significant number of point mutations, which are located in the kinase domain and in the C-terminal noncatalytic region (Figure 1). Interestingly, no point mutations in the N-terminal noncatalytic region of LKB1 have been identified, indicating that this region of the enzyme is not crucial for tumor suppression (Figure 1).

of 45 weeks, most *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> animals developed polyps in the gastrointestinal tract, predominantly in the glandular stomach, distinct from PJS patients who develop polyps mainly in the small intestine. Differences in preferential sites for intestinal tumor formation in mice and humans have also been observed with adenomatous polyposis coli knockout mice (19). However, a histological analysis revealed that the hamartomatous polyps in *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice were remarkably similar to those found in PJS patients (20–23).

A major question concerning the mechanism of tumor formation in the *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> animals was whether the polyps still expressed LKB1. Three groups reported that LKB1 levels in polyps from PJS patients had roughly half of the normal amount of LKB1, suggesting that tumor formation resulted from haploinsufficiency of LKB1 (20–22). However, a fourth study reported that three out of twelve polyps isolated from *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice showed loss of the wild-type *LKB1* allele (23). Moreover, the LKB1 protein was not detected in four out of eight polyps from *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice that retained a wild-type *LKB1* allele, suggesting that epigenetic gene inactivation had occurred prior to polyp emergence (23). Thus, these results suggest that total loss of LKB1 expression is required as a precondition of polyp formation. Consistent with this view, *LKB1*<sup>f/f</sup> hypomorphic mice that express five- to tenfold reduced levels of LKB1 in all tissues examined (except in the brain) have recently been described (24). These mice, at least until the age of 26 weeks, display no signs of developing hamartomas (K. Sakamoto, unpublished observations). In future studies, it would be interesting to study the incidence of hamartoma formation in *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup>, *LKB1*<sup>f/f</sup>, and *LKB1*<sup>f/−</sup> mice, which should provide insight into whether it is loss of heterozygosity or a reduction in LKB1 level that is necessary to drive polyposis. A significant number of *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice over the age of 50 weeks developed hepatocellular carcinoma (25). No expression of LKB1 mRNA and protein was observed in these hepatocellular carcinomas,

**EVIDENCE THAT LKB1 FUNCTIONS AS A TUMOR SUPPRESSOR**

A much discussed early finding was that overexpression of wild-type LKB1 caused a G1 cell cycle arrest in HeLa and G361 cells, which do not express LKB1 (18). Catalytically inactive LKB1 mutants, including some of those isolated from PJS patients, failed to inhibit cell growth. Thus, it was assumed that the intrinsic serine-threonine protein kinase catalytic activity of LKB1 was required to block cell division. Heterozygous *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice were viable and displayed no obvious phenotype at birth and early adult life. However, by the age

**Mutation:** permanent change(s) to the DNA sequence caused by copying errors during cell division and exposure to harmful substances

**Protein kinase:** a human gene family, which regulates aspects of cell function and, when dysfunctional, causes human disease

**Cancer:** cells that grow out of control into malignant tumors and replace normal tissue

**Carcinoma:** a cancerous tumor that begins in tissues covering or lining various body organs

Figure 1

Mutations identified in the human LKB1 gene in patients with PJS and sporadic cancer showing a schematic representation of their predicted effects on the primary structure of the LKB1 protein. The genomic organization of the coding sequence of the LKB1 gene is shown on the top, and the functional domains of the protein are shown below with (a) stop mutations, in-frame deletions, splicing mutations, and deletions; (b) point mutations; (c) frameshift mutations.

Abbreviations used: NRD, N-terminal regulatory domain; CRD, C-terminal regulatory domain (white boxes); Δ, in-frame deletion; fs, frameshift; Ref, reference; X, point mutation. The protein kinase domain (blue boxes) and amino acid sequence introduced by the frameshift (green boxes) are also indicated.

|  | I | II | III | IV | V | VI | VII | VIII | IX |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 49 |  |  |  |  |  | 309 |  | 433 |
| NRD | Kinase domain | CRD |

**Stop mutations**
- 36stop | 45
- 37stop | 45
- 44stop | 45
- 49stop | 133
- 52stop | 45
- 57stop | 11
- 60stop | 45
- 65stop | 16
- 70stop | 11
- 84stop | 11
- 120stop | 16
- 123stop | 45
- 137stop | 128,139
- 156stop | 133
- 170stop | 45
- 208stop | 45
- 210stop | 45
- 214stop | 133
- 223stop | 45
- 246stop | 45
- 252stop | 45
- 256stop | 129
- 308stop | 45
- 332stop | 45
- 416stop | 45

**In-frame deletions**
- Δ50-53 | 45
- Δ51-56 | 45
- Δ52 | 45
- Δ56-63 | 128
- Δ74-77 | 139
- Δ73-77 | 128
- Δ107-109 | 45
- Δ137-140 | 45
- Δ166-173 | 45
- Δ175-176 | 45
- Δ247 | 45
- Δ303-306 | 45
- Δ98-155 | 45
- Δ156-307 | 45
- Δ330-334 | 45

**Splicing mutations**
- Intron 1 | 139
- Intron 2 | 130
- Intron 3 | 13
- Intron 5 | 45
- Intron 6 | 45
- Intron 7 | 139

**Deletions**
- Exon 4-6 | 17
- Exon 8 | 16

indicating that complete loss of LKB1 expression is required for the development of carcinomas (25). LKB1 clearly plays an important role in development, as knockout of both LKB1 alleles results in mid-gestation embryonic lethality at E11.0 (20, 21, 26). LKB1−/− embryos display multiple abnormalities after E8.0, such as defects in neural tube closure, abnormal development of the aorta and hypoplastic first

|  | II | III | IV | V | VI | VII | VIII | IX |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 97 | 125 | 155 | 199 | 245 | 287 | 307 | 369 | 433 |
| 1 | 49 | 309 | 433 |

| NRD | Kinase domain | CRD |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Y49D | X | Ref. | 45 |
| Y60X | X | 45 |
| L67P | X | 45 |
| Q100X | X | 45 |
| K108R | X | 45 |
| Y118X | X | 45 |
| C132X | X | 45 |
| G135R | X | 45 |
| F157S | X | 45 |
| D162N | X | 45 |
| G163D | X | 45 |
| L164M | X | 45 |
| Q170P | X | 128 |
| G171S | X | 45 |
| D176N | X | 45 |
| I177N | X | 45 |
| N181Y | X | 45 |
| N181E | X | 128 |
| L182P | X | 45 |
| D194N | X | 45 |
| D194V | X | 45 |
| D194Y | X | 45 |
| E199K | X | 45 |
| D208N | X | 45 |
| G215D | X | 45 |
| T230P | X | 128 |
| S232P | X | 45 |
| W239C | X | 45 |
| G242W | X | 45 |
| G242V | X | 45 |
| L245R | X | 133 |
| G251S | X | 45 |
| E256S | X | 45 |
| H272Y | X | 45 |
| P281L | X | 45 |
| R297K | X | 45 |
| R297S | X | 45 |
| R304W | X | 45 |
| W308C | X | 45 |
| P314H | X | 45 |
| G315S | X | 45 |
| P324L | X | 45 |
| F354L | X | 45 |
| T367M | X | 45 |

Figure 1

(Continued)

branchial arch, as well as major placental defects in females (26). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA levels in LKB1-/-embryos at E8.5 and E9.5 were observed to be elevated, and these embryos displayed abnormally high basal and hypoxia-induced levels of VEGF mRNA, indicating that normally LKB1 might negatively regulate VEGF production and vascular development (26).

|  | I | II | III | IV | V | VI | VII | VIII | IX |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 97 | 125 | 155 | 199 | 245 | 287 | 307 | 369 | 433 |
| 1 | 49 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 309 | 433 |
| NRD | Kinase domain | CRD |

**Frameshift mutations**

| fs37 |  | Ref. |
| --- | --- | --- |
| fs38 |  | 45 |
| fs52 |  | 45 |
| fs53 |  | 128, 16 |
| fs57 |  | 138 |
| fs57 |  | 45 |
| fs64 |  | 11 |
| fs66 |  | 45 |
| fs117 |  | 11 |
| fs140 |  | 45 |
| fs143 |  | 45 |
| fs145 |  | 128 |
| fs152 |  | 128 |
| fs158 |  | 45 |
| fs161 |  | 45 |
| fs162 |  | 45 |
| fs165 |  | 45 |
| fs169 |  | 133 |
| fs176 |  | 133 |
| fs189 |  | 45 |
| fs190 |  | 45 |
| fs191 |  | 128 |
| fs212 |  | 45 |
| fs214 |  | 45 |
| fs214 |  | 45 |
| fs216 |  | 133 |
| fs217 |  | 45 |
| fs222 |  | 45 |
| fs223 |  | 45 |
| fs240 |  | 133 |
| fs245 |  | 45 |
| fs248 |  | 45 |
| fs251 |  | 45 |
| fs253 |  | 45 |
| fs260 |  | 45 |
| fs262 |  | 133 |
| fs263 |  | 45 |
| fs278 |  | 45 |
| fs279 |  | 45 |
| fs280 |  | 13 |
| fs281 |  | 45 |
| fs282 |  | 137 |
| fs297 |  | 134 |
| fs301 |  | 45 |
| fs305 |  | 45 |
| fs306 |  | 45 |
| fs307 |  | 45 |
| fs312 |  | 45 |
| fs316 |  | 45 |
| fs319 |  | 45 |
| fs342 |  | 45 |
| fs359 |  | 45 |

**Figure 1**

(Continued)

POSTTRANSLATIONAL
MODIFICATIONS OF LKB1

As summarized in Figure 2, LKB1 is phosphorylated on at least 8 residues. The evidence suggests that LKB1 is phosphorylated at Ser31, Ser325, Thr366, and Ser431 by upstream kinases, whereas LKB1 autophosphorylates itself at Thr185, Thr189, Thr336, and Ser404. Mutation of any of these sites of phosphorylation to either Ala to abolish phosphorylation or to Glu to mimic phosphorylation has thus far not been reported to significantly affect LKB1 catalytic activity in vitro or its cellular localization (27–29). Mutation of Ser431 to either Ala or Glu prevented LKB1 from suppressing the growth of G361 cells in a colony formation assay, suggesting that phosphorylation of this residue is essential for LKB1 to inhibit cell growth (28). Mutation of Thr336, the major autophosphorylation site on LKB1, to a Glu, but not Ala, prevented LKB1 from inhibiting G361 cell growth, indicating that phosphorylation of this residue may somehow inhibit LKB1 tumor suppressor function (27). In contrast, mutation of Ser31, Ser325, or Thr366 had no major effect on the ability of LKB1 to suppress G361 cell growth (27).

The Thr336, Thr366, and Ser431 phosphorylation sites and the residues surrounding these are highly conserved in *Drosophila*, *Xenopus*, and mammalian LKB1, but not in *Caenorhabditis elegans* LKB1 (27). LKB1 is phosphorylated at Ser431 by the p90 ribosomal S6 protein kinase (RSK) and PKA in response to agonists, which trigger the activation of these kinases (28, 30). Therefore, RSK and PKA may regulate cell growth through phosphorylation of LKB1. Phosphorylation of LKB1 at Thr366 is triggered only following exposure of cells to ionizing radiation, and it is likely that the DNA-damage activated (ATM) kinase

DNA
damage
↓
Proline-
directed
kinase
ATM
↓
P P
T185 T189
S325 T336 T366
NRD Kinase domain CRD
↓
Nuclear localization signal
Mouse LKB1
Farnesylation

Figure 2

Posttranslational modification sites of the mouse LKB1 protein. Autophosphorylation sites are depicted in red, and the sites phosphorylated by other kinases are in black. The Cys433 farnesylation site is depicted in green. The agonists and upstream protein kinases postulated to phosphorylate each site are indicated. Residues Thr366, Ser404, Ser431, and Cys433 in the mouse sequence correspond to human LKB1 residues Thr363, Thr402, Ser428, and Cys430, respectively. The noncatalytic domains are in white, and the kinase domain is light blue.

mediates this phosphorylation in vivo (31). Moreover, after exposure of cells to DNA-damaging ionizing radiation, the N-terminal substrate-binding domain of ATM was observed to associate with LKB1 (32). It would be of interest to explore whether LKB1 could play a role in mediating DNA damage responses in cells. The upstream kinases phosphorylating LKB1 at Ser31 and Ser325 have not yet been characterized. Ser31 lies in a consensus sequence for phosphorylation by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (27, 33), and it would be interesting to test whether AMPK or one of the AMPK-related kinases could phosphorylate this residue. As Ser325 is followed by a proline, it is likely to be phosphorylated by one of the proline-directed kinases (27).

Collins et al. (30) observed that LKB1 terminated in the amino acid sequence Cys-Lys-Gln-Gln, lying in an optimal consensus sequence for protein prenylation. This motif is conserved in LKB1 homologues in *Xenopus* and *Drosophila*, but not in *C. elegans*. LKB1 expressed in 293 cells was shown to be prenylated by labeling with \[^{14}C\]-mevalonic acid, and mutation of the Cys residue in the prenylation motif (Cys433) abolished prenylation (28, 30). Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the form of prenylation on LKB1 was farnesylation rather than geranylgeranylation (28). Recent genetic analysis in *Drosophila* indicated that both phosphorylation of the Ser431 residue by PKA and the prenylation of Cys433 are essential for LKB1 to regulate cell polarity (34). However, the mechanism by which prenylation regulates LKB1 is unknown. A mutant of LKB1, in which Cys433 is changed to Ala to prevent prenylation, possessed normal in vitro catalytic activity, was able to suppress G361 cell growth (28), and displayed indistinguishable cellular localization to wild-type LKB1 in HeLa cells (27). Cys433 is located two residues away from Ser431, the site of RSK and PKA modification, but mutation of Ser431 to either Ala or Glu did not affect farnesylation of Cys433. Mutation of Cys433 to Ala also had no effect on phosphorylation

of LKB1 at Ser431 in response to agonists that activate RSK and PKA (28).

**LKB1:STRAD:MO25 COMPLEX**

Through a combination of yeast two-hybrid analysis (35) and affinity purification from mammalian cells (29, 36), LKB1 was found to exist in mammalian cells in a complex with two other proteins, termed STE20-related adaptor (STRAD) and mouse protein 25 (MO25). There are two closely related isoforms of STRAD termed STRADα and STRADβ, which possess high sequence homology to the STE20 family of protein kinases but lack several key catalytic residues required for catalysis and have therefore been classified as pseudokinases. STRADα is inactive and does not autophosphorylate or phosphorylate any substrate tested (35). There are also two isoforms of MO25, known as MO25α and MO25β, that, although closely related to each other, bear no sequence homology to any other protein in the database. *MO25α* was first identified as a gene expressed at the early cleavage stage of mouse embryogenesis (37) and was also noticed in a screen for proteins showing an unusually high degree of evolutionary conservation (38, 39). Complexes of LKB1:STRAD:MO25 can be isolated from mammalian 293 cell expression systems (29) or insect Sf9 cells (G. Kular and D.R. Alessi, unpublished observations) in which the three components are present in a similar stoichiometry, suggesting a relatively high affinity of the individual subunits for each other.

LKB1, when overexpressed on its own in mammalian cells, is localized mainly in the nucleus, although a small fraction was reproducibly found in the cytoplasm (40–42). LKB1 possesses a nuclear localization signal at its N-terminal noncatalytic region (residues 38–43) (Figure 2), and mutation of this motif results in LKB1 being located throughout the cell (27, 40). A mutant of LKB1 lacking the nuclear localization signal still retains ability to suppress cell growth (41), suggesting that the cytosolic pool of LKB1 plays an important

role in mediating its tumor suppressor properties. This is also consistent with the finding that no point mutations in this region of LKB1 have been reported in human cancers (Figure 1). Also supporting this conclusion is the finding that mutants of LKB1, which are unable to enter the nucleus, still suppress cell growth in overexpression studies (41). STRADα and MO25α when expressed alone in cells are both localized throughout the cytoplasm and nucleus, but they are only localized in the cytoplasm and excluded from the nucleus when expressed together. Interestingly, when LKB1 is expressed with STRAD and MO25, it becomes strikingly relocalized in the cytoplasm (29, 35, 43). Point mutants of LKB1 found in human cancers, which are unable to interact with STRAD and MO25, remain localized exclusively within the nucleus when expressed in cells (29, 35, 43). Additional mechanisms may also exist to maintain LKB1 in the cell cytoplasm. The interaction of LKB1 with a protein called LKB1 interacting protein-1 (LIP1) was reported to induce LKB1 cytoplasmic localization in 30% of the cells (44). Whether LIP1 can interact with the heterotrimeric LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex has not been tested. Prior to the discovery that LKB1 phosphorylated and activated AMPK-related subfamily protein kinases (discussed below), LKB1 was assayed either measuring its autophosphorylation or employing the nonspecific substrate, myelin basic protein, which LKB1 phosphorylates poorly at Thr65 (35). The catalytic activity of LKB1 toward myelin basic protein is increased ~10-fold in the presence of STRAD and MO25 isoforms, indicating that these subunits activated LKB1 (35, 45). Moreover, LKB1 was found to phosphorylate STRADα at Thr329 and Thr419. However, the role that these phosphorylations play is not known because mutation of these sites to either Ala or Asp had no effect on the ability of STRADα to bind, activate, or localize LKB1 in the cytoplasm (35). Furthermore, the Thr329 and Thr419 residues are not conserved in STRADβ (29).

The pseudokinase domain of STRAD isoforms binds directly to the kinase domain of LKB1. There are likely to be multiple sites of interaction between LKB1 catalytic and STRAD pseudokinase domain because 12 PJS point mutations, located within different regions of the LKB1 catalytic domain, abolished interaction with STRAD:MO25 (43). The importance of STRAD is further emphasized by the finding that a non-STRADα-binding mutant of LKB1 was unable to induce a G1 cell cycle arrest when overexpressed in G361 cells, which do not express LKB1 (35). Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous STRADα inhibited the ability of wild-type LKB1 to arrest cell growth (35).

MO25α forms a high-affinity interaction with the last three Trp-Glu-Phe amino acids of STRAD. Mutation of any of these three residues abolishes the ability of MO25α to bind STRADα (29). In this regard, MO25 appears to function similarly to many PDZ domains that also recognize the extreme C-terminal residues of their protein-binding partners, although there is no obvious sequence similarity between MO25 and PDZ domains (46). The three-dimensional structure of full-length MO25α in complex with a peptide that encompassed the Trp-Glu-Phe residues of STRADα revealed that MO25α forms an extended α-helical repeat rod-like structure, which was distantly related to the armadillo repeat domain. At its C terminus, MO25α possesses a deep pocket that binds specifically to Trp-Glu-Phe residues of STRADα, and mutation of residues making up this pocket inhibited the binding of MO25α to STRADα (47).

Cotransfection/overexpression studies indicated that the amount of STRADα associated with LKB1 in cells is significantly enhanced by the overexpression of MO25α, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of MO25α reduced the amount of endogenous STRADα associated with LKB1 (29). Interestingly, a STRADα mutant lacking the C-terminal Trp-Glu-Phe residues can still form a complex
with MO25α but only in the presence of LKB1 (29, 43). This indicates that interaction of LKB1 with STRADα creates an additional binding site for either MO25 or LKB1 within the complex, which may explain why MO25α stabilizes the binding of LKB1 to STRADα. Mutational analysis has indicated that Arg240, located on the opposite surface to the Trp-Glu-Phe-binding pocket on MO25α, participates in this second interaction site (43). However, it will be necessary to crystallize the entire LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex in order to understand in full the molecular mechanism by which these proteins interact.

In addition to interacting with STRAD and MO25 isoforms, a significant pool of cellular LKB1 is associated with a chaperone complex consisting of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and the Cdc37 kinase-specific targeting subunit for Hsp90 (48, 49). The LKB1:STRAD:MO25 and LKB1:Cdc37:Hsp90 are likely to form separate complexes because the immunoprecipitation of STRAD or MO25 results in coimmunoprecipitation of LKB1, but not Cdc37 and Hsp90 (J. Boudeau and D.R. Alessi, unpublished observations). It is possible that Hsp90 and Cdc37 may play a role in enabling LKB1 to assemble into a complex with STRAD and MO25 as it is not possible to simply assemble an active LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex by mixing the three individual components together in vitro (29). Hsp90 stabilizes and prevents degradation of LKB1 because treatment of cells with Hsp90 inhibitors induces degradation of LKB1 by the proteasome complex (48, 49).

**ROLE OF PSEUDOKINASES**

Although STRAD is an inactive pseudokinase, it still possesses several conserved motifs found in active protein kinases, including the Gly-rich P-loop motif required for ATP binding to kinases. Interestingly, STRADα was found to bind ATP, ADP, and AMP with relatively high affinity (*K*~d~ of ~30–130 μM) (43).

Mutation of the conserved Gly residues in the P-loop motif on STRADα abolished its ability to bind ATP, but did not affect the ability of STRADα to activate LKB1 or induce its cytoplasmic localization (43). One possibility is that STRADα evolved from an active protein kinase that was capable of phosphorylating and activating LKB1, and despite losing its catalytic activity, STRADα has retained the ability to bind ATP. Attempts at restoring the catalytic activity of STRADα by mutating residues back to those found in active kinases failed to reactivate STRADα (43). The human genome comprises ~50 pseudokinases (10% of the total number of kinases) that lack one or more of the conserved catalytic residues (14). Interestingly, aside from STRADα, a few of the other mammalian pseudokinases that have been studied also interact with catalytically active kinases. The ErbB3 epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor pseudokinase forms heterodimers with other catalytically active members of the ErbB tyrosine kinases, and binding of ErbB3 to these kinases is required for their activation (50, 51). The kinase suppressor of ras (KSR) pseudokinase forms a scaffolding regulatory complex with Raf and regulates signal propagation through the ERK/MAPK pathway (52). The janus kinase (JAK) family of tyrosine kinases possess a pseudokinase domain located next to the catalytically active tyrosine kinase domain. The JAK pseudokinase domain binds to the catalytically active domain and may regulate its activity (53, 54). Thus an emerging theme is that pseudokinases function as key regulators of active protein kinases, and it is likely that interesting information will be learnt from studying the physiological roles of these proteins.

**ACTIVATION OF THE AMP-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE BY LKB1**

Work carried out over the past 20 years has indicated that the AMPK functions as a master regulator of cellular energy metabolism(55). AMPK is switched on during situations in which the cellular level of ATP is depleted and the level of AMP is increased, for example, those triggered by various cellular stresses such as hypoxia/ischemia or muscle contraction/exercise. Activation of AMPK restores cellular energy levels by stimulating catabolic pathways, such as glucose uptake and/or glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation, as well as by inhibiting energy-consuming anabolic processes, such as protein synthesis. AMPK is also activated by metformin, the most widely employed antidiabetic drug, which is thought to exert its blood glucose-lowering effects through its ability to activate AMPK in liver and skeletal muscle (56). The mechanism by which metformin or its closely related analog, phenformin, activates AMPK has not yet been fully established, but it may involve inhibition of ATP production via effects on complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (57). AMPK is a heterotrimeric complex comprising a catalytic AMPKα subunit and regulatory AMPKβ and AMPKγ subunits. AMP activates the AMPK complex by binding to a pair of cystathionine-beta-synthase (CBS) domains, located on the AMPKγ subunit (58), thereby stimulating phosphorylation of Thr172 in the T loop of both mammalian AMPKα catalytic subunits, termed AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 (reviewed in 59 and 60). There has been much interest in the identities of the upstream protein kinase(s) that phosphorylate Thr172, but prior to 2004, despite considerable research, there were no obvious candidates for this enzyme(s).

Although there were clear relatives of LKB1 in *Drosophila* (34) and *C. elegans* (61), the genetic studies undertaken on these enzymes did not yield much information on what the molecular targets of LKB1 may be. The breakthrough was unexpectedly made in budding yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, wherein three kinases termed Elm1, Pak1/Sak1, and Tos3 displayed moderate similarity to LKB1, although they were more closely related to mammalian calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase (CAMKK). There was much excitement in 2004, when elegant genetic studies, reported simultaneously by several groups, suggested that Elm1, Pak1/Sak1, and Tos3 were all capable of phosphorylating the T loop of the Snf1, the homolog of mammalian AMPK (62–64). These fascinating findings prompted studies in mammals to investigate whether LKB1 might be capable of activating AMPK. Indeed, it was found that LKB1 efficiently phosphorylated AMPK in vitro specifically at Thr172, the residue that becomes phosphorylated when cellular ATP levels fall (65–67). The ability of LKB1 to activate AMPK was enhanced over 100-fold if it was present with isoforms of STRAD and MO25 in a complex, demonstrating that these subunits are indeed required for the activation of LKB1 (65). Most importantly, it was found that in cell lines, such as HeLa cells that lack LKB1 expression or *LKB1⁻/⁻* mouse embryonic fibroblasts, AMPK could not be activated by a variety of agonists and stresses (65–67). These included phenformin or the drug 5-aminioimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside (AICAR) that activates AMPK in intact cells by being taken up and converted to AICAR-monophosphate, which mimics the effect of AMP on the AMPK system (68). More recently, mice lacking LKB1 expression in skeletal muscle were found to possess vastly reduced AMPKα2 isoform activity and phosphorylation of Thr172 (24). Moreover, AMPKα2 was not stimulated by AICAR, by phenformin, or by muscle contraction in the LKB1-lacking muscle (24). Two of the most studied processes regulated by AMPK in muscle are its ability to induce glucose uptake (69) and to stimulate fatty acid oxidation through phosphorylating acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) carboxylase-2 (70). In LKB1-deficient muscle, phosphorylation of acetyl CoA carboxylase-2 and glucose uptake, triggered by AICAR or muscle contraction, were profoundly inhibited, thereby supporting a role for the LKB1-AMPK pathway in regulating these processes in muscle (24). It was also observed that muscle contraction induced

**AICAR:**

5-aminioimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside

www.annualreviews.org • LKB1-Signaling Pathways 147a markedly greater rise in the AMP:ATP ratio in LKB1-deficient muscle than in wild-type skeletal muscle (24). This provided the first genetic evidence that the LKB1-AMPK pathway is physiologically linked to regulation and maintenance of cellular energy levels. More recently, it has been demonstrated that mice lacking expression of LKB1 in the liver possess greatly reduced AMPK activity, supporting the notion that LKB1 is a key regulator of AMPK in mammalian tissues (70a). Importantly, this study also demonstrated that the antidiabetic drug metformin no longer reduced blood glucose levels in mice that lacked hepatic expression of LKB1, providing the first direct evidence that LKB1-mediated activation of AMPK in the liver is indeed required for the ability of metformin to lower blood glucose levels (70a).

Although LKB1 is not closely related to any other protein kinase, sequence alignments of kinase catalytic domains indicated that LKB1 does display some sequence similarity to the catalytic domain of AMPK. Significantly, several other upstream protein kinases are also homologous to the downstream kinases that they activate. These include cyclin-dependent kinase 7 that activates other CDK isoforms (71), the 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) that activates AGC family kinases (72), and the WNK (with no lysine kinase) isoforms that are related to the SPAK(STE20/SPS1-related proline-alanine-rich kinase) and OSR1 (oxidative-stress response kinase 1), which they activate (73). These observations may indicate that perhaps the downstream kinases evolved from their upstream regulator or vice versa.

Although much evidence supports the notion that LKB1 is a key regulator of AMPK, it is likely that there are alternative regulators. For example, in LKB1-deficient cells, although AMPK could not be activated by AICAR or phenformin, it possessed significant basal activity and phosphorylation at Thr172 (65, 67). In mouse skeletal muscle lacking LKB1, although the activity of the AMPKα2 isoform of AMPK was virtually abolished, the other isoform AMPKα1 was still significantly active and could be further stimulated with AICAR (24) and phenformin (K. Sakamoto, unpublished results). In cardiac muscle lacking LKB1, AMPKα1 is barely reduced under conditions which AMPKα2 activity is totally ablated (73a). Recent studies have provided compelling evidence that CAMKK isoforms, which, as mentioned above, are more closely related to the yeast Elm1, Pak1/Sak1, and Tos3 activators of Snf1 than LKB1, can function as alternative regulators of AMPK. CAMKK isoforms phosphorylate AMPK in vitro at Thr172 and STO-609, a CAMKK inhibitor [which is not completely specific, but does not inhibit LKB1 (74)], and siRNA-mediated knockdown of CAMKK isoforms inhibit basal AMPK activity in LKB1-deficient cell lines as well as the activation of AMPK, observed in response to agents that elevate Ca²⁺ levels (74–76). CAMKK isoforms are highly expressed in neuronal tissue. K⁺-induced depolarization of rat cerebrocortical slices, which increases Ca²⁺ without affecting ATP levels, was found to activate AMPK in a manner that was inhibited by STO-609, suggesting that CAMKK rather than LKB1 regulates AMPK in Ca²⁺-regulated pathways at least in neuronal tissues (74). It is not yet known whether CAMKK isoforms are involved in phosphorylating the AMPKα1 isoform in the skeletal and cardiac muscle of LKB1-deficient mice. LKB1 can phosphorylate both AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 with similar efficiency in vitro (65). It is possible that the differential cellular localization of AMPK isoforms and upstream activators may play a role in regulating the activation of AMPK isoforms by diverse upstream stimuli.

Thus far, all studies indicate that the LKB1 complex in vitro is not stimulated by AMP, and when the LKB1 complex is assayed after its immunoprecipitation from cell/tissue extracts, it is constitutively active because its activity does not change in cell lines (66, 67, 77)or skeletal and cardiac muscle (73a, 78) under conditions that stimulate AMPK. In vitro studies suggest that binding of AMP to a pair of CBS domains located within the AMPKγ regulatory subunit (58) induces a conformational change that converts AMPK into a better substrate for the LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex (65). This is reminiscent of the mechanism of activation of protein kinase B (PKB, also designated c-Akt) by the upstream kinase PDK1, in insulin-stimulated cells (72). Insulin does not directly activate PDK1, which like LKB1 is constitutively active, but instead leads to the generation of the lipid second-messenger phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) trisphosphate (PIP3), which interacts with PKB/Akt and converts it into a better substrate for PDK1 (72).

**TUMOR SUPPRESSOR PROPERTIES OF LKB1 AND AMPK**

Until the surprising discovery that AMPK activation involved a tumor suppressor, AMPK was mainly considered an enzyme playing a role in controlling metabolic responses that were mainly of relevance to diabetes and exercise physiologists. There was no prior interest in AMPK in the cancer field. On reflection, however, the unique ability of AMPK to directly sense cellular energy places it in an ideal position to ensure that cell division, which is a highly energy-consuming process, only proceeds if cells have sufficient metabolic resources to support a doubling of cell mass.

Recent studies (reviewed in 79) indicate that tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1) and TSC2 tumor suppressor proteins form a complex and play a key role in controlling cell growth by serving as negative regulators of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-signaling pathway and hence of protein synthesis, as summarized in Figure 3. The TSC1-TSC2 complex acts as a GTP-activating protein (GAP) on the mTOR activator, Rheb, a small GTPase. Two of the most well characterized downstream effectors of the mTOR pathway are the p70 S6 kinase (S6K) and the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) translational regulator, but there are likely to be many others (80). In the absence of growth factors the TSC1:TSC2 complex inhibits the mTOR-signaling pathway, and therefore biosynthesis is switched off. Mutations in either TSC1 or TSC2 or other upstream regulators of these proteins, such as the PTEN tumor suppressor, increase the level of the mTOR activator, Rheb-GTP, and lead to the inappropriate stimulation of protein translation and, hence, cell growth (Figure 3). In a seminal study, Guan's laboratory (81) reported that AMPK could inhibit cell proliferation under energy starvation conditions by directly phosphorylating TSC2 and enhancing its ability to switch off mTOR-signaling networks through an as yet undefined mechanism. This study also provided evidence that the ability of AMPK to switch off mTOR signaling by phosphorylation of TSC2, protected cells from apoptosis induced by energy deprivation (81). In addition, this study provided the first indication that the tumor suppressor effects mediated by LKB1 might arise from its ability to regulate the mTOR pathway. This notion was further supported by the finding that in LKB1 knockout cells low cellular ATP conditions failed to suppress the mTOR-signaling pathway (82, 83). Furthermore, hamartomatous gastrointestinal polyps derived from LKB1 mutant mice displayed increased S6K activity, leading Shaw and colleagues (83) to conclude that aberrant mTOR activation is likely to be at the nexus of PJS. Overexpression of LKB1 in A549 cells has also been reported to increase the expression of the PTEN tumor suppressor (84), which metabolizes the PIP3 second messenger that activates the mTOR pathway through its ability to activate PKB (Figure 3). It is important to investigate whether conversely, PTEN levels are reduced in LKB1-deficient cells and whether this leads to increased PKB and mTOR activity. Interestingly, PTEN is

mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin

www.annualreviews.org • LKB1-Signaling Pathways 149
Growth  
factors  

Receptors  

PIP2  
PI3K  
PIP3  

PTEN  

Cowden's  
syndrome  

PKB  

TSC2  
Ser939 Thr1462  

TSC1  

Tuberous  
sclerosis  
Inactive  

LKB1:  
STRAD:  
MO25  

Peutz-Jeghers  
syndrome  

AMPK  

Thr1227 Ser1345  

TSC2  

TSC1  

Active  

Rheb-GDP  
inactive  

Rheb-GTP  
active  

GTP  

mTOR  

S6K  

4E-BP1  

40S rS6  

eIF4E  

Protein synthesis,  
cell growth and viability  

Figure 3  

Model describing the regulation of mTOR pathway by the AMPK and the PKB-signaling pathways. Phosphorylation of TSC2 by PKB after growth factor stimulation induces activation of the Rheb GTPase and, hence, the activation of the mTOR pathway promoting protein synthesis, cell growth, and viability. Phosphorylation of TSC2 by AMPK after ATP depletion results in Rheb inactivation and mTOR inhibition. Tumor suppressors that are lost in the indicated human cancer syndromes are indicated (red); loss of function of TSC1 or TSC2 in tuberous sclerosis or PTEN in Cowden’s syndrome will result in mTOR activation. Loss of LKB1 in PJS prevents the mTOR pathway from becoming inhibited in low-energy conditions. Abbreviations not used in the main text: PIP2, phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; 40S rS6, 40 S ribosomal S6 protein; and eIF4E, elongation factor 4E.
also mutated in an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer disease, termed Cowden's syndrome, which is phenotypically similar to PJS (85). Moreover, mutations in either the TSC1 or TSC2 genes results in tuberous sclerosis, an inherited syndrome that has some similarities to both PJS and Cowden's syndrome (79). In essence, loss of PTEN, LKB1, TSC1, or TSC2 causes inappropriate activation of the mTOR pathway (Figure 3), thereby explaining the link between these tumor suppressors.

It is also possible that activation of AMPK can inhibit cell growth through additional pathways. According to recent reports, glucose deprivation induced AMPK to phosphorylate p53 at Ser15, thereby inducing a cell cycle arrest (86). This study also suggested that persistent activation of AMPK induced cells to undergo a p53-dependent cellular senescence. Overexpression of LKB1 in cell lines that are deficient in LKB1 (G361 or A549) induced expression of several p53-responsive genes, including the p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup> inhibitor of the cyclin-dependent kinases, further implicating that the p53 pathway is controlled by LKB1. Thus, in addition to its effects on mTOR, there may be additional mechanisms by which LKB1 influences cell division (41, 84).

**MEDICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF PJS AND OTHER CANCERS**

The finding that in LKB1-deficient tumors the mTOR-signaling pathway is elevated and not switched off under low-energy conditions suggests that mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin would be effective at inhibiting growth of those cancer cells (87). Because rapamycin is already used clinically to prevent transplant rejection, it should be possible to treat heterozygous *LKB1*<sup>+/−</sup> mice and even PJS patients with rapamycin or one of its derivatives to investigate its potential effect in ameliorating the frequency and severity of tumor formation.

Most sporadic cancers are likely to express LKB1 and, hence, should be capable of switching off the mTOR pathway in response to metabolic stresses that activate AMPK. Thus, if it is possible to induce the activation of AMPK with a drug, this might inhibit proliferation of LKB1-expressing cancer cells. Verhoeven and colleagues (88) have recently investigated this idea and reported that treatment of various cancer cell lines with AICAR prevented proliferation and also inhibited DNA synthesis, lipogenesis, and protein translation. It has also been reported that AICAR inhibited proliferation of HepG2 cells (89). These observations further suggest that the AMPK pathway functions as a cellular energy-sensing checkpoint, enabling growth and proliferation of cells to be coupled to the availability of fuel supplies, which could be exploited for cancer treatment and/or prevention.

A mechanism by which AMPK could be activated in human tumors would be to employ the antitype 2 diabetes drug metformin. A recent pilot small-scale epidemiology, population-based case-control study to address whether diabetics prescribed metformin were protected from developing cancer has been undertaken. This suggested that diabetics who take metformin were 23% less likely to get cancer with the reduction in risk rising to 40% for people who have been taking the drug for a longer period of time (90). This was a preliminary study, and the hypothesis needs to be tested in a more rigorous cohort study with a larger number of subjects. Metformin has been utilized for diabetes treatment for nearly 50 years and has very moderate side effects. Thus metformin could be used therapeutically to prevent cancer quite quickly, without the need for lengthy clinical trials that would be necessary to evaluate a new drug. Interestingly, before it was known that metformin activated AMPK, one study reported that metformin markedly inhibited carcinogen-induced pancreatic cancer in hamster (91). It would be interesting to determine whether

Type 2 diabetes: a condition in which resistance to the effects of insulin results in blood with elevated levels of glucose
the striking effect of metformin in cancer that was reported in this study was mediated through the ability of metformin to stimulate AMPK.

Another physiological mechanism by which AMPK is activated in humans is through exercise. Several studies have reported that exercise is beneficial in the prevention of certain cancers. Large-scale clinical trials have suggested that the incidence of recurrence of colon and breast cancer is reduced in patients who undertake long-term exercise regimes (reviewed in 92 and 93). If exercise does have the beneficial outcome of reducing cancer frequency, this effect is likely to be complex and involve many factors, such as reducing whole-body fat content and improving the immune system. However, for the reasons outlined above, it would also be expected that depletion of whole-body ATP levels in tissues induced by exercise would also raise AMPK activity, which would have the potential to inhibit cell growth.

Detailed molecular analysis of the polyps from *LKB1*+/− mice revealed that the levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) protein were significantly increased (22). Induction of COX-2 has been implicated in promotion of tumor formation and progression (94). Makela and colleagues (95) have reported that treatment of *LKB1*+/− mice with celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor, reduced polyp burden by over 50%, an effect that was even more marked if the celecoxib was administered before tumor onset. In a pilot clinical study, celecoxib was also found to reduce polyp burden in two of the six PJS patients who were treated (95). It will be important to undertake similar studies with mTOR inhibitors and metformin in the future.

**LKB1 FUNCTIONS AS A MASTER UPSTREAM KINASE**

Inspection of the human kinome dendrogram (14) indicated that there is a group of protein kinases highly related to AMPK, termed the AMPK-related kinases (Figure 4). The amino acid sequences of the activation loops in these enzymes are homologous to AMPK, which suggested to us that the LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex might also phosphorylate and activate these enzymes (Figure 4). Previous studies indicated that four members of the AMPK-related kinase subfamily (MARK1, MARK2, MARK3, and MARK4—microtubule affinity-regulating kinases), also known as Par-1 or c-TAK1, play roles in regulating cell polarity (96, 97). However, little or no previous research had been performed on the remaining members of the AMPK-related protein kinases (BRSK1/SAD-A, BRSK2/SAD-B, NUAK1/ARK5, NUAK2/SNARK, QIK/ SIK2, QSK, SIK, MELK, SNRK, NIM1, TSSK1, TSSK2, TSSK3, TSSK4, SSTK, and HUNK). Evidence to date suggests that 12 of these AMPK-related kinases (BRSK1, BRSK2, NUAK1, NUAK2, QIK, QSK, SIK, MARK1, MARK2, MARK3, MARK4, and SNRK) are indeed activated over 50-fold by the LKB1-catalyzed phosphorylation of their T loops and that these enzymes are substantially less active when expressed in LKB1-deficient cells (77, 98). As observed for AMPK, the STRAD and MO25 components are essential for LKB1 to phosphorylate every AMPK-related enzyme. These findings suggest that LKB1 functions as a master kinase, similarly to PDK1 (72), to activate many members of the AMPK-related protein kinase subfamily. In addition, these data suggest that the AMPK-related kinases may mediate some of the physiological effects previously ascribed to LKB1 and that one or more of the AMPK-related kinases may themselves function as tumor suppressors.

A useful observation was that the LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex efficiently phosphorylated a peptide derived from the T loop of NUAK2, termed LKBtide (77), which has been developed into a facile quantitative assay for LKB1 activity (77, 78). Many protein kinases rely on sequences, termed docking sites, lying outside of the catalytic core, which stabilize the interaction between

LKB1 substrates

| LKB1 | 194 | D | L | G | V | A | E | A | L | H | P | F | A | A | D | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | D | T | C | R | T | S | Q | G | S | P | A | F | Q | P | P | E |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| AMPKα1 | 159 | D | F | G | L | S | N | M | M | S | D | G | E | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | F | L | R | T | S | C | G | S | P | N | Y | A | A | P | E |
| AMPKα2 | 157 | D | F | G | L | S | N | M | M | S | D | G | E | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | F | L | R | T | S | C | G | S | P | N | Y | A | A | P | E |
| BRSK1 | 174 | D | F | G | M | A | S | L | Q | V | G | D | S | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | L | L | E | T | S | C | G | S | P | H | Y | A | C | P | E |
| BRSK2 | 159 | D | F | G | M | A | S | L | Q | V | G | D | S | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | L | L | E | T | S | C | G | S | P | H | Y | A | C | P | E |
| NUAK1 | 196 | D | F | G | L | S | N | L | Y | Q | K | D | K | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | F | L | Q | T | F | C | G | S | P | L | Y | A | S | P | E |
| NUAK2 | 193 | D | F | G | L | S | N | L | Y | H | Q | G | K | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | F | L | Q | T | F | C | G | S | P | L | Y | A | S | P | E |
| SIK | 167 | D | F | G | F | G | N | F | Y | K | S | G | E | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | P | L | S | T | W | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| QIK/SIK2 | 160 | D | F | G | F | G | N | F | F | K | S | G | E | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | L | L | A | T | W | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| QSK | 206 | D | F | G | F | S | N | L | F | T | P | G | Q | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | L | L | K | T | W | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| MARK1 | 200 | D | F | G | F | S | N | E | F | T | V | G | N | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | K | L | D | T | F | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| MARK2 | 160 | D | F | G | F | S | N | E | F | T | V | G | N | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | K | L | D | T | F | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| MARK3 | 196 | D | F | G | F | S | N | E | F | T | V | G | G | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | K | L | D | T | F | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| MARK4 | 198 | D | F | G | F | S | N | E | F | T | L | G | S | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | K | L | D | T | F | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| SNRK | 158 | D | F | G | F | S | N | K | F | Q | P | G | K | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | K | L | T | T | S | C | G | S | L | A | Y | S | A | P | E |
| MELK | 150 | D | F | G | L | C | A | K | P | K | G | N | K | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | D | Y | H | L | Q | T | C | C | G | S | L | A | Y | A | A | P | E |
| NIM1 | 214 | D | F | G | F | S | T | V | S | K | K | G | E | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | M | L | N | T | F | C | G | S | P | P | Y | A | A | P | E |
| HUNK | 204 | D | F | G | L | S | N | C | A | G | I | L | G | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | Y | S | D | P | F | S | T | Q | C | G | S | P | A | Y | A | A | P | E |
| TSSK1 | 154 | D | F | S | F | S | K | R | C | L | R | D | D | S | G | R | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | M | A | L | S | K | T | F | C | G | S | P | A | Y | A | A | P | E |
| TSSK2 | 153 | D | F | G | F | S | K | R | C | L | R | D | S | N | G | R | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | I | I | L | S | K | T | F | C | G | S | P | A | A | Y | A | A | P | E |
| TSSK3 | 151 | D | F | G | F | A | K | V | L | P | K | S | H | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | R | E | L | S | O | Q | T | F | C | G | S | T | A | Y | A | A | P | E |
| TSSK4 | 166 | D | F | G | F | A | K | M | V | P | S | N | Q | P | V | G | C | S | P | S | Y | R | Q | V | N | C | S | H | L | S | Q | T | Y | C | G | S | F | A | Y | A | C | P | E |
| SSTK | 154 | D | F | G | F | G | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | -
the kinase and its substrate(s). It is possible that the STRAD and MO25 subunits play a similar role in docking the LKB1 complex to its substrate. However, this role for STRAD and MO25 seems unlikely because these subunits stimulate LKB1 to phosphorylate even the LKBtide peptide, which is probably too short to interact with docking sites. Thus, it would seem that STRAD:MO25 directly activate LKB1.

The MELK, NIM1, and TSSK isoforms of the AMPK-related kinases have the intrinsic ability to autoactivate themselves because they are active and phosphorylated on their T loop when expressed in *E. coli* and therefore may not be controlled by LKB1 (77, 98). Shaw and colleagues (67) have determined the optimal substrate phosphorylation motif for LKB1, employing a degenerate peptide library screen, and found that LKB1 possesses a strong preference to phosphorylate Thr residues, which possess a Leu residue at the –2 position. Interestingly, the 14 AMPK subfamily kinases that are phosphorylated and activated by LKB1 all possess a Leu residue at the –2 position from the T-loop Thr (Figure 4). In contrast, TSSK1, TSSK2, TSSK3, TSSK4, SSTK, and HUNK do not possess such a –2 Leu residue, suggesting one reason why these proteins are not LKB1 substrates. LKB1 itself has a T-loop residue resembling that of AMPK, but it lacks the –2 Leu (Figure 4). LKB1 does not autophosphorylate itself at its T-loop residue, nor is the T-loop Thr of LKB1 phosphorylated in cells or required for the activation of LKB1 by binding to STRAD and MO25 (43). LKB1 may have evolved the unusual mechanism of binding to STRAD and MO25 for its activation in order to bypass the requirement that most kinases display for T-loop phosphorylation. The ability of LKB1 to be regulated in a manner different from the downstream kinases that it controls may be the critical property that enables LKB1 to operate as the upstream kinase for the AMPK-related kinase subfamily.

---

**MARK AND BRSK KINASES: ROLE OF LKB1 IN REGULATING CELL POLARITY**

The counterpart of mammalian LKB1 in *C. elegans* is termed Par-4 (61), and it was originally identified as a member of the maternally expressed *Par* (partitioning defective) gene family, required for establishing cell polarity during the first cycle of *C. elegans* embryogenesis (99). Maternal lethal mutations in the gene encoding *C. elegans* Par-4 have been shown to affect several aspects of cell polarity (100). Mutation of *Drosophila* LKB1 results in defects in anterior-posterior axis formation and epithelial polarity (34). In a mammalian system, the most spectacular evidence that LKB1 also regulates cell polarization came from the observation that activation of LKB1 in single unpolarized epithelial cells resulted in a dramatic repolarization of these cells in which the actin cytoskeleton was remodeled to form an apical brush border and gap junctions (101). These findings indicate that a major role of mammalian LKB1 is to control cell polarity. Thus, gastrointestinal hamartoma formation in PJS patients could result from inappropriate overgrowths of differentiated cells, which have lost their ability to regulate their polarity as a consequence of LKB1 inactivation.

The mechanisms by which LKB1 mediated its effects on cell polarity were at first unclear. Early genetic studies indicated another *Par* gene, a kinase termed Par-1, controlled the partitioning of the *C. elegans* zygote (102). More recently, Par-1 homologues in *Drosophila* (34, 103) and *Xenopus* (104) were also shown to play important roles in regulating cell polarity. Taken together these studies strongly indicate that the Par-1 enzymes are master regulators of cell polarity (96). Although the genetic studies suggested a connection between Par-1 and Par-4, the relationship between these two enzymes was not clear, and one study even suggested that Par-1 might lie upstream of Par-4 (34). In humans, there are four closely related

Par-1 like isoforms MARK1, MARK2, MARK3, and MARK4 (96). The demonstration that MARK isoforms are phosphorylated and activated by LKB1 (77, 105), as discussed above, suggests that LKB1/Par-4 regulates cell polarity by activating MARK/Par-1 isoforms.

Numerous mutations that affect only the C-terminal region of LKB1 have been identified in PJS as well as in other tumors (Figure 1). It was recently reported that several such C-terminal mutants of LKB1 had reduced ability to polarize epithelial cells in overexpression studies, suggesting that the C-terminal noncatalytic domain of LKB1 may have a role in controlling polarity (106). It is not yet known whether these mutants have a specific defect in their ability to activate MARK isoforms. Two mutations of MARK3 have recently been reported in sporadic colorectal cancer. One is a frameshift mutation that is expected to ablate functional MARK3 expression, whereas the other changes Arg173 in the catalytic domain to a Gln residue (107). The effect that this point mutation has on MARK3 catalytic activity or ability to induce polarization of cells has not yet been investigated.

Recently another kinase, TAO1, purified from pig brain, was identified by its ability to phosphorylate the T-loop Thr residue and thereby activate MARK2 (108). Although TAO1 overexpression also activated MARK2 in vivo (108), no genetic evidence indicating how knockout or knockdown of TAO1 affects the activity of MARK family kinases in vivo has been reported. Such evidence may be difficult to acquire because mammalian cells possess three closely related TAO isoforms (14). However, the fact that MARK3 activity is only moderately reduced in *LKB1*^−/−^ cells (77), as well as in LKB1-deficient skeletal and cardiac muscle (K. Sakamoto, unpublished results), supports the notion that there are additional regulators of MARK isoforms. It would be interesting to test whether TAO1, or even CAMKK, could regulate MARK3 and other AMPK-related kinases in LKB1-

deficient cells or tissues. It should be noted that, unlike LKB1 and CAMKK, TAO1 and LKB1 share no obvious amino acid sequence homology and lie in distinct regions of the human kinase dendrogram (14). TAO1 belongs to the STE20 group of kinases and is therefore related to STRADα and STRADβ, but whether this has any significance is not clear.

In mammals, MARK isoforms also phosphorylate Tau, thereby priming it for hyperphosphorylation by other kinases including glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) and Cdk5. These modifications induce the aggregation of Tau into the toxic “neurofibrillary filaments and tangles,” which are the deposits found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (109). Although several kinases phosphorylate Tau at multiple sites to induce the neurofibrillary filaments and tangles, elegant genetic studies performed in *Drosophila* indicate that MARK-mediated phosphorylation of Tau plays a major initiator role in enabling other kinases to phosphorylate Tau (110). These results indicate that drugs that inhibit MARK isoforms or even LKB1 might be useful as therapy for Alzheimer’s disease.

The brain-specific kinase 1 (BRSK1 also known as SAD-A) and BRSK2 (SAD-B) that are activated by LKB1 are mainly expressed in the brain and in low levels in the testis (111). Interestingly, the *C. elegans* BRSK homologue was originally found as a kinase that controlled several aspects of presynaptic differentiation, such as presynaptic vesicle clustering and axon termination (112). More recently, mice lacking both the SAD-A and SAD-B kinases were reported to die at birth because of failure of their neurons to polarize and form axons and dendrites (111). These results suggest that the BRSK kinases may play a specific role in regulating polarization of neuronal cells. A key challenge of future research will be to identify the substrates that MARK and BRSK kinases phosphorylate to regulate cell polarity. UV irradiation has also been reported to stimulate BRSK1 activity and cause its translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus by an

**Alzheimer's disease**: a disorder characterized by the progressive and irreversible loss of nerve cells in specific brain areas

unknown mechanisms, suggesting that BRSK isoforms may have a DNA damage checkpoint function (113).

**OTHER AMPK-RELATED KINASES**

Salt-inducible kinase (SIK) was first cloned from the adrenal glands of rats fed on a high-salt diet (114). SIK mRNA was also induced by membrane depolarization in brain (115), and recent overexpression studies have indicated that SIK may play a role in steroidogenesis (116). The mRNA-expressing QIK (also termed SIK2) was highest in adipose tissue, and in overexpression studies, QIK was reported to phosphorylate the human adapter protein insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1) (117) at the same residue phosphorylated by AMPK (118). Recently, the CREB coactivator protein TORC2 was also found to be phosphorylated at the same sites by QIK and/or AMPK. This modification caused interaction with 14-3-3 proteins and resulted in TORC2 (not related to the mTOR containing complex of the same name) sequestration in the cytoplasm, preventing CREB-dependent gene transcription (70a, 119). Consistent with this, in mice that lack LKB1 expression in the liver, TORC2 was localized within the nucleus and not phosphorylated at the QIK/AMPK sites (70a). QIK activity was also reported to be inhibited by agonists that increased cyclic-AMP levels (119). In other overexpression studies, NUAK1 (ARK5) was shown to suppress apoptosis induced by some stimuli, including nutrient starvation (120). Furthermore, it has been claimed that Akt/PKB phosphorylated NUAK1 at a C-terminal site outside of the catalytic domain, leading to a threefold activation of the enzyme (121). NUAK2 (SNARK) activity was reportedly stimulated by glucose starvation of cells (121, 122). Expression of NUAK2 was also found to be upregulated by the tumor necrosis factor receptor in apoptosis-resistant tumor cell lines (123). Cells with reduced expression of NUAK2 displayed lower motility and invasiveness in response to CD95 engagement, suggesting that NUAK2 plays a role in protecting cancer cells from apoptosis and that inhibitors of NUAK2 might be useful for the treatment of certain apoptosis-resistant tumors (123). RNAi-mediated knockdown of QSK in *Drosophila* cells resulted in mitotic defects that included spindle and chromosome alignment abnormalities, indicating that this enzyme might play a crucial role in regulating cell proliferation (124). SNRK is only expressed in the testis, and its function is unknown, but it may play a role in regulating spermatogenesis and/or sperm motility (98). Testis, in addition to expressing the usual 50-kDa species of LKB1, also expresses a faster migrating 48-kDa species that is likely to represent a C-terminal splice variant (24). Interestingly, male LKB1 hypomorphic mice, which express 10-fold reduced levels of LKB1 and also lack the 48-kDa splice variant of LKB1, are sterile (24). It would be interesting to determine whether SNRK or another AMPK subfamily enzyme was specifically controlled by the 48-kDa splice variant of LKB1 and also to characterize in more detail spermatogenesis and/or sperm motility in LKB1 hypomorphic mice.

**REGULATION OF AMPK-RELATED KINASES**

The AMPK-related kinases are not activated in response to AICAR, phenformin, or other stresses that stimulate AMPK itself (77, 78). Recently, the tandem affinity purification strategy has been deployed to identify proteins that interact with AMPKα as well as with 12 other AMPK-related kinases activated by LKB1 (125). The AMPKβ and AMPKγ regulatory subunits, required for activation of AMPK by LKB1 in low cellular energy conditions when AMP levels are elevated, were associated only with AMPKα and not with any of the other AMPK-related kinases examined (125). This finding may explain why AMPK-related kinases are not stimulated by AICAR, phenformin, or other stresses, as they
lack the subunits to sense AMP concentrations. An important implication of the finding that AMPK-related kinases are not activated by low cellular energy conditions is that the beneficial antidiabetic as well as the antiproliferative effects of these agonists, discussed above, are probably mediated through the activation of AMPK per se, rather than through one of the other AMPK-related kinases. In future studies, it will be important to define the physiological stimuli that regulate each of the AMPK-related kinases and to identify the physiologically relevant targets that these enzymes phosphorylate. The finding that AMPK-related kinases phosphorylate the same set of peptide substrates at different relative rates (77) suggests that these enzymes have distinct substrate preferences and will selectively phosphorylate different substrates in vivo. It has also been recently demonstrated that certain 14-3-3 isoforms can bind directly to the T-loop Thr residue of QSK and SIK after they are phosphorylated by LKB1 (125). Moreover, binding of 14-3-3 to QSK and SIK enhanced their catalytic activity two- to threefold and was also required for the cytoplasmic localization of SIK and for localization of QSK to undefined punctate structures within the cytoplasm (125).

**CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE**

Eighty-three years have now elapsed since Dr. Peutz first described PJS (1). In the last seven years since LKB1 was identified as the causative gene of PJS (11), remarkable progress has been made in the biochemical and genetic analysis of LKB1 in human, mice, and model organisms. These studies indicate that LKB1 functions as a tumor suppressor by not only regulating cell division, but also by controlling polarity and enabling cell growth and division to be coupled to cellular energy levels. The findings outlined in this review also provide unexpected insights for novel therapies for the prevention and treatment of PJS and possibly other cancers. For example, drugs, such as metformin, or exercise that activate AMPK might be used to induce a cell cycle arrest, fooling cancer cells (which express LKB1) into thinking that they lack sufficient energy resources to divide. The finding that cancer cells lacking LKB1 are unable to switch off the mTOR pathway under conditions of low cellular energy suggests that inhibitors of mTOR might be effective at treating PJS patients and other LKB1-deficient tumors, such as lung adenocarcinomas. LKB1 does not represent an obvious drug target itself because drugs that inhibited LKB1 might be expected to induce tumors. However, it could be envisaged that inhibiting LKB1 or AMPK might make cancer cells more susceptible to apoptosis under low-energy conditions, for example hypoxic situations found in tumors or following chemotherapy. The findings that LKB1 hypomorphic mice express markedly lower levels of LKB1 (24) and do not appear to develop detectable tumors by age six months (K. Sakamoto, unpublished findings) may also indicate that a drug that inhibited LKB1 would not cause overt cancer. It would be interesting to test whether the LKB1 hypomorphic animals are protected from developing tumors. Other challenges for future research will be to characterize in greater detail the molecular mechanism by which AMPK-related kinases are controlled and to identify cellular substrates for these enzymes. These studies should provide deeper insight into how the tumor suppressor effects of LKB1 are mediated. Further investigation is also required to understand the roles that phosphorylation, prenylation, and the C-terminal domain of LKB1 play. Apparently, a significant number of inherited forms of PJS found in certain families do not exhibit mutations in the LKB1 gene (126, 127). If this is indeed the case, there could be other causative loci for PJS. Identifying these genes is of crucial importance because these are likely to lie in the same signaling network as LKB1.
SUMMARY POINTS

1. LKB1 is a protein kinase that functions as a tumor suppressor, and its mutation in humans causes the rare inherited Peutz-Jeghers cancer syndrome.
2. LKB1 is activated in an unusual manner that involves forming a complex with an inactive pseudokinase termed STRAD and an armadillo repeat scaffolding protein MO25.
3. LKB1 phosphorylates the T loop of at least 14 related protein kinases that belong to the AMPK subfamily, which includes isoforms of AMPK—an important regulator of cellular energy levels—as well as the MARK and BRSK enzymes that control cell polarity.
4. The ability of AMPK to be activated in response to low cellular energy levels depends upon LKB1 in cells and tissues.
5. LKB1 is constitutively switched on in cells, and it is believed that under conditions of low cellular energy and stress, the binding of AMP to a regulatory subunit of AMPK induces a conformational change that permits the phosphorylation and activation of AMPK by LKB1.
6. The LKB1-AMPK pathway functions as a cellular energy-sensing checkpoint, enabling growth and proliferation of cells to be coupled to the availability of fuel supplies, which could be exploited for cancer treatment and/or prevention.
7. Activation of the AMPK by the antidiabetes drug metformin or exercise in humans may reduce the frequency of cancer.

FUTURE ISSUES TO BE RESOLVED

1. The substrates that the AMPK-related kinases phosphorylate and the role that these enzymes play in mediating the tumor suppressor effects of LKB1 are needed to provide insights into the fundamental mechanism by which LKB1 regulates proliferation and polarity as well as other processes that it controls. This information is relevant to the general understanding of cancer and may provide insights for the development of new approaches to anticancer treatments.
2. A three-dimensional structural analysis of the LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex is needed to provide fundamental information on how LKB1 is activated by binding to a pseudokinase as well as functional insights into how this complex may operate in vivo.
3. The roles that phosphorylation, prenylation, and the C-terminal domain of LKB1 play in regulating its cellular functions should be determined.
4. A putative “second” gene has been postulated to be mutated in a significant number of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients, who do not possess obvious mutations in LKB1, and this second gene should be found.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Association for International Cancer Research, Diabetes UK, the Medical Research Council, the Moffat Charitable Trust, as well as the pharmaceutical companies that support the Division of Signal Transduction Therapy (AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck & Co. Inc., Merck KGaA, and Pfizer), which have generously supported our research on LKB1. We also thank Jeremy Thorner for helpful comments on the manuscript.

# LITERATURE CITED

1. Peutz JLA. 1921. *Ned. Maandschr. Geneesk.* 10:134–46
2. Jeghers H. 1944. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 231:122–19
3. Jeghers H, McKusick VA, Katz KH. 1949. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 241:992–1005
4. Hemminki A. 1999. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 55:735–50
5. Tomlinson IP, Houlston RS. 1997. *J. Med. Genet.* 34:1007–11
6. Westerman AM, Entius MM, de Baar E, Boor PP, Koole R, et al. 1999. *Lancet* 353:1211–15
7. Giardiello FM, Brensinger JD, Tersmette AC, Goodman SN, Petersen GM, et al. 2000. *Gastroenterology* 119:1447–53
8. Mallory SB, Stough DB 4th. 1987. *Dermatol. Clin.* 5:221–30
9. Boardman LA, Couch FJ, Burgart LJ, Schwartz D, Berry R, et al. 2000. *Hum. Mutation* 16:23–30
10. Hemminki A, Tomlinson I, Markie D, Jarvinen H, Sistonen P, et al. 1997. *Nat. Genet.* 15:87–90
11. Hemminki A, Markie D, Tomlinson I, Avizienyte E, Roth S, et al. 1998. *Nature* 391:184–87
12. Su JY, Erikson E, Maller JL. 1996. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:14430–37
13. Jenne DE, Reimann H, Nezu J, Friedel W, Loff S, et al. 1998. *Nat. Genet.* 18:38–43
14. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S. 2002. *Science* 298:1912–34
15. Sanchez-Cespedes M, Parrella P, Esteller M, Nomoto S, Trink B, et al. 2002. *Cancer Res.* 62:3659–62
16. Fernandez P, Carretero J, Medina PP, Jimenez AI, Rodriguez-Perales S, et al. 2004. *Oncogene* 23:5084–91
17. Carretero J, Medina PP, Pio R, Montuenga LM, Sanchez-Cespedes M. 2004. *Oncogene* 23:4037–40
18. Tiainen M, Ylikorkala A, Makela TP. 1999. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96:9248–51
19. Shibata H, Toyama K, Shioya H, Ito M, Hirota M, et al. 1997. *Science* 278:120–23
20. Jishage KI, Nezu JI, Kawase Y, Iwata T, Watanabe M, et al. 2002. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99:8903–8
21. Miyoshi H, Nakau M, Ishikawa TO, Seldin MF, Oshima M, Taketo MM. 2002. *Cancer Res.* 62:2261–66
22. Rossi DJ, Ylikorkala A, Korsisaari N, Salovaara R, Luukko K, et al. 2002. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99:12327–32
23. Bardeesy N, Sinha M, Hezel AF, Signoretti S, Hathaway NA, et al. 2002. *Nature* 419:162–67
24. Sakamoto K, McCarthy A, Smith D, Green KA, Hardie DG, et al. 2005. *EMBO J.* 24:1810–20

25. Nakau M, Miyoshi H, Seldin MF, Imamura M, Oshima M, Taketo MM. 2002. *Cancer Res.* 62:4549–53

26. Ylikorkala A, Rossi DJ, Korsisaari N, Luukko K, Alitalo K, et al. 2001. *Science* 293:1323–26

27. Sapkota GP, Boudeau J, Deak M, Kieloch A, Morrice N, Alessi DR. 2002. *Biochem. J.* 362:481–90

28. Sapkota GP, Kieloch A, Lizcano JM, Lain S, Arthur JS, et al. 2001. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:19469–82

29. Boudeau J, Baas AF, Deak M, Morrice NA, Kieloch A, et al. 2003. *EMBO J.* 22:5102–14

30. Collins SP, Reoma JL, Gamm DM, Uhler MD. 2000. *Biochem. J.* 345 (Part 3):673–80

31. Sapkota GP, Deak M, Kieloch A, Morrice N, Goodarzi AA, et al. 2002. *Biochem. J.* 368:507–16

32. Fernandes N, Sun Y, Chen S, Paul P, Shaw RJ, et al. 2005. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:15158–64

33. Scott JW, Norman DG, Hawley SA, Kontogiannis L, Hardie DG. 2002. *J. Mol. Biol.* 317:309–23

34. Martin SG, St Johnston D. 2003. *Nature* 421:379–84

35. Baas AF, Boudeau J, Sapkota GP, Smit L, Medema R, et al. 2003. *EMBO J.* 22:3062–72

36. Brajenovic M, Joberty G, Kuster B, Bouwmeester T, Drewes G. 2003. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:12804–11

37. Miyamoto H, Matsushiro A, Nozaki M. 1993. *Mol. Reprod. Dev.* 34:1–7

38. Karos M, Fischer R. 1999. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* 260:510–21

39. Nozaki M, Onishi Y, Togashi S, Miyamoto H. 1996. *DNA Cell Biol.* 15:505–9

40. Smith CM, Radzio-Andzelm E, Madhusudan, Akamine P, Taylor SS. 1999. *Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.* 71:313–41

41. Tiainen M, Vaahtomeri K, Ylikorkala A, Makela TP. 2002. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 11:1497–504

42. Nezu J, Oku A, Shimane M. 1999. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 261:750–55

43. Boudeau J, Scott JW, Resta N, Deak M, Kieloch A, et al. 2004. *J. Cell Sci.* 117:6365–75

44. Smith DP, Rayter SI, Niederlander C, Spicer J, Jones CM, Ashworth A. 2001. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 10:2869–77

45. Boudeau J, Sapkota G, Alessi DR. 2003. *FEBS Lett.* 546:159–65

46. Songyang Z, Fanning AS, Fu C, Xu J, Marfatia SM, et al. 1997. *Science* 275:73–77

47. Milburn CC, Boudeau J, Deak M, Alessi DR, van Aalten DM. 2004. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 11:193–200

48. Boudeau J, Deak M, Lawlor MA, Morrice NA, Alessi DR. 2003. *Biochem. J.* 370:849–57

49. Nony P, Gaude H, Rossel M, Fournier L, Rouault JP, Billaud M. 2003. *Oncogene* 22:9165–75

50. Holbro T, Beerli RR, Maurer F, Koziczak M, Barbas CF 3rd, Hynes NE. 2003. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100:8933–38

51. Berger MB, Mendrola JM, Lemmon MA. 2004. *FEBS Lett.* 569:332–36

52. Roy F, Laberge G, Douziech M, Ferland-McCollough D, Therrien M. 2002. *Genes Dev.* 16:427–38

53. Luo H, Rose P, Barber D, Hanratty WP, Lee S, et al. 1997. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 17:1562–71

54. Saharinen P, Vihinen M, Silvennoinen O. 2003. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 14:1448–59

55. Hardie DG, Scott JW, Pan DA, Hudson ER. 2003. *FEBS Lett.* 546:113–20

56. Zhou GC, Myers R, Li Y, Chen YL, Shen XL, et al. 2001. *J. Clin. Investig.* 108:1167–74

57. Zou MH, Kirkpatrick SS, Davis BJ, Nelson JS, Wiles WG 4th, et al. 2004. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:43940–51

58. Scott JW, Hawley SA, Green KA, Anis M, Stewart G, et al. 2004. *J. Clin. Investig.* 113:274–84

59. Hardie DG. 2004. *J. Cell Sci.* 117:5479–87  
60. Carling D. 2004. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 29:18–24  
61. Watts JL, Morton DG, Bestman J, Kemphues KJ. 2000. *Development* 127:1467–75  
62. Nath N, McCartney RR, Schmidt MC. 2003. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 23:3909–17  
63. Hong SP, Leiper FC, Woods A, Carling D, Carlson M. 2003. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100:8839–43  
64. Sutherland CM, Hawley SA, McCartney RR, Leech A, Stark MJ, et al. 2003. *Curr. Biol.* 13:1299–305  
65. Hawley SA, Boudeau J, Reid JL, Mustard KJ, Udd L, et al. 2003. *J. Biol.* 2:28  
66. Woods A, Johnstone SR, Dickerson K, Leiper FC, Fryer LG, et al. 2003. *Curr. Biol.* 13:2004–8  
67. Shaw RJ, Kosmatka M, Bardeesy N, Hurley RL, Witters LA, et al. 2004. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101:3329–35  
68. Corton JM, Gillespie JG, Hawley SA, Hardie DG. 1995. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 229:558–65  
69. Winder WW, Hardie DG. 1999. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* 277:E1–10  
70. Saha AK, Ruderman NB. 2003. *Mol. Cell. Biochem.* 253:65–70  
70a. Shaw RJ, Lamina KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N, et al. 2005. *Science* 310:1642–46  
71. Lolli G, Johnson LN. 2005. *Cell Cycle* 4:572–77  
72. Mora A, Komander D, Van Aalten DM, Alessi DR. 2004. *Semin. Cell. Dev. Biol.* 15:161–70  
73. Vitari AC, Deak M, Morrice NA, Alessi DR. 2005. *Biochem. J.* 391:17–24  
73a. Sakamoto K, Zarrinpashneh E, Budas GR, Pouleur AC, Dutta A, et al. 2006. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* In press  
74. Hawley SA, Pan DA, Mustard KJ, Ross L, Bain J, et al. 2005. *Cell Metab.* 2:9–19  
75. Hurley RL, Anderson KA, Franzone JM, Kemp BE, Means AR, Witters LA. 2005. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:29060–66  
76. Woods A, Dickerson K, Heath R, Hong SP, Momcilovic M, et al. 2005. *Cell Metab.* 2:21–33  
77. Lizcano JM, Goransson O, Toth R, Deak M, Morrice NA, et al. 2004. *EMBO J.* 23:833–43  
78. Sakamoto K, Goransson O, Hardie DG, Alessi DR. 2004. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* 287:E310–17  
79. Inoki K, Corradetti MN, Guan KL. 2005. *Nat. Genet.* 37:19–24  
80. Pan DJ, Dong JX, Zhang Y, Gao XS. 2004. *Trends Cell Biol.* 14:78–85  
81. Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. 2003. *Cell* 115:577–90  
82. Corradetti MN, Inoki K, Bardeesy N, DePinho RA, Guan KL. 2004. *Genes Dev.* 18:1533–38  
83. Shaw RJ, Bardeesy N, Manning BD, Lopez L, Kosmatka M, et al. 2004. *Cancer Cell* 6:91–99  
84. Jimenez AI, Fernandez P, Dominguez O, Dopazo A, Sanchez-Cespedes M. 2003. *Cancer Res.* 63:1382–88  
85. Liaw D, Marsh DJ, Li J, Dahia PL, Wang SI, et al. 1997. *Nat. Genet.* 16:64–67  
86. Jones RG, Plas DR, Kubek S, Buzzai M, Mu J, et al. 2005. *Mol. Cell* 18:283–93  
87. Law BK. 2005. *Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol.* 56:47–60  
88. Swinnen JV, Beckers A, Brusselmans K, Organe S, Segers J, et al. 2005. *Cancer Res.* 65:2441–48  
89. Imamura K, Ogura T, Kishimoto A, Kaminishi M, Esumi H. 2001. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 287:562–67  
90. Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR, Morris AD. 2005. *Br. Med. J.* 330:1304–5

91. Schneider MB, Matsuzaki H, Haorah J, Ulrich A, Standop J, et al. 2001. *Gastroenterology* 120:1263–70

92. Willer A. 2003. *Onkologie* 26:283–89

93. Slattery ML. 2004. *Sports Med.* 34:239–52

94. Dempke W, Rie C, Grothey A, Schmoll HJ. 2001. *J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.* 127:411–17

95. Udd L, Katajisto P, Rossi DJ, Lepisto A, Lahesmaa AM, et al. 2004. *Gastroenterology* 127:1030–37

96. Drewes G. 2004. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 29:548–55

97. Tassan JP, Le Goff X. 2004. *Biol. Cell* 96:193–99

98. Jaleel M, McBride A, Lizcano JM, Deak M, Toth R, et al. 2005. *FEBS Lett.* 579:1417–23

99. Kemphues KJ, Priess JR, Morton DG, Cheng NS. 1988. *Cell* 52:311–20

100. Morton DG, Roos JM, Kemphues KJ. 1992. *Genetics* 130:771–90

101. Baas AF, Kuipers J, van der Wel NN, Batlle E, Koerten HK, et al. 2004. *Cell* 116:457–66

102. Guo S, Kemphues KJ. 1995. *Cell* 81:611–20

103. Shulman JM, Benton R, St Johnston D. 2000. *Cell* 101:377–88

104. Ossipova O, Bardeesy N, DePinho RA, Green JB. 2003. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5:889–94

105. Spicer J, Rayter S, Young N, Elliott R, Ashworth A, Smith D. 2003. *Oncogene* 22:4752–56

106. Forcet C, Etienne-Manneville S, Gaude H, Fournier L, Debilly S, et al. 2005. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 14:1283–92

107. Parsons DW, Wang TL, Samuels Y, Bardelli A, Cummins JM, et al. 2005. *Nature* 436:792

108. Timm T, Li XY, Biernat J, Jiao J, Mandelkow E, et al. 2003. *EMBO J.* 22:5090–101

109. Drewes G, Ebneth A, Preuss U, Mandelkow EM, Mandelkow E. 1997. *Cell* 89:297–308

110. Nishimura I, Yang Y, Lu B. 2004. *Cell* 116:671–82

111. Kishi M, Pan YA, Crump JG, Sanes JR. 2005. *Science* 307:929–32

112. Crump JG, Zhen M, Jin Y, Bargmann CI. 2001. *Neuron* 29:115–29

113. Lu R, Niida H, Nakanishi M. 2004. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:31164–70

114. Wang Z, Takemori H, Halder SK, Nonaka Y, Okamoto M. 1999. *FEBS Lett.* 453:135–39

115. Feldman JD, Vician L, Crispino M, Hoe W, Baudry M, Herschman HR. 2000. *J. Neurochem.* 74:2227–38

116. Takemori H, Doi J, Horike N, Katoh Y, Min L, et al. 2003. *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 85:397–400

117. Horike N, Takemori H, Katoh Y, Doi J, Min L, et al. 2003. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:18440–47

118. Jakobsen SN, Hardie DG, Morrice N, Tornqvist HE. 2001. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:46912–16

119. Screaton RA, Conkright MD, Katoh Y, Best JL, Canettieri G, et al. 2004. *Cell* 119:61–74

120. Suzuki A, Kusakai G, Kishimoto A, Lu J, Ogura T, Esumi H. 2003. *Oncogene* 22:6177–82

121. Suzuki A, Kusakai G, Kishimoto A, Lu J, Ogura T, et al. 2003. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:48–53

122. Lefebvre DL, Bai Y, Shahmolkky N, Sharma M, Poon R, et al. 2001. *Biochem. J.* 355:297–305

123. Legembre P, Schickel R, Barnhart BC, Peter ME. 2004. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:46742–47

124. Bettencourt-Dias M, Giet R, Sinka R, Mazumdar A, Lock WG, et al. 2004. *Nature* 432:980–87

125. Al-Hakim AK, Goransson O, Deak M, Toth R, Campbell DG, et al. 2005. *J. Cell Sci.* 118:5661–73

126. Buchet-Poyau K, Mehenni H, Radhakrishna U, Antonarakis SE. 2002. *Cytogenet. Genome Res.* 97:171–78

127. Resta N, Stella A, Susca FC, Di Giacomo M, Forleo G, et al. 2002. *Hum. Mutat.* 20:78–79

128. Amos CI, Keitheri-Cheteri MB, Sabripour M, Wei C, McGarrity TJ, et al. 2004. *J. Med. Genet.* 41:327–33

129. Connolly DC, Katabuchi H, Cliby WA, Cho KR. 2000. *Am. J. Pathol.* 156:339–45  
130. Hastings ML, Resta N, Traum D, Stella A, Guanti G, Krainer AR. 2005. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 12:54–59  
131. Deleted in proof  
132. Deleted in proof  
133. Schumacher V, Vogel T, Leube B, Driemel C, Goecke T, et al. 2005. *J. Med. Genet.* 42:428–35  
134. Shinmura K, Goto M, Tao H, Shimizu S, Otsuki Y, et al. 2005. *Clin. Genet.* 67:81–86  
135. Deleted in proof  
136. Deleted in proof  
137. Tate G, Suzuki T, Mitsuya T. 2003. *Acta Med. Okayama* 57:305–8  
138. Trojan J, Brieger A, Raedle J, Roth WK, Zeuzem S. 1999. *Am. J. Gastroenterol.* 94:257–61  
139. Wei C, Amos CI, Rashid A, Sabripour M, Nations L, et al. 2003. *J. Histochem. Cytochem.* 51:1665–72

# Contents

Wanderings of a DNA Enzymologist: From DNA Polymerase to Viral Latency  
**I. Robert Lehman** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Structure and Mechanism of the Hsp90 Molecular Chaperone Machinery  
*Laurence H. Pearl and Chrisostomos Prodromou* ………………………………………… 271  

Biochemistry of Mammalian Peroxisomes Revisited  
*Ronald J.A. Wanders and Hans R. Waterham* ………………………………………… 295  

Protein Misfolding, Functional Amyloid, and Human Disease  
*Fabrizio Chiti and Christopher M. Dobson* ………………………………………… 333  

Obesity-Related Derangements in Metabolic Regulation  
*Deborah M. Muoio and Christopher B. Newgard* ………………………………………… 367  

Cold-Adapted Enzymes  
*Khawar Sohail Siddiqui and Ricardo Cavicchioli* ………………………………………… 403  

The Biochemistry of Sirtuins  
*Anthony A. Sauve, Cynthia Wolberger, Vern L. Schramm, and Jef D. Boeke* ………………………………………… 435  

Dynamic Filaments of the Bacterial Cytoskeleton  
*Katharine A. Michie and Jan Löwe* ………………………………………… 467  

The Structure and Function of Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase  
*Chantal Autexier and Neal F. Lue* ………………………………………… 493  

Relating Protein Motion to Catalysis  
*Sharon Hammes-Schiffer and Stephen J. Benkovic* ………………………………………… 519  

Animal Cytokinesis: From Parts List to Mechanisms  
*Ulrike S. Eggert, Timothy J. Mitchison, and Christine M. Field* ………………………………………… 543  

Mechanisms of Site-Specific Recombination  
*Nigel D.F. Grindley, Katrine L. Whiteson, and Phoebe A. Rice* ………………………………………… 567  

Axonal Transport and Alzheimer’s Disease  
*Gorazd B. Stokin and Lawrence S.B. Goldstein* ………………………………………… 607  

Asparagine Synthetase Chemotherapy  
*Nigel G.J. Richards and Michael S. Kilberg* ………………………………………… 629  

Domains, Motifs, and Scaffolds: The Role of Modular Interactions in the Evolution and Wiring of Cell Signaling Circuits  
*Roby P. Bhattacharyya, Attila Reményi, Brian J. Yeh, and Wendell A. Lim* ………………………………………… 655  

Ribonucleotide Reductases  
*Pär Nordlund and Peter Reichard* ………………………………………… 681  

Introduction to the Membrane Protein Reviews: The Interplay of Structure, Dynamics, and Environment in Membrane Protein Function  
*Jonathan N. Sachs and Donald M. Engelman* ………………………………………… 707  

Relations Between Structure and Function of the Mitochondrial  
ADP/ATP Carrier  
H. Nury, C. Dahout-Gonzalez, V. Trézéguet, G.J.M. Lauquin,  
G. Brandolin, and E. Pebay-Peyroula ………………………………………… 713  

G Protein–Coupled Receptor Rhodopsin  
Krzysztof Palczewski ……………………………………………………………… 743  

Transmembrane Traffic in the Cytochrome $b_{6} f$ Complex  
William A. Cramer, Huamin Zhang, Jiusheng Yan, Genji Kurisu,  
and Janet L. Smith ……………………………………………………………… 769  

INDEXES  

Subject Index …………………………………………………………………… 791  
Author Index …………………………………………………………………… 825  

ERRATA  

An online log of corrections to *Annual Review of Biochemistry* chapters (if any, 1977 to  
the present) may be found at http://biochem.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
