
J Pharmacol Sci 100, 495–512 (2006)

Journal of Pharmacological Sciences  
© 2006 The Japanese Pharmacological Society

Review

# Water Channels and Zymogen Granules in Salivary Glands

Yasuko Ishikawa${}^{1*}$, Gota Cho${}^{2}$, Zhenfang Yuan${}^{3}$, Mariusz T. Skowronski${}^{4}$, Yan Pan${}^{5}$, and Hajime Ishida${}^{1\#}$

Departments of ${}^{1}$Pharmacology and ${}^{2}$Dental Anesthesiology, The University of Tokushima School of Dentistry,  
3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8504, Japan  

Departments of ${}^{3}$Internal Medicine and ${}^{5}$Pharmacology, Peking University First Hospital, Xishiku Street, Xicheng District,  
Beijing, 100034, China  

${}^{4}$Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warmia and Mazury,  
Oczapowskiego 1A 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland  

Received April 5, 2006

**Abstract.** Salivary secretion occurs in response to stimulation by neurotransmitters released from autonomic nerve endings. The molecular mechanisms underlying the secretion of water, a main component of saliva, from salivary glands are not known; the plasma membrane is a major barrier to water transport. A 28-kDa integral membrane protein, distributed in highly water-permeable tissues, was identified as a water channel protein, aquaporin (AQP). Thirteen AQPs (AQP0–AQP12) have been identified in mammals. AQP5 is localized in lipid rafts under unstimulated conditions and translocates to the apical plasma membrane in rat parotid glands upon stimulation by muscarinic agonists. The importance of increases in intracellular calcium concentration $[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]_{i}$ and the nitric oxide synthase and protein kinase G signaling pathway in the translocation of AQP5 is reviewed in section I. Signals generated by the activation of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ mobilizing receptors simultaneously trigger and regulate exocytosis. Zymogen granule exocytosis occurs under the control of essential process, stimulus-secretion coupling, in salivary glands. $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signaling is a principal signal in both protein and water secretion from salivary glands induced by cholinergic stimulation. On the other hand, the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/cAMP-dependent protein kinase system has a major role in zymogen granule exocytosis without significant increases in $[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]_{i}$. In section II, the mechanisms underlying the control of salivary protein secretion and its dysfunction are reviewed.

**Keywords:** aquaporin, lipid raft, zymogen granule, supersensitivity, desensitization

---

Introduction ..... 496  
I. Water secretion from salivary glands ..... 496  
1. Aquaporin (AQP) water channel proteins in salivary glands ..... 496  
   1) Structure of AQP5 water channel  
   2) Localization of AQP5 with lipid rafts in rat parotid gland cells  
   3) Translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts to the apical plasma membrane (APM) and its dissociation to non-rafts within the APM ..... 498  
   4) Intracellular signals for the translocation of AQP5 toward the APM ..... 498  

II. Protein secretion from salivary glands ..... 500  
1. Role of salivary gland membrane receptors in protein secretion ..... 500  
   1) Exocytosis regulated by a membrane receptor system in salivary glands  
   2) Exocytic machinery in salivary glands  
   3) Intracellular signals in stimulation-secretion coupling in salivary glands  
2. Altered protein secretion in salivary glands ..... 506  
   1) Functional alterations of membrane receptors in salivary glands  
   2) Post-receptor mechanisms underlying the supersensitivity and desensitization of protein secretion in salivary glands  

Concluding remarks ..... 507  

*Corresponding author. isikawa@dent.tokushima-u.ac.jp  
# Professor Emeritus at the University of Tokushima  
Published online in J-STAGE  
DOI:10.1254/jphs.CRJ06007X  

Invited article

Introduction

Mammalian salivary glands are composed of the major paired glands, parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands, and hundreds of minor salivary glands scattered over most of the oral mucosa. All these salivary glands are innervated by the autonomic nervous system. Parasympathetic nerves innervate all of the major and minor salivary glands, demonstrating that parasympathetic innervation has a role in the control of the salivary gland function. Parasympathetic nerves that innervate the submandibular and sublingual glands are derived from the superior salivary nucleus, whereas parasympathetic nerves that innervate the parotid glands are derived from the inferior salivary nucleus. Sympathetic nerves innervate the parotid and submandibular glands and are derived from the superior cervical ganglion. Activation of M₃ muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (M₃ mAChRs) by ACh released from parasympathetic nerve endings and pilocarpine and cevimeline produces the largest increase in fluid flow rates in salivary glands and a modest increase in salivary protein secretion (1). Norepinephrine released from sympathetic nerve endings acts at both α- and β-adrenoceptors (β-ADRs) in parotid and submandibular glands. Activation of β-ADRs induces the secretion of the salivary proteins contained in zymogen granules by exocytosis, whereas activation of α-ADRs increases modest fluid secretion (2). Salivary glands also secrete saliva as resting saliva even under the resting conditions. Dopamine (3), substance P (4), vasoactive intestinal peptide (5), histamine (6), bradykinin (7), γ-aminobutyric acid (8), and benzodiazepine (9) act at their respective receptors and contribute to regulate salivary secretion. Acinar cells in the salivary glands generate and secrete primary saliva containing isotonic plasma-like electrolyte concentrations, proteins in secretory granules, and water. The primary saliva is subsequently modified by reabsorption and secretion of electrolytes and water as it passes along the duct, resulting in the generation of a hypotonic solution, saliva (10, 11). Amylase and mucin, major salivary proteins, are synthesized in the parotid and sublingual glands, respectively, and both the proteins are synthesized in the submandibular glands. Salivary proteins are stored in zymogen granules in the acinar cells of these salivary glands and secreted by exocytosis, the fusion of zymogen granules with the apical plasma membranes (APMs) of the salivary glands. Zymogen granule exocytosis in the salivary glands is the called regulated exocytosis, because it is tightly regulated by intracellular signals produced via plasma membrane receptors, and can be distinguished from the unregulated exocytosis in which integral membrane proteins are delivered to the plasma membranes for the secretion of various substances.

Saliva has important roles in the function of the oral cavity and the protection of the oral mucosa and gastrointestinal epithelium. Saliva in the oral cavity functions in mastication, digestion, swallowing, speech, taste, denture holding, and it has anticaries activity, antihalitosis activity, and anti-infective activity. Based on the presence of secretory immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgG, IgM, lysozyme, peroxidase, lactoferrin, histatin, epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, nerve growth factor, and endorphin in saliva, saliva also functions in protection of the oral mucosa and gastrointestinal epithelium. On the other hand, the molecular mechanisms underlying the secretion of water from the salivary gland cells are not clarified; the presence of plasma membranes is a major barrier to water transport. Recently, aquaporins (AQPs) were discovered as water channel proteins (12–16). There have been many efforts to study the molecular basis of water movement. The various roles of saliva are obvious in the clinical problems of patients with reduced salivary flow rate, xerostomia. In this review, we focus on studies demonstrating the molecular mechanisms underlying the secretion of water and proteins from salivary glands. For descriptions of the molecular mechanisms underlying the secretion of electrolytes from the glands, see the reviews by Nauntofte (10) and Turner (11).

I. Water secretion from salivary glands

1. Aquaporin water channel proteins in salivary glands

Water is the main component of saliva, but the molecular mechanisms by which water is secreted from the salivary gland cells are unknown; the plasma membrane is a major barrier to water transport. In 1988, a 28-kDa integral protein was discovered as a water channel (12, 13). This protein is now known as AQP1. A number of AQPs that selectively transport water across the plasma membrane have been cloned in a variety of mammalian cells. AQPs have homology with the major intrinsic proteins of the lens (14) and thirteen members of the AQP family, AQP0–AQP12, have been identified from many mammalian cells (15, 16). The AQP family consists of three subsets: aquaporins (AQP0, AQP1, AQP2, AQP4, AQP5, AQP6, and AQP8); aquaglyceroporins (AQP3, AQP7, AQP9, and AQP10); and superaquaporins (AQP11 and AQP12) (15, 16). Among these members of the AQP family, AQP1, AQP3, AQP4, AQP5 (17), and AQP8 (18, 19) are present in mammalian salivary glands. Hybridization studies indicate that AQP1, AQP3, and AQP5 mRNA

are present at significant levels, but AQP4 is not detected (17). AQP homologues are localized in different cell membranes including various intracellular organelles in many kinds of cells. For example, AQP5 is expressed in the APM, the lateral membrane, and intracellular organelles, but not in the basilar membrane of salivary gland cells (20, 21). AQP5 is also present in zymogen granules in rat parotid glands (22). AQP5 mRNA is abundantly present in rat serous acinar cells of exocrine glands such as the parotid and submandibular glands, lacrimal glands, and subepithelial glands of the upper airway, and eye, but not in kidney, brain, or intestine (23). Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed AQP5 fluorescence not only in the acinar cells, but also in the interlobular duct cells in rat parotid glands (21). The AQP5 cDNA, which encodes a 265-residue polypeptide, was isolated from rat submandibular glands using a homology-based cloning approach by Raina et al. (23). In vitro transcription and translation of this cDNA yielded a 27-kDa polypeptide. Expression of the corresponding cRNA in Xenopus oocytes resulted in a 20-fold increase in water permeability. The increase in water permeability was reversibly inhibited by HgCl₂, but did not enhance membrane transport of urea or glycerol. In AQP5 knockout mice, although protein secretion from salivary glands and amylase activity in the saliva were not affected, the body growth rate was reduced by 20% and pilocarpine-stimulated saliva production was reduced by more than 60% compared with those in wild-type mice (24). AQP1 is a 28-kDa protein that was first isolated from human red blood cells (25). Antibodies to AQP1 react with endothelial cells and erythrocytes in capillaries and venules within the salivary glands, but not with the gland cells themselves (26). Adenovirus-mediated transfer of AQP1 cDNA to rat irradiated

salivary glands results in a 2- and 3-fold increase in salivary secretion compared with secretion from glands exposed to control virus (27). AQP4, a 28-kDa protein, is expressed in brain and parotid and submandibular glands (17). AQP4 is not detected, however, in immunofluorescence microscopy images of salivary gland cells (17). AQP8 is also a 28-kDa protein, and it is abundant in the testis (28), pancreas, and liver (19) and is expressed in the myoepithelial cells of rat submandibular and parotid glands (18). These findings indicate that AQP5 has a significant role in water secretion from serous acinar cells and interlobular duct cells of parotid and submandibular glands.

### I) Structure of AQP5 water channel

Hydropathy analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence of AQP5 predicted a protein with a six transmembrane domain (12, 23, 25, 29, 30) (Fig. 1). The amino acid sequence contains two tandem repeats corresponding approximately to the NH₂-terminal and COOH-terminal halves of a single polypeptide. There are three extracellular loops (loop A, loop C, and loop E) and two intracellular loops (loop B and loop D). The two halves of each AQP share substantial sequence similarity, but are oriented in the plasma membrane in such a manner that corresponding regions are located on opposite sides of the membrane. Both loop B and loop E, which contain the Asp-Pro-Ala (NPA) sequence that is characteristic of AQPs and are intracellular and extracellular, respectively, are critical for the formation of functional water-selective pores. In polarized mammalian cells, proteins anchored to the cell membrane by glycosphingolipids are generally located at the APM (31). Glycosylation might, therefore, have an important role in the function of integral membrane proteins. AQP5, AQP2, AQP3, and AQP4 each contain an N-

---

**Repeat 1**  
**Loop A**  
**Extracellular**  
**Intracellular**  
**NH₂**  

**Repeat 2**  
**Loop C**  
**Loop E**  
**COOH**  

**Loop B**  
**Loop D**

---

Fig. 1. Proposed membrane topology of AQP5. The topology is based on the sequence analysis and the hourglass model proposed by Raina et al. (23). The AQP molecule is thought to consist of six transmembrane domains and five connecting loops (loop-A, -B, -C, -D, and -E). The aqueous pore is thought to form when loop-B and -E fold together into an hourglass. There are characteristic Asp-Pro-Ala (NPA) motifs in loop-B and -E. Loop-C contains N-glycosylation site (N) and loop-E does mercury-sensitive site (C). This figure is reproduction with permission from ref. 1.
glycosylation site in loop C (23), whereas AQP1 contains an N-glycosylation site in loop A. Elimination of the N-glycosylation site in AQP1, however, has no effect on the trafficking of this protein when expressed in Xenopus oocytes (25). AQP5 contains a mercury-sensitive cysteine residue at position 182, which is located just upstream of the NPA sequence in loop E (23, 32, 33). Treatment of Xenopus oocytes expressing AQP5 with 1 mM HgCl₂ results in a marked decrease in water permeability, which is reversed by incubation with β-mercaptoethanol (23, 32, 33). The AQP5 amino acid sequence also contains potential phosphorylation sites for cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) (23, 32, 33), but not protein kinase C (PKC) and casein kinase II (34).

2) Localization of AQP5 with lipid rafts in rat parotid gland cells

Cholesterol- and glycolipid-enriched microdomains, commonly known as lipid rafts, have been suggested to be involved in a number of cell functions such as membrane sorting and trafficking (35–39), receptor signaling (40), and cholesterol homeostasis (41). For example, transcytosis of IgA and exocytosis of newly-made brush-border proteins in enterocytes occur through an apical lipid raft-containing compartment (42). In addition, the involvement of several other protein families is implicated in structural and functional modifications of lipid rafts (43). These reports suggest that lipid rafts are involved in sorting some apical resident proteins. Whether AQP5 is located in lipid rafts in rat parotid gland cells was examined using flotillin-2, a lipid raft-associated integral membrane protein, and GM1 ganglioside, a glycosphingolipid, as markers of lipid rafts (38). Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy images revealed that under resting conditions, AQP5 colocalizes with flotillin-2 and GM1 in the cytoplasm of interlobular duct cells of rat parotid glands, indicating that AQP5 is located in lipid rafts (21). This finding was further supported by the fact that under resting conditions, AQP5 in rat parotid gland tissues is fractionated in sucrose density gradients to the same fractions containing flotillin-2 and GM1 (21). Lipid rafts float to the lighter density fractions in an Opti-Prep discontinuous density gradient (21). After separation of the homogenate of parotid tissues of control rats on the Opti-Prep gradient, the amount of AQP5 was the largest in the lighter fractions, supporting the finding from unstimulated conditions, in which AQP5 is located with lipid rafts in rat parotid gland cells. This result was also confirmed by the finding that AQP5 in unstimulated parotid tissues of rats fractionates to the 1% Triton X-100-insoluble fraction. Thus, AQP5 localizes in lipid rafts in the cytoplasm of parotid gland cells under resting

conditions.

2. Translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts to the APM and its dissociation to non-rafts within the APM

Treatment of rat parotid tissues with the M₃ agonists ACh for 15 s (44) and SNI-2011 (cevimeline) for 10 min (45) or the α₁ agonists epinephrine and phenylephrine for 1 min (46) increases the amount of AQP5 in the APM and decreases in the amount of AQP5 in the intracellular membranes (ICM) in the tissues, indicating that M₃ agonists and α₁ agonists induce the translocation of AQP5 from the ICM to the APM. Immunoelectron microscopy of parotid glands of rats with cevimeline injected into the tail vein revealed that the number of gold particles marking AQP5 markedly increases in the APM and decreases in the cytoplasm in the interlobular duct cells (21). Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy also revealed that intravenous injection of cevimeline induces trafficking of the AQP5 immunofluorescence together with flotillin-2 and GM1 between the APM and the cytoplasm in interlobular duct cells of rat parotid glands (21). The distribution of AQP5 was compared with that of F-actin which is known to locate beneath the APM (Fig. 2). Under control conditions, AQP5 was predominantly located outside of F-actin. Within 10 min of the injection of cevimeline, AQP5 translocated towards the luminal side. After 10-min treatment of rat parotid tissues with cevimeline, AQP5 levels decrease in the 1% Triton X-100-insoluble fraction and increase in the Triton X-100-soluble fraction (21), but AQP levels in the tissues treated without cevimeline did not show these changes in detergent solubility (21), showing the dissociation of AQP5 from lipid rafts to non-rafts within the APM. These results revealed that cevimeline induced the translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts to the APM and the dissociation of AQP5 from lipid rafts within the APM. These findings are also supported by the results from fractionation studies using sucrose or Opti-Prep density gradients (21).

3. Intracellular signals for the translocation of AQP5 towards the APM

The M₃ agonist- or α₁ agonist-induced increases in the amount of AQP5 in the APM in rat parotid tissue cells is inhibited by TMB-8 and dantrolene, calcium release inhibitors from intracellular stores (44–47); BAPTA-AM, a cell permeable calcium chelator (45); or U73122, an inhibitor of phospholipase C (PLC) (46), but not by H-7 or GF109203X (46), PKC inhibitors; or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, an activator of PKC (45). Conversely, A23187, a calcium ionophore (44), alone increases the amount of AQP5 in the APM and decreases
Salivary Water and Protein Secretion

| AQP5 | F-actin | Merge |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A-1 | A-2 | A-3 |
| B-1 | B-2 | B-3 |
| C-1 | C-2 | C-3 |

Fig. 2. Changes in confocal immunofluorescence microscope images of tissue slices showing AQP5 and F-actin in interlobular ducts of parotid glands of rat injected with cevimeline. Parotid glands were obtained from rats injected with physiological saline (A) and cevimeline (5.0 mg/kg, B and C). At 10 (B) and 60 (C) min after injection, the glands were embedded. The section was immunostained to detect AQP5 with Alexa Fluor 488 (green) and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin (red). Bars, 10 μm.

the amount of AQP5 in the Triton X-100-insoluble fraction (21). These findings indicate that an increase in the intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca²⁺]i) by the activation of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃) receptors and ryanodine receptors with IP₃ and cADP ribose, respectively, via M₃ mChRs or α₁-ADRs in rat parotid gland cells causes the translocation of AQP5 towards the APM. Exposure of isolated rat parotid acinar cells to ACh or cevimeline induces a rapid increase in [Ca²⁺]i with marked oscillations (45, 47). This increase coincides with the increased AQP5 levels in the APM in rat parotid gland cells. ML-9, an inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), which is identified in parotid glands and regulates capacitative Ca²⁺ entry, inhibits the ACh- and pilocarpine-induced increase in the AQP5 levels in the APM in rat parotid tissue cells (47), suggesting that the increase in [Ca²⁺]i caused by the release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores and by the capacitative Ca²⁺ entry into the cells is necessary for the maximum effect of ACh on the increase of AQP5

in the APM in parotid glands. Intravenous injection of A23187 into rats increases AQP5 levels in the APM and, moreover, decreases in the amount of AQP5 in the 1% Triton X-100-insoluble fraction (21). These findings indicate that the increase in [Ca²⁺]i mediates the effect of M₃ agonists on the translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts from the cytoplasm to the APM and subsequently the dissociation of AQP5 from lipid rafts to non-rafts within the APM. The site of action of Ca²⁺ for the translocation and dissociation of AQP5 in parotid gland cells, however, is not clear.

In Ca²⁺-mediated intracellular signal transduction, an increase in [Ca²⁺]i has an important role in the activation of Ca²⁺/calmodulin (CaM)-dependent proteins such as CaM kinases, MLCK, and nitric oxide (NO) synthase (NOS). Cevimeline increases CaM kinase II activity in rat parotid glands (48). CaM kinase II is a multifunctional enzyme that is required for both granule mobilization under stimulating conditions and maintenance of secretory capacity under resting conditions in pancreatic
$\beta$ cells (48). MLCK regulates capacitative $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ entry (49) and is involved in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-dependent secretion of insulin (50) and rennin (51). NO increases cGMP formation through the stimulation of soluble guanylate cyclase (GC-s) (52, 53). The possible roles of CaM kinase II, NOS, MLCK, and PKG in the regulation of AQP5 function were investigated to clarify the molecular basis of water movement across biologic membranes in parotid gland cells (47). Neuronal NOS (nNOS) is expressed in isolated parotid acinar cells, and endothelial and inducible NOS are not (54). $M_{3}$ agonist-induced increases in the amount of AQP5 in the APM in rat parotid gland cells is inhibited by ML-9, an inhibitor of MLCK; carboxy-PTIO, an NO scavenger; or KN-62, an inhibitor of CaM kinase II (47). The NO donors, SIN-1 or SNAP, increase the amount of AQP5 in the APM; and the NO donor-induced increase is inhibited by KT5823, an inhibitor of PKG, and L-Nil, an nNOS inhibitor (47). The increase in the amount of AQP5 in the APM is induced by treating rat parotid tissues with dibutyryl cGMP, but not with dibutyryl cAMP (47). Studies using the NO probe, 4,5,-diaminofluorescein (DAF-2)/diacetate (DA), revealed that NOS activity increases rapidly after treating isolated rat parotid acinar cells with an $M_{3}$ agonist (54, 55). These findings suggest that NO/cGMP signal transduction has a crucial role in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ homeostasis in the $M_{3}$ agonist-stimulated increase in AQP5 in the APM of rat parotid glands. AQP1 has a cyclic nucleotide-binding domain in the C-terminus (56), and PKG phosphorylates the C-terminal residue in AQP2 and increases the insertion of AQP2 into renal epithelial cells (57). The site of action of PKG on AQP5 in parotid glands, however, remains unknown.

### 4. Disorders of AQP5 in parotid glands: age- or diabetes-related xerostomia

Great importance has been attached to AQPs as a cause of human adult diseases. Diabetic patients and aged people often complain of xerostomia, which is characterized by oral dryness and difficulty in performing oral functions (58–60). The mechanisms underlying xerostomia are not known. The stimulatory effect of ACh on AQP5 levels in the APM of parotid tissue cells of rats decreases markedly during aging, but this decrease is not observed in the effect of epinephrine on AQP5 levels in the APM in the glands (55). The amounts of AQP5, $M_{3}$ mAChRs, IP$_{3}$, and Gq/11$\alpha$ protein do not decrease in rat parotid glands during aging (55). This finding indicates a marked decrease in the responsiveness of AQP5 in parotid gland cells of senescent rats to cholinergic stimulation, but not to adrenergic stimulation.

The age-related changes in NOS activities in isolated parotid acinar cells from young adult (10-week-old) and senescent (110-week-old) rats treated with ACh or epinephrine using DAF-2/DA are coincident with those in the responsiveness of AQP5 in the cells of these rats to the agonists (55). Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy images revealed that under unstimulated conditions, AQP5 fluorescence localizes in a diffuse pattern in the cytoplasm parotid interlobular duct cells of both young adult and senescent rats. Under stimulated conditions with cevimeline, there is an increase in the fluorescence for AQP5 in the cells of young adult rats, but not senescent rats (55, 61). These findings indicate that the age-related impairment in the responsiveness of AQP5 in rat parotid gland cells to muscarinic stimulation might account for the concomitant changes in NOS activity in the cells, and might induce age-related xerostomia. To study the mechanisms underlying diabetic xerostomia, changes in the distribution of AQP5 in parotid gland cells of control and streptozocin-induced diabetic (diabetic) rats were investigated after intravenous injection of cevimeline. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that cevimeline-induced translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts to the APM from the cytoplasm in the parotid interlobular duct cells of control rats is not observed in diabetic rats (61). The decreased solubility of AQP5 by 1% Triton X-100 observed in parotid gland cells of control rats is also not observed in diabetic rats. These findings indicate that cevimeline-induced translocation of AQP5 with lipid rafts to the APM and the dissociation of AQP5 from lipid rafts to non-rafts within the APM in parotid gland cells is impaired in diabetic rats. The amount of AQP5 in parotid glands in diabetic rats does not decrease in comparison with control rats. In contrast, the amount of $M_{3}$ receptors decreases 50% in parotid glands of diabetic rats. NOS activity, as measured using DAF-2/DA, in isolated parotid acinar cells from diabetic rats is not increased compared to that in control rats, suggesting a decrease in the release of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ stores by IP$_{3}$ synthesized through the activation of $M_{3}$ mAChRs with their respective agonists. Finally, there is a decline in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signaling via $M_{3}$ mAChRs in salivary glands in diabetic xerostomia (61).

#### II. Protein secretion from salivary glands

##### 1. Role of salivary gland membrane receptors in protein secretion

###### 1) Exocytosis regulated by a membrane receptor system in salivary glands

The salivary proteins amylase and mucin are synthesized in acinar cells and stored in zymogen granules in the cells of parotid and sublingual glands, respectively.Submandibular gland acinar cells synthesize both these proteins and store them in the granules. Activation of M₃ mAChRs (1, 49, 54), β₂-ADRs (2, 62–66), H₂ histamine receptors (6), NK₁ (4), and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) (5) receptors on the basolateral plasma membrane (BLM) in salivary glands with their respective agonists induces marked secretion of proteins in zymogen granules by exocytosis. The fusion of zymogen granules, which are mostly present in the apical region in acinar cells of salivary glands, with the APM as well as the other exocrine gland cells is tightly regulated by intracellular signals produced in response to secretagogues, ACh (1), norepinephrine (2), histamine (6), substance P (4), and VIP (5), in a dose-dependent manner. Regulated exocytosis differs from unregulated exocytosis, which delivers integral membrane proteins to the plasma membrane for the secretion of various substances from the cells (67). Stimulation of salivary gland β₂-ADRs induces the largest increase in protein secretion from the glands, while stimulation of M₃ mAChRs induces a modest increase in protein secretion (1, 66). Both β-ADR and mAChR are present in parotid tissues of 3-day-old rats, as indicated by binding studies with radiolabeled ligands that specifically bind their respective receptors (66). Thereafter, the number of β-ADRs increases steadily to the tissue level at 28 days of age, when it levels off and this level is maintained till 730 days of age (66). These changes are coupled with those of the affinity of β-ADR for the respective agonists, but not for the antagonists. On the other hand, the number of mAChR also increases steadily to the tissue level at 56 days of age, at which point it levels off and is maintained till 730 days of age. The affinities of mAChR, for both the agonists and antagonists do not change after birth, which differs from the affinities of β-ADR (66). The ability of the cholera toxin to catalyze ADP-ribosylation of Gs proteins increases steadily in the tissues at 14 to 56 days of age and thereafter this level is maintained until 365 days of age, in association with the responsiveness of adenylate cyclase (AC) to isoproterenol (IPR) in the tissues (66). However, the ability of pertussis toxin (IAP) to catalyze ADP-ribosylation is recognized in the tissues at 14 days of age and this affinity does not change thereafter (66). These findings support the superior efficacy of β-ADR stimulation for the induction of amylase secretion in rat parotid tissues (66).

### 2) Exocytotic machinery in salivary glands

The mechanisms underlying zymogen granule exocytosis have been studied using the granules isolated from rat parotid glands (62, 63, 67–70). The release of amylase from the isolated zymogen granules was

Fig. 3. Conformational changes in zymogen granules by ATP-Mg and a low concentration of Ca²⁺ in the presence of cytosolic proteins from parotid glands. Panel A: Zymogen granules in rat parotid tissues. AC: acinar cells. Panel B: Zymogen granules after incubation with ATP-Mg and EGTA in the presence of cytosolic proteins. Panel C: Zymogen granules after incubation with ATP-Mg and a low concentration of Ca²⁺ in the presence of cytosolic proteins. Bars, 1 μm. This figure is a reproduction with permission from ref. 63.

stimulated by ATP-Mg, showing that this process is a priming step (Fig. 3) (62). ATP was hydrolyzed in this step, suggesting the presence ATPase in the zymogen granules. The ATP-dependent release of amylase was inhibited by glycoletheldiamine tetraacetic acid (EGTA), a calcium chelator (Fig. 3) (62), suggesting the importance of Ca²⁺ in this step. The release of amylase from zymogen granules was, however, not caused by ATP-Mg and a low concentration of Ca²⁺ (62). The stimulatory effect of Ca²⁺ was observed in the presence of ATP-Mg and the cytosolic proteins from parotid glands
(62). Changes of the turbidity of the reaction medium containing zymogen granules in the presence of cytosolic proteins from parotid glands was caused by the addition of ATP-Mg and a low concentration of Ca²⁺, showing the conformational changes of zymogen

granules in this step (63). This finding was confirmed by the electron microscope images (63). It is known that the priming step itself is stimulated by lower levels of Ca²⁺ and is required by ATP hydrolysis (67). Priming and fusion are shown to be stimulated by cytosolic

Ca²⁺
DG PIP₂
PKC
PLCβ
GDP
α
β
GTP
α
cAMP
ATP
cADP ribose
IP₃
Ca²⁺
CaM
RyR IP₃R
NOS
CaM kinase
GC-s
cGMP
PKG
SNAP25
P
VAMP, Syntaxn 1
SNARE complex
Fusion
Release
Primary step
Tethering step
Docking step
AC
BLM
GPCR
PKA
APM

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of signal transduction for regulated exocytosis of zymogen granules. The events in nor- adrenalin-induced exocytosis in parotid gland cells are represented. Priming step is ATP-dependent and zymogen granules move physically to subplasmalemmal region of the cells in this step. Tethering step and docking step are also ATP-dependent. Fusion of zymogen granules with the APM and release of amylase are triggered by Ca²⁺ without ATP.

Table 1. Major proteins that function in zymogen granule exocytosis

| Class of protein         | Protein          | Function                                                                 |
|--------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| SNARE                    | Syntaxin 1       | Formation of SNARE complex which mediates membrane fusion.            |
|                          | SNAP-25          |                                                                         |
|                          | VAMP             |                                                                         |
| SNARE cofactor           | αSNAP            | αSNAP/ATPase NSF acts in priming step and in disassembly of SNARE      |
|                          |                  | complex.                                                                |
|                          | NSF              | Prevention of formation of SNARE complex.                             |
|                          | Munc 18/nSec 1   | Promotion of syntaxin 1 for formation of SNARE complex.                |
|                          | Munc 13          |                                                                         |
| Rab                      | Rab3D            | Regulation of granule maturation.                                     |
|                          | Rab27B           | Reguration of formation of SNARE complex.                             |
| Ca²⁺-binding protein     | Synaptotagmin    | Ca²⁺ sensor                                                            |
| Others                   | cAMP-GEF/Epac    | Mediation of cAMP dependent, PKA-independent exocytosis.               |

VAMP (synaptobrevin): vesicle associated membrane protein, SNAP-25: 25-kDa synaptosomal-associated protein, SNARE: soluble N-ethyl- maleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein (SNAP) receptor, NSF: N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein, GEF: guanine nucleotide exchange factor, Epac: exchange proteins directly activated by cAMP.

proteins (67–69). Requirement of the cytosolic proteins in the Ca²⁺-dependent step in zymogen granule exocytosis suggests the importance of the modification of the proteins that function in the zymogen granule exocytosis, such as soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein receptors (SNAREs). The priming, tethering, docking, fusion, and release steps are sequential steps in zymogen granule exocytosis (Fig. 4). Recently, the idea of “kiss and run” exocytosis is proposed (67, 70). In this phenomenon, the fusion pore is rapidly reclosed after formation and expansion of a fusion pore and release of vesicle contents. Evidences of “kiss and run” exocytosis have been shown in synaptic vesicles and chromaffin granules exocytosis, but not have been shown in zymogen granule exocytosis (67). The exocytotic machinery in salivary acinar cells (Table 1) as well as in neurons and endocrine cells includes SNAREs, ATPase, NSF, and its cofactor (α-synaptosomal-associated protein (α-SNAP)), Munc18/Sec1, Munc13, synaptotagmins, Rab3, and its effectors (67, 70, 71). SNAREs are membrane proteins in parotid acinar cells and are involved in basic components of exocytosis. SNAREs are classified as arginine (R)-SNAREs and glutamine (Q)-SNAREs based on the presence of arginine or glutamine in the center of the SNARE motif (72). SNARE complex formation is proposed to mediate the fusion of zymogen granules with the APM. The SNARE complex comprises three proteins, vesicle-associated membrane protein-2 (VAMP-2, synaptobrevin), syntaxin 1, and 25-kDa SNAP (SNAP-25). SNAP-25 is a Q-SNARE and contains two SNARE motifs. VAMP-2, an R-SNARE that is an integral membrane protein, and syntaxin 1, a Q-SNARE, each contain a single SNARE motif. These four SNARE motifs form a stable SNARE complex and mediate the zymogen granule fusion (73, 74). For the SNARE complexes to be recycled, they must be disassembled after exocytosis (75). NSF, a chaperone-like ATPase, and αSNAP, an adaptor protein, interact with the assembled SNARE motifs and disassemble the complexes. The complex is dissociated into its individual components by NSF ATPase. Munc18/Sec1 was discovered in *C. elegans* in the UNC-18 mutant (Munc18) and in yeast in a secretory mutant (Sec1) (76, 77). Both Sec1 and Munc18 were also discovered in mammals (78). Munc18 binds to syntaxin 1 and prevents the formation of the SNARE complex (79). A recent study, however, demonstrated that Munc18 might facilitate the SNARE complex formation by regulating the conformation of syntaxin 1 (70). Munc13 promotes the activation of syntaxin 1 for SNARE complex formation by disturbing the interaction between syntaxin 1 and Munc18 (79, 80). Rab proteins are

involved in the Ras superfamily of small G proteins that function in vesicle transport (81). Rab proteins localize in the cytosol as the GDP-bound form, an inactive state, and in the membrane as the GTP-bound form, an active state. Mammals have many Rab protein isoforms. Rab3 is involved in secretory granule exocytosis (82, 83) and has several potential effectors, Rabphilin3 (84), Rims (Rim1 and Rim2) (85), Noc2 (86), and Granuphilin (87). SNAREs, Rabs, syntaxins (except for syntaxin 1), VAMPs (except for VAMP-7), SNAP-23, α-SNAP, and NSF are expressed in parotid acinar cells and are involved in cAMP- and Ca²⁺-triggered exocytosis (88). Syntaxin 1 and SNAP25 are not expressed in parotid acinar cells (71, 88). Rab3D, one of four structurally related Rab3 isoforms (Rab3A, 3B, 3C, and 3D), and Rab27B are present in parotid acinar cells (89, 90). Rab3D is not essential for the regulation of exocytosis, but Rab27B regulates the formation of the SNARE complex with its effector protein (90, 91). Salivary glands of Noc2 knockout mice have a marked accumulation of secretory granules (92).

3) Intracellular signals in stimulation-secretion coupling in salivary glands

Ca²⁺ signaling: ACh stimulates PLCβ via the activation of Gq/11a protein coupled to M₃ mAChRs and generates phospholipids-derived messengers, DG and IP₃. DG activates PKC and induces salivary protein secretion by regulating the exocytic process (Fig. 4). Norepinephrine acts both at α₁-ADRs and β₂-ADRs in salivary glands. Activation of α₁-ADRs stimulates PLCβ and generates IP₃. Norepinephrine also acts at β₂-ADRs in salivary glands and activates AC via the activation of Gsα protein, thereby increasing the amount of cAMP (Fig. 4). Increases in the amount of cAMP activate PKA in the cells and induce zymogen granule exocytosis without a significant increase in [Ca²⁺]i (2). Ca²⁺ signaling IP₃ mobilizes Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores via the activation of IP₃ receptors. A rise in [Ca²⁺]i is the primary signal that triggers zymogen granule exocytosis as well as AQP5 translocation to the APM in salivary glands (1, 21, 44–47). The mode of Ca²⁺ release depends on the concentration of IP₃-generated secretagogues. Low concentrations of cevimeline (21, 45–47) and methacholine (MCh) (93), cholinergic agonists, evoke Ca²⁺ release in parotid isolated acinar cells with oscillation. High concentrations of the agonists evoke Ca²⁺ release with an initial rapid rise followed by a gradual decline to the plateau level observed under unstimulated conditions (94). Cevimeline- and MCh-induced exocytosis in rat parotid glands are completely inhibited by BAPTA-AM, KN-93 (CaM kinase II inhibitor), ML-9 (MLCK inhibitor), L-NAME (nNOS inhibitor), ODQ (GC-

inhibitor), or KT5823 (PKG inhibitor), but not KT5720 (PKA inhibitor) (21, 54). Exocytosis induced by cevimeline or MCh is inhibited by dantrolene, which prevents the release of Ca²⁺ from ryanodine-sensitive stores (45, 54, 93). nNOS is expressed in rat isolated parotid acinar cells, and cevimeline-induced amylase secretion from parotid tissues in nNOS knockout mice has not been observed in spite of the expression of M₃ receptors and the maintenance of the IPR-induced secretory response in the tissues (54). These findings suggest the activation of Ca²⁺- and CaM-dependent enzymes and the NOS-PKG signaling pathway in cevimeline- and MCh-induced salivary protein secretion. The changes in [Ca²⁺]i in salivary glands are coupled with the initial Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores by IP₃ and both the subsequent Ca²⁺ extrusion mediated by Ca²⁺-ATPase in the APM (95) and Ca²⁺ influx into the cells through receptor-operated Ca²⁺ channels (capacitative Ca²⁺ influx) (95) and Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores by cADPribose (96).

DG/PKC: DG generated by the activation of PLCβ activates PKC. Although Ca²⁺ is the key intracellular trigger in zymogen granule exocytosis in salivary glands, PKC together with PKA regulates exocytosis (97). PKC is a family of isoenzymes classified into classical (α, β, and γ) PKC activated both by Ca²⁺ and DG; novel (δ, ε, η, and θ) PKC activated by DG; and atypical (ζ, and ι/λ) PKC activated by neither Ca²⁺ nor DG (98). Because phorbol esters act mainly to regulate exocytosis via PKC, PKC is suggested to have a role modulating regulated exocytosis. There is another process in exocytosis, however, that is stimulated in a PKC-independent manner (99). The secretion of amylase from rat parotid tissues induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PKC activator) is not inhibited by KN-93, L-NAME, or ODQ (93), suggesting that PKC-mediated exocytosis is independent of Ca²⁺-mediated exocytosis in rat parotid glands. The site at which PKC affects the exocytosis process, that is the PKC substrate, is not known (100). Recently, the characteristics of proteins phosphorylated by PKC in the exocytosis process were studied. Phosphorylation of SNAP-25 occurs in pancreatic β cells in response to phorbol ester treatment and stimulation with physiologic stimuli (101). SNAP-25 contributes to form SNARE complexes with VAMP and syntaxin 1. The formation of SNARE complexes is thought to mediate vesicle docking/fusion at the plasma membrane (98). The phosphorylation of SNAP-25 on Ser187 is induced by phorbol esters, but PKC does not phosphorylate recombinant SNAP-25 on Ser187. This finding indicates that the effect of PKC on the phosphorylation of SNAP-25 is not clear. SNAP23, a non-neuronal homo-

logue of SNAP-25, is phosphorylated by PKC in platelets and mast cells (102, 103). The effect of phosphorylated SNAP-23 on SNARE proteins, however, is not known (102). In Munc-18 knockout mice, vesicle exocytosis is completely blocked (104). Munc18-1, 18-2, and 18-3 are involved in exocytosis in mammals, and Munc18-1 and 18-3 are phosphorylated in the intact cells in response to secretory stimuli and phorbol esters (105–108). Munc18-1 is phosphorylated by PKC and reduces the binding ability of PKC to syntaxin 1A (109). Thus, further studies are required to understand the molecular mechanisms by which PKC phosphorylates SNAP-25/23 and Munc18, and alters the protein secretion from exocrine cells.

cAMP/PKA: cAMP regulates exocytosis in various secretory cells. In synapses (110), adrenal chromaffin cells (111, 112), PC12 cells (113), and pancreatic β cells (114), cAMP enhances exocytosis, but an increase in the amount of cAMP in the absence of Ca²⁺ elevation is not sufficient to trigger exocytosis. In these cells, increases in the amount of cAMP activate PKA and regulate Ca²⁺-triggered exocytosis, suggesting that cAMP-dependent pathways exist with Ca²⁺-dependent pathways for exocytosis and SNARE proteins have an important role in this exocytosis. In contrast, in parotid and submandibular glands, cAMP directly triggers zymogen granule exocytosis without significant increases in [Ca²⁺]i (115–117). In parotid glands, the amount of amylase secretion due to an increase in [Ca²⁺]i is less than that induced by an increase in cAMP (66). The cAMP-triggered exocytosis is also observed in glucagon-induced insulin release in pancreatic β cells (114) or parathyroid hormone secretion in parathyroid cells (118). Botulinum toxin B inhibits IPR-induced amylase secretion from parotid glands, which is cAMP-triggered exocytosis (88). This toxin cleaves VAMP-2, which is present on the membrane of zymogen granules and mediates fusion with syntaxin 2 on the plasma membrane (119). The inhibition of cAMP exocytosis by botulinum toxin B indicates the requirement of VAMP-2, a SNARE protein, in cAMP- and Ca²⁺-triggered exocytosis (88). The involvement of other SNARE proteins or other components of fusion machinery in cAMP-triggered exocytosis has not been reported. It is proposed that cAMP signaling and Ca²⁺ signaling act at different steps in amylase secretion from pancreatic cells (120). The involvement of cAMP in Ca²⁺-triggered exocytosis might be due to the protein of the exocytotic machinery, which is a PKA substrate (121). Cysteine string protein (Csp) (122) phosphorylated by PKA reduces the affinity to bind syntaxin and synaptotagmin, and thus, Csp might be a candidate substrate (122, 123). Another candidate is cAMP-guanine nucleotide

exchange factor (GEF), which is a cAMP-binding protein (124). This protein is part of a family of novel cAMP-binding proteins and is suggested to have many roles in cAMP-regulated, PKA-independent exocytosis (123–127). These findings suggest the involvement of a cAMP regulated, PKA-independent mechanism in amylase secretion from parotid glands. It is, however, unknown whether cAMP-induced amylase secretion in parotid glands depends only on a PKA-dependent mechanism. cAMP is synthesized from ATP by adenylate cyclase. The addition of dibutyryl cAMP alone induces amylase secretion from rat parotid gland tissues (66). The intracellular concentration is regulated by four components, heterotrimeric GTP-binding protein (G protein) coupled receptors (GPCR), G protein, AC, and cyclic nucleotide specific phosphodiesterase (PDE). AC comprises a large superfamily and its activation is induced by Gsα protein. Nine membrane-bound forms (type I–IX) are expressed in mammals and one soluble form is found in sperm (128). Types I, III, and VIII are expressed in neurons and in nonneuronal secretory cells and are regulated by Ca²⁺/CaM. Types II, IV, VI, VII, and IX are expressed in various tissues, and type V is expressed in heart. Gsα protein stimulates the activity of all forms of AC; Giα protein inhibits the activity of types I, V, VI, and VIII (129). Ca²⁺/CaM stimulates the activities of types I and III by binding to the CaM-binding site in the cytosolic domain, and Ca²⁺ also stimulates the activity of type V by its phosphorylation

with PKC (130). DG stimulates the activity of types I, II, III, and VII by PKC-mediated phosphorylation (131). Conversely, PKA phosphorylates types V and VI and inhibits their activities (132, 133). PDEs, enzymes that hydrolyze the phosphodiester bond of cyclic nucleotides, comprise more than 50 different PDE proteins. PDE families have different responses to inhibitors. PDE1s are stimulated by Ca²⁺/CaM activity (134, 135), and PDE4 regulates cAMP signaling by its PKA-mediated phosphorylation (136–138). PKA is a major target of cAMP-regulated exocytosis in exocrine cells. Various ligands bind to GPCR and activate AC, resulting in the activation of PKA. In the salivary glands, β₂ agonists (2, 64) and H₂ agonists (6) activate AC and PKA, resulting in the induction of protein secretion. PKA is composed of two regulatory subunits, type I and type II, and two catalytic subunits, RI and RII. Each regulatory subunit comprises R Iα, R Iβ, and R IIα and R IIβ, respectively (139, 140). In parotid glands, there are two PKA isoforms, type I and II (64). PKA type I is the membrane-bound form that is activated during β-ADR stimulation and is accompanied by an increase in specific membrane phosphorylation during amylase secretion induced by β-ADR agonists (64, 141). These findings suggest that Gi2α protein is selectively phosphorylated by PKA type I, resulting in decreased function and supersensitivity of amylase secretion (6, 64, 65).

---

**Fig. 5.** Schematic representation of mechanism of isoproterenol-induced supersensitivity and desensitization of amylase secretion in rat parotid glands. Regulation of phosphorylation of Gi2α by protein kinase A (PKA) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is coupled with isoproterenol (IPR)-induced supersensitivity and desensitization of amylase secretion. βAR: β-adrenergic receptor.

2. Altered protein secretion in salivary glands

1) Functional alterations of membrane receptors in salivary glands

Plasma membrane receptors not only relay physiologic information to effector cells, but also control peripheral responses by functional alterations due to interactions with their agonists. Supersensitivity and desensitization of protein secretion from salivary glands mediated plasma membrane receptors is induced by the interaction with their agonists (2, 6, 64, 65) (Fig. 5). Desensitization is a phenomenon in which short-term exposure of plasma membrane receptors coupled with G proteins to an agonist results in a reduction of the physiologic response. This phenomenon commonly occurs in response to a variety of stimuli and is found in many organisms, indicating the importance of the plasma membrane receptors in cell signaling. Desensitization of salivary protein secretion in response to IPR is also induced by repeated administration of a tricyclic antidepressant (142). Regarding the mechanisms underlying the rapid β₂-ADR desensitization, the sequestration of β₂-ADR quickly follows the rapid uncoupling of the β₂-ADR from Gs proteins (143–147). This uncoupling phenomenon involves the phosphorylation of β₂-ADRs by PKA and β-ADR kinase, which are activated under different conditions. Receptor phosphorylation, presumably caused by any hormone or drug that increases cAMP levels in the cell, reduces the ability of a receptor occupied by the agonist to stimulate the GTPase activity of the Gs proteins with which it couples, resulting in the induction of heterologous desensitization. The mechanisms underlying homologous desensitization of β₂-ADR involve receptor phosphorylation by β-ADR kinase (143–147).

On the other hand, supersensitivity is observed in exocrine glands, skeletal and smooth muscles, and neurons after chronic interruption of the neuronal input by denervation in mammals. Supersensitivity of salivary fluid secretion and salivary protein secretion develop after parasympathetic (148) and sympathetic (149) denervation, respectively. Supersensitivity of salivary secretion also occurs following sympathetic nerve stimulation after partial sympathetic ganglionectomy (150). These findings suggest that only β-ADRs-mediated amylase secretion becomes supersensitive after chronic denervation. Short-term treatment (<10 min) of rat parotid tissues with IPR results in supersensitivity of amylase secretion during further treatment with the same agonist, but longer (>20 min) IPR treatment results in desensitization (2, 64). In submandibular gland tissues, however, IPR treatment for various periods of time only desensitizes mucin secretion from the tissues, but does not induce supersensitivity (65). On the other hand, histamine acts at H₂ receptors and induces amylase secretion from rat parotid gland tissues (6). Short-term treatment of rat parotid tissues with histamine for less than 10 min does not result in supersensitivity of amylase secretion during further treatment with histamine, but rather in desensitization (6). These changes in the secretory response are accompanied by both alterations in the numbers of β₂-ADRs (2, 64, 65) and H₂ histamine receptors (6) and in the affinity of the receptors for the agonists, as assessed by measurement of the specific binding of radiolabeled ligands. The increases and decreases in the number of β₂-ADRs or H₂ histamine receptors in salivary gland tissues are coupled with supersensitivity and desensitization, respectively. The affinity of these receptors for their agonists, but not their antagonists, increases and decreases in the supersensitivity and desensitization, respectively (2, 6, 64, 65).

2) Post-receptor mechanisms underlying the supersensitivity and desensitization of protein secretion in salivary glands

The cAMP concentration in the tissues that induces the supersensitivity of amylase secretion is lower than that after pre-treatment with IPR (2). The cAMP concentration in the parotid or submandibular tissues desensitized by IPR (2, 64, 65) or histamine (6) treatment is also significantly lower than that after pre-treatment with IPR or histamine. G proteins have a key role in transmembrane signal transduction as coupling proteins, and in transducing information from a variety of membrane receptors to their respective effector proteins. Gs, Gi, and Gq have been identified in rat parotid glands (151, 152). β-ADRs are coupled with the carboxyl-terminus of Gsa protein, and the binding of β-agonists with the β-ADRs promotes activation of Gs proteins (153) and results in the activation of AC. Functional modifications and decreases in Gs protein levels are involved in agonist-induced heterologous desensitization of AC stimulation in erythrocytes (154) and hepatocytes (155). Activation of Gs proteins leads to the activation of PKA via the stimulation of AC, suggesting the importance of PKA in the regulation of G protein function. In rat salivary gland, however, changes in the levels and function of Gs proteins, measured as cholera toxin-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation and GTP-binding capacities of these proteins, are not involved in the mechanism underlying IPR-induced supersensitivity, or in IPR- and histamine-induced desensitization of protein secretion from rat parotid (2, 6, 64) and submandibular glands (65). IAP-sensitive G proteins, termed Gi1, Gi2, and Gi3, comprise a family of Gi proteins and Gi2 inhibits adenylate cyclase activity (156). Gia protein is

phosphorylated by PKA (64, 157, 158). The phosphorylation causes some conformational changes in Gi protein trimers and decreases in both the IAP-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of Gi protein and their dissociation into α- and βγ-subunits (157, 158). In parotid tissues sensitized with IPR, there is a 60% decrease in IAP-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of Gia (64). Conversely, however, a 40% increase in IAP-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of Gia is coupled with the desensitization of amylase and mucin secretion from rat parotid and submandibular tissues induced by IPR and histamine, respectively (6, 64, 65). In agonist-induced desensitization of AC stimulation in MDCK cells (159) and rat heart muscle cells (160), there are also increases in the level and function of Gi proteins, as measured by IAP-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation and GTP-binding capacities of these proteins. Treatment of rat parotid tissue membranes with the PKA catalytic subunit or alkaline phosphatase induces a decrease or increase in IAP-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of Gia protein, respectively. A 40% increase and a 50% decrease in the phosphorylation of Gi2α immunoprecipitated with AS/7 (anti-G protein antiserum) from [32P]Pi-labeled parotid cells is coupled with supersensitivity and desensitization, respectively (64). Pretreatment with okadaic acid at a concentration that inhibits the activities of protein phosphatase (PP) I and IIA increases the phosphorylation level of Gi2α protein and results in enhanced supersensitivity of salivary protein secretion and the disappearance of the desensitization (6, 64). Phosphorylation by PKA of a specific serine residue on the G-subunit of PP I inhibits the activity by dissociation of the catalytic subunit from the G-subunit (161). Inhibitor I, an inhibitor of PP I, is phosphorylated through the activation of PKA by adrenaline and results in an inhibition of PP I activity (161), indicating that PP I activity is inhibited through the activation of PKA by cAMP elevation. PP IIA is suggested to be involved in dephosphorylation of Gi2α. In histamine-induced desensitization of amylase secretion from rat parotid tissues, there is a 50% increase in PP IIA activity, but PP I levels do not change (6). These findings indicate that the function of Gi2α protein is dynamically regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation systems involving PKA and PP IIA, and its phosphorylation is directly involved in the regulation of cellular responses in rat salivary glands.

Concluding remarks

The secretory mechanisms of water and protein from salivary glands have been studied as models to investigate water transport and exocytosis regulated by signal transduction via plasma membrane receptors. The studies have revealed the characteristics of physiologic regulation of salivary secretion. A rise in \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) is an important trigger in the stimulation-secretion coupling in salivary gland cells as with any other secretory cells. In most secretory cells, an increase in cAMP levels in the cells triggers exocytosis under conditions of increased \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\), and in the absence of \(Ca^{2+}\), an increase in cAMP levels acting through PKA alone is not sufficient to trigger exocytosis. In the parotid and submandibular gland cells, however, an increase in cAMP levels in the cells alone triggers exocytosis through a PKA-dependent pathway without an increase in \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\). On the other hand, salivary protein is also secreted from these gland cells by the PKC- and PKG-dependent pathways. The amount of salivary protein secreted by cAMP alone is larger than that by increased \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\), indicating that cAMP is the principal signal for exocytosis in salivary gland cells. Recently, PKA-independent, cAMP-regulated exocytosis was reported to be present in certain neurons and endocrine cells, but not in salivary gland cells. There is quite a difference in the mechanisms underlying regulated exocytosis between salivary gland cells and other secretory cells. Salivary fluid secretion from parotid gland cells is regulated by \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) acting through a NO/PKG-dependent pathway. These findings demonstrate that PKA-, PKC-, and PKG-dependent pathways for exocytosis, and PKG-dependent pathways for water secretion, coexist in salivary gland cells. One or more of the proteins of the fundamental machinery for exocytosis and water secretion, however, are not known. To better understand the universality of the mechanisms underlying exocytosis and water secretion, various substances, including the substrates for PKA, PKC, and PKG, must be identified.

Acknowledgments

We thank the many colleagues who have studied with us. This work was supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research and that for Knowledge Cluster Initiative from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan and a Research-Grant from the Daiichi Pharmaceutical Company (Tokyo, Japan).

References

1. Ishikawa Y, Ishida H. Aquaporin water channel in salivary glands. Jpn J Pharmacol. 2000;83:95–101.
2. Hata F, Ishida H, Kagawa K, Kondo E, Kondo S, Noguchi Y. β-Adrenoceptor alterations coupled with secretory response in rat parotid tissue. J Physiol. 1983;341;185–196.
3. Hata F, Ishida H, Kondo E. Dopamine-induced amylase secre-

tion from rat parotid salivary gland in vitro: an effect mediated via noradrenergic and cholinergic nerve. Br J Pharmacol. 1986;89:473–483.

4 Guillemain B, Rollandy I, Imhoff V, Rossignol B. The NK-1 receptor and a calcium-phospholipid pathway: inositoltrisphosphate production and calcium movement by selective agonists of neurokinin receptors in rat parotid glands. J Neurochem. 1992; 58:2321–2325.

5 Turner JT, Camden JM. Regulation of secretion by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in isolated perfused rat submandibular glands. Arch Oral Biol. 1992; 37:281–287.

6 Eguchi T, Ishikawa Y, Ishida H. Mechanism underlying histamine-induced desensitization of amylase secretion in rat parotid glands. Br J Pharmacol. 1998; 124:1523–1533.

7 Gallacher DV. Are there purinergic receptors on parotid acinar cells. Nature. 1982; 296:83–86.

8 Sawaki K, Ouchi K, Sato T, Kawaguchi M. Existence of gamma-aminobutyric acid and its biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes in rat salivary glands. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1995; 67:359–363.

9 Kujirai M, Sawaki K, Kawaguchi M. Inhibitory effect of diazepam on muscarinic receptor-stimulated inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate production in rat parotid acinar cells. Br J Pharmacol. 2002; 137:945–952.

10 Nauntofte B. Regulation of electrolyte and fluid secretion in salivary acinar cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 1992; 263:G823–G837.

11 Turner RJ. Mechanisms of fluid secretion by salivary glands. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1993; 694:24–35.

12 Preston GM, Agre P. Isolation of the cDNA for erythrocyte integral membrane protein of 28 kilodaltons: member of an ancient channel family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1991; 88: 11110–11114.

13 Preston GM, Carroll TP, Guggino WB, Agre P. Appearance of water channels in Xenopus oocytes expressing red cell CHIP 28 protein. Science. 1992; 256:385–387.

14 Knepper MA. The aquaporin family of molecular water channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1994; 91:6255–6258.

15 King LS, Kozono D, Agre P. From structure to disease; the evolving tale of aquaporin biology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 5:687–698.

16 Morishita Y, Sakube Y, Sasaki S, Ishibashi K. Aquaporin superfamily (superaquaporins) expansion of aquaporins restricted to multicellular organisms. J Pharmacol Sci. 2004; 96:276–279.

17 Gresz V, Kwon TH, Hurley PT, Varga G, Zelles T, Nielsen S, et al. Identification and localization of aquaporin water channels in human salivary glands. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001; 281:G247–G257.

18 Wellner RB, Redman RS, Swain WD, Baum BJ. Further evidence for AQP8 expression in the myoepithelium of rat submandibular and parotid glands. Pflugers Arch Eur J Physiol. 2006; 451:642–645.

19 Koyama Y, Yamamoto T, Kondo D, Funaki H, Yaoita E, Kawasaki K, et al. Molecular cloning of a new aquaporin from rat pancreas and liver. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272:30329–30333.

20 Takata K, Matsuzaki T, Tajika Y. Aquaporins; water channel proteins of the cell membrane. Progr Histochem Cytochem. 2004; 39:1–84.

21 Ishikawa Y, Yuan Z, Inoue N, Skowronski MT, Nakae Y,

Shono M, et al. Identification of AQP5 in lipid rafts and its translocation to apical membranes by activation of M3 mAChRs in intracellular ducts of rat parotid gland. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005; 289:C1303–C1311.

22 Matsuki M, Hashimoto S, Shimono M, Murakami M, Fujita-Yoshinaga J, Furuyama S, et al. Involvement of aquaporin-5 water channel in osmoregulation in parotid secretory granules. J Mem Biol. 2005; 203:119–126.

23 Raina S, Preston GM, Guggino WB, Agre P. Molecular cloning and characterization of an aquaporin cDNA from salivary, lacrimal, and respiratory tissues. J Biol Chem. 1995; 270:1908–1912.

24 Ma T, Song Y, Gillespie A, Carlson EJ, Epstein CJ, Verkman AS. Defective secretion of saliva in transgenic mice lacking aquaporin-5 water channels. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:20071–20074.

25 King LS, Agre P. Pathophysiology of the aquaporin water channels. Ann Rev Physiol. 1996; 58:619–648.

26 He X, Tse CM, Donowitz M, Alper SL, Gabriel S, Baum BJ. Polarization distribution of key membrane transport proteins in rat submandibular gland. Pflugers Arch Eur J Physiol. 1997; 433:260–268.

27 Delporte C, Hoque ATNMS, Kulakusky JA, Braddon VR, Goldsmith CM, Wellner RB, et al. Relationship between adenovirus-mediated aquaporin-1 expression and fluid movement across epithelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998; 246:584–588.

28 Ishibashi K, Kuwahara M, Kageyama Y, Tohsaka A, Marumo F, Sasaki S. Cloning and functional expression of a second new aquaporin abundantly expressed in testis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997; 237:714–718.

29 Smith BL, Agre P. Erythrocyte Mr 28,000 transmembrane protein exists as multisubunit similar to channel proteins. J Biol Chem. 1991; 266:6407–6415.

30 Agre P, Kozono D. Aquaporin water channels: molecular mechanisms for human diseases. FEBS Lett. 2003; 555:72–78.

31 Ramamoorthy S, Melikian H, Qian Y, Blakely RD. Biosynthesis, N-glycosylation and surface trafficking of biogenic amine transporter protein. Method Enzymol. 1998; 296:347–370.

32 Lee MD, Bhakta KY, Raina S, Yanescu R, Griffin CA, Copeland NG, et al. The human aquaporin-5 gene. J Biol Chem. 1995; 271:8500–8604.

33 Krane CM, Towne JE, Menon AG. Cloning and characterization of murine AQP5: evidence for a conserved aquaporin gene cluster. Mamm Genome. 1999; 10:498–505.

34 Sidhaye V, Hoffert JD, King LS. cAMP has distinct acute and chronic effects on aquaporin-5 in lung epithelial cells. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:3590–3596.

35 Simons K, Ikonen E. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature. 1997; 387:569–572.

36 Simons K, Meer G. Lipid sorting in epithelial cells. Biochemistry. 1988; 27:6197–6202.

37 Brown DA, Rose JK. Sorting of GPI-anchored proteins to glycolipid-enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface. Cell. 1992; 68:533–544.

38 Paladino S, Samataro D, Pillich R, Tivodar S, Nitsch L, Zurzolo C. Protein oligomerization modulates raft partitioning and apical sorting of GPI-anchored proteins. J Cell Biol. 2004; 167:699–709.

39 Li X, Galli S, Leu JB, Wade EV, Weinman MD, Donowitz M.

Na<sup>+</sup>-K<sup>+</sup> exchanger3 (NHE3) is present in lipid rafts in the rabbit ileal brush border: a role for rafts in trafficking and rapid stimulations of NHE3. J Physiol. 2001;541:537–552.

Simons K, Toomre D. Lipid rafts and signal transduction. Natl Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2000;1:31–39.

Simons K, Ehehalt R. Cholesterol, lipid rafts, and disease. J Clin Invest. 2002;110:597–603.

Hansen GH, Pedersen J, Niels-Christensen LL, Immerdal, L, Danielsen EM. Deep-apical tubules: dynamic lipid-raft micro-domains in the brush-border region of enterocytes. Biochem J. 2003;373:125–132.

Galbiati FI, Razani B, Lisanti MP. Emerging themes in lipid rafts and caveolae. Cell. 2001;106:403–411.

Ishikawa Y, Eguchi T, Skowronski MT, Ishida H. Acetylcholine acts on M3 muscarinic receptors and induces the translocation of aquaporin-5 water channel via cytosolic Ca<sup>2+</sup> elevation in rat parotid glands. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;245:835–840.

Ishikawa Y, Skowronski MT, Ishida H. Persistent increase in the amount of aquaporin-5 in the apical membrane of rat parotid acinar cells induced a muscarinic agonist SNI-2011. FEBS Lett. 2000;477:253–257.

Ishikawa Y, Skowronski MT, Inoue N, Ishida H. α1-Adrenoceptor-induced trafficking of aquaporin-5 to the apical plasma membrane of rat parotid cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999;245:835–840.

Ishikawa Y, Iida H, Ishida H. The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor-stimulated increase in aquaporin-5 levels in the apical plasma membrane in rat parotid acinar cells is coupled with activation of nitric oxide/cGMP signal transduction. Mol Pharmacol. 2002;61:1423–1434.

Gromada J, Hog M, Renstrom E, Bokvist E, Eliasson L, Noguchi Y. CaM kinase II-dependent mobilization of secretory granules underlies acetylcholine-induced stimulation of exocytosis in mouse pancreatic β-cells. J Physiol. 1999;518:745–759.

Watanabe H, Takahashi R, Zhang X, Hayashi H, Ando J, Ishiki M, et al. An essential role of myosin light chain kinase in the regulation of agonist- and fluid flow-stimulated Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx in endothelial cells. FASEB J. 1998;12:341–348.

Niwa T, Matsukawa Y, Senda T, Nimura Y, Hidaka H, Niki I. Acetylcholine activates intracellular movements of insulin granules in pancreatic β-cells via inositol triphosphate-dependent mobilization of Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Diabetes. 1998;47:1699–1706.

Kim M, Kim S, Kim HS, Chang JW, Kim HW, Park CS. Regulation of rennin secretion through reversible phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase and protein phosphatase type I. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998;285:968–974.

Moncada S, Palmer RMJ, Higgs EA. Nitric oxide: physiology, pathology, and pharmacology. Pharmacol Rev. 1991;517:317–326.

Lucas KA, Pitari GM, Kazerounian S, Ruiz-Stwat I, Schulz S, Chepenik KP, et al. Guanyl cyclases and signaling by cGMP. Pharmacol Rev. 2000;52:375–413.

Yuan Z, Iida H, Inoue N, Ishikawa Y, Ishida H. Effect of SNI-2011 on amylase secretion from parotid tissue in rats and in neuronal nitric oxide synthase knockout mice. Eur J Pharmacol. 2003;464:197–216.

Inoue N, Iida H, Yuan Z, Ishikawa Y, Ishida H. Age-related decreases in the response of aquaporin-5 to acetylcholine in rat

parotid glands. J Dent Res. 2003;82:476–480.

Anthony TI, Brooks HL, Boasse D, Reonov S, Yanohko GM, Regan JW, et al. Cloned human aquaporin-1 is a cyclic GMP-gated ion channel. Mol Pharmacol. 2000;57:576–588.

Bouley R, Breton S, Sun T-X, McLaughlin M, Nsumu NN, Lin HY, et al. Nitric oxide and atrial natriuretic factor stimulation cGMP-dependent membrane insertion of aquaporin-2 in renal epithelial cells. J Clin Invest. 2000;106:1115–1126.

Mandel ID. The functions of saliva. J Dent Res. 1987;66:623–627.

Ship JA, Baum BJ. Is reduced salivary flow normal in old people? Lancet. 1990;336:1507.

Mata AD, Marques D, Rocha S, Francisco H, Santos C, Mesquita MF, et al. Effect of diabetes mellitus on salivary secretion and its composition in the human. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;261:137–142.

Ishikawa Y, Inoue N, Zhenfang Y, Nakae Y. Molecular mechanisms and drug development in aquaporin water channel diseases: the translocation of aquaporin-5 from lipid rafts to the apical plasma membranes of parotid glands of normal rats and impairment of it in diabetic or aged rats. J Pharmacol Sci. 2004;96:271–273.

Ishida H, Miki N, Yoshida H. Role of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in the secretion of amylase from the parotid glands. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1971;21:227–238.

Ishida H, Miki N, Hata F, Yoshida H. Conformational changes in zymogen granules from the parotid glands induced by ATP and a low concentration of Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1971;21:239–251.

Amano I, Ishikawa Y, Eguchi T, Ishida H. Regulation of phosphorylation of Gi2α protein controls the secretory response to isoproterenol in rat parotid tissues. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996;1313:146–156.

Ishikawa Y, Amano I, Eguchi T, Ishida H. Mechanism of isoproterenol-induced heterologous desensitization of mucin secretion: Regulation of phosphorylation of Gi proteins controls the cell response to the subsequent stimulation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995;1265:173–180.

Ishikawa Y, Chen C, Eguchi T, Skowronski MT, Ishida H. Developmental enhancement of secretory response to isoproterenol coupled with increases in β-adrenoceptor density of Gs protein function in rat parotid tissues. Mech Aging Develop. 1998;104:75–90.

Burgoyne RD, Morgan A. Secretory granule exocytosis. Physiol Rev. 2003;83:581–632.

Hay JC, Martin TFJ. Resolution of regulated secretion into sequential MgATP-dependent and calcium dependent stages mediated by distinct cytosolic proteins. J Cell Biol. 1992;119:139–151.

Walent JH, Porter BW, Martin TFJ. A novel 145Kd brain cytosolic protein reconstitutes Ca<sup>2+</sup>-regulated secretion in permeable neuroendocrine cells. Cell. 1992;70:765–775.

Seino S, Shibasaki T. PKA-dependent and PKA-independent pathway for cAMP-regulated exocytosis. Physiol Rev. 2005;85:1303–1342.

Imai A, Nashida T, Shimomura H. mRNA expression of membrane-fusion-related proteins in rat parotid gland. Arch Oral Biol. 2001;46:955–962.

Fasshauser HC, Sutton RB, Brünger AT, Jahn R. Conserved structural features of the synaptic fusion complex: SNARE

proteins reclassified as Q- and R-SNAREs. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 1998;95:15781–15786.
73 Bennett MK, Scheller RH. The molecular machinery for secretion is conserved yeast to neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
1993;90:2559–2563.
74 Rothman JE, Warren G. Implication of the SNARE hypothesis
for intracellular membrane topology and dynamics. Curr Biol.
1994;4:220–233.
75 Barnard RJ, Morgan A, Burgoyne RD. Stimulation of NSF
ATPase activity by αSNAP is required for SNARE complex
disassembly and exocytosis. J Cell Biol. 1997;139:875–883.
76 Hosono R, Hekimi S, Kamiya Y, Sassa T, Murakami S,
Nishiwaki S, et al. The unc-18 gene encodes a novel protein
affecting the kinetics of acetylcholine metabolism in nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Neurochem. 1992;58:1517–1525.
77 Novick P, Schekman R. Secretion and cell-surface growth are
blocked in a temperature sensitive mutant of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1979;76:1858–1862.
78 Halachmi N, Lev Z. The Sec-1 family: a novel family of proteins
involved in synaptic transmission and general secretion. J
Neurochem. 1996;66:889–897.
79 Dububova I, Sugita S, Hill S, Hosaka M, Fernandez I, Sudhof
TC, Rizo J. A conformational switch in syntaxin during
exocytosis: role of munc18. EMBO J. 1999;18:4372–4382.
80 Yang B, Steegmaier M, Gonzalez LC Jr, Scheller RH. nSec1
binds a closed conformation of syntaxin 1A. J Cell Biol.
2000;148:247–252.
81 Pfeffer SR. Rab GTPase: specifying and deciphering organelle
identify and function. Trends Cell Biol. 2001;11:487–491.
82 Geppert M, Bolshakov VY, Siegelbaum SA, Takei K, DeCamilli
P, Hammer RE, et al. The role of Rab3A in neurotransmitter
release. Nature. 1994;369:493–497.
83 Darchen F, Goud B. Multiple aspects of Rab protein action in the
secretory pathway: focus on Rab 3 and Rab 6. Biochimie.
2000;82:375–384.
84 Shirataki H, Kaibuchi K, Sakuda T, Kishida S, Yamaguchi T,
Wada K, et al. Rabphilin-3A, a putative target protein for
smg p25A/rab3Ap25 small GTP binding protein related to
synaptotagmin. Mol Cell Biol. 1993;13:2061–2068.
85 Wang Y, Okamoto M, Schmitz F, Hoffman K, Sudhof TC. Rim
is a putative Rab3 effector in regulating synaptic vesicle fusion.
Nature. 1997;388:593–598.
86 Matsumoto M, Miki T, Shibasaki T, Kawaguchi M, Shinozaki
H, Nio J, et al. Noc2 is essential in normal regulation of exocytosis in endocrine and exocrine cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2004;101:8313–8318.
87 Coppola T, Frantz C, Perret-Menoud V, Gattesco S, Hirling H,
Regazzi R. Pancreatic β cell protein granuphilin binds Rab3 and
Munc-18 and control exocytosis. Mol Biol Cell. 2002;13:1906–
1915.
88 Fuguta-Yoshigaki J, Dohke Y, Hara-Yokoyama M, Kamata Y,
Kozaki S, Furuyama S, et al. Vesicle-associated membrane
protein2 is essential for cAMP-regulated exocytosis in rat
parotid acinar cells. The inhibition of cAMP-dependent amylase
release by botulinum neurotoxin B. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:
13130–13134.
89 Raffainiello RD, Lin J, Schwimmer R, Ojakian GK. Expression
and localization of Rab3D in rat parotid gland. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 1990;1450:352–363.
90 Imai A, Yoshie S, Nashida T, Shimomura R, Fukuda M. The

small GTPase Rab27B regulates amylase release from rat
parotid acinar cells. J Cell Sci. 2004;117:1945–1953.
91 El-Amraoui A, Schonn JS, Kussel-Andermann P, Blanchard S,
Desnos C, Henry JP, et al. MyRIP, a novel Rab effector, enables
myosin VIla recruitment to retinal melanosomes. EMBO Rep.
2002;3:463–470.
92 Wang Y, Sugita S, Dsudhof TC. The RIM/NIM family of
neuronal C2 domain proteins. Interaction with Rab3 and a new
class of Src homology 3 domain proteins. J Biol Chem.
2000;275:20033–20044.
93 Ishikawa Y, Iida H, Skowronski MT, Ishida H. Activation of
endogenous nitric oxide synthase coupled with methacholin-
induced exocytosis in rat parotid acinar cells. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 2002;301:355–363.
94 Campos-Toimil M, Edwardson JM, Thomas P. Real-time studies
of zymogen granule exocytosis in intact rat pancreatic acinar
cells. J Physiol. 2000;528:317–326.
95 Belan PV, Gerasimenko O, Tepikin A, Petersen OH. Localization of Ca²⁺ extrusion sites in pancreatic acinar cells. J Biol
Chem. 1996;271:7615–7619.
96 Putney JW Jr. TRP, inositol 1,4,5,-trisphosphate receptors, and
capacitative calcium entry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999;96:
14669–14671.
97 Thorn P, Gerasimenko O, Petersen OH. Cyclic ADP-ribose
regulation of ryanodine receptors involved in agonist evoked
cytosolic Ca²⁺ oscillation in pancreatic acinar cells. EMBO J.
1994;13:2038–2043.
98 Morgan RD, Burgoyne JW, Barclay TJ, Craig GR, Prescott LF,
Giufio GJO, et al. Regulation of exocytosis by protein kinase C.
Biochem Soc Trans. 2005;33:1341–1344.
99 Newton AC. Protein kinase C: structural and spatial regulation
by phosphorylation, cofactors, and macromolecular interactions.
Chem Rev. 2001;101:2353–2364.
100 Rhee JS, Betz A, Pyott S, Reim K, Varoqueaux FIA, Hesse D,
et al. Beta phorbol ester- and diacylglycerol-induced augmentation of transmitter release is mediated by Munc13s and not by
PKCs. Cell. 2002;108:121–133.
101 Gonelle-Gispert C, Costa M, Takahashi M, Sadoul K, Halban P.
Phosphorylation of SNAP-25 on serine-187 is induced by
secretagogues in insulin-secreting cells, but is not correlated
with insulin secretion. Biochem J. 2002;368:223–232.
102 Risinger C, Bennett MK. Differential phosphorylation of
syntaxin and synaptosome-associated protein of 25 kDa (SNAP-
25) isoforms. J Neurochem. 1999;72:614–624.
103 Hepp R, Puri N, Hohenstein AC, Crawford GL, Whiteheart SW,
Roche PA. Phosphorylation of SNAP-23 regulates exocytosis
from mast cells. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:6610–6620.
104 Polgar J, Lane WS, Chung SH, Houng AK, Reed GL. Phosphorylation of SNAP-23 in activated human platelets. J Biol
Chem. 2003;278:44369–44376.
105 Toonen RF, Verhage M. Vesicle trafficking: pleasure and pain
from SM genes. Trends Cell Biol. 2003;13:177–186.
106 Barclay JW, Craig TJ, Fisher RJ, Ciufio Lf, Evans GJO, Morgan
A, et al. Phosphorylation of Munc18 by protein kinase C
regulates the kinetics of exocytosis. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
10538–10545.
107 Craig TJ, Evans GJ, Morgan A. Physiological regulation of
Munc18/nSec1 phosphorylation on serine-313. J Neurochem.
2003;86:1450–1457.
108 Reed GI, Houng AK, Fitzgerald ML. Human platelets contain

SNARE proteins and a Sec1p homologue that interacts with syntaxin 4 and is phosphorylated after thrombin activation: implications for platelet secretion. Blood. 1999;93:2617–2626.

109 Fujita Y, Sasaki T, Fukai K, Kotani H, Kimura T, Hata Y, et al. Phosphorylation of Munc-18/n-Sec1/rbSec1 by protein kinase C: its implication in regulating the interaction of Munc-18/n-Sec1/rbSec1 with syntaxin. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:7265–7268.

110 Chavez-Noriega LE, Stevens CF. Increased transmitter release at excitatory synapses produced by direct activation of adenylate cyclase in rat hippocampal slices. J Neurosci. 1974;4:310–317.

111 Burgoyne RD. Mechanisms of secretion from adrenal chromaffin cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1984;779:201–216.

112 Morgan A, Wilkinson M, Burgoyne RD. Identification of Exo2 as the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A reveals a role for cyclic AMP in Ca²⁺-dependent exocytosis in chromaffin cells. EMBO J. 1993;12:3747–3752.

113 Rabe CS, Schneider J, McGee R: Enhancement of depolarization-dependent neurosecretion from PC12 cells by forskolin-induced elevation of cAMP. J Cyclic Nucleotide Res. 1982;8:371–384.

114 Ammala C, Ashcroft FM, Rorsman P. Calcium-independent potentiation of insulin release by cyclic AMP in single B-cells. Nature. 1993;363:356–358.

115 Baldys-Waligorska A, Pour A, Moriarty CM, Dowd F. The effect of calcium and cyclic AMP on amylase release in digitonin-permeabilized parotid gland cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987;929:190–196.

116 Quissell DO, Barzen KA, Deishen LM. Rat submandibular and parotid protein phosphorylation and exocytosis: effect of site selective cAMP analogs. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med. 1993;4:443–448.

117 Takuma T, Ichida T. Cyclic AMP antagonist Rp-cAMPS inhibits amylase exocytosis from saponin-permeabilized parotid acini. J Biochem. 1991;110:292–294.

118 Muff R, Fisher JA. Parathyroid hormone secretion does not respond to changes of free calcium in electropermeabilized bovine parathyroid cells, but is stimulated with phorbol ester and cyclic AMP. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1986;139:1233–1238.

119 Gaisano HY, Shen L, Grondin G, Ghai M, Bouquillon A, Lowe A, et al. The vesicle-associated membrane protein family of proteins in rat pancreatic and parotid acinar cells. Gastroenterology. 1997;111:1661–1669.

120 Hansen J, Antonin W, Edwardson JM. Identification of SNAREs involved in regulated exocytosis in the pancreatic acinar cells. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:22871–22876.

121 Turner KM, Burgoyne RD, Morgan A. Protein phosphorylation and the regulation of synaptic membrane traffic. Trends Neurosci. 1999;22:459–464.

122 Evans GJO, Wilkinson MC, Graham ME, Turner KM, Chamberlain LH, Burgoyne RD, et al. Phosphorylation of cysteine string protein by PKA: Implication for the modulation of exocytosis. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:47878–47885.

123 Evans GJ, Morgan A. Phosphorylation-dependent interaction of the synaptic vesicle proteins cysteine string protein and synaptotagmin I. Biochem J. 2002;364:343–347.

124 Ozaki N, Shibzaki T, Kashima Y, Miki T, Takahashi K, Ueno H, et al. cAMP, GEF a direct target of cAMP in regulated exocytosis. Nat Cell Biol. 2000;2:805–811.

125 Zong N, Zucker RS. Roles of Ca²⁺, hyperpolarization and cyclic nucleotide-activated channel activation, and actin temporal synaptic tagging. J Neurosci. 2004;24:4205–4212.

126 Kaneko M, Takahashi T. Presynaptic mechanism underlying cAMP-dependent synaptic potentiation. J Neurosci. 2004;24:5204–5208.

127 Renstrom E, Eliasson I, Rorsman P. Protein kinase A-dependent and -independent stimulation of exocytosis by cAMP in mouse pancreatic B-cells. J Physiol. 1997;502:105–118.

128 Kripenski J, Coussen F, Bakalyar Ha, Tang WJ, Feinstein PG, Orth K, et al. Adenylyl cyclase amino acid sequence: possible channel- or transporter-like structure. Science. 1989;244:1558–15564.

129 Taussig R, Tang WJ, Hepler JR, Gilman AG. Distinct patterns of bidirectional regulation of mammalian adenylyl cyclases. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:6093–6100.

130 Kawabe J, Ebina T, Toya Y, Oka N, Schwencke C, Duzic E, et al. Regulation of type V adenylyl cyclase by PMA-sensitive and -insensitive protein kinase C isoenzymes in intact cells. FEBS Lett. 19965;384:273–276.

131 Yoshimura M, Cooper DM. Type-specific stimulation of adenylyl cyclase by protein kinase C. J Biol Chem. 1993;268:4604–4607.

132 Chen Y, Harry A, Li J, Smit MJ, Bai X, Magnusse NR, et al. Adenylyl cyclase VI is selectively regulated by protein kinase A phosphorylation in a region involved in Gas stimulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997;94:14100–14104.

133 Iwami G, Kawabe J, Ebina T, Cannon PJ, Homcy CJ, Ishikawa Y. Regulation of adenylyl cyclase by protein kinase A. J Biol Chem. 1995;270:12481–12484.

134 Charbonneau H, Kumar S, Novack JP, Blumenthal DK, Griffin PR, Shabanowitz J, et al. Evidence for domain organization within the 61-kDa calmodulin-dependent cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase from bovine brain. Biochemistry. 1991;30:7931–7940.

135 Yan C, Zhao AZ, Rentley JK, Loughney K, Ferguson K, Veavo JA. Molecular cloning and characterization of a calmodulin-dependent phosphodiesterase enriched in olfactory sensory neuron. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1995;92:9677–9681.

136 Conti M, Richter W, Mehats C, Livera G, Park JY, Jin C. Cyclic AMP-specific PDE4 phosphodiesterases as critical components of cyclic AMP signaling. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:5493–5496.

137 Houslay MD, Adams DR. PDE4 cAMP phosphodiesterases: modular enzymes that orchestrate signaling cross-talk, desensitization and compartmentalization. Biochem J. 2003;370:1–18.

138 Oki N, Takahashi SI, Hidaka H, Conti M. Short term feedback regulation of cAMP in FRTL-5 thyroid cells. Role of PDE4D3 phosphodiesterase activation. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:10831–10837.

139 Taylor SS, Yang JU, Wu J, Baste NM, Radzio-Andzel M, Anand G. PKA: a portrait of protein kinases dynamics. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004;1697:259–269.

140 Zimmermann B, Chiorini JA, Ma Y, Kotin RM, Herberg FW. PrKX is a novel catalytic subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulated by the regulatory subunit type I. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:5370–5378.

141 Quissell DO, Deisher LM, Barzen KA. Activation and distribution of rat parotid cAMP-dependent protein kinase following beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation in vitro. Arch Oral Biol. 1989;34:23–26.

142 Scarpace PJ, Koller MM, Rajakumar G. Desipramine

desensitizes beta-adrenergic signal transduction in salivary glands: differential regulation with age. Eur J Pharmacol. 1993;247:65–72.

143 Benovic JL, Pike LJ, Cerione RA, Staniszewski C, Yoshimasa T, Codina J, et al. Phosphorylation of the mammalian beta-adrenergic receptor by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. Regulation of the rate of receptor phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by agonist occupancy and effects on coupling of the receptor to the stimulatory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein. J Biol Chem. 1985;269:7094–7101.

144 Clark RB, Kunkel MW, Friedman J, Goka TJ, Johnson JA. Activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase is required for heterologous desensitization of adenylyl cyclase in S49 wild-type lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1988;85:1442–1446.

145 Hausdorff WP, Bouvier M, O’Dowd BE, Iros GP, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Phosphorylation sites on two domains of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor are involved in distinct pathways of receptor desensitization. J Biol Chem. 1989;264:12657–12665.

146 Krasel C, Vilardaga JP, Bunemann M, Lohse MJ. Kinetics of G-protein-coupled receptor signalling and desensitization. Biochem Soc Trans. 2004;32:1029–1031.

147 Lohse MJ, Benovic CJ, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Multiple pathways of rapid beta 2-adrenergic receptor desensitization. Delineation with specific inhibitors. J Biol Chem. 1990;265:3202–3209.

148 Ekstrom J. Sensitization of the rat parotid gland to secretagogues following either parasympathetic denervation or sympathetic denervation or decentralization. Acta Physiol Scand. 1980;108:253–261.

149 De Peusner ICW, Perec CJ, Stefano FJE. Effects of sympathectomy on the in vitro and β-responses of the parotid glands. Naunyn Schmiedeberg Arch Pharmacol. 1979;308:217–221.

150 Asking B, Emmelin N. Amylase-secretory responses to sympathetic nerve impulses in the rat parotid gland following partial sympathetic ganglionectomy. Arch Oral Biol. 1987;32:469–472.

151 Watson EL, DiJulio D, Kauffman D, Iversen J, Robinovitch MR, Izutsu KT. Evidence for G proteins in rat parotid plasma membranes and secretary granule membranes. Biochem J. 1992;285:441–449.

152 Sawaki K, Hiramatsu Y, Baum BJ, Ambudkar IS. Involvement of G alpha q/11 in m3-muscarinic receptor stimulation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate-specific phospholipase C

in rat parotid gland membranes. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1993;305:546–550.

153 Palm D, Munch G, Malek D, Hekman K. Identification of a Gs-protein coupling domain to the beta-adrenoceptor using site-specific synthetic peptides. Carboxyl terminus of Gs alpha is involved in coupling to beta-adrenoceptors. FEBS Lett. 1990;261:294–298.

154 Briggs MM, Stadel JM, Iyengar R, Lefkowitz RJ. Functional modification of the guanine nucleotide regulatory protein after desensitization of turkey erythrocytes by catecholamines. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1983;224:142–151.

155 Garrity MJ, Andreasen TJ, Storm DR, Robertson RP. Prostaglandin E-induced heterologous desensitization of hepatic adenylate cyclase. Consequences on the guanyl nucleotide regulatory complex. J Biol Chem. 1983;258:8692–8697.

156 Simonds WF, Goldsmith PK, Codina J, Unson C, Spiegel AM. Gi2 mediates alpha 2-adrenergic inhibition of adenylyl cyclase in platelet membranes: in situ identification with G alpha C-terminal antibodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1989;86:7809–7813.

157 Katada T, Gilman AG, Watanabe Y, Bauer S, Jakobs KH. Protein kinase C phosphorylates the inhibitory guanine-nucleotide-binding regulatory component and apparently suppresses its function in hormonal inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Eur J Biochem. 1985;151:431–437.

158 Watanabe Y, Imaizumi T, Misaki N, Iwakura K, Yoshida H. Effects of phosphorylation of inhibitory GTP-binding protein by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase on its ADP-ribosylation by pertussis toxin, islet-activating protein. FEBS Lett. 1988;236:372–374.

159 Rich KA, Codina J, Floyd G, Sekura R, Hildebrandt JD, Iyengar R. Glucagon-induced heterologous desensitization of the MDCK cell adenylyl cyclase. Increases in the apparent levels of the inhibitory regulator (Ni). J Biol Chem. 1984;259:7893–7901.

160 Reithmann C, Gierschik P, Sidiropoulos D, Werdan K, Jakob KH. Mechanism of noradrenaline-induced heterologous desensitization of adenylate cyclase stimulation in rat heart muscle cells: increase in the level of inhibitory G-protein alpha-subunits. Eur J Pharmacol. 1989;172:211–221.

161 Hubbard MJ, Cohen P. Regulation of protein phosphatase-1G from rabbit skeletal muscle. 1. Phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase at site 2 releases catalytic subunit from the glycogen-bound holoenzyme. Eur J Biochem. 1989;186:701–709.
