
VIRAL IMMUNOLOGY  
Volume 19, Number 2, 2006  
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.  
Pp. 133–146  

---

**Review**

Coxsackievirus Myocarditis: Interplay between Virus and Host in the Pathogenesis of Heart Disease

PATRICIA E. TAM

---

**ABSTRACT**

Coxsackievirus (CVB) infection is a significant cause of myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Heart disease may be caused by direct cytopathic effects of the virus, a pathologic immune response to persistent virus, or autoimmunity triggered by the viral infection. CVB interacts with its host at multiple stages during disease development. Signaling through viral receptors may alter the intracellular environment in addition to facilitating virus entry. Viral genetic determinants that encode cardiovirulence have been mapped and may change depending on the nutritional status of the host. Virus persistence is directly associated with pathology, and recent work demonstrates that CVB evolves into a slowly replicating form capable of establishing a low-grade infection in the heart. The innate immune response to CVB has taken on increasing importance because of its role in shaping the development of the adaptive immune response that is responsible for cardiac pathology. Studies of T cell responsiveness and the development of autoimmunity at the molecular level are beginning to clarify the mechanisms through which CVB infection causes inflammatory heart disease.

---

**INTRODUCTION**

MYOCARDITIS IS COMMONLY defined as heart disease consisting of inflammation of the myocardium accompanied by cardiomyocyte necrosis. The underlying causes of myocarditis may vary, with distinctions being drawn between idiopathic, autoimmune, and infectious forms (89, 93, 103). According to current WHO/WHF guidelines (109) cardiomyopathy or, more, simply put, heart muscle disease, accompanied by detection of persistent virus, is defined as viral cardiomyopathy. In the presence of immunohistological detection of a combined total of at least 14 lymphocytes and macrophages/mm², the terms viral myocarditis or inflammatory viral cardiomyopathy are used. The incidence of myocarditis is thought to be underestimated, as many cases are asymptomatic. Patients diagnosed with acute myocarditis may recover with little or no permanent damage when given bed rest and supportive therapy. In other cases, myocarditis can cause sudden death or lead to the development of DCM, a chronic condition in which the heart becomes weakened and enlarged. Unlike skeletal muscle, which has significant regenerative potential, cardiac myocytes have minimal self-healing capabilities and may be permanently damaged by cytopathic viral infections. Cardiomyocyte calcification and extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix with fibrosis often occur in the aftermath of myocardial infection (46). Progression to

---

Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

DCM may ensue due to cardiomyocyte loss accompanied by fibrosis and scar tissue formation causing a loss of contractility and ventricular enlargement. A variety of infectious agents including viruses have been detected in biopsy samples from patients with myocarditis or DCM (37, 70, 78). Chief among these are the type B coxsackieviruses (CVB), adenovirus, and parvovirus B19. Technologic advances have improved the detection of viruses in the heart, with a significant impact on confirming a role for these agents and influencing current therapeutic approaches. A recent study found that the prognosis in viral cardiomyopathy patients is associated with persistence or clearance of virus (79). In the initial patient group, biopsy-verified viral infection was found for enterovirus (32.6%), adenovirus (8.1%), parvovirus B19 (36.6%), and human herpesvirus 6 (10.5%). On follow-up at least 5 months later, a significant improvement in left ventricular function was observed in patients who cleared any of the viral genomes detected initially, whereas function was diminished in those who did not clear virus. Although there are still many questions regarding appropriate treatment, future efforts are likely to require tailoring the treatment to the underlying cause, depending on whether it is infectious or driven by a destructive immune response (7).

Murine models that reproduce most of the features of human myocarditis provide direct evidence for CVB involvement and have helped to unveil the underlying complexity of virus-host interactions involved in the disease process. Viral infection, persistence, and the immune response may all contribute to varying degrees in the pathogenesis of myocarditis and its progression to DCM. CVB are members of the Human enterovirus B cluster in the family Picornaviridae (65). They are nonenveloped viruses with a single-stranded RNA genome of positive-strand orientation that acts as a messenger RNA upon infection. CVB are best known as cytolytic viruses that kill the cells they infect. Infection of susceptible strains of mice with myocarditic CVB3 causes a biphasic disease. The acute stage is characterized by viral infection of the heart with acute necrosis and associated inflammation. This stage resolves within 2 weeks, after which virus can no longer be cultured by the usual methods. Chronic myocarditis develops thereafter with infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells and progressive fibrosis. The end stage is reminiscent of DCM with fibrosis and ventricular dilation. There is a large body of research on coxsackievirus myocarditis with many excellent reviews on various aspects of the disease in both humans and experimental mouse models (16, 21, 40, 56, 80, 85, 90, 107, 133, 134). The intimate relationship between CVB and its host makes it difficult to discuss one without considering the other. By necessity, this review does not intend to be comprehensive in all aspects of CVB-induced heart

TAM disease but will present some background information on CVB-induced myocarditis as well as recent advances in our understanding of pathogenesis during the interaction of CVB with its host.

### CVB RECEPTORS AND CARDIOTROPISM

The discovery that coxsackievirus and adenovirus use the same receptor provided a satisfying explanation for why these seemingly unrelated viruses are both associated with the development of myocarditis (12, 22, 124). The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) is a 46 kDa member of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily. All six CVB serotypes use CAR as the primary receptor for cell entry (92). CAR expression is higher in neonates and decreases during postnatal development (67, 71), which may explain the enhanced susceptibility of the young to viral myocarditis. Although it seems axiomatic that the expression of CAR would govern tropism, it is less clear whether it always provides an efficient portal of entry. As a component of the intercellular tight junction, CAR is fairly inaccessible to virus (27). In the hearts of adult mice and humans, CAR is expressed as two isoforms in the intercalated disc (120), a region of cell-cell contact involved in excitation-contraction coupling. Defects in excitation-contraction coupling are found in DCM, but whether this is related to changes in CAR expression is not known. Genetic screening of patients with acquired or familial myocarditis or DCM has not uncovered any significant mutations in CAR that are associated with susceptibility (15). It has been suggested that CAR is a pathfinder protein expressed during development but not essential for maintaining the structural integrity of adult tissue. CAR expression changes readily in a number of tissues under different conditions. It is upregulated in the hearts of rats with autoimmune myocarditis induced by immunization with cardiac myosin (67). It is also upregulated in the hearts of DCM patients (102, 111), potentially increasing their vulnerability to infection. Explanted rat cardiomyocytes upregulate CAR when incubated in conditioned medium obtained from Con A-activated splenocytes (67), raising the possibility that infiltration of activated lymphocytes into the myocardium may further augment susceptibility to CVB infection. On the other hand, TNFα and IFNγ, either alone or in combination, downregulate CAR expression in human umbilical vein and microvascular endothelial cells (129), which could decrease junctional integrity and facilitate lymphocyte transmigration into tissues. Thus, the level of CAR expression may have multiple consequences in the pathobiology of myocarditis and DCM.

The extracellular domain of CAR is sufficient for CVB attachment and internalization (130). However, clinical

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

isolates of CVB serotypes 1, 3, and 5 also bind to decay accelerating factor (DAF; CD55). DAF belongs to a cluster of genes involved in regulating complement activation and accelerates the decay of C3 convertase in both the classical and alternate pathways. DAF sequesters virus and facilitates its binding to CAR but is not directly involved in formation of the structurally-altered A-particle required for virus entry (13, 96, 118, 119). On the other hand, CVB3 will adapt to and replicate in RD cells that do not express detectable levels of CAR but do express DAF (13). Thus, the existence of alternative, perhaps lower affinity, receptors capable of facilitating entry remains an area of ongoing speculation and exploration (106, 108, 114). Heparan sulfate has been described as a second receptor for the laboratory-derived PD variant of CVB3 strain Nancy which is capable of infecting DAF- and CAR-negative cells because of substitutions in VP1 (140). It is well established that CVB binds to human but not rodent DAF (122). Nonetheless, differences in DAF binding are associated with cardiovirulence in mice (91). It is possible that mice possess a surrogate molecule that binds to the DAF footprint on CVB, which could include other regulators of complement activation that are structurally similar. Upregulation of DAF expression in vascular endothelium by proinflammatory cytokines such as TNFα (1) helps to protect host cells from complement deposition and injury but could also be exploited by CVB to promote its own transmigration across the endothelial barrier. DAF is abundantly expressed on the apical surface of these cells and has recently emerged as an active player in this process. When bound by virus, DAF triggers activation of Abl kinase and Rac-dependent rearrangements of actin that facilitate its transport to the tight junction where it can interact with CAR (28). Moreover, Fyn, a Src kinase, is activated by DAF binding and mediates caveolin phosphorylation and transport of virus into the cell. Additional connections between DAF binding and cardiovirulence exist beyond those just described and are discussed below in the sections on viral determinants and signaling in the immune response to virus.

VIRAL DETERMINANTS OF CARDIOVIRULENCE

CVB3 and CVB4 are the serotypes most commonly associated with myocarditis. Early studies found that myocarditic CVB3 replicates initially in the acinar tissue of the pancreas followed by focal replication in the myocardium (47). Most naturally occurring field strains of CVB3 cause pancreatitis when injected into mice, but only a fraction cause myocarditis (125). Amplification of viral titers in the more permissive environment of the pancreas may help to facilitate subsequent infection of the heart. Transgenic expression of IFNγ in the pancreas blocks the development of CVB3-induced myocarditis despite the fact that no IFNγ was detected in other tissues or in serum, suggesting that the pancreas acts as a reservoir for virus, and that pathogenesis of heart disease begins in the pancreas (55). Comparative studies show that a cardiovirulent CVB3 strain replicates to higher titers in serum, pancreas, and heart than noncardiovirulent strains (125). However, there are strains that replicate equally well in the heart with varying amounts of myocardial necrosis and damage but do not induce a strong inflammatory response (20, 42, 44, 48). For therapeutic purposes, limiting the replication of a myocarditic strain is likely to be beneficial, but the observation that replication of CVB in the heart is not always sufficient to cause myocarditis suggests that additional factors are involved.

A number of studies have implicated the 5′ non-translated region (5′ NTR) in cardiovirulence and suggest that it may be a secondary determinant of tropism. The 5′ NTR is a region of approximately 741 nucleotides that possesses a highly conserved RNA secondary structure. It controls translation of viral proteins and plays a role in replication of viral RNA. A number of host proteins bind to various regions of the 5′ NTR. For example, the multifunctional cellular protein La shows a highly specific interaction with nucleotides 210–529 and binds with lower affinity to other regions (24). A single mutation at U234C in a laboratory strain of CVB3 attenuates cardiovirulence (127). The presence of U234C attenuates viral replication, most likely through inhibitory effects on RNA transcription. Inoculation of this mutant into scid mice caused massive cardiomyocyte necrosis and reversion to the myocarditic determinant 234U. Chimeras constructed from clinical isolates also point to the 5′ NTR as a determinant of cardiovirulence in naturally-occurring strains (30). However, examination of 13 of these strains revealed that 234U is strictly conserved, regardless of cardiovirulence phenotype (23). In fact, 234U exists within a 5-mer (5′-232 CGUUAA<sub>236</sub>) that is completely conserved in enteroviruses and located in a predicted single-stranded region between RNA structural domains III and IV. Mutational analysis has shown that this sequence affects synthesis of the positive RNA strand and is essential to achieve wild-type levels of viral replication (135). Replication defects are more pronounced in murine compared to human cells, which may indicate a role for host factor binding to this region. Domain II in the 5′ NTR is also implicated in cardiovirulence. Again, attenuated viruses were defective for replication in mouse myocardial fibroblasts but not HeLa cells (29), demonstrating tissue and species tropism in a receptor-independent manner. The 5′ NTR of CVB3 also affects replication in the pancreas (49). The

identity of the putative host factors that control these differences in permissiveness and pathology is not known. Resistance to infection in the kidney and the aging heart correlates with binding of a 28 kDa protein to CVB 3 antisense sequence from nucleotides 210–529 (25), and additional studies of tissue-specific binding proteins seem warranted. Despite the information pointing to pathologic determinants encoded by the 5′ NTR, its exact role in pathogenesis is far from understood.

Capsid regions have also been mapped as cardiovirulence determinants. Reduced pancreovirulence and cardiovirulence have been documented in neutralizing antibody escape mutants with VP2 and VP3 mutations in close proximity to each other near the puff region of VP2 and the knob of VP3, both located in a putative DAF footprint (123). The amyocarditic CVB3 strain H310A, an antibody escape mutant of myocarditic strain H3, has reduced receptor binding avidity (128). H310A differs from its H3 parent virus by an N165D mutation in the puff region of VP2 (77). This region, by analogy to the footprint for binding of echovirus 7, is associated with the A region of the footprint for virus binding to DAF (51). H310A causes reduced TNFα production and is a poor inducer of apoptosis, but replicates as well as H3. The PD variant of CVB3 Nancy has enhanced cytolytic activity in human fibroblasts that are localized to mutations in VP1 (114). This variant has weak binding to CAR but strong binding to DAF. Although this variant also uses heparan sulfate as an alternate entry receptor (140), it fits in this class of mutants where changes in DAF binding are linked to differences in pathogenicity.

The interaction between viral pathogenicity and host susceptibility became more complex with the demonstration that genetic determinants of cardiovirulence can change readily depending on the nutritional status of the host. This seminal discovery found that cardiovirulence of CVB3 was increased in selenium-deficient mice, and that increased virulence was tied to the reversion of determinants found in myocarditic CVB3 strains (8–10). The practical significance of this work was a better understanding of endemic cardiomyopathy, known as Keshan disease, in the Keshan province of the People’s Republic of China. Selenium supplementation effectively reduced the incidence of Keshan disease, but involvement of CVB was an additional factor that emerged as nutrition-dependent. In RNA viruses that exist as quasispecies, nutritional status may impose different fitness requirements that direct the emergence of strains with varying degrees of virulence.


TAM

ously, the presence of viral genome in the myocardium is associated with progressively impaired cardiac function (79). In mice, viral replication and persistence correlate both spatially and temporally with the development of cardiac lesions at the sites of viral replication (74). Direct cytopathic effects of viral gene expression have been demonstrated in cardiomyocytes transfected with CVB3 constructs that are mutated at the VP4/VP2 junction and cannot undergo the final step of maturation cleavage in virion assembly (131). When constitutively expressed in the myocardium of transgenic mice under control of the cardiac-specific myosin light chain promoter, this construct caused myocardial fibrosis and myocyte degeneration that resembled DCM (132). Other features included ventricular dilation and defective excitation-contraction coupling. Direct pathologic effects of CVB proteins on cardiomyocytes include cleavage of dystrophin by viral protease 2A (6). Nitrosylation of cysteine in the active site of the 2A protease inactivates it and may be a mechanism whereby nitric oxide, which is elevated in DCM, is protective (5).

Numerous studies have detected persistent CVB RNA in target tissues such as the pancreas, heart, and skeletal muscle, but it has not been possible to culture persistent virus from immunocompetent mice, raising the question of whether CVB truly causes persistent infection. A recent study provided the first direct evidence that infectious CVB3 persists and evolves into a form that is noncytolytic (73). For those investigators that have searched in vain for infectious virus, this study represents a paradigm shift in how we think about CVB persistence. Analysis of the persistent virus revealed that 5′ terminal deletions (TD) of up to 49 nucleotides occur in slowly replicating forms of CVB3 that evolve in the hearts of infected mice and persist long after cytopathic virus has been cleared. TD viruses are capable of secondary in vivo infection and persist in immunocompetent or scid mice without causing overt necrosis or inflammation in the heart or pancreas. The 5′ deletions do not alter secondary structure in what remains of the domain I cloverleaf in the 5′ NTR, and even the most highly deleted TD strains retain stem-loop d, preserving the binding site for 3CD that is required for genome replication (141). It will be interesting to see how these TD strains interact with the immune system and if their slow replication mode allows them to avoid the induction of interferon (IFN). A reexamination of other mouse models and CVB serotypes as well as testing of human heart samples should reveal whether this is a common and conserved mechanism for persistence of CVB.


CVB PERSISTENCE

Persistent CVB infection may be present in as many as 40–50% of patients with DCM (4, 113). As noted previ-

INNATE IMMUNITY

The immediate response to viral infection and injury is mediated by the innate immune response. The re-

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

sponding cells include natural killer (NK) cells, NK T cells, and γδ T cells. γδ T cells express γδ T cell receptors instead of the αβ receptor found on classical T cells. They respond to antigen presented by CD1, a nonpoly- morphic class I MHC-like molecule. Few ligands for γδ T cells have been discovered, and those that are best characterized react with ubiquitous cellular glycolipids. A series of studies has shown that recognition of CD1d by γδ T cells expressing the Vγ4+ T cell receptor plays a central role in myocarditis susceptibility. A high percentage of CD3+ lymphocytes that infiltrate the heart are γδ- positive (58). Two subsets, Vγ1+ and Vγ4+, affect myocarditis development through differential effects on the CD4+ T-helper (Th) cell phenotype (60). In BALB/c mice, activation of Vγ1+ T cells suppresses the development of myocarditis by promoting a Th2 response whereas myocarditis is enhanced by activation of Vγ4+ T cells that induce a dominant Th1 response (61). The CD4+ Th1 response further promotes the differentiation of CD8+ effector T cells (64). In addition to modulating the immune response, activated Vγ4+ T cells are capable of CD1d-restricted killing of infected cardiac myocytes (57). Myocarditic CVB 3 plays a direct role in this process by upregulating CD1d expression. In contrast, the attenuated H310A CVB 3 variant does not upregulate CD1d. This difference resides in the induction of TNFα and the receptor TNFR p55 during infection by the myocarditic virus, a defect that can be bypassed by supplementing H310A-infected mice with TNFα (63). These studies paint a picture in which the initial interaction between virus and the innate immune response regulates subsequent development of the adaptive (and pathologic) immune response. Most of the studies of γδ T cells were performed in BALB/c mice, with the exception of the TNFα experiments that were performed in the C57BL/6 strain. However, the C57BL/6 studies also demonstrated that Vγ4+ T cells were present in infected myocardium. Further study should reveal whether Vγ4+ T cells are involved in other strains in which pathology is driven by an overly exuberant Th1 response.

A second component of the innate immune response uses pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to identify pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) found in microbial constituents. These PRRs are the toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are transmembrane proteins that induce production of interferons and cytokines and stimulate the adaptive immune response. Several studies show that cardiac inflammation depends on TLRs. This was observed for TLR4 in mice, which recognizes LPS, as well as TLR7 and TLR8, which recognize ssRNA, in humans (33, 126). Knockout of MyD88, an adaptor involved in TLR signaling, causes reduced cardiac transcription of cytokines IL-1β, TNFα, IFNγ, IL-10, and IL-18; reduced expression of CAR and p56<sup>lck</sup>; and increased levels of IFNα and IFNβ in CVB 3-infected mice (39). TLR4 signals through both MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent pathways. The MyD88-dependent pathway leads to production of proinflammatory cytokines, while the MyD88-independent pathway activates antiviral effectors such as IRF3, IRF7, and type I IFNs (72). Unexpectedly, knockout of TLR4 or MyD88 also attenuated CVB 3 replication in the heart. For MyD88-null mice, this could be due to reduced expression of CAR and p56<sup>lck</sup> (a kinase that is required for CVB replication) (84) combined with an effective type I IFN response, but the final answer awaits further investigation. These studies fit into a model in which the adjuvant effect caused by signaling through TLRs during the early stages of infection directs the subsequent development of pathologic effector T cells that control myocarditis development.

Stimulation through TLRs also benefits the host, since coxsackieviruses are susceptible to the antiviral effects of type I IFNs (52, 68). The response to a number of cytokines including IFNs is mediated by the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway. JAK1 plays a nonredundant role in the response to IFNα and IFNγ (110). CD45 is a transmembrane phosphatase that possesses multiple activities, acting as a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) and a JAK phosphatase. Replication of CVB 3 is impaired in CD45-deficient Jurkat cells, and CD45-null mice are completely resistant to CVB 3-induced myocarditis (66), presumably due to an enhanced antiviral IFN response but also perhaps because of NK cell expansion (138). Phosphorylation of JAK1, STAT1, and STAT3 is increased in response to IFNα in CD45-null cells. Thus, CD45 acts as a negative regulator of the antiviral IFN response. Innate JAK-STAT signaling may also be operative in nonhematopoietic cells and is part of the antiviral response in cardiomyocytes (139). Transgenic expression of the suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) inhibits JAK and STAT signaling and increases viral replication, cardiomyopathy, and mortality in CVB 3-infected mice (139). Conversely, inhibition of SOCS1 increases cardiomyocyte resistance to CVB-induced injury. An effective host response represents a balance between JAK-STAT activation and regulation by SOCS, and induction of SOCS by Day 3 postinfection may explain why IFN is most beneficial when administered early in infection (87).

ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY

B cells are important for clearing CVB infections through production of neutralizing antibodies. Humans with genetically determined agammaglobulinemia are highly susceptible to chronic infection with coxsackie-

viruses and related enteroviruses. In mice, coxsackie-
virus infection of B cells has been proposed as a reser-
voir that could facilitate dissemination of the virus
through B cell trafficking, and infected B cells have been
observed in the myocardium (3, 69, 75, 76). B cell knock-
out mice experience chronic CVB 3 infection that is sim-
ilar to that of gamma globulin–deficient humans with
chronic infection that lasts for the lifetime of the mouse
(95). Initially, viral replication and dissemination are
slightly delayed in these mice, perhaps due to loss of the
B cell reservoir. Eventually they have higher titers of
virus and myocarditis that progress to severe cardiomy-
opathy including myocardial fibrosis and a DCM-type of
pathology.

T cells are also an important component of the antivi-
ral immune response to CVB infection. Clearance of in-
fectious virus is impaired in nu/nu compared to nu/+
mice (112, 115). However, T-cell responses may also
harm the host, causing damage through immunopatho-
logic mechanisms. Early studies in nude mice showed
that the presence of mononuclear cell infiltrates was thy-
mus-dependent (50). With the advent of knockout tech-
nology, the question of T-cell dependence has been re-
visited. Studies in CD4-null mice found that they were
protected against mortality but developed more severe
myocarditis (53). Additional antibody-mediated deple-
tion of CD8⁺ T cells from these mice increased viral
titers but reduced the degree of myocarditis, implicating
CD8⁺ T cells in pathogenesis. A different research group
found that double-knockouts of both CD4- and CD8-pos-
itive cells or T-cell receptor β chain knockout mice
showed the greatest protection from myocardial inflam-
mation (105). Protection was associated with elevated
levels of IFNγ and decreased TNFα. Individual knock-
outs revealed enhanced myocarditis in CD8-null mice
and less myocarditis in CD4-null mice. Although the
first study suggests a greater role for CD8⁺ T cells and
the second for CD4⁺ T cells as mediators of im-
munopathology, differences in these studies are likely
due to the genetic background of the strains with the first
study performed in C57BL/6 (H-2ᵇ/ᵇ) mice and the sec-
ond in the highly susceptible A/J (H-2ᵏ/ᵏ) strain. What
they both illustrate is that adaptive responses of T cells
are an integral part of the pathologic process in my-
ocarditis, and that the response of different T cell sub-
sets to CVB 3 may lead to the same clinical pathology.
One can envision a dual role for T cells, for example,
with antiviral cytotoxic CD8⁺ T cells helping to clear the
infection while also exacerbating myocarditis. These sep-
arate activities can be distinguished in perforin knockout
mice in which myocarditis is alleviated without altering
virus clearance (45).

It has become clear that intact signal transduction path-
ways are necessary for the generation of normal T-cell

TAM
responses as well as for efficient replication and release
of virus. Tyrosine protein kinase p56ˡᶜᵏ is a sarcoma (Src)
family kinase expressed in thymocytes, peripheral T
cells, B cells, and NK cells (14). In T cells, p56ˡᶜᵏ asso-
ciates with the cytoplasmic domains of CD4 and CD8
and interacts with the β chain of the IL2 receptor.
p56ˡᶜᵏ⁻/⁻ mice have defective T-cell activation and re-
duced numbers of T cells (97). p56ˡᶜᵏ is required for vi-
ral replication and persistence in vivo as well as replica-
tion in Jurkat cells *in vitro* (84). p56ˡᶜᵏ⁻/⁻ mice are
protected from development of myocarditis and show a
low-grade infection with impaired replication of CVB 3
in the heart, brain, pancreas, and spleen. Reconstitution
of null mice with T cells from p56ˡᶜᵏ⁺/⁺ mice restores
viral pathogenicity. The mechanism for protection-medi-
ated by p56ˡᶜᵏ⁻/⁻ appears to involve complex interac-
tions that are not completely understood. There are indi-
cations that p56ˡᶜᵏ is expressed in cardiac myocytes (104),
but this does not explain why reconstitution of p56ˡᶜᵏ⁻/⁻
mice with wild-type T cells restores CVB 3 replication in
the heart, especially since mice that lack T cells are fully
susceptible to infection. Upregulation of CAR or other
permissiveness factors could occur in response to cy-
tokines produced as a result of signaling through p56ˡᶜᵏ.
If so, T-cell reconstitution may have supplied sufficient
amounts of the missing cytokine. A second aspect of
p56ˡᶜᵏ involvement is its upregulation in splenic T lym-
phocytes of mice fed a zinc-deficient diet (82), prompt-
ing speculation that p56ˡᶜᵏ may be involved in enhanc-
ing CVB virulence in nutritionally deficient states such
as that described for selenium deficiency.

Signal transduction events that occur both upstream
and downstream of p56ˡᶜᵏ also influence susceptibility to
infection and myocarditis. Cross-linking of the short con-
sensus region 3 of ectopically expressed glycosyl-phos-
phatidylinositol (GPI) anchored DAF transduces activa-
tion signals, stimulates tyrosine kinase activity and forms
complexes with src kinases p56ˡᶜᵏ and p59ᶠʸⁿ in EL-4 thy-
moma cells (121). A better understanding of DAF- and
CAR-mediated signal transduction may provide a link be-
tween altered receptor binding associated with car-
diovirulence-attenuated mutants and functional effects
downstream. In this regard, the signal transduction me-
diated by attenuated mutants that map in the putative
DAF-binding region of virus would be worth examining.
Interaction of CVB with co-receptors such as DAF may
be more than just a means of getting into the cell; it may
also be a means of conditioning the cell to support pro-
ductive infection. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1
and 2 (ERK1/2) is another host factor required for maxi-
mum levels of CVB 3 replication and killing of HeLa
cells (86). ERK1/2 is a mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) that is upregulated in a biphasic manner, both
early and later in infection. Early activation occurs even

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

when virus is UV-inactivated, suggesting that binding to the receptor and/or coreceptor is sufficient for triggering. ERK1/2 is also activated by CVB3 infection of Jurkat T cells and cardiac myocytes, and activation is required to attain maximal titers of virus (104). In Jurkat cells, ERK1/2 is activated downstream of p56<sup>lck</sup> and its deficiency probably contributes to the p56<sup>lck-/-</sup> phenotype. It is also activated to a greater extent in myocarditis-susceptible A/J mice than in the more resistant C57BL/6 mice. In general, active cell division provides an environment that is conducive to CVB3 replication (35, 36). The developing story of p56<sup>lck</sup> and ERK1/2 suggests that many of the same signals used by T cells to respond to foreign antigen also promote viral replication, which may provide an added advantage to the virus.

### AUTOIMMUNITY

The primary focus of this review has been on experimental studies of CVB infection conducted in murine or cell culture models. Nevertheless, when it comes to the role of autoimmunity in DCM and myocarditis, patient studies provide an informative backdrop to put the experimental data in perspective. Among the features that fulfill the criteria of autoimmune disease are clustering of autoimmune diseases in first-degree relatives of DCM patients (83), DCM-like histopathologic and immunopathologic changes in asymptomatic relatives (88), and an increased presence of disease and cardiac-specific autoantibodies in patients and their families (17, 19). Autoantibodies that react with the cardiac-specific antigen α-myosin occur in both DCM and myocarditis (18, 81). A large randomized control study published over a decade ago did not show any benefit of immunosuppressive therapy, raising questions about whether pathology was immune-mediated (94). As the information obtained from endomyocardial biopsies, virologic status, and other biomarkers improved, important distinctions could be drawn between different subsets of cardiomyopathy. Current indications are that immunosuppressive therapy does improve disease outcome in certain cases. Adsorptive removal of circulating immunoglobulin improves cardiovascular function in DCM patients (34), and immunosuppression is beneficial in those DCM patients who show upregulation of HLA expression on biopsy specimens (136). A study of active lymphocytic myocarditis found distinct differences between patient populations that correlated with responsiveness to a combination of prednisone and azathioprine therapy (38). Except for three patients who were positive for hepatitis C virus, none of the responders were positive for other viral genomes, and circulating cardiac autoantibodies were present in 90% of this group overall. In contrast, 85% of nonresponders were positive for viral genomes, and all nonresponders were negative for autoantibodies. This suggests a dichotomy whereby immunopathology and autoimmunity are responsible for disease in responders, and virus-mediated pathology is predominant in nonresponders. Transfer of peripheral blood leukocytes from virus-negative myocarditis patients into scid mice caused accumulation of inflammatory cells in the myocardium and impaired left ventricular function (116). These mice also developed human autoantibodies to adenine nucleotide translocator, a myocardial autoantigen. These studies support the existence of autoimmune heart disease in a subset of patients, but the question remains as to whether it is triggered by infection.

Infection of mice with CVB3 induces humoral and cell-mediated autoreactivity. Variations are observed depending on the strain of mouse, and there may be different pathways that lead to autoimmunity (32). An additional caveat is that the presence of autoreactivity, by itself, is not proof of autoimmune disease. Nondiseased individuals may have detectable levels of circulating autoantibodies with no apparent ill effects. There are numerous reports of heart-specific autoantibodies induced by CVB infection (41, 43, 137). Infection of A.CA and A.SW strains with CVB3 causes chronic myocarditis and development of IgG autoantibodies directed primarily against myosin, unlike myocarditis-resistant B10.S and B10.PL mice that produce autoantibodies of the IgM class (2, 98). The anti-myosin IgG autoantibodies did not cross-react with virus (99). Cross-reactivity was observed between an anti-CVB4 neutralizing monoclonal antibody and cardiac myosin, indicating that there may be shared epitopes (11). Cardiac myosin is immunogenic, and immunization causes myocarditis (101). However, the antibodies that are produced do not passively transfer disease and do not appear to actively mediate autoimmunity (100). Induction of peripheral tolerance to cardiac myosin using antigen-coupled splenocytes does not prevent CVB3-induced myocarditis in the NOD mouse (54). These myosin-tolerized mice do not produce cardiac myosin autoantibodies but continue to produce autoantibodies to other heart antigens. This contrasts with a similar study where tolerization to an immunodominant streptococcal M protein peptide with similarity to cardiac myosin induced partial tolerance to CVB3-induced myocarditis in MRL<sup>+/+</sup> mice (59). The development of myocarditis in B cell knockout mice suggests that autoantibodies are not required for disease in C57BL/6 mice (95). Given the importance of antibodies for virus clearance, an alternate interpretation is that the disease mechanism shifts to one that is now mediated by virus, as illustrated by studies in scid mice (26). In most strains of mice, and even in humans, autoantibodies appear to be useful markers of disease activity but are not directly pathogenic.

T cells have also been implicated in CVB-induced autoimmunity (62). Although the exact mechanism linking CVB infection to autoimmune myocarditis may be subject to debate, it is likely to bridge both the innate and adaptive immune responses. This has been shown in a noninfectious model in which injection of dendritic cells loaded with cardiac myosin peptide MYHC-α induces CD4⁺ T cell-mediated myocarditis that progresses to DCM and heart failure (31). Disease induction in this model requires stimulation through TLRs and CD40, and relapse of myocarditis can be induced by restimulation of TLR4 with LPS alone (31). CVB3 infection increases the expression of CD40 on cardiomyocytes, and blocking this interaction with antibodies to CD40 and B7-1, either alone or in combination, reduces myocarditis (117). Upregulation of CD40 and stimulation of TLRs during viral infection may set the stage for the development of autoimmunity. This could occur as a response to autoantigenic host cell proteins released from dying cells or presentation of viral peptides that share determinants. The latter is known as molecular mimicry, and while sequence similarities and cross-reactivity between virus and host have been demonstrated in some experimental models, it has been difficult to prove. Whether it is molecular mimicry or endogenous antigen that primes autoimmunity, the adjuvant effect of viral infection probably induces the appropriate costimulatory signals and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines that promote the development of autoimmune myocarditis.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Nora Chapman at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, for helpful discussions.

### REFERENCES

1. Ahmad, S. R., E. A. Lidington, R. Ohta, N. Okada, M. G. Robson, K. A. Davies, M. Leitges, C. L. Harris, D. O. Haskard, and J. C. Mason. 2003. Decay-accelerating factor induction by tumour necrosis factor-, through a phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and protein kinase C-dependent pathway, protects murine vascular endothelial cells against complement deposition. Immunology 110:258–268.
2. Alvarez, F. L., N. Neu, N. R. Rose, S. W. Craig, and K. W. Beisel. 1987. Heart-specific autoantibodies induced by Coxsackievirus B3: identification of heart autoantigens. Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 43:129–139.
3. Anderson, D. R., J. E. Wilson, C. M.Carthy, D. Yang, R. Kandolf, and B. M. McManus. 1996. Direct interactions of coxsackievirus B3 with immune cells in the splenic compartment of mice susceptible or resistant to myocarditis. J. Virol. 70:4632–4645.
4. Archard, L. C., M. A. Khan, B. A. Soteriou, H. Zhang, H. J. Why, N. M. Robinson, and P. J. Richardson. 1998. Characterization of Coxsackie B virus RNA in myocardium from patients with dilated cardiomyopathy by nucleotide sequencing of reverse transcription-nested polymerase chain reaction products. Hum. Pathol. 29:578–584.
5. Badorff, C., B. Fichtlscherer, R. E. Rhoads, A. M. Zeiher, A. Muelsch, S. Dimmeler, and K. U. Knowlton. 2000. Nitric oxide inhibits dystrophin proteolysis by coxsackieviral protease 2A through S-nitrosylation: a protective mechanism against enteroviral cardiomyopathy. Circulation 102:2276–2281.
6. Badorff, C., G.-H. Lee, B. J. Lamphear, M. E. Martone, K. P. Campbell, R. E. Rhoads, and K. U. Knowlton. 1999. Enteroviral protease 2A cleaves dystrophin: evidence of cytoskeletal disruption in an acquired cardiomyopathy. Nat. Med. 5:320–326.
7. Baughman, K. L. 2006. Diagnosis of myocarditis: death of Dallas criteria. Circulation 113:593–595.
8. Beck, M. A., P. C. Kolbeck, L. H. Rohr, Q. Shi, V. C. Morris, and O. A. Levander. 1994. Benign human enterovirus becomes virulent in selenium-deficient mice. J. Med. Virol. 43:166–170.
9. Beck, M. A., P. C. Kolbeck, Q. Shi, L. H. Rohr, V. C. Morris, and O. A. Levander. 1994. Increased virulence of a human enterovirus (coxsackievirus B3) in selenium-deficient mice. J. Infect. Dis. 170:351–357.
10. Beck, M. A., Q. Shi, V. C. Morris, and O. A. Levander. 1995. Rapid genomic evolution of a non-virulent coxsackievirus B3 in selenium-deficient mice results in selection of identical virulent isolates. Nat. Med. 1:433–436.
11. Beisel, K. W., J. Srinivasappa, M. R. Olsen, A. C. Stiff, K. Essani, and B. S. Prabhakar. 1990. A neutralizing monoclonal antibody against Coxsackievirus B4 cross-reacts with contractile muscle proteins. Microb. Pathog. 8:151–156.
12. Bergelson, J. M., J. A. Cunningham, G. Droguett, E. A. Kurt-Jones, A. Krithivas, J. S. Hong, M. S. Horwitz, R. L. Crowell, and R. W. Finberg. 1997. Isolation of a Common Receptor for Coxsackie B Viruses and Adenoviruses 2 and 5. Science 275:1320–1323.
13. Bergelson, J. M., J. G. Mohanty, R. L. Crowell, N. F. St. John, D. M. Lublin, and R. W. Finberg. 1995. Coxsackievirus B3 adapted to growth in RD cells binds to decay-accelerating factor (CD55). J. Virol. 69:1903–1906.
14. Bolen, J. B., R. B. Rowley, C. Spana, and A. Y. Tsygangkov. 1992. The Src family of tyrosine protein kinases in hemopoietic signal transduction. FASEB J. 6:3403–3409.
15. Bowles, N. E., F. Javier Fuentes-Garcia, K. A. Makar, H. Li, J. Gibson, F. Soto, P. L. Schwimmbeck, H. P.

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

Schultheiss, and M. Pauschinger. 2002. Analysis of the coxsackievirus B-adenovirus receptor gene in patients with myocarditis or dilated cardiomyopathy. Mol. Genet. Metab. 77:257–259.

16. Bowles, N. E., and J. Vallejo. 2003. Viral causes of cardiac inflammation. Curr. Opin. Cardiol. 18:182–188.

17. Caforio, A. L., E. Bonifacio, J. T. Stewart, D. Neglia, O. Parodi, G. F. Bottazzo, and W. J. McKenna. 1990. Novel organ-specific circulating cardiac autoantibodies in dilated cardiomyopathy. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 15:1527–1534.

18. Caforio, A. L., M. Grazzini, J. M. Mann, P. J. Keeling, G. F. Bottazzo, W. J. McKenna, and S. Schiaffino. 1992. Identification of alpha- and beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain isoforms as major autoantigens in dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation 85:1734–1742.

19. Caforio, A. L., P. J. Keeling, E. Zachara, L. Mestroni, F. Camerini, J. M. Mann, G. F. Bottazzo, and W. J. McKenna. 1994. Evidence from family studies for autoimmunity in dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet 344:773–777.

20. Cao, Y., D. P. Schnurr, and N. J. Schmidt. 1984. Differing cardiotropic and myocarditic properties of group B type 4 coxsackievirus strains. Arch. Virol. 80:119–130.

21. Carson, S. D. 2001. Receptor for the group B coxsackieviruses and adenoviruses: CAR. Rev. Med. Virol. 11:219–226.

22. Carson, S. D., N. N. Chapman, and S. M. Tracy. 1997. Purification of the Putative Coxsackievirus B Receptor from HeLa Cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 233:325–328.

23. Chapman, N. M., J. R. Romero, M. A. Pallansch, and S. Tracy. 1997. Sites other than nucleotide 234 determine cardiovirulence in natural isolates of coxsackievirus B3. J. Med. Virol. 52:258–261.

24. Cheung, P., M. Zhang, J. Yuan, D. Chau, B. Yanagawa, B. McManus, and D. Yang. 2002. Specific interactions of HeLa cell proteins with Coxsackievirus B3 RNA: La autoantigen binds differentially to multiple sites within the 5 prime untranslated region. Virus Res. 90:23–36.

25. Cheung, P. K., J. Yuan, H. M. Zhang, D. Chau, B. Yanagawa, A. Suarez, B. McManus, and D. Yang. 2005. Specific interactions of mouse organ proteins with the 5′ untranslated region of coxsackievirus B3: Potential determinants of viral tissue tropism. J. Med. Virol. 77:414–424.

26. Chow, L. H., K. W. Beisel, and B. M. McManus. 1992. Enteroviral infection of mice with severe combined immunodeficiency. Evidence for direct viral pathogenesis of myocardial injury. Lab. Invest. 66:24–31.

27. Cohen, C. J., J. T. C. Shieh, R. J. Pickles, T. Okegawa, J.-T. Hsieh, and J. M. Bergelson. 2001. The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor is a transmembrane component of the tight junction. PNAS 98:15191–15196.

28. Coyne, C. B., and J. M. Bergelson. 2006. Virus-induced Abl and Fyn kinase signals permit coxsackievirus entry through epithelial tight junctions. Cell 124:119–131.

29. Dunn, J. J., S. S. Bradrick, N. M. Chapman, S. M. Tracy, and J. R. Romero. 2003. The stem loop II within the 5′ nontranslated region of clinical coxsackievirus B3 genomes determines cardiovirulence phenotype in a murine model. J. Infect. Dis. 187:1552–1561.

30. Dunn, J. J., N. M. Chapman, S. Tracy, and J. R. Romero. 2000. Genomic determinants of cardiovirulence in coxsackievirus B3 clinical isolates: localization to the 5′ nontranslated region. J. Virol. 74:4787–4794.

31. Eriksson, U., R. Ricci, L. Hunziker, M. O. Kurrer, G. Y. Oudit, T. H. Watts, I. Sonderegger, K. Bachmaier, M. Kopf, and J. M. Penninger. 2003. Dendritic cell-induced autoimmune heart failure requires cooperation between adaptive and innate immunity. Nat. Med. 9:1484–1490.

32. Fairweather, D., Z. Kaya, G. R. Shellam, C. M. Lawson, and N. R. Rose. 2001. From Infection to Autoimmunity. J. Autoimmun. 16:175–186.

33. Fairweather, D., S. Yusung, S. Frisancho, M. Barrett, S. Gatewood, R. Steele, and N. R. Rose. 2003. IL-12 receptor beta 1 and Toll-like receptor 4 increase IL-1 beta- and IL-18-associated myocarditis and coxsackievirus replication. J. Immunol. 170:4731–4737.

34. Felix, S. B., A. Staudt, W. V. Dorffel, V. Stangl, K. Merkel, M. Pohl, W. D. Docke, S. Morgera, H. H. Neumayer, and K. D. Wernecke. 2000. Hemodynamic effects of immunoadsorption and subsequent immunoglobulin substitution in dilated cardiomyopathy: Three-month results from a randomized study. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 35:1590–1598.

35. Feuer, R., I. Mena, R. Pagarigan, D. Hassett, and J. L. Whitton. 2004. Coxsackievirus replication and the cell cycle: a potential regulatory mechanism for viral persistence/latency. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. (Berl). 193:83–90.

36. Feuer, R., I. Mena, R. Pagarigan, M. K. Slifka, and J. L. Whitton. 2002. Cell cycle status affects coxsackievirus replication, persistence, and reactivation in vitro. J. Virol. 76:4430–4440.

37. Friman, G., L. Wesslen, J. Fohlman, J. Karjalainen, and C. Rolf. 1995. The epidemiology of infectious myocarditis, lymphocytic myocarditis, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur. Heart J. 16:36–41.

38. Frustaci, A., C. Chimenti, F. Calabrese, M. Pieroni, G. Thiene, and A. Maseri. 2003. Immunosuppressive therapy for active lymphocytic myocarditis: virological and immunologic profile of responders versus nonresponders. Circulation 107:857–863.

39. Fuse, K., G. Chan, Y. Liu, P. Gudgeon, M. Husain, M. Chen, W.-C. Yeh, S. Akira, and P. P. Liu. 2005. Myeloid differentiation factor-88 plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis and in-

fluences type I interferon production. Circulation 112: 2276–2285.

40. Gauntt, C., and S. Huber. 2003. Coxsackievirus experimental heart diseases. Frontiers in Bioscience. 8:e23–35.

41. Gauntt, C. J., H. M. Arizpe, A. L. Higdon, M. M. Rozek, R. Crawley, and M. W. Cunningham. 1991. Anti-Coxsackievirus B3 neutralizing antibodies with pathological potential. Eur. Heart J. 12 Suppl D:124–129.

42. Gauntt, C. J., P. T. Gomez, P. S. Duffey, J. A. Grant, D. W. Trent, S. M. Witherspoon, and R. E. Paque. 1984. Characterization and myocarditic capabilities of coxsackievirus B3 variants in selected mouse strains. J. Virol. 52:598–605.

43. Gauntt, C. J., A. L. Higdon, H. M. Arizpe, M. R. Tamayo, R. Crawley, R. D. Henkel, M. E. Pereira, S. M. Tracy, and M. W. Cunningham. 1993. Epitopes shared between coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) and normal heart tissue contribute to CVB3-induced murine myocarditis. Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 68:129–134.

44. Gauntt, C. J., M. D. Trousdale, D. R. LaBadie, R. E. Paque, and T. Nealon. 1979. Properties of coxsackievirus B3 variants which are amyocarditic or myocarditic for mice. J. Med. Virol. 3:207–220.

45. Gebhard, J. R., C. M. Perry, S. Harkins, T. Lane, I. Mena, V. C. Asensio, I. L. Campbell, and J. L. Whitton. 1998. Coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis: perforin exacerbates disease, but plays no detectable role in virus clearance. Am. J. Pathol. 153:417–428.

46. Gomez, R. M., C. G. Castagnino, and M. I. Berria. 1992. Extracellular matrix remodelling after coxsackievirus B3-induced murine myocarditis. Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 73:643–653.

47. Gomez, R. M., E. F. Lascano, and M. I. Berria. 1991. Murine acinar pancreatitis preceding necrotizing myocarditis after Coxsackievirus B3 inoculation. J. Med. Virol. 35:71–75.

48. Guthrie, M., P. A. Lodge, and S. A. Huber. 1984. Cardiac injury in myocarditis induced by Coxsackievirus group B, type 3 in Balb/c mice is mediated by Lyt 2+ cytolytic lymphocytes. Cell. Immunol. 88:558–567.

49. Harvala, H., H. Kalimo, J. Bergelson, G. Stanway, and T. Hyypia. 2005. Tissue tropism of recombinant coxsackieviruses in an adult mouse model. J. Gen. Virol. 86:1897–1907.

50. Hashimoto, I., and T. Komatsu. 1978. Myocardial changes after infection with coxsackie virus B3 in nude mice. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 59:13–20.

51. He, Y., F. Lin, P. R. Chipman, C. M. Bator, T. S. Baker, M. Shoham, R. J. Kuhn, M. E. Medof, and M. G. Rossmann. 2002. Structure of decay-accelerating factor bound to echovirus 7: A virus-receptor complex. PNAS 99:10325–10329.

52. Heim, A., C. Brehm, M. Stille-Siegener, G. Muller, S. Hake, R. Kandolf, and H. R. Figulla. 1995. Cultured human myocardial fibroblasts of pediatric origin: natural human interferon-alpha is more effective than recombinant interferon-alpha 2a in carrier-state coxsackievirus B3 replication. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 27:2199–2208.

53. Henke, A., S. Huber, A. Stelzner, and J. L. Whitton. 1995. The role of CD8+ T lymphocytes in coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis. J. Virol. 69:6720–6728.

54. Horwitz, M. S., A. Ilic, C. Fine, and N. Sarvetnick. 2005. Induction of antigen specific peripheral humoral tolerance to cardiac myosin does not prevent CB3-mediated autoimmune myocarditis. J. Autoimmun. 25:102–111.

55. Horwitz, M. S., A. La Cava, C. Fine, E. Rodriguez, A. Ilic, and N. Sarvetnick. 2000. Pancreatic expression of interferon-[gamma] protects mice from lethal coxsackievirus B3 infection and subsequent myocarditis. Nat. Med. 6:693–697.

56. Huber, S. 2004. T cells in coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis. Viral Immunol. 17:152–164.

57. Huber, S., D. Sartini, and M. Exley. 2003. Role of CD1d in coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis. J. Immunol. 170:3147–3153.

58. Huber, S. A. 2000. T cells expressing the gamma delta T cell receptor induce apoptosis in cardiac myocytes. Cardiovasc. Res. 45:579–587.

59. Huber, S. A., and M. W. Cunningham. 1996. Streptococal M protein peptide with similarity to myosin induces CD4+ T cell-dependent myocarditis in MRL/++ mice and induces partial tolerance against coxsakieviral myocarditis. J. Immunol. 156:3528–3534.

60. Huber, S. A., D. Graveline, W. K. Born, and R. L. O'Brien. 2001. Cytokine production by Vgamma(+) T-cell subsets is an important factor determining CD4(+) Th-cell phenotype and susceptibility of BALB/c mice to coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis. J. Virol. 75: 5860–5869.

61. Huber, S. A., D. Graveline, M. K. Newell, W. K. Born, and R. L. O'Brien. 2000. V gamma 1+ T cells suppress and V gamma 4+ T cells promote susceptibility to coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis in mice. J. Immunol. 165:4174–4181.

62. Huber, S. A., and P. A. Lodge. 1984. Coxsackievirus B-3 myocarditis in Balb/c mice. Evidence for autoimmunity to myocyte antigens. Am. J. Pathol. 116:21–29.

63. Huber, S. A., and D. Sartini. 2005. Roles of Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha (TNF-{alpha}) and the p55 TNF Receptor in CD1d Induction and Coxsackievirus B3-Induced Myocarditis. J. Virol. 79:2659–2665.

64. Huber, S. A., D. Sartini, and M. Exley. 2002. Vgamma4(+) T cells promote autoimmune CD8(+) cytolytic T-lymphocyte activation in coxsackievirus B3-in-

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

duced myocarditis in mice: role for CD4(+) Th1 cells. J. Virol. 76:10785–10790.

65. Hyypia, T., T. Hovi, N. J. Knowles, and G. Stanway. 1997. Classification of enteroviruses based on molecular and biological properties. J. Gen. Virol. 78:1–11.

66. Irie-Sasaki, J., T. Sasaki, W. Matsumoto, A. Opavsky, M. Cheng, G. Welstead, E. Griffiths, C. Krawczyk, C. D. Richardson, K. Aitken, N. Iscove, G. Koretzky, P. Johnson, P. Liu, D. M. Rothstein, and J. M. Penninger. 2001. CD45 is a JAK phosphatase and negatively regulates cytokine receptor signalling. Nature 409:349–354.

67. Ito, M., M. Kodama, M. Masuko, M. Yamaura, K. Fuse, Y. Uesugi, S. Hirono, Y. Okura, K. Kato, Y. Hotta, T. Honda, R. Kuwano, and Y. Aizawa. 2000. Expression of coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor in hearts of rats with experimental autoimmune myocarditis. Circ. Res. 86:275–280.

68. Kandolf, R., A. Canu, and P. H. Hofscheider. 1985. Coxsackie B3 virus can replicate in cultured human foetal heart cells and is inhibited by interferon. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 17:167–181.

69. Kandolf, R., M. Sauter, C. Aepinus, J. J. Schnorr, H. C. Selinka, and K. Klingel. 1999. Mechanisms and consequences of enterovirus persistence in cardiac myocytes and cells of the immune system. Virus Research. 62:149–158.

70. Karjalainen, J., and J. Heikkila. 1999. Incidence of three presentations of acute myocarditis in young men in military service. A 20-year experience. Eur. Heart J. 20:1120–1125.

71. Kashimura, T., M. Kodama, Y. Hotta, J. Hosoya, K. Yoshida, T. Ozawa, R. Watanabe, Y. Okura, K. Kato, H. Hanawa, R. Kuwano, and Y. Aizawa. 2004. Spatiotemporal changes of coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor in rat hearts during postnatal development and in cultured cardiomyocytes of neonatal rat. Virchows Arch. 444: 283–292.

72. Kawai, T., O. Takeuchi, T. Fujita, J.-i. Inoue, P. F. Muhlradt, S. Sato, K. Hoshino, and S. Akira. 2001. Lipopolysaccharide stimulates the MyD88-independent pathway and results in activation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 and the expression of a subset of lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes. J. Immunol. 167:5887–5894.

73. Kim, K. S., S. Tracy, W. Tapprich, J. Bailey, C. K. Lee, K. Kim, W. H. Barry, and N. M. Chapman. 2005. 5′-Terminal deletions occur in coxsackievirus B3 during replication in murine hearts and cardiac myocyte cultures and correlate with encapsidation of negative-strand viral RNA. J. Virol. 79:7024–7041.

74. Klingel, K., C. Hohenadl, A. Canu, M. Albrecht, M. Seemann, G. Mall, and R. Kandolf. 1992. Ongoing enterovirus-induced myocarditis is associated with persistent heart muscle infection: quantitative analysis of virus

replication, tissue damage, and inflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89:314–318.

75. Klingel, K., P. Rieger, G. Mall, H. C. Selinka, M. Huber, and R. Kandolf. 1998. Visualization of enteroviral replication in myocardial tissue by ultrastructural in situ hybridization: identification of target cells and cytopathic effects. Lab. Invest. 78:1227–1237.

76. Klingel, K., S. Stephan, M. Sauter, R. Zell, B. M. McManus, B. Bultmann, and R. Kandolf. 1996. Pathogenesis of murine enterovirus myocarditis: virus dissemination and immune cell targets. J. Virol. 70:8888–8895.

77. Knowlton, K. U., E. S. Jeon, N. Berkley, R. Wessely, and S. Huber. 1996. A mutation in the puff region of VP2 attenuates the myocarditic phenotype of an infectious cDNA of the Woodruff variant of coxsackievirus B3. J. Virol. 70:7811–7818.

78. Kuhl, U., M. Pauschinger, M. Noutsias, B. Seeberg, T. Bock, D. Lassner, W. Poller, R. Kandolf, and H.-P. Schultheiss. 2005. High prevalence of viral genomes and multiple viral infections in the myocardium of adults with “idiopathic” left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation 111:887–893.

79. Kuhl, U., M. Pauschinger, B. Seeberg, D. Lassner, M. Noutsias, W. Poller, and H.-P. Schultheiss. 2005. Viral persistence in the myocardium is associated with progressive cardiac dysfunction. Circulation 112: 1965–1970.

80. Kyung-Soo Kim, K.-S., G. Hufnagel, N. M. Chapman, and S. Tracy. 2001. The group B coxsackieviruses and myocarditis. Reviews in Medical Virology 11:355–368.

81. Lauer, B., M. Schannwell, U. Kuhl, B. E. Strauer, and H. P. Schultheiss. 2000. Antimyosin autoantibodies are associated with deterioration of systolic and diastolic left ventricular function in patients with chronic myocarditis. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 35:11–18.

82. Lepage, L. M., J.-A. C. Giesbrecht, and C. G. Taylor. 1999. Expression of T lymphocyte p56lck, a zinc-finger signal transduction protein, is elevated by dietary zinc deficiency and diet restriction in mice. J. Nutr. 129:620–627.

83. Limas, C. J., P. Jakovis, A. Anyfantakis, C. Kroupis, and D. V. Cokkinos. 2004. Familial clustering of autoimmune diseases in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Cardiol. 93:1189–1191.

84. Liu, P., K. Aitken, Y. Y. Kong, M. A. Opavsky, T. Martin, F. Dawood, W. H. Wen, I. Kozieradzki, K. Bachmaier, D. Straus, T. W. Mak, and J. M. Penninger. 2000. The tyrosine kinase p56lck is essential in coxsackievirus B3-mediated heart disease. Nat. Med. 6:429–434.

85. Liu, Z., J. Yuan, B. Yanagawa, D. Qiu, B. M. McManus, and D. Yang. 2005. Coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis: new trends in treatment. Expert Review of Anti-infective Therapy 3:641–650.

86. Luo, H., B. Yanagawa, J. Zhang, Z. Luo, M. Zhang, M. Esfandiarei, C. Carthy, J. E. Wilson, D. Yang, and B. M. McManus. 2002. Coxsackievirus B3 replication is reduced by inhibition of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway. J. Virol. 76:3365–3373.

87. Lutton, C. W., and C. J. Gauntt. 1985. Ameliorating effect of IFN-beta and anti-IFN-beta on coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis in mice. J. Interferon Res. 5:137–146.

88. Mahon, N. G., B. P. Madden, A. L. P. Caforio, P. M. Elliott, A. J. Haven, B. E. Keogh, M. J. Davies, and W. J. McKenna. 2002. Immunohistologic evidence of myocardial disease in apparently healthy relatives of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 39: 455–462.

89. Maisch, B., A. D. Ristic, G. Hufnagel, R. Funck, P. Alter, D. Tontsch, and S. Pankuweit. 2002. Dilated cardiomyopathies as a cause of congestive heart failure. Herz. 27:113–134.

90. Maisch, B., A. D. Ristic, I. Portig, and S. Pankuweit. 2003. Human viral cardiomyopathy. Front. Biosci. 8:s39–67.

91. Martino, T. A., M. Petric, M. Brown, K. Aitken, C. J. Gauntt, C. D. Richardson, L. H. Chow, and P. P. Liu. 1998. Cardiovirulent Coxsackieviruses and the Decay-Accelerating Factor (CD55) Receptor. Virology 244: 302–314.

92. Martino, T. A., M. Petric, H. Weingartl, J. M. Bergelson, M. A. Opavsky, C. D. Richardson, J. F. Modlin, R. W. Finberg, K. C. Kain, and N. Willis. 2000. The Coxsackie-Adenovirus Receptor (CAR) Is Used by Reference Strains and Clinical Isolates Representing All Six Serotypes of Coxsackievirus Group B and by Swine Vesicular Disease Virus. Virology 271:99.

93. Mason, J. W. 2003. Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy: an inflammatory link. Cardiovasc. Res. 60:5–10.

94. Mason, J. W., J. B. O’Connell, A. Herskowitz, N. R. Rose, B. M. McManus, M. E. Billingham, T. E. Moon, and I. The Myocarditis Treatment Trial. 1995. A Clinical Trial of Immunosuppressive Therapy for Myocarditis. N. Engl. J. Med. 333:269–275.

95. Mena, I., C. M. Perry, S. Harkins, F. Rodriguez, J. Gebhard, and J. L. Whitton. 1999. The role of B lymphocytes in coxsackievirus B3 infection. Am. J. Pathol. 155: 1205–1215.

96. Milstone, A. M., J. Petrella, M. D. Sanchez, M. Mahmud, J. C. Whitbeck, and J. M. Bergelson. 2005. Interaction with coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor, but not with decay-accelerating factor (DAF), induces A-particle formation in a DAF-binding coxsackievirus B3 isolate. J. Virol. 79:655–660.

97. Molina, T. J., K. Kishihara, D. P. Siderovskid, W. van Ewijk, A. Narendran, E. Timms, A. Wakeham, C. J. Paige, K. U. Hartmann, A. Veillette, D. Davidson, and T. W. Mak. 1992. Profound block in thymocyte development in mice lacking p56lck. Nature 357:161–164.


98. Neu, N., K. W. Beisel, M. D. Traystman, N. R. Rose, and S. W. Craig. 1987. Autoantibodies specific for the cardiac myosin isoform are found in mice susceptible to Cox-sackievirus B3-induced myocarditis. J. Immunol. 138: 2488–2492.

99. Neu, N., S. W. Craig, N. R. Rose, F. Alvarez, and K. W. Beisel. 1987. Coxsackievirus induced myocarditis in mice: cardiac myosin autoantibodies do not cross-react with the virus. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 69:566–574.

100. Neu, N., B. Ploier, and C. Ofner. 1990. Cardiac myosin-induced myocarditis. Heart autoantibodies are not involved in the induction of the disease. J. Immunol. 145:4094–4100.

101. Neu, N., N. R. Rose, K. W. Beisel, A. Herskowitz, G. Gurri-Glass, and S. W. Craig. 1987. Cardiac myosin induces myocarditis in genetically predisposed mice. J. Immunol. 139:3630–3636.

102. Noutsias, M., H. Fechner, H. de Jonge, X. Wang, D. Dekkers, A. B. Houtsmuller, M. Pauschinger, J. Bergelson, R. Warrach, M. Yacoub, R. Hetzer, J. Lamers, H.-P. Schultheiss, and W. Poller. 2001. Human coxsackieadenovirus receptor is colocalized with integrins {alpha}v{beta}3 and {alpha}v{beta}5 on the cardiomyocyte sarcolemma and upregulated in dilated cardiomyopathy: implications for cardiotropic viral infections. Circulation 104:275–280.

103. Noutsias, M., M. Pauschinger, W. C. Poller, H. P. Schultheiss, and U. Kuhl. 2003. Current insights into the pathogenesis, diagnosis and therapy of inflammatory cardiomyopathy. Heart Failure Monitor. 3:127–135.

104. Opavsky, M. A., T. Martino, M. Rabinovitch, J. Penninger, C. Richardson, M. Petric, C. Trinidad, L. Butcher, J. Chan, and P. P. Liu. 2002. Enhanced ERK-1/2 activation in mice susceptible to coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis. J. Clin. Invest. 109:1561–1569.

105. Opavsky, M. A., J. Penninger, K. Aitken, W. H. Wen, F. Dawood, T. Mak, and P. Liu. 1999. Susceptibility to myocarditis is dependent on the response of alpha beta T lymphocytes to coxsackieviral infection. Circ. Res. 85: 551–558.

106. Orthopoulos, G., K. Triantafilou, and M. Triantafilou. 2004. Coxsackie B viruses use multiple receptors to infect human cardiac cells. J. Med. Virol. 74:291–299.

107. Perriard, J.-C., A. Hirschy, and E. Ehler. 2003. Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Disease of the Intercalated Disc? Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 13:30–38.

108. Polacek, C., J.-O. Ekstrom, A. Lundgren, and A. M. Lindberg. 2005. Cytolytic replication of coxsackievirus B2 in CAR-deficient rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Virus Res. 113:107–115.

109. Richardson, P. J., W. McKenna, M. Bristow, B. Maisch, B. Mautner, J. O’Connell, E. Olsen, G. Thiene, J. Goodwin, I. Gyarfás, I. Martin, and P. Nordet. 1996. Report of the 1995 World Health Organization/International Soci-

COXSACKIE MYOCARDITIS

109. ety and Federation of Cardiology Task Force on the definition and classification of cardiomyopathies. Circulation 93:841–842.

110. Rodig, S. J., M. A. Meraz, J. M. White, P. A. Lampe, J. K. Riley, C. D. Arthur, K. L. King, K. C. F. Sheehan, L. Yin, and D. Pennica. 1998. Disruption of the Jak1 gene demonstrates obligatory and nonredundant roles of the Jaks in cytokine-induced biologic responses. Cell 93:373–383.

111. Sasse, A., M. Wallich, Z. Ding, A. Goedecke, and J. Schrader. 2003. Coxsackie-and-adenovirus receptor mRNA expression in human heart failure. J. Gene Med. 5:876–882.

112. Sato, S., R. Tsutsumi, A. Burke, G. Carlson, V. Porro, Y. Seko, K. Okumura, R. Kawana, and R. Virmani. 1994. Persistence of replicating coxsackievirus B3 in the athymic murine heart is associated with development of myocarditic lesions. J. Gen. Virol. 75:2911–2924.

113. Satoh, M., G. Tamura, I. Segawa, K. Hiramori, and R. Satodate. 1994. Enteroviral RNA in dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur. Heart J. 15:934–939.

114. Schmidtke, M., H. C. Selinka, A. Heim, B. Jahn, M. Tonew, R. Kandolf, A. Stelzner, and R. Zell. 2000. Attachment of coxsackievirus B3 variants to various cell lines: mapping of phenotypic differences to capsid protein VP1. Virology 275:77–88.

115. Schnurr, D. P., and N. J. Schmidt. 1984. Coxsackievirus B3 persistence and myocarditis in NFR nu/nu and +/nu mice. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. (Berl). 173:1–7.

116. Schwimmbeck, P. L., G. Rohn, A. Wrusch, K. Schulze, A. Doerner, U. Kuehl, C. Tschoepe, M. Pauschinger, and H. P. Schultheiss. 2000. Enteroviral and immune-mediated myocarditis in SCID mice. Herz 25:240–244.

117. Seko, Y., N. Takahashi, M. Azuma, H. Yagita, K. Okumura, and Y. Yazaki. 1998. Expression of costimulatory molecule CD40 in murine heart with acute myocarditis and reduction of inflammation by treatment with anti-CD40L/B7-1 monoclonal antibodies. Circ. Res. 83: 463–469.

118. Shafren, D. R., R. C. Bates, M. V. Agrez, R. L. Herd, G. F. Burns, and R. D. Barry. 1995. Coxsackieviruses B1, B3, and B5 use decay accelerating factor as a receptor for cell attachment. J. Virol. 69:3873–3877.

119. Shafren, D. R., D. T. Williams, and R. D. Barry. 1997. A decay-accelerating factor-binding strain of coxsackievirus B3 requires the coxsackievirus-adenovirus receptor protein to mediate lytic infection of rhabdomyosarcoma cells. J. Virol. 71:9844–9848.

120. Shaw, C., P. Holland, M. Sinnreich, C. Allen, K. Sollerbrant, G. Karpati, and J. Nalbantoglu. 2004. Isoform-specific expression of the Coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR) in neuromuscular junction and cardiac intercalated discs. BMC Cell Biology 5:42–49.

121. Shenoy-Scaria, A. M., J. Kwong, T. Fujita, M. W. Olszowy, A. S. Shaw, and D. M. Lublin. 1992. Signal transduction through decay-accelerating factor. Interaction of glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor and protein tyrosine kinases p56lck and p59fyn 1. J. Immunol. 149:3535–3541.

122. Spiller, O. B., I. G. Goodfellow, D. J. Evans, J. W. Almond, and B. P. Morgan. 2000. Echoviruses and coxsackie B viruses that use human decay-accelerating factor (DAF) as a receptor do not bind the rodent analogues of DAF. J. Infect. Dis. 181:340–343.

123. Stadnick, E., M. Dan, A. Sadeghi, and J. K. Chantler. 2004. Attenuating mutations in coxsackievirus B3 map to a conformational epitope that comprises the puff region of VP2 and the knob of VP3. J. Virol. 78:13987–14002.

124. Tomko, R. P., R. Xu, and L. Philipson. 1997. HCAR and MCAR: The human and mouse cellular receptors for subgroup C adenoviruses and group B coxsackieviruses. PNAS 94:3352–3356.

125. Tracy, S., K. Hofling, S. Pirruccello, P. H. Lane, S. M. Reyna, and C. J. Gauntt. 2000. Group B coxsackievirus myocarditis and pancreatitis: connection between viral virulence phenotypes in mice. J. Med. Virol. 62:70–81.

126. Triantafilou, K., G. Orthopoulos, E. Vakakis, M. A. E. Ahmed, D. T. Golenbock, P. M. Lepper, and M. Triantafilou. 2005. Human cardiac inflammatory responses triggered by Coxsackie B viruses are mainly Toll-like receptor (TLR) 8-dependent. Cellular Microbiology 7:1117–1126.

127. Tu, Z., N. M. Chapman, G. Hufnagel, S. Tracy, J. R. Romero, W. H. Barry, L. Zhao, K. Currey, and B. Shapiro. 1995. The cardiovirulent phenotype of coxsackievirus B3 is determined at a single site in the genomic 5′ nontranslated region. J. Virol. 69:4607–4618.

128. Van Houten, N., P. E. Bouchard, A. Moraska, and S. A. Huber. 1991. Selection of an attenuated Coxsackievirus B3 variant, using a monoclonal antibody reactive to myocyte antigen. J. Virol. 65:1286–1290.

129. Vincent, T., R. F. Pettersson, R. G. Crystal, and P. L. Leopold. 2004. Cytokine-mediated downregulation of coxsackievirus-adenovirus receptor in endothelial cells. J. Virol. 78:8047–8058.

130. Wang, X., and J. M. Bergelson. 1999. Coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains are not essential for coxsackievirus and adenovirus infection. J. Virol. 73:2559–2562.

131. Wessely, R., A. Henke, R. Zell, R. Kandolf, and K. U. Knowlton. 1998. Low-level expression of a mutant coxsackieviral cDNA induces a myocytopathic effect in culture: an approach to the study of enteroviral persistence in cardiac myocytes. Circulation 98:450–457.

132. Wessely, R., K. Klingel, L. F. Santana, N. Dalton, M. Hongo, W. Jonathan Lederer, R. Kandolf, and K. U. Knowlton. 1998. Transgenic expression of replication-re-

146

stricted enteroviral genomes in heart muscle induces defective excitation-contraction coupling and dilated cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 102:1444–1453.

133. Whitton, J. L. 2002. Immunopathology during coxsackievirus infection. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 24: 201–213.

134. Whitton, J. L., C. T. Cornell, and R. Feuer. 2005. Host and virus determinants of picornavirus pathogenesis and tropism. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 3:765–776.

135. Willian, S., S. Tracy, N. Chapman, S. Leser, J. Romero, B. Shapiro, and K. Currey. 2000. Mutations in a conserved enteroviral RNA oligonucleotide sequence affect positive strand viral RNA synthesis. Arch. Virol. 145:2061–2086.

136. Wojnicz, R., E. Nowalany-Kozielska, C. Wojciechowska, G. Glanowska, P. Wilczewski, T. Niklewski, M. Zembala, L. Polonski, M. M. Rozek, and J. Wodniecki. 2001. Randomized, placebo-controlled study for immunosuppressive treatment of inflammatory dilated cardiomyopathy: two-year follow-up results. Circulation 104:39–45.

137. Wolfgram, L. J., K. W. Beisel, and N. R. Rose. 1985. Heart-specific autoantibodies following murine coxsackievirus B3 myocarditis. J. Exp. Med. 161:1112–1121.

138. Yamada, H., K. Kishihara, Y. Y. Kong, and K. Nomoto. 1996. Enhanced generation of NK cells with intact cyto-

TAM

toxic function in CD45 exon 6-deficient mice. J. Immunol. 157:1523–1528.

139. Yasukawa, H., T. Yajima, H. Duplain, M. Iwatate, M. Kido, M. Hoshijima, M. D. Weitzman, T. Nakamura, S. Woodard, D. Xiong, A. Yoshimura, K. R. Chien, and K. U. Knowlton. 2003. The suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS1) is a novel therapeutic target for enterovirus-induced cardiac injury. J. Clin. Invest. 111:469–478.

140. Zautner, A. E., U. Korner, A. Henke, C. Badorff, and M. Schmidtke. 2003. Heparan sulfates and coxsackievirus adenovirus receptor: each one mediates coxsackievirus B3 PD infection. J. Virol. 77:10071–10077.

141. Zell, R., K. Sidigi, E. Bucci, A. Stelzner, and M. Gorlach. 2002. Determinants of the recognition of enteroviral cloverleaf RNA by coxsackievirus B3 proteinase 3C. RNA 8:188–201.

Address reprint requests to:

Patricia E. Tam, Ph.D.
Division of Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases
420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 108
Department of Medicine
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

E-mail: tamxx001@umn.edu
