
Cell Tissue Res (2006) 326:573–581  
DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0255-8  

---

**REVIEW**

# Serotonin 5-HT₃ receptors in the central nervous system

Pascal Chameau · Johannes A. van Hooft

Received: 3 April 2006 / Accepted: 19 May 2006 / Published online: 7 July 2006  
© Springer-Verlag 2006  

---

**Abstract** The 5-HT₃ receptor is a ligand-gated ion channel activated by serotonin (5-HT). Although originally identified in the peripheral nervous system, the 5-HT₃ receptor is also ubiquitously expressed in the central nervous system. Sites of expression include several brain stem nuclei and higher cortical areas such as the amygdala, hippocampus, and cortex. On the subcellular level, both presynaptic and postsynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors can be found. Presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors are involved in mediating or modulating neurotransmitter release. Postsynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors are preferentially expressed on interneurons. In view of this specific expression pattern and of the well-established role of 5-HT as a neurotransmitter shaping development, we speculate that 5-HT₃ receptors play a role in the formation and function of cortical circuits.

**Keywords** 5-HT₃ · Serotonin · Interneuron · Presynaptic · Postsynaptic

---

## Introduction

Among the receptors for serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), the 5-HT₃ receptor is the only ligand-gated ion channel; it belongs to the Cys-loop family of ligand-gated ion channels, which include nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors, and glycine receptors. To date, two functional subunits have been cloned: the obligatory 5-HT<sub>3A</sub> subunit (Maricq et al. 1991) and the accessory 5-HT<sub>3B</sub> subunit (Davies et al. 1999).

The 5-HT₃ receptor was originally identified in the peripheral nervous system as the “M” receptor because of its sensitivity to morphine (Gaddum and Picarelli 1957). Because cocaine inhibited the actions of “M” receptors in the peripheral nervous system in models such as the rat vagus nerve, guinea pig ileum, and isolated rabbit heart, several selective and potent antagonists based on the structural motive of cocaine were developed in the 1980s (Fozard 1984; Richardson et al. 1985). A short time later, the “M” receptor was classified as the 5-HT₃ receptor (Bradley et al. 1986). The availability of these highly potent antagonists, such as MDL72222 and ICS205-930 (tropisetron), greatly facilitated the identification of the 5-HT₃ receptor as a ligand-gated ion channel in clonal cell lines and in peripheral nervous tissue (Neijt et al. 1986; Lambert et al. 1989; Derkach et al. 1989). The development of further, more selective, 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists was motivated by the notion that these antagonists were highly effective in the prevention of chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (for a review, see Costall and Naylor 2004). Several of these antagonists were shown to have behavioral effects in rodents and primates, possibly reflecting an action of the antagonists in the central nervous system (CNS); this suggested that the expression of 5-HT₃ receptors was not limited to peripheral tissue. Kilpatrick et al. (1987) used a tritiated analog of the selective 5-HT₃ receptor antagonist GR65630 to show that 5-HT₃-receptor-binding sites were indeed present in the CNS.

In contrast to the huge interest in 5-HT₃ receptor pharmacology because of the therapeutic value of 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists in preventing chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, progress in

P. Chameau · J. A. van Hooft (✉)  
Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,  
Center for NeuroScience, University of Amsterdam,  
P.O. Box 94084, NL-1090 GB Amsterdam, The Netherlands  
e-mail: hooft@science.uva.nl
understanding central 5-HT₃ receptor physiology at the molecular, cellular, and system levels has lagged behind. In this review, we summarize the advances that have been made.

# Distribution of 5-HT₃ receptors in the CNS

The availability of a plethora of selective 5-HT₃ receptor ligands has enabled the detailed mapping of 5-HT₃-receptor-binding sites in the CNS by quantitative autoradiography. The highest densities of 5-HT₃-receptor-binding sites have been detected in several nuclei in the caudal medulla, such as the area postrema, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, and the nucleus of the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve. In addition, 5-HT₃-receptor-binding sites have been found in the forebrain, albeit at lower densities and with a scattered distribution (for reviews, see Pratt et al. 1990; Barnes and Sharp 1999). Using in situ hybridization, Tecott et al. (1993) have shown that the distribution of the 5-HT₃A subunit closely resembles that of the 5-HT₃-receptor-binding sites; they suggest that the scattered distribution of the 5-HT₃ receptor in the forebrain may reflect expression in gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic interneurons. This has been confirmed by immunocytochemical studies showing that 5-HT₃ receptors in the hippocampus and cortex are expressed in a subpopulation of interneurons that often contain cholecystokinin and the Ca²⁺-binding protein calbindin, but not somatostatin or the Ca²⁺-binding protein parvalbumin (Morales et al. 1996a,b; Morales and Bloom 1997). Functional 5-HT₃ receptors have indeed been detected in interneurons, such as basket cells in the dentate gyrus (Kawa 1994), interneurons in the stratum radiatum of the hippocampal CA1 area (McMahon and Kauer 1997; van Hooft and Wadman 2003), and neocortical interneurons (Roerig et al. 1997; Zhou and Hablitz 1999; Ferezou et al. 2002). In earlier investigations (Yakel et al. 1988; Yakel and Jackson 1988), 5-HT₃-receptor-mediated currents had been detected in cultured striatal and hippocampal neurons. These neurons probably represent a subpopulation of nonpyramidal interneurons, since 5-HT₃-receptor-mediated current has been observed in only 6%–10% of these cultured cells (Yakel et al. 1988).

In addition to the postsynaptic localization of 5-HT₃ receptors on interneurons, the 5-HT₃ receptor can also be found on presynaptic terminals. This was initially observed in nuclei such as the nucleus of the solitary tract and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, in which specific radioligand binding of 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists is lost upon deafferentation by nodose ganglionectomy or vagotomy (Pratt and Bowery 1989; Leslie et al. 1990). Indeed, no 5-HT₃A transcripts can be detected in these areas (Tecott

et al. 1993), supporting the notion that 5-HT₃ receptors are localized on presynaptic terminals in these regions.

## Presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors

The presence of functional 5-HT₃ receptors on presynaptic terminals has clearly been established in some brain regions. An increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ induced by specific activation of 5-HT₃ receptors on synaptosomes isolated from rat striatum (Nichols and Mollard 1996; Ronde and Nichols 1998) and from striatum, hippocampus, amygdala, and cerebellum (Nayak et al. 1999) indicate the presence of functional presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors in the brain. Immunocytochemical experiments have confirmed the presence of 5-HT₃ receptors in subsets of synaptosomes isolated from the striatum, hippocampus, amygdala, and cerebellum (Nayak et al. 1999). Recently, using an antibody directed against the short form of the 5-HT₃A subunit, Miquel et al. (2002) have reported a preferential location of 5-HT₃ receptors in axons and axon terminals in several rat limbic structures, such as the frontal, piriform, and entorhinal cortices and the amygdala (with the exception of the hippocampus in which 56% of the immunostaining is concentrated on dendrites).

5-HT₃ receptors have been suggested to be involved in dopamine release, both in the striatum and in the nucleus accumbens. A presynaptic mechanism for the modulation of dopamine release is indicated by the findings that the activation of 5-HT₃ receptors enhances Ca²⁺-dependent basal release of endogenous dopamine in rat striatal slices, and that this effect is partially inhibited by tetrodotoxin (TTX; Blandina et al. 1988, 1989). However, this modulation of dopamine release by presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors is still controversial (see van Hooft and Vijverberg 2000). Recent in vivo experiments performed in rat striatum (Porras et al. 2003) and in rat nucleus accumbens (De Deurwaerdere et al. 2005) have shown that basal dopamine release is not affected by 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists, but that 5-HT₃ receptors modulate dopamine release only when both the dopamine and 5-HT tones are increased. Thus, the excitatory effect of 5-HT₃ receptors on dopamine release requires an increase in 5-HT release and an increase in the firing of dopaminergic neurons.

The most convincing evidence for a direct role of presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors in mediating neurotransmitter release arises from studies of GABA release. Electrophysiological experiments have provided indirect evidence for GABA release induced by the activation of 5-HT₃ receptors. The frequency of spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic potentials recorded from hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons is enhanced by micromolar concentrations of 5-HT and 2-methyl-5-HT, these effects being potent.antagonized by the 5-HT₃ receptor antagonist tropisetron (Ropert and Guy 1991). A similar enhancement of the frequency of both excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials has been observed in nucleus tractus solitarii neurons, in addition to a direct depolarizing effect of 5-HT and 2-methyl-5-HT on the postsynaptic membrane (Glaum et al. 1992). Use of the “nerve-bouton preparation” (Akaike and Moorhouse 2003), in which amygdala (Koyama et al. 2000, 2002) and hippocampal (Katsurabayashi et al. 2003) neurons are mechanically dissociated to preserve functional terminal boutons that adhere to the dissociated neurons, has demonstrated the presence of functional presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors on GABAergic nerve terminals. In both the preparations from amygdala and hippocampus, activation of 5-HT₃ receptors increases the frequency of GABAergic mIPSCs (inhibitory postsynaptic currents). This increase can be blocked by specific 5-HT₃ receptor antagonists and is Ca²⁺-dependent. The focal stimulation of a single synaptic bouton has further demonstrated the presynaptic origin of these functional 5-HT₃ receptors in hippocampal preparations (Katsurabayashi et al. 2003). More recently, an increase in the frequency and amplitude of GABAA-receptor-mediated IPSCs has been reported in CA1 pyramidal neurons (Turner et al. 2004). The enhancement of IPSC frequency and the amplitude by 5-HT agonists remain in the presence of TTX and are dependent on Ca²⁺ influx through 5-HT₃ receptors. In addition, experiments performed on hippocampal synaptosomes show an increase in GABA release after 5-HT₃ receptor activation. Taken together, these results provide strong evidence of a direct role of presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors in mediating GABA release.

the heteromeric 5-HT₃AB receptor has a lower Ca²⁺ permeability than the homomeric 5-HT₃A receptor (Davies et al. 1999). The presence of 5-HT₃A transcripts in the brain has been firmly established by in situ hybridization (Maricq et al. 1991; Tecott et al. 1993; Morales and Wang 2002) and single-cell polymerase chain reaction (PCR; Ferezou et al. 2002; Sudweeks et al. 2002). In contrast, evidence for the expression of 5-HT₃B in the CNS is less obvious (van Hooft and Yakel 2003). Initially, the 5-HT₃B subunit was reported to be expressed in human central nervous tissue (Davies et al. 1999; Dubin et al. 1999) and in rat hippocampal interneurons (Monk et al. 2001). However, in other studies of rat tissue, the expression of 5-HT₃B in the CNS has not been corroborated by in situ hybridization and PCR (Morales and Wang 2002) or single-cell PCR from hippocampal interneurons (Sudweeks et al. 2002) or cortical interneurons (Ferezou et al. 2002). Therefore, the 5-HT₃B subunit is unlikely to be a major determinant of the properties of central 5-HT₃ receptors, at least in rats. In this light, we should mention that 5-HT₃C-, 5-HT₃D-, and 5-HT₃E-like subunits have recently been cloned from human samples (Niesler et al. 2003; Karnovsky et al. 2003). From these subunits, only the 5-HT₃C seems to be expressed in the brain. However, a detailed description of the expression pattern and a demonstration of the ability of the 5-HT₃C subunit to form a functional ion channel (either as a homomer or in combination with the 5-HT₃A subunit) is still lacking. Interestingly, the novel 5-HT₃C-, 5-HT₃D-, and 5-HT₃E-like subunits seem to be absent in the rodent genome (Karnovsky et al. 2003). In addition, short and long splice variants of the human 5-HT₃A subunit have been identified (Bruss et al. 2000). The short isoform is a truncated protein with a single transmembrane domain, whereas the long isoform contains a 32-amino-acid insert in the extracellular loop between transmembrane domains 2 and 3. Both isoforms are coexpressed with the 5-HT₃A subunit in human amygdala and hippocampus. This raises the possibility that, in humans, the repertoire of putative 5-HT₃ receptor subtypes is larger than that in rodents.

With respect to the possible molecular determinants of central 5-HT₃ receptors, the co-assembly of the 5-HT₃A subunit with the α4 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor has been reported; this results in a hybrid receptor with enhanced Ca²⁺ permeability as compared with the homomeric 5-HT₃A receptor (van Hooft et al. 1998; Kriegler et al. 1999a,b; Sudweeks et al. 2002). However, no firm evidence is available that such a hybrid receptor is indeed present in vivo. Fletcher et al. (1998) have shown that the 5-HT₃A subunit does not co-immunoprecipitate with the α4 subunit from homogenates of porcine whole-brain. Similarly, 5-HT₃A and α4 subunits do not interact in striatal and cerebellar synaptosomes (Nayak et al. 2000).

Molecular determinants of 5-HT₃ receptors in the CNS

In order to sustain neurotransmitter release, presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors have to mediate an increase in intracellular Ca²⁺, either indirectly via the activation of voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels or directly via Ca²⁺ entry through the 5-HT₃ receptor-operated ion channel. In a study of NG108-15 neuroblastoma cells, 5-HT₃ receptors on presynaptic-like varicosities have been shown to become permeable to Ca²⁺ when cultured in the presence of a postsynaptic substrate (Ronde and Nichols 2001), suggesting a difference in Ca²⁺ permeability between pre- and postsynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors. This raises the possibility that either multiple subunits are responsible for the various properties of central 5-HT₃ receptors, or that additional regulatory mechanisms determine Ca²⁺ permeability. With respect to the multiple subunits, two functional subunits have been cloned, viz., the 5-HT₃A and 5-HT₃B (see above), which would allow the existence of different oligomeric 5-HT₃ receptors. Indeed,The 5-HT₃ synapse

In the classical view of neurotransmission, the major fast excitatory and inhibitory signal transduction is mediated by glutamate and GABA, respectively. Given the ubiquitous expression of 5-HT₃ receptors in the CNS, 5-HT probably also acts as a fast excitatory neurotransmitter. Surprisingly, only a few isolated reports have been presented on fast synaptic transmission mediated by 5-HT₃ receptors. In this section, we will consider some anatomical and physiological aspects of fast serotonergic transmission in the CNS.

Anatomical considerations

In the mammalian brain, serotonergic neurons have their cell bodies located in the raphe nuclei (B1–B9 groups according to Dahlstrom and Fuxe 1964). These groups of neurons are distributed near the midline of the brain stem and are positioned all along its rostro-caudal extensions. The raphe nuclei can be divided into two major groups of 5-HT-containing neurons according to their position on the rostro-caudal axis (for a review, see Baumgarten and Grozdanovic 2000). The caudal raphe nuclei (the raphe magnus, the raphe pallidus, and the raphe obscurus; B1–B5) project to the spinal cord and the brain stem. The rostral group includes the median raphe, the dorsal raphe, and a lateral extension of the median raphe nucleus (B6–B9) and projects essentially to the forebrain (diencephalon and telencephalon). There is a great similarity in the distribution and in the projections of serotonergic neurons for all mammalian species, although some differences exist between non-primates, primates, and humans (for a review, see Hornung 2003).

In addition to neurons from the raphe nuclei, thalamic neurons projecting to sensory cortices (somatosensory, visual, and auditory) represent a transient source of 5-HT. Although they do not synthesize 5-HT, they transiently express Sert, the high-affinity transporter of 5-HT and Vmat2, the transporter that packages 5-HT into synaptic vesicles (Gaspar et al. 2003).

Innervation of the forebrain by the dorsal and the median raphe nuclei is largely overlapping, target areas receiving parallel afferents from serotonergic neurons located both in the dorsal and in the median raphe nuclei. The highest levels of serotonergic fibers are found in the limbic areas (temporal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus) and in the sensory cortex (visual, auditory, somatosensory, olfactory, and entorhinal cortices). However, some differences exist in the distribution of afferents from the dorsal and median raphe nuclei, in their cellular targets, and in their axonal morphologies. Functionally related structures receive afferents from the same group of serotonergic neurons. Neurons from the dorsal raphe nucleus project to the entire neocortex, to the thalamus, amygdala, striatum, pallidum, nucleus accumbens, and olfactory tubercle, whereas the median raphe neurons mostly project not only to the limbic forebrain and hippocampus, but also to the hypothalamus and thalamus. In addition, there is a somatotopic arrangement of dorsal raphe neurons. Neurons that innervate functionally related areas are clustered in the dorsal raphe nucleus and organized topographically in the rostrocaudal plane. Additionally, individual serotonergic neurons give rise to collateral projections to functionally related brain areas. In contrast, no rostro-caudal somatotopic arrangement of neurons in the median raphe has been reported.

The projections from dorsal and median raphe nuclei to the same brain areas can be distinguished on the basis of their axon morphology. Axons from the dorsal raphe are generally fine with many branches and have pleomorphic varicosities of granular and fusiform shapes. These axons are distributed across all areas of the cerebral cortex and are widely spread throughout the cortical layers. Interestingly, they are more abundant in layers receiving thalamic inputs (layer IV and V). These diffuse fine varicosities target a multitude of cortical neurons and contribute numerically to the majority of the serotonergic cortical innervations, although their ability to form chemical synapses has been a matter of debate. The incidence of synaptic contacts varies from 3% to 40% and up to 90%, a discrepancy that might be explained by the diverse methods used and/or by species differences (see Baumgarten and Grozdanovic 2000). In contrast, axons from the median raphe are characterized by large spherical varicosities that form true chemical synapses. These synaptic contacts are preferentially made with GABA-ergic interneurons (Smiley and Goldman-Rakic 1996). In the cortex, the large beaded fibers run in layer I and in the lower white matter and give off collaterals that form a basket-like arbor surrounding the cell bodies and the proximal dendrites of a specific population of GABAergic interneurons expressing calbindin (Hornung and Celio 1992). Moreover, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide(VIP)/cholecystokinin (CCK)-containing interneurons in the cortex are targeted by serotonergic fibers (Fig. 1; Ferezou et al. 2002). In the hippocampus, a similar specific innervation of interneurons by serotonergic afferents is observed (Gulyas et al. 1999). Taken together, these results show that a specific subset of interneurons in the cortex and hippocampus is preferentially innervated by 5-HT.

Physiological considerations

The preferential innervation of specific interneurons by 5-HT, combined with the preferential expression of 5-HT₃ receptors in interneurons, suggests that 5-HT₃ receptors can control the excitability of neuronal networks by means of fast synaptic
reported in interneurons (Roerig et al. 1997); however, electrically evoked 5-HT<sub>3</sub>-receptor-mediated currents have additionally been observed in layer II/III and layer V/VI pyramidal neurons in this study. No substantial expression of the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptor has been reported in pyramidal neurons (Morales et al. 1996a,b; Morales and Bloom 1997) and so whether species differences or developmental aspects account for this apparent discrepancy remains to be determined.

In both hippocampal and cortical interneurons, the I/V curve of the 5-HT<sub>3</sub>-receptor-mediated ion current displays a voltage-dependent block by Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions (Kawa 1994; McMahon and Kauer 1997; Roerig et al. 1997; van Hooft and Wadman 2003), reminiscent of the voltage-dependent block of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors by Mg<sup>2+</sup>. This phenomenon might therefore represent a coincidence-detector function underlying a long-term potentiation (LTP)-like mechanism. A few reports have suggested that 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors are involved in LTP. For example, systemic injections of the selective 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptor antagonist ondansetron have been reported to facilitate the induction of LTP, increase the frequency of the theta electroencephalogram rhythm, and enhance the retention of memory in hippocampus-dependent tasks (Staubli and Xu 1995). In addition, the blockade of 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors in vivo results in a reduction of the firing activity of hippocampal interneurons and an increase of the firing of hippocampal pyramidal neurons (Reznic and Staubli 1997). However, so far, the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptor itself has not been demonstrated to undergo LTP-like enhancement upon synaptic activation. Interestingly, the I/V curve of 5-HT<sub>3</sub>-receptor-mediated currents in layer I interneurons of rat cortex does not display the voltage-dependent Ca<sup>2+</sup> block (Zhou and Hablitz 1999). Together with the putative differences in Ca<sup>2+</sup> permeability of pre- and postsynaptic 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors (see above), this implies the existence of receptor heterogeneity, either at a structural level or at the level of receptor regulation.

Fig. 1 5-HT-containing fibers form close appositions with 5-HT<sub>3</sub>-responsive neurons. Confocal reconstruction showing two m-chlorophenylbiguanide (mCPBG)-responsive neurons from layers V (a2) and II (b2) labeled by biocytin (green) and immunostained 5-HT-containing fibers (red). Responses to local pressure applications of mCPBG (100 μM, 50 ms), a selective 5-HT<sub>3</sub>R agonist, consist of membrane potential depolarizations surmounted by action potentials (a1, b1). Confocal reconstructions (a2, b2) consist of a z-series of 48 and 28 images, respectively, projected in one layer via the maximum intensity method (the spacing of successive z-images was 1 μm). Bars 20 μm. mCPBG-responsive neurons exhibit a bipolar morphology, typical of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide(VIP)/cholecystokinin (CCK)-expressing interneurons. 5-HT immunostaining shows thin varicose fibers coursing in the vicinity of these neurons. As seen at higher magnification (6×) on unitary z-images, 5-HT-containing varicosities lie in close apposition to the soma (a4, a5, b3) or dendrites (a3, a6, a7, b4) of mCPBG-responsive neurons. Reproduced, with permission, from Ferezou et al. (2002). Copyright 2002 held by the Society for Neuroscience

Perspectives

Because 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors have a preferential and almost exclusive location on a subpopulation of GABA-ergic interneurons (VIP/CCK-expressing basket cells and double bouquet cells) and mediate fast serotonergic synaptic transmission, they might be involved in the control of the balance between excitation and inhibition in cortical columns. Mini-(or micro) columns are basic cortical units composed of a narrow chain of pyramidal neurons and interneurons extending vertically across layers II–VI (Mountcastle 1997). They are defined anatomically by cell nuclei and by dendritic and axonal bundles shaping the “core area” of the column (Jones 2000; Buxhoeveden and Casanova 2002; Casanova et al. 2003). Dendritic bundles

a
D-AP5 20 μM, CNQX 10 μM

Tropisetron 1 nM

Control

Amplitude: -310 pA  
Latency: 2.25 ms

b
D-AP5 20 μM, CNQX 10 μM

Tropisetron 1 nM

Control

c
D-AP5 20 μM, CNQX 10 μM

Tropisetron (1nM)

are formed by apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons from layers II, III, and V ascending toward layer I and by apical dendrites of layer VI pyramidal neurons having their terminal dendritic arborization in layer IV. Bundles of vertical axons arise from myelinated axons of cortico-cortical fibres, of descending cortical efferents (originating

Fig. 2 Serotonergic synaptic transmission in 5-HT<sub>3</sub>-responsive cells. A 5-HT-responsive regular spiking nonpyramidal interneuron located in layer II was recorded in voltage-clamp mode at a holding potential of 78 mV (corresponding to the reversal potential of GABA<sub>A</sub>-mediated events). Electrical stimulation (0.2 mA; 0.067 Hz) applied in layer I, ~100 μm above the soma of this neuron, evoked D-AP-5/CNQX-resistant excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs). The example of evoked D-AP-5/CNQX-resistant EPSCs shown in a had an amplitude of 310 pA and a latency to peak of 2.25 ms. For this EPSC the rise time was 0.29 ms (10%–90%), and the decay was fitted to two exponentials with time constants of 0.65 ms (87%) and 2.63 ms (13%). The same EPSC shown in b at a different time scale was followed by a slowly inactivating outward current (17 pA; arrowhead). Both the EPSC and the outward current were blocked completely by the 5-HT<sub>3</sub>R antagonist tropisetron (a, b). c Steady amplitude of the evoked EPSCs (mean, 287±13 pA for 10 successive events) that were blocked completely by tropisetron 2.5 min after the beginning of the bath application. Reproduced, with permission, from Ferezou et al. (2002). Copyright 2002 held by the Society for Neuroscience

in pyramidal cells from layer II and III), and from descending axons of double bouquet cells located in layer II and the upper layer III. Apart from double bouquet cells, two other types of inhibitory interneurons may contribute to the organization of the minicolumns: basket cells and chandelier cells. All these GABA-ergic interneurons make two types of inhibitory synaptic contacts on pyramidal neurons: perisomatic (basket and chandelier cells) and dendritic branches and distal dendritic trees (double bouquet cells). They are thought to define the functional minicolumnar organization by providing specific inhibitory control of the columnar circuitry and are suggested to be essential in columnar differentiation and signal processing (Casanova et al. 2003).

Evidence exists that cortical minicolumns are abnormal in the frontal and temporal lobes of autistic brains (Buxhoeveden and Casanova 2002; Casanova et al. 2003). There are also indications that, in some neurological disorders such as autism, the serotonergic system is disturbed (Scott and Deneris 2005; Whitaker-Azmitia 2005). About one third of autistic patients show high blood levels of 5-HT with an increase of about 50%–70%. This hyperserotonemia found in humans is also relevant in animals since rodents exposed to high serotonin levels during brain development exhibit behavioral changes comparable with those of autistic subjects (increased impulsivity, less social interaction; Whitaker-Azmitia et al. 1994). One attractive hypothesis is that these high levels of serotonin may enter the brain at early stages of development, when the brain-blood barrier is not yet fully mature, and induce a loss of serotonin innervation of the brain (Whitaker-Azmitia 2005). The anatomical disturbances observed in autistic cortices may be attributable to the abnormal migration and placement of interneurons as a consequence of reduced serotonergic innervation. Interneurons, generated by precursors located in the ganglionic eminence of the ventral telecephalon,

migrate tangentially toward the cortex through the intermediate zone, the marginal zone, and the subventricular zone (Nadarajah and Parnavelas 2002). In their review, Vitalis and Parnavelas (2003) report unpublished results suggesting an involvement of the serotonergic system in neuronal migration. The destruction of 5-HT afferents by p-chlorophenylalanine at a critical period of migration of GABAergic interneurons (E12 to E17) does not interfere with their migration to the dorsal cortex, but the GABAergic interneurons are abnormally distributed in the cortex (Vitalis and Parnavelas 2003). They also report preliminary results of a modulation of GABAergic interneuron morphology by 5-HT₃ receptors. The neuritic architecture of these cultured interneurons from E16 rat cortices appears to be dependent on 5-HT₃ receptor activation. Additionally, perturbations of the mouse prenatal 5-HT system (by using 5-methoxytryptamine) induces an alteration of the cortical columnar organization in the presubicular cortex (Janusonis et al. 2004). Thus, an abnormal distribution of GABAergic interneurons and/or changes in their morphology might affect columnar organization and function. The exact involvement of 5-HT₃ receptors in the physiology of interneurons and the formation and function of cortical columns remain to be determined. However, almost 50 years after the identification of the 5-HT₃ receptor, we are now at the threshold of discovering the physiological role of 5-HT₃ receptors in the CNS.

### References

Akaike N, Moorhouse AJ (2003) Techniques: applications of the nerve-bouton preparation in neuropharmacology. Trends Pharmacol Sci 24:44–47

Barnes NM, Sharp T (1999) A review of central 5-HT receptors and their function. Neuropharmacology 38:1083–1152

Baumgarten HG, Grozdanovic Z (2000) Anatomy of central serotonergic projection systems. In: Baumgarten HC, Gothert M (eds) Serotoninergic neurons and 5-HT receptors in the CNS. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp 41–89

Blandina P, Goldfarb J, Green JP (1988) Activation of a 5-HT₃ receptor releases dopamine from rat striatal slice. Eur J Pharmacol 155:349–350

Blandina P, Goldfarb J, Craddock-Royal B, Green JP (1989) Release of endogenous dopamine by stimulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptors in rat striatum. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 251:803–809

Bradley PB, et al (1986) Proposals for the classification and nomenclature of functional receptors for 5-hydroxytryptamine. Neuropharmacol 25:563–576

Bruss M, Barann M, Hayer-Zillgen M, Eucker T, Gothert M, Bonisch H (2000) Modified 5-HT₃A receptor function by co-expression of alternatively spliced human 5-HT₃A receptor isoforms. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 362:392–401

Buxhoeveden DP, Casanova MF (2002) The minicolumn hypothesis in neuroscience. Brain 125:935–951

Casanova MF, Buxhoeveden D, Gomez J (2003) Disruption in the inhibitory architecture of the cell minicolumn: implications for autism. Neuroscientist 9:496–507

Costall B, Naylor RJ (2004) 5-HT₃ receptors. Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord 3:27–37

Dahlstrom A, Fuxe K (1964) Localization of monoamines in the lower brain stem. Experientia 20:398–399

Davies PA, Pistis M, Hanna MC, Peters JA, Lambert JJ, Hales TG, Kirkness EF (1999) The 5-HT₃B subunit is a major determinant of serotonin-receptor function. Nature 397:359–363

De Deurwaerdere P, Moison D, Navailles S, Porras G, Spampinato U (2005) Regionally and functionally distinct serotonin3 receptors control in vivo dopamine outflow in the rat nucleus accumbens. J Neurochem 94:140–149

Derkach V, Surprenant A, North RA (1989) 5-HT₃ receptors are membrane ion channels. Nature 339:706–709

Dubin AE, Huvar R, D’Andrea MR, Pyati J, Zhu JY, Joy KC, Wilson SJ, Galindo JE, Glass CA, Luo L, Jackson MR, Lovenberg TW, Erlander MG (1999) The pharmacological and functional characteristics of the serotonin 5-HT₃A receptor are specifically modified by a 5-HT₃B receptor subunit. J Biol Chem 274:30799–30810

Ferezou I, Cauli B, Hill EL, Rossier J, Hamel E, Lambolez B (2002) 5-HT₃ receptors mediate serotonergic fast synaptic excitation of neocortical vasoactive intestinal peptide/cholecystokinin interneurons. J Neurosci 22:7389–7397

Fletcher S, Lindstrom JM, McKernan RM, Barnes NM (1998) Evidence that porcine native 5-HT₃ receptors do not contain nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits. Neuropharmacology 37:397–399

Fozard JR (1984) MDL 72222: a potent and highly selective antagonist at neuronal 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors. Naunyn-Schmiedenbergs Arch Pharmacol 326:36–44

Gaddum JH, Picarelli ZP (1957) Two kinds of tryptamine receptor. Br J Pharmacol Chemother 12:323–328

Gaspar P, Cases O, Maroteaux L (2003) The developmental role of serotonin: news from mouse molecular genetics. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:1002–1012

Glaum SR, Brooks PA, Spyer KM, Miller RJ (1992) 5-Hydroxytryptamine-3 receptors modulate synaptic activity in the rat nucleus tractus solitarius in vitro. Brain Res 589:62–68

Gulyas AI, Acsady L, Freund TF (1999) Structural basis of the cholinergic and serotonergic modulation of GABAergic neurons in the hippocampus. Neurochem Int 34:359–372

Hornung JP (2003) The human raphe nuclei and the serotonergic system. J Chem Neuroanat 26:331–343

Hornung JP, Celio MR (1992) The selective innervation by serotonergic axons of calbindin-containing interneurons in the neocortex and hippocampus of the marmoset. J Comp Neurol 320:457–467

Janusonis S, Gluncic V, Rakic P (2004) Early serotonergic projections to Cajal-Retzius cells: relevance for cortical development. J Neurosci 24:1652–1659

Jones EG (2000) Microcolumns in the cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:5019–5021

Karnovsky AM, Gotow LF, McKinley DD, Piechan JL, Ruble CL, Mills CJ, Schellin KA, Slightom JL, Fitzgerald LR, Benjamin CW, Roberds SL (2003) A cluster of novel serotonin receptor 3-like genes on human chromosome 3. Gene 319:137–148

Katsurabayashi S, Kubota H, Tokutomi N, Akaike N (2003) A distinct distribution of functional presynaptic 5-HT receptor subtypes on GABAergic nerve terminals projecting to single hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Neuropharmacology 44:1022–1030

Kawa K (1994) Distribution and functional properties of 5-HT₃ receptors in the rat hippocampal dentate gyrus: a patch-clamp study. J Neurophysiol 71:1935–1947

Kilpatrick GJ, Jones BJ, Tyers MB (1987) Identification and distribution of 5-HT₃ receptors in rat brain using radioligand binding. Nature 330:746–748

Koyama S, Matsumoto N, Kubo C, Akaike N (2000) Presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptor-mediated modulation of synaptic GABA release in the mechanically dissociated rat amygdala neurons. J Physiol (Lond) 529:373–383

Koyama S, Matsumoto N, Murakami N, Kubo C, Nabekura J, Akaike N (2002) Role of presynaptic 5-HT₁A and 5-HT₃ receptors in modulation of synaptic GABA transmission in dissociated rat basolateral amygdala neurons. Life Sci 72:375–387

Kriegler S, Sudweeks S, Yakel JL (1999a) The nicotinic alpha4 receptor subunit contributes to the lining of the ion channel pore when expressed with the 5-HT₃ receptor subunit. J Biol Chem 274:3934–3936

Kriegler S, Sudweeks S, Yakel JL (1999b) MTSEA potentiates 5-HT₃ receptors containing the nicotinic alpha4 subunit. Neuropharmacology 38:1913–1915

Lambert JJ, Peters JA, Hales TG, Dempster J (1989) The properties of 5-HT₃ receptors in clonal cell lines studied by patch-clamp techniques. Br J Pharmacol 97:27–40

Leslie RA, Reynolds DJ, Andrews PL, Grahame-Smith DG, Davis CJ, Harvey JM (1990) Evidence for presynaptic 5-hydroxytryptamine3 recognition sites on vagal afferent terminals in the brainstem of the ferret. Neuroscience 38:667–673

Maricq AV, Peterson AS, Brake AJ, Myers RM, Julius D (1991) Primary structure and functional expression of the 5-HT₃ receptor, a serotonin-gated ion channel. Science 254:432–437

McMahon LL, Kauer JA (1997) Hippocampal interneurons are excited via serotonin-gated ion channels. J Neurophysiol 78:2493–2502

Miquel MC, Emerit MB, Nosjean A, Simon A, Rumajogee P, Brisorgueil MJ, Doucet E, Hamon M, Verge D (2002) Differential subcellular localization of the 5-HT₃-As receptor subunit in the rat central nervous system. Eur J Neurosci 15:449–457

Monk SA, Desai K, Brady CA, Williams JM, Lin L, Princivalle A, Hope AG, Barnes NM (2001) Generation of a selective 5-HT₃B subunit-recognising polyclonal antibody; identification of immunoreactive cells in rat hippocampus. Neuropharmacology 41:1013–1016

Morales M, Bloom FE (1997) The 5-HT₃ receptor is present in different subpopulations of GABAergic neurons in the rat telencephalon. J Neurosci 17:3157–3167

Morales M, Wang SD (2002) Differential composition of 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptors synthesized in the rat CNS and peripheral nervous system. J Neurosci 22:6732–6741

Morales M, Battenberg E, Lecea L de, Bloom FE (1996a) The type 3 serotonin receptor is expressed in a subpopulation of GABAergic neurons in the rat neocortex and hippocampus. Brain Res 731:199–202

Morales M, Battenberg E, Lecea L de, Sanna PP, Bloom FE (1996b) Cellular and subcellular immunolocalization of the type 3 serotonin receptor in the rat central nervous system. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 36:251–260

Mountcastle VB (1997) The columnar organisation of the neocortex. Brain 120:701–722

Nadarajah B, Parnavelas JG (2002) Modes of neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:423–432

Nayak SV, Ronde P, Spier AD, Lummis SC, Nichols RA (1999) Calcium changes induced by presynaptic 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 serotonin receptors on isolated terminals from various regions of the rat brain. Neuroscience 91:107–117

Nayak SV, Ronde P, Spier AD, Lummis SC, Nichols RA (2000) Nicotinic receptors co-localize with 5-HT₃ serotonin receptors on striatal nerve terminals. Neuropharmacology 39:2681–2690

Neijt HC, Vijverberg HPM, Bercken J van den (1986) The dopamine response in mouse neuroblastoma cells is mediated by serotonin 5-HT₃ receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 127:271–274

Nichols RA, Mollard P (1996) Direct observation of serotonin 5-HT₃ receptor-induced increases in calcium levels in individual brain nerve terminals. J Neurochem 67:581–592

Niesler B, Frank B, Kapeller J, Rappold GA (2003) Cloning, physical mapping and expression analysis of the human 5-HT₃ serotonin receptor-like genes HTR3C, HTR3D and HTR3E. Gene 310:101–111

Porras G, De Deurwaerdere P, Moison D, Spampinato U (2003) Conditional involvement of striatal serotonin3 receptors in the control of in vivo dopamine outflow in the rat striatum. Eur J Neurosci 17:771–781

Pratt GD, Bowery NG (1989) The 5-HT₃ receptor ligand, [³H]BRL 43694, binds to presynaptic sites in the nucleus tractus solitarius of the rat. Neuropharmacol 28:1367–1376

Pratt GD, et al (1990) Consensus meeting agrees distribution of 5-HT₃ receptors in mammalian hindbrain. Trends Pharmacol Sci 11:135–137

Reznic J, Staubli U (1997) Effects of 5-HT₃ receptor antagonism on hippocampal cellular activity in the freely moving rat. J Neurophysiol 77:517–521

Richardson BP, Engel G, Donatsch P, Stadler PA (1985) Identification of serotonin M-receptor subtypes and their specific blockade by a new class of drugs. Nature 316:126–131

Roerig B, Nelson DA, Katz LC (1997) Fast synaptic signaling by nicotinic acetylcholine and serotonin 5-HT₃ receptors in developing visual cortex. J Neurosci 17:8353–8362

Ronde P, Nichols RA (1998) High calcium permeability of serotonin 5-HT₃ receptors on presynaptic nerve terminals from rat striatum. J Neurochem 70:1094–1103

Ronde P, Nichols RA (2001) Postsynaptic target regulates functional responses induced by 5-HT₃ serotonin receptors on axonal varicosities of NG108-15 hybrid neuroblastoma cells. Neuroscience 102:979–987

Roper N, Guy N (1991) Serotonin facilitates GABAergic transmission in the CA1 region of rat hippocampus in vitro. J Physiol (Lond) 441:121–136

Scott MM, Deneris ES (2005) Making and breaking serotonin neurons and autism. Int J Devl Neurosci 23:277–285

Smiley JF, Goldman-Rakic PS (1996) Serotonergic axons in monkey prefrontal cerebral cortex synapse predominantly on interneurons as demonstrated by serial section electron microscopy. J Comp Neurol 367:431–443

Staubli U, Xu FB (1995) Effects of 5-HT₃ receptor antagonism on hippocampal theta rhythm, memory, and LTP induction in the freely moving rat. J Neurosci 15:2445–2452

Sudweeks SN, van Hooft JA, Yakel JL (2002) Serotonin 5-HT₃ receptors in rat CA1 hippocampal interneurons: functional and molecular characterization. J Physiol (Lond) 544:715–726

Tecott LH, Maricq AV, Julius D (1993) Nervous system distribution of the serotonin 5-HT₃ receptor mRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:1430–1434

Turner TJ, Mokler DJ, Luebke JI (2004) Calcium influx through presynaptic 5-HT₃ receptors facilitates GABA release in the hippocampus: in vitro slice and synaptosome studies. Neuroscience 129:703–718

van Hooft JA, Vijverberg HPM (2000) 5-HT₃ receptors and neurotransmitter release in the CNS: a nerve ending story? Trends Neurosci 23:605–610

van Hooft JA, Wadman WJ (2003) Ca²⁺ ions block and permeate serotonin 5-HT₃ receptor channels in rat hippocampal interneurons. J Neurophysiol 89:1864–1869

van Hooft JA, Yakel JL (2003) 5-HT₃ receptors in the CNS: 3B or not 3B? Trends Pharmacol Sci 24:157–160

van Hooft JA, Spier AD, Yakel JL, Lummis SC, Vijverberg HPM (1998) Promiscuous coassembly of serotonin 5-HT₃ and nicotinic alpha4 receptor subunits into Ca²⁺-permeable ion channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:11456–11461

Vitalis T, Parnavelas JG (2003) The role of serotonin in early cortical development. Dev Neurosci 25:245–256

Whitaker-Azmitia PM (2005) Behavioral and cellular consequences of increasing serotonergic activity during brain development: a role in autism? Int J Dev Neurosci 23: 75–83

Whitaker-Azmitia PM, Zang X, Clarke C (1994) Effects of gestational exposure to monoamine oxidase inhibitors in rats: preliminary behaviour and neurochemical studies. Neuropsychopharmacology 11:125–132

Yakel JL, Jackson MB (1988) 5-HT₃ receptors mediate rapid responses in cultured hippocampus and a clonal cell line. Neuron 1:615–621

Yakel JL, Trussell LO, Jackson MB (1988) Three serotonin responses in cultured mouse hippocampal and striatal neurons. J Neurosci 8:1273–1285

Zhou FM, Hablitz JJ (1999) Activation of serotonin receptors modulates synaptic transmission in rat cerebral cortex. J Neurophysiol 82:2989–2999
