
# A KaiC-associating SasA–RpaA two-component regulatory system as a major circadian timing mediator in cyanobacteria

**Naoki Takai*†**, **Masato Nakajima*†**, **Tokitaka Oyama*†**, **Ryotaku Kito***, **Chieko Sugita*†**, **Mamoru Sugita*†**, **Takao Kondo*†**, and **Hideo Iwasaki†§¶**

*Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, and †Center for Gene Research, Nagoya University, Furocho, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan; ‡Solution Oriented Research for Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Furocho, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan; and §Department of Electrical Engineering and Bioscience, Graduate School of Engineering and Sciences, Waseda University, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan*

Edited by J. Woodland Hastings, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved June 15, 2006 (received for review April 11, 2006)

KaiA, KaiB, and KaiC clock proteins from cyanobacteria and ATP are sufficient to reconstitute the KaiC phosphorylation rhythm *in vitro*, whereas almost all gene promoters are under the control of the circadian clock. The mechanism by which the KaiC phosphorylation cycle drives global transcription rhythms is unknown. Here, we report that RpaA, a potential DNA-binding protein that acts as a cognate response regulator of the KaiC-interacting kinase SasA, mediates between KaiC phosphorylation and global transcription rhythms. Circadian transcription was severely attenuated in *sasA* (*Synecoccus adaptive sensor A*)- and *rpaA* (*regulator of phycobilisome-associated*)-mutant cells, and the phosphotransfer activity from SasA to RpaA changed dramatically depending on the circadian state of a coexisting Kai protein complex *in vitro*. We propose a model in which the SasA–RpaA two-component system mediates time signals from the enzymatic oscillator to drive genome-wide transcription rhythms in cyanobacteria. Moreover, our results indicate the presence of secondary output pathways from the clock to transcription control, suggesting that multiple pathways ensure a genome-wide circadian system.

biological clock | response regulator | phosphorelay | *Synechococcus*

Circadian rhythms are endogenous biological timing processes that are observed ubiquitously in organisms from cyanobacteria to green plants and mammals (1). Cyanobacteria are the simplest organisms known to exhibit such rhythms (2). In the cyanobacterium *Synecoccus elongatus* PCC 7942 (hereafter referred to as *Synecoccus*), essentially all gene promoters are under the control of the circadian clock, as demonstrated by promoter-trap experiments (3, 4). Generation of such transcription rhythms requires three clock genes: *kaiA*, *kaiB*, and *kaiC* (4, 5). Recently, we demonstrated that the circadian rhythm of KaiC phosphorylation persists even in the absence of transcription/translation processes (6). Moreover, the circadian oscillation of KaiC phosphorylation was reconstituted *in vitro* by incubating three recombinant Kai proteins with ATP (7). The period of oscillation *in vitro* was stable despite temperature change (temperature compensation), and the circadian periods observed *in vivo* in KaiC mutant strains were consistent with those measured *in vitro* (7). Thus, a transcription/translation feedback loop is not essential for the circadian timing mechanism, but the biochemical network among Kai proteins must drive the core oscillation.

How does the Kai-based chemical oscillator drive circadian rhythms in genome-wide transcription in cyanobacteria? Kai proteins do not show any similarity to eukaryotic circadian clock proteins or to any known DNA-binding motifs. One possibility could be KaiC-mediated activation of gene expression by means of a two-component regulatory system, including a KaiC-binding histidine kinase (HK), SasA (8). In *sasA* (*Synecoccus adaptive sensor A*)-inactivated strains, *kaiBC* expression is lowered dramatically, and circadian transcription rhythms are attenuated severely. Although SasA is not necessary to drive basic oscillation, it may function in a connection between the KaiC phosphorylation cycle and transcription. To examine this possibility, the identification and characterization of the as yet unknown cognate response regulator(s) (RRs) of SasA is essential.

Here, we report a presumed DNA-binding RR, RpaA, as a SasA partner that is involved in the Kai-based circadian system. RpaA is required for genome-wide transcription rhythms. Moreover, our biochemical analysis shows that autophosphorylation of SasA and phosphotransfer from SasA to RpaA are altered, depending on some circadian states of the coexisting Kai protein complex. Our results strongly suggest that a circadian timing signal is primarily mediated by the SasA–RpaA two-component regulatory system acting from the posttranslational oscillator to the transcription machinery.

## Results

### Identification of RpaA as a Potential SasA Partner

In the complete genome sequence of *S.* *elongatus* PCC 6301, which is highly homologous to that of *S.* *elongatus* PCC 7942, we identified 24 RR genes, including hybrid sensory kinase genes (Table 2, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site) and 13 HK genes. To search for a cognate RR of SasA, we performed genetic deletion of each RR gene individually in a *S.* *elongatus* PCC 7942 strain harboring a *kaiBC* bioluminescence reporter (*P*<sub>*kaiBC*</sub>::*luxAB*) by substituting the gene of interest with a kanamycin-resistant gene or by insertion of a spectinomycin-resistant gene. We succeeded in inactivating 22 of 24 RR genes, whereas null mutant strains lacking *syc2234_d* (*ycf29*) or *syc0104_c* (*ycf27, rpaB*) were not obtained, suggesting that the two latter genes were essential under our experimental conditions (Table 2). Then temporal *kaiBC* gene expression patterns were monitored in the 22 RR mutants under continuous light (LL) conditions after 12-h dark treatment to synchronize the clock. We found that disruption of the *syc1409_d* gene dramatically affected the *P*<sub>*kaiBC*</sub>::*luxAB* bioluminescence profile (Fig. 1A). The gene *syc1409_d* encodes an OmpR (outer membrane protein regulator) family RR harboring presumed DNA-binding motifs and is highly homologous to the *Synecystis rpaA* (*regulator of phycobilisome-associated*) gene (9) (Fig. 5, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site).

---

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts declared.

This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the PNAS office.

Abbreviations: LL, continuous light; LD, light/dark; μE, microeinsteins; HK, histidine kinase; RR, response regulator.

See Commentary on page 11819.

¶To whom correspondence should be sent at the § address. E-mail: hideo-iwasaki@waseda.jp.

© 2006 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0602955103

Fig. 1. Genome-wide transcription rhythms are attenuated in the sasA-null and rpaA-null mutants. (A) Arrhythmia in the absence of sasA or rpaA at standard LL conditions. WT, sasA-disrupted (∆sasA, green trace) and rpaA-disrupted (∆rpaA, red trace) cells that carry kaiBC-, psbAI-, purF-, sigC-, and sigD6-reporter cassettes were grown for 3–4 d on solid medium in LL at 50 µE·m⁻²·s⁻¹ to give 30–60 colonies (0.2-mm diameter). After a 12-h dark treatment, cells were transferred to LL at 50 µE·m⁻²·s⁻¹. The bioluminescence was measured by a photomultiplier tube. For clarity, bioluminescence profiles of the reporter strains lacking sasA or rpaA are shown on magnified scales (∆sasA, pale blue; ∆rpaA, orange; magnified scale is shown on the right). (B) Residual rhythmicity from sasA- or rpaA-null mutants under dim LL conditions at 15 µE·m⁻²·s⁻¹.

Although RpaA is somehow responsible for energy transfer from phycobilisome to photosystem I in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (9), its underlying mechanism and the cognate sensory kinase are unknown.

As shown in Fig. 1A, genetic deletion of the Synechococcus rpaA gene lowered kaiBC promoter activity dramatically and nullified rhythmicity under LL conditions with standard light intensity [50 microeinsteins (µE)·m⁻²·s⁻¹], reminiscent of the sasA-null phenotype (8). Examining a larger set of clock-controlled promoters revealed that inactivation of either of the sasA or rpaA genes similarly nullified rhythmic expression of the kaiA, psbAI, purF, sasA, cikA, rpaA, srrB, rpoD6, and sigC genes (Fig. 1A; see also Fig. 6, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site).

To confirm that the lowered bioluminescence indeed accompanied reduced kaiBC mRNA levels, we performed northern (RNA) blot analyses under standard LL conditions. As shown in Fig. 2A, circadian fluctuation in kaiBC mRNA level was not evident in either mutant strain, whereas a robust circadian change peaking at subjective dusk was observed in the WT strain. The levels of kaiBC mRNAs were lowered in the mutants to ≈10% of that in WT cells at peak, correlating well with the bioluminescence profiles shown in Fig. 1A.

In WT cells, the KaiB and KaiC levels oscillate under LL conditions in a circadian manner, whereas KaiA and SasA proteins accumulate constitutively (8, 10). Consistent with our bioluminescence and Northern blot analyses, circadian rhythms in the KaiB and KaiC levels were abolished with lowered expression levels in the rpaA-null mutant and in the sasA-null mutant (8), whereas the KaiA and SasA accumulation profiles were unaffected (Fig. 2B).

Circadian rhythm in the KaiC phosphorylation state is observed in WT cells by Western blot analysis (ref. 8 and Fig. 2B).

Interestingly, accumulated KaiC protein was phosphorylated constitutively without evident circadian modulation in both sasA and rpaA mutant strains (Fig. 2B). Because KaiA is known to enhance the accumulation of phosphorylated KaiC (11–13), the constitutively elevated KaiA/KaiC ratio may account for the enhanced KaiC phosphorylation levels in both mutant strains. These results also suggest that both the SasA protein and the RpaA protein are necessary for accumulating the levels of KaiB and KaiC that are sufficient for driving a robust KaiC phosphorylation rhythm.

Phosphorelay from KaiC to the SasA-RpaA Two-Component System. How do the SasA and RpaA proteins modulate kaiBC gene expression? In general, sensory kinases function with autophosphorylation and phosphotransfer activities at the beginning of a phosphorelay system that terminates by modifying function of the cognate RR. The closely similar circadian phenotypes and clock protein behaviors in sasA-null and rpaA-null mutants strongly suggest that SasA and RpaA are bona fide cognate partners in a two-component regulatory system. To validate this possibility, we examined phosphotransfer between SasA and RpaA in vitro. Initially, purified recombinant SasA protein was incubated with or without recombinant RpaA protein in the presence of [γ-³²P]ATP at 25°C for 60 min and then subjected to SDS/PAGE and autoradiography. SasA was radiolabeled in the presence of ATP because of its autophosphorylation activity (Fig. 3A Top), as shown in ref. 14. When the in vitro phosphorylation experiment was performed in the presence of RpaA, SasA’s autophosphorylation signal was attenuated (Fig. 3A Middle). However, no incorporation of radioactive phosphate into RpaA could be detected, presumably because of rapid dephosphorylation of RpaA by SasA, as demonstrated for a typical Escherichia coli two-component system, EnvZ and OmpR.

(or represses) expression of RpaA’s target genes in a circadian manner.

### Residual Transcription Rhythms in the Absence of SasA or RpaA.
In *sasA*-null mutant strains, a residual unstable *kaiBC* bioluminescence rhythm with a period length shortened by ≈3 h is observed under LL with lower light intensity [15 μE·m⁻²·s⁻¹ (8)]. This light-intensity-dependent attenuation of the bioluminescence rhythm in the *sasA*-null strain was also observed for many clock-controlled genes (Table 1 and Figs. 1B and 6B). In the WT strain, *purF::luxAB* bioluminescence rhythm peaks at subjective dawn, in contrast to dusk-peaking genes such as *kaiBC*. Interestingly, such phase-angle difference among clock-controlled genes was abolished in *sasA*-null mutant cells (Figs. 1B and 6B). Thus, SasA is involved in phase control in this cyanobacterial circadian system, but the mechanism that drives different phasic expression profiles remains obscure. By contrast, almost all gene promoter activities remain arrhythmic in the *rpaA*-null mutants (Table 1 and Figs. 1B and 6B). Most HKs have both kinase and phosphoryl-protein phosphatase activities (17). Thus, the activity of its cognate RR can remain residually even in the absence of the phosphatase activity of HK, possibly accounting for the more severe phenotype in the *rpaA*-null mutants than in the *sasA*-null mutants. Nevertheless, the residual rhythmicity in the *sasA*-null mutants demonstrates the presence of some cryptic output pathways that are sustained without SasA function.

Next, we examined KaiB, KaiC, and SasA accumulation and KaiC phosphorylation profiles in the *sasA* and *rpaA* mutants under lower-light LL conditions. As shown in Fig. 6C, KaiB and KaiC protein levels in both mutants remained lower than in the WT strain. Again, the phosphorylated form of KaiC was dominant over the nonphosphorylated form. Therefore, the residual rhythmicity observed only under LL in both mutants cannot be caused simply by the attenuated accumulation of KaiB and KaiC proteins (see *Discussion*).

### Growth of *sasA-* or *rpaA*-Disrupted Cells Under Light/Dark (LD) Cycles.
Previously, we observed that inactivation of *sasA* did not affect the growth rate of *Synechococcus* under various LL conditions, whereas the *sasA*-disrupted strain grows much slower than the WT or a *kaiABC*-deficient strain under LD cycles [periodic alteration of 12-h light and 12-h darkness (8)]. These results suggested an additional role for SasA in adapting the cell’s metabolism specifically to natural light and dark transitions. We examined whether RpaA is also involved in this type of SasA-mediated physiology by comparing the growth phenotypes of the WT, *sasA*-deficient, and *rpaA*-deficient strains under LL and LD conditions. As shown in Fig. 7, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site, both *sasA*-deficient and *rpaA*-deficient strains grow as well as the WT strain under LL conditions, whereas they grow much slower than the WT cells under LD cycles. These results further support the hypothesis that SasA and RpaA are bona fide two-component partners, participating in both circadian output regulation and metabolic control.

### Discussion

#### From a Posttranslational Oscillator to Transcription Rhythms.
Our results strongly support the hypothesis that the SasA–RpaA two-component regulatory system is the primary clock output that is necessary for coordinating genome-wide circadian gene expression with proper phase relationship and period length and for maintaining the robust oscillation of KaiC phosphorylation (Fig. 4).

There are LxxxExxxL, LR, and TxxGxGY DNA-binding motifs that are characteristic of OmpR-type proteins in the RpaA aminoacyl sequence (ref. 9 and Fig. 5). *E. coli* OmpR protein regulates only a subset of genes responding to osmotic stimuli

(15). Therefore, it is plausible that Kai-mediated activation of the presumed DNA-binding protein RpaA accelerates transcription of its target gene(s), although biochemical analysis of its DNA-binding activity has not yet been reported. Considering the genome-wide transcription rhythms regulated by the SasA-RpaA system (Fig. 1), one possible class of RpaA target genes may include master transcription regulators such as sigma factor genes and/or transcription factors for driving transcriptional cascades. In this context, any dramatic reduction in the promoters of *sigC* and *rpoD6* genes in the *rpaA*-null mutant (Fig. 1) would severely affect a number of downstream genes. Another class of potential targets would be factors that regulate chromosome compaction (18). In any case, the search for the RpaA-binding promoter will provide a further clue to understanding the cyanobacterial circadian system. It should be noted that RpaA did not exhibit significant affinity to the *kaiBC* promoter by the gel-shift analysis in our experimental conditions (data not shown).

Our biochemical analysis demonstrated that the magnitude of SasA–RpaA phosphorelay changed depending on the phase of the coexisting Kai protein cycle (Fig. 3B). Interestingly, the time course profiles demonstrated that ${}^{32}$P incorporation into SasA and RpaA was maximal in the presence of the Kai mixture before the KaiC phosphorylation peak was reached. Therefore, it is unlikely that KaiC, with a minimal or maximal phosphorylation state in itself, is most effective at accelerating the phosphorelay from SasA to RpaA. Instead, some biochemical reaction states that enhance the KaiC phosphorylation process would be more important for activating the SasA–RpaA system. In this respect, under LL conditions, KaiC phosphorylation peaks at hour 16 in LL in *Synechococcus*, whereas transcription rhythms of most genes peak at LL hour 10–12, at which time the SasA–RpaA activities presumably become maximal.

### Presence of Secondary Output Pathway(s)

Because the circadian KaiC phosphorylation cycle can be reconstituted with three Kai proteins and ATP *in vitro* in the absence of SasA and RpaA (7), nullification of KaiC protein cycles in the *sasA* and *rpaA* mutants seems primarily caused by dramatic reductions in the accumulated levels of KaiB and KaiC. Nevertheless, residual unstable *kaiBC* promoter rhythmicity was observed, if not always, in both *sasA* and *rpaA* mutants exclusively under dim LL conditions (Table 1). Because the KaiC phosphorylation rhythm was obscure in these mutants under such low-light conditions (Fig. 6C), very weak posttranslational cycles in KaiC phosphorylation and/or Kai–protein interactions may be sufficient to drive transcription cycles. Note that in the recently isolated *kaiCpr1* mutant, the amplitude of KaiC phosphorylation rhythm becomes very low, whereas that of the $P_{kaiBC}::luxAB$ bioluminescence rhythm remains less affected (19). Although we previously suggested that the KaiC phosphorylation cycle was the core process for generating a basic oscillation (6, 7), these results may implicate that an additional, as yet unknown process also contributes to transcription rhythms. Alternatively, it is possible that only a small set of cells produced sufficient amounts of KaiB and KaiC proteins stochastically to gain both phosphorylation and bioluminescence rhythms, whereas bulk biochemical analysis might fail to detect such a single-cell level phosphorylation rhythm.

As documented above, *sasA*-null mutants produce unstable, short-period transcription rhythms, whereas *rpaA*-null mutants are more arrhythmic under dim LL conditions (Table 1 and Figs. 1B and 6B). This phenotypic difference between *sasA* and *rpaA* mutants may be explained by the more severe phenotype of RR mutants than that of cognate HK mutants (see above). Another HK may sense time signals from KaiC to mediate phosphorelay to RpaA in the absence of SasA. Furthermore, very unstable, low-amplitude rhythms with low penetrance in the *rpaA*-null

Fig. 3. *In vitro* reconstitution of SasA–RpaA phosphorelay activated by phosphorylated KaiC. (A) Autophosphorylation of SasA and SasA–RpaA phosphorelay in the presence or absence of KaiC. (Top) SasA protein was incubated in the absence of RpaA, in the presence of RpaA, or in the presence of RpaA and KaiC in a buffer containing [γ-${}^{32}$P]ATP. Each reaction was stopped at the indicated times and then analyzed by SDS/PAGE followed by autoradiography. (Middle and Bottom) Densitometric analyses of [${}^{32}$P]SasA signals in the absence (▲) and presence (●) of RpaA or in the presence of RpaA plus KaiC (■) and of [${}^{32}$P]RpaA signals in the presence of SasA only (×) and SasA plus KaiC (♦) are shown. (B) KaiC-mediated phosphotransfer signaling between SasA and RpaA *in vitro*. KaiC was incubated with KaiA and KaiB, collected at the indicated times, and stored. The time-fractionated samples were then incubated with SasA and RpaA in the presence of [γ-${}^{32}$P]ATP at 25°C for 30 min. SDS/PAGE and autoradiography were performed. Below the autoradiogram, the densitometric analyses are shown as follows. (Top) Relative ratio of phosphorylated KaiC to total KaiC. (Middle) Relative amounts of [${}^{32}$P]SasA. (Bottom) Relative amounts of [${}^{32}$P]RpaA. Two independent experiments were performed for each combination; the black lines show plots of average values.

Table 1. Bioluminescence rhythms of PkaiBC/PpsbAI-reporter strains

| Genotype | Reporter cassette | Light condition, $\mu$E·m${}^{-2}$·s${}^{-1}$ | Number rhythmic | Average amplitude, mean ± SD | Average period, mean ± SD |
|----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------|----------------------------|---------------------------|
| WT       | PkaiBC::luxAB     | 50                                          | 19/19 (100)     | 11.9 ± 3.4                 | 24.8 ± 0.4                |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 50                                          | 19/19 (100)     | 9.1 ± 3.9                  | 25.6 ± 0.6                |
|          | PkaiBC::luxAB     | 15                                          | 8/8 (100)       | 5.5 ± 1.0                  | 25.6 ± 0.3                |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 15                                          | 8/8 (100)       | 2.3 ± 0.7                  | 25.3 ± 0.7                |
| $\Delta$sasA | PkaiBC::luxAB | 50                                          | 0/91 (0)        | n.r.                       | n.r.                      |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 50                                          | 6/32 (18)       | 1.2 ± 0.1                  | 22.8 ± 0.5                |
|          | PkaiBC::luxAB     | 15                                          | 32/32 (100)     | 1.7 ± 0.2                  | 23.0 ± 0.3                |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 15                                          | 24/24 (100)     | 1.3 ± 0.1                  | 22.7 ± 0.7                |
| $\Delta$rpaA | PkaiBC::luxAB | 50                                          | 0/35 (0)        | n.r.                       | n.r.                      |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 50                                          | 0/32 (0)        | n.r.                       | n.r.                      |
|          | PkaiBC::luxAB     | 15                                          | 3/24 (12)       | 1.2 ± 0.1                  | 22.6 ± 0.5                |
|          | PpsbAI::luxAB     | 15                                          | 5/24 (20)       | 1.3 ± 0.2                  | 23.0 ± 0.7                |

Values under "Number rhythmic" indicate the number of rhythmic culture plates from the total that had an analytically extracted amplitude >1.1 (percentages are given in parentheses). Amplitude was defined as an average peak-to-trough bioluminescence signal ratio during the second and third cycles from each culture plate. "Average amplitude" is the average amplitude extracted from all of the culture plates. "Average period" is the average period extracted from all of the culture plates showing a circadian period in a population. n.r., no rhythmicity.

mutants (Table 1) suggest that there may be another minor clock output pathway functioning without the SasA-RpaA function (Fig. 4).

SasA and RpaA as Adaptive Systems for LD Cycles. Growth is severely suppressed in a $sasA$-disrupted strain (8) as well as in a $rpaA$-disrupted strain only under LD cycles (Fig. 7). These results suggest that $sasA$ is important for normal growth under natural diurnal conditions. In a different unicellular cyanobacterial strain, *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803, $rpaA$ was originally identified by mutant screening for abnormal energy transfer from phycobilisomes to photosystems (9): Disruption of $rpaA$ and $rpaB$

affected energy transfer from phycobilisome to photosystem I and photosystem II, respectively. Although both OmpR-type RRs were originally thought to belong to the Ycf27 family of RR members, the same researchers showed that RpaA could not be the member responsible by reexamining its sequence in detail (20). As documented above, we failed to obtain mutant cells in which $rpaB$ was disrupted in *Synechococcus*. Instead, we generated an inducible dominant-negative $rpaB$ mutant and found that this mutant was also defective in growth under LD cycles but that its circadian cycling remained essentially unaffected (H.I., unpublished data). Therefore, the effect of $sasA$ and $rpaA$ disruption on circadian function alone cannot explain the adaptation to diurnal growth and vice versa.

The *Synechocystis* $rpaA$ gene, also known as $rre31$, is involved in the induction of a subset of genes by hyperosmotic and salt stresses (21). Microarray analysis suggested that a candidate partner of Rre31 in the stress response would be Hik33 (21). Therefore, we tried to generate a *Synechococcus* strain that was deficient in the $hik33$ homolog but could not obtain null mutant cells, suggesting its essential role in our standard LL and LD conditions (H.I. and R.K., unpublished data). The effects of signal cross-talk among His-to-Asp phosphorelay factors on circadian systems and other cellular functions would be interesting topics to be further addressed.

Materials and Methods

**Bacterial Strains, Media, and Culture.** *S. elongatus* PCC 7942 and its derivatives used in this study are listed in Tables 2 and 3, which are published as supporting information on the PNAS web site. These strains were grown in a modified BG-11 liquid medium [BG-11M (8)] for RNA and protein preparations or on BG-11 solid media (1.5% agar) for bioluminescence assays at 30°C under LL by using white fluorescent lamps ($50 \, \mu$mol·m${}^{-2}$·s${}^{-1}$ or $15 \, \mu$mol·m${}^{-2}$·s${}^{-1}$).

**Construction of Bioluminescence Reporter Plasmids.** Targeting plasmids for various bioluminescence reporters were constructed by using the MultiSite Gateway Three-Fragment Vector Construction Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Briefly, the upstream region of the gene of interest (listed in Table 3) was fused to a promoterless *Vibrio harveyi luxAB* operon with a spectinomycin-resistant gene ($\Omega$). This promoter–reporter cassette was cloned

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the SasA-RpaA functions in the cyanobacterial circadian system. See Discussion for details.
into the XhoI site of the neutral site I (22) segment from the *Synechococcus* genome.

### Genetic Deletion of RR Genes.
Genetic disruption of three hybrid kinase genes that contained the RR domain with the HK motifs (*syc0532_d*, *syc0681_c*, and *syc2278_d*) was performed by insertion of the Ω cassette. Briefly, each of the coding segments were cloned into the pGEM-T vector (Promega, Madison, WI). Then the Ω cassette was inserted into the RR genes on each vector by using the GPS-M Mutagenesis System (NEB, Beverly, MA) (Table 2). Each of the other 21 RR genes (a list is shown in Table 2) was deleted by substitution with a kanamycin-resistant gene (*kmr*) as described in ref. 23. Each of the resulting inactivation cassettes and vectors was introduced into a *kaiBC::luxAB* reporter strain, NUC42 (24).

### Bioluminescence Monitoring.
Bioluminescence assays and analysis were performed as described in ref. 8.

### Northern Blot Analysis.
Total RNA (5 μg) from *Synechococcus* cells was prepared by using the hot phenol method, followed by Northern blotting analysis using a digoxigenin-labeled *kaiBC* probe as described in ref. 8.

### Western Blot Analysis.
Western blotting analysis was performed as described in ref. 6.

### Bacterial Expression and Purification of the KaiA, KaiB, KaiC, SasA, and RpaA Proteins.
Recombinant KaiA, KaiB, and KaiC proteins were produced in *E. coli* and purified as described in ref. 7. For the expression and purification of SasA and RpaA, we cloned the *S. elongatus sasA* and *rpaA* genes into the BamHI–SmaI and EcoRI sites of the pGEX-6P-1 vector (Amersham Pharmacia Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, U.K.), respectively, and then introduced them to *E. coli* strain BL21. Cells expressing either the SasA or RpaA protein were collected and disrupted in an extraction buffer (300 mM NaCl/20 mM Tris·HCl/1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) by sonication. After addition of benzonase nuclease (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and 1% Triton X-100, the homogenate was centrifuged at 38,000 × g. The supernatant was applied to a glutathione Sepharose 4B column (Amersham Pharmacia Biosciences), washed with five column volumes of the buffer, and then applied with PreScission Protease (Amersham Pharmacia Biosciences) to remove the GST tag. SasA and RpaA were eluted with one column volume of extraction buffer, and

the eluent was diluted and applied to a Resource Q column (Amersham Pharmacia Biosciences). After washing with the buffer (60 mM NaCl/20 mM Tris·HCl/0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0), proteins were eluted with a 60–450 mM NaCl gradient. SasA was further purified by Superose 6 gel filtration chromatography with buffer (150 mM NaCl/20 mM Tris·HCl/0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method with BSA as a standard. Purity of SasA and RpaA was ≥95% as determined by SDS/PAGE.

### Phosphotransfer Assays.
For the experiments shown in Fig. 3A, phosphotransfer assays were performed as described in ref. 15 with slight modifications. In the presence or absence of 1.7 μM KaiC and RpaA proteins, SasA (1.7 μM) was incubated in 10 μl of TEDG buffer [20 mM Tricine-NaOH/0.5 mM EDTA/0.5 mM DTT/10% glycerol (vol/vol), pH 8.0] containing 0.05 mM [γ-32P]ATP (10,000 cpm/pmol), 5 mM MgCl₂, and 150 mM KCl. After incubation at 25°C, the reaction was stopped by addition of 5 μl of an SDS buffer. After heating at 95°C for 5 min, samples were subjected to SDS/PAGE by using 10% gels. The radioactive levels of phosphorylated proteins were analyzed by using a BAS2000 Image Analyzer (Fuji, Tokyo, Japan). For the experiments shown in Fig. 3B, KaiC (17 μM) was incubated with KaiA (6 μM) and KaiB (17 μM) in a reaction buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl/150 mM KCl/0.5 mM EDTA/5 mM MgCl₂/1 mM ATP, pH 8.0) at 30°C. Aliquots (1 μl) of the reaction mixture were collected at the indicated times and stored at –80°C. The time-sampled Kai reaction mixture was then incubated with SasA (1.7 μM) and RpaA (1.7 μM) in 10 μl of reaction buffer [20 mM Tricine-NaOH/0.5 mM EDTA/0.5 mM DTT/10% glycerol (vol/vol)/0.1 mM [γ-32P]ATP (10,000 cpm/pmol)/5 mM MgCl₂/150 mM KCl, pH 8.0] at 25°C for 30 min. SDS/PAGE and autoradiography were performed as described above.

We thank Dr. Stanly B. Williams (University of Utah, Salt Lake City) for sharing data before publication; Dr. Hirofumi Aiba (Nagoya University) for technical advice; and Ms. Hisayo Kondo, Ms. Seiko Matsuura, and Ms. Hoai-Linh Vu (Nagoya University) for technical assistance. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (17687017, 17657002, and 17017018 to H.I.; 13206027 to M.S. and H.I.; 15GS0308 to T.K. and H.I.; and 15770025 and 17370088 to T.O.), the Japanese Science and Technology Agency/Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (T.K., H.I., T.O., and M.N.), Waseda University Grant for Special Research Project 2005A-870 (to H.I.), the Uehara Memorial Foundation for Systems Biology (H.I.), and the Nakajima Memorial Foundation (H.I.).

---

1. Dunlap, J. C., Loros, J. J. & DeCoursey, P. J. (2004) *Chronobiology: Biological Timekeeping* (Sinauer, Sunderland, MA).
2. Iwasaki, H. & Kondo, T. (2004) *J. Biol. Rhythms* **19**, 436–444.
3. Liu, Y., Tsinoremas, N. F., Johnson, C. H., Lebedeva, N. V., Golden, S. S., Ishiura, M. & Kondo, T. (1995) *Genes Dev.* **9**, 1469–1478.
4. Nakahira, Y., Katayama, M., Miyashita, H., Kutsuna, S., Iwasaki, H., Oyama, T. & Kondo, T. (2002) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 881–885.
5. Ishiura, M., Kutsuna, S., Aoki, S., Iwasaki, H., Andersson, C. R., Johnson, C. H., Golden, S. S. & Kondo, T. (1998) *Science* **281**, 1519–1523.
6. Tomita, J., Nakajima, M., Kondo, T. & Iwasaki, H. (2005) *Science* **307**, 251–254.
7. Nakajima, M., Imai, K., Ito, H., Nishiwaki, T., Murayama, Y., Iwasaki, H., Oyama, T. & Kondo, T. (2005) *Science* **308**, 414–415.
8. Iwasaki, H., Williams, S. B., Kitayama, Y., Ishiura, M., Golden, S. S. & Kondo, T. (2000) *Cell* **101**, 223–233.
9. Ashby, M. K. & Mullineaux, C. W. (1999) *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **181**, 253–260.
10. Xu, Y., Mori, T. & Johnson, C. H. (2000) *EMBO J.* **19**, 3349–3357.
11. Iwasaki, H., Nishiwaki, T., Kitayama, Y., Nakajima, M. & Kondo, T. (2002) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 14788–15793.
12. Kitayama, Y., Iwasaki, H., Nishiwaki, T. & Kondo, T. (2003) *EMBO J.* **22**, 2127–2134.
13. Xu, Y., Mori, T. & Johnson, C. H. (2003) *EMBO J.* **22**, 2117–2126.
14. Nagaya, M., Aiba, H. & Mizuno, T. (1993) *Gene* **131**, 119–124.
15. Aiba, H., Nakasai, F., Mizushima, S. & Mizuno, T. (1989) *J. Biol. Chem.* **264**, 14090–14094.
16. Smith, R. M. & Williams, S. B. (2006) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 8564–8569.
17. Pratt, L. A. & Shilhavy, T. J. (1994) *J. Mol. Biol.* **243**, 579–594.
18. Mori, T. & Johnson, C. H. (2001) *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* **12**, 271–278.
19. Kiyohara, Y. B., Katayama, M. & Kondo, T. (2005) *J. Bacteriol.* **187**, 2559–2564.
20. Ashby, M. K., Houmard, J. & Mullineaux, C. W. (2002) *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **214**, 25–30.
21. Shoumskaya, M. A., Paithoonrangsarid, K., Kanesaki, Y., Los, D. A., Zinchenko, V. V., Tanticharoen, M., Suzuki, I. & Murata, N. (2005) *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 21531–21538.
22. Andersson, C. R., Tsinoremas, N. F., Shelton, J., Lebedeva, N. V., Yarrow, J., Min, H. & Golden, S. S. (2000) *Methods Enzymol.* **305**, 527–542.
23. Kuwayama, H., Obara, S., Morio, T., Katoh, M., Urushihara, H. & Tanaka, Y. (2002) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **30**, E2.
24. Nishimura, H., Nakahira, Y., Imai, K., Tsuruhara, A., Kondo, H., Hayashi, H., Hirai, M., Saito, H. & Kondo, T. (2002) *Microbiology* **148**, 2903–2909.