
Journal of Plant Physiology 164 (2007) 886–894

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

ELSEVIER

JOURNAL OF  
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY

www.elsevier.de/jplph

---

**Biosynthesis of malonylated flavonoid glycosides on the basis of malonyltransferase activity in the petals of Clitoria ternatea**

Koichiro Kogawa¹, Kohei Kazuma*, Naoki Kato², Naonobu Noda, Masahiko Suzuki

Division of Cell Engineering, Aomori Green BioCenter, 221-10 Nogi-Yamaguchi, Aomori, Aomori 030-0142, Japan

Received 24 March 2006; accepted 18 May 2006

---

### KEYWORDS
Anthocyanins;  
Biosynthesis;  
Clitoria ternatea;  
Flavonol glycosides;  
Malonyltransferase

---

### Summary

The crude malonyltransferase from the petals of *Clitoria ternatea* was characterized enzymatically to investigate its role on the biosynthetic pathways of anthocyanins and flavonol glycosides. In *C. ternatea*, a blue flower cultivars (DB) and mauve flower variety (WM) accumulate polyacylated anthocyanins (ternatins) and delphinidin 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside which is one of the precursors of ternatins, respectively. Moreover, WM accumulates minor delphinidin glycosides – 3-O-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside of delphinidin. These glycosidic patterns for minor anthocyanins in WM are also found among the minor flavonol glycosides in all the varieties including a white flower variety (WW) although the major flavonol glycosides are 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, 3-O-(6″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″,6″-di-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside of kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin. How do the enzymatic characteristics affect the variety of glycosidic patterns in the flavonoid glycoside biosynthesis among these varieties?

While the enzyme from DB highly preferred delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside in the presence of malonyl-CoA, it also has a preference for other anthocyanidin 3-O-β-glucosides. It could use flavonol 3-O-β-glucosides in much lower specific activities than anthocyanins; however, it could not utilize 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides of anthocyanins and flavonols, and 3,3′-di- and 3,3′,5′-tri-O-β-glucoside of delphinidin – other possible precursors in ternatins biosynthesis. It highly preferred

---

Abbreviations: DTT, 1,4-dithiothreitol; pAPMSF, (p-amidinophenyl)methanesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride; PVPP, polyvinyl polypyrrrolidone; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +81 17728 1015; fax: +81 17728 1017.

E-mail address: kohei_kazuma@mac.com (K. Kazuma).

¹Present address: Kamikita Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Office, Misawa Branch, 1-1-7, Higashiokamisawa, Misawa, Aomori 033-0024, Japan

²Present address: Aomori Ornamental Experiment Station, 395-1 Matsumori, Goshizawa, Aomori, Aomori 030-0134, Japan

0176-1617/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2006.05.006

malonyl-CoA as an acyl donor in the presence of delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside. The crude enzymes prepared from WM and WW had the same enzymatic characteristics. These results suggested that 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides of flavonoids were synthesized via 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides rather than via 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, and that malonylation proceeded prior to glucosylation at the B-ring of delphinidin in the early biosynthetic steps towards ternatins. It seemed that the substrate specificities largely affected the difference in the accumulated amount of malonylated glycosides between anthocyanins and flavonols although they are not simply proportional to the accumulation ratio. This enzyme might join in the production of both malonylanthocyanins and flavonol malonylglycosides as a result of broad substrate specificities towards flavonoid 3-O-β-glucosides.

© 2006 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

---

# Introduction

Flavonoid malonyltransferases from various plant species have been characterized enzymatically—these enzymes transfer a malonyl group from malonyl-CoA to a hydroxyl group of a sugar residue of a flavonoid with their own regioselectivity; some of them are selective to 6″-hydroxyl group of 3-glucosyl moiety of anthocyanins or flavonols; others are to 4‴- or 6‴-hydroxyl group of 5-glucosyl group of anthocyanins (Nakayama et al., 2003); in addition, a malonyltransferase selective to 6″-hydroxyl group of 7-glucosyl group of isoflavones has been reported (Koester et al., 1984). Malonyltransferases basically have particular substrate specificities corresponding to the substrates found or expected to be present in the plant organs in which the enzyme activities occurred (Koester et al., 1984; Ino et al., 1993; Suzuki et al., 2002). However, malonyltransferase of *Clitoria ternatea* have not been characterized enzymatically, although almost all the anthocyanins and some flavonoid glycoside in the petals were found to be malonylated in this species (Terahara et al., 1998; Kazuma et al., 2003a).

In *C. ternatea*, the three flower varieties—a blue petal cultivar Double blue (DB), a mauve petal variety (WM), and a white petal variety (WW)—show their distinctive constitution of anthocyanins and flavonol glycosides (Kazuma et al., 2003b). DB accumulates a set of 15 polyacylated anthocyanins, ternatins. Ternatins are a group of 15delphinidin 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside-3′,5′-glucosides which are *p*-coumaroylated or variously glucosyl-*p*-coumaroylated at 3′- and/or 5′-glucosyl groups (Fig. 1). Polyacylation of ternatins with *p*-coumaroyl groups is one of the reasons for its blue petal because polyacylation with aromatic acyl groups generally contribute to make anthocyanins bluish under a physiological pH by intramolecular co-pigmentation among aromatic acyl groups and an anthocyanidin chromophore (Honda and Saito, 2002). In fact, WM does not accumulate ternatins but accumulates delphinidin 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside as the major anthocyanin—the absence of polyacylation in anthocyanin structure eventually affects mauve flower color. WW does not contain anthocyanin, which is the reason for white flower color. In addition, WM contains 3-O-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, and 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside of delphinidin as minor anthocyanins, although they have not been detected in DB.

These three varieties accumulate the same set of glycosides of kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin. The major glycosides are 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, 3-O-(6″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, and 3-O-(2″,6″-di-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, while 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside, and 3-O-β-glucoside are the minor ones. Interestingly, several glycosidic patterns, such as 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside, 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, and 3-O-β-glucoside, appear both in the flavonol glycosides and anthocyanins while all of them are the minor compounds (Kazuma et al., 2003b). Thus, it is interesting how the enzymatic characteristics of malonyltransferase(s) affect the variety of glycosidic patterns and their amount in the flavonoid glycoside biosynthesis among these varieties.

The 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl-6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside structure suggests that it can be synthesized by at least two routes, via 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides or 3-O-(2″-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides (Fig. 2). The two routes differ only in the sequence of the malonyltransferase and rhamnosyltransferase reactions. In addition, the biosynthetic steps leading to the simplest ternatin, ternatin C5, involve the stepwise glucosylation of delphinidin.

Delphinidin 3-$O$-β-glucoside

Delphinidin 3,3'-di-$O$-β-glucoside

Delphinidin 3,3',5'-tri-$O$-β-glucoside

A6"MaT

A6"MaT

Delphinidin 3-$O$-(6"-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside

Delphinidin 3-$O$-(6"-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside-3'-$O$-β-glucoside

Ternatin C5, delphinidin 3-$O$-(6"-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside-3',5'-di-$O$-β-glucoside

Ternatin A1

Figure 1. Biosynthetic steps involving malonyltransferase in the blue petals of *Clitoria ternatea*. Neither non-malonylated delphinidin 3-di-$O$-β-glucoside nor 3-tri-$O$-β-glucoside is a practical intermediate in ternatin biosynthesis. The very first step is the malonylation of delphinidin 3-$O$-β-glucoside, which is subsequently glucosylated twice by anthocyanin 3'- and 5'-$O$-glucosyltransferase (3' and 5'GT) and converted into ternatin C5, the common structure of ternatins. An arrow with a solid line is a confirmed reaction involving anthocyanidin 3-$O$-glucoside 6"-$O$-malonyltransferase (A6"MaT), and a doubly slashed line indicates no reaction. An arrow with a dotted line indicates a reaction that was not assayed. ATs and GTs represent acyltransferases and glucosyltransferases.

3-$O$-(6"-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucosides at the 3'- and 5'-positions (Kazuma et al., 2004). However, it has not been investigated whether non-malonylated intermediates, such as delphinidin 3,3'-$O$-di- and 3,3',5'-$O$-tri-β-glucosides, take part in the biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 1).

All of these pathways include steps involving malonyltransferase, thus the probable biosynthetic steps can be proposed by investigating the characteristics of malonyltransferase, especially its substrate specificity. In this study, we assayed malonyltransferase activity in crude enzyme extracts from the petals of *C. ternatea*. Biosynthetic pathways of malonylated flavonoid glycosides with respect to the characteristics of malonyltransferase are discussed.

3-$O$-β-glucosides were purchased from Polyphenol Laboratories (Sandnes, Norway). Isorhamnetin 3-$O$-β-glucoside was purchased from Funakoshi (Tokyo, Japan). The 3-$O$-β-glucosides, 3-$O$-(2"--$O$-$α$-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, and 3-$O$-(2"--$O$-$α$-rhamnosyl-6"--$O$-malonyl)-β-glucosides of kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin were purified from the petals of *C. ternatea* DB (Kazuma et al., 2003a). Delphinidin 3-$O$-(6"--$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside, 3-$O$-(2"--$O$-$α$-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside, and 3-$O$-(2"--$O$-$α$-rhamnosyl-6"--$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside were purified from *C. ternatea* WM (Kazuma et al., 2003b). Delphinidin 3,3',5'-tri-$O$-β-glucoside was prepared via the alkaline hydrolysis of ternatins B1 and B2 (Terahara et al., 1990). Delphinidin 3,3'-di-$O$-β-glucoside was prepared in our lab (Kazuma et al., 2004). The anthocyanins and flavonol glycosides used as substrates were dissolved in 40% MeCN containing 0.05 M trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 2.0 mM. The LC/PDA/MS/MS system used was described previously (Kazuma et al., 2003a).

## Material and methods

### General

Buffer A consisted of 100 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5) with 10 mM ascorbic acid, 10 μM $p$APMSF, and 5 mM DTT; Buffer B consisted of 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5) with 10 μM $p$APMSF and 1 mM DTT. Anthocyanidin

### Plant material

The flowers were harvested from *Clitoria ternatea* L. (butterfly pea) cultivar DB, a mauve flower

Biosynthesis of malonylated flavonoid glycosides in Clitoria ternatea

---

### Anthocyanin biosynthesis in WM

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| Delphinidin 3-$O$-β-glucoside | Delphinidin 3-$O$-(2″-$O$-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside |
| A6″MaT | A6″MaT |
| Delphinidin 3-$O$-(6″-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside | Delphinidin 3-$O$-(2″-$O$-α-rhamnosyl-6″-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucoside |

---

### Flavonol glycoside biosynthesis in DB, WM, and WW

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| Flavonol<br>3-$O$-(6″-$O$-α-rhamnosyl)-<br>β-glucosides | Flavonol<br>3-$O$-(2″,6″-di-$O$-α-<br>rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides |
| RT | RT |
| Flavonol 3-$O$-β-glucosides | Flavonol 3-$O$-(2″-$O$-α-<br>rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides |
| A6″MaT | A6″MaT |
| Flavonol 3-$O$-(6″-$O$-<br>malonyl)-β-glucosides | Flavonol 3-$O$-(2″-$O$-α-rhamnosyl-<br>6″-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucosides |

Kaempferol, $R_1 = R_2 = \text{H}$; quercetin, $R_1 = \text{OH}$, $R_2 = \text{H}$; myricetin, $R_1 = R_2 = \text{OH}$

---

**Figure 2. Proposed biosynthetic pathways of flavonoid 3-$O$-(2″-$O$-α-rhamnosyl-6″-$O$-malonyl)-β-glucosides in the petals of Clitoria ternatea varieties. All the varieties produce malonylated flavonol glycosides. Only WM produces anthocyanins possessing a set of glycosidic modifications similar to that of flavonol glycosides. An arrow with a solid line is a confirmed reaction with anthocyanidin 3-$O$-glucoside 6″-$O$-malonyltransferase (A6″MaT), and a doubly slashed line indicates no reaction. Rhamnosyltransferase (RT) activity was not assayed and is shown as an arrow with a dotted line.**

---

### variety WM, and a white flower variety WW, as described previously (Kazuma et al., 2003b), and stored at –80 °C until use.

#### Enzyme extraction

Each flower sample of DB (10.6 g), WM (14.1 g), and WW (12.2 g) was homogenized ($\times 3$) in Buffer A with PVPP (0.5 g) and sea sand (ca. 0.1 g). The homogenate was centrifuged ($9000 \times g$, 10 min), and the supernatant was then stirred with Dowex 1 × 2 (Muromachi Kagaku Kogyo Kaisha, Tokyo) (0.5 g). The Dowex was removed by centrifugation ($9000 \times g$, 20 min). Proteins were fractionated by precipitation with $(NH_4)_2SO_4$. The precipitate from the 30–70% $(NH_4)_2SO_4$ fraction was collected by centrifugation ($9000 \times g$, 20 min), resuspended in Buffer B, and desalted on a PD-10 column (Pharmacia) to obtain a crude enzyme preparation. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976), with bovine serum albumin as a standard. The protein yields were 28.7, 31.6, and 33.3 mg from DB, WM, and WW, respectively. The protein concentrations of the crude enzyme preparations of DB, WM, and WW were adjusted to 7.2 g/L before reactions. The crude malonyltransferase preparations obtained from the petals of three different varieties of C. ternatea (DB, WM, and WW) had specific activities of 298.0, 271.8, and 177.0 pkat/mg protein for delphinidin 3-$O$-β-glucoside, respectively.

#### Enzyme reaction

The reaction mixture generally consisted of 1.0 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.5 (2.0 μL), 5.0 mM malonyl-CoA aqueous solution (4.0 μL), distilled water (2.0 μL), 2.0 mM anthocyanin or flavonol glycoside solution (4.0 μL), and the crude enzyme preparation.

tion or concentrated active enzyme fraction (8.0 μL). The reaction was initiated by adding anthocyanin or flavonol glycoside solution to the reaction mixture. A set of three reactions for each substrate was performed for 30, 60, and 90 s (for anthocyanins) or for 5, 10, and 15 min (for flavonols) at 30°C to estimate specific activity. The reactions were stopped by adding 4.0 μL of 1.0 M HCl. Before HPLC analysis, the reaction mixture was mixed with 24 μL of 5% MeCN containing 0.05 M TFA.

HPLC and LC/PDA/MS/MS analysis

The reaction mixtures were analyzed using a modification of the method of Kazuma et al. (2003a), with a 20-min linear gradient of 14–86% solvent B (40% MeCN in aq. 0.05 M TFA) in solvent A (5% MeCN in aq. 0.05 M TFA). For LC/PDA/MS/MS analysis to identify the anthocyanidin and flavonol malonylglucosides, a modification of the method of Kazuma et al. (2003a) using a 45-min linear gradient of 0–100% solvent B in solvent A was used.

Hibiscus syriacus petal extract which contains 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides and 3-O-β-glucosides of anthocyanidins

To identify anthocyanidin 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides, each reaction product was co-chromatographed with *H*. syriacus petal extract because the flower of *H*. syriacus contains 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides and 3-O-β-glucosides of pelargonidin, cyanidin, peonidin, delphinidin, petunidin, and malvidin (Kim et al., 1989; Kim and Fujieda, 1991). The co-chromatographic LC/PDA/MS/MS analysis of the reaction mixtures with *H*. syriacus petal extracts allowed us to identify these 12 anthocyanins. To identify flavonol 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides in the reaction mixtures, co-chromatographic LC/PDA/MS/MS analyses with a crude petal extract from DB were performed. The results were as follows: for myricetin 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-gluco-

side, *t*~R~ 25.3 min, *m/z* 567 \[M+H\]^+^, MS/MS from *m/z* 567, *m/z* 319 \[myricetin+H\]^+^; for quercetin 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside, *t*~R~ 29.0 min, *m/z* 551 \[M+H\]^+^, MS/MS from *m/z* 551, *m/z* 303 \[quercetin+H\]^+^; for kaempferol 3-O-(6′-O-malonyl)-β-glucoside, *t*~R~ 32.6 min, *m/z* 535 \[M+H\]^+^, MS/MS from *m/z* 535, *m/z* 287 \[kaempferol+H\]^+^.

Partial purification of UDP-glucose:anthocyanidin 3-O-β-glucoside 6′-O-malonyltransferase

We partially purified this enzyme several times as follows; however, we could not purify it as a single band in SDS-PAGE (Table 1). All the procedures were performed under 4°C or on ice. All the buffers contained 30 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 10 μM pAPMSF other than stated. Enzyme was extracted with 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) containing 10 mM ascorbic acid and 500 μM pAPMSF from the frozen petals (530 g) which were stored in a refrigerator (−80°C). After ammonium sulfate precipitation with 30–70% saturation (Total protein, 580 mg; Specific activity, 164 pkat/mg protein), it was applied to a DEAE Toyopearl (Tosoh) column, eluted with 0–20% gradient of 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) containing 1.0 M NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5); an active fraction was obtained (80 mg; 1030 pkat/mg protein). Then, it was applied to a Ceramic Hydroxyapatite Type I (Bio-Rad) column, eluted with 0–30% gradient of 400 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) in 5.0 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0); an active fraction was obtained (14 mg; 2658 pkat/mg protein). And then, it was applied to a Reactive Brown 10 (Sigma) column which was equilibrated with MES-OH buffer (pH 7.0), eluted with 5.0 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) containing 0.1 mM acetyl-CoA; an active fraction was obtained (4.3 mg; 5632 pkat/mg protein). Further purification successively using Mimetic Yellow 2A6XL (Nacalai Tesque), MonoQ (Amaesham Biosciences), Resource PHE (Amaesham Biosciences), MonoS (Amaesham

Table 1. Partial purification of anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside 6′-O-malonyltransferase from the petals of *C*. ternatea

| Purification step       | Protein (mg) | Total activity (pkat) | Specific activity (pkat/mg) | Purification (-fold) | Yield (%) |
|-------------------------|--------------|-----------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|-----------|
| Ammonium sulfate        | 579.6        | 95183                 | 164.2                      | 1.0                  | 100       |
| DEAE Toyopearl          | 79.8         | 82170                 | 1030                       | 6.3                  | 86        |
| Ceramic Hydroxyapatite  | 13.8         | 36677                 | 2660                       | 16                   | 39        |
| Reactive Brown 10       | 4.3          | 24330                 | 5700                       | 35                   | 26        |
| Mimetic Yellow 2        | 3.1          | 15904                 | 5100                       | 31                   | 17        |
| Mono Q                  | 2.6          | 11798                 | 4500                       | 28                   | 12        |

Biosynthesis of malonylated flavonoid glycosides in Clitoria ternatea

Biosciences), Superdex 200 (Amaesham Biosciences) eventually gave an active fraction, but did not give higher specific activities. In addition, all the chromatography resin used for purification did not give more than one active fraction at all.

### Determination of molecular mass

Molecular mass was determined by gel filtration, which was performed on a calibrated Superdex 75 HR 10/30 column (Pharmacia) with 20 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.5) containing 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 10 μM pAPMSF at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The column was calibrated with the following molecular mass standards: albumin (67 kDa), ovalbumin (43 kDa), chymotrypsinogen A (25 kDa), and ribonuclease (13.7 kDa). The active fraction from Resource PHE chromatography (17.5 μg protein) was used.

### Enzyme kinetics

The crude enzyme solution (10.6 g/L) prepared from the petals of C. ternatea DB (20 g) was used for determining \( K_{\text{m}} \) and \( V_{\text{max}} \) values for delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside and malonyl-CoA, respectively. The reactions were basically performed under the standard reaction condition except for the concentration of the substrates. The concentration of malonyl-CoA was varied from 10 to 400 μM, when the concentration of delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside was set constant (200 μM). And the concentration of malonyl-CoA was set constant (200 μM), the concentration of delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside was varied from 1.0 μM to 2.0 mM. The initial velocity was calculated as specific activity, and then Lineweaver-Burk plots were constructed to calculate \( K_{\text{m}} \) and \( V_{\text{max}} \) values.

### Results and discussion

At first, the crude enzyme was used in this research because no more than one active fraction was observed during partial purification when a careful gradient elution was performed on each column chromatography (see Experimental). The purification steps are listed in Table 1. The molecular weight was estimated to be 52 kDa in the gel filtration. It seemed that one malonyltransferase was responsible for malonylation of anthocyanins and flavonoid glycosides in the petals of C. ternatea.

Each anthocyanin and flavonol glycoside was incubated with crude enzyme extract from the petals of DB in the presence of malonyl-CoA to investigate the substrate specificity of the malonyltransferase (Table 2). Of all the acyl acceptors tested, the enzyme used only the 3-O-β-glucosides of anthocyanidins and flavonols to produce the corresponding 3-O-(6″-O-malonyl)-β-glucosides, as confirmed by co-chromatographic LC/MS/MS experiments with authentic compounds. Of those 3-O-β-glucosides, the enzyme had a preference for delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside (100%), followed by the 3-O-β-glucosides of peonidin (74%), petunidin (66%), and cyanidin (62%). The specificity for flavonol 3-O-β-glucosides was much lower than that for anthocyanin 3-O-β-glucosides. Of the flavonol 3-O-β-glucosides, the enzyme preferred kaempferol 3-O-β-glucoside (8%), followed by the 3-O-β-glucosides of quercetin (5%) and myricetin (0.7%). The enzyme also used isorhamnetin 3-O-β-glucoside (3%), although any isorhamnetin glycosides have not been detected in the petals of *C. ternatea*. Of the aliphatic acyl donors tested, the enzyme used only malonyl-CoA (Table 2). It was obvious that the enzyme preferred anthocyanins to flavonols as acyl acceptors; it used only malonyl-CoA as an acyl donor, and it used only the 3-O-β-glucosides of anthocyanidins and flavonols. This implies a more specific recognition of glycosidic structures over aglycone structures and strong specificity for malonyl-CoA, which are some of the common features of anthocyanin malonyltransferases in various species (Nakayama et al., 2003). Therefore, the *Clitoria* malonyltransferase has malonyl-coenzyme A:anthocyanidin 3-O-β-glucoside 6″-O-malonyltransferase and possibly possess low substrate specificity for flavonol 3-O-β-glucosides. To our knowledge, only quercetin 3-glucoside has been reported to be the substrate of anthocyanin malonyltransferase in *Dahlia variabilis* (Suzuki et al., 2002) and *Senecio cruentus* (Suzuki et al., 2003), and several anthocyanins have been reported as the substrates of flavonol malonyltransferases (Suzuki et al., 2004).

The kinetic data for the crude malonyltransferase were obtained. The \( K_{\text{m}} \) and \( V_{\text{max}} \) values for malonyl-CoA were calculated as 41.8 μM and 504 pkat/mg, respectively. And the \( K_{\text{m}} \) and \( V_{\text{max}} \) values for delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside were calculated as 492 μM and 1.51 nkat/mg, respectively. The \( K_{\text{m}} \) value for the acceptor was larger than those reported for anthocyanin malonyltransferases (Nakayama et al., 2003); however, this could be because of the lower anthocyanin concentration than what it was expected to be during the reaction caused by the non-specific adsorption of anthocyanin to the proteins in the crude enzyme preparation.

Table 2. Substrate specificity for anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside 6"-O-malonyltransferase in the petals of C. ternatea varieties

| Acceptor | Donor | Relative activity (%) |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | DB | WM | WW |
| **Anthocyanins**$^a$ |  |  |  |  |
| Delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 100 | 100 | 100 |
| Pelargonidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 39 | 70 | 82 |
| Cyanidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 62 | 107 | 120 |
| Peonidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 74 | 103 | 119 |
| Petunidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 66 | 89 | 98 |
| Malvidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 25 | 27 | 31 |
| Delphinidin 3,3'-di-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d.$^b$ | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3,3',5'-tri-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3-O-(2"-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Acetyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Succinyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside | p-Coumaroyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside | Caffeoyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| **Flavonol glycosides**$^c$ |  |  |  |  |
| Kaempferol 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 8 | 7 | 8 |
| Quercetin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 5 | 5 | 5 |
| Myricetin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 |
| Isorhamnetin 3-O-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | 3 | 4 | 4 |
| Kaempferol 3-O-(2"-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Quercetin 3-O-(2"-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |
| Myricetin 3-O-(2"-O-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucoside | Malonyl-CoA | n.d. | n.d. | n.d. |

$a$ Relative activities were expressed as percent of specific activity for delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside which were 280.3, 145.3, and 100.1 pkat/mg for DB, WM, and WW, respectively.

$b$ Not detected.

$c$ Relative activities were expressed as percent of specific activity for delphinidin 3-O-β-glucoside which were 298.0, 271.8, and 177.0 pkat/mg for DB, WM, and WW, respectively.

complicated problem, and the relative enzymatic activities shown in Table 2 are not simply proportional to the accumulation ratio. However, the amount of accumulated malonylated anthocyanins was ca. 10 or 3 times that of malonylated flavonols in DB or WM, respectively (Kazuma et al., 2003b); only 5–6% of the total flavonol glycosides were malonylated in all the varieties, which was the reverse of the nearly complete malonylation of anthocyanins in DB (100%) and WM (97%) (Kazuma et al., 2003b). While the broad substrate specificity of anthocyanin acyltransferases has been suggested to contribute to the diversity of anthocyanin biosynthesis (Nakayama et al., 2003), in the case of *C. ternatea*, its broad specificity including flavonol glycosides could affect flavonol glycoside biosynthesis, resulting in the production of malonylated flavonol glycosides.

Considering the substrate specificity, the 3-*O*-(2″-*O*-α-rhamnosyl-6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucosides of anthocyanins and flavonols might be synthesized via their respective 3-*O*-(6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucosides rather than via 3-*O*-(2″-*O*-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides (Fig. 2) because the enzyme did not use 3-*O*-(2″-*O*-α-rhamnosyl)-β-glucosides, but used 3-*O*-β-glucosides instead (Table 2). Thus, it appears that malonylation of 3-*O*-β-glucosides comes first, and then rhamnosylation converts them into 3-*O*-(2″-*O*-α-rhamnosyl-6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucosides, although we did not assay the rhamnosyltransferase (RT) activity in this research.

In addition, malonyltransferase did not utilize delphinidin 3,3′-di-*O*-β-glucoside or delphinidin 3,3′,5′-tri-*O*-β-glucoside (Table 2). This means these two non-malonylated anthocyanins could not be the practical intermediates of ternatin biosynthesis. This complemented recent findings on ternatin biosynthesis, i.e., ternatin C5 is synthesized from delphinidin 3-*O*-(6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucoside via the intermediate delphinidin 3-*O*-(6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucoside-3′-*O*-β-glucoside by anthocyanin 3′-glucosyltransferase (A3′GT) and 5′-glucosyltransferase activities (Kazuma et al., 2004) (Fig. 1).

It is interesting that only WM produces a set of anthocyanins that have similar glycosidic patterns to that of flavonol glycosides, while DB does not (Kazuma et al., 2003b) (Fig. 2). The production of these glycosides requires some RTs in addition to malonyltransferase. The RTs are probably involved in the flavonol glycoside pathway because almost all of the rhamnosylated glycosides of flavonoids are of flavonols (99%) in WM (Kazuma et al., 2003b). Presently, there is no direct evidence that the RTs are responsible for producing minor rhamnosylated anthocyanins, just as anthocyanin malonyltransfer-

ase takes part in synthesizing minor malonylated flavonols. However, the co-existence and cooperation of these two enzymes would allow crosstalk between the anthocyanin and flavonol glycoside pathways, resulting in the production of these minor malonylated, rhamnosylated, and both malonylated and rhamnosylated glucosides of delphinidin and flavonols in WM. The lack of A3′GT activity in WM (Kazuma et al., 2004) might unveil hidden crosstalk between the anthocyanin and flavonol glycoside biosynthetic routes.


### References

Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 1976;72:248–54.

Heller W, Forkmann G. Biosynthesis of flavonoids. In: Harborne JB, editor. The flavonoids, advances in research since 1986. London: Chapman & Hall; 1994. p. 500–35.

Honda T, Saito N. Recent progress in the chemistry of polyacylated anthocyanins as flower color pigments. Heterocycles 2002;56:633–92.

Ito I, Nishiyama H, Yamaguchi M-A. Malonylation of anthocyanins by extracts of flower buds in *Dendranthema morifolium* cultivars. Phytochemistry 1993;32:1425–6.

Ito I, Yamaguchi M-A. Acetyl-coenzyme A:anthocyanidin 3-glucoside acetyltransferase from flowers of *Zinnia elegans*. Phytochemistry 1993;33:1415–7.

Kazuma K, Noda N, Suzuki M. Malonylated flavonol glycosides from the petals of *Clitoria ternatea*. Phytochemistry 2003a;62:229–37.

Kazuma K, Noda N, Suzuki M. Flavonoid composition related to petal color in different lines of *Clitoria ternatea*. Phytochemistry 2003b;64:1133–9.

Kazuma K, Kogawa K, Noda N, Kato N, Suzuki M. Delphinidin 3-*O*-(6″-*O*-malonyl)-β-glucoside-3′-*O*-β-glucoside, a postulated intermediate in the biosynthesis of ternatin C5 in the blue petals of *Clitoria ternatea* (butterfly pea). Chem Biodivers 2004;1:1762–70.

Kim JH, Fujieda K. Studies on the flower color variation in *Hibiscus syriacus* L. J Kor Soc Hort Sci 1991;32:247–55.

Kim JH, Nonaka GI, Fujieda K, Uemoto S. Anthocyanidin malonylglucosides in flowers of *Hibiscus syriacus*. Phytochemistry 1989;28:1503–6.

Koester J, Bussmann R, Barz W. Malonyl-coenzyme A: isoflavone 7-*O*-glucoside-6″-*O*-malonyltransferase from roots of chick pea (*Cicer arietinum* L.). Arch Biochem Biophys 1984;234:513–21.

Nakayama T, Suzuki H, Nishino T. Anthocyanin acyltransferases: specificities, mechanism, phylogenetics, and applications. J Mol Catal B Enzyme 2003;23:117–32.

Suzuki H, Nakayama T, Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Fukui Y, Nakamura N, Yamaguchi M-A, et al. cDNA cloning,

heterologous expressions, and functional characterization of malonyl-coenzyme A:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside-6″-O-malonyltransferase from *Dahlia* flowers. Plant Physiol 2002;130:2142–51.

Suzuki H, Sawada S, Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Nakayama T, Yamaguchi M-A, Nishino T. Identification of cDNA encoding malonyl-coenzyme A:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucose 6″-O-malonyltransferase from Cineraria (*Senecio cruentus*) flowers. Plant Biotechnol 2003;20:229–34.

Suzuki H, Nakayama T, Nagae S, Yamaguchi M-A, Iwashita T, Fukui Y, et al. cDNA cloning and functional

characterization of flavonol 3-O-glucoside-6″-O-malonyltransferases from flowers of *Verbena hybrida* and *Lamium purpureum*. J Mol Catal B Enzym 2004;28:87–93.

Terahara N, Saito N, Honda T, Toki K, Osajima Y. Further structural elucidation of the anthocyanin, deacylernatin, from *Clitoria ternatea*. Phytochemistry 1990;29:3686–7.

Terahara N, Toki K, Saito N, Honda T, Matsui T, Osajima Y. Eight new anthocyanins, ternatins C1–C5 and D3 and preternatin A3-C4 from young *Clitoria ternatea* flowers. J Nat Prod 1998;61:1361–7.
