
Circulation

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION

American Heart Association®

Advanced Glycation End Products: Sparking the Development of Diabetic Vascular Injury

Alison Goldin, Joshua A. Beckman, Ann Marie Schmidt and Mark A. Creager

*Circulation.* 2006;114:597-605

doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.621854

*Circulation* is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231

Copyright © 2006 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.

Print ISSN: 0009-7322. Online ISSN: 1524-4539

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the World Wide Web at:

http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/114/6/597

---

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published in *Circulation* can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this process is available in the *Permissions and Rights Question and Answer* document.

Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:

http://www.lww.com/reprints

Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to *Circulation* is online at:

http://circ.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

---

Downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ at NORTH DAKOTA STATE UNIV on June 21, 2014

Basic Science for Clinicians

# Advanced Glycation End Products
## Sparking the Development of Diabetic Vascular Injury

Alison Goldin, BA; Joshua A. Beckman, MD; Ann Marie Schmidt, MD; Mark A. Creager, MD

**Abstract—** Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are proteins or lipids that become glycated after exposure to sugars. AGEs are prevalent in the diabetic vasculature and contribute to the development of atherosclerosis. The presence and accumulation of AGEs in many different cell types affect extracellular and intracellular structure and function. AGEs contribute to a variety of microvascular and macrovascular complications through the formation of cross-links between molecules in the basement membrane of the extracellular matrix and by engaging the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). Activation of RAGE by AGEs causes upregulation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB and its target genes. Soluble AGEs activate monocytes, and AGEs in the basement membrane inhibit monocyte migration. AGE-bound RAGE increases endothelial permeability to macromolecules. AGEs block nitric oxide activity in the endothelium and cause the production of reactive oxygen species. Because of the emerging evidence about the adverse effects of AGEs on the vasculature of patients with diabetes, a number of different therapies to inhibit AGEs are under investigation. (*Circulation*. 2006;114:597-605.)

**Key Words:** advanced glycosylation end products ■ diabetes mellitus ■ vasculature

---

A dvanced glycation end products (AGEs) are modifications of proteins or lipids that become nonenzymatically glycated and oxidized after contact with aldose sugars. Early glycation and oxidation processes result in the formation of Schiff bases and Amadori products. Further glycation of proteins and lipids causes molecular rearrangements that lead to the generation of AGEs. AGEs may fluoresce, produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), bind to specific cell surface receptors, and form cross-links. AGEs form in vivo in hyperglycemic environments and during aging and contribute to the pathophysiology of vascular disease in diabetes. This review summarizes AGE formation and biochemistry, cellular receptors for AGE, AGE-induced effects on extracellular and intracellular functions, and developing AGE therapies.

AGEs accumulate in the vessel wall, where they may perturb cell structure and function. AGEs have been implicated in both the microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes. As reviewed by Brownlee, AGEs may modify the extracellular matrix (ECM); modify the action of hormones, cytokines, and free radicals via engagement of cell surface receptors; and impact the function of intracellular proteins.

### AGE Biochemistry

Key factors crucial to the formation of AGEs include the rate of turnover of proteins for glycoxidation, the degree of hyperglycemia, and the extent of oxidative stress in the environment. If one or more of these conditions is present,

both intracellular and extracellular proteins may be glycated and oxidized. The AGE formation process, or the Maillard reaction, begins from Schiff bases and the Amadori product, a 1-amino-1-deoxyketose, produced by the reaction of the carbonyl group of a reducing sugar, like glucose, with proteins, lipids, and nucleic acid amino groups. During Amadori reorganization, these highly reactive intermediate carbonyl groups, known as α-dicarbonyls or oxoaldehydes, products of which include 3-deoxyglucosone and methylglyoxal, accumulate. Such buildup is referred to as “carbonyl stress.” The α-dicarbonyls have the ability to react with amino, sulfhydryl, and guanidine functional groups in proteins. The reaction results in denaturation, browning, and cross-linking of the targeted proteins. In addition, the α-dicarbonyls can react with lysine and arginine functional groups on proteins, leading to the formation of stable AGE compounds, such as Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML), which are nonfluorescent AGEs. CMLs also form in vitro from LDL incubated with copper ions and glucose and therefore are believed to be both lipid and protein adducts. Once AGEs are formed, they are nearly irreversible. There is evidence that enzymes, such as glyoxalase-1, have the ability to detoxify AGE precursors and inhibit AGE production, as evidenced by the presence of deoxyfructose, a reduction product of 3-deoxyglucosone in human urine and plasma.

### Receptors for AGEs

Several different receptors for AGEs have been discovered, one of which, termed RAGE, initiates the intracellular sig-

---

From the Cardiovascular Division (A.G., J.A.B., M.A.C.), Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass, and Columbia University Medical Center (A.M.S.), New York, NY.

Correspondence to Mark A. Creager, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Cardiovascular Division, 75 Francis St, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail mcreager@partners.org

© 2006 American Heart Association, Inc.

*Circulation* is available at http://www.circulationaha.org

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.621854

Downloaded from [http://circ.ahajournals.org](http://circ.ahajournals.org) at NORTH DAKOTA STATE UNIV on June 21, 2014

naling that disrupts cellular function through its recognition and binding of AGEs. RAGE is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of receptors.²⁰,²¹ The human RAGE gene is on chromosome 6 in the major histocompatibility complex between genes for class II and class III.²² Nuclear factor (NF)-κB sites, an interferon-γ response element, and an NF-interleukin-6 (IL-6) DNA binding motif are located on the RAGE promoter.²³ NF-κB sites control cellular expression of RAGE, linking RAGE to the inflammatory response.²³ RAGE has a 332-amino acid extracellular component, consisting of 2 “C”-type domains preceded by 1 “V”-type immunoglobulin-like domain.²⁴–²⁶ RAGE has a single transmembrane domain followed by a highly charged 43-amino acid cytosolic tail.²⁶ The V domain in the N-terminus is important in ligand binding, and the cytosolic tail is critical for RAGE-induced intracellular signaling.²⁶ A form of RAGE that lacks the cytosolic tail but stays embedded in the membrane where it binds AGEs functions as a dominant-negative RAGE, unable to transduce a cell signal on ligand engagement.²⁶,²⁷

RAGE may be complexed with another polypeptide, termed LF-L, for its likeness to lactoferrin, at least in certain cell types.²⁸ LF-L can bind AGEs and can also bind noncovalently to the extracellular domain of RAGE.²⁸ RAGE is minimally expressed in normal tissue and vasculature.²⁶ However, RAGE is upregulated when AGE ligands accumulate, an example of positive-feedback activation.²¹ Upregulation of RAGE occurs on cells such as endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and mononuclear phagocytes in diabetic vasculature.²⁶,²⁹ In diabetic vessels, RAGE ligands include AGEs of at least 2 varieties: CML adducts and hydroimidazolones.²⁵,³⁰ CML-AGEs are the most prevalent AGEs in vivo.³¹ CML adducts are signal-transducing ligands for RAGE, both in vitro and in vivo.²⁵ Hydroimidazolone AGEs are derived from methylglyoxal and 3-deoxyglucosone.³²

Other receptors, like AGE-R1 (oligosaccharyl transferase-48), -R2 (80K-H phosphoprotein), and -R3 (galectin-3), and the class A macrophage scavenger receptor types I and II, also are able to recognize and bind AGE ligands, but they have not been shown to transduce cellular signals after engagement by AGEs.³³,³⁴ Instead, they may cause the clearance and possible detoxification of AGEs.³⁴ AGE-R1 is a type 1 single transmembrane integral protein. AGE-R1 has a small extracellular N-terminal domain and a cytoplasmic C-terminal domain.³³,³⁵–³⁷ AGE-R2 is an 80- to 90-kD protein involved in the intracellular signaling of various receptors, like the fibroblast growth factor receptor.³³,³⁸ AGE-R2 contains a tyrosine-phosphorylated section in the plasma membrane of the cell.³⁸,³⁹ AGE-R3, whose binding domain is at the C-terminus, also binds AGE ligands with high affinity.³³,⁴⁰ Two class B scavenger receptors, CD36 and class B type I, also bind AGE ligands. CD36 is not involved in the clearance of AGEs from the circulation, but it plays an important role in the induction of oxidative stress in the cell.⁴¹,⁴² AGE ligands interfere with scavenger receptor class B type I uptake of HDL cholesterol.⁴³,⁴⁴ AGEs bind to and are recognized by the class E scavenger receptor, lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1), and AGEs increase LOX-1 expression in diabetic rats.⁴⁵,⁴⁶ Fasciclin, epidermal

growth factor-like, laminin-type epidermal growth factor-like, and link domain-containing scavenger receptor-1 and -2 (FEEL-1 and FEEL-2) also are scavenger receptors that bind AGEs.⁴⁷

# AGE Effects on Extracellular Function

General mechanisms through which AGEs contribute to diabetic complications include the following: (1) formation of cross-links between key molecules in the basement membrane of the ECM, permanently altering cellular structure; and (2) interaction of AGEs with RAGE on cell surfaces, altering cellular function (the Figure).

Formation of AGEs in the ECM occurs on proteins with a slow turnover rate. Accumulation of AGEs on proteins in the ECM can cause formation of cross-links, which can “trap” other local macromolecules.⁹,⁴⁸ AGEs can alter properties of the large matrix proteins collagen, vitronectin, and laminin, through AGE-AGE intermolecular covalent bonds, or cross-linking.⁴⁸–⁵⁰ AGE cross-linking on type I collagen and elastin causes an increase in the area of ECM, resulting in increased stiffness of the vasculature.⁵,¹¹,⁵¹–⁵³ Glycation results in increased synthesis of type III collagen, α3(IV) collagen, type V collagen, type VI collagen, laminin, and fibronectin in the ECM, most likely via upregulation of a transforming growth factor-β intermediate.⁵⁴–⁵⁷ AGEs disrupt binding of the noncollagenous domain (NC-1) to the helix-rich domain on type IV collagen from the basement membrane, inhibiting the formation of a matrix-like structure.⁵,⁵⁸,⁵⁹ Formation of AGEs on laminin results in reduced binding to type IV collagen, reduced polymer elongation, and reduced binding of heparan sulfate proteoglycan.⁶⁰ Glycation of laminin and type I and type IV collagens, key molecules in the basement membrane, causes inhibited adhesion to endothelial cells for both matrix glycoproteins.⁵¹,⁶¹ In diabetic subjects, the glycation of these proteins can lead to disparities in production, growth, and secretory activity of different types of cells.⁵¹ Studies suggest that AGE formation leads to a reduction in the binding of collagen and heparan to the adhesive matrix molecule vitronectin.⁵ AGE-induced alterations of vitronectin and laminin may explain the reduction in binding of heparan sulfate, a stimulant of other matrix molecules in the vessel wall, to the diabetic basement membrane.⁵,⁴⁹,⁶² In addition to the formation of AGEs on proteins, AGEs can also form on lipids, as evidenced by the increased lipid-linked AGEs in LDL samples from persons with and without diabetes.⁶³ Glycated LDL reduces nitric oxide (NO) production and suppresses uptake and clearance of LDL through its receptor on endothelial cells.⁶³–⁶⁵

# AGE Effects on Intracellular Function

AGEs also form on intracellular proteins. Intracellular AGEs change cellular properties that are critical in vascular homeostasis.⁶⁶ The rate of AGE formation on intracellular proteins is slowest in the presence of glucose and more rapid with intracellular natural sugars, like fructose, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, and glucose-6-phosphate.⁵,⁶⁷ Ten times more fructose-derived AGEs form after 5 days than glucose-derived AGEs in vivo.⁶⁸ Intracellular AGE formation significantly increases in endothelial cells after 1 week in a

The extracellular and intracellular effects of AGEs. In the ECM, AGEs form on a variety of different molecules, including lipids, collagen, laminin, elastin, and vitronectin. The formation of AGEs on ECM molecules alters the constitution of the matrix and increases stiffness. AGEs also activate the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β receptor to stimulate cell growth, leading to increased ECM production. AGEs that bind to RAGE on the endothelial cell surface lead to a signaling cascade, stimulating NAD(P)H oxidase and increasing ROS, p21 RAS, and MAPKs. In addition, the ligand-RAGE interaction also may stimulate signaling via p38 MAPK and Rac/Cdc. A key target of RAGE signaling is NF-κB. NF-κB is translocated to the nucleus, where it increases transcription of a number of different proteins, including endothelin-1, ICAM-1, E-selectin, and tissue factor. AGE and ligands for RAGE, such as HMGB1 and S100 calgranulins, trigger inflammatory pathways. AGE may decrease NO availability by the decreased activity of NOS and by quenching NO. sAGEs activate monocytes, causing increased expression of macrophage scavenger receptor (MSR) class A receptors and CD36 receptors, leading to increased OxLDL uptake and foam cell formation. DN indicates dominant-negative.

hyperglycemic environment.⁶⁹ Intracellularly, basic fibroblast growth factor is one of the proteins that may be glycated.⁷⁰ AGE modification of this protein drastically reduces the mitogenic activity of endothelial cell cytosol by 70%.⁷⁰

Circulating AGEs may interact with endothelial RAGEs, which leads to perturbation of cellular properties, such as upregulation of the transcription factor NF-κB.⁹,⁷¹ Activation of RAGEs by AGEs transduces multiple signals, such as NAD(P)H oxidase, p21<sup>ras</sup>, the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), extracellular signal-regulated kinase

1/2 and p38, and the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac, resulting in activation and translocation of nuclear transcription factors, including NF-κB, which transcribes its target genes (the Figure).⁷²–⁷⁵ Among these are endothelin-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), E-selectin, tissue factor, thrombomodulin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and likely, proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-1α, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α, and RAGE itself.⁷⁶,⁷⁷ Blockade of RAGE with anti-RAGE IgG or

soluble RAGE (sRAGE), the extracellular ligand, inhibits NF-κB activation. 8

## AGE and the Endothelial Cell

sAGEs are chemotactic for human blood monocytes both in vitro and in vivo. 78,79 AGEs on the subendothelium induce monocyte migration across an endothelial cell monolayer. 79 In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, inhibitors of NF-κB greatly reduce high glucose–induced monocyte adhesion, suggesting that the activation of NF-κB is essential in AGE-induced monocyte adhesion and migration. 78 Activation of RAGE by AGEs increases endothelial permeability to macromolecules, yet another receptor-mediated effect of AGEs on the diabetic vasculature. 23,71 AGEs located on proteins, in addition to immobilized AGEs on the subendothelium, bind RAGE on the endothelium to induce hyperpermeability. 77 Administration of sRAGE inhibits vascular leakage in the intestine and skin of streptozotocin-treated rats. 8 AGE-bound RAGE on the endothelium also results in alteration of the cell surface structure, from that of an anticoagulant to a procoagulant endothelium, via reduced thrombomodulin activity concomitant with increased tissue factor expression. 71,77,80

## AGE and the Macrophage

Whereas sAGEs activate monocytes, AGEs located in basement membranes inhibit monocyte migration, inducing a process called “apoptaxis.” AGEs may contribute to the expression of oxidized LDL (OxLDL) receptors in human monocyte-derived macrophages. 81 AGEs have been shown to induce gene expression of 2 important OxLDL receptors: macrophage scavenger receptor class A and CD36. 81 The increased expression of these receptors leads to enhanced OxLDL uptake, resulting in foam cell transformation (the Figure). Activation of monocytes by AGE-modified human serum albumin also leads to expression of IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α mRNA. 82 AGEs also alter cellular coagulant properties, partly via the monocyte-produced procoagulant, tissue factor, and decreased expression of the endothelial anticoagulant cofactor, thrombomodulin. 23,71,80,83,84

## AGE and the Smooth Muscle Cell

Addition of AGE-albumin to rat pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells results in increased levels of GTP-bound p21<sup>ras</sup> and activation of ERK1 and ERK2 (ie, MAPKs), whereas addition of nonglycated albumin to the same type of cells yields basal levels of GTP-bound p21<sup>ras</sup> and nonactivated MAPKs. 85 p21<sup>ras</sup> is critical for signal transduction of AGEs, as evident when Cys<sup>118</sup>, a molecular target of ROS on p21<sup>ras</sup>, is mutated and overexpressed in PC12 cells expressing RAGE. The mutated PC12 cells are nonresponsive to AGE-albumin, whereas the wild-type cells respond to AGE-albumin by activating ERK 1/2 kinases. 85

## AGE Effects on NO

AGEs reduce the bioavailability and activity of endothelium-derived NO (Figure). Because NO inhibits many of the mechanisms that contribute to atherosclerosis, such as leukocyte adhesion to the vessel wall, vascular smooth muscle growth, and platelet adhesion and aggregation, this effect of AGEs on NO may be relevant to atherogenesis. 67,86,87 Indeed, Hogan et al 68 have demonstrated that matrix-bound and sAGEs inhibit the antiproliferative effects of NO. Moreover, impaired vasodilation in diabetes may be a result of AGEs’ reduction of NO activity. 67 The levels of serum AGEs in patients with type 2 diabetes are inversely related to the degree of endothelium-dependent and endothelium-independent vasodilation. 88 Several mechanisms by which AGEs reduce or block NO activity have been proposed. One mechanism suggests that AGEs reduce the half-life of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) mRNA through an increased rate of mRNA degradation and reduced eNOS activity. 89 Another mechanism proposes that AGEs impair NO production via the binding of CML residues to endothelial AGE receptors, causing a reduction in phosphorylation of serine residues in eNOS, resulting in deactivation of the enzyme. 90,91 AGEs also may quench and inactivate endothelium-derived NO. 67,68 Also, the endothelial production of prostacyclin (PGI<sub>2</sub>) is reduced by AGEs. 92 In addition to affecting the activity of these 2 major vasodilators, AGEs also enhance the expression of endothelin-1, via NF-κB, in bovine aortic endothelial cells incubated with erythrocytes from patients with type 2 diabetes. 93

AGE-bound RAGE in the endothelium results in the production of reactive oxygen intermediates, triggered, at least in part, through the activation of NADPH oxidase. 72,94 AGE-RAGE interaction stimulates the production of reactive oxygen intermediates, which in turn activate a range of signaling pathways, the consequences of which include activation of NF-κB. 72,94,95

## The Specific AGEs: CML-AGEs

AGE-RAGE–produced oxidative stress activates NF-κB and affects the transcriptional activation of numerous cytokines and adhesion molecules, many of which are closely linked to inflammation and atherosclerosis, as discussed earlier. 72,96 Through the appearance of thiobarbituric acid–reactive substances (TBARS) and activation of NF-κB, mononuclear phagocytes are also affected by oxidative processes resulting from the presence of AGEs. In addition, AGEs found on the surface of erythrocytes can bind to RAGE, increasing TBARS levels and activating NF-κB. The source of ROS on diabetic erythrocytes is most likely AGEs bound to the erythrocyte surface, because engagement of RAGE by antibodies does not produce oxidant stress. 97 In mice infused with AGE-albumin, the induction of oxidant stress leads to activation of NF-κB, induction of heme oxygenase mRNA, and TBARS in the tissues. 72

## Anti-AGE Therapies

A variety of different compounds that inhibit AGEs have been under investigation. Aminoguanidine is a hydrazine compound that prevents AGE formation. 72 Aminoguanidine reacts mostly with derivatives of early glycation products that are not bound on proteins, like 3-deoxyglucosone. 72 Several avenues of investigation have suggested that aminoguanidine favorably affects vascular structure in experimental models of diabetes. The reduction of AGE formation by aminoguanidine
dine attenuates the effects of diabetes on large arteries.52 Aminoguanidine treatment increases arterial elasticity as measured by aortic input impedance, static compliance, and left ventricular afterload in diabetic rats.52 Aminoguanidine reduces ECM accumulation of both fibronectin and laminin in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats with diabetic nephropathy.98 In addition, aminoguanidine decreases vascular AGE accumulation and the severity of atherosclerotic plaque in diabetic rats.99 Aminoguanidine is also an NOS inhibitor, which may offset some of its benefits as an AGE inhibitor.67,100 In a placebo-controlled, randomized trial in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus, aminoguanidine caused a slower reduction in glomerular filtration rate. Aminoguanidine reduced 24-hour urinary proteinuria and progression of retinopathy.101 However, aminoguanidine did not attenuate the time to doubling of serum creatinine.101

N-(2-Acetamidoethyl)hydroxinecarboximidamide hydrochloride (ALT-946) has been shown to be an effective inhibitor of AGE-induced cross-links.102 Like aminoguanidine, ALT-946 also inhibits NOS, though less so than aminoguanidine.102 Like aminoguanidine, (±)-2-isopropylidenehydrazono-4-oxothiazolidin-5-yacetanidide (OPB-9195) is constructed to prevent alteration of nucleophilic residues in proteins by trapping carbonyl intermediates.103 One study has shown that administration of OPB-9195 to hypertensive rats lowered levels of glycated albumin and increased urinary NO excretion and expression of eNOS mRNA when compared with control rats.104

4,5-Dimethyl-3-phenacylthiozolium chloride (ALT-711) is a compound that breaks the cross-links of AGEs. It has a thiazolium structure that is able to sever α-carbonyl compounds by breaking the carbon-carbon bonds between carbonyls.53,103 Diabetic rats treated for 4 months with ALT-711 show reduced collagen III, increased collagen solubility, and reduced RAGE and AGE-R3 mRNA expression compared with placebo.105 In addition, ALT-711 has been shown to improve left ventricular function, reduce ventricular collagen, and lengthen survival in diabetic animals, including aged animals in whom there was a large reduction of left ventricle chamber stiffness.106,107 In older humans, ALT-711 is reported to improve arterial compliance and decrease pulse pressure.53

Hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) not only inhibit cholesterol production but also block synthesis of isoprenoid intermediates that function as “platforms” for several intracellular signaling molecules.108,109 Cerivastatin prevents AGE-stimulated increases in VEGF mRNA, NF-κB expression, and DNA synthesis in microvascular endothelial cells and also prevents AGE-induced angiogenesis by interfering with the intracellular AGE signal transduction pathway.109 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers have been shown to decrease the production of reactive carbonyl precursors.110 In one study, the ACE inhibitor ramipril attenuated AGE accumulation in diabetic animals.111

sRAGE, the extracellular ligand-binding domain of RAGE, blocks AGEs from binding to RAGE, as if sRAGE were a “sponge” soaking up sAGEs.112 In doing so, sRAGE suppresses accelerated atherosclerotic lesion formation and decreases vascular hyperpermeability.112–115 Levels of AGEs and RAGE are increased in streptozotocin-treated (diabetic) apolipoprotein E-null mice that have advanced atherosclerosis by 14 weeks of age.26 Administration of sRAGE suppresses the severity of atherosclerosis to the same level as that found in euglycemic control mice.26 Blockade of RAGE by sRAGE in mice with diabetes reduces atherosclerotic lesion area, supporting the notion that RAGE is a crucial part of the development and acceleration of atherosclerosis and that sRAGE is an effective intervention.113,114,116

Pyridoxamine, the natural form of vitamin B6, is effective at inhibiting AGEs at 3 different levels.117–120 Pyridoxamine prevents the degradation of protein-Amadori intermediates to protein-AGE products.121 In diabetic rats, pyridoxamine reduces hyperlipidemia and prevents AGE formation.122–124 Pyridoxamine scavenges the carbonyl byproducts of glucose and lipid degradation. Zucker rats treated with pyridoxamine have reduced plasma levels of glyoxal, methylglyoxal, and AGEs in collagen.125,126 Benfotiamine, a lipid-soluble thiamine derivative, inhibits the AGE formation pathway.127,128 In endothelial cells, water-soluble thiamine is similar to benfotiamine in inhibiting AGE formation in high-glucose environments.128

AGEs can be absorbed through the diet.129 Foods high in protein and fat, such as meat, cheese, and egg yolk, are rich in AGEs.130 Foods high in carbohydrates have the lowest amount of AGEs. In addition, increased cooking temperatures, like broiling and frying, and increased cooking times lead to increased amounts of AGEs.131 A diet heavy in AGEs results in proportional elevations in serum AGE levels and increased AGE cross-linking in patients with diabetes.129 Conversely, dietary AGE restriction causes a 30% to 40% decrease of serum AGE levels in healthy subjects.131 Diabetic patients on a high-AGE diet have increased expression and activity of MAPK, NF-κB, and VCAM-1 compared with diabetic subjects on a low-AGE diet.132 Excretion of AGEs absorbed through the diet is suppressed in diabetic nephropathy patients compared with healthy controls.129 Patients with diabetes and renal failure who restrict dietary AGE intake demonstrate suppressed AGE-related tissue injury.130,133

### Summary

AGEs form when proteins or lipids interact with aldose sugars for an extended period of time, subsequently undergoing molecular transformations that glycate the protein or lipid, thereby imparting distinct and likely maladaptive signatures in the vessel wall. In hyperglycemic environments and in natural aging, AGEs alter cell structure and function. The recognition and binding of AGEs to RAGE contribute to the microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes. Understanding AGE formation and biochemistry, cellular receptors for AGE, and AGE-induced effects on extracellular and intracellular functions will serve to expedite the process of finding effective therapies that block excessive accumulation of these species and their interaction with the signal transduction receptor RAGE.

### Sources of Funding

This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (HL-48743) and the American Diabetes Association (1-06-
CD-01). Dr Creager is the Simon C. Fireman Scholar in Cardiovascular Medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

# Disclosures

None.

# References

1. Schmidt AM, Hori O, Brett J, Yan SD, Wautier JL, Stern D. Cellular receptors for advanced glycation end products: implications for induction of oxidative stress and cellular dysfunction in the pathogenesis of vascular lesions. *Arterioscler Thromb*. 1994;14:1521–1528.
2. Singh R, Barden A, Mori T, Beilin L. Advanced glycation end-products: a review. *Diabetologia*. 2001;44:129–146.
3. Brownlee M, Vlassara H, Cerami A. Nonenzymatic glycosylation products on collagen covalently trap low-density lipoprotein. *Diabetes*. 1985; 34:938–941.
4. Schmidt AM, Yan SD, Stern DM. The dark side of glucose. *Nat Med*. 1995;1:1002–1004.
5. Brownlee M. Advanced protein glycosylation in diabetes and aging. *Annu Rev Med*. 1995;46:223–234.
6. Garay-Sevilla ME, Regalado JC, Malacara JM, Nava LE, Wrobel-Zasada K, Castro-Rivas A, Wrobel K. Advanced glycosylation end products in skin, serum, saliva and urine and its association with complications of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. *J Endocrinol Invest*. 2005;28:223–230.
7. Rojas A, Morales MA. Advanced glycation and endothelial functions: a link towards vascular complications in diabetes. *Life Sci*. 2004;76: 715–730.
8. Schmidt AM, Yan SD, Wautier JL, Stern D. Activation of receptor for advanced glycation end products: a mechanism for chronic vascular dysfunction in diabetic vasculopathy and atherosclerosis. *Circ Res*. 1999;84:489–497.
9. Schmidt AM, Hasu M, Popov D, Zhang JH, Chen J, Yan SD, Brett J, Cao R, Kuwabara K, Costache G, Simionescu N, Simionescu M, Stern D. Receptor for advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has a central role in vessel wall interactions and gene activation in response to circulating AGE proteins. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1994;91: 8807–8811.
10. Fu MX, Wells-Knecht KJ, Blackledge JA, Lyons TJ, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. Glycation, glycoxidation, and cross-linking of collagen by glucose: kinetics, mechanisms, and inhibition of late stages of the Maillard reaction. *Diabetes*. 1994;43:676–683.
11. Tanaka S, Avigad G, Brodsky B, Eikenberry EF. Glycation induces expansion of the molecular packing of collagen. *J Mol Biol*. 1988;203: 495–505.
12. Baynes JW, Thorpe SR. Role of oxidative stress in diabetic complications: a new perspective on an old paradigm. *Diabetes*. 1999;48:1–9.
13. Suzuki D, Miyata T, Saotome N, Horie K, Inagi R, Yasuda Y, Uchida K, Izuhara Y, Yagame M, Sakai H, Kurokawa K. Immunohistochemical evidence for an increased oxidative stress and carbonyl modification of proteins in diabetic glomerular lesions. *J Am Soc Nephrol*. 1999;10: 822–832.
14. Lo TW, Westwood ME, McLellan AC, Selwood T, Thornalley PJ. Binding and modification of proteins by methylglyoxal under physiological conditions: a kinetic and mechanistic study with N-α-acetylglycine, N-α-acetylglutamine, and N-α-acetyllysine, and bovine serum albumin. *J Biol Chem*. 1994;269:32299–32305.
15. Frye EB, Degenhardt TP, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. Role of the Maillard reaction in aging of tissue proteins. *J Biol Chem*. 1998;273: 18714–18719.
16. Ahmed MU, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. Identification of N-ε-carboxymethyllysine as a degradation product of fructoselysine in glycated protein. *J Biol Chem*. 1986;261:4889–4894.
17. Sakata N, Uesugi N, Takebayashi S, Nagai R, Jono T, Horiuchi S, Takeya M, Itabe H, Takano T, Myint T, Taniguchi N. Glycoxidation and lipid peroxidation of low-density lipoprotein can synergistically enhance atherogenesis. *Cardiovasc Res*. 2001;49:466–475.
18. Imanaga Y, Sakata N, Takebayashi S, Matsunaga A, Sasaki J, Arakawa K, Nagai R, Horiuchi S, Itabe H, Takano T. In vivo and in vitro evidence for the glycoxidation of low density lipoprotein in human atherosclerotic plaques. *Atherosclerosis*. 2000;150:343–355.
19. Knecht KJ, Feather MS, Baynes JW. Detection of 3-deoxyfructose and 3-deoxyglucosone in human urine and plasma: evidence for intermediate stages of the Maillard reaction in vivo. *Arch Biochem Biophys*. 1992; 294:130–137.
20. Schmidt AM, Vianna M, Gerlach M, Brett J, Ryan J, Kao J, Esposito C, Hegarty H, Hurley W, Clauss M, Clauss FW, Yu-Ching EP, Tsang TC, Stern D. Isolation and characterization of two binding proteins for advanced glycosylation end products from bovine lung which are present on the endothelial cell surface. *J Biol Chem*. 1992;267:14987–14997.
21. Neeper M, Schmidt AM, Brett J, Yan SD, Wang F, Pan YC, Elliston K, Stern D, Shaw A. Cloning and expression of a cell surface receptor for advanced glycosylation end products of proteins. *J Biol Chem*. 1992; 267:14998–15004.
22. Sugaya K, Fukagawa T, Matsumoto K, Mita K, Takahashi E, Ando A, Inoko H, Ikemura T. Three genes in the human MHC class III region near the junction with the class II gene for receptor of advanced glycosylation end products, PBX2 homeobox gene and a notch homolog, human counterpart of mouse mammary tumor gene int-3. *Genomics*. 1994;23:408–419.
23. Li J, Schmidt AM. Characterization and functional analysis of the promoter of RAGE, the receptor for advanced glycation end products. *J Biol Chem*. 1997;272:16498–16506.
24. Yan SF, Ramasamy R, Naka Y, Schmidt AM. Glycation, inflammation, and RAGE: a scaffold for the macrovascular complications of diabetes and beyond. *Circ Res*. 2003;93:1159–1169.
25. Kislinger T, Fu C, Huber B, Qu W, Taguchi A, Du Yan S, Hofmann M, Yan SF, Pischetsrieder M, Stern D, Schmidt AM. Ne-(carboxymethyl)lysine adducts of proteins are ligands for receptor for advanced glycation end products that activate cell signaling pathways and modulate gene expression. *J Biol Chem*. 1999;274:31740–31749.
26. Schmidt AM, Yan SD, Yan SF, Stern DM. The multiligand receptor RAGE as a progression factor amplifying immune and inflammatory responses. *J Clin Invest*. 2001;108:949–955.
27. Schafer BW, Heizmann CW. The S100 family of EF-hand calcium-binding proteins: functions and pathology. *Trends Biochem Sci*. 1996; 21:134–140.
28. Schmidt AM, Mora R, Cao R, Yan SD, Brett J, Ramakrishnan R, Tsang TC, Simionescu M, Stern D. The endothelial cell binding site for advanced glycation end products consists of a complex: an integral membrane protein and a lactoferrin-like polypeptide. *J Biol Chem*. 1994;269:9882–9888.
29. Schmidt AM, Stern DM. RAGE: a new target for the prevention and treatment of the vascular and inflammatory complications of diabetes. *Trends Endocrinol Metab*. 2000;11:368–375.
30. Makita Z, Vlassara H, Rayfield E, Cartwright K, Friedman E, Rodby R, Cerami A, Bucala R. Hemoglobin-AGE: a circulating marker of advanced glycosylation. *Science*. 1992;258:651–653.
31. Dyer DG, Dunn JA, Thorpe SR, Bailie KE, Lyons TJ, McCance DR, Baynes JW. Accumulation of Maillard reaction products in skin collagen in diabetes and aging. *J Clin Invest*. 1993;91:2463–2469.
32. Ahmed N, Babaei-Jadidi R, Howell SK, Thornalley PJ, Beisswenger PJ. Glycated and oxidized protein degradation products are indicators of fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in diabetes. *Diabetes Care*. 2005;28:2465–2471.
33. Stitt AW, Bucala R, Vlassara H. Atherogenesis and advanced glycation: promotion, progression, and prevention. *Ann NY Acad Sci*. 1997;811: 115–127; discussion 127–129.
34. Bucciarelli LG, Wendt T, Rong L, Lalla E, Hofmann MA, Goova MT, Taguchi A, Yan SF, Yan SD, Stern DM, Schmidt AM. RAGE is a multiligand receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily: implications for homeostasis and chronic disease. *Cell Mol Life Sci*. 2002;59: 1117–1128.
35. Yang Z, Makita Z, Horii Y, Brunelle S, Cerami A, Sehajpal P, Suthanthiran M, Vlassara H. Two novel rat liver membrane proteins that bind advanced glycosylation end products: relationship to macrophage receptor for glucose-modified proteins. *J Exp Med*. 1991;174:515–524.
36. Kelleher DJ, Kreibich G, Gilmore R. Oligosaccharyltransferase activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorins I and II and a 48 kd protein. *Cell*. 1992;69:55–65.
37. Vlassara H. The AGE-receptor in the pathogenesis of diabetic complications. *Diabetes Metab Res Rev*. 2001;17:436–443.
38. Goh KC, Lim YP, Ong SH, Siak CB, Cao X, Tan YH, Guy GR. Identification of p90, a prominent tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in fibroblast growth factor-stimulated cells, as 80K-H. *J Biol Chem*. 1996; 271:5832–5838.
39. Li YM, Mitsuhashi T, Wojciechowicz D, Shimizu N, Li J, Stitt A, He C, Banerjee D, Vlassara H. Molecular identity and cellular distribution of

advanced glycation end product receptors: relationship of p60 to OST-48 and p90 to 80K-H membrane proteins. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1996;93:11047–11052.

40. Vlassara H, Li YM, Imani F, Wojciechowicz D, Yang Z, Liu FT, Cerami A. Identification of galectin-3 as a high-affinity binding protein for advanced glycation end products (AGE): a new member of the AGE-receptor complex. *Mol Med*. 1995;1:634–646.

41. Nakajou K, Horiuchi S, Sakai M, Hirata K, Tanaka M, Takeya M, Kai T, Otagiri M. CD36 is not involved in scavenger receptor-mediated endocytic uptake of glycolaldehyde- and methylglyoxal-modified proteins by liver endothelial cells. *J Biochem (Tokyo)*. 2005;137: 607–616.

42. Horiuchi S, Unno Y, Usui H, Shikata K, Takaki K, Koito W, Sakamoto Y, Nagai R, Makino K, Sasao A, Wada J, Makino H. Pathological roles of advanced glycation end product receptors SR-A and CD36. *Ann N Y Acad Sci*. 2005;1043:671–675.

43. Ohgami N, Nagai R, Miyazaki A, Ikemoto M, Arai H, Horiuchi S, Nakayama H. Scavenger receptor class B type I-mediated reverse cholesterol transport is inhibited by advanced glycation end products. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:13348–13355.

44. Horiuchi S, Sakamoto Y, Sakai M. Scavenger receptors for oxidized and glycated proteins. *Amino Acids*. 2003;25:283–292.

45. Jono T, Miyazaki A, Nagai R, Sawamura T, Kitamura T, Horiuchi S. Lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) serves as an endothelial receptor for advanced glycation end products (AGE). *FEBS Lett*. 2002;511:170–174.

46. Chen M, Nagase M, Fujita T, Narumiya S, Masaki T, Sawamura T. Diabetes enhances lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) expression in the vascular endothelium: possible role of LOX-1 ligand and AGE. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 2001;287:962–968.

47. Tamura Y, Adachi H, Osuga J, Ohashi K, Yahagi N, Sekiya M, Okazaki H, Tomita S, Izuka Y, Shimano H, Nagai R, Kimura S, Tsujimoto M, Ishibashi S. FEEL-1 and FEEL-2 are endocytic receptors for advanced glycation end products. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:12613–12617.

48. Schmidt AM, Hori O, Chen JX, Li JF, Crandall J, Zhang J, Cao R, Yan SD, Brett J, Stern D. Advanced glycation end products interacting with their endothelial receptor induce expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) in cultured human endothelial cells and in mice: a potential mechanism for the accelerated vasculopathy of diabetes. *J Clin Invest*. 1995;96:1395–1403.

49. Hammes HP, Weiss A, Hess S, Araki N, Horiuchi S, Brownlee M, Preissner KT. Modification of vitronectin by advanced glycation alters functional properties in vitro and in the diabetic retina. *Lab Invest*. 1996;75:325–338.

50. Howard EW, Benton R, Ahern-Moore J, Tomasek JJ. Cellular contraction of collagen lattices is inhibited by nonenzymatic glycation. *Exp Cell Res*. 1996;228:132–137.

51. Haitoglou CS, Tsilibary EC, Brownlee M, Charonis AS. Altered cellular interactions between endothelial cells and nonenzymatically glycosylated laminin/type IV collagen. *J Biol Chem*. 1992;267: 12404–12407.

52. Corman B, Duriez M, Poitevin P, Heudes D, Bruneval P, Tedgui A, Levy BI. Aminoguanidine prevents age-related arterial stiffening and cardiac hypertrophy. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1998;95:1301–1306.

53. Kass DA, Shapiro EP, Kawaguchi M, Capriotti AR, Scuteri A, deGroof RC, Lakatta EG. Improved arterial compliance by a novel advanced glycation end-product crosslink breaker. *Circulation*. 2001;104: 1464–1470.

54. Makino H, Shikata K, Kushiro M, Hironaka K, Yamasaki Y, Sugimoto H, Ota Z, Araki N, Horiuchi S. Roles of advanced glycation end-products in the progression of diabetic nephropathy. *Nephrol Dial Transplant*. 1996;11(suppl 5):76–80.

55. Striker LJ, Striker GE. Administration of AGEs in vivo induces extracellular matrix gene expression. *Nephrol Dial Transplant*. 1996; 11(suppl 5):62–65.

56. Throckmorton DC, Brogden AP, Min B, Rasmussen H, Kashgarian M. PDGF and TGF-β mediate collagen production by mesangial cells exposed to advanced glycosylation end products. *Kidney Int*. 1995;48: 111–117.

57. Kushiro M, Shikata K, Sugimoto H, Ikeda K, Horiuchi S, Makino H. Accumulation of N-Σ-(carboxy-methyl)lysine and changes in glomerular extracellular matrix components in Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima fatty rat: a model of spontaneous NIDDM. *Nephron*. 1998;79:458–468.

58. Tsilibary EC, Charonis AS, Reger LA, Wohlhueter RM, Furcht LT. The effect of nonenzymatic glycosylation on the binding of the main non-collagenous NC1 domain to type IV collagen. *J Biol Chem*. 1988;263: 4302–4308.

59. Sell DR, Monnier VM. Structure elucidation of a senescence cross-link from human extracellular matrix: implication of pentoses in the aging process. *J Biol Chem*. 1989;264:21597–21602.

60. Charonis AS, Reger LA, Dege JE, Kouzi-Koliakos K, Furcht LT, Wohlhueter RM, Tsilibary EC. Laminin alterations after in vitro nonenzymatic glycosylation. *Diabetes*. 1990;39:807–814.

61. Paul RG, Bailey AJ. The effect of advanced glycation end-product formation upon cell-matrix interactions. *Int J Biochem Cell Biol*. 1999; 31:653–660.

62. Klein DJ, Oegema TR Jr, Brown DM. Release of glomerular heparan-35SO₄ proteoglycan by heparin from glomeruli of streptozotin-induced diabetic rats. *Diabetes*. 1989;38:130–139.

63. Bucala R, Makita Z, Vega G, Grundy S, Koschinsky T, Cerami A, Vlassara H. Modification of low density lipoprotein by advanced glycation end products contributes to the dyslipidemia of diabetes and renal insufficiency. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1994;91:9441–9445.

64. Posch K, Simecek S, Wascher TC, Jurgens G, Baumgartner-Parzer S, Kostner GM, Graier WF. Glycated low-density lipoprotein attenuates shear stress-induced nitric oxide synthesis by inhibition of shear stress-activated L-arginine uptake in endothelial cells. *Diabetes*. 1999;48: 1331–1337.

65. Gempel KE, Gerbitz KD, Olgemoller B, Schleicher ED. In-vitro carboxymethylation of low density lipoprotein alters its metabolism via the high-affinity receptor. *Horm Metab Res*. 1993;25:250–252.

66. Hofmann MA, Drury S, Fu C, Qu W, Taguchi A, Lu Y, Avila C, Kambham N, Bierhaus A, Nawroth P, Neurath MF, Slattery T, Beach D, McClary J, Nagashima M, Morser J, Stern D, Schmidt AM. RAGE mediates a novel proinflammatory axis: a central cell surface receptor for S100/calgranulin polypeptides. *Cell*. 1999;97:889–901.

67. Bucala R, Tracey KJ, Cerami A. Advanced glycosylation products quench nitric oxide and mediate defective endothelium-dependent vasodilatation in experimental diabetes. *J Clin Invest*. 1991;87:432–438.

68. Hogan M, Cerami A, Bucala R. Advanced glycosylation end products block the antiproliferative effect of nitric oxide: role in the vascular and renal complications of diabetes mellitus. *J Clin Invest*. 1992;90: 1110–1115.

69. McPherson JD, Shilton BH, Walton DJ. Role of fructose in glycation and cross-linking of proteins. *Biochemistry*. 1988;27:1901–1907.

70. Giardino I, Edelstein D, Brownlee M. Nonenzymatic glycosylation in vitro and in bovine endothelial cells alters basic fibroblast growth factor activity: a model for intracellular glycosylation in diabetes. *J Clin Invest*. 1994;94:110–117.

71. Bierhaus A, Illmer T, Kasper M, Luther T, Quehenberger P, Tritschler H, Wahl P, Ziegler R, Muller M, Nawroth PP. Advanced glycation end product (AGE)-mediated induction of tissue factor in cultured endothelial cells is dependent on RAGE. *Circulation*. 1997;96:2262–2271.

72. Yan SD, Schmidt AM, Anderson GM, Zhang J, Brett J, Zou YS, Pinsky D, Stern D. Enhanced cellular oxidative stress by the interaction of advanced glycation end products with their receptors/binding proteins. *J Biol Chem*. 1994;269:9889–9897.

73. Schiekofer S, Andrssy M, Chen J, Rudofsky G, Schneider J, Wendt T, Stefan N, Humpert P, Fritsche A, Stumvoll M, Schleicher E, Haring HU, Nawroth PP, Bierhaus A. Acute hyperglycemia causes intracellular formation of CML and activation of ras, p42/44 MAPK, and nuclear factor-κB in PBMCs. *Diabetes*. 2003;52:621–633.

74. Huttunen HJ, Fages C, Rauvala H. Receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE)-mediated neurite outgrowth and activation of NF-κB require the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor but different downstream signaling pathways. *J Biol Chem*. 1999;274:19919–19924.

75. Taguchi A, Blood DC, del Toro G, Canet A, Lee DC, Qu W, Tanji N, Lu Y, Lalla E, Fu C, Hofmann MA, Kislinger T, Ingram M, Lu A, Tanaka H, Hori O, Ogawa S, Stern DM, Schmidt AM. Blockade of RAGE-amphoterin signalling suppresses tumour growth and metastases. *Nature*. 2000;405:354–360.

76. Neumann A, Schinzell R, Palm D, Riederer P, Munch G. High molecular weight hyaluronic acid inhibits advanced glycation endproduct-induced NF-κB activation and cytokine expression. *FEBS Lett*. 1999;453: 283–287.

77. Basta G, Schmidt AM, De Caterina R. Advanced glycation end products and vascular inflammation: implications for accelerated atherosclerosis in diabetes. *Cardiovasc Res*. 2004;63:582–592.

78. Morigi M, Angioletti S, Imberti B, Donadelli R, Micheletti G, Figliuzzi M, Remuzzi A, Zoja C, Remuzzi G. Leukocyte-endothelial interaction is

Downloaded from [http://circ.ahajournals.org](http://circ.ahajournals.org) at NORTH DAKOTA STATE UNIV on June 21, 2014

augmented by high glucose concentrations and hyperglycemia in a

79. Edelstein D, Brownlee M. Mechanistic studies of advanced glycosylation end product inhibition by aminoguanidine. *Diabetes*. 1992;41: 26–29.

80. Esposito C, Gerlach H, Brett J, Stern D, Vlassara H. Endothelial receptor-mediated binding of glucose-modified albumin is associated with increased monolayer permeability and modulation of cell surface coagulant properties. *J Exp Med*. 1989;170:1387–1407.

81. Iwashima Y, Eto M, Hata A, Kaku K, Horiuchi S, Ushikubi F, Sano H. Advanced glycation end products-induced gene expression of scavenger receptors in cultured human monocyte-derived macrophages. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 2000;277:368–380.

82. Webster L, Abordo EA, Thornalley PJ, Limb GA. Induction of TNF-α and IL-1β mRNA in monocytes by methylglyoxal- and advanced glycated end product-modified human serum albumin. *Biochem Soc Trans*. 1997;25:250S.

83. Ichikawa K, Yoshinari M, Iwase M, Wakisaka M, Doi Y, Iino K, Yamamoto M, Fujishima M. Advanced glycosylation end products induced tissue factor expression in human monocyte-like U937 cells and increased tissue factor expression in monocytes from diabetic patients. *Atherosclerosis*. 1998;136:281–287.

84. Min C, Kang E, Yu SH, Shinn SH, Kim YS. Advanced glycation end products induce apoptosis and procoagulant activity in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells. *Diabetes Res Clin Pract*. 1999;46: 197–202.

85. Lander HM, Tauras JM, Ogiste JS, Hori O, Moss RA, Schmidt AM. Activation of the receptor for advanced glycation end products triggers a p21ras-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway regulated by oxidative stress. *J Biol Chem*. 1997;272:17810–17814.

86. Asahi K, Ichimori K, Nakazawa H, Izuhara Y, Inagi R, Watanabe T, Miyata T, Kurokawa K. Nitric oxide inhibits the formation of advanced glycation end products. *Kidney Int*. 2000;58:1780–1787.

87. Frank GD, Eguchi S, Motley ED. The role of reactive oxygen species in insulin signaling in the vasculature. *Antioxid Redox Signal*. 2005;7: 1053–1061.

88. Tan KC, Chow WS, Ai VH, Metz C, Bucala R, Lam KS. Advanced glycation end products and endothelial dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Care*. 2002;25:1055–1059.

89. Rojas A, Romay S, Gonzalez D, Herrera B, Delgado R, Otero K. Regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression by albumin-derived advanced glycosylation end products. *Circ Res*. 2000;86: E50–E54.

90. Xu B, Chibber R, Ruggerio D, Kohner E, Ritter J, Ferro A. Impairment of vascular endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity by advanced glycation end products. *FASEB J*. 2003;17:1289–1291.

91. Chakravarthy U, Hayes RG, Stitt AW, McAuley E, Archer DB. Constitutive nitric oxide synthase expression in retinal vascular endothelial cells is suppressed by high glucose and advanced glycation end products. *Diabetes*. 1998;47:945–952.

92. Yamagishi S, Fujimori H, Yonekura H, Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto H. Advanced glycation end products inhibit prostacyclin production and induce plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in human microvascular endothelial cells. *Diabetologia*. 1998;41:1435–1441.

93. Quehenberger P, Bierhaus A, Fasching P, Muellner C, Klevesath M, Hong M, Stier G, Sattler M, Schleicher E, Speiser W, Nawroth PP. Endothelin 1 transcription is controlled by nuclear factor-κB in AGE-stimulated cultured endothelial cells. *Diabetes*. 2000;49:1561–1570.

94. Wautier MP, Chappey O, Corda S, Stern DM, Schmidt AM, Wautier JL. Activation of NADPH oxidase by AGE links oxidative stress to altered gene expression via RAGE. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab*. 2001;280: E685–E694.

95. Bierhaus A, Schiekofer S, Schwaninger M, Andrassy M, Humpert PM, Chen J, Hong M, Luther T, Henle T, Kloting I, Morcos M, Hofmann M, Tritschler H, Weigle B, Kasper M, Smith M, Perry G, Schmidt AM, Stern DM, Haring HU, Schleicher E, Nawroth PP. Diabetes-associated sustained activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB. *Diabetes*. 2001;50:2792–2808.

96. Basta G, Lazzerini G, Massaro M, Simoncini T, Tanganelli P, Fu C, Kislinger T, Stern DM, Schmidt AM, De Caterina R. Advanced glycation end products activate endothelium through signal-transduction receptor RAGE: a mechanism for amplification of inflammatory responses. *Circulation*. 2002;105:816–822.

97. Wautier JL, Wautier MP, Schmidt AM, Anderson GM, Hori O, Zoukourian C, Capron L, Chappey O, Yan SD, Brett J, Guillausseau PJ,

Stern D. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) on the surface of diabetic erythrocytes bind to the vessel wall via a specific receptor inducing oxidative stress in the vasculature: a link between surface-associated AGEs and diabetic complications. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1994;91:7742–7746.

98. Thallas-Bonke V, Lindschau C, Rizkalla B, Bach LA, Boner G, Meier M, Haller H, Cooper ME, Forbes JM. Attenuation of extracellular matrix accumulation in diabetic nephropathy by the advanced glycation end product cross-link breaker ALT-711 via a protein kinase Cα-dependent pathway. *Diabetes*. 2004;53:2921–2930.

99. Forbes JM, Yee LT, Thallas V, Lassila M, Candido R, Jandeleit-Dahm KA, Thomas MC, Burns WC, Deemer EK, Thorpe SM, Cooper ME, Allen TJ. Advanced glycation end product interventions reduce diabetes-accelerated atherosclerosis. *Diabetes*. 2004;53:1813–1823.

100. Wilkinson-Berka JL, Kelly DJ, Koerner SM, Jaworski K, Davis B, Thallas V, Cooper ME. ALT-946 and aminoguanidine, inhibitors of advanced glycation, improve severe nephropathy in the diabetic transgenic (mREN-2)27 rat. *Diabetes*. 2002;51:3283–3289.

101. Bolton WK, Catrana DC, Williams ME, Adler SG, Appel GB, Cartwright K, Foiles PG, Freedman BI, Raskin P, Ratner RE, Spinowitz BS, Whittier FC, Wuerth JP. Randomized trial of an inhibitor of formation of advanced glycation end products in diabetic nephropathy. *Am J Nephrol*. 2004;24:32–40.

102. Forbes JM, Soulis T, Thallas V, Panagiotopoulos S, Long DM, Vasan S, Wagle D, Jerums G, Cooper ME. Renoprotective effects of a novel inhibitor of advanced glycation. *Diabetologia*. 2001;44:108–114.

103. Kass DA. Getting better without AGE: new insights into the diabetic heart. *Circ Res*. 2003;92:704–706.

104. Mizutani K, Ikeda K, Tsuda K, Yamori Y. Inhibitor for advanced glycation end products formation attenuates hypertension and oxidative damage in genetic hypertensive rats. *J Hypertens*. 2002;20:1607–1614.

105. Candido R, Forbes JM, Thomas MC, Thallas V, Dean RG, Burns WC, Tikellis C, Ritchie RH, Twigg SM, Cooper ME, Burrell LM. A breaker of advanced glycation end products attenuates diabetes-induced myocardial structural changes. *Circ Res*. 2003;92:785–792.

106. Susic D, Varagic J, Ahn J, Frohlich ED. Crosslink breakers: a new approach to cardiovascular therapy. *Curr Opin Cardiol*. 2004;19: 336–340.

107. Asif M, Egan J, Vasan S, Jyothirmayi GN, Masurekar MR, Lopez S, Williams C, Torres RL, Wagle D, Ulrich P, Cerami A, Brines M, Regan TJ. An advanced glycation end product cross-link breaker can reverse age-related increases in myocardial stiffness. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2000;97:2809–2813.

108. Zhang FL, Casey PJ. Protein prenylation: molecular mechanisms and functional consequences. *Annu Rev Biochem*. 1996;65:241–269.

109. Okamoto T, Yamagishi S, Inagaki Y, Amano S, Koga K, Abe R, Takeuchi M, Ohno S, Yoshimura A, Makita Z. Angiogenesis induced by advanced glycation end products and its prevention by cerivastatin. *FASEB J*. 2002;16:1928–1930.

110. Miyata T, van Ypersele de Strihou C, Ueda Y, Ichimori K, Inagi R, Onogi H, Ishikawa N, Nangaku M, Kurokawa K. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors lower in vitro the formation of advanced glycation end products: biochemical mechanisms. *J Am Soc Nephrol*. 2002;13:2478–2487.

111. Forbes JM, Cooper ME, Thallas V, Burns WC, Thomas MC, Brammar GC, Lee F, Grant SL, Burrell LA, Jerums G, Osicka TM. Reduction of the accumulation of advanced glycation end products by ACE inhibition in experimental diabetic nephropathy. *Diabetes*. 2002;51:3274–3282.

112. Wautier JL, Zoukourian C, Chappey O, Wautier MP, Guillaumeau PJ, Cao R, Hori O, Stern D, Schmidt AM. Receptor-mediated endothelial cell dysfunction in diabetic vasculopathy: soluble receptor for advanced glycation end products blocks hyperpermeability in diabetic rats. *J Clin Invest*. 1996;97:238–243.

113. Park L, Raman KG, Lee KJ, Lu Y, Ferran LJ Jr, Chow WS, Stern D, Schmidt AM. Suppression of accelerated diabetic atherosclerosis by the soluble receptor for advanced glycation end products. *Nat Med*. 1998; 4:1025–1031.

114. Bucciarelli LG, Wendt T, Qu W, Lu Y, Lalla E, Rong LL, Goova MT, Moser B, Kislinger T, Lee DC, Kashyap Y, Stern DM, Schmidt AM. RAGE blockade stabilizes established atherosclerosis in diabetic apolipoprotein E-null mice. *Circulation*. 2002;106:2827–2835.

115. Goova MT, Li J, Kislinger T, Qu W, Lu Y, Bucciarelli LG, Nowygrod S, Wolf BM, Caliste X, Yan SF, Stern DM, Schmidt AM. Blockade of receptor for advanced glycation end-products restores effective wound healing in diabetic mice. *Am J Pathol*. 2001;159:513–525.

116. Naka Y, Bucciarelli LG, Wendt T, Lee LK, Rong LL, Ramasamy R, Yan SF, Schmidt AM. RAGE axis: animal models and novel insights into the vascular complications of diabetes. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 2004;24:1342–1349.

117. Snell EE. The vitamin activities of ‘pyridoxal’ and ‘pyridoxamine.’ *J Biol Chem*. 1944;154:313–314.

118. Snell EE. The vitamin B₆ group, V: the reversible interconversion of pyridoxal and pyridoxamine by transamination reactions. *J Am Chem Soc*. 1945;67:194–197.

119. Braunstein AE, Shemyakin MM. Theory of processes of amino acid metabolism that are catalyzed by pyridoxal enzymes. *Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR*. 1952;85:1115–1118.

120. Metzler DE, Ikawa M, Snell EE. A general mechanism for vitamin B₆-catalyzed reactions. *J Am Chem Soc*. 1954;76:648–652.

121. Voziyan PA, Khalifah RG, Thibaudeau C, Yildiz A, Jacob J, Serianni AS, Hudson BG. Modification of proteins in vitro by physiological levels of glucose: pyridoxamine inhibits conversion of Amadori intermediate to advanced glycation end-products through binding of redox metal ions. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:46616–44624.

122. Degenhardt TP, Alderson NL, Arrington DD, Beattie RJ, Basgen JM, Steffes MW, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. Pyridoxamine inhibits early renal disease and dyslipidemia in the streptozotocin-diabetic rat. *Kidney Int*. 2002;61:939–950.

123. Stitt A, Gardiner TA, Alderson NL, Canning P, Frizzell N, Duffy N, Boyle C, Januszewski AS, Chachich M, Baynes JW, Thorpe SR. The AGE inhibitor pyridoxamine inhibits development of retinopathy in experimental diabetes. *Diabetes*. 2002;51:2826–2832.

124. Alderson NL, Chachich ME, Frizzell N, Canning P, Metz TO, Januszewski AS, Youssef NN, Stitt AW, Baynes JW, Thorpe SR. Effect of antioxidants and ACE inhibition on chemical modification of proteins and progression of nephropathy in the streptozotocin diabetic rat. *Diabetologia*. 2004;47:1385–1395.

125. Alderson NL, Chachich ME, Youssef NN, Beattie RJ, Nachtigal M, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. The AGE inhibitor pyridoxamine inhibits

lipemia and development of renal and vascular disease in Zucker obese rats. *Kidney Int*. 2003;63:2123–2133.

126. Iacovella G, Alderson NL, Chachich M, Youssef NN, Beattie RJ, Nachtigal M, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW. Pyridoxamine decreases levels of reactive α-dicarbonyls in plasma of ZDF diabetic rats. *Diabetes*. 2003;52:A187. Abstract.

127. Hammes HP, Du X, Edelstein D, Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Ju Q, Lin J, Bierhaus A, Nawroth P, Hannak D, Neumaier M, Bergfeld R, Giardino I, Brownlee M. Benfotiamine blocks three major pathways of hyperglycemic damage and prevents experimental diabetic retinopathy. *Nat Med*. 2003;9:294–299.

128. Pomero F, Molinar Min A, La Selva M, Allione A, Molinatti GM, Porta M. Benfotiamine is similar to thiamine in correcting endothelial cell defects induced by high glucose. *Acta Diabetol*. 2001;38:135–138.

129. Koschinsky T, He CJ, Mitsuhashi T, Bucala R, Liu C, Buenting C, Heitmann K, Vlassara H. Orally absorbed reactive glycation products (glycotoxins): an environmental risk factor in diabetic nephropathy. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1997;94:6474–6479.

130. Vlassara H, Cai W, Crandall J, Goldberg T, Oberstein R, Dardaine V, Peppa M, Rayfield EJ. Inflammatory mediators are induced by dietary glycotoxins, a major risk factor for diabetic angiopathy. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 2002;99:15596–155601.

131. Goldberg T, Cai W, Peppa M, Dardaine V, Baliga BS, Uribarri J, Vlassara H. Advanced glycoxidation end products in commonly consumed foods. *J Am Diet Assoc*. 2004;104:1287–1291.

132. Cai W, He JC, Zhu L, Peppa M, Lu C, Uribarri J, Vlassara H. High levels of dietary advanced glycation end products transform low-density lipoprotein into a potent redox-sensitive mitogen-activated protein kinase stimulant in diabetic patients. *Circulation*. 2004;110:285–291.

133. Uribarri J, Peppa M, Cai W, Goldberg T, Lu M, He C, Vlassara H. Restriction of dietary glycotoxins reduces excessive advanced glycation end products in renal failure patients. *J Am Soc Nephrol*. 2003;14:728–731.
