
DNA Double-Strand Break Repair: All’s Well that Ends Well

Claire Wyman and Roland Kanaar

Department of Cell Biology & Genetics and Department of Radiation Oncology, Erasmus MC, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands; email: r.kanaar@erasmusmc.nl

Annu. Rev. Genet. 2006. 40:363–83

First published online as a Review in Advance on August 8, 2006

The Annual Review of Genetics is online at http://genet.annualreviews.org

This article's doi: 10.1146/annurev.genet.40.110405.090451

Copyright © 2006 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

0066-4197/06/1215-0363$20.00

**Key Words**

DNA damage, genome (in)stability, homologous recombination, nonhomologous DNA end-joining, stalled DNA replication

**Abstract**

Breaks in both DNA strands are a particularly dangerous threat to genome stability. At a DNA double-strand break (DSB), potentially lost sequence information cannot be recovered from the same DNA molecule. However, simple repair by joining two broken ends, though inherently error prone, is preferable to leaving ends broken and capable of causing genome rearrangements. To avoid DSB-induced genetic disinformation and disruption of vital processes, such as replication and transcription, cells possess robust mechanisms to repair DSBs. Because all breaks are not created equal, the particular repair mechanism used depends largely on what is possible and needed based on the structure of the broken DNA. We argue that although categorizing different DSB repair mechanisms along pathways and subpathways can be conceptually useful, in cells flexible and reversible interactions among DSB repair factors form a web from which a nonpredetermined path to repair for any number of different DNA breaks will emerge.

Contents

DIFFERENT MEANS TO THE ENDS ..... 364
ALL ENDS ARE NOT CREATED EQUAL ..... 364
ONE END OR TWO ..... 367
REJOINING OF TWO-ENDED DSBs BY THE CORE NONHOMOLOGOUS DNA END-JOINING COMPONENTS ..... 367
END CLEANING BEFORE JOINING ..... 369
WHEN RECOMBINATION IS NEEDED AN ORDERED SERIES OF REACTIONS IS SET IN MOTION ..... 369
FIRST, KEEP REPAIR PARTNERS CLOSE THROUGH ALL THE PRELIMINARY STEPS ..... 370
SECOND, CREATE SINGLE-STRANDED DNA AT THE BREAK ..... 371
THIRD, ASSEMBLING NUCLEOPROTEIN FILAMENTS, THE CORE RECOMBINATION CATALYST ..... 372
AFTER THE RECOMBINATION PARTNERS ENGAGE ..... 374
BEFORE THE BEGINNING AND AFTER THE END ..... 374
BEFORE RECOMBINATION ..... 375
AFTER STRAND EXCHANGE ..... 375
SUMMING UP AND MOVING ON ..... 376

duced reactive oxygen species, can promote genome rearrangements that initiate carcinogenesis or apoptosis (29). By contrast, DSBs can actually be beneficial when they occur in a controlled manner in the context of specialized events that demand that genome sequences be rearranged, such as during development of the immune system and generation of genetic diversity in meiosis (52, 79, 108). To counteract the deleterious effects of unwanted DSBs and to promote the beneficial effects of programmed DSBs, multiple DNA repair mechanisms have evolved (99). Two distinct DSB repair mechanisms, nonhomologous DNA end-joining and homologous recombination, are schematically depicted in Figures 1 and 2, respectively. Nonhomologous DNA end-joining uses extremely limited or no sequence homology to rejoin juxtaposed ends in a manner that does not need to be error free (67). Homologous recombination requires extensive regions of DNA homology and repairs DSBs accurately by using information on the undamaged sister chromatid (114). These distinct DSB repair mechanisms can be subdivided further, depending on the nature of the DNA end. Additional discussions on the details of DSB repair mechanisms can be found in a number of reviews (15, 39, 47, 69).

**ALL ENDS ARE NOT CREATED EQUAL**

The current mechanistic picture of DSB repair has been cobbled together from experimental systems that span the methodological spectrum from biochemical analysis of limited but defined components to genetic analysis in animals and cells. Knowing what structures are created when DNA is experimentally broken is an essential prerequisite for sorting through the results. For biochemical analysis, the DNA substrates to be repaired are created to mimic a specific in vivo situation and are usually defined sequences and structures. To study repair in cells or animals, DSBs are induced by a variety of treatments that differ in the type and amount of breaks induced as well

**DIFFERENT MEANS TO THE ENDS**

DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) are interesting DNA lesions because they can be both detrimental and beneficial to organisms. DSBs, such as those induced by exogenous DNA-damaging agents or endogenously pro-

DSB: DNA double-strand break

Wyman • Kanaar

Break formation

End binding; Ku70/80

End juxtaposition; Ku70/80, DNA-PKcs

No end processing required

End processing required

XRCC4
DNA ligase IV
XLF

Artemis
TdT
pol lambda
pol mu

XRCC4
DNA ligase IV
XLF

Figure 1

DNA double-strand break repair through nonhomologous DNA end-joining. The formation of a two-ended DSB, for example, by ionizing radiation, is indicated. The DNA ends are substrates for binding of the Ku70/80 heterodimer, which localizes DNA-PKcs to the ends and promotes their juxtaposition. If no further processing of the ends is required, the additional core components of nonhomologous DNA end-joining, XRCC4, DNA ligase IV, and XLF can complete the rejoining reaction. Alternatively, end processing may require the activities of the nuclease Artemis and/or the DNA polymerases TdT, pol lambda, and pol mu. The Ku heterodimer likely plays a central role in orchestrating the activities of the proteins involved in nonhomologous DNA end-joining. Transient reversible interaction of the processing factors with the core components provides great flexibility in the combination of broken ends that can be rejoined because this does not require a strict order in which the processing factors engage or in which the four strands will be processed.

as in the amount of “collateral damage” in the form of other types of DNA lesions. For instance, in cell biology experiments, DSBs can be introduced directly by ionizing radiation, using an X-ray machine or a $^{137}$Cs course, by synchrotron-generated ultrasoft X rays (63), by α-particles (3), or by heavy ion irradiation (31, 45). All of these methods certainly induce DSBs but also other types of lesions such as single-strand breaks, damage to the sugar moiety and base modifications (22). Furthermore, radiation-introduced DSBs are not “clean” in that the DNA ends created often cannot be directly ligated. Thus mechanisms for repairing these types of breaks will necessarily include DNA end-processing steps as a prerequisite to their repair, irrespective of the DSB repair mechanism used. Popular but less well-defined methods to introduce DSBs involve laser illumination with or without addition of an activating compound associated with the DNA such as UV-A laser light following incorporation in DNA of halogenated thymidine analogs (45, 46, 93) or incubation of the cells with Hoechst dye (7, 76, 103), irradiation with a pulsed neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser (37, 38) and pulsed multiphoton laser (55). Again, breaks are certainly produced, but an unknown spectrum of other lesions also results. Thus, DNA repair occurring in cells subjected to these treatments must deal with a variety of lesions, sometimes undefined, and often with an artificially high local damage load. In addition, a different chemical structure at the break necessitates specific processing steps for repair that will depend on the way damage was created.

Nonhomologous DNA end-joining: rejoining of ends from a broken DNA molecule without the use of a repair template. The DNA ends may be processed to expose or create ligatable ends, a 3′-hydroxyl and a 5′-phosphate. Sequence information can be lost upon rejoining, making this process error prone

Homologous recombination: the exchange of base-paired partners between two homologous DNA molecules

www.annualreviews.org • DNA Double-Strand Break Repair

DNA double-strand break repair through homologous recombination. The close pairs of parallel lines represent the two strands of duplex DNA, while the lighter colored pair is the sister chromatid of the darker colored pair. The left-hand side of the top most strand has 3′ polarity. (a) One of the two sister chromatids has suffered a DSB. (b) Processing results in single-stranded tails at the break with 3′-hydroxyl ends. The tails are a substrate for nucleoprotein filament formation with a recombinase. (c) Nucleoprotein filament directed homology recognition and DNA strand exchange lead to joint molecule formation between the broken DNA and the intact sister chromatid, resulting in a structure known as a D-loop. (d) In one model, termed DSBR, DNA synthesis (indicated by the arrowhead) from the D-loop intermediate and migration of the junction lead to formation of a Holliday junction and engagement of the second end of the break with the intact sister chromatid. (e and f) Continued DNA synthesis followed by strand ligation results in a double Holliday junction intermediate. (g) Resolution of this intermediate by junction resolvases can result in crossover and noncrossover recombinants. Alternatively, the intermediate can be resolved by the combined action of a helicase and a topoisomerase I, which gives rise to noncrossover recombinants exclusively. (h, i, and j) As an alternative to the DSBR model, the synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA) model proposes that after DNA synthesis from the D-loop intermediate, the newly synthesized strand is exchanged between the sister chromatid template and the other end of the processed break. This will result in noncrossover recombinants.

On the other hand, breaks with defined structure, genomic location, and number can be created by enzymes, either rare cutting restriction enzymes such as I-SceI, the HO endonuclease of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, or chimeric enzymes that couple the nuclease domain of the type II restriction enzyme FokI to Zn-finger DNA-binding domains (27, 32, 71). DNA cut by enzymes often has complementary single-strand overhangs that can be easily ligated and do not require otherwise essential steps for processing authentic damage. Another special class of defined DSBs results in covalent protein-DNA complexes, such as those induced by topoisomerase inhibitors (4, 70). The resulting protein-bound DNA ends may be specifically recognized and must be specifically processed before rejoining or recombination can proceed. Thus different enzymatic activities are expected to participate based on the type of damage being studied, though all are often referred to simply as DSBs.

**ONE END OR TWO**

Break repair possibilities are influenced by the manner in which the break is created. DSBs are caused directly, for instance, by ionizing radiation, by severing both phosphate-sugar backbones close together. These two ends can, in principle, be rejoined by nonhomologous DNA end-joining (Figure 1) or be repaired by homologous recombination (Figure 2) with their intact sister chromatid as the repair template. More commonly, DNA breaks occur indirectly as a result of damage or discontinuities in one strand encountered during replication (15). Here often only one free end is produced (Figure 3g), which eliminates nonhomologous DNA end-joining as a means for repair and therefore requires homologous recombination (16). During replication a homologous duplex, in the form of the sister chromatid, is close by and available as a recombination partner because daughter duplexes are linked at the replication fork (Figure 3). On the other hand, when a DNA break is created directly, both ends are in close proximity, which favors their repair by nonhomologous DNA end-joining over homologous recombination because a homologous sister chromatid may not be near. Thus it follows logically that homologous recombination is mostly limited to S phase, whereas nonhomologous DNA end-joining can operate irrespective of the cell cycle phase.

**REJOINING OF TWO-ENDED DSBs BY THE CORE NONHOMOLOGOUS DNA END-JOINING COMPONENTS**

The simplest way to heal a two-ended DSB is to ligate it back together through nonhomologous DNA end-joining (107). The structure of the DSB end will direct the substrate into differential use of end-processing factors. A “clean” two-ended DSB, with either blunt ends or small 5′ or 3′ complementary overhangs (6), is a substrate for a nonhomologous DNA end-joining reaction that requires just its “core” components: Ku70, Ku80, DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), XRCC4, XLF, and DNA ligase IV (Figure 1). The Ku70 and Ku80 proteins form a heterodimer that displays affinity for DNA ends. X-ray crystallography revealed that the Ku70/80 heterodimer forms a ring with a hole that fits DNA, explaining its preference for binding DNA ends (102). Ku70/80 is thought to recruit DNA-PKcs. The precise role of DNA-PKcs is not clear, but its association near ends might be important for their juxtaposition (19, 85). In addition, DNA-PKcs binding causes Ku70/80 to move about one helical turn inward from the end (118), thereby facilitating access of other proteins to the business end of the break. In particular, the final step in rejoining is mediated by DNA ligase IV (41). This ligase is associated with a dimer of XRCC4 (57). XRCC4 can bind to DNA, is required for the stability of DNA ligase IV in vivo, and stimulates its adenylization and ligase activity (8, 25, 26, 56). Recently, an XRCC4-like

**Replication fork:** site along a DNA molecule where replicative DNA synthesis is taking place. The DNA structure formed can be drawn as a forked junction, where the two parental strands are still a paired duplex before synthesis, separating into the newly synthesized daughter duplexes. The associated proteins minimally include a helicase, a primase and both leading and lagging strand DNA polymerases. Leading and lagging strand synthesis are coupled and therefore occur in a coordinated fashion at a fork

Figure 3

Re-establishing DNA replication forks upon encountering DNA damage in the leading strand template.

(a) Shown is a replication fork with leading and lagging strand DNA synthesis. Arrowheads indicate 3′-hydroxyl ends. The small circle represents DNA damage in the leading strand template.

(b) Uncoupling of DNA polymerases when a fork encounters the damage results in continued lagging strand synthesis, creating a single-strand region on the leading strand template. (c) DNA synthesis can be restarted by de novo synthesis of a primer downstream of the damage in the template, leaving the lesion in a single-stranded gap that might require recombination with the sister chromatid, translesion DNA synthesis or their combination for its conversion to double-stranded DNA. (d) Alternatively, the lesion can be bypassed through homologous recombination directly. The blocked nascent strand can invade the intact sister chromatid to form a D-loop. (e) D-loop extension by DNA synthesis can lead to formation of a Holliday junction when the displaced lagging strand template pairs with the leading strand template.

(f) Branch migration of the Holliday junction in the direction of fork movement creates an intermediate from which an active replication fork can be reassembled. (g) In case the lesion in the template DNA is a single-strand nick, the replication fork will be converted into a one-ended DSB. (h) Processing of the end results in single-stranded DNA that can invade the sister chromatid via a D-loop intermediate from which DNA synthesis will result in the arrangement of DNA strands depicted. (i) Holliday junction resolution will result in an intermediate onto which a competent replication fork can be assembled.

(j) The structure shown is redrawn from panel (i) to more clearly indicate the fork reassembly potential of the intermediate.

protein, XLF (also known as Cernunnos), has been identified as an interaction partner of the DNA ligase IV/XRCC4 complex (1, 9). Its function in nonhomologous DNA end-joining has not yet been defined, but cells from patients with mutations in the XLF gene are radiosensitive and DSB repair defective. The patients themselves are immunodeficient because of their inability to properly process the DSB intermediates required for the assembly of active immunoglobulin genes.

END CLEANING BEFORE JOINING

DSBs differ not only with respect to the number of DNA ends but also in the chemical composition of the ends. For example, ionizing radiation-induced DNA breaks are not directly ligatable because they are not proper substrates for DNA ligases, which require 3′-hydroxyl and 5′-phosphate groups. In addition to damaging the phosphodiester backbone, reactive oxygen species resulting from radiation cause base and sugar damage. Thus, many radiation-induced DNA ends require nucleolytic processing and DNA synthesis to remove and replace nonligatable remnants of nucleotides and incompatible single-strand overhangs. Obviously, the core nonhomologous DNA end-joining reaction described above will not suffice for repair of these DNA ends. Genetic and biochemical experiments have revealed the existence of activities that augment the core reaction so that it can handle DNA ends with a variety of different chemical and secondary structures (Figure 1).

The Artemis protein is a versatile endonuclease involved in nonhomologous DNA end-joining (47, 61). The protein cleaves DNA structures with single-strand/double-strand transitions, such as 3′-overhangs, 5′-overhangs, hairpins, flaps, and gaps (49, 50). Artemis interacts with DNA-PKcs, which is required for its activity. The involvement of Artemis in specifically processing damaged DNA ends before they can be rejoined is supported by experiments using Artemis-deficient cells. In G₀/G₁ arrested Artemis-deficient fibroblasts, approximately 10% of ionizing radiation-induced DSBs remain unjoined for up to 14 days, whereas essentially all DSBs are rejoined in normal fibroblasts (72).

Three DNA polymerases are implicated in nonhomologous DNA end-joining: terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), and the translesion DNA polymerases pol mu and pol lambda (47, 48, 64). Each of these DNA polymerases has different properties that will be useful depending on the structure of the ends

to be repaired. After nuclease processing the paired ends to be ligated can consist of every possible permutation of a 3′-overhang, a 5′-overhang, and a blunt end, in addition to the possibility that ligation of both strands is not coordinated, leading to a small single-strand gap. While TdT can add untemplated nucleotides to DNA ends, pol mu and pol lambda can fill gaps (64, 65). In addition, the translesion DNA polymerases can incorporate nucleotides encoded by the other end of the break even before the template is covalently closed.

The core components of nonhomologous DNA end-joining must play a central role in orchestrating all these activities. They might serve as a platform bridging the ends to be rejoined. Ligation could ensue when ends are compatible and do not require further processing. The accessory components required for the diverse processing reactions may reversibly interact with the platform, and they might be engaged if they can act on the particular substrate held by the platform provided by the core components. The central player of this platform is likely to be the Ku heterodimer (Figure 1), which can interact with Artemis (through DNA-PKcs), pol lambda, pol mu, and the XRCC4/DNA ligase IV complex (11, 48, 51, 66, 107). The reversible interaction of the processing factors with the core provides great flexibility in the combination of different ends that can be rejoined, because reversible interaction requires neither a strict order at which the processing factors engage nor that they act simultaneously on each of the two ends or even on each of the two strands of one end.

WHEN RECOMBINATION IS NEEDED AN ORDERED SERIES OF REACTIONS IS SET IN MOTION

DSBs are apparently an inevitable consequence of DNA replication (Figure 3). Such one-ended breaks require homologous

recombination for repair, and, therefore, homologous recombination is an essential process. DSB repair through homologous recombination is generally accurate because the undamaged sister chromatid is used as a repair template (Figures 2, 3). In order to re-establish a replication fork, one strand of the broken end must be base paired with its complement in the duplex sister chromatid through homologous recombination reactions. Understanding the web of molecular mechanisms that are coordinated to effect homologous recombination repair usually starts at the central defining event of the process, DNA homology search, and joint molecule formation where the end to be repaired pairs with an intact homologous duplex (Figure 2c). This step, at the core of DSB repair by homologous recombination, is catalyzed by a recombinase-coated single-stranded DNA. Our mechanistic understanding is less certain for the steps preceding and following joint molecule formation. As a first order of business, broken ends need to be kept in close proximity to their repair partners. Before pairing with a homologous partner, broken DNA ends have to be processed to create single-stranded DNA with a 3'-hydroxyl overhang end. In eukaryotic cells this is likely coordinated with removal of nucleosomes around the break. In addition, recombinase function is clearly controlled so that the recombinase is efficiently loaded onto breaks that occur during replication, and has limited activity at other times and places in the genome. [The obvious exception of activating recombination during meiosis is not considered here (68).] After joint molecule formation, any DNA sequence information lost at the break site is recovered by synthesis using the intact sister chromatid as a template and the invading broken end as a primer. For this to happen, a DNA polymerase has to be assembled at this particular type of primer template structure and initiate synthesis. There are several scenarios for completing repair after joint molecule formation that differ for one-ended and two-ended

breaks (Figures 2, 3). Two-ended breaks that involve joint molecule formation with both ends result in double Holliday junctions that need to be separated into two intact chromatids (Figure 2d–g). Completing repair of one-ended breaks may require reassembling a replication fork from a joint molecule, or repairing of newly synthesized DNA with its sister chromatid at the original break by processes formally resembling branch migration (Figure 3g–j). Much of the actual molecular detail here is theoretical, and what is needed exactly will vary with the type of DNA break and the structure of the recombination partners created to repair it. The required protein machinery for identifying homology and performing strand exchange has been conserved across the three kingdoms of life and is reviewed elsewhere (16, 91, 113). New information is emerging on the cellular factors needed to properly coordinate recombination functions for effective DSB repair.

**FIRST, KEEP REPAIR PARTNERS CLOSE THROUGH ALL THE PRELIMINARY STEPS**

When both strands of DNA are severed, the correct repair partners can become separated, be it the two ends of a direct break or one daughter duplex emanating from a replication fork. Therefore, an early step in DSB repair is a “bandaid” procedure to keep partners close for eventual healing reactions. There are good candidates for these molecular bandaids from several organisms, and a mechanistic picture of their molecular function is emerging. Genetic studies in yeast link both the cohesin complex and the related SMC5/6 complex to DNA repair, suggesting that these proteins, known to be in the business of keeping chromosomes together, similarly link broken DNA molecules to facilitate repair (14, 89). The most mechanistically advanced concepts for protein-mediated organization of broken DNA are provided by the eukaryotic Rad50/Mre11 complex (Figure 4). This complex has

required functions early in DSB repair when bandaid action is needed. In cell biological experiments, the Rad50/Mre11 complex is one of the first factors detected at DSB sites (42). A role for organizing broken ends in the nucleus is suggested by the reduced clustering of DNA ends in Rad50/Mre11 complex-deficient cells (3). The molecular basis for this can be found in biochemical and biophysical studies of human Rad50/Mre11 complex that show it to form oligomeric complexes on linear DNA (Figure 4d). Rad50/Mre11 oligomers bound to DNA work like molecular velcro, through interactions among the apexes of the 50-nm long coiled coils of complexes bound to different DNA molecules, thereby tethering broken DNA ends (18, 30, 101). Single-molecule imaging experiments show that DNA binding acts as a conformational switch in the Rad50/Mre11 complex that favors interaction among coiled-coil apexes of different complexes and thereby promotes DNA tethering (58). The in vivo importance of interaction between the Rad50 coiled-coil apexes was elegantly demonstrated by replacing them with a ligand inducible dimerization domain. The rescue of Rad50 function in yeast cells expressing this variant became ligand dependent, proving the necessity for Rad50 coiled-coil apex interactions for biological function (109). Contrary to the usual relationship, the molecular details of keeping broken ends close are less well developed for bacteria. However, evidence is emerging that the RecN protein, structurally related to Rad50, is likely to have a role in organizing broken DNA for repair, perhaps in an analogous fashion (35, 54, 78).

**SECOND, CREATE SINGLE-STRANDED DNA AT THE BREAK**

The next step required for homologous recombination repair of a DSB is to process it into a single-stranded end specifically with a 3′-hydroxyl overhang (Figure 2b). Here the story is much clearer in bacteria, where

---

**Figure 4**

Tethering of broken DNA molecules by the Rad50/Mre11 complex. (a) The human Rad50 protein consists of a globular ATPase domain and a 50-nm long coiled coil. The Rad50/Mre11 complex contains two Rad50 molecules dimerized at their globular domains where two Mre11 nuclease subunits are also located. The stoichiometry of the third subunit of the complex, Nbs1, which also resides in the globular domain, is less well defined. (b) The two coiled-coil arms of the complex are flexible and can interact at their apexes though coordination of a Zn-ion in a so-called Zn-hook structure. Interaction of the coiled coils within a complex prevents its biological important function, which is to tether broken DNA molecules through intercomplex interactions. (c) The complex binds DNA (red line) through its globular domain while the coiled-coil arms protrude away. DNA binding induces a parallel conformation of the coiled-coil arms, which prevent their futile intracomplex interaction while simultaneously promoting intercomplex interactions. (d) On linear DNA the complex will oligomerize near DNA ends. (e) Oligomers of the Rad50/Mre11 complex can now tether DNA molecules to keep them in close proximity before repair.

this is accomplished by the RecBCD helicase/nuclease machine, which also concomitantly loads the RecA recombinase (87, 88). Though these functions of RecBCD are long established, the recent crystal structure of this complete complex with bound DNA provided a clear explanation for how the many functions of this extraordinary molecular machine are coordinated. The RecBCD structure shows that bound DNA ends are split and each single strand is threaded into a channel where one of the two helicase motors pulls on it
(20, 83). The nuclease responsible for end processing is located downstream of the helicase motors so as to have access to one strand or the other. Details of how nuclease access switches from one DNA strand to the other upon encountering a specific sequence, known as Chi, remain to be elucidated, but the overall machinery is now understood (86). In contrast, the equivalent machinery has yet to be identified in eukaryotic cells. Genetic evidence in yeast indicates that end processing involves at least the Rad50/Mre11 complex but does not prove that this is the nuclease (40). Indeed, the nuclease activities of Mre11 described to date would create a single-strand end with the incorrect polarity (95); however, this is also true of RecBCD activity before modulation by passing a Chi sequence in DNA (2). Rad50/Mre11 activity may well be similarly modified by interaction with or addition of another component. Alternatively, Rad50/Mre11 may be less directly involved in end resection but rather act as a necessary cofactor for another nuclease, of which there are several candidates. The identity of the components responsible for end resection, the mechanisms controlling their action, and coordination of this step with the rest of homologous recombination are important unanswered questions in eukaryotic systems. Here again, there are likely to be several variations used for the different circumstances in which DSBs can be created.

Processing a DSB to reveal a stretch of single-stranded DNA suitable to load a recombinase is required for any type of break to be repaired by homologous recombination. However, as for nonhomologous DNA end-joining, the exact structure at the end may guide specific processing to facilitate eventual repair that will require using the DNA end either as a primer for synthesis or as a ligation partner. Thus the DNA end has to be either a clean 3′-hydroxyl or a 5′-phosphate. This means that DNA ends with other chemical structures have to be specifically processed or cleaned up. The different requirements for end trimming and cleaning may be reflected

in differential requirements for specific factors in various experimental systems. For instance, depending on the type of treatment applied to create DNA breaks, the ends may need no processing at all (site-specific endonucleases), or may need to be processed to remove covalently bound proteins (topoisomerase inhibitors), or may need trimming to remove chemical groups left when the backbone break occurs in the ribose ring (ionizing radiation). The endonuclease activities of Rad50/Mre11 are suited to play a role here, allowing possible processing of several different end structures, and are consistent with its requirement early in DSB repair. SbcCD, a bacterial protein complex structurally related to Rad50/Mre11 (17), is a potent nuclease that likely processes aberrant DNA structures in need of repair, including proteins covalently attached to DNA ends (12). Identifying the eukaryotic factors needed to trim specific end damage will be important because different end-processing factors might direct or require different activities in downstream steps.

**THIRD, ASSEMBLING NUCLEOPROTEIN FILAMENTS, THE CORE RECOMBINATION CATALYST**

For the next step in homologous recombination repair, specifically processed DNA ends are coated with a recombinase. The all-purpose bacterial RecBCD machine loads the RecA recombinase onto 3′-ended single-stranded DNA as it is produced by the helicase/nuclease. Similarly, the RecFOR proteins collaborate to load RecA onto single-stranded DNA regions created when damage is encountered during replication that needs to be repaired by homologous recombination (59, 104). In yeast, the Rad52 protein has an established role early in recombination in facilitating recombinase filament formation (39). A role analogous to Rad52 in mammalian cells is apparently performed by BRCA2. A large body of evidence from cell biology,
biochemistry, and structural studies indicates that BRCA2 is involved in controlling the activity of the eukaryotic recombinase, Rad51 (23, 81, 82). A specific mechanistic role for BRCA2 in loading Rad51 onto single-stranded DNA emerged from these studies. Direct biochemical analysis of human BRCA2 function has been hampered by the inability to purify this very large protein. However, a more manageable version of BRCA2, Brh2, from the fungus *Ustilago maydis* has been purified and appears to have the right biochemical activities. Elegant biochemical experiments show that Brh2 facilitates loading Rad51 onto DNA, specifically single-stranded DNA with the correct polarity starting at a double-strand to single-strand DNA transition that would be created by resection of a DNA end in need of repair (117). A pared-down human BRCA2, including only the DNA-binding domain and two Rad51-binding domains, BRC3 and BRC4, has in vitro activities similar to those of Brh2, and further supports a role for the complete BRCA2 in loading Rad51 onto DNA in need of recombinational repair (77).

In addition to its possible importance in producing the single-stranded DNA substrate for Rad51 binding, the Rad50/Mre11 complex may have a direct, still unproven, role in loading Rad51. This idea emerges from experiments designed to test for chromosome remodeling at DNA breaks (see below) that demonstrate a requirement for Rad50/Mre11 to load Rad51 at enzyme-induced specific breaks, even though these breaks were efficiently processed into single-stranded DNA (96). It is equally important to keep Rad51 away from sites where recombination is not needed and may be dangerous (92). The DNA translocating motor-protein Rad54 can facilitate Rad51 filament disassembly in vitro, and recent in vivo work supports the importance of this Rad54 function (36, 74, 84, 90, 100, 105). Currently under investigation are the consequences of Rad51 accumulating where it is not needed or not disassociating after strand exchange is complete; these should reveal the important biological function of the recombination mediators involved in controlling Rad51 function.

Eukaryotic Rad51 is a problematic recombinase from the biochemist's point of view. The accumulated in vivo and in vitro data on the essential nature of Rad51, its functions and activities, as well as structural studies led to the universally accepted view that Rad51 is the functional homolog of RecA and therefore a bona fide recombinase. However, unlike RecA, Rad51 does not have a strong preference for binding to single-stranded DNA over double-stranded DNA, and Rad51 is less active than RecA in ATPase and strand-exchange assays in vitro (81). This raises several questions concerning the nature of active Rad51 nucleoprotein filaments, the optimal in vitro conditions, and the possible need for other proteins in eukaryotic strand exchange reactions. Different experimental approaches are sorting through these details and provide some fresh ideas for understanding mechanistic aspects of strand exchange. For instance, the enigmatic Rad51 paralogs are essential proteins similar to Rad51 but so far without defined mechanistic roles in homologous recombination (94). The frequent suggestion that they are involved in controlling Rad51 filament function is reasonable and difficult to refute, but is not supported by much data. It has at least now been shown that Rad51C preferentially localizes to sites of enzyme-induced DSBs (75). These data, together with the association of Rad51 with Rad51C, support a role for Rad51C in DSB repair in association with Rad51 filaments, but a role for Rad51C in controlling Rad51 filament function is still not proven.

Contrary to the prominent cartoon view that the recombinase nucleoprotein filament is a helical regular static rod, the recombinase filament is a variable and dynamic structure. Evidence for filaments with different pitches, the number of protein monomers per turn, and the length of their rise along the helix axis, even within a single filament has long been available (23, 44, 119). Recent imaging of

human Rad51 filaments in a manner that did not require regular structure for analysis and avoided fixing regularities shows them to be irregular, especially in the catalytically active single-stranded DNA bound form (73). These images, as well as single-molecule force spectroscopy experiments, suggest dynamic association and disassociation of Rad51 at many points along DNA molecules that could be essential for accomplishing strand-exchange reactions. Molecular insight into the source of dynamic rearrangements within recombinase filaments comes from atomic resolution structures of yeast Rad51 and archaeal RadA that notably reveal ATP binding and hydrolysis to occur at the interface of two monomers (13, 111). There is a wealth of information indicating that the nature of the cofactors bound at the ATPase site influences Rad51 function and that this is reflected in filament structure (44, 73, 113, 119). Several structural features of Rad51 and its filaments on DNA account for these flexible arrangements and, presumably, controlled rearrangements that accompany DNA strand exchange. The ATPase interface in the Rad51 filament has at least the two alternating arrangements observed in the crystal structure. The amino-terminal domain, which likely binds DNA and contacts the ATPase core of its neighboring monomer, is attached to the core by a flexible stretch of amino acids (13, 119). Thus there are several “hinge” points within Rad51 monomers and between them in a filament that allows for potentially large changes in structure. Perhaps more important, these multiple flexible connections within the protein polymer and between the protein and DNA polymers mean that loss of contact between any two partners, such as at the Rad51 ATPase interface or between a Rad51 monomer and DNA, does not result in dissociation of the complex but allows for a variety of dynamic rearrangements (24, 112). The extent of these rearrangements, their control by nucleotide cofactor binding and hydrolysis, as well as their role in promoting strand exchange are exciting questions that can now be addressed.

**Holliday junction:**
a mobile junction between two duplex DNA molecules. The point at which two of the strands between the two duplexes crossover can move along the duplexes in a process referred to as branch migration

**AFTER THE RECOMBINATION PARTNERS ENGAGE**

Most homologous recombination repair of DNA breaks occurs at replication forks where one-ended breaks are produced, as mentioned above (15). The DNA structures resulting from strand invasion and joint molecule formation have crossed DNA strands, called Holliday junctions (Figure 2f, Figure 3b). In order to complete repair after recombination, the DNA strands have to be uncrossed or cut by structure-specific nucleases called Holliday junction resolvases. This is accomplished by the RuvABC complex or the RecG protein in bacteria (106). The search for an equivalent enzyme in eukaryotes has turned up a complex of two Rad51 paralogs, XRCC3 and Rad51C, that appears to be associated with resolvase activity. In addition, extracts from Rad51C-deficient cells have no resolvase activity (43). Alternatively, the crossed DNA strands resulting from joint molecule formation can be separated by the combined action of a helicase, specifically those in the RecQ family, and a topoisomerase (28, 110). A true Holliday junction resolvase may not be needed to complete repair of breaks by recombination at replication forks, and the exact biochemical activity required to separate the recombined strands will depend on where the break originally occurred, for instance whether leading or lagging strand templates were broken. This step in homologous recombination repair may also require different mechanisms and enzymes depending on circumstances, similar to the requirement for diverse mechanisms at early steps to process different types of broken DNA ends.

**BEFORE THE BEGINNING AND AFTER THE END**

So far we have considered advances in understanding mechanistic steps of strand-exchange reactions of homologous recombination repair. However, in cells this repair process is connected to a web of other events.

Exciting advances are also elucidating these mechanistic connections. Evidence is rapidly emerging for the role of chromosome remodeling as an essential prerequisite to DSB repair, and the molecular components involved are being identified. Completing repair of DNA breaks requires the product of recombination, a joint molecule, to become the substrate for replication. New information is also emerging on this hand-off step and the identity of the eukaryotic polymerase involved.

### BEFORE RECOMBINATION

DSBs are associated with changes in the surrounding chromatin. The dramatic phosphorylation of histone variant H2AX was the first described chromatin alteration that follows a DNA break. This histone mark may have a role in activating DNA damage-response cell cycle checkpoints and recruiting chromatin remodeling and repair factors (98), although the lack of dramatic DNA repair-defective phenotype of H2AX-deficient cells and mice suggests its role might be nonessential (5, 10). Histone acetylation by Trrap-Trip60 also modulates loading of repair proteins at DNA breaks (62). Here chromatin immunoprecipitation data indicated that Rad51 association with enzyme-induced break sites is dependent on Trrap-Trip60. It was suggested that the acetylation of histones “loosened” chromatin as a necessary step before homologous recombination proteins could assemble on DNA. The chromatin remodeling complexes INO80 and SWR1 are also specifically implicated in making broken DNA ends accessible to repair factors (21, 60, 97). The possibility that certain chromatin changes are associated with either homologous recombination or nonhomologous DNA end-joining is still unclear. In yeast, components of the RSC chromatin-remodeling complex were identified in genetic screens for defects in nonhomologous DNA end-joining and were also shown to interact with Mre11, suggesting that Mre11 recruits RSC to ends where chromatin remodeling facilitates repair (80). In most of these cases, the implication is that DNA at break sites has to be freed of nucleosomes before repair proteins can have access. Nucleosome removal at HO-induced break sites was directly demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments (96). The loss of nucleosomes involved the INO80 chromatin remodeler and was less efficient if the Rad50/Mre11 complex was absent.

### AFTER STRAND EXCHANGE

Homologous recombination reactions involving DNA broken during replication do not completely repair collapsed replication forks, but create DNA structures that can be rescued by strand-switch synthesis. In this way, one broken daughter strand will invade the homologous daughter duplex, creating a primer with the 3′ end of the invading nascent strand using the other nascent strand as a template to copy sequence information past the site of the break-causing lesion (Figure 3). In order to complete repair, this recombination intermediate has to be recognized by a DNA polymerase as a primer template in a manner coordinated with joint molecule formation. The accumulated genetic and biochemical evidence provides a clear picture for how recombination-directed replication can occur. Joint molecules formed by RecBCD processing of a double-stranded end, concerted loading of RecA, and strand invasion yield a 3′-hydroxyl paired to a duplex as a primer template terminus. A dynamic RecA filament, capable of disassembly, is required at this stage of the reaction to expose the DNA for assembly of replication machinery (115). A complete replication fork, including the DnaB helicase, DnaG primase, and DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, can restart from this structure in reactions that depend on the PriA primosome (115, 116). Comparable detail on coordinating replication restart with recombination is not available for mammalian cells; however, the translesion polymerase pol eta participates in this DNA synthesis reaction both in vivo and in vitro (34, 53). Colocalization of pol eta
and Rad51 in DNA damage-induced nuclear foci had previously been described (33) but did not prove functional interaction or mechanistic connections. The in vitro studies report direct interaction between pol eta and Rad51 as well as Rad51-stimulated pol eta-specific polymerase activity from a model recombination intermediate primer template (53).

The general scenario that follows would be for components that are needed early in DSB repair to simply associate with the broken DNA if they can. Additional components would interact reversibly and engage if their substrates and partners are present. These combinatorial molecular interactions are envisioned to stabilize the assembly of molecular machinery responsible for affecting eventual repair. Conversely, following initial interaction with broken DNA, repair factors not stabilized by additional interactions will disassociate, allowing other possible components to build up and other mechanisms to take over. This suggests that the build-up or stability of functional repair machinery is based at some point on the presence of one or two DNA ends. In simple form, nonhomologous DNA end-joining would involve a stable intermediate with both DNA ends engaged that are then not likely to be stably bound by homologous recombination proteins that otherwise recognize ends. Likewise, a single DNA end, possibly in combination with a duplex partner, would form stable complexes with homologous recombination proteins and not with nonhomologous DNA end-joining components.

The molecular details connecting DSB repair to other genome transactions are now becoming clear. The exciting coordination between break-induced chromatin remodeling and repair reactions is just beginning to be explored. In addition, the molecular collaborations needed to restart replication following recombination at collapsed forks are beginning to be identified in mammalian systems. We expect that these multiple, connected and overlapping collaborations will form a web of molecular interactions from which a path to repair for any number of different DNA breaks can emerge.

### SUMMING UP AND MOVING ON

Genome stability is normally maintained in the face of potentially dangerous DSBs by the combined activity of nonhomologous DNA end-joining and homologous recombination. As reviewed here, the reaction that will eventually accomplish the repair of any given DNA break will depend primarily on whether there were one or two ends to begin with. Two-ended breaks, not necessarily created with a sister chromatid in the neighborhood, will be repaired before they can cause more trouble by nonhomologous DNA end-joining. One-ended breaks that occur during replication when DNA polymerases encounter damage or breaks in the template need homologous recombination for repair and are conveniently associated with the required homologous duplex in the form of the other newly synthesized sister chromatid. In addition, the exact chemical structure of the DNA break, and therefore the manner in which breaks are created either in natural or experimental situations, also manipulates the requirement for processing steps and consequently influences which factors will affect repair. Therefore, although categorizing different DSB repair mechanisms along pathways and subpathways is conceptually useful, it is unlikely that DSB repair occurs along ordered pathways because there is variation in and overlap between the required molecular machinery.

#### SUMMARY POINTS

1. DNA double-strand breaks are potentially very dangerous and vary in structure, and therefore multiple options for their repair are available.
2. The structure of the DNA ends themselves influences their path to repair.
3. Two-ended breaks can be repaired by nonhomologous DNA end-joining, which is possible and active at all stages of cell division cycle.
4. One-ended breaks, created commonly during replication, need to be repaired by homologous recombination, which is important in the S phase of the cell division cycle.
5. Variations within the nonhomologous DNA end-joining mechanism have been defined based on the processing of the DSB ends required before joining, and similar requirements for end processing likely occur in homologous recombination.
6. DNA break-induced chromatin remodeling activities specifically coupled to repair have been identified, and the role of the remodeling factors in genome stability is being defined.
7. Important aspects of the molecular level dynamics occurring in the machinery of homologous recombination, both the early step of keeping ends close and later step of recombinase nucleoprotein filament, are now being defined by single-molecule experiments.
8. There is a web of interactions between the molecular components of break recognition, break processing, and break repair that can accommodate a path to repair for many different broken DNA structures occurring in many different cellular situations.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

Work in the C.W. and R.K. laboratories is supported by grants from the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), the Association for International Cancer Research (AICR) and the European Commission.

**LITERATURE CITED**

1. Ahnesorg P, Smith P, Jackson SP. 2006. XLF interacts with the XRCC4-DNA ligase IV complex to promote DNA nonhomologous end-joining. *Cell* 124:301–13
2. Anderson DG, Kowalczykowski SC. 1997. The recombination hotspot chi is a regulatory element that switches the polarity of DNA degradation by the RecBCD enzyme. *Genes Dev.* 11:571–81
3. Aten JA, Stap J, Krawczyk PM, van Oven CH, Hoebe RA, et al. 2004. Dynamics of DNA double-strand breaks revealed by clustering of damaged chromosome domains. *Science* 303:92–95
4. Baldwin EL, Osheroff N. 2005. Etoposide, topoisomerase II and cancer. *Curr. Med. Chem. Anticancer Agents* 5:363–72
5. Bassing CH, Chua KF, Sekiguchi J, Suh H, Whitlow SR, et al. 2002. Increased ionizing radiation sensitivity and genomic instability in the absence of histone H2AX. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99:8173–78
6. Baumann P, West SC. 1998. DNA end-joining catalyzed by human cell-free extracts. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 95:14066–70

7. Bradshaw PS, Stavropoulos DJ, Meyn MS. 2005. Human telomeric protein TRF2 associates with genomic double-strand breaks as an early response to DNA damage. *Nat. Genet.* 37:193–97

8. Bryans M, Valenzano MC, Stamato TD. 1999. Absence of DNA ligase IV protein in XR-1 cells: evidence for stabilization by XRCC4. *Mutat. Res.* 433:53–58

9. Buck D, Malivert L, de Chasseval R, Barraud A, Fondaneche MC, et al. 2006. Cernunnos, a novel nonhomologous end-joining factor, is mutated in human immunodeficiency with microcephaly. *Cell* 124:287–99

10. Celeste A, Petersen S, Romanienko PJ, Fernandez-Capetillo O, Chen HT, et al. 2002. Genomic instability in mice lacking histone H2AX. *Science* 296:922–27

11. Chen L, Trujillo K, Sung P, Tomkinson AE. 2000. Interactions of the DNA ligase IV-XRCC4 complex with DNA ends and the DNA-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:26196–205

12. Connelly JC, de Leau ES, Leach DR. 2003. Nucleolytic processing of a protein-bound DNA end by the *E. coli* SbcCD (MR) complex. *DNA Repair* 2:795–807

13. Conway AB, Lynch TW, Zhang Y, Fortin GS, Fung CW, et al. 2004. Crystal structure of a Rad51 filament. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 11:791–96

14. Cost GJ, Cozzarelli NR. 2006. Smc5p promotes faithful chromosome transmission and DNA repair in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Genetics* 172:2185–200

15. Cox MM, Goodman MF, Kreuzer KN, Sherratt DJ, Sandler SJ, Marians KJ. 2000. The importance of repairing stalled replication forks. *Nature* 404:37–41

16. Cromie GA, Connelly JC, Leach DR. 2001. Recombination at double-strand breaks and DNA ends: conserved mechanisms from phage to humans. *Mol. Cell* 8:1163–74

17. de Jager M, Trujillo KM, Sung P, Hopfner KP, Carney JP, et al. 2004. Differential arrangements of conserved building blocks among homologs of the Rad50/Mre11 DNA repair protein complex. *J. Mol. Biol.* 339:937–49

18. de Jager M, van Noort J, van Gent DC, Dekker C, Kanaar R, Wyman C. 2001. Human Rad50/Mre11 is a flexible complex that can tether DNA ends. *Mol. Cell* 8:1129–35

19. DeFazio LG, Stansel RM, Griffith JD, Chu G. 2002. Synapsis of DNA ends by DNA-dependent protein kinase. *EMBO J.* 21:3192–200

20. Dillingham MS, Spies M, Kowalczykowski SC. 2003. RecBCD enzyme is a bipolar DNA helicase. *Nature* 423:893–97

21. Downs JA, Cote J. 2005. Dynamics of chromatin during the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. *Cell Cycle* 4:1373–76

22. Friedberg EC, Walker GC, Siede W, Wood RD, Schultz RA, Ellenberger T. 2006. *DNA Repair and Mutagenesis*. Washington, DC: ASM Press

23. Galkin VE, Esashi F, Yu X, Yang S, West SC, Egelman EH. 2005. BRCA2 BRC motifs bind RAD51-DNA filaments. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102:8537–42

24. Galkin VE, Wu Y, Zhang XP, Qian X, He Y, et al. 2006. The Rad51/RadA N-terminal domain activates nucleoprotein filament ATPase activity. *Structure* 14:983–92

25. Grawunder U, Wilm M, Wu X, Kulesza P, Wilson TE, et al. 1997. Activity of DNA ligase IV stimulated by complex formation with XRCC4 protein in mammalian cells. *Nature* 388:492–95

26. Grawunder U, Zimmer D, Fugmann S, Schwarz K, Lieber MR. 1998. DNA ligase IV is essential for V(D)J recombination and DNA double-strand break repair in human precursor lymphocytes. *Mol. Cell* 2:477–84

27. Haber JE. 1995. In vivo biochemistry: physical monitoring of recombination induced by site-specific endonucleases. *BioEssays* 17:609–20

28. Heyer WD, Ehmsen KT, Solinger JA. 2003. Holliday junctions in the eukaryotic nucleus: resolution in sight? *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 28:548–57

29. Hoeijmakers JH. 2001. Genome maintenance mechanisms for preventing cancer. *Nature* 411:366–74

30. Hopfner KP, Craig L, Moncalian G, Zinkel RA, Usui T, et al. 2002. The Rad50 zinc-hook is a structure joining Mre11 complexes in DNA recombination and repair. *Nature* 418:562–66

31. Jakob B, Scholz M, Taucher-Scholz G. 2003. Biological imaging of heavy charged-particle tracks. *Radiat. Res.* 159:676–84

32. Jasin M. 1996. Genetic manipulation of genomes with rare-cutting endonucleases. *Trends Genet.* 12:224–28

33. Kannouche P, Broughton BC, Volker M, Hanaoka F, Mullenders LH, Lehmann AR. 2001. Domain structure, localization, and function of DNA polymerase eta, defective in xeroderma pigmentosum variant cells. *Genes Dev.* 15:158–72

34. Kawamoto T, Araki K, Sonoda E, Yamashita YM, Harada K, et al. 2005. Dual roles for DNA polymerase eta in homologous DNA recombination and translesion DNA synthesis. *Mol. Cell* 20:793–99

35. Kidane D, Sanchez H, Alonso JC, Graumann PL. 2004. Visualization of DNA double-strand break repair in live bacteria reveals dynamic recruitment of *Bacillus subtilis* RecF, RecO and RecN proteins to distinct sites on the nucleoids. *Mol. Microbiol.* 52:1627–39

36. Kiianitsa K, Solinger JA, Heyer WD. 2006. Terminal association of Rad54 protein with the Rad51-dsDNA filament. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:9767–72

37. Kim JS, Krasieva TB, Kurumizaka H, Chen DJ, Taylor AM, Yokomori K. 2005. Independent and sequential recruitment of NHEJ and HR factors to DNA damage sites in mammalian cells. *J. Cell Biol.* 170:341–47

38. Kim JS, Krasieva TB, LaMorte V, Taylor AM, Yokomori K. 2002. Specific recruitment of human cohesin to laser-induced DNA damage. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:45149–53

39. Krogh BO, Symington LS. 2004. Recombination proteins in yeast. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 38:233–71

40. Lee SE, Moore JK, Holmes A, Umezu K, Kolodner RD, Haber JE. 1998. *Saccharomyces* Ku70, mre11/rad50 and RPA proteins regulate adaptation to G2/M arrest after DNA damage. *Cell* 94:399–409

41. Lees-Miller SP, Meek K. 2003. Repair of DNA double-strand breaks by nonhomologous end-joining. *Biochimie* 85:1161–73

42. Lisby M, Barlow JH, Burgess RC, Rothstein R. 2004. Choreography of the DNA damage response: spatiotemporal relationships among checkpoint and repair proteins. *Cell* 118:699–713

43. Liu Y, Masson JY, Shah R, O’Regan P, West SC. 2004. RAD51C is required for Holliday junction processing in mammalian cells. *Science* 303:243–46

44. Liu Y, Stasiak AZ, Masson JY, McIlwraith MJ, Stasiak A, West SC. 2004. Conformational changes modulate the activity of human RAD51 protein. *J. Mol. Biol.* 337:817–27

45. Lukas C, Bartek J, Lukas J. 2005. Imaging of protein movement induced by chromosomal breakage: tiny ‘local’ lesions pose great ‘global’ challenges. *Chromosoma* 114:146–54

46. Lukas C, Falck J, Bartkova J, Bartek J, Lukas J. 2003. Distinct spatiotemporal dynamics of mammalian checkpoint regulators induced by DNA damage. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5:255–60

47. Ma Y, Lu H, Schwarz K, Lieber MR. 2005. Repair of double-strand DNA breaks by the human nonhomologous DNA end-joining pathway: the iterative processing model. *Cell Cycle* 4:1193–200

This paper identifies an in vivo role for the translesion polymerase pol eta in DNA synthesis associated with homologous recombination mediated DNA break repair.

48. Ma Y, Lu H, Tippin B, Goodman MF, Shimazaki N, et al. 2004. A biochemically defined system for mammalian nonhomologous DNA end-joining. *Mol. Cell* 16:701–13

49. Ma Y, Pannicke U, Schwarz K, Lieber MR. 2002. Hairpin opening and overhang processing by an Artemis/DNA-dependent protein kinase complex in nonhomologous end-joining and V(D)J recombination. *Cell* 108:781–94

50. Ma Y, Schwarz K, Lieber MR. 2005. The Artemis:DNA-PKcs endonuclease cleaves DNA loops, flaps, and gaps. *DNA Repair* 4:845–51

51. Mahajan KN, Nick McElhinny SA, Mitchell BS, Ramsden DA. 2002. Association of DNA polymerase mu (pol mu) with Ku and ligase IV: role for pol mu in end-joining double-strand break repair. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 22:5194–202

52. Maizels N. 2005. Immunoglobulin gene diversification. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 39:23–46

53. McIlwraith MJ, Vaisman A, Liu Y, Fanning E, Woodgate R, West SC. 2005. Human DNA polymerase eta promotes DNA synthesis from strand invasion intermediates of homologous recombination. *Mol. Cell* 20:783–92

54. Meddows TR, Savory AP, Grove JI, Moore T, Lloyd RG. 2005. RecN protein and transcription factor DksA combine to promote faithful recombinational repair of DNA double-strand breaks. *Mol. Microbiol.* 57:97–110

55. Meldrum RA, Botchway SW, Wharton CW, Hirst GJ. 2003. Nanoscale spatial induction of UV photoproducts in cellular DNA by three-photon near-infrared absorption. *EMBO Rep.* 4:1144–49

56. Modesti M, Hesse JE, Gellert M. 1999. DNA binding of Xrcc4 protein is associated with V(D)J recombination but not with stimulation of DNA ligase IV activity. *EMBO J.* 18:2008–18

57. Modesti M, Junop MS, Ghirlando R, van de Rakt M, Gellert M, et al. 2003. Tetramerization and DNA ligase IV interaction of the DNA double-strand break repair protein XRCC4 are mutually exclusive. *J. Mol. Biol.* 334:215–28

58. Moreno-Herrero F, de Jager M, Dekker NH, Kanaar R, Wyman C, Dekker C. 2005. Mesoscale conformational changes in the DNA-repair complex Rad50/Mre11/Nbs1 upon binding DNA. *Nature* 437:440–43

59. Morimatsu K, Kowalczykowski SC. 2003. RecFOR proteins load RecA protein onto gapped DNA to accelerate DNA strand exchange: a universal step of recombinational repair. *Mol. Cell* 11:1337–47

60. Morrison AJ, Highland J, Krogan NJ, Arbel-Eden A, Greenblatt JF, et al. 2004. INO80 and gamma-H2AX interaction links ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling to DNA damage repair. *Cell* 119:767–75

61. Moshous D, Callebaut I, de Chasseval R, Corneo B, Cavazzana-Calvo M, et al. 2001. Artemis, a novel DNA double-strand break repair/V(D)J recombination protein, is mutated in human severe combined immune deficiency. *Cell* 105:177–86

62. Murr R, Loizou JI, Yang YG, Cuenin C, Li H, et al. 2006. Histone acetylation by Trrap-Tip60 modulates loading of repair proteins and repair of DNA double-strand breaks. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 8:91–99

63. Nelms BE, Maser RS, MacKay JF, Lagally MG, Petrini JH. 1998. In situ visualization of DNA double-strand break repair in human fibroblasts. *Science* 280:590–92

64. Nick McElhinny SA, Havener JM, Garcia-Diaz M, Juarez R, Bebenek K, et al. 2005. A gradient of template dependence defines distinct biological roles for family X polymerases in nonhomologous end-joining. *Mol. Cell* 19:357–66

65. Nick McElhinny SA, Ramsden DA. 2004. Sibling rivalry: competition between Pol X family members in V(D)J recombination and general double strand break repair. *Immunol. Rev.* 200:156–64

66. Nick McElhinny SA, Snowden CM, McCarville J, Ramsden DA. 2000. Ku recruits the XRCC4-ligase IV complex to DNA ends. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 20:2996–3003

67. O’Driscoll M, Jeggo PA. 2006. The role of double-strand break repair—insights from human genetics. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 7:45–54

68. Okada T, Keeney S. 2005. Homologous recombination: needing to have my say. *Curr. Biol.* 15:R200–2

69. Paques F, Haber JE. 1999. Multiple pathways of recombination induced by double-strand breaks in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 63:349–404

70. Pommier Y. 2004. Camptothecins and topoisomerase I: a foot in the door. Targeting the genome beyond topoisomerase I with camptothecins and novel anticancer drugs: importance of DNA replication, repair and cell cycle checkpoints. *Curr. Med. Chem. Anticancer Agents* 4:429–34

71. Porteus MH, Carroll D. 2005. Gene targeting using zinc finger nucleases. *Nat. Biotechnol.* 23:967–73

72. Riballo E, Kuhne M, Rief N, Doherty A, Smith GC, et al. 2004. A pathway of double-strand break rejoining dependent upon ATM, Artemis, and proteins locating to gamma-H2AX foci. *Mol. Cell* 16:715–24

73. Ristic D, Modesti M, van der Heijden T, van Noort J, Dekker C, et al. 2005. Human Rad51 filaments on double- and single-stranded DNA: correlating regular and irregular forms with recombination function. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 33:3292–302

74. Ristic D, Wyman C, Paulusma C, Kanaar R. 2001. The architecture of the human Rad54-DNA complex provides evidence for protein translocation along DNA. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:8454–60

75. Rodrigue A, Lafrance M, Gauthier MC, McDonald D, Hendzel M, et al. 2006. Interplay between human DNA repair proteins at a unique double-strand break in vivo. *EMBO J.* 25:222–31

76. Rogakou EP, Boon C, Redon C, Bonner WM. 1999. Megabase chromatin domains involved in DNA double-strand breaks in vivo. *J. Cell Biol.* 146:905–16

77. San Filippo J, Chi P, Sehorn MG, Etchin J, Krejci L, Sung P. 2006. Recombination mediator and Rad51 targeting activities of a human BRCA2 polypeptide. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:11649–57

78. Sanchez H, Alonso JC. 2005. *Bacillus subtilis* RecN binds and protects 3′-single-stranded DNA extensions in the presence of ATP. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 33:2343–50

79. Schatz DG, Spanopoulou E. 2005. Biochemistry of V(D)J recombination. *Curr. Top Microbiol. Immunol.* 290:49–85

80. Shim EY, Ma JL, Oum JH, Yanez Y, Lee SE. 2005. The yeast chromatin remodeler RSC complex facilitates end-joining repair of DNA double-strand breaks. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 25:3934–44

81. Shin DS, Chahwan C, Huffman JL, Tainer JA. 2004. Structure and function of the double-strand break repair machinery. *DNA Repair* 3:863–73

82. Shivji MK, Venkitaraman AR. 2004. DNA recombination, chromosomal stability and carcinogenesis: insights into the role of BRCA2. *DNA Repair* 3:835–43

83. Singleton MR, Dillingham MS, Gaudier M, Kowalczykowski SC, Wigley DB. 2004. Crystal structure of RecBCD enzyme reveals a machine for processing DNA breaks. *Nature* 432:187–93

84. Solinger JA, Kiianitsa K, Heyer WD. 2002. Rad54, a Swi2/Snf2-like recombinational repair protein, disassembles Rad51:dsDNA filaments. *Mol. Cell* 10:1175–88

85. Spagnolo L, Rivera-Calzada A, Pearl LH, Llorca O. 2006. Three-dimensional structure of the human DNA-PKcs/Ku70/Ku80 complex assembled on DNA and its implications for DNA DSB repair. *Mol. Cell* 22:511–19

86. Spies M, Bianco PR, Dillingham MS, Handa N, Baskin RJ, Kowalczykowski SC. 2003. A molecular throttle: the recombination hotspot chi controls DNA translocation by the RecBCD helicase. *Cell* 114:647–54

87. Spies M, Dillingham MS, Kowalczykowski SC. 2005. Translocation by the RecB motor is an absolute requirement for (77)-recognition and RecA protein loading by RecBCD enzyme. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:37078–87

88. Spies M, Kowalczykowski SC. 2006. The RecA binding locus of RecBCD is a general domain for recruitment of DNA strand exchange proteins. *Mol. Cell* 21:573–80

89. Strom L, Sjogren C. 2005. DNA damage-induced cohesion. *Cell Cycle* 4:536–39

90. Sugawara N, Wang X, Haber JE. 2003. In vivo roles of Rad52, Rad54, and Rad55 proteins in Rad51-mediated recombination. *Mol. Cell* 12:209–19

91. Symington LS. 2002. Role of RAD52 epistasis group genes in homologous recombination and double-strand break repair. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 66:630–70

92. Tan TL, Kanaar R, Wyman C. 2003. Rad54, a Jack of all trades in homologous recombination. *DNA Repair* 2:787–94

93. Tashiro S, Walter J, Shinohara A, Kamada N, Cremer T. 2000. Rad51 accumulation at sites of DNA damage and in postreplicative chromatin. *J. Cell Biol.* 150:283–91

94. Thacker J. 2005. The RAD51 gene family, genetic instability and cancer. *Cancer Lett.* 219:125–35

95. Trujillo KM, Yuan SS, Lee EY, Sung P. 1998. Nuclease activities in a complex of human recombination and DNA repair factors Rad50, Mre11, and p95. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:21447–50

96. Tsukuda T, Fleming AB, Nickoloff JA, Osley MA. 2005. Chromatin remodelling at a DNA double-strand break site in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Nature* 438:379–83

97. van Attikum H, Fritsch O, Hohn B, Gasser SM. 2004. Recruitment of the INO80 complex by H2A phosphorylation links ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling with DNA double-strand break repair. *Cell* 119:777–88

98. van Attikum H, Gasser SM. 2005. The histone code at DNA breaks: a guide to repair? *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 6:757–65

99. van Gent DC, Hoeijmakers JH, Kanaar R. 2001. Chromosomal stability and the DNA double-stranded break connection. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 2:196–206

100. Van Komen S, Petukhova G, Sigurdsson S, Stratton S, Sung P. 2000. Superhelicity-driven homologous DNA pairing by yeast recombination factors Rad51 and Rad54. *Mol. Cell* 6:563–72

101. van Noort J, van Der Heijden T, de Jager M, Wyman C, Kanaar R, Dekker C. 2003. The coiled-coil of the human Rad50 DNA repair protein contains specific segments of increased flexibility. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100:7581–86

102. Walker JR, Corpina RA, Goldberg J. 2001. Structure of the Ku heterodimer bound to DNA and its implications for double-strand break repair. *Nature* 412:607–14

103. Walter J, Cremer T, Miyagawa K, Tashiro S. 2003. A new system for laser-UVA-microirradiation of living cells. *J. Microsc.* 209:71–75

104. Webb BL, Cox MM, Inman RB. 1997. Recombinational DNA repair: The RecF and RecR proteins limit the extension of RecA filaments beyond single-strand DNA gaps. *Cell* 91:347–56

105. Wesoly J, Agarwal S, Sigurdsson S, Bussen W, Van Komen S, et al. 2006. Differential contributions of mammalian Rad54 paralogs to recombination, DNA damage repair, and meiosis. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 26:976–89

106. West SC. 2003. Molecular views of recombination proteins and their control. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 4:435–45

107. Weterings E, van Gent DC. 2004. The mechanism of nonhomologous end-joining: a synopsis of synapsis. *DNA Repair* 3:1425–35

108. Whitby MC. 2005. Making crossovers during meiosis. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 33:1451–55

109. Wiltzius JJ, Hohl M, Fleming JC, Petrini JH. 2005. The Rad50 hook domain is a critical determinant of Mre11 complex functions. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 12:403–7

110. Wu L, Hickson ID. 2003. The Bloom's syndrome helicase suppresses crossing over during homologous recombination. *Nature* 426:870–74

111. Wu Y, He Y, Moya IA, Qian X, Luo Y. 2004. Crystal structure of archaeal recombinase RADA: a snapshot of its extended conformation. *Mol. Cell* 15:423–35

112. Wyman C. 2006. Monomer networking activates recombinases. *Structure* 14:949–50

113. Wyman C, Kanaar R. 2004. Homologous recombination: down to the wire. *Curr. Biol.* 14:R629–31

114. Wyman C, Ristic D, Kanaar R. 2004. Homologous recombination-mediated double-strand break repair. *DNA Repair* 3:827–33

115. Xu L, Marians KJ. 2002. A dynamic RecA filament permits DNA polymerase-catalyzed extension of the invading strand in recombination intermediates. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:14321–28

116. Xu L, Marians KJ. 2003. PriA mediates DNA replication pathway choice at recombination intermediates. *Mol. Cell* 11:817–26

117. Yang H, Li Q, Fan J, Holloman WK, Pavletich NP. 2005. The BRCA2 homologue Brh2 nucleates RAD51 filament formation at a dsDNA-ssDNA junction. *Nature* 433:653–57

118. Yoo S, Dynan WS. 1999. Geometry of a complex formed by double strand break repair proteins at a single DNA end: recruitment of DNA-PKcs induces inward translocation of Ku protein. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 27:4679–86

119. Yu X, VanLoock MS, Yang S, Reese JT, Egelman EH. 2004. What is the structure of the RecA-DNA filament? *Curr. Protein. Pept. Sci.* 5:73–79

This paper shows that interaction between the Rad50 coiled-coil apexes, here replaced by an unrelated drug inducible dimerization domain, is required for in vivo activity and thus key to biological function.

This paper reports the impressive in vitro reconstitution of DSB repair from the stage of DNA end processing, to joint molecule formation by homologous recombination through establishing a new replication fork using purified and defined components.

This paper reports the biochemical characterization of a BRCA2 homolog showing that this protein functions to facilitate Rad51 filament formation specifically on the DNA structures appropriate for homologous recombination.

Frontispiece
David A. Hopwood  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Regulation of Imaginal Disc Growth by Tumor-Suppressor Genes in  
*Drosophila*  
Iswar K. Hariharan and David Bilder ………………………………………… 335  

DNA Double-Strand Break Repair: All’s Well That Ends Well  
Claire Wyman and Roland Kanaar ………………………………………… 363  

Mechanisms of Cyclic-di-GMP Signaling in Bacteria  
Urs Jenal and Jacob Malone ………………………………………… 385  

Interplay of Circadian Clocks and Metabolic Rhythms  
Herman Wijnen and Michael W. Young ………………………………………… 409  

Genetic Analysis of Brain Circuits Underlying Pheromone Signaling  
C. Dulac and S. Wagner ………………………………………… 449  

Aspects of Genetic Susceptibility to Human Infectious Diseases  
Adrian V. S. Hill ………………………………………… 469  

Genetics of Egg-Laying in Worms  
William F. Schafer ………………………………………… 487  

ERRATA  

An online log of corrections to *Annual Review of Genetics*  
chapters (if any, 1997 to the present) may be found at  
http://genet.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
