
REVIEW

**Divorcing ARF and p53: an unsettled case**

**Charles J. Sherr**

Abstract | Mammalian cells that sustain oncogenic insults can invoke defensive programmes that either halt their division or trigger their apoptosis, but these countermeasures must be finely tuned to discriminate between physiological and potentially harmful growth-promoting states. By functioning specifically to oppose abnormally prolonged and sustained proliferative signals produced by activated oncogenes, the ARF tumour suppressor antagonizes functions of MDM2 to induce protective responses that depend on the p53 transcription factor and its many target genes. However, ARF has been reported to physically associate with proteins other than MDM2 and to have p53-independent activities, most of which remain controversial and poorly understood.

The INK4a–ARF locus (*CDKN2A* in humans) encodes two intimately linked but distinct tumour-suppressor proteins, p16<sup>INK4a</sup> and p14<sup>ARF</sup> (p19<sup>ARF</sup> in the mouse), that indirectly govern the activities of the retinoblastoma protein (*RB*) and the *p53* transcription factor, respectively. These four proteins comprise part of a complex signalling network that regulates checkpoint responses to oncogenic stress by halting cell division and/or eliminating cells that have sustained irreparable damage¹. Because the inactivation of these genes allows cells that sustain oncogenic insults to survive and proliferate, their loss of function through deletion, mutation or epigenetic silencing is detected in most forms of cancer.

Retinoblastoma protein (RB) Named for its tumour-suppressor role in familial retinoblastoma, RB and its related family members (p130 and p107) function as transcriptional co-repressors to prevent cells from entering the DNA synthesis (S) phase of the cell division cycle.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) These enzymes are composed of a catalytic CDK subunit and a regulatory cyclin subunit. The cyclin D-dependent CDKs are activated in response to extracellular mitogenic signals and phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein (RB) and other RB-family members (p107 and p130).

The intercalation of an additional exon (designated exon 1β) between the *INK4a* and *INK4b* genes enables the production of an alternatively spliced mRNA that also incorporates sequences encoded by exons 2 and 3 of *INK4a* (FIG. 1a). Unexpectedly, this transcript was found to specify an entirely unrelated protein, the exon-2-derived segment of which is translated in an alternative reading frame (ARF) from that which encodes p16<sup>INK4a</sup> (REF. 3). Even more surprisingly, the resulting ARF protein is also a potent tumour suppressor⁴ that blocks cell-cycle progression by directly binding to, and interfering with, the p53 negative-regulator *MDM2*, thereby stabilizing and activating p53 (REFS 5–8) (FIG. 2).

Although the overall design of the *INK4b–ARF–INK4a* locus is highly conserved among mammals, the splicing of exon 1β to exon 2 sequences in the chicken does not enable the translation of the exon 2 alternative reading frame, thereby resulting in the formation of a smaller but functional chicken ARF protein (p7<sup>ARF</sup>) specified by exon 1β alone⁹. This is consistent with previous mutational analyses of the mouse and human ARF proteins, which showed that the elimination of the segment specified by exon 2 had no effect on the known p53-dependent functions of the protein⁸,¹⁰. Therefore, in retrospect, the design of the locus might simply enable the RNA segment encoded by ARF exon 1β to be spliced and polyadenylated. Because it is difficult to understand how exon 2 of *INK4a* and *ARF* evolved to serve the functions of two distinct proteins, others have suggested that the structure of the locus highlights a need, at least in some biological settings, for the coordinated regulation of the gene products¹¹.

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA.  
e-mail: sherr@stjude.org  
doi:10.1038/nrc1954  
Published online 17 August 2006

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER  
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEW S

---

### E3 ubiquitin ligase
The addition of polyubiquitin chains to proteins is carried out by a cascade of three enzymes, designated E1, E2 and E3, that sequentially activate and transfer ubiquitin. The selection of protein substrates for ubiquitylation is mediated by the E3 enzymes.

### Hyaloid vascular system (HVS)
During eye development, this delicate vasculature extends from the optic cup in the back of the eye through the vitreous to supply the lens. In the mouse, the HVS involutes within the first 10 days postnatally, correlating with maximal p19ARF expression in pericytes surrounding the vascular endothelium.

### INK4 proteins
So named because they are inhibitors of CDK4, these proteins associate with and block the enzymatic activities of the cyclin D-dependent kinases CDK4 and CDK6. There are four such proteins, designated INK4a, INK4b, INK4c, and INK4d in order of their discovery.

---

### At a glance
- The ARF tumour suppressor interferes with the MDM2 E3 ubiquitin protein ligase to stabilize and activate the p53 transcription factor, triggering cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis.
- It is widely accepted that the activity of ARF is mediated through the activation of the p53 transcription programme, but several lines of evidence, much of it controversial, indicate that ARF also exerts p53-independent tumour-suppressor functions.
- The ARF protein has an unusual amino-acid composition, being highly basic (pl>12, despite a paucity of lysine residues); it is probably unstructured unless bound to other targets and highly promiscuous in its binding.
- ARF is a nucleolar protein that assembles into high-molecular-mass complexes with nucleophosmin (NPM). Its binding to NPM inhibits ARF turnover and results in its accumulation within the nucleolus.
- ARF has an associated sumoylating activity that can lead to the modification of proteins to which it binds, including MDM2 and NPM.
- ARF has now been reported to physically interact with more than 25 other proteins, at least some of which have been postulated to be responsible for its p53-independent functions. These include proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis, transcriptional regulation, the DNA-damage response, apoptosis and autophagy. How strong are the data?

---

### The ARF–MDM2–p53 pathway
Although ARF is not detectably expressed in most normal tissues, aberrantly sustained and increased levels of mitogenic signals resulting from the overexpression or mutational activation of oncogenes induce the transcription of ARF¹. In turn, by antagonizing the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of MDM2, ARF stabilizes p53 and increases its transcriptional activity (FIG. 2). The respective functions of the three proteins indicate that the disruption of the pathway can be achieved either through the inactivation of ARF or p53, or through the overexpression of MDM2, genetic interactions that have been best defined in mice (BOX 2).

In general, mutations affecting the three genes in the pathway occur in a mutually exclusive manner consistent with the idea that the inactivation of ARF mimics p53 loss of function in accelerating oncogene-induced tumorigenesis. However, some cancers might lack both ARF and TP53 activity. This could reflect a selection for the loss of one or both of the INK4 genes that flank ARF or, alternatively, might result from the propensity of p53 to respond to a wider variety of oncogenic stresses (FIG. 2) that select for its inactivation even in an ARF-null background. Therefore, the prevailing view is that the tumour-suppressor functions of ARF are mediated through p53.

### ARF without p53?
Despite this neat paradigm, there is evidence to suggest that ARF might have additional tumour-suppressor activities. As for ‘double-null’ mice that lack Arf and Trp53, or Mdm2 and Trp53 (BOX 2), the co-inactivation of all three genes in the pathway has no effect on the rate of the spontaneous development of tumours in mice. However, these triple knockout (TKO) mice succumb to an expanded range of tumour types and frequently develop multiple primary tumours (as many as four per mouse arising *de novo* from different cell lineages)¹². These observations raised the idea that ARF has an MDM2- and p53-independent role as a tumour suppressor. Still, the interpretation is not entirely straightforward, because the interbred Arf-null and Mdm2/Trp53 double-null mice were all of mixed 129 X C57Bl/6 background, so it is not formally possible to rule out contributions of unrecognized strain-specific modifiers to their tumour-prone phenotype.

A recent study has shown that, relative to wild-type mice, the growth rate of carcinogen-induced papillomas was greater in p19ARF-deficient mice but reduced in p53-deficient animals, although their malignant conversion to squamous-cell carcinomas and metastatic spread to lymph nodes and lungs were accelerated in both backgrounds¹³. Therefore, in the early stages of disease, p19ARF seemed to inhibit the growth rate of tumours in a p53-independent manner.

Although ARF is not detectably expressed during much of mouse development, it regulates the regression of the hyaloid vascular system (HVS) of the developing eye¹⁴. These are the first findings to highlight a role for p19ARF outside the context of tumour suppression. Arf-null mice become blind soon after birth because of an abnormal accumulation of perivascular cells in the vitreous that prevent the involution of the HVS. This leads to the formation of a retrolental mass that ultimately

---

### Box 1 | The RB–E2F signalling pathway
Heterodimeric complexes formed between one of five E2F subunits and one of two DP subunits form complexes on E2F-responsive promoters that either repress or activate transcription. At the G1–S transition of the cell division cycle, the coordinated activation of E2F-responsive promoters establishes a programme of gene expression that is required for DNA replication. Retinoblastoma protein (RB) and two ‘RB-family’ proteins (p130 and p107) are principally responsible for negatively regulating the activities of the E2F-responsive genes during the G1 phase of the cell cycle, thereby preventing entry into S phase. In response to mitogenic stimulation, the phosphorylation of RB-family proteins by the cyclin D-dependent kinases, cyclin dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and CDK6, helps to cancel RB function. Conversely, the inhibition of CDK4 and CDK6 by stress-induced INK4 proteins maintains RB-family proteins in their growth-suppressive state. The negative effects of RB and INK4 proteins on the progression of the cell division cycle account for their activity as tumour suppressors. Conversely, the inappropriate upregulation of D-type cyclins and their associated CDKs provides an oncogenic stimulus. In its simplest terms, the ‘RB pathway’ can be visualized as shown below.


Mitogen stimulation
↓
INK4 proteins → Cyclin D-CDKs → RB-family proteins → E2Fs → S-phase entry


---

664 | SEPTEMBER 2006 | VOLUME 6  
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group  
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

Roles for p14<sup>ARF</sup> in triggering the growth arrest or apoptosis of p53-deficient human tumour cell lines in culture and in inhibiting their growth as xenografts in nude mice have also been described<sup>17–21</sup>. However, although primary mouse cells derived from p53-deficient or TKO mice arrest in G1 phase in response to ARF and then exit the division cycle, many p53-deficient human tumour cell lines arrest in S or G2 phase and then undergo apoptosis. The presence of additional mutations in cancer cells might account for the variability in their response to ARF overexpression.

In short, the purported p53-independent functions of ARF have remained difficult to unambiguously evaluate. At a biochemical level, such effects rely on the ability of ARF to functionally and physically interact with targets other than MDM2, and a surprising number of candidates have now been identified, primarily through co-precipitation with antibodies to ARF, tandem-affinity tagging and yeast two-hybrid interactive screens (TABLE 1). However, ARF is a peculiar protein from several points of view, and its biochemical and cell-biological analysis is fraught with technical difficulties that are not generally appreciated. Against this backdrop, and with measured skepticism, I will discuss the p53-independent, tumour-suppressor activities that are attributed to ARF with attention to some of the emerging themes.

### ARF: what kind of protein is this?

The hallmark of ARF proteins is that they are composed of more than 20% arginine residues, but contain little or no lysine. The arginine residues are widely spread throughout the entire molecule, and the protein segments encoded by exon 1β and exon 2 are equally basic in character (FIG. 1b). Therefore, either in a test tube or in a living cell, ARF alone is probably unstructured and needs to form complexes with other molecules, both to be folded and for its charge to be neutralized at physiological pH. Indeed, when shown the amino-acid sequence of mouse p19<sup>ARF</sup>, one of my colleagues, a structural biologist, instantly remarked “this isn’t a protein!” This precipitates the question of whether the RNA encoded by ARF exon 1β might convey the biological activity of the gene. However, the expression of a synthetic ARF exon 1β minigene that included several interspersed silent mutations induced p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest, so the protein seems to be responsible for ARF activity<sup>22</sup>. Other unusual features of the ARF protein are summarized in BOX 3.

With an isoelectric point greater than 12, it is not surprising that ARF binds promiscuously to other molecules. Antibody co-precipitation experiments or tandem-affinity tagging experiments used to identify protein–protein interactions in mammalian cells might therefore be inadequate to document *bona fide* physiological interactions of ARF with other proteins, and it is difficult to devise appropriate experimental controls that sidestep this problem. At the time of writing, ARF reportedly interacts with more than 25 proteins, at least some of which have been implicated in conveying p53-independent functions (TABLE 1). Of note, no concerted effort has yet been undertaken to determine whether ARF interacts with nucleic acids.

REVIEW S

(X-ray, UV, genotoxic drugs, hypoxia)

Oncogene activation  
(Such as MYC, E2F1, Ras, BCR–ABL)

ARF

MDM2

p53

Apoptosis

Target genes

Cell-cycle arrest

Figure 2 | The ARF–MDM2–p53 pathway: the generally accepted paradigm.  
Sustained and increased signalling thresholds induced by mutated or overexpressed oncogenes activate the ARF promoter. Once expressed, the ARF protein interferes with the activity of MDM2, leading to p53 stabilization and the triggering of a complex p53-dependent transcriptional programme mediated by hundreds of target genes. MDM2 is not only a negative regulator of p53-dependent transcription and turnover, but is also a canonical p53-activated gene that has a key role in negative-feedback regulation of the p53 response. The activation of p53 classically occurs in response to many other cellular stresses that produce DNA damage. Interestingly, oncogene-induced stress can also activate protective DNA damage responses early in precancerous lesions ${ }^{81,82}$. Depending on the nature of the inducing signal, these DNA-damage responses activate the kinase mutated in the ataxia telangiectasia syndrome (ATM) and/or the ATM and RAD3-related kinase (ATR). These kinases phosphorylate p53 directly and also indirectly through the agency of the CHK kinases. These phosphorylations have an important role in increasing the transcriptional activity of p53. Although ARF is not generally thought to be induced in response to DNA damage, its MDM2-inhibitory activity can still modify the DNA-damage-induced p53 response. Target genes induced by p53 can generate different biological outcomes depending on the tissue type and convergence of different activating signals. ARF induction primarily tends to trigger cell-cycle arrest, but oncogene-induced signals conveyed through collateral pathways (not shown) can shift the response from growth arrest to apoptosis.

and only few identified E3 ligases that include the nucleoporin RANBP2 and a family of PIAS proteins (protein inhibitors of activated STATs). The covalent addition of SUMO to proteins can generate diverse effects, including alterations in protein transport, interference with ubiquitylation and protein turnover, changes in DNA repair and sister chromatid cohesion, and alterations in gene expression (usually downregulation) ${ }^{28,29}$.

The functional significance of ARF-induced sumoylation is unknown. Observations that ARF-induced sumoylation of the Werner syndrome helicase (WRN) (TABLE 1) correlates with its redistribution from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm suggest a role for this process in altering protein topology ${ }^{25}$. However, like many sumoylated proteins in cells, only a small fraction of the targeted WRN protein is modified at any one time. Perhaps sumoylation only has a role at some stage during the trafficking process and this is followed by the removal of SUMO when proteins reach their destination ${ }^{25}$. How ARF proteins trigger sumoylation also remains unclear. ARF does not seem to inhibit the activity of SUMO proteases ${ }^{24}$. However, the ability of ARF to associate with UBC9 (REF. 26) indicates that it might facilitate the transfer of SUMO from the E2 complex to ARF-binding proteins. Whatever the mechanisms, observations that ARF proteins provoke post-translational protein modifications provide an additional layer of complexity that must be taken into account when considering the effect of ARF on proteins to which it might bind.

### ARF and nucleophosmin: two-way traffic

On induction, the ARF protein accumulates within the nucleolus, an intranuclear organelle primarily concerned with ribosome biosynthesis. Here, the ARF protein associates in high-molecular-mass complexes with nucleophosmin (NPM, also known as B23, numatrin or NO38) ${ }^{30-33}$, an abundant nucleolar phosphoprotein of 37 kDa, the overall level of expression of which correlates directly with the proliferative state of a cell (FIG. 3). NPM oligomerizes with itself and can bind to other proteins and to RNA ${ }^{34}$. Although most NPM resides within the nucleolus, the protein contains a nuclear export signal (NES) and shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm ${ }^{35}$. Its exact biochemical functions are not well understood, but NPM has been implicated in diverse, seemingly unrelated cellular processes, including ribosome

### Sumoylation

The small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is conjugated to target proteins in a manner analogous to ubiquitylation. The biological consequences of sumoylation are relatively poorly understood, although the process might regulate diverse cellular activities such as protein trafficking, chromatin remodelling and gene expression.

### Nucleolus

An intranuclear organelle that is the primary site of ribosomal DNA transcription, rRNA processing, ribosome assembly and transport.

### Box 2 | Genetic interactions between Arf, Mdm2 and Trp53 in mice

Mice that lack either Trp53 or Arf develop tumours spontaneously, although those that lack Trp53 succumb to cancer at an earlier age. This is probably explained by the fact that p53 is induced by many forms of cellular stress, including DNA damage and oncogene activation, whereas ARF is selectively triggered by the latter (FIG. 2). About 70% of the tumours that arise in Trp53-null mice are T-cell lymphomas, but Arf-null animals have a lower lymphoma incidence and instead tend to develop sarcomas and other cancers, which indicates that the increased latency in the Arf-null setting shifts the tumour spectrum. The inactivation of Mdm2 results in embryonic lethality, but animals that lack both Mdm2 and Trp53 survive, and these mice develop cancers with the same latency and tumour spectrum as those that lack Trp53 alone. This indicates that the essential function of MDM2 is mediated through p53, presumably by antagonizing its transcriptional activity and catalysing its ubiquitylation and degradation ${ }^{98,99}$. The deletion of Arf in Trp53 ${ }^{+/+}$ mice significantly shortens tumour latency and alleviates the selective pressure to inactivate the wild-type Trp53 allele ${ }^{100}$. Mice that completely lack Arf and Trp53 genes have a tumour incidence similar to those of Trp53-null mice, implying that, in this setting, tumour suppression by ARF is also entirely p53-dependent ${ }^{12,100}$.

Table 1 | ARF-interacting proteins

| Protein       | Function                                                                                   | Refs   |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|
| ANCO1         | Binds histone deacetylases and inhibits transcription by nuclear receptors                  | 106    |
| ARF-BP1       | HECT-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase                                                      | 67,107 |
| ATR and ATM   | Protein kinases that are activated by DNA damage                                          | 71,89–91 |
| BCL6          | Transcriptional repressor: an oncoprotein in B cells and an inhibitor of ARF-induced senescence | 75,108 |
| CARF          | A collaborator of ARF, no known biochemical function                                      | 109–111 |
| CTBP1         | C-terminal binding protein; an anti-apoptotic transcriptional co-repressor that is destabilized by p14<sup>ARF</sup> | 112    |
| Cyclin G1     | Canonical p53-induced gene product that recruits PP2A to dephosphorylate MDM2               | 113    |
| E2F1 and DP1  | Transcription factors that are required for DNA replication                               | 17,60–62 |
| FOXM1B        | Transcription factor from the forkhead box (Fox) family                                   | 73,74  |
| GSPT1         | GTP-binding protein that is required for G1–S transition                                  | 106    |
| HIF1α         | Transcription factor that is induced by hypoxia                                          | 114    |
| HPV16 E7      | Human papillomavirus oncoprotein that antagonizes retinoblastoma protein function          | 115    |
| LZAP          | Leucine zipper-containing ARF-binding protein that antagonizes the inhibition by ARF of MDM2 E3 ligase activity, but nonetheless helps to maintain p53 stability | 116    |
| MDM2          | An E3 ubiquitin ligase for p53                                                          | 5–8    |
| MYC           | Transcription factor capable of the transactivation and transrepression of many target genes | 63–65,70 |
| NIAM          | Nuclear interactor with ARF and MDM2                                                     | 106    |
| Nucleolin     | Nucleolar protein with a putative role in ribosome biogenesis                             | 31,106 |
| Nucleophosmin | Nucleolar phosphoprotein that is implicated in ribosome biogenesis, centrosome duplication and the DNA-damage response | 30–33,39,41, 103,104 |
| PARF          | A putative GTP-binding protein                                                           | 106    |
| p53           | Transcription factor that is activated by multiple stress signals, including DNA damage, hypoxia and oncogene activation | 6,7, 24,79,117 |
| p63           | Member of the p53-family of transcription factors                                         | 118    |
| p120E4F       | Cellular transcriptional repressor of the adenovirus E4 gene that is antagonized by adenovirus E1A oncoprotein and increases ARF-induced arrest | 119    |
| PXF           | Cytoplasmic peroxisomal protein                                                          | 106,120 |
| Spinophilin   | Type-1 phosphatase binding protein                                                       | 106,121 |
| TBP1          | HIV Tat-binding protein                                                                  | 122    |
| TIP60         | A histone acetyltransferase that has a role in gene activation                            | 71,72  |
| Topoisomerase I | Relaxes DNA supercoils                                                                 | 43,123 |
| UBC9          | An E2 ligase required for sumoylation                                                    | 26     |
| WRN           | Werner helicase mutated in premature-ageing syndrome                                     | 25     |
| YY1           | Transcription factor; a co-factor of MDM2 and negative regulator of p53                   | 124    |

biogenesis, centrosome duplication, spindle-pole assembly, DNA-damage responses, transcription and nucleosome remodelling<sup>36</sup>. Its homology to nuclear chaperons of the nucleoplasm family indicates that NPM might have an analogous function, possibly in preventing protein aggregation<sup>37</sup>. *Npm1* is an essential gene: its inactivation in the mouse germ line leads to many developmental defects that cause embryonic lethality at mid-gestation<sup>38,39</sup>.

The complexes that form between ARF and NPM are much more abundant than ARF–MDM2 complexes, which are of lower molecular mass and do not contain NPM<sup>31,32</sup>. ARF is stable when expressed within the nucleolus, but turns over more rapidly in the nucleoplasm<sup>40</sup>.

Metabolic labelling using \[^{3}H\]-leucine (obligatorily in lieu of \[^{35}S\]-methionine — see BOX 3) showed that both mouse p19<sup>ARF</sup> and human p14<sup>ARF</sup> turn over with half-lives (*t*<sub>1/2</sub>) of 6–8 hours; although they lack lysine, ARF proteins are polyubiquitylated at their free (non-acetylated) N termini and are degraded by the proteasome<sup>41</sup>. In response to increased levels of NPM, the turnover of p19<sup>ARF</sup> is retarded, whereas lowering the levels of NPM by the use of short hairpin RNAs accelerates p19<sup>ARF</sup> degradation<sup>41</sup>. In agreement, when *Npm1* is inactivated, p19<sup>ARF</sup> is excluded from nucleoli and destabilized<sup>39</sup>. Mutants of ARF that fail to associate with NPM are much more rapidly degraded by the proteasome (*t*<sub>1/2</sub> ~90 min),

Proteasome  
A macromolecular ‘machine’ that hydrolyses proteins into their constituent amino acids.

REVIEWS

Box 3 | The unusual primary structure of ARF

There are no recognizable structural motifs in ARF proteins of mammals and chickens, and neither NMR nor crystal structures have been determined despite the small size of ARF. The protein is highly insoluble and mistranslated in bacteria²². Human p14<sup>ARF</sup> can form stable homo-oligomers in the presence of oxidizing agents even when electrophoretically separated on denaturing polyacrylamide gels¹⁰¹. Structure modelling algorithms based on primary amino-acid sequences predict that exon-1β- and exon-2-encoded sequences fold into distinct domains that are separated by a linker peptide. Immunization with conjugated synthetic peptides from the predicted linker segment (residues 54–75) have generated the most avid polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies now available, implying that this region is not buried within the structure. An inspection of amino acids specified by ARF exon 1β, the only region retained in chicken p7<sup>ARF</sup> (REF. 9), shows that only 6 of ~60 residues are invariant, 3 of which are arginines (FIG. 1c). Mouse p19<sup>ARF</sup> and human p14<sup>ARF</sup> contain only single internal methionine residues (Met45 and Met48, respectively), whereas ARF proteins of several other species (rat, opossum, pig and chicken) entirely lack internal methionines. Given that N-terminal methionine is cleaved from penultimate residues that have a radius of gyration of 1.29Å or less (glycine, alanine, serine, cysteine, threonine, proline and valine), ARF proteins cannot be metabolically labelled using conventional protocols that use [³⁵S]-methionine. Mouse p19<sup>ARF</sup> contains only one lysine (Lys26) and human p14<sup>ARF</sup> has none. These considerations have proven to be particularly important in studies of ARF stability and turnover.

A different view is that ARF is stored in an inactive state within the nucleolus in complexes with NPM, but can be displaced to the nucleoplasm where it can enter into more dynamic complexes with MDM2 or other targets³³,⁴⁰,⁵⁰,⁵¹. Although ARF can import MDM2 into nucleoli and shelter it from nucleoplasmic p53 (REFS 52–54), this might not be required for its p53-dependent functions⁵⁰. Several groups have raised the possibility that NPM and MDM2 compete for ARF binding³²,³³,⁵¹. Again, this is difficult to envision, because even under experimental conditions of maximal vector-enforced ARF expression, most cellular NPM remains in vast excess and unassociated with ARF³¹. However, although the overexpression of NPM stabilizes ARF it can antagonize p53 induction; conversely, the knock-down of NPM, although accelerating ARF turnover⁴¹, seems to increase the association of ARF with MDM2 (REF. 33). Therefore, there is now persuasive evidence, including results from *Npm1* knockout mice and from NPM mutations in human cancer, that the stability and subcellular localization of ARF are dictated by NPM, and that these properties do not require p53.

and these have reduced or negligible anti-proliferative activity⁴¹. It should be noted that the failure of many such mutants to associate with many ARF-interacting proteins (TABLE 1) has been unwittingly taken, by my own group and others, as evidence of the functional specificity of these binding reactions. Therefore, the ARF protein assumes a stable structure when bound to NPM, whereas unbound mutant forms remain unstructured and, like many misfolded proteins⁴², are rapidly destroyed by the proteasome. Together, these observations indicate that NPM is responsible not only for protecting ARF from degradation, but also for its nuclear compartmentalization, a finding that is underscored by the recent identification of leukaemia-associated cytoplasmic NPM mutants that relocalize ARF from the nucleolus (BOX 4).

The biological consequences of the ARF–NPM interaction are subject to considerable debate. At issue is whether ARF functions within the nucleolus, where much of it normally resides or, instead, exerts its tumour-suppressor effects in the nucleoplasm. The ability of NPM to shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, its association with maturing pre-ribosomal particles and its effects in promoting the processing of ribosomal RNA precursors implicate NPM in ribosome biogenesis³⁶ (FIG. 3). Downregulation of *NPM1* mRNA inhibits rRNA processing³⁰, and disabling *Npm1* in mouse cells decreases their ribosome content³⁸. Similarly, ARF retards rRNA transcription⁴³ and processing³⁰,⁴⁴, interferes with NPM nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and impedes ribosome export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm³²,⁴⁵. However, these effects of ARF have required its enforced overexpression and are difficult to reconcile with the relative stoichiometry of ARF and NPM. Observations that the inactivation of NPM³⁸,³⁹, disruption of nucleolar integrity⁴⁶ or inhibition of ribosomal RNA processing⁴⁷ trigger a p53 response that in turn downregulates transcription by RNA polymerase I (REFS 48, 49) further confound the issue of whether ARF also retards ribosomal biogenesis in a p53-independent manner (FIG. 3).

MYC

MYC is a transcription factor that, following heterodimerization with its partner MAX, can bind directly to canonical hexameric DNA sequences found in the promoters of many genes. Depending on other proteins recruited to promoters, the MYC–MAX complex can either transactivate or repress gene expression.

Radius of gyration

A parameter characterizing the size of a particle of any shape, used in this context to refer to different penultimate amino acids at the N terminus of a polypeptide chain.

Does ARF directly regulate gene expression?

In order to induce cell-cycle arrest ARF must functionally antagonize gene expression governed by transcription factors such as E2F and MYC, the activities of which are required for cell-cycle progression. Members of the E2F family are best known for their role in driving the G1–S transition and DNA replication (BOX 1), but they also govern the expression of many other target genes, ARF among them, that are not periodically expressed during the cell cycle⁵⁵,⁵⁶. Certain E2F isoforms assemble into complexes that repress ARF transcription, a process that is relieved by RB inactivation or E2F overexpression, both of which occur in many cancer cells⁵⁷⁻⁵⁹. Therefore, ARF is positively and negatively regulated by different E2F complexes⁵⁸,⁵⁹. An abnormal surfeit of MYC activity can also induce ARF, but the mechanism is likely to be indirect. By inducing p53, ARF blocks the growth-promoting activities of both MYC and the E2Fs, whereas their oncogenic potential is unleashed by the disruption of the ARF–MDM2–p53 pathway¹. However, several groups of investigators have argued that ARF functions independently of p53 in physically binding to E2F1 and MYC and attenuating their transcriptional activity¹⁷,⁶⁰⁻⁶⁴.

One series of reports showed that ARF can bind to E2F1 (REFS 17, 60) and to its dimerization partner DP1, but not to assembled E2F1–DP1 complexes⁶¹,⁶². Because ARF binding requires the DP1 segment required for E2F heterodimerization, ARF inhibits the formation of the active transcriptional complex. Although the unassembled E2F1 and DP1 subunits could be imported together with ARF into the nucleolus⁶⁰,⁶¹, their relocalization might not be necessary for the interference of E2F-mediated transcription¹⁷. When ARF and DP1 were co-transfected into cultured human osteosarcoma cells (U2OS), ARF mutants that were previously found to be defective in inducing proliferative arrest in wild-type MEFs and in TKO MEFs that lacked *Arf*, *Mdm2* and *Trp53* (REF. 33) did not bind to DP1 or relocalize it to nucleoli⁶².

a Proliferating
b Quiescent
c Oncogenic stress

Figure 3 | ARF–NPM interactions and ribosomal biogenesis. Mammalian cells (cytoplasm in yellow, nucleus in grey) quickly adjust the rate of ribosome synthesis based on the availability of extracellular nutrients and growth-promoting mitogens.  
a | High levels of nucleophosmin (NPM) (pink) are expressed in rapidly proliferating cells. Although most NPM is compartmentalized within the nucleolus, NPM dynamically shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm. NPM is assumed to have a key role in ribosomal biogenesis, possibly by preventing protein aggregation within the nucleolus and by facilitating the transport of large (60S) and small (40S) ribosomal subunits (green circles) into the cytoplasm, where, together with mRNAs, they form polyribosomes required for protein synthesis. Structural ribosomal core RNAs (rRNA) are transcribed from rDNA genes located within regions of chromatin that are sequestered within the nucleolus (not shown). In mammalian cells, a 47S rRNA precursor transcribed by polymerase I undergoes sequential nucleolytic processing to yield the 28S and 5.8S rRNAs of the 60S subunit and the 18S rRNA of the 40S subunit. Newly synthesized ribosomal proteins (green squiggly lines) synthesized in the cytoplasm are imported into the nucleolus where they associate with precursor rRNA intermediates and many other accessory proteins including NPM and small nucleolar (sno) RNAs to form the maturing ribonucleoprotein particles.  
b | In cells made quiescent by mitogen deprivation, ribosome biogenesis is attenuated and the level of NPM falls.  
c | In response to oncogenic stress, induced ARF protein (blue) binds to MDM2 (yellow), which leads to p53 activation and cell-cycle arrest. ARF also enters the nucleolus to form distinct, stable complexes with NPM. One effect of p53 is to inhibit the transcription of RNA polymerase I, thereby dampening rRNA transcription and slowing ribosome biogenesis. The ARF protein has been proposed to function independently of p53 to antagonize the shuttling of NPM and attenuate ribosome trafficking to the cytoplasm (indicated by the question mark). Similar to proliferative arrest triggered by mitogen depletion (quiescence), ARF-induced arrest also results in reduced NPM synthesis.

results<sup>62</sup> are also at odds with an earlier report <sup>17</sup>, which concluded that the absence of MDM2 negated the effects of ARF on E2F1.

As for E2F1, the interactions between ARF and MYC highlight a p53-independent negative feedback mechanism (FIG. 4a). In some cell lines in which MYC expression was enforced, MYC binding relocalized ARF from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm, whereas in other cell types ARF was found to import MYC into nucleoli<sup>63,64</sup>. These differences might depend on the relative levels of expression of the two proteins. However, more striking were observations that p19<sup>ARF</sup> could associate with MYC on chromatin, antagonizing the transactivation of selected MYC target genes without impairing its trans-repression of others<sup>63,65</sup> (FIG. 4b). The dampening effects of ARF on MYC-regulated transcription did not result from interference with MYC binding to its heterodimerization partner MAX, did not depend on MDM2 and p53 and, in Trp53-null cells, preceded the inhibition of S-phase progression.

There are several ways that ARF binding to MYC might inhibit its transactivating functions. One mechanism might involve ARF-induced sumoylation of MYC-containing complexes or of neighbouring histones<sup>66</sup>. Another potential mode of regulation might be mediated by ARF-BP1 (also known as HECTH9), a HECT-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase with which ARF directly interacts<sup>67</sup>. ARF-BP1 catalyses the lysine-63-linked polyubiquitylation of MYC, a process that facilitates the recruitment of co-activators and the upregulation of MYC target genes<sup>68</sup>. By contrast, the MYC transrepressing cofactor MIZ1 antagonizes this modification. ARF strongly inhibits the ubiquitin ligase activity of ARF-BP1 (REF. 67), which might contribute to the selective dampening of MYC transactivating activity by ARF (FIG. 4b). Intriguingly, increased expression of ARF-BP1 has been detected in many advanced human cancers, and its siRNA-mediated inactivation can slow the growth of cancer cell lines<sup>68</sup>. As most such tumours sustain genetic lesions that inactivate TP53 or ARF, the oncogenic activity of ARF-BP1 is likely to be p53-independent. Another regulator of MYC is the histone acetyl transferase TIP60, which is recruited to the MYC BOX II domain as part of the transformation/transcription domain associated protein (TRRAP) co-activating complex<sup>69</sup>. ARF directly interacts with MYC through this same domain<sup>70</sup>, and also binds to the histone acetyl transferase TIP60 (REF. 71), inhibiting its acetylation of certain target proteins<sup>72</sup>. Similar mechanisms might underlie the ability of ARF to antagonize the activities of other transcription factors, including the forkhead box (Fox) family member FOXM1B (REFS 73,74) and B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) (REF. 75).

The co-transfection of ARF and E2F1 into TP53-null human cells inhibited E2F1 transactivating activity, and ARF sequences encoded by exon 1β were necessary and sufficient for this effect<sup>17</sup>.

In an ARF-inducible U20S cell line engineered to co-express a dominant-negative, interfering form of p53, ARF activation reduced the expression of cyclin A, an E2F-responsive gene, before any inhibition of S-phase progression; conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Arf in MEFs that lacked both Trp53 and Mdm2 led to increased cyclin A transcription<sup>62</sup>. When ARF levels were reduced, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed increased binding of DP1 to the DHFR promoter (another E2F-responsive gene). Although the ChIP findings show that ARF can attenuate the E2F transcriptional programme in a p53-independent manner, the mechanism need not be direct. For example, cells that lack both Arf and Trp53 can proliferate at a faster rate than those that lack either gene alone, so the observed increase in the transcription of E2F target genes when ARF is disabled might also be an indirect consequence of accelerated cell-cycle progression. These

How does ARF affect the DNA damage response? Understanding the inter-relations between ARF and DNA-damage signalling pathways is important, as both are central to tumour suppression. A broadly held view is that ARF is not directly induced by acute DNA damage caused by radiation, hypoxia or genotoxic drugs. Still, ARF loss can attenuate the DNA-damage response

REVIEW S

Box 4 | Cytoplasmic NPM mutants in acute myeloid leukaemia
---

Remarkably, mutations that affect the C terminus of nucleophosmin (NPM) were recently detected in more than one third of adult cases of adult acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), and are now recognized to represent the single most common genetic alteration in this disease<sup>102</sup>. These mutations occur in leukaemic cells with an otherwise normal karyotype, and represent a new class of AML-initiating lesions. All such mutations shift the NPM mRNA reading frame to generate an additional nuclear export signal at the protein C terminus, which has the effect of relocalizing the bulk of the mutant protein from the nucleolus to the cytoplasm. The variant NPMc+ proteins (NPM cytoplasmic-positive) form higher order complexes, both with the wild-type NPM protein and with ARF, causing their delocalization to the cytoplasm and attenuating the ability of ARF to stabilize p53 and to sumoylate both NPM and MDM2 (REFS 103,104). Although the basis of their oncogenicity remains unclear, these NPMc+ variants highlight the role of NPM in determining the subcellular localization of ARF.

ARF-inducible H358 human lung carcinoma cells lacking functional p53, a system in which the G1 checkpoint is defective and where the expression of p14<sup>ARF</sup> arrests the cells only in G2 phase<sup>21</sup>. A central claim was that the activation of the ATR and/or ATM signalling cascade was triggered by ARF binding to and stabilizing TIP60 (REF. 71), which is presumed to acetylate and activate ATM<sup>92</sup> (but, as discussed above, was also implicated in the negative regulation of MYC by ARF). siRNAs directed to TIP60, ATM and/or ATR and CHK kinases all abrogated p14<sup>ARF</sup>-induced G2 arrest in these cells and triggered apoptosis. However, unlike the results obtained with p14<sup>ARF</sup>-inducible TP53<sup>+/+</sup> U20S cells<sup>90</sup>, the induction of *ARF* in p53-deficient H358 lung carcinoma cells was accompanied by the formation of γ-H2AX-positive foci, raising the possibility that p14<sup>ARF</sup> could trigger DNA damage<sup>71</sup>. Turning things around completely, there are other claims that UV and cytotoxic drugs can acutely and directly induce *ARF* expression in cultured cells<sup>18,71,93,94</sup>.

Collectively, these findings remain inconsistent and confusing. On the one hand, there is good evidence that the ARF–MDM2–p53 pathway and the ATM or ATR-triggered DNA-damage signalling pathways can each be activated by oncogenes and that each have a role in modulating p53 activity (FIG. 2). What remains unclear is whether ARF impinges on ATM and/or ATR signalling through some direct interaction with these kinases or through the agency of other regulatory enzymes, such as TIP60, that might modify them. The issues of whether the transcription of *ARF* either triggers DNA damage or, conversely, responds directly to DNA-damage signals also remain controversial.

### smARF and autophagy

Translational initiation from the internal methionine residues of human (Met48) and mouse (Met45) *ARF* mRNAs produces a short form of the protein that, when overexpressed, localizes to mitochondria (smARF)<sup>95</sup>. This N-terminally truncated protein lacks all of the p19<sup>ARF</sup> amino-acid residues that direct nucleolar localization, stable binding to MDM2 and NPM, and that are necessary and sufficient for triggering a p53 response (FIG. 1). The co-translation of full-length and shortened forms of ARF cannot be a ubiquitously used mechanism, as several other mammalian ARF proteins lack internal methionine residues (BOX 3). Moreover, smARF contains no lysine, but it is rapidly degraded by the proteasome (*t*<sub>1/2</sub> <1 hour). Unlike the full-length version of the protein, sequence considerations predict that the initiating methionine residue of human or mouse smARF should not be cleaved by methionine aminopeptidase and would probably undergo acetylation (BOX 2). The complete absence of free amino groups therefore implies that smARF is efficiently targeted to proteasomes without being polyubiquitylated, a process that normally eliminates mistranslated and/or misfolded polypeptides<sup>42</sup>.

Surprisingly, its overexpression enabled smARF to be imported into mitochondria<sup>95</sup>. Under these conditions, smARF altered the mitochondrial membrane potential and triggered autophagy, a process usually initiated in response to nutrient starvation in which cells digest

ATR and ATM
---

ATM, the gene mutated in the ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome, encodes a protein kinase whose activity is triggered by DNA double-strand breaks. The ATM and RAD3-related kinase, ATR, has a similar role but is primarily activated by stalled replication forks.

Nuclear factor κB
---

A family of transcription factors that regulate the inflammatory response. Some NFκB family members interfere with apoptosis.

γ-H2AX
---

A modified histone H2 variant, the phosphorylation of which occurs at chromosomal sites of DNA damage.

problem, as in vivo approaches are necessarily limited. Indeed, the conclusion that ARF is a tumour suppressor would not have readily arisen from studies in humans because ARF is not inactivated by single point mutations and, in many human cancers, tends to be deleted together with the flanking INK4 genes at the locus. Relevant findings with cell-culture systems need be viewed with caution. Most mechanistic data from investigations of human p14ARF have relied on the use of established cell lines, almost all of which were derived from tumours and have acquired additional mutations. Not surprisingly, the enforced expression of p14ARF or its elimination using shRNA in different TP53-negative human cell lines have rendered conflicting results and differ, at least in part, with findings made with primary cells. But, in primary cells ARF is induced by the non-physiological conditions of tissue culture, and is further upregulated by the ablation of p53. So, the factors that govern ARF expression and the effects of the protein in cultured cells probably differ from its behaviour in vivo. The obvious strength of mouse models is the ability to genetically engineer different strains and to study the effects of programmed mutations in living mammals. However, the possibility that ARF activities in humans and mice differ in some fundamental ways cannot be precluded.

Even with these difficulties there has been progress. One significant step forward is the recognition that NPM stabilizes ARF and determines its subcellular localization. The earlier biochemical experiments have been reinforced through genetic analyses in mice and, fortuitously, by the recent recognition of mutations that affect NPM function in human cancers, which have provided further genetic purchase. We are yet to fully appreciate the consequences of the NPM–ARF interaction, but the coalescence of data from different studies strongly suggests that this particular association is meaningful.

Another surprise has come from observations that ARF has a key role in regulating vascular development in the mouse eye. Although formal proof that this process is p53-independent is lacking, this is so far the only demonstration that ARF is involved in something other than tumour suppression. Intriguingly, this anti-proliferative function of ARF is required for vascular involution at a precise site and narrow time window during normal tissue development. If Arf-null mice were not blind, this could easily have been missed. Are there other circumstances in which ARF controls vasculogenesis? Might ARF inhibit angiogenesis in tumour cells?

The idea that ARF regulates gene expression or the DNA-damage response is also attractive and warrants further investigation. Similarly, the finding that ARF triggers sumoylation is potentially exciting. These are interesting threads, but tying them together is the key. We need to consider carefully the kinds of experimental controls that would convince us that a physical interaction between ARF and a target protein is biologically relevant. Putting biochemistry and genetics together will be necessary if we hope to make more complete sense of ARF.

1. Lowe, S. W. & Sherr, C. J. Tumor suppression by Ink4a-Arf: progress and puzzles. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **13**, 77–83 (2003).
2. Serrano, M., Hannon, G. J. & Beach, D. A new regulatory motif in cell cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. *Nature* **366**, 704–707 (1993).
3. Quelle, D. E., Zindy, F., Ashmun, R. A. & Sherr, C. J. Alternative reading frames of the INK4a tumor suppressor gene encode two unrelated proteins capable of inducing cell cycle arrest. *Cell* **83**, 993–1000 (1995).
4. Kamijo, T. *et al.* Tumor suppression at the mouse *INK4a* locus mediated by the alternative reading frame product p19<sup>ARF</sup>. *Cell* **91**, 649–659 (1997).
5. Pomerantz, J. *et al.* The *Ink4a* tumor suppressor gene product, p19<sup>Arf</sup> interacts with MDM2 and neutralizes MDM2's inhibition of p53. *Cell* **92**, 713–723 (1998).
6. Zhang, Y., Xiong, Y. & Yarbrough, W. G. ARF promotes MDM2 degradation and stabilizes p53: *ARF-INK4a* locus deletion impairs both the Rb and p53 tumor suppressor pathways. *Cell* **92**, 725–734 (1998).
7. Kamijo, T. *et al.* Functional and physical interactions of the ARF tumor suppressor with p53 and Mdm2. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 8292–8297 (1998).
8. Stott, F. J. *et al.* The alternative product from the human *CDKN2A* locus, p14<sup>ARF</sup>, participates in a regulatory feedback loop with p53 and MDM2. *EMBO J.* **17**, 5001–5014 (1998).
9. Kim, S. H., Mitchell, M., Fujii, H., Llanos, S. & Peters, G. Absence of p16INK4a and truncation of ARF tumor suppressors in chickens. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 211–216 (2003).
10. Quelle, D. E., Cheng, M., Ashmun, R. A. & Sherr, C. J. Cancer-associated mutations at the *INK4a* locus cancel cell cycle arrest by p16INK4a but not by the alternative reading frame protein p19ARF. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 669–673 (1997).
11. Gil, J. & Peters, G. Regulation of the *INK4b-ARF-INK4a* tumour suppressor locus: All for one or one for all. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.* **7**, 667–677 (2006). This recent review summarizes how the genes at the *INK4b-ARF-INK4a* locus are regulated both positively and negatively in response to different physiological states.
12. Weber, J. D. *et al.* p53-independent functions of the p19<sup>ARF</sup> tumor suppressor. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 2358–2365 (2000). This description of the greatly increased tumour spectrum observed in TKO mice that lack *Arf*, *Mdm2* and *Trp53* provided the first evidence that p19<sup>ARF</sup> might exert tumour-suppressor functions independently of the MDM2-p53 axis.
13. Kelly-Spratt, K. S., Gurley, K. E., Yasui, Y. & Kemp, C. J. p19<sup>Arf</sup> suppresses growth, progression, and metastasis of H-ras-driven carcinomas through p53-dependent and -independent pathways. *PLoS Biology* **2**, 1138–1149 (2004). This paper documents the different tumour-suppressor activities of p53 and p19<sup>ARF</sup> in a mouse model of carcinogen-induced skin cancer.
14. McKeller, R. N. *et al.* The Arf tumor suppressor gene promotes hyaloid vascular regression during mouse eye development. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 3848–3853 (2002).
15. Silva, R. L. *et al.* Arf-dependent regulation of Pdgf signaling in perivascular cells in the developing eye. *EMBO J.* **24**, 2803–2814 (2005). The authors argue that ARF regulates PDGF receptor expression and perivascular cell proliferation in the vitreous of the mouse eye in a manner that seems to be independent of p53. This is the first and only clear description of a functional role for ARF in normal development outside the context of tumour suppression.
16. Carnero, A., Hudson, J. D., Price, C. M. & Beach, D. H. p16<sup>INK4a</sup> and p19<sup>ARF</sup> act in overlapping pathways in cellular immortalization. *Nature Cell Biol.* **2**, 148–155 (2000).
17. Eymin, B. *et al.* Human ARF binds E2F1 and inhibits its transcriptional activity. *Oncogene* **20**, 1033–1041 (2001).
18. Yarbrough, W. G., Bessho, M., Zanation, A., Bisi, J. E. & Xiong, Y. Human tumor suppressor ARF impedes S-phase progression independent of p53. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 1171–1177 (2002).
19. Tsuji, K. *et al.* p53-independent apoptosis is induced by the p19ARF tumor suppressor. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* **295**, 621–629 (2002).
20. Hemmati, P. G. *et al.* Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of p14(ARF) induces p53 and Bax-independent apoptosis. *Oncogene* **21**, 3149–3161 (2002).
21. Eymin, B., Leduc, C., Coll, J. L., Brambilla, E. & Gazzeri, S. p14ARF induces G2 arrest and apoptosis independently of p53 leading to regression of tumours established in nude mice. *Oncogene* **22**, 1822–1835 (2003).
22. Weber, J. D. *et al.* Cooperative signals governing ARF-Mdm2 interaction and nuclear localization of the complex. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 2517–2528 (2000).
23. Xirodimas, D. P., Chisholm, J., Desterro, J. M. S., Lane, D. P. & Hay, R. T. p14ARF promotes accumulation of SUMO-1 conjugated (H)Mdm2. *FEBS Lett.* **528**, 207–211 (2002). This is the first of several papers (references 23–27) showing that ARF overexpression can trigger protein sumoylation. The underlying mechanism and functional significance of these findings remain unclear.
24. Chen, L. & Chen, J. MDM2-ARF complex regulates p53 sumoylation. *Oncogene* **22**, 5348–5357 (2003).
25. Woods, Y. L. *et al.* p14ARF promotes small ubiquitin-like modifier conjugation of Werner helicase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 50157–50166 (2004). This study suggests that ARF-induced sumoylation of the WRN helicase might have a role in relocalizing the protein from the nucleolus into the nucleoplasm. It is the only investigation to date that implicates ARF-induced sumoylation in a defined biological process.
26. Rizos, H., Woodruff, S. & Kefford, R. F. p14ARF interacts with the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and promotes the sumoylation of its binding partners. *Cell Cycle* **4**, 597–603 (2005).
27. Tago, K., Chiocca, S. & Sherr, C. J. Sumoylation induced by the Arf tumor suppressor: a p53-independent function. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 7689–7694 (2005).
28. Johnson, E. S. Protein modification by SUMO. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **73**, 355–382 (2004).
29. Melchior, F. SUMO- nonclassical ubiquitin. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **16**, 591–626 (2000).
30. Itahana, K. *et al.* Tumor suppressor ARF degrades B23, a nucleolar protein involved in ribosomal biogenesis and cell proliferation. *Mol. Cell.* **12**, 1151–1164 (2003).
31. Bertwistle, D., Sugimoto, M. & Sherr, C. J. Physical and functional interactions of the Arf tumor suppressor protein with nucleophosmin/B23. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 985–996 (2004).
32. Brady, S. N., Yu, Y., Maggi, L. B. Jr. & Weber, J. D. ARF impedes NPM/B23 shuttling in an Mdm2-sensitive tumor suppressor pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 9327–9338 (2004). Whereas references 30, 31, and 33 also document interactions between ARF and NPM, this paper argues that ARF has a nucleolar function, affecting NPM activity by impeding its shuttling from the nucleolus to the cytoplasm.
33. Korgaonkar, C. *et al.* Nucleophosmin (B23) targets ARF to nucleoli and inhibits its function. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 1258–1271 (2005). In contrast to reference 32, the authors suggest that NPM retains ARF in nucleoli, restricting its potential for interacting with nucleoplasmic MDM2.
34. Hingorani, K., Szebeni, A. & Olson, M. O. Mapping the functional domains of nucleolar protein B23. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 24451–24457 (2000).
35. Borer, R. A., Lehner, C. F., Epplenberger, H. M. & Nigg, E. A. Major nucleolar proteins shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm. *Cell* **103**, 379–390 (1989).
36. Grisendi, S., Mecucci, C., Falini, B. & Pandolfi, P. P. Nucleophosmin and cancer. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **6**, 493–505 (2006). This encyclopaedic and usefully referenced review discusses the many activities attributed to NPM and their potential contributions to cancer.
37. Szebeni, A. & Olson, M. O. Nucleolar protein B23 has molecular chaperone activities. *Protein Sci.* **8**, 905–912 (1999).
38. Grisendi, S. *et al.* Role of nucleophosmin in embryonic development and tumorigenesis. *Nature* **437**, 147–153 (2005).
39. Columbo, E. *et al.* Nucleophosmin is required for DNA integrity and p19<sup>Arf</sup> protein stability. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 8874–8886 (2005). References 38 and 39 document the pleiotropic effects of disabling the *Npm1* gene in the mouse. Given the many different functions ascribed to NPM, it might not be surprising that it is essential for mouse development.
40. Rodway, H., Llanos, S., Rowe, J. & Peters, G. Stability of nucleolar versus non-nucleolar forms of human p14(ARF). *Oncogene* **23**, 6186–6192 (2004).
41. Kuo, M.-L., den Besten, W., Bertwistle, D., Roussel, M. F. & Sherr, C. J. N-terminal polyubiquitination and degradation of the Arf tumor suppressor. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 1862–1874 (2004). Metabolic labelling with \[^{3}\]leucine was used to determine the half-life of human and mouse ARF proteins. This study shows the effects of NPM on ARF stabilization, and demonstrates that ARF proteins are polyubiquitylated at their N termini.
42. Goldberg, A. L. Protein degradation and protection against misfolded or damaged proteins. *Nature* **426**, 895–899 (2003). The author argues that the mistranslation of proteins is frequent, and that mechanisms are in place that recognize improperly folded polypeptides and degrade them, even in the absence of their ubiquitylation.
43. Ayrault, O., Andrique, L., Larsen, C. J. & Seite, P. Human Arf tumor suppressor specifically interacts with chromatin containing the promoter of rRNA genes. *Oncogene* **23**, 8097–8104 (2004).
44. Sugimoto, M., Kuo, M. L., Roussel, M. F. & Sherr, C. J. Nucleolar Arf tumor suppressor inhibits ribosomal RNA processing. *Mol. Cell.* **11**, 415–424 (2003).
45. Yu, Y. *et al.* Nucleophosmin is essential for ribosomal protein L5 nuclear export. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 3798–3809 (2006).
46. Rubbi, C. P. & Milner, J. Disruption of the nucleolus mediates stabilization of p53 in response to DNA damage and other stresses. *EMBO J.* **22**, 6068–6077 (2003). Disrupting nucleolar integrity is sufficient to induce p53 (see also reference 47).
47. Pestov, D. G., Strezoska, Z. & Lau, L. F. Evidence of p53-dependent cross-talk between ribosome biogenesis and the cell cycle: effects of nuclear protein Bop1 on G1/S transition. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 4246–4255 (2001). Similar to the conclusions of reference 46, a mutant protein that interferes with rRNA processing triggers a p53 response.
48. Budde, A. & Grummt, I. p53 represses ribosomal gene transcription. *Oncogene* **28**, 1119–1124 (1999).
49. Zhai, W. & Comai, L. Repression of RNA polymerase I transcription by the tumor suppressor p53. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 5930–5938 (2000).
50. Llanos, S., Clark, P. A., Rowe, J. & Peters, G. Stabilization of p53 by p14ARF without relocation of MDM2 to the nucleolus. *Nature Cell. Biol.* **3**, 445–452 (2001).
51. Gjerstad, R. A. & Bandyopadhyay, K. Regulation of p14ARF through subnuclear compartmentalization. *Cell Cycle* **5**, 686–690 (2006).
52. Weber, J. D., Taylor, L. J., Roussel, M. F., Sherr, C. J. & Bar-Sagi, D. Nucleolar Arf sequesters Mdm2 and activates p53. *Nature Cell Biol.* **1**, 20–26 (1999).
53. Tao, W. & Levine, A. J. P19<sup>ARF</sup> stabilizes p53 by blocking nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of Mdm2. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 6937–6941 (1999).
54. Lohrum, M. A. E., Ashcroft, M., Kubbatat, M. H. G. & Vousden, K. H. Identification of a cryptic nucleolar-localization signal in MDM2. *Nature Cell Biol.* **2**, 179–181 (2000).
55. Bracken, A. P., Ciro, M., Cocito, A. & Helin, K. E2F target genes: unraveling the biology. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **29**, 409–417 (2004).
56. Blais, A. & Dynlacht, B. D. Hitting their targets: an emerging picture of E2F and cell cycle control. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **14**, 527–532 (2004). These two reviews point to an extensive network of genes governed by E2F transcription factors, many of which are implicated in regulating activities other than the G1–S transition. Both papers highlight the power of ‘ChIP on chip’ technologies in studying promoter occupancy.
57. Rowland, B. D. *et al.* E2F transcriptional repressor complexes are critical downstream targets of p19<sup>ARF</sup>/p53-induced proliferative arrest. *Cancer Cell* **2**, 55–65 (2002).
58. Aslanian, A., Iaquinta, P. J., Verona, R. & Lees, J. A. Repression of the Arf tumor suppressor by E2F3 is required for normal cell cycle kinetics. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 1413–1422 (2004).
59. Komori, H., Enomoto, M., Nakamura, M., Iwanaga, R. & Ohtani, K. Distinct E2F-mediated transcriptional program regulates p14ARF gene expression. *EMBO J.* **24**, 3724–3736 (2005).
60. Martelli, F. *et al.* p19ARF targets certain E2F species for degradation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.* **98**, 4455–4460 (2001).
61. Datta, A., Nag, A. & Raychaudhuri, P. Differential regulation of E2F1, DP1, and the E2F1/DP1 complex by ARF. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 8398–8408 (2002).
62. Datta, A. *et al.* ARF directly binds DP1: interaction with DP1 coincides with the G1 arrest function of ARF. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 8024–8036 (2005). This is the latest in a series of papers from this group that highlight direct physical interactions between E2F subunits and ARF.
63. Qi, Y. *et al.* p19ARF directly and differentially controls the functions of c-Myc independently of p53. *Nature* **431**, 712–717 (2004).
This provocative report provides experimental support for the idea that ARF interacts with MYC-containing transcriptional complexes on chromatin to regulate transactivation but not transrepression.

Datta, A. *et al.* Myc-ARF (alternative reading frame) interaction inhibits the functions of Myc. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 36698–36707 (2004).

Gregory, M. A., Qi, Y. & Hann, S. R. The ARF tumor suppressor: keeping Myc on a leash. *Cell Cycle* **4**, 249–252 (2005).

Shiio, Y. & Eisenman, R. N. Histone sumoylation is associated with transcriptional repression. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 13118–13120 (2003).

Chen, D. *et al.* ARF-BP1/Mule is a critical mediator of the ARF tumor suppressor. *Cell* **121**, 1071–1083 (2005). ARF binding to ARF-BP1 (also known as HECTH9 and MULE) inhibits its ubiquitin E3 ligase activity directed at p53. The same protein has been independently found to ubiquitylate MYC (see reference 68) and the cytoplasmic BCL2 family member MCL1 (see reference 106).

Adhikary, S. *et al.* The ubiquitin ligase HectH9 regulates transcriptional activation by Myc and is essential for tumor cell proliferation. *Cell* **123**, 409–421 (2005). See reference 67

Frank, S. R. *et al.* MYC recruits the TIP60 histone acetyltransferase complex to chromatin. *EMBO Rep.* **4**, 575–580 (2003).

Amente, S. *et al.* p14ARF directly interacts with Myc through the Myc BOX II domain. *Cancer Biol. Ther.* **5**, 287–291 (2006).

Eymin, B. *et al.* p14ARF activates a Tip60-dependent and p53-independent ATM/ATR/CHK pathway in response to genotoxic stress. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 4339–4350 (2006).

Leduc, C. *et al.* p14ARF promotes RB accumulation through inhibition of its Tip60-dependent acetylation. *Oncogene* (2006) (in the press).

Kalinichenko, V. V. *et al.* Foxm1b transcription factor is essential for development of hepatocellular carcinomas and is negatively regulated by the p19ARF tumor suppressor. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 830–850 (2004).

Costa, R. H., Kalinichenko, V. V., Major, M. L. & Raychaudhuri, P. New and unexpected: forkhead meets ARF. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **15**, 42–48 (2005).

Suzuki, H. *et al.* The ARF tumor suppressor inhibits BCL6-mediated transcriptional repression. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* **326**, 242–248 (2005).

Shieh, S.-Y., Ikeda, M., Taya, Y. & Prives, P. DNA damage-induced phosphorylation of p53 alleviates inhibition by MDM2. *Cell* **91**, 325–334 (1997).

Siliciano, J. D. *et al.* DNA damage induces phosphorylation of the amino terminus of p53. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 3471–3481 (1997).

Li, Y. *et al.* ATM activity contributes to the tumor-suppressing functions of p14(ARF). *Oncogene* **23**, 7355–7365 (2004).

Khan, S., Guevara, C., Fujii, G. & Parry, D. p14ARF is a component of the p53 response following ionizing irradiation of normal human fibroblasts. *Oncogene* **23**, 6040–6046 (2004).

Pauklin, S., Kristjuhan, A., Maimets, T. & Jaks, V. ARF and ATM/ATR cooperate in p53-mediated apoptosis upon oncogenic stress. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **334**, 386–394 (2005).

Bartkova, J. *et al.* DNA damage response as a candidate anti-cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis. *Nature* **434**, 864–870 (2005).

Gorgoulis, V. G. *et al.* Activation of the DNA damage checkpoint and genomic instability in human precancerous lesions. *Nature* **434**, 907–913 (2005). References 81 and 82 show that oncogenic stress causes DNA damage in early precancerous lesions. The induced checkpoint responses play a tumour-suppressor role in preventing or delaying human cancer.

Pusapati, R. V. *et al.* ATM promotes apoptosis and suppresses tumorigenesis in response to Myc. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 1446–1451 (2006).

Parrinello, S. *et al.* Oxygen sensitivity severely limits the replicative lifespan of murine fibroblasts. *Nature Cell Biol.* **5**, 741–747 (2003). Primary cells cultured under low oxygen tension (more closely approximating their physiological state *in vivo*) overcome ‘culture shock’ and have an extended lifespan.

Chua, K. F. *et al.* Mammalian SIRT1 limits replicative lifespan in response to chronic genotoxic stress. *Cell Metab.* **2**, 67–76 (2006). Although it is not the central theme of this report, these investigators show that primary MEFs grown in subliminal concentrations of H₂O₂ activate ARF and undergo premature senescence.

Vafa, O. *et al.* c-Myc can induce DNA damage, increase reactive oxygen species, and mitigate p53 function: a mechanism for oncogene-induced genetic instability. *Mol. Cell* **9**, 1031–1044 (2002). This intriguing paper provides direct evidence that the MYC oncogene can increase reactive oxygen species and induce DNA damage. It complements results reported in reference 88.

Halazonetis, T. D. Constitutively active DNA damage checkpoint pathways as the driving force for the high frequency of p53 mutations in human cancer. *DNA Repair* **3**, 1057–1062 (2004).

Karlsson, A. *et al.* Defective double-strand DNA break repair and chromosomal translocations by MYC overexpression. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 3940–3944 (1999). See reference 86.

Rocha, S., Campbell, K. J. & Perkins, N. D. p53- and Mdm2-independent repression of NF-κB transactivation by the ARF tumor suppressor. *Mol. Cell* **12**, 15–25 (2003).

Rocha, S., Garrett, M. D., Campbell, K. J., Schumm, K. & Perkins, N. D. Regulation of NF-κB and p53 through activation of ATR and Chk1 by the ARF tumour suppressor. *EMBO J.* **24**, 1157–1169 (2005).

Rocha, S. & Perkins, N. D. ARF the integrator: linking NF-κB, p53 and checkpoint kinases. *Cell Cycle* **4**, 756–759 (2005).

Sun, Y., Jiang, S., Chen, N., Fernandes, N. & Price, B. D. A role for the Tip60 histone acetyltransferase in the acetylation and activation of ATM. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 13182–13187 (2005).

Khan, S. H., Moritsugu, J. & Wahl, G. M. Differential requirement for p19ARF in the p53-dependent arrest induced by DNA damage, microtubule disruption, and ribonucleotide depletion. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 3266–3271 (2000).

Lee, C., Smith, B. A., Bandyopadhyay, K. & Gjerstad, R. A. DNA damage disrupts the p14ARF-B23 (nucleophosmin) interaction and triggers a transient subnuclear redistribution of p14ARF. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 9834–9842 (2005).

Reef, S. *et al.* A novel mitochondrial short form of p19ARF induces autophagy and caspase-independent cell death. *Mol. Cell* **22**, 463–475 (2006). Initiation of translation at unique internal methionine residues in human and mouse ARF mRNAs results in the production of N-terminally truncated smARF proteins that lack MDM2 or NPM binding capability. The authors provide provocative evidence that these unstable proteins home to mitochondria and trigger autophagy.

Kondo, Y., Kanazawa, T., Sawaya, R. & Kondo, S. The role of autophagy in cancer development and response to therapy. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **5**, 726–734 (2005).

Lum, J. J., DeBerardinis, R. J. & Thompson, C. B. Autophagy in metazoans: cell survival in the land of plenty. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.* **6**, 439–448 (2005).

Lozano, G. & Zambetti, G. P. What have animal models taught us about the p53 pathway? *J. Pathol.* **205**, 206–220 (2005).

Poyurovsky, M. V. & Prives, C. Unleashing the power of p53: lessons from mice and men. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 125–131 (2006).

Moore, L. V. S. *et al.* Cooperativity of p19ARF, Mdm2, and p53 in murine tumorigenesis. *Oncogene* **22**, 7831–7837 (2003).

Menendez, S. *et al.* Oligomerization of the human ARF tumor suppressor and its response to oxidative stress. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 18720–18729 (2003).

Falini, B. *et al.* Cytoplasmic nucleophosmin in acute myelogenous leukemia with a normal karyotype. *New Eng. J. Med.* **352**, 254–266 (2005). This paper documents the surprising occurrence of NPM C-terminal frameshift mutations in more than a third of adult cases of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), showing these to be the single most common genetic anomaly in AML.

den Besten, W., Kuo, M.-L., Williams, R. T. & Sherr, C. J. Myeloid leukemia-associated nucleophosmin mutants perturb p53-dependent and independent activities of the Arf tumor suppressor protein. *Cell Cycle* **4**, 1593–1598 (2005).

Colombo, E. *et al.* Delocalization and destabilization of the Arf tumor suppressor by the leukemia-associated NPM mutant. *Cancer Res.* **66**, 3044–3050 (2006). References 103 and 104 illustrate that NPMc+ mutants relocate the bulk of cellular ARF protein from the nucleolus to the cytoplasm. Reference 104 suggests that cytoplasmic ARF–NPM complexes are destabilized, whereas no effect on ARF stability was observed in reference 103.

Cleveland, J. L. & Sherr, C. J. Antagonism of Myc functions by Arf. *Cancer Cell* **6**, 309–311 (2004).

Tompkins, V., Hagen, J., Zediak, V. P. & Quelle, D. E. Identification of novel ARF binding proteins by two-hybrid screening. *Cell Cycle* **5**, 641–646 (2006).

Zhong, Q., Gao, W., Du, F. & Wang, X. Mule/ARF-BP1, a BH3-only E3 ubiquitin ligase, catalyzes the polyubiquitination of Mcl-1 and regulates apoptosis. *Cell* **121**, 1085–1095 (2005). See reference 67.

Shvarts, A. *et al.* A senescence rescue screen identifies BCL6 as an inhibitor of anti-proliferative p19(ARF)-p53 signaling. *Genes Dev.* **16**, 681–686 (2002).

Hasan, M. K. *et al.* CARF is a novel protein that cooperates with mouse p19ARF (Human p14ARF) in activating p53. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 37765–37770 (2002).

Wadhwa, R. *et al.* A novel putative collaborator of p19ARF. *Exp. Gerontol.* **38**, 245–252 (2003).

Hasan, M. K. *et al.* Alternative reading frame protein (ARF)-independent function of CARF (collaborator of ARF) involves its interactions with p53: evidence for a novel p53-activation pathway and its negative feedback control. *Biochem J.* **380**, 605–610 (2004).

Paliwal, S. *et al.* Targeting of C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) by ARF results in p53-independent apoptosis. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 2360–2372 (2006).

Zhao, L. *et al.* Cyclin G1 has growth inhibitory activity linked to the ARF-Mdm2-p53 and pRb tumor suppressor pathways. *Mol. Cancer Res.* **1**, 195–206 (2003).

Fatyal, K. & Szalay, A. A. The p14ARF tumor suppressor protein facilitates nuclear sequestration of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) and inhibits HIF-1-mediated transcription. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 28421–28429 (2001).

Pan, W., Datta, A., Adaami, G. R., Raychaudhuri, P. & Bagchi, S. p19ARF inhibits the functions of the HPV16 E7 oncoprotein. *Oncogene* **22**, 5496–5503 (2003).

Wang, J., He, X., Luo, Y. & Yarbrough, W. G. A novel ARF-binding protein (LZAP) alters ARF regulation of HDM2. *Biochem J.* **393**, 489–501 (2006).

Zhang, Y. & Xiong, Y. Control of p53 ubiquitination and nuclear export by MDM2 and ARF. *Cell Growth & Differ.* **12**, 175–186 (2001).

Calabro, V. *et al.* Inhibition of p63 transcriptional activity by p14ARF: functional and physical link between human ARF tumor suppressor and a member of the p53 family. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 8529–8540 (2004).

Rizos, H. *et al.* Association of p14ARF with the p120E4F transcriptional repressor enhances cell cycle inhibition. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 4981–4989 (2003).

Sugihara, T. *et al.* Pex19p dampens the p19ARF-p53-p21WAF1 tumor suppressor pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 18649–18652 (2001).

Vivo, M. *et al.* The human tumor suppressor ARF interacts with spinophilin/neurabin II, a type 1 protein-phosphatase-binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 14161–14169 (2001).

Pollice, A. *et al.* Functional and physical interaction of the human ARF tumor suppressor with Tat-binding protein-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 6345–6353 (2004).

Karayan, L. *et al.* Human ARF protein interacts with topoisomerase I and stimulates its activity. *Oncogene* **20**, 836–848 (2001).

Sui, G. *et al.* Ying Yang 1 is a negative regulator of p53. *Cell* **117**, 859–872 (2004).

### Acknowledgements
The author thanks M. B. Kastan, J. L. Cleveland, J. T. Opferman and M. F. Roussel for critical comments and suggestions.

### Competing interests statement
The author declares no competing financial interests.

### DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to Entrez Gene:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene
ARF–BP1 | ATG5 | ATM | ATR | ATRIP | BCL6 | BECN1 | BRCA1 | CDK4 | CDK6 | CDKN2A | CHK | DHFR | FOXM1B | histone deacetylase 1 | INK4b | MAX | MDM2 | MIZ1 | MYC | NFκB | NPM | p53 | PDGF | RANBP2 | RB | RELA | TIP60 | TNFα | TRRAP | UBC9 | WRN

### FURTHER INFORMATION
Charles J. Sherr’s homepage:
http://www.hhmi.org/research/investigators/sherr_bio.html
Access to this links box is available online.