
J Mol Med (2006) 84:712–725  
DOI 10.1007/s00109-006-0084-y  

---

**REVIEW**

# Toll-like receptors and innate immunity

**Satoshi Uematsu · Shizuo Akira**

Received: 10 April 2006 / Accepted: 8 June 2006 / Published online: 10 August 2006  
© Springer-Verlag 2006

---

**Abstract** The innate immune system is an evolutionarily conserved host defense mechanism against pathogens. Innate immune responses are initiated by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which recognize specific structures of microorganisms. Among them, Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are capable of sensing organisms ranging from bacteria to fungi, protozoa, and viruses, and play a major role in innate immunity. However, TLRs recognize pathogens either on the cell surface or in the lysosome/endosome compartment. Recently, cytoplasmic PRRs have been identified to detect pathogens that have invaded cytosols. In this review, we focus on the functions of PRRs in innate immunity and their downstream signaling cascades.

**Keywords** TLR · NLR · RIG-I

---

## Introduction

The innate immune response is the first line of defense against microbial infections. Since the discovery of the *Drosophila* protein Toll, which induces effective immune responses to *Aspergillus fumigatus* [1], accumulating evidence showed that the innate immune system specifically recognizes invading microorganisms. The targets of innate

---

Dr. SATOSHI UEMATSU  
received his M.D. in 1997 from Osaka University medical school, Osaka City, Japan. He obtained his Ph.D. in 2004 at Osaka University. He is currently an assistant professor of the Department of Host Defense at the Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Japan. His research focuses on innate immunity, especially the defense mechanism of macrophages and dendritic cells in intracellular bacterial infection.

Dr. SHIZUO AKIRA  
received his M.D. and Ph.D. degree from the Osaka University, Japan. He is currently a professor in the Department of Host Defense at the Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University. His research interests focus on pathogen recognition and signaling pathways of Toll-like receptors and TLR-independent pathogen recognition in innate immunity.

---

S. Uematsu · S. Akira  
Department of Host Defense,  
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,  
3-1 Yamada-oka,  
Suita, Osaka 565-0851, Japan  

S. Akira (✉)  
ERATO, Japan Science and Technology Corporation,  
3-1 Yamada-oka,  
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan  
e-mail: sakira@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp  

---

immune recognition are the conserved molecular patterns (pathogen-associated molecular patterns, PAMPs) of microorganisms. Receptors in innate immunity are therefore called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) [2]. PAMPs are generated by microbes and not by the host, suggesting that PAMPs are good targets for innate immunity to discriminate between self- and nonself. Furthermore, PAMPs are essential for microbial survival and are conserved structures among many pathogens, which allows innate immunity to recognize
microorganisms with limited numbers of PRRs. Among PRRs, Toll-like receptors (TLRs), mammalian homologs of Toll, were highlighted as the key recognition structures of the innate immune system in the past few years [3]. TLRs are capable of sensing organisms ranging from bacteria to fungi, protozoa, and viruses. However, host recognition and response is not restricted to TLRs. Some members of the NACHT (domain present in NAIP, CIITA, HET-E, and TP1)-LRR (leucine-rich repeat) (NLR) family, which includes both nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) proteins and NACHT-LRR- and pyrin-domain-containing proteins (NALPs), recognize microbial components in the cytosol [4]. Furthermore, the RNA helicase, retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I), was identified as a cytosolic receptor for intracellular double-stranded (dsRNA) [5] and induces type I interferons (IFNs) in response to dsRNA viruses in a TLR-independent manner [6]. The recent understanding of these PRRs in innate immunity and their signaling pathways is the focus of this review.

### TLR

A mammalian homolog of a Toll receptor (now termed TLR4) was identified through database searches. The TLR family now consists of 13 mammalian members: with each TLR having its intrinsic signaling pathway and inducing specific biological responses against microorganisms. Recognition of microbial components by TLRs triggers the activation of signal transduction pathways, which then induces dendritic cell (DC) maturation and cytokine production, resulting in development of adaptive immunity [3].

#### Structure

The cytoplasmic portion of a TLR is similar to that of the interleukin (IL)-1 receptor family. It is therefore called the Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain. A TIR domain is required for initiating intracellular signaling. The extracellular region of TLRs and IL-1R are markedly different. Whereas IL-1R possesses an Ig-like domain, TLRs contain LRRs in the extracellular domain. LRRs are responsible for the recognition of PAMPs [3] (Fig. 1).

#### Pathogen recognition

##### Bacteria

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a cell wall component of gram-negative bacteria, a strong immunostimulant (Table 1). LPS is composed of lipid A (endotoxin), core oligosaccharide, and O-antigen. TLR4 recognizes lipid A of LPS; this occurs through the TLR4/MD2/CD14 complex, which is present on various cells such as macrophages and DCs [7]. LPS forms a complex with an accessory protein, LPS-binding protein in serum, which converts oligomeric micelles of LPS to a monomer for delivery to CD14, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored, high-affinity membrane protein that can also circulate in a soluble form. CD14 concentrates LPS for binding to the TLR4/MD2 complex [8].

TLR2 recognizes various microbial components, such as lipoproteins/lipopeptides and peptidoglycans from gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, and lipoteichoic acid from gram-positive bacteria, a phenol-soluble modulin from *Staphylococcus aureus*, and glycolipids from *Treponema maltophillum* [3, 9]. TLR2 is also reported to be involved in the recognition of atypical LPS from nonenterobacteria, whose structures are different from typical LPS of gram-negative bacteria [3, 10]. However, a recent report has indicated that lipoproteins contaminated in a LPS preparation from *Porphyromonas gingivalis* stimulated TLR2 and that LPS from *P. gingivalis* itself had poor activity for TLR4 stimulation [11]. There are also controversial reports regarding peptidoglycan recognition by TLR2. More careful analyses will be needed to exclude any possibility of contaminants remaining.

TLR1 and TLR6 are structurally related to TLR2 [12]. TLR2 and TLR1 or TLR6 form a heterodimer, which is involved in the discrimination between the molecular structure of diacyl and triacyl lipopeptides [13–15]. CD36, a member of the class II scavenger family of proteins was shown to serve as a facilitator or coreceptor for diacyl lipopeptide recognition through the TLR2/6 complex [16].

TLR5 is responsible for the recognition of flagellin, the major portion of bacterial flagella [17]. Gewirtz et al. [18] reported that TLR5 is expressed on the basolateral surface, but not the apical side of intestinal epithelial cells, suggesting that TLR5 serves as the sensor for the pathogenic bacteria that invade across the epithelium. A common stop codon polymorphism in the ligand-binding domain of TLR5 (TLR5 392STOP SNP) is unable to mediate flagellin signaling and is associated with susceptibility to pneumonia caused by *Legionella pneumophila* [19]. However, researchers in Vietnam have reported that the TLR5 392STOP SNP is not associated with susceptibility to typhoid fever [20]. A recent work has reported that some commensal bacteria, such as α and ε *Proteobacteria*, change the TLR5 recognition site of flagellin without losing flagellar motility [21]. This modification may contribute to the persistence of these bacteria on mucosal surfaces.

Bacterial DNA, which contains unmethylated CpG motifs, is a potent stimulator of the host immune response. In vertebrates, the frequency of CpG motifs is severely reduced and the cysteine residues of CpG motifs are highly methylated, which leads to abrogation of the immunostimulatory activity. Analysis of TLR9-deficient mice showed that TLR9 is a receptor for CpG DNA [22].
TLR2
MD2
TLR4
LRR domain
TIR domain
MyD88
TIRAP/Mal
TRAM
IRAK-4
TRAF6
RAK-1
TAK1
NEMO
IKKα
IKKβ
IκB
NF-κB
nucleus
Inflammatory
cytokines
MyD88-dependent
pathway
TRIF
TBK1
IRF3
IFN-β
IFN-inducible genes
MyD88-independent
pathway
Endosome
TLR7
TLR8
TLR9
MyD88
IRAK-4
P
IRAK-1
P
TAK1
Ub
TRAF6
NEMO
IKKα
IKKβ
IκB
NF-κB
IFN-αs & IFN-β
IFN-inducible genes
Inflammatory
cytokines
Specific pathway in plasmacytoid DCs

Fig. 1 TLR signaling pathways. TLR signaling pathways originate from the cytoplasmic TIR domain. A TIR domain-containing adaptor, MyD88, associates with the cytoplasmic TIR domain of TLRs and recruits IRAKs to the receptor upon ligand binding. IRAKs then activate TRAF6, leading to the activation of TAK1. TAK1 activates the IKK complex consisting of IKKα, IKKβ, and NEMO/IKKγ. The IKK complex phosphorylates IκB, resulting in nuclear translocation of NF-κB, which induces expression of inflammatory cytokines. Among the TLR family members, TLR4 on cell surfaces and TLR3, 7, 8, and 9 on endosomal membrane can induce type I IFNs. Stimulation of macrophages and DCs with LPS and dsRNA results in the activation of IRF3 and subsequent induction of IFN-β and IFN-inducible genes. A TIR domain-containing adapter, TRIF is responsible for TLR3- and

TLR4-mediated IRF3 activation. In addition, TLR4 also requires another adaptor, TRAM, for IRF3 activation. TRIF interacts with TBK1, IKKi, RIP1, and TRAF6. IRF3 is activated by TBK1 and IKKi, which catalyze IRF3 phosphorylation and stimulate its nuclear translocation and DNA binding. pDCs express TLR7 (also TLR8 in human) and TLR9 and secrete large amounts of IFN-αs and IFN-β in response to ssRNA and CpG DNA. This induction by TLR7 and TLR9 depends entirely on MyD88. After stimulation, IRF7 translocates into the nucleus to induce type I IFNs. IRF7 is activated through forming a signaling complex with MyD88, IRAKs, and TRAF6 in the cytoplasm. IRAK-1 but not IRAK-4 is an essential enzyme for phosphorylation and activation of IRF7 in TLR7- and TLR9-mediated type I IFNs induction

Mouse TLR11, a relative of TLR5, is expressed abundantly in the kidney and bladder. TLR11-deficient mice are susceptible to uropathogenic bacterial infections, indicating that TLR11 senses the component of uropathogenic bacteria. However, TLR11 is thought to be nonfunctional in human because of the presence of stop codon [23].

Fungi

Several components located in the cell wall or cell surface of fungi were identified as potential ligands for TLRs. Yeast zymosan activates TLR2/TLR6 heterodimers, whereas mannan, derived from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and C. albicans is detected by TLR4. Phospholipomannan, present on the cell surface of C. albicans, is recognized by TLR2, while TLR4 mainly interacts with glucuronoxylomannan, the major capsular polysaccharide of C. neoformans [24].

Dectin-1 is a lectin family receptor for the fungal cell wall component, β-glucan [25]. Dectin-1 functionally collaborates with TLR2 and induces a strong immune

TLRs are involved in the recognition of fungal pathogens such as Candida albicans, A. fumigatus, Cryptococcus neoformans, and Pneumocystis carinii [3, 24] (Table 1).

J Mol Med (2006) 84:712–725

Table 1 Pathogen recognition of TLRs

| TLRs | Ligands |
|------|--------|
| TLR1 | Triacyl lipopeptides (bacteria) |
| TLR2 | Peptidoglycan, lipoprotein, lipopeptides, atypical LPS (bacteria)<br>Zymosan, phospholipomannan (fungi)<br>GPI anchor (protozoa)<br>Envelope protein (virus) |
| TLR3 | Poly(I:C), dsRNA (virus) |
| TLR4 | LPS (bacteria)<br>Mannan, glucuronoxylomannan (fungi)<br>Glycoinositolphospholipids (protozoa)<br>RSV fusion protein (virus) |
| TLR5 | Flagellin (bacteria) |
| TLR6 | Diacyl lipopeptides (bacteria) |
| TLR7/TLR8 | Synthetic imidazoquinoline-like molecules,<br>ssRNA (virus) |
| TLR9 | CpG DNA (bacteria, protozoa, virus)<br>Hemozoin (protozoa) |
| TLR11 | Component of uropathogenic bacteria (bacteria)<br>Profilin like molecule (protozoa) |

TLRs recognize molecular patterns associated with a broad range of pathogens including bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses.

**Protozoa**

TLRs also sense the components of protozoa including *Trypanosoma cruzi*, *Trypanosoma brucei*, *Toxoplasma gondii*, *Leishmania major*, and *Plasmodium falciparum* (Table 1). GPI anchors, glycoinositolphospholipids, and genomic DNA-derived from *T. cruzi* are recognized by TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9, respectively [29]. Murine TLR11 senses the profilin-like molecule of *T. gondii* [30]. Malaria parasites digest host hemoglobin into a hydrophobic heme polymer known as hemozoin. TLR9 recognizes hemozoin from *P. falciparum* [31]. However, the precise mechanism of how TLR9 recognizes both DNA and non-DNA crystals remains unclear.

**Virus**

TLR4 recognizes not only bacterial components but also viral envelope proteins (Table 1). The fusion protein from respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is recognized by TLR4 [32]. TLR4-mutated C3H/HeJ mice are sensitive to RSV infection [33]. The envelope protein of mouse mammary tumor virus directly activates B cells via TLR4 [34].

TLR2 is also involved in the recognition of viral components such as measles virus, human cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) [35–37].

During viral replication, dsRNA is generated, and TLR3 is involved in the recognition of a synthetic analog of dsRNA, polyinosine-deoxycytidylic acid (poly I:C), a potent inducer of type I IFNs [38, 39]. TLR3-deficient mice are susceptible to mouse cytomegalovirus [40]. On the other hand, TLR3-deficient mice show more resistance to West Nile virus (WNV) infection. This single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) flavivirus triggers inflammatory responses via TLR3, which leads a disruption of the blood brain barrier, followed by enhanced brain infection [41]. These findings suggested that WNV utilizes TLR3 to efficiently enter the brain.

Mouse splenic DCs are divided into CD11c high B220- and CD11c dull B220+ cells. The latter contain plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), which induce large amounts of IFN-α during viral infection. CpG DNA motifs are also found in genomes of DNA viruses, such as HSV-1, HSV-2, and murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV). Mouse pDCs recognize CpG DNA of HSV-2 via TLR9 and produce IFN-α [42]. TLR9-deficient mice are susceptible to MCMV infection, suggesting that TLR9 induces antiviral responses by sensing CpG DNA of DNA virus [40, 43, 44].

TLR7 and TLR8 are structurally highly conserved proteins [12]. The synthetic imidazoquinoline-like molecules imiquimod (R-837) and resiquimod (R-848) have potent antiviral activities and are used for clinical treatment of viral infections. Analysis of TLR7-deficient mice showed that TLR7 recognizes these synthetic compounds [45]. Human TLR7 and TLR8, but not murine TLR8, recognize imidazoquinoline compounds [46]. Furthermore, murine TLR7 recognizes guanosine analogs such as loxoribine, which has antiviral and antitumor activities [47]. All these compounds are structurally similar to ribonucleic acids. After a short while, TLR7 and human TLR8 also were shown to recognize guanosine- or uridine-rich ssRNA from viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), and influenza virus [48, 49].

**Signaling pathways**

The activation of TLR signaling pathways originates from the cytoplasmic TIR domains. Four TIR domain-containing adaptors (MyD88, TIRAP/MAL, TRIF, and TRAM) were shown to play an important role in TLR signaling pathway. These adaptors are associated with TLRs through homophilic interaction of TIR domains. Each TLR mediates distinctive responses in association with a different combination of these adaptors (Fig. 1).

MyD88-dependent pathway

TLR family members use many of the same signaling components as IL-1R because both have a conserved cytoplasmic domain, the TIR domain-containing adapter MyD88 is utilized by all TLRs with the exception of TLR3. MyD88 possesses a TIR domain in its C terminus and a death domain in its N terminus. Upon stimulation, MyD88 recruits IL-1 receptor kinase (IRAK) to TLRs through the interaction of both molecules’ death domains. Two members of the IRAK family, IL-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK-1) and IRAK-4 are activated by phosphorylation, and associate with TRAF6. TRAF6 forms a complex with ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes to activate TAK1, leading to the activation of nuclear factor (NF)-κB (IκB) and activator protein-1 through the canonical IκB kinase (IKK) complex and the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, respectively. The IKK complex phosphorylates the inhibitor of IκB, which sequesters the transcription factor NF-κB to induce target genes. This signaling pathway is called the “MyD88-dependent pathway” and is essential for the expression of inflammatory cytokine genes, including TNF-α, IL-6, IL-12, and IL-1β, and costimulatory molecules [3]. In the case of the TLR2 and TLR4 signaling pathways, TIRAP/MAL is also required for the activation of the MyD88-dependent pathway [50, 51].

TRIF interacts with TBK1 and IKKi, which phosphorylates IRF3, allowing IRF3 to translocate into the nucleus and activate the IFN-β promoter.

TRAF6 is reported to bind TRIF and cooperatively activate NF-κB [64]. However, cells doubly deficient in TRAF6 and MyD88 still partially activated NF-κB in response to LPS, suggesting that TRIF activates NF-κB through both TRAF6-dependent and TRAF6-independent pathways in TLR4 signaling [65, 66].

Receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP1) was implicated in the TLR3-mediated NF-κB response to dsRNA. RIP1 binds the C terminus of TRIF via a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM). In cells lacking RIP1, TLR3-mediated NF-κB activation and the subsequent induction of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 is severely impaired, whereas IFN-β induction is intact. By contrast, responses to LPS were normal in the absence of RIP1. However, LPS fails to stimulate NF-κB activation in rip–/–MyD88–/– cells, revealing that RIP1 is also required for the TRIF-dependent TLR4-induced NF-κB pathway. In the TNF-α pathway, RIP1 interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF2 and is modified by a polyubiquitin chain. Upon TLR3 activation, RIP1 is also modified by polyubiquitin chains and is recruited to TLR3 along with TRAF6 and TAK1, suggesting that RIP1 uses a similar ubiquitin-dependent mechanism to activate IKK-β in response to TNF-α and TLR3 ligands [67].

MyD88-independent pathway

Specific pathway in pDCs

In addition to proinflammatory signals, some members of the TLR family trigger the induction of type I IFNs. In particular, TLR3 and TLR4 have the ability to induce IFN-β and IFN-inducible genes in a MyD88-independent manner [52]. Thus, this signaling pathway is called the MyD88-independent pathway. A third adapter, TRIF [53, 54], is essential for the TLR3- and TLR4-mediated MyD88-independent pathway [39, 55]. TRIF is also required for the induction of inflammatory cytokines in the TLR4 signaling pathway.

A fourth adapter, TRAM is essential for the TLR4-mediated MyD88-independent pathway [56–58]. The N terminus of TRAM has a myristoylation site, the mutation of which alters its normal membrane localization and abolishes the TLR4 signaling. TRAM acts as a bridging adapter between TLR4 and TRIF [58].

pDCs are specialized for producing large amounts of type I IFNs during viral infection [68]. pDCs highly express TLR7 and TLR9 and produce high levels of IFN-α in response to TLR7 and TLR9 ligands [47]. It appears that IFN-α induction by TLR7 and TLR9 depends entirely on MyD88 [69]. IRF7 is a transcriptional factor structurally related to IRF3, which is expressed constitutively in pDCs. Overexpression of IRF7 activates IFN-α- and IFN-β-dependent promoters. IRF7 forms a signaling complex with MyD88 and TRAF6 in the cytoplasm [70, 71]. After ligand stimulation, IRF7 translocates into the nucleus to induce IFN-αs [70, 71]. Similar to IRF3, IRF7 is activated by its phosphorylation. However, in TBK1-deficient cells, TLR9-mediated IFN-α production is still observed [70]. Mouse pDCs lacking IRAK-4 fails to produce both inflammatory cytokines and IFN-αs [71]. Human TLR7-, TLR8-, and TLR9-mediated induction of IFN-α/β and -λ was also IRAK-4 dependent [72]. Recently, IRAK-1 was shown to serve as an IRF7 kinase. In IRAK-1-deficient mice, TLR7-and TLR9-induced IFN-α production was completely abolished, although inflammatory cytokines are normally produced. Furthermore, IRF7 activation by TLR9 ligand is impaired in IRAK-1-deficient mice, in spite of normal

TLR3- and TLR4-mediated signaling activates a member of the IRF family of transcription factors, IRF3 to induce IFN-β and IFN-inducible genes. Two noncanonical IKKs, inducible IKK (IKKi)/IKKε and TRAF family member-associated NF-κB activator-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)/NF-κB-activating kinase (NAK)/TRAF2-associated kinase (T2K), were shown to be responsible for TLR3- and TLR4-mediated IRF-3 activation [59–63]. Upon stimula-

NF-κB activation. IRAK-1 but not IRAK-4 can directly bind and phosphorylate IRF7; thus, IRAK-1 specifically mediates IFN-α induction downstream of MyD88 and IRAK-4 [73].

IRF8 is involved in TLR9-mediated responses because pDCs lacking IRF8 fails to produce proinflammatory cytokines and IFN-α in response to TLR9 ligand; in IRF8-deficient cells, TLR9-stimulated NF-κB activation is unexpectedly impaired, suggesting that IRF8 mediates NF-κB activation in TLR9 signaling [74].

**NLR**

**Structure**

Mammalian NLR family members are also thought to recognize PAMPs. NLR proteins contain three characteristic domains. The first is a LRR domain, which is involved in ligand recognition. The second is a centrally located NOD (also known as a NACHT domain), which acts as an ATP-dependent dimerization domain. The last N-terminal domain is composed of protein-protein interaction cassettes. NLRs are divided into subgroups according to the N-terminal domain: caspase-recruitment domain (CARD), pyrin domain (PYD), baculoviral inhibitory repeat (BIR)-like, and unclassified. NODs, NALPs, and IPAFs contain CARDs, PYDs, and BIR, respectively. All these domains are involved in the regulation of proapoptotic and proinflammatory signaling [75].

**Pathogen recognition and signaling pathway**

Recent reports showed that some members of the NLR family are involved in intracellular recognition of microbial products. Although initial studies identified LPS as a NOD2 ligand [76], it is well established now that NOD1 and NOD2 recognize peptidoglycan-derived peptides, γ-D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP) [77] and muramyl dipeptide (MDP) [78, 79], respectively. Recognition of ligands through the LRR domains activates NOD proteins, which then recruit the serine-threonine kinase RICK (also known as RIP2 or CARDIACK) through a CARD-CARD interaction [80]. In the NOD2 signaling pathway, activation of RICK leads to K63 (Lys63)-linked polyubiquitylation of NEMO/IKKγ, which is followed by phosphorylation of IKKβ and the phosphorylation of IkB, leading to the translocation of NF-κB to the nucleus [81, 82]. CARD12 (also known as IPAF or CLAN) binds both NOD1 and NOD2 through NOD-NOD interactions [83] and inhibits NOD1- and NOD2-mediated activation of NF-κB in vitro [84]. However, recent reports show that invasive bacteria lead to the activation of CARD12 and the induction of expression of IL-1β [85]. CARD6 was shown

to physically interact with NOD1 and RICK (but not with NOD2) and suppress NOD1/RICK-mediated NF-κB activation [86]. In addition to NF-κB activation and NOD1 and NOD2 signaling give rise to the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway although the precise mechanism remains unknown [4] (Fig. 2).

Inflammasome is a multiprotein complex and is responsible for the activation of caspase 1 and 5, leading to the processing and secretion of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 [87]. Two types of the inflammasome were reported to date: NALP1 inflammasome and NALP2/3 inflammasome (Fig. 3). Whereas NALP1 inflammasome is composed of NALP1, ASC, caspase 1, and caspase 5, NALP2/3 inflammasome contains NALP2/3, ASC, caspase 1, and Cardinal. NALPs are the chief platforms for inflammasome [88]. ASC is an essential adapter molecule that connects the NALPs to caspase 1. Because NALP2/3 do not have FIND domain and CARD domains in the C terminus, the NALP2/3 inflammasome contains Cardinal, which has the same structural organizations as the C-terminal region of NALP1 [88]. All of the inflammasome components reside in the cytoplasm. Activation of inflammasome is thought to occur through the recognition of PAMPs by NALPs. However, the precise activation mechanism remains unknown. After activation of inflammasome, activated caspases cleave the proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18. Processing leads to the secretion of mature IL-1β and IL-18 and induces inflammatory responses. IL-1β production is tightly controlled to avoid excessive inflammation. Caspase-1 activation is inhibited by CARD containing ICEBERG, COP, and DASC (POP1) and possibly by human caspase-12. Activated caspase-1 is blocked by PI-9 and IL-1β activity is inhibited by IL1Ra [89].

The NALP3/cryopyrin/CIAS1 inflammasome is activated by MDP. Recent reports showed that NALP3/cryopyrin/CIAS1 is involved in the recognition of bacterial RNA, ATP, and uric acid crystals, and is essential for caspase-1 activation and IL-1β and IL-18 production in response to these ligands [90–92] (Fig. 3).

Another CARD-containing NOD-LRR protein, Ipaf is responsible for *Salmonella typhimurium*-induced, but not TLR-induced, caspase-1 activation. ASC but not RICK/RIP2 is also essential for *S. typhimurium*-induced caspase-1 activation [85] (Fig. 3).

The *Lgnl* locus was found to control the intracellular replication of *L. pneumophila* in murine macrophages. NAIP5/Bircle, a NLR protein with BIR domains, was identified to be responsible for the *Lgnl* effect [93]. NAIP5/Bircle is assumed to function as a cytoplasmic sensor of *L. pneumophila* and is responsible for *L. pneumophila*-mediated caspase-1 activation. The pathway used for caspase-1-dependent processing and secretion of IL-1 was

Fig. 2 Signaling pathways of NOD1 and NOD2. NOD1 and NOD2 recognize iE-DAP and MDP, respectively, and activate NF-κB via RIP2/RICK. NOD1 and NOD2 signaling gives rise to the activation of MAPKs by unknown mechanism. CARD12 negatively regulates RICK/ RIP2-mediated NF-κB activation by both NOD1 and NOD2. CARD6 also negatively regulates RICK/RIP2-mediated NF-κB activation by NOD1

distinct from the pathway used for caspase-1-dependent inhibition of *L. pneumophila* growth. It is interesting to note that the adapter molecule ASC is essential for the secretion of IL-1β after *L. pneumophila* infection but not for the control of *L. pneumophila* replication. These data suggest that Ipaf and Asc have separate and distinct functions in controlling innate immune responses to *L. pneumophila* [94] (Fig. 3).

The importance of NLRs was highlighted by findings that mutations affecting the function of these proteins are associated with the occurrence of autoimmune diseases. NOD2 is associated with two autoinflammatory disorders. A missense point mutation in the human NOD2 gene is correlated with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease [4]. Blau syndrome, an inheritable disorder characterized by granu-

Fig. 3 Bacterial recognition of NLRs and their signaling. NLRs recognize bacterial proteins in the cytoplasm and trigger signaling pathways. MDP, RNA, ATP, and uric acid crystal are recognized by NALP3, which forms an inflammasome comprised of ASC, CARDINAL, and caspase-1. NALP1 also forms an inflammasome composed of ASC, caspase-1, and caspase-5. Little is known about the natural stimuli that lead to the activation of NALP1 inflammasome. Activated caspase-1 cleaves pro-IL-1β for the maturation of IL-1β. Another NOD-LRR protein, IPAF, is activated by *S. typhimurium* and induces maturation of IL-1β associating with ASC. Naip5/Birc1e is activated by *L. pneumophila* and induces caspase-1 activation in an IPAF/ASC-dependent manner

lomatous polyarthritis, panuveitis, and exanthema, was shown to share a mutated form of CARD15 (which encodes NOD2) [95].

NALP3/cryopyrin/CIAS1 is associated with three auto-inflammatory syndromes: familial-cold autoinflammatory syndrome, Muckle-Wells syndrome, and neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease [96, 97]. These diseases are now referred as cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). CAPS patients have systemic inflammation with increased levels of C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, and inflammatory cytokines. However, it is not well understood how the mutated NALP3/cryopyrin/CIAS1 contributes to the induction of systemic infection [75].

CIITA is a master transcription regulator of MHC class II genes [98]. Mutations in CIITA lead to MHC class II deficiency or a rare form of autosomal recessive hereditary immunodeficiency, group A bare lymphocyte syndrome [99, 100].

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease that is characterized by recurrent episodes of fever accompanied with topical signs of inflammation. The gene, Mediterranean fever, which encodes the pyrin (also known as marenostrin) protein is mutated in patients with FMF [75].

### Antiviral RNA helicases

Whereas TLR2 and TLR4 recognize viral components at the cell surface, TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 are exclusively expressed in endosomal compartments. After phagocytes internalize viruses or virus-infected apoptotic cells, viral nucleic acids are released in phagolysosomes and are recognized by these TLRs [3]. Recent reports showed that hosts also have a mechanism to detect replicating viruses in the cytoplasm in a TLR-independent manner [101].

#### RIG-I

RIG-I was identified as a cytoplasmic receptor for viral dsRNA. RIG-I is a DExD/H box RNA helicase, which possesses C-terminal helicase domain and two tandem caspase-recruiting domains at the N terminus (Fig. 4). RIG-I binds to RNA with its C-terminal helicase domain and unwinds dsRNA in an ATPase dependent manner. The binding of the helicase domain and RNA is likely to induce conformational changes that exposes the N-terminal CARDs to recruit downstream signaling proteins, leading to the activation of IRF3 and NF-κB [5].

The functional significance of RIG-I was shown in vitro and in vivo [5, 6]. Overexpression of RIG-I blocks replication of VSV and encephalomyocarditis virus

(EMCV), and RNAi of RIG-I type I inhibited induction of type I IFNs in response to Newcastle disease virus (NDV), Sendai virus, and EMCV [5]. Most RIG-I-deficient mice are embryonic lethal because of severe liver degeneration. Conventional DCs and fibroblasts derived from RIG-I-deficient mice are almost completely unable to produce type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines after infection with NDV, Sendai virus, or VSV. However, RIG-I-deficient pDCs produced type I IFNs normally in response to NDV. In pDCs, TLR systems are responsible for RNA virus-mediated type I IFN induction. Thus, RIG-I and the TLR system exert antiviral responses in a cell-type-specific manner [6].

#### Other molecules

Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5, also called Helicard) was identified as the DExD/H box RNA helicase and contains two CARD-like domains and a single helicase domain [102–105]. Like RIG-I, overexpression of MDA5 enhanced NDV-induced type I IFN production and antiviral responses in response to VSV or EMCV. RNAi of MDA5 blocks NDV-induced activation of type I IFN promoters [105]. MDA5 was identified as a binding target for V proteins of paramyxoviruses [104]. Although the precise mechanism is unclear, these V proteins inhibit the dsRNA-induced activation of the IFN-β gene through MDA5. Virus-encoded proteins may specifically target these RNA helicases to escape from antiviral detection by the host cells.

An RNA helicase Lgp2 is also related to RIG-I and MDA5, but lacks the CARD-like domains. Overexpression of Lgp2 inhibits Sendai virus-induced activation of IFN-β promoter, suggesting that Lgp2 is a negative regulator of RIG-I and MDA5 [105, 106] (Fig. 4).

#### Signaling pathway of antiviral RNA helicases

The signaling pathway of RIG-I and MDA5 ultimately engages the IKK complex (IKKα/β/γ) and TBK1/IKKi, which leads to phosphorylation and activation of NF-κB and IRF3 and IRF7, respectively. IFN-β promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1) was identified as a molecule that acts downstream of RIG-I and MDA5. IPS-1 consists of two domains characterized as an N-terminal CARD domain and a C-terminal effector domain. IPS-1 associates with RIG-I and MDA5 with a CARD domain. Overexpression of IPS-1 activates IFN-β, IFN-α4, IFN-α6, and NF-κB promoters and inhibits VSV replication. RNAi of IPS-1 blocks type I IFN production in response to intracellular administration of dsRNA or infection with VSV or NDV. TBK1 and IKKi are required for IPS-1-mediated activation of the type I IFN promoters, although it does not directly bind to these

Fig. 4 Signaling pathways of antiviral RNA helicases. Viruses produce dsRNA during replication in cytoplasm. RIG-I and Mda5 recognize dsRNA to initiate antiviral signaling. IPS-1 interacts with RIG-I and Mda5 via the CARD-like domain, followed by the activation of IRF3 and IRF7 via TBK1- and IKKi-dependent phosphorylation. IPS-1 also activates NF-κB via FADD/ RIP1-dependent pathways. Synthetic dsDNA also activates type I IFN promoters, although a receptor responsible for DNA recognition was not identified

protein kinases. IPS-1 interacts with FADD and RIP1 via its effector domain to facilitate NF-κB activation. Thus, IPS-1 is an adaptor protein that mediates RIG-I- and MDA5-dependent antiviral responses [107].

IPS-1 was independently identified by three different groups: mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) [108], virus-induced signaling adaptor [109], and CARD-adaptor-inducing IFN-β (Cardif) [110]. The MAVS study shows that MAVS localizes to the outer mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrial-targeting transmembrane domain is essential for MAVS signaling, implying the importance of mitochondria in innate immunity [108] (Fig. 4).

Viral modification of the host immune system

Viruses have various mechanisms to escape from host immunity. Vaccinia virus (VV) protein A52R was shown to block the activation of NF-κB by multiple TLRs, in particular, TLR3 [111, 112]. A52R associates with both IRAK2 and TRAF6, and disrupts signaling complexes containing these proteins. Furthermore, deletion of the A52R gene from VV reduced virus virulence [112]. The other VV protein, A46R, has a TIR domain, and as such is the only viral member of the IL-1R/TLR family identified to date [111]. Recent studies revealed that A46R inhibited IL-1R/TLR, but not TNF-induced NF-κB activation, by associating with TIR-domain containing adaptor molecules [111, 113]. A46R interacts with multiple TIR-containing adaptors and thereby inhibits the activation of IRF3 and NF-κB [113]. NS3-4A, a multifunctional protein of hepatitis C virus that has serine protease activity essential for the production of mature viral proteins, was recently shown to block the activation of IRF3. NS3-4A counteracts not only TLR3-dependent pathways by targeting Trif for proteolytic cleavage, but also counteracts TLR3-independent pathways by targeting an undefined protein of the RIG-I-dependent pathway [114, 115]. Meylan et al. [110] showed that Cardif is cleaved by wild-type but not by a catalytically inactive form of NS3-4A, which cleaves the C-terminal region of Cardif, causing disruption of IRF3 and NF-κB activation, probably by causing mislocalization of cleaved Cardif from mitochondria. Also, the V proteins of paramyxoviruses, such as simian virus 5, human parainfluenza virus 2, mumps virus, Sendai virus, and Hendra virus, associate with MDA5 and block the downstream signaling of MDA5 [104, 105]. Thus, for their survival many viruses antagonize important components of the host antiviral defense.

DNA recognition in cytoplasm

DNA, including host DNA, can be recognized independently of TLR9. DNase II, a chief DNase present in the phagosome of macrophages, clears DNA from phagocytosed apoptotic cells or debris [116]. In DNase II-deficient mice, macrophages begin to produce IFN-β, which lead to subsequent TLR9-independent inflammatory events [117]. Furthermore, dsDNA but not ssDNA derived from either pathogens or the host activates both immune and nonimmune cells when introduced into the cytoplasm by transfection [118, 119]. Double-stranded breaks form of

DNA (B-DNA) but not Z-form DNA stimulated mouse and human stromal cells and DCs, resulting in the production of type I IFN and chemokines. B-DNA activated IRF3 and the IFN-β promoter via both TBK1 and IKKi, whereas it activated transcription factor NF-κB independently of both TBK1 and IKKi. Both of these pathways required the adaptor molecule IPS-1 in vitro but not TLRs or RIG-I and MDA5. In addition, B-DNA activation of fibroblasts conferred resistance to viral infection, suggesting that B-DNA-induced IFN genes might be important in antiviral innate immune responses. Furthermore, B-DNA activation of the signaling pathways may be involved in the pathogenesis of nucleic acid-dependent autoimmune diseases [120] (Fig. 4). It is thus necessary to identify a cytoplasmic detector of DNA.

### Conclusion

Since the discovery of mammalian TLRs, there was a rapid clarification of the molecular mechanisms of pathogen recognition. Research on TLRs has also revealed that recognition of intracellular pathogens is also mediated via a TLR-independent mechanism. Newly described NLR family members, which recognize pathogens in the cytoplasm, are genetically linked to several human immunological disorders. Innate immune responses via RIG-I are essential for the control of viral replication in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, TLR system and RIG-I system were tactfully utilized against viral infection in a cell-type-specific manner. Thus, hosts have developed the skillful and complicated innate immune system to counter the various pathogens with various modes of infection. Future studies on PRRs should provide a more comprehensive understanding of innate immune responses.

### Acknowledgements

We thank M. Hashimoto for secretarial assistance. This work was supported by grants from Special Coordination Funds, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Japan Research Foundation for Clinical Pharmacology.

### References

1. Lemaitre B, Nicolas E, Michaut L, Reichhart JM, Hoffmann JA (1996) The dorsoventral regulatory gene cassette spatzle/Toll/cactus controls the potent antifungal response in Drosophila adults. Cell 86:973–983
2. Medzhitov R, Janeway CJ (1997) Innate immunity: the virtues of a nonclonal system of recognition. Cell 91:295–298
3. Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O (2006) Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. Cell 124:783–801
4. Strober W, Murray PJ, Kitani A, Watanabe T (2006) Signalling pathways and molecular interactions of NOD1 and NOD2. Nat Rev Immunol 6:9–20
5. Yoneyama M, Kikuchi M, Natsukawa T, Shinobu N, Imaizumi T, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Akira S, Fujita T (2004) The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses. Nat Immunol 5:730–737
6. Kato H, Sato S, Yoneyama M, Yamamoto M, Uematsu S, Matsui K, Tsujimura T, Takeda K, Fujita T, Takeuchi O, Akira S (2005) Cell type-specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response. Immunity 23:19–28
7. Shimazu R, Akashi S, Ogata H, Nagai Y, Fukudome K, Miyake K, Kimoto M (1999) MD-2, a molecule that confers lipopoly-saccharide responsiveness on Toll-like receptor 4. J Exp Med 189:1777–1782
8. Takeda K, Kaisho T, Akira S (2003) Toll-like receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 21:335–376
9. Takeuchi O, Hoshino K, Kawai T, Sanjo H, Takada H, Ogawa T, Takeda K, Akira S (1999) Differential roles of TLR2 and TLR4 in recognition of gram-negative and gram-positive bacterial cell wall components. Immunity 11:443–451
10. Netea MG, van Deuren M, Kullberg BJ, Cavaillon JM, Van der Meer JW (2002) Does the shape of lipid A determine the interaction of LPS with Toll-like receptors? Trends Immunol 23:135–139
11. Hashimoto M, Asai Y, Ogawa T (2004) Separation and structural analysis of lipoprotein in a lipopolysaccharide preparation from Porphyromonas gingivalis. Int Immunol 16:1431–1437
12. Akira S (2004) Toll receptor families: structure and function. Semin Immunol 16:1–2
13. Takeuchi O, Kawai T, Muhlradt PF, Morr M, Radolf JD, Zychlinsky A, Takeda K, Akira S (2001) Discrimination of bacterial lipoproteins by Toll-like receptor 6. Int Immunol 13:933–940
14. Takeuchi O, Sato S, Horiuchi T, Hoshino K, Takeda K, Dong Z, Modlin RL, Akira S (2002) Cutting edge: role of Toll-like receptor 1 in mediating immune response to microbial lipoproteins. J Immunol 169:10–14
15. Alexopoulou L, Thomas V, Schnare M, Lobet Y, Anguita J, Schoen RT, Medzhitov R, Fikrig E, Flavell RA (2002) Hyporesponsiveness to vaccination with Borrelia burgdorferi OspA in humans and in TLR1- and TLR2-deficient mice. Nat Med 8:878–884
16. Hoebe K, Georgel P, Rutschmann S, Du X, Mudd S, Crozat K, Sovath S, Shamel L, Hartung T, Zahringer U, Beutler B (2005) CD36 is a sensor of diacylglycerides. Nature 433:523–527
17. Hayashi F, Smith KD, Ozinsky A, Hawn TR, Yi EC, Goodlett DR, Eng JK, Akira S, Underhill DM, Aderem A (2001) The innate immune response to bacterial flagellin is mediated by Toll-like receptor 5. Nature 410:1099–1103
18. Gewirtz AT, Navas TA, Lyons S, Godowski PJ, Madara JL (2001) Cutting edge: bacterial flagellin activates basolaterally expressed TLR5 to induce epithelial proinflammatory gene expression. J Immunol 167:1882–1885
19. Hawn TR, Verbon A, Lettinga KD, Zhao LP, Li SS, Laws RJ, Skerrett SJ, Beutler B, Schroeder L, Nachman A, Ozinsky A, Smith KD, Aderem A (2003) A common dominant TLR5 stop codon polymorphism abolishes flagellin signaling and is associated with susceptibility to legionnaires’ disease. J Exp Med 198:1563–1572
20. Dunstan SJ, Hawn TR, Hue NT, Parry CP, Ho VA, Vinh H, Diep TS, House D, Wain J, Aderem A, Hien TT, Farrar JJ (2005) Host susceptibility and clinical outcomes in toll-like receptor 5-deficient patients with typhoid fever in Vietnam. J Infect Dis 191:1068–1071
21. Andersen-Nissen E, Smith KD, Strobe KL, Barrett SL, Cookson BT, Logan SM, Aderem A (2005) Evasion of Toll-like receptor 5 by flagellated bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9247–9252

22. Hemmi H, Takeuchi O, Kawai T, Kaisho T, Sato S, Sanjo H, Matsumoto M, Hoshino K, Wagner H, Takeda K, Akira S (2000) A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408: 740–745

23. Zhang D, Zhang G, Hayden MS, Greenblatt MB, Bussey C, Flavell RA, Ghosh S (2004) A toll-like receptor that prevents infection by uropathogenic bacteria. Science 303:1522–1526

24. Netea MG, Van der Graaf C, Van der Meer JW, Kullberg BJ (2004) Recognition of fungal pathogens by Toll-like receptors. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 23:672–676

25. Brown GD, Taylor PR, Reid DM, Willment JA, Williams DL, Martinez-Pomares L, Wong SY, Gordon S (2002) Dectin-1 is a major beta-glucan receptor on macrophages. J Exp Med 196:407–412

26. Gantner BN, Simmons RM, Canavery SJ, Akira S, Underhill DM (2003) Collaborative induction of inflammatory responses by dectin-1 and Toll-like receptor 2. J Exp Med 197:1107–1117

27. Rogers NC, Slack EC, Edwards AD, Nolte MA, Schulz O, Schweighoffer E, Williams DL, Gordon S, Tybulewicz VL, Brown GD, Reis ESC (2005) Syk-dependent cytokine induction by Dectin-1 reveals a novel pattern recognition pathway for C type lectins. Immunity 22:507–517

28. Underhill DM, Rossnagle E, Lowell CA, Simmons RM (2005) Dectin-1 activates Syk tyrosine kinase in a dynamic subset of macrophages for reactive oxygen production. Blood 106:2543–2550

29. Gazzinelli RT, Ropert C, Campos MA (2004) Role of the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor signaling pathway in host resistance and pathogenesis during infection with protozoan parasites. Immunol Rev 201:9–25

30. Yarovinsky F, Zhang D, Andersen JF, Bannenberg GL, Serhan CN, Hayden MS, Hiieny S, Sutterwala FS, Flavell RA, Ghosh S, Sher A (2005) TLR11 activation of dendritic cells by a protozoan profilin-like protein. Science 308(5728):1626–1629

31. Coban C, Ishii KJ, Kawai T, Hemmi H, Sato S, Uematsu S, Yamamoto M, Takeuchi O, Itagaki S, Kumar N, Horii T, Akira S (2005) Toll-like receptor 9 mediates innate immune activation by the malaria pigment hemozoin. J Exp Med 201:19–25

32. Kurt-Jones EA, Popova L, Kwinn L, Haynes LM, Jones LP, Tripp RA, Walsh EE, Freeman MW, Golenbock DT, Anderson LJ, Finberg RW (2000) Pattern recognition receptors TLR4 and CD14 mediate response to respiratory syncytial virus. Nat Immunol 1:398–401

33. Haynes LM, Moore DD, Kurt-Jones EA, Finberg RW, Anderson LJ, Tripp RA (2001) Involvement of toll-like receptor 4 in innate immunity to respiratory syncytial virus. J Virol 75:10730–10737

34. Rassa JC, Meyers JL, Zhang Y, Kudaravalli R, Ross SR (2002) Murine retroviruses activate B cells via interaction with toll-like receptor 4. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:2281–2286

35. Bieback K, Lien E, Klagge IM, Avota E, Schneider-Schaulies J, Duprex WP, Wagner H, Kirschning CJ, Ter Meulen V, Schneider-Schaulies S (2002) Hemagglutinin protein of wild-type measles virus activates toll-like receptor 2 signaling. J Virol 76:8729–8736

36. Compton T, Kurt-Jones EA, Boehme KW, Belko J, Latz E, Golenbock DT, Finberg RW (2003) Human cytomegalovirus activates inflammatory cytokine responses via CD14 and Toll-like receptor 2. J Virol 77:4588–4596

37. Kurt-Jones EA, Chan M, Zhou S, Wang J, Reed G, Bronson R, Arnold MM, Knipe DM, Finberg RW (2004) Herpes simplex virus 1 interaction with Toll-like receptor 2 contributes to lethal encephalitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:1315–1320

38. Alexopoulou L, Holt AC, Medzhitov R, Flavell RA (2001) Recognition of double-stranded RNA and activation of NF-kappaB by Toll-like receptor 3. Nature 413:732–738

39. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, Takeuchi O, Sugiyama M, Okabe M, Takeda K, Akira S (2003) Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. Science 301:640–643

40. Tabetta K, Georgel P, Janssen E, Du X, Hoebe K, Crozat K, Mudd S, Shamel L, Sovath S, Goode J, Alexopoulou L, Flavell RA, Beutler B (2004) Toll-like receptors 9 and 3 as essential components of innate immune defense against mouse cytomegalovirus infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:3516–3521

41. Wang T, Town T, Alexopoulou L, Anderson JF, Fikrig E, Flavell RA (2004) Toll-like receptor 3 mediates West Nile virus entry into the brain causing lethal encephalitis. Nat Med 10: 1366–1373

42. Lund J, Sato A, Akira S, Medzhitov R, Iwasaki A (2003) Toll-like receptor 9-mediated recognition of herpes simplex virus-2 by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. J Exp Med 198:513–520

43. Krug A, French AR, Barchet W, Fischer JA, Dzionek A, Pingel JT, Orihuela MM, Akira S, Yokoyama WM, Colonna M (2004) TLR9-dependent recognition of MCMV by IPC and DC generates coordinated cytokine responses that activate antiviral NK cell function. Immunity 21:107–119

44. Krug A, Luker GD, Barchet W, Leib DA, Akira S, Colonna M (2004) herpes simplex virus type 1 activates murine natural interferon-producing cells through toll-like receptor 9. Blood 103:1433–1437

45. Hemmi H, Kaisho T, Takeuchi O, Sato S, Sanjo H, Hoshino K, Horiuchi T, Tomizawa H, Takeda K, Akira S (2002) Small anti-viral compounds activate immune cells via the TLR7 MyD88-dependent signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 3:196–200

46. Ito T, Amakawa R, Kaisho T, Tajima K, Uehira K, Ozaki Y, Tomizawa H, Akira S, Fukuhara S (2002) Interferon-alpha and interleukin-12 are induced differentially by Toll-like receptor 7 ligands in human blood dendritic cell subsets. J Exp Med 195:1507–1512

47. Akira S, Hemmi H (2003) Recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns by TLR family. Immunol Lett 85:85–95

48. Diebold SS, Kaisho T, Hemmi H, Akira S, Reis E, Sousa C (2004) Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. Science 303:1529–1531

49. Heil F, Hemmi H, Hochrein H, Ampenberger F, Kirschning C, Akira S, Lipford G, Wagner H, Bauer S (2004) Species-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA via toll-like receptor 7 and 8. Science 303:1526–1529

50. Horng T, Barton GM, Flavell RA, Medzhitov R (2002) The adaptor molecule TIRAP provides signalling specificity for Toll-like receptors. Nature 420:329–333

51. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Sanjo H, Uematsu S, Kaisho T, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Kobayashi M, Fujita T, Takeda K, Akira S (2002) Essential role for TIRAP in activation of the signalling cascade shared by TLR2 and TLR4. Nature 420:324–329

52. Kawai T, Adachi O, Ogawa T, Takeda K, Akira S (1999) Unresponsiveness of MyD88-deficient mice to endotoxin. Immunity 11:115–122

53. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Mori K, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, Akira S (2002) Cutting edge: a novel Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the IFN-beta promoter in the Toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol 169:6668–6672

54. Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M, Funami K, Akazawa T, Seya T (2003) TICAM-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in Toll-like receptor 3-mediated interferon-beta induction. Nat Immunol 4:161–167

55. Hoebe K, Du X, Georgel P, Janssen E, Tabetta K, Kim SO, Goode J, Lin P, Mann N, Mudd S, Crozat K, Sovath S, Han J,

Beutler B (2003) Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling. Nature 424:743–748

56. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Uematsu S, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, Akira S (2003) TRAM is specifically involved in the Toll-like receptor 4-mediated MyD88-independent signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 4:1144–1150

57. Bin LH, Xu LG, Shu HB (2003) TIRP, a novel Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adapter protein involved in TIR signaling. J Biol Chem 278:24526–24532

58. Oshiumi H, Sasai M, Shida K, Fujita T, Matsumoto M, Seya T (2003) TIR-containing adapter molecule (TICAM)-2, a bridging adapter recruiting to toll-like receptor 4 TICAM-1 that induces interferon-beta. J Biol Chem 278:49751–49762

59. Sharma S, tenOever BR, Grandvaux N, Zhou GP, Lin R, Hiscott J (2003) Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. Science 300:1148–1151

60. Fitzgerald KA, McWhirter SM, Faia KL, Rowe DC, Latz E, Golenbock DT, Coyle AJ, Liao SM, Maniatis T (2003) IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 4:491–496

61. McWhirter SM, Fitzgerald KA, Rosains J, Rowe DC, Golenbock DT, Maniatis T (2004) IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent gene expression is defective in Tbk1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:233–238

62. Perry AK, Chow EK, Goodnough JB, Yeh WC, Cheng G (2004) Differential requirement for TANK-binding kinase-1 in type I interferon responses to toll-like receptor activation and viral infection. J Exp Med 199:1651–1658

63. Hemmi H, Takeuchi O, Sato S, Yamamoto M, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, Kawai T, Hoshino K, Takeda K, Akira S (2004) The roles of two IkappaB Kinase-related kinases in lipopolysaccharide and double stranded RNA signaling and viral infection. J Exp Med 199:1641–1650

64. Sato S, Sugiyama M, Yamamoto M, Watanabe Y, Kawai T, Takeda K, Akira S (2003) Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and TANK-binding kinase 1, and activates two distinct transcription factors, NF-kappa B and IFN-regulatory factor-3, in the Toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol 171:4304–4310

65. Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Fujita T, Inoue J, Muhlradt PF, Sato S, Hoshino K, Akira S (2001) Lipopolysaccharide stimulates the MyD88-independent pathway and results in activation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 and the expression of a subset of lipopoly-saccharide-inducible genes. J Immunol 167:5887–5894

66. Gohda J, Matsumura T, Inoue J (2004) Cutting edge: TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 6 is essential for MyD88-dependent pathway but not toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)-dependent pathway in TLR signaling. J Immunol 173:2913–2917

67. Meylan E, Burns K, Hofmann K, Blancheteau V, Martinon F, Kelliher M, Tschopp J (2004) RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-kappaB activation. Nat Immunol 5:503–507

68. Liu YJ (2005) IPC: professional type 1 interferon-producing cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors. Annu Rev Immunol 23:275–306

69. Hemmi H, Kaisho T, Takeda K, Akira S (2003) The roles of Toll-like receptor 9, MyD88, and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit in the effects of two distinct CpG DNAs on dendritic cell subsets. J Immunol 170:3059–3064

70. Kawai T, Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, Terai K, Matsuda M, Inoue J, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Akira S (2004) Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. Nat Immunol 5:1061–1068

71. Honda K, Yanai H, Mizutani T, Negishi H, Shimada N, Suzuki N, Ohba Y, Takaoka A, Yeh WC, Taniguchi T (2004) Role of a transductional-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:15416–15421

72. Yang K, Puel A, Zhang S, Eidenschenk C, Ku CL, Casrouge A, Picard C, von Bernuth H, Senechal B, Plancoulaine S, Al-Hajjar S, Al-Ghonaium A, Marodi L, Davidson D, Speert D, Roifman C, Garty BZ, Ozinsky A, Barrat FJ, Coffman RL, Miller RL, Li X, Lebon P, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Chapel H, Geissmann F, Jouanguy E, Casanova JL (2005) Human TLR-7-, -8-, and -9-mediated induction of IFN-alpha/beta and -lambda Is IRAK-4 dependent and redundant for protective immunity to viruses. Immunity 23:465–478

73. Uematsu S, Sato S, Yamamoto M, Hirotani T, Kato H, Takeshita F, Matsuda M, Coban C, Ishii KJ, Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Akira S (2005) Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-1 plays an essential role for Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7- and TLR9-mediated interferon-{alpha} induction. J Exp Med 201:915–923

74. Tsujimura H, Tamura T, Kong HJ, Nishiyama A, Ishii KJ, Klinman, DM, Ozato K (2004) Toll-like receptor 9 signaling activates NF-kappaB through IFN regulatory factor-8/IFN consensus sequence binding protein in dendritic cells. J Immunol 172:6820–6827

75. Ting JP, Kastner DL, Hoffman HM (2006) CATERPILLERs, pyrin and hereditary immunological disorders. Nat Rev Immunol 6:183–195

76. Ogura Y, Bonen DK, Inohara N, Nicolae DL, Chen FF, Ramos R, Britton H, Moran T, Karaliuskas R, Duerr RH, Achkar JP, Brant SR, Bayless TM, Kirschner BS, Hanauer SB, Nunez G, Cho JH (2001) A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease. Nature 411:603–606

77. Chamaillard M, Hashimoto M, Horie Y, Masumoto J, Qiu S, Saab L, Ogura Y, Kawasaki A, Fukase K, Kusumoto S, Valvano MA, Foster SJ, Mak TW, Nunez G, Inohara N (2003) An essential role for NOD1 in host recognition of bacterial peptidoglycan containing diaminopimelic acid. Nat Immunol 4:702–707

78. Inohara N, Ogura Y, Fontalba A, Gutierrez O, Pons F, Crespo J, Fukase K, Inamura S, Kusumoto S, Hashimoto M, Foster SJ, Moran AP, Fernandez-Luna JL, Nunez G (2003) Host recognition of bacterial muramyl dipeptide mediated through NOD2. Implications for Crohn's disease. J Biol Chem 278:5509–5512

79. Girardin SE, Boneca IG, Viala J, Chamaillard M, Labigne A, Thomas G, Philpott DJ, Sansonetti PJ (2003) Nod2 is a general sensor of peptidoglycan through muramyl dipeptide (MDP) detection. J Biol Chem 278:8869–8872

80. Kobayashi K, Inohara, N, Hernandez LD, Galan JE, Nunez G, Janeway CA, Medzhitov R, Flavell RA (2002) RICK/Rip2/CARDIAK mediates signalling for receptors of the innate and adaptive immune systems. Nature 416:194–199

81. Abbott DW, Wilkins A, Asara JM, Cantley LC (2004) The Crohn's disease protein, NOD2, requires RIP2 in order to induce ubiquitinylation of a novel site on NEMO. Curr Biol 14:2217–2227

82. Zhou H, Wertz I, O'Rourke K, Ultsch M, Seshagiri S, Eby M, Xiao W, Dixit VM (2004) Bcl10 activates the NF-kappaB pathway through ubiquitination of NEMO. Nature 427:167–171

83. Damiano JS, Stehlik C, Pio F, Godzik A, Reed JC (2001) CLAN, a novel human CED-4-like gene. Genomics 75:77–83

84. Damiano JS, Oliveira V, Welsh K, Reed JC (2004) Heterotypic interactions among NACHT domains: implications for regulation of innate immune responses. Biochem J 381:213–219

85. Mariathasan S, Newton K, Monack DM, Vucic D, French DM, Lee WP, Roose-Girma M, Erickson S, Dixit VM (2004)

Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipa f. Nature 430:213–218

86. Stehlik C, Hayashi H, Pio F, Godzik A, Reed JC (2003) CARD6 is a modulator of NF-kappa B activation by Nod1- and Cardiak-mediated pathways. J Biol Chem 278:31941–31949

87. Martinon F, Burns K, Tschopp J (2002) The inflammasome: a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory caspases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol Cell 10:417–426

88. Petrilli V, Papin S, Tschopp J (2005) The inflammasome. Curr Biol 15:R581

89. Martinon F, Tschopp J (2004) Inflammatory caspases: linking an intracellular innate immune system to autoinflammatory diseases. Cell 117:561–574

90. Kanneganti TD, Ozoren N, Body-Malapel M, Amer A, Park JH, Franchi L, Whitfield J, Barchet W, Colonna M, Vandenberghe P, Bertin J, Coyle A, Grant EP, Akira S, Nunez G (2006) Bacterial RNA and small antiviral compounds activate caspase-1 through cryopyrin/Nalp3. Nature 440:233–236

91. Mariathasan S, Weiss DS, Newton K, McBride J, O'Rourke K, Roose-Girma M, Lee WP, Weinrauch Y, Monack DM, Dixit VM (2006) Cryopyrin activates the inflammasome in response to toxins and ATP. Nature 440:228–232

92. Martinon F, Petrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J (2006) Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 440:237–241

93. Diez E, Lee SH, Gauthier S, Yaraghi Z, Tremblay M, Vidal S, Gros P (2003) Bircle is the gene within the Lgnl locus associated with resistance to Legionella pneumophila. Nat Genet 33:55–60

94. Zamboni DS, Kobayashi KS, Kohlsdorf T, Ogura Y, Long EM, Vance RE, Kuida K, Mariathasan S, Dixit VM, Flavell RA, Dietrich WF, Roy CR (2006) The Bircle cytosolic pattern-recognition receptor contributes to the detection and control of Legionella pneumophila infection. Nat Immunol 7:318–325

95. Miceli-Richard C, Lesage S, Rybojad M, Prieur AM, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Hafner R, Chamaillard M, Zouali H, Thomas G, Hugot JP (2001) CARD15 mutations in Blau syndrome. Nat Genet 29:19–20

96. Hoffman HM, Mueller JL, Broide DH, Wanderer AA, Kolodner RD (2001) Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome. Nat Genet 29:301–305

97. Aksentijevich I, Nowak M, Mallah M, Chae JJ, Watford WT, Hofmann SR, Stein L, Russo R, Goldsmith D, Dent P, Rosenberg HF, Austin F, Remmers EF, Balow JE Jr, Rosenzweig S, Komarow H, Shoham NG, Wood G, Jones J, Mangra N, Carrero H, Adams BS, Moore TL, Schikler K, Hoffman H, Lovell DJ, Lipnick R, Barron K, O'Shea JJ, Kastner DL, Goldbach-Mansky R (2002) De novo CIAS1 mutations, cytokine activation, and evidence for genetic heterogeneity in patients with neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID): a new member of the expanding family of pyrin-associated autoinflammatory diseases. Arthritis Rheum 46:3340–3348

98. Harton JA, Linhoff MW, Zhang J, Ting JP (2002) Cutting edge: CATERPILLER: a large family of mammalian genes containing CARD, pyrin, nucleotide-binding, and leucine-rich repeat domains. J Immunol 169:4088–4093

99. Ting JP, Davis BK (2005) CATERPILLER: a novel gene family important in immunity, cell death, and diseases. Annu Rev Immunol 23:387–414

100. Steimle V, Otten LA, Zufferey M, Mach B (1993) Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary MHC class II deficiency (or bare lymphocyte syndrome). Cell 75:135–146

101. Kawai T, Akira S (2006) Innate immune recognition of viral infection. Nat Immunol 7:131–137

102. Kang DC, Gopalkrishnan RV, Wu Q, Jankowsky E, Pyle AM, Fisher PB (2002) mda-5: An interferon-inducible putative RNA helicase with double-stranded RNA-dependent ATPase activity and melanoma growth-suppressive properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:637–642

103. Kovacsics M, Martinon F, Micheau O, Bodmer JL, Hofmann K, Tschopp J (2002) Overexpression of Helicard, a CARD-containing helicase cleaved during apoptosis, accelerates DNA degradation. Curr Biol 12:838–843

104. Andrejeva J, Childs KS, Young DF, Carlos TS, Stock N, Goodbourn S, Randall RE (2004) The V proteins of paramyxoviruses bind the IFN-inducible RNA helicase, mda-5, and inhibit its activation of the IFN-beta promoter. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:17264–17269

105. Yoneyama M, Kikuchi M, Matsumoto K, Imazumi T, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Foy E, Loo YM, Gale M Jr, Akira S, Yonehara S, Kato A, Fujita T (2005) Shared and unique functions of the DExD/H-box helicases RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 in antiviral innate immunity. J Immunol 175:2851–2858

106. Rothenfusser S, Goutagny N, DiPerna G, Gong M, Monks BG, Schoenemeyer A, Yamamoto M, Akira S, Fitzgerald KA (2005) The RNA helicase Lgp2 inhibits TLR-independent sensing of viral replication by retinoic acid-inducible gene-I. J Immunol 175:5260–5268

107. Kawai T, Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, Akira S (2005) IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. Nat Immunol 6:981–988

108. Seth RB, Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ (2005) Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF 3. Cell 122:669–682

109. Xu LG, Wang YY, Han KJ, Li LY, Zhai Z, Shu HB (2005) VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling. Mol Cell 19:727–740

110. Meylan E, Curran J, Hofmann K, Moradpour D, Binder M, Bartenschlager R, Tschopp J (2005) Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. Nature 437:1167–1172

111. Bowie A, Kiss-Toth E, Symons JA, Smith GL, Dower SK, O'Neill LA (2000) A46R and A52R from vaccinia virus are antagonists of host IL-1 and toll-like receptor signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:10162–10167

112. Harte MT, Haga IR, Maloney G, Gray P, Reading PC, Bartlett NW, Smith GL, Bowie A, O'Neill LA (2003) The poxvirus protein A52R targets Toll-like receptor signaling complexes to suppress host defense. J Exp Med 197:343–351

113. Stack J, Haga IR, Schroder M, Bartlett NW, Maloney G, Reading PC, Fitzgerald KA, Smith GL, Bowie AG (2005) Vaccinia virus protein A46R targets multiple Toll-like-interleukin-1 receptor adaptors and contributes to virulence. J Exp Med 201:1007–1018

114. Foy E, Li K, Sumpter R Jr, Loo YM, Johnson CL, Wang C, Fish PM, Yoneyama M, Fujita T, Lemon SM, Gale M Jr (2005) Control of antiviral defenses through hepatitis C virus disruption of retinoic acid-inducible gene-I signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:2986–2991

115. Li XD, Sun L, Seth RB, Pineda G, Chen ZJ (2005) Hepatitis C virus protease NS3/4A cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein off the mitochondria to evade innate immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:17717–17722

116. Kawane K, Fukuyama H, Yoshida H, Nagase H, Ohsawa Y, Uchiyama Y, Okada K, Iida T, Nagata S (2003) Impaired thymic

development in mouse embryos deficient in apoptotic DNA
degradation. Nat Immunol 4:138–144
117. Yoshida H, Okabe Y, Kawane K, Fukuyama H, Nagata S (2005)
Lethal anemia caused by interferon-beta produced in mouse
embryos carrying undigested DNA. Nat Immunol 6:49–56
118. Suzuki K, Mori A, Ishii KJ, Saito J, Singer DS, Klinman DM,
Krause PR, Kohn LD (1999) Activation of target-tissue immune-
recognition molecules by double-stranded polynucleotides. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 96:2285–2290
119. Ishii KJ, Suzuki K, Coban C, Takeshita F, Itoh Y, Matoba H,
Kohn LD, Klinman DM (2001) Genomic DNA released by
dying cells induces the maturation of APCs. J Immunol
167:2602–2607
120. Ishii KJ, Coban C, Kato H, Takahashi K, Torii Y, Takeshita F,
Ludwig H, Sutter G, Suzuki K, Hemmi H, Sato S, Yamamoto M,
Uematsu S, Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Akira S (2006) A Toll-like
receptor-independent antiviral response induced by double-
stranded B-form DNA. Nat Immunol 7:40–48
