
Cell Tissue Res (2006) 326:517–533  
DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0264-7  

---

**REVIEW**

**GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and synaptic modulation**

Hans-Christian Kornau

Received: 12 April 2006 / Accepted: 31 May 2006 / Published online: 25 August 2006  
© Springer-Verlag 2006

---

**Abstract** GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors modulate transmitter release and postsynaptic membrane potential at various types of central synapses. They function as heterodimers of two related seven-transmembrane domain receptor subunits. Trafficking, activation and signalling of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are regulated both by allosteric interactions between the subunits and by the binding of additional proteins. Recent studies have shed light on the roles of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in plasticity processes at excitatory synapses. This review summarizes our knowledge of the localization, structure and function of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in the central nervous system and their use as drug targets for neurological and psychiatric disorders.

**Keywords** GABA · G-protein-coupled receptor · Metabotropic · Dendritic spine · Synaptic plasticity

---

**Introduction**

The major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), activates Cl<sup>-</sup> channels termed GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors (for a review, see Möhler 2006, this issue) and elicits metabotropic G-protein-mediated responses by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. Milestones of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor research include the first description of the binding site (Bowery et al. 1980; Hill and Bowery 1981), the development of antagonists (Kerr et al. 1987; Froestl et al.

---

**A receptor for both excitatory and inhibitory synapses: localization**

The GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor is widely distributed throughout the CNS. Both GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor mRNAs and proteins are expressed in almost all neuronal cell populations (Kaupmann et al. 1998; Benke et al. 1999; Fritschy et al. 1999; Margeta-
Mitrović et al. 1999); they have also been detected in non-neuronal cells (Charles et al. 2003; Kuhn et al. 2004). The subcellular localization of the receptor in neurons has been studied in detail in the hippocampus (Kulik et al. 2003), which may be exemplary for other regions of the brain (Gonchar et al. 2001; Kulik et al. 2002). Pre-embedding immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy (EM) have demonstrated GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at presynaptic and, more abundantly, at postsynaptic elements. Presynaptically, the receptors have been detected at extrasynaptic sites and occasionally at the presynaptic membrane specialization of glutamatergic terminals and, less frequently, of GABAergic terminals. Postsynaptically, the receptors are found in dendritic shafts of principal neurons and interneurons and in dendritic spines. The receptors are concentrated around glutamatergic synapses in spines but are evenly distributed over dendritic shafts of principal neurons contacted by GABAergic terminals (Kulik et al. 2003). All in all, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have been located in positions to modulate GABAergic and, in particular, glutamatergic synapses.

How can GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at extrasynaptic sites and excitatory synapses be activated? One suggestion is that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors located at a considerable distance from GABA release sites are activated by GABA “spillover” occurring when assemblies of neurons fire in synchrony or in cases of hyperexcitation accompanying, for example, epileptic seizures (Isaacson 2000; Kulik et al. 2003). According to this model, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors mediate a “paracrine” action of GABA (Isaacson 2000). Measurements from pairs of interneurons and pyramidal neurons in cultured hippocampal slices have revealed that the simultaneous release of GABA from several interneurons, as occurs during rhythmic hippocampal activity, or the blockade of GABA uptake results in the activation of postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, which in turn control the oscillation frequency of the network (Scanziani 2000). Similarly, effects of presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors on excitatory terminals in the hippocampus and the cerebellum have been found to be mediated by “spillover” from nearby GABAergic release sites rather than by axo-axonal synapses (Isaacson et al. 1993; Dittman and Regehr 1997; Vogt and Nicoll 1999). Thus, mechanisms influencing the concentration of GABA outside the synaptic cleft can affect GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation. In addition, at certain excitatory synapses, presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors may be activated by GABA released from dendrites (Zilberter et al. 1999).

During pre- and postnatal brain development, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors show a similar pre- and postsynaptic distribution as in adulthood in the neocortex, hippocampus and dorsal cochlear nucleus (Lopez-Bendito et al. 2002, 2004; Luján et al. 2004). A localization study of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in the developing cerebellum by using quantitative analysis and

three-dimensional reconstructions of electron micrographs has revealed a progressive lateral movement of the receptor on the surface of Purkinje cells from dendritic shafts into dendritic spines between postnatal days 7 and 21 (Luján and Shigemoto 2006). Thus, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor distribution seems to be coregulated with the establishment of excitatory inputs onto Purkinje cells. GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have also been detected on olfactory nerve terminals at early developmental stages (Panzanelli et al. 2004; Priest and Puche 2004). These data suggest a role for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors during the formation of synapses and neuronal circuits.

### An obligatory heterodimeric G-protein-coupled receptor: structure and activation

The GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor has a structure initially regarded as special within the field of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). It is built from two related seven-transmembrane domain receptor subunits: GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Marshall et al. 1999). Heterodimerization of these two subunits is a prerequisite for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor function. Expression cloning of the first GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subunit GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> (Kaupmann et al. 1997) has revealed that the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor belongs to family 3 or C of GPCRs characterized by a long extracellular ligand-binding domain encompassing metabotropic glutamate (for a review, see Ferraguti and Shigemoto 2006, this issue), calcium-sensing (Brown and MacLeod 2001), vomeronasal (Dulac 2000) and taste (Scott 2004) receptors, plus several orphan receptors. Subsequent searches for proteins displaying conspicuous sequence similarity to GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> or interacting with GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> have supplied the partner subunit GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Jones et al. 1998; Kaupmann et al. 1998; White et al. 1998; Kuner et al. 1999; Martin et al. 1999; Ng et al. 1999). Recent studies on the activation mechanism of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor have explained why it only functions as a heterodimer (Kubo and Tateyama 2005; Pin et al. 2005).

The receptor assembles by a C-terminal coiled-coil interaction between the intracellular tails of the subunits (White et al. 1998; Kammerer et al. 1999; Kuner et al. 1999) and an additional binding between the extracellular and/or the membrane-spanning regions. The two subunits fulfil different functions. The extracellular N-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> is sufficient for ligand binding (Malitschek et al. 1999; Deriu et al. 2005) but assembly with GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> increases the affinity of the receptor to agonists (Kaupmann et al. 1998; White et al. 1998). Both the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> N-terminal domains contain a venus flytrap module (VFTM; Galvez et al. 1999, 2000a). Modelling the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> VFTM based on homology to the X-ray structures of bacterial periplasmic-binding proteins in
Cell Tissue Res (2006) 326:517–533

Table 1 Selected effects of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors on synaptic transmission (NMDA N-methyl-D-aspartate, GABA γ-aminobutyric acid, mGluR1 metabotropic glutamate receptor 1)

| Effect | Signal transduction | Localization | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Inhibition of elicited neurotransmitter release | GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors inhibit voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels via G protein β/γ subunits. | Presynaptic terminals releasing GABA or other neurotransmitters | Dunlap and Fischbach 1981; Scholz and Miller 1991; Dittman and Regehr 1996; Ikeda 1996; Takahashi et al. 1998 |
| Retardation of synaptic vesicle recruitment during sustained activity | GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors inhibit adenylate cyclases via G<sub>i/o</sub>α proteins resulting in a decreased local cAMP level. This retards vesicle recruitment, which probably relies on a cAMP- and Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent guanine nucleotide exchange factor. | Presynaptic glutamatergic terminal (calyx of Held) | Sakaba and Neher 2003 |
| Slow inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs) | GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors activate inwardly-rectifying K<sup>+</sup> channels (GIRK/Kir3) via G protein β/γ subunits. | Postsynaptic compartments | Newberry and Nicoll 1984; Dutar and Nicoll 1988; Otis et al. 1993; Kofuji et al. 1995; Luscher et al. 1997 |
| Expression of long-term potentiation of slow synaptic inhibition | Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx through NMDA receptor channels induces long-term increases in GABA<sub>B</sub>-GIRK-mediated sIPSCs. Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin kinase II activity and the RNA-binding protein Nova-2 are necessary for the induction of the potentiation. | Postsynaptic side of glutamatergic synapse (dendritic spines of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons) | Huang et al. 2005 |
| Enhancement of metabotropic glutamate receptor responses | mGluR1 signalling can be sensitized either in a GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation-dependent pathway involving G protein cross-talk or by a constitutive cofactor function of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor in a GABA<sub>B</sub>-mGluR1 complex independently of GABA and G<sub>i/o</sub> protein activation. | Postsynaptic side of glutamatergic synapse (dendritic spines of cerebellar Purkinje cells) | Hirono et al. 2001; Tabata et al. 2004 |

combination with mutational analysis has identified the amino acid residues of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> involved in the binding of GABA (Kniazeff et al. 2002; Bettler et al. 2004). Our understanding of VFTMs in family C GPCR activation has been improved significantly by the X-ray structure of the dimeric extracellular domain of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) 1 in the presence and absence of glutamate (Kunishima et al. 2000). Agonist binding to GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> results in the closure of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> VFTM inducing conformational changes in the relative positions of the two VFTMs and of the heptahelical domains. This movement allows G protein activation mediated by the heptahelical domain of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> with important determinants residing in the intracellular loops (Robbins et al. 2001; Duthey et al. 2002; Havlickova et al. 2002). The subunits influence each other allosterically during both steps of the sequential activation process (Galvez et al. 2001; Margeta-Mitrovic et al. 2001a,b; Liu et al. 2004). The closure of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> VFTM is facilitated by GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> and the G-protein-coupling of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> is in turn enhanced by the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> subunit, providing an explanation for the requirement of heterodimerization for signal transduction. Ligand binding to the extracellular domain of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> is not required for the allosteric interaction of the subunits (Kniazeff et al. 2002) and it remains unclear whether the GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> VFTM closes during the sequential activation of the receptor. No ligand binding to the GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> VFTM has been reported, although a new synthetic compound, CGP 7930, has been shown to influence GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> activity by binding directly to its heptahelical domain (Binet et al. 2004).

The GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor was the first GPCR shown to require heterodimerization for its function and this finding boosted efforts to analyse the dimerization of other seven-transmembrane domain proteins by using biochemical and biophysical techniques (Bouvier 2001). Dimerization is now well accepted for many GPCRs. Several family C GPCRs form constitutive dimers by intermolecular disulphide bridges between their extracellular cysteine-rich domains (Romano et al. 1996; Pin et al. 2005). For rhodopsin, a prototype family A GPCR, homodimers and higher order oligomeric states have been demonstrated in native membranes (Fotiadis et al. 2003; Liang et al. 2003). Heterodimerization can provide a mechanism to increase receptor diversity and to generate receptors with different ligand selectivities by combinatorial arrangements of sub-
units. Taste receptors of the T1R family, for example, are obligatory heterodimers like GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. Assembly of the seven-transmembrane domain proteins T1R1 and T1R3 results in receptors for the umami taste, whereas T1R2 and T1R3 form sweet receptors (Scott 2004). In general, combinations of seven-transmembrane domain proteins appear to increase the pharmacological diversity of GPCRs and the cross-talk between different transmitter systems (Bouvier 2001) with important implications for drug development (George et al. 2002).

Pre- and postsynaptic consequences of activation: signalling

Table 1 summarizes selected effects of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors on synaptic transmission.

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are coupling to heterotrimeric G proteins of the G<sub>i</sub>- and G<sub>o</sub>-type, probably in a stoichiometry of one receptor heterodimer to one G protein (Bettler et al. 2004). Upon activation of the G protein, the βγ complex inhibits Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels and activates K<sup>+</sup> channels, whereas the α subunit influences the level of the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by regulating adenylate cyclase activities.

The major effect of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in presynaptic nerve terminals is the voltage-dependent inhibition of N- and P/Q-type voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels (Dunlap and Fischbach 1981; Scholz and Miller 1991; Mintz and Bean 1993; Pfrieger et al. 1994; Dittman and Regehr 1996; Ikeda 1996; Takahashi et al. 1998; Filipov et al. 2000; Poncer et al. 2000), resulting in presynaptic inhibition of elicited neurotransmitter release (Wu and Saggau 1997). Presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors regulating GABA release are termed autoreceptors, whereas GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors controlling the release of other neurotransmitters are called heteroreceptors. The βγ-mediated inhibition of the Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels is relieved by strong depolarization, which may result in a differential frequency-dependent modulation of action potential trains (Brody and Yue 2000). L-, T- and R-type Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel currents are also regulated by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (Wu et al. 1998; Bettler et al. 2004).

On the postsynaptic side, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors induce a slow inhibitory postsynaptic current (sIPSC) mediated by G-protein-activated inwardly rectifying K<sup>+</sup> (GIRK/Kir3) channels (Newberry and Nicoll 1984; Newberry and Nicoll 1985; Dutar and Nicoll 1988; Otis et al. 1993; Lüscher et al. 1997). Upon activation by the G protein βγ complex (Kofuji et al. 1995), these channels allow an increased efflux of K<sup>+</sup> resulting in a slow hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane. Mice with a targeted deletion of the Kir3.2 subunit lack GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor agonist-inducible outward currents in hippocampal neurons, underscoring the involvement of Kir3 channels as GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor effectors in vivo (Lüscher et al. 1997). However, additional K<sup>+</sup> channels with rectification properties differing from Kir3 channels may also be opened by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation (Bettler et al. 2004).

All in all, presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors primarily regulate transmitter release by the inhibition of Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels, whereas postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors lead to a GIRK-channel-mediated hyperpolarization. However, GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-mediated inhibition of postsynaptic Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels (Harayama et al. 1998) and the activation of presynaptic K<sup>+</sup> currents have also been observed (Thompson and Gähwiler 1992).

GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-activated G<sub>i</sub>α and G<sub>o</sub>α proteins inhibit adenylate cyclase types I, III, V and VI (Hill 1985; Simonds 1999). In cross-talk with G<sub>s</sub>-coupled GPCRs, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors can however also increase the activity of adenylate cyclase forms II, IV and VII (Bowery et al. 2002). The consequences of adenylate cyclase modulation include a differential activation of cAMP-dependent kinase and guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). These in turn may induce changes in ion channel activities (Gerber and Gähwiler 1994). Moreover, synaptic lowering of cAMP by presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors retards synaptic vesicle recruitment during sustained activity and after short-term depression, implicating the GABA<sub>B</sub>-cAMP pathway in synaptic plasticity processes, as described below (Sakaba and Neher 2003). A G<sub>i/o</sub> protein-dependent enhancement of mGluR1 responses in cerebellar Purkinje cell dendrites by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation has also been described (Hirono et al. 2001). The analysis of this functional cross-talk has suggested a signalling pathway including Ca<sup>2+</sup> release from internal stores upon G<sub>i/o</sub> protein-mediated phospholipase C activation and possibly involving cooperative upregulation of GPCR signalling by G protein β/γ subunits.

During postnatal development, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors move from dendritic shafts into dendritic spines of cerebellar Purkinje cells suggesting that the modulation of synaptic transmission and neuronal excitability by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors is also involved in developmental physiological events (Lujan and Shigemoto 2006). Moreover, in rat embryonic organotypic cultures, the blockade of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor signalling significantly changes the distribution of tangentially migrating interneurons in the cortex and reduces the length of their leading processes (Lopez-Bendito et al. 2003). In developing mouse olfactory receptor neurons, which express GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors from embryonic day 14 onwards, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation reduces neurite outgrowth (Priest and Puche 2004). Thus, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor signalling is not only crucial for the modulation of nascent and mature synapses, but may also be involved in developmental processes such as neuronal migration and axon growth. Moreover, an independent maturation of
GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> during postnatal development has suggested a function of these proteins in the immature brain in addition to their contribution to dimeric GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor complexes (Fritschy et al. 2004).

The signalling of many GPCRs is subject to desensitization during continuous or repeated use of the receptor. However, the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor does not appear to fit onto the classical scheme of desensitization with receptor phosphorylation, β-arrestin-recruitment and endocytosis upon sustained or repeated activation. A cAMP-dependent kinase-mediated phosphorylation at serine 892 of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> has been found to result in an increased stability of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor heterodimer at the cell surface, in facilitated GIRK channel coupling and in attenuated desensitization of the currents (Couve et al. 2002; Fairfax et al. 2004). Independently, G-protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK) 4 has been identified as a crucial factor for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor desensitization assessed by GTPγS binding after prolonged stimulation (Perroy et al. 2003). GRK4 expression is necessary for agonist-induced GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor desensitization in cerebellar granule cells and restores agonist-promoted desensitization in HEK293 cells. This kind of desensitization is atypical as it neither depends on ligand-induced phosphorylation of the receptor nor requires the kinase activity of GRK4. In addition, studies in HEK293T cells indicate that the desensitization of GABA<sub>B</sub>-dependent GIRK currents can be enhanced by “regulator of G protein signalling” proteins (Mutneja et al. 2005). In vivo, marked differences in the desensitization of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor responses have been observed depending on the analyzed cell type and membrane compartment (Bettler and Tiao 2006). However, these differences, which are probably of physiological relevance, may depend on the differential use of G proteins or effector systems (Cruz et al. 2004; Koyrakh et al. 2005) and not necessarily on intrinsic properties of the receptor. The relationship between GABA<sub>B</sub> desensitization, receptor internalization and tolerance to GABA<sub>B</sub> drugs requires further analysis (Bettler and Tiao 2006).

(Kulik et al. 2006), an essential subunit of GIRK channels in the hippocampus (Lüscher et al. 1997). Similar to GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, GIRK2 molecules have been detected at the extrasynaptic plasma membrane of dendritic shafts and spines. Importantly, GIRK2 is enriched around glutamatergic synapses in dendritic spines (Kulik et al. 2006). Using an SDS-digested freeze-fracture replica immunolabeling technique, Kulik et al. (2006) have succeeded in simultaneously detecting GIRK2, GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and PSD95 at the EM level. Their results show a striking colocalization of GIRK2 and GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> in dendritic spines but a segregated distribution in dendritic shafts. This differential compartment-dependent distribution is functionally relevant, as the efficiency of coupling between GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and GIRKs, which is mediated by G protein β/γ subunits diffusing in a membrane-delimited manner, strongly depends on the distance between the proteins. These data imply that, in the vicinity of glutamatergic synapses in hippocampal dendritic spines, hyperpolarizing GIRK-mediated K<sup>+</sup> currents are primarily elicited by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation, whereas in dendritic shafts, GIRK-mediated outward currents may be activated by other G-protein-coupled receptors. The GIRK-mediated slow hyperpolarizing currents in dendritic spines are important for shunting excitatory synaptic currents and can control N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activation and thereby the induction of synaptic plasticity (Otmakhova and Lisman 2004). Thus, GIRK channels and GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in dendritic spines are positioned to fulfil a control function on excitatory transmission upon activation by GABA “spilling over” from nearby inhibitory circuits. The tight colocalization of GIRK2 and GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> suggests that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors might form direct protein complexes with GIRK channels, as described for other GPCRs (Lavine et al. 2002). Interestingly, the GABA<sub>B</sub>/GIRK signalling complex in hippocampal dendritic spines is involved in the expression of long-term changes of inhibitory currents as outlined below (Huang et al. 2005).

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor signalling in dendritic spines of other neuronal populations may depend on the differential expression and distribution of GIRK channel subunits (Cruz et al. 2004; Koyrakh et al. 2005). Moreover, in dendritic spines of cerebellar Purkinje cells, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors display a distribution similar to that of mGluR1 allowing cross-talk and/or complex formation between these GPCRs (Hirono et al. 2001; Tabata et al. 2004); this may be important for cerebellar long-term depression (Lujan and Shigemoto 2006).

### Postsynaptic control of excitatory transmission: GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in dendritic spines

Dendritic spines are specialized compartments housing the postsynaptic side of the majority of excitatory synapses. GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have been found to be enriched around synapses in dendritic spines in hippocampal pyramidal neurons (Kulik et al. 2003), cerebellar Purkinje cells (Kulik et al. 2002) and the dorsal cochlear nucleus (Lujan et al. 2004), suggesting a GABAergic control of glutamatergic transmission onto dendritic spines. GIRK channels are the main postsynaptic effectors of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and a recent study has elucidated the spatial distribution of GIRK2

### Changing the efficacy of synaptic transmission: plasticity

Modulation of transmitter release by presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and the tight GIRK channel coupling of GABA<sub>B</sub>
receptors in dendritic spines controlling postsynaptic NMDA receptor activation are involved in regulating the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampal regions CA1 and CA3 (Davies et al. 1991; Mott and Lewis 1991; Vogt and Nicoll 1999; Otmakhova and Lisman 2004). Two intriguing recent findings have unravelled additional roles for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activity in short-term and long-term changes of synaptic transmission.

The depletion of presynaptic neurotransmitter vesicles available for release is a mechanism used to modulate synaptic strength reflecting the history of use of a synapse. Sakaba and Neher (2003) have shown that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation directly influences this process by retarding the recruitment of synaptic vesicles of the fast vesicle pool during sustained activity and after short-term depression. Their experiments at the glutamatergic calyx of Held synapse (for a review, see Scheggenburger and Forsythe 2006, this issue) have revealed that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation decreases synaptic strength not only by down-regulating Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx, but also by slowing the refilling of the pool of primed vesicles at the active zone. This synaptic modulation relies on a G-protein-mediated lowering of cAMP. At a late step of synaptic vesicle recruitment, cAMP and Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin appear to cooperate, possibly during the activation of a cAMP-dependent GEF. The regulation of recruitment of the fast vesicle pool (for a review, see Becherer and Rettig 2006, this issue) is physiologically relevant for synchronous activity during trains of action potentials. This study delineated for the first time that presynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors act directly on molecular components of the release machinery by lowering cAMP (Stevens 2004).

A recent study has implicated GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors additionally in a new form of LTP in dendritic spines (Huang et al. 2005). The term LTP had previously been tightly connected to a stable increase in excitatory postsynaptic currents induced by NMDA receptor activation. However, in postsynaptic CA1 pyramidal neurons, NMDA receptor activation also leads to a long-lasting increase in the sIPSC mediated by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and GIRK channels. This new form of synaptic plasticity has been observed in both acute and cultured hippocampal slices. Whereas the induction of both types of LTP (excitatory and inhibitory) depend on Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx through NMDA receptors (for a review, see Köhr 2006, this issue) and Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent kinase II activation, only the LTP of slow synaptic inhibition requires the presence of the RNA-binding protein “neuro-oncological ventral antigen” (Nova) 2. Mice with a targeted deletion of the Nova-2 gene show normal excitatory LTP and normal sIPSCs but no LTP of slow inhibition. Nova-2 regulates alternative splicing of a large number of mRNAs in the brain including those for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and GIRK channels (Ule et al. 2003,

2005). However, it remains unclear whether Nova-2 exerts its function crucial for LTP of synaptic inhibition by differentially splicing the pre-mRNAs for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, GIRKs or associated proteins in the nucleus or by targeting and regulating mRNAs for these proteins outside of the nucleus, e.g. in neuronal processes (Huang et al. 2005). Interestingly, Nova-2 is the target of an autoimmune response in patients suffering from a rare neurological disorder termed paraneoplastic opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia, which is characterized by abnormal motor inhibition and cognitive loss (Pranzatelli 1992; Yang et al. 1998). Thus, the activation of NMDA receptors in dendritic spines potentiates not only fast excitation, but also slow inhibition. As a consequence, the coincidence detection of excitatory events may be sharpened by reducing the impact of late-arriving inputs (Huang et al. 2005). Moreover, given that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation influences the oscillation frequency of hippocampal pyramidal neurons (Scanziani 2000), LTP of slow synaptic inhibition may also modulate rhythmic activities with additional implications for learning and memory (Huang et al. 2005).

### Limited molecular variation: subtypes

Most neurotransmitters can activate several GPCRs differing in pharmacological, G-protein-coupling or signal transduction properties. For example, the family of mGluRs, the closest relatives of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, consists of eight mGluR subtypes (for a review, see Ferraguti and Shigemoto 2006, this issue). Pharmacological studies have also predicted the presence of a variety of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (Bonanno and Raiteri 1993; Cunningham and Enna 1996; Bonanno et al. 1997). However, mammalian genomes contain only two GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor genes, viz. GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>, which encode subunits of essentially one heterodimeric GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor. Extensive database mining has not revealed additional genes encoding GPCRs of high similarity to GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> or GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>. One related protein, GABA<sub>B</sub>-like protein (Calver et al. 2003), does not appear to mediate GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor functions. Alternative splicing of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor mRNAs has been suggested as a mechanism leading to an increased GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor variety, with six alternatively spliced GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> mRNAs having been identified (Bettler et al. 2004). However, protein products of these mRNA variants have not been demonstrated in native tissue as yet. In contrast, alternative transcriptional start site selection on the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> gene results in two isoforms, viz. GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub>, which form the basis of two proteins highly expressed in the CNS. GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> in contrast to GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub> contains two N-terminal sushi domains, also called short consensus repeats or complement control protein modules, hitherto
known as interaction domains in complement system proteins. The two main GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> variants are conserved from zebrafish to man (Bettler et al. 2004) and show temporally and spatially different expression patterns in the brain (Kaupmann et al. 1997; Benke et al. 1999; Fritschy et al. 1999). In heterologous expression systems, they display an indistinguishable pharmacology upon assembly with GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>. However, a differential subcellular distribution with concomitant coupling to different types of G proteins can lead to pharmacological and functional differences. The isoforms may also differ in their pre- and postsynaptic distribution (Benke et al. 1999). The sushi repeats are expected to bind to molecules of the extracellular matrix and an interaction of the first sushi repeat with fibulin-2 has been reported (Blein et al. 2004). GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> is the predominant isoform in the prenatal brain suggesting the importance of the sushi repeats in development. The role of GABA<sub>B(1a,2)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b,2)</sub> as the major subtypes of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are currently being intensively investigated by using genetic and biochemical tools.

that the coiled-coil interaction is involved in shielding the ER retention motif (Margeta-Mitrovic et al. 2000; Calver et al. 2001; Pagano et al. 2001). In agreement with this, GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> does not reach the cell surface in mice lacking the C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Thualt et al. 2004). Nevertheless, in the context of the full-length receptors, forward trafficking is not completely abolished in the absence of the coiled-coil interaction (Pagano et al. 2001; Grünewald et al. 2002), suggesting that this interaction is not absolutely necessary for masking the retention signal. In accord with this, ectopic RSRR signals in the distal C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> are efficiently masked by GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> without coiled-coil interaction (Gassmann et al. 2005). Thus, the masking of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> ER retention signal may be mediated by direct shielding of the signal by the coiled-coil interaction or by other structural changes induced by GABA<sub>B(1)/</sub>GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> heteromerization, e.g. by reducing the spacing of RSRR to the plasma membrane (Gassmann et al. 2005). The ER trafficking checkpoint ensures exclusive surface trafficking of correctly assembled and therefore functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (neurotransmitter receptor trafficking is reviewed by Groc and Choquet 2006, this issue).

### Tightly controlled transient ER retention: trafficking

The forward transport of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor is regulated by transient endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention, a feature that the receptor shares with a number of additional multisubunit integral membrane proteins (Zerangue et al. 1999; Michelsen et al. 2005). GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> is retained within the ER (Couve et al. 1998), unless it assembles with GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (White et al. 1998). Accordingly, GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> remains largely within the ER in GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> knockout mice and does not reach distal neurites as in wild-type mice (Gassmann et al. 2004a). The retention relies on an RSRR signal (where R is arginine and S is serine) located in the distal C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> in the direct vicinity of the coiled-coil region (Margeta-Mitrovic et al. 2000). The efficacy of the retention signal has been found to depend on the distance to the plasma membrane: ectopic RSRR signals are only functional in the distal C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> (Gassmann et al. 2005). The sequence context of the ER retention signal also affects its efficacy (Grünewald et al. 2002; Gassmann et al. 2005). In addition to the RSRR signal, a dileucine signal contributes to the intracellular retention of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> (Margeta-Mitrovic et al. 2000; Restituito et al. 2005).

In transfected cells, expression of the soluble GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> C-terminus (Pagano et al. 2001; Grünewald et al. 2002) or the GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> coiled-coil domain tagged with green fluorescence protein (Brock et al. 2005) is sufficient to target coexpressed GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> to the plasma membrane. Moreover, point mutations destabilizing the coiled-coil domains of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> or GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> support the notion

### Coiled-coils and beyond: interactions

GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> are assembled into a functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor. The C-terminal tails of the subunits mediate a coiled-coil interaction but are not required for the ligand-induced signalling of the receptor (Calver et al. 2001; Pagano et al. 2001; Grünewald et al. 2002). In addition, however, interactions of the intracellular C-terminal domains of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> or GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> with several other proteins have been identified, most of them by using genetic screens such as the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) system. These include members of the 14-3-3 family (Couve et al. 2001), several leucine zipper-containing transcription factors (Nehring et al. 2000; White et al. 2000; Vernon et al. 2001; Sauter et al. 2005) and an RNA-binding protein (Couve et al. 2004). The interactions of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are not restricted to cytoplasmic factors. GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have been reported to bind to fibulin-2 (Blein et al. 2004) and to HNK-1 carbohydrate on neural recognition molecules (Saghatelyan et al. 2003) in the extracellular matrix. A ionotropic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subunit has also been shown to interact with GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (Balasubramanian et al. 2004). Finally, in a complex with mGluR1, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors can function as Ca<sup>2+</sup>-sensitive cofactors for metabotropic glutamate signalling (Tabata et al. 2004).

The interaction of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> C-terminus with two members of the 14-3-3 family of proteins, viz. 14-3-3η and 14-3-3ζ, was identified several years ago (Couve et al. 2001). A fragment of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> C-terminus mediating
the interaction with 14-3-3 encompasses part of the coiled-coil domain and the RSRR ER retention signal. Recruitment of 14-3-3 proteins can counteract arginine-motif-based ER retention of oligomeric membrane protein complexes by direct competition with coatomer vesicle coat protein (COPI; Yuan et al. 2003; Michelsen et al. 2005). Although this also suggests a role for 14-3-3 in GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor trafficking, and although 14-3-3 and COPI are able to interact with the RSRR signal in the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> C-terminus, recent results indicate that 14-3-3-binding to GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> is not required for the controlled surface targeting of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (Brock et al. 2005). However, delineating the functional consequences of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor/14-3-3 interaction is complicated: 14-3-3 exists in seven isoforms with diverse functions rendering the interpretation of both overexpression and interfering RNA knock-down experiments in mammalian cells difficult.

Genetic screens for the interaction partners of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> have also frequently revealed the activating transcription factor (ATF) 4/cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) 2 and ATF4 (Nehring et al. 2000; White et al. 2000; Vernon et al. 2001). This interaction is based on the leucine zipper domains in ATFs and the coiled-coil domain in GABA<sub>B(1)</sub>, although the ATFs can independently bind to GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Nehring et al. 2000; White et al. 2000). The interaction of a GPCR with a transcription factor has provoked questions about its physiological role. ATF4 has been detected not only in the nucleus, but also in the cytoplasm of primary neuronal cells (White et al. 2000), it co-localizes with GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> in cultured neurons (Nehring et al. 2000; Vernon et al. 2001) and in retinal amacrine cells in vivo (Nehring et al. 2000) and activation of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors leads both to changes in the nuclear-somatic distribution of ATF4 and to an increased expression of an ATF4-responsive reporter gene (White et al. 2000). These results are in agreement with the model that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation results in changes in transcription mediated by ATF4. Interestingly, in vivo treatment of rats with a GABA<sub>B</sub> antagonist with cognition enhancing activity reduces the total cAMP-response-element binding in the hippocampus (Helm et al. 2005). However, a translocation of ATF4 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm of cultured hippocampal neurons has been also described as a consequence of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation (Vernon et al. 2001). The interaction of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> with ATF4 may also be involved in the regulation of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor expression. The two main isoforms of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> result from alternative transcriptional start sites and ATF4 has been shown to differentially regulate GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub> promoter activity (Steiger et al. 2004). Thus, the binding of ATF4 to GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> may be part of a feedback mechanism connecting receptor number and gene regulation.

An additional level of regulation of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor expression is suggested by the finding that GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> can bind to an RNA-binding brain-specific protein termed Marlin-1 (Couve et al. 2004). This multiple coiled-coil domain protein binds to a variety of mRNAs including the 3'-untranslated regions of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> and down-regulation of Marlin-1 in primary cortical neurons by RNA interference results in increased GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> expression. Thus, Marlin-1 may control the expression of functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors by regulating the cellular levels of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>.

Recently, a subtype-selective interactor of GABA<sub>B(1a,2)</sub> receptors was identified (Sauter et al. 2005). The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP) was found in a Y2H screen with the C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> as a bait. Further analyses revealed a coiled-coil interaction between CHOP and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> and, in addition, the binding of a different region in CHOP to GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub>, but not to GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub>. Both interactions were necessary to regulate the surface expression of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in transfected HEK293 cells. Coexpression of GABA<sub>B(1a,2)</sub> with CHOP resulted in an intracellular accumulation of the receptor. Given that the two GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> subtypes differ only in extracellular sequences, conformational differences between GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub> must account for the selective binding of CHOP.

The coiled-coil domains appear to serve as docking platforms for several GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-interacting proteins. However, in most cases, the interactions with the partner subunit and with a soluble coiled-coil interaction partner are mutually exclusive. Some of these interactions may occur transiently, e.g. during trafficking of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subunits in the ER, before the functional heterodimer is formed. Possibly, the number and composition of functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at the cell surface is affected by the differential repertoire of coiled-coil interaction partners in different cell types or cellular situations including activation, stress or toxicity (Sauter et al. 2005).

A dileucine motif in the C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> has been shown to influence surface trafficking of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at the level of the trans-Golgi network (Margeta-Mitrovic et al. 2000; Restituito et al. 2005). A GEF for the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) family of GTPases termed mSec7-1, which is typically involved in vesicular membrane trafficking, has been shown to interact with the C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and to influence its surface trafficking in a dileucine motif-dependent manner (Restituito et al. 2005). These data suggest that mSec7-1 regulates the export of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> from the trans-Golgi network.

In addition to the coiled-coil domain, the intracellular C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> contains a PDZ-domain-interaction motif (C-terminal amino acids SGL, where S is serine, G is glycine and L is leucine). PDZ domains are found in a number of scaffolding proteins connecting receptors andchannels with signal transduction complexes at sites of cell-to-cell contact (Kornau et al. 1997; Kim and Sheng 2004). A PDZ domain protein interacting with the C-termini of several mGluRs termed tamalin (for “tagging mGluRs and ARF-GEF”) has also shown a capability to bind GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> in the Y2H assay (Kitano et al. 2002). Tamalin is a scaffolding protein physically linking components of postsynaptic signalling and trafficking pathways. The multi-PDZ domain protein MUPP1 (Milligan and White 2001), NEM-sensitive factor NSF and the actin-binding protein β-filamin have also been suggested as candidate interaction partners of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (White et al. 2002).

Two extracellular interactions of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor have been described. First of all, HNK-1 carbohydrate, frequently found on neural recognition molecules of the extracellular matrix (for a review, see Dityatev and Schachner 2006, this issue) including tenascin-R and tenascin-C, interacts with GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-containing membranes in vitro and inhibits GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-activated K<sup>+</sup> currents in transfected cells (Saghatelyan et al. 2003). Moreover, a neutralizing HNK-1 antibody stimulates GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor-mediated activation of K<sup>+</sup> currents in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, resulting in an increased extracellular K<sup>+</sup> concentration and a reduction in evoked release of GABA in perisomatic inhibitory synapses. These data suggest HNK-1-mediated suppression of postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors as a mechanism underlying the regulation of perisomatic inhibition in the hippocampus by recognition molecules (Saghatelyan et al. 2003). Secondly, the extracellular matrix protein fibulin-2 has been found to interact with the N-terminal sushi repeat in the GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> isoform. A detailed study of the two sushi repeats in GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> has revealed that they have strikingly different structural properties, with the more C-terminal one being more compactly folded (Blein et al. 2004). A recombinant fibulin-2 fragment binds GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors from synaptic plasma membranes and the recombinant N-terminal sushi repeat is able to interact with fibulin-2 from cellular extracts. The fibulin-2 interaction is highly interesting because the sushi repeats constitute the only difference between the known GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subtypes. Thus, interactions of the sushi repeats may explain the differential subcellular distribution of GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub>- versus GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub>-containing receptors.

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subunits have also been reported to interact with components of other neuronal receptors. Tests of a series of receptor proteins for trafficking GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> to the plasma membrane of transfected cells have revealed that the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor γ2 subunit can promote surface expression of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> in the absence of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Balasubramanian et al. 2004). The interaction is mediated partly by the intracellular loop of γ2 and a distal portion of the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> C-terminus. The γ2 subunit is able to interact with the GABA<sub>B(1,2)</sub> heterodimer and experiments

in transfected cells suggest a role in agonist-promoted internalization of the receptor. Thus, the γ2 subunit might affect both GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor forward trafficking and internalization (Balasubramanian et al. 2004).

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have been found to augment mGluR1 responses depending on the extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration in cerebellar Purkinje cells, which show a strong codistribution of both receptors (Tabata et al. 2004). This novel Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent cofactor function of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor has been tested because (1) mGluR1 signalling is enhanced as a consequence of the interaction between Ca<sup>2+</sup> and an unknown protein (Tabata et al. 2002) and (2) the binding of Ca<sup>2+</sup> to a region close to the GABA-binding site in GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> increases the agonist affinity of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor (Wise et al. 1999; Galvez et al. 2000b). The results show that the described mGluR1 sensitization is indeed mediated by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, since it is completely absent in GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> knockout mice (Tabata et al. 2004). However, electrophysiological analyses with pharmacological tools have revealed that this novel cofactor function of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor is independent of GABA and of G<sub>i/o</sub>-protein activation in contrast to the G-protein-mediated functional cross-talk of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and mGluR1 in cerebellar Purkinje cells described above (Hirono et al. 2001). It may instead result from a direct or indirect physical interaction of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> with mGluR1, a proposal supported by coimmunoprecipitations of both proteins from cerebellar membranes (Tabata et al. 2004). Under physiological conditions, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are thought to interact with a relatively constant level of extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> suggesting that they might sensitize mGluR1 constitutively. All in all, these data indicate a functional role of postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at excitatory synapses in addition to sensing GABA “spill-over” from neighbouring inhibitory terminals. Moreover, they corroborate the finding that the GPCR variety can be increased by the assembly of seven-transmembrane domain proteins recognizing different ligands.

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor functions highlighted in vivo: lessons from knockout mice

Given the apparent discrepancy between the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor diversity predicted from studies of native receptors and the limited molecular heterogeneity of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors, investigations of mice with targeted deletions of the *GABA<sub>B(1)</sub>* and *GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>* genes have been of special interest. Moreover, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor gene targeting approaches have improved our picture of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor functions and hinted at possible indications for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor drugs. GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> knockout $\left(GAB{A}_{B(1)}^{-/-}\right)$ mice lack all typical pre- and postsynaptic biochemical and electrophysiologicalGABA<sub>B</sub> responses (Prosser et al. 2001; Schuler et al. 2001). Moreover, in contrast to wild-type mice, $GAB{A}_{B(1)}^{-/-}$ mice do not show the typical muscle relaxation, hypothermia or electroencephalogram (EEG) delta-waves upon GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor agonist application. Thus, GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> is an essential component of all GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. Mice lacking GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> exhibit spontaneous (primarily clonic) epileptic seizures, hyperalgesia, hyperlocomotor activity, hypothermia and impairment in passive avoidance learning (Prosser et al. 2001; Schuler et al. 2001; Queva et al. 2003). The GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> subunit is markedly down-regulated at the protein level in $GAB{A}_{B(1)}^{-/-}$ mice, suggesting that the interaction of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> promotes protein stability (Prosser et al. 2001; Schuler et al. 2001).

Mice lacking GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> have revealed that the GABA<sub>B(1,2)</sub> heterodimer is the major GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor as these mice show all the behavioural abnormalities found previously in the $GAB{A}_{B(1)}^{-/-}$ mice and a drastic reduction in GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> protein expression (Gassmann et al. 2004a). In agreement with an essential function of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor forward trafficking, a strikingly changed subcellular distribution of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> has been observed in the hippocampus of $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ mice: the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> protein is exclusively found in the neuronal somata and proximal dendrites in $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ mice, but not at distal neuronal sites in which it resides primarily in wild-type mice. In contrast to $GAB{A}_{B(1)}^{-/-}$ mice, an electrophysiological GABA<sub>B</sub> response is detected in hippocampal CA1 neurons of $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ mice. However, this effect is atypical as GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation in $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ mice results in an inward instead of an outward current. Probably, a closure of K<sup>+</sup> channels is the basis of this response (Gassmann et al. 2004a). It remains an open question whether functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors lacking GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> normally exist with their effect on K<sup>+</sup> channels being masked in electrophysiological measurements by the large outward current elicited by agonist application in wild-type mice or whether their plasma membrane localization and function is a secondary effect mediated, for example, by an ER overload of unassembled GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> occurring specifically in $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ mice. Nevertheless, although the molecular mechanism leading to this effect is not elucidated as yet, these findings suggest that GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> might be part of functional receptors in neurons lacking GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> in vivo.

Mice with a specifically targeted deletion of the C-terminus of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> also show the absence of all well-known agonist-mediated GABA<sub>B</sub> responses and an epileptic phenotype (Thuault et al. 2004). No atypical electrophysiological response has been detected upon agonist treatment in the hippocampus of these mice in contrast to the $GAB{A}_{B(2)}^{-/-}$ animals. Moreover, the GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> protein level remains unchanged in mice with a deletion of the GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> C-terminus, suggesting that the truncated GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> subunit

assembled with GABA<sub>B(1)</sub>. GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> is not detected on the surface of cultured neurons derived from mice with this deletion, in agreement with the forward trafficking function mediated by the C-terminal interaction between GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub>.

In summary, the gene targeting approaches on GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors have indicated that both subunits are essential for all classical GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor functions in the CNS. GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> may be part of functional signal transduction complexes in addition to the GABA<sub>B(1,2)</sub> heterodimer. Gene targeting is expected to elucidate the physiological role of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors even further by analysis of mice with conditional, spatially or temporally restricted deletion of GABA<sub>B(1)</sub>; this has been made possible by the generation of mice with a floxed GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> allele (Haller et al. 2004). Moreover, mice with isoform-specific deletions of GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> or GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub> (Gassmann et al. 2004b) are expected to provide insights into the functional role of the two known GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subtypes, GABA<sub>B(1a,2)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b,2)</sub>.

### External fine-tuning: drugs and applications

The GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor may be a good drug target for the treatment of several neurological diseases (Bettler et al. 1998; Bowery 2006). Agonists may be useful for the treatment of pain and drug-dependence, whereas antagonists appear promising as cognitive enhancers and anti-absence epilepsy agents. Recent work has indicated emotional disorders such as depression and anxiety as GABA<sub>B</sub> indications (Cryan and Kaupmann 2005). However, given that GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are widely distributed throughout the brain and spinal cord, tools for selective intervention would be highly desirable. Allosteric modulators of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors may be one way to achieve this goal (Pin et al. 2001).

Baclofen (β-chlorophenyl GABA, Lioresal), the prototype GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor agonist, and GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonists have been instrumental in evaluating promising GABA<sub>B</sub> drug applications. Moreover, they have proved invaluable as tools for the functional characterization of the receptor and the expression cloning of the first GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor cDNA (Froestl et al. 1995; Kaupmann et al. 1997). The molecular characterization of the receptor, in turn, has allowed the set-up of functional high-throughput screening systems for novel compounds affecting GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors at sites distinct from the GABA-binding site. In addition, the cloning of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subunits has allowed the generation of knockout mice; this has suggested additional applications for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor drugs and these mice may be useful during the optimization of GABA<sub>B</sub> compounds (Bettler et al. 2004).
Baclofen, the first synthetic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor agonist, was introduced to the market in 1972, long before the identification of the GABA<sub>B</sub>-binding site. It is used clinically for the treatment of spasticity and skeletal muscle rigidity, e.g. in patients with spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cerebral palsy (Brogden et al. 1974; Bowery 1993). Activation of heteroreceptors in the spinal cord most likely underlies this function. In addition, baclofen has antinociceptive effects in neuralgias, neuropathy and migraine and is clinically used to treat neuropathic pain (Herman et al. 1992; Taira et al. 1994). GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> knockout mice exhibit hyperalgesia in accord with a function of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in pain pathways (Schuler et al. 2001). Baclofen is the only GABA<sub>B</sub> drug on the market so far. Its use, however, is limited by side effects (including sedation) and by rapid tolerance, especially with respect to its pain-relieving activity (Bowery and Smart 2006). GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor agonists have also shown promising effects on addiction in both animals and man (Xi and Stein 1999; Cousins et al. 2002; Slattery et al. 2005). They reduce the craving for several drugs of addiction, e.g. cocaine, probably by blocking the increase of dopamine release normally induced by the abused drug. Interestingly, both GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> knockout mice display increased anxiety in the light-dark box paradigm (Mombereau et al. 2004a; Cryan and Kaupmann 2005; Mombereau et al. 2005). Moreover, in GABA<sub>B(1)</sub>-deficient mice, the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines are reduced (Mombereau et al. 2004b). Thus, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation may reduce anxiety, and baclofen has indeed shown anxiolytic effects (Cryan and Kaupmann 2005).

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonists result in the cessation of absence seizures in both *lh/lh* lethargic mice (Hosford et al. 1992) and genetic absence-epilepsy rats from Strasbourg (GAERS; Marescaux et al. 1992). Thus, GABA<sub>B</sub> antagonists may be beneficial in the treatment of absence epilepsy. However, clinical trials may be problematic, since convulsions have also been described in rats after treatment with high doses of antagonists (Vergnes et al. 1997) and targeted deletion of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor in mice results in spontaneous seizures (Prosser et al. 2001; Schuler et al. 2001; Gassmann et al. 2004a). GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonists also show cognition-enhancing activity in several animal models (Mondadori et al. 1993). One specific antagonist, SGS742/CGP36742, improved cognitive performance in men in a phase II clinical study in mild cognitive impairment (Froestl et al. 2004). In the forced swim test, both GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> deletion and treatment with the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonist CGP56433A showed antidepressant-like activity in mice (Mombereau et al. 2004a), supporting an antidepressant potential of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonists (Cryan and Kaupmann 2005).

To avoid the major side effects, substances specifically targeting only a subset of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors or their functions would be highly desirable for the treatment of some of the above indications. However, the finding that all known GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are built as GABA<sub>B(1,2)</sub> heterodimers has so far precluded subtype-selective pharmacotherapeutic intervention. Allosteric modulators for the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor, CGP7930 and GS39783, have been identified (Urwyler et al. 2001, 2003). These, by definition, act at a site of the receptor distinct from the natural ligand-binding region of the protein. The modulators enhance the potency and the maximal efficacy of GABA at GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors (Urwyler et al. 2001). They do not activate the receptor on their own and their activity can be blocked by competitive GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonists. Thus, they function only in conjunction with GABA. Importantly, they do not enhance the potency of glutamate on mGluR2 (Urwyler et al. 2001). Interestingly, CGP7930 has been found to bind directly to the heptahelical domain of GABA<sub>B(2)</sub> (Binet et al. 2004). The positive allosteric modulators, while needing further optimization in terms of potency, duration of action and blood-brain barrier penetration (Marshall 2005), are promising as anxiolytic GABA<sub>B</sub> drugs lacking the side-effects of sedation, cognitive impairment and hypothermia known from treatment with the full agonist baclofen (Cryan et al. 2004). They may also constitute potential pharmacotherapies for cocaine abuse and dependence (Smith et al. 2004; Slattery et al. 2005; Bowery and Smart 2006). In addition, high-throughput screens may identify noncompetitive GABA<sub>B</sub> antagonists to increase the possibilities of fine-tuning GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activity (Bettler et al. 2004).

### Concluding remarks

Synaptic transmission in the mammalian CNS is modulated in many ways by the two major isoforms of the heterodimeric GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor: GABA<sub>B(1a,2)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b,2)</sub>. GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation affects the release of various neurotransmitters by limiting Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx and retarding vesicle recruitment in the presynaptic terminal. Moreover, postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation elicits GIRK-channel-mediated sIPSCs and this pathway is subject to an NMDA-receptor-induced form of LTP in dendritic spines. Based on these functions, GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors may have a considerable impact on the synchronous firing of neuronal assemblies.

GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors are expressed in many neuronal circuits of the CNS, thus explaining the complex phenotype of the knockout mice and the potential of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors as drug targets in several clinical applications. The importance of the two major receptor subtypes and their role in a given brain area may be deciphered by isoform-selective and region-specific gene targeting, respectively. Identification of additional components of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor complexes will deepen our understanding of the regulated

trafficking, signal transduction and role of the receptor subtypes. The minimal molecular heterogeneity of the receptor, however, renders subtype-selective pharmacotherapeutic intervention difficult. As an alternative, allosteric modulators of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors that can selectively affect activated receptors might represent attractive tools for the treatment of some neurological and emotional disorders.

Acknowledgements I thank D. Zunner, C. Deschermeier, T. Bartoi and G. Köhr for critically reading the manuscript.

Note added in proofs Two recent studies not covered by this review describe the analysis of mice with isoform-selective deletions of GABA<sub>B(1a)</sub> and GABA<sub>B(1b)</sub> (Perez-Garci et al. 2006; Vigot et al. 2006). They have revealed that the N-terminal GABA<sub>B(1)</sub> variants form the basis for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subtypes localizing to distinct synaptic sites and conveying separate functions in hippocampal and cortical neurons in vivo.

### References

Balasubramanian S, Teissere JA, Raju DV, Hall RA (2004) Heterooligomerization between GABA<sub>A</sub> and GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors regulates GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor trafficking. J Biol Chem 279:18840–18850

Becherer U, Rettig J (2006) Vesicle pools, docking, priming, and release. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0243-z; this issue)

Benke D, Honer M, Michel C, Bettler B, Möhler H (1999) Gammaaminobutyric acid type B receptor splice variant proteins GBR1a and GBR1b are both associated with GBR2 in situ and display differential regional and subcellular distribution. J Biol Chem 274:27323–27330

Bettler B, Tiao JY (2006) Molecular diversity, trafficking and subcellular localization of GABA(B) receptors. Pharmacol Ther 110:533–543

Bettler B, Kaupmann K, Bowery N (1998) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors: drugs meet clones. Curr Opin Neurobiol 8:345–350

Bettler B, Kaupmann K, Mosbacher J, Gassmann M (2004) Molecular structure and physiological functions of GABA(B) receptors. Physiol Rev 84:835–867

Billinton A, Ige AO, Bolam JP, White JH, Marshall FH, Emson PC (2001) Advances in the molecular understanding of GABA(B) receptors. Trends Neurosci 24:277–282

Binet V, Brajon C, Le Corre L, Acher F, Pin JP, Prezeau L (2004) The heptahelical domain of GABA(B2) is activated directly by CGP7930, a positive allosteric modulator of the GABA(B) receptor. J Biol Chem 279:29085–29091

Blein S, Ginham R, Uhrin D, Smith BO, Soares DC, Veltel S, McIlhinney RA, White JH, Barlow PN (2004) Structural analysis of the complement control protein (CCP) modules of GABA(B) receptor 1a: only one of the two CCP modules is compactly folded. J Biol Chem 279:48292–48306

Bonanno G, Raiteri M (1993) Multiple GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 14:259–261

Bonanno G, Fassio A, Schmid G, Severi P, Sala R, Raiteri M (1997) Pharmacologically distinct GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors that mediate inhibition of GABA and glutamate release in human neocortex. Br J Pharmacol 120:60–64

Bouvier M (2001) Oligomerization of G-protein-coupled transmitter receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:274–286

Bowery NG (1993) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor pharmacology. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 33:109–147

Bowery NG (2006) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor: a site of therapeutic benefit. Curr Opin Pharmacol 6:37–43

Bowery NG, Smart TG (2006) GABA and glycine as neurotransmitters: a brief history. Br J Pharmacol 147 Suppl 1:S109–119

Bowery NG, Hill DR, Hudson AL, Doble A, Middlemiss DN, Shaw J, Turnbull M (1980) (-)Baclofen decreases neurotransmitter release in the mammalian CNS by an action at a novel GABA receptor. Nature 283:92–94

Bowery NG, Bettler B, Froestl W, Gallagher JP, Marshall F, Raiteri M, Bonner TI, Enna SJ (2002) International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIII. Mammalian gamma-aminobutyric acid(B) receptors: structure and function. Pharmacol Rev 54:247–264

Brock C, Boudier L, Maurel D, Blahos J, Pin JP (2005) Assemblydependent surface targeting of the heterodimeric GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor is controlled by COPI but not 14-3-3. Mol Biol Cell 16:5572–5578

Brody DL, Yue DT (2000) Relief of G-protein inhibition of calcium channels and short-term synaptic facilitation in cultured hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci 20:889–898

Brogden RN, Speight TM, Avery GS (1974) Baclofen: a preliminary report of its pharmacological properties and therapeutic efficacy in spasticity. Drugs 8:1–14

Brown EM, MacLeod RJ (2001) Extracellular calcium sensing and extracellular calcium signaling. Physiol Rev 81:239–297

Calver AR, Robbins MJ, Cosio C, Rice SQ, Babbs AJ, Hirst WD, Boyfield I, Wood MD, Russell RB, Price GW, Couve A, Moss SJ, Panganos MN (2001) The C-terminal domains of the GABA (b) receptor subunits mediate intracellular trafficking but are not required for receptor signaling. J Neurosci 21:1203–1210

Calver AR, Davies CH, Panganos M (2002) GABA(B) receptors: from monogamy to promiscuity. Neurosignals 11:299–314

Calver AR, Michalovich D, Testa TT, Robbins MJ, Jaillard C, Hill J, Szekeres PG, Charles KJ, Jourdain S, Holbrook JD, Boyfield I, Patel N, Medhurst AD, Panganos MN (2003) Molecular cloning and characterisation of a novel GABA<sub>B</sub>-related G-protein coupled receptor. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 110:305–317

Charles KJ, Deuchars J, Davies CH, Panganos MN (2003) GABA B receptor subunit expression in glia. Mol Cell Neurosci 24: 214–223

Cousins MS, Roberts DC, Wit H de (2002) GABA(B) receptor agonists for the treatment of drug addiction: a review of recent findings. Drug Alcohol Depend 65:209–220

Couve A, Filippov AK, Connolly CN, Bettler B, Brown DA, Moss SJ (1998) Intracellular retention of recombinant GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. J Biol Chem 273:26361–26367

Couve A, Kittler JT, Uren JM, Calver AR, Panganos MN, Walsh FS, Moss SJ (2001) Association of GABA(B) receptors and members of the 14-3-3 family of signaling proteins. Mol Cell Neurosci 17:317–328

Couve A, Thomas P, Calver AR, Hirst WD, Panganos MN, Walsh FS, Smart TG, Moss SJ (2002) Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation facilitates GABA(B) receptor-effector coupling. Nat Neurosci 5:415–424

Couve A, Restituito S, Brandon JM, Charles KJ, Bawagan H, Freeman KB, Panganos MN, Calver AR, Moss SJ (2004) Marlin-1, a novel RNA-binding protein associates with GABA receptors. J Biol Chem 279:13934–13943

Cruz HG, Ivanova T, Lunn ML, Stoffel M, Slesinger PA, Lüscher C (2004) Bi-directional effects of GABA(B) receptor agonists on the mesolimbic dopamine system. Nat Neurosci 7:153–159

Cryan JF, Kaupmann K (2005) Don't worry 'B' happy!: a role for GABA(B) receptors in anxiety and depression. Trends Pharmacol Sci 26:36–43

Cryan JF, Kelly PH, Chaperon F, Gentsch C, Mombereau C, Lingenhoehl K, Froestl W, Bettler B, Kaupmann K, Spooren

WP (2004) Behavioral characterization of the novel GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor-positive modulator GS39783 (N,N′-dicyclopropyl-2-methylsulfanyl-5-nitro-pyrimidine-4,6-diamine): anxiolytic-like activity without side effects associated with baclofen or benzodiazepines. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 310:952–963

Cunningham MD, Enna SJ (1996) Evidence for pharmacologically distinct GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors associated with cAMP production in rat brain. Brain Res 720:220–224

Davies CH, Starkey SJ, Pozza MF, Collingridge GL (1991) GABA autoreceptors regulate the induction of LTP. Nature 349:609–611

Deriu D, Gassmann M, Firbank S, Ristig D, Lampert C, Mosbacher J, Froestl W, Kaupmann K, Bettler B, Grutter MG (2005) Determination of the minimal functional ligand-binding domain of the GABAB1b receptor. Biochem J 386:423–431

Dittman JS, Regehr WG (1996) Contributions of calcium-dependent and calcium-independent mechanisms to presynaptic inhibition at a cerebellar synapse. J Neurosci 16:1623–1633

Dittman JS, Regehr WG (1997) Mechanism and kinetics of heterosynaptic depression at a cerebellar synapse. J Neurosci 17:9048–9059

Dityatev A, Schachner M (2006) The extracellular matrix and synapses. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0217-1; this issue)

Dulac C (2000) Sensory coding of pheromone signals in mammals. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:511–518

Dunlap K, Fischbach GD (1981) Neurotransmitters decrease the calcium conductance activated by depolarization of embryonic chick sensory neurones. J Physiol (Lond) 317:519–535

Dutar P, Nicoll RA (1988) A physiological role for GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in the central nervous system. Nature 332:156–158

Duthey B, Caudron S, Perroy J, Bettler B, Fagni L, Pin JP, Prezeau L (2002) A single subunit (GB2) is required for G-protein activation by the heterodimeric GABA(B) receptor. J Biol Chem 277:3236–3241

Fairfax BP, Pitcher JA, Scott MG, Calver AR, Pangalos MN, Moss SJ, Couve A (2004) Phosphorylation and chronic agonist treatment atypically modulate GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor cell surface stability. J Biol Chem 279:12565–12573

Ferraguti F, Shigemoto R (2006) Metabotropic glutamate receptors. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0266-5; this issue)

Filippov AK, Couve A, Pangalos MN, Walsh FS, Brown DA, Moss SJ (2000) Heteromeric assembly of GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B) R2 receptor subunits inhibits Ca(2+) current in sympathetic neurons. J Neurosci 20:2867–2874

Fotiadis D, Liang Y, Filipek S, Saperstein DA, Engel A, Palczewski K (2003) Atomic-force microscopy: rhodopsin dimers in native disc membranes. Nature 421:127–128

Fritschy JM, Meskenaite V, Weinmann O, Honer M, Benke D, Möhler H (1999) GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor splice variants GB1a and GB1b in rat brain: developmental regulation, cellular distribution and extrasynaptic localization. Eur J Neurosci 11:761–768

Fritschy JM, Sidler C, Parpan F, Gassmann M, Kaupmann K, Bettler B, Benke D (2004) Independent maturation of the GABA(B) receptor subunits GABA(B1) and GABA(B2) during postnatal development in rodent brain. J Comp Neurol 477:235–252

Froestl W, Mickel SJ, Sprecher G von, Diel PJ, Hall RG, Maier L, Strub D, Melillo V, Baumann PA, Bernasconi R, et al (1995) Phosphinic acid analogues of GABA. 2. Selective, orally active GABA<sub>B</sub> antagonists. J Med Chem 38:3313–3331

Froestl W, Gallagher M, Jenkins H, Madrid A, Melcher T, Teichman S, Mondadori CG, Pearlman R (2004) SGS742: the first GABA (B) receptor antagonist in clinical trials. Biochem Pharmacol 68:1479–1487

Galvez T, Parmentier ML, Joly C, Malitschek B, Kaupmann K, Kuhn R, Bittiger H, Froestl W, Bettler B, Pin JP (1999) Mutagenesis and modeling of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor extracellular domain

support a venus flytrap mechanism for ligand binding. J Biol Chem 274:13362–13369

Galvez T, Prezeau L, Milioti G, Franek M, Joly C, Froestl W, Bettler B, Bertrand HO, Blahos J, Pin JP (2000a) Mapping the agonist-binding site of GABA<sub>B</sub> type 1 subunit sheds light on the activation process of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. J Biol Chem 275:41166–41174

Galvez T, Urwyler S, Prezeau L, Mosbacher J, Joly C, Malitschek B, Heid J, Brabet I, Froestl W, Bettler B, Kaupmann K, Pin JP (2000b) Ca(2+) requirement for high-affinity gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) binding at GABA(B) receptors: involvement of serine 269 of the GABA(B)R1 subunit. Mol Pharmacol 57:419–426

Galvez T, Duthey B, Kniazeff J, Blahos J, Rovelli G, Bettler B, Prezeau L, Pin JP (2001) Allosteric interactions between GB1 and GB2 subunits are required for optimal GABA(B) receptor function. EMBO J 20:2152–2159

Gassmann M, Shaban H, Vigot R, Sansig G, Haller C, Barbieri S, Humeau Y, Schuler V, Muller M, Kinzel B, Klebs K, Schmutz M, Froestl W, Heid J, Kelly PH, Gentry C, Jaton AL, Putten H van der, Mombereau C, Lecourtier L, Mosbacher J, Cryan JF, Fritschy JM, Luthi A, Kaupmann K, Bettler B (2004a) Redistribution of GABAB(1) protein and atypical GABAB responses in GABAB(2)-deficient mice. J Neurosci 24:6086–6097

Gassmann M, Vigot R, Shaban H, Barbieri S, Brauner-Osborne H, Lüthi A, Cryan JF, Kaupmann K, Bettler B (2004b) Genetic dissection of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor function in mice. Soc Neurosci Abstr 32:959.3

Gassmann M, Haller C, Stoll Y, Aziz SA, Biermann B, Mosbacher J, Kaupmann K, Bettler B (2005) The RXR-type endoplasmic reticulum-retention/retrieval signal of GABA<sub>B</sub>(1) requires distant spacing from the membrane to function. Mol Pharmacol 68:137–144

George SR, O’Dowd BF, Lee SP (2002) G-protein-coupled receptor oligomerization and its potential for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 1:808–820

Gerber U, Gähwiler BH (1994) GABA<sub>B</sub> and adenosine receptors mediate enhancement of the K<sup>+</sup> current, IAHP, by reducing adenylyl cyclase activity in rat CA3 hippocampal neurons. J Neurophysiol 72:2360–2367

Gonchar Y, Pang L, Malitschek B, Bettler B, Burkhalter A (2001) Subcellular localization of GABA(B) receptor subunits in rat visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 431:182–197

Groc L, Choquet D (2006) AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptor trafficking: multiple roads for reaching and leaving the synapse. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0254-9; this issue)

Grünewald S, Schupp BJ, Ikeda SR, Kuner R, Steigerwald F, Kornau HC, Köhr G (2002) Importance of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (B) receptor C-termini for G-protein coupling. Mol Pharmacol 61:1070–1080

Haller C, Casanova E, Muller M, Vacher CM, Doll T, Barbieri S, Gassmann M, Bettler B (2004) Floxed allele for conditional inactivation of the GABAB(1) gene. Genesis 40:125–130

Harayama N, Shibuya I, Tanaka K, Kabashima N, Ueta Y, Yamashita H (1998) Inhibition of N- and P/Q-type calcium channels by postsynaptic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation in rat supraoptic neurons. J Physiol (Lond) 509:371–383

Havlickova M, Prezeau L, Duthey B, Bettler B, Pin JP, Blahos J (2002) The intracellular loops of the GB2 subunit are crucial for G-protein coupling of the heteromeric gamma-aminobutyrate B receptor. Mol Pharmacol 62:343–350

Helm KA, Haberman RP, Dean SL, Hoyt EC, Melcher T, Lund PK, Gallagher M (2005) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor antagonist SGS 742 improves spatial memory and reduces protein binding to the cAMP

response element (CRE) in the hippocampus. Neuropharmacology 48:956–964

Herman RM, D'Luzansky SC, Ippolito R (1992) Intrathecal baclofen suppresses central pain in patients with spinal lesions. A pilot study. Clin J Pain 8:338–345

Hill DR (1985) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor modulation of adenylate cyclase activity in rat brain slices. Br J Pharmacol 84:249–257

Hill DR, Bowery NG (1981) 3H-baclofen and 3H-GABA bind to bicuculline-insensitive GABA B sites in rat brain. Nature 290:149–152

Hirono M, Yoshioka T, Konishi S (2001) GABA(B) receptor activation enhances mGluR-mediated responses at cerebellar excitatory synapses. Nat Neurosci 4:1207–1216

Hosford DA, Clark S, Cao Z, Wilson WA Jr, Lin FH, Morrisett RA, Huin A (1992) The role of GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor activation in absence seizures of lethargic (l h/l h) mice. Science 257:398–401

Huang CS, Shi SH, Ule J, Ruggiu M, Barker LA, Darnell RB, Jan YN, Jan LY (2005) Common molecular pathways mediate long-term potentiation of synaptic excitation and slow synaptic inhibition. Cell 123:105–118

Ikeda SR (1996) Voltage-dependent modulation of N-type calcium channels by G-protein beta gamma subunits. Nature 380: 255–258

Isaacson JS (2000) Spillover in the spotlight. Curr Biol 10:R475–R477

Isaacson JS, Solis JM, Nicoll RA (1993) Local and diffuse synaptic actions of GABA in the hippocampus. Neuron 10:165–175

Jones KA, Borowsky B, Tamm JA, Craig DA, Durkin MM, Dai M, Yao WJ, Johnson M, Gunwaldsen C, Huang LY, Tang C, Shen Q, Salon JA, Morse K, Laz T, Smith KE, Nagarathnam D, Noble SA, Branchek TA, Gerald C (1998) GABA(B) receptors function as a heteromeric assembly of the subunits GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2. Nature 396:674–679

Kammerer RA, Frank S, Schulthess T, Landwehr R, Lustig A, Engel J (1999) Heterodimerization of a functional GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor is mediated by parallel coiled-coil alpha-helices. Biochemistry 38:13263–13269

Kaupmann K, Hugel K, Heid J, Flor PJ, Bischoff S, Mickel SJ, McMaster G, Angst C, Bittiger H, Froestl W, Bettler B (1997) Expression cloning of GABA(B) receptors uncovers similarity to metabotropic glutamate receptors. Nature 386:239–246

Kaupmann K, Malitschek B, Schuler V, Heid J, Froestl W, Beck P, Mosbacher J, Bischoff S, Kulik A, Shigemoto R, Karschin A, Bettler B (1998) GABA(B)-receptor subtypes assemble into functional heteromeric complexes. Nature 396:683–687

Kerr DI, Ong J, Prager RH, Gynther BD, Curtis DR (1987) Phaclofen: a peripheral and central baclofen antagonist. Brain Res 405: 150–154

Kim E, Sheng M (2004) PDZ domain proteins of synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:771–781

Kitano J, Kimura K, Yamazaki Y, Soda T, Shigemoto R, Nakajima Y, Nakanishi S (2002) Tamalin, a PDZ domain-containing protein, links a protein complex formation of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor cytohesins. J Neurosci 22:1280–1289

Kniazeff J, Galvez T, Labesse G, Pin JP (2002) No ligand binding in the GB2 subunit of the GABA(B) receptor is required for activation and allosteric interaction between the subunits. J Neurosci 22:7352–7361

Köhr G (2006) NMDA receptor function: Subunit composition versus spatial distribution. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0273-6; this issue)

Kofuji P, Davidson N, Lester HA (1995) Evidence that neuronal G-protein-gated inwardly rectifying K<sup>+</sup> channels are activated by G beta gamma subunits and function as heteromultimers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:6542–6546

Kornau HC, Seeburg PH, Kennedy MB (1997) Interaction of ion channels and receptors with PDZ domain proteins. Curr Opin Neurobiol 7:368–373

Koyrakh L, Lujan R, Colon J, Karschin C, Kurachi Y, Karschin A, Wickman K (2005) Molecular and cellular diversity of neuronal G-protein-gated potassium channels. J Neurosci 25:11468–11478

Kubo Y, Tateyama M (2005) Towards a view of functioning dimeric metabotropic receptors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:289–295

Kuhn SA, Landeghem FK van, Zacharias R, Farber K, Rappert A, Pavlovic S, Hoffmann A, Nolte C, Kettenmann H (2004) Microglia express GABA(B) receptors to modulate interleukin release. Mol Cell Neurosci 25:312–322

Kulik A, Nakadate K, Nyiri G, Notomi T, Malitschek B, Bettler B, Shigemoto R (2002) Distinct localization of GABA(B) receptors relative to synaptic sites in the rat cerebellum and ventrobasal thalamus. Eur J Neurosci 15:291–307

Kulik A, Vida I, Lujan R, Haas CA, Lopez-Bendito G, Shigemoto R, Frotscher M (2003) Subcellular localization of metabotropic GABA(B) receptor subunits GABA(B1a/b) and GABA(B2) in the rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 23:11026–11035

Kulik A, Vida I, Fukazawa Y, Guetg N, Kasugai Y, Marker CL, Rigato F, Bettler B, Wickman K, Frotscher M, Shigemoto R (2006) Compartment-dependent colocalization of Kir3.2-containing K<sup>+</sup> channels and GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors in hippocampal pyramidal cells. J Neurosci 26:4289–4297

Kuner R, Köhr G, Grünewald S, Eisenhardt G, Bach A, Kornau HC (1999) Role of heteromer formation in GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor function. Science 283:74–77

Kunishima N, Shimada Y, Tsuji Y, Sato T, Yamamoto M, Kumasaka T, Nakanishi S, Jingami H, Morikawa K (2000) Structural basis of glutamate recognition by a dimeric metabotropic glutamate receptor. Nature 407:971–977

Lavine N, Ethier N, Oak JN, Pei L, Liu F, Trieu P, Rebois RV, Bouvier M, Hebert TE, Van Tol HH (2002) G protein-coupled receptors form stable complexes with inwardly rectifying potassium channels and adenylyl cyclase. J Biol Chem 277: 46010–46019

Liang Y, Fotiadis D, Filipek S, Saperstein DA, Palczewski K, Engel A (2003) Organization of the G protein-coupled receptors rhodopsin and opsin in native membranes. J Biol Chem 278:21655–21662

Liu J, Maurel D, Etzol S, Brabet I, Ansanay H, Pin JP, Rondard P (2004) Molecular determinants involved in the allosteric control of agonist affinity in the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor by the GABA<sub>B2</sub> subunit. J Biol Chem 279:15824–15830

Lopez-Bendito G, Shigemoto R, Kulik A, Paulsen O, Fairen A, Lujan R (2002) Expression and distribution of metabotropic GABA receptor subtypes GABABR1 and GABABR2 during rat neocortical development. Eur J Neurosci 15:1766–1778

Lopez-Bendito G, Lujan R, Shigemoto R, Ganter P, Paulsen O, Molnar Z (2003) Blockade of GABA(B) receptors alters the tangential migration of cortical neurons. Cereb Cortex 13:932–942

Lopez-Bendito G, Shigemoto R, Kulik A, Vida I, Fairen A, Lujan R (2004) Distribution of metabotropic GABA receptor subunits GABAB1a/b and GABAB2 in the rat hippocampus during prenatal and postnatal development. Hippocampus 14:836–848

Lujan R, Shigemoto R, Kulik A, Juiz JM (2004) Localization of the GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor 1a/b subunit relative to glutamatergic synapses in the dorsal cochlear nucleus of the rat. J Comp Neurol 475: 36–46

Lüscher C, Jan LY, Stoffel M, Malenka RC, Nicoll RA (1997) G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying K<sup>+</sup> channels (GIRKs) medi-

ate postsynaptic but not presynaptic transmitter actions in
hippocampal neurons. Neuron 19:687–695
Malitschek B, Schweizer C, Keir M, Heid J, Froestl W, Mosbacher J,
Kuhn R, Henley J, Joly C, Pin JP, Kaupmann K, Bettler B (1999)
The N-terminal domain of gamma-aminobutyric acid(B) receptors is sufficient to specify agonist and antagonist binding. Mol
Pharmacol 56:448–454
Marescaux C, Vergnes M, Liu Z, Depaulis A, Bernasconi R (1992)
GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor involvement in the control of genetic absence
seizures in rats. Epilepsy Res Suppl 9:131–139
Margeta-Mitrovic M, Mitrovic I, Riley RC, Jan LY, Basbaum AI
(1999) Immunohistochemical localization of GABA(B) receptors
in the rat central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 405:299–321
Margeta-Mitrovic M, Jan YN, Jan LY (2000) A trafficking checkpoint
controls GABA(B) receptor heterodimerization. Neuron 27:97–106
Margeta-Mitrovic M, Jan YN, Jan LY (2001a) Function of GB1 and
GB2 subunits in G protein coupling of GABA(B) receptors. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 98:14649–14654
Margeta-Mitrovic M, Jan YN, Jan LY (2001b) Ligand-induced signal
transduction within heterodimeric GABA(B) receptor. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98:14643–14648
Marshall FH (2005) Is the GABA B heterodimer a good drug target?
J Mol Neurosci 26:169–176
Marshall FH, Jones KA, Kaupmann K, Bettler B (1999) GABA<sub>B</sub>
receptors—the first 7TM heterodimers. Trends Pharmacol Sci
20:396–399
Martin SC, Russek SJ, Farb DH (1999) Molecular identification of the
human GABABR2: cell surface expression and coupling to
adenylyl cyclase in the absence of GABABR1. Mol Cell
Neurosci 13:180–191
Michelsen K, Yuan H, Schwappach B (2005) Hide and run. Arginine-
based endoplasmic-reticulum-sorting motifs in the assembly of
heteromultimeric membrane proteins. EMBO Rep 6:717–722
Milligan G, White JH (2001) Protein-protein interactions at G-protein-
coupled receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 22:513–518
Mintz IM, Bean BP (1993) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor inhibition of P-type Ca<sup>2+</sup>
channels in central neurons. Neuron 10:889–898
Misgeld U, Bijak M, Jarolimek W (1995) A physiological role for
GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors and the effects of baclofen in the mammalian
central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 46:423–462
Möhler H (2006) GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor diversity and pharmacology . Cell
Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0284-3; this issue)
Möhler H, Fritschy JM (1999) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors make it to the top—
as dimers. Trends Pharmacol Sci 20:87–89
Mombereau C, Kaupmann K, Froestl W, Sansig G, Putten H van der,
Cryan JF (2004a) Genetic and pharmacological evidence of a
role for GABA(B) receptors in the modulation of anxiety- and
antidepressant-like behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology
29:1050–1062
Mombereau C, Kaupmann K, Putten H van der, Cryan JF (2004b)
Altered response to benzodiazepine anxiolytics in mice lacking
GABA B(1) receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 497:119–120
Mombereau C, Kaupmann K, Gassmann M, Bettler B, Putten H van
der, Cryan JF (2005) Altered anxiety and depression-related
behaviour in mice lacking GABAB(2) receptor subunits.
Neuroreport 16:307–310
Mondadori C, Jaekel J, Preiswerk G (1993) CGP 36742: the first orally
active GABA<sub>B</sub> blocker improves the cognitive performance of
mice, rats, and rhesus monkeys. Behav Neural Biol 60:62–68
Mott DD, Lewis DV (1991) Facilitation of the induction of long-term
potentiation by GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors. Science 252:1718–1720
Mutneja M, Berton F, Suen KF, Lüscher C, Slesinger PA (2005)
Endogenous RGS proteins enhance acute desensitization of
GABA(B) receptor-activated GIRK currents in HEK-293T cells.
Pflugers Arch 450:61–73

Nehring RB, Horikawa HP, El Far O, Kneussel M, Brandstatter JH,
Stamm S, Wischmeyer E, Betz H, Karschin A (2000) The
metabotropic GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor directly interacts with the activating
transcription factor 4. J Biol Chem 275:35185–35191
Newberry NR, Nicoll RA (1984) Direct hyperpolarizing action of
baclofen on hippocampal pyramidal cells. Nature 308:450–452
Newberry NR, Nicoll RA (1985) Comparison of the action of
baclofen with gamma-aminobutyric acid on rat hippocampal
pyramidal cells in vitro. J Physiol (Lond) 360:161–185
Ng GY, Clark J, Coulombe N, Ethier N, Hebert TE, Sullivan R,
Kargman S, Chateaueneuf A, Tsukamoto N, McDonald T,
Whiting P, Mezey E, Johnson MP, Liu Q, Kolakowski LF Jr,
Evans JF, Bonner TI, O’Neill GP (1999) Identification of a
GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor subunit, gb2, required for functional GABA<sub>B</sub>
receptor activity. J Biol Chem 274:7607–7610
Otis TS, De Koninck Y, Mody I (1993) Characterization of
synaptically elicited GABA<sub>B</sub> responses using patch-clamp
recordings in rat hippocampal slices. J Physiol (Lond) 463:
391–407
Otmakhova NA, Lisman JE (2004) Contribution of Ih and GABA<sub>B</sub> to
synaptically induced afterhyperpolarizations in CA1: a brake on
the NMDA response. J Neurophysiol 92:2027–2039
Pagano A, Rovelli G, Mosbacher J, Lohmann T, Duthey B, Stauffer
D, Ristig D, Schuler V, Meigel I, Lampert C, Stein T, Prezeau L,
Blahos J, Pin J, Froestl W, Kuhn R, Heid J, Kaupmann K, Bettler
B (2001) C-terminal interaction is essential for surface trafficking
but not for heteromeric assembly of GABA(b) receptors.
J Neurosci 21:1189–1202
Panzanelli P, Lopez-Bendito G, Lujan R, Sassoe-Pognetto M (2004)
Localization and developmental expression of GABA(B) receptors
in the rat olfactory bulb. J Neurocytol 33:87–99
Perez-Garcia E, Gassmann M, Bettler B, Larkum ME (2006) The
GABA(B1b) isoform mediates long-lasting inhibition of dendritic
Ca(2+) spikes in layer 5 somatosensory pyramidal neurons.
Neuron 50:603–616
Perroy J, Adam L, Qanbar R, Chenier S, Bouvier M (2003)
Phosphorylation-independent desensitization of GABA(B) receptor
by GRK4. EMBO J 22:3816–3824
Pfrieger FW, Gottmann K, Lux HD (1994) Kinetics of GABA<sub>B</sub>
receptor-mediated inhibition of calcium currents and excitatory
synaptic transmission in hippocampal neurons in vitro. Neuron
12:97–107
Pin JP, Parmentier ML, Prezeau L (2001) Positive allosteric
modulators for gamma-aminobutyric acid(B) receptors open
new routes for the development of drugs targeting family 3
G-protein-coupled receptors. Mol Pharmacol 60:881–884
Pin JP, Kniazeff J, Liu J, Binet V, Goudet C, Rondard P, Prezeau L
(2005) Allosteric functioning of dimeric class C G-protein-
coupled receptors. FEBS J 272:2947–2955
Poncer JC, McKinney RA, Gähwiler BH, Thompson SM (2000)
Differential control of GABA release at synapses from
distinct interneurons in rat hippocampus. J Physiol (Lond)
528:123–130
Pranzatelli MR (1992) The neurobiology of the opsoclonus-myoclonus
syndrome. Clin Neuropharmacol 15:186–228
Priest CA, Puche AC (2004) GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor expression and
function in olfactory receptor neuron axon growth. J Neurobiol
60:154–165
Prosser HM, Gill CH, Hirst WD, Grau E, Robbins M, Calver A,
Soffin EM, Farmer CE, Lanneau C, Gray J, Schenck E,
Warmerdam BS, Clapham C, Reavill C, Rogers DC, Stean T,
Upton N, Humphreys K, Randall A, Geppert M, Davies CH,
Pangalos MN (2001) Epileptogenesis and enhanced prepulse
inhibition in GABA(B1)-deficient mice. Mol Cell Neurosci
17:1059–1070

Queva C, Bremner-Danielsen M, Edlund A, Ekstrand AJ, Elg S, Erickson S, Johansson T, Lehmann A, Mattsson JP (2003) Effects of GABA agonists on body temperature regulation in GABA(B(1))--/mice. Br J Pharmacol 140:315–322

Restituito S, Couve A, Bawagan H, Jourdain S, Panganos MN, Calver AR, Freeman KB, Moss SJ (2005) Multiple motifs regulate the trafficking of GABA(B) receptors at distinct checkpoints within the secretory pathway. Mol Cell Neurosci 28:747–756

Robbins MJ, Calver AR, Filippov AK, Hirst WD, Russell RB, Wood MD, Nasir S, Couve A, Brown DA, Moss SJ, Panganos MN (2001) GABA(B2) is essential for G-protein coupling of the GABA(B) receptor heterodimer. J Neurosci 21:8043–8052

Romano C, Yang WL, O'Malley KL (1996) Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a disulfide-linked dimer. J Biol Chem 271:28612–28616

Saghatelyan AK, Snapyan M, Gorissen S, Meigel I, Mosbacher J, Kaupmann K, Bettler B, Kornilov AV, Nifantiev NE, Sakanyan V, Schachner M, Dityatev A (2003) Recognition molecule associated carbohydrate inhibits postsynaptic GABA(B) receptors: a mechanism for homeostatic regulation of GABA release in perisomatic synapses. Mol Cell Neurosci 24:271–282

Sakaba T, Neher E (2003) Direct modulation of synaptic vesicle priming by GABA(B) receptor activation at a glutamatergic synapse. Nature 424:775–778

Sauter K, Grampp T, Fritschy JM, Kaupmann K, Bettler B, Möhler H, Benke D (2005) Subtype-selective interaction with the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP) regulates cell surface expression of GABA (B) receptors. J Biol Chem 280:33566–33572

Scanziani M (2000) GABA spillover activates postsynaptic GABA(B) receptors to control rhythmic hippocampal activity. Neuron 25:673–681

Schneggenburger R, Forsythe ID (2006) Calyx of held. Cell Tissue Res (DOI 10.1007/s00441-006-0272-7; this issue)

Scholz KP, Miller RJ (1991) GABA_B receptor-mediated inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents and synaptic transmission in cultured rat hippocampal neurones. J Physiol (Lond) 444:669–686

Schuler V, Lüscher C, Blanchet C, Klix N, Sansig G, Klebs K, Schmutz M, Heid J, Gentry C, Urban L, Fox A, Spooren W, Jaton AL, Vigouret J, Pozza M, Kelly PH, Mosbacher J, Froestl W, Kaslin E, Korn R, Bischoff S, Kaupmann K, Putten H van der, Bettler B (2001) Epilepsy, hyperalgesia, impaired memory, and loss of pre- and postsynaptic GABA(B) responses in mice lacking GABA(B(1)). Neuron 31:47–58

Scott K (2004) The sweet and the bitter of mammalian taste. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:423–427

Simonds WF (1999) G protein regulation of adenylate cyclase. Trends Pharmacol Sci 20:66–73

Slattery DA, Markou A, Froestl W, Cryan JF (2005) The GABA_B receptor-positive modulator GS39783 and the GABA_B receptor agonist baclofen attenuate the reward-facilitating effects of cocaine: intracranial self-stimulation studies in the rat. Neuropsychopharmacology 30:2065–2072

Smith MA, Yancey DL, Morgan D, Liu Y, Froestl W, Roberts DC (2004) Effects of positive allosteric modulators of the GABA_B receptor on cocaine self-administration in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 173:105–111

Steiger JL, Bandyopadhyay S, Farb DH, Russek SJ (2004) cAMP response element-binding protein, activating transcription factor 4, and upstream stimulatory factor differentially control hippocampal GABABR1a and GABABR1b subunit gene expression through alternative promoters. J Neurosci 24:6115–6126

Stevens CF (2004) Presynaptic function. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:341–345

Tabata T, Aiba A, Kano M (2002) Extracellular calcium controls the dynamic range of neuronal metabotropic glutamate receptor responses. Mol Cell Neurosci 20:56–68

Tabata T, Araishi K, Hashimoto K, Hashimoto-Y, Putten H van der, Bettler B, Kano M (2004) Ca²⁺ activity at GABA_B receptors constitutively promotes metabotropic glutamate signaling in the absence of GABA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:16952–16957

Taira T, Tanikawa T, Kawamura H, Iseki H, Takakura K (1994) Spinal intrathecal baclofen suppresses central pain after a stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57:381–382

Takahashi T, Kajikawa Y, Tsujimoto T (1998) G-protein-coupled modulation of presynaptic calcium currents and transmitter release by a GABA_B receptor. J Neurosci 18:3138–3146

Thompson SM, Gähwiler BH (1992) Comparison of the actions of baclofen at pre- and postsynaptic receptors in the rat hippocampus in vitro. J Physiol (Lond) 451:329–345

Thuault SJ, Brown JT, Sheardown SA, Jourdain S, Fairfax B, Spencer JP, Restituito S, Nation JH, Topps S, Medhurst AD, Randall AD, Couve A, Moss SJ, Collingridge GL, Panganos MN, Davies CH, Calver AR (2004) The GABA(B2) subunit is critical for the trafficking and function of native GABA(B) receptors. Biochem Pharmacol 68:1655–1666

Ule J, Jensen KB, Ruggiu M, Mele A, Ule A, Darnell RB (2003) CLIP identifies Nova-regulated RNA networks in the brain. Science 302:1212–1215

Ule J, Ule A, Spencer J, Williams A, Hu JS, Cline M, Wang H, Clark T, Fraser C, Ruggiu M, Zeeberg BR, Kane D, Weinstein JN, Blume J, Darnell RB (2005) Nova regulates brain-specific splicing to shape the synapse. Nat Genet 37:844–852

Urwyler S, Mosbacher J, Lingenhoel K, Heid J, Hofstetter K, Froestl W, Bettler B, Kaupmann K (2001) Positive allosteric modulation of native and recombinant gamma-aminobutyric acid(B) receptors by 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-(3-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-propyl)-phenol (CGP7930) and its aldehyde analog CGP13501. Mol Pharmacol 60:963–971

Urwyler S, Pozza MF, Lingenhoel K, Mosbacher J, Lampert C, Froestl W, Koller M, Kaupmann K (2003) N,N'-dicyclopropyl-2-methylsulfanyl-5-nitro-pyrimidine-4,6-diamine (GS39783) and structurally related compounds: novel allosteric enhancers of gamma-aminobutyric acidB receptor function. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 307:322–330

Vergnes M, Boehner A, Simler S, Bernasconi R, Marescaux C (1997) Opposite effects of GABA_B receptor antagonists on absences and convulsive seizures. Eur J Pharmacol 332:245–255

Vernon E, Meyer G, Pickard L, Dev K, Molnar E, Collingridge GL, Henley JM (2001) GABA(B) receptors couple directly to the transcription factor ATF4. Mol Cell Neurosci 17:637–645

Vigot R, Barbieri S, Brauner-Osborne H, Turecek R, Shigemoto R, Zhang YP, Lujan R, Jacobson LH, Biermann B, Fritschy JM, Vacher CM, Muller M, Sansig G, Guetg N, Cryan JF, Kaupmann K, Gassmann M, Oertner TG, Bettler B (2006) Differential compartmentalization and distinct functions of GABA(B) receptor variants. Neuron 50:589–601

Vogt KE, Nicoll RA (1999) Glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid mediate a heterosynaptic depression at mossy fiber synapses in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:1118–1122

White JH, Wise A, Main MJ, Green A, Fraser NJ, Disney GH, Barnes AA, Emson P, Foord SM, Marshall FH (1998) Heterodimeriza-

tion is required for the formation of a functional GABA(B)
receptor. Nature 396:679–682
White JH, McIllhinney RA, Wise A, Ciruela F, Chan WY, Emson PC,
Billinton A, Marshall FH (2000) The GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor interacts
directly with the related transcription factors CREB2 and ATF4.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:13967–13972
White JH, Ginham R, Pontier S, Wise A, Blein S, Barlow P, Bouvier
M, McIlhinney RA (2002) The heterodimeric GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor
and associated proteins. FENS Abstr 1:062.061
Wise A, Green A, Main MJ, Wilson R, Fraser N, Marshall FH
(1999) Calcium sensing properties of the GABA(B) receptor.
Neuropharmacology 38:1647–1656
Wu LG, Saggau P (1997) Presynaptic inhibition of elicited neuro-
transmitter release. Trends Neurosci 20:204–212
Wu LG, Borst JG, Sakmann B (1998) R-type Ca<sup>2+</sup> currents evoke
transmitter release at a rat central synapse. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 95:4720–4725

Xi ZX, Stein EA (1999) Baclofen inhibits heroin self-administration
behavior and mesolimbic dopamine release. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 290:1369–1374
Yang YY, Yin GL, Darnell RB (1998) The neuronal RNA-binding
protein Nova-2 is implicated as the autoantigen targeted in
POMA patients with dementia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
95:13254–13259
Yuan H, Michelsen K, Schwappach B (2003) 14-3-3 Dimers probe the
assembly status of multimeric membrane proteins. Curr Biol
13:638–646
Zerangue N, Schwappach B, Jan YN, Jan LY (1999) A new ER
trafficking signal regulates the subunit stoichiometry of plasma
membrane K(ATP) channels. Neuron 22:537–548
Zilberter Y, Kaiser KM, Sakmann B (1999) Dendritic GABA
release depresses excitatory transmission between layer 2/3
pyramidal and bitufted neurons in rat neocortex. Neuron 24:
979–988
