
Anal Bioanal Chem (2007) 387: 415–423  
DOI 10.1007/s00216-006-0701-1  

---

**REVIEW**

Anne M. L. Barnard · George P. C. Salmond  

**Quorum sensing in *Erwinia* species**

Received: 1 June 2006 / Revised: 19 July 2006 / Accepted: 20 July 2006 / Published online: 30 August 2006  
© Springer-Verlag 2006  

---

**Abstract** The term quorum sensing (QS) refers to the ability of bacteria to regulate gene expression according to the accumulation of signalling molecules that are made by every cell in the population. The erwiniae group of bacteria are often phytopathogens and the expression of a number of their important virulence determinants and secondary metabolites is under QS control. The erwiniae utilise two types of QS signalling molecules: *N*-acyl homoserine lactones and AI-2-type signalling molecules. Here, we review the regulatory networks involving QS in the soft rot erwiniae.

**Keywords** Erwinia · Quorum sensing · *N*-Acyl homoserine lactone · Carbapenem antibiotic · Virulence

---

### Introduction

The term ‘quorum sensing’ (QS) describes a related set of regulatory systems in which gene expression is coupled to the accumulation of a chemical signalling molecule, which is often diffusible. In the Gram-negative *Erwinia* species, at least two QS systems exist and are defined by the nature of the chemical signals involved: *N*-acyl homoserine lactones (*N*-AHLs; also called AI-1 signals), synthesised by the LuxI family of proteins; and the AI-2 signal, which is synthesised by a LuxS homologue. Bacteria of the erwiniae group are mostly phytopathogens which cause a range of plant diseases. They include *Erwinia carotovora* subspecies *carotovora* (Ecc), *Erwinia carotovora* subspecies *atroseptica* (Eca), which is the aetiological agent of potato black leg (reviewed in [1, 2]), *Erwinia chrysanthemi* (Echr; reviewed in [3]) and *Erwinia amylovora* (Ea), the causative agent of fire blight disease of apples and pears (reviewed in

---

### *N*-Acyl homoserine lactone (*N*-AHL)-based QS

#### The transmitter: producing the *N*-AHL QS signal

*N*-AHL signals are made by a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria (reviewed in [5]). They are characterised by an invariant homoserine lactone ring, to which a variable acyl side chain is attached. Each cell in the bacterial population has the capacity to make the QS signal, which indicates their presence to other cells in the population. *N*-AHLs are made by an enzymatic reaction, catalysed by homologues of the LuxI autoinducer synthase, which is required for the QS-dependent control of bioluminescence in *Vibrio fischeri* [6, 7]. LuxI synthesises the *N*-AHL *N*-(3-oxohexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C6-HSL; structure is shown in Fig. 1), using S-adenosyl methionine and hexanoyl acyl carrier protein as substrates for the reaction [7, 8]. Other LuxI homologues are presumed to catalyse similar reactions to form the required *N*-AHL.

Within the erwiniae, a particular bacterial species normally only synthesises one or two major *N*-AHL signals, sometimes along with minor *N*-AHL products and, depending on the strain, there is variation in the signals that are produced (Table 1). The LuxI homologue EamI of Ea strain OMP-BO 1077/7 is predicted to synthesise mainly either *N*-(3-hydroxyhexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone or 3-oxo-C6-HSL [9], while Expl from *Echr* strain 3937 directs the synthesis of both 3-oxo-C6-HSL and *N*-hexanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (C6-HSL) [10]. *Echr* 3937 also produces a third *N*-AHL signal, *N*-decanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (C10-HSL), which is presumed to be synthesised by an uncharacterised LuxI homologue [10].

Other Ecc and Eca strains have been divided into two groups on the basis of the *N*-AHL signal that they produce (Table 1) [11]. Class I strains, such as Ecc strains EC153

---

A. M. L. Barnard · G. P. C. Salmond (✉)  
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge,  
Tennis Court Road,  
Cambridge, CB2 1QW, UK  
e-mail: gpcs@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

virR (expR2)
3-oxo-C8-HSL (Class I erwiniae)
or 3-oxo-C6-HSL (Class II erwiniae)

plant cell wall
breakdown products
(KDG)

RsmC
VirR (ExpR2)

HexA
RpoS

High temperature
?

Carbon source
?

expI expR

High temperature
?

Class II erwiniae
{
    3-oxo-C6-HSL
    3-oxo-C8-HSL
}
Class I erwiniae

Alkaline pH and/or
Quorum Quenching?

High temperature

rsmA
ExpR1
3-oxo-C6-HSL
RsmA
rsmB
KDG
Phenotypes
pectate lyase
cellulase
protease
Svx
Nip
virulence
Carbapenem antibiotic*

Hor
hor
carR
carA
B C D E F G H

RsmC
KdgR
HexA
ExpA
ExpS
AI-2?
VirR (ExpR2) with 3-oxo-C6-
HSL or 3-oxo-C8-HSL
ExpR with 3-oxo-C6-HSL
CarR with 3-oxo-C6-HSL


Fig. 1 The quorum sensing regulatory network of the Class I and
Class II erwiniae. Genes are represented by rectangles with the
direction of transcription denoted by a shaded triangle. Open arrows
indicate transcription or translation. The rsmB regulatory RNA is
denoted by rsmB. Filled arrows indicate stimulatory effects (such as
transcription activation). Inhibitory effects are indicated by (—|).
Question marks indicate either potential direct effects (such as the
activation of rsmA transcription by RpoS), or effects for which the
precise molecular mechanism remains unclear (such as the effect of
carbon source on expI transcription). See text for more details. These
interactions have been shown in at least one Erwinia strain (in
general either Ecc Class I, Ecc Class II or Eca Class II strains).

However, it remains possible that one of more of these interactions
may be strain-specific (i.e. not seen in every Erwinia strain). *Note
that while only some strains produce the carbapenem antibiotic,
cryptic car gene clusters can be found in a number of erwiniae (see
text). It is also worth noting that many of these regulators have
alternative names, depending on the Erwinia strain. The most
commonly used naming conventions have been used in this figure
i.e. ExpI (also known variously as Carl, AhlI, HslI); ExpR1 (also
known as ExpR or EccR); rsmB (also known as aepH); RsmC (also
known as HexY) and VirR (also known as ExpR2). See text for
further details

and SCC3193, synthesise predominantly N-(3-oxooctanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C8-HSL), along with smaller amounts of 3-oxo-C6-HSL [11]. By contrast, Class II strains produce predominantly 3-oxo-C6-HSL (but little or no detectable 3-oxo-C8-HSL; [11]). Class II strains include Ecc strain ATCC39048 and its derivatives (e.g. GS101, ATTn10 and MS1 [12]), Ecc strain 71 [11] and Eca strain SCRI1043, for which the genome sequence has recently been published [13, 14]. In these Class I and Class II Erwinia species, a single LuxI homologue has been described for each strain, which is responsible for production of all of the N-AHLs produced by that strain. The LuxI homologues have different names according to the strain: in Ecc ATCC39048, the LuxI homologue is called Carl [15]. The corresponding LuxI homologue in

Ecc strain 71 is known as AhlI [16] or alternatively HslI [17]. The LuxI homologue present in Eca strain SCRI1043 is called ExpI [13], as is the LuxI homologue of Ecc strain SCC3193 [18].

The receiver: sensing the N-AHL signal

In order to respond to the QS signal, ‘listening’ bacteria require a sensor which acts to detect the signal and transduce that information into a cellular response. In the case of N-AHL-based signalling, this is mediated by members of the LuxR family of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators (reviewed in [5, 19, 20]. These proteins are proposed to directly bind their cognate N-AHL signal

Table 1 N-Acyl homoserine lactone QS systems of some Erwinia species

| Strain | Major QS signal(s) | LuxI homologue | LuxR homologue(s) | QS regulated phenotype(s) | Reference |
|--------|---------------------|----------------|-------------------|---------------------------|-----------|
| Class I erwiniae examples |  |  |  |  |  |
| Ecc EC 153 | 3-oxo-C8-HSL and<br>3-oxo-C6-HSL | AhlI | ExpR | Production of exoenzymes | [11] |
| Ecc SCC 3193 | 3-oxo-C8-HSL and<br>3-oxo-C6-HSL | ExpI | ExpR1(ExpR) *,<br>ExpR2 | Virulence, production of exoenzymes | [11, 18, 24, 40, 82] |
| Class II erwiniae examples |  |  |  |  |  |
| Ecc ATCC 39048 3-oxo-C6-HSL | CarI | CarR, EccR(ExpR) *,<br>VirR | Carbapenem antibiotic production,<br>virulence, production of exoenzymes | [12, 15, 21, 22, 25] |
| Ecc SCRI 193 | 3-oxo-C6-HSL | ExpI | ExpR, VirR, [CarR (cryptic)] | Virulence, production of exoenzymes | [12, 21, 33] |
| Ecc 71 | 3-oxo-C6-HSL | AhlI (HslI) * | ExpR1(ExpR) *,<br>ExpR2 | Virulence, production of exoenzymes | [11, 16, 17, 23] |
| Eca SCRI 1043 | 3-oxo-C6-HSL | ExpI | ExpR, VirR | Virulence, production of exoenzymes, Svx and Nip | [13, 14, 22] |
| Erwinia amylovora |  |  |  |  |  |
| OMP-BO 1077/7 3-oxo-C6-HSL | EamI | EamR |  | [9] |
| Erwinia chrysanthemi |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3937 | 3-oxo-C6-HSL, C6-HSL, C10-HSL | ExpI | ExpR | Pectinase production | [10] |

*Alternative nomenclature is given in brackets; Ecc, Erwinia carotovora subspecies carotovora; Eca, Erwinia carotovora subspecies atroseptica. See text for further details*

and undergo a conformational change, which modulates their DNA-binding ability or alters their function as a transcription regulator. The consequential effects on gene transcription result in coupling of the accumulation of the QS signalling molecule to a cellular response(s).

In Ea and Echr, a single luxR homologue has been identified in each case (eamR [9] and expR [10], respectively), found adjacent to their cognate luxI homologues in the genome. However, there is the potential for more than one luxR homologue to be present. In both Ecc strain ATCC 39048 and Eca strain SCRI 1043, there are corresponding luxR homologues, called eccR (ATCC 39048) and expR (SCRI 1043), adjacent to their luxI homologue genes (carI and expI, respectively) [13, 15, 21]. However, the precise function of EccR and ExpR in these strains is unclear as no obvious phenotype has yet been described for eccR or expR mutants of either strain [21, 22]. The roles of the corresponding ExpR (also known as ExpR1) of Ecc strain 71 and ExpR (also known as ExpR1) of Ecc strain SCC 3193 have recently been more clearly defined and will be discussed below [11, 16, 23, 24].

Ecc strain ATCC 39048 and Eca strain SCRI 1043 both carry a second luxR homologue, which has been termed virR, and which is central to the QS-dependent regulation of the production of various important virulence determinants (discussed below) [22]. The virR gene appears to be present in a number of erwiniae including Ecc strains 71 and SCC 3193 [22]. The homologues of VirR in Ecc strain 71 and Ecc strain SCC 3193 have very recently been characterised and will also be discussed below (ExpR2) [23, 24].

Ecc strain ATCC 39048 also has a third luxR homologue called carR, which is apparently dedicated to mediating QS control of carbapenem antibiotic production in this strain (see below) [25]. Eca strain SCRI 1043 does not synthesise the carbapenem antibiotic and does not possess the antibiotic biosynthetic genes, and (as might be expected) does not possess an equivalent carR gene either [13].

The QS systems of Ecc and Eca strains have been studied in the greatest detail, so the remainder of this review will focus on what is known about these systems.

Regulation of carbapenem antibiotic production in Ecc strain ATCC 39048

Some strains of Ecc, including strain ATCC 39048 (and its derivatives), produce the β-lactam antibiotic, 1-carbapen-2-em-3-carboxylic acid (Car), normally during the late log and stationary phases of growth in laboratory culture [26–28]. QS is central to the control of Car production, since mutants which no longer make the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal do not make the Car antibiotic [12]. However, these mutants can be induced to make Car by the addition of either Ecc-conditioned medium or synthetic 3-oxo-C6-HSL [12]. The threshold concentration of 3-oxo-C6-HSL required to induce Car production in Ecc has been estimated at 0.1 μg mL⁻¹ [27]. In fact, the amount of Car produced can be correlated with the concentration of 3-oxo-C6-HSL that is supplied. Car production can even be
induced prematurely in laboratory cultures of the wild-type $Ecc$ by providing a physiological excess of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal during early phases of growth [29].

The cognate LuxR homologue required for the 3-oxo-C6-HSL-dependent production of Car is called CarR [25]. The $carR$ gene is located immediately upstream of the $carA-H$ biosynthetic operon (Fig. 1), which encodes proteins required for Car biosynthesis and for the Car antibiotic intrinsic resistance function [25, 30, 31]. CarR has been shown to associate with 3-oxo-C6-HSL and bind to the $carA$ promoter as a multimer in the presence of this signal [32]. This results in a CarR/3-oxo-C6-HSL-dependent activation of transcription of the $carA-H$ operon. $carR$ mutants are unable to respond to the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal, so transcription of the $carA-H$ genes is not activated and these mutants do not produce the Car antibiotic [25]. Interestingly, cryptic $car$ gene clusters have been identified in a number of erwiniae [33]. Antibiotic production can be induced in some of these strains by the provision of $carR$ from ATCC39048 *in trans*, suggesting that their lack of Car production is due to defects in their CarR proteins or defects in $carR$ expression [33]. Thus, CarR is essential for sensing the accumulation of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal and for activating Car production accordingly.

The CarR receptor therefore allows each cell in the $Ecc$ population to specifically monitor the presence of other, equivalent cells, which are identified by production of 3-oxo-C6-HSL. Accumulation of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal tells each cell in the population that they are part of a group of ‘friends’ and they respond by altering gene expression accordingly. It is possible to speculate that it may be advantageous to the $Ecc$ population to delay making antibiotic until the population reaches a quorum. As each cell in the population has a finite capacity to produce Car, the total amount of antibiotic made (and hence the concentration of antibiotic in the surrounding environment) will depend, at least in part, on the size of the population. However, in order for antibiotics to be effective against any sensitive competing bacteria, the antibiotics must reach a high enough concentration in the surrounding environment to counter any resistance mechanisms that these competing bacteria may have in place. Continuous, low-level production of the antibiotic would be a wasteful use of resources. Additionally, before any antibiotic is made, the producer organisms must have an intrinsic antibiotic resistance mechanism in place. In $Ecc$, there is a second, QS-independent promoter located within the $car$ operon, which directs the transcription of $carE$, as well as the genes required for resistance to the carbapenem antibiotic, $carF$ and $carG$ [29]. This allows expression of the Car resistance function prior to the $Ecc$ population becoming quorate and, therefore, prior to the onset of Car antibiotic biosynthesis. This mechanism ensures that Car production eliminates any Car-sensitive competitors, while leaving the $Ecc$ population unaffected.

Finding friends: how does the QS signal accumulate?

Our model predicts that Car production in $Ecc$ is triggered once the concentration of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal in the local environment surrounding a responsive $Ecc$ cell reaches a particular ‘threshold’ concentration (of $0.1 \mu \mathrm{g} \mathrm{mL}^{-1}$) [27]. This concentration is, presumably, related to the affinities of CarR for the QS signal and of the CarR/3-oxo-C6-HSL complex for the $carA$ promoter. An interesting question is that of how this local high concentration of the QS signal may be achieved.

The classical explanation for this phenomenon is that the concentration of the QS signal is dependent upon the sheer number of signal-producing cells present in a population inhabiting a confined space (reviewed in [5]). Put simply, if every member of that population produces the signal, the presence of more members means that more signal will be produced. If the signal is not allowed to escape quickly from the immediate vicinity of these cells, it is easy to see how the concentration of the QS signalling molecule will rise in parallel with the population density. This situation is probably best approximated in laboratory culture shake flasks. The shaking motion designed to aerate the cultures has the dual role of ensuring that the bacteria are not allowed to colonise the air/liquid interface or the walls of the culture flask and instead are distributed evenly throughout the cell suspension, as is the QS signal itself. The result is that Car production by laboratory cultures of $Ecc$ is switched on once the population reaches a quorum [26, 27].

However, are bacteria using their QS systems to ‘quorum sense’, or are they sensing a different parameter? One suggestion is that bacteria are in reality using their QS systems to sense ‘diffusion’ rather than population density per se [34]. A related question is that of what happens ‘in real life’, when bacteria are allowed to colonise a surface? In this scenario, there are several factors to consider. Firstly, by providing a surface to which bacteria can adhere, the surface itself may restrict the potential for diffusion of the QS signal molecule away from the producer cells. Bacteria rarely inhabit environmental niches as pure cultures, so there is the potential for cross-talk between the QS systems of different bacterial species, providing the Erwinia possess a LuxR homologue that is capable of responding to the AHL signal made by the neighbouring bacterial species, particularly if the neighbours also produce the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal. In further support of this idea, experiments performed in vitro have shown that CarR is also capable of detecting and responding (albeit less efficiently) to AHLs other than the cognate 3-oxo-C6-HSL ligand [32, 35].

VirR and the regulation of virulence determinants

The control of Car antibiotic production in $Ecc$ is by no means the only phenotype under QS control in the
erwiniae. Mutants defective in the AHL synthase exhibit strain-dependent phenotypes, including reduced production of various virulence determinants such as pectate lyases, cellulases, proteases, and the secreted factors Nip and Svx, and are attenuated in virulence in potato tuber models of infection [12, 17, 18, 22, 36, 37].

The LuxR homologue which mediates the QS-dependent control of these factors in two Class II erwiniae, *Ecc* strain ATCC 39048 and *Eca* strain SCRI 1043, is called VirR and, unlike CarR, appears to function as a repressor only in the absence of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal [22]. The evidence for this relies on the observations that, although *virR* single mutants have no obvious phenotype, the *virR* mutation bypasses the *carI* or *expI* phenotypes and production of a number of important virulence determinants is completely restored in a *virR/carI* double mutant in *Ecc* or a *virR/expI* double mutant in *Eca* [22]. Thus, at low cell densities, expression of Nip, Svx and plant cell wall degrading enzymes is repressed by VirR and this repression is alleviated upon accumulation of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal [22].

In order to function as a repressor, VirR could either directly repress expression of its target genes, or it could be involved in the activation of another cellular repressor [22]. It has recently been shown that the LuxR homologue ExpR1 (also known as ExpR), from strain *Ecc* strain 71, activates transcription of the global repressor, *rsmA*, only in the absence of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL QS signal [16, 23]. The Rsm system is a key regulatory network which controls the production of virulence determinants in *Erwinia* (described below) [16, 17, 38]. Given this precedent for LuxR-mediated control of *rsmA*, it is likely that VirR also functions via the Rsm system.

Burr et al. used Southern hybridisation experiments to identify homologues of *virR* in a number of erwiniae, including *Ecc* strains 71 and SCC3193, suggesting that the VirR regulator may have a central role in the control of virulence in a large number of *Erwinia* species [22]. Interestingly, a *virR* homologue did not appear to be present in the *Echr* genome [22, 39]. This may suggest that the control of production of virulence determinants in *Echr* is different from that which operates in *Ecc* or *Eca*.

The homologue of *virR* in the Class II *Ecc* strain 71 has recently been described further [23], as has the homologue found in the Class I *Ecc* strain SCC3193 [24]. The authors name both of these genes *expR2* and describe *expR2* mutants. In *Eca* strain SCRI1043 or *Ecc* strain ATCC39048, a *virR* mutation completely restores virulence factor production in an *expI* background [22]. Similarly, an *expR2* mutation in *Ecc* strain 71 also restores exoenzyme production [23]. However, in *Ecc* strain SCC3193, *expR2/expI* double mutants have a similar phenotype to an *expI* single mutant [24]. The full effects of ExpR2 are therefore seen only in the *expR1/expR2/expI* triple mutants of strain SCC3193 and the two LuxR homologues, ExpR1 and ExpR2, therefore appear to exhibit a degree of redundancy in this strain [24].

Like the VirR proteins of *Ecc* strain ATCC39048 and *Eca* strain SCRI1043, both ExpR1 and ExpR2 of strains

SCC3193 and *Ecc* 71 appear to function as repressors of plant cell wall degrading enzyme production, only in the absence of QS signalling molecule(s) [22–24, 40]. As predicted, the ExpR1 and ExpR2 proteins of both *Ecc* strain 71 and strain SCC3193 have been shown to act by activating transcription of the *rsmA* global regulator in the absence of QS signals [23, 24]. Cui et al. have demonstrated direct binding of both ExpR1 and ExpR2 from *Ecc* strain 71 to the *rsmA* promoter region and this binding is reduced or abolished in the presence of QS signals [23]. It is interesting to note that it appears that ExpR1 and ExpR2 exhibit a differential response to QS signals. ExpR1 from *Ecc* strain 71 responds to 3-oxo-C6-HSL (but not 3-oxo-C8-HSL), while ExpR2 responds to both 3-oxo-C6-HSL and 3-oxo-C8-HSL [11, 16, 23]. The LuxR homologues from *Ecc* strain SCC3193 also exhibit a similar differential response: ExpR1 from strain SCC3193 responds best to the cognate ligand, 3-oxo-C8-HSL, but is also able to respond (to a lesser extent) to 3-oxo-C10-HSL and C8-HSL. However, ExpR2 from strain SCC3193 responds to a wider range of N-AHLs, including 3-oxo-C6-HSL and 3-oxo-C8-HSL [24]. Sjöblom et al. speculate that the observed ‘promiscuity’ of ExpR2 may allow interspecies communication between *Ecc* strain SCC3193 and neighbouring bacteria [24].

The regulator of secondary metabolites (Rsm)

The Rsm regulatory network is summarised in Fig. 1. RsmA was first identified in *Ecc* strain 71, but has since been found in a range of erwiniae [17, 38]. It is a homologue of the carbon storage regulator, CsrA from *Escherichia coli*, which is thought to act by binding to the mRNA transcripts of its target genes and signalling their degradation by host RNases [38, 41–44]. In some cases, CsrA has been found to have an alternative role of stabilising selected target transcripts [45]. Mutants of *rsmA* in *Ecc* strain 71 were found to overexpress plant cell wall degrading enzymes and to be hyper-virulent [17, 38].

There is a clear link between RsmA and the QS system as *rsmA* mutants of *Ecc* strain 71 produce more of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal than the wild-type progenitor [16, 37]. It appears that at least part of the roles of ExpR1 and ExpR2 from *Ecc* strains 71 and SCC3193 are mediated by their effects on expression of *rsmA* [16, 23, 24].

There are at least two more components of the Rsm system: the small, untranslated RNA, *rsmB*, and the RsmC protein. The predicted secondary structure of the *rsmB* RNA (which is also known as *aepH*) has multiple stem loop structures, with GGA sequence motifs exposed in the unpaired loop regions [46, 47]. It has been proposed that RsmA may bind to these motifs, and it has been shown that *rsmB* can antagonise RsmA function by sequestering it and therefore preventing RsmA from binding to its other target transcripts [47]. RsmC was identified in *Ecc* strain 71 [48], but a homologue called HexY also exists in strain ATCC39048 [49]. When *rsmC* is mutated, it leads to
elevated levels of production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes and RsmC is thought to act by negatively controlling *rsmB* expression and (either directly, or indirectly via *rsmB*) activating expression of *rsmA* (summarised in Fig. 1) [48, 49].

Raising or lowering the gain: modulating the sensitivity of the QS system

The population density is not the only physical or chemical parameter that bacteria sense and respond to by altering gene expression. However, the QS system of *Ecc* appears to be able to operate as a kind of central ‘hub’ at which cues from multiple inputs can be integrated to control gene expression in an appropriate way (Fig. 1).

There is some evidence that other genetic regulatory networks feed into the Rsm system, with obvious implications for the QS regulon in *Erwinia*. The stationary phase sigma factor, RpoS, has been shown to be important for virulence in some *Erwinia* strains. *Ecc rpoS* mutants are less able to infect tobacco plants, but exhibit elevated production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes [50]. In these mutants, levels of the *rsmA* transcript appear reduced, so it is possible that the effects of RpoS are mediated via RsmA and hence QS, although an additional, direct role for RpoS cannot be ruled out [50, 51]. The HexA global regulator is also known to influence both RpoS and *rsmB* [52]. *hexA* mutants of *Eca* and *Ecc* are hyper-virulent and over-produce plant cell wall degrading enzymes. RpoS protein levels have been shown to be increased and *rsmB* transcription has been shown to be decreased in some of these *hexA* mutants [52, 53]. Additionally, the ExpA/ExpS two-component system also feeds into Rsm. Transcription of *rsmB* is reduced in an *expA* mutant, which correlates well with the observed reduction of production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes in this mutant [54].

The Rsm system may also be responsible for mediating the effect of temperature on the QS system in *Erwinia* [55]. In *Ecc* strain 71, production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes is reduced when the strain is cultured at 34.5 °C compared to a 28 °C growth temperature and this could be correlated with a reduction in the concentration of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL QS signal present in supernatants taken from cultures grown at the higher temperature. This reduction in production of the QS signal was shown by Northern blot analysis to be due to reduced levels of the *ahlI* transcript. Interestingly, it was observed that levels of the *rsmA* transcript and the RsmA protein were increased at the elevated temperature, suggesting a potential link between thermoregulation and the Rsm system [55]. A similar effect of elevated growth temperatures on Car production in *Ecc* strain ATCC39048 has also been observed [29]. Car production is completely abolished when the temperature of growth is raised to 37 °C and the concentration of 3-oxo-C6-HSL found in culture supernatants is reduced to below the threshold concentration required for Car production. This is not due to a decrease in transcription of the *carI*

gene [29], but may be due to an effect on the *carI* transcript, potentially via RsmA.

The presence of particular carbon sources in the growth medium of *Ecc* strain ATCC39048 has a big impact on transcription of the *carI* gene and hence both 3-oxo-C6-HSL production and the ability of the bacterium to quorum sense. For example, growth in minimal medium containing glycerol resulted in a 50% decrease in *carI* transcription relative to that seen during growth in minimal glucose medium and transcription of the *car* biosynthetic genes is abolished in medium containing glycerol [29]. The precise mechanism by which the carbon source affects *carI* transcription is at present unknown, but the observation suggests that the nature of the growth medium is of critical importance to the functioning of the QS system in *Erwinia*. N-Acyl homoserine lactones are particularly sensitive to pH and undergo rapid hydrolysis under alkaline conditions [56, 57]. Thus the 3-oxo-C6-HSL QS signal in *Erwinia* acts as an in-built pH sensor. For bacteria inhabiting an alkaline environmental setting, this has obvious implications for their ability to sense their neighbours and to regulate gene expression via QS. It might also play a role in plant defences against *Erwinia* infection, since one of the first plant responses to infection is an alkalisation of the infection site [56, 58].

Global importance of QS in *Erwinia*

Of course, while QS is clearly a key factor in the control of gene expression in the erwiniae, it is important to note that it is not the only genetic regulatory system that is present. For example, full expression of the plant cell wall degrading enzymes of the *Ecc* and *Eca* requires the presence of plant cell wall breakdown products in the culture medium (such as KDG; 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate). This is because expression of the genes encoding these enzymes is repressed by the KdgR regulator, which binds to DNA target sites at the promoters of these target genes [59]. KdgR can also have an indirect effect via QS because it has also been shown to bind to the *rsmB* promoter [59]. This DNA-binding ability of KdgR (and hence its ability to repress transcription) is abolished by the presence of KDG and hence expression of the genes encoding plant cell wall degrading enzymes is induced.

Thus, control of production of these enzymes is under both QS and KdgR control. This makes sense from a bacterial perspective, because being ‘quorate’ does not necessarily mean that the bacteria are located anywhere near plant tissue, and secretion of the plant cell wall degrading enzymes with no available substrate for them to act on would be a wasteful use of resources for the bacterial population. The plant cell wall degrading enzymes that erwiniae secrete are potent activators of the plant response to infection, so if the erwiniae population is very small (i.e. non-quorate), it would make sense to postpone production of the enzymes until they are absolutely required [60, 61]. However, the precise role of QS in *Erwinia* virulence and infection is probably more subtle than previously thought,
since potato plants which have been genetically modified to produce N-AHLs were found to be more susceptible to infection with *Erwinia*, so this is an area which needs further investigation [14].

It is worth noting that predicted KdgR binding sites do not appear to be present at the *Ecc* strain ATCC39048 *carA* promoter and Car production in this strain does not appear to be repressed in the absence of plant cell wall degradation products [29]. This means that Car production occurs when the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal accumulates, but irrespective of whether there is plant cell wall material present or not. Thus KdgR is important because it allows the differential regulation of two subsets of the QS regulon in strain ATCC39048.

By contrast, the Hor transcriptional regulator is required for production of both Car and the plant cell wall degrading enzymes in *Ecc* and for production of the enzymes in *Eca* [62]. Presumably Hor responds to a different signal, but the precise details of this regulatory system have not yet been characterised. Hor may also be partially responsible for mediating the effect of temperature on carbapenem antibiotic production in strain ATCC39048, since transcription of *hor* is abolished at growth temperatures of 37 °C [29]. Like KdgR, Hor appears to act independently of the QS system [29, 62]. However, the *hor* phenotype can be by-passed by the provision of a physiological excess of the 3-oxo-C6-HSL signal in *Ecc*, suggesting that (under certain circumstances) the need for Hor can be circumvented [29].

### Interfering with the QS signal: quorum quenching

Recently, several N-AHL-degrading enzymes have been isolated from a range of different bacteria. The first to be identified was AiiA, an N-AHL lactonase, which hydrolyses the homoserine lactone ring [63, 64]. It was found in a Gram-positive bacterium, a *Bacillus* isolate. As expected, transgenic tobacco and potato plants expressing the *aiiA* gene exhibited increased resistance to infection by *Erwinia carotovora*, confirming the role of the QS signal in phytopathogenesis. Homologues of AiiA have also been found in some Gram-negatives, such as the AttM protein from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* [65]. N-AHL acylases, which hydrolyse the N-AHL amide bond and remove the acyl side chain from the homoserine lactone ring, have also been identified in *Variovorax paradoxus* and in *Ralstonia* [66, 67]. The enzyme responsible for this in *Ralstonia* strain XJ12B has been identified and is called AiiD [67]. It is possible that these N-AHL-degrading enzymes might have biocontrol potential, to attenuate infections caused by AHL-producing bacteria, including *Erwinia*. However, the extent to which these degrading enzymes interfere with bacterial QS in physiologically or ecologically meaningful settings remains to be clarified.

---

### LuxS-based quorum sensing in *Erwinia*

The Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) signalling system was first described in *Vibrio harveyi*, where it is part of a complex network of at least three parallel QS systems which regulate a range of phenotypes including bioluminescence (reviewed in [68–70]). At high *Vibrio harveyi* cell densities (i.e. high AI-2 concentrations), AI-2 is bound by a periplasmic protein called LuxP, which interacts with the hybrid sensor kinase, LuxQ. This initiates a dephosphorylation cascade which results in dephosphorylation of a phosphotransfer protein, LuxU, and hence inactivation of the LuxO response regulator. Inactivation of LuxO alleviates small RNA-mediated repression of the LuxR<sub>Vh</sub> master regulator, which leads to activation of bioluminescence. The other QS systems in *Vibrio harveyi* feed into the phosphotransfer relay at LuxU.

AI-2 production requires the *luxS* gene product [71]. Many species of bacteria, including both Gram-positive and Gram-negative species, produce AI-2-like activity and *luxS* genes can be identified in a wide range of bacteria. This led to the suggestion that AI-2 might be a kind of ‘universal signal’ to allow chemical communication between bacterial species [72, 73]. The LuxS protein may have a metabolic role in the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) utilisation pathway. The nucleosidase Pfs acts on S-adenosyl homocysteine, the product of SAM-dependent methyltransferase reactions, to give S-ribosyl homocysteine (SRH), which is the substrate for LuxS [74, 75]. LuxS then converts SRH to homocysteine (which could be recycled to methionine), and 4,5-dihydroxypentanedione (DPD), which spontaneously forms multiple, interconvertible, cyclised derivatives which show AI-2 activity. The structure of the AI-2 signal detected by *V. harveyi* is a furanosyl borate diester, whereas it is a hydrated furanone in *Salmonella typhimurium* [76, 77]. These findings suggest that ‘AI-2’ is a collective term for multiple chemical signalling molecules [70]. However, since LuxS may have a metabolic role, it is currently unclear how many of the phenotypes that have been attributed to *luxS* mutants are due to the loss of methionine recycling capacity rather than due to loss of the AI-2 signal (reviewed in [78]).

An *Erwinia luxS* homologue was first reported in a derivative of *Ecc* strain ATCC39048 (strain ATTn10) and *Eca* strain SCRI1043 [79, 80] and has since also been identified in *Ecc* strain SCC3193 [81]. *luxS* mutants in each of these strains fail to make detectable AI-2-like activity. Production of some of the plant cell wall degrading enzymes was also reduced in each of the *luxS* mutants, and virulence in potato tuber tests was diminished in the *luxS* mutants of *Ecc* strains ATTn10 and SCC3193 [80, 81]. However, virulence did not seem to be affected in the *luxS* derivative of *Eca* strain SCRI1043, suggesting that the precise role of LuxS may vary in different strains [80]. In common with the majority of bacteria for which the ‘LuxS system’ has been described, the fine details of how the AI-2 system may function in *Erwinia* remain to be elucidated.

Concluding comments

The QS regulatory network in *Erwinia* is summarised in Fig. 1. QS in *Erwinia* allows coupling of the accumulation of small, diffusible signalling molecules to the regulation of gene expression. The accumulation of these signals may indicate an increase in population density, colonisation of a surface or the diffusibility of the QS signal itself. The members of the QS regulon include genes encoding some secondary metabolites such as the carbapenem antibiotic produced by some strains of *Ecc*, as well as a large number of important virulence determinants.

The N-AHL QS system can act as an integration point for cues from a variety of different regulatory networks. The beauty of this integration system is that it allows the components of the gene regulatory system to be simple. It cuts down the number of transcriptional regulators that are needed to bring about the required changes in expression of downstream target genes and also allows the promoter architecture of the target genes to be simplified. Separate regulators such as KdgR or Hor can be layered into this regulatory hierarchy to allow differential regulation of subsets of the QS regulon in response to different environmental cues. QS therefore represents an elegant solution to the complex problem that bacteria face, of sensing and responding appropriately to a large number of external signals.

Acknowledgements Work in the authors’ laboratory is funded by the BBSRC. We would like to thank Tom Burr and Sarah Coulthurst for critical reading of the manuscript.

References

1. Toth IK, Bell KS, Holeva MC, Birch PRJ (2003) Mol Plant Pathol 4:17–30
2. Toth IK, Birch PRJ (2005) Curr Opin Plant Biol 8:424–429
3. Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat N, Condemine G, Nasser W, Reverchon S (1996) Annu Rev Microbiol 50:213–257
4. Oh C-S, Beer SV (2005) FEMS Microbiol Lett 253:185–192
5. Whitehead NA, Barnard AML, Slater H, Simpson NJL, Salmond GPC (2001) FEMS Microbiol Rev 25:365–404
6. Engebrecht J, Nealson KH, Silverman M (1983) Cell 32: 773–781
7. Schaefer AL, Val DL, Hanzelka BL, Cronan JE Jr, Greenberg EP (1996) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9505–9509
8. Val DL, Cronan JE Jr (1998). J Bacteriol 180:2644–2651
9. Venturi V, Venuti C, Devescovi G, Lucchese C, Friscina A, Degrassi G, Aguilar C, Mazzucchi U (2004) FEMS Microbiol Lett 241:179–183
10. Nasser W, Bouillant ML, Salmond G, Reverchon S (1998) Mol Microbiol 29:1391–1405
11. Chatterjee A, Cui Y, Hasegawa H, Leigh N, Dixit V, Chatterjee AK (2005) J Bacteriol 187:8026–8038
12. Jones S, Yu B, Bainton NJ, Birdsall M, Bycroft BW, Chhabra SR, Cox AJ, Golby P, Reeves PJ, Stephens S, Winson MK, Salmond GPC, Stewart GSAB, Williams P (1993) EMBO J 12:2477–2482
13. Bell KS, Sebaihia M, Prichard L, Holden MT, Hyman LJ, Holeva MC, Thomson NR, Bentley SD, Churcher LJ, Mungall K, Atkin R, Bason N, Brooks K, Chillingworth T, Clark K, Doggett J, Fraser A, Hance Z, Hauser H, Jagels K, Mould S, Norbertczak H, Ormond D, Price C, Quail MA, Sanders M, Walker D, Whitehead S, Salmond GP, Birch PR, Parkhill J, Toth IK (2004) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:11105–11110
14. Toth IK, Newton JA, Hyman LJ, Lees AK, Daykin M, Ortori C, Williams P, Fray RG (2004) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 17:880–887
15. Swift S, Winson MK, Chan PF, Bainton NJ, Birdsall M, Reeves PJ, Rees CED, Chhabra SR, Hill PJ, Throup JP, Bycroft BW, Salmond GPC, Williams P, Stewart GSAB (1993) Mol Microbiol 10:511–520
16. Cui Y, Chatterjee A, Hasegawa H, Dixit V, Leigh N, Chatterjee AK (2005) J Bacteriol 187:4792–4803
17. Chatterjee A, Cui Y, Liu Y, Dumenyo CK, Chatterjee AK (1995) Appl Environ Microbiol 61:1959–1967
18. Pirhonen M, Flego D, Heikinheimo R, Palva ET (1993) EMBO J 12:2467–2476
19. Barnard AML, Salmond GPC (2005) ComPlexUs 2:87–101
20. Waters CM, Bassler BL (2005) Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 21:319–346
21. Rivet MM (1998) Investigation into the regulation of exoenzyme production in *Erwinia carotovora* subsp. *carotovora*. PhD Thesis, University of Warwick, UK
22. Burr T, Barnard AML, Corbett MJ, Pemberton CL, Simpson NJL, Salmond GPC (2006) Mol Microbiol 59:113–125
23. Cui Y, Chatterjee A, Hasegawa H, Chatterjee AK (2006) J Bacteriol 188:4715–4726
24. Sjöblom S, Brader G, Koch G, Palva ET (2006) Mol Microbiol DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05210.x
25. McGowan SJ, Sebaihia M, Jones S, Yu B, Bainton N, Chan PF, Bycroft V, Stewart GSAB, Williams P, Salmond GPC (1995) Microbiology 141:541–550
26. Bainton NJ, Stead P, Chhabra SR, Bycroft BW, Salmond GPC, Stewart GSAB, Williams P (1992) Biochem J 288:997–1004
27. Bainton NJ, Bycroft BW, Chhabra SR, Stead P, Gledhill L, Hill PJ, Rees CED, Winson MK, Salmond GPC, Stewart GSAB, Williams P (1992) Gene 116:87–91
28. Coulthurst SJ, Barnard AML, Salmond GPC (2005) Nature Rev Microbiol 3:295–306
29. McGowan SJ, Barnard AML, Bosgelmez G, Sebaihia M, Simpson NJL, Thomson NR, Todd DE, Welch M, Whitehead NA, Salmond GPC (2005) Mol Microbiol 55:526–545
30. McGowan SJ, Sebaihia M, Porter LE, Stewart GSAB, Williams P, Bycroft BW, Salmond GPC (1996) Mol Microbiol 22:415–426
31. McGowan SJ, Sebaihia M, O'Leary S, Hardie KR, Williams P, Stewart GSAB, Bycroft BW, Salmond GPC (1997) Mol Microbiol 26:545–556
32. Welch M, Todd DE, Whitehead NA, McGowan SJ, Bycroft BW, Salmond GPC (2000) EMBO J 19:631–641
33. Holden MTG, McGowan SJ, Bycroft BW, Stewart GSAB, Williams P, Salmond GPC (1998) Microbiology 144: 1495–1508
34. Redfield RJ (2002) Trends Microbiol 10:365–370
35. Welch M, Dutton JM, Glansdorp FG, Thomas GL, Smith DS, Coulthurst SJ, Barnard AML, Salmond GPC, Spring DR (2005) Bioorg Med Chem Lett 15:4235–4238
36. Pemberton CL, Whitehead NA, Sebaihia M, Bell KS, Hyman LJ, Harris SJ, Matlin AJ, Robson ND, Birch PRJ, Carr JP, Toth IK, Salmond GPC (2005) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 18:434–353
37. Corbett MJ, Virtue S, Bell K, Birch P, Burr T, Hyman L, Lilley KS, Poock S, Toth I, Salmond GPC (2005) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 18:334–342
38. Cui Y, Chatterjee A, Liu Y, Dumenyo CK, Chatterjee AK (1995) J Bacteriol 177: 5108–5115
39. *Erwinia chrysanthemi* sequencing project at http://www.tigr.org

40. Andersson RA, Eriksson AR, Heikinheimo R, Mäe A, Pirhonen M, Kõiv V, Hyytiäinen H, Tuikkala A, Palva ET (2000) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 13:384–393
41. Baker CS, Morozov I, Suzuki K, Romeo T, Babitzke P (2002) Mol Microbiol 44:1599–1610
42. Dubey AK, Baker CS, Suzuki K, Jones AD, Pandit P, Romeo T, Babitzke P (2003) J Bacteriol 185:4450–4460
43. Dubey AK, Baker CS, Romeo T, Babitzke P (2005) RNA 11:1579–1587
44. Liu MY, Yang H, Romeo T (1995) J Bacteriol 177:2663–2672
45. Wei BL, Brun-Zinkernagel A-M, Simecka JW, Prüß BM, Babitzke P, Romeo T (2001) Mol Microbiol 40:245–256
46. Murata H, Chatterjee A, Liu Y, Chatterjee AK (1994) Appl Environ Microbiol 60:3150–3159
47. Liu Y, Cui Y, Mukherjee A, Chatterjee AK (1998) Mol Microbiol 29:219–234
48. Cui Y, Mukherjee A, Dumenyo CK, Liu Y, Chatterjee AK (1999) J Bacteriol 181:6042–6052
49. Shih Y-L, Harris SJ, Borner G, Rivet MM, Salmond GPC (1999) Environ Microbiol 1:535-547
50. Andersson RA, Palva ET, Pirhonen M (1999) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 12:575–584
51. Mukherjee A, Cui Y, Ma Y, Liu Y, Ishihama A, Eisenstark A, Chatterjee AK (1998) J Bacteriol 180:3629–3634
52. Mukherjee A, Cui Y, Ma Y, Liu Y, Chatterjee AK (2000) Environ Microbiol 2:203–215
53. Harris SJ, Shih Y-L, Bentley SD, Salmond GPC (1998) Mol Microbiol 28:705–717
54. Cui Y, Chatterjee A, Chatterjee AK (2001) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 14:516–526
55. Hasegawa H, Chatterjee A, Cui Y, Chatterjee AK (2005) Appl Environ Microbiol 71:4655–4663
56. Byers JT, Lucas C, Salmond GPC, Welch M (2002) J Bacteriol 184:1163–1171
57. Yates EA, Philipp B, Buckley C, Atkinson S, Chhabra SR, Sockett RE, Goldner M, Dessaux Y, Camara M, Smith H, Williams P (2002) Infect Immun 70:5635–5646
58. Nachin L, Barras R (2000) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 13: 882–886
59. Liu Y, Jiang G, Cui Y, Mukherjee A, Ma WL, Chatterjee AK (1999) J Bacteriol 18:2411–2421
60. Salmond GPC, Bycroft BW, Stewart GSAB, Williams P (1995) Mol Microbiol 16:615–624
61. Mäe A, Montesano M, Koiv V, Palva ET (2001) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 14:1035–1042
62. Thomson NR, Cox A, Bycroft BW, Stewart GSAB, Williams P, Salmond GPC (1997) Mol Microbiol 26:531–544
63. Dong Y-H, Xu J-L, Li X-Z, Zhang L-H (2000) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:3526–3531
64. Dong Y-H, Wang L-H, Xu J-L, Zhang H-B, Zhang X-F, Zhang L-H (2001) Nature 411:813–817
65. Zhang H-B, Wang L-H, Zhang L-H (2002) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:4638–4643
66. Leadbetter JR, Greenberg EP (2000) J Bacteriol 182:6921–6926
67. Lin Y-H, Xu J-L, Hu J, Wang L-H, Ong SL, Leadbetter JR, Zhang L-H (2003) Mol Microbiol 47:849–860
68. Federle MJ, Bassler BL (2003) J Clin Invest 112:1291–1299
69. Henke JM, Bassler BL (2004) Trends Cell Biol 14:648–656
70. Vendeville V, Winzer K, Heurlier K, Tang CM, Hardie KR (2005) Nat Rev Microbiol 3:383–396
71. Surette MG, Miller MB, Bassler BL (1999) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:1639–1644
72. Schauder S, Bassler BL (2001) Genes Dev 15:1468–1480
73. Sun J, Daniel R, Wagner-Döbler I, Zeng AP (2004) BMC Evol Biol 4:36
74. Schauder S, Shokat K, Surette MG, Bassler BL (2001) Mol Microbiol 41:463–476
75. Winzer K, Hardie KR, Burgess N, Doherty N, Kirke D, Holden MT, Linforth R, Cornell KA, Taylor AJ, Hill PJ, Williams P (2002) Microbiology 148:909–922
76. Chen X, Schauder S, Potier N, Van Dorsselaer A, Pelczer I, Bassler BL, Hughson FM (2002) Nature 415:545–549
77. Miller ST, Xavier KB, Campagna SR, Taga ME, Semmelhack MF, Bassler BL, Hughson, FM (2004) Mol Cell 15:1625–1635
78. Winzer K, Hardie KR, Williams P (2002) Curr Opin Microbiol 5:216-222
79. Coulthurst SJ, Kurz CL, Salmond GPC (2004) Microbiology 150:1901–1910
80. Coulthurst SJ, Lilley KS, Salmond GPC (2006) Mol Plant Pathol 7:31–45
81. Laasik E, Andresen L, Mäe A (2006) FEMS Microbiol Lett 258:227–234
82. Pirhonen M, Saarilahti H, Karlsson M-B, Palva ET (1991) Mol Plant Microbe Interact 4:276–283
