
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 73:1097–1105  
DOI 10.1007/s00253-006-0579-z  

---

**BIOTECHNOLOGICALLY RELEVANT ENZYMES AND PROTEINS**

---

**A gene linB2 responsible for the conversion of β-HCH and 2,3,4,5,6-pentachlorocyclohexanol in Sphingomonas sp. BHC-A**

Jun Wu · Qing Hong · Peng Han · Jian He · Shunpeng Li

Received: 2 May 2006 / Revised: 9 July 2006 / Accepted: 10 July 2006 / Published online: 15 September 2006  
© Springer-Verlag 2006

---

**Abstract** Commercial formulations of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) consist of a mixture of four isomers: α-, β-, γ-, and δ-. All four isomers are toxic and recalcitrant pollutants. β-HCH is more problematic due to its longer persistence in the environment. *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A was able to degrade not only α-, γ-, and δ-HCH but also β-HCH. To clone a gene responsible for the degradation of β-HCH, a Tn5 mutation was introduced into BHC-A, and one mutant BHC-A45 defective in β-HCH degradation was selected. Sequencing analysis showed this mutant had a Tn5 insertion at the site of one haloalkane dehalogenase gene, designated *linB2*. *linB2* was overexpressed in *Escherichia coli* and the 32-kDa product LinB2 showed the conversion activity of not only β-HCH to β-2,3,4,5,6-pentachlorocyclohexanol (β-PCHL) but also β-PCHL to β-2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-cyclohexanediol.

---

**Introduction**

Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) is an organochlorine insecticide which has been banned in technologically advanced countries because of its toxicity and long persistence in the environment. However, in some areas in the world, this insecticide is still in use for economic reasons and thus new areas continue to be contaminated. Theoretically, HCH has eight possible stereoisomers, of which four (α-, β-, γ-, and δ-HCH) predominate in the technical product (Johri et al. 1996). γ-HCH is the best known and effective insecticide component of HCH, and only 9–18% of technical HCH consists of this γ-isomer. The remaining part consists of α-, β-, and δ-HCH, which do not show insecticide activity (Langenhoff et al. 2002). These isomers differ significantly from each other with respect to their persistence and toxicity to insects, birds, mammals, and other nontarget organisms (Johri et al. 1996). In contrast to α-, γ-, and δ-HCH, β-HCH was for a long time known as recalcitrant under anaerobic and aerobic conditions due to its chemical stability (Langenhoff et al. 2002). A survey for HCH residues in various samples conducted over many years showed that most were contaminated with β- and α-HCH (Jensen and Slorach 1991; Li et al. 2002; Nigam and Siddiqui 2001). There is also evidence that the α- and γ-HCH are converted into β-isomer in living organisms (Jensen and Slorach 1991).

The genes and enzymes responsible for the degradation of γ-HCH have been characterized mostly from *Sphingobium japonicum* UT26, which was isolated from an upland experimental field in Japan where γ-HCH had been applied once a year for 12 years (Imai et al. 1991; Nagasawa et al. 1993; Nagata et al. 1999a-c). The primary enzyme for γ-HCH degradation in strain UT26 is HCH dehydrochlorinase, encoded by only one copy of the gene *linA* (Imai et al. 1991; Nagata et al. 1993a, 1999a). The remaining genes of the γ-HCH degradative pathway, i.e., *linB* (Nagata et al. 1993b, 1997, 1999a-c), *linC* (Nagata et al. 1994), *linD* (Miyaura et al. 1998), *linE* (Miyaura et al. 1999), *linF* (Endo et al. 2005), *linR* (Miyaura et al. 2002), and *linX* (Nagata et al. 1994), encoding a halidohydrolase, a dehydrogenase, a reductive dechlorinase, a dioxygenase, a reductase, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator, and another dehydrogenase, respectively, have been cloned and characterized from UT26. The *linA* gene can also trigger the dehydrochlorination of α- and δ-HCH and α-pentachlorocyclohexene (α-PCCH) (Nagata et al. 1993a). The *linA1* and *linA2* genes that are two
nonidentical copies of *linA* and encode HCH dehydrochlorinase to trigger the degradation of α-, γ-, and δ-HCH have also been cloned and characterized from *S. indicum* B90, which was isolated in Cuttack, India, from rice rhizosphere soil that had been treated repeatedly with technical HCH (Bhuyan et al. 1993; Kumari et al. 2002; Sahu et al. 1990). On the amino acid level, LinA1 and LinA2 were 88% identical to each other, and LinA2 was 100% identical to LinA of UT 26. LinA1 and LinA2 can enantioselectively transform chiral α-HCH to β-PCCH enantiomers. LinA1 preferentially converts the (+)-α-HCH enantiomer to (3S, 4S, 5R, 6R)-β-1,3,4,5,6-PCCH, whereas LinA2 preferentially converts the (−)-α-HCH enantiomer to (3R, 4R, 5S, 6S)-β-1,3,4,5,6-PCCH (Suar et al. 2005). β-HCH as the most recalcitrant HCH isomer has been researched for a long time, and β-HCH degrading bacteria have been reported (Gupta et al. 2000, 2001; Johri et al. 1998; Kumari et al. 2002; Sahu et al. 1990). Recently, the primary enzyme encoded by *linB* for β-HCH degradation in UT 26 has been reported (Nagata et al. 2005). In strain UT 26, haloalkane dehalogenase LinB converts β-HCH to β-2,3,4,5,6-pentachlorocyclohexanol (β-PCHL) and β-PCHL is a dead-end product that cannot be degraded anymore.

*Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A (16s rRNA GeneBank accession number, AY973169) is an HCH-degrading strain that can degrade not only α, γ, and δ isomers but also β isomer (Ai-zhi et al. 2005). In this paper, we introduced mutations into BHC-A by Tn5 mutagenesis (de Bruijn and Lupski 1984; de Bruijn 1987) that originated from pGS9 (Rehman et al. 2002), isolated and characterized the mutants defective in β-HCH degradation, and cloned a haloalkane dehalogenase gene *linB2* which triggered not only the conversion of β-HCH to β-PCHL as *linB* gene in UT 26 but also the continuous degradation of β-PCHL.

### Materials and methods

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids, and culture conditions

Hexachlorocyclohexane-degrading strain *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A (*Amp<sup>r</sup>, Str<sup>r</sup>*) (Ai-zhi et al. 2005) was grown at 30°C in Luria broth (LB) medium (Maniatis et al. 1982). *Escherichia coli* strains were grown on LB medium at 37°C. *E. coli* DH5α (*F<sup>−</sup>/hsdR17, recA1, gyrA*) cells were used for cloning experiments. Aliquots (200 μl) were heat-shock transformed (Maniatis et al. 1982). *E. coli* BL21 [BF<sup>−</sup>*ompT hsdS* (*r<sub>B</sub><sup>−</sup>m<sub>B</sub><sup>−</sup>) *gal dcm*] cells were used for expression experiments.

Plasmids pUC18 (*Amp<sup>r</sup>*) and pET29a (*Km<sup>r</sup>*) were used for cloning and expression, respectively (Maniatis et al. 1982). The suicide, self-transmissible pGS9 (*Cm<sup>r</sup>, Km<sup>r</sup>*,

mob<sup>+</sup>, tra<sup>+</sup>, Tn5, P15 replicon) plasmid was used as a source for Tn5 delivery in *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A (Selvaraj and Iyer 1983).

Antibiotics were used at final concentrations of 50 μg/ml for ampicillin and streptomycin, 10 μg/ml for chloramphenicol, and 5 μg/ml for kanamycin.

#### Enzymes and reagents

Enzymes and kits necessary for DNA manipulations were purchased from Takara Biotechnology (Dalian) Co., Ltd., and New England Biolabs Co., Beijing, China. Isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and X-Gal were obtained from Shanghai Sangon Biological Engineering Technology & Service Co., Ltd. β-HCH was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich USA (Genetimes Technology, Inc., China).

#### Degradation of HCH isomers by strain

The degradation of α-, β-, γ-, and δ-HCH by strain was carried out in mineral salt medium (SM) containing (per liter) 1.0 g of NH<sub>4</sub>NO<sub>3</sub>, 1.0 g of NaCl, 1.5 g of K<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub>, 0.5 g of KH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>, and 0.1 g of MgSO<sub>4</sub>, supplemented with 1% LB medium. Precultures of strain grown overnight in LB were transferred at 2% (vol/vol) to fresh medium containing 17 μM of each HCH isomer. Each flask containing α-, β-, γ-, or δ-HCH was incubated at 30°C on a rotary shaker. Appropriate controls containing medium plus the 17 μM of each HCH isomer were prepared simultaneously. Aliquots (200 μl) were taken out periodically and extracted with 200 μl of hexane; 1 μl of this extract was analyzed by gas chromatography (GC) with an electron capture detector (ECD).

#### Transposon Tn5 mutagenesis

The recipient (*Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A) and donor (*E. coli* DH5α harboring the suicide vector pGS9) strains were grown overnight in LB with the appropriate antibiotics. After incubation of the recipient at 42°C for 15 min to temporarily inactivate its restriction systems, 1 ml was mixed with 2 ml of the donor. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 6000×g for 5 min, washed three times with saline, and resuspended in 100 μl of fresh LB. The cells were then spotted on an LB plate. After overnight incubation at 30°C, cells were scraped off the plate and resuspended in 1 ml of LB, and serial dilutions were plated on selective LB medium containing 50 μg/ml streptomycin and 5 μg/ml kanamycin. Streptomycin<sup>r</sup> and kanamycin<sup>r</sup> transformants were selected as Tn5 insertional conjugants. β-HCH degradation activity was visually assayed by spraying β-HCH solution (3 mg/ml in ethanol) on the conjugants grown on the LB plates. *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A could make a clear zone on this plate, whereas
conjugants defective in β-HCH degradation did not make clear zones. Afterward, GC quantitative analysis of the β-HCH degradation activity of these conjugants was performed, and the conjugants which completely lost the degradation activity were selected. These conjugants were incubated in SM supplemented with 1% glucose in order to screen and eliminate auxotroph conjugants. As control, *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A was also incubated in the same medium. After incubation at 30°C for 48 h, the conjugant who could normally grow as BHC-A was selected.

Isolation of DNA

Genomic DNA from *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A strain and the mutant strain were isolated by the method of high salt concentration precipitation (Miller et al. 1988). Plasmid DNA of *E. coli* was isolated by the alkaline lysis method (Maniatis et al. 1982).

Construction of a genomic library isolation of DNA regions containing Tn5, Southern blot hybridization, and sequencing

A partially digested EcoRI, BHC-A 45 genomic library was constructed in pUC18 DNA digested with EcoRI. The ligation products were transformed into *E. coli* DH5α (Maniatis et al. 1982). Recombinant cells that had the Km<sup>r</sup> gene derived from Tn5 were selected for Amp<sup>r</sup> and Km<sup>r</sup> on agar plates.

Southern blot hybridization analyses were done as reported (Maniatis et al. 1982) against EcoRI digested genomic DNA of the BHC-A strain and the mutant strain. To obtain a probe, a specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the Tn5 was performed. The forward primer used was 5′-ATG ATT GAA CAA GAT GGA TT-3′, and the reverse primer used was 5′-CGC TCA GAA GAA CTC GTC AA-3′. Amplification was performed in the PCR buffer—using about 20 ng of pGS 9 plasmid DNA as a template, 25 pmol of each primers, and 2 U of Pyrob conventional DNA polymerase (TaKaRa, Japan) in a total volume of 50 μl—by 30 cycles, as follows: a denaturing step at 94°C for 30 s, primers annealing step at 50°C for 30 s, and an extension step at 72°C for 1 min. The 780-bp DNA fragment amplified was obtained and labeled with [α-<sup>32</sup>P]dCTP as the probe.

Expression and purification of His-tagged LinB2

The oligonucleotides used as primers are as follows:

primers P1 added EcoRI site (5′-CCG GAA TTC ATG AGC CTC GGC GCA AAG CC-3′) and primers P2 added XhoI site (5′-CCG CTC GAG TTA TGC TGG GCG CAA

TCG CC-3′). The *linB2* gene was specifically amplified by using these primers, Pyrob conventional DNA polymerase (TaKaRa, Japan), and genomic DNA of BHC-A as a template. After digestion with EcoRI and XhoI, the *linB2* was introduced into multiple cloning site of pET29a to construct plasmid p29B2, which could highly express the LinB2 containing 6-histidyl tails into the C-terminus in *E. coli* BL21. *E. coli* BL21 containing p29B2 was cultured in 500 ml of LB medium at 30°C. When the culture reached an optical density of 0.5 at 550 nm, IPTG was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. Cells were harvested after 4 h of incubation, washed with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), and resuspended in the buffer. The cells were disrupted by sonication (VCX 600; Sonics, Newtown, CT, USA) and centrifuged at 200,000×g for 30 min. The supernatant was further purified by a 2-ml volume of NTA-Ni<sup>2+</sup> agarose (QIAGEN) at 4°C. The His-tagged LinB2 was allowed to bind to the resin in the 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) containing 0.5 M sodium chloride and 10 mM imidazole, and then was eluted by the 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) containing 0.5 M sodium chloride and 500 mM imidazole. The amount of protein was determined by the protein assay kit purchased from Shanghai Sangon Biological Engineering Technology & Service Co., Ltd., with bovine serum albumin as a standard. The purified enzyme was stored in the 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 10% glycerol at concentration about 1 mg/ml at 0–4°C (Hynkova et al. 1999; Nagata et al. 1999b).

Assay for the LinB2 activity

The purified LinB2 enzyme was diluted with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) to yield a final concentration of 10 mg/l and incubated with 0.344 mM β-HCH at 30°C. Appropriate controls containing cell extracts of *E. coli* BL21 containing pET29a plus 0.344 mM β-HCH were prepared simultaneously. An equal volume of ethyl acetate was then added, and the mixture was vortexed for 2 min. After centrifugation (12,000×g, 5 min), the ethyl acetate layer was recovered; 1 μl of this extract was analyzed by GC-ECD.

GC-ECD, GC-mass spectrometry, and the chloride ion released analysis

GC-ECD analysis was performed with a Shimadzu GC-14B equipped with an electron capture <sup>63</sup>Ni detector (ECD, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) and an OV-225 capillary gas chromatography column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm; OV). The column, injector, and detector temperatures were maintained at 210°C, 250°C, and 300°C, respectively, with
a flow rate of carrier gas (nitrogen) of 40 ml/min. The sensitivity of the determination in GC analysis was \(1.7 \times 10^{-13} \mathrm{~g} / \mathrm{s}\).

GC-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed with a Varian-Saturn GC/MS (Varian-Saturn 2200), equipped with the CP-3800 GC, injection port split-splitless, and the 2000 Series Ion Trap MS. The column used was a DB-1701 Low Bleed/MS capillary column \((30 \mathrm{~m} \times 0.25 \mathrm{~mm} \times 0.25 \mu \mathrm{m}\); Agilent). The oven temperature was programmed as follows: hold time at \(100^{\circ} \mathrm{C}, 5 \mathrm{~min}\); ramp rate at \(10^{\circ} \mathrm{C} \mathrm{min}^{-1}\) to \(210^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\); hold time at \(210^{\circ} \mathrm{C}, 30 \mathrm{~min}\). The temperatures corresponding to the transfer line and the ion trap were \(280^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) and \(220^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\), respectively, and the ionization energy was \(70 \mathrm{eV}\). The injection volume was \(1 \mu \mathrm{l}\) via a splitless injection at \(280^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\). Helium was used as a carrier at a flow rate of \(1.0 \mathrm{ml} / \mathrm{min}\).

The amount of chloride ion released was measured spectrophotometrically at \(460 \mathrm{~nm}\) with mercuric thiocyanate and ferric ammonium sulfate (Iwasaki et al. 1952).

Identification of the final metabolite by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy

Fifteen milligrams of \(\beta\)-HCH and \(50 \mathrm{ml}\) of phosphate buffer, \(\mathrm{pH} 7.5\), were equilibrated at \(30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) in a water-bath shaker. The enzymatic reaction was initiated by adding \(1 \mathrm{ml}\) LinB2 (protein concentration, \(1 \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{ml}\) ) and incubated at \(30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) overnight. The reaction was then stopped by extraction with ethyl acetate. Afterward, ethyl acetate was blown dry by nitrogen gas, and a total volume of \(200 \mu \mathrm{l}\) \(99.99 \% \mathrm{CD}_{3} \mathrm{OD}\) was supplemented. Nuclear magnetic

resonance (NMR) analysis was performed with a Bruker DRX 300 MHz NMR spectrometer.

Nucleotide sequence accession number

The nucleotide sequence data reported in this paper are registered with the GenBank nucleotide sequence databases under accession number DQ246619.

Results

Degradation of HCH isomers by *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A

*Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A was tested for its ability to degrade \(\alpha-\), \(\beta-\), \(\gamma-\), and \(\delta\)-HCH separately. During the period of incubation, strain BHC-A was found to degrade not only \(\alpha-\), \(\gamma-\), and \(\delta\)-HCH but also \(\beta\)-HCH (Fig. 1). No disappearance of all four HCH isomers was detected in control cultures. The complete degradation of \(\gamma\)-HCH was observed in \(6 \mathrm{~h}\), followed by \(\alpha-\) and \(\delta\)-HCH in \(10 \mathrm{~h}\). The degradation of \(\beta\)-HCH was the slowest, and during \(\beta\)-HCH degradation, a very predominant peak (at \(3.248 \mathrm{~min}\) compared to \(\beta\)-HCH at \(1.998 \mathrm{~min}\) ) appeared in GC chromatograms from samples taken after \(4\) and \(8 \mathrm{~h}\), which persisted in prolonged incubations but eventually disappeared. After \(12 \mathrm{~h}\), no \(\beta\)-HCH was detected in the medium.

Fig. 1 Degradation of HCH isomers by *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A in SM plus \(1 \% \mathrm{LB}\). Cells were grown overnight in LB medium to an optical density at \(600 \mathrm{~nm}\) of 1.0 to 1.2 , and an initial inoculum of \(2 \mathrm{ml}\) was added to \(100 \mathrm{ml}\) of medium containing \(17 \mu \mathrm{M}\) of each HCH isomer, respectively. The assay solution was extracted with hexane every \(2 \mathrm{~h}\) and analyzed by GC-ECD. ■ \(\alpha\)-HCH, ▲ \(\beta\)-HCH, □ \(\gamma\)-HCH, \(\Delta \delta\)-HCH. The error bars indicate standard deviations

$\begin{array}{lllllllllllll} & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 & 9 & 10 & 11 & 12 & 13 & 14 \\ \text { Time (hours) } & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & \end{array}$

Springer
Isolation of Tn5 induced conjugants defective in β-HCH degradation and Southern blot hybridization

Km<sup>r</sup>Str<sup>r</sup> transconjugants, expected to have at least one copy of Tn5 in their genome since pGS9 plasmid contained P15 replicon and could not replicate in BHC-A, were obtained at a frequency of 8.2×10<sup>-5</sup> per recipient cell. From them, several conjugants defective in β-HCH degradation were isolated. The auxotroph experiment showed that only one conjugant was nonauxotroph conjugant among these conjugants. This conjugant was selected and named BHC-A45.

Southern hybridization analyses showed that only one band was detected from the EcoRI digested genomic DNA of BHC-A45 and no band was detected from BHC-A (data not shown). This suggested that BHC-A45 had a single copy insertion of Tn5 in its genome (Tn5 does not contain recognition sites for EcoRI).

Cloning of adjacent DNA to a Tn5 insertion

To determine the nature of the sequence of the knocked out gene, the DNA adjacent to Tn5 was cloned and sequenced. Genomic library of mutant BHC-A45 was constructed and a Amp<sup>r</sup> and Km<sup>r</sup> clone was selected. The recombinant plasmid was called pUC18-A. DNA digestion with several restriction enzymes revealed that a 10- to 11-kb fragment of DNA had been cloned from the mutant BHC-A45. After digestion with HindIII, three bands of about 2.5, 3.6, and 4.2 kb were found. The 3.6-kb band corresponded to the internal HindIII fragment of Tn5, and the 2.5-kb band represented one of the Tn5 border DNA plus adjacent BHC-A chromosomal DNA. The 4.2-kb band represented the other Tn5 border plus adjacent BHC-A chromosomal DNA. The 2.5- and 4.2-kb fragments were sequenced at Takara Biotechnology Co. Ltd. Afterward, DNA sequenced from the Tn5 two borders was

religated and then one 4.3-kb DNA sequence was obtained. Searches for nucleotide similarity were done with the BLAST program via the National Center for Biotechnology Information server. Analysis revealed that a gene with a size of 891 bp similar to haloalkane dehalogenase was present in the 4.3-kb DNA fragment. It had a sequence similarity of 100% to the haloalkane dehalogenase gene *linB* of *S. indicum* B90 and 99% to another haloalkane dehalogenase gene *linB* of *S. japonicum* UT26. The results also proved that Tn5 insertion had occurred in this gene in our strain BHC-A45. This haloalkane dehalogenase gene in *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A was designated *linB2* (GenBank accession number, DQ246619).

Construction and purification of His-tagged LinB2

An overexpression plasmid, p29B2, with the *linB2* gene under the control of the T7 promoter, was constructed as described in “Materials and methods.” *E. coli* BL21 cells containing p29B2 were incubated with or without IPTG, and total proteins were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Only one induced protein corresponding to 32 kDa was observed in the IPTG-treated cells (data not shown). The molecular mass of this protein was almost equal to that deduced from the nucleotide sequence of the *linB2* gene. Thus, it was confirmed that the product of *linB2* is a protein with the molecular mass of about 32 kDa. LinB2 was then purified as described in “Materials and methods.” Only one protein band was observed on SDS-PAGE after this treatment.

Dechlorination kinetic measurement of LinB2

The dechlorination activity of *E. coli* overexpressing LinB2 was assayed. During the period of incubation, the concen-

Fig. 2 Kinetics of dechlorination of β-HCH by LinB2. ◇ β-HCH, △ the released chloride ions. The error bars indicate standard deviations

Fig. 3 Mass spectra of metabolite M1 in the β-HCH degradation pathway by LinB2. M1, β-PCHL

tration of β-HCH was decreased, with a simultaneous elimination of two chlorides per β-HCH molecule by LinB2.

Identification of metabolites of β-HCH by the LinB2 protein

M1 and M2, the β-HCH metabolites produced by LinB2, were detected by GC-MS analysis. β-PCHL, the conversion product of β-HCH by LinB from UT26, was also measured in same analytical process by GC-MS (data not shown). The retention time of M1 was 20.14 min, which was identical to

Fig. 4 Mass spectra of metabolite M2 in the β-HCH degradation pathway by LinB2. M2, β-TDOL

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 73:1097–1105

Table 1 One-dimensional $^{1}$H NMR data of metabolite M2 ($\beta$-TDOL) in the $\beta$-HCH degradation pathway by LinB2

| Proton | Chemical shift (ppm) | Description | Structural formula |
|--------|-----------------------|-------------|--------------------|
| 1      | 4.26                 | 2H (hydroxymetine) |  |
| 2      | 4.37                 | 4H (chlorometine) |  |
| 3      | not detected         | 2H (deuterium exchange with CD$_{3}$OD) |  |

that of $\beta$-PCHL. The mass spectrum of M1 showed a molecular ion peak $m/z$ 270 (M1$^{+}$) and major fragment peaks such as $m/z$ 235 (M1$^{+}$-Cl), $m/z$ 217 (M1$^{+}$-OH-HCl), $m/z$ 199 (M1$^{+}$-Cl-HCl), $m/z$ 163 (M1$^{+}$-Cl-HCl-HCl), $m/z$ 170 (M1$^{+}$-Cl-HCl-CO), $m/z$ 135 (M1$^{+}$-Cl-HCl-CO-Cl), and $m/z$ 109 (M1$^{+}$-Cl-HCl-CO-Cl-$C_{2}H_{2}$) (Fig. 3). These features were identical to those observed in the spectrum of $\beta$-PCHL (Nagata et al. 2005). From these results, M1 was identified as $\beta$-PCHL. It was suggested that the first step of $\beta$-HCH conversion of LinB2 was dechlorination to yield $\beta$-PCHL.

The retention time of M2 was 18.82 min and the mass spectrum of M2 was shown (Fig. 4). M2 had a molecular ion peak $m/z$ 252 (M2$^{+}$) and the isotopic cluster at $m/z$ 252 to 258, indicating four chlorine atoms. Because of $\beta$-PCHL containing five chlorine atoms, M2 must be the dechlorination product of $\beta$-PCHL. The difference between these two compounds' molecular weights was only 18 ($\beta$-PCHL molecular weight was 270; M2 molecular weight was 252), so one OH (OH molecular weight was 17) should replace one chlorine atom (chlorine molecular weight was 35) in $\beta$-PCHL to form M2. That is to say, there were two OH functional groups in the structure of M2. The fragmentation of this compound was consistent with the possible fragments such as $m/z$ 235 (M2$^{+}$-OH), $m/z$ 199 (M2$^{+}$-OH-HCl), $m/z$ 181 (M2$^{+}$-HCl-Cl), $m/z$ 163 (M2$^{+}$-OH-HCl-HCl), $m/z$ 145 (M2$^{+}$-HCl-Cl-HCl), $m/z$ 135 (M2$^{+}$-OH-HCl-HCl-CO), $m/z$ 99 (M2$^{+}$-OH-HCl-HCl-CO-HCl), and $m/z$ 109 (M2$^{+}$-OH-HCl-HCl-CO-$C_{2}H_{4}$). In order to determine the positions of two OH functional groups on the cyclic carbon, NMR analysis was performed. In proton NMR spectrom-

etry, the signals of M2 were observed at 4.37 ppm (chlorometine, 4H) and 4.26 ppm (hydroxymetine, 2H), respectively (Table 1). Because of deuterium exchange with CD$_{3}$OD, the chemical shift of the protons of OH groups of M2 could not be observed. The results indicated that the two OH functional groups on the cyclic carbon were situated at para-position and not at ortho- or meta-position. Based on these data, the most probable structure of M2 to account for this spectrum was $\beta$-2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-cyclohexanediol ($\beta$-TDOL).

Discussion

In this report, biodegradation of HCH isomers by *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A was described. In our experiment, *Sphingomonas* sp. BHC-A showed the strong degradation activity of not only $\alpha$-, $\gamma$-, and $\delta$-HCH but also $\beta$-HCH. In order to clone the gene responsible for the degradation of $\beta$-HCH, we introduced the Tn5 mutation into BHC-A and obtained one mutant (BHC-A45) defective in $\beta$-HCH degradation. The sequential analysis of the insertion region in this mutant indicated that the *linB2* gene was mutated in BHC-A45. Afterward, *linB2* was cloned and overexpressed in *E. coli* and the product LinB2 showed the conversion activity of $\beta$-HCH and $\beta$-PCHL. LinB2 was also a haloalkane dehalogenase of the $\alpha/\beta$ hydrolase family of enzymes that showed significant similarity to three types of $\alpha/\beta$ hydrolase fold enzymes: haloalkane dehalogenase (DhlA) from *Xanthobacter autotrophicus* GJ10, haloacetate dehalogenase (DehH1) from *Moraxella* sp. B, and serine

Fig. 5 Proposed initial pathway for $\beta$-HCH degradation in BHC-A. Compounds: 1 $\beta$-HCH, 2 $\beta$-PCHL, 3 $\beta$-TDOL
hydrolases represented by 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde hydrolase (DmpD) from *Pseudomonas* sp. CF600. According to the results of the BLAST program, the deduced amino acid sequence of LinB2 shares 97% homology to the LinB of *S. japonicum* UT26.

The crystal structure of the LinB from UT26 has been reported (Smatanova et al. 1999). The enzyme contains a catalytical triad (Asp-108, His-272, and Glu-132) in the lipase-like topological arrangement (Hynkova et al. 1999). LinB2 was compared with it, and the structural features showed that LinB2 contained the same catalytical triad (Asp-108, His-272, and Glu-132) and most amino acid residues composing the active site were identical with those of LinB. Although LinB2 showed a high level of similarity to LinB, LinB2 showed conversion activity of β-PCHL, which was not observed in LinB (Nagata et al. 2005). The sequence analysis results showed that seven amino acid residues in same sites of the amino acid sequences of these two enzymes were heterogeneous. These residues in LinB were Ala-81, Ala-112, Ile-134, Ala-135, Ile-138, Ala-247, and Met-253, and they were in the same sites of LinB2 instead of Thr-81, Val-112, Val-134, Thr-135, Leu-138, His-247, and Ile-253. We deduced that the changes of the seven amino acid residues were possibly relative to the difference of β-PCHL conversion activity between LinB2 and LinB. Recently, we have obtained the evidence from site-directed mutagenesis of the seven amino acid residues of LinB2, respectively, according to the corresponding residues in LinB to prove that every change of the seven amino acid residues would strongly weaken the β-HCH and β-PCHL conversion activities of LinB2. The weakening effect would be accumulated with the increase in the change number of amino acid residues. When LinB2 was transformed to LinB by site-directed mutagenesis of all seven different amino acid residues, the maximal weakening effect was observed, which was about 90%. β-HCH degradation activity was lost and the β-PCHL degradation activity could not be observed by the general method (unpublished data).

The two degradation products by LinB2 were identified as β-PCHL and β-TDOL, respectively, and the proposed early steps of β-HCH degradation in BHC-A were shown (Fig. 5). We demonstrated that LinB2 was not only essential for the first-step dechlorination reaction but is also essential for the following dechlorination reaction by in vitro experiments. This finding was very important because it was one step further in the elucidation of probable β-HCH biodegradation.

Acknowledgments We thank Prof. Y. Nagata, Tohoku University, for providing the authentic mass spectrum of β-PCHL. This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation (projects nos. 40471073 and 30400013), the 863 hi-tech research and development program of Ministry of Science and Technology

[projects nos. 2003AA241150, 2004AA246070, 2004(249), and 2004(514)] and the hi-tech research program of JiangSu Science & Technology Department of The People's Republic of China (project nos. BE2002345, BE2003343, and BG2005322).

### References

Ai-zhi Ma, Jun Wu, Guo-shun Zhang, Ting Wang, Shun-peng Li (2005) Isolation and characterization of a HCH degradation *Sphingomonas* sp. strain BHC-A. Acta Microbiol Sin 45:728–732

Bhuyan S, Sreedharan B, Adhya TK, Sethunathan N (1993) Enhanced biodegradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane (γ-HCH) in HCH (commercial) acclimatized flooded soil: factors affecting its development and persistence. Pestic Sci 38:49–55

de Brujin FJ (1987) Transposon Tn5 mutagenesis to map genes. Methods Enzymol 154:175–196

de Bruijn FJ, Lupski JR (1984) The use of transposon Tn5 mutagenesis in the rapid generation of correlated physical and genetic maps of DNA segments cloned into multicopy plasmids—a review. Gene 27:131–149

Endo R, Kamakura M, Miyauchi K, Fukuda M, Ohtsubo Y, Tsuda M, Nagata Y (2005) Identification and characterization of genes involved in the downstream degradation pathway of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. J Bacteriol 187:847–853

Gupta A, Kaushik CP, Kaushik A (2000) Degradation of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH; α, β, γ and δ) by *Bacillus circulans* and *Bacillus brevis* isolated from soil contaminated with HCH. Soil Biol Biochem 32:1803–1805

Gupta A, Kaushik CP, Kaushik A (2001) Degradation of hexachlorocyclohexane isomers by two strains of *Alcaligenes faecalis* isolated from a contaminated site. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 66:794–800

Hynkova K, Nagata Y, Takagi M, Damborsky J (1999) Identification of the catalytic triad in the haloalkane dehalogenase from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. FEBS Lett 446:177–181

Imai R, Nagata Y, Fukuda M, Takagi M, Yano K (1991) Molecular cloning of a *Pseudomonas paucimobilis* gene encoding a 17-kilodalton polypeptide that eliminates HCl molecules from γ-hexachlorocyclohexane. J Bacteriol 173:6811–6819

Iwasaki I, Utsumi S, Ozawa T (1952) New colorimetric determination of chloride using mercuric thiocyanate and ferric ion. Bull Chem Soc Japan 25:226

Jensen AA, Slorach SA (1991) Chemical contaminants in human milk. CRC, Boca Raton, FL

Johri AK, Dua M, Tuteja D, Saxena R, Saxena DM, Lal R (1996) Genetic manipulations of microorganisms for the degradation of hexachlorocyclohexane. FEMS Microbiol Rev 19:69–84

Johri AK, Dua M, Tuteja D, Saxena R, Saxena DM, Lal R (1998) Degradation of alpha, beta, gamma and delta-hexachlorocyclohexanes by *Sphingomonas paucimobilis*. Biotechnol Lett 20:885–887

Kumari R, Subudhi S, Suar M, Dhingra G, Raina V, Dogra C, Lal S, van der Meer JR, Holliger C, Lal R (2002) Cloning and characterization of *lin* genes responsible for the degradation of hexachlorocyclohexane isomers by *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* strain B90. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:6021–6028

Langenhoff AAM, Staps JJM, Pijls CGJM, Alphenaar A, Zwiep G, Rijnaarts HHM (2002) Intrinsic and stimulated in situ biodegradation of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH). Water Air and Soil Pollut Focus 2:171–181

Li YF, Macdonald RW, Jantunen LM, Harner T, Bidleman TF, Strachan WM (2002) The transport of beta-hexachlorocyclohexane to the western Arctic Ocean: a contrast to alpha-HCH. Sci Total Environ 27:229–246
Maniatis T, Fritsch EF, Sambrook J (1982) Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY

Miller SA, Dykes DD, Polesky HF (1988) A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acids Res 16:1215

Miyachi K, Suh S, Nagata Y, Takagi M (1998) Cloning and sequencing of a 2,5-dichlorohydroquinone reductive dehalogenase gene which is involved in the degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis*. J Bacteriol 180:1354–1359

Miyachi K, Adachi Y, Nagata Y, Takagi M (1999) Cloning and sequencing of a novel meta-cleavage dioxygenase gene whose product is involved in degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis*. J Bacteriol 181:6712–6719

Miyachi K, Lee HS, Fukuda M, Takagi M, Nagata Y (2002) Cloning and characterization of *linR*, involved in regulation of the downstream pathway for γ-hexachlorocyclohexane degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:1803–1807

Nagasawa S, Kikuchi R, Nagata Y, Takagi M, Matsuo M (1993) Aerobic mineralization of γ-HCH by *Pseudomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Chemosphere 26:1719–1728

Nagata Y, Hatta T, Imai R, Kimbara K, Fukuda M, Yano K, Takagi M (1993a) Purification and characterization of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane (γ-HCH) dehydrochlorinase (LinA) from *Pseudomonas paucimobilis*. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 57:1582–1583

Nagata Y, Nariya T, Ohtomo R, Fukuda M, Yano K, Takagi M (1993b) Cloning and sequencing of a dehalogenase gene encoding an enzyme with hydrolase activity involved in the degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Pseudomonas paucimobilis*. J Bacteriol 175:6403–6410

Nagata Y, Ohtomo R, Miyachi K, Fukuda M, Yano K, Takagi M (1994) Cloning and sequencing of a 2,5-dichloro-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dioldehydrogenase gene involved in the degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Pseudomonas paucimobilis*. J Bacteriol 176:3117–3125

Nagata Y, Miyachi K, Damborsky J, Manova K, Ansorgova A, Takagi M (1997) Purification and characterization of a haloalkane dehalogenase of a new substrate class from a γ-hexachloro-

cyclohexane-degrading bacterium, *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:3707–3710

Nagata Y, Futamura A, Miyauchi K, Takagi M (1999a) Two different types of dehalogenases, LinA and LinB, involved in γ-hexachlorocyclohexane degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26 are localized in the periplasmic space without molecular processing. J Bacteriol 181:5409–5413

Nagata Y, Hynkova K, Damborsky J, Takagi M (1999b) Construction and characterization of histidine-tagged haloalkane dehalogenase (LinB) of a new substrate class from a γ-hexachlorocyclohexane-degrading bacterium, *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Protein Expr Purif 17:299–304

Nagata Y, Miyauchi K, Takagi M (1999c) Complete analysis of genes and enzymes for γ-hexachlorocyclohexane degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 23:380–390

Nagata Y, Prokop Z, Sato Y, Jerabek P, Kumar A, Ohtsubo Y, Tsuda M, Damborsky J (2005) Degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane by haloalkane dehalogenase LinB from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:2183–2185

Nigam U, Siddqui KJ (2001) Organochlorine insecticide residues in dairy milk samples collected in Lucknow, India. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 66:678–682

Sahu SK, Patnaik KK, Sharmila M, Sethunathan N (1990) Degradation of alpha-, beta-, and gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane by a soil bacterium under aerobic conditions. Appl Environ Microbiol 56:3620–3622

Selvaraj G, Iyer VN (1983) Suicide plasmid vehicles for insertion mutagenesis in *Rhizobium meliloti* and related bacteria. J Bacteriol 156:1292–1300

Smatanova I, Nagata Y, Svensson LA, Takagi M, Marek J (1999) Crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of haloalkane dehalogenase LinB from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr D55:1231–1233

Suar M, Hauser A, Poiger T, Buser HR, Muller MD, Dogra C, Raina V, van der Holliger C (2005) Enantioselective transformation of alpha-hexachlorocyclohexane by the dehydrochlorinases LinAl and LinA2 from the soil bacterium *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* B90A. Appl Environ Microbiol 71(12):8514–8518
