
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Nov. 2006, p. 7413–7417  
0099-2240/06/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/AEM.01162-06  
Copyright © 2006, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Degradation of Fluorobenzene by Rhizobiales Strain F11 via ortho Cleavage of 4-Fluorocatechol and Catechol

Maria F. Carvalho,$^{1\S}$ Maria Isabel M. Ferreira,$^{2\S}$ Irina S. Moreira,$^{1}$  
Paula M. L. Castro,$^{1*}$ and Dick B. Janssen$^{2}$  

**Escola Superior de Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal,$^{1}$ and Department of Biochemistry, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, NL-9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands$^{2}$**

Received 19 May 2006/Accepted 5 September 2006

The aerobic metabolism of fluorobenzene by *Rhizobiales* sp. strain F11 was investigated. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis showed that 4-fluorocatechol and catechol were formed as intermediates during fluorobenzene degradation by cell suspensions. Both these compounds, unlike 3-fluorocatechol, supported growth and oxygen uptake. Cells grown on fluorobenzene contained enzymes for the *ortho* pathway but not for *meta* ring cleavage of catechols. The results suggest that fluorobenzene is predominantly degraded via 4-fluorocatechol with subsequent *ortho* cleavage and also partially via catechol.

During the last decades, environmental contamination by fluorinated organic compounds has received increasing attention because of their use as herbicides, fungicides, surfactants, refrigerants, intermediates in organic synthesis, solvents, and pharmaceuticals (11). Whereas the biodegradation of chlorinated compounds has been studied quite extensively (19), little is known about the bacterial metabolism of fluoroaromatic compounds, even though there have been several reports on the degradation of fluorobenzoic acids (5, 6, 7, 16). With chloroaromatics, most degradation routes involve dioxygenase- and dehydrogenase-mediated conversion to the corresponding chlorocatechols, which are further metabolized by a dioxygenase that cleaves the aromatic ring. Dehalogenation occurs during metabolism of the ring-cleavage products (19). Most described strains degrade chlorocatechols via the *ortho*-cleavage pathway (14, 18, 19, 20), but *meta* cleavage of 3-chlorocatechol can also occur (13), even though the *meta*-cleavage route is often unproductive due to the formation of toxic or dead-end products (1, 19). Dehalogenation may in some cases occur prior to ring cleavage. For example, mutants of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13 and *Alcaligenes eutrophus* B9 that grow on 2-fluorobenzoate use a dioxygenase to convert it to catechol, with concomitant decarboxylation and defluorination (5). *Pseudomonas putida* strain CLB 250, which can use three different 2-halobenzoates, also converts these substrates by initial dehalogenating dioxygenation (6), and a defluorinating 4-fluorobenzoate monooxygenase has been reported as well (16).

The present paper describes a metabolic pathway for fluorobenzene (FB). Information about the bacterial metabolism of this compound is scarce, despite studies on its chlorinated analogue (13, 18). Lynch et al. (12) described the oxidation of FB to 3-fluorocatechol by a strain of *Pseudomonas putida*, but

in this study FB was not used as a carbon source. Recently, FB was reported to be completely degraded by a bacterial consortium (2) and by a pure bacterial culture that utilized it as a sole carbon and energy source (3). This gram-negative bacterium, phylogenetically classified within the order *Rhizobiales*, was named strain F11 and was used here to investigate the metabolism of FB.

Intermediates produced during FB degradation. In order to obtain information about the degradation pathway of FB, we tested which intermediates accumulated upon incubation of concentrated cell suspensions of strain F11 with FB. First, cells were grown in sealed flasks on FB in mineral medium as described previously (3), harvested by centrifugation (10,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C), washed twice with mineral medium, and resuspended in the same medium to give an optical density at 600 nm of 0.3. Glucose (1 mM) was added, since it was found in preliminary experiments that this enhanced degradation of FB and stimulated accumulation of intermediates. The suspensions were incubated in closed flasks with FB, and samples were taken at appropriate times, centrifuged, and subjected to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas chromatography, and fluoride measurements. Fluoride was measured with a Dionex Dx-120 ion chromatograph equipped with an Allsep A-2 anion column from Alltech, and the eluent was a mixture of NaHCO₃ and Na₂CO₃ in deionized water. For FB analysis, culture samples were extracted with diethylether and analyzed by gas chromatography as described previously (3). It was observed that whole cells of strain F11 completely removed 1.1 mM FB in 13 h, but stoichiometric fluoride release was seen only after 29 h (Fig. 1). This indicates that fluorinated intermediates did temporarily accumulate but that there was no formation of high levels of fluorinated dead-end metabolites.

Samples (20 μl) from the same culture fluid were also analyzed by HPLC and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). HPLC analysis was carried out on a Lichrospher 100 RP8 reversed-phase column in connection with Jasco PU-980 pumps, a Jasco MD-910 diode array detector, and a Jasco UV-2075 detector. Compounds were isocratically eluted at a

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Escola Superior de Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal. Phone: 351 225580059. Fax: 351 225090351. E-mail: plc@esb.ucp.pt.
§ M.F.C. and M.I.M.F. contributed equally to this work.
Published ahead of print on 15 September 2006.

CARVALHO ET AL.

FIG. 1. Accumulation of metabolites during degradation of 1.1 mM FB by strain F11. Symbols: ■, FB (calculated as if all substrate was present in the liquid phase); ▲, fluoride; X, 4-fluorocatechol; ●, catechol; ◆, optical density at 600 nm. Liquid phase FB is in equilibrium with gas-phase substrate according to the Henry coefficient (H = $C_g/C_l$ = 0.258). The closed flasks had a volume of 1,200 ml and contained 250 ml medium.

flow rate of 1 ml/min with a solution of water-acetonitrile (80:20) and 10 mM formic acid. LC-MS was carried out with a Micromass ZMD detector equipped with a XTerra MS, a SymmetryShield C8 column (4.6 mm by 150 mm), a 996 photodiode array detector, and a 2690 separations module, all from Waters. While degradation proceeded, five metabolites (compounds I to V) appeared in the culture medium (Table 1). Four of these (compounds I, II, IV, and V) were completely consumed during prolonged incubation. One minor metabolite (compound III) remained in the culture supernatant even after incubation for 48 h.

Metabolite I, which appeared early, coeluted with catechol and had a molecular mass (negative-mode MS) of $m/z = 109$ (M-H⁺). Metabolite II was identified as 4-fluorocatechol on the basis of cochromatography with a standard in HPLC analysis and its negative-mode mass spectrum with $m/z = 126.91$ (M-H⁺). The dead-end metabolite III was identified as cis-dienelactone by cochromatography and mass spectrometry (positive ionization, $m/z = 140.04$ [M+H⁺]). Metabolites IV and V could not be identified, since no ionization was obtained with LC-MS.

The occurrence of the two catechols during the initial 20 h of FB degradation (Fig. 1) suggests that strain F11 converts FB partially to catechol and partially to 4-fluorocatechol during the first metabolic step. Approximately 0.6 mM of the FB that was converted transiently appeared as 4-fluorocatechol, and about 0.3 mM was detected as catechol. This is in agreement with the observation that significant fluoride release is taking place already during the initial period of FB degradation, i.e., when catechol is formed but that fluoride release is only complete when the intermediate 4-fluorocatechol and possibly other fluorinated metabolites have been degraded. The formation of both catechol and 4-fluorocatechol from FB is also consistent with the ability of strain F11 to grow on both of these catechols. The fact that catechol remained in the medium for quite a long time even though it is a better growth substrate than 4-fluorocatechol suggests inhibition of the catechol pathway by the presence of 4-fluorocatechol.

TABLE 1. HPLC retention times and absorption maxima of metabolic intermediates formed by F11 cells exposed to fluorobenzene in the presence of glucose

| Compound | Retention time (min) | $\lambda_{\text{max}}$ (nm) | Growth in substrate${}^a$ |
|----------|----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Catechol (metabolite I) | 8.4 | 195, 276 | + |
| 4-Fluorocatechol (metabolite II) | 13 | 190, 280 | + |
| cis-Dienelactone (metabolite III) | 8 | 190, 220, 275 | NT |
| Metabolite IV | 23.4 | 273 | NT |
| Metabolite V | 6 | 210 | NT |
| Fluorobenzene | 65 | 260 | + |
| 3-Fluorocatechol | 10.5 | 190, 267 | – |
| cis,cis-Muconic acid | 6.25 | 260 | + |
| Phenol | 15 | 270 | + |
| 4-Fluorophenol | 22 | 190, 277 | + |
| Hydroquinone | 5.2 | 280 | NT |
| 1,2,4-Benzenetriol | 4 | 280 | NT |

${}^a$ Abbreviations: NT, not tested; –, no growth after 14 days; +, clearly visible growth in liquid culture after 4 days.

Substrate-dependent oxygen consumption by whole cells. In order to test the inducibility of FB transformation activity, oxygen uptake measurements were done. Cells of strain F11 were grown on FB, benzene, or citrate, harvested by centrifugation, washed, resuspended to a density of 0.43 mg of cellular protein per ml, and transferred to a stirred vessel that was equipped with a fiber optic oxygen sensor (MOPS-1; ProSense BV, Hanover, Germany). The rate of O₂ consumption was measured at room temperature in the presence of different substrates (Table 2).

Cells grown on FB oxidized fluorobenzene and cis-1,2-dihydrobenzenediol as well as 4-fluorocatechol and were also highly induced for the oxidation of catechol. Rapid oxidation of catechol, 4-fluorocatechol, and cis-1,2-dihydrobenzenediol was also obtained with cells that were pregrown on benzene. With fluorobenzene and benzene, these cells showed even higher oxygen uptake rates than cells grown on FB. With cells grown on citrate, the aromatic substrates were not oxidized, suggesting that the formation of the first catabolic enzyme was induced during growth on the aromatic substrates and repressed on citrate. The oxygen uptake rates with 3-fluorocatechol were very low, independent of whether the cells were grown on FB, benzene, or citrate. The patterns of oxygen

TABLE 2. Substrates oxidized by fluorobenzene-, benzene-, and citrate-grown cells of strain F11${}^a$

| Assay substrate | Rate of oxygen consumption (nmol/min per mg of cells) after growth with: |
|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | Fluorobenzene | Benzene | Citrate |
| Fluorobenzene    | 66            | 420     | <0.1    |
| Benzene          | 2             | 220     | <0.1    |
| cis-1,2-Dihydrobenzenediol | 160        | 400     | <0.1    |
| Catechol         | 570           | 340     | <0.1    |
| 3-Fluorocatechol | <0.1          | <0.1    | <0.1    |
| 4-Fluorocatechol | 300           | 570     | <0.1    |
| Citrate          | <0.1          | <0.1    | 151     |

${}^a$ Oxygen consumption was measured with an oxygen sensor as described in Materials and Methods. All substrates were used at a concentration of 1 mM. Results represent the means of the results of at least three independently performed experiments. Oxygen uptake experiment results are corrected for endogenous respiration; replicates showed less than 10% variation.

TABLE 3. Enzyme activities in cell extracts of strain F11 grown on FB

| Enzyme | Assay substrate | Sp act<sup>b</sup> (U · mg of protein<sup>-1</sup>) |
|--------|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase | Catechol | 0.96 |
|  | 3-Fluorocatechol<sup>a</sup> | 0.009 |
|  | 4-Fluorocatechol | 0.16 |
| Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase | Catechol | 0.002 |
| Muconate cycloisomerase | cis,cis-Muconic acid | 0.200 |
| Dienelactone hydrolase | cis-Dienelactone | 0.002 |
| Maleylacetate reductase | Maleylacetate | 0.78 |
| 3-Oxoadipate:succinyl-CoA transferase | 3-Oxoadipic acid | 0.12 |

<sup>a</sup> Activity with 3-fluorocatechol was tested both at 0.5 and 0.1 mM; the results obtained were always very similar.

<sup>b</sup> Numbers represent the means of the results of at least three independently performed experiments.

age of 4-fluorocatechol is also a key step in the metabolism of 3- and 4-fluorobenzoate by several bacterial strains (9, 21, 22, 24). These convert 4-fluorocatechol via 3-fluoro-cis,cis-muconate and 4-fluoromuconolactone (22, 24) or via a non-fluorinated dienelactone intermediate (24). If 4-fluorocatechol metabolism in strain F11 proceeds in the same way, this could also explain the accumulation of cis-dienelactone since it can slowly be formed as a side product during spontaneous or enzyme-catalyzed dehydrodefluorination of 4-fluoromuconolactone (23, 24). This pathway would also allow formation of protoanemonin.

Maleylacetate can be channeled into the tricarboxylic acid cycle via 3-oxoadipate. Catechol, the minor product of the initial dioxygenation reaction, is proposed to be metabolized to cis,cis-muconate, converted to the lactone derivative, and then also channeled into the 3-oxoadipate route (Fig. 2).

M.F.C. acknowledges a research grant from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT), Portugal (BD/21839/99), and Fundo Social Europeu (III Quadro Comunitário de Apoio). This work was supported in part by the European Community’s Human Potential Programme under contract HPRTN-CT-2002-00213 [BIOSAP] and by a grant from the European Science Foundation.

We thank Paolo De Marco for help in the preparation of cell extracts and Filip Kaminski for valuable discussions and a kind gift of protoanemonin. Both 4-fluorocatechol and cis-dienelactone were generous gifts of W. Reineke (Bergische Universität, Wuppertal, Germany). We thank Theodora Tiemersma for help with the LC-MS analysis.

### REFERENCES

1. Bartels, I., H.-J. Knackmuss, and W. Reineke. 1984. Suicide inactivation of catechol 2,3-dioxygenase from *Pseudomonas putida* mt-2 by 3-halocatechols. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 47:500–505.
2. Carvalho, M. F., C. C. T. Alves, M. I. M. Ferreira, P. De Marco, and P. M. L. Castro. 2002. Isolation and initial characterization of a bacterial consortium able to mineralize fluorobenzene. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:102–105.
3. Carvalho, M. F., R. Ferreira Jorge, C. C. Pacheco, P. De Marco, and P. M. L. Castro. 2005. Isolation and properties of a pure bacterial strain capable of fluorobenzene degradation as sole carbon and energy source. Environ. Microbiol. 7:294–298.
4. Dorn, E., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1978. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Substituent effects on 1,2-dioxygenation of catechol. Biochem. J. 174:85–94.
5. Engesser, K. H., E. Schmidt, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1980. Adaptation of *Alcaligenes eutrophus* B9 and *Pseudomonas* sp. B13 to 2-fluorobenzoate as growth substrate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 39:68–73.
6. Engesser, K. H., and P. Schulte. 1989. Degradation of 2-bromo-, 2-chloro- and 2-fluorobenzoate by *Pseudomonas putida* CLB 250. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 51:143–147.
7. Engesser, K. H., G. Auling, J. Busse, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1990. 3-Fluorobenzoate enriched bacterial strain FLB 300 degrades benzoate and all three isomeric monofluorobenzoates. Arch. Microbiol. 153:193–199.
8. Evans, W. C., B. S. W. Smith, P. Moss, and H. N. Fernley. 1971. Bacterial metabolism of 4-chlorophenoxyacetate. Biochem. J. 122:509–517.
9. Harper, D. B., and E. R. Blakley. 1971. The metabolism of p-fluorophenylacetic acid by a *Pseudomonas* sp. II. The degradative pathway. Can. J. Microbiol. 17:645–650.
10. Kaschabek, S. R., and W. Reineke. 1992. Maleylacetate reductase of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13: dechlorination of chloromalylacetates, metabolites in the degradation of chloroaromatic compounds. Arch. Microbiol. 158:412–417.
11. Key, B. D., R. D. Howell, and C. S. Criddle. 1997. Fluorinated organics in the biosphere. Environ. Sci. Technol. 31:2445–2454.
12. Lynch, R. M., J. M. Woodley, and M. D. Lilly. 1997. Process design for the oxidation of fluorobenzene to fluorocatechol by *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Biotechnol. 58:167–175.
13. Mars, A. E., and T. Kasberg, S. R. Kaschabek, M. H. van Agteren, D. B. Janssen, and W. Reineke. 1997. Microbial degradation of chloroaromatics: use of *meta*-cleavage pathway for mineralization of chlorobenzene. J. Bacteriol. 179:4530–4537.
14. Nikodem, P., V. Hecht, M. Schlömann, and D. H. Pieper. 2003. New bacterial pathway for 4- and 5-chlorosalicylate degradation via 4-chlorocatechol and maleylacetate in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain MT1. J. Bacteriol. 185:6790–6800.

FIG. 2. Proposed pathway for fluorobenzene metabolism by strain F11. The enzyme activities are denoted as follows: 1, fluorobenzene dioxygenase; 2, fluorobenzene dihydrodiol dehydrogenase; 3, fluorocatechol 1,2-dioxygenase; 4, fluoromuconate cycloisomerase; 5 and 6, possible side reactions to cis-dienelactone by fluoromuconate cycloisomerase (activity 5) or by slow spontaneous conversion (activity 6); 7, trans-dienelactone hydrolase; 8, maleylacetate reductase; 9, fluorobenzene dioxygenase; 10, nonenzymatic defluorination; 11, catechol 1,2-dioxygenase; 12, muconate cycloisomerase; 13, muconolactone isomerase; 14, 3-oxoadipate enol-lactone hydrolase.

15. Nozaki, M. 1970. Metapyrocatechase (*Pseudomonas*). Methods Enzymol. **17**:522–525.
16. Oltmanns, R. H., R. Müller, M. K. Otto, and F. Lingens. 1989. Evidence for a new pathway in the bacterial degradation of 4-fluorobenzoate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **55**:2499–2504.
17. Pettigrew, C. A., B. E. Haigler, and J. C. Spain. 1991. Simultaneous biodegradation of chlorobenzene and toluene by a *Pseudomonas* strain. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **57**:157–162.
18. Reineke, W., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1984. Microbial metabolism of haloaromatics: isolation and properties of a chlorobenzene-degrading bacterium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **47**:395–402.
19. Reineke, W., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1988. Microbial degradation of haloaromatics. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **42**:263–287.
20. Schlömann, M. 1994. Evolution of chlorocatechol catabolic pathways.

Conclusions to be drawn from comparisons of lactone hydrolases. Biodegradation **5**:301–321.

21. Schlömann, M., E. Schmidt, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1990. Different types of dienelactone hydrolase in 4-fluorobenzoate-utilizing bacteria. J. Bacteriol. **172**:5112–5118.

22. Schlömann, M., P. Fischer, E. Schmidt, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1990. Enzymatic formation, stability, and spontaneous reactions of 4-fluoromuconolactone, a metabolite of the bacterial degradation of 4-fluorobenzoate. J. Bacteriol. **172**:5119–5129.

23. Schmidt, E., G. Remberg, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1980. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Halogenated muconic acids as intermediates. Biochem. J. **192**:331–337.

24. Schreiber, A., M. Hellwig, E. Dorn, W. Reineke, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1980. Critical reactions in fluorobenzoic acid degradation by *Pseudomonas* sp. B13. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **39**:58–67.
