
# Intracellular Signals and Events Activated by Cytokines of the Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily: From Simple Paradigms to Complex Mechanisms

Sergei I. Grivennikov, ${}^{*,\dagger}$ Dmitry V. Kuprash, ${}^{*}$ Zheng-Gang Liu, ${}^{\ddagger}$ and Sergei A. Nedospasov ${}^{*}$

${}^{*}$Laboratory of Molecular Immunology,  
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology,  
Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 Moscow, Russia  

${}^{\dagger}$Basic Research Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research,  
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702  

${}^{\ddagger}$Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research,  
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892  

---

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and several related cytokines can induce opposite effects such as cell activation and proliferation or cell death. How the cell maintains the balance between these seemingly mutually exclusive pathways has long remained a mystery. TNF receptor I (TNFRI) initially emerged as a potent activator of NFκB and AP-1 transcription factors, while the related CD95 (Fas, Apo-1) was recognized as a prototype death receptor. Advances in research have uncovered critical molecular players in these intracellular processes. They have also revealed a much more complex picture than originally thought. Several new signaling pathways, including the alternative NFκB activation cascade, have been uncovered, and previously unknown modes of cross-talk between intracellular signaling molecules were revealed. It also turned out that signaling mechanisms mediated by the TNF receptor superfamily members can operate not only in the immune system but also in organ development.

KEY WORDS: TNFR superfamily, Signal transduction, Apoptosis, Gene activation, Adaptor molecules, Caspases, Transcriptional factors. © 2006 Elsevier Inc.

International Review of Cytology, Vol. 252  
Copyright 2006, Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  
DOI: 10.1016/S0074-7696(06)52002-9

130

I. Introduction

Cytokines and their receptors are best classified according to the type of intracellular signals they can transmit, which are primarily determined by the enzymatic and docking domains in the intracellular portions of the receptors. The tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily can be distinguished from other cytokine receptors both by the homology between their extracellular domains and by a unique combination of docking modules and adaptor molecules interacting with intracellular parts of the receptors. TNF receptors can be subdivided into three groups: (1) a group containing a proapoptotic docking module, called “death domain” (DD-containing receptors); (2) a group consisting of non-DD TNF receptors, which signal primarily through accessory molecules, called TNF receptor–associated factors (TRAFs); and (3) a group of decoy receptors, which apparently do not transmit any signal. Overall, this family has grown to include 32 members that may interact with at least 19 ligands, often with a pattern more complex than a “one ligand-one receptor” paradigm. Ligands form a separate TNF-like ligand superfamily, even though at least two TNF family receptors, NGFR (nerve growth factor receptor) and TACI (transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor), can bind non-TNF-like ligands.

The extracellular regions of receptors of the TNFR superfamily are characterized by the presence of several copies of cysteine-rich domains (CRDs) CXXCXXC ([Walczak and Krammer, 2000]) with three disulfide bonds contributing to the elongated shape of the molecule. The number of CRDs can range from one [TWEAK; TNF-related weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) receptor] ([Wiley et al., 2001]) to four among the various family members ([Locksley et al., 2001]). Unlike many other cytokine receptors, this family is characterized by the formation of trimers (predominantly homotrimers) or even oligomers on the cell surface, and it is their oligomerization state that defines the strength and the mode of signaling. The only exception is NGFR, which binds non-TNF-like ligands and signals as a dimer ([Locksley et al., 2001]).

Most TNF family ligands are type II (intracellular N terminus) membrane-spanning proteins with the exception of lymphotoxin-α(LTα), which lacks the transmembrane domain. However, many membrane-anchored forms of the ligands can be cleaved off by metalloproteinases of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family, and released from the cell surface in the form of classical cytokines—soluble trimers that can trigger receptor activation and signaling. Several solved structures of cocrystallized ligand–receptor complexes are consistent with trimer–trimer interaction between TNF family ligands and TNF family receptors. Formation of higher order oligomers have been demonstrated with recombinant proteins ([Liu et al., 2002]); however, the biological

significance of such signaling modes remains controversial (Zhukovsky *et al.*, 2004).

TNF and lymphotoxin are the TNF family’s two “oldest” cytokines (whose similarity became apparent only after gene cloning in 1984) (Pennica *et al.*, 1984), and NGFR is the oldest known TNF family receptor. Other receptors, characterized more than 15 years ago, are CD95 (Fas, Apo-1) and CD40. The first is a prototype “death receptor”; the second, a prototype nondeath receptor of the TNFR superfamily. Studies have uncovered cross-talk(s) between intracellular signaling cascades originating with both subgroups of receptors, resulting in a more complex signaling pattern than that originally described.

## II. Evolutionary Aspects

TNF- and TNFR-like molecules were initially found in vertebrates, where they form two distinct families (Collette *et al.*, 2003). The Eiger/Wengen signaling axis, representing a TNF/TNFR-like system in *Drosophila*, has been discovered (Igaki *et al.*, 2002). Both receptor and ligand for the fly molecules share structural similarity with mammalian TWEAKR, BAFFR (B cell-activating factor belonging to TNF family receptor) and TWEAK, BAFF, respectively (Kanda *et al.*, 2002). Unexpectedly, the *Drosophila* prototype is not implicated in the two main types of intracellular signaling traditionally associated with this receptor family in mammals: activation of NFκB and activation of apoptosis via a caspase-dependent mechanism. Instead, their ability to activate the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway emerged as the most evolutionarily ancient (Igaki *et al.*, 2002) (Fig. 1).

An examination of evolutionary aspects of the TNF/TNFR families (Collette *et al.*, 2003) suggests coevolution of receptors and ligands (Beschin *et al.*, 2004). The ancestor of these cytokines was found in earthworms. The worm “TNF” shows only minimal structural homology with the mammalian counterparts, but demonstrated significant functional similarity (Beschin *et al.*, 1999). It is thus conceivable that a similar signaling axis also existed in worms, which were the predecessors of both vertebrates and insects. Because the degree of homology between members of the TNFR family in mammals is rather low, it will not be too surprising if some additional genes and gene products are identified in lower organisms.

Multiple TNF-like ligands have emerged because of gene duplications or duplications of chromosomal loci, and since then have been subjected to evolutionary pressure individually. In addition to the primordial JNK pathway, other intracellular pathways controlled by these receptors appear to have been borrowed from the nonhomologous but functionally complementary Toll pathway, critical for control of both morphogenesis and immunity.

Wengen  
(Drosophila)  

TNFR1  
(Mammals)  

Toll  
(Drosophila)  

TLR  
(Mammals)  

?  

TRADD  

?  

Tube  

MyD88/TIRAP  

?  

RIP1  

Pelle  

IRAK  

DTRAF1  

TRAF2,5,6  

TRAF  

FADD  

FADD  

MAPKKK  

Caspase 8/10  

DREDD  

Basket/JNK  

JNK  

IKK  

?  

TAK1  

IKK  

DARK/  

DRONC  

Caspase 9/  

Apaf1  

Executor caspases, apoptosis  

NFκB  

Dorsal  

NFκB  

Gene activation, proliferation, survival  

FIG. 1 Similarities between TNFR and Toll pathways in mammals and insects. Wengen pathway in *Drosophila* represents the most ancient example of TNF-like signaling. Its homologous arm in mammals is the MAPKKK/JNK pathway. Receptor-driven caspase activation (FADD-caspase 8) and NFκB activation arm appear to be borrowed from the Toll receptor signaling. Molecules with functional and/or evolutionary similarities are aligned by introducing several putative “missing links.”

For example, the “death domain” (DD) has been almost definitely captured as a “ready to use” functional unit during evolution rather than created by coevolution or domain fusions. The gene for the first ancestor DD-containing TNF receptor was apparently subjected to further duplication events because it is unlikely that DD was hijacked by so many receptors independently. Similarly to the Toll pathway, the TNF receptor family uses downstream molecules from the cell death pathway [caspases, *Caenorhabditis elegans* cell death protein (CED)-3] as well as activation targets from the NFκB family.

Interestingly, TNF three-dimensional topology, which is usually described as a jelly-roll β sandwich, is remarkably similar to that of several proteins or protein families with no homology at the protein sequence level. These include Clq complement component and similar proteins (*Kishore et al.*, 2004), capsid proteins of small RNA viruses (*Fesik*, 2000) and *Bacillus anthracis* spore surface protein (*Rety et al.*, 2005). Although the easiest

explanation for these striking similarities is convergent coevolution, the possibility of ancient horizontal gene transfer cannot be excluded (Locksley *et al.*, 2001).

### III. Signaling Paradigms for Receptors of the TNFR Family

#### A. Overview

As for many other cytokine and noncytokine receptors, the main result of receptor-mediated signaling is transcriptional activation of specific genes. The choice of such genes is primarily defined by the presence of distinct sequence elements in their promoters, enhancers, and silencers that may bind specific sets of transcription factors activated by signaling pathways downstream from the receptors. The principal types of activation signals emanating from TNF receptors converge on two prominent families of transcription factors: NFκB and AP-1. Activation of NFκB and AP-1 is also triggered through other receptors, such as interleukin (IL)-1R (Dinarello, 1998) or the T cell receptor (TCR) (Li *et al.*, 2004), not belonging to TNF receptor superfamily, but the initial postreceptor events in these cases are distinct. What is unique to the TNFR superfamily is the ability of a subgroup of receptors (“death receptors”) to transmit the signal for instructive cell death, which is distinct from “intracellular” apoptotic signals mediated by mitochondria. Studies have revealed extensive cross-talk between various branches of intracellular signaling, including mutual dependence of activation and proapoptotic pathways.

#### B. Fas and TRAILR: Receptor Prototypes for Instructive Apoptotic Signaling

##### 1. Induction of Apoptosis by Fas and TRAILR

Apoptotic signaling, especially as mediated by CD95 (Fas, Apo-1), has been studied in great detail and its main steps are fairly well understood. Therefore, this type of signaling is briefly discussed first. The intracellular portions of some TNF family receptors contain a “death domain” (DD, initially defined by comparison of TNFR1 and CD95 sequences). Such DD-containing receptors may become associated with DD-containing intracellular adaptors [e.g., Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD), tumor necrosis factor receptor-1–associated death domain protein (TRADD), and receptor-interacting protein

(RIP); see below] via homotypic interactions. Another intrinsic property of DD-containing proteins is their ability to form trimers. Homotypic interactions between several different protein modules are responsible for the recruitment of both caspases (involved primarily in the proapoptotic arm of signaling) and protein kinases into intracellular complexes formed on activated receptors.

Fas (Apo-1, CD95) was the first receptor identified whose triggering induced programmed cell death via the so-called extrinsic (or instructive) pathway (Nagata, 1999; Trauth *et al.*, 1989). Fas is a type 1 transmembrane protein with broad expression on the surface of most cell types, but it also can exist in several soluble forms (Itoh *et al.*, 1991; Oehm *et al.*, 1992; Trauth *et al.*, 1989). The main function of Fas *in vivo* appears to be the elimination by apoptosis of excessively produced or dangerous cells. The single natural ligand for CD95 identified so far is Fas ligand (FasL, CD95L), a type 2 transmembrane molecule structurally related to TNF (Suda *et al.*, 1993). The soluble form of human (but not of mouse) FasL, produced as a result of cleavage by an extracellular protease, can induce apoptosis. However, membrane-bound FasL is much more potent and vigorous (Shudo *et al.*, 2001; Suda *et al.*, 1997). Natural mutations in mice that result in inactivation of either Fas (*gld*) or FasL (*lpr*) lead to lymphoproliferative disorders (Watanabe-Fukunaga *et al.*, 1992).

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL, Apo-2L) is another membrane-bound cytokine, identified and cloned because of its extensive homology to FasL. TRAIL possesses not only a proapoptotic, but also an activation function, and signals primarily through Fas-like receptors DR4/TRAILR1/Apo-2 and DR5/TRAILR2, each of which contains a DD (Ashkenazi and Dixit, 1999; Hymowitz *et al.*, 1999). TRAIL can transmit similar proapoptotic signals through either DR4 or DR5 or even possibly through their heterotrimer (Sprick *et al.*, 2000).

Fas, DR4, and DR5 have signal transduction features typical of the death receptors. Signaling starts with the engagement of the oligomeric receptor by the ligand, immediately followed by recruitment of several proteins to the DD of Fas (or TRAILR) and the formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) (Kischkel *et al.*, 1995) (Fig. 2). The DISC complexes for Fas and TRAIL are similar and clearly distinct from TNFR1-associated complexes I and II (see below) because the former do not contain TRADD adaptor molecules (Figs. 2 and 3). A typical DISC is formed on the platform of the death domain and contains the recruited adaptor FADD and two isoforms of procaspase 8, which can initiate the death cascade (Kischkel *et al.*, 2000; Lavrik *et al.*, 2005b). Procaspase 8 recruited into DISC is prone to autoactivation by proteolytic cleavage, with the formation of active caspase 8 dimers. In addition, procaspase 10 is also present in DR4/DR5 and Fas DISCs and is believed to initiate cascades leading to cell death even in the absence of caspase 8 (Wang *et al.*, 1999). On the other hand,

SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION BY RECEPTORS OF TNFR SUPERFAMILY 135

FIG. 2 Signal transduction by CD95 and TRAIL receptors. CD95 and TRAILR signaling relies on the formation of high molecular weight protein complex DISC (death-inducing signaling complex) consisting of multimerized receptor, adaptor molecule FADD, and caspase 8/10. Two possible scenarios are envisioned: (1) in cells capable of strong caspase 8/10 activation apoptosis is triggered by direct action of caspase 8/10 on executor caspases; (2) if the strength of the signal through the receptor is not sufficient to promote robust apical caspase activation, additional amplification loop comes to action. Bid protein is cleaved by caspases 8/10 and induces cytochrome $c$ liberation from mitochondria and caspase 9 activation, which then further contributes to the induction of caspases 3/7/8. Executor caspases then cleave various vital cellular molecules, making cell death irreversible. Among known targets are prosurvival factors (NFκB, TRAF2), cytoskeleton components (Fadin, gelsolin), DNA, and regulatory proteins (PARP, Rb). Onset of apoptosis may be inhibited by FLIP association with apical caspases. CD95 and TRAILR can also trigger NFκB activation.

several molecular forms of FLICE inhibitory protein (FLIP), associated with caspase 8 within the DISC, may inhibit its autoactivation, thereby blocking or interfering with the proapoptotic signal transmission ([Lavrik et al., 2005a](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401608)). The most important substrates for caspases 8 and 10 are the “executor caspases” 3, 6, and 7. The time point of their proteolytic activation is often referred to as the point of no return, because active caspases 3, 6, and 7 can cleave multiple critical cellular substrates such as poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), retinoblastoma protein (Rb), protein kinase C (PKC), and components of the cytoskeleton, and other molecules making the onset of apoptosis irreversible ([Fig. 2](#fig2)).

TNF (LTα3)
TNFR1

TRADD
RIP1
TRADD
Complex I
Ubc13
TRAF6
RIP1
TRAF2
C-IAP1
IKKγ
TAK1
Ask-1
MEKK
MKK4/7
IKKα
IKKβ
MKK3/6
p38
RelA
p50
c-Jun
AP1
SURVIVAL
inflammation
Cytokines,
adhesion molecules
TRADD
FADD
Complex II
C-FLIP
Caspace 8,
Caspace 10
Itch
JNK1,2
Bid
jBid
Smac
Bcl-2
Bim, BmF
Bax, Bak
APOPTOSIS
cytC
c-IAP1
caspase 9
Apaf-1

FIG. 3 Signal transduction by TNFR1. TNFR1 can activate several arms of intracellular signaling, which may be involved in mutual regulation and cross-talk. Current signaling paradigms include the formation of receptor-associated complex I, which signals IKK/NFκB activation, or MAPK activation (p38 and JNK). All these pathways are essential for the induction of various downstream genes. In addition, in the absence of protective NFκB signaling, JNK may become a potent inducer of apoptosis. Complex I can slowly dissociate from the membrane and be transformed into soluble cytoplasmic complex II, capable of activating caspase-mediated cell death.

This straightforward death pathway, receptor → DISC → caspases 8 and 10 → executor caspases → death, is often called the *extrinsic death pathway I* and is predominant in several cell types that have strong potential for apical caspase (i.e., caspases 8 and 10) activation and resultant robust activation of caspases 3, 6, and 7. In addition, there is an amplification loop, which allows potent executor caspase activation even when activation through the death receptor-caspase 8 axis is relatively weak (Fig. 2). This loop relies on apoptotic machinery of mitochondria and is called the *intrinsic death pathway II*. On its activation caspase 8 can cleave the Bid protein, which is activated and translocated into the mitochondrion, where it in turn can activate proapoptotic proteins Bak and Bax (Li and Yuan, 1999; Luo et al., 1998). The latter ensure that cytochrome c exits from the mitochondria by forming huge pores in the outer mitochondrial membrane. Cytochrome c next associates with

Apaf-1 protein (homolog of CED-9 in *C. elegans*) in the cytoplasm, and this molecular complex then facilitates proteolytic activation of caspase 9. Caspase 9 contributes to and enhances the activation of terminal caspases 3, 6, and 7 and thus can facilitate proapoptotic triggering in cells with poor activation of caspases 8 and 10. Therefore, the extrinsic caspase 8- and 10-mediated pathway and the intrinsic mitochondria-dependent apoptotic loop converge at the stage of “executor caspase” activation (Fig. 2).

Unlike DR4 and DR5, other receptors for TRAIL appear to play a regulatory role, as they cannot transmit signal because of the lack of DD (DcR1 and DcR2) or because they lack the transmembrane domain, effectively becoming soluble decoy receptors [decoy receptor-3 (DcR3), osteoprotegerin (OPG)] (Ashkenazi and Dixit, 1999; Sheridan *et al.*, 1997). One report suggests that DcR2 (TR4) can preassociate via its preligand assembly domain (PLAD) regions with DR5 and by doing so inhibit cell death through the absence of functional intracellular DD trimers (Clancy *et al.*, 2005). Moreover, such blockade of DR5 appears to be more important for apoptosis inhibition, as compared with simple ligand trapping by a decoy receptor. Thus, overexpression of decoy receptors on cancer cells may not only deplete the available death ligand (e.g., TRAIL), but also interfere with DR4/DR5 signaling itself. However, whether such heterotrimeric complexes also block other arms of signal transduction, such as induction of mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) or NFκB, remains to be determined.

## Activation Signals Transmitted by Fas and TRAILR

Initially implicated only in death signaling, receptors for TRAIL and FasL can also provide survival/activation signals. It appears from evidence of cross-talk between intracellular pathways that CD95 is able to signal gene activation via FADD and/or caspase 8 to NFκB. Interestingly, in order to induce apoptosis, cells need to retain both alleles of CD95, whereas the presence of a single allele is sufficient to activate NFκB (Legembre *et al.*, 2004). This implies the possibility of a threshold switch that depends on the strength of the signal. If so, loss of even one Fas allele in tumor cells could explain their insensitivity to Fas-induced death. Whether the TRAILR system has similar features remains to be determined; however, DR4 and DR5 can activate NFκB and can define, similarly to CD95, thresholds for survival versus death (Chaudhary *et al.*, 1997). Mechanistically, at least two possible pathways are implicated: one is due to association of RIP1 with the receptor complex, resulting in the downstream signaling to NFκB and to other transcriptional factors (Lin *et al.*, 2000). The second pathway, paradoxically, relies on the antiapoptotic functions of caspase 8 required for cell proliferation (Chaudhary *et al.*, 2000; Kang *et al.*, 2004).

C. TNFR1: A Beautiful But Complex Pathway

### 1. Overview

TNFR1 signaling toward gene activation has been worked out in detail and has been called a “beautiful pathway” (Chen and Goeddel, 2002). TNFR1 is expressed by most cell types *in vivo* and comprises a trimeric transmembrane protein complex. TNFR1 appears to be the major receptor for both soluble and transmembrane TNF (Grell *et al.*, 1995, 1998) as well as for homotrimeric LTα, and it can mediate cellular activation and apoptosis depending on cellular context (Chen and Goeddel, 2002; Locksley *et al.*, 2001; Tartaglia and Goeddel, 1992). Ligands for TNFR1 are produced by multiple cell types and may play distinct *in vivo* roles, also depending on cellular context and physiological settings (Grivennikov *et al.*, 2005). The ultimate result of TNF action on many types of cells is activation of genes, primarily controlled by transcriptional factors NFκB and AP-1, or induction of apoptosis via caspase or JNK-dependent pathways. In most cell types the default TNFR1 signaling induces activation rather than cell death. Under normal conditions cells are resistant to apoptosis, explaining why inactivation of TNF or TNFR1 genes in mice does not result in gross hyperproliferation, as opposed to the effects of Fas deficiency. However, under special circumstances the balance between intrinsic and extrinsic signals may push the cell toward apoptotic or necrotic death (Varfolomeev and Ashkenazi, 2004). For example, blockade of NFκB or inhibition of *de novo* protein synthesis makes cells extremely susceptible to TNF-induced apoptosis. Mice injected with D-galactosamine quickly die from massive liver necrosis after administration of TNF or its inducers (such as ligands of Toll-like receptors), whereas TNFR1-deficient animals are remarkably resistant to such toxicity (Pfeffer *et al.*, 1993).

### 2. TNFR1, Associated Molecules, and Signaling Complexes

Ligand binding (TNF, but presumably also LTα) induces receptor trimerization or even oligomerization critical for the downstream signaling events (Chen and Goeddel, 2002). Trimerized DDs of the intracellular portions of the receptors have the ability to recruit various signaling adaptor molecules. The most important and best studied accessory molecules associated with TNFR1 are DD-containing adaptors TRADD and RIP1 and non-DD adaptors TRAF2 and TRAF6 (Fig. 3).

#### a. TRADD

Tumor necrosis factor receptor-1-associated death domain protein (TRADD) becomes associated with TNFR1 through homophilic interactions between DD modules, somewhat similar to FADD-Fas association in Fas signaling. TRADD is critical for proapoptotic action of the

receptor: it recruits FADD, which then binds caspases 8 and 10, leading to apoptosis (after dissociation of complex l; see below). However, TRADD is also necessary for the activation pathway. On the other hand, it forms a docking platform for recruitment of TRAF2 and RIP1 (Hsu *et al.*, 1995), both of which appear critical for subsequent IkB kinase (IKK) and JNK/p38 activation (Liu *et al.*, 1996).

**b. TRAF** TNF receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) were initially discovered as TNFR2 adaptor molecules (Rothe *et al.*, 1994), and later recognized as a family of adaptor molecules involved in signaling outside of the TNFR superfamily, most notably in Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathways (Barton and Medzhitov, 2003). Because both TNF and TLR/IL-1 receptor superfamilies lack internal kinase domains and cannot recruit kinases directly (Fesik, 2000), TRAFs serve to bridge the receptors to downstream signaling molecules such as transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase-1 (TAK1) required for subsequent MAPK activation (Sato *et al.*, 2005).

So far, seven different TRAF molecules have been described and studied, all of them being well conserved in evolution. Importantly, TRAFs are able to form homo- and heterotrimers and appear to be docked to the receptor only after its trimerization (Takeuchi *et al.*, 1996). This feature makes signaling through TRAFs more complex and potentially leaves room for competition-based inhibition of one TRAF by another. TNFR1 is able to recruit TRAF1, TRAF2, and TRAF6 (Chen and Goeddel, 2002).

**c. RIP1** Receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP1) is a ubiquitously expressed DD-containing kinase that docks to the TNFR1 receptor complex through TRADD in response to ligand binding (Hsu *et al.*, 1996a,b). RIP1 can also bind other DD-containing receptors, such as Fas, DR4, DR5, translocation-associated membrane protein (TRAM; DR3), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Meylan and Tschopp, 2005). It can then recruit to the receptor complex several kinases that mediate downstream effects: MAPK kinase (MAPKK) [MAPK/ERK kinase kinase (MEKK)1 and MEKK3] (Kelliher *et al.*, 1998; Yang *et al.*, 2001), Tpl-2, and focal adhesion kinase (FAK). On the other hand, RIP1 can also aid in recruiting procaspases 8 and 10, thereby favoring proapoptotic signal transduction. Through the detailed functional analysis of TNFR1-associated molecules it was possible to establish their corresponding roles in the activation of caspases, IKK/NFκB, p38, and JNK pathways (Liu *et al.*, 1996). For example, the kinase activity of RIP1 is critical for the activation of JNK (Shen *et al.*, 2004) and NFκB (Aggarwal, 2003), but is not required for p38 activation (Lee *et al.*, 2004). Thus, the association of RIP with TRAF2 induces two distinct pathways: MAP3K-dependent activation of IKK (NFκB pathway) and the MAPK cascade, which can activate the p38 and JNK pathways.

3. Classical NFκB Pathway

a. Receptor-Mediated NFκB1/RelA Activation The first event occurring after TNFR1 binds TNF (or LTα) is the recruitment of TRADD through homotypic DD interactions. In the receptor complex TRADD then serves as a platform for recruiting other signaling proteins, including TRAF2 and RIP1 (Muppidi et al., 2004; Wallach et al., 1999), giving rise to a large molecular complex (so-called complex I) (Micheau and Tschopp, 2003). Formation of complex I (Fig. 3) results in signal transduction to activate IKK/NFκB, p38, or JNK [stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK)]/AP-1 (Shaulian and Karin, 2002). For efficient signaling to NFκB, that is, transmission of signals from complex I to the downstream kinases, TNFR1 should be recruited into lipid rafts (Legler et al., 2003) and be internalized after binding the ligand (Schneider-Brachert et al., 2004; Schutze et al., 1999). Otherwise, signals to NFκB, which should induce antiapoptotic genes, are too weak and, therefore, the proapoptotic signal may prevail (Muppidi et al., 2004). The key event in the activation of NFκB transcription factors by TNFR1 via the canonical/classical pathway is the recruitment of TRAF6 to the receptor complex, probably in the form of a heterotrimer with TRAF2. TRAF6 associates with Ubcl3, a ubiquitin-ligase that is capable of polyubiquitinating the K63 residue of IKKγ, in the IKK kinase complex (Deng et al., 2000; Sun et al., 2004). This covalent modification, together with TNFR1-dependent phosphorylation of IKKβ by the upstream MAPKKK (Sato et al., 2005), activates the IKK complex. IKKβ then phosphorylates IkB, which otherwise retains NFκB in the cytoplasm in inactive form (Ghosh and Karin, 2002; Karin and Ben-Neriah, 2000). Phospho-IkB is rapidly targeted to proteosomes and degraded, while the NFκB1/RelA complex is transported into the nucleus and activates various sets of targets (presumably with a distinct subset of κB sites, making them different from those activated through the alternative pathway; see below), among them genes encoding inflammatory cytokines, survival factors, antioxidant factors, and others.

b. NFκB-Mediated Prevention of Cell Death As already pointed out, NFκB (primarily NFκB1/RelA) is also a potent inducer of several antiapoptotic genes (Tang et al., 2001). Some of them, such as the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein-1 (c-IAP1) and c-IAP2, and c-FLIP_L (cellular FLICE inhibitory protein, long form), can inhibit the activation of both apical and effector caspases, whereas others, such as Bcl-x_L and A1, can block the mitochondria-dependent apoptotic circuit (Karin and Lin, 2002). In most cell types this survival/activation signal is dominant and the expression of such antiapoptotic molecules results in their association with the components of either complex I or complex II. Thus, most cells are naturally resistant to TNF-induced apoptosis despite the

fact that NFκB-dependent activation of genes requires hours, whereas apical caspase activation may occur in minutes (Micheau and Tschopp, 2003). However, in cells in which NFκB activation is compromised or *de novo* protein synthesis is blocked, the level of transcription of c-IAP and FLIP may not be sufficiently high to inhibit complex II. Therefore, such cells may be skewed toward self-destruction in response to the engagement of TNFR1 by its ligands.

## JNK and p38 Pathway May Lead Either to Apoptosis or to AP-1 Activation

c-Jun kinases 1 and 2 (JNK1 and -2), also referred to as stress-induced kinases (SAPKs), are important players in intracellular signaling, integrating signals coming from surface receptors as well as in response to heat shock, ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, and osmotic stress (Davis, 2000; Karin and Gallagher, 2005). TNFR1 can activate JNK1 (Liu et al., 1996) and the JNK pathway probably represents the most evolutionarily ancient type of TNF-like signaling, as suggested by the Eiger/Wengen system in *Drosophila* (Moreno et al., 2002). Activation of MAPK (JNK and p38) after TNFR1 triggering goes through the following molecular steps (Fig. 3): TRAF2 recruits multiple MAP3K (Ask1, MLK, MEKK3, and TAK1) to the receptor complex, which can, in turn, activate the downstream kinases p38, Erk, and JNK by phosphorylation (Chang and Karin, 2001; Yang et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2003). Ask-1 is also critical for TNFR1-induced elevation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), a pathway that has cross-talk with JNK-mediated apoptosis (Tobiume et al., 2001), as is discussed below.

The JNK pathway, together with p38, also activates AP-1 transcriptional factors, which, in cooperation with NFκB, control the expression of distinct adhesion molecules and of cytokines such as RANTES, IL-12, IL-6, and IL-8 (Karin and Gallagher, 2005). Under normal conditions the protein kinase JNK is activated only transiently, leading to AP-1 (c-Jun) activation and thus turning on a specific gene transcription program. However, JNK may also be activated for a prolonged period(s) of time when the NFκB pathway is defective and the intracellular microenvironment does not favor strong apical caspase 8/10 activation (Deng et al., 2003; Varfolomeev and Ashkenazi, 2004).

TNFR1-induced ROS may facilitate both necrosis and apoptosis (Fiers et al., 1995) and also contribute to sustained JNK activation (Sakon et al., 2003). ROS can oxidize the critical cysteine residues in multiple MAPK phosphatases, thereby preventing them from inactivating JNK (Kamata et al., 2005). There are several important consequences of such sustained JNK activation. One is activation of Bid, independent of caspase 8, resulting in activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway and in release of

cytochrome $c$ and Smac (inhibitors of c-IAP) (Deng *et al.*, 2003). Through this mechanism TNFR1 can induce apoptosis even in cells that are not prone to robust apical caspase activation. Even more important appears to be JNK-dependent phosphorylation/activation of the ubiquitin ligase Itch, which regulates the turnover of Jun (Gao *et al.*, 2004) and of the long form of c-FLIP. As soon as FLIP is degraded, complex II becomes functional and the terminal caspases become activated. Cells deficient in Itch fail to show any notable FLIP degradation or caspase 3/8 activation and, therefore, remain resistant to proapoptotic signaling induced by such sustained activation of JNK (Chang *et al.*, 2006).

## 5. Instructive Apoptosis Signaling by TNFR1

The proapoptotic arm of TNFR1 signaling remained controversial for decades, as the existence of DISC (see Section III.B.1, on Fas/DR5 signal transduction) could not be clearly demonstrated under the conditions similar to those described for CD95 and later for TRAIL receptors. However, a more recent study suggests that the receptor complex that transmits the activation signal (complex I) may be distinct from the proapoptotic complex (complex II) that triggers cell death. Complex I is formed on the intracellular part of the receptor on ligand binding (and, probably, involving receptor internalization). However, it is believed that complex I may dissociate from TNFR1 and use its liberated DD-docking modules to recruit FADD, procaspase 8 and caspase 10 via homotypic DD interaction (Micheau and Tschopp, 2003; Schneider-Brachert *et al.*, 2004). Thus, another oligomolecular complex can be formed (complex II) containing TRADD, RIP1, TRAF2, FADD, and procaspases 8 and 10 (see Fig. 3). This complex is clearly distinct from the “classical” DISC described for CD95 because it contains TRADD and recruits caspases in a different subcellular location—namely, the cytoplasm. Caspases that are brought together in complex II can proteolytically activate each other, much as in DISC, and trigger the apoptotic cascade. However, dissociation from the membrane and activation of complex II take time, and thus apoptotic triggering is completed only if the survival signals upregulated by the initial action of TNFR1 through NFκB remain below a certain threshold.

## 6. Self-Assembly of TNFR1 and Signaling in the Absence of Ligands

Data suggest that aggregation of intracellular receptor domains does not necessarily require binding of the ligand to the extracellular part of the

receptor. Thus, several receptors of the TNFR family may self-assemble because of the existence of PLAD regions in their extracellular portions, with subsequent steps dependent on this aggregation (Chan *et al.*, 2000; Siegel *et al.*, 2000). The possibility of such signaling implies the existence of additional regulatory checkpoints, such as, for example, silencer of death domains (SODD). SODD can occupy DDs on death receptors and prevent receptor activation, until or unless it is released through conformational changes induced by ligand binding. However, genetic inactivation of SODDs did not provide clear support for such a hypothesis (Endres *et al.*, 2003; Takada *et al.*, 2003). Overall, the significance of ligand-independent signaling *in vivo* remains unclear, even though it is indirectly supported by disease-associated mutations in PLAD domains of TNFR1 in humans (Galon *et al.*, 2000; McDermott *et al.*, 1999).

### 7. Regulation of TNFR1 Signaling

Because *in vivo* TNFR1 can transmit powerful signals leading to activation, inflammation, or cell death, these signaling pathways should be tightly regulated. As briefly discussed above, there are several built-in feedback loops, and correspondingly there are several regulatory molecules controlled by one arm of the TNFR1-dependent pathways that may have an effect on another arm. For example, upregulation of expression of inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs, FLIP) can efficiently block apoptosis, whereas inhibition of MAPK phosphatases by abundant ROS would facilitate cell death. On the other hand, induction of apoptosis may lead to inactivation of TNFR-mediated survival pathways via caspase-dependent cleavage of specific proteins. NFκB subunits, the IκB regulatory domain, IKKβ, TRAF2, and other molecules can be targeted by caspases during apoptosis to ensure that the death signal will prevail (Karin and Lin, 2002).

Several mechanisms have emerged in evolution to be able to block the TNFR signaling at various checkpoints. First, both TNFR1 and TNFR2 can be shed from the cell surface, or internalized, thereby preventing signal transmission (Pinckard *et al.*, 1997). Second, ubiquitin-ligase A20 (Wertz *et al.*, 2004) is induced by NFκB and participates in specific degradation of TRAF2, thus acting as a negative feedback regulator (Gao and Karin, 2005). As a consequence, mice with targeted disruption of A20 demonstrate cachexia and early death due to the inability to shut down TNF signaling (Lee *et al.*, 2000). The proapoptotic cascade ultimately leads to caspase activation, which may result in proteolytic cleavage of signaling components for NFκB activation. Thus, the apoptotic signal may interfere with and disrupt prosurvival signaling within the cell.

D. Non-DD Receptors

1. LTβR Signaling: A Paradigm for the Alternative NFκB Pathway: CD27, CD40, and BAFFR

LTβR was initially discovered because of its binding to the surface LT complex (a heterotrimer consisting of LTα and LTβ). LIGHT (TNFSF14 according to TNF superfamily nomenclature, [http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/aboutHGNC.html](http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/aboutHGNC.html)) can also bind and activate this receptor (Hehlgans and Pfeffer, 2005). Whether LTβ and LIGHT may mediate different downstream effects via LTβR in the same cell remains unclear. LTβR lacks the classical DD and its signaling relies solely on the recruitment of non-DD adaptor molecules, that is, TRAFs. Experiments have shown that only TRAF2, TRAF3, TRAF4, and TRAF5 are able to associate with LTβR (Crowe et al., 1994; Tada et al., 2001; VanArsdale et al., 1997). However, inactivation of LTβR in mice results in the lack of all lymph nodes (LNs), whereas TRAF2/TRAF5 inactivation does not, suggesting that they are not required for LTβR-dependent LN formation. On the other hand, TRAF6 knockout (KO) mice also fail to develop LNs, perhaps suggesting that TRAF6 recruitment to LTβR occurs via an unknown additional adaptor (Schneider et al., 2004).

LTβR activates three major pathways: the alternative NFκB pathway, the classical NFκB pathway, and the JNK pathway (Browning et al., 1996; Chang et al., 2002; Mackay et al., 1996) (Fig. 4). Prevalence of the alternative NFκB pathway is a hallmark of LTβR signaling, as opposed to TNFR1 signaling. As with TNFR1, TRAF2 is required both for NFκB and JNK activation by LTβR. However, TRAF5 can also be recruited to the activated LTβR and, in combination with TRAF2, induce the activity of NFκB-inducing kinase (NIK) (Malinin et al., 1997; Yin et al., 2001), thus initiating the alternative NFκB pathway. NIK phosphorylates serine residues of IKKα, in its activation loop, thereby activating IKKα (Dejardin et al., 2002). IKKα (but not IKKβ, involved only in the “classical pathway”) phosphorylates the p100/RelB complex (which contains an internal inhibitor within the NFκB2 precursor), targeting p100 to partial ubiquitin-dependent degradation and resulting in liberation of p52/RelB (Xiao et al., 2004). Because of the newly exposed nuclear localization signal (NLS) of the complex, it is transported into the nucleus to activate specific gene programs that differ from those induced by NFκB1/RelA, presumably because of particular sequence contexts of the κB sites (Senftleben et al., 2001). Among genes activated by the alternative pathway are those encoding homeostatic chemokines [SLC (secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine), ELC (EBV-induced molecule 1 ligand chemokine), and BLC (B lymphocyte chemoattractant)] and addressin molecules. The alternative NFκB pathway is activated with

SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION BY RECEPTORS OF TNFR SUPERFAMILY 145

BAFF
BAFFR
LIGHT
LTβ
LTβR
CD40L
CD40
CD70
CD27
TRAF6?
TRAF5
TRAF3
TRAF2
TRAF5
TRAF3
TRAF2
NIK
IKKα
TAK1
JNK
RelB
p100
RelB
p52
RelA
p50
NIK
IKKγ
IKKα
IKKβ
(1)
(2)
Alternative NFκB pathway NFκB2/RelB
Classical NFκB pathway NFκB1/RelA

FIG. 4 Emerging paradigms for non-DD TNFR signaling. LTβR, CD40, and BAFFR are predominantly engaged in activation of the “alternative” NFκB pathway via kinases NIK and IKKα, which phosphorylate and mark for proteolytic processing the p100 NFκB subunit. However, these receptors also appear to activate the classical NFκB pathway and JNK pathway. CD70 may be capable of triggering both classical and alternative NFκB pathways; however, these events are separated in time. First, receptor engagement leads to the recruitment and activation of NIK, which in turn activates IKKα. Second, NIK induces the recruitment of the entire IKK complex to the receptor proximity, resulting in activation of IKKβ—the hallmark of the classical NFκB pathway. Although activation of JNK and NFκB1 is rapid, it is short-lived. In contrast, alternative NFκB pathway activation is slower, but lasts longer.

slower kinetics than the classical pathway, but remains active for a longer time, allowing, for example, constitutive basal homeostatic expression of chemokines critical for development and maintenance of the structure of the secondary lymphoid organs (Bonizzi and Karin, 2004). Thus, both the kinetics of gene induction and the pattern of genes activated by the alternative NFκB pathway are different from its classical counterpart.

In certain situations the LTβR is also able to activate the classical pathway via a yet-unidentified protein kinase, which phosphorylates IKKγ and
activates the IKK complex (Dejardin *et al.*, 2002) or the TRAF2 → JNK pathway (Kim *et al.*, 2005). However, the physiological importance of these events remains to be elucidated. Another signaling arm that may be triggered by LTβR is a proapoptotic pathway induced via TRAF2/TRAF3 and liberation of Smac (Kuai *et al.*, 2003), although its role *in vivo* should be further investigated.

Two other prominent non-DD-containing receptors, B cell-activating factor receptor (BAFFR) and CD40, demonstrate similar patterns of signal transduction—they bind TRAFs, activate NIK and IKKα (Fig. 4), yet retain the ability to activate the IKK complex via phosphorylation of IKKγ and activation of IKKβ. Similarly, CD27 signaling relies on the recruitment of NIK kinase to the receptor complex. However, in this case activation of the classical and the alternative pathways occurs within different kinetics because of the sequential action of NIK, initially as a signal transducer and then as a platform for activation of the IKK complex. First, NIK is recruited to the receptor complex and triggers IKKα, thereby activating the alternative NFκB pathway. Next, the whole IKK complex is docked to the receptor via an NIK-dependent mechanism, resulting in canonical NFκB activation (Ramakrishnan *et al.*, 2004) (Fig. 4).

## 2. Ectodysplasin Signaling

Positional cloning of the murine *downless* gene led to the discovery of a novel TNF receptor molecule named the ectodysplasin receptor (EDAR). In addition, XEDAR (X-linked ectodysplasin receptor) was identified as a novel TNFR family member in a database search based on sequence similarity with TROY, but not with EDAR (Mikkola and Thesleff, 2003). Because of phenotypic similarities between *Tabby* and *downless* mice, it was immediately suggested that EDAR was the receptor for Eda, which is encoded by the gene bearing the *Tabby* mutation.

This ligand-receptor pathway is clearly involved in organogenic functions outside of the immune system, because mutations in the corresponding genes lead to severe ectodysplasia and skin, hair, sweat gland, and teeth defects (Doffinger *et al.*, 2001; Srivastava *et al.*, 1997). The only known ligand for EDAR/XEDAR is Eda (ectodysplasin), which has two isoforms, Eda-A1 and Eda-A2. EDAR, a DD-containing receptor, is specific for Eda-A1, whereas XEDAR binds Eda-A2, but not Eda-A1. There is a striking amino acid conservation between human and murine ligands: the overall homology is 95%, and the TNF-like domain is 100% identical (Koppinen *et al.*, 2001). The closest ligand homologs of Eda are BAFF and APRIL (Mackay *et al.*, 2005).

Although they initially appeared similar, EDAR and XEDAR exhibit different signaling profiles (Fig. 5). Eda-A2/XEDAR signaling closely resembles
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION BY RECEPTORS OF TNFR SUPERFAMILY 147

FIG. 5 Ectodysplasin signaling. EDAR utilizes a unique adaptor molecule, EDARADD, whereas signaling through XEDAR relies on TRAFs and yet unidentified molecules, which are able to recruit FADD to the receptor. Both EDAR and XEDAR are known to activate NFκB and JNK pathways, whereas only XEDAR can signal caspase activation and apoptosis. EDARADD inactivation fully mimics the phenotype of mutated EDAR, implicating EDARADD as the only adaptor molecule for EDAR.

TNFR1 signal transduction. XEDAR recruits TRAF molecules, specifically TRAF3 and TRAF6, and can activate both JNK and IKK/NFκB pathways (Mikkola and Thesleff, 2003). In addition, XEDAR but not EDAR can signal cell death by a caspase-dependent mechanism, although EDAR but not XEDAR recruits molecules with death domains (DDs) into its signaling complex. How XEDAR, which lacks DD and apparently is not able to bind either FADD or TRADD, can activate apoptosis via a caspase 8-dependent mechanism remains to be elucidated. It has been proposed that activation of the receptor leads to formation of a secondary complex containing FADD, caspase 8, and caspase 10 (Sinha and Chaudhary, 2004). If so, this would constitute an additional similarity to the TNFR1 pathway (where apoptotic complex II contains FADD and the two caspases). In the case of XEDAR, there may exist an unknown adaptor linking XEDAR to FADD (Fig. 5).

Regarding EDAR, a DD-containing adaptor has been found, and its gene is related to that responsible for the crinkled mutation (Headon et al., 2001; Yan et al., 2002). This adaptor, named EDARADD (EDAR-associated death domain), appears to be a unique molecule that directly binds to

EDAR and recruits TRAF1, -2, -3, and -6 to the receptor complex (Headon *et al.*, 2001). Such binding results in MAPKK TAB2 and TAK1 activation, which induces downstream NFκB and JNK signaling (Morlon *et al.*, 2005). Despite the presence of DD in the EDARADD adaptor molecule, it is not yet clear whether EDAR can induce caspase-dependent apoptosis *in vivo*. Thus, more work on this interesting receptor system is required to resolve all remaining issues.

## 3. TNFR2

TNFR2 was characterized more than 15 years ago (Pennica *et al.*, 1992). It was believed to preferentially bind membrane-bound TNF, versus soluble TNF and soluble LTα3. Although TNFR2 shares significant homology with TNFR1, its cytoplasmic tail lacks the classical DD that would support signal transduction via FADD/TRADD-like adaptor molecules. Instead, TNFR2 contains motifs of four to six amino acids that can help to recruit TRAF proteins (Rothe *et al.*, 1994). The key downstream adaptor molecules for TNFR2 appear to be TRAF2 and TRAF3 (Shu *et al.*, 1996). As with other members of the TNFR family, signaling through TNFR2 is complex and may result in quite opposite effects depending on physiological settings. TNFR2 can upregulate antiapoptotic molecules, such as c-IAP1 and -2, which would inhibit caspase 8 activity (Shu *et al.*, 1996; Wang *et al.*, 1998). This may be a mechanism by which TNFR2 controls survival/proliferation of T cells. On the other hand, TNFR2 can potentiate a TNFR1-mediated apoptotic signal (Ka-Ming and Lenardo, 2000), that is, it may play the role of a switch for TNFR1, allowing signaling to proceed predominantly toward transcriptional activation or toward apoptosis/necrosis. The mechanism of this cross-talk appears to involve TNFR2/ubiquitin-dependent degradation of TRAF2, the molecule that mediates survival signals by TNFR1 (Li *et al.*, 2002). Another earlier hypothesis stated that TNFR2 may function as a collector of TNF, which would then pass the ligand to TNFR1 for signaling, especially at low ligand concentrations because of the much higher affinity of TNF for TNFR2 compared with TNFR1 (Tartaglia *et al.*, 1993).

Somewhat surprisingly, TNFR2/TRAF2 may activate both the classical and alternative NFκB pathways. Recruitment of TRAF3 instead of TRAF2 to the receptor complex can inhibit TRAF2 binding, thereby skewing signaling toward the alternative NFκB pathway (Hauer *et al.*, 2005), as it has been demonstrated for B cells (Liao *et al.*, 2004). Accordingly, in the absence of TRAF3 there is dramatic NFκB1/RelA activation leading to uncontrolled inflammation due to the excessive TNFR2/TRAF2 signaling (Hostager and Bishop, 1999, 2002). On the other hand, TNFR2/TRAF2 mediates not only the classical NFκB pathway but also the alternative pathway, as shown in the case of TNFR2 synergism with CD40 in B cells to activate IgM secretion.

(Signal Transduction by Receptors of TNFR Superfamily) 149

(Bishop, 2004). In addition to NFκB-mediated survival/proliferation, TNFR2 is able to execute another important signal, using the Etk-1 → Akt pathway. Etk-1 is a TNFR2-specific kinase that mediates survival, cell adhesion, and migration signals (Pan et al., 2002; Zhang et al., 2003). Notably, this pathway is TRAF2 independent. Etk associates with TNFR2, but not with TNFR1, and can trigger the Akt pathway, which leads to gene transcription and survival (Al-Lamki et al., 2005).

Heterocomplexes consisting of TNFR1 and TNFR2 have been reported (Pinckard et al., 1997). However, it is not yet clear whether such heteromers may provide a distinct physiological signal or represent a possible mechanism of negative TNFR1 regulation, similar to the DR5/DcR2 complex in TRAIL signaling.

## 4. 4-1BB, GITR, and OX40

Receptors 4-1BB, glucocorticoid-induced TNFR (GITR), and OX40 are widely expressed in innate and adaptive immune systems and serve as a bridge between antigen-presenting cells and lymphocytes, ensuring proper costimulation (Watts, 2005). The result of triggering these TNFR-like costimulatory receptors is complementary to the well-known CD28 signaling, although the downstream effects may be functionally distinct and/or temporally segregated. Signals by 4-1BB and OX40 regulate T cell responses and ensure the survival of properly activated specific T cells. They exhibit similar signaling patterns, and like many of the TNFR family receptors are able to recruit TRAFs and to activate NFκB (the alternative pathway via NIK, and the classical pathway via the IKK complex), MAPK p38, and JNK. The main downstream targets of these pathways are pro-survival genes such as Bcl-2, Bcl-X<sub>L</sub>, and components of the PKB/Akt pathway needed for survival of activated lymphocytes. What is different from many other TNFRs is that in the absence of DD these receptors can recruit a DD-containing adaptor molecule, Siva (Watts, 2005), which is capable of triggering apoptosis via caspase recruitment (Table I).

## 5. DR3 and DR6

Signaling by receptors DR3 and DR6 remains incompletely understood (Pan et al., 1998). So far, it has been found that, like TNFR1, they can recruit TRADD and RIP1 and activate NFκB (Bhardwaj and Aggarwal, 2003). They can also bind SODD, which may be a signature molecule for receptor preassociation type of signaling, similarly to TNFR1 (Endres et al., 2003). Phenotypes of knockout animals lacking these receptors may shed light on their role *in vivo*.

TABLE I  
Signaling Molecules Implicated in TNFR-like Signaling: Activation and Death Signals  

| Receptor | TRAF adaptors | Death domains adaptors | Kinases and transcription factors | References |
|----------|---------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------|
| TNFR 1   | 1, 2, 6       | TRADD, FADD, caspase 8, 10, TRAF 2, RIP 1 | IKKβ/NFκB p38 JNK Caspases | Cao et al., 1999; Chen and Goeddel, 2002; Kamata et al., 2005; Karin and Lin, 2002 |
| TNFR 2   | 2, 3          |                        | NFκB Etk, Akt                    | Li et al., 2002; Pan et al., 2002 |
| Fas      |               | FADD, caspase 8, 10 RIP 1? | Caspases NFκB                   | Lavrik et al., 2005a Kreuz et al., 2004 |
| DR 4 (TRAILR 1) |         | FADD, caspase 8, 10     | Caspases                         | Kischkel et al., 2000 |
| DR 5 (TRAILR 2) |         | FADD, caspase 8, 10     | Caspases                         | Bhardwaj and Aggarwal, 2003 |
| DR3      | 2, 3, 6       | TRADD, FADD, caspase 8 | Caspases, NFκB JNK               | Bhardwaj and Aggarwal, 2003 |
| DR6      |               | TRADD                  | Caspases, NFκB JNK               | Bhardwaj and Aggarwal, 2003 |
| CD27     | 2, 3, 5       | Siva                   | NIK, IKKα, NFκB 2 apoptosis      | Nakano et al., 1999; Ramakrishnan et al., 2004 |
| CD30     | 1, 2, 3, 5    |                        | NIK, IKKα, NFκB 2                | Aizawa et al., 1997 |
| CD40     | 2, 5          |                        | NIK, IKKα, NFκB 2                | Nakano et al., 1999 |

LTβR          2,3,5         NIK, IKKα, NFκB2       Shen et al., 2004; Shim et al., 2005;
                          TAK1, IKKβ, NFκB1      Nakano, 1996 1516/id; Ramakrishnan et al., 2004

Ox40          2,3,5         Siva                 NIK, IKKα, NFκB2       Gramaglia et al., 2000
                          Caspases?

4-1BB         1,2,3         Siva                 NIK, IKKα, NFκB2       Watts and Gommerman, 2005

HVEM          1,2,3,5       Siva                 NIK, IKKα, NFκB2       Schneider et al., 2004

GITR          1,2,3         Siva                 NIK, IKKα, NFκB2       Watts, 2005
                          Caspases

BAFFR         2,3,5         Elf-1                Morrison et al., 2005
                          NIK, IKKα, NFκB2      Reviewed in Mackay et al., 2003
                          NFκB1
                          Bl-2

BCMA          1,2,3         MAPK, JNK,           Hatzoglou et al., 2000
                          NFκB1

TACI          2,3,5,6       CAML                 MAPK, NFκB1, AP1       Xia et al., 2000
                          Calcineurin, NFAT

EDAR          1,2,3         EDARADD              NFκB                   Headon et al., 2001

XEDAR         1,3,6         FADD, caspase 8/10   NFκB                   Sinha and Chaudhary, 2004
                          JNK

Fn14/TWEAKR   2,5           NFκB1                Saitoh et al., 2003
                          NFκB2
                          JNK

TAJ/TROY      2             JNK                  Eby et al., 2000
                          NFκB?

IV. Concluding Remarks: Biological Significance of TNF Signaling

TNFR-like receptors and TNF-like cytokines comprise two large and important families of signaling molecules in mammals. Although first identified in relation to the immune system, they were further proved to participate in various functions that control tissue development and homeostasis. Rapid parallel evolution of receptors and ligands created a powerful signaling system that is able to act differently in various cell types and provide fine-tuned responses depending on physiological context. Genetic inactivation of TNFR or TNF-like ligands in mice, or natural mutations in mice and humans, have further proved the important role played by TNF/TNFR superfamilies *in vivo*. Several general functions may be attributed to TNF receptors: (1) control of apoptosis and cell death (CD95/Fas/Apo-1, DR4, DR5, TNFR1) (Ashkenazi and Dixit, 1999; Scaffidi *et al.*, 1999; Walczak and Krammer, 2000); (2) organogenic role in lymphoid tissue or in skin (LTβR, TNFR1, EDAR, XEDAR) (Mikkola and Thesleff, 2003; Tumanov *et al.*, 2003); (3) activation and survival signals, including costimulation (TNFR1, TNFR2, LTβR, HVEM, GITR, 4-1BB, CD40, CD27, CD30) (Watts, 2005; Schneider *et al.*, 2004); and (4) inflammation (TNFR1, TNFR2, LTβR, and others). Research on these fascinating molecules will undoubtedly continue.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Dr. Nancy Rice for critically reading the manuscript. S.A.N. is an International Research Scholar of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, with federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under Contract NO1-CO-12400 and by grants from the Russian Academy of Sciences (Molecular and Cell Biology). The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. government.

References

Aggarwal, B. B. (2003). Signalling pathways of the TNF superfamily: A double-edged sword. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 3, 745–756.

Al-Lamki, R. S., Wang, J., Vandenberghe, P., Bradley, J. A., Thiru, S., Luo, D., Min, W., Pober, J. S., and Bradley, J. R. (2005). TNFR1- and TNFR2-mediated signaling pathways in human kidney are cell type-specific and differentially contribute to renal injury. *FASEB J.* 19, 1637–1645.

Aizawa, S., Nakano, H., Ishida, T., Horie, R., Nagai, M., Ito, K., Yagita, H., Okumura, K., Inoue, J., and Watanabe, T. (1997). Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 5 and TRAF2 are involved in CD30-mediated NFkappaB activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 2042–2045.

Ashkenazi, A., and Dixit, V. M. (1999). Apoptosis control by death and decoy receptors. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **11**, 255–260.

Barton, G. M., and Medzhitov, R. (2003). Toll-like receptor signaling pathways. *Science* **300**, 1524–1525.

Beschin, A., Bilej, M., Brys, L., Torreele, E., Lucas, R., Magez, S., and De Baetselier, B. P. (1999). Convergent evolution of cytokines. *Nature* **400**, 627–628.

Beschin, A., Bilej, M., Magez, S., Lucas, R., and De Baetselier, B. P. (2004). Functional convergence of invertebrate and vertebrate cytokine-like molecules based on a similar lectin-like activity. *Prog. Mol. Subcell. Biol.* **34**, 145–163.

Bhardwaj, A., and Aggarwal, B. B. (2003). Receptor-mediated choreography of life and death. *J. Clin. Immunol.* **23**, 317–332.

Bishop, G. A. (2004). The multifaceted roles of TRAFs in the regulation of B-cell function. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **4**, 775–786.

Bonizzi, G., and Karin, M. (2004). The two NF-kappaB activation pathways and their role in innate and adaptive immunity. *Trends Immunol.* **25**, 280–288.

Browning, J. L., Miatkowski, K., Sizing, I., Griffiths, D., Zafari, M., Benjamin, C. D., Meier, W., and Mackay, F. (1996). Signaling through the lymphotoxin beta receptor induces the death of some adenocarcinoma tumor lines. *J. Exp. Med.* **183**, 867–878.

Cao, Z., Tanaka, M., Regnier, C., Rothe, M., Yamit-hezi, A., Woronicz, J. D., Fuentes, M. E., Durnin, M. H., Dalrymple, S. A., and Goeddel, D. V. (1999). NF-kappa B activation by tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1. *Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol.* **64**, 473–483.

Chan, F. K., Chun, H. J., Zheng, L., Siegel, R. M., Bui, K. L., and Lenardo, M. J. (2000). A domain in TNF receptors that mediates ligand-independent receptor assembly and signaling. *Science* **288**, 2351–2354.

Chang, L., and Karin, M. (2001). Mammalian MAP kinase signalling cascades. *Nature* **410**, 37–40.

Chang, Y. H., Hsieh, S. L., Chen, M. C., and Lin, W. W. (2002). Lymphotoxin beta receptor induces interleukin 8 gene expression via NF-kappaB and AP-1 activation. *Exp. Cell Res.* **278**, 166–174.

Chang, L., Kamata, H., Solinas, G., Luo, J. L., Maeda, S., Venuprasad, K., Liu, Y. C., and Karin, M. (2006). The E3 Ubiquitin ligase itch couples JNK activation to TNFalpha-induced cell death by inducing c-FLIP (L) turnover. *Cell* **124**, 601–613.

Chaudhary, P. M., Eby, M., Jasmin, A., Bookwalter, A., Murray, J., and Hood, L. (1997). Death receptor 5, a new member of the TNFR family, and DR4 induce FADD-dependent apoptosis and activate the NF-kappaB pathway. *Immunity* **7**, 821–830.

Chaudhary, P. M., Eby, M. T., Jasmin, A., Kumar, A., Liu, L., and Hood, L. (2000). Activation of the NF-kappaB pathway by caspase 8 and its homologs. *Oncogene* **19**, 4451–4460.

Chen, G., and Goeddel, D. V. (2002). TNF-R1 signaling: A beautiful pathway. *Science* **296**, 1634–1635.

Clancy, L., Mruk, K., Archer, K., Woelfel, M., Mongkolsapaya, J., Screaton, G., Lenardo, M. J., and Chan, F. K. (2005). Preligand assembly domain-mediated ligand-independent association between TRAIL receptor 4 (TR4) and TR2 regulates TRAIL-induced apoptosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 18099–18104.

Collette, Y., Gilles, A., Pontarotti, P., and Olive, D. (2003). A co-evolution perspective of the TNFSF and TNFRSF families in the immune system. *Trends Immunol.* **24**, 387–394.

Crowe, P. D., VanArsdale, T. L., Walter, B. N., Ware, C. F., Hession, C., Ehrenfels, B., Browning, J. L., Din, W. S., Goodwin, R. G., and Smith, C. A. (1994). A lymphotoxin-beta-specific receptor. *Science* **264**, 707–710.

Davis, R. J. (2000). Signal transduction by the JNK group of MAP kinases. *Cell* **103**, 239–252.

Dejardin, E., Droin, N. M., Delhase, M., Haas, E., Cao, Y., Makris, C., Li, Z. W., Karin, M., Ware, C. F., and Green, D. R. (2002). The lymphotoxin-beta receptor induces different patterns of gene expression via two NF-kappaB pathways. *Immunity* **17**, 525–535.

Deng, L., Wang, C., Spencer, E., Yang, L., Braun, A., You, J., Slaughter, C., Pickart, C., and Chen, Z. J. (2000). Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain. *Cell* **103**, 351–361.

Deng, Y., Ren, X., Yang, L., Lin, Y., and Wu, X. (2003). A JNK-dependent pathway is required for TNFalpha-induced apoptosis. *Cell* **115**, 61–70.

Dinarello, C. A. (1998). Interleukin-1, interleukin-1 receptors and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. *Int. Rev. Immunol.* **16**, 457–499.

Doffinger, R., Smahi, A., Bessia, C., Geissmann, F., Feinberg, J., Durandy, A., Bodemer, C., Kenwrick, S., Dupuis-Girod, S., Blanche, S., Wood, P., Rabia, S. H., Headon, D. J., Overbeek, P. A., Le Deist, F., Holland, S. M., Belani, K., Kumararatne, D. S., Fischer, A., Shapiro, R., Conley, M. E., Reimund, E., Kalhoff, H., Abinun, M., Munnich, A., Israel, A., Courtois, G., and Casanova, J. L. (2001). X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is caused by impaired NF-kappaB signaling. *Nat. Genet.* **27**, 277–285.

Eby, M. T., Jasmin, A., Kumar, A., Sharma, K., and Chaudhary, P. M. (2000). TAJ, a novel member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, activates the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway and mediates caspase-independent cell death. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 15336–15342.

Endres, R., Hacker, G., Brosch, I., and Pfeffer, K. (2003). Apparently normal tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling in the absence of the silencer of death domains. *Mol. Cell.* **23**, 6609–6617.

Fesik, S. W. (2000). Insights into programmed cell death through structural biology. *Cell* **103**, 273–282.

Fiers, W., Beyaert, R., Boone, E., Cornelis, S., Declercq, W., Decoster, E., Denecker, G., Depuydt, B., De Valck, D., De Wilde, G., Goossens, V., Grooten, J., Haegeman, G., Heyninck, K., Penning, L., Plaisance, S., Vancompernolle, K., Van Criekinge, W., Vandenberghe, P., Vanden Berghe, W., Van de Craen, M., Vandevoorde, V., and Vercammen, D. (1995). TNF-induced intracellular signaling leading to gene induction or to cytotoxicity by necrosis or by apoptosis. *J. Inflamm. (Lond.)* **47**, 67–75.

Galon, J., Aksentijevich, I., McDermott, M. F., O’Shea, J. J., and Kastner, D. L. (2000). TNFRSF1A mutations and autoinflammatory syndromes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **12**, 479–486.

Gao, M., and Karin, M. (2005). Regulating the regulators: Control of protein ubiquitination and ubiquitin-like modifications by extracellular stimuli. *Mol. Cell* **19**, 581–593.

Gao, M., Labuda, T., Xia, Y., Gallagher, E., Fang, D., Liu, Y. C., and Karin, M. (2004). Jun turnover is controlled through JNK-dependent phosphorylation of the E3 ligase Itch. *Science* **306**, 271–275.

Ghosh, S., and Karin, M. (2002). Missing pieces in the NF-kappaB puzzle. *Cell* **109** (Suppl.), S81–S96.

Gramaglia, I., Jember, A., Pippig, S. D., Weinberg, A. D., Killeen, N., and Croft, M. (2000). The OX40 costimulatory receptor determines the development of CD4 memory by regulating primary clonal expansion. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 3043–3050.

Grell, M., Douni, E., Wajant, H., Lohden, M., Clauss, M., Maxeiner, B., Georgopoulos, S., Lesslauer, W., Kollias, G., and Pfizenmaier, K. (1995). The transmembrane form of tumor necrosis factor is the prime activating ligand of the 80 kDa tumor necrosis factor receptor. *Cell* **83**, 793–802.

Grell, M., Wajant, H., Zimmermann, G., and Scheurich, P. (1998). The type 1 receptor (CD120a) is the high-affinity receptor for soluble tumor necrosis factor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 570–575.

Grivennikov, S. I., Tumanov, A. V., Liepinsh, D. J., Kruglov, A. A., Marakusha, B. I., Shakhov, A. N., Murakami, T., Drutskaya, L. N., Forster, I., Clausen, B. E., Tessarollo, L., Ryffel, B., Kuprash, D. V., and Nedospasov, S. A. (2005). Distinct and nonredundant *in vivo* functions of TNF produced by T cells and macrophages/neutrophils: Protective and deleterious effects. *Immunity* **22**, 93–104.

Hatzoglou, A., Roussel, J., Bourgeade, M. F., Rogier, E., Madry, C., Inoue, J., Devergne, O., and Tsapis, A. (2000). TNF receptor family member BCMA (B cell maturation) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 1, TRAF2, and TRAF3 and activates NF-kappa B, elk-1, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 1322–1330.

Hauer, J., Puschner, S., Ramakrishnan, P., Simon, U., Bongers, M., Federle, C., and Engelmann, H. (2005). TNF receptor (TNFR)-associated factor (TRAF) 3 serves as an inhibitor of TRAF2/5-mediated activation of the noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway by TRAF-binding TNFRs. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 2874–2879.

Headon, D. J., Emmal, S. A., Ferguson, B. M., Tucker, A. S., Justice, M. J., Sharpe, P. T., Zonana, J., and Overbeek, P. A. (2001). Gene defect in ectodermal dysplasia implicates a death domain adapter in development. *Nature* **414**, 913–916.

Hehlgans, T., and Pfeffer, K. (2005). The intriguing biology of the tumour necrosis factor/tumour necrosis factor receptor superfamily: Players, rules and the games. *Immunology* **115**, 1–20.

Hostager, B. S., and Bishop, G. A. (1999). Cutting edge: Contrasting roles of TNF receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and TRAF3 in CD40-activated B lymphocyte differentiation. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 6307–6311.

Hostager, B. S., and Bishop, G. A. (2002). Role of TNF receptor-associated factor 2 in the activation of IgM secretion by CD40 and CD120b. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 3318–3322.

Hsu, H., Xiong, J., and Goeddel, D. V. (1995). The TNF receptor 1-associated protein TRADD signals cell death and NF-kappa B activation. *Cell* **81**, 495–504.

Hsu, H., Huang, J., Shu, H. B., Baichwal, V., and Goeddel, D. V. (1996a). TNF-dependent recruitment of the protein kinase RIP to the TNF receptor-1 signaling complex. *Immunity* **4**, 387–396.

Hsu, H., Shu, H. B., Pan, M. G., and Goeddel, D. V. (1996b). TRADD-TRAF2 and TRADD-FADD interactions define two distinct TNF receptor 1 signal transduction pathways. *Cell* **84**, 299–308.

Hymowitz, S. G., Christinger, H. W., Fuh, G., Ultsch, M., O’Connell, M., Kelley, R. F., Ashkenazi, A., and de Vos, A. M. (1999). Triggering cell death: The crystal structure of Apo2L/TRAIL in a complex with death receptor 5. *Mol. Cell* **4**, 563–571.

Igaki, T., Kanda, H., Yamamoto-Goto, Y., Kanuka, H., Kuranaga, E., Aigaki, T., and Miura, M. (2002). Eiger, a TNF superfamily ligand that triggers the Drosophila JNK pathway. *EMBO J.* **21**, 3009–3018.

Itoh, N., Yonehara, S., Ishii, A., Yonehara, M., Mizushima, S., Sameshima, M., Hase, A., Seto, Y., and Nagata, S. (1991). The polypeptide encoded by the cDNA for human cell surface antigen Fas can mediate apoptosis. *Cell* **66**, 233–243.

Kamata, H., Honda, S., Maeda, S., Chang, L., Hirata, H., and Karin, M. (2005). Reactive oxygen species promote TNFalpha-induced death and sustained JNK activation by inhibiting MAP kinase phosphatases. *Cell* **120**, 649–661.

Ka-Ming, C. F., and Lenardo, M. J. (2000). A crucial role for p80 TNF-R2 in amplifying p60 TNF-R1 apoptosis signals in T lymphocytes. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 652–660.

Kanda, H., Igaki, T., Kanuka, H., Yagi, T., and Miura, M. (2002). Wengen, a member of the Drosophila tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, is required for Eiger signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 28372–28375.

Kang, T. B., Ben-Moshe, T., Varfolomeev, E. E., Pewzner-Jung, Y., Yogev, N., Jurewicz, A., Waisman, A., Brenner, O., Haffner, R., Gustafsson, E., Ramakrishnan, P., Lapidot, T., and Wallach, D. (2004). Caspase-8 serves both apoptotic and nonapoptotic roles. *J. Immunol.* 173, 2976–2984.

Karin, M., and Ben-Neriah, Y. (2000). Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination: The control of NF-[kappa]B activity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18, 621–663.

Karin, M., and Gallagher, E. (2005). From JNK to pay dirt: jun kinases, their biochemistry, physiology and clinical importance. *IUBMB Life* 57, 283–295.

Karin, M., and Lin, A. (2002). NF-kappaB at the crossroads of life and death. *Nat. Immunol.* 3, 221–227.

Kelliher, M. A., Grimm, S., Ishida, Y., Kuo, F., Stanger, B. Z., and Leder, P. (1998). The death domain kinase RIP mediates the TNF-induced NF-kappaB signal. *Immunity* 8, 297–303.

Kim, Y. S., Nedospasov, S. A., and Liu, Z. G. (2005). TRAF2 plays a key, nonredundant role in LIGHT-lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 25, 2130–2137.

Kischkel, F. C., Hellbardt, S., Behrmann, I., Germer, M., Pawlita, M., Krammer, P. H., and Peter, M. E. (1995). Cytotoxicity-dependent APO-1 (Fas/CD95)-associated proteins form a death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) with the receptor. *EMBO J.* 14, 5579–5588.

Kischkel, F. C., Lawrence, D. A., Chuntharapai, A., Schow, P., Kim, K. J., and Ashkenazi, A. (2000). Apo2L/TRAIL-dependent recruitment of endogenous FADD and caspase-8 to death receptors 4 and 5. *Immunity* 12, 611–620.

Kishore, U., Gaboriaud, C., Waters, P., Shrive, A. K., Greenhough, T. J., Reid, K. B., Sim, R. B., and Arlaud, G. J. (2004). Clq and tumor necrosis factor superfamily: Modularity and versatility. *Trends Immunol.* 25, 551–561.

Koppinen, P., Pispa, J., Laurikkala, J., Thesleff, I., and Mikkola, M. L. (2001). Signaling and subcellular localization of the TNF receptor Edar. *Exp. Cell Res.* 269, 180–192.

Kreuz, S., Siegmund, D., Rumpf, J. J., Samel, D., Leverkus, M., Janssen, O., Hacker, G., ttrich-Breiholz, O., Kracht, M., Scheurich, P., and Wajant, H. (2004). NFkappaB activation by Fas is mediated through FADD, caspase-8, and RIP and is inhibited by FLIP. *J. Cell Biol.* 166, 369–380.

Kuai, J., Nickbarg, E., Wooters, J., Qiu, Y., Wang, J., and Lin, L. L. (2003). Endogenous association of TRAF2, TRAF3, cIAP1, and Smac with lymphotoxin beta receptor reveals a novel mechanism of apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 14363–14369.

Lavrik, I., Golks, A., and Krammer, P. H. (2005a). Death receptor signaling. *J. Cell Sci.* 118, 265–267.

Lavrik, I. N., Golks, A., and Krammer, P. H. (2005b). Caspases: Pharmacological manipulation of cell death. *J. Clin. Invest.* 115, 2665–2672.

Lee, E. G., Boone, D. L., Chai, S., Libby, S. L., Chien, M., Lodolce, J. P., and Ma, A. (2000). Failure to regulate TNF-induced NF-kappaB and cell death responses in A20-deficient mice. *Science* 289, 2350–2354.

Lee, T. H., Shank, J., Cusson, N., and Kelliher, M. A. (2004). The kinase activity of Rip1 is not required for tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced IkappaB kinase or p38 MAP kinase activation or for the ubiquitination of Rip1 by Traf2. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 33185–33191.

Legembre, P., Barnhart, B. C., Zheng, L., Vijayan, S., Straus, S. E., Puck, J., Dale, J. K., Lenardo, M., and Peter, M. E. (2004). Induction of apoptosis and activation of NF-kappaB by CD95 require different signalling thresholds. *EMBO Rep.* 5, 1084–1089.

Legler, D. F., Micheau, O., Doucey, M. A., Tschopp, J., and Bron, C. (2003). Recruitment of TNF receptor 1 to lipid rafts is essential for TNFalpha-mediated NF-kappaB activation. *Immunity* **18**, 655–664.

Li, H., and Yuan, J. (1999). Deciphering the pathways of life and death. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **11**, 261–266.

Li, X., Yang, Y., and Ashwell, J. D. (2002). TNF-RII and c-IAP1 mediate ubiquitination and degradation of TRAF2. *Nature* **416**, 345–347.

Li, Z. W., Rickert, R. C., and Karin, M. (2004). Genetic dissection of antigen receptor induced-NF-kappaB activation. *Mol. Immunol.* **41**, 701–714.

Liao, G., Zhang, M., Harhaj, E. W., and Sun, S. C. (2004). Regulation of the NF-kB inducing kinase by TRAF3-induced degradation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 26243–26250.

Lin, Y., Devin, A., Cook, A., Keane, M. M., Kelliher, M., Lipkowitz, S., and Liu, Z. G. (2000). The death domain kinase RIP is essential for TRAIL (Apo2L)-induced activation of IkappaB kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 6638–6645.

Liu, Y., Xu, L., Opalka, N., Kappler, J., Shu, H. B., and Zhang, G. (2002). Crystal structure of sTALL-1 reveals a virus-like assembly of TNF family ligands. *Cell* **108**, 383–394.

Liu, Z. G., Hsu, H., Goeddel, D. V., and Karin, M. (1996). Dissection of TNF receptor 1 effector functions: JNK activation is not linked to apoptosis while NF-kappaB activation prevents cell death. *Cell* **87**, 565–576.

Locksley, R. M., Killeen, N., and Lenardo, M. J. (2001). The TNF and TNF receptor superfamilies: Integrating mammalian biology. *Cell* **104**, 487–501.

Luo, X., Budihardjo, I., Zou, H., Slaughter, C., and Wang, X. (1998). Bid, a Bcl2 interacting protein, mediates cytochrome c release from mitochondria in response to activation of cell surface death receptors. *Cell* **94**, 481–490.

Mackay, F., Majeau, G. R., Hochman, P. S., and Browning, J. L. (1996). Lymphotoxin beta receptor triggering induces activation of the nuclear factor kappaB transcription factor in some cell types. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 24934–24938.

Mackay, F., Schneider, P., Rennert, P., and Browning, J. (2003). BAFF AND APRIL: A tutorial on B cell survival. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **21**, 231–264.

Mackay, F., Sierra, F., Grey, S. T., and Gordon, T. P. (2005). The BAFF/APRIL system: An important player in systemic rheumatic diseases. *Curr. Dir. Autoimmun.* **8**, 243–265.

Malinin, N. L., Boldin, M. P., Kovalenko, A. V., and Wallach, D. (1997). MAP3K-related kinase involved in NF-kappaB induction by TNF, CD95 and IL-1. *Nature* **385**, 540–544.

McDermott, M. F., Aksentijevich, I., Galon, J., McDermott, E. M., Ogunkolade, B. W., Centola, M., Mansfield, E., Gadina, M., Karenko, L., Pettersson, T., McCarthy, J., Frucht, D. M., Aringer, M., Torosyan, Y., Teppo, A. M., Wilson, M., Karaarslan, H. M., Wan, Y., Todd, I., Wood, G., Schlimgen, R., Kumarajewa, T. R., Cooper, S. M., Vella, J. P., and Kastner, D. L. (1999). Germline mutations in the extracellular domains of the 55 kDa TNF receptor, TNFR1, define a family of dominantly inherited autoinflammatory syndromes. *Cell* **97**, 133–144.

Meylan, E., and Tschopp, J. (2005). The RIP kinases: Crucial integrators of cellular stress. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **30**, 151–159.

Micheau, O., and Tschopp, J. (2003). Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes. *Cell* **114**, 181–190.

Mikkola, M. L., and Thesleff, I. (2003). Ectodysplasin signaling in development. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* **14**, 211–224.

Moreno, E., Yan, M., and Basler, K. (2002). Evolution of TNF signaling mechanisms. JNK-dependent apoptosis triggered by Eiger, the *Drosophila* homolog of the TNF superfamily. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 1263–1268.

Morlon, A., Munnich, A., and Smahi, A. (2005). TAB2, TRAF6 and TAK1 are involved in NF-{$\kappa$}B activation induced by the TNF-receptor, Edar and its adaptor Edaradd. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **14**, 3751–3757.

Morrison, M. D., Reiley, W., Zhang, M., and Sun, S. C. (2005). An atypical tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor-binding motif of B cell-activating factor belonging to the TNF family (BAFF) receptor mediates induction of the noncanonical NF-kappaB signaling pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 10018–10024.

Muppidi, J. R., Tschopp, J., and Siegel, R. M. (2004). Life and death decisions: Secondary complexes and lipid rafts in TNF receptor family signal transduction. *Immunity* **21**, 461–465.

Nagata, S. (1999). Fas ligand-induced apoptosis. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **33**, 29–55.

Nakano, H., Sakon, S., Koseki, H., Takemori, T., Tada, K., Matsumoto, M., Munechika, E., Sakai, T., Shirasawa, T., Akiba, H., Kobata, T., Santee, S. M., Ware, C. F., Rennert, P. D., Taniguchi, M., Yagita, H., and Okumura, K. (1999). Targeted disruption of Traf5 gene causes defects in CD40- and CD27-mediated lymphocyte activation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 9803–9808.

Oehm, A., Behrmann, I., Falk, W., Pawlita, M., Maier, G., Klas, C., Li-Weber, M., Richards, S., Dhein, J., and Trauth, B.C. (1992). Purification and molecular cloning of the APO-1 cell surface antigen, a member of the tumor necrosis factor/nerve growth factor receptor superfamily. Sequence identity with the Fas antigen. *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 10709–10715.

Pan, G., Bauer, J. H., Haridas, V., Wang, S., Liu, D., Yu, G., Vincenz, C., Aggarwal, B. B., Ni, J., and Dixit, V. M. (1998). Identification and functional characterization of DR6, a novel death domain-containing TNF receptor. *FEBS Lett.* **431**, 351–356.

Pan, S., An, P., Zhang, R., He, X., Yin, G., and Min, W. (2002). Etk/Bmx as a tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2-specific kinase: Role in endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 7512–7523.

Pennica, D., Nedwin, G. E., Hayflick, J. S., Seeburg, P. H., Derynck, R., Palladino, M. A., Kohr, W. J., Aggarwal, B. B., and Goeddel, D. V. (1984). Human tumour necrosis factor: Precursor structure, expression and homology to lymphotoxin. *Nature* **312**, 724–729.

Pennica, D., Lam, V. T., Mize, N. K., Weber, R. F., Lewis, M., Fendly, B. M., Lipari, M. T., and Goeddel, D. V. (1992). Biochemical properties of the 75-kDa tumor necrosis factor receptor. Characterization of ligand binding, internalization, and receptor phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 21172–21178.

Pfeffer, K. D., Huecksteadt, T. P., and Hoidal, J. R. (1993). Expression and regulation of tumor necrosis factor in macrophages from cystic fibrosis patients. *Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol.* **9**, 511–519.

Pinckard, J. K., Sheehan, K. C., and Schreiber, R. D. (1997). Ligand-induced formation of p55 and p75 tumor necrosis factor receptor heterocomplexes on intact cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 10784–10789.

Ramakrishnan, P., Wang, W., and Wallach, D. (2004). Receptor-specific signaling for both the alternative and the canonical NF-kappaB activation pathways by NF-kappaB-inducing kinase. *Immunity* **21**, 477–489.

Rety, S., Salamitou, S., Garcia-Verdugo, I., Hulmes, D. J., Le, H. F., Chaby, R., and Lewit-Bentley, A. (2005). The crystal structure of the *Bacillus anthracis* spore surface protein BclA shows remarkable similarity to mammalian proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 43073–43078.

Rothe, M., Wong, S. C., Henzel, W. J., and Goeddel, D. V. (1994). A novel family of putative signal transducers associated with the cytoplasmic domain of the 75 kDa tumor necrosis factor receptor. *Cell* **78**, 681–692.

Saitoh, T., Nakayama, M., Nakano, H., Yagita, H., Yamamoto, N., and Yamaoka, S. (2003). TWEAK induces NF-kappaB2 p100 processing and long lasting NF-kappaB activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 36005–36012.

Sakon, S., Xue, X., Takekawa, M., Sasazuki, T., Okazaki, T., Kojima, Y., Piao, J. H., Yagita, H., Okumura, K., Doi, T., and Nakano, H. (2003). NF-kappaB inhibits TNF-induced accumulation of ROS that mediate prolonged MAPK activation and necrotic cell death. *EMBO J.* 22, 3898–3909.

Sato, S., Sanjo, H., Takeda, K., Ninomiya-Tsuji, J., Yamamoto, M., Kawai, T., Matsumoto, K., Takeuchi, O., and Akira, S. (2005). Essential function for the kinase TAK1 in innate and adaptive immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* 6, 1087–1095.

Scaffidi, C., Kirchhoff, S., Krammer, P. H., and Peter, M. E. (1999). Apoptosis signaling in lymphocytes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 11, 277–285.

Schneider, K., Potter, K. G., and Ware, C. F. (2004). Lymphotoxin and LIGHT signaling pathways and target genes. *Immunol. Rev.* 202, 49–66.

Schneider-Brachert, W., Tchikov, V., Neumeyer, J., Jakob, M., Winoto-Morbach, S., Held-Feindt, J., Heinrich, M., Merkel, O., Ehrenschwender, M., Adam, D., Mentlein, R., Kabelitz, D., and Schutze, S. (2004). Compartmentalization of TNF receptor 1 signaling: Internalized TNF receptosomes as death signaling vesicles. *Immunity* 21, 415–428.

Schutze, S., Machleidt, T., Adam, D., Schwandner, R., Wiegmann, K., Kruse, M. L., Heinrich, M., Wickel, M., and Kronke, M. (1999). Inhibition of receptor internalization by monodansylcadaverine selectively blocks p55 tumor necrosis factor receptor death domain signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 10203–10212.

Senftleben, U., Cao, Y., Xiao, G., Greten, F. R., Krahn, G., Bonizzi, G., Chen, Y., Hu, Y., Fong, A., Sun, S. C., and Karin, M. (2001). Activation by IKKalpha of a second, evolutionary conserved, NF-kappa B signaling pathway. *Science* 293, 1495–1499.

Shaulian, E., and Karin, M. (2002). AP-1 as a regulator of cell life and death. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 4, E131–E136.

Shen, H. M., Lin, Y., Choksi, S., Tran, J., Jin, T., Chang, L., Karin, M., Zhang, J., and Liu, Z. G. (2004). Essential roles of receptor-interacting protein and TRAF2 in oxidative stress-induced cell death. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24, 5914–5922.

Sheridan, J. P., Marsters, S. A., Pitti, R. M., Gurney, A., Skubatch, M., Baldwin, D., Ramakrishnan, L., Gray, C. L., Baker, K., Wood, W. I., Goddard, A. D., Godowski, P., and Ashkenazi, A. (1997). Control of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by a family of signaling and decoy receptors. *Science* 277, 818–821.

Shim, J. H., Xiao, C., Paschal, A. E., Bailey, S. T., Rao, P., Hayden, M. S., Lee, K. Y., Bussey, C., Steckel, M., Tanaka, N., Yamada, G., Akira, S., Matsumoto, K., and Ghosh, S. (2005). TAK1, but not TAB1 or TAB2, plays an essential role in multiple signaling pathways in vivo. *Genes Dev.* 19, 2668–2681.

Shu, H. B., Takeuchi, M., and Goeddel, D. V. (1996). The tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 signal transducers TRAF2 and c-IAP1 are components of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93, 13973–13978.

Shudo, K., Kinoshita, K., Imamura, R., Fan, H., Hasumoto, K., Tanaka, M., Nagata, S., and Suda, T. (2001). The membrane-bound but not the soluble form of human Fas ligand is responsible for its inflammatory activity. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 31, 2504–2511.

Siegel, R. M., Chan, F. K., Chun, H. J., and Lenardo, M. J. (2000). The multifaceted role of Fas signaling in immune cell homeostasis and autoimmunity. *Nat. Immunol.* 1, 469–474.

Sinha, S. K., and Chaudhary, P. M. (2004). Induction of apoptosis by X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor via a caspase 8-dependent mechanism. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 41873–41881.

Sprick, M. R., Weigand, M. A., Rieser, E., Rauch, C. T., Juo, P., Blenis, J., Krammer, P. H., and Walczak, H. (2000). FADD/MORT1 and caspase-8 are recruited to TRAIL receptors 1 and 2 and are essential for apoptosis mediated by TRAIL receptor 2. *Immunity* 12, 599–609.

Srivastava, A. K., Pispa, J., Hartung, A. J., Du, Y., Ezer, S., Jenks, T., Shimada, T., Pekkanen, M., Mikkola, M. L., Ko, M. S., Thesleff, I., Kere, J., and Schlessinger, D. (1997). The Tabby

phenotype is caused by mutation in a mouse homologue of the EDA gene that reveals novel mouse and human exons and encodes a protein (ectodysplasin-A) with collagenous domains. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 13069–13074.

Suda, T., Takahashi, T., Golstein, P., and Nagata, S. (1993). Molecular cloning and expression of the Fas ligand, a novel member of the tumor necrosis factor family. *Cell* **75**, 1169–1178.

Suda, T., Hashimoto, H., Tanaka, M., Ochi, T., and Nagata, S. (1997). Membrane Fas ligand kills human peripheral blood T lymphocytes, and soluble Fas ligand blocks the killing. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 2045–2050.

Sun, L., Deng, L., Ea, C. K., Xia, Z. P., and Chen, Z. J. (2004). The TRAF6 ubiquitin ligase and TAK1 kinase mediate IKK activation by BCL10 and MALT1 in T lymphocytes. *Mol. Cell.* **14**, 289–301.

Tada, K., Okazaki, T., Sakon, S., Kobara, T., Kurosawa, K., Yamaoka, S., Hashimoto, H., Mak, T. W., Yagita, H., Okumura, K., Yeh, W. C., and Nakano, H. (2001). Critical roles of TRAF2 and TRAF5 in tumor necrosis factor-induced NF-kappa B activation and protection from cell death. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 36530–36534.

Takada, H., Chen, N. J., Mirtsos, C., Suzuki, S., Suzuki, N., Wakeham, A., Mak, T. W., and Yeh, W. C. (2003). Role of SODD in regulation of tumor necrosis factor responses. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **23**, 4026–4033.

Takeuchi, M., Rothe, M., and Goeddel, D. V. (1996). Anatomy of TRAF2. Distinct domains for nuclear factor-kappaB activation and association with tumor necrosis factor signaling proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 19935–19942.

Tang, G., Minemoto, Y., Dibling, B., Purcell, N. H., Li, Z., Karin, M., and Lin, A. (2001). Inhibition of JNK activation through NF-kappaB target genes. *Nature* **414**, 313–317.

Tartaglia, L. A., and Goeddel, D. V. (1992). Two TNF receptors. *Immunol. Today* **13**, 151–153.

Tartaglia, L. A., Pennica, D., and Goeddel, D. V. (1993). Ligand passing: The 75-kDa tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor recruits TNF for signaling by the 55-kDa TNF receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 18542–18548.

Tobiume, K., Matsuzawa, A., Takahashi, T., Nishitoh, H., Morita, K., Takeda, K., Minowa, O., Miyazono, K., Noda, T., and Ichijo, H. (2001). ASK1 is required for sustained activations of JNK/p38 MAP kinases and apoptosis. *EMBO Rep.* **2**, 222–228.

Trauth, B. C., Klas, C., Peters, A. M., Matzku, S., Moller, P., Falk, W., Debatin, K. M., and Krammer, P. H. (1989). Monoclonal antibody-mediated tumor regression by induction of apoptosis. *Science* **245**, 301–305.

Tumanov, A. V., Grivennikov, S. I., Shakhov, A. N., Rybtsov, S. A., Koroleva, E. P., Takeda, J., Nedospasov, S. A., and Kuprash, D. V. (2003). Dissecting the role of lymphotoxin in lymphoid organs by conditional targeting. *Immunol. Rev.* **195**, 106–116.

VanArsdale, T. L., VanArsdale, S. L., Force, W. R., Walter, B. N., Mosialos, G., Kieff, E., Reed, J. C., and Ware, C. F. (1997). Lymphotoxin-beta receptor signaling complex: Role of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 recruitment in cell death and activation of nuclear factor kappaB. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 2460–2465.

Varfolomeev, E. E., and Ashkenazi, A. (2004). Tumor necrosis factor; an apoptosis JuNKie? *Cell* **116**, 491–497.

Walczak, H., and Krammer, P. H. (2000). The CD95 (APO-1/Fas) and the TRAIL (APO-2L) apoptosis systems. *Exp. Cell Res.* **256**, 58–66.

Wallach, D., Varfolomeev, E. E., Malinin, N. L., Goltsev, Y. V., Kovalenko, A. V., and Boldin, M. P. (1999). Tumor necrosis factor receptor and Fas signaling mechanisms. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **17**, 331–367.

Wang, C. Y., Mayo, M. W., Korneluk, R. G., Goeddel, D. V., and Baldwin, A. S., Jr. (1998). NF-kappaB antiapoptosis: Induction of TRAF1 and TRAF2 and c-IAP1 and c-IAP2 to suppress caspase-8 activation. *Science* **281**, 1680–1683.

Wang, J., Zheng, L., Lobito, A., Chan, F. K., Dale, J., Sneller, M., Yao, X., Puck, J. M., Straus, S. E., and Lenardo, M. J. (1999). Inherited human caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. *Cell* **98**, 47–58.

Watanabe-Fukunaga, R., Brannan, C. I., Copeland, N. G., Jenkins, N. A., and Nagata, S. (1992). Lymphoproliferation disorder in mice explained by defects in Fas antigen that mediates apoptosis. *Nature* **356**, 314–317.

Watts, T. H. (2005). TNF/TNFR family members in costimulation of T cell responses. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**, 23–68.

Watts, T. H., and Gommerman, J. L. (2005). The LIGHT and DARC sides of herpesvirus entry mediator. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 13365–13366.

Wertz, I. E., O'Rourke, K. M., Zhou, H., Eby, M., Aravind, L., Seshagiri, S., Wu, P., Wiesmann, C., Baker, R., Boone, D. L., Ma, A., Koonin, E. V., and Dixit, V. M. (2004). Deubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-kappaB signalling. *Nature* **430**, 694–699.

Wiley, S. R., Cassiano, L., Lofton, T., Davis-Smith, T., Winkles, J. A., Lindner, V., Liu, H., Daniel, T. O., Smith, C. A., and Fanslow, W. C. (2001). A novel TNF receptor family member binds TWEAK and is implicated in angiogenesis. *Immunity* **15**, 837–846.

Xia, X. Z., Treanor, J., Senaldi, G., Khare, S. D., Boone, T., Kelley, M., Theill, L. E., Colombero, A., Solovyev, I., Lee, F., McCabe, S., Elliott, R., Miner, K., Hawkins, N., Guo, J., Stolina, M., Yu, G., Wang, J., Delaney, J., Meng, S. Y., Boyle, W. J., and Hsu, H. (2000). TACI is a TRAF-interacting receptor for TALL-1, a tumor necrosis factor family member involved in B cell regulation. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 137–143.

Xiao, G., Fong, A., and Sun, S. C. (2004). Induction of p100 processing by NF-kappaB-inducing kinase involves docking IKKalpha to p100 and IKKalpha-mediated phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 30099–30105.

Yan, M., Zhang, Z., Brady, J. R., Schilbach, S., Fairbrother, W. J., and Dixit, V. M. (2002). Identification of a novel death domain-containing adaptor molecule for ectodysplasin-A receptor that is mutated in crinkled mice. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 409–413.

Yang, J., Lin, Y., Guo, Z., Cheng, J., Huang, J., Deng, L., Liao, W., Chen, Z., Liu, Z., and Su, B. (2001). The essential role of MEKK3 in TNF-induced NF-kappaB activation. *Nat. Immunol.* **2**, 620–624.

Yin, L., Wu, L., Wesche, H., Arthur, C. D., White, J. M., Goeddel, D. V., and Schreiber, R. D. (2001). Defective lymphotoxin-beta receptor-induced NF-kappaB transcriptional activity in NIK-deficient mice. *Science* **291**, 2162–2165.

Zhang, R., He, X., Liu, W., Lu, M., Hsieh, J. T., and Min, W. (2003). AIP1 mediates TNF-alpha-induced ASK1 activation by facilitating dissociation of ASK1 from its inhibitor 14-3-3. *J. Clin. Invest.* **111**, 1933–1943.

Zhukovsky, E. A., Lee, J. O., Villegas, M., Chan, C., Chu, S., and Mroske, C. (2004). TNF ligands: Is TALL-1 a trimer or a virus-like cluster? *Nature* **427**, 413–414.
