
Pentalenolactone Biosynthesis. Molecular Cloning and Assignment of Biochemical Function to PtlI, a Cytochrome P450 of Streptomyces avermitilis

Richard Quaderer,$^{\dagger}$ Satoshi Omura,$^{\ddagger}$ Haruo Ikeda,$^{\S}$ and David E. Cane$^{*,\dagger}$

Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Box H, Providence, Rhode Island 02912-9108, The Kitasato Institute, 9-1, Shirokane 5-chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8642, Japan, and Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, 1-15-1, Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan

Received June 5, 2006; E-mail: david_cane@brown.edu

Streptomycetes are a rich source of bioactive secondary metabolites. The 9.03 Mb linear chromosome of *S*. *avermitilis*, the producer of the widely used antiparasitic avermectins, harbors 7575 open reading frames (ORFs)${}^{1}$ of which 33 encode cytochrome P450 enzymes.${}^{2}$ One of these CYP genes, *ptlI* (SAV2999, CYP183A1), is found within the gene cluster for the biosynthesis of the sesquiterpene antibiotic pentalenolactone (1). This cluster lies in a 13.4 kb segment, centered at 3.75 Mb in the *S*. *avermitilis* genome, that contains 13 unidirectionally transcribed ORFs (Figure 1).${}^{3}$ Among these ORFs, the 1011 bp *ptlA* encodes pentalene synthase (PtlA), which catalyzes the cyclization of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) (2) to pentalene (3), the established parent hydrocarbon of the pentalenolactone family of antibiotics (Scheme 1).${}^{3,4}$ Besides the heme-dependent monooxygenase CYP183A1 (*ptlI*),${}^{2}$ seven of the remaining ORFs correspond to redox enzymes, including the non-heme iron dioxygenase encoded by *ptlH*,${}^{5}$ and six additional monooxygenases and dioxygenases.

We recently showed that PtlH, an Fe${}^{2+}$/α-ketoglutarate-dependent hydroxylase, catalyzes the conversion of 1-deoxypentalenic acid (4) to a new biosynthetic intermediate, 11β-hydroxy-1-deoxypentalenic acid (5).${}^{5}$ Although several presumptive intermediates of pentalenolactone biosynthesis have been isolated from a wide variety of Streptomycetes species,${}^{3,4}$ PtlH is the only enzyme linking pentalene (3) to pentalenolactone (1) that has been characterized to date. Here we describe the biochemical characterization of PtlI, the cytochrome P450 that is shown to catalyze the conversion of pentalene (3) to pentalen-13-al (7) by stepwise oxidation via pentalen-13-ol (6).

According to the proposed biosynthetic pathway (Scheme 1), the enzymes responsible for the conversion of pentalene (3) to pentalenolactone (1) must first oxidize pentalene to the corresponding unsaturated carboxylic acid 4. Cytochrome P450s are known to catalyze numerous oxygenation reactions of nonactivated hydrocarbons. ${}^{6}$ Among these reactions is the three-step oxidation of a methyl group to a carboxylic acid. ${}^{7-9}$ We therefore speculated that PtlI might be responsible for all or part of the allylic oxidation of pentalene (3) to 1-deoxypentalenic acid (4) (Scheme 2).

*PtlI* was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from DNA of *S*. *avermitilis* cosmid CL_216_D07 and cloned between the *NdeI* and *XhoI* sites of the vector pET31b. The resulting construct pET31b-*PtlI* was transformed into *Escherichia coli* BL21-(DE3). After induction with IPTG, the expressed PtlI protein, carrying a C-terminal His${}_{6}$-tag, was purified to homogeneity by Ni–NTA chromatography. ${}^{10}$ MALDI-TOF MS of purified protein showed subunit $M_{D}$ $m/z$ 51667 ± 50 (calcd 51723 for apo-protein) and $m/z$ 52078 ± 50 (calcd 52339 for holo-protein). Treatment of

---

${}^{\dagger}$ Brown University.  
${}^{\ddagger}$ The Kitasato Institute.  
${}^{\S}$ Kitasato University.

for ref 14b. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

**References**

(1) (a) Omura, S.; Ikeda, H.; Ishikawa, J.; Hanamoto, A.; Takahashi, C.; Shinose, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Horikawa, H.; Nakazawa, H.; Osonoe, T.; Kikuchi, H.; Shiba, T.; Sakaki, Y.; Hattori, M. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **2001**, 98, 12215–12220. (b) Ikeda, H.; Ishikawa, J.; Hanamoto, A.; Shinose, M.; Kikuchi, H.; Shiba, T.; Sakaki, Y.; Hattori, M.; Omura, S. *Nat. Biotechnol.* **2003**, 21, 526–531.

(2) Lamb, D. C.; Ikeda, H.; Nelson, D. R.; Ishikawa, J.; Skaug, T.; Jackson, C.; Omura, S.; Waterman, M. R.; Kelly, S. L. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **2003**, 307, 610–619.

(3) Tetzlaff, C. N.; You, Z.; Cane, D. E.; Takamatsu, S.; Omura, S.; Ikeda, H. *Biochemistry* **2006**, 45, 6179–6186.

(4) (a) Cane, D. E.; Sohng, J. K.; Lamberson, C. R.; Rudnicki, S. M.; Wu, Z.; Lloyd, M. D.; Oliver, J. S.; Hubbard, B. R. *Biochemistry* **1994**, 33, 5846–5857. (b) Cane, D. E.; Oliver, J. S.; Harrison, P. H. M.; Abell, C.; Hubbard, B. R.; Kane, C. T.; Lattman, R. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1990**, 112, 4513–4524.

(5) (a) You, Z.; Omura, S.; Ikeda, H.; Cane, D. E. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2006**, 128, 6566–6567. (b) The 1-deoxypentalenic acid (4) has been isolated as the glucuronate ester: Takahashi, S.; Takeuchi, M.; Arai, M.; Seto, H.; Otake, N. *J. Antibiot.* **1983**, 36, 226–228.

(6) Sono, M.; Roach, M. P.; Coulter, E. D.; Dawson, J. H. *Chem. Rev.* **1996**, 96, 2841–2887.

(7) Gibberellin biosynthesis: (a) Helliwell, C. A.; Poole, A.; Peacock, W. J.; Dennis, E. S. *Plant Physiol.* **1999**, 119, 507–510. (b) Helliwell, C. A.; Chandler, P. M.; Poole, A.; Dennis, E. S.; Peacock, W. J. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **2001**, 98, 2065–2070.

(8) Bile acid biosynthesis: (a) Cali, J. J.; Russell, D. W. *J. Biol. Chem.* **1991**, 266, 7774–7778. (b) Pikuleva, I. A.; Babiker, A.; Waterman, M. R.; Bjorkhem, I. *J. Biol. Chem.* **1998**, 273, 18153–18160.

(9) Artemisinic acid biosynthesis: (a) Ro, D. K.; Paradise, E. M.; Ouellet, M.; Fisher, K. J.; Newman, K. L.; Ndungu, J. M.; Ho, K. A.; Eachus, R. A.; Ham, T. S.; Kirby, J.; Chang, M. C. Y.; Withers, S. T.; Shiba, Y.; Sarpong, R.; Keasling, J. D. *Nature* **2006**, 440, 940–943. (b) Teoh, K. H.; Polichuk, D. R.; Reed, D. W.; Nowak, G.; Covello, P. S. *FEBS Lett.* **2006**, 580, 1411–1416.

(10) The nonionic detergent Triton X-100 (0.1%) was a required component of the lysis buffer in order for PtII to bind to the Ni–NTA resin, suggesting that PtII may be membrane-associated.

(11) Omura, T.; Sato, R. *J. Biol. Chem.* **1964**, 239, 2370–2378.

(12) Compounds (±)-3, (±)-6, (±)-7, and (±)-4 were synthesized as previously described: (a) Ohfune, Y.; Shirahama, H.; Matsumoto, T. *Tetrahedron Lett.* **1976**, 17, 2869–2872. (b) Ohtsuka, T.; Shirahama, H.; Matsumoto, T. *Tetrahedron Lett.* **1983**, 24, 3851–3854. (c) Cane, D. E.; Tillman, A. M. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1983**, 105, 122–124. (d) Tillman, A. M. Ph.D. Thesis, Brown University, Providence, RI, 1984; pp 115–163.

(13) Jefcoate, C. R. *Methods Enzymol.* **1978**, 52, 258–279.

(14) The natural electron transport pair for PtII is unknown. *S. avermitilis* harbors six putative ferredoxin reductases and nine ferredoxins (cf. ref 2). Numerous attempts to observe PtII-catalyzed oxidation of pentalenene (3) using typical redox pairs, such as spinach ferredoxin and NADPH: ferredoxin oxidoreductase or putidaredoxin and putidaredoxin reductase, were uniformly unsuccessful. By contrast, incubations of 3 and NADPH with unpurified cell-free extracts of *E. coli* PtII expression cultures indicated that the endogenous *E. coli* flavodoxin (Fld) and flavodoxin reductase (Fdr) supported activity of PtII. Although *S. avermitilis* does not harbor a native flavodoxin, similar observations have been previously reported for other P450s. (a) Jenkins, C. M.; Waterman, M. R. *J. Biol. Chem.* **1994**, 269, 27401–27408. (b) Zhao, B.; et al. *J. Biol. Chem.* **2005**, 280, 11599–11607.

(15) (a) FldA, Swissprot P61949: Jenkins, C. M.; Pikuleva, I.; Kagawa, N.; Waterman, M. R. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **1997**, 347, 93–102. (b) Fdr, Swissprot P28861: Jenkins, C. M.; Waterman, M. R. *Biochemistry* **1998**, 37, 6106–6113.

(16) Some background oxidation of (±)-6 to pentalen-13-al (7) could also be detected. Under typical incubation conditions, the ratio of P450-catalyzed oxidation to oxidation in the absence of PtII was ~3:1, as judged by GC–MS [PtII (1.4 μM), Fld (6.0 μM), Fdr (3.4 μM), NADPH (0.53 mM), glucose-6-phosphate (0.53 mM), and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (5 u) in 2.9 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, 10% glycerol (v/v), pH 8, was incubated with (±)-6 (0.1 mM) for 2 h at 25 °C]. This finding was consistent with chiral GC–MS analysis of an incubation of (±)-6 with PtII, which revealed formation of both enantiomers of aldehyde 7 in a ratio of 2.6:1 natural 7 to enantio-7.

(17) Incubations carried out with PtII, ferredoxin FdxD (SAV3129), and ferredoxin reductase FprD (SAV5675), the most abundant electron carriers in *S. avermitilis*, showed no enhancement in pentalene oxidation and no detectable formation of 1-deoxypentalenic acid (4).

**Supporting Information Available:** Expression of recombinant PtII, binding spectra of 3 to PtII, CO difference spectrum, mass spectra of products, chiral GC traces, NMR data, kinetic assays, and full citation JA0639214
