
10

THE IL-17  
CYTOKINE FAMILY  

SARAH L. GAFFEN, ${}^{*,\dagger}$ JILL M. KRAMER, ${}^{*}$  
JEFFREY J. YU, ${}^{\dagger}$ AND FANG SHEN ${}^{*}$  

${}^{*}$Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine  
University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, New York 14214  
${}^{\dagger}$Department of Microbiology and Immunology  
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences  
University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, New York 14214  

I. Overview of the IL-17 Family  
II. Molecular and Structural Aspects of the IL-17 Family  
    A. IL-17 Family Ligands  
    B. IL-17 Family Receptors  
III. IL-17A In Vivo  
    A. Th17, a New T Cell Subset  
    B. IL-17A in Autoimmune/Inflammatory Diseases  
    C. IL-17A in Infectious Disease  
    D. IL-17A in Cancer  
IV. Gene Targets and Signal Transduction  
    A. Major Gene Targets  
    B. Major Signaling Pathways  
V. Concluding Remarks  
References  

IL-17A and its receptor are the founding members of a recently described cytokine family, with unique sequences and functions in the  

Vitamins and Hormones, Volume 74  
Copyright 2006, Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  
255  
0083-6729/06 $35.00  
DOI: 10.1016/S0083-6729(06)74010-9
immune system and elsewhere. Consisting of six ligands (IL-17A–F) and five receptors (IL-17RA–IL-17RE) in mammals, these molecules have distinct primary amino acid structures with only minimal homology to other cytokine families. By far the best studied of these cytokines to date are IL-17A and its receptor, IL-17RA. IL-17A is produced primarily by T cells, and is the hallmark cytokine of a newly defined T helper cell subset that appears to be involved in generation of autoimmunity. Despite its production by the adaptive immune system, IL-17A exhibits proinflammatory activities similar to innate immune cytokines such as IL-1β and TNF-α and appears to play important and nonredundant roles in regulating granulocytes *in vivo*. As a result, IL-17A also plays key roles in host defense. In contrast to the restricted expression of IL-17A, the IL-17RA receptor is ubiquitously expressed, and thus most cells are potential physiological targets of IL-17A. This chapter describes the major molecular properties, biological activities, and known signaling pathways of the IL-17 family, with an emphasis on IL-17A and IL-17RA. © 2006 Elsevier Inc.

---

### I. OVERVIEW OF THE IL-17 FAMILY

The completion of human and rodent genome sequencing has revealed the “parts list” of genes required to control the many complex physiological processes required for survival. However, the daunting task remains to assign roles to each gene product in its physical and functional context. Cytokines, in a sense, represent a microcosm of this task, with approximately 200 cytokines together with their cognate receptors responsible for coordinating virtually every aspect of immunity, as well as other biological processes such as bone remodeling, nervous system function, and so on.

Understanding cytokine function requires an understanding of receptor signal transduction, and receptor structure is often predictive of function. Cytokines have been subdivided into families based primarily on receptor structure ([Ozaki and Leonard, 2002](#ozaki-leonard-2002)), and the newest subfamily with unique structures to be described is the interleukin (IL)-17<sup>1</sup> family ([Aggarwal and Gurney, 2002](#aggarwal-gurney-2002); [Moseley et al., 2003](#moseley-et-al-2003)). Although first identified over a decade ago, this enigmatic family has recently received considerable attention for its

---

<sup>1</sup> Abbreviations: C/EBP, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein; CIA, collagen-induced arthritis; COX, cyclooxygenase; DC, dendritic cells; EAE, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL-, interleukin; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; JAK, Janus kinase; LIX, LPS-inducible CXC chemokine; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; PI 3-K, phosphatidylinositol-3′ kinase; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SEF, similar expression to FGF receptor genes; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
role as a hallmark cytokine produced by a novel T helper subset (Wynn, 2005). The following sections review structural and functional aspects of the IL-17 family, with an emphasis on the prototypical and best understood of these, IL-17A.

# II. MOLECULAR AND STRUCTURAL ASPECTS OF THE IL-17 FAMILY

## A. IL-17 FAMILY LIGANDS

Originally cloned from a rodent T cell hybridoma library screen and termed CTLA-8 (Rouvier *et al.*, 1993), IL-17A (often called simply IL-17) is the founding member of a novel family of cytokines, termed IL-17A through IL-17F (Table I) (Aggarwal and Gurney, 2002). Family members share the highest degree of similarity in their C-terminal portions, with 20–30% amino acid identity and strict conservation of four cysteine residues (Lee *et al.*, 2001). IL-17A has a molecular weight of approximately 17 kDa and three potential N-linked glycosylation sites. Biochemically, IL-17A migrates as a dimer, apparently through cysteine bond interactions (Fossiez *et al.*, 1996). X-ray crystallography studies revealed an unexpected structural homology between IL-17 family members and neurotrophins such as nerve growth factor (NGF) (see IL-17F in a later section) (Hymowitz *et al.*, 2001). As will be described in detail in subsequent sections, IL-17A is produced almost exclusively by activated T cells, and is definitive of a new T cell subset that is distinct from Th1 or Th2 (Harrington *et al.*, 2005; Park *et al.*, 2005; Wynn, 2005). Although produced by the adaptive immune system, IL-17A is clearly a proinflammatory cytokine with potent effects on numerous cells of the innate immune system, particularly the granulocyte lineage.

### TABLE I. IL-17 Family Ligands<sup>a</sup>

| Family member | Alternate names | Chromosome | Receptor(s) |
|---------------|-----------------|------------|-------------|
| IL-17A        | CTLA-8, IL-17   | 6p12       | IL-17RA, IL-17RC |
| IL-17B        | CX1             | 5q32–34    | IL-17RB     |
| IL-17C        | CX2             | 16g24      | Not determined |
| IL-17D        |                 | 13q12.11   | Not determined |
| IL-17E        | IL-25           | 14q11.2    | IL-17RB     |
| IL-17F        | ML-1            | 6p12       | IL-17RA, IL-17RC |
| vIL-17        | ORF13           | N/A<sup>b</sup> (H. Saimiri) | IL-17RA |

<sup>a</sup> Additional information on nomenclature in Eberl (2002).

<sup>b</sup> N/A: Not applicable.
Compared to IL-17A, little is known about other members of the IL-17 family, most of which were first identified by homology searches to IL-17A. In contrast to IL-17A and other IL-17 family members, size exclusion chromatography demonstrated that IL-17B appears to be a nondisulfide-linked dimer. Also unlike IL-17A, its expression is quite widespread; Northern blot analyses showed strong signals in spinal cord, small intestine, brain, heart, and testis. *In vivo* studies revealed that IL-17B causes a dose-dependent recruitment of neutrophils to the peritoneal cavity following injection of IL-17B into this site (Shi et al., 2000). IL-17C is expressed at very low levels, and is only detectable in adult prostate and fetal kidney libraries. Although they are both proinflammatory, the functions of IL-17B and C are clearly distinct from those of IL-17A, because IL-17A but not IL-17B or IL-17C induce secretion of IL-6 in human fibroblasts. In addition, IL-17B and IL-17C induce the release of TNF-$\alpha$ and IL-1$\beta$ from the monocytic cell line THP-1, whereas IL-17A has only a minor effect on these cells (Li et al., 2000). However, the mechanisms involved in IL-17B and IL-17C signaling are still poorly understood, and little is known about the major biological roles for these cytokines.

IL-17D shares the most sequence homology with IL-17B, with 27% sequence identity, and is found in skeletal muscle, brain, adipose tissue, heart, lung, and pancreas. Like IL-17A, IL-17D stimulation triggers the secretion of IL-6, IL-8, and GM-CSF in target cells, and thus appears to be proinflammatory. In addition, IL-17D suppresses the proliferation of myeloid progenitor cells in colony formation assays. It is postulated that in addition to its proinflammatory activities, IL-17D plays a role in the anemia of chronic disease, as IL-17D secretion appears to decrease hematopoiesis (Starnes et al., 2002). Again, much remains to be learned about this cytokine *in vivo*.

IL-17E (more commonly referred to as IL-25) was also cloned by a homology search, and has a 25–35% identity with other IL-17 family members (Fort et al., 2001; Kim et al., 2002). IL-25 transcripts are expressed in a variety of tissues, and high levels are present in testis and polarized Th2 cells. Numerous studies have borne out the observation that IL-25 drives a Th2-type response. For example, parenteral administration of IL-25 or overexpression by transgenesis induces expression of Th2-type cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, together with Th2-type pathologies (Hurst et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2002; Pan et al., 2001). Transgenic mice overexpressing human IL-25 under a promoter that directs secretion from liver showed dramatic hematopoietic changes, such as splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy. Strikingly, these mice also exhibited a 50-fold increase in eosinophils, along with smaller but significant increases in lymphocytes and neutrophils. In addition, these studies revealed a role for IL-25 in lymphocyte development and B cell trafficking (Kim et al., 2002). Corroborative data were obtained from mice transgenic for the murine IL-25 gene under the control of the systemic myosin L-chain promoter, which also showed growth retardation and jaundiced skin (Pan et al., 2001). Data also support a role for IL-25 in autoimmunity and parasiticinfections, as IL-25-deficient mice show accelerated onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) as well as increased susceptibility to the parasitic worm *Trichuris muris* (Owyang et al., 2005).

The most recently discovered IL-17 family member, IL-17F, resembles IL-17A most closely, both in terms of homology and function. IL-17F has 58% sequence identity with IL-17A at the protein level, and both bind to the same receptor (see Section II.B). IL-17A and IL-17F are potent inducers of G-CSF and numerous CXC chemokines in a variety of cell types, and a synergistic enhancement of signaling is observed when these cytokines are combined with TNF-$\alpha$. In addition, both IL-17A and IL-17F play important roles in neutrophil recruitment, particularly in lung (Kolls and Linden, 2004). Furthermore, both IL-17A and IL-17F are demonstrated to play important inflammatory roles in the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis (McAllister et al., 2005). IL-17A and IL-17F are linked on chromosome 6p12 and may be coordinately regulated at the transcriptional level (Table I). Recent work has demonstrated that, in addition to NFAT, the STAT3 transcription factor plays an important role in regulating these genes (Chen et al., 2006). IL-17F is also the only IL-17 family member whose crystal structure has been solved. This study revealed that IL-17F adopts a cysteine knot fold, which is characterized by three sets of disulfide linkages. Importantly, IL-17F forms an unusually large cavity by residues in the dimer interface, which is suggestive of a region that may bind another molecule (Hymowitz et al., 2001). Based on sequence analysis, an analogous cavity is predicted to exist for other IL-17 family members, which could provide clues to specific amino acids in the cytokine that are critical for receptor interactions. Identification of such contact points may provide valuable targets for rationally designed therapeutics aimed at mitigating IL-17 signaling.

Another intriguing aspect of the IL-17 family is the existence of a viral homolog of IL-17A encoded in the T cell–tropic gamma herpesvirus, *Herpesvirus saimiri* (Rouvier et al., 1993). Termed vIL-17, the biological significance of its presence in this viral genome is unclear. However, the vIL-17 gene (ORF13) is not required for viral replication or pathogenicity in susceptible primates, or T cell transformation *in vitro* (Knappe et al., 1998). Since vIL-17 is agonistic for the same receptor subunit that binds IL-17A and IL-17F, it may contribute to viral persistence in the squirrel monkey, its natural host (Fossiez et al., 1996; Yao et al., 1995).

### B. IL-17 FAMILY RECEPTORS

The IL-17 receptor family also comprises a unique class of cytokine receptors (Table II). The founding member of the family was identified on the basis of binding to IL-17A. Originally termed IL-17R, it is now known as IL-17RA, and bears almost no homology to other known cytokine receptors (Yao et al., 1995, 1997). It was also shown that IL-17RA binds another IL-17
TABLE II. IL-17 Receptor Family Members

| Family member | Alternate names | Ligand(s)               | Chromosome | Splice variants? |
|--------------|----------------|-------------------------|------------|------------------|
| IL-17RA      | IL-17R         | IL-17A, IL-17F          | 22q11.1    | No               |
| IL-17RB      | IL-17Rh1       | IL-17B, IL-17E/IL-25    | 3p21.1     | Yes              |
| IL-17RC      | IL-17RL        | IL-17F, IL-17A          | 3p25.3     | Yes              |
| IL-17RD      | SEF            | FGF?                   | 3p21.2     | Yes              |
| IL-17RE      |                | Not determined          | 3p25.3     | Yes              |

family ligand, IL-17F (Hymowitz et al., 2001), albeit with 10- to 30-fold reduced affinity compared to IL-17A (S. Levin, personal communication). In contrast to the tissue-specific expression of IL-17A (Fossiez et al., 1996), IL-17RA is expressed essentially ubiquitously (Yao et al., 1995). It is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein receptor, containing an extracellular domain of 293 amino acids, a transmembrane domain of 21 amino acids, and a cytoplasmic domain of 525 amino acids. The IL-17RA has a molecular weight of 128–132 kDa, but usually migrates at larger sizes due to extensive and variable glycosylation (Yao et al., 1997; J. M. Kramer, unpublished data).

Surprisingly, the composition and stoichiometry of the IL-17A-binding complex has still not been completely defined. It is certain that IL-17RA is an essential subunit, as cells from IL-17RA knockout mice fail to bind IL-17A. However, IL-17A binds its receptor complex with a relatively low affinity, with reported $K_a$ values ranging from $2 \times 10^7/M$ to $2 \times 10^8/M$, whereas much lower doses of IL-17A (5 ng/ml) are able to elicit biological responses in target cells (Yao et al., 1997). These data hint that another subunit may be present in the IL-17RA signaling complex. Indeed, very recent work has demonstrated that IL-17RC may be this elusive second subunit (Toy et al., 2006). In this regard, all known cytokine receptors contain multiple subunits, and since IL-17A forms a homodimer, it was long assumed that the receptor was also homodimeric. Accordingly, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) analyses showed that the IL-17RA complex contains at least two identical subunits (Kramer et al., 2006). Notably, this interaction is observed in the absence of ligand, suggesting that the receptor complex is preassembled in the membrane, a phenomenon that has been observed for other cytokine receptors, particularly erythropoietin and TNF family receptors (Chan et al., 2000; Remy et al., 1999). Strikingly, addition of ligand (IL-17A or IL-17F) causes a loss of FRET, indicating that a conformational change occurs and/or that an additional protein is recruited to the receptor complex, thereby increasing the distance between IL-17RA monomers (Kramer et al., 2006). Since other IL-17 family cytokines are also homodimers, this may be a typical mode of IL-17 receptor interactions.
The IL-17RA receptor constitutes the founding member of a family composed of at least four other distantly related receptors (Table II). IL-17RB (also known as Evi-27 or IL-17rh-1), binds to IL-17B with a relatively high affinity of 7.6 nM ([Shi et al., 2000]). This receptor also binds to IL-17E, although direct affinity measurements were not reported ([Lee et al., 2001]). The IL-17RB protein has 19.2% and 18.2% protein sequence identity to the human and murine IL-17RA sequences, respectively. Unlike IL-17RA, several alternatively spliced forms of IL-17BR with different extracellular domains exist ([Moseley et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2000]), suggesting the intriguing likelihood of soluble “decoy” receptors and multiple potential ligands for this receptor ([Tian et al., 2000]). IL-17RB mRNA is present in several endocrine tissues, and is highly expressed in fetal and adult liver, kidney, pancreas, small intestine, and colon. The receptor is absent or at least poorly expressed in peripheral blood leukocytes and lymphoid organs ([Lee et al., 2001; Shi et al., 2000]). The IL-17RB locus is also a common site of retroviral integration in certain murine myeloid leukemias and thus may contribute to malignancy ([Tian et al., 2000]).

IL-17RC, first named IL-17 receptor like protein (IL-17RL), was also identified through database searches of human expressed sequence tags (ESTs) ([Haudenschild et al., 2002]). This protein is 22% identical and 34% similar to the human IL-17RA. The cytoplasmic domains of these proteins are most highly conserved, with 25% identity and 41% similarity. IL-17RC expression is quite ubiquitous, being highest in prostate, liver, kidney, muscle, and heart. This receptor has several splice variants, as four exons are frequently spliced out in various combinations, resulting in at least 12 possible proteins. The receptor is reported to have multiple molecular weights, ranging from 33–60 kDa, which corresponds with the high number of predicted splice variants. It was demonstrated that one splice variant of IL-17RC binds IL-17F with quite high affinity, both in humans and mice (S. Levin, personal communication). IL-17RC expression is reduced in prostate cancer compared to normal prostate, and expression correlates with Gleason grade. Therefore, redistribution of IL-17RC may indicate dysregulation of expression or signaling in prostate cancer ([Haudenschild et al., 2002; Moseley et al., 2003]). As indicated, at least one splice variant of IL-17RC appears to be an essential part of the IL-17A binding complex as well ([Toy et al., 2006]).

IL-17RD reveals a striking relationship between the IL-17R family and evolutionarily conserved molecules involved in embryonic development. First described as an inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling in zebrafish ([Tsang et al., 2002]), similar expression to fibroblast growth factor genes (SEF) and its mammalian counterparts (hSEF and mSEF in human and mouse, respectively) share sequence homology primarily with the intracellular domain of IL-17R family members ([Yang et al., 2003]). The extracellular domain of human SEF/IL-17RD shares seven potential sites for N-linked glycosylation, and eight cysteine residues are conserved among the extracellular domains of human, mouse, and zebrafish SEF homologs.This receptor is found in numerous cell types, with especially high expression in ovary, breast, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, and colon. Similar to its role in zebrafish and *Xenopus laevis*, hSEF coimmunoprecipitates with human FGF receptor 1 and inhibits FGF-dependent signaling through Ras-mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase (MAPK) pathways ([Tsang and Dawid, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0308569101); [Xiong et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Yang et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). The ligand(s) for IL-17RD are not known; in fact, the extracellular domain of SEF is dispensable for its ability to inhibit FGF signal transduction ([Tsang et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205576200)).

IL-17RE was identified by bioinformatics efforts to identify receptor proteins ([Clark et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)), but nothing is presently known about its ligand specificity or biological functions. In addition, IL-17R homologs have been reported in sea lamprey ([Pancer et al., 2004](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)), dog, cow, and chicken (NCBI nucleotide database).

Interactions among IL-17 family cytokines and receptors are emerging as a complex story (Table II). Both IL-17A and IL-17F interact with IL-17RA, although the IL-17F affinity is one to two orders of magnitude less than that of IL-17A ([Hymowitz et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). IL-17A also binds to IL-17RC ([Toy et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). Further studies demonstrate that IL-17F binds to IL-17RC (S. Levin, personal communication). Similarly, IL-17B and IL-17E/IL-25 both bind IL-17RB. No receptors are identified for IL-17C and IL-17D ([Aggarwal and Gurney, 2002](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)), and no ligand has been found for SEF or IL-17RE ([Clark et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Kolls and Linden, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). Understanding interactions among IL-17 and IL-17R family members is perhaps valuable in understanding and treating a wide variety of disease ranging from cancer to cystic fibrosis.

### III. IL-17A IN VIVO

#### A. TH17, A NEW T CELL SUBSET

Shortly after its discovery, it became clear that IL-17A was secreted primarily, if not exclusively by activated T lymphocytes in response to stimulation through the T cell receptor ([Fossiez et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). Because these T cells were CD62L-CD44+CD45RO+, they were classified as effector memory cells ([Shin et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). However, efforts to assign IL-17 to a Th1 or Th2 subset were largely unsuccessful. A major advance in understanding IL-17A biology was made with the appreciation that the IL-12 family cytokine, IL-23, drives IL-17A expression in a CD4+ T cell subset, termed “Th17” ([Aggarwal et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Ghilardi et al., 2004](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Happel et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Liu et al., 2005](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). Recent developments have modified this model, showing that it is actually TGFβ and IL-6 that drive Th17 development, whereas IL-23 is important for expanding this population ([Bettelli et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Mangan et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200); [Veldhoen et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305857200)). This “pathological” T cell population produces IL-17A as well as IL-17F, TNF-α, IL-6, and increased expressionof numerous chemokines and chemokine receptors. This population is postulated to arise as a unique T helper cell subset (Bettelli and Kuchroo, 2005; Langrish *et al.*, 2005). Strikingly, IL-17A-producing cells are sufficient to drive pathology in an EAE model (Langrish *et al.*, 2005). Consistent with this, IL-23-driven T cells produce IL-17A but not IFN-$\gamma$, whereas IL-12-driven Th1 cells produce IFN-$\gamma$ but not IL-17A, suggesting a stage of T cell differentiation independent of Th1. Two studies have confirmed and extended these findings, showing that differentiation to the Th17 lineage can be generated in STAT4${}^{-/-}$ and STAT6${}^{-/-}$ mice. Moreover, IFN-$\gamma$ and IL-4 both suppress development of the Th17 population, further supporting its existence as a unique subset (Harrington *et al.*, 2005; Park *et al.*, 2005). Finally, some studies have shown that IL-15 also appears to trigger IL-17A production in T cells (Ziolkowska *et al.*, 2000). Most interestingly, Th17 cells appear to develop in opposition to suppressive “Tregulatory” cells, suggesting another reason for the role of IL-17A in autoimmunity (Bettelli *et al.*, 2006).

The major source of IL-23 driving Th${}_{IL-17}$ differentiation appears to be bone marrow derived dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages (Aggarwal *et al.*, 2002; Liu *et al.*, 2005), although it has also been reported in fibroblasts (Zhang *et al.*, 2005). IL-23 and IL-17 are part of a homeostatic feedback loop regulating granulopoiesis. Specifically, phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils inhibits IL-23 secretion by macrophages and dendritic cells, which in turn reduces levels of IL-17A-secreting T cells (Stark *et al.*, 2005). IL-17A is a major stimulator of neutrophil-activating chemokines as well as G-CSF and GM-CSF (Linden *et al.*, 2005). Consequently, in mice that lack leukocyte adhesion molecules or other neutrophil-trafficking defects, apoptotic neutrophils cannot migrate into tissues to be phagocytosed, and thus IL-17A secretion is not restricted. As a result, these mice have elevated granulopoiesis and excessive numbers of circulating neutrophils (Stark *et al.*, 2005). Consistent with this, IL-17A receptors are downregulated on human polymorpho nuclear cells (PMNs) during apoptosis (Kobayashi *et al.*, 2003).

While IL-23 is clearly important for maximal expression of IL-17A *in vivo* (Happel *et al.*, 2003), signals from the T cell receptor are also critical (Liu *et al.*, 2004, 2005), and production of IL-17A can be completely blocked with the immunosuppressant cyclosporine A (Liu *et al.*, 2004; Ziolkowska *et al.*, 2000). Consistent with this, characterization of the human IL-17A proximal promoter has identified two essential nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)-binding sites required for transcriptional activation of a linked reporter (Liu *et al.*, 2004). The murine IL-17A promoter is surprisingly divergent from the human promoter, although NFAT sites are also present upstream of the transcriptional start site and it is also sensitive to cyclosporine A (Liu *et al.*, 2004, 2005; X. K. Liu, unpublished observations). In this regard, the role of T cell costimulation in regulating IL-17A expression is somewhat confusing. In human cells, costimulation of the T cell receptor (CD3) through CD28 signaling leads to strongly enhanced IL-17A
production, similar to the hallmark T cell cytokine, IL-2. Moreover, human cells with a defective CD28-signaling pathway fail to show any costimulation of the IL-17A promoter (Liu *et al.*, 2004). It is known that CD28 costimulation of the IL-2 gene requires activation of the NF-$\kappa$B pathway, and there is a key NF-$\kappa$B-binding site in the IL-2 promoter that responds to these signals (Lin and Wang, 2004). However, there is no apparent NF-$\kappa$B target site in the human IL-17A proximal promoter (Liu *et al.*, 2004). Moreover, the mouse IL-17A gene is neither enhanced in a substantive way by costimulatory signals from CD28 (Liu *et al.*, 2005) nor is there evidence for a functional NF-$\kappa$B element in the mouse IL-17A proximal promoter. However, mice deficient in another CD28-related costimulatory molecule, inducible costimulator (ICOS), are defective in IL-17A production, and these mice are also highly resistant to autoimmune conditions such as collagen-induced arthritis (Dong and Nurieva, 2003). In the same regard, the TNF$\alpha$ receptor (TNFR) family costimulator, OX40, has also been implicated in IL-17A expression *in vivo* (Nakae *et al.*, 2003b). Surprisingly, studies *in vitro* did not find a noteworthy costimulatory effect of ICOS or OX40 (or several other costimulators) on IL-17A production in murine T cells (Liu *et al.*, 2005). Therefore, the means by which IL-17A expression is controlled in T cells remains an important area of inquiry.

### B. IL-17A IN AUTOIMMUNE/INFLAMMATORY DISEASES

The proinflammatory functions of IL-17A have been examined in many contexts. *In vitro*, IL-17A has been shown to augment the activities of several classic inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-$\alpha$, IL-1$\beta$, and IFN-$\gamma$ (Albanesi *et al.*, 1999; Chabaud *et al.*, 1998; Miossec, 2003; Shen *et al.*, 2005). IL-17A in humans has been associated with pathology in numerous autoimmune and inflammatory conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis (Kotake *et al.*, 1999; Van Bezooijen *et al.*, 1999), systemic lupus erythematosus (Wong *et al.*, 2000), multiple sclerosis (Matusevicius *et al.*, 1999), psoriasis (Arican *et al.*, 2005; Teunissen *et al.*, 1998), asthma (Laan *et al.*, 1999), cystic fibrosis (McAllister *et al.*, 2005), and Crohn’s disease (Fujino *et al.*, 2003; Yen *et al.*, 2006). Particular attention has been paid to the role of IL-17A in arthritis in animal models, both collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) (Dong and Nurieva, 2003; Gaffen, 2004; Kolls and Linden, 2004; Lubberts *et al.*, 2003; Nakae *et al.*, 2003a) and streptococcal cell wall–induced arthritis (Koenders *et al.*, 2005; Lubberts *et al.*, 2005b). These studies and many others have shown an association with IL-17A signaling and upregulation of joint destructive factors (Fig. 1) (Lubberts *et al.*, 2005a).

Considerable emerging evidence shows that IL-17A plays an essential, nonredundant role in neutrophil activation, maturation, and homeostasis (Kolls and Linden, 2004), but how this relates to arthritis pathology is still unclear. Several studies have linked the neutrophil recruitment activity of

DC
MHC II-Ag: TCR
IL-23
CD4+
Th0
Th1
IFN-γ
Th2
IL-4
Th17
IL-17A
IL-17F
TNF-α
Neutrophil
recruitment
G-CSF
GM-CSF
ICAM-1
CXCL1
CXCL5
Lymphocyte
recruitment
IP-10
MIG
Monocyte
recruitment
MCP-1
MCP-3
Increased host
defense, pathogen
elimination
Fibroblasts
Osteoblasts
Endothelial cells
Epithelial cells
IL-6, ICAM-1
Nitric oxide, PGE₂
Increased inflammation
Bone destruction
Airway hyperreactivity
Autoimmunity
Pathogen
IL-17A
IL-17RA

FIGURE 1. IL-17A in inflammation and disease. Dendritic cells (DCs) produce IL-23, which drives development of the “Th17” subset of T cells that secrete IL-17A, IL-17F, and TNF-α. IL-17A (and, to a lesser extent, IL-17F) bind to the IL-17RA on numerous target cells, including fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and epithelial/endothelial cells. Signals from IL-17RA lead to expression of a variety of inflammatory genes, particularly chemokines and cytokines that promote granulocyte hematopoiesis and recruitment. Depending on context, these inflammatory signals can be pathogenic (as in RA and EAE) or protective (as in various infectious diseases).

IL-17A to bone and joint destruction. Based on microarray data, IL-17A, particularly in concert with TNF-$\alpha$, significantly upregulates neutrophil-attracting chemokines such as LPS-inducible CXC chemokine, CXCL5 (LIX) and keratinocyte-derived chemokine, CXCL1 or Gro$\alpha$ (KC) in osteoblast and bone marrow stromal cells ([Shen *et al.*, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bmt.1704962)). In light of the strong association of IL-17A with RA, and the presence of extensive neutrophil populations in synovium of arthritic joints, it has been suggested that IL-17A plays a direct role in recruiting neutrophils to synovium and mediating joint destruction through release of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species ([Liew and McInnes, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2005.02.001)).

Because IL-17A drives bone-resorptive activities in the context of arthritis, some studies have examined IL-17A as a potential mediator of inflammatory bone pathology in periodontal disease ([Takahashi *et al.*, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2005.02.016)). Consistent with this, IL-17A mRNA has been found in gingival crevicular fluid of some patients with severe periodontal disease ([Johnson *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.42.1.346-352.2004)), but a direct mechanistic link to pathology has not yet been established. Conversely, neutrophils play an undisputed protective role in host defense against periodontal infection ([Kantarci *et al.*, 2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.41.1.274-280.2003)), and the profound effects of IL-17A on promoting neutrophil activity may prove to be more important than its bone resorptive activity in the context of periodontal disease (J. J. Yu *et al.*, unpublished data).

### C. IL-17A IN INFECTIOUS DISEASE

Despite its apparent pathologic role in autoimmunity and some inflammatory conditions, IL-17 plays a protective role in many infectious settings. Studies of bacterial infections ([*Klebsiella pneumoniae*](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00507-5) [Ye *et al.*, 2001], [*Porphyromonas gingivalis*](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.41.1.274-280.2003) (J. J. Yu *et al.*, unpublished data), parasitic infections (*Toxoplasma gondii*) ([Kelly *et al.*, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2005.01.005)), and fungal infections (*Candida albicans*) ([Huang *et al.*, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2004.02.037)]) have revealed that a deficiency in IL-17 signaling in IL-17RA-deficient mice results in a more severe disease course than in wild-type animals ([Ye *et al.*, 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00507-5)). In most cases, this has been linked to a failure to expand and/or recruit neutrophils rather than an inherent defect in neutrophil function. For example, in mice infected with *K. pneumoniae* or *C. albicans*, an IL-17RA-deficiency caused reduced production of neutrophil-attractive CXC chemokines as well as granulopoietic cytokines ([Kelly *et al.*, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2005.01.005); [Ye *et al.*, 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00507-5)). Similarly, in *P. gingivalis*-infected IL-17RKO mice, neutrophils failed to be recruited to the site of infected gingiva, apparently due to reduced LIX/CXCL5 and KC/CXCL1 expression (J. J. Yu, unpublished observations). In some cases, contributions of IL-17A have been inferred through studies of IL-23. For example, in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* infection, pulmonary IL-23 administration enhanced protective immunity by driving IL-17A production from lung T cells; moreover, IL-23-deficient mice show a reduction in both IL-17A-producing

M. tuberculosis–specific T cells and IL-12p70-independent protection from infection (Happel *et al.*, 2005; Khader *et al.*, 2005).

Notably, IL-17A does not play a defensive role in all infectious diseases. For example, in murine schistosomiasis, hepatic granuloma formation was linked to high levels of IL-17A. Moreover, neutralizing IL-17A antibody treatment reduced granuloma size (Rutitzky *et al.*, 2005). Consistent with this, IL-17RA-deficient mice show a reduced worm burden on *Schistosoma mansoni* infection (C. Carvalho-Queiroz, P. T. Loverde, and S. L. Gaffen, unpublished observations). The underlying mechanism for the role of IL-17A (and perhaps IL-17F) in this disease is not understood. Therefore, these findings warrant examination of IL-17A in other infections that rely on nonneutrophil-mediated immunity.

# D. IL-17A IN CANCER

IL-17A has been linked with the pathogenesis of several malignancies, particularly those associated with production of inflammatory molecules. For example, a human cervical carcinoma cell line transfected with IL-17A caused significantly larger tumors in nude mice than untransfected cells (Tartour *et al.*, 1999). It was subsequently shown that, in addition to its ability to upregulate proangiogenic factors in target cells, IL-17A itself was proangiogenic (Numasaki *et al.*, 2003). Moreover, IL-17A selectively augments secretion of angiogenic CXC chemokines but not angiostatic chemokines in the context of non-small cell lung cancer implanted in SCID mice (Numasaki *et al.*, 2005). In humans, elevated levels of IL-17A are found in patients with ovarian cancer (Kato *et al.*, 2001), Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Maggio *et al.*, 2002), benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatic carcinoma (Steiner *et al.*, 2003), and cutaneous T cell lymphomas such as mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome (Ciree *et al.*, 2004).

Conversely, the proinflammatory action of IL-17A has also been considered to be a protective factor in some cancer settings via augmentation of antitumor immunity. For example, murine Meth-A fibrosarcoma cells transfected with IL-17A were readily rejected by immunocompetent mice, whereas untransfected cells were not. The increased rejection was associated with increased MHC class I and class II expression in transfected cells (Hirahara *et al.*, 2001). Similarly, some hematopoietic tumors transfected with IL-17A exhibited impaired growth, associated with increased generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for tumor antigens (Benchetrit *et al.*, 2002). Finally, preincubation of U-2 OS osteosarcoma cells with IL-17A increased NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity through increased expression of fibronectin (Honorati *et al.*, 2003). Thus, like many aspects of the immune system, IL-17 can have both pro- and antineoplastic effects, depending on the immunogenicity of the tumor cell, as well as the mechanism of tumorigenesis that is unique to each tumor type.

IV. GENE TARGETS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION

While considerable information regarding the biological roles of IL-17A and its receptor has been obtained, surprisingly little is known about the molecular mechanics of IL-17RA-mediated signal transduction. Even less is known about signaling by other IL-17R family members, so the following sections will deal only with IL-17RA-mediated events. However, as these become elucidated for IL-17RA, they are likely to apply to other IL-17R family members as well.

### A. MAJOR GENE TARGETS

The endpoint of most signaling pathways is specific gene transcription. Many genes have been defined as specific targets of IL-17RA signaling, the majority of which are inflammatory in nature. One of the earliest IL-17A target genes identified was IL-6 (Yao *et al.*, 1995), which is still the standard bioassay for IL-17A activity. This cytokine is induced by IL-17A in numerous cell types, and it is regulated both at the transcriptional level and by mRNA stability. Moreover, IL-17A and TNF-$\alpha$ exhibit potent synergy in regulation of IL-6 expression. The mechanism(s) by which synergy occurs are still not completely defined, but evidence for cooperation at the transcriptional and mRNA stability level have been reported (Hata *et al.*, 2002; Hennessy *et al.*, 2004; Hwang *et al.*, 2004; Ruddy *et al.*, 2004b; Shimada *et al.*, 2002).

IL-17A is an important regulator of granulocyte generation and neutrophil trafficking. In this regard, other cytokines regulated by IL-17A include G-CSF and GM-CSF, which drive expansion and survival of the granulocyte and macrophage lineages. G-CSF can be induced by IL-17 in numerous cells, including human bronchial epithelial cells (Kolls and Linden, 2004; McAllister *et al.*, 2005). *In vivo*, local costimulation with mouse IL-17A together with TNF-$\alpha$ caused a potentiation of neutrophil accumulation of in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from mouse airways, and this effect could be blocked by a neutralizing anti-GM-CSF antibody (Laan *et al.*, 2003). In addition, adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of murine IL-17A in liver results in a transiently transgenic phenotype, with dramatic effects on granulopoiesis (Schwarzenberger *et al.*, 1998). Another interesting study revealed that in mice with neutrophil-trafficking defects, levels of G-CSF and IL-17A were elevated in proportion to the neutrophilia seen in these mice, regardless of the underlying mutation. Moreover, blocking IL-17A or G-CSF function significantly reduced neutrophil counts in severely neutrophilic mice. Thus, peripheral blood neutrophil numbers are regulated by a feedback loop involving G-CSF and IL-17A (Forlow *et al.*, 2001; Stark *et al.*, 2005).

IL-17A also induces expression of various chemokines, particularly those involved in neutrophil recruitment. CXCL8 (IL-8) was identified early as a human gene target of IL-17A, and CXCL1 (KC, Groα), CXCL2 (MIP2), and CXCL5 (LIX) were also subsequently identified as important targets in mice, both *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Kolls and Linden, 2004; Ruddy *et al.*, 2004a; Ye *et al.*, 2001). Specifically, in many IL-17RA-deficient mouse infection models, failures in host defense have been linked to reduction in chemokine production and neutrophil recruitment to infected sites. Consistent with this, ICAM-1, an adhesion molecule important for granulocyte recruitment and inflammation, is also induced strongly by IL-17A (Albanesi *et al.*, 1999; Schwandner *et al.*, 2000). Several studies have shown that CCL5 (RANTES), a chemokine primarily involved in recruiting T cells, monocytes, basophils, and eosinophils, is actually suppressed by IL-17A, either alone or in combination with TNF-α (Andoh *et al.*, 2002; Maertzdorf *et al.*, 2002; Shen *et al.*, 2005). However, the significance of this finding is not clear, although it may relate to the decreased sensitivity of IL-17RA-deficient mice to murine Schistosomiasis (Rutitzky *et al.*, 2005).

A variety of other inflammatory genes are induced by IL-17A. For example, several studies showed that IL-17A enhances prostaglandin E₂ production via upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) (Fossiez *et al.*, 1996; LeGrand *et al.*, 2001; Shalom-Barak *et al.*, 1998). IL-17A induction of COX-2 gene expression is initiated ATF2/CREB transactivation of the proximal promoter and stabilized by the stress-activated protein kinase 2/p38 MAPK cascade. Adding IL-17A to cells stabilized COX-2 mRNA, a process compromised by MAPK inhibitors (Faour *et al.*, 2003). Nitric oxide (NO) is another important signaling molecule in inflammation, and pathogenic NO is produced mainly by inducible NO synthase (iNOS) during inflammatory events. IL-17A triggers a dose- and time-dependent increase in the level of NO in various cell types, and iNOS is induced by IL-17A in chondrocytes (Martel-Pelletier *et al.*, 1999), mouse and rat primary astrocytes (Trajkovic *et al.*, 2001), and menisci from patients with osteoarthritis (LeGrand *et al.*, 2001). The iNOS gene is regulated by NF-κB and MAPK pathways (Martel-Pelletier *et al.*, 1999; Shalom-Barak *et al.*, 1998) but may also be partly regulated through IRF-1 activation (Miljkovic and Trajkovic, 2004; Miljkovic *et al.*, 2005). IL-17A-mediated enhancement of NO is independent of IL-1β, as a soluble IL-1 receptor cannot block IL-17A-induced NO production (Attur *et al.*, 1997).

Considerable data implicates IL-17A as a bone destructive factor in arthritis (Gaffen, 2004). The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are potent mediators of tissue damage in arthritis, and MMP-3 and MMP-13 are induced by IL-17A in bovine chondrocytes (Liacini *et al.*, 2005b), subepithelial myofibroblasts (Bamba *et al.*, 2003), fetal mouse metatarsals (Van Bezooijen *et al.*, 2002), and human synovial fibroblasts (Liacini *et al.*, 2005a). IL-17A also increases concentrations of biologically active MMP-9 and MMP-1
(Chabaud *et al.*, 2000; Jovanovic *et al.*, 2000; Praise *et al.*, 2004). Moreover, IL-17A was also shown to stimulate a dose-dependent release of proteoglycan and type II collagen from cartilage explants via increased MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-13 expression, which was completely inhibited by tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 or BB-94, a synthetic metalloproteinase inhibitor (Koshy *et al.*, 2002). As with many other IL-17RA target genes, the NF-$\kappa$B and MAPK pathways appear to be involved in MMP gene regulation. For example, IL-17A-induced MMP-9 expression is dependent on both MAPK and NF-$\kappa$B (Jovanovic *et al.*, 2000), while IL-17-inducible AP-1 DNA-binding activity is essential for both basal and cytokine-induced MMP-13 promoter activity. IL-17A also increases the concentration of biologically active MMP-9 and MMP-1 (Chabaud *et al.*, 2000; Jovanovic *et al.*, 2000; Praise *et al.*, 2004).

A number of other genes with inflammatory activities are induced by IL-17A, alone or combination with other inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-$\alpha$ or IL-1$\beta$. For example, the acute phase protein 24p3/lipocalin 2 is strongly enhanced by IL-17A in osteoblasts and bone marrow stromal cells (Shen *et al.*, 2005, 2006). 24p3 exhibits potent antibacterial functions by competing with bacterial siderophores to limit concentrations of free iron in blood, and thus may be involved in IL-17A-mediated host defense to certain types of bacterial infections (Flo *et al.*, 2004). IL-17A also enhances expression of $\beta$-defensins (Kao *et al.*, 2004), IkB$\zeta$ (Shen *et al.*, 2005) and C/EBP family transcription factors (Ruddy *et al.*, 2004b) (see Section IV.B). Although the entire spectrum of IL-17A target genes has probably not been completely defined, it is clear that the major function of IL-17A *in vivo* is to promote inflammation, which is reflected in the genes it regulates.

## B. MAJOR SIGNALING PATHWAYS

On its discovery, IL-17RA shared no apparent homology with other known receptor proteins, making it impossible to predict signaling function on the basis of receptor primary structure. However, early studies showed that IL-17A activated the NF-$\kappa$B pathway (Yao *et al.*, 1995), a classic inflammatory signaling pathway activated by diverse stimuli including antigen receptors, inflammatory cytokines, Toll-like receptors, and UV light (Lin and Wang, 2004). Although the means by which IL-17RA signaling leads to NF-$\kappa$B activation is still poorly understood, a bioinformatics analysis has proposed that IL-17R family members contain a region within the intracellular tail that appears to be homologous to the TIR domain, a functional motif present in TLR and IL-1 receptors. The TIR domain is a site of interaction for other TIR-containing molecules such as MyD88 (Novatchkova *et al.*, 2003), which in turn initiate intracellular signaling cascades leading to NF-$\kappa$B activation. However, the functionality of this
putative signaling motif in IL-17RA has not been verified experimentally. Its homology with the TIR domain suggests that IL-17RA may activate signaling components common to TIR-domain containing receptors such as the IL-1R. Consistent with this, IL-17A-induced NF-κB activation is dependent on the molecule TRAF6 (Awane *et al.*, 1999; Schwandner *et al.*, 2000), which is also recruited by IL-1β and TLRs. However, there are no obvious TRAF6-binding domains within IL-17RA (Pullen *et al.*, 1999), and therefore, it is likely that TRAF6 does not bind IL-17RA directly, but rather bridges it through MyD88 or a related adaptor. Moreover, the downstream effectors of TRAF6 in the IL-17RA signaling pathway have not been defined, and it remains to be seen if IL-17A, IL-1β, or TLR ligands activate the same signaling pathways. Also consistent with a key role for NF-κB, the majority of IL-17A target genes contain NF-κB sites in their proximal promoters, and in some cases it has been shown directly that these sites are indeed essential for IL-17A-mediated transcription (Ruddy *et al.*, 2004b). Although it is certainly clear that IL-17A activates NF-κB, in many cell types NF-κB activation is considerably lower than the level of activation induced by other inflammatory stimuli such as LPS or TNF-α, even at very high concentrations of IL-17A (Hwang *et al.*, 2004; Ruddy *et al.*, 2004b). Therefore, given the powerful *in vivo* effects of IL-17, it is likely that this cytokine activates additional signaling pathways.

While NF-κB is one essential transcription factor activated by IL-17A, microarray studies examining IL-17A-induced target genes revealed that members of the C/EBP family [also known as the NF-IL6 transcription factors (Ramji and Foka, 2002)] were also involved in IL-17A signal transduction (Fig. 2). Specifically, treatment of various cell types with IL-17A and/or TNF-α lead to upregulation of expression of C/EBPδ and C/EBPβ mRNA (Shen *et al.*, 2005). In the IL-6 promoter, the NF-κB site and C/EBP sites are both essential for IL-17A/TNF-α-mediated promoter activation. Moreover, C/EBP-deficient cells fail to induce IL-6 in response to IL-17A, and overexpression of C/EBPβ or C/EBPδ can partly substitute for IL-17A-mediated signal transduction (Ruddy *et al.*, 2004b). Strikingly, many other IL-17A-induced genes such as COX2, 24p3, and CXCL1 also contain conserved C/EBP and NF-κB promoter elements in their minimal promoters, suggesting a common pathway by which IL-17A may activate transcription of target genes through both NF-κB and C/EBP (Shen *et al.*, 2006). C/EBP protein expression and activities are regulated both transcriptionally and by post-transcriptional events. For example, phosphorylation of C/EBPβ has been suggested to be required for its nuclear localization (Piwien Pilipuk *et al.*, 2003; Ramji and Foka, 2002). In this regard, a number of kinases have been implicated in phosphorylation of C/EBPβ, including MAPK and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) (Tang *et al.*, 2005). The C/EBPδ gene is also capable of autoregulation, as its own promoter contains a functional C/EBP DNA-binding site (Yamada *et al.*, 1998). Since C/EBP family members are

FIGURE 2. Role of C/EBP in IL-17RA-mediated signal transduction. Treatment of target cells with IL-17A and/or TNF-$\alpha$ leads to activation of the NF-$\kappa$B and MAPK pathways, probably through the adaptors MyD88 and TRAF6. These signals lead to transcriptional upregulation of various C/EBP isoforms, especially C/EBP$\delta$, as well as posttranscriptional modification (e.g., phosphorylation) of C/EBP$\beta$. In addition, critical C/EBP DNA-binding sites are present in the promoters of both the C/EBP$\delta$ and IL-6 genes, leading to further enhancement of C/EBP-dependent gene activation.

also transcriptional targets of IL-17A signaling, this suggests a positive reinforcement of IL-17A signaling mediated via C/EBP expression (Fig. 2).

Considerable evidence supports a role for the MAP kinases ERK1, ERK2, JNK, and p38 in IL-17A receptor signaling. Numerous studies using kinase-specific inhibitors showed blunted IL-17A activation of MAPKs and inhibited expression of respective target genes (Laan *et al.*, 2001; Martel-Pelletier *et al.*, 1999; Shalom-Barak *et al.*, 1998). Although never proven directly, it is likely that the MAPK pathway is downstream of TRAF6 (Schwandner *et al.*, 2000), as it is in TLR-signaling pathways. One key function of IL-17A-induced MAPK activation may be to regulate mRNA stability. For example, IL-17 increased COX-2 reporter gene mRNA stability and protein synthesis via distal regions of the 3'-untranslated region.
This response was mediated entirely by p38 MAPK cascade (Faour *et al.*, 2003). Other genes such as IL-6 are probably also regulated by mRNA stability through the MAPK pathway (Henness *et al.*, 2004). MAPK signaling probably also activates the AP1 transcription factor complex, which is classically composed of c-fos (induced by the p38 MAPK pathway) and c-Jun (activated by the JNK pathway). Numerous IL-17A target genes contain important AP1 DNA-binding elements, and are probably the endpoints of MAPK-signaling pathways. It has also been suggested that the MAPK pathway is another point of synergy between IL-17A and TNF-$\alpha$ signaling (Tokuda *et al.*, 2004).

Additional kinase pathways may also be involved in IL-17RA signaling. For example, a specific src kinase inhibitor was shown to reduce IL-6, IL-8, and MCP-1 mRNA expression stimulated by IL-17A in a dose-dependent manner (Hsieh *et al.*, 2002). Although some reports have suggested that the JAK-STAT pathway may be involved in IL-17A-mediated signaling, none of the data are especially convincing (Subramaniam *et al.*, 1999); moreover, a report showed that IL-17A treatment increased IL-6 expression in STAT1-deficient fibroblasts, thus indicating that STAT1 activation and subsequent IRF-1 transcription are not required for induction of IL-6 (Samardzic *et al.*, 2001). It has also been suggested that IL-17A also activates the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K)/Akt signaling pathway and that this event is upstream of IL-6 and IL-8 gene expression (Hwang *et al.*, 2004). If true, PI-3K signaling may intersect the NF-$\kappa$B pathway, analogous to signals in the T cell receptor system (Kane *et al.*, 1999). In summary, there remains much to be learned about the mechanisms of IL-17RA signal transduction, and elucidation of such pathways may eventually be the basis for rational drug design for diseases involving this cytokine.

## V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The genomics era has revealed the existence of many new cytokines. The IL-17 family of cytokines and receptors remain enigmatic in their ligand–receptor relationships, functions, and signaling mechanisms, but their biological significance is rapidly becoming appreciated.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

SLG was supported by the NIH (AR050458) and the Arthritis Foundation. JMK was supported by an individual predoctoral training grant (DE01483) and JJY was supported by the Medical Scientist Training Program at the University at Buffalo and an Oral Biology training grant (DE007034). We thank Dr. Steven Levin of Zymogenetics for sharing unpublished information and Dr. Matthew Ruddy for critical reading of the chapter.
Aggarwal, S., Ghilardi, N., Xie, M. H., De Sauvage, F. J., and Gurney, A. L. (2002). Interleukin 23 promotes a distinct CD4 T cell activation state characterized by the production of interleukin 17. *J. Biol. Chem.* 3, 1910–1914.

Aggarwal, S., and Gurney, A. L. (2002). IL-17: A prototype member of an emerging family. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* 71, 1–8.

Albanesi, C., Cavani, A., and Girolomoni, G. (1999). IL-17 is produced by nickel-specific T lymphocytes and regulates ICAM-1 expression and chemokine production in human keratinocytes: Synergistic or antagonistic effects with IFN-$\gamma$ and TNF-$\alpha$. *J. Immunol.* 162, 494–502.

Andoh, A., Fujino, S., Bamba, S., Araki, Y., Okuno, T., Bamba, T., and Fujiyama, Y. (2002). IL-17 selectively down-regulates TNF-alpha-induced RANTES gene expression in human colonic subepithelial myofibroblasts. *J. Immunol.* 169, 1683–1687.

Arican, O., Aral, M., Sasmaz, S., and Ciragil, P. (2005). Serum Levels of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-17, and IL-18 in patients with active psoriasis and correlation with disease severity. *Mediators Inflamm.* 2005, 273–279.

Attur, M. G., Patel, R. N., Abramson, S. B., and Amin, A. R. (1997). Interleukin-17 upregulation of nitric oxide production in human osteoarthritis cartilage. *Arthritis Rheum.* 40, 1050–1053.

Awane, M., Andres, P. G., Li, D. J., and Reinecker, H. C. (1999). NF-kappa B-inducing kinase is a common mediator of IL-17-, TNF-alpha-, and IL-1 beta-induced chemokine promoter activation in intestinal epithelial cells. *J. Immunol.* 162, 5337–5344.

Bamba, S., Andoh, A., Yasui, H., Araki, Y., Bamba, T., and Fujiyama, Y. (2003). Matrix metalloproteinase-3 secretion from human colonic subepithelial myofibroblasts: Role of interleukin-17. *J. Gastroenterol.* 38, 548–554.

Benchetrit, F., Ciree, A., Vives, V., Warnier, G., Gey, A., Sautes-Fridman, C., Fossiez, F., Haicheur, N., Fridman, W. H., and Tartour, E. (2002). Interleukin-17 inhibits tumor cell growth by means of a T-cell-dependent mechanism. *Blood* 99, 2114–2121.

Bettelli, E., and Kuchroo, V. K. (2005). IL-12– and IL-23–induced T helper cell subsets: Birds of the same feather flock together. *J. Exp. Med.* 201, 169–171.

Bettelli, E., Carrier, Y., Gao, W., Korn, T., Strom, T. B., Oukka, M., Weiner, H. L., and Kuchroo, V. J. (2006). Reciprocal developmental pathways for the generation of pathogenic effector $T_{H}17$ and regulatory T cells. *Nature* 441, 235–238.

Chabaud, M., Fossiez, F., Taupin, J. L., and Miossec, P. (1998). Enhancing effect of IL-17 on IL-1–induced IL-6 and leukemia inhibitory factor production by rheumatoid arthritis synoviocytes and its regulation by Th2 cytokines. *J. Immunol.* 161, 409–414.

Chabaud, M., Garnero, P., Dayer, J. M., Guerne, P. A., Fossiez, F., and Miossec, P. (2000). Contribution of interleukin 17 to synovium matrix destruction in rheumatoid arthritis. *Cytokine* 12, 1092–1099.

Chan, F. K., Chun, H. J., Zheng, L., Siegel, R. M., Bui, K. L., and Lenardo, M. J. (2000). A domain in TNF receptors that mediates ligand-independent receptor assembly and signaling. *Science* 288, 2351–2354.

Chen, A., Laurence, A., Kanno, Y., Pacher-Zavisin, M., Zhu, B.-M., Tato, C., Yoshimura, A., Hennighausen, L., and O’Shea, J. J. (2006). Selective regulatory function of Socs3 in the formation of IL-17-secreting cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103, 8137–8142.

Ciree, A., Michel, L., Camilleri-Broet, S., Jean Louis, F., Oster, M., Flageul, B., Senet, P., Fossiez, F., Fridman, W. H., Bachelez, H., and Tartour, E. (2004). Expression and activity of IL-17 in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome). *Int. J. Cancer* 112, 113–120.

Clark, H. F., Gurney, A. L., Abaya, E., Baker, K., Baldwin, D., Brush, J., Chen, J., Chow, B., Chui, C., Crowley, C., Currell, B., Deuel, B., et al. (2003). The secret protein discovery

initiative (SPDI), a large-scale effort to identify novel human secreted and transmembrane proteins: A bioinformatics assessment. *Genome Res.* 13, 2265–2270.

Dong, C., and Nurieva, R. I. (2003). Regulation of immune and autoimmune responses by ICOS. *J. Autoimmunity* 21, 255–260.

Eberl, M. (2002). Don’t count your interleukins before they’ve hatched. *Trends Immunol.* 23, 341–342.

Faour, W. H., Mancini, A., He, Q. W., and Di Battista, J. A. (2003). T-cell-derived interleukin-17 regulates the level and stability of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA through restricted activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade: Role of distal sequences in the 3′-untranslated region of COX-2 mRNA. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 26897–26907.

Flo, T. H., Smith, K. D., Sato, S., Rodriguez, D. J., Holmes, M. A., Strong, R. K., Akira, S., and Aderem, A. (2004). Lipocalin 2 mediates an innate immune response to bacterial infection by sequestrating iron. *Nature* 432, 917–921.

Forlow, S. B., Schurr, J. R., Kolls, J. K., Bagby, G. J., Schwarzenberger, P. O., and Ley, K. (2001). Increased granulopoiesis through interleukin-17 and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in leukocyte adhesion molecule-deficient mice. *Blood* 98, 3309–3314.

Fort, M. M., Cheung, J., Yen, D., Li, J., Zurawski, S. M., Lo, S., Menon, S., Clifford, T., Hunt, B., Lesley, R., Muchamuel, T., Hurst, S. D., *et al.* (2001). IL-25 induces IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and Th2-associated pathologies *in vivo*. *Immunity* 15, 985–995.

Fossiez, F., Djossou, O., Chomarat, P., Flores-Romo, L., Ait-Yahia, S., Maat, C., Pin, J.-J., Garrone, P., Garcia, E., Saeland, S., Blanchard, D., Gaillard, C., *et al.* (1996). T cell interleukin-17 induces stromal cells to produce proinflammatory and hematopoietic cytokines. *J. Exp. Med.* 183, 2593–2603.

Fujino, S., Andoh, A., Bamba, S., Ogawa, A., Hata, K., Araki, Y., Bamba, T., and Fujiyama, Y. (2003). Increased expression of interleukin 17 in inflammatory bowel disease. *Gut* 52, 65–70.

Gaffen, S. L. (2004). Interleukin-17: A unique inflammatory cytokine with roles in bone biology and arthritis. *Arth. Res. Ther.* 6, 240–247.

Ghilardi, N., Kljavin, N., Chen, Q., Lucas, S., Gurney, A., and de Sauvage, F. J. (2004). Compromised humoral and delayed-type hypersensitivity responses in IL-23–deficient mice. *J. Immunol.* 172, 2827–2833.

Happel, K. I., Lockhart, E. A., Mason, C. M., Porretta, E., Keoshkerian, E., Odden, A. R., Nelson, S., and Ramsay, A. J. (2005). Pulmonary interleukin-23 gene delivery increases local T-cell immunity and controls growth of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* in the lungs. *Infect. Immun.* 73, 5782–5788.

Happel, K. I., Zheng, M., Young, E., Quinton, L. J., Lockhart, E., Ramsay, A. J., Shellito, J. E., Schurr, J. R., Bagby, G. J., Nelson, S., and Kolls, J. K. (2003). Cutting Edge: Roles of Toll-like receptor 4 and IL-23 in IL-17 expression in response to *Klebsiella pneumoniae* Infection. *J. Immunol.* 170, 4432–4436.

Harrington, L. E., Hatton, R. D., Mangan, P. R., Turner, H., Murphy, T. L., Murphy, K. M., and Weaver, C. T. (2005). Interleukin 17–producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages. *Nat. Immunol.* 6, 1123–1132.

Hata, K., Andoh, A., Shimada, M., Fujino, S., Bamba, S., Araki, Y., Okuno, T., Fujiyama, Y., and Bamba, T. (2002). IL-17 stimulates inflammatory responses via NF-kappaB and MAP kinase pathways in human colonic myofibroblasts. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 282, G1035–G1044.

Haudenschild, D., Moseley, T., Rose, L., and Reddi, A. H. (2002). Soluble and transmembrane isoforms of novel interleukin-17 receptor-like protein by RNA splicing and expression in prostate cancer. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 4309–4316.

Henness, S., Johnson, C. K., Ge, Q., Armour, C. L., Hughes, J. M., and Ammit, A. J. (2004). IL-17A augments TNF-alpha-induced IL-6 expression in airway smooth muscle by enhancing mRNA stability. *J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.* 114, 958–964.

Hirahara, N., Nio, Y., Sasaki, S., Minari, Y., Takamura, M., Iguchi, C., Dong, M., Yamasawa, K., and Tamura, K. (2001). Inoculation of human interleukin-17 gene-transfected Meth-A fibrosarcoma cells induces T cell-dependent tumor-specific immunity in mice. *Oncology* 61, 79–89.

Honorati, M. C., Neri, S., Cattini, L., and Facchini, A. (2003). IL-17 enhances the susceptibility of U-2 OS osteosarcoma cells to NK cell lysis. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* 133, 344–349.

Hsieh, H. G., Loong, C. C., and Lin, C. Y. (2002). Interleukin-17 induces src/MAPK cascades activation in human renal epithelial cells. *Cytokine* 19, 159–174.

Huang, W., Na, L., Fidel, P. L., and Schwarzenberger, P. (2004). Requirement of interleukin-17A for systemic anti-Candida albicans host defense in mice. *J. Infect. Dis.* 190, 624–631.

Hurst, S. D., Muchamuel, T., Gorman, D. M., Gilbert, J. M., Clifford, T., Kwan, S., Menon, S., Seymour, B., Jackson, C., Kung, T. T., Brieland, J. K., Zurawski, S. M., *et al.* (2002). New IL-17 family members promote Th1 or Th2 responses in the lung: In vivo function of the novel cytokine IL-25. *J. Immunol.* 169, 443–453.

Hwang, S. Y., Kim, J. Y., Kim, K. W., Park, M. K., Moon, Y., Kim, W. U., and Kim, H. Y. (2004). IL-17 induces production of IL-6 and IL-8 in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts via NF-kappaB- and PI3-kinase/Akt-dependent pathways. *Arthritis Res. Ther.* 6, R120–128.

Hymowitz, S. G., Filvaroff, E. H., Yin, J. P., Lee, J., Cai, L., Risser, P., Maruoka, M., Mao, W., Foster, J., Kelley, R. F., Pan, G., Gurney, A. L., *et al.* (2001). IL-17s adopt a cystine knot fold: Structure and activity of a novel cytokine, IL-17F, and implications for receptor binding. *EMBO J.* 20, 5332–5341.

Johnson, R. B., Wood, N., and Serio, F. G. (2004). Interleukin-11 and IL-17 and the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. *J. Periodontol.* 75, 37–43.

Jovanovic, D. V., Martel-Pelletier, J., Di Battista, J. A., Mineau, F., Jolicoeur, F.-C., Benderdour, M., and Pelletier, J.-P. (2000). Stimulation of 92-kD gelatinase (matrix metalloproteinase 9) production by interleukin-17 in human monocyte/macrophages. *Arthritis Rheum.* 43, 1134–1144.

Kane, L. P., Shapiro, V. S., Stokoe, D., and Weiss, A. (1999). Induction of NF-kappaB by the Akt/PKB kinase. *Curr. Biol.* 9, 601–604.

Kantarci, A., Oyaizu, K., and Van Dyke, T. E. (2003). Neutrophil-mediated tissue injury in periodontal disease pathogenesis: Findings from localized aggressive periodontitis. *J. Periodontol.* 74, 66–75.

Kao, C. Y., Chen, Y., Thai, P., Wachi, S., Huang, F., Kim, C., Harper, R. W., and Wu, R. (2004). IL-17 markedly up-regulates beta-defensin-2 expression in human airway epithelium via JAK and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. *J. Immunol.* 173, 3482–3491.

Kato, T., Furumoto, H., Ogura, T., Onishi, Y., Irahara, M., Yamano, S., Kamada, M., and Aono, T. (2001). Expression of IL-17 mRNA in ovarian cancer. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 282, 735–738.

Kelly, M. N., Kolls, J. K., Happel, K., Schwartzman, J. D., Schwarzenberger, P., Combe, C., Moretto, M., and Khan, I. A. (2005). Interleukin-17/interleukin-17 receptor-mediated signaling is important for generation of an optimal polymorphonuclear response against *Toxoplasma gondii* infection. *Infect. Immun.* 73, 617–621.

Khader, S. A., Pearl, J. E., Sakamoto, K., Gilmartin, L., Bell, G. K., Jelley-Gibbs, D. M., Ghilardi, N., deSauvage, F., and Cooper, A. M. (2005). IL-23 compensates for the absence of IL-12p70 and is essential for the IL-17 response during tuberculosis but is dispensable for protection and antigen-specific IFN-gamma responses if IL-12p70 is available. *J. Immunol.* 175, 788–795.

Kim, M. R., Manoukian, R., Yeh, R., Silbiger, S. M., Danilenko, D. M., Scully, S., Sun, J., DeRose, M. L., Stolina, M., Chang, D., Van, G. Y., Clarkin, K., *et al.* (2002). Transgenic overexpression of human IL-17E results in eosinophilia, B-lymphocyte hyperplasia, and altered antibody production. *Blood* 100, 2330–2340.

Knappe, A., Hiller, C., Niphuis, H., Fossiez, F., Thurau, M., Wittmann, S., Kuhn, E. M., Lebecque, S., Bachereau, J., Rosenwirth, B., Fleckenstein, B., Heeney, J., *et al.* (1998). The interleukin-17 gene of herpesvirus saimiri. *J. Virol.* 72, 5797–5801.

Kobayashi, S. D., Voyich, J. M., Braughton, K. R., and DeLeo, F. R. (2003). Down-regulation of proinflammatory capacity during apoptosis in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. *J. Immunol.* 170, 3357–3368.

Koenders, M. I., Kolls, J. K., Oppers-Walgreen, B., van den Bersselaar, L., Joosten, L. A., Schurr, J. R., Schwarzenberger, P., van den Berg, W. B., and Lubberts, E. (2005). Interleukin-17 receptor deficiency results in impaired synovial expression of interleukin-1 and matrix metalloproteinases 3, 9, and 13 and prevents cartilage destruction during chronic reactivated streptococcal cell wall-induced arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* 52, 3239–3247.

Kolls, J. K., and Linden, A. (2004). Interleukin-17 family members and inflammation. *Immunity* 21, 467–476.

Koshy, P. J., Henderson, N., Logan, C., Life, P. F., Cawston, T. E., and Rowan, A. D. (2002). Interleukin 17 induces cartilage collagen breakdown: Novel synergistic effects in combination with proinflammatory cytokines. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* 61, 704–713.

Kotake, S., Udagawa, N., Takahashi, N., Matsuzaki, K., Itoh, K., Ishiyama, S., Saito, S., Inoue, K., Kamatani, N., Gillespie, M. T., Martin, T. J., and Suda, T. (1999). IL-17 in synovial fluids from patients with rheumatoid arthritis is a potent stimulator of osteoclastogenesis. *J. Clin. Invest.* 103, 1345–1352.

Kramer, J., Yi, L., Shen, F., Maitra, A., Jiao, X., Jin, T., and Gaffen, S. (2006). Cutting edge: Evidence for ligand-independent multimerization of the IL-17 receptor. *J. Immunol.* 176, 711–715.

Laan, M., Cui, A.-H., Hoshino, H., Lötvall, J., Sjöstrand, M., Gruenert, D. C., Skoogh, B.-E., and Lindén, A. (1999). Neutrophil recruitment by human IL-17 via C-X-C chemokine release in the airways. *J. Immunol.* 162, 2347–2352.

Laan, M., Lotvall, J., Chung, K. F., and Linden, A. (2001). IL-17–induced cytokine release in human bronchial epithelial cells *in vitro*: Role of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 133, 200–206.

Laan, M., Prause, O., Miyamoto, M., Sjostrand, M., Hytonen, A. M., Kaneko, T., Lotvall, J., and Linden, A. (2003). A role of GM-CSF in the accumulation of neutrophils in the airways caused by IL-17 and TNF-alpha. *Eur. Respir. J.* 21, 387–393.

Langrish, C. L., Chen, Y., Blumenschein, W. M., Mattson, J., Basham, B., Sedgwick, J. D., McClanahan, T., Kastelein, R. A., and Cua, D. J. (2005). IL-23 drives a pathogenic T cell population that induces autoimmune inflammation. *J. Exp. Med.* 201, 233–240.

Lee, J., Ho, W. H., Maruoka, M., Corpuz, R. T., Baldwin, D. T., Foster, J. S., Goddard, A. D., Yansura, D. G., Vandlen, R. L., Wood, W. I., and Gurney, A. L. (2001). IL-17E, a novel proinflammatory ligand for the IL-17 receptor homolog IL-17Rh1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 1660–1664.

LeGrand, A., Fermor, B., Fink, C., Pisetsky, D. S., Weinberg, J. B., Vail, T. P., and Guilak, F. (2001). Interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin-17 synergistically upregulate nitric oxide and prostaglandin E2 production in explants of human osteoarthritic knee menisci. *Arthritis Rheum.* 44, 2078–2083.

Li, H., Chen, J., Huang, A., Stinson, J., Heldens, S., Foster, J., Dowd, P., Gurney, A. L., and Wood, W. I. (2000). Cloning and characterization of IL-17B and IL-17C, two new members of the IL-17 family. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97, 773–778.

Liacini, A., Sylvester, J., Li, W. Q., and Zafarullah, M. (2005a). Mithramycin downregulates proinflammatory cytokine-induced matrix metalloproteinase gene expression in articular chondrocytes. *Arthritis Res. Ther.* 7, R777–R783.

Liacini, A., Sylvester, J., and Zafarullah, M. (2005b). Triptolide suppresses proinflammatory cytokine-induced matrix metalloproteinase and aggrecanase-1 gene expression in chondrocytes. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 327, 320–327.

Liew, F. Y., and McInnes, I. B. (2005). A fork in the pathway to inflammation and arthritis. *Nat. Med.* 11, 601–602.

Lin, X., and Wang, D. (2004). The roles of CARMA1, Bcl10, and MALT1 in antigen receptor signaling. *Semin. Immunol.* 16, 429–435.

Linden, A., Laan, M., and Anderson, G. (2005). Neutrophils, interleukin-17A and lung disease. *Eur. Respir. J.* 25, 159–172.

Liu, X., Lin, X., and Gaffen, S. L. (2004). Crucial role for nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) in T cell receptor-mediated regulation of the human interleukin-17 gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 52762–52771.

Liu, X. K., Clements, J. L., and Gaffen, S. L. (2005). Signaling through the murine T cell receptor induces IL-17 production in the absence of costimulation, IL-23 or dendritic cells. *Mol. Cells* 20, 329–337.

Lubberts, E., van den Bersselaar, L., Oppers-Walgreen, B., Schwarzenberger, P., Coenen-de Roo, C. J., Kolls, J. K., Joosten, L. A., and van den Berg, W. B. (2003). IL-17 promotes bone erosion in murine collagen-induced arthritis through loss of the receptor activator of NF-kappa B ligand/osteoprotegerin balance. *J. Immunol.* 170, 2655–2662.

Lubberts, E., Koenders, M. I., and van den Berg, W. B. (2005a). The role of T cell interleukin-17 in conducting destructive arthritis: Lessons from animal models. *Arthritis Res. Ther.* 7, 29–37.

Lubberts, E., Schwarzenberger, P., Huang, W., Schurr, J. R., Peschon, J. J., van den Berg, W. B., and Kolls, J. K. (2005b). Requirement of IL-17 receptor signaling in radiation-resistant cells in the joint for full progression of destructive synovitis. *J. Immunol.* 175, 3360–3368.

Maertzdorf, J., Osterhaus, A. D., and Verjans, G. M. (2002). IL-17 expression in human herpetic stromal keratitis: Modulatory effects on chemokine production by corneal fibroblasts. *J. Immunol.* 169, 5897–5903.

Maggio, E., van den Berg, A., Diepstra, A., Kluiver, J., Visser, L., and Poppema, S. (2002). Chemokines, cytokines and their receptors in Hodgkin’s lymphoma cell lines and tissues. *Ann. Oncol.* 13(Suppl. 1), 52–56.

Mangan, P. R., Harrington, L. E., O’Quinn, D. B., Helms, W. S., Bullard, D. C., Elson, C. O., Hatton, R. D., Wahl, S. M., Schoe, T. R., and Weaver, C. T. (2006). Transforming growth factor-β induces development of the T<sub>H</sub>17 lineage. *Nature* 441, 231–234.

Martel-Pelletier, J., Mineau, F., Jovanovic, D., Di Battista, J. A., and Pelletier, J. P. (1999). Mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor kappaB together regulate interleukin-17–induced nitric oxide production in human osteoarthritic chondrocytes: Possible role of transactivating factor mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP-KAPK). *Arthritis Rheum.* 42, 2399–2409.

Matusevicius, D., Kivisakk, P., He, B., Kostulas, N., Ozenci, V., Fredrikson, S., and Link, H. (1999). Interleukin-17 mRNA expression in blood and CSF mononuclear cells is augmented in multiple sclerosis. *Mult. Scler.* 5, 101–104.

McAllister, F., Henry, A., Kreindler, J. L., Dubin, P. J., Ulrich, L., Steele, C., Finder, J. D., Pilewski, J. M., Carreno, B. M., Goldman, S. J., Pirhonen, J., and Kolls, J. K. (2005). Role of IL-17A, IL-17F, and the IL-17 receptor in regulating growth-related oncogene-alpha and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in bronchial epithelium: Implications for airway inflammation in cystic fibrosis. *J. Immunol.* 175, 404–412.

Miljkovic, D., and Trajkovic, V. (2004). Inducible nitric oxide synthase activation by interleukin-17. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 15, 21–32.

Miljkovic, D., Cvetkovic, I., Momcilovic, M., Maksimovic-Ivanic, D., Stosic-Grujicic, S., and Trajkovic, V. (2005). Interleukin-17 stimulates inducible nitric oxide synthase-dependent toxicity in mouse beta cells. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci* 62, 2658–2668.

Miossec, P. (2003). Interleukin-17 in rheumatoid arthritis: If T cells were to contribute to inflammation and destruction through synergy. *Arthritis Rheum.* 48, 594–601.

Moseley, T. A., Haudenschild, D. R., Rose, L., and Reddi, A. H. (2003). Interleukin-17 family and IL-17 receptors. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 14, 155–174.

Nakae, S., Nambu, A., Sudo, K., and Iwakura, Y. (2003a). Suppression of immune induction of collagen-induced arthritis in IL-17–deficient mice. *J. Immunol* 171, 6173–6177.

Nakae, S., Saijo, S., Horai, R., Sudo, K., Mori, S., and Iwakura, Y. (2003b). IL-17 production from activated T cells is required for the spontaneous development of destructive arthritis in mice deficient in IL-1 receptor antagonist. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 5986–5990.

Novatchkova, M., Leibbrandt, A., Werzowa, J., Neubuser, A., and Eisenhaber, F. (2003). The STIR-domain superfamily in signal transduction, development and immunity. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 28, 226–229.

Numasaki, M., Fukushi, J., Ono, M., Narula, S. K., Zavodny, P. J., Kudo, T., Robbins, P. D., Tahara, H., and Lotze, M. T. (2003). Interleukin-17 promotes angiogenesis and tumor growth. *Blood* 101, 2620–2627.

Numasaki, M., Watanabe, M., Suzuki, T., Takahashi, H., Nakamura, A., McAllister, F., Hishinuma, T., Goto, J., Lotze, M. T., Kolls, J. K., and Sasaki, H. (2005). IL-17 enhances the net angiogenic activity and *in vivo* growth of human non-small cell lung cancer in SCID mice through promoting CXCR-2-dependent angiogenesis. *J. Immunol.* 175, 6177–6189.

Owyang, A., Schmitz, J., McClanahan, T., Artis, D., Kastelein, R., and Cua, D. (2005). IL-25 is required for the regulation of autoimmunity and immunity to parasites. Paper presented at Keystone Symposia: Cytokines, Disease and Therapeutic Intervention (Santa Fe, NM).

Ozaki, K., and Leonard, W. J. (2002). Cytokine and cytokine receptor pleiotropy and redundancy. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 29355–29358.

Pan, G., French, D., Mao, W., Maruoka, M., Risser, P., Lee, J., Foster, J., Aggarwal, S., Nicholes, K., Guillet, S., Schow, P., and Gurney, A. L. (2001). Forced expression of murine IL-17E induces growth retardation, jaundice, a Th2-biased response, and multiorgan inflammation in mice. *J. Immunol.* 167, 6559–6567.

Pancer, Z., Mayer, W. E., Klein, J., and Cooper, M. D. (2004). Prototypic T cell receptor and CD4-like coreceptor are expressed by lymphocytes in the agnathan sea lamprey. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 13273–13278.

Park, H., Li, Z., Yang, X. O., Chang, S. H., Nurieva, R., Wang, Y. H., Wang, Y., Hood, L., Zhu, Z., Tian, Q., and Dong, C. (2005). A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by producing interleukin 17. *Nat. Immunol.* 6, 1133–1141.

Piwien Pilipuk, G., Galigniana, M. D., and Schwartz, J. (2003). Subnuclear localization of C/EBP beta is regulated by growth hormone and dependent on MAPK. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 35668–35677.

Prause, O., Bozinovski, S., Anderson, G. P., and Linden, A. (2004). Increased matrix metalloproteinase-9 concentration and activity after stimulation with interleukin-17 in mouse airways. *Thorax* 59, 313–317.

Pullen, S. S., Dang, T. T., Crute, J. J., and Kehry, M. R. (1999). CD40 signaling through tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs). Binding site specificity and activation of downstream pathways by distinct TRAFs. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 14246–14254.

Ramji, D. P., and Foka, P. (2002). CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins: Structure, function and regulation. *Biochem. J.* 365, 561–575.

Remy, I., Wilson, I. A., and Michnick, S. W. (1999). Erythropoietin receptor activation by a ligand-induced conformation change. *Science* 283, 990–993.

Rouvier, E., Luciani, M.-F., Mattei, M.-G., Denizot, F., and Golstein, P. (1993). CTLA-8, cloned from an activated T cell, bearing AU-rich messenger RNA instability sequences, and homologous to a *Herpesvirus Saimiri* gene. *J. Immunol.* 150, 5445–5456.

Ruddy, M. J., Shen, F., Smith, J., Sharma, A., and Gaffen, S. L. (2004a). Interleukin-17 regulates expression of the CXC chemokine LIX/CXCL5 in osteoblasts: Implications for inflammation and neutrophil recruitment. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* 76, 135–144.

Ruddy, M. J., Wong, G. C., Liu, X. K., Yamamoto, H., Kasayama, S., Kirkwood, K. L., and Gaffen, S. L. (2004b). Functional cooperation between interleukin-17 and tumor necrosis factor-α is mediated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family members. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 2559–2567.

Rutitzky, L. I., Lopes da Rosa, J. R., and Stadecker, M. J. (2005). Severe CD4 T cell-mediated immunopathology in murine schistosomiasis is dependent on IL-12p40 and correlates with high levels of IL-17. *J. Immunol.* 175, 3920–3926.

Samardzic, T., Jankovic, V., Stosic-Grujicic, S., and Trajkovic, V. (2001). STAT1 is required for iNOS activation, but not IL-6 production in murine fibroblasts. *Cytokine* 13, 179–182.

Schwandner, R., Yamaguchi, K., and Cao, Z. (2000). Requirement of tumor necrosis factor-associated factor (TRAF) 6 in interleukin 17 signal transduction. *J. Exp. Med.* **191**, 1233–1239.

Schwarzenberger, P., La Russa, V., Miller, A., Ye, P., Huang, W., Zieske, A., Nelson, S., Bagby, G. J., Stoltz, D., Mynatt, R. L., Spriggs, M., and Kolls, J. K. (1998). IL-17 stimulates granulopoiesis in mice: Use of an alternate, novel gene therapy-derived method for *in vivo* evaluation of cytokines. *J. Immunol.* **161**, 6383–6389.

Shalom-Barak, T., Quach, J., and Lotz, M. (1998). Interleukin-17-induced gene expression in articular chondrocytes is associated with activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and NF-kappaB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 27467–27473.

Shen, F., Ruddy, M. J., Plamondon, P., and Gaffen, S. L. (2005). Cytokines link osteoblasts and inflammation: Microarray analysis of interleukin-17- and TNF-alpha-induced genes in bone cells. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* **77**, 388–399.

Shen, F., Hu, Z., Goswami, J., and Gaffen, S. L. (2006). Identification of common transcriptional regulatory elements in interleukin-17 target genes. *J. Biol. Chem.*, in press.

Shi, Y., Ullrich, S. J., Zhang, J., Connolly, K., Grzegorzewski, K. J., Barber, M. C., Wang, W., Wathen, K., Hodge, V., Fisher, C. L., Olsen, H., Ruben, S. M., *et al.* (2000). A novel cytokine receptor-ligand pair. Identification, molecular characterization, and *in vivo* immunomodulatory activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 19167–19176.

Shimada, M., Andoh, A., Hata, K., Tasaki, K., Araki, Y., Fujiyama, Y., and Bamba, T. (2002). IL-6 secretion by human pancreatic periacinar myofibroblasts in response to inflammatory mediators. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 861–868.

Shin, H. C., Benbernou, N., Esnault, S., and Guenounou, M. (1999). Expression of IL-17 in human memory CD45RO+ T lymphocytes and its regulation by protein kinase A pathway. *Cytokine* **11**, 257–266.

Stark, M. A., Huo, Y., Burcin, T. L., Morris, M. A., Olson, T. S., and Ley, K. (2005). Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils regulates granulopoiesis via IL-23 and IL-17. *Immunity* **22**, 285–294.

Starnes, T., Broxmeyer, H. E., Robertson, M. J., and Hromas, R. (2002). Cutting edge: IL-17D, a novel member of the IL-17 family, stimulates cytokine production and inhibits hemopoiesis. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 642–646.

Steiner, G. E., Newman, M. E., Paikl, D., Stix, U., Memaran-Dagda, N., Lee, C., and Marberger, M. J. (2003). Expression and function of pro-inflammatory interleukin IL-17 and IL-17 receptor in normal, benign hyperplastic, and malignant prostate. *Prostate* **56**, 171–182.

Subramaniam, S. V., Cooper, R. S., and Adunyah, S. E. (1999). Evidence for the involvement of JAK/STAT pathway in the signaling mechanism of interleukin-17. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **262**, 14–19.

Takahashi, K., Azuma, T., Motohira, H., Kinane, D. F., and Kitetsu, S. (2005). The potential role of interleukin-17 in the immunopathology of periodontal disease. *J. Clin. Periodontol.* **32**, 369–374.

Tang, Q. Q., Gronborg, M., Huang, H., Kim, J. W., Otto, T. C., Pandey, A., and Lane, M. D. (2005). Sequential phosphorylation of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta by MAPK and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta is required for adipogenesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 9766–9771.

Tartour, E., Fossiez, F., Joyeux, I., Galinha, A., Gey, A., Claret, E., Sastre-Garau, X., Couturier, J., Mosseri, V., Vives, V., Banereau, J., Fridman, W. H., *et al.* (1999). Interleukin 17, a T-cell-derived cytokine, promotes tumorigenicity of human cervical tumors in nude mice. *Cancer Res.* **59**, 3698–3704.

Teunissen, M. B., Koomen, C. W., de Waal Malefyt, R., Wierenga, E. A., and Bos, J. D. (1998). Interleukin-17 and interferon-γ synergize in the enhancement of proinflammatory cytokine production by human keratinocytes. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **111**, 645–649.

Tian, E., Sawyer, J. R., Largaespada, D. A., Jenkins, N. A., Copeland, N. G., and Shaughnessy, J. D. (2000). *Evi27 encodes a novel membrane protein with homology to the IL-17 receptor*. *Oncogene* **19**, 2098–2109.

Tokuda, H., Kanno, Y., Ishisaki, A., Takenaka, M., Harada, A., and Kozawa, O. (2004). Interleukin (IL)-17 enhances tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated IL-6 synthesis via p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in osteoblasts. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **91**, 1053–1061.

Toy, D., Kugler, D., Wolfson, M., Bos, T. V., Gurgel, J., Tocker, J., and Peschon, J. (2006). Cutting Edge: IL-17 signals through a heteromeric receptor complex. *J. Immunol.* **117**, 136–139.

Trajkovic, V., Stosic-Grujicic, S., Samardzic, T., Markovic, M., Miljkovic, D., Ramic, Z., and Mostarica Stojkovic, M. (2001). Interleukin-17 stimulates inducible nitric oxide synthase activation in rodent astrocytes. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **119**, 183–191.

Tsang, M., and Dawid, I. (2004). Promotion and attenuation of FGF signaling through the Ras-MAPK pathway. *Sci. STKE* **228**, PE17.

Tsang, M., Friesel, R., Kudoh, T., and Dawid, I. (2002). Identification of Sef, a novel modulator of FGF signalling. *Nat. Cell. Biol.* **4**, 165–169.

Van Bezooijen, R. L., Farih-Sips, H. C. M., Papapoulos, S. E., and Löwik, C. W. G. M. (1999). Interleukin-17: A new bone acting cytokine in vitro. *J. Bone Min. Res.* **14**, 1513–1521.

Van Bezooijen, R. L., Van Der Wee-Pals, L., Papapoulos, S. E., and Lowik, C. W. (2002). Interleukin 17 synergises with tumour necrosis factor alpha to induce cartilage destruction in vitro. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **61**, 870–876.

Veldhoen, M., Hocking, R. J., Atkins, C. J., Locksley, R. M., and Stockinger, B. (2006). TGFβ in the context of an inflammatory cytokine milieu supports de novo differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells. *Immunity* **24**, 179–189.

Wong, C. K., Ho, C. Y., Li, E. K., and Lam, C. W. (2000). Elevation of proinflammatory cytokine (IL-18, IL-17, IL-12) and Th2 cytokine (IL-4) concentrations in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. *Lupus* **9**, 589–593.

Wynn, T. A. (2005). T(H)-17: A giant step from T(H)1 and T(H)2. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**, 1069–1070.

Xiong, S., Zhao, Q., Rong, Z., Huang, G., Huang, Y., Chen, P., Zhang, S., Liu, L., and Chang, Z. (2003). hSef inhibits PC-12 cell differentiation by interfering with Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase MAPK signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 50273–50282.

Yamada, T., Tsuchiya, T., Osada, S., Nishihara, T., and Imagawa, M. (1998). CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein δ gene expression is mediated by autoregulation through downstream binding sites. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **242**, 88–92.

Yang, R. B., Ng, C. K., Wasserman, S. M., Komuves, L. G., Gerritsen, M. E., and Topper, J. N. (2003). A novel interleukin-17 receptor-like protein identified in human umbilical vein endothelial cells antagonizes basic fibroblast growth factor-induced signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 33232–33238.

Yao, Z., Fanslow, W. C., Seldin, M. F., Rousseau, A.-M., Painter, S. L., Comeau, M. R., Cohen, J. I., and Spriggs, M. K. (1995). Herpesvirus Saimiri encodes a new cytokine, IL-17, which binds to a novel cytokine receptor. *Immunity* **3**, 811–821.

Yao, Z., Spriggs, M. K., Derry, J. M. J., Stockbine, L., Park, L. S., VandenBos, T., Zappone, J., Painter, S. L., and Armitage, R. J. (1997). Molecular characterization of the human interleukin-17 receptor. *Cytokine* **9**, 794–800.

Ye, P., Rodriguez, F. H., Kanaly, S., Stocking, K. L., Schurr, J., Schwarzenberger, P., Oliver, P., Huang, W., Zhang, P., Zhang, J., Shellito, J. E., Bagby, G. J., *et al.* (2001). Requirement of interleukin 17 receptor signaling for lung CXC chemokine and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor expression, neutrophil recruitment, and host defense. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 519–527.

Yen, D., Cheung, J., Scheeres, H., Poulet, F., McClanahan, T., Mckenzie, B., Kleinschek, M. A., Owyang, A., Mattson, J., Blumenschein, W., Murphy, E., Sathe, M., Cua, D. J., Kastelein,

R. A., and Rennick, D. (2006). IL-23 is essential for T cell-mediated colitis and promotes inflammation via IL-17 and IL-6. *J. Clin. Invest.* **116**, 1310–1316.

Zhang, Z., Andoh, A., Yasui, H., Inatomi, O., Hata, K., Tsujikawa, T., Kitoh, K., Takayanagi, A., Shimizu, N., and Fujiyama, Y. (2005). Interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha upregulate interleukin-23 subunit p19 gene expression in human colonic subepithelial myofibroblasts. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* **15**, 79–83.

Ziolkowska, M., Koc, A., Luszczkiewicz, G., Ksiezopolska-Pietrzak, K., Klimczak, E., Chwalinska-Sadowska, H., and Maslinski, W. (2000). High levels of IL-17 in rheumatoid arthritis patients: IL-15 triggers *in vitro* IL-17 production via cyclosporin A-sensitive mechanism. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 2832–2838.
