
Journal of Molecular Neuroscience
Copyright © 2006 Humana Press Inc.
All rights of any nature whatsoever are reserved.
ISSN 0895-8696/06/29:195–214/$30.00
JMN (Online) ISSN 1559-1166
DOI 10.1385/JMN/29:03:195

**ORIGINAL ARTICLE**

# Prions

## Protein Only or Something More? Overview of Potential Prion Cofactors

### Carlo Fasano,¹ Vincenza Campana,¹² and Chiara Zurzolo*,¹²

¹Unité de Trafic Membranaire et Pathogénèse, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France;  
²Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare and CEINGE, Centro di Biotecnologie Avanzate, Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, 80131 Napoli, Italy

Received October 12, 2005; Accepted February 3, 2006

---

### Abstract

Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) in humans and animals are attributed to protein-only infectious agents, called prions. Prions have been proposed to arise from the conformational conversion of the cellular protein PrP<sup>C</sup> into a misfolded form (e.g., PrP<sup>Sc</sup> for scrapie), which precipitates into aggregates and fibrils. It has been proposed that the conversion process is triggered by the interaction of the infectious form (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>) with the cellular form (PrP<sup>C</sup>) or might result from a mutation in the gene for PrP<sup>C</sup>. However, until recently, all efforts to reproduce this process in vitro had failed, suggesting that host factors are necessary for prion replication. In this review we discuss recent findings such as the cellular factors that might be involved in the conformational conversion of prion proteins and the potential mechanisms by which they could operate.

DOI 10.1385/JMN/29:03:195

Index Entries: PrP<sup>C</sup>; PrP<sup>Sc</sup>; prion conversion; transconformation; cofactor.

---

### Introduction

Prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are fatal neurodegenerative disorders affecting animals and humans (Prusiner, 1998). They include scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), and chronic wasting disease in animals, and they can manifest as different syndromes in humans (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [CJD], kuru, Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome, and fatal familial insomnia) (Collinge, 2001; Chesebro, 2003). Prion diseases can be of infectious origin and can be transmitted from cattle to humans by means of the food chain (Will et al., 1996; Bruce et al., 1997; Hill et al., 1997; Lasmezas et al., 2005). More than 150 people in the United Kingdom have died from a new variant of CJD, transmitted to humans through prion-contaminated beef (Ironside, 2003). Interestingly, TSEs also can have sporadic, iatrogenic, and inherited origins (Chesebro, 2003).

The precise nature of the transmissible agent has been debated since the mid-1960s and is still not completely clear (Mestel, 1996; Chesebro, 1998; Prusiner, 1998). Pioneering experiments proved not only the transmissibility of scrapie, kuru, and CJD to appropriate recipients (Gajdusek et al., 1966; Gajdusek and Gibbs, 1971; Telling et al., 1994; Lasmezas et al., 1996)

*Author to whom all correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed. E-mail: zurzolo@pasteur.fr

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience 195 Volume 29, 2006

but led also to the discovery of different strains and
revealed the peculiar characteristics of the trans-
missible agent, such as its lack of immunogenicity
and requirement for long incubation periods (Hill
and Collinge, 2001; Bruce, 2003).

To explain the lack of immunogenicity and strain
variation, the “virino” hypothesis was postulated,
and the infectious agent was proposed to be formed
of a specific nucleic acid enveloped in a host-specified
protein (Hope, 1994). However, further research
indicated that the infectious particle was substan-
tially different from viruses and other conventional
agents. In particular, its uncommon resistance to UV
radiation and nucleases led to the proposal that the
infectious agent was devoid of nucleic acid (Alper et
al., 1967; Prusiner, 1982, 1998). Accordingly, a new
hypothesis, the protein-only hypothesis, still consi-
dered the most reliable, postulated the transmissible
agent to be a protein capable of replicating itself within
the host (Prusiner, 1982, 1998). This newly discovered
pathogen was called a proteinaceous infectious
particle, or prion (Prusiner, 1982). The isolation of the
protease-resistant prion protein (PrP<sup>res</sup>) (also called
PrP<sup>Sc</sup> from scrapie) from the brains of infected animals,
in turn infectious (Bolton et al., 1982), was a crucial
discovery in understanding the nature of this novel
infectious agent. Interestingly, PrP<sup>Sc</sup> copurified with
the infectious agent, and its concentration was
proportional to the infectivity titer (Gabizon et al.,
1988). In addition, infectivity was substantially
reduced by agents capable of destroying protein struc-
ture and by anti-PrP antibodies (Gabizon et al., 1988).

Isolation of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> allowed the identification of a
gene coding for a cellular variant (PrP<sup>C</sup>) of the trans-
missible agent, *Prnp* (Basler et al., 1986), which is
constitutively expressed in brain and many other tis-
sues of healthy animals (Basler et al., 1986). Thus, it
was discovered that PrP exists in two alternative
forms: the normal cellular protein (PrP<sup>C</sup>) and the
pathological isoform (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>), which do not differ in
primary sequence but only in their three-dimen-
sional conformation. The α-helical content of normal
PrP<sup>C</sup> is reduced in PrP<sup>Sc</sup>, which instead contains a
higher amount of β-sheet structures (Pan et al., 1993).
These structural changes determine alterations of
the biochemical properties; whereas PrP<sup>C</sup> is solubi-
lized by nondenaturing detergents and is easily
digested by proteases, PrP<sup>Sc</sup> is insoluble in deter-
gents and is generally resistant to protease diges-
tion, which results in the formation of an
N-terminally truncated fragment known as PrP
27–30 (Cohen and Prusiner, 1998; Prusiner, 1998).


Fasano et al.

Following an original intuition of Griffith (1967),
that an abnormal infectious protein can propagate
by interacting with its normal counterpart, it has
been proposed that PrP<sup>Sc</sup> amplifies itself by con-
verting PrP<sup>C</sup> to the PrP<sup>Sc</sup> isoform in a reaction that,
once started in different cell types of the central
nervous system (CNS), causes fatal neurodege-
ration (Bueler et al., 1993; Brandner et al., 1996).
The fact that administration of a small quantity of
PrP<sup>Sc</sup> can induce conversion of the host PrP<sup>C</sup> and
that the ablation of the PrP-encoding gene renders
animals resistant to prion diseases (Bueler et al.,
1993; Brandner et al., 1996) represents the strongest
evidence in favor of the prion hypothesis. However,
the ultimate proof of the protein-only hypothesis
requires infectivity to be generated in vitro. If the
infectious agent consists only of the misfolded
PrP<sup>Sc</sup> and its replication is promoted by inter-
action with PrP<sup>C</sup>, it should be possible to reproduce
the whole process entirely in vitro. Because sev-
eral strategies have been used to achieve this, until
only very recently without success (Saborio et al.,
2001; Soto et al., 2002; May et al., 2004), an alter-
native model, the “unified theory,” was proposed
to incorporate both the protein-only and the pro-
tein-plus nucleic acid hypotheses (Weissmann,
1991). According to this model, PrP<sup>C</sup>-PrP<sup>Sc</sup> con-
version is the principal pathogenic event, but a
co-prion (a small host-specified nucleic acid asso-
ciated with PrP<sup>Sc</sup>) represents a crucial component
required to modulate conversion and strain speci-
ficity (Weissmann, 1991). The discovery of the
existence of small interfering (si)RNAs and
microRNAs could suggest them to be candidates
for hypothetical co-prions (Supattapone, 2004),
because they were not examined in earlier analyses
of prion preparations.

Major support for the protein-only hypothesis has
been provided recently by two publications (Legname
et al., 2004; Castilla et al., 2005) that have successfully
generated infectious particles in vitro by using two
different approaches (see “Cell-Free Systems for Prion
Conversion”). However, although these and other
previous evidence strongly support that PrP<sup>Sc</sup> is the
transmissible agent, they do not exclude that other
cellular factors could be important cofactors to tri-
gger, enhance, or accelerate prion formation.

In this review we have summarized the possible
mechanisms of the prion conversion reaction and have
analyzed some of the putative co-prion candidates,
speculating on the possible mechanisms by which
they could act in prion conversion.


Journal of Molecular Neuroscience

Volume 29, 2006

Prions: Protein Only or Something More?

### Prion Replication In Vivo

Although experimental prions are generally transmitted by intracerebral and intraperitoneal injection, the natural agents are usually caused by oral intake of prion-contaminated material (Miller et al., 2004). How prions traverse the gastrointestinal tract is still debated, although an important role has been proposed for special epithelial cells present in the gut, called M cells (Heppner et al., 2001), which would be responsible for passing prions to the lymphoreticular system. After invasion of the lymphoreticular system and the peripheral nervous system (Aguzzi et al., 2003), prions enter the CNS where they replicate and cause spongiform neurodegeneration and astrocytosis by a pathogenic mechanism still unknown. Pathogenesis leads to death after some months in mice and years to decades in humans (Gambetti et al., 2003; Weissmann and Flechsig, 2003). Given this picture, most efforts in prion research have focused on the mechanism of its conversion, which seemed the most accessible target for potential therapy.

To date, the exact intracellular compartment where the transconformation process occurs is still widely discussed and could be different in the case of infectious and inherited diseases (reviewed in Campana et al., 2005). In scrapie-infected cells, prion conversion is a post-translational event that involves the mature fully glycosylated PrP<sup>C</sup> protein, probably after its arrival at the cell surface or after its internalization from the plasma membrane (PM) in endosomes or lysosomes (Borchelt et al., 1992; Taraboulos et al., 1992; Arnold et al., 1995). In contrast, in the case of the inherited form of the disease, caused by mutations in the *Prnp* gene, some of the prion mutants show abnormal properties early in the biosynthetic pathway, supporting a conformational transition occurring before arrival to the PM (reviewed in Harris, 2003).

Two models have been proposed to explain how the abnormal infectious PrP<sup>Sc</sup> is able to propagate itself by converting the normal host PrP<sup>C</sup> into its abnormal form (Prusiner, 1991, 1998; Come et al., 1993; Harper and Lansbury, 1997). The simplest, or “refolding,” model proposes that PrP<sup>C</sup> unfolds and refolds under the influence of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> (Prusiner, 1991). The nucleation, or “seeding” model proposes, instead, that PrP can spontaneously assume different conformations (such as PrP<sup>C</sup> and PrP<sup>Sc</sup>), which are in equilibrium (Come et al., 1993; Harper and Lansbury, 1997). In physiological conditions the equilibrium of the reaction strongly favors PrP<sup>C</sup>, because of the high activation energy to acquire the PrP<sup>Sc</sup> conformation (Come et al., 1993; Harper and Lansbury, 1997). However, the presence of a PrP<sup>Sc</sup> crystal-like seed abolishes this energy barrier by stabilizing the PrP<sup>Sc</sup> conformation and by promoting the rapid monomer addition of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> to the seed (Jarrett and Lansbury, 1993). This view is consistent with the finding that the converting activity (and infectivity) specifically associates with aggregates and not with monomers of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> (reviewed in Weissmann, 2004). Complete disaggregation and denaturation of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> results in a coincident loss of converting activity and scrapie infectivity, whereas partial reversible unfolding of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> does not (Morillas et al., 2001). Consequently, although spontaneous PrP misfolding is a slow event, the incubation in vitro of PrP<sup>C</sup> with a PrP<sup>Sc</sup> crystal-like seed triggers a rapid conversion, directly indicating that the PrP<sup>Sc</sup> seed induces prion formation, and occasional fragmentation of these aggregates could explain the exponential increase of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> during infection (Orgel, 1996).

Another element of specificity of the conversion reaction in vivo is indicated by its dependence on the concentrations of both PrP<sup>C</sup> and PrP<sup>Sc</sup>. However, in the case of mammalian prions, PrP<sup>C</sup> expression (or even overexpression) in cell cultures is not sufficient to initiate and/or maintain prion replication (Montrasio et al., 2001), indicating either the requirement of an auxiliary host factor(s) (see “Protein X or Co-Factor for Protein”) or that in a particular system the rate of degradation of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> exceeds the rate of its formation (Enari et al., 2001; Peretz et al., 2001). This phenomenon has been well described by Weissmann (2004) in his proposal of a dynamic susceptibility model, where the capacity of cells to propagate prions would depend on a synthesis-degradation equilibrium. If the rate of prion synthesis would not be equal or exceed twice the rate of its degradation, prions would be eliminated from cells after infection. Instead, when the rate of scrapie formation is more than twice that of its degradation, the high prion accumulation could trigger cell death. Thus, the ability of the cell to efficiently sustain prion replication would depend on this delicate equilibrium. This model could explain why not all PrP-expressing cell lines are susceptible to prion infection (Rubenstein et al., 1984; Race et al., 1987; Schatzl et al., 1997; Vilette et al., 2001; Vorberg et al., 2004) but not why the same cell line can replicate only a few prion strains (Race et al., 1987; Bosque and Prusiner, 2000; Nishida et al., 2000).

The evidence that interspecies transmission of TSEs is less efficient (sometimes even impossible) compared with intraspecies transmission has suggested the existence of a species barrier (Bruce, 1993; Bruce et al., 1994). As for other pathogens, one of the properties of prions is the existence of several strains, originally identified by the different incubation times and characteristic neuropathologies in a particular host (Bruce, 1993, 2003; Bruce et al., 1994). To be possible, interspecies TSE transmission generally requires a high degree of identity between the PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ donor and PrP${}^{\mathrm{C}}$ host sequences for an efficient prion replication (Prusiner et al., 1990; Priola and Chesebro, 1995), such that even a single amino acid mutation can protect against interspecies transmission (Priola and Chesebro, 1995). In particular, the specific requirement of amino acid sequence homologies in the contact region between PrP present in the inoculum and in the host has been shown in interspecies TSE transmissions in vivo (Prusiner et al., 1990). By using cell culture and animal models, it has been demonstrated that the central third of the PrP molecule is the most important and that differences in as little as one residue at position 138 can dramatically diminish PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ formation in scrapie-infected neuroblastoma cells and animals (Priola and Chesebro, 1995). However, it is also possible that the specificity of the species barrier can be related to the ability of other putative interacting factors to bind or not to a certain region of the PrP sequence (Lee et al., 2003) (see “Co-Factor for Prion Protein”). The importance of intermolecular interactions between this portion of the PrP sequence was further shown by the fact that synthetic peptides corresponding to this region of the molecule (especially residues 119–136) profoundly inhibit PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ formation (Horiuchi et al., 2001). In addition, the fact that only PrP${}^{\mathrm{C}}$ was observed to bind and cosediment with PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ (Horiuchi and Caughey, 1999) when PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ was incubated with cell lysates or tissue culture supernatants containing complex mixtures of proteins indicates that the binding between PrP${}^{\mathrm{C}}$ and PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ is highly selective, whereas other putative interacting factors could be associated only transiently and weakly. Another factor to take into account in the strain barrier transmission is that strain-specific properties can be determined by the prion amino acid sequence, or by the glycosylation pattern or its conformation (Bessen and Marsh, 1992; Collinge et al., 1996; Telling et al., 1996). This assumption leads to the existence of stable conformations of PrP, many of which can be propagated in mice of a particular genotype (reviewed in Weissmann, 2004).

Fasano et al.

Although differences in the glycosylation pattern of misfolded PrP have been proposed to have a certain importance (DeArmond et al., 1997), the finding that a particular prion strain can be transmitted between two species carrying different PrP sequences maintaining the strain-specific properties (Kimberlin et al., 1987) is directly in contrast with the hypothesis of the importance of the primary sequence (primary of strain) for the conversion reaction and implies that the same conformation can be imposed on PrP molecules with different amino acid sequences. Another issue that is not readily explained by the protein-only hypothesis is why different prion strains cause lesions and PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ deposition at different locations in the brain. All of these unanswered questions, especially in connection with the strain issue, have been used to support the proposal that the infectious agent has a nucleic acid component in addition to misfolded PrP. Recent experiments have been instrumental in shedding some light on this unsolved issue of prion replication in cell-free systems.

### Cell-Free Systems for Prion Conversion

The in vitro generation and propagation of infectious PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$ by PrP${}^{\mathrm{C}}$ misfolding can provide the ultimate evidence for the protein-only hypothesis. The conformational PrP transition has been analyzed in vitro by different approaches (reviewed in Riesner, 2003). Although these studies were very useful in elucidating some steps in prion conversion, they failed to produce infectivity in vitro. In one of the earliest efforts to produce infectivity, in vitro natural (nonrecombinant) infectious PrP 27–30 was first converted to an $\alpha$-helical, oligomeric and noninfectious form by addition of 0.3% SDS at neutral pH (Riesner et al., 1996) and was then refolded into a $\beta$-sheet-rich, aggregated, and partially proteinase K-resistant conformation by addition of 30% acetonitrile or more diluted SDS (Post et al., 1998). Although this form exhibited the major characteristics of PrP${}^{\mathrm{Sc}}$, its infectivity could not be reestablished (Post et al., 1998), indicating that infectivity is probably related to something more than protein misfolding. Nonetheless, these experiments were very interesting because they were able to show that conversion is a multistep process, with an initial fast formation of $\beta$-sheet structures and small oligomers, followed by the formation of larger oligomers in minutes to an hour, and finally by the constitution of large insoluble aggregates in hours to days (Post et al., 1998). Moreover, these experiments can be considered the closest to

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience

Volume 29, 2006

natural conditions because the low concentration of

SDS could be regarded as a membrane-like environment. Interestingly, subsequent work showed that PrP<sup>Sc</sup>-like conformation of recombinant PrP fragments could be promoted by denaturing agents at acidic pH (Hornemann and Glockshuber, 1998; Morillas et al., 1999; Baskakov et al., 2001). Moreover, at low pH, β-sheet conformation was always associated with aggregation, which was the most stable state (Morillas et al., 1999; Baskakov et al., 2001). Only in reducing conditions could an acidic pH induce a β-sheet-rich structure in a monomeric state (Jackson et al., 1999b). However, it is not known whether this finding is relevant to PrPC-PrP<sup>Sc</sup> conversion in vivo because the intramolecular disulfide bridge is present in both PrP conformers and the disulfide bridge was not opened transiently in all other in vitro conversion experiments (Welker et al., 2002). Moreover, systematic studies on the influence of varying SDS concentrations have shown that an α-helical dimer is thermodynamically stable at high detergent concentrations and can be converted to a β-sheet-rich oligomeric state in a cooperative manner at lower detergent concentrations (Jansen et al., 2001). On the other hand, large insoluble aggregates are formed and remain stable in a low detergent concentration, and both PrPC-like and PrP<sup>Sc</sup>-like conformations can be established in the absence of detergent at pH 7; however, the stable state is the PrP<sup>Sc</sup>-like conformation, and the conversion can be induced by different detergents even at very low concentrations (Jansen et al., 2001). Taken together, these results seem to suggest that the PrP<sup>Sc</sup>-like state is the thermodynamically stable state both at lysosomal acidic pH or at cell-surface neutral pH but that a high activation barrier renders the transition very slow (i.e., hours, days, or even weeks) (Riesner, 2003).

Different approaches to produce in vitro infectious prions, based on the use of inherited pathological PrP mutants (Lehmann and Harris, 1996; Chiesa et al., 1998) and on the β-sheet refolding of recombinant full-length PrP or its short peptides (Zhang et al., 1995; Jackson et al., 1999a; Baskakov et al., 2000; Lee and Eisenberg, 2003), have also largely failed to produce infectivity.

In one of the first efforts to produce mammalian prions in a cell-free system, the structural conversion of purified PrPC to PrP<sup>Sc</sup> catalyzed by purified PrP<sup>Sc</sup> was shown, but the low rate of conversion product relative to the template makes it difficult to estimate the infectious properties of in vitro-produced PrP<sup>Sc</sup> (Kocisko et al., 1994).


Recently, a recombinant mouse PrP fragment (PrP 89–230) assembled into amyloid fibrils was used to inject transgenic mice expressing the same recombinant prion and has been shown to cause a TSE-like disease with PrP<sup>Sc</sup> formation and death between 380 and 660 days after injection (Legname et al., 2004). The disease could be transmitted to wild-type mice in a second passage. Although this work represents the first evidence that prion infectivity can be produced in vitro, it is also known that transgenic mice could develop spontaneously a prion-like disease, albeit over a longer time period (Westaway et al., 1994; Chiesa et al., 1998; Castilla et al., 2004). Another important advance was provided by a novel procedure that involves sonication and cyclic amplification of the misfolded PrP<sup>Sc</sup> used as template (PMCA) (Saborio et al., 2001; Castilla et al., 2005). Scrapie brain homogenates as source of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> were diluted 10,000 times with brain homogenates from healthy animals as sources of PrPC and incubated to produce PrP<sup>Sc</sup> in vitro. During incubation, the samples were repeatedly sonicated (20 times), with an average amplification rate of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> production of 50-to >200-fold. According to the seeding model, sonication promotes the fragmentation of newly formed amyloid fibrils that would then produce new nucleation sites for prion conversion. Interestingly, the in vitro-produced PrP<sup>Sc</sup> exhibited identical biochemical and structural properties of the protein used to begin the conversion process (Castilla et al., 2005). After improvement of this technique, it was recently possible to obtain a higher level of PrP<sup>Sc</sup> amplification, and the in vitro-produced material was proven to generate an in vivo disease in wild-type animals with the same properties of the disorder produced by brain-isolated prions (Castilla et al., 2005). These experiments strongly suggest that the infectious agent can be produced in vitro but do not exclude amplification and participation in the reaction by other factors contained in the brain homogenates used as template and as infected material.

Interestingly, in a modified PMCA protocol without sonication, Supattapone and coworkers were also able to produce PrP<sup>Sc</sup> (although its infectivity was not tested), and they showed that this process was highly stimulated by specific host RNAs and abolished by RNases, suggesting that siRNAs could be important cofactors in the prion conversion event (Deleault et al., 2003).

### Protein X or Cofactor for Prion Protein

The existence of a potential factor involved in prion conversion was initially proposed to explain

the data on the transmission of human prions to transgenic mice (Telling et al., 1995) and was then proposed to explain the protective effects of basic polymorphic residues in humans and sheep PrP (Hunter et al., 1993; Shibuya et al., 1998). Briefly, mice expressing both mouse and human PrPs were resistant to human prions, whereas either mice expressing only human PrP or mice expressing both mouse PrP and mouse-human chimeric (MHu2M) PrP (containing the mouse C-terminal sequence) were susceptible, indicating that mouse PrPC inhibited transmission of human prions but had little effect on the conversion of MHu2M. The existence of a host murine protein necessary for prion replication, referred to as protein X, able to bind with a higher affinity to mouse than human PrPC, was postulated to explain the lack of human prion replication when the mouse gene was expressed together with the human one. Because mouse PrPC had little effect on the conversion of MHu2M and the two proteins share the same C-terminal sequence, the PrP-interacting region with protein X could be located in the carboxyl terminus. The subsequent discovery that substitution of amino acid residues of the human sequence at positions 167, 171, 214, or 218 prevented PrPSc formation (Perrier et al., 2002), perhaps by sequestering protein X and rendering it unavailable for prion propagation, led to the identification of putative interaction sites. Notwithstanding the extensive efforts to identify this prion cofactor, its identity is still unknown although many putative candidates have been proposed.

About 10 years ago, a cellular receptor for prions was proposed to act in the propagation of the transmissible agent by mediating its cellular internalization by clathrin-coated pits (Shyng et al., 1994) (Fig. 1). Moreover, different studies have highlighted the possibility that the factors involved in PrP conversion could be nucleic acids, as shown by the fact that PrPC is able to bind nucleic acids and that this association can modulate its structure (Cordeiro et al., 2001). A third possibility is that lipids could act as lipochaperones modulating prion conformation, as suggested by the finding that binding of PrPC and/or PrPSc to different lipids can promote the stabilization and/or the acquisition of α-helix- or β-sheet-enriched structures (Sanghera and Pinheiro, 2002; Kazlauskaitė et al., 2003; Kazlauskaitė and Pinheiro, 2005) (Fig. 1). Thus, until the exact nature of molecules potentially involved in prion conversion is elucidated, it is more appropriate to talk about a generic factor X and not about a protein.

The identification of this cofactor is complicated by the fact that different intracellular compartments have been proposed to participate in prion formation (reviewed in Harris, 2003; Campana et al., 2005), so the search for pro-prion factors should consider all of the molecules that interact with PrPSc or its normal conformer PrPC in the different organelles. Many proteins at different levels of the secretory pathway (endoplasmic reticulum [ER], PM, and endolysosomes) have been shown to interact with PrPC (Table 1) (reviewed in Lee et al., 2003), and the findings that most of them are able to bind to it in different domains (reviewed in Lee et al., 2003) support the hypothesis that a macromolecular complex rather than one simple factor might be involved in prion internalization and/or conversion in one or more specific cellular localizations.

Proteins found to associate with PrPC on the cell surface include neural cell-adhesion molecules (NCAMs) (Schmitt-Ulms et al., 2001), Applp1 (amyloid precursor-like protein 1) (Yehiely et al., 1997), the extracellular matrix (ECM) glycoprotein laminin, the 37-kDa laminin receptor precursor, and 67-kDa laminin receptor (Rieger et al., 1997; Graner, 2000a, 2000b; Gauczynski et al., 2001a, 2001b; Hundt et al., 2001). Interestingly, it has been shown that the 67-kDa laminin receptor mediates about 30% of PrP internalization through clathrin-coated pits (Gauczynski et al., 2001b; Hundt et al., 2001), supporting the existence of a cellular receptor for prions (see above). Because the endolysosomal compartment has been postulated to be implicated in PrPSc conversion (reviewed in Campana et al., 2005), it is also possible that this factor could indirectly promote prion replication by promoting PrP internalization. Although their role in prion internalization and conversion is still unknown, other membrane proteins (e.g., synapsin b1, Grb-2, Pint1, p75 neurotrophin receptor [NTR], caveolin, casein kinase 2 [CK2]) (Table 1) were found associated to PrPC in intracellular vesicles or caveolae-like domains at the cell surface (reviewed in Lee, 2003). One suggestive possibility could also be that these molecules could contribute to PrP internalization and subsequent concentration in the endolysosomes and/or raft/caveolae, subcellular domains postulated to be involved in prion transformation (reviewed in Campana et al., 2005). It has been suggested that p75-NTR participates not only in the binding of PrP at the PM but also in the subsequent transport of PrPC and presumably also the infectious PrPSc. In addition, it has been shown that in T cells the antibody cross-linking of PrPC leads

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience
Volume 29, 2006

JMN_29_3_0059_Zurzolo 8/16/06 2:05 PM Page 201

Prions: Protein Only or Something More? 201

Fig. 1. Possible mechanisms for prion cofactor action. (1) Prion-interacting factors on the cell surface could promote PrP internalization either via clathrin-coated pits (CCP) or caveolae-like domains (CLD), favoring prion transconformation in the endolysosomal compartment. Alternatively, their interaction could stabilize prions in a pro- or anti-transconformation cellular microenvironment (such as rafts, caveolae, or endolysosomes) indirectly participating in the process. (2) Alteration of cellular lipid homeostasis by deregulation of the levels of many enzymes involved in lipid metabolism can promote prion transconformation and/or aggregation. (3) Cofactors in prion transconformation could operate as molecular chaperones, helping the interaction between PrP<sup>C</sup> and PrP<sup>Sc</sup> and scrapie refolding and/or amyloid fibril formation. (4) Up-regulation of many proteases in prion-infected cells and tissue suggests that lysosomal proteases could act in concert with PrP<sup>Sc</sup> to promote prion replication by disrupting large PrP<sup>Sc</sup> aggregates and expanding the population of seeding units, analogously to the effect of sonication in the in vitro PMCA protocol.

to PrP<sup>C</sup> cocapping with the intracellular lipid raft proteins flotillins (reggie-1 and -2), triggering signal transduction by Lck- and Fyn-dependent pathways (Stuermer et al., 2004). It would be interesting to investigate whether these factors could also have effects on prion replication, acting as carriers to lipid rafts. Another protein found associated with PrP<sup>C</sup> at the PM is stress-inducible protein 1 (STI1), which by interacting with PrP<sup>C</sup> promotes neuroprotection through a cAMP/PKA signaling pathway (Chiarini et al., 2002; Zanata et al., 2002). Because STI1 is also found in a complex with some chaperones of the heat shock protein (Hsp) families 70 and 90 (Blatch et al., 1997; Lassle et al., 1997), it has been proposed that it might also assist PrP<sup>C</sup> conversion.

Interestingly, in the ER, PrP and some of its mutants were shown to bind BiP and other ER chaperones (Table 1) (Jin et al., 2000; Sarnataro et al., 2004), suggesting that ER chaperones could be involved in PrP folding or in the recognition of the misfolded/mutated forms. Another chaperone of the Hsp family, Hsp60, has been proposed recently as an important prion chaperone, because its bacterial homolog, GroEL, has been shown to mediate PrP<sup>C</sup>

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience Volume 29, 2006

Table 1  
PrP-Interacting Molecules  

| Molecular partners | Suggested/demonstrated functions | PrP-binding isoforms | Experimental systems | Intracellular compartments |
|--------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| BiP                | Chaperoning                     | PrPC/PrP mutants     | Cell lines            | ER                        |
| CNX                | Chaperoning                     | PrPC                 | Cell lines            | ER                        |
| Calr               | Chaperoning                     | PrPC                 | Cell lines            | ER                        |
| Hsp 60             | Aggregation                     | recPrP/PrPC          | cDNA library screen and cell free | Unknown                  |
| ST1                | Signaling, neuroprotection, chaperoning | PrPC                 | Cell free and cells   | PM                        |
| Nucleic acid       | Chaperoning                     | PrPC                 | Cell free and cells   | Nucleus                   |
| Lipids             | Chaperoning/aggregation         | recα and recβPrP/PrPC/PrPSc/mutants PrPC | Artificial microsomes, cellular membranes | Raft/membranes           |
| Laminin            | Neurite outgrowth               | recPrP/PrPC          | Cell free and cells   | PM                        |
| GAG                | Internalization                 | PrPCPrPC             | Cell free and cells   | PM                        |
| 37-/67-kDa         | Internalization                 | PrPC                 | Yeast two-hybrid cell lines | PM                       |
| Laminin R          |                                 |                      |                       |                           |
| Aplp1              | Unknown                         | PrP fragments        | cDNA library screen and cell free | PM                       |
| Caveolin 1         | Signaling, internalization, concentration | recPrP               | Cell lines            | PM                        |
| p 75-NTR           | Apoptosis, internalization, transport | PrPC                 | Cell lines            | PM, caveolae              |
| CK2                | CK 2 activity modulator, internalization, concentration | recPrP/PrPC          | Cell lines                | Caveolae                 |
| NCAM               | Neurite outgrowth, internalization, concentration | PrPC                 | Cell lines               | PM, caveoale             |
| Pint1              | Signaling, internalization, transport | recPrP/PrPC          | Yeast two hybrid and cells | Unknown                  |
| Flotillins         | Signaling, raft carrier         | recPrP/PrPC          | Cell lines            | Rafts                     |
| Grb-2              | Internalization, concentration  | PrPSc                | Yeast two hybrid and cells | Vesicles                 |
| Synapsin1b         | Signaling, internalization, concentration | PrPC                 | Yeast two hybrid and cells | Vesicles                 |
| Plasminogen        | Plasminogen activator           | PrPC/PrPSc           | Cell free             | Raft/extracellular        |
| Bcl-2              | Unknown                         |                      | Yeast two hybrid and cells | Unknown                  |
| Nrf2               | Unknown                         |                      | cDNA library screen and cell free | Unknown                  |
| GFAP               | Unknown                         |                      | Brain extract         | Unknown                   |

aggregation (Edenhofer et al., 1996; Stockel and Hartl, 2001). Finally, other cellular proteins such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Bcl-2 have been identified as binding PrPC (Oesch et al., 1990; Kurschner and Morgan, 1995), but the cellular compartments and functions of these interactions have never been clarified. It is also known that PrPSc interacts with plasminogen in the extracellular space and that recombinant apo-PrPC (copper-devoid PrP) can induce plasminogen activation (Fischer et al., 2000; Maisseu et al., 2001; Ellis et al., 2002), but to date it is not known whether this association can in some way be involved in prion conversion.

An important class of nonproteinaceous factors recently proposed to be important in prion formation includes certain glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), in particular heparan sulfate and pentosan polysulfate, which can bind PrPC and stimulate PrPSc

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience  
Volume 29, 2006

formation in a cell-free system (Table 1) (Priola and
Caughey, 1994; Wong et al., 2001; Pan et al., 2002). This result is very interesting because in scrapie-
infected cells and animals these same GAGs act as
inhibitors (Adjou et al., 2003; Schonberger et al.,
2003), favoring the hypothesis that GAGs linked to
transmembrane proteins or to ECM components
could be critical cofactors for prion conversion in
vivo. Thus, the inhibitory effect on prion conversion
of GAGs or GAG analogs added to the cellular milieu
could depend on GAG sequestration of PrPC, which
would block a productive interaction between
endogenous GAGs with PrPSc. Interestingly, GAGs
are associated both with the 67-kD laminin receptor
and with ECM molecules such as laminin, which are
able to interact with PrPC (Graner et al., 2000a, 2000b;
Gauczynski et al., 2001b).

Another interesting class of nonproteinaceous mol-
ecules able to stimulate PrPSc formation is represented
by specific RNA molecules (Table 1). Addition of total
RNA isolated from hamster brain (but not other
polyanions) stimulates PrPSc amplification in a dose-
dependent manner in an in vitro system, whereas
different RNases cleaving single-stranded RNA
inhibit the process (Deleault et al., 2003; Supattapone,
2004). Accordingly, nucleic acids also bind avidly to
recombinant PrP and promote its conformational
change (Alper et al., 1967; Cordeiro et al., 2001; Nandi
et al., 2002; Adler et al., 2003). In addition, it has been
proposed that some inhibitors of PrPSc formation in
prion-infected cells, such as GAGs, could act as com-
petitive inhibitors of RNA binding, mimicking nucleic
acid structure. Accordingly, other inhibitors able to
bind nucleic acid, such as polypropyleneimine and
polyamidoamine dendrimers, might work by seques-
tering RNA from binding to PrP (Supattapone et al.,
1999). However, the recent observation that 25-mer
polynucleotides are able to associate to prions and
that their inactivation by UV irradiation strongly
reduces prion infectivity without altering strain prop-
erties (Safar et al., 2005) supports the protein-only
hypothesis, because the RNA or general nucleic acid
molecules involved in catalyzing prion conversion
are host encoded and not contained within the infec-
tious agent (Supattapone, 2004).

**Differential Expression Profile Analysis:**
**A New Approach to Identify Potential**
**Cofactors in Prion Conversion**

Recently, new genomic approaches to analyze dif-
ferential gene expression profiles in prion-infected

tissue have been used to identify factors potentially
involved in prion conversion (Dando y-Dron et al.,
1998; Baker and Manuelidis, 2003; Booth et al., 2004a,
2004b; Riemer et al., 2004; Xiang et al., 2004; Green-
wood et al., 2005).

The genes more frequently found altered in
infected brains belong to four different families: genes
involved in inflammatory and immune responses,
and genes participating in signal transduction, cell
growth and differentiation, cell adhesion, and stress
responses in the CNS. However, these studies show
problems of data interpretation. The results obtained
using prion-infected cortex, medulla, and pons over-
lap only minimally with those obtained using whole
brains or purified microglia. This might be explained
by the fact that the brain is made up of different cell
types, and so it is possible that each cell type reacts
differently to prion infection. Another fact to be taken
into account is that the differential regulation of many
genes is obscured in mixed cells or whole brain stud-
ies. Thus, to better understand which factors partic-
ipate in prion formation and to discriminate between
those responsible for neurodegeneration and those
involved in the inflammatory response, microarray
analyses were recently performed recently in two dif-
ferent neuronal cell lines: scrapie-infected N2a
(ScN2a) and scrapie-infected GT1 (ScGT1) (Green-
wood et al., 2005). Unfortunately, the expression pro-
files of the two infected cell lines were very different
compared with the studies of microglia and the whole
brain, confirming the hypothesis that different cells
might react differently to prion infection.

By analyzing the different published results, we
have identified three major classes of factors most
likely to be involved in the transconformation
process (Table 2). The first class of factors includes
genes involved in lipid metabolism. In different brain
regions (cortex, medulla, and pons) [Riemer et al.,
2004]) from scrapie-infected animals, several genes
involved in the biosynthesis of cholesterol were
down-regulated (Riemer et al., 2004) (Table 2). Con-
versely, the down-regulation of the sterol regulatory
element binding protein (SREBP) cleavage-activat-
ing protein (SCAP) gene, a mediator of activation
of lipid biosynthesis, was found in a different study
performed on whole mouse brains infected with dif-
ferent scrapie strains (Booth et al., 2004a). Interest-
ingly, a decreased synthesis of cholesterol is often
found in the brain during scrapie infection, and this
event is probably enhanced by the up-regulation of
another gene, ABCA1 (Riemer et al., 2004), which
increases cholesterol turnover by promoting the

| Gene family | Gene name | Function | System | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Lipid metabolism | Isopentenyl diphosphate δ-isomerase | Cholesterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Lanosterol 14-α-demethylase | Sterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | C-4-sterol methyl oxidase-like | Sterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Squalene synthase | Cholesterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase | Isoprene biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Lathosterol oxidase | Cholesterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase | Cholesterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Squalene epoxidase | Sterol biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Putative NADPH steroid dehydrogenase | Steroid biosynthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | LDL receptor | Cholesterol metabolism | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A synthase 1 | Ketogenesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Long chain fatty acyl elongase | Fatty acid synthesis | ↓ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Lipoprotein lipase | HDL metabolism | ↑ scrapie-infected brain, cortex, medulla, pons, and CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
|  | ABCA1 | Lipid removal pathway | ↑ scrapie-infected cortex, medulla, pons | Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | SREBP SCAP | Activation lipid biosynthesis | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004b) |
|  | Apolipoprotein D | Secreted lipid transporter | ↑ scrapie-infected brain, cortex, medulla, pons | Dandoy-Dron et al. (1998); Booth et al. (2004a); Riemer et al. (2004) |
|  | Apolipoprotein E | Secreted lipid transporter | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Booth et al. (2004a) |

| ApoC1 | Secreted lipid transporter | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dbi | Acyl-CoA binding transport | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Grn | Phospholipase A2/cytokine/ | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Sgpp1 | binds Ca | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Sgpp1 | Sphinganine-1-phosphate | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Pltp | phosphatase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| SAA3 | Lipid-binding/transport | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Major HDL component | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Lipid-binding protein | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| CD36 | Mediator of lipid uptake | ↑ CJD microglia and | Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| CD68 | and transport | scrapie-infected brain | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Peripheral benzodiazepine | Lipid-binding protein | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| receptor | VLDL receptor | ↓ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| VLDL receptor |  |  |  |
| Cathepsin H | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Dandoy-Dron et al. (1998); Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Booth et al. (2004a); Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| Proteases/ | Cathepsin S | and CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Booth et al. (2004); Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| lysosomal |  |  |  |
| genes/ |  |  |  |
| protease |  |  |  |
| inhibitors |  |  |  |
| Cathepsin C | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| Cathepsin D | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. 2004 |
| Cathepsin Z | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| Cathepsin K | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Cathepsin B | Cysteine-type endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Cathepsin L | Serine-type endopeptidase/ | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Furin | furin | O-Sialoglycoprotein | Booth et al. (2004a) |
|  | endopeptidase | ↑ scrapie-infected brain |  |

(Continued)

| Gene family | Gene name | Function | System | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Cysteine-type peptide | Osgep | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Proliferation-associated 2G4 | Uchl5 | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Heparan sulfate N-deacetylase | Pa2g4 | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Serine-type endopeptidase/ | Ndst1 | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| trypsin |  |  |  |
| Metallopeptidase | Maspl | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Cysteine protease inhibitor | Adam23 | ↓ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Cysteine protease inhibitor | Cystatin C | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Booth et al. (2004a) |
| Protease inhibitor | Cystatin F | ↑ scrapie-infected brain, cortex, medulla, pons and CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003); Riemer et al. (2004); Xiang et al. (2004) |
| Serine (or cysteine) proteinase | Serine protease inhibitor, Kunitz | Protease inhibitor | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Xiang et al. (2004) |
| type 2 | Serine protease inhibitor 3, | Protease inhibitor | ↓ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Tissue inhibitor of metallopro- | Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 | Protease inhibitor | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| Lysozyme M | Lysosomal hydrolase | ↓ CJD microglia | Xiang et al. (2004) |
| B-N-acetylhexosaminidase α | Lysosomal hydrolase subunit | ↑ scrapie-infected brain and CJD microglia | Kopacek (2000); Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |
| B-N-acetylhexosaminidase β | Lysosomal hydrolase subunit | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Kopacek (2000) |
| CLN2 lysosomal protease | Lysosomal protease | ↑ scrapie-infected brain | Kopacek, 2000; Booth et al. (2004a) |
|  |  |  | ↑ CJD microglia | Baker and Manuelidis (2003) |

Tissue inhibitor of metallopro-
teinase
Plasminogen activation
inhibitor II
Serpina 12
Ide

Chaperones
and binding
proteins

hspA, hspa9a
clu (apolipoprotein J)
calr

hsp701A

hsp1, α-hspca
hsp1

Protease inhibitor
Protease inhibitor
Serine/cysteine proteinase
inhibitor
Isomerase, protein folding
Protein folding
Transport and
binding protein
Protein folding
Protein folding
Protein folding
Heat shock factor

↓ CJD microglia
↓ ScGt1 cells
↑ ScN2a
↓ ScN2a cells
↓ CJD microglia
↑ ScGT1 cells and brain
↑ ScGT1 cells and brain
↑ ScGT1 cells
↓ strain-specific scrapie
infected brain
↑ scrapie infected brain
↓ strain-specific scrapie
infected brain
↑ ScN2a
↓ scrapie infected cortex,
medulla, pons

Baker and Manuelidis
(2003)
Greenwood et al.
(2005)
Greenwood et al.
(2005)
Greenwood et al. (2005)
Baker and Manuelidis
(2003)
Booth et al. (2004b);
Greenwood et al.
(2005)
Booth et al. (2004a);
Greenwood et al.
(2005)
Booth et al. (2004b)
Xiang et al. (2004)
Booth et al. (2004b)
Doh-Ura et al. (1995)
Doh-Ura et al. (1995)
Riemer et al. (2004)

efflux of cholesterol from cells and its subsequent binding to apolipoproteins that were also found to be up-regulated (Booth et al., 2004b). In addition, genes involved in lipid metabolism were also altered in expression profile analysis of CJD-infected microglia (Baker and Manuelidis, 2003). Because microglia can migrate to the brain from the periphery, bringing high levels of infectious prions (Baker et al., 1999), they can represent not only a carrier but also a site of prion production (at least for some PrP strains). Results obtained by analysis of microglia might also be very important in discovering potential cofactors in prion transconformation. In particular, the level of several mediators of lipid uptake and transport, as well as lipoprotein lipase and the scavenger receptors CD36 and CD68, which could promote cholesterol uptake in the form of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), was increased in CJD-infected microglia (Baker and Manuelidis, 2003). In addition, serum amyloid A3 (SAA3), the major constituent of high-density lipoprotein during inflammatory reactions, is also highly increased in CJD microglia and can affect cholesterol storage and release (Ely et al., 2001). In contrast, the concomitant increase in apolipoprotein Cl (ApoCl) levels, which is also linked to other neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (Petit-Turcotte et al., 2001), would inhibit both LDL uptake and lipoprotein lipase activity. This class of genes is of interest not only because alterations in cholesterol metabolism and lipid equilibrium seem to participate in other neurodegenerative diseases (Taraboulos et al., 1995; Simon et al., 1998; Ehehalt et al., 2003; Wollmer et al., 2003; Sarnataro et al., 2004), but also because it has been shown recently that lipids can act as lipochaperones for the folding of transmembrane proteins (Bogdanov and Dowhan, 1999; Sanders and Nagy, 2000). Cholesterol depletion has been shown to cause misfolding of PrPC (Sarnataro et al., 2004) and some mutants (Campana, 2006) in cell cultures, so it could have a role in facilitating the correct folding of PrP and protecting PrP mutants from transformation (Campana et al., 2005).

Another interesting class of genes that emerged from these studies included some proteases and protease inhibitors (Table 2). Cathepsins S, H, C, D, and Z and several protease inhibitors, including the cysteine protease inhibitor cystatin F, were up-regulated in scrapie-infected brains (Booth et al., 2004b; Xiang et al., 2004). Interestingly, cathepsin S was also up-regulated in a first study where mRNA differential display was used to study changes in gene

Fasano et al.
expression in scrapie-infected compared with uninfected mouse brains (Dandoy-Dron et al., 1998), whereas cystatin F was the transcript most highly induced in CJD microglia (Baker and Manuelidis, 2003). Although cathepsins could be linked to the cytotoxic and neurodegenerative process by the induction of apoptosis and the degradation of ECM proteins (Nakanishi, 2003), they could also have an effect on prion replication. This possibility is supported by the fact that in ScN2a cells the activity of some members of this family was found to be significantly increased (Zhang et al., 2003), and lysosomotropic agents and cysteine protease inhibitors block PrPSc accumulation (Doh-Ura et al., 2000), suggesting that lysosomal proteases could act in concert with PrPSc to promote prion replication by disrupting large PrPSc aggregates and expanding the population of converting units, analogous to the effect of sonication in the in vitro PMCA procedure (Saborio et al., 2001; Castilla et al., 2005) (Fig. 1). Moreover, because cystatin family members can form amyloid structures (Staniforth et al., 2001) it is also possible that cystatin F might interact with PrPC and PrPSc and participate in seed formation during prion conversion (see "Cell-Free Systems for Prion Conversion"). One of the most interesting up-regulated genes in infected N2a cells is the insulin-degrading enzyme (Ide) (Greenwood et al., 2005), also associated with the degradation of β-amyloid peptide in Alzheimer's disease (Bian et al., 2004), which could act as a defense against aggregation of misfolded PrPSc.

Chaperone-encoding genes are another class of genes likely to be involved in prion conversion, as evidenced from cDNA microarrays on brains of different mouse models of scrapie (ME7, 79A, and 22A), where different genes specific for each of the three different strains were also identified (Booth et al., 2004a). Of these, the most relevant for prion conversion might be the chaperone-encoding genes hspca, hspA1A (a ubiquitous chaperone), and calreticulin (calr, an ER chaperone), which exhibit strain-specific differences in gene expression, supporting the proposed interaction between PrP and ER biosynthetic and quality control machinery (Booth et al., 2004a).

Other chaperone-encoding genes that exhibit altered expression in infected N2a cells were also found in an earlier study where cDNA libraries from scrapie-infected and uninfected N2a cells were screened with cDNA probes derived by subtractive hybridization (Doh-Ura et al., 1995). In particular, hsp70 was found to be up-regulated and hsp90 downregulated.

Prions: Protein Only or Something More?

Furthermore, several genes involved in cellular responses to stress and/or protein folding, as well as *hspa9a* and the ER chaperone *calr*, were also altered in prion-infected scGT1 (Greenwood et al., 2005). Moreover, the gene-encoding FK506-binding protein, a protein involved in the regulation of protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via cis-trans-proline isomerization (Davis et al., 1998) is down-regulated in CJD microglia such as in infected ScN2a cells (Greenwood et al., 2005), and loss of this function could contribute to ER stress and PrP<sup>Sc</sup> conversion and aggregation. Interestingly, in infected GT1 cells a strong upregulation of Clusterin (Clu [apolipoprotein J]) was found. Because this protein has been shown to accumulate around prion protein lesions and its deficiency seems to reduce the incubation time in mice infected with BSE (Kempster et al., 2004), it has been suggested that it interacts directly with PrP<sup>Sc</sup> and thus might have a role in prion conversion. Moreover, Clu appears to play an important role in other neurodegenerative diseases, such as Sandhoff and Tay Sachs diseases (Myerowitz et al., 2002).

inactive prion aggregates to produce smaller seed-ing units.

We believe that discovering factors involved in prion transconformation is a very important field in prion research, which can contribute to increasing our knowledge about the molecular mechanisms of prion formation and developing a targeted therapeutic strategy.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Chris Bowler for critical reading of the manuscript and Dr. Giampietro Schiavo for discussion. Prion research in the Zurzolo laboratory is supported by grants from MURST (PRIN 2004), the Telethon Foundation (GGP0414), the European Union (QLK-CT-2002-81628), the Weizmann-Pasteur Foundation, and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale.

### References

Adjou K. T., Simoneau S., Sales N., Lamoury F., Dormont D., Papy-Garcia D., et al. (2003) A novel generation of heparan sulfate mimetics for the treatment of prion diseases. *J. Gen. Virol.* 84, 2595–2603.

Adler V., Zeiler B., Kryukov V., Kascsak R., Rubenstein R., and Grossman A. (2003) Small, highly structured RNAs participate in the conversion of human recombinant PrP(Sen) to PrP(Res) in vitro. *J. Mol. Biol.* 332, 47–57.

Aguuzzi A., Heppner F. L., Heikenwalder M., Prinz M., Mertz K., Seeger H., and Glatzel M. (2003) Immune system and peripheral nerves in propagation of prions to CNS. *Br. Med. Bull.* 66, 141–159.

Alper T., Cramp W. A., Haig D. A., and Clarke M. C. (1967) Does the agent of scrapie replicate without nucleic acid? *Nature* 214, 764–766.

Arnold J. E., Tipler C., Laszlo L., Hope J., Landon M., and Mayer R. J. (1995) The abnormal isoform of the prion protein accumulates in late-endosome-like organelles in scrapie-infected mouse brain. *J. Pathol.* 176, 403–411.

Baker C. A. and Manuelidis L. (2003) Unique inflammatory RNA profiles of microglia in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 100, 675–679.

Baker C. A., Lu Z. Y., Zaitsev I., and Manuelidis L. (1999) Microglial activation varies in different models of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. *J. Virol.* 73, 5089–5097.

Baskakov I. V., Aagaard C., Mehlhorn I., Wille H., Groth D., Baldwin M. A., et al. (2000) Self-assembly of recombinant prion protein of 106 residues. *Biochemistry* 39, 2792–2804.

Baskakov I. V., Legname G., Prusiner S. B., and Cohen F. E. (2001) Folding of prion protein to its native alpha-helical conformation is under kinetic control. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 19,687–19,690.

Basler K., Oesch B., Scott M., Westaway D., Walchli M., Groth D. F., et al. (1986) Scrapie and cellular PrP

### Conclusions

By combining information on the factors that directly interact with different PrP isoforms and those that are differentially expressed in prion-infected cells and tissue, some interesting classes of molecules that could act during the process of prion transconformation have emerged. First, chaperones could be required to promote PrP misfolding and aggregation. In this scenario, it is important to note that not only proteins but also sugars, nucleic acids, and lipids could act in these processes. In the latter case, it is remarkable that many genes involved in lipid metabolism were altered in prion-infected cells and tissues. Another class of PrP-interacting molecules includes factors that could operate as coreceptors for PrP<sup>C</sup> and/or PrP<sup>Sc</sup> internalization either by caveolae or clathrin-coated pits. Because the involvement of these two pathways in prion metabolism and transconformation is not clear, whereas endolysosomes seem to participate in prion formation, we also speculate that the presence and levels of these factors in the cell can promote or protect against prion infection and transconformation. Finally, a third class of factors includes proteases and protease inhibitors. Interestingly, these molecules could have a protective role in prion replication by removing pathological aggregates but could also enhance scrapie formation by fragmenting the

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience
Volume 29, 2006

isoforms are encoded by the same chromosomal gene. Cell 46, 417–428.

Bessen R. A. and Marsh R. F. (1992) Biochemical and physical properties of the prion protein from two strains of the transmissible mink encephalopathy agent. J. Virol. 66, 2096–2101.

Bian L., Yang J. D., Guo T. W., Sun Y., Duan S. W., et al. (2004) Insulin-degrading enzyme and Alzheimer disease: a genetic association study in the Han Chinese. Neurology 63, 241–245.

Blatch G. L., Lassle M., Zetter B. R., and Kundra V. (1997) Isolation of a mouse cDNA encoding mSTI1, a stress-inducible protein containing the TPR motif. Gene 194, 277–282.

Bogdanov M. and Dowhan W. (1999) Lipid-assisted protein folding. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 36,827–36,830.

Bolton D. C., McKinley M. P., and Prusiner S. B. (1982) Identification of a protein that purifies with the scrapie prion. Science 218, 1309–1311.

Booth S., Bowman C., Baumgartner R., Dolenko B., Sorensen G., Robertson C., et al. (2004a) Molecular classification of scrapie strains in mice using gene expression profiling. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 325, 1339–1345.

Booth S., Bowman C., Baumgartner R., Sorensen G., Robertson C., Coulthart M., et al. (2004b) Identification of central nervous system genes involved in the host response to the scrapie agent during preclinical and clinical infection. J. Gen. Virol. 85, 3459–3471.

Borchelt D. R., Taraboulos A., and Prusiner S. B. (1992) Evidence for synthesis of scrapie prion proteins in the endocytic pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 16,188–16,199.

Bosque P. J. and Prusiner S. B. (2000) Cultured cell sublines highly susceptible to prion infection. J. Virol. 74, 4377–4386.

Brandner S., Isenmann S., Raeber A., Fischer M., Sailer A., Kobayashi Y., et al. (1996) Normal host prion protein necessary for scrapie-induced neurotoxicity. Nature 379, 339–343.

Bruce M. E. (1993) Scrapie strain variation and mutation. Br. Med. Bull. 49, 822–838.

Bruce M. E. (2003) TSE strain variation. Br. Med. Bull. 66, 99–108.

Bruce M., Chree A., McConnell I., Foster J., Pearson G., and Fraser H. (1994) Transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and scrapie to mice: strain variation and the species barrier. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 343, 405–411.

Bruce M. E., Will R. G., Ironside J. W., McConnell I., Drummond D., Suttie A., et al. (1997) Transmissions to mice indicate that ‘new variant’ CJD is caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389, 498–501.

Bueler H., Aguzzi A., Sailer A., Greiner R. A., Autenried P., Aguet M., and Weissmann C. (1993) Mice devoid of PrP are resistant to scrapie. Cell 73, 1339–1347.

Campana V., Sarnataro D., and Zurzolo C. (2005) The highways and byways of prion protein trafficking. Trends Cell. Biol. 15, 102–111.


Fasano et al.

Campana V., Sarnataro D., Fasano C., Casanova P., Paladino S., and Zurzolo C. (2006) Detergent-resistant membrane domains but not the proteasome are involved in the misfolding of a PrP mutant retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell Sci. 119, 433–442.

Castilla J., Gutierrez-Adan A., Brun A., Pintado B., Parra B., Ramirez M. A., et al. (2004) Different behavior toward bovine spongiform encephalopathy infection of bovine prion protein transgenic mice with one extra repeat octapeptide insert mutation. J. Neurosci. 24, 2156–2164.

Castilla J., Saa P., Hetz C., and Soto C. (2005) In vitro generation of infectious scrapie prions. Cell 121, 195–206.

Chesebro B. (1998) BSE and prions: uncertainties about the agent. Science 279, 42,43.

Chesebro B. (2003) Introduction to the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies or prion diseases. Br. Med. Bull. 66, 1–20.

Chiarini L. B., Freitas A. R., Zanata S. M., Brentani R. R., Martins V. R., and Linden R. (2002) Cellular prion protein transduces neuroprotective signals. EMBO J. 21, 3317–3326.

Chiesa R., Piccardo P., Ghetti B., and Harris D. A. (1998) Neurological illness in transgenic mice expressing a prion protein with an insertional mutation. Neuron 21, 1339–1351.

Cohen F. E. and Prusiner S. B. (1998) Pathologic conformations of prion proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 793–819.

Collinge J. (2001) Prion diseases of humans and animals: their causes and molecular basis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 519–550.

Collinge J., Sidle K. C., Meads J., Ironside J., and Hill A. F. (1996) Molecular analysis of prion strain variation and the aetiology of ‘new variant’ CJD. Nature 383, 685–690.

Come J. H., Fraser P. E., and Lansbury P. T., Jr. (1993) A kinetic model for amyloid formation in the prion diseases: importance of seeding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 5959–5963.

Cordeiro Y., Machado F., Juliano L., Juliano M. A., Brentani R. R., Foguel D., and Silva J. L. (2001) DNA converts cellular prion protein into the beta-sheet conformation and inhibits prion peptide aggregation. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 49,400–49,409.

Dandoy-Dron F., Guillo F., Benboudjema L., Deslys J. P., Lasmezas C., Dormont D., et al. (1998) Gene expression in scrapie. Cloning of a new scrapie-responsive gene and the identification of increased levels of seven other mRNA transcripts. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 7691–7697.

Davis E. C., Broekelmann T. J., Ozawa Y., and Mecham R. P. (1998) Identification of tropoelastin as a ligand for the 65-kDFK506-binding protein, FKBP65, in the secretory pathway. J. Cell Biol. 140, 295–303.

DeArmond S. J., Sanchez H., Yehiely F., Qiu Y., Ninchak-Casey A., Daggett V., et al. (1997) Selective neuronal targeting in prion disease. Neuron 19, 1337–1348.

Deleault N. R., Lucassen R. W., and Supattapone S. (2003) RNA molecules stimulate prion protein conversion. Nature 425, 717–720.

Doh-Ura K., Iwaki T., and Caughey B. (2000) Lysosomotropic agents and cysteine protease inhibitors inhibit scrapie-associated prion protein accumulation. *J. Virol.* 74, 4894–4897.

Doh-Ura K., Perryman S., Race R., and Chesebro B. (1995) Identification of differentially expressed genes in scrapie-infected mouse neuroblastoma cells. *Microb. Pathog.* 18, 1–9.

Edenhofer F., Rieger R., Famulok M., Wendler W., Weiss S., and Winnacker E. L. (1996) Prion protein PrPc interacts with molecular chaperones of the Hsp60 family. *J. Virol.* 70, 4724–4728.

Ehehalt R., Keller P., Haass C., Thiele C., and Simons K. (2003) Amyloidogenic processing of the Alzheimer beta-amyloid precursor protein depends on lipid rafts. *J. Cell Biol.* 160, 113–123.

Ellis V., Daniels M., Misra R., and Brown D. R. (2002) Plasminogen activation is stimulated by prion protein and regulated in a copper-dependent manner. *Biochemistry* 41, 6891–6896.

Ely S., Bonatesta R., Ancsin J. B., Kindy M., and Kisilevsky R. (2001) The in-vitro influence of serum amyloid A isoforms on enzymes that regulate the balance between esterified and un-esterified cholesterol. *Amyloid* 8, 169–181.

Enari M., Flechsig E., and Weissmann C. (2001) Scrapie prion protein accumulation by scrapie-infected neuroblastoma cells abrogated by exposure to a prion protein antibody. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 98, 9295–9299.

Fischer M. B., Roeckl C., Parizek P., Schwarz H. P., and Aguzzi A. (2000) Binding of disease-associated prion protein to plasminogen. *Nature* 408, 479–483.

Gabizon R., McKinley M. P., Groth D., and Prusiner S. B. (1988) Immunoaffinity purification and neutralization of scrapie prion infectivity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 85, 6617–6621.

Gajdusek D. C. and Gibbs C. J. Jr. (1971) Transmission of two subacute spongiform encephalopathies of man (Kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) to new world monkeys. *Nature* 230, 588–591.

Gajdusek D. C., Gibbs C. J., and Alpers M. (1966) Experimental transmission of a Kuru-like syndrome to chimpanzees. *Nature* 209, 794–796.

Gambetti P., Kong Q., Zou W., Parchi P., and Chen S. G. (2003) Sporadic and familial CJD: classification and characterisation. *Br. Med. Bull.* 66, 213–239.

Gauczynski S., Hundt C., Leucht C., and Weiss S. (2001a) Interaction of prion proteins with cell surface receptors, molecular chaperones, and other molecules. *Adv. Protein Chem.* 57, 229–272.

Gauczynski S., Peyrin J. M., Haik S., Leucht C., Hundt C., Rieger R., et al. (2001b) The 37-kDa/67-kDa laminin receptor acts as the cell-surface receptor for the cellular prion protein. *EMBO J.* 20, 5863–5875.

Graner E., Mercadante A. F., Zanata S. M., Forlenza O. V., Cabral A. L., Veiga S. S., et al. (2000a) Cellular prion protein binds laminin and mediates neuritogenesis. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 76, 85–92.

Graner E., Mercadante A. F., Zanata S. M., Martins V. R., Jay D. G., and Brentani R. R. (2000b) Laminin-induced PC-12 cell differentiation is inhibited following laser inactivation of cellular prion protein. *FEBS Lett.* 482, 257–260.

Greenwood A. D., Horsch M., Stengel A., Vorberg I., Lutzny G., Maas E., et al. (2005) Cell line dependent RNA expression profiles of prion-infected mouse neuronal cells. *J. Mol. Biol.* 349, 487–500.

Griffith J. S. (1967) Self-replication and scrapie. *Nature* 215, 1043–1044.

Harper J. D. and Lansbury P. T. Jr. (1997) Models of amyloid seeding in Alzheimer's disease and scrapie: mechanistic truths and physiological consequences of the time-dependent solubility of amyloid proteins. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 66, 385–407.

Harris D. A. (2003) Trafficking, turnover and membrane topology of PrP. *Br. Med. Bull.* 66, 71–85.

Heppner F. L., Christ A. D., Klein M. A., Prinz M., Fried M., Kraehenbuhl J. P., and Aguzzi A. (2001) Trans-epithelial prion transport by M-cells. *Nat. Med.* 7, 976–977.

Hill A. F. and Collinge J. (2001) Strain variations and species barriers. *Contrib. Microbiol.* 7, 48–57.

Hill A. F., Desbruslais M., Joiner S., Sidle K. C., Gowland I., Collinge J., et al. (1997) The same prion strain causes vCJD and BSE. *Nature* 389, 448–450.

Hope J. (1994) The nature of the scrapie agent: the evolution of the virino. *Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.* 724, 282–289.

Horiuchi M. and Caughey B. (1999) Specific binding of normal prion protein to the scrapie form via a localized domain initiates its conversion to the protease-resistant state. *EMBO J.* 18, 3193–3203.

Horiuchi M., Baron G. S., Xiong L. W., and Caughey B. (2001) Inhibition of interactions and interconversions of prion protein isoforms by peptide fragments from the C-terminal folded domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 15,489–15,497.

Hornemann S. and Glockshuber R. (1998) A scrapie-like unfolding intermediate of the prion protein domain PrP(121-231) induced by acidic pH. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 6010–6014.

Hundt C., Peyrin J. M., Haik S., Gauczynski S., Leucht C., Rieger R., et al. (2001) Identification of interaction domains of the prion protein with its 37-kDa/67-kDa laminin receptor. *EMBO J.* 20, 5876–5886.

Hunter N., Goldmann W., Benson G., Foster J. D., and Hope J. (1993) Swaledale sheep affected by natural scrapie differ significantly in PrP genotype frequencies from healthy sheep and those selected for reduced incidence of scrapie. *J. Gen. Virol.* 74, 1025–1031.

Ironside J. W. (2003) The spectrum of safety: variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the United Kingdom. *Semin. Hematol.* 40, 16–22.

Jackson G. S., Hill A. F., Joseph C., Hosszu L., Power A., Waltho J. P., et al. (1999a) Multiple folding pathways for heterologously expressed human prion protein. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1431, 1–13.

Jackson G. S., Hosszu L. L., Power A., Hill A. F., Kenney J., Saibil H., et al. (1999b) Reversible conversion of

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience
Volume 29, 2006

monomeric human prion protein between native and fibrilogenic conformations. *Science* 283, 1935–1937.

Jansen K., Schafer O., Birkmann E., Post K., Serban H., Prusiner S. B., and Riesner D. (2001) Structural intermediates in the putative pathway from the cellular prion protein to the pathogenic form. *Biol. Chem.* 382, 683–691.

Jarrett J. T. and Lansbury P. T. Jr. (1993) Seeding “one-dimensional crystallization” of amyloid: a pathogenic mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease and scrapie? *Cell* 73, 1055–1058.

Jin T., Gu Y., Zanusso G., Sy M., Kumar A., Cohen M., Gambetti P., and Singh N. (2000) The chaperone protein BiP binds to a mutant prion protein and mediates its degradation by the proteasome. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 38,699–38,704.

Kazlauskaitė J. and Pinheiro T. J. (2005) Aggregation and fibrillation of prions in lipid membranes. *Biochem. Soc. Symp.* 72, 211–222.

Kazlauskaitė J., Sanghera N., Sylvester I., Venien-Bryan C., and Pinheiro T. J. (2003) Structural changes of the prion protein in lipid membranes leading to aggregation and fibrillation. *Biochemistry* 42, 3295–3304.

Kempster S., Collins M. E., Aronow B. J., Simmons M., Green R. B., and Edington N. (2004) Clusterin shortens the incubation and alters the histopathology of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in mice. *Neuroreport* 15, 1735–1738.

Kimberlin R. H., Cole S., and Walker C. A. (1987) Temporary and permanent modifications to a single strain of mouse scrapie on transmission to rats and hamsters. *J. Gen. Virol.* 68, 1875–1881.

Kocisko D. A., Come J. H., Priola S. A., Chesebro B., Raymond G. J., Lansbury P. T., and Caughey B. (1994) Cell-free formation of protease-resistant prion protein. *Nature* 370, 471–474.

Kopacek J., Sagaguchi S., Shigematsu K., et al. (2000) Upregulation of the genes encoding lysosomal hydrolases, a peforin-like protein, and peroxidases in the brains of mice affected with an experimental prion disease. *J. Virol.* 74, 411–417.

Kurschner C. and Morgan J. I. (1995) The cellular prion protein (PrP) selectively binds to Bcl-2 in the yeast two-hybrid system. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 30, 165–168.

Lasmezas C. I., Comoy E., Hawkins S., Herzog C., Mouton F., Konold T., et al. (2005) Risk of oral infection with bovine spongiform encephalopathy agent in primates. *Lancet* 365, 781–783.

Lasmezas C. I., Deslys J. P., Demaimay R., Adjou K. T., Lamoury F., Dormont D., et al. (1996) BSE transmission to macaques. *Nature* 381, 743–744.

Lassle M., Blatch G. L., Kundra V., Takatori T., and Zetter B. R. (1997) Stress-inducible, murine protein mSTI1. Characterization of binding domains for heat shock proteins and in vitro phosphorylation by different kinases. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 1876–1884.

Lee S. and Eisenberg D. (2003) Seeded conversion of recombinant prion protein to a disulfide-bonded

Fasano et al.

oligomer by a reduction-oxidation process. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* 10, 725–730.

Lee K. S., Linden R., Prado M. A., Brentani R. R., and Martins V. R. (2003) Towards cellular receptors for prions. *Rev. Med. Virol.* 13, 399–408.

Legname G., Baskakov I. V., Nguyen H. O., Riesner D., Cohen F. E., DeArmond S. J., and Prusiner S. B. (2004) Synthetic mammalian prions. *Science* 305, 673–676.

Lehmann S. and Harris D. A. (1996) Two mutant prion proteins expressed in cultured cells acquire biochemical properties reminiscent of the scrapie isoform. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 93, 5610–5614.

Maisissen M., Roeckl C., Glatzel M., Goldmann W., and Aguzzi A. (2001) Plasminogen binds to disease-associated prion protein of multiple species. *Lancet* 357, 2026–2028.

May B. C., Govaerts C., Prusiner S. B., and Cohen F. E. (2004) Prions: so many fibers, so little infectivity. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 29, 162–165.

Mestel R. (1996) Putting prions to the test. *Science* 273, 184–189.

Miller M. W., Williams E. S., Hobbs N. T., and Wolfe L. L. (2004) Environmental sources of prion transmission in mule deer. *Emerg. Infect. Dis.* 10, 1003–1006.

Montrasio F., Cozzio A., Flechsig E., Rossi D., Klein M. A., Rulicke T., et al. (2001) B lymphocyte-restricted expression of prion protein does not enable prion replication in prion protein knockout mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 98, 4034–4037.

Morillas M., Swietnicki W., Gambetti P., and Surewicz W. K. (1999) Membrane environment alters the conformational structure of the recombinant human prion protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 36,859–36,865.

Morillas M., Vanik D. L., and Surewicz W. K. (2001) On the mechanism of alpha-helix to beta-sheet transition in the recombinant prion protein. *Biochemistry* 40, 6982–6987.

Myerowitz R., Lawson D., Mizukami H., Mi Y., Tifft C. J., and Proia R. L. (2002) Molecular pathophysiology in Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases as revealed by gene expression profiling. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 11, 1343–1350.

Nakanishi H. (2003) Neuronal and microglial cathepsins in aging and age-related diseases. *Ageing Res. Rev.* 2, 367–381.

Nandi P. K., Leclerc E., Nicole J. C., and Takahashi M. (2002) DNA-induced partial unfolding of prion protein leads to its polymerisation to amyloid. *J. Mol. Biol.* 322, 153–161.

Nishida N., Harris D. A., Vilette D., Laude H., Frobert Y., Grassi J., et al. (2000) Successful transmission of three mouse-adapted scrapie strains to murine neuroblastoma cell lines overexpressing wild-type mouse prion protein. *J. Virol.* 74, 320–325.

Oesch B., Teplow D. B., Stahl N., Serban D., Hood L. E., and Prusiner S. B. (1990) Identification of cellular proteins binding to the scrapie prion protein. *Biochemistry* 29, 5848–5855.

Orgel L. E. (1996) Prion replication and secondary nucleation. *Chem. Biol.* 3, 413–414.

Pan K. M., Baldwin M., Nguyen J., Gasset M., Serban A., Groth D., et al. (1993) Conversion of alpha-helices into beta-sheets features in the formation of the scrapie prion proteins. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 90, 10,962–10,966.

Pan T., Wong B. S., Liu T., Li R., Petersen R. B., and Sy M. S. (2002) Cell-surface prion protein interacts with glyco-saminoglycans. *Biochem. J.* 368, 81–90.

Peretz D., Williamson R. A., Kaneko K., Vergara J., Leclerc E., Schmitt-Ulms G., et al. (2001) Antibodies inhibit prion propagation and clear cell cultures of prion infectivity. *Nature* 412, 739–743.

Perrier V., Kaneko K., Safar J., Vergara J., Tremblay P., DeArmond S. J., et al. (2002) Dominant-negative inhibition of prion replication in transgenic mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 99, 13,079–13,084.

Petit-Turcotte C., Stohl S. M., Beffert U., Cohn J. S., Aumont N., Tremblay M., et al. (2001) Apolipoprotein C-I expression in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 8, 953–963.

Post K., Pitschke M., Schafer O., Wille H., Appel T. R., Kirsch D., et al. (1998) Rapid acquisition of beta-sheet structure in the prion protein prior to multimer formation. *Biol. Chem.* 379, 1307–1317.

Priola S. A. and Caughey B. (1994) Inhibition of scrapie-associated PrP accumulation. Probing the role of glyco-saminoglycans in amyloidogenesis. *Mol. Neurobiol.* 8, 113–120.

Priola S. A. and Chesebro B. (1995) A single hamster PrP amino acid blocks conversion to protease-resistant PrP in scrapie-infected mouse neuroblastoma cells. *J. Virol.* 69, 7754–7758.

Prusiner S. B. (1991) Molecular biology of prion diseases. *Science* 252, 1515–1522.

Prusiner S. B. (1982) Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie. *Science* 216, 136–144.

Prusiner S. B. (1998) Prions. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 13,363–13,383.

Prusiner S. B., Scott M., Foster D., Pan K. M., Groth D., Mirenda C., et al. (1990) Transgenic studies implicate interactions between homologous PrP isoforms in scrapie prion replication. *Cell* 63, 673–686.

Race R. E., Fadness L. H., and Chesebro B. (1987) Characterization of scrapie infection in mouse neuroblastoma cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 68, 1391–1399.

Rieger R., Edenhofer F., Lasmezas C. I., and Weiss S. (1997) The human 37-kDa laminin receptor precursor interacts with the prion protein in eukaryotic cells. *Nat. Med.* 3, 1383–1388.

Riemer C., Neidhold S., Burwinkel M., Schwarz A., Schultz J., Kratzschmar J., et al. (2004) Gene expression profiling of scrapie-infected brain tissue. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 323, 556–564.

Riesner D. (2003) Biochemistry and structure of PrP(C) and PrP(Sc). *Br. Med. Bull.* 66, 21–33.

Riesner D., Kellings K., Post K., Wille H., Serban H., Groth D., et al. (1996) Disruption of prion rods generates 10-nm spherical particles having high alpha-

helical content and lacking scrapie infectivity. *J. Virol.* 70, 1714–1722.

Rubenstein R., Carp R. I., and Callahan S. M. (1984) In vitro replication of scrapie agent in a neuronal model: infection of PC12 cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 65, 2191–2198.

Saborio G. P., Permanne B., and Soto C. (2001) Sensitive detection of pathological prion protein by cyclic amplification of protein misfolding. *Nature* 411, 810–813.

Safar J. G., Kellings K., Serban A., Groth D., Cleaver J. E., Prusiner S. B., and Riesner D. (2005) Search for a prion-specific nucleic acid. *J. Virol.* 79, 10,796–10,806.

Sanders C. R. and Nagy J. K. (2000) Misfolding of membrane proteins in health and disease: the lady or the tiger? *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* 10, 438–442.

Sanghera N. and Pinheiro T. J. (2002) Binding of prion protein to lipid membranes and implications for prion conversion. *J. Mol. Biol.* 315, 1241–1256.

Sarnataro D., Campana V., Paladino S., Stornaiuolo M., Nitsch L., and Zurzolo C. (2004) PrPC Association with lipid rafts in the early secretory pathway stabilizes its cellular conformation. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 15, 4031–4042.

Schatzl H. M., Laszlo L., Holtzman D. M., Tatzelt J., De-Armond S. J., Weiner R. I., et al. (1997) A hypothalamic neuronal cell line persistently infected with scrapie prions exhibits apoptosis. *J. Virol.* 71, 8821–8831.

Schmitt-Ulms G., Legname G., Baldwin M. A., Ball H. L., Bradon N., Bosque P. J., et al. (2001) Binding of neural cell adhesion molecules (N-CAMs) to the cellular prion protein. *J. Mol. Biol.* 314, 1209–1225.

Schonberger O., Horonchik L., Gabizon R., Papy-Garcia D., Barritault D., and Taraboulos A. (2003) Novel heparan mimetics potently inhibit the scrapie prion protein and its endocytosis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 312, 473–479.

Shibuya S., Higuchi J., Shin R. W., Tateishi J., and Kitamoto T. (1998) Protective prion protein polymorphisms against sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. *Lancet* 351, 419.

Shyng S. L., Heuser J. E., and Harris D. A. (1994) A glycolipid-anchored prion protein is endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits. *J. Cell Biol.* 125, 1239–1250.

Simons M., Keller P., De Strooper B., Beyreuther K., Dotti C. G., and Simons K. (1998) Cholesterol depletion inhibits the generation of beta-amyloid in hippocampal neurons. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 6460–6464.

Soto C., Saborio G. P., and Anderes L. (2002) Cyclic amplification of protein misfolding: application to prion-related disorders and beyond. *Trends Neurosci.* 25, 390–394.

Staniforth R. A., Giannini S., Higgins L. D., Conroy M. J., Hounslow A. M., Jerala R., et al. (2001) Three-dimensional domain swapping in the folded and molten-globule states of cystatins, an amyloid-forming structural superfamily. *EMBO J.* 20, 4774–4781.

Stockel J. and Hartl F. U. (2001) Chaperonin-mediated de novo generation of prion protein aggregates. *J. Mol. Biol.* 313, 861–872.

Stuermer C. A., Langhorst M. F., Wiechers M. F., Legler D. F., Von Hanwehr S. H., Guse A. H., and Plattner H.

(2004) PrPc capping in T cells promotes its association with the lipid raft proteins reggie-1 and reggie-2 and leads to signal transduction. *FASEB J.* 18, 1731–1733.

Supattapone S. (2004) Prion protein conversion in vitro. *J. Mol. Med.* 82, 348–356.

Supattapone S., Nguyen H. O., Cohen F. E., Prusiner S. B., and Scott M. R. (1999) Elimination of prions by branched polyamines and implications for therapeutics. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 14,529–14,534.

Taraboulos A., Raeber A. J., Borchelt D. R., Serban D., and Prusiner S. B. (1992) Synthesis and trafficking of prion proteins in cultured cells. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 3, 851–863.

Taraboulos A., Scott M., Semenov A., Avrahami D., Laszlo L., Prusiner S. B., and Avraham D. (1995) Cholesterol depletion and modification of COOH-terminal targeting sequence of the prion protein inhibit formation of the scrapie isoform. *J. Cell Biol.* 129, 121–132.

Telling G. C., Parchi P., DeArmond S. J., Cortelli P., Montagna P., Gabizon R., et al. (1996) Evidence for the conformation of the pathologic isoform of the prion protein enciphering and propagating prion diversity. *Science* 274, 2079–2082.

Telling G. C., Scott M., Hsiao K. K., Foster D., Yang S. L., Torchia M., et al. (1994) Transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from humans to transgenic mice expressing chimeric human-mouse prion protein. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 91, 9936–9940.

Telling G. C., Scott M., Mastrianni J., Gabizon R., Torchia M., Cohen F. E., et al. (1995) Prion propagation in mice expressing human and chimeric PrP transgenes implicates the interaction of cellular PrP with another protein. *Cell* 83, 79–90.

Vilette D., Andreoletti O., Archer F., Madelaine M. F., Vilotte J. L., Lehmann S., and Laude H. (2001) Ex vivo propagation of infectious sheep scrapie agent in heterologous epithelial cells expressing ovine prion protein. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 98, 4055–4059.

Vorberg I., Raines A., Story B., and Priola S. A. (2004) Susceptibility of common fibroblast cell lines to transmissible spongiform encephalopathy agents. *J. Infect. Dis.* 189, 431–439.

Weissmann C. (1991) A 'unified theory' of prion propagation. *Nature* 352, 679–683.

Weissmann C. (2004) The state of the prion. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 2, 861–871.

Fasano et al.

Weissmann C. and Flechsig E. (2003) PrP knock-out and PrP transgenic mice in prion research. *Br. Med. Bull.* 66, 43–60.

Welker E., Raymond L. D., Scheraga H. A., and Caughey B. (2002) Intramolecular versus intermolecular disulfide bonds in prion proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 33,477–33,481.

Westaway D., DeArmond S. J., Cayetano-Canlas J., Groth D., Foster D., Yang S. L., et al. (1994) Degeneration of skeletal muscle, peripheral nerves, and the central nervous system in transgenic mice overexpressing wild-type prion proteins. *Cell* 76, 117–129.

Will R. G., Ironside J. W., Zeidler M., Cousens S. N., Estibeiro K., Alperovitch A., et al. (1996) A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. *Lancet* 347, 921–925.

Wollmer M. A., Streffer J. R., Lutjohann D., Tsolaki M., Iakovidou V., Hegi T., et al. (2003) ABCA1 modulates CSF cholesterol levels and influences the age at onset of Alzheimer's disease. *Neurobiol. Aging* 24, 421–426.

Wong C., Xiong L. W., Horiuchi M., Raymond L., Wehrly K., Chesebro B., and Caughey B. (2001) Sulfated glycans and elevated temperature stimulate PrP(Sc)-dependent cell-free formation of protease-resistant prion protein. *EMBO J.* 20, 377–386.

Xiang W., Windl O., Wunsch G., Dugas M., Kohlmann A., Dierkes N., et al. (2004) Identification of differentially expressed genes in scrapie-infected mouse brains by using global gene expression technology. *J. Virol.* 78, 11,051–11,060.

Yehily F., Bamborough P., Da Costa M., Perry B. J., Thnakaran G., Cohen F. E., et al. (1997) Identification of candidate proteins binding to prion protein. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 3, 339–355.

Zanata S. M., Lopes M. H., Mercadante A. F., Hajj G. N., Chiarini L. B., Nomizo R., et al. (2002) Stress-inducible protein 1 is a cell surface ligand for cellular prion that triggers neuroprotection. *EMBO J.* 21, 3307–3316.

Zhang H., Kaneko K., Nguyen J. T., Livshits T. L., Baldwin M. A., Cohen F. E., et al. (1995) Conformational transitions in peptides containing two putative alpha-helices of the prion protein. *J. Mol. Biol.* 250, 514–526.

Zhang Y., Spiess E., Groschup M. H., and Burkle A. (2003) Up-regulation of cathepsin B and cathepsin L activities in scrapie-infected mouse Neuro2a cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 84, 2279–2283.
