
Genome Analysis

---

# Genome-Wide Analysis of the Arabidopsis Leaf Transcriptome Reveals Interaction of Phosphate and Sugar Metabolism${}^{1[W]}$

Renate Müller, Marc Morant, Hanne Jarmer, Lena Nilsson, and Tom Hamborg Nielsen*

Plant Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Plant Biology, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, DK–1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark (R.M., M.M., L.N., T.H.N.); Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, BioCentrum-DTU, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet, DK–2800 Lyngby, Denmark (H.J.); and Department of Agricultural Sciences, Crop Science, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, 2630 Taastrup, Denmark (R.M.)

Global gene expression was analyzed in Arabidopsis (*Arabidopsis thaliana*) by microarrays comprising 21,500 genes. Leaf segments derived from phosphorus (P)-starved and P-replenished plants were incubated with or without sucrose (Suc) to obtain tissues with contrasting combinations of P and carbohydrate levels. Transcript profiling revealed the influence of the two factors individually and the interactions between P- and sugar-dependent gene regulation. A large number of gene transcripts changed more than 2-fold: In response to P starvation, 171 genes were induced and 16 repressed, whereas Suc incubation resulted in 337 induced and 307 repressed genes. A number of new candidate genes involved in P acquisition were discovered. In addition, several putative transcription factors and signaling proteins of P sensing were disclosed. Several genes previously identified to be sugar responsive were also regulated by P starvation and known P-responsive genes were sugar inducible. Nearly 150 genes were synergistically or antagonistically regulated by the two factors. These genes exhibit more prominent or contrasting regulation in response to Suc and P in combination than expected from the effect of the two factors individually. The genes exhibiting interactions form three main clusters with different response patterns and functionality of genes. One cluster (cluster 1) most likely represents a regulatory program to support increased growth and development when both P and carbohydrates are ample. Another cluster (cluster 3) represents genes induced to alleviate P starvation and these are further induced by carbohydrate accumulation. Thus, interactions between P and Suc reveal two different signaling programs and novel interactions in gene regulation in response to environmental factors. cis-Regulatory elements were analyzed for each factor and for interaction clusters. PHR1 binding sites were more frequent in promoters of P-regulated genes as compared to the entire Arabidopsis genome, and E2F and PHR1 binding sites were more frequent in interaction clusters 1 and 3, respectively.

Phosphorus (P) is an essential macronutrient and efficient acquisition of phosphate ($\mathrm{P}_{i}$) is an important factor for plant growth. Consequently, plants have evolved a wide range of morphological and molecular adaptations to increase remobilization, uptake, and efficient use of $\mathrm{P}_{i}$ when availability is low. These adaptations require the plant to sense the level of $\mathrm{P}_{i}$ and change the expression of a number of genes accordingly.

In Arabidopsis (*Arabidopsis thaliana*), such P-responsive genes are exemplified by genes coding for RNases (Bariola et al., 1994), phosphatases (del Pozo et al., 1999), and high-affinity $\mathrm{P}_{i}$ transporters, which are responsible for P uptake against a steep concentration gradient. To some extent, low-affinity $\mathrm{P}_{i}$ transporters are also induced in response to P limitation (Muchhal et al., 1996; Muchhal and Raghothama, 1999; Mudge et al., 2002). Other typical markers for P deficiency are the genes *At4* (Burleigh and Harrison, 1999) and *IPS1* (Martin et al., 2000), which appear to have regulatory functions (Shin et al., 2006). Although numerous P starvation-inducible genes have been reported (Raghothama, 1999), understanding of transcriptional regulation in response to P deficiency is still far from complete and molecular mechanisms that initially sense and transmit information on P status in plants are largely unknown.

The use of microarray techniques in transcriptome analysis has opened new possibilities to elucidate the sensing, signaling, and regulatory pathways of the P starvation response. In a partial transcriptome analysis of responses to $\mathrm{P}_{i}$ starvation in Arabidopsis (Wu et al., 2003), 6,172 genes were analyzed and 29% of the genes were altered in the root and/or shoot. The regulated genes could be divided into several groups according to the temporal pattern of expression and the tissue in which genes were induced or repressed. In another transcriptome study, Hammond et al. (2003) concluded that at least two transcriptional programs

---

${}^{1}$ This work was supported by the Danish National Research Foundation, Center for Molecular Plant Physiology, and by the Danish Research Council for Technology and Production Sciences.

* Corresponding author; e-mail thni@kvl.dk; fax 45–35283333.

The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the findings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is: Tom Hamborg Nielsen (thni@kvl.dk).

[W] The online version of this article contains Web-only data. www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.106.090167

156 Plant Physiology, January 2007, Vol. 143, pp. 156–171, www.plantphysiol.org © 2006 American Society of Plant Biologists Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

operate in response to P starvation. First, a transient change in expression during the early stages of starvation preferentially involves genes characteristic for general stress responses. Thereafter, transcriptional changes are induced for genes that mainly play a more specific role in the alleviation of Pi starvation. The concept of a less specific early response and a more specific later response to Pi starvation was also supported by transcriptome analysis of tomato (*Lycopersicon esculentum*) roots following Pi, potassium (K), and iron (Fe) limitation (Wang et al., 2002), where expression of several of the early responding genes was coordinately induced by all these types of nutrient stress.

Recently, comprehensive examination of global gene expression in response to P deficiency revealed coordinated induction of 612 genes and suppression of 254 genes, respectively (Misson et al., 2005). The regulated genes were involved in a wide range of functional groups related to metabolism, ion transport, signal transduction, transcriptional regulation, and growth and development. Such results may contribute to the identification of key molecular determinants for the improvement of Pi economy.

Evidence for close interactions between P- and sugar-sensing pathways has recently emerged. Aside from the crucial role of P in metabolic pathways (Paul and Stitt, 1993; Plaxton and Carswell, 1999), P status in plants also modifies metabolism by transcriptional regulation of several genes encoding enzymes with function in carbohydrate metabolism (Nielsen et al., 1998; Ciereszko et al., 2001a, 2001b). Regulation of gene expression typically represents more long-term metabolic adaptations (Gibon et al., 2004), and sugar-regulated gene expression is known to influence general activity of photosynthetic carbon (C) metabolism (Paul and Pellny, 2003; Thum et al., 2004) and a multitude of other aspects of metabolism and tissue development (Rolland et al., 2006). Likewise, interaction with P status mediated through gene expression is expected to influence overall C metabolism and vice versa. However, documented examples of cross-talk between sugar and P signaling are still relatively few. In soybean (*Glycine max*), sugar-induced expression of *VspB*, a gene encoding a vacuolar acid phosphatase, was repressed by Pi. This suggested a common mechanism of transcriptional control and a promoter domain, which mediates both sugar induction and Pi repression, was identified (Sadka et al., 1994). In the same study, several other sugar-inducible genes were also shown to be repressed by Pi in the absence of exogenous Suc. In tobacco (*Nicotiana tabacum*) seedlings, Pi starvation promoted expression of a gene encoding the AGPase small subunit (AGPS2) and this effect was more prominent when Suc was added. Feeding Pi to excised leaves also decreased the AGPS2 transcript level by antagonizing the induction by Suc (Nielsen et al., 1998). In Arabidopsis, the impact of P on C metabolism has been exemplified by P starvation-induced expression of genes for β-glucosidase (Malboobi and Lefebvre, 1997), UDP-Glc pyrophosphorylase (UGPase), and the small subunit of ADP-Glc pyrophosphorylase (Ciereszko et al., 2001a, 2001b), and sugar induction of a Pi transporter has been demonstrated in Arabidopsis roots (Lejay et al., 2003). Recently, we have shown for Arabidopsis that the sugar-inducible genes encoding β-amylase (*BMY1*) and chalcone synthase (*CHS*) are also induced by P deficiency and are more strongly regulated by sugars when leaf segments originate from P-starved plants. In addition, transcript levels of the P starvation-inducible genes *ACP5* (encoding an acid phosphatase), *RNS1* (encoding a ribonuclease), and *IPS1* (unknown function) increase in response to exogenously applied sugars, and supply of Pi to the leaf segments reversed both P starvation-induced and sugar-induced gene expression (Müller et al., 2005). In accordance with these data, it has been shown for white lupine (*Lupinus albus*) that induction of a phosphate transporter and an acid phosphatase in roots in response to P deficiency requires either photosynthesis and phloem transport or exogenously applied sugar (Liu et al., 2005).

These studies demonstrate that Pi influences sugar sensing of genes involved in C metabolism and also that sugars influence Pi-regulated genes with a function in P metabolism. However, the overall pattern and mechanisms behind these interactions still need to be outlined, and clearly this calls for closer examination.

The focus of this study was to test the effect of P starvation and Suc accumulation in combination. Our hypothesis was that synergistic effects on gene expression by these two major nutrients have widespread importance for the regulation of P starvation-dependent genes, but also that further interaction patterns exist representing different regulatory programs, which will be revealed by analysis of global gene expression.

Previously, we demonstrated that resupply of Pi to starved plants is a useful approach to explore P starvation responses. Combination of this approach with sugar-feeding experiments makes it possible to control and change both Pi and sugar levels in tissues over short time periods, and this setup has proven valuable to study the interaction of P and sugar sensing (Müller et al., 2004, 2005). This microarray study investigates the effect on transcriptional activity of Pi and Suc concentrations, individually and in combination. Thus, we reveal novel interactions and disclose new candidate genes of signaling pathways. A large number of differentially expressed genes were identified for the two individual factors, P starvation and Suc. In addition, a subset of nearly 150 genes was synergistically regulated in response to both factors, and cluster analysis of these genes reveals a strong relationship between different patterns of interaction and functionality of genes.

---

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this study, comprehensive analysis of gene expression in response to P starvation and Suc treatment
Müller et al.

was conducted using Arabidopsis Agilent microarrays with a total number of 21,500 genes represented. The aim was to explore cross-talk between transcriptional regulation in response to the two factors and to identify new candidate genes involved in P sensing.

### Pi Concentrations and Sugar Content

Arabidopsis plants of similar size and development, but with different Pi status, were obtained by first growing plants on limited P supply (0.05 mM Pi in rockwool media) and then either maintaining these conditions or supplying the plants with high P concentration (4 mM Pi) for 1 week. Leaf segments with different Pi status were then incubated with or without Suc. Quantification of P in leaf segments verified that the total P content in resupplied plants was increased about 7-fold as compared to starved plants and the level of Pi was about 70-fold higher than in starved plants. As expected, leaves of P-starved plants had a higher level of sugars (3-fold) than P-supplied plants. During incubation, leaf segments remained floating, but with good contact to the solutions, and a considerable amount of exogenous Suc was taken up and metabolized to Fru and Glc (Table I). These data confirm that the samples represent different combinations of Pi and sugar status.

### General Features of the P Starvation and Sugar Treatment Expression Profile

Two treatments at a time were compared on a set of slides revealing the relative changes in gene expression. With a significance level of \(P < 0.001\), a total of 1,319 genes responded to P starvation (6.1% of the genes on the array), 5,479 genes responded to Suc (25.5%), and 149 genes exhibited alteration in transcript level, which revealed interaction between the two factors (0.7%). Full datasets for each of the factors P, Suc, and their interaction are available (Supplemental Tables S2, S3, and S4).

There are both distinct and overlapping groups of genes regulated in response to P starvation and Suc (Fig. 1). Five hundred and five genes were significantly regulated in response to both treatments, but independently, whereas 72 genes, which also responded to both P and Suc, showed interaction between the two factors. This group of genes will respond to either of the factors alone, but the response pattern will also depend on the other factor. In principle, the combined effect of two factors without interaction could be assumed additive or multiplicative. When testing for interaction, we have assumed a multiplicative effect of the two factors as a basis for our evaluation because this is the more stringent test. A small group of 20 genes responded in a contrasting manner to both individual factors, depending on the other factor, and, therefore, on average there is no effect and the response is exclusively interaction. For example, if P depletion induces a gene at low Suc but represses the gene at high Suc, then there is on average no effect of P and the observed responses to P at high and low Suc are considered interaction.

Restricting the observations to those genes that changed expression by more than 2-fold, a total of 187 genes were regulated in response to P starvation (Fig. 1, sum of numbers in parentheses); of these, 171 genes were induced and 16 were repressed. These may represent useful targets in molecular breeding of crops for improved performance during P starvation. The list of P-responding genes (Supplemental Table S2) contains several new potential target genes compared to previous microarray studies (Hammond et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2003; Misson et al., 2005). Using the same 2-fold ratio as cutoff criteria, Suc incubation resulted in 337 up-regulated and 307 down-regulated genes.

Tight coupling exists between Pi and sugar metabolism and several studies have shown an interaction between sugar metabolism and Pi-regulated gene expression (Sadka et al., 1994; Nielsen et al., 1998; Ciereszko et al., 2001a, 2001b; Lejay et al., 2003; Franco-Zorrilla et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2005; Müller et al., 2005). Such interactions could rely on a secondary effect; for example, sugar added may operate as a scavenger, influencing the level of Pi and thereby the expression of any P-regulated gene. Alternatively, there could be direct interaction between the regulatory mechanisms for gene expression.

These data show that a large number of genes respond to both factors. However, for most of these genes (505), the two factors show no significant interaction, suggesting that these genes respond to simple

---

### Table I. Levels of Pi, total P, and soluble sugars in leaf segments of P-starved or P-resupplied Arabidopsis plants

Plants were grown for 4 weeks in inert media (rockwool) and supplied with full nutrient solution containing a limiting level of Pi (0.05 mM). One-half of the plants were supplied with 4 mM Pi for the last 7d, whereas the other half remained at limiting Pi. At the end of the growth period, leaf segments were excised and incubated for 16 h in solutions containing 100 mM Suc or water.

| Cultivation | Incubation | P Content | Content of Soluble Sugars |
|-------------|------------|-----------|--------------------------|
|             |            | Pi        | P Total                  | Glc                | Fru                | Suc                |
|             |            | \(\mu mol \, g^{-1} \, FW\) | \(\mu mol \, g^{-1} \, FW\) | \(\mu mol \, g^{-1} \, FW\) | \(\mu mol \, g^{-1} \, FW\) | \(\mu mol \, g^{-1} \, FW\) |
| 0.05 mM Pi  | Water      | 0.16 ± 0.09 | 2.13 ± 0.12              | 1.87 ± 0.25        | 0.29 ± 0.11        | 0.71 ± 0.18        |
|             | 100 mM Suc | 0.09 ± 0.02 | 1.76 ± 0.93              | 5.22 ± 2.18        | 1.45 ± 1.17        | 5.50 ± 1.31        |
| 0.05 ± 4 mM Pi | Water    | 11.08 ± 2.65 | 15.92 ± 5.22             | 0.68 ± 0.35        | 0.09 ± 0.06        | 0.20 ± 0.04        |
|             | 100 mM Suc | 10.76 ± 0.16 | 20.81 ± 2.90             | 7.34 ± 2.55        | 5.76 ± 2.38        | 3.32 ± 0.22        |

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org  
Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Gene Expression in Response to Phosphate and Sugar

Validation of Microarray Results by Reverse Transcription-PCR

Transcriptional regulation revealed by microarrays was confirmed in a biologically independent experiment using reverse transcription (RT)-PCR (Figs. 2 and 3). Despite some quantitative differences in relative expression levels, RT-PCR data reflected the same regulatory patterns as the microarray data, showing clear induction or repression in response to Suc (Fig. 2). Similarly, induction of gene expression by P starvation was confirmed (Fig. 3), and here we also included a gene encoding a putative Tre-6-P synthase (At1g23870) that was found to be repressed in response to P starvation by both techniques. RT-PCR data confirm the expression data obtained by microarrays.

Genes Regulated in Response to P<sub>i</sub> Starvation

In the following sections, we will mainly focus on P sensing and the interactions and less on sugar sensing because this has been covered by other studies using full Arabidopsis genome arrays and different experimental approaches (Koch, 1996; Yu, 1999; Ho et al., 2001; Lloyd and Zakhleniuk, 2004; Price et al., 2004; Thum et al., 2004; Villadsen and Smith, 2004; Loreti et al., 2005; Gonzali et al., 2006).

The genes regulated 2-fold or more in response to P starvation can be related to several functions, including P mobilization, signal transduction, transport, transcriptional regulation, and carbohydrate metabolism (Supplemental Table S3). Many of these 171 genes are directly linked to P mobilization and cleavage of P<sub>i</sub> from P-containing compounds (e.g., phosphatases and ribonucleases), which agrees with the general perception of P<sub>i</sub>-dependent gene regulation (Poirier et al.,

---

phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase  
- like protein (At4g34200)  

proline oxidase (At3g30775)  

glycosyl hydrolase family 35 (At5g63800)  

TAZ zinc finger family protein (At4g37610)  

cytochrome p450 family (At2g30770)  

putative tropinone reductase (At2g29350)  

glutathione peroxidase, putative (At2g25080)  

Actin (At2g37620)

---

-Suc +Suc -Suc +Suc  
0.05 +4  
Pi, mM

Figure 2. Transcript level of selected genes regulated by Suc incubation. Levels of mRNA in leaf tissue were determined by RT-PCR using gene-specific primers as listed in Supplemental Table S1. Leaf tissue was obtained as described in Table I, but in a biologically independent experiment. Leaf sections derived from plants grown on 0.05 mM P<sub>i</sub> were incubated for 16 h in solutions containing 100 mM Suc or water.

Müller et al.

| SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain-containing protein (At5g20150) |
| EXS family protein family protein (At1g68740) |
| CCAAT-binding transcription factor (At5g065510) |
| protein with phoshoric monoester hydrolase activity (At1g17710) |
| myb family transcription factor (At1g68670) |
| unknown protein, catalytic activity (At1g58280) |
| ACTIN (At2g37620) |
| Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinase (At1g08650) |
| phosphate transporter (PT2, At2g38940) |
| cornichon family protein (At4g12090) |
| SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain containing protein (SPX2, At2g26660) |
| member of the ERF subfamily B-5 of ERF/AP2 transcription factor family (At1g71130) |
| sulfolipid biosynthesis protein SQRD1 (At4g33030) |
| trehalose 6-phosphate Synthase, putative (Glycosyl transferase 20, At1g23870) |
| ACTIN (At2g37620) |

0.05 +4  
mM P<sub>i</sub>

Figure 3. Transcript level of selected genes regulated by P starvation. Levels of mRNA were determined by RT-PCR using gene-specific primers as listed in Supplemental Table S1. Leaf tissue was obtained as described in Table I, but in a biologically independent experiment. Leaves used were derived from plants grown on 0.05 mM P<sub>i</sub> and 4 mM P<sub>i</sub>, and leaf sections were incubated for 16 h in water.

and one member of the Pht3 family of mitochondrial transporters (At3g48850). The only member of the Pht2 family was not regulated in leaves, which is consistent with previous studies (Daram et al., 1999; Müller et al., 2004).

Other regulated genes are also related to P uptake and transport. The factor, PHF1, which facilitates correct membrane location of Pht1;1 (González et al., 2005), was induced (2.7-fold) in response to P deficiency, and this might support a faster processing of transporter proteins during increased rates of synthesis. Possibly the genes encoding the SPX domain-containing proteins (At5g20150, At2g26660) and the EXS family protein (At1g68740) are also related to P transport. The SPX domain has been identified in proteins, which appear to be involved in either transport or sensing of P<sub>i</sub> (Hamburger et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2004). The SPX domain-containing proteins have some similarity to PHO1, a protein involved in xylem loading of P<sub>i</sub>. The gene At5g20150 was 29-fold induced. Also, the EXS family protein contains a domain that relates to the PHO1 protein and has been classified as PHO1;H1 (Wang et al., 2004). The family comprises nine other homologs (PHO1;H2–10), but none of these responded to P starvation. Unfortunately, the PHO1 itself was not present on the array. Finally, two genes encoding an ATP-binding cassette transporter family protein and a putative germin-like protein are also connected to transport and storage.

Another important group of P starvation-induced genes codes for enzymes active in C metabolism (e.g. key enzymes of primary metabolism, including starch degradation, glycolysis, and Suc biosynthesis). Induction of such genes is likely to promote changes in C metabolism to improve P utilization and remobilization in the cell (Plaxton and Carswell, 1999). Interestingly, a number of genes that are sugar inducible or are known to be directly related to sugar sensing were also induced by P deficiency, revealing integration of P and sugar sensing. Two examples of P-regulated genes associated with sugar sensing or C metabolism are BMY1 (At4G15210) and CHS (At5g13930), which is in accordance with results by Müller et al. (2005). The expression pattern of these two genes and homologs of other genes that have earlier been reported to respond to both factors (Fig. 4) clearly demonstrates the response to both factors for BMY1, CHS, and RNS1, but much less for the P-responsive gene ACP5 as also observed by Müller et al. (2005). AGPase is involved in starch biosynthesis, and three of four AGPase subunits present on the slides were induced by Suc and more so during P starvation (Fig. 4A), as also discovered for tobacco (Nielsen et al., 1998). A quite similar response was seen for two UGPase isoforms (Fig. 4B) in accordance with previous data (Ciereszko et al., 2001a, 2001b). In Figure 4, we have also included actin (At2g37620) as a reference (Fig. 4H) and five other genes (Fig. 4G) suggested to be superior as reference genes by Czechowski et al. (2005). These were all stably expressed, validating these microarray data. Among the

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007
Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org
Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

Gene Expression in Response to Phosphate and Sugar

Table II. Gene products of selected genes showing ≥2-fold change in transcript abundance in response to P starvation and a P value < 0.001 (full dataset for the selected genes in Supplemental Table S5)

P-starved plants were produced as described in Table I. Fold changes were calculated by R as an average between the fold change when the other parameter is varied.

| AGI | Description | Fold Change |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Varied Factor P |
|  |  | Varied Factor Suc |
| Encoding putative transcription factors |  |  |
| At1g71130 | AP2 domain-containing transcription factor, putative | 4.5 | 1.6 |
| At3g05690 | CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CBF-B/NF-YA) family protein | 4.2 | 1.3 |
| At1g56650 | myb family transcription factor (MYB75) | 3.5 | 4.1 |
| At5g06510 | CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CBF-B/NF-YA) family protein | 2.6 | 1.2 |
| At1g30500 | CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CBF-B/NF-YA) family protein | 2.6 | 1.7 |
| At5g56840 | DNA-binding family protein, Myb-like DNA-binding domain | 2.6 | 0.9 |
| At1g68670 | myb family transcription factor, Myb-like DNA-binding domain | 2.4 | 1.1 |
| At3g58900 | F-box family protein contains F-box domain | 2.3 | 1.1 |
| At5g41580 | Zinc-finger (MIZ-type) family protein | 2.0 | 1.2 |
| At3g12350 | F-box family protein; similar to SKP1 interacting partner 2 | 2.0 | 1.3 |
| At2g34210 | KOW domain-containing transcription factor family protein | 2.0 | 1.3 |
| Putative signaling proteins |  |  |
| At1g52940 | Calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein | 5.5 | 1.7 |
| At1g05000 | Tyr-specific protein phosphatase family protein | 4.4 | 3.4 |
| At4g12090 | Cornichon family protein | 4.2 | 1.3 |
| At2g32960 | Tyr-specific protein phosphatase family protein | 3.2 | 1.6 |
| At3g46120 | Calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein | 2.9 | 2.3 |
| At1g13750 | Calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein | 2.8 | 1.9 |
| At3g08720 | Ser-Thr protein kinase (PK19) | 2.4 | 1.5 |
| At1g35720 | Annexin 1 (ANN1) | 2.3 | 2.4 |
| At4g35750 | Rho-GTPase-activating protein-related | 2.3 | 1.0 |
| At4g36350 | Calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein | 2.2 | 1.7 |
| At5g39380 | Calmodulin-binding protein-related | 2.1 | 1.2 |
| P transporter and PHO1-like proteins |  |  |
| At5g20150 | SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain-containing protein similar to PHO1 protein | 28.6 | 1.6 |
| At2g38940 | Pi transporter (PT2) | 10.3 | 1.9 |
| At5g43360 | Pi transporter (PHT3) | 7.7 | 1.9 |
| At3g47420 | Glycerol-3-P transporter | 5.2 | 1.3 |
| At1g68740 | EXS family protein/ERD1/XPR1/SYG1 family protein similar to PHO1 protein | 4.7 | 1.5 |
| At2g26660 | SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain-containing protein | 4.3 | 1.6 |
| At5g43370 | Pi transporter (PHT2) | 3.1 | 1.1 |
| At3g52190 | Plant-specific prot. structurally related to SEC12 prot. of early secretory pathway (PHF) | 2.7 | 1.5 |
| At3g48850 | Mitochondrial phosphate transporter, putative | 2.5 | 2.6 |
| At2g32830 | Pi transporter (PHT5) | 2.1 | 1.7 |

P-responding genes, we further find (expression data not shown) Suc phosphate synthase (At4g10120), a sugar transporter family protein (At1g73220), phosphoglycerate mutases (At1g22170, At1g78050), pyruvate kinase (At5g63680), a putative sugar transporter (At4G02050), phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxylase kinase (At1g08650), putative PEP carboxylase (At1g53310), pyrophosphate:Fru-6-P phosphotransferase (PFP) β-subunit (At4g04040), and glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase (At4g34200). It is interesting to note that we find one isoform of Tre-6-P synthase induced by ample Pi (verified by RT-PCR; Fig. 3) because Tre-6-P is emerging as a key regulator of plant development (Rolland et al., 2006).

Of the 187 genes regulated more than 2-fold in response to P starvation, 11 transcription factors or putative transcription factors were identified (Table II).

The expression level varied among these genes, but all levels were substantially above the limit of detection, especially at the combination low P and high Suc, where expression was maximal for all genes (Supplemental Table S5). In general, there is little information on transcription factors involved in regulation during P starvation. Until now, only two transcription factors have been conclusively shown to participate in P regulation in photosynthetic eukaryotes. These are the MYB family proteins, PSR1 from *Chlamydomonas reinhardtii* (Wykoff et al., 1999; Moseley et al., 2006) and PHR1 from Arabidopsis (Rubio et al., 2001). Two more related transcription factors appear to be associated with nutrient stress responses (Todd et al., 2004), and these factors belong to a family of 15 genes with homology to PHR1. In this study, none of the genes in this family, including PHR1, responded to P starvation.

However, tissue localization is important because we know PHR1 is regulated in roots in response to P (L. Nilsson, unpublished data). Among the 11 transcription factors that we found to be regulated in response to P starvation, three encode MYB proteins. These are interesting candidates for P-regulating factors, although they do not belong to the PHR1 family. The most regulated (4.5-fold) of the transcription factor genes encodes an AP2 domain protein (At1g71130), which belongs to a group of factors with a highly conserved DNA-binding domain. Many of these factors belong to the ethylene-responsive element-binding protein group of transcription factors, several of which are known to be responsive to environmental stresses (Weigel, 1995). The AP2 domain-containing transcription factor was also observed in a recent microarray study (Misson et al., 2005). Finally, we find 11 P starvation-induced genes encoding proteins likely to be involved in signal transduction. These include a cornichon family protein (At4g12090), a putative calcium-dependent protein kinase (At1g08650), and a putative receptor kinase (At4g31240; Table II). We further analyzed the genes listed in Table II for coexpressed gene networks using the ATTED-II database (http://www.atted.bio.titech.ac.jp), which integrates the expression pattern from a large number of microarray studies. Several genes that were highly coregulated with the genes listed in Table II were also identified as P-regulated genes in this study. For the two most regulated factors, AP2 and CCAAT-binding transcription factor (At3g05690), we found that, respectively, six and eight of the 10 most correlated genes belonged to the P-regulated genes in our study. Thus, the lists of coexpression revealed by ATTED-II also extend to expression during P starvation, which suggests that these two factors are good candidates to be directly involved in regulating a part of the P response.

Table III shows the 40 most up-regulated genes and their fold change in response to P starvation. This list includes a number of the above-mentioned genes with direct relation to Pi metabolism and six genes with unknown function.

The vast majority of the genes responding to Pi are up-regulated, whereas only 16 of 187 genes were down-regulated in response to P starvation (Supplemental Table S2). No common function is evident from the small selection of repressed genes. Apparently, there are only few dispensable reactions that are turned off to improve use of P in the leaf. One interesting response is the reduction of a light-harvesting complex II protein. This could represent a mechanism to reduce light harvesting to alleviate overreduction of photosystems as a consequence of Pi limitation. However, both Pi and Suc. Leaf tissue with different P and Suc content was obtained as described in Table I, and relative expression levels were analyzed by microarray as described in Figure 1. The genes in G are 1, At4g34270; 2, At1g13320; 3, At1g59830; 4, At4g33380; and 5, At2g28390.

Table III. Gene products of the 40 most up-regulated genes in response to P starvation and a P value < 0.001 (a full dataset is listed in Supplemental Table S2)

P-starved plants were produced as described in Table I.

| AGI         | Description                                                                                                      | Fold Change |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| At1g17710   | Similar to expressed protein (Arabidopsis; TAIR:At1g73010.1); similar to putative phosphatase (tomato)                   | 69.1        |
| At1g73010   | Expressed protein similar to phosphatase, orphan 1 (GI: 20196841; Mus musculus), (GI: 20196839; Homo sapiens)           | 33.8        |
| At5g20150   | SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain-containing protein similar to PHO1 protein                                              | 28.6        |
| At1g08310   | Esterase/lipase/thioesterase family protein contains Interpro entry IPR000379                                        | 20.3        |
| At1g23110   | Hypothetical protein                                                                                             | 19.8        |
| At5g01220   | UDP-sulfoquinovose:DAG sulfoquinovosyltransferase/sulfolipid synthase (SQD2)                                         | 12.1        |
| At3g02040   | Glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase family protein                                                         | 11.4        |
| At2g38940   | Pi transporter (PT2) identical to Pi transporter (AtPT2)                                                           | 10.3        |
| At2g02990   | Ribonuclease 1 (RNS1) identical to ribonuclease SP: P42813 ribonuclease 1 precursor                                   | 10.2        |
| At3g17790   | Acid phosphatase type 5 (ACP5) contains Pfam profile:PF00149 calcineurin-like phosphoesterase                         | 8.5         |
| At1g08650   | PEP carboxylase kinase identical to PEP carboxylase kinase                                                         | 8.2         |
| At2g11810   | 1,2-Diacylglycerol 3-β-galactosyltransferase, putative/monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthase,                        | 7.7         |
|             | putative/monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthase                                                                    |             |
| At5g43360   | Pi transporter (PHT3) identical to Pi transporter                                                                | 7.7         |
| At1g58280   | Expressed protein                                                                                                | 7.4         |
| At4g33030   | UDP-sulfoquinovose synthase/sulfite:UDP-Glc sulfotransferase/sulfolipid biosynthesis protein (SQD1)                  | 6.8         |
| At3g44510   | Expressed protein                                                                                                | 6.5         |
| At3g05630   | Phospholipase D, putative (PLDP2) identical to SP|Q9M9W8 phospholipaseDp2                                            | 6.0         |
| At1g52940   | Calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein contains Pfam profile:PF00149 calcineurin-like                      | 5.5         |
|             | phosphoesterase                                                                                                 |             |
| At1g32740   | Expressed protein                                                                                                | 5.4         |
| At3g47420   | Glycerol-3-P transporter, putative/glycerol 3-P permease                                                          | 5.2         |
| At5g20410   | 1,2-Diacylglycerol 3-β-galactosyltransferase, putative/monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthase,                        | 5.2         |
|             | putative/monogalactosyldiacylglycerol synthase                                                                    |             |
| At4g19810   | Glycosyl hydrolase family 18 protein similar to chitinase/lysozyme GI: 467689 from tobacco                           | 5.1         |
| At5g20790   | Expressed protein predicted protein, Arabidopsis                                                                 | 5.0         |
| At3g56040   | Expressed protein                                                                                                | 5.0         |
| At3g44520   | Esterase/lipase/thioesterase family protein similar to SP|Q02104 lipase 1 precursor (EC 3.1.1.3;                       | 4.8         |
|             | triacylglycerol lipase)                                                                                          |             |
| At1g03495   | Pseudogene, transferase family similar to anthocyanin 5-aromatic acyltransferase from Gentiana triflora               | 4.8         |
|             | GI: 4185599                                                                                                     |             |
| At1g56600   | Galactinol synthase, putative similar to galactinol synthase, isoform GolS-1 GI: 5608497 from Ajuga reptans            | 4.7         |
| At5g39130   | Germin-like protein, putative identical to germin-like protein subfamily 1 member 16                                  | 4.7         |
| At1g68740   | EXS family protein/ERD1/XPR1/SYG1 family protein similar to PHO1 protein                                             | 4.7         |
| At4g19720   | Glycosyl hydrolase family 18 protein similar to chitinase, class V GI: 899342 from tobacco                           | 4.6         |
| At1g71130   | AP2 domain-containing transcription factor, putative                                                             | 4.5         |
| At1g05000   | Tyr-specific protein phosphatase family protein contains Tyr-specific protein phosphatases active site              | 4.4         |
| At2g34810   | FAD-binding domain-containing protein similar to SP|P30986 reticuline oxidase precursor                            | 4.4         |
| At4g03960   | Tyr-specific protein phosphatase family protein contains Tyr-specific protein phosphatases active site              | 4.4         |
| At2g26660   | SPX (SYG1/Pho81/XPR1) domain-containing protein low similarity to NUC-2 (Neurospora crassa)                        | 4.3         |
| At5g39160   | Germin-like protein (GLP2a) (GLP5a) identical to germin-like protein subfamily 1 member 18                           | 4.3         |
| At3g12500   | Basic endochitinase identical to basic endochitinase precursor                                                    | 4.3         |
| At4g12090   | Cornichon family protein contains Pfam profile: PF03311 cornichon protein                                          | 4.2         |
| At3g05690   | CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CBF-B/NF-YA) family protein                                                    | 4.2         |
| At5g13930   | CHS/naringenin-CHS                                                                                              | 4.2         |

there are several light-harvesting complex isoforms

and none of the others were responding to Pi treatment. Two other genes in the list are NMT1 and

NMT3, which encode enzymes, phosphoethanolamine

N-methyltransferases, involved in phospholipid bio-

synthesis; their regulation suggests specific reduction

of the formation of phospholipids, thereby comple-

menting the mechanisms for up-regulation of alterna-

tive lipids during P starvation.

In two previous array studies, Hammond et al.

(2003) and Wu et al. (2003) divided the P starvation

responses into two categories, the specific responses

and the general responses. Hammond found that

transient changes in gene expression taking place a

short time (4h) after P withdrawal were highly var-

iable and many nonspecific genes were induced during

this time period. Opposed to this, genes up-regulated

after a longer period of P deficiency (100h) were more

specific to P starvation. Wu et al. (2003) found SEN1, a

senescence-induced gene, to be highly up-regulated

in response to P starvation in both leaves and

roots. Apparently, P starvation obtained by complete

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org

Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

Müller et al.

Table IV. Occurrence of promoter motifs in differentially expressed genes showing response to P starvation with fold change ≥ 2

Upstream regions (1,000 bp) of differentially expressed genes were analyzed for the occurrence of the various motifs. The frequency in the 1,000-bp upstream regions was analyzed for the whole genome using the Patmatch tool at TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp). For references to motifs, see Rubio et al. (2001)ᵃ; Hammond et al., (2003)ᵇ; and Tang et al. (2001)ᶜ. Overrepresented motifs were identified using promomer at BAR (http://bbc.botany.utoronto.ca/).

| Name/Sequence | Genes Induced by P Starvation (169 Genes) | Genes Repressed by P Starvation (16 Genes) | Genome |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Genes with Motif | % Genes with Motif | Genes with Motif | % Genes with Motif | % Genes with Motif |
| PHR1, GNATATNC | 80 | 47.3 | 2 | 3 | 18.1 |
| P responsive, ATGCCAT | 12 | 7.1 | 0 | 0 | 4.3 |
| PHO, CACGT(G/C) | 45 | 26.6 | 7 | 8 | 22.1 |
| PHO-like, (G/T/A)(C/T/A) GTGG | 44 | 26 | 5 | 5 | 24.8 |
| TATA box, TATAAATA | 31 | 18.3 | 2 | 3 | 16 |
| TC-rich, TCTCTCT | 43 | 25.4 | 2 | 4 | 24.8 |
| NIT2, TATC(A/T)(A/T) | 143 | 84.6 | 11 | 41 | 86.3 |
| NIT2-like, AAATATCT | 14 | 8.2 | 3 | 3 | 8 |
| HLH, CA(T/G)(A/C)TG | 89 | 52.7 | 9 | 13 | 56.3 |
| HD-ZIP, CATTAAATAG | 0 | 0.0 | 0 | 0 | 0.0 |
| Overrepresented motif searches |  |  |  |  |  |
| AGTTTT | 86 | 50.9 | 12 | 32 | 58.7 |
| GAATAT | 101 | 59.8 | 6 | 8 | 37.5 |
| ANGAATATNC | 26 | 15.4 | 1 | 1 | 2.6 |

withdrawal of the nutrient after high supply conditions presents a severe general stress condition to the plants. To avoid this, Misson et al. (2005) maintained a low level of P supply to the P-starved plants, but despite this precaution they observed induction of a large number of stress-responsive genes. Potentially, the exchange of the complete nutrient solution may induce the stress responses. In this study, fewer genes directly related to stress responses were induced during P starvation and this may relate to several factors: (1) longer cultivation at low P may promote adaptation to any unspecific stress conditions and subsequent supply of high P most likely does not promote stress; (2) plants were grown and incubated at low light intensities; and (3) only leaves are analyzed and any abrupt change in the nutrient solution is more likely to impose general stress on the roots. These differences in the regulation of stress-responsive genes emphasize the importance of the choice of the experimental system. Addition of P to plants grown on low P can be done without exchanging the entire nutrient solution and will therefore impose less stress on the plants. An initial longer period of low P, as in this study, will efficiently induce genes to improve P mobilization and resupply of P to these plants will primarily reveal these specific P responses. Furthermore, the relative changes in P levels in the leaves are much more pronounced than during starvation developing from a high P situation. Therefore, our data complement previous array studies.

cis-Regulatory Elements in Promoters of Regulated Genes

Analyzing 1,000-bp upstream promoter regions using Athena Web tools (O'Connor et al., 2005; http://www.bioinformatics2.wsu.edu/cgi-bin/Athena/cgi/

home.pl) revealed strongly significant (P < 10⁻⁵) enrichment of four motifs (ABA response element-like binding-site motif, CACGTG motif, ACGT core of motif A in ABA response element of the rice [Oryza sativa] gene Osem, and a motif present in a group of GA

cluster

|  |  | zinc knuckle (CCHC-type) family protein (At3g02820) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 |  | DNA replication licensing factor, putative (At1g44900) |
| 1 |  |  |
| 2 |  | putative xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase (At5g48070) |
| 3 |  | purple acid phosphatase (PAP22) (At3g52820) |
| 3 |  | sugar transporter family protein (At1g73220) |
| 3 |  | sulfate transporter (Sultr1;3) (At1g22150) |
| 3 |  | inorganic phosphate transporter (PHT5, At2g32830) |
| 3 |  | phosphofructokinase family protein PFK (At4g32840) |
| 3 |  | germin-like protein (At5g39130) |
| 3 |  | sucrose-phosphate synthase, putative (At4g10120) |
| 3 |  | ABC transporter family protein (At3g59140) |
| 3 |  | ACTIN (At2g37620) |
| -Suc + Suc | -Suc + Suc |  |
| 0.05 | +4 | Pi, mM |

Figure 5. Transcript level of selected genes regulated by the interaction of P starvation and Suc. Levels of mRNA were determined by RT-PCR using gene-specific primers as listed in Supplemental Table S1. Leaf tissue was obtained as described in Table I, but in a biologically independent experiment. Cluster numbers indicate to which cluster in Figure 6 the individual gene belongs.

Gene Expression in Response to Phosphate and Sugar

AT3G12930 expressed protein  
AT5G45380 sodium:solute symporter family protein  
AT2G38810 histone H2A, putative  
AT5G59500 expressed protein  
AT1G55760 BTB/POZ domain-containing protein  
AT2G21790 ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase small chain, putative  
AT5G23420 high mobility group (HMG1/2) family protein  
AT1G63220 C2 domain-containing protein  
AT2G31750 UDP-glucuronosyl/UDP-glucosyl transferase family protein  
AT5G08020 replication protein, putative  
AT5G53920 ribosomal protein L11 methyltransferase-related  
AT1G18000 expressed protein contains 11 transmembrane domains  
AT5G40160 ankyrin repeat family protein  
AT3G04600 tRNA synthetase class I (W and Y) family protein  
AT4G26600 nucleolar protein, putative  
AT5G56670 40S ribosomal protein S30  
AT1G65040 zinc finger (C3HC4-type RING finger) family protein  
AT3G22660 rRNA processing protein-related  
AT2G19750 40S ribosomal protein S30  
AT5G22580 expressed protein  
AT4G12600 ribosomal protein L7Ae/L30e/S12e/Gadd45 family protein  
AT3G23990 chaperonin  
AT5G44810 expressed protein  
AT5G36880 acetyl-CoA synthetase, putative  
AT5G22790 expressed protein  
AT5G60960 pentatricopeptide (PRR) repeat-containing protein  
AT1G16300 glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, cytosolic, putative  
AT4G23680 major latex protein-related  
AT1G11240 transducin family protein / WD-40 repeat family protein  
AT2G37270 40S ribosomal protein S5  
AT3G27360 histone H3  
AT2G43780 expressed protein  
AT2G46170 reticulon family protein  
AT4G25630 fibrillarin 2  
AT5G12910 histone H3, putative  
AT3G56070 peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, putative  
AT3G44750 histone deacetylase, putative  
AT3G54750 expressed protein  
AT5G59870 histone H2A, putative  
AT3G02530 chaperonin, putative  
AT1G09486 pseudogene, 60S ribosomal protein  
AT1G61580 60S ribosomal protein L3  
AT1G48630 guanine nucleotide-binding family protein  
AT5G46280 DNA replication licensing factor, putative  
AT3G49620 zinc knuckle (CCHC-type) family protein  
AT3G02020 aspartate kinase, lysine-sensitive, putative  
AT1G44900 DNA replication licensing factor, putative  
AT3G27060 ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase small chain, putative  
AT1G78650 expressed protein weak similarity to DNA polymerase delta subunit 3  
AT1G63940 monodehydroascorbate reductase, putative  
AT5G28520 jacalin lectin family protein  
AT1G78370 glutathione S-transferase, putative  
AT1G60660 cytochrome b5 domain-containing protein  
AT2G40360 transducin family protein  
AT1G74560 nucleosome assembly protein (NAP) family protein  
AT3G44330 expressed protein  
AT2G43780 60S ribosomal protein L7  
AT5G61000 replication protein, putative  
AT5G62720 integral membrane HPP family protein  
AT3G52630 hypothetical protein  
AT5G09470 40S ribosomal protein S6  
AT1G31660 bystin family  
AT3G10610 40S ribosomal protein S17  
AT5G3220 DNA primase, large subunit family  
AT5G50450 zinc finger (MYND type) family protein  
AT4G15700 glutaredoxin family protein  
AT5G38710 proline oxidase, putative  
AT5G01720 F-box family protein  
AT3G52980 RNA recognition motif (RRM)-containing protein  
AT3G20460 sugar transporter, putative  
AT1G13700 glucosamine/galactosamine-6-phosphate isomerase family protein  
AT4G36880 cysteine proteinase, putative  
AT2G24240 potassium channel tetramerisation domain-containing protein  
AT4G15670 glutaredoxin family protein  
AT4G24040 glycosyl hydrolase family protein 37 / trehalase, putative  
AT1G08620 expressed protein  
AT2G32150 haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase family protein  
AT1G18830 myb family transcription factor  
AT2G38390 peroxidase, putative  
AT5G57530 xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase, putative  
AT2G31760 zinc finger protein-related  
AT3G15820 phosphatic acid phosphatase-related  
AT1G18870 isochorismate synthase, putative  
AT4G00550 UDP-galactose:MGDG galactosyltransferase 2  
AT4G24230 acyl-CoA binding protein, putative  
AT2G2480 serine carboxypeptidase S10 family protein  
AT2G23000 serine carboxypeptidase S10 family protein  
AT5G15550 protein kinase family protein  
AT5G41080 glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase family protein  
AT5G45180 flavin-containing monoxygenase family protein  
AT4G01670 expressed protein  
AT1G65310 xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase, putative  
AT5G56790 protein kinase family protein  
AT5G56750 Ndr family protein  
AT1G50110 branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase 6  
AT1G3720 cytochrome P450, putative  
AT3G13430 zinc finger (C3HC4-type RING finger) family protein  
AT4G30280 xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase, putative  
AT5G48070 xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase, putative  
AT1G52940 calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein  
AT3G45520 esterase/lipase/thioesterase family protein  
AT1G17710 expressed protein  
AT3G22750 protein kinase, putative  
AT1G17830 expressed protein  
AT3G61410 hypothetical protein  
AT4G28260 expressed protein  
AT4G10120 sucrose-phosphate synthase, putative  
AT2G01890 purple acid phosphatase, putative  
AT1G03020 glutaredoxin family protein  
AT3G52820 purple acid phosphatase (PAP22)  
AT2G12480 purple acid phosphatase  
AT5G67080 protein kinase family protein  
AT1G22170 phosphoglycerate/bisphosphoglycerate mutase family protein  
AT1G56360 calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein  
AT1G73220 sugar transporter family protein  
AT1G65840 amine oxidase family protein  
AT5G09470 mitochondrial substrate carrier family protein  
AT4G19810 glycosyl hydrolase family 18 protein  
AT2G34810 FAD-binding domain-containing protein  
AT1G05000 tyrosine specific protein phosphatase family protein  
AT5G63680 pyruvate kinase, putative  
AT3G48850 mitochondrial phosphate transporter, putative  
AT1G54570 esterase/lipase/thioesterase family protein  
AT1G10585 expressed protein  
AT4G15210 beta-amylase (BMY1) / 1,4-alpha-D-glucan maltohydrolase  
AT4G32840 phosphofructokinase family protein  
AT1G69930 glutathione S-transferase, putative  
AT2G30040 gibberellin 2-oxidase / GA2-oxidase  
AT2G34555 gibberellin 2-oxidase / GA2-oxidase  
AT4G27150 short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) family protein  
AT4G37990 mannitol dehydrogenase, putative  
AT1G60740 peroxidoxin type 2, putative  
AT4G37250 auxin-responsive GH3 family protein  
AT3G48580 xyloglucan:xyloglucosyl transferase, putative  
AT2G32830 inorganic phosphate transporter (PHT5)  
AT5G54510 auxin-responsive GH3 protein, putative  
AT5G39110 germin-like protein, putative  
AT3G46120 calcineurin-like phosphoesterase family protein  
AT5G39160 germin-like protein  
AT1G22150 sulfate transporter (Sultr1;3)  
AT5G39130 germin-like protein, putative  
AT3G08730 serine/threonine protein kinase  
AT2G19820 glycosyl hydrolase family 18 protein  
AT3G59140 ABC transporter family protein putative  
AT2G19880 ceramide glucosyltransferase, putative  
AT3G03530 phosphoesterase family protein  

Figure 6. Clustering analysis of differentially expressed genes showing interaction between the two factors Suc and P starvation. Leaf tissue with different P and sugar content was obtained as described in Table I. Hierarchical clustering was performed with the

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org

Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Müller et al.

down-regulated Arabidopsis genes) in the 581 genes regulated more than 2-fold in response to Suc feeding. The same elements were also more frequent in the 46 genes regulated 2-fold by both P and Suc. In contrast, no motifs were significantly enriched in the 125 genes regulated only by P, and analyzing all the different groups in the Venn diagram (Fig. 1) by this approach did not reveal further significantly enriched elements. However, it should be noted that Athena does not test for all known elements and, for example, the presence of the PHR1 binding site needs to be analyzed using alternative methods.

The frequency of motifs previously suggested to be mediating P responsiveness of genes was analyzed for all P-regulated genes showing more than 2-fold induction or repression by P starvation, respectively, and this was compared to the frequency in the whole Arabidopsis genome (Table IV). For induced genes, the only both frequent and considerably enriched motif compared to the entire genome was the PHR1 binding site (Rubio et al., 2001) GNATATNC. Interestingly, we also find a connection between the occurrence of the PHR1 binding site and the fold change in response to P. It is not a strict correlation, but the binding site is more frequent in the most regulated genes and, notably, the seven most regulated genes all contain two or three copies of this element (data not shown). For the repressed genes, the most enriched motif was the PHO element. However, the number of repressed genes is low (16 genes) and the observed enrichment may not be significant. All other motifs analyzed were not over-represented and therefore do not seem to be important for P-dependent gene regulation in leaf tissue.

New potential cis-elements were searched using the promomer program (Toufighi et al., 2005; http://bbc.botany.utoronto.ca/n-tools/cgi-bin/BAR_Promomer.cgi), which will identify enriched nucleotide sequences of 4 to 10 bp. One element, AGTTTT, appeared to be enriched in 16 P-repressed genes. Evaluating whether this is a true cis-element must await experimental analysis. Similar analysis of the induced genes revealed the motif GAATAT. Evaluating longer motifs and aligning all the sequences that included this core suggested that the motif could be further extended to ANGAATATNC. This motif includes the PHR1 recognition site, which validates that this unbiased approach can identify frequently occurring cis-elements. It further indicates that PHR1 might have a preference for an A in the second position of the binding site (now N) and for an additional A 2 bp upstream. Several other motifs were enriched, but these elements did not give similarly consistent results when different motif sizes were tested. Further cis-elements can potentially be revealed by more extensive approaches (e.g. as outlined by Geisler et al. [2006], who discovered several new Suc-responsive elements by an iterative method).

### Genes Regulated in Response to Suc

In plants, sugar accumulation induces the expression of genes involved in the synthesis of polysaccharides, storage proteins, pigments (e.g. anthocyanins), and genes associated with defense responses and respiration (Koch, 1996; Ho et al., 2001; Price et al., 2004). By contrast, sugar deprivation induces genes involved in photosynthesis and resource remobilization, including degradation of starch, lipids, and proteins (Yu, 1999; Price et al., 2004). This is in good accordance with our data, where the 644 genes regulated more than 2-fold (Supplemental Table S3) were most frequently related to energy, metabolism, and storage proteins (analyzed by the Classification Super-Viewer at http://bbc.botany.utoronto.ca).

The three genes most strongly induced in response to Suc encode a Glc-6-P/phosphate translocator precursor (GPT; At1g61800) induced 8.8-fold, a CHS up-regulated 6.6-fold (At5g13930), and a glycosyl hydrolase family 1 protein (At1g52400) induced 6.5-fold. Normally, GPT is not highly expressed in photosynthetic tissue, but it can be induced by stress conditions and, in the *pho3* mutant, GPT is strongly induced (Lloyd and Zakhleniuk, 2004). CHS participates in the biosynthesis of flavonoids and is required for the accumulation of anthocyanins, which is known to be stimulated by Suc (Teng et al., 2005; Solfanelli et al., 2006). Induction of anthocyanin biosynthesis depends on the MYB transcription factor PAP1 (At1g56650; Tohge et al., 2005). Teng et al. (2005) found that expression of *PAP1* was induced by Suc, which is in accordance with our study where *PAP1* was 4-fold induced in response to Suc. Interestingly, P starvation applied in this investigation resulted in 3.5-fold induction of *PAP1*.

### Genes Regulated in Response to the Interaction of P Starvation and Suc

Interaction of both factors is defined as a change in expression level in response to the two factors together, which is significantly higher or lower than expected from the changes in response to the two factors applied individually. In total, 149 genes displayed a highly significant interaction between the two factors (Fig. 1). Microarray data were verified by RT-PCR for 11 of the genes showing interaction, chosen to represent diverse functionality and strong

---

**Figure 6. (Continued.)**

Cluster program (Eisen et al., 1998; http://rana.lbl.gov) based on log₂ intensity ratios. Only genes revealing interaction between the two factors Suc and P starvation were included in the analysis. Blue color indicates repression and yellow color induction. Three main clusters are indicated. Treatments from left to right: 1, low/high P, no Suc; 2, low/high P, plus Suc; 3, plus Suc/no Suc, low P; and 4, plus Suc/no Suc, high P. Color code at right refers to Venn groups as indicated in Figure 1.

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org  
Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Gene Expression in Response to Phosphate and Sugar

to 53% for cluster 2 and 70% for cluster 3, as compared to only 17% of the genes in cluster 1 (Fig. 7). To some degree, the clusters reflect which of the Venn groups (Fig. 1) the genes belong to as indicated by the color code in Figure 6.

To allow for overall comparison of expression pattern in each cluster, the level of expression was normalized for each gene, with the highest expression level set to 1 and the average expression pattern was

Figure 7. Molecular function of gene products belonging to clusters 1 to 3. Differentially expressed genes were divided into three clusters as described in Figure 6. Function of gene products was ascribed according to categorization in TAIR gene ontology annotation (www.arabidopsis.org/tools/bulk/go/index.jsp). Gene annotations corresponding to kinase, transferase, hydrolase, and transporter activities are emphasized as a group by shaded background area. In total, these represent 17%, 53%, and 70% of the gene annotations in clusters 1, 2, and 3, respectively (note that each gene can be annotated in several groups).

regulation (Fig. 5). Most of these provided clear examples of expression patterns where induction by P starvation is much stronger in the presence of high sugar level. In addition, two of the genes (At3g02820 and At1g44900) show a different pattern, with higher expression when both P and sugar are ample.

To obtain an overview of the transcriptional pattern for these genes, clustering analysis was conducted. Log₂ values of expression intensity ratios for each of the four comparisons were used as a basis for hierarchical cluster analysis (Eisen et al., 1998; http://rana.lbl.gov). The genes organize into three main clusters (Fig. 6), where clusters 1, 2, and 3 comprise 66, 36, and 47 genes, respectively. These genes are also listed with their expression levels in Supplemental Table S4.

Further categorization with respect to molecular function of the three clusters reveals large differences in the function of these three groups of genes (Fig. 7). The total group of 149 genes only showed minor deviation from the entire genome (data not shown), but this covers up that the interaction group includes different types of responses. When clustered according to their expression pattern, the genes also organize into different functions. Cluster 1 covers a relatively diverse group of genes, with clear overrepresentation of genes with structural molecule activity (9.5%), which were all coding for ribosomal subunits, and less frequently kinase, transporter, and hydrolase activities (7% compared to 22% for the entire genome). Cluster 1 is also enriched in DNA or RNA, protein, nucleic acid, or other binding (in total 42%), when compared to genes belonging to cluster 2 or 3. In contrast, genes belonging to cluster 2 and even more pronounced cluster 3 have a notably higher representation of kinase, transporter, hydrolase, and transferase activity. Together, these functional groups amount

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007
Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org
Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Müller et al.

plotted for genes that were regulated more than 2-fold (Fig. 8). For cluster 2, the two major subclusters (Fig. 6) were plotted separately because these showed a clearly different pattern. Genes in cluster 1 are induced by Suc feeding, but more so when the tissue has enough of both nutrients, P and sugar (Fig. 8A). Two examples of genes belonging to cluster 1 (Fig. 5, top images) clearly illustrate this pattern. Considering that the genes of cluster 1 are diverse in function and notably enriched in ribosomal subunits, we suggest that this cluster represents a molecular program to support increased growth and development when nutrients, in general, are ample. This agrees well with the notion that the function of many of the gene products of cluster 1 can be associated to cell growth, protein synthesis, regulation of the cell cycle, and DNA replication.

A search for overrepresented promoter motifs in cluster 1 revealed that, of 66 genes, 11 had promoter sequences that contained a short motif TCCCGC similar to the E2F binding-site motif (TTTCCCGC). The high frequency in cluster 1 contrasts with absence from clusters 2 and 3 and low frequency in the Arabidopsis genome. Table V shows enrichment of both the short motif core and the full E2F binding site. In a genome-wide search of E2F binding sites within the Arabidopsis genome, Ramirez-Parra et al. (2003) identified over 180 potential E2F target genes. Many of the targets were cell-cycle-related genes, but also other functional categories, such as transcription, stress, defense, and signaling, were found. In accordance, in our study all genes in cluster 1, which have the E2F binding site in their promoter, are cell cycle-related genes.

Genes in cluster 2 are less consistent in their regulation and fall into two subclusters that have a different expression pattern (Fig. 8, B and C). The first group has a complex pattern, being induced by P starvation at low sugar but repressed at high sugar. The other group is more related to P starvation-induced genes because these are preferentially expressed at low P in combination with high sugar.

Genes in cluster 3 are induced by P starvation and also by Suc feeding and more so at low P (Fig. 8D). The expression patterns of eight genes belonging to this cluster were also confirmed by RT-PCR (Fig. 5). This pattern is compatible with genes primarily regulated

in response to P starvation, a response that is then accentuated by Suc. As expected from this pattern, cluster 3 comprises genes that are likely to be directly involved in P mobilization either by cleavage of P from P-containing compounds or by metabolic changes resulting in improved P utilization and remobilization. Examples of such genes are purple acid phosphatases (At3g52820, At2g18130), calcineurin-like phosphoesterases (At1g52940, At3g46120), and phosphoesterase family proteins (At3g03530). Indeed, most of the genes characterized as hydrolases in this cluster were phosphatases. Examples of genes coding for enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism are Suc phosphate synthase (At4g10120), BMY1 (At4g15210), pyruvate kinase (At5g63680), and PFK (At4g32840). In this cluster, we also find transporter and storage-associated genes, such as a P transporter (At3g48850), genes coding for germins and germin-like transporters (At5g39110, At5g39160, At5g39130), a Suc transporter (At1g73220), and an ATP-binding cassette transporter (At3g59140). Induction of these genes can also be assumed to improve P metabolism of the tissue.

In cluster 3, genes encoding ethylene-responsive proteins and GA-regulated proteins were regulated in response to P starvation, and an auxin-and two GA-regulated proteins were induced in response to the interaction of both factors. In roots, regulation via these plant hormones, especially ethylene and auxin, is likely to be involved in alteration of developmental processes in response to limited P (Lynch and Brown, 1997; Wu et al., 2003). These data would suggest a P-signaling role for these hormones also in leaves. It has been shown that mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades are involved in GA, auxin, and ethylene-induced signaling, but details of the interaction between these hormone-responsive proteins and the mitogen-activated protein kinase are not clear (Wu et al., 2003). In addition, induction of genes coding for a Rho GTPase activation protein and a calmodulin-binding protein was found.

In agreement with our observation that cluster 3 represents genes induced to alleviate P starvation, we also find that the PHR1 binding site is specifically enriched in this cluster (Table V). Searching for other known or new motifs has not revealed any further motifs unique to the interaction clusters.

---

**Table V. Occurrence of P1BS and E2F in differentially expressed genes showing interaction between the two factors Suc and P starvation**

Differentially expressed genes were divided into three clusters as described in Figure 6 and 1,000-bp upstream regions for each were analyzed for the occurrence of the motifs. The frequency in the 1,000-bp upstream regions was analyzed for the whole genome using the Patmatch tool at TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp) choosing single+strand (Watson).

| Genes | No. Genes in Cluster | PHR1 Binding Site, P1BS (GNATATNC) | E2F Binding Site (TTTCCCGC) | Core of E2F Binding Site (TCCCGC) |
|-------|------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|       |                        | Genes with Motif                   | % Genes with Motif           | Genes with Motif                  | % Genes with Motif              | Genes with Motif                 | % Genes with Motif               |
| Cluster 1 | 65                    | 8                                   | 9                             | 12.3                              | 7                                 | 16                                | 10.8                             | 11                               | 24                               | 16.9                             |
| Cluster 2 | 36                    | 10                                  | 13                            | 27.8                              | 0                                 | 0                                 | 0                                | 1                                | 1                                | 2.8                              |
| Cluster 3 | 47                    | 20                                  | 28                            | 42.6                              | 0                                 | 0                                 | 0                                | 1                                | 1                                | 2.2                              |
| Genome    |                       |                                     | 18.1                          |                                   |                                   | 1.1                               |                                   |                                   | 5.0                              |                                  |

Plant Physiol. Vol. 143, 2007

Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 1, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org  
Copyright © 2007 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Gene Expression in Response to Phosphate and Sugar

Plants will experience severe stress when limiting P is combined with conditions that promote accumulation of carbohydrates, for example, during high irradiation or low temperature. We suggest that the cooperative regulation of genes observed in cluster 3 is likely to have evolved to meet the need for alleviation of P starvation during such conditions.

Thus, organization of the genes showing interaction in three clusters reveals a close relationship between functionality of the gene products and the expression pattern. These data outline the contours of at least two regulatory programs. One, represented by cluster 1, serves to control genes with relation to growth and development during ample nutrient conditions. Another program, represented by cluster 3, has a function in coordination of adaptation to P starvation and C metabolism. A possible third program, represented by cluster 2, seems related to cluster 3 (subcluster 2-2), but, in general, cluster 2 is not as well defined.

In this study, we have identified possible cis-regulatory elements, but it has not been possible to establish any unique elements for the genes showing interaction, and this may suggest that known elements, such as the PHR1 binding site, are important also for the observed interaction pattern. We suggest that an important future research topic should be to experimentally investigate whether these coordinated genes possess separate promoter elements that can be related to sugar and P responsiveness, respectively, or whether changing one element will affect the response to both factors.

The experiment was designed as a two-factor experiment with P = phosphate, Suc = sucrose, resulting in four treatments: (1) +P, –Suc; (2) +P, +Suc; (3) –P, –Suc; and (4) –P, +Suc. Two treatments at a time were compared by cohybridizing differentially labeled mRNA from two samples on a set of slides. The comparisons conducted were (1) (+P, –Suc) versus (–P, –Suc); (2) (+P, +Suc) versus (–P, +Suc); (3) (–P, –Suc) versus (–P, +Suc); and (4) (+P, –Suc) versus (+P, +Suc).

The experiment included four biological replicates and four technical replicates. The technical replicates included dye swaps. Each sample represented leaf material from five to 10 plants.

### RNA Extraction and Labeling, Hybridization, and Image Analysis

RNA was isolated according to Müller et al. (2004). RNA was purified using the RNeasy kit spin columns (Qiagen). RNA concentration and quality were determined spectrophotometrically measuring \(A_{260}\) and \(A_{280}\).

Cyanine 3- or cyanine 5-labeled cDNA targets were synthesized with the Agilent fluorescent direct labeling kit (Agilent) using 20 μg total RNA per reaction as input. The labeled target cDNA was purified using Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). The cyanine 3- and cyanine 5-labeled targets were combined and hybridized to the slides for 17 h at 42°C using the Agilent hybridization kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Image Analysis and Data Analysis

Slides were scanned (scanner GMS418M; WG), and images were analyzed using ImaGene software (BioDiscovery).

Statistical analysis was performed with the freeware program \(R\), using BioConductor packages (BioConductor, 2005). Normalization was performed by the use of the Qspline method (Workman et al., 2002).

To discriminate genes with significant changes in their expression in response to P starvation or Suc or the interaction of the two factors, two-way ANOVA was conducted (the \(P < 0.001\) cutoff was chosen after evaluation of the permuted data in a Volcano-plot [Knudsen, 2002]). Hierarchical clustering was performed as described by Eisen et al. (1998). Log₂ values of expression intensity ratios for each of the four comparisons listed above were used as a basis for hierarchical cluster analysis using Cluster and TreeView software (http://rana.lbl.gov). Upstream regulatory sequences were analyzed using MathInspector (Quandt et al., 1995).

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Plant Material and Cultivation Conditions

Seeds of Arabidopsis (*Arabidopsis thaliana*) ecotype Columbia were germinated on soil and, after 3 weeks, transferred to 40-mL rockwool cubes (Rockwool). Plants were placed in a growth chamber at 20°C, 70% relative humidity, and 120 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹ photosynthetically active radiation over an 8-h photoperiod and supplied with nutrient solution with limiting \(P_i\) concentration (0.05 mM) as described by Müller et al. (2004). Three weeks after transferring the plants to rockwool, one part of the plants was supplied with 4 mM \(P_i\) for 1 week (+P), whereas the other plants remained on 0.05 mM \(P_i\) (–P). For incubation of leaf segments, the tip and the base of each leaf were excised and the remaining middle sections were incubated on water. Sectioning of leaves started at the end of the light period. Four hours later, sections were transferred to 100 mM Suc (+Suc) solution or water (–Suc) and left floating at 20°C under dim fluorescent light (50 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹) for 16 h before harvest.

#### Extraction and Determination of \(P_i\), Total P, and Soluble Sugars

\(P_i\) and total P were extracted and quantified as described by Müller et al. (2004). Soluble sugars and starch were extracted as described by Nielsen et al. (1991), and sugars were quantified by enzyme-linked reduction of NAD⁺ as described by Beutler (1984) and Kunst et al. (1984). Assays were performed in microplates and absorbance was followed at 340 nm.

#### Experimental Design and Microarray Used

The microarray Agilent Arabidopsis 2 oligo was used in this study. The array contained 22,000 probes (60mers) comprising 21,500 genes (Agilent; www.home.agilent.com), which represent approximately 80% of all Arabidopsis genes.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Jonas Müller for helpful Ruby scripts for data conversion.

Received September 21, 2006; accepted October 17, 2006; published November 3, 2006.

Müller et al.

# LITERATURE CITED

Andersson MX, Stridh MH, Larsson KE, Liljenberg C, Sandelius AS (2003) Phosphate-deficient oat replaces a major portion of the plasma-membrane phospholipids with the galactolipid digalactosyldiacylglycerol. FEBS Lett 537: 128–132

Bariola PA, MacIntosh GC, Green PJ (1994) Regulation of S-like ribonuclease levels in *Arabidopsis*. Antisense inhibition of RNS1 or RNS2 elevates anthocyanin accumulation. Plant J 6: 673–685

Beutler HO (1984) Monosaccharides and derivatives. In HU Bergmeyer, ed, Methods of Enzymatic Analysis, Vol VI. Verlag Chemie, Weinheim, Germany, pp 331–337

Burleigh SH, Harrison MJ (1999) The down-regulation of Mt4-like genes by phosphate fertilization occurs systemically and involves phosphate translocation to the shoots. Plant Physiol 119: 241–248

Ciereszko I, Johnsson H, Hurry V, Kleczkowski LA (2001a) Phosphate status affects the gene expression, protein content and enzymatic activity of UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in wild-type and pho mutants of *Arabidopsis*. Planta 212: 598–605

Ciereszko I, Johnsson H, Kleczkowski LA (2001b) Sucrose and light regulation of a cold-inducible UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase gene via a hexokinase-independent and abscisic acid-insensitive pathway in *Arabidopsis*. Biochem J 354: 67–72

Czechowski T, Stitt M, Altmann T, Udvardi MK, Scheible WR (2005) Genome-wide identification and testing of superior reference genes for transcript normalization in *Arabidopsis*. Plant Physiol 139: 5–17

Daram P, Brunner S, Rausch C, Steiner C, Amrhein N, Bucher M (1999) *Pht2;1* encodes a low-affinity phosphate transporter from *Arabidopsis*. Plant Cell 11: 2153–2166

del Pozo JC, Allona I, Rubio V, Leyva A, de la Pena A, Aragoncillo C, Paz-Ares J (1999) A type 5 acid phosphatase gene from *Arabidopsis thaliana* is induced by phosphate starvation and by some other types of phosphate mobilising/oxidative stress conditions. Plant J 19: 579–589

Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D (1998) Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 14863–14868

Essigmann B, Güler S, Narang RA, Linke D, Benning C (1998) Phosphate availability affects the thylakoid lipid composition and the expression of SQD1, a gene required for sulfolipid biosynthesis in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 1950–1955

Franco-Zorrilla JM, González E, Bustos R, Linhares F, Leyva A, Paz-Arez J (2004) The transcriptional control of plant responses to phosphate limitation. J Exp Bot 55: 285–293

Geisler M, Kleczkowski LA, Karpinski S (2006) A universal algorithm for genome-wide in silico identification of biologically significant gene promoter putative cis-regulatory elements; identification of new elements for reactive oxygen species and sucrose signaling in *Arabidopsis*. Plant J 45: 384–98

Gibon Y, Blasing OE, Hannemann J, Carillo P, Höhne M, Hendriks JHM, Palacios N, Cross J, Selbig J, Stitt M (2004) A robot-based platform to measure multiple enzyme activities in *Arabidopsis* using a set of cycling assays: comparison of changes of enzyme activities and transcript levels during diurnal cycles and in prolonged darkness. Plant Cell 16: 3304–3325

González E, Solano R, Rubio V, Leyva A, Paz-Ares J (2005) PHOSPHATE TRANSPORTER FACILITATOR1 is a plant-specific SEC12-related protein that enables the endoplasmic reticulum exit of a high-affinity phosphate transporter in *Arabidopsis*. Plant Cell 17: 3500–3512

Gonzali S, Loreti E, Solfanelli C, Novi G, Alpi A, Perata P (2006) Identification of sugar-modulated genes and evidence for in vivo sugar sensing in *Arabidopsis*. J Plant Res 119: 115–123

Hamburger D, Rezzonico E, Petétot JM-C, Somerville C, Poirier Y (2002) Identification and characterisation of the *Arabidopsis PHO1* gene involved in phosphate loading to the xylem. Plant Cell 14: 889–902

Hammond JP, Bennett MJ, Bowen HC, Broadley MR, Eastwood DC, May ST, Rahn C, Swarup R, Woolaway KE, White PJ (2003) Changes in gene expression in *Arabidopsis* shoots during phosphate starvation and the potential for developing smart plants. Plant Physiol 132: 578–596

Ho SL, Chao YC, Tong WF, Yu SM (2001) Sugar coordinately and differentially regulates growth- and stress-related gene expression via a complex signal transduction network and multiple control mechanisms. Plant Physiol 125: 877–890

Knudsen S (2002) A Biologist’s Guide to Analysis of DNA Microarray Data, Ed 1. Wiley-Liss, New York

Koch KE (1996) Carbohydrate modulated gene expression in plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 47: 509–540

Kunst A, Draeger B, Zieg enhorn J (1984) Monosaccharides and derivatives. *In* HU Bergmeyer, ed, Methods of Enzymatic Analysis, Vol VI. Verlag Chemie, Weinheim, Germany, pp 163–172

Lejay L, Gansel X, Cerezo M, Tillard P, Müller C, Krapp A, von Wirén N, Daniel-Vedele F, Gojon A (2003) Regulation of root ion transporters by photosynthesis: functional importance and relation with hexokinase. Plant Cell 15: 2218–2232

Liu J, Samac DA, Bucciarelli B, Allan DL, Vance CP (2005) Signaling of phosphorus deficiency-induced gene expression in white lupin requires sugar and phloem transport. Plant J 41: 257–268

Lloyd JC, Zakhleniuk OV (2004) Responses of primary and secondary metabolism to sugar accumulation revealed by microarray expression analysis of the *Arabidopsis* mutant, *pho3*. J Exp Bot 55: 1221–1230

Loreti E, Poggi A, Novi G, Alpi A, Perata P (2005) A genome-wide analysis of the effect of sucrose on gene expression in *Arabidopsis* seedlings under anoxia. Plant Physiol 137: 1130–1138

Lynch JP, Brown KM (1997) Ethylene and plant responses to nutritional stress. Physiol Plant 100: 613–619

Malboobi MA, Lefebvre NN (1997) A phosphate-starvation inducible beta-glucosidase gene (*psr3.2*) isolated from *Arabidopsis thaliana* is a member of a distinct subfamily of the BGA family. Plant Mol Biol 34: 57–68

Martin AC, del Pozo JC, Iglesias J, Rubio V, Solano R, de la Peña A, Leyva A, Paz-Ares J (2000) Influence of cytokinins on the expression of phosphate starvation responsive genes in *Arabidopsis*. Plant J 24: 559–567

Misson J, Raghothama KG, Jain A, Jouhet J, Block MA, Bligny R, Ortet P, Creff A, Somerville S, Rolland N, et al (2005) A genome-wide transcriptional analysis using *Arabidopsis thaliana* Affymetrix gene chips determined plant responses to phosphate deprivation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102: 11934–11939

Moseley JL, Chang CW, Grossman AR (2006) Genome-based approaches to understanding phosphorus deprivation responses and PSR1 control in *Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*. Eukaryot Cell 5: 26–44

Müller R, Nilsson L, Krintel C, Nielsen TH (2004) Gene expression during recovery from phosphate starvation in roots and shoots of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Physiol Plant 122: 233–243

Müller R, Nilsson L, Nielsen LK, Nielsen TH (2005) Interaction between phosphate starvation signalling and hexokinase-independent sugar sensing in *Arabidopsis* leaves. Physiol Plant 124: 81–90

Muchhal US, Pardo JM, Raghothama KG (1996) Phosphate transporters from the higher plant *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 10519–10523

Muchhal US, Raghothama KG (1999) Transcriptional regulation of plant phosphate transporters. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 5868–5872

Mudge SR, Rae AL, Diatloff E, Smith FW (2002) Expression analysis suggests novel roles for members of the Pht1 family of phosphate transporters in *Arabidopsis*. Plant J 31: 341–353

Nielsen TH, Krapp A, Röber-Schwarz U, Stitt M (1998) The sugar-mediated regulation of genes encoding the small subunit of Rubisco and the regulatory subunit of ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase is modified by phosphate and nitrogen. Plant Cell Environ 21: 443–454

Nielsen TH, Skjærbæk HC, Karlsen P (1991) Carbohydrate metabolism during fruit development in sweet pepper (*Capsicum annuum* L.) plants. Physiol Plant 82: 311–319

O’Connor TR, Dyreson C, Wyrick JJ (2005) Athena: a resource for rapid visualization and systematic analysis of *Arabidopsis* promoter sequences. Bioinformatics 21: 4411–4413

Paul MJ, Pellny TK (2003) Carbon metabolite feedback regulation of leaf photosynthesis and development. J Exp Bot 54: 539–547

Paul MJ, Stitt M (1993) Effects of nitrogen and phosphorus deficiencies on levels of carbohydrates, respiratory enzymes and metabolites in seedlings of tobacco and their responses to exogenous sucrose. Plant Cell Environ 16: 1047–1057

Plaxton WC, Carswell MC (1999) Metabolic aspects of the phosphate starvation response in plants. *In* HR Lerner, ed, Plant Responses to Environmental Stresses: From Phytohormones to Genome Reorganization. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 349–372

Poirier Y, Thoma S, Somerville C, Schiefelbein J (1991) A mutant of *Arabidopsis* deficient in xylem loading of phosphate. Plant Physiol 97: 1087–1093

Price J, Laxmi A, St. Martin SK, Jang JC (2004) Global transcription profiling reveals multiple sugar signal transduction mechanisms in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16: 2128–2150

Quandt K, French K, Karas H, Wingender E, Werner T (1995) MatInd and MatInspector: new fast and versatile tools for detection of consensus matches in nucleotide sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res 23: 4878–4884

Raghothama KG (1999) Phosphate acquisition. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 50: 665–693

Ramirez-Parra E, Fründt C, Gutierrez C (2003) A genome-wide identification of E2F-regulated genes in Arabidopsis. Plant J 33: 801–811

Rausch C, Bucher M (2002) Molecular mechanisms of phosphate transport in plants. Planta 216: 23–37

Rolland F, Baena-Gonzalez E, Sheen J (2006) Sugar sensing and signalling in plants: conserved and novel mechanisms. Annu Rev Plant Biol 57: 675–709

Rubio V, Linhares F, Solano R, Martin AC, Iglesias J, Leyva A, Paz-Ares J (2001) A conserved MYB transcription factor involved in phosphate starvation signaling both in vascular plants and in unicellular algae. Genes Dev 15: 2122–2133

Sadka A, DeWald DB, May GD, Park WD, Mullet JE (1994) Phosphate modulated transcription of soybean VspB and other sugar-inducible genes. Plant Cell 6: 737–749

Shin H, Shin HS, Chen R, Harrison M (2006) Loss of At4 function impacts phosphate distribution between the roots and the shoots during phosphate starvation. Plant J 45: 712–726

Solfanelli C, Poggi A, Loreti E, Alpi A, Perata P (2006) Sucrose-specific induction of the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 140: 637–646

Tang Z, Sadka A, Morishige DT, Mullet JE (2001) Homeodomain leucine zipper proteins bind to the phosphate response domain of the soybean VspB tripartite promoter. Plant Physiol 125: 797–809

Teng S, Keurentjes J, Bentsink L, Koornef M, Smeele S (2005) Sucrose-specific induction of anthocyanin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis requires the MYB75/PAP1 gene. Plant Physiol 139: 1840–1852

Thum KE, Shin MJ, Palenchar PM, Kouranov A, Coruzzi GM (2004) Genome-wide investigation of light and carbon signaling interactions in Arabidopsis. Genome Biol 5: R10

Todd CD, Zeng P, Huete AMR, Hoyos ME, Polacco JC (2004) Transcripts of MYB-like genes respond to phosphorus and nitrogen deprivation in *Arabidopsis*. Planta 219: 1003–1009

Tohge T, Nishiyama Y, Hirai MY, Yano M, Nakajima JI, Awazuhara M, Inoue E, Takahashi H, Goodenowe DB, Kitayama M, et al (2005) Functional genomics by integrated analysis of metabolome and transcriptome of Arabidopsis plants over-expressing a MYB transcription factor. Plant J 42: 218–235

Toufighi K, Brady SM, Austin R, Ly E, Provart NJ (2005) The Botany Array Resource: e-Northerns, Expression Angling, and promoter analyses. Plant J 43: 153–163

Vance CP, Uhde-Stone C, Allan DL (2003) Phosphorus acquisition and use: critical adaptations by plants for securing a nonrenewable resource. New Phytol 157: 423–447

Villadsen D, Smith SM (2004) Identification of more than 200 glucose-responsive *Arabidopsis* genes none of which responds to 1-O-methylglucose or 6-deoxyglucose. Plant Mol Biol 55: 467–477

Wang Y, Ribot C, Rezzonico E, Poirier Y (2004) Structure and expression profile of the Arabidopsis *PHO1* gene family indicates a broad role in inorganic phosphate homeostasis. Plant Physiol 135: 1–12

Wang YH, Garvin DF, Kochian LV (2002) Rapid induction of regulatory and transporter genes in response to phosphorus, potassium, and iron deficiencies in tomato roots. Evidence for cross talk and root/rhizosphere-mediated signals. Plant Physiol 130: 1361–1370

Weigel D (1995) The APETALA2 domain is related to a novel type of DNA binding domain. Plant Cell 7: 388–389

Wu P, Ma LG, Hou X, Wang M, Wu Y, Liu F, Deng XW (2003) Phosphate starvation triggers distinct alterations of genome expression in Arabidopsis roots and leaves. Plant Physiol 132: 1260–1271

Workman C, Jensen L, Jarmer H, Berka R, Gautier L, Nielsen HB, Saxild HH, Nielsen C, Knudsen S (2002) A new non-linear normalization method for reducing variability in DNA microarray experiments. Genome Biol 3: research 0048.1–0048.16

Wykoff DD, Grossman AR, Weeks DP, Usuda H, Shimogawara K (1999) Psr1, a nuclear localized protein that regulates phosphorus metabolism in Chlamydomonas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 15336–15341

Yu SM (1999) Cellular and genetic responses of plants to sugar starvation. Plant Physiol 121: 687–693

Suppl. Table S1 Primers used for RT-PCR amplification.

| AGI          | Forward-primer (5'→3')                                      | Reverse-primer (5'→3')                                      | Product size | cycles |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------|
| Genes regulated by P-starvation |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |              |        |
| AT1G68740    | CTGAAA CCGCACCCGTAAA                                       | GCCAGGATCATTGAAC TTGTC                                     | 411          | 28     |
| AT5G20150    | TTCCTGAATGGCAAGACAAGTT                                    | ACGCATGAGATCACCAGTTC                                       | 407          | 28     |
| AT5G06510    | TTACTACGGAGGCAGAACAGTG                                    | TCAAGAAACGCCCGCCAGAT                                       | 438          | 28     |
| AT1G17710    | GTGTCA TCCCAGCCA TCAA                                     | CTTCTCCATCGGTCC AATCTC TA                                  | 444          | 26     |
| AT1G58280    | GGAGGAGCGTGGAGGAGCAT                                      | CTAAATTACCAA CCCCACTTC ACG                                 | 437          | 28     |
| AT1G68670    | CGGTGC GTTTCAGCC ATTTC                                    | GCTGATTCCCGGTAC TTTGTGC                                    | 413          | 28     |
| AT4G12090    | CGATCTACTGATTGG                                           | GGGCGATCTACTGATTGG                                         | 392          | 30     |
| AT2G38940    | GTCGCAGCCGCCGTC AAT                                       | CATAGCCGCAGGATAGC ACCAG                                    | 480          | 26     |
| AT1G08650    | GGCCACCGGTGATTTCTTC                                       | AACGACGCCGGCGCTCCA TAG                                     | 508          | 28     |
| AT1G71130    | GCCACCGATTCTTCTAGCGACGAA                                   | GATTCTCCGCGGCAACCAA                                        | 397          | 28     |
| AT4G33030    | CTTGGGACGATGGGTGAGTATG                                    | AACCGCTTTAGTGACGAGTG A                                     | 508          | 26     |
| AT2G26660    | GCGCGA CAATT CCTCTC ATAC                                  | AGCACC GGT TCTTTGTCA TACTT                                 | 409          | 28     |
| AT1G23870    | AGCGGT AAACTTAGCCCTACT                                     | CGCCTCAGCCGACGAATA AC                                      | 526          | 28     |
| Genes regulated by sucrose |                                                                                             |                                                                                          |              |        |
| AT4G34200    | GCCACCGCGGATTCTTCTT                                        | GCTTCC TCCGGCCAC CAGTTG                                    | 465          | 28     |
| AT3G30775    | GGTGACGCGTGGCATGGTTTTAGG                                  | TCGCGGGTTGGATTG TGTTCTT                                    | 542          | 28     |
| AT5G63800    | AATGCGGCGAGATTTCCTG                                       | CTGGCTTTAGGTTGA TTGTTTACC                                  | 451          | 28     |
| AT4G37610    | ACCACCA CCACCTC TC                                         | TTCGCA GACTCGCTTCAA ATG                                    | 403          | 28     |
| AT2G30770    | TTACTCGGAGGAACGTCAACACTT                                  | CCGGGGCATATCCTTCTCC                                        | 436          | 28     |
| AT2G29350    | CCGACCA GAGTATACAGCA GAA                                   | GCCGTC AACGCAATGGTC                                        | 441          | 27     |
| AT2G25080    | CGCGAATCTGAGTAATGGGTTT                                     | ATCGGCGCTGTGGTTGGTC                                        | 417          | 27     |
| Genes regulated by interaction |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |              |        |
| AT5G39130    | AAGCGGTTTTGTGTA GTGGTAG                                   | GAACGCCCTGGCAAGAAGC                                        | 500          | 26     |
| AT3G02820    | CTCGGCTATGTTCTTCGCTATTTTC                                 | TTCATCGCTCGGTA ACTTTG                                      | 417          | 30     |
| AT3G52820    | AGCCGCCTCGTCCCATCGTATT                                    | GCTGGTGAGTGT CGGCGTAGGA                                    | 462          | 26     |
| AT1G73220    | TGGATTGGCAGTGGCTTTGT TTA                                   | CTTCCGCTTCC CCTGTTGTG CTA                                  | 560          | 28     |
| AT1G44900    | GGGGCTTGTACTTGCTGACC                                      | TTGCCGC TAGATCCCTG AAT                                     | 406          | 29     |
| AT1G22150    | CCCCGCGGCAA GCAATA                                        | GCCGCGTGGGACAAGAAATC                                       | 562          | 28     |
| AT2G32830    | CCGCCGCGAAAC AATGA                                        | CTGCGCCGCGTAAAGAAAA CC                                     | 407          | 28     |
| AT4G32840    | CAGAAGAATAAGTTTCTTC                                       | TGACGG AATGTA TTTTGCC AA                                   | 1446         | 28     |
| AT5G48070    | GGTGATGGCCGTGGAAAAT                                       | TCTGTA GAAAGCGGTGAA AGGAG                                  | 546          | 28     |
| AT4G10120    | GTGGGATGACGGGGTTAGTTC                                     | CAGGGGATGCGGATAATGTAGGAG                                   | 498          | 28     |
| AT3G59140    | CAACGCTCCTATCGCAA AACTC                                   | CTCGCCCCTCCCA CCTT                                         | 453          | 28     |
| ACTIN        |                                                          |                                                              |              |        |
| At2g37620    | TGGAACTGGAA TGGTTAAGCTGG                                  | TCTCCAGAGTCGAGCA ATACCG                                   | 435          | 26     |

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

Suppl. Table S1  Primers used for RT-PCR amplification.

Suppl. Table S2  List of 1319 genes differentially expressed in response to P starvation (P<0.001)

Suppl. Table S3  List of 5479 genes differentially expressed in response to Suc (P<0.001)

Suppl. Table S4. List of differentially expressed genes (P<0.001) showing interaction between the two factors Suc and P starvation.

Suppl. Table S5. Full dataset for the list of selected genes presented in Table II
