
# RORα-Mediated Purkinje Cell Development Determines Disease Severity in Adult SCA1 Mice

Heliane G. Serra,$^{1}$ Lisa Duvick,$^{1}$ Tao Zu,$^{1}$ Kerri Carlson,$^{1}$ Sam Stevens,$^{1,2}$ Nathan Jorgensen,$^{1,3}$ Alana Lysholm,$^{1}$ Eric Burright,$^{1,4}$ Huda Y. Zoghbi,$^{5}$ H. Brent Clark,$^{1}$ J. Michael Andresen,$^{1,4}$ and Harry T. Orr$^{1,2,4,*}$

$^{1}$ Institute of Human Genetics  
$^{2}$ Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology  
$^{3}$ Department of Neuroscience  
$^{4}$ Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology  
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA  

$^{5}$ Departments of Molecular and Human Genetics, Pediatrics, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA  

*Contact: orrxx002@umn.edu  

DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.036  

## SUMMARY

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is one of nine inherited, typically adult onset, polyglutamine neurodegenerative diseases. To examine whether development impacts SCA1, we used a conditional transgenic mouse model of SCA1 to delay the postnatal expression of mutant ATXN1 until after completion of cerebellar development. Delayed postnatal expression of mutant ATXN1 led to a substantial reduction in severity of disease in adults in comparison with early postnatal gene expression. This was linked to a destabilization of RORα, a transcription factor critical for cerebellar development. In SCA1 mice, there was a depletion of RORα and a reduction in expression of genes controlled by RORα. Partial loss of RORα enhanced mutant ATXN1 pathogenicity. Additionally, evidence points to the existence of a complex containing ATXN1, RORα, and the RORα coactivator Tip60. These studies indicate RORα and Tip60 have a role in SCA1 and suggest a mechanism by which compromising cerebellar development contributes to severity of neurodegeneration in an adult.

## INTRODUCTION

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is one of nine inherited diseases known as polyglutamine neurodegenerative disorders (Zoghbi and Orr, 2000; Taylor et al., 2002). The mutational mechanism of these diseases is the expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat that encodes a polyglutamine stretch within each respective disease-causing protein. Typical of the autosomal dominant ataxias, SCA1 is characterized by a progressive loss of motor coordination, speech impairment, and problems with swallowing. Although the SCA1 encoded protein ATAXIN 1 (ATXN1) is widely expressed (Servadio et al., 1995; Banfi et al., 1996), in SCA1, mutant ATXN1 causes neurodegeneration predominantly of cerebellar Purkinje cells and neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord (Clark and Orr, 2000).

Studies utilizing animal models have provided considerable insight into mechanisms of pathogenesis. Sca1 null mice fail to develop ataxia and Purkinje cell pathology (Matilla et al., 1998). In contrast, mice that either overexpress mutant ATXN1 or mice that have a targeted insertion of 154 repeats into the endogenous Sca1 locus develop ataxia and Purkinje cell pathology similar to that seen in SCA1 patients (Burright et al., 1995; Watase et al., 2002). Transgenic mouse studies demonstrated that while mutant ATXN1 must enter the nucleus of Purkinje cells to cause disease, formation of the inclusions per se was not required for the initiation of disease (Klement et al., 1998). Further, misfolding and impaired degradation of mutant ATXN1 likely contributes to pathogenesis (Cummings et al., 1998, 1999, 2001). Phosphorylation of Ser776 in mutant ATXN1 is important for pathogenesis (Emamian et al., 2003), likely because this modification of ATXN1 is involved in its stabilization by regulating its interaction with the cellular protein 14-3-3 (Chen et al., 2003). Specific genes whose expression is downregulated prior to the onset of pathology were identified (Lin et al., 2000; Serra et al., 2004). Several nuclear proteins that interact with ATXN1 have been identified as possible mediators of SCA1 pathogenesis, including PQBP, SMRT, BOAT, and Gfi-1 (Okazawa et al., 2002; Tsai et al., 2004; Tsuda et al., 2005). Yet, even with these advances, the molecular mechanism by which a mutant ATXN1-induced alteration
in gene expression results in the degeneration of only certain neurons, such as cerebellar Purkinje cells, remains unknown. Here we show that developmental timing of mutant SCA1 expression has a substantial impact upon disease and suggest a mechanism by which mutant ATXN1 compromises cerebellar development and, thus, contributes to severity of neurodegeneration in adult mice.

**RESULTS**

**Expression of Mutant ATXN1 during Cerebellar Development Enhances Disease**

In the original series of SCA1[82Q] transgenic mice, one line, designated B04, stood out as having a relatively low level of SCA1 expression yet developed a severe ataxia (Figure S1; Burright et al., 1995). An interesting feature of SCA1 expression in line B04 is that it began on postnatal day 2. In the other SCA1[82Q] lines, exemplified by line B05, transgene expression begins during postnatal week 2 (days P10–P14).

Since the first 3 postnatal weeks are a critical period for Purkinje cell and cerebellar cortex development in the mouse (Goldowitz and Hamre, 1998), we hypothesized that the increased susceptibility to mutant ATXN1 in SCA1[82Q] B04 mice might be due to expression of the SCA1[82Q] transgene for a greater portion of the critical period of postnatal development. The availability of a doxycycline-regulated conditional transgenic mouse model of SCA1 (Zu et al., 2004) allowed us to test this idea.

The strategy utilized was to compare disease in two groups of conditional SCA1[82Q] transgenic mice. Both groups were exposed to mutant ATXN1 expression for a total of 12 weeks. In one group, the 12 week gene-on group, SCA1 transgene expression was allowed to begin during postnatal week 2. In the second group SCA1 transgene expression was delayed for 14 weeks, until well after the cerebellum had matured, and then turned on for 12 weeks. The time course of SCA1 transgene expression in each group of mice was confirmed by northern blot analysis (Figure 1A). In the 12 week gene-on mice, SCA1 mRNA was first detectable at day P3, reaching the maximum level of expression by day P10. In the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on mice, expression of the SCA1 transgene was suppressed for 14 weeks. By 2 days after removing doxycycline, the SCA1 transgene reached a maximum level of expression similar to the maximum level of expression seen with the 12 week-gene-on mice.

Disease severity in the 12 week gene-on mice and the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on mice was assessed using both neurological and pathological criteria. By home cage behavior, the 12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice had a moderate level of ataxia as reported previously (Zu et al., 2004). In contrast, the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice showed no signs of ataxia. Consistent with the home cage behavior observations, the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on mice performed markedly better on the accelerating Rotarod than did the 12 week gene-on mice (Figure 1B).

Purkinje cell pathology in both the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice and the 12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice was quantified by measuring the thickness of the molecular layer (Zu et al., 2004). This measurement assesses the degree of dendritic atrophy characteristic of disease in SCA1[82Q] transgenic mice. The milder neurological phenotype seen in 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice was accompanied by a substantially reduced level of Purkinje cell pathology (Figures 1C and 1D). The thickness of the cerebellar molecular layer measured in the 14 week gene-off/12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice was greater, comparable to wild-type mice, than the thickness of the molecular layer seen in the 12 week gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice (Figure 1D). This milder Purkinje cell pathology continued to be observed when the 14 week gene-off/gene-on SCA1[82Q] mice were allowed to age further with the gene-on period extended to 24 weeks (Figure 1E). In 14 week gene-off/24 week gene-on mice, the thickness of the molecular layer remained greater than the molecular layer in mice where SCA1[82Q] was expressed for 24 weeks straight.

To further focus on the critical period where the lack of mutant ATXN1 expression seems to protect Purkinje cells from the effects of subsequent expression of mutant ATXN1, we generated mice where SCA1[82Q] was expressed for 12 weeks following off periods of either the first 2 or 3 postnatal weeks. At both the primary fissure and a posterior fissure, gene-off periods for the first 2 and 3 postnatal weeks also had a protective effect on the thickness of the molecular layer (Figure 1D).

These data indicate that the timing of mutant ATXN1 expressed during the first postnatal weeks, i.e., during a critical period of cerebellar development and maturation, modifies subsequent disease severity in the adult. One potential explanation for this developmental effect on SCA1 severity is that ATXN1 interacts with a pathway involved in Purkinje cell development.

**RORα-Regulated Genes Are Downregulated in the Cerebella of SCA1[82Q] Mice**

Previously, using a subtractive cDNA approach (Lin et al., 2000) as well as a microarray-based gene profiling strategy (Serra et al., 2004), we identified four genes whose expression is regulated by RORα (Gold et al., 2003). Subsequently, we analyzed the SCA1 gene-profile data set with a set of analytical programs specifically designed for microarray data. This analysis yielded an expanded SCA1-selected set of 53 genes, 13 of which increased in expression with disease and 40 of which decreased in expression with disease (Table S1).

When the set of 40 genes with a decreased expression in 5 week-old SCA1[82Q] mice was compared to the entire set of RORα-mediated genes generated by Gold et al. (2003), considerable overlap was found (Table 1). Among the RORα-responsive genes in the SCA1 gene set were all four of the genes to which RORα has been found to bind directly to their promoters in vivo (Gold et al., 2003). These data indicated that RORα-mediated genes are, as a group,
Figure 1. Mutant ATXN1 Levels during Cerebellar Development Modify Disease

(A) Northern blot analysis of SCA1[82Q] transgene RNA expression in the 12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice and the 14 week SCA1[82Q] gene-off/12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice.

(B) Rotarod performance (mean ± SEM) for 12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice and 14 week SCA1[82Q] gene-off/12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice. *Significant p values (student’s t test) were obtained for day 1 (p = 0.04) and day 4 (p = 0.03). The p values for day 2 and day 3 were 0.05 and 0.07, respectively.

(C) Calbindin immunostaining depicting the atrophy of Purkinje cell dendrites in the 14 week SCA1[82Q] gene-off/12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on and 12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice.

(D) Purkinje cell dendritic atrophy (molecular layer thickness, mean ± SEM) in the various cohorts of conditional SCA1[82Q]. To assess statistical significance, a one-way ANOVA was performed followed by a Tukey Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) Test when necessary.

(E) Thickness of the molecular layer in mice aged for 24 weeks with the transgene on following a 12 week gene-off period (12 week SCA1[82Q] gene-off/24 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice) compared to 24 week SCA1[82Q] gene-on mice.

downregulated at an early stage of disease in Purkinje cells of SCA1[82Q] mice.

**RORα Is Decreased in Purkinje Cells of SCA1[82Q] Transgenic Mice**

To examine whether a decrease in RORα might be the cause of the decrease in RORα-mediated gene expression seen in cerebella from the SCA1 mice, we used immunofluorescence to assess RORα expression. Figure 2A shows the level of RORα immunostaining in the nuclei of wild-type mouse Purkinje cells as well as the level of staining in the nuclei of specific interneurons in the molecular layer. In contrast, the levels of RORα staining in Purkinje cell nuclei in a 12 week-old SCA1[82Q] heterozygous

Table 1. Overlap between SCA1[82Q] and Staggerer (RORα) Gene Sets

| GENE       | PROTEIN                                      | Staggerer   | SCA1[82Q]   |
|------------|----------------------------------------------|-------------|-------------|
|            |                                              | Microarray  | Microarray  |
|            |                                              | Q-PCR       | Q-PCR       |
| Calb1      | calbindin-28K, Ca²⁺ binding protein          | ↓           | ↓           |
| **Itpr1**  | inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor 1       | ↓           | ↓           | ↓           |
| **Slc1a6** | EAAT4, glutamate transporter                  | ↓           | ↓           | ↓           |
| **Pcp2 (L7)** | GoLoco G protein modulatory domain         | ↓           | ↓           | ↓           |
| Rora       | RAR-related orphan Receptor α                | ↓           | ↓           |
| Kit1       | kit ligand                                   | ↓           |             | ↓           |
| **Pcp4**   | calmodulin inhibitor                         | ↓           | ↓           | ↓           |
| Spnb3      | brain-specific β-spectrin III                | ↓           | ↓           |
| Idb2       | inhibitor of DNA binding 2                   | ↓           | ↓           |
| Grm1       | mGluR1 glutamate receptor subunit            |             | ↓           | ↓           |
| Atp2a2     | SERCA2, Ca²⁺-transporting ATPase             | ↓           |             | ↓           |
| Cals1      | CARP, an Itpr1 binding protein               | ↓           | ↓           | ↓           |
| Homer2     |                                              | ↔           | ↔           |

****Genes to which RORα binds to the promoter (Gold et al., 2003).

mouse (Figure 2B) was noticeably less than RORα staining in the nuclei of wild-type Purkinje cells. Sca1⁻/⁻ mice (Figure 2C) and mice overexpressing a wild-type allele of SCA1 (Figure 2D) had levels of RORα in their Purkinje cells that appeared similar to those seen in wild-type mice. To quantitatively assess the levels of RORα, we determined the mean pixel density of RORα-positive Purkinje cell and interneuron nuclei (Figure 2E). This analysis showed that there were significant decreases in the levels of RORα in the Purkinje cell nuclei of SCA1[30Q] and SCA1[82Q] compared to wild-type mice.

To obtain a more quantitative assessment of RORα levels, we performed western blot analyses. As a specificity control, the amount of RORα in a cerebellar lysate prepared from a staggerer (sg/sg) mouse, a null mutation at Rora (Hamilton et al., 1996), was determined and found to be negligible compared to the level of RORα in cerebellar lysate from a wild-type mouse (Figure 3A, lane 1 versus lane 8). Compared to the level of RORα in a lysate from a wild-type mouse, the amount of RORα in a lysate from a 12 week-old mouse expressing a conditional SCA1[82Q] allele was decreased significantly (Figure 3A, lane 4). Importantly, when the conditional SCA1[82Q] allele was turned off, RORα levels returned to normal by 2 days (Figure 3A, lane 5). To confirm that the restoration of RORα expression occurred within Purkinje cell nuclei, we used immunofluorescence to examine RORα expression within 5 days of shutting off SCA1 expression in the conditional SCA1[82Q] transgenic mice (Figures 3B and 3C). Mice lacking expression of the endogenous Sca1 gene, Sca1⁻/⁻ mice, had levels of RORα by western blot analysis similar to those seen in wild-type mice (Figure 3A, lane 3). Normal levels of RORα were also found in mice expressing a form of ATXN1 with 82 glutamines,

ATXN1[82Q]-K772T (Figure 3A, lane 2), that does not cause disease due to a mutation in the nuclear localization sequence preventing the protein from entering the nucleus (Klement et al., 1998). Moreover, mice overexpressing wild-type ATXN1, ATXN1[30Q], also had levels of RORα similar to nontransgenic wild-type mice (Figure 3A, lane 7). Thus, decreased levels of RORα were found only in cerebellar extracts from mice expressing a mutant form of ATXN1 that caused ataxia.

To gain insight into the molecular basis for the loss of RORα from Purkinje cell nuclei in the presence of mutant ATXN1, northern blots were performed. As shown in Figure 3D, the amount of RORα mRNA in a SCA1[82Q] cerebellum was decreased compared to wild-type, SCA1[30Q], or Sca1⁻/⁻ mice. Thus, in the presence of mutant ATXN1, both RORα protein and mRNA levels were reduced. The conditional SCA1[82Q] mice were used to assess the relative contributions of RNA-based and protein-based mechanisms to the mutant ATXN1-induced decrease in RORα. The cerebellar levels of RORα protein and mRNA in 12 week gene-on mice were compared with those from 12 week gene-on/2 day gene-off mice. The results (Figure 3E) show that after turning the SCA1[82Q] gene off for 2 days the RORα protein was restored in absence of a restoration of the RORα-mRNA level. This result is consistent with mutant ATXN1 affecting RORα protein levels independent of its effect on RORα-mRNA levels.

### Partial Loss of RORα Enhances the Pathogenicity of ATXN1[82Q] in Transgenic Mice

To evaluate the role of RORα in SCA1 pathogenesis in vivo using a genetic approach, we assessed the effect of a loss-of-function allele of Rora in Purkinje cells by placing

To assess the effect of a partial loss of RORα function on SCA1, the disease status in heterozygous SCA1[82Q] mice on a wild-type background was compared to the level of disease in the homozygous SCA1[82Q]:sg/+ mice. Figure 4B shows that Purkinje cell pathology in the homozygous SCA1[82Q]:sg/+ mice at 20 and 24 weeks of age was more severe than the pathology seen in heterozygous SCA1[82Q] mice. These results indicate that there is a genetic interaction between SCA1[82Q] and *Rora* and support the idea that loss of *Rora* function enhances ATXN1[82Q] pathogenicity.

### ATXN1 Interacts with the Nuclear Hormone Coactivator

To gain insight into the molecular means by which mutant ATXN1 disrupts RORα-mediated gene expression in Purkinje cells, we examined the possibility that ATXN1 interacts with RORα. First, ATXN1[30Q] and RORα proteins colocalized within the nuclei of Purkinje cells by confocal microscopy (Figure S2).

To examine whether this reflected a biochemical interaction between endogenous ATXN1 and RORα, we performed coimmunoprecipitation studies on cerebellar lysates prepared from normal and *Sca1*−/− mice. An immunoprecipitation using an antibody against RORα coimmunoprecipitated ATXN1 from a lysate prepared from a normal mouse cerebellum. Conversely, RORα coimmunoprecipitated with the anti-ATXN1 antibody 11750 (Figure 5A). Control immunoprecipitations using lysates prepared from the cerebella of *Sca1*−/− mice failed to bring down ATXN1 with the anti-RORα antibody or RORα with the anti-ATXN1 antibody. GST-ATXN1 pull-downs of in vitro transcribed/translated RORα were used to assess whether ATXN1 and RORα might interact directly. As shown in Figure 5B, the results of this analysis failed to demonstrate an interaction. None of the following were able to pull down RORα above background levels observed with GST alone: GST-Atx-30Q, 53Q, and 82Q.

The ability to coimmunoprecipitate ATXN1 and RORα from cerebellar extracts in the absence of a direct interaction between the two proteins indicates that ATXN1 interacts directly with a component of the RORα complex other than RORα itself. At the promoter of Purkinje cell-specific genes, RORα exists in a complex that includes many coregulators (Gold et al., 2003). One protein found consistently in the RORα complex at Purkinje cell-specific genes is the coactivator Tip60 (Brady et al., 1999). Based on this observation, we tested whether ATXN1 interacts with Tip60. Coimmunoprecipitations using cerebella extracts from wild-type mice indicated that endogenous ATXN1 and Tip60 do interact (Figure 5C). The ability of GST-ATXN1 to pull down Tip60 from wild-type mouse cerebella extracts provided additional evidence that ATXN1 and Tip60 interact (Figure 5D). Furthermore, the GST-ATXN1 pull-down results suggested that as the length of the polyglutamine tract increased from 30Q to 53Q to 82Q, the amount of Tip60 pulled down increased. The effect of

---

**Figure 2. Purkinje Cell Expression of RORα in SCA1 Transgenic Mice**

(A) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12-week-old wild-type (wt) FVB/n mouse. The box indicates Purkinje cells.

(B) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12-week-old SCA1[82Q] transgenic mouse.

(C) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12-week-old *Sca1*−/− mouse. Section was simultaneously stained with antibodies against RORα (red) and the Purkinje cell-marker calbindin (green).

(D) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12-week-old SCA1[30Q] transgenic mouse.

(E) Quantitative analysis of the immunofluorescence data in panels (A)–(D) (mean ± SEM).

the SCA1[82Q] transgene on a sg/+ background that lacks one functional copy of *Rora*. It is important to note that this approach is complicated by the fact that the *Pcp2* promoter directing Purkinje cell expression of the SCA1[82Q] transgene is regulated by RORα (Gold et al., 2003). The prediction would be that loss of function at *Rora* would result in a decrease in ATXN1[82Q] expression, which by itself would lead to a less severe form of disease.

Therefore, mice homozygous for *Pcp2*-SCA1[82Q] were crossed onto the sg/+ background. As predicted, mice homozygous for *Pcp2*-SCA1[82Q] and heterozygous for sg expressed a reduced level of SCA1[82Q] compared to homozygous *Pcp2*-SCA1[82Q] mice on a wild-type background (Figure 4A). The amount of SCA1[82Q] expressed by the homozygous SCA1[82Q]:sg/+ mice was comparable to SCA1[82Q] expressed by heterozygous SCA1[82Q] mice on a wild-type background. Thus, to as-

Figure 3. Cerebellar RORα Is Depleted in Mice Expressing a Disease-Causing Form of ATXN1[82Q]

(A) Western blot analysis of RORα in protein extracts prepared from SCA1 mice. RORα levels are normalized to α-tubulin. Lane 1, a wild-type FVB/n mouse; lane 2, a mouse expressing the K772T ATXN1[82Q] variant; Lane 3, a mouse null for endogenous Sca1; lane 4, an affected 12 week old gene-on conditional SCA1[82Q] mouse; lane 5, a conditional SCA1[82Q] mice where the gene was on for 12 weeks and turned off for 2 days and 10 days (lane 6); lane 7, an unaffected 12 week old mouse expressing SCA1[30Q]; lane 8, a sg/sg mouse.

(B) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12 week old gene-on SCA1[82Q] mouse.

(C) Immunofluorescent staining of RORα in the cerebellar cortex of a 12 week old gene-on/5 day gene-off SCA1[82Q] mouse. Section was simultaneously stained with antibodies against RORα (red) and Purkinje cell-marker calbindin (green).

(D) Northern blot analysis of Rora mRNA (mean ± SEM) levels in murine cerebellar extracts from 12 week-old wild-type (FVB) mice, ATXN1 transgenic mice expressing wild-type ATXN1 (SCA1[30Q]) or mutant ATXN1 (SCA1[82Q]), Sca1−/−, and staggerer mice (sg/sg). Statistical significance was assessed using a one-way ANOVA test followed by a Tukey HSD test when necessary.

(E) Recovery of cerebellar RORα protein levels (western-blot data from A) and Rora mRNA levels in SCA1[82Q] transgenic mice where the transgene was on for 12 weeks (12 wks on-hatched bars), compared to protein and mRNA levels in mice where the SCA1[82Q] transgene was expressed for 12 weeks and turned off for 2 days (2d off, solid bars). Mean ± SEM.

the ATXN1 polyglutamine tract length on its interaction with Tip60 was also assessed using coimmunoprecipitations from transfected tissue culture cell extracts. Figure 5E shows that more ATXN1[82Q] was coimmunoprecipitated with Tip60 than was ATXN1[30Q], providing further evidence for a polyglutamine effect on the interaction of ATXN1 with Tip60.

To assess if ATXN1 and Tip60 might interact directly, we utilized GST-ATXN1 pull-downs of in vitro transcribed/translated Tip60. In contrast to the results obtained when this approach was used to assess the interaction

Figure 4. Partial Loss of RORα Enhances Pathogenicity of ATXN1[82Q] In Vivo

(A) Northern blot of cerebellar mRNA from B05 transgenic mice, B05/B05:staggerer (sg) heterozygous mice and B05/+Rora wild-type mice.

(B) Molecular layer thickness (mean ± SEM) at the primary fissure (see Figure 2D) is reduced at both 20 (p = 0.01) and 24 (p = 0.013) weeks of age in B05/B05:staggerer (sg) heterozygous mice compared to B05/+Rora wild-type mice. Statistical significance was determined using a student’s t test.

Figure 5. Interaction of ATXN1 with RORα and Tip60

(A) Coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous murine ATXN1 and RORα performed on cerebellar protein extracts prepared from either a wild-type FVB/n mouse or a Sca1−/−. Panel 1B, anti-RORα immunoprecipitation followed by western blotting with anti-ATXN1. Panel 2B, Anti-ATXN1 immunoprecipitation followed by western blotting with anti-RORα.

(B) GST-ATXN1 pull-down experiments of in vitro transcribed/translated radio-labeled RORα performed with ATXN1[30Q], ATXN1[53Q], and ATXN1[82Q].

(C) Immunoprecipitations were performed on cerebellar protein extracts prepared from either a wild-type FVB/n mouse or a Sca1−/−. Panel 1 depicts the amount of ATXN1 obtained with an anti-Tip60 immunoprecipitation. Panel 2 depicts the amount of Tip60 obtained with an anti-ATXN1 immunoprecipitation.

(D) GST-ATXN1 fusion proteins with glutamine repeats of 30Q, 53Q, and 82Q were used to pull down Tip60 from a cerebellar lysate prepared from a wild-type FVB/n mouse.

(E) Coimmunoprecipitation of ATXN1 with Tip60 from extracts of transfected COS-1 cells. COS-1 cells were transfected with Tip60 and either wild-type ATXN1[30Q] or mutant ATXN1[82Q]. Upper panel is a western blot analysis of RORα expression levels using an anti-Xpress antibody. The middle panel is a western blot analysis of ATXN1 expression using the anti-ATXN1 antibody 11750. The lower panel depicts the amounts of radiolabeled Tip60.

(F) GST-ATXN1 pull down of in vitro transcribed/translated radio-labeled Tip60. Pull-down experiments were performed with ATXN1[30Q], ATXN1[53Q], and ATXN1[82Q]. The position of radiolabeled Tip60 is indicated.

ATXN1[30Q] and ATXN1[82Q] coimmunoprecipitated with RORα. Normalized quantifications are shown.

length of wild-type ATXN1 (Figure 6A). These constructs were cotransfected with Tip60 into COS cells. As shown in Figure 6B, the results reveal that amino acids 425–547 of ATXN1 have a critical role in ATXN1’s interaction with Tip60. The two fragments of ATXN1 containing amino acids 425–547, fragment III and IV, interacted with Tip60 at least as well as intact ATXN1[30Q] did. In contrast, fragments lacking this portion of ATXN1 interacted to a lesser extent with Tip60 than did full-length ATXN1[30Q]. Notably, these include the N-terminal 360 amino-acid fragment containing the polyglutamine stretch and the C-terminal fragment spanning amino acids 568–816 containing the AXH domain (Chen et al., 2004).

Although the N-terminal 360 amino-acid fragment containing a wild-type polyglutamine stretch (30 residues) did not interact strongly with Tip60, the same fragment containing a mutant polyglutamine stretch (82 residues) did interact with Tip60 (Figure 6C). This may be because two regions of full-length and properly folded ATXN1 are involved in the interaction with Tip60. It is also possible that the self-association or aggregation properties of the exposed polyglutamine stretch leads to a detectable interaction with Tip60 through a nonspecific effect. Regardless, deciphering relevance of the polyglutamine-length

effect on the interaction between Tip60 and the N-terminal fragment of ATXN1 is complicated by the absence of a polyglutamine-length effect in GST pull downs from in vitro translated Tip60 experiments.

DISCUSSION

We demonstrate that delaying expression of mutant ATXN1 until completion of cerebellar maturation dramatically reduced the susceptibility of adult Purkinje cells to mutant ATXN1-induced neurodegeneration. We propose that the molecular mechanism employed by mutant ATXN1 to influence cerebellar development and induce neurodegeneration in adult Purkinje cells is its ability to induce the loss of RORα from Purkinje cell nuclei. This leads to a reduced expression of RORα-mediated genes that are critical for Purkinje cell development and function.

Expression of *Rora* begins embryonically around day E14.5 (Nakagawa et al., 1997), while endogenous *Sca1* is first detectable at the beginning of postnatal week 2 (Banfi et al., 1996). Expression of these two genes overlaps during a substantial portion of postnatal cerebellar development in the mouse. Throughout the first 3 postnatal weeks, the cerebellum increases in size by 1000-fold and

Insight into the molecular components of Purkinje cell development targeted by mutant ATXN1 came from a microarray analysis of gene expression in the SCA1 mice. Previous results from subtractive cDNA cloning and microarray-based gene expression profiling studies indicated that genes whose products have a role in calcium and/or glutamate signaling were downregulated prior to the onset of symptoms in SCA1[82Q] mice (Lin et al., 2000; Serra et al., 2004). Efforts to understand the physiological basis of these results were complicated by the fact that in many instances the genes identified had opposing effects on signaling. The critical step in linking many of the genes downregulated in SCA1[82Q] mice came upon comparing the SCA1 microarray data with similar data obtained using the staggerer mouse (Gold et al., 2003). Staggerer (sg/sg) mice have a deletion of Rora, encoding the retinoid-related orphan nuclear receptor transcription factor RORα (Hamilton et al., 1996). RORα is highly expressed by Purkinje cells (Ino, 2004), and its loss blocks Purkinje cell maturation (Landis and Sidman, 1978; Hatten and Messer, 1978), resulting in a congenital ataxia and hypoplastic cerebellum.

Many of the RORα-mediated genes whose expression was decreased in SCA1[82] cerebella are highly expressed by Purkinje cells (Figure S3). What’s more, loss-of-function mutations for several of these genes result in an ataxic phenotype. For example, mice with targeted mutations in Calb1 (Airaksinen et al., 1997), Itpr1 (Matsumoto et al., 1996), Rora (Hamilton et al., 1996; Dussalt et al., 1998; Steinmayr et al., 1998), Slc1a6 (Huang et al., 2004), and Grm1 (Aiba et al., 1994; Ichise et al., 2000) develop ataxia. In addition, dominant-negative mutations in the human homolog of Spnb3 cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 (Ikeda et al., 2006). These results provide strong support that the SCA1/staggerer overlapping set of genes encode proteins important for Purkinje cell function, consistent with a reduction in their expression having a role in SCA1.

Our data showed that a disease-causing form of ATXN1 consistently induced the depletion of RORα from Purkinje cells. A subtle decrease in RORα was seen, by immunofluorescence, in mice overexpressing wild-type SCA1[30Q]. This is of interest given that SCA1[30Q] overexpressing mice do have a very mild altered phenotype (Fernandez-Funez et al., 2000). Importantly, no decrease in RORα was detectable in mice overexpressing a form of mutant ATXN1 that fails to cause disease due to the presence of a nonfunctional nuclear localization signal (NLS), or in Sca1−/− mice that lack expression of endogenous ATXN1. This last observation is key in that it demonstrates that the effect on RORα levels is a dominant property of ATXN1[82Q]. Finally, the conditional mouse model of SCA1, where RORα levels were restored within just a few days of turning off the expression of mutant ATXN1, provides additional insight into the possible connection between RORα and SCA1. First, recovery of RORα preceded the recovery of the morphological and neurological symptoms in these mice (Zu et al., 2004), suggesting that perhaps morphological and neurological recovery is linked

Figure 6. Mapping the Region of ATXN1 that Interacts with Tip60

(A) Diagram of the deletion constructs used to map the interacting region of ATXN1 with Tip60. I contains the polyQ tract (amino acids 1–360). III contains the SAD region of ATXN1 (amino acids 250–547). IV contains the SAD and AXH region (amino acids 425–689). V contains the AXH and NLS region of ATXN1 (amino acids 568–816).

(B) Top panel depicts coimmunoprecipitation of ATXN1[30Q] with M2 agarose beads and probed with anti-Tip60. Middle and lower panel depict whole cell lysate probed with anti-FLAG or anti-Tip60 antibody.

(C) Comparison of the amount of Tip60 coimmunoprecipitated with full-length ATXN1[82Q] and with fragment I of ATXN1[82Q].

undergoes a series of dramatic developmental changes to establish its adult structure and function (Goldowitz and Hamre, 1998). During this period, the external granule layer seeds the internal granule layer with granule cells, and Purkinje cells mature, elaborating their dendritic trees and forming synapses with granule cells. This is also the time when the major inputs into the cerebellar cortex arise: climbing fiber inputs to Purkinje cells from the inferior olive and the mossy fiber inputs to the granule cells.
to restoration of RORα. Second, we found that recovery of RORα protein occurred in the absence of a recovery of Rora mRNA. This provides evidence that the effect of mutant ATXN1 on RORα expression is at least in part due to an effect on RORα protein stability.

Although the means by which expansion of the polyglutamine tract in ATXN1 alters RORα stability in vivo is unclear, results of protein-protein interaction studies indicate that the relationship between RORα and ATXN1 extends to the molecular level. RORα and ATXN1 could be coimmunoprecipitated from cerebellar extracts prepared from wild-type mice, yet GST-ATXN1 was unable to pull down in vitro transcribed/translated RORα. Though either GST-ATXN1 or in vitro transcribed/translated RORα could lack a posttranslational modification critical for the two to interact directly, a more likely conclusion is that RORα and ATXN1 do not interact directly. Rather, their ability to be coimmunoprecipitated from cerebellar extracts reflects that they both can be part of the same complex. There is evidence that RORα (Gold et al., 2003) and nuclear receptors in general function as part of a number of coregulatory complexes that include coactivators and corepressors (Perissi and Rosenfeld, 2005). The Tat-interacting protein, Tip60, is one nuclear-receptor coactivator (Brady et al., 1999) that has been placed in the RORα complex at the promoters of Purkinje cell-specific genes (Gold et al., 2003). Our data showing an interaction between ATXN1 and RORα and a direct interaction between ATXN1 and Tip60 point to the existence of a complex containing ATXN1, RORα, and Tip60. This is consistent with and adds to the concept that RORα and Tip60 are within the same complex.

A complex containing ATXN1, RORα, and Tip60, in which there is a direct interaction between ATXN1 and Tip60, provides a situation whereby mutant ATXN1 might induce the destabilization of RORα. In transfected COS-1 cells, RORα is a short-lived protein (Moraitis and Giguère, 2003). Perhaps RORα is stabilized when it is located in a complex with Tip60. In this case, one could envision that this complex is disrupted and RORα destabilized by virtue of a direct interaction between mutant ATXN1 and Tip60. It is of interest, therefore, that our data on the interaction of ATXN1 and Tip60 showed some indication of a polyglutamine effect (Figures 6D and 6E).

Amino acids 425–547 of ATXN1 were shown to mediate its interaction with Tip60. Previously, this region of ATXN1 was designated as the self-association region based on its ability to promote the self association of ATXN1 in a yeast two-hybrid system (Burright et al., 1997). Interestingly, mice overexpressing in their Purkinje cells a version of ATXN1[82Q] lacking residues 425–547 developed a disease in which progression was slowed dramatically (Skinner et al., 2002). This is in agreement with interactions mediated by this region of ATXN1, perhaps with Tip60/RORα, contributing to disease in vivo.

Thus far, several proteins that interact with ATXN1 have been identified as possible mediators of SCA1 pathogenesis. These include PQBP, SMRT, BOAT, and Gfi-1

(Okazawa et al., 2002; Tsai et al., 2004; Tsuda et al., 2005). The portion of ATXN1 implicated in its interaction with Tip60 does not include the polyglutamine tract that mediates the interaction between ATXN1 and PQBP, nor does the Tip60 interacting region include the AXH domain of ATXN1, an OB-folding domain shared by ATXN1 and the transcriptional repressor HBP-1 (de Chiara et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2004). The AXH domain does mediate the interaction of ATXN1 with RNA (Yue et al., 2001) as well as with SMRT (Tsai et al., 2004; Mizutani et al., 2005) and Gfi-1 (Tsuda et al., 2005). Gfi-1 and Tip60/RORα are unique in that they fulfill several criteria consistent with having a role in SCA1 pathogenesis. Thus, it is likely that ATXN1 participates in more than one pathway in Purkinje cells, with each pathway making some contribution to SCA1 pathogenesis.

Taking our in vivo and in vitro observations together with those of other studies, we propose that a critical determinant of SCA1 is the developmental timing of mutant ATXN1 expression. Moreover, this developmental contribution to SCA1 pathogenesis is likely is the result of a disruption of RORα-mediated gene expression by mutant ATXN1. Thus the developmental processes impacted by mutant ATXN1 would be those mediated by RORα and take place when Sca1 and RORα are both expressed by Purkinje cells. One attractive candidate is the development of the stereotypical dendritic tree of the Purkinje cell. Timing of Purkinje cell dendritic development overlaps with the period of RORα/ATXN1 coexpression (Armen gol and Sotelo, 1991). Recently, Boukhtouche et al. (2006) reported that RORα plays a crucial role in the development of the Purkinje cell dendritic tree. They suggested that RORα has a role in the remodeling that occurs early in the development of the Purkinje cell dendritic tree. This disruption likely extends into the adult since heterozygous staggerer mice have an age-dependent atrophy of their Purkinje cell dendrites (Hadj-Sahraoui et al., 2001). Despite the apparent developmental component to the course of SCA1 in Purkinje cells, no obvious structural abnormalities of dendrite development have been noted in the SCA1 mice (Clark et al., 1997). This suggests that the SCA1-associated disruption in Purkinje cell development is likely to be subtle.

In summary, we conclude that a decrease of RORα-mediated gene expression during development is an important factor in the susceptibility of Purkinje cells to SCA1. What might be the relevance of these observations to SCA1 in humans and perhaps neurodegenerative disease more generally? We suggest this work demonstrates that a failure of neurons to develop fully, even in the absence of having an immediate effect on phenotype, can result in a decreased ability of adult neurons to handle an insult.

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### DNA Microarray Analysis
Microarray data was obtained as described (Serra et al., 2004) and analyses performed using Gene Data Expressionist Version 5, Refiner

Cell 127, 697–708, November 17, 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc. 7055.0.6, Analyst 5.0.6. Criteria used to detect differences in gene expression were p values ≤ 0.05 and a fold change ≥ 1.5.

### Transfection and Immunoprecipitation Using Tissue-Culture Cells

Briefly, we transfected COS-1 cells with pcDNA Amp-flag-ATXN 1[30Q] or [85] and either pcDNA3.1 His A RORα or Tip60 with Lipofectamine Plus (Invitrogen). Cells were harvested 48 hr posttransfection and lysed in RIPA buffer. Immunoprecipitations were performed using either the anti-Xpress antibody (Invitrogen) or anti-ATXN 1 antibody 11750 (Servadio et al., 1995) (see Supplemental Data). The following antibodies were used for western blot analysis: anti-ATXN 1 antibody 11750, anti-Tip60 antibody (07-038 Upstate), or anti-RORα antibody (SC-26380 Santa Cruz) (See Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Protein was detected with Western Lightning Chemiluminescence (Perkin Elmer Life Sciences) and quantified by densitometry using the BioRad Gel Doc GS700 system.

### Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot Analysis of Cerebellar Extracts

Cerebellar homogenates were prepared from each genotype, and immunoprecipitations were performed using either the anti-ATXN 1 antibody 11750 (Servadio et al., 1995), anti-RORα sc-6062 (Santa Cruz, CA), or anti-Tip60 sc-25378 (Santa Cruz, CA). Subsequent western blot analysis was performed with the anti-ATXN 1 antibody 11750, with anti-RORα (SC-26380 at 1:500; Santa Cruz, CA), or with antiTip60 (SC-25378 at 1:1000; Santa Cruz, CA) (see Supplemental Data).

### Immunofluorescence

Immunofluorescent staining of mouse cerebellum was performed as previously described (Skinner et al., 1997). Briefly, epitopes were unmasked using 0.01 M urea. The sections were blocked for 1 hr in 2% normal donkey serum and incubated for 48 hr with the primary antibodies either anti-ATXN 1 antibody 11750 or 11NQ, anti-RORα (SC-6062) or anti-calbindin (SC-9848). The sections were washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated for 48 hr with secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Cy 3. Confocal images were collected (Bio-Rad, MRC 1000) with the collection parameters held constant. For further detail, see Supplemental Data.

Quantification of RORα in Purkinje cells was measured using Image Pro Plus analysis software (Media Cybernetics’ Corporation, USA). Twelve bit confocal images were collected (Bio-Rad, MRC 1000) from three different animals in each genotype, and the average density of the mean was determined for approximately 50 Purkinje cells and interneurons from each animal. The average density of the mean of RORα in Purkinje cells was divided by the average density of the mean in interneurons, and the ratios were compared to FVB/n. Levels of RORα in interneurons were used as a control.

### In Vitro Transcription/Translation GST Pull-Down Assay

Full-length and partial human ATXN1 cDNAs were cloned into pGEX family vectors (Amersham Biosciences) and expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells. Fusion proteins in the supernatants were separated from bacterial proteins on a glutathione agarose column (Molecular Probes). Fusion-protein degradation products were removed by gel-filtration chromatography on a 300X 9 mm Superdex 200 column (Amersham Biosciences). For a pull-down experiment, 8–20 μg of fusion protein was pre bound to 20 μl packed glutathione agarose with 1 ml binding buffer (120 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% NP-40) for 30 min at room temperature. After binding, the supernatant was removed and replaced with 20 μl binding buffer and 11 μl of an in vitro transcription/translation reaction prepared according to the directions of the TNT Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate System (Promega) using [35S] methionine (Perkin Elmer) and pCDNA3.1 expression constructs for either mouse RORα or XPRESS- and His-tagged human Tip60. Binding was allowed to proceed at room temperature for 20 min with occasional flicking to agitate the beads. Beads were washed 4 times in binding buffer, and protein was eluted with 30 μl 2X sample buffer (125 mM Tris pH 6.8, 2% sodium dodecylsulfate, 20% glycerol, 160 mM DTT, and 2 mM EDTA with 0.01% bromphenol blue).

### GST Pull-Down from Cerebella Extracts

SCA1[30Q, 53Q, and 82Q] cDNAs were cloned into pGEX-2T (Amersharm) to generate GST-ATXN1 fusion proteins and expressed in E. coli DH5. The fusion proteins were isolated from cell pellets by adding 200 ml of Cell Lysis Reagent (MagneGST™ Pull-Down System, Promega), 2 ml of RQ1 Rnase-Free Dnase and 1X protease inhibitor (Roche) with incubation at room temperature for 20–30 min on a rotating platform. The amount of bacterial extract used in each experiment was determined based on a Simply Blue SafeStain (Invitrogen) stained 4%–12% Nupage Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel to assess levels of fusion-protein expression. The bacterial extracts were bound to 20 ml of MagneGST™ Particles (Promega) in MagneGST™ Binding/wash Buffer and incubated for 30 min at room temperature on a rotating platform. Beads were washed 3 times in MagneGST™ Binding/wash Buffer. After the last wash, the particles were resuspended in 20 ml of MagneGST™ Binding/wash Buffer. To each 5 ml aliquot of particles carrying GST-fusion protein (or GST control), 50 mg of cerebellar extract, 20 ml 10%BSA, and MagneGST™ Binding/wash Buffer were added to a final volume of 200 ml and incubated for 2 hr at 4°C with mild rotation. Immune complexes were washed 5 times with 400 ml of MagneGST™ Binding/wash Buffer. Beads were resuspended in 1X SDS sample buffer for 5 min at room temperature, removed and the supernatant was boiled for 5 min, run on a 4%–12% Nupage Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen), and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Protran, Schleicher and Schuell). The membrane was probed with anti-Tip60 antibody at 1:1000 (SC-25378; Santa Cruz, CA).

### Deletion Constructs and Coimmunoprecipitation

SCA1 deletion constructs were cloned into CSII-CDF-EF-3xFLAG-MCS (gift from Nik Somia). This vector contains three tandem flag epitope sequences at the amino terminus. Full-length SCA1 cDNA was digested with Sal I, treated with Klenow to fill in and digested with EcoR I, and then cloned into the EcoR I/Hpa I sites of CSII-CDF-EF-3× FLAG-MCS. Creation of the SCA1 fragments is described in Supplemental Data. COS-1 cells were cotransfected with the SCA1 constructs and pcDNA 3.1 HisA-Tip60 using lipofectamine plus reagent (Invitrogen) and harvested 48 hr posttransfection. Cell lysates were collected, and coimmunoprecipitations were performed using the FLAG-IP kit (catalog # FLAGIPT1-1KT, Sigma) as per instructions. Immunoprecipitated samples were run on 4%–12% Nupage Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels, transferred to nitrocellulose membrane, and probed with anti-Tip60 antibody at 1:1000 (#07-038 Upstate). Total lysate controls were probed with anti-Flag-HRP antibody at 1:20,000 (#A8592 Sigma) or anti-Tip60 antibody.

### Statistical Analysis

Data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. Data were analyzed using either a student’s t test for the comparison of two groups or a one-way anova for the comparison of more than two groups. A Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) Post Hoc Test was performed when necessary.

### Supplemental Data

Supplemental Data include three figures, one table, and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/127/4/697/DC1/.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We appreciate the efforts of R. Ehlenfeldt for handling the mouse colony, J. Sedgewick in the Biomedical Image Processing Lab for assistance with quantitative immunofluorescence, and the Minnesota

706 Cell 127, 697–708, November 17, 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc.
Super Computer Institute for assistance with microarray data analyses. This work was supported by grants NS22920 and NS45667 to H.T.O. and NS27699 to H.Y.Z. from NIH.

Received: August 17, 2005  
Revised: July 14, 2006  
Accepted: September 7, 2006  
Published: November 16, 2006

**REFERENCES**

Aiba, A., Kano, M., Chen, C., Stanton, M.E., Fox, G.D., Herrup, K., Zwingman, T.A., and Tonegawa, S. (1994). Deficient cerebellar long-term depression and impaired motor learning in mGluR1 mutant mice. Cell 79, 377–388.

Airaksinen, M.S., Eilers, J., Garaschuk, O., Thoenen, H., Konnerth, A., and Meyer, M. (1997). Ataxia and altered dendritic calcium signaling in mice carrying a targeted null mutation of the calbindin D28k gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 1488–1494.

Armengol, J.A., and Sotelo, C. (1991). Early dendritic development of Purkinje cells in the rat cerebellum. A light and electron microscopic study using axonal tracing in “in vitro” slices. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 64, 95–114.

Banfi, S., Servadio, A., Chung, M.-y., Capozzoli, F., Duvick, L.A., Elde, R., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1996). Cloning and developmental expression analysis of the murine homolog of the spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 gene (Sca1). Hum. Mol. Genet. 5, 33–40.

Boukhtouche, F., Janmaat, S., Vodjdani, G., Gautheron, V., Mallet, J., Dusart, I., and Mariani, J. (2006). Retinoid-related orphan receptor α controls the early steps of Purkinje cell dendritic differentiation. J. Neurosci. 26, 1531–1538.

Brady, M.E., Ozanne, D.M., Gaughan, L., Waite, I., Cook, S., Neal, D.E., and Robson, C.N. (1999). Tip60 is a nuclear hormone receptor coactivator. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 17599–17604.

Burright, E.N., Clark, H.B., Servadio, A., Matilla, T., Feddersen, R.M., Yunis, W.S., Duvick, L.A., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1995). SCA1 transgenic mice: a model for neurodegeneration caused by an expanded CAG trinucleotide repeat. Cell 82, 937–948.

Burright, E.N., Davidson, J.D., Duvick, L.A., Koshy, B., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1997). Identification of a self-association region within the SCA1 gene product, ataxin 1. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 513–518.

Chen, H.-K., Fernandez-Funez, P., Acevedo, S.F., Lam, Y.C., Kaytor, M.D., Fernandez, M.H., Aitken, A., Skoulakis, E.M.C., Orr, H.T., Botas, J., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (2003). Interaction of Akt-phosphorylated ATAXIN 1 with 14-3-3 mediates neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type1. Cell 113, 457–468.

Chen, Y.W., Allen, M.D., Veprintsev, D.B., Lowe, J., and Bycroft, M. (2004). The structure of the AXH domain of spinocerebellar ATAXIN 1. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 3758–3765.

Clark, H.B., and Orr, H.T. (2000). Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1-modeling the pathogenesis of a polyglutamine neurodegenerative disorder in transgenic mice. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 59, 265–270.

Clark, H.B., Burright, E.N., Yunis, W.S., Larson, S., Wilcox, C., Hartman, B., Matilla, A., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1997). Purkinje cell expression of a mutant allele of SCA1 in transgenic mice leads to disparate effects on motor behaviors, followed by a progressive cerebellar dysfunction and histological alterations. J. Neurosci. 17, 7385–7395.

Cummings, C.J., Mancini, M.A., Antalffy, B., DeFranco, D.B., Orr, H.T., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (1998). Chaperone suppression of aggregation and altered subcellular proteasome localization imply protein misfolding in SCA1. Nat. Genet. 19, 148–154.

Cummings, C.J., Reinstein, E., Sun, Y., Antalffy, B., Jiang, Y., Ciechanover, A., Orr, H.T., Beaudet, A.L., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (1999). Mutation of the E6-AP ubiquitin ligase reduces nuclear inclusion frequency while accelerating polyglutamine-induced pathology in SCA1 mice. Neuron 24, 879–892.

Cummings, C.J., Sun, Y., Opal, P., Antalffy, B., Mestril, R., Orr, H.T., Dillman, W.H., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (2001). Over-expression of inducible HSP70 chaperone suppresses neuropathology and improves motor function in SCA1 mice. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 1511–1518.

de Chiara, C., Giannini, C., Adinolfi, S., de Boer, J., Guida, S., Ramos, A., Jodice, C., Kioussis, D., and Pastore, A. (2003). The AXH module: and independently folded domain common to ATAXIN 1 and HBP1. FEBS Lett. 551, 107–112.

Dussalt, I., Fawcett, D., Matthysсен, A., Badr, J.-A., and Guìère, V. (1998). Orphan nuclear receptor RORα-deficient mice display the cerebellar defects of staggerer. Mech. Dev. 70, 147–153.

Eamian, E.S., Kaytor, M.D., Duvick, L.A., Zu, T., Tousey, S.K., Zoghbi, H.Y., Clark, H.B., and Orr, H.T. (2003). Serine 776 of ATAXIN 1 is critical for polyglutamine-induced disease in SCA1 transgenic mice. Neuron 38, 375–387.

Fernandez-Funez, P., Rosales, M.L.N., de Gouyon, B., She, W.-C., Luchack, J., Martinez, P., Turiegano, E., Benito, J., Capovilla, M., Skinner, P., et al. (2000). Identification of genes that modify ataxin-1-induced neurodegeneration. Nature 408, 101–106.

Gold, D.A., Baek, S.H., Schork, N.J., Rose, D.W., Larsen, D.D., Sachs, B.D., Rosenfeld, M.G., and Hamilton, B.A. (2003). RORα coordinates reciprocal signaling in cerebellar development through Sonic hedgehog and calcium-dependent pathways. Neuron 40, 1119–1131.

Goldowitz, D., and Hamre, K. (1998). The cells and molecules that make a cerebellum. Trends Neurosci. 21, 375–382.

Hadj-Sahraoui, N., Frederic, F., Zanjani, H., Delhaye-Bouchaud, N., Herrup, K., and Mariani, J. (2001). Progressive atrophy of cerebellar Purkinje cell dendrites during aging of the heterozygous staggerer mouse (Rora+/sg). Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 126, 201–209.

Hamilton, B.A., Frankel, W.N., Kerrebrock, A.W., Hawkins, T.L., Fitz-Hugh, W., Kusumi, K., Russell, L.B., Mueller, K.L., van Berkel, V., Birren, B., et al. (1996). Disruption of the nuclear hormone receptor RORα in staggerer mice. Nature 379, 736–739.

Hatten, M.E., and Messer, A. (1978). Postnatal cerebellar cells from staggerer mutant mice express embryonic cell surface characteristic. Nature 276, 504–506.

Huang, Y.H., Dykes-Hoberg, M., Tanaka, K., Rothstein, J.D., and Bergles, D.E. (2004). Climbing fiber activation of EAAT4 transporters and kainite receptors in cerebellar Purkinje cells. J. Neurosci. 24, 103–111.

Ichise, T., Kano, M., Hashimoto, K., Yanagihara, D., Nakao, K., Shigemoto, R., Katsuki, M., and Aiba, A. (2000). mGluR1 in cerebellar Purkinje cells essential for long-term depression, synapse elimination, and motor coordination. Science 288, 1832–1835.

Ikeda, Y., Katherine, A., Dick, K.A., Weatherspoon, M.R., Gincel, D., Armburst, K.R., Dalton, J.C., Stevanin, G., Dürr, A., Zühlke, C., et al. (2006). Spectrin mutations cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 5. Nat. Genet. 38, 184–190.

Ino, H. (2004). Immunohistochemical characterization of the orphan nuclear receptor RORα in the mouse nervous system. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 52, 311–323.

Klement, I.A., Skinner, P.J., Kaytor, M.D., Yi, H., Hersch, S.M., Clark, H.B., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1998). ATAXIN 1 nuclear localization and aggregation: role in polyglutamine-induced disease in SCA1 transgenic mice. Cell 95, 41–53.

Landis, D.M., and Sidman, R.L. (1978). Electron microscopic analysis of postnatal histogenesis in the cerebellar cortex of staggerer mutant mice. J. Comp. Neurol. 179, 831–863.

Lin, X., Antalffy, B., Kang, D., Orr, H.T., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (2000). Polyglutamine expansion down-regulates specific neuronal genes before pathologic changes in SCA1. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 157–163.

Matilla, A., Roberson, E.D., Banfi, S., Morales, J., Armstrong, D.L., Burright, E.N., Orr, H.T., Sweatt, J.D., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Matzuk, M. (1998). Mice lacking ATAXIN 1 display learning deficits and decreased hippocampal paired-pulse facilitation. J. Neurosci. 18, 5508–5516.

Matsumoto, M., Nakagawa, T., Inoue, T., Nagata, E., Tanaka, K., Takano, H., Minowa, O., Kuno, J., Sakakibara, S., Yammada, M., et al. (1996). Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Nature 379, 169–171.

Mizutani, A., Wang, L., Rajan, H., Vig, P.J.S., Alaynick, W.A., Thaler, J.P., and Tsai, C.-C. (2005). Boat, and AXH domain protein, suppresses the cytotoxicity of mutant ATAXIN 1. EMBO J. 24, 3339–3351.

Moraitis, A.N., and Giguère, V. (2003). The co-repressor Hairless protects RORα orphan nuclear receptor from proteasome-mediated degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 52511–52518.

Nakagawa, S., Watanabe, M., and Inoue, Y. (1997). Prominent expression of nuclear hormone receptor RORα in Purkinje cells from early development. Neurosci. Res. 28, 177–184.

Okazawa, H., Rich, T., Chang, A., Lin, X., Waragai, M., Kajikawa, M., Enokido, Y., Komuro, A., Kato, S., Shibata, M., et al. (2002). Interaction between mutant ataxin-1 and PQBP-1 affects transcription and cell death. Neuron 43, 701–713.

Perissi, V., and Rosenfeld, M.G. (2005). Controlling nuclear receptors: the circular logic of cofactors cycles. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 542–554.

Serra, H.G., Byam, C.E., Lande, J.D., Tousey, S.K., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (2004). Gene profiling links SCA1 pathophysiology to glutamate signaling in Purkinje cells of transgenic mice. Hum. Mol. Genet. 13, 2535–2543.

Servadio, A., Koshy, B., Armstrong, D., Antalffy, B., Orr, H.T., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (1995). Expression analysis of the ATAXIN 1 protein in tissues from normal and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 individuals. Nat. Genet. 10, 94–98.

Skinner, P.J., Koshy, B., Klement, I.A., Helin, K., Servadio, A., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (1997). SCA1 pathogenesis involves alterations in nuclear matrix associated structures. Nature 389, 971–974.

Skinner, P.J., Vierra-Green, C.A., Emamian, E., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (2002). Amino acids in a region of ataxin 1 outside of the polyglutamine tract influence the course of disease in SCA1 transgenic mice. Neuromolecular Med. 1, 33–42.

Steinmayr, M., Andre, E., Conquet, F., Rondi-Reig, L., Delhaye-Bouchaud, N., Auclair, N., Daniel, H., Crepel, F., Mariani, J., Sotelo, C., and Becker-Andre, M. (1998). Staggerer phenotype in retinoid-related orphan receptor alpha-deficient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 3960–3965.

Taylor, J.P., Hardy, J., and Fischbeck, K.H. (2002). Toxic protein in neurodegenerative disease. Science 296, 1991–1995.

Tsai, C.-C., Kao, H.-Y., Mitzutani, A., Banayo, E., Rajan, H., McKeown, M., and Evans, R.M. (2004). ATAXIN 1, a SCA1 neurodegenerative disorder protein, is functionally linked to the silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 4047–4052.

Tsuda, H., Jafar-Nejad, H., Patel, A.J., Sun, Y., Chen, H.-K., Rose, M.F., Venken, K.J.T., Botas, J., Orr, H.T., Bellen, H.J., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (2005). The AXH domain in mammalian/Drosophila ATAXIN 1 mediates neurodegeneration in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 1 through its interaction with Gf-i/Senseless proteins. Cell, in press.

Watase, K., Weeber, E.J., Xu, B., Anatalfyy, B., Yuva-Paylor, L., Hashimoto, K., Kano, M., Atkinson, R., Sun, Y., Armstrong, D.L., et al. (2002). A long CAG repeat in the mouse Sca1 locus replicates SCA1 features and reveals the impact of protein solubility on selective neurodegeneration. Neuron 34, 905–919.

Yue, S., Serra, H., Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (2001). The SCA1 protein, ATXN1, has RNA-binding activity that is inversely affected by the length of its polyglutamine tract. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 25–30.

Zoghbi, H.Y., and Orr, H.T. (2000). Glutamine repeats and neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 217–247.

Zu, T., Duvick, L.A., Kaytor, M.D., Berlinger, M., Zoghbi, H.Y., Clark, H.B., and Orr, H.T. (2004). Recovery from polyglutamine-Induced neurodegeneration in conditional SCA1 transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 24, 8853–8861.
