
Reviews

This Review is part of a thematic series on Mechanisms, Models, and In Vivo Imaging of Thrombus Formation, which includes the following articles:

- Activation of Platelet Function Through G Protein–Coupled Receptors
- Platelets As Immune Cells: Bridging Inflammation and Cardiovascular Disease
- In Vivo Thrombus Formation
- Platelet Adhesion
- Platelet Inhibitors and Thrombus Formation

Bernhard Nieswandt and Ulrich Walter, Guest Editors

# Activation of Platelet Function Through G Protein–Coupled Receptors

Stefan Offermanns

Abstract—Because of their ability to become rapidly activated at places of vascular injury, platelets are important players in primary hemostasis as well as in arterial thrombosis. In addition, they are also involved in chronic pathological processes including the atherosclerotic remodeling of the vascular system. Although primary adhesion of platelets to the vessel wall is largely independent of G protein–mediated signaling, the subsequent recruitment of additional platelets into a growing platelet thrombus requires mediators such as ADP, thromboxane A₂, or thrombin, which act through G protein–coupled receptors. Platelet activation via G protein–coupled receptors involves 3 major G protein–mediated signaling pathways that are initiated by the activation of the G proteins Gq, Gi₃, and Gi. This review summarizes recent progress in understanding the mechanisms underlying platelet activation and thrombus extension via G protein–mediated signaling pathways. (Circ Res. 2006;99:1293-1304.)

Key Words: platelet activation ■ heterotrimeric G proteins ■ GPCRs ■ thrombosis

Platelet adhesion and activation at sites of vascular wall injury is initiated by a multistep process involving the interaction of platelets with the subendothelial extracellular matrix which contains adhesive macromolecules including collagen and von Willebrand factor (vWF).¹,² The initial interaction of platelets with the extracellular matrix under conditions of high shear rates and the subsequent strengthening of this interaction involves the platelet vWF receptor GPIb/V/IX and the collagen receptor GPVI³⁻⁴ (which will be covered in a forthcoming review in this series). GPVI is unable to mediate adhesion but, via activation of the FcRγ chain, induces intracellular signaling processes which promote the inside-out activation of integrins such as αIIbβ₃ (GPIIb/IIIa) or α₂β₁ (GPIa/IIa).⁴⁻⁵ The interaction of activated integrins with the extracellular matrix then mediates the firm adhesion of platelets to the injured vessel wall, resulting in the formation of a platelet monolayer.

During the next stage of platelet activation, a platelet plug forms through the recruitment of additional platelets from the circulation and their integrin αIIbβ₃-mediated aggregation (see Figure 1). The recruitment of additional platelets is mediated by a variety of locally accumulating mediators that are produced or released once platelet adhesion has been initiated and some level of platelet activation through platelet adhesion receptors has occurred. These mediators include ADP/ATP and thromboxane A₂ (TXA₂), which are secreted or released from activated platelets and thrombin, which is produced on the surface of activated platelets. These diffusible mediators have in common that they act via G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs). Through the activation of G protein–mediated

---

Original received August 14, 2006; revision received October 2, 2006; accepted October 20, 2006.  
From the Institute of Pharmacology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.  
Correspondence to Stefan Offermanns, Institute of Pharmacology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.  
E-mail stefan.offermanns@pharma.uni-heidelberg.de  

© 2006 American Heart Association, Inc.  

*Circulation Research* is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org  
DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000251742.71301.16  

Downloaded from http://circres.ahajournals.org/1293 East Tennessee State University on June 13, 2015

1294 Circulation Research December 8/22, 2006

Figure 1. Activation of platelets at sites of vascular injury. The initial contact of platelets with the subendothelial extracellular matrix is mediated by vWF and GPIbα, followed by the activation of platelets by collagen via the collagen receptor GPVI. This results in the integrin-mediated adhesion of platelets and some cellular activation, which leads to the release and production of diffusible mediators such as ADP, TXA₂, and thrombin acting via GPCRs. Activation of these receptors strengthens the adhesion of the first and second layers of adhering platelets, induces platelet shape change, and further drives the formation and release of mediators. These diffusible mediators then act on platelets nearby and recruit them into the growing platelet plug. ECM indicates extracellular matrix; Fg, fibrinogen.

signaling pathways, they can further increase their own formation and release, thus acting as positive-feedback mediators that amplify the initial signals to ensure the rapid activation and recruitment of platelets into a growing thrombus (Figure 1).

Thus, G proteins are centrally involved in the second phase of platelet-dependent thrombus formation. Pharmacological studies as well as work based on the analysis of mice lacking individual components of G protein–mediated signaling pathways have identified GPCRs, G proteins, and effector pathways regulating platelet activation (see Tables 1 and 2). This review describes the major GPCRs involved in platelet activation and summarizes recent data on the role of individual G proteins and their downstream effectors in the regulation of platelet functions such as integrin-mediated aggregation, degranulation, or platelet-shape change. Finally, the review discusses whether G protein–mediated signaling pathways could serve as targets for the development of new antiplatelet strategies.

### Platelet Activators Working Through G Protein–Coupled Receptors

GPCRs constitute the largest family of proteins in the human genome.⁶⁻⁸ They can be activated by a chemically very diverse group of ligands including amines, lipids, peptides, ions, nucleotides, or proteases.⁹ Because of their ability to specifically interact with various functionally different heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins), agonist-activated GPCRs can induce different signaling pathways to change cellular functions.¹⁰,¹¹ The large versatility of the G protein–mediated signaling system may explain why it is the primary mediator of the second phase of platelet activation during thrombosis and hemostasis, which requires the coordinated and fast action of a variety of diffusible mediators to activate platelets and to recruit them into the growing thrombus.

### Adenosine Diphosphate

ADP is stored at high concentrations in dense granules of platelets and is released on platelet activation. Released ADP strongly activates platelets in an autocrine and paracrine fashion. It can also be released from damaged cells at places of vascular injury. Platelet activation by ADP is mediated by 2 G protein-coupled receptors, P2Y₁ and P2Y₁₂.¹²,¹³ Whereas P2Y₁ couples to Gq,¹⁴,¹⁵ P2Y₁₂ is coupled to Gi-type G proteins, in particular to Gi₂.¹⁶,¹⁷ Studies using receptor agonists had suggested that activation of both receptors is required for a full response of platelets to ADP.¹⁸⁻²⁰ Platelets from mice lacking P2Y₁ do not undergo shape change in response to ADP, and ADP-induced aggregation is severely impaired. In addition, mice lacking P2Y₁ have mildly increased bleeding times and a relative resistance to ADP-induced thromboembolism.²¹,²² Absence of P2Y₁₂ in humans results in a mild form of hemorrhagia,²³,²⁴ a phenotype not observed in mice lacking P2Y₁₂.²⁵,²⁶ Platelets from mice deficient in P2Y₁₂ have a normal shape change but an impaired aggregation in response to ADP.²⁵,²⁶ In addition, these animals have severely prolonged bleeding times and form smaller and unstable thrombi.²⁷ Both P2Y₁ and P2Y₁₂ are also involved in ADP-induced platelet procoagulant activity.²⁸ Interestingly, platelet responses to thrombin and TXA₂ at low and intermediate concentrations are reduced in the absence of ADP receptors,²¹,²²,²⁵,²⁷ underlining the important role of ADP as a positive-feedback mediator required for sustained platelet activation. The P2Y₁₂ receptor is irreversibly inhibited by thienopyridines such as clopidogrel, which is currently used for the secondary prevention of cardiovascular events.²⁹,³⁰

### Thrombin

Thrombin is the main effector protease of the coagulation system and is among the most effective activators of platelets. Thrombin formation is initiated by the exposure of tissue factor to plasma coagulation factors after disruption of the vascular endothelium. Thrombin formation takes place on cellular surfaces including that of activated platelets.³¹ The local production of thrombin on the platelet surface represents an important mechanism by which activated platelets stimulate coagulatory processes. In addition, it may facilitate activation of platelets by thrombin, which is rapidly inactive.

vated after its formation. Activation of platelets by thrombin is mediated by protease-activated receptors (PARs),<sup>32</sup> which couple to G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub> and, in some cases, also to the G<sub>i</sub> family of heterotrimeric G proteins.<sup>33,34</sup> Of the four protease-activated receptors, PAR1 and PAR4 are present on human platelets, whereas mouse platelets express PAR3 and PAR4.<sup>35,36</sup> Studies using PAR1 antagonists or antibodies blocking PAR1 or PAR4 activation have indicated that PAR1 mediates human platelet activation at low thrombin concentrations, whereas PAR4 contributes to thrombin-induced platelet activation only at high thrombin concentrations.<sup>35,37–39</sup> The higher potency of thrombin toward PAR1 activation is most likely attributable to the presence of a hirudin-like sequence close to the C-terminal thrombin cleavage site, which facilitates binding of thrombin and is absent in PAR4.<sup>35,40</sup> The presence of PAR3 and PAR4 in mouse platelets suggested that they function analogous to PAR1 and PAR4 in human platelets. This was initially suggested by studies using platelets from PAR3-deficient mice, which did not respond any more to low and intermediate concentrations of thrombin but could be activated by high concentrations via PAR4.<sup>35</sup> However, studies with heterologously expressed receptors revealed that mouse PAR3, which contains a hirudin-like sequence close to the thrombin cleavage site, did not mediate thrombin-induced transmembrane signaling unless PAR4 was present. This suggests that mouse PAR3 functions as a coreceptor for mouse PAR4 and facilitates cleavage and activation of PAR4 at low thrombin concentrations.<sup>41</sup> Consistent with this, platelets from PAR4-deficient mice are unresponsive to thrombin and protected against thrombosis.<sup>42,43</sup> Thus, although thrombin activates human platelets by cleaving and activating PAR1 and PAR4 at low and high concentrations, respectively, thrombin-induced mouse platelet activation is completely dependent on PAR4-mediated signaling and requires PAR3 only to facilitate cleavage of PAR4 at low thrombin concentrations. It is not known whether mouse PAR3 and PAR4 form stable heterodimers in which PAR3 mediates activation and PAR4 signaling, or whether binding of thrombin to PAR3 simply facilitates cleavage of PAR4.

### Thromboxane A<sub>2</sub>

Like ADP, TxA<sub>2</sub> functions as a positive-feedback mediator during platelet activation. It is produced from arachidonic acid through conversion by cyclooxygenase-1, the target of low-dose aspirin, and thromboxane synthase. The action of TxA<sub>2</sub> is locally restricted because of its short half-life. The TxA<sub>2</sub> receptor (TP), which is also activated by the prostaglandin endoperoxides PGG<sub>2</sub> and PGH<sub>2</sub>, couples to G<sub>q</sub> and G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub>.<sup>33,44,45</sup> The role of TP as the platelet TxA<sub>2</sub> receptor has been demonstrated in studies using platelets from TP-deficient mice, which become unresponsive to TxA<sub>2</sub>.<sup>46</sup> TP-deficient mice have prolonged bleeding times and are unable to form stable thrombi.<sup>46</sup> A reduced activation of TP-deficient platelets has been suggested to contribute to a reduced injury-induced vascular proliferation as well as to a reduced progression of atherosclerosis observed in mice lacking TP.<sup>47,48</sup>

---

### Other Platelet Stimuli

Several other stimuli have been identified that act through GPCRs. However, in contrast to ADP, thrombin, and TxA<sub>2</sub>, they are only weak activators of platelets and appear to serve primarily as potentiators of platelet responses to other stimuli. For instance, epinephrine alone is not able to activate platelets but potentiates the effect of other stimuli by acting through the α<sub>2A</sub>-adrenergic receptor. Interestingly, the α<sub>2A</sub> receptor in platelets preferentially couples to the G<sub>i</sub>-type G protein G<sub>z</sub>.<sup>49</sup> In mice lacking the α<sub>2A</sub>-adrenergic receptor, the potentiating effect of epinephrine on platelet activation was absent, bleeding time was moderately prolonged, and the formation of stable thrombi was impaired.<sup>50</sup>

Prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> can potentiate platelet activation via the EP3 receptor. The EP3 receptor form expressed on platelets is believed to be coupled to G<sub>i</sub>-type G proteins. In mice lacking EP3, bleeding times are increased and the potentiating effects of prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> are abrogated.<sup>51,52</sup>

Serotonin is taken up by platelets, stored in dense granules, and released on platelet activation. Part of its action serves as a positive-feedback mechanism by activating 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptors on platelets, which are G<sub>q</sub>-coupled.

Various chemokines such as platelet factor 4 (PF4/CXCL4), RANTES (CCL5), or CXCL5 are released from activated platelets. During recent years, it has been demonstrated that platelets express chemokine receptors such as CXCR4, the receptor of stromal cell-derived factors 1α (SDF-1/CXCL12), or CCR4, which is activated by macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC/CCL22) and by TARC (CCL17).<sup>53–57</sup> Also, the chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2, and CX3CR1, which are activated by RANTES (CCL5), MCP-1 (CCL2), and fractalkine (CX3CL1), respectively, have been shown to be expressed by platelets.<sup>56,58</sup> Chemokine receptors are coupled to G<sub>i</sub>-type G proteins and mediate a rather weak activation of platelets. However, they are able to potentiate the effects of other platelet stimuli. There is increasing evidence that the secretion and presentation of chemokines by platelets, as well as the activation of platelets by chemokines, play an important role in the development of atherosclerotic vascular disease.<sup>59,60</sup>

Lysophospholipids such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) can activate platelets.<sup>61</sup> There is evidence that platelets express LPA<sub>1</sub>, LPA<sub>2</sub>, and LPA<sub>3</sub> receptors.<sup>62,63</sup> LPA and related lysophospholipid species are found in mildly oxidized low-density lipoprotein, as well as in advanced atherosclerotic lesions, and may contribute to platelet activation at various stages of atherosclerosis.<sup>64</sup>

---

### Inhibitors of Platelets Acting Through GPCRs

The major endothelium-derived inhibitors of platelet activation are nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin (PGI<sub>2</sub>), which raise the levels of the cyclic nucleotides cGMP and cAMP. Although NO directly activates guanylyl cyclase, PGI<sub>2</sub> acts through a G<sub>s</sub>-coupled receptor, the IP receptor, to stimulate adenylate cyclase. Recent evidence suggests that PGI<sub>2</sub>-dependent platelet inhibition may play an important role in the protective effect of prostacyclin. In IP receptor-deficient mice, injury-induced vascular proliferation and platelet activation are enhanced.

TABLE 1. Main Platelet Stimuli Acting via GPCRs and Phenotypes Observed in Receptor-Deficient Mice

| Agonist and Receptor | G Protein Coupled to | Platelet Phenotype In Vitro | Platelet Phenotype In Vivo | References |
|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------|------------|
| ADP                  |                      |                            |                           |            |
| P2Y₁                 | Gq                   | Absence of Ca²⁺ transients and shape change in response to ADP; reduced aggregation in response to ADP | Moderately prolonged bleeding time; somewhat protected against thromboembolism | 21,22 |
| P2Y₁₂                | Gi*                  | Severely reduced aggregation and inhibition of cAMP formation but normal Ca²⁺ transients and shape change in response to ADP; reduced aggregation in response to thrombin and collagen | Severely prolonged bleeding time; protected against thromboembolism; impaired formation of thrombi | 25,26 |
| Thrombin             |                      |                            |                           |            |
| PAR1 (human)         | Gq; G₁₂/G₁₃; (Gi)     | Reduced aggregation and secretion in response to thrombin | Prolonged bleeding time; defective thrombus formation; protection against thromboembolism | 35,162 |
| PAR3 (mouse)         | ?†                   | Complete unresponsiveness to thrombin | Severely prolonged bleeding time; defective thrombus formation; protected against thromboembolism | 42,43 |
| PAR4 (mouse and human) | Gq; G₁₂/G₁₃          | Unresponsiveness to TXA₂ | Prolonged bleeding time; reduced injury-induced vascular proliferation‡; reduced progression of atherosclerosis‡ | 46–48 |
| TXA₂                 |                      |                            |                           |            |
| TP                   | Gq; G₁₂/G₁₃          | Unresponsiveness to epinephrine | Moderately prolonged bleeding time; impaired formation of thrombi | 50 |
| Epinephrine          |                      |                            |                           |            |
| α₂A                  | Gz                   | Unresponsiveness to prostaglandin E₂ | Moderately prolonged bleeding time; no thrombus formation in response to arachidonic acid | 51,52 |
| Prostaglandin E₂     |                      |                            |                           |            |
| EP3                  | Gi                   | NA | NA |            |
| Serotonin            |                      |                            |                           |            |
| 5-Hydroxytryptamine 2A | Gq                   | NA | NA |            |

*The major Gi-type G protein activated via P2Y₁₂ is Gi₂. †The murine PAR3 receptor does not itself mediate transmembrane signaling but is believed to function as a cofactor for cleavage and activation of PAR4. ‡It is not clear whether these defects are attributable to loss of TP on platelets or other vascular cells. NA indicates not analyzed.

vation was enhanced. In mice lacking both IP and TP receptors, this augmented response was abolished, suggesting that PGI₂ and TXA₂, acting through their respective receptors, antagonistically regulate vascular and platelet functions.⁴⁷ This complex functional antagonism may also explain the adverse cardiovascular effects associated with selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, which inhibit the formation of PGI₂ but not of TXA₂.⁶⁵ Adenosine released during cell damage or by conversion of ADP by the endothelial ectonucleotidase CD39 inhibits platelet function by activating the Gs-coupled A₂A receptor.⁶⁶

### G Protein-Mediated Signaling Pathways Mediating Platelet Activation

The main diffusible platelet stimuli ADP, TXA₂, and thrombin recruit platelets into a growing thrombus by activating multiple G protein-mediated signaling pathways to induce platelet-shape change, degranulation, and integrin αIIbβ₃-mediated aggregation. They use distinct mechanisms to induce full platelet activation. ADP activates Gq and Gi through its receptors P2Y₁ and P2Y₁₂, whereas TXA₂ and thrombin activate mainly Gq and G₁₂/G₁₃ via the TXA₂ receptor or the protease-activated receptors PAR1/PAR4 or PAR3/PAR4. Because all mediators can in turn increase the formation and release of thrombin, TXA₂, and ADP, their effects are amplified and eventually all major G protein-mediated signaling pathways are activated. These positive-feedback mechanisms have obscured the analysis of the roles individual G protein-mediated signaling pathways play in platelet activation. Platelets lacking the α subunits of individual G-protein subtypes have been used to study the function of the main G protein-mediated signaling pathways in platelet activation independently of the mediators and their respective receptors involved. In the course of these studies the G proteins Gq, G₁₃, and G₁₂ have been demonstrated to play important roles in platelet activation (see Table 2).

The Gq/G₁₁ family of G proteins couples receptors to β isoforms of phospholipase C (PLC), of which, especially the β₂ and the β₃ isoforms, are present in platelets. Activation of PLC results in the formation of IP₃ and diacyl glycerol leading to an elevation of free cytoplasmic [Ca²⁺] and activation of protein kinase C (PKC), respectively. Although most cells in the mammalian organism express both Gq and G₁₁, platelets are an exception in that they only contain

platelets couples receptors in an inhibitory fashion to adenylyl cyclase. In addition, G<sub>i</sub>-type G proteins are a major source for βγ complexes, which are released on G-protein activation and can regulate a variety of channels or enzymes including adenyllyl cyclases or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks).<sup>71</sup> The latter enzyme produces phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate, which activates a variety of downstream effectors including the serine/threonine kinase Akt/protein kinase B (PKB).<sup>72,73</sup>

# Platelet-Shape Change

A shape change is the initial response of platelets to activators such as thrombin, ADP, or TxA<sub>2</sub>. It is an extremely rapid process based on the reorganization of the cytoskeleton.<sup>74,75</sup> During platelet-shape change, new actin filaments are formed, leading to the formation of a submembranous actin filament network and the extension of filopodia. In addition, actomyosin-based contractile processes are stimulated, resulting in the centralization of dense and α granules. Finally, the circumferential microtubule coil depolymerizes, which allows the platelet to change from a discoid to a spherical shape. The platelet-shape change, which is induced by agonist concentrations lower than those required for degranulation and aggregation, is believed to be a prerequisite for efficient secretion of granule contents and to greatly facilitate adhesion of platelets to each other and to components of the extracellular matrix.

Platelet agonists can induce shape change under conditions in which they do not stimulate PLC or induce an increase in [Ca<sup>2+</sup>]<sub>i</sub>, suggesting that an elevation of [Ca<sup>2+</sup>]<sub>i</sub> alone is not sufficient to induce platelet-shape change.<sup>76–79</sup> Consistent with that, thrombin and TxA<sub>2</sub> can still induce platelet-shape change in the absence of G<sub>q</sub>-mediated PLC activation.<sup>68</sup> This suggests that other G proteins activated by thrombin and TxA<sub>2</sub> receptors such as G<sub>12</sub> and G<sub>13</sub> are involved in the induction of platelet-shape change.<sup>34</sup> In platelets lacking Ga<sub>13</sub>

## TABLE 2. Platelet Phenotypes of Mice Lacking G Protein α Subunits

| G Protein α Subunit | Effector                     | Platelet Phenotype In Vitro                                                                                   | Platelet Phenotype In Vivo                                                                                          | References |
|----------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| Ga<sub>i2</sub>      | AC↓; PI3Ka/β↑*               | Reduced aggregation and inhibition of cAMP formation in response to ADP and thrombin; normal shape change       | NA                                                                                                              | 17,108     |
| Ga<sub>i3</sub>      | AC↓; PI3Ka/β↑*               | No apparent defect                                                                                           | NA                                                                                                              | 123        |
| Ga<sub>z</sub>       | AC↓                          | Reduced aggregation and inhibition of cAMP formation in response to epinephrine; normal shape change           | No overt bleeding defect in 1 study; increased bleeding time in the other; protected against thromboembolism induced by collagen/epinephrine | 109,49     |
| Ga<sub>q</sub>       | PLC-β↑                       | Absence of IP<sub>3</sub> production; Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients; aggregation and secretion in response to TxA<sub>2</sub>; ADP and thrombin; normal shape change and RhoA activation in response to thrombin and TxA<sub>2</sub> but not to ADP | Increased bleeding time; protected against collagen/epinephrine-induced thromboembolism                                   | 34,98,68   |
| Ga<sub>12</sub>      | RhoGEF↑                      | No apparent defect                                                                                           | No apparent defect                                                                                               | 80         |
| Ga<sub>13</sub>      | RhoGEF↑                      | Reduced aggregation and secretion in response to TxA<sub>2</sub> and thrombin; impaired shape change and RhoA activation | Increased bleeding time; protected against arterial thrombosis                                                    | 80         |
| Ga<sub>q</sub>+Ga<sub>13</sub> | See above                | Unresponsive to thrombin, TxA<sub>2</sub>, and ADP                                                             | NA                                                                                                              | 81         |

*Activation of PI3K is mediated by Gβγ. RhoGEF indicates Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor. AC indicates adenyllyl cyclase.

but not Gα₁₂, low and intermediate concentrations of thrombin and TXA₂ were not able to induce a shape change.⁸⁰ At high agonist concentrations, TXA₂ and thrombin activated platelet-shape change also in the absence of Gα₁₃. However, in the absence of both Gα₁₃ and Gαq, platelet-shape change could not be induced even at maximal agonist concentrations.⁸¹ This clearly indicates that platelet-shape change can be induced through Gq as well as through G₁₃. Stimuli that are able to activate both G proteins via their respective receptors such as TXA₂ and thrombin preferentially use G₁₃ to induce platelet-shape change. Stimuli such as ADP, which activates Gq-mediated signaling pathways but not signaling via G₁₃, induce platelet-shape change solely via Gq.⁶⁸,⁸¹ Activation of Gi does not appear to be required for the induction of platelet-shape change (see Figure 2).

The regulation of myosin light chain (MLC) phosphorylation has been suggested to be involved in the induction of platelet-shape change.⁸²,⁸³ MLC phosphorylation can be controlled through a Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent regulation of MLC kinase and through a Rho/Rho-kinase–mediated regulation of myosin phosphatase.⁸⁴ In Gαq-deficient platelets the agonist-induced platelet-shape change could be blocked by inactivation of Rho and inhibition of Rho-kinase,³⁴ and MLC phosphorylation and shape change in response to TXA₂ and low concentrations of thrombin were strongly dependent on the Rho/Rho-kinase pathway in wild-type platelets.⁸⁵,⁸⁶ The central role of the Rho/Rho-kinase–mediated regulation of MLC phosphorylation and platelet-shape change is supported by the strong correlation between the ability of stimuli to induce platelet-shape change and their ability to stimulate RhoA activation and MLC phosphorylation. In platelets lacking Gαq, TXA₂ and thrombin were still able to induce shape change, RhoA activation, and MLC phosphorylation.⁶⁸,⁸⁰,⁸¹ High concentrations of TXA₂ and thrombin as well as ADP are able to induce platelet-shape change as well as RhoA activation and MLC phosphorylation also in the absence of Gα₁₃. However, in the absence of both Gαq and Gα₁₃, none of the stimuli can induce platelet-shape change or activation of RhoA or MLC phosphorylation.⁸¹ This indicates that activation of the Rho/Rho-kinase–mediated signaling pathway is required for agonist-induced MLC phosphorylation in platelets. When the G₁₃-mediated signaling pathway resulting in Rho/Rho-kinase activation is blocked, Gq-mediated MLC phosphorylation can be induced only under sufficiently high agonist concentrations which result in RhoA activation through Gq. Gq has been shown to be able to mediate RhoA activation in a PLC-independent manner via Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors.⁸⁷⁻⁸⁹ Stimulation of Rho/Rho-kinase and MLC phosphorylation increases actomyosin contractility, and activation of Rho-kinase has been suggested to be required for the dynamic regulation of microtubule coils during platelet-shape change.⁹⁰

In addition to MLC phosphorylation, several other signaling processes may be involved in agonist-induced platelet-shape change. This includes tyrosine kinases such as pp60c-src or pp72syk.³⁴,⁷⁸,⁹¹,⁹² Actin assembly during platelet-shape change has also been shown to be controlled by polyphosphoinositides such as phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Formation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate by phos-

phatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase can be regulated by the small GTP-binding protein Rac,⁷⁵,⁹³,⁹⁴ as well as by RhoA.⁹⁵ Rac becomes activated in platelets on receptor activation⁹⁶ and can also induce actin polymerization through the activation of the Arp2/3 complex mediated by WAVE proteins.⁹⁷ However, in Gαq-deficient platelets, activation of Rac by various agonists is abrogated while they are still able to induce platelet-shape change,⁹⁸ indicating that Rac activation is not required for agonist-induced platelet-shape change. Under these conditions, actin assembly and polymerization may be induced through other RhoA-dependent pathways such as the activation of 4-phosphate 5-kinase⁹⁹ or of formins, which promote linear elongation of actin filaments.¹⁰⁰

# Platelet Aggregation

The accumulation of platelets into a hemostatic thrombus is based on the formation of multiple platelet/platelet interactions (platelet aggregation). Platelet aggregation is mediated by integrin αIIbβ₃, which binds various extracellular macromolecular ligands including fibrinogen and vWF. The dimeric structure of fibrinogen and the multimeric structure of vWF allow these ligands to crossbridge platelets and to generate a platelet aggregate. In unactivated, resting platelets, αIIbβ₃ is in an “off” state, in which ligand binding affinities are low and no signaling occurs. Platelet activation induces intracellular signaling processes that influence the cytoplasmic part of αIIbβ₃, rapidly converting αIIbβ₃ into an active conformation (inside-out signaling), which results in fibrinogen/vWF-mediated platelet aggregation.¹⁰¹⁻¹⁰⁶

Although the exact signaling mechanisms that link receptors of platelet activators to the cytoplasmic domains of αIIbβ₃ are incompletely understood, the role of different G-protein subfamilies and the role of some of their immediate effector pathways have been described during recent years. There is good evidence that activation of PLCβ through Gq, which results in the formation of IP₃ and diacyl glycerol, plays an important role in mediating αIIbβ₃ activation. IP₃-mediated increases in cytosolic-free Ca²⁺ appears to be required for integrin activation, but Ca²⁺ alone is obviously not sufficient to induce inside-out signaling.¹⁰⁷ Activation of PKC by diacyl glycerol or phorbol esters leads to αIIbβ₃ activation.¹⁰⁷ It is, however, not clear which of the various PKC isoforms are involved in G protein–mediated inside-out activation and which are the relevant PKC substrates in this process. The requirement of Gq-mediated signaling for agonist-induced αIIbβ₃ activation has also been demonstrated by the phenotype of Gαq-deficient platelets, which fail to aggregate and to secrete in response to thrombin, ADP, and TXA₂ because of a lack of agonist-induced PLC activation.⁶⁸ There is, however, clear evidence for additional Gq-independent signaling processes which are involved in αIIbβ₃ activation. This has first been suggested based on several observations made when the mechanisms of ADP-induced integrin αIIbβ₃ activation were studied. Platelets lacking the Gi-coupled P2Y₁₂ receptor or in which P2Y₁₂ was blocked did not aggregate in response to ADP unless the Gi-mediated pathway was activated by alternative mechanisms.¹⁴,²⁵,⁸⁶ A role for Gi-mediated signaling in integrin αIIbβ₃ activation by platelet stimuli is also indicated by the fact that platelets lacking Gα₁₂ or the related

Gα<sub>z</sub> show reduced aggregation in response to ADP, thrombin or adrenaline.<sup>17,49,108,109</sup> Thus, G<sub>q</sub> and G<sub>i</sub> appear to synergize to induce platelet aggregation.

How G<sub>i</sub> contributes to integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation in platelets is currently not clear. It is conceivable that the G<sub>i</sub>-mediated decrease in cAMP levels counteracts the antiaggregatory effects of endothelial mediators such as PGI<sub>2</sub>, which increases platelet cAMP levels via its G<sub>s</sub>-coupled receptor. However, under in vitro conditions, a decrease in cAMP levels alone does not induce aggregation of platelets.<sup>19,110,111</sup> Activation of G<sub>i</sub> results in the release of reasonable amounts of G-protein βγ subunits, which, as dimers themselves, regulate various effectors and may contribute to α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation and platelet aggregation. The 2 PI3K isoforms activated by βγ complexes, p110β (PI3Kβ) and p110γ (PI3Kγ), are both expressed in platelets.<sup>112,113</sup> Activation of PI3K results in the formation of 3-phosphorylated phosphoinositides, which can activate a variety of effectors including various isoforms of PKC or PKB/Akt.<sup>72,114</sup> A role of PI3K in the activation of integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> is also supported by observations in PI3Kγ-deficient mice, which show reduced aggregation responses to ADP,<sup>115,116</sup> as well as by studies using specific inhibitors of PI3Kβ, which suggests that this enzyme plays an important role in sustaining platelet aggregation in response to low concentrations of platelet activators.<sup>117</sup> Consistent with that, platelets lacking the downstream effectors of PI3K, Akt1, and/or Akt2 show reduced aggregation.<sup>118,119</sup>

Recently, the small GTPase Rap1 has attracted interest as a potential mediator of integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation by various platelet activators. Rap1, which has been implicated in the activation of inside-out signaling for a variety of integrins including α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub>,<sup>120,121</sup> is rapidly activated on platelet activation obviously through G<sub>q</sub>- and G<sub>i</sub>-mediated signaling pathways.<sup>122,123</sup> Mice lacking Rap1b show defects in the activation of integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> in response to various platelet stimuli and are protected from arterial thrombosis.<sup>124</sup> Similarly, mice lacking CalDAG-GEFI, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor mediating agonist-induced Rap1 activation in platelets, show decreased platelet activation and thrombus formation and have severely prolonged bleeding times.<sup>125</sup> These data clearly indicate that Rap1 is involved in at least 1 of several mechanisms mediating the integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation by various platelet activators.

There is also clear evidence that G<sub>13</sub>-mediated signaling contributes to efficient α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation. This has first been suggested on the basis of the observation that some level of integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation and platelet aggregation can also be induced in the absence of G<sub>q</sub>-mediated signaling when G<sub>i</sub>- and G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub>-dependent signaling pathways are concomitantly activated.<sup>126,127</sup> A role of G<sub>13</sub> in platelet integrin activation could be confirmed in studies with platelets lacking Ga<sub>13</sub>. In the absence of Ga<sub>13</sub>, agonist-induced α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> activation was reduced. In addition, Ga<sub>13</sub>-deficient animals had prolonged bleeding times and were protected against arterial thrombosis.<sup>80</sup> A role of the G<sub>13</sub>-mediated activation of the Rho/Rho-kinase pathway is consistent with findings that indicate a role of RhoA in platelet aggregation under high-shear conditions and in the irreversible aggregation of platelets in suspension.<sup>128,129</sup>

Although the precise signaling mechanisms linking GPCRs to integrin α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub>-mediated platelet aggregation are only partially understood, it has become clear in recent years that the rapid platelet aggregation with high efficiency requires the activation of at least 3 signaling pathways mediated by the heterotrimeric G proteins G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>13</sub>, and G<sub>i</sub>. In the absence of 1 of the 3 pathways, activation of α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub> still occurs, although with lower efficacy.

# Platelet Secretion and Procoagulant Activity

Secretion from platelets is an important mechanism that amplifies platelet activation and results in the release of mediators that act on the vessel wall as well as on other blood cells. It occurs in 2 waves, the first consists of the release of dense core granules and α-granules followed by the release of lysosomes. Dense granules contain small molecules such as nucleotides (ADP, ATP) or serotonin, whereas α granules contain various proteins including growth factors, chemokines, adhesive molecules, and coagulation factors. There is good evidence that platelet secretion functions analogous to other systems of regulated secretion, and platelets have been shown to contain the necessary components of the secretory machinery.<sup>130,131</sup> Although a detailed model of the mechanisms linking platelet surface receptors to the activation of platelet secretion is still missing, some of the upstream regulatory processes have been elucidated. It is well established that an increase in the free cytosolic [Ca<sup>2+</sup>] and an activation of PKC are required for platelet activation.<sup>76,132</sup> Platelet secretion can be inhibited by various inhibitors of PKC isoforms.<sup>133–136</sup> However, the identity of the PKC isoforms involved in stimulus-induced platelet secretion is not clear. PKCα has been suggested to be involved.<sup>137</sup> Several targets of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and PKC have been suggested including Munc-18, MARCKS proteins, or phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate 4-kinase.<sup>131</sup> Although elevation of cytosolic [Ca<sup>2+</sup>] and activation of PKC are able to induce some platelet degranulation, full secretory responses of platelets to various stimuli require the synergistic activation of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and PKC-mediated processes.<sup>136,138–140</sup> The central role of the G<sub>q</sub>/PLC-β pathway in agonist-induced platelet granule secretion is supported by the finding that various platelet activators failed to induce secretion in platelets lacking Ga<sub>q</sub><sup>68</sup> and by the fact that secretion in response to TxA<sub>2</sub> and low concentrations of thrombin are reduced in PLCβ-deficient platelets.<sup>116</sup>

Platelet-shape change does not appear to be required for platelet aggregation.<sup>141</sup> Platelet-shape change, however, precedes platelet secretion, and contractile forces generated during platelet-shape change lead to the centralization of platelet granules. Centralization of platelet granules is believed to be required for fusion of granules with each other as well as with the open canicular system and the plasma membrane. This implies that the cytoskeletal reorganization during platelet-shape change contributes to the secretion of platelet granules. Consistent with this, signaling pathways that are involved in the induction of platelet-shape change such as the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent and the RhoA/Rho-kinase-mediated stimulation of MLC phosphorylation have been shown to be involved in platelet secretion,<sup>142,143</sup> and platelet secretion

in response to thrombin and TxA₂ is severely impaired in platelets lacking Gα₁₃.⁸⁰

It is well established that the activation of platelets and the activation of the coagulation cascade are complementary processes that influence each other. Platelet secretion contributes to the procoagulant activity of activated platelets by providing additional coagulation factors including factor V, factor VIII, or fibrinogen.¹⁴⁴ In addition, strong platelet activation results in the exposure of phosphatidylserine at the outer surface of the plasma membrane as well as in the formation of membrane blebs and microvesicles. The exposure of phosphatidylserine supports the formation of thrombin by facilitating the assembly of the prothrombinase and tenase complexes on the surface of activated platelets.³¹,¹⁴⁵ The shedding of membrane blebs into the circulation is suggested to provide procoagulant microvesicles. There is good evidence that the procoagulant activity of platelets is induced by very strong and prolonged increases in intracellular [Ca²⁺]. The most important stimulus appears to be fibrillar collagen, which acts through primarily G protein-independent processes. The transient [Ca²⁺] increases induced via Gq-coupled receptors are obviously only sufficient to induce a small degree of phosphatidylserine exposure and procoagulant activity.³¹ Nevertheless, the autocrine activation of platelets by ADP and subsequent activation of P2Y₁ and P2Y₁₂ receptors contributes to the activation of platelet-procoagulant activity in vitro and in vivo.²⁸,¹⁴⁶,¹⁴⁷

# Implications for Future Development of Antiplatelet Agents

Platelet adhesion at sites of atherosclerotic plaque rupture and subsequent formation of platelet aggregates is a central mechanism underlying the formation of arterial thrombi, resulting in acute coronary syndromes, stroke, and peripheral artery disease. In addition, platelet activation appears to be already involved in earlier stages of atherosclerosis development.⁶⁰,¹⁴⁸ Platelets are therefore prime targets for therapeutic approaches to treat or prevent cardiovascular diseases.³⁰,¹⁴⁹ Although considerable progress has been made in the development of antiplatelet agents as well as in the clinical evaluation of their effects, available antiplatelet therapies are still not optimal. This topic will be covered further in a forthcoming review in this series.

The currently most widely used antiplatelet drugs, aspirin, and clopidogrel have been shown to prevent cardiovascular diseases and are relatively well tolerated by treated patients. However, despite the proven beneficial effects, both drugs can reduce the risk for serious vascular events such as myocardial infarction or stroke in high-risk patients only by approximately one-quarter.¹⁵⁰,¹⁵¹ Thus, the efficacy of aspirin and clopidogrel is limited. This is probably attributable to the fact that both drugs inhibit the action of only 1 of several positive-feedback mediators acting via GPCRs. A third class of antiplatelet drug, αⅡbβ₃ (GPIIb/IIIa) antagonists, block the final convergence point of platelet activation. Blockers of αⅡbβ₃ have been shown in clinical trials to be very efficacious when used in patients undergoing coronary interventions. However, the increased efficacy is accompanied by a considerable reduction in safety, which restricts the use of αⅡbβ₃

antagonists to the treatment of acute clinical conditions or to the treatment of patients undergoing coronary interventions.¹⁵²,¹⁵³ Thus, especially for the prevention of cardiovascular diseases, there is still a clinical need for antiplatelet drugs with higher antithrombotic efficacy than aspirin and clopidogrel but with safety profiles that allow for a preventive long-term administration.

Because Gq, G₁₃, and Gi integrate the effects of various platelet stimuli acting through their GPCRs, interference with signaling pathways downstream of GPCRs appears to be a promising strategy to develop antiplatelet agents with higher efficacy than those that block only individual platelet stimuli or their individual receptors. Because all 3 G protein-mediated signaling pathways show some level of redundancy, inhibition of 1 of the pathways should still be safer than blocking the common end point of platelet activation. Based on the fact that platelets lack G₁₁, which can compensate Gq deficiency in almost all tissues except platelets and the nervous system,⁶⁸,¹⁵⁴ Gq has been suggested as a target for antiplatelet agents.⁶⁸ To circumvent potential side effects in the central nervous system, a Gq inhibitor should not be able to pass the blood/brain barrier. It has, however, turned out to be extremely difficult to selectively target the function of Gq because of its close structural similarity to Gα₁₁.¹⁵⁵ However, a Gaq-specific approach would be required, because inhibition of both Gq and G₁₁ is likely to have deleterious effects in multiple organs.¹⁵⁶–¹⁵⁸ Alternatively, signaling pathways downstream of Gq, G₁₃, or Gi such as the Rho/Rho-kinase or the PI3K-mediated signaling pathways represent attractive targets for antiplatelet drugs.¹⁵⁹,¹⁶⁰ Because most components of G protein-mediated downstream signaling pathways are present in a variety of cells, potential inhibitors should act in a somewhat platelet-selective manner to reduce the risk of side effects in other cells and tissues. Depending on their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties, drugs acting on widely expressed protein targets can have remarkable platelet selectivity, as demonstrated by the well-established antiplatelet activity of low-dose aspirin.¹⁶¹

## Conclusions

After the initial interaction of platelets with the altered vessel wall and their adhesion, the subsequent activation and formation of a platelet thrombus require the action of various diffusible mediators that act through GPCRs. In recent years, the major GPCRs involved in platelet activation under physiological and pathological conditions have been identified, and it has become clear that platelet activation requires the parallel signaling through several heterotrimeric G proteins. Although, in the absence of Gq-, Gi-, or G₁₃-mediated signaling, some platelet activation can occur, efficient activation of platelets in vitro and in vivo requires all 3 G protein-mediated signaling pathways. Mouse lines lacking individual G-protein α subunits or other downstream signaling components of these pathways have provided the first models not only to evaluate the physiological role of individual signaling pathways but also to make predictions regarding their potential role as targets for new antiplatelet agents.

Acknowledgments
The secretarial assistance of Rose LeFaucheur is gratefully acknowledged.

Sources of Funding
Work by the author has been supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

Disclosures
None.

References
1. Ruggeri ZM. Platelets in atherothrombosis. *Nat Med.* 2002;8:1227–1234.
2. Jackson SP, Nesbitt WS, Kulkarni S. Signaling events underlying thrombus formation. *J Thromb Haemost.* 2003;1:1602–1612.
3. Ruggeri ZM. Von Willebrand factor, platelets and endothelial cell interactions. *J Thromb Haemost.* 2003;1:1335–1342.
4. Nieswandt B, Watson SP. Platelet-collagen interaction: is GPVI the central receptor? *Blood.* 2003;102:449–461.
5. Nieswandt B, Offermanns S. Pharmacology of platelet adhesion and aggregation. In: Behrens J, Nelson J, eds. *Handbook of experimental Pharmacology*. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer; 2004:437–471.
6. Pierce KL, Premont RT, Lefkowitz RJ. Seven-transmembrane receptors. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.* 2002;3:639–650.
7. Vassilatis DK, Hohmann JG, Zeng H, Li F, Ranchalis JE, Mortrud MT, Brown A, Rodriguez SS, Weller JR, Wright AC, Bergmann JE, Gaitanaris GA. The G protein-coupled receptor repertoires of human and mouse. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 2003;100:4903–4908.
8. Fredriksson R, Lagerstrom MC, Lundin LG, Schioth HB. The G-protein-coupled receptors in the human genome form five main families. Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. *Mol Pharmacol.* 2003;63:1256–1272.
9. Bockaert J, Claeysen S, Becamel C, Pinloche S, Dumuis A. G protein-coupled receptors: dominant players in cell-cell communication. *Int Rev Cytol.* 2002;212:63–132.
10. Cabrera-Vera TM, Vanhauwe J, Thomas TO, Medkova M, Preininger A, Mazzoni MR, Hamm HE. Insights into G protein structure, function, and regulation. *Endocr Rev.* 2003;24:765–781.
11. Wettschureck N, Offermanns S. Mammalian G proteins and their cell type specific functions. *Physiol Rev.* 2005;85:1159–1204.
12. Murugappa S, Kunapuli SP. The role of ADP receptors in platelet function. *Front Biosci.* 2006;11:1977–1986.
13. Gachet C. Regulation of platelet functions by P2 receptors. *Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol.* 2006;46:277–300.
14. Savi P, Beauverger P, Labouret C, Delfaud M, Salel V, Kaghad M, Herbert JM. Role of P2Y1 purinoceptor in ADP-induced platelet activation. *FEBS Lett.* 1998;422:291–295.
15. Hechler B, Leon C, Vial C, Vigne P, Frelin C, Cazenave JP, Gachet C. The P2Y1 receptor is necessary for adenosine 5′-diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation. *Blood.* 1998;92:152–159.
16. Ohlmann P, Laugwitz KL, Nurnberg B, Spicher K, Schultz G, Cazenave JP, Gachet C. The human platelet ADP receptor activates Gi2 proteins. *Biochem J.* 1995;312(pt 3):775–779.
17. Jantzen HM, Milstone DS, Gousset L, Conley PB, Mortensen RM. Impaired activation of murine platelets lacking G alpha(i2). *J Clin Invest.* 2001;108:477–483.
18. Jin J, Kunapuli SP. Coactivation of two different G protein-coupled receptors is essential for ADP-induced platelet aggregation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 1998;95:8070–8074.
19. Pulcinelli FM, Pesciotti M, Pignatelli P, Riondino S, Gazzaniga PP. Concomitant activation of Gi and Gq protein-coupled receptors does not require an increase in cytosolic calcium for platelet aggregation. *FEBS Lett.* 1998;435:115–118.
20. Jantzen HM, Gousset L, Bhaskar V, Vincent D, Tai A, Reynolds EE, Conley PB. Evidence for two distinct G-protein-coupled ADP receptors mediating platelet activation. *Thromb Haemost.* 1999;81:111–117.
21. Leon C, Hechler B, Freund M, Eckly A, Vial C, Ohlmann P, Dierich A, LeMeur M, Cazenave JP, Gachet C. Defective platelet aggregation and increased resistance to thrombosis in purinergic P2Y (1) receptor-null mice. *J Clin Invest.* 1999;104:1731–1737.
22. Fabre JE, Nguyen M, Latour A, Keifer JA, Audoly LP, Coffman TM, Koller BH. Decreased platelet aggregation, increased bleeding time and resistance to thromboembolism in P2Y1-deficient mice. *Nat Med.* 1999;5:1199–1202.
23. Hollopeter G, Jantzen HM, Vincent D, Li G, England L, Ramakrishnan V, Yang RB, Nurden P, Nurden A, Julius D, Conley PB. Identification of the platelet ADP receptor targeted by antithrombotic drugs. *Nature.* 2001;409:202–207.
24. Cattaneo M, Zighetti ML, Lombardi R, Martinez C, Lecchi A, Conley PB, Ware J, Ruggeri ZM. Molecular bases of defective signal transduction in the platelet P2Y12 receptor of a patient with congenital bleeding. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 2003;100:1978–1983.
25. Foster CJ, Prosser DM, Agans JM, Zhai Y, Smith MD, Lachowicz JE, Zhang FL, Gustafson E, Monsma FJ Jr, Wiekowski MT, Abbondanzo SJ, Cook DN, Bayne ML, Lira SA, Chintala MS. Molecular identification and characterization of the platelet ADP receptor targeted by thienopyridine antithrombotic drugs. *J Clin Invest.* 2001;107:1591–1598.
26. Andre P, Prasad KS, Denis CV, He M, Papalia JM, Hynes RO, Phillips DR, Wagner DD. CD40L stabilizes arterial thrombi by a beta3 integrin-dependent mechanism. *Nat Med.* 2002;8:247–252.
27. Andre P, Delaney SM, LaRocca T, Vincent D, DeGuzman F, Jurek M, Koller B, Phillips DR, Conley PB. P2Y12 regulates platelet adhesion/activation, thrombus growth, and thrombus stability in injured arteries. *J Clin Invest.* 2003;112:398–406.
28. Leon C, Ravanat C, Freund M, Cazenave JP, Gachet C. Differential involvement of the P2Y1 and P2Y12 receptors in platelet procoagulant activity. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol.* 2003;23:1941–1947.
29. Quinn MJ, Fitzgerald DJ. Ticlopidine and clopidogrel. *Circulation.* 1999;100:1667–1672.
30. Bhatt DL, Topol EJ. Scientific and therapeutic advances in antiplatelet therapy. *Nat Rev Drug Discov.* 2003;2:15–28.
31. Heemskerk JW, Bevers EM, Lindhout T. Platelet activation and blood coagulation. *Thromb Haemost.* 2002;88:186–193.
32. Coughlin SR. Protease-activated receptors in hemostasis, thrombosis and vascular biology. *J Thromb Haemost.* 2005;3:1800–1814.
33. Offermanns S, Laugwitz KL, Spicher K, Schultz G. G proteins of the G12 family are activated via thromboxane A2 and thrombin receptors in human platelets. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 1994;91:504–508.
34. Klages B, Brandt U, Simon MI, Schultz G, Offermanns S. Activation of G12/G13 results in shape change and Rho/Rho-kinase-mediated myosin light chain phosphorylation in mouse platelets. *J Cell Biol.* 1999;144:745–754.
35. Kahn ML, Zheng YW, Huang W, Bigornia V, Zeng D, Moff S, Farese RV Jr, Tam C, Coughlin SR. A dual thrombin receptor system for platelet activation. *Nature.* 1998;394:690–694.
36. Kahn ML, Nakanishi-Matsui M, Shapiro MJ, Ishihara H, Coughlin SR. Protease-activated receptors 1 and 4 mediate activation of human platelets by thrombin. *J Clin Invest.* 1999;103:879–887.
37. Hung DT, Wong YH, Vu TK, Coughlin SR. The cloned platelet thrombin receptor couples to at least two distinct effectors to stimulate phosphoinositide hydrolysis and inhibit adenyl cyclase. *J Biol Chem.* 1992;267:20831–20834.
38. Bernatowicz MS, Klimas CE, Hartl KS, Peluso M, Allegretto NJ, Seiler SM. Development of potent thrombin receptor antagonist peptides. *J Med Chem.* 1996;39:4879–4887.
39. Brass LF, Vassallo RR Jr, Belmonte E, Ahuja M, Cichowski K, Hoxie JA. Structure and function of the human platelet thrombin receptor. Studies using monoclonal antibodies directed against a defined domain within the receptor N terminus. *J Biol Chem.* 1992;267:13795–13798.
40. Xu WF, Andersen H, Whitmore TE, Presnell SR, Yee DP, Ching A, Gilbert T, Davie EW, Foster DC. Cloning and characterization of human protease-activated receptor 4. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 1998;95:6642–6646.
41. Nakanishi-Matsui M, Zheng YW, Sulciner DJ, Weiss EJ, Ludeman MJ, Coughlin SR. PAR3 is a cofactor for PAR4 activation by thrombin. *Nature.* 2000;404:609–613.
42. Sambrano GR, Weiss EJ, Zheng YW, Huang W, Coughlin SR. Role of thrombin signalling in platelets in haemostasis and thrombosis. *Nature.* 2001;413:74–78.
43. Hamilton JR, Cornelissen I, Coughlin SR. Impaired hemostasis and protection against thrombosis in protease-activated receptor 4-deficient mice is due to lack of thrombin signaling in platelets. *J Thromb Haemost.* 2004;2:1429–1435.

44. Knezevic I, Borg C, Le Breton GC. Identification of Gq as one of the G-proteins which copurify with human platelet thromboxane A2/prostaglandin H2 receptors. *J Biol Chem*. 1993;268:26011–26017.

45. Djellas Y, Manganello JM, Antonakis K, Le Breton GC. Identification of Galpha13 as one of the G-proteins that couple to human platelet thromboxane A2 receptors. *J Biol Chem*. 1999;274:14325–14330.

46. Thomas DW, Mannon RB, Mannon PJ, Latour A, Oliver JA, Hoffman M, Smithies O, Koller BH, Coffman TM. Coagulation defects and altered hemodynamic responses in mice lacking receptors for thromboxane A2. *J Clin Invest*. 1998;102:1994–2001.

47. Cheng Y, Austin SC, Rocca B, Koller BH, Coffman TM, Grosser T, Lawson JA, FitzGerald GA. Role of prostacyclin in the cardiovascular response to thromboxane A2. *Science*. 2002;296:539–541.

48. Kobayashi T, Tahara Y, Matsumoto M, Iguchi M, Sano H, Murayama T, Arai H, Oida H, Yurugi-Kobayashi T, Yamashita JK, Katagiri H, Majima M, Yokode M, Kita T, Narumiya S. Roles of thromboxane A(2) and prostacyclin in the development of atherosclerosis in apoE-deficient mice. *J Clin Invest*. 2004;114:784–794.

49. Yang J, Wu J, Kowalska MA, Dalvi A, Prevost N, O’Brien PJ, Manning D, Poncz M, Lucki I, Blendy JA, Brass LF. Loss of signaling through the G protein, Gz, results in abnormal platelet activation and altered responses to psychoactive drugs. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2000;97:9984–9989.

50. Pozgajova M, Sachs UJ, Hein L, Nieswandt B. Reduced thrombus stability in mice lacking the {alpha}2A-adrenergic receptor. *Blood*. 2006;108:510–514.

51. Fabre JE, Nguyen M, Athirakul K, Coggins K, McNeish JD, Austin S, Parise LK, FitzGerald GA, Coffman TM, Koller BH. Activation of the murine EP3 receptor for PGE2 inhibits cAMP production and promotes platelet aggregation. *J Clin Invest*. 2001;107:603–610.

52. Ma H, Hara A, Xiao CY, Okada Y, Takahata O, Nakaya K, Sugimoto Y, Ichikawa A, Narumiya S, Ushikubi F. Increased bleeding tendency and decreased susceptibility to thromboembolism in mice lacking the prostaglandin E receptor subtype EP(3). *Circulation*. 2001;104:1176–1180.

53. Kowalska MA, Ratajczak J, Hoxie J, Brass LF, Gewirtz A, Poncz M, Ratajczak MZ. Megakaryocyte precursors, megakaryocytes and platelets express the HIV co-receptor CXCR4 on their surface: determination of response to stromal-derived factor-1 by megakaryocytes and platelets. *Br J Haematol*. 1999;104:220–229.

54. Abi-Younes S, Sauty A, Mach F, Sukhova GK, Libby P, Luster AD. The stromal cell-derived factor-1 chemokine is a potent platelet agonist highly expressed in atherosclerotic plaques. *Circ Res*. 2000;86:131–138.

55. Kowalska MA, Ratajczak MZ, Majka M, Jin J, Kunapuli S, Brass L, Poncz M. Stromal cell-derived factor-1 and macrophage-derived chemokine: 2 chemokines that activate platelets. *Blood*. 2000;96:50–57.

56. Clemetson KJ, Clemetson JM, Proudfoot AE, Power CA, Baggiolini M, Wells TN. Functional expression of CCR1, CCR3, CCR4, and CXCR4 chemokine receptors on human platelets. *Blood*. 2000;96:4046–4054.

57. Abi-Younes S, Si-Tahar M, Luster AD. The CC chemokines MDC and TARC induce platelet activation via CCR4. *Thromb Res*. 2001;101:279–289.

58. Schäfer A, Schulz C, Eigenthaler M, Fraccarollo D, Kobsar A, Gawaz M, Ertl G, Walter U, Bauersachs J. Novel role of the membrane-bound chemokine fractalkine in platelet activation and adhesion. *Blood*. 2004;103:407–412.

59. Weber C. Platelets and chemokines in atherosclerosis: partners in crime. *Circ Res*. 2005;96:612–616.

60. Gawaz M, Langer H, May AE. Platelets in inflammation and atherogenesis. *J Clin Invest*. 2005;115:3378–3384.

61. Moolenaar WH. LPA. A novel lipid mediator with diverse biological actions. *Trends Cell Biol*. 1994;4:213–219.

62. Motohashi K, Shibata S, Ozaki Y, Yatomi Y, Igarashi Y. Identification of lysophospholipid receptors in human platelets: the relation of two agonists, lysophosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate. *FEBS Lett*. 2000;468:189–193.

63. Rother E, Brandl R, Baker DL, Goyal P, Gebhard H, Tigyi G, Siess W. Subtype-selective antagonists of lysophosphatidic acid receptors inhibit platelet activation triggered by the lipid core of atherosclerotic plaques. *Circulation*. 2003;108:741–747.

64. Siess W, Tigyi G. Thrombogenic and atherogenic activities of lysophosphatidic acid. *J Cell Biochem*. 2004;92:1086–1094.

65. Grosser T, Fries S, FitzGerald GA. Biological basis for the cardiovascular consequences of COX-2 inhibition: therapeutic challenges and opportunities. *J Clin Invest*. 2006;116:4–15.

66. Ledent C, Vaugeois SN, Schiffmann T, Pedrazzini T, El Yacoubi M, Vanderhaeghen JJ, Costentin J, Heath JK, Vassart G, Parmentier M. Aggressiveness, hypoalgesia and high blood pressure in mice lacking the adenosine A2a receptor. *Nature*. 1997;388:674–678.

67. Johnson GJ, Leis LA, Dunlop PC. Specificity of G alpha q and G alpha 11 gene expression in platelets and erythrocytes. Expressions of cellular differentiation and species differences. *Biochem J*. 1996;318(pt 3):1023–1031.

68. Offermanns S, Toombs CF, Hu YH, Simon MI. Defective platelet activation in G alpha(q)-deficient mice. *Nature*. 1997;389:183–186.

69. Hart MJ, Jiang X, Kozasa T, Roscoe W, Singer WD, Gilman AG, Sternweis PC, Bollag G. Direct stimulation of the guanine nucleotide exchange activity of p115 RhoGEF by Galpha13. *Science*. 1998;280:2112–2114.

70. Fukuhara S, Chikumi H, Gutkind JS. RGS-containing RhoGEFs: the missing link between transforming G proteins and Rho? *Oncogene*. 2001;20:1661–1668.

71. Clapham DE, Neer EJ. G protein beta gamma subunits. *Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol*. 1997;37:167–203.

72. Vanhaesebroeck B, Leevers SJ, Ahmadi K, Timms J, Katso R, Driscoll PC, Woscholski R, Parker PJ, Waterfield MD. Synthesis and function of 3-phosphorylated inositol lipids. *Annu Rev Biochem*. 2001;70:535–602.

73. Cantley LC. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. *Science*. 2002;296:1655–1657.

74. Wurzinger LJ. Histophysiology of the circulating platelet. *Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol*. 1990;120:1–96.

75. Hartwig JH. Mechanisms of actin rearrangements mediating platelet activation. *J Cell Biol*. 1992;118:1421–1442.

76. Rink TJ, Smith SW, Tsien RY. Cytoplasmic free Ca2+ in human platelets: Ca2+ thresholds and Ca-independent activation for shape-change and secretion. *FEBS Lett*. 1982;148:21–26.

77. Simpson AW, Hallam TJ, Rink TJ. Low concentrations of the stable prostaglandin endoperoxide U44069 stimulate shape change in quin2-loaded platelets without a measurable increase in [Ca2+]. *FEBS Lett*. 1986;201:301–305.

78. Negrescu EV, de Quintana KL, Siess W. Platelet shape change induced by thrombin receptor activation. Rapid stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of novel protein substrates through an integrin- and Ca(2+)-independent mechanism. *J Biol Chem*. 1995;270:1057–1061.

79. Ohkubo S, Nakahata N, Ohizumi Y. Thromboxane A2-mediated shape change: independent of Gq-phospholipase C-Ca2+ pathway in rabbit platelets. *Br J Pharmacol*. 1996;117:1095–1104.

80. Moers A, Nieswandt B, Massberg S, Wettschureck N, Gruner S, Konrad I, Schulte V, Aktas B, Gratacap MP, Simon MI, Gawaz M, Offermanns S. G13 is an essential mediator of platelet activation in hemostasis and thrombosis. *Nat Med*. 2003;9:1418–1422.

81. Moers A, Wettschureck N, Gruner S, Nieswandt B, Offermanns S. Unresponsiveness of Platelets Lacking Both G{alpha}q and G{alpha}13: implications for collagen-induced platelet activation. *J Biol Chem*. 2004;279:45354–45359.

82. Daniel JL, Molish IR, Rigmaiden M, Stewart G. Evidence for a role of myosin phosphorylation in the initiation of the platelet shape change response. *J Biol Chem*. 1984;259:9826–9831.

83. Nachmias VT, Kavaler J, Jacobowitz S. Reversible association of myosin with the platelet cytoskeleton. *Nature*. 1985;313:70–72.

84. Wettschureck N, Offermanns S. Rho/Rho-kinase mediated signaling in physiology and pathophysiology. *J Mol Med*. 2002;80:629–638.

85. Bauer M, Retzer M, Wilde JI, Maschberger P, Essler M, Aepfelbacher M, Watson SP, Siess W. Dichotomous regulation of myosin phosphorylation and shape change by Rho-kinase and calcium in intact human platelets. *Blood*. 1999;94:1665–1672.

86. Paul BZ, Jin J, Kunapuli SP. Molecular mechanism of thromboxane A(2)-induced platelet aggregation. Essential role for p2t(ac) and alpha(2a) receptors. *J Biol Chem*. 1999;274:29108–29114.

87. Chikumi H, Vazquez-Prado J, Servitja JM, Miyazaki H, Gutkind JS. Potent activation of RhoA by Galpha q and Gq-coupled receptors. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:27130–27134.

88. Booden MA, Siderovski DP, Der CJ. Leukemia-associated Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor promotes G alpha q-coupled activation of RhoA. *Mol Cell Biol*. 2002;22:4053–4061.

89. Vogt S, Grosse R, Schultz G, Offermanns S. Receptor-dependent RhoA activation in G12/G13-deficient cells: genetic evidence for an involvement of Gq/G11. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:28743–28749.

90. Paul BZ, Kim S, Dangelmaier C, Nagaswami C, Jin J, Hartwig JH, Weisel JW, Daniel JL, Kunapuli SP. Dynamic regulation of microtubule

coils in ADP-induced platelet shape change by p160ROCK (Rho-
kinase). *Platelets*. 2003;14:159–169.

91. Maeda H, Inazu T, Nagai K, Maruyama S, Nakagawara G, Yamamura H. Possible involvement of protein-tyrosine kinases such as p72syk in the disc-sphere change response of porcine platelets. *J Biochem (Tokyo)*. 1995;117:1201–1208.

92. Gallet C, Rosa JP, Habib A, Lebret M, Levy-Toledano S, Maclouf J. Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin associated with Syk accompanies thromboxane analogue-induced platelet shape change. *J Biol Chem*. 1999;274:23610–23616.

93. Hartwig JH, Barkalow K. Polyphosphoinositide synthesis and platelet shape change. *Curr Opin Hematol*. 1997;4:351–356.

94. Tolias KF, Hartwig JH, Ishihara H, Shibasaki Y, Cantley LC, Carpenter CL. Type I alpha phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase mediates Rac-dependent actin assembly. *Curr Biol*. 2000;10:153–156.

95. Weernink PA, Meletiadis K, Hommeltenberg S, Hinz M, Ishihara H, Schmidt M, Jakobs KH. Activation of type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase isoforms by the Rho GTPases, RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42. *J Biol Chem*. 2004;279:7840–7849.

96. Azim AC, Barkalow K, Chou J, Hartwig JH. Activation of the small GTPases, rac and cdc42, after ligation of the platelet PAR-1 receptor. *Blood*. 2000;95:959–964.

97. Jaffe AB, Hall A. Rho GTPases: biochemistry and biology. *Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol*. 2005;21:247–269.

98. Gratacap MP, Payrastre B, Nieswandt B, Offermanns S. Differential regulation of Rho and Rac through heterotrimeric G-proteins and cyclic nucleotides. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:47906–47913.

99. Yang SA, Carpenter CL, Abrams CS. Rho and Rho-kinase mediate thrombin-induced phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase trafficking in platelets. *J Biol Chem*. 2004;279:42331–42336.

100. Faix J, Grosse R. Staying in shape with formins. *Dev Cell*. 2006;10:693–706.

101. Bennett JS. Structure and function of the platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3. *J Clin Invest*. 2005;115:3363–3369.

102. Shattil SJ, Newman PJ. Integrins: dynamic scaffolds for adhesion and signaling in platelets. *Blood*. 2004;104:1606–1615.

103. Ratnikov BI, Partridge AW, Ginsberg MH. Integrin activation by talin. *J Thromb Haemost*. 2005;3:1783–1790.

104. Critchley DR. Focal adhesions—the cytoskeletal connection. *Curr Opin Cell Biol*. 2000;12:133–139.

105. Priddle H, Hemmings L, Monkley S, Woods A, Patel B, Sutton D, Dunn GA, Zicha D, Critchley DR. Disruption of the talin gene compromises focal adhesion assembly in undifferentiated but not differentiated embryonic stem cells. *J Cell Biol*. 1998;142:1121–1133.

106. Tadokoro S, Shattil SJ, Eto K, Tai V, Liddington RC, de Pereda JM, Ginsberg MH, Calderwood DA. Talin binding to integrin beta tails: a final common step in integrin activation. *Science*. 2003;302:103–106.

107. Shattil SJ, Brass LF. Induction of the fibrinogen receptor on human platelets by intracellular mediators. *J Biol Chem*. 1987;262:992–1000.

108. Yang J, Wu J, Jiang H, Mortensen R, Austin S, Manning DR, Woulfe D, Brass LF. Signaling through Gi family members in platelets. Redundancy and specificity in the regulation of adenylyl cyclase and other effectors. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:46035–46042.

109. Kelleher KL, Matthaei KI, Hendry IA. Targeted disruption of the mouse Gz-alpha gene: a role for Gz in platelet function? *Thromb Haemost*. 2001;85:529–532.

110. Savi P, Pfleiger AM, Herbert JM. cAMP is not an important messenger for ADP-induced platelet aggregation. *Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis*. 1996;7:249–252.

111. Daniel JL, Dangelmaier C, Jin J, Kim YB, Kunapuli SP. Role of intracellular signaling events in ADP-induced platelet aggregation. *Thromb Haemost*. 1999;82:1322–1326.

112. Jackson SP, Yap CL, Anderson KE. Phosphoinositide 3-kinases and the regulation of platelet function. *Biochem Soc Trans*. 2004;32:387–392.

113. Hirsch E, Lembo G, Montrucchio G, Rommel C, Costa C, Barberis L. Signaling through PI3Kgamma: a common platform for leukocyte, platelet and cardiovascular stress sensing. *Thromb Haemost*. 2006;95:29–35.

114. Wymann MP, Zvelebil M, Laffargue M. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase signalling—which way to target? *Trends Pharmacol Sci*. 2003;24:366–376.

115. Hirsch E, Bosco O, Tropel P, Laffargue M, Calvez R, Altruda F, Wymann M, Montrucchio G. Resistance to thromboembolism in PI3Kgamma-deficient mice. *FASEB J*. 2001;15:2019–2021.


116. Lian L, Wang Y, Draznin J, Eslin D, Bennett JS, Poncz M, Wu D, Abrams CS. The relative role of PLCbeta and PI3Kgamma in platelet activation. *Blood*. 2005;106:110–117.

117. Jackson SP, Schoenwaelder SM, Goncalves I, Nesbitt WS, Yap CL, Wright CE, Kenche V, Anderson KE, Dopheide SM, Yuan Y, Sturgeon SA, Prabaharan H, Thompson PE, Smith GD, Shepherd PR, Daniele N, Kulkarni S, Abbott B, Saylik D, Jones C, Lu L, Giuliano S, Hughan SC, Angus JA, Robertson AD, Salem HH. PI 3-kinase p110beta: a new target for antithrombotic therapy. *Nat Med*. 2005;11:507–514.

118. Woulfe D, Jiang H, Morgans A, Monks R, Birnbaum M, Brass LF. Defects in secretion, aggregation, and thrombus formation in platelets from mice lacking Akt2. *J Clin Invest*. 2004;113:441–450.

119. Chen J, De S, Damron DS, Chen WS, Hay N, Byzova TV. Impaired platelet responses to thrombin and collagen in AKT-1-deficient mice. *Blood*. 2004;104:1703–1710.

120. Bertoni A, Tadokoro S, Eto K, Pampori N, Parise LV, White GC, Shattil SJ. Relationships between Rap1b, affinity modulation of integrin alpha IIbbeta 3, and the actin cytoskeleton. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:25715–25721.

121. de Bruyn KM, Zwartkruis FJ, de Rooij J, Akkerman JW, Bos JL. The small GTPase Rap1 is activated by turbulence and is involved in integrin [alpha]IIb[beta]3-mediated cell adhesion in human megakaryocytes. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:22412–22417.

122. Franke B, Akkerman JW, Bos JL. Rapid Ca2+-mediated activation of Rap1 in human platelets. *EMBO J*. 1997;16:252–259.

123. Woulfe D, Jiang H, Mortensen R, Yang J, Brass LF. Activation of Rap1B by G(i) family members in platelets. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:23382–23390.

124. Chrzanowska-Wodnicka M, Smyth SS, Schoenwaelder SM, Fischer TH, White GC 2nd. Rap1b is required for normal platelet function and hemostasis in mice. *J Clin Invest*. 2005;115:680–687.

125. Crittenden JR, Bergmeier W, Zhang Y, Piffath CL, Liang Y, Wagner DD, Housman DE, Graybiel AM. CalDAG-GEFI integrates signaling for platelet aggregation and thrombus formation. *Nat Med*. 2004;10:982–986.

126. Nieswandt B, Schulte V, Zywietz A, Gratacap MP, Offermanns S. Costimulation of Gi- and G12/G13-mediated signaling pathways induces integrin alpha IIbbeta 3 activation in platelets. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:39493–39498.

127. Dorsam RT, Kim S, Jin J, Kunapuli SP. Coordinated signaling through both G12/13 and G(i) pathways is sufficient to activate GPIIb/IIIa in human platelets. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:47588–47595.

128. Missy K, Plantavid M, Pacaud P, Viala C, Chap H, Payrastre B. Rho-
kinase is involved in the sustained phosphorylation of myosin and the irreversible platelet aggregation induced by PAR1 activating peptide. *Thromb Haemost*. 2001;85:514–520.

129. Schoenwaelder SM, Hughan SC, Boniface K, Fernando S, Holdsworth M, Thompson PE, Salem HH, Jackson SP. RhoA sustains integrin alpha IIbbeta 3 adhesion contacts under high shear. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:14738–14746.

130. Reed GL, Fitzgerald ML, Polgar J. Molecular mechanisms of platelet exocytosis: insights into the “secrete” life of thrombocytes. *Blood*. 2000;96:3334–3342.

131. Flaumenhaft R. Molecular basis of platelet granule secretion. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 2003;23:1152–1160.

132. Knight DE, Hallam TJ, Scrutton MC. Agonist selectivity and second messenger concentration in Ca2+-mediated secretion. *Nature*. 1982;296:256–257.

133. Yamada K, Iwahashi K, Kase H. K252a, a new inhibitor of protein kinase C, concomitantly inhibits 40K protein phosphorylation and serotonin secretion in a phorbol ester-stimulated platelets. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 1987;144:35–40.

134. Watson SP, McNally J, Shipman LJ, Godfrey PP. The action of the protein kinase C inhibitor, staurosporine, on human platelets. Evidence against a regulatory role for protein kinase C in the formation of inositol trisphosphate by thrombin. *Biochem J*. 1988;249:345–350.

135. Gerrard JM, Beattie LL, Park J, Israels SJ, McNicol A, Lint D, Cragoe EJ Jr. A role for protein kinase C in the membrane fusion necessary for platelet granule secretion. *Blood*. 1989;74:2405–2413.

136. Walker TR, Watson SP. Synergy between Ca2+ and protein kinase C is the major factor in determining the level of secretion from human platelets. *Biochem J*. 1993;289(pt 1):277–282.

137. Yoshioka A, Shirakawa R, Nishioka H, Tabuchi A, Higashi T, Ozaki H, Yamamoto A, Kita T, Horiuchi H. Identification of protein kinase Calpha as an essential, but not sufficient, cytosolic factor for Ca2+-

induced alpha- and dense-core granule secretion in platelets. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:39379–39385.

138. Kaibuchi K, Takai Y, Sawamura M, Hoshijima M, Fujikura T, Nishizuka Y. Synergistic functions of protein phosphorylation and calcium mobilization in platelet activation. *J Biol Chem*. 1983;258: 6701–6704.

139. Knight DE, Niggli V, Scrutton MC. Thrombin and activators of protein kinase C modulate secretory responses of permeabilised human platelets induced by Ca2+. *Eur J Biochem*. 1984;143:437–446.

140. Siess W, Lapetina EG. Ca2+ mobilization primes protein kinase C in human platelets. Ca2+ and phorbol esters stimulate platelet aggregation and secretion synergistically through protein kinase C. *Biochem J*. 1988; 255:309–318.

141. Peerschke EI, Zucker MB. Relationship of ADP-induced fibrinogen binding to platelet shape change and aggregation elucidated by use of colchicine and cytochalasin B. *Thromb Haemost*. 1980;43:58–60.

142. Suzuki Y, Yamamoto M, Wada H, Ito M, Nakano T, Sasaki Y, Narumiya S, Shiku H, Nishikawa M. Agonist-induced regulation of myosin phosphatase activity in human platelets through activation of Rho-kinase. *Blood*. 1999;93:3408–3417.

143. Watanabe Y, Ito M, Kataoka Y, Wada H, Koyama M, Feng J, Shiku H, Nishikawa M. Protein kinase C-catalyzed phosphorylation of an inhibitory phosphoprotein of myosin phosphatase is involved in human platelet secretion. *Blood*. 2001;97:3798–3805.

144. Bouchard BA, Saulius B, Mann KG, Tracy PB. Interactions between platelets and the coagulation system. In: Michelson AD, ed. *Platelets*. Amsterdam, Boston, London, New York: Academic Press; 2002: 229–253.

145. Bouchard BA, Tracy PB. Platelets, leukocytes, and coagulation. *Curr Opin Hematol*. 2001;8:263–269.

146. Herault JP, Dol F, Gaich C, Bernat A, Herbert JM. Effect of clopidogrel on thrombin generation in platelet-rich plasma in the rat. *Thromb Haemost*. 1999;81:957–960.

147. Storey RF, Sanderson HM, White AE, May JA, Cameron KE, Heptinstall S. The central role of the P(2T) receptor in amplification of human platelet activation, aggregation, secretion and procoagulant activity. *Br J Haematol*. 2000;110:925–934.

148. Huo Y, Ley KF. Role of platelets in the development of atherosclerosis. *Trends Cardiovasc Med*. 2004;14:18–22.

149. Jackson SP, Schoenwaelder SM. Antiplatelet therapy: in search of the ‘magic bullet’. *Nat Rev Drug Discov*. 2003;2:775–789.

150. Collaboration AT. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. *BMJ*. 2002;324:71–86.

151. Committee CS. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). CAPRIE Steering Committee. *Lancet*. 1996;348:1329–1339.

152. Bhatt DL, Topol EJ. Current role of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in acute coronary syndromes. *JAMA*. 2000;284:1549–1558.

153. Chew DP, Bhatt DL, Topol EJ. Oral glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors: why don’t they work? *Am J Cardiovasc Drugs*. 2001;1:421–428.

154. Offermanns S, Hashimoto K, Watanabe M, Sun W, Kurihara H, Thompson RF, Inoue Y, Kano M, Simon MI. Impaired motor coordination and persistent multiple climbing fiber innervation of cerebellar Purkinje cells in mice lacking Galphaq. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1997;94:14089–14094.

155. Kawasaki T, Taniguchi M, Moritani Y, Uemura T, Shigenaga T, Takamatsu H, Hayashi K, Takasaki J, Saito T, Nagai K. Pharmacological properties of YM-254890, a specific G(alpha)q/11 inhibitor, on thrombosis and neointima formation in mice. *Thromb Haemost*. 2005; 94:184–192.

156. Offermanns S, Zhao LP, Gohla A, Sarosi I, Simon MI, Wilkie TM. Embryonic cardiomyocyte hypoplasia and craniofacial defects in G alpha q/G alpha 11-mutant mice. *EMBO J*. 1998;17:4304–4312.

157. Rieken S, Sassmann A, Herroeder S, Wallenwein B, Moers A, Offermanns S, Wetschureck N. G12/G13 family G proteins regulate marginal zone B cell maturation, migration, and polarization. *J Immunol*. 2006;177:2985–2993.

158. Wetschureck N, Lee E, Libutti SK, Offermanns S, Robey PG, Spiegel AM. Parathyroid-specific double knockout of Gq- and G11-{alpha} subunits leads to a phenotype resembling germline knockout of the extracellular Ca++-sensing receptor. *Mol Endocrinol*. 2006 Sep 20; [Epub ahead of print].

159. Rolfe BE, Worth NF, World CJ, Campbell JH, Campbell GR. Rho and vascular disease. *Atherosclerosis*. 2005;183:1–16.

160. Jackson SF, Schoenwaelder SM. Type I phosphoinositide 3-kinases: potential antithrombotic targets? *Cell Mol Life Sci*. 2006;63:1085–1090.

161. Patrono C, Garcia Rodriguez LA, Landolfi R, Baigent C. Low-dose aspirin for the prevention of atherothrombosis. *N Engl J Med*. 2005; 353:2373–2383.

162. Weiss EJ, Hamilton JR, Lease KE, Coughlin SR. Protection against thrombosis in mice lacking PAR3. *Blood*. 2002;100:3240–3244.

Circulation
Research
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION

Activation of Platelet Function Through G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Stefan Offermanns

*Circ Res.* 2006;99:1293-1304
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000251742.71301.16

*Circulation Research* is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2006 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 1524-4571

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the World Wide Web at:
http://circres.ahajournals.org/content/99/12/1293

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published in *Circulation Research* can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this process is available in the *Permissions and Rights Question and Answer* document.

Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints

Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to *Circulation Research* is online at:
http://circres.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

Downloaded from http://circres.ahajournals.org/ at East Tennessee State University on June 13, 2015
