
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Cancer Letters 252 (2007) 184–194

Mini-review

**Cigarette smoke as a trigger for the dioxin receptor-mediated signaling pathway**

Masanori Kitamura*, Ayumi Kasai

Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan

Received 15 September 2006; received in revised form 14 November 2006; accepted 16 November 2006

---

### Abstract

Dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals cause a wide range of pathologies including carcinogenesis, immune dysfunction, and developmental/reproductive abnormalities. Most of these toxic effects are mediated by aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR; also called the dioxin receptor), a ligand-activated transcription factor. Constitutive activation of AhR via genetic manipulation causes development of cancers, inflammation and immune abnormality in mice even without exposure to xenobiotic ligands. Recent investigation disclosed that cigarette smoke contains high levels of agonists for AhR and strongly activates the dioxin signaling pathway. In this review, we describe and discuss possible roles of AhR activation in cigarette smoke-related pathologies, especially focusing on carcinogenesis, inflammation, atherosclerosis, immune dysfunction and teratogenesis.

© 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Cigarette smoke; Dioxin; Dioxin responsive element (DRE); Xenobiotic responsive element (XRE); Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR); Secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP); DRE-based sensing via SEAP (DRESSA)

---

### 1. Introduction

There is solid epidemiological evidence that cigarette smoking is related to dozens of pathological conditions [1]. It has negative effects on almost all organs of the body. The most serious health problem is malignant disease, especially lung cancer, which is one of major causes of cigarette smoke-related death. Cigarette smoking correlates to development of other cancers in the respiratory and upper digestive tracts, including oral, pharyngeal,

* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +81 55 273 8054.
E-mail address: masanori@yamanashi.ac.jp (M. Kitamura).

laryngeal, esophageal and gastric cancers, and also associates with carcinogenesis in the bladder, kidney and pancreas. Smoking is the crucial cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that includes emphysema, chronic bronchitis and asthmatic bronchitis, and thereby causative of various respiratory symptoms including cough, phlegm, wheezing and dyspnea. Vascular disease is another major problem caused by cigarette smoking. It includes angina pectoris and myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular ischemia and peripheral vascular diseases. Reproductive and developmental abnormalities are also crucial problems, and immune dysfunction and inflammation can be caused by

0304-3835/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2006.11.015

cigarette smoke. Although a lot of epidemiological, solid evidence supports the relationship between cigarette smoking and diseases, information is still limited regarding how cigarette smoke causes a variety of those disorders.

Several previous reports showed that cigarette smoke contains low levels of agonists for the dioxin receptor. However, the potential of cigarette smoke for activating the dioxin pathway had never been evaluated quantitatively. Recently, our laboratory disclosed that cigarette smoke has the extremely high potential for triggering the dioxin receptor-mediated signaling pathway that is essential for carcinogenesis, immune abnormality and teratogenesis caused by dioxins. This article summarizes and discusses possible involvement of the dioxin pathway in the toxic effects of cigarette smoke.

2. Dioxins, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and dioxin receptor-mediated signaling

Dioxins cause a broad spectrum of biochemical and toxicological effects on mammals, including carcinogenesis, teratogenesis and immune dysfunction [2]. Most of these toxic effects are mediated by the cytosolic dioxin receptor, so-called aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Once a xenobiotic ligand is recognized by AhR, the AhR-ligand complex translocates into the nucleus and forms a heterodimer with its partner coactivator, AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt). The AhR/Arnt heterodimer then binds to its recognition DNA sequence, the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) [also called the dioxin-responsive element (DRE)] [3]. AhR ligands with the highest affinity are halogenated and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) [4]. Binding of the AhR-ligand complex to XRE leads to transcriptional induction of dioxin-responsive genes such as cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) (Fig. 1). Although CYP1A1 plays a physiological role in the detoxification of polycyclic aromatic compounds, induction of this enzyme is also harmful because it generates mutagenic metabolites and reactive oxygen species (ROS) [5].

Using AhR-deficient mice, several investigators revealed that AhR is essential for most, if not all, of toxic effects of dioxins and PAHs. For example, when pregnant dams were administered with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD), almost all wild-type fetuses suffered from cleft palate and hydronephrosis. In contrast, none of AhR-null mutant fetuses were sensitive to the teratogenic effects

xenobiotics  
(dioxins, PAHs)

AhR  

nucleus  
AhR Arnt  
XRE  
CYP1A1, etc.  

Cell  

Fig. 1. Cellular responses to dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals. Xenobiotic ligands including dioxins and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are initially recognized by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor. The AhR-ligand complex translocates into the nucleus and forms a heterodimer with its partner molecule, AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt). The AhR/Arnt heterodimer then binds to its recognition DNA sequence, the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE), leading to transcriptional induction of dioxin-responsive genes such as cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1).

of 2,3,7,8-TCDD [6]. Similarly wild-type mice subjected to subcutaneous injection of benzo[a]pyrene, a widely distributed environmental PAH, developed tumors at the site of injection, whereas no tumors were observed in AhR-deficient mice [7]. The harmful roles of the AhR-mediated signaling pathway were further investigated by some researchers using transgenic mice with constitutively active AhR. Anderson et al., reported that constitutive activation of AhR reduced the life span and caused spontaneous development of gastric cancers [8]. Furthermore, those mice were susceptible to subtoxic doses of carcinogens; e.g., when the mice were treated with a single injection of the hepatocarcinogen N-nitrosodiethylamine, hepatoma was hardly observed in wild-type mice, whereas many tumors were developed in the transgenic mice [9]. These results provided evidence for the oncogenic potential of activated AhR.

Environmental exposure to PAHs has been suggested to provoke inflammatory and/or allergic disorders. Tauchi et al., generated transgenic mice expressing the active form of AhR in keratinocytes. They found that severe skin lesions with itching developed spontaneously, which was accompanied by inflammation that resembled typical atopic dermatitis [10]. The relationship between activation of
AhR and immune abnormality was also evidenced by Andersson et al., using transgenic mice systematically expressing the active form of AhR. They examined immune function in these mice and found that peritoneal population of CD5-expressing B cells (B1 cells) was significantly diminished, suggesting perturbation of the local immune function [11].

These results suggested a possibility that, once activated, the AhR signaling pathway leads to carcinogenesis, inflammation and immune dysfunction regardless of the type of xenobiotic triggers.

### 3. Activation of the AhR-mediated signaling pathway by cigarette smoke

Using gas chromatography-mass spectrometric analyses, previous investigation demonstrated that cigarette smoke contained low levels of dioxins, dioxin-like compounds and other agonists of AhR. Those chemicals include polychlorinated dibenzop-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls (Co-PCBs) and PAHs including benzo[a]pyrene [12,13]. Using a luciferase-based reporter assay, Gebremichael et al., showed that aged and diluted sidestream cigarette smoke induced CYP1A1 expression and that it was mediated by activation of AhR [14]. Dertinger et al., also reported that the AhR signaling played a significant role in mediating benzo[a]pyrene- and cigarette smoke-induced cytogenetic damage [15]. However, the total potential of cigarette smoke for activating the AhR pathway had not been determined quantitatively. Cigarette smoke contains thousands of chemicals that could have the agonistic potential for AhR. An important question is how strongly the whole cigarette smoke evokes activation of the dioxin pathway. Using a novel reporter bioassay, we attempted quantitative assessment of the potential of cigarette smoke to activate the AhR-XRE pathway [16].

#### 3.1. DRE-based sensing via secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) assay (DRESSA assay)

We recently reported a fast, sensitive and economical bioassay DRESSA that can detect and quantify the levels of dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals [17–19]. In this approach, a murine hepatoma cell line was stably transfected with a SEAP gene under the control of the XRE consensus sequences or the truncated CYP1A1 promoter that contains XREs. The established reporter cells secreted SEAP following exposure to 2,3,7,8-TCDD in a dose-dependent manner. Secretion of SEAP was also induced by other activators of AhR such as PAHs (3-methylcholanthrene, benzo[a]pyrene, β-naphthoflavone), but not by activators of other signaling pathways [17].

#### 3.2. Activation of the AhR-XRE pathway by cigarette smoke

Using the DRESSA assay, we evaluated the total dioxin-like potential of cigarette smoke for activation of the AhR-XRE pathway [16]. Cigarette smoke extract (CSE) was prepared by dissolving smoke from a 10 mg-tar cigarette in PBS, and the reporter cells were exposed to CSE. After incubation, culture media were collected and subjected to chemiluminescent assay to evaluate SEAP activity. Significant increases in the level of SEAP were observed by CSE in a dose-dependent manner. Of note, activation of XRE was also observed when the reporter cells without medium were exposed to smoke directly [16].

To confirm involvement of AhR in the activation of XRE by cigarette smoke, α-naphthoflavone, an antagonist of AhR, was used. In reporter cells, CSE induced activation of XRE comparable to 2,3,7,8-TCDD, and this induction was attenuated by α-naphthoflavone. Using engineered reporter cells constitutively expressing a dominant-negative mutant of AhR (AhRDN) and the cells transiently transfected with AhR siRNA, we further confirmed the critical involvement of AhR in CSE-triggered activation of XRE [16]. These results evidenced that, like dioxins, cigarette smoke activates XRE largely through the AhR-dependent mechanism.

#### 3.3. Quantitative assessment of the XRE activating potential (XAP) in cigarette smoke

To evaluate the total dioxin-like potential of cigarette smoke, five major cigarette brands (tar content: 1–20 mg) were selected and used for preparation of CSE. To quantify the XAP of cigarette smoke, 2,3,7,8-TCDD was used as the standard. Reporter cells were treated with serial concentrations of 2,3,7,8-TCDD or diluted CSE, and XAP values of individual smoke (total XAP in smoke generated from one cigarette) were estimated as ng 2,3,7,8-TCDD-equivalent (TEQ)/cigarette using the standard curve of 2,3,7,8-TCDD. To distinguish the biologically assessed TEQ from
M. Kitamura, A. Kasai / Cancer Letters 252 (2007) 184–194

Table 1  
Xenobiotic responsive element-activating potential (XAP) of cigarette smoke  

| Tar content (mg/cigarette) | XAP value (ng BioTEQ/cigarette ± SE) |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| 1                         | 18.5 ± 1.5                          |
| 6                         | 21.8 ± 1.5                          |
| 10                        | 39.3 ± 1.8                          |
| 14                        | 51.2 ± 2.9                          |
| 20                        | 47.8 ± 2.8                          |

Data are shown as means ± SE. BioTEQ; bioassay-based, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-equivalent.

The TEQ estimated by the gas chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis, we used a term “Bio-TEQ” to present the data based on the DRESSA bioassay. The results showed that the mean XAP values estimated were ranging approximately from 20 to 50 ng BioTEQ/cigarette (Table 1). The tolerable daily intake (TDI) of 2,3,7,8-TCDD proposed by WHO is 1–4 pg/kg/day. In a person with 60 kg body weight, therefore, the XAP generated from one cigarette is approximately 80–800 times higher than the proposed TDI for dioxins, although in vivo half-life and toxicity of AhR agonists in cigarette smoke may not be comparable to that of dioxins. We do believe that the extremely high potential of cigarette smoke for activating the AhR-XRE pathway needs to be considered seriously, like dioxins and related, hazardous environmental substances.

3.4. Activation of XRE by cigarette smoke in vivo

We found that, in vitro, cigarette smoke has unexpectedly high levels of dioxin-like potential that triggers the AhR-XRE pathway. However, under in vivo situations, cells in the respiratory tract are exposed to cigarette smoke in a different manner, and absorption and metabolism of AhR agonists in smoke may be different from those in culture cells. Our findings described above, therefore, do not directly certify that inhalation of cigarette smoke activates AhR in vivo. We therefore generated transgenic mice that produce SEAP under the control of XRE. The mice, named DRESSA mice, responded to orally administered 2,3,7,8-TCDD and exhibited high levels of serum SEAP activity. Using this transgenic line, direct effects of cigarette smoke were examined using two different protocols. In a set of experiments that mimic passive smoking, reporter mice were exposed to diluted mainstream smoke for sustained periods. In another set of experiments that mimic active smoking, DRESSA mice were subjected to brief exposure to undiluted mainstream smoke with intervals for breathing fresh air. In both experimental settings, significant increases in the level of serum SEAP were observed [16]. This result provided direct evidence that exposure to cigarette smoke triggers activation of the AhR-XRE pathway not only in vitro but also under in vivo situations. Of note, we observed that, once exposed to smoke, activation of AhR in vivo lasted for several days without additional exposures to smoke [16]. It is probable that habitual, day-to-day smoking in humans causes chronic, sustained activation of AhR.

4. Active entities in cigarette smoke

Cigarette smoke contains agonists of AhR, e.g., dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals including PCDDs, PCDFs and Co-PCBs [12,13]. However, previous assessment using gas chromatography-mass spectrometric analyses showed that the levels of individual chemicals in cigarette smoke were very low and within permissible ranges. For example, Aoyama et al., evaluated the amount of dioxins (PCDDs, PCDFs and Co-PCBs) in mainstream and sidestream smoke [20]. They reported that the total amount of dioxins in cigarette smoke was ranging from 0.4 to 2.4 pg-TEQ/cigarette. In a person with 60 kg body weight, therefore, the total intake of dioxins is estimated as 0.14–0.96 pg-TEQ/kg body weight/day by smoking 20 cigarettes. It is below the TDI proposed by WHO (1–4 pg-TEQ/kg body weight/day). The low levels of dioxins contained in cigarette smoke, therefore, cannot explain the high levels of XAP that we observed.

Another important group of AhR agonists contained in cigarette smoke is PAH. PAH is a class of environmental pollutants generated primarily from incomplete combustion of organic materials including tobacco. Ding et al. detected 14 PAHs in mainstream smoke from unfiltered cigarettes using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and measured their levels quantitatively [21]. They found that the amount of total PAHs in mainstream smoke ranged from 1 to 1.6 μg per cigarette. Individual PAHs ranged from benzo[k]fluoranthene at levels below 10 ng/cigarette to naphthalene at levels of approximately 500 ng/cigarette. However, the source of PAHs is not only mainstream smoke but also sidestream smoke. Bi et al., analyzed 9 PAHs
detected in mainstream and sidestream smoke (fluoranthene, pyrene, benzo[a]anthracene, chrysene, benzo[a]pyrene, benzo[b]fluoran-thene, benzo[k]fluoranthene, benzo[g,h,i]perylene and dibenzo[a,h]anthracene) [22]. They found that total PAH content in sidestream smoke was ten fold higher than that in mainstream smoke. These results indicated that sidestream smoke might be the main determinant of exposure to PAHs in both active and passive smokers. Of note, using a smoking environment in a real office space, Bi et al. detected 24 PAHs in the room air [23].

Cigarette smoke contains more than thousands of chemicals whose actions on the AhR–XRE pathway are largely unknown. Our results indicated that a number of chemicals with substantial XAP are present in cigarette smoke and act cooperatively as strong stimulants for XRE. PAHs may be the major constituents responsible for the activation of AhR by cigarette smoke, but contribution of other components including dioxins cannot be ignored.

### 5. Pathological implications

#### 5.1. Carcinogenesis

Cigarette smoking causes 30% of all cancer death in developed countries [24]. Lung cancer is the most common in smoking-associated cancers, and approximately 87% of lung cancer cases are caused by cigarette smoking [25]. In addition to lung cancer, cigarette smoking is an important cause of oral, oropharyngeal, hypopharyngeal, laryngeal and esophageal cancers as well as those of the pancreas, bladder and kidney. Smoking is also associated with cancers of the nose, stomach, liver, colon and cervix [26]. Among over 4000 chemicals identified in cigarette smoke, more than 60 are known as carcinogens. The most potent carcinogens are PAHs, especially benzo[a]pyrene and nitrosamine 4-(methyl-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone [27]. Previous studies have demonstrated that PAHs induce expression and production of cytochrome P450 (e.g., CYP1A1) via the AhR–XRE pathway, and the induced enzymes metabolize a range of different PAHs, including benzo[a]pyrene, towards generation of mutagenic DNA adducts [28]. This CYP-catalyzed formation of DNA adducts is regarded as a crucial mechanism in PAH-induced carcinogenesis [29]. However, as described before, constitutive activation of AhR in transgenic mice causes spontaneous development of some types of cancers [8], indicating that activation of AhR *per se* has the potential for induction of carcinogenesis without xenobiotics and subsequent generation of DNA-adducts. Furthermore, constitutive activation of AhR renders mice more susceptible to carcinogens; e.g., those mice develop tumors even after exposure to subtoxic doses of carcinogens [9]. These results indicated that the high AhR-activating potential of cigarette smoke contributes to carcinogenesis via dual mechanisms; i.e., one is via generation of carcinogenic metabolites from PAHs in smoke, and another is via sensitization of the body to low levels of carcinogens present in the environment.

#### 5.2. Inflammation and COPD

Cigarette smoking is the most important cause of COPD [30]. COPD is characterized and defined by limitation of expiratory airflow caused by loss of lung elastic recoil and fibrosis and narrowing of small airways by edema and excessive secretion. During the past decades, a number of studies have shown a clear correlation between cigarette smoking and pathogenesis of COPD. Various mechanisms have been postulated for the development of COPD, and it is generally accepted that inflammation in the lung is the critical, initial step leading to tissue destruction, and active proteases and oxidants are believed to play crucial roles. In response to tissue injury, repair mechanisms are elaborated, but the repair process may also be affected by cigarette smoke. Consequently, insufficient repair of alveolar structures results in emphysema [30,31].

Cigarette smoke is a powerful inducer of inflammatory responses [32,33]. A wide range of inflammation-associated genes contain one or more XREs or XRE-like sequences in the regulatory regions. Putative target genes of AhR are: immunoglobulin E, proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α), cytokine receptors (IL-2 receptor, IL-8 receptor, TNF receptor p75/80), chemokines (IL-8, RANTES, interferon γ receptor II), inflammatory enzymes [inducible nitric oxide synthase, cyclooxygenases 2 (COX-2), lipoygenases, microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase (mPGES)], intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and NF-kB subunits (p65 and p50) [34]. Indeed, previous reports showed that AhR agonists have the ability to induce expression of IL-1β and TNF-α [35,36], IL-2 [37], RANTES [38], ICAM-1 [39], COX-2 [40] and mPGES [40]. Furthermore, it is known thatmatrix-degrading proteinases and ROS, the crucial mediators responsible for cigarette smoke-induced tissue damage in the lung, are generated by AhR ligands [41, 42]. For example, the best known target of AhR, CYP1A1, is induced by various dioxins and PAHs and triggers generation of ROS, leading to DNA damage, lipid peroxidation and other pathological effects [43]. Of note, in transgenic mice expressing constitutively active AhR in keratinocytes exhibited spontaneous inflammation in the skin without exposure to xenobiotic ligands [10]. In these mice, increased expression of (1) cytokines, chemokines and their receptors, (2) ROS-generating enzymes including CYP1A1, and (3) mast cell proteases and matrix metalloproteinases have been observed. These data suggest that the strong activation of AhR by cigarette smoke can cause inflammation and subsequent COPD through induction of inflammatory mediators including cytokines, matrix-degrading proteinases and ROS.

### 5.3. Atherogenesis and cardiovascular diseases

Cigarette smoking accelerates atherogenesis and vasoconstriction and participates in acute vascular insults [44]. For example, cigarette smoking is associated with high incidence of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. These pathological conditions are caused by cigarette smoke through a variety of mechanisms including promotion of thrombosis, induction of oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, vascular inflammation and coronary vasoconstriction [45]. Three constituents of cigarette smoke have been mainly focused as potential contributors to vascular diseases. Those are nicotine, carbon monoxide and oxidant gases. However, recent reports also suggested potential roles of PAHs and other AhR agonists in atherogenesis [34]. For example, weekly injections of benzo[a]pyrene and 7,12 dimethyl benz[a]anthracene increased development of atherosclerotic plaques in the aortas of cockerels [46]. Although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated, several possibilities are postulated. First of foremost, the AhR agonists are strong inducers of CYP1A1 that produces ROS [5]. The generated ROS causes DNA damage, lipid peroxidation and other pathological effects [43], leading to endothelial injury and dysfunction, inflammation, lipid abnormalities (oxidation of low density lipoprotein) and platelet activation [47]. In particular, the endothelium is important in regulating vascular tone as well as influencing coagulation, leukocyte adhesion and immune function [48]. Endothelial dysfunction, therefore, results in impaired vasodilatory reserve, a prothrombotic state, increased neutrophils and monocyte adhesion to blood vessels, and promotion of inflammation. These actions serve to accelerate atherogenesis. The involvement of CYP1A1 in smoking-associated vascular diseases has also been evidenced by some etiological studies focusing on polymorphism of the CYP1A1 gene. A previous report showed that C allele of CYP1A1, which is thought to be associated with high inducibility or enhanced catalytic activity of this enzyme, was associated with an increased risk of 3-vessel coronary artery disease in smokers [49].

As described before, cigarette smoke is a powerful inducer of inflammatory responses [32, 33]. Cigarette smoking results in a chronic inflammatory state evidenced by increased circulating leukocytes, increased C-reactive protein, and increased levels of acute phase reactants such as fibrinogen [50–52]. It is known that a number of inflammation-associated genes, including chemokines and adhesion receptors for leukocytes, contain one or more XREs or XRE-like sequences in the regulatory regions, as was mentioned before. PAHs and other AhR ligands in cigarette smoke, therefore, enhance recruitment and adhesion of leukocytes to blood vessels, a crucial step in vascular inflammation and consequent atherosclerosis [53].

### 5.4. Immune dysfunction

Dioxins are known to cause dysfunction of the immune system and affect both T cell and B cell lineages [54]. For example, atrophy of the thymus is observed in various animals exposed to 2,3,7,8-TCDD [2, 55], and dioxins perturb normal activation processes within the immune system, e.g., reduced cytotoxic responses of T cells and decreased production of antibodies by B cells [56]. Exposure to dioxin and dioxin-like compounds results in susceptibility to infectious pathogens, both in experimental animals [57, 58] and in humans [59]. Similarly, cigarette smoking is a substantial risk factor for bacterial and viral infections in humans. For example, smokers incur a 2-to 4-fold increased risk of invasive pneumococcal infection. A risk of tuberculosis increases by cigarette smoking, and a risk of influenza is several fold higher and is much more severe in smokers than nonsmokers [60]. Cigarette smoking is also regarded as a possible risk factor
of autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus [61, 62]. Using transgenic mice that express constitutively active AhR, Andersson et al., provided evidence that activation of AhR causes dysfunction of immune cells, especially B cells. Mice expressing active AhR showed increased populations of mature, bone marrow-derived B cells. It is consistent with a previous report showing that dioxins caused similar effects [63]. However, they also observed that the peritoneal population of CD5-expressing B cells (B1 cells) was significantly diminished in the transgenic mice [11]. B1 cells originate from the fetal liver and the omentum, rather than the bone marrow, and forms a distinctive peripheral B cell population, mainly in the peritoneal and pleural cavities. This population is self-renewing and produces most of the antibodies found in serum. The findings described above, therefore, indicate that activation of AhR disturbs development of B1 cells and perturbs local immunity. Nohara et al., generated transgenic mice expressing a constitutively active mutant of AhR under the regulation of a T cell-specific promoter. These transgenic mice had a decreased number of thymocytes and an increased percentage of CD8 single-positive cells. Those mice exhibited attenuation of the immunization-induced increases in both T cells and B cells [64]. These data suggested that activation of AhR by cigarette smoke may cause the similar immune abnormalities. It may explain why smokers are more susceptible to infections and autoimmune disorders.

Currently, it is not fully elucidated how AhR agonists cause immune dysfunction, especially decreases in the number of lymphocytes. One possibility is aberrant apoptosis of lymphocytes following activation of AhR. Previous reports showed that AhR-driven expression of Bax caused apoptosis of the B cell lineage as well as ovarian germ cells [65, 66]. AhR-mediated induction of Bax may also be involved in premature ovarian failure and embryonic loss after exposure to PAHs [67, 68].

### 5.5. Teratogenesis

Cigarette smoking during pregnancy affects the health of both mothers and children. Those are infertility, spontaneous abortion, low birthweight, perinatal mortality, malformation, and postnatal effects including sudden infant death, respiratory disorders, susceptibility to cancer, disturbed growth and abnormal behavior [69]. In particular, malformation of infants, especially oral cleft (cleft lip and palate), is closely correlated with smoking by mothers during pregnancy [70–72]. Previous reports showed that 2,3,7,8-TCDD has the ability to induce cleft palate and that AhR is essential for its teratogenic effect. That is, when pregnant mice were administered with 2,3,7,8-TCDD, almost all wild-type fetuses suffered from cleft palate, whereas none of AhR-null mutant fetuses were sensitive to the teratogenic effects of 2,3,7,8-TCDD [6]. In addition, using transgenic reporter mice, Willey et al., showed that activation of AhR was preferentially induced in hard and soft palates of murine embryos by *in utero* exposure to 2,3,7,8-TCDD [73]. The fact that cigarette smoke has the high levels of AhR-activating potential indicates that smoking increases the incidence of oral cleft via activation of AhR. Currently, however, there is no report showing that activation of AhR alone can cause oral cleft. Activation of AhR may be required but not sufficient to induce malformation after the exposure to cigarette smoke.

## 6. Conclusions

Cigarette smoking causes a variety of pathologies including cancers, obstructive pulmonary diseases, inflammation, immune abnormality, atherosclerosis, cardiovascular/cerebrovascular diseases, and developmental/reproductive abnormalities. Of note, many of these pathologies are also caused by dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals. The fact that, like dioxins, cigarette smoke has the high potential to activate the AhR-XRE pathway suggests a possibility that the similar mechanism may underlie the health problems caused by dioxins and by cigarette smoke. Our current hypothesis has been summarized and illustrated in Fig. 2.

If the AhR-XRE pathway plays a crucial role, AhR antagonists may be useful for prevention of and therapy for smoking-related disorders. Indeed, several previous reports support this hypothesis using resveratrol, an antagonist of AhR [74]. For example, benzo[a]pyrene, a major carcinogen in cigarette smoke, is implicated in the etiology of lung cancer through the generation of benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxidation (BPDE) and BPDE-DNA adducts. Resveratrol prevents these adverse effects of benzo[a]pyrene on the lung [75]. Similarly, benzo[a]pyrene causes BPDE-DNA adduct formation and apoptosis in sperms, and the toxic effect is attenuated by resveratrol [76]. Alveolar macrophages isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid

mutagens in cigarette smoke may contribute to carcinogenesis directly without conversion to toxic metabolites via the AhR–XRE pathway. Obviously, activation of the AhR pathway is not the only mechanism of cigarette smoke toxicity, and elucidation of additive or synergistic cooperation between the dioxin pathway and other toxic pathways should await further investigation. Investigation will be required especially to elucidate exact roles of the AhR–XRE pathway in the development of individual, cigarette smoke-related pathologies and to determine therapeutic usefulness and limitations of AhR antagonists.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by a grant from the Smoking Research Foundation and by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (No. 1639243 and 17651026 to M.K.).

References

[1] S.K. Das, Harmful health effects of cigarette smoking, Mol. Cell. Biochem. 253 (2003) 159–165.

[2] A. Poland, J.C. Knutson, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons: examination of the mechanism of toxicity, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 22 (1982) 517–554.

[3] J. Mimura, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, Functional role of AhR in the expression of toxic effects by 2,3,7,8-TCDD, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1619 (2003) 263–268.

[4] M.S. Denison, A. Pandini, S.R. Nagy, E.P. Baldwin, L. Bonati, Ligand binding and activation of the Ah receptor, Chem. Biol. Interact. 141 (2002) 3–24.

[5] D.W. Nebert, A.L. Roe, M.Z. Dieter, W.A. Solis, Y. Yang, T.P. Dalton, Role of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor and [Ah] gene battery in the oxidative stress response, cell cycle control, and apoptosis, Biochem. Pharmacol. 59 (2000) 65–85.

[6] J. Mimura, K. Yamashita, K. Nakamura, M. Morita, T.N. Takagi, K. Nakao, M. Ema, K. Sogawa, M. Yasuda, M. Katsuki, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, Loss of teratogenic response to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in mice lacking the Ah (dioxin) receptor, Genes Cells 2 (1997) 645–1654.

[7] Y. Shimizu, Y. Nakatsuru, M. Ichinose, Y. Takahashi, H. Kume, J. Mimura, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, T. Ishikawa, Benzo[a]pyrene carcinogenicity is lost in mice lacking the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (2000) 779–782.

[8] P. Andersson, J. McGuire, C. Rubio, K. Gradin, M.L. Whitelaw, S. Pettersson, A. Hanberg, L. Poellinger, A constitutively active dioxin/aryl hydrocarbon receptor induces stomach tumors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 9990–9995.

[9] O. Moennikes, S. Loeppen, A. Buchmann, P. Andersson, C. Ittrich, L. Poellinger, M. Schwarz, A constitutively active dioxin/aryl hydrocarbon receptor promotes hepatocarcino- genesis in mice, Cancer Res. 64 (2004) 4410–4707.

[10] M. Tauchi, A. Hida, T. Negishi, F. Katsuoka, S. Noda, J. Mimura, T. Hosoya, A. Yanaka, H. Aburatani, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, H. Motohashi, M. Yamamoto, Constitutive expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor in keratinocytes causes inflammatory skin lesions, Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 (2005) 9360–9368.

[11] P. Andersson, A. Ridderstad, J. McGuire, S. Pettersson, L. Poellinger, A. Hanberg, A constitutively active aryl hydrocarbon receptor causes loss of peritoneal B1 cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 302 (2003) 336–341.

[12] H. Muto, Y. Takizawa, Dioxin in cigarette smoke, Arch. Environ. Health 44 (1989) 171–174.

[13] G. Lofroth, Y. Zebuhr, Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in mainstream and sidestream cigarette smoke, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 48 (1992) 789–794.

[14] A. Gebremichael, K. Tullis, M.S. Denison, J.M. Cheek, J.S. Birnbaum, J. Tuomisto, Ah-receptor-dependent modulation of gene expression by aged and diluted sidestream cigarette smoke, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 141 (1996) 76–83.

[15] S.D. Dertinger, D.A. Nazarenko, A.E. Silverstone, T.A. Gasiewicz, Aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling plays a significant role in mediating benzo[a]pyrene- and cigarette smoke condensate-induced cytogenetic damage *in vivo*, Carcinogenesis 22 (2001) 171–177.

[16] A. Kasai, N. Hiramatsu, K. Hayakawa, J. Yao, S. Maeda, M. Kitamura, High levels of dioxin-like potential in cigarette smoke evidenced by *in vitro* and *in vivo* biosensing, Cancer Res. 66 (2006) 7143–7150.

[17] A. Kasai, N. Hiramatsu, Y. Meng, J. Yao, M. Takeda, S. Maeda, M. Kitamura, DRESSA: biosensing of dioxin and dioxin-like chemicals using secreted alkaline phosphatase, Anal. Biochem. 335 (2004) 73–80.

[18] A. Kasai, N. Hiramatsu, Y. Meng, J. Yao, S. Maeda, M. Kitamura, Fast-track DRESSA: a bioassay for fast, sensitive, and selective detection of halogenated and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Anal. Biochem. 337 (2005) 84–88.

[19] A. Kasai, J. Yao, K. Yamauchi, N. Hiramatsu, K. Hayakawa, Y. Meng, S. Maeda, M. Kitamura, Influence of cAMP on reporter bioassay for dioxin and dioxin-like compound, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 211 (2006) 11–19.

[20] T. Aoyama, K. Ikeda, A. Takatori, T. Obal, Risk assessment of dioxins in cigarette smoke, Organohalogen Compd. 65 (2003) 321–324.

[21] Y.S. Ding, J.S. Trommel, X.J. Yan, D. Ashley, C.H. Watson, Determination of 14 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in mainstream smoke from domestic cigarettes, Environ. Sci. Technol. 39 (2005) 471–478.

[22] M. Lodovici, V. Akpan, C. Evangelisti, P. Dolara, Sidestream tobacco smoke as the main predictor of exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, J. Appl. Toxicol. 24 (2004) 277–281.

[23] X. Bi, G. Sheng, Y. Feng, J. Fu, J. Xie, Gas- and particulate-phase specific tracer and toxic organic compounds in environmental tobacco smoke, Chemosphere 61 (2005) 1512–1522.

[24] WHO. Tobacco or health: a global status report. Geneva: WHO, (1997) 10–48.

[25] American Cancer Society. Tobacco use. In: American Cancer Society, (Ed). Cancer Facts and Figures 2001. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society, 2001: 29–32.

[26] R. Doll, Cancers weakly related to smoking, Br. Med. J. 52 (1996) 35–49.

[27] S.S. Hecht, Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 91 (1999) 1194–1210.

[28] T. Shimada, M.V. Martin, D. Pruess-Schwarz, L. Marnett, F.P. Guengerich, Roles of individual human cytochrome P-450 enzymes in the bioactivation of benzo[a]pyrene, 7,8-dihydroxy-7,8-dihydrobenzo[a]pyrene, and other dihydrodiol derivatives of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Cancer Res. 49 (1989) 6304–6312.

[29] J.T. Buters, B. Mahadevan, L. Quintanilla-Martinez, F.J. Gonzalez, H. Greim, W.M. Baird, A. Luch, Cytochrome P450 1B1 determines susceptibility to dibenzo[a,l]pyrene-induced tumor formation, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 15 (2002) 1127–1135.

[30] S.I. Rennard, Overview of causes of COPD. New understanding of pathogenesis and mechanisms can guide future therapy, Postgrad. Med. 111 (2002) 28–30, 33–34, 37–38.

[31] R.M. Tuder, T. Yoshida, W. Arap, R. Pasqualini, I. Petrache, State of the art. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of alveolar destruction in emphysema: an evolutionary perspective, Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 3 (2006) 503–510.

[32] B. Friedrichs, E. Miert, P. Vanscheewijck, Lung inflammation in rats following subchronic exposure to cigarette mainstream smoke, Exp. Lung Res. 32 (2006) 151–179.

[33] J.G. Wright, J.W. Christman, The role of nuclear factor kappa B in the pathogenesis of pulmonary diseases: implications for therapy, Am. J. Respir. Med. 2 (2003) 211–219.

[34] J.F. Savouret, A. Berdeaux, R.F. Casper, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its xenobiotic ligands: a fundamental trigger for cardiovascular disease, Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 13 (2003) 104–113.

[35] F. Fan, B. Yan, G. Wood, M. Viluksela, K.K. Rozman, Cytokines (IL-1β and TNF-α) in relation to biochemical and immunological effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in rats, Toxicology 116 (1997) 9–16.

[36] A. Tamaki, H. Hayashi, H. Nakajima, T. Takii, D. Katagiri, K. Miyazawa, K. Hirose, K. Onozaki, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon increases mRNA level for interleukin-1β in human fibroblast-like synoviocyte line via aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Biol. Pharm. Bull. 27 (2004) 407–410.

[37] M.S. Jeon, C. Esser, The murine IL-2 promoter contains distal regulatory elements responsive to the Ah receptor, a member of the evolutionarily conserved bHLH-PAS transcription factor family, J. Immunol. 165 (2000) 6975–6983.

[38] D. Zhao, E.A. Pritts, V.A. Chao, J.F. Savouret, R.N. Taylor, Dioxin stimulates RANTES expression in an *in-vitro* model of endometriosis, Mol. Hum. Reprod. 8 (2002) 849–854.

[39] B.A. Vorderstrasse, N.I. Kerkvliet, 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin affects the number and function of murine splenic dendritic cells and their expression of accessory molecules, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 171 (2001) 117–125.

[40] C.A. Martey, C.J. Baglole, T.A. Gasiewicz, P.J. Sime, R.P. Phipps, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a regulator of

cigarette smoke induction of the cyclooxygenase and prostaglandin pathways in human lung fibroblasts, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 289 (2005) L391–L399.

[41] C.M. Villano, K.A. Murphy, A. Akintobi, L.A. White, 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and invasion in A2058 melanoma cells, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 210 (2006) 212–224.

[42] R.H. Elbekai, H.M. Korashy, K. Wills, N. Gharavi, A.O. El-Kadi, Benzo[a]pyrene, 3-methylcholanthrene and β-naphthoflavone induce oxidative stress in hepatoma Hepa-1clc7 cells by an AhR-dependent pathway, Free Radic. Res. 38 (2004) 1191–1200.

[43] J.Y. Park, M.K. Shigenaga, B.N. Ames, Induction of cytochrome P4501A1 by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin or indolo(3,2-b)carbazole is associated with oxidative DNA damage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 2322–2327.

[44] D.M. Burns, Epidemiology of smoking-induced cardiovascular disease, Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 46 (2003) 11–29.

[45] N.L. Benowitz, Cigarette smoking and cardiovascular disease: pathophysiology and implications for treatment, Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 46 (2003) 91–111.

[46] A. Penn, C. Snyder, Arteriosclerotic plaque development is ‘promoted’ by polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, Carcinogenesis 9 (1988) 2185–2189.

[47] A. Burke, G.A. FitzGerald, Oxidative stress and smoking-induced tissue injury, Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 46 (2003) 79–90.

[48] R. Puranik, D.S. Celermajer, Smoking and endothelial function, Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 45 (2003) 443–458.

[49] X.L. Wang, M. Greco, A.S. Sim, N. Duarte, J. Wang, D.E. Wilcken, Effect of CYP1A1MspI polymorphism on cigarette smoking related coronary artery disease and diabetes, Atherosclerosis 162 (2002) 391–397.

[50] E.J. Jensen, B. Pedersen, R. Frederiksen, R. Dahl, Prospective study on the effect of smoking and nicotine substitution on leucocyte blood counts and relation between blood leucocytes and lung function, Thorax 53 (1998) 784–789.

[51] R.P. Tracy, B.M. Psaty, E. Macy, E.G. Bovill, M. Cushman, E.S. Cornell, L.H. Kuller, Lifetime smoking exposure affects the association of C-reactive protein with cardiovascular disease risk factors and subclinical disease in healthy elderly subjects, Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17 (1997) 2167–2176.

[52] M. Tuut, H.-W. Hense, Smoking other risk factors and fibrinogen levels: evidence of effect modification, Ann. Epidemiol. 11 (2001) 232–238.

[53] H.A. Lehr, B. Frei, K.E. Arfors, Vitamin C prevents cigarette smoke-induced leukocyte aggregation and adhesion to endothelium *in vivo*, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91 (1994) 7688–7692.

[54] N.I. Kerkvliet, Immunological effects of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, Environ. Health Perspect. 103 (Suppl. 9) (1995) 47–53.

[55] R. Pohjanvirta, J. Tuomisto, Short-term toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in laboratory animals: effects, mechanisms, and animal models, Pharmacol. Rev. 46 (1994) 483–549.

[56] M.P. Holsapple, N.K. Snyder, S.C. Wood, D.L. Morris, A review of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced changes in immunocompetence: 1991 update, Toxicology 69 (1991) 219–255.

[57] G.R. Burleson, H. Lebrec, Y.G. Yang, J.D. Ibanes, K.N. Pennington, L.S. Birnbaum, Effect of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) on influenza virus host resistance in mice, Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 29 (1996) 40–47.

[58] R.W. Luebke, C.B. Copeland, J.J. Dilberto, P.I. Akubue, D.L. Andrews, M.M. Riddle, W.C. Williams, L.S. Birnbaum, Assessment of host resistance to *Trichinella spiralis* in mice following preinfection exposure to 2,3,7,8-TCDD, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 125 (1994) 7–16.

[59] N. Weisglas-Kuperus, S. Patandin, G.A. Berbers, T.C. Sas, P.G. Mulder, P.J. Sauer, H. Hooijkaas, Immunologic effects of background exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dioxins in dutch preschool children, Environ. Health Perspect. 108 (2000) 1203–1207.

[60] L. Arcavi, N.L. Benowitz, Cigarette smoking and infection, Arch. Intern. Med. 164 (2004) 2016–2206.

[61] K.H. Costenbader, E.W. Karlson, Cigarette smoking and systemic lupus erythematosus: a smoking gun?, Autoimmunity 38 (2005) 541–547

[62] K. Aho, M. Heliovaara, Risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis, Ann. Med. 36 (2004) 242–251.

[63] T.S. Thurmond, T.A. Gasiewicz, A single dose of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin produces a time- and dose-dependent alteration in the murine bone marrow B-lymphocyte maturation profile, Toxicol. Sci. 58 (2000) 88–95.

[64] K. Nohara, X. Pan, S. Tsukumo, A. Hida, T. Ito, H. Nagai, Constitutively active aryl hydrocarbon receptor expressed specifically in T-lineage cells causes thymus involution and suppresses the immunization-induced increase in splenocytes, J. Immunol. 174 (2005) 2770–2777.

[65] K. Yamaguchi, R.I. Near, R.A. Matulka, A. Schneider, P. Toselli, A.F. Trombino, D.H. Sherr, Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor/transcription factor and bone marrow stromal cell-dependent preB cell apoptosis, J. Immunol. 158 (1997) 2165–2173.

[66] T.M. Matikainen, T. Moriyama, Y. Morita, G.I. Perez, S.J. Korsmeyer, D.H. Sherr, J.L. Tilly, Ligand activation of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor transcription factor drives Bax-dependent apoptosis in developing fetal ovarian germ cells, Endocrinology 143 (2002) 615–620.

[67] T. Matikainen, G.I. Perez, A. Jurisicova, J.K. Pru, J.J. Schlezinger, H.Y. Ryu, J. Laine, T. Sakai, S.J. Korsmeyer, R.F. Casper, D.H. Sherr, J.L. Tilly, Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor-driven Bax gene expression is required for premature ovarian failure caused by biohazardous environmental chemicals, Nat. Genet. 28 (2001) 355–360.

[68] J. Detmar, T. Rabaglino, Y. Taniuchi, J. Oh, B.M. Acton, A. Benito, G. Nunez, A. Jurisicova, Embryonic loss due to exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons is mediated by Bax, Apoptosis 11 (2006) 1413–1425.

[69] E.L. Abel, Smoking and pregnancy, J. Psychoactive Drugs 16 (1984) 327–338.

[70] A. Ericson, B. Kallen, P. Westerholm, Cigarette smoking as an etiologic factor in cleft lip and palate, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 135 (1979) 348–351.

[71] M.J. Khoury, A. Weinstein, S. Panny, N.A. Holtzman, P.K. Lindsay, K. Farrel, M. Eisenberg, Maternal cigarette smoking and oral clefts: a population-based study, Am. J. Public Health 77 (1987) 623–625.

[72] S. Lieff, A.F. Olshan, M. Werler, R.P. Strauss, J. Smith, A. Mitchell, Maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy and risk of oral clefts in newborns, Am. J. Epidemiol. 150 (1999) 683–694.

[73] J.J. Willey, B.R. Stripp, R.B. Baggs, T.A. Gasiewicz, Aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation in genital tubercle, palate, and other embryonic tissues in 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-responsive lacZ mice, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 151 (1998) 33–44.

[74] H.P. Ciolino, P.J. Daschner, G.C. Yeh, Resveratrol inhibits transcription of CYP1A1 *in vitro* by preventing activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 5707–5712.

[75] A. Revel, H. Raanan, E. Younglai, J. Xu, I. Rogers, R. Han, J.F. Savouret, R.F. Casper, Resveratrol, a natural aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonist, protects lung from DNA damage and apoptosis caused by benzo[a]pyrene, J. Appl. Toxicol. 23 (2003) 255–261.

[76] A. Revel, H. Raanan, E. Younglai, J. Xu, R. Han, I. Rogers, R. Han, J.F. Savouret, R.F. Casper,

Resveratrol, a natural aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonist, protects sperm from DNA damage and apoptosis caused by benzo[a]pyrene, Reprod. Toxicol. 15 (2001) 479–486.

[77] S.V. Culpitt, D.F. Rogers, P.S. Fenwick, P. Shah, C. De Matos, R.E. Russell, P.J. Barnes, L.E. Donnelly, Inhibition by red wine extract, resveratrol, of cytokine release by alveolar macrophages in COPD, Thorax 58 (2003) 942–946.

[78] S.U. Singh, R.F. Casper, P.C. Fritz, B. Sukhu, B. Ganss, B. Girard Jr., J.F. Savouret, H.C. Tenenbaum, Inhibition of dioxin effects on bone formation *in vitro* by a newly described aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonist, resveratrol, J. Endocrinol. 167 (2000) 183–195.

[79] V. Andreou, M. D'Addario, R. Zohar, B. Sukhu, R.F. Casper, R.P. Ellen, H.C. Tenenbaum, Inhibition of osteogenesis *in vitro* by a cigarette smoke-associated hydrocarbon combined with *Porphyromonas gingivalis* lipopolysaccharide: reversal by resveratrol, J. Periodontol. 75 (2004) 939–948.
