
# Integrating cell-signalling pathways with NF-κB and IKK function

**Neil D. Perkins**

Abstract | Nuclear factor (NF)-κB and inhibitor of NF-κB kinase (IKK) proteins regulate many physiological processes, including the innate- and adaptive-immune responses, cell death and inflammation. Disruption of NF-κB or IKK function contributes to many human diseases, including cancer. However, the NF-κB and IKK pathways do not exist in isolation and there are many mechanisms that integrate their activity with other cell-signalling networks. This crosstalk constitutes a decision-making process that determines the consequences of NF-κB and IKK activation and, ultimately, cell fate.

Nuclear factor (NF)-κB transcription factors can both induce and repress gene expression by binding to discrete DNA sequences, known as κB elements, in promoters and enhancers¹. In mammalian cells, there are five NF-κB family members, RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50/p105 (NF-κB1) and p52/p100 (NF-κB2) (FIG. 1), and different NF-κB complexes are formed from their homo- and heterodimers. In most cell types, NF-κB complexes are retained in the cytoplasm by a family of inhibitory proteins known as inhibitors of NF-κB (IκBs) (FIG. 1). Activation of NF-κB typically involves the phosphorylation of IκB by the IκB kinase (IKK) complex, which results in IκB degradation. This releases NF-κB and allows it to translocate freely to the nucleus¹ (BOX 1).

The genes regulated by NF-κB include those controlling programmed cell death (apoptosis), cell adhesion, proliferation, the innate- and adaptive-immune responses, inflammation, the cellular-stress response and tissue remodelling¹⁻⁵. However, the expression of these genes is tightly coordinated with the activity of many other signalling and transcription-factor pathways. Therefore, the outcome of NF-κB activation depends on the nature and the cellular context of its induction. For example, it has become apparent that NF-κB activity can be regulated by both oncogenes and tumour suppressors, resulting in either stimulation or inhibition of apoptosis and proliferation⁶. Alternatively, NF-κB regulation of the Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-signalling pathway can have opposing results that depend on the cell type (discussed below). This review discusses the mechanisms that link the NF-κB pathway to other cell-signalling pathways and asks why integration of NF-κB function is required for the specific regulation of its target genes. Defects in these mechanisms can lead to inappropriate NF-κB or IKK activity and can contribute to the pathology of inflammatory diseases and cancers. The development of NF-κB and IKK inhibitors for the treatment of inflammatory diseases and cancers, together with the observation that many drugs currently in clinical use have significant effects on NF-κB activity, means that understanding the pathways that regulate NF-κB function will have many diagnostic and prognostic applications⁶⁻⁹.

## NF-κB complexes

All NF-κB family members contain an N-terminal domain of approximately 300 amino acids called the Rel-homology domain (RHD), which mediates DNA binding and dimerization. Furthermore, Rel subfamily members, RelA, RelB and c-Rel, all contain unrelated C-terminal transcriptional activation domains (FIG. 1). Despite obvious structural similarities and their ability to bind related DNA sequences, genetic studies have shown that all NF-κB subunits have distinct and non-overlapping functions³,¹⁰. In most unstimulated, non-diseased mammalian cells, Rel subunits are found predominantly in the cytoplasm bound to a member of the IκB family of inhibitory proteins¹. In mammalian cells, there are three principal IκBs, IκBα, IκBβ and IκBε, which function in part by masking a conserved nuclear localization sequence (NLS) that is found in the RHD of the NF-κB subunits. For IκBα, this NLS masking is only partially effective and NF-κB–IκBα complexes shuttle into the nucleus even in the absence of cellular stimulation¹. However, IκBα also contains a nuclear export sequence (NES), which causes the rapid export of such complexes back to the cytoplasm¹.

Both p50 and p52 are synthesized as longer precursor proteins, p105 and p100, that contain ankyrin-repeat motifs in their C termini, similar to those found in IκB proteins (FIG. 1). p100 and p105 also function as IκB-like

---

**College of Life Sciences, Division of Gene Regulation and Expression, James Black Centre, Dow Street, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.**

e-mail: n.d.perkins@dundee.ac.uk

doi:10.1038/nrm2083

**NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY**

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEW S

a The NF-κB family

| RelA (p65) | 1 | RHD | TA2 | TA1 | 551 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | 301 | 428 | 521 |  |

| RelB | 1 | LZ | RHD | TAD | 557 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | 410 |  |  |

| c-Rel | 1 | RHD | TA1 | TA2 | 587 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 8 | 290 | 422 | 497 | 518 |

| p105 (p50) | 1 | RHD | ANK | DD | 969 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 43 | 363 | 543 | 751 818 893 |  |

| p100 (p52) | 1 | RHD | ANK | DD | 900 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 38 | 338 | 487 | 699 851 | 776 |

b The IκB family

| IκBα | 1 | ANK | PEST | 317 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 73 | 256 | 264 |  |

| IκBβ | 1 | ANK | PEST | 361 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 57 | 298 | 307 |  |

| IκBε | 1 | ANK |  | 500 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 258 | 473 |  |  |

| BCL-3 | 1 | ANK |  | 446 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 126 | 351 |  |  |

c The IKK family

| NEMO (IKKγ) | 1 | CC1 | CC2 | LZ | ZF | 419 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 63 | 193 | 258 | 319 346 | 397 | 417 |

| IKKα | 1 | Kinase domain | LZ | HLH | NBD | 745 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 15 | 301 | 455 483 | 599 638 738 743 |  |  |

| IKKβ | 1 | Kinase domain | LZ | HLH | NBD | 756 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 15 | 300 | 458 486 | 603 642 737 742 |  |  |

Figure 1 | The mammalian members of the NF-κB, IκB and IKK families.

a | In mammalian cells, there are five nuclear factor (NF)-κB family members, RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50/p105 (NF-κB1) and p52/p100 (NF-κB2). p50 and p52 (not shown) are derived from the longer precursor proteins p105 and p100, respectively. All NF-κB family members contain an N-terminal Rel-homology domain (RHD) that mediates DNA binding and dimerization and contains the nuclear-localization domain. The Rel subfamily, RelA, RelB and c-Rel, contain unrelated C-terminal transcriptional activation domains (TADs). TA1 and TA2 are subdomains of the RelA transactivation domain.
b | The inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) family consists of IκBα, IκBβ, IκBε and BCL-3. Like p105 and p100, the IκB proteins contain ankyrin-repeat motifs (ANK) in their C termini.
c | The three core subunits of the IκB kinase (IKK) complex are shown: the catalytic subunits IKKα and IKKβ and the regulatory subunit called the NF-κB essential modifier (NEMO, also known as IKKγ). The principal structural motifs of each protein are shown, together with amino-acid numbers corresponding to the human proteins, although some definitions of where a domain begins and ends might differ between publications. CC, coiled-coil; DD, region with homology to a death domain; HLH, helix–loop–helix; LZ, RelB-transactivation-domain containing a putative leucine-zipper-like motif; NBD, NEMO-binding domain; PEST, domain rich in proline (P), glutamate (E), serine (S) and threonine (T); ZF, zinc-finger domain.

and p52 can function as nuclear transcription factors. Both p50 and p52 homodimers can interact with another IκB family member, BCL-3, which, unlike the other IκBs, is nuclear and functions as a transcriptional co-activator¹.

Homodimers composed of the p50 and p52 NF-κB subunits evade regulation by IκBs and, consequently, are often found constitutively in the nucleus. However, when p50 and p52 form heterodimers with the Rel subunits, these subunits are also subject to cytoplasmic retention by IκBs¹. The exception to this is the p52–RelB complex, which has a low affinity for IκBα and can therefore evade this mechanism of regulation¹¹.

There are several distinct NF-κB-activation pathways. The most frequently observed is the canonical, or classical, pathway (BOX 1), which is induced in response to various inflammatory stimuli, including the pro-inflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and interleukin-1 (IL-1), engagement of the T-cell receptor (TCR) or exposure to bacterial products such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS)¹. This pathway is typified by the rapid phosphorylation of IκBα at Ser32 and Ser36 and subsequent ubiquitin-induced degradation by the 26S proteasome¹. In many cell types, IκBβ and IκBε are also subject to phosphorylation and degradation, but with slower kinetics¹,¹².

In the canonical pathway, IκB phosphorylation is due to IKK-complex activation¹. The IKK complex consists of three core subunits, the catalytic subunits IKKα and IKKβ (also known as IKK1 and IKK2) and several copies of a regulatory subunit called the NF-κB essential modifier (NEMO, also known as IKKγ)¹. Genetic experiments have shown that IKKβ is the predominant IκB kinase in the canonical pathway²,⁴.

A subset of NF-κB-induction stimuli, such as stimulation of the CD40 and lymphotoxin-β receptors, B-cell-activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF), LPS and latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1) of Epstein–Barr virus, activate the non-canonical, or alternative, pathway²,¹³. Here, activation of IKKα by the NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) results in the formation of p52 from p100, as a consequence of phosphorylation-induced, ubiquitin-dependent processing of p100 by the 26S proteasome²,¹². p52–RelB heterodimers, which are frequently activated as a consequence of non-canonical pathway activation, have a higher affinity for distinct κB elements and might therefore regulate a distinct subset of NF-κB target genes (BOX 1). It has been suggested that the non-canonical pathway is regulated by IKKα homodimers that function independently of the larger IKK complex². The non-canonical pathway does not lead to the formation of p50 from p105 and, in many cells, high levels of p50 are created in the absence of cell stimulation by a co-translational mechanism. In this co-translational mechanism, p50 is generated during mRNA translation as a consequence of proteolysis of the nascent p105 polypeptide by the 26S proteasome¹⁴, although other mechanisms of p50 generation have also been proposed¹⁵,¹⁶. However, IKKβ-inducible and ubiquitin-dependent total degradation of p105, without p50 generation, can also occur¹⁵.

proteins and retain their NF-κB-subunit dimeric partners in the cytoplasm, inhibiting their activity¹. Processing of p100 and p105 can occur through several mechanisms (discussed below) and is required before p50

Box 1 | Pathways leading to the activation of NF-κB

Atypical pathway  
(IKK independent)  

Hypoxia, H₂O₂  

Tyr kinase  

CK2  

UV, HER2/Neu  

Canonical  
pathway  
(TNFα, IL-1, LPS)  

NEMO  

IKKα IKKβ  

Activation of  
IKK complex  

Atypical pathway  
(genotoxic stress,  
IKK dependent)  

NEMO  

ATM  

NEMO  

SUMO  

ATM  

Degradation or  
dissociation of IκB  

(Ser32)  

(Ser36)  

Ubiquitylation  
and proteosomal  
degradation of IκB  

p50  

IκBα  

RelA  

p50  

IκBα  

RelA  

p50  

RelA  

Cytoplasm  

Degradation  
of IκB  

p50  

RelA  

p50  

RelA  

Non-canonical pathway  
(LPS, CD40 and lymphotoxin  
receptors, LMP1)  

NIK  

IKKα IKKβ  

RelB  

p100  

ANK  

RelB  

(Ser866)  
(Ser870)  

Ubiquitylation  
and proteasomal  
processing of p100  

RelB  

TAD  

p52  

RelB  

RHD  

Zn-finger TFs  

Co-activator  

P  

P  

p50  

RelA  

Ac  

Ac  

Transcriptional  
activation  

Co-repressor  

P  

P  

p50  

RelA  

Transcriptional  
repression  

HMG-I  

bZIP  

bZIP  

P  

p50  

RelA  

TF  

Promoter targeting  
and selectivity  

Distinct κB elements  

p52  

RelB  

The canonical pathway is induced by tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα), interleukin-1 (IL-1) and many other stimuli, and is  
dependent on activation of IKKβ. This activation results in the phosphorylation (P) of IκBα at Ser32 and Ser36, leading to its  
ubiquitylation (Ub) and subsequent degradation by the 26S proteasome. Release of the NF-κB complex allows it to relocate to  
the nucleus. Under some circumstances, the NF-κB–IκBα complex shuttles between the cytoplasm and the nucleus (not  
shown). IKK-dependent activation of NF-κB can occur following genotoxic stress. Here, NF-κB essential modifier (NEMO)  
localizes to the nucleus, where it is sumoylated and then ubiquitylated, in a process that is dependent on the ataxia  
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) checkpoint kinase. NEMO relocates back to the cytoplasm together with ATM, where activation  
of IKKβ occurs. IKK-independent atypical pathways of NF-κB activation have also been described, which include casein  
kinase-II (CK2) and tyrosine-kinase-dependent pathways. The non-canonical pathway results in the activation of IKKα by the  
NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK), followed by phosphorylation of the p100 NF-κB subunit by IKKα. This results in proteasome-  
dependent processing of p100 to p52, which can lead to the activation of p52–RelB heterodimers that target distinct  
κB elements. Phosphorylation of NF-κB subunits by nuclear kinases, and modification of these subunits by acetylases and  
phosphatases, can result in transcriptional activation and repression as well as promoter-specific effects. Moreover,  
cooperative interactions with heterologous transcription factors can target NF-κB complexes to specific promoters, resulting  
in the selective activation of gene expression following cellular exposure to distinct stimuli. Ac, acetylation; bZIP, leucine-  
zipper-containing transcription factor; HMG-I, high-mobility-group protein-I; IκB, inhibitor of κB; IKK, IκB kinase;  
LMP1, latent membrane protein-1; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; RHD, Rel-homology domain;  
TAD, transcriptional activation domain; TF, transcription factor; UV, ultraviolet; Zn-finger TF, zinc-finger-containing  
transcription factor. This figure is modified with permission from REF. 6 © (2006) Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

Co-activators and  
co-repressors  

Transcriptional regulatory  
proteins that are typically  
recruited to promoters and  
enhancers by interacting with  
DNA-bound transcription  
factors. Co-activators stimulate  
transcription whereas  
co-repressors do the opposite.  
Co-activators are frequently  
histone acetyltransferases  
whereas co-repressors are  
often histone deacetylases.

REVIEW S

### IKK-complex activation

Numerous NF-κB-activating stimuli, which frequently engage distinct cell-surface receptors and/or cytoplasmic signalling pathways, converge on the IKK complex and induce the canonical pathway ${ }^{1,12,17-19}$. The key to activation of the IKK complex is the regulatory subunit NEMO. Activation of the canonical pathway results in complex, Lys63-linked ubiquitylation of signalling molecules, ultimately resulting in Lys63-linked ubiquitylation of NEMO (discussed in more detail in REFS 12, 18–20). In contrast to Lys48-linked ubiquitylation, which results in protein degradation by the 26S proteasome, Lys63-linked ubiquitylation has a role in signalling by facilitating interactions with proteins that contain ubiquitin-binding domains ${ }^{12,18-20}$. Ubiquitylation of NEMO allows the recruitment of kinases — such as transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)-activated kinase-1 (TAK1), which phosphorylates IKKβ in its activation loop at Ser177 and Ser181 — to the IKK complex ${ }^{12,18-20}$. However, a mouse knockout of the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13, which selectively stimulates Lys63-linked ubiquitylation, has cast doubt on whether ubiquitylation of NEMO is required for NF-κB activation under all circumstances. Instead, this study indicated that NEMO ubiquitylation might be required for the activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP)-kinase signalling ${ }^{21}$ (see below).

Other mechanisms of canonical pathway activation — for example, by genotoxic stimuli, such as ionizing radiation, or by some chemotherapeutic drugs — also result in NEMO-dependent IKKβ activation ${ }^{22}$. Here, in some contexts, NEMO first translocates to the nucleus, where it is sumoylated and then phosphorylated by the checkpoint kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) ${ }^{23}$ (BOX 1). NEMO sumoylation is then replaced by mono-ubiquitylation, leading to the nuclear export of NEMO as a complex with ATM. The NEMO–ATM complex subsequently activates the IKK complex in a process that requires the IKK-associated protein ELKS ${ }^{23}$ (a protein that is rich in glutamate (E), leucine (L), lysine (K) and serine (S)). Whether this pathway is activated in response to all genotoxic stresses, in all cell types, is currently unclear. Nonetheless, this serves as an illustration of how IKK activity and, consequently, induction of NF-κB DNA binding, can be integrated with parallel signalling pathways.

#### Checkpoint kinases

The checkpoint kinases ATM and ATR are differentially activated in response to distinct forms of genotoxic stress. Generally, ATR and ATM activate the downstream checkpoint kinases CHK1 and CHK2, respectively. Together these kinases help orchestrate the cellular response to DNA damage.

#### 14-3-3 proteins

A large eukaryotic class of proteins that are involved in cell division, apoptosis, signal transduction, transmitter release, receptor function, gene expression and enzyme activation. They function by binding to various different, specific target proteins, usually in response to phosphorylation of these targets.

#### Type-2 diabetes

Diabetes that results from insulin resistance or from reduced production of insulin.

IKK-independent pathways have the potential to induce differentially modified forms of NF-κB subunits with distinct functions.

### NF-κB-independent effects of the IKKs

IKK activation does more than merely induce IκB degradation and the release of NF-κB. IKK subunits also programme the cellular response to the initial activating stimulus (FIGS 2,3). In part, this can occur through post-translational modification of NF-κB subunits, such as RelA, which helps to define which genes are induced or repressed by the NF-κB complexes ${ }^{6,12}$. However, several NF-κB- and IκB-independent targets of IKKα and IKKβ are now being identified, which reveals that activation of the IKKs could result in more widespread effects on cell signalling than previously realized. Many of these NF-κB-independent functions of IKKs have only been recently discovered, and these putative roles for IKKs therefore require further confirmation. Nonetheless, there is a clear trend towards recognizing a more promiscuous role for IKKs, and it is likely that many more substrates have yet to be discovered.

#### The consequences of IKKβ activation

Activation of IKKβ stimulates anti-apoptotic, pro-inflammatory and proliferative pathways ${ }^{24,25}$ (FIG. 2), although pro-apoptotic functions have also been described ${ }^{26,27}$.

Consistent with its anti-apoptotic role, IKKβ has been shown to phosphorylate and inhibit FOXO3a, a transcription factor and tumour suppressor that can induce either apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest ${ }^{28}$. However, such effects might be context dependent as, conversely, IKKβ has also been found to activate FOXO3a in regressing mammary glands, leading to upregulation of the death-receptor ligand TWEAK and induction of apoptosis ${ }^{27}$. Whether these latter effects involve direct phosphorylation of FOXO3a was not investigated.

IKKβ can also phosphorylate 14-3-3β when this protein is complexed with tristetraprolin (TPP), an AU-rich element (ARE) binding protein that regulates mRNA stability ${ }^{29}$. IKKβ phosphorylation inhibits TPP–14-3-3β ARE binding and might therefore promote the stability of cytokine, chemokine and growth factor mRNAs, which all contain the ARE motif ${ }^{29}$.

Pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNFα and IL-1, can lead to insulin resistance and the development of type-2 diabetes. This effect can, in part, be attributed to inhibition of insulin signalling that results from IKKβ phosphorylation of insulin-receptor-substrate-1 (IRS1) ${ }^{30-32}$.

IKKβ can also participate in a negative feedback loop that downregulates the signalling pathways that lead to its activation. The TCR induces IKKβ through activation of the Carma1–BCL10–MALT1 (CBM) complex. IKKβ is required for the induction of the CBM complex through an ill-defined mechanism. However, it is also necessary for the attenuation of CBM-complex signalling. This attenuation effect results from IKKβ directly phosphorylating BCL10, which disrupts its association with MALT1, thereby inactivating the CBM complex ${ }^{33}$.

Disruption of BCL10–MALT1  
interaction, inhibition of  
T-cell signalling and impaired  
activation of NF-κB  

Inhibition of  
insulin  
signalling  

Downregulation of MAP  
kinase signalling  

Cell proliferation  

Cell proliferation  

MAP kinase activation  

Nuclear  
localization  
of RelA,  
stimulation of  
transactivation  
functions  

Canonical pathway  
activation  

Innate immune response,  
inflammation, cell survival  
and cell adhesion  

Inhibition of mRNA binding,  
possible stabilization of cytokine,  
chemokine and growth factor  
mRNAs  

Inactivation of FOXO3a,  
inhibition of apoptosis  

Cell proliferation  

Figure 2 | The consequences of IKKβ activation. Activation of IKKβ stimulates anti-apoptotic, pro-inflammatory and  
proliferative pathways. As well as activating the canonical NF-κB-signalling pathway through phosphorylation (P) of the  
IκB proteins, IKKβ phosphorylates several other substrates, including NF-κB subunits. For example, phosphorylation of  
RelA at Ser536 can result in nuclear localization and stimulation of its transactivation functions by promoting interactions  
with co-activator proteins. In some unactivated cells, the p105 NF-κB subunit is found in a complex with the mitogen-  
activated protein (MAP)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (MEK) kinase TPL2 (also known as COT). IKKβ  
phosphorylates p105 resulting in its degradation, which releases TPL2 resulting in activation of the pro-proliferative MAP  
kinase-signalling pathway. Another way in which IKKβ might exert its anti-apoptotic effects is through phosphorylation  
and inhibition of the tumour suppressor FOXO3a. By contrast, phosphorylation of the adaptor protein DOK1 is thought to  
contribute to its ability to inhibit MAP kinase signalling and cell proliferation. IKKβ phosphorylates and inhibits the 14-3-3β  
protein when complexed with tristetraprolin (TPP), an AU-rich element (ARE) binding protein that regulates mRNA  
stability. IKKβ phosphorylation inhibits TPP–14-3-3β ARE binding and might therefore stabilize cytokine, chemokine and  
growth factor transcripts. IKKβ can also inhibit insulin signalling by targeting insulin-receptor substrate-1 (IRS1).  
Phosphorylation of BCL10 as part of the T-cell receptor (TCR) Carma1–BCL10–MALT1 complex disrupts the BCL10–MALT1  
interaction, therefore attenuating T-cell signalling. As TCR signalling activates the NF-κB pathway, BCL10 phosphorylation  
by IKKβ serves as a negative feedback loop. ANK, ankyrin-repeat motif; IκB, inhibitor of κB; IKK, IκB kinase; NF-κB, nuclear  
factor-κB; RHD, Rel-homology domain; TAD, transcriptional activation domain.

There are also links between IKKβ activity and the  
pro-proliferative MAP kinase pathway. In unstimulated  
cells, such as macrophages and fibroblasts, the MAP/  
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (MEK)  
kinase TPL2 (also known as COT) is found in a complex  
with a subset of the p105 NF-κB subunit. IKKβ activity  
can induce proteolysis of p105, which in turn releases  
the bound TPL2, resulting in MAP kinase-pathway activ-  
ation³⁴,³⁵. Whether this pathway provides the basis for  
activation of MAP kinase signalling by Lys63 modified  
NEMO²¹ is not currently clear. p105 has been reported to  
associate with several other non-NF-κB proteins, such as  
the basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) transcription factor LYL1,  

the cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP), the  
coatomer-β subunit protein COPB2, JNK-interacting  
leucine-zipper protein (JLP) and A20-binding inhibitor  
of NF-κB (ABIN)³⁶⁻³⁹. So, IKKβ-induced p105 proteolysis  
might conceivably activate various NF-κB-independent  
pathways. IKKβ can also phosphorylate DOK1, an adap-  
tor protein that downregulates MAP kinase activation,  
providing another possible link for the regulation of this  
pathway⁴⁰.  

A clear implication of these results is that the pro-  
inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, pro-proliferative and  
tumour-promoting characteristics that have been  
ascribed to IKKβ²,⁴,⁸ might in part result from these

bHLH transcription factor  
A transcription factor  
containing a DNA-binding and  
dimerization domain  
characterized by a region of  
basic amino acids followed by  
a helix–loop–helix motif.

Regulates chromatin  
remodelling, activates  
transcription  

Induction of  
INFα  
expression  

Degradation of  
RelA  

Resolution of  
inflammation  

Proteolytic  
processing  
of p100 to p52  

Non-canonical pathway  
activation  

Adaptive immune response,  
cell proliferation  

Derepression of NF-κB-  
dependent transactivation  

Degradation of cyclin D1  

Induction of cyclin D1 expression  

Cell proliferation  

Figure 3 | The consequences of IKKα activation. In addition to activation of the non-canonical signalling pathway through phosphorylation of the p100 NF-κB subunit, IKKα is now thought to phosphorylate a number of other substrates. For example, phosphorylation of RelA at Ser536 in macrophages can stimulate its degradation and thus promote resolution of inflammation. IKKα also phosphorylates proteins that are not components of the NF-κB and IKK pathway. Through associating with cyclic-AMP responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein (CBP), IKKα functions as a histone H3 serine 10 (H3 Ser10) kinase and thereby regulates chromatin remodelling. IKKα also regulates cyclin D1 expression independently of NF-κB by phosphorylating oestrogen receptor-α (ERα), its co-activator SRC3 as well as β-catenin and cyclin D1 itself. IKKα also affects transcription through phosphorylation of the SMRT co-repressor, which leads to derepression of NF-κB transactivation, and interferon regulatory factor-7 (IRF7), which can induce the expression of interferon-α (IFNα). Not shown are the kinase-independent effects of IKKα on keratinocyte differentiation and tooth development. ANK, ankyrin-repeat motif; IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; RHD, Rel homology domain; TAD, transcriptional activation domain.

Cyclin D1  
A cyclin that forms heterodimers with the cyclin-dependent kinases CDK4 or CDK6, thereby regulating transition through the G1 phase. Cyclin D1 also has CDK-independent functions and can function as a regulator of transcription.

β-catenin  
A dual-function protein that has a role in the cytoplasm regulating cell adhesion and a role in the nucleus as a transcriptional co-activator that mediates the Wnt-signal-transduction pathway. Frequently mutated in cancer, β-catenin can function as an oncogene.

E2F1  
A member of the E2F family of transcription factors, which, together with the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor, regulate genes that control cell-cycle progression and DNA synthesis.

NF-κB-independent effects. Furthermore, it should be appreciated that although the development of IKKβ inhibitors has numerous potential therapeutic application for both inflammatory diseases and cancer^{7–9}, their effects will not be totally mediated through the inhibition of NF-κB function.

The consequences of IKKα activation. IKKα can have a pro-proliferative function by inducing p52 activity and by consequently inducing the cyclin D1 promoter^{41,42}. Indeed, IKKα also seems to be able to regulate cyclin D1 expression through numerous NF-κB-independent mechanisms (FIG. 3). These include the phosphorylation and activation of the oestrogen receptor-α (ERα) transcription factor, together with its co-activator protein SRC3, in breast cancer cells^{43,44}. Moreover, IKKα can stimulate the cyclin D1 promoter through the phosphorylation and stabilization of the β-catenin oncoprotein, a transcriptional co-activator for members of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of transcription factors, which bind directly to the cyclin D1 promoter^{45–47}. Interestingly, β-catenin has also been described as an inhibitor of NF-κB transcriptional activity^{48,49}. Furthermore, it has been reported that IKKα can directly phosphorylate the cyclin D1 protein at Thr286 which, in direct contrast to its more established effects on the cyclin D1 promoter, seems to induce cyclin D1 degradation^{50}.

IKKα has also been found to regulate oestrogen-induced cell-cycle progression by indirectly inducing the expression, acetylation and target-gene expression of the E2F1 transcription factor, indicating a potentially significant role for IKKα in breast cancer^{51}. Other NF-κB-independent transcriptional effects of IKKα include the phosphorylation of the SMRT co-repressor while it is bound to NF-κB complexes on the promoter^{52}. This does not seem to disrupt the SMRT–NF-κB interaction, but instead results in release of chromatin bound histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3), leading to derepression
of NF-κB-dependent transcription<sup>52</sup>. IKKα can also phosphorylate and activate interferon regulatory factor-7 (IRF7), which is required for interferon-α (IFNα) production<sup>53</sup>.

In addition, IKKα regulates chromatin structure and facilitates gene expression by functioning as a histone H3 serine 10 (H3 Ser10) kinase<sup>54,55</sup>. In part, this function is facilitated by IKKα interacting with the transcriptional co-activator cyclic-AMP responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein<sup>55</sup> (CBP). Under some circumstances, the predominant H3 Ser10 kinases are mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK1) and MSK2, which are induced by p38 MAP kinase activation<sup>56,57</sup>. H3 Ser10 phosphorylation is crucial for the activation of a subset of NF-κB-dependent genes<sup>58</sup>. As p38 MAP kinase is induced by many of the same inflammatory stimuli and cell stresses that also induce NF-κB, this provides a mechanism through which this signalling pathway can determine the consequences of NF-κB activation.

IKKα also has kinase-independent roles in the regulation of keratinocyte differentiation<sup>59</sup> and tooth development<sup>60</sup>. Taken together, it can be concluded that IKKα regulation of these diverse pathways will result in profound effects on the expression of many genes, independently of any direct regulation of NF-κB.

**IKK-independent functions of NEMO.** There is also evidence that NEMO has IKK-independent functions. For example, the ability of NEMO to translocate to the nucleus and to associate with ATM following DNA damage<sup>23</sup> clearly implies that NEMO can function independently of IKKα or IKKβ. Indeed, nuclear-localized NEMO has been shown to compete with both RelA and IKKα for binding to the N-terminal domain of CBP<sup>61</sup>. This interaction has the potential to regulate many other transcription factors that use CBP. For example, NEMO stimulates the interaction of CBP with hypoxia-inducible factor-2α (HIF2α), independently of the IKK subunits, and also directly interacts with HIF2α, thereby enhancing its transcriptional activity<sup>62</sup>.

**IκB proteins**

Whether the IκB proteins themselves have NF-κB-independent functions is less clear, although there have been interesting, albeit largely unconfirmed, reports indicating that this might be the case. For example, proteomic analysis of IκB-associated proteins indicated that, in addition to interactions with NF-κB subunits, IKKs and components of the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery, IkBα also associates with the replication proteins minichromosome maintenance-5 (MCM5) and MCM7 (REF. 36). IkBβ and IkBε were found to associate with several uncharacterized proteins in this study. IkBα was also reported to interact with cyclin-dependent kinase-4 (CDK4)<sup>63</sup> together with the p53 tumour suppressor<sup>64–66</sup>, and can inhibit HIV-1 Rev protein function independently of NF-κB<sup>67</sup>. The significance of these reports is not currently clear. It is possible that IκB degradation might release sequestered proteins in a manner that is analogous to p105-mediated activation of TPL2 (see above),

---

**CBP and p300**

CBP and p300 are highly homologous transcriptional co-activator proteins with histone acetyltransferase domains. Both interact with various transcription factors.

although a more dynamic role as a regulator of protein function is also possible. For example, a nuclear role for IkBα as a promoter-bound transcriptional repressor of the Notch-target gene *hes1*, which encodes a transcriptional repressor and regulator of cell differentiation, has been described<sup>68</sup>. One implication of these findings is that, similar to the phenotypes of IKK-knockout mice, the phenotypes of model systems that rely solely on the expression of a non-degradable IkBα ‘super-repressor’ protein might not result exclusively from inhibition of NF-κB function.

**Modulation of NF-κB subunits**

NF-κB subunits are subject to many modifications and regulatory interactions that define their transcriptional activity and target-gene specificity. These interactions form a crucial interface with other signalling pathways in the cell; modifications of NF-κB subunits by IKK-independent routes can determine their ability to interact with co-activators or co-repressors, whereas cooperative DNA binding with heterologous transcription factors can determine their ability to selectively target promoters and enhancers (BOX 1). Indeed, these regulatory mechanisms provide explanations for cell-type- and stimulus-specific effects of NF-κB, such as the ability to either inhibit or facilitate apoptosis<sup>6,12,25</sup>. These pathways also provide important routes through which oncogenes and tumour suppressors can modulate NF-κB activity<sup>6</sup>.

**Post-translational modifications.** The true extent of NF-κB-subunit modifications is currently unknown, with only the RelA protein having been studied in any detail<sup>12</sup>. However, from these studies, it is clear that there are many subunit modifications with diverse functional consequences<sup>12</sup>. Both IKKα and IKKβ are RelA kinases. However, many other signalling pathways also use modification of RelA and the other NF-κB subunits to control NF-κB-pathway function. For example, RelA is phosphorylated at: Ser276 by the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKAc), MSK1 and MSK2; at Ser311 by the atypical PKCζ; at Ser468 by IKKβ, IKKε and glycogen-synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β); at Ser529 by CK2; and at Ser536 by IKKβ, IKKα, IKKε, NF-κB activating kinase (NAK, also known as TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1)) and RSK1 (also known as p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p90S6K))<sup>12</sup>. These can all generally be described as stimulatory modifications that enhance the transcriptional activity of RelA and its ability to interact with co-activators, such as p300 and CBP<sup>69,70</sup>. RelA is also acetylated at several sites by p300 and CBP<sup>12,69–71</sup>. By contrast, phosphorylation at Thr505 by the CHK1 checkpoint kinase, which can be activated by ATM- and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase in response to ARF tumour suppressor induction or DNA damage following cisplatin treatment, inhibits RelA transactivation and results in its increased association with HDAC1 (REFS 72–74). This results in the repression of *BCL-xL* expression, an anti-apoptotic gene that is typically induced by NF-κB in response to inflammatory stimuli, and sensitization to apoptosis. RelA-dependent repression of anti-apoptotic gene expression is also sometimes observed following

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY  
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  
VOLUME 8 | JANUARY 2007 | 55  
NF-κB activation by UV-light exposure and some chemotherapeutic drugs, although the mechanisms involved are probably diverse and do not all involve Thr505 phosphorylation^{74–77}. The effects of the many subunit modifications are also probably promoter specific^{78} and allow heterologous signalling pathways to specifically modulate the NF-κB pathway.

RelA Ser536 phosphorylation by IKKβ provides a mechanism to integrate NF-κB with the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and PKB/AKT-signalling pathway, which is induced by growth factors, cytokines and oncogenes such as Ras^{79}. Similar to IKKβ activation, this pathway promotes cell survival, and several reports indicate that IKKβ-dependent RelA Ser536 phosphorylation requires PI3K/AKT activity^{80–82}. Interestingly, *in vitro*, AKT is required for the IKKβ-mediated phosphorylation of RelA, but not of IκBα^{81}. Underlining its potential role as an integration point, IKKβ-dependent phosphorylation of RelA at Ser536 that follows TCR stimulation is PI3K/AKT-independent but requires TPL2, PKCθ and NIK kinases^{83}. The complexity of these signalling pathways is further illustrated by the diverse consequences of Ser536 phosphorylation which, in addition to enhancing RelA transactivation, can also induce its translocation to the nucleus, independently of IκB degradation, and enhance its proteolytic degradation^{84,85}.

**Crosstalk with heterologous transcription factors.** Cooperative interactions with DNA-bound transcription factors provide another important mechanism to integrate NF-κB function with other signalling pathways. The position and orientation of many (if not most) NF-κB binding sites in promoters and enhancers is not random, and both the context and the sequence of the κB element can determine the function of NF-κB subunits. Promoter structure can therefore facilitate the cooperative binding of NF-κB subunits with heterologous transcription factors, thereby enhancing the recruitment of one or both to weak or nucleosome-associated binding sites^{86,87}.

One of the best characterized examples of such effects is provided by the IFNβ enhancer. IFNβ expression is induced upon viral infection and is NF-κB dependent^{88}. However, other non-viral inducers of NF-κB fail to induce IFNβ expression. This is due to the specific architecture of the IFNβ enhancer, in which the κB motif is part of a composite element that contains DNA-binding sites for a heterodimer of the bZIP-motif-containing transcription factors Jun and ATF2, members of the IRF family and the high-mobility-group protein HMG-I^{89}. Mutation or altering the spacing or orientation of the transcription-factor binding sites in the enhancer prevents cooperative DNA binding and the formation of a higher-order transcription-factor–DNA complex, known as the enhanceosome^{90}. Furthermore, the IFNβ κB element differs from those in many other promoters, as it contains a central core with the sequence AAATT that allows binding of HMG-I to the minor groove^{89}. HMG-I also binds other sites in the enhancer and facilitates cooperative DNA binding of other transcription factors as well as enhanceosome formation^{89}. Formation of the enhanceosome structure is required for the exquisite virus-specific expression of IFNβ: other inducers of NF-κB fail to activate the full complement of IFNβ enhancer-binding proteins and so fail to induce its formation. The principles of enhanceosome formation, including the integration of NF-κB activity with other signalling pathways and the specificity this brings, are found at many other promoters, although the components might differ^{88}.

NF-κB can interact with many types of transcription factor, including bZIP transcription factors such as C/EBPβ, members of the Jun, ATF, CREB and Fos family and zinc-finger-containing proteins such as specificity protein-1 (Sp1) and early growth response-1 (EGR1)^{86,87,91,92} (BOX 1). Also, recruitment of NF-κB to promoters might not always require a κB element. Recruitment of the RelA-HDAC4 complex to the Krüppel-like factor-2 (KLF2) promoter by the MADS box factor myocyte-enhancer factor-2 (MEF2), independently of RelA DNA binding, has recently been proposed^{93}. Furthermore, the p52 NF-κB subunit can be recruited by p53 to multiple p53-regulated promoters, independently of the DNA-binding activity of p52 (REF. 94). There might well be many other mechanisms of crosstalk between transcription factors. For example, the non-canonical NF-κB pathway can be induced by the signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3), which binds DNA in a complex with p52 (REF. 95). By contrast, active STAT1, induced by IFNα expression, has been reported to interact with RelA and inhibit its DNA binding and nuclear localization^{96}.

Recent data indicate that cooperative DNA binding might not always be the mechanism of the synergistic transcriptional effects that are observed between NF-κB and heterologous transcription factors^{87,97}. Rather, these might derive from cooperative recruitment of co-activator proteins, as also occurs at the IFNβ enhanceosome^{98}, or from the ability of different transcription factors to affect different steps in the transcriptional activation process. For example, synergism between RelA and the constitutive and widely expressed DNA-binding protein Sp1 might derive in part from the ability of Sp1 to stimulate the initiation of transcription, whereas RelA enhances subsequent re-initiation steps^{99}. Similarly, transcriptional synergy between the *Drosophila melanogaster* NF-κB homologue Dorsal and the bHLH transcription factor Twist, which is essential for the expression of Snail, a protein required for the specification of mesoderm, is thought to occur primarily through their ability to make separate contacts with distinct, rate-limiting components of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcriptional machinery^{100}. Whatever the mechanism, the many interactions between NF-κB and other transcription factors provide a key mechanism to both integrate NF-κB signalling with other cellular processes and define the exact nature of the NF-κB response to specific cell stimuli.

**Feedback loops.** Activation of NF-κB results in reprogramming of the cell’s gene-expression patterns to respond to a specific stimulus or changed environment. Many NF-κB target genes generate feedback to influence the function of NF-κB and also to profoundly affect other signalling pathways.

---

bZIP-motif-containing  
transcription factor  
A transcription factor that  
contains a DNA-binding and  
dimerization domain  
characterized by a region of  
basic amino acids followed by  
a leucine-zipper motif.

Jun, ATF, CREB and Fos  
family  
A transcription factor family,  
members of which all contain  
related bZIP domains and form  
homo- and heterodimers that  
bind related DNA sequences.  
Collectively, dimers of Jun and  
Fos family members are often  
referred to as the AP1  
transcription factor.

Krüppel-like factor  
A protein that is homologous  
to the Krüppel transcription  
factor, originally characterized  
in *Drosophila melanogaster*.  
Krüppel-like factors possess  
zinc-finger-containing DNA-  
binding domains.

MADS box  
The MADS box is a conserved  
DNA-binding motif originally  
identified in the MCM1, AG,  
DEFA and SRF proteins, from  
which it derives its name.

B cells<sup>107</sup>. These, in turn, through cooperative effects similar to those described above, are then required for the induction of a second wave of NF-κB target genes. The duration of the NF-κB response is prolonged following LPS stimulation relative to that caused by other stimuli, such as TNFα. This is a result of IRF3-dependent TNFα synthesis leading to a positive feedback loop that restimulates IKK activity<sup>108,109</sup>. Interestingly, RelA has been shown to function as a transcriptional co-activator for IRF3 following treatment with LPS, but not other stimuli<sup>110</sup>.

Together, mechanisms such as these can control the timing and functional consequences of NF-κB activation, allowing its cell-type and stimulus-specific functions to be revealed.

### Integration with other signalling pathways

The integration of the NF-κB pathway with some important cell-signalling pathways has been analysed in detail. The complex relationships that exist provide examples of the intricate crosstalk that can occur between fundamental cell-signalling pathways. Importantly, these studies also show that feedback can occur in both directions and that the functional consequences of this can vary, depending on the context.

#### Crosstalk with the JNK-signalling pathway

Many cell stresses and stimuli that induce the NF-κB pathway, such as TNFα, can also activate JNK signalling<sup>111,112</sup>, which has many consequences, including pro-apoptotic effects<sup>111,112</sup>. However, NF-κB activation by TNFα prevents apoptosis through the induction of several anti-apoptotic genes<sup>25</sup> and by the suppression of the JNK pathway<sup>111,112</sup> (FIG. 4). Activation of JNK by TNFα requires the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), a process that can be counteracted by NF-κB through the induction of genes that encode antioxidizing enzymes such as manganese-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and ferritin heavy chain (FHC)<sup>111–113</sup>. In addition, the products of other activated NF-κB target genes, such as GADD45β (also known as MYD118), which is an inhibitor of the JNK upstream kinase mitogen-activated-protein kinase kinase-7 (MKK7, also known as JNKK2) and the anti-apoptotic protein XIAP, also suppress JNK activation (the effect of XIAP occurs through an undefined mechanism)<sup>111,112</sup>. In many cell types, suppression of JNK-induced apoptosis can contribute to the tumour-promoting activities of NF-κB<sup>111–113</sup>. However, in epidermal cells, JNK stimulates cell proliferation and therefore, in these cells, the inhibition of JNK by NF-κB has a tumour-suppressing function<sup>6,114</sup>. By contrast, after UV stimulation, RelA directly induces the expression of PKCδ, which in turn activates JNK<sup>77</sup>.

#### Crosstalk with p53

The p53 tumour suppressor and transcription factor is one of the first lines of defence against the effects of genotoxic damage or oncogene activation, and it typically induces apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest in response to these stimuli<sup>115</sup>. The amount of p53 protein in cells is regulated by HDM2 (known as MDM2 in mice) which functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase

With the exception of RelA, all the NF-κB subunits and IkBα contain κB sites in their promoters<sup>1,5</sup>. The positive regulation of NF-κB subunits can result in the composition of the NF-κB complex changing over time, whereas induction of IkBα provides a crucial negative feedback loop that helps terminate the NF-κB response. Other NF-κB target genes, such as the CYLD tumour suppressor and A20, both of which encode deubiquitylating enzymes, can also inhibit and limit the NF-κB response by targeting signalling molecules, such as TRAF proteins, which are required for IKK-complex activation<sup>101–106</sup>. Interestingly, CYLD was also recently shown to deubiquitylate the p50 and p52 co-activator BCL-3, leading to inhibition of both cyclin D1 expression and proliferation in keratinocytes<sup>106</sup>.

Activation of other genes also determines NF-κB-target-gene specificity. For example, members of the activator protein-1 (AP1) and ATF families of transcription factors, such as JunB, JunD, B-ATF and ATF4, are rapidly induced by NF-κB following LPS stimulation of precursor

**Figure 4 | Crosstalk between the NF-κB and JNK-signalling pathways.** Exposure of cells to tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) can result in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to activation of mitogen-activated-protein kinase kinase-7 (MKK7) and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). If left unopposed, JNK activation will lead to apoptosis, except in some cell types, such as epidermal cells, in which it can stimulate cell proliferation. However, TNFα signalling also activates IKKβ and the canonical NF-κB pathway. NF-κB induces the expression of antioxidizing enzymes such as manganese-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and ferritin heavy chain (FHC), which counteract ROS generation. Also, other proteins activated by NF-κB, such as GADD45β and XIAP, can oppose JNK activation by inhibiting other components of the JNK-signalling pathway. By contrast, following ultraviolet (UV)-light exposure, NF-κB induces the expression of protein kinase Cδ (PKCδ), which activates JNK. The point at which XIAP affects the JNK pathway is not currently known. IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB kinase; NEMO, NF-κB essential modifier; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB.

---

**IRF3**

A transcription factor that regulates genes that contain the interferon-sensitive response element (ISRE). IRF3 activity can be induced through binding of LPS to Toll-like receptor-4, which also activates NF-κB.

**E3 ubiquitin ligase**

A protein that directly interacts with target proteins and catalyses their ubiquitylation. Lys48-linked ubiquitylation can lead to proteasomal degradation whereas Lys63-linked ubiquitylation can facilitate protein interactions and activation of signalling pathways.

REVIEW S

Figure 5 | Integration of the p53 pathway with the function of the RelA (p65) NF-κB subunit. Crosstalk between the tumour suppressor p53 and NF-κB pathways regulates apoptosis. In response to inflammatory stimuli, NF-κB induces anti-apoptotic genes that antagonize the pro-apoptotic function of p53. Moreover, NF-κB, or the IkB family member BCL-3, can induce the expression of HDM2 (known as MDM2 in mice) and reduce p53 protein levels. Additional antagonism comes from competition between p53 and RelA for binding to shared co-activator proteins such as p300 and cyclic-AMP responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein (CBP). By contrast, there are also cooperative pathways between p53 and NF-κB. Some inducers of NF-κB result in repression of anti-apoptotic genes and induction of pro-apoptotic genes. Furthermore, induction of the ARF tumour suppressor can activate the CHK1 checkpoint kinase, which phosphorylates (P) RelA at Thr505, leading to repressed expression of the anti-apoptotic NF-κB gene target BCL-xL. p53 can induce RelA nuclear localization and DNA binding through activation of RSK1 (also known as p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p90S6K)). NF-κB has also been reported to induce the expression of p53. Which of these pathways dominates will probably depend on the cell type and the nature of the inducing stimulus for both p53 and NF-κB. Not shown are the regulatory mechanisms linking p53 to the p52 NF-κB subunit. ATR, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)- and Rad3-related; IkB, inhibitor of κB; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB.

and induces p53 proteolysis¹¹⁵. Expression of HDM2 and the consequent downregulation of p53 can be induced by IKK and by NF-κB activation¹¹⁶, or by the IkB-like BCL-3 co-activator¹¹⁷ (FIG. 5). The RelA NF-κB subunit has also been shown to antagonize p53 transactivation through sequestration of the p300 and CBP co-activators¹¹⁸. These effects on p53, together with the other functions of NF-κB, such as induction of anti-apoptotic genes, all contribute to the tumour-promoting effects of NF-κB.

In contrast to these antagonistic effects, there is also significant cooperative crosstalk between the NF-κB and p53 pathways (FIG. 5). For example, p53 can induce RSK1 activity, which phosphorylates RelA at Ser536, resulting in the nuclear localization of NF-κB⁸⁴. Moreover, in some circumstances RelA and p53 cooperatively induce apoptosis¹¹⁹⁻¹²¹. This can occur through the coordinated induction of pro-apoptotic target genes such as death receptor-5 (DR5), which contains both p53 and NF-κB response elements¹²².

a Induction of IkBα expression

Ligand

Nucleus

Cytoplasm

b Co-activator competition

RelA

p50

NF-κB

κB element

p300/CBP

c Sequestration of NF-κB

IRF3

IRSE

d Disruption of co-activator-
complex formation

IRF3

κB element

e Inhibition of RNA polymerase II
hyperphosphorylation

P-TEFb

Pol II

κB element

f Recruitment of HDACs

HDAC2

κB element

Figure 6 | Crosstalk between the NF-κB and nuclear-receptor pathways. Multiple mechanisms contribute to the ability of nuclear receptors (NRs) to repress the NF-κB pathway and thereby function in an anti-inflammatory manner. Different mechanisms seem to selectively regulate distinct subsets of NF-κB-regulated genes. Some pathways of NR-mediated repression are indirect and involve: (a) induction of IkBα expression; or (b) competition for co-activator proteins such as cyclic-AMP responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) and p300. However, most mechanisms of NF-κB repression involve direct interactions with NRs and are referred to as transrepression. (c) Direct interaction with NRs can result in sequestration of NF-κB, which inhibits interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3)-dependent promoters, for which RelA functions as a transcriptional co-activator. (d) Conversely, interactions of NRs with RelA can prevent IRF3 from functioning as a co-activator at some NF-κB-regulated promoters. RelA-dependent recruitment of NRs to promoters can lead to repression of transcription by other mechanisms, including: (e) inhibition of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) phosphorylation (P) by P-TEFb; (f) recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs); or a failure to clear co-repressors from the repressed basal state of the gene (not shown). IkB, inhibitor of κB; IRSE, interferon-sensitive response element; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; P-TEFb, positive transcription elongation factor b. This figure is modified with permission from REF. 124 © (2006) Elsevier.

There is also crosstalk between p53 and the p52 NF-κB subunit. Activation of p53 can inhibit cyclin D1 expression by inducing the association of the p52 NF-κB subunit with co-repressor complexes<sup>42</sup>. Moreover, in some cell lines, p52 is directly recruited to p53-regulated promoters, where it regulates co-activator and co-repressor recruitment, leading to either repression or activation of p53 target genes such as $p21^{WAF1}$, DR5 and PUMA<sup>94</sup>. Through this pathway, p52 has the potential to regulate p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis.

Crosstalk with nuclear receptors. Nuclear receptors (NRs) are transcription factors that are typically regulated by the binding of specific ligands, such as glucocorticoids, oestrogen, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid<sup>124–126</sup>. Many NRs possess anti-inflammatory functions that are mediated largely through the inhibition of NF-κB and AP1 transcriptional activity<sup>124</sup>. What is revealing about studies of NRs, and what is especially relevant when considering the other pathways engaged in crosstalk by NF-κB, is the diversity of mechanisms through which NRs can inhibit NF-κB function<sup>124</sup> (FIG. 6).

Most mechanisms of NF-κB repression seem to involve direct interactions between NF-κB and NRs, and these are referred to as transrepression<sup>124–126</sup>. However, there are also indirect mechanisms, including induction of IkBα expression<sup>127,128</sup> and competition for co-activators such as p300 and CBP<sup>129</sup>.

Direct interaction with NRs can result in sequestration of NF-κB, which inhibits IRF3-dependent promoters at which RelA functions as a transcriptional co-activator<sup>110,130</sup>. Conversely, IRF3 can also function as a co-activator for some NF-κB-regulated genes and here, binding of RelA to the glucocorticoid receptor prevents IRF3 recruitment, leading to transcriptional repression<sup>130</sup>. Interestingly, other NRs do not disrupt the interaction between IRF3 and RelA, but rather repress distinct subsets of NF-κB-regulated genes, indicating that there are other mechanisms of repression<sup>124,130</sup>. Direct recruitment of NRs by RelA to NF-κB-regulated promoters can have various other effects that can lead to repression of transcription. These include the recruitment of HDACs (or a failure to clear co-repressors from the repressed basal state of the gene) and the inhibition of Pol II phosphorylation<sup>131,132</sup>. These diverse mechanisms seem to affect specific subsets of NF-κB-regulated genes, providing opportunities for selective and context-dependent regulation of NF-κB function.

Conclusions

These examples illustrate the complexity of the NF-κB pathway, but only scratch the surface of this complicated area of biology. The different modifications of the NF-κB subunits, and how they control the selectivity of NF-κB target-gene regulation, has only begun to be investigated. Furthermore, in many contexts, the contribution of NF-κB interactions with other transcriptional regulators to NF-κB subunit function and target-gene specificity has not been investigated in depth, and the significance of IKK-independent mechanisms of NF-κB activation has not yet been clearly defined. Therefore, although much

Alternatively, in contrast to the results described above, NF-κB activity can also increase p53 expression and stability, which results at least in part from the direct regulation of the $p53$ gene by NF-κB<sup>120,121</sup>. In addition, the ARF tumour suppressor, which binds to and inhibits HDM2, thereby activating p53, can induce ATR and CHK1 checkpoint kinase activity<sup>73,123</sup> leading to RelA Thr505 phosphorylation, $BCL-xL$ repression and sensitization to apoptosis<sup>73</sup>.

has been learnt about the core mechanisms regulating NF-κB and IKK activation, there is still much to learn about the fine-tuning of this response and of the proteins that control the impact of this pathway on normal physiological processes and diseases.

The growing appreciation of the role of NF-κB in human diseases is leading both to the development of inhibitors of this pathway and to an appreciation that many existing drugs and natural compounds function in part through their effects on IKK and NF-κB signalling^{7–9,133}. To use these compounds effectively, it will be necessary to understand the function of NF-κB in the diseased cells of patients^6. Indeed, the analysis of NF-κB-dependent patterns of gene expression using microarray technology has already been used successfully for the diagnosis of some forms of diffuse B-cell lymphoma^134. However, as discussed, NF-κB-target-gene expression can vary depending on the context, which might result in differences between patients with cancer, depending, for example, on the tumour type or the nature of the oncogenic mutation. Indeed, one study has shown that NF-κB targets differ if the cell contains oncogenic forms of Ras^135. Therefore, an understanding of the regulation of NF-κB function and how its activity is integrated with other cell-signalling pathways has the potential to inform diagnostic methods and provide prognostic indicators of the effectiveness of drugs targeting the NF-κB pathway. For example, the effect of an IKKβ inhibitor might vary depending on whether a tumour is derived from a chronic inflammatory condition^136, whether tumour suppressor proteins such as p53 or ARF are still active, or on the types of oncogene present. Although understanding the details of the NF-κB and IKK pathway presents a challenge, it also provides an opportunity for the effective exploitation of these proteins in the treatment of many diseases.

---

1. Hayden, M. S. & Ghosh, S. Signaling to NF-κB. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 2195–2224 (2004). This review of the mechanisms of NF-κB activation provides a comprehensive analysis of the NF-κB-signalling pathway.
2. Bonizzi, G. & Karin, M. The two NF-κB activation pathways and their role in innate and adaptive immunity. *Trends Immunol.* **25**, 280–288 (2004).
3. Gerondakis, S., Grossmann, M., Nakamura, Y., Pohl, T. & Grumont, R. Genetic approaches in mice to understand Rel/NF-κB and IkB function: transgenics and knockouts. *Oncogene* **18**, 6888–6895 (1999).
4. Pasparakis, M., Luedde, T. & Schmidt-Supprian, M. Dissection of the NF-κB signalling cascade in transgenic and knockout mice. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 861–872 (2006). Genetic experiments in mice provide much of the basis for our understanding of the NF-κB and IKK pathway. Reference 3 summarizes fundamental information about different NF-κB-, IkB- and IKK-knockout mouse phenotypes. Reference 4 describes how these mice have been used to study the role of the NF-κB and IKK pathway in physiological processes and human diseases. These reviews are both essential reading.
5. Pahl, H. L. Activators and target genes of Rel/NF-κB transcription factors. *Oncogene* **18**, 6853–6866 (1999).
6. Perkins, N. D. & Gilmore, T. D. Good cop, bad cop: the different faces of NF-κB. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 759–772 (2006). Inhibiting NF-κB might not be all good news. This review discusses how NF-κB functions can vary depending on the biological context, and in some cases display apparently contradictory roles.
7. Karin, M., Yamamoto, Y. & Wang, Q. M. The IKK NF-κB system: a treasure trove for drug development. *Nature Rev. Drug Discov.* **3**, 17–26 (2004).
8. Kim, H. J., Hawke, N. & Baldwin, A. S. NF-κB and IKK as therapeutic targets in cancer. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 738–747 (2006). Targeting the NF-κB pathway is now recognized as a potential therapy for many inflammatory diseases and cancer. References 7 and 8 provide the rationale for why this is the case and describe the strategies that can be used.
9. Kumar, A., Takada, Y., Boriek, A. M. & Aggarwal, B. B. Nuclear factor-κB: its role in health and disease. *J. Mol. Med.* **82**, 434–448 (2004).
10. Hoffmann, A., Leung, T. H. & Baltimore, D. Genetic analysis of NF-κB/Rel transcription factors defines functional specificities. *EMBO J.* **22**, 5530–5539 (2003).
11. Dobrzanski, P., Ryseck, R. P. & Bravo, R. Differential Interactions of Rel–NF-κB complexes with IkBa determine pools of constitutive and inducible NF-κB activity. *EMBO J.* **13**, 4608–4616 (1994).
12. Perkins, N. D. Post-translational modifications regulating the activity and function of the nuclear factor κB pathway. *Oncogene* **25**, 6717–6730 (2006).
13. Perkins, N. D. Oncogenes, tumor suppressors and p52 NF-κB. *Oncogene* **22**, 7553–7556 (2003).
14. Lin, L., DeMartino, G. N. & Greene, W. C. Cotranslational biogenesis of NF-κB p50 by the 26S proteasome. *Cell* **92**, 819–828 (1998).
15. Cohen, S., Achbert-Weiner, H. & Ciechanover, A. Dual effects of IkB kinase β-mediated phosphorylation on p105 fate: SCF(β-TrCP)-dependent degradation and SCF(β-TrCP)-independent processing. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 475–486 (2004).
16. Moorthy, A. K. *et al.* The 20S proteasome processes NF-κB1 p105 into p50 in a translation-independent manner. *EMBO J.* **25**, 1945–1956 (2006).
17. Kawai, T. & Akira, S. TLR signaling. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 816–825 (2006).
18. Chen, Z. J. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-κB pathway. *Nature Cell Biol.* **7**, 758–765 (2005).
19. Krappmann, D. & Scheidereit, C. A pervasive role of ubiquitin conjugation in activation and termination of IkB kinase pathways. *EMBO Rep.* **6**, 321–326 (2005). NEMO-dependent activation of IKKβ involves a complex, ubiquitin-based signalling pathway that is comprehensively described in references 18 and 19.
20. Burns, K. A. & Martinon, F. Inflammatory diseases: is ubiquitinated NEMO at the hub? *Curr. Biol.* **14**, R1040–R1042 (2004).
21. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Key function for the Ubc13 E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme in immune receptor signaling. *Nature Immunol.* **7**, 962–970 (2006).
22. Janssens, S. & Tschopp, J. Signals from within: the DNA-damage-induced NF-κB response. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 773–784 (2006).
23. Wu, Z. H., Shi, Y., Tibbetts, R. S. & Miyamoto, S. Molecular linkage between the kinase ATM and NF-κB signaling in response to genotoxic stimuli. *Science* **311**, 1141–1146 (2006).
24. Luo, J. L., Kamata, H. & Karin, M. IKK/NF-κB signaling: balancing life and death — a new approach to cancer therapy. *J. Clin. Invest.* **115**, 2625–2632 (2005).
25. Kucharczak, J., Simmons, M. J., Fan, Y. J. & Gelinas, C. To be, or not to be: NF-κB is the answer — role of Rel/NF-κB in the regulation of apoptosis. *Oncogene* **22**, 8961–8982 (2003). Comprehensive review of the complexities surrounding NF-κB-dependent regulation of apoptosis.
26. Herrmann, O. *et al.* IKK mediates ischemia-induced neuronal death. *Nature Med.* **11**, 1322–1329 (2005).
27. Baxter, F. O. *et al.* IKKβ/2 induces TWEAK and apoptosis in mammary epithelial cells. *Development* **133**, 3485–3494 (2006).
28. Hu, M. C. *et al.* IkB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. *Cell* **117**, 225–237 (2004).
29. Gringhuis, S. I., Garcia-Vallejo, J. J., van Het Hof, B. & van Dijk, W. Convergent actions of IkB kinase β and protein kinase Cδ modulate mRNA stability through phosphorylation of 14-3-3β complexed with tristetraprolin. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 6454–6463 (2005).
30. Gao, Z. *et al.* Serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 by inhibitor κB kinase complex. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 48115–48121 (2002).
31. He, J. *et al.* Interleukin-1α inhibits insulin signaling with phosphorylating insulin receptor substrate-1 on serine residues in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **20**, 114–124 (2006).
32. Nakamori, Y. *et al.* Myosin motor Myo1c and its receptor NEMO/IKK-γ promote TNF-α-induced serine307 phosphorylation of IRS-1. *J. Cell. Biol.* **173**, 665–671 (2006).
33. Wegener, E. *et al.* Essential role for IkB kinase β in remodelling Carma1–Bcl10–Malt1 complexes upon T cell activation. *Mol. Cell* **23**, 13–23 (2006).
34. Beinke, S., Robinson, M. J., Hugunin, M. & Ley, S. C. Lipopolysaccharide activation of the TPL-2/MEK/ extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen- activated protein kinase cascade is regulated by IkB kinase-induced proteolysis of NF-κB1 p105. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 9658–9667 (2004).
35. Waterfield, M., Jin, W., Reiley, W., Zhang, M. & Sun, S. C. IkB kinase is an essential component of the Tpl2 signaling pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 6040–6048 (2004). References 34 and 35 describe how IKKβ-induced proteolysis of p105 results in TPL2 and MAP kinase-pathway activation.
36. Bouwmeester, T. *et al.* A physical and functional map of the human TNF-α NF-κB signal transduction pathway. *Nature Cell Biol.* **6**, 97–105 (2004).
37. Zhang, J., Xu, L. G., Han, K. J. & Shu, H. B. Identification of a ZU5 and death domain-containing inhibitor of NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 17819–17825 (2004).
38. Li, Z., Zhang, J., Chen, D. & Shu, H. B. Casper/c-FLIP is physically and functionally associated with NF-κB1 p105. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **309**, 980–985 (2003).
39. Ferrier, R. *et al.* Physical interaction of the bHLH LYL1 protein and NF-κB1 p105. *Oncogene* **18**, 995–1005 (1999).
40. Lee, S. *et al.* IkB kinase β phosphorylates Dok1 serines in response to TNF, IL-1, or γ radiation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 17416–17421 (2004).
41. Westerheide, S. D., Mayo, M. W., Anest, V., Hanson, J. L. & Baldwin, A. S. The putative oncoprotein Bcl-3 induces cyclin D1 to stimulate G1 transition. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **21**, 8428–8436 (2001).
42. Rocha, S., Martin, A. M., Meek, D. W. & Perkins, N. D. p53 represses cyclin D1 transcription through down regulation of Bcl-3 and inducing increased association of the p52 NF-κB subunit with histone deacetylase 1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **23**, 4713–4727 (2003).
43. Wu, R. C. *et al.* Regulation of SRC-3 (pCIP/ACTR/ AIB-1/RAC-3/TRAM-1) coactivator activity by IkB kinase. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 3549–3561 (2002).

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

44. Park, K. J., Krishnan, V., O'Malley, B. W., Yamamoto, Y. & Gaynor, R. B. Formation of an IKKα-dependent transcription complex is required for estrogen receptor-mediated gene activation. *Mol. Cell* **18**, 71–82 (2005). A good example of NF-κB-independent regulation of transcription by IKKα.

45. Albanese, C. *et al.* IKKα regulates mitogenic signaling through transcriptional induction of cyclin D1 via Tcf. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **14**, 585–599 (2003).

46. Carayol, N. & Wang, C. Y. IKKα stabilizes cytosolic β-catenin by inhibiting both canonical and non-canonical degradation pathways. *Cell. Signal.* **18**, 1941–1946 (2006).

47. Lambert, C. *et al.* Regulation of β-catenin function by the IkB kinases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 42276–42286 (2001).

48. Deng, J. O. *et al.* β-catenin interacts with and inhibits NF-κB in human colon and breast cancer. *Cancer Cell* **2**, 323–334 (2002).

49. Kim, J. H. *et al.* Transcriptional regulation of a metastasis suppressor gene by Tip60 and β-catenin complexes. *Nature* **434**, 921–926 (2005).

50. Kwak, Y. T. *et al.* IkB kinase α regulates subcellular distribution and turnover of cyclin D1 by phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 33945–33952 (2005).

51. Tu, Z. *et al.* IKKα regulates estrogen-induced cell cycle progression by modulating E2F1 expression. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 6699–6706 (2006).

52. Hoberg, J. E., Yeung, F. & Mayo, M. W. SMRT derepression by the IkB kinase α: a prerequisite to NF-κB transcription and survival. *Mol. Cell* **16**, 245–255 (2004).

53. Hoshino, K. *et al.* IkB kinase-α is critical for interferon-α production induced by Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. *Nature* **440**, 949–953 (2006).

54. Anest, V. *et al.* A nucleosomal function for IkB kinase-α in NF-κB-dependent gene expression. *Nature* **423**, 659–663 (2003).

55. Yamamoto, Y., Verma, U. N., Prajapati, S., Kwak, Y. T. & Gaynor, R. B. Histone H3 phosphorylation by IKK-α is critical for cytokine-induced gene expression. *Nature* **423**, 655–659 (2003).

56. Soloaga, A. *et al.* MSK2 and MSK1 mediate the mitogen- and stress-induced phosphorylation of histone H3 and HMG-14. *EMBO J.* **22**, 2788–2797 (2003).

57. Duncan, E. A., Anest, V., Cogswell, P. & Baldwin, A. S. The kinases MSK1 and MSK2 are required for epidermal growth factor-induced, but not tumor necrosis factor-induced, histone H3 Ser10 phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 12521–12525 (2006).

58. Saccani, S., Pantano, S. & Natoli, G. p38-dependent marking of inflammatory genes for increased NF-κB recruitment. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 69–75 (2002).

59. Hu, Y. L. *et al.* IKKα controls formation of the epidermis independently of NF-κB. *Nature* **410**, 710–714 (2001).

60. Ohazama, A. *et al.* A dual role for IKKα in tooth development. *Dev. Cell* **6**, 219–227 (2004).

61. Verma, U. N., Yamamoto, Y., Prajapati, S. & Gaynor, R. B. Nuclear role of IκB Kinase-γ/NF-κB essential modulator (IKKγ/NEMO) in NF-κB-dependent gene expression. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 3509–3515 (2004).

62. Bracken, C. P., Whitelaw, M. L. & Peet, D. J. Activity of hypoxia-inducible factor 2α is regulated by association with the NF-κB essential modulator. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 14240–14251 (2005).

63. Li, J., Joo, S. H. & Tsai, M. D. An NF-κB-specific inhibitor, IkBa, binds to and inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase 4. *Biochemistry* **42**, 13476–13483 (2003).

64. Chang, N. S. The non-ankyrin C terminus of IkBα physically interacts with p53 in vivo and dissociates in response to apoptotic stress, hypoxia, DNA damage, and transforming growth factor-β1-mediated growth suppression. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 10323–10331 (2002).

65. Zhou, M., Gu, L., Zhu, N., Woods, W. G. & Findley, H. W. Transfection of a dominant-negative mutant NF-κB inhibitor (IkBm) represses p53-dependent apoptosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells: interaction of IkBm and p53. *Oncogene* **22**, 8137–8144 (2003).

66. Dreyfus, D. H., Nagasawa, M., Gelfand, E. W. & Ghoda, L. Y. Modulation of p53 activity by IkBa: evidence suggesting a common phylogeny between NF-κB and p53 transcription factors. *BMC Immunol.* **6**, 12 (2005).

67. Wu, B. Y., Woffendin, C., MacLachlan, I. & Nabel, G. J. Distinct domains of IkB-α inhibit human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication through NF-κB and Rev. *J. Virol.* **71**, 3161–3167 (1997).

68. Aguilera, C., Hoya-Arias, R., Haegeman, G., Espinosa, L. & Bigas, A. Recruitment of IkBα to the hes1 promoter is associated with transcriptional repression. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 16537–16542 (2004).

69. Zhong, H. H., Voll, R. E. & Ghosh, S. Phosphorylation of NF-κB p65 by PKA stimulates transcriptional activity by promoting a novel bivalent interaction with the coactivator CBP/p300. *Mol. Cell* **1**, 661–671 (1998).

70. Hoberg, J. E., Popko, A. E., Ramsey, C. S. & Mayo, M. W. IkB kinase α-mediated derepression of SMRT potentiates acetylation of RelA/p65 by p300. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 457–471 (2006). Interesting paper describing the complexities of NF-κB-mediated gene regulation, including the role of co-activators, co-repressors and post-translational modifications.

71. Chen, L. F. & Greene, W. C. Shaping the nuclear action of NF-κB. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **5**, 392–401 (2004).

72. Rocha, S., Campbell, K. J. & Perkins, N. D. p53- and Mdm2-independent repression of NF-κB transactivation by the ARF tumor suppressor. *Mol. Cell* **12**, 15–25 (2003).

73. Rocha, S., Garrett, M. D., Campbell, K. J., Schumm, K. & Perkins, N. D. Regulation of NF-κB and p53 through activation of ATR and Chk1 by the ARF tumour suppressor. *EMBO J.* **24**, 1157–1169 (2005). Describes how RelA can repress as well as activate transcription and how these contrasting functions can result from subunit phosphorylation and be linked to tumour-suppressor function.

74. Campbell, K. J., Witty, J. M., Rocha, S. & Perkins, N. D. Cisplatin mimics ARF tumor suppressor regulation of RelA (p65) nuclear factor-κB transactivation. *Cancer Res.* **66**, 929–935 (2006).

75. Campbell, K. J., Rocha, S. & Perkins, N. D. Active repression of antiapoptotic gene expression by RelA(p65) NF-κB. *Mol. Cell* **13**, 853–865 (2004).

76. Strozyk, E., Poppelmann, B., Schwarz, T. & Kulms, D. Differential effects of NF-κB on apoptosis induced by DNA-damaging agents: the type of DNA damage determines the final outcome. *Oncogene* **25**, 6239–6251 (2006).

77. Liu, J. *et al.* NF-κB is required for UV-induced JNK activation via induction of PKCδ. *Mol. Cell* **21**, 467–480 (2006).

78. Annrather, J., Racchumi, G. & ladecola, C. cis-acting, element-specific transcriptional activity of differentially phosphorylated nuclear factor-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 244–252 (2005).

79. Thompson, J. E. & Thompson, C. B. Putting the rap on Akt. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **22**, 4217–4226 (2004).

80. Madrid, L. V., Mayo, M. W., Reuther, J. Y. & Baldwin, A. S. Akt stimulates the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-κB through utilization of the IkB kinase and activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 18934–18940 (2001).

81. Jeong, S. J., Pise-Masison, C. A., Radonovich, M. F., Park, H. U. & Brady, J. N. Activated AKT regulates NF-κB activation, p53 inhibition and cell survival in HTLV-1-transformed cells. *Oncogene* **24**, 6719–6728 (2005).

82. Haller, D., Russo, M. P., Sartor, R. B. & Jobin, C. IKKβ and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt participate in non-pathogenic Gram-negative enteric bacteria-induced RelA phosphorylation and NF-κB activation in both primary and intestinal epithelial cell lines. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 38168–38178 (2002).

83. Mattioli, I. *et al.* Transient and selective NF-κB p65 serine 536 phosphorylation induced by T cell costimulation is mediated by IkB kinase β and controls the kinetics of p65 nuclear import. *J. Immunol.* **172**, 6336–6344 (2004).

84. Bohuslav, J., Chen, L. F., Kwon, H., Mu, Y. & Greene, W. C. p53 induces NF-κB activation by an IkB kinase-independent mechanism involving phosphorylation of p65 by ribosomal S6 kinase 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 26115–26125 (2004).

85. Lawrence, T., Bebien, M., Liu, G. Y., Nizet, V. & Karin, M. IKKα limits macrophage NF-κB activation and contributes to the resolution of inflammation. *Nature* **434**, 1138–1143 (2005).

86. Perkins, N. D. Achieving transcriptional specificity with NF-κB. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol.* **29**, 1433–1448 (1997).

87. Natoli, G., Saccani, S., Bosisiso, D. & Marazzi, I. Interactions of NF-κB with chromatin: the art of being at the right place at the right time. *Nature Immunol.* **6**, 439–445 (2005). Interesting review that discusses the importance of chromatin structure, including histone phosphorylation, for the regulation of NF-κB-dependent gene expression.

88. Merika, M. & Thanos, D. Enhanceosomes. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **11**, 205–208 (2001).

89. Falvo, J. V., Thanos, D. & Maniatis, T. Reversal of intrinsic DNA bends in the IFN-β gene enhancer by transcription factors and the architectural protein HMG I(Y). *Cell* **83**, 1101–1111 (1995).

90. Thanos, D. & Maniatis, T. Virus induction of human IFNβ gene expression requires the assembly of an enhanceosome. *Cell* **83**, 1091–1100 (1995).

91. Chapman, N. R. & Perkins, N. D. Inhibition of the RelA(p65) NF-κB subunit by Egr-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 4719–4725 (2000).

92. Natoli, G. & De Santa, F. Shaping alternative NF-κB-dependent gene expression programs: new clues to specificity. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 693–696 (2006).

93. Kumar, A., Lin, Z., SenBanerjee, S. & Jain, M. K. Tumor necrosis factor α-mediated reduction of KLF2 is due to inhibition of MEF2 by NF-κB and histone deacetylases. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 5893–5903 (2005).

94. Schumm, K., Rocha, S., Caamaño, J. & Perkins, N. D. Regulation of p53 tumour suppressor target gene expression by the p52 NF-κB subunit. *EMBO J.* **25**, 4820–4832 (2006).

95. Nadiminty, N. *et al.* Stat3 activation of NF-κB p100 processing involves CBP/p300-mediated acetylation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 7264–7269 (2006).

96. Kramer, O. H. *et al.* Acetylation of Stat1 modulates NF-κB activity. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 473–485 (2006).

97. Bosio, D. *et al.* A hyper-dynamic equilibrium between promoter-bound and nucleoplasmic dimers controls NF-κB-dependent gene activity. *EMBO J.* **25**, 798–810 (2006).

98. Merika, M., Williams, A. J., Chen, G. Y., Collins, T. & Thanos, D. Recruitment of CBP/p300 by the IFNβ enhanceosome is required for synergistic activation of transcription. *Mol. Cell* **1**, 277–287 (1998).

99. Ainbinder, E. *et al.* Mechanism of rapid transcriptional induction of tumor necrosis factor α-responsive genes by NF-κB. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 6354–6362 (2002).

100. Stathopoulos, A. & Levine, M. Dorsal gradient networks in the *Drosophila* embryo. *Dev. Biol.* **246**, 57–67 (2002).

101. Jono, H. *et al.* NF-κB is essential for induction of CYLD, the negative regulator of NF-κB: evidence for a novel inducible autoregulatory feedback pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 36171–36174 (2004).

102. Wertz, I. E. *et al.* De-ubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-κB signalling. *Nature* **430**, 694–699 (2004).

103. Trompouki, E. *et al.* CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme that negatively regulates NF-κB activation by TNFR family members. *Nature* **424**, 793–796 (2003).

104. Brummelkamp, T. R., Nijman, S. M. B., Dirac, A. M. G. & Bernards, R. Loss of the cylindromatosis tumour suppressor inhibits apoptosis by activating NF-κB. *Nature* **424**, 797–801 (2003).

105. Kovalenko, A. *et al.* The tumour suppressor CYLD negatively regulates NF-κB signalling by deubiquitination. *Nature* **424**, 801–805 (2003).

106. Massoumi, R., Chmielarska, K., Henncke, K., Pfeifer, A. & Fassler, R. Cyld inhibits tumor cell proliferation by blocking Bcl-3-dependent NF-κB signaling. *Cell* **125**, 665–677 (2006).

107. Krappmann, D. *et al.* The IkB kinase complex and NF-κB act as master regulators of lipopolysaccharide-induced gene expression and control subordinate activation of AP-1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 6488–6500 (2004). This paper is an excellent example of how NF-κB-induced genes, in this case AP1 family members, influence a second wave of NF-κB-dependent gene expression.

108. Werner, S. L., Barken, D. & Hoffmann, A. Stimulus specificity of gene expression programs determined by temporal control of IKK activity. *Science* **309**, 1857–1861 (2005).

109. Covert, M. W., Leung, T. H., Gaston, J. E. & Baltimore, D. Achieving stability of lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-κB activation. *Science* **309**, 1854–1857 (2005).

REVIEWS

110. Wietek, C., Miggin, S. M., Jefferies, C. A. & O’Neill, L. A. Interferon regulatory factor-3-mediated activation of the interferon-sensitive response element by Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 but not TLR3 requires the p65 subunit of NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 50923–50931 (2003).

111. Papa, S. *et al.* The NF-κB-mediated control of the JNK cascade in the antagonism of programmed cell death in health and disease. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 712–729 (2006).

112. Nakano, H. *et al.* Reactive oxygen species mediate crosstalk between NF-κB and JNK. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 730–737 (2006). References 111 nd 112 are comprehensive reviews that discuss the mechanisms linking NF-κB activity to the JNK-signalling pathway.

113. Kamata, H. *et al.* Reactive oxygen species promote TNFα-induced death and sustained JNK activation by inhibiting MAP kinase phosphatases. *Cell* **120**, 649–661 (2005).

114. Zhang, J. Y., Tao, S., Kimmel, R. & Khavari, P. A. CDK4 regulation by TNFR1 and JNK is required for NF-κB-mediated epidermal growth control. *J. Cell Biol.* **168**, 561–566 (2005).

115. Vousden, K. H. & Lu, X. Live or let die: the cell’s response to p53. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **2**, 594–604 (2002).

116. Tergaonkar, V., Pando, M., Vafa, O., Wahl, G. & Verma, I. p53 stabilization is decreased upon NFκB activation: a role for NFκB in acquisition of resistance to chemotherapy. *Cancer Cell* **1**, 493–503 (2002). Shows how, in some circumstances, the NF-κB and IKK pathway can suppress p53 activity through inducing HDM2 (or MDM2) expression.

117. Kashatus, D., Cogswell, P. & Baldwin, A. S. Expression of the Bcl-3 proto-oncogene suppresses p53 activation. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 225–235 (2006).

118. Webster, G. A. & Perkins, N. D. Transcriptional cross talk between NF-κB and p53. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 3485–3495 (1999).

119. Ryan, K. M., Ernst, M. K., Rice, N. R. & Vousden, K. H. Role of NF-κB in p53-mediated programmed cell death. *Nature* **404**, 892–897 (2000).

120. Fujioka, S. *et al.* Stabilization of p53 is a novel mechanism for proapoptotic function of NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 27549–27559 (2004).

121. Aleyasin, H. *et al.* Nuclear factor-κB modulates the p53 response in neurons exposed to DNA damage. *J. Neurosci.* **24**, 2963–2973 (2004).

122. Shetty, S. *et al.* Transcription factor NF-κB differentially regulates death receptor 5 expression involving histone deacetylase 1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 5404–5416 (2005).

123. Eymin, B. *et al.* p14ARF activates a Tip60-dependent and p53-independent ATM/ATR/CHK pathway in response to genotoxic stress. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 4339–4350 (2006).

124. Pascual, G. & Glass, C. K. Nuclear receptors versus inflammation: mechanisms of transrepression. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* **17**, 321–327 (2006). Clear and concise discussion of the complex relationship between nuclear receptors and the NF-κB pathway.

125. De Bosscher, K., Vanden Berghe, W. & Haegeman, G. The interplay between the glucocorticoid receptor and nuclear factor-κB or activator protein-1: molecular mechanisms for gene repression. *Endocrine Rev.* **24**, 488–522 (2003).

126. Ito, K., Chung, K. F. & Adcock, I. M. Update on glucocorticoid action and resistance. *J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.* **117**, 522–543 (2006).

127. Auphan, N., DiDonato, J. A., Rosette, C., Helmberg, A. & Karin, M. Immunosuppression by glucocorticoids: inhibition of NF-κB activity through induction of IkB synthesis. *Science* **270**, 286–290 (1995).

128. Scheinman, R. I., Cogswell, P. C., Lofquist, A. K. & Baldwin, A. S. Role of transcriptional activation of IkBa in mediation of immunosuppression by glucocorticoids. *Science* **270**, 283–286 (1995).

129. Sheppard, K. A. *et al.* Nuclear integration of glucocorticoid receptor and nuclear factor-κB signaling by CREB-binding protein and steroid receptor coactivator-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 29291–29294 (1998).

130. Ogawa, S. *et al.* Molecular determinants of crosstalk between nuclear receptors and toll-like receptors. *Cell* **122**, 707–721 (2005).

131. Ito, K., Barnes, P. J. & Adcock, I. M. Glucocorticoid receptor recruitment of histone deacetylase 2 inhibits interleukin-1β-induced histone H4 acetylation on lysines 8 and 12. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 6891–6903 (2000).

132. Luecke, H. F. & Yamamoto, K. R. The glucocorticoid receptor blocks P-TEFb recruitment by NFκB to effect promoter-specific transcriptional repression. *Genes Dev.* **19**, 1116–1127 (2005).

133. Aggarwal, B. B. & Shishodia, S. Molecular targets of dietary agents for prevention and therapy of cancer. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **71**, 1397–1421 (2006).

134. Davis, R. E. & Staudt, L. M. Molecular diagnosis of lymphoid malignancies by gene expression profiling. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **9**, 333–338 (2002).

135. Hanson, J. L., Hawke, N. A., Kashatus, D. & Baldwin, A. S. The nuclear factor κB subunits RelA/p65 and c-Rel potentiate but are not required for Ras-induced cellular transformation. *Cancer Res.* **64**, 7248–7255 (2004).

136. Greten, F. R. & Karin, M. The IKK/NF-κB activation pathway — a target for prevention and treatment of cancer. *Cancer Lett.* **206**, 193–199 (2004).

**Acknowledgements**

My apologies for any relevant reports I was unable to cite, either due to lack of space, the need to selectively choose examples or my oversight. Thanks to Cameron Bracken, Kirsteen Campbell, John O’Shea, Katie Schumm and Sonia Rocha for their critical reading of the manuscript and all members of the N.D.P. laboratory for their help and support. Research in the author’s laboratory is supported by a programme grant from Cancer Research UK together with funding from the Association of International Cancer Research (AICR) and the Wellcome Trust.

**Competing interests statement**

The author declares no competing financial interests.

**DATABASES**

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

HDM2 | HMG-I | IkBα | IkBβ | IkBe | IKK1 | IKK2 | NEMO | p100 | p105 | RelA | RelB

**FURTHER INFORMATION**

Neil D. Perkins’s homepage: http://www.dundee.ac.uk/biocentre/SLSBDIV3ndp.htm

Access to this links box is available online.
