
REVIEW

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum

# Drug Insight: resistance to methotrexate and other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs—from bench to bedside

Joost W van der Heijden, Ben AC Dijkmans, Rik J Scheper and Gerrit Jansen*

## SUMMARY

The chronic nature of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) means that patients require drug therapy for many years. Many RA patients, however, have to discontinue treatment because of drug-related toxic effects, loss of efficacy, or both. The underlying molecular cause for loss of efficacy of antirheumatic drugs is not fully understood, but it might be mediated, at least in part, by mechanisms shared with resistance to anticancer drugs. This Review outlines molecular mechanisms that could be involved in the onset of resistance to, or the loss of efficacy of, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs in RA patients, including methotrexate, sulfasalazine, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, and leflunomide. The mechanisms suggested are based on findings from experimental laboratory studies of specific drug-uptake and drug-efflux transporters belonging to the superfamily of multidrug-resistance transporters, alterations in intracellular drug metabolism, and genetic polymorphisms of drug transporters and metabolic enzymes. We also discuss strategies to overcome resistance and the current clinical studies aiming to predict response and risk of toxic effects. More in-depth knowledge of the mechanisms behind these features could help facilitate a more efficient use of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.

KEYWORDS DMARDs, methotrexate, multidrug-resistance proteins, resistance, rheumatoid arthritis

## REVIEW CRITERIA

We searched PubMed using the keywords “DMARDs”, “resistance”, “multidrug resistance”, “methotrexate”, “sulfasalazine” and “rheumatoid arthritis”. Searches included full text papers and abstracts from annual American College of Rheumatology (ACR) meetings and European League against Rheumatology (EULAR) meetings from 1995–2006. We have also included experimental data from our own research aimed at identifying the molecular mechanisms of resistance to DMARDs in experimental model systems and patients.

## INTRODUCTION

Despite the current success of biological therapies (inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor [TNF], interleukin-1β-receptor antagonists and antibodies to CD20),<sup>1–3</sup> disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) have an established place in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) because of their convenience, safety, and low related costs. One common phenomenon associated with chronic DMARD treatment, however, is a gradual reduction in drug efficacy, which could point to the onset of drug resistance. Increases in drug doses might partly regain therapeutic efficacy, but this approach also increases the risk of adverse effects and could ultimately lead to discontinuation of treatment. The issue of drug resistance as a cause for therapy failure has received considerable attention in the treatment of cancer and infectious diseases,<sup>4</sup> but has just started to be appreciated in RA treatment.<sup>5,6</sup> Whereas endpoint evaluations for anticancer drug resistance usually refer to a loss of the antiproliferative effects on target cells, DMARD resistance might be defined as a loss of ability to block the release of proinflammatory cytokines, in addition to a loss of antiproliferative effects.

This Review describes the current knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of cellular resistance to DMARDs (methotrexate, sulfasalazine, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, auranofin, aurothiomalate, ciclosporin, gold, and leflunomide). The suggested mechanisms are mainly based on the results of *in vitro* laboratory studies and theories about the emergence of DMARD resistance in RA. We also discuss potential strategies to deal with drug resistance.

## GENERAL FEATURES OF DRUG RESISTANCE

Human beings have defense mechanisms against daily exposure to hundreds or even thousands of xenobiotic substances present in our environment and food. For this reason, most chemically designed therapeutic drugs, including DMARDs, are recognized by target cells as

JW van der Heijden is a trainee in the MD/PhD program, BAC Dijkmans is a Full Professor in Rheumatology, and G Jansen is Head of the Experimental Rheumatology section in the Department of Rheumatology, and RJ Scheper holds a Chair in Experimental Pathology in the Department of Pathology, all at the VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

---

**Correspondence**

*Department of Rheumatology, Room 4A42, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands  
g.jansen@vumc.nl

**Received** 20 April 2006 **Accepted** 31 October 2006  
www.nature.com/clinicalpractice  
doi:10.1038/ncprheum0380

26 NATURE CLINICAL PRACTICE RHEUMATOLOGY  
JANUARY 2007 VOL 3 NO 1

©2007 Nature Publishing Group
foreign substances. Sooner or later, immunologic or cellular defense mechanisms will become operative and inactivate the drugs. In a clinical setting, such a process manifests as reduced drug efficacy, for which, at a molecular level, the onset of drug resistance might be an underlying cause.⁷⁻¹² Cellular drug resistance can be categorized under two main headings: inherent or primary resistance (referring to cells that are already resistant before receiving therapy) and acquired drug resistance (which indicates that cells were initially sensitive to drugs but developed resistance during the course of treatment). In RA treatment, a study by Morgan *et al.*¹³ showed that 5–10% of RA patients had inherent or primary resistance to DMARDs, which might account for the variable responses to DMARDs seen among RA patients during initial therapy. Similarly, some animal strains have displayed an inherent genetic basis for treatment failure of methotrexate in collagen-induced arthritis.¹⁴ The majority of cases of DMARD-treatment failure are, however, considered to be the result of various underlying mechanisms, some of which could be specific to the type of DMARD used.

### EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF DRUG RESISTANCE MECHANISMS

The mechanisms of resistance to DMARDs might be similar to those of resistance to anticancer and antimicrobial drugs. Box 1 outlines several mechanisms of drug resistance for disease-specific target cells; in RA, the causes of resistance could involve cells of the immune system (T lymphocytes and macrophages) implicated in the disease pathophysiology. Possible mechanisms of drug resistance include impaired drug delivery to target cells, defective cellular uptake, increased drug extrusion, alterations in intracellular drug activation, target inhibition, processes downstream of target inhibition, or a combination of these features. For methotrexate, an example of impaired drug delivery is its metabolism to the less active 7-hydroxymethotrexate. For sulfasalazine, the activity of intestinal drug-efflux transporters is a determining factor in variability of plasma drug concentrations.¹⁵

Increased drug efflux has been recognized as an important mechanism of drug resistance. Cell-membrane proteins responsible for drug efflux belong to the family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters.⁴,¹⁶ A wide range of structurally and functionally different

---

**Box 1 Mechanisms of cellular resistance to different DMARDs.**

#### Methotrexate
- Defective transport via reduced folate carrier (decreased protein levels, altered kinetics)
- Slow transport via folate receptor (lower affinity for methotrexate than for folic acid)
- Increased drug efflux via ATP-binding cassette (ABC) subfamily transporters ABCC1–ABCC5 and ABCG2 (polymorphic variations)
- Impaired polyglutamylation (decreased expression or activity of folylpolyglutamate synthetase protein, increased expression or activity of folylpolyglutamate hydrolase protein, polymorphic variants)
- Altered target enzymes (increased dihydrofolate reductase activity or expression, kinetically altered dihydrofolate reductase, increased 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase activity, polymorphic variants)
- Increased salvage (exogenous or endogenous folates, purines)
- Increased metabolism of methotrexate to 7-hydroxymethotrexate in liver

#### Sulfasalazine
- Increased drug efflux via ABCG2 (polymorphic variants)
- Increased metabolism to 5-aminosalicylic acid and sulfapyridine in colon

#### Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
- Increased drug efflux via ABCB1, ABCC1 (polymorphic variants)
- Sequestration in intracellular compartments (lysosomes)

#### Auranofin, aurothiomalate, and gold
- Increased expression of metallothioneins (metal-binding proteins)

#### Leflunomide
- Altered target enzyme (increased activity or expression of dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase, kinetically altered protein)

#### Azathioprine
- Increased drug efflux via ABCC4 or ABCC5
- Increased activity of thiopurine methyltransferase linked to genetic polymorphism

#### Glucocorticoids
- Decreased levels of glucocorticoid receptor α
- Increased ratio of glucocorticoid receptor β isoforms to glucocorticoid receptor α isoforms
- Diminished phosphorylation of glucocorticoid receptors, leading to shorter half-life
- Diminished crosstalk with transcription factors
- Enhanced drug efflux via ABCB1

---

JANUARY 2007 VOL 3 NO 1 VAN DER HEIJDEN ET AL.  
NATURE CLINICAL PRACTICE RHEUMATOLOGY 27  
©2007 Nature Publishing Group
drugs can be pumped out of the cell by these proteins, leading to multidrug resistance. Several DMARDs seem to be among the substrates of ABC transporters.

A summary of reported mechanisms of resistance to various DMARDs is shown in Box 1. On the basis of laboratory and preclinical data from all the DMARDs, resistance mechanisms to methotrexate have been best characterized, [17,18] and are shown in Figure 1. A first limiting step in the mechanism of action of methotrexate is cellular uptake via the reduced folate carrier (RFC, also designated SLC19A1), which is constitutively expressed in almost all immune effector cells, [19] or via folate receptor-β, which has a restricted expression on activated macrophages, such as in the synovium. [20] Reduced expression of, or alterations in the transport kinetics of, these proteins will diminish cellular uptake of methotrexate, resulting in lower intracellular concentrations of the drug, which will thus not reach thresholds for therapeutic effects. Within the cell, methotrexate is converted to polyanionic polyglutamated forms via the action of the enzyme folylpolyglutamate synthetase, which improves drug retention because the polyglutamated forms are poorer substrates for efflux transporters such as ABCC1–5 or ABCG2. [21,22] Thus, cells with a low capacity to retain polyglutamated forms of methotrexate (because of decreased folylpolyglutamate synthetase activity or increased activity of the breakdown enzyme folylpolyglutamate hydrolase) will be more prone to reduced activity because of drug-efflux mechanisms mediated by transporter mechanisms. Polyglutamated forms of methotrexate inhibit several key enzymes in folate metabolism (dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase) and purine metabolism (aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase). Elevated levels of these enzymes or kinetically altered enzymes with lower binding affinities will necessitate higher doses of methotrexate to achieve optimum inhibition.

For the DMARD sulfasalazine, increased drug efflux via ABCG2 has been reported as a potential mechanism of cellular resistance. [23,24] Molecular mechanisms of resistance for the antimalarial DMARDs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine include drug sequestration in lysosomal compartments or drug efflux via ABC transporters ABCB1 (also called MDR1 or P-glycoprotein) and ABCC1. [25] With respect to the DMARDS auranofin and aurothiomalate,

studies by Glennas *et al.* [26] revealed that upregulated expression of the metal-binding protein metallothionein was the dominant mechanism of acquired resistance to this DMARD. The DMARD azathioprine is a prodrug of the nucleoside analog 6-mercaptopurine. At least two mechanisms could be implicated in diminished azathioprine activity: one relates to variations in metabolism (and toxicity) associated with specific gene polymorphisms of the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase, [27] and in the other, two drug-efflux transporters, ABCC4 and ABCC5, mediate cellular efflux of 6-mercaptopurine to confer resistance. [28] Cellular resistance to ciclosporin has been reported in two laboratory studies but the molecular basis for resistance was not disclosed. [5] Preliminary reports investigating mechanisms of resistance to leflunomide in B cells revealed a marked upregulation of its target enzyme dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase, [29] which, therefore, requires higher drug doses in order to be effectively inhibited. Finally, two reviews have summarized molecular mechanisms of resistance to glucocorticoids in RA. These mechanisms might involve reduced levels of the α isoform of the glucocorticoid receptor and an increased ratio of the β isoform to the α isoform (the β isoform lacks the high-affinity glucocorticoid-binding capacity and acts as a dominant-negative regulator of the α isoform), impaired crosstalk with transcription factors, or increased drug efflux via the multidrug-resistance protein ABCB1. [30,31]

Clinical laboratory studies have identified several molecular mechanisms that could contribute to a reduction in the efficacy of various DMARDs. To test whether these mechanisms, alone or in combination, are actually operative in a clinical setting will require further evaluation of specific markers for DMARD resistance in prospective clinical studies. One additional point of consideration is that the onset of resistance to a specific DMARD in immune effector cells might be accompanied by other genotypic and phenotypic changes that collaterally influence the efficacy of other DMARDs, the release of proinflammatory cytokines, or both. Findings from *in vitro* studies showed that acquired resistance to chloroquine in T cells is accompanied by a markedly reduced release of TNF and interleukin 8, along with a marked loss of sensitivity to glucocorticoids. [25] Conversely, acquired resistance to sulfasalazine

Figure 1 Mechanisms of pharmacokinetic and cellular resistance to methotrexate. Metabolism of methotrexate in the liver to partly inactive 7-hydroxymethotrexate reduces plasma concentrations of methotrexate and creates competition for cellular uptake via RFC, which also internalizes reduced folates and folic acid, although with low affinity for the latter. Folate receptors mediate low affinity endocytosis of methotrexate. Quantitative or qualitative alterations in RFCs or folate-receptor expression confer transport-related resistance to methotrexate, as do high levels of exogenous folates competing for cell entry. Intracellularly, methotrexate is metabolized to polyglutamated forms by FPGS, and these are broken down by FPGH. The monoglutarated forms and, to some extent, polyglutamated forms are expelled via transporters ABCC1–ABCC5 and ABCG2. ABCB1 does not transport anionic drugs such as methotrexate. Polyglutamated forms of methotrexate can inhibit several key enzymes in folate metabolism, such as DHFR and TS, preventing de novo purine biosynthesis by APRTFase and AICARTFase. Enzyme inhibition, folate depletion, and direct or indirect effects on cytokine release signaling pathways (such as those mediated by NFκB and IKK) all create routes via which methotrexate could suppress RA.⁵¹,⁵⁸,⁵⁹ Abbreviations: 5-CH₃-THF, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate; 5,10-CH₂-THF, 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate; 7-OH-MTX, 7-hydroxymethotrexate; ABC, ATP-binding cassette, subfamily specific; AICARTFase, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase; APRTFase, amidophosphoribosyltransferase; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; FA, folic acid; FH₂, dihydrofolate; FH₄, tetrahydrofolate; FPGH, folylpolyglutamate hydrolase; FPGS, folylpolyglutamate synthetase; FR, folate receptor; IKK, inhibitor of IκB kinase; LV, leucovorin; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; MTX, methotrexate; MTX-PG; polyglutamated forms of methotrexate; NFκB, nuclear factor κB; RFC, reduced folate carrier; TS, thymidylate synthase; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

in the same T cells is accompanied by a markedly increased sensitivity to glucocorticoids.²³ Hence, upon chronic exposure, DMARDs might exert both beneficial and adverse pleiotropic effects. Such effects might have been unrecognized when the anti-inflammatory effects of specific DMARDs were tested over a short time frame in a laboratory setting.

DMARD RESISTANCE OR INEFFICACY IN RA

Observational studies and meta-analyses of treatment efficacy, average treatment duration and adverse effects for RA patients consistently demonstrate variable responses for individual DMARDs and DMARD combinations.⁷,⁸,¹⁰–¹²,³²,³³ For example, in a 10-year follow-up study (1985–1994) that included 2,296 RA patients, 25% of patients
had to discontinue DMARD treatment owing to inefficacy, and 20% discontinued treatment as a result of adverse effects. ${ }^{7,33}$ The percentage of RA patients who had to discontinue DMARD mono- therapy for inefficacy was highest for auranofin (37%), sulfasalazine (36%), and the anti- malarials chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine (25%), and lowest for methotrexate (9%). ${ }^{7}$ Unfortunately, except for clinical end points, the molecular basis for DMARD inefficacy was not further unraveled in these studies. This lack of findings was probably the result of an insuf- ficient number of clinical samples and small sample sizes of peripheral blood or synovial tissue, which made biochemical and molecular analyses of potential DMARD-resistance-related parameters impossible.

### Multidrug resistance and RA

Over the past decade, attempts have been made to associate or correlate loss of DMARD efficacy with one or more of the resistance parameters that have been identified in laboratory studies. In particular, studies have assessed the poten- tial role of multidrug-resistance proteins and aimed to establish parameters that could predict patient response to methotrexate. Early studies by Salmon and Dalton ${ }^{34}$ suggested that the drug- efflux transporter ABCB1 might mediate the cellular release of TNF, but this hypothesis could not be confirmed experimentally. Maillefert et al. ${ }^{35}$ observed ABCB1 expression on periph- eral blood cells in higher percentages of pred- nisone-treated RA patients than controls (10.7% versus 3.3%, respectively). This finding might be consistent with the notion that prednisone is a substrate for ABCB1. In a small group of eight RA patients, Llorente et al. ${ }^{36}$ noted a higher percentage of peripheral blood lymphocytes with high ABCB1 activity among patients who did not respond to therapy than among those who did (34.4% versus 3.3%). Finally, Yudoh et al. ${ }^{37}$ noted higher percentages of T-helper-1 cells expressing ABCB1 in a group of RA patients who did not respond to therapy with bucillamine and sulfasalazine: 9.6% at baseline and 15.4% after 3 months of therapy versus 3.3% in responding patients at both baseline and 3 months of therapy. Commenting on this study, Rahman et al. ${ }^{38}$ suggested that increased ABCB1 expression might also contribute to resistance to methotrexate and referred to the findings of Norris et al. ${ }^{39}$ In the study by Norris et al., however, the human lymphoblastic cell lines used already had an extremely high level of resistance to methotrexate (four orders of magnitude higher than their methotrexate- sensitive counterparts) as measured from the defective cellular uptake via RFC. In addition to this finding, ABCB1 contributed only a minor extent to the methotrexate resistant pheno- type. Given the general substrate preference of ABCB1 (for neutral or cationic compounds) a general role in transporting an anionic drug such as methotrexate seems unlikely. Studies of ABCB1 in reconstituted vesicles produced similar findings. The involvement of other drug transporters in methotrexate efflux has been demonstrated (Figure 1) and could contribute to resistance to this drug. Preliminary data by Oerlemans et al. ${ }^{40}$ show that the transporters ABCC1, ABCC5 and ABCG2 could be identi- fied on monocyte-derived macrophages of RA patients. Detailed studies of the presence of drug-efflux transporters in RA synovial tissue are lacking. Preliminary data from our labora- tory revealed the presence of ABCG2 on macro- phages in the synovial sublining of a small group of RA patients. ${ }^{41}$ Studies are required to further elaborate on, or confirm possible correlations with, DMARD efficacy.

### Multidrug resistance and inflammation

As well as their possible role in DMARD resist- ance, drug-efflux transporters have other physio- logic functions. The substrates of ABCB1, ABCC1–ABCC5 and ABCG2, for example, include leukotrienes, prostaglandins, cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP, and steroids, through which inflammatory responses can be modulated. ${ }^{5}$ Furthermore, evidence increasingly shows that the transcriptional regulation of these trans- porters involves cytokine mediation. ${ }^{42}$ Hence, basal expression of individual drug-efflux trans- porters on immune effector cells of RA patients could be a reflection of disease activity at the time therapy is started. Hider et al. ${ }^{43}$ showed that ABCC1 expression on peripheral blood cells of RA patients declined compared with baseline after 6 months of therapy with methotrexate. Consistent with the notion of cytokine media- tion, expression of this drug-efflux transporter might be upregulated again when the efficacy of methotrexate treatment is reduced over time.

### Methotrexate efficacy or resistance in RA

The discovery of different mechanisms of resistance to methotrexate from in vitro studies
has led to the identification of common mechanisms for sensitivity or resistance in RA patients. Stranzl *et al.*<sup>44</sup> observed in a cross-sectional study that messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of folylpolyglutamate synthetase were negatively correlated with response to methotrexate therapy. In 55% of 141 RA patients, no folylpolyglutamate synthetase mRNA was measurable; the response rate to methotrexate therapy was significantly higher among these patients than among patients with folylpolyglutamate synthetase mRNA expression (57% versus 33%, *P* = 0.005). A positive correlation would have been expected between expression and response, as proficient folylpolyglutamate synthetase activity should allow better intracellular retention of methotrexate; however, as cellular activation or proliferation can upregulate folylpolyglutamate synthetase mRNA levels and activity, the reduced response rates might reflect augmented disease activity.

In a study of 163 RA patients, Wolf *et al.*<sup>45</sup> analyzed parameters of cellular uptake transporters (RFC mRNA) and efflux transporters (functional activity of ABCC1–ABCC4). Patients with high RFC activity and low ABCC activity might be expected to respond well to methotrexate treatment. Irrespective of RFC status, however, more patients with ABCC activity on peripheral blood cells had better response rates, according to the European League Against Rheumatism criteria, than those with a low ABCC activity (53–60% versus 29%, respectively). Whether low levels of RFC mRNA were actually translated into negligible RFC protein levels was not established, and it is unclear how defective methotrexate uptake could confer a good response. These parameters should be further evaluated in prospective studies.

Several groups have investigated the contribution of common polymorphisms of genes coding for folate or methotrexate transporters, such as RFC, and key enzymes in folate or purine metabolism (Figure 1).<sup>46–51</sup> They have been searching for associations with toxic effects and response to methotrexate in RA patients. Dervieux *et al.*<sup>47</sup> reported that RA patients with homozygous variant genotypes, such as 80AA in the RFC region, 347GG in the aminoimidazolecarboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase region, and two 28-bp tandem repeats in the thymidylate synthase enhancer region (*2/*2), had a 3.7-fold increased likelihood of a good response after at least 3 months' therapy. In addition, patients with red blood cell concentrations of methotrexate long-chain polyglutamates of higher than 60 nmol/l were 14 times more likely to have a good response.

In another cross-sectional study, Dervieux *et al.*<sup>48</sup> showed that RA patients harboring the 401TT genotype in the promoter region of folylpolyglutamate hydrolase, a lysosomal folate/methotrexate polyglutamate breakdown enzyme, were 4.8-fold more likely to have long-chain methotrexate polyglutamates in their red blood cells than patients with the CC or CT genotypes. A composite of cumulative homozygous genotypes associated with toxic side effects included methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677TT, thymidylate synthase enhancer region *2/*2, aminoimidazolecarboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase 347GG and serine hydroxymethyltransferase 1420CC.<sup>49</sup> For methotrexate treatment in early RA, Wessels *et al.*<sup>50</sup> observed that patients with the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 1298AA and 677CC genotypes showed a greater clinical improvement than those with the other genotype combinations, and patients carrying the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 1298C allele were more prone to methotrexate-related toxic effects. For all these polymorphic variants, the extent to which they translate into functionally altered proteins in terms of kinetics, stability, or other properties needs to be established. Whether these features are causative in relation to methotrexate inefficacy or toxic effects also requires clarification. Ultimately, these polymorphic variants should prove their value in predicting responsiveness and toxicity in prospective studies.

### STRATEGIES TO OVERCOME DMARD RESISTANCE

Since resistance to anticancer drugs has various causes, several strategies have been proposed to overcome resistance,<sup>4</sup> some of which might also apply to DMARD resistance in RA. In a clinical setting, when loss of efficacy for a particular DMARD is observed, making controlled, incremental increases in dose is a logical option until toxic effects manifest or, if drugs are used in combination, drug interactions become apparent.<sup>52,53</sup> In general, alternating drugs, either in a step-up approach (therapy is started as monotherapy and drug(s) are added in cases of insufficient response) or a step-down approach (therapy is started with multiple drugs but one is stopped at a time), is thought to slow the onset of drug resistance seen with monotherapy. In cases

Box 2 General mechanisms of cellular drug resistance.

- Impaired drug delivery to cells
  - Pharmacokinetic resistance or bioavailability (impaired intestinal absorption, raised urinary secretion, extensive protein binding)
  
- Impaired cellular uptake
  - Quantitative or qualitative defects of specific drug-uptake transporters
  - Increased cellular efflux
  
- Impaired drug activation or increased intracellular drug inactivation
  - Defective activation (phosphorylation or polyglutamylation) of drugs
  - Raised metabolism to nonactive drugs
  - Sequestration in intracellular compartments (e.g. lysosomes)
  
- Alterations in drug target levels
  - Increase in drug target (enzyme) levels (e.g. by transcriptional activation or gene amplification)
  - Altered target (modified drug-binding properties)
  
- Altered events downstream of target
  - Improved repair of drug-induced damage
  - Defective drug-induced apoptosis
  - Improved bypassing of drug-induced effect

ABCG2-knockout mice had markedly altered pharmacokinetics for sulfasalazine; plasma levels were more than 100-fold higher than in control mice. These same raised plasma levels of sulfasalazine could be achieved in normal mice by administering gefitinib, an ABCG2 inhibitor with sulfasalazine. This example suggests that when DMARDs are substrates for drug-efflux transporters, therapy with transporter blockers could modulate plasma levels, reducing the risk of adverse effects.

Accumulated knowledge about resistance mechanisms for methotrexate has led to the rational design of second-generation folate antagonists. Use of these drugs might overcome the issue of methotrexate resistance, because they are more efficiently taken up by RFC and are better substrates for folylpolyglutamate synthetase, which prevents efflux by drug exporters.⁵⁶ Preliminary results in ex vivo experiments indicate that some of these second-generation folate antagonists are potent inhibitors of TNF production in activated T cells of RA patients. Some second-generation folate antagonists might also target folate receptors (see Figure 1). By following this route of entry, they could bypass efflux routes encountered after cell entry via the RFC route. The current status of this research is not, however, advanced enough to predict whether any of the second-generation therapies will be able to replace methotrexate.

where combination DMARD therapy has proved unsuccessful, addition of a third DMARD has proved to be highly efficacious in certain combinations (e.g. methotrexate plus sulfasalazine plus hydroxychloroquine⁵⁴ or methotrexate plus sulfasalazine plus prednisolone⁵⁵). Whether the superiority of these triple-therapy schedules is explained by minimizing the contribution of resistance-related parameters is not fully clear.²⁵

When a specific mechanism of resistance has been identified for a type of drug, including DMARDs, strategies to overcome resistance might include engagement with, bypassing, or taking advantage of, the mode of resistance. Engagement, for example in the case of drug-efflux transporters, could involve the use of inhibitors specific to these proteins. In cancer chemotherapy, however, this approach has, for various reasons, had limited success.⁴ The lower drug doses given to RA patients might make an engagement strategy more efficacious than in cancer treatment, but the likelihood of this outcome has not yet been established.

Blocking of drug-efflux transporters could raise plasma and intracellular drug concentrations. Zaher et al.¹⁵ showed that

CONCLUSIONS

Given the long duration of drug treatment that most RA patients face, maintaining the efficacy of DMARDs and biological agents for as long as possible is a challenge.³,⁵⁷ When efficacy is insufficient or lost, rheumatologists switch to alternative regimens, the long-lasting effects of which might be unpredictable. Interdisciplinary research into drug resistance has provided extensive knowledge of mechanisms associated with resistance and toxic effects. Some of the findings might apply to DMARD treatment in RA.

Laboratory studies have revealed various factors that can contribute to diminished activity of specific DMARDs (Box 2), some of which are currently being evaluated in clinical practice. Of particular interest are studies aiming to predict response to methotrexate, when it is used as the main drug in RA treatment. The most useful studies will assess response in relation to specific resistance-related parameters during the course of therapy that might precede clinical signs of
loss of efficacy. This approach will allow the extrapolation of data into predictive criteria. Thus, pharmacogenetically guided, prospective clinical studies in early RA are warranted.

The investigation of ways to make more efficient use of the currently available DMARDs would also be useful. For example, modulation of pharmacokinetics by blocking intestinal drug-efflux transporters and ways in which second-generation of drugs might overcome resistance deserve further attention.

Finally, beyond the level of immune effector cells in peripheral blood, more insight into factors of DMARD resistance related to inflamed synovial tissue would be helpful to assist therapeutic interventions. Any extension of DMARD efficacy over time in monotherapy or in combination with other DMARDs or biological agents will be beneficial from therapeutic and socioeconomic perspectives.

### KEY POINTS

- Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and anticancer drugs share common molecular mechanisms of resistance
- Resistance to DMARDs can be acquired by upregulation of drug-efflux proteins belonging to the family of multidrug-resistance transporters
- Multidrug-resistance proteins exert primary physiologic functions in the cellular export of inflammatory mediators
- The current knowledge of molecular mechanisms of resistance to methotrexate facilitates the prediction of patient response to methotrexate by target-directed genetic and biochemical screening of blood cells
- Identification of the molecular mechanisms of resistance to various DMARDs opens up new strategies for circumvention of drug resistance

### References

1. Smolen JS and Steiner G (2003) Therapeutic strategies for rheumatoid arthritis. *Nat Rev Drug Discov* **2**: 473–488
2. O'Dell JR (2004) Therapeutic strategies for rheumatoid arthritis. *N Engl J Med* **350**: 2591–2602
3. Goekoop-Ruiterman YP et al. (2005) Clinical and radiographic outcomes of four different treatment strategies in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (the BeSt study): a randomized, controlled trial. *Arthritis Rheum* **52**: 3381–3390
4. Szakacs G et al. (2006) Targeting multidrug resistance in cancer. *Nat Rev Drug Discov* **5**: 219–234
5. Jansen G et al. (2003) Multidrug resistance proteins in rheumatoid arthritis, role in disease-modifying antirheumatic drug efficacy and inflammatory processes: an overview. *Scand J Rheumatol* **32**: 325–336

6. Wollheim FA (2003) Drug resistance in rheumatology: an area in search of investigators. *Curr Rheumatol Rep* **5**: 333–335
7. Fleischmann RM (2005) Is there a need for new therapies for rheumatoid arthritis? *J Rheumatol* **73** (Suppl): S3–S7
8. Choy EH et al. (2005) A meta-analysis of the efficacy and toxicity of combining disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis based on patient withdrawal. *Rheumatology* (Oxford) **44**: 1414–1421
9. Nurmohamed MT and Dijkmans BA (2005) Efficacy, tolerability and cost effectiveness of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and biologic agents in rheumatoid arthritis. *Drugs* **65**: 661–694
10. Aletaha D and Smolen JS (2002) Effectiveness profiles and dose dependent retention of traditional disease modifying antirheumatic drugs for rheumatoid arthritis. An observational study. *J Rheumatol* **29**: 1631–1638
11. Bingham S and Emery P (2000) Resistant rheumatoid arthritis clinics—a necessary development? *Rheumatology* (Oxford) **39**: 2–5
12. Wolfe F (1995) The epidemiology of drug treatment failure in rheumatoid arthritis. *Baillieres Clin Rheumatol* **9**: 619–632
13. Morgan C et al. (2003) Contribution of patient related differences to multidrug resistance in rheumatoid arthritis. *Ann Rheum Dis* **62**: 15–19
14. Delano DL et al. (2005) Genetically based resistance to the antiinflammatory effects of methotrexate in the air-pouch model of acute inflammation. *Arthritis Rheum* **52**: 2567–2575
15. Zaher H et al. (2006) Breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp/abcg2) is a major determinant of sulfasalazine absorption and elimination in mouse. *Mol Pharm* **3**: 55–61
16. Borst P and Elferink RO (2002) Mammalian ABC transporters in health and disease. *Annu Rev Biochem* **71**: 537–592
17. Gorlick R et al. (1996) Intrinsic and acquired resistance to methotrexate in acute leukemia. *N Engl J Med* **335**: 1041–1048
18. Rots MG et al. (2000) Classification of ex vivo methotrexate resistance in acute lymphoblastic and myeloid leukaemia. *Br J Haematol* **110**: 791–800
19. Matherly LH and Goldman ID (2003) Membrane transport of folates. *Vitam Horm* **66**: 403–456
20. Nakashima-Matsushita N et al. (1999) Selective expression of folate receptor beta and its possible role in methotrexate transport in synovial macrophages from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **42**: 1609–1616
21. Hooijberg JH et al. (1999) Antifolate resistance mediated by the multidrug resistance proteins MRP1 and MRP2. *Cancer Res* **59**: 2532–2535
22. Shafran A et al. (2005) ABCG2 harboring the Gly482 mutation confers high-level resistance to various hydrophilic antifolates. *Cancer Res* **65**: 8414–8422
23. Van der Heijden J et al. (2004) Acquired resistance of human T cells to sulphasalazine: stability of the resistant phenotype and sensitivity to non-related DMARDs. *Ann Rheum Dis* **63**: 131–137
24. Van der Heijden J et al. (2004) Development of sulphasalazine resistance in human T cells induces expression of the multidrug resistance transporter ABCG2 (BCRP) and augmented production of TNFalpha. *Ann Rheum Dis* **63**: 138–143
25. Oerlemans R et al. (2006) Acquired resistance to chloroquine in human CEM T cells is mediated by multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 and provokes high levels of cross-resistance to glucocorticoids. *Arthritis Rheum* **54**: 557–568
26. Glennas A and Rugstad HE (1986) Cultured human cells with high levels of gold-binding cytosolic metallothionein are not resistant to the growth inhibitory effect of sodium aurothiomalate. *Ann Rheum Dis* **45**: 101–109

JANUARY 2007 VOL 3 NO 1 VAN DER HEIJDEN ET AL.  
NATURE CLINICAL PRACTICE RHEUMATOLOGY 33  

©2007 Nature Publishing Group  
www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum

**Acknowledgments**

Work described in this Review was supported by grants from the Dutch Arthritis Association and The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research. JW van der Heijden is a recipient of the 2006 Rheumatology Grant from the Dutch Association for Rheumatology. We apologize to authors whose work could not be cited for space reasons.

**Competing interests**

The authors declared they have no competing interests.

---

27 Clunie GP and Lennard L (2004) Relevance of thiopurine methyltransferase status in rheumatology patients receiving azathioprine. *Rheumatology* (Oxford) **43**: 13–18

28 Wielinga PR et al. (2002) Thiopurine metabolism and identification of the thiopurine metabolites transported by MRP4 and MRP5 overexpressed in human embryonic kidney cells. *Mol Pharmacol* **62**: 1321–1331

29 Loffler M et al. (2004) Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase mRNA and protein expression analysis in normal and drug-resistant cells. *Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids* **23**: 1281–1285

30 Chikanza IC and Kozaci DL (2004) Corticosteroid resistance in rheumatoid arthritis: molecular and cellular perspectives. *Rheumatology* **43**: 1337–1345

31 Buttgeireit F et al. (2004) Glucocorticoids in the treatment of rheumatic diseases: an update on the mechanisms of action. *Arthritis Rheum* **50**: 3408–3417

32 Maetzel A et al. (2000) Meta-analysis of treatment termination rates among rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs. *Rheumatology* (Oxford) **39**: 975–981

33 Galindo-Rodriguez G et al. (1999) Disappointing long-term results with disease modifying antirheumatic drugs. A practice based study. *J Rheumatol* **26**: 2337–2343

34 Salmon SE and Dalton WS (1996) Relevance of multidrug resistance to rheumatoid arthritis: development of a new therapeutic hypothesis. *J Rheumatol* **44** (Suppl): S97–S101

35 Maillefert JF et al. (1996) Expression of the multidrug resistance glycoprotein 170 in the peripheral blood lymphocytes of rheumatoid arthritis patients. The percentage of lymphocytes expressing glycoprotein 170 is increased in patients treated with prednisolone. *Br J Rheumatol* **35**: 430–435

36 Llorente L et al. (2000) Multidrug resistance-1 (MDR-1) in rheumatic autoimmune disorders. Part I: increased P-glycoprotein activity in lymphocytes from rheumatoid arthritis patients might influence disease outcome. *Joint Bone Spine* **67**: 30–39

37 Yudoh K et al. (1999) Increased expression of multidrug resistance of glycoprotein on Th1 cells correlates with drug resistance in rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **42**: 2014–2015

38 Rahman P et al. (2000) Increased MDR1 P-glycoprotein expression in methotrexate resistance: comment on the article by Yudoh et al. *Arthritis Rheum* **43**: 1661–1662

39 Norris MD et al. (1996) Involvement of MDR1 P-glycoprotein in multifactorial resistance to methotrexate. *Int J Cancer* **65**: 613–619

40 Oerlemans R et al. (2005) Differential expression of multidrug resistance-related proteins on monocyte-derived macrophages from rheumatoid arthritis patients. *Arthritis Res Ther* **7** (Suppl 1): P83

41 Van der Heijden JW et al. (2005) Expression of the multidrug resistance protein BCRP in synovial tissue of RA patients—a marker for inflammation or resistance to MTX? *Arthritis Rheum* **52** (Suppl): S540

42 Scotto KW (2003) Transcriptional regulation of ABC drug transporters. *Oncogene* **22**: 7496–7511

43 Hider SL et al. (2006) Down-regulation of MRP1 expression in early RA patients exposed to methotrexate as a first DMARD. *Ann Rheum Dis* **65**: 1449–1455

44 Stranzl T et al. (2003) Expression of folylpolyglutamyl synthetase predicts poor response to methotrexate therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Clin Exp Rheumatol* **21**: 27–32

45 Wolf J et al. (2005) Expression of resistance markers to methotrexate predicts clinical improvement in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Ann Rheum Dis* **64**: 564–568

46 Ranganathan P et al. (2003) Will pharmacogenetics allow better prediction of methotrexate toxicity and efficacy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? *Ann Rheum Dis* **62**: 4–9

47 Dervieux T et al. (2004) Polyglutamation of methotrexate with common polymorphisms in reduced folate carrier, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase, and thymidylate synthase are associated with methotrexate effects in rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **50**: 2766–2774

48 Dervieux T et al. (2004) Contribution of common polymorphisms in reduced folate carrier and gamma-glutamylhydrolase to methotrexate polyglutamate levels in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Pharmacogenetics* **14**: 733–739

49 Weisman MH et al. (2006) Risk genotypes in folate-dependent enzymes and their association with methotrexate-related side effects in rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **54**: 607–612

50 Wessels JA et al. (2006) Efficacy and toxicity of methotrexate in early rheumatoid arthritis are associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms in genes coding for folate pathway enzymes. *Arthritis Rheum* **54**: 1087–1095

51 Kremer JM (2004) Toward a better understanding of methotrexate. *Arthritis Rheum* **50**: 1370–1382

52 Smolen JS et al. (2005) Superior efficacy of combination therapy for rheumatoid arthritis: fact or fiction? *Arthritis Rheum* **52**: 2975–2983

53 Jansen G et al. (2004) Sulfasalazine is a potent inhibitor of the reduced folate carrier: implications for combination therapies with methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **50**: 2130–2139

54 O’Dell JR et al. (2002) Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with methotrexate and hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate and sulfasalazine, or a combination of the three medications. *Arthritis Rheum* **46**: 1164–1170

55 Goekoop-Ruiterman YP et al. (2005) Clinical and radiographic outcomes of four different treatment strategies in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (the BeSt study): a randomized, controlled trial. *Arthritis Rheum* **52**: 3381–3390

56 Rots MG et al. (1999) Circumvention of methotrexate resistance in childhood leukemia subtypes by rationally designed antifolates. *Blood* **94**: 3121–3128

57 Wolbink GJ et al. (2006) Development of anti-infliximab antibodies and relationship to clinical response in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum* **54**: 711–715

58 Cronstein BN (1996) Molecular therapeutics. Methotrexate and its mechanism of action. *Arthritis Rheum* **39**: 1951–1960

59 Cutolo M et al. (2001) Anti-inflammatory mechanisms of methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. *Ann Rheum Dis* **60**: 729–735

---

34 NATURE CLINICAL PRACTICE RHEUMATOLOGY

VAN DER HEIJDEN ET AL. JANUARY 2007 VOL 3 NO 1

©2007 Nature Publishing Group
