
MINIREVIEW / MINISYNTHÈSE

# VirB8: a conserved type IV secretion system assembly factor and drug target¹

**Christian Baron**

---

### Abstract:
Type IV secretion systems are used by many Gram-negative bacteria for the translocation of macromolecules (proteins, DNA, or DNA–protein complexes) across the cell envelope. Among them are many pathogens for which type IV secretion systems are essential virulence factors. Type IV secretion systems comprise 8–12 conserved proteins, which assemble into a complex spanning the inner and the outer membrane, and many assemble extracellular appendages, such as pili, which initiate contact with host and recipient cells followed by substrate translocation. VirB8 is an essential assembly factor for all type IV secretion systems. Biochemical, cell biological, genetic, and yeast two-hybrid analyses showed that VirB8 undergoes multiple interactions with other type IV secretion system components and that it directs polar assembly of the membrane-spanning complex in the model organism *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. The availability of the VirB8 X-ray structure has enabled a detailed structure–function analysis, which identified sites for the binding of VirB4 and VirB10 and for self-interaction. Due to its multiple interactions, VirB8 is an excellent model for the analysis of assembly factors of multiprotein complexes. In addition, VirB8 is a possible target for drugs that target its protein–protein interactions, which would disarm bacteria by depriving them of their essential virulence functions.

**Key words:** Agrobacterium, Brucella, Helicobacter, pilus assembly, protein-protein interactions, secretion system, virulence.

---

### Résumé :
Les systèmes de sécrétion de type IV sont utilisés par de nombreuses bactéries Gram-négatives pour la translocation de macromolécules (protéines, ADN, complexes ADN–protéine) à travers l’enveloppe cellulaire. Parmi celles-ci, on retrouve de nombreux pathogènes pour lesquels les systèmes de sécrétion de type IV sont des facteurs de virulence essentiels. Les systèmes de sécrétion de type IV comprennent de huit à 12 protéines conservées qui s’assemblent en complexe traversant les membranes interne et externe. Plusieurs d’entre eux assemblent des appendices extracellulaires comme les pili qui initient le contact avec l’hôte et les cellules réceptrices, suivi par la translocation du substrat. VirB8 est un facteur d’assemblage essentiel pour tous les systèmes de sécrétion de type IV. Des analyses biochimiques, cellulaires, génétiques et par double-hybride chez la levure ont montré que VirB8 est impliqué dans plusieurs interactions avec d’autres composantes des systèmes de sécrétion de type IV et qu’il dicte la polarité de l’assemblage des complexes traversant la membrane chez l’organisme modèle *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. La disponibilité de la structure cristallographique déterminée par rayons X a permis d’effectuer des études structure–fonction détaillées, lesquelles ont permis d’identifier les sites de liaison avec VirB4 et VirB10 ainsi que les sites d’auto-interaction. À cause des multiples interactions qui l’impliquent, VirB8 constitue un excellent modèle pour l’analyse des facteurs d’assemblage des complexes multi-protéiques. De plus, VirB8 est une cible potentielle pour les drogues visant ses interactions protéine/protéine, ce qui pourrait désarmer les bactéries en les privant de leurs fonctions de virulence essentielles.

**Mots clés :** Agrobacterium, Brucella, Helicobacter, assemblage du pilus, interactions protéine/protéine, système de sécrétion, virulence.

[Traduit par la Rédaction]

---

### Introduction
Many bacteria secrete macromolecules, such as proteins or DNA, across their cell envelope, where they play multiple roles for bacterial metabolism and adaptation (Pallen et al. 2003). For example, many secreted enzymes (e.g., cellulases, DNases, pectinases, proteases) degrade macromolecules so that the low molecular mass breakdown products

---

Received 23 July 2006. Revision received 30 August 2006. Accepted 31 August 2006. Published on the NRC Research Press Web site at http://bcb.nrc.ca on 7 December 2006.

C. Baron. McMaster University, Department of Biology and Antimicrobial Research Centre, 1280 Main St. West, Hamilton, ON L8 4K1, Canada (e-mail: baronc@mcmaster.ca).

¹ This paper is one of a selection of papers published in this Special Issue, entitled CSBMCB — Membrane Proteins in Health and Disease.

Biochem. Cell Biol. **84**: 890–899 (2006)  
doi:10.1139/O06-148  
© 2006 NRC Canada

can be transported and metabolized. Other secreted proteins enter mammalian cells (e.g., anthrax toxins, cholera toxin, pertussis toxin) and modify their metabolism to facilitate the pathogen's life style, whereas some secreted proteins remain attached to the cell surface to protect bacteria from the environment and (or) to modulate the host's immune response (S layers, protein A, and protein S). Some bacteria secrete DNA molecules either alone or bound to protein(s), and others take up DNA, followed by integration into their genomes. These DNA trafficking processes play a major role during horizontal gene transfer and contribute to the adaptation of bacteria to changing environmental conditions. In Gram-positive bacteria, secreted macromolecules traverse only the cytoplasmic membrane, followed by the murein cell wall, and membrane translocation is mediated by the Sec–general secretion pathway (GSP) (Cao and Saier 2003; van Roosmalen et al. 2004). In contrast, Gram-negative bacteria require a more elaborate secretion process, since the macromolecules traverse both the inner and the outer membrane, the intermittent murein cell wall, and the periplasmic space. Gram-negative bacteria use one or more of 5 different types of secretion systems for this purpose, which differ widely in their mechanism and composition. Whereas type I and type V secretion systems consist of only 1, 2, or 3 protein components (Delepelaire 2004; Henderson et al. 2004), the composition of type II, type III, and type IV secretion systems (T4SSs) is much more complex, and they comprise 8 to approximately 20 components (Christie et al. 2005; Cianciotto 2005; Johnson et al. 2006; Yip and Strynadka 2006). In spite of the differences in their protein composition and mechanism, these protein secretion systems share assembly and functional principles, i.e., they all contain energizing ATPases, core components that form the translocation channel, and surface-exposed proteins. Here we focus on type IV secretion systems as an example of complex secretion systems composed of many components, as well as on VirB8 as a key assembly factor.

### Type IV secretion systems mediate bacterial virulence and horizontal gene transfer

T4SSs are used by many Gram-negative bacteria for the translocation of macromolecules across their cell envelope (Backert and Meyer 2006; Baron 2005; Christie et al. 2005). Their substrates (proteins, DNA, and protein–DNA complexes) are as diverse as the lifestyles of the organisms (free living, extracellular, and intracellular pathogens and symbionts) and the targets of the secretion process (cell supernatant or host–recipient cells). A selection of bacteria that use T4SSs is shown in Fig. 1, and illustrates the exceptional versatility of this translocation conduit, which can be readily adapted to many different purposes. Most T4SSs inject substrates directly into host–recipient cells, and cell–cell contact is necessary to initiate the translocation process. The exact nature of the trigger is currently unknown, but it is believed that T4SS-mediated transfer occurs only after close cell–cell contact. The only known exception is the *Bordetella pertussis* T4SS, which secretes pertussis toxin into the cell supernatant. This process is independent of the presence of host cells under laboratory conditions, but it may be regulated in the natural infection process. Similarly, both secretion and uptake systems for single-stranded DNA do not require the presence of other cells, but it is reasonable to assume that these processes may also be regulated in the natural environment. T4SSs are possible targets for a novel class of drugs that does not work by killing bacteria, but instead deprives them of their essential virulence functions (Baron and Coombes 2006). The development of such anti-virulence drugs would circumvent many of the pitfalls of classical antibiotics, such as strong selection pressure for resistance development and negative effects on commensal bacteria (Alksne and Projan 2000; Alksne 2002; Lee et al. 2003). To isolate such drugs, the target must be well defined, and insights into its structure and function would facilitate the establishment of screening systems, as well as rational drug design. To this end, the current knowledge on T4SS architecture and function is described in the next section, using the nomenclature of the best-described model system from the plant pathogen *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*.

#### Type IV secretion systems form complexes across the bacterial cell envelope

The 12 typical components of the T4SS machinery (VirB1–VirB11 and VirD4) are divided into 3 functional categories: (i) the energizing components (VirB4, VirB11 and VirD4); (ii) the core and accessory components (VirB1, VirB6, VirB7, VirB8, VirB9, and VirB10); and (iii) the pilus-associated proteins (VirB2, VirB3, and VirB5) (Fig. 2A). One of the most important breakthroughs of research in the field in recent years was the development of the transfer DNA (T-DNA) immunoprecipitation (TrIP) assay to track the pathway of substrate translocation through the *A. tumefaciens* T4SS. This work revealed that components of all 3 functional categories participate in the substrate translocation process (Cascales and Christie 2004a) (Fig. 2B). The first category of all T4SSs is that of cytoplasmic and inner-membrane-associated VirB4- and VirB11-like proteins that contain Walker box motifs and provide energy for substrate translocation and (or) T4SS assembly. The ATPase activity of the homohexameric VirB11-like proteins was well characterized, and homologs from *Helicobacter pylori* and *Brucella suis* were crystallized (Hare et al. 2006; Yeo et al. 2000). In contrast to VirB11, there is no unequivocal evidence for ATPase activity of VirB4-like proteins (Rabel et al. 2003; Shirasu et al. 1994), but Walker A site changes that disrupted potential nucleotide hydrolysis abolished T4SS function (Sagulenko et al. 2001; Yuan et al. 2005). In silico modeling of *A. tumefaciens* VirB4 predicted a homohexameric structure (Middleton et al. 2005), and direct evidence for multimer formation was provided in the case of *B. suis* VirB4 overproduced and purified from *Escherichia coli* (Yuan et al. 2005). Interestingly, the changes in the Walker A site that disrupted T4SS function did not negatively impact its assembly, suggesting that VirB4 stabilizes the T4SS via its protein interactions, e.g., with VirB8, and that its ATPase activity may be exclusively required for substrate translocation (Dang et al. 1999; Yuan et al. 2005). The third energizing component, VirD4, does not occur in all T4SSs and it is also a hexamer localized at the cytoplasmic side of the inner membrane (Gomis-Ruth et al. 2001). VirD4-like proteins are referred to as “coupling” components.

Fig. 1. Overview of the diversity of T4SS-enabled lifestyles and processes in bacteria. DNA transfer occurs by secretion or uptake of naked DNA molecules, whereas conjugative plasmids and the T-DNA from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* are translocated as DNA-protein complexes. T4SSs are used by both extracellular and intracellular pathogens and symbionts. Intracellular bacteria survive and multiply inside the host cell in vesicles derived from intracellular compartments, such as endosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum. The translocated substrates have not been identified in many intracellular bacteria, but they are believed to be secreted into the vesicle lumen, the vesicular membrane, or directly into the host cytoplasm where they act as effectors to support the bacterial lifestyle.

**Extracellular pathogens**

- **effector/toxin secretion**
  - *Agrobacterium*
  - *Helicobacter*
  - *Bordetella*

**DNA transfer**
- *Helicobacter*: DNA uptake
- *Neisseria*: DNA secretion
- broad host range plasmids: conjugative plasmid transfer

**Intracellular pathogens and symbionts**
- effector secretion
  - *Bartonella*, *Brucella*, *Coxiella*, *Legionella*, *Mesorhizobium*, *Wolbachia*

=T4SS
- translocated substrates

Fig. 2. T4SS architecture in the bacterial cell envelope. (A) Model of a T4SS complex showing the 3 functional categories of its components and the steps of substrate translocation after host cell contact. Energizing components are labeled in red, core components are labeled in blue, and pilus-associated proteins are labeled in orange. Host cell contact triggers substrate translocation, followed by action of the translocated effectors inside host cells. Pili are believed to initiate host cell contact, but the exact composition of the contact structure is not yet known. (B) The T-DNA immunoprecipitation assay revealed a sequence of T4SS components from all functional categories that directly bind to the T-complex in *A. tumefaciens* and others that are required for substrate progression along the pathway.

**A**
- host cell
- effects
- host cell contact?
- surface/pilus proteins
  - VirB2
  - VirB5
  - VirB3
  - VirB7
  - VirB9
  - murein
- core components
  - VirB1
  - VirB8
  - VirB10
- energizing components
  - ATP
  - VirB4
  - ADP
  - VirD4
  - ATP
  - VirB11
  - ADP

**B**
- substrate translocation steps
  - VirB2
  - VirB9
  - VirB3
  - VirB5
  - VirB10
  - VirB6
  - VirB8
  - VirB4
  - VirB11
  - VirB7
  - VirD4
  - substrates

components, because they mediate the transfer of substrates to the T4SS via binding to VirB10-like core components (Gilmour et al. 2003; Llosa et al. 2003). VirB4, VirB11, and VirD4 have been shown to interact in *A. tumefaciens*, suggesting that the action of the energizing components is coordinated (Atmakuri et al. 2004).

The next step in substrate translocation in *A. tumefaciens* requires the substrate to bind to VirB6 and VirB8, followed by its transfer to the core component VirB9 and the pilus component VirB2 (Cascales and Christie 2004a). VirB6-like proteins have several transmembrane domains and have been thought to form the translocation channel. So far, there is no direct evidence for channel formation by VirB6 proteins, but the fact that VirB6 was found to be cross-linked to substrates in *Agrobacterium*, and that different VirB6 variants were affected at different steps of substrate translocation, substantiate this hypothesis (Jakubowski et al. 2004; Judd et al. 2005a, 2005c). VirB8 also binds directly to the

translocated substrate and to VirB10, which is a universally conserved T4SS component (Das and Xie 2000). The X-ray structure of an *H. pylori* VirB10-like protein was solved and a conformational change that could correspond to a change observed in energy-depleted *A. tumefaciens* cells was proposed (Terradot et al. 2005). The fact that the conformation of VirB10 changed depending on the energy charge of the cells suggested that, similar to TonB, this protein may couple ATP hydrolysis via the energizing T4SS components to substrate translocation (Cascales and Christie 2004b). VirB10 was not directly cross-linked to the translocated substrate in *A. tumefaciens*, but it is essential for substrate transfer to VirB9 and VirB2 (Cascales and Christie 2004a), which is in line with the notion that it may transmit energy for the translocation process via its conformational change. VirB9 is the next core component that was found to directly cross-link to the translocated substrate, suggesting that it is a component of the translocation channel. VirB9 was previously believed to form a secretin-like pore in the outer membrane (Lawley et al. 2003). Secretins are type II and type III secretion-system-determined multimeric pores in the outer membrane (Johnson et al. 2006; Yip and Strynadka 2006), and such a role for VirB9 would be in line with its role in substrate translocation. However, so far there is no direct evidence for a secretin-like function of VirB9, and the purified homolog from *B. suis* was shown to be soluble and did not readily multimerize (Höppner et al. 2005). VirB9 is stabilized by the small 4.5 kDa outer membrane lipoprotein VirB7 via a covalent cysteine bridge, and this bond anchors VirB9 to the outer membrane in *A. tumefaciens* (Anderson et al. 1996; Baron et al. 1997; Fernandez et al. 1996). VirB1 is the last periplasmic protein conserved in many T4SSs, but in contrast to all the other components, it is often not essential. VirB1-like proteins are believed to locally lyse the murein cell wall, thus enabling assembly of the membrane-spanning complex, and in their absence, T4SS functions are reduced 10- to 100-fold (Koraimann 2003). Purified *B. suis* VirB1 was shown to interact with VirB8, VirB9, and VirB11 (Höppner et al. 2005), suggesting that targeting of the enzyme to the T4SS assembly site is an important step for localized murein degradation. It is likely that cellular murein metabolic enzymes may partly compensate for the functions of VirB1, but the observed reductions in T4SS functionality are likely very important in the natural biological context.

The last group of T4SS components comprises VirB2, VirB5, and VirB3. VirB2 was shown to be the *A. tumefaciens* major T-pilus component, and its homologs TrbC and TraA are major components of the RP4- and F-determined pili, respectively (Eisenbrandt et al. 1999; Lai and Kado 1998). The role of VirB5-like proteins is unclear and they have been detected as minor pilus-components in *A. tumefaciens*, plasmid pKM101 and pJJP4 T4SSs (Schmidt-Eisenlohr et al. 1999a, 1999b, 2001). The X-ray structure of the VirB5 homolog TraC from pKM101 was determined, and subsequent structure-function analyses suggested that it may be an adhesin (Yeo et al. 2003). Interestingly, VirB5–TraC also shares some structural similarity with the FAT domain of the focal adhesion kinase (Fak) (Hayashi et al. 2002). This similarity with a eukaryotic protein would be in accord with a role in cell–cell contact formation, but direct experimental evidence will be required to establish such a role for VirB5. VirB3 was shown to localize preferentially in the outer membrane, and its stabilization was dependent on VirB4 and VirB6. These findings indicate a function at the cell surface (Hapfelmeier et al. 2000; Jones et al. 1994). VirB3 was extracted from the membranes with mild detergent in a complex with the pilus components VirB2 and VirB5 (Yuan et al. 2005), it bound to VirB5 in vitro (Shamaei-Tousi et al. 2004), and these findings further supported a direct role in pilus assembly, e.g., targeting of VirB2 and VirB5 to the pilus assembly site. Most of the above-mentioned processes are strictly dependent on VirB8, and current knowledge on this assembly factor is described in the following section.

### VirB8 undergoes multiple protein–protein interactions

VirB8-like proteins are core components conserved in all T4SSs (Christie et al. 2005), and their length varies from about 202 to 260 amino acids (Cao and Saier 2001). Similar to VirB10, they are bitopic membrane proteins and *B. suis* VirB8 comprises a 49-amino-acid cytoplasmic N terminus, an 18-amino-acid transmembrane helix, and a 172-amino-acid periplasmic C terminus. The X-ray structures of the periplasmic domains of the *B. suis* and *A. tumefaciens* VirB8 were solved (Bailey et al. 2006; Terradot et al. 2005). Both proteins share only 30% amino acid identity, but the structures are very similar, comprising a 4-β-sheet face juxtaposed to a region of the protein with 5 α-helices (see below). The structures are similar to the mammalian nuclear transfer factor NTF2, a protein that also dimerizes and undergoes multiple protein–protein interactions (Chaillan-Huntington et al. 2001). The central role of VirB8 as a factor determining interactions among T4SS components first became apparent in an immuno-electron microscopic study of VirB8, VirB9, and VirB10 (Kumar et al. 2000), and these interactions were also analyzed with a bacterial cytology-based assay that had been based on the targeting of GFP-labeled fusion proteins (Ding et al. 2002). Subsequently, yeast two-hybrid analyses were applied, first on a limited scale for binding among VirB8, VirB9, and VirB10 (Das and Xie 2000), and later in a screen with peptide fragments derived from all T4SS components (Ward et al. 2002). Taken together, the yeast two-hybrid studies suggested that VirB8 interacts with VirB1, VirB4, VirB8, VirB9, VirB10, and VirB11. The interactions with VirB1, VirB4, VirB8, VirB9, and VirB10 were subsequently confirmed with purified proteins from the *B. suis* T4SS, and a novel interaction with VirB5 was discovered (Höppner et al. 2005; Yuan et al. 2005).

In addition to the interactions for which direct evidence is available, VirB6 and VirB8 were identified at a common step of substrate translocation from *A. tumefaciens* and may therefore, bind to each other (Cascales and Christie 2004a). Further support for this hypothesis stems from the observation that VirB6 and VirB8 have been shown to colocalize in *A. tumefaciens*, as determined by immuno-fluorescence microscopy (Judd et al. 2005b). Additionally, VirB6 and VirB8 had a similar fractionation pattern after isolation of VirB proteins from the membranes with mild detergent (Yuan et al. 2005). Both VirB6 and VirB8 cofractionated with a high molecular mass complex comprising the T4SS core components, as well as with a low molecular mass complex comprising the pilus-associated proteins, suggesting

Fig. 3. A model for T4SS assembly emphasizing the role of VirB8. (A) VirB8 initiates T4SS assembly and targets VirB1 to the cell pole. (B) VirB1 locally lyses the murein and enables T4SS assembly across the cell envelope. VirB8 binding to the VirB9–VirB7 complex likely initiates this process. (C) Interactions with VirB8 target other T4SS components to the assembly site. (D) VirB4 and VirB8 mediate the formation of VirB2–VirB5 pilus pre-assembly complexes. VirB8 and VirB5 may interact and form heterodimers at this step of pilus assembly (Yuan et al. 2005). (E) Extracellular assembly of pili after the translocation of VirB2–VirB5 complexes to VirB3 and VirB7 in the outer membrane. The ATPase activities of VirB4 and VirD4 are not required for T4SS assembly until this step. (F) Host cell contact triggers ATPase activity of VirB4 and VirD4, and energy is transmitted by conformational changes to VirB10, followed by substrate translocation.

A  
VirB8 initiates T4SS assembly  

B  
VirB1 activity enables  
transmembrane assembly  

C  
VirB8 targets T4SS components  
to the assembly site  

D  
Formation of VirB2-VirB5  
pilus assembly complexes  

E  
Extracellular pilus assembly  

F  
Host cell contact and  
substrate translocation  

that they may link both functional units of the T4SS. Whereas the above-mentioned data pointed out the role of VirB8 as the T4SS assembly factor, the most compelling evidence came from a study using immunofluorescence analysis to determine the localization of most T4SS components (except VirB2) in A. tumefaciens. In this study, VirB proteins were detected at the poles of virulence-gene-induced cells, and the targeting of most of them (except for that of VirB3, VirB4, and VirB11) depended on the presence of VirB8 (Judd et al. 2005b). The fact that VirB8 was shown to cross-link to the T-complex also indicates that it may bind directly to single-stranded DNA and (or) to the VirD2 portion of the T-complex (Cascales and Christie 2004a). Thus, VirB8 plays a central role in T4SS function, both as an assembly factor in the binding of many VirB proteins, as well as in the process of substrate translocation. This leads to the question of how such a relatively small protein can engage in a large number of interactions. The most likely explanation is that not all of them occur simultaneously and that VirB8 sequentially interacts with different T4SS components. Based on the available data, a model for VirB8-driven T4SS assembly is proposed and is described in Fig. 3. The multiple protein–protein interactions of VirB8 are reminiscent of its structural homolog NTF2, which binds

Baron

Fig. 4. Sequence alignment, X-ray analysis, and structure–function studies of VirB8. (A) Alignment of VirB8 proteins from different type IV secretion systems performed with ClustalW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/). *, Strictly conserved amino acids; :, more conserved amino acids; ·, less conserved amino acids. The predicted transmembrane helix (TM) is indicated, and secondary structures identified in the X-ray structure are colour coded as in B (Terradot et al. 2005). *S. meliloti*, *Sinorhizobium meliloti*; *B. henselae*, *Bartonella henselae*; *A. tumefaciens*, *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. (B) The X-ray structure of *Brucella suis* VirB8 (Terradot et al. 2005). (C) Residues changed in a structure-driven functional analysis of *B. suis* VirB8, and protein interactions that were affected by individual changes (Paschos et al. 2006). (D) Topology of *B. suis* VirB8 with display on the periplasmic domain of secondary structures, identified in the X-ray structure (colour-coded as in B; Terradot et al. 2005), of residues that affect interactions in vitro (colour-coded as in C; Paschos et al. 2006), and of residues and domains required for specific interactions identified by yeast two-hybrid analysis (in black; Das and Xie 2000; Kumar and Das 2001; Ward et al. 2002). TM, transmembrane domain; N, N terminus; C, C terminus.

to the small GTPase Ran and undergoes multiple transient interactions with components of the nuclear pore during transfer with its cargo to the nucleus (Bayliss et al. 2002; Chaillan-Huntington et al. 2001). Due to its anchoring to the inner membrane. VirB8 is not likely to move extensively inside the T4SS. However, different binding affinities may drive its sequential interactions with other VirB proteins, thereby coordinating transporter assembly. The proposed function of VirB8 is reminiscent of the PapD chaperone that sequentially interacts with different P-pilus subunits and thereby directs the assembly of this extracellular structure (Sauer et al. 2004). P-pilus assembly is based on differential affinities of the chaperone for its binding partners and similar principles could also apply to VirB8 function. Structure–function analyses will be necessary to test the above model and to identify the exact contributions of individual domains of VirB8. The current status of this work is discussed in the next section.

Structure–function analysis of VirB8 and drug design

Prior to the availability of X-ray structures (Figs. 4A and 4B), the contributions of individual domains of VirB8 to its functionality were analyzed by site-directed and random mutagenesis (Kumar and Das 2001). The analysis of T4SS component-derived protein fragments by yeast two-hybrid analysis subsequently identified residues required for the interaction of VirB8 with itself, as well as with VirB1, VirB4, VirB8, VirB9, and VirB10 (Fig. 4D) (Das and Xie 2000; Ward et al. 2002). Domain swaps between *B. suis* VirB8 and its homolog from the plasmid pSB102 conjugation system showed that, after exchange of the periplasmic domain, the hybrid protein was still functional in *Brucella* infection experiments (Patey et al. 2006). However, when the N-terminal cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains were swapped, a nonfunctional protein resulted, suggesting that this domain may undergo *Brucella*-specific protein interactions that are not supported by the pSB102 fragment. So far, there is no information on the function of the N-terminal domain of VirB8, but the results of this study suggest that it is more than merely an anchor in the inner membrane. Enabled by the availability of the X-ray structure, the interactions of 13 variants of *B. suis* VirB8 were analyzed in vitro, and regions of the protein required for dimerization and interaction with both VirB4 and VirB10, were identified (Paschos et al. 2006) (Figs. 4C and 4D). The importance of many of these residues for the functionality of VirB8 was then confirmed in the natural biological context of *Brucella* infection experiments. This work identified the β-sheet face of VirB8 as an important site for interactions with other VirB proteins, and

dimer formation via the α-helix face of the protein was apparently important for its functionality, as well. However, some of the changes introduced into *Brucella* VirB8 that inactivated the protein in vivo did not have any effects on its in vitro interactions (Paschos et al. 2006). More detailed functional studies are therefore required to determine the molecular basis of these effects in the future.

How could knowledge of the structure and function of VirB8 be used for the design of drugs that inhibit its role as T4SS assembly factor? The X-ray structures of 2 VirB8 proteins revealed surface-exposed residues, and the subsequent structure–function analysis showed that interactions via the dimer interface and the β-sheet face are important for VirB8 functionality in vivo. It is reasonable to assume that drugs binding to these sites would inhibit VirB8 function, and thereby T4SS assembly, and 3 strategies could be envisaged for the isolation of such molecules. First, the VirB8–VirB protein interaction assays could be adapted to a high-throughput screening format for the isolation of small molecule inhibitors, e.g., by measuring changes of the fluorescence polarization of labeled VirB8 upon binding of an interaction partner (Eggeling et al. 2003). Second, VirB8-binding peptides could be isolated by phage display, and those that block the binding site(s) for one or more interaction partner(s) may inhibit its function (Kehoe and Kay 2005). Third, based on the X-ray structures, VirB8-derived peptides comprising the binding sites, which inhibit the interaction(s) with one or more T4SS components, could be developed. Both small molecules, as well as peptides, which disrupt interactions of VirB8 could be leads for drug development, but they may also be useful tools for mechanistic studies. By specifically disrupting one or more of its interactions, the contribution of VirB8 to T4SS assembly and function could be probed at high resolution. This approach would improve basic research knowledge, as well as facilitate the optimization of inhibitory drugs.

Conclusions

A multitude of approaches, including random mutagenesis, the yeast two-hybrid system, immuno-electron and immuno-fluorescence microscopy, X-ray analysis, and membrane protein biochemistry, have contributed to our current understanding of the function of VirB8. The availability of the VirB8 X-ray structure has permitted a new level of refinement of this analysis and revealed molecular details of the interactions with VirB4, VirB10, and with itself. These experiments have led to a model for VirB8 function as a T4SS assembly factor, but further mechanistic studies are required to unravel the molecular details. T4SSs are well de-

A

| B. suis VirB8 | MFGRKQSPQKSVKNGQGNAPSVYDEALNWEAAHVRLEKSERRAWKIAGA | 50 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| R388 TrwG | -MSKKQP--KPVKAEQ--LKSYYEESRGLERDLIGEFVKSRKTAWRVATA | 45 |
| A. tumefaciens AvhB8 | -----------------MATTDNLKSYFDKARRFDQDRMIQVERSKRIAWSIAIV | 38 |
| S. meliloti VirB8 | -----------------MVSADELKTYFEKARRFDQDRVIQVERSARIAWSVAIV | 38 |
| B. henselae VirB8 | -----------------MKINEFNEYIKEARSFDIRMHGMRQRMRIAMALTVL | 37 |
| A. tumefaciens VirB8 | ----MKGSEYALLVARETLAEHYKEVEAFQTARAKSARRLSKVIAAVATI | 46 |

| : | : | : | : | :: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| TM | FGTITVLLGGIGIAGMLPLKQ--HVPYLVRVNAQTGAPDILTSILDEKSVSY | 98 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| B. suis VirB8 | SG-LFGLLGM-VCGIVGFSQPAPAPLVLVRVDNATGAVDVTTTIREHESY | 93 |
| R388 TrwG | SGIVAAAVFAVACLTPLKT--VEPFVVRVDNSTGIVDVSALTSTAGTY | 86 |
| A. tumefaciens AvhB8 | AGILAGASIFAVAALTPLKT--IEPFVVRVDNSTGIVDVSALTSTAGTY | 86 |
| S. meliloti VirB8 | FGLMTIALALAVAAALTPLKT--VEPFVIRVDNSTGIIEVSAALKETPNDY | 85 |
| B. henselae VirB8 | AVLGNVAQAFTIATMVPLIR--LVPVYLWIR-PDGTVDSEVSVSRLPATQ | 93 |

| : | ::: | : | * | : | * | : | ::: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| α1 | DTVMDKYWLSQYVIARETYDWYTLOKDYEVTGMLS | 148 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| B. suis VirB8 | GEVVDTYWLNQYVLNREAYDYNTIQMNYDTTALLSAPAQQDYKKLFDGS | 143 |
| R388 TrwG | DEAVTKYFAAKYVRAREGYVWSEAENFRTIALLSTQAEQTRFAALYRGS | 136 |
| A. tumefaciens AvhB8 | DEAVTKYFAAKYVRAREGYVWSEAEENFRTVALLSTQPEQARFSAIYRGS | 136 |
| S. meliloti VirB8 | DEAITYFASKYVRAREGFQLSEAEHNFRIVSILLSSPEEQSRFAKWYAGN | 135 |
| B. henselae VirB8 | EEAVVNASLWEYVRLRESYDADTAQYAYDLVSNFSAPMVRQNYQQFFNYP | 143 |

| : | :** | **: | : | :*: | : |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| α2 | SPSEGQSYASQFQGD | 148 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| α3 | SPSEGQSYASQFQGD | 148 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| α4 | K--ALDKQYGSNVRTSVTIVSIVPNGKGIGTVRF | 196 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| β1 | N--ARDRVLGNKARITVRVRSIQPNRGQATVR | 190 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| β2 | NPQSPQNTYGRGATARIDIASISLINQNVVSVRYMRTITR-GEEVR--TT | 183 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| β3 | NPDSPQNTYGRSATARISIASISLINPNVVSVRYMRTITR-GEEVR--PT | 183 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A. tumefaciens AvhB8 | NPESPQNIY-QNMIATVTIKSISFLSKDLIQVRYYKTVERLNDKEN--IS | 182 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A. tumefaciens VirB8 | NPTSPQVILGKHGRLEVEHIASNDVTPGVQQIRYKRTLIVDGKMPM--AS | 191 |

| : | : | : | : | :* | . |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| β3 | HWIATIGYQYNPSLMSESARLTNPLGFNVTSYRVDPEMGVVQ------ | 239 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| B. suis VirB8 | HQIATIGYTYIG-APMRSSDRLLNPLGFQVTSYRADPEILNN------ | 231 |
| R388 TrwG | HWVASITYSYAN-APMSSTDRLVNPLGFVVSEYRADPEEVR------ | 223 |
| A. tumefaciens AvhB8 | HWVATLTFSYVN-SPMSSTDRLVNPLGFAVSEYRADPEAIN------ | 223 |
| S. meliloti VirB8 | HWVSILNFSYIN-AQISTQDRLLINPLGFQVSEYRSDPEVIQ------ | 222 |
| B. henselae VirB8 | TWTATVRYEKVT--SLPGRLRLTNPGGLVVTSYQTSEDTVSNAGHSEP | 237 |

| : | : | : | *** | ** | *::.* | . | : |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

B

C

VirB10  
VirB4  

D

α1 α2 α3 α4 β1 β2 β3 α5 β4  
cytoplasmic TM VirB9 VirB8 VirB9/VirB10 VirB10 VirB8 VirB4  
N VirB8/VirB9 VirB9 VirB1/VirB4/VirB8/VirB11 C

Baron

developed models for mechanistic analyses of the assembly of complex protein machineries in cellular membranes. The general principles discovered in this research will therefore impact the understanding of other secretion systems from bacteria and membrane protein complexes from eukaryotes.

# Acknowledgements

Work on T4SSs in the Baron laboratory is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (grant No. MOP-64300), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (grant No. 262104), the Canada Foundation for Innovation, and the Ontario Innovation Trust.

# References

Alksne, L.E. 2002. Virulence as a target for antimicrobial chemotherapy. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs, **11**: 1149–1159. doi:10.1517/13543784.11.8.1149. PMID: 12150708.

Alksne, L.E., and Projan, S.J. 2000. Bacterial virulence as a target for antimicrobial chemotherapy. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. **11**: 625–636. doi:10.1016/S0958-1669(00)00155-5. PMID: 11102800.

Anderson, L.B., Vogel Hertzel, A., and Das, A. 1996. *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* VirB7 and VirB9 form a disulfide-linked protein complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **93**: 8889–8894. doi:10.1073/pnas.93.17.8889. PMID: 8799123.

Atmakuri, K., Cascales, E., and Christie, P.J. 2004. Energetic components VirD4, VirB11 and VirB4 mediate early DNA transfer reactions required for bacterial type IV secretion. Mol. Microbiol. **54**: 1199–1211. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04345.x. PMID: 15554962.

Backert, S., and Meyer, T.F. 2006. Type IV secretion systems and their effectors in bacterial pathogenesis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. **9**: 207–217. doi:10.1016/j.mib.2006.02.008. PMID: 16529981.

Bailey, S., Ward, D., Middleton, R., Grossmann, J.G., and Zambryski, P. 2006. *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* VirB8 structure reveals potential protein–protein interactions sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **103**: 2582–2587. doi:10.1073/pnas.0511216103. PMID: 16481621.

Baron, C. 2005. From bioremediation to biowarfare: On the impact and mechanism of type IV secretion systems. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **253**: 163–170. PMID: 16239080.

Baron, C., and Coombes, B. 2007. Targeting bacterial secretion systems: benefits of disarmament in the microcosm. Infect. Dis.-Drug Targets, In press.

Baron, C., Thorstenson, Y.R., and Zambryski, P.C. 1997. Biochemical analysis of the complex between the lipoprotein VirB7 and VirB9 in the membranes of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J. Bacteriol. **179**: 1211–1218. PMID: 9023204.

Bayliss, R., Leung, S.W., Baker, R.P., Quimby, B.B., Corbett, A.H., and Stewart, M. 2002. Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin FxFG repeats. EMBO J. **21**: 2843–2853. doi:10.1093/emboj/cdf305. PMID: 12065398.

Cao, T.B., and Saier, M.R.J. 2001. Conjugal type IV macromolecular transfer systems of Gram-negative bacteria: organismal distribution, structural constraints and evolutionary conclusions. Microbiology, **147**: 3201–3214. PMID: 11739753.

Cao, T.B., and Saier, M.H., Jr. 2003. The general protein secretary pathway: phylogenetic analyses leading to evolutionary conclusions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, **1609**: 115–125. PMID: 12507766.

Cascales, E., and Christie, P.J. 2004a. Definition of a bacterial type IV secretion pathway for a DNA substrate. Science (Washington, D.C.), **304**: 1170–1173. doi:10.1126/science.1095211. PMID: 15155952.

Cascales, E., and Christie, P.J. 2004b. *Agrobacterium* VirB10, an ATP energy sensor required for type IV secretion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **101**: 17228–17233. doi:10.1073/pnas.0405843101. PMID: 15569944.

Chaillan-Huntington, C., Butler, P.J., Huntington, J.A., Akin, D., Feldherr, C., and Stewart, M. 2001. NTF2 monomer-dimer equilibrium. J. Mol. Biol. **314**: 465–477. doi:10.1006/jmbi.2001.5136. PMID: 11846560.

Christie, P.J., Atmakuri, K., Krishnamoorthy, V., Jakubowski, S., and Cascales, E. 2005. Biogenesis, architecture, and function of bacterial type IV secretion systems. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **59**: 451–485. doi:10.1146/annurev.micro.58.030603.123630. PMID: 16153176.

Cianciotto, N.P. 2005. Type II secretion: a protein secretion system for all seasons. Trends Microbiol. **13**: 581–588. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2005.09.005. PMID: 16216510.

Dang, T.A., Zhou, X.-R., Graf, B., and Christie, P.J. 1999. Dimerization of the *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* VirB4 ATPase and the effect of ATP-binding cassette mutations on the assembly and function of the T-DNA transporter. Mol. Microbiol. **32**: 1239–1253. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01436.x. PMID: 10383764.

Das, A., and Xie, Y.-H. 2000. The *Agrobacterium* T-DNA transport pore proteins VirB8, VirB9 and VirB10 interact with one another. J. Bacteriol. **182**: 758–763. doi:10.1128/JB.182.3.758-763.2000. PMID: 10633111.

Delepelaire, P. 2004. Type I secretion in gram-negative bacteria. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, **1694**: 149–161. PMID: 15546664.

Ding, Z., Zhao, Z., Jakubowski, S., Krishnamohan, A., Margolin, W., and Christie, P.J. 2002. A novel cytology-based, two-hybrid screen for bacteria applied to protein-protein interaction studies of a type IV secretion system. J. Bacteriol. **184**: 5572–5582. doi:10.1128/JB.184.20.5572-5582.2002. PMID: 12270814.

Eggeling, C., Brand, L., Ullmann, D., and Jager, S. 2003. Highly sensitive fluorescence detection technology currently available for HTS. Drug Discov. Today, **8**: 632–641. doi:10.1016/S1359-6446(03)02752-1. PMID: 12867149.

Eisenbrandt, R., Kalkum, M., Lai, E.M., Lurz, R., Kado, C.I., and Lanka, E. 1999. Conjugative pili of IncP plasmids, and the Ti pilus are composed of cyclic subunits. J. Biol. Chem. **274**: 22548–22555. doi:10.1074/jbc.274.32.22548. PMID: 10428832.

Fernandez, D., Dang, T.A.T., Spudich, G.M., Zhou, X.-R., Berger, B.R., and Christie, P.J. 1996. The *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* virB7 gene product, a proposed component of the T-complex transport apparatus, is a membrane-associated lipoprotein exposed at the periplasmic surface. J. Bacteriol. **178**: 3156–3167. PMID: 8655494.

Gilmour, M.W., Gunton, J.E., Lawley, T.D., and Taylor, D.E. 2003. Interaction between the IncHI1 plasmid R27 coupling protein and type IV secretion system: TraG associates with the coiled-coil mating pair formation protein TrhB. Mol. Microbiol. **49**: 105–116. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03551.x. PMID: 12823814.

Gomis-Ruth, F.X., Moncalian, G., Perez-Luque, R., Gonzalez, A., Cabezón, E., de la Cruz, F., and Coll, M. 2001. The bacterial conjugation protein TrwB resembles ring helicases and F1-ATPase. Nature (London), **409**: 637–641. PMID: 11214325.

Hapfelmeier, S., Domke, N., Zambryski, P.C., and Baron, C. 2000. VirB6 is required for stabilization of VirB5, VirB3 and formation of VirB7 homodimers in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J. Bacteriol. **182**: 4505–4511. doi:10.1128/JB.182.16.4505-4511.2000. PMID: 10913084.

Hare, S., Bayliss, R., Baron, C., and Waksman, G. 2006. A large domain swap in the VirB11 ATPase of *Brucella suis* leaves the hexameric assembly intact. J. Mol. Biol. **360**: 56–66. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.060. PMID: 16730027.

Hayashi, I., Vuori, K., and Liddington, R.C. 2002. The focal adhe-

sion targeting (FAT) region of focal adhesion kinase is a four-
helix bundle that binds paxillin. Nat. Struct. Biol. 9: 101–106.
doi:10.1038/nsb755. PMID:11799401.

Henderson, I.R., Navarro-Garcia, F., Desvaux, M., Fernandez, R.C.,
and Ala’Aldeen, D. 2004. Type V protein secretion pathway: the
autotransporter story. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68: 692–744.
PMID: 15590781.

Höppner, C., Carle, A., Sivanesan, D., Hoeppner, S., and Baron, C.
2005. The putative lytic transglycosylase VirB1 from Brucella
suis interacts with the type IV secretion system core components
VirB8, VirB9 and VirB11. Microbiology, 151: 3469–3482.
doi:10.1099/mic.0.28326-0. PMID:16272371.

Jakubowski, S.J., Krishnamoorthy, V., Cascales, E., and Christie,
P.J. 2004. Agrobacterium tumefaciens VirB6 domains direct the
ordered export of a DNA substrate through a type IV secretion
System. J. Mol. Biol. 341: 961–977. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004.06.
052. PMID:15328612.

Johnson, T.L., Abendroth, J., Hol, W.G., and Sandkvist, M. 2006.
Type II secretion: from structure to function. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 255: 175–186. doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00102.x.
PMID: 16448494.

Jones, A.L., Shirasu, K., and Kado, C.I. 1994. The product of the
virB4 gene of Agrobacterium tumefaciens promotes accumulation
of VirB3 protein. J. Bacteriol. 176: 5255–5261. PMID: 8071199.

Judd, P.K., Kumar, R.B., and Das, A. 2005a. The type IV secretion
apparatus protein VirB6 of Agrobacterium tumefaciens localizes
to a cell pole. Mol. Microbiol. 55: 115–124. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2958.2004.04378.x. PMID:15612921.

Judd, P.K., Kumar, R.B., and Das, A. 2005b. Spatial location and
requirements for the assembly of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens
type IV secretion apparatus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102:
11498–11503. doi:10.1073/pnas.0505290102. PMID:16076948.

Judd, P.K., Mahli, D., and Das, A. 2005c. Molecular characteriza-
tion of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens DNA transfer protein
VirB6. Microbiology, 151: 3483–3492. doi:10.1099/mic.0.
28337-0. PMID:16272372.

Kehoe, J.W., and Kay, B.K. 2005. Filamentous phage display in
the new millennium. Chem. Rev. 105: 4056–4072. doi:10.1021/
cr000261r. PMID:16277371.

Koraimann, G. 2003. Lytic transglycosylases in macromolecular
transport systems of Gram-negative bacteria. Cell. Mol. Life
Sci. 60: 2371–2388. PMID:14625683.

Kumar, R.B., and Das, A. 2001. Functional analysis of the Agro-
bacterium tumefaciens T-DNA transport pore protein VirB8. J.
Bacteriol. 183: 3636–3641. doi:10.1128/JB.183.12.3636-3641.
2001. PMID:11371528.

Kumar, R.B., Xie, Y.-H., and Das, A. 2000. Subcellular localiza-
tion of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA transport pore
proteins: VirB8 is essential for assembly of the transport pore.
Mol. Microbiol. 36: 608–617. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.
01876.x. PMID:10844650.

Lai, E.-M., and Kado, C.I. 1998. Processed VirB2 is the major sub-
unit of the promiscuous pilus of Agrobacterium tumefaciens. J.
Bacteriol. 180: 2711–2717. PMID:9573157.

Lawley, T.D., Klimke, W.A., Gubbins, M.J., and Frost, L.S. 2003.
F factor conjugation is a true type IV secretion system. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 224: 1–15. doi:10.1016/S0378-1097(03)00430-
0. PMID:12855161.

Lee, Y.M., Almqvist, F., and Hultgren, S.J. 2003. Targeting viru-
lence for antimicrobial chemotherapy. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol.
3: 513–519. PMID:14559097.

Llosa, M., Zunzunegui, S., and de la Cruz, F. 2003. Conjugative
coupling proteins interact with cognate and heterologous
VirB10-like proteins while exhibiting specificity for cognate re-

Baron

Peptide linkage mapping of the *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* vir-encoded type IV secretion system reveals novel protein subassemblies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99: 11493–11500. doi:10.1073/pnas.172390299. PMID: 12177441.

Yeo, H.J., Savvides, S.N., Herr, A.B., Lanka, E., and Waksman, G. 2000. Crystal structure of the hexameric traffic ATPase of the *Helicobacter pylori* type IV secretion system. Mol. Cell, 6: 1461–1472. doi:10.1016/S1097-2765(00)00142-8. PMID: 11163218.

Yeo, H.-J., Yuan, Q., Beck, M.R., Baron, C., and Waksman, G. 2003. Structural and functional characterization of the VirB5

protein from the type IV secretion system encoded by the conjugative plasmid pKM101. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100: 15947–15962. doi:10.1073/pnas.2535211100. PMID: 14673074.

Yip, C.K., and Strynadka, N.C. 2006. New structural insights into the bacterial type III secretion system. Trends Biochem. Sci. 31: 223–230. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2006.02.005. PMID: 16537106.

Yuan, Q., Carle, A., Gao, C., Sivanesan, D., Aly, K., Höppner, C., et al. 2005. Identification of the VirB4-VirB8-VirB5-VirB2 pilus assembly sequence of type IV secretion systems. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 26349–26359. doi:10.1074/jbc.M502347200. PMID: 15901731.
