
# Complement evasion strategies of microorganisms

**Neil R. Cooper**

The success of microorganisms as human pathogens stems partly from their ability to evade recognition and/or avoid destruction by complement and other natural and acquired defense mechanisms. Here, Neil Cooper reviews the various mechanisms that pathogens have evolved to evade the destructive actions of the complement system, with particular emphasis on the many remarkable examples of the duplication of complement-like structural and functional epitopes by microorganisms. Such mimicry not only enables the pathogens to avoid destruction by complement-mediated mechanisms but also, in a number of instances, facilitates infection.

Microorganisms activate complement in the absence of antibody¹. Normal mammalian cells are protected from complement-mediated destruction by regulatory membrane proteins, including complement receptor type 1 (CR1), membrane cofactor protein (MCP) and decay-accelerating factor (DAF). CR1 and MCP act as cofactors for C3b and C4b cleavage, catalysing their inactivation by plasma factor I; DAF dissociates C3 convertase molecules that form on cell surfaces (Fig. 1). These regulatory proteins prevent amplification of C3b deposited on the surface of normal cells as a consequence of low level C3 cleavage in plasma²,³.

Microorganisms lack mammalian complement regulatory proteins and, thus, cannot restrict complement deposition and amplification on their surfaces. Furthermore, some infectious agents possess molecules or structures that impede access of the plasma regulatory molecules (Fig. 1 and Ref. 4). The absence of complement regulatory molecules, occasionally coupled with the presence of C3b on a 'protected' surface inaccessible to factors H and I, accounts for the fact that most bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites directly activate the alternative complement pathway¹⁻⁵. In addition, certain bacteria and viruses circumvent the potent regulatory control normally exerted by Cl inhibitor and directly activate the classical pathway in the absence of antibody⁶⁻⁸. This uncontrolled activation and amplification, leading to the accumulation of large numbers of C3b molecules and C3 and C5 convertases on the surface of the microorganisms might be anticipated to be incompatible with pathogen survival. However, a range of strategies has been developed by microorganisms to evade complement-mediated destruction.

## Resistance to complement-mediated damage

Pathogens have evolved a number of mechanisms to interfere with complement activation. One of these is the development of capsules by bacteria: capsules are antiphagocytic as they physically prevent access of phagocytes to C3b deposited on the cell wall of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains⁴,⁵,⁹. In addition, the capsules of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria are poor activators of complement, a property attributed, in certain instances, to the presence of sialic acid⁴,⁵,⁹. The acquisition of sialic acid has also been postulated to account for the inability of schistosomula to activate complement⁴,⁵. Salmonella strains exhibit dramatically varying abilities to activate the alternative pathway in the absence of antibody, owing to differences in the chemical structure of the O antigen side chains of their lipopolysaccharide (LPS) molecules¹⁰.

A second mechanism of resistance to complement involves the development of surface structures that interfere with C3 convertase assembly, as demonstrated by certain Streptococcus and Campylobacter strains⁴,⁹,¹¹ and by Trypanosoma cruzi¹². A variation on this theme is the enzymatic disassembly of the C3 convertase complexes, as used by Leishmania major¹³.

In addition to the above, pathogens have developed several mechanisms to resist complement-mediated cytolytic destruction. Although Gram-positive bacteria activate complement and the C5b–9 complex assembles on their surface, they are resistant to destruction, most

© 1991, Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd, UK. 0167-4919/91/$02.00

Immunology Today 327 Vol. 12 No. 9 1991
likely because the thick peptidoglycan layer prevents, or  
greatly restricts, access of C5b–9 to the cytoplasmic  
membrane${}^{4,5,9}$.

Gram-negative bacteria that are serum- (that is comp-  
lement) resistant are more virulent than serum-sensitive  
strains. In the presence of bactericidal antibody, serum-  
resistant as well as serum-sensitive bacteria generally  
activate complement efficiently through C9 (Refs 4,5,9),  
ruling out lack of C5b–9 assembly as the mechanism of  
the serum resistance. Studies with serum-resistant *Sal-  
monella* and *Escherichia coli* strains indicate that C5b–9  
fails to insert into hydrophobic domains in the outer  
membrane and, consequently, is shed${}^{4,5,9}$. In these serum-  
resistant strains, complement activation occurs on the  
LPS molecules with the longest O polysaccharide side  
chains; C5b–9 is thus generated at a considerable dis-  
tance from the outer membrane and would be expected  
both to insert poorly and to be sterically hindered in  
gaining access to the membrane${}^{4,5,9,14,15}$. In contrast, C3b  
binding and C5b–9 assembly on serum-sensitive strains  
occurs on LPS molecules with short O polysaccharide  
side chains${}^{4,5,9,14,15}$.

A different mechanism has been demonstrated with  
serum-resistant *Neisseria*. These organisms do activate  
complement through C9; however, C5b–9 appears to be  
bound to hydrophobic outer membrane constituents in a  
form that is different from the form found on serum-  
sensitive organisms${}^{9,16}$. Similar findings have been ob-  
tained with complement-resistant *T. cruzi* amastigotes,  
which also activate through C9 but, again, C5b–9 fails to  
insert effectively into the lipid bilayer${}^{17}$.

**Mimicry of complement epitopes by microorganisms**

**Binding and regulatory epitopes**

Several pathogens have developed the ability to dis-  
assemble C3 convertases or to act as cofactors for clea-

age of bound C3b by factor I; thus, they have evolved  
functional properties identical to those used by normal  
mammalian cells to prevent their own destruction by  
complement. A number of distinct proteins have been  
identified, some bearing no structural or genetic  
similarity to mammalian complement regulatory pro-  
teins and others sharing structural or genetic homology  
with the complement proteins or proteins that mediate  
cell–cell or protein–protein interactions (Table 1).

One of the first examples of the latter was the demon-  
stration of a CR1-like, C3b-binding molecule in herpes  
simplex virus (HSV) types I and II${}^{18,19}$. C3b binding was  
shown to be a property of glycoprotein C (gC-1)${}^{18,19}$;  
subsequently, gC-2 from HSV-2 was also found to bind  
C3b${}^{19}$. In addition to C3b binding, relatedness of gC-1  
and gC-2 to CR1 is indicated by the ability of a mono-  
clonal antibody to CR1 to block gC-1 binding to C3b${}^{20}$  
and by the finding that gC-1 accelerates decay of the  
alternative pathway C3 convertase${}^{21}$. Finally, structural  
relatedness with CR1 is also suggested by the presence  
of homologous regions between the deduced protein se-  
quences of gC-1, gC-2 and CR1, although the typical  
short consensus repeat (SCR) found in CR1, CR2, DAF  
and MCP is not present${}^{19,22}$. The activity also differs from  
that of CR1, since gC-1 does not accelerate the decay of  
the classical pathway C3 convertase or possess factor I  
cofactor activity, as CR1 does. The presence of gC-1 does  
provide protection from complement-mediated neutral-  
ization of HSV-1 *in vitro*${}^{19}$, strongly suggesting that the  
binding and regulatory functions are biologically signifi-  
cant; however, the relevance *in vivo* has not yet been  
addressed.

Another human herpes virus, Epstein–Barr virus  
(EBV), also possesses complement regulatory activity${}^{23}$.  
Purified EBV accelerates the decay of the alternative  
pathway C3 convertase and can serve as a cofactor for

### Table 1. Complement binding and regulatory epitopes used by microorganisms to evade the complement system or augment infection

| Microorganism          | Microorganism protein       | Homologous complement protein(s) | Complement-binding/regulatory functions of microorganism proteins | Complement-like motif of microorganism proteins |
|------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Vaccinia virus         | gp35                        | C4bp                              | Block CCP C3 convertase assembly                                   | SCR                                              |
| Trypanosoma cruzi     | gp160                       | CR1, DAF                          | Block ACP C3 convertase assembly                                   | SCR                                              |
| Herpes simplex virus   | gC-1, gC-2                  | CR1, DAF                          | Disassemble ACP C3 convertase                                      | SCR-like                                         |
| Epstein–Barr virus    | Unknown                     | CR1, DAF, MCP                    | Factor I cofactor for C3 and C4 cleavage, disassemble ACP C3        | Unknown                                          |
| Trypanosoma cruzi     | 87–93 kDa, 68 kDa           | CR1, DAF                          | Block assembly of and disassemble ACP C3 convertase                 | Unknown                                          |
| Candida albicans      | 165 kDa                     | CR3                               | iC3b binding                                                       | Integrin                                         |
| Plasmodium falciparum | Circumsporozoite protein, TRAP | Properdin                         | C3b adhesion?                                                      | Thrombospondin repeats                           |

CCP: classical pathway; ACP: alternative pathway; TRAP: thrombospondin-related anonymous protein; DAF: decay-accelerating factor; SCR: short consensus repeat; MCP: membrane cofactor protein.

Immunology Today **328** Vol. 12 No. 9 1991
factor-I-mediated cleavage of C3b, iC3b and for both C4 cleavages²³. The spectrum of activities is somewhat similar to those of CR1 but different in that EBV fails to bind C3b and does not accelerate decay of the classical pathway C3 convertase, as does CR1. The EBV envelope protein responsible for this complement regulatory function has not been identified, and a search for the sequences of the known envelope proteins has not revealed intact SCRs. It has not yet been determined whether the complement regulatory activities of EBV increase viral infectivity.

### Short consensus repeats

We have also obtained evidence for a DAF-like molecule(s) in the complement-resistant infectious vertebrate form of *Trypanosoma cruzi*, the protozoan parasite which causes Chagas disease. Purified gp160, a developmentally-regulated trypomastigote glycoprotein, binds C3b and blocks alternative pathway C3 convertase formation (K.A. Norris, B.M. Bradt, N.R. Cooper and M. So, unpublished). A 3 kb partial genomic clone, identified by antibody to gp160 in a *T. cruzi* genomic expression library, hybridizes to an authentic human DAF clone under medium stringency conditions. Thus, the 160 kDa protein is, functionally and genetically, similar to DAF. Vector-stage epimastigotes, which are complement susceptible, lack gp160. *T. cruzi* trypomastigotes possess additional, somewhat different, complement regulatory activities; these properties have been attributed to 87–93 kDa²⁴ and 68 kDa²⁵ molecules. These complement regulatory activities of *T. cruzi* trypanastigotes together probably account for the resistance of the blood stage form to inactivation by the complement system.

The 35 kDa vaccinia virus (VV) major secretory protein possesses complement regulatory activity (Table 1)²⁶. The deduced amino acid sequence of the VV protein indicates that the protein is composed of four tandemly arranged SCRs. These SCRs of the VV protein are 38% identical to the four amino-terminal SCRs and 28% identical to the four carboxy-terminal SCRs of C4bp²⁶. The VV protein binds C4b, thus preventing formation, and accelerating the decay, of the classical pathway C3 convertase²⁷. Preliminary studies indicate that VV with mutations in the 35 kDa protein are attenuated *in vivo*²⁷.

The outer lipid bilayer membrane of *Schistosoma mansoni* contains a molecule with DAF activity²⁸. Unlike the molecules described above, the DAF associated with *S. mansoni* is derived from the host, not the parasite. It has been suggested that host cell DAF is absorbed and inserted into parasite membranes, thereby permitting the organisms to evade destruction by the alternative pathway.

### Integrins, thrombospondin repeats and other structures

There are several examples of the presence of complement-related sequences in microorganisms, which probably facilitate infection by processes distinct from complement regulation (Table 1). *Candida albicans* is a case in point. It binds not only C3 fragments²⁹, but it also reacts with antibody to the α chain of CR3 (Ref. 29) and contains a protein with a nucleotide sequence that is homologous to the carboxy-terminal regions of CR3 and p150,95 (CD11b and CD11c)³⁰. CR3 and p150,95, two complement receptors that bind iC3b, are integrins, members of a gene family involved in interactions between cells and between tissues. Thus, *C. albicans* expresses a protein with functional, antigenic and structural homology to members of the β₂ integrin family. The functional significance of the CR3 homologue is not clear; however, pathogenic *Candida* strains bind iC3b more strongly than less pathogenic strains²⁹. A role involving adherence of the organism to host cells could be postulated, since integrin superfamily members mediate binding reactions and cellular adherence of *Candida* correlates with infection²⁹.

The TRAP (thrombospondin-related anonymous protein) and circumsporozoite proteins of *Plasmodium falciparum* contain thrombospondin repeats that are very similar to those in properdin, C6, C7, C8 and C9 (Ref. 31). Such repeats are thought to mediate protein-protein interactions. It has been suggested that the thrombospondin repeats in *Plasmodium falciparum* may bind C3b, as does properdin, thus permitting the complement-coated organisms to gain entry into cells via CR1 (Ref. 31).

A quite different example is a protein of *T. cruzi* that crossreacts with antibody to C9 and appears to possess pore-forming cytotoxic activity³². It has been postulated that the C9 homologue mediates passage of the parasite from vacuoles into the cytosol³².

### Use of complement receptors to initiate infection

A number of microorganisms not only avoid inactivation and destruction by complement, but also use complement receptors to initiate infection (Table 2). In a few instances, this has been shown to be due to the presence of complement-like epitopes that mediate binding to the receptor in the organism; more commonly, attachment to the complement receptor is via C3 fragments covalently bound to microorganisms as a consequence of their complement-activating properties. This adaptation of the specificity of complement-binding reactions effectively circumvents the surveillance functions of the complement system and targets the microorganisms to the appropriate cell type.

EBV infects its target cell, the B cell, via CR2 (Ref. 33). Our studies suggest that the binding sites for the virus and the natural complement ligand, C3dg, are either structurally identical or located very close to each other, since various monoclonal antibodies to CR2 have identical effects on virus and C3dg attachment to cells³³. Furthermore, studies with monoclonal antibodies, purified proteins and peptides duplicating primary sequences indicate that attachment of EBV to CR2 is mediated by a C3dg-like nine amino acid primary sequence epitope located at the amino terminus of the major external glycoprotein of the virus³⁴.

Another example of appropriation of complement receptors by microorganisms is found in the infectious metacyclic trypomastigote of *Leishmania* (Table 2). This organism parasitizes the macrophage of its vertebrate host via phagocytosis; conversion to the amastigote form within the phagolysosome follows. A number of approaches have indicated that attachment, which occurs in

Table 2. Use of complement receptors by microorganisms to facilitate infection

| Microorganism                  | Cell                | Complement receptor | Complement-dependent | Ligand               |
|-------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| Epstein-Barr virus            | B cell             | CR2                 | 0                     | C3-like sequence in gp350 |
| Leishmania major/donovani     | Monocyte-macrophage | CR3, p150,95        | 0                     | gp63                 |
| Histoplasma capsulatum        | Monocyte-macrophage | CR3, p150,95        | 0                     | Unknown              |
| Babesia rodhaini              | Red blood cell     | CR1                 | +                     | C3b                  |
| Leishmania major              | Monocyte-macrophage | CR1, CR3            | +                     | C3b or iC3b          |
| Legionella pneumophila        | Monocyte-macrophage | CR1/CR3             | +                     | C3b or iC3b          |
| Mycobacterium leprae          | Monocyte-macrophage | CR1, CR3            | +                     | C3b or iC3b          |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis    | Monocyte-macrophage | CR1, CR3            | +                     | C3b or iC3b          |
| West Nile virus               | Monocyte-macrophage | CR3                 | +                     | iC3b                 |
| HIV                           | Monocyte-macrophage | CR3                 | +                     | C3b, iC3b            |
| HIV                           | B cell, T cell     | CR2                 | +                     | C3b                  |

the absence of complement, is mediated by CR3, the iC3b  
receptor, as well as by p150,95 and lymphocyte function-  
associated molecule 1 (LFA-1)³⁵. Furthermore, the bind-  
ing of Leishmania metacyclic promastigotes to CR3 is  
mediated by either of two parasite ligands, one of which  
is the major surface glycoprotein of the organism, gp63  
(Ref. 35). Histoplasma capsulatum also infects macro-  
phages via CR3 and p150,95 in the absence of comp-  
lement³⁶. The data indicate that these microorganisms  
possess C3-like epitopes which mediate attachment to  
CR3.

Microorganisms that have become enveloped with  
covalently-attached C3 fragments acquire the ability to  
bind with high specificity and avidity to C3 receptors. A  
number of organisms use this process to initiate infection  
in vitro (Table 2). Successful adaptation of this process  
requires some regulation of enzymic processing of C3 on  
the surface of the organism; for example, an organism  
using CR1 to gain entry must somehow impede break-  
down of deposited C3b to iC3b and C3dg.

Babesia rodhaini, which activates complement, enters  
red blood cells via CR1 (Ref. 1); Plasmodium merozoites  
may initiate infection in a similar way¹. Legionella pneu-  
mophila, Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium  
tuberculosis, bacterial pathogens that replicate in mono-  
nuclear phagocytes, all activate complement and initiate  
infection of the cells via CR1 and CR3 (Refs 1,37).  
Different developmental stages of Leishmania major  
promastigotes that activate different complement path-  
ways have predominantly either C3b or iC3b on their  
surfaces, and they enter macrophages selectively via CR1  
or CR3, respectively¹⁴,³⁸. Certain viruses, including flavi-  
viruses and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), have  
been found, after complement activation, to infect  
macrophages and monocytes via CR3 (Refs 1,39).  
Evidence also suggests that HIV, after complement acti-  
vation, infects human B cells via CR2 in conjunction with  
CD4 (Ref. 40).

Comment  
Microorganisms have developed a number of different  
strategies to evade the potentially destructive actions of  
the complement system. These include chemical or physi-  
cal structures that either interfere with C3b deposition  
and amplification or limit opsonic interactions with  
phagocytic cells, and molecular strategies that limit  
complement-mediated cytolytic damage by interfering  
with effective C5b–9 membrane insertion. In a number of  
instances, microorganisms have developed the ability to  
initiate infection via complement receptors. This adap-  
tation of the specificity of complement receptor inter-  
actions targets the organism to particular cell types.  
Most interesting, however, is the possession, by several  
microorganisms, of proteins that impair mammalian C3  
convertase assembly, accelerate its dissociation, or pos-  
sess factor I cofactor activity, thus facilitating the proteo-  
lytic destruction of C3b. Such microorganisms use the  
same molecular processes to evade effective complement  
activation and the resulting cytolytic damage as do mam-  
malian cells. Even more surprisingly, several complement  
regulatory proteins of microorganisms are antigenically  
or genetically related to mammalian CR1, DAF, MCP  
or C4bp. However, they do differ functionally, anti-  
genically or genetically from their mammalian counter-  
parts, indicating that they have not merely been ‘picked-  
up’ or otherwise acquired during infection but, rather,  
are microorganism proteins. Not all of the examples are  
of viral origin, ruling out capture and maintenance of  
host cell genes by viruses as a general explanation. Vir-  
tually all of the pathogen and mammalian complement  
regulatory proteins bind C3 or C4 fragments.  
Such highly specific interactions could be considered to  
be specialized molecular recognition processes. In this  
context, the presence of genetically-related, functionally-  
similar complement regulatory activities in diverse  
pathogens and mammals may represent the conservation  
of ancestral molecular recognition motifs important for

recognition, growth, development or other basic processes. It will be of interest to determine whether some of the SCR, integrin and TSR motifs in proteins that have no relationship to the complement system interact with C3-like sequences in their ligands.

The author thanks Catalina Hope for preparation of the manuscript. Studies from the author's laboratory were supported by NIH grants. This is Publication 6768-IMM from the Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Neil R. Cooper is at the Dept of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10666 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

**References**

1. Cooper, N.R., Bradt, B.M. and Norris, K.A. in *New Comprehensive Biochemistry* (Harrison, R.A., ed.), Elsevier Science Publishers (in press)
2. Pangburn, M.K. (1986) in *Immunobiology of the Complement System* (Ross, G.D., ed.), pp. 45–62, Academic Press
3. Atkinson, J.P. and Farries, T. (1987) *Immunol. Today* 8, 212–215
4. Joiner, K.A. (1986) in *Immunobiology of the Complement System* (Ross, G.D., ed.), pp. 183–195, Academic Press
5. Joiner, K.A. (1988) *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 42, 201–230
6. Cooper, N.R. (1985) *Adv. Immunol.* 37, 151–207
7. Tenner, A.J., Ziccardi, R.J. and Cooper, N.R. (1984) *J. Immunol.* 133, 886–891
8. Peitsch, M.C., Kovacsonics, T.J., Tschopp, J. and Isliker, H. (1987) *J. Immunol.* 138, 1871–1876
9. Joiner, K.A., Brown, E.J. and Frank, M.M. (1984) *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 2, 461–491
10. Jimenez-Lucho, V.E., Joiner, K.A., Foulds, J., Frank, M.M. and Leive, L. (1987) *J. Immunol.* 139, 1253–1259
11. Blaser, M.J., Smith, P.F., Repine, J.E. and Joiner, K.A. (1988) *J. Clin. Invest.* 81, 1434–1444
12. Kipnis, T.L., David, T.R., Alper, C.A., Sher, A. and Dias da Silva, W. (1981) *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 78, 602–605
13. Puentes, S.M., Sacks, D.L., Da Silva, R.P. and Joiner, K.A. (1988) *J. Exp. Med.* 167, 887–902
14. Joiner, K.A., Hammer, C.H., Brown, E.J., Cole, R.J. and Frank, M.M. (1982) *J. Exp. Med.* 155, 797–804
15. Joiner, K.A., Goldman, R., Schmaetz, M. et al. (1984) *J. Immunol.* 132, 369–375
16. Joiner, K.A., Warren, K.A., Brown, E.J. and Frank, M.M.
(1983) *J. Immunol.* 131, 1443–1449
17 Iida, K., Whitlow, M.B. and Nussenzweig, V. (1989) *J. Exp. Med.* 169, 881–891
18 Friedman, H.M., Cohen, G.J., Eisenberg, R.J., Seidel, C.A. and Cines, D.B. (1984) *Nature* 309, 633–635
19 McNearney, T.A., Odell, C., Holers, V.M., Spear, P.G. and Atkinson, J.P. (1987) *J. Exp. Med.* 166, 1525–1535
20 Kubota, Y., Gaither, T.A., Cason, J., O’Shea, J.J. and Lawley, T.J. (1987) *J. Immunol.* 138, 1137–1142
21 Fries, L.F., Friedman, H.M., Cohen, G.H. et al. (1986) *J. Immunol.* 137, 1636–1641
22 Seidel-Dugan, C., Ponce de Leon, M., Friedman, H.M., Eisenberg, R.J. and Cohen, G.H. (1990) *J. Virol.* 64, 1897–1906
23 Mold, C., Bradt, B.M., Nemerow, G.R. and Cooper, N.R. (1988) *J. Exp. Med.* 168, 949–969
24 Joiner, K.A., Dias de Silva, W., Rimoldi, M. et al. (1988) *J. Biol. Chem.* 263, 11327–11335
25 Fischer, E., Quaissi, M., Veige, P. and Cornette, J. (1988) *Immunology* 65, 299–303
26 Kotwal, G.J. and Moss, B. (1988) *Nature* 335, 176–178
27 Kotwal, G.J., Isaacs, S.N., McKenzie, R., Frank, M.M. and Moss, B. (1990) *Science* 250, 827–830
28 Pearce, E.J., Hall, B.F. and Sher, A. (1990) *J. Immunol.* 144, 2751–2756
29 Edwards, J.E., Jr, Gaither, T.A., O’Shea, J.J. et al. (1986) *J. Immunol.* 137, 3577–3583
30 Hostetter, M.K. and Kendrick, K.E. (1989) *Complement Inflamm.* 6, 348 (Abstract)
31 Goundis, D. and Reid, K.B.M. (1988) *Nature* 335, 82–85
32 Andrews, N.W., Abrams, C.K., Slatin, S.L. and Griffiths, G. (1990) *Cell* 61, 1277–1287
33 Cooper, N.R., Moore, M.D. and Nemerow, G.R. (1988) *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 6, 85–113
34 Nemerow, G.R., Houghten, R.A., Moore, M.D. and Cooper, N.R. (1989) *Cell* 56, 369–377
35 Russell, D.G. and Talamas-Rohana, P. (1989) *Immunol. Today* 10, 328–333
36 Bullock, W.E. and Wright, S.D. (1987) *J. Exp. Med.* 165, 195–210
37 Schlesinger, L.S., Bellinger-Kawahara, C.G., Payne, N.R. and Horwitz, M.A. (1990) *J. Immunol.* 144, 2771–2780
38 Da Silva, R.P., Hall, B.F., Joiner, K.A. and Sacks, D.L. (1989) *J. Immunol.* 143, 617–622
39 Soelder, B.M., Reisinger, E.C., Koeffler, D. et al. (1989) *Lancet ii*, 271–272
40 Tremblay, M., Meloche, S., Sekaly, R-P. and Wainberg, M.A. (1990) *J. Exp. Med.* 171, 1791–1796

---

**Immunology Today for colleagues abroad**

Scientists in many countries are unable to benefit from *Immunology Today* because the currency necessary to pay for a personal subscription (US dollars or pounds sterling) is not available. If you wish to help a colleague abroad who has this difficulty, *Immunology Today* will help by accepting your cheque or credit card payment for another person’s subscription. Simply complete the subscription order card bound into any issue of *Immunology Today*, giving the recipient’s name and address and, after ‘signature’, YOUR OWN NAME AND ADDRESS. Then dispatch payment as indicated on the subscription form. Renewal notices will be sent to your address and the copies of the journal will be sent regularly to the nominated recipient. Please inform the recipient of your action.

---

**Immunology Today** 331 **Vol. 12 No. 9 1991**
