
INSTITUT PASTEUR

Research in Microbiology 158 (2007) 175–186

**Isolation and characterization of a gene cluster involved in PAH degradation in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11: Expression in *Mycobacterium smegmatis mc²155***

Christophe Pagnout ${}^{a}$, Gilles Frache ${}^{b}$, Pascal Poupin ${}^{a,*}$, Benoît Maunit ${}^{b}$, Jean-François Muller ${}^{b}$, Jean-François Férard ${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$ Laboratoire d'Ecotoxicité, Santé Environnementale, CNRS UMR 7146, Université Paul Verlaine, rue du Général Delestraint, F-57070 Metz, France  
${}^{b}$ Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse et de Chimie Laser, Université Paul Verlaine, 1 Bd Arago, F-57078 Metz, France  

Received 5 June 2006; accepted 24 November 2006  
Available online 20 December 2006  

---

### Abstract

*Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 is able to grow with pyrene, fluoranthene, phenanthrene and fluorene the sole carbon and energy sources. A probe based on the previously described gene *pdoA2*, which encodes the α subunit of a PAH ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1 [S. Krivobok et al., Identification of pyrene-induced proteins in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1: evidence for two ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases, J. Bacteriol. 185(13) (2003) 3828–3841], was used to isolate a 14 kb DNA fragment from strain SNP11. Twelve putative open reading frames (ORFs), divided into two groups by a promoter intergenic region, were detected in this DNA sequence. The first gene cluster, located upstream of the promoter region, showed low but significant deduced amino acid sequence homologies with enzymes involved in aromatic degradation. The second gene cluster, under control of the promoter, contained *pdoA2* (designated *phdA* in this study) and several other ORFs with deduced amino acid sequences closely related to enzymes involved in the phenanthrene-degrading pathway of *Nocardioides* sp. strain KP7. Gene expression analysis in *Mycobacterium smegmatis mc²155* revealed broad substrate specificity of the ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase, since transformant cells containing *phdAB* strongly oxidized fluoranthene, phenanthrene, anthracene, fluorene and dibenzofuran. Laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LDI-ToF MS) analyses of culture media after PAH degradation by *M.* *smegmatis* transformants also revealed that the second gene cluster, located downstream of the promoter, takes an active share in initial phenanthrene and anthracene degradation by allowing transformation of these two PAHs in aromatic ring-cleaved metabolites.

© 2006 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

#### Keywords: Biodegradation; Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; *Mycobacterium gilvum*; *phd* Gene cluster

---

### 1. Introduction

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) comprise a large and heterogeneous group of organic contaminants that are formed and emitted as a result of the incomplete combustion of organic material. The fate of these ubiquitous compounds in the environment is of concern due to their toxic, mutagenic and carcinogenic properties. Degradation of PAHs in the environment occurs through biological and chemical processes. Microbial degradation represents the major biological route responsible for PAH elimination in soil [7]. Microorganisms, such as bacteria and fungi, may partially degrade, cometabolically oxidize or mineralize PAHs. Some bacteria are capable of using the PAHs as sole carbon and energy sources. They transform these compounds into molecules that can enter their central metabolic pathway [7].

Bacterial degradation of low-molecular-weight PAHs (LMW-PAHs), such as naphthalene (two fused rings) and

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 3 87 37 8514; fax: +33 3 87 37 8512.  
E-mail address: poupin@univ-metz.fr (P. Poupin).

0923-2508/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.resmic.2006.11.002

phenanthrene (three fused rings), has been investigated for over 30 years. Most of the information about metabolic pathways, enzymes, and genes involved in LMW-PAH degradation comes from studies on Gram-negative bacteria. The degradative genes involved in the metabolism of naphthalene and phenanthrene in *Pseudomonas*, *Sphingomonas*, *Comamonas* and *Ralstonia* often share a large degree of nucleotide homology, especially those encoding dioxygenase components. These degradative genes, organized into operons, are localized on the chromosome DNA or on self-transmissible large catabolic plasmids [4,11,45].

On the other hand, relatively little information is available on the metabolism of high-molecular-weight PAHs (HMW-PAHs). Most of the isolated bacteria capable of mineralizing pyrene or fluoranthene are actinomycetes belonging to the *Mycobacterium*, *Rhodococcus* or *Nocardioides* genus [2,3,9,10,19,28,36,37,48]. These Gram-positive bacteria seem to play a more important role than Gram-negative bacteria in the environmental degradation of these PAHs.

Genetic analysis and biochemical mechanism data on HMW-PAH degradation by Gram-positive bacteria are less abundant. The study of these bacteria, particularly mycobacteria, faces a number of difficulties basically associated with their handling, like their slow growth rate, cell clumping, extremely resistant cell wall and the presence of efficient restriction/modification systems which seriously limit the introduction of recombinant DNA [18].

However, recently, two distinct ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases induced in the pyrene- and phenanthrene-grown mycobacterial cells (Nid, also designed Pdo1; and Pdo2) were detected using a proteomic approach [24,28]. Genes *nidAB* and *pdoA2B2* encoding the α and β subunits of these two enzymes were cloned, sequenced and overexpressed in *Escherichia coli*. Recombinant dioxygenases significantly inhibit different substrate profiles [28]. NidAB converts pyrene much more efficiently than does PdoA2B2, whereas the latter dioxygenase displays higher activity in the oxidation of phenanthrene.

Genes homologous to *nidAB*, more widely studied than *pdoA2B2*, were detected with high levels of similarities and sometimes with more than one copy in several PAH-degrading mycobacteria isolated from different geographic locations (USA, Germany, Denmark, France) [6,40]. Recently, Stingley et al. characterized the genes present in the vicinity of *nidA* in *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* PYR-1 [43,44]. A number of genes encoding putative enzymes involved in the PAH to protocatechic acid biodegradation pathways were identified within a 37 kb region (Fig. 1). This region seems to be involved in both pyrene and phenanthrene degradation.

In this paper, we report the isolation and characterization of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11, which uses pyrene, fluoranthene, phenanthrene and fluorene as sole sources of carbon and energy. This strain is also able to transform anthracene and dibenzofuran into more hydrophilic compounds. Genes *nidA* and *pdoA2* (designated *phdA* in this study) encoding the α subunits of both dioxygenases Nid and Pdo2 were detected in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11. The *pdoA2* region was

cloned, sequenced and expressed in *Mycobacterium smegmatis* mc²155.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Bacterial strains, plasmids, and culture conditions

The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are described in Table 1. *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 was isolated from grass-land soil by the spray plate method of Kiyohara et al. [27], after 1 month of enrichment with pyrene as the sole source of carbon and energy. This bacterium was grown and maintained on Luria-Bertani-rich medium (LB) or on mineral salt medium (MS) coated by PAHs. LB medium contains (per liter) 10 g of peptone, 5 g of yeast extract and 5 g of NaCl. MS medium contains (per liter) 1 g of \((\mathrm{NH}_{4})_{2} \mathrm{SO}_{4}\), \(1 \mathrm{~g}\) of \(\mathrm{KH}_{2} \mathrm{PO}_{4}, 1 \mathrm{~g}\) of \(\mathrm{K}_{2} \mathrm{HPO}_{4}, 0.04 \mathrm{~g}\) of \(\mathrm{MgSO}_{4} \cdot 7 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}, 0.004 \mathrm{~g}\) of \(\mathrm{FeCl}_{3} \cdot 6 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}\). *M.* *smegmatis* mc²155 was grown in Middlebrook liquid 7H9 medium supplemented with \(0.085 \%\) (w/v) of NaCl and \(0.05 \%\) (w/v) of Tween 80. When appropriate, \(0.2 \%\) (w/v) of glucose was added (7H9-glc). Media were solidified by addition of \(1.5 \%\) (w/v) agar. The antibiotics used in this study were ampicillin (Ap; \(100 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}\)) and kanamycin (Kn; \(20 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}\)). PAHs and BTEX were purchased from Aldrich Chemical (Sigma Aldrich Sarl, St Quentin Fallavier, France).

### 2.2. DNA isolation and manipulation

Restriction and modification enzymes were purchased by MBI Fermentas (Euromedex, Mundolsheim, France). Isolation of genomic DNA was carried out as described by Sambrook et al. [39]. Prior to DNA isolation, mycobacteria were pretreated with \(100 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}\) of D-cycloserine and \(200 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}\) of lysosome and incubated overnight at \(30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\).

Plasmid DNA isolation was performed with the Qiagen plasmid extraction kit (Qiagen S.A., Courtaboeuf, France). DNA fragments of interest were purified from agarose gel using the NucleoTrap kit (Macherey-Nagel SARL, France) or the GELase agarose gel-digesting preparation (Epicentre, France).

Electrocompetent *E. coli* cells were prepared and electroporated by the method of Dower et al. [12]. Cells of *M.* *smegmatis* mc²155 were made electrocompetent and used according to the method described by Pelicic et al. [35].

### 2.3. 16S rRNA analysis

The near full-length 16S rRNA gene of strain SNP11 was amplified by PCR using forward primer \(5^{\prime}-\) GCTGGCGGGCGTGCTTAACA-3' (position 36–56 in the *E. coli* numbering system) and reverse primer \(5^{\prime}\)-AAGGAGGTGATCCARCCGCA-3' (position 1535–1516 in the *E. coli* numbering system) [47]. The reaction mixture (100 μl) contained 2 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), \(1 \times\) Taq buffer with \(1.5 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{Mg}^{2+}\), \(0.2 \mathrm{mM}\) of dNTP mix, \(0.4 \mu \mathrm{M}\) of each primer and \(100 \mathrm{ng}\) of DNA. PCR was performed under conditions of 35 cycles

C. Pagnout et al. / Research in Microbiology 158 (2007) 175–186

pyrene


nidA/B


pyrene cis-4,5-dihydrodiol


?


3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene


(phdF)


2-hydroxybenzo[h]chromene-2-
carboxylic acid


?


4-[1-hydroxy(2-naphthyl)]-2-
oxobut-3-enoic acid


phdG


1-hydroxy-2-naphthaldehyde


(nidD)


phenanthrene

nidA/B


phenanthrene cis-3,4-dihydrodiol


?


3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene


(phdF)


2-hydroxybenzo[h]chromene-2-
carboxylic acid


?


4-[1-hydroxy(2-naphthyl)]-2-
oxobut-3-enoic acid


phdG


1-hydroxy-2-naphthaldehyde


(nidD)



1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid


phdl


2′-carboxybenzalpyruvic acid


phdJ


2-carboxybenzaldehyde


(nidD)


o-phthalic acid


phtAa/Ab/Ac/Ad


phthalic acid cis-3,4-dihydrodiol


phtB


3,4-dihydroxyphthalic acid


?


protocatechuic acid


Fig. 1. Schematic representation of phenanthrene biodegradation pathway in *Mycobacterium* species. Genes detected in the *nidA* region of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 [43,44] are shown in italics, and enzymes are numbered as follows: 1, ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase (*α* and *β* subunits); 2, dihydrodiol dehydrogenase; 3, extradiol dioxygenase; 4, isomerase; 5, hydratase aldolase; 6, aldehyde dehydrogenase; 7, ring-cleaving dioxygenase; 8, hydratase aldolase; 9, aldehyde dehydrogenase; 10, ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase (*α* and *β* subunits, ferredoxin and reductase); 11, dihydrodiol dehydrogenase; 12, decarboxylase. Extradiol dioxygenase numbered 3 is presumably encoded by *phdF* and aldehyde dehydrogenases numbered 6 and 9 are presumably encoded by *nidD* [44]. These genes are presented in parentheses.

Table 1  
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study  

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics$^a$ | Source or reference |
|-------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------|
| Strains           |                               |                     |
| Mycobacterium sp. strain SNP 11 | Wild-type; pyrene, fluoranthene, phenanthrene and fluorene degrading strain | This study |
| E.coli XL 1-Blue  | F'::Tn10proA$^{+}$B$^{+}$lacI$^{q}$ Δ(lacZ) M15recA1endA1gyrA96thi-1hsdR17supE44reLA1 | Stratagene |
| M.smegmatis mc$^{2}$ 155 | Highly transformable mutant | [41] |
| M.smegmatis C20   | Transformant strain containing pVI20 | This study |
| M.smegmatis C201  | Transformant strain containing pVI201 | This study |
| M.smegmatis C202  | Transformant strain containing pVI202 | This study |
| M.smegmatis C203  | Transformant strain containing pVI203 | This study |
| M.smegmatis C204  | Transformant strain containing pVI204 | This study |
| M.smegmatis C205  | Transformant strain containing pVI205 | This study |
| Plasmids          |                               |                     |
| pBluescript II KS(+) | E.coli cloning vector; Ap$^{r}$ | Stratagene |
| pHLD 69           | Mycobacterium-Escherichia coli shuttle vector; Kn$^{r}$ | [20] |
| pJEM 15           | Mycobacterium-Escherichia coli promoter-probe shuttle vector for lacZ fusions; Kn$^{r}$ | [46] |
| pPROM            | pJEM 15 with the internal promoter P$_{PAH}$ introduced between sites BamHI and KpnI | This study |
| pVI20             | pHLD69with14kbKpnI fragment of Mycobacterium sp. strain SNP 11 | This study |
| pVI201            | pHLD69with6.75kbKpnI*-XbaI* fragment containing the putative internal promoter, phtC, phdEFAB and ORF 10 | This study |
| pVI202            | pHLD69with4.79kbKpnI*-XbaI* fragment containing the putative internal promoter P$_{PAH}$, phtC, phdEF | This study |
| pVI203            | pHLD69with5.39kbKpnI*-XbaI* fragment containing phdEFAB and ORF 10 | This study |
| pVI204            | pPROM with 5.39kbKpnI*-KpnI* fragment containing phdEFAB and ORF 10 | This study |
| pVI205            | pPROM with 3.23kbKpnI*-KpnI* fragment containing phdAB and ORF 10 | This study |

$^a$ Restriction sites introduced by PCR design are indicated by asterisks.

consisting of 94°C for 45s, 55°C for 30s and 72°C for 45s. PCR products were analyzed by 1% (w/v) agarose electrophoresis separation, and partial sequencing of about 750bp was performed by MWG Biotech (Courtaboeuf, France).

2.4. Biodegradation studies

PAH biodegradation studies were performed at 30°C in liquid MS medium for Mycobacterium sp. strain SNP 11. The PAHs dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (1M) were introduced as the sole source of carbon in MS medium at a final concentration of 500 μM. PAH mineralization was established when the PAH disappearance was concomitant with a bacterial biomass increase. PAH degradation by strain SNP 11 was also confirmed by resting cell experiments.

PAH degradation in resting cells was performed as follows: Mycobacterium sp. SNP 11 cells were pregrown at 30°C in 200ml of LB medium and M.smegmatis transformants in 200ml of 7H9-glc medium containing kanamycin. They were collected in exponential phase by centrifugation, washed twice and respectively resuspended in MS and 7H9 medium to an optical density of 1.0 at 600nm. An aliquot (20ml) of the culture was distributed into Erlenmeyer flasks (50ml), and the PAHs dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide were added to make a final concentration of 500 μM. Incubation was performed at 30°C in a rotary shaker at 175rpm.

PAH degradation by M.smegmatis transformants was monitored by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). At different times of incubation, 1ml of the culture media were collected and mixed with 5ml of methanol to completely dissolve PAHs [38]. These mixtures were injected with an autosampler (AS-465, Kontron Instruments), into a reversed phase column (5μm, C18 Ultrasphere column, 4.6×250mm) maintained at 30°C. Isocratic elution with acetonitrile/water (50:50, v/v) was performed at a flow rate of 1ml/min by a HPLC pump system (Waters 600E). UV detection was conducted at the maximum absorbance wavelength of each investigated PAH by a Waters 481 spectrophotometer to follow its decrease in the degradation media. Data were integrated by Varian Star software.

Metabolites formed were analyzed by laser desorption/ionization (LDI) time-of-flight mass spectrometry (ToFMS) after 96h of incubation. LDI experiments were conducted on a Bruker Reflex IV TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) fitted with a Scout 384 ion source. A new optical path had been developed on this instrument to perform LDI analyses at the wavelength of 266nm, delivered by a quadrupled Nd:YAG laser. The laser spot diameter was around

30 μm. Analyses were carried out in positive detection mode, with a 200 ns delayed extraction time. A mass spectrometer operated in a reflectron mode at a total acceleration voltage of 20 kV and a reflecting voltage of 23 kV. After amplification, the signals were transferred to XACQ software and processed with XMASS 5.1. Degradation media (0.5 μl) were directly deposited on a stainless steel sample holder. Presented mass spectra are relative to the sum of two series of a 50 laser shot performed on two different sample sites. The chemical structures of metabolites were suggested on the basis of their molecular weights and literature data.

### 2.5. Southern blot analysis

Mycobacterial DNA (10 μg) was digested with different restriction enzymes, subjected to electrophoresis overnight in a 0.9% (w/v) agarose gel and transferred onto nylon membranes. To produce a probe by PCR against the *nidA* and *pdoA2* genes of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11, two primer pairs were designed: *nidA*-F (5′-TGATGTCAGCGAACTG GAAG-3′) and *nidA*-R (5′-AGTCCATGCCCACTTCGTAG-3′), and *pdoA2*-F (5′-ACGCAGAAACTCCACAAGCTC-3′) and *pdoA2*-R (5′-ACTTCCATCGTGTGCTGTGA-3′). The cycling profile consisted of 35 cycles of 1 min at 94 °C, 30 s at 55 °C, and 45 s at 72 °C, followed by a final incubation at 72 °C for 5 min. A 615 bp DNA fragment was amplified with total genomic DNA of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 as template and primers *nidA*-F/*nidA*-R. A 808 bp DNA fragment was also amplified with the same genomic DNA as template and primers *pdoA2*-F/*pdoA2*-R. PCR amplicons were sequenced and then labeled with a DIG labeling system according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche-Boehringer-Mannheim, Germany). Membranes were prehybridized in hybridization solution (50% formamide, 5 × SSC [NaCl 3 M, TriNa 0.3 M; pH 7.0], 2% Blocking Reagent, 0.1% N-laurylsarcosine, 0.02% SDS) for 1 h at 42 °C and then hybridized overnight at 42 °C with the denatured probe in the same solution. Detection was performed by chemiluminescence according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche-Boehringer-Mannheim).

### 2.6. Cloning, sequencing and analysis of PAH catabolic genes

DNA of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 was digested with KpnI and subjected to electrophoresis overnight in a 0.9% (w/ v) low melting point agarose gel. Fragments higher than 10 kb were extracted with GELase, inserted in the digested and de-phosphorylated *Mycobacterium–E. coli* shuttle vector pHLD69 [20] and cloned in *E. coli* XL1-Blue. Positive clones were detected with the *pdoA2* probe using standard methods for colony hybridization.

Large fragments were sequenced using the GeneJumper primer insertion kit (Invitrogen). An in vitro transposition reaction from bacteriophage Mu generates template from subcloned DNA for sequencing. Sequencing was performed by MWG Biotech (Courtaboeuf, France).

### 2.7. Nucleotide sequence analysis

Searches of homologous nucleotide and amino acid sequences were performed with the FASTA and BLASTP programs [1,34], and the EMBL and GenBank databases ([http://www.infobiogen.fr](http://www.infobiogen.fr)). Promoter identification was determined using Neural Network Promoter Prediction and BPROM software available at the Berkeley *Drosophila* Genome Project ([http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/promoter.html](http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/promoter.html)) and Soft-Berry ([http://www.softberry.com](http://www.softberry.com)) web sites.

### 2.8. Promoter activity analysis

A 716 bp DNA fragment containing the putative promoter region (designated P<sub>PAH</sub>) was amplified by PCR with primers prom-L: **5′-CGGGATCCATCGAGCTGAGATCGTGGAT-3′** and prom-R: **5′-GGGGTACCATGGCGTGTGCTTCA GTGT CTA-3′** containing *BamHI* and *KpnI* restriction sites (restriction sites are underlined). The amplicon was digested by *BamHI* and *KpnI*, and cloned into the pJEM15 operon fusion vector [46] to give plasmid *E. coli* XL1-blue cells were transformed with the ligation product by electroporation, and recombinant clones were selected on LB-kanamycin agar plates. Recombinant plasmid was purified and introduced in *M. smegmatis* mc²155 by electroporation. Bacteria were distributed on 7H9-glc-kanamycin-X-gal agar plates and incubated for 4 to 5 days at 37 °C.

For determination of β-galactosidase activity, recombinant *M. smegmatis* cells containing *lacZ* under control of the P<sub>PAH</sub> promoter were collected in exponential phase by centrifugation and resuspended in 1 ml of buffer Z (60 mM Na<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub>, 40 mM NaH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO<sub>4</sub>, 50 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, pH 7.0) after cell densities were adjusted to an OD of 1.0 at 600 nm. One drop of SDS 0.1% and two drops of chloroform were added and tubes were vigorously agitated for 1 min. 200 μl of ONPG were added, and the mixtures were incubated for 15 min at 28 °C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 500 μl of 1 M Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>. β-galactosidase activities were determined as described by Miller [30]. Units of β-galactosidase were calculated using the formula: 1000 × A<sub>420</sub> – (1.75 × A<sub>550</sub>)/reaction time (min). Experiments were carried out in triplicate.

### 2.9. Subclone construction

Fragments of pVI20 were generated by PCR using the Expand Long Template PCR system (Roche-Boehringer-Mannheim) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The amplicons were cloned into *KpnI–XbaI* restriction sites of the pHLD69 vector (plasmids pVI201, pVI202 and pVI203) or into *KpnI–KpnI* restriction sites of pPROM plasmid (plasmids pVI204 and pVI205). All these plasmids are described in more detail in Table 1. Plasmid pVI201 contains a 6.75 kb PCR product generated with the primer pair A-L: **5′-GGGGTACCATTCCGTGAGACCACCTTG-3′** (*KpnI* restriction site is underlined) and A-R: **5′-GCTCTAGAAGT GAAAACCCAGACGATGC-3′** (the *XbaI* restriction site is
underlined). Plasmid pVI202 contains a 4.79 kb PCR product generated with the primer pair A-L and B-R: 5′-GCTCTAGA GAACGACAGGTGGGAAAGA-3′ (the XbaI restriction site is underlined). Plasmid pVI203 contains a 5.39 kb PCR product generated with the primer pair B-L: 5′-GGGGTACCC GATGTCAATGCTGTGGGTTC-3′ (the KpnI restriction site is underlined) and A-R. Plasmid pVI204 contains a similar PCR product as that of pVI205, but generated with the primer pair B-L and C-R: 5′-GGGGTACCAGTGAAAACCCAGAC GATGC-3′ (the KpnI restriction site is underlined) and introduced into the pPROM plasmid. Plasmid pVI205 contains a 3.23 kb PCR product generated with the primer pair D-L: 5′-GGGGTACCGATGGTCGAGGTGCAAAGTT-3′ (KpnI restriction site is underlined) and C-R.

### 2.10. Nucleotide sequence accession numbers

The 16S rRNA sequence of *Mycobacterium* sp. SNP11 and the 14 kb DNA sequence reported in this paper have been submitted to the GenBank database and respectively assigned accession numbers **DQ983919** and **EF026099**.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Characterization of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11

Strain SNP11 was isolated from grassland soil near Metz (France) after one month of enrichment with pyrene. This strain is a Gram-positive coccus able to grow at 20°C and 30°C (*T<sub>D</sub>*: 7.2 h), but not at 37°C. On LB agar plates, colonies are circular, smooth with a convex surface, yellow-pigmented. The degradative capacities of strain SNP11, confirmed by HPLC analyses (data not shown), are listed in Table 2. This strain grows with pyrene, fluoranthene, phenanthrene and fluorene as the sole carbon and energy sources. It is also able to transform anthracene and dibenzofuran into more hydrophilic compounds. A medium coloring, resulting probably from a metabolite accumulation, was observed during fluoranthene, dibenzofuran, phenanthrene, anthracene and fluorene resting cell degradation experiments. Strain SNP11 did not growth

### Table 2  
**Aromatic compound degradation by strain SNP11**

| Substrate       | Mineralization<sup>a</sup> | Medium coloring<sup>b</sup> |
|-----------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Pyrene          | +                          | –                           |
| Fluoranthene    | +                          | + (temporary red)           |
| Phenanthrene    | +                          | + (temporary yellow)        |
| Anthracene      | –                          | + (persistent yellow)       |
| Fluorene        | +                          | + (temporary yellow)        |
| Naphthalene     | –                          | –                           |
| Dibenzofuran    | –                          | + (persistent yellow)       |
| BTEX            | –                          | –                           |

+ Disappearance of compound with a concomitant bacterial biomass increase; –, no growth.  
<sup>a</sup> Degradation in liquid medium with PAHs as sole carbon source.  
<sup>b</sup> Medium coloring observed during PAH degradation in resting cells.

### 3.2. Cloning and sequencing of the PAH catabolic genes

Two distinct dioxygenases (Nid and Pdo2) are known to be responsible for the initial PAH attack in mycobacteria. PCR and Southern experiments using primers and probes based on the α subunit (*nidA* and *pdoA2*) of these dioxygenases revealed that they were both present in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 (data not shown). The *nidA* (615 bp) and *pdoA2* (808 bp) amplicon sequences were more than 99% identical to *nidA* of *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* strain PYR-1 and *pdoA2* of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1, respectively. Southern analysis profiles suggested two copies of *nidA* and a single copy of *pdoA2* in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 (data not shown). No amplification or hybridization of the *nidA* and *pdoA2* genes was observed in *M. smegmatis mc<sup>2</sup> 155.*

In this study, we focused on Pdo2 dioxygenase, which, contrary to Nid, remains currently sparsely documented. A partial genomic library from *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 was constructed in *E. coli* XL1-Blue by cloning the KpnI genomic fragments with a length greater than 10 kb into the *Mycobacterium-E. coli* shuttle vector pHLd69. The library was screened using *pdoA2* as a probe. Three similar clones containing a 14 kb DNA fragment (plasmid pVI20) were obtained.

### 3.3. Sequence analysis of PAH degradation genes

Approximately 11 kb of the 14 kb DNA fragment were totally sequenced. Analysis revealed the presence of 12 ORFs (Fig. 2). The putative function of individual ORFs was determined based on their deduced amino acid sequence homologies with previously described enzymes. A putative promoter was also identified with high probability by Neural Network Promoter prediction and BPROM software. It was localized in a 533 bp intergenic region (position 3531–3576) which divides the ORFs into two distinct clusters (Table 3).

with naphthalene and monoaromatic compounds such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and *p*-xylene (BTEX).

The partial primary sequence of the 16S rRNA gene (754 bp) of strain SNP11 was 100% identical to the 16S rRNA of the *Mycobacterium gilvum* strain BB1 (accession no. **X81891**) and *M. gilvum* strain LB307T (accession no. **AJ245703**). *M. gilvum* strain BB1 is able to utilize phenanthrene, fluoranthene, and pyrene as sole sources of carbon and energy [3,5]. *M. gilvum* strain LB307T also grows on phenanthrene and fluoranthene, but degrades pyrene cometabolically [2]. The 16S rRNA gene sequence of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 also exhibited very high levels of similarity (more than 99.7%) with 16S rRNA sequences of other PAH-degrading mycobacteria such as *Mycobacterium* sp. strain RJGII.135 (accession no. **U30661**), *Mycobacterium* sp. strain C2-3 (accession no. **AF165182**), *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SM 7.6.1 (accession no. **AF247497**) and *Mycobacterium* sp. strain WF2 (accession no. **U90877**). It showed 98% identity with the 16S rRNA sequence of *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* strain PYR-1 (accession no. **U30662**).
C. Pagnout et al. / Research in Microbiology 158 (2007) 175–186

pVI20
K Sm E Sm Sm Sc A P Sc PE Sc A P PAH B P Sm AE B E P Sc Sm Sc P BK
ORF1 ORF2 ORF3 ORF4 ORF5 ORF6 ORF7 ORF8 ORF9 ORF11 ORF12
phtC phdE phdF phdA phdB
1Kb

pVI201
pVI203
pVI202
pVI204 P PAH
pVI205 P PAH

Fig. 2. Physical map of the 14 kb *KpnI* fragment containing the PAH ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11. The pentagons indicate the size, location and direction of the ORFs. Plasmids pVI20, pVI201, pVI202, pVI203, pVI204, and pVI205 are represented by continuous lines. Positions of the promoter *P*<sub>PAH</sub> are marked by full arrows. Restriction sites: A, *ApaI*; B, *BamHI*; E, *EcoRI*; K, *KpnI*; P, *PstI*; Sc, *SacI*; Sm, *SmaI*.

The first gene cluster was localized upstream of the putative promoter. It consisted of four ORFs which showed deduced amino acid sequences 30–40% identical to dioxygenases (*α* and *β* subunits), dehydrogenases and extradiol dioxygenases involved in aromatic degradation (Table 3). The putative dioxygenase encoded by ORF1 and ORF2 shared low but significant deduced amino acid sequence homologies with the ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases catalyzing the angular dioxygenation of dibenzofuran in *Terrabacter* sp. strain DBF63 [22] and *Rhodococcus* sp. strain YK2 [21]. In the first strain, it was also shown that this enzyme oxidized dibenzo-*p*-dioxin and fluorene but not naphthalene, phenanthrene or anthracene [17,22]. The putative dehydrogenase encoded by ORF3 showed a deduced amino acid sequence more than 30% identical to the *cis*-phthalate dihydrodiol dehydrogenases of *Burkholderia cepacia* strain DB01 and *Pseudomonas putida* (Table 3), which converted *cis*-4,5-dihydro-4,5-dihydroxyphthalate into 4,5-dihydroxyphthalate [8,32]. The N-terminal GxxGxG dinucleotide binding domain and the Hx<sub>11</sub>KHVLxEKPxA consensus region flanked by alpha-helical domains of the dehydrogenase superfamily members [31] were detected between residues 11 and 18 and residues 83 and 106 (MI instead of VL) in the product of ORF3. The putative extradiol, encoded by ORF4, showed low but significant homology with extradiol dioxygenases involved in the degradation of carbazole. These enzymes are members of the group of extradiol dioxygenases (type II or class III) described by Eltis and Bolin [15] and by Spence et al. [42]. The conserved DH and GxSH motifs, which may function as iron-coordinating ligands, were respectively detected in positions 167–168 and 218–221 of the ORF4 product.

The second gene cluster, localized downstream of the putative promoter, contained several ORFs with deduced amino acid sequences more than 70% identical to enzymes involved in phenanthrene degradation (Table 3). The gene encoding the *α* subunit of the PdoA2B2 ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase (ORF 8), which serves as probe to isolate the 14 kb *KpnI* fragment, was detected in this cluster. In the vicinity, genes encoding the *β* subunit (ORF9) and an unknown function protein similar to the ORF1 product of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1 (ORF10), were also found. Gene expression in *E. coli* previously showed that PdoA2B2 displayed high activity in oxidation of phenanthrene [28,38]. In that study, ORF8 and ORF9 were respectively designated *phdA* and *phdB* rather than *pdoA2* and *pdoB2*, to avoid confusion with *pdoA1* and *pdoB1* of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1 [28] or *pdoA* and *pdoB* of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain S65 [40] which, in spite of different names, are more than 98% identical to *nidA* and *nidB* of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR1.

Sequence analyses of the second gene cluster also revealed that the deduced amino acid sequence of a great majority of ORFs, among them ORF8, ORF9, and ORF10 mentioned above, are closely related to enzymes responsible for the first steps of phenanthrene degradation in *Nocardioides* sp. strain KP7 [38] (Table 3). The hypothetical RBS (GGAGGGA) and UUG translation initiation codons of ORF6 (designated *phdE*) were identified by deduced amino acid sequence comparison with the dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (PhdE) of this strain and with the dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (PhnB) of *Burkholderia* sp. strain RP007. These enzymes catalyze transformation of phenanthrene *cis*-3,4-dihydrodiol into 3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene [29,37,38]. The deduced amino acid sequence of ORF6 matches the PROSITE short-chain dehydrogenases/reductase family signature (PS00061). ORF7 (designated *phdF*) showed high deduced amino acid sequence homology with the extradiol dioxygenase of *Nocardioides* sp. strain KP7 (PhdF), responsible for 3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene transformation into 2-hydroxybenzo[*h*]chromene-2-carboxylic acid [37,38]. The product of ORF7 contained the PROSITE consensus motif for extradiol ring-cleavage dioxygenases (PS00082). Gene *phdF* was also recently identified in the vicinity of *nidA* of *M. vanbaalenii* strain PYR-1 [44]. Deduced amino acid sequences of the *phdF* genes present in the *nidA* region of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 and in the *phdA* region of *Mycobacterium* sp. SNP11 were 99% identical (Table 3).

Three other ORFs, ORF5, ORF11 and ORF12, were detected in the second gene cluster. ORF5, located just downstream from the putative promoter, showed a deduced amino acid sequence close to the 3,4-dihydroxyphthalate-2-decarboxylase of *Arthrobacter keyseri* 12B and *Terrabacter* sp. strain DBF63, respectively (Table 3). This enzyme is responsible for 3,4-dihydroxyphthalate transformation into protocatechuate in the Gram-positive phthalate biodegradation pathway [14,16]. ORF11, located on the complementary strand, just downstream from ORF10, showed strong homology with the transposase of the IS1110 insertion sequences

Table 3  
Homology of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 gene products  

| ORF | Size (a.a.) | % Identity (a.a.) | Probable function | Organism/gene (degradation pathway) | Accession no. |
|-----|-------------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------|
| Gene cluster 1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1 | 166 | 36.5 | α subunit of dioxygenase | Terrabacter sp. DBF63/dbfA1 (dibenzofuran/fluorene) | AB054975 |
|  |  | 36.5 | α subunit of dioxygenase | Rhodococcus sp. YK2/dbfA1YK2 (dibenzofuran) | AB070456 |
| 2 | 170 | 41 | β subunit of dioxygenase | Terrabacter sp. DBF63/dbfA2 (dibenzofuran/fluorene) | AB054975 |
|  |  | 40.2 | β subunit of dioxygenase | Rhodococcus sp. YK2/dbfA2YK2 (dibenzofuran) | AB070456 |
| 3 | 409 | 35.3 | Dehydrogenase | Burkholderia cepacia DB01/ophB (phthalate) | AF095748 |
|  |  | 33.7 | Dehydrogenase | Pseudomonas putida/pht4 (phthalate) | D13229 |
| 4 | 317 | 28.5 | Extradiol dioxygenase | Janthinobacterium sp. J3/carBb (carbazole) | AB095952 |
|  |  | 28.1 | Extradiol dioxygenase | Pseudomonas sp./carBb (carbazole) | D89064 |
| Gene cluster 2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5 (phtC) | 259 | 74.5 | Decarboxylase | Arthrobacter keyseri 12B/phtC (phthalate) | AF331043 |
|  |  | 68.2 | Decarboxylase | Terrabacter sp. DBF63/phtC (phthalate) | AB084235 |
| 6 (phdE) | 283 | 76.5 | Dihydrodiol dehydrogenase | Nocardioides sp. KP7/phdE (phenanthrene) | AB031319 |
|  |  | 55.5 | Dihydrodiol dehydrogenase | Rhodococcus sp. RHA1/bphB2 (biphenyl) | AB127606 |
| 7 (phdF) | 296 | 99 | Extradiol dioxygenase | Mycobacterium vanbaalenii PYR-1/phdF (phenanthrene) | AY365117 |
|  |  | 82.4 | Extradiol dioxygenase | Nocardioides sp. KP7/phdF (phenanthrene) | AB031319 |
| 8 (phdA) | 466 | 98.9 | α subunit of dioxygenase | Mycobacterium sp. 6PY1/pdoA2 (phenanthrene) | AJ494743 |
|  |  | 73.7 | α subunit of dioxygenase | Nocardioides sp. KP7/phdA (phenanthrene) | AB031319 |
| 9 (phdB) | 172 | 99.4 | β subunit of dioxygenase | Mycobacterium sp. 6PY1/pdoB2 (phenanthrene) | AJ494743 |
|  |  | 64.7 | β subunit of dioxygenase | Nocardioides sp. KP7/phdB (phenanthrene) | AB031319 |
| 10 | 72 | 97.2 | Unknown | Mycobacterium sp. 6PY1/ORF1 | AJ494743 |
|  |  | 73.9 | Unknown | Nocardioides sp. KP7/ORF72 | AB031319 |
| 11 | 401 | 76.6 | Transposase | Mycobacterium paratuberculosis k10/IS1110 | AE017240 |
|  |  | 76.3 | Transposase | Mycobacterium avium LR541/IS1110 | Z23003 |
| 12 | 307 | 34.5 | Transcriptional regulator | Rhodococcus ruber/ethR | AF333761 |
|  |  | 32.2 | Transcriptional regulator | Rhodococcus erythropolis/thcR | U17130 |

of *Mycobacterium avium* LR541 (Z23003) and *Mycobacterium paratuberculosis* k10 (AE017240) [33]. Genes encoding transposases were commonly found in the vicinity of the biodegradation operons, and probably play an important role in horizontal transfer of these genes between bacteria. The deduced amino acid sequence of ORF12 exhibits homology with positive transcriptional regulators of the AraC/XylS family and matches the PROSITE consensus motif for the helix-turn-helix signature of bacterial regulatory proteins (PS00041). The two most closely related members are EthR of *Rhodococcus ruber* and ThcR of *Rhodococcus erythropolis* (Table 3). BlastP search indicated that the putative protein encoded by ORF12 is shorter than other members of the AraC/XylS family: 50–60 amino acids are lacking in the N-terminal end region. Activity of this putative regulator in the regulation of the gene cluster expression has not been investigated. The DNA sequence downstream of ORF12 (circa 2.28 kb) was partially sequenced and no putative ORF was detected. FASTA and BLAST analyses produced no significant homology with DNA sequences from EMBL and GenBank databases. Moreover, no gene encoding ferredoxin and reductase, commonly associated with the large and small subunits of the ring dioxygenase, was found in this DNA isolated fragment.

3.4. Promoter activity analysis

Activity of the putative promoter (*P*~PAH~) previously identified between ORF4 and *phtC* was determined in *M. smegmatis*

high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), revealed that after 5 h of incubation, *M. smegmatis* C20 transformed 25% of fluoranthene, 18% of phenanthrene, 65% of anthracene and 30% of fluorene (Fig. 3). After 20 h, 50% of fluoranthene, 51% of phenanthrene, 90% of anthracene and 67% of fluorene were transformed. After 50 h, anthracene, fluorine and dibenzofuran had totally disappeared, and 79% of fluoranthene and 74% of phenanthrene were transformed. Except for pyrene, a prolonged period of incubation (96 h) led to complete disappearance of PAHs. Pyrene degradation was only 30% after more than 50 h of incubation and, in contrast to other PAH degradation, no more hydro soluble compound was detected in the culture medium.

Plasmid pVI201 containing genes *phtC*, *phdEFAB* and ORF10 under the control of the *P*~PAH~ promoter, and plasmid pVI203, which contains a truncated *phtC* gene, *phdEFAB* and ORF10, were constructed (Table 1 and Fig. 2). The same PAH degradation profile as that observed with *M. smegmatis* C20 was obtained with *M. smegmatis* C201. In contrast, no PAH degradation and no media coloring were observed during biodegradation experiments with *M. smegmatis* C203. When the same DNA fragment (containing *phdEFAB* and ORF10) was introduced into the vector pPROM, under control of the *P*~PAH~ promoter (plasmid pVI204), PAH transformation was observed.

Two other plasmids, pVI202 and pVI205, were constructed. Plasmid pVI202 is similar to pVI201, except that it does not contain genes encoding the ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase (*phdA* and *phdB*) and ORF10. Plasmid pVI205 contains these three absent genes under control of the *P*~PAH~ promoter. Only *M. smegmatis* transformants containing pVI205 were able to transform fluoranthene, phenanthrene, anthracene, fluorine and dibenzofuran into more hydro soluble compounds. Medium staining was once again observed. These results revealed the involvement of the ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase in initial PAH oxygenation.

To better understand the involvement of genes in PAH transformation, culture media were collected after 96 h of incubation and analyzed by laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LDI-ToF MS). Experiments were performed on *M. smegmatis* C20, C201, C204 and C205 which carried, respectively, plasmids pVI20, pVI201, pVI204 and pVI205. Metabolites with *m/z* values higher than that of the original PAH were detected in all culture media after fluoranthene, phenanthrene, anthracene, fluorine and dibenzofuran degradation (Table 4). No metabolite was detected after incubation with pyrene.

In all cases, a major metabolite with *m/z* 248.08 was detected during LDI-ToF mass spectrometry analyses in fluoranthene-degraded culture media. This compound showed a *m/z* consistent with the C<sub>17</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>2</sub> formula (*m/z* calculated: 248.083) corresponding to the hydroxy-methoxyfluoranthene. A similar dead-end metabolite, 8-hydroxy-7-methoxyfluoranthene, was previously identified during fluoranthene degradation by *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 [23].

Analyses of culture media after phenanthrene and anthracene biodegradation revealed the presence of several metabolites with similar *m/z* values. After biodegradation by *M. smegmatis* C20 and C201, the most abundant ion was characterized by *m/z* at 200.08. This metabolite was not clearly identified. However, it had to correspond to a substituted-naphthalene compound. Indeed, when laser irradiance was increased, sequential fragmentation of this compound was observed, and an ion with *m/z* at 128.06, consistent with the molecular weight of the naphthalene (*m/z* calculated: 128.063) was clearly identified (data not shown). A second non-identified metabolite with *m/z* 198.07, which was also not clearly identified, was exclusively detected in the anthracene-degraded culture media. Experiments are in progress to determine the structure of these two dead end metabolites. *M. smegmatis* C204 contained *phdEFAB*-ORF10, but contrary to *M. smegmatis* C201, it did not contain *phtC*. After phenanthrene and anthracene biodegradation, this strain generated metabolites with *m/z* at 242.06. These compounds were consistent with the C<sub>14</sub>H<sub>10</sub>O<sub>4</sub> formula (*m/z* calculated: 242.057) corresponding to hydroxybenzochromene carboxylic acid and to hydroxyl(naphthyl)oxobut-enoic acid generated during the phenanthrene biodegradation pathway (Fig. 1). The putative decarboxylase encoded by *phtC* could catalyze decarboxylation of these compounds, leading to formation of the metabolite with *m/z* at 200.08 by *M. smegmatis* C201. Analysis of the *M. smegmatis* C205 culture media revealed the presence of a compound with *m/z* 224.08, consistent with the C<sub>15</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>2</sub> formula (*m/z* calculated: 224.084) corresponding to hydroxy-methoxyphenanthrene and to hydroxy-methoxyanthracene. In the phenanthrene biodegradation culture medium, another metabolite with *m/z* 194.07 was also detected. This compound, with molecular weight similar to a monooxygenated phenanthrene metabolite (*m/z* calculated: 194.073), corresponded to a phenanthrol or to an epoxyphenanthrene compound.

After fluorene and dibenzofuran degradation by *M. smegmatis* transformant cells, several metabolites were detected

![Transformation of pyrene (●), fluoranthene (×), phenanthrene (▲), anthracene (□), fluorene (○), and dibenzofuran (■) by *M. smegmatis* C20 (continuous line) and *M. smegmatis mc*²155 control (dotted line). Cell density was adjusted to an OD at 600 nm of 1.0 before addition of PAHs (500 μM) as sole carbon and energy sources. PAH concentration was monitored by HPLC. Prolonged incubation (96 h) of *M. smegmatis* C20 resulted in complete removal of fluoranthene, phenanthrene and anthracene.](image.png)

Table 4  
LDI-ToF analyses of culture media after PAH degradation by *M. smegmatis* transformants  

| Strain                     | $m/z$ of the major products$^a$ (relative intensity) |
|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
|                            | Pyrene                  | Fluoranthene            | Phenanthrene             | Anthracene              | Fluorene                | Dibenzofuran            |
| *M. smegmatis mc²155* (control) | 202.08 (0.96)           | 202.08 (0.94)           | 178.08 (0.98)            | 178.08 (0.85)           | 166.08 (0.91)           | 168.06 (0.94)           |
| *M. smegmatis C20*         | 202.08 (0.96)           | 248.08 (0.95)           | 200.08 (0.95)            | 198.07 (0.43)           | 182.07 (0.51)           | 184.05 (0.62)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         | 200.09 (0.51)           | 212.07 (0.27)           | 220.05 (0.15)           |
| *M. smegmatis C201*        | n.t.$^b$                | 248.08 (0.98)           | 200.08 (0.84)            | 198.07 (0.34)           | 182.07 (0.47)           | 184.05 (0.51)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         | 200.09 (0.30)           | 212.07 (0.09)           | 220.05 (0.21)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         |                         | 224.08 (0.32)           |                         |
| *M. smegmatis C204*        | n.t.                    | 248.08 (0.88)           | 242.06 (0.76)            | 242.06 (0.81)           | 182.07 (0.53)           | 184.05 (0.38)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         |                         | 206.11 (0.09)           | 214.06 (0.31)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         |                         | 212.07 (0.13)           |                         |
| *M. smegmatis C205*        | n.t.                    | 248.08 (0.96)           | 194.08 (0.38)            | 224.09 (0.85)           | 182.07 (0.16)           | 184.05 (0.62)           |
|                            |                         |                         | 224.08 (0.50)            |                         | 192.09 (0.19)           | 214.06 (0.31)           |
|                            |                         |                         |                         |                         | 206.11 (0.20)           |                         |
|                            |                         |                         |                         |                         | 212.07 (0.10)           |                         |

$a$ Results are relative to the sum of two series of 50 laser shots performed on two different sample places.  
$b$ n.t., not tested.

phenanthrene and anthracene biodegradation. Transformant *M. smegmatis* cells containing *phdEFAB-ORF10* accumulated a metabolite with an *m/z* value consistent with those of the 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylic acid and 4-[1-hydroxy(2-benzyl)]-2-oxobut-3-enoic acid (*m/z* values at 242.06) (Fig. 1 and Table 4). The functionality of genes located upstream of the *P<sub>PAH</sub>* promoter (ORF1, 2, 3, 4), which also show deduced amino acid sequences related to enzymes involved in aromatic degradation, was not highlighted by expression analyses performed in the present study.

Recently, Stingley et al. examined genes present in the *nidA* region of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 [43,44]. A DNA fragment of 37 kb was cloned, sequenced and expressed in *E. coli*. A number of genes encoding putative enzymes involved in both pyrene and phenanthrene biodegradation pathways were identified. Only genes encoding dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (Fig. 1, step 2), the isomerase (Fig. 1, step 4) and phthalate decarboxylase (Fig. 1, step 12), were missing from this region so as to have the complete phenanthrene to protocatechuic acid biodegradation pathway. Thus, when the genes of the *nidA* region were expressed in *E. coli*, cells were able to produce phenanthrene cis-3,4-dihydrodiol from phenanthrene and the phthalic acid from 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid. *E. coli* cells expressing the putative phthalate operon (*pht* operon) of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 were capable of degrading phthalic acid to 3,4-dihydroxyphthalic acid. As underlined by Stingley et al., the absence of genes encoding the phthalate decarboxylase in the *pht* operon of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 is unusual [43]. In Gram-positive bacteria, as in Gram-negative bacteria, this gene was generally found associated with *pht* operons.

In this study, we detected in the vicinity of *phdA* two ORFs (designated *phtC* and *phdE*) highly homologous to genes encoding the putative phenanthrene cis-3,4-dihydrodiol dehydrogenase and the 3,4-dihydroxyphthalate 2-decarboxylase absent in the *nidA* region to have the complete phenanthrene to protocatechuic acid biodegradation pathway (Fig. 1). Genes localized in the *phdA* region of *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11 seem complementary to those present in the *nidA* region of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1. Only the gene encoding the isomerase, presumed to transform 2-hydroxybenzo[h]chromene-2-carboxylic acid to 4-[1-hydroxy(2-naphthyl)]-2-oxobut-3-enoic acid, was not detected in the *nidA* and *phdA* regions of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 and *Mycobacterium* sp. strain SNP11, respectively. The activity of this isomerase in the PAH biodegradation pathways of mycobacteria was suggested by homology with the PAH biodegradation in Gram-negative bacteria [28,44]. However, analyses of the protein extract from *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 and *Mycobacterium* sp. 6PY1 grown in phenanthrene by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis did not allow identification of this enzyme [24,25,28]. In the same way, in *Nocardioides* sp. strain KP7, the gene encoding the isomerase was not detected. As previously shown by Eaton and Chapman for naphthalene biodegradation by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 [13], isomerase activity may not be necessary for complete achievement of the PAH biodegradation pathway in Gram-positive bacteria.

Based on these observations, genes of the phenanthrene to protocatechuic acid biodegradation pathway all seem to be found in the *nidA* region of *M. vanbaalenii* PYR-1 and the *phdA* region of *Mycobacterium* sp. SNP11. In a given strain, these two distinct regions would act in parallel during PAH degradation.

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by a grant from the Conseil Régional de Lorraine and the Ministère de la Recherche et de l’Enseignement Supérieur and was performed as part of the French Scientific Interest Group—Industrial Wasteland (GISFI) program.

## References

[1] S.F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E.W. Myersand, D.J. Lipman, Basic local alignment search tool, J. Mol. Biol. 215 (1990) 403–410.

[2] L. Bastiaens, D. Springael, P. Wattiau, H. Harms, R. deWachter, H. Verachtert, L. Diels, Isolation of adherent polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-degrading bacteria using PAH-sorbing carriers, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66 (2000) 1834–1843.

[3] B. Boldrin, A. Tiehm, C. Fritzsche, Degradation of phenanthrene, fluorene, fluoranthene, and pyrene by a *Mycobacterium* sp, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59 (1993) 1927–1930.

[4] R. Bosch, E. Garcia-Valdés, E.R.B. Moore, Genetic characterization and evolutionary implications of a chromosomally encoded naphthalene-degradation upper pathway from *Pseudomonas stutzeri* AN10, Gene 236 (1999) 149–157.

[5] E.C. Böttger, P. Kirschmer, B. Springer, W. Zumft, Mycobacteria degrading polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 47 (1997) 247.

[6] B. Brezna, A.A. Khan, C.E. Cerniglia, Molecular characterization of dioxygenases from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading *Mycobacterium* spp, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 223 (2003) 177–183.

[7] C.E. Cerniglia, Biodegradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Biodegradation 3 (1992) 351–368.

[8] H.-K. Chang, G.J. Zylstra, Novel organization of the genes for phthalate degradation from *Burkholderia cepacia* DB01, J. Bacteriol. 180 (1998) 6529–6537.

[9] S.A. Churchill, J.P. Harper, P.F. Churchill, Isolation and characterization of a *Mycobacterium* species capable of degrading three- and four-ring aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65 (1999) 549–552.

[10] D. Dean-Ross, C.E. Cerniglia, Degradation of pyrene by *Mycobacterium flavescens*, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 46 (1996) 307–312.

[11] S.A. Denome, D.C. Stanley, E.S. Olson, K.D. Young, Metabolism of dibenzothiophene and naphthalene in *Pseudomonas* strains: complete DNA sequence of an upper naphthalene catabolic pathway, J. Bacteriol. 175 (1993) 6890–6901.

[12] W.J. Dower, J.F. Miller, C.W. Ragsdale, High efficiency transformation of *E. coli* by high voltage electroporation, Nucleic Acids Res. 16 (1998) 6127–6145.

[13] R.W. Eaton, P.J. Chapman, Bacterial metabolism of naphthalene: construction and use of recombinant bacteria to study ring cleavage of 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene and subsequent reaction, J. Bacteriol. 174 (1992) 7542–7554.

[14] R.W. Eaton, Plasmid-encoded phthalate catabolic pathway in *Arthrobacter keyseri* 12B, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 3689–3703.

[15] L.D. Eltis, J.T. Bolin, Evolutionary relationships among extradiol dioxygenases, J. Bacteriol. 178 (1996) 5930–5937.

[16] H. Habe, M. Miyakoshi, J.S. Chung, K. Kasuga, T. Yoshida, H. Nojiri, T. Omori, Phthalate catabolic gene cluster is linked to the angular

dioxygenase gene in *Terrabacter* sp. strain DBF63, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol 61 (2003) 44–54.

[17] H. Habe, J.S. Chung, H. Kato, Y. Ayabe, K. Kasuga, T. Yoshida, H. Nojiri, H. Yamane, T. Omori, Characterization of the upper pathway genes for fluorene metabolism in *Terrabacter* sp. strain DBF63, J. Bacteriol 186 (2004) 5938–5944.

[18] G.F. Hatfull, W.R. Jacobs Jr., Molecular genetics of mycobacteria, ASM Press, Washington, DC, 2000.

[19] M.A. Heitkamp, C.E. Cerniglia, Mineralization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by a bacterium isolated from sediment below an oil field, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54 (1988) 1612–1614.

[20] M. Houssaini-Iraqi, R. Lazraq, S. Clavel-Sérès, N. Rastogi, H.L. David, Cloning and expression of *Mycobacterium aurum* carotenogenesis genes in *Mycobacterium smegmatis*, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 90 (1992) 239–244.

[21] T. Iida, Y. Mukouzaka, K. Nakamura, I. Yamaguchi, T. Kudo, Isolation and characterization of dibenzofuran-degrading actinomycetes: analysis of multiple extradiol dioxygenase genes in dibenzofuran-degrading *Rhodococcus* species, Biosci. Biochem. 66 (2002) 1462–1472.

[22] K. Kasuga, H. Habe, J.-S. Chung, T. Yoshida, H. Nojiri, H. Yamane, T. Omori, Isolation and characterization of the genes encoding a novel oxygenase component of angular dioxygenase from the gram-positive dibenzofuran-degrader *Terrabacter* sp. strain DBF63, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 283 (2001) 195–204.

[23] I. Kelley, J.P. Freeman, F.E. Evans, C.E. Cerniglia, Identification of metabolites from the degradation of fluoranthene by *Mycobacterium* sp. strain PYR-1, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59 (1993) 800–806.

[24] A.A. Khan, R.F. Wang, W.W. Cao, D.R. Doerge, D. Wennerstrom, C.E. Cerniglia, Molecular cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression of genes encoding a polycyclic aromatic ring dioxygenase from *Mycobacterium* sp. strain PYR-1, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67 (2001) 3577–3585.

[25] S.J. Kim, R.C. Jones, C.J. Cha, O. Kweon, R.D. Edmondson, C.E. Cerniglia, Identification of proteins induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon in *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* PYR-1 using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and de novo sequencing methods, Proteomics 12 (2004a) 3899–3908.

[26] Y.H. Kim, J.D. Moody, J.P. Freeman, B. Brezna, K.H. Engesser, C.E. Cerniglia, Evidence for the existence of PAH-quinone reductase and catechol-O-methyltransferase in *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* PYR-1, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol 31 (2004b) 507–516.

[27] H. Kiyohara, K. Nagao, K. Yana, Rapid screen for bacteria degrading water-insoluble, solid hydrocarbons on agar plates, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 43 (1982) 454–457.

[28] S. Krivobok, S. Kuony, C. Meyer, M. Louwagie, J.C. Willison, Y. Jouanneau, Identification of pyrene-induced proteins in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain 6PY1: evidence for two ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases, J. Bacteriol 185 (2003) 3828–3841.

[29] A.D. Laurie, G. Lloyd-Jones, The *phn* genes of *Burkholderia* sp. strain RP007 constitute a divergent gene cluster for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon catabolism, J. Bacteriol 181 (1999) 531–540.

[30] J.H. Miller, Experiments in molecular genetics, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y, 1972.

[31] C.H. Nakatsu, M. Providenti, R.C. Wyndham, The *cis*-diol dehydrogenase *cbaC* gene of Tn5271 is required for growth on 3-chlorobenzoate but not 3,4-dichlorobenzoate, Gene 196 (1997) 209–218.

[32] Y. Nomura, M. Nakagawa, N. Ogawa, S. Harashima, Y. Oshima, Genes in PHT plasmid encoding the initial degradation pathway of phthalate in *Pseudomonas putida*, J. Ferment. Bioeng 74 (1992) 333–344.

[33] C. Pagnout, J.-F. Férard, P. Poupin, Characterization of IS1110-like sequences found in *Mycobacterium* species other than *Mycobacterium avium*, Res. Microbiol. 157 (2006) 650–658.

[34] W.R. Pearson, Rapid and sensitive sequence comparison with FASTP and FASTA, Methods Enzymol 183 (1990) 63–98.

[35] V. Pelicic, J.M. Reyrat, B. Gicquel, Expression of the *Bacillus subtilis sacB* gene confers sucrose sensitivity on mycobacteria, J. Bacteriol 178 (1996) 1197–1199.

[36] K. Rehmann, H.P. Noll, C.E.W. Steinberg, A.A. Kettrup, Pyrene degradation by *Mycobacterium* sp. strain KR2, Chemosphere 36 (1998) 2977–2992.

[37] A. Saito, T. Iwabuchi, S. Harayama, Characterization of genes for enzymes involved in the phenanthrene degradation in *Nocardioides* sp. KP7, Chemosphere 38 (1999) 1331–1337.

[38] A. Saito, T. Iwabuchi, S. Harayama, A novel phenanthrene dioxygenase from *Nocardioides* sp. strain KP7: Expression in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol 182 (2000) 2134–2141.

[39] J. Sambrook, E.F. Fritsch, T. Maniatis, Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual, 2nd Edn, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1989.

[40] M. Sho, C. Hamel, C.W. Greer, Two distinct gene clusters encode pyrene degradation in *Mycobacterium* sp. strain S65, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol 48 (2004) 209–220.

[41] S.B. Snapper, R.E. Melton, S. Mustafa, T. Kieser, W.R. Jacobs Jr., Isolation and characterization of efficient plasmid transformation mutants of *Mycobacterium smegmatis*, Mol. Microbiol. 4 (1990) 1911–1919.

[42] E.L. Spence, M. Kawamukai, J. Sanvoisin, H. Braven, T.D. Bugg, Catechol dioxygenases from *Escherichia coli* (MhpB) and *Alcaligenes eutrophus* (MpcI): sequence analysis and biochemical properties of a third family of extradiol dioxygenases, J. Bacteriol 178 (1996) 5249–5256.

[43] R.L. Stingley, B. Brezna, A.A. Khan, C.E. Cerniglia, Novel organization of genes in a phthalate degradation operon of *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* PYR-1, Microbiology 150 (2004a) 3749–3761.

[44] R.L. Stingley, A.A. Khan, C.E. Cerniglia, Molecular characterization of a phenanthrene degradation pathway in *Mycobacterium vanbaalenii* PYR-1, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 322 (2004b) 133–146.

[45] N. Takizawa, T. Iida, T. Sawada, K. Yamauchi, Y.-W. Wang, M. Fukuda, H. Kiyohara, Nucleotide sequences and characterization of genes encoding naphthalene upper pathway of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PaK1 and *Pseudomonas putida* OUS82, J. Biosci. Bioeng 87 (1999) 723–731.

[46] J. Timm, E.M. Lim, B. Gicquel, *Escherichia coli*-mycobacteria shuttle vectors for operon and gene fusions to *lacZ*: the pJEM series, J. Bacteriol 176 (1994) 6749–6753.

[47] R.F. Wang, W.W. Cao, C.E. Cerniglia, Phylogenetic analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degrading mycobacteria by 16S rRNA sequencing, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 130 (1995) 75–80.

[48] P. Willumsen, U. Karlson, E. Stackebrandt, R.M. Kroppenstedt, *Mycobacterium frederiksbergense* sp. nov., a novel polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading *Mycobacterium* species, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 51 (2001a) 1715–1722.
