
Seminars in Immunology 19 (2007) 24–32

Review

**TLR signaling**

Taro Kawai${}^{a,b}$, Shizuo Akira${}^{a,b,*}$

${}^{a}$Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,  
3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan  

${}^{b}$Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology (ERATO), Japan Science and Technology Agency, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,  
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan  

---

### Abstract

The TLR family senses the molecular signatures of microbial pathogens, and plays a fundamental role in innate immune responses. TLRs signal via a common pathway that leads to the expression of diverse inflammatory genes. In addition, each TLR elicits specific cellular responses to pathogens owing to differential usage of intracellular adapter proteins. Recent studies have revealed the importance of the subcellular localization of TLRs in pathogen recognition and signaling. TLR signaling pathways is negatively regulated by a number of cellular proteins to attenuate inflammation. Here, we describe recent advances in our understanding of the regulation of TLR-mediated signaling.

© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Innate immunity; Signal transduction; Toll-like receptor

---

### 1. Introduction

The innate immune system is the first line of the defensive mechanisms that protect hosts from invading microbial pathogens. Host cells express various pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that sense diverse pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), ranging from lipids, lipoproteins, proteins and nucleic acids [1]. Recognition of PAMPs by PRRs activates intracellular signaling pathways that culminate in the induction of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, interferons (IFNs) and upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules. In mammals, the family of Toll-like receptors (TLR) expressed on antigen presenting cells such as dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages serves as key PRRs with central roles in induction of innate immune responses as well as the subsequent development of adaptive immune responses [1]. TLRs are type I membrane proteins characterized by an ectodomain composed of leucine rich repeats (LRR) that are responsible for recognition of PAMPs and a cytoplasmic domain homologous to the cytoplasmic region of the IL-1 receptor, known as the TIR domain, which is required for downstream signaling. To date, 11 human TLRs and 13 mouse TLRs have been identified, and each TLR appears to recognize distinct PAMPs derived from various microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, protozoa and fungi [1]. TLRs are classified into several groups based on the types of PAMPs they recognize. TLR1, 2, 4 and 6 recognize lipids. For example, TLR4, together with its extracellular components such as MD-2 and CD14, recognizes lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria, which causes septic shock [1]. TLR2 forms heterodimers with TLR1, TLR6 and non-TLRs such as CD36 to discriminate a wide variety of PAMPs, including peptidoglycan, lipopeptides and lipoproteins of Gram-positive bacteria, mycoplasma lipopeptides and fungal zymosan [1]. In particular, TLR1/2 and TLR2/6 can discriminate triacyl- and diacyl-lipopeptide, respectively [1]. In addition, human TLR10 is thought to heterodimerize with TLR2 and TLR1, although a ligand for these heterodimers remains unknown [1]. TLR5 and 11 recognize protein ligands. TLR5 is expressed abundantly in intestinal CD11c-positive lamina propria cells where it senses bacterial flagellin [1,2]. Mouse TLR11 recognizes as yet unknown components of uropathogenic bacteria, and a profilin-like molecule of the protozoan parasite *Toxoplasma gondii*. The third class of TLRs includes TLR3, 7, 8 and 9, which are localized intracellularly where they detect nucleic acids derived from viruses and bacteria. TLR3 was shown to recognize double stranded RNA (dsRNA), which is produced by many viruses during replication. TLR7 recognizes synthetic imidazoquinoline-like molecules, guanosine analogs such as

* Corresponding author at: Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Tel.: +81 6 6879 8303; fax: +81 6 6879 8305.  
E-mail address: sakira@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp (S. Akira).

1044-5323/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.smim.2006.12.004
loxoribine, single stranded RNA (ssRNA) derived from various viruses and small interfering RNA [1]. Human TLR8, which has the highest homology to TLR7, participates in the recognition of imidazoquinolines and ssRNA. It has been reported that human TLR8 is expressed on regulatory T cells (Treg) and directly recognizes polyG-containing DNA oligonucleotides [1]. This recognition can reverse the suppressive function of Treg without a requirement for DC activation. In mice, however, the function and ligands of TLR8 remain unknown. TLR9 recognizes CpG DNA motifs present in bacterial and viral genomes as well as non-nucleic acids such as hemozoin from the malaria parasite [1].

### 2. TIR domain-containing adapters

After recognizing PAMPs, TLRs activate intracellular signaling pathways that lead to the induction of inflammatory cytokine genes such as TNFα, IL-6, IL-1β and IL-12. Signaling from TLRs also elicits the upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules on DCs, a step that is critical for the induction of pathogen-specific adaptive immune responses. Furthermore, several TLRs are capable of inducing type I IFN (multiple IFNα and single IFNβ) to elicit antiviral responses.

Recognition of PAMPs by TLRs stimulates the recruitment of a set of intracellular TIR-domain-containing adaptors, including MyD88, TIRAP (also known as MAL), Trif (also known as TICAM1) and TRAM (also known as TICAM2) via TIR-TIR interactions (Fig. 1) [3]. MyD88 is a universal adaptor that activates inflammatory pathways; it is shared by all TLRs with the exception of TLR3. Recruitment of MyD88 leads to the activation of MAP kinases (MAPKs) (ERK, JNK, p38) and the transcription factor NF-κB to control the expression of inflammatory cytokine genes. TIRAP mediates the activation of a MyD88-dependent pathway downstream of TLR2 and TLR4. TRIF is recruited to TLR3 and TLR4, and activates an alternative pathway (TRIF-dependent pathway) that culminates in the activation of NF-κB, MAPKs and the transcription factor IRF3. Activation of IRF3 is pivotal for induction of type I IFN, particularly IFNβ. TRAM selectively participates in the activation of the TRIF-dependent pathway downstream of TLR4, but not TLR3. More recently, an additional adaptor, SARM, has been shown to inhibit the TRIF-dependent pathway in human cell lines; however, the physiological function of SARM in mice remains unknown [4]. Collectively, each TLR recruits a specific combination of adaptors to activate different transcription factors, giving rise to appropriate and effective responses to pathogens.

### 3. MyD88-dependent pathway

The association of TLRs and MyD88 stimulates the recruitment of members of the IRAK family, including IRAK1, IRAK2, IRAK4 and IRAK-M. In particular, IRAK4 is indispensable for activation of the MyD88-dependent pathway. Once phosphorylated, IRAKs dissociate from MyD88 and interact with TRAF6, a member of the TRAF family. TRAF6, an E3 ligase, forms a complex with Ubc13 and Uev1A to promote the synthesis of lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin chains, which in turn activate TAK1, a MAPKKK [5]. TAK1, in combination with TAB1, TAB2 and TAB3, activates two downstream pathways involving the IKK complex and the MAPK family. The IKK complex, composed of the catalytic subunits IKKα and IKKβ and a regulatory subunit IKKγ/NEMO, catalyzes the phosphorylation of IkB proteins. This phosphorylation is necessary for the degradation of IkBs and the subsequent nuclear translocation of the transcription factor NF-κB, which controls the expression of various inflammatory cytokine genes (Fig. 1). Members of the MAPK family phosphorylate and activate the transcription factor AP-1, a dimer of basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins from the Jun, Fos, ATF and the Maf subfamilies [6]. Among them, c-Jun is implicated in having a central role in inflammatory responses in TLR signaling (Fig. 1). Cells derived from TAK1-deficient mice consistently display reduced inflammatory cytokine production and impaired NF-κB and MAPK activation in response to multiple TLR ligands, indicating an essential and non-redundant role of TAK1 in the activation of NF-κB and MAPK pathways [7]. However, substrates of TAK1, which are responsible for activation of the IKK complex and MAPK, remain unknown.

Although in vitro analyses have implicated Ubc13 in the activation of NF-κB and MAPK, via ubiquitination of TAK1, studies on mice with a conditionally deleted Ubc13 gene in various tissues have shown that it has a dispensable role in NF-κB activation [8]. Macrophages deficient for Ubc13 show defective inflammatory cytokine induction after treatment with multiple TLR ligands. They display impaired MAPK activation, but normal NF-κB activation, indicating that Ubc13 controls MAPK rather than NF-κB. Importantly, TAK1 activation and TRAF6 ubiquitination are normally observed in the absence of Ubc13. Given that TAK1 and TRAF6 are essential for optimal MAPK and NF-κB activation in TLR signaling, it is possible that Ubc13 activates the MAPK pathway independently of TAK1/TRAF6 or that it is located downstream of TAK1/TRAF6. Alternatively, other E2 enzymes such as Ubc5 might compensate for the loss of Ubc13 function by activating the TAK1/TRAF6-dependent NF-κB pathway *in vivo*. Notably, in Ubc13-deficient cells, there is a reduction in the stimulus-dependent ubiquitination of IKKγ/NEMO, suggesting a link between Ubc13-dependent IKKγ/NEMO ubiquitination and MAPK activation (Fig. 1) [8].

In addition to TAK1, several other MAPKKKs are implicated in TLR4 signaling. Macrophages deficient for MEKK3 show defective JNK and p38 activation and IL-6 production after LPS treatment [9]. In contrast, LPS-stimulated ERK activation and TNFα production is severely impaired in Tpl2-deficient macrophages, whereas activation of JNK and p38 is normal [10]. It has been reported that ABIN2 (A20-binding inhibitor of NF-κB 2) increases the stability of Tpl2 to facilitate ERK activation [11]. ASK1-deficient splenocytes and DC have defects in LPS-stimulated p38 activation as well as IL-6 and TNFα production [12]. LPS-induced ROS production is implicated in facilitating the TRAF6-ASK1-p38 signaling axis. Taken together, these observations suggest that activation of distinct MAPKKKs might determine the nature and magnitude of TLR4-mediated inflammatory responses.
T. Kawai, S. Akira / Seminars in Immunology 19 (2007) 24–32

MyD88/TIRAP-dependent pathway  
TRIF/TRAM-dependent pathway  

Fig. 1. TLR signaling. Following stimulation, all TLRs except for TLR3 recruit MyD88, IRAKs and TRAF6 to activate the Ubc13/TAK1 pathway. The TAK1 complex then activates the IKK complex composed of IKKα, IKKβ and IKKγ/NEMO, which catalyzes phosphorylation of IkB proteins. Phosphorylated IkB proteins are degraded by a proteasome-dependent pathway, allowing NF-κB to translocate to the nucleus. TAK1 also activates the MAPK pathway, which mediates AP-1 activation. IRF5 is recruited to the MyD88-IRAK4-TRAF6 complex, phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus. NF-κB, AP-1 and IRF5 control the expression of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines. TIRAP is recruited to TLR4, TLR1/2 and TLR2/6, activating the MyD88-dependent pathway. TRIF is recruited to TLR3 and TLR4, and interacts with TBK1 and IKKi, which mediate phosphorylation of IRF3. Phosphorylated IRF3 dimerizes and is translocated to the nucleus to induce expression of type I IFN and IFN-inducible genes. TRAF3 forms a complex with TBK1 and IKKi. TRIF interacts with TRAF6 and RIP1, which mediate NF-κB activation. TLR4, but not TLR3, utilizes TRAM for activation of the TRIF-dependent pathway. In pDC, a signaling complex consisting of MyD88-TRAF6-IRAK4-IRAK1-IRF7 is formed. In this complex, IRF7 is directly phosphorylated by IRAK1, and then translocated to the nucleus to induce expression of type I IFN and IFN-inducible genes. OPN-i, TRAF3 and IKKα are also involved in this complex. Among these, IKKα is capable of phosphorylating IRF7, similar to IRAK1. TLR3, TLR7 and TLR9 locate in intracellular compartments such as endosomes.

### 4. TRIF-dependent pathway

MyD88-deficient mice show a failure to activate NF-κB and MAPK and produce inflammatory cytokines in response to ligands specific for TLR2, 5, 7 and 9. Although MyD88-deficient macrophages also fail to produce inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS, they appear to activate NF-κB and MAPK, albeit with delayed kinetics [13]. Furthermore, activation of IRF3 and subsequent induction of IFNβ after treatment with TLR3 and TLR4 ligands is normal in MyD88-deficient mice [14]. These observations strongly suggest the presence of a MyD88-independent pathway in TLR3 and TLR4 signaling. In these regards, TRIF was identified as an essential adapter of the MyD88-independent pathway [15,16]. TRIF, overexpression of which activates IRF3 and NF-κB, is recruited to TLR3 and TLR4. TRIF-deficient mice consistently show defective IRF3 activation and IFNβ induction after LPS and poly IC stimulation [17,18]. Moreover, late phase NF-κB and MAPK activation after LPS stimulation is totally abolished in MyD88 and TRIF double-deficient mice, indicating that TRIF-dependent signaling contributes to late phase activation of NF-κB and MAPK (Fig. 1) [17].

The N-terminal and the C-terminal regions of TRIF have distinct functions with regards to the recruitment of signaling molecules. The N-terminal region of TRIF activates both IFNβ and NF-κB promoters, whereas the C-terminal region activates NF-κB but not the IFNβ promoter. The N-terminal region recruits non-canonical IKKs, TBK1 (T2K, NAK) and IKKi (IKKe), which phosphorylate serine/threonine clusters present in the C-terminal region of IRF3 [19,20]. Phosphorylated IRF3 forms a dimer, which translocates from cytoplasm to the nucleus to induce expression of target genes including IFNβ (Fig. 1). Cells lacking both TBK1 and IKKi show a loss of IRF3 activation and IFNβ induction in response to TLR3 and TLR4 ligands, whereas activation of NF-κB and MAPK and inflammatory cytokine induction is unaffected in these cells [21–23].

Moreover, the N-terminal region of TRIF recruits TRAF6 via TRAF6-binding motifs [24]. Dominant-negative TRAF6 prevents TRIF-induced NF-κB activation and mutations in the TRAF6-binding motifs of TRIF abrogate NF-κB activation, indicating the importance of TRAF6 in TRIF-dependent NF-κB activation. The C-terminal region of TRIF contains a RHIM (Rip homotypic interaction motif), which mediates its interaction with RIP1, a member of the RIP family involved in TNF receptor-mediated NF-κB activation [25]. TLR3- and TLR4-mediated NF-κB activation and the subsequent induction of target genes are impaired in the absence of RIP1, indicating that RIP1 participates in TRIF-dependent NF-κB activation. Furthermore, RIP1 is reportedly polyubiquitinated and forms a complex with TRAF6 and TAK1 [26]. Together, the recruitment by TRIF of RIP1 and TRAF6 might facilitate TAK1 activation, resulting in activation of NF-κB and MAPK (Fig. 1). It is currently uncertain whether Ubc13 is a component of the complex that mediates RIP1 polyubiquitination.

Recent reports have suggested that TRIF-dependent IRF3 activation is tightly linked to late phase NF-κB activation [27,28]. LPS-induced late phase NF-κB activation seems to require de novo synthesis of TNFα. Indeed, a reduction in IRF3 expression by siRNA results in the inhibition of late phase NF-κB activation. Thus, it is possible that IRF3, activated by the TRIF-dependent pathway, binds the promoter region of the TNFα gene to promote the synthesis of TNFα, which subsequently binds TNF receptor to initiate late phase NF-κB activation in an autocrine manner; however, detailed analyses of IRF3-deficient mice will be required to support these findings. Moreover, given that RIP1 is critically involved in TNF receptor-mediated NF-κB activation, it is possible that the defects in TRIF-dependent NF-κB activation observed in cells from RIP1-deficient mice are due to defective TNF receptor signaling in those cells.

### 5. IRFs in TLR signaling

There are nine members of the IRF family (IRF1 to IRF9), and several IRFs, in addition to IRF3, are critically involved in TLR-signaling [29]. IRF7, which is also present in the cytoplasm and translocates to the nucleus after phosphorylation, is structurally the most similar to IRF3. IRF7 potently activates the promoter of IFNβ and various IFNα genes. Unlike IRF3, which is ubiquitously expressed, IRF7 expression is weak in unstimulated condition, but rapidly upregulated in response to viral infection or TLR-ligands in most cell types, suggesting a positive feedback regulation of type I IFN induction [29]. However, IRF7 is constitutively expressed in plasmacytoid DC (pDC) (also known as type I IFN-producing cells), which have the ability to rapidly produce vast amounts of type I IFN in response to a wide variety of viruses [30,31]. TLR7 and TLR9 are abundantly expressed on pDC. Notably, TLR7- and TLR9-mediated type I IFN induction is elicited by the MyD88-dependent pathway, but not by the TRIF-dependent pathway [32,33]. In these contexts, it has been shown that IRF7 forms a complex with MyD88, IRAK1, IRAK4 and TRAF6 that translocates into the nucleus in response to CpG DNA in pDC [34,35]. Although

mice deficient for MyD88, IRAK4 or TRAF6 have defects in both IRF7 and NF-κB activation, with a concomitant impairment in the induction of type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines in response to CpG DNA. IRAK1 deficiency results in the loss of IRF7 activation without affecting NF-κB activity [36]. Moreover, IRAK1, but not IRAK4, is capable of phosphorylating IRF7. Together, IRAK1 is most likely a kinase that phosphorylates IRF7 in pDC [36]. Recently, IKKα has been reported to have a similar role to IRAK1, having the ability to bind and phosphorylate IRF7 [37]. Although the functional relationships between IRAK1 and IKKα remain unclear, it is possible that they function as a heterodimer to potentiate IRF7 activation. Alternatively, they might phosphorylate different residues of IRF7, both of which are required for the activation. IRF7 also participates in type I IFN induction activated by the cytosolic RNA helicases RIG-I and Mda5, which recognize viral dsRNA, in conventional DC, macrophages and fibroblast cells [38,39]. In these pathways, IRF7 is phosphorylated by TBK1/IKKi but not IRAK1/IKKα. Thus, unlike TLR7 and TLR9, which require IRAK1 and IKKα for optimal IRF7 phosphorylation, RIG-I and Mda5 use TBK1/IKKi to activate both IRF3 and IRF7. Collectively, IRF7 is the master regulator for type I IFN induction in both TLR-dependent and TLR-independent cytosolic pathways.

Additional components involved in the MyD88-IRF7 complex in pDC have been recently identified. TRAF3, a member of the TRAF family, is critical for type I IFN induction in TLR7- and TLR9-signaling [40,41]. TRAF3 binds MyD88, IRAK1, and perhaps IKKα, modulating IRF7 activation. Furthermore, TRAF3 is also required for TBK1/IKKi-dependent IRF7 and IRF3 activation in TLR3 and RIG-I/Mda5-signaling, indicating that TRAF3 is an integral component in the activation of IRF7 and IRF3 by multiple pathways. Notably, TRAF3 is also necessary for the induction of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, but not pro-inflammatory cytokines, in response to ligands specific for TLR3, 4, 7 and 9. Furthermore, IRAK1-deficient splenocytes show a remarkable reduction in IL-10 after LPS treatment [42]. Thus, the IRAK1-TRAF3-dependent pathway might control the release of IL-10 as well. Osteopontin (OPN) is a secreted phosphoprotein implicated in diverse cellular functions, including bone resorption, vascularization, inflammation and Th1 polarization. In pDC, OPN expression is upregulated by TLR9 ligand through T-bet, a master transcription factor driving Th1 differentiation. pDC isolated from either T-bet- or OPN-deficient mice have defects in the induction of type I IFN in response to TLR9-ligand, but they can produce NF-κB-driven IL-6 as usual [43]. A previous report showing that a precursor of OPN (OPN-i) is retained in the cytoplasm suggests a possible function of OPN-i as an intracellular signaling molecule. In this context, it was shown that expression of a mutant OPN lacking the signal sequence stimulates IFNα production by pDC, but not by conventional DC, and that OPN-i interacts and colocalizes with MyD88 [43]. Furthermore, nuclear translocation of IRF7 in response to a TLR9 ligand is impaired in OPN-deficient pDC. These observations suggest that intracellular OPN is a component of the MyD88-IRF7 complex in pDC.

IRF1 also participates in TLR9 signaling [44]. IRF1 directly binds the central region of MyD88 and is released into the
nucleus in response to stimulation. Conventional DC derived from IRF1-deficient mice display impaired induction of IFNβ, inducible nitric-oxide synthase and IL-12 p35, in response to a TLR9 ligand. In contrast, pDC derived from IRF1-deficient mice show normal induction of IFNβ and IFNα, suggesting a cell type-specific involvement of IRF1 in MyD88-dependent signaling. It is well known that cytokine induction is enhanced by pretreatment with IFNγ in response to TLR ligands. As IFNγ stimulation induces IRF1 expression, it is possible that IRF1 is involved in IFNγ-mediated enhancement of TLR signaling. Consistently, this enhancement is ablated in IRF1-deficient mice. Thus, IRF1 is recruited to MyD88 when it is induced by IFNγ stimulation, and translocates into the nucleus in response to TLR stimulation to induce a set of genes including IFNβ in conventional DC.

In addition to IRF3, IRF7 and IRF1, IRF5 is also involved in TLR signaling [45]. IRF5-deficient conventional DC and macrophages exhibit impaired inflammatory cytokine production against multiple TLR ligands, whereas they exhibit normal secretion of type I IFN by pDC. IRF5 binds MyD88 and TRAF6 and moves to the nucleus after phosphorylation. In the nucleus, IRF5 binds ISRE motifs found in the promoter region of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines to cause their expression, presumably via collaborative activation with NF-κB. As inflammatory cytokine induction after TLR ligation occurs independently of TBK1/IKKi and IRAK1, other protein kinases such as TAK1, IRAK4 and canonical IKKs, which mediate MyD88-dependent inflammatory cytokine induction, might participate in IRF5 phosphorylation. In humans, increased expression of multiple unique isoforms of IRF5 due to mutations is associated with the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), a systemic autoimmune disease exhibiting elevated levels of type I IFN [46].

IRF8 is implicated in TLR9-mediated responses. pDC derived from IRF8-deficient mice show a loss of TLR9-mediated induction of type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines. These cells also show a severe impairment in the DNA-binding activity of NF-κB in response to TLR9-ligand [47]. These data strongly suggest the possibility that IRF8 facilitates NF-κB DNA-binding activity or is an activator for the IKK complex.

CpG DNA, it has no ability to sense viral DNA. More importantly, when TLR9N4C is expressed on the cell surface of macrophages, these cells respond to self-DNA. As abnormal recognition of self-DNA is associated with the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, intracellular localization of TLR9 might be the safeguards against contact with self-DNA.

In pDC, TLR9 acts as a sensor of viral infection, which leads to the transcription of type I IFN, particularly IFNα, through the MyD88-IRF7 pathway. In other cells, such as conventional DC or macrophages, TLR9 ligands poorly induce type I IFN but they can still induce inflammatory cytokines. One mechanism to explain these differences is that pDC express IRF7, but other cells do not. However, the spatiotemporal regulation of TLR9 signaling has been recently proposed as an alternative explanation for the ability of pDC to robustly produce IFNα [49]. A/D-type CpG DNA (CpG-A), a TLR9 ligand that strongly induces IFNα production from pDC, co-localizes with TLR9, MyD88 and IRF7 in endosomes in pDC. By contrast, CpG-A is rapidly transferred and degraded in the lysosome in conventional DC and macrophages. However, when CpG-A is relocalized to the endosome in conventional DC using a cationic lipid, these cells can produce IFNα as a consequence of activation of the MyD88-IRF7 pathway. B/K-type CpG DNA (CpG-B), a conventional TLR9 ligand that poorly induces type I IFN, but induces inflammatory cytokines, also elicits IFNα induction if it is manipulated to stay longer in the endosome of conventional DC [49]. These findings suggest that retention of the CpG DNA-TLR9 complex in the endosome might cause the induction of robust IFNα production.

Signaling via intracellular TLR3, 7 and 9 is abrogated in 3D mice, which have a single missense mutation in the gene encoding UNC-93B, a twelve membrane spanning protein that resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [50]. These mice show defective TNFα production as well as reduced upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules in response to TLR3, 7 and 9 ligands. Furthermore, these mice have no ability to present peptides derived from exogenous antigens. Although it remains unclear how ER-resident UNC-93B controls the function of TLR3, 7 and 9, it is possible that it regulates communication between the ER and the endosome.

In contrast to intracellular TLRs, which utilize MyD88 or TRIF, plasma membrane-localized TLRs, such as TLR1, 2, 4 and 6, use TIRAP and/or TRAM as additional adapters, suggesting a link between adapter usage and TLR localization. TRAM localizes to the plasma membrane and Golgi apparatus, where it colocalizes with TLR4, but not TLR3 [51]. TRAM possessing a mutation in a putative myristoylation site at the N-terminus distributes to the cytoplasm and abrogates activation of NF-κB and IRF3, indicating the importance of its plasma membrane localization. Myristoylated proteins are phosphorylated by PKC resulting in dissociation from the plasma membrane; accordingly, TRAM is phosphorylated at serine 16 by PKCε in response to LPS [52]. This phosphorylation is required for activation of NF-κB and MAPK in LPS-stimulated cells as well as for clearing infectious bacteria. Collectively, phosphorylation of TRAM by PKCε at the plasma membrane and subsequent dissociation from the membrane is a prerequisite to activating

6. TLR localization and signaling

TLRs can be classified into two groups based on subcellular localization. The first group includes TLR1, 2, 4, 5 and 6, which are all present at the plasma membrane [1]. The second group includes TLR3, 7, 8 and 9, which localize to intracellular compartments such as endosomes [1]. Intracellular TLRs sense viral and bacterial nucleic acids in particular. Viral particles are endocytosed and degraded in late endosomes or lysosomes, and this degradation causes the release of viral DNA and RNA, allowing TLRs to contact them. Moreover, it has been suggested that the intracellular localization of these TLRs is important to enable discrimination of viral DNA and self-DNA. When the transmembrane and cytoplasmic region of TLR9 is replaced to that of TLR4, the chimeric protein (TLR9N4C) is trafficked to the plasma membrane [48]. Whereas TLR9N4C responds to
T. Kawai, S. Akira / Seminars in Immunology 19 (2007) 24–32

Fig. 2. Negative regulators for TLR signaling. TLR signaling is negatively regulated by multiple pathways. SIGIRR, ST2L and RP105 antagonize TLR signaling. Triad3 downregulates the expression of TLR4 and TLR9. IRAK-M, MyD88c, IRAK1c and IRAK2c/d inhibit signaling downstream of MyD88. SOCS1 and TRAF1 downregulate the expression of TIRAP and TRIF, respectively. TRAF4, A20 and β-arrestins (β-arr) bind and block TRAF6 function. IRF4 prevents the recruitment of IRF5 to MyD88. PIN1 mediates the degradation of IRF3, and ATF3 negatively regulates NF-κB activation.

the TRIF-dependent pathway. It is currently unclear how LPS activates PKCε in TLR4 signaling. TIRAP contains a phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) binding domain, which targets TIRAP to the plasma membrane and facilitates interactions with TLR4 [53]. Mutations in this PIP2 binding domain abrogate the ability of TIRAP to localize to the plasma membrane and to induce inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS, suggesting that PIP2-dependent recruitment of TIRAP to the plasma membrane is important for TLR4 signaling. Integrin signaling regulates the production of PIP2 through the activation of ARF6 GTPase and PI5K. Macrophages lacking integrin CD11b show a loss of TIRAP localization to the plasma membrane and a hypo-responsiveness to LPS. These findings suggest that TLR4 recruits TIRAP to the plasma membrane as a result of CD11b-mediated production of PIP2, which subsequently recruits MyD88 after which the signaling complex is assembled to initiate the MyD88-dependent signaling.

### 7. Negative regulators

Negative regulation of TLR signaling is essential for limiting inflammation and a number of molecules have been identified that serve to negatively regulate TLR signaling. Some of these molecules downregulate TLR expression, whereas others negatively regulate TLR signaling via sequestration of signaling molecules, blockade of their recruitment, degradation of target proteins and inhibition of transcription (Fig. 2). Furthermore, most of these proteins are inducible, suggesting a negative feedback regulation of TLR-dependent innate immune responses.

RP105, originally identified as a B cell-specific surface protein that triggers proliferation, contains extracellular LRR with homology to TLR4 and a short cytoplasmic tail [54]. The LRR of RP105 associate with MD-1 to form a complex on the cell surface [55]. RP105 is also expressed on non-B cells, and the RP105-MD-1 complex interacts with a TLR4-MD-2 complex to prevent LPS binding to TLR4-MD-2. RP105-deficient mice display hyper-production of inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS, but respond normally to CpG DNA, indicating that RP105-MD-1 specifically inhibits TLR4-responses [56]. ST2L belongs to the IL-1 receptor family, comprised of an extracellular immunoglobulin-like domain and an intracellular TIR domain. ST2L-deficient mice show enhanced production of inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS, and impaired induction of LPS tolerance [57]. ST2L sequesters MyD88 and TIRAP to inhibit the recruitment of these adapters to TLR4. SIGIRR also belongs to the IL-1 receptor family, but lacks two amino acid residues essential for signaling [58]. Kidney and intestinal epithelial cells and splenocytes derived from SIGIRR-deficient mice are hyper-
responsive to LPS and CpG DNA with respect to increased activation of NF-κB and JNK. SIGIRR interacts with IRAKs and TRAF6 to block TLR signaling. Triad3A is an E3 ligase that binds the TIR domain of TLR4 and 9, but not that of TLR2. Triad3 overexpression promotes degradation of TLR4 and 9 via a proteasome-dependent pathway; conversely, a reduction in Triad3A expression by siRNA increases the expression of these TLRs with a concomitant activation of signaling molecules [59]. These data suggest that Triad3A represents a negative regulator of TLR signaling that downregulates the expression of TLR4 and 9.

Several intracellular proteins have been identified that negatively regulate the function of TIR domain-containing adapter proteins. Among IRAK family members, IRAK-M lacks intrinsic kinase activity, and overexpression of IRAK-M results in prevention of the dissociation of IRAK4 and IRAK1 from MyD88 [60]. Accordingly, IRAK-M-deficient mice secrete more inflammatory cytokines in response to various TLR ligands than wild type mice do. The finding that IRAK-M is LPS-inducible suggests a negative feedback function of IRAK-M in TLR signaling. Splicing variants of IRAK1 (IRAK1c), IRAK2 (IRAK2c, IRAK2d) and MyD88 (MyD88s) have been isolated and implicated in antagonizing TLR signaling [61,62]. IRAK1c lacks kinase activity and, therefore, interferes with TLR signaling. IRAK2c and IRAK2d lack a death domain, which is required for interaction with MyD88, to prevent the recruitment of MyD88. MyD88s forms a heterodimer with MyD88. The MyD88s-MyD88 heterodimer is unable to recruit IRAK4, thereby inhibiting IRAK1 phosphorylation. SOCS1, an E3 ligase initially identified to suppress JAK-STAT pathways, also suppresses signaling downstream of TLR2 and TLR4 [63]. TIRAP is phosphorylated by a tyrosine kinase, Btk, in response to TLR2 and TLR4 ligands, and interacts with SOCS1, which subsequently targets TIRAP for ubiquitination and degradation [63].

Whereas TRAF3 and TRAF6 positively regulate TLR signaling, TRAF1 and TRAF4 are implicated in negatively regulating TLR signaling. TRAF1 interacts with TRIF and overexpression of TRIF causes Caspase 8-dependent cleavage of TRAF1 [64]. The cleaved fragment of TRAF1 can inhibit TRIF-dependent activation of NF-κB and IRF3, suggesting that TRIF-induced cleavage of TRAF1 is responsible for shutdown of the TRIF-dependent pathway. TRAF4 interacts with TRIF and TRAF6, and its overexpression results in inhibition of NF-κB activation induced by TRIF and TRAF6 [65]. TRAF4 also suppresses MyD88-dependent NF-κB activation. Therefore, TRAF4 may serve to antagonize TRAF6 function by preventing recruitment of TRAF6 to the adapter complex. Additionally, the function of TRAF6 is negatively regulated by several independent mechanisms. In response to LPS, β-arrestins interact with TRAF6 to prevent its oligomerization, resulting in inhibition of TRAF6 polyubiquitination and subsequent activation of NF-κB and MAPK [66]. A20, an inducible de-ubiquitination enzyme, removes ubiquitin moieties from TRAF6 to terminate TLR signaling [67]. A20-deficient mice consistently show enhanced NF-κB activation in response to multiple TLR ligands, including TLR2, 4 and 9 [67].

The activation of transcription factors is also negatively regulated. Phosphorylation of the C-terminal region of IRF3 by TBK1/IKKi is essential for transcriptional activity. IRF3 is also phosphorylated at Ser339, and this phosphorylation is linked to IRF3 destabilization rather than activation. The cytoplasmic peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase Pin1, which catalyzes the cis-trans isomerization of peptide-bonds located N-terminal to proline to modulate substrate function, binds IRF3 when it is phosphorylated at Ser339, triggering ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of IRF3 by a proteasome-dependent pathway to terminate IFN responses [68]. LPS stimulation leads to the expression of ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors. ATF3-deficient macrophages produce high amounts of IL-6 and IL-12. Mechanistically, ATF3 recruits histone deacetylases, which alter chromatin structure to restrict access of NF-κB and AP-1 to the promoter region of genes encoding IL-6 and IL12b, thereby repressing expression [69]. IRF4 is reported to bind MyD88 [70]. Whereas IRF7 binds N-terminal MyD88, IRF5 and IRF4 interact with the same central region of MyD88. Macrophages derived from IRF4-deficient mice show markedly high expression of inflammatory cytokine genes, which depend on IRF5 [70]. As expression of the IRF4 gene is upregulated after exposure with TLR ligands, the induced IRF4 might associate with MyD88 to prevent recruitment of IRF5, thereby attenuating IRF5-dependent inflammatory responses.

### 8. Future perspectives

Recent progress has revealed that TLR responses are tightly controlled by multiple mechanisms to induce appropriate responses against diverse microbial pathogens. First, TLRs utilize different combinations of adapter molecules, which activate different transcription factors to elicit specific innate immune responses. Second, several TLRs are expressed in the intracellular compartments to detect nucleic acids derived from microbial pathogens, and the intracellular localization of TLRs is likely to be important for discrimination between self- and non-self nucleic acids. Cellular localization of TIR domain-containing adapters is also important to determine the specificity of signaling and responses. Third, TLR expression and signaling are tightly controlled by a number of negative regulators to terminate immune and inflammatory responses and prevent excessive inflammation. Despite their beneficial roles in host defense, aberrant activation of TLR signaling and abnormal cellular localization of TLRs are suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as SLE.

Accumulating evidence has shown that cells express additional PRRs in the cytoplasm. These include the RNA helicases RIG-I and Mda5, which recognize cytoplasmic dsRNA, proteins of the NLR (NACHT-LRR) family, which sense intracellular bacterial PAMPs and even host-derived molecules such as monosodium urate crystal and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate, and an as-yet-unidentified cytosolic receptor(s) that recognizes cytosolic double-stranded DNA released from DNA viruses, bacteria and host damaged cells [1,71,72]. Thus, an understanding of the precise mechanisms of how PRRs activate
innate immune cells, and how they discriminate between host and pathogens, will be required to improve therapeutic strategies that control infectious, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases.

Acknowledgement

We thank members of our lab for helpful discussions.

References

[1] Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. Cell 2006;124:783–801.

[2] Uematsu S, Jang MH, Chevrier N, Guo Z, Kumagai Y, Yamamoto M, et al. Detection of pathogenic intestinal bacteria by Toll-like receptor 5 on intestinal CD11c+ lamina propria cells. Nat Immunol 2006;7:868–74.

[3] Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol 2004;4:499–511.

[4] Carty M, Goodbody R, Schroder M, Stack J, Moynagh PN, Bowie AG. The human adaptor SARM negatively regulates adaptor protein TRIF-dependent Toll-like receptor signaling. Nat Immunol 2006;7:1074–81.

[5] Chen ZJ. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-kappaB pathway. Nat Cell Biol 2005;7:758–65.

[6] Shaulian E, Karin M. AP-1 as a regulator of cell life and death. Nat Cell Biol 2002;4:131–6.

[7] Sato S, Sanjo H, Takeda K, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Yamamoto M, Kawai T, et al. Essential function for the kinase TAK1 in innate and adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol 2005;6:1087–95.

[8] Yamamoto M, Okamoto T, Takeda K, Sato S, Sanjo H, Uematsu S, et al. Key function for the Ubc13 E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme in immune receptor signaling. Nat Immunol 2006;7:962–70.

[9] Huang Q, Yang J, Lin Y, Walker C, Cheng J, Liu ZG, et al. Differential regulation of interleukin 1 receptor and Toll-like receptor signaling by MEKK3. Nat Immunol 2004;5:98–103.

[10] Dumitru CD, Ceci JD, Tsatsanis C, Kontoyiannis D, Stamatakis K, Lin JH, et al. TNF-alpha induction by LPS is regulated posttranscriptionally via a Tpl2/ERK-dependent pathway. Cell 2000;103:1071–83.

[11] Papoutsopoulou S, Symons A, Tharmalingham T, Belich MP, Kaiser F, Kioussis D, et al. ABIN-2 is required for optimal activation of Erk MAP kinase in innate immune responses. Nat Immunol 2006;7:606–15.

[12] Matsuzawa A, Saegusa K, Noguchi T, Sadamitsu C, Nishitoh H, Nagai S, et al. ROS-dependent activation of the TRAF6-ASK1-p38 pathway is selectively required for TLR4-mediated innate immunity. Nat Immunol 2005;6:587–92.

[13] Kawai T, Adachi O, Ogawa T, Takeda K, Akira S. Unresponsiveness of MyD88-deficient mice to endotoxin. Immunity 1999;11:115–22.

[14] Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Fujita T, Inoue J, Muhlradt PF, Sato S, et al. Lipopolysaccharide stimulates the MyD88-independent pathway and results in activation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 and the expression of a subset of lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes. J Immunol 2001;167:5887–94.

[15] Yamamoto M, Sato S, Mori K, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, et al. A novel Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the IFN-beta promoter in the Toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol 2002;169:6668–72.

[16] Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M, Funami K, Akazawa T, Seya T. TICAM-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in Toll-like receptor 3-mediated interferon-beta induction. Nat Immunol 2003;4:161–7.

[17] Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, et al. Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. Science 2003;301:640–3.

[18] Hoebe K, Du X, Georgel P, Janssen E, Tabeta K, Kim SO, et al. Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling. Nature 2003;424:743–8.

[19] Sharma S, tenOever BR, Grandvaux N, Zhou GP, Lin R, Hiscott J. Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. Science 2003;300:1148–51.

[20] Fitzgerald KA, McWhirter SM, Faia KL, Rowe DC, Latz E, Golenbock DT, et al. IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 2003;4:491–6.

[21] McWhirter SM, Fitzgerald KA, Rosains J, Rowe DC, Golenbock DT, Manatis T. IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent gene expression is defective in Tbk1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:233–8.

[22] Hemmi H, Takeuchi O, Sato S, Yamamoto M, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, et al. The roles of two IkappaB Kinase-related kinases in lipopolysaccharide and double stranded RNA signaling and viral infection. J Exp Med 2004;199:1641–50.

[23] Perry AK, Chow EK, Goodnough JB, Yeh WC, Cheng G. Differential requirement for TANK-binding kinase-1 in type I interferon responses to Toll-like receptor activation and viral infection. J Exp Med 2004;199:1651–8.

[24] Sato S, Sugiyama M, Yamamoto M, Watanabe Y, Kawai T, Takeda K, et al. Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and TANK-binding kinase 1, and activates two distinct transcription factors, NF-kappa B and IFN-regulatory factor-3, in the Toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol 2003;171:4304–10.

[25] Meylan E, Burns K, Hofmann K, Blancheteau V, Martinon F, Kelliher M, et al. RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-kappaB activation. Nat Immunol 2004;5:503–7.

[26] Cusson-Hermance N, Lee TH, Fitzgerald KA, Kelliher MA. Rip1 mediates the Trif-dependent toll-like receptor 3 and 4-induced NF-kappa B activation but does not contribute to IRF-3 activation. J Biol Chem 2005;280:36560–6.

[27] Covert MW, Leung TH, Gaston JE, Baltimore D. Achieving stability of lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-kappaB activation. Science 2005;309:1854–7.

[28] Werner SL, Barken D, Hoffmann A. Stimulus specificity of gene expression programs determined by temporal control of IKK activity. Science 2005;309:1857–61.

[29] Honda K, Taniguchi T. IRFs: master regulators of signalling by Toll-like receptors and cytosolic pattern-recognition receptors. Nat Rev Immunol 2006;6:644–58.

[30] Colonna M, Trinchieri G, Liu YJ. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells in immunity. Nat Immunol 2004;5:1219–26.

[31] Liu YJ. IPC: professional Type 1 interferon-producing cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors. Annu Rev Immunol 2005;23:275–306.

[32] Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Iwabe T, Takeuchi O, Akira S. Differential involvement of IFN-beta in Toll-like receptor-stimulated dendritic cell activation. Int Immunol 2002;14:1225–31.

[33] Hemmi H, Kaisho T, Takeda K, Akira S. The roles of Toll-like receptor 9, MyD88, and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit in the effects of two distinct CpG DNAs on dendritic cell subsets. J Immunol 2003;170:3059–64.

[34] Kawai T, Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, et al. Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. Nat Immunol 2004;5:1061–8.

[35] Honda K, Yanai H, Mizutani T, Negishi H, Shimada N, Suzuki N, et al. Role of a transductional-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signalling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:15416–21.

[36] Uematsu S, Sato S, Yamamoto M, Hirotani T, Kato H, Takeshita F, et al. Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinase-1 (IRAK-1) plays an essential role for TLR7- and TLR9-mediated interferon-a-induction. J Exp Med 2005;201:915–23.

[37] Hoshino K, Sugiyama T, Matsumoto M, Tanaka T, Saito M, Hemmi H, et al. IkappaB kinase-alpha is critical for interferon-alpha production induced by Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. Nature 2006;440:949–53.

[38] Meylan E, Tschopp J, Karin M. Intracellular pattern recognition receptors in the host response. Nature 2006;442:39–44.

[39] Meylan E, Tschopp J. Toll-like receptors and RNA helicases: two parallel ways to trigger antiviral responses. Mol Cell 2006;22:561–9.

[40] Hacker H, Redecke V, Blagoev B, Kratchmarova I, Hsu LC, Wang GG, et al. Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 2006;439:204–7.

[41] Oganesyan G, Saha SK, Guo B, He JQ, Shahangian A, Zarnegar B, et al. Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. Nature 2006;439:208–11.

[42] Huang Y, Li T, Sane DC, Li L. IRAK1 serves as a novel regulator essential for lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin-10 gene expression. J Biol Chem 2004;279:51697–703.

[43] Shinohara ML, Lu L, Bu J, Werneck MB, Kobayashi KS, Glimcher LH, et al. Osteopontin expression is essential for interferon-alpha production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Nat Immunol 2006;7:498–506.

[44] Negishi H, Fujita Y, Yanai H, Sakaguchi S, Ouyang X, Shinohara M, et al. Evidence for licensing of IFN-gamma-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 transcription factor by MyD88 in Toll-like receptor-dependent gene induction program. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:15136–41.

[45] Takaoka A, Yanai H, Kondo S, Duncan G, Negishi H, Mizutani T, et al. Integral role of IRF-5 in the gene induction programme activated by Toll-like receptors. Nature 2005;434:243–9.

[46] Graham RR, Kozyrev SV, Baechler EC, Reddy MV, Plenge RM, Bauer JW, et al. A common haplotype of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) regulates splicing and expression and is associated with increased risk of systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat Genet 2006;38:550–5.

[47] Tsujimura H, Tamura T, Kong HJ, Nishiyama A, Ishii KJ, Klinman DM, et al. Toll-like receptor 9 signaling activates NF-kappaB through IFN regulatory factor-8/IFN consensus sequence binding protein in dendritic cells. J Immunol 2004;172:6820–7.

[48] Barton GM, Kagan JC, Medzhitov R. Intracellular localization of Toll-like receptor 9 prevents recognition of self-DNA but facilitates access to viral DNA. Nat Immunol 2006;7:49–56.

[49] Honda K, Ohba Y, Yanai H, Negishi H, Mizutani T, Takaoka A, et al. Spatiotemporal regulation of MyD88-IRF-7 signalling for robust type-I interferon induction. Nature 2005;434:1035–40.

[50] Tabeta K, Hoebe K, Janssen EM, Du X, Georgel P, Crozat K, et al. The Unc93b1 mutation 3d disrupts exogenous antigen presentation and signaling via Toll-like receptors 3, 7 and 9. Nat Immunol 2006;7:156–64.

[51] Rowe DC, McGgetrick AF, Latz E, Monks BG, Gay NJ, Yamamoto M, et al. The myristoylation of TRIF-related adaptor molecule is essential for Toll-like receptor 4 signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:6299–304.

[52] McGgetrick AF, Brint EK, Palsson-McDermott EM, Rowe DC, Golenbock DT, Gay NJ, et al. Trif-related adapter molecule is phosphorylated by PKC {epsilon} during Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:9196–201.

[53] Kagan JC, Medzhitov R. Phosphoinositide-mediated adaptor recruitment controls Toll-like receptor signaling. Cell 2006;125:943–55.

[54] Miyake K, Yamashita Y, Ogata M, Sudo T, Kimoto M. RP105, a novel B cell surface molecule implicated in B cell activation, is a member of the leucine-rich repeat protein family. J Immunol 1995;154:3333–40.

[55] Miyake K, Shimazu R, Kondo J, Niki T, Akashi S, Ogata H, et al. Mouse MD-1, a molecule that is physically associated with RP105 and positively regulates its expression. J Immunol 1998;161:1348–53.

[56] Divanovic S, Trompette A, Atabani SF, Madan R, Golenbock DT, Visintin A, et al. Negative regulation of Toll-like receptor 4 signaling by the Toll-like receptor homolog RP105. Nat Immunol 2005;6:571–8.

[57] Brint EK, Xu D, Liu H, Dunne A, McKenzie AN, O’Neill LA, et al. ST2 is an inhibitor of interleukin 1 receptor and Toll-like receptor 4 signaling and maintains endotoxin tolerance. Nat Immunol 2004;5:373–9.

[58] Wald D, Qin J, Zhao Z, Qian Y, Naramura M, Tian L, et al. SIGIRR, a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor-interleukin 1 receptor signaling. Nat Immunol 2003;4:920–7.

[59] Chuang TH, Ulevitch RJ. Triad3A, an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase regulating Toll-like receptors. Nat Immunol 2004;5:495–502.

[60] Kobayashi K, Hernandez LD, Galan JE, Janeway CAJ, Medzhitov R, Flavell R. IRAK-M is a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor signaling. Cell 2002;110:191–202.

[61] Janssens S, Burns K, Vercammen E, Tschopp J, Beyaert R. MyD88S, a splice variant of MyD88, differentially modulates NF-kappaB- and AP-1-dependent gene expression. FEBS Lett 2003;548:103–7.

[62] Hardy MP, O’Neill LA. The murine IRAK2 gene encodes four alternatively spliced isoforms, two of which are inhibitory. J Biol Chem 2004;279:27699–708.

[63] Mansell A, Smith R, Doyle SL, Gray P, Fenner JE, Crack PJ, et al. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 negatively regulates Toll-like receptor signaling by mediating Mal degradation. Nat Immunol 2006;7:148–55.

[64] Su X, Li S, Meng M, Qian W, Xie W, Chen D, et al. TNF receptor-associated factor-1 (TRAF1) negatively regulates Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)-mediated signaling. Eur J Immunol 2006;36:199–206.

[65] Takeshita F, Ishii KJ, Kobiyama K, Kojima Y, Coban C, Sasaki S, et al. TRAF4 acts as a silencer in TLR-mediated signaling through the association with TRAF6 and TRIF. Eur J Immunol 2005;35:2477–85.

[66] Wang Y, Tang Y, Teng L, Wu Y, Zhao X, Pei G. Association of beta-arrestin and TRAF6 negatively regulates Toll-like receptor-interleukin 1 receptor signaling. Nat Immunol 2006;7:139–47.

[67] Boone DL, Turer EE, Lee EG, Ahmad RC, Wheeler MT, Tsui C, et al. The ubiquitin-modifying enzyme A20 is required for termination of Toll-like receptor responses. Nat Immunol 2004;5:1052–60.

[68] Saitoh T, Tun-Kyi A, Ryo A, Yamamoto M, Finn G, Fujita T, et al. Negative regulation of interferon-regulatory factor 3-dependent innate antiviral response by the prolyl isomerase Pin1. Nat Immunol 2006;7:598–605.

[69] Gilchrist M, Thorsson V, Li B, Rust AG, Korb M, Kennedy K, et al. Systems biology approaches identify ATF3 as a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 4. Nature 2006;441:173–8.

[70] Negishi H, Ohba Y, Yanai H, Takaoka A, Honma K, Yui K, et al. Negative regulation of Toll-like-receptor signaling by IRF-4. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:15989–94.

[71] Martinon F, Petrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J. Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 2006;440:237–41.

[72] Ishii KJ, Akira S. Innate immune recognition of, and regulation by, DNA. Trends Immunol 2006;27:525–32.
