
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Apr. 2007, p. 2996–3005
0021-9193/07/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/JB.01819-06
Copyright © 2007, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# The Transcriptional Regulators NorG and MgrA Modulate Resistance to both Quinolones and β-Lactams in *Staphylococcus aureus*

**Que Chi Truong-Bolduc and David C. Hooper\***

*Division of Infectious Diseases and Medical Services, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114-2696*

Received 4 December 2006/Accepted 25 January 2007

MgrA is a known regulator of the expression of several multidrug transporters in *Staphylococcus aureus*. We identified another regulator of multiple efflux pumps, NorG, by its ability, like that of MgrA, to bind specifically to the promoter of the gene encoding the NorA efflux pump. NorG is a member of the family of the GntR-like transcriptional regulators, and it binds specifically to the putative promoters of the genes encoding multidrug efflux pumps NorA, NorB, NorC, and AbcA. Overexpression of *norG* produces a threefold increase in *norB* transcripts associated with a fourfold increase in the level of resistance to quinolones. In contrast, disruption of *norG* produces no change in the level of transcripts of *norA*, *norB*, and *norC* but causes an increase of at least threefold in the transcript level of *abcA*, associated with a fourfold increase in resistance to methicillin, cefotaxime, penicillin G, and nafcillin. Overexpression of cloned *abcA* caused an 8- to 128-fold increase in the level of resistance to all four β-lactam antibiotics. Furthermore, MgrA and NorG have opposite effects on *norB* and *abcA* expression. MgrA acts as an indirect repressor for *norB* and a direct activator for *abcA*, whereas NorG acts as a direct activator for *norB* and a direct repressor for *abcA*.

MgrA, a multifunctional MarR-like regulator, was first identified by its ability to bind directly to the *norA* promoter, leading to altered expression of *norA*, which encodes the NorA efflux pump in *Staphylococcus aureus*, an important pathogen responsible for infections in hospital and community settings (28). Infections caused by *S. aureus* can be difficult to treat because of resistance to multiple antibiotics and multiple virulence factors (2). One of the most interesting mechanisms of resistance in *S. aureus* is its ability to express several multidrug resistance efflux pumps, which constitute a major defense against diverse families of toxins and antimicrobial agents (17, 18).

The complete genome of *S. aureus* N315 is 2.81 Mb in length, containing genes predicted to encode 210 transporters. Sixty-seven of these transporters are predicted to be ATP dependent, representing 31% of the total. The majority of the ATP-dependent transporters belong to the ABC family (63 ABC transporters, or 94% of the total of 67). Among the 114 (54.3%) secondary transporters energized by ion gradients across the membrane, there are 28 efflux pumps (24.6%) belonging to the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) and fewer that are members of other families. A similar distribution is found in the genomes of *S. aureus* strains COL, Mu50, and NCTC 8325 (11, 19). NorB, NorC, and Tet38 are three new additions to the MFS of transporters in *S. aureus*, and recently MepA, a multidrug resistance pump belonging to the multidrug and toxin extrusion family, was identified (9, 26, 27). Efflux pumps can extrude a specific class of antibiotics such as tetracyclines (TetK, TetL, and Tet38) or macrolides (MsrA) or

can extrude diverse unrelated compounds, such as quinolones, ethidium bromide, and cetrimide (NorA, NorB, and MepA) (1, 9, 22, 26).

AbcA is an ATP-dependent transporter of the ABC family, members of which use the energy liberated by ATP hydrolysis rather than the energy generated by transmembrane ion gradients, which is used by the members of the MFS to extrude their substrates (3). AbcA was shown to participate in cell wall autolysis, but no relation was established between its overexpression and resistance to β-lactam antibiotics (4, 6, 24). This transporter shares an overlapping promoter region with the structural gene (*pbpD*) encoding the PBP4 protein, a transpeptidase/carboxypeptidase, which is involved in cell wall synthesis and confers a decrease in sensitivity to β-lactam drugs (4). The expression of *abcA* and that of *pbpD*, however, appear to be independent of each other and to require different regulatory factors. The transcription of *abcA* depends on the *agr* regulatory system (24).

MgrA affects resistance to antibiotics by controlling the expression of at least four efflux pumps, NorA, NorB, NorC, and Tet38, which are responsible for decreases in susceptibility to hydrophilic (norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin) and hydrophobic (moxifloxacin and sparfloxacin) quinolones, tetracycline, and chemical compounds (ethidium bromide, cetrimide, and tetraphenylphosphonium [TPP]) (26–28). In addition to modulating the expression of efflux transporters, MgrA also regulates autolytic activity and the expression of several virulence factors, including alpha-toxin, nuclease, protein A, and capsular polysaccharides (7, 8, 14).

In this report, we have identified and characterized an additional regulatory factor, NorG, a new member of the GntR (gluconate regulatory protein) family that regulates expression of the NorB and AbcA efflux pumps and affects resistance to both quinolones and β-lactam antimicrobial agents. We have

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston MA 02114-2696. Phone: (617) 726-3812. Fax: (617) 726-7416. E-mail: dhooper@partners.org.
Published ahead of print on 2 February 2007.

VOL. 189, 2007                                                                 NorG REGULATORY PROTEIN 2997

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Genotype or relevant characteristic(s) | Reference or source |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------------|
| S. aureus         | RN4220                                 | 8325-4r⁻            | 10                    |
|                   | ISP794                                 | 8325-4pig-131       | 25                    |
|                   | QT1                                    | ISP794mgrA::cat     | 28                    |
|                   | QT11                                   | ISP794norG::cat     | This study            |
|                   | QT12                                   | ISP794mgrA::cat norG::cat | This study            |
| E. coli DH5α      | F⁻ φ80dlacZΔM15 Δ(lacZYA-argF)U169 deoR recA1 endA1 phoA hsdR17(rK⁻ mK⁻) supE44λ⁻ thi-1 gyrA96 relA1 | Gibco-BRL           |

Plasmids

| Plasmid    | Description                                                                 | Reference or source |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| pGEM3-zf(+) | 2.9-kb *E. coli* cloning vector; Apʳ                                       | Promega             |
| pLI50      | Shuttle cloning vector (Apʳ Cmʳ)                                           | 23                  |
| pCL52.2    | Temperature-sensitive *E. coli-S. aureus* shuttle vector                     | 23                  |
| pSK950     | 10.5-kb plasmid carrying the attP site of phage L54a, replicon of pE194; Tcʳ Emʳ (*S. aureus*) | 15                  |
| pQT13      | pSK950-norG                                                                | This study          |
| pQT14      | pSK950-abcA                                                                | This study          |

5′-ATGGACAGCTGATGAAGATA-3′) (the PstI site is underlined) and antisense primer 5′-CGAATTAGAATTCTTGTTTTAA-3′ (the EcoRI site is underlined), which generated flanking PstI and EcoRI sites, respectively. The amplified *norG* gene was digested with PstI and EcoRI, ligated into the PstI and EcoRI sites of the plasmid pGEM3-zf(+) to yield pGEM3-zf(+)-norG, and introduced into *E. coli* DH5α. Plasmids extracted from ampicillin-resistant colonies were screened for the *norG* fragment insertion by restriction endonuclease digest patterns and confirmed by DNA sequencing.

To generate a plasmid for overexpression of *norG* in *S. aureus*, the *norG* gene was amplified by PCR from *S. aureus* ISP794 chromosomal DNA with sense primer 5′-ATGGAGGATCCATGAAGATA-3′ (the BamHI site is underlined) and antisense primer 5′-CGAATTAGAATTCTTGTTTTAA-3′ (the EcoRI site is underlined), which generated flanking BamHI and EcoRI sites, respectively. The amplified *norG* gene was digested with BamHI and EcoRI and ligated into the BamHI and EcoRI sites of the temperature-sensitive shuttle plasmid pSK950 to yield pQT13. This plasmid was then electroporated into *S. aureus* RN4220 (8325r⁻) to generate transformants, and the structure of pQT13 in *S. aureus* was confirmed by restriction mapping. Electrocompetent ISP794 was then transformed with this plasmid isolated from RN4220. Tetracycline-resistant colonies isolated at 30°C were confirmed to have intact pQT13 by restriction mapping.

Construction of an *abcA* overexpressor. The *abcA* gene was amplified by PCR from *S. aureus* ISP794 chromosomal DNA with sense primer 5′-GGATCCTTA ATCTGTTAATTTTTGA-3′ (the BamHI site is underlined) and antisense primer 5′-GAATTCATGAAAACGAGAAAAATCCAT-3′ (the EcoRI site is underlined). The amplified *abcA* gene was digested with BamHI and EcoRI and ligated into the BamHI and EcoRI sites of the temperature-sensitive shuttle plasmid pSK950 to yield pQT14. This plasmid was electroporated into *S. aureus* RN4220 (8325r⁻), reextracted, and then introduced into ISP794 by electroporation. Tetracycline-resistant colonies isolated at 30°C were confirmed to have intact pQT14 by restriction mapping.

Construction of a *norG* mutant by allelic exchange. The 800-bp DNA fragment containing the *cat* gene was amplified from plasmid pLI50 using primers catpvu1 and catpvu2 (23, 28). The PCR product was digested with PvuII and then ligated into an EcoRV site within the putative *norG* coding region of plasmid pGEM-3zf(+)-norG. The resultant plasmid containing the 2.1-kb *norG::cat* was subcloned into the temperature-sensitive shuttle plasmid pCL52.2 to yield pCL52.2-(norG::cat). The allelic exchange procedure was then carried out as described previously (28). pCL52.2-(norG::cat) was first introduced into RN4220 by electroporation, and chloramphenicol-resistant (5 μg/ml) colonies of RN4220 were grown at 30°C in the presence of 5 μg/ml tetracycline and used for reisolation of pCL52.2-(norG::cat), which was then electroporated into ISP794. ISP794 harboring pCL52.2-(norG::cat) was grown in BHI broth with tetracycline (3 μg/ml) at 30°C, diluted 1:1,000 in fresh medium, and propagated at 42°C for 24 h. The culture was diluted and grown again at 30°C without selection for 48 h. Chloramphenicol-resistant, tetracycline-sensitive colonies, representing possible double-crossover events, were tested for *cat* insertion into *norG* by PCR and sequencing. To construct the *mgrA::cat norG::cat* double mutant, we carried out a second allelic exchange using the same plasmid construct pCL52.2-(norG::cat) and QT1 (*mgrA::cat*) as the recipient. Since QT1 already had one chromosomal copy of the *cat* gene, we increased the chloramphenicol concentration to 10 μg/ml for the selection of the double mutant. DNA sequencing was performed to confirm the presence of the chromosomal insertion of the *norG::cat* and *mgrA::cat* genes.

DNA mobility shift analysis. Primers designed to amplify the putative promoter regions of *norA, norB, norC, norG, abcA, pbpD, tet38,* and *mgrA* are listed in Table 2. One of the primers was biotinylated at the Tufts University Core Facility (Boston, MA). The gel mobility shift assay was carried out using the LightShift chemiluminescent EMSA kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL), as recommended by the manufacturer. The biotin-labeled DNA was incubated with the indicated amount of cell extract or purified proteins from *S. aureus* in 20 μl of binding buffer (10 mM HEPES [pH 8], 60 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl₂, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mg/ml of bovine serum albumin, 0.25 mM dithiothreitol) containing 1 μg of poly(dI-dC), 200 ng of sheared herring sperm DNA, and 10% glycerol. The reaction mixture was incubated for 20 min at room temperature and analyzed by 5% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). For the competition assays, a 100-fold excess of specific or nonspecific unlabeled DNA was added to the reaction mixture prior to the incubation.

Identification of the NorG protein from cell extracts. Cell extracts collected from 1 liter of overnight culture of *S. aureus* QT1 were used to purify the NorG protein, as previously described for purification of MgrA protein (28). The 150-bp biotinylated *norA* DNA fragment was immobilized on magnetic beads with covalently coupled streptavidin (Dynabeads M-280; Dynal) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA bound to beads was incubated with protein ex-

further identified AbcA as a transporter that can confer resistance to β-lactams.

# MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Bacterial strains, plasmids, growth media, and other materials.
Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. *S. aureus* strains were cultivated in brain heart infusion (BHI) broth (Difco, Sparks, MD) at 37°C unless otherwise stated. *Escherichia coli* strains were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium. Lysostaphin was obtained from AMBI Products Inc., New York, NY; ciprofloxacin and moxifloxacin from Bayer Corp., Westhaven, CT; sparfloxacin from Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research Division, Ann Arbor, MI; and 2′-(4-ethoxyphenyl)-5-(4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)-2,5′-bi-1H-benzimidazole (Hoechst 33342), norfloxacin, ethidium bromide, cetrimide, tetracycline, TPP, rhodamine, nafcillin, methicillin, penicillin G, cefotaxime, and chloramphenicol from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO. All primers used in this study were synthesized at the Tufts University Core Facility, Boston, MA.

## MIC determinations.
MICs of quinolones, β-lactams, TPP, rhodamine, ethidium bromide, cetrimide, and Hoechst 33342 were carried out by serial agar dilution on BHI agar. All plates were incubated at 30°C or 37°C for 24 h before reading. Determinations of MICs of quinolones, β-lactams, and other chemical compounds for transformants containing pQT13 or pQT14 were done on BHI agar containing 5 μg tetracycline per ml to ensure maintenance of the plasmid, with incubation at 30°C.

## RNA analysis.
Total *S. aureus* RNA was prepared by extraction from lysostaphin-treated cells grown to exponential phase at 37°C or 30°C, using the RNeasy minikit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA). The concentration of RNA was determined spectrophotometrically as the absorbance at 260 nm. For Northern blot analysis, 10 μg of total RNA was electrophoresed through a 0.9% agarose-0.66 M formaldehyde gel in morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS) and blotted onto Hybond-N+ membranes as previously described (26, 28). DNA probes were amplified from the ISP794 chromosome and labeled with psoralen for the detection of specific transcripts, using the Northern maxi kit (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX) as recommended by the manufacturer. Blots were hybridized with probes overnight at 42°C, washed, and autoradiographed with Kodak X-Omat film. The reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analyses were performed using the SuperScript one-step RT-PCR kit (Invitrogen Inc.) with 10 picograms of total RNA as the template. Primers for *norB* (5′-GAAGATAGTTTCAATACAG A-3′ and 5′-ATTATAAATGATAGGATGAA-3′) generated a 370-bp amplicon. The running conditions were 1 cycle for 30 min at 45°C; 1 cycle for 2 min at 94°C; 30 cycles for 45 s at 94°C, 45 s at 48°C, and 30 s at 72°C; and 1 cycle for 10 min at 72°C. The 16S rRNA was used as an internal control to normalize the RT-PCR data as described previously (5, 27).

## Cloning and overexpression of *norG*.
To clone the *norG* gene, primers based on flanking sequences (NCTC8325, Oklahoma University) were synthesized by the Tufts University Core Facility (Boston, MA). A 1,321-bp fragment was amplified by PCR from *S. aureus* ISP794 chromosomal DNA with sense primer

TABLE 2. Primers used to amplify putative promoter regions

| Promoter | Orientation | Sequence (5'→3') | DNA length (bp) |
|----------|-------------|------------------|-----------------|
| norA     | Sense       | TGCAATTTTCATATGATCAATCCC | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | AGATTGCAATTCATGCTAAATATT | 150 |
| norB P1  | Sense       | ATAAGGTAAGATAACTAGCA    | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | ATCTCTATTTGCCTCCCTATA   | 150 |
| norB P2  | Sense       | ACTCCTCTTTCATTTGTGAA    | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | GAGGTAACACTAAATATCAAC   | 150 |
| norC     | Sense       | GCAGCTGTGATGGTGAA       | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | ATTTCATTCATGTTAGTTA     | 150 |
| norG     | Sense       | ATCACTCCTTTAATTATGT     | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | ATTCCATAAAACCAATCC      | 150 |
| mgrA (P1 and P2) $^a$ | Sense       | CGAATTCATTCATGATTT | 200 |
|          | Antisense   | AAAGTTGATTTTTATTTAA     | 200 |
| abcA     | Sense       | CACCTTAATTAATTTGTGA     | 138 |
|          | Antisense   | CTCAAAGTCTTTATATTTAAA   | 138 |
| pbpD     | Sense       | TGTTTGTACGAAGAGCAA      | 138 |
|          | Antisense   | CTATCATATCATATACTTTTC   | 138 |
| tet 38   | Sense       | TTGGATGCGTATGGGTATTT    | 150 |
|          | Antisense   | TAATCATCTACCCAATGAC     | 150 |

$^a$ The P1 and P2 promoters of the mgrA gene are both located on the same 200-bp DNA fragment.

Putative promoter

aaaatgagtacaaccaattttgaatggatttacctatccaatttttaaaaggagggagaatgg
ctaaata**ttaaga**tattgctagtgacataagagataaaa taatcac**agggga**ttggttttatgga
-35 -10 RBS

Putative H-T-H region

atgaagatacctccacagaggcagttggcgatacaatacaacgtaaatagagtgacgatttaa
M K I P P Q R Q L A I Q Y N V N R V T I I K
aagtattgagtatttagaggctgaaggatttatctatactaaagtggggagtggaacatatgta
S I E L L E A E G F I Y T K V G S G T Y V N
atgactatttgaatgaagcacatattacaataagtgtctgaaatgatgttatggtcctctcaa
D Y L N E A H I T N K W S E M M L W S S Q
caaagaagtcatatacggtgcaattaataaaaaattgagacagatgattcgtatatacatat
Q R S Q Y T V Q L I N K I E T D D S Y I H I
aagtaaagtgaaattgggtatatcgttaatgccacatattcaattggggggagcatgtctaata
S K G E L G I S L M P H I Q L K K A M S N T
cagccagtcatattgaagacttatctttttggttataataatggctatggttatatcaagtttaa
A S H I E D L S F G Y N N G Y G Y I K L R
gatattatcgttgaacgaatgtcaaagcaagtataaatgttagtagagaaaatgtaatgatcac
D I I V E R M S K Q G I N V G R E N V M I T
ttcaggcgcttttacatgccattcaacttttatctattggggttttttaggtcaagatgcccataaa
S G A L H A I Q L L S I G F L G Q D A I I I
tttcgaatacacccatcatatattcactctacaatgtttttgagcaattgaatttttagacatatt
S N T P S Y I H S T N V F E Q L N F R H I
gatgttccttataatcaaattaatgaaattaataccatcattgatagattttattaattttttaaaa
D V P Y N Q I N E I N T I I D R F I N F K N
taaagcgatttatatagaacacctaggttaataacccgacaggtcgttcttttaacgaatgagcaaa
K A I Y I E P R F N N P T G R S L T N E Q K
agaaaaatataattacttatagcgaaagacataatattcctatcattgaagatgatatctttaga
K N I I T Y S E R H N I P I I E D D I F R
gatattttcttttagcgatccaactcctgctatcaaaacttatgataattggggaaagttataca
D I F F S D P T P A I K T Y D K L G K V I H
tataagcagtttttcaaaaaacgattgcaccagcaataagaataggttgtgatttgtgcttctgaaa
I S S F S K T I A P A I R I G W I V A S E K
aaataatagagcaattggcagatgtaagaatgcaaattgactatggatccagtattttgtcacaa
I I E Q L A D V R M Q I D Y G S S I L S Q
atggttgttatatagagatgttgaaaaaagtcttatgataaacacttagtaaagttatgt
M V V Y E M L K N S Y D K H L V K L R Y V
tttaaaagataaacgagacttttatgttaaacatcctcaataattttattaaggatatagcacatt
L K D K R D F M L N I L N L F K D I A H W
gggaggttccaagtggagttatttttgtatgggttagtcttttaatagatatagatatattaaat
E V P S G G Y F V W L V F K I D I K Y
ttattttacgaatttgttaagtaaaaaaaaatattaatcaatccgggttacatttatggcagtaa
L F Y E L L S K E K I L I N P G Y I Y G S K
agaaaagagtataaggctatctttttgcctttgaatcaaatgaaaatattaagcatgcgctctata
E K S I R L S F A F E S N E I K H A L Y K
aaatttatatatgtgaaaaaggtttta
I Y T Y V K K V *


FIG. 1. Nucleotide and amino acid sequences of the 1,321 bp of *S.* aureus DNA containing the *norG* gene from ISP794 (complete sequence shown). The −35 and −10 sequences of the putative promoter region and the putative helix-turn-helix (H-T-H) region are shown. The coding region of *norG*, preceded by a putative ribosome-binding site (RBS), is demarcated by the ATG start codon and the TAA stop codon.

norG promoter fragment, suggesting that MgrA could affect expression of norG (Fig. 3A). The DNA fragment shifts were each shown to be specific by competition experiments using 100-fold excesses of specific and nonspecific unlabeled DNAs (data not shown), as was done to establish the specificity of the interaction of NorG with the norA promoter.

The *abcA* gene, which encodes a putative ABC transporter, is transcribed divergently from *pbpD*, the structural gene encoding the penicillin-binding protein PBP4. The published overlapping promoter region *abcA-pbpD* as well as the specific regions harboring either *abcA* or *pbpD* promoters were amplified and labeled with biotin and used in the gel mobility shift assays. The inverted repeat that was shown previously to affect the expression of *abcA* and *pbpD* was present in both DNA fragments (4) (Table 2 and Fig. 3C). NorG bound to the *abcA* promoter and the overlapping region, but no binding to the putative *pbpD* promoter was detected. MgrA also bound to the *abcA* promoter and the overlapping region but not to the *pbpD* promoter (Fig. 3B). We performed the competition experiments using 100-fold excesses of specific and nonspecific unlabeled DNAs, which demonstrated the specificity of the interaction of NorG and MgrA with the *abcA* promoter (data not shown).

Phenotype of *norG* mutants. We constructed a *norG* knock-out mutant, QT11, by allelic exchange of a disrupted copy of *norG::cat* for the wild-type copy of *norG* on the chromosome of strain ISP794 (28). We also constructed a *norG mgrA* double mutant, QT12, using the same allelic exchange procedure with strain QT1 (*mgrA::cat*). QT12 carried two copies of the *cat* gene on its chromosome and was able to be constructed by its ability to grow in the presence of 10 μg chloramphenicol per ml, a concentration at which neither QT1 nor QT11 grew. The growth curves of the two mutants QT11 and QT12 are similar to that of the wild-type ISP794 (data not shown). We determined the MICs of quinolones, β-lactams, and dyes for ISP794, QT1, QT11, and QT12. The MICs of the quinolones (norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and sparfloxacin) showed no change for mutant QT11 (*norG::cat*) relative to its parent strain. Mutant QT12 (*norG::cat mgrA::cat*), however, showed an increase of fourfold for the four quinolones tested compared to those of the wild-type ISP794 but twofold less than those of the single mutant QT1 (*mgrA*). Thus, intact *norG*

TRUONG-BOLDUC AND HOOPER

A

norA promoter

B

norB promoter

C

Rho-dependent terminator
AAAAAGACTATTTCTACCTTGCACTGATAAGAAATAGTCTTTT

SA1273
SA1272
SA1271
SA1270
norB

Putative promoter P2
TAATAAAATTTTAATATATTATTCTTCTTAATATTATGTGCAATTA

Putative promoter P1
TTTTTGATTTTAATGTGTAATCTTTAAATTATTAGTAGTCCATCCATT

FIG. 2. (A) Gel mobility shift analyses of the interactions of the crude cell extracts (CE) from ISP794 and QT1 and the purified NorG protein with the biotinylated 150-bp norA promoter fragment. Competing unlabeled herring sperm DNA (nonspecific) and norA promoter DNA (specific) were used to determine the specificity of promoter binding. The amount of labeled DNA used was 2 ng per reaction. The amount of protein used was 50 ng per reaction for the NorG protein and 100 ng per reaction for the crude cell extracts. (B) Gel mobility shift analyses of the interactions of the crude cell extracts from ISP794 and the purified NorG protein with the biotinylated 150-bp norB P1 and P2 promoter fragments. (C) Schematic representation of the positions of norB and the three adjacent ORFs on the S. aureus N315 published genome (11). The two putative promoters and the putative rho-dependent terminator are indicated.

is needed for the full effect of mutation in mgrA on resistance to quinolones.

We also determined the MICs of four β-lactams (nafcillin, penicillin G, methicillin, and cefotaxime) and five dyes (cet- rimide, TPP, rhodamine, ethidium bromide, and Hoechst 33342) for all strains. Interestingly, QT11 (norG) and QT12 (norG mgrA), respectively, showed fourfold and twofold increases in the MICs of the four β-lactams, while QT1 (mgrA) was twofold more sensitive to these β-lactams than the wild- type strain ISP794. Both QT11 and QT12 showed increases in MICs of dyes, but QT12 was twofold more resistant than QT11. The MIC data are summarized in Table 3.

Alterations in gene expression in norG mutants. We carried out Northern blotting using RNAs extracted from ISP794, QT1, QT11, and QT12, which were hybridized with biotin-

labeled probes generated from 200-bp internal regions of either abcA or pbpD (encoding PBP4). The level of abcA transcripts from QT11 was at least threefold greater than that from QT12 and was almost undetectable for ISP794 and QT1 (Fig. 4A). In contrast, no increases in the level of transcription of pbpD in QT11 and QT12 were detected (data not shown). In order to confirm these findings, RT-PCRs were carried out using the same primers designed for amplification of the two probe DNAs used for Northern hybridizations. We found a similar increase (threefold) in the intensity of the abcA ampli- con for QT11 compared to that of QT12, confirming the results of the Northern blot assays (data not shown).

Because the low copy number of the norA, norB, and norC transcripts in the wild-type strain ISP794 made it difficult to perform Northern blotting, we performed RT-PCR assays to

VOL. 189, 2007                                                                 NorG REGULATORY PROTEIN 3001

A

| DNA | DNA+NorG | DNA | DNA+NorG | DNA | DNA+NorG |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

Promoters mgrA norG norG norC

B

| Free DNA | DNA + QT1 crude extract | DNA + NorG Purified | DNA + ISP794 crude extract | DNA + MgrA Purified | Free DNA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

abcA promoter abcA promoter

C


CACCTTAATTAATTGTGAAAATAAAGTTTCTGCAGTTAATTTGAAAAAATAATGCAAATAT ATTACG
* -35 (abcA)
TGTGTAGCTAAAGGTGT TATAAT GTTTGTCGAAGAGGC AAACTTACTCAAAAGCGATTAATTTT CATGT
-10 (abcA) (abcA)

TTTAATATAAAAGACTTTGAGAAGTTATTACAAAAAATGCAAATAGAAATATTCTATCATATAAATGTTAT
(pbpD) -10 (pbpD)
GAGCGGTATTTTGGGCAACACTTTATTTGATTTTTAAAGTTTTGTTGGGAGAAAAGTATATGATAGAA ATG
-35 (pbpD)
AbcA


FIG. 3. (A) Gel mobility shift analyses of the interactions of the purified NorG and MgrA proteins with the biotinylated promoters of *mgrA*, *norG*, and *norC*. (B) Gel mobility shift analyses of the interactions of the crude cell extracts from ISP794 and QT1 and the purified NorG and MgrA proteins with the biotinylated 150-bp *abcA* promoter. (C) Schematic representation of the overlapping promoter region *abcA-pbpD* as published by Domanski et al. (4). Primers designed to amplify *abcA* DNA generated a fragment that included the inverted repeat located 8 bp downstream from the *abcA* transcriptional start (+1). This region was shown to be essential for the expression of both genes. The −35 and −10 consensus sequences of the *abcA* and *pbpD* promoters are underlined and/or in bold. The inverted repeat region is underlined and in bold. The asterisk indicates the transcription start site for *abcA*. The boxed DNA region indicates the *abcA* promoter that was used in the gel mobility shift binding assay. The *pbpD* promoter region used for the gel mobility shift assay contains the inverted repeat as well as the −10 and −35 regions (underlined). The inverted repeat is located at a distance of 46 bp from the transcription start site of the *pbpD* gene (T).

detect whether any differences occurred in transcript levels between strains. The 16S rRNA was used as an internal control as described previously (5, 27). RT-PCRs were carried out for *norA*, *norB*, and *norC* in ISP794 (parent strain), QT11, and QT12. An increase of twofold was found associated with *norB* and *norC* amplicons in QT12 (*norG mgrA*), an increase that was similar to that with the *mgrA* mutation alone (26, 27). In contrast, there was no change in the levels of these transcripts for QT11 (*norG*) relative to those for the wild-type strain. No change in levels of *norA* mRNA was detected in either mutant (data not shown).

Alterations in gene expression and phenotype by overexpression of *norG*. We cloned the 1,321-bp *norG* gene into plasmid pSK950 to generate pQT13. This plasmid was introduced first into RN4220 and then into ISP794 to study the effects of overproduction of *norG*. As expected, in Northern blots there was an increase (threefold) in the level of *norG*

transcripts in ISP794(pQT13) compared to ISP794 (Fig. 4A). In complementation experiments pQT13 was introduced into mutant QT11 (*norG::cat*), resulting in an increase of *norG* mRNA and a decrease in *abcA* mRNA. RT-PCR assays using specific primers of an internal region of 200 bp of the *norA*, *norB*, and *norC* genes showed a 2.5-fold increase in *norB* transcript levels in ISP794(pQT13) compared to ISP794 (Fig. 4B). In contrast, no differences in the levels of *norA* and *norC* transcripts were detected between the two strains.

We then determined the MICs of quinolones, β-lactams, and dyes for ISP794 and ISP794(pQT13). The MICs of norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and sparfloxacin showed an increase of fourfold for ISP794(pQT13), while no change occurred for the other drugs tested (Table 3). The transformant QT11(pQT13) showed a MIC profile for quinolones, β-lactams, and dyes that was identical to that of ISP794(pQT13) and increased for quinolones relative to ISP794. The presence of

TABLE 3. Susceptibilities of strains to quinolones and other agents

| Antimicrobial or dye | ISP 794 | QT1 | QT11 | QT12 | ISP 794(pQT 13) | ISP 794(pQT 14) | Side chain partition coefficient$^b$ |
|---------------------|--------|-----|------|------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------------------------------|
| Quinolones          |        |     |      |      |                 |                 |                                       |
| Norfloxacin         | 0.5    | 4   | 0.5  | 2    | 2               | 0.5             |                                       |
| Ciprofloxacin       | 0.25   | 2   | 0.25 | 1    | 1               | 0.25            |                                       |
| Moxifloxacin        | 0.06   | 0.5 | 0.06 | 0.25 | 0.25            | 0.06            |                                       |
| Sparfloxacin        | 0.125  | 1   | 0.06 | 0.5  | 0.5             | 0.125           |                                       |
| β-Lactams           |        |     |      |      |                 |                 |                                       |
| Nafcillin           | 0.5    | 0.25| 2    | 1    | 0.5             | 64              | 4,200                                 |
| Penicillin G        | 0.03   | 0.01| 0.125| 0.06 | 0.03            | 2               | 270                                   |
| Methicillin         | 4      | 2   | 16   | 8    | 4               | 32              |                                       |
| Cefotaxime          | 0.5    | 0.25| 2    | 1    | 0.5             | 4               | 6                                     |
| Chemical compounds and dyes |        |     |      |      |                 |                 |                                       |
| Cetrimide           | 0.5    | 2   | 0.5  | 2    | 0.5             | 0.5             |                                       |
| TPP                 | 0.5    | 2   | 2    | 4    | 0.5             | 8               |                                       |
| Rhodamine           | 1      | 2   | 1    | 2    | 0.5             | 4               |                                       |
| Ethidium bromide    | 2      | 4   | 4    | 8    | 2               | 4               |                                       |
| Hoechst 33342       | 1      | 4   | 2    | 4    | 2               | 2               |                                       |

$^a$ Strain QT1, ISP794mgrA::cat; QT11, ISP794norG::cat; QT12, ISP794mgrA::cat norG::cat. pQT13, construct pSK950-norG; pQT14, construct pSK950-abcA. Strains harboring plasmids pQT13 and pQT14 were grown in the presence of tetracycline (5 μg/ml) at 30°C.

$^b$ The side chain partition coefficients were determined by Nikaido et al. (16) and represent the calculated octanol-water partition coefficients of the 6-substituents and the 7-substituents of the β-lactams.

activator of transcription of *norB*. A similar regulatory system has been demonstrated for the *farAB*-encoded efflux pump in *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*, which confers resistance to antibacterial fatty acids. The *farAB* operon was indirectly activated by the MtrR regulator, which is a direct repressor of FarR, a repressor of the *farAB* system (12). The role of NorG in regulation of expression of *norA-* and *norC*-encoded efflux pumps remains to be determined. The ability of the protein to bind to both promoters without an apparent effect on gene transcript levels in vivo suggests participation of other proteins or other pathways in this regulation. This hypothesis is supported by our finding that disruption of the *norG* gene did not lead to any detectable effects on the transcription of *norA* or *norC* in mutant QT11 (*norG*).

NorG represses the expression of genes involved in β-lactam susceptibility and resistance. The *norG::cat* mutant had no change in quinolone resistance phenotype, but this mutant showed a fourfold increase in the MICs of β-lactam drugs, including nafcillin, penicillin G, methicillin, and cefotaxime. By Northern blotting and RT-PCR assays, we found that the transcription level of *abcA* increased fourfold in this mutant. AbcA is an ATP-dependent transporter, involved in cell autolysis, and its transcription is dependent on the *agr* regulatory system (3, 24). *pbpD* is the structural gene encoding the transpeptidase PBP4 of *S. aureus*, a native low-molecular-weight penicillin-binding protein that participates in the synthesis of highly cross-linked muropeptide components of the cell wall (13). Although *abcA* and *pbpD* are divergently transcribed, they share an intergenic region with overlapping promoters. An inverted repeat region of 26 bp that plays an important role in the expression of these two genes was found 8 bp from the transcription initiation point (+1) of *abcA*, while it was at a distance of 46 bp from the transcription initiation point of *pbpD* (4). Schrader-Fischer and Berger-Bachi (24) found no connection between resistance to methicillin and AbcA expression in their studies, but the cloned *abcA* structural gene in those experiments lacked approximately 4% of its full sequence. Exposure of cells to methicillin, however, led to an increase in expression of *abcA* transcripts (24). We found an increase in *abcA* transcripts without a change in *pbpD* transcripts in the *norG* mutant, strengthening the earlier suggestion that *abcA* and *pbpD* are regulated differently (6). Consistent with this notion, NorG bound to the putative *abcA* promoter, including the inverted repeat region, in a specific manner, but no binding occurred in the DNA region bearing the putative *pbpD* promoter (data not shown).

AbcA and resistance to β-lactams. Cloning and overexpression of the complete *abcA* gene on plasmid pQT14 resulted in increased β-lactam resistance. Thus, it appears that β-lactams may be substrates of AbcA and that the β-lactam resistance phenotype of a *norG* mutant can be attributed at least in part to overexpression of *abcA*.

AbcA is classified in the group A family of ATP-dependent transporters, whose members have two membrane-spanning domains and an ATP-binding domain in a single polypeptide. Exporting substrates is the principal function of this family (24). AbcA shows similarity with efflux transporters LmrA of *Lactococcus lactis* (65% amino acid similarity) and MsbA of *Escherichia coli* (57% amino acid similarity). The substrate profiles of these two transporters both include the dyes

FIG. 4. (A) Northern blot analyses of RNAs isolated from the specified *S. aureus* strains. The same amount of RNA (10 μg) was loaded in each lane, and loading was verified by ethidium bromide staining of 16S rRNA before RNAs were transferred onto a nylon membrane and hybridized with specific probes (*abcA* or *norG*). (B) RT-PCR using RNA extracted at exponential phase. Each reaction used 10 picograms of total RNA as the template and primers specific to an internal region of *norB*. We used 16S rRNA as an internal control for the RT-PCR assays as described previously (27). Photographs of ethidium bromide-stained gels were scanned and analyzed using the NIH Scion Image program as described previously (5).

floxacin and sparfloxacin, across the cytoplasmic membrane. The exact role of NorB, if any, in amino acid metabolism or transport is not known, but its coordinated expression with that of components of certain metabolic pathways may reflect a response to environmental conditions in which removal of toxins by efflux and changes in amino acid metabolism are both advantageous to cell survival.

We postulate that MgrA acts as an indirect repressor of *norB* via repression of the expression of NorG, which acts as a direct

ethidium bromide and Hoechst 33342 (20). Overexpression of *abcA* from pQT14 also produced increases in the MICs of the dyes, TPP, rhodamine, ethidium bromide, and Hoechst 33342. In *E. coli*, MsbA is an essential transporter involved in the trafficking of lipids, including lipid A. Since the targets of β-lactams are extracellular transpeptidases, a role of multidrug transporters located in the cytoplasmic membrane in β-lactam resistance might be unexpected. LmrA in *L. lactis*, however, has been previously shown to confer resistance to lipophilic but not hydrophilic β-lactam antibiotics, suggesting a link between the ability of the antibiotics to partition into the cytoplasmic membrane and LmrA-mediated drug resistance (29). Similarly, the multidrug efflux pump AcrAB of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium confers resistance to β-lactams with more lipophilic side chains, possibly due to side chain partitioning in the membrane (16). The observation that AbcA confers resistance to β-lactam drugs with a preference toward the more lipophilic ones such as nafcillin or penicillin G supports this hypothesis. Further study of the transport properties of AbcA is ongoing.

AbcA was previously shown to be involved in cell autolysis and is under the control of the *agr* regulatory system (24). In our early microarray experiments leading to the identification of the NorB, NorC, and Tet38 efflux pumps (26, 27), we also observed a fivefold increase in *abcA* mRNA in a strain overexpressing *mgrA* compared to that of the wild-type ISP794 and a specific binding of MgrA to the overlapping promoter *abcA-pbpD* (data not shown), suggesting that MgrA is a direct activator for the expression of *abcA*. In this study, we demonstrated that *abcA* was also under the control of NorG and also affects resistance to β-lactams. Taken together, our data suggest that AbcA is oppositely regulated by MgrA and NorG.

Conclusions. Multiple regulators affect the expression of a variety of efflux pumps that alter antimicrobial susceptibility in *S. aureus*. Thus far two regulators, NorG and MgrA, have been shown to bind the *norA* promoter, a property that led to their identification (28). In contrast to MgrA, NorG binds more strongly to the putative *norB* promoters P1 and P2, as well as to the *norC* putative promoter. NorG also binds specifically to its own putative promoter and the promoter of *abcA*. Furthermore, MgrA and NorG have opposite effects on *norB* and *abcA* expression. MgrA behaves as an indirect repressor for *norB* and a direct activator for *abcA*, whereas NorG behaves as a direct activator for *norB* and a direct repressor for *abcA*. The multiplicity of staphylococcal efflux pumps and the complexity of their regulation imply that such pumps are highly important to the physiology of *S. aureus* and likely contribute to its ability to survive in diverse environments, an ability that underlies its facility in colonizing, persisting in, and causing disease in mammalian hosts.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by grant R01-AI23988 from the U.S. Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health (to D.C.H.).

### REFERENCES

1. Chopra, I., P. M. Hawkey, and M. Hinton. 1992. Tetracyclines, molecular and clinical aspects. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 29:245–277.
2. Cunha, B. A. 2002. Strategies to control antibiotic resistance. Semin. Respir. Infect. 17:250–258.
3. Domanski, T. L., and K. W. Bayles. 1995. Analysis of *Staphylococcus aureus*
genes encoding penicillin-binding protein 4 and an ABC-type transporter. Gene 167:111–113.
4. Domanski, T. L., B. L. M. De Jonge, and K. W. Bayles. 1997. Transcription analysis of the *Staphylococcus aureus* gene encoding penicillin-binding protein 4. J. Bacteriol. 179:2651–2657.
5. Fournier, B., Q. C. Truong-Bolduc, X. Zhang, and D. C. Hooper. 2001. A mutation in the 5′ untranslated region increases stability of *norA* mRNA, encoding a multidrug resistance transporter of *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 183:2367–2371.
6. Henze, U. U., and B. Berger-Bächi. 1996. Penicillin-binding protein 4 overproduction increases β-lactam resistance in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 40:2121–2125.
7. Ingavale, S., W. van Wamel, T. T. Luong, C. Y. Lee, and A. L. Cheung. 2005. Rat/MgrA, a regulator of autolysis, is a regulator of virulence genes in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Infect. Immun. 73:1423–1431.
8. Ingavale, S. S., W. van Wamel, and A. L. Cheung. 2003. Characterization of RAT, an autolysis regulator in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Mol. Microbiol. 48:1451–1466.
9. Kaatz, G. W., F. McAleese, and S. M. Seo. 2005. Multidrug resistance in *Staphylococcus aureus* due to overexpression of a novel multidrug and toxin extrusion transport protein. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49:1857–1864.
10. Kreiswirth, B. 1983. The toxic shock syndrome exotoxin structural gene is not detectably transmitted by a prophage. Nature 305:709–712.
11. Kuroda, M., T. Ohta, I. Uchiyama, T. Baba, H. Yuzawa, I. Kobayashi, L. Cui, A. Oguchi, K. Aoki, Y. Nagai, J. Lian, T. Ito, M. Kanamori, H. Matsumaru, A. Maruyama, H. Murakami, A. Hosoyama, Y. Mizutani-Ui, N. K. Takahashi, T. Sawano, R. Inoue, C. Kaito, K. Sekimizu, H. Hirakawa, S. Kuhara, S. Goto, J. Yabuzaki, M. Kanehisa, A. Yamashita, K. Oshima, K. Furuya, C. Yoshino, T. Shiba, M. Hattori, N. Ogasawara, H. Hayashi, and K. Hiramatsu. 2001. Whole genome sequencing of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*. Lancet 357:1225–1240.
12. Lee, E. H., C. Rouquette-Loughlin, J. P. Folster, and W. M. Shafer. 2003. FarR regulates the *farAB*-encoded efflux pump of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* via an MtrR regulatory mechanism. J. Bacteriol. 185:7145–7152.
13. Leski, T. A., and A. Tomasz. 2005. Role of penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2) in the antibiotic susceptibility and cell wall cross-linking of *Staphylococcus aureus*: evidence for the cooperative functioning of PBP2, PBP4, and PBP2A. J. Bacteriol. 187:1815–1824.
14. Luong, T. T., S. W. Newell, and C. Y. Lee. 2003. *mgr*, a novel global regulator in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 185:3703–3710.
15. Niemeyer, D. M., M. J. Pucci, J. A. Thanassi, V. K. Sharma, and G. L. Archer. 1996. Role of *mecA* transcriptional regulation in the phenotypic expression of methicillin resistance in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 178:5464–5471.
16. Nikaido, H., M. Basina, V. Nguyen, and E. Y. Rosenberg. 1998. Multidrug efflux pump AcrAB of *Salmonella typhimurium* excretes only those β-lactam antibiotics containing lipophilic side chains. J. Bacteriol. 180:4686–4692.
17. Putman, M., H. W. Van Veen, J. E. Degener, and W. N. Konings. 2000. Antibiotic resistance: era of the multidrug pump. Mol. Microbiol. 36:772–773.
18. Putman, M., H. W. Van Veen, and W. N. Konings. 2000. Molecular properties of bacterial multidrug transporters. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64:672–693.
19. Ren, Q., K. H. Kang, and I. T. Paulsen. 2004. TransportDB: a relational database of cellular membrane transport systems. Nucleic Acids Res. 32:D284–D288.
20. Reuter, G., T. Janvilisri, H. Venter, S. Shahi, L. Balakrishnan, and H. W. Van Veen. 2003. The ATP binding cassette multidrug transporter LmrA and lipid transporter MsbA have overlapping substrate specificities. J. Biol. Chem. 278:35193–35198.
21. Rigali, S., A. Derouaux, F. Giannotta, and J. Dusart. 2002. Subdivision of the helix-turn-helix GntR family of bacterial regulators in the FadR, HutC, MocR, and YtrA subfamilies. J. Biol. Chem. 277:12507–12515.
22. Ross, J. I., E. A. Eady, J. H. Cove, and S. Baumberg. 1996. Minimal functional system required for expression of erythromycin resistance by *msrA* in *Staphylococcus aureus* RN4220. Gene 183:143–148.
23. Sau, S., J. Sun, and C. Y. Lee. 1997. Molecular characterization and transcriptional analysis of type 8 capsule genes in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 179:1614–1621.
24. Schrader-Fischer, G., and B. Berger-Bachi. 2001. The AbcA transporter of *Staphylococcus aureus* affects cell autolysis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45:407–412.
25. Stahl, M. L., and P. A. Pattee. 1983. Confirmation of protoplast fusion-derived linkages in *Staphylococcus aureus* by transformation with protoplast DNA. J. Bacteriol. 154:406–412.
26. Truong-Bolduc, Q. C., P. M. Dunman, J. Strahilevitz, S. J. Projan, and D. C.

Hooper. 2005. MgrA is a multiple regulator of two new efflux pumps in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 187:2395–2405.

27. Truong-Bolduc, Q. C., J. Strahilevitz, and D. C. Hooper. 2006. NorC, a new efflux pump regulated by MgrA of *Staphylococcus aureus*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50:1104–1107.

28. Truong-Bolduc, Q. C., X. Zhang, and D. C. Hooper. 2003. Characterization

of NorR protein, a multifunctional regulator of *norA* expression in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. 185:3127–3138.

29. Van Veen, H. W., K. Venema, H. Bolhuis, I. Oussenko, J. Kok, B. Poolman, A. J. M. Driessen, and W. N. Konings. 1996. Multidrug resistance mediated by a bacterial homolog of the human multidrug transporter MDR1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:10668–10672.
