
Circulation
Research
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION

AMP-Activated Protein Kinase in Metabolic Control and Insulin Signaling
Mhairi C. Towler and D. Grahame Hardie

Circ Res. 2007;100:328-341
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000256090.42690.05
Circulation Research is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2007 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 1524-4571

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the World Wide Web at:
http://circres.ahajournals.org/content/100/3/328

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published in Circulation Research can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.

Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints

Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Circulation Research is online at:
http://circres.ahajournals.org/subscriptions/

Downloaded from http://circres.ahajournals.org/ at UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS on June 11, 2014

This Review is part of a thematic series on AMP Kinase, which includes the following articles:

AMP-Activated Protein Kinase in Metabolic Control and Insulin Signaling

Cardiac AMP-Activated Protein Kinase in Health and Disease Bruce Kemp, Guest Editor

# AMP-Activated Protein Kinase in Metabolic Control and Insulin Signaling

Mhairi C. Towler, D. Grahame Hardie

Abstract—The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) system acts as a sensor of cellular energy status that is conserved in all eukaryotic cells. It is activated by increases in the cellular AMP:ATP ratio caused by metabolic stresses that either interfere with ATP production (eg, deprivation for glucose or oxygen) or that accelerate ATP consumption (eg, muscle contraction). Activation in response to increases in AMP involves phosphorylation by an upstream kinase, the tumor suppressor LKB1. In certain cells (eg, neurones, endothelial cells, and lymphocytes), AMPK can also be activated by a Ca²⁺-dependent and AMP-independent process involving phosphorylation by an alternate upstream kinase, CaMKKβ. Once activated, AMPK switches on catabolic pathways that generate ATP, while switching off ATP-consuming processes such as biosynthesis and cell growth and proliferation. The AMPK complex contains 3 subunits, with the α subunit being catalytic, the β subunit containing a glycogen-sensing domain, and the γ subunits containing 2 regulatory sites that bind the activating and inhibitory nucleotides AMP and ATP. Although it may have evolved to respond to metabolic stress at the cellular level, hormones and cytokines such as insulin, leptin, and adiponectin can interact with the system, and it now appears to play a key role in maintaining energy balance at the whole body level. The AMPK system may be partly responsible for the health benefits of exercise and is the target for the antidiabetic drug metformin. It is a key player in the development of new treatments for obesity, type 2 diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome. (Circ Res. 2007;100:328-341.)

Key Words: calcium signaling ■ diabetes ■ insulin ■ metabolism ■ signaling pathways

Genes encoding the α, β, and γ subunits of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) are highly conserved in all eukaryotic species in which genome sequences have been completed, including vertebrates and invertebrates, plants, fungi, and protozoa.¹ Genetic studies show that in the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, the genes encoding these subunits are required for the response to glucose starvation.²³ In a primitive green plant, the moss *Physcomitrella patens*, genes encoding the catalytic subunits are required for growth in alternate light/dark cycles, as opposed to continuous light.⁴ Darkness represents a period of starvation for a green plant because it is unable to produce carbohydrate by photosynthesis. The AMPK system therefore appears to have initially evolved to execute responses to carbon starvation. Because of the sophisticated endocrine systems that control glucose homeostasis in mammals (including

the effects of insulin), starvation for glucose is not a normal physiological event for mammalian cells in vivo. Nevertheless, AMPK is still ubiquitously expressed in mammalian cells, where it is involved in the response to a variety of metabolic stresses that disturb cellular energy homeostasis. More recently, it has been realized that hormones and other extracellular signals have acquired the ability to modulate the AMPK system, and it is now known to be involved in regulating energy homeostasis at the whole body, as well as the cellular, levels.

## Regulation of the AMPK Complex by 5′-AMP and Calcium

With hindsight, the first reports describing the AMPK system were 2 independent articles published in 1973 involving

Original received October 26, 2006; revision received November 30, 2006; accepted December 12, 2006.
From the Division of Molecular Physiology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.
Correspondence to Prof D. G. Hardie, Division of Molecular Physiology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Sir James Black Centre, Dow St, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK. E-mail d.g.hardie@dundee.ac.uk
© 2007 American Heart Association, Inc.
* Circulation Research* is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000256090.42690.05

Downloaded from http://circres.ahajournals.org at UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS on June 11, 2014

Towler and Hardie  AMPK in Metabolic Control and Insulin Signaling 329

poorly defined protein fractions that, in the presence of ATP, inactivated 2 key metabolic enzymes involved in lipid synthesis, ie, acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) (involved in fatty acid synthesis)⁵ and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase (involved in isoprenoid/cholesterol synthesis).⁶ The protein fractions were correctly surmised to contain protein kinases, and subsequent studies revealed that both the ACC kinase and the HMG-CoA reductase kinase were stimulated by 5′-AMP.⁷⁸ However, it was not realized that both functions were performed by the same protein kinase until our laboratory provided evidence in favor of that hypothesis in 1987⁹; we renamed the activity AMP-activated protein kinase the following year.¹⁰

As well as allosterically activating the enzyme by up to 5-fold,⁹ AMP also promotes its phosphorylation¹¹ at a specific threonine residue on the α subunit (Thr172¹²) by an upstream kinase that has recently been identified as a complex between the tumor suppressor protein LKB1 and 2 accessory subunits, termed STRAD and MO25.¹³¹⁴ Phosphorylation of Thr172 produces at least 100-fold activation,¹⁵ so that it is quantitatively much more important than the allosteric activation. The LKB1 complex is not itself activated by AMP, and the effect of the nucleotide is to make AMPK a better substrate for LKB1,¹³ while at the same time making it a worse substrate for protein phosphatases that dephosphorylate Thr172.¹⁶ The 3 effects of AMP make the system very sensitive to small increases in AMP.¹⁷ All 3 effects are also antagonized by high concentrations of ATP. Because all eukaryotic cells express very active adenylate kinases, which maintains their reaction (2ADP ↔ AMP + ATP) close to equilibrium at all times, the cellular AMP:ATP ratio varies approximately as the square of the ADP:ATP ratio,¹⁸ making it a very sensitive indicator of cellular energy status.

In cells lacking LKB1, such as HeLa cells (tumor cells in which LKB1 is not expressed), there is still some basal phosphorylation of Thr172 and AMPK activity,¹³ and both can be dramatically increased by addition of a Ca²⁺ ionophore. Three groups have now identified the upstream kinase responsible for phosphorylation of Thr172 under these circumstances as Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase (CaMKK), especially the CaMKKβ (CaMKK2) isoform.¹⁹⁻²¹ CaMKKs were originally identified as protein kinases that acted upstream of calmodulin-dependent protein kinases I and IV.²² Our laboratory showed that a purified CaMKK could phosphorylate and activate AMPK in cell-free assays as long ago as 1995,¹¹ although at that time, we did not consider that this was likely to have any physiological relevance. CaMKKβ is expressed primarily in the brain but is also expressed in testis, thymus, and T cells.²³ Our laboratory has shown that when Ca²⁺ enters neurones in rat brain slices following K⁺-induced depolarization, there is a marked phosphorylation of Thr172 and activation of AMPK that is catalyzed by a CaMKK.

Given the limited tissue distribution of the CaMKKs compared with LKB1, the Ca²⁺-mediated pathway may be restricted to certain cell types such as neurones, although additional examples are discussed below. However, it is interesting to speculate about the function of the

---

Figure 1. Domain structure of AMPK subunit isoforms and splice variants. Regions shown in the same color are related, and their functions, where known, are indicated.

CaMKK → AMPK pathway in those cell types in which it occurs. Any treatment that causes an increase in cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ will create a subsequent demand for ATP, if only because the Ca²⁺ is immediately pumped out of the cytoplasm using ATP-driven pumps in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum. Activation of AMPK under these circumstances may represent a mechanism to anticipate the demand for ATP created by Ca²⁺ entry.

## Subunit Structure of the AMPK Complex

AMPK is a heterotrimer comprising α, β, and γ subunits. There are 2 or 3 genes encoding each subunit (Figure 1 and Table 1), giving rise to 12 possible heterotrimeric combinations, with splice variants further increasing the potential diversity. The 2 isoforms of the α subunit, α₁²⁴ and α₂²⁵ contain the kinase domain in their N-terminal half, with the C-terminal regions being required to form a complex with the β and γ subunits.²⁶ They appear to have rather similar substrate specificities,²⁷ but the α₂ isoform is enriched in the nucleus of several cell types, including pancreatic β cells,²⁸ neurones,²⁹ and skeletal muscle,³⁰ whereas α₁ is predominantly cytoplasmic. The α₁ isoform is associated with the plasma membrane in carotid body type 1 cells³¹ and airway epithelial cells,³² in the latter case particularly with the apical membrane.

The β subunits from different eukaryotic species contain 2 conserved regions, located in the central and C-terminal regions (Figure 1).³³ It is now clear that the C-terminal domain is all that is required to form a functional αβγ

TABLE 1. Information Regarding AMPK Subunits, Subunit Isoforms, and Domains

| Isoform | Mass (kDa) | GenBank Accession No. | Amino Acids | Domain (Approximate) | Domain Location | Domain Function | Site of Major Expression | Chromosomal Location |
|---------|------------|-----------------------|-------------|----------------------|------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| $\alpha_1$ | 63 | Q13131 | 550 | Kinase domain | 1–270 | Catalytic | Ubiquitous? | 5p11-p14 |
|  |  |  |  | C-terminal domain | 393–550 | $\beta\gamma$ binding |  |  |
| $\alpha_2$ | 62 | P54646 | 552 | Kinase domain | 1–268 | Catalytic | Muscle, liver | 1p31 |
|  |  |  |  | C-terminal domain | 397–552 | $\beta\gamma$ binding |  |  |
| $\beta_1$ | 30 | Q9Y478 | 270 | Glycogen-binding domain | 72–151 | Glycogen binding | Ubiquitous? | 12q24.1–24.3 |
|  |  |  |  | C-terminal domain | 179–270 | $\alpha\gamma$ Binding |  |  |
| $\beta_2$ | 30 | O43741 | 272 | Glycogen-binding domain | 72–154 | Glycogen binding | Muscle | 1q21.1 |
|  |  |  |  | C-terminal domain | 181–272 | $\alpha\gamma$ Binding |  |  |
| $\gamma_1$ | 38 | P54619 | 331 | N-terminal domain | 1–42 | ? | Ubiquitous? | 12q12-q14 |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 1 | 43–178 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 2 | 199–331 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
| $\gamma_2$ | Long | 63 | Q9UGJ0 | 569 | N-terminal domain | 1–274 | ? | Muscle? | 7q36 |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 1 | 275–410 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 2 | 431–556 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  | Short | 38 | NM_024429.1 | 328 | N-terminal domain | 1–33 | ? | Muscle? | 7q36 |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 1 | 34–169 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 2 | 190–315 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
| $\gamma_3$ | Long | 54 | NP_059127 | 489 | N-terminal domain | 1–197 | ? | Skeletal muscle | 2q35 |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 1 | 198–333 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 2 | 358–479 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  | Short | 52 | Q9UGI9 | 464 | N-terminal domain | 1–171 | ? | Skeletal muscle | 2q35 |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 1 | 172–308 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Bateman domain 2 | 329–454 | AMP/ATP binding |  |  |

All data are for human proteins. Mass refers to the mass predicted from the amino acid sequence: some subunits migrate anomalously on SDS-PAGE, eg, $\beta_1$ migrates more slowly than $\gamma_1$, even though it is smaller by sequence analysis. This may be attributable to covalent modifications; $\beta_1$ (and possibly $\beta_2$) is myristoylated at the N terminus, ${}^{149}$ whereas the $\alpha$ and $\beta$ subunits can be phosphorylated at multiple sites. ${}^{12,149,150}$ The 2 variants of $\gamma_2$ and $\gamma_3$ appear to be attributable to alternate splicing.

complex that is regulated by AMP, ${}^{34}$ whereas the central conserved region is recognized to be a glycogen-binding domain. ${}^{34,35}$ The crystal structure of the glycogen-binding domain of $\beta_1$ was recently determined, ${}^{36}$ but the functions of this domain remain unclear, although it is present in the $\beta$ subunits of all eukaryotic species.

The $\gamma$ subunits ($\gamma_1$, $\gamma_2$, and $\gamma_3$) contain variable N-terminal regions followed by 4 tandem repeats of a 60-aa sequence termed by Bateman as a CBS motif. ${}^{37}$ It is now known that these act in pairs to form 2 domains (now termed Bateman domains), each of which binds one molecule of AMP (Figure 1). ${}^{38}$ Mutations in these domains reduce both AMP binding and AMP activation, proving that these are the regulatory binding sites for the nucleotides. ${}^{38}$ The Bateman domains also antagonistically bind ATP with a lower affinity than AMP, ${}^{38}$ consistent with previous findings that high concentrations of ATP oppose activation of the AMPK complex by AMP. ${}^{39}$ The discovery that there were 2 binding domains for AMP or ATP was unexpected. The tandem domains bind AMP with a high degree of cooperativity ${}^{38}$ suggesting that the second site is inaccessible until AMP has bound at the first. This represents yet another potential mechanism to increase the sensitivity of the AMPK system to small changes in AMP.

Regulation of AMPK by Metabolic Stress

Any metabolic stress that inhibits ATP production, or that accelerates ATP consumption, will tend to increase the cellular ADP:ATP ratio, which will be amplified by adenylate kinase into a much larger increase in the AMP:ATP ratio, with consequent activation of AMPK. 2-Deoxyglucose, which depletes ATP by being converted to the nonmetabolizable 2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate, has sometimes been used to activate AMPK. ${}^{40}$ Not surprisingly, AMPK can also be activated by metabolic poisons that inhibit ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation, such as arsenite, oligomycin, antimycin A, azide, or dinitrophenol, ${}^{41-43}$ or by ischemia ${}^{44}$ or hypoxia. ${}^{45}$ Although the effect of ischemia is relevant to cardiovascular disease, these are all rather nonphysiological stresses. However, a more physiological stress that activates AMPK in skeletal muscle is exercise or contraction, ${}^{46-48}$ and, as discussed further below, it seems likely that AMPK activation underlies many of the health benefits of regular exercise. Although there is currently no satisfactory method to measure changes in AMP during exercise in vivo, electrical stimulation of mouse hindlimb muscle in situ does cause small increases in the cellular AMP:ATP ratio. ${}^{49}$ This is

almost certainly responsible for the accompanying activation of AMPK, because no activation occurs if the same experiment is performed in mice with a muscle-specific knockout of the upstream kinase LKB1,^{49} which is known in other cells to be required for the AMPK system to respond to changes in AMP.^{13} Intriguingly, the changes in AMP:ATP ratio in response to electrical stimulation are significantly larger in the muscles from the knockout mice,^{49} confirming the proposed role of AMPK in maintenance of cellular energy homeostasis.

In many tissues and organs, such as the heart, the AMPK system may be significantly activated by hypoxia only during pathological ischemic episodes, but there is evidence that, in certain specialized oxygen-sensing cells, the system is important in the response to more physiological variations in oxygen tension. These include the glomus cells in the carotid body, which sense the oxygen level in arterial blood supplying the brain, and also pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells.^{50} In glomus cells, hypoxia causes opening of voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels and consequent entry of extracellular Ca²⁺, leading to release of neurotransmitters that cause firing of afferent neurones, triggering increased breathing. In pulmonary artery smooth muscle, hypoxia triggers release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores, causing contraction of the muscle. This contrasts with the behavior of the smooth muscle in other arteries, which relax in response to hypoxia to supply more blood to the hypoxic tissue. However, this unusual behavior makes physiological sense in the pulmonary circulation, because it ensures that blood flow is diverted away from poorly oxygenated areas of the lung in favor of well-oxygenated areas. In collaboration with the groups of Evans and Peers, our laboratory has recently shown that AMPK is activated by changes in AMP:ATP that occur in response to hypoxia in pulmonary artery smooth muscle.^{31} Unfortunately, glomus cells are too small to allow bulk measurements of AMP and ATP using the same methodology. However, AMPK-activating drugs (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside [AICAR] or phenformin; see below) precisely mimic all of the effects of hypoxia in both the carotid body glomus cell and in pulmonary artery smooth muscle, suggesting that hypoxia is detected by AMPK as it senses the changes in AMP:ATP ratio caused by inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation in these cells.^{31}

As mentioned in the introduction, in lower eukaryotes such as the yeast *S. cerevisiae*, the primary role of the AMPK homolog seems to be in the response to glucose starvation. Most mammalian cells express glucose transporters and hexokinase isoforms that have a very low *K*ₘ for glucose, so that the rate of ATP synthesis from glucose only drops when blood glucose falls to pathologically low levels. However, just as there are specialized oxygen-sensing cells in the carotid body and pulmonary arteries, so too are there specialized glucose-sensing cells, including the β cells in pancreatic islets that release insulin and neurones in the hypothalamus of the brain that control feeding behavior. These cells express isoforms of glucose transporter (GLUT2) and hexokinase (hexokinase IV, glucokinase) with a much higher *K*ₘ for glucose, so that the rate of ATP synthesis falls in response to decreases in blood glucose within the physiological range.

Consequently, AMPK in these cells is regulated by physiological variations in blood glucose. Thus, in cell lines derived from rodent pancreatic β cells, AMPK is activated by low glucose and inhibited by high glucose,^{51,52} whereas, in fasted mice, intracerebroventricular injection of glucose, or refeeding of the mice, inhibits the α₂ isoform of AMPK in the hypothalamus.^{53} Moreover, the known downstream consequences of lowering external glucose in both cell types, ie, decreased insulin secretion (β cells) and increased feeding behavior (hypothalamus), can be mimicked by activation of AMPK at these sites, either by pharmacological or molecular biological interventions.^{51–55} Thus, an ancient signaling pathway involved in the response to glucose starvation in single-celled eukaryotes responds to the same signal in multicellular eukaryotes, but its role has been adapted to control complex processes such as hormone release and feeding behavior.

# Regulation of AMPK by Hormones, Cytokines, and Other Extracellular Ligands

The AMPK system is found in all present-day single-celled eukaryotes and is therefore likely to have evolved long before multicellular organisms, and the hormones and cytokines that help to integrate their functions, had developed. Nevertheless, recently it has become clear that hormones and cytokines have learnt how to exploit the cell signaling capabilities of the AMPK system. The first hints of this came with findings that AMPK complexes in CHO cells stably expressing receptors coupled via the G protein Gq, such as those for platelet-activating factor, epinephrine (*α*₁b), or bradykinin (B₂), were activated by stimulation of the receptor with the appropriate ligand.^{56} Because Gq couples these receptors to phospholipase C, triggering production of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate and Ca²⁺ release, it seems likely that the activation of AMPK in these systems is triggered by phosphorylation by CaMKKβ, although this has not yet been demonstrated conclusively. However, in human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells Heller and colleagues^{57} have provided evidence that thrombin (also known to act through a Gq-coupled receptor) stimulates AMPK through the Ca²⁺-mediated pathway. This pathway also appears to operate in other cells of the endothelial/hematopoietic lineage, such as T lymphocytes. With Cantrell and colleagues, we have recently shown that AMPK is dramatically but transiently activated when quiescent T cells are stimulated via the antigen receptor, peaking at 1 minute and returning to baseline by 60 minutes. A variety of evidence suggest that this activation is mediated by the Ca²⁺/CaMKKβ pathway.^{58} Quiescent T cells have a very limited energy turnover but when stimulated, they need to generate a considerable amount of ATP for the rapid growth and proliferation that follows. We speculate that activation of AMPK allows them to rapidly switch on catabolic, ATP-generating processes to anticipate this demand. However, there is now much evidence that a high AMPK activity also represses cell growth and proliferation (see below); therefore, it may be necessary for AMPK activity to return to baseline values before T cell proliferation can commence.

Considerable excitement was generated by the discovery in the 1990s of adipokines (cytokines released by adipocytes) that control whole-body energy homeostasis, especially leptin.

and adiponectin. Leptin, the product of the obese gene (ob), appears to represent a signal that stores of fat are adequate, and exerts a feedback inhibition of food intake via effects on hypothalamic neurones that express the leptin receptor.⁵⁹ However, as well as inhibiting energy intake, leptin also stimulates energy expenditure by promoting uptake and oxidation of glucose⁶⁰ and fatty acids⁶¹ in skeletal muscle. Kahn and colleagues⁶² reported that the α₂ isoform of AMPK was activated in muscle by leptin injection in vivo in rats, accounting for its ability to stimulate these pathways. There appeared to be 2 effects: a rapid effect that was a direct effect on the muscle itself; and a longer-term effect that appeared to be a primary action of leptin on the hypothalamus, with a secondary effect on muscle being mediated by the sympathetic nervous system. Remarkably, the same group subsequently provided evidence⁵³ that leptin inhibited AMPK-α₂ activity in the arcuate and paraventricular regions of the hypothalamus of fasted mice. Along with leptin, other known anorexigenic agents, including insulin and a melanocortin receptor agonist, inhibit AMPK-α₂ in the paraventricular region, whereas agouti-related protein, an orexigenic agent, increased α₂ activity in the same region in fed mice. Other orexigenic agents, such as the gut hormone ghrelin⁵⁵ and the cannabinoids,⁶³ have also been reported to activate AMPK in the hypothalamus. Inhibition of AMPK appears to be necessary for the anorexigenic effects of leptin, because adenoviral expression of an activated form of AMPK in the hypothalamus blocked the effects of leptin.⁵³

AMPK also appears to mediate many of the effects of adiponectin. This adipokine (also known as ACRP30⁶⁴) was discovered as a protein secreted into the blood by adipocytes, although, paradoxically, its plasma concentration is reduced in obese rodents and humans.⁶⁵,⁶⁶ AMPK has been reported to be activated by adiponectin in skeletal muscle, where it stimulates glucose uptake and fatty acid oxidation, and in liver, where it inhibits expression of gluconeogenic genes.⁶⁷,⁶⁸ Experiments with liver-specific expression of dominant negative mutants⁶⁷ and knockouts⁶⁹ show that liver AMPK, and especially the α₂ isoform, is necessary for the ability of adiponectin to lower blood glucose.

### AMPK-Activating Drugs and Identification of Metabolic Pathways Regulated by AMPK

Many of the metabolic pathways regulated by AMPK were originally identified by incubating cells, or injecting whole animals, with the adenosine analog AICAR. AICAR is taken up into cells by adenosine transporters⁷⁰ and converted by adenosine kinase⁷¹ to the phosphorylated nucleotide ZMP (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside), which mimics all 3 effects of AMP on the AMPK system.³⁹ Another pharmacological tool for AMPK activation became available with the discovery that the antihyperglycemic drug metformin, currently prescribed to more than 120 million people with type 2 diabetes worldwide, activates AMPK both in intact cells and in vivo.⁷² A recent mouse gene targeting study involving a liver-specific knockout of LKB1, which prevents activation of AMPK by metformin in that tissue, suggested that activation of liver AMPK is required for the plasma glucose-lowering effects of metformin.⁷³ Thus, the major

effect of metformin seems to be inhibition of liver gluconeogenesis. Although one might expect that metformin would also activate AMPK and stimulate glucose uptake in skeletal muscle and other tissues, this may not occur in vivo because the concentrations the drug reaches in the peripheral circulation (as opposed to the portal vein, which supplies the liver direct from the gut) may not be sufficiently high to yield significant AMPK activation in those tissues. However, metformin can be used to activate AMPK in muscle and other cells in culture or ex vivo. The related biguanide drug phenformin, which is no longer used for treatment in humans because of complications resulting from lactic acidosis, is a more rapid and potent activator of AMPK in cultured cells.¹³

The use of AICAR and the biguanides has been extremely useful in the AMPK field, but like any pharmacological tools, results obtained using them must be interpreted with care. For example, the active derivative of AICAR, ZMP, also modulates other AMP-sensitive enzymes, such as glycogen phosphorylase⁷⁴ and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase.⁷¹ AICAR, itself, can compete with released adenosine for reuptake into cells, and if this allows adenosine to accumulate in the medium this can exert effects via adenosine receptors.⁷⁰ In the case of biguanides, they do not directly activate AMPK in cell-free assays⁴² but instead appear to inhibit complex I of the respiratory chain,⁷⁵,⁷⁶ leading to an increase in cellular AMP:ATP ratio.¹⁹ Effects of biguanides could therefore be secondary effects of ATP depletion, rather than effects of AMPK activation per se. As an excellent example of these problems, Hue and colleagues have recently shown that effects of AICAR and metformin on the function of glucokinase in hepatocytes are still observed in cells from knockout mice lacking both AMPK catalytic subunits.⁷⁷ Another example is provided by findings that, although AICAR was originally reported to inhibit autophagy in isolated hepatocytes,⁷⁸ experiments involving expression of dominant negative mutants, or the use of compound C, now suggest that AMPK activation stimulates this process.⁷⁹ Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor developed by Merck⁷² that has recently become commercially available, can be used as an AMPK inhibitor in intact cells, although its selectivity for AMPK remains uncertain.

These considerations highlight the increasing importance of confirming that the effects of pharmacological agents are indeed mediated by AMPK using molecular biological methods, such as the expression of constitutively active or dominant negative AMPK mutants,⁸⁰,⁸¹ small interference RNAs targeted at AMPK or, best of all, AMPK or LKB1 knockouts.⁷⁷ Another important approach is to identify the direct target for AMPK that mediates the effect on the pathway or process, identify the sites phosphorylated on that target, and confirm that phosphorylation of those sites correlates with AMPK activation. The use of Western blotting with phospho-specific antibodies is the usual method to achieve this, and phospho-specific antibodies against Thr172 on the AMPK-α subunits are often now used as a surrogate for measuring AMPK activity. An even more convincing approach is to show that the effect is lost in knock-in mice or cells expressing the target protein mutated at the AMPK sites.

Towler and Hardie AMPK in Metabolic Control and Insulin Signaling 333

TABLE 2. Metabolic Pathways Regulated by AMPK

| Metabolic Pathway       | Effect | Immediate Target                     | Immediate Effects                                                                 | Tissue               | Reference |
|-------------------------|--------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|-----------|
| Glucose uptake          | ↑      | AS160?                              | ↑ GLUT 4 translocation                                                          | Muscle               | 144, 151, 152 |
| Glucose uptake          | ↑      | ?                                   | ↑ GLUT 4 expression                                                             | Muscle               | 128, 153   |
| Glucose uptake          | ↑      | ?                                   | ↑ GLUT 1 activity                                                              | Many cells           | 154       |
| Glycolysis              | ↑      | Cardiac 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase    | ↑ Activity, ↑ fructose-2,6-bisphosphate                                         | Cardiac myocytes     | 45, 155    |
| Glycolysis              | ↑      | Inducible 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase | ↑ Activity, ↑ fructose-2,6-bisphosphate                                         | Monocytes, macrophages | 45, 155    |
| Fatty acid oxidation    | ↑      | ACC-2                               | ↓ Activity, ↓ malonyl-CoA, ↑ CPT 1 activity                                      | Liver, muscle, others | 144, 156   |
| Fatty acid synthesis    | ↓      | ACC-1                               | ↓ Activity                                                                     | All cells?           | 41, 157    |
| Fatty acid synthesis    | ↓      | *SREBP-1c?, HNF-4α?                 | ↓ Expression ACC1, fatty acid synthase                                           | Liver                | 72, 158–160 |
| Cholesterol synthesis   | ↓      | HMG-CoA reductase                   | ↓ Activity                                                                     | Liver                | 40, 161    |
| Glycogen synthesis      | ↓      | Muscle glycogen synthase            | ↓ Activity                                                                     | Muscle               | 162, 163   |
| Gluconeogenesis         | ↓      | TORC2, others?                      | ↓ Expression of PEPCK, glucose-6-phosphatase                                     | Liver                | 108, 129   |
| Protein synthesis       | ↓      | Elongation factor-2 kinase*         | ↓ Translation elongation                                                       | All cells?           | 164       |
| Protein synthesis       | ↓      | TSC2                               | ↓ TOR, ↓ S6K1, ↓ translation initiation                                          | All cells?           | 85        |
| Autophagy               | ↑      | TSC2?                               | ↓ TOR                                                                           | All cells?           | 79        |
| Glucose uptake          | ↓      | GLUT4?                             | ↓ Insulin stimulation                                                           | Adipocytes           | 165       |
| Lipolysis               | ↓      | Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL)      | ↓ Adrenergic stimulation of lipolysis                                            | Adipocytes           | 39, 130, 131 |

This is not a comprehensive summary of all literature in the field but a list of effects for which, in our opinion, there is reasonable evidence of a role for AMPK. AS160 indicates Akt substrate of 160 kDa; CPT1, carnitine palmitoyl-CoA transferase-1; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; S6K1, ribosomal protein S6 kinase-1. *Although a change in function of these proteins are among the first known events downstream of AMPK activation, it has not been conclusively shown that they are direct targets of AMPK.

method was first demonstrated in a landmark study of HMG-CoA reductase phosphorylation published in 1993.40 Although there are very few pathways thought to be regulated by AMPK for which all of these criteria have been met, those with reasonably convincing evidence for an effect of AMPK are listed in Table 2. In general, AMPK switches on catabolic pathways that generate ATP (e.g., glucose uptake, glycolysis) while switching off ATP-consuming anabolic pathways (fatty acid, cholesterol, glycogen, and protein synthesis). Figure 2 summarizes the major effects of AMPK activation on glucose and lipid metabolism in liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. As well as its acute and long-term effects on metabolism, for which it is best known, it is becoming increasingly clear that AMPK is involved in regulating other cellular processes. For example, if cells are running short of ATP, it does not make sense for them to grow and proliferate. AMPK inhibits cell growth and proliferation by inhibiting both the activity and expression of biosynthetic enzymes involved in lipid, carbohydrate, and protein synthesis, and also by switching off the target-of-rapamycin (TOR) → S6 kinase I pathway,82–84 which appears to be crucial in the regulation of cell growth and cell size. AMPK appears to achieve this by phosphorylation of tuberous sclerosis complex-2 (TSC2) (tuberin), an upstream regulator of TOR.85 AMPK activation also halts progress through the cell cycle at the G1→S phase transition, which is associated with accumulation of the tumor suppressor p53 and of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21 and p27, which act downstream of p53.86–89 Under these conditions, p53 becomes phosphorylated on Ser15,86,88 although it is not clear that this is a direct phosphorylation. Another mechanism potentially contributing to cell cycle arrest is that AMPK activation reduces the cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio of the RNA-binding protein HuR, reducing its ability to stabilize mRNAs encoding critical cell cycle regulators, including cyclins.90 AMPK activation also has complex effects on apoptosis. In some situations, it prevents the process,91–94 whereas in others it induces it.95–100 Successful apoptosis requires ATP, and an explanation for these conflicting findings may be that AMPK activation sometimes allows cells to recover from an energy crisis that would otherwise have triggered cell death. However, if the cells go past the “point of no return,” AMPK may become proapoptotic.

AMPK also has a role in cell senescence. Increased cellular AMP:ATP and AMPK activity appear to contribute to the senescence observed in human fibroblasts after a high num-

TABLE 3. Protein Targets Directly Phosphorylated by AMPK

| Protein Target                     | Site   | Effect on Protein Function | Pathway                  | Tissue               | Effect on Pathway         | Reference |
|------------------------------------|--------|---------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------|---------------------------|-----------|
| Lipid metabolism                   |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| ACC-1                              | S80    | ↓ Activity                | Fatty acid synthesis     | All cells?           | ↓ Fatty acid synthesis    | 166       |
| ACC-2                              | S221   | ↓ Activity                | Fatty acid oxidation     | Muscle, liver        | ↑ Fatty acid oxidation    | 156       |
| HMG-CoA reductase                  | S872   | ↓ Activity                | Isoprenoid synthesis     | Liver                | ↓ Cholesterol synthesis   | 161       |
| Hormone-sensitive lipase           | S554   | ↓ Activity                | Lipolysis                | Adipose tissue       | ↓ Lipolysis               | 131, 133  |
| Carbohydrate metabolism            |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| Glycogen synthase                  | S8     | ↓ Activity                | Glycogen synthesis       | Muscle               | ↓ Glycogen synthesis      | 162, 163  |
| 6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase            |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| Cardiac isoform                    | S466   | ↑ Activity                | Regulation of glycolysis | Heart                | ↑ Glycolysis              | 45        |
| Inducible isoform                  | S461   | ↑ Activity                | Regulation of glycolysis | Monocytes, macrophages | ↑ Glycolysis              | 155       |
| Cell signaling                     |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| Endothelial NO synthase            | S1177  | ↑ Activity                | NO production            | Endothelial cells    | ↑ NO, increased blood flow? | 113       |
| TSC2 (tuberin)                     | S1387  | ↑ Rheb-GAP                | Regulation of TOR        | All cells?           | ↓ Cell growth, protein synthesis | 85        |
| Insulin receptor substrate-1       | S794   | ↑ PI3K binding            | Insulin signaling        | All cells?           | ↑ Insulin signaling?      | 167       |
| AS160                             | ?      | ↓ Rab-GAP?                | GLUT 4 trafficking       | Muscle               | ↑ Glucose uptake          | 123       |
| Transcription                      |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| p300                              | S89    | ↓ Interaction             | Gene expression          | All cells?           | ↓ Transcription by nuclear receptors | 168       |
| HNF4-α                            | S313   | ↓ DNA binding; ↑ degradation | Gene expression          | Liver, others        | ↓ Transcription           | 107       |
| ChREBP                            | S568   | ↓ DNA binding             | Gene expression          | Liver                | ↓ Transcription, L-pyruvate kinase gene | 106       |
| TORC2                             | S171   | ↑ Cytoplasmic localization | Gene expression          | Liver                | ↓ Transcription, gluconeogenic genes | 108       |
| Ion transport/ion balance          |        |                           |                          |                      |                           |           |
| CFTR                              | ?      | ↓ Channel opening         | Ion transport, fluid secretion | Airway, gut, epithelium | ↓ Ion transport           | 32        |

PI3K indicates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.

[eNOS]) have the basic-hydrophobic-basic motif that usually occurs at the P-6, P-5, and P-4 or P-3 positions displaced by 1 residue, ie, at P-5, P-4, and P-3. It may be significant that in both these cases the 2 basic residues at P-5 and P-3 are arginine. The side chain of arginine can probably position its positively charged nitrogen atoms with more flexibility than either lysine or histidine. It is conceivable that this, coupled with the large size of the 2 acidic patches on the kinase domain that bind the basic side chains, provides sufficient flexibility to allow a different spacing of the basic residues from the phosphoacceptor. This flexibility means that predicting phosphorylation sites for AMPK from raw sequence data are not straightforward.

Many of the direct targets for AMPK identified in Table 3 and Figure 3 are transcription factors (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 [HNF4-α], ChREBP) or transcriptional coactivators (p300, TORC2), and it is now clear that mammalian AMPK has many effects on transcription, as has always been known to be the case for the yeast homolog. In most of the cases listed in Table 3, phosphorylation by AMPK inhibits transcription, either by inhibiting DNA binding (ChREBP, HNF4-α), triggering degradation (HNF4-α), or promoting binding of 14-3-3 proteins, thus causing cytoplasmic sequestration (TORC2). However, AMPK activation can also increase gene expression, particularly in skeletal muscle. In a microarray study in mice, transgenic expression of a dominant negative AMPK mutant in muscle reduced AMPK activity and caused increased expression of 234 genes and decreased expression of 130 genes. AMPK activation has also been shown to downregulate expression of the transcription factor SREBP-1c (sterol response element binding protein-1c) in liver, and upregulate expression of the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPAR-α) and the coactivator PPAR-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) in muscle, although in these cases, this does not appear to be attributable to direct phosphorylation.

## Role of AMPK in the Vasculature

The role of AMPK in the heart is discussed in another article in this issue, so will not be discussed in detail here. In endothelial cells, AMPK activation has the same effects on metabolism as it does in other cells. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, AMPK can be activated using AICAR or glucose deprivation, and when activated it, stimulates acetyl-CoA carboxylase phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation. One AMPK target that may be particularly important in the circulatory system is the endothelial isoform of NO synthase (eNOS). Phosphorylation of Ser1177 on eNOS increases the \(V_{\text{max}}\) of the enzyme and its sensitivity to \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\) and calmodulin. Because the classical effect of NO is to relax the smooth muscle lining blood vessels, it is conceivable that this is a mechanism to increase blood flow to hypoxic tissues. Consistent with this, Salt and colleagues have shown that activation of AMPK in human aorta endothelial cells causes increased phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser1177 and increased NO production. AMPK is also activated by hypoxia in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), and adenoviral expression of a dominant negative AMPK mutant in those cells blocked increased eNOS

phosphorylation at Ser1177 in response to hypoxia.¹¹⁵ However, AMPK activation does not seem to account for eNOS phosphorylation in HUVECs treated with thrombin.⁵⁷

AMPK may also be important in the process of angiogenesis. Mice with an embryonic knockout of the upstream kinase LKB1 die in mid-gestation with vascular abnormalities and abnormal expression of vascular endothelial cell growth factor.¹¹⁶ In addition, adenoviral expression of a dominant negative AMPK mutant in HUVECs inhibited their migration toward vascular endothelial cell growth factor and inhibited angiogenesis using in vitro and in vivo assays.¹¹⁵

## Interactions Between the AMPK and Insulin/Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 Signaling Pathways

The insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling pathway is activated when nutrients are available, whereas the AMPK pathway is activated when cells are starved for a carbon source. One would therefore expect these 2 pathways to oppose each other, and this is often the case. In mammals, insulin promotes lipid, protein, and glycogen synthesis, whereas AMPK inhibits these biosynthetic pathways. The effect of insulin on protein synthesis is mediated in part by activation of the TOR pathway via phosphorylation of TSC2, whereas activation of AMPK causes phosphorylation of different sites on TSC2 and inhibits TOR.⁸⁵,¹¹⁷ There also appears to be direct crosstalk between the 2 pathways. In some tissues, such as cardiac muscle, insulin antagonizes activation of AMPK,¹¹⁸,¹¹⁹ and this appears to involve activation of the protein kinase Akt (also termed protein kinase B [PKB]).¹²⁰ It has recently been proposed that this is attributable to phosphorylation by Akt of the AMPK α subunits on Ser485 or Ser491 (equivalent residues on the α₁ or α₂ isoforms), which antagonizes AMPK activation via phosphorylation at Thr172 by LKB1.¹²¹ Whether this mechanism operates in other tissues remains unclear.

In other cases, the insulin and AMPK signaling pathways work in the same direction, particularly in processes that regulate plasma glucose levels. In skeletal muscle, both insulin and AMPK activation stimulate glucose uptake by increased translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane, although the subsequent fate of the glucose is different (glycogen synthesis in the case of insulin, which is anabolic; glycolysis/oxidation in the case of AMPK, which is catabolic). The 2 pathways appear to converge on the phosphorylation of AS160,¹²²,¹²³ a protein with a Rab-GTPase–activating protein (Rab-GAP) domain that is involved in regulation of GLUT4 translocation. Activation of AMPK plays a major part in the well-known ability of muscle contraction to stimulate glucose uptake, because in mice overexpressing a dominant negative AMPK mutant,⁸⁰ and in a skeletal muscle–specific knockout of the upstream kinase LKB1,⁴⁹ the effects of contraction on glucose uptake are reduced. There is also evidence that AMPK activation may be involved in the ability of a single bout of acute exercise to increase the insulin sensitivity of glucose uptake.¹²⁴ The mechanism for this effect remains unclear, although a possibility is that it is attributable to the ability of AMPK to inhibit the TOR pathway because the latter, which is activated by

insulin, is believed to exert a feedback regulation on insulin signaling by downregulating IRS1.¹²⁵⁻¹²⁷ AMPK activation may also be involved in the effects of repeated exercise (ie, training) to improve insulin-sensitive glucose uptake, because of its ability to increase expression of GLUT4¹²⁸ and perhaps other effects.

A second case in which insulin and AMPK act in the same direction occurs in the liver, in which both repress the expression of enzymes of gluconeogenesis, such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase.¹²⁹ It makes obvious sense that insulin, a hormone released in response to high blood glucose, should repress hepatic glucose production, whereas in the case of AMPK it may perhaps have evolved as among its antianabolic actions. Gene repression by AMPK is thought to occur via phosphorylation and consequent cytoplasmic sequestration of the transcriptional coactivator TORC2.¹⁰⁸ Repression of gluconeogenesis appears to be the major cause of the plasma glucose-lowering effects of the adipokine, adiponectin, and the antidiabetic drug metformin on plasma glucose levels, and in both cases, there is evidence that the mechanism involves activation of AMPK.⁶⁷,⁷³

A final case in which insulin and AMPK act in the same direction occurs in adipocytes, where both suppress activation of hormone-sensitive lipase, and hence lipolysis, by cAMP-elevating agonists.³⁹,¹³⁰,¹³¹ The 2 pathways act by different mechanisms, with insulin causing phosphorylation and activation of phosphodiesterase 3B by Akt, thus lowering cAMP,¹³² whereas AMPK phosphorylates hormone-sensitive lipase at a site (Ser565) that antagonizes activation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase.¹³³ In the case of insulin, this can be regarded as among its anticatabolic actions, but the reason why AMPK should suppress lipolysis requires more explanation. If fatty acids released by lipolysis are not removed from the cell rapidly enough, they are known to recycle into triglyceride, thus consuming ATP.¹³⁴ Inhibition of lipolysis by AMPK has been proposed¹³⁵ as a mechanism to limit this recycling, ensuring that the rate of lipolysis does not exceed the rate at which fatty acids can be removed or metabolized by other routes, such as fatty acid oxidation.

The parallel effects of insulin and AMPK on muscle glucose uptake and hepatic glucose production formed part of the basis for the idea first proposed in 1999¹³⁶ that activators of AMPK could be used to treat type 2 diabetes and perhaps obesity. This was initially tested successfully using AICA riboside in animal models such as genetically obese or fat-fed rodents,¹³⁷⁻¹⁴⁰ and findings that activation of AMPK underlies the glucose-lowering effects of metformin⁷²,⁷³ provided a “proof-of-concept” for the idea in humans. Intriguingly, in at least 3 animal models that are resistant to diet-induced obesity, ie, mice overexpressing the uncoupling proteins UCP1¹⁴¹ or UCP3,¹⁴² or mice with a knockout of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1,¹⁴³ there appears to be a persistent activation of AMPK in the affected cell types.

The ability of AMPK to inhibit adipocyte lipolysis and to stimulate fatty acid oxidation in many tissues, both acutely via phosphorylation of ACC2¹⁴⁴ and chronically by upregulating PGC-1α and mitochondrial biogenesis,¹¹⁰,¹⁴⁵ is also likely to be beneficial in insulin resistance and type 2

diabetes. There is much evidence that these conditions are partly caused by abnormal accumulation of triglyceride in muscle and liver and that this can be at least partly caused by a defect in mitochondrial function.¹⁴⁶ Interestingly, incubation of cultured cells with high levels of the saturated fatty acid palmitate affected the integrity of the endoplasmic reticulum and led to cell death, and this was ameliorated using AICAR to activate AMPK and stimulate fatty acid oxidation.¹⁴⁷ One caveat is that it has also been proposed that high rates of fatty acid oxidation can be damaging because of oxidative stress, for example, in ischemic heart following reperfusion⁴⁴ and in endothelial cells.¹⁴⁸ It will be important to establish whether any adverse effects of AMPK activation in certain cell types are outweighed by the overall improvements in metabolic status.

# Conclusions and Perspectives

Based on the known effects of AMPK on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, it is already clear that the system is a major player in the development and/or treatment of obesity, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome, which have reached epidemic proportions in modern industrialized society. AMPK is probably involved in the beneficial effects of regular exercise on these conditions and now appears to mediate many of the effects of the adipokines leptin and adiponectin, as well as the antidiabetic drug metformin. AMPK also appears to be involved in cancer because of the ability of the LKB1→AMPK pathway to act as a tumor suppressor, together with potential roles of this pathway in angiogenesis, apoptosis, and senescence of tumors. There are also now indications the AMPK system is involved in the effects of caloric restriction on life span. All of these represent fruitful areas for further investigation.

# Sources of Funding

Supported by a Programme Grant from the Wellcome Trust and the EXGENESIS Integrated project (LSHM-CT-2004 to 005272) from the European Commission.

# Disclosures

None.

# References

1. Hardie DG, Scott JW, Pan DA, Hudson ER. Management of cellular energy by the AMP-activated protein kinase system. *FEBS Lett.* 2003; 546:113–120.
2. Hardie DG, Carling D, Carlson M. The AMP-activated/SNF1 protein kinase subfamily: metabolic sensors of the eukaryotic cell? *Ann Rev Biochem.* 1998;67:821–855.
3. Schmidt MC, McCartney RR. β-Subunits of Snf1 kinase are required for kinase function and substrate definition. *EMBO J.* 2000;19:4936–4943.
4. Thelander M, Olsson T, Ronne H. Snf1-related protein kinase 1 is needed for growth in a normal day-night light cycle. *EMBO J.* 2004; 23:1900–1910.
5. Carlson CA, Kim KH. Regulation of hepatic acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. *J Biol Chem.* 1973; 248:378–380.
6. Beg ZH, Allmann DW, Gibson DM. Modulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme: a reductase activity with cAMP and with protein fractions of rat liver cytosol. *Biochem Biophys Res Comm.* 1973;54:1362–1369.
7. Yeh LA, Lee KH, Kim KH. Regulation of rat liver acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Regulation of phosphorylation and inactivation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase by the adenylate energy charge. *J Biol Chem.* 1980;255: 2308–2314.
8. Ferrer A, Caelles C, Massot N, Hegardt FG. Activation of rat liver cytosolic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase kinase by adenosine 5′-monophosphate. *Biochem Biophys Res Comm.* 1985;132: 497–504.
9. Carling D, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. A common bicyclic protein kinase cascade inactivates the regulatory enzymes of fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis. *FEBS Lett.* 1987;223:217–222.
10. Sim ATR, Hardie DG. The low activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase in basal and glucagon-stimulated hepatocytes is due to phosphorylation by the AMP-activated protein kinase and not cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. *FEBS Lett.* 1988;233:294–298.
11. Hawley SA, Selbert MA, Goldstein EG, Edelman AM, Carling D, Hardie DG. 5′-AMP activates the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade, and Ca²⁺/calmodulin the calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I cascade, via three independent mechanisms. *J Biol Chem.* 1995;270: 27186–27191.
12. Hawley SA, Davison M, Woods A, Davies SP, Beri RK, Carling D, Hardie DG. Characterization of the AMP-activated protein kinase kinase from rat liver, and identification of threonine-172 as the major site at which it phosphorylates and activates AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem.* 1996;271:27879–27887.
13. Hawley SA, Boudeau J, Reid JL, Mustard KJ, Udd L, Makela TP, Alessi DR, Hardie DG. Complexes between the LKB1 tumor suppressor, STRADα/β and MO25α/β are upstream kinases in the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade. *J Biol.* 2003;2:28.
14. Woods A, Johnstone SR, Dickerson K, Leiper FC, Fryer LG, Neumann D, Schlattnner U, Wallimann T, Carlson M, Carling D. LKB1 is the upstream kinase in the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade. *Curr Biol.* 2003;13:2004–2008.
15. Scott JW, Norman DG, Hawley SA, Kontogiannis L, Hardie DG. Protein kinase substrate recognition studied using the recombinant catalytic domain of AMP-activated protein kinase and a model substrate. *J Mol Biol.* 2002;317:309–323.
16. Davies SP, Helps NR, Cohen PTW, Hardie DG. 5′-AMP inhibits dephosphorylation, as well as promoting phosphorylation, of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Studies using bacterially expressed human protein phosphatase-2Ca and native bovine protein phosphatase-2Ac. *FEBS Lett.* 1995;377:421–425.
17. Hardie DG, Salt IP, Hawley SA, Davies SP. AMP-activated protein kinase: an ultrasensitive system for monitoring cellular energy charge. *Biochem J.* 1999;338:717–722.
18. Hardie DG, Hawley SA. AMP-activated protein kinase: the energy charge hypothesis revisited. *Bioessays.* 2001;23:1112–1119.
19. Hawley SA, Pan DA, Mustard KJ, Ross L, Bain J, Edelman AM, Frenguelli BG, Hardie DG. Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta is an alternative upstream kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. *Cell Metab.* 2005;2:9–19.
20. Woods A, Dickerson K, Heath R, Hong SP, Momcilovic M, Johnstone SR, Carlson M, Carling D. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta acts upstream of AMP-activated protein kinase in mammalian cells. *Cell Metab.* 2005;2:21–33.
21. Hurley RL, Anderson KA, Franzone JM, Kemp BE, Means AR, Witters LA. The Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinases are AMP-activated protein kinase kinases. *J Biol Chem.* 2005;280:29060–29066.
22. Soderling TR. The Ca-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase cascade. *Trends Biochem Sci.* 1999;24:232–236.
23. Anderson KA, Means RL, Huang QH, Kemp BE, Goldstein EG, Selbert MA, Edelman AM, Fremeau RT, Means AR. Components of a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase cascade. Molecular cloning, functional characterization and cellular localization of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase beta. *J Biol Chem.* 1998;273:31880–31889.
24. Stapleton D, Mitchelhill KI, Gao G, Widmer J, Michell BJ, Teh T, House CM, Fernandez CS, Cox T, Witters LA, Kemp BE. Mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase subfamily. *J Biol Chem.* 1996;271: 611–614.
25. Woods A, Munday MR, Scott J, Yang X, Carlson M, Carling D. Yeast SNF1 is functionally related to mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase and regulates acetyl-CoA carboxylase in vivo. *J Biol Chem.* 1994;269:19509–19515.
26. Iseli TJ, Walter M, van Denderen BJ, Katsis F, Witters LA, Kemp BE, Michell BJ, Stapleton D. AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit tethers alpha and gamma subunits via its C-terminal sequence (186–270). *J Biol Chem.* 2005;280:13395–13400.

27. Woods A, Salt I, Scott J, Hardie DG, Carling D. The α1 and α2 isoforms of the AMP-activated protein kinase have similar activities in rat liver but exhibit differences in substrate specificity in vitro. *FEBS Lett.* 1996;397:347–351.

28. Salt IP, Celler JW, Hawley SA, Prescott A, Woods A, Carling D, Hardie DG. AMP-activated protein kinase—greater AMP dependence, and preferential nuclear localization, of complexes containing the α2 isoform. *Biochem J.* 1998;334:177–187.

29. Turnley AM, Stapleton D, Mann RJ, Witters LA, Kemp BE, Bartlett PF. Cellular distribution and developmental expression of AMP-activated protein kinase isoforms in mouse central nervous system. *J Neurochem.* 1999;72:1707–1716.

30. Ai H, Ihlemann J, Hellsten Y, Lauritzen HP, Hardie DG, Galbo H, Ploug T. Effect of fiber type and nutritional state on AICAR- and contraction-stimulated glucose transport in rat muscle. *Am J Physiol.* 2002;282: E1291–E1300.

31. Evans AM, Mustard KJ, Wyatt CN, Peers C, Dipp M, Kumar P, Kinnear NP, Hardie DG. Does AMP-activated protein kinase couple inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation by hypoxia to calcium signaling in O₂-sensing cells? *J Biol Chem.* 2005;280:41504–41511.

32. Hallows KR, Kobinger GP, Wilson JM, Witters LA, Foskett JK. Physiological modulation of CFTR activity by AMP-activated protein kinase in polarized T84 cells. *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.* 2003;284: C1297–C1308.

33. Jiang R, Carlson M. The Snf1 protein kinase and its activating subunit, Snf4, interact with distinct domains of the Sip1/Sip2/Gal83 component in the kinase complex. *Mol Cell Biol.* 1997;17:2099–2106.

34. Hudson ER, Pan DA, James J, Lucocq JM, Hawley SA, Green KA, Baba O, Terashima T, Hardie DG. A novel domain in AMP-activated protein kinase causes glycogen storage bodies similar to those seen in hereditary cardiac arrhythmias. *Current Biol.* 2003;13:861–866.

35. Polekhina G, Gupta A, Michell BJ, van Denderen B, Murthy S, Feil SC, Jennings IG, Campbell DJ, Witters LA, Parker MW, Kemp BE, Stapleton D. AMPK β-Subunit targets metabolic stress-sensing to glycogen. *Current Biol.* 2003;13:867–871.

36. Polekhina G, Gupta A, van Denderen BJ, Feil SC, Kemp BE, Stapleton D, Parker MW. Structural basis for glycogen recognition by AMP-activated protein kinase. *Structure (Camb).* 2005;13:1453–1462.

37. Bateman A. The structure of a domain common to archaeabacteria and the homocystinuria disease protein. *Trends Biochem Sci.* 1997;22: 12–13.

38. Scott JW, Hawley SA, Green KA, Anis M, Stewart G, Scullion GA, Norman DG, Hardie DG. CBS domains form energy-sensing modules whose binding of adenosine ligands is disrupted by disease mutations. *J Clin Invest.* 2004;113:274–284.

39. Corton JM, Gillespie JG, Hawley SA, Hardie DG. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside: a specific method for activating AMP-activated protein kinase in intact cells? *Eur J Biochem.* 1995;229: 558–565.

40. Sato R, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. Replacement of serine-871 of hamster 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase prevents phosphorylation by AMP-activated kinase and blocks inhibition of sterol synthesis induced by ATP depletion. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 1993;90: 9261–9265.

41. Corton JM, Gillespie JG, Hardie DG. Role of the AMP-activated protein kinase in the cellular stress response. *Current Biol.* 1994;4:315–324.

42. Hawley SA, Gadalla AE, Olsen GS, Hardie DG. The anti-diabetic drug metformin activates the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade via an adenine nucleotide-independent mechanism. *Diabetes.* 2002;51: 2420–2425.

43. Witters LA, Nordlund AC, Marshall Lc. Regulation of intracellular acetyl-CoA carboxylase by ATP depletors mimics the action of the 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 1991; 181:1486–1492.

44. Kudo N, Barr AJ, Barr RL, Desai S, Lopaschuk GD. High rates of fatty acid oxidation during reperfusion of ischemic hearts are associated with a decrease in malonyl-CoA levels due to an increase in 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase inhibition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. *J Biol Chem.* 1995;270:17513–17520.

45. Marsin AS, Bertrand L, Rider MH, Deprez J, Beauloye C, Vincent MF, Van den Berghe G, Carling D, Hue L. Phosphorylation and activation of heart PFK-2 by AMPK has a role in the stimulation of glycolysis during ischaemia. *Current Biol.* 2000;10:1247–1255.

46. Fujii N, Hayashi T, Hirshman MF, Smith JT, Habinowski SA, Kaijser L, Mu J, Ljungqvist O, Birnbaum MJ, Witters LA, Thorell A, Goodyear LJ.


Exercise induces isoform-specific increase in 5′AMP-activated protein kinase activity in human skeletal muscle. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 2000;273:1150–1155.

47. Winder WW, Hardie DG. Inactivation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in muscle during exercise. *Am J Physiol.* 1996;270:E299–E304.

48. Wojtaszewski JF, Nielsen P, Hansen BF, Richter EA, Kiens B. Isoform-specific and exercise intensity-dependent activation of 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase in human skeletal muscle. *J Physiol.* 2000;528: 221–226.

49. Sakamoto K, McCarthy A, Smith D, Green KA, Hardie DG, Ashworth A, Alessi DR. Deficiency of LKB1 in skeletal muscle prevents AMPK activation and glucose uptake during contraction. *EMBO J.* 2005;24: 1810–1820.

50. Evans AM. AM. P-Activated protein kinase and the regulation of Ca2+ signalling in O2-sensing cells. *J Physiol.* 2006;574:113–123.

51. Salt IP, Johnson G, Ashcroft SJH, Hardie DG. AMP-activated protein kinase is activated by low glucose in cell lines derived from pancreatic β cells, and may regulate insulin release. *Biochem J.* 1998;335:533–539.

52. da Silva Xavier G, Leclerc I, Salt IP, Doiron B, Hardie DG, Kahn A, Rutter GA. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the regulation by glucose of islet beta cell gene expression. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 2000;97:4023–4028.

53. Minokoshi Y, Alquier T, Furukawa N, Kim YB, Lee A, Xue B, Mu J, Foufelle F, Ferre P, Birnbaum MJ, Stuck BJ, Kahn BB. AMP-kinase regulates food intake by responding to hormonal and nutrient signals in the hypothalamus. *Nature.* 2004;428:569–574.

54. da Silva Xavier G, Leclerc I, Varadi A, Tsuboi T, Moule SK, Rutter GA. Role for AMP-activated protein kinase in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and preproinsulin gene expression. *Biochem J.* 2003;371: 761–774.

55. Andersson U, Filipsson K, Abbott CR, Woods A, Smith K, Bloom SR, Carling D, Small CJ. AMP-activated protein kinase plays a role in the control of food intake. *J Biol Chem.* 2004;279:12005–12008.

56. Kishi K, Yuasa T, Minami A, Yamada M, Hagi A, Hayashi H, Kemp BE, Witters LA, Ebina Y. AMP-Activated protein kinase is activated by the stimulations of G(q)-coupled receptors. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 2000;276:16–22.

57. Stahmann N, Woods A, Carling D, Heller R. Thrombin activates AMP-activated protein kinase in endothelial cells via a pathway involving Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase beta. *Mol Cell Biol.* 2006;26:5933–5945.

58. Tamas P, Hawley SA, Clarke RG, Mustard KJ, Green K, Hardie DG, Cantrell DA. Regulation of the energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase by antigen receptor and Ca2+ in T lymphocytes. *J Exp Med.* 2006;203:1665–1670.

59. Friedman JM, Halaas JL. Leptin and the regulation of body weight in mammals. *Nature.* 1998;395:763–770.

60. Kamohara S, Burcelin R, Halaas JL, Friedman JM, Charron MJ. Acute stimulation of glucose metabolism in mice by leptin treatment. *Nature.* 1997;389:374–377.

61. Muoio DM, Dohm GL, Fiedorek FT Jr, Tapscott EB, Coleman RA. Leptin directly alters lipid partitioning in skeletal muscle. *Diabetes.* 1997;46:1360–1363.

62. Minokoshi Y, Kim YB, Peroni OD, Fryer LG, Muller C, Carling D, Kahn BB. Leptin stimulates fatty-acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase. *Nature.* 2002;415:339–343.

63. Kola B, Hubina E, Tucci SA, Kirkham TC, Garcia EA, Mitchell SE, Williams LM, Hawley SA, Hardie DG, Grossman AB, Korbonits M. Cannabinoids and ghrelin have both central and peripheral metabolic and cardiac effects via AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem.* 2005;280:25196–25201.

64. Tsao TS, Lodish HF, Fruebis J. ACRP30, a new hormone controlling fat and glucose metabolism. *Eur J Pharmacol.* 2002;440:213–221.

65. Hu E, Liang P, Spiegelman BM. AdipoQ is a novel adipose-specific gene dysregulated in obesity. *J Biol Chem.* 1996;271:10697–10703.

66. Arita Y, Kihara S, Ouchi N, Takahashi M, Maeda K, Miyagawa J, Hotta K, Shimomura I, Nakamura T, Miyaoa K, Kuriyama H, Nishida M, Yamashita S, Okubo K, Matsubara K, Muraguchi M, Ohmoto Y, Funahashi T, Matsuzawa Y. Paradoxical decrease of an adipose-specific protein, adiponectin, in obesity. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 1999; 257:79–83.

67. Yamauchi T, Kamon J, Minokoshi Y, Ito Y, Waki H, Uchida S, Yamashita S, Noda M, Kita S, Ueki K, Eto K, Akanuma Y, Froguel P, Foufelle F, Ferre P, Carling D, Kimura S, Nagai R, Kahn BB, Kadowaki
T. Adiponectin stimulates glucose utilization and fatty-acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase. *Nat Med.* 2002;6:1288–1295.

68. Tomas E, Tsao TS, Saha AK, Murrey HE, Zhang Cc C, Itani SI, Lodish HF, Ruderman NB. Enhanced muscle fat oxidation and glucose transport by ACRP30 globular domain: acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibition and AMP-activated protein kinase activation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 2002;99:16309–16313.

69. Andreelli F, Foretz M, Knauf C, Cani PD, Perrin C, Iglesias MA, Pillot B, Bado A, Tronche F, Mithieux G, Vaulont S, Burcelin R, Viollet B. Liver adenosine monophosphate-activated kinase-alpha2 catalytic subunit is a key target for the control of hepatic glucose production by adiponectin and leptin but not insulin. *Endocrinology.* 2006;147:2432–2441.

70. Gadalla AE, Pearson T, Currie AJ, Dale N, Hawley SA, Randall AD, Hardie DG, Frenguelli BG. Distinct mechanisms underlie the activation of rat brain AMP-activated protein kinase and the inhibition of excitatory synaptic transmission by AICA riboside (Acadesine) in area CA1 of rat hippocampus. *J Neurochem.* 2004;88:1272–1282.

71. Vincent MF, Marangos PJ, Gruber HE, Van den Berghe G. Inhibition by AICA riboside of gluconeogenesis in isolated rat hepatocytes. *Diabetes.* 1991;40:1259–1266.

72. Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody J, Wu M, Ventre J, Doebber T, Fujii N, Musi N, Hirshman MF, Goodyear LJ, Moller DE. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. *J Clin Invest.* 2001;108:1167–1174.

73. Shaw RJ, Lamia KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N, Depinho RA, Montminy M, Cantley LC. The kinase LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of metformin. *Science.* 2005;310:1642–1646.

74. Longnus SL, Wambolt RB, Parsons HL, Brownsey RW, Allard MF. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide 1-beta-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR) stimulates myocardial glycogenolysis by allosteric mechanisms. *Am J Physiol.* 2003;284:R936–R944.

75. El-Mir MY, Nogueira V, Fontaine E, Averet N, Rigoulet M, Leverve X. Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respiration via an indirect effect targeted on the respiratory chain complex I. *J Biol Chem.* 2000;275:223–228.

76. Owen MR, Doran E, Halestrap AP. Evidence that metformin exerts its anti-diabetic effects through inhibition of complex 1 of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. *Biochem J.* 2000;348:607–614.

77. Guigas B, Bertrand L, Taleux N, Foretz M, Wiernsperger N, Vertommen D, Andreelli F, Viollet B, Hue L. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside and metformin inhibit hepatic glucose phosphorylation by an AMP-activated protein kinase-independent effect on glucokinase translocation. *Diabetes.* 2006;55:865–874.

78. Samari HR, Seglen PO. Inhibition of hepatocytic autophagy by adenosine, aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside, and N<sub>6</sub>-mercaptopurine riboside. Evidence for involvement of AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem.* 1998;273:23758–23763.

79. Wang Z, Wilson WA, Fujino MA, Roach PJ. Antagonistic controls of autophagy and glycogen accumulation by Snflp, the yeast homolog of AMP-activated protein kinase, and the cyclin-dependent kinase Pho85p. *Mol Cell Biol.* 2001;21:5742–5752.

80. Mu J, Brozinick JT, Valladares O, Bucan M, Birnbaum MJ. A role for AMP-activated protein kinase in contraction- and hypoxia-regulated glucose transport in skeletal muscle. *Molecular Cell.* 2001;7:1085–1094.

81. Woods A, Azzout-Marniche D, Foretz M, Stein SC, Lemarchand P, Ferre P, Foufelle F, Carling D. Characterization of the role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the regulation of glucose-activated gene expression using constitutively active and dominant negative forms of the kinase. *Mol Cell Biol.* 2000;20:6704–6711.

82. Bolster DR, Crozier SJ, Kimball SR, Jefferson LS. AMP-activated protein kinase suppresses protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle through downregulated mTOR signaling. *J Biol Chem.* 2002;277:23977–23980.

83. Kimura N, Tokunaga C, Dalal S, Richardson C, Yoshino K, Hara K, Kemp BE, Witters LA, Mimura O, Yonezawa K. A possible linkage between AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling pathway. *Genes Cells.* 2003;8:65–79.

84. Krause U, Bertrand L, Hue L. Control of p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase and acetyl-CoA carboxylase by AMP-activated protein kinase and protein phosphatases in isolated hepatocytes. *Eur J Biochem.* 2002;269:3751–3759.

85. Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to control cell growth and survival. *Cell.* 2003;115:577–590.

86. Imamura K, Ogura T, Kishimoto A, Kaminishi M, Esumi H. Cell cycle regulation via p53 phosphorylation by a 5′-AMP activated protein kinase activator, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside, in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 2001;287:562–567.

87. Rattan R, Giri S, Singh AK, Singh I. 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-{beta}-D-ribofuranoside inhibits cancer cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo via AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem.* 2005;280:39582–39593.

88. Jones RG, Plas DR, Kubek S, Buzzai M, Mu J, Xu Y, Birnbaum MJ, Thompson CB. AMP-activated protein kinase induces a p53-dependent metabolic checkpoint. *Mol Cell.* 2005;18:283–293.

89. Xiang X, Saha AK, Wen R, Ruderman NB, Luo Z. AMP-activated protein kinase activators can inhibit the growth of prostate cancer cells by multiple mechanisms. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 2004;321:161–167.

90. Wang W, Fan J, Yang X, Furer-Galban S, Lopez de Silanes I, von Kobbe C, Guo J, Georas SN, Foufelle F, Hardie DG, Carling D, Gorospe M. AMP-activated kinase regulates cytoplasmic HuR. *Mol Cell Biol.* 2002;22:3425–3436.

91. Stefanelli C, Stanic I, Bonavita F, Flamigni F, Pignatti C, Guarnieri C, Calderera CM. Inhibition of glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside, a cell-permeable activator of AMP-activated protein kinase. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun.* 1998;243:821–826.

92. Blazquez C, Geelen MJ, Velasco G, Guzman M. The AMP-activated protein kinase prevents ceramide synthesis de novo and apoptosis in astrocytes. *FEBS Lett.* 2001;489:149–153.

93. Shaw RJ, Kosmatka M, Bardeesy N, Hurley RL, Witters LA, DePinho RA, Cantley LC. The tumor suppressor LKB1 kinase directly activates AMP-activated kinase and regulates apoptosis in response to energy stress. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.* 2004;101:3329–3335.

94. Ido Y, Carling D, Ruderman N. Hyperglycemia-induced apoptosis in human umbilical vein endothelial cells: inhibition by the AMP-activated protein kinase activation. *Diabetes.* 2002;51:159–167.

95. Campas C, Lopez JM, Santidrian AF, Barragan M, Bellosillo B, Colomer D, Gil J. Acadesine activates AMPK and induces apoptosis in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells but not in T lymphocytes. *Blood.* 2003;101:3674–3680.

96. Meisse D, Van de Castelee M, Beauloye C, Hainault I, Kefas B, Rider M, Foufelle F, Hue L. Sustained activation of AMP-activated protein kinase induces c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation and apoptosis in liver cells. *FEBS Lett.* 2002;526:38–42.

97. Kefas BA, Cai Y, Ling Z, Heimberg H, Hue L, Pipeleers D, Van De Casteele MAM. P-Activated protein kinase can induce apoptosis of insulin-producing MIN6 cells through stimulation of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase. *J Mol Endocrinol.* 2003;30:151–161.

98. Kefas BA, Heimberg H, Vaulont S, Meisse D, Hue L, Pipeleers D, Van De Casteele M. A-Riboside induces apoptosis of pancreatic beta cells through stimulation of AMP-activated protein kinase. *Diabetologia.* 2003;46:250–254.

99. Jung JE, Lee J, Ha J, Kim SS, Cho YH, Baik HH, Kang I. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-ribonucleoside enhances oxidative stress-induced apoptosis through activation of nuclear factor-kappaB in mouse Neuro 2a neuroblastoma cells. *Neurosci Lett.* 2004;354:197–200.

100. Saitoh M, Nagai K, Nakagawa K, Yamamura T, Yamamoto S, Nishizaki T. Adenosine induces apoptosis in the human gastric cancer cells via an intrinsic pathway relevant to activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. *Biochem Pharmacol.* 2004;67:2005–2011.

101. Wang W, Yang X, Lopez de Silanes I, Carling D, Gorospe M. Increased AMP:ATP ratio and AMP-activated protein kinase activity during cellular senescence linked to reduced HuR function. *J Biol Chem.* 2003;278:27016–27023.

102. Apfeld J, O'Connor G, McDonagh T, Distefano PS, Curtis R. The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like signals to lifespan in C. elegans. *Genes Dev.* 2004;18:3004–3009.

103. Weekes J, Ball KL, Caudwell FB, Hardie DG. Specificity determinants for the AMP-activated protein kinase and its plant homologue analysed using synthetic peptides. *FEBS Lett.* 1993;334:335–339.

104. Dale S, Wilson WA, Edelman AM, Hardie DG. Similar substrate recognition motifs for mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase, higher plant HMG-CoA reductase kinase-A, yeast SNF1, and mammalian calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I. *FEBS Lett.* 1995;361:191–195.
105. Istvan ES, Deisenhofer J. The structure of the catalytic portion of human HMG-CoA reductase. *Biochim Biophys Acta*. 2000;1529:9–18.

106. Kawaguchi T, Osatomi K, Yamashita H, Kabashima T, Uyeda K. Mechanism for fatty acids sparing effect on glucose-induced transcription: regulation of carbohydrate response element binding protein by AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;277:3829–3835.

107. Hong YH, Varanasi US, Yang W, Leff T. AMP-activated protein kinase regulates HNF4alpha transcriptional activity by inhibiting dimer formation and decreasing protein stability. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:27495–27501.

108. Koo SH, Flechner L, Qi L, Zhang X, Screaton RA, Jeffries S, Hedrick S, Xu W, Boussouar F, Brindle P, Takemori H, Montminy M. The CREB coactivator TORC2 is a key regulator of fasting glucose metabolism. *Nature*. 2005;437:1109–1111.

109. Mu J, Barton ER, Birnbaum MJ. Selective suppression of AMP-activated protein kinase in skeletal muscle: update on ‘lazy mice’. *Biochem Soc Trans*. 2003;31:236–241.

110. Terada S, Goto M, Kato M, Kawanaka K, Shimokawa T, Tabata I. Effects of low-intensity prolonged exercise on PGC-1 mRNA expression in rat epitrochlearis muscle. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 2002;296:350–354.

111. Dagher Z, Ruderman N, Tornheim K, Ido Y. The effect of AMP-activated protein kinase and its activator AICAR on the metabolism of human umbilical vein endothelial cells. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 1999;265:112–115.

112. Dagher Z, Ruderman N, Tornheim K, Ido Y. Acute regulation of fatty acid oxidation and AMP-activated protein kinase in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. *Circ Res*. 2001;88:1276–1282.

113. Chen ZP, Mitchelhill KI, Michell BJ, Stapleton D, Rodriguez-Crespo I, Witters LA, Power DA, Ortiz de Montellano PR, Kemp BE. AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylation of endothelial NO synthase. *FEBS Lett*. 1999;443:285–289.

114. Morrow VA, Foufelle F, Connell JM, Petrie JR, Gould GW, Salt IP. Direct activation of AMP-activated protein kinase stimulates nitric-oxide synthesis in human aortic endothelial cells. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:31629–31639.

115. Nagata D, Mogi M, Walsh K. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling in endothelial cells is essential for angiogenesis in response to hypoxic stress. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:31000–31006.

116. Ylikorkala A, Rossi DJ, Korsisaari N, Luukko K, Alitalo K, Henkemeyer M, Makela TP. Vascular abnormalities and deregulation of VEGF in LKB1-deficient mice. *Science*. 2001;293:1323–1326.

117. Inoki K, Li Y, Zhu T, Wu J, Guan KL. TSC2 is phosphorylated and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. *Nat Cell Biol*. 2002;4:648–657.

118. Gamble J, Lopaschuk GD. Insulin inhibition of 5′ adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase in the heart results in activation of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase and inhibition of fatty acid oxidation. *Metabolism*. 1997;46:1270–1274.

119. Beauloye C, Marsin AS, Bertrand L, Krause U, Hardie DG, Vanoverschelde JL, Hue L. Insulin antagonizes AMP-activated protein kinase activation by ischemia or anoxia in rat hearts, without affecting total adenine nucleotides. *FEBS Lett*. 2001;505:348–352.

120. Kovacic S, Solty S CL, Barr AJ, Shiojima I, Walsh K, Dyck JR. Akt activity negatively regulates phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase in the heart. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:39422–39427.

121. Hormann S, Vertommen D, Heath R, Neumann D, Mouton V, Woods A, Schlattnerr U, Wallimann T, Carling D, Hue L, Rider MH. Insulin antagonizes ischemia-induced Thr172 phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase alpha-subunits in heart via hierarchical phosphorylation of Ser485/491. *J Biol Chem*. 2006;281:5335–5340.

122. Kramer HF, Witzczak CA, Fujii N, Jessen N, Taylor EB, Arnolds DE, Sakamoto K, Hirshman MF, Goodyear LJ. Distinct signals regulate AS160 phosphorylation in response to insulin, AICAR, and contraction in mouse skeletal muscle. *Diabetes*. 2006;55:2067–2076.

123. Treebak JT, Glund S, Deshmukh A, Klein DK, Long YC, Jensen TE, Jorgensen SB, Viollet B, Andersson L, Neumann D, Wallimann T, Richter EA, Chibalin AV, Zierath JR, Wojtaszewski JF. AMPK-mediated AS160 phosphorylation in skeletal muscle is dependent on AMPK catalytic and regulatory subunits. *Diabetes*. 2006;55:2051–2058.

124. Fisher JS, Gao J, Han DH, Holloszy JO, Nolte LA. Activation of AMP kinase enhances sensitivity of muscle glucose transport to insulin. *Am J Physiol*. 2002;282:E18–E23.

125. Um SH, Frigerio F, Watanabe M, Picard F, Joaquin M, Sticker M, Fumagalli S, Allegrini PR, Kozma SC, Auwerx J, Thomas G. Absence

of S6K1 protects against age- and diet-induced obesity while enhancing insulin sensitivity. *Nature*. 2004;431:200–205.

126. Harrington LS, Findlay GM, Gray A, Tolkacheva T, Wigfield S, Rebholz H, Barnett J, Leslie NR, Cheng S, Shepherd PR, Gout I, Downes CP, Lamb RF. The TSC1–2 tumor suppressor controls insulin-PI3K signaling via regulation of IRS proteins. *J Cell Biol*. 2004;166:213–223.

127. Shah OJ, Wang Z, Hunter T. Inappropriate activation of the TSC/Rheb/mTOR/S6K cassette induces IRS1/2 depletion, insulin resistance, and cell survival deficiencies. *Curr Biol*. 2004;14:1650–1656.

128. Zheng D, MacLean PS, Pohnert SC, Knight JB, Olson AL, Winder WW, Dohm GL. Regulation of muscle GLUT-4 transcription by AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Appl Physiol*. 2001;91:1073–1083.

129. Lochhead PA, Salt IP, Walker KS, Hardie DG, Sutherland C. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside mimics the effects of insulin on the expression of the 2 key gluconeogenic genes PEPCK and glucose-6-phosphatase. *Diabetes*. 2000;49:896–903.

130. Sullivan JE, Brocklehurst KJ, Marley AE, Carey F, Carling D, Beri RK. Inhibition of lipolysis and lipogenesis in isolated rat adipocytes with AICAR, a cell-permeable activator of AMP-activated protein kinase. *FEBS Lett*. 1994;353:33–36.

131. Daval M, Diot-Dupuy F, Bazin R, Hainault I, Viollet B, Vaulont S, Hajduch E, Ferre P, Foufelle F. Anti-lipolytic action of AMP-activated protein kinase in rodent adipocytes. *J Biol Chem*. 2005;280:25250–25207.

132. Wijkander J, Landstrom TR, Manganiello V, Belfrage P, Degerman E. Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of phosphodiesterase 3B in rat adipocytes: possible role for protein kinase B but not mitogen-activated protein kinase or p70 S6 kinase. *Endocrinology*. 1998;139:219–227.

133. Garton AJ, Campbell DG, Carling D, Hardie DG, Colbran RJ, Yeaman SJ. Phosphorylation of bovine hormone-sensitive lipase by the AMP-activated protein kinase. A possible antilipolytic mechanism. *Eur J Biochem*. 1989;179:249–254.

134. Brooks BJ, Arch JR, Newsholme EA. Effect of some hormones on the rate of the triacylglycerol/fatty-acid substrate cycle in adipose tissue of the mouse in vivo. *Biosci Rep*. 1983;3:263–267.

135. Hardie DG, Carling D. The AMP-activated protein kinase: fuel gauge of the mammalian cell? *Eur J Biochem*. 1997;246:259–273.

136. Winder WW, Hardie DG. The AMP-activated protein kinase, a metabolic master switch: possible roles in Type 2 diabetes. *Am J Physiol*. 1999;277:E1–E10.

137. Bergeron R, Previs SF, Cline GW, Perret P, Russell RR, 3rd, Young LH, Shulman GI. Effect of 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside infusion on in vivo glucose and lipid metabolism in lean and obese Zucker rats. *Diabetes*. 2001;50:1076–1082.

138. Buhl ES, Jessen N, Pold R, Ledet T, Flyvbjerg A, Pedersen SB, Pedersen O, Schmitz O, Lund S. Long-term AICAR administration reduces metabolic disturbances and lowers blood pressure in rats displaying features of the insulin resistance syndrome. *Diabetes*. 2002;51:2199–2206.

139. Iglesias MA, Ye JM, Frangioudakis G, Saha AK, Tomas E, Ruderman NB, Cooney GJ, Kraegen EW. AICAR administration causes an apparent enhancement of muscle and liver insulin action in insulin-resistant high-fat-fed rats. *Diabetes*. 2002;51:2886–2894.

140. Song XM, Fiedler M, Galuska D, Ryder JW, Fernström M, Chibalin AV, Wallberg-Henriksson H, Zierath JR. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside treatment improves glucose homeostasis in insulin-resistant diabetic (ob/ob) mice. *Diabetologia*. 2002;45:56–65.

141. Matejkova O, Mustard KJ, Sponarova J, Flachs P, Rossmeisl M, Miksik I, Thomason-Hughes M, Hardie DG, Kopecky J. Possible involvement of AMP-activated protein kinase in obesity resistance induced by respiratory uncoupling in white fat. *FEBS Lett*. 2004;569:245–248.

142. Schrauwen P, Hardie DG, Roorda B, Clapham JC, Abuin A, Thomason Hughes M, Green K, Frederik PM, Hesselink MK. Improved glucose homeostasis in mice overexpressing human UCP3: a role for AMP-kinase? *Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord*. 2004;28:824–828.

143. Dobrzyn P, Dobrzyn A, Miyazaki M, Cohen P, Asilmaz E, Hardie DG, Friedman JM, Ntambi JM. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 deficiency increases fatty acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase in liver. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2004;101:6409–6414.

144. Merrill GM, Kurth E, Hardie DG, Winder WW. AICAR decreases malonyl-CoA and increases fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle of the rat. *Am J Physiol*. 1997;273:E1107–E1112.

145. Zong H, Ren JM, Young LH, Pypaert M, Mu J, Birnbaum MJ, Shulman GI. AMP kinase is required for mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle in response to chronic energy deprivation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2002;99:15983–15987.

146. Lowell BB, Shulman GI. Mitochondrial dysfunction and type 2 diabetes. *Science*. 2005;307:384–387.

147. Borradale NM, Han X, Harp JD, Gale SE, Ory DS, Schaffer JE. Disruption of endoplasmic reticulum structure and integrity in lipotoxic cell death. *J Lipid Res*. 2006;47:2726–2537.

148. Du X, Edelstein D, Obici S, Higham N, Zou MH, Brownlee M. Insulin resistance reduces arterial prostacyclin synthase and eNOS activities by increasing endothelial fatty acid oxidation. *J Clin Invest*. 2006;116:1071–1080.

149. Mitchelhill KI, Michell BJ, House CM, Stapleton D, Dyck J, Gamble J, Ullrich C, Witters LA, Kemp BE. Posttranslational modifications of the 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase β1 subunit. *J Biol Chem*. 1997;272:24475–24479.

150. Woods A, Vertommen D, Neumann D, Turk R, Bayliss J, Schlattner U, Wallimann T, Carling D, Rider MH. Identification of phosphorylation sites in AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) for upstream AMPK kinases and study of their roles by site-directed mutagenesis. *J Biol Chem*. 2003;278:28434–28442.

151. Hayashi T, Hirshman MF, Kurth EJ, Winder WW, Goodyear LJ. Evidence for 5′ AMP-activated protein kinase mediation of the effect of muscle contraction on glucose transport. *Diabetes*. 1998;47:1369–1373.

152. Kurth-Kraczek EJ, Hirshman MF, Goodyear LJ, Winder WW. 5′ AMP-activated protein kinase activation causes GLUT4 translocation in skeletal muscle. *Diabetes*. 1999;48:1667–1671.

153. Holmes BF, Kurth-Kraczek EJ, Winder WW. Chronic activation of 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase increases GLUT-4, hexokinase, and glycogen in muscle. *J Appl Physiol*. 1999;87:1990–1995.

154. Barnes K, Ingram JC, Porras OH, Barros LF, Hudson ER, Fryer LG, Foufelle F, Carling D, Hardie DG, Baldwin SA. Activation of GLUT1 by metabolic and osmotic stress: potential involvement of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). *J Cell Sci*. 2002;115:2433–2442.

155. Marsin AS, Bouzin C, Bertrand L, Hue L. The stimulation of glycolysis by hypoxia in activated monocytes is mediated by AMP-activated protein kinase and inducible 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase. *J Biol Chem*. 2002;277:30778–30783.

156. Winder WW, Wilson HA, Hardie DG, Rasmussen BB, Hutber CA, Call GB, Clayton RD, Conley LM, Yoon S, Zhou B. Phosphorylation of rat muscle acetyl-CoA carboxylase by AMP-activated protein kinase and cAMP-dependent protein kinase. *J App Physiol*. 1997;82:219–225.

157. Davies SP, Sim ATR, Hardie DG. Location and function of three sites phosphorylated on rat acetyl-CoA carboxylase by the AMP-activated protein kinase. *Eur J Biochem*. 1990;187:183–190.

158. Foretz M, Carling D, Guichard C, Ferré P, Foufelle F. AMP-activated protein kinase inhibits the glucose-activated expression of fatty acid synthase gene in rat hepatocytes. *J Biol Chem*. 1998;273:14767–14771.

159. Leclerc I, Kahn A, Doiron B. The 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase inhibits the transcriptional stimulation by glucose in liver cells, acting through the glucose response complex. *FEBS Lett*. 1998;431:180–184.

160. Leclerc I, Lenzner C, Gourdon L, Vaulont S, Kahn A, Viollet B. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4α involved in type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a novel target of AMP-activated protein kinase. *Diabetes*. 2001;50:1515–1521.

161. Clarke PR, Hardie DG. Regulation of HMG-CoA reductase: identification of the site phosphorylated by the AMP-activated protein kinase in vitro and in intact rat liver. *EMBO J*. 1990;9:2439–2446.

162. Carling D, Hardie DG. The substrate and sequence specificity of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Phosphorylation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylase kinase. *Biochim Biophys Acta*. 1989;1012:81–86.

163. Jorgensen SB, Nielsen JN, Birk JB, Olsen GS, Viollet B, Andreelli F, Schjerling P, Vaulont S, Hardie DG, Hansen BF, Richter EA, Wojtaszewski JF. The α2-5′AMP-activated protein kinase is a site 2 glycogen synthase kinase in skeletal muscle and is responsive to glucose loading. *Diabetes*. 2004;53:3074–3081.

164. Horman S, Browne G, Krause U, Patel J, Vertommen D, Bertrand L, Lavoinne A, Hue L, Proud C, Rider M. Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase leads to the phosphorylation of elongation factor 2 and an inhibition of protein synthesis. *Current Biol*. 2002;12:1419–1423.

165. Salt IP, Connell JM, Gould GW. 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) inhibits insulin-stimulated glucose transport in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. *Diabetes*. 2000;49:1649–1656.

166. Davies SP, Carling D, Munday MR, Hardie DG. Diurnal rhythm of phosphorylation of rat liver acetyl-CoA carboxylase by the AMP-activated protein kinase, demonstrated using freeze-clamping. Effects of high fat diets. *Eur J Biochem*. 1992;203:615–623.

167. Jakobsen SN, Hardie DG, Morrice N, Tornqvist HE. 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates IRS-1 on Ser-789 in mouse C2C12 myotubes in response to 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:46912–46916.

168. Yang W, Hong YH, Shen XQ, Frankowski C, Camp HS, Leff T. Regulation of transcription by AMP-activated Protein Kinase. Phosphorylation of p300 blocks its interaction with nuclear receptors. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:38341–38344.
