
REVIEW S

---

# The Salvador–Warts–Hippo pathway — an emerging tumour-suppressor network

**Kieran Harvey**\* **and Nicolas Tapon**†

Abstract | Intense research over the past four years has led to the discovery and characterization of a novel signalling network, known as the Salvador–Warts–Hippo (SWH) pathway, involved in tissue growth control in *Drosophila melanogaster*. At present, eleven proteins have been implicated as members of this pathway, and several downstream effector genes have been characterized. The importance of this pathway is emphasized by its evolutionary conservation, and by increasing evidence that its deregulation occurs in human tumours. Here, we review the main findings from *Drosophila* and the implications that these have for tumorigenesis in mammals.

---

The size of developing organs is controlled by cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis, which collectively define cell size and number¹. Many signalling pathways control these cellular processes, including the recently described **Salvador–Warts–Hippo** (SWH) pathway. Although this pathway has been extensively studied in *Drosophila melanogaster*, evidence from patient samples, cancer cell lines and mouse models indicate that the disruption of the analogous human pathway is involved in tumorigenesis.

In *Drosophila*, adult organs such as eyes, wings, legs and genitalia are derived from epithelial precursor tissues known as imaginal discs, which mature during larval and pupal development. An important function of the SWH pathway is to limit imaginal disc size, as imaginal discs that lack SWH activity are abnormally large owing to excessive cell proliferation, increased rates of cellular growth and defects in apoptosis (FIG. 1). The first characterized components of the SWH pathway were isolated in genetic mosaic screens aimed at identifying genes that normally restrict cell growth and proliferation. Several genes have now been described as components of this signalling pathway, and can be divided into two groups based on the *Drosophila* phenotypes described so far (BOX 1). Core components of the SWH pathway (*salvador* (*sav*), *warts* (*wts*, also known as *lats*), *hippo* (*hpo*) and *yorkie* (*yki*)) are required to control cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis²⁻¹¹. Several other genes (*mob as tumour suppressor* (*mats*), *expanded* (*ex*), *fat* (*ft*), *merlin* (*mer*), *Ras Association Family* (*dRASSF*), *discs overgrown* (*dco*) and *dachs* (*d*)) can affect the pathway, but they only seem to regulate a subset of cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis, or their role in SWH pathway control has not been studied in enough detail to permit classification as a core pathway component¹²⁻²⁰ (FIG. 2).

## SWH pathway family members

Eleven proteins have been implicated so far as components of the SWH signalling pathway in *Drosophila*. Here we provide a brief description of each of these, from transmembrane proteins through to nuclear proteins.

### Fat

FT is a giant atypical cadherin that spans the apical membrane of epithelial cells. FT has four mammalian orthologues (**FAT1–FAT4**), which have not been studied in detail. In *Drosophila*, FT has recently been shown to modulate organ size by functioning at the apical point of the SWH pathway¹³,¹⁴,¹⁸,¹⁹ (FIG. 2). FT is thought to function as part of a receptor–ligand pair with another cadherin, Dachsous (**DS**), by engaging in a heterotypic interaction, as opposed to a canonical homotypic interaction typical of many cadherins. Tissues that lack DS show overgrowth, but a clear role for DS in the SWH pathway has not been shown.

### Expanded and Merlin

EX and MER belong to the band 4.1 family of proteins. Mammalian members of this protein family such as **Ezrin**, **Radixin** and **Moesin** are thought to relay signals from cell surface receptors to the cytoskeleton (reviewed in REFS 21,22). The mammalian orthologue of *Drosophila* MER is the tumour-suppressor protein neurofibromin 2 (**NF2**, also known as Merlin or Scwhannomin). Potential mammalian homologues of EX exist, but have not yet been functionally characterized.

---

*Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St Andrew’s Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002 Australia.*

*Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.*

Correspondence to K.H.

e-mail: kieran.harvey@petermac.org

doi:10.1038/nrc2070

---

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

At a glance

- The Salvador–Warts–Hippo (SWH) pathway controls organ size by modulating cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis.
- Deregulation of this pathway in *Drosophila melanogaster* leads to dramatic increases in organ size.
- Proteins predicted to function in the SWH pathway include the cadherin Fat, the band 4.1 proteins Expanded and Merlin, the kinases Hippo, Warts and Discs overgrown, the adaptor molecules Salvador, Mats and Dachs, dRASSF and the transcriptional co-activator Yorkie.
- SWH pathway components are conserved throughout evolution from yeast to humans, and the pathway has been implicated in the genesis of human cancers.
- The human orthologue of merlin (*NF2*) is a *bona fide* tumour-suppressor gene, which is mutated in the familial cancer syndrome neurofibromatosis type 2. Homologues of warts, salvador, mats (mob as tumour suppressor), dRASSF (Ras association family) and yorkie have also been implicated in mammalian tumorigenesis.
- Important target genes of the SWH pathway include cyclin E (which drives cell proliferation), *DIAP1* (which inhibits apoptosis) and the bantam microRNA. The pathway also controls expanded and four-jointed expression in apparent regulatory feedback loops.
- Potential regulatory processes that control SWH pathway activity include the modification of expression and sub-cellular localization of Expanded, the modulation of expression levels of Warts and the phosphorylation of Yorkie.

---

several RASSF family members (dRASSF, RASSF5 and RASSF1A) have a zinc-finger-containing domain (either a C1 or a LIM domain) that might mediate membrane binding. As *dRASSF* mutants are viable, whereas *hpo* mutants are lethal, the control of HPO activity by dRASSF must be redundant with other modes of regulation<sup>17</sup>. For example, SAV availability could be limiting for HPO activation in most circumstances.

**Warts and Hippo.** WTS and HPO are both serine/threonine kinases that belong to the nuclear DBF2-related (NDR) and sterile-20 kinase families, respectively. Members of these kinase families are functionally diverse, and have poorly defined target specificity<sup>34,35</sup>. Proteins that are phosphorylated by HPO and WTS have been predicted using *in vitro* and tissue-culture assays. HPO phosphorylates WTS, *Drosophila* inhibitor of apoptosis 1 (DIAP1) and SAV, whereas WTS phosphorylates YKI<sup>6,8,10,11</sup>. These proteins are strong candidate substrates for these kinases given their importance for pathway activity. However, further examination is required to confirm these findings *in vivo* and to define the complete array of physiological targets of the HPO and WTS kinases.

**Mats.** Mats and its homologues (MOBK1B and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* MOB1) have no known enzymatic or structural protein domains, but are conserved in eukaryotes. Studies in several organisms have shown that Mats and Mob proteins are important activators of NDR serine/threonine kinases, such as WTS<sup>12,36–38</sup>.

**Yorkie.** YKI was identified as a WTS binding partner in a yeast two-hybrid screen, and genetic epistasis experiments place *yki* downstream of *sav*, *wts* and *hpo*<sup>11</sup> (FIG. 2). YKI has an acidic domain, which is required for its activity as a transcriptional co-activator<sup>11,39–41</sup>. YKI also contains a single WW domain, which is necessary for interaction with WTS<sup>11</sup>. Studies in mammalian tissue culture indicate that the mammalian orthologue of YKI, Yes-associated protein (YAP), is tethered in the cytoplasm and shuttles to the nucleus after activation, where it drives the transcription of target genes in collaboration with its cognate transcription factor(s)<sup>42</sup>. Several potential transcription factors have been proposed to function in collaboration with YKI, and are discussed in detail below.

**The SWH pathway and cancer**

All known components of the SWH pathway seem to be evolutionarily conserved, and several pathway member orthologues, including *sav*, *wts*, *mats*, *mer*, *yki* and *dRASSF*, have been implicated in the genesis of mammalian cancer<sup>4,12,43–47</sup> (TABLE 1). It has been proposed that cancerous cells must acquire six essential traits to reach malignancy<sup>48</sup>. We speculate that the inactivation of the SWH pathway might be particularly advantageous to cancer cells, as it is required to restrict both cell growth and proliferation, as well as to induce apoptosis.

The most compelling evidence that the SWH pathway is deregulated in human cancer is that *NF2* is a *bona fide* tumour-suppressor gene (reviewed in REF. 47).

---

**Discs overgrown.** DCO (also known as Double-time) is a highly conserved protein kinase, and is the orthologue of mammalian casein kinase I (*CSNK1ε*)<sup>23,24</sup>. DCO is a pleiotropic protein, and is important for the control of Hedgehog signalling, Wnt–Wingless (WG) signalling, circadian rhythms, planar cell polarity and organ size<sup>14,23–27</sup>. At present, no known DCO substrates that have a role in the SWH pathway have been identified.

**Dachs.** Dachs is an unconventional myosin that is predicted to function as a motor protein, or a scaffold molecule<sup>14,16</sup>. Genetic epistasis experiments place *d* upstream of *wts* and downstream of *ft* and *dco*<sup>14</sup> (FIG. 2). Mutations in *d* can suppress excessive growth and proliferation in tissue that lacks either *ft* or *dco*, suggesting that Dachs antagonizes FT and DCO<sup>14,16</sup>. Dachs can complex with WTS *in vitro*, but the mechanism by which it suppresses SWH pathway activity is unclear<sup>14</sup>.

**Genetic epistasis experiments**

The analysis of dominance of phenotypes generated by the altered function of two or more gene products. Genetic epistasis experiments are often used to predict the order of gene products within signalling pathways.

**LIM domain**

LIM domains are protein structural domains that are comprised of two contiguous Zinc-finger domains separated by a 2-amino acid residue hydrophobic linker. They are named after their initial discovery in the proteins LIN11, ISL1 and MEC3.

**Salvador.** SAV is a scaffold protein containing a WW domain that can interact with WTS, and a C-terminal SAV–RASSF–HPO (SARAH) domain that mediates binding to HPO<sup>4,5</sup>. The primary function of SAV is probably to facilitate the close association of the WTS and HPO kinases, and/or to recruit HPO to its site of activation<sup>4,6,8–10</sup>.

**dRASSF.** dRASSF, which shares homology with six related human proteins, antagonizes the SWH pathway by competing with SAV for HPO<sup>17,28–32</sup>. RASSF proteins have several functional domains: a Ras-association (RA) domain, which in mammals mediates binding to Ras and other small GTPases, and a SARAH domain, which homotypically and/or heterotypically binds to other SARAH domain proteins<sup>33</sup>. In addition,

REVIEW S

NF2 is mutated in the familial cancer syndrome neurofibromatosis type 2, which is characterized by tumours of the central nervous system. NF2 mutations are also observed in sporadic tumours of the nervous system and other tumour types, including malignant mesothelioma. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 2 normally carry a germ-line NF2 mutation, and develop the disease after the mutation, deletion or epigenetic silencing of the wild-type NF2 allele<sup>47,49,50</sup>. More recently, loci other than NF2 have been implicated in neurofibromatosis type 2, including a locus on chromosome 22 that is close to, but independent of, NF2 (REF. 51). Interestingly, the human orthologue of dco, CSNK1ε, is located at 22q13.1 (NF2 is at 22q12.2). All other known human orthologues of SWH pathway components map to chromosomes other than 22. To determine whether the inactivation of SWH pathway components other than NF2 are causal in neurofibromatosis type 2, it will be necessary to determine the mutation status of these genes in cases of neurofibromatosis type 2 that are not caused by the mutation or silencing of NF2.

Several downstream regulators of the SWH pathway have also been implicated in cancer, including sav, mats and wts. The SAV1 gene (also known as WW45) was deleted in two renal cancer cell lines, and deletions in MOBK1B (also known as MATS1) have been identified in cell lines derived from a human melanoma sample and a mouse mammary gland carcinoma<sup>4,12</sup>. Evidence for a role of the WTS kinase homologues LATS1 and LATS2 in cancer was provided from studies in both mice and humans. Mice deficient for LATS1 developed ovarian tumours and soft-tissue sarcomas<sup>43</sup>. Moreover, methylation-dependent silencing of both LATS1 and LATS2 correlates with an aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers<sup>52</sup>. LATS2 has recently been reported to be a p53 transcriptional target gene, and is also thought to be subject to regulation by two microRNAs (miRNAs), miR-372 and miR-373 (REFS 53,54). These miRNAs show increased expression in testicular cancer cell lines and tumour samples. Therefore, the downregulation of LATS2 by several mechanisms might promote tumour formation.

Two recent studies provide further evidence for the importance of the SWH pathway in mammalian tumorigenesis. Two independent screens for gene copy number changes in mouse tumour models showed that the murine genomic locus 9qA1, which contains the orthologue of yki, Yap, is amplified<sup>44,45</sup>. The amplification of Yap and Birc2 (also known as cIAP1, a homologue of the SWH pathway-target gene DIAP1), was shown in a mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma. Moreover, these two genes function cooperatively to stimulate tumorigenesis<sup>45</sup>. Yap amplification has also been shown in a mouse mammary tumour model<sup>44</sup>. Subsequent studies have shown that YAP has several oncogenic properties when overexpressed in human breast epithelial cells, including the ability to support growth-factor and anchorage-independent growth, epithelial–mesenchymal transition and resistance to apoptosis<sup>44</sup>. The syntenic locus of mouse 9qA1 is the human locus 11q22; a genomic region that is amplified in various human cancers including ovarian, liver, lung, pancreatic and oesophageal<sup>55–63</sup>. Conversely, YAP has been reported to promote p73-dependent apoptosis in response to DNA damage, suggesting a potential pro-apoptotic (and therefore tumour suppressive) function under certain conditions<sup>42</sup>.

Figure 1 | Tissue that lacks SWH pathway activity develops tumours. a,b | Eyes and cuticular head tissue that lack hippo (b) are larger than wild-type tissue (a) and are highly convoluted. c,d | Mutations in core components of the SWH pathway such as salvador, warts and hippo result in increased interommatidial eye cells (d) compared with wild-type tissue (c). e | Clones of tissue that lacks SWH pathway activity (black) show a characteristic rounded morphology and are larger than wild-type twin-spot clones (white).

Members of the RASSF family, particularly RASSF1A, have been proposed to function as tumour-suppressor genes<sup>46</sup>. The expression of RASSF1A is frequently reduced in human tumours by promoter methylation (reviewed in REFS 46,64). RASSF1A and RASSF5 (also known as NORE1) have been shown to be biochemical inhibitors of mammalian sterile twenty (MST) kinases, although when fused to a membrane localization signal they can promote MST kinase activity<sup>65–68</sup>. This has led to the suggestion that RASSF proteins are necessary both to silence basal MST kinase activity and to activate MST kinases on stimulation. One potential stimulus might be activated Ras, which induces a conformational change in RASSF5 on binding to its RA domain, and can activate MST kinases in cell culture<sup>65,69</sup>. Intriguingly, dRASSF antagonizes, rather than promotes SWH pathway activity, suggesting a predominantly oncogenic function in the developing fly<sup>70</sup>. dRASSF does seem to have a growth-suppressive function, which might be independent of its ability to modulate the SWH pathway, as the loss of dRASSF increases the overgrowth of hpo mutant clones. Indeed, the deletion of the MST and Ras-bining domain does not abolish the ability of RASSF5 to inhibit colony formation in lung carcinoma cells<sup>71</sup>. This poses the question: do RASSF genes function as tumour-suppressor genes in some tissues where the SWH pathway has been compromised or is not active, and possess oncogenic properties in other tissues where SWH pathway activity is high? Another possibility is that individual mammalian RASSF family members have different effects on SWH pathway activity.

The mammalian HPO orthologues, **MST1** and **MST2**, have been reported to be activated during apoptosis in tissue culture cells<sup>72,73</sup>, but the role of these genes in the control of cell growth, proliferation and human cancer has not been explored thoroughly. One study proposes that the Ras effector kinase **RAF1** binds and inactivates MST2 in cell culture, and suggests that oncogenic Ras

can promote apoptosis by preventing the ability of RAF1 to inhibit MST2 (REF. 74). Whether RAF1 normally regulates MST2 under physiological conditions has not been determined. Given that several other human SWH pathway members have been implicated in cancer, a more detailed analysis of the mutation and expression status of MST1 and MST2 in human cancer cell lines and primary tissues is warranted.

Given that the above data indicates the SWH pathway is involved in human tumorigenesis, it is important to understand how this pathway is regulated. The conserved nature of this pathway means that much of this can be addressed, at least initially, in *Drosophila*.

### Modes of regulation

In *Drosophila*, most SWH pathway components are ubiquitously expressed throughout imaginal disc development. Therefore, pathway activity might be regulated by a specific cue in a spatial and/or temporal fashion in order to trigger cell death or cell-cycle exit at the appropriate time during development. An alternative model is that the SWH pathway is constitutively active, but its signalling capacity is modulated by other pathways that regulate tissue growth and cell survival. Upstream regulation of the SWH pathway presumably requires the integration of morphogenetic cues such as Decapentaplegic (**DPP**) and WG, as well as growth-regulatory pathways (such as Janus kinase (JAK)–signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), epidermal growth factor receptor (**EGFR**), Delta–Notch, insulin-like receptor (INR) and target of rapamycin (**TOR**) pathways) that participate in overall size control<sup>75</sup>. How cells are induced to undergo either cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to SWH pathway activity remains to be addressed, but might depend on the strength and/or duration of SWH signalling and/or the cellular signalling context.

Our understanding of upstream regulatory control of the SWH pathway has progressed recently, owing to the discovery of pathway components such as EX, MER and FT. *Mer* and *ex* double-mutant tissue closely phenocopies tissue that lacks SWH pathway activity, including the accumulation of the key effector proteins DIAP1 and Cyclin E (**CYCE**)<sup>15</sup>. *Mer* or *ex* alone have relatively weak mutant phenotypes, suggesting that *mer* and *ex* control organ size in a partially redundant fashion<sup>15,76</sup>. Importantly, recent studies also suggest that they can, in part, independently regulate tissue growth<sup>20</sup>. Given these findings, and the observation that *ex* is not required for apoptosis in the developing eye, we propose the classification of *ex* and *mer* as non-core members of the SWH pathway. Genetic epistasis experiments place *mer* and *ex* upstream (or in parallel) to *hpo* and *sav*, although their precise role in HPO activation is not known<sup>15</sup> (FIG. 2). MER and EX could function as scaffolds between signalling receptors and the actin cytoskeleton (although EX lacks an obvious actin-binding domain). Several receptors, such as Notch and the Hedgehog receptor **Patched**, are upregulated at the membrane of *mer* and *ex* mutant cells, suggesting that transmembrane receptor trafficking is altered in these cells<sup>76</sup>.

---

**Box 1 | Core components and regulation of the SWH pathway**

The core of the SWH pathway is composed of two serine/threonine kinases, Hippo (HPO) and Warts (WTS). Like its mammalian orthologues MST1 and MST2, HPO is thought to be activated by phosphorylation on several residues within the kinase domain<sup>78,93</sup>. This activation process is not yet understood, but seems to involve the band 4.1 proteins Expanded (EX) and Merlin (MER), as well as the atypical cadherin Fat (FT)<sup>13–15,18,19</sup>. Once activated, HPO phosphorylates the scaffold proteins Salvador (SAV) and Mats, as well as WTS<sup>8,10,12</sup>. This is postulated to lead to WTS activation and the phosphorylation by WTS of its binding partner, the transcriptional co-activator Yorkie (YKI)<sup>11</sup>. When YKI is phosphorylated by WTS it is inactivated, leading to a reduction in cell number owing to the downregulation of its putative transcriptional targets, the anti-apoptotic molecules DIAP1 and Bantam, and the cell-cycle regulator Cyclin E<sup>11,82,83</sup>. Therefore, the hyperactivation of the SWH pathway leads to smaller organs with fewer cells, whereas its downregulation increases cell number and tissue size. An alternative mode of SWH pathway activation might involve the control of WTS stability by FT through the kinase Discs overgrown (DCO) and the unconventional myosin Dachs<sup>14,16</sup>. Although SAV, HPO, WTS and YKI can both promote apoptosis and repress cell growth and division, it is clear that the loss of *ft* and *ex* does not affect apoptosis, at least in the developing *Drosophila melanogaster* eye<sup>13,18</sup>. The molecular basis for this difference is unclear, but it probably signifies that alternative modes of regulation of the core components of the SWH pathway remain to be identified.

WTS<sup>14</sup>. The regulation of levels of EX is likely to be a crucial event in the control of SWH pathway activity, as its localization and/or stability is controlled by FT, and also because its expression is stimulated when SWH pathway activity drops, in an apparent regulatory feedback loop<sup>15</sup>. FT probably controls the abundance of WTS protein by modulating the association of WTS with the atypical myosin Dachs<sup>14</sup>. Control of WTS stability by FT seems to occur independently of other SWH pathway components such as HPO and EX<sup>14</sup>. These two mechanisms might operate together to control SWH pathway activation.

The FT signalling regulators Four-jointed (FJ), DS and DCO have also been implicated in the control of SWH pathway activity, but their contribution remains to be addressed in detail<sup>14</sup>. As *ft* is not required to promote apoptosis through the SWH pathway, other upstream regulators of the pathway probably exist. The hypothesis that FT functions as a receptor for the SWH pathway is further supported by the fact that FT is a transmembrane protein, whereas other SWH pathway proteins are cytoplasmic or nuclear. An alternative possibility is that FT controls pathway activity by influencing the stability or localization of another transmembrane protein that serves as the SWH pathway receptor. By analogy to its function in controlling planar cell polarity, it has been proposed that FT might enable cells to compare their positional values within developing organs<sup>77</sup>. In this model, the SWH pathway would respond to a gradient of morphogens such as DPP or WG, becoming active when the organ has reached its appropriate size and the morphogen gradient slopes have decreased. This would mean that the abundance of FT, its ligand (possibly DS) or the intensity of FT signalling can somehow respond to minor differences in morphogen signalling levels between two neighbouring cells. Further work is required to address this interesting hypothesis.

Genetic epistasis experiments in yeast and *Drosophila* suggest that HPO functions upstream of WTS. The mechanism by which upstream regulators such as FT, EX and MER signal to HPO has not yet been identified. By analogy with its mammalian counterparts, it is probable that HPO is activated through auto and/or transphosphorylation, or through the action of an unknown upstream kinase<sup>78</sup>. Membrane recruitment of MST kinases has also been suggested as a potential activation mechanism<sup>65</sup>. The exact role of SAV in the activation of HPO remains unclear. Its role in the pathway could be to facilitate WTS phosphorylation by HPO by bringing both proteins together. Once phosphorylated, WTS itself becomes activated and phosphorylates its binding partner YKI<sup>11</sup> (see below).

The C-terminal Src kinase (*Csk*) was identified in a genetic screen for modifiers of the excessive cell death phenotype elicited by *wts* overexpression, and CSK can phosphorylate WTS *in vitro*<sup>79</sup>. *Csk* mutants have interesting characteristics: if in contact with wild-type cells, *Csk* mutant cells lose apico-basal polarity and acquire the ability to spread through the epithelium before undergoing apoptosis<sup>80</sup>, a phenotype reminiscent of

Figure 2 | Components of the SWH pathway. Positive regulatory components of the SWH pathway are in blue, whereas negative acting components are in red. Fat (FT) resides at the apical membrane, where it is proposed to respond to an extracellular stimulus on a neighbouring cell. An FT-dependent signal is relayed through Expanded (EX) to a complex containing Hippo (HPO), Salvador (SAV), Mats and Warts (WTS), which in turn phosphorylates and inactivates Yorkie (YKI). YKI normally stimulates the transcription of genes such as cyclin E, DIAP1 and bantam, which promote cell survival and proliferation. YKI also promotes the expression of *ex* and four-jointed as part of regulatory feedback loops. How Discs overgrown (DCO) and Dachs (D) integrate into this signalling pathway is currently unclear. They might function in parallel to EX and Merlin (MER) or as part of a linear pathway downstream from FT. The existence of additional pathway components is proposed, including a transmembrane protein that signals to MER, a transcription factor(s) that functions in partnership with YKI, and target genes that stimulate cell growth.

Table 1 | The Salvador–Warts–Hippo pathway and cancer

| Drosophila melanogaster | Human | Evidence for role in cancer | Refs |
|-------------------------|-------|----------------------------|------|
| merlin                 | NF2 (merlin) | Mutated or silenced in familial and sporadic human tumours | 47 |
| salvador              | SAV1 | Deleted in human kidney cancer cell lines | 4 |
| mats                  | MOBK1B | Mutated in mouse and human cancer cell lines | 12 |
| warts                 | LATS1 | Mouse mutant develops tumours | 43 |
|                       | LATS1 and LATS2 | Silenced by methylation in aggressive human breast cancers | 52 |
| yorkie                | YAP | Amplified in mouse models of liver and breast cancer; overexpression augments mouse model of liver cancer; has oncogenic properties in human tissue culture cells | 44,45 |
| Cyclin E              | CCNE1 | Amplified in many primary tumours and cancer cell lines | 100 |
| DIAP1                 | BIRC2 (also known as clAP1) | Amplified in mouse model of liver cancer; overexpression drives mouse model of liver cancer | 45 |

mutations in neoplastic tumour suppressors such as *scribble*, but not SWH pathway members. However, rare Csk mutant clones do show the typical SWH pathway characteristic of increased interommatidial cell number<sup>80</sup>. CSK seems to modulate several effectors, including Src, JAK–STAT and Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), which have been shown to promote proliferation and apoptosis<sup>81</sup>. The relationship between these pathways and the SWH pathway remains to be explored. DIAP1 levels are not increased in mutant Csk clones<sup>80</sup>, so it seems unlikely that the relationship between Csk and wts is straightforward. One possibility is that different pools of WTS might be controlled by HPO and CSK. This idea is consistent with the observation that the wts mutant phenotype is stronger than that of hpo or sav, which suggests that wts integrates several distinct growth-inhibitory signals.

### Downstream target genes

The discovery of YKI as a phosphorylation target of WTS was a major breakthrough in the field, as it underscored the importance of transcriptional control as an output for the SWH pathway<sup>11</sup>. Interestingly, yki overexpression closely phenocopies the sav, wts and hpo loss-of-function phenotype, whereas yki mutations have the opposite effect (that is, yki mutant clones do not survive)<sup>11</sup>. After phosphorylation by WTS, the ability of YKI to activate gene transcription is reduced<sup>11</sup>.

Several strong candidate target genes for YKI exist, although no direct target genes have been formally defined. DIAP1 and cycE were the first discovered targets of the SWH pathway<sup>4,5</sup>. mRNA for these genes is increased in mutant clones for sav, wts, hpo and other pathway members, and in tissue that overexpresses yki<sup>4,9–11</sup>. The accumulation of DIAP1 probably confers resistance to apoptosis, whereas the increased expression of cycE mediates ectopic proliferation. DIAP1 is upregulated in all yki overexpression clones, whereas cycE transcription is upregulated only in certain regions of the eye disc, suggesting that DIAP1 is more likely to be a direct yki target, whereas cycE regulation might be more complex<sup>11</sup>.

Like ex and ft, the miRNA bantam (*ban*) was identified as a component of the SWH pathway owing to phenotypic similarities<sup>82,83</sup>. ban was originally identified in mis-expression screens as a gene that induced excessive tissue growth<sup>84,85</sup>. Further analysis showed that the ban locus encodes a miRNA that can promote growth and inhibit apoptosis, such that imaginal discs in ban loss-of-function animals are stunted<sup>86</sup>. The only described target of ban so far is the IAP inhibitor head involution defective (*hid*)<sup>86</sup>. Genetic epistasis experiments place ban downstream of yki, and yki expression is sufficient to trigger a ban sensor in imaginal tissues<sup>82,83</sup>. Loss of ban only partially reverses the YKI overgrowth phenotype, suggesting other targets of YKI (such as DIAP1 and cycE, and possibly others) are important for the control of tissue size. In addition to hid, other targets of ban are sure to exist. In particular, the target(s) that accounts for the increased growth (mass accumulation) in ban overexpression clones remains to be identified. It is currently unclear whether a ban equivalent exists in vertebrates.

Several SWH pathway components are regulated by the pathway itself in regulatory-feedback loops. Both mer and ex are upregulated in clones of tissue that lacks SWH pathway genes, and in the case of ex, feedback regulation occurs at least in part at the transcript level<sup>15</sup>. As ex and mer can trigger SWH pathway activation, this seems to constitute a negative-feedback loop. The expression of the fj gene, which encodes a Golgi protein, is also increased in cells in which the SWH pathway is inhibited<sup>14,19</sup>. FJ is thought to potentiate the ability of DS to signal to FT through an unknown mechanism<sup>87</sup>. Therefore, the regulation of fj by the SWH pathway could constitute a positive-feedback loop. However, a clear role for DS in the SWH pathway has not been shown. In fact, DS and FT have been proposed to function independently of each other in growth control<sup>88</sup>.

In previous studies FT was shown to repress the expression of the Notch ligand Serrate and the Wnt pathway ligand WG<sup>16,89,90</sup>. Recent work has shown that the same is true for other SWH pathway members. As the activation of Notch or WG signalling can trigger overgrowth in developing imaginal discs, both of these pathways could be involved in the overgrowth caused by the loss of SWH pathway members. However, as this regulation is confined to certain tissue domains (the proximal part of wing and leg discs), this is unlikely to account for the overgrowth phenotype in all developmental contexts.

### Additional functions of the SWH pathway

In addition to controlling imaginal disc size, the SWH pathway is required for different functions in post-mitotic neurons<sup>91,92</sup>. In the Drosophila eye, R8 photoreceptor cells are specified to receive either short or long wavelengths of light, a process that is dependent

Interommatidial cell  
A specific cell type that eventually adopts pigment or bristle cell fates, and surrounds the cone and photoreceptor cells in the Drosophila eye, optically insulating the individual units of the compound eye from each other.

Ectopic proliferation  
The generation of daughter cells at a developmental stage or localization within an organ in which cells would normally be quiescent.

REVIEWS

Box 2 | The SWH pathway, MEN and SIN: shared machinery
SWH pathway constituents are conserved throughout evolution to varying degrees. Homologues of at least three SWH pathway proteins function in the mitotic exit network (MEN) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), and the septation initiation network (SIN) in Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast). Both the MEN and the SIN control cytokinesis, and the MEN also ensures timely exit from mitosis³⁶⁻³⁸. For simplicity we have focused on parallels between the SWH pathway and the MEN. SWH pathway components that are conserved in the MEN include CDC15, a sterile-20 kinase (hippo (hpo) homologue), DBF2, an NDR kinase (warts (wts) homologue), and MOB1 (mats homologue), an activator of DBF2. The main difference between the MEN and the SWH pathway is the biological processes they control: a key function of DBF2 in budding yeast is to augment the release of CDC14 phosphatase from the nucleus into the cytoplasm, which stimulates mitotic exit and cytokinesis³⁶⁻³⁸. In flies, WTS phosphorylates the transcriptional enhancer protein YKI and inhibits it, thereby altering the transcription of genes that control cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis¹¹. This suggests that a signalling module composed of a sterile-20 kinase, an NDR kinase and a Mob family protein has been conserved throughout eukaryotes, and has adapted to control different downstream effector molecules, and therefore diverse biological processes. The regulation of assembly and/or activity of the sterile-20 kinase–NDR kinase–Mob signalling module also seems to differ between yeast and flies, as yeast do not possess a homologue of SAV, which is essential for SWH pathway activity in flies and is proposed to function as an adaptor molecule for the WTS and HPO serine/threonine kinases⁴⁵. In addition, in budding yeast, CDC15 activity is modulated by a GTPase (TEM1), a guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF; LTE1) and a two-component GTPase activating protein (GAP; BUB1–BFA1)³⁶⁻³⁸. Functional Drosophila melanogaster or human equivalents of these genes have not been defined, but it is tempting to speculate on their existence given the presence of other MEN and SIN components in the SWH pathway.

Future investigations

The SWH pathway and human cancer. To further define the role of the SWH pathway in human cancer it is necessary to determine whether pathway components other than NF2 represent *bona fide* human tumour-suppressor genes or oncogenes by analysing the gene expression levels and mutation status of SWH pathway genes in various human tumours. An associated question is the importance of the YKI orthologue, YAP, in human cancer — does increased activity of YAP contribute to tumours with amplified 11q22, as well as tumours that harbour NF2 mutations? To address these questions, the requirement of YAP for tumour formation in NF2 mutant mice and the contact-inhibition-independent proliferation of cells that lack NF2 must be determined. If YAP actively promotes tumorigenesis in neurofibromatosis type 2, and tumours with amplification of 11q22, then it will constitute an attractive target for the development of new anticancer agents with which to treat these tumours.

Which tissues does the SWH pathway function in? We do not yet know in which mammalian tissues and cell types the SWH pathway controls proliferation and apoptosis, and which are therefore likely to develop tumours owing to pathway deregulation. In *Drosophila* this pathway restricts the growth of imaginal discs¹⁻¹⁸, which are columnar epithelia, but does not seem to limit the growth of tissues such as the salivary gland and fat body (K.H. and N.T., unpublished observations). This raises the possibility that the SWH pathway modulates tumour formation in a subset of human tissues and cell types that share similar growth, proliferation and apoptotic properties to *Drosophila* imaginal discs. Interestingly, various tumour types develop spontaneously in *Nf2*⁻/⁻ mice, including bone tumours and malignant mesothelioma, whereas in humans, *NF2* deficiency predominantly results in tumours of the central nervous system⁴⁷. Mice deficient for *Lats1* develop soft tissue sarcoma and ovarian tumours, but have not been reported to develop nervous system tumours or mesothelioma⁴³. To help address the question of tumours arising owing to the deregulation of the SWH pathway, it will be beneficial to analyse tumour formation in mice that are mutant for different SWH pathway orthologues.

Are there additional SWH pathway components? The mechanism by which upstream SWH pathway members signal to downstream components such as SAV, WTS, HPO and MATS is currently unknown. In the mitotic exit network (MEN, see BOX 2) of the budding yeast *S. cerevisiae*, the HPO homologue **CDC15** is controlled by the guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) **LTE1**, a GTPase (**TEM1**) and a two-component GTPase activating protein (GAP; **BUB1–BFA1**)³⁶,³⁷. The existence of these proteins in the MEN in yeast begs the question: is the activity of the SWH pathway also controlled by a GEF, a GTPase and a GAP? Such proteins might signal between EX and MER, and HPO, SAV, WTS and MATS. Many GEFs, GAPs and GTPases exist in the *Drosophila* genome, making it difficult to identify potential functional orthologues by sequence homology. One might also predict that if a GEF and GAP do activate the SWH pathway,

on wts, hpo and sav⁹¹. These genes are also required for dendrite morphogenesis during the larval stage of *Drosophila* development. *hpo* is essential for both the tiling and maintenance of dendrites, whereas *wts* and *sav* are only required for dendrite maintenance⁹². It is unclear at present whether more recently identified members of the SWH pathway, such as *ex, mer, ft* and *dco*, also modulate R8 photoreceptor function and dendrite morphogenesis, although dendrite morphogenesis operates independently of *yki*⁹².

The SWH pathway also participates in stress-induced apoptosis. The treatment of developing imaginal discs with ionizing radiation induces a robust, p53-dependent apoptotic response, which is reduced in mutant clones for SWH pathway members⁹³. Ionizing radiation can promote Dmp53-dependent activation of HPO in cultured cells and *in vivo*, as does Dmp53 expression alone⁹³. Therefore, the SWH pathway is part of a Dmp53-dependent pro-apoptotic response to ionizing radiation, along with Dmp53 transcriptional targets such as the IAP inhibitor **reaper**⁹⁴. This implies that the SWH pathway is a general effector pathway that can mediate cell death and cell-cycle arrest in response to various developmental or environmental cues. Indeed, MST kinases have been shown to respond to various stimuli, from osmotic shock to oxidative stress⁹⁵. In particular, MST1 can promote **FOXO** phosphorylation in response to oxidative stress, resulting in FOXO translocation and neuronal cell death. This mechanism seems to be conserved in *Caenorhabditis elegans*⁹⁵.
then alleles of these genes should have been identified in recessive clonal screens which recovered several other positive-acting pathway components (for example, *sav*, *wts*, *hpo*, *ft*, *ex* and *mer*). The fact that the isolation of a GEF and a GAP from such screens has not been reported suggests that SWH pathway activation in *Drosophila* differs from that of the yeast MEN. This statement relies on the assumptions that such screens were saturating, and that all potential SWH pathway components map to genetic loci that were able to be homozygosed in clonal screens that isolated such genes. These genes might also reside on the fourth chromosome, which is not amenable to homozygous clonal screens.

**What is the identity of YKI’s cognate transcription factor(s)?** YKI and its orthologue YAP are transcriptional co-activator proteins that induce the expression of target genes in collaboration with transcription factors. The transcription factor(s) that functions with YKI to control the expression of SWH pathway target genes has not been described, but based on studies of YAP in mammalian cells, several candidates exist: transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF1)–TEF4, p73, and the runt family protein phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein 2α<sup>39,41</sup>. Of these, the *Drosophila* TEF homologue Scalloped (*SD*) is the most appealing candidate. In unbiased protein–protein interaction screens in both *Drosophila* and mammals, YKI and YAP, and SD and TEF proteins were identified as binding partners<sup>41,96</sup>. In addition, YAP can potently increase the transcriptional activity of TEF<sup>41</sup>. Given that SD only seems to function in growth control in the wing, it is plausible that YKI complexes with several transcription factors to stimulate its complete array of target genes.

**Are there additional target genes?** It is likely that many target genes of the SWH pathway remain to be identified. In particular, target genes that stimulate cell growth (mass accumulation) have not been described. The identification of YKI transcriptional targets by microarray analysis, and the analysis of *ban* targets should provide answers to this question.

---

**Does the SWH pathway control cell adhesion?** One phenotypic characteristic of SWH pathway members has generated considerable interest, but remains unexplained. To various extents mutations in all members of the pathway seem to modify the adhesive properties of cells, such that they preferentially adhere to cells of the same genotype rather than neighbouring wild-type cells. This leads to a distinctive rounded morphology of mutant clones (FIG. 1e). This is not unique to the SWH pathway, as the expression of activated forms of Ras, or of the DPP receptor thickveins, elicit similar clonal morphology, although the relationship between these molecules and the SWH pathway is yet to be explored<sup>97,98</sup>. This phenotype has been proposed to bear similarities with the loss of contact inhibition in tissue-culture cells. Interestingly, *Nf2*-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts show compromised adhesion properties and fail to undergo contact inhibition<sup>99</sup>. It remains unclear whether this adhesion phenotype is a consequence of excessive proliferation, or whether specific SWH pathway targets control cell–cell adhesion directly. Several upstream regulators of the pathway have been implicated in cellular adhesion. FT and band 4.1 proteins such as MER and EX connect the cytoskeleton with extracellular matrix receptors such as **CD44** (REF. 22). This suggests that the SWH pathway might also respond to adhesion or ‘social’ interaction cues elicited by contacts between neighbouring cells. Clearly, a greater mechanistic understanding of the SWH pathway will provide interesting insight into the behaviour of cells in developing and adult epithelia.

### Conclusions

Since its discovery, substantial progress has been made on the mechanistic understanding and biological roles of the SWH pathway. Most of this work has been performed in *Drosophila*, highlighting the impact of fundamental biological studies in model organisms. Significant work is required to further our understanding of how the SWH pathway controls the size of developing organs, and to fully appreciate the role of this pathway in human tumorigenesis.

---

1. Conlon, I. & Raff, M. Size control in animal development. *Cell* **96**, 235–244 (1999).
2. Justice, R. W., Zilian, O., Woods, D. F., Noll, M. & Bryant, P. J. The *Drosophila* tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. *Genes Dev.* **9**, 534–546 (1995).
3. Xu, T., Wang, W., Zhang, S., Stewart, R. A. & Yu, W. Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the *Drosophila lats* gene encodes a putative protein kinase. *Development* **121**, 1053–1063 (1995).
4. Tapon, N. *et al*. Salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in *Drosophila* and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. *Cell* **110**, 467–478 (2002).
5. Kango-Singh, M. *et al*. Shar-pei mediates cell proliferation arrest during imaginal disc growth in *Drosophila*. *Development* **129**, 5719–5730 (2002). References 4 and 5 describe the discovery of the *sav* gene, and reference 4 outlines its functional link with *wts* and hence a new tumour-suppressor pathway.
6. Harvey, K. F., Pfleger, C. M. & Hariharan, I. K. The *Drosophila* Mst ortholog, hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. *Cell* **114**, 457–467 (2003).
7. Jia, J., Zhang, W., Wang, B., Trinko, R. & Jiang, J. The *Drosophila* Ste20 family kinase dMST functions as a tumor suppressor by restricting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 2514–2519 (2003).
8. Pantalacci, S., Tapon, N. & Leopold, P. The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in *Drosophila*. *Nature Cell Biol.* **5**, 921–927 (2003).
9. Udan, R. S., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Tao, C. & Halder, G. Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. *Nature Cell Biol.* **5**, 914–920 (2003).
10. Wu, S., Huang, J., Dong, J. & Pan, D. hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. *Cell* **114**, 445–456 (2003).
11. Huang, J., Wu, S., Barrera, J., Matthews, K. & Pan, D. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the *Drosophila* homolog of YAP. *Cell* **122**, 421–434 (2005). This paper describes the identification of YKI as a crucial transcriptional regulator in growth control and an important target of the SWH pathway.
12. Lai, Z. C. *et al*. Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. *Cell* **120**, 675–685 (2005).
13. Bennett, F. C. & Harvey, K. F. Fat Cadherin Modulates Organ Size in *Drosophila* via the Salvador/Warts/Hippo Signaling Pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2101–2110 (2006).
14. Cho, E. *et al*. Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. *Nature Genet.* **38**, 1142–1150 (2006).
15. Hamaratoglu, F. *et al*. The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. *Nature Cell Biol.* **8**, 27–36 (2006).
16. Mao, Y. *et al*. Dachs: an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth, affinity and gene expression in *Drosophila*. *Development* **133**, 2539–2551 (2006).
17. Polesello, C., Huelsmann, S., Brown, N. H. & Tapon, N. The *Drosophila* RASSF homolog antagonizes the hippo pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2459–2465 (2006).
18. Silva, E., Tsatskis, Y., Gardano, L., Tapon, N. & McNeill, H. The tumor-suppressor gene *fat* controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the hippo signaling pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2081–2089 (2006).

--- 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER  
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  
VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2007 | 189
REVIEW S

19. Willecke, M. *et al.* The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2090–2100 (2006). References 13, 14, 15, 18 and 19 shed some light on events upstream of the core components of the SWH pathway. They implicate the band 4.1 proteins MER and EX, as well as the atypical cadherin Fat and the unconventional myosin Dachs in pathway activation.
20. Pellock, B. J., Buff, E., White, K. & Hariharan, I. K. The *Drosophila* tumor suppressors Expanded and Merlin differentially regulate cell cycle exit, apoptosis, and Wingless signaling. *Dev. Biol.* 15 December 2006 [epub ahead of print].
21. McClatchey, A. I. Merlin and ERM proteins: unappreciated roles in cancer development? *Nature Rev. Cancer* **3**, 877–883 (2003).
22. Bretscher, A., Edwards, K. & Fehon, R. G. ERM proteins and merlin: integrators at the cell cortex. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **3**, 586–599 (2002).
23. Kloss, B. *et al.* The *Drosophila* clock gene double-time encodes a protein closely related to human casein kinase lepsilon. *Cell* **94**, 97–107 (1998).
24. Zilian, O. *et al.* double-time is identical to discs overgrown, which is required for cell survival, proliferation and growth arrest in *Drosophila* imaginal discs. *Development* **126**, 5409–5420 (1999).
25. Klein, T. J., Jenny, A., Djiane, A. & Mlodzik, M. CKlepsilon/discs overgrown promotes both Wnt-Fz/ beta-catenin and Fz/PCP signaling in *Drosophila*. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1337–1343 (2006).
26. Strutt, H., Price, M. A. & Strutt, D. Planar polarity is positively regulated by casein kinase lepsilon in *Drosophila*. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1329–1336 (2006).
27. Price, M. A. & Kalderon, D. Proteolysis of the Hedgehog signaling effector Cubitus interruptus requires phosphorylation by Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 and Casein Kinase 1. *Cell* **108**, 823–835 (2002).
28. Vavvas, D., Li, X., Avruch, J. & Zhang, X. F. Identification of Nore1 as a potential Ras effector. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 5439–5442 (1998).
29. Dammann, R. *et al.* Epigenetic inactivation of a RAS association domain family protein from the lung tumour suppressor locus 3p21.3. *Nature Genet.* **25**, 315–319 (2000).
30. Tommasi, S. *et al.* RASSF3 and NORE1: identification and cloning of two human homologues of the putative tumor suppressor gene RASSF1. *Oncogene* **21**, 2713–2720 (2002).
31. Vos, M. D., Martinez, A., Ellis, C. A., Vallecorsa, T. & Clark, G. J. The pro-apoptotic Ras effector Nore1 may serve as a Ras-regulated tumor suppressor in the lung. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 21938–21943 (2003).
32. Eckfeld, K. *et al.* RASSF4/AD037 is a potential ras effector/tumor suppressor of the RASSF family. *Cancer Res.* **64**, 8688–8693 (2004).
33. Scheel, H. & Hofmann, K. A novel interaction motif, SARAH, connects three classes of tumor suppressor. *Curr. Biol.* **13**, R899–R900 (2003).
34. Tamaskovic, R., Bichsel, S. J. & Hemmings, B. A. NDR family of AGC kinases--essential regulators of the cell cycle and morphogenesis. *FEBS Lett.* **546**, 73–80 (2003).
35. Dan, I., Watanabe, N. M. & Kusumi, A. The Ste20 group kinases as regulators of MAP kinase cascades. *Trends Cell Biol.* **11**, 220–230 (2001).
36. Bardin, A. J. & Amon, A. Men and sin: what's the difference? *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **2**, 815–826 (2001).
37. Bosl, W. J. & Li, R. Mitotic-exit control as an evolved complex system. *Cell* **121**, 325–333 (2005).
38. Krapp, A., Gulli, M. P. & Simanis, V. SIN and the art of splitting the fission yeast cell. *Curr. Biol.* **14**, R722–R730 (2004).
39. Yagi, R., Chen, L. F., Shigesada, K., Murakami, Y. & Ito, Y. A WW domain-containing yes-associated protein (YAP) is a novel transcriptional co-activator. *ENBO J.* **18**, 2551–2562 (1999).
40. Strano, S. *et al.* Physical interaction with Yes-associated protein enhances p73 transcriptional activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 15164–15173 (2001).
41. Vassilev, A., Kaneko, K. J., Shu, H., Zhao, Y. & DePamphilis, M. L. TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm. *Genes Dev.* **15**, 1229–1241 (2001).
42. Basu, S., Totty, N. F., Irwin, M. S., Sudol, M. & Downward, J. Akt phosphorylates the Yes-associated protein, YAP, to induce interaction with 14–3-3 and attenuation of p73-mediated apoptosis. *Mol. Cell* **11**, 11–23 (2003).
43. St John, M. A. *et al.* Mice deficient of Lats1 develop soft-tissue sarcomas, ovarian tumours and pituitary dysfunction. *Nature Genet.* **21**, 182–186 (1999).
44. Overholtzer, M. *et al.* Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 12405–12410 (2006).
45. Zender, L. *et al.* Identification and validation of oncogenes in liver cancer using an integrative oncogenic approach. *Cell* **125**, 1253–1267 (2006).
46. Agathanggelou, A., Cooper, W. N. & Latif, F. Role of the Ras-association domain family 1 tumor suppressor gene in human cancers. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 3497–3508 (2005).
47. McClatchey, A. I. & Giovannini, M. Membrane organization and tumorigenesis — the NF2 tumor suppressor, Merlin. *Genes Dev.* **19**, 2265–2277 (2005).
48. Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. The hallmarks of cancer. *Cell* **100**, 57–70 (2000).
49. Gonzalez-Gomez, P. *et al.* CpG island methylation in sporadic and neurofibromatis type 2-associated schwannomas. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **9**, 5601–5606 (2003).
50. Lomas, J. *et al.* Genetic and epigenetic alteration of the NF2 gene in sporadic meningiomas. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **42**, 314–319 (2005).
51. Buckley, P. G. *et al.* Identification of genetic aberrations on chromosome 22 outside the NF2 locus in schwannomatosis and neurofibromatosis type 2. *Hum. Mutat.* **26**, 540–549 (2005).
52. Takahashi, Y. *et al.* Down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **11**, 1380–1385 (2005).
53. Voorhoeve, P. M. *et al.* A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. *Cell* **124**, 1169–1181 (2006).
54. Aylon, Y. *et al.* A positive feedback loop between the p53 and Lats2 tumor suppressors prevents tetraploidization. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 2687–2700 (2006).
55. Weber, R. G., Sommer, C., Albert, F. K., Kiessling, M. & Cremer, T. Clinically distinct subgroups of glioblastoma multiforme studied by comparative genomic hybridization. *Lab. Invest.* **74**, 108–119 (1996).
56. Snijders, A. M. *et al.* Rare amplicons implicate frequent deregulation of cell fate specification pathways in oral squamous cell carcinoma. *Oncogene* **24**, 4232–4242 (2005).
57. Lambros, M. B. *et al.* Analysis of ovarian cancer cell lines using array-based comparative genomic hybridization. *J. Pathol.* **205**, 29–40 (2005).
58. Imoto, I. *et al.* Expression of clAP1, a target for 11q22 amplification, correlates with resistance of cervical cancers to radiotherapy. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 4860–4866 (2002).
59. Imoto, I. *et al.* Identification of clAP1 as a candidate target gene within an amplicon at 11q22 in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. *Cancer Res.* **61**, 6629–6634 (2001).
60. Hermсен, M. *et al.* Chromosomal changes in relation to clinical outcome in larynx and pharynx squamous cell carcinoma. *Cell Oncol.* **27**, 191–198 (2005).
61. Dai, Z. *et al.* A comprehensive search for DNA amplification in lung cancer identifies inhibitors of apoptosis clAP1 and clAP2 as candidate oncogenes. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **12**, 791–801 (2003).
62. Bashyam, M. D. *et al.* Array-based comparative genomic hybridization identifies localized DNA amplifications and homozygous deletions in pancreatic cancer. *Neoplasia* **7**, 556–562 (2005).
63. Baldwin, C., Garnis, C., Zhang, L., Rosin, M. P. & Lam, W. L. Multiple microalterations detected at high frequency in oral cancer. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 7561–7567 (2005).
64. Pfeifer, G. P. *et al.* Methylation of the RASSF1A gene in human cancers. *Biol. Chem.* **383**, 907–914 (2002).
65. Khokhlatchev, A. *et al.* Identification of a novel Ras-regulated proapoptotic pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 253–265 (2002).
66. Praskova, M., Khokhlatchev, A., Ortiz-Vega, S. & Avruch, J. Regulation of the MST1 kinase by autophosphorylation, by the growth inhibitory proteins, RASSF1 and NORE1, and by Ras. *Biochem. J.* **381**, 453–462 (2004).
67. Avruch, J., Praskova, M., Ortiz-Vega, S., Liu, M. & Zhang, X. F. Nore1 and RASSF1 Regulation of Cell Proliferation and of the MST1/2 Kinases. *Methods Enzymol.* **407**, 290–310 (2005).
68. Oh, H. J. *et al.* Role of the tumor suppressor RASSF1A in Mst1-mediated apoptosis. *Cancer Res.* **66**, 2562–2569 (2006).
69. Harjes, E. *et al.* GTP-Ras disrupts the intramolecular complex of C1 and RA domains of Nore1. *Structure* **14**, 881–888 (2006).
70. Polesello, C., Huelsmann, S., Brown, N. H. & Tapon, N. The *Drosophila* RASSF homologue antagonizes the Hippo pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2459–2465 (2006).
71. Aoyama, Y., Avruch, J. & Zhang, X. F. Nore1 inhibits tumor cell growth independent of Ras or the MST1/2 kinases. *Oncogene* **23**, 3426–3433 (2004).
72. Graves, J. D. *et al.* Caspase-mediated activation and induction of apoptosis by the mammalian Ste20-like kinase Mst1. *EMBO J.* **17**, 2224–2234 (1998).
73. Kakeya, H., Onose, R. & Osada, H. Caspase-mediated activation of a 36-kDa myelin basic protein kinase during anticancer drug-induced apoptosis. *Cancer Res.* **58**, 4888–4894 (1998).
74. O'Neill, E., Rushworth, L., Baccarini, M. & Kolch, W. Role of the kinase MST2 in suppression of apoptosis by the proto-oncogene product Raf-1. *Science* **306**, 2267–2270 (2004).
75. Hariharan, I. K. & Bilder, D. Regulation of imaginal disc growth by tumor-suppressor genes in *Drosophila*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **40**, 335–361 (2006).
76. Maitra, S., Kulikauskas, R. M., Gavilan, H. & Fehon, R. G. The tumor suppressors Merlin and Expanded function cooperatively to modulate receptor endocytosis and signaling. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 702–709 (2006).
77. Hariharan, I. K. Growth regulation: a beginning for the hippo pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, R1037–R1039 (2006).
78. Glantschnig, H., Rodan, G. A. & Reszka, A. A. Mapping of MST1 kinase sites of phosphorylation. Activation and autophosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 42987–42996 (2002).
79. Pedraza, L. G., Stewart, R. A., Li, D. M. & Xu, T. *Drosophila* Src-family kinases function with Csk to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. *Oncogene* **23**, 4754–4762 (2004).
80. Vidal, M., Larson, D. E. & Cagan, R. L. Csk-deficient boundary cells are eliminated from normal *Drosophila* epithelia by exclusion, migration, and apoptosis. *Dev. Cell* **10**, 33–44 (2006).
81. Read, R. D., Bach, E. A. & Cagan, R. L. *Drosophila* C-terminal Src kinase negatively regulates organ growth and cell proliferation through inhibition of the Src, Jun N-terminal kinase, and STAT pathways. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **24**, 6676–6689 (2004).
82. Nolo, R., Morrison, C. M., Tao, C., Zhang, X. & Halder, G. The bantam microRNA is a target of the Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1895–1904 (2006).
83. Thompson, B. J. & Cohen, S. M. The Hippo pathway regulates the bantam microRNA to control cell proliferation and apoptosis in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **126**, 767–774 (2006).
84. Hipfner, D. R., Weigmann, K. & Cohen, S. M. The bantam gene regulates *Drosophila* growth. *Genetics* **161**, 1527–1537 (2002).
85. Raisin, S., Pantalacci, S., Breittmayer, J. P. & Leopold, P. A new genetic locus controlling growth and proliferation in *Drosophila melanogaster*. *Genetics* **164**, 1015–1025 (2003).
86. Brennecke, J., Hipfner, D. R., Stark, A., Russell, R. B. & Cohen, S. M. Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **113**, 25–36 (2003).
87. Strutt, H., Mundy, J., Hofstra, K. & Strutt, D. Cleavage and secretion is not required for four-jointed function in *Drosophila* patterning. *Development* **131**, 881–890 (2004).
88. Matakatsu, H. & Blair, S. S. Interactions between Fat and Dachsous and the regulation of planar cell polarity in the *Drosophila* wing. *Development* **131**, 3785–3794 (2004).
89. Cho, E. & Irvine, K. D. Action of fat, four-jointed, dachsous and dachs in distal-to-proximal wing signaling. *Development* **131**, 4489–4500 (2004).
90. Jaiswal, M., Agrawal, N. & Sinha, P. Fat and Wingless signaling oppositely regulate epithelial cell-cell adhesion and distal wing development in *Drosophila*. *Development* **133**, 925–935 (2006).

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

91. Mikeladze-Dvali, T. *et al.* The growth regulators warts/lats and melted interact in a bistable loop to specify opposite fates in *Drosophila* R8 photoreceptors. *Cell* **122**, 775–787 (2005).

92. Emoto, K., Parrish, J. Z., Jan, L. Y. & Jan, Y. N. The tumour suppressor Hippo acts with the NDR kinases in dendritic tiling and maintenance. *Nature* **443**, 210–213 (2006).

93. Colombani, J., Polesello, C., Josue, F. & Tapon, N. Dmp53 activates the hippo pathway to promote cell death in response to DNA damage. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1453–1458 (2006).

94. Brodsky, M. H. *et al.* *Drosophila* p53 binds a damage response element at the reaper locus. *Cell* **101**, 103–113 (2000).

95. Lehtinen, M. K. *et al.* A conserved MST-FOXO signaling pathway mediates oxidative-stress responses and extends life span. *Cell* **125**, 987–1001 (2006).

96. Giot, L. *et al.* A protein interaction map of *Drosophila melanogaster*. *Science* **302**, 1727–1736 (2003).

97. Nellen, D., Burke, R., Struhl, G. & Basler, K. Direct and long-range action of a DPP morphogen gradient. *Cell* **85**, 357–368 (1996).

98. Prober, D. A. & Edgar, B. A. Ras1 promotes cellular growth in the *Drosophila* wing. *Cell* **100**, 435–446 (2000).

99. Lallemend, D., Curto, M., Saotome, I., Giovanniini, M. & McClatchey, A. I. NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing adherens junctions. *Genes Dev* **17**, 1090–1100 (2003).

100. Hwang, H. C. & Clurman, B. E. Cyclin E in normal and neoplastic cell cycles. *Oncogene* **24**, 2776–2786 (2005).

**Acknowledgements**

K.H. is a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Special Fellow, and the recipient of a Career Development Award from the International Human Frontier Science Program Organization. The laboratory of K.H. is supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. Work in the laboratory of N.T. is funded by Cancer Research UK.

**Competing interests statement**

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

**DATABASES**

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

ban | *Birc2* | BFA1 | BUB1 | CD44 | CDC15 | Csk | CSNK1ε | CYCE | d | dco | DIAP1 | DPP | DS | EGFR | ex | ezrin | FAT1 | FAT4 | FJ | FOXO | ft | Hedgehog | Hippo | LTE1 | mats | mer | MOB1 | MOBK1B | moesin | MST1 | MST2 | NF2 | p53 | p73 | radixin | RAF1 | reaper | Salvador | scribble | SD | Serrate | TEM1 | TOR | Warts | WG | YAP | yki

**FURTHER INFORMATION**

Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre:  
http://www.petermac-research.org.au  

Nicolas Tapon’s homepage: http://science.cancerresearchuk.org/research/loc/london/lifch/taponn/

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
