
Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology 63 (2007) 12–31

Mechanisms of resistance to cisplatin and carboplatin

David J. Stewart*

Section of Experimental Therapeutics, Department of Thoracic/Head & Neck Medical Oncology,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 432, Houston, TX 77030, United States

Accepted 2 February 2007

Contents

1. Introduction ..... 13
2. Platinum resistance ..... 13
3. “Classical” resistance mechanisms ..... 13
   3.1. Blood flow and drug delivery ..... 13
   3.2. Extracellular environment ..... 16
   3.3. Drug uptake ..... 16
   3.4. Drug efflux ..... 16
   3.5. Drug detoxification ..... 17
   3.6. Drug binding ..... 17
   3.7. DNA repair ..... 18
   3.8. Decreased DNA mismatch repair ..... 18
   3.9. Reduced apoptotic response ..... 18
   3.10. Apoptosis inhibitors ..... 19
4. Newer molecular factors linked to platinum resistance ..... 19
   4.1. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) ..... 20
   4.2. Heat shock proteins (HSP) ..... 20
   4.3. Cell signaling pathways & molecules ..... 20
      4.3.1. Cadherins/catenins ..... 20
      4.3.2. EGF family ..... 20
      4.3.3. PTEN/PI3K/AKT ..... 20
      4.3.4. Hyaluronan-CD44 ..... 20
      4.3.5. IP3R1 ..... 21
      4.3.6. SRPK1 ..... 21
      4.3.7. Ras ..... 21
      4.3.8. C-myc, c-Fos, c-Jun, SAPK/JNK ..... 21
      4.3.9. STATs ..... 21
      4.3.10. JAK ..... 21
      4.3.11. Protein kinase C (PKC) ..... 21
      4.3.12. Protein phosphatases 2A and 4 ..... 21
   4.4. cAMP-phosphodiesterase 2 ..... 21
   4.5. Cell-cycle related factors ..... 21
   4.6. Checkpoints ..... 21
   4.7. NF-kappaB ..... 22
   4.8. Other transcription factors ..... 22
   4.9. Chromosomal alterations ..... 22
   4.10. Miscellaneous ..... 22

* Tel.: +1 713 692 6363; fax: +1 713 792 1220.
E-mail address: dstewart@mdanderson.org.

1040-8428/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.critrevonc.2007.02.001

D.J. Stewart / Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology 63 (2007) 12–31

4.11. Gene arrays ..... 22  
4.12. Proteomics ..... 22  
5. Summary ..... 22  
Reviewers ..... 23  
References ..... 23  
Biography ..... 31  

---

### Abstract

While cisplatin and carboplatin are active versus most common cancers, epithelial malignancies are incurable when metastatic. Even if an initial response occurs, acquired resistance due to mutations and epigenetic events limits efficacy. Resistance may be due to excess of a resistance factor, to saturation of factors required for tumor cell killing, or to mutation or alteration of a factor required for tumor cell killing. Platinum resistance could arise from decreased tumor blood flow, extracellular conditions, reduced platinum uptake, increased efflux, intracellular detoxification by glutathione, etc., decreased binding (e.g., due to high intracellular pH), DNA repair, decreased mismatch repair, defective apoptosis, antiapoptotic factors, effects of several signaling pathways, or presence of quiescent non-cycling cells. In lung cancer, flattening of dose–response curves at higher doses suggests that efficacy is limited by exhaustion of something required for cell killing, and several clinical observations suggest epigenetic events may play a major role in resistance.

© 2007 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Cisplatin; Carboplatin; Resistance

---

### 1. Introduction

Cisplatin and carboplatin have broad antitumor activity, but normal tissue toxicity is largely limited to gastrointestinal enterochromaffin cells, kidney convoluted tubules, cochlear hair cells, dorsal root ganglia and megakaryocytes [1], suggesting an epigenetic influence in toxicity. Normal cells have several mechanisms of protection from a noxious environment [2–4] that may also underlie cancer chemotherapy resistance.

(due to excess resistance factor, giving a shoulder on a dose–response curve [DRC]) (Fig. 1) versus saturable passive (deficiency of a factor required for drug efficacy, giving a DRC terminal plateau) versus non-saturable passive (due to factor alteration, giving a decreased DRC slope) [11]. Examples of active resistance factors would include efflux pumps, DNA repair systems, anti-apoptotic factors, etc. Examples of factors that might give saturable passive resistance if deficient would include drug uptake or activating systems, obligate targets (e.g., topoisomerase II for topoisomerase II inhibitors), proapoptotic factors or factors that are part of the apoptotic cascade, or cells in a sensitive phase of the cell cycle. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) DRCs for cisplatin combinations flatten at higher doses, suggesting that efficacy is ultimately limited by saturable passive resistance, i.e., by deficiency of a required factor [12]. A potential example would be the presence of non-cycling cells, in keeping with the relative resistance in vitro of quiescent/slowly proliferating cells [13–16]. Overall, several factors may contribute to resistance (Table 1).

### 2. Platinum resistance

Cisplatin resistance has been studied to a greater extent than has carboplatin resistance. However, in reviewing platinum resistance mechanisms, the overall available data strongly suggest that resistance mechanisms are very similar for cisplatin and carboplatin (although not always identical). In this review, we will make the assumption that the same mechanisms generally apply to both, recognizing that this will not be so in all instances.

For colon and renal cancers, intrinsic resistance limits platinum usefulness. For many other malignancies, some patients initially respond, but acquired resistance then develops. While acquired resistance has been attributed to mutations [5], various clinical [6] and laboratory [7] observations and the rapid induction of resistance with brief drug exposure in vitro [8] and clinically [9,10] suggest epigenetic changes may also be important.

We hypothesized that resistance mechanisms may be regarded in pharmacodynamic terms and that dose–response relationships would reflect the major mechanisms underlying resistance [11]. Resistance may be classified as “active”

### 3. “Classical” resistance mechanisms

#### 3.1. Blood flow and drug delivery

Delivery of chemotherapy and oxygen varies with blood flow. Hypoxia reduces efficacy of many agents, but has little impact on cisplatin [17]. With respect to drug delivery, tissue drug concentrations conform to either flow-limited models (varying with blood flow [18]) or to membrane-limited models (not proportional to flow) [19,20]. Against a flow-limited model for cisplatin, concentrations are as high in necrotic as in viable human tumors [21] and cisplatin concentrations

Table 1  
Mechanisms of resistance to platinums  

| Mechanism | Contributing factor |
| --- | --- |
| Impaired blood flow/drug delivery | ↑ Tissue pressure<sup>a</sup> |
|  | ↓ Blood pressure<sup>e</sup> |
|  | ↑ Plasma fibrinogen<sup>b</sup> |
|  | ↓ RBC deformability<sup>b</sup> |
|  | ↑ Blood viscosity<sup>b</sup> |
| Extracellular matrix/other factors | ↑ Tissue pressure<sup>a</sup>/↓ diffusion |
|  | ↑ Fibronectin |
|  | ↑ γ-Glutamyltransferase |
|  | ↑ Type IV collagen |
|  | ↑ Laminin |
| Decreased drug uptake | ↑ Cell membrane rigidity |
|  | ↑ NaCl<sup>c</sup> |
|  | ↑ Sphingomyelin |
|  | ↑ KCl<sup>c</sup> |
|  | ↑ Extracellular pH |
|  | ↑ Protein binding |
|  | ↓ Copper transporter CTR1 |
|  | ↑ Copper |
|  | ↓ CaCl₂<sup>c</sup> |
|  | ↓ Uptake concurrently of several |
|  | Concurrent ↓ expression several |
|  | transporters |
|  | ↓ γ-Catenin |
| Defective endocytosis/formation of |
| endocytic recycling compartment | ↓ Small GTPases (rab5, rac1, |
|  | rhoA) which regulate |
|  | endocytosis |
| Increased efflux | ↑ Cu transporters ATP7A, -7B |
|  | ↓ CuCl₂<sup>c</sup> |
|  | ↑ MRP2/cMOAT/GSH-X pump<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ MRP1<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ MVP/LRP<sup>d</sup> |
|  | Abnormal sorting into exosomal |
|  | pathway |
|  | ↑ Intracellular pH |
|  | ↑ p-Glycoprotein<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ Sequestration intracellularly |
| Increased detoxification | ↑ GSH |
|  | ↑ GST<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ γ-Glutamylcysteine synthase |
|  | ↑ γ-Glutamyltransferase |
|  | ↑ Glutamate cysteine ligase |
|  | ↑ GSH reductase |
|  | ↑ Dihydrodiol dehydrogenase |
|  | ↑ Superoxide dismutase |
|  | ↑ Catalase |
|  | ↑ Metallothioneins<sup>d,e</sup> |
|  | ↑ GST-pi/GST-pi SNPs<sup>e</sup> |
|  | ↑ GSH peroxidase |
| Decreased drug binding | ↑ Proton pumps |
|  | ↑ Intracellular pH |
|  | ↑ In cell cycle G1/↓ in G2/M |
|  | ↑ Histone methylation |
|  | ↑ Extracellular pH |
| Increased DNA repair | ↑ Nucleotide excision repair system |
|  | ↑ XPA<sup>e</sup> |
|  | (ERCC1 and XPF) |
|  | Host ERCC1/XPD SNPs<sup>e</sup>, |
|  | ↑ Topoisomerase-II |
|  | ↑ Base excision repair (DNA |
|  | ↑ Homologous recombination |
|  | polymerase-β<sup>d</sup>, -zeta, and -eta) |
|  | repair |
|  | ↑ DNA damage recognition protein |
|  | HMG1 |
|  | ↑ BRCA1<sup>e</sup> |
|  | ↑ REV1 |
|  | ↑ DDB2 (damaged-DNA- |
|  | binding-protein-2) |
| Increased tolerance of DNA damage | ↓ DNA postreplicational mismatch |
|  | ↓ hMLH1, hMSH2, hMSH6<sup>d</sup> |
|  | repair |
|  | ↓ Non-homologous end-joining |
|  | repair |
| Decreased pro-apoptotic factors | Down-regulation/↓ expression (p53, |
|  | ↓ Activation (Fas, caspase 9) |
|  | p53-binding-protein-2, Bax, Fas, |
|  | caspases 8, 9, other) |
|  | P53 mutation (with |
|  | overexpression of a |
|  | non-functional protein)<sup>d,e</sup> |
| Mitochondrial abnormalities | P53 deletion |
| Increased apoptosis inhibitors | ↑ Bcl-2<sup>d,e</sup> |
|  | ↑ Bcl-xL<sup>d,e</sup> |
|  | ↑ Survivin |
|  | Hypoxia (via ↑ Bcl-xL) |
|  | ↑ FLIP |
|  | ↑ Xiap |
|  | ↑ IAP-2 |
|  | ↑ COX-2<sup>d,e</sup> |
| Altered mitochondria | ↑ Fatty acid use for O₂ consumption |
|  | ↑ Mitochondrial-uncoupling- |
|  | protein-2 |
|  | ↓ Membrane potential |
|  | ↑ No. mitochondria |
| Increased chaperones | ↑ HSP27<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↓ GRP78 |
|  | ↑ HSP 90-β |
|  | ↑ HSP70 |
| Altered cell signaling pathways | ↑ E-cadherin |
|  | ↑ EGF/EGFR |
|  | ↑ Her-2/neu<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ Heregulin/↑ p21WAF1/CIP1 |
|  | ↑ PI3K |
|  | ↑ AKT |
|  | ↑ MAPK signaling cascade<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ p110α |
|  | ↑ Hyaluronan-CD44 |
|  | ↑ c-Myc/c-Fos/c-Jun activation |
|  | ↑ /Mutated ras |
|  | ↑ c-cot |
|  | ↑ STAT1/STAT3/JAK2 |
|  | ↑ PDE2 |
|  | ↑ PKC-iota |
|  | ↑ Protein phosphatases 2A & 4 |
|  | SRPK1 inactivation |
|  | ↓ SAPK/JNK activation |
|  | ↓ p38 kinase activation |
|  | ↓ IP3R1 |
|  | ↓ HGF |
| Transcription factors, cell cycle related | ↑ YB-1 |
| factors, checkpoint kinases, etc. | ↑ CTF2 |
|  | ↑ ATF4 |
|  | ↑ ZNF143 |
|  | ↑ mtTFA |
|  | ↑ Ets-1 |
|  | ↑ Zipper transcriptional factor |
|  | ↑ AP-2 |
|  | ↑ SKP2 |
|  | ↑ NF-kappaB<sup>d</sup> |
|  | ↑ Cyclin D1 |
|  | ↓ Chk1 |
|  | ↓ Chk2 |
|  | ↓ Telomerase mRNA expression |
|  | ↓ Telomere length |
|  | ↓ Telomerase activity |

Table 1 (Continued)

| Mechanism                     | Contributing factor                                                                 |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Gene arrays: differential expression | ↑ FN1<br>↑ ASS<br>↑ SGPP1<br>↑ MDR1<br>↑ CD55 |
|                               | ↑ TOP2A<br>↑ COL3A1<br>↑ ITGAE<br>↑ MRP1<br>↑ PGK1 |
|                               | ↑ LBR<br>↑ STK6<br>↑ PCNA<br>↑ MRP2<br>↓ Caveolin 1 |
| Proteomic analyses: differential expression | ↑ HSP 60/HSP 90/heat-shock cognate<br>71 kDa protein<br>↑ Peroxiredoxins PRX 2/PRX 6<br>↑ Voltage-dependent anion-selective channel-1 |
|                               | ↑ Calmodulin<br>↑ GST |
|                               | ↑ Calumenin<br>↑ 14-3-3 |
| Miscellaneous                | ↑ Ribosomal proteins RPS 13, RPL 23<br>Chromosomal abnormalities<br>↑ Glucose utilization<sup>f</sup><br>↑ Golgi apparatus |
|                               | Altered sphingolipid pathway<br>↑ Splicing factor SPF 45<br>↑ Lactate production<sup>f</sup><br>↓ Microsatellite D6S1581 |
|                               | Altered ganglioside expression<br>↑ Serum LDH<sup>d,e</sup><br>↑ LDH-5<sup>e,f</sup><br>↓ Pyruvate kinase M2 |

<sup>a</sup> Paradoxically associated with improved cisplatin efficacy and patient survival.<br>
<sup>b</sup> Thought to be important for drugs in general, but not directly tested with platinums.<br>
<sup>c</sup> Alter platinum cellular uptake and efficacy when added in vitro.<br>
<sup>d</sup> Effect not seen consistently across all studies, or opposite effect seen in some studies.<br>
<sup>e</sup> Demonstrated in clinical studies.<br>
<sup>f</sup> Despite cells with low intracellular and extracellular pH having decreased platinum efflux and increased platinum uptake, binding and efficacy.

in human autopsy tissues do not correlate with organ blood flow rates [22]. Human tumor cisplatin concentrations do vary with pulse and blood pressure [23], with metastatic site [23], and with tumor type [21, 23].

Since blood flow autoregulation is defective in tumors, blood pressure fluctuations have greater impact on flow to tumors than to normal tissues [24], and agents that alter blood pressure may selectively alter tumor blood flow/drug delivery [24–26]. Decreased red blood cell deformability, high fibrinogen levels, etc. may reduce tumor blood flow by increasing blood viscosity [27, 28], while agents that reduce blood viscosity (e.g., pentoxifylline, mannitol or fibrinolytics

**Fig. 1.** Dose-response relationships and proposed resistance mechanisms. We hypothesize that if log % cell survival is plotted vs. drug dose, excess of a resistance factor (“active resistance”) would give a shoulder on the dose-response curve (analogous to competitive inhibition of drug effect), mutation or alteration of a factor such as a target or drug transport or activating system, etc. (“non-saturable passive resistance”) would decrease the slope of the curve (analogous to decreased affinity of a drug for its receptor), and deficiency of a factor required for cell killing (“saturable passive resistance”) would give a terminal plateau on the dose-response curve (analogous to non-competitive inhibition of drug effect).

[27, 29–31]) might increase tumor blood flow and drug delivery. While both blood flow [32] and drug diffusion through interstitium from vessel to tumor cell [33] may be impeded by the abnormally high tissue pressures in tumors, higher interstitial fluid pressures may nevertheless be associated with increased cisplatin efficacy and prolonged patient survival [34]. Overall, it is unknown to what extent tissue pressure and tumor blood flow affect platinum activity clinically.

### 3.2. Extracellular environment

Cisplatin-induced apoptosis is reduced in the presence of the extracellular matrix proteins fibronectin, type IV collagen and laminin that may bind tumor cells [35], and extracellular gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) may cleave glutathione to yield thiol groups that bind and inactivate cisplatin and other electrophilic drugs [36]. The impact of these factors in the clinic remains unknown.

Unlike tumor intracellular pH (which is neutral-to-alkaline) [37], tumor extracellular pH is often acidic [37, 38]. A pH gradient with extracellular pH < intracellular pH favors uptake of weak acids [37], and cisplatin uptake is markedly increased at low extracellular pH [39]. Hence, diet could potentially impact cisplatin efficacy, as tumor extracellular pH is increased by bicarbonate [40] and lowered by glucose administration [41, 42]. One might speculate that some of the broad efficacy and favorable therapeutic index for the platinums may be due in part to the relatively greater acidity in many tumors compared to most normal tissues.

Other agents could also potentially have an impact. For example, mannitol and NaCl, both of which are used to decrease cisplatin nephrotoxicity, decrease cisplatin uptake and cytotoxicity in vitro [43, 44], as does KCl [43, 44], while CaCl₂ and CuCl₂ may increase net cisplatin accumulation and cytotoxicity [44].

Binding of drug to proteins either in plasma or the interstitium also could contribute to resistance. Protein-bound platinum is much less cytotoxic than is free cisplatin [45, 46], with substantially reduced uptake into cells [46] and tissues [47]. Cisplatin binds irreversibly [48] to plasma proteins, with a half-life for protein binding of about 2 h [46]. Carboplatin takes substantially longer to bind to protein than does cisplatin [49–51].

### 3.3. Drug uptake

Many resistant cell lines have reduced cisplatin accumulation [52–54]. Cisplatin cellular uptake is not saturable with dose, but is altered by metabolic inhibitors [44, 54] which do not affect efflux [55]. While some studies found that cell membrane fluidity (which could potentially alter either drug passive diffusion or activity of membrane transport systems) did not correlate with cisplatin uptake [56], others suggested that resistant lines with reduced uptake have rigid cell membranes [57, 58] with high sphingomyelin and cholesterol content [58], and sphingolipid pathway modulation [59] and cholesterol depletion [60] increase cellular platinum uptake and efficacy. Cisplatin resistance may also be associated with altered ganglioside expression [61].

The copper transporter CTR1 contributes to platinum cellular uptake [62–66], and CTR1-deficient cells are cisplatin-resistant [63]. Copper transporters undergo rapid cytoplasmic internalization after cisplatin exposure, reducing transporter surface expression and limiting further cisplatin uptake [63, 66].

Reduced cisplatin uptake may be associated with a broad reduction in uptake of several factors, including folates, epidermal growth factor (EGF), iron, glucose, etc., in conjunction with downregulation of various transporters, defective endocytosis, and downregulation of the small GTPases rab5, rac1, and rhoA which regulate endocytosis, and this may be reversed via DNA demethylation with reactivation of silenced genes [67]. Microtubule alterations with defective formation of the endocytic recycling compartment may lead to cisplatin resistance and reduced uptake of cisplatin and other molecules [68]. The extent to which reduced transport and uptake contributes to platinum resistance in the clinic remains unclear. However, note that the flat dose–response curve seen with platinums in non-small cell lung cancer could hypothetically result from saturation of drug uptake systems.

### 3.4. Drug efflux

Resistance may also be associated with increased cisplatin efflux from cells [15, 69] or from nucleus into cytoplasm [70]. The copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatases ATP7A and ATP7B have been implicated in platinum efflux and resistance [64, 71–76]. Copper competes with cisplatin for uptake into cells, but also reduces cisplatin efflux [55], and may increase cisplatin net accumulation and cytotoxicity [44]. ATP7B overexpression is associated with poor outcome in cisplatin-treated patients with esophageal cancers [73] and squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (SCCHN) [74], suggesting that ATP7B-associated platinum efflux could potentially contribute to clinical platinum resistance.

Other pumps that may also play a role in cisplatin resistance (+enhanced efflux) include the MRP2 (multidrug-resistance-associated-protein-2)/cMOAT (canalicular Multispecific Organic Anion Transporter)/glutathione-X-conjugate pump [75, 77–82], MRP1 [83, 84], p-glycoprotein [80, 82, 84–87], and major vault/lung resistance-related protein (MVP/LRP) [70, 82, 88–90], although there have also been negative studies for MRP1 [91], MRP2 [92], p-glycoprotein [91, 93], and LRP [84, 91]. In ovarian cancer (OC) cells, LRP down-regulation reversed resistance, increased cellular cisplatin accumulation, increased cisplatin in isolated nuclei, and decreased cisplatin efflux from nuclei [70].

Resistance has also been associated with abnormal sorting of some lysosomal proteins and cisplatin transporters
into an exosomal pathway [75], and with drug sequestration in subcellular organelles such as melanosomes, with significantly reduced drug nuclear localization and with increased extracellular transport of melanosomes containing cisplatin [94].

Resistant lines with increased cisplatin efflux also may have increased intracellular pH [15]. Intracellularly, cisplatin’s chlorides are replaced by neutral hydroxy or highly reactive positively charged aqua groups, with the pKa for the interconversion between chloro-hydroxy and chloro-aqua species being 6.56 [95]. Hence, if intracellular pH is high, a higher proportion of drug may be in the uncharged chloro-hydroxy form, with increased passive efflux of this form. Again, clinical importance of each of these different efflux mechanisms remains uncertain.

### 3.5. Drug detoxification

Increased glutathione (GSH) may cause resistance [96–100] by binding/inactivating cisplatin, enhancing DNA repair, or reducing cisplatin-induced oxidative stress [53]. Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) [14,86,100–102], particularly GST-pi [103–109] or specific GST-pi polymorphisms [109], may augment resistance by catalyzing GSH-drug binding, although not all studies agree [96,97]. Clinically, GST-pi gene amplification [104], immunostaining [105], host gene polymorphisms [101], and plasma levels [106] correlated with cisplatin resistance clinically, suggesting that platinum detoxification by GSH and GST may be clinically important.

Other GSH-related enzymes such as gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase [102], gamma-glutamyltransferase [36], glutamate cysteine ligase [110], GSH peroxidase [99], GSH reductase [102,111], and catalase [87,99] have also been linked to cisplatin resistance, as have the antioxidants superoxide dismutase [87,112,113] and dihydrodiol dehydrogenase [114] in preclinical systems.

Metallothioneins (sulfur-containing proteins involved in zinc homeostasis) have been associated with resistance to cisplatin in some studies [87,96,108,115–118] (but not others [97]), presumably through drug binding, and correlated with clinical cisplatin resistance in hepatocellular carcinomas [117] and NSCLC [118], again suggesting its clinical relevance as a platinum resistance mechanism. Zinc upregulates metallothionein expression and decreases cisplatin efficacy [119].

### 3.6. Drug binding

As noted above, intracellularly cisplatin’s chlorides are replaced by neutral hydroxy or highly reactive positively charged aqua groups [95]. Chloro-aquated platinum accounts for most DNA binding [120]. Intrastrand and interstrand DNA crosslinks are responsible for cell killing [121]. DNA adduct levels in lymphocytes correlate with those in tumor [122] and with platinum efficacy [122–127], although not in all studies [122,128,129]. Platinum–DNA adducts are found primarily in nuclear high-density chromatin loci and in mitochondria, with highest adduct levels in dividing cell [130]. Cisplatin cytotoxicity and DNA binding are highest with cell exposure during G1 and lowest during G2/M [131]. Reducing histone methylation relaxes condensed chromatin, increases cisplatin access to DNA, increases DNA–platinum adduct formation, and augments cisplatin efficacy [132].

Decreased DNA adduct formation and cisplatin resistance may occur despite high cellular concentrations [52]. Cisplatin is most effective at low intracellular [133] and extracellular [39] pH, and pH was significantly increased in cisplatin-resistant cells with reduced DNA binding [15,134]. Cisplatin DNA binding is markedly increased in acidic conditions [134]. Cisplatin-resistant lines had upregulation of expression of proton pumps [134], and proton pump inhibitors augment cisplatin retention [135] and efficacy [134,135], although results varied between lines [136]. Intracellular pH is lowest during G1 and highest during G2/M, in keeping with cisplatin’s phase-specific relative DNA binding and cytotoxicity [131].

The major determinants of intracellular pH were H+-linked monocarboxylate transporters in melanoma cells versus the Na+/H+ exchanger in normal tissues, suggesting that monocarboxylate transporter inhibitors might selectively sensitize tumors [137]. In other systems, the lactate-/H+ symporter was the most active exchanger regulating tumor cell pH under aerobic conditions, while in hypoxia, lactate extrusion is reduced and a major factor in maintaining normal cytosolic pH despite an acidic extracellular environment may be enhanced sequestration of protons into acidic cellular vesicles [138]. Tumor cell pH may also correlate with nucleoside triphosphate/inorganic phosphate ratios [139].

Anaerobic glycolysis and other processes drive tumor acid production [140]. Lowering extracellular pH markedly increases cisplatin uptake and DNA binding, and also lowers intracellular pH [39]. In vivo, intravenous glucose administration lowers tumor extracellular pH [41,42], while oral bicarbonate administration raises it [40]. However, despite low pH enhancing cisplatin uptake and binding and reducing efflux, glucose utilization and lactate production may be increased in resistant lines [15]. Furthermore, tumor expression of the HIF-1 regulated isoenzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)-5 (the LDH isoenzyme most important in anaerobic glycolysis and in pyruvate–lactate conversion) predicts poor prognosis [141], while the LDH isoenzyme most efficient at converting lactate to pyruvate under aerobic conditions is associated with increased cisplatin sensitivity [142]. High serum LDH level is associated with poor prognosis in many [143–155] but not all [156–158] platinum-treated malignancies. Expression of pyruvate kinase M2 (another key glycolytic pathway enzyme) was reduced in resistant cells [159]. In summary, there is substantial preclinical evidence suggesting that reduced extracellular and intracellular pH may be associated with platinum uptake, binding and cytotoxicity, but its importance clinically has not yet been adequately assessed, and high LDH expression (which might be expectedto be associated with reduced tumor pH) is often associated with poor outcome in patients with platinum-treated malignancies.

### 3.7. DNA repair

Cisplatin is effective versus testicular carcinoma, which has a particularly low capacity to repair platinum-induced DNA damage [160]. Cisplatin is most efficiently removed from transcribed areas within DNA [161] and gene-specific repair efficiency of cross-links correlates with resistance [162]. Platinum damage is repaired primarily by the nucleotide excision repair (NER) system (particularly ERCC1 and ERCC1/XPF) and the related genes XPA and BRCA1 [163,164]. ERCC1 overexpression (without gene amplification [165]) is associated with reduced platinum-based therapy efficacy in both OC [166] and NSCLC [111,118,167], and response [168] or survival [107] varies with host genotype ERCC1 polymorphisms. However, ERCC1 is involved mainly in removal of interstrand cross-links rather than therapeutically important intrastrand cross-links [53].

Polymorphisms of XPD (involved in the NER transcription-coupled repair pathway) conferring reduced repair capacity are associated with increased platinum sensitivity [169], and are associated with a trend towards improved outcome in some NSCLC studies [170], but not others [107]. In OC, cisplatin resistance is associated with enhanced expression of XPA (but not with XPA gene mutation or amplification [171]), and with upregulation of expression of the Fanconi Anemia/BRCA pathway [172,173]. BRCA1 mutation augments lymphocyte sensitivity to cisplatin [174], and in NSCLC patients treated with neoadjuvant cisplatin/gemcitabine, low tumor BRCA1 mRNA levels predicted better survival [113].

The base excision repair enzyme DNA polymerase-β is overexpressed in several cisplatin-resistant cell lines demonstrating translesion synthesis across platinated crosslinks [175–177]. Incorporation of incorrect bases is frequent during platinum adduct repair by DNA polymerase-β [177]. Cell transfection with DNA polymerase-β genes increases cisplatin resistance [178], while DNA polymerase-β antagonists [179,180] increase cisplatin efficacy, although not in all studies [181]. AP-2 transcription factors which are modulated by protein kinase A (PKA) and regulate genes for DNA polymerase-β and metallothioneins also are associated with cisplatin resistance [182].

DNA polymerase-zeta is associated with cisplatin resistance [183], and may enable mutagenic bypass of replication-blocking DNA adducts [184], as may DNA polymerase-eta [185]. The bypass replication by DNA polymerase-eta may be more efficient [177] and less error-prone [177,186] than with DNA polymerase-β. REV1, which interacts with Y-type DNA polymerases and DNA polymerase-zeta to bypass many types of adducts that block the replicative DNA polymerases also confers cisplatin resi-

tance [187]. Cytarabine, which inhibits DNA polymerase-α [188,189], is synergistic with cisplatin [190].

Topoisomerase-II [191] and homologous recombination repair [179,192] may also increase platinum DNA damage repair, while non-homologous end-joining repair may enhance platinum efficacy [193]. Cisplatin resistance has also been associated with overexpression of the DNA damage recognition protein HMG1 (which may shield DNA adducts from repair) [194] and of damaged-DNA-binding-protein-2 (DDB2) (which is involved in UV damage repair) [195]. The O⁶-alkylguanine-DNA-alkyltransferase repair system does not confer cisplatin resistance [196,197].

Cisplatin adduct formation is greater and repair less on mitochondrial DNA versus genomic DNA [198], although the significance of cisplatin mitochondrial DNA binding remains unknown.

Overall, there are clinical data that support a role for components of the NER pathway in platinum resistance. While there is preclinical evidence of a role for various DNA polymerases, topoisomerase II and homologous recombination repair in platinum resistance, there is not yet clinical information available on the role of these DNA repair systems.

#### 3.8. Decreased DNA mismatch repair

DNA postreplicational mismatch repair (MMR)-mediated processing of platinum adducts results in apoptosis and **increased** platinum sensitivity [199]. Cells deficient in MMR [199–201] or with reduced nuclear content of the MMR proteins hMLH1, hMSH2 or hMSH6 [202] paradoxically have increased cisplatin resistance and reduced apoptosis [203], although not in all studies [204]. An intact c-Abl and p73 system may be required for MMR to enhance apoptosis, and cells lacking p73 expression after cisplatin exposure may be resistant [205]. DNA polymerase-zeta may be required for the resistance from MMR loss, suggesting that resistance is mediated by enhanced mutagenic translesion synthesis [206]. Concurrent p53 loss also enhances resistance development [206]. From a clinical perspective, hMLH1 gene methylation and down-regulation is common in treated germ cell tumors [207], suggesting that there may in fact be a clinical role for deficient DNA mismatch repair in platinum resistance.

#### 3.9. Reduced apoptotic response

Several genes regulating DNA damage, apoptosis and survival signaling may contribute to resistance [208]. Cisplatin may induce apoptosis through the Fas/Fas ligand signaling complex (with activation of caspase 8, then caspase 3), or by mitochondrial cytochrome-c release [209]. In the presence of ATP and cytochrome-c, apoptotic-protease-activating-factor-1 (Apaf-1) activates caspase 9, with subsequent caspase 3 activation [209]. Cisplatin may also kill via a caspase-3 independent apoptotic pathway, by a defective apoptotic pathway or by necrosis [209].
Defective apoptosis may contribute to resistance to both p53-dependent and -independent cisplatin cytotoxicity [210]. P53 down-regulation may confer resistance, possibly by over-expression of the negative feedback regulator Mdm2, with or without downregulation of p14ARF (which moderates Mdm2) [53]. Resistance has also been associated with reduced p53-binding-protein-2 expression [211].

Cells with p53 deletions [212] or mutations [213] are often resistant to cisplatin. Cisplatin resistance has been associated with p53 mutation in vitro in OC [214] and SCCHN [215] cell lines, and clinically in germ cell tumors [216] and SCCHNs [106,217].

p53 mutation is generally associated with protein overexpression, but mutant protein lacks normal tumor suppressor function [218]. p53 overexpression is associated with poor outcome in platinum-treated OC [219] and NSCLC [118,220] patients. However, this is not seen in all studies [155], and glioma cells with mutant p53 paradoxically had enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis, while wild-type variants instead responded with G2-M arrest [221].

Caspases 3, 8, and 9 are important in cisplatin-induced apoptosis [53]. A cisplatin-resistant line had global down-regulation of caspase and Bax expression, but increased Bcl-2 [222]. Loss of caspase 8 pathway was associated with cis-platin resistance in a SCCHN cell line [223]. Decreased CD95 (Fas) expression or pathway activation after cisplatin may lead to inhibition of activation of caspases 3 and 8 [53], and was associated with cisplatin resistance in germ cell tumors [224] and OC cells [14]. Decreased cisplatin caspase 9 activation was noted in cells with normal mitochondrial cytochrome-c release and normal Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL expression [225]. Cisplatin-resistant cells have also been reported with abnormal mitochondrial membrane potential, intracellular distribution, or structure, and with up-regulation of cytochrome-c in the mitochondria in response to cisplatin rather than release into the cytoplasm [226].

Overall, there is preclinical evidence of an association of platinum resistance with abnormalities of a variety of apoptotic factors, but to date this has only been documented clinically for p53.

### 3.10. Apoptosis inhibitors

Apoptosis may be inhibited by overexpression of Xiap (X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein) and its interaction with the PI3-K/Akt pathway [227]. Overexpression of Xiap and IAP-2 correlated with cisplatin resistance in some cell lines [228], down-regulating Xiap increased cis-platin sensitivity, caspase-3 activity and apoptosis in resistant ovarian [229] and prostate cancer cells [230], and cell transfection with hRFI (a Ring Finger domain highly homologous to XIAP) induced cisplatin resistance and inactivation of caspase-3 [231]. Cell line overexpression of survivin also correlates with cisplatin resistance [228,232], and survivin antisense oligonucleotides augment cisplatin-induced apoptosis [233].

Bcl-2 [14,234,235] or Bcl-xL [235–237] overexpression (with no change in BAX or Bcl-Xs, but with marked down-regulation of caspase-3 expression [238]) is often (but not always [53]) associated with cisplatin resistance, and was associated with decreased response [239] or disease-free survival [237] in OC patients. Hypoxia increases Bcl-XL expression and resistance to cisplatin [236], while Bcl-2 or Bcl-XL antagonists augment cisplatin efficacy [233,236]. Cisplatin generation of reactive oxygen species causes dephosphorylation and degradation of Bcl-2, while nitric oxide (NO) induces its S-nitrosylation, inhibiting its ubiquitination and upregulating Bcl-2 expression. NO synthase activity and NO production correlate with resistance in NSCLC cells [240].

Overexpression of ribosomal proteins (RP) S13 and RPL23 in a resistant cell line increased Bcl-2 expression, the Bcl-2/Bax ratio, GST activity and intracellular GSH content [241]. Resistant cells also may overexpress the Bcl-2-related protein Bfl-1/A1, mediated by NF-kappaB [242].

Other resistant OC lines had increased expression of Fas-associated death domain-like interleukin-1beta-converting enzyme-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) [243]. Cisplatin decreased FLIP and induced caspase-8 and caspase-3 cleavage and apoptosis in cisplatin-sensitive but non-resistant cells. FLIP downregulation in chemoresistant cells increased cisplatin-induced apoptosis [243].

Hence, several apoptosis inhibitors have been associated with platinum resistance in preclinical systems, with clinical evidence of an association of bcl-2 and bcl-xL with resistance.

## 4. Newer molecular factors linked to platinum resistance

There are also several new molecular factors that have been linked to platinum resistance. With only a few exceptions, the effect on platinum efficacy has to date been assessed only in vitro, with little information on their impact on resistance in xenograft models or clinically. The extent to which they may also mediate resistance to other unrelated chemotherapy agents is also unclear, as is their potential impact on cross-resistance and on synergism versus antagonism of cisplatin and carboplatin with other agents. For most of these new factors, it is also not yet known whether their apparent ability to counteract platinum efficacy is due to counteracting a specific effect of the chemotherapy agent or whether it is due instead to a more non-specific ability to block cell death/promote cell survival and growth. However, these potential resistance factors are of substantial interest since inhibitors of several of these are currently under development and may eventually prove useful, either as therapy in their own right or else as a means of reversing platinum resistance. Ultimately, inhibitors of these factors will only prove useful if they can reverse chemotherapy resistance in tumor without substantially increasing normal tissue toxicity, and their impact on chemotherapy tox-
city to normal tissues remains largely undefined at this time.

### 4.1. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)

In preclinical studies, cisplatin treatment augmented tumor cell COX-2 expression [244] and cisplatin resistance was induced by COX-2 overexpression [83]. COX-2 inhibitors decreased bcl-2 expression [245] and potentiated cisplatin efficacy in some preclinical studies [83,245,246], but reduced efficacy in others [247]. Clinically, high COX-2 expression was associated with reduced platinum-based therapy efficacy in esophageal [248,249], bladder [250], cervical [251,252] and ovarian [253] cancers, but not in NSCLC [254]. The fact that a link is seen between therapy efficacy and COX-2 expression clinically makes the assessment of COX-2 inhibitors a particularly interesting focus for further research.

### 4.2. Heat shock proteins (HSP)

HSP27 overexpression [255–257] or gene transfection [256–258] increased cisplatin resistance in cell lines, although not consistently [259,260]. Growing cells to confluence increased HSP27 expression [257]. HSP90-β [261] and HSP70 [256] also may augment cisplatin resistance, and cisplatin treatment increases HSP70 expression in vitro [262]. On the other hand, glucose-regulated-stress-protein-78 (GRP78) overexpression was associated with increased cisplatin sensitivity in colon cancer cell lines [263]. HSP inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical trials, but little is known regarding the role of HSP in clinical resistance, and it remains unknown whether HSP inhibitors will prove useful.

### 4.3. Cell signaling pathways & molecules

Several signaling pathways and transcription factors may augment cisplatin resistance by promoting cell survival [264]:

#### 4.3.1. Cadherins/catenins

E-cadherin expression is associated with cisplatin resistance in vitro [14,265], as is increased expression of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) and α- and β-catenins [14]. As with HSP, it remains unknown whether E-cadherin plays a role in clinical platinum resistance. However, this area is of interest since EGFR antagonists may be particularly effective against lung cancer cells expressing E-cadherin [266], raising the possibility that E-cadherin expression may eventually help guide the decision whether to treat a lung cancer patient with a platinum-based regimen versus an EGFR inhibitor.

Cisplatin exposure results in proteolysis of γ-catenin, with loss of γ-catenin from adherens plaques and rapid reduction in uptake of subsequent carboplatin in vitro. Cell transfection with γ-catenin increased cisplatin sensitivity [267].

#### 4.3.2. EGF family

Possibly linked to the E-cadherin effect is the fact that EGFR inhibition increased cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC [268] and nasopharyngeal cancer cell lines [269]. Induction of tumor cell migration by chemotaxis to EGF up-regulates anti-apoptotic genes, down-regulates pro-apoptotic genes, and decreases cisplatin-induced apoptosis in vitro [270]. The related growth factor heregulin modulates expression of p21WAF1/CIP1, a resistance-promoting mediator of DNA repair. Cell lines overexpressing heregulin demonstrate constitutive hyperactivation of Her-2/neu, activation of down-stream PI-3K/AKT and MAPK signaling cascades, up-regulation of p21WAF1/CIP1 expression, nuclear accumulation of p21WAF1/CIP1 [271] and cisplatin resistance [271,272] that may be reversed by trastuzumab [272]. However, in other lines, Her-2/neu over-expression enhanced cisplatin sensitivity instead of resistance [273], and there are conflicting data on the role of the MAPK pathway in cisplatin resistance [53].

Despite the augmentation of cell line sensitivity to cisplatin by EGFR inhibitors, administration of EGFR inhibitors concurrently with platinum-based regimens has not proven useful clinically in NSCLC [274–276]. It has been postulated that inhibition of cell growth by the EGFR inhibitor may render tumor cells resistant to chemotherapy [277], and trials are now underway giving these therapies sequentially rather than concurrently.

#### 4.3.3. PTEN/PI3K/AKT

PI3K inhibitors enhanced cisplatin efficacy in resistant lines [278] and OC xenograft models [279], while SiRNA knockdown of PTEN and the expression of active p110α blocked cisplatin-induced apoptosis and increased resistance [278]. Xiap may inhibit apoptosis through its interaction with the PI3K/Akt pathway [227], and up-regulation of the PI3K/Akt pathway by Her-2/neu may lead to down-regulation of p53 expression and inactivation of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bad and procaspase 9 [53]. Cells expressing Akt1 [280] or Akt2 and Akt3 [281] display cisplatin resistance, with threshold modulation for several apoptotic pathways, increased Bcl-x(L) expression and delayed p53 activation [280]. Akt knockout reduces resistance [281]. Also, inhibition by rapamycin of mTOR (which acts downstream of PI3K/Akt) enhanced carboplatin-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells [282]. There remains little knowledge about the importance of this pathway in clinical platinum resistance, but early clinical trials are underway combining chemotherapy with inhibitors of mTOR (a signaling molecule which is downstream from AKT).

#### 4.3.4. Hyaluronan-CD44

Hyaluronan is an extracellular matrix ligand for the transmembrane receptor CD44, which acts through mul-
triple signaling pathways. Hyaluronan-CD44 promotes phospholipase-C calcium signaling and cisplatin resistance in SCCHN [283, 284]. Nothing is yet known about its clinical importance in platinum resistance.

### 4.3.5. IP3R1

A cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer line had reduced expression of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein IP3R1 (inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-receptor-type1) [285]. IP3R1 suppression in sensitive variants decreased apoptosis and cisplatin sensitivity, while overexpression of IP3R1 in resistant cells increased apoptosis and cisplatin sensitivity [285]. Again, clinical data are lacking.

### 4.3.6. SRPK1

Inactivation of serine/arginine-rich protein-specific kinase 1 (SRPK1) induces cisplatin resistance [286]. In clinical studies, SRPK1 expression was found to be high in testicular tissues, and was lower in resistant than in sensitive germ cell tumors [286].

### 4.3.7. Ras

Cells with ras mutation [287] or overexpression or with H-ras or c-cot gene transfection [288] may be resistant, with reduced cisplatin uptake [287], increased metallothionein [287], ERCC1 induction [289], and enhanced DNA repair [182]. The clinical importance of ras in platinum resistance remains uncertain.

### 4.3.8. C-myc, c-Fos, c-Jun, SAPK/JNK

C-Myc, c-Fos and c-Jun are activated by the MAPK pathway, and may be overexpressed in cisplatin resistance [53]. The c-fos/AP-1 complex turns on other genes in response to DNA damage [182]. Cisplatin induces c-Jun and AP-1 activity [290], and cell transfection with c-jun increases cellular GSH and cisplatin resistance [291]. On the other hand, attenuated MAPK signaling may be associated with cisplatin resistance in some cell lines, possibly due to decreased activation of stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) and p38 kinase [290]. Cisplatin-induced activation of SAPK/JNK [290, 292] and p38 kinase [290] is significantly decreased in resistant lines, and inhibition of JNK [290, 292] or p38 kinase [290] attenuates cisplatin-induced apoptosis. JNK pathway stimulation activates c-Jun and sensitizes resistant cells to cisplatin [292].

### 4.3.9. STATs

OC gene arrays revealed a significant association of STAT1 expression with cisplatin resistance in cell lines [293]. Cell transfection with Stat1 cDNA induced cisplatin resistance, but a Jak/Stat inhibitor failed to augment sensitivity. STAT3 (involved in signal transduction activated by various growth factors and cytokines) is overexpressed in some cisplatin-resistant cell lines [294], and may suppress the apoptotic pathway in cisplatin-resistant NSCLC cells [295].

### 4.3.10. JAK

Addition of erythropoietin to tumor cells induced cisplatin resistance that was reversed by JAK2 inhibition, suggesting erythropoietin-induced resistance is JAK2-dependent [296].

### 4.3.11. Protein kinase C (PKC)

In human OC cell lines, PKCa had no role in cisplatin resistance [297], but PKC-iota inhibition sensitized glioblastoma cells to cisplatin by increasing p38 MAP kinase expression [298].

### 4.3.12. Protein phosphatases 2A and 4

Protein phosphatase-2A [299] and -4 increase cisplatin resistance [300]. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) enhances OC cell killing by cisplatin, possibly by up-regulating p38 MAPK activity and down-regulating protein phosphatase-2A [299]. Protein phosphatase-4 regulates several cellular functions and signaling pathways, including NF-kappaB and mTOR pathways, and decreases histone deacetylase activity [300]. Again, the clinical significance of these observations remains uncertain.

### 4.4. cAMP-phosphodiesterase 2

The gene PDE2, encoding cAMP-phosphodiesterase-2, may induce resistance by increasing tolerance of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions [301].

### 4.5. Cell-cycle related factors

S-phase-kinase-associated-protein-2 (SKP2) controls stability of cell cycle-related proteins. SKP2 overexpression reduced expression of p27Kip1, cyclin E, and p21Cipl, increased S-phase cells, and increased cisplatin resistance, while SKP2 down-regulation increased sensitivity in vitro [302]. Cyclin D1 overexpression augmented pancreatic cancer cell chemoresistance both by promoting cell proliferation and by inhibiting drug-induced apoptosis in association with upregulation of NF-kappaB activity [303]. However, while restoration of wild-type p16 to melanoma cell lines restored radiation sensitivity, it had no impact on cisplatin sensitivity [304].

### 4.6. Checkpoints

Checkpoint-kinase-2 (Chk2) is a critical kinase governing the cell cycle checkpoint, DNA damage repair, and cell apoptosis in response to DNA damaging signals. Cisplatin induces Chk2 degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, and Chk2 expression is decreased in cisplatin-resistant OC cells [305]. Chk1 may also be important in the cellular response to cisplatin [306]. Cisplatin-induced apoptosis in gastric cancer cells is also reduced

substantially if Mitotic Arrest Deficient 2 (MAD2, an essential mitotic spindle checkpoint pathway component) is down-regulated [307].

### 4.7. NF-kappaB

Up-regulation of expression of antiapoptotic factors by NF-kappaB may antagonize cisplatin-induced apoptosis [242,308,309], and cisplatin significantly increases NF-kappaB DNA binding activity [310,311]. NF-kappaB inhibitors augment platinum activity against some cancer cell lines [60,311–322] and tumor xenograft models [310], but not against normal cells [311,312] nor against some other cancer cell lines [311,314]. NF-kappaB activation actually augmented cisplatin efficacy in some lines [323,324], or antagonized apoptosis with low cisplatin concentrations but enhanced efficacy of higher cisplatin concentrations [325].

### 4.8. Other transcription factors

Other transcription factors that may contribute to DNA repair and cisplatin resistance include Y-box-binding-protein-1 (YB-1), CCAAT-binding-transcription-factor-2 (CTF2), activating-transcription-factor-4 (ATF4), zinc-finger-factor-143 (ZNF143), mitochondrial-transcription-factor-A (mtTFA) [326], Ets-1 [327], AP-2 [182] and a protein related to zipper transcriptional factor [328]. YB-1 nuclear localization was increased in resistant cells [329]. Ets-1 [327] and AP-2 transcription factors (which are modulated by PKA) [182] contribute to transcriptional activation of other resistance genes including metallothioneins and DNA repair enzymes, and Ets-1 overexpression is associated with poor prognosis [327]. OC cell transfection with the splicing factor SPF45 (RBM17) also conferred resistance to carboplatin [330].

### 4.9. Chromosomal alterations

Platinum-resistant cells may have several chromosomal abnormalities [331–338]. Telomere length, telomerase activity, and telomerase mRNA expression were reduced in cisplatin-resistant OC cell lines [339], and OCs with a loss of microsatellite D6S1581 were cisplatin-resistant [340].

### 4.10. Miscellaneous

Cells with pleiotropic drug resistance may also have altered metabolic pathways, with low mitochondrial membrane potential, increased fatty acid use for mitochondrial oxygen consumption, and high levels of mitochondrial uncoupling-protein-2 [341]. Cisplatin-resistant cells also may have ultrastructural changes [342], with increased Golgi apparatus and mitochondria, and altered nuclear structure [130,343]

### 4.11. Gene arrays

Carboplatin-resistant versus -sensitive OC cells differentially expressed genes associated with apoptosis, cell–cell communication, cell adhesion, DNA repair, and cell proliferation [344]. In tumors from OC patients, the genes FN1, TOP2A, LBR, ASS, COL3A1, STK6, SGPP1, ITGAE, and PCNA correlated with platinum resistance [345]. Cisplatin-resistant SCCHN cell lines had up-regulated expression of ATP-binding cassette transporter genes (MDR1, MRP1, and MRP2), CD55, and PGK1 and down-regulated Caveolin 1 expression [80].

### 4.12. Proteomics

In proteomic analyses of cervix carcinoma cells, cisplatin-sensitive versus -resistant lines differentially expressed several proteins, including molecular chaperones (e.g., HSP60, HSP90, heat-shock cognate 71 kDa protein), calcium-binding proteins (e.g., calmodulin, calumenin), proteins involved in drug detoxification (e.g., the peroxiredoxins PRX 2 and PRX 6, and GST), anti-apoptotic proteins (e.g., 14-3-3) and ion channels (e.g., voltage-dependent anion-selective channel-1) [346]. Cisplatin exposure was associated with up-regulation of HSP60 and HSP90, 14-3-3 protein, GST in sensitive cells and PRX6 in resistant cells [346]. The study suggested a constitutive expression of defense factors by resistant cells, with further increase in expression upon cisplatin exposure [346].

## 5. Summary

It is unknown which of these numerous resistance mechanisms are most important clinically. NSCLC DRCs flatten at higher doses for cisplatin combinations, suggesting therapy efficacy is ultimately limited by exhaustion of a required factor [12], and this may also apply to other epithelial malignancies. Several clinical observations suggest epigenetic factors play a major role in resistance [6], and platinum resistance has been reported with down regulation of expression (e.g., by gene hypermethylation) of a variety of factors, including membrane transporters, hMLH1, and caspases [67,207,222,238]. In addition, when tumors shrink with chemotherapy, some patients have rapid tumor regrowth, while others have prolonged stability after therapy completion. Based on several observations, we propose the following model of resistance: cells with sufficient active resistance mechanisms [11] to withstand initial chemotherapy will continue to divide between therapy cycles. If active resistance mechanisms are insufficient for protection, non-cycling cells will nevertheless survive based on their intrinsic saturable passive resistance. Cells that do not have sufficient active resistance mechanisms to permit continued growth would down-regulate growth and remain quiescent until treatment cessation. While increasing drug doses

could overcome active resistance, the larger problem may remain identification of exploitable targets in non-cycling cells.

**Reviewers**

Michael M. Gottesman, MD, The Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Laboratory of Cell Biology - Molecular Cell Genetics, Multidrug Resistance Unit, 37 Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-4255, U.S.A.

Matthew D. Hall, MD, The Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Laboratory of Cell Biology - Molecular Cell Genetics, Multidrug Resistance Unit, 37 Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-4255, U.S.A.

**References**

[1] McKeage MJ. Comparative adverse effect profiles of platinum drugs. Drug Saf 1995;13:228–44.

[2] Crawford DR, Davies KJ. Adaptive response and oxidative stress. Environ Health Perspect 1994;102(Suppl 10):25–8.

[3] Prestera T, Zhang Y, Spencer SR, Wilczak CA, Talalay P. The electrophile counterattack response: protection against neoplasia and toxicity. Adv Enzyme Regul 1993;33:281–96.

[4] Soti C, Csermely P. Pharmacological modulation of the heat shock response. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2006:417–36.

[5] Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. A model for tumor response to chemotherapy: an integration of the stem cell and somatic mutation hypotheses. Cancer Invest 1985;3:553–64.

[6] Stewart DJ, Tomiak E, Shamji FM, Mazziak DE, MacLeod P. Phase II study of alternating chemotherapy regimens for advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2004;44:241–9.

[7] Nyce JW. Drug-induced DNA hypermethylation: a potential mediator of acquired drug resistance during cancer chemotherapy. Mutat Res 1997;386:153–61.

[8] Graham CH, Kobayashi H, Stankiewicz KS, Man S, Kapitan SJ, Kerbel RS. Rapid acquisition of multicellular drug resistance after a single exposure of mammary tumor cells to antitumor alkylating agents. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:975–82.

[9] Di Nicolantonio F, Mercer SJ, Knight LA, et al. Cancer cell adaptation to chemotherapy. BMC Cancer 2005;5:78.

[10] Akita H, Doki Y, Miyata H, et al. Clinical significance of the second cycle response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy as preoperative treatment for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 2006;93:401–9.

[11] Stewart DJ, Raaphorst GP, Yau J, Beaubien AR. Active vs. passive resistance, dose-response relationships, high dose chemotherapy, and resistance modulation: a hypothesis. Invest New Drugs 1996;14:115–30.

[12] Stewart D, Chiritescu G, Dahrouge S, Banerjee S, Tomiak E. Chemotherapy dose-response relationships in non-small cell lung cancer and implied resistance mechanisms. Cancer Treat Rev 2007;33:101–37.

[13] Mellor HR, Ferguson DJ, Callaghan R. A model of quiescent tumour microregions for evaluating multicellular resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Br J Cancer 2005;93:302–9.

[14] Chekhun VF, Lukyanova NY, Urchenko OV, Kulik GI. The role of expression of the components of proteome in the formation of molecular profile of human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells sensitive and resistant to cisplatin. Exp Oncol 2005;27:191–5.

[15] Chau Q, Stewart DJ. Cisplatin efflux, binding and intracellular pH in the HTB56 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line and the

E-8/0.7 cisplatin-resistant variant. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;44:193–202.

[16] Naumov GN, Townson JL, MacDonald IC, et al. Ineffectiveness of doxorubicin treatment on solitary dormant mammary carcinoma cells or late-developing metastases. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2003;82:199–206.

[17] Teicher BA, Lazo JS, Sartorelli AC. Classification of antineoplastic agents by their selective toxicities toward oxygenated and hypoxic tumor cells. Cancer Res 1981;41:73–81.

[18] Mapleson WW. An electric analogue for uptake and exchange of inert gases and other agents. J Appl Physiol 1963;18:197–204.

[19] Bischoff KB. Some fundamental considerations of the applications of pharmacokinetics to cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;59:777–93.

[20] Lutz RJ, Galbraith WM, Dedrick RL, Shrager R, Mellett LB. A model for the kinetics of distribution of actinomycin-D in the beagle dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1977;200:469–78.

[21] Stewart DJ, Molepo JM, Green RM, et al. Factors affecting platinum concentrations in human surgical tumour specimens after cisplatin. Br J Cancer 1995;71:598–604.

[22] Stewart DJ, Benjamin RS, Luna M, et al. Human tissue distribution of platinum after cis-diamminedichloroplatinum. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1982;10:51–4.

[23] Stewart D, Molepo M, Mikhael N, Montpetit V, Goel R. Factors associated with tumor cisplatin content. In: Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res Abstract 39: Abstract #2236; 1998.

[24] Suzuki M, Hori K, Abe I, Saito S, Sato H. A new approach to cancer chemotherapy: selective enhancement of tumor blood flow with angiotensin II. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:663–9.

[25] Noguchi S, Miyauchi K, Nishizawa Y, et al. Augmentation of anticancer effect with angiotensin II in intraarterial infusion chemotherapy for breast carcinoma. Cancer 1988;62:467–73.

[26] Guichard M, Lespinasse F, Trotter M, Durand R, Chaplin D. The effect of hydralazine on blood flow and misomidazole toxicity in human tumour xenografts. Radiother Oncol 1991;20:117–23.

[27] Leonhardt H, Grigoleit HG. Effects of pentoxifylline on red blood cell deformability and blood viscosity under hyperosmolar conditions. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1977;299:197–200.

[28] von Tempelhoff GF, Heilmann L, Hommel G, Pollow K. Impact of rheological variables in cancer. Semin Thromb Hemost 2003;29:499–513.

[29] Muizelaar JP, Wei EP, Kontos HA, Becker DP. Mannitol causes compensatory cerebral vasoconstriction and vasodilation in response to blood viscosity changes. J Neurosurg 1983;59:822–8.

[30] Andrews RJ, Bringas JR, Muto RP. Effects of mannitol on cerebral blood flow, blood pressure, blood viscosity, hematocrit, sodium, and potassium. Surg Neurol 1993;39:218–22.

[31] Lowe GD. Defibrinating agents: effects on blood rheology, blood flow and vascular diseases in controlled studies. Bibl Haematol 1981:247–51.

[32] Boucher Y, Baxter LT, Jain RK. Interstitial pressure gradients in tissue-isolated and subcutaneous tumors: implications for therapy. Cancer Res 1990;50:4478–84.

[33] Jain RK. Haemodynamic and transport barriers to the treatment of solid tumours. Int J Radiat Biol 1991;60:85–100.

[34] Nathan SS, DiResta GR, Casas-Ganem JE, et al. Elevated physiologic tumor pressure promotes proliferation and chemosensitivity in human osteosarcoma. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:2389–97.

[35] Berube M, Talbot M, Collin C, et al. Role of the extracellular matrix proteins in the resistance of SP6.5 uveal melanoma cells toward cisplatin. Int J Oncol 2005;26:405–13.

[36] Pompella A, De Tata V, Paolicchi A, Zunino F. Expression of gamma-glutamyltransferase in cancer cells and its significance in drug resistance. Biochem Pharmacol 2006;71:231–8.

[37] Raghunand N, Gillies RJ. pH and drug resistance in tumors. Drug Resist Updat 2000;3:39–47.

[38] Prescott DM, Charles HC, Poulson JM, et al. The relationship between intracellular and extracellular pH in spontaneous canine tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:2501–5.

[39] Laurencot CM, Kennedy KA. Influence of pH on the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in EMT6 mouse mammary tumor cells. Oncol Res 1995;7:371–9.

[40] Raghunand N, He X, van Sluis R, et al. Enhancement of chemotherapy by manipulation of tumour pH. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1005–11.

[41] Kozin SV, Shkarin P, Gerweck LE. The cell transmembrane pH gradient in tumors enhances cytotoxicity of specific weak acid chemotherapeutics. Cancer Res 2001;61:4740–3.

[42] Dickson JA, Calderwood SK. Effects of hyperglycemia and hyperthermia on the pH, glycolysis, and respiration of the Yoshida sarcoma in vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 1979;63:1371–81.

[43] Andrews P, Mann S, Velury S, Howell S. Cisplatin uptake mediated cisplatin-resistance in human ovarian carcinoma cells. In: Nicolini M, editor. Platinum and other metal coordination compounds in cancer chemotherapy. Boston, MA: Martinus Nijhoff Publishing; 1988. p. 248–54.

[44] Stewart DJ, Grewal D, Popovic P, et al. Effect of cations on cisplatin uptake and efficacy in lung cancer cell lines. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1995;36:399.

[45] Takahashi K, Seki T, Nishikawa K, et al. Antitumor activity and toxicity of serum protein-bound platinum formed from cisplatin. Jpn J Cancer Res 1985;76:68–74.

[46] Melvik JE, Dornish JM, Pettersen EO. The binding of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II) to extracellular and intracellular compounds in relation to drug uptake and cytotoxicity in vitro. Br J Cancer 1992;66:260–5.

[47] Fracasso ME, Apostoli P, Benoni G, Bonetti A, Griso C, Leone R. Kinetics of platinum in cancer patients treated with cisplatin at different doses. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1987;13:367–72.

[48] Vermorken JB, van der Vijgh WJ, Klein I, Hart AA, Gall HE, Pinedo HM. Pharmacokinetics of free and total platinum species after short-term infusion of cisplatin. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:505–13.

[49] Perera A, Jackson H, Sharma HL, McAuliffe CA, Fox BW. A comparative binding of platinum anti-tumour compounds to plasma proteins in the rat (in vivo) and mouse (in vitro). Chem Biol Interact 1992;85:199–213.

[50] van der Vijgh WJ. Clinical pharmacokinetics of carboplatin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1991;21:242–61.

[51] Gaver RC, George AM, Deeb G. In vitro stability, plasma protein binding and blood cell partitioning of 14C-carboplatin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;20:271–6.

[52] Johnson SW, Shen D, Pastan I, Gottesman MM, Hamilton TC. Cross-resistance, cisplatin accumulation, and platinum-DNA adduct formation and removal in cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant human hepatoma cell lines. Exp Cell Res 1996;226:133–9.

[53] Siddik ZH. Cisplatin: mode of cytotoxic action and molecular basis of resistance. Oncogene 2003;22:7265–79.

[54] Andrews PA, Velury S, Mann SC, Howell SB. cis-Diamminedichloroplatinum(II) accumulation in sensitive and resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 1988;48:68–73.

[55] Stewart DJ, Grewal D, Molepo JM, Popovic P, Goel R. Effect of metabolic inhibitors and cations on cisplatin efflux from lung cancer cell lines. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1996;37:174.

[56] Mann SC, Andrews PA, Howell SB. Comparison of lipid content, surface membrane fluidity, and temperature dependence of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) accumulation in sensitive and resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells. Anticancer Res 1988;8:1211–5.

[57] Popovic P, Wong P, Goel R, Evans WK, Howell SB, Stewart DJ. Pressure-tuning infrared spectra of cisplatin sensitive and resistant human ovarian cancer cells exposed to cisplatin. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1993;34:404.

[58] Popovic P, Wong PTT, Kates M, et al. Membrane fluidity and lipids in cisplatin resistant cells with low cisplatin uptake. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1994;35:440.

[59] Min J, Stegner AL, Alexander H, Alexander S. Overexpression of sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase or inhibition of sphingosine kinase in *Dictyostelium discoideum* results in a selective increase in sensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy drugs. Eukaryot Cell 2004;3:795–805.

[60] Upadhyay AK, Singh S, Chhipa RR, Vijayakumar MV, Ajay AK, Bhat MK. Methyl-beta-cyclodextrin enhances the susceptibility of human breast cancer cells to carboplatin and 5-fluorouracil: involvement of Akt, NF-kappaB and Bcl-2. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2006;216:177–85.

[61] Kiura K, Watarai S, Ueoka H, et al. An alteration of ganglioside composition in cisplatin-resistant lung cancer cell line. Anticancer Res 1998;18:2957–60.

[62] Safaei R, Howell SB. Copper transporters regulate the cellular pharmacology and sensitivity to Pt drugs. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2005;53:13–23.

[63] Ishida S, Lee J, Thiele DJ, Herskowitz I. Uptake of the anticancer drug cisplatin mediated by the copper transporter Ctrl in yeast and mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:14298–302.

[64] Safaei R, Katano K, Samimi G, et al. Cross-resistance to cisplatin in cells with acquired resistance to copper. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2004;53:239–46.

[65] Lin X, Okuda T, Holzer A, Howell SB. The copper transporter CTR1 regulates cisplatin uptake in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Mol Pharmacol 2002;62:1154–9.

[66] Holzer AK, Katano K, Klomp LW, Howell SB. Cisplatin rapidly down-regulates its own influx transporter hCTR1 in cultured human ovarian carcinoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:6744–9.

[67] Shen DW, Su A, Liang XJ, Pai-Panandiker A, Gottesman MM. Reduced expression of small GTPases and hypermethylation of the folate binding protein gene in cisplatin-resistant cells. Br J Cancer 2004;91:270–6.

[68] Liang XJ, Mukherjee S, Shen DW, Maxfield FR, Gottesman MM. Endocytic recycling compartments altered in cisplatin-resistant cancer cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:2346–53.

[69] Mann SC, Andrews PA, Howell SB. Short-term cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) accumulation in sensitive and resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;25:236–40.

[70] Wang W, Ke S, Chen G, et al. Effect of lung resistance-related protein on the resistance to cisplatin in human ovarian cancer cell lines. Oncol Rep 2004;12:1365–70.

[71] Nakayama K, Miyazaki K, Kanzaki A, Fukumoto M, Takebayashi Y. Expression and cisplatin sensitivity of copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATP7B) in human solid carcinoma cell lines. Oncol Rep 2001;8:1285–7.

[72] Katano K, Safaei R, Samimi G, Holzer A, Rochdi M, Howell SB. The copper export pump ATP7B modulates the cellular pharmacology of carboplatin in ovarian carcinoma cells. Mol Pharmacol 2003;64:466–73.

[73] Higashimoto M, Kanzaki A, Shimakawa T, et al. Expression of copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase in human esophageal carcinoma. Int J Mol Med 2003;11:337–41.

[74] Miyashita H, Nitta Y, Mori S, et al. Expression of copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATP7B) as a chemoresistance marker in human oral squamous cell carcinoma treated with cisplatin. Oral Oncol 2003;39:157–62.

[75] Safaei R, Larson BJ, Cheng TC, et al. Abnormal lysosomal trafficking and enhanced exosomal export of cisplatin in drug-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2005;4:1595–604.

[76] Samimi G, Safaei R, Katano K, et al. Increased expression of the copper efflux transporter ATP7A mediates resistance to cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin in ovarian cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:4661–9.

[77] Ishikawa T, Wright CD, Ishizuka H. GS-X pump is functionally overexpressed in cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)-resistant human

leukemia HL-60 cells and down-regulated by cell differentiation. J Biol Chem 1994;269:29085–93.

[78] Taniguchi K, Wada M, Kohno K, et al. A human canalicular multi-specific organic anion transporter (cMOAT) gene is overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant human cancer cell lines with decreased drug accumulation. Cancer Res 1996;56:4124–9.

[79] Kobayashi T, Fujii T, Jo Y, Kinugawa K, Fujisawa M. Possible mechanism responsible for the acquisition of resistance to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) by cultured human testicular seminoma cells. J Urol 2004;171:1929–33.

[80] Nakamura M, Nakatani K, Uzawa K, et al. Establishment and characterization of a cisplatin-resistant oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line H-1R. Oncol Rep 2005;14:1281–6.

[81] Materna V, Liedert B, Thomale J, Lage H. Protection of platinum-DNA adduct formation and reversal of cisplatin resistance by anti-MRP2 hammerhead ribozymes in human cancer cells. Int J Cancer 2005;115:393–402.

[82] Peng ZM, Luo J, Wang WB, Wang XH, Chen JH, Lan SM. Predictive value of drug resistance-related genes expression in neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with non-small cell lung cancer of stage III. Ai Zheng 2004;23:963–7.

[83] Saikawa Y, Sugiura T, Toriumi F, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2 gene induction causes CDDP resistance in colon cancer cell line, HCT-15. Anticancer Res 2004;24:2723–8.

[84] Yeh JJ, Hsu NY, Hsu WH, Tsai CH, Lin CC, Liang JA. Comparison of chemotherapy response with P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistance-related protein-1, and lung resistance-related protein expression in untreated small cell lung cancer. Lung 2005;183:177–83.

[85] Monden N, Abe S, Hishikawa Y, et al. The role of P-glycoprotein in human gastric cancer xenografts in response to chemotherapy. Int J Surg Investig 1999;1:3–10.

[86] Zhang T, Guan M, Jin HY, Lu Y. Reversal of multidrug resistance by small interfering double-stranded RNAs in ovarian cancer cells. Gynecol Oncol 2005;97:501–7.

[87] Xu H, Choi SM, An CS, et al. Concentration-dependent collateral sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant gastric cancer cell sublines. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;328:618–22.

[88] Berger W, Elbling L, Micksche M. Expression of the major vault protein LRP in human non-small-cell lung cancer cells: activation by short-term exposure to antineoplastic drugs. Int J Cancer 2000;88:293–300.

[89] Ikeda K, Oka M, Narasaki F, et al. Lung resistance-related protein gene expression and drug sensitivity in human gastric and lung cancer cells. Anticancer Res 1998;18:3077–80.

[90] Zurita AJ, Diestra JE, Condom E, et al. Lung resistance-related protein as a predictor of clinical outcome in advanced testicular germ-cell tumours. Br J Cancer 2003;88:879–86.

[91] Ikuta K, Takemura K, Sasaki K, et al. Expression of multidrug resistance proteins and accumulation of cisplatin in human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Biol Pharm Bull 2005;28:707–12.

[92] Guminski AD, Balleine RL, Chiew YE, et al. MRP2 (ABCC2) and cisplatin sensitivity in hepatocytes and human ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 2006;100:239–46.

[93] Pastan I, Gottesman MM, Ueda K, Lovelace E, Rutherford AV, Willingham MC. A retrovirus carrying an MDR1 cDNA confers multidrug resistance and polarized expression of P-glycoprotein in MDCK cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988;85:4486–90.

[94] Chen KG, Valencia JC, Lai B, et al. Melanosomal sequestration of cytotoxic drugs contributes to the intractability of malignant melanomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:9903–7.

[95] Andersson A, Hedemalm H, Elfsson B, Ehrsson H. Determination of the acid dissociation constant for cis-diammineaquachloro-platinum(II) ion. A hydrolysis product of cisplatin. J Pharm Sci 1994;83:859–62.

[96] Perego P, Romanelli S, Carenini N, et al. Ovarian cancer cisplatin-resistant cell lines: multiple changes including collateral sensitivity to Taxol. Ann Oncol 1998;9:423–30.


[97] Masters JR, Thomas R, Hall AG, et al. Sensitivity of testis tumour cells to chemotherapeutic drugs: role of detoxifying pathways. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1248–53.

[98] Fokkema E, Groen HJ, Helder MN, de Vries EG, Meijer C. JM216-, JM118-, and cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in relation to platinum-DNA adduct formation, glutathione levels and p53 status in human tumour cell lines with different sensitivities to cisplatin. Biochem Pharmacol 2002;63:1989–96.

[99] Bose Girigoswami K, Bhaumik G, Ghosh R. Induced resistance in cells exposed to repeated low doses of H2O2 involves enhanced activity of antioxidant enzymes. Cell Biol Int 2005;29:761–7.

[100] Byun SS, Kim SW, Choi H, Lee C, Lee E. Augmentation of cisplatin sensitivity in cisplatin-resistant human bladder cancer cells by modulating glutathione concentrations and glutathione-related enzyme activities. BJU Int 2005;95:1086–90.

[101] Medeiros R, Pereira D, Afonso N, et al. Platinum/paclitaxel-based chemotherapy in advanced ovarian carcinoma: glutathione S-transferase genetic polymorphisms as predictive biomarkers of disease outcome. Int J Clin Oncol 2003;8:156–61.

[102] Richardson ME, Siemann DW. Thiol-related mechanisms of resistance in a murine tumor model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:387–92.

[103] Cao W, Zuo J, Fang F. Role of glutathione S-transferase pi in tumor drug resistance. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao 1999;21:402–6.

[104] Cullen KJ, Newkirk KA, Schumaker LM, Aldosari N, Rone JD, Had-dad BR. Glutathione S-transferase pi amplification is associated with cisplatin resistance in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines and primary tumors. Cancer Res 2003;63:8097–102.

[105] Kase H, Kodama S, Nagai E, Tanaka K. Glutathione S-transferase pi immunostaining of cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells in ascites. Acta Cytol 1998;42:1397–402.

[106] Cabelguenne A, Loriot MA, Stucker I, et al. Glutathione-associated enzymes in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and response to cisplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Int J Cancer 2001;93:725–30.

[107] Ryu JS, Hong YC, Han HS, et al. Association between polymorphisms of ERCC1 and XPD and survival in non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with cisplatin combination chemotherapy. Lung Cancer 2004;44:311–6.

[108] Surowiak P, Materna V, Kaplenko I, et al. Augmented expression of metallothionein and glutathione S-transferase pi as unfavourable prognostic factors in cisplatin-treated ovarian cancer patients. Virchows Arch 2005;447:626–33.

[109] Kimura S, Imagawa Y, Satake K, Tsukuda M. The relationship of the human glutathione S-transferase P1 polymorphism and chemotherapeutic sensitivity in head and neck squamous carcinoma. Int J Mol Med 2004;14:185–9.

[110] Nishi M, Abe Y, Fujimori S, et al. The modifier subunit of glutamate cysteine ligase relates to cisplatin resistance in human small cell lung cancer xenografts in vivo. Oncol Rep 2005;14:421–4.

[111] Rosell R, Cobo M, Isla D, et al. Applications of genomics in NSCLC. Lung Cancer 2005;50(Suppl 2):S33–40.

[112] Altafah R, Liang X, Yu JJ, Reed E. Excision repair cross complementing-group 1: gene expression and platinum resistance. Int J Mol Med 2004;14:959–70.

[113] Taron M, Rosell R, Felip E, et al. BRCA1 mRNA expression levels as an indicator of chemoresistance in lung cancer. Hum Mol Genet 2004;13:2443–9.

[114] Chen YJ, Yuan CC, Chow KC, et al. Overexpression of dihydrodiol dehydrogenase is associated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy resistance in ovarian cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol 2005;97:110–7.

[115] Ebadi M, Iversen PL. Metallothionein in carcinogenesis and cancer chemotherapy. Gen Pharmacol 1994;25:1297–310.

[116] Andrews PA, Murphy MP, Howell SB. Metallothionein-mediated cisplatin resistance in human ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:149–54.

[117] Endo T, Yoshikawa M, Ebara M, et al. Immunohistochemical metallothionein expression in hepatocellular carcinoma: relation to tumor progression and chemoresistance to platinum agents. J Gastroenterol 2004;39:1196–201.

[118] Huang PY, Liang XM, Lin SX, Luo RZ, Hou JH, Zhang L. Correlation analysis among expression of ERCC-1, metallothionein, p53 and platinum resistance and prognosis in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Ai Zheng 2004;23:845–50.

[119] Smith DJ, Jaggi M, Zhang W, et al. Metallothioneins and resistance to cisplatin and radiation in prostate cancer. Urology 2006;67:1341–7.

[120] Davies MS, Berners-Price SJ, Hambley TW. Slowing of cisplatin aquation in the presence of DNA but not in the presence of phosphate: improved understanding of sequence selectivity and the roles of monoaquated and diaquated species in the binding of cisplatin to DNA. Inorg Chem 2000;39:5603–13.

[121] Zwelling LA, Kohn KW. Mechanism of action of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II). Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1439–44.

[122] Poirier MC, Egorin MJ, Fichtinger-Schepman AM, Yuspa SH, Reed E. DNA adducts of cisplatin and carboplatin in tissues of cancer patients. IARC Sci Publ.; 1988. pp. 313–20.

[123] Reed E, Ozols RF, Tarone R, Yuspa SH, Poirier MC. Platinum-DNA adducts in leukocyte DNA correlate with disease response in ovarian cancer patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987;84:5024–8.

[124] Reed E, Ostchega Y, Steinberg SM, et al. Evaluation of platinum-DNA adduct levels relative to known prognostic variables in a cohort of ovarian cancer patients. Cancer Res 1990;50:2256–60.

[125] Parker RJ, Gill I, Tarone R, et al. Platinum-DNA damage in leukocyte DNA of patients receiving carboplatin and cisplatin chemotherapy, measured by atomic absorption spectrometry. Carcinogenesis 1991;12:1253–8.

[126] Dabholkar M, Bradshaw L, Parker RJ, et al. Cisplatin-DNA damage and repair in peripheral blood leukocytes in vivo and in vitro. Environ Health Perspect 1992;98:53–9.

[127] Reed E, Parker RJ, Gill I, et al. Platinum-DNA adduct in leukocyte DNA of a cohort of 49 patients with 24 different types of malignancies. Cancer Res 1993;53:3694–9.

[128] Motzer RJ, Reed E, Perera F, et al. Platinum-DNA adducts assayed in leukocytes of patients with germ cell tumors measured by atomic absorbance spectrometry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cancer 1994;73:2843–52.

[129] Poirier MC, Reed E, Shamkhani H, Tarone RE, Gupta-Burt S. Platinum drug-DNA interactions in human tissues measured by cisplatin-DNA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and atomic absorbance spectroscopy. Environ Health Perspect 1993;99:149–54.

[130] Meijera C, van Luyn MJ, Nienhuis EF, Blom N, Mulder NH, de Vries EG. Ultrastructural morphology and localisation of cisplatin-induced platinum-DNA adducts in a cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant human small cell lung cancer cell line using electron microscopy. Biochem Pharmacol 2001;61:573–8.

[131] Shirazi F. Cell cycle dependency of cisplatin cytotoxicity on ovarian cancer cells. PhD Thesis, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine. Ottawa, Canada: University of Ottawa; 1998.

[132] Abbosh PH, Montgomery JS, Starkey JA, et al. Dominant-negative histone H3 lysine 27 mutant derepresses silenced tumor suppressor genes and reverses the drug-resistant phenotype in cancer cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:5582–91.

[133] Kuin A, Alders M, Lamfers M, et al. Potentiation of anti-cancer drug activity at low intratumoral pH induced by the mitochondrial inhibitor m-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) and its analogue benzylguanidine (BG). Br J Cancer 1999;79:793–801.

[134] Murakami T, Shibuya I, Ise T, et al. Elevated expression of vacuolar proton pump genes and cellular pH in cisplatin resistance. Int J Cancer 2001;93:869–74.

[135] Luciani F, Spada M, De Milito A, et al. Effect of proton pump inhibitor pretreatment on resistance of solid tumors to cytotoxic drugs. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:1702–13.

[136] Liang XJ, Taylor B, Cardarelli C, et al. Different roles for K⁺ channels in cisplatin-resistant cell lines argue against a critical role for these channels in cisplatin resistance. Anticancer Res 2005;25:4113–22.

[137] Wahl ML, Owen JA, Burd R, et al. Regulation of intracellular pH in human melanoma: potential therapeutic implications. Mol Cancer Ther 2002;1:617–28.

[138] Webb SD, Sherratt JA, Fish RG. Mathematical modelling of tumour acidity: regulation of intracellular pH. J Theor Biol 1999;196:237–50.

[139] Stubbs M, McSheehy PM, Griffiths JR. Causes and consequences of acidic pH in tumors: a magnetic resonance study. Adv Enzyme Regul 1999;39:13–30.

[140] Newell K, Franchi A, Pouyssegur J, Tannock I. Studies with glycolysis-deficient cells suggest that production of lactic acid is not the only cause of tumor acidity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:1127–31.

[141] Koukourakis MI, Giatromanolaki A, Sivridis E, et al. Lactate dehydrogenase-5 (LDH-5) overexpression in non-small-cell lung cancer tissues is linked to tumour hypoxia, angiogenic factor production and poor prognosis. Br J Cancer 2003;89:877–85.

[142] de Graaf TW, de Jong S, de Vries EG, Mulder NH. Expression of proteins correlated with the unique cisplatin-sensitivity of testicular cancer. Anticancer Res 1997;17:369–75.

[143] Albain KS, Crowley JJ, Hutchins L, et al. Predictors of survival following relapse or progression of small cell lung cancer. Southwest Oncology Groxup Study 8605 report and analysis of recurrent disease data base. Cancer 1993;72:1184–91.

[144] Lassen U, Kristjansen PE, Osterlund K, et al. Superiority of cisplatin or carboplatin in combination with teniposide and vincristine in the induction chemotherapy of small-cell lung cancer. A randomized trial with 5 years follow up. Ann Oncol 1996;7:365–71.

[145] Kawahara M, Fukuoka M, Saijo N, et al. Prognostic factors and prognostic staging system for small cell lung cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1997;27:158–65.

[146] Hong RL, Ting LL, Ko JY, et al. Induction chemotherapy with mitomycin, epirubicin, cisplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin followed by radiotherapy in the treatment of locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:4305–13.

[147] Keilholz U, Martus P, Punt CJ, et al. Prognostic factors for survival and factors associated with long-term remission in patients with advanced melanoma receiving cytokine-based treatments: second analysis of a randomised EORTC Melanoma Group trial comparing interferon-alpha2a (IFNalpha) and interleukin 2 (IL-2) with or without cisplatin. Eur J Cancer 2002;38:1501–11.

[148] Guida M, Ravaioli A, Sileni VC, et al. Fibrinogen: a novel predictor of responsiveness in metastatic melanoma patients treated with biochemotherapy: IMI (italian melanoma inter-group) trial. J Transl Med 2003;1:13.

[149] Polee MB, Hop WC, Kok TC, et al. Prognostic factors for survival in patients with advanced oesophageal cancer treated with cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. Br J Cancer 2003;89:2045–50.

[150] O'Connell JP, Kris MG, Gralla RJ, et al. Frequency and prognostic importance of pretreatment clinical characteristics in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1604–14.

[151] Shinkai T, Eguchi K, Sasaki Y, et al. A randomised clinical trial of vindesine plus cisplatin versus mitomycin plus vindesine and cisplatin in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:571–5.

[152] Albain KS, Crowley JJ, LeBlanc M, Livingston RB. Survival determinants in extensive-stage non-small-cell lung cancer: the Southwest Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1618–26.

[153] Takifuji N, Fukuoka M, Negoro S, et al. Prognostic factors affecting survival and response in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho 1990;17:429–34.

[154] Carles J, Rosell R, Ariza A, et al. Neuroendocrine differentiation as a prognostic factor in non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1993;10:209–19.

[155] Gregorc V, Darwish S, Ludovini V, et al. The clinical relevance of Bcl-2, Rb and p53 expression in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2003;42:275–81.

[156] Kawahara M, Furuse K, Kodama N, et al. A randomized study of cisplatin versus cisplatin plus vindesine for non-small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1991;68:714–9.

[157] Borges M, Sculier JP, Paesmans M, et al. Prognostic factors for response to chemotherapy containing platinum derivatives in patients with unresectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Lung Cancer 1996;16:21–33.

[158] Ray P, Quantin X, Grenier J, Pujol JL. Predictive factors of tumor response and prognostic factors of survival during lung cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Detect Prev 1998;22:293–304.

[159] Yoo BC, Ku JL, Hong SH, et al. Decreased pyruvate kinase M2 activity linked to cisplatin resistance in human gastric carcinoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 2004;108:532–9.

[160] Koberle B, Grimaldi KA, Sunters A, Hartley JA, Kelland LR, Masters JR. DNA repair capacity and cisplatin sensitivity of human testis tumour cells. Int J Cancer 1997;70:551–5.

[161] Dempke W, Voigt W, Grothey A, Schmoll HJ. Preferential repair of the N-ras gene in K 562 cells after exposure to cisplatin. Anticancer Drugs 1999;10:545–9.

[162] Zhen W, Link Jr CJ, O'Connor PM, et al. Increased gene-specific repair of cisplatin interstrand cross-links in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:3689–98.

[163] Reed E. Platinum-DNA adduct, nucleotide excision repair and platinum based anti-cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Treat Rev 1998;24:331–44.

[164] Dabholkar M, Vionnet J, Bostick-Bruton F, Yu JJ, Reed E. Messenger RNA levels of XPAC and ERCC1 in ovarian cancer tissue correlate with response to platinum-based chemotherapy. J Clin Invest 1994;94:703–8.

[165] Yu JJ, Bicher A, Ma YK, Bostick-Bruton F, Reed E. Absence of evidence for allelic loss or allelic gain for ERCC1 or for XPD in human ovarian cancer cells and tissues. Cancer Lett 2000;151:127–32.

[166] Dabholkar M, Bostick-Bruton F, Weber C, Bohr VA, Egwuagu C, Reed E. ERCC1 and ERCC2 expression in malignant tissues from ovarian cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1512–7.

[167] Rosell R, Taron M, Barnadas A, Scagliotti G, Sarries C, Roig B. Nucleotide excision repair pathways involved in Cisplatin resistance in non-small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Control 2003;10:297–305.

[168] Kang S, Ju W, Kim JW, et al. Association between excision repair cross-complementation group 1 polymorphism and clinical outcome of platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Exp Mol Med 2006;38:320–4.

[169] Rosell R, Taron M, Ariza A, et al. Molecular predictors of response to chemotherapy in lung cancer. Semin Oncol 2004;31:20–7.

[170] Camps C, Sarries C, Roig B, et al. Assessment of nucleotide excision repair XPD polymorphisms in the peripheral blood of gemcitabine/cisplatin-treated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients. Clin Lung Cancer 2003;4:237–41.

[171] States JC, Reed E. Enhanced XPA mRNA levels in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer are not associated with XPA mutations or gene amplification. Cancer Lett 1996;108:233–7.

[172] D'Andrea AD. The Fanconi Anemia/BRCA signaling pathway: disruption in cisplatin-sensitive ovarian cancers. Cell Cycle 2003;2:290–2.

[173] Olopade OI, Wei M. FANCF methylation contributes to chemosensitivity in ovarian cancer. Cancer Cell 2003;3:417–20.

[174] Trenz K, Lugowski S, Jahrsdorfer U, Jainta S, Vogel W, Speit G. Enhanced sensitivity of peripheral blood lymphocytes from women carrying a BRCA1 mutation towards the mutagenic effects of various cytostatics. Mutat Res 2003;544:279–88.

[175] Raaphorst GP, Yang DP, Grewaal D, Stewart D, Goel R, Ng CE. Analysis of mechanisms of cisplatin resistance in three pairs of human tumour cell lines expressing normal and resistant responses to cisplatin. Oncol Rep 1995;2:1037–43.

[176] Bergoglio V, Canitrot Y, Hogarth L, et al. Enhanced expression and activity of DNA polymerase beta in human ovarian tumor cells: impact on sensitivity towards antitumor agents. Oncogene 2001;20:6181–7.

[177] Bassett E, Vaisman A, Havener JM, Masutani C, Hanaoka F, Chaney SG. Efficiency of extension of mismatched primer termini across from cisplatin and oxaliplatin adducts by human DNA polymerases beta and eta in vitro. Biochemistry 2003;42:14197–206.

[178] Raaphorst GP, Cybulski SE, Sobol R, Ng CE. The response of human breast tumour cell lines with altered polymerase beta levels to cisplatin and radiation. Anticancer Res 2001;21:2079–83.

[179] Albertella MR, Lau A, O'Connor MJ. The overexpression of specialized DNA polymerases in cancer. DNA Repair (Amst) 2005;4:583–93.

[180] Boudsocq F, Benaim P, Canitrot Y, et al. Modulation of cellular response to cisplatin by a novel inhibitor of DNA polymerase beta. Mol Pharmacol 2005;67:1485–92.

[181] Raaphorst GP, Ng CE, Yang DP. Comparison of response to radiation, hyperthermia and cisplatin in parental and polymerase beta knockout cells. Int J Hyperthermia 2002;18:33–9.

[182] Dempke W, Voigt W, Grothey A, Hill BT, Schmoll HJ. Cisplatin resistance and oncogenes—a review. Anticancer Drugs 2000;11:225–36.

[183] Wu F, Lin X, Okuda T, Howell SB. DNA polymerase zeta regulates cisplatin cytotoxicity, mutagenicity, and the rate of development of cisplatin resistance. Cancer Res 2004;64:8029–35.

[184] Lin X, Trang J, Okuda T, Howell SB. DNA polymerase zeta accounts for the reduced cytotoxicity and enhanced mutagenicity of cisplatin in human colon carcinoma cells that have lost DNA mismatch repair. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:563–8.

[185] Albertella MR, Green CM, Lehmann AR, O'Connor MJ. A role for polymerase eta in the cellular tolerance to cisplatin-induced damage. Cancer Res 2005;65:9799–806.

[186] Chaney SG, Campbell SL, Bassett E, Wu Y. Recognition and processing of cisplatin- and oxaliplatin-DNA adducts. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2005;53:3–11.

[187] Lin X, Okuda T, Trang J, Howell SB. Human REV1 modulates the cytotoxicity and mutagenicity of cisplatin in human ovarian carcinoma cells. Mol Pharmacol 2006;69:1748–54.

[188] Jiang HY, Hickey RJ, Abdel-Aziz W, Malkas LH. Effects of gemcitabine and araC on in vitro DNA synthesis mediated by the human breast cell DNA synthesome. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2000;45:320–8.

[189] Yoshida S, Yamada M, Masaki S. Inhibition of DNA polymerase-alpha and -beta of calf thymus by 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine-5′-triphosphate. Biochim Biophys Acta 1977;477:144–50.

[190] Bergerat JP, Drewinko B, Corry P, Barlogie B, Ho DH. Synergistic lethal effect of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum and 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Cancer Res 1981;41:25–30.

[191] Ali-Osman F, Berger MS, Rajagopal S, Spence A, Livingston RB. Topoisomerase II inhibition and altered kinetics of formation and repair of nitrosourea and cisplatin-induced DNA interstrand cross-links and cytotoxicity in human glioblastoma cells. Cancer Res 1993;53:5663–8.

[192] Xu ZY, Loignon M, Han FY, Panasci L, Aloyz R. Xrcc3 induces cisplatin resistance by stimulation of Rad51-related recombinational repair, S-phase checkpoint activation, and reduced apoptosis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2005;314:495–505.

[193] Britten RA, Kuny S, Perdue S. Modification of non-conservative double-strand break (DSB) rejoining activity after the induction of cisplatin resistance in human tumour cells. Br J Cancer 1999;79:843–9.

[194] Nagatani G, Nomoto M, Takano H, et al. Transcriptional activation of the human HMG1 gene in cisplatin-resistant human cancer cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:1592–7.

[195] Sun CL, Chao CC. Cross-resistance to death ligand-induced apoptosis in cisplatin-selected HeLa cells associated with overexpression of DDB2 and subsequent induction of cFLIP. Mol Pharmacol 2005;67:1307–14.

[196] Pepponi R, Marra G, Fuggetta MP, et al. The effect of O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase and mismatch repair activities on the sensitivity of human melanoma cells to temozolomide, 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)1-nitrosourea, and cisplatin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;304:661–8.

[197] Passagne I, Evrard A, Depeille P, Cuq P, Cupissol D, Vian L. O(6)-methylguanine DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) overexpression in melanoma cells induces resistance to nitrosoureas and temozolomide but sensitizes to mitomycin C. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2006;211:97–105.

[198] Olivero OA, Chang PK, Lopez-Larraza DM, Semino-Mora MC, Poirier MC. Preferential formation and decreased removal of cisplatin–DNA adducts in Chinese hamster ovary cell mitochondrial DNA as compared to nuclear DNA. Mutat Res 1997;391:79–86.

[199] Berry S, Kinsella TJ. Targeting DNA mismatch repair for radiosensitization. Semin Radiat Oncol 2001;11:300–15.

[200] Aebi S, Kurdi-Haidar B, Gordon R, et al. Loss of DNA mismatch repair in acquired resistance to cisplatin. Cancer Res 1996;56:3087–90.

[201] Fink D, Zheng H, Nebel S, et al. In vitro and in vivo resistance to cisplatin in cells that have lost DNA mismatch repair. Cancer Res 1997;57:1841–5.

[202] Lage H, Christmann M, Kern MA, et al. Expression of DNA repair proteins hMSH2, hMSH6, hMLH1, O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase and N-methylpurine-DNA glycosylase in melanoma cells with acquired drug resistance. Int J Cancer 1999;80:744–50.

[203] Lin X, Howell SB. Effect of loss of DNA mismatch repair on development of topotecan-, gemcitabine-, and paclitaxel-resistant variants after exposure to cisplatin. Mol Pharmacol 1999;56:390–5.

[204] Ercoli A, Ferrandina G, Genuardi M, et al. Microsatellite instability is not related to response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in cervical cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2005;15:308–11.

[205] Ono Y, Nonomura N, Harada Y, et al. Loss of p73 induction in a cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer cell line. Mol Urol 2001;5:25–30.

[206] Lin X, Howell SB. DNA mismatch repair and p53 function are major determinants of the rate of development of cisplatin resistance. Mol Cancer Ther 2006;5:1239–47.

[207] Olasz J, Mandoky L, Geczi L, Bodrogi I, Csuka O, Bak M. Influence of hMLH1 methylation, mismatch repair deficiency and microsatellite instability on chemoresistance of testicular germ-cell tumors. Anticancer Res 2005;25:4319–24.

[208] Richardson A, Kaye SB. Drug resistance in ovarian cancer: the emerging importance of gene transcription and spatio-temporal regulation of resistance. Drug Resist Updat 2005;8:311–21.

[209] Gonzalez VM, Fuertes MA, Alonso C, Perez JM. Is cisplatin-induced cell death always produced by apoptosis? Mol Pharmacol 2001;59:657–63.

[210] Minagawa Y, Kigawa J, Itamochi H, et al. Cisplatin-resistant HeLa cells are resistant to apoptosis via p53-dependent and -independent pathways. Jpn J Cancer Res 1999;90:1373–9.

[211] Mori T, Okamoto H, Takahashi N, Ueda R, Okamoto T. Aberrant overexpression of 53BP2 mRNA in lung cancer cell lines. FEBS Lett 2000;465:124–8.

[212] Asada N, Tsuchiya H, Tomita K. De novo deletions of p53 gene and wild-type p53 correlate with acquired cisplatin-resistance in human osteosarcoma OST cell line. Anticancer Res 1999;19:5131–7.

[213] Kigawa J, Sato S, Shimada M, et al. p53 gene status and chemosensitivity in ovarian cancer. Hum Cell 2001;14:165–71.

[214] Perego P, Giarola M, Righetti SC, et al. Association between cisplatin resistance and mutation of p53 gene and reduced bax expression in ovarian carcinoma cell systems. Cancer Res 1996;56:556–62.

[215] Mandic R, Schamberger CJ, Muller JF, et al. Reduced cisplatin sensitivity of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines correlates with mutations affecting the COOH-terminal nuclear localization signal of p53. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:6845–52.

[216] Houldsworth J, Xiao H, Murty VV, et al. Human male germ cell tumor resistance to cisplatin is linked to TP53 gene mutation. Oncogene 1998;16:2345–9.

[217] Bradford CR, Zhu S, Poore J, et al., Department of Veterans Affairs Laryngeal Cancer Cooperative Study Group. p53 Mutation as a prognostic marker in advanced laryngeal carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997;123:605–9.

[218] Wang W, Rastinejad F, El-Deiry WS. Restoring p53-dependent tumor suppression. Cancer Biol Ther 2003;2:S55–63.

[219] Nakayama K, Takebayashi Y, Nakayama S, et al. Prognostic value of overexpression of p53 in human ovarian carcinoma patients receiving cisplatin. Cancer Lett 2003;192:227–35.

[220] Kawasaki M, Nakanishi Y, Yatsunami J, et al. p53 Immunostaining predicts chemosensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer: a preliminary report. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:217–20.

[221] Datta K, Shah P, Srivastava T, Mathur SG, Chattopadhyay P, Sinha S. Sensitizing glioma cells to cisplatin by abrogating the p53 response with antisense oligonucleotides. Cancer Gene Ther 2004;11:525–31.

[222] Achanzar WE, Webber MM, Waalkes MP. Altered apoptotic gene expression and acquired apoptotic resistance in cadmium-transformed human prostate epithelial cells. Prostate 2002;52:236–44.

[223] Toyozumi Y, Arima N, Izumaru S, Kato S, Morimatsu M, Nakashima T. Loss of caspase-8 activation pathway is a possible mechanism for CDDP resistance in human laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, HEP-2 cells. Int J Oncol 2004;25:721–8.

[224] Spierings DC, de Vries EG, Vellenga E, de Jong S. Loss of drug-induced activation of the CD95 apoptotic pathway in a cisplatin-resistant testicular germ cell tumor cell line. Cell Death Differ 2003;10:808–22.

[225] Kuwahara D, Tsutsumi K, Kobayashi T, Hyoudou M, Koizuka I. Inhibition of caspase-9 activity in cisplatin-resistant head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho 2002;105:152–7.

[226] Isonishi S, Saitou M, Yasuda M, Tanaka T. Mitochondria in platinum resistant cells. Hum Cell 2001;14:203–10.

[227] Cheng JQ, Jiang X, Fraser M, et al. Role of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein in chemoresistance in ovarian cancer: possible involvement of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase/Akt pathway. Drug Resist Updat 2002;5:131–46.

[228] Nomura T, Yamasaki M, Nomura Y, Mimata H. Expression of the inhibitors of apoptosis proteins in cisplatin-resistant prostate cancer cells. Oncol Rep 2005;14:993–7.

[229] Yang X, Xing H, Gao Q, et al. Regulation of HtrA2/Omi by X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein in chemoresistance in human ovarian cancer cells. Gynecol Oncol 2005;97:413–21.

[230] Amantana A, London CA, Iversen PL, Devi GR. X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein inhibition induces apoptosis and enhances chemotherapy sensitivity in human prostate cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:699–707.

[231] Konishi T, Sasaki S, Watanabe T, Kitayama J, Nagawa H. Exogenous expression of hRFI induces multidrug resistance through escape from apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells. Anticancer Res 2005;25:2737–41.

[232] Wang Z, Xie Y, Wang H. Changes in survivin messenger RNA level during chemotherapy treatment in ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:716–9.

[233] Sharma H, Sen S, Lo Muzio L, Mariggio A, Singh N. Antisense-mediated downregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins induces apoptosis and sensitizes head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells to chemotherapy. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:720–7.

[234] Beale PJ, Rogers P, Boxall F, Sharp SY, Kelland LR. BCL-2 family protein expression and platinum drug resistance in ovarian carcinoma. Br J Cancer 2000;82:436–40.

[235] Yu L, Wang Z. Difference in expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl genes in cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant human in ovarian cancer cell lines. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technol Med Sci 2004;24:151–3.

[236] Dong Z, Wang J. Hypoxia selection of death-resistant cells. A role for Bcl-X(L). J Biol Chem 2004;279:9215–21.

[237] Williams J, Lucas PC, Griffith KA, et al. Expression of Bcl-xL in ovarian carcinoma is associated with chemoresistance and recurrent disease. Gynecol Oncol 2005;96:287–95.

[238] Yang X, Zheng F, Xing H, et al. Resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis via decreased caspase-3 activity and overexpression of antiapoptotic proteins in ovarian cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2004;130:423–8.

[239] Raspollini MR, Castiglione F, Degl'Innocenti DR, et al. Bcl-2 in ovarian carcinoma: a clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical and molecular study. Pathologica 2004;96:465–9.

[240] Chanvorachote P, Nimmanit U, Stehlik C, et al. Nitric oxide regulates cell sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis through S-nitrosylation and inhibition of Bcl-2 ubiquitination. Cancer Res 2006;66:6353–60.

[241] Shi Y, Zhai H, Wang X, et al. Ribosomal proteins S13 and L23 promote multidrug resistance in gastric cancer cells by suppressing drug-induced apoptosis. Exp Cell Res 2004;296:337–46.

[242] Kim JK, Kim KD, Lee E, et al. Up-regulation of Bfl-1/A1 via NF-kappaB activation in cisplatin-resistant human bladder cancer cell line. Cancer Lett 2004;212:61–70.

[243] Abedini MR, Qiu Q, Yan X, Tsang BK. Possible role of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) in chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells in vitro. Oncogene 2004;23:6997–7004.

[244] Mercer SJ, Di Nicolantonio F, Knight LA, et al. Rapid up-regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 by 5-fluorouracil in human solid tumors. Anti-cancer Drugs 2005;16:495–500.

[245] Mizutani Y, Nakanishi H, Li YN, Sato N, Kawauchi A, Miki T. Enhanced sensitivity of bladder cancer cells to cisplatin mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo by the selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor JTE-522. J Urol 2004;172:1474–9.

[246] Sugiura T, Saikawa Y, Kubota T, et al. Combination chemotherapy with JTE-522, a novel selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, and cis-platin against gastric cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo. In Vivo 2003;17:229–33.

[247] Czembirek C, Eder-Czembirek C, Erovic BM, Turhani D, Selzer E, Thurnher D. Inhibition of cytotoxicity of cisplatin by cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor nimesulide in head and neck cancer cell lines. Oncol Rep 2005;14:1523–6.

[248] Xi H, Baldus SE, Warnecke-Eberz U, et al. High cyclooxygenase-2 expression following neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy is associated with minor histopathologic response and poor prognosis in esophageal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:8341–7.

[249] Takatori H, Natsugoe S, Okumura H, et al. Predictive value of COX-2 for the effect of chemoradiotherapy on esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Oncol Rep 2005;13:697–701.

[250] Wulfing C, Eltze E, Von Struensee D, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2-expression in bladder cancer: tumor-biological and clinical implications. Aktuelle Urol 2004;35:331–8.

[251] Distefano M, Ferrandina G, Smanioto D, et al. Concomitant radiochemotherapy plus surgery in locally advanced cervical cancer: update of clinical outcome and cyclooxygenase-2 as predictor of treatment susceptibility. Oncology 2004;67:103–11.

[252] Ferrandina G, Lauriola L, Distefano MG, et al. Increased cyclooxygenase-2 expression is associated with chemotherapy resistance and poor survival in cervical cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 2002;20:973–81.

[253] Ferrandina G, Lauriola L, Zannoni GF, et al. Increased cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression is associated with chemotherapy resistance and outcome in ovarian cancer patients. Ann Oncol 2002;13:1205–11.

[254] Rosell R, Scagliotti G, Danenberg KD, et al. Transcripts in pre-treatment biopsies from a three-arm randomized trial in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncogene 2003;22:3548–53.

[255] Fortin A, Raybaud-Diogene H, Tetu B, Deschenes R, Huot J, Landry J. Overexpression of the 27 kDa heat shock protein is associated with thermoresistance and chemoresistance but not with radioresistance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000;46:1259–66.

[256] Yamamoto K, Okamoto A, Isonishi S, Ochiai K, Ohtake Y. Heat shock protein 27 was up-regulated in cisplatin resistant human ovarian tumor cell line and associated with the cisplatin resistance. Cancer Lett 2001;168:173–81.

[257] Garrido C, Ottavi P, Fromentin A, et al. HSP27 as a mediator of confluence-dependent resistance to cell death induced by anticancer drugs. Cancer Res 1997;57:2661–7.

[258] Richards EH, Hickey E, Weber L, Master JR. Effect of overexpression of the small heat shock protein HSP27 on the heat and drug sensitivities of human testis tumor cells. Cancer Res 1996;56:2446–51.

[259] Zacal N, Espiritu M, Singh G, Rainbow AJ. Increased BNip3 and decreased mutant p53 in cisplatin-sensitive PDT-resistant HT29 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;331:648–57.

[260] Yang WL, Yang-Biggs G, Wu Y, et al. Development of cross-resistance between heat and cisplatin or hydroxyurea treatments in FaDu squamous carcinoma cells. J Surg Res 2003;111:143–51.

[261] Huang C, Zhou C, Zhao M. The effect of antisense hsp90 beta on the malignant phenotype and sensitivity of HeLa cells to chemotherapeutic drugs. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi 2000;22:14–6.

[262] Brozovic A, Simaga S, Osmak M. Induction of heat shock protein 70 in drug-resistant cells by anticancer drugs and hyperthermia. Neoplasma 2001;48:99–103.

[263] Belfi CA, Chatterjee S, Gosky DM, Berger SJ, Berger NA. Increased sensitivity of human colon cancer cells to DNA cross-linking agents after GRP78 up-regulation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;257:361–8.

[264] Kohno K, Uchiumi T, Niina I, et al. Transcription factors and drug resistance. Eur J Cancer 2005;41:2577–86.

[265] Fricke E, Hermannstadter C, Keller G, et al. Effect of wild-type and mutant E-cadherin on cell proliferation and responsiveness to the chemotherapeutic agents cisplatin, etoposide, and 5-fluorouracil. Oncology 2004;66:150–9.

[266] Witta SE, Gemmill RM, Hirsch FR, et al. Restoring E-cadherin expression increases sensitivity to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in lung cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 2006;66:944–50.

[267] Liang XJ, Shen DW, Gottesman MM. Down-regulation and altered localization of gamma-catenin in cisplatin-resistant adenocarcinoma cells. Mol Pharmacol 2004;65:1217–24.

[268] Bai L, Zhu R, Chen Z, et al. Potential role of short hairpin RNA targeting epidermal growth factor receptor in growth and sensitivity to drugs of human lung adenocarcinoma cells. Biochem Pharmacol 2006;71:1265–71.

[269] Hsu CH, Gao M, Chen CL, Yeh PY, Cheng AL. Inhibitors of epidermoid growth factor receptor suppress cell growth and enhance chemosensitivity of nasopharyngeal cancer cells in vitro. Oncology 2005;68:538–47.

[270] Goswami S, Wang W, Wyckoff JB, Condeelis JS. Breast cancer cells isolated by chemotaxis from primary tumors show increased survival and resistance to chemotherapy. Cancer Res 2004;64:7664–7.

[271] Menendez JA, Mehmi I, Lupu R. Heregulin-triggered Her-2/neu signaling enhances nuclear accumulation of p21WAF1/CIP1 and protects breast cancer cells from cisplatin-induced genotoxic damage. Int J Oncol 2005;26:649–59.

[272] Menendez JA, Mehmi I, Lupu R. Trastuzumab in combination with heregulin-activated Her-2 (erbB-2) triggers a receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity effect in the absence of Her-2 overexpression. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:3735–46.

[273] Boudny V, Murakami Y, Nakano S, Niho Y. Expression of activated c-erbB-2 oncogene induces sensitivity to cisplatin in human gallbladder adenocarcinoma cells. Anticancer Res 1999;19:5203–6.

[274] Herbst RS, Giaccone G, Schiller JH, et al. Gefitinib in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase III trial—INTACT 2. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:785–94.

[275] Herbst RS, Prager D, Hermann R, et al. TRIBUTE: a phase III trial of erlotinib hydrochloride (OSI-774) combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:5892–9.

[276] Giaccone G, Herbst RS, Manegold C, et al. Gefitinib in combination with gemcitabine and cisplatin in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase III trial—INTACT 1. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:777–84.

[277] Davies AM, Ho C, Lara Jr PN, Mack P, Gumerlock PH, Gandara DR. Pharmacodynamic separation of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors and chemotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer 2006;7:385–8.

[278] Lee S, Choi EJ, Jin C, Kim DH. Activation of PI3K/Akt pathway by PTEN reduction and PIK3CA mRNA amplification contributes to cisplatin resistance in an ovarian cancer cell line. Gynecol Oncol 2005;97:26–34.

[279] Ohta T, Ohmichi M, Hayasaka T, et al. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase increases efficacy of cisplatin in in vivo ovarian cancer models. Endocrinology 2006;147:1761–9.

[280] Hovelmann S, Beckers TL, Schmidt M. Molecular alterations in apoptotic pathways after PKB/Akt-mediated chemoresistance in NCI H460 cells. Br J Cancer 2004;90:2370–7.

[281] Gagnon V, Mathieu I, Sexton E, Leblanc K, Asselin E. AKT involvement in cisplatin chemoresistance of human uterine cancer cells. Gynecol Oncol 2004;94:785–95.

[282] Mondesire WH, Jian W, Zhang H, et al. Targeting mammalian target of rapamycin synergistically enhances chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:7031–42.

[283] Wang SJ, Bourguignon LY. Hyaluronan-CD44 promotes phospholipase C-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling and cisplatin resistance in head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2006;132:19–24.

[284] Wang SJ, Bourguignon LY. Hyaluronan and the interaction between CD44 and epidermal growth factor receptor in oncogenic signaling and chemotherapy resistance in head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2006;132:771–8.

[285] Tsunoda T, Koga H, Yokomizo A, et al. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor type 1 (IP3R1) modulates the acquisition of cisplatin resistance in bladder cancer cell lines. Oncogene 2005;24:1396–402.

[286] Schenk PW, Stoop H, Bokemeyer C, et al. Resistance to platinum-containing chemotherapy in testicular germ cell tumors is associated with downregulation of the protein kinase SRPK1. Neoplasia 2004;6:297–301.

[287] Isonishi S, Hom DK, Thiebaut FB, et al. Expression of the c-Ha-ras oncogene in mouse NIH 3T3 cells induces resistance to cisplatin. Cancer Res 1991;51:5903–9.

[288] Hamamoto T, Suzuki K, Sasaki H, Ichikawa M, Kodama S, Watanabe M. Differences in effects of oncogenes on sensitivity to anticancer drugs. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 2005;46:197–203.

[289] Youn CK, Kim MH, Cho HJ, et al. Oncogenic H-Ras up-regulates expression of ERCC1 to protect cells from platinum-based anticancer agents. Cancer Res 2004;64:4849–57.

[290] Brozovic A, Fritz G, Christmann M, et al. Long-term activation of SAPK/JNK, p38 kinase and fas-L expression by cisplatin is attenuated in human carcinoma cells that acquired drug resistance. Int J Cancer 2004;112:974–85.

[291] Pan B, Yao KS, Monia BP, et al. Reversal of cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cell lines by a c-jun antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ISIS 10582): evidence for the role of transcription factor overexpression in determining resistant phenotype. Biochem Pharmacol 2002;63:1699–707.

[292] Li F, Meng L, Zhou J, et al. Reversing chemoresistance in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells: a role of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;335:1070–7.

[293] Roberts D, Schick J, Conway S, et al. Identification of genes associated with platinum drug sensitivity and resistance in human ovarian cancer cells. Br J Cancer 2005;92:1149–58.

[294] Kato K, Nomoto M, Izumi H, et al. Functional analysis of the human STAT3 gene promoter: alteration of chromatin structure as a possible mechanism for the upregulation in cisplatin-resistant cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1493:91–100.

[295] Ikuta K, Takemura K, Kihara M, et al. Overexpression of constitutive signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 mRNA in cisplatin-resistant human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Oncol Rep 2005;13:217–22.

[296] Belenkov AI, Shenouda G, Rizhevskaya E, et al. Erythropoietin induces cancer cell resistance to ionizing radiation and to cisplatin. Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:1525–32.

[297] Righetti SC, Perego P, Carenini N, et al. Molecular alterations of cells resistant to platinum drugs: role of PKCalpha. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1763:93–100.

[298] Baldwin RM, Garratt-Lalonde M, Parolin DA, Krzyzanowski PM, Andrade MA, Lorimer IA. Protection of glioblastoma cells from cisplatin cytotoxicity via protein kinase Ciota-mediated attenuation of p38 MAP kinase signaling. Oncogene 2006;25:2909–19.

[299] Olivero M, Ruggiero T, Saviozzi S, et al. Genes regulated by hepatocyte growth factor as targets to sensitize ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin. Mol Cancer Ther 2006;5:1126–35.

[300] Cohen PT, Philp A, Vazquez-Martin C. Protein phosphatase 4—from obscurity to vital functions. FEBS Lett 2005;579:3278–86.

[301] Burger H, Capello A, Schenk PW, Stoter G, Brouwer J, Nooter K. A genome-wide screening in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for genes that confer resistance to the anticancer agent cisplatin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000;269:767–74.

[302] Ishii T, Matsuse T, Masuda M, Teramoto S. The effects of S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2) on cell cycle status, viability, and chemoresistance in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. Exp Lung Res 2004;30:687–703.

[303] Biliran Jr H, Wang Y, Banerjee S, et al. Overexpression of cyclin D1 promotes tumor cell growth and confers resistance to cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in an elastase-myc transgene-expressing pancreatic tumor cell line. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:6075–86.

[304] Matsumura Y, Yamagishi N, Miyakoshi J, Imamura S, Takebe H. Increase in radiation sensitivity of human malignant melanoma cells by expression of wild-type p16 gene. Cancer Lett 1997;115:91–6.

[305] Zhang P, Gao W, Li H, Reed E, Chen F. Inducible degradation of checkpoint kinase 2 links to cisplatin-induced resistance in ovarian cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;328:567–72.

[306] Carrassa L, Broggini M, Erba E, Damia G. Chk1, but not Chk2, is involved in the cellular response to DNA damaging agents: differential activity in cells expressing or not p53. Cell Cycle 2004;3:1177–81.

[307] Du Y, Yin F, Liu C, et al. Depression of MAD2 inhibits apoptosis of gastric cancer cells by upregulating Bcl-2 and interfering mitochondrion pathway. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006;345:1092–8.

[308] Amaya K, Ohta T, Kitagawa H, et al. II activates MAP kinase and NF-kappaB through angiotensin II type I receptor in human pancreatic cancer cells. Int J Oncol 2004;25:849–56.

[309] Eichholtz-Wirth H, Sagan D. IkappaB/NF-kappaB mediated cisplatin resistance in HeLa cells after low-dose gamma-irradiation is associated with altered SODD expression. Apoptosis 2000;5:255–63.

[310] Mohammad RM, Banerjee S, Li Y, Aboukameel A, Kucuk O, Sarkar FH. Cisplatin-induced antitumor activity is potentiated by the soy isoflavone genistein in BxPC-3 pancreatic tumor xenografts. Cancer 2006;106:1260–8.

[311] Venkatraman M, Anto RJ, Nair A, Varghese M, Karunagaran D. Biological and chemical inhibitors of NF-kappaB sensitize SiHa cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Mol Carcinogen 2005;44:51–9.

[312] Sharma V, Peddibhotla S, Tepe JJ. Sensitization of cancer cells to DNA damaging agents by imidazoles. J Am Chem Soc 2006;128:9137–43.

[313] Ruan HY, Masuda M, Ito A, et al. Effects of a novel NF-kappaB inhibitor, dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ), on growth, apoptosis, gene expression, and chemosensitivity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. Head Neck 2006;28:158–65.

[314] Poma P, Notarbartolo M, Labbozzetta M, et al. Antitumor effects of the novel NF-kappaB inhibitor dehydroxymethyl-epoxyquinomicin

on human hepatic cancer cells: analysis of synergy with cisplatin and
of possible correlation with inhibition of pro-survival genes and IL-6
production. Int J Oncol 2006; 28:923–30.

[315] Li Y, Ahmed F, Ali S, Philip PA, Kucuk O, Sarkar FH. Inactivation
of nuclear factor kappaB by soy isoflavone genistein contributes to
increased apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents in human
cancer cells. Cancer Res 2005; 65:6934–42.

[316] Lee CT, Seol JY, Lee SY, et al. The effect of adenovirus-IkappaBalpha
transduction on the chemosensitivity of lung cancer cell line with
resistance to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II)(cisplatin) and doxorubicin(adriamycin). Lung Cancer 2003; 41:199–206.

[317] Weaver KD, Yeyeodu S, Cusack Jr JC, Baldwin Jr AS, Ewend
MG. Potentiation of chemotherapeutic agents following antagonism of nuclear factor kappa B in human gliomas. J Neurooncol
2003; 61:187–96.

[318] Mabuchi S, Ohmichi M, Nishio Y, et al. Inhibition of NFkappaB
increases the efficacy of cisplatin in in vitro and in vivo ovarian cancer
models. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:23477–85.

[319] Notarbartolo M, Poma P, Perri D, Dusonchet L, Cervello M,
D'Alessandro N. Antitumor effects of curcumin, alone or in combination with cisplatin or doxorubicin, on human hepatic cancer cells.
Analysis of their possible relationship to changes in NF-kB activation
levels and in IAP gene expression. Cancer Lett 2005; 224:53–65.

[320] Lu YS, Yeh PY, Chuang SE, Gao M, Kuo ML, Cheng AL. Glucocorticoids enhance cytotoxicity of cisplatin via suppression of
NF-{kappa}B activation in the glucocorticoid receptor-rich human
cervical carcinoma cell line SiHa. J Endocrinol 2006; 188:311–9.

[321] Abdel-Latif MM, Raouf AA, Sabra K, Kelleher D, Reynolds JV, Vitamin. C enhances chemosensitization of esophageal cancer cells in
vitro. J Chemother 2005; 17:539–49.

[322] Zhong X, Li X, Wang G, et al. Mechanisms underlying the synergistic
effect of SU5416 and cisplatin on cytotoxicity in human ovarian tumor
cells. Int J Oncol 2004; 25:445–51.

[323] Strozyk E, Poppelmann B, Schwarz T, Kulms D. Differential effects
of NF-kappaB on apoptosis induced by DNA-damaging agents:
the type of DNA damage determines the final outcome. Oncogene
2006; 25:6239–51.

[324] Kim SB, Kim JS, Lee JH, et al. NF-kappaB activation is required for
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in head and neck squamous carcinoma
cells. FEBS Lett 2006; 580:311–8.

[325] Shehata M, Shehata M, Shehata F, Pater A. Apoptosis effects of Xrel3
c-Rel/Nuclear Factor-kappa B homolog in human cervical cancer
cells. Cell Biol Int 2005; 29:429–40.

[326] Torigoe T, Izumi H, Ishiguchi H, et al. Cisplatin resistance and transcription factors. Curr Med Chem Anticancer Agents 2005; 5:15–27.

[327] Wilson LA, Yamamoto H, Singh G. Role of the transcription factor
Ets-1 in cisplatin resistance. Mol Cancer Ther 2004; 3:823–32.

[328] Furuchi T, Ishikawa H, Miura N, et al. Two nuclear proteins, Cin5 and
Ydr259c, confer resistance to cisplatin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Mol Pharmacol 2001; 59:470–4.

[329] Yahata H, Kobayashi H, Kamura T, et al. Increased nuclear localization
of transcription factor YB-1 in acquired cisplatin-resistant ovarian
cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2002; 128:621–6.

[330] Perry 3rd WL, Shepard RL, Sampath J, et al. Human splicing factor
SPF45 (RBM17) confers broad multidrug resistance to anticancer
drugs when overexpressed—a phenotype partially reversed by selective
estrogen receptor modulators. Cancer Res 2005; 65:6593–600.

[331] Sakamoto M, Umayahara K, Sakamoto H, et al. Cancer-associated
gene abnormalities and chemosensitivity. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
1998; 25:1819–31.

[332] Takano M, Kudo K, Goto T, Yamamoto K, Kita T, Kikuchi Y. Analyses by comparative genomic hybridization of genes relating with
cisplatin-resistance in ovarian cancer. Hum Cell 2001; 14:267–71.

[333] Osterberg L, Levan K, Partheen K, Helou K, Horvath G. Cytogenetic
analysis of carboplatin resistance in early-stage epithelial ovarian
carcinoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2005; 163:144–50.


[334] Nessling M, Kern MA, Schadendorf D, Lichter P. Association of genomic imbalances with resistance to therapeutic drugs
in human melanoma cell lines. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1999; 87:
286–90.

[335] Hiorns LR, Seckl MJ, Paradinas F, et al. A molecular cytogenetic approach to studying platinum resistance. J Inorg Biochem
1999; 77:95–104.

[336] Rao PH, Houldsworth J, Palanisamy N, et al. Chromosomal amplification is associated with cisplatin resistance of human male germ cell
tumors. Cancer Res 1998; 58:4260–3.

[337] Leyland-Jones B, Kelland LR, Harrap KR, Hiorns LR. Genomic imbalances associated with acquired resistance to platinum analogues. Am J Pathol 1999; 155:77–84.

[338] Wasenius VM, Jekunen A, Monni O, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization analysis of chromosomal changes occurring during development of acquired resistance to cisplatin in human
ovarian carcinoma cells. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1997; 18:
286–91.

[339] Kiyoizuka Y, Yamamoto D, Yang J, et al. Correlation of chemosensitivity to anticancer drugs and telomere length, telomerase activity and
telomerase RNA expression in human ovarian cancer cells. Anticancer
Res 2000; 20:203–12.

[340] Makhija S, Sit A, Edwards R, et al. Identification of genetic alterations related to chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol
2003; 90:3–9.

[341] Harper ME, Antoniou A, Villalobos-Menuey E, et al. Characterization of a novel metabolic strategy used by drug-resistant tumor cells. Faseb
J 2002; 16:1550–7.

[342] Yoon SJ, Park I, Kwak C, Lee E. Ultrastructural change due to acquired cisplatin resistance in human bladder cancer cells. Oncol
Rep 2003; 10:1363–7.

[343] Tregubova NA, Iurchenko OV, Todor IN, Sudiakov VS, Kulik
GI, Chekhun VF. Ultrastructural organization of carcinoma Lewis
(3LL) cells during cisplatin resistance formation. Tsitol Genet
2006; 40:58–65.

[344] Peters D, Freund J, Ochs RL. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis of carboplatin response in chemosensitive and chemoresistant ovarian
cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2005; 4:1605–16.

[345] Helleman J, Jansen MP, Span PN, et al. Molecular profiling of platinum resistant ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer 2006; 118:1963–71.

[346] Castagna A, Antonioli P, Astner H, et al. A proteomic approach to cisplatin resistance in the cervix squamous cell carcinoma cell line
A431. Proteomics 2004; 4:3246–67.


Biography

David J. Stewart, M.D., FRCPC, is a Professor of Medicine and Deputy Chair of the Department of Thoracic/Head & Neck Medical Oncology at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas. Dr. Stewart earned his M.D. at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario Canada. His postgraduate training included an internship and residency at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal, Canada. His medical oncology fellowship was completed at University of Texas MD Anderson Hospital & Tumor Institute in Houston, Texas. Dr. Stewart’s main areas of research interest are in chemotherapy resistance & resistances modulation, cisplatin pharmacology, new drug development and treatment of lung cancer. Dr. Stewart is author and co-author of more than 200 peer-reviewed publications. He is an active member of ASCO & AACR.
