
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER
Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 (2007) 991–1001

ScienceDirect

Developmental & Comparative
Immunology
www.elsevier.com/locate/devcompimm

---

**Iap2 is required for a sustained response in the Drosophila Imd pathway**

Susanna Valanne${}^{a}$, Anni Kleino${}^{a}$, Henna Myllymäki${}^{a}$, Jussi Vuoristo${}^{b}$, Mika Rämet${}^{a,b,c,*}$

${}^{a}$Institute of Medical Technology, 33014 University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland  
${}^{b}$Biocenter Oulu, 90014 University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland  
${}^{c}$Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland  

Received 15 December 2006; received in revised form 4 January 2007; accepted 5 January 2007  
Available online 15 February 2007

---

### Abstract

Fruit flies have effective immune response against Gram-negative bacteria. Upon infection, early JNK-signaling pathway mediated response is followed by the action of the Immune deficiency (Imd) signaling cascade, a *Drosophila* equivalent of mammalian TNF-receptor pathway, leading to the release of antimicrobial peptides. Recently, Tak1-binding protein 2 (Tab2) and Inhibitor of apoptosis 2 (Iap2) were identified as components of the Imd pathway. In this study, we carried out a genome-wide kinetic analysis of the role of Tab2 and Iap2 for immune response in *Drosophila* S2 cells using oligonucleotide microarrays. Tab2 RNAi abolished the induction of all immune response genes in S2 cells indicating its requirement for signaling both via the Imd and the JNK pathway. The role of Iap2 was more specific. Kinetic analysis indicated that Iap2 is required to sustain antimicrobial peptide gene expression in S2 cells. Furthermore, inactivation of Iap2 by RNAi resulted in impaired microbial resistance in *Drosophila* in vivo.

© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: NF-κB pathway; Signal transduction; Innate immunity; *Drosophila*; Inhibitor of apoptosis 2

---

### 1. Introduction

*Drosophila melanogaster* has emerged as a productive model to study conserved signaling cascades regulating immune response. There are two major pathways for microbe recognition in flies leading to production of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs): the Toll pathway which mainly responds to Gram-positive bacteria and fungi, and the Immune deficiency (Imd) pathway, which responds to Gram-negative bacteria (reviewed in [1–3]). Imd pathway is evolutionarily conserved and it corresponds closely to mammalian TNF receptor

---

Abbreviations: AMP, antimicrobial peptide; Tak1, Transforming growth factor β-activated kinase; Tab2, Tak1-binding protein 2; Iap2, Inhibitor of apoptosis 2; RNAi, RNA interference; Imd, Immune deficiency; IKK, IkB kinase; TRAF, TNF Receptor-associated Factor; AttA, Attacin A; AttD, Attacin D; CecA1, Cecropin A1; Drs, Drosomycin; Rel, Relish; Dredd, Death-related ced-3/Nedd 2-like protein; key, kenny; hep, hemipterous; bsk, basket; kay, kayak; puc, puckered; ben, bendless

*Corresponding author. Institute of Medical Technology, 33014 University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. Tel.: +358 335517724; fax: +358 335517710. E-mail address: mika.ramet@uta.fi (M. Rämet).

0145-305X/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.dci.2007.01.004

signaling pathway. The Imd pathway signaling is mediated through PGRP-LC [4–6] to a death-domain containing protein Imd [7]. The exact signaling events occurring downstream of Imd are currently unclear, but it is known that at least the IkB kinase (IKK) complex, dFADD, Dredd and Tak1 (TGFβ-activated kinase 1) are required for Relish activation. Of these, Tak1 has been implied in the sequential activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and the Imd pathways [8–11]. However, recently it was shown that although needed for AMP production, Tak1 is not required for Relish nuclear translocation in S2 cells [12] or in vivo [13], proposing a more complex regulation of Relish activity than previously suggested.

Recently, a *Drosophila* homologue of TAK1-binding proteins 2 and 3 (Tab2) was identified and shown to be required for AMP gene expression [12,14] and JNK phosphorylation [14]. In mammals, it has been proposed that TAB2 and TAB3 act as adaptor proteins in TRAF6, TRAF2 and TAK1 interaction [15], which leads to phosphorylation and subsequent activation of TAK1 [16]. In addition, it has been suggested that ubiquitination is needed for the activation of Tak1 and the IKK complex [17]. In mammals, TRAF proteins are known to act as K63-ubiquitin E3 ligases in NF-κB signaling, but in *Drosophila* Imd signaling, the E3 ligase required has not been identified. Some conflicting data have been published about the role of Traf s in *Drosophila* immunity [18] (reviewed in [3]). However, current reports about knockdown of all *Drosophila* Traf s in S2 cells [19] as well as the resistance of Traf2 mutant flies to *Erwinia carotovora* septic injury [20] suggest that Traf s do not participate in Imd signaling. Instead, a putative E3 ligase Iap2, a member of the Inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, was recently identified as a new component of the Imd pathway in *Drosophila* [12,21]. In *Drosophila*, there are two IAP-proteins: DIAP1 and Iap2. Both of them contain BIR (baculovirus IAP repeat) domains and a RING (really interesting new gene) domain, which is a signature for an E3 ligase. DIAP1 regulates the cell death machinery by inhibiting caspases and is hence essential for survival [22]. In mammals, there are several IAPs (reviewed in [23]), out of which the best characterized are cellular proteins cIAP1 and cIAP2 [24] and X-chromosome-linked IAP (XIAP) [25]. Although the best known function of IAPs is caspase inhibition and therefore anti-apoptotic action, they are also able to bind other molecules and change their activity by

ubiquitination [23]. The exact mechanism how Iap2 and Tab2 affect the Imd pathway signaling in *Drosophila* is unknown. In this study, we have further characterized the role of Iap2 and Tab2 in the Imd pathway signaling. In particular, we have analyzed the kinetics of the AMP gene expression in S2 cells and in vivo, and evaluated the role of Iap2 for normal resistance in vivo.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Cell culture

S2 cells were cultured in Schneider medium (Sigma) + 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin at 25°C.

2.2. Synthesis of dsRNAs

dsRNAs were produced using targeted primers (see Supplemental Table S1) and cDNA from S2 cells as a template. First the selected region of the gene was amplified using the outer primers. The obtained PCR product was used as a template for nested PCR with primers containing binding sites for T7 RNA polymerase. pMT/BiP/V5-His/GFP plasmid (Invitrogen) was used as a template for the production of the negative control GFP dsRNA. dsRNA synthesis was performed by in vitro transcription using T7 MegaScript RNA polymerase (Ambion) and the PCR products containing T7 sites as templates.

2.3. Luciferase reporter assay

Attacin A (AttA)-luciferase [26] reporter construct was kindly provided by Prof. Jean-Luc Imler and Prof. Jean-Marc Reichhart. Luciferase reporter assay for Imd pathway was performed essentially as described earlier [12,27,28]. Briefly, S2 cells were transfected with AttA-luciferase or Drs-luciferase reporter together with dsRNAs, using Fugene® transfection reagent (Roche) according to manufacturer's instructions. Heat-killed *Escherichia coli* was added to the cells 48 h after transfection to induce the Imd pathway. The cells were harvested in Passive lysis buffer (Promega) at 0 (uninduced), 1, 4, 8, or 24 h after induction with heat-killed *E. coli* and stored at –20°C until analyzed. Luciferase values were measured using standard procedures.

S. Valanne et al. / Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 (2007) 991–1001

2.4. Genome-wide analysis of mRNA levels using oligonucleotide microarrays

0.5 × 10⁶ S2 cells were seeded on 24-well plates and treated with 4 μg of control (GFP) or experimental dsRNAs. 48 h later, heat-killed *E. coli* was added, and cells incubated with the bacteria for 0 (uninduced), 0.5, 1, 4, 24 or 32 h. Cells (~2 × 10⁶ cells/well) were harvested, and total RNA extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen CA, USA). Gene expression analysis was performed using the Affymetrix (Santa Clara) *Drosophila* GeneChips according to the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual.

them with a needle dipped into concentrated culture of *Enterobacterium cloacae* (*E. cloacae*). 20 flies (10 males and 10 females) were collected at each time point and snap-frozen in dry ice. The flies were homogenized in TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen) and the total RNAs were extracted according to manufacturer's instructions. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was performed using SuperScript™ II One-Step RT-PCR with Platinum® Taq (Invitrogen) kit. Primers and PCR product sizes are listed in Supplemental Table S1.

2.5. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR from S2 cells

5 × 10⁵ S2 cells were seeded onto 24-well plates and treated with 3 μg of experimental or control dsRNA. 48 h later, antimicrobial peptide expression was induced by heat-killed *E. coli* treatment. At selected time points after induction, ranging between 0 and 72 h, cells were harvested in TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen) and stored at –80°C until total RNA extraction according to manufacturer's instructions. cDNA syntheses and PCR reactions for Attacin D (*AttD*) were carried out using SuperScript™ II One-Step RT-PCR with Platinum® Taq (Invitrogen) kit. Primers and sizes of PCR products are listed in Supplemental Table S1.

2.6. Fly stocks

Canton S and Relish<sup>E20</sup> flies were obtained from Prof. Dan Hultmark from the Umeå University. GAL4 driver C564-GAL4, UAS-RNAi transgenic fly stocks Iap2-IR and dFADD-IR as well as recently described Iap2 null mutant flies [20] were kindly provided by Prof. Bruno Lemaitre, Prof. Ryu Ueda and Dr. François Leulier. The generation of the RNAi transgenic fly stocks is described elsewhere [12, 29]. The C564-GAL4 driver expresses GAL4 in adult fat body and hemocytes. C564-GAL4 flies were crossed with UAS-RNAi flies and the adult flies carrying one copy of the GAL4 driver and one copy of the UAS-RNAi construct were used in infections.

2.7. RNA extraction from flies and semi-quantitative RT-PCR

Canton S, Relish<sup>E20</sup>, and Iap2 flies were infected 0, 1, 4 or 8 h prior to RNA extraction by pricking

2.8. Survival assay

Bacterial infections were performed by pricking adult flies with a thin tungsten needle dipped into a fresh, concentrated culture of bacteria. The survival of the flies was monitored for 72 h. The Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria applied were *Micrococcus luteus* (*M. luteus*) and *E. cloacae*, respectively.

3. Results

3.1. Iap2 activity determines the duration of AttD expression in S2 cells

Iap2 was recently identified as an essential component of the *Drosophila* Imd pathway [12, 21]. In our earlier study, Iap2 RNAi robustly reduced the AttA-luciferase reporter activity (98 ± 1% decrease) in response to heat-killed *E. coli*, whereas the effect was clearly more moderate on endogenous CecAl gene expression as shown by semi-quantitative RT-PCR [12]. We hypothesized that this difference might be due to different AMPs studied and/or different time points used in these experiments: in the luciferase reporter assays we had used a 24 h *E. coli*-treatment to induce the Imd pathway, whereas a 6 h time point was used in RT-PCR reactions.

To study our hypothesis, we performed experiments where the Imd pathway was induced with heat-killed *E. coli*, and the expression of selected AMP genes was measured at various time points after induction, using both a luciferase reporter assay and a semi-quantitative RT-PCR assay. As shown in Fig. 1a, dsRNA-treatments targeting Rel, Tab2, Iap2, Dredd or key completely abolished the *E. coli*-induced AttA-luciferase activity at all time points measured. Similar results were obtained with CecAl-luciferase and Drs-luciferase reporters
(Supplemental Fig. 1). In addition, Tab2 and Takl dsRNA-treatments almost entirely blocked the E. coli-induced endogenous AttD induction as measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (Fig. 1b). Intriguingly, endogenous AttD mRNA was induced comparably in Iap2 dsRNA-treated S2 cells compared to GFP dsRNA-treated controls at 4h (Fig. 1b). In later time points however, AttD mRNA levels were markedly reduced in Iap2 dsRNA-treated cells compared to GFP dsRNA-treated controls (Fig. 1b). Incidentally, the expression of AttA in S2 cells was not sufficient to perform RT-PCR experiments. In conclusion, Iap2 appears necessary for sustained AMP response, but it is not needed for early response in S2 cells.

Drosophila JNK pathway is required for a number of processes, including wound healing [30], development, apoptosis and immunity (reviewed in [31]). During immune challenge with Gram-negative bacteria, the JNK pathway is activated prior to the IKK/Relish dependent Imd pathway in S2 cells [9,10]. In S2 cells, the early response of JNK pathway signaling is terminated approximately after 4 h [10], after which the Imd pathway and consequently a different set of target genes are activated. Takl and Tab2 are necessary for both the Imd and the JNK pathway activity in Drosophila [8–10,14]. As neither Takl nor Tab2 are required for Relish cleavage [12,13], it is plausible that the role of these proteins in the regulation of

![Picture 1]



Fig. 1. Iap2 is required for sustained AMP gene expression in S2 cells. (a) and (c), S2 cells were transfected with AttA-luciferase reporter plasmid together with shown dsRNAs. Imd pathway was induced with heat-killed E. coli, and luciferase values measured from cells collected at given time points after induction. Luciferase values were normalized to uninduced GFP controls. Data is shown as mean±SD, $N=2$. (b) and (d), S2 cells were treated with indicated dsRNAs and 48 h later the Imd pathway was induced as above. Cells were collected at given time points after induction, total RNA extracted with TRIzol® and Attacin D and Actin 5C expression levels measured by RT-PCR.
the Imd pathway activity is mediated via the JNK pathway.

To test this, we investigated the role of the JNK pathway downstream components (Hemipterous (JNKK), Basket (JNK) and Kayak (homologue of human Fos; part of the AP1-complex)) to AMP gene expression using both AttA-luciferase reporter assay and AttD semi-quantitative RT-PCR. As shown in Fig. 1c, *hep*, *bsk* and *kay* RNAi moderately reduced the *E. coli*-induced AttA-luciferase activity compared to GFP dsRNA-treated controls in S2 cells. Similar results were obtained using semi-quantitative RT-PCR estimation of the endogenous AttD mRNA levels. These results are in line with our earlier results indicating that the JNK pathway has a role in regulating AMP expression in S2 cells [12,28]. However, Takl and Tab2 are clearly much more important for the AMP response than the downstream JNK pathway components. This indicates that the function of Takl and Tab2 is not restricted to regulation of the JNK pathway activity in S2 cells.

### 3.2. Iap2 is required for maintaining the expression of sustained immune response genes at genome level in S2 cells

To obtain a genome-wide view to the role of Tab2 and Iap2 in regulation of the immune response genes in S2 cells, we used oligonucleotide microarrays. S2 cells were exposed to heat-killed *E. coli* for 0, 0.5, 1, 4, 24, and 32 h and thereafter the mRNA levels of ~18,500 transcripts were measured using Affymetrix Drosophila Genechips. The genes whose induction with heat-killed *E. coli* is greater than two-fold in 4 h can be grouped into two groups based on the Relish RNAi result at the 4 h time point: Relish-dependent or sustained (*n* = 32), and Relish-independent or early (*n* = 14) response gene groups (Table 1). Others have also shown this time-dependent clustering of immune response genes [9,10]. As shown in Fig. 2a, at 4 h after *E. coli* induction, Relish RNAi completely eliminates the induction of sustained immune response genes. Likewise, *imd*, *Takl* and *Tab2* RNAi block this induction, whereas *Iap2* RNAi has no effect (Fig. 2a). This indicates that Imd, Takl, Tab2 and Relish are required for induction of all the Imd pathway target genes in S2 cells, whereas Iap2 is not required at the 4 h time point. The inhibitory action of all the dsRNA treatments was analyzed and was found to be effective (Supplemental Fig. 2).

The early immune response is mediated via the JNK pathway and it does not require Relish activity (Fig. 2b) [9,10]. Relish RNAi at the 4 h time point actually increased and/or prolonged the induction of the early group genes by nearly three-fold compared to GFP dsRNA-treated samples (Fig. 2b). This demonstrates that Relish induction is required for termination of the early response as shown earlier by Park and coworkers [10]. In contrast, the induction of early response genes is almost completely blocked by *Takl* and *Tab2* RNAi (Fig. 2b) indicating that Imd/Relish and Imd/JNK pathways branch at the level of Takl and Tab2 as shown earlier [9,10]. The effect of *Iap2* RNAi to the induction of the early response group genes (Fig. 2b) was modest (29 ± 34% decrease). Therefore it appears that Iap2 has minor role in the JNK pathway signaling which is in line with recent results by Huh et al. [32].

Next, we monitored the *E. coli*-mediated induction of gene expression in the sustained response gene group as a function of time. The fold induction of Attacin B (*AttB*; the most strongly induced gene at 4 h) in S2 cells treated with indicated dsRNAs is shown in Fig. 2c. In *Takl* and *Tab2* dsRNA-treated cells, a marginal induction of *AttB* can be seen at 4 h but this induction is quickly returned to baseline levels. In contrast, in *Iap2* dsRNA-treated cells, the induction at 4 h is greater than in the GFP dsRNA-treated controls, but by 32 h this induction is reduced to less than half of the controls. The same was observed when the induction levels of all the sustained response genes (*n* = 32) were analyzed together (Fig. 2d). These results confirm at the genome level that Iap2 is required to maintain the expression of the sustained immune response genes in S2 cells.

Of note, the expression levels of *AttA*, *Attacin C* and *Diptericin*, genes whose expression has been shown to be induced in vivo in response to *E. coli* infection [33,34], were not markedly induced with *E. coli* in S2 cells. This indicates that activated Relish alone is not sufficient to induce these genes in S2 cells but another, yet unidentified factor, is required.

### 3.3. Impaired expression of AMPs in Iap2 knockout flies

To rule out the possibility, that in S2 cells the time-dependent effect of *Iap2* RNAi on AMP expression was caused by leftover Iap2 protein, we monitored the expression levels of *AttA*, *AttD* and

Table 1  
Genes induced by E.coli in S2 cells at 4h  

| CG#      | Name               | 0h    | 0.5h   | 1h     | 4h       | 24h      | 32h      | 4hRelRNAi |
|----------|--------------------|-------|--------|--------|----------|----------|----------|-----------|
| **Sustained response i.e. Relish-dependent genes** |
| CG18372  | Attacin B         | 1±0.1 | 1.5    | 6.0    | 60.6±15.1 | 87.2±2.0 | 108.8    | 0.1±0.0   |
| CG10794  | Diptericin B      | 1±0.0 | 2.3    | 3.6    | 52.4±4.3 | 78.1±1.8 | 95.9     | 0.2±0.1   |
| CG7629   | Attacin D         | 1±0.0 | 1.1    | 2.6    | 47.6±6.3 | 92.5±2.1 | 112.9    | 0.1±0.1   |
| CG8175   | Metchnikowin      | 1±0.0 | 1.7    | 6.5    | 41.3±15.7 | 52.2±2.0 | 52.7     | 0.4±0.1   |
| CG32185  |                    | 1±0.1 | 0.9    | 3.5    | 29.8±6.4 | 48.5±1.1 | 61.3     | 0.0±0.0   |
| CG15678  |                    | 1±0.2 | 2.0    | 15.5   | 15.1±0.6 | 5.4±0.0  | 6.4      | 0.4±0.1   |
| CG14704  | PGRP-LB           | 1±0.0 | 1.2    | 2.0    | 8.5±2.0  | 20.7±0.3 | 19.9     | 0.7±0.2   |
| CG1878   | Cecropin B        | 1±0.0 | 1.2    | 3.2    | 7.4±0.9  | 4.0±0.3  | 3.6      | 0.6±0.0   |
| CG8180   |                    | 1±0.3 | 1.1    | 1.7    | 5.5±1.1  | 8.5±2.2  | 9.1      | 1.1±0.7   |
| CG13458  |                    | 1±0.7 | 0.7    | 3.1    | 5.2±0.0  | 7.3±0.7  | 9.2      | 1.1±0.7   |
| CG10145  | M-spondin         | 1±0.0 | 0.9    | 0.8    | 5.0±1.0  | 12.0±0.9 | 13.3     | 0.6±0.4   |
| CG13335  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.1    | 1.2    | 4.9±0.0  | 12.9±0.7 | 13.5     | 0.4±0.4   |
| CG7142   |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.2    | 4.5    | 4.5±1.4  | 4.5±0.8  | 5.2      | 0.9±0.4   |
| CG9312   |                    | 1±0.3 | 2.3    | 1.3    | 4.0±0.1  | 5.1±0.2  | 7.0      | 0.9±0.2   |
| CG10810  | Drosomycin        | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 1.7    | 3.6±1.5  | 15.9±0.4 | 17.9     | 0.1±0.1   |
| CG10816  | Drosocin          | 1±0.2 | 1.5    | 1.3    | 3.5±0.1  | 3.6±0.0  | 2.7      | 0.2±0.0   |
| CG9681   | PGRP-SB1          | 1±0.6 | 1.3    | 1.3    | 3.4±0.2  | 3.4±0.1  | 2.6      | 0.9±0.1   |
| CG32145  | omega             | 1±0.2 | 1.2    | 1.1    | 3.4±0.1  | 4.0±0.0  | 3.6      | 0.5±0.1   |
| CG2217   |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 1.0    | 3.3±0.7  | 3.8±0.2  | 3.0      | 0.4±0.1   |
| CG13077  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 1.3    | 3.3±1.5  | 7.0±0.2  | 6.3      | 0.8±0.4   |
| CG13482  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 2.1    | 3.1±0.3  | 2.0±0.1  | 2.7      | 1.6±0.2   |
| CG14489  | olf186-M          | 1±0.0 | 1.1    | 0.9    | 3.1±0.3  | 1.9±0.1  | 1.8      | 0.8±0.1   |
| CG7496   | PGRP-SD           | 1±0.1 | 1.2    | 1.4    | 2.9±0.7  | 5.1±0.0  | 5.4      | 0.0±0.0   |
| CG32170  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.0    | 1.6    | 2.9±1.0  | 2.7±0.1  | 3.1      | 0.6±0.1   |
| CG32040  |                    | 1±0.2 | 0.6    | 1.4    | 2.7±0.6  | 2.1±0.1  | 1.9      | 1.2±0.1   |
| CG30377  |                    | 1±0.0 | 1.2    | 1.4    | 2.6±0.4  | 3.1±0.3  | 2.8      | 0.5±0.2   |
| CG8008   |                    | 1±0.0 | 1.1    | 1.3    | 2.6±0.2  | 1.3±0.0  | 1.2      | 1.1±0.1   |
| HDC07235 |                    | 1±0.3 | 0.5    | 1.5    | 2.4±0.1  | 4.1±0.1  | 4.1      | 0.8±0.2   |
| CG8046   |                    | 1±0.0 | 1.1    | 1.3    | 2.3±0.0  | 1.4±0.1  | 1.6      | 1.2±0.2   |
| CG4437   | PGRP-LF           | 1±0.0 | 1.0    | 1.2    | 2.2±0.1  | 2.0±0.3  | 1.9      | 0.8±0.1   |
| CG1225   | RhoGEF3           | 1±0.0 | 1.0    | 1.0    | 2.1±0.5  | 1.2±0.1  | 1.1      | 0.9±0.4   |
| CG33468  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.1    | 1.2    | 2.0±0.5  | 3.8±0.5  | 3.3      | 0.1±0.0   |

| **Early response i.e. Relish-independent genes** |
| CG7778   |                    | 1±0.2 | 1.1    | 2.8    | 6.8±0.7 | 4.1±0.0 | 4.4      | 6.5±2.1   |
| CG4859-RA | Mmpl              | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 1.3    | 4.7±0.4 | 1.3±0.1 | 1.1      | 14.6±5.2  |
| CG4859-RB | Mmpl              | 1±0.1 | 1.2    | 1.2    | 3.7±0.1 | 0.9±0.1 | 0.4      | 7.3±2.2   |
| CG4859-RB | Mmpl              | 1±0.0 | 1.4    | 1.9    | 3.4±0.9 | 1.4±0.1 | 1.2      | 13.5±1.8  |
| CG8805   | wunen 2           | 1±0.1 | 1.3    | 2.1    | 2.6±0.1 | 0.8±0.1 | 0.6      | 11.5±1.0  |
| CG8177   |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.2    | 1.1    | 2.4±0.5 | 1.2±0.1 | 1.1      | 2.1±0.6   |
| CG6765   |                    | 1±0.1 | 0.8    | 1.8    | 2.3±0.3 | 1.7±0.6 | 0.9      | 3.7±1.2   |
| CG6725   | sulfated          | 1±0.1 | 1.0    | 0.9    | 2.2±0.4 | 1.8±0.0 | 1.6      | 2.1±0.7   |
| CG32030  |                    | 1±0.0 | 1.0    | 1.9    | 2.1±0.4 | 1.2±0.0 | 1.6      | 4.3±0.5   |
| CG17124  |                    | 1±0.1 | 1.0    | 1.1    | 2.1±0.0 | 1.3±0.1 | 0.9      | 3.9±0.0   |
| CG5730   | Annexin IX        | 1±0.1 | 1.1    | 1.1    | 2.1±0.4 | 1.3±0.1 | 1.2      | 3.2±1.1   |
| CG7702   |                    | 1±0.3 | 0.7    | 0.9    | 2.1±0.6 | 0.7±0.1 | 0.4      | 4.1±0.6   |
| CG7554   | comm2             | 1±0.1 | 1.2    | 3.0    | 2.0±0.3 | 0.6±0.2 | 0.6      | 3.2±0.5   |
| CG4196   |                    | 1±0.1 | 0.4    | 0.8    | 2.0±0.0 | 0.9±0.2 | 1.2      | 4.9±0.2   |
| Relish   |                    |       |        |        |          |          |          |           |
| CG11992  | Relish            | 1±0.0 | 1.1    | 2.3    | 2.8±0.3 | 1.8±0.0 | 1.9      | 0.3±0.0   |

S. Valanne et al. / Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 (2007) 991–1001

**Fig. 2.** Microarray data analysis of mRNA levels in S2 cells. S2 cells were treated with *GFP, Iap2, Tab2, Tak1, imd* and *Relish* dsRNAs. *Imd* pathway was induced with heat-killed *E. coli* and cells collected at given time points after induction. The expression levels of approximately 18,500 *Drosophila* genes were measured using Affymetrix *Drosophila* Genome 2.0 arrays. Genes, whose *E. coli*-mediated induction was more than two-fold in 4 h were divided into sustained immune response or Relish-dependent (*n* = 32) an early immune response or Relish-independent (*n* = 14) groups (see also Table 1). (a) Relish RNAi completely eliminates the induction of sustained immune response genes at 4 h after *E. coli* induction. *imd*, *Tak1* and *Tab2* RNAi also block this induction, whereas *Iap2* RNAi has no effect at 4 h. (b) The induction of early immune response genes at 4 h is enhanced with Relish RNAi compared to GFP dsRNA-treated cells, whereas *imd*, *Tak1*, and *Tab2* RNAi block this induction. (c) The fold induction of Attacin B as a function of time in S2 cells treated with given dsRNAs. (d) The fold induction of all sustained response group genes as a function of time in S2 cells treated with given dsRNAs.

low at all time points, whereas *AttD* and *CecAl* are clearly produced especially during the first hours after infection as measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (Fig. 3). This is in line with our results in S2 cells (Fig. 1b) and indicates that at least certain AMP genes can be expressed independently of *Iap2* in the early phases of infection. Unexpectedly,

moderate levels of *AttA* expression are present in *Relish*<sup>*E20*</sup> flies suggesting the existence of a Relish-independent means to induce *AttA* expression. Corresponding levels of *AttA* expression were also observed in *Relish*<sup>*E20*</sup> larvae naturally infected with *Erwinia carotovora* by Leulier and coworkers [20 Fig. 5C].

S. Valanne et al. / Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 (2007) 991–1001

| Canton S | $Relish^{E_{20}}$ | $lap2(-/-)$ | Neg. |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| AltA |  |  | Ctrl |
| AttD |  |  |  |
| CecA1 |  |  |  |
| Act5C |  |  |  |

Time from  
$E$. cloacae  
infection (h)

Fig. 3. Impaired antimicrobial peptide gene expression Iap2(-/-)  
flies. AMP expression in flies was induced by $E$. cloacae septic  
injury. $AttA$, $AttD$ and $CecAl$ expression levels were measured  
from RNA isolated from flies at given time points after infection  
by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The experiment was repeated  
three times with an identical result; a representative picture is  
shown.

### 3.4. Iap2-IR flies are susceptible to Gram-negative  
bacteria  

To examine the importance of Iap2 to Drosophila  
immunity, we tested whether $Iap2$ in vivo RNAi  
mutant ($Iap2-IR$) flies were susceptible to Gram-  
negative or Gram-positive bacteria. Canton $S$,  
$Relish^{E_{20}}$, $dFADD-IR$ and $Iap2-IR$ flies were in-  
fected with either $M$. luteus or $E$. cloacae (represent-  
ing Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria,  
respectively). None of the tested fly strains was  
susceptible to $M$. luteus (Fig. 4a). Likewise, Canton  
$S$ wild-type flies were resistant to $E$. cloacae. As  
expected, in vivo RNAi knockdown of dFADD—a  
known component of the Imd signaling pathway—  
lead to significantly reduced resistance. $Iap2-IR$ flies  
behaved comparably to the $dFADD-IR$ flies  
(Fig. 4b). 44 h after $E$. cloacae infection, only 35%  
of $Iap2-IR$ flies were alive. $Relish^{E_{20}}$ flies were, as  
expected, very sensitive to $E$. cloacae. These results  
indicate that $Iap2$ is required for normal immune  
response in Drosophila.

---

### 4. Discussion  

Both the Imd and the JNK pathways regulate the  
immune response against Gram-negative bacteria in  
Drosophila. During immune challenge, the JNK  
pathway is activated prior to the activation of the  
Imd pathway [9,10]. It has been proposed that the  
API complex, the main target of JNK pathway  
activation, inhibits the activation of the Relish  
dependent genes [35]. This could explain the  
relatively slow kinetics of AMP gene expression

---

**Figure 4.** $Iap2-IR$ flies are susceptible to $E$. cloacae infection. Wild-  
type (Canton $S$), $Relish^{E_{20}}$, $dFADD-IR$, and $Iap2-IR$ flies were pricked with a needle dipped in concentrated culture of either $M$.  
$luteus$ or $E$. cloacae. The respective survival rates are presented in  
panels (a) and (b). Number of flies was as follows: Canton $S$ (20  
and 27), $Relish^{E_{20}}$ (20 and 30), $dFADD-IR$ (52 and 67), and $Iap2-$  
$IR$ (43 and 67).

after rapid cleavage and nuclear localization of  
Relish. On the other hand, Relish and IKK  
activities are required for terminating the expression  
of the JNK pathway target genes (Fig. 2b) [10]. The  
exact mode of regulation of these pathways is  
unclear. It has been shown that Takl and Tab2 are  
required for the JNK pathway activation  
[9,10,13,14]. The role of the JNK pathway in the  
expression of the AMP genes is more controversial  
[9–13,28,34]. It was recently reported by Delaney  
and coworkers [13] that the role of Takl in AMP  
release is mediated via the JNK pathway in  
Drosophila in vivo. In their study, Takl mutant  
immune response phenotype was rescued by over-  
expression of a downstream JNKK, proposing that  
JNK pathway activation is sufficient to induce  
AMP gene expression in vivo.

In our current study, we have tested the effect of  
RNAi knockdown of $Takl$ and $Tab2$ and of the  
JNK pathway downstream components on AMP

gene expression in S2 cells. We observed a much more moderate effect with hep, bsk and kay dsRNA-treatments compared to those of Tak1 and Tab2. Therefore, the JNK pathway components appear to have a role in the AMP gene expression in S2 cells, but Tak1 and Tab2 are much more important to the AMP gene response than the downstream JNK pathway components. We conclude that the function of Tak1 and Tab2 is not restricted to JNK pathway regulation in S2 cells. We hypothesize that Relish activity is regulated both by cleavage and phosphorylation and that these two may be separate events. Tak1/Tab2 complex has no role in Relish cleavage [12,13], but it is possible that the complex functions as an IKK kinase complex [36]—regulating the IKK activity and thus phosphorylation of Relish.

The controversial reports about the involvement of the JNK pathway in AMP gene expression may be in part due to diverse times of induction used in different studies. It seems that the JNK pathway requirement for AMP gene expression is time-dependent: as shown in Fig. 1d, the expression of AMP genes appears normal within the first few hours after immune challenge in S2 cells treated with dsRNAs targeting JNK pathway (Fig. 1d). However, dsRNA treatments targeting JNK pathway components clearly decrease the AMP gene expression from 24h onwards (Fig. 1d) [12,28].

Iap2 is required for sustained AMP gene response and therefore appears as a unique molecular switch determining the duration of the AMP gene expression in S2 cells. Correspondingly, Iap2 null mutant flies were able to express AttD and CecAl during the first hours after infection. This indicates that at least certain AMP genes can be expressed independently of Iap2 in the early phases of infection. Curiously, we were unable to detect any AttA expression in Iap2 mutant flies. This suggests that the role of Iap2 to the induction of different AMP genes in vivo varies.


Early response

Sustained response


Fig. 5. Schematic representation of the JNK and Imd pathways in *Drosophila* immune response. (a) Early response, (b) Sustained response. Dashed line illustrates translation; asterisk (*) represents Relish putative phosphorylation. CG15678 is a potential negative regulator of the JNK and Imd pathways [28]. Question mark (?) indicates that the exact mechanism of action remains to be characterized.

How *Drosophila* Iap2 functions is yet unclear, but it can be hypothesized that the mechanism involves changing the activity of a component of the Imd pathway by ubiquitination perhaps in a similar fashion as TRAF2 and TRAF6 function in mammals. It has been suggested that an E3 ligase analogous to human TRAF2 or TRAF6 is needed in *Drosophila* to function with Bendless (Ubc13) and dUEV1a (UEV1a) in the activation of Tak1 and the IKK complex [17]. However, when we knocked down bendless, dUEV1a, Traf1 or Traf2 in S2 cells by RNAi, we observed no marked effect on AMP response as measured by AttA-luciferase reporter assay, AttD RT-PCR and AttD qRT-PCR. So in contrast to mammalian NF-κB signaling, we are unable to demonstrate any role for Ubc13, UEV1a or Trafts in the Imd pathway signaling in S2 cells using dsRNA-treatment either alone or in combination (Supplemental Fig. 3). Others have also demonstrated that knocking down all *Drosophila* Trafts by RNAi has no effect on Imd signaling in S2 cells [19], and that Traf2 mutant flies are resistant to Gram-negative bacteria [20]. Therefore other yet unidentified factors are most likely involved in the Imd pathway signaling. Our current model of the Imd and JNK pathways is presented in Fig. 5.

It has been proposed that JNK pathway inactivation is caused by the proteasomal degradation of Tak1 [10], and that the E3 ligase responsible for Tak1 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation is Plenty of SH3s (POSH) [37]. As Iap2 is a putative E3 ligase, we hypothesized that it might play a role in the degradation of Tak1. However, we could not demonstrate Tak1 degradation when the Imd pathway was activated either with heat-killed *E. coli* or by Relish overexpression: Tak1-V5 signals from cells collected at the same time points with or without *E. coli* did not differ and no potential degradation products were seen. Likewise, over-expression of either wild type Relish or active form of Relish (RelΔS29-S45) did not cause decreased stability of Tak1-V5 (Supplemental Fig. 4). Furthermore, we did not see a stabilizing effect upon knockdown of Iap2 by RNAi (data not shown).

In conclusion, the Imd signaling appears more complex than previously thought. There are many similarities to mammalian immunity pathways, but there are some important differences. For example, the roles of TRAFs, Ubc13 and UEV1a in immune challenge in *Drosophila* appear to differ from those of the mammalian counterparts. The exact molecular mechanisms of Iap2, Tak1 and Tab2 still remain elusive and are targets for further investigation.

## Acknowledgements

We thank other members of our laboratory for help in practice and for insightful discussions. We are grateful to Prof. Jean-Luc Imler, Prof. Jean-Marc Reichhart (Strasbourg, France) and Dr. Svenja Stöven (Umeå University, Sweden) for providing us reporter and Relish plasmid constructs, respectively. Furthermore, we thank Prof. Ryu Ueda, Prof. Bruno Lemaitre, Dr François Leulier, and Prof. Dan Hultmark for providing us the *Drosophila* lines. This work was supported by grants from the Academy of Finland, the Foundation for Pediatric Research and the Sigrid Juselius Foundation to M.R.

## Appendix A. Supplementary materials

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.dci.2007.01.004.

## References

[1] Hoffmann JA. The immune response of *Drosophila*. Nature 2003;426(6962):33–8.

[2] Hultmark D. *Drosophila* immunity: paths and patterns. Curr Opin Immunol 2003;15(1):12–9.

[3] Kaneko T, Silverman N. Bacterial recognition and signalling by the *Drosophila* IMD pathway. Cell Microbiol 2005;7(4):461–9.

[4] Choe KM, Werner T, Stöven S, Hultmark D, Anderson KV. Requirement for a Peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGRP) in Relish activation and antibacterial immune responses in *Drosophila*. Science 2002;296(5566):359–62.

[5] Gottar M, Gobert V, Michel T, Belvin M, Duyk G, Hoffmann JA, et al. The *Drosophila* immune response against Gram-negative bacteria is mediated by peptidoglycan recognition protein. Nature 2002;416(6881):640–4.

[6] Rämet M, Manfruelli P, Pearson A, Mathey-Prevot B, Ezekowitz RA. Functional genomic analysis of phagocytosis and identification of a *Drosophila* receptor for *E. coli*. Nature 2002;416(6881):644–8.

[7] Lemaitre B, Kromer-Metzger E, Michaut L, Nicolas E, Meister M, Georgel P, et al. A recessive mutation, immune deficiency (Imd), defines two distinct control pathways in the *Drosophila* host defense. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92(21):9465–9.

[8] Vidal S, Khush RS, Leulier F, Tzou P, Nakamura M, Lemaitre B. Mutations in the *Drosophila* dTak1 gene reveal a conserved function for MAPKKKs in the control of rel/

S. Valanne et al. / Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 (2007) 991–1001

NF-kappaB-dependent innate immune responses. Genes Dev 2001; 15(15): 1900–12.

[9] Boutros M, Agaisse H, Perrimon N. Sequential activation of signaling pathways during innate immune responses in *Drosophila*. Dev Cell 2002; 3(5): 711–22.

[10] Park JM, Brady H, Ruocco MG, Sun H, Williams D, Lee SJ, Kato Jr. T, Richards N, Chan K, Mercurio F, Karin M, Wasserman SA. Targeting of Tak1 by the NF-κB protein Relish regulates the JNK-mediated immune response in *Drosophila*. Genes Dev 2004; 18(5): 584–94.

[11] Silverman N, Zhou R, Erlich RL, Hunter M, Bernstein E, Schneider D, et al. Immune activation of NF-kappaB and JNK requires *Drosophila* TAK1. J Biol Chem 2003; 278(49): 48928–34.

[12] Kleino A, Valanne S, Ulvila J, Kallio J, Myllymäki H, Enwald H, et al. Inhibitor of apoptosis 2 and Tak1-binding protein are components of the *Drosophila* Imd pathway. EMBO J 2005; 24(19): 3423–34.

[13] Delaney JR, Stöven S, Uvell H, Anderson KV, Engström Y, Mlodzik M. Cooperative control of *Drosophila* immune responses by the JNK and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. EMBO J 2006; 25(13): 3068–77.

[14] Zhuang ZH, Sun L, Kong L, Hu JH, Yu MC, Reinach P, et al. *Drosophila* Tab2 is required for the immune activation of JNK and NF-kappaB. Cell Signal 2006; 18(7): 964–70.

[15] Ishitani T, Takaesu G, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Shibuya H, Gaynor RB, Matsumoto K. Role of the Tab2-related protein Tab3 in IL-1 and TNF signaling. EMBO J 2003; 22(23): 6277–88.

[16] Singhirunnusorn P, Suzuki S, Kawasaki N, Saiki I, Sakurai H. Critical roles of threonine 187 phosphorylation in cellular stress-induced rapid and transient activation of transforming growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 (Tak1) in a signaling complex containing Tak1-binding protein Tab1 and Tab2. J Biol Chem 2005; 280(8): 7359–68.

[17] Zhou R, Silverman N, Hong M, Liao DS, Chung Y, Chen ZJ, et al. The role of ubiquitination in *Drosophila* innate immunity. J Biol Chem 2005; 280(40): 34048–55.

[18] Cha GH, Cho KS, Lee JH, Kim M, Kim E, Park J, et al. Discrete functions of TRAF1 and TRAF2 in *Drosophila melanogaster* mediated by c-Jun N-terminal kinase and NF-kappaB-dependent signaling pathways. Mol Cell Biol 2003; 23(22): 7982–91.

[19] Sun H, Bristow BN, Qu G, Wasserman SA. A heterotrimeric death domain complex in Toll signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99(20): 12871–6.

[20] Leulier F, Lhocine N, Lemaitre B, Meier P. The *Drosophila* Iap/dIap2 functions in innate immunity and is essential to resist Gram-negative bacterial infection. Mol Cell Biol 2006; 26(21): 7821–31.

[21] Gesellchen V, Kuttenkeuler D, Steckel M, Pelte N, Boutros M. An RNA interference screen identifies Apoptosis Protein 2 as a regulator of innate immune signalling in *Drosophila*. EMBO Rep 2005; 6(10): 979–84.

[22] Wang SL, Hawkins CJ, Yoo SJ, Muller HA, Hay BA. The *Drosophila* caspase inhibitor dIap1 is essential for cell survival and is negatively regulated by HID. Cell 1999; 98(4): 453–63.

[23] Vaux DL, Silke J. Iaps, RINGs and ubiquitylation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6(4): 287–97.

[24] Rothe M, Pan MG, Henzel WJ, Ayres TM, Goeddel DV. The TNFR2-TRAF signaling complex contains two novel proteins related to baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis proteins. Cell 1995; 83(7): 1243–52.

[25] Uren AG, Pakusch M, Hawkins CJ, Puls KL, Vaux DL. Cloning and expression of apoptosis inhibitory protein homologs that function to inhibit apoptosis and/or bind tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996; 93(10): 4974–8.

[26] Tauszig S, Jouanguy E, Hoffmann JA, Imler JL. Toll-related receptors and the control of antimicrobial peptide expression in *Drosophila*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97(19): 10520–5.

[27] Rämet M, Pearson A, Manfruelli P, Li X, Koziel H, Gobel V, et al. *Drosophila* scavenger receptor CI is a pattern recognition receptor for bacteria. Immunity 2001; 15(6): 1027–38.

[28] Kallio J, Leinonen A, Ulvila J, Valanne S, Ezekowitz RA, Rämet M. Functional analysis of immune response genes in *Drosophila* identifies JNK pathway as a regulator of antimicrobial peptide gene expression in S2 cells. Microbes Infect 2005; 7(5–6): 811–9.

[29] Leulier F, Vidal S, Saigo K, Ueda R, Lemaitre B. Inducible expression of double-stranded RNA reveals a role for dFADD in the regulation of the antibacterial response in *Drosophila* adults. Curr Biol 2002; 12(12): 996–1000.

[30] Rämet M, Lanot R, Zachary D, Manfruelli P. JNK signaling pathway is required for efficient wound healing in *Drosophila*. Dev Biol 2002; 241(1): 145–56.

[31] Stronach BE, Perrimon N. Stress signaling in *Drosophila*. Oncogene 1999; 18(45): 6172–82.

[32] Huh JR, Foe I, Muro I, Chen CH, Seol JH, Yoo SJ, Guo M, Park JM, Hay BA. The *Drosophila* IAP DIAP2 is dispensable for cell survival, required for the innate immune response to Gram-negative bacterial infection, and can be negatively regulated by the Reaper/Hid/Grim family of Iap-binding apoptosis inducers. J Biol Chem 2006; doi:10.1074/jbc.M608051200.

[33] Irving P, Troxler L, Heuer TS, Belvin M, Kopczynski C, Reichhart JM, et al. A genome-wide analysis of immune responses in *Drosophila*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98(26): 15119–24.

[34] De Gregorio E, Spellman PT, Rubin GM, Lemaitre B. Genome-wide analysis of the *Drosophila* immune response by using oligonucleotide microarrays. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98(22): 12590–5.

[35] Kim T, Yoon J, Cho H, Lee WB, Kim J, Song YH, et al. Downregulation of lipopolysaccharide response in *Drosophila* by negative crosstalk between the AP1 and NF-κB signaling modules. Nat Immunol 2005; 6(2): 211–8.

[36] Wang C, Deng L, Hong M, Akkaraju GR, Inoue J, Chen ZJ. Tak1 is a ubiquitin-dependent kinase of MKK and IKK. Nature 2001; 412(6844): 346–51.

[37] Tsuda M, Langmann C, Harden N, Aigaki T. The RING-finger scaffold protein plenty of SH3s targets Tak1 to control immunity signalling in *Drosophila*. EMBO Rep 2005; 6(11): 1082–7.
