
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 64 (2007) 1269–1289  
1420-682X/07/101269-21  
DOI 10.1007/s00018-007-6527-y  
© Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2007  

---

**Biomedicine & Diseases: Review**

**Eosinophils in the pathogenesis of allergic airways disease**

S. G. Trivedi and C. M. Lloyd*

Leukocyte Biology Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ (UK), Fax: +44 207 594 3119, e-mail: c.lloyd@imperial.ac.uk

Received 6 December 2006; received after revision 11 January 2007; accepted 15 February 2007  
Online First 15 March 2007

**Abstract.** Eosinophils are traditionally thought to form part of the innate immune response against parasitic helminths acting through the release of cytotoxic granule proteins. However, they are also a central feature in asthma. From their development in the bone marrow to their recruitment to the lung via chemokines and cytokines, they form an important component of the inflammatory milieu observed in the asthmatic lung following allergen challenge. A wealth of studies has been performed in both patients with asthma and in mouse models of allergic pulmonary inflammation to delineate the role of eosinophils in the allergic response. Although the long-standing association between eosinophils and the induction of airway hyper-responsiveness remains controversial, recent studies have shown that eosinophils may also promote airway remodelling. In addition, emerging evidence suggests that the eosinophil may also serve to modulate the immune response. Here we review the highly co-ordinated nature of eosinophil development and trafficking and the evolution of the eosinophil as a multi-factorial leukocyte with diverse functions in asthma.

**Keywords.** Eosinophil, asthma, airway hyper-responsiveness, remodelling.

---

**Introduction – eosinophils and asthma**

Eosinophils were first described by Paul Ehrlich in 1879. These bilobed granulocytes possess secondary granules containing four primary cationic proteins namely, major basic protein (MBP), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN), and eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) all of which can be toxic. Eosinophils are thought to have evolved as part of the innate immune response against parasitic helminths. These multi-cellular parasites display distinct developmental phases with changing antigenicity during infection and invasion of host tissue. Classically, helminth infection can induce an IgE-mediated response leading to eosinophilia together with a Th2 cytokine response. While eosinophils have been shown to effectively kill parasites *in vitro* [1], they have been associated with both protective immunity [2] and pathology [3] in response to helminth infection *in vivo*. The complexity of the immune response against helminth infection is demonstrated by the fact that infection can be associated with long periods of latency, due to the ability of helminths to antagonise and regulate various cells of the immune system. The intricate nature of the immune response against helminth infection is reviewed in detail elsewhere [4, 5]. The pathology of asthma is thought to represent an aberration in the defence response to helminth infection. The prevalence of asthma is increasing in the developed world and current anti-inflammatory treatment cannot completely control symptoms [6]. Asthma is a chronic disease affecting the airways

whereby progressive inflammation together with structural changes known as airway remodelling lead to reversible airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR) and obstruction. Although the aetiology of asthma remains unclear, both environmental and genetic factors are thought to contribute. Genes that regulate both airway remodelling and inflammation have been associated with susceptibility to asthma [7]. The coordinated action of numerous leukocytes and their mediators then manifest the diverse pathology seen in the lung.

Commonly, susceptible individuals mount an immune response to otherwise innocuous agents. This begins with the IgE-mediated activation of mast cells, basophils and macrophages, which leads to the rapid release of pro-inflammatory mediators including histamine, eicosanoids and reactive oxygen species. These induce microvascular leakage, resulting in oedema within the airway wall, which contributes to the narrowing of the airway lumen. Such plasma exudation may also collect in the airway lumen, damaging the epithelium and preventing mucus clearance. In addition, mucus secretion and smooth muscle cell contraction are also induced by these early phase pro-inflammatory mediators. The production of various chemoattractants then leads to the recruitment of numerous leukocytes, including CD4 T cells and eosinophils. The persistent activation of these cells and their production of pro-inflammatory mediators, particularly Th2 like cytokines, plays an integral role in the pathogenesis of asthma [8].

In addition to this chronic inflammatory state within the airway, the aberrant regeneration and repair processes following tissue damage are thought to result in airway remodelling. This is characterised by goblet cell hyperplasia, subepithelial fibrosis and smooth muscle hypertrophy. The precise mechanisms leading to airway remodelling are still unknown. While it was believed that airway remodelling occurred as a result of ongoing inflammatory processes, much evidence suggests that inflammation and remodelling may indeed occur as parallel and independent events [9]. As such alternative ideas regarding the evolution and treatment of asthma unfold, the central role of the eosinophil in the pathogenesis of asthma is of particular interest. The diversity of eosinophil secretory products (Table 1), together with the range of receptors expressed on eosinophils (Table 2) is reflective of their broad range of functions beyond the role of a basic granulocyte. Eosinophils are able to modulate immune mechanisms that are important in asthma and contribute to inflammation, AHR and the remodelling processes. This review focuses on the changing views of the eosinophil in asthma. The role of eosinophils in homeostasis and mucosal immunity as

---

Eosinophils in allergic airways disease well as asthma has also been recently reviewed elsewhere [10].

### Eosinophil development

Eosinophils predominantly reside within the gastrointestinal tract, and represent only 1–3 % of circulating leukocytes. They are derived from CD34⁺ haematopoietic progenitor cells within the bone marrow. Their differentiation is induced by the coordinated actions of the transcription factors GATA-1, PU.1 and C/EBP members (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family). The contribution of other transcription factors and subtypes may also be important but is less well established [11]. Although GATA-1, PU.1 and C/EBP are commonly expressed by a variety of haematopoietic lineages, their unique coordination together with specific cytokine stimulation results in the selective development of eosinophils.

Varied levels of expression of PU.1 ensure the specific differentiation of lymphocytic or myelocytic cells [12]. Furthermore, while the actions of PU.1 and GATA-1 have been antagonistic with regard to other cell types, these transcription factors act in synergy for eosinophil differentiation. *In vitro* studies show that the transfection of PU.1 amplified GATA-1 mediated gene transcription in the eosinophil lineage. This synergism was dependent on the level of PU.1 expression relative to that of GATA-1 [13].

Various types of C/EBP have differing roles in eosinophil development. C/EBPα knockout (KO) mice lack both neutrophils and eosinophils, suggesting that C/EBPα is required for the early induction of myeloid lineage-specific genes [14]. Both C/EBPα and C/EBPβ physically interact with GATA-1 and enhance transactivation of the eosinophil-specific MBP promoter, while two isoforms of human C/EBPε act to limit myeloid gene expression by antagonising GATA-1/PU.1 synergy and the functions of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ [13]. This further demonstrates the highly regulated process of eosinophil development.

While C/EBP is crucial for the development of both eosinophils and neutrophils [14], GATA-1 selectively promotes eosinophil development. The enforced expression of GATA-1 in human primary myeloid progenitor cells leads to eosinophil lineage commitment, via a mechanism dependent upon the COOH-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 [15]. Furthermore, foetal liver cells from GATA-1-deficient mice did not support the development of eosinophils [15]. In eosinophils, GATA-1 uniquely acts via a high-affinity palindromic (or double) GATA site, which is present in the downstream GATA-1 promoter and also in

Table 1. Eosinophil-derived secretory products.

| Mediator | General function | References |
|----------|------------------|------------|
| Basic granule proteins. | Major basic protein (MBP) | Cell and parasite toxicity. | [99] |
| | | Stimulation of mast cells, basophils and neutrophils. | [91, 162] |
| | | Binding to M2 inhibitory muscarinic receptor leading to bronchoconstriction | [163] |
| | Eosinophil peroxidase. (EPO) | Cell and parasite toxicity. | [103] |
| | | Generation of oxygen radicals as part of respiratory burst | [164, 165] |
| | Eosinophil-derived Neurotoxin (EDN) | Ability to cause neuronal damage. | [166] |
| | | Anti-viral activity as it is a ribonuclease | [167] |
| | Eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) | Cell and parasite toxicity. | [168] |
| | | Anti-viral activity as it is a ribonuclease. | [167] |
| | | Suppression of lymphocyte responses. | [169] |
| | | Stimulation of mast cells and fibroblasts | [170, 171] |
| Lipids | Cysteinyl leukotrienes, . PAF, thromboxane, PGD₂, PGE₂, | Activation of eosinophils, mast cells, basophils, Smooth muscle cell contraction | [60, 143, 172] |
| Chemokines | CCL 11, CCL 5, . CCL 2, IL-8, CCL 3 | Migration of eosinophils, T cells, monocytes, macrophages | [173–177] |
| Cytokines | IL-3, IL-5, GM-CSF IFNγ, TNFα, IL-2, . IL-4, IL-6, IL-13, . IL-16, IL-17 IL-2, IL-8. | Eosinophil development, activation and survival Pro-inflammatory Enhances migration of primed eosinophils | [18] [92, 93, 147, 177–181] [176, 182, 183] |
| Regulatory mediators | IL-10, IL-12, . indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase (IDO) | Anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory and T cell polarising effects | [146, 148, 152] |
| Fibrogenic factors | IL-1β, IL-4, IL-11, . IL-13, IL-17 TGF-β TGF-α NGF NGF, SCF PDGF FGF VEGF HB-EGF MMP 9, MMP 17 TIMP-1, -2 | Activation of fibroblasts ECM production, myofibroblast development Epithelial cell proliferation Fibroblast migration and differentiation Mast cell survival Myofibroblast development, smooth muscle cell proliferation Fibroblast proliferation, angiogenesis, smooth muscle cell proliferation Induction of vascular permeability and angiogenesis Fibroblast and smooth muscle cell proliferation Degradation of matrix proteins, Cell migration through tissue, remodelling Inhibitors of MMPs | [92, 93, 181, 184–187] [188, 189] [190, 191] [192] [91] [193–195] [140, 195] [140] [196, 197] [198–200] [198] |

CCL 2, monocyte chemotactic peptide; CCL 3, macrophage inflammatory protein; CCL 5, regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted; CCL 11, eotaxin; ECM, extracellular matrix; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HB-EGF, heparin-binding epidermal growth factor; IFN, interferon; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NGF, nerve growth factor; PAF, platelet-activating factor; PGD₂/PGE₂, prostaglandin D₂/E₂; TGF-β, TGF-α, transforming growth factor; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase; TNF, tumour necrosis factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

Table 2. Receptors expressed by eosinophils and their ligands..

| Receptor | Ligand |
|----------|--------|
| Chemokine | CCR1 | CCL3, CCL5 |
|          | CCR2 | CCL2 |
|          | CCR3 | CCL2, -5, -11, -24, -26 |
|          | CCR6 | CCL20 |
|          | CRTH2 | PGD₂ |
|          | CXCR1 and CXCR2(h) | IL-8 |
| Activation factors and chemotactic agonists | C3aR, C3bR, C5aR | Complement factor C3 and C5 |
|          | PAF receptor | Platelet-activating factor |
|          | LTB4R | Leukotriene B4 |
|          | CysLT1R, CysLT2R | Cysteinyl Leukotrienes |
|          | fMLPR | Bacterial N-formyl peptide FMLP |
|          | Histamine4R | Histamine |
|          | CD156(ADAM8) | CD23 and various other ligands [201], [202] |
| Cytokine | CD25, CD116, CD119, | IL-2, GM-CSF, IFNγ, TNFα |
|          | CD120,. | IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13 |
|          | CD123, CD124, CD125, | IL-9, TGFβ |
|          | CD213,. |  |
|          | IL-9R, TGFβR |  |
| Adhesion molecules | CD11a/CD18 (αLβ₂) | ICAM-1, -2, -3 |
|          | CD11b/CD18 (αMβ₂) | ICAM-1, fibrinogen, C3bi |
|          | CD11c/CD18 (αXβ₂) | Fibrinogen, C3bi |
|          | CD49d/CD29 (VLA-4/β₁) | VCAM-1, fibronectin |
|          | CD49f/CD29 (VLA-6β₁) | Laminin |
|          | CD62L (L-selectin) | MAdCAM-1, CD34 |
|          | CD162 (P-selectin glycoprotein-1) | P-selectin |
|          | αdβ₂ | VCAM |
|          | α₄β₇ | MAdCAM-1, VCAM, fibronectin |
|          | SiglecF(m) or Siglec8(h) | Sialic acid-containing glycans 6'-sulfo-sialyl Lewis X [203] |
| Signalling molecules | Toll-like receptors-7, -8 | Oligonucleotide-based pattern associated membrane proteins (PAMPs) |
|          | MHCII | T Cell receptor |
|          | CD80, CD86 | CD28 |
|          | Leukocyte Ig-like receptor (LIR). | MHC I and HLA-G molecules [204] |
|          | LIR-1, -2, -3, -7 |  |
|          | CD244 (2B4)-(h) | CD48 [205] |

(m) and (h) indicate exclusive expression on mouse or human eosinophils, respectively.

phages [18]. Furthermore, the expression of IL-5R on eosinophils is closely regulated depending upon the activation state and anatomical location of the cell. For instance stimulation of mature human eosinophils with IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF down-regulates their expression of IL-5Ra and reduces their responsiveness to IL-5 [19]. Interestingly, stimulation of human cord blood-derived CD34⁺ cells with IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF led to the exclusive up-regulation of the IL-5Ra; an important early step in eosinophil lineage commitment [20]. Eosinophil development resulting from the culture of these cells with IL-3 and GM-CSF was associated with increases in IL-5 mRNA, and blocking this endogenously produced IL-5 prevented eosinophil development [20]. These data demonstrate the essential role for IL-5 in eosinophil development within the bone marrow. However, the observation that mice that are unresponsive to IL-3, GM-CSF and IL-5 are able to produce eosinophils albeit in low numbers indicates the presence of unidentified factors that may play an important role in eosinophil development [21]. Eosinophil production within the bone marrow is an important feature in asthma. The numbers of CD34⁺CD45⁺IL-5Ra eosinophil progenitors are increased in the peripheral blood and bone marrow of atopic asthmatics [22] and upon allergen challenge in asthmatics [23] and in murine models of airway inflammation [24]. Therefore, upon allergen challenge, signals from the bronchial mucosa are relayed to the bone marrow to increase the pool of mature eosinophils available for rapid mobilisation. Further evidence suggests that progenitor cells are also able to migrate from the bone marrow to the site of allergic inflammation and then differentiate *in situ*. Increased numbers of CD34⁺/IL-5Ra mRNA⁺ cells were found in the bronchial mucosa of atopic asthmatic individuals [25]. Recently, CD34⁺CD45⁺IL-5Ra⁺ eosinophil

progenitors were found to be elevated in murine lung tissue 6 hours after allergen challenge preceding an increase in total progenitor cells and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) eosinophils [26]. This study identifies a possible contribution of resident progenitor cells that are able to differentiate *in situ*. The trafficking of both mature eosinophils and progenitor cells are thought to effectively provide a continual source of inflammatory cells.

### Eosinophil trafficking

The trafficking of eosinophils from the bone marrow to the inflammatory site is dependent on the coordinated actions of numerous cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules. However, only IL-5 and the eotaxin family of chemokines selectively regulate eosinophil trafficking.

#### Eosinophil chemoattractants – Eotaxin

Eotaxin was the first eosinophil-specific chemokine to be discovered after being identified as the major chemoattractant found in the BAL fluid taken from guinea pigs that had been sensitised and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) [27, 28]. Eotaxin was then identified in mouse [29, 30], rat [31], and human tissue [32]. Subsequently, two more CC chemokines with functional similarities to eotaxin were cloned and named eotaxin-2 and -3 [33, 34]. Eotaxin was then referred to as eotaxin-1. A functional murine homologue of human eotaxin-3 has not yet been characterised. Studies using mouse models of airway inflammation have determined a functional role for the eotaxin family of chemokines in mediating the pulmonary recruitment of eosinophils [35, 36].

The eotaxins are up-regulated upon allergen challenge in mouse models [37] and in asthmatics [38]. They can be produced by mast cells, alveolar macrophages, eosinophils, airway smooth muscle, and vascular endothelial cells but are mainly produced by epithelial cells [39]. Recently, it has been shown that monocyte/macrophage-derived eotaxin-2 predominates over eotaxin-1 in the BAL fluid of allergic mice [40]. However, allergen-induced pulmonary eosinophilia was shown to be significantly reduced in eotaxin-1 and -2 double-KO mice when compared to eotaxin-1 or eotaxin-2 single-KO mice, demonstrating the importance of the synergism between these eotaxins in the induction of eosinophilia [40]. Indeed, human studies reveal that eotaxin-1 may be important immediately after allergen challenge, whereas eotaxin-2 and possibly eotaxin-3 may account for the persistence of eosinophilia [41].

Unlike most chemokines that bind to numerous receptors, the eotaxins signal exclusively through the CCR3 receptor [42, 43]. CCR3 is primarily expressed on basophils [44], mast cells [45], and Th2 cells [46] as well as both mature eosinophils [43] and CD34⁺ progenitor cells [47]. Although CCR3 is constitutively expressed on eosinophils, its expression is further increased in response to inflammatory stimuli [47]. Typical of chemokine receptors, CCR3 is a seven transmembrane spanning, G protein-coupled receptor. Ligation of eosinophil CCR3 by eotaxin stimulates calcium mobilisation, actin polymerisation, shape change, and chemotaxis, and also induces inhibitory events such as desensitisation of the receptor [48]. CCR3 undergoes prolonged ligand-induced receptor internalisation [49]. Certain functional responses, such as actin polymerisation and shape change, are dependent on such receptor internalisation, whereas signals that regulate chemotaxis are largely dissociated from those that regulate receptor internalisation [48, 49]. Understanding the biology of the CCR3 receptor may identify new approaches to target-specific eosinophil function. Although CCR3 also recognises RANTES, MIP-1α and MCP-2, -3, and -4, these chemokines act via a variety of receptors and are not as selective as eotaxin for the recruitment of eosinophils. Therefore, the eotaxin/CCR3 axis remains central in the pathology of asthma. The expression of CCR3 on some Th2 cells and the unique synergism between T cell-derived IL-5 and eotaxin in regulating various stages of eosinophil trafficking further highlight the importance of the CCR3 receptor.

#### Eosinophil mobilisation

Mobilisation of eosinophils from the bone marrow represents the first stage of eosinophil trafficking and IL-5 plays a critical role in this. The importance of IL-5 in regulating eosinophil maturation and release is demonstrated by the fact that IL-5 transgenic mice exhibit eosinophilia [50], while IL-5 KO mice show a reduction in eosinophils in blood and lungs after challenge [51]. The systemic administration of IL-5 to guinea pigs reduced bone marrow eosinophil numbers while increasing circulating eosinophils, indicative of a role in inducing mobilisation [52]. Using an *in situ* perfusion system of the guinea pig hind limb, infusion of IL-5 was shown to dose-dependently induce the selective release of eosinophils from the bone marrow [53]. This release was dependent on the actions of β2-integrin and regulated by the antagonistic actions of α4-integrin [53]. IL-5 also synergises with eotaxin to enhance mobilisation of eosinophils. Although eotaxin is primarily produced by epithelial cells and therefore largely associated with the recruit-

ment of eosinophils into lung tissue, it also has a role in the release of eosinophils from the bone marrow. Allergic airway inflammation in guinea pigs showed that levels of eotaxin in the lung peak as rapidly as 6 hours post challenge, and correlated with blood and lung eosinophilia together with a reduction in bone marrow eosinophil numbers [36]. The inhibition of IL-5 abolished these effects without altering the production of eotaxin in the lung [36], thereby demonstrating the importance of the co-ordinated actions of eotaxin and IL-5 in the development of eosinophilia. Furthermore, neutralisation of eotaxin during the development of murine airway inflammation prevented the production of myeloid progenitor cells within the bone marrow, while administration of eotaxin enhanced myelopoiesis [54]. In contrast, systemic administration of eotaxin in unsensitised mice induced blood eosinophilia without any changes in bone marrow eosinophil numbers [55]; however, the administration of eotaxin was sufficient to mobilise eosinophils in unsensitised guinea pigs [56]. Moreover, the infusion of eotaxin into the arterial supply of guinea pig femoral bone marrow resulted in the selective release of eosinophils and eosinophil progenitor cells, while the infusion of IL-5 followed by eotaxin significantly enhanced the number of mature eosinophils being released from the bone marrow [56].

**Eosinophil priming and trafficking through the vasculature.** Following the release of eosinophils from the bone marrow their recruitment into the lung is also governed by the synergism between IL-5 and eotaxin. Systemic administration of eotaxin dose dependently induced blood eosinophilia but had no effect on increasing the chemotactic response to eotaxin given subcutaneously; however, systemic IL-5 significantly increased tissue eosinophilia and this effect was further amplified when eotaxin and IL-5 were co-administered intravenously [55]. The essential and synergistic role of IL-5 seen here could in part be attributed to its ability to prime circulating eosinophils, which increases their capacity of migration, adhesion and degranulation.

Amongst asthmatics, levels of IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF are raised within the blood [57]; these together with mediators such as platelet-activating factor (PAF) and complement factor 5a (C5a) may act to prime circulating eosinophils [58, 59]. *In vitro* studies using human eosinophils showed that PAF may act on eosinophils in an autocrine manner. Furthermore, stimulation of these eosinophils with IL-5 or IgG resulted in the production of PAF, and the specific antagonism of PAF inhibited both superoxide production and eosinophil degranulation [60]. Further

support for the circulation of primed eosinophils comes from studies that show that peripheral blood eosinophils obtained from asthmatics display differing patterns of adhesion and chemotaxis compared to eosinophils from normal subjects [58, 59]. In addition, eosinophils obtained from BAL fluid of allergen-challenged asthmatics were primed to a greater extent than those in the peripheral blood, showing that eosinophil priming begins in the circulation but peaks within the lung [61].

The migration of these partially primed eosinophils from the vasculature into tissue depends on the binding of several adhesion receptors including eosinophil P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1, α<sub>4</sub>β<sub>1</sub>, and α<sub>A</sub>β<sub>2</sub> to endothelial P-selectin, VCAM-1 and ICAM-1, respectively [62]. Eosinophilia was significantly reduced following peritoneal challenge with ragweed in both P-selectin- and ICAM-deficient mice when compared to wild-type (WT) mice [63]. Specifically intra-vital microscopy revealed that eosinophil rolling and firm adhesion was impaired in P-selectin-KO mice, while only firm adhesion of leukocytes in general was investigated and found to be inhibited in ICAM-KO mice [63]. In contrast to neutrophil recruitment, eosinophil recruitment was not completely abolished in P-selectin/ICAM-1 double-KO mice, but pre-treatment of these mice with an antibody against VCAM-1 resulted in an almost complete inhibition of eosinophil recruitment [63]. In support of these studies, Gonzalo et al. [35] showed the requirement of P-selectin in the early stages of eosinophil recruitment to the lung following allergen challenge. In addition, mice that were genetically deficient for VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 did not develop pulmonary eosinophilia following allergen challenge. Given that pulmonary eosinophilia is a T cell-dependent process [35] and lymphocyte accumulation in the lung was also reduced in VCAM-1- and ICAM-1-KO mice, VCAM-1 and ICAM may regulate tissue eosinophilia by directly regulating endothelial-eosinophil interactions and also by enhancing T cell responses [35]. Evidence from CCR3-KO mice indicates that the binding of eotaxin with eosinophil CCR3 is mainly responsible for the migratory process beyond the sub-endothelial space [64].

**Eosinophil recruitment into the lung.** Mediators such as PAF, LTB4 and C5a were amongst the first eosinophil chemoattractants to be identified [65]; however, these were found to be non-selective, having potent actions on neutrophils [66]. Interestingly, incubation of human eosinophils with IL-5 selectively enhanced their migratory response to PAF, LTB4 and FMLP, while having no such effect on neutrophils [58]. Therefore, the increase in these mediators within the

asthmatic lung may contribute to eosinophil recruitment in the presence of IL-5. Unlike chemokines, which induce direct chemotaxis along a gradient, these mediators have stimulatory and chemoattractant properties. Cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-13 produced by Th2 cells and epithelial cells [67] and also the recently described acidic mammalian chitinases [68] are increased upon allergen challenge and may contribute to eosinophil recruitment by enhancing the production of eotaxin.

Within the lung, the combined actions of eotaxin and IL-5 are crucial in the specific recruitment of eosinophils. IL-5 has been shown to display chemokinetic properties [56]. In addition, subcutaneous administration of IL-5 induced concentration-dependent eosinophilia in mice [55], suggesting that it may act as a chemoattractant. Therefore, IL-5 may act to enhance the local chemotactic response to eotaxin. Interestingly, tissue eosinophilia using eotaxin could not be induced in IL-5-KO mice, and restoration of eosinophil homing ability in these mice could not be restored by the intravenous transfer of eosinophils. Tissue eosinophilia could only be induced in these IL-5 KO mice by transplanting a device that continually delivered IL-5 for 72 hours [55]. This demonstrates an essential role of IL-5 in tissue homing of eosinophils. In addition to the direct action of eotaxin on eosinophil mobilisation and recruitment into tissue, its actions on Th2 cells further enhances eosinophil recruitment to the lung. Eosinophilic inflammation seen in asthma is dependent on the antigen-specific activation of Th2 cells. T cell-deficient mice are protected from lung eosinophilia and AHR [35, 69] and Th2 cells are increased in the BAL fluid of asthmatic patients [70]. In a murine model of allergen-induced airway inflammation, eotaxin was responsible for the early recruitment of Th2 cells, a response that was later maintained by the actions of monocyte-derived chemokine [71]. Cytokines produced by Th2 cells, including IL-4 and IL-13, stimulate and enhance the production of eotaxin, which then synergises with Th2 cell-derived IL-5 in the selective recruitment of eosinophils [39, 72]. A summary of eosinophil trafficking from the bone marrow to the lung is shown in Figure 1.

Blockade of eotaxin using neutralising antibodies [37] and single eotaxin-KO animals [73] have shown significant yet incomplete reduction in eosinophilic inflammation, suggesting that other factors may contribute. The combined actions of the CC chemokines RANTES, MCP-1 and MCP-5 together with eotaxin led to the development of OVA-induced lung eosinophilia [37]. While these chemokines do not act specifically on eosinophils, it is noteworthy that the neutralisation of RANTES completely abolished

OVA-induced lung eosinophilia [37]. The CCL1/CCR8 axis has also been shown to preferentially induce the recruitment of eosinophils to the lung following allergen challenge [74]. The complexity of chemokine function *in vivo* is discussed in detail elsewhere [75], but collectively these studies indicate that chemokines other than eotaxin may also have an important role in eosinophil recruitment. Furthermore, eosinophils also express the chemokine receptor CCR1, which binds MIP-1α as well as RANTES and MCP. Asthmatic patients exhibit increased mRNA expression of MCP-1, RANTES, and MIP-1α [76]; moreover, these chemokines are increased at sites of endobronchial allergen challenge [77]. In addition, blockade of MIP-1α *in vivo* reduced lung eosinophils by 20% [37], and MIP-1α also induced a potent chemotactic response in eosinophils from a subgroup of asthmatic patients [78]. Therefore, CCR1 may also be an important target in blocking eosinophil responses. Human eosinophils also express the IL-8 receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 [79]. Given the potency of IL-8 for neutrophils, its significance in eosinophil trafficking is less clear. Generally, while numerous other chemokine networks may act in concert to regulate eosinophil trafficking, the importance of eotaxin acting via CCR3 was demonstrated by the substantial reduction in eosinophilia seen in both CCR3 and eotaxin double KO mice [40].

### Inflammation in the lung

Eosinophils have a central role in influencing the inflammatory networks that are established within the asthmatic lung. Here, primed eosinophils are further activated by numerous stimuli including IL-5, GM-CSF, IL-3 and secretory IgA. Activation is dependent on β2-integrins and results in degranulation [80]. Eosinophils are able to selectively release stored mediators via three highly regulated mechanisms (classical exocytosis, compound exocytosis or piecemeal degranulation) as well as cytolysis where the entire contents of the cell are released following rupture [81]. Classical exocytosis involves the extrusion of single secretory granules but this has not yet been demonstrated in airway tissue *in vivo* [82]. Compound exocytosis entails the fusion of multiple intra-cellular granules followed by focused secretion onto the target cell at the site of adhesion [83]. Piecemeal degranulation allows the partial and selective release of granule contents by transferring them into smaller vesicles, which are subsequently released by exocytosis. This is demonstrated by the selective release of RANTES from IFN-γ-stimulated human eosinophils independently of both MBP and EPO

Eosinophils in allergic airways disease

Figure 1. Eosinophil development and trafficking. The differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and then common myeloid progenitor cells (CMP) into eosinophil progenitor cells (CD34+/IL-5Rα+) is governed by the transcription factors PU.1, C/EBP and GATA under the influence of IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF. IL-5 and eotaxin (CCL11) generated following allergen-induced inflammation within the lung signal the increase in eosinophil production within the bone marrow. Mature eosinophils are specifically mobilised from the bone marrow by the combined actions of IL-5 and eotaxin. Eosinophils are primed in the circulation, increasing their migratory capacity and adhesiveness. This facilitates their specific integrin-mediated trafficking across the vasculature, after which their recruitment into the lung is largely dependent on eotaxin. Eosinophil accumulation within the lung contributes to both AHR and airway remodelling. This is perpetuated by the actions of Th2 cells that can accumulate partly due to the actions of eotaxin; they then act to further increase the production of both eotaxin and IL-5 and thereby enhance eosinophil recruitment.

release [84]. The release of mediators by exocytosis is regulated by the formation of a docking complex composed of soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs), which are located on both the vesicle and the target cell [85, 86]. Piecemeal degranulation appears to be the predominant mechanism of granule release in allergic inflammation, since examination of nasal biopsies following allergen challenge revealed 67% of eosinophils undergoing piecemeal degranulation with the remainder undergoing cytolysis [87]. Furthermore, mucosal tissue obtained from patients suffering from various allergic conditions including asthma, rhinitis and colitis contained similar numbers of tissue eosinophils but these displayed differing levels of piecemeal degranulation [88].

Although mechanisms of exocytosis act to limit tissue damage, eosinophil granule proteins are cytotoxic and damage the epithelium [89]. In addition, they are able to increase vascular permeability *in vivo* at concentrations that are observed in pathological conditions [90]. Importantly, they also activate mast cell release of pro-inflammatory mediators including histamine, eicosanoids and cytokines [91]. In addition, eosinophils produce stem cell factor and nerve growth factor, which further supports the growth and survival of mast

cells [91]. Eosinophils can also produce pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4 [92] and IL-13 [93], which potently stimulate the release of eotaxin and also increase production of RANTES and MCP-1 [67], thereby further enhancing eosinophil recruitment. Eotaxin can induce the respiratory burst and actin polymerisation in eosinophils and therefore directly contribute to tissue damage as well as orchestrate the continual recruitment of both eosinophils and T cells [94]. Altogether, eosinophils have an essential role in the perpetuation of the inflammatory response.

Following allergen challenge, eosinophils are recruited to the lung as part of a protective inflammatory response after which cells are cleared from the tissue. This process of inflammatory resolution is a highly coordinated and active event and mechanisms exist to limit eosinophilic inflammation such as the actions of the regulatory cytokine IL-10 [95]. Defects in these resolution pathways may cause inflammation to persist. The down-regulation of IL-3 may be a potentially important mechanism in limiting airway inflammation. The cytokines IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF promote eosinophil activation and survival in all compartments. However, in contrast to their effects within the bone marrow, the stimulation of mature human eosinophils with IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF down-regulates the IL-5Rα and up-regulates the IL-3Rα [19]. In a murine model of acute transient AHR, IL-3 was elevated in the lung prior to the resolution of inflammation, which was associated with reduced levels of IL-3 together with increased leukocyte apoptosis in the peri-bronchiolar regions. In addition, inhibition of IL-3 in a model of sustained AHR resulted in a reduction in eosinophilia and AHR together with an increase in the number of apoptotic cells within the lung [96]. Therefore, IL-3 may act to promote inflammation by preventing apoptosis but also pro-resolving signals may exist to down-regulate IL-3 and promote cell clearance by apoptosis. It has also been proposed that, in addition to apoptosis, eosinophils could be more effectively removed by promoting egress into the airway lumen. The resolution of murine allergic airway inflammation following steroid treatment was associated with the trans-epithelial egression of eosinophils into the lumen [97].

Eosinophils and AHR

AHR refers to the increased ability of the airways to narrow after exposure to non-specific stimuli. It is a classical feature of asthma and its severity correlates with the severity of disease [98]. Similarly, eosinophilia is also a characteristic feature of asthma, and

eosinophil number and activation state broadly correlate with disease severity [8]. Eosinophils are recruited and activated during allergen challenge in both human subjects [23] and animal models of disease [24]. Activated eosinophils are thought to contribute to airway inflammation and AHR by the direct release of basic granules, leukotrienes and other mediators and also indirectly by their interactions with numerous cell types.

Although eosinophils release an array of mediators, some of the basic granule proteins are specific to eosinophils. These are highly toxic and present within the lung of asthmatic patients at concentrations that are able to damage the airway epithelium and increase smooth muscle cell reactivity [99]. Smooth muscle cell contraction is controlled via M3 muscarinic receptor stimulation with acetylcholine released from parasympathetic nerves [100]. The release of acetylcholine and, therefore, smooth muscle cell contraction are limited by the M2 receptor [101]. Evidence suggests that eosinophils may be responsible for the loss of M2 receptor function. Eosinophils can be seen clustered around the vagal nerve ganglia in lung sections taken from asthmatic patients [102]. Furthermore, MBP is an allosteric antagonist for the M2 receptor and has been shown to induce bronchoconstriction by dysregulating vagal muscarinic M2 and M3 receptor function [103]. In guinea pigs sensitised and challenged with OVA, eosinophil depletion prevents the loss of M2 receptor function [104].

Eosinophils are also a rich source of cysteinyl leukotrienes, which directly contribute to bronchoconstriction but also increase vascular permeability, and contribute to inflammatory cell recruitment. Furthermore, clinical trials of two leukotriene receptor antagonists have shown that they are able to control the symptoms of asthma [105]. In addition, eosinophils indirectly contribute to the development of AHR by the induction of mast cell and basophil degranulation, leading to the production of prostaglandins, leukotrienes and histamine, all of which can induce AHR [65].

Many studies support the long-standing view of the eosinophil as a central effector cell in airway disease. The thorough depletion of lung eosinophils in C57BL/6J mice using an antibody against CCR3 abolished allergen-induced AHR while having no direct effect on other cell types [106]. Other studies highlight the importance of eosinophil interactions with T cells. The transfer of eosinophils to OVA-sensitised IL-5 KO mice resulted in the development of eosinophilia, Th2 cytokine production and the development of AHR in a similar magnitude to that in WT mice; however, treatment of KO mice with anti-CD4 antibody diminished the effect of adoptive transfer of eosino-

phils on AHR [107]. While IL-13 alone has been shown to induce AHR independently of eosinophilia [108], the ablation of eosinophils using IL-5- and eotaxin-double KO mice abolished AHR by reducing the ability of T cells to produce IL-13 [109]. This study also showed that the transfer of IL-13-producing T cells could induce AHR in naïve eosinophil-deficient mice, suggesting a more indirect role for the eosinophil in the induction of AHR [109]. While these studies indicate an important role of the eosinophil in the development of AHR, they also suggest the significant and independent contributions of other cells and mediators.

Despite the fact that eosinophilia is a common feature of asthma, its precise role in the pathology of the disease remains unclear. The overlapping actions of various cells that infiltrate the asthmatic lung make it difficult to assess the contribution made by eosinophils alone. The current literature shows that there is much controversy surrounding the role of the eosinophil in the induction of AHR. As with human disease, animal models have also shown the association of eosinophilic inflammation with AHR [110]. Numerous in vivo studies use eosinophilia as an indicator of pathology, but human studies show that the correlation between eosinophilia and the severity of asthma as measured by AHR remains weak, and amongst non-atopic asthmatics some studies show no correlation at all [111]. Observations that eosinophilic bronchitis presents with a similar distribution of tissue eosinophils to that seen in asthma but shows no signs of AHR further suggests that mast cells may be more important than eosinophils in manifesting AHR [112]. Furthermore, while eosinophil-derived MBP is thought to directly contribute to AHR, MBP-1-KO mice were not protected from airway inflammation or AHR [113]. Other studies also indicate that eosinophils may not be necessary for the induction of AHR. In a model of OVA-induced airway inflammation the tracheal administration of recombinant CCL1 led to the recruitment of eosinophils in the absence of T cells or AHR. Additionally, neutralisation of CCL1 specifically blocked eosinophil recruitment but had no effect on AHR [74].

The specific blockade of eosinophils mainly by targeting CCR3 and IL-5 in animal models have played a crucial role in trying to define the importance of the eosinophil in the induction of AHR. Although CCR3 is expressed on numerous cell types including Th2 cells [46], basophils [44] and mast cells [45], CCR3 is the principle chemokine receptor involved in the attraction of eosinophils into inflamed tissue [43]. Allergen-challenged CCR3-KO mice showed that eosinophils could migrate through the endothelium but could not pass any further through the blood vessel, indicating that the eotaxin/CCR3 axis is essential for the final step of migration into inflamed tissue [64]. However, CCR3 also has a role in mast cell homing, with CCR3-KO mice displaying increased numbers of tracheal mast cells, possibly accounting for the increase in AHR seen in allergic mice [64]. This, together with the fact that differing methods of sensitising CCR3-KO mice give opposing effects on AHR [64, 114], indicates a complex role for the eotaxin/CCR3 axis in airway inflammation. Therefore, the role of eosinophils in the induction of AHR may be difficult to interpret from studies based on the blockade of CCR3, particularly due to the fact that CCR3 is not exclusively expressed on eosinophils. Recently, treatment with a low molecular weight CCR3 antagonist resulted in a 50–60% reduction of tissue eosinophilia and led to the reduction of AHR and prevention of airway remodelling [115]. While infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages and the local production of IL-5 and IL-13 remained unchanged, this reduction in AHR could be accounted for by CCR3 antagonism on mast cells. Furthermore, the partial blockade of eosinophils observed after antagonism of CCR3 [115] and IL-5 [116] suggest that interplay and possibly compensation by other factors may be important.

Despite this, IL-5 is undoubtedly a major contributing factor in the induction of eosinophilia due to its central role in eosinophil trafficking. However, the relationship between IL-5 blockade and AHR remains controversial. AHR was observed in transgenic mice that overexpress IL-5 [117], and reduced in IL-5-KO mice [51], but this reduction was strain specific. The reduction in AHR was less pronounced or nonsignificant in IL-5-KO mice on a BALB/c background depending upon the mode of sensitisation used [118]. In addition, the inhibition of mast cell responses by blocking IL-4 in vivo could not control AHR in BALB/c mice [118]. These data suggested that multiple T cell-mediated mechanisms may exist to regulate AHR in BALB/c mice. BALB/c mice have been shown to have greater airway responses than C57BL/6 mice [119]. Furthermore, using similar protocols of i.p. sensitisation with OVA followed by challenge, the number of BAL eosinophils was increased by tenfold in BALB/c mice [118] when compared to C57BL/6 mice [51]. Therefore, the direct or indirect impact of residual eosinophils may also account for the strain-specific differences in AHR seen in IL-5-KO mice. Similarly, amongst asthmatic patients anti-IL-5 therapy has also produced some conflicting data as discussed later.

Further to the difficulties in interpreting data obtained following the use of both CCR3- and IL-5-KO animals and blocking antibodies, eosinophil-deficient

mice were generated and used to better assess the role of eosinophils in the induction of AHR. Eosinophils were genetically ablated in mice by the deletion of a high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1 promoter [16]. Following the induction of airway inflammation, these Δdbl-GATA mice showed no significant differences in AHR when compared to WT mice [17]. In contrast, mice in which eosinophils were depleted by the transgenic expression of the diphtheria-toxin A chain under the control of the eosinophil peroxidase promoter (PHIL), were protected against AHR [120]. More recently, a study using chronic allergen challenge to model the acute exacerbation of allergic asthma also used these Δdbl-GATA mice and also found that the recruitment of eosinophils was not obligatory for the development of AHR [121].

The differences between these studies could be due to the fact that the Δdbl-GATA mice were on a BALB/c background, whereas the PHIL mice were on a C57BL/6 background. Furthermore, the diphtheria toxin-mediated deletion of maturing eosinophils by inducing apoptosis resulted in a significant increase in the number of peripheral blood leukocytes in these mice [120], which could alter their immune response. In addition, increased levels of apoptosis seen in the PHIL mice may cause a generalised immunosuppressive effect [122], which may also contribute to the suppression in AHR seen in these mice. Three independent studies have failed to detect any residual eosinophils in these Δdbl-GATA mice, which may account for the insignificant differences in AHR observed between WT and Δdbl-GATA mice [17, 121, 123]. In addition, Δdbl-GATA mice do not develop eosinophilia, even when backcrossed to the IL-5 transgenic mice [16]. Recently, a minor population of ‘eosinophil-like cells’ was reported in BAL fluid of Δdbl-GATA mice following chronic intranasal challenge with *Aspergillus fumigatus* allergic extract [124]. However, lung tissue from these mice was essentially devoid of eosinophils and BAL eosinophil numbers were significantly reduced in these Δdbl-GATA mice to the same degree as that observed in both CCR3-KO and eotaxin-double KO mice [124]. It may therefore be unlikely that such a population could account for the induction of AHR seen by Humbles et al. [17]. Although much controversy surrounds the role of eosinophils in the induction of AHR, emerging evidence suggests that eosinophils may have an important role in airway remodelling that is less recognised.

---

Eosinophils and remodelling

Airway remodelling refers to structural changes in the asthmatic airway thought to occur as a result of dysfunctional regeneration and repair processes within the lung. It is characterised by the increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as collagen I and tenascin within the reticular basement membrane and bronchial mucosa, increases in airway smooth muscle mass, and goblet cell hyperplasia [125]. Airway remodelling may contribute to AHR and fixed airway flow obstruction and also contribute to the loss of lung function over time [9, 126]. Patients with chronic asthma have shown a decline in lung function despite aggressive anti-inflammatory therapy [9, 126]. Furthermore, airway remodelling has been seen in children prior to the symptoms of asthma [127]. Therefore, targeting airway remodelling represents an important strategy in controlling asthma.

Although eosinophils can secrete a range of mediators that could contribute to airway remodelling, an association between eosinophils and airway remodelling has only recently been described. The essential role for eosinophils in airway remodelling was shown by a study in which eosinophils were genetically ablated in mice by the deletion in the high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1 promoter. Interestingly, after a period of prolonged allergen challenge using a well-established model [110], WT mice exhibited prominent features of airway remodelling, namely increased subepithelial deposition of collagen together with airway smooth muscle cell hyperplasia and proliferation, both of which were significantly reduced in Δdbl-GATA mice [17]. Importantly, the observations seen using the Δdbl-GATA mice [17] compliment those seen in human studies where anti-IL-5 treatment protects against remodelling [116]. This signifies the importance of targeting the eosinophil in asthma regardless of its debated role in the induction of AHR.

Eosinophils may contribute to the induction of airway remodelling by synthesising a variety of profibrotic mediators (Fig. 2). Eosinophils are thought to be an important source of the potent pro-fibrotic cytokine TGF-β [128, 129], although numerous other cell types including platelets, fibroblasts, smooth muscle and epithelial cells can also produce TGF-β [130]. TGF-β is able to induce ECM protein production [131, 132], and also contributes to the accumulation of fibroblasts below the reticular basement membrane by stimulating fibroblast proliferation [133]. It further contributes to airway remodelling by promoting the differentiation of myofibroblasts from resident fibroblasts [134] and also from circulating precursor cells

AHR ← IMMUNOMODULATION → REMODELLING

Epithelial damage  
Epithelial activation  

SMC contraction  

Mast cell activation  
and survival  

Histamine,  
Prostaglandins,  
Cytokines  

TGFα, IL-4,  
IL-13  

MPO, ECP,  
EDN, EPO  

MPO, ECP, EDN,  
EPO, NGF, SCF  

MHCI  
CD80  
CD86  

IDO  

TH1  

TH2  

T cell antigen  
presentation  

T cell  
polarisation  

TGFβ  
IL4, IL13 TGFα  

IL-4, IL-13, IL-17  
IL-6, IL-11  
TGFβ, NGF,  
PDGF, HB-EGF  

Fibroblast activation  
and proliferation  

Differentiation  

Myofibroblast  

Differentiation  

SMC proliferation,  
ECM production  

ECM production  
Mucus secretion  

Figure 2. Mechanisms by which eosinophils may contribute to airway hyper-responsiveness, airway remodelling and modulation of the immune response. ECM, extracellular matrix; ECP, eosinophil cationic protein; EDN, eosinophil-derived neurotoxin; EPO, eosinophil peroxidase; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HB-EGF, heparin-binding epidermal growth factor; IDO, Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase; MBP, major basic protein; NGF, nerve growth factor; SCF, stem cell factor; TGF-β, TGF-α, transforming growth factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

known as fibrocytes [135]. The differentiation of myofibroblasts into smooth muscle cells [136] and their proliferation [137] may also be governed by TGF-β. Many studies implicate eosinophil-derived TGF-β in promoting mechanisms of remodelling. IL-5-KO mice expressing significantly reduced BAL eosinophils in a model of chronic allergen challenge were protected from airway remodelling [129, 138]. Both studies point to a role for eosinophil-derived TGF-β in the propagation of airway remodelling. Furthermore, administration of an anti-TGF-β antibody in mice that underwent sensitisation followed by prolonged allergen challenge prevented the progression of airway remodelling without altering inflammation [137]. These animal experiments are supported by the findings of Flood-Page et al. [116], who showed that treatment of asthmatic patients with an anti-IL-5 antibody reduced the deposition of ECM proteins within the lung in association with a reduction in BAL TGF-β. However, the precise role of eosinophil-derived TGF-β in airway remodelling is complicated by the fact that TGF-β may induce the expression of other fibrotic factors such as plasminogen activator inhibitor [139] while being able to act both synergistically and antagonistically with other factors such as epidermal growth factor [130]. In addition, TGF-β itself is produced by numerous cell types. Eosinophils could be the primary source of TGF-β production at the early stages of disease, while other sources such as myofibroblasts may become more important at later stages [138]. In a chronic model of OVA-induced airway remodelling, monocytes/macrophages were found to be the primary source of lung TGF-β [110], and using the same model Δdbl-GATA mice were protected against airway remodelling via a TGF-β-independent pathway [17]. Numerous other eosinophil-derived fibrogenic factors may play an important role in airway remodelling as summarised in Table 1; however, many of these are not specifically produced by eosinophils [140]. Recently, the incubation of normal human bronchial epithelial cells with subcytotoxic concentrations of the eosinophil granule proteins MBP or EPO increased the mRNA expression of endothelin-1 and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), as well as the matrix

metalloproteinases MMP1 and MMP9, all of which are known to contribute to airway remodelling [141]. MMP-9 also has a critical role in eosinophil recruitment [142] and can therefore amplify both inflammation and remodelling. In addition, eosinophils are a rich source of the cysteinyl leukotriene LTC₄ [143], and mice that were unable to produce cysteinyl leukotrienes due to the targeted disruption of the LTC₄ synthase gene were protected against alveolar septal thickening and collagen deposition [144]. A novel study using microarray analysis to compare lung tissue from allergen-challenged WT, CCR3-KO and Adbl-GATA mice revealed that the induction of genes for the adenosine A3 receptor and the coagulation-associated genes PAI-2, factor 5 and factor 10 was significantly reduced in eosinophil-deficient and CCR3-KO mice when compared to WT mice [124]. These genes have a role in regulating mucus production and fibrin deposition. Furthermore, this study also described eosinophil-dependant genes that have an important role in modulating the immune response [124].

### Immunomodulation

Eosinophils are a classical feature of the inflammatory infiltrate subsequent to allergen challenge and also contribute to airway remodelling. Being granulocytes, their function has been largely attributed to the release of granule proteins. However, the effectiveness of granule release as a solely important mechanism in host defence has been questioned by the observations that granule release may be responsible for eliminating a finite number of pathogens and may also destroy the cell itself [145]. From an evolutionary perspective, while it is now thought that eosinophils may have evolved to combat parasitic infection, eosinophils existed prior to the emergence of helminths that had adopted a parasitic lifestyle [145]. Eosinophils also existed prior to the evolution of acquired immune responses, such as the Th2 response that they are now associated with for the clearance of parasites. Furthermore, the functions of granule proteins are not conserved and eosinophils show species-specific differences with regard to granulation [145]. Such observations led these authors to suggest that perhaps the role of eosinophil degranulation may stem from the requirement of large multi-cellular organisms to amplify the signals generated during cellular stress and damage, thereby acting to regulate host defence and facilitating tissue remodelling and the clearance of cellular debris to maintain homeostasis. Indeed, the role for eosinophils in immunomodulation is evident from the fact that eosinophils are able to synthesise, store, and secrete a variety of cytokines. These include not only the Th2 cytokines IL-4 [92] and IL-13 [93] that have been shown to have a central role in the propagation of asthma, but also Th1 cytokines IL-12 [146] and IFN-γ [147] and regulatory cytokines such as IL-10 [147, 148]. Eosinophils express MHC class II and co-stimulatory molecules for lymphocytes. Human eosinophils are able to function as antigen-presenting cells after cytokine stimulation *in vitro* [149]. Furthermore, *in vivo* studies show that eosinophils are also able to traffic to T cell areas of the paratracheal lymph nodes and stimulate lymphocyte proliferation [150]. Anti-gen-loaded eosinophils were also able to prime for Th2-driven allergic disease of the lung when transferred to naive animals [151]. They may therefore influence T cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis *in vivo*. Eosinophils may also effect T cell polarisation by their constitutive production of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), a substance that converts tryptophan into kynurenines; these induce the apoptosis of Th1 cells [152]. Additionally, gene transcripts of the leukotriene B₄ receptor, IL-4, Egr-2 and the IL-1 receptor-related protein ST2, all of which are important in regulating T cell activation and recruitment, were significantly reduced in eosinophil-deficient and CCR3-KO mice [124]. Such varied functions of eosinophils suggest that their role in asthma may be more diverse than initially anticipated.

### Targeting eosinophils for therapy

Given the potentially important role of eosinophils in both airway hyper-responsiveness and remodelling, eosinophils have been targeted as a novel therapeutic strategy for asthma, particularly via IL-5. However, the use of anti-IL-5 antibody therapy in animal models has produced some conflicting data. While some studies show that treatment with anti-IL-5 antibodies abolished eosinophilia and AHR in both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice [153], anti-IL-5 antibodies abolished eosinophilia but had no effect on AHR when treating established airway disease [154]. Subsequently, two monoclonal antibodies against IL-5, SCH55700 (Schering-Plough Research Institute) and Mepolizumab/SB-240563 (Glaxo SmithKline) were used in clinical trials. Treatment with SB 240563 prevented the maturation of eosinophils in the bone marrow and significantly reduced the number of eosinophil progenitors in the bronchial mucosa [155]. In a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial, allergen-challenged atopic asthmatics received a single infusion of SB 240563 and showed a significant reduction in both blood and sputum

eosinophils up to 30 days post treatment. Despite this, no improvement was seen in the late asthmatic reaction or AHR after inhaled allergen [156]. This led these authors to conclude that eosinophils may not be required for the induction of AHR. In support of this study, the administration of another anti-IL-5 antibody, SCH55700, to patients with severe persistent asthma showed a long-lasting reduction in blood eosinophils without any significant improvement in lung function [157].

The interpretations from these studies remain inconclusive as the SCH55700 was tested in a small Phase I study and the study using SB240563 has also been criticised for lack of statistical power as well as for improper baseline measurements [158]. In addition, a later study found that even after multiple infusions of SB240563 eosinophil numbers in the bronchial mucosa were only reduced by 55% [116]; however, this was sufficient to significantly reduce parameters of airway remodelling including the deposition of tenascin, lumican and procollagen III, and the percentage of tissue eosinophils expressing mRNA for TGF-β [116]. Therapies based on targeting the CCR3/eotaxin axis may be more beneficial in the treatment of asthma as these will not only prevent eotaxin-mediated eosinophil recruitment but also target numerous other cell types, such as Th2 cells and mast cells that play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma. Recently the administration of a low molecular weight CCR-3 antagonist after the establishment of disease in a murine model of allergic airway inflammation resulted in a reduction of AHR and prevention of airway remodelling [115]. A number of CCR3 antagonists are being developed by pharmaceutical companies, but at present the most advanced data come from compound DPC168, which has completed Phase I clinical trials for asthma and allergic rhinitis [159]. Antibody therapy has also been developed to target this chemokine/receptor axis. A neutralising monoclonal antibody directed to CCR3 blocks chemotaxis and calcium flux induced by all CCR3 ligands in human eosinophils *in vitro* [160]. *In vivo*, anti-CCR3 antibodies led to an improvement in allergic pathology in a mouse model [103]. The most advanced anti-chemokine antibody for treatment of allergic diseases in patients is Bertilimumab (CAT213), a human IgG4 monoclonal antibody specific for CCL11 (eotaxin-1), which is under development by Cambridge Antibody Technology. Phase I/IIa clinical trials have determined that Bertilimumab is well tolerated with no adverse events reported, and the compound is currently in Phase II trials for allergic rhinitis and in preclinical investigation for asthma [161]. The delay in development of specific eosinophil therapy for asthma may, in part, stem from nervousness in the industry over the failure of therapies such as anti-IL-5 antibodies to abolish eosinophil recruitment after allergen challenge [151] as well as an indication that eosinophils may not control AHR [16]. However, further trials are needed as well as the development of combination therapies designed to antagonise both CCR3 and IL-5 before the eosinophil can confidently be deprioritised as a candidate target for asthma therapy. This point is of particular importance when one considers the potential role of the eosinophil in the long-term aspects of the asthmatic reaction – airway remodelling.

### Concluding remarks

Emerging evidence suggests that eosinophils have a broad range of functions beyond that of a basic granulocyte. They remain an important therapeutic target in the management of asthma due to their role in the perpetuation of airway inflammation, their potential in the induction of AHR and their recently described role in airway remodelling. Evidence also suggests that eosinophils have important immunomodulatory functions. Further *in vivo* studies examining the mechanisms of eosinophil-induced airway remodelling and also examining the importance of the potential of eosinophils to modulate immune function will improve our understanding of the extended role of the eosinophil in the pathogenesis of asthma and thereby identify the best methods of targeting this cell.

#### Acknowledgements

The authors are supported by the Wellcome Trust (Ref 057704/Z/99/B).

1. Butterworth, A. E., Wassom, D. L., Gleich, G. J., Loegering, D. A. and David, J. R. (1979) Damage to schistosomula of *Schistosoma mansoni* induced directly by eosinophil major basic protein. J. Immunol. 122, 221–229.
2. Rotman, H. L., Yutanawiboonchai, W., Brigandi, R. A., Leon, O., Gleich, G. J., Nolan, T. J., Schad, G. A. and Abraham, D. (1996) *Strongyloides stercoralis*: eosinophil-dependent immune-mediated killing of third stage larvae in BALB/cByJ mice. Exp. Parasitol. 82, 267–278.
3. O’ Bryan, L., Pinkston, P., Kumaraswami, V., Vijayan, V., Yenokida, G., Rosenberg, H. F., Crystal, R., Ottesen, E. A. and Nutman, T. B. (2003) Localized eosinophil degranulation mediates disease in tropical pulmonary eosinophilia. Infect. Immun. 71, 1337–1342.
4. Maizels, R. M. and Yazdanbakhsh, M. (2003) Immune regulation by helminth parasites: cellular and molecular mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 733–744.
5. Klion, A. D. and Nutman, T. B. (2004) The role of eosinophils in host defense against helminth parasites. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 113, 30–37.
6. Eder, W., Ege, M. J. and von Mutius, E. (2006) The asthma epidemic. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2226–2235.
7. Wills-Karp, M. and Ewart, S. L. (2004) Time to draw breath: asthma-susceptibility genes are identified. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 376–387.

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 64, 2007

8 Bousquet, J., Jeffery, P. K., Busse, W. W., Johnson, M. and Vignola, A. M. (2000) Asthma. From bronchoconstriction to airways inflammation and remodeling. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 161, 1720–1745.

9 Holgate, S. T., Holloway, J., Wilson, S., Bucchieri, F., Puddicombe, S. and Davies, D. E. (2004) Epithelial-mesenchymal communication in the pathogenesis of chronic asthma. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 1, 93–98.

10 Rothenberg, M. E. and Hogan, S. P. (2006) The eosinophil. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 24, 147–174.

11 McNagny, K. and Graf, T. (2002) Making eosinophils through subtle shifts in transcription factor expression. J. Exp. Med. 195, F43–47.

12 DeKoter, R. P. and Singh, H. (2000) Regulation of B lymphocyte and macrophage development by graded expression of PU.1. Science 288, 1439–1441.

13 Du, J., Stankiewicz, M. J., Liu, Y., Xi, Q., Schmitz, J. E., Lekstrom-Himes, J. A. and Ackerman, S. J. (2002) Novel combinatorial interactions of GATA-1, PU.1, and C/EBPepsilon isoforms regulate transcription of the gene encoding eosinophil granule major basic protein. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 43481–43494.

14 Zhang, D. E., Zhang, P., Wang, N. D., Hetherington, C. J., Darlington, G. J. and Tenen, D. G. (1997) Absence of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor signaling and neutrophil development in CCAATenhancer binding protein alpha-deficient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 569–574.

15 Hirasawa, R., Shimizu, R., Takahashi, S., Osawa, M., Takayanagi, S., Kato, Y., Onodera, M., Minegishi, N., Yamamoto, M., Fukao, K., Taniguchi, H., Nakauchi, H. and Iwama, A. (2002) Essential and instructive roles of GATA factors in eosinophil development. J. Exp. Med. 195, 1379–1386.

16 Yu, C., Cantor, A. B., Yang, H., Browne, C., Wells, R. A., Fujiwara, Y. and Orkin, S. H. (2002) Targeted deletion of a high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1 promoter leads to selective loss of the eosinophil lineage in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 195, 1387–1395.

17 Humbles, A. A., Lloyd, C. M., McMillan, S. J., Friend, D. S., Xanthou, G., McKenna, E. E., Ghiran, S., Gerard, N. P., Yu, C., Orkin, S. H. and Gerard, C. (2004) A critical role for eosinophils in allergic airways remodeling. Science 305, 1776–1779.

18 Sanderson, C.J. (1992) Interleukin-5, eosinophils, and disease. Blood 79, 3101–3109.

19 Gregory, B., Kirchem, A., Phipps, S., Gevaert, P., Pridgeon, C., Rankin, S. M. and Robinson, D. S. (2003) Differential regulation of human eosinophil IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF receptor alpha-chain expression by cytokines: IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF down-regulate IL-5 receptor alpha expression with loss of IL-5 responsiveness, but up-regulate IL-3 receptor alpha expression. J. Immunol. 170, 5359–5366.

20 Tavernier, J., Van der Heyden, J., Verhee, A., Brusselle, G., Van Ostade, X., Vandekerckhove, J., North, J., Rankin, S. M., Kay, A. B. and Robinson, D. S. (2000) Interleukin 5 regulates the isoform expression of its own receptor alpha-subunit. Blood 95, 1600–1607.

21 Nishinakamura, R., Miyajima, A., Mee, P. J., Tybulewicz, V. L. and Murray, R. (1996) Hematopoiesis in mice lacking the entire granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor/interleukin-3/interleukin-5 functions. Blood 88, 2458–2464.

22 Sehmi, R., Howie, K., Sutherland, D. R., Schragge, W., O’Byrne, P. M. and Denburg, J. A. (1996) Increased levels of CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cells in atopic subjects. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 15, 645–655.

23 Sehmi, R., Wood, L. J., Watson, R., Foley, R., Hamid, Q., O’Byrne, P. M. and Denburg, J. A. (1997) Allergen-induced increases in IL-5 receptor alpha-subunit expression on bone marrow-derived CD34+ cells from asthmatic subjects. A novel marker of progenitor cell commitment towards eosinophilic differentiation. J. Clin. Invest. 100, 2466–2475.


Biomedicine & Diseases: Review Article 1283

24 Johansson, A. K., Sjostrand, M., Tomaki, M., Samulesson, A. M. and Lotvall, J. (2004) Allergen stimulates bone marrow CD34(+) cells to release IL-5 in vitro; a mechanism involved in eosinophilic inflammation? Allergy 59, 1080–1086.

25 Robinson, D. S., Damia, R., Zeibecoglou, K., Molet, S., North, J., Yamada, T., Kay, A. B. and Hamid, Q. (1999) CD34+/interleukin-5Ralpha messenger RNA+ cells in the bronchial mucosa in asthma: potential airway eosinophil progenitors. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 20, 9–13.

26 Southam, D.S., Widmer, N., Ellis, R., Hirota, J.A., Inman, M.D. and Sehmi, R. (2005) Increased eosinophil-lineage committed progenitors in the lung of allergen-challenged mice. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 115, 95–102.

27 Griffiths-Johnson, D. A., Collins, P.D., Rossi, A. G., Jose, P.J. and Williams, T. J. (1993) The chemokine, eotaxin, activates guinea-pig eosinophils in vitro and causes their accumulation into the lung in vivo. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 197, 1167–1172.

28 Jose, P.J., Griffiths-Johnson, D. A., Collins, P.D., Walsh, D.T., Moqbel, R., Totty, N.F., Truong, O., Hsuan, J.J. and Williams, T. J. (1994) Eotaxin: a potent eosinophil chemoattractant cytokine detected in a guinea pig model of allergic airways inflammation. J. Exp. Med. 179, 881–887.

29 Rothenberg, M. E., Luster, A. D. and Leder, P. (1995) Murine eotaxin: an eosinophil chemoattractant inducible in endothelial cells and in interleukin 4-induced tumor suppression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 8960–8964.

30 Ganzalo, J. A., Jia, G. Q., Aguirre, V., Friend, D., Coyle, A. J., Jenkins, N. A., Lin, G. S., Katz, H., Lichtman, A., Copeland, N., Kopf, M. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (1996) Mouse eotaxin expression parallels eosinophil accumulation during lung allergic inflammation but it is not restricted to a Th2-type response. Immunity 4, 1–14.

31 Williams, C. M., Newton, D. J., Wilson, S. A., Williams, T. J., Coleman, J.W. and Flanagan, B.F. (1998) Conserved structure and tissue expression of rat eotaxin. Immunogenetics 47, 178–180.

32 Garcia-Zepeda, E. A., Rothenberg, M. E., Ownbey, R. T., Celestin, J., Leder, P. and Luster, A. D. (1996) Human eotaxin is a specific chemoattractant for eosinophil cells and provides a new mechanism to explain tissue eosinophilia. Nat. Med. 2, 449–456.

33 Forssmann, U., Uguccioni, M., Loetscher, P., Dahinden, C. A., Langen, H., Thelen, M. and Baggiolini, M. (1997) Eotaxin-2, a novel CC chemokine that is selective for the chemokine receptor CCR3, and acts like eotaxin on human eosinophil and basophil leukocytes. J. Exp. Med. 185, 2171–2176.

34 Patel, V. P., Kreider, B. L., Li, Y., Li, H., Leung, K., Salcedo, T., Nardelli, B., Pippalla, V., Gentz, S., Thotakura, R., Parmelee, D., Gentz, R. and Garotta, G. (1997) Molecular and functional characterization of two novel human C-C chemokines as inhibitors of two distinct classes of myeloid progenitors. J. Exp. Med. 185, 1163–1172.

35 Gonzalo, J. A., Lloyd, C. M., Kremer, L., Finger, E., Martinez, A. C., Siegelman, M. H., Cybulsky, M. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (1996) Eosinophil recruitment to the lung in a murine model of allergic inflammation. The role of T cells, chemokines, and adhesion receptors. J. Clin. Invest. 98, 2332–2345.

36 Humbles, A. A., Conroy, D. M., Marleau, S., Rankin, S. M., Palframan, R.T., Proudfoot, A. E., Wells, T.N., Li, D., Jeffery, P. K., Griffiths-Johnson, D. A., Williams, T. J. and Jose, P. J. (1997) Kinetics of eotaxin generation and its relationship to eosinophil accumulation in allergic airways disease: analysis in a guinea pig model in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 186, 601–612.

37 Gonzalo, J. A., Lloyd, C. M., Wen, D., Albar, J.P., Wells, T.N., Proudfoot, A., Martinez, A. C., Dorf, M., Bjerke, T., Coyle, A. J. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (1998) The coordinated action of CC chemokines in the lung orchestrates allergic inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness. J. Exp. Med. 188, 157–167.

1284 S. G. Trivedi and C. M. Lloyd

Eosinophils in allergic airways disease

38 Zeibecoglou, K., Macfarlane, A. J., Ying, S., Meng, Q., Pavord, I., Barnes, N. C., Robinson, D. S. and Kay, A. B. (1999) Increases in eotaxin-positive cells in induced sputum from atopic asthmatic subjects after inhalational allergen challenge. Allergy 54, 730–735.

39 Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C., Lloyd, C. and Gonzalo, J. A. (1999) Eotaxin: from an eosinophilic chemokine to a major regulator of allergic reactions. Immunol. Today 20, 500–504.

40 Pope, S. M., Zimmermann, N., Stringer, K. F., Karow, M. L. and Rothenberg, M. E. (2005) The eotaxin chemokines and CCR3 are fundamental regulators of allergen-induced pulmonary eosinophilia. J. Immunol. 175, 5341–5350.

41 Ravensberg, A. J., Ricciardolo, F. L., van Schadewijk, A., Rabe, K. F., Sterk, P. J., Hiemstra, P. S. and Mauad, T. (2005) Eotaxin-2 and eotaxin-3 expression is associated with persistent eosinophilic bronchial inflammation in patients with asthma after allergen challenge. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 115, 779–785.

42 Daugherty, B. L., Siciliano, S. J., DeMartino, J. A., Malkowitz, L., Sirotina, A. and Springer, M. S. (1996) Cloning, expression, and characterization of the human eosinophil eotaxin receptor. J. Exp. Med. 183, 2349–2354.

43 Ponath, P. D., Qin, S., Ringler, D. J., Clark-Lewis, I., Wang, J., Kassam, N., Smith, H., Shi, X., Gonzalo, J. A., Newman, W., Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. and Mackay, C. R. (1996) Cloning of the human eosinophil chemoattractant, eotaxin. Expression, receptor binding, and functional properties suggest a mechanism for the selective recruitment of eosinophils. J. Clin. Invest. 97, 604–612.

44 Uguccioni, M., Mackay, C. R., Ochensberger, B., Loetscher, P., Rhis, S., LaRosa, G. J., Rao, P., Ponath, P. D., Baggolini, M. and Dahinden, C. A. (1997) High expression of the chemokine receptor CCR3 in human blood basophils. Role in activation by eotaxin, MCP-4, and other chemokines. J. Clin. Invest. 100, 1137–1143.

45 Ochi, H., Hirani, W. M., Yuan, Q., Friend, D. S., Austen, K. F. and Boyce, J. A. (1999) Thelper cell type 2 cytokine-mediated comitogenic responses and CCR3 expression during differentiation of human mast cells in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 190, 267–280.

46 Sallusto, F., Mackay, C. R. and Lanzavecchia, A. (1997) Selective expression of the eotaxin receptor CCR3 by human Thelper 2 cells. Science 277, 2005–2007.

47 Sehmi, R., Dorman, S., Baatjes, A., Watson, R., Foley, R., Ying, S., Robinson, D. S., Kay, A. B., O’Byrne, P. M. and Denburg, J. A. (2003) Allergen-induced fluctuation in CC chemokine receptor 3 expression on bone marrow CD34+ cells from asthmatic subjects: significance for mobilization of haemopoietic progenitor cells in allergic inflammation. Immunology 109, 536–546.

48 Zimmermann, N. and Rothenberg, M. E. (2003) Receptor internalization is required for eotaxin-induced responses in human eosinophils. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, 97–105.

49 Zimmermann, N., Conkright, J. J. and Rothenberg, M. E. (1999) CC chemokine receptor-3 undergoes prolonged ligand-induced internalization. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 12611–12618.

50 Dent, L. A., Strath, M., Mellor, A. L. and Sanderson, C. J. (1990) Eosinophilia in transgenic mice expressing interleukin 5. J. Exp. Med. 172, 1425–1431.

51 Foster, P. S., Hogan, S. P., Ramsay, A. J., Matthaei, K. I. and Young, I. G. (1996) Interleukin 5 deficiency abolishes eosinophilia, airways hyperreactivity, and lung damage in a mouse asthma model. J. Exp. Med. 183, 195–201.

52 Collins, P. D., Marleau, S., Griffiths-Johnson, D. A., Jose, P. J. and Williams, T. J. (1995) Cooperation between interleukin-5 and the chemokine eotaxin to induce eosinophil accumulation in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 182, 1169–1174.

53 Palframan, R. T., Collins, P. D., Severs, N. J., Rothery, S., Williams, T. J. and Rankin, S. M. (1998) Mechanisms of acute eosinophil mobilization from the bone marrow stimulated by interleukin 5: the role of specific adhesion molecules and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J. Exp. Med. 188, 1621–1632.

54 Peled, A., Gonzalo, J. A., Lloyd, C. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (1998) The chemotactic cytokine eotaxin acts as a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor during lung inflammation. Blood 91, 1909–1916.

55 Mould, A. W., Matthaei, K. I., Young, I. G. and Foster, P. S. (1997) Relationship between interleukin-5 and eotaxin in regulating blood and tissue eosinophilia in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99, 1064–1071.

56 Palframan, R. T., Collins, P. D., Williams, T. J. and Rankin, S. M. (1998) Eotaxin induces a rapid release of eosinophils and their progenitors from the bone marrow. Blood 91, 2240–2248.

57 Walker, C., Virchow, J. C. Jr., Bruijnzeel, P. L. and Blaser, K. (1991) T cell subsets and their soluble products regulate eosinophilia in allergic and nonallergic asthma. J. Immunol. 146, 1829–1835.

58 Sehmi, R., Wardlaw, A. J., Cromwell, O., Kurihara, K., Waltmann, P. and Kay, A. B. (1992) Interleukin-5 selectively enhances the chemotactic response of eosinophils obtained from normal but not eosinophilic subjects. Blood 79, 2952–2959.

59 Warringa, R. A., Mengelers, H. J., Kuijper, P. H., Raaijmakers, J. A., Bruijnzeel, P. L. and Koenderman, L. (1992) In vivo priming of platelet-activating factor-induced eosinophil chemotaxis in allergic asthmatic individuals. Blood 79, 1836–1841.

60 Bartemes, K. R., McKinney, S., Gleich, G. J. and Kita, H. (1999) Endogenous platelet-activating factor is critically involved in effector functions of eosinophils stimulated with IL-5 or IgG. J. Immunol. 162, 2982–2989.

61 Luijk, B., Lindemans, C. A., Kanters, D., van der Heijde, R., Bertics, P., Lammers, J. W., Bates, M. E. and Koenderman, L. (2005) Gradual increase in priming of human eosinophils during extravasation from peripheral blood to the airways in response to allergen challenge. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 115, 997–1003.

62 Wardlaw, A. J. (1999) Molecular basis for selective eosinophil trafficking in asthma: A multistep paradigm. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 104, 917–926.

63 Broide, D. H., Humber, D., Sullivan, S. and Sriramarao, P. (1998) Inhibition of eosinophil rolling and recruitment in P-selectin- and intracellular adhesion molecule-1-deficient mice. Blood 91, 2847–2856.

64 Humbles, A. A., Lu, B., Friend, D. S., Okinaga, S., Lora, J., Al-Garawi, A., Martin, T. R., Gerard, N. P. and Gerard, C. (2002) The murine CCR3 receptor regulates both the role of eosinophils and mast cells in allergen-induced airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 1479–1484.

65 Kay, A. B. (1983) Mediators of hypersensitivity and inflammatory cells in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma. Eur. J. Respir. Dis. Suppl. 129, 1–44.

66 Morita, E., Schroder, J. M. and Christophers, E. (1989) Differential sensitivities of purified human eosinophils and neutrophils to defined chemotaxins. Scand. J. Immunol. 29, 709–716.

67 Li, L., Xia, Y., Nguyen, A., Lai, Y. H., Feng, L., Mosmann, T. R. and Lo, D. (1999) Effects of Th2 cytokines on chemokine expression in the lung: IL-13 potently induces eotaxin expression by airway epithelial cells. J. Immunol. 162, 2477–2487.

68 Zhu, Z., Zheng, T., Homer, R. J., Kim, Y. K., Chen, N. Y., Cohn, L., Hamid, Q. and Elias, J. A. (2004) Acidic mammalian chitinase in asthmatic Th2 inflammation and IL-13 pathway activation. Science 304, 1678–1682.

69 Gavett, S. H., Chen, X., Finkelman, F. and Wills-Karp, M. (1994) Depletion of murine CD4+ T lymphocytes prevents antigen-induced airway hyperreactivity and pulmonary eosinophilia. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 10, 587–593.

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 64, 2007

70 Robinson, D. S., Hamid, Q., Ying, S., Tsicopoulos, A., Barkans, J., Bentley, A. M., Corrigan, C., Durham, S. R. and Kay, A. B. (1992) Predominant TH2-like bronchoalveolar T-lymphocyte population in atopic asthma. N. Engl. J. Med. 326, 298–304.

71 Lloyd, C. M., Delaney, T., Nguyen, T., Tian, J., Martinez, A. C., Coyle, A. J. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (2000) CC chemokine receptor (CCR)3/eotaxin is followed by CCR4/ monocyte-derived chemokine in mediating pulmonary T helper lymphocyte type 2 recruitment after serial antigen challenge *in vivo*. J. Exp. Med. 191, 265–274.

72 Foster, P. S., Mould, A. W., Yang, M., Mackenzie, J., Mattes, J., Hogan, S. P., Mahalingam, S., McKenzie, A. N., Rothenberg, M. E., Young, I. G., Matthaei, K. I. and Webb, D. C. (2001) Elemental signals regulating eosinophil accumulation in the lung. Immunol. Rev. 179, 173–181.

73 Rothenberg, M. E., MacLean, J. A., Pearlman, E., Luster, A. D. and Leder, P. (1997) Targeted disruption of the chemokine eotaxin partially reduces antigen-induced tissue eosinophilia. J. Exp. Med. 185, 785–790.

74 Bishop, B. and Lloyd, C. M. (2003) CC chemokine ligand 1 promotes recruitment of eosinophils but not Th2 cells during the development of allergic airways disease. J. Immunol. 170, 4810–4817.

75 Lloyd, C. M. and Rankin, S. M. (2003) Chemokines in allergic airway disease. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 3, 443–448.

76 Alam, R., York, J., Boyars, M., Stafford, S., Grant, J. A., Lee, J., Forsythe, P., Sim, T. and Ida, N. (1996) Increased MCP-1, RANTES, and MIP-1alpha in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of allergic asthmatic patients. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 153, 1398–1404.

77 Holgate, S. T., Bodey, K. S., Janezic, A., Frew, A. J., Kaplan, A. P. and Teran, L. M. (1997) Release of RANTES, MIP-1 alpha, and MCP-1 into asthmatic airways following endobronchial allergen challenge. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 156, 1377–1383.

78 Sabroe, I., Hartnell, A., Jopling, L. A., Bel, S., Ponath, P. D., Pease, J. E., Collins, P. D. and Williams, T. J. (1999) Differential regulation of eosinophil chemokine signaling via CCR3 and non-CCR3 pathways. J. Immunol. 162, 2946–2955.

79 Petering, H., Gotze, O., Kimmig, D., Smolarski, R., Kapp, A. and Elsner, J. (1999) The biologic role of interleukin-8: functional analysis and expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on human eosinophils. Blood 93, 694–702.

80 Gleich, G. J. (2000) Mechanisms of eosinophil-associated inflammation. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 105, 651–663.

81 Logan, M. R., Odemuyiwa, S. O. and Moqbel, R. (2003) Understanding exocytosis in immune and inflammatory cells: the molecular basis of mediator secretion. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, 923–932; quiz 933.

82 Erjefalt, J. S. and Persson, C. G. (2000) New aspects of degranulation and fates of airway mucosal eosinophils. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 161, 2074–2085.

83 Hafez, I., Stolpe, A. and Lindau, M. (2003) Compound exocytosis and cumulative fusion in eosinophils. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 44921–44928.

84 Lacy, P., Mahmudi-Azer, S., Bablitz, B., Hagen, S. C., Velazquez, J. R., Man, S. F. and Moqbel, R. (1999) Rapid mobilization of intracellularly stored RANTES in response to interferon-gamma in human eosinophils. Blood 94, 23–32.

85 Hoffmann, H. J., Bjerke, T., Karawajczyk, M., Dahl, R., Knepper, M. A. and Nielsen, S. (2001) SNARE proteins are critical for regulated exocytosis of ECP from human eosinophils. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 280, 172–176.

86 Lacy, P., Logan, M. R., Bablitz, B. and Moqbel, R. (2001) Fusion protein vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 is implicated in IFN-gamma-induced piecemeal degranulation in human eosinophils from atopic individuals. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 107, 671–678.

87 Erjefalt, J. S., Greiff, L., Andersson, M., Matsson, E., Petersen, H., Linden, M., Ansari, T., Jeffery, P. K. and Persson, C. G. (1999) Allergen-induced eosinophil cytolysis is a primary mechanism for granule protein release in human upper airways. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 160, 304–312.

88 Erjefalt, J. S., Greiff, L., Andersson, M., Adelroth, E., Jeffery, P. K. and Persson, C. G. (2001) Degranulation patterns of eosinophil granulocytes as determinants of eosinophil driven disease. Thorax 56, 341–344.

89 Motojima, S., Frigas, E., Loegering, D. A. and Gleich, G. J. (1989) Toxicity of eosinophil cationic proteins for guinea pig tracheal epithelium *in vitro*. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 139, 801–805.

90 Minnicozzi, M., Duran, W. N., Gleich, G. J. and Egan, R. W. (1994) Eosinophil granule proteins increase microvascular macromolecular transport in the hamster cheek pouch. J. Immunol. 153, 2664–2670.

91 Piliponsky, A. M., Gleich, G. J., Bar, I. and Levi-Schaffer, F. (2002) Effects of eosinophils on mast cells: a new pathway for the perpetuation of allergic inflammation. Mol. Immunol. 38, 1369.

92 Nonaka, M., Nonaka, R., Woolley, K., Adelroth, E., Miura, K., Okhawara, Y., Glibetic, M., Nakano, K., O'Byrne, P., Dolovich, J. and Manel, J. (1995) Distinct immunohistochemical localization of IL-4 in human inflamed airway tissues. IL-4 is localized to eosinophils *in vivo* and is released by peripheral blood eosinophils. J. Immunol. 155, 3234–3244.

93 Woerly, G., Lacy, P., Younes, A. B., Roger, N., Loiseau, S., Moqbel, R. and Capron, M. (2002) Human eosinophils express and release IL-13 following CD28-dependent activation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 72, 769–779.

94 Tenscher, K., Metzner, B., Schopf, E., Norgauer, J. and Czech, W. (1996) Recombinant human eotaxin induces oxygen radical production, Ca(2+)-mobilization, actin reorganization, and CD11b upregulation in human eosinophils via a pertussis toxin-sensitive heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein. Blood 88, 3195–3199.

95 Kearley, J., Barker, J. E., Robinson, D. S. and Lloyd, C. M. (2005) Resolution of airway inflammation and hyperactivity after *in vivo* transfer of CD4⁺CD25⁺ regulatory T cells is interleukin 10 dependent. J. Exp. Med. 202, 1539–1547.

96 Lloyd, C. M., Gonzalo, J. A., Nguyen, T., Delaney, T., Tian, J., Oettgen, H., Coyle, A. J. and Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. (2001) Resolution of bronchial hyperresponsiveness and pulmonary inflammation is associated with IL-3 and tissue leukocyte apoptosis. J. Immunol. 166, 2033–2040.

97 Uller, L., Lloyd, C. M., Rydell-Tormanen, K., Persson, C. G. and Erjefalt, J. S. (2006) Effects of steroid treatment on lung CC chemokines, apoptosis and transepithelial cell clearance during development and resolution of allergic airway inflammation. Clin. Exp. Allergy 36, 111–121.

98 O'Byrne, P. M. and Inman, M. D. (2003) Airway hyperresponsiveness. Chest 123, 411S-416S.

99 Frigas, E., Loegering, D. A., Solley, G. O., Farrow, G. M. and Gleich, G. J. (1981) Elevated levels of the eosinophil granule major basic protein in the sputum of patients with bronchial asthma. Mayo Clin. Proc. 56, 345–353.

100 Roffel, A. F., Elzinga, C. R. and Zaagsma, J. (1990) Muscarinic M3 receptors mediate contraction of human central and peripheral airway smooth muscle. Pulm. Pharmacol. 3, 47–51.

101 Fryer, A. D. and Maclagan, J. (1984) Muscarinic inhibitory receptors in pulmonary parasympathetic nerves in the guinea-pig. Br. J. Pharmacol. 83, 973–978.

102 Costello, R. W., Schofield, B. H., Kephart, G. M., Gleich, G. J., Jacoby, D. B. and Fryer, A. D. (1997) Localization of eosinophils to airway nerves and effect on neuronal M2 muscarinic receptor function. Am. J. Physiol. 273, L93–103.

103 Jacoby, D. B., Gleich, G. J. and Fryer, A. D. (1993) Human eosinophil major basic protein is an endogenous allosteric antagonist at the inhibitory muscarinic M2 receptor. J. Clin. Invest. 91, 1314–1318.

104 Elborn, C. L., Jacoby, D. B. and Fryer, A. D. (1995) Pretreatment with an antibody to interleukin-5 prevents loss of pulmonary M2 muscarinic receptor function in antigen-

105 Hamid, Q., Tulic, M. K., Liu, M. C. and Moqbel, R. (2003) Inflammatory cells in asthma: mechanisms and implications for therapy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, S5-S12; discussion S12–S17.

106 Justice, J.P., Borchers, M.T., Crosby, J.R., Hines, E.M., Shen, H.H., Ochkur, S.I., McGarry, M.P., Lee, N.A. and Lee, J.J. (2003) Ablation of eosinophils leads to a reduction of allergen-induced pulmonary pathology. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 284, L169–L178.

107 Shen, H. H., Ochkur, S. I., McGarry, M. P., Crosby, J. R., Hines, E. M., Borchers, M. T., Wang, H., Biechelle, T. L., O’Neill, K. R., Ansay, T. L., Colbert, D. C., Cormier, S. A., Justice, J. P., Lee, N. A. and Lee, J. J. (2003) A causative relationship exists between eosinophils and the development of allergic pulmonary pathologies in the mouse. J. Immunol. 170, 3296–3305.

108 Grunig, G., Warnock, M., Wakil, A. E., Venkayya, R., Brombacher, F., Rennick, D. M., Sheppard, D., Mohrs, M., Donaldson, D. D., Locksley, R. M. and Corry, D. B. (1998) Requirement for IL-13 independently of IL-4 in experimental asthma. Science 282, 2261–2263.

109 Mattes, J., Yang, M., Mahalingam, S., Kuehr, J., Webb, D. C., Simson, L., Hogan, S. P., Koskinen, A., McKenzie, A. N., Dent, L. A., Rothenberg, M. E., Matthaei, K. I., Young, I. G. and Foster, P. S. (2002) Intrinsic defect in T cell production of interleukin (IL)-13 in the absence of both IL-5 and eotaxin precludes the development of eosinophilia and airways hyperreactivity in experimental asthma. J. Exp. Med. 195, 1433–1444.

110 McMillan, S. J. and Lloyd, C. M. (2004) Prolonged allergen challenge in mice leads to persistent airway remodelling. Clin. Exp. Allergy 34, 497–507.

111 Scott, K. A. and Wardlaw, A. J. (2006) Eosinophilic airway disorders. Semin. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 27, 128–133.

112 Brightling, C. E., Bradding, P., Symon, F. A., Holgate, S. T., Wardlaw, A. J. and Pavord, I. D. (2002) Mast-cell infiltration of airway smooth muscle in asthma. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 1699–1705.

113 Denzler, K. L., Farmer, S. C., Crosby, J. R., Borchers, M., Cieslewicz, G., Larson, K. A., Cormier-Regard, S., Lee, N. A. and Lee, J. J. (2000) Eosinophil major basic protein-1 does not contribute to allergen-induced airway pathologies in mouse models of asthma. J. Immunol. 165, 5509–5517.

114 Spergel, J. M., Mizoguchi, E., Brewer, J. P., Martin, T. R., Bhan, A. K. and Geha, R. S. (1998) Epicutaneous sensitization with protein antigen induces localized allergic dermatitis and hyperresponsiveness to methacholine after single exposure to aerosolized antigen in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 101, 1614–1622.

115 Wegmann, M., Goggel, R., Sel, S., Sel, S., Erb, K. J., Kalkbrenner, F., Renz, H. and Garn, H. (2007) Effect of a low molecular weight CCR-3 antagonist on chronic experimental asthma. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 36, 61–67.

116 Flood-Page, P., Menzies-Gow, A., Phipps, S., Ying, S., Wangoo, A., Ludwig, M. S., Barnes, N., Robinson, D. and Kay, A. B. (2003) Anti-IL-5 treatment reduces deposition of ECM proteins in the bronchial subepithelial basement membrane of mild atopic asthmatics. J. Clin. Invest. 112, 1029–1036.

117 Lee, J. J., McGarry, M. P., Farmer, S. C., Denzler, K. L., Larson, K. A., Carrigan, P.E., Brenneise, I.E., Horton, M.A., Haczku, A., Gelfand, E. W., Leikauf, G. D. and Lee, N. A. (1997) Interleukin-5 expression in the lung epithelium of transgenic mice leads to pulmonary changes pathognomonic of asthma. J. Exp. Med. 185, 2143–2156.

118 Hogan, S. P., Matthaei, K. I., Young, J. M., Koskinen, A., Young, I. G. and Foster, P. S. (1998) A novel T cell-regulated mechanism modulating allergen-induced airways hyperreactivity in BALB/c mice independently of IL-4 and IL-5. J. Immunol. 161, 1501–1519.

119 Corry, D. B., Folkesson, H. G., Warnock, M. L., Erle, D. J., Matthay, M. A., Wiener-Kronish, J. P. and Locksley, R. M. (1996) Interleukin 4, but not interleukin 5 or eosinophils, is required in a murine model of acute airway hyperreactivity. J. Exp. Med. 183, 109–117.

120 Lee, J. J., Dimina, D., Macias, M. P., Ochkur, S. I., McGarry, M. P., O’Neill, K. R., Protheroe, C., Pero, R., Nguyen, T., Cormier, S. A., Lenkiewicz, E., Colbert, D., Rinaldi, L., Ackerman, S. J., Irvin, C. G. and Lee, N. A. (2004) Defining a link with asthma in mice congenitally deficient in eosinophils. Science 305, 1773–1776.

121 Siegle, J. S., Hansbro, N., Herbert, C., Yang, M., Foster, P. S. and Kumar, R. K. (2006) Airway hyperreactivity in exacerbation of chronic asthma is independent of eosinophilic inflammation. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 35, 565–570.

122 McDonald, P.P., Fadok, V. A., Bratton, D. and Henson, P. M. (1999) Transcriptional and translational regulation of inflammatory mediator production by endogenous TGF-beta in macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells. J. Immunol. 163, 6164–6172.

123 Voehringer, D., Reese, T. A., Huang, X., Shinkai, K. and Locksley, R. M. (2006) Type 2 immunity is controlled by IL-4/IL-13 expression in hematopoietic non-eosinophil cells of the innate immune system. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1435–1446.

124 Fulkerson, P.C., Fischetti, C. A., McBride, M. L., Hassman, L. M., Hogan, S. P. and Rothenberg, M. E. (2006) A central regulatory role for eosinophils and the eotaxin/CCR3 axis in chronic experimental allergic airway inflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 16418–16423.

125 Elias, J. A., Zhu, Z., Chupp, G. and Homer, R. J. (1999) Airway remodeling in asthma. J. Clin. Invest. 104, 1001–1006.

126 Kariyawasam, H. H. and Robinson, D. S. (2005) Airway remodeling in asthma: models and supermodels? Clin. Exp. Allergy 35, 117–121.

127 Pohunek, P., Warner, J. O., Turzikova, J., Kudrmann, J. and Roche, W. R. (2005) Markers of eosinophilic inflammation and tissue re-modelling in children before clinically diagnosed bronchial asthma. Pediatr. Allergy Immunol. 16, 43–51.

128 Minshall, E. M., Leung, D. Y., Martin, R. J., Song, Y. L., Cameron, L., Ernst, P. and Hamid, Q. (1997) Eosinophil-associated TGF-beta1 mRNA expression and airways fibrosis in bronchial asthma. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 17, 326–333.

129 Cho, J. Y., Miller, M., Baek, K. J., Han, J. W., Nayar, J., Lee, S. Y., McElwain, K., McElwain, S., Friedman, S. and Broide, D. H. (2004) Inhibition of airway remodeling in IL-5-deficient mice. J. Clin. Invest. 113, 551–560.

130 Boxall, C., Holgate, S. T. and Davies, D. E. (2006) The contribution of transforming growth factor-beta and epidermal growth factor signalling to airway remodelling in chronic asthma. Eur. Respir. J. 27, 208–229.

131 Fine, A. and Goldstein, R. H. (1993) Regulation of type I collagen mRNA translation by TGF-beta. Reg. Immunol. 5, 218–224.

132 Kenyon, N.J., Ward, R. W., McGrew, G. and Last, J. A. (2003) TGF-beta1 causes airway fibrosis and increased collagen I and III mRNA in mice. Thorax 58, 772–777.

133 Richter, A., Puddicombe, S. M., Lordan, J. L., Bucchieri, F., Wilson, S. J., Djukanovic, R., Dent, G., Holgate, S. T. and Davies, D. E. (2001) The contribution of interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 to the epithelial-mesenchymal trophic unit in asthma. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 25, 385–391.

134 Masur, S. K., Dewal, H. S., Dinh, T. T., Erenburg, I. and Petridou, S. (1996) Myofibroblasts differentiate from fibroblasts when plated at low density. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 4219–4223.

135 Mori, L., Bellini, A., Stacey, M. A., Schmidt, M. and Mattoli, S. (2005) Fibrocytes contribute to the myofibroblast population in wounded skin and originate from the bone marrow. Exp. Cell Res. 304, 81–90.

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 64, 2007

136 Wicks, J., Haitchi, H. M., Holgate, S. T., Davies, D. E. and Powell, R. M. (2006) Enhanced upregulation of smooth muscle related transcripts by TGF beta2 in asthmatic (myo) fibroblasts. Thorax 61, 313–319.

137 McMillan, S. J., Xanthou, G. and Lloyd, C. M. (2005) Manipulation of allergen-induced airway remodeling by treatment with anti-TGF-beta antibody: effect on the Smad signaling pathway. J. Immunol. 174, 5774–5780.

138 Tanaka, H., Komai, M., Nagao, K., Ishizaki, M., Kajiwara, D., Takatsu, K., Delespesse, G. and Nagai, H. (2004) Role of interleukin-5 and eosinophils in allergen-induced airway remodeling in mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 31, 62–68.

139 Hara, K., Hasegawa, T., Ooi, H., Koya, T., Tanabe, Y., Tsukada, H., Igarashi, K., Suzuki, E., Arakawa, M. and Gejyo, F. (2001) Inhibitory role of eosinophils on cell surface plasmin generation by bronchial epithelial cells: inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor beta. Lung 179, 9–20.

140 Hoshino, M., Takahashi, M. and Aoike, N. (2001) Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, and angiogenin immunoreactivity in asthmatic airways and its relationship to angiogenesis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 107, 295–301.

141 Pegorier, S., Wagner, L. A., Gleich, G. J. and Pretolani, M. (2006) Eosinophil-derived cationic proteins activate the synthesis of remodeling factors by airway epithelial cells. J. Immunol. 177, 4861–4869.

142 McMillan, S.J., Kearley, J., Campbell, J.D., Zhu, X.W., Larbi, K. Y., Shipley, J.M., Senior, R. M., Nourshargh, S. and Lloyd, C. M. (2004) Matrix metalloproteinase-9 deficiency results in enhanced allergen-induced airway inflammation. J. Immunol. 172, 2586–2594.

143 Bandeira-Melo, C. and Weller, P. F. (2003) Eosinophils and cysteinyl leukotrienes. Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids 69, 135–143.

144 Beller, T. C., Friend, D. S., Maekawa, A., Lam, B. K., Austen, K. F. and Kanaoka, Y. (2004) Cysteinyl leukotriene 1 receptor controls the severity of chronic pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 3047–3052.

145 Lee, J. J. and Lee, N. A. (2005) Eosinophil degranulation: an evolutionary vestige or a universally destructive effector function? Clin. Exp. Allergy 35, 986–994.

146 Grewe, M., Czech, W., Morita, A., Werfel, T., Klammer, M., Kapp, A., Ruzicka, T., Schopf, E. and Krutmann, J. (1998) Human eosinophils produce biologically active IL-12: implications for control of T cell responses. J. Immunol. 161, 415–420.

147 Lamkhioued, B., Gounni, A. S., Aldebert, D., Delaporte, E., Prin, L., Capron, A. and Capron, M. (1996) Synthesis of type 1 (IFN gamma) and type 2 (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10) cytokines by human eosinophils. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 796, 203–208.

148 Nakajima, H., Gleich, G. J. and Kita, H. (1996) Constitutive production of IL-4 and IL-10 and stimulated production of IL-8 by normal peripheral blood eosinophils. J. Immunol. 156, 4859–4866.

149 Shi, H. Z. (2004) Eosinophils function as antigen-presenting cells. J. Leukoc. Biol. 76, 520–527.

150 Shi, H. Z., Humbles, A., Gerard, C., Jin, Z. and Weller, P. F. (2000) Lymph node trafficking and antigen presentation by endobronchial eosinophils. J. Clin. Invest. 105, 945–953.

151 MacKenzie, J. R., Mattes, J., Dent, L. A. and Foster, P. S. (2001) Eosinophils promote allergic disease of the lung by regulating CD4(+) Th2 lymphocyte function. J. Immunol. 167, 3146–3155.

152 Odemuyiwa, S.O., Ghahary, A., Li, Y., Puttagunta, L., Lee, J. E., Musat-Marcu, S., Ghahary, A. and Moqbel, R. (2004) Cutting edge: human eosinophils regulate T cell subset selection through indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. J. Immunol. 173, 5909–5913.

153 Hamelmann, E. and Gelfand, E. W. (2001) IL-5-induced airway eosinophilia – the key to asthma? Immunol. Rev. 179, 182–191.


Biomedicine & Diseases: Review Article 1287

154 Mathur, M., Herrmann, K., Li, X., Qin, Y., Weinstock, J., Elliott, D., Monahan, J. and Padrid, P. (1999) TRFK-5 reverses established airway eosinophilia but not established hyperresponsiveness in a murine model of chronic asthma. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 159, 580–587.

155 Menzies-Gow, A., Flood-Page, P., Sehmi, R., Burman, J., Hamid, Q., Robinson, D.S., Kay, A. B. and Denburg, J. (2003) Anti-IL-5 (mepolizumab) therapy induces bone marrow eosinophil maturation arrest and decreases eosinophil progenitors in the bronchial mucosa of atopic asthmatics. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, 714–719.

156 Leckie, M. J., ten Brinke, A., Khan, J., Diamant, Z., O’Connor, B. J., Walls, C. M., Mathur, A. K., Cowley, H. C., Chung, K. F., Djukanovic, R., Hansel, T. T., Holgate, S. T., Sterk, P. J. and Barnes, P. J. (2000) Effects of an interleukin-5 blocking monoclonal antibody on eosinophils, airway hyperresponsiveness, and the late asthmatic response. Lancet 356, 2144–2148.

157 Kips, J. C., O’Connor, B. J., Langley, S. J., Woodcock, A., Kerstjens, H. A., Postma, D. S., Danzig, M., Cuss, F. and Pauwels, R. A. (2003) Effect of SCH55700, a humanized anti-human interleukin-5 antibody, in severe persistent asthma: a pilot study. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 167, 1655–1659.

158 O’Byrne, P. M., Inman, M. D. and Parameswaran, K. (2001) The trials and tribulations of IL-5, eosinophils, and allergic asthma. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 108, 503–508.

159 De Lucca, G. V., Kim, U. T., Vargo, B. J., Duncia, J. V., Santella, J.B.3rd, Gardner, D.S., Zheng, C., Liauw, A., Wang, Z., Emmett, G., Wacker, D. A., Welch, P. K., Covington, M., Stowell, N. C., Wadman, E. A., Das, A. M., Davies, P., Yeleswaram, S., Graden, D. M., Solomon, K. A., Newton, R. C., Trainor, G.L., Decicco, C.P. and Ko, S.S. (2005) Discovery of CC chemokine receptor-3 (CCR3) antagonists with picomolar potency. J. Med. Chem. 48, 2194–2211.

160 Heath, H., Qin, S., Rao, P., Wu, L., LaRosa, G., Kassam, N., Ponath, P. D. and Mackay, C. R. (1997) Chemokine receptor usage by human eosinophils. The importance of CCR3 demonstrated using an antagonistic monoclonal antibody. J. Clin. Invest. 99, 178–184.

161 Ding, C., Li, J. and Zhang, X. (2004) Bertilimumab Cambridge Antibody Technology Group. Curr. Opin. Investig. Drugs 5, 1213–1218.

162 O’Donnell, M. C., Ackerman, S. J., Gleich, G. J. and Thomas, L. L. (1983) Activation of basophil and mast cell histamine release by eosinophil granule major basic protein. J. Exp. Med. 157, 1981–1991.

163 Moy, J. N., Gleich, G. J. and Thomas, L. L. (1990) Nontoxic activation of neutrophils by eosinophil granule major basic protein. Effect on superoxide anion generation and lysosomal enzyme release. J. Immunol. 145, 2626–2632.

164 Ayars, G. H., Altman, L. C., McManus, M. M., Agosti, J. M., Baker, C., Luchtel, D. L., Loegering, D. A. and Gleich, G. J. (1989) Injurious effect of the eosinophil peroxidase-hydrogen peroxide-halide system and major basic protein on human nasal epithelium in vitro. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 140, 125–131.

165 Wu, W., Chen, Y. and Hazen, S. L. (1999) Eosinophil peroxidase nitrates protein tyrosyl residues. Implications for oxidative damage by nitrating intermediates in eosinophilic inflammatory disorders. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 25933–25944.

166 Durack, D. T., Ackerman, S. J., Loegering, D. A. and Gleich, G. J. (1981) Purification of human eosinophil-derived neurotoxin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 5165–5169.

167 Gleich, G. J., Loegering, D. A., Bell, M. P., Checkel, J. L., Ackerman, S. J. and McKean, D. J. (1986) Biochemical and functional similarities between human eosinophil-derived neurotoxin and eosinophil cationic protein: homology with ribonuclease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 3146–3150.

168 Rosenberg, H. F., Ackerman, S. J. and Tenen, D. G. (1989) Human eosinophil cationic protein. Molecular cloning of a cytotoxin and helminthotoxin with ribonuclease activity. J. Exp. Med. 170, 163–176.

169 Matsunaga, Y., Shono, M., Takahashi, M., Tsuboi, Y., Ogawa, K. and Yamada, T. (2000) Regulation of lymphocyte proliferation by eosinophils via chymotrypsin-like protease activity and adhesion molecule interaction. Br. J. Pharmacol. 130, 1539–1546.

170 Zheutlin, L. M., Ackerman, S. J., Gleich, G. J. and Thomas, L. L. (1984) Stimulation of basophil and rat mast cell histamine release by eosinophil granule-derived cationic proteins. J. Immunol. 133, 2180–2185.

171 Hernnas, J., Sarnstrand, B., Lindroth, P., Peterson, C. G., Venge, P. and Malmstrom, A. (1992) Eosinophil cationic protein alters proteoglycan metabolism in human lung fibroblast cultures. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 59, 352–363.

172 Kroegel, C. and Matthys, H. (1993) Platelet-activating factor-induced human eosinophil activation. Generation and release of cyclo-oxygenase metabolites in human blood eosinophils from asthmatics. Immunology 78, 279–285.

173 Nakajima, T., Yamada, H., Iikura, M., Miyamasu, M., Izumi, S., Shida, H., Ohta, K., Imai, T., Yoshie, O., Mochizuki, M., Schroder, J. M., Morita, Y., Yamamoto, K. and Hirai, K. (1998) Intracellular localization and release of eotaxin from normal eosinophils. FEBS Lett. 434, 226–230.

174 Ying, S., Meng, Q., Taborda-Barata, L., Corrigan, C. J., Barkans, J., Assoufi, B., Moqbel, R., Durham, S. R. and Kay, A. B. (1996) Human eosinophils express messenger RNA encoding RANTES and store and release biologically active RANTES protein. Eur. J. Immunol. 26, 70–76.

175 Izumi, S., Hirai, K., Miyamasu, M., Takahashi, Y., Misaki, Y., Takaishi, T., Morita, Y., Matsushima, K., Ida, N., Nakamura, H., Kasahara, T. and Ito, K. (1997) Expression and regulation of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 by human eosinophils. Eur. J. Immunol. 27, 816–824.

176 Yousefi, S., Hemmann, S., Weber, M., Holzer, C., Hartung, K., Blaser, K. and Simon, H. U. (1995) IL-8 is expressed by human peripheral blood eosinophils. Evidence for increased secretion in asthma. J. Immunol. 154, 5481–5490.

177 Costa, J. J., Matossian, K., Resnick, M. B., Beil, W. J., Wong, D. T., Gordon, J. R., Dvorak, A. M., Weller, P. F. and Galli, S. J. (1993) Human eosinophils can express the cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha and macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha. J. Clin. Invest. 91, 2673–2684.

178 Levi-Schaffer, F., Barkans, J., Newman, T. M., Ying, S., Wakelin, M., Hohenstein, R., Barak, V., Lacy, P., Kay, A. B. and Moqbel, R. (1996) Identification of interleukin-2 in human peripheral blood eosinophils. Immunology 87, 155–161.

179 Hamid, Q., Barkans, J., Meng, Q., Ying, S., Abrams, J. S., Kay, A. B. and Moqbel, R. (1992) Human eosinophils synthesize and secrete interleukin-6, *in vitro*. Blood 80, 1496–1501.

180 Lim, K. G., Wan, H. C., Bozza, P. T., Resnick, M. B., Wong, D. T., Cruikshank, W. W., Kornfeld, H., Center, D. M. and Weller, P. F. (1996) Human eosinophils elaborate the lymphocyte chemoattractants. IL-16 (lymphocyte chemoattractant factor) and RANTES. J. Immunol. 156, 2566–2570.

181 Molet, S., Hamid, Q., Davoine, F., Nutku, E., Taha, R., Page, N., Olivenstein, R., Elias, J. and Chakir, J. (2001) IL-17 is increased in asthmatic airways and induces human bronchial fibroblasts to produce cytokines. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 108, 430–438.

182 Rand, T. H., Silberstein, D. S., Kornfeld, H. and Weller, P. F. (1991) Human eosinophils express functional interleukin 2 receptors. J. Clin. Invest. 88, 825–832.

183 Lampinen, M., Hakansson, L. and Venge, P. (2001) Interleukin-2 inhibits eosinophil migration but is counteracted by IL-5 priming. Clin. Exp. Allergy 31, 249–258.

184 Gomes, I., Mathur, S. K., Espenshade, B. M., Mori, Y., Varga, J. and Ackerman, S. J. (2005) Eosinophil-fibroblast interactions induce fibroblast IL-6 secretion and extracellular matrix gene expression: implications in fibrogenesis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 116, 796–804.

185 Doucet, C., Brouty-Boye, D., Pottin-Clemenceau, C., Jasmin, C., Canonica, G. W. and Azzarone, B. (1998) IL-4 and IL-13 specifically increase adhesion molecule and inflammatory cytokine expression in human lung fibroblasts. Int. Immunol. 10, 1421–1433.

186 Minshall, E., Chakir, J., Laviolette, M., Molet, S., Zhu, Z., Olivenstein, R., Elias, J. A. and Hamid, Q. (2000) IL-11 expression is increased in severe asthma: association with epithelial cells and eosinophils. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 105, 232–238.

187 Kumar, R. K., Herbert, C., Yang, M., Koskinen, A. M., McKenzie, A. N. and Foster, P. S. (2002) Role of interleukin-13 in eosinophil accumulation and airway remodelling in a mouse model of chronic asthma. Clin. Exp. Allergy 32, 1104–1111.

188 Phipps, S., Ying, S., Wangoo, A., Ong, Y. E., Levi-Schaffer, F. and Kay, A. B. (2002) The relationship between allergen-induced tissue eosinophilia and markers of repair and remodeling in human atopic skin. J. Immunol. 169, 4604–4612.

189 Solomon, A., Aloe, L., Pe'er, J., Frucht-Pery, J., Bonini, S., Bonini, S. and Levi-Schaffer, F. (1998) Nerve growth factor is preformed in and activates human peripheral blood eosinophils. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 102, 454–460.

190 Elovic, A., Wong, D. T., Weller, P.F., Matossian, K. and Galli, S. J. (1994) Expression of transforming growth factors-alpha and beta 1 messenger RNA and product by eosinophils in nasal polyps. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 93, 864–869.

191 Booth, B. W., Adler, K. B., Bonner, J. C., Tournier, F. and Martin, L. D. (2001) Interleukin-13 induces proliferation of human airway epithelial cells *in vitro* via a mechanism mediated by transforming growth factor-alpha. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 25, 739–743.

192 Micera, A., Vigneti, E., Pickholtz, D., Reich, R., Pappo, O., Bonini, S., Maquart, F. X., Aloe, L. and Levi-Schaffer, F. (2001) Nerve growth factor displays stimulatory effects on human skin and lung fibroblasts, demonstrating a direct role for this factor in tissue repair. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 6162–6167.

193 Bostrom, H., Willetts, K., Pekny, M., Leveen, P., Lindahl, P., Hedstrand, H., Pekna, M., Hellstrom, M., Gebre-Medhin, S., Schalling, M., Nilsson, M., Kurland, S., Tornell, J., Heath, J. K. and Betsholtz, C. (1996) PDGF-A signaling is a critical event in lung alveolar myofibroblast development and alveogenesis. Cell 85, 863–873.

194 Ohno, I., Nitta, Y., Yamauchi, K., Hoshi, H., Honma, M., Woolley, K., O'Byrne, P., Dolovich, J., Jordana, M. and Tamura, G. (1995) Eosinophils as a potential source of platelet-derived growth factor B-chain (PDGF-B) in nasal polyposis and bronchial asthma. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 13, 639–647.

195 Bosse, Y., Thompson, C., Stankova, J. and Rola-Pleszczyński, M. (2006) Fibroblast growth factor 2 and transforming growth factor betal synergy in human bronchial smooth muscle cell proliferation. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 34, 746–753.

196 Powell, P.P., Klagsbrun, M., Abraham, J. A. and Jones, R. C. (1993) Eosinophils expressing heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor mRNA localize around lung microvessels in pulmonary hypertension. Am. J. Pathol. 143, 784–793.

197 Zhang, L., Rice, A. B., Adler, K., Sannes, P., Martin, L., Gladwell, W., Koo, J. S., Gray, T. E. and Bonner, J. C. (2001) Vanadium stimulates human bronchial epithelial cells to produce heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor: a mitogen for lung fibroblasts. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 24, 123–131.

198 Schwingshackl, A., Duszyk, M., Brown, N. and Moqbel, R. (1999) Human eosinophils release matrix metalloproteinase-9 on stimulation with TNF-alpha. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 104, 983–989.

199 Okada, S., Kita, H., George, T.J., Gleich, G. J. and Leiferman, K. M. (1997) Migration of eosinophils through basement membrane components *in vitro*: role of matrix metalloproteinase-9. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 17, 519–528.

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 64, 2007

Biomedicine & Diseases: Review Article 1289

200 Gauthier, M.C., Racine, C., Ferland, C., Flamand, N., Chakir, J., Tremblay, G.M. and Laviolette, M. (2003) Expression of membrane type-4 matrix metalloproteinase (metalloproteinase-17) by human eosinophils. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 35, 1667–1673.

201 Fourie, A.M., Coles, F., Moreno, V. and Karlsson, L. (2003) Catalytic activity of ADAM8, ADAM15, and MDC-L (ADAM28) on synthetic peptide substrates and in ectodomain cleavage of CD23. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 30469–30477.

202 Matsuno, O., Miyazaki, E., Nureki, S., Ueno, T., Kumamoto, T. and Higuchi, Y. (2006) Role of ADAM8 in experimental asthma. Immunol Lett. 102, 67–73.

203 Tateno, H., Crocker, P.R. and Paulson, J.C. (2005) Mouse Siglec-F and human Siglec-8 are functionally convergent

paralogs that are selectively expressed on eosinophils and recognize 6′-sulfo-sialyl Lewis X as a preferred glycan ligand. Glycobiology 15, 1125–1135.

204 Tedla, N., Bandeira-Melo, C., Tassinari, P., Sloane, D.E., Sampaski, M., Cosman, D., Borges, L., Weller, P.F. and Arm, J.P. (2003) Activation of human eosinophils through leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor 7. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 1174–1179.

205 Munitz, A., Bachelet, I., Fraenkel, S., Katz, G., Mandelboim, O., Simon, H.U., Moretta, L., Colonna, M. and Levi-Schaffer, F. (2005) 2B4 (CD244) is expressed and functional on human eosinophils. J. Immunol. 174, 110–118.

---

To access this journal online:

http://www.birkhauser.ch/CMLS
