
# Is inhibition of the renin–angiotensin system a new treatment option for Alzheimer’s disease?

**Patrick G Kehoe, Gordon K Wilcock**

Findings from longitudinal and cross-sectional studies suggest an association between high blood pressure and dementia, and in turn the use of antihypertensives has been suggested to reduce incidence of dementia. Alzheimer’s disease, the most common cause of dementia, is characterised in part by the deposition of amyloid β protein (Aβ) in the brain. Reduction of Aβ load is now a major therapeutic strategy. In recent years the renin–angiotensin system, already of recognised importance in the pathogenesis of hypertension, has become a source of interest in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. This review explores molecular, genetic, and clinical studies that might help explain the relation between the renin–angiotensin system, hypertension, and Alzheimer’s disease and whether treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and similar treatment strategies have a part to play in the management of the disease.

## Introduction

Hypertension is a risk factor for cerebrovascular disease (stroke, ischaemic white-matter lesions, silent infarcts), coronary heart disease (myocardial infarction), and increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Currently, hypertension is typically defined as either sustained systolic blood pressure of 140 mm Hg or more or diastolic blood pressure of 90 mm Hg or more at rest. Treatment of hypertension to achieve these targets is beneficial in lessening morbidity and mortality as well as improving quality of life and preserving cognitive function. Incidence of the disorder correlates with advancing age and has an estimated prevalence of 50% in people older than 70 years.

Dementia is defined as memory impairment combined with one or more deficits in higher mental functions—eg, abstract thinking, orientation, judgment, or higher cortical disturbances such as aphasia, agnosia, or personality disorders. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia contributing to around two-thirds of all dementias, and, as is the case for hypertension, the greatest risk factor for the development of Alzheimer’s disease is advancing age.

A key pathological feature of Alzheimer’s disease is the production of a 40–42 amino acid peptide called amyloid beta (Aβ), which is the building brick for Aβ protein accumulation and deposition in the brain—eg, as extracellular senile plaques or within the walls of the cerebrovasculature. Although extracellular senile plaques are one of the primary hallmarks for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, intravascular deposition of Aβ within the walls of some smaller blood vessels, called cerebral amyloid angiopathy, occurs in more than 90% of patients with Alzheimer’s disease and to a lesser extent in about 30% of non-demented elderly people. The formation of Aβ is the result of sequential cleavage of a membrane-bound amyloid precursor protein (APP) by several enzyme systems—ie, cleavage by β-secretase and then γ-secretase enzymes. Current drug development includes strategies to reduce Aβ deposition through inhibition or modulation of β-secretase and γ-secretase.

activity on APP or through increased promotion of its removal.

Much epidemiological evidence points to a link between hypertension, risk factors for atherosclerotic vascular disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. In particular, raised blood pressure in mid-life precedes the development of Alzheimer’s disease, but curiously this hypertension reduces in the years immediately preceding dementia onset. Some believe that this reduction is a secondary event in Alzheimer’s disease. Suggested mechanisms to explain the association between hypertension and dementia or Alzheimer’s disease include hypertension-related pathologies, such as cerebrovascular disease, atherosclerosis, and arteriosclerosis, or indeed the clustering of other vascular factors such as diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hypercholesterolaemia, all of which have been linked to Alzheimer’s disease. Reports of an interaction between age and hypertension, on atrophy of the temporal and occipital regions of the brain, of high systolic blood pressure being associated with low brain weight, and of high systolic and diastolic blood pressures being associated with increased prevalence of the neurofibrillary tangles in hippocampal brain regions are also suggestive of a role for hypertension in Alzheimer’s disease.

## Hypertension treatment and dementia

Renin–angiotensin system and hypertension treatment

The classic view of the renin–angiotensin system was that renin acts on angiotensinogen to produce angiotensin 1, which in turn is cleaved by ACE to form the active angiotensin 2. The latter, a potent vasoconstrictor, exerts its hypertensive effects by its action on two receptors (AT1 and AT2). However, in the past two decades our view of the composition of the renin–angiotensin system pathway has been substantially broadened (figure 1) to accommodate the identification of several angiotensin 1 and angiotensin 2 metabolites and putative receptors, about which varying amounts of information is available with respect to biological function and relevance.

Personal View

Hypertension, stroke, and dementia

Two of the largest studies of the use of antihypertensive treatments for the reduction of stroke incidence, the Systolic Hypertension in Europe (SYST-EUR) trial<sup>17</sup> and the Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study (PROGRESS),<sup>18</sup> have both yielded interesting data for dementia. SYST-EUR was a double-blind placebo-controlled trial involving more than 2000 participants and included a side project that examined the incidence of vascular dementia following treatment of older patients with hypertension with a calcium-channel blocker (nitrendipine), possibly in addition to an ACE inhibitor (enalapril) with or without a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide).<sup>18</sup> The trial follow-up was limited to only 2 years because there was early evidence of a reduction in stroke, but the incidence of dementia, vascular dementia, and Alzheimer's disease was also shown to be reduced.<sup>19</sup> A further 2 year follow-up after the double-blind controlled period also showed reduced risk for both vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease.<sup>19</sup>

Similarly, PROGRESS was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving more than 6000 patients with a previous stroke or ischaemic attack. All participants were allocated either active treatments involving perindopril (an ACE inhibitor) and, where tolerated, indapamide (a diuretic) or matching placebo.<sup>18</sup> After a follow-up of nearly 4 years, dementia and cognitive decline were shown to be reduced in the treatment group.<sup>18</sup>

In summary, the findings from these and other studies suggest that ACE inhibitors with or without diuretics would seem to reduce cognitive decline, but mainly in stroke-related dementia.<sup>19,20</sup> Calcium-channel blockers also seem to offer some degree of benefit.<sup>20</sup> However, β blockers with or without diuretics seem to have no effect on cognitive impairment. By contrast with the findings of these two large studies another large study undertaken by Khachaturian and co-workers,<sup>21</sup> which involved more than 3000 participants, revealed increased protection from Alzheimer's disease with the use of antihypertensive medication as a whole. However, in this study, which involved the Cache County cohort in Utah, USA,<sup>22</sup> when the consequences of different types of antihypertensives were examined, varying effects were observed. Khachaturian and colleagues noted that both β blockers and diuretics had the lowest associated risk for incidence of Alzheimer's disease based on hazard ratios adjusted for age, sex, education, number of APOE ε4 alleles, cholesterol, diabetes, myocardial infarction, and stroke (0·53 and 0·61, respectively). Calcium-channel blockers had slightly higher adjusted hazard ratios (0·86), but this finding was still indicative of a protective effect (ie, a value less than 1).<sup>21</sup> By contrast, ACE inhibitors were shown to be the only drug class to potentially be associated with a slight increased incidence of Alzheimer's disease (adjusted hazard ratio 1·13).<sup>21</sup>

Various pharmacological and lifestyle options are available to help manage hypertension. Diuretics, β blockers, calcium-channel blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and α blockers are all commonly used classes of antihypertensives with similar effectiveness. Angiotensin-receptor blockers, which are newer than but act in the same biological pathway as ACE inhibitors, are also rapidly gaining recognition as an effective and well-tolerated class of antihypertensive. In addition to targeting ACE and angiotensin 2 receptors to treat hypertension, further emerging avenues include those that target inhibition of renin,<sup>14</sup> aminopeptidase A,<sup>15</sup> and neprilysin,<sup>16</sup> which shares targets with ACE (figure 1).

Clinical observations

The possible effect of antihypertensive treatments on Alzheimer's disease has been difficult to assess because, until recently, many previous epidemiological studies measured and categorised cognitive performance or decline in a general sense rather than studying specific disease types. The contribution of stroke, which can be caused by hypertension, to dementia (including Alzheimer's disease) and to cognitive decline must also be considered when investigating the effect of hypertension on cognition in epidemiological studies.

Figure 1: Renin-angiotensin system

REN=renin. NEP=neprilysin. AP-A=aminopeptidase. ACE=angiotensin converting enzyme. ACE-2=human angiotensin converting enzyme homologue. AP-N=aminopeptidase N. AP-B=aminopeptidase B. DAP=dipeptidyl aminopeptidases. PO=propyl oligopeptidase. PCP=carboxypeptidase. TO=thimet oligopeptidase.

Hypertension and Alzheimer's disease

In addition to the study by Khachaturian and co-workers,²¹ there was a previous study of the incidence of Alzheimer's disease in elderly Japanese patients with hypertension (n=4124) who were treated continuously with either ACE inhibitors or other antihypertensive drugs over a 10 year period.²³ In this study, by contrast with the findings of Khachaturian and colleagues,²¹ Ohruí and co-workers²³ showed that ACE inhibitors had a beneficial effect on the rate of cognitive decline. However, the observations of Ohruí and co-workers were based on examination of the effects of those ACE inhibitors believed to cross the blood-brain barrier—ie, brain-penetrating drugs—which was not a concept examined in any depth by Khachaturian and co-workers.²¹,²³ Following these initial observations, Ohruí and colleagues then undertook a randomised, three-arm, parallel group trial to investigate the use of ACE inhibitors as a possible treatment for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease in a cohort of 162 individuals. In addition to treatment with a cholinesterase inhibitor, patients were also treated for 1 year with either a brain-penetrating ACE inhibitor (perindopril or captopril; n=51), a non-brain-penetrating ACE inhibitor (enalapril or imidapril; n=53), or a calcium-channel blocker (nifedipine or nilvadipine; n=58).²⁴ Significantly reduced decline in mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score—ie, a benefit—was observed in Alzheimer's disease patients assigned to the brain-penetrating ACE inhibitor group compared with either of the other two treatment groups.²⁴

These data are also consistent with findings of a smaller observational study undertaken by Rozzini and colleagues on individuals (n=74) with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which is a strong predictor of dementia and Alzheimer's disease.²⁵ After a year of follow-up, antihypertensive medication (ACE inhibitors in particular) were shown to be significantly associated with more stable MCI—ie, patients did not show further memory decline.²⁵ Both of these studies are also consistent with a recent study of cognitive performance and learning in rats. Jenkins and Chai²⁶ showed that two groups of rats, treated with differing concentrations of the ACE inhibitor, learnt the location of the submerged platform in the water maze task significantly faster than control rats over 5 training days, reflecting some memory enhancing effects.

There is a plausible biological rationale to support these observations. ACE inhibitors, through prevention of the formation of angiotensin 2 (figure 1), help to stop inhibition of potassium-mediated release of acetylcholine (a primary neurotransmitter in memory) in human and rat entorhinal cortex slices.²⁷ The effects of a rise in ACE activity, and changes in other components of the renin–angiotensin system that have been reported in Alzheimer's disease, would be reduced by use of ACE inhibitors.²⁸,²⁹

However, since cholinesterase inhibitors currently used to treat Alzheimer's disease have a limited effect, benefiting only a proportion of those to whom they are prescribed, it is possible that the effect of ACE inhibitors on cholinergic activity—ie, reduction of angiotensin-2-mediated depression of acetylcholine release—might also only be modest at best. Nevertheless, in those who respond, even these modest effects are often deemed very worthwhile and important to patients and carers with respect to quality of life.

Another possible explanation for the benefits of ACE inhibitors is that they increase brain substance P, which is normally degraded by ACE, which in turn is reported to augment the activity of neprilysin,²⁴ a recognised amyloid β degrading enzyme.³⁰ Important though the results may be, interpretation of the study by Ohruí and colleagues is limited by a lack of blinding when the treatments were given to patients in each study group, and therefore replication studies that also attempt to examine the underlying mechanisms would be of great benefit.

### In-vitro laboratory-based findings

These clinical findings seem to be at odds with data recently generated from in-vitro studies of cell lines by several independent groups.³¹⁻³³ In 2001, Hu and colleagues³² reported that human ACE inhibited Aβ aggregation deposition and fibril formation in vitro. They also showed that ACE reduced Aβ-mediated toxic effects on rat cells preincubated with Aβ. This protective effect was nullified if the ACE inhibitor lisinopril was added to the cultures.³²

Captopril, another ACE inhibitor, has also been shown to significantly block the ability of ACE to inhibit Aβ-mediated cytotoxicity on rat cells grown in a similar system to that reported in the study by Hu and co-workers.³²,³³ Furthermore, Hemming and Selkoe³¹ have confirmed this finding and have further explored the role of ACE in Aβ degradation by investigating the effect of captopril on point mutations introduced to alter the activity at the two catalytic sites of ACE. Their findings suggested that increased, rather than decreased, Aβ deposition could be precipitated by ACE inhibitors,³¹ in keeping with our own hypotheses reported previously.²⁸,³⁴

In view of these data, it is noteworthy that reduced concentrations of plasma ACE, contributed to by a common polymorphism in the ACE gene (ACEI),³⁵ was shown to be associated with increased risk of Alzheimer's disease more than 5 years ago.³⁶ This association was greatly supported by a comprehensive meta-analysis of 39 case–control cohorts by Lehmann and colleagues.³⁴ Thus, the risk for Alzheimer's disease might be related to reduced availability of ACE, which could in turn increase concentrations of Aβ. This notion is further supported by studies of haplotypes of ACEI—ie, linear combinations of alleles from individual sites of variation along a gene or chromosome.³⁷,³⁸

Personal View

These questions are very relevant with respect to the renin–angiotensin system in general, where under normal circumstances there may be a delicate balance between positive and negative effects on the processes affecting cognitive function and which in turn are probably affected by the mechanism of action of ACE inhibitors (figure 2). Further studies to understand the balance between these positive and negative stimuli would be very helpful.

Perhaps some clues to understanding these apparent paradoxes—ie, evidence and mechanisms pointing to both potential harm on the one hand and benefit on the other—lie in an animal study that examined the role of ACE in Aβ degradation.⁴⁰ In three animal models tested, which involved wild-type mice, ACE-deficient (knockout) mice, and mice transgenic for a known human mutation that causes familial Alzheimer’s disease, ACE inhibition was undertaken and there seemed to be no significant alterations to steady-state Aβ concentrations. Thus, there was little evidence to support a role for ACE in the degradation of Aβ in vivo, by contrast with indications from previous in-vitro studies.³¹⁻³³

When trying to understand this situation it is important to remember that the data derived from the animal models might not equate to the human disease state. Not only might differences between species be an issue, but also the models are, for instance, experiments that were done in young animals (only 3 and 4 weeks of age) and therefore might not yet be prone to any possible age-related metabolic alterations that might occur. Further work in older animals will help to clarify this issue and will allow the effects of more chronic administration of ACE inhibitors to be studied.⁴⁰

We also need a better understanding of the association between mouse ACE and human Aβ. Is it appropriate to assume that mouse ACE handles human Aβ in the same manner as ACE in the human brain? Additional studies on these interactions are now needed. Furthermore, what is the effect of ACE inhibitors on oligomeric forms of Aβ—ie, much smaller and barely soluble collections of Aβ that indicate the earliest forms of Aβ aggregation—which could be more important than plaque amyloid to cognitive deterioration?⁴¹ Furthermore, what is the effect of ACE inhibitors on cerebrovascular Aβ deposition (cerebral amyloid angiopathy)? These are all important questions that need further investigation.

Role of ACE inhibitors in Alzheimer’s disease

The key question is the mechanism by which people taking ACE inhibitors have reduced cognitive decline when the basis of their decline is thought to be partly due to the presence of Aβ, and yet ACE-inhibitor treatment might increase Aβ concentrations. Likewise, how might ACE inhibitors provide benefit when they create an ACE enzymatic environment that is similar to that resulting from genetic variants thought to be associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease?

Inhibition of the renin–angiotensin system

If ACE were to significantly contribute to brain degradation of Aβ is it conceivable that contrary to the short-term cognitive gains reported thus far in clinical studies,¹⁸,²⁴,²⁵,⁴² ACE inhibitors could mediate increased or more rapid cognitive decline in the long term? The preliminary animal studies discussed above may suggest otherwise.⁴⁰,⁴³ Nevertheless, until there is further clarification, people with pre-existing low concentrations of ACE (especially genetically predetermined) could have

Figure 2: Proposed interaction between the renin–angiotensin system and APP metabolism

The putative interaction between the ACE pathway and the APP metabolism pathway that leads to the formation of Aβ is illustrated. Under normal (ie, drug-free conditions) ACE can have the positive potential (green arrow) to degrade Aβ that is formed from APP processing. The amount of ACE available to do this is partly genetically linked such that some genotypes that are found to have increased prevalence in Alzheimer’s disease are also associated with lower levels of ACE. Under this model it is also clear that following the action of ACE on angiotensin 1 there may be a negative effect (blue arrows) on cognitive performance through angiotensin-2-mediated depression of acetylcholine (ACh) release and also negative effects with respect to increased probability of hypertension. With the introduction of an ACE inhibitor, which will negatively affect ACE activity, the positive benefits to Aβ degradation may be reduced or abolished, but equally the negative effects resulting from angiotensin 2 action on either ACh release or hypertension are reduced. With the introduction of an angiotensin-receptor blocker (ARB) the successful management of angiotensin-2-mediated hypertension and reduced ACh release are maintained while still allowing ACE activity to go unaltered and potentially act to positively reduce Aβ concentrations. The relation of ACE genotype with respect to effects of ACE inhibitors and ARBs is unclear.

Additional supportive findings are available from imaging studies—eg, people with the ACE1 variants associated with Alzheimer’s disease risk were shown to have reduced hippocampus and amygdala volume. However, the only post-mortem study undertaken up to now, which was a relatively small study and examined brain Aβ load and ACE genotype, found no significant associations between ACE1 variants and either increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease or Aβ load.³⁹
their natural Aβ degradative capacity further depleted by treatment with ACE inhibitors.²⁸

ACE inhibitors could also be mediating clinical benefit through an alternative compensatory mechanism associated with increased upregulation of neprilysin²⁴ (an Aβ degrading enzyme³⁰), which also operates within the renin-angiotensin system (figure 1). However, if this is the case, plans to develop dual ACE and neprilysin inhibitor compounds as anti-hypertensives¹⁶ could increase the risk for Alzheimer’s disease by similar mechanisms to those proposed above for ACE. This possibility is further emphasised by the findings of a post-mortem study that reported a significant reduction of neprilysin activity in brain homogenates of patients with Alzheimer’s disease compared with controls, and that loss of cerebrovascular-associated neprilysin in Alzheimer’s disease is inversely related to the severity of cerebral amyloid angiopathy.⁴⁴

Angiotensin-receptor blockers offer an alternative avenue for inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system by specifically blocking angiotensin 2 from mediating its actions through its receptors. In doing so this could reduce angiotensin-2-mediated inhibition of acetylcholine release and in turn improve cognitive function. Some studies are beginning to suggest that this could be the case.²,⁴⁵

### Conclusion

There is conflicting evidence about the potential benefits, or otherwise, of ACE inhibitors for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. By contrast with the positive benefits suggested from a small number of clinical studies, the evidence suggesting that such treatments might have a negative effect is worrying but remains largely laboratory based.

To progress this area further there is a need to tackle some unresolved questions that include clarification of: the reliability of mouse models for this system; whether angiotensin-2-mediated inhibition of acetylcholine release is the mechanism by which ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers reportedly improve cognitive function; and whether the cognitive benefits observed in people remain over extended follow-up periods. There may also be other, as yet undetermined, components of the renin-angiotensin pathway that affect cognition, which might have some relevance to our understanding of these conflicting issues.⁴⁶ However, in the interim, until further clinical evidence is available, the question is whether angiotensin-receptor blockers or other non-ACE (and non-neprilysin) modifying antihypertensives might be a more appropriate treatment for hypertension, especially in people with or at risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease.

#### Contributors

PGK and GKW were responsible for the inception of the review and contributed equally to a number of drafts and edits. PGK did the initial drafting and figure production of the manuscript and specifically focused on the text discussing all laboratory-based findings. GKW provided literature critique and discussion of all clinically relevant information. Both authors approved the final version.

---

**Conflicts of interest**

We have no conflicts of interest.

**Acknowledgments**

This work was supported by the Sigmund Gestetner Foundation. We thank Zoë Van Helmond for her help with figure 2 and Scott Miners and the reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments on this manuscript.

**References**

1. Skoog I, Gustafson D. Hypertension, hypertension-clustering factors and Alzheimer’s disease. *Neurol Res* 2003; **25**: 675–80.
2. Papademetriou V. Hypertension and cognitive function. Blood pressure regulation and cognitive function: a review of the literature. *Geriatrics* 2005; **60**: 20–22.
3. Dannenberg AL, Garrison RJ, Kannel WB. Incidence of hypertension in the Framingham Study. *Am J Public Health* 1988; **78**: 676–79.
4. Trenkwalder P. Potential for antihypertensive treatment with an AT(1)-receptor blocker to reduce dementia in the elderly. *J Hum Hypertens* 2002; **16** (suppl 3): S71–75.
5. Luchsinger JA, Mayeux R. Cardiovascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease. *Curr Atheroscler Rep* 2004; **6**: 261–66.
6. Love S. Contribution of cerebral amyloid angiopathy to Alzheimer’s disease. *J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry* 2004; **75**: 1–4.
7. Lamar J, Hu J, Bueno AB, et al. Phe*-Ala-based pentapeptide mimetics are BACE inhibitors: P2 and P3 SAR. *Bioorg Med Chem Lett* 2004; **14**: 239–43.
8. Wong GT, Manfra D, Poulet FM, et al. Chronic treatment with the gamma-secretase inhibitor LY-411,575 inhibits beta-amyloid peptide production and alters lymphopoiesis and intestinal cell differentiation. *J Biol Chem* 2004; **279**: 12876–82.
9. Wilcock GK, Black S, Howarth J, et al. A placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of the selective AB-42 lowering agent, flurizan (MPC-7869, (R)-flurbiprofen) in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. *Alzheimers Dement* 2005; **1**: 95.
10. Nicoll JA, Wilkinson D, Holmes C, Steart P, Markham H, Weller RO. Neuropathology of human Alzheimer disease after immunization with amyloid-beta peptide: a case report. *Nat Med* 2003; **9**: 448–52.
11. Hanon O, Latour F, Seux ML, Lenoir H, Forette F, Rigaud AS. Evolution of blood pressure in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a one year survey of a French Cohort (REAL.FR). *J Nutr Health Aging* 2005; **9**: 106–11.
12. Chiu AT, Herblin WF, McCall DE, et al. Identification of angiotensin II receptor subtypes. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 1989; **165**: 196–203.
13. Whitebread S, Mele M, Kamber B, de Gasparo M. Preliminary biochemical characterization of two angiotensin II receptor subtypes. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 1989; **163**: 284–91.
14. Stanton A. Potential of renin inhibition in cardiovascular disease. *J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst* 2003; **4**: 6–10.
15. Reaux A, Iturrio X, Vazeux G, et al. Aminopeptidase A, which generates one of the main effector peptides of the brain renin-angiotensin system, angiotensin III, has a key role in central control of arterial blood pressure. *Biochem Soc Trans* 2000; **28**: 435–40.
16. Tabrizchi R. Dual ACE and neutral endopeptidase inhibitors: novel therapy for patients with cardiovascular disorders. *Drugs* 2003; **63**: 2185–202.
17. Forette F, Seux ML, Staessen JA, et al. Prevention of dementia in randomised double-blind placebo-controlled Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) trial. *Lancet* 1998; **352**: 1347–51.
18. Tzourio C, Anderson C, Chapman N, et al. Effects of blood pressure lowering with perindopril and indapamide therapy on dementia and cognitive decline in patients with cerebrovascular disease. *Arch Intern Med* 2003; **163**: 1069–75.
19. Hanon O, Forette F. Prevention of dementia: lessons from SYST-EUR and PROGRESS. *J Neurol Sci* 2004; **226**: 71–74.
20. Hanon O, Seux ML, Lenoir H, Rigaud AS, Forette F. Prevention of dementia and cerebroprotection with antihypertensive drugs. *Curr Hypertens Rep* 2004; **6**: 201–07.
21. Khachaturian AS, Zandi PP, Lyketsos CG, et al. Antihypertensive medication use and incident Alzheimer disease: the Cache County Study. *Arch Neurol* 2006; **63**: 686–92.
22 Breitner JC, Wyse BW, Anthony JC, et al. APOE-epsilon4 count predicts age when prevalence of AD increases, then declines: the Cache County Study. *Neurology* 1999; **53**: 321–31.

23 Ohrui T, Matsui T, Yamaya M, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease in Japan. *J Am Geriatr Soc* 2004; **52**: 649–50.

24 Ohrui T, Tomita N, Sato-Nakagawa T, et al. Effects of brain-penetrating ACE inhibitors on Alzheimer disease progression. *Neurology* 2004; **63**: 1324–25.

25 Rozzini L, Chilovi BV, Bertoletti E, et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors modulate the rate of progression of amnestic mild cognitive impairment. *Int J Geriatr Psychiatry* 2006; **21**: 550–55.

26 Jenkins TA, Chai SY. Effect of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors on memory. *Neurobiol Learn Mem* 2007; **87**: 218–24.

27 Barnes JM, Barnes NM, Costall B, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition, angiotensin, and cognition. *J Cardiovasc Pharmacol* 1992; **19** (suppl 6): S63–71.

28 Kehoe PG. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and Alzheimer s disease? *J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst* 2003; **4**: 80–93.

29 Savaskan E. The role of the brain renin-angiotensin system in neurodegenerative disorders. *Curr Alzheimer Res* 2005; **2**: 29–35.

30 Carson JA, Turner AJ. Beta-amyloid catabolism: roles for neprilysin (NEP) and other metallopeptidases? *J Neurochem* 2002; **81**: 1–8.

31 Hemming ML, Selkoe DJ. Amyloid beta-protein is degraded by cellular angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and elevated by an ACE inhibitor. *J Biol Chem* 2005; **280**: 37644–50.

32 Hu J, Igarashi A, Kamata M, Nakagawa H. Angiotensin-converting enzyme degrades Alzheimer amyloid beta-peptide (A beta ); retards A beta aggregation, deposition, fibril formation; and inhibits cytotoxicity. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276**: 47863–68.

33 Oba R, Igarashi A, Kamata M, Nagata K, Takano S, Nakagawa H. The N-terminal active centre of human angiotensin-converting enzyme degrades Alzheimer amyloid beta-peptide. *Eur J Neurosci* 2005; **21**: 733–40.

34 Lehmann DJ, Cortina-Borja M, Warden DR, et al. Large meta-analysis establishes the ACE insertion-deletion polymorphism as a marker of Alzheimer’s disease. *Am J Epidemiol* 2005; **162**: 305–17.

35 Rigat B, Hubert C, Alhenc-Gelas F, Cambien F, Corvol P, Soubrier F. An insertion/deletion polymorphism in the angiotensin I-converting enzyme gene accounting for half the variance of serum enzyme levels. *J Clin Invest* 1990; **86**: 1343–46.

36 Kehoe PG, Russ C, McIlory S, et al. Variation in DCP1, encoding ACE, is associated with susceptibility to Alzheimer disease. *Nat Genet* 1999; **21**: 71–72.

37 Kehoe PG, Katzov H, Feuk L, et al. Haplotypes extending across ACE are associated with Alzheimer’s disease. *Hum Mol Genet* 2003; **12**: 859–67.

38 Meng Y, Baldwin CT, Bowirrat A, et al. Association of polymorphisms in the Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene with Alzheimer disease in an Israeli Arab community. *Am J Hum Genet* 2006; **78**: 871–77.

39 Lendon CL, Thaker U, Harris JM, et al. The angiotensin 1-converting enzyme insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism does not influence the extent of amyloid or tau pathology in patients with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. *Neurosci Lett* 2002; **328**: 314–18.

40 Eckman EA, Adams SK, Troendle FJ, et al. Regulation of steady-state beta -amyloid levels in the brain by neprilysin and endothelin-converting enzyme, but not angiotensin-converting enzyme. *J Biol Chem* 2006; **281**: 30471–78.

41 Klein. Synaptic targeting by Aβ oligomers (ADDLS) as a basis for memory loss in early Alzheimer’s disease. *Alzheimers Dement* 2006; **2**: 43–55.

42 Forette F, Seux ML, Staessen JA, et al. The prevention of dementia with antihypertensive treatment: new evidence from the Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) study. *Arch Intern Med* 2002; **162**: 2046–52.

43 Saito TC, Iwata N. Metabolism of amyloid beta peptide and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Towards presymptomatic diagnosis, prevention and therapy. *Neurosci Res* 2006; **54**: 235–53.

44 Miners JS, Van Helmond Z, Chalmers K, Wilcock GK, Love S, Kehoe PG. Decreased expression and activity of neprilysin in Alzheimer disease are associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. *J Neuropathol Exp Neurol* 2006; **65**: 1012–21.

45 Fogari R, Preti P, Mugellini A, et al. Influence of losartan and atenolol on cognitive function in very elderly hypertensive patients. *Am J Hypertens* 2002; **15** (4 part 2): 36A.

46 Haulica I, Bild W, Serban DN. Angiotensin peptides and their pleiotropic actions. *J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst* 2005; **6**: 121–31.
