
Molecular Machines of the Cell

The SecY translocation complex: convergence of genetics and structure

Ann M. Flower

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Dakota School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, ND 58202-9037, USA

All organisms share a requirement for translocation of proteins across membranes. The major mechanism for this process is the universally conserved SecY/Sec61 pathway. Many years of extensive genetic and biochemical analyses identified the components of the SecY/Sec61 pathway, demonstrated that most exported proteins use this route for translocation, and led to understanding of many functions of the components. Recently, structural predictions based on genetic analyses in Escherichia coli were confirmed, in a striking and satisfying manner, by the solution of an X-ray crystal structure from an archaeal SecY complex. This review discusses the genetic background that led to those hypotheses and the convergence of genetic studies with structural data.

Relevance of the SecY/Sec61 export pathway

Although protein synthesis occurs in the cytoplasm, all organisms localize ~30% of all proteins to extracytoplasmic destinations. For Gram-negative bacteria, this might be the inner or outer membrane or the periplasmic space. Gram-positive bacteria and archaea also localize proteins to the cell membrane and to the external environment. Eukaryotes target proteins to a variety of destinations, including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria and chloroplasts. In all of these examples, the proteins must cross a hydrophobic membrane barrier to reach their final destination. The major route used by all organisms for translocation of proteins across membranes has been conserved throughout the three domains of life [1] and is the SecY system in bacteria and archaea, and the Sec61 pathway in eukaryotes, each named for the major protein of the translocation pore and referred to collectively as SecY/Sec61.

The structure of the SecY/Sec61 translocation channel has been the subject of scrutiny for many years, and both genetic and biochemical experiments resulted in predictions of the general structure of the translocation complex and domains of the major proteins that interact. The recent resolution of an X-ray crystal structure of the archaeal SecY complex propelled structural considerations to the forefront and facilitated interpretation of previous experiments. This review primarily discusses the impact of genetic analyses on the understanding of the SecY structure and the satisfying convergence of these previous findings with the current structural data. The discussion will focus on the Escherichia coli SecY pathway and the primary components that constitute the translocation channel – SecY, SecE and SecG.

The SecY pathway of *E. coli*

The bacterial SecY system is the primary pathway responsible for export of proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane and for insertion of proteins into the cytoplasmic membrane. Sec-dependent secretory proteins with ultimate destinations in the periplasm or outer membrane are synthesized in precursor form with a cleavable N-terminal signal sequence that slows folding of the precursor and aids in recognition by export factors (Figure 1). These proteins can be exported by either a co- or post-translational mechanism; the mode of translocation is dependent on recognition by distinct cytoplasmic factors, usually SecB or SRP (signal recognition particle).

Most often, SecB – a chaperone that maintains the preprotein in a loosely folded conformation – binds secretory proteins following translation. Both SecB and the preprotein provide binding sites for SecA, a peripheral membrane ATPase. SecA binding targets the preprotein to the translocation complex, the principal components of which are the membrane proteins, SecY, SecE and SecG. Additional membrane proteins (SecD, SecF and YajC) contribute to efficient translocation. Formation of the complete translocation complex promotes an ATP binding and hydrolysis cycle by SecA that results in segmental movement of the secretory protein across the membrane. In the absence of SecA, the energy requirement can be met through the proton motive force, but only after translocation has initiated (for reviews, see Refs [2–7]).

An alternative to the SecB pathway depends on recognition of secretory proteins by SRP and is a co-translational export process that is primarily used by inner membrane proteins. In this case, nascent secretory proteins interact with the SRP as the signal sequence emerges from the ribosome. Whereas the eukaryotic SRP is a complex ribonucleoprotein particle consisting of six proteins and a 7S RNA molecule, the *E. coli* SRP contains only a single protein, Ffh (fifty-four homolog, indicative of its homology to the mammalian 54 kDa subunit) and a 4.5 S RNA encoded by *ffs* (Table 1). Ffh interacts with hydrophobic regions of membrane proteins and also with some signal sequences. In particular, the greater

Corresponding author: Flower, A.M. (<aflower@medicine.nodak.edu>).
Available online 23 March 2007.
www.sciencedirect.com 0966-842X/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2007.03.001

SecB-dependent pathway  
(periplasmic and outer membrane)  

SRP-dependent pathway  
(inner membrane)  

YidC-dependent  
inner membrane proteins  

N  
B B B  
B B B  
C  

A  

YidC  
YidC  

G  
E  
Y  

FtsY  

Cytoplasm  

Periplasm  

TRENDS in Microbiology  

Figure 1. Export pathways in Escherichia coli. The SecY pathway is the most commonly used export pathway and, although other routes are used by some proteins, most periplasmic and outer membrane proteins use the SecB-dependent pathway, whereas most inner membrane proteins are SRP-dependent. SecB-dependent proteins are translocated post-translationally through the membrane through SecA and the SecYEG channel. By contrast, co-translational export by SRP-FtsY (the membrane receptor for SRP) can be SecYEG-dependent or SecYEG-independent. In addition, some inner membrane proteins require YidC; most of these are SecYEG-dependent. However, a few YidC substrates are exported independently of SecYEG.

the hydrophobicity of the signal sequence, the more likely it is to be recognized by SRP. In addition, increasing the hydrophobicity can render exported proteins SRP-dependent rather than SecB-dependent [8,9]. SRP targets the ribosome-secretory protein complex to the membrane through interaction with FtsY, the peripheral membrane receptor for SRP. At the membrane, the complex binds SecYEG and initiates translocation, which proceeds similarly to that described earlier, although at least some of the energy requirement can be met through GTP hydrolysis associated with translation. Some SRP substrates require SecA for export, whereas others are SecA-independent; this might be related to the length of periplasmic domains that must be exported. Most, but not all, inner membrane proteins are recognized by SRP and, although membrane proteins that are targeted by SRP require SecYEG for insertion, there are membrane proteins that are both SRP-and SecYEG-independent (for reviews, see Refs [7,10,11]).

Insertion of membrane proteins might also require YidC, which is homologous to the mitochondrial Oxa1 and the chloroplast Alb3 proteins [12,13]. It is thought that YidC associates with SecYEG to facilitate movement of membrane-spanning segments from the translocation channel into the membrane. The role of YidC in the insertion of membrane proteins is intriguing because both Sec-dependent and Sec-independent proteins might require YidC for insertion. However, not all membrane proteins require YidC and, additionally, YidC might be required for export of some lipoproteins (for a review, see Ref. [10]).

In summary, the pathways for export of periplasmic and outer membrane proteins and for insertion of inner membrane proteins are conserved and interconnected. Although each pathway has general characteristics that define its substrates, none of these criteria are absolute and exceptions exist for each. It is not fully understood why some exported proteins use SRP, others use SecB, and a few are independent of both SRP and SecB. Nor is it known why

Table 1. Components of the Sec translocation system are conserved in all domains${}^{a}$

| Bacteria | Archaea | Yeast | Mammals |
|----------|---------|-------|---------|
| SecY (PrlA) | SecY | Sec61p | Sec61α |
| SecE (PrlG) | SecE | Sss1p | Sec61γ |
| SecG (PrlH) | Secβ | Sbh | Sec61β |
| SecA (PrlD) | – | BiP/Kar2${}^{b}$ | BiP/Kar2${}^{b}$ |
| SecD, SecF | SecD, SecF | – | – |
| YidC | YidC | Oxa1 (mitochondria) | Oxa1 (mitochondria) |
| SRP (Ffh, Ffs) | SRP | SRP | SRP |

${}^{a}$Dash (–) indicates that no analogous protein has been identified.  
${}^{b}$No sequence homology: both provide energy for translocation.

www.sciencedirect.com
some membrane proteins, but not all, are YidC-dependent or why SecYEG is required for most but not all membrane protein insertion. Our knowledge to date has come through a rewarding convergence of genetic analysis, biochemical assays, and biophysical and structural determinations.

### Components of the SecY pathway

Phylogenetic analysis of the Sec pathways from known genomes demonstrated the functional conservation of the major components [1]. The heterotrimeric SecYEG complex forms the translocation channel (Table 1) [1]. SecY (SecY in bacteria and archaea, Sec61α in mammals and Sec61p in yeast) is the largest protein in the complex with ten membrane-spanning domains, and forms the core of the structure [14,15]. SecE (SecE in bacteria and archaea, Sec61γ in mammals and Sss1p in yeast) is a smaller protein with three transmembrane helices in *E. coli* and a single transmembrane segment in most other organisms [14]. The third component is not conserved but a small protein that seems to fulfill a similar structural role is found in all organisms (SecG in bacteria, Secβ in archaea, Sec61β in mammals and Sbh in yeast) [1,14,16].

The SecY homologs display significant sequence homology and are required for translocation both *in vitro* and *in vivo* (although some early studies disputed this finding) [17–20]. SecE is also essential; however, the two N-terminal transmembrane segments of *E. coli* SecE can be deleted without significant impact, demonstrating that the conserved third transmembrane helix (TM3) and the adjoining cytoplasmic region are the crucial portions of this protein [21]. While SecG stimulates translocation *in vitro* [22,23], it is not essential; deletions confer a cold-sensitive phenotype and a modest export defect [24]. For these reasons, it has been thought that SecY and the third transmembrane helix of SecE constitute the core of the translocation apparatus.

SRP is also conserved, although it is a more complex particle in eukaryotes than in bacteria [25,26]. The remaining components of the bacterial pathway – SecB, SecA, SecD, SecF and YajC – are not conserved across all species. None of these are found in eukaryotes, whereas at least some archaea have SecD and SecF homologs [27,28] but not SecA or SecB counterparts. Because archaea lack the SecA ATPase, it is not known how they provide energy for translocation. In eukaryotes, which also lack SecA, translocation is energized in part by BiP, a binding protein located in the ER lumen that hydrolyzes ATP and ‘pulls’ proteins across the membrane [29]. However, this is not a viable solution for archaea because there is no ATP on the exterior face of the membrane. Although translocation coupled to translation might provide energy, there is evidence that at least some archaeal proteins are exported after translation is complete [30,31].

### Lessons from the prl alleles

Extensive genetic analyses from several laboratories contributed enormously to understanding of both structure and function of the Sec proteins. Two fundamentally different genetic screens identified most of the genes encoding components of the *E. coli* translocase apparatus (for reviews, see Refs [2,32,33]). This has unfortunately led to some confusion regarding gene names, but it is important to understand the distinction because the resultant alleles confer very different phenotypes (Table 1). The sec alleles (*secA*, *secB*, *secD*, *secE*, *secF*, *secY* and *secG*) were identified by selection for internalization of an exported protein and are loss-of-function mutations: they confer export defects and conditional lethality. These phenotypes indicate that the *sec* mutations cause defects resulting in a non-functional translocation complex. The *secY* mutations are located throughout the protein, suggesting that a large variety of alterations can abolish function of the protein [34].

Conversely, the *prl* alleles (for protein localization) are gain-of-function mutations that promote export of an export-deficient precursor containing a signal sequence mutation. These mutations are specific alleles of *sec* genes. The *prl* alleles do not confer export defects and are not detectably detrimental to cell growth (it has been suggested that some *prlA* alleles might confer subtle and undetectable negative effects that are alleviated by secondary mutations [35,36]). Therefore, the *prlA* and *prlG* mutations do not render the translocase non-functional, but rather alter its function by expanding the repertoire of substrates that can be exported. They do not alter export of wild-type secretory proteins (although *in vitro* enhancement of export has been observed), nor do they cause mislocalization of cytoplasmic proteins [37]. It is important to recognize that the *sec* and *prl* mutations are genetically distinct and that the Prl forms of these proteins are functional mutants. These *prl* alleles have greatly influenced understanding of the structure of the SecY complex.

The numerous searches for suppressors of signal sequence mutations repeatedly identified *prlA* (*secY*), *prlG* (*secE*) and *prlD* (*secA*) alleles [32,35,38], and a directed selection resulted in *prlH* (*secG*) mutations [39]. Although the *prlD* mutations have been enlightening with regards to SecA function [40], the *prlA* and *prlG* alleles were more instructive concerning SecY complex structure. A revealing feature of these suppressors is that they lack allele specificity. That is, except for a few unusual exceptions, every *prlA* and *prlG* mutation promotes export of every signal sequence mutation, including complete deletions of the signal sequence [38,40,41]. This suggested that suppression was not a result of altered interactions between the signal sequence and SecY or SecE but, instead, was caused by the loss of such interaction [35,38]. This hypothesis was an important milestone that paved the way for further analysis of *prl* suppressors.

The majority of *prlA* suppressors map to three domains within SecY. Out of 25 alleles, six are located in transmembrane segment 7 (TM7), five within TM10, and 11 in periplasmic loop 1 (P1) [35] (Figure 2). If suppression was caused by loss of signal sequence recognition, the localization of *prlA* mutations would suggest that these are important regions for this interaction and for initiation of translocation. The prevalence of *prl* suppressor mutations in TM7, in addition to the finding that large deletions in this region function as *prl* alleles [35], led to the prediction that SecYTM7 was primarily responsible for signal sequence binding and that mutations here enable export in the absence of such interaction. This prediction
Figure 2. Schematic of SecY and SecE. Many of the *prl* suppressors map to specific regions of SecE and SecY, as indicated by red boxes. Interactions between the two proteins were predicted based on synthetic lethality experiments in which specific combinations of *prlA* (*secY*) and *prlG* (*secE*) mutations caused a lethal phenotype. In particular, *prlA4* and *prlA6* both alter Ile408 to Asn and are located in SecY TM10, whereas *prlA11* and *prlA301* change Leu407 to Arg and are also located in SecY TM10. When any of these are combined with *prlG1* (Leu108Arg) in SecE TM3, the effect is lethal. Similarly, *prlA3* (Phe67Cys) and *prlA726* (Ser68Pro) are located in SecY P1 and cause lethality when combined with *prlG3* (Ser120Phe) in SecE P2.

was bolstered by photoaffinity labeling studies that also demonstrated interaction between TM7 (and TM2) of SecY and signal sequences [42].

If it is true that TM7 interacts with the signal sequence and that mutations to TM7 bypass this recognition event, how do mutations to TM10 and P1 or to *secE* confer the Prl phenotype? An answer to this question came from synthetic lethality studies in which *prlA* and *prlG* alleles were combined [43]. Synthetic lethality refers to combinations of mutations that are lethal to the cell even though each mutation alone exerts no detrimental effect. In the case of the *prl* alleles, a single *prlA* or *prlG* mutation is not harmful and most pair-wise combinations are likewise benign. However, several pairs of mutations were lethal when present together, indicating that the two mutant proteins in combination cannot form a functional translocation complex. The lethal pairs were allele-specific and topologically defined. That is, specific alleles in SecY TM10 (*prlA4*, *prlA6*, *prlA11*, *prlA301*) were lethal with the *prlG1* allele located in TM3 of SecE, whereas certain mutations in P1 of SecY (*prlA3*, *prlA726*) were lethal when combined with a mutation in P2 of SecE (*prlG3*). This precise localization led to the prediction that these pairs reflected domains of the two proteins that normally interact; the lethality was attributed to disruption of this interaction. Specifically, it was predicted that the regions of interaction between SecY and SecE are as follows: SecY TM10 and SecE TM3, SecY TM7 and SecY TM10, and the periplasmic domains SecY P1 and SecE P2 (Figure 2).

The latter interaction between the periplasmic domains was substantiated by introduction of cysteine residues at specific sites in P1 of SecY (Phe67Cys) and P2 of SecE (Ser120Cys) [44]. These cysteine residues were shown to form disulfide bonds in the periplasm, resulting in lethality. When disulfide bond formation was prevented by introduction of a *dsbA* mutation, lethality was abrogated.

The conclusions from these studies included a hypothesis that the *prl* mutations affect the structure and/or stability of the SecY complex such that secretory proteins with mutant or missing signal sequences can be exported independent of signal sequence recognition. Because TM7 was thought to interact with signal sequences, it was proposed that mutations to TM10 (SecY) and TM3 (SecE)

exerted their effect indirectly through their interaction with TM7. Because it was difficult to envision how mutations to a periplasmic domain affected an early step of translocation, it was suggested that P1 might be transiently located within the membrane [35]. In addition, it was proposed that certain pairs of alleles, particularly those of periplasmic mutations, were lethal because of formation of a constitutively open channel that compromised membrane integrity [43].

Many of the predicted interactions were corroborated by crosslinking approaches. In particular, cysteine-scanning mutagenesis was used to introduce cysteines at specific residues and search for crosslinking between proteins [45–47]. Using this approach, interactions were demonstrated between SecE TM3 and three regions of SecY—TM10, TM7 and TM2. These numerous crosslinks led to the prediction that SecE TM3 is tilted across SecY, resulting in multiple points of contact [47].

Similarly, the prediction that *prlA* and *prlG* mutations affect stability of the SecY complex was supported by co-immunoprecipitation experiments, which demonstrated that SecY complexes containing Prl forms of either SecE or SecY were more thermolabile than wild-type complexes. Additionally, complexes containing synthetic lethal pairs exhibited greatly decreased stability and complete dissociation of the complex [48].

### Structure of the SecY complex

Recently, X-ray crystallography produced a structural determination for the SecY complex from the archaeon, *Methanococcus jannaschii* [15]. Because of the conserved nature of the Sec complex, it is reasonable to predict that the bacterial and eukaryotic SecY complexes are significantly similar to this archaeal complex. Indeed, the predicted structure corresponds extremely well with a prediction based on 2D cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) of *E. coli* SecYEG complexes [49]. This prediction indicates that the bacterial complex is a dimer whereas the archaeal complex was crystallized as a monomer (a point that will be further addressed later); however, other details are strikingly similar. All of the transmembrane helices are superimposable in the two structures and the central channel is similar in size, lending confidence

to the assumption that complexes from the two species are similar in structure.

The SecY complex consists of one copy each of SecY, SecE and SecG, arranged in a roughly rectangular shape (Figure 3). SecY forms the central channel with two domains in a quasi-dimeric arrangement described as a clamshell [15]. One half of the SecY clamshell is formed from transmembrane segments 1–5 and the other half consists of membrane segments 6–10. The long membrane-spanning domain of SecE wraps around two sides of SecY, forming a ‘clamp’ and Secβ (SecG) wraps around a third side, leaving the mouth of the clamshell open to the membrane. Viewed from the cytoplasm, it is clear that the SecY channel narrows at the center to a constricting ring. This ring is composed entirely of hydrophobic residues (all Ile in *E. coli*) that are thought to form a seal around translocating polypeptides to maintain membrane integrity [15]. Additionally, the portion of SecY referred to previously as the periplasmic loop 1 (also termed TM2a) folds back into the channel, forming a plug that keeps the channel closed. The model proposed for protein export posits that signal sequence binding to SecY transmembrane helices 2 and 7 at the mouth of the clamshell triggers movement of the plug out of the pore to bind to the carboxyl terminus of SecE. Concomitantly, the ring opens slightly to enable transport of the secretory protein. Membrane-spanning segments of inner membrane proteins would be displaced laterally into the membrane through the open face of the clamshell by a mechanism yet to be determined [15,50–52].

### Accuracy of genetic predictions

When we examine the SecY structure in light of previous genetic experiments, we find that the predictions are gratifyingly accurate. As suggested, the major structural component is SecY, and the third membrane-spanning

---

**Figure 3. Structure of the SecYEG translocation complex from *Methanococcus jannaschii* [15].** (a) The SecY structure as seen from the plane of the membrane. SecY is colored blue, SecE is green and SecG (Secβ) is brown. The cytoplasm is to the top and the periplasm to the bottom. (b) The complex viewed from the periplasmic side. The three chains are the same colors as in part (a) but the plug is highlighted in pink. The complex forms a channel with the plug blocking translocation in the inactive state. SecE and SecG are located on three sides of the complex, leaving the fourth side open to accept signal sequence binding and to enable lateral exit of membrane domains. (c) The diagrams illustrate the export pathway: (i) The SecY complex is in the inactive state. The plug prevents passage of molecules and the ring is closed. (ii) Binding of a signal sequence (SS) to SecY TM7 and TM2 triggers movement of the plug out of the channel and opening of the hydrophobic ring. (iii) The fully active state is depicted. The plug has moved to interact with the periplasmic portion of SecE and the ring has widened to enable movement of the mature secretory protein (M) through the channel.

segment of SecE is in contact with SecY, probably contributing important stability qualities to the complex and facilitating maintenance of the closed state. The structural model predicts that the signal sequence binds to transmembrane helices 2 and 7, in agreement with previous hypotheses that TM7 was the major interactive domain for signal sequence binding. The most striking observation comes when the residues that correspond to prl alleles are highlighted [34] (Figure 4). All of the prlA mutations alter amino acids in the channel of SecY. A subset of these directly affects either the hydrophobic ring residues (six alleles) or the plug domain (nine mutations). The prlG mutations affect residues that are in close proximity to ring residues or that are at the C-terminal portion of SecE to which the plug binds when displaced. This analysis of the sites of mutation led to the hypothesis that all of the prlA and prlG mutations cause alterations that either stabilize the open state of the complex or destabilize the closed state [34]. In either case, the resultant shift toward an open channel enables translocation of a secretory protein without the normally required trigger from signal sequence binding.

The identification of the plug is one of the more satisfying links between genetic analysis and structural data. As described earlier, synthetic lethality indicated that SecY P1 and SecE P2 not only interact but, if locked together, also result in a constitutively open channel. Upon resolution of the crystal data, it was observed that SecY P1 is folded back into the channel, forming the plug. This places the SecY residue in question too far from SecE to interact. In addition, it was not apparent how substrates would be transported with the plug in place. Therefore, it was proposed that the plug could be displaced, thereby opening the channel and interacting with the appropriate periplasmic loop of SecE [15]. Indeed, this seems the only likely explanation for both structural and genetic results.

Recent crosslinking experiments support this model of plug action and further correlate plug movement to the process of translocation [53].

### Future directions and remaining questions

Although it might seem that the process of protein translocation across membranes is well understood, a plethora of questions remain. Much of what is presented here is based on models, which remain to be tested. For example, the current model for translocation predicts that deletion of the plug is lethal because it would result in an open channel, much like a synthetic lethal pair. However, recent reports indicate that deletion of the plug domain does not affect cell viability in either yeast or E. coli [54,55]. Similarly, we would predict that mutation to any of the ring residues would result in a Prl phenotype; preliminary results in the author’s laboratory do not support this hypothesis. These are important issues that bear directly on the basic mechanism of action of the SecY complex and demonstrate the importance of in vivo testing of structural models.

Conversely, some results obtained previously have not been supported by the structural data. For instance, cross-linking experiments demonstrated a link between SecY TM2 and SecE TM3, yet no such interaction is observed in the structure. Further efforts will be required to clarify the bases for such discrepancies.

Another important issue concerns the multimeric nature of the SecY complex. The X-ray crystallography data of the M. jannaschii complex was obtained using reconstituted proteins in detergent and shows a monomeric, closed complex [15]. The 2D cryo-EM data was obtained with purified E. coli proteins in the native lipid bilayer and show the complex to be a dimer of SecYEG arranged in a back-to-back conformation [49]. Yet another study used cryo-EM to examine a ribosome nascent-chain

**Figure 4.** Localization of the prl mutations of SecY and SecE. The prl mutations alter the SecY complex such that signal sequence recognition and binding is no longer essential for translocation. As shown in the figure, all of the prlA and prlG mutations alter residues within the channel of the complex, with many changing hydrophobic ring residues or plug residues. This suggests that the mutations function either by stabilizing the open state of the complex or by destabilizing the closed state [34]. (a) The complex viewed from the plane of the membrane (as in Figure 3a) with the residues altered by prlA and prlG mutations shown in space-filling mode. (b) The SecY complex viewed from the periplasm (as in Figure 3b), again with the Prl residues as space-filling residues.

complex with SecYEG (*E. coli*) and the results also indicate a dimeric complex [56]. In this case, however, the dimers are arranged front-to-front and the authors speculate that the active channel is formed by two dimers that open together. Although it is possible that each of these is a correct conformation for the conditions examined, further experiments are required to determine the oligomeric state of active translocation complexes. Similarly, there are varying reports of the oligomeric state of SecA [57, 58], which need to be clarified to understand how SecA interacts with SecYEG.

YidC was identified relatively recently and, although we know that it is important for the insertion of many inner membrane proteins, we do not know how it interacts with SecYEG to direct insertion, nor why it is required for some but not all membrane proteins. In addition, the targeting of secretory proteins by SecB versus SRP is not fully understood. Resolution of the structure of the SecYEG complex not only validated many hypotheses generated through genetic and biochemical analysis, but provides a basis for the design of additional experiments. It will require the combined and continuing efforts of genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches to unravel the intricacies of this complex molecular machine.

### Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Stanley Maloy, Tom Silhavy, Margaret Smith, Kevin Young and members of the Silhavy laboratory for critical review and discussion of this manuscript. I thank Tom Hill, Kathryn Thomasson and Eric Njabon for assistance with figures and the National Institutes of Health/INBRE and North Dakota Computational Chemistry and Biology Network for computational resources.

### References

1. Cao, T.B. and Saier, M.H. (2003) The general protein secretary pathway: phylogenetic analyses leading to evolutionary conclusions. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1609, 115–125
2. Danese, P.N. and Silhavy, T.J. (1998) Targeting and assembly of periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins in *Escherichia coli*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 32, 59–94
3. Duong, F. *et al.* (1997) Biogenesis of the Gram-negative bacterial envelope. *Cell* 91, 567–573
4. Fekkes, P. and Driessen, A.J.M. (1999) Protein targeting to the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 63, 161–173
5. Manting, E.H. and Driessen, A.J.M. (2000) *Escherichia coli* translocase: the unravelling of a molecular machine. *Mol. Microbiol.* 37, 226–238
6. Mori, H. and Ito, K. (2001) The Sec protein-translocation pathway. *Trends Microbiol.* 9, 494–500
7. Pohlschroder, M. *et al.* (2004) Diversity and evolution of protein translocation. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 59, 91–111
8. Bowers, C.W. *et al.* (2003) Secretion of LamB-LacZ by the signal recognition particle pathway of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 185, 5697–5705
9. Lee, H.C. and Bernstein, H.D. (2001) The targeting pathway of *Escherichia coli* presecretory and integral membrane proteins is specified by the hydrophobicity of the targeting signal. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 98, 3471–3476
10. Dalbey, R.E. and Chen, M. (2004) Sec-translocase mediated membrane protein biogenesis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1694, 37–53
11. Shan, S.O. and Walter, P. (2005) Co-translational protein targeting by the signal recognition particle. *FEBS Lett.* 579, 921–926
12. van Bloois, E. *et al.* (2005) The Sec-independent function of *Escherichia coli* YidC is evolutionary-conserved and essential. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 12996–13003
13. Yen, M.R. *et al.* (2001) Phylogenetic and structural analyses of the Oxa1 family of protein translocases. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 204, 223–231

14 Hartmann, E. *et al.* (1994) Evolutionary conservation of components of the protein translocation complex. *Nature* 367, 654–657
15 van den Berg, B. *et al.* (2004) X-ray structure of a protein-conducting channel. *Nature* 427, 36–44
16 Panzner, S. *et al.* (1995) Posttranslational protein transport in yeast reconstituted with a purified complex of Sec proteins and Kar2p. *Cell* 81, 561–570
17 Akimaru, J. *et al.* (1991) Reconstitution of a protein translocation system containing purified SecY, SecE, and SecA from *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 88, 6545–6549
18 Brundage, L. *et al.* (1990) The purified *E. coli* integral membrane protein SecY/E is sufficient for reconstitution of SecA-dependent precursor protein translocation. *Cell* 62, 649–657
19 Cabelli, R.J. *et al.* (1988) SecA protein is required for secretory protein translocation into *E. coli* membrane vesicles. *Cell* 55, 683–692
20 Nishiyama, K. *et al.* (1991) SecY is an indispensable component of the protein secretory machinery of *Escherichia coli*. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1065, 89–97
21 Schatz, P.J. *et al.* (1991) One of three transmembrane stretches is sufficient for the functioning of the SecE protein, a membrane component of the *E. coli* secretion machinery. *EMBO J.* 10, 1749–1757
22 Douville, K. *et al.* (1994) Band 1 subunit of *Escherichia coli* preprotein translocase and integral membrane export factor P12 are the same protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 18705–18707
23 Nishiyama, K. *et al.* (1993) A novel membrane protein involved in protein translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane of *Escherichia coli*. *EMBO J.* 12, 3409–3415
24 Flower, A.M. *et al.* (2000) SecG is an auxiliary component of the protein export apparatus of *Escherichia coli*. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* 263, 131–136
25 Luirink, J. and Sinning, I. (2004) SRP-mediated protein targeting: structure and function revisited. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1694, 17–35
26 Pool, M.R. (2005) Signal recognition particles in chloroplasts, bacteria, yeast and mammals. *Mol. Membr. Biol.* 22, 3–15
27 Eichler, J. (2003) Evolution of the prokaryotic protein translocation complex: a comparison of archaeal and bacterial versions of SecDF. *Mol. Phylogenet. Evol.* 27, 504–509
28 Hand, N.J. *et al.* (2006) Archaeal and bacterial SecD and SecF homologs exhibit striking structural and functional conservation. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 1251–1259
29 Gething, M.J. (1999) Role and regulation of the ER chaperone BiP. *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* 10, 465–472
30 Irihimovitch, V. and Eichler, J. (2003) Post-translational secretion of fusion proteins in the halophilic archaea *Haloferax volcanii*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 12881–12887
31 Ortenberg, R. and Mevarech, M. (2000) Evidence for post-translational membrane insertion of the integral membrane protein bacterioopsin expressed in the heterologous halophilic archaeon *Haloferax volcanii*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 22839–22846
32 Bieker, K.L. and Silhavy, T.J. (1990) The genetics of protein secretion in *E. coli*. *Trends Genet.* 6, 329–334
33 Schatz, P.J. and Beckwith, J. (1990) Genetic analysis of protein export in *Escherichia coli*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 24, 215–248
34 Smith, M.A. *et al.* (2005) Modeling the effects of *prl* mutations on the *Escherichia coli* SecY complex. *J. Bacteriol.* 187, 6454–6465
35 Osborne, R.S. and Silhavy, T.J. (1993) PrlA suppressor mutations cluster in regions corresponding to three distinct topological domains. *EMBO J.* 12, 3391–3398
36 Francetic, O. *et al.* (1993) *prlA* suppression of defective export of maltose-binding protein in *secB* mutants of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 175, 4036–4044
37 Prinz, W.A. *et al.* (1996) Targeting of signal sequenceless proteins for export in *Escherichia coli* with altered protein translocase. *EMBO J.* 15, 5209–5217
38 Flower, A.M. *et al.* (1994) PrlA and PrlG suppressors reduce the requirement for signal sequence recognition. *J. Bacteriol.* 176, 5607–5614
39 Bost, S. and Belin, D. (1997) *prl* mutations in the *Escherichia coli secG* gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 4087–4093
40 Huie, J.L. and Silhavy, T.J. (1995) Suppression of signal sequence defects and azide resistance in *Escherichia coli* commonly result from the same mutations in *secA*. *J. Bacteriol.* 177, 3518–3526
41 Derman, A.I. *et al.* (1993) A signal sequence is not required for protein export in *prlA* mutants of *Escherichia coli*. *EMBO J.* 12, 879–888

210 Review TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.15 No.5

42 Wang, L. *et al.* (2004) Demonstration of a specific Escherichia coli SecY- signal peptide interaction. *Biochemistry* 43, 13185–13192  
43 Flower, A.M. *et al.* (1995) The allele-specific synthetic lethality of prlA- prlG double mutants predicts interactive domains of SecY and SecE. *EMBO J.* 14, 884–893  
44 Harris, C.R. and Silhavy, T.J. (1999) Mapping an interface of SecY (PrlA) and SecE (PrlG) by using synthetic phenotypes and *in vivo* cross- linking. *J. Bacteriol.* 181, 3438–3444  
45 Kaufmann, A. *et al.* (1999) Cysteine-directed cross-linking demonstrates that helix 3 of SecE is close to helix 2 of SecY and helix 3 of a neighboring SecE. *Biochemistry* 38, 9115–9125  
46 Veenendaal, A.K. *et al.* (2001) Mapping the sites of interaction between SecY and SecE by cysteine scanning mutagenesis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 32559–32566  
47 Veenendaal, A.K. *et al.* (2002) The core of the bacterial translocase harbors a tilted transmembrane segment 3 of SecE. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 36640–36645  
48 Duong, F. and Wickner, W. (1999) The PrlA and PrlG phenotypes are caused by a loosened association among the translocase SecYEG subunits. *EMBO J.* 18, 3263–3270  
49 Breyton, C. *et al.* (2002) Three-dimensional structure of the bacterial protein-translocation complex SecYEG. *Nature* 418, 662–665  

50 Collinson, I. (2005) The structure of the bacterial protein translocation complex SecYEG. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 33, 1225–1230  
51 Osborne, A.R. *et al.* (2005) Protein translocation by the Sec61/SecY channel. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* 21, 529–550  
52 Mitra, K. *et al.* (2006) Co- and post-translational translocation through the protein-conducting channel: analogous mechanisms at work? *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 13, 957–964  
53 Tam, P.C. *et al.* (2005) Investigating the SecY plug movement at the SecYEG translocation channel. *EMBO J.* 24, 3380–3388  
54 Junne, T. *et al.* (2006) The plug domain of yeast Sec61p is important for efficient protein translocation, but is not essential for cell viability. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 17, 4063–4068  
55 Maillard, A.P. *et al.* (2006) Deregulation of the SecYEG translocation channel upon removal of the plug domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 1281–1287  
56 Mitra, K. *et al.* (2005) Structure of the *E. coli* protein-conducting channel bound to a translating ribosome. *Nature* 438, 318–324  
57 Driessen, A.J. (1993) SecA, the peripheral subunit of the *Escherichia coli* precursor protein translocase, is functional as a dimer. *Biochemistry* 32, 13190–13197  
58 Or, E. *et al.* (2002) Dissociation of the dimeric SecA ATPase during protein translocation across the bacterial membrane. *EMBO J.* 21, 4470–4479  

---

Elsevier.com – linking scientists to new research and thinking

Designed for scientists’ information needs, Elsevier.com is powered by the latest technology with customer-focused navigation and an intuitive architecture for an improved user experience and greater productivity.

The easy-to-use navigational tools and structure connect scientists with vital information – all from one entry point. Users can perform rapid and precise searches with our advanced search functionality, using the FAST technology of Scirus.com, the free science search engine. Users can define their searches by any number of criteria to pinpoint information and resources. Search by a specific author or editor, book publication date, subject area – life sciences, health sciences, physical sciences and social sciences – or by product type. Elsevier’s portfolio includes more than 1800 Elsevier journals, 2200 new books every year and a range of innovative electronic products. In addition, tailored content for authors, editors and librarians provides timely news and updates on new products and services.

Elsevier is proud to be a partner with the scientific and medical community. Find out more about our mission and values at Elsevier.com. Discover how we support the scientific, technical and medical communities worldwide through partnerships with libraries and other publishers, and grant awards from The Elsevier Foundation.

As a world-leading publisher of scientific, technical and health information, Elsevier is dedicated to linking researchers and professionals to the best thinking in their fields. We offer the widest and deepest coverage in a range of media types to enhance cross-pollination of information, breakthroughs in research and discovery, and the sharing and preservation of knowledge.

Elsevier. Building insights. Breaking boundaries.
www.elsevier.com
