
REVIEW S

---

**Osteoimmunology: shared mechanisms and crosstalk between the immune and bone systems**

**Hiroshi Takayanagi**

Abstract | Osteoimmunology is an interdisciplinary research field focused on the molecular understanding of the interplay between the immune and skeletal systems. Although osteoimmunology started with the study of the immune regulation of osteoclasts, its scope has been extended to encompass a wide range of molecular and cellular interactions, including those between osteoblasts and osteoclasts, lymphocytes and osteoclasts, and osteoblasts and haematopoietic cells. Therefore, the two systems should be understood to be integrated and operating in the context of the ‘osteoimmune’ system, a heuristic concept that provides not only a framework for obtaining new insights by basic research, but also a scientific basis for the discovery of novel treatments for diseases related to both systems.

---

**Osteoclastogenesis**  
A process whereby haematopoietic stem cells differentiate into multinucleated osteoclasts with bone-resorbing activity.

The close relationship between the immune and skeletal systems has long been appreciated, since the pioneering works in the early 1970s (REFS 1–4). Soluble factors secreted from antigen-stimulated immune cells were known as osteoclast-activating factors¹, one of which was revealed to be interleukin-1 (IL-1)³. Since then, accumulating evidence has indicated that the immune and skeletal systems share a number of regulatory molecules including cytokines, receptors, signalling molecules and transcription factors⁵,⁶. Furthermore, immune cells are formed and haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are maintained in the bone marrow where they interact with bone cells. Therefore, the evidence that the physiology and pathology of one system might affect the other is compelling (FIG. 1) and the term osteoimmunology was coined to cover these overlapping scientific fields⁷.

The most typical example of the interaction between the skeletal and immune systems is seen in the abnormal and/or prolonged activation of the immune system in autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, that lead to bone destruction caused by bone-resorbing osteoclasts⁸,⁹. Osteoclast differentiation is regulated by macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)¹⁰ and receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) ligand (RANKL; also known as TNFSF11), a tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-family cytokine¹¹,¹². A mutation in the M-CSF gene causes a defect in both macrophage and osteoclast formation, pointing to the notion that immune cells and bone cells are derived from the same origin¹³. RANKL is not only expressed by the bone-forming osteoblasts that support osteoclastogenesis in bone tissue, but also by activated T cells, indicating that osteoclastic bone resorption is influenced by the immune system¹²,¹⁴. As the analyses of osteoclasts and RANKL have been at the forefront of recent progress in osteoimmunology, this Review first focuses on the signalling mechanism of RANKL and the role of immune mediators in osteoclastic signal transduction.

However, M-CSF and RANKL are not the only factors linking the immune and skeletal systems. Targeted disruption of various immunomodulatory molecules has resulted in unexpected phenotypes in the skeletal system (TABLE 1; **Supplementary information S1** (table)). It is worth noting that extracellular matrix components, such as osteopontin, also have crucial roles in both systems. Moreover, recent studies have indicated that osteoblasts and even osteoclasts are involved in the maintenance and regulation of HSCs, indicating the crucial role of skeletal cells in both the haematopoietic and immune systems¹⁵–¹⁸. Clinically, the effectiveness of TNF-specific antibody therapy against bone destruction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis also highlights the importance of the relationship between the immune and skeletal systems¹⁹. Therefore, osteoimmunology is becoming increasingly important for understanding the pathogenesis of, and developing new therapeutic strategies for, diseases affecting both

Department of Cell Signaling, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Yushima 1-5-45, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549; COE Program for Frontier Research on Molecular Destruction and Reconstruction of Tooth and Bone, Tokyo Medical and Dental University; and SORST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Honcho 4-1-8, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.  
e-mail: taka.csi@tmd.ac.jp  
doi:10.1038/nri2062

---

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

systems. Here I introduce the key cells and molecules involved in the interactions between the bone and immune systems and summarize recent progress in this field.

### Overview of the cells in the skeletal system

The bony skeleton, the essential component of the skeletal system, enables locomotive activity, the storage of calcium and the harbouring of HSCs from which immune cells are derived. This multifunctional organ is characterized by calcified hard tissue composed of type I collagen and highly organized deposits of calcium phosphate (hydroxyapatite)²⁰. Although it seems to be metabolically inert, bone is restructured at such a high speed that approximately 10% of the total bone content is replaced per year in adult vertebrates. This process, called bone remodelling, is dependent on the dynamic balance of bone formation and resorption, which are mediated by osteoblasts and osteoclasts, respectively. A delicate regulation of this process is a prerequisite for normal bone homeostasis (TABLE 1; Supplementary information S1 (table)), and an imbalance is often linked to metabolic bone diseases in humans, such as osteoporosis and inflammatory bone loss²¹.

Osteoblasts are cells of mesenchymal origin that secrete bone-matrix proteins and promote mineralization²⁰,²¹. The proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts are under the control of a number of soluble factors and transcription factors such as RUNX2 (runt-related transcription factor 2) and OSTERIX (also known as SP7)²²,²³. Differentiated osteoblasts embedded in the bone matrix are called osteocytes, and might have a specific but as-yet unclear role in mechanotransduction²⁰.

Osteoclasts are cells of haematopoietic origin that decalcify and degrade the bone matrix by acid decalcification and proteolytic degradation, respectively²⁴. They are large, multinucleated cells formed by the fusion of precursor cells of the monocyte–macrophage lineage. *In vitro* osteoclast differentiation is supported by mesenchymal cells (bone-marrow stromal cells or osteoblasts) through cell–cell contact²⁵, although there has been little *in vivo* information about osteoclastogenesis-supporting cells. Osteoclastogenic signals are mediated by RANKL and its co-stimulatory signals, in addition to M-CSF⁵,¹¹,¹². The congenital lack of osteoclasts leads to osteopetrosis, which is characterized by a high bone mass and a defect in bone-marrow formation. Naturally occurring mutant mice or genetically modified mice with osteopetrosis have provided insights into the molecular mechanism of osteoclast differentiation and function²⁶ (TABLE 1; Supplementary information S1 (table)): M-CSF and the transcription factor PU.1 are crucial for the proliferation and survival of osteoclast precursor cells; transcription factors such as cFOS, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and NF-κB have been shown to be essential for osteoclast differentiation; and factors such as cSRC, VAV3, β₃-integrin, chloride-channel family member ClC7, vacuolar ATPase and cathepsin K are crucial for osteoclast function²⁶.

---

**Osteoporosis**

A metabolic or age-related (often occurring in postmenopausal women) disease in which low bone mineral density causes bone fragility.

**Mechanotransduction**

A process by which the mechanical stress (such as gravity, loading and tension) is converted to biological responses, which in this case control bone remodelling.

**Osteopetrosis**

A rare congenital disease with extremely high bone mass and low strength (typically, no bone-marrow formation and no tooth eruption), which results from impaired differentiation or function of osteoclasts.

---

**Inputs**
- Calcium intake
- Mechanostress
- Ageing
- Stress
- Tumour
- Infection
- Inflammation

**Controllers**
- Immune system
- Other regulatory systems

**Bone**
- Bone marrow
  - Haematopoietic cells
  - Osteoblast
  - Osteoclast
- Osteocyte

**Outputs**
- Calcium metabolism
- Bone mass/quality (locomotion and body support)
- Haematopoiesis

Figure 1 | **The osteimmune system.** The skeletal system is involved in the regulation of three main outputs that are related to calcium reserves, locomotion and haematopoiesis. To maintain homeostasis while responding to various inputs (such as nutrition, mechanical stress, ageing, and inflammation), the cells in the bone marrow are controlled by the immune systems in concert with other regulatory systems, such as the endocrine and neural systems. As depicted, the bone system and the immune system in the bone-marrow microenvironment are regulated as if they were integrated in the context of the osteimmune system.

---

### M-CSF

M-CSF was first identified as an essential factor for osteoclastogenesis. M-CSF transmits its signal to the cell through the specific receptor cFMS, which is a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase superfamily. M-CSF is crucial for the proliferation and survival of precursor cells of osteoclasts as well as macrophages, mainly by activating ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) through GRB2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2) and AKT through PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)¹⁰. M-CSF also stimulates the expression of RANK in

Familial expansile osteolysis (FEO). A rare autosomal-dominant disorder resembling Paget’s disease of bone (PDB), characterized by the erosion of long bones by progressive osteoclastic resorption (the constitutive active mutation of RANK has been reported).

Paget’s disease of the bone (PDB). A metabolic bone disorder in which focal abnormalities of increased bone turnover (excessive osteoclastic bone resorption and irregular bone formation) lead to bone pain and deformity.

monocyte-macrophage precursor cells, thereby rendering them able to efficiently respond to RANKL. PU.1, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, regulates the development of macrophages and osteoclasts by controlling the expression of cFMS²⁷. MITE, activated by M-CSF, induces BCL-2 (B-cell lymphoma 2), which has a pivotal role in cell survival²⁸. The transgenic expression of BCL-2 rescues the osteopetrosis found in *op/op* mice (which are deficient in M-CSF), indicating the main role of M-CSF as a survival factor of osteoclast precursor cells²⁹.

**RANKL**

*The crucial role of RANKL in bone.* It was unexpected both for bone biologists and for immunologists that the long-sought osteoclast-differentiation factor expressed by osteoblasts would be the same molecule expressed by T cells to stimulate dendritic cells (DCs)³⁰⁻³³. This osteoclast-differentiation factor is now called RANKL, or TNF-related activation-induced cytokine (TRANCE), according to the nomenclature of the immune system. RANKL, a type II membrane protein, belongs to the TNF superfamily and contains a C-terminal receptor-binding domain and a transmembrane domain. Its receptor, RANK, is a type I membrane protein sharing high homology with CD40, and the binding of RANKL to RANK is inhibited by the decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG)³⁴,³⁵. In bone, RANKL is expressed by osteoclastogenesis-supporting cells, including osteoblasts, in response to osteoclastogenic factors, such as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ (1,25(OH)₂D₃), prostaglandin E₂ (PGE₂) and parathyroid hormone, and is a crucial determinant of the level of bone resorption *in vivo*²⁵. A series of genetically modified mice has clearly shown that RANKL and its receptor RANK are indispensable for osteoclastogenesis¹²,³⁶, and human mutations in RANK and OPG cause familial expansile osteolysis and

**Table 1 | Bone phenotypes in mice deficient in osteoimmunoregulatory molecules**

| Disrupted osteoimmunomodulatory molecule | Osteoclast-mediated bone resorption | Osteoblast-mediated bone formation | Bone volume | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Differentiation | Function |  |  |
| **Cytokine or secreted protein** |  |  |  |  |
| RANKL | ↓ | ND | ND | ↑ | 12 |
| **Receptors, channels and membrane factors** |  |  |  |  |
| DAP12/FcRγ | ↓ | ↓ | ↓ | ↑ | 99 |
| DC-STAMP | ↓ | ↓ | ND | ↑ | 94 |
| Plexin-A1 | ↓ | ↓ | ↔ | ↑ | 97 |
| IFNα/βR1 | ↑ | ND | ↔ | ↓ | 72 |
| IFNγR1 | ↑* | ND | ND | ND | 73 |
| EPHB4† | ↓ | ↓ | ↑ | ↑ | 96 |
| **Adaptor and signalling molecules** |  |  |  |  |
| TRAF6 | ↓ | ND | ND | ↑ | 49 |
| GAB2 | ↓ | ND | ↔ | ↑ | 56 |
| STAT1 | ↑ | ND | ↑ | ↑ | 88 |
| SOCS1/3 | ↓* | ND | ND | ND | 90 |
| **Kinases and phosphatases** |  |  |  |  |
| NIK | ↓* | ND | ND | ↔ | 76 |
| IKKβ | ↓ | ND | ↓ | ↑ | 75 |
| SHP1 (me*/me*)§ | ↑ | ND | ↓ | ↓ | 102 |
| SHIP1 | ↑ | ↑ | ND | ↓ | 104 |
| **Transcription factors** |  |  |  |  |
| NF-κB p50/p52 | ↓ | ND | ↔ | ↑ | 53 |
| NFATc1 | ↓ | ND | ↓ | ↑ | 63 |
| NFATc2 | ↔ | ↔ | ↓ | ↓ | 81 |
| SHN3 | ↔ | ↔ | ↑ | ↑ | 91 |

*Analysed in models of inflammatory bone loss. †Data in transgenic mice. §Naturally occurring mutant in brackets. See the full list of mutant mice in Supplementary information S1 (table). ↑, increased; ↓, decreased; ↔, unchanged; DC-STAMP, dendritic-cell-specific transmembrane protein; EPHB4, ephrin receptor B4; FcRγ, Fc receptor common γ-subunit; GAB2, growth-factor-receptor-bound-protein-2-associated binding protein 2; IFN, interferon; IKK-β, inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB (IκB) kinase-β; ND, not determined; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; NIK, NF-κB-inducing kinase; RANKL, receptor activator of NF-κB ligand; SHN3, Schnurri-3; SHIP1, SH2-domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase; SHP1, SH2-domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1; SOCS, suppressor of cytokine signalling; STAT1, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1; TRAF6, tumour-necrosis factor-receptor-associated factor 6.

a Generation of osteoclast precursor cells by M-CSF

- Unknown ligand
- Ig-like receptor
- DAP12 or FcRγ
- NFATc2

Cytosol
Nucleus

b Early response to RANKL

- RANKL
- TRAF6
- Phosphorylation of ITAM
- NFATc2
- Co-stimulatory signals

c Initial induction of NFATc1

- SYK
- PLCγ
- Ca²⁺
- NF-κB
- NFATc2
- NFATc1

d Autoamplification of NFATc1

- SYK
- PLCγ
- Ca²⁺
- cFOS
- CREB
- CaMKIV
- Calcineurin
- AP1
- Auto-amplification
- NFATc1

e Induction of osteoclast-specific genes

- SYK
- PLCγ
- Ca²⁺
- Calcineurin
- API
- MITF
- PU.1
- CREB
- NFATc1
- Induction of osteoclast-specific genes

Figure 2 | Spatiotemporal control of signal transduction during osteoclastogenesis. Osteoclast differentiation is induced by M-CSF (macrophage colony-stimulating factor), RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) ligand) and its co-stimulatory factor, immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptor. a | Precursor-cell stage. The binding of M-CSF to its receptor, cFMS, activates the proliferation and survival of osteoclast precursor cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage that express RANK. The co-stimulatory receptors might be stimulated from early stages, although ligands of co-stimulatory receptors have yet to be identified. b | Proximal RANK signals. RANKL binding to RANK results in the recruitment of TRAF6 (tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor 6). At the same time, RANK activation results in the phosphorylation of the ITAM (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif) in DAP12 and FcRγ (Fc-receptor common γ-subunit), both of which are adaptor proteins associating with distinct Ig-like receptors. Ig-like receptor signals are called co-stimulatory signals for RANK. c | Initial induction of NFATc1 (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 1). NFATc1, a key transcription factor for osteoclastogenesis, is initially induced by TRAF6-activated NF-κB and NFATc2 that is present in the cell before RANKL stimulation. Phosphorylation of the ITAM in DAP12 (or FcRγ) results in the recruitment of spleen tyrosine kinases (SYKs) that activate calcium signalling through phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ). d | Auto-amplification of NFATc1. Calcium-signal-mediated persistent activation of NFATc1, as well as cooperation with activator protein 1 (AP1), is a prerequisite for the robust induction of NFATc1. AP1 activation is mediated by the induction and activation of cFOS by CaMKIV (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV)-stimulated CREB (cyclic AMP responsive-element-binding protein) and cFMS. The NFATc1 promoter is epigenetically activated through histone acetylation and NFATc1 binds to an NFAT-binding site of its own promoter. e | In the nucleus, NFATc1 works together with other transcription factors, such as AP1, PU.1, MITF (microphthalmia-associated transcription factor) and CREB, to induce various osteoclast-specific genes, including TRAP (tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase), cathepsin K and calcitonin receptor.

juvenile Paget’s disease of the bone, respectively<sup>37</sup>. T cells not only express RANKL on their membrane, but also release it as a soluble form, although the *in vivo* function of the soluble form remains to be clarified<sup>12,38</sup>.

**Immunological functions of RANKL.** Interestingly, *RANKL*<sup>−/−</sup> mice have a defect in the development of secondary lymphoid organs<sup>36</sup> (a lack of lymph nodes and abnormality in the spleen) and mammary glands<sup>39</sup>. RANKL might regulate lymphotoxin expression in lymph nodes, but the intact formation of Peyer’s patches in *RANKL*<sup>−/−</sup> mice indicates a more complicated mechanism that needs to be clarified<sup>12</sup>.

T cells that express RANKL have a positive role in DC activation and survival *in vitro*<sup>30,40,41</sup>, indicating that the RANKL–RANK system regulates DC function through the T cell–DC interaction. However, DC development and function are normal in *RANKL*<sup>−/−</sup> mice<sup>12</sup> and the function of RANKL in the eradication of pathogens such as viruses has not been clearly observed *in vivo*<sup>42</sup>. The inhibition of RANKL greatly decreases antiviral responses in mice lacking CD40L, possibly because the CD40L–CD40 system has a redundant role<sup>42</sup>. On the basis of this functional redundancy, the crucial role of RANKL in the immune system might not be obvious under physiological conditions.

RANKL was shown to have a pathological role in a model of inflammatory bowel disease, indicating that RANKL stimulates DC activation *in vivo* and accelerates immune reactions under certain autoimmune conditions<sup>43</sup>. On the other hand, RANKL is involved in the generation of regulatory T cells in a diabetic model<sup>44</sup>. In addition, RANKL expressed by keratinocytes in the skin has a crucial role in the control of regulatory T cells by modulating the function of Langerhans cells and it suppresses autoimmune reactions induced by CD40L<sup>45</sup>. These reports clearly indicate that RANKL has an immunosuppressive role *in vivo*. In addition, a recent report indicated that RANKL is a chemotactic factor for RANK-expressing tumour cells as well as osteoclasts, indicating that RANKL also functions as a chemokine<sup>46</sup>. Therefore, although the function of RANKL in the immune system needs to be elucidated in more detail, it is clear that RANKL is one of the most important molecules that explicitly link the bone and immune systems.

**Cellular response to RANKL.** The intracellular signalling pathways of RANKL have been extensively studied in the context of osteoclast differentiation<sup>11</sup> (FIG. 2). RANK lacks intrinsic enzymatic activity in its intracellular domain, and transduces signalling by recruiting adaptor molecules such as the TNF-receptor-associated factor (TRAF) family of proteins<sup>47</sup>. Among the TRAF proteins, gene-disruption studies<sup>48,49</sup> followed by intensive molecular analyses identified TRAF6 as the main adaptor molecule that links RANK to the differentiation and function of osteoclasts<sup>50–52</sup>. By an as-yet-unknown mechanism, RANKL binding to RANK induces the trimerization of RANK and TRAF6, which leads to the activation of NF-κB and mitogen-activated kinases (MAPKs), including JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 (REF. 52). The essential role of NF-κB in osteoclastogenesis has been shown genetically<sup>53,54</sup>, but the *in vivo* function of each MAPK remains to be elucidated. The lysine-63-linked polyubiquitylation mediated by the RING (really interesting new gene)-finger motif of TRAF6 has been shown to be important for NF-κB activation in other cell types<sup>55</sup>, but deletion analysis has indicated that the RING-finger domain of TRAF6 is dispensable for the formation of osteoclasts<sup>52</sup>. Therefore, the importance of the ubiquitin-ligase activity of TRAF6 in osteoclastogenesis is yet to be established.

Although RANK activation is linked to the phosphorylation of DAP12 (also known as TYROBP and KARAP) and Fc-receptor common γ-subunit (FcRγ), as mentioned below, it is still not clear how RANK alone among the TRAF6-binding receptors is able to stimulate osteoclastogenesis so strongly. Additional RANK-specific adaptor molecule(s) might exist and enhance TRAF6 signalling<sup>50</sup>. For example, the molecular scaffold GRB2-associated binding protein 2 (GAB2) has been shown to be associated with RANK and to have an important role in its signal transduction<sup>56</sup>. Signalling crosstalk between RANKL and M-CSF, another essential cytokine for osteoclast differentiation, might be crucially important for osteoclastogenesis<sup>10</sup>, but it is only partially characterized (FIG. 3). Similar to RANK, Toll-like receptors (TLRs) also use TRAF6 as a crucial component of their signalling cascade<sup>57</sup>, but how such receptor signalling is able to bring about completely distinct outputs is poorly understood.

RANK also activates the transcription-factor complex, activator protein 1 (AP1), through induction of its component cFOS<sup>58</sup>, which has recently been shown to be dependent on the activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV (CaMKIV) and cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB)<sup>59</sup>. Importantly, RANKL specifically and strongly induces nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1), the master regulator of osteoclast differentiation<sup>60</sup>, and this induction is dependent on both the TRAF6–NF-κB and the cFOS pathways. The NFAT family of transcription factors was originally discovered in T cells, but they are involved in the regulation of various biological systems<sup>61,62</sup>. Activation of NFAT is mediated by a specific phosphatase, calcineurin, which is activated by calcium–calmodulin signalling. The essential and sufficient role of the *NFATc1* gene in osteoclastogenesis has been shown both *in vitro* and *in vivo*<sup>60,63</sup>. The *NFATc1* promoter contains NFAT binding sites and NFATc1 specifically autoregulates its own promoter during osteoclastogenesis and enables the robust induction of NFATc1 (REF. 63). AP1 (containing cFOS) and continuous activation of calcium signalling is crucial for this auto-amplification<sup>60,64</sup>. NFATc1 regulates a number of osteoclast-specific genes, such as cathepsin K, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), calcitonin receptor, osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR) and β<sub>3</sub>-integrin, in cooperation with other transcription factors such as AP1, PU.1 and MITF<sup>60,65–67</sup>. A recent study indicated that CREB activated by CaMKIV also cooperates with

NFATc1 in the activation of osteoclast-specific genes⁵⁹. Compared with the wealth of information on the role of RANKL in osteoclasts, it remains unclear whether RANKL uses the same signalling mechanism when it exerts its functions in the immune system⁴⁰,⁴¹,⁴⁴.

Interplay with other cytokine systems. Osteoclasts are derived from the haematopoietic lineage and are therefore naturally influenced by cytokines that direct haematopoietic-cell differentiation. Crosstalk among cytokines is a target of much interest for osteoimmunology, and

**Osteoblast**

- **RANKL**
- **OPG**
- **RANK**

**Osteoclast**

- **CD40L**
- **IL-1**
- **IFNγ**
- **TRAF6**
- **IKKs**
- **MAPKs**
- **cFOS**
- **CREB**
- **CaMKIV**
- **Calcineurin**
- **NF-κB**
- **AP1**
- **NFATc1**
- **Auto-amplification**
  - **PU.1**
  - **AP1**
  - **NFATc1**
  - **MITF**
  - **CREB**
- **Osteoclast differentiation**
  - **DC-STAMP**
  - **ATP6V0D2**
  - **Cathespin K**
  - **MMP9**
  - **ATP6I**
  - **CLIC7**
- **Bone resorption**
- **Fusion**
- **Cytoskeletal reorganization**
- **Proliferation and survival**
  - **PI3K**
  - **AKT**
  - **GRB2**
  - **ERK**
  - **VAV3**
  - **cSRC**
  - **cCBL**
- **Unknown**
- **Ig-like receptor**
- **DAP12 or FcRγ**
- **SYK**
- **PLCγ**
- **Ca²⁺**
- **M-CSF**
- **cFMS**

Figure 3 | Osteoimmunological interactions in osteoclasts and osteoblasts. The immune and skeletal systems share cytokines, receptors, signalling molecules and transcription factors, all of which cooperatively regulate osteoclasts and osteoblasts as well as their interactions. Osteoblasts regulate osteoclastogenesis through receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) ligand (RANKL)-RANK (and its decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG)) interactions, macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)-cFMS interactions and immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptors associated with immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-harbouring adaptor molecules (such as DAP12 and Fc-receptor common γ-subunit (FcRγ), the ligands of which are not well characterized). Although not depicted, semaphorin 6D and its receptor plexin A1, and ephrin receptor B4 and ephrin B2 were newly identified as mediators of osteoblast–osteoclast interactions. There are extensive signalling pathways in osteoclasts. RANK and Ig-like receptors stimulate downstream signalling cascades (such as tumour-necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), NF-κB, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), activator protein 1 (AP1), calcineurin and nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1)), which are influenced by a number of immunoregulatory molecules including CD40 ligand (CD40L), interleukin-1 (IL-1), interferon-β (IFNβ), IFNγ, TNF and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Dendritic-cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP) and ATP6V0D2 are necessary for the fusion of osteoclast precursor cells. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT and GRB2-ERK (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2-extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) pathways are important for the proliferation and survival of the osteoclast lineage, whereas VAV3, cSRC and Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (cCBL) are included in the molecules required for cytoskeletal reorganization and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Osteoclast activity is dependent on acidifying proton pump ATP6I and chloride channel CLIC7, as well as matrix-degrading enzymes such as cathepsin K and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9). The following molecules are known to be involved in both the bone system and the immune system: NF-κB, RANKL, RANK, OPG, cFMS, M-CSF, Ig-like receptors, FcRγ, DAP12, TRAF6, MAPKs, AP1, calcineurin, NFATc1, CD40L, IL-1, IFNγ, IFNβ, TNF, LPS, DC-STAMP, PI3K, AKT, ERK, VAV3, cSRC and cCBL. CaMKIV, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV; CREB, cyclic AMP responsive-element-binding protein; IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB (IkB) kinase; SYK, spleen tyrosine kinase.

is of great clinical relevance. Inflammatory cytokines that are mainly produced by macrophages, such as IL-1, TNF and IL-6, promote osteoclastogenesis, and are also called osteolytic cytokines on the basis of their bone-resorbing effect *in vivo*²⁴,²⁵. IL-1 stimulates TRAF6 (and therefore activates NF-κB and MAPKs) and synergizes with RANKL to induce mature osteoclasts to carry out bone-resorbing activity, but, interestingly, IL-1 alone cannot induce differentiation, indicating that TRAF6 activation is not sufficient. IL-1 also indirectly facilitates osteoclastogenesis by acting on the osteoblasts through the induction of PGE₂, and induces the expression of RANKL²⁵. TNF stimulates the activation of NF-κB mainly through TRAF2. Although TNF alone cannot induce osteoclastogenesis *in vivo*, nor can TNF over-expression rescue the deficiency of RANKL⁶⁸,⁶⁹, it is reported that TNF with transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) induces *in vitro* osteoclastogenesis even in the absence of RANK or TRAF6 (REF. 70). These results indicate that TNF has a pivotal role in the pathological activation of osteoclasts that are associated with inflammation.

Type I IFNs (that is, IFNα and IFNβ) are essential for host defence against pathogens such as viruses. The induction mechanism of type I IFNs in response to pathogen-associated molecular patterns has been well documented⁷¹, and recent studies on TLR signalling have provided new insights into the mechanism and the function of the IFN system⁵⁷. Similar to TLRs, RANKL induces the *IFNB* gene in osteoclast precursor cells, and IFNβ functions as a negative-feedback regulator that inhibits the differentiation of osteoclasts by interfering with the RANKL-induced expression of cFOS⁷². The importance of type I IFNs in bone homeostasis was underscored by the observation that mice deficient in the type-I-IFN-receptor component IFNAR1 spontaneously develop marked osteopaenia, accompanied by enhanced osteoclastogenesis⁷².

As T-cell activation is often associated with abnormal bone resorption, the regulation of bone metabolism by T cells is one of the central subjects of osteoimmunology⁸,¹⁴,⁷³. T cells express RANKL, but the main T-cell cytokines such as IFNγ, IL-4 and IL-10 are all inhibitory to *in vitro* osteoclastogenesis, and IL-12 and IL-18 also negatively affect osteoclastogenesis⁶,⁸, indicating a complex mechanism working *in vivo*, which will be discussed below.

### Immune mediators in osteoimmunology

#### Transcription factors
NF-κB is a family of dimeric transcription factors including REL (cREL), RELA (p65), RELB, NF-κB1 (p50) and NF-κB2 (p52, which is processed from its precursor, p100)⁷⁴. p50 and p52 function by heterodimerization with any of the three REL proteins containing transcriptional activation domains. Mice deficient in both p50 and p52 develop osteopetrosis owing to a defect in osteoclast differentiation, which indicates a crucial (but possibly overlapping) function of p50 and p52 in osteoclastogenesis⁵³,⁵⁴. NF-κB is required for NFATc1 induction, but it is not clear whether NFATc1 is the exclusive transcriptional target of NF-κB during osteoclastogenesis⁶³. Signals induced by the pro-inflammatory cytokines probably converge at the activation of NF-κB, which therefore has an integral role in osteoimmunological interactions. The function of classical and alternative NF-κB signalling pathways has been studied using mice deficient in inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) kinases (IKKs)⁷⁵ or NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK)⁷⁶, but further studies will be needed to obtain a complete understanding of their specific functions in osteoimmunology.

As mentioned above, the AP1 component cFOS is essential for the RANKL-mediated induction of NFATc1. The AP1 transcription factor is a dimeric complex composed of the FOS-family proteins (cFOS, FOSB, FOS-related antigen 1 (FRA1) and FRA2), JUN-family proteins (cJUN, JUNB and JUND) and activating transcription factor (ATF)-family proteins⁵⁸. The specific and indispensable functions of AP1 transcription factors in the regulation of osteoclasts and osteoblasts (for example, the role of cFOS and FRA1 in bone resorption and of FRA1 and ATF4 in bone formation) have been well established by a series of studies from genetically modified mice⁵⁸, but emerging evidence indicates that they also have an unexpectedly interesting role in the immune system (for example, the role of FOS in lipopolysaccharide signalling)⁷⁷,⁷⁸, which indicates the importance of AP1 in the osteoimmune system. Although the precise composition of AP1 dimers is not well characterized in the physiological context, a recent study showed that an AP1 dimer composed of FOS and any JUN protein induces osteoclastogenesis, but that FRA1 has different partners⁷⁹.

The NFAT transcription-factor family was originally identified in T cells, and comprises five known members: NFATc1 (also known as NFAT2), NFATc2 (also known as NFAT1), NFATc3 (also known as NFAT4), NFATc4 (also known as NFAT3) and NFAT5 (REFS 61,62). This family of transcription factors developed along with the evolution of vertebrates, and is involved in the regulation of various biological systems, such as the cardiovascular and muscular systems, in addition to the bone system and the immune system. As the activation of NFATc1–NFATc4 is mediated by the phosphatase calcineurin, which is activated by calcium–calmodulin signalling, calcineurin inhibitors such as FK506 and cyclosporin A strongly inhibit osteoclastogenesis⁶⁰. The necessary and sufficient role of the *NFATc1* gene in osteoclastogenesis was established using a genetic approach, and the robust induction of NFATc1 by an auto-amplification mechanism is dependent on the epigenetically determined chromatin structure of the *NFATc1* and *NFATc2* promoters⁶³. It is notable that NFATc1 has an exclusive role in osteoclasts but that NFATc1 and NFATc2 have a redundant role in T cells⁸⁰. The importance of NFAT in the regulation of bone homeostasis is also supported by the recent findings that NFAT and calcineurin regulate osteoblast differentiation and bone formation⁸¹⁻⁸³. It has been shown that NFAT regulates bone formation through interaction with OSTERIX⁸¹, but further studies are needed to clarify what activates calcineurin and NFAT in osteoblasts.

---

**Osteopaenia**  
A decrease in bone mineral density.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 2 (ID2) is a helix–loop–helix protein, which often functions as a negative regulator of helix–loop–helix transcription factors. Id2-deficient mice have no lymph nodes or Peyer’s patches<sup>84</sup>, and have a defect in mammary-gland formation as well as a defective development of natural killer cells<sup>85</sup>. In this respect, *Id2*<sup>−/−</sup> mice resemble *RANKL*<sup>−/−</sup> mice in many ways, but, interestingly, osteoclastogenesis is enhanced in *Id2*<sup>−/−</sup> cells<sup>86</sup>. ID2 therefore functions downstream of RANKL, but, depending on the context, it can be both a positive or negative regulator of RANKL signalling; this indicates a unique osteoimmunological function for this molecule.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) has a crucial role in the immune system as a mediator of signal transduction and a regulator of gene transcription in both type I and II IFN systems<sup>87</sup>. In the skeletal system, both types of IFN inhibit osteoclastogenesis through STAT1, but bone mass was increased in STAT1-deficient mice, despite increased osteoclastogenesis. Subsequently, STAT1 was found to have a unique, non-canonical function as a cytoplasmic attenuator of RUNX2, a key transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation<sup>88</sup>. Therefore, the loss of STAT1 results in excessive RUNX2 activation and osteoblast differentiation, thereby tipping the balance in favour of bone formation over bone resorption. This is an interesting example of an immunologically latent transcription factor having a distinct function in the skeletal system. As expected, the suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) proteins, which are crucial regulators of IFN and STAT signal transduction, are also involved in the diverse regulatory mechanisms of osteoimmunology<sup>89,90</sup>.

Schnurri-3 (SHN3), a zinc-finger protein, was first identified as a DNA-binding protein involved in the regulation of V(D)J recombination of immunoglobulin genes. However, SHN3 has been shown to have an important role in the control of bone formation through proteolytic degradation of RUNX2, to which the activity of WWP1 (WW domain-containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1) might also contribute<sup>91</sup>.

Therefore, accumulating evidence indicates that a great number of transcriptional regulators are shared by the immune and the bone systems, and they control not only osteoclasts but also osteoblasts (FIG. 3). Osteoblast-mediated bone formation is also affected by soluble factors such as cytokines in the immune system, including TNF, IL-1 and IL-4 (REF. 6); osteoblasts are therefore influenced by the immune cells, although the physiological and pathological significance and the molecular mechanisms are less well understood than in osteoclasts.

---

**Immunoreceptors and co-stimulation.** RANK and cFMS were thought to be necessary and sufficient for osteoclastogenesis<sup>24</sup>, but this was only based on the observation that the addition of RANKL and M-CSF is sufficient to induce osteoclast formation in a culture system. Genome-wide screening and gene-disruption studies have shed light on hitherto-unknown functions of immunological receptors, such as osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR; an immunoglobulin-like receptor)<sup>92</sup>, DC-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP; a seven-transmembrane-domain-containing receptor that mediates cell–cell fusion of osteoclasts)<sup>93,94</sup> and B7-H3 (a member of the B7 superfamily; also known as CD276)<sup>95</sup>, in addition to those involved in axon guidance, including the ephrin<sup>96</sup> and semaphorin receptors<sup>97</sup>. *In vitro* studies also have shown that osteoclast-inhibitory lectin (OCIL) and 4-1BB (also known as CD137) might be involved in the regulation of osteoclastogenesis. These findings indicate that osteoclast differentiation is regulated by additional receptor systems that cooperate with RANK and cFMS, and many of them are involved in the interaction between the osteoblast and osteoclast lineages. Therefore, an increasing number of ligand–receptor systems originally identified in the immune system have also been found to be functional in the skeletal system (FIG. 3; TABLE 1; **Supplementary information S1** (table)).

FcRγ and DAP12 are adaptor molecules that associate with immunoglobulin-like receptors, classically helping these receptors to express themselves on the membrane, and transduce signals through the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in natural killer and myeloid cells<sup>98</sup>. An osteopetrotic phenotype observed in mice deficient in both FcRγ and DAP12 led to the designation of immunoglobulin-like receptors as crucial co-stimulatory molecules for RANK<sup>99,100</sup>. The immunoglobulin-like receptors identified in osteoclast precursor cells include OSCAR, triggering receptor expressed in myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), signal-regulatory protein β1 (SIRPβ1) and paired immunoglobulin-like receptor A (PIRA), although the ligands and function of each of these receptors remain to be elucidated. ITAM-mediated signals cooperate with RANK to stimulate calcium signalling through ITAM phosphorylation and the resulting activation of spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) and phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ)<sup>101</sup>. As this pathway is crucial for the robust induction of NFATc1 that leads to osteoclastogenesis, but because ITAM signals alone cannot induce osteoclastogenesis, these signals should be called co-stimulatory signals for RANK<sup>5,99</sup>.

The role of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) in osteoclast differentiation remains to be elucidated, but osteoclastogenesis is enhanced in mice lacking phosphatases such as SH2-domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP1)<sup>102,103</sup> or SH2-domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase 1 (SHIP1)<sup>104</sup>, which counterbalance the ITAM signal in the immune system. The importance of the ITAM-harbouring adaptors and the receptors associated with them in bone metabolism is also underscored by reports that mutations in the *DAP12* and *TREM2* genes cause skeletal and psychotic abnormalities that are collectively known as Nasu–Hakola disease<sup>98</sup>. The expression of semaphorins, which are axon-guidance molecules and immunoregulators, has been observed in bone cells, but it has recently been shown that semaphorin 6D and its receptor plexin-A1 might have an important role in the activation of the DAP12-mediated ITAM signal through the interactions among plexin-A1, DAP12 and TREM2 (REF. 97).

---

**Nasu–Hakola disease**  
A rare autosomal-recessive disease characterized by systemic bone cysts and psychotic symptoms similar to dementia or schizophrenia (mutations in *DAP12* or *TREM2* genes are reported).

REVIEWS

Table 2 | Cytokines functioning in the regulation of osteoclast differentiation by T cells

| Cytokine | Effects on osteoclastogenesis | Main producer cells | Main target cells in the regulation of osteoclasts | Functions in the context of osteoimmunology |
|----------|---------------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| IFNγ     | Inhibition                     | T<sub>H</sub>1 cells and NK cells | Osteoclast precursor cells                      | Cellular immunity; RANKL signalling inhibition |
| IL-4     | Inhibition                     | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and NKT cells | Osteoclast precursor cells                      | Humoral immunity; RANKL signalling inhibition |
| IL-6     | Activation                     | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and DCs        | Mesenchymal cells and T cells                  | Inflammatory; RANKL induction on mesenchymal cells; T<sub>H</sub>17-cell differentiation |
| IL-10    | Inhibition                     | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells                | Osteoclast precursor cells                      | Anti-inflammatory; RANKL signalling inhibition |
| GM-CSF   | Inhibition                     | T<sub>H</sub>1 cells                | Osteoclast precursor cells                      | Granulocyte differentiation; RANKL signalling inhibition |
| IL-12    | Inhibition                     | Macrophages and DCs                 | T cells                                         | T<sub>H</sub>1-cell differentiation; IFNγ and GM-CSF induction |
| IL-17    | Activation                     | T<sub>H</sub>17 cells and memory T cells | Mesenchymal cells                              | Inflammatory; RANKL induction on mesenchymal cells |
| IL-18    | Inhibition                     | Macrophages and DCs                 | T cells                                         | T<sub>H</sub>1-cell differentiation, IFNγ induction |
| RANKL    | Activation                     | T cells and mesenchymal cells (osteoblasts) | Osteoclast precursor cells                      | Osteoclast differentiation induction |
| TNF      | Activation                     | Macrophages and T<sub>H</sub>1 cells | Osteoclast precursor cells and mesenchymal cells | Inflammatory; RANKL induction on mesenchymal cells; synergy with RANKL |

DC, dendritic cell; GM-CSF, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFNγ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer; NKT, natural killer T; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand; T<sub>H</sub>, Thelper; TNF, tumour-necrosis factor.

---

### Cellular interactions in the osteoimmune system

#### Lymphocyte regulation of osteoclasts.
Activation of the immune system is essential for host defence against pathogens, but aberrant and/or prolonged activation under certain pathological conditions results in tissue damage owing to the activation of effector cells. In autoimmune arthritis, it has long been a challenging question as to how the abnormal T-cell activation (characterized by infiltration of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells) mechanistically induces bone damage<sup>8,9</sup>. Researchers had already observed osteoclast-like cells at the bone-destruction site in the early 1980s (REF. 105), but the importance of osteoclasts has just recently come into general acceptance because of the therapeutic efficacy of osteoclast-targeted therapies<sup>14,106</sup> and the protection of osteoclast-deficient mice from inflammatory bone loss<sup>107,108</sup>. It remains unclear whether osteoclasts under physiological and inflammatory conditions have distinct characteristics, but osteoclasts are partly resistant to apoptosis induced by bisphosphonates in the presence of inflammatory cytokines.

As RANKL is expressed in activated T cells, T cells might have the capacity to induce osteoclast differentiation by directly acting on osteoclast-precursor cells<sup>14,109</sup>. However, the IFNγ produced by T cells potently suppresses RANKL signalling through downregulation of TRAF6 (REF. 73). T cells also secrete various cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-17 (REF. 110) (TABLE 2), so the effects of T cells on osteoclastogenesis should be dependent on the balance between positive and negative factors expressed by the T cells. As the well-known effector CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper (T<sub>H</sub>)-cell subsets T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 produce IFNγ and IL-4, respectively, both of which are anti-osteoclastogenic, it has been a paradox that activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in arthritis enhance osteoclastogenesis in the presence of these cytokines.

It is worthwhile to define what we believe to be a very rare but pathologically important T<sub>H</sub>-cell subset responsible for abnormal bone resorption as osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub> cells. Previous investigations in our laboratory and other studies on synovial T cells in rheumatoid arthritis clarified the characteristics of osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub> cells in autoimmune arthritis<sup>8,9</sup>. First, osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub> cells do not produce a large amount of IFNγ. Second, they trigger local inflammation and the production of inflammatory cytokines, including TNF, that induce RANKL expression on synovial fibroblasts. Third, osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub> cells express RANKL and might directly participate in accelerated osteoclastogenesis. Because these T<sub>H</sub> cells have such osteoclastogenic characteristics, they can tip the balance in favour of osteoclastogenesis in various aspects. Although autoimmune arthritis has been traditionally categorized as a T<sub>H</sub>1-type disease, T<sub>H</sub>1 cells do not have such characteristics, indicating that the osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub> cells might belong to an as-yet unknown subset.

Recent data from our laboratory indicate that an IL-17-producing T<sub>H</sub>-cell subset (T<sub>H</sub>17 cells) represents the long-sought-after osteoclastogenic T<sub>H</sub>-cell subset, fulfilling all the criteria mentioned above<sup>111</sup>. Therefore, the infiltration of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells into the inflammatory lesion links the abnormal T-cell response to bone damage (FIG. 4), and the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis should be reconsidered in the context of a T<sub>H</sub>17-type disease. Clearly, this subset will be an auspicious target of future therapy, and cytokines related to T<sub>H</sub>17-cell differentiation and expansion, such as IL-6, TGFβ and IL-23, will be of great clinical importance.

Compared with the established pathological role of T cells in arthritis, the role of T cells in non-inflammatory metabolic bone diseases such as postmenopausal osteoporosis has recently been proposed<sup>112</sup> but is

Rheumatoid joint | Normal joint
Inflamed synovium
Bone
Synovial membrane
Cartilage

Osteoclastogenesis and bone destruction
Osteoclast
Osteoclast precursor cell
Synovial macrophage
Blood vessel
Inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, IL-1 and IL-6
Increased RANKL
Synovial fibroblast
Synovial T cell (T_H17 cell)
IL-17

Figure 4 | How T cells induce osteoclastogenesis in autoimmune arthritis. In rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory synovium invades and destroys bone; this is mediated by osteoclasts that are induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL). Cells in the synovium include synovial macrophages and fibroblasts in addition to the dendritic cells, plasma cells, endothelial cells and infiltrating T cells. Although CD4⁺ T-cell infiltration is a hallmark of the pathogenesis of arthritis, the link between T cells and the activation of osteoclast-mediated bone resorption has only recently been shown: interleukin-17 (IL-17)-producing T helper cells (T_H17 cells) are the only osteoclastogenic T_H-cell subset characterized so far. T_H17 cells do not produce interferon-γ (IFNγ), which suppresses RANKL signalling, but secrete a huge amount of IL-17 that induces RANKL on synovial fibroblasts. IL-17 also stimulates the local inflammation and activates synovial macrophages to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour-necrosis factor (TNF), IL-1 and IL-6. These cytokines activate osteoclastogenesis by either directly acting on osteoclast precursor cells or inducing RANKL on synovial fibroblasts. T_H17 cells also express RANKL on their membrane, which partly contributes to the enhanced osteoclastogenesis.

not yet recognized by immunologists. The possibility that oestrogen regulates T-cell immune responses and that T-cell-mediated autoimmunity is involved in postmenopausal osteoporosis is intriguing, and further points to the notion of an intricate interplay between the immune and skeletal systems, but this concept is still highly controversial¹¹³ and will not be proved until the autoantigen that causes osteoporosis is identified¹¹⁴.

**Osteoblasts as a stem-cell niche.** Osteoimmunology is in the process of extending beyond the function of immune mediators in bone cells — increasing attention is currently being given to the regulation of HSCs by bone cells. The role of osteoblasts in haematopoiesis was proposed in a previous study, in which impaired haematopoiesis was observed after the chemical ablation of osteoblasts¹¹⁵. HSCs interact with specialized microenvironments, known as stem-cell niches, to maintain the ability of self-renewal and pluripotency. Osteoblasts on the trabecular bone surface have emerged as a crucial component of the niche, and the interaction between osteoblasts and HSCs is mediated by molecular interactions, such as N-cadherin–β-catenin, Jagged–Notch1 and angiopoietin-1–tyrosine kinase receptor 2 interactions¹⁵,¹⁶,¹⁸. It is possible that the osteoblast and niche functions are under the control of bi-potential regulators such as WNT¹¹⁶. The CXCL12–CXCR4 (CXC-chemokine ligand 12 (also known as SDF1)–CXC-chemokine receptor 4) system is also involved in the colonization of bone marrow by HSCs and in their retention in the bone marrow, but the localization of CXCL12-expressing cells is not consistent with that of osteoblasts on the trabecular bone surface¹¹⁷.

Therefore, the detailed localization and characterization of cells representing the stem-cell niche in the bone marrow remain to be clarified in the future. As it is unclear whether the bone-forming capacity is related to the function required for the niche, it is necessary to carefully reconsider the definition of osteoblasts. More recently, osteoclasts have also been indicated to be involved in the mobilization of HSCs¹⁷, further supporting the intimate relationship between the haematopoietic and skeletal systems.

Trabecular bone
A spongy and low-density type of osseous tissue with high surface area, which fills up the inner cavity of long bones and vertebrae.

REVIEW S

## Clinical implications

A detailed osteoimmunological understanding of the pathogenesis of bone destruction in many contexts will lead to novel strategies for the treatment of various diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, periodontal disease, Paget’s disease, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, multiple myeloma and metastatic bone tumours. Rheumatologists are now aware of the remarkable impact of TNF-specific antibody therapy on the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and other cytokines will soon be targeted by similar strategies using biological agents^{19}. The action of TNF and other inflammatory cytokines is not limited to the induction of local inflammation, but is directly and indirectly involved in the activation of osteoclasts, as mentioned above. Such osteoimmunological pleiotropy might explain the dramatic efficacy of the biological agent to prevent or even ameliorate bone destruction. In addition, the efficacy of a RANKL-specific antibody for postmenopausal osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis in clinical trials has been reported^{118,119}, and its apparent preventive effect on bone metastasis is enormously promising^{46}.

Interestingly, severe adverse effects of RANKL inhibition on the immune system have never been reported. The clinical relevance of newly recognized cytokines such as IL-17 and IL-23 has yet to be established in humans, but IL-6 inhibition, which is also under clinical trial with successful results, might have a dual impact on T_H17-mediated immune responses and bone^{120}. Although it is difficult to specifically target transcription factors and signalling molecules in drug treatment, some of the anti-rheumatic drugs inhibit osteoclastogenesis by suppressing the induction of NFATc1 (REF. 121). Therefore, the osteoimmunological perspective has enabled us to gain profound insights into the understanding of the mode of action of therapeutic drugs as well as a novel strategy for drug design.

## Concluding remarks and future perspectives

The bone system and the immune system share an abundance of molecules and regulatory mechanisms, and this, together with the importance of the interactions between the two systems might have resulted in the emergence of the field of osteoimmunology, but more attention should be paid to the differences in the future: how are distinct functions achieved through similar mechanisms? Similarly, genetically modified mice deficient in a molecule originally characterized in one system should be analysed in another system to clarify the functions in the context of the osteoimmune system. This will surely lead to an understanding of the molecular basis for the cell-lineage specification and, perhaps more importantly, cell-type-specific treatment despite the similarity of the two systems. The novel functions of bone cells in the regulation of cells outside the bone will have an impact on many genres of biomedical studies. For example, the crucial function of bone cells in the control of HSCs might provide new methods to modulate the HSC mobilization through bone cells. Therefore, there is reason to believe that both clinical and non-clinical researchers will benefit from the emerging insights that are leading to an integrated understanding of the osteoimmune system and its complex interactions.

---

1. Horton, J. E., Raisz, L. G., Simmons, H. A., Oppenheim, J. J. & Mergenhagen, S. E. Bone resorbing activity in supernatant fluid from cultured human peripheral blood leukocytes. *Science* **177**, 793–795 (1972).
2. Mundy, G. R., Raisz, L. G., Cooper, R. A., Schechter, G. P. & Salmon, S. E. Evidence for the secretion of an osteoclast stimulating factor in myeloma. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **291**, 1041–1046 (1974).
3. Dewhirst, F. E., Stashenko, P. P., Mole, J. E. & Tsurumachi, T. Purification and partial sequence of human osteoclast-activating factor: identity with interleukin 1 β. *J. Immunol.* **135**, 2562–2568 (1985).
4. Horowitz, M., Vignery, A., Gershon, R. K. & Baron, R. Thymus-derived lymphocytes and their interactions with macrophages are required for the production of osteoclast-activating factor in the mouse. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **81**, 2181–2185 (1984).
5. Takayanagi, H. Mechanistic insight into osteoclast differentiation in osteoimmunology. *J. Mol. Med.* **83**, 170–179 (2005).
6. Walsh, M. C. *et al*. Osteoimmunology: interplay between the immune system and bone metabolism. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **24**, 33–63 (2006).
7. Arron, J. R. & Choi, Y. Bone versus immune system. *Nature* **408**, 535–536 (2000).
8. Sato, K. & Takayanagi, H. Osteoclasts, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoimmunology. *Curr. Opin. Rheumatol.* **18**, 419–426 (2006).
9. Takayanagi, H. Inflammatory bone destruction and osteoimmunology. *J. Periodontal Res.* **40**, 287–293 (2005).
10. Ross, F. P. & Teitelbaum, S. L. α_vβ_3 and macrophage colony-stimulating factor: partners in osteoclast biology. *Immunol. Rev.* **208**, 88–105 (2005).
11. Asagiri, M. & Takayanagi, H. The molecular understanding of osteoclast differentiation. *Bone* **40**, 251–264 (2007).
12. Theill, L. E., Boyle, W. J. & Penninger, J. M. RANK-L and RANK: T cells, bone loss, and mammalian evolution. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **20**, 795–823 (2002).
13. Yoshida, H. *et al*. The murine mutation osteopetrosis is in the coding region of the macrophage colony stimulating factor gene. *Nature* **345**, 442–444 (1990).
14. Kong, Y. Y. *et al*. Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. *Nature* **402**, 304–309 (1999).
15. Arai, F. *et al*. Tie2/angiopoietin-1 signaling regulates hematopoietic stem cell quiescence in the bone marrow niche. *Cell* **118**, 149–161 (2004).
16. Calvi, L. M. *et al*. Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche. *Nature* **425**, 841–846 (2003). This is one of the initial studies showing that osteoblasts function as a haematopoietic stem-cell niche.
17. Kollet, O. *et al*. Osteoclasts degrade endosteal components and promote mobilization of hematopoietic progenitor cells. *Nature Med.* **12**, 657–664 (2006).
18. Zhang, J. *et al*. Identification of the haematopoietic stem cell niche and control of the niche size. *Nature* **425**, 836–841 (2003).
19. Palladino, M. A., Bahjat, F. R., Theodorakis, E. A. & Moldawer, L. L. Anti-TNFα therapies: the next generation. *Nature Rev. Drug Discov.* **2**, 736–746 (2003).
20. Seeman, E. & Delmas, P. D. Bone quality—the material and structural basis of bone strength and fragility. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **354**, 2250–2261 (2006).
21. Harada, S. & Rodan, G. A. Control of osteoblast function and regulation of bone mass. *Nature* **423**, 349–355 (2003).
22. Karsenty, G. & Wagner, E. F. Reaching a genetic and molecular understanding of skeletal development. *Dev. Cell* **2**, 389–406 (2002).
23. Nakashima, K. *et al*. The novel zinc finger-containing transcription factor osterix is required for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. *Cell* **108**, 17–29 (2002).
24. Boyle, W. J., Simonet, W. S. & Lacey, D. L. Osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Nature* **423**, 337–342 (2003).
25. Suda, T. *et al*. Modulation of osteoclast differentiation and function by the new members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor and ligand families. *Endocr. Rev.* **20**, 345–357 (1999).
26. Teitelbaum, S. L. & Ross, F. P. Genetic regulation of osteoclast development and function. *Nature Rev. Genet.* **4**, 638–649 (2003).
27. Tondravi, M. M. *et al*. Osteopetrosis in mice lacking haematopoietic transcription factor PU.1. *Nature* **386**, 81–84 (1997).
28. McGill, G. G. *et al*. Bcl2 regulation by the melanocyte master regulator Mitf modulates lineage survival and melanoma cell viability. *Cell* **109**, 707–718 (2002).
29. Lagasse, E. & Weissman, I. L. Enforced expression of Bcl-2 in monocytes rescues macrophages and partially reverses osteopetrosis in op/op mice. *Cell* **89**, 1021–1031 (1997). This is one of the important studies that determines the role of M-CSF in osteoclasts.
30. Anderson, D. M. *et al*. A homologue of the TNF receptor and its ligand enhance T-cell growth and dendritic-cell function. *Nature* **390**, 175–179 (1997).
31. Lacey, D. L. *et al*. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Cell* **93**, 165–176 (1998).
32. Wong, B. R. *et al*. TRANCE is a novel ligand of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 25190–25194 (1997).
33. Yasuda, H. *et al*. Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 3597–3602 (1998).
34. Simonet, W. S. *et al*. Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved in the regulation of bone density. *Cell* **89**, 309–319 (1997).

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group
www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

35. Tsuda, E. *et al.* Isolation of a novel cytokine from human fibroblasts that specifically inhibits osteoclastogenesis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **234**, 137–142 (1997).

36. Kong, Y. Y. *et al.* OPGL is a key regulator of osteoclastogenesis, lymphocyte development and lymph-node organogenesis. *Nature* **397**, 315–323 (1999). This study provides the first genetic evidence for the crucial role of RANKL in both immune and bone systems.

37. Whyte, M. P. & Mumm, S. Heritable disorders of the RANKL/OPG/RANK signaling pathway. *J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal. Interact.* **4**, 254–267 (2004).

38. Hikita, A. *et al.* Negative regulation of osteoclastogenesis by ectodomain shedding of receptor activator of NF-κB ligand. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 36846–36855 (2006). The authors show the functional difference between membrane-bound and soluble RANKL in osteoclastogenesis.

39. Fata, J. E. *et al.* The osteoclast differentiation factor osteoprotegerin-ligand is essential for mammary gland development. *Cell* **103**, 41–50 (2000).

40. Josien, R. *et al.* TRANCE, a tumor necrosis factor family member, enhances the longevity and adjuvant properties of dendritic cells *in vivo*. *J. Exp. Med.* **191**, 495–502 (2000).

41. Wong, B. R. *et al.* TRANCE, a TNF family member, activates Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c-Src. *Mol. Cell* **4**, 1041–1049 (1999).

42. Bachmann, M. F. *et al.* TRANCE, a tumor necrosis factor family member critical for CD40 ligand-independent T helper cell activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **189**, 1025–1031 (1999).

43. Ashcroft, A. J. *et al.* Colonic dendritic cells, intestinal inflammation, and T cell-mediated bone destruction are modulated by recombinant osteoprotegerin. *Immunity* **19**, 849–861 (2003).

44. Green, E. A., Choi, Y. & Flavell, R. A. Pancreatic lymph node-derived CD4+CD25+ T reg cells: highly potent regulators of diabetes that require TRANCE-RANK signals. *Immunity* **16**, 183–191 (2002). This study indicates an immunosuppressive role of RANKL through the induction of regulatory T cells.

45. Loser, K. *et al.* Epidermal RANKL controls regulatory T-cell numbers via activation of dendritic cells. *Nature Med.* **12**, 1372–1379 (2006).

46. Jones, D. H. *et al.* Regulation of cancer cell migration and bone metastasis by RANKL. *Nature* **440**, 692–696 (2006). The authors point to the notion that the chemokine-like function of RANKL contributes to tumour metastasis.

47. Wong, B. R. *et al.* The TRAF family of signal transducers mediates NF-κB activation by the TRANCE receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 28355–28359 (1998).

48. Lomaga, M. A. *et al.* TRAF6 deficiency results in osteopetrosis and defective interleukin-1, CD40, and LPS signaling. *Genes Dev.* **13**, 1015–1024 (1999).

49. Naito, A. *et al.* Severe osteopetrosis, defective interleukin-1 signalling and lymph node organogenesis in TRAF6-deficient mice. *Genes Cells* **4**, 353–362 (1999).

50. Gohda, J. *et al.* RANK-mediated amplification of TRAF6 signaling leads to NFATc1 induction during osteoclastogenesis. *EMBO J.* **24**, 790–799 (2005).

51. Kadono, Y. *et al.* Strength of TRAF6 signalling determines osteoclastogenesis. *EMBO Rep.* **6**, 17–176 (2005).

52. Kobayashi, N. *et al.* Segregation of TRAF6-mediated signaling pathways clarifies its role in osteoclastogenesis. *EMBO J.* **20**, 1271–1280 (2001).

53. Franzoso, G. *et al.* Requirement for NF-κB in osteoclast and B-cell development. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 3482–3496 (1997).

54. Iotsova, V. *et al.* Osteopetrosis in mice lacking NF-κB1 and NF-κB2. *Nature Med.* **3**, 1285–1289 (1997).

55. Chen, Z. J. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-κB pathway. *Nature Cell Biol.* **7**, 758–765 (2005).

56. Wada, T. *et al.* The molecular scaffold Gab2 is a crucial component of RANK signaling and osteoclastogenesis. *Nature Med.* **11**, 394–399 (2005).

57. Akira, S. & Takeda, K. Toll-like receptor signalling. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **4**, 499–511 (2004).

58. Wagner, E. F. & Eferl, R. Fos/AP-1 proteins in bone and the immune system. *Immunol. Rev.* **208**, 126–140 (2005).

59. Sato, K. *et al.* Regulation of osteoclast differentiation and function by the CaMK-CREB pathway. *Nature Med.* **12**, 1410–1416 (2006).

60. Takayanagi, H. *et al.* Induction and activation of the transcription factor NFATc1 (NFAT2) integrate RANKL signaling for terminal differentiation of osteoclasts. *Dev. Cell* **3**, 889–901 (2002).

61. Crabtree, G. R. & Olson, E. N. NFAT signaling: choreographing the social lives of cells. *Cell* **109**, S67–S79 (2002).

62. Hogan, P. G., Chen, L., Nardone, J. & Rao, A. Transcriptional regulation by calcium, calcineurin, and NFAT. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 2205–2232 (2003).

63. Asagiri, M. *et al.* Autoamplification of NFATc1 expression determines its essential role in bone homeostasis. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 1261–1269 (2005). Using chimeric mice, this report was the first to provide *in vivo* evidence that NFATc1 is essential for osteoclast differentiation.

64. Matsuo, K. *et al.* Nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) rescues osteoclastogenesis in precursors lacking c-Fos. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 26475–26480 (2004).

65. Crotti, T. N. *et al.* NFATc1 regulation of the human β3 integrin promoter in osteoclast differentiation. *Gene* **372**, 92–102 (2006).

66. Kim, Y. *et al.* Contribution of nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 to the transcriptional control of immunoreceptor osteoclast-associated receptor but not triggering receptor expressed by myeloid cells-2 during osteoclastogenesis. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 32905–32913 (2005).

67. Matsumoto, M. *et al.* Essential role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in cathepsin K gene expression during osteoclastogenesis through association of NFATc1 and PU.1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 45969–45979 (2004).

68. Lam, J. *et al.* TNF-α induces osteoclastogenesis by direct stimulation of macrophages exposed to permissive levels of RANK ligand. *J. Clin. Invest.* **106**, 1481–1488 (2000).

69. Li, P. *et al.* RANK signaling is not required for TNFα-mediated increase in CD11hi osteoclast precursors but is essential for mature osteoclast formation in TNFα-mediated inflammatory arthritis. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* **19**, 207–213 (2004).

70. Kim, N. *et al.* Osteoclast differentiation independent of the TRANCE-RANK-TRAF6 axis. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 589–595 (2005).

71. Takayanagi, H., Sato, K., Takaoka, A. & Taniguchi, T. Interplay between interferon and other cytokine systems in bone metabolism. *Immunol. Rev.* **208**, 181–193 (2005).

72. Takayanagi, H. *et al.* RANKL maintains bone homeostasis through c-Fos-dependent induction of interferon-β. *Nature* **416**, 744–749 (2002).

73. Takayanagi, H. *et al.* T cell-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis by signalling cross-talk between RANKL and IFN-γ. *Nature* **408**, 600–605 (2000).

74. Jimi, E. & Ghosh, S. Role of nuclear factor-κB in the immune system and bone. *Immunol. Rev.* **208**, 80–87 (2005).

75. Ruocco, M. G. *et al.* IkB kinase (IKK)β, but not IKKa, is a critical mediator of osteoclast survival and is required for inflammation-induced bone loss. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 1677–1687 (2005).

76. Novack, D. V. *et al.* The IkB function of NF-κB2 p100 controls stimulated osteoclastogenesis. *J. Exp. Med.* **198**, 771–781 (2003).

77. Ray, N. *et al.* c-Fos suppresses systemic inflammatory response to endotoxin. *Int. Immunol.* **18**, 671–677 (2006).

78. Zenz, R. *et al.* Psoriasis-like skin disease and arthritis caused by inducible epidermal deletion of Jun proteins. *Nature* **437**, 369–375 (2005).

79. Bakiri, L. *et al.* Role of heterodimerization of c-Fos and Fra1 proteins in osteoclast differentiation. *Bone* 23 Dec 2006 (doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.005).

80. Peng, S. L., Gerth, A. J., Ranger, A. M. & Glimcher, L. H. NFATc1 and NFATc2 together control both T and B cell activation and differentiation. *Immunity* **14**, 13–20 (2001).

81. Koga, T. *et al.* NFAT and Osterix cooperatively regulate bone formation. *Nature Med.* **11**, 880–885 (2005).

82. Sun, L. *et al.* Calcineurin regulates bone formation by the osteoblast. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 17130–17135 (2005).

83. Winslow, M. M. *et al.* Calcineurin/NFAT signaling in osteoblasts regulates bone mass. *Dev. Cell* **10**, 771–782 (2006).

84. Yokota, Y. *et al.* Development of peripheral lymphoid organs and natural killer cells depends on the helix-loop-helix inhibitor Id2. *Nature* **397**, 702–706 (1999).

85. Kim, N. S. *et al.* Receptor activator of NF-κB ligand regulates the proliferation of mammary epithelial cells via Id2. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 1002–1013 (2006).

86. Lee, J. *et al.* Id helix-loop-helix proteins negatively regulate TRANCE-mediated osteoclast differentiation. *Blood* **107**, 2686–2693 (2006).

87. Takayanagi, H., Kim, S., Koga, T. & Taniguchi, T. Stat1-mediated cytoplasmic attenuation in osteoimmunology. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **94**, 232–240 (2005).

88. Kim, S. *et al.* Stat1 functions as a cytoplasmic attenuator of Runx2 in the transcriptional program of osteoblast differentiation. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 1979–1991 (2003).

89. Hayashi, T., Kaneda, T., Toyama, Y., Kumegawa, M. & Hakeda, Y. Regulation of receptor activator of NF-κB ligand-induced osteoclastogenesis by endogenous interferon-β (INF-β) and suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS). The possible counteracting role of SOCSs in IFN-β-inhibited osteoclast formation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 27880–27886 (2002).

90. Ohishi, M. *et al.* Suppressors of cytokine signaling-1 and -3 regulate osteoclastogenesis in the presence of inflammatory cytokines. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 3024–3031 (2005).

91. Jones, D. C. *et al.* Regulation of adult bone mass by the zinc finger adapter protein Schnurri-3. *Science* **312**, 1223–1227 (2006). This paper reveals RUNX2 to be regulated by immunomodulatory proteins.

92. Kim, N., Takami, M., Rho, J., Josien, R. & Choi, Y. A novel member of the leukocyte receptor complex regulates osteoclast differentiation. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 201–209 (2002).

93. Kukita, T. *et al.* RANKL-induced DC-STAMP is essential for osteoclastogenesis. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 941–946 (2004).

94. Yagi, M. *et al.* DC-STAMP is essential for cell-cell fusion in osteoclasts and foreign body giant cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 345–351 (2005). This was the first *in vivo* evidence for the role of DC-STAMP in the regulation of osteoclast fusion.

95. Suh, W. K. *et al.* The immune regulatory protein B7-H3 promotes osteoblast differentiation and bone mineralization. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 12969–12973 (2004).

96. Zhao, C. *et al.* Bidirectional ephrinB2-EphB4 signaling controls bone homeostasis. *Cell Metab.* **4**, 111–121 (2006). This report was the first to describe the bidirectional function of the ephrin-EPH-family molecules in osteoclast-osteoblast interactions.

97. Takegahara, N. *et al.* Plexin-A1 and its interaction with DAP12 in immune responses and bone homeostasis. *Nature Cell Biol.* **8**, 615–622 (2006).

98. Humphrey, M. B., Lanier, L. L. & Nakamura, M. C. Role of ITAM-containing adapter proteins and their receptors in the immune system and bone. *Immunol. Rev.* **208**, 50–65 (2005).

99. Koga, T. *et al.* Costimulatory signals mediated by the ITAM motif cooperate with RANKL for bone homeostasis. *Nature* **428**, 758–763 (2004). This study shows that, in addition to RANKL and M-CSF, immunoglobulin-like receptor signals provide essential co-stimulation in osteoclast differentiation.

100. Mocsai, A. *et al.* The immunomodulatory adapter proteins DAP12 and Fc receptor γ-chain (FcRγ) regulate development of functional osteoclasts through the Syk tyrosine kinase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 6158–6163 (2004).

101. Mao, D., Apple, H., Uthgenannt, B., Novack, D. V. & Faccio, R. PLCγ2 regulates osteoclastogenesis via its interaction with ITAM proteins and GAB2. *J. Clin. Invest.* **116**, 2869–2879 (2006).

102. Aoki, K. *et al.* The tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 is a negative regulator of osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast resorbing activity: increased resorption and osteopenia in *mev/mev* mutant mice. *Bone* **25**, 261–267 (1999).

103. Umeda, S. *et al.* Deficiency of SHP-1 protein-tyrosine phosphatase activity results in heightened osteoclast function and decreased bone density. *Am. J. Pathol.* **155**, 223–233 (1999).

REVIEWS

104. Takeshita, S. *et al.* SHIP-deficient mice are severely osteoporotic due to increased numbers of hyper-resorptive osteoclasts. *Nature Med.* **8**, 943–949 (2002).

105. Bromley, M. & Woolley, D. E. Chondroclasts and osteoclasts at subchondral sites of erosion in the rheumatoid joint. *Arthritis Rheum.* **27**, 968–975 (1984).

106. Takayanagi, H. *et al.* Suppression of arthritic bone destruction by adenovirus-mediated *csk* gene transfer to synoviocytes and osteoclasts. *J. Clin. Invest.* **104**, 137–146 (1999).

107. Pettit, A. R. *et al.* TRANCE/RANKL knockout mice are protected from bone erosion in a serum transfer model of arthritis. *Am. J. Pathol.* **159**, 1689–1699 (2001).

108. Redlich, K. *et al.* Osteoclasts are essential for TNF-α-mediated joint destruction. *J. Clin. Invest.* **110**, 1419–1427 (2002).

109. Horwood, N. J. *et al.* Activated T lymphocytes support osteoclast formation *in vitro*. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **265**, 144–150 (1999).

110. Kotake, S. *et al.* IL-17 in synovial fluids from patients with rheumatoid arthritis is a potent stimulator of osteoclastogenesis. *J. Clin. Invest.* **109**, 1345–1352 (1999).

111. Sato, K. *et al.* T~H~17 functions as an osteoclastogenic helper T cell subset that links T cell activation and bone destruction. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 2673–2682 (2006).

112. Cenci, S. *et al.* Estrogen deficiency induces bone loss by increasing T cell proliferation and lifespan through IFN-γ-induced class II transactivator. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 10405–10410 (2003).

113. Lee, S. K. *et al.* T lymphocyte-deficient mice lose trabecular bone mass with ovariectomy. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* **21**, 1704–1712 (2006).

114. Teitelbaum, S. L. Postmenopausal osteoporosis, T cells, and immune dysfunction. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 16711–16712 (2004).

115. Visnjic, D. *et al.* Conditional ablation of the osteoblast lineage in Col2.3Δtk transgenic mice. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* **16**, 2222–2231 (2001).

116. Rattis, F. M., Voermans, C. & Reya, T. Wnt signaling in the stem cell niche. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **11**, 88–94 (2004).

117. Tokoyoda, K., Egawa, T., Sugiyama, T., Choi, B. I. & Nagasawa, T. Cellular niches controlling B lymphocyte behavior within bone marrow during development. *Immunity* **20**, 707–718 (2004).

118. McClung, M. R. *et al.* Denosumab in postmenopausal women with low bone mineral density. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **354**, 821–831 (2006).

119. Lane, N. E. *et al.* RANKL inhibition with Denosumab decreases markers of bone and cartilage turnover in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* **54**, S225–S226 (2006).

120. Nishimoto, N. & Kishimoto, T. Interleukin 6: from bench to bedside. *Nature Clin. Pract. Rheumatol.* **2**, 619–626 (2006).

121. Urushibara, M. *et al.* The antirheumatic drug leflunomide inhibits osteoclastogenesis by interfering with receptor activator of NF-κB ligand-stimulated induction of nuclear factor of activated T cells c1. *Arthritis Rheum.* **50**, 794–804 (2004).


Acknowledgements  
We thank Y. Choi, G. Karsenty, N. Takahashi, K. Matsuo, T. Nakashima, M. Asagiri, T. Koga and M. Shinohara for critical reading of the manuscript and fruitful discussion. The work was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid for Creative Scientific Research from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, SORST program of Japan Science and Technology Agency, Grants-in-Aid for the 21st century COE program and Genome Network Project from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (MEXT), Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from MEXT, and Health Sciences Research Grants from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan.

Competing interests statement  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.


DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to: Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene DAP12 | IL-1 | M-CSF | NF-κB | OSTERIX | RANKL | RUNX2


FURTHER INFORMATION  
Hiroshi Takayanagi’s homepage: http://osteoinmunology.com/


SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION  
See online article: S1 (table)  
Access to this links box is available online.
