
[Autophagy 3:4, 337-346; July/August 2007]; ©2007 Landes Bioscience

Research Paper

# The Role of Autophagy in Mitochondria Maintenance

## Characterization of Mitochondrial Functions in Autophagy-Deficient S. cerevisiae Strains

### Yong Zhang
### Haiyan Qi
### Robert Taylor
### Weihong Xu
### Leroy F. Liu
### Shengkan Jin*

Pharmacology Department and the Cancer Institute of New Jersey; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey—Robert Wood Johnson Medical School; Piscataway, New Jersey USA

*Correspondence to: Shengkan Jin; Pharmacology Department and the Cancer Institute of New Jersey; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey—Robert Wood Johnson Medical School; 675 Hoes Lane; Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 USA; Tel.: 732.235.4329; Fax: 732.235.4073 Email: jinsh@umdnj.edu

Original manuscript submitted: 12/29/06  
Manuscript accepted: 03/09/07  

Previously published online as an Autophagy E-publication:  
http://www.landesbioscience.com/journals/autophagy/abstract.php?id=4127

---

### KEY WORDS
autophagy, mitochondrial function, petite, oxidative phosphorylation, reactive oxygen species, S. cerevisiae

---

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. X. Steven Zheng for productive discussions and Dr. Francoise Foury for the MIP1 temperature sensitive strain. Y.Z. is supported by a research grant from NJCCR. R.T. is supported by the NCI (TCA108455). S.J. is supported by the American Cancer Society (RSG-05-206-01-MGO).

---

### ABSTRACT
Autophagy is a lysosome-dependent cellular degradation process. Organisms bearing deletions of the essential autophagy genes exhibit various pathological conditions, including cancer in mammals and shortened life span in C. elegans. The direct cause for these phenotypes is not clear. Here we used yeast as a model system to characterize the cellular consequence of ATG (autophagy-related) gene deletions. We found that the atg mutant strains, atg1Δ, atg6Δ, atg8Δ and atg12Δ, showed defects related to mitochondrial biology. These strains were unable to degrade mitochondria in stationary culture. In non-fermentable medium, which requires mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation for survival, these atg strains showed a growth defect with an increased cell population at the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The cells had lower oxygen consumption rates and reduced mitochondrial electron transport chain activities. Under these growth conditions, the atg strains had lower mitochondrial membrane potential. In addition, these mutants generated higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and they were prone to accumulate dysfunctional mitochondria. This study clearly indicates that an autophagy defect has a functional impact on various aspects of mitochondrial functions and suggests a critical role of autophagy in mitochondria maintenance.

---

### INTRODUCTION
Autophagy is a cellular process leading to lysosomal degradation.¹² There are two types of autophagy that involve a process of membrane-mediated sequestration of cytoplasmic components, i.e., macroautophagy and microautophagy.³ In macroautophagy, a nascent autophagosome engulfs a portion of cytoplasm, forming a double-membrane vesicle which subsequently translocates to and fuses with a lysosome/vacuole. In microautophagy, the sequestration process occurs at the lysosome/vacuole surface through a direct invagination of the lysosomal/vacuolar membrane. The genes required for macroautophagy, ATG (autophagy-related), have been identified through genetic screening, and the biochemical properties of some Atg proteins have been characterized.⁴⁻⁶ In contrast, the molecular components of microautophagy are not well defined. Recent in vitro reconstitution studies indicate that the ATG gene products, while not essential for microautophagy activity, are required for maximal microautophagy induction upon starvation in yeast, indicating a close interaction between macroautophagy and microautophagy.⁷

The machinery for macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is highly conserved evolutionarily.² Organisms with targeted deletions of the essential autophagy genes show various pathological conditions, which reveal the important roles of autophagy in various physiological processes (see refs. 2, 8 and references therein). In mammals, heterozygous deletion of the *beclin1* (*atg6*) gene in mice increases cancer rates.⁹,¹⁰ In addition, conditional knockouts that block the expression of the *atg5* or *atg7* gene in mouse neurons cause neurodegeneration.¹¹,¹² Moreover, reduced autophagy capacity has been associated with aging in mammals¹³,¹⁴ and knocking down the expression of *atg* genes shortens the life span in *C. elegans*.¹⁵,¹⁶ The exact direct causes leading to these diverse pathological conditions are not totally understood. The likely culprits are the critical cargoes of autophagy that fail to be recycled in *atg* mutants. Accumulation of these cargoes may elicit tissue-specific and organism-specific phenotypes.

Mitochondria are semi-autonomous organelles in eukaryotic cells where a number of important metabolic processes occur, including the TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondria are also a central regulator for cell death. Loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and subsequent release of intra-mitochondria

components trigger apoptosis. In addition, mitochondria are the major intracellular source of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the primary endogenous agents that damage DNA, lipids and proteins, contributing to aging, neurodegeneration and cancer. Indeed, alteration of mitochondrial function is associated with a variety of diseases, including cancer, neurodegeneration and aging. Autophagy is involved in the degradation of mitochondria. In mammalian cells, mitochondrial permeability transition induces mitochondria degradation by autophagy. In addition, mitochondrial damage in combination with inhibition of apoptosis triggers autophagic removal of mitochondria. In the yeast *S. cerevisiae*, alteration of the mitochondrial F₀F₁-ATPase complex triggers autophagy. Moreover, some mitochondrial proteins implicated in the specific autophagic degradation of mitochondria in yeast have been identified, including Uth1 and Aup1. Altogether, this has led to a hypothesis that autophagy plays a critical role in mitochondria maintenance, and mitochondrial defects could be primary causes responsible for the cancer and aging conditions observed in autophagy-compromised animals.

Although appealing, this hypothesis is far from proven. First, although there is no doubt that mitochondria can be degraded through autophagy, it is not totally clear whether autophagy is the only way or even a functionally significant way for mitochondria degradation. Second, even if autophagy is the only way by which mitochondria are degraded, given the fact that the effects of damaged mitochondria can be buffered in a number of ways, such as mitochondrial repair, mitochondria dilution through cell proliferation, and elimination of mitochondria through cell death (e.g., apoptosis), an autophagy defect may not have any impact on mitochondrial functions. In essence, a critical set of literature which supports the mitochondria-centered hypothesis is missing: the direct characterization of mitochondrial functions in organisms that have autophagy defects. As a first step to fill this gap and to provide genetic evidence that an autophagy defect affects mitochondrial functions, here we characterized these functions in a number of *S. cerevisiae* strains with targeted deletions of ATG genes, *ATG1, ATG6, ATG8* and *ATG12*. These ATG genes encode proteins that are independently involved in separate processes of autophagy. We demonstrated that these *atg* mutant strains exhibit defects in various aspects of mitochondrial functions, including a growth defect in non-fermentable medium, lower oxygen consumption rates, reduced mitochondrial electron transport chain activities, lower mitochondrial membrane potential, higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and higher mitochondrial DNA mutation rates.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

Yeast strains and growth conditions. The wild type strain BY4741 (MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0) and the *atg1Δ, atg6Δ, atg8Δ* and *atg12Δ* mutants were made by the Saccharomyces Genome Deletion Project and distributed by Invitrogen Corp. (California, USA). The *mip1ts* (MATα ade2 ura3 his3 trp1 leu2 mip1Δ::URA3 rho+, with centromeric pFL39 plasmid (TRP1) with MIP1(T716I) under control of its own promoter) strain was a gift from Dr. Francoise Foury (Unite de Biochimie physiologique, Belgium). *mip1ts atg6Δ* was made by replacing the *ATG6* gene in the *mip1ts* strain with KanMX4 (G418R, primers used to amplify KanMX4 flanked with upstream and downstream sequences of *ATG6*: 5'-AAGTGCCAAAACATGTCACTTACCCCTGCAACTAGACCCCATC TTTAGAAGGTCTTAGTCAGCTGAAGCTTCGTACGC-3') and

5'-TCCGCTGATGGTCTTATCTAAC TAATTCACTGTAGGG CTTAAGGTAATTGACTTGGATGCCATAGGCCACTAGTGGAT CTG-3'). All the strains were maintained in either YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose) or YPEG (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 3% ethanol and 3% glycerol) or as indicated.

Ethidium bromide (EB) treatment, *Mip1ts* temperature shift, mitochondrial DNA measurement, electron microscopy and mitochondrial mass assay. For EB treatment, cells from YPEG plates were grown in minimal medium (0.17% Yeast Nitrogen Base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% (NH₄)₂SO₄, 2% dextrose, 0.82 g/L Complete Supplement Mixture With 40 mg/L Adenine (MP Biomedicals, California, USA)) to early stationary stage (OD₆₀₀ = 3.0) and treated with 25 μg/ml ethidium bromide (Sigma, Missouri, USA). For temperature shifting, the *mip1ts* strains from YPD plates were grown in YPD (2% glucose) at 25°C to early stationary phase (OD₆₀₀ = 4.0), and shifted to 35°C for the indicated periods of time. Yeast total DNA was extracted with the MasterPure Yeast DNA Purification Kit (EPICENTRE, Wisconsin, USA), treated with RNase (Roche, Indiana, USA), and digested with EcoRV. Southern blot analysis was performed with a ³²-P labelled DNA fragment of the mitochondrial COXIII gene (COXIII PCR fragment oligos: 5'-TGGTTATGCCTTCACCATGA-3' and 5'-TGAACCATAAACAC CATCAGAGA-3'). The membranes were then rehybridized with a ³²-P labelled DNA fragment of the nuclear TDH1 gene (TDH1 PCR fragment oligos: 5'-GGTGCCAAGAAGGTTGTGCAT-3' and 5'- AACGGCATCTTCGGGTG TAAC-3'). The results were quantified by digitalization of the Southern blot film and analyzed with Scion Image (Scion Corporation, Maryland, USA). For electron microscopy, 10⁸ cells were collected on a 0.45 μm filter apparatus, washed with 0.1 M cacodylate (pH 6.8), fixed in 2.5% gluteraldehyde/4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer. After Zymolyase digestion, the cells were then post-fixed in buffered 2% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and embedded in SPURR resin. 90 nm thin sections were cut on a Reichert ultracut E microtome and picked up on copper grids. The grids were stained with ethanoic uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Sections were analyzed at 80 Kv with a JEOL 1200EX transmission electron microscope.

For mitochondrial mass assay, 3 x 10⁶ cells were collected from samples before and 16 hour after temperature shift and resuspended with 1 ml culture medium from the same flask. MitoTracker Green FM (Invitrogen Corporation) was added to 1ml cell suspension at a final concentration of 5 μM and the cells were incubated at 30°C for 20 min. Cells were then collected, washed and resuspended in fresh YPD at the concentration of 1 x 10⁶/ml. The fluorescence intensity of MitoTracker Green FM was measured immediately using a Cytomics FC500 with excitation wavelength of 488 nm and emission wavelength of 516 nm.

Cell growth rate and growth curve. Cells were inoculated from YPD and YPEG plates into YPD and YPEG medium, respectively. Cells in the logarithmic growth phase were diluted and plated on YPD and YPEG plates. Pictures were taken after 3-5 days. To measure growth curves, cells were inoculated from YPD or YPEG plates into YPD or YPEG medium, respectively. Cells in the logarithmic growth phase in YPD or YPEG medium were diluted to OD₆₀₀ = 0.1, and the OD₆₀₀ was measured every 3 hrs.

Flow cytometry analysis of cell cycle profile. 1 x 10⁷ cells at logarithmic growth phase (OD₆₀₀ = 1.5~2.0) in YPEG medium and YPD medium were collected, resuspended in 1 ml cold 70% ethanol, and incubate at 4°C overnight. Before staining, cells were washed and resuspended with 0.1 ml Tris-HCl buffer (10 mM, pH 7.5). The cells

CCCP (50 μM). After staining, cells were collected, washed and resuspended in 1 ml fresh YPEG. The fluorescence intensity of RH123 or TMRE was measured immediately using a Cytomics FC500 with excitation wavelength of 488 nm and emission wavelength of 525–550 nm (RH123) or 590 nm (TMRE).

TTC (triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride) staining. Cells were grown to form colonies in plates. The plates were then overlaid with TTC agar (1.5% Bacto-agar in 0.067 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, autoclaved and cooled to 55–60°C, 0.1 g/ml TTC (2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride, Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml). The plates were incubated for a further one hour before pictures were taken.

ROS assay. Clones from YPEG plates were grown overnight in 5 ml YPEG medium and reinoculated into fresh YPEG medium. At different OD<sub>600</sub>, 3 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells were spun down and resuspended with 1 ml culture medium from the same flask. Dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR123, Sigma) was added to a 1 ml cell suspension at a final concentration of 50 μM and the cells were further incubated at 30°C for 2 hr. Cells were then collected, washed and resuspended in fresh YPEG at a concentration of 1 × 10<sup>6</sup>/ml. The fluorescence intensity of RH123 was measured immediately using a Cytomics FC500 with excitation wavelength of 488 nm and emission wavelength of 525–550 nm.

SOD activity assay. Individual clones from YPEG plates were grown overnight in YPEG medium and inoculated again into fresh YPEG medium. When the cell culture reached logarithmic phase (OD<sub>600</sub> = 2.0), 3 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells were harvested, washed with PBS and resuspended in 200 μl PBS. Cells were disrupted with an equal volume of ice-chilled 0.5-mm diameter glass beads using FastPrep FP120 (BIO101 SAVANT, New York, USA) at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min to remove additional debris. SOD activity was measured with a SOD Determination Kit (Fluka, Switzerland) using SOD standard obtained from Sigma, and the protein concentration was determined with a Bio-Rad protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, California, US).

Petite frequency. Individual clones from YPEG plates were grown in YPD medium overnight, then diluted 1:50 with fresh YPD medium. Cells were grown to reach OD<sub>600</sub> = 1.0–1.5 before being plated on YPD. The number of total colonies and petite colonies were counted. The YPD plates were replicated to YPEG plates to verify petite colonies. For each experiment, the petite frequencies of six independent clones from each strain were determined and averaged.

Statistical analysis. The results obtained from each mutant strain were compared with the results obtained from the wild type strain under the same experimental condition using Student t-test, two sample equal variance, two-tailed distribution.

---

**RESULTS**

Autophagy-deficient *atg* strains exhibited defects in degradation of mitochondria in stationary culture. First, the impact of *ATG* gene deletion on mitochondria degradation was studied. The levels of mitochondrial DNA, which is an integral and unique component of mitochondria, were analyzed in *atg1Δ*, *atg6Δ*, *atg8Δ* and *atg12Δ* strains. Under normal growth conditions, the mitochondria biogenesis rate is equal to the mitochondria degradation rate. Thus the mitochondria in a population of cells remain at a constant steady-state level. To directly detect mitochondria degradation, cells were treated with ethidium bromide (EB), a reagent that

Figure 1. Mitochondrial DNA degradation in wild type and autophagy-deficient *atg* strains upon ethidium bromide treatment. Cells of the indicated strains were grown in minimal medium (2% glucose) to early stationary phase, and then treated with or without 25 μg/ml EB, for the indicated period of time. Total DNA was extracted and the levels of mitochondrial DNA (represented by the COXIII gene) and nuclear DNA (represented by the TDH1 gene) were determined by Southern blot analysis. The samples shown are representative results from four independent experiments. WT, wild type strain; EB, ethidium bromide treatment.

were then incubated with 1 mg/ml RNaseA (Sigma) for 2 hr at 37°C, and further incubated with 0.2 mg/ml proteinase K at 55°C for 3 hr. After washing with PBS, the cells were stained in 0.1 ml PBS (phosphate buffered saline) with 100 μg/ml propidium iodide (Sigma) in the dark at 4°C overnight. Cells were then diluted with PBS and flow cytometry was performed on a Cytomics FC500 (Beckman Coulter, California, USA).

O<sub>2</sub> consumption. Cells from YPEG plates were grown in YPEG medium to logarithmic phase (OD<sub>600</sub> = 1.5–2.0). 5.4 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells were spun down and resuspended in 0.9 ml fresh oxygen-saturated YPEG medium. CCCP was added to a final concentration of 50 μM, where indicated. The culture was sealed and stirred with a flea magnetic bar at 65 rpm. The concentration of O<sub>2</sub> in the medium was continuously measured with a Hansatech oxygen electrode (Hansatech Instrument, Norfolk, UK).

Mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψ<sub>m</sub>). Clones from YPEG plates were grown overnight in 5 ml YPEG medium and reinoculated into fresh YPEG medium. When cells reached logarithmic phase (OD = 1.5–2.0), 3 × 10<sup>6</sup> cells were collected and resuspended with 1 ml fresh YPEG medium. Rhodamine 123 (RH123, Sigma) or TMRE (Invitrogen) was added to a final concentration of 5 μM (RH123) or 2.5 μM (TMRE), and the cells were incubated at 30°C for 25 min. As a negative control, mitochondrial membrane potential was collapsed by the mitochondrial membrane uncoupler

Figure 2. Mitochondria degradation in autophagy-competent ($mip1^{ts}$) and autophagy-deficient ($mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$) cells. (A–C) Southern blot analysis of mitochondrial DNA in $mip1^{ts}$ or $mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$ cells, as indicated. Cells were grown in YPD (2% glucose) medium to early stationary phase at $25^\circ C$, then shifted to $35^\circ C$ and incubated for the indicated periods of time. Total DNA was extracted and the levels of mitochondrial DNA (COXIII) and nuclear DNA (TDH1) were determined by Southern blot analysis. D. Densitometry quantification of the Southern blot results of (B and C). Mitochondrial DNA levels were normalized against nuclear DNA levels and expressed as a percentage of the level at the 0 hr time point. The data shown are representative results from three independent experiments. (E–G) Electron microscopy analysis of mitochondria degradation in autophagy-competent ($mip1^{ts}$) and autophagy-deficient ($mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$) cells. (E and F) Representative electron microscopy pictures of the $mip1^{ts}$ and $mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$ cells, respectively, 16 hours after shifting to $35^\circ C$ from an early stationary culture at $25^\circ C$. Arrows indicate mitochondria, scale bar = 0.5 $\mu$m. (G) Average mitochondria number in the $mip1^{ts}$ and $mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$ cells 16 hours after temperature shift. The number of mitochondria per cell in 15 randomly selected electron microscopy pictures of each strain were counted and averaged. (H) Mitochondrial mass assay with MitoTracker Green FM. Cells before and after temperature shift (16 hr) were collected and resuspended in the original decanted growth medium at a concentration of $3 \times 10^6$/ml, stained with 5 $\mu$M MitoTracker Green FM and measured with flow cytometry. The average intensity of 10,000 cells was presented in arbitrary units. The data shown represent three independent experiments.

preferentially intercalates into the A-T-rich mitochondrial DNA thus blocking mitochondrial DNA replication/mitochondria biogenesis.²⁹ An early stationary phase was chosen for the study and the mitochondrial DNA levels were determined at different time points by Southern blot analysis. The reasons that cells at the stationary growth stage were chosen were: (1) Mitochondria at this stage exist as discrete individual units instead of a single connected, large, branched network structure (see ref. 30 and refs. therein, and Fig. 2F; (2) There is no cell division; therefore, the mitochondria “dilution” that is otherwise caused by cell division is avoided. As shown in Figure 1A, the level of mitochondrial DNA in wild type cells treated with EB decreased during the first 24-hours of culture. In contrast, under exactly the same conditions, mitochondrial DNA remained at a rather stable level (Fig. 1B–E) in all the autophagy mutant cells we had chosen, the $atgl\Delta$, $atg6\Delta$, $atg8\Delta$ and $atgl2\Delta$ strains. There was no apparent degradation of mitochondria in these mutants during the entire experimental time course and

mitochondrial DNA levels following exposure to EB appeared to be similar to the wild type strain in the absence of EB treatment.

To rule out any nonspecific effect of ethidium bromide on the physiology of yeast, we further directly measured mitochondria degradation in a yeast strain in which mitochondria biogenesis can be specifically and conditionally turned off. In *S. cerevisiae*, the nuclear gene $MIP1$ (mitochondrial polymerase) encodes the mitochondrial DNA polymerase which is responsible for mitochondrial DNA replication and required for mitochondria biogenesis.³¹ The $mip1^{ts}$ strain expresses a temperature sensitive form of Mip1 containing a mutation of threonine at position 716 to isoleucine, a mutant that is functional at $25^\circ C$ but is inactive at $35^\circ C$.³¹,³² An autophagy-deficient $mip1^{ts}$ strain, $mip1^{ts} atg6\Delta$, was made by deleting $ATG6$. The cells were grown to an early stationary phase at $25^\circ C$ and then the culture was shifted to $35^\circ C$, and the levels of mitochondrial

Autophagy and Mitochondrial Function in Yeast

the mitochondrial mass before and after temperature shift was measured using a fluorescent dye MitoTracker Green FM, which specifically accumulates in the mitochondrial matrix where it covalently binds to mitochondrial proteins by reacting with free thiol groups of cysteine residues. 33,34 The accumulation of MitoTracker Green FM in mitochondria is relatively insensitive to mitochondrial membrane potential and therefore reflects mitochondrial mass. As shown in Figure 2H, 16 hrs after temperature shift, the mitochondrial mass decreased significantly in autophagy-competent cells, whereas the decrease of mitochondrial mass in autophagy-deficient cells was limited. These results further confirmed the observations described in Figure 2A–G.

We noticed that the kinetics of mitochondria degradation upon temperature shift in the mip1ts strain were slightly different from that in the wild type strain upon EB treatment. Likely, various differences between the two experiments account for this observation, including: the different strain backgrounds, differences in the kinetics of mitochondria biogenesis inhibition resulting from EB treatment versus the mip1ts mutation, possible differences in the kinetics of vacuolar degradation of EB-incorporated DNA compared to naked DNA, and differences in the culture medium (effective inhibition of mitochondria DNA replication by EB requires culturing in minimal medium 35). Regardless of the quantitative difference, these results consistently showed that indeed ATG gene deletion has a functional impact on mitochondria degradation as measured in stationary cultures.

Autophagy-deficient atg strains exhibited defects in mitochondria-dependent growth with an increased cell population at the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The growth rates of these mutants in either the fermentable medium YPD (yeast peptone with 2% dextrose) or the non-fermentable medium YPEG [yeast peptone with ethanol (3%) and glycerol (3%)] were compared with their wild type counterpart cells. Growing in fermentable medium, which contains glucose (dextrose), does not require oxidative phosphorylation, whereas growing in non-fermentable medium, which contains ethanol and glycerol as the only carbon sources, does require mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. As shown in the left panel of Figure 3A as well as in Figure 3B, when growing in YPD medium these atg strains exhibited a growth rate comparable to that of their wild type counterpart as measured by the size of colonies (Fig. 3A) and by growth curves (Fig. 3B). In contrast, when growing in the non-fermentable YPEG medium, as shown in the right panel of Figure 3A as well as in Figure 3C, these mutant cells exhibited growth defect of various degrees compared to their wild type counterparts, suggesting that the mutants have a reduced mitochondrial efficiency.

The cell cycle distribution of these mutant cells and their isogenic wild type counterparts grown in either YPEG or YPD were compared by flow cytometry analysis. As shown in Figure 4A and C, when growing in YPEG medium the mutant strains had a significantly increased population at the G1 phase of the cell cycle and a reduced cell population at the G2/M phase. In contrast, when growing in YPD medium the cell cycle profile of the mutants did not show any significant difference compared to the wild type cells (Fig. 4B and D).

Figure 3. Growth rates of the wild type and autophagy-deficient atg strains. (A) Colony size of the wild type and atg strains in YPD or YPEG medium, as indicated. Cells in logarithmic growth were diluted (at the indicated ratio) and dropped onto plates containing either YPD (left panel) or YPEG (right panel) medium, and allowed to grow for 3–5 days at 30°C. (B and C) Growth curves of the wild type and atg strains in YPD and YPEG, respectively. The data shown represent three independent experiments. WT, wild type cells.

DNA were measured (Fig. 2A–D). In addition, electron microscopy was performed to directly analyze mitochondria (Fig. 2E–G). As shown in Figure 2A, upon shifting the culture to the non-permissive temperature, mitochondria degradation, as measured by the decrease of mitochondrial DNA levels, was rapidly detected in the mip1ts strain. Mitochondria reached a minimal level within the first 16 hours. In contrast, much less mitochondria degradation was observed in the mip1ts atg6Δ strain, similar to the result shown in Figure 1C. Even 48 hours after the temperature shift, the ratio of mitochondrial to nuclear DNA in the mip1ts atg6Δ cells did not show significant change. A more detailed kinetic study of mitochondria degradation in the mip1ts strain (Fig. 2C and D) indicated that the half-life of mitochondria was around four hours under this growth condition in the autophagy-competent strain.

Electron microscopy analysis was performed to confirm that the degradation of mitochondrial DNA reflected the degradation of mitochondria. As shown in Figure 2E–G, indeed 16 hours after the temperature shift, the majority of the mip1ts cells contain no mitochondria, whereas the majority of the mip1ts atg6Δ cells contained multiple mitochondria (with an average of ~8/cell). In addition,

Autophagy-deficient *atg* strains exhibited lower oxygen consumption rates. To confirm that the growth defect of the *atg* mutants in YPEG is related to mitochondrial functions, the autophagy-deficient cells and their isogenic wild type counterparts were further analyzed by measuring the rate of oxygen consumption. The cells were grown in YPEG medium to logarithmic growth phase. The same number of wild type or mutant cells were collected and resuspended in fresh medium in a sealed chamber under rapid stir, and the oxygen concentration in the medium was measured continuously. As shown in Figure 5A, the average oxygen consumption rate of the wild type cells was about 2–3 fold faster than that of the autophagy mutant *atg12Δ* strain. Other autophagy mutant strains had a similar rate as that of the *atg12Δ* strain, as shown in Figure 5B. The difference in oxygen consumption was not due to the difference in the number of mitochondria in cells. The wild type cells and all autophagy mutant cells had roughly the same amount of mitochondria as measured by the levels of mitochondrial DNA (Fig. 6D).

Further experiments were performed with the addition of carbonyl cyanide m-chloro-phenyl hydrazone (CCCP), a mitochondrial membrane uncoupler, to measure the maximal oxygen consumption. Interestingly, as shown in Figure 5C and D, the difference in oxygen consumption rates between the wild type cells and the mutants diminished, indicating that the lower oxygen consumption rates in autophagy-deficient cells were not caused by the reduction of the capacity of the mitochondrial electron transport chain.

Autophagy-deficient *atg* strains exhibited reduced mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψm) and reduced activities of the electron transport chain. The mitochondrial membrane potential was compared between the wild type strain and the *atg* mutants. The fluorescent dye rhodamine 123 (RH 123) directly targets mitochondria, and its distribution in the mitochondrial matrix is dependent on mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψm). Thus, the amount of RH 123 accumulated in the mitochondrial matrix reflects the membrane potential of mitochondria. RH 123 is widely used to measure ∆Ψm in mammalian cells and in yeast. As shown in Figure 6A, the average mitochondrial membrane potential in the *atg* strains was consistently lower than that in the wild type strain. The FACS histogram profiles, which show the distribution of mitochondrial membrane potential of the cell population, were similar between the wild type and mutant strains (data not shown). In addition, the mitochondrial membrane potential was measured with tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester (TMRE), a more specific mitochondrial membrane potential dye. As shown in Figure 6B, essentially the same profile was obtained as when cells were stained with RH 123 (Fig. 6A).

The activities of the mitochondrial respiration electron transport chain were also compared between the wild type strain and the

Figure 4. Cell cycle profile of the wild type and autophagy-deficient *atg* strains grown in YPEG. (A and B) Cell cycle profiles of the wild type and mutant cells at logarithmic growth phase in YPEG or YPD, as indicated, were analyzed by flow cytometry analysis. (C and D) Summary of the percentages of wild type and *atg* deletion cells in G1 and G2/M phases from flow cytometry analysis in (A and B), respectively. The data shown represent three independent experiments.

autophagy mutants. Triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride (TTC) is a colorless electron acceptor that could be reduced to a red formazan precipitate specifically by a functional mitochondrial respiratory chain. Therefore, the amount of red formazan formation reflects the activity of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. As shown in Figure 6C, much less red formazan was formed in mutant cells compared to the wild type cells growing on either YPD or YPEG plates. Again, the difference in electron transport chain activity was not due to the difference in the number of mitochondria in cells. The wild type cells and all autophagy mutant cells had roughly the same amount of mitochondria as measured by the levels of mitochondrial DNA (Fig. 6D).

Autophagy-deficient *atg* strains exhibited higher levels of ROS and oxidative stress. ROS is a by-product of oxidative phosphorylation as a result of leakiness of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. The increase of ROS production is often associated with a reduction of mitochondrial efficiency. We directly measured the ROS levels in the *atg* mutant cells cultured in YPEG medium. Dihydrorhodamine 123 is a non-fluorescent molecule that can be converted by hydrogen peroxide to the fluorescent molecule rhodamine 123, which accumulates in mitochondria. When a low concentration of dihydrorhodamine 123 is used for treatment, the rate-limiting step of fluorescent rhodamine 123 accumulation in cells is the production of rhodamine 123, rather than the mitochondrial

Autophagy and Mitochondrial Function in Yeast

DISCUSSION

In the current study we characterized a number of S. cerevisiae strains with targeted deletion of essential ATG genes, atg1Δ, atg6Δ, atg8Δ and atg12Δ, in terms of properties related to mitochondrial biology. These mutant strains exhibited growth defects and lower oxygen consumption rates in non-fermentable medium, which suggested compromised mitochondrial functions. Consistently, direct characterization of mitochondrial functions revealed that the mutant cells had lower mitochondrial membrane potential, reduced mitochondrial electron transport chain activities, higher levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and higher mitochondrial mutation rates. In addition, these mutant strains showed a severe defect in mitochondria degradation in stationary growth phase. Together, these results provided strong direct evidence that autophagy plays a significant role in mitochondria maintenance and that an autophagy defect compromises mitochondrial functions.

It is not clear which mitochondrial defect is the primary cause of the various compromised mitochondrial functions. However, the finding that the maximal capacity of oxygen consumption does not change in the mutants suggests that the primary cause might be the leakiness in mitochondrial electron transport chain. As a result, the efficiency of mitochondria decreases, leading to lower mitochondrial membrane potential which in turn affects the rates of respiration. In the meantime, the production of ROS increases, which increases the mitochondrial DNA mutation rates and, consequently, the petite frequency.

It seems likely that the major, if not the only, way mitochondria are degraded in stationary culture is through autophagy. Stationary culture represents a combination of nutrient reduction and stress that inhibits cell proliferation and is associated with increased ROS production. Autophagy activation might be critical for the stationary cells not only to recycle internal resources but also to eliminate the malfunctioning mitochondria that overproduce ROS, a process also called mitoptosis.

Mitochondria are critical organelles for metabolism and the regulation of cell death. In humans the functionality of mitochondria decreases over the lifetime of an organism, which contributes to various pathological conditions such as aging, metabolic diseases and cancer. The factors that cause the deterioration of mitochondrial function are not well defined. It is clear that mitochondria can be degraded through autophagy. Interestingly, the capacity of autophagy declines significantly with age. These observations led to the development of the mitochondrial-lysosomal axis theory of aging. This hypothesis proposes that age-related reduction of autophagic capacity causes, or at least contributes to, the accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria, which in turn are responsible for various

www.landesbioscience.com
Autophagy
343

age-related conditions. However, evidence is scant to date that directly demonstrates that an autophagy defect affects mitochondrial functions. Given the fact that the effect of damaged mitochondria could be relieved by a number of means, including being eliminated through cell death, being repaired, or being diluted through cell proliferation, it is important that our current study provides direct evidence at the organismal level that autophagy deficiency affects mitochondrial functions and establishes experimentally the functional significance of autophagy in mitochondrial biology.

It is of particular interest that our results directly demonstrated that autophagy-deficient strains have reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, higher ROS levels, increased intracellular oxidative stress, and increased rates of mitochondrial mutation. These results indicate the increased accumulation of functionally compromised mitochondria in the autophagy-deficient strains. In addition, intracellular ROS is a major agent that damages cellular components such as DNA, proteins and lipids, which contribute to aging and tumorigenesis in higher organisms. In light of these results, a similar functional characterization in mammalian systems, for example using beclin 1+/− mice, is warranted. Similar results from mice would support the idea that compromised mitochondrial functions might have contributed to the phenotypes observed in these autophagy-defective organisms such as increased cancer incidences and aging, and will provide experimental evidence supporting the mitochondrial-lysosomal axis theory of aging.

Our results demonstrated a functional impact of autophagy defect on mitochondrial biology; however, they do not provide mechanistic details on how autophagy is involved in mitochondria maintenance. Our results in theory cannot differentiate whether damaged mitochondria are selectively degraded or non-selectively degraded through autophagy. In addition, although our results, which characterized four strains harboring deletion of an independent ATG gene, strongly suggest that a defect in macroautophagy is the cause of the observed mitochondrial dysfunctions, we cannot formally rule out the possibility that defect of another cellular process, which also directly or indirectly requires the function of the ATG1, ATG6, ATG8 and ATG12 gene products, is involved. Future investigation on the mechanistic aspects of mitophagy would provide further insight into the maintenance of overall cellular mitochondria function via degradation.

Figure 6. Mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial electron transport activities of the wild type and autophagy-deficient *atg* mutant cells. (A and B) Mitochondrial membrane potential of the wild type and autophagy mutant cells measured with RH123 or TMRE, as indicated. Cells in logarithmic growth in YPEG were collected and diluted to a final concentration of 3 × 10⁶ cells/ml with fresh medium. The cells were then incubated at 30°C for 25 min with RH123 (5 μM) (A) or TMRE (2.5 μM) (B), the fluorescence intensity of RH123 or TMRE was then measured with flow cytometry and the average intensity of 10,000 cells was presented in arbitrary units. Wild type cells treated with CCCP (50 μM) served as a negative control. The error bars represent the standard deviation, p < 0.003 (RH123), and p < 0.01 (TRME). (C) TTC staining of the wild type and autophagy-deficient *atg* mutant cells in YPD or YPEG, as indicated. Cells in the logarithmic growth phase were diluted at the indicated ratio and dropped onto YPD or YPEG plates. After individual colonies were formed, the plates were overlaid with agar containing TTC and stained for 1 hour. (D) Southern blot analysis of mitochondrial DNA in wild type and autophagy-deficient *atg* mutant cells. Cells were grown in YPD or YPEG, as indicated, to logarithmic phase and total DNA was extracted. The levels of mitochondrial DNA (COXIII) and nuclear DNA (TDH1) were determined by Southern blot analysis. All the data shown in this figure are representative results from three independent experiments.

References

1. Klionsky DJ, Emr SD. Autophagy as a regulated pathway of cellular degradation. Science 2000; 290:1717-21.
2. Levine B, Klionsky DJ. Development by self-digestion: Molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy. Dev Cell 2004; 6:463-77.
3. Klionsky DJ, Cregg JM, Dunn Jr WA, Emr SD, Sakai Y, Sandoval IV, Sibirny A, Subramani S, Thumm M, Veenhuis M, Ohsumi Y. A unified nomenclature for yeast autophagy-related genes. Dev Cell 2003; 5:539-45.
4. Mizushima N, Ohsumi Y, Yoshimori T. Autophagosome formation in mammalian cells. Cell Struct Funct 2002; 27:421-9.
5. Noda T, Suzuki K, Ohsumi Y. Yeast autophagosomes: De novo formation of a membrane structure. Trends Cell Biol 2002; 12:231-5.
6. Tsukada M, Ohsumi Y. Isolation and characterization of autophagy-defective mutants of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. FEBS Lett 1993; 333:169-74.
7. Sattler T, Mayer A. Cell-free reconstitution of microautophagic vacuole invagination and vesicle formation. J Cell Biol 2000; 151:529-38.
8. Mizushima N. The pleiotropic role of autophagy: From protein metabolism to bactericide. Cell Death Differ 2005; 12:1535-41.

Autophagy and Mitochondrial Function in Yeast

**Figure 7. ROS levels and oxidative stress in the wild type and autophagy-deficient atg mutant cells.**

(A) ROS levels of the wild type and autophagy-deficient atg mutant cells. Cells were cultured in YPEG to different OD values as indicated. Cells were then collected and resuspended in the original decanted growth medium at a concentration of 3 x 10⁷/ml. After incubating with dihydrorhodamine 123 (50 μM) at 30°C for 2 hr, cells were collected and resuspended in fresh YPEG at the concentration of 1 x 10⁶/ml. The fluorescence intensity was then measured with flow cytometry and the average intensity of 10,000 cells was presented in arbitrary units. The error bars represent the standard deviation and p values at all points are less than 0.03, with the exception of atg6Δ at OD = 4.5 (p = 0.065).

(B) SOD activities of the wild type and autophagy-deficient atg mutant cells. 3 x 10⁷ cells cultured in YPEG were collected at logarithmic phase (OD₆₀₀ = 2.0) and SOD activity was measured. The error bars represent the standard deviation and p < 0.002. All the data shown are representative results from three independent experiments.

**Figure 8. Petite frequencies in the wild type and autophagy-deficient atg mutant cells.** Spontaneous petite frequencies were measured as described in Materials and Methods. The results are the average petite frequencies of 6 independent clones from each strain. The error bars represent the standard deviation and p < 0.01. The data shown are representative results from five independent experiments.

9. Qu X, Yu J, Bhagat G, Furuya N, Hibshoosh H, Troxel A, Rosen J, Eskelinen EL, Mizushima N, Ohsumi Y, Cattoretti G, Levine B. Promotion of tumorigenesis by heterozygous disruption of the beclin1 autophagy gene. J Clin Invest 2003; 112:1809-20.
10. Yue Z, Jin S, Yang C, Levine AJ, Heintz N. Beclin 1, an autophagy gene essential for early embryonic development, is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100:15077-82.
11. Hara T, Nakamura K, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakahara Y, Suzuki-Migishima R, Yokoyama M, Mishima K, Saito I, Okano H, Mizushima N. Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature 2006; 441:885-9.
12. Komatsu M, Waguri S, Chiba T, Murata S, Iwata J, Tanida I, Ueno T, Koike M, Uchiyama Y, Kominami E, Tanaka K. Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice. Nature 2006; 441:880-4.
13. Cuervo AM. Autophagy and aging—when “all you can eat” is yourself. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ 2003; 2003:pe25.
14. Cuervo AM, Dice JF. Age-related decline in chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Biol Chem 2000; 275:31505-13.
15. Hars ES, Qi H, Jin S, Cai L, Hu C, Liu LF. Autophagy regulates ageing in C. elegans. Autophagy 2007; 3:93-95.
16. Melendez A, Talloczy Z, Seaman M, Eskelinen EL, Hall DH, Levine B. Autophagy genes are essential for dauer development and life-span extension in C. elegans. Science 2003; 301:1387-91.
17. Wallace DC. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: A dawn for evolutionary medicine. Annu Rev Genet 2005; 39:359-407.
18. Elmore SP, Qian T, Grissom SF, Lemasters JJ. The mitochondrial permeability transition initiates autophagy in rat hepatocytes. FASEB J 2001; 15:2286-7.
19. Rodriguez-Enriquez S, Kim I, Currin RT, Lemasters JJ. Tracker dyes to probe mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy) in rat hepatocytes. Autophagy 2005; 2:55-57.
20. Tolkovsky AM, Xue L, Fletcher GC, Borutaite V. Mitochondrial disappearance from cells: A clue to the role of autophagy in programmed cell death and disease? Biochimie 2002; 84:233-40.
21. Xue L, Fletcher GC, Tolkovsky AM. Autophagy is activated by apoptotic signalling in sympathetic neurons: An alternative mechanism of death execution. Mol Cell Neurosci 1999; 14:180-98.
22. Yu L, Wan F, Dutta S, Welsh S, Liu Z, Freundt E, Baehrecke EH, Lenardo M. Autophagic programmed cell death by selective catalase degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:4952-7.
23. Priault M, Salin B, Schaeffer J, Vallette FM, di Rago JP, Martinou JC. Impairing the bioenergetic status and the biogenesis of mitochondria triggers mitophagy in yeast. Cell Death Differ 2005; 12:1613-21.
24. Kissova I, Deffieu M, Manon S, Camougrand N. Uth1p is involved in the autophagic degradation of mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:39068-74.
25. Tal R, Winter G, Ecker N, Klionsky DJ, Abeliovich H. Aup1p, a yeast mitochondrial protein phosphatase homolog, is required for efficient stationary phase mitophagy and cell survival. J Biol Chem 2006; 282:5617-24.
26. Jin S. Autophagy, mitochondrial quality control, and oncogenesis. Autophagy 2006; 2:80-4.
27. Lemasters JJ. Selective mitochondrial autophagy, or mitophagy, as a targeted defense against oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and aging. Rejuvenation Res 2005; 8:3-5.
28. Ohsumi Y. Molecular mechanism of autophagy in yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1999; 354:1577-80.
29. Ferguson LR vBR. Induction of the cytoplasmic ‘petite’ mutation by chemical and physical agents in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutation Research 1992; 265:103-48.
30. Hermann GJ, Shaw JM. Mitochondrial dynamics in yeast. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1998; 14:265-303.
31. Foury F. Cloning and sequencing of the nuclear gene MIP1 encoding the catalytic subunit of the yeast mitochondrial DNA polymerase. J Biol Chem 1989; 264:20552-60.
32. Genga A, Bianchi L, Foury F. A nuclear mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae deficient in mitochondrial DNA replication and polymerase activity. J Biol Chem 1986; 261:9328-32.
33. Maguire P, Mothersill C, Seymour C, Lyng FM. Medium from irradiated cells induces dose-dependent mitochondrial changes and BCL2 responses in unirradiated human keratinocytes. Radiat Res 2005; 163:384-90.
34. McQuibban GA, Saurya S, Freeman M. Mitochondrial membrane remodelling regulated by a conserved rhomboid protease. Nature 2003; 423:537-41.
35. Fox T, Folley L, Mulero J, McMullin T, Thorsness P, Hedin L, Constanzo M. Analysis and manipulation of yeast mitochondrial genes. Meth Enzymol 1991; 194:149-65.

www.landesbioscience.com

36. Emaus RK, Grunwald R, Lemasters JJ. Rhodamine 123 as a probe of transmembrane potential in isolated rat-liver mitochondria: Spectral and metabolic properties. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986; 850:436-48.

37. Johnson LV, Walsh ML, Bockus BJ, Chen LB. Monitoring of relative mitochondrial membrane potential in living cells by fluorescence microscopy. J Cell Biol 1981; 88:526-35.

38. Johnson LV, Walsh ML, Chen LB. Localization of mitochondria in living cells with rhodamine 123. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980; 77:990-4.

39. Juan G, Cavazzoni M, Saez GT, O'Connor JE. A fast kinetic method for assessing mitochondrial membrane potential in isolated hepatocytes with rhodamine 123 and flow cytometry. Cytometry 1994; 15:335-42.

40. Ludovico P, Sansonetty F, Corte-Real M. Assessment of mitochondrial membrane potential in yeast cell populations by flow cytometry. Microbiology 2001; 147:3335-43.

41. Petit P, Glab N, Marie D, Kieffer H, Metezeau P. Discrimination of respiratory dysfunction in yeast mutants by confocal microscopy, image, and flow cytometry. Cytometry 1996; 23:28-38.

42. Skowronek P, Krummeck G, Haferkamp O, Rodel G. Flow cytometry as a tool to discriminate respiratory-competent and respiratory-deficient yeast cells. Curr Genet 1990; 18:265-7.

43. Loew LM, Tuft RA, Carrington W, Fay FS. Imaging in five dimensions: Time-dependent membrane potentials in individual mitochondria. Biophys J 1993; 65:2396-407.

44. Muhlenhoff U, Stadler JA, Richhardt N, Seubert A, Eickhorst T, Schwien RJ, Lill R, Wiesenberger G. A specific role of the yeast mitochondrial carriers MRS3/4p in mitochondrial iron acquisition under iron-limiting conditions. J Biol Chem 2003; 278:40612-20.

45. Rich PR, Mischis LA, Purton S, Wiskich JT. The sites of interaction of triphenyltetrazolium chloride with mitochondrial respiratory chains. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2001; 202:181-7.

46. Madeo F, Frohlich E, Ligr M, Grey M, Sigrist SJ, Wolf DH, Frohlich KU. Oxygen stress: A regulator of apoptosis in yeast. J Cell Biol 1999; 145:757-67.

47. Moon H, Baek D, Lee B, Prasad DT, Lee SY, Cho MJ, Lim CO, Choi MS, Bahk J, Kim MO, Hong JC, Yun DJ. Soybean ascorbate peroxidase suppresses Bax-induced apoptosis in yeast by inhibiting oxygen radical generation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002; 290:457-62.

48. Zhang L, Onda K, Imai R, Fukuda R, Horiuchi H, Ohta A. Growth temperature downshift induces antioxidant response in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003; 307:308-14.

49. Takeshige K, Baba M, Tsuboi S, Noda T, Ohsumi Y. Autophagy in yeast demonstrated with proteinase-deficient mutants and conditions for its induction. J Cell Biol 1992; 119:301-11.

50. Skulachev VP. Bioenergetic aspects of apoptosis, necrosis and mitoptosis. Apoptosis 2006; 11:473-85.

51. Brunk UT, Terman A. The mitochondrial-lysosomal axis theory of aging: Accumulation of damaged mitochondria as a result of imperfect autophagocytosis. Eur J Biochem 2002; 269:1996-2002.
