
The FASEB Journal • Review

# Beyond IkBs: alternative regulation of NF-κB activity

Manfred Neumann and Michael Naumann  
Institute of Experimental Internal Medicine, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany

## ABSTRACT

The transcription factor nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) is a crucial regulator of many physiological and patho-physiological processes, including control of the adaptive and innate immune responses, inflammation, proliferation, tumorigenesis, and apoptosis. Thus, the tight regulation of NF-κB activity within a cell is extremely important. The central mechanism of NF-κB regulation is the signal-induced proteolytic degradation of a family of cytoplasmic inhibitors of NF-κB, the IkBs. However, with the discovery of an IkB-independent noncanonical or “alternative” pathway of NF-κB activation, the importance of other regulatory mechanisms responsible for the fine-tuning of NF-κB became clear. Post-translational modification, especially phosphorylation, of the Rel proteins, of which dimeric NF-κB is composed, are such alternative regulatory mechanisms. The best analyzed example is RelA phosphorylation, which takes place at specific amino acids resulting in distinct functional changes of this gene regulatory protein. The interaction of NF-κB with other proteins such as glucocorticoid receptors is very important for the regulation of NF-κB activity. Recently, exciting new concepts of IkB-independent NF-κB control like dimer exchange and nucleolar sequestration of RelA have been described, indicating that many aspects of NF-κB control are waiting to be discovered.—Neumann, M., Naumann, M. Beyond IkBs: alternative regulation of NF-κB activity. *FASEB J.* 21, 2642–2654 (2007)

Key Words: RelA phosphorylation · RelA acetylation · GR/NF-κB cross-talk · nucleolar sequestration · dimer exchange

NF-κB is a dimer composed of the five mammalian Rel proteins p65/RelA, c-Rel, RelB, NF-κB1/p50, and NF-κB2/p52 in almost any combination. The last two are synthesized as precursor molecules, p105 and p100, respectively, and processing of these precursors is needed to generate the mature transcription factors. Only RelA, c-Rel, and RelB, but not p50 or p52, possess C-terminal transactivation domains. All Rel proteins share the N-terminal Rel homology domain (RHD) mediating dimerization, DNA binding, and nuclear localization and interaction with the inhibitors of NF-κB, the IkBs. This family of mainly cytoplasmic inhibitors currently has eight members: IkBα, IkBβ, IkBγ, IkBε, IkBζ, Bcl-3, as well as p105 and p100. These precursors possess ankyrin repeats in their C terminus, the characteristic structural feature of all IkBs (1, 2). The IkB-dependent NF-κB activation pathways outlined below certainly play the dominant role in controlling NF-κB activity. However, the question remains: how is the specificity of NF-κB function achieved under certain physiological conditions or in a specific cell type? It is the purpose of this review to demonstrate the complex mechanisms contributing to the fine-tuning of NF-κB activity.

## IkB-DEPENDENT NF-κB ACTIVATION

The IkBs (inhibitors of NF-κB) are the centerpiece of the canonical (classical) pathway (1, 4) (Fig. 1A). In unstimulated cells, NF-κB is complexed with the IkBs and thereby locked into the cytoplasm. Upon stimulation of the cell, multiple intracellular signaling pathways are activated that converge at the IkB kinase (IKK) complex. The most common form of this complex consists of two functionally nonredundant kinases, IKKα (IKK1) and IKKβ (IKK2), as well as a regulatory subunit, IKKγ, also called NEMO (“NF-κB essential modulator”). Upon activation, the IKK complex phosphorylates the IkBs at specific amino acid residues. The phosphorylation of IkBα at Ser-32 and Ser-36 is predominantly mediated by IKKβ. This site-specific phosphorylation is a prerequisite for a subsequent post-translational modification, the ubiquitinylation of IkBα, which tags the NF-κB inhibitor for degradation in

---

<sup>1</sup>Correspondence: Institute of Experimental Internal Medicine, Otto-von-Guericke University, Medical Faculty, Leipziger Strasse 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany. E-mail: docmn@web.de  
doi: 10.1096/fj.06-7615rev

Figure 1. Schematic representation of four IkB-dependent NF-κB pathways. A) The canonical (“classical”) pathway depends on the site-specific phosphorylation of IkBs by activated IKK complexes. The TNF-R1-mediated NF-κB activation is shown as an example. Activation of NF-κB takes place near the membrane. One recently discovered critical step—the interaction of NEMO with Lys-63 polyubiquitinated RIP1—is shown. It should be noted that the TNF-RI complex contains more components. Some of them, such as the transforming growth factor beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and the TAK1 binding protein 2 (TAB2), which also bind polyubiquitinated RIP1, are able to interact with and activate the IKK complex. B) The noncanonical (alternative) pathway based on the processing of the p100 precursor. NIK and IKKα, but not IKKβ, are critical kinases. Mainly RelB/p52 NF-κB dimers are generated. C) The unique NF-κB activation pathway induced by UV light and a few select chemotherapeutic agents. The MAP kinase p38 and CKII are needed to phosphorylate IkBα at sites different from the amino acid residues used in the canonical pathway. These phosphorylation events are a prerequisite for signal-induced IkBα degradation. D) A stress-activated pathway based on the sequential, nuclear modification of NEMO. Nuclear NEMO first becomes sumoylated, mediated by PIDD and RIP1, then phosphorylated by the stress sensor ATM kinase. This phosphorylation is a prerequisite for mono-ubiquitination of NEMO, which serves as nuclear export signal. ATM is also translocated to the cytoplasm along with NEMO interacting with and activating IKK.

the 26S proteasome. NF-κB is now free to translocate into the nucleus, where it regulates the expression of genes involved in fundamental physiological and patho-physiological cellular processes such as control of the immune system, especially of the innate immune response, as well as the regulation of inflammation and apoptosis. Various MAP3kinases (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases) located immediately upstream of the IKK complex have been thought to be key components of IKK activation. However, recent studies have demonstrated that the binding of NEMO to Lys-63-linked polyubiquitinated RIP1 is the essential step in IKK activation mediated by TNF-R1 (5–7). This finding provided a key step to understanding the link between cytokine receptor proximal signaling and the activation of IKK/NF-κB.

The canonical NF-κB activation pathway outlined above is generally regarded to be the main mechanism by which NF-κB activity is regulated. However, this

fundamental pathway is not the only one controlling NF-κB. Recently, a noncanonical (alternative) signaling pathway of NF-κB activation was discovered that involves processing of the p52 precursor p100 (1, 4) (Fig. 1B). This pathway is completely independent of IKKβ or NEMO, whereas IKKα and the NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) are essential. NIK is positioned immediately upstream of the IKKα homodimer. Cytokines such as lymphotoxin β (LT-β) and B cell-activating factor, CD40 ligand, as well as viruses such as the human T cell leukemia virus 1 (HTLV-1) or the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), are among the few select stimuli able to activate the noncanonical pathway. The phosphorylation of p100 at two specific C-terminal serine residues by IKKα homodimers is a key event in this pathway. Again, this site-specific phosphorylation is essential for polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. However, the entire molecule is not degraded; only the C terminus of p100 is destroyed. RelB/p52 heterodimers are

IkB-INDEPENDENT NF-κB REGULATION
the main NF-κB factors generated by p100 processing so that not only the signals inducing this pathway, but also its products, are specific.

The mechanism of UV light-induced NF-κB induction is unique (Fig. 1C). Exposure of cells to UV light leads to the degradation of IκBα, but this phosphorylation-dependent process is not mediated by the IKK complex (8). It could be demonstrated that activation of a p38-MAPkinase-dependent pathway is critical for UV-induced IκBα-degradation. One of the main targets of this pathway is casein kinase II (CKII), a serine/threonine kinase that can phosphorylate IκBα at a cluster of C-terminal sites. Like the IKK-mediated N-terminal phosphorylation, this post-translational IκBα modification induces degradation of this NF-κB inhibitor. Thus, CKII is a stress-activated rather than a constitutive IκB kinase playing a crucial role in UV protection by inducing NF-κB-dependent antiapoptotic gene expression (8).

UV light can induce NF-κB activation in a DNA damage-independent manner. In contrast, other DNA-damaging stimuli such as ionizing radiation or chemotherapeutic drugs also induce an NF-κB response. However, this type of NF-κB activation is not only induced by DNA damage, particularly the formation of double strand breaks (genotoxic stress), but is also found to be associated with other stress conditions, such as oxidative stress as well as heat or electric shock (9) (Fig. 1D). Recent studies have shed new light onto these “nuclear-to-cytoplasmic” pathways of NF-κB activation (4, 10, 11). The regulatory IKK component NEMO and its tripartite post-translational modification stand in the center of this NF-κB activation pathway. Upon cellular stress, NEMO is sumoylated within the nucleus. This means it is modified by covalent attachment of the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO). PIASy (protein inhibitor of activated STATy) was recently identified to be the NEMO-specific SUMO ligase (12). Sumoylation is increased in the presence of PIDD (p53-inducible death domain-containing protein), a protein implicated in cell cycle control. PIDD forms a complex with NEMO and RIP1 (11, 13). Then a second ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM)-dependent pathway results in the phosphorylation of NEMO and subsequently its mono-ubiquitinylation. The last modification does not mark NEMO for proteasomal degradation, but rather is a signal for cytoplasmic translocation, where modified NEMO activates the IKK complex.

The NF-κB activation pathway originating from DNA damage described above is an excellent example of the fact that protein ubiquitinylation has emerged as an important intracellular mechanism regulating various biological processes (14, 15). Ubiquitin is a highly conserved 76 amino acid polypeptide that can be covalently attached to a lysine residue of a target protein by an E3-ubiquitin ligase, which is primarily responsible for providing substrate specificity. Subsequent to the attachment of the first ubiquitin, polyubiquitin chains are often generated by the ligation of

multiple ubiquitin moieties. Ubiquitin has seven lysine residues, of which Lys-48 and Lys-63 are used for generating most polyubiquitinylation chains. Whereas Lys-48-linked polyubiquitinylation is a marker for proteasomal degradation, the attachment of Lys-63-linked polyubiquitin chains regulates protein kinase activities and protein trafficking (7).

The zinc finger protein A20 functions as a ubiquitin editor and a potent NF-κB inhibitor; both functions are connected (16). The central role played by A20 in regulating NF-κB is demonstrated by the fact that A20-deficient mice develop severe inflammation and cachexia, are hypersensitive to LPS as well as TNF-α, and die prematurely (17). A20 interferes with TNF-α-induced NF-κB activation upstream of the IKK complex (18). A20 interacts with TRAF2 (TNF receptor-associated factor 2) and NEMO, both critical signaling components of the pathway originating from the TNF receptor. Other A20 binding proteins such as ABIN-1 (A20 binding inhibitor of NF-κB 1) also bind to NEMO and cooperate with A20 in inhibiting NF-κB (19). However, the critical A20 target for inhibition of TNF-α-induced NF-κB activation seems to be the serine/threonine protein kinase RIP1 (receptor-interacting protein 1), which also interacts with A20. RIP1 is activated by TRAF2-driven Lys-63-linked polyubiquitinylation. A deubiquitinylation activity located in the so-called OTU (ovarian tumor) domain at the N terminus of A20 can remove these polyubiquitin chains. The subsequent attachment of Lys-48-linked polyubiquitin chains to RIP1 is mediated by the C terminus of A20, which encompasses seven novel zinc finger structures. This domain functions as an E3-ubiquitin ligase. RIP1 is marked for proteasomal degradation by the latter post-translational modification interrupting the NF-κB activation pathway (18). Thus, A20 is an astonishing molecule combining two distinct, but connected, functions of ubiquitin editing.

**IkB-INDEPENDENT REGULATION OF NF-κB: POST-TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS OF REL PROTEINS**

Not only the IkB inhibitors, but also the Rel proteins themselves, are subject to signal-induced post-translational modifications (20, 21) (Fig. 2). These modifications alter various physiological functions of the NF-κB factors. The most important post-translational modification is phosphorylation, and the basal and signal-induced phosphorylation of RelA is by far the best-characterized modification. Site-specific phosphorylation is often a prerequisite for other modifications regulating RelA activity. Such subsequent post-translational modifications include acetylation, ubiquitinylation, and isomerization of specific amino acid residues.
| modified amino acid | modification | enzyme(s) | function of modification | Ref. |
|---------------------|--------------|-----------|--------------------------|------|
| 1. RelA/p65         | serine 536   | IKKα      | transactivation ▲       | 25,26 |
|                     |              | IKKβ      | transactivation ▲       | 24    |
|                     |              | IKKε      | transactivation ▲       | 27,29,37 |
|                     |              | TBK1      | nuclear export ▼        | 27,28 |
|                     |              | RSK1      | turnover ▲              | 30    |
|                     | serine 535   | CaMKIV    | transactivation ▲       | 32,33 |
|                     | serine 529   | CKII      | unknown                 | 25,34,35 |
|                     | serine 468   | GSK-3β    | transactivation ▼       | 38    |
|                     |              | IKKβ      | transactivation ▼       | 36    |
|                     |              | IKKε      | transactivation ▲       | 37    |
|                     | serine 311   | PKCζ      | transactivation ▲       | 42    |
|                     | serine 276   | PKAc      | transactivation ▲       | 43,45 |
|                     |              | MSK1      | transactivation ▲       | 44,46 |
|                     | threonine 505| ATR       | transactivation ▼       | 48    |
|                     |              | ChK1      | transactivation ▼       | 49    |
|                     | threonine 435| unknown   | transactivation ▼       | 47    |
|                     | threonine 254| unknown   | IkB interaction ▼       | 50    |
|                     |              |           | stabilization ▲         |      |
|                     | lysine 310   | CBP/p300  | transactivation ▲       | 56,59 |
|                     | lysine 221   | CBP/p300  | DNA binding             | 56    |
|                     |              |           | IkB interaction ▼       |      |
|                     | lysine 218   | CBP/p300  | DNA binding             | 56    |
|                     |              |           | IkB interaction ▼       |      |
|                     | lysine 123   | PCAF,p300 | DNA binding             | 58    |
|                     | lysine 122   | PCAF,p300 | DNA binding             | 58    |
| 2. RelB            | serine 368   | unknown   | dimerization ▲          | 62    |
|                     | serine 552   | unknown   | degradation ▲          | 61    |
|                     | threonine 254| unknown   | degradation ▲          | 61    |
| 3. c-Rel           | serine 552   | PKC       | transactivation ▲       | 65,67 |
|                     | unknown      | PKA<sub>cβ</sub> | transactivation ▲       | 66    |
|                     | unknown      | IKKα      | degradation ▲          | 53,68,69 |
|                     | unknown      | TBK1      | nuclear transloc. ▲     | 70    |
|                     | unknown      | IKKε      | nuclear transloc. ▲     | 71    |
| 4. NF-κB1/p50      | serine 337   | PKAc      | DNA binding             | 72    |

Figure 2. Compilation of post-translational modifications of Rel proteins and their functional consequences. ▲ = increase, up-regulation; ▼ = decrease, down-regulation.

REGULATION OF NF-κB ACTIVITY BY MODIFICATIONS OF RelA

The first description of an inducible phosphorylation of RelA *in vivo* already suggested an important mechanism in the control of NF-κB activity (22, 23). Today, nine putative sites of RelA phosphorylation are known: six serine and three threonine residues (Fig. 2). Three of these sites (Ser-276, Ser-311, and Thr-254) are located within the N-terminal RHD, whereas six acceptor sites (Ser-468, Ser-529, Ser-535, Ser-536, Thr-435, and Thr-505) are found within the C-terminal transactivation domain. The effects of RelA phosphorylation at these specific sites vary dramatically, ranging from transcriptional activation to the complete repression of certain genes. The pattern of RelA phosphorylation is most likely stimulus- and cell type-specific. It becomes more and more apparent that RelA phosphorylation at different sites serves as an integrator for multiple incoming signals, which could control both the kinetics

IkB-INDEPENDENT NF-κB REGULATION
ated by ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) involving a p53-dependent pathway (30). The physiological consequence is a weaker interaction, with nuclear IkBα resulting in a drastic decrease of nuclear RelA export and thus enhanced RelA-dependent transcription. In line with this observation, a recent study claims that Ser-536-phosphorylated RelA does not interact at all with cytosolic IkBα and that this RelA species regulates a distinct set of target genes emphasizing the importance of the Ser-536 phosphorylation (31).

Ser-535 of RelA is specifically targeted by calmodulin-dependent kinase IV (CaMKIV) (32, 33). This phosphorylation results in the activation of gene expression, especially of antiapoptotic genes. This is in line with the observation that CaMKIV activity, like NF-κB, has antiapoptotic and proproliferative effects, suggesting that NF-κB is a potential effector of CaMKIV (33).

CKII phosphorylates Ser-529 of RelA upon stimulation with TNF-α or IL-1β (34, 35). Ser-529 phosphorylation is dependent on IkB degradation, and thus takes place exclusively within the cytoplasm. This RelA modification appears to play a minor role in regulating RelA-dependent transactivation and appears to be relevant only for an optimal cellular response induced by HTLV-1 infection (25).

Phosphorylation of the serine residue at position 468 located in the TAD2 of RelA appears to have opposing effects. RelA phosphorylated at Ser-468 is located predominantly within the nucleus, whereas most other versions of phosphorylated RelA are found mainly in the cytoplasm, indicating a function for this specific phosphorylation in the control of RelA-dependent transactivation. This site is the target of three protein kinases: IKKβ, IKKε, and GSK-3β (36–38). GSK-3β mediates basal Ser-486 phosphorylation inhibiting the basal activity of RelA (38). In line with this, expression of a constitutive-active form of GSK-3β suppresses NF-κB activity (39, 40). However, a contradictory finding appears to be of greater physiological relevance: NF-κB cannot be activated in cells derived from GSK-3β-deficient embryos despite an unaltered profile of IkBα degradation, which suggests a positive regulatory role of GSK-3β in NF-κB activation (41). A positive impact on RelA activity was also observed for the IKKε-mediated Ser-468 phosphorylation on T cell costimulation (37), whereas the IKKβ-dependent phosphorylation induced in HeLa cells stimulated with TNF-α or IL-1β had a negative effect on RelA-mediated transactivation (36). This contradiction might be explained by the influence of other phosphorylation events, which differ significantly in both experimental systems.

Phosphorylation of both serine residues 311 and 276 located within the N-terminal RHD of RelA results in an increase in transactivation potency. Ser-311 is phosphorylated by PKCζ upon TNF-α stimulation, leading to an enhanced interaction of Ser-311-phosphorylated RelA with the cAMP response element binding (CREB) binding protein (CBP) and its recruitment to the interleukin 6 (IL-6) promoter together with RNA polymerase II (42). Ser-276 is phosphorylated exclusively within the cytoplasm by the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKAc) (43). Since PKAc is complexed to and inactivated by IkBα, the stimulus-induced degradation of IkBα is a prerequisite for the activation of PKAc. Ser-276 is also targeted by the mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK1) (44). In this case, the phosphorylation takes place exclusively within the nucleus. Thus, a single serine residue is phosphorylated by different protein kinases in distinct cellular compartments. In both cases, RelA phosphorylation results in an enhanced recruitment of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) such as CBP and p300 and to increased displacement of inhibitory p50/histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) complexes from the DNA (45). In addition, Ser-276-phosphorylated RelA can interact with RelB in the nucleus (46). These heterodimers cannot bind DNA, and thus represent inactive NF-κB. The physiological consequence is the inhibition of RelB-mediated NF-κB activity.

RelA can also be phosphorylated at three specific threonine residues. Two are located within the C-terminal TADs (Thr-435 and Thr-505) and one (Thr-254) is found at the N-terminal RHD of RelA (47–49). Phosphorylation of each of the two C-terminal amino acids has a suppressive effect on RelA activity. Phosphorylation of Thr-505 is induced by the ARF tumor suppressor (human p14ARF). ARF induces RelA phosphorylation via activation of the ATM/Rad3-related (ATR) checkpoint kinase and checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) in an p53-independent fashion. Phosphorylation of Thr-505 results in an increased association of RelA with HDAC1, and this complex formation is responsible for the ARF-induced inhibition of RelA activity. In osteosarcoma cells, an induction of the inhibitory Thr-505 phosphorylation of RelA is observed upon treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin. Since it uses the same signaling pathways as ARF, cisplatin can be regarded as an ARF mimic (49).

Phosphorylation of Thr-254 leads to the activation of RelA by a novel mechanism. The nuclear peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 [protein-interacting NIMA (never in mitosis arrest) 1] binds and isomerizes specific phosphorylated serine or threonine residues that precede a proline residue (50). These Pin1-induced conformational changes have profound functional effects on the target proteins. One of these targets is RelA, which is bound by Pin1 at phosphorylated Thr-254-Pro-255. Binding precedes the isomerization of the proline residue. This alteration of RelA structure results in a strong decrease in its affinity to IkBα, whereas the binding to p50 remains unchanged. Further, phosphorylation-dependent Pin1/RelA interaction increases the nuclear translocation of RelA and, most important, results in stabilization of RelA, as demonstrated by the extreme instability of the T254A mutant of RelA. The counterpart of Pin1 in the regulation of RelA stability is the E3-ubiquitin ligase suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1), which has been shown to ubiquitinate RelA, thereby inducing its proteolysis.
Pin1 and SOCS-1 bind RelA at sites extremely close to one another, making it likely that both proteins compete for the same binding site (50). The role of SOCS-1 in RelA ubiquitination was confirmed in a recent study demonstrating that COMMD1 (copper metabolism gene MURR1 domain containing 1) accelerates ubiquitination and degradation of RelA through its interaction with a multimeric ubiquitin ligase containing Elongins B and C, cullin 2 (Cul2), and SOCS-1 (ECS(SOCS-1)) (51). COMMD1 binds to Cul2 in a stimulus-dependent manner, thereby strengthening the interaction between SOCS-1 and RelA. The important role of COMMD1 for RelA ubiquitination is stressed by the finding that RelA is stabilized in COMMD1-deficient cells (51). However, it is still a matter of discussion whether SOCS-1 is the only ubiquitin ligase mediating ubiquitination of RelA (7). Functionally, RelA ubiquitination is a potential mechanism regulating the termination of NF-κB-mediated inflammatory responses (52) and may also contribute to the oscillation of nuclear NF-κB activity (53).

The finding that the phosphorylation status of Rel proteins, especially of RelA, is the decisive parameter for their association with either activating HATs (e.g., CBP/p300) or suppressing HDACs was a hallmark discovery in the field of NF-κB regulation (45) (Fig. 3A). RelA is also reversibly modified by these enzymes. Upon TNF-α stimulation, RelA is acetylated at five specific lysine residues: Lys-122, -123, -218, -221, and -310 (54, 55). Modification of Lys-218 and Lys-221 weakens the interaction of RelA with IkBα and increases RelA DNA binding (56). Acetylation of Lys-310 strongly enhances the transactivation potency of RelA (56), whereas deacetylation by histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) or SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) inhibits the transcriptional activity of NF-κB and augments TNF-α-mediated apoptosis (56, 57). Stimulation with TPA specifically acetylates RelA at Lys-122 and -123. PCAF (p300/CBP-associated factor) and p300 are involved in these post-translational modifications, which decreases RelA-specific DNA binding and facilitates its nuclear export (58). The most important aspect of these studies of

Figure 3. Changes in NF-κB-dependent transcription induced by the interaction with GR. A) All cytoplasmic and nuclear kinases that can phosphorylate RelA upon TNF-RI stimulation are shown. Only phosphorylated RelA is able to interact with coactivators such as CBP/p300. The recruitment of such coactivators changes the chromatin structure by histone acetylation and facilitates assembly of the basic transcription apparatus. DNA-bound RelA can induce an activating phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II. B) The interaction of activated, monomeric GR with DNA-bound NF-κB results in the active recruitment of corepressors such as HDAC2, whose expression is also up-regulated. The activity of CBP/p300 is suppressed by the GR/NF-κB complex. Further, histone 3 methylation adds to the inactive chromatin state. Finally, the activating RNA polymerase II phosphorylation is inhibited. hsp, heat shock protein.

IkB-INDEPENDENT NF-κB REGULATION
RelA acetylation is that modification of specific lysine residues regulates distinct functions of NF-κB. Thus, modification of RelA by site-specific acetylation is another mechanism whereby different signals controlling NF-κB activity are integrated.

It was recently demonstrated that decreased phosphorylation of Ser-276 or Ser-536 by ectopic expression of enzymatically inactive forms of PKAc/MSK1 (target: Ser-276) or IKKα/IKKβ (target: Ser-536), respectively, drastically reduced RelA acetylation at Lys-310. In line with this, reconstitution of RelA-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts with mutated forms of RelA (RelA S276A or S536A) resulted in a sharp decrease of RelA acetylation. Reconstitution with wild-type RelA led to an increased assembly of phospho-RelA with p300 and, as a consequence, to an up-regulation of Lys-310 acetylation compared with cells expressing mutant RelA (59). Phosphorylation of DNA-bound RelA at Ser-536 occurs prior to RelA acetylation at lysine 310. In parallel, the repressor SMRT (silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor), which is bound to RelA/p50 heterodimers, is also phosphorylated and thereby derepressed (55). Both phosphorylation events are mediated by nuclear IKKα recruited to the chromatin. The derepression of SMRT potentiates RelA acetylation by p300, leading to a further increase in NF-κB activity. In line with these findings, histone deacetylase inhibitors induce phosphorylation and thus the activation of p300 (54).

### REGULATION OF NF-κB ACTIVITY BY MODIFICATIONS OF RELB

RelB is in many respects an unusual member of the Rel/NF-κB family. For example, RelB preferentially binds to p50 and p52, although an inhibitory interaction with RelA and homodimerization have been demonstrated. Further, it could be shown that the RelB monomer is an extremely unstable protein that is almost instantly degraded (60).

RelB is phosphorylated at Thr-84 and Ser-552 (61) (Fig. 2). These phosphorylation events have functional consequences that are contrary to the effects of RelA phosphorylation. RelB phosphorylation is induced by specific signals and is a prerequisite for the subsequent proteasomal degradation of RelB. The inducing signals are T cell receptor activation by CD3/CD28-specific antibodies or TPA/ionomycin stimulation, which is supposed to mimic T cell receptor activation. At first sight, induced proteolysis of RelB resembles the signal-induced degradation of the IκBs. However, there are also differences between the two processes. The phosphorylation-dependent RelB degradation takes place in at least two distinct steps: an N-terminal processing is followed by the complete proteasomal degradation of the protein. Further, RelB degradation is stimulus specific and cannot be induced by cytokines like TNF-α or IL-1 (61).

Another prominent post-translational modification

of RelB is Ser-368 phosphorylation. A murine plasma-cytoma cell line lacking endogenous RelB expression was substituted with wild-type and Ser-368-mutated RelB (62). The authors observed that Ser-368 phosphorylation is not required for the nuclear translocation of RelB, but rather appears to be critical for RelB dimerization with the p52 precursor p100. RelB phosphorylated at Ser-368 stabilizes p100, suggesting a role in regulating the noncanonical pathway of NF-κB activation. As in the case of the two other RelB phosphorylation sites, the kinase (or kinases) mediating Ser-368 phosphorylation has not been identified (62).

### REGULATION OF NF-κB ACTIVITY BY MODIFICATIONS OF C-REL

Regulation of c-Rel activity is achieved to a large extent by its signal-induced phosphorylation (Fig. 2). An initial hint stressing the importance of c-Rel phosphorylation came from a study reporting that tyrosine phosphorylation can be rapidly induced by G-CSF (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) in human neutrophils (63). However, neither the protein tyrosine kinase mediating the G-CSF effect nor the target tyrosine residue (or residues) has been identified. Six years later, the complex formation of a 65 kDa serine/threonine protein kinase with murine c-Rel was reported (64). This kinase apparently has two binding sites and mediated C-terminal phosphorylation of c-Rel. Again, the specific phospho-acceptor sites within c-Rel and the protein kinase responsible for c-Rel phosphorylation have not been identified.

Two prominent serine/threonine signaling kinases, PKC and the Cβ isoform of PKA, have been shown to phosphorylate c-Rel (65, 66). Both phosphorylation events have the same result: they enhance the transactivation potential of c-Rel. The target serine/threonine residue of PKA is still unknown, whereas PKC phosphorylates Ser-471 of c-Rel in Jurkat T cells stimulated by TNF-α. The signaling pathway leading to this c-Rel modification also involves the PI3K/AKT kinase located upstream of PKC (67). The mutation of either Ser-471 or Ser-460 to a nonphosphorylatable residue resulted in a version of c-Rel with higher transforming potency, whereas the transactivation ability was not influenced (68). However, the expression of selected genes was differentially affected by mutated vs. wild-type c-Rel, indicating that phosphorylation inhibits the transforming potency of this proto-oncoprotein by enabling it to correctly express target genes.

A dysregulated phosphorylation of c-Rel might also contribute to the development of certain human B cell lymphomas. In two patients with different types of B cell lymphoma, point mutations affecting Ser-525 were detected (69). The mutant c-Rel proteins display altered transactivation properties depending on the cell type analyzed, and the potency of mutant c-Rel to transform chicken spleen cells was drastically enhanced.
Phosphorylation of specific sites within c-Rel as well as of RelA appears to be crucial for the resolution of inflammation. A clear division of tasks between IKKβ and IKKα was noted in a study analyzing NF-κB activation in macrophages during inflammatory processes (52). IKKβ mediates NF-κB activation in response to proinflammatory cytokines and microbial products, whereas IKKα contributes to the termination of inflammation by accelerating the turnover of c-Rel as well as RelA in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Both Rel proteins have been shown to be ubiquitinated and subsequently proteolytically degraded. This study demonstrated that IKKα is able to phosphorylate c-Rel and RelA, and thereby induce their degradation. The serine residue 536 of RelA appears to be one IKKα target, whereas the phospho-acceptor site of c-Rel was not identified in detail. It is known only that phosphorylation takes place at the C terminus of c-Rel.

Recent studies identified NIK, TBK1, and IKKε as c-Rel-specific kinases (70, 71). TBK1 and IKKε phosphorylate c-Rel at its C terminus with the functional consequence of an increased nuclear c-Rel accumulation. The degradation of IkBα is not affected, but rather IKKε-mediated phosphorylation leads to dissociation of the IkBα-c-Rel complex.

kB/C/EBPβ complex formation leads to the enhancement of C/EBPβ activity but to the repression of NF-κB via inhibition of RelA phosphorylation (73). A recent study showed that interaction of RelA with breast cancer-associated protein 3 (BCA3) results in the transcriptional repression of NF-κB (74). This complex formation is dependent on neddylation of BCA3. Neddylated BCA3 can recruit SIRT1, a histone deacetylase that might be responsible for the suppression of NF-κB activity.

The binding of NF-κB to glucocorticoid receptors (GR), ligand-induced transcription factors belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily, is an excellent example of the regulation of NF-κB activity by cross-coupling to unrelated proteins (75, 76) (Fig. 3B). Glucocorticoids are potent immunosuppressants that work mainly by inhibiting cytokine gene expression. Surprisingly, it could be shown that the DNA binding and transactivating ability of GR are not needed to mediate most of these anti-inflammatory effects. It is mainly the interaction with NF-κB that finally leads to down-regulation of the transcription of cytokine genes due to GR-mediated NF-κB repression. This inhibition results in decreased transactivation potency, DNA binding, and nuclear localization of NF-κB.

The precise molecular mechanisms mediating the inhibiting effects of glucocorticoids on NF-κB vary with the cell type and depend on the availability of specific cofactors, the promoter context of a given target gene, the status of the chromatin, the so-called histone code, and other parameters. The general importance of cytoplasmic mechanisms of GR-mediated NF-κB transrepression, such as an glucocorticoid-induced increase in IkBα levels, is still a matter of controversy (77). In most cases, gene repression by activated GR takes place through interaction with DNA-bound NF-κB. GR DNA binding and homodimerization are not required for this process (78). Evidence of a completely nuclear mechanism of glucocorticoid repression of specific promoters, such as the IL-8 or the ICAM promoter, came from *in vivo* footprinting and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showing that the pattern of RelA/NF-κB binding remains unchanged under repression conditions (79, 80).

One crucial nuclear mechanism is based on changes in the chromatin environment of the regulatory elements of the respective genes called chromatin remodeling (75). In the resting cell, DNA is tightly wrapped around a protein core. This chromatin structure is composed of nucleosomes, which are particles consisting of ~146 bp DNA associated with an octamer of two molecules each of core proteins (histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4). This “closed” chromatin structure can be loosened by modification of the N-terminal tails of the core histones enabling access of RNA polymerase II and the rest of the transcription machinery. These modifications include methylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and (of special importance) acetylation. It is known that NF-κB activated by TNF-α or IL-1β can induce histone acetylation preferentially on histone H4

REGULATION OF NF-κB ACTIVITY BY MODIFICATIONS OF p50/NF-κB1

Similar to the IκBs, p105, the precursor of the Rel protein p50, is site-specifically phosphorylated, then polyubiquitinated and proteolytically degraded in the 26S proteasome. Although it has been known for many years that p50 as well as its p105 precursor are inducibly phosphorylated upon stimulation of various cell types (23), reports about site-specific phosphorylation of the mature p50 and the functional consequences of such a post-translational modification are rare. So far, the finding that the catalytic subunit of PKA (PKAc) can inducibly phosphorylate Ser-337, which is located within the RHD of p50, stands alone. Since p50 has no transactivation domains, the only functional consequence appears to be an enhanced p50 DNA binding (72).

IκB-INDEPENDENT REGULATION OF NF-κB: CROSS-TALK BETWEEN NF-κB AND OTHER PROTEINS

Complex formation of NF-κB with transcriptional regulators such as AP-1 (activator protein 1), SP1 (specificity protein 1), and C/EBPβ, termed cross-coupling or cross-talk, is important for the control of NF-κB activity. Cross-talk is defined as the interaction between different transcription factors resulting in either the synergistic activation or antagonistic inhibition of gene expression. The interaction of NF-κB with AP-1 leads to activation of both transcription factors, whereas NF-
at lysine residues 8 and 12. This takes place at NF-κB-responsive regulatory elements. Upon DNA binding, NF-κB recruits large coactivator complexes containing the histone acetylase (HAT) proteins CBP and p300. In overexpression experiments, PCAF was also shown to be critical for the RelA-associated increase in HAT activity. Further, several other HATs are known to interact with NF-κB such as transcriptional intermediary factor 2 (TIF-2), aka GR interacting protein 1, and steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1). In addition to the site-specific acetylation of histone H4, the phosphorylation of histone H3 at Ser-10 is associated with gene induction. Surprisingly, this phosphorylation was found to be mediated by nuclear IKKα, which is recruited to the promoters of NF-κB-regulated genes in association with CBP and RelA upon stimulation with TNF-α (81, 82).

The interaction between transcription factors, such as NF-κB and GRs, may result in differential effects on histone acetylation/deacetylation (75). Several mechanisms, which are probably not exclusive, are currently discussed. Activated GRs can directly modify the chromatin structure. It is known that low glucocorticoid concentrations are able to repress TNF-α-induced histone H4 acetylation *via* direct inhibition of CBP-associated HAT activity. In addition, high concentrations of glucocorticoids lead to an increase in HDAC2 expression and the activated GR can be recruited to activated inflammatory gene complexes, switching off NF-κB-driven gene expression (83). Using a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assay, it was shown that treatment with the GR antagonist RU486 efficiently recruited the corepressor NcoR (nuclear corepressor) to GR (84). These and other findings led to the conclusion that suppression of NF-κB-driven gene expression may involve recruitment of a fully functional corepressor complex that minimally contains HDAC2 and NcoR (76).

The GR/NF-κB cross-talk can also change the chromatin structure by methylating histone H3. This change of the “histone code,” the sequence of histone modifications within a distinct chromatin area, might be critical for switching off NF-κB-mediated inflammatory gene transcription. Another level of GR action seems to be the reduction of an activating C-terminal serine phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II induced by DNA-bound NF-κB (80). This phosphorylation is mediated by the kinase pTEFb and promotes glucocorticoid-mediated repression (85). This indicates that the GR/NF-κB cross-talk has effects downstream of NF-κB DNA binding and even downstream of coactivator function (Fig. 3B).

NUCLEAR SEQUESTRATION AND DIMER EXCHANGE: NEW CONCEPTS IN IkB-INDEPENDENT REGULATION OF NF-κB

The compartmentalization of transcription-associated proteins within nuclear bodies is increasingly recognized as an important mechanism for the control of gene expression, proliferation, and apoptosis. Two prominent examples are regulation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene by the nuclear sequestration of its inhibitor MDM2 (86, 87) and the inhibition of c-*myc*-induced cell cycle progression by sequestration of this proto-oncoprotein to the nucleolus (88). With regard to the NF-κB system, NIK (89) and the transacting NF-κB-repressing factor (NRF) (90) have been shown to shuttle between the nucleoplasm and nuclear bodies. Furthermore, two prominent nuclear proteins, NF-κB binding protein (NFBP) (91) and nucleophosmin/B32 (92), strongly interact with NF-κB, indicating a possible role for nuclear sequestration of NF-κB in regulating NF-κB activity.

The final proof of this hypothesis came from a study demonstrating that RelA translocates into the nucleolus of colon cancer cells in response to proapoptotic stimuli like aspirin, serum withdrawal, and UV-C radiation (93). In contrast, RelA is excluded from the nucleolus in response to the cytokines TNF-α or TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand). Nuclear RelA sequestration is functionally accompanied by a sharp decrease in NF-κB transcriptional activity and a strong increase in apoptosis. An N-terminal motif seems to be responsible for nuclear translocation of RelA, but the exact molecular mechanism has yet to be identified. The current model suggests the existence of an unknown nuclear cofactor (corepressor) that selectively associates with the cytoplasmic NF-κB pool activated by proapoptotic stimuli such as aspirin. A second NF-κB population, the basal pool, constitutively drives the transcription of antiapoptotic genes. The induced RelA/corepressor complex does not activate transcription but interacts with basal NF-κB; subsequently, all nuclear RelA translocates into the nucleolus. As a consequence, NF-κB is in a cellular location different from its target promoters, resulting in a decreased transcription of antiapoptotic genes and finally in apoptosis. In contrast to TNF-α and TRAIL, proapoptotic stimuli induce NF-κB with a delay, which might be responsible for the selective association of the hypothetical cofactor with this NF-κB pool (93).

Dimer exchange at specific NF-κB-dependent promoters represents a new and intriguing concept for the modulation of NF-κB activity. There are two types of NF-κB-regulated promoters. One type is selectively controlled by only one specific dimer, whereas other promoters are regulated by more than one NF-κB complex. Using dendritic cell maturation as a model system, it could be demonstrated that rapidly activated dimers like p50/RelA are replaced by more slowly activated dimers such as p52/RelB at a subset of promoters (94). p52/RelB dimers are less stringently controlled by IκBs and are less sensitive to resynthesized IκBs, enabling them to mediate a sustained activation. Thus, dimer exchange contributes to both the fine-tuning of the NF-κB response as well as a prolonged activation at specific NF-κB target promoters. Further, it was shown that each NF-κB complex has aspecific transcriptional activity at a specific promoter, which is not simply due to affinity variations of different NF-κB dimers. At some promoters, a complete replacement of specific dimers in an ordered sequence was notable, whereas multiple dimers were recruited to others without an obvious temporal order. The occurrence of dimer exchange was also dependent on the applied stimulus. These findings indicate that the regulated disassembly of existing promoter complexes and the controlled reassembly of new complexes containing other components would make the expression of specific genes responsive to changes in the concentration of Rel proteins as well as other cooperating transcription factors (94).

The same research group discovered a mechanism that might promote the exchange of NF-κB dimers at specific target genes (95). They found that RelA polyubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation is a dominant control mechanism for the posttranscriptional repression of NF-κB activity in the absence of IκBα. This polyubiquitination-dependent degradation specifically affects DNA-bound RelA. Thus, it also provides an elegant mechanism for how the composition of NF-κB dimers at specific promoters can be altered in an ordered, sequential manner.

indications that the regulation of phosphorylation of Rel proteins plays an important role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and malignant diseases (95, 97). Physiological and biological processes controlled by alternative regulatory mechanisms of NF-κB are the specific NF-κB-dependent gene expression by controlling the transactivating potency of NF-κB, proliferation including tumorigenesis, apoptosis, immune responses, inflammatory processes, and intracellular viral responses. The ultimate goal of research focusing on physiological effects of NF-κB modifications has to be the identification of novel targets to interfere with disease processes. Such targets could be enzymes (*i.e.*, protein kinases) known to modify Rel proteins in pathological conditions. For example, the activity of these enzymes could be blocked by specific inhibitory drugs. The prerequisite for such an interference with disease processes is a profound understanding of the physiological role played by each NF-κB control mechanism. Progress in this field of research will become increasingly faster in the near future.

The expected discoveries will certainly add to the fascination surrounding the field of IκB-independent regulation of NF-κB and will provide new insights into the regulation of NF-κB-dependent physiological processes.
[FJ]

The authors thank Dr. Jonathan Lindquist for critical reading of the manuscript. The work described from the authors' laboratory was funded by grants of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft NE608/3–2 to Ma.N. and NA292/7–3 to Mi.N., respectively. The authors apologize to those colleagues whose work could not be cited due to space limitations.

# PROSPECTS AND PREDICTIONS

A few years ago most of the regulatory aspects in the NF-κB system appeared to be solved. An elegant activation mechanism centering around the signal-induced degradation of the IκBs had been elucidated in detail. However, research within the last few years has unraveled a far more sophisticated picture of NF-κB activation. For example, IκB-independent mechanisms of NF-κB regulation exist and their importance for the control of nuclear NF-κB activity is increasingly recognized. What can we expect in the future from this exciting research field? First, new types of post-translational modification of Rel proteins important for regulating NF-κB activity will be discovered; one strong candidate is sumoylation. The precise molecular mechanisms underlying the controlled nuclear sequestration of Rel proteins should be discovered in the near future. The same is true for another exciting concept of NF-κB regulation, the dimer exchange at specific promoters. Last, but not least, the research area of microRNAs (miRNAs) promises to become increasingly important for unraveling novel mechanisms regulating NF-κB activity independent of IκBs. miR-146 is such an inducible miRNA inhibiting NF-κB-activating pathways involved in the innate immune response (96). Potential targets of miR-146 are TRAF6 and IRAK1 (interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1). The expression of this miRNA is NF-κB-dependent, suggesting a feedback regulatory loop.

Analysis of the physiological significance of alternative mechanisms of NF-κB regulation will be another area of intense future research. There are already clear

# REFERENCES

1. Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2004) Signaling to NF-κB. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 2195–2224
2. Gilmore, T. D. (2006) Introduction to NF-κB: players, pathways, perspectives. *Oncogene* **25**, 6680–6684
3. Strober, W., Murray, P. J., Kitani, A., and Watanabe, T. (2006) Signalling pathways and molecular interactions of NOD1 and NOD2. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **6**, 9–20
4. Janssens, S., and Tschopp, J. (2006) Signals from within: the DNA-damage-induced NF-κB response. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 773–784 (review)
5. Wu, C.-J., Conze, D. B., Li, T., Srinivasula, S. M., and Ashwell, J. D. (2006) Sensing of Lys 63-linked polyubiquitination by NEMO is a key event in NF-κB activation. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **8**, 398–406
6. Ea, C.-K., Deng, L., Xia, Z.-P., Pineda, G., and Chen, Z.J. (2006) Activation of IKK by TNFα requires site-specific ubiquitination of RIP1 and polyubiquitin binding by NEMO. *Mol. Cell* **22**, 245–257
7. Chen, F., Bhatia, D., and Castranova, V. (2006) Finding NEMO by K63-linked polyubiquitin chain. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**, 1835–1838
8. Kato, T., Jr., Delhase, M., Hoffmann, A., and Karin, M. (2003) CK2 is a C-terminal IκB kinase responsible for NF-κB activation during UV response. *Mol. Cell* **12**, 829–839
9. Wuerzberger-Davis, S. M., Nakamura, Y., Seufzer, B. J., and Miyamoto, S. (2007) NF-κB activation by combinations of NEMO sumoylation and ATM activation stresses in the absence of DNA damage. *Oncogene* **26**, 641–651

# IkB-INDEPENDENT NF-κB REGULATION
2651
10. Huang, T. T., Wuerzberger-Davis, S. M., Wu, Z.-H., and Miyamoto, S. (2003) Sequential modification of NEMO/IKKγ by SUMO-1 and ubiquitin mediates NF-κB activation by genotoxic stress. *Cell* 115, 565–576

11. Janssens, S., Tinel, A., Lippens, S., and Tschopp, J. (2005) PIDD mediates NF-κB activation in response to DNA damage. *Cell* 123, 1–14

12. Mabb, A. M., Wuerzberger-Davis, S. M., and Miyamoto, S. (2006) PIASy mediates NEMO sumoylation and NF-κB activation in response to genotoxic stress. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 8, 986–993

13. Wu, Z.-H., Shi, Y., Tibbetts, R. S., and Miyamoto, S. (2006) Molecular linkage between the kinase ATM and NF-κB signaling in response to genotoxic stimuli. *Science* 311, 1141–1146

14. Karin, M., and Ben-Neriah, Y. (2000) Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination: the control of NF-κB activity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18, 621–663

15. Gao, M., and Karin, M. (2005) Regulating the regulators: control of protein ubiquitinylation and ubiquitin-like modifications by extracellular stimuli. *Mol. Cell* 19, 581–593

16. Heynick, K., and Beyaert, R. (2005) A20 inhibits NF-κB activation by dual ubiquitin-editing functions. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 30, 1–4

17. Lee, E. G., Boone, D. L., Chai, S., Libby, S. L., Chien, M., Lodolce, J. P., and Ma, A. (2000) Failure to regulate TNF-induced NF-κB and cell death responses in A20-deficient mice. *Science* 289, 2350–2354

18. Wertz, I. E., O’Rourke, K. M., Zhou, H., Eby, M., Aravind, L., Seshagiri, S., Wu, P., Wiesmann, C., Baker, R., Boone, D. L., Ma, A., *et al.* (2004) De-ubiquitinylation and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-κB signalling. *Nature* 430, 694–699

19. Mauro, C., Pacifico, F., Lavorgna, A., Mellone, S., Iannetti, A., Acquaviva, R., Formisano, S., Vito, P., and Leonardi, A. (2006) ABIN-1 binds to NEMO/IKKγ and co-operates with A20 in inhibiting NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 18482–18488

20. Viator, P., Merville, M.-P., Bours, V., and Chariot, A. (2005) Phosphorylation of NF-κB and IkB proteins: implications in cancer and inflammation. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 30, 43–52

21. Perkins, N. D. (2006) Post-translational modifications regulating the activity and function of the NF-κB pathway. *Oncogene* 25, 6717–6730

22. Mellits, K. H., Hay, R. T., and Goodbourn, S. (1993) Proteolytic degradation of MAD3 (IkBa) and enhanced processing of the NF-κB precursor p105 are obligatory steps in the activation of NF-κB. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 21, 5059–5066

23. Naumann, M., and Scheidereit, C. (1994) Activation of NF-κB *in vivo* is regulated by multiple phosphorylations. *EMBO J.* 13, 4597–4607

24. Sakurai, H., Chiba, H., Miyoshi, H., Sugita, T., and Toriumi, W. (1999) IkB kinases phosphorylate NF-κB p65 subunit on serine 536 in the transactivation domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 30353–30356

25. O’Mahony, A. M., Montano, M., vanBeneden, K., Chen, L. F., and Greene, W. C. (2004) Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 tax induction of biologically active NF-κB requires IkB kinase-1-mediated phosphorylation of RelA/p65. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 18137–18145

26. Jiang, X., Takahashi, N., Matsui, N., Tetsuka, T., and Okamoto, T. (2003) The NF-κB activation in lymphotoxin β receptor signaling depends on the phosphorylation of p65 at serine 536. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 919–926

27. Buss, H., Dorrie, A., Schmitz, M. L., Hoffmann, E., Resch, K., and Kracht, M. (2004) Constitutive and interleukin-1-inducible phosphorylation of p65 NF-κB at serine 536 is mediated by multiple protein kinases including IkB kinases IKKα, IKKβ, IKKε, TRAF family member-associated (TANK)-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), and an unknown kinase and couples p65 to TATA-binding protein-associated factor II31-mediated interleukin-8 transcription. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 55633–55643

28. Fujita, F., Taniguchi, Y., Kato, T., Narita, Y., Furuya, A., Ogawa, T., Sakurai, H., Joh, T., Itoh, M., Delhase, M., Karin, M., and Nakanishi, M. (2003) Identification of NAP1, a regulatory subunit of IkB kinase-related kinases that potentiates NF-κB signaling. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 23, 7780–7793

29. Adli, M., and Baldwin, A. S. (2006) IKK-i/IKKε controls constitutive, cancer cell-associated NF-κB activity via regulation of

Ser-536 p65/RelA phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 26976–26984

30. Bohuslav, J., Chen, L. F., Kwon, H., Mu, Y., and Greene, W. C. (2004) p53 induces NF-κB activation by an IkB kinase-independent mechanism involving phosphorylation of p65 by ribosomal S6 kinase 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 26115–26125

31. Sasaki, C. Y., Barberi, T. J., Ghosh, P., and Longo, D. L. (2005) Phosphorylation of RelA/p65 on serine 536 defines an IkBa-independent NF-κB pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 34538–34547

32. Qin, C., Nguyen, T., Stewart, J., Samudio, I., Burghardt, R., and Safe, S. (2002) Estrogen up-regulation of p53 gene expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells is mediated by calmodulin kinase IV-dependent activation of a NF-κB/CCAAT-binding transcription factor-1 complex. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 16, 1793–1809

33. Bae, J. S., Jang, M. K., Hong, S., An, W. G., Choi, Y. H., Kim, H. D., and Cheong, J. (2003) Phosphorylation of NF-κB by calmodulin-dependent kinase IV activates anti-apoptotic gene expression. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 305, 1094–1098

34. Bird, T. A., Schooley, K., Dower, S. K., Hagen, H., and Virca, G. D. (1997) Activation of nuclear transcription factor NF-κB by interleukin-1 is accompanied by casein kinase II-mediated phosphorylation of the p65 subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 32606–32612

35. Wang, D., Westerheide, S. D., Hanson, J. L., and Baldwin, A. S., Jr. (2000) Tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced phosphorylation of RelA/p65 on Ser529 is controlled by casein kinase II. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 32592–32596

36. Schwabe, R. F., and Sakurai, H. (2006) IKKβ phosphorylates p65 at S468 in transactivation domain 2. *FASEB J.* 19, 1758–1760

37. Mattioli, I., Geng, H., Sebald, A., Hodel, M., Bucher, C., Kracht, M., and Schmitz, M. L. (2006) Inducible phosphorylation of NF-κB p65 at serine 468 by T cell costimulation is mediated by IKKε. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 6175–6183

38. Buss, H., Dorrie, A., Schmitz, M. L., Frank, R., Livingstone, M., Resch, K., and Kracht, M. (2004) Phosphorylation of serine 468 by GSK-3β negatively regulates basal p65 NF-κB activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 49571–49574

39. Bournat, J. C., Brown, A. M., and Soler, A. P. (2000) Wnt-1 dependent activation of the survival factor NF-κB in PC12 cells. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 61, 21–32

40. Sanchez, J. F., Sniderhan, L. F., Williamson, L. F., Fan, S., Chakraborty-Sett, S., and Maggirwar, S. B. (2003) Glycogen synthase kinase 3β-mediated apoptosis of primary cortical astrocytes involves inhibition of NF-κB signaling. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 23, 4649–4662

41. Hoeflich, K. P., Luo, J., Rubie, E. A., Tsao, M. S., Jin, O., and Woodgett, J. R. (2000) Requirement for glycogen synthase kinase-3β in cell survival and NF-κB activation. *Nature* 206, 86–90

42. Duran, A., Diaz-Meco, M. T., and Moscat, J. (2003) Essential role of RelA Ser311 phosphorylation by zetaPKC in NF-κB transcriptional activation. *EMBO J.* 22, 3910–3918

43. Zhong, H., SuYang, H., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., and Ghosh, S. (1997) The transcriptional activity of NF-κB is regulated by the IkB-associated PKAc subunit through a cyclic AMP-independent mechanism. *Cell* 89, 413–424

44. Vermeulen, L., De Wilde, G., van Damme, P., van den Berghe, W., and Haegeman, G. (2003) Transcriptional activation of the NF-κB p65 subunit by mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK1). *EMBO J.* 22, 1313–1324

45. Zhong, H., May, M. J., Jimi, E., and Ghosh, S. (2002) The phosphorylation status of nuclear NF-κB determines its association with CBP/p300 or HDAC-1. *Mol. Cell* 9, 625–636

46. Jacque, E., Tchenio, T., Piton, G., Romeo, P. H., and Baud, V. (2005) RelA repression of RelB activity induces selective gene activation downstream of TNF receptors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 102, 14635–14640

47. Yeh, P. Y., Yeh, K. H., Chuang, S. E., Song, Y. C., and Cheng, A. L. (2004) Suppression of MEK/ERK signaling pathway enhances cisplatin-induced NF-κB activation by protein phosphatase 4-mediated NF-κB p65 Thr dephosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 26143–26148

48. Rocha, S., Garrett, M. D., Campbell, K. J., Schumm, K., and Perkins, N. D. (2005) Regulation of NF-κB and p53 through activation of ATR and Chk1 by the ARF tumour suppressor. *EMBO J.* 24, 1157–1169

49. Campbell, K. J., Witty, J. M., Rocha, S., and Perkins, N. D. (2006) Cisplatin mimics ARF tumor suppressor regulation of RelA (p65) NF-κB transactivation. *Cancer Res.* 66, 929–935

50. Ryo, A., Suizu, F., Yoshida, Y., Perrem, K., Liou, Y. C., Wulf, G., Rottapel, R., Yamaoka, S., and Lu, K. P. (2003) Regulation of NF-κB signaling by Pin1-dependent prolyl isomerization and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis of p65/RelA. *Mol. Cell* 12, 1413–1426

51. Maine, G. N., Mao, X., Komarck, C. M., and Burstein, E. (2007) COMMD1 promotes the ubiquitination of NF-κB subunits through a cullin-containing ubiquitin ligase. *EMBO J.* 26, 436–447

52. Lawrence, T., Bebien, M., Liu, G. Y., Nizet, V., and Karin, M. (2005) IKKα limits macrophage NF-κB activation and contributes to the resolution of inflammation. *Nature* 434, 1138–1143

53. Nelson, D. E., Ihekwaaba, A. E., Elliot, M., Johnson, J. R., Gibney, C. A., Foreman, B. E., Nelson, G., See, V., Horton, C. A., Spiller, D. G., *et al.* (2004) Oscillations in NF-κB signaling control the dynamics of gene expression. *Science* 306, 704–708

54. Liu, Y., Denlinger, C. E., Randall, B. K., Smith, P. W., and Jones, D. R. (2006) Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid induces Akt-mediated phosphorylation of p300, which promotes acetylation and transcriptional activation of RelA/p65. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 31359–31368

55. Hoberg, J. E., Popko, A. E., Ramsey, C. S., and Mayo, M. W. (2006) IKKα-mediated derepression of SMRT potentiates acetylation of RelA/p65 by p300. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 26, 457–471

56. Chen, L. F., Mu, Y., and Greene, W. C. (2002) Acetylation of RelA at discrete sites regulates distinct nuclear functions of NF-κB. *EMBO J.* 21, 6539–6548

57. Yeung, F., Hoberg, J. E., Ramsey, C. S., Keller, M. D., Jones, D. R., Frye, R. A., and Mayo, M. W. (2004) Modulation of NF-κB-dependent transcription and cell survival by the SIRT1 deacetylase. *EMBO J.* 23, 2369–2380

58. Kiernan, R., Bres, V., Nig, R. W., Coudart, M. P., El Mesaudi, S., Sardet, C., Jin, D. Y., Emiliani, S., and Benkirane, M. (2003) Post-activation turn-off of NF-κB-dependent transcription is regulated by acetylation of p65. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 2758–2766

59. Chen, L. F., Williams, S. A., Mu, Y., Nakano, H., Duerr, J. M., Buckbinder, L., and Greene, W. C. (2005) NF-κB RelA phosphorylation regulates RelA acetylation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 25, 7966–7975

60. Huang, D. B., Vu, D., and Gosh, G. (2005) NF-κB RelB forms an intertwined homodimer. *Structure* 13, 1365–1373

61. Marienfeld, R., Berberich-Siebelt, F., Berberich, I., Denk, A., Serfling, E., and Neumann, M. (2001) Signal-specific and phosphorylation-dependent RelB degradation: a potential mechanism of NF-κB control. *Oncogene* 20, 8142–8147

62. Maier, H. J., Marienfeld, R., Wirth, T., and Baumann, B. (2003) Critical role of RelB serine 368 for dimerization and p100 stabilization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 39242–39250

63. Druker, B. J., Neumann, M., Okuda, K., Franza, B. R., Jr., and Griffin, J. D. (1994) rel Is rapidly tyrosine-phosphorylated following granulocyte-colony stimulating factor treatment of human neutrophils. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 5387–5390

64. Fognani, C., Rondi, R., Romano, A., and Blasi, F. (2000) cRel-TD kinase: a serine/threonine kinase binding in vivo and in vitro c-Rel and phosphorylating its transactivation domain. *Oncogene* 19, 2224–2232

65. Martin, A. G., and Fresno, M. (2000) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha activation of NF-κB requires the phosphorylation of Ser-471 in the transactivation domain of c-Rel. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 24383–24391

66. Yu, S. H., Chiang, W. C., Shih, H. M., and Wu, K. J. (2004) Stimulation of c-Rel transcriptional activity by PKA catalytic subunit beta. *J. Mol. Med.* 82, 621–628

67. Martin, A. G., San-Antonio, B., and Fresno, M. (2001) Regulation of NF-κB transactivation. Implication of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and PKCζ in c-Rel activation by TNFα. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 15840–15849

68. Starczynowski, D. T., Reynolds, J. G., and Gilmore, T. D. (2005) Mutations of TNFα-responsive serine residues within the C-terminal transactivation domain of human transcription factor REL enhance its in vitro transforming ability. *Oncogene* 24, 7355–7368

69. Starczynowski, D. T., Trautmann, H., Pott, C., Harder, L., Arnold, N., Africa, J. A., Leeman, J. R., Siebert, R., and Gilmore, T. D. (2006) Mutation of an IKK phosphorylation site within the transactivation domain of REL in two patients with B-cell lymphoma enhances REL’s *in vitro* transforming activity. *Oncogene* In press

70. Harris, J., Oliere, S., Sharma, S., Sun, Q., Lin, R., Hiscott, J., and Grandvaux, N. (2006) Nuclear accumulation of c-Rel following C-terminal phosphorylation by TBK1/IKKε. *J. Immunol.* 177, 2527–2535

71. Sanchez-Valdepenas, C., Martin, A. G., Ramakrishnan, P., Wallach, D., and Fresno, M. (2006) NF-κB-inducing kinase is involved in the activation of the CD28 responsive element through phosphorylation of c-Rel and regulation of its transactivating activity. *J. Immunol.* 176, 4666–4674

72. Guan, H., Hou, S., and Ricciardi, R. P. (2005) DNA binding of repressor NF-κB p50/p50 depends on phosphorylation of Ser337 by the protein kinase A catalytic subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 9957–9962

73. Zwergal, A., Quirling, M., Saugel, B., Huth, K. C., Sydlik, C., Poli, V., Neumeier, D., Ziegler-Heitbrock, H. W., and Brand, K. (2006) C/EBP beta blocks p65 phosphorylation and thereby NF-κB-mediated transcription in TNF-tolerant cells. *J. Immunol.* 177, 665–672

74. Gao, F., Cheng, J., Shi, T., and Yeh, E. T. (2006) Neddylation of a breast cancer-associated protein recruits a class III histone deacetylase that represses NF-κB-dependent transcription. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 8, 1171–1178

75. Adcock, I. M., Ito, K., and Barnes, P. J. (2004) Glucocorticoids: effects on gene transcription. *Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc.* 1, 247–254

76. De Bosscher, K., Vanden Berghe, W., and Haegeman, G. (2006) Cross-talk between nuclear receptors and NF-κB. *Oncogene* 25, 6868–6886

77. De Bosscher, K., Vanden Berghe, W., and Haegeman, G. (2003) The interplay between the glucocorticoid receptor and NF-κB or AP-1: molecular mechanisms for gene repression. *Endocr. Rev.* 24, 488–522

78. Martens, C., Bilodeau, S., Maira, M., Gauthier, Y., and Drouin, J. (2005) Protein-protein interactions and transcriptional antagonism between the subfamily of NGFI-B/Nur77 orphan nuclear receptors and glucocorticoid receptor. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 19, 885–897

79. Liden, J., Rafter, I., Truss, M., Gustafsson, J. A., and Okret, S. (2000) Glucocorticoid effects on NF-κB binding in the transcription of the ICAM-1 gene. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 273, 1008–1014

80. Nissen, R. M., and Yamamoto, K. R. (2000) The glucocorticoid receptor inhibits NF-κB by interfering with serine-2 phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain. *Genes Dev.* 14, 2314–2329

81. Park, K. J., Krishnan, V., O’Malley, B. W., Yamamoto, Y., and Gaynor, R. B. (2005) Formation of an IKKα-dependent transcription complex is required for estrogen receptor-mediated gene activation. *Mol. Cell* 18, 71–82

82. Park, G. Y., Wang, X., Hu, N., Pedchenko, T. V., Blackwell, T. S., and Christman, J. W. (2006) NIK is involved in nucleosomal regulation by enhancing histone H3 phosphorylation by IKKα. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 18684–18690

83. Ito, K., Barnes, P. J., and Adcock, I. M. (2000) Glucocorticoid receptor recruitment of HDAC 2 inhibits interleukin-1β-induced histone H4 acetylation on lysines 8 and 12. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 6891–6903

84. Garside, H., Stevens, A., Farrow, S., Normand, C., Houle, B., Berry, A., Maschera, B., and Ray, D. (2004) Glucocorticoid ligands specify different interactions with NF-κB by allosteric effects on the glucocorticoid receptor DNA binding domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 50050–50059

85. Luecke, H. F., and Yamamoto, K. R. (2005) The glucocorticoid receptor blocks P-TEFb recruitment by NF-κB to effect promoter-specific transcriptional repression. *Genes Dev.* 19, 1116–1127

86. Rubbi, C. P., and Milner, J. (2000) Non-activated p53 colocalizes with sites of transcription within both the nucleoplasm and the nucleolus. *Oncogene* 19, 85–96

87. Weber, J. D., Kuo, M. L., Bothner, B., DiGiammarino, E. L., Kriwacki, R. W., Russel, M. F., and Sherr, C. J. (2000) Cooper-

ative signals governing ARF-Mdm2 interaction and nuclear localization of the complex. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 2517–2528

88. Datta, A., Nag, A., Pan, W., Hay, N., Gartel, A. L., Colamonici, O., Mori, Y., and Raychaudhuri, P. (2004) Myc-ARF interaction inhibits the functions of Myc. *J. Biol. Chem.* **35**, 36698–36707

89. Birbach, A., Bailey, S. T., Ghosh, S., and Schmid, J. A. (2004) Cytosolic, nuclear and nucleolar localization signals determine subcellular distribution and activity of the NF-κB inducing kinase NIK. *J. Cell Sci.* **117**, 3615–3624

90. Niedick, I., Froese, N., Oumard, A., Müller, P. P., Nourbakhsh, M., Hauser, H., and Koster, M. (2004) Nuclear localization and mobility analysis of the NF-κB repressing factor NRF. *J. Cell Sci.* **117**, 3447–3458

91. Sweet, T., Khalili, K., Sawaya, B. E., and Amini, S. (2003) Identification of a novel protein from glia cells based on its ability to interact with NF-κB subunits. *J. Cell Biochem.* **90**, 884–891

92. Dhar, S. K., Lynn, B. C., Daosukho, C., and St. Clair, D. K. (2004) Identification of nucleophosmin as an NF-κB co-activator for the induction of the human SOD2 gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 28209–28219

93. Stark, L., and Dunlop, M. G. (2005) Nuclear sequestration of RelA (p65) regulates NF-κB-driven transcription and apoptosis. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 5985–6004

94. Saccani, S., Pantano, S., and Natoli, G. (2003) Modulation of NF-κB activity by exchange of dimers. *Mol. Cell* **11**, 1563–1574

95. Saccani, S., Marazzi, I., Beg, A. A., and Natoli, G. (2004) Degradation of promoter-bound p65/RelA is essential for the prompt termination of the nuclear factor kappaB response. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 107–113

96. Taganov, K. D., Boldin, M. P., Chang, K.-J., and Baltimore, D. (2006) NF-κB-dependent induction of microRNA miR-146, an inhibitor targeted to signaling proteins of innate immune responses. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **103**, 12481–12486

97. Rayet, B., Fan, Y., and Gelinas, C. (2003) Mutations in the v-Rel transactivation domain indicate altered phosphorylation and identify a subset of NF-κB-regulated cell death inhibitors important for v-Rel transforming activity. *Mol. Cell.* **23**, 1520–1533

Received for publication January 8, 2007. Accepted for publication March 15, 2007.
