
Unusual Two-Component Signal Transduction
Pathways in the Actinobacteria

MATTHEW I. HUTCHINGS

School of Biological Sciences
and School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice
University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park
Norwich NR4 7TJ, United Kingdom

I. Introduction                                                                                       1
II. Unusual Two-Component Systems in Actinobacteria                                                 6
   A. VanRS and Vancomycin Resistance                                                              6
   B. AbsA1/2                                                                                         7
   C. SenRS and Haemin Resistance                                                                   9
   D. The $\sigma^{E}$-CseABC Signal Transduction Pathway                                           9
   E. MtrAB                                                                                          12
   F. Intramembrane-Sensing Histidine Kinases                                                       14
   G. Leaderless Transcripts                                                                        14
III. Orphan Two-Component Proteins                                                                  16
   A. DosRST: A Branched Pathway                                                                   16
   B. Predictions Based on Homology and Ontology                                                    17
   C. Typical Response Regulators                                                                   18
   D. Atypical Response Regulators                                                                  19
IV. Conclusions and Perspectives                                                                     20
References                                                                                           21

I. Introduction

The actinobacteria are a group of high-GC Gram-positive bacteria which are of huge industrial importance and which also include many important human, plant, and animal pathogens. The best-studied genera in the actinobacteria are the corynebacteria, mycobacteria, and streptomycetes. The corynebacteria include the human pathogen *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*, the causative agent of diphtheria, and the important industrial organism *Corynebacterium glutamicum* which is used to produce around $1.2 \times 10^6$ and $6 \times 10^5$ tonnes of L-glutamate and L-lysine every year. The mycobacteria include the human pathogens *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, which kills two million people in the world every year, and *Mycobacterium leprae*, the causative agent of Hansen's disease (leprosy). The streptomycetes are responsible for producing the majority of commercially important antibiotics as well as many important immunosuppressants, anticancer and antihelminthic drugs.

The corynebacteria and mycobacteria are closely related, both belonging to the suborder *Corynebacterineae* within the order Actinomycetales (Stackerbrandt *et al.*, 1997). The streptomycetes are more distantly related but have been well studied because of their importance as producers of bioactive secondary metabolites and because of their interesting developmental life cycle, which includes both hyphal growth and sporulation (Chater, 2001).

In order to survive, all bacteria must sense and respond to their environment and one of the major ways in which they do this is via two-component signal transduction pathways. In the classical two-component system model, the extracellular domain of the transmembrane sensor kinase senses a specific signal, autophosphorylates its intracellular kinase domain, and passes that phosphate group to its cognate response regulator. The activated response regulator then switches on target genes to bring about a response to the original signal (Fig. 1). In bacteria, the range of environmental stimuli to which an organism can respond is said to be directly correlated to the number of sensor kinases encoded by that organism’s genome (Kim and Forst, 2001).

The model organism for the actinobacteria, *Streptomyces coelicolor*, contains 164 two-component signal transduction genes, more than nearly any other bacterium. This includes 84 sensor kinase and 80 response regulator genes, 67 of which are adjacent on the chromosome and are predicted to form two-component systems (Hutchings *et al.*, 2004). The large number of two-component genes suggest that *S. coelicolor* is well adapted to its complex soil environment. In comparison, *M. tuberculosis* contains only 14 sensor kinases and 16 response regulators, 11 of which are paired on the chromosome (Tyagi and Sharma, 2004), while *C. glutamicum* contains 13 sensor kinases and 13 response regulator genes, all of which lie adjacent on the chromosome and presumably encode two-component systems (Kocan *et al.*, 2006). All of the genes encoding two-component systems in *M. tuberculosis* and *C. glutamicum* have been subjected to deletion mutagenesis. Only one system in *C. glutamicum*, *cgtSR4*, is essential for growth and viability (Kocan *et al.*, 2006). Similarly in *M. tuberculosis*, only a single gene, *mtrA*, which encodes a response regulator, is essential for viability. It could only be disrupted when a second copy was introduced *in trans* (Zahrt and Deretic, 2000). None of the other 29 two-component genes are essential in *M. tuberculosis*, although several have been implicated in intracellular survival and pathogenesis (Rison *et al.*, 2005).

Despite this comprehensive deletion analysis, very little is known about either the signals or the targets for the two-component signal transduction systems in either organism. In *M. tuberculosis*, signals

UNUSUAL TWO-COMPONENT SYSTEMS IN THE ACTINOBACTERIA 3

Outside the cell Inside the cell
Signal → Sensor —— Kinase —— P Phosphorylation
Response regulator Inactive
P Response regulator Active
Response

FIG. 1. The classical model of a bacterial two-component signal transduction pathway. The extracytoplasmic sensor domain of the transmembrane sensor kinase senses a specific signal, autophosphorylates its cytoplasmic kinase domain, and then passes that phosphate group to its cognate response regulator. The activated response regulator can then switch on target genes to bring about a response to the original signal.

have only been identified for one system, DosRS (Kendall et al., 2004), while target genes have been identified for both DosRS and MtrAB (Table I). Like many of the two-component systems which have been characterized in the actinobacteria, neither system conforms to the classical model shown in Fig. 1. Other systems have been implicated in regulating genes required for virulence in *M. tuberculosis*, including MprAB (He et al., 2006) and PhoPR (Walters et al., 2006). In *C. glutamicum*, only the PhoRS and MtrAB two-component systems have been characterized. PhoRS senses limited phosphate availability and switches on phosphate starvation genes (Kocan et al., 2006),

TABLE I  
TWO-COMPONENT PROTEINS WHICH HAVE BEEN CHARACTERIZED IN THE MYCOBACTERIA, CORYNEBACTERIA, AND STREPTOMYCETES  

| Bacterium               | Response regulator | Sensor kinase | Signal                          | Function                              | References                |
|-------------------------|--------------------|---------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | MtrA              | MtrB          | Unknown                         | Cell proliferation                   | Fol et al., 2006          |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | DosR              | DosS, DosT    | Hypoxia, nitric oxide, ethanol, H₂O₂ | Dormancy                             | Sherman et al., 2001; Kendall et al., 2004 |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | MprA              | MprB          | Detergents, alkaline pH         | Cell envelope stress response        | He et al., 2006           |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | PhoP              | PhoR          | Unknown                         | Cell envelope homeostasis            | Walters et al., 2006      |
| Corynebacterium glutamicum | PhoR              | PhoS          | Phosphate starvation            | Phosphate transport                  | Kocan et al., 2006        |
| Corynebacterium glutamicum | MtrA              | MtrB          | Unknown                         | Cell envelope stress, osmoprotection, and cell division | Moker et al., 2004       |
| Corynebacterium glutamicum | CitA              | CitB          | Citrate                         | Citrate uptake and metabolism        | Kocan et al., 2006        |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | CseB              | CseC          | Cell envelope stress            | Cell envelope homeostasis            | Paget et al., 1999b       |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | VanR              | VanS          | Vancomycin                      | Vancomycin resistance                | Hutchings et al., 2006a   |

| Streptomyces coelicolor | PhoR | PhoP | Phosphate starvation | Phosphate transport | Sola-Landa et al., 2003 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Streptomyces reticuli | SenR | SenS | Redox stress | Haemin resistance | Ortiz de Orue Lucana et al., 2005 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | AbsA 2 | AbsA 1 | Unknown | Antibiotic production | Adamidis et al., 1990 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | AfsQ 2 | AfsQ 1 | Unknown | Antibiotic production | Ishizuka et al., 1992 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | CutR | CutS | Unknown | Antibiotic production | Tseng and Chen, 1991 |
| Streptomyces thermoviolaceus | ChiR | ChiS | Chitinobiose | Chitinase expression | Tsujibo et al., 1999 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | KdpE | KdpD | Osmotic stress | Potassium transport | Hutchings et al., 2004 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | OsaA | OsaB | Osmotic stress | Osmosensing | Bishop et al., 2004 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | WhiI | Unknown | Unknown | Development | Ainsa et al., 1999 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | RamR | Unknown | Unknown | Development | O'Connor et al., 2002 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | BldM | Unknown | Unknown | Development | Molle and Buttner, 2000 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | RedZ | Unknown | Unknown | Antibiotic production | Guthrie et al., 1998 |
| Streptomyces coelicolor | GlnR | Unknown | Unknown | Glutamine synthesis | Wray and Fisher, 1991 |

while MtrAB is homologous to the *M. tuberculosis* system and is implicated in the regulation of cell division, osmoprotection, and cell envelope integrity (*Moker et al.*, 2004; Table I).

Carrying out comprehensive deletion analysis of the *S. coelicolor* two-component systems is more challenging simply because of the large number of genes involved. Of the 164 predicted two-component system proteins, only 15 have been assigned functions or phenotypes (Table I). Many of these were identified prior to the completion of the genome sequence through classical genetic screens for mutants which affect either antibiotic production or development. Others, such as KdpDE and PhoRP, were identified in *S. coelicolor* on the basis of homology to systems which are widespread in bacteria. The PhoRP system senses phosphate starvation and switches on the expression of alkaline phosphatase (*Sola-Landa et al.*, 2003), while KdpDE senses turgor pressure (*Jung and Altendorf*, 2003) and activates expression of the KdpFABC potassium transporter which adjusts the potassium content of the cytoplasm to maintain turgor pressure (*Wood*, 1999).

## II. Unusual Two-Component Systems in Actinobacteria

In recent years, it has become clear that not all two-component systems conform to the classical model shown in Fig. 1. Variations on the components themselves include bifunctional sensor kinases, which can act as both kinase and phosphatase. It has been shown that disruption of a bifunctional sensor kinase gene can lead to cross-talk between the response regulator and noncognate sensor kinase(s) or to phosphorylation by a small molecule phosphodonor such as acetyl phosphate. Branched pathways, in which a single sensor kinase can activate multiple response regulators, or where multiple sensor kinases can feed into a single response regulator have also been reported, as have “three-component systems” in which the activity of either the sensor kinase or its cognate response regulator is modulated by an accessory protein. Many of these systems have been identified in the actinobacteria and these are the main focus of this chapter.

### A. VanRS AND VANCOMYCIN RESISTANCE

*S. coelicolor* and *Streptomyces toyocaensis* contain a cluster of genes, *vanRSJKHAX*, which confer high-level inducible resistance to glycopeptide antibiotics (*Hong et al.*, 2004; *Pootoolal et al.*, 2002). These genes are split into four transcription units, the *vanRS* operon, the *vanJ* and *vanK* genes, and the *vanHAX* operon (*Hong et al.*, 2004). *vanRS* encodes the

VanRS two-component system which controls expression of the *vanRSJ-KHAX* gene cluster. In *S. coelicolor*, the VanS sensor kinase is activated by the glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin, resulting in autophosphorylation of the cytoplasmic kinase domain and subsequent phosphorylation of VanR. Phospho-VanR then switches on the expression of the *vanRSJKHAX* genes (Hong et al., 2004, Hutchings et al., 2006a).

Vancomycin works by binding to the D-Ala-D-Ala termini of the stem peptides of cell wall precursors to prevent cross-linking of the mature cell wall. The *vanHAX* genes encode enzymes which reprogram the cell wall such that the precursors terminate D-Ala-D-Lac, a substrate for which vancomycin has 1000-fold lower specificity (Bugg et al., 1991). *vanJ* and *vanK* are novel genes that are only found in the vancomycin resistance gene clusters of streptomycetes. The function of *vanJ* is unknown but it is not required for vancomycin resistance (Hong et al., 2004). Disruption of *vanK*, however, resulted in a vancomycin-sensitive strain. Subsequent work revealed that *vanK* encodes a Fem protein which catalyses the addition of a single glycine crossbridge amino acid to the D-Ala-D-Lac-containing cell wall precursors. This crossbridge is required for cross-linking of the mature cell wall. Under normal growth conditions, an essential enzyme called FemX adds the glycine crossbridge to D-Ala-D-Ala-containing precursors, but FemX cannot recognize precursors containing D-Ala-D-Lac. Instead, in the presence of vancomycin, VanK is expressed and replaces the essential FemX enzyme. This led to the discovery that the essential *femX* gene could be disrupted in the presence of vancomycin, or any structurally related glycopeptide which induces VanS activity (Hong et al., 2005). Furthermore, suppressor mutations, which allowed the *femX* strain to grow in the absence of glycopeptides, were all mapped to the *vanS* gene, leading to the discovery that a null mutation in *vanS* results in constitutive vancomycin resistance (Hutchings et al., 2006a). This is because, in the absence of inducer, VanR is phosphorylated by the small molecule phosphodonor, acetyl phosphate and VanS acts as a VanR-specific phosphatase to suppress the levels of phospho-VanR (Hutchings et al., 2006a). When cells are exposed to vancomycin, VanS switches to a kinase and phosphorylates VanR, resulting in rapid induction of the *van* genes (Fig. 2).

### B. AbsA1/2

The AbsA1/2 two-component system was identified through the analysis of mutations that blocked production of the pigmented antibiotics actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin in *S. coelicolor*

MATTHEW I. HUTCHINGS

Vancomycin                      Cell wall

Phosphatase    VanS  ←→  VanS     Kinase
                          P

P          VanR         P

Acetyl phosphate

vanRSJKHAX

FIG. 2. The bifunctional VanRS two-component system. In the absence of the activating signal, the sensor kinase, VanS, acts as a specific phosphatase to suppress the levels of phosphorylated response regulator, VanR, and keep target genes switched off. Nonspecific phosphorylation of VanR arises via the small molecule phosphodonor acetyl phosphate. In the presence of the activating signal, the activity of the sensor kinase switches from phosphatase to kinase and VanS then actively phosphorylates VanR, which in turn activates expression of the vancomycin resistance genes. When the signal disappears, the activity of the VanS reverts to a phosphatase and rapidly switches off the response.

(Adamidis *et al.*, 1990). The point mutations accounting for this phenotype were all located in the *absA1* (sensor kinase) gene, whereas deletion of either *absA1* or *absA2* resulted in hyperproduction of actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin, known as the precocious hyperproduction of antibiotics (Pha) phenotype (Brian *et al.*, 1996). This implies that the original point mutants were gain-of-function mutations that led to constitutive phosphorylation of the response regulator and that phosphorylated AbsA2 turns off antibiotic production. Mutation of the conserved H202 residue, the proposed site of autophosphorylation, resulted in a strain exhibiting the Pha phenotype, although the strain produced even more undecylprodigiosin and actinorhodin than the *absA1* deletion strain (Sheeler *et al.*, 2005). This could be explained by the fourfold increase in AbsA2-specific phosphatase activity of the AbsA1 H202A protein.

compared to the wild-type protein, *in vitro* (Sheeler *et al.*, 2005). If AbsA2 is phosphorylated *in vivo* by either acetyl phosphate or a noncognate sensor kinase then the overproduction of pigmented antibiotics in the H202A *absA1* strain could be explained by its enhanced phosphatase activity (Sheeler *et al.*, 2005).

### C. SenRS AND HAEMIN RESISTANCE

The SenRS two-component system negatively regulates the expression of *furS*, *cpeB*, and *hbpS* in *Streptomyces reticuli*. The *furS* gene encodes a zinc-dependent transcription factor, *cpeB* encodes a catalase-peroxidase, and *hbpS* encodes a novel haem-binding protein (Ortiz de Orue Lucana *et al.*, 2005). HbpS is an extracellular protein that is secreted via the twin arginine translocase (Tat) pathway (Ortiz de Orue Lucana *et al.*, 2004), a pathway typically used to transport fully folded proteins and those requiring cofactor assembly in the cytoplasm (Sargent *et al.*, 2006). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the sensor kinase, SenS, binds to HbpS *in vitro* suggesting HbpS is an accessory protein to the sensor kinase (Ortiz de Orue Lucana *et al.*, 2005). Disruption of *hbpS* reduces the expression of the *furS-cpeB* operon implying that HbpS negatively modulates the activity of SenS. The SenS protein has five predicted transmembrane helices at the N-terminus and no obvious sensor domain (Ortiz de Orue Lucana *et al.*, 2005). HbpS might therefore interact with one or more of the short extracellular loops of the protein to modulate its activity. Both *senRS* and *hbpS* mutants are more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and haemin and it has been proposed that this system senses redox stress (Ortiz de Orue Lucana *et al.*, 2005). If this is the case then it seems likely that the haem-containing HbpS acts as a separate sensor module for the SenRS two-component system. Reduction of the haem group of HbpS could block SenS and thereby inactivate the SenRS signal transduction system, resulting in derepression of the *furS-cpeB* operon. The resulting expression of the CpeB catalase-peroxidase would confer resistance to hydrogen peroxide and other redox stresses.

### D. THE $\sigma^{\text{E}}$-CseABC SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAY

The *sigE* operon encodes $\sigma^{\text{E}}$, an extracytoplasmic function (ECF) RNA polymerase sigma factor, CseA, a lipoprotein, CseB, a response regulator, and CseC, a sensor kinase (Paget *et al.*, 1999a). Null mutations in *sigE* and *cseB* have identical phenotypes, namely an altered
cell wall profile and hypersensitivity to lysozyme (Paget *et al.*, 1999b), suggesting that the *sigE* promoter is the only target for CseB. To our knowledge, this is the only case in which a two-component system is solely dedicated to regulating the expression of an RNA polymerase sigma factor. The signal sensed by CseC has yet to be elucidated but there is good evidence that this sensor kinase responds to cell envelope damage since expression of *sigE* can be induced by a wide range of cell wall-specific compounds, including antibiotics such as vancomycin and bacitracin and muramidases such as lysozyme (Hong *et al.*, 2002). Interestingly, while null mutations have been made in the *sigE*, *cseA*, and *cseB* genes, all attempts to disrupt *cseC* have been unsuccessful, suggesting that CseC is essential (M. I. Hutchings, unpublished data). This implies that CseB can be activated via cross-talk in the absence of CseC and that the resulting overexpression of $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ is lethal to the cell. The targets for RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ are largely unknown but it seems likely that these targets will include genes involved in cell wall homeostasis.

CseA, a novel lipoprotein with no homologues outside the streptomyces, acts as a negative regulator of *sigE* expression (Hutchings *et al.*, 2006b; Fig. 3). Lipoproteins are anchored in the membrane by a lipid anchor such that all of the protein is located outside of the cell and it has been proposed that, in Gram-positive bacteria, these proteins are equivalent to periplasmic proteins in Gram-negative bacteria (Nielsen and Lampen, 1982). The mechanism by which CseA negatively modulates *sigE* expression is not yet clear but the fact that CseA is extracellular strongly suggests that it blocks signal sensing by CseC (Hutchings *et al.*, 2006b). If CseA downregulates transcription of *sigE* by modulating the activity of the sensor kinase, CseC, this is not unprecedented. Several two-component systems of Gram-positive bacteria are known to be regulated by extracytoplasmic accessory proteins, including the KapB lipoprotein of *Bacillus subtilis*, which is proposed to act as an accessory protein to the KinB sensor kinase involved in triggering sporulation (Dartois *et al.*, 1997). Other examples include SenS, which is regulated by the Tat-secreted protein HbpS (Section II.B) and YycH, a membrane-anchored protein which regulates the essential envelope stress-sensing system YycFG from the extracytoplasmic face of the membrane (Szurmant *et al.*, 2005).

Bioinformatics analysis of the genome sequence of *S.* coelicolor revealed five other sensor kinase genes which form operons with genes encoding putative lipoproteins. Four of these are also linked to response regulator genes, presumably forming two-component systems (Fig. 4). However, while the five sensor kinase proteins are all ~40% identical to
UNUSUAL TWO-COMPONENT SYSTEMS IN THE ACTINOBACTERIA 11

Envelope
stress

Cell wall

CseA

Cell membrane

CseC
P

P
CseB

+ sigE cseA cseB cseC

Sigma Lipo- Response Sensor
factor protein regulator kinase

FIG. 3. Model for the $\sigma^{E}$ cell envelope stress response in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. The *sigE-cseABC* operon of *S.* *coelicolor* encodes an RNA polymerase sigma factor $\sigma^{E}$, a lipoprotein CseA, a response regulator CseB, and a sensor kinase CseC (Cse, control of sigma E). CseC senses cell envelope stress and phosphorylates CseB which then activates expression of the *sigE* operon. RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing $\sigma^{E}$ is proposed to activate genes involved in maintaining cell envelope homeostasis. The novel lipoprotein, CseA, negatively modulates transcription of *sigE* from the extracytoplasmic face of the membrane, probably by blocking signal sensing by CseC.

CseC, the five lipoproteins do not share significant identity with CseA. The *sigE* operon is also the only operon in *S.* *coelicolor* to encode both a sigma factor and a two-component system. One of the other five operons, the *afsQ* operon, is divergently transcribed from a sigma factor gene, *sigQ*, whose product is closely related to $\sigma^{E}$ (Fig. 4). However, expression of *sigQ* is not regulated by the AfsQ system, at least under the conditions tested (M. I. Hutchings, unpublished data). The function of these systems is unknown, but one operon, SCO3011-SCO3013, is an orthologue of the *mtrAB-lpqB* operon of *M.* *tuberculosis*.

MATTHEW I. HUTCHINGS

3014 $mtrA$ $mtrB$ $lpqB$

$sigE$ $cseA$ $cseB$ $cseC$

$sigQ$ $afsQ1$ $afsQ2$ $afsQ3$

7533 7534 7535

7230 7231 7232

5305 5304

Hypothetical Sigma factor Response regulator  
Sensor kinase Lipoprotein  

FIG. 4. Two-component system operons that also encode lipoproteins in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. In *S. coelicolor*, a subgroup of six closely related sensor kinases are encoded by operons which also encode lipoproteins. The activity of at least one, CseC, and possibly all of these sensor kinases is modulated by its cotranscribed lipoprotein. Genes without names are identified by their SCO numbers ([http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/S_coelicolor/](http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/S_coelicolor/)). There is no response regulator gene associated with the SCO5304-5 operon.

### E. MtrAB

MtrA is an essential response regulator in the human pathogen *M. tuberculosis*. It is encoded within the three-gene operon *mtrAB-lpqB*, which also encodes its cognate sensor kinase, MtrB, and a lipoprotein of unknown function, LpqB. This operon is conserved in all of the actinobacterial genomes published to date, with the exception of the obligate intracellular human pathogen *Tropheryma whipplei* (Hoskisson and Hutchings, 2006), a bacterium which has undergone extensive gene decay (Bentley et al., 2003). It is significant that the *mtrAB-lpqB* genes are conserved as functional genes in *M. leprae* since this bacterium also has a greatly reduced genome and is predicted to have lost most of the sigma factor and two-component genes found in the other mycobacteria (Tyagi and Saini, 2004). Furthermore, MtrA protein was detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of soluble cell extracts

from *M. leprae* (Marques *et al.*, 1998), showing that MtrA is not only conserved but is also expressed in *M. leprae*.

In *M. tuberculosis*, it has been shown that MtrA binds to, and activates, expression of the *dnaA* gene (Fol *et al.*, 2006). This is the first direct MtrA target to be identified in the actinobacteria and reveals a possible role for MtrA in cell cycle progression. The *dnaA* gene, which encodes the master regulator of DNA replication, is an essential gene in all bacteria. If it is absolutely dependent on MtrA for activation in *M. tuberculosis* this would explain why disruption of MtrA is lethal. Interestingly, MtrB is nonessential in *M. tuberculosis* suggesting that MtrA can be phosphorylated via cross-talk in the absence of its cognate sensor kinase (Fol *et al.*, 2006).

In the closely related *Mycobacterium avium* disruption of the *mtrB* gene resulted in a strain which is fivefold more sensitive to penicillin, ciprofloxacin, and clanthromycin. The *mtrB* mutant also exhibited cell envelope defects, resulting in increased permeability and an elongated cell shape (Cangelosi *et al.*, 2006). All of these phenotypes are in agreement with those reported for *mtrAB* mutants of *C. glutamicum* (Moker *et al.*, 2004).

It is significant that *mtrA* is essential in mycobacteria but not in the closely related corynebacteria. Microarray studies comparing wild-type *C. glutamicum* with an *mtrAB* strain revealed that many osmoprotection genes were downregulated, while a protease/protease inhibitor pair was upregulated in the *mtrAB* null mutant. Overexpression of this protease, MepA, in *E. coli* (but not *C. glutamicum*) led to an elongation of the cells and led the authors to suggest that this protein has a role in regulating cell wall turnover (Moker *et al.*, 2004).

In *S. coelicolor*, a fourth gene, *SCO3014*, lies just five base pairs upstream of *mtrA* and preliminary analysis of the transcriptional organization of these genes suggests that *SCO3014*, *mtrA*, *mtrB*, and *lpqB* are transcriptionally coupled in *S. coelicolor* (Tri-Than Ngat and M. I. Hutchings, unpublished data). *SCO3014* encodes a homologue of a eukaryotic translation initiation factor and is only linked to the *mtrAB-lpqB* genes in *Streptomyces*. The function of this gene is unclear but null mutations in *SCO3014*, *mtrB*, and *lpqB* all affect normal septation and sporulation. Attempts to disrupt *mtrA* have so far been unsuccessful, suggesting this may also be an essential gene in *Streptomyces* (M. I. Hutchings, unpublished data).

Disruption of MtrAB affects cell cycle progression in all of the actinobacteria studied to date. This could explain both the essential nature of MtrA in the mycobacteria and the reason for MtrAB conservation throughout this group of high-GC Gram-positive bacteria.

likely hypothesis appears to be that MtrAB senses and responds to general stresses which could ultimately inhibit cell division. It is also likely that the conserved LpqB lipoprotein, which was described as a signature protein of the actinobacteria (Gao et al., 2006) plays a role in signal transduction through MtrB.

F. INTRAMEMBRANE-SENSING HISTIDINE KINASES

Mascher et al. (2003) used whole genome microarrays to study vancomycin- and bacitracin-induced cell envelope stress in the model low-GC Gram-positive bacterium *B. subtilis*. They identified three two-component systems, YvqEC, YvqQ/YvcP, and BceRS which could sense and respond to such stress. They noted that all three sensor kinases have extracellular domains less than 20 residues long and proposed that such proteins constitute a new family of intramembrane-sensing histidine kinases which sense signals generated within the cell membrane (Mascher et al., 2003). These kinases appear to be widespread in the low-GC Gram-positive bacteria known as the Firmicutes and they are often genetically linked to ABC transporters which are known, or proposed, to be involved in antibiotic resistance (Mascher et al., 2003).

In the actinobacteria, intramembrane-sensing histidine kinases are found only in the genomes of *S. coelicolor*, *Streptomyces avermitilis*, and *Bifidobacterium longum* (Table II). The functions of these proteins are unknown but one, SCO1369, is genetically linked to a three-gene operon encoding an putative ABC transporter. This suggests that it too might be involved in antibiotic resistance. Another, SCO3390, is encoded within an operon which also encodes a *tmrB*-like gene. TmrB confers resistance to the antibiotic tunicamycin, an inhibitor of the essential cell wall assembly enzyme MraY (Brandish et al., 1996). The surrounding genes of the other kinases do not give any clues to their function and it will be interesting to investigate whether they really are involved in sensing cell envelope stress.

G. LEADERLESS TRANSCRIPTS

Leaderless transcripts are those which start at the same point as the translational start codon, usually the adenine nucleotide of the ATG start codon. Such leaderless transcription appears to be a common theme in *S. coelicolor* two-component system operons, and is more common in actinobacteria as a whole than in other bacteria (Day and Jansenn, 2004). The reason why some genes have leaderless transcripts

TABLE II  
INTRAMEMBRANE-SENSING HISTIDINE KINASES IN THE ACTINOBACTERIA  

| Organism                  | Gene number | Length (amino acids) $^a$ | Whole protein | Sensor domain | N-terminus |
|---------------------------|-------------|---------------------------|---------------|---------------|------------|
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 1369    | 404                       | 11            |               | 91         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 3390    | 401                       | 5             |               | 61         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 3740    | 370                       | 7             |               | 89         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 5282    | 375                       | 7             |               | 81         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 5784    | 358                       | 3             |               | 87         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 6163    | 303                       | 3             |               | 44         |
| Streptomyces coelicolor   | SCO 6424    | 331                       | 3             |               | 64         |
| Streptomyces avermitilis  | SAV 2971    | 368                       | 6             |               | 76         |
| Streptomyces avermitilis  | SAV 7391    | 388                       | 8             |               | 84         |
| Bifidobacterium longum    | BL1001      | 358                       | 1             |               | 75         |

$a$ Mascher *et al.* (2003) stipulated that the total length of the protein must not exceed 400-amino acid residues, with an N-terminus not greater than 100 residues and an extracellular domain (the part of the protein between the two transmembrane helices) not longer than 20 residues. We have relaxed the criteria slightly to include SCO 1369 and SCO 3390 as their adjacent genes suggest they could be involved in the envelope stress response.

is not yet clear but it has been demonstrated *in vitro* that dissociation of the 70S ribosome is not required in order for leaderless transcripts to be translated (*Udagawa et al.*, 2004). This suggests that these genes need to be expressed very rapidly in response to an activating signal and therefore “jump the queue” at the ribosome. The mechanism by which these transcripts bind to the ribosome, however, is not yet known.

In *M. tuberculosis*, the *mtrA* transcript is leaderless (*Via et al.*, 1996) and in *S. coelicolor*, four out of the five two-component system operons (*vanRS*, *afsQ1/2*, *phoPR*, and *absA1/2*) that have been mapped have leaderless transcripts (*Anderson et al.*, 2001; *Hong et al.*, 2004; *Ishizuka et al.*, 1992; *Sola-Landa et al.*, 2003). The exception is *cseBC* in which both genes appear to be under the control of the *sigE* promoter. This leaderless arrangement, along with the positive autoregulation of most two-component system operons, probably allows rapid expression and amplification of the signal transduction cascade in response to the specific environmental signals inducing each system.

III. Orphan Two-Component Proteins

*C. glutamicum* is unusual among the actinobacteria in containing only paired two-component system genes (Kocan *et al.*, 2006). *M. tuberculosis* contains two unpaired sensor kinase genes and six orphan response regulator genes of which only one, the unpaired sensor kinase DosT, has been assigned a function (Roberts *et al.*, 2004). *S. coelicolor* contains 17 unpaired sensor kinase genes and 13 orphan response regulator genes. Five of these orphan response regulators have been implicated in the regulation of developmental processes in *S. coelicolor* or in the regulation of primary or secondary metabolism (Table I). It is interesting to note that in the differentiating bacterium *Caulobacter crescentus*, developmental processes are also regulated by orphan response regulators, although these were shown to form cognate pairs with sensor kinases encoded elsewhere on the chromosome (Skerker *et al.*, 2005).

Four of the 13 orphan regulators in *S. coelicolor* are missing the conserved aspartate residue which is the site of phosphorylation, suggesting they have an alternative mechanism of activation, or are phosphorylated on a different active site residue (Hutchings *et al.*, 2004) while another, BldM, has a normal phosphorylation pocket but is active *in vivo* in the absence of phosphorylation (Molle and Buttner, 2000). The high sensor kinase to response regulator ratio in *S. coelicolor* suggests that some response regulators are activated by multiple sensor kinases. Such branched arrangements allow a single regulon to be switched on by multiple signals, as has been demonstrated in other branched systems. For example, DosRST in *M. tuberculosis* (Section III.A). Alternatively, in *M. tuberculosis*, the response regulators exceed sensor kinases in number suggesting either that a single sensor kinase feeds into more than one response regulator, that the orphan response regulators are phosphorylated by a small molecule phosphodonor such as acetyl phosphate, or that they are not dependent on phosphorylation for activity.

A. DosRST: A BRANCHED PATHWAY

DosRS (also known as DevRS) is the only two-component system in *M. tuberculosis* for which inducing signals have been identified. It is also the only branched pathway to be characterized in the actinobacteria. The *dosRS* genes are upregulated in response to hypoxia, nitric oxide (NO), ethanol, and hydrogen peroxide (Kendall *et al.*, 2004; Sherman *et al.*, 2001). The sensor kinase, DosS, is predicted to be cytoplasmic and is divided into a C-terminal kinase domain and an
N-terminal sensor domain. The N-terminus contains two GAF domains which are predicted to be involved in signal sensing. The proximal GAF domain has been shown to bind haem *in vitro*, and is presumed to sense oxygen and NO directly but the function of the second GAF domain is not yet known (*Sardiwal et al.*, 2005).

Disruption of the *dosR* gene resulted in a strain with a severe defect in hypoxic viability, while disruption of *dosS* had very little effect on hypoxic survival (*Sherman et al.*, 2001). This led to the discovery that a second sensor kinase, Rv2027c, which is 62.5% identical to DosS can also activate DosR (*Roberts et al.*, 2004; *Saini et al.*, 2004). This kinase, renamed DosT, also contains two GAF domains but is expressed constitutively under hypoxic conditions. It has been proposed that DosS and DosT sense the same signals, with DosT sensing them first and activating DosR which then switches on expression of *dosRS* to amplify the hypoxic response. A *dosST* double mutant has the same phenotype as a *dosR* mutant, suggesting that these are the only activators of DosR (*Roberts et al.*, 2004).

The majority of genes in the DosR regulon encode hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins (*Sherman et al.*, 2001). However, the regulon includes six proteins which contain the Universal stress protein domain (Usp) and another protein, α-crystallin or Acr, which belongs to the small heat shock protein family (*Sherman et al.*, 2001; *Tyagi and Sharma*, 2004). These proteins typically act as chaperones and Acr is proposed to have a role in latent infection by *M. tuberculosis* by slowing the growth of *M. tuberculosis* immediately following infection (*Hu et al.*, 2006).

### B. PREDICTIONS BASED ON HOMOLOGY AND ONTOLOGY

In *S. coelicolor*, some predictions can be made about which sensor kinases feed into which response regulators based on genome location and sequence similarity (*Table III*). For example, one response regulator, SCO4596, falls into an operon with two sensor kinases, SCO4597 and SCO4598, which share 52% identity over the total length of the protein. It is likely that both kinases feed into this response regulator. Interestingly, alignment of these sensor kinases reveals that the main difference in sequence is in the N-termini of the proteins, which are predicted to contain the sensor domain. The N-termini share 45% identity and the C-termini, containing the kinase domains, share 79% identity. This suggests a model whereby each kinase is activated by a different environmental signal, autophosphorylates and passes that phosphate to a single response regulator so that the net response
MATTHEW I. HUTCHINGS

TABLE III  
PREDICTED BRANCHED PATHWAYS IN *S. COELICOLOR*

| Response regulator | Putative sensor kinases (% identity) |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------|
| SCO 0203           | SCO 0204 (100)                     |
|                    | SCO 0211 (49)                      |
|                    | SCO 3948 (39)                      |
| SCO 4596           | SCO 4597 (100)                     |
|                    | SCO 4598 (52)                      |
| OsaB               | OsaA (100)                         |
|                    | SCO 7327 (60)                      |

is the same. SCO 7327 and OsaA are both yeast-like osmosensing sensor kinases which share 60% identity over the total length of the proteins. OsaA activates OsaB in response to osmotic stress (*Bishop et al.*, 2004) and it seems likely that SCO 7327 also feeds into OsaB. Finally, the response regulator SCO 0204 shares 49% identity with *M. tuberculosis* DosR, while SCO 0203 and SCO 3948 share 35% identity with DosS and DosT, respectively. Like DosS, both sensor kinases contain two GAF domains at their N-termini (*Sardiwal et al.*, 2005). Another sensor kinase, SCO 0211, shares 36% identity with the kinase domain of DosS but lacks the N-terminal, GAF-containing, sensor domain. All three sensor kinases are predicted to be soluble, cytoplasmic proteins and may be involved in the survival response of *S. coelicolor* to microaerobic and anaerobic conditions (*van Keulen et al.*, 2003).

C. TYPICAL RESPONSE REGULATORS

The N-termini of response regulators typically contain several conserved residues which, together, form the phosphorylation pocket. These residues include two adjacent aspartates at the N-terminus of the protein, an aspartate in the middle of the N-terminal domain which is the site of phosphorylation, a hydroxylated residue at position 82, normally serine or threonine, and a lysine residue at the end of the N-terminus, close to position 105. Typical response regulators contain all of the conserved phosphorylation pocket residues. Atypical response regulators are those which lack two or more of the conserved residues which make up the phosphorylation pocket (*Hutchings et al.*, 2004). In *M. tuberculosis*, all six orphan response regulators contain atypical phosphorylation pockets, suggesting they might be activated by an alternative mechanism. To date, nothing is known about the function of these proteins. Of the 13 orphan response regulator genes in the *S. coelicolor* genome, seven have typical phosphorylation pockets, five have atypical phosphorylation pockets, and a single protein,

BldM, has a pseudo-phosphorylation pocket. BldM has a typical phosphorylation pocket but is active *in vivo* in the absence of phosphorylation (Molle and Buttner, 2000). Only two, RamR and GlnR, out of seven typical response regulators in *S. coelicolor*, have been studied experimentally and these are discussed briefly below.

1. **RamR**

   RamR regulates expression of the rapid aerial mycelium (*ramCSAB*) operon in *S. coelicolor*. The *ramC* gene encodes the SapB synthetase RamC, *ramS* encodes the SapB lantibiotic-like peptide precursor, and the *ramAB* genes encode the subunits of an ABC transporter. SapB functions as a biological surfactant, breaking the surface tension at the air–water interface thus allowing the aerial hyphae to grow up into the air. RamC, which was previously thought to be a serine–threonine kinase, acts as a lantibiotic synthase and catalyses the formation of the SapB lantibiotic from the peptide precursor (Kodani *et al.*, 2005).

2. **GlnR**

   The *S. coelicolor* genome contains five glutamine synthetase (GS) homologues: a GSI of the β-subtype, three of the GSI-α-subtype, and a GSII-type enzyme, a type normally associated with eukaryotes (Brown *et al.*, 1994). The GlnR response regulator is required for transcription of the GSI-like enzyme, *glnA*, in *S. coelicolor* (Fink *et al.*, 2002; Wray and Fisher, 1991) and a *glnR* null mutant is a glutamine auxotroph. A close homologue, named GlnRII, is required for GSII transcription. GlnRII shows significant similarity to GlnR in the C-terminal DNA-binding domain but lacks the N-terminal CheY domain for sensor kinase interaction, suggesting that GlnRII is not a true response regulator.

### D. ATYPICAL RESPONSE REGULATORS

1. **BldM**

   The original point mutations isolated in the *bldM* locus lay in the putative phosphorylation pocket and resulted in a strain which could not form aerial hyphae (Molle and Buttner, 2000). However, replacement of the conserved aspartate-54 with unphosphorylatable residues such as asparagine or alanine did not affect its function, with wild-type levels of aerial hyphae and spores still being formed (Molle and Buttner, 2000). In *E. coli*, substitution of the conserved aspartate to asparagine in the response regulator CheY resulted in an active protein *in vivo* as a result of phosphorylation of an adjacent serine residue

(Appleby and Bourret, 1999; Bourret *et al.*, 1990). Phosphorylation at alternative residues has also been reported in FixJ of Rhizobium meliloti and NtrC of *E. coli* (Moore *et al.*, 1993; Reyrat *et al.*, 1994). However, no potentially phosphorylatable hydroxyamino acid residues are found adjacent to D54 in BldM, suggesting that BldM has a pseudo-phosphorylation pocket.

2. WhiI

    whiI encodes an orphan response regulator that is required for normal septum formation early in the development of aerial hyphae. A whiI null mutant is unable to sporulate and the lack of gray spore pigment gives it a white colony phenotype. The phosphorylation pocket of WhiI lacks the lysine residue and an aspartate which are conserved in conventional phosphorylation pockets. This suggests that whiI is regulated by alternative mechanism, such as small ligand binding, or interaction with another protein (Ainsa *et al.*, 1999).

3. RedZ

    RedZ, the pathway-specific activator for undecylprodigiosin (also known as Red) production, lacks the paired aspartate residues and the lysine residue conserved in the phosphorylation pocket of conventional response regulators (Guthrie *et al.*, 1998) and the mechanism of activation is not known. However, there is some experimental evidence which suggests that RedZ could be regulated posttranslationally (J. White and M. J. Bibb, personal communication).

IV. Conclusions and Perspectives

The unusual mechanisms of action described here are likely to be widespread in the bacterial kingdom. Bioinformatics analysis of all the complete bacterial genome sequences suggest that many two-component systems are encoded by gene clusters which also encode extracellular proteins (G. Chandra and M. I. Hutchings, unpublished data). In Gram-positive bacteria, these are usually anchored in the membrane, either by lipid modification or by a single, N-terminal, transmembrane helix. Several examples of two-component accessory proteins have been described (Section II.D). In Gram-negative bacteria such accessory proteins are usually localized to the periplasm, for example CpxP of *E. coli*, which regulates the envelope stress-sensing sensor kinase, CpxA (Isaac *et al.*, 2005). It appears that these accessory proteins can either negatively regulate the sensor kinase, by preventing unnecessary activation of the signal transduction pathway in the absence of a *bona fide* signal, or
positively regulate the sensor kinase by directing the signal to its sensor domain.

In recent years, it has also become clear that many sensor kinases are bifunctional. This gives the sensor protein much tighter control over the whole signal transduction pathway because, instead of simply phosphorylating its cognate response regulator and letting it go, the sensor kinase can also suppress the levels of phosphorylated response regulator in the absence of signal and switch the pathway off when the signal has disappeared. It seems likely that, as in the case of VanS and MtrB, removing these bifunctional kinases from the cell will result in constitutively active response regulators. The consequences of this could be catastrophic, because all of the intracellular targets of that regulator would be constitutively expressed.

Although progress in characterizing signals and targets for two-component systems has been slow, with the advent of genome sequencing, whole-genome microarrays, and proteomics technology, the speed of this progress should increase dramatically. To date, most of the detailed characterization of these systems has been carried out in *E. coli* and *B. subtilis*. However, interest in the actinobacteria is increasing rapidly as the need for new antibiotics, and for novel treatments of persistent mycobacterial infections, becomes ever more desperate. Two-component systems are implicated both in the production of secondary metabolites in streptomycetes and in the persistent infections of mycobacteria. It has also been noted that essential two-component proteins in pathogenic bacteria, such as MtrA in *M. tuberculosis*, are potential targets for new classes of antibiotic since these systems are widespread in bacteria but are absent from the animal kingdom as a whole ([Wolanin et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.184.17.4935-4943.2002)).

\section{ACKNOWLEDGMENTS}

I would like to thank the Research Councils UK, the BBSRC, the Royal Society, and the School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice at UEA for financial support. I would also like to thank Keith Chater and David Hopwood for interesting discussions and Paul Hoskisson for interesting discussions and for useful feedback on the chapter.

\section{REFERENCES}

Adamidis, T., Riggle, P., and Champness, W. (1990). Mutations in a new *Streptomyces coelicolor* locus which globally block antibiotic biosynthesis but not sporulation. *J. Bacteriol.* **172**, 2962–2969.

Ainsa, J. A., Parry, H. D., and Chater, K. F. (1999). A response regulator-like protein that functions at an intermediate stage of sporulation in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). *Mol. Microbiol.* **34**, 607–619.
Anderson, T. B., Brian, P., and Champness, W. C. (2001). Genetic and transcriptional analysis of *absA*, an antibiotic gene cluster-linked two-component system that regulates multiple antibiotics in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. Mol. Microbiol. **39**, 553–566.

Appleby, J. R., and Bourret, R. B. (1999). Activation of CheY mutant D557N by phosphorylation at an alternative site, Ser-56. Mol. Microbiol. **34**, 915–925.

Bentley, S. D., Maiwald, M., Murphy, L. D., Pallen, M. J., Yeats, C. A., Dover, L. G., Norbertczak, H. T., Besra, G. S., Quail, M. A., Harris, D. E., Von Herbay, A., Goble, A., *et al.* (2003). Sequencing and analysis of the genome of the Whipple’s disease bacterium *Tropheryma whipplei*. Lancet **361**, 637–644.

Bishop, A., Fielding, S., Dyson, P., and Herron, P. (2004). Concerted mutagenesis of a Streptomyces genome: A link between osmoadaptation and antibiotic production. Genome Res. **14**, 893–900.

Bourret, R. B., Hess, F., and Simon, M. I. (1990). Conserved aspartate residues and phosphorylation in signal transduction by the chemotaxis protein CheY. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **87**, 41–45.

Brandish, P. E., Kimura, K. I., Inukai, M., Southgate, R., Lonsdale, J. T., and Bugg, T. D. (1996). Modes of action of tunicamycin, liposidomycin B, and mureidomycin A: Inhibition of phospho-N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide translocase from *Escherichia coli*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **40**, 1640–1644.

Brian, P., Riggle, P. J., Santos, R. A., and Champness, W. C. (1996). Global negative regulation of *Streptomyces coelicolor* antibiotic synthesis mediated by an absA-encoded putative signal transduction system. J. Bacteriol. **178**, 3221–3231.

Brown, J. R., Masuchi, Y., Robb, F. T., and Doolittle, W. F. (1994). Evolutionary relationships of bacterial and archaeal glutamine synthetase genes. J. Mol. Evol. **38**, 566–576.

Bugg, T., Wright, G. D., Dutka-Malen, S., Arthur, M., Courvalin, P., and Walsh, C. T. (1991). Molecular basis for vancomycin resistance in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147: Biosynthesis of a depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursor by vancomycin resistance proteins VanH and VanA. Biochemistry **30**, 10408–10415.

Cangelosi, G. A., Do, J. S., Freeman, R., Bennett, J. G., Semret, M., and Behr, M. A. (2006). The two-component regulatory system *mtrAB* is required for morphotypic multidrug resistance in *Mycobacterium avium*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **50**, 61–66.

Chater, K. F. (2001). Regulation of sporulation in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2): A checkpoint multiplex? Curr. Opin. Microbiol. **4**, 667–673.

Dartois, V., Djavakhishvili, T., and Hoch, J. A. (1997). KapB is a lipoprotein required for KinB signal transduction and activation of the phosphorelay to sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol. Microbiol. **26**, 1097–1108.

Day, G. M., and Jansenn, G. R. (2004). Isolation and characterization of ribosomes and translation initiation factors from the Gram-positive soil bacterium *Streptomyces lividans*. J. Bacteriol. **186**, 6864–6875.

Fink, D., Weisschuh, N., Reuther, J., Wohlleben, W., and Engels, A. (2002). Two transcriptional regulators GlnR and GlnRII are involved in regulation of nitrogen metabolism in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). Mol. Microbiol. **46**, 331–347.

Fol, M., Chauhan, A., Nair, N. K., Maloney, E., Moomey, M., Jagannath, C., Madiraju, M. V. V. S., and Rajagopalan, M. (2006). Modulation of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* proliferation by MtrA, an essential two-component response regulator. Mol. Microbiol. **60**, 643–657.

Gao, B., Paramanathan, R., and Gupta, R. S. (2006). Signature proteins that are distinctive characteristics of Actinobacteria and their subgroups. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek **90**, 69–91.

Guthrie, E. P., Flaxman, C. S., White, J., Hodgson, D. A., Bibb, M. J., and Chater, K. F. (1998). A response-regulator-like activator of antibiotic synthesis from *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2) with an amino-terminal domain that lacks a phosphorylation pocket. *Microbiology* 144, 727–738.

He, H., Hovey, R., Kane, J., Singh, V., and Zahrt, T. C. (2006). MprAB is a stress-responsive two-component system that directly regulates expression of sigma factors SigB and SigE in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 2134–2143.

Hong, H. J., Paget, M. S. B., and Buttner, M. J. (2002). A signal transduction system in *Streptomyces coelicolor* that activates the expression of a putative cell wall glycan operon in response to vancomycin and other cell wall-specific antibiotics. *Mol. Microbiol.* 44, 1199–1211.

Hong, H. J., Hutchings, M. I., Neu, J. M., Wright, G. D., Paget, M. S. B., and Buttner, M. J. (2004). Characterisation of an inducible vancomycin resistance system in *Streptomyces coelicolor* reveals a novel gene (*vanK*) required for drug resistance. *Mol. Microbiol.* 52, 1107–1121.

Hong, H. J., Hutchings, M. I., Hill, L., and Buttner, M. J. (2005). The role of the novel Fem protein VanK in vancomycin resistance in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 13055–13061.

Hoskisson, P. A., and Hutchings, M. I. (2006). MtrAB-LpqB, a conserved three-component system in the actinobacteria? *Trends Microbiol.* 14, 444–449.

Hu, Y., Movahedzadeh, F., Stoker, N. G., and Coates, A. R. (2006). Deletion of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* alpha-crystallin-like hspX gene causes increased bacterial growth in vivo. *Infect. Immun.* 74, 861–868.

Hutchings, M. I., Hoskisson, P. A., Chandra, G., and Buttner, M. J. (2004). Sensing and responding to diverse extracellular signals? Analysis of the sensor kinases and response regulators of *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). *Microbiology* 150, 2795–2806.

Hutchings, M. I., Hong, H. J., and Buttner, M. J. (2006a). The vancomycin resistance VanRS signal transduction system of *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 59, 923–935.

Hutchings, M. I., Hong, H. J., Leibowitz, E., Sutcliffe, I. C., and Buttner, M. J. (2006b). The $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ cell envelope stress response of *Streptomyces coelicolor* is modulated by a novel lipoprotein, CseA. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 7222–7229.

Isaac, D. D., Pinkner, J. S., Hultgren, S. J., and Silhavy, T. J. (2005). The extracytoplasmic adaptor protein CpxP is degraded with substrate by DegP. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102, 17775–17779.

Ishizuka, H., Horinouchi, S., Kieser, H. A., Hopwood, D. A., and Beppu, T. (1992). A putative two-component regulatory system involved in secondary metabolism in *Streptomyces* spp. *J. Bacteriol.* 174, 7585–7594.

Jung, K., and Altendorf, K. (2003). Stimulus perception and signal transduction by the KdpD/KdpE system of *Escherichia coli*. In “Regulatory Networks in Prokaryotes” (P. Durre and B. Friedrich, eds.). Horizon Press, UK.

Kendall, S.L., Movahedzadeh, F., Rison, S. C. G., Wernisch, L., Parish, T., Duncan, K., Betts, J. C., and Stoker, N. (2004). The *Mycobacterium tuberculosis dosRS* two-component system is induced by multiple stresses. *Tuberculosis* 84, 247–255.

Kim, D., and Forst, S. (2001). Genomic analysis of the histidine kinase family in bacteria and archaea. *Microbiology* 147, 1197–1212.

Kocan, M., Schaffer, S., Ishige, T., Sorger-Herrmann, U., Wendisch, V. F., and Bott, M. (2006). Two-component systems of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*, deletion analysis

and involvement of the PhoS-PhoR system in the phosphate starvation response. *J. Bacteriol.* **188**, 724–732.

Kodani, S., Hudson, M. E., Durrant, M. C., Buttner, M. J., Nodwell, J. R., and Willey, J. M. (2005). The SapB morphogen is a lantibiotic-like peptide derived from the product of the developmental gene *ramS* in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 11448–11453.

Marques, M. A., Chitale, S., Brennan, P. J., and Pessolani, M. C. (1998). Mapping and identification of the major cell wall-associated components of *Mycobacterium leprae*. *Infect. Immun.* **66**, 2625–2631.

Mascher, T., Margulis, N. G., Wang, T., Ye, R. W., and Helmann, J. D. (2003). Cell wall stress responses in *Bacillus subtilis*: The regulatory network of the bacitracin stimulon. *Mol. Microbiol.* **50**, 1591–1604.

Moker, N., Brocker, M., Schaffer, S., Krämer, R., Morbach, S., and Bott, M. (2004). Deletion of the genes encoding the MtrA-MtrB two-component system of *Corynebacterium glutamicum* has a strong influence on cell morphology, antibiotics susceptibility and expression of genes involved in osmoprotection. *Mol. Microbiol.* **54**, 420–438.

Molle, V., and Buttner, M. J. (2000). Different alleles of the response regulator gene *bldM* arrest *Streptomyces coelicolor* development at distinct stages. *Mol. Microbiol.* **36**, 1265–1278.

Moore, J. B., Shiau, S. P., and Reitzer, L. J. (1993). Alterations of highly conserved residues in the regulatory domain of nitrogen regulator I (NtrC) of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 2692–2701.

Nielsen, J. B., and Lampen, J. O. (1982). Glyceride-cysteine lipoproteins and secretion by Gram-positive bacteria. *J. Bacteriol.* **152**, 315–322.

O'Connor, T. J., Kanellis, P., and Nodwell, J. R. (2002). The *ramC* gene is required for morphogenesis in *Streptomyces coelicolor* and expressed in a cell type-specific manner under the direct control of RamR. *Mol. Microbiol.* **45**, 45–57.

Ortiz de Orue Lucana, D., Schaa, T., and Schrempf, H. (2004). The novel extracellular *Streptomyces reticuli* haem-binding protein HbpS influences the production of the catalase-peroxidase CpeB. *Microbiology* **150**, 2575–2585.

Ortiz de Orue Lucana, D., Zou, P., Nierhaus, M., and Schrempf, H. (2005). Identification of a novel two-component system SenS/SenR modulating the production of the catalase-peroxidase CpeB and the haem-binding protein HbpS in *Streptomyces reticuli*. *Microbiology* **151**, 3603–3614.

Paget, M. S. B., Chamberlin, L., Atrih, A., Foster, S. J., and Buttner, M. J. (1999a). Evidence that the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor $\sigma^{E}$ is required for normal cell wall structure in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). *J. Bacteriol.* **181**, 204–211.

Paget, M. S. B., Leibovitz, E., and Buttner, M. J. (1999b). A putative two-component signal transduction system regulates $\sigma^{E}$, a sigma factor required for normal cell wall integrity in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). *Mol. Microbiol.* **33**, 97–107.

Pootoolal, J., Thomas, M. G., Marshall, C. G., Neu, J. M., Hubbard, B. K., Walsh, C. T., and Wright, G. D. (2002). Assembling the glycopeptide antibiotic scaffold: The biosynthesis of A47934 from *Streptomyces toyocaensis* NRRL15009. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **25**, 8962–8967.

Reyrat, J. M., David, M., Batut, J., and Boistard, P. (1994). FixL of *Rhizobium meliloti* enhances the transcriptional activity of a mutant FixJD54N protein by phosphorylation on an alternative residue. *J. Bacteriol.* **176**, 1969–1976.

Rison, S. C. G., Kendall, S. L., Movahedzadeh, F., and Stoker, N. (2005). The mycobacterial two-component regulatory systems. In “*Mycobacterium Molecular Microbiology*” (T. Parish, ed.). Horizon Press, UK.

Roberts, D. M., Liao, R. P., Wisedchaisr, G., Hol, W. G. J., and Sherman, D. R. (2004). Two sensor kinases contribute to the hypoxic response of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 23082–23087.

Saini, D. K., Malhotra, V., Dey, D., Pant, N., Das, T. K., and Tyagi, J. S. (2004). DevR–DevS is a bona fide two-component system of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* that is hypoxia-responsive in the absence of the DNA-binding domain of DevR. *Microbiology* **150**, 865–875.

Sardiwal, S., Kendall, S. L., Movahedzadeh, F., Rison, S. C. G., Stoker, N., and Djordjevic, S. (2005). A GAF domain in the hypoxia/NO-inducible *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* DosS protein binds haem. *J. Mol. Biol.* **353**, 929–936.

Sargent, F., Berks, B. C., and Palmer, T. (2006). Pathfinders and trailblazers: A prokaryotic targeting system for transport of folded proteins. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **254**, 198–207.

Sheeler, N. L., MacMillan, S. V., and Nodwell, J. R. (2005). Biochemical activities of the *absA* two-component system of *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *J. Bacteriol.* **187**, 687–696.

Sherman, D. R., Voskuil, M., Schnappinger, D., Liao, R., Harrell, M. I., and Schoolnik, G. K. (2001). Regulation of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* hypoxic response gene encoding α-crystallin. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 7534–7539.

Skerker, J. M., Prasol, M. S., Perchuk, B. S., Biondi, E. G., and Laub, M. T. (2005). Two-component signal transduction pathways regulating growth and cell cycle progression in a bacterium: A system-level analysis. *PLoS Biol.* **3**, e334.

Sola-Landa, A., Moura, R. S., and Martin, J. F. (2003). The two-component PhoR-PhoP system controls both primary metabolism and secondary metabolite biosynthesis in *Streptomyces lividans*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 6133–6138.

Stackerbrandt, E., Rainey, F. A., and Ward-Rainey, N. L. (1997). Proposal for a new hierarchic classification system, Actinobacteria classis nov. *Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol.* **47**, 479–491.

Szurmant, H., Nelson, K., Kim, E. J., Perego, M., and Hoch, J. A. (2005). YycH regulates the activity of the essential YycFG two-component system in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Bacteriol.* **187**, 5419–5426.

Tseng, H. C., and Chen, C. W. (1991). A cloned *ompR*-like gene of *Streptomyces lividans* 66 suppresses defective *melC1*, a putative copper-transfer gene. *Mol. Microbiol.* **5**, 1187–1196.

Tsujibo, H., Hatano, N., Okamoto, T., Endo, H., Miyamoto, K., and Inamori, Y. (1999). Synthesis of chitinase in *Streptomyces thermoviolaceus* is regulated by a two-component sensor-regulator system. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **181**, 83–90.

Tyagi, J. S., and Saini, D. K. (2004). Did the loss of two-component systems initiate pseudogene accumulation in *Mycobacterium leprae?* *Microbiology* **150**, 4–6.

Tyagi, J. S., and Sharma, D. (2004). Signal transduction systems of mycobacteria with special reference to. *M. tuberculosis*. *Curr. Sci.* **86**, 93–102.

Udagawa, T., Shimizu, Y., and Ueda, T. (2004). Evidence for the translation initiation of leaderless mRNAs by the intact 70S ribosome without its dissociation into subunits in eubacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 8539–8546.

van Keulen, G., Jonkers, H. M., Claessen, D., Dijkuiizen, L., and Wosten, H. A. (2003). Differentiation and anaerobiosis in standing liquid cultures of *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *J. Bacteriol.* **185**, 1455–1458.

Via, L. E., Curcic, R., Mudd, M. H., Dhandayuthapani, S., Ulmer, R. J., and Deretic, V. (1996). Elements of signal transduction in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, in vitro phosphorylation and in vivo expression of the response regulator MtrA. *J. Bacteriol.* **178**, 3314–3321.

Walters, S. B., Dubnau, E., Kolesnikova, I., Laval, F., Daffe, M., and Smith, I. (2006). The *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* PhoPR two-component system regulates genes essential for virulence and complex lipid biosynthesis. *Mol. Microbiol.* **60**, 312–330.

Wolanin, P. M., Thomason, P. A., and Stock, J. B. (2002). Histidine protein kinases: Key signal transducers outside the animal kingdom. *Genome Biol.* **3**[REVIEWS3013]. Epub 2002. Sep 25.

Wood, J. M. (1999). Osmosensing by bacteria: Signals and membrane-based sensors. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* **63**, 230–262.

Wray, L. V., and Fisher, S. H. (1991). Identification and cloning of the *glnR* locus, which is required for transcription of the *glnA* gene in *Streptomyces coelicolor*. *J. Bacteriol.* **173**, 7351–7360.

Zahrt, T. C., and Deretic, V. (2000). An essential two-component signal transduction system in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Bacteriol.* **182**, 3832–3838.
