
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 104 (2007) 161–168

**Endogenous inhibitors (GALFs) of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoforms 1 and 2: Derivatives of adrenally produced corticosterone and cortisol**

D.J. Morris${}^{a,*}$, S.A. Latif${}^{a}$, M.P. Hardy${}^{b}$, A.S. Brem${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$ Brown University Medical School, Providence, RI 02906, USA  
${}^{b}$ Population Council, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA  

---

### Abstract

Two isoforms of 11β-HSD exist; 11β-HSD1 is bi-directional (the reductase usually being predominant) and 11β-HSD2 functions as a dehydrogenase, conferring kidney mineralocorticoid specificity. We have previously described endogenous substances in human urine, “glycyrrhetinic acid-like factors (GALFs)”, which like licorice, inhibit the bi-directional 11β-HSD1 enzyme as well as the dehydrogenase reaction of 11β-HSD2.

Many of the more potent GALFs are derived from two major families of adrenal steroids, corticosterone and cortisol. For example, 3α5α-tetrahydro-corticosterone, its derivative, 3α5α-tetrahydro-11β-hydroxy-progesterone (produced by 21-deoxygenation of corticosterone in intestinal flora); 3α5α-tetrahydro-11β-hydroxy-testosterone (produced by side chain cleavage of cortisol); are potent inhibitors of 11β-HSD1 and 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase, with IC₅₀'s in range 0.26–3.0 μM, whereas their 11-keto-3α5α-tetrahydro-derivatives inhibit 11β-HSD1 reductase, with IC₅₀'s in range 0.7–0.8 μM (their 3α5β-derivatives being completely inactive).

Inhibitors of 11β-HSD2 increase local cortisol levels, permitting it to act as a mineralocorticoid in kidney. Inhibitors of 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase/11β-HSD1 reductase serve to adjust the set point of local deactivation/reactivation of cortisol in vascular and other glucocorticoid target tissues, including adipose, vascular, adrenal tissue, and the eye. These adrenally derived 11-oxygenated C₂₁- and C₁₉-steroidal substances may serve as 11β-HSD1- or 11β-HSD2-GALFs. We conclude that adrenally derived products are likely regulators of local cortisol bioactivity in humans.

© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** 11β-HSD1; 11β-HSD2; GALF inhibitors; Corticosterone/cortisol derivatives; Hypertension

---

### 1. Introduction

Our earlier experiments described the presence of endogenous inhibitor substances in human urine, which could inhibit one or both isoforms of the enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-HSD). We termed these substances “glycyrrhetinic acid-like factors (GALFs)” which, like the licorice derivative, glycyrrhetinic acid (GA), inhibited the

---

Poster paper presented at the 17th International Symposium of the Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ‘Recent Advances in Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology’ (Seefeld, Austria, 31 May–03 June 2006).

* Corresponding author at: Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Miriam Hospital, 164, Summit Avenue, Providence, RI 02906, USA. Tel.: +1 401 793 4231; fax: +1 401 274 5154.  
E-mail address: dmorris@lifespan.org (D.J. Morris).

metabolism of glucocorticoids [1]. In later studies, we demonstrated the presence of elevated levels of both 11β-HSD2- and 11β-HSD1-GALF in urine from pregnant women [2]. Inhibition of cortisol to cortisone metabolism by renal 11β-HSD2 prolongs the local tissue half-life, $t_{1/2}$, of cortisol, permitting cortisol to be recruited as a mineralocorticoid, similar to what occurs in patients who have ingested licorice [3], or in hypertensive children with apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) syndrome [4–6]. Endogenous inhibitors of 11β-HSD1 may serve an additional role to adjust the set point of local deactivation/reactivation of cortisol in vascular and other target tissues of glucocorticoids [7,8]. The concept that endogenous (or exogenous) substances exist which inhibit the enzymatic activity of 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase and that of 11β-HSD1 has its origins in several pieces of important work.

0960-0760/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2007.03.020

This paper will closely examine the evidence in support of GALFs and review our selective inhibitor experiments with both 11β-HSD2 and 11β-HSD1 isoforms. We specifically will present our hypothesis that (a) the C₂₁-steroids (corticosterone, 11-dehydro-corticosterone, their 5α-reduced pathway products, and corticosterone-derived progestational 11-oxygenated derivatives,) and (b) the C₁₉-androgen 11-oxygenated steroids derived from cortisol and their respective 5α-reduced pathway products, comprise two principal steroidal classes of 11β-HSD2- and 11β-HSD1-GALF inhibitory substances. We believe that various GALFs can contribute directly or indirectly to the regulation of Na⁺ homeostasis and vascular resistance.

### 2. Background

#### 2.1. Isoforms of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase

The two isoforms of 11β-HSD, which exist in a variety of mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid target tissues [6,7,9], inter-convert active endogenous glucocorticoids (cortisol and corticosterone) to their respective 11-dehydro-derivatives (cortisone and 11-dehydro-corticosterone) [10–12] (Fig. 1). Thus far, these 11-dehydro-metabolites have not been shown to directly activate either glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid receptors and induce a primary biologic effect. The NADP(H) dependent enzyme 11β-HSD1 is capable of bi-directional activity deactivating glucocorticoids in the dehydrogenase mode and regenerating active glucocorticoids from 11-dehydro-metabolites in the reductase mode [9,11]; the reductase mode usually being predominant in many tissues [13]. The NAD dependent 11β-HSD2 is generally considered to function physiologically only as a dehydrogenase [6,9,12].

#### 2.2. Isoforms of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in hypertension

Glucocorticoids (GC’s) enhance the vasoconstrictive actions of both catecholamines and angiotensin II in aortic ring preparations [14,15]. Human and rat vascular endothelial tissue contain both 11β-HSD1 together with smaller amounts of 11β-HSD2, whereas vascular smooth muscle cells only contains 11β-HSD1 [8,16,17]. Aortic tissue preparations and whole cell preparations of vascular smooth muscle (VSM) display both dehydrogenase and reductase enzymatic activity [7,9], with the reductase being predominant in a ratio of about 3:1 [18]. Selective blunting in vascular tissue of either 11β-HSD2 or 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase activity with specific anti-sense oligonucleotides enhances the effects of glucocorticoids upon catecholamine vasoconstriction, whereas impaired reductase activity leads to a potential decrease in blood pressure [8]. Thus, both 11β-HSD2 and 11β-HSD1 play important vascular role(s) in BP regulation. Alterations in the rates of enzymatic reaction in either of the components of bi-directional 11β-HSD1 will lead to an adjustment of the set point/functional equilibrium of this enzyme, permitting either increased or decreased local levels of glucocorticoids in their target tissues. In vascular tissue for example, blunting of the dehydrogenase activity leads to increased vascular tone whereas impaired reductase activity leads to a decrease in vascular tone [8,19].

11β-HSD2 in the kidney has been shown to play a potentially important role in volume regulation and hypertension. When the enzyme is blocked, cortisol in humans and corticosterone in rodent models, can bind to mineralocorticoid receptors present in the distal nephron with avidity equal to that of aldosterone [20]. The steroid binding generates an increase in renal Na⁺ reabsorption resulting in expansion of the extracellular (plasma volume) volume and hypertension.

### 2.3. Evidence supporting the concept of GALF's

#### 2.3.1. Licorice studies

Ingestion of licorice, whose active ingredient is glycyrrhetinic acid (GA), inhibits the conversion of cortisol to cortisone by 11β-HSD. Like hypertensive children with AME syndrome [4–6], licorice ingestion also leads to suppressed plasma aldosterone and renin levels, evidence of pseudo-hyperaldosteronism, and a significantly prolonged half-life, \( t_{1/2} \), of 11α-³H-cortisol. Both in vivo and in vitro studies [21,22] have shown that GA is a potent inhibitor of metabolism by steroid Ring A-5β-reductase, a major pathway for the metabolism of cortisol and other adrenal steroid hormones; as a consequence the metabolism by the 5α-reductase pathway is markedly increased.

#### 2.3.2. Studies in essential hypertension

Several studies with patients with essential hypertension have shown similar marked increases in the ratio of 5α/5β-reduced steroid metabolites of cortisol and corticosterone excreted in the urine [23,24] due to decreases in the Ring A-5β-reductase pathway and increases in their metabolism by the 5α-reductase pathway. The more recent studies in essential hypertensive patients [24] again showed the ratio of 11β-hydroxy metabolites to 11-dehydro-metabolites (THF + alloTHF/THE) to be significantly higher, as in the case of licorice ingestion [3] and the earlier studies of Kornel et al., in 1969 [23]. These changes in the routes of steroid metabolism could account for the prolonged half-life, \( t_{1/2} \), of 11α-³H-cortisol observed in a large proportion of patients with essential hypertension [25].

Importantly, the above studies with essential hypertensives [23,24] noted both increased adrenal secretion of corticosterone, and increases in both plasma levels of corticosterone and the quantities of corticosterone metabolites excreted per day by the 5α-reductase pathway as allo/3α5α-THB, when compared to the normotensive controls. Similar findings showing decreased conversion of cortisol to cortisone by 11β-HSD, accompanied by increases in the metabolism of cortisol by the 5α-reductase pathway, have also been reported in studies of patients with low renin hypertension [26].

Thus, a large proportion of patients with essential hypertension likely exhibit endogenous GALF-like inhibitors, particularly endogenous allo/3α5α-reduced pathway steroidal products, which cause cortisol to be recruited to act as a mineralocorticoid in the kidney. These findings prompted us to link-altered metabolism of cortisol and cor-

ticosterone, increased Na⁺ retention, and hypertension. This linkage might then be associated with excessive endogenous production of GALF substances, which inhibit either of the two isoforms of 11β-HSD dehydrogenase.

#### 2.3.3. Impact of dietary intake of Na⁺ and metabolism of glucocorticoids and adrenocorticosteroids

In vivo experiments with rats fed low Na⁺ diets resulted in switching the hepatic metabolism of aldosterone and other adrenal steroids from the 5β- to 5α-reductase pathway [27]. Low Na⁺ diet altered the set point in the liver directing the metabolism of aldosterone and other steroids towards the 5α-pathway, whereas high Na⁺ diet led to decreased 5α-pathway products and increased synthesis of 5β-pathway products.

The observation that only derivatives of 11-oxygenated steroid hormones possessing the 5α-Ring A-reduced configuration selectively inhibit 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase [28] and the dehydrogenase activity of 11β-HSD1, while their 5β-derivatives are inactive, is no happenstance. The patterns of increases in the ratio of 11β-hydroxy metabolites to 11-dehydro-metabolites and in the ratio of 5α/5β-reduced metabolites of cortisol and other adrenocorticosteroids are repetitive and significant. Taken together, these findings provide important clues as to the importance of the 5α-pathway of adrenocorticosteroids, and that they may be more directly linked to Na⁺ homeostasis and regulation of BP. They may be responsible for cortisol being recruited to act as a mineralocorticoid in the kidney. This switch may also be responsible for an increase in local cortisol levels in vascular tissue in these patients due to the actions of 11β-HSD inhibitors, similar to the increased BP observed when the inhibitor 11β-OH-3α,5α-TH-progesterone was infused into normotensive SD rats [29].

#### 2.3.4. Previous studies of inhibitors of 11β-HSD2 and 11β-HSD1

Several publications have addressed the effects of inhibition of 11β-HSD by licorice, carbenoxolone (a succinate derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid) including derivatives of progesterone and adrenocorticosteroids [11,30,31,32]. Many of these earlier studies did not investigate specificity towards either of the isoforms of 11β-HSD or address relative selectivity against the dehydrogenase and reductase activities of 11β-HSD1. However, earlier studies investigating endogenous steroids related to parturition and its relationship to fetal size [31], had shown several 11β-hydroxylated derivatives of progesterone and pregnenolone to potently inhibit placental 11β-HSD.

##### 2.3.4.1. Studies of GALF activity using Leydig cells (11β-HSD1) and kidney microsomes (11β-HSD2)

Over the past several years, we have screened over a hundred C₂₁- and C₁₉-steroids and their 5α- and 5β-derivatives for their 11β-HSD inhibitory properties [28,30]. The substances listed in Tables 1 and 2 stand out from all the other endogenous

Table 1  
IC₅₀ (μM) values against 11β-HSD2  

| Compounds                          | Dehydrogenase [S] = 50 nM |
|------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| 5α-DH-corticosterone               | 0.15                      |
| 3α,5α-TH-corticosterone            | 0.26                      |
| 11-Dehydro-corticosterone          | 0.47                      |
| 3α,5α-TH-11-dehydro-corticosterone | 0.80                      |
| 11β-OH-progesterone                | 0.05                      |
| 11-keto-Progesterone               | 0.40                      |
| 11β-OH-allopregnanolone            | 0.12                      |
| 11-keto-Allopregnanolone           | 1.50                      |
| 11β-OH-testosterone                | 0.35                      |
| 11-keto-Testosterone               | 1.35                      |
| 11β-OH-androstanediol              | 4.50                      |

Reproduced with permission from Elsevier [28].

5β-reduced derivatives were totally inactive. Additionally, 11β-OH-testosterone and 11-keto-testoesterone were also potent inhibitors of 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase activity with IC₅₀'s of 0.35 and 1.35 μM, respectively, and 11β-OH-androstanediol also being a moderate inhibitor (Table 1). In contrast, 11β-OH-androstenedione only weakly inhibited 11β-HSD2 and 11-keto-androstenedione and its 5α-Ring A-reduced derivative were inactive.

These studies also highlighted that both 5α-DH-corticosterone and 3α,5α-TH-corticosterone, were potent inhibitors of 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase with IC₅₀'s of 2.1 and 1.3 μM, respectively. 11β-OH-progesterone, 11β-OH-testosterone, 11β-OH-allopregnanolone and 11β-OH-androstanediol, all strongly inhibited 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase activity with IC₅₀'s in the range of 3.0–9.0 μM (Table 2). However, each of their 5β-reduced derivatives was inactive. In addition, these studies showed that 3α,5α-TH-11-dehydro-corticosterone very potently inhibited 11β-HSD1 reductase with an IC₅₀ of 0.7 μM, whereas 3α,5β-11-dehydro-corticosterone was totally inactive. The 11-keto derivatives, 11-keto-progesterone, 11-keto-testosterone and 11-keto-androstenedione inhibited reductase activity with IC₅₀'s of 9.5, 18.0 and 21.0 μM, respectively. Surprisingly, the 5α derivatives, 11-keto-allopregnanolone, as well as 11-keto-3β,5α-TH-testosterone, were even more potent inhibitors (Table 2) with IC₅₀'s of 0.8 and 0.65 μM, respectively. Their potency was increased by an order of magnitude compared with their corresponding 11-keto-parent steroids (Table 2). Again, the 5β-reduced derivatives, 11β-OH-pregnanolone, 11-keto-pregnanolone, and 11-keto-etiocholanolone either weakly inhibited 11β-HSD1 reductase or were inactive.

2.4. Effects of corticosterone, 11β-oxygenated progesterone and androgens, and their 5α derivatives on 11β-HSD1 and 11β-HSD2 activity

Our recent studies [28] pinpointed that both 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives of corticosterone, 5α-DH-corticosterone and 3α,5α-TH-corticosterone, as well as 11-dehydro-corticosterone and its 5α-Ring A-reduced product, 3α,5α-TH-11-dehydro-corticosterone, all potently inhibited 11β-HSD2 with IC₅₀'s in the range of 0.15–0.8 μM (Table 1). Both 11β-OH-progesterone, 11-keto-progesterone, and each of their 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives, 11β-OH-allopregnanolone and 11-keto-allopregnanolone, also potently inhibited 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase activity with IC₅₀'s in the range of 0.05–1.5 μM (Table 1). Each of their

2.4.1. Endogenous steroid inhibitors of 11β-HSD2 of adrenal origin

Our recent studies have confirmed that the 3α5α-tetrahydro-derivatives of several adrenal corticosteroid hormones, particularly corticosterone, and 11-dehydro-corticosterone, selectively inhibit 11β-HSD2-dehydrogenase

Table 2  
IC₅₀ (μM) values against 11β-HSD1  

| Compounds                          | Leydig cell 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase [S] = 600 nM | Leydig cell 11β-HSD1 reductase [S] = 600 nM |
|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| 5α-DH-corticosterone               | 2.1                                              | 6.30                                         |
| 3α,5α-TH-corticosterone            | 1.3                                              | 50.0                                         |
| 3α,5α-TH-11-dehydro-corticosterone | 8.0                                              | 0.70                                         |
| 11β-OH-progesterone                | 5.6                                              | IA                                           |
| 11β-OH-allopregnanolone            | 3.0                                              | IA                                           |
| 11-keto-Progesterone               | IA                                               | 9.50                                         |
| 11-keto-Allopregnanolone           | IA                                               | 0.80                                         |
| 11β-OH-testosterone                | 9.0                                              | IA                                           |
| 11β-OH-androstanediol              | 5.0                                              | 11.50                                        |
| 11-keto-Testosterone               | IA                                               | 18.0                                         |
| 11-keto-3β,5α-TH-testosterone      | 50.0                                             | 0.65                                         |
| 11-keto-Androstenedione            | IA                                               | 21.0                                         |

Inactive (IA) > 100. Key: potent, 1–10 μM; moderate, 11–30 μM; weak, >50 μM. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier [28].

[28]. These studies also demonstrated that 11β-hydroxylated derivatives of progestogens and androgens and their 3α5α-tetrahydro-metabolites, all of which can be derived from adrenal corticosterone and cortisol, strongly inhibit 11β-HSD2. In addition (Table 1), several 11-keto derivatives, and particularly their 3α5α-tetrahydro-metabolites, are also potent inhibitors of 11β-HSD2, most likely serving as end-product inhibitors.

### 2.4.2. Endogenous steroid inhibitors of 11β-HSD1 of adrenal origin

Again, the 5α-dihydro- and 3α5α-tetrahydro-derivatives of corticosterone, are potent inhibitors of the dehydrogenase activity, whereas 3α5α-tetrahydro-11-dehydro-corticosterone potently inhibited the reductase activity of 11β-HSD1. Interestingly, 11-dehydro-corticosterone, which potently inhibits the uni-directional 11β-HSD2 as an end-product inhibitor, is inactive towards the dehydrogenase activity of 11β-HSD1. In addition, 11β-hydroxy-progesterone and its 3α5α-tetrahydro-derivative, and 11β-hydroxy-testosterone and its 3α5α-tetrahydro-metabolite, (but not 11β-hydroxy-androstenedione or its 3α5α-tetrahydro-metabolite), potently inhibited 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase. This confirms earlier work [11,31] showing that replacement of the 17-OH in the testosterone series with a 17-keto group markedly diminishes this 11β-HSD inhibitory capability. In contrast, the 11-keto derivatives of both progesterone and testosterone and particularly their 5α-tetrahydro-derivatives are selective, potently inhibiting the reductase component of 11β-HSD1 (Table 2). It should be emphasized that both the 3α5α- and 3β5α-Ring A-reduced metabolites of the above steroids most likely possess similar abilities to inhibit the isoforms of 11β-HSD.

Thus, endogenous inhibitors of 11β-HSD2 in kidney, vascular endothelium, and other tissues, which affect the rate of inactivation of cortisol, may play an important role by increasing local cortisol levels. Similarly, endogenous inhibitors of both 11β-HSD1 dehydrogenase and 11β-HSD1 reductase may also serve to adjust the set point of local deactivation/reactivation of cortisol in vascular and other glucocorticoid target tissues, which might include various types of adipose tissue, the adrenal gland and the eye [7,9,33,34].

### 2.4.3. Corticosterone and its metabolite derivatives

The initial identification of corticosterone and subsequently, cortisol and aldosterone, as the life-sustaining substances present in the adrenal cortex was of seminal importance [35]. However, a role for corticosterone produced by the human adrenal, distinct from the major activities provided by the glucocorticoid, cortisol, has never been clearly elucidated. The quantity of corticosterone secreted by the adrenal is significant and corticosterone levels attained in the plasma are one-fifth to one tenth that of cortisol [35]; allo(3α,5α)tetrahydro-corticosterone is the major metabolite [35,36].

Corticosterone has a much lower \(K_{\text{m}}\) for both 11β-HSD2 and 11β-HSD1 enzymatic dehydrogenase activity, compared to that for cortisol, and 11-dehydro-corticosterone has a much lower \(K_{\text{m}}\) for 11β-HSD1 reductase, compared to cortisol [28]. Compounds derived from both of these steroids, 11-oxygenated progesterone and their 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives, are also excellent substrates for the dehydrogenase and reductase activities of 11β-HSD1 or 11β-HSD2. Corticosterone, 11-dehydro-corticosterone, and many of these derivatives are most likely competitive substrates for these enzymes, and hence more effectively inhibit the rate of deactivation of cortisol to cortisone, or in the case of the 11-keto substances, inhibit the enzymatic reduction (activation) of cortisone to cortisol.

### 2.4.4. Steroid metabolite inhibitors derived from adrenal corticosterone by intestinal flora

Although not widely acknowledged, important earlier work of Honour [37] and Bokkenhauser et al. [38] clearly indicated that in both humans and rodents, a significant proportion of corticosterone, and its 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives, are excreted via the bile in contrast to cortisol. These steroids can then be 21-deoxygenated by microorganisms in intestinal flora yielding 11-oxygenated derivatives of progesterone and its 5α-tetrahydro-derivatives (Fig. 2). This is best exemplified by the very high levels of 11β-hydroxy-progesterone and its 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives (derived from corticosterone) identified by gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy analysis in patients with congenital 17-hydroxylase deficiency and adrenal hyperplasia; these accompany the very high levels of corticosterone and deoxycorticosterone in this disease state [39–41]. The 5α-Ring A-reduced derivatives of corticosterone and 11β-hydroxy-progesterone are even more potent inhibitors of the dehydrogenase activity of both isoforms of 11β-HSD.

### 2.4.5. Side chain cleavage of cortisol in adrenal gland and peripheral tissues

A significant proportion (10–15%) of the approximately 10mg cortisol, normally secreted daily by humans is metabolized, possibly by a C₁₇, C₂₀ lyase, to 11β-hydroxy-androstenedione in the adrenal gland [42–44]. Synthesis of 11β-hydroxy-androstenedione from cortisol can also occur in both vascular and kidney tissue [42,44,45], and can likely be metabolized further to 11β-hydroxy-testosterone by 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-HSD) and converted to 5α-tetrahydro-derivatives in target tissues of glucocorticoids (Fig. 3). Multiple isoforms of the bi-directional enzyme 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/17-ketosteroid reductase (17β-HSD) have now been reported [46–48]. They are widely distributed and the overall directionality of the enzyme may differ depending on the isoform composition and redox potential and co-factor supply, in the various tissues studied. Although 11β-OH-androstenedione is a poor inhibitor of both 11β-HSD1 and -HSD2 isoforms [11,31], the enzymatic reduction of the 17-keto group

yielding 17β-OH-C₁₉ steroids can transform and markedly activate these steroids into very potent inhibitors of either 11β-HSD isoenzyme. Significant quantities of 11β-hydroxy and 11-keto metabolites of both 17β-OH-androsterone and 17-keto-androsterone are excreted in human urine [41]. Presumably an equilibrium exists in tissues between 11β-hydroxy-androstene-dione and 11β-hydroxy-testosterone, an enzymatic transformation resulting in striking activation of the GALF inhibitory properties of this commonly adrenally secreted steroid.

3. Hypotheses and prospects

We hypothesize that two principal steroidal classes of 11β-HSD2-GALF and 11β-HSD1-GALF inhibitory substances related to Na⁺ homeostasis and hypertension potentially exist. We believe that these two families of steroids provide a constant supply of adrenally derived 11β-HSD inhibitors, one derived from corticosterone and the other derived from the side chain cleavage product of cortisol, which continually bathe and compete with both the cortisol and cortisone for

D.J. Morris et al. / Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 104 (2007) 161–168

and cortisone. Research is necessary to test the hypotheses that these endogenous 11β-HSD1 or 11β-HSD2 inhibitor substances are physiologically relevant and their relationship to disease states.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the US NIH Grant HD33000 and the Lifespan Research Foundation.

References

[1] D.J. Morris, W.E. Semafuko, S.A. Latif, B. Vogel, C.A. Grimes, M.F. Sheff, Detection of glycyrrhetinic acid-like factors (GALFs) in human urine, Hypertension 20 (1992) 356–360.

[2] Y.H. Lo, M.F. Sheff, S.A. Latif, C. Ribeiro, S. Silver, A.S. Brem, D.J. Morris, Kidney 11β-HSD2 is inhibited by glycyrrhetinic acid-like factors in human urine, Hypertension 29 (1997) 500–505.

[3] P.M. Stewart, A.M. Wallace, R. Valentino, D. Burt, C.H.L. Shackleton, C.R.W. Edwards, Mineralocorticoid activity of liquorice: 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency comes of age, Lancet 2 (1987) 8210–8824.

[4] S. Ulick, L.S. Levine, P. Gunczler, G. Zanconato, L.C. Ramirez, W. Rauh, A. Rosler, H.L. Bradlow, A syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess associated with defects in the peripheral metabolism of cortisol, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 49 (1979) 757–764.

[5] R.C. Wilson, M.D. Harbison, Z.S. Krozowski, J.W. Funder, C.H. Shackleton, H.M. Hanauske-Abel, J.Q. Wei, J. Hertecant, A. Moran, R.E. Neiberger, Several homozygous mutations in the gene for 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 in patients with apparent mineralocorticoid excess, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 80 (1995) 3145–3150.

[6] P.C. White, T. Mune, A.K. Agarwal, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess, Endocr. Rev. 18 (1997) 135–156.

[7] D.J. Morris, A.S. Brem, R. Ge, H.P. Jellinck, R.R. Sakai, M.P. Hardy, The functional roles of 11β-HSD1: vascular tissue, testis and brain, Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 203 (2003) 1–12.

[8] G.W. Souness, A.S. Brem, D.J. Morris, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase antisense affects vascular contractile response and glucocorticoid metabolism, Steroids 67 (2002) 195–201.

[9] J.W. Tomlinson, E.A. Walker, I.J. Bujalska, N. Draper, G.G. Lavery, M.S. Cooper, M. Hewison, P.M. Stewart, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Type 1: a tissue-specific regulator of glucocorticoid response, Endocr. Rev. 25 (2005) 831–866.

[10] I.E. Bush, S.A. Hunter, R.A. Meigs, Metabolism of 11-oxygenated steroids, Biochem. J. 107 (1968) 239–257.

[11] C. Monder, P.C. White, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, Vitam. Horm. 47 (1993) 187–269.

[12] E. Rusvai, A. Naray-Fejes-Toth, A new isoform of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in aldosterone target cells, J. Biol. Chem. 268 (1993) 10717–10720.

[13] J.R. Seckl, B.R. Walker, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Type 1—a tissue-specific amplifier of glucocorticoid action, Endocrinology 142 (2001) 1371–1376.

[14] M. Pirpiris, K. Sudhir, S. Teung, G. Jennings, J.A. Whitworth, Presor responsiveness in corticosteroid-induced hypertension in humans, Hypertension 19 (1992) 567–574.

[15] M.E. Ullian, L.G. Walsh, Corticosterone metabolism and effects on angiotensin II receptors in vascular smooth muscle, Circ. Res. 77 (1995) 702–709.

[16] H. Hatakeyama, S. Inaba, I. Miyamori, 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in cultured human vascular cells, Hypertension 33 (1999) 1179–1184.

[17] T.-Q. Cai, B. Wong, S.S. Mundt, R. Thieringer, S.D. Wright, A. Hermanowski-Vosatka, Induction of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 but not type-2 in human aortic smooth muscle cells by inflammatory stimuli, J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 77 (2001) 117–122.

[18] A.S. Brem, R.B. Bina, T.C. King, D.J. Morris, Localization of 2 11β-OH steroid dehydrogenase isoforms in aortic endothelial cells, Hypertension 31 (1998) 459–462.

[19] A.S. Brem, R.B. Bina, T. King, D.J. Morris, 11β-OH-progesterone affects vascular glucocorticoid metabolism and contractile response, Hypertension 30 (I) (1997) 449–454.

[20] J.L. Arriza, C. Weinberger, T. Glaser, B.L. Handelin, D.E. Housman, R.M. Evans, Cloning of human mineralocorticoid receptor complementary DNA: structural and functional kinship with the glucocorticoid receptors, Science 237 (1987) 268–275.

[21] A. Kumagai, S. Yano, M. Otomo, K. Takeuchi, Study on the corticoid-like action of glycyrrhizine and the mechanism of action, Endocrinol. Jpn. 4 (1957) 17–27.

[22] S.A. Latif, T.J. Conca, D.J. Morris, The effects of the licorice derivatives, glycyrrhetic acid on hepatic 3α- and 3β-hydroxy dehydrogenases and 5α- and 5β-reductase pathways of metabolism of aldosterone in male rats, Steroids 55 (1990) 52–58.

[23] L. Kornel, W.R. Starnes, S.R. Holl Jr., A. Hill, Studies on steroid conjugates. Part VI. Quantitative paper chromatography of urinary corticosteroids in essential hypertension, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 29 (1969) 1608–1617.

[24] A. Soro, M.C. Ingram, G. Tonolo, N. Glorioso, R. Fraser, Evidence of coexisting changes in 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and 5β-reductase activity in subjects with untreated essential hypertension, Hypertension 25 (1) (1995) 67–70.

[25] B.R. Walker, P.M. Stewart, C. Shackleton, P.L. Padfield, C.R.W. Edwards, Deficient inactivation of cortisol by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in essential hypertension, Clin. Endocrinol. 39 (1993) 221–227.

[26] S. Lewicka, C. Monder, P. Vecsei, S. Abdelhamid, Development of radioimmunoassays for tetrahydrocortisol, allotetrahydrocortisol, and tetrahydrocortisone in human plasma, Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 595 (1991) 435–439.

[27] J. Gorsline, S.A. Latif, D.J. Morris, Changes in 5α- and 5β-reductase pathways of aldosterone metabolism by dietary sodium, Am. J. Hypertens. 1 (1988) 272–275.

[28] S.A. Latif, H.A. Pardo, M.P. Hardy, D.J. Morris, Endogenous selective inhibitors of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoforms 1 and 2 of adrenal origin, Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 243 (2005) 43–50.

[29] D.J. Morris, G.W. Souness, Endogenous 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitors and their role in glucocorticoid Na⁺ retention and hypertension, Endocr. Res. 22 (1996) 793–801.

[30] S.A. Latif, M.F. Sheff, C.E. Ribeiro, D.J. Morris, Selective inhibition of sheep kidney 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoform 2 activity by 5α-reduced (but not 5β) derivatives of adrenocorticosteroids, Steroids 62 (1997) 230–237.

[31] B.E. Pearson Murphy, Demonstration of novel compounds in human fetal tissues and a consideration of their possible role in parturition, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 139 (1981) 353–358.

[32] S. Diederich, C. Grossmann, B. Hanke, M. Quinkler, M. Herrmann, V. Bahr, W. Oelkers, In the search for specific inhibitors of human 11β-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenases (11β-HSDs): chenodeoxycholic

acid selectively inhibits 11β-HSD-I, Eur. J. Endocrinol. 142 (2000) 200–207.

[33] S. Rauz, C.M.G. Cheung, P.J. Wood, M. Coca-Prados, E.A. Walker, P.I. Murray, P.M. Stewart, Inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 lowers intraocular pressure in patients with ocular hypertension, Q. J. Med. 96 (2003) 481–490.

[34] I.J. Bujalska, E.A. Walker, M. Hewison, P.M. Stewart, A switch in dehydrogenase to reductase activity of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 upon differentiation of human omental adipose stromal cells, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 87 (2002) 1205–1210.

[35] R.E. Peterson, C.E. Pierce, The metabolism of corticosterone in man, J. Clin. Invest. 39 (1960) 741–755.

[36] R.B. Heap, M. Holzbauer, H.M. Newport, Adrenal secretion rates of C-19 and C-21 steroids before and after hypophysectomy in the pig and the dog, J. Endocrinol. 36 (1966) 159–176.

[37] J. Honour, The possible involvement of intestinal bacteria in steroidal hypertension, Endocrinology 110 (1982) 285–287.

[38] V.D. Bokkenheuser, J. Winter, J.W. Honour, C.H.L. Shackleton, Reduction of aldosterone by anaerobic bacteria: origin of 21-deoxy metabolites in man, J. Steroid Biochem. 11 (1979) 1145–1149.

[39] T.E. Chapman, G.P. Kraan, G.T. Nagel, B.G. Wolthers, N.M. Drayer, Measurement of the cortisol production rate in two sisters with 17α-hydroxylase deficiency using [1,2,3,4-13C] cortisol and isotope dilution mass spectrometry, J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 38 (1991) 489–496.

[40] C.H.L. Shackleton, E.G. Biglieri, E. Roitman, J.W. Honour, Metabolism of radiolabeled corticosterone in an adult with the 17α-hydroxylase deficiency syndrome, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 48 (1979) 976–982.

[41] J.W. Honour, J. Tourniaire, E.G. Biglieri, C.H.L. Shackleton, Urinary steroid excretion in 17α-hydroxylase deficiency, J. Steroid Biochem. 9 (1978) 495–505.

[42] C.L. Cope, Adrenal steroids and disease, in: C.L. Cope (Ed.), Metabolic Breakdown, Pitman Medical, London, 1972, pp. 80–104.

[43] F.M. Ganis, L.R. Axlerod, L.L. Miller, The metabolism of hydrocortisone by kidney tissue in vitro, J. Biol. Chem. 218 (1956) 814–820.

[44] R.I. Dorfman, F. Ungar, Catabolic reactions of steroids, in: R.I. Dorfman, F. Ungar (Eds.), Metabolites of Steroid Hormones, Academic Press, New York and London, 1965, p. 321.

[45] L. Kornel, Co-localization of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and mineralocorticoid receptors in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells, Am. J. Hypertens. 7 (1994) 100–103.

[46] Andersson, N. Moghrabi, Physiology and molecular genetics of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, Steroids 62 (1997) 143–147.

[47] N. Khan, K.K. Sharma, S. Andersson, R.J. Auchus, Human 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase types 1, 2 and 3 catalyze bi-directional equilibrium reactions, rather than unidirectional metabolism, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 429 (2004) 50–59.

[48] G. Pelletier, V. Luu-The, S. Li, F. Labrie, Localization of type 7,17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in mouse tissues. In situ hybridization studies, J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 93 (2005) 49–57.

[49] I.E. Bush, The 11-oxygen function in steroid metabolism, Experientia 12 (1957) 325–331.

[50] P. Alberts, L. Engblom, N. Edling, M. Forsgren, G. Klingstrom, C. Larsson, Y. Ronquist Nii, B. Ohman, L. Abrahmsen, Selective inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 decreases blood glucose concentrations in hyperglycaemic mice, Diabetologia 45 (2002) 1528–1532.
