
The family of five: TIR-domain-containing adaptors in Toll-like receptor signalling

Luke A. J. O’Neill and Andrew G. Bowie

Abstract | Signalling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) involves five adaptor proteins known as MyD88, MAL, TRIF, TRAM and SARM. Recent insights have revealed additional functions for MyD88 apart from NF-κB activation, including activation of the transcription factors IRF1, IRF5 and IRF7, and also a role outside the TLRs in interferon-γsignalling. Biochemical information on MAL and TRAM has shown that both act as bridging adaptors, with MAL recruiting MyD88 to TLR2 and TLR4, and TRAM recruiting TRIF to TLR4 to allow for IRF3 activation. Finally, the function of the fifth adaptor, SARM, has been revealed, which negatively regulates TRIF. These new insights allow for a detailed description of the function of the five TIR-domain-containing adaptors in the initiation of TLR signalling.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are of interest to immunologists because of their front-line role in the initiation of innate immunity against invading pathogens¹. The signalling pathways activated by different TLRs have therefore been the focus of much research. TLR signalling involves a family of five adaptor proteins, which couple to downstream protein kinases that ultimately lead to the activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and members of the interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor (IRF) family. The key signalling domain, which is unique to the TLR system, is the Toll/interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor (TIR) domain, which is located in the cytosolic face of each TLR, and also in the adaptors². Similar to the TLRs, the adaptors are conserved across many species, a striking recent example being in the sea urchin, which is predicted to contain a remarkable 222 TLRs and 26 adaptors³⁴. FIG. 1 illustrates the TIR domain and other domains found in each of the human TIR-domain-containing adaptors. These adaptors are **MyD88**, MyD88-adaptor-like (**MAL**, also known as TIRAP), TIR-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (**TRIF**; also known as TICAM1), TRIF-related adaptor molecule (**TRAM**; also known as TICAM2) and sterile α- and armadillo-motif-containing protein (**SARM**). SARM has now been shown to interact with TRIF and thereby interfere with TRIF function⁵. This recent finding, together with other findings in relation to the biochemical regulation of MAL and TRAM, allows us to make conclusions about the role of the five adaptors in TLR signalling and to provide for the first time a detailed molecular description of the earliest phase of TLR signal transduction and therefore the initiation of innate immunity.

How TLR signalling is initiated

TLRs activate a potent immunostimulatory response. The signal that is transmitted from TLRs must therefore be tightly controlled, and there is clear evidence that if TLRs are overactivated, infectious and inflammatory diseases can result⁶. What is it therefore that initiates signalling from TLRs and how is this controlled? TLRs occur as dimers⁷. TLR1 and TLR2 heterodimerize, and the resulting dimer senses bacterial triacylated lipopeptides. TLR2 heterodimerizes with TLR6, which recognizes bacterial diacylated lipopeptides. TLR4 (the receptor for the Gram-negative bacterial product lipopolysaccharide (LPS)) and TLR9 (the receptor for unmethylated CpG-containing DNA motifs, which occur in bacterial and viral DNA) homodimerize. This is also presumed to be the case for TLR3 (which senses synthetic and viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)) and TLR5 (which detects flagellin from bacteria). Most recently, TLR8 (which, similar to TLR7, can sense viral single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) and synthetic imidazoquinoline compounds such as imiquimod) has been shown to dimerize with TLR7 and TLR9, and ligands for TLR8 have been shown to antagonize signalling by TLR7 or TLR9. TLR9 has also been shown to interact with and

Imiquimod
An imidazoquinolene-based compound that is sensed by TLR7 and is currently used for the treatment of genital warts and basal-cell carcinoma.

School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
e-mails: laoneill@tcd.ie;
agbowie@tcd.ie
doi:10.1038/nri2079

However, crystal structures of the receptor-adaptor interface are still required to define precisely how TLR signalling is initiated. Once signalling is initiated, each adaptor will then ultimately lead to the activation of specific transcription factors, as described in this Review and as summarized in FIG. 2.

### MyD88

#### Discovery
MyD88 was first named in 1990 as a protein that was induced during the terminal differentiation of M1D+ myeloid precursors in response to IL-6 — the 'MyD' part of the name stands for myeloid differentiation and '88' refers to the gene number in the list of induced genes<sup>10</sup>. By 1997, the function of MyD88 had been uncovered. MyD88 was first shown to be involved in signalling by the type 1 IL-1 receptor (IL-1R1)<sup>11–14</sup> and subsequently in signalling by various TLRs<sup>15,16</sup>, with the crucial evidence coming from MyD88-deficient mice<sup>17,18</sup>. These mice were shown to be profoundly unresponsive to ligands for TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR7 and TLR9.

Numerous studies have now been carried out on MyD88-deficient mice in the context of disease models. They are resistant to the toxic effect of LPS, and they are also immunocompromised in terms of their ability to fight a range of pathogens, as shown in TABLE 1 (REFS 19–24). MyD88-dependent signalling is involved in transplant rejection<sup>25</sup>, and it is required for the inflammation that occurs in a model of airway hyperactivity involving the antigen ovalbumin<sup>26</sup>. However, implicating a lack of TLR signalling in the phenotype of MyD88-deficient mice in models of infectious or inflammatory disease must be done with caution, as these mice are also impaired in their response to IL-1 and IL-18 (REF. 27).

#### Signalling
In terms of signalling, the situation regarding MyD88 has become more complex than previously suspected. FIG. 3 describes the functions of MyD88. The activation of NF-κB, JNK (JUN N-terminal kinase) and p38 is absent in MyD88-deficient cells in response to all TLRs tested except TLR4 and TLR3. In both cases, this is because of the alternative use of the adaptor TRIF (described later). As shown in FIG. 3, members of the IL-1R-associated kinase (IRAK) family are recruited immediately downstream of MyD88. IRAK4 seems to be the MyD88-proximal kinase, which in turn recruits IRAK1. A splice variant of MyD88, known as MyD88s, has been described that prevents the recruitment of IRAK4 to full-length MyD88, and thereby inhibits NF-κB activation<sup>28</sup>. MyD88s lacks an important 'interdomain', which is the region in MyD88 that is involved in IRAK4 interaction. MyD88s is therefore an important negative regulator of TLR signalling and is, in fact, induced by LPS as part of a negative-feedback mechanism. Also of interest is the observation that MyD88s does not inhibit JNK activation, indicating that IRAK4 is not required for this signal<sup>29</sup>.

IRAK2 can also be found in the MyD88 complex (although this has only been shown when IRAK2 is overexpressed), and the fourth and final IRAK, IRAK-M, seems to have an inhibitory role that prevents the dissociation of IRAK1 and IRAK4 from MyD88

antagonize signalling through TLR7. These interactions, therefore, indicate that there is added complexity in the TLR7–TLR9 subset of TLRs<sup>8</sup>.

The TLR dimers are thought to be pre-assembled in a low-affinity complex before ligand binding. Once the ligand binds, a conformational change is thought to occur that brings the two TIR domains on the cytosolic face of each receptor into closer proximity, creating a new platform on which to build a signalling complex. The dimerization of the ectodomains of each TLR is likely to be symmetrical, given that the ligand is monomeric. This has been shown for TLR3 (REF. 9). This symmetrical dimerization will cause the cytosolic TIR domains to associate symmetrically, and consequently force them to undergo a structural reorganization, creating the signalling platform that is necessary for adaptor recruitment.

IL-1R  
or TLR5  

TLR1–TLR2  
or TLR2–TLR6  

TLR3  

TLR4  

TLR7, TLR8  
or TLR9  

Plasma membrane  

TIR domain  

MyD88  

MAL  

TRIF  

NF-κB  

NF-κB  

NF-κB  
IRF3  
IRF5  
IRF7  

NF-κB  
IRF5  

NF-κB  
IRF3  
IRF7  

NF-κB  
IRF5  
IRF7 (in mDCs)  

SARM  

Figure 2 | Overview of transcription-factor activation through TIR-domain-containing adaptors for the TLR/ IL-1R superfamily. Each adaptor is differentially used by receptor complexes to positively regulate transcription-factor activation. The exception is SARM (sterile α- and armadillo-motif-containing protein), which inhibits TRIF (Toll/IL-1R (TIR)-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing interferon-β (IFNβ))-mediated transcription-factor activation. These pathways are described in detail in the text. IL-1R, interleukin-1 receptor; IRF, IFN regulatory factor; mDC, myeloid dendritic cell; MAL, MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary-response gene 88) adaptor-like protein; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TRAM, TRIF-related adaptor molecule.

(REF. 30). A key downstream target for IRAK1 is thought to be tumour necrosis-factor (TNF)-receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), which through the recruitment of transforming-growth-factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2), and the ubiquitylating factors ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 variant 1 (UEV1A) and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 13 (UBC13) ultimately engages with the upstream kinases for p38 and JNK, and with the inhibitor of NF-κB kinase (IKK) complex, leading to NF-κB activation. These aspects are reviewed in detail elsewhere³¹.

More recent observations have provided further information about the role of MyD88 in TLR signalling. It has now been shown that CD14 is required for MyD88-dependent signalling to NF-κB by TLR2–TLR6 ligands and through TLR4 by a subtype of LPS known as ‘smooth’ LPS, but not by ‘rough’ LPS³². However, CD14 was required for signalling of rough LPS via TLR4 to the adaptor TRIF to regulate IRF3. These results indicate that the engagement of TLR4 with MyD88 and TRIF is complex and must somehow depend on the conformation of TLR4, which in turn depends on the presence of CD14. Furthermore, CD14 must also be required for the TLR2–TLR6 dimer to have the correct conformation to recruit MyD88.

Smooth and rough LPS  
Smooth LPS contains the O-antigen, which comprises a long-chain polysaccharide, an oligosaccharide core and lipid A. Rough LPS is identical with the notable difference that it lacks the O-antigen.

Other recent studies have expanded our understanding of the role of MyD88 in signalling during the host defence response. As shown in FIG. 3, MyD88 is required for the induction of type I IFNs by TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9. MyD88 has also been shown to be essential for the activation of IRF7 by these TLRs, which leads to IFNα

production³³⁻³⁵, and a complex comprising MyD88, IRAK1, IRAK4, TRAF6 and IRF7 has been detected³⁶, with IRF7 being phosphorylated by IRAK1. This phosphorylation seems to be a key function for IRAK1 in TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signalling, as the IRF7 response is totally abolished in IRAK1-deficient cells, whereas NF-κB activation is only partially impaired³⁷. In the case of TLR9, IRF7 activation seems to require a stable interaction between MyD88 and the TIR domain of TLR9, which occurs on the cytosolic side of endosomes³⁵.

MyD88 also interacts with IRF5 and IRF1 and is required for the activation of these IRFs. IRF5 was identified as being crucial for the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs by all TLRs tested³⁸. The association of MyD88 with IRF1 seems to be required for translocation of IRF1 to the nucleus in myeloid DCs³⁹, and IRF1 is required for the induction of several TLR-dependent genes in these cells. IFNγ is required to induce IRF1, and this might be the basis for the priming effect of IFNγ on TLR action.

Another intriguing link to the IFNγ system is the reported association between MyD88 and IFNγ receptor 1 (IFNγR1)⁴⁰. MyD88 recruits mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK3) downstream of IFNγR1, which in turn activates p38. An alternative signalling pathway has therefore been revealed for MyD88 that does not involve TIR-domain-containing receptors. Another TLR-independent function of MyD88 was reported in CD95 (also known as FAS) signalling. CD95 signalling enhances IL-1R1 signalling by redirecting FADD (FAS-associated death domain) from a complex with

REVIEW S

Table 1 | Infections of mice deficient for TIR-domain-containing adaptors

| Adaptor | Infection | Phenotype | Refs |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MyD88 | Staphylococcus aureus | ↓ Survival after intravenous infection<br>↑ Bacterial load in blood and organs<br>↑ Cytokines produced by macrophages | 19 |
|  | Plasmodium berghei | Normal parasitaemia and survival<br>↓ Serum IL-12 and liver injury | 20 |
|  | Toxoplasma gondii | ↓ Survival after intraperitoneal infection<br>↓ Serum IL-12 and IFNγ | 21 |
|  | Listeria monocytogenes | ↓ Survival after intraperitoneal infection<br>↑ Bacteriaemia in spleen and liver<br>↓ Serum TNF, IFNγ and NO | 22 |
|  | Leishmania major | ↓ Resistance to skin inoculum<br>↓ IL-12-mediated T<sub>H</sub>1-cell response | 24 |
| MAL | Escherichia coli | ↑ Survival<br>↓ Lung innate immune response<br>↑ Bacterial load in lungs | 59 |
|  | Klebsiella pneumoniae | ↓ Survival<br>↑ Bacterial load in lungs<br>↑ Bacterial dissemination | 60 |
| TRIF (Lps2) | Cytomegalovirus | ↑ Viral load in spleen | 79 |
|  | Escherichia coli | ↓ Dendritic-cell maturation and apoptosis | 94 |

IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MAL, MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary-response gene 88) adaptor-like protein; NO, nitric oxide; T<sub>H</sub>1, T helper 1; TNF, tumour-necrosis factor; TRIF, Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR)-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ.

MyD88 to the death domain of CD95, thereby allowing IL-1R1 to signal through MyD88 (REF. 41). Similarly, the TIR-domain-containing receptor ST2, which belongs to the IL-1 receptor subgroup, can sequester MyD88 and interfere with signalling by TLR4 (REF. 42). Both of these studies indicate that MyD88 is an important point of control for signalling through various receptors, and this is further supported by the observation that transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), an anti-inflammatory cytokine that can interfere with TLR4 signalling, promotes the ubiquitylation and degradation of MyD88 (REF. 43).

An additional MyD88-interacting signalling component that has been recently identified is TRAF3. In TRAF3-deficient cells, the induction of type I IFNs and IL-10, but not pro-inflammatory cytokines, was impaired in response to TLR3, TLR4 and TLR9 activation<sup>44</sup>. TRAF3 also interacts with TRIF, and is required for activation of the kinase TBK1 (TRAF-family-member-associated NF-κB-activator-binding kinase 1)<sup>45</sup>. TRAF3, therefore, seems to have a key role in both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signalling.

A final aspect concerning signalling by MyD88 relates to the timing of signals from TLR4. In MyD88-deficient cells the time course of activation of NF-κB is delayed in the case of TLR4 signalling. Two studies have provided an explanation for this finding. NF-κB activation occurs in two waves in response to LPS<sup>46,47</sup>; the first wave is activated by MyD88 directly engaging with the pathway that leads to the IKK complex; however, the second, delayed wave depends on autocrine TNF production, which is initiated by TRIF activation of IRF3. This two-phase mechanism has been modelled and when each phase was examined in isolation, both were shown to exhibit damped oscillatory behaviour<sup>46</sup>. This combination of two out-of-phase oscillatory-based responses gives rise to stability in the NF-κB activation pathway, which presumably reflects the importance of this pathway for the initiation of host defence by TLR4.

**Structural requirements for adaptor recruitment to TLRs.** The TIR domain is defined by a motif of ~160 amino acids composing five β-sheets surrounded by α-helices and connected together by flexible loops<sup>48</sup>. Conservation between TIR domains reflects the structural requirement of this folding pattern. However, the surface properties of TIR-domain-containing adaptors have been shown to be distinct and it has been proposed that electrostatic complementarity might explain specific interactions between adaptors and TLRs. This is discussed in more detail in relation to MAL (see below). Two particular loop regions within the TIR domain have been studied; these are known as the ‘BB loop’ and ‘DD loop’. Each TIR domain has both of these loops. The BB loop occurs in the Box 2 sequence of the TIR domain, which in most TIR domains contains a key proline residue. This proline was shown to be mutated to a histidine in the TLR4 of C3H/HeJ mice, which rendered the mice non-responsive to LPS. The BB loop of TLR2 and the DD loop of MyD88 are required for the two proteins to interact<sup>48,49</sup>, and the DD loop of TLR2 interacts with the BB loop of TLR1 (REF. 50). A simple model might therefore be that TLR dimerization occurs as a result of interaction between the DD loop of one TIR domain and the BB loop of the other TIR domain, and that the adaptor dimer then interacts with the receptor dimer through other regions in the TIR domain that are dependent on electrostatic complementarity, although this has yet to be demonstrated. We can provisionally conclude that the BB and DD loops of TIR domains are required for TIR–TIR interactions. Structural studies on the complex between MyD88 (or indeed any of the adaptors) and a TLR are required to clarify the situation. Peptides based on the BB loop of MyD88 and the other adaptors have been tested as possible inhibitors of signalling but a clear picture of the use of specific adaptors by different TLRs has yet to emerge from these studies<sup>51</sup>. However a peptidomimetic based on the BB loop of MyD88 has been designed that interferes with the interaction between MyD88 and IL-1R1, and inhibits IL-1 signalling<sup>52</sup>. Ultimately, the hope is that inhibitors might be designed that would specifically interfere with adaptor recruitment and modify signalling in diseases involving TLRs.

Electrostatic complementarity  
A situation in which the electrical charge of atoms in two molecules are opposite, such that an interaction between the molecules is favoured.

C3H/HeJ mice  
A strain of mice hyporesponsive to LPS in which there is a missense mutation in the gene encoding TLR4, which changes a proline to a histidine in the TIR domain, rendering TLR4 unable to signal.

LPS
Bacterial
lipoproteins
IL-1
IL-18
Flagellin
ssRNA
Imiquimod
ssRNA
CpG DNA
IFNγ

TLR4
TLR2 or TLR1
IL-1R
IL-18R
TLR5
TLR7
TLR8
TLR9
IFNγR1

Plasma membrane

TIR domain
SOCS1
MAL
MyD88
BTK
MyD88s
FADD
IRAK-M
IRAK1
IRAK4
TRAF6
UEV1A
UBC13
TRAF6
Ub Ub Ub
TAB2
TAK1
Ub Ub Ub
TAB1
IKKγ
IKK1 IKK2
MKK3/
MKK6
MKK7
p38
JNK
NF-κB
(Rapid)
TNF
IRAK4
IRAK1
TRAF6 TRAF3
MLK3
IRF5
IRF1
IRF7
p38
(Delayed)
TNF
IFNβ
IFNα

Figure 3 | The world of MyD88. MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary-response gene 88) is the key signalling adaptor for all Toll-like receptors (TLRs; with the exception of TLR3 and certain TLR4 signals), IL-1R and IL-18R. Its main role is the activation of NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB). It is directly recruited to the TIR (Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R)) domains in certain TLRs (here, shown for TLR5, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9), and acts to recruit IRAK4 (IL-1R-associated kinase 4). This leads to a pathway involving IRAK1, TRAF6 (tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor 6), TAK1 (transforming-growth-factor-β-activated kinase) and the ubiquitylating factors UEV1A (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 variant 1) and UBC13 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 13), which modify and activate TRAF6 and TAK1. This leads to the activation of the inhibitor of NF-κB kinase (IKK) complex and NF-κB, and the upstream kinases for p38 and JNK (JUN N-terminal kinase). MyD88 is targeted by negative regulators, such as a shorter form known as MyD88s, which interferes with IRAK4 recruitment, and FADD (FAS-associated via death domain). IRAK-M can also inhibit signalling by preventing the release of IRAK1 and IRAK4 from MyD88. MyD88 also couples to interferon-regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and IRF1. In the latter case, MyD88 traffics to the nucleus with IRF1. In the case of TLR2 and TLR4 signalling, a bridging adaptor, MAL (MyD88-adaptor-like protein), is required for MyD88 recruitment. This is subject to regulation by BTK (Bruton’s tyrosine kinase) and SOCS1 (suppressor of cytokine signalling 1), which promotes MAL degradation. In the case of signalling by TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9, the MyD88–IRAK4 pathway also leads through TRAF6 and TRAF3 to the activation of IRF7. Finally, IFNγR1 (interferon-γ receptor 1) can also engage with MyD88, and through mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK3) leads to activation of p38. Target genes for each of these pathways are shown. MKK, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase; TAB, TAK1-binding protein; TNF, tumour-necrosis factor; Ub, Ubiquitin.

Random germline mutagenesis
A technique whereby mutagenesis with a chemical, such as the ethylating chemical N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU), produces a high rate of genome-wide point mutations at random in the mouse germline. Mutagenized mice can then be tested for functional defects, and the mutant gene that is responsible identified.

Phenovariant
A variant in which the phenotype is different, which can then be linked back to the genotype and thereby lead to the identification of the protein responsible for the phenotype.

Recently, an interesting observation has been made in relation to a region in MyD88 defined as the Poc site⁵³. Random germline mutagenesis was used to create a phenovariant of TLR signalling known as Pococurante (Poc). Mice with this variant were shown not to respond to any TLR ligands that signal through MyD88, with the notable exception of diacyl lipopeptides (which signal though TLR2–TLR6 dimers). The Poc mutation results in the missense error Ile179Asn in MyD88. Ile179 in

MyD88 is therefore a key amino acid in all MyD88-mediated TLR signalling, with the exception of TLR2–TLR6 signalling. The model that was proposed from this study was one in which the role of the Poc site in MyD88 is to interact with the BB loop of the recruiting TLR. Both the Poc site and the BB loop are required for all MyD88–TLR interactions, except in MyD88 interactions with TLR2–TLR6, which only seem to require either the Poc site or the BB loop. Although, why this should be the case is

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group
VOLUME 7 | MAY 2007 | 357

unclear. A final point of interest in this study was that the mice bearing the Poc mutation were not impaired in their ability to contain infection with *Streptococcus pyogenes*. This contrasts with MyD88-deficient mice, which were highly susceptible to the infection. Given that the only antibacterial TLR that apparently functions in the Poc mutant mice is TLR2 in combination with TLR6, the sensing of diacyl lipopeptides by TLR2–TLR6 through MyD88 must be of primary importance in the host defence response to S. *pyogenes*, emphasizing the specificity of TLR use during infection.

### MAL

The second adaptor in the TIR-domain-containing adaptor family to be discovered was MAL<sup>54,55</sup>. MAL is required for signalling by TLR2 and TLR4, serving as a bridge to recruit MyD88 (REFS 54–58). A dominant-negative version, in which the Box 2 proline in MAL was mutated to a histidine, resulted in the inhibition of TLR4 signalling, but not IL-1 signalling<sup>55</sup>. In addition, a peptide based on the BB loop region of MAL was shown to inhibit TLR4 but not TLR9 signalling<sup>54</sup>. These results were the first indication that there is specificity in TIR-domain-dependent signalling. This specific role for MAL was confirmed in MAL-deficient mice, which were shown to be defective in TLR4 signalling in terms of cytokine induction. IL-1 and TLR9 signalling were normal, but TLR2 signalling was also impaired<sup>56,57</sup>. This led to the conclusion that MAL is required for signalling only by TLR2 and TLR4 (FIG. 3). TLR2 signalling in MAL-deficient cells was impaired to a greater extent than TLR4 signalling, with no evident activation of NF-κB or p38. For TLR4 signalling, the phenotype in MAL-deficient cells was the same as that for MyD88-deficient cells — involving a delay in NF-κB and p38 activation. Similar to MyD88, MAL was found to have no role in the activation of IRF3 and so the conclusion was drawn that MAL is a component of the MyD88 pathway. This would explain why TLR2 signalling was more impaired than TLR4 signalling, as TRIF, which in TLR4 signalling was shown to induce TNF production to promote the later activation of NF-κB, is not used in TLR2 signalling.

MAL-deficient mice have not been tested in as many disease models as have MyD88-deficient mice. However, MAL has been shown to be crucial for early immune responses to *Escherichia coli* and LPS in the lung<sup>59</sup>, and also in the induction of antimicrobial peptides in the lung in response to *Klebsiella pneumoniae*, but not to *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*<sup>60</sup> (TABLE 1). LPS-induced airway hyper-reactivity has been shown to involve MAL<sup>61</sup>. MAL also has a role in the injury that occurs in the heart in a model of ischemia–reperfusion injury<sup>62</sup>.

A clear role for MAL as a bridging adaptor for MyD88 has been shown. MAL has a binding domain in its N-terminus that binds to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>)<sup>58</sup>. This mediates the recruitment of MAL to the plasma membrane (which is the key PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> containing membrane) and in particular to microdomains that contain TLR4. MyD88 does not bind directly to TLR4, but instead interacts with MAL in association with TLR4. This is consistent with the electrostatic surfaces of the TIR domains of MAL and MyD88. The TIR domain of MAL is largely electro-negative on its surface, whereas that of MyD88 is electro-positive. As the TIR domain in TLR4 is also electro-positive, it would be predicted to repel MyD88 but allow MAL to interact, which is consistent with molecular modelling of the interaction between TLR4 and MAL<sup>49</sup>. When the PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>-binding domain in phospholipase C was grafted onto the N-terminus of MyD88, signalling to NF-κB could be reconstituted in MAL-deficient cells, which strongly indicates that the only function of MAL in relation to the NF-κB pathway is to recruit MyD88. Whether other TLR4-mediated MyD88-dependent signals, such as IRF5 activation, are similarly dependent on MAL was not examined. This study also indicates that the amount of PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> will determine whether MAL is recruited, and that manipulation of PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> levels will regulate MAL-dependent signalling.

New features of MAL have recently been uncovered that distinguish it from MyD88. First, MAL has a TRAF6-binding domain, and MAL might therefore participate in the recruitment of TRAF6 to the signalling complex<sup>63</sup>. In addition, MAL undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation by Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), which has a role in both TLR4 and TLR2 signalling<sup>64–66</sup>, and in turn leads to the increased phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of NF-κB<sup>67</sup>, which is required for transactivation of gene expression. The phosphorylation of MAL by BTK is required for MAL to signal, but tyrosine-phosphorylated MAL is subject to suppressor of cytokine signalling 1 (SOCS1)-mediated degradation<sup>68</sup>. These data provide an explanation for why SOCS1-deficient cells are hyper-responsive to LPS<sup>69,70</sup>, as the pathway to p65 phosphorylation and transactivation through MAL is particularly sensitive to SOCS1. It should be noted, however, that BTK also has a role in signalling by other TLRs, notably TLR8 (REFS 64, 71), and so there are likely to be other targets for BTK in TLR signalling. MAL has also recently been shown to interact with caspase-1, with cleavage of MAL by caspase-1 being required for MAL to activate NF-κB<sup>72</sup>.

Finally, a variant of MAL has been found in humans that confers resistance to the infectious diseases malaria, tuberculosis and pneumococcal pneumonia. Wild-type MAL has a serine at position 180, whereas the variant has a leucine at this position. Khor and colleagues have found that being heterozygous for MAL halves the risk of these diseases<sup>73</sup>. The molecular basis for this involves the impaired recruitment of the leucine form of MAL to TLR2. Heterozygotes are therefore likely to be protected from disease because they have a decreased level of signalling from TLR2 and/or TLR4, which is sufficient for host defence but not for the over-production of inflammatory cytokines that is involved in disease pathogenesis. Hawn and colleagues have also studied the role of this variant in decreased susceptibility to tuberculosis, with three other single-nucleotide polymorphisms also occurring in MAL<sup>74</sup>.

Yeast two-hybrid screen
A system used to determine the existence of direct interactions between proteins. It involves the use of plasmids that encode two hybrid proteins; one of them is fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain and the other one is fused to the GAL4 activation domain. The two proteins are expressed together in yeast and, if they interact, then the resulting complex will drive the expression of a reporter gene, commonly β-galactosidase.

Polyinosinic–polycytidylic acid (PolyI:C). A substance that is used as a mimic of viral double-stranded RNA.

TRIF

Discovery. MAL was initially thought to control the TLR4-mediated, MyD88-independent pathway leading to IRF3 and delayed NF-κB activation. However, the discovery of the role of MAL as a bridging adaptor in the MyD88-dependent pathway left a gap in our understanding of how TLR4 could mediate type I IFN induction. This gap was filled by TRIF, which is now known to control the TLR4-induced MyD88-independent pathway, and also to be the exclusive adaptor used by TLR3. Similar to MAL, TRIF was identified by database screening for TIR-domain-containing proteins<sup>75</sup>, but also independently in a yeast two-hybrid screen with TLR3 (REF. 76). In contrast to MAL or MyD88, overexpression of TRIF led to the induction of the IFNB promoter<sup>75,76</sup>. Furthermore, TRIF-deficient mice were impaired in both TLR3- and TLR4-induced IFNβ production and activation of IRF3, and inflammatory cytokine production was impaired in signalling through TLR4 but not TLR2, TLR7 or TLR9 in macrophages<sup>77</sup>. Importantly, in cells deficient both in TRIF and MyD88, LPS-induced NF-κB activation was completely abolished, thereby showing that TRIF accounts for the MyD88-independent aspect of TLR4 signalling. Also, in double-deficient macrophages deficient in both TRIF and MyD88, no genes were upregulated in response to LPS<sup>78</sup>. Examination of single-deficient macrophages showed that the contribution of MyD88 to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation is likely to be more significant than that of TRIF, as genes that are regulated by MyD88 were regulated by messenger RNA stability (presumably through MAPKs), as well as by transcription<sup>78</sup>.

A further study, in which random germline mutagenesis led to a phenovariant known as *Lps2*, independently confirmed the role of TRIF. In these mice, cytokine responses to polyinosinic–polycytidylic acid (polyI:C) were abolished, and LPS-induced responses were impaired<sup>79</sup>. The *Lps2* mutation mapped to *Trif*, giving rise to a frameshift. Mice homozygous for *Lps2* were resistant to a normally lethal dose of *E. coli* LPS, and succumbed to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection more readily (TABLE 1). Macrophages isolated from *Lps2* homozygotes were also compromised in their ability to suppress vaccinia virus (VACV) replication. A follow-on study showed that, in the absence of TLR3, mice infected with CMV had increased viral titres in the spleen, slightly increased mortality, decreased serum levels of IFNs and cytokines, and decreased activation of natural killer (NK) cells and NKT cells<sup>80</sup>. Clearly then, the TLR3–TRIF pathway is important for controlling DNA viruses such as VACV and CMV.

So, TRIF was established as the adaptor controlling both TLR3- and TLR4-mediated IFN production, through the activation of IRF3 (REF. 81). As polyI:C-mediated IL-6, TNF and IL-12 induction were impaired in macrophages from IRF5-deficient mice, TRIF, similar to MyD88, probably also mediates IRF5 activation<sup>38</sup>. TRIF directly engages with TLR3, whereas TRAM bridges the TLR4 interaction (see below). Another important LPS–TLR4-mediated pathway known to be independent of MyD88 is the upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules and MHC class II molecules by dendritic cells (DCs), and TRIF was shown to mediate this pathway through the induction of type I IFNs<sup>82</sup>. This is important *in vivo*, as when LPS was used as an adjuvant, TRIF was essential not only for co-stimulatory molecule upregulation, but also for specific CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell responses, although the T-cell responses were also dependent on MyD88. In response to polyI:C, both TLR3–TRIF-dependent and -independent pathways were involved in co-stimulatory molecule expression.

Signalling. TRIF uses some shared and some unique signalling molecules compared with MyD88, as shown in FIG. 4. As mentioned above, TRAF3 has been recently identified as being crucial for both MyD88 and TRIF signalling to induce type I IFN through IRF3 by different TLRs (REFS 44,45). To mediate IRF3 activation, the N-terminal region of TRIF was proposed to engage with TBK1 (REF. 83), which is now known to be the crucial upstream kinase for IRF3 activation in most pathways,

Figure 4 | Signalling pathways mediated by TRIF and their regulation by SARM.
a | TRIF (Toll/interleukin 1 receptor (TIR)-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing interferon-β) is used by both Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3; shown here) and TLR4 (through TRAM) to mediate NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB) and interferon-regulatory factor (IRF) activation, and to induce apoptosis. Ligand engagement by the TLR complex results in TRIF recruitment through its TIR domain. TRIF has distinct protein-interaction motifs that allow it to (directly or indirectly) recruit the effector proteins TBK1 (tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor (TRAF)-family-member-associated NF-κB-activator-binding kinase 1), TRAF6 and RIP1 (receptor-interacting protein 1). It is still unclear how TRIF uses TRAF3 to induce IRF3 activation, but TBK1 might be recruited to TRIF through TRAF3, and NAP1 (NAK-associated protein 1; not shown). NF-κB is activated by two distinct pathways, mediated by TRAF6 and RIP1 engaging different ends of TRIF. RIP1 also activates a pathway involving FADD (FAS-associated death domain) that facilitates TRIF-induced apoptosis through caspase-8.b | In resting cells, levels of SARM (sterile α- and armadillo-motif-containing protein) are low. Ligand stimulation of either TLR3 or TLR4 leads to a rapid increase of SARM expression, which correlates with increased association between SARM and TRIF. This inhibits downstream signalling by TRIF, probably by preventing the recruitment of TRIF effector proteins. IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB kinase.

including signalling through TLR3 and TLR4 (REF. 84). However, it is now thought that TRIF associates with TBK1 through NAK-associated protein 1 (NAP1) (REF. 85) and possibly TRAF3. For NF-κB activation, two separate pathways seem to bifurcate from TRIF, and these map to distinct sites at the N- and C-termini of TRIF. Similar to MAL, TRIF has consensus TRAF6-binding motifs (FIG. 1) in the N-terminal region in the case of TRIF; mutating these motifs decreased TRIF-induced NF-κB, but not IRF3, activation^{83,86}. However, the role of TRAF6 in TRIF signalling is still controversial as in macrophages from TRAF6-deficient mice, in contrast to the situation in TRAF6-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)^{86}, TLR3 signalling was not affected^{87}. However, there is also a distinct route to NF-κB activation involving the C-terminus of TRIF, which contains a receptor-interacting protein (RIP) homotypic interaction motif (RHIM). TRIF was found to recruit both RIP1 and RIP3 through this domain, and in MEFs deficient in RIP1, polyI:C-induced NF-κB activation was completely blocked^{88}. By contrast, RIP3 negatively regulated the TRIF–RIP1–NFκB pathway. Interestingly, the absence of RIP1 had no effect on TLR4 signalling, indicating that TLR3 and TLR4 might use TRIF differentially. However, a different study found that both TLR3- and TLR4-mediated NF-κB (but not IRF3) activation were affected by the absence of RIP1 (REF. 89). Further differences in the MyD88-independent pathway for TLR3 and TLR4 were revealed by Wietek *et al.*^{90}, who showed that IRF3-mediated activation of IFN-sensitive response elements (ISREs) by TLR4 but not TLR3 required the p65 subunit of NF-κB.

In addition to NF-κB and IRF3 activation, TRIF mediates a third distinct signalling pathway for TLR3, that of induction of apoptosis. In fact, on the basis of overexpression studies, it has been proposed that TRIF is the only one of the five adaptors that can mediate apoptosis^{91}. This pathway also uses the C-terminal RHIM of TRIF, and seems to involve RIP1, FADD and caspase-8 (REFS 92,93). This apoptotic pathway has also been shown to be active for TLR4, to be MyD88 independent, and to be responsible for bacterial-induced apoptosis of infected macrophages^{94}. The TRIF pathway was also shown to control TLR4-mediated bacterial-induced DC apoptosis *in vivo*^{94}. A further TRIF-specific and MyD88-independent pathway for TLR4 has been recently identified that provides a molecular mechanism to explain how LPS upregulates MHC class II expression during DC maturation. This involves LPS-induced activation of the small G protein RHOB (RAS homologue gene family, member B) through TRIF and the guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor H1 (GEFH1)^{95}.

**IFN-sensitive response elements (ISREs)**  
DNA motifs found in the promoters of interferon (IFN)-sensitive genes that binds the transcription factor IRF3.

**RIG-I pathway**  
A signalling pathway activated by the receptor retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) by viral RNA, which through the adaptor protein IPS1 (also known as VISA, MAVS or CARDIF) activates the transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7, leading to the production of type I interferons.

**Negative regulation.** Similar to MyD88, endogenous strategies for downregulating TRIF signalling have been identified. However, most of these are not specific for TRIF, and they either target MyD88 and TRAF6 signalling, or affect downstream components of the TRIF pathway, such as TBK1 or IRF3, and thus exert an effect on other signalling systems that converge on these components (for example, the RIG-I pathway (retinoic-acid-inducible gene I pathway)). Examples of molecules that downregulate both the MyD88 and the TRIF pathways include TRAF1 (REF. 96) and A20 (REF. 97), whereas suppressor of IKKε (SIKE)^{98} and cis-trans peptidylprolyl isomerase, NIMA-interacting 1 (PIN1)^{99} inhibit IRF3 activation through TRIF-dependent and -independent pathways. Furthermore, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), which exerts multiple effects on both MyD88-dependent and -independent TLR pathways has been shown to interact with TRIF, and inhibition of PI3K activity increased TRIF-mediated NF-κB activation^{100}. The phosphatase SHP2 (SRC homology 2 (SH2)-domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2) has recently been shown to inhibit TRIF-dependent, but not MyD88-dependent, cytokine and IFN induction^{101}. SARM, the fifth TIR adaptor, is a specific negative regulator of TRIF in that it does not inhibit the MyD88 pathway or non-TLR responses (see later).

As well as endogenous regulators of TRIF function, pathogen-derived molecules have also been shown to regulate TRIF activity. To successfully replicate and spread within a host, every virus must have ways of overcoming or suppressing the antiviral response. Consistent with a role for TRIF in containing viruses through type I IFN induction, at least two viruses have been shown to contain proteins that antagonize TRIF. VACV encodes two proteins, A46 and A52, that differentially affect TRIF signalling in a non-redundant manner, as deletion of either gene in isolation led to an attenuated phenotype in a murine intranasal model of infection^{102,103}. So, targeting TLR signalling pathways in infected cells confers an advantage on VACV *in vivo*. A strategy to evade detection by the TRIF-dependent pathway has also been identified for hepatitis C virus (HCV). This virus has a serine protease that can cleave TRIF and thus prevent TLR3 signalling to NF-κB and IRF3 (REF. 104). The same protease can also target IPS-1 (REF. 105) (also known as CARDIF, VISA and MAVS; the signalling adaptor for the RIG-I-mediated viral-RNA detection system), and so HCV can disable both the TLR3 and RIG-I detection pathways with a single protein.

**TRAM**

The fourth adaptor to be identified was TRAM (also known as TICAM2)^{81,106,107}. This adaptor was also discovered using bioinformatics, followed by a combination of overexpression studies, dominant-negative mutant analysis, interaction studies with TRIF and studies in TRAM-deficient cells, which showed that TRAM functions exclusively in the TLR4 pathway. TRAM is therefore the most restricted of the adaptors in terms of TLR action. Although TRAM interacts with TRIF, its role seems to be more general than that of TRIF for TLR4 signalling in that the activation of signals and induction of cytokines by LPS is more impaired in TRAM-deficient cells than in TRIF-deficient cells. The basis for this is not clear, as, if TRAM were only to function as a bridging adaptor for TRIF recruitment, we might expect the phenotypes of the TRAM- and TRIF-deficient mice to be similar for LPS signalling. TRAM is required for the induction of

Figure 5 | TIR-domain-containing adaptor usage by TLR4. In terms of adaptor usage, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is the most complex of the TLRs; it requires four signalling adaptors to function upon activation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-MD2. In an apparently identical manner to TLR2, it uses MAL (MyD88 adaptor-like protein) as a bridging adaptor to recruit MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary-response gene 88) and to activate the NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB) pathway and p38 and JNK (JUN N-terminal kinase) MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathways. MAL is recruited to plasma-membrane microdomains containing the phospholipid PtdIns(4,5)P₂ (phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate). These microdomains also contain TLR4. MAL subsequently recruits MyD88, and is a substrate for BTK (Bruton’s tyrosine kinase), which seems to be required for its activation and subsequent degradation. The other pathway activated by TLR4 involves TRAM (TRIF-related adaptor molecule). Similar to MAL, TRAM is also membrane proximal, but the mechanism of activation is different. It requires the attachment of a myristate group to TRAM, which lodges in the plasma membrane. TRAM is also a substrate for PKCε (protein kinase Cε) and must undergo phosphorylation to be active. It recruits TRIF (Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR)-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing interferon-β), which in an identical manner to the TLR3 pathway, activates pathways involving TBK1 (tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor (TNFR)-associated factor (TRAF)-family-member-associated NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB)-activator-binding kinase 1) to IRF3, TRAF6 to NF-κB, and RIP1 to apoptosis. Also similar to TLR3 signalling, SARM antagonizes TRIF in TLR4 signalling (not shown). FADD, FAS-associated death domain; IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB kinase; IRF, interferon-regulatory factor; TRAF, TNFR-associated factor.

TNF, IL-6, CD86 and a range of IRF3-dependent genes. Similar to TRIF, TRAM is required for the late activation of NF-κB, as well as for IRF3 activation. The discovery of TRAM allowed a detailed description of adaptor use by TLR4, as shown in FIG. 5.

Recently two biochemical modifications have been identified that are important for TRAM function [108,109]. The N-terminus of TRAM undergoes constitutive myristoylation and this is required for TRAM to be membrane associated [108]. This is therefore analogous to MAL, which binds PtdIns(4,5)P₂ in the plasma membrane. TRAM has been shown to act as a bridging adaptor for TRIF [107], a situation that is again analogous to the use of MAL as a bridging adaptor for MyD88 (REFS 54,55). Mutation of the myristoylation motif in TRAM abolishes its ability to signal. A second important modification is phosphorylation of TRAM on the serine at position 16 by protein kinase Cε (PKCε) [109], which is proximal to the myristoylation site. This is a crucial event in TRAM signalling, as, if phosphorylation is inhibited, TRAM signals are impaired, and a mutant TRAM that cannot undergo this modification is inactive. PKCε is an essential component of the LPS-induced signalling pathway in macrophages [10], and TRAM is probably a key target for PKCε. However, the precise functional consequences of PKCε-mediated phosphorylation for TRAM are as yet unknown.

A key unresolved question is whether TRAM and MAL are mutually exclusive in TLR4 signalling. It is possible that TLR4 is unable to interact with both adaptors simultaneously. An intriguing possibility is that signalling pathways might be governed by whether TRAM or MAL is recruited, and the fine-tuning of signalling might depend on the covalent modification of each protein.

### SARM

SARM, the last of the five adaptors to be assigned a role in TLR signalling, is in fact the most evolutionarily ancient, being the only member of the family to have a clear orthologue in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. SARM was initially identified in 2001 as a human gene encoding an orthologue of a *Drosophila melanogaster* protein with two sterile α-motifs (SAMs) and HEAT/armadillo repeats [111]. SARM was also reported to be conserved in mice and *C. elegans*. Initially, the presence of a TIR domain in SARM was not reported, and the existence of SAM motifs did not provide many clues on the function of the protein, as these protein–protein interaction motifs have a large degree of functional diversity [112]. The realization that SARM had a TIR domain, and that in *C. elegans* only two genes encoded TIR-domain-containing proteins (*tol-1* and *tir-1*, the latter encoding the SARM orthologue) led to an anticipation of a role for TIR-1 in worm immunity. Couillault et al. [113]

showed that inactivation of *tir-1* by RNA interference led to decreased worm survival in response to fungal infection, which was related to decreased expression of two antimicrobial peptides. Surprisingly, the activity of TIR-1 was independent of TOL-1. This study also showed that there are five isoforms of TIR-1, all of which contain the two SAM motifs and a TIR domain, but differ in their N-termini. Liberati *et al.*<sup>114</sup> showed that TIR-1 functions upstream of PMK-1 (p38 MAPK family 1), a worm p38 MAPK that is known to be important in innate immunity. It was subsequently shown that TIR-1 also has a role in worm development, specifically in the asymmetrical expression of odorant receptors of olfactory neurons, and that this function also involves the regulation of MAPK activation<sup>115</sup>.

Liberati *et al.* also showed that human SARM, in contrast to the other four mammalian TIR-domain-containing adaptors, did not induce NF-κB activation when overexpressed<sup>114</sup>. So, the role of SARM remained a mystery. Recently, however, SARM has been assigned a role in TLR signalling, and, in contrast to the other four adaptors, it is a negative regulator of NF-κB and IRF activation<sup>5</sup>. SARM expression was shown to specifically block TRIF-dependent transcription-factor activation and gene induction, without affecting the MyD88-dependent pathway or non-TLR signalling by TNF or RIG-I (FIG. 4). Inhibition of TRIF involved direct interaction between TRIF and SARM. Knockdown of SARM expression in primary human peripheral-blood mononuclear cells led to increased polyI:C- and LPS-induced chemokine and cytokine expression. Treatment of cells with LPS led to a marked increase of SARM protein levels, thereby indicating a mechanism for specific negative feedback of the TRIF pathway of TLR4 (and TLR3) signalling. Interestingly, the SAM and TIR domains of SARM were necessary and sufficient for inhibition, and deletion of the N-terminus of SARM increased its expression and rendered the protein resistant to regulation by LPS. Hence,

the N-terminus might contain motifs that destabilize SARM, which are then somehow regulated by LPS stimulation. The N-terminus of TIR-1 in *C. elegans* also seems to have a regulatory role, and, similar to SARM, the SAM motifs and TIR domain of TIR-1 are essential for function<sup>115</sup>. It is unclear how SARM inhibits TRIF function: it could be that the interaction between the two adaptors prevents the recruitment of downstream effector proteins by TRIF (such as RIP1, TRAF6 and TBK1), or alternatively SARM might recruit an as-yet-unknown TRIF inhibitor through its SAM motifs. It will be important to clarify the mechanism of SARM inhibition of TRIF, the rationale for why SARM selectively targets TRIF and whether SARM has further functions in TLR signalling.

### Conclusions

TLR signalling depends on the selective use of different adaptor combinations by different TLRs. Recent insights into the covalent regulation of TRAM and MAL, and the inhibitory role of SARM with regard to TRIF signalling, highlight the complexity of adaptor use and regulation in TLR action. Clear models of this regulation that identify key points of control can now be drawn. The role of the adaptors in inflammatory and infectious diseases is also becoming more apparent, largely from disease models in mice deficient for each adaptor, and in the case of MAL from a variant conferring protection in multiple infectious diseases. The possibility of targeting the adaptors therapeutically is becoming a realistic possibility. This might involve targeting the enzymes that modulate adaptor function, such as BTK or PKCε. More specifically, the insights gained into the regions of the adaptors involved in protein–protein interactions (such as the BB loop regions or the Poc box in MyD88) might allow for the development of specific agents to disrupt these interactions and thereby limit their signalling capacity. This could in turn lead to new therapeutics for diseases in which TLRs have been shown to have a role.

---

1. Akira, S., Uematsu, S. & Takeuchi, O. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. *Cell* **124**, 783–801 (2006).
2. O’Neill, L. A., Fitzgerald, K. A. & Bowie, A. G. The Toll–IL-1 receptor adaptor family grows to five members. *Trends Immunol.* **24**, 286–290 (2003).
3. Sodergren, E. *et al.* The genome of the sea urchin *Strongylocentrotus purpuratus*. *Science* **314**, 941–952 (2006). This paper reports the striking observation that the sea urchin is predicted to contain 222 TLRs and 26 TIR-domain-containing adaptors. The reason for this diversity is as yet unclear.
4. Rast, J. P., Smith, L. C., Loza-Coll, M., Hibino, T. & Litman, G. W. Genomic insights into the immune system of the sea urchin. *Science* **314**, 952–956 (2006).
5. Carty, M. *et al.* The human adaptor SARM negatively regulates adaptor protein TRIF-dependent Toll-like receptor signaling. *Nature Immunol.* **7**, 1074–1081 (2006). A key functional aspect of SARM is reported here — inhibition of signalling by TRIF.
6. O’Neill, L. A. J. Targeting signal transduction as a strategy to treat inflammatory diseases. *Nature Rev. Drug Discov.* **5**, 549–563 (2006).
7. Ozinsky, A. *et al.* The repertoire for pattern recognition of pathogens by the innate immune system is defined by cooperation between Toll-like receptors. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 13766–13771 (2000).

8. Wang, J. *et al.* The functional effects of physical interactions among Toll-like receptors 7, 8, and 9. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 37427–37434 (2006).
9. Bell, J. K., Askins, J., Hall, P. R., Davies, D. R. & Segal, D. M. The dsRNA binding site of human Toll-like receptor 3. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 8792–8797 (2006).
10. Lord, K. A., Hoffman-Liebermann, B. & Liebermann, D. A. Nucleotide sequence and expression of a cDNA encoding MyD88, a novel myeloid differentiation primary response gene induced by IL6. *Oncogene* **5**, 1095–1097 (1990).
11. Yamagata, M., Merlie, J. P. & Sanes, J. R. Interspecific comparisons reveal conserved features of the *Drosophila* Toll protein. *Gene* **139**, 223–228 (1994).
12. Hultmark, D. Macrophage differentiation marker myd88 is a member of the Toll/IL-1 receptor family. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **199**, 144–146 (1994).
13. Wesche, H., Henzel, W. J., Shillinglaw, W., Li, S. & Cao, Z. MyD88: An adapter that recruits IRAK to the IL-1 receptor complex. *Immunity* **7**, 837–847 (1997).
14. Muzio, M., Ni, J., Feng, P. & Dixit, V. M. IRAK (pelle) family member IRAK-2 and MyD88 as proximal mediators of IL-1 signaling. *Science* **278**, 1612–1615 (1997).
15. Medzhitov, R. *et al.* MyD88 is an adaptor protein in the hToll/IL-1 receptor family signaling pathways. *Mol. Cell* **2**, 253–258 (1998).

16. Muzio, M., Natoli, G., Saccani, S., Levero, M. & Mantovani, A. The human Toll signaling pathway: Divergence of nuclear factor κB and JNK/SAPK activation upstream of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 2097–2101 (1998).
17. Kawai, T., Adachi, O., Ogawa, T., Takeda, K. & Akira, S. Unresponsiveness of MyD88-deficient mice to endotoxin. *Immunity* **11**, 115–122 (1999).
18. Takeuchi, O. *et al.* Cellular responses to bacterial cell wall components are mediated through MyD88-dependent signaling cascades. *Int. Immunol.* **12**, 113–117 (2000).
19. Takeuchi, O., Hoshino, K. & Akira, S. Cutting edge: TLR2-deficient and MyD88-deficient mice are highly susceptible to *Staphylococcus aureus* infection. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 5392–5396 (2000).
20. Adachi, K. *et al.* *Plasmodium berghei* infection in mice induces liver injury by an IL-12- and Toll-like receptor/myeloid differentiation factor 88-dependent mechanism. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 5928–5934 (2001).
21. Scanga, C. A. *et al.* Cutting edge: MyD88 is required for resistance to *Toxoplasma gondii* infection and regulates parasite-induced IL-12 production by dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 5997–6001 (2002).
22. Edelson, B. T. & Unanue, E. R. MyD88-dependent but Toll-like receptor 2-independent innate immunity to *Listeria*: No role for either in macrophage listericidal activity. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 3869–3875 (2002).

23. Henneke, P. *et al.* Cellular activation, phagocytosis, and bactericidal activity against group B streptococcus involve parallel myeloid differentiation factor 88-dependent and independent signaling pathways. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 3970–3977 (2002).

24. Muraille, E. *et al.* Genetically resistant mice lacking MyD88-adapter protein display a high susceptibility to *Leishmania major* infection associated with a polarized Th2 response. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 4237–4241 (2003).

25. Walker, W. E. *et al.* Absence of innate MyD88 signaling promotes inducible allograft acceptance. *J. Immunol.* **177**, 5307–5316 (2006).

26. Piggott, D. A. *et al.* MyD88-dependent induction of allergic Th2 responses to intranasal antigen. *J. Clin. Invest.* **115**, 459–467 (2005).

27. Adachi, O. *et al.* Targeted disruption of the MyD88 gene results in loss of IL-1- and IL-18-mediated function. *Immunity* **9**, 143–150 (1998).

28. Burns, K. *et al.* Inhibition of interleukin 1 receptor/Toll-like receptor signaling through the alternatively spliced, short form of MyD88 is due to its failure to recruit IRAK-4. *J. Exp. Med.* **197**, 263–268 (2003).

29. Janssens, S., Burns, K., Vercammen, E., Tschopp, J. & Beyaert, R. MyD88s, a splice variant of MyD88, differentially modulates NF-κB- and AP-1-dependent gene expression. *FEBS Lett.* **548**, 103–107 (2003).

30. Kobayashi, K. *et al.* IRAK-M is a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor signaling. *Cell* **110**, 191–202 (2002).

31. Chen, Z. J. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-κB pathway. *Nature Cell Biol.* **7**, 758–765 (2005).

32. Jiang, Z. *et al.* CD14 is required for MyD88-independent LPS signaling. *Nature Immunol.* **6**, 565–570 (2005).

33. Honda, K. *et al.* Role of a transductional-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 15416–15421 (2004).

34. Kawai, T. *et al.* Interferon-α induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 1061–1068 (2004). This paper expanded the function of MyD88 from activation of NF-κB to another transcription factor, IRF7. MyD88 was shown to occur in a complex with IRF7 and IRAK1.

35. Honda, K. *et al.* Spatiotemporal regulation of MyD88–IRF7 signalling for robust type-I interferon induction. *Nature* **434**, 1035–1040 (2005).

36. Hochrein, H. *et al.* Herpes simplex virus type-1 induces IFN-α production via Toll-like receptor 9-dependent and-independent pathways. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 11416–11421 (2004).

37. Uematsu, S. *et al.* Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-1 plays an essential role for Toll-like receptor (TLR)7- and TLR9-mediated interferon-α induction. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 915–923 (2005).

38. Takaoka, A. *et al.* Integral role of IRF-5 in the gene induction programme activated by Toll-like receptors. *Nature* **434**, 243–249 (2005).

39. Negishi, H. *et al.* Evidence for licensing of IFN-γ-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 transcription factor by MyD88 in Toll-like receptor-dependent gene induction program. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 15136–15141 (2006).

40. Sun, D. & Ding, A. MyD88-mediated stabilization of interferon-γ-induced cytokine and chemokine mRNA. *Nature Immunol.* **7**, 375–381 (2006). A role for MyD88, independent of TLR signalling, is reported here. MyD88 is shown to be recruited by the IFNγ receptor to the plasma membrane, where it signals for chemokine production.

41. Ma, Y. *et al.* Fas ligation on macrophages enhances IL-1R1–Toll-like receptor 4 signaling and promotes chronic inflammation. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 380–387 (2004).

42. Brint, E. K. *et al.* ST2 is an inhibitor of interleukin 1 receptor and Toll-like receptor 4 signaling and maintains endotoxin tolerance. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 373–379 (2004).

43. Naiki, Y. *et al.* Transforming growth factor-β differentially inhibits MyD88-dependent, but not TRAM- and TRIF-dependent, lipopolysaccharide-induced TLR4 signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 5491–5495 (2005).

44. Hacker, H. *et al.* Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. *Nature* **439**, 204–207 (2006).

45. Oganesyan, G. *et al.* Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and-independent antiviral response. *Nature* **439**, 208–211 (2006).

46. Covert, M. W., Leung, T. H., Gaston, J. E. & Baltimore, D. Achieving stability of lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-κB activation. *Science* **309**, 1854–1857 (2005).

47. Werner, S. L., Barken, D. & Hoffmann, A. Stimulus specificity of gene expression programs determined by temporal control of IKK activity. *Science* **309**, 1857–1861 (2005). References 46 and 47 report the modelling of NF-κB activation by LPS. Two waves of activation occur — an early wave activated by MyD88, and a later wave activated by TRIF, which is required for autocrine TNF production, leading to the later NF-κB activation. These two responses stabilize the activation process.

48. Xu, Y. *et al.* Structural basis for signal transduction by the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domains. *Nature* **408**, 111–115 (2000). This was the first report of a crystal structure for a TIR domain and as such paved the way for most of our current understanding about how TIR adaptors associate during signalling.

49. Dunne, A., Edelback, M., Ludidi, P. L., O'Neill, L. A. J. & Gay, N. J. Structural complementarity of Toll/interleukin 1 receptor identity regions in Toll-like receptors and the adaptors Mal and MyD88. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 41443–41451 (2003).

50. Gautam, J. K., Ashish, Comeau, L. D., Krueger, J. K. & Smith, M. F. Jr. Structural and functional evidence for the role of the TLR2 DD loop in TLR1/TLR2 heterodimerization and signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 30132–30142 (2006).

51. Toshchakov, V. U., Basu, S., Fenton, M. J. & Vogel, S. N. Differential involvement of BB loops of Toll–IL-1 resistance (TIR) domain-containing adapter proteins in TLR4- versus TLR2-mediated signal transduction. *J Immunol* **175**, 494–500 (2005).

52. Bartfai, T. *et al.* A low molecular weight mimic of the Toll/IL-1 receptor/resistance domain inhibits IL-1 receptor-mediated responses. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 7971–7976 (2003).

53. Jiang, Z. *et al.* Details of Toll-like receptor:adapter interaction revealed by germ-line mutagenesis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 10961–10966 (2006). This paper reports how germ-line mutagenesis uncovered a mutant form of MyD88 that was unable to signal in response to all TLRs, with the exception of TLR2–TLR6 dimers, pointing to specificity in the structural requirements of MyD88 recruitment by TLRs.

54. Horng, T., Barton, G. M. & Medzhitov, R. TIRAP: An adapter molecule in the Toll signaling pathway. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 835–841 (2001).

55. Fitzgerald, K. A. *et al.* Mal (myd88-adaptor-like) is required for Toll-like receptor-4 signal transduction. *Nature* **413**, 78–83 (2001).

56. Horng, T., Barton, G. M., Flavell, R. A. & Medzhitov, R. The adaptor molecule TIRAP provides signalling specificity for toll-like receptors. *Nature* **420**, 329–333 (2002).

57. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Essential role for TIRAP in activation of the signalling cascade shared by TLR2 and TLR4. *Nature* **420**, 324–329 (2002).

58. Kagan, J. C. & Medzhitov, R. Phosphoinositide-mediated adaptor recruitment controls Toll-like receptor signaling. *Cell* **125**, 943–955 (2006). MAL is shown to contain a PtdIns(4,5)P₂-binding domain, which localizes MAL to membrane microdomains, where it acts to recruit MyD88 to the TLR4 signalling complex.

59. Jeyaseelan, S. *et al.* Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor protein is critical for early lung immune responses against *Escherichia coli* lipopolysaccharide and viable *Escherichia coli*. *J. Immunol.* **175**, 7484–7495 (2005).

60. Jeyaseelan, S. *et al.* Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adaptor protein (TIRAP) is a critical mediator of antibacterial defense in the lung against *Klebsiella pneumoniae* but not *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J. Immunol.* **177**, 538–547 (2006).

61. Togbe, D. *et al.* Nonredundant roles of TIRAP and MyD88 in airway response to endotoxin, independent of TRIF, IL-1 and IL-18 pathways. *Lab. Invest.* **86**, 1126–1135 (2006).

62. Sakata, Y. *et al.* Toll-like receptor 2 modulates left ventricular function following ischemia-reperfusion injury. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* **292**, H503–H509 (2006).

63. Mansell, A., Brint, E., Gould, J. A., O'Neill, L. A. & Hertzog, P. J. Mal interacts with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF)-6 to mediate NF-κB activation by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2 and TLR4. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 37227–37230 (2004).

64. Jefferies, C. A. *et al.* Bruton's tyrosine kinase is a Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-binding protein that participates in nuclear factor κB activation by Toll-like receptor 4. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 26258–26264 (2003).

65. Liljeroos, M. *et al.* Bruton's tyrosine kinase together with PI3-kinase are part of Toll-like receptor 2 multiprotein complex and mediate LTA induced Toll-like receptor 2 responses in macrophages. *Cell. Signal.* **19**, 625–633 (2006).

66. Gray, P. *et al.* MyD88 adapter-like (MAL) is phosphorylated by Bruton's tyrosine kinase during TLR2 and TLR4 signal transduction. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 10489–10495 (2006).

67. Doyle, S. L., Jefferies, C. A. & O'Neill, L. A. Bruton's tyrosine kinase is involved in p65-mediated transactivation and phosphorylation of p65 on serine 536 during NFκB activation by lipopolysaccharide. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 23496–23501 (2005).

68. Mansell, A. *et al.* Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 negatively regulates Toll-like receptor signaling by mediating mal degradation. *Nature Immunol.* **7**, 148–155 (2006).

69. Nakagawa, R. *et al.* SOCS-1 participates in negative regulation of LPS responses. *Immunity* **17**, 677–687 (2002).

70. Kinjyo, I. *et al.* SOCS1/JAB is a negative regulator of LPS-induced macrophage activation. *Immunity* **17**, 583–591 (2002).

71. Sochorova, K. *et al.* Impaired Toll-like receptor 8-mediated IL-6 and TNF-α production in antigen presenting cells from patients with X-linked agammaglobulinaemia. *Blood*, 7 November 2006 (doi:10.1182/blood-2006-07-037960).

72. Miggin, S. M. *et al.* NF-κB activation by the Toll–IL-1 receptor domain protein MyD88 adapter-like is regulated by caspase-1. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 3372–3377 (2007).

73. Khor, C. C. *et al.* A Mal functional variant is associated with protection against invasive pneumococcal disease, bacteremia, malaria and tuberculosis. *Nature Genet.* 25 February 2007 (doi:10.1038/ng1976).

74. Hawn, T. R. *et al.* A polymorphism in Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain containing adaptor protein is associated with susceptibility to meningeal tuberculosis. *J. Infect. Dis.* **194**, 1127–1134 (2006).

75. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Cutting edge: A novel Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the IFN-β promoter in the Toll-like receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 6668–6672 (2002).

76. Oshiumi, H., Matsumoto, M., Funami, K., Akazawa, T. & Seya, T. TICAM-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in Toll-like receptor 3-mediated interferon-β induction. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 161–167 (2003).

77. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent Toll-like receptor signaling pathway. *Science* **310**, 640–643 (2003).

78. Hirotani, T. *et al.* Regulation of lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes by MyD88 and Toll/IL-1 domain containing adaptor inducing IFN-β. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **328**, 383–392 (2005).

79. Hoebe, K. *et al.* Identification of *Lps2* as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling. *Nature* **424**, 743–748 (2003).

80. Tabetta, K. *et al.* Toll-like receptors 9 and 3 as essential components of innate immune defense against mouse cytomegalovirus infection. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 3516–3521 (2004).

81. Fitzgerald, K. A. *et al.* LPS–TLR4 signaling to IRF-3/7 and NF-κB involves the Toll adapters TRAM and TRIF. *J. Exp. Med.* **198**, 1043–1055 (2003).

82. Hoebe, K. *et al.* Upregulation of costimulatory molecules induced by lipopolysaccharide and double-stranded RNA occurs by TRIF-dependent and TRIF-independent pathways. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 1223–1229 (2003).

83. Sato, S. *et al.* Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-β (TRIF) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and tank-binding kinase 1, and activates two distinct transcription factors, NF-κB and IFN-regulatory factor-3, in the Toll-like receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **171**, 4304–4310 (2003).

REVIEWS

84. McWhirter, S. M. *et al.* IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent gene expression is defective in TBK1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 233–238 (2004).

85. Sasai, M. *et al.* NF-κB-activating kinase-associated protein 1 participates in TLR3/Toll-IL-1 homology domain-containing adapter molecule-1-mediated IFN regulatory factor 3 activation. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 27–30 (2005).

86. Jiang, Z., Mak, T. W., Sen, G. & Li, X. Toll-like receptor 3-mediated activation of NF-κB and IRF3 diverges at Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-β (TRIF)-dependent pathway in TLR signaling. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 2913–2917 (2004).

87. Gohda, J., Matsumura, T. & Inoue, J.-i. Cutting edge: TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 6 is essential for MyD88-dependent pathway but not Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-β (TRIF)-dependent pathway in TLR signaling. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 2913–2917 (2004).

88. Meylan, E. *et al.* RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-κB activation. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 503–507 (2004).

89. Cusson-Hermance, N., Khurana, S., Lee, T. H., Fitzgerald, K. A. & Kelliher, M. A. RIP1 mediates the TRIF-dependent Toll-like receptor 3- and 4-induced NF-κB activation but does not contribute to interferon regulatory factor 3 activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 36560–36566 (2005).

90. Wietek, C., Miggin, S. M., Jefferies, C. A. & O’Neill, L. A. J. Interferon regulatory factor-3-mediated activation of the interferon-sensitive response element by Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 but not TLR3 requires the p65 subunit of NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 50923–50931 (2003).

91. Kaiser, W. J. & Offermann, M. K. Apoptosis induced by the Toll-like receptor adaptor TRIF is dependent on its receptor interacting protein homotypic interaction motif. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 4942–4952 (2005).

92. Han, K.-J. *et al.* Mechanisms of the TRIF-induced interferon-stimulated response element and NF-κB activation and apoptosis pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 15652–15661 (2004).

93. Ruckdeschel, K. *et al.* Signaling of apoptosis through TLRs critically involves Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-β, but not MyD88, in bacteria-infected murine macrophages. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 3320–3328 (2004).

94. De Trez, C. *et al.* TLR4 and Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-β, but not MyD88, regulate *Escherichia coli*-induced dendritic cell maturation and apoptosis *in vivo*. *J. Immunol.* **175**, 839–846 (2005).

95. Kamon, H. *et al.* TRIF–GEFH1–RhoB pathway is involved in MHCII expression on dendritic cells

96. Su, X. *et al.* TNF receptor-associated factor-1 (TRAF1) negatively regulates Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-β (TRIF)-mediated signaling. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **36**, 199–206 (2006).

97. Boone, D. L. *et al.* The ubiquitin-modifying enzyme A20 is required for termination of Toll-like receptor responses. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 1052–1060 (2004).

98. Huang, J. *et al.* SIKE is an IKKε/TBK1-associated suppressor of TLR3- and virus-triggered IRF-3 activation pathways. *EMBO J.* **24**, 4018–4028 (2005).

99. Saitoh, T. *et al.* Negative regulation of interferon-regulatory factor 3-dependent innate antiviral response by the prolyl isomerase Pin1. *Nature Immunol.* **7**, 598–605 (2006).

100. Aksoy, E. *et al.* Inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhances TRIF-dependent NF-κB activation and IFN-β synthesis downstream of Toll-like receptor 3 and 4. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **35**, 2200–2209 (2005).

101. An, H. *et al.* SHP-2 phosphatase negatively regulates the TRIF adaptor protein-dependent type I interferon and proinflammatory cytokine production. *Immunity* **25**, 919–928 (2006).

102. Stack, J. *et al.* Vaccinia virus protein A46R targets multiple Toll-like-interleukin-1 receptor adaptors and contributes to virulence. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 1007–1018 (2005).

103. Harte, M. T. *et al.* The poxvirus protein A52R targets Toll-like receptor signaling complexes to suppress host defense. *J. Exp. Med.* **197**, 343–351 (2003).

104. Li, K. *et al.* Immune evasion by hepatitis C virus NS3/4a protease-mediated cleavage of the Toll-like receptor 3 adaptor protein TRIF. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 2992–2997 (2005).

105. Li, X.-D., Sun, L., Seth, R. B., Pineda, G. & Chen, Z. J. From the cover: Hepatitis C virus protease N3/4a cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein off the mitochondria to evade innate immunity. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 17717–17722 (2005).

106. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* TRAM is specifically involved in the Toll-like receptor 4-mediated MyD88-independent signaling pathway. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 1144–1150 (2003).

107. Oshiumi, H. *et al.* TIR-containing adapter molecule (TICAM)-2, a bridging adapter recruiting to Toll-like receptor 4 TICAM-1 that induces interferon-β. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 49751–49762 (2003).

108. Rowe, D. C. *et al.* The myristoylation of TRIF-related adaptor molecule is essential for toll-like receptor 4 signal transduction. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 6299–6304 (2006).

109. McGirrick, A. F. *et al.* TRIF-related adapter molecule is phosphorylated by PKCε during Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 9196–9201 (2006). This paper describes the targeting of TRAM by PKCε in TLR4 signaling. This process is required for LPS action, and TRAM may be the key target for PKCε in macrophages during activation with LPS.

110. Castrillo, A. *et al.* Protein kinase Cε is required for macrophage activation and defense against bacterial infection. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 1231–1242 (2001).

111. Mink, M., Fogelgren, B., Olszewski, K., Maroy, P. & Csizsar, K. A novel human gene (SARM) at chromosome 17q11 encodes a protein with a SAM motif and structural similarity to armadillo/β-catenin that is conserved in mouse, *Drosophila*, and *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Genomics* **74**, 234–244 (2001).

112. Kim, C. A. & Bowie, J. U. Sam domains: Uniform structure, diversity of function. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **28**, 625–628 (2003).

113. Couillault, C. *et al.* TLR-independent control of innate immunity in *Caenorhabditis elegans* by the TIR domain adaptor protein TIR-1, an ortholog of human SARM. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 488–494 (2004).

114. Liberati, N. T. *et al.* Requirement for a conserved Toll/interleukin-1 resistance domain protein in the *Caenorhabditis elegans* immune response. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 6593–6598 (2004).

115. Chuang, C. F. & Bargmann, C. I. A Toll-interleukin 1 repeat protein at the synapse specifies asymmetric odorant receptor expression via ASK1 MAPKKK signaling. *Genes Dev.* **19**, 270–281 (2005).

Acknowledgements  
We thank Science Foundation Ireland, the Irish Research Council of Science, Engineering and Technology, and the Health Research Board of Ireland for providing financial support for the research programmes in our laboratories.

Competing interests statement  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to: Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene MAL | MyD88 | SARM | TRAM | TRIF

FURTHER INFORMATION  
Luke A. J. O’Neill’s homepage: http://www.tcd.ie/Biochemistry/research/l_o_neill.php Andrew G. Bowie’s homepage: http://www.tcd.ie/Biochemistry/research/a_bowie.php Access to this links box is available online.
