
Abnormal Lipid and Glucose Metabolism in Obesity: Implications for Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease

SAMIR PAREKH and FRANK A. ANANIA

Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, Atlanta, Georgia

Frank Anania, MD,  
FACP, AGAF

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease represents a spectrum of histopathologic abnormalities, the prevalence of which may be as high as 24% of the population of the United States. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease will play a major role in the science and practice of gastroenterology in the near future. The fundamental derangement in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is insulin resistance, a key component of the metabolic syndrome, which includes type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertriglyceridemia, essential hypertension, low circulating high-density lipoprotein, and obesity. The natural history of fatty liver disease is not always benign, and causality for cirrhosis and chronic liver disease is well-founded in the literature. Treatment strategies are limited and, at present, are primarily focused on weight loss and use of insulin sensitizing agents, including the thiazolidenediones. Recent data clearly implicate hepatic insulin resistance as a culprit in accumulation of free fatty acids as triglycerides in hepatocytes. Hepatic insulin resistance is clearly exacerbated by systemic insulin resistance and impaired handling by skeletal muscle and adipose tissue of both glucose and free fatty acids. The key consequence of hepatic insulin resistance, impaired hepatocyte insulin signal transduction, results in adverse cellular and molecular changes exacerbating hepatocyte triglyceride storage. Cytokines secreted by white adipose tissue, adipokines, have emerged as key players in glucose and fat metabolism previously thought controlled largely by insulin. Modulation of adipokines may aid in further understanding of the pathophysiology and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) represents a wide spectrum of disorders, the hallmark of which is hepatic steatosis. NAFLD was thought to be a benign condition but is now increasingly recognized as a major cause of liver-related morbidity and mortality. The disease encompasses not only simple steatosis but also includes nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), advanced fibrosis, and cirrhosis. The histopathology of NAFLD has a striking resemblance to alcohol-related liver disease but occurs in the absence of significant alcohol consumption. Recent basic and epidemiologic data reveal that the spectrum of NAFLD is closely associated with obesity, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia, a constellation of clinical problems that arise from insulin resistance. This review has 2 components: one is a clinical review of NAFLD and how treatment of obesity can improve this lesion. The second component is a contemporary approach to hepatic insulin resistance.

## Epidemiology of NAFLD

The true prevalence of NAFLD remains unknown. Difficulties in assessing NAFLD prevalence include the absence of signs and symptoms, the poor sensitivity of liver enzymes to indicate disease, and the disputed need for histopathology (and liver biopsy) as a gold standard for diagnosis. When taken together, these barriers may lead to underdiagnosis of NAFLD. Depending on which specific diagnostic criteria are used, the prevalence of NAFLD is estimated to range between 10% and 24% of the general population. Variability arises from country to country, with a trend toward higher disease burden in developed countries. In the United States, the prevalence

---

**Abbreviations used in this paper:** AMP, adenosine monophosphate; ApoB-100, apolipoprotein B-100; BMI, body mass index; DM, diabetes mellitus; DNP, mitochondrial uncoupler 2, 4-dinitrophenol; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FFAs, free fatty acids; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IRS, insulin receptor substrate; JNK, c-jun N-terminal kinase; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ; PERK, pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum-like kinase; SREBP-1, sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1; SREPP-1c, sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c; Tzd, thiazolidenediones; UCP-2, uncoupling protein 2; VLDL, very-low-density lipoproteins; WAT, white adipose tissue; ACRP30, adiponectin; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase.

© 2007 by the AGA Institute  
0016-5085/07/\$32.00  
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2007.03.055
of NAFLD is estimated to be 20% and those patients with NASH to be 2% to 3%,²⁻⁴ a substantially greater prevalence than chronic hepatitis C infection, which is approximately 1.8%⁵ in the United States. These statistics underscore the pressing importance of NAFLD in digestive health. NAFLD is the cause of asymptomatic elevation of aminotransferases in 42%-90% of cases when other known causes of liver disease are excluded.⁶ Furthermore, NAFLD is becoming an important concern to pediatricians, affecting 2.6% of children and 22.5% to 52.8% of obese children.⁷,⁸

Initial prevalence studies indicated that NAFLD was most common in middle-aged white women⁹⁻¹¹; however, subsequent population-based studies indicate that NAFLD is probably more common in men and in those of Hispanic ethnicity compared with non-Hispanic white or non-Hispanic black ethnicity.³,¹² Several studies, including the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III (NHANES III), suggest a lower prevalence of NAFLD in African Americans.¹³⁻¹⁶ Little population-based data are available regarding the change in prevalence of NAFLD with time; however, it is assumed that NAFLD will parallel the growing prevalence of the metabolic syndrome, a condition closely linked to NAFLD.

### The Metabolic Syndrome and NAFLD

According to the Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III [ATP III]), the metabolic syndrome is defined as the presence of 3 or more of the following: (1) increased waist circumference, (2) hypertriglyceridemia, (3) hypertension, (4) high fasting glucose, and (5) low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) level.¹⁶ Insulin resistance is the pathogenic denominator that links all components of the metabolic syndrome. Insulin resistance is now recognized as the most common risk factor for the development of NAFLD, and steatosis may simply characterize the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome. A recent study demonstrated that patients with metabolic syndrome have a 4- to 11-fold higher risk of developing NAFLD.¹⁷ The prevalence of metabolic syndrome in 304 consecutive NAFLD patients without overt diabetes was found to be 18% in normal weight persons but increased sharply to 67% in obese persons.¹⁸

The reported prevalence of obesity in patients with NAFLD also varies widely between 30% and 100% in published reports.¹ In those obese individuals with a body mass index (BMI, kg/m²) of at least 30, the prevalence of NAFLD increases by a factor of 4.6.¹⁹ The presence of NASH has clearly been linked to increasing weight, occurring in 3% of the lean population, 19% of the obese population, and nearly half of the morbidly obese population.²⁰,²¹ Distribution of fat may also play an important role in the development of NAFLD because

truncal obesity has been associated with NAFLD even in patients with normal BMI.²²

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) associated with NAFLD ranges from 10% to 75%.¹ A recent Japanese study found that the prevalence of NAFLD by ultrasonography rose from 27% among those with normal fasting blood glucose to 43% among those with fasting hyperglycemia and to 62% among patients with type 2 DM.²³ Importantly, type 2 DM is not only associated with NAFLD but may be a risk factor for development of progressive fibrosis. The prevalence of hyperlipidemia associated with NAFLD varies from 20% to 92%, where hypertriglyceridemia rather than hypercholesterolemia appears to be the major risk factor in this association.²²,²⁴ In keeping with the criteria of the metabolic syndrome, low HDL levels are also frequently observed in patients with NAFLD.¹²,¹⁸ The importance of hypertension in NAFLD has long been questioned. A recent study examining nonobese, nondiabetic patients with normal liver enzymes and arterial hypertension found a significantly higher prevalence of NAFLD (30.9% vs 12.7%) compared to age- and sex-matched controls not having hypertension.²⁵ Regression analyses suggest that the association between hypertension and hepatic steatosis is also mediated by increased insulin resistance.

#### Clinical Features and Diagnosis of NAFLD

NAFLD is a diagnosis of exclusion that requires the proper context of historical and supporting clinical features including laboratory, imaging, and histologic findings. Because many findings are indistinguishable when compared with alcoholic liver disease, the current definition of NAFLD requires the absence of significant alcohol consumption. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) clinical research network on NAFLD/NASH has defined the maximum allowable level of alcohol intake for NAFLD to be 2 standard drinks per day (140-g ethanol/week) for men and 1 standard drink per day (70-g ethanol/week) for women.

Most patients presenting with a new diagnosis of NAFLD are asymptomatic.² Of those who do have symptoms, fatigue, malaise, and right upper quadrant discomfort are the most common complaints. In the absence of cirrhosis, hepatomegaly is the only physical finding in most patients, reported in up to 75% of cases. Laboratory testing reveals a pattern of hepatocellular injury with mild to moderate elevations in liver transaminases (<5× the upper limit of normal); however, aminotransferases may fluctuate, with normal levels present in 78% of patients at any one time.²⁶,²⁷ Unlike alcohol-related liver disease, the aspartate to alanine aminotransferase ratio is usually less than 1 in NAFLD; however, diagnostic accuracy is lost in patients with cirrhosis because the ratio increases as fibrosis advances.²⁸
Imaging studies play an important role in diagnosing NAFLD. Ultrasonography produces a diffuse increase in echogenicity of the liver when fatty infiltration is present. Ultrasound is the least costly and invasive imaging modality for evaluating NAFLD, with a sensitivity of 60% to 94% and specificity of 88% to 95%.²⁹ With lesser degrees of fatty infiltration, the sensitivity of ultrasound decreases. In the presence of ≥30% fatty infiltration, ultrasound has a sensitivity of 80% compared with a sensitivity of 55% when hepatic content is 10% to 19%.³⁰ Patient body habitus is also an important consideration, with the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound in morbidly obese patients dropping to 49% and 75%, respectively.³¹ With computed tomography, hepatic fatty infiltration has a low attenuation, and the amount of fat can be estimated by comparing liver density with spleen or paraspinal density. The sensitivity of detecting hepatic steatosis by computed tomography may be as high as 93% with a positive predictive value of 76%.³² These data are comparable, however, to the ultrasound, which is less costly. Magnetic resonance imaging utilizes differences in the precession frequency between water and fat protons in opposed-phase images to diagnose hepatic steatosis and may allow for a quantitative assessment of fatty infiltration within the liver. Magnetic resonance imaging appears to be the most sensitive modality for detecting steatosis but is also the most expensive.³³ In general, the shortcomings with all 3 radiographic techniques are that they cannot distinguish (1) benign steatosis from steatohepatitis, (2) severity of inflammation or grade, and (3) degree of fibrosis or stage of disease. Clearly, biomarkers to assess adequately such important questions should be forthcoming.

Liver biopsy is the only available means to accurately grade and stage NAFLD with certainty. Histologic features of NAFLD include steatosis, mixed inflammatory cell infiltrates, hepatocyte balloon degeneration, necrosis, glycogen nuclei, Mallory’s hyaline, and fibrosis. The value of liver biopsy in establishing the diagnosis of NAFLD in routine clinical practice remains controversial. Opponents argue that although the prevalence of NAFLD in the general population appears to be relatively high, only a very small percentage of patients will have NASH. Thus, most patients will have steatosis alone, generally portending a favorable prognosis. Furthermore, there are currently no approved therapies for NAFLD, and, therefore, management is unlikely to change based on histologic findings. Advocates of liver biopsy argue that histology provides prognostic information and diagnostic confirmation of NAFLD. A recent study revealed that at least one third of patients suspected of having NAFLD on clinical grounds were found to have an alternative diagnosis based on liver biopsy results.³⁴ At present, the decision to perform liver biopsy cannot be advocated as standard of care for all patients; however, practitioners must evaluate the need for liver biopsy in patients with NAFLD on a case-by-case basis.

# Natural History of NAFLD

Although the prevalence of NAFLD is approximately 20%, best estimates indicate that only 2% to 3% of all adults in the United States have NASH.³⁵ Of those individuals with NASH, approximately 20% will go on to develop cirrhosis.³⁶ Historically, the etiology of cirrhosis for many patients has been undetermined and labeled cryptogenic. It is likely that a significant proportion of patients diagnosed with cryptogenic cirrhosis truly had NASH as the etiology and that, at presentation, liver biopsy demonstrates “burned out” cirrhotic histology. This is supported by studies indicating an overrepresentation of metabolic syndrome features in patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis.²⁴,³⁷ Compared to age- and sex-matched controls, the prevalence of obesity and diabetes was significantly higher in patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis awaiting liver transplantation.²⁴ Furthermore, NASH may occur following liver transplantation for cryptogenic cirrhosis as it does in patients with known NASH.³⁸,³⁹

Thirty percent to 40% of NASH-related cirrhosis patients receive a liver transplant or die of liver disease-related complications.³⁵ In Olmstead County, Minnesota, survival for patients with NAFLD was less than that for the age- and sex-matched general population, and liver disease was the third leading cause of death compared with the thirteenth in the general population.⁴⁰ It is estimated that 10% to 12% of liver transplantations are now performed because of liver disease caused by NASH.³⁵

Importantly, hepatocellular carcinoma is now recognized as a serious potential complication of NAFLD.⁴¹⁻⁴⁴ In 150 consecutive patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, cryptogenic cirrhosis accounted for 29% of cases, with half of the patients having histologic or clinical features of NAFLD.⁶⁵ Diabetes also appears to be an independent risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma,⁴⁶ and chronic hyperinsulinemia as the carcinogenic stimulus has been suggested.⁴²,⁴³,⁴⁷

The ability to predict which patients with NAFLD are at greatest risk for progression to cirrhosis and its complications is an important element of optimizing patient care. Progression of fibrosis has been demonstrated histologically in 32% to 37% of patients, but histologic regression may occur in 18% to 29%.⁴⁸⁻⁵⁰ The primary determinant of liver disease progression seems to be the severity of histologic damage (Figure 1). Patients with pure steatosis on liver biopsy appear to have nonprogressive liver disease and a benign course⁵⁰,⁵¹ (Figure 1A, 1B, and 2), whereas features of steatohepatitis or more advanced fibrosis are associated with a worse prognosis over time (Figure 1C, 1D, and 2). The presence of obesity and diabetes are also predictive of advanced fibrosis. Among

NAFLD Disease Progression
Types of non-alcoholic fatty liver

**A** Fat alone  
Type I  

**B** Fat alone ± inflammation  
Type II  

**C** Fat alone ± inflammation ±  
ballooning degeneration ±  
Mallory Bodies  
Type III  

**D** Fibrosis  
Type IV  

Figure 1. (A) Steatosis: the presence of triglyceride stores in hepatocytes indicated by arrows; (B) polymorpho-nuclear leukocyte (PMN) infiltration, which may lead to inflammation and steatohepatitis; (C) ongoing hepatocyte injury, ballooning, and loss of steatosis indicating significant damage; (D) the presence of pericellular and pericentral fibrosis indicate an aggressive steatohepatitis that is more likely to progress to cirrhosis. Original magnification, ×200. Figure part D printed with permission.

severely obese patients with diabetes, 100% were found to have steatosis, 50% had steatohepatitis, and 19% had cirrhosis. Age appears to be another critical factor, with significant fibrosis present in only 4% of NASH patients under the age of 45 years compared with 40% in those older than 45 years.

### Therapy for NAFLD

Despite the rapidly growing recognition of NAFLD over the past decade, therapy directed at treating or preventing the disease remains limited. To date, no large reliable clinical trials have demonstrated efficacy in altering the natural history of NAFLD. Based on current understanding of the pathogenesis of NAFLD, investigational therapy has been targeted at reducing intrahepatic oxidant stresses and improving insulin resistance. This review will focus on weight reduction as a means of improving insulin resistance.

Given the high prevalence of obesity in NAFLD patients, improving insulin resistance through weight loss remains the cornerstone of therapy for NAFLD. The rate and degree of weight loss play an important role in patient safety. Rapid weight loss with fasting or very low caloric diets or following aggressive jejuno-ileal or gastric bypass surgery may decrease hepatic fat content but can induce hepatic inflammation and exacerbate NASH. Therefore, moderate, gradual weight loss is the goal of therapy. Weight loss can be achieved through multiple approaches, including life style modification, pharmacologic treatment, and bariatric surgery.

---

### Weight Loss Through Life Style Modification

Life style modification and weight loss through reduced caloric intake and increased physical activity have been shown to improve insulin resistance. It is reasonable to assume that such modifications would also improve parameters of NAFLD; however, the efficacy of this approach remains to be established. Several small trials and case series have shown that moderate (~10%), sustained, and gradual weight loss may lead to an improvement.

---

### Natural History Of NAFLD

#### Benign Course
- **Fat alone**
- **NAFL**
- **Fat alone ± inflammation**

#### Aggressive Course
- **Fat alone ± inflammation ± ballooning degeneration**
- **NASH**
- **Fat alone ± fibrosis ± Mallory Bodies**

Up to 23% may progress to cirrhosis; 5% risk of hepatocellular carcinoma

---

### Figure 2

The present histopathologic understanding of the spectrum of liver disease and that NASH is the most severe form of this spectrum. (Matteoni CA, Younossi ZM, Marchesini G, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a spectrum of clinical and pathologic severity. Gastroenterology 1999;116:1413–1419). As has been pointed out previously, the significance of the histologic lesions as categorized may predict clinical outcome (McCullough AJ. Pathophysiology of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2006;40:S17–S29.)

provement in liver biochemistries.⁵⁸ Only one published study, however, has documented histology as an end point, demonstrating a significant decrease in steatosis with life style modification as an intervention.⁵⁹ In this study, no change in fibrosis or inflammation was found, but this was likely limited by the short 3-month duration of the study. To date, there are no randomized controlled clinical trials related to life style modification as a treatment for NAFLD. The American Gastroenterology Association Medical Position Statement on NAFLD in 2002 highlighted this fact but also noted, “Despite the absence of randomized studies, obese subjects with NAFLD require weight management because of the benefits of weight loss on their cardiovascular risk profile.”⁶⁰

### Weight Loss Through Pharmacotherapy

Despite concerted efforts at weight loss through life style modifications, some patients are unsuccessful, and, therefore, clinicians must be familiar with adjunctive means to weight loss. Pharmacologic options for obesity have decreased over the recent years because of the severe cardiopulmonary adverse effects of fenfluramines; however, 2 drugs remain Food and Drug Administration approved for weight loss: orlistat (Xenical) and sibutramine (Meridia).

Orlistat inhibits gastric and pancreatic lipase, thereby reducing dietary fat absorption by approximately 30%.⁶² Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated improved modest weight loss (4–8 lb) over a 1-year period with orlistat when compared to dietary treatment alone. In addition to weight loss, treatment with orlistat has also resulted in significant reduction in blood pressure, cholesterol, and fasting serum insulin and glucose levels. Use of orlistat for the treatment of NAFLD has been investigated in small case series and pilot studies.⁶³⁻⁶⁵ Although limited by study design (nonrandomized, no placebo control groups, and short duration [6 months]), these studies achieved significant weight reduction, averaging 22–31 lb. In general, liver enzymes, hepatic fat on ultrasound, and liver histology improved. Three times daily administration and common adverse effects including dyspepsia, bloating, diarrhea, steatorrhea, and decreased absorption of fat-soluble vitamins may limit the use of orlistat in clinical practice.

An alternative pharmacologic treatment for weight loss is sibutramine, which is both a serotonergic and noradrenergic reuptake inhibitor that acts to enhance satiety. In randomized placebo-controlled studies, sibutramine achieved modest weight loss (6–12 lb) at 1 year with a favorable safety profile.⁶⁶,⁶⁷ Adverse effects of sibutramine include mild increases in diastolic blood pressure (+2 mm Hg), as well as dry mouth, headache, insomnia, and constipation. Improvement in metabolic factors has been demonstrated with sibutramine-induced weight reduction, including plasma insulin levels in patients with type 2 DM, suggesting that sibutramine has utility in the treatment of NAFLD.⁶⁸,⁶⁹ Thus far, only one study with NAFLD as a direct indication for the use of sibutramine has been published.⁷⁰ This study is nonrandomized, with 2 arms comparing sibutramine against orlistat in 25 overweight or obese NAFLD patients. End points achieved with sibutramine included weight loss, improvement in liver enzymes, and reduction in steatosis by ultrasound (in 11 of 13 patients; 85%). The findings were similar in the orlistat arm; however, a statistical comparison between the 2 treatment arms was, unfortunately, not reported.

### Weight Loss Through Bariatric Surgery

For those obese patients who fail to lose weight with life style modification, bariatric surgery may be a consideration. Candidates for bariatric surgery must have a BMI of at least 40 or a BMI of at least 35 with significant obesity-related disease, according to the 1991 NIH consensus guidelines.⁷¹ Bariatric procedures are classified according to their respective mechanism of action and include restrictive and malabsorptive procedures; the details of bariatric surgery are covered elsewhere in this supplemental issue.

Weight loss after bariatric surgery is typically expressed as the percentage of excess weight lost defined as the number of pounds above the patient’s ideal body weight. In a recent meta-analysis, the mean percentage of excess weight loss was 61% for all bariatric procedures combined. Analyzed by procedure, excess weight loss was greatest after biliopancreatic diversion (70%), followed by gastroplasty (68%), gastric bypass (62%), and gastric banding (48%).⁷² Thirty-day operative mortality was 1.1% for biliopancreatic diversion, 0.5% for gastric bypass, and 1% for restrictive procedures. Components of the metabolic syndrome were markedly improved, including resolution of type 2 DM in 77% of patients, improvement of cholesterol (total and low-density lipoprotein [LDL]) and triglycerides in 70% of patients, and resolution of hypertension in 62% of patients. In another study that included 645 severely obese patients undergoing laparoscopic vertical band gastroplasty or laparoscopic gastric bypass, 52% of patients met the ATPIII definition of the metabolic syndrome.⁷³ Ninety-six percent of these patients had resolution of the metabolic syndrome a year following surgery, demonstrating a dramatic beneficial effect of bariatric surgery on obesity-related comorbidities. In addition to weight loss and improvement in the metabolic syndrome, bariatric surgery may lower mortality rates. In an observational cohort study, Christo et al found that the 5-year death rate in the bariatric surgical group was 0.68% compared with 16.2% in the medically managed patients, a reduction in relative risk of 89%.⁷⁴

Recent reports of bariatric surgery in NAFLD patients have also been promising. Laparoscopic adjustable banding in 36 NAFLD patients produced a mean weight loss of 52%. Repeat liver biopsies performed 25 months after
surgery demonstrated a marked improvement or resolution of NASH in 82% of patients. Eighteen patients had fibrosis on initial biopsy, which improved in all or completely resolved in 70% of patients.⁷⁵ With Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 16 NAFLD patients had improvement in steatosis (15/16), inflammation (12/15), and portal fibrosis (6/13) associated with a 35.8% weight loss after nearly 1 year.⁷⁶ Similar promising data have also been recently published in which 70 NAFLD patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery, the majority being Roux-en-Y gastric bypass,⁷⁷ were followed. Patients had a mean weight loss of 59% at the time of postoperative liver biopsy, and the mean time interval between biopsies was 15 months. Overall, histologic parameters were markedly improved, including liver steatosis from 88% to 8%, inflammation from 23% to 2%, and fibrosis from 31% to 13%. Resolution of inflammation and fibrosis occurred in 37% and 20% of patients, respectively. Current evidence indicates that bariatric surgery is beneficial for many morbidly obese patients with NAFLD. The procedure appears to be safe; however, special attention must be directed at patient selection and underlying hepatic reserve of these patients because premature death following weight loss surgery has been due to hepatic failure in patients with cirrhosis.⁷⁸

### Insulin Sensitizers and NAFLD

Because insulin resistance is thought to represent the “first hit” in the pathogenesis of NASH, agents that reduce insulin resistance have been investigated as potential therapy. Metformin, an insulin sensitizing agent, was initially shown to improve histologic and biochemical features of fatty liver in *ob/ob* mice.⁷⁸,⁷⁹ Human trials, however, yielded mixed results. In an open-label study of 20 patients with biopsy-proven NASH, half the patients normalized their transaminases after 4 months of treatment with metformin; however, follow-up liver histology after treatment was not available in this study.⁷⁹ In a randomized trial of 36 patients with NASH, patients received either metformin and dietary intervention or diet alone for 6 months. Reduction in transaminase levels and insulin resistance indices were noted in the metformin group, but there was no significant difference in histologic scores between the 2 groups.⁸⁰ Another open-label trial addressed the durability of the efficacy of metformin: among 15 NASH patients treated with metformin for 12 months, significant liver enzyme lowering was noted in the first 3 months, but this effect was transient with liver enzymes back to pretreatment levels by the end of the follow-up study period. Less impressive was that only 1 of 10 patients in that study who had follow-up liver biopsy had improvement in fibrosis.⁸¹

The thiazolidenediones (TZDs) are peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) ligands that increase insulin sensitivity and are important in the treatment of type 2 DM. The first pilot study using TZDs for the

treatment of NASH was an open-label trial in 10 women with biopsy-proven NASH treated with troglitazone. Seven out of 10 patients normalized their transaminases at the end of the trial. The degree of fibrosis improved in one patient but worsened in another.⁸² A second open-label study included 30 patients with biopsy-proven NASH treated with rosiglitazone for 48 weeks. Liver enzymes improved significantly on treatment but returned to pretreatment levels on posttreatment follow-up. There was significant improvement in liver histology compared with pretreatment biopsy in the 22 patients who had a posttreatment biopsy. The mean BMI increased after treatment because weight gain is a known side effect of TZD treatment.⁸³ In a third open-label trial, 18 nondiabetic, overweight, or obese patients with biopsy-proven NASH were treated with pioglitazone for 48 weeks. All patients had elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) pretreatment; 72% of the patients had normal ALT at the end of therapy. Posttreatment liver biopsy was available on all patients and showed a significant improvement in steatosis and necroinflammatory markers. Fibrosis was decreased in 61% of the patients, worsened in 17%, and remained unchanged in 22%.⁸⁴ One published randomized trial of TZDs in NASH compared pioglitazone and vitamin E to vitamin E alone for 6 months in 20 nondiabetic patients with biopsy-proven NASH. Transaminase levels normalized in all patients, in both arms of the study. Regression of steatosis was observed in both arms as well; however, a reduction in necroinflammation and in pericellular fibrosis was only seen in the pioglitazone and vitamin E combination arm.⁸⁵

Finally, a recent randomized controlled trial published in the *New England Journal of Medicine* compared pioglitazone with placebo for 6 months in 55 patients with impaired glucose tolerance or type 2 DM and biopsy-proven NASH.⁸⁶ Administration of pioglitazone was significantly associated with normalization of liver transaminases; improved hepatic insulin sensitivity; and improved histologic findings, including steatosis, balloon necrosis, and inflammation. A reduction in hepatic fibrosis did not differ significantly from that in the placebo group. A summary of the available studies regarding TZDs and NASH can be found in Table 1. Larger randomized controlled trials of greater duration are anticipated in the future to examine further the efficacy of insulin sensitizers in the treatment of NAFLD.

### Pathogenesis of NAFLD

#### Overview

NAFLD is strongly associated with both hepatic and adipose tissue insulin resistance⁸⁷–⁸⁹ as well as reduced whole body insulin sensitivity. Studies have documented nearly a 50% reduction in glucose disposal, a measure of whole body insulin sensitivity,⁸⁷,⁸⁸ as well as an impaired ability of insulin to suppress endogenous
Table 1. Summary of Clinical Studies Regarding TZDs and NASH

| Author/year | N | Design     | Agent         | Duration      | Liver Biopsy$^a$ | Aminotransferases | Histology                          |
|-------------|---|------------|---------------|---------------|------------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|
| Caldwell et al 2001$^{82}$ | 10 | Open label | Troglitazone | 3–6 Months       | 5                | Improved                           | Improved mild inflammation          |
| Neuschwander-Tetri et al 2003$^{83}$ | 30 | Open label | Rosiglitazone | 48 Weeks        | 22               | Improved                           | Improved steatosis and inflammation |
| Promrat et al 2004$^{84}$ | 18 | Open label | Pioglitazone | 48 Weeks        | 18               | Improved                           | Improved steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis |
| Sanyal et al 2004$^{85}$ | 21 | RCT         | Pioglitazone | 6 Months        | ?                | Improved                           | Improved steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis |
| Belfort et al 2006$^{86}$ | 55 | RCT         | Pioglitazone | 6 Months        | 47               | Improved                           | Improved steatosis and inflammation |

RCT, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.

$^a$Number of patients who underwent posttreatment liver biopsy.

Pathophysiology of NAFLD

- Steatosis
  - ↓
- Oxidative stress
  - ↓
- Necrosis
  - ↓
- Inflammation
  - ↓
- Apoptosis
  - ↓
- Fibrosis
  - ↑
- Cytokine release

Figure 4. The current 2-hit hypothesis invoked in the progression of NAFLD. Although the first hit is believed to be a consequence of insulin resistance and, hence, is a focus of this review, the second hit, which results from the accumulation of fatty acids and triglycerides, is not reviewed here. However, numerous recent reviews examine the potential for oxidative stress from steatotic hepatocytes leading to lipid peroxidation; impaired mitochondrial and peroxisomal oxidation of fatty acids; and release of cytokines, chemokines, and adipokines that in concert result in lobular inflammation, hepatocyte necrosis, and apoptosis and cell dropout. The end result is a severe necroinflammatory hepatitis (NASH) that can lead to significant fibrosis. Some patients will develop frank cirrhosis with insipient complications including portal hypertension, encephalopathy, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hepatic Insulin Resistance: An Emerging Culprit in the Development of Metabolic Syndrome and NAFLD

Insulin resistance in liver is a major culprit in the development of type 2 DM [95,96] and may be the single most important pathophysiologic derangement in the metabolic syndrome. [93] Insulin is the primary anabolic hormone promoting the storage of energy in the fed state. In response to nutrient secretagogues, insulin is secreted from the pancreatic β cells directly into the

Increased systemic and hepatic insulin resistance leads to steatosis

Figure 5. Systemic insulin resistance coupled with impaired insulin action in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and hepatocyte leads to high circulating FFA loads as a consequence of the inability of mammals to handle both carbohydrate and fat loading. Normal handling of FFAs would result in (1) increased glycogen storage, (2) reduced de novo lipogenesis (DNL), (3) increased hepatic export of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), and (4) enhanced oxidation of FFAs. The persistence of high circulating levels of FFAs and persistent hyperglycemia result in a series of changes in hepatic FFA metabolism that ultimately leads to hepatic steatosis. Impaired skeletal muscle and adipose tissue handling of triglycerides result in increased circulating FFAs that are transported across hepatocyte membranes and ultimately are incorporated into triglycerides. DNL is also increased in the insulin-resistant state, whereas decreased β-oxidation of FFAs and impaired synthesis and secretion of apolipoprotein B (ApoB) reduces the secretion of triglycerides from the liver as VLDLs. The consequence is net storage of hepatocyte storage of triglycerides, or steatosis.

whole body insulin resistance, subcutaneous fat is also important in NAFLD.¹⁰¹ Subcutaneous fat makes up a large percentage of the total fat mass.¹⁰¹ Although intra-abdominal fat is more strongly correlated with total glucose disposal during a hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp, deep subcutaneous fat has been shown to be associated with total glucose disposal during the low-dose clamp.¹⁰² Hence, the contribution of subcutaneous fat contributes more to higher circulating levels of FFAs that enter the liver.¹⁰² Clamp studies, it should be recalled, are a means for investigators to infuse a fixed amount of glucose and or insulin. Typically, to maintain euglycemia, an infusion is maintained so that the glucose concentration is 5 mmol/L and, for hyperglycemic clamps, is approximately 10 mmol/L. Glucose infusions are administered at various rates to achieve target glucose levels. Frequently, hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp studies are conducted in which both insulin and glucose concentrations are fixed by varying rates of insulin and glucose delivery. Such approaches are being used more frequently and are detailed elsewhere.¹⁰³,¹⁰⁴

Long-term injury from hepatocyte triglyceride storage leads to the development of oxidative injury, hepatocyte apoptosis, inflammation, and impaired mitochondrial function principally by expression of uncoupling protein-2 (UCP-2) (Figure 7). Fat negatively affects mitochondrial function in hepatocytes.¹⁰⁵ Induction of the cytochrome P450 system occurs, including upregulation of CYP2E1 as a consequence of hepatocyte triglyceride stores.

## Molecular Derangements Associated With Hepatic Insulin Resistance

Although an association between NAFLD and hepatic insulin resistance is clear, a causal relationship between hepatic fat accumulation and hepatic insulin resistance has not been established.¹⁰⁶ Some investigators have postulated that, with insulin resistance, the combination of elevated plasma concentrations of glucose and fatty acids promote hepatic fatty acid synthesis and impaired β-oxidation leading to hepatic steatosis.¹⁰⁶,¹⁰⁷ In contrast, others have proposed that hepatic fat accumulation and hepatic insulin resistance can occur without the development of peripheral insulin resistance.⁹⁴,¹⁰⁸ Whether peripheral insulin resistance, hepatic insulin resistance, or both play a role in hepatocyte steatosis, recent studies have been designed to separate peripheral and hepatic insulin activities. Feeding a high-fat diet in rats for 3 days resulted in an abundance of liver triglycerides composed of 18:2 fatty acids, suggesting that the source of hepatic fat was the diet. Unlike the liver, however, the magnitude of accumulation of liver triglyceride stores was absent in the muscle; furthermore, the brief period of high-fat feeding did not alter fasting plasma glucose concentration or the basal rate of endogenous glucose production.¹⁰⁹ In addition, insulin-stimulated

that facilitate glucose uptake and utilization (Figure 6). Protein kinase C-ε was also shown to be activated in hepatocytes taken from rats fed the short-term, high-fat diet raising suspicion that protein kinase C-ε also plays a role in pathogenesis of hepatic insulin resistance.

# Role of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in Hepatic Insulin Resistance

Studies in mice fed high-fat diets and ob/ob mice, which are leptin deficient, obese, and diabetic, have demonstrated the importance of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in exacerbating hepatocyte insulin resistance. ER stress results from many factors including excess FFA stores. Such stress was shown in these animal models to result in phosphorylation of transcription factors in hepatocytes known to be associated with ER stress including pancreatic ER kinase (PKR-like kinase, or PERK), translation initiation factor 2, and c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). This was also true of the 78-kilodalton glucose-regulated/binding immunoglobulin protein, an ER chaperone protein whose expression is also increased upon ER stress. Apparently, ER stress may be a unique pathophysiologic response in liver (Figure 7), and such stress reduces insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1, increases serine phosphorylation of IRS-1, and reduces Akt phosphorylation. JNK appears to result in similar phosphorylation in the balance between tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of IRS-1, with the net effect being inhibition of insulin receptor signaling, which worsens hepatocyte insulin resistance.

# Impaired Hepatic Handling of FFA in the Metabolic Syndrome

Systemic insulin resistance results in the net increase of FFA stores in hepatocytes. The consequence of excess fat in the liver, stored as triglycerides, raises the profound problem with the normal regulatory function of hepatocyte handling of FFA resulting in (1) increased FFA flux into the liver and (2) enhanced de novo lipogenesis of more FFA by activation of sterol-CoA regulatory element binding protein (SREBP-1) (Figures 5–7).

# Reduced VLDL Secretion

Apolipoprotein B-100 (ApoB-100) is a large protein (512 kilodaltons) involved in the transport of triglycerides and cholesterol from the liver to peripheral tissues. Lipids are chiefly exported from the liver in the form of VLDL, a complex of protein (ApoB-100), lipids (triglycerides or cholesterol esters), and phospholipids. The mechanisms regulating the synthesis of ApoB-100 are incompletely understood, and the production of ApoB-100 messenger RNA has been shown to be altered by insulin and unaffected by changes in lipid metabolism in vitro. The synthesis of ApoB-100 is the rate-limiting step in the formation and disposition of VLDL

from liver; and hyperinsulinemia has been shown to reduce hepatocyte capacity for ApoB-100 synthesis.¹²⁰,¹²¹ In a clinical study published several years ago, Charlton et al concluded that insulin resistance is associated with markedly altered hepatic synthesis of ApoB-100 and that this had nothing to do with global protein synthesis because albumin production did not change regardless of the cohort of liver samples examined.¹²² The authors concluded that insulin-associated resistance impairs the biosynthesis of ApoB-100 and thus is another mechanism for accumulation of hepatocyte triglycerides.

### Enhanced Triglyceride Synthesis

Increased de novo lipogenesis also contributes to hepatic fat accumulation and may account for approximately 25% of liver triacylglycerol in NAFLD subjects compared with 5% reported in a healthy historical control group. Increased de novo lipogenesis may be a result of insulin resistance and the resulting hyperinsulinemia in subjects with NAFLD because insulin stimulates lipogenic enzymes via sterol regulatory element binding protein 1-c (SREBP-1c) even in the insulin-resistant state.¹²³ Overexpression of SREBP-1c in transgenic mice leads to increased lipogenesis and the development of hepatic steatosis.¹²⁴ Inactivation of the SREBP-1c gene in livers of *ob/ob* mice results in a significant reduction in hepatic triglyceride stores.¹²⁵ Carbohydrates can also stimulate lipogenesis by activating the carbohydrate response element binding protein, leading to transcription of genes involved in glycolysis and lipogenesis, thus resulting in the conversion of excess glucose to fatty acids.¹²⁶ Although carbohydrate response element binding protein activation may be more important in states of hyperglycemia, it may also contribute to the accumulation of fat in the liver in patients consuming diets with high percentages of calories from carbohydrates.¹⁰¹ Hyperinsulinemia may also contribute to triglyceride accumulation in the liver by inactivating the Forkhead transcription factor Foxa2,¹²⁷ which normally promotes fatty acid oxidation in the liver but is inactivated by phosphorylation by either IRS-1 or IRS-2 signal transduction pathways. Hyperinsulinemia, and therefore insulin resistance, can result in suppression of Foxa2 signaling and result in reduced fatty acid oxidation and contribute to fat accumulation.¹²⁷

### Adipokines

Oxidative stress produces alterations in the production of adipokines, cytokines secreted by the adipose tissues. The abnormality in the transport of lipoprotein diminishes the catabolism of the VLDL and increases the catabolism of the HDL, which creates insulin resistance. This process is associated with a lower concentration of adiponectin that in turn regulates the catabolism of VLDL and HDL.

The mechanism(s) whereby increased visceral adiposity is associated with insulin resistance is unclear, but circulating hormones secreted from adipose tissue have been implicated in modulating insulin sensitivity. These hormones, secreted by white adipose tissue (WAT), play a major role in modulating mammalian insulin resistance and have potential to influence the progression of NASH including the development of hepatic fibrosis. WAT is now widely considered to be an active endocrine organ, and it is unique in that (1) it is found throughout the whole organism in pads and is not connected, and (2) it is heterogeneous in terms of metabolic function, depending on its visceral or subcutaneous location. Although WAT mass increases in obesity and substantially shrinks in lipoatrophic syndromes, adipokine secretion is markedly dysregulated in either condition, underscoring the point that obesity and lipoatrophy are associated with the metabolic syndrome. Adipokines associated with mammalian insulin resistance include tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin 6, resistin, adiponectin, leptin, and acylation stimulating protein.¹²⁸,¹²⁹ Tumor necrosis factor-α is overexpressed in obesity, and plasma levels decrease with weight loss and was the first adipose-secreted product proposed to represent a molecular link between obesity and insulin resistance.¹³⁰ Tumor necrosis factor-α-regulated pathways in WAT may mediate, in part, obesity-altered expression of some circulating adipokines, and these may lead to decreased adiponectin production.¹³¹

#### Leptin

Leptin, discovered as a product of the obesity (*ob*) gene,¹³² is a 16-kilodalton protein that has been shown to play a dramatic role in partitioning energy stores,¹³³ including fat and glucose by way of modulating insulin sensitivity.¹³⁴,¹³⁵ Excess caloric intake results in up-regulation of leptin production, whereas starvation suppresses leptin expression and serum circulation.¹³⁶ Although a key property of leptin improves insulin sensitivity,¹³⁷ leptin deficiency is not a common cause of type 2 diabetes or human obesity. Rather, like insulin, it appears that leptin resistance plays a role in aggravating glucose intolerance and plays a permissive role in increased FFA uptake by the liver. Leptin acts primarily via the long form of the receptor OB-Rb¹³⁸,¹³⁹ on specific nuclei in the hypothalamus,¹⁴⁰ adipocytes,¹³⁷,¹⁴¹,¹⁴² skeletal muscle,¹³³,¹³⁷ hepatocytes,¹⁸⁸ and other cell types including hepatic stellate cells.¹⁴³–¹⁴⁵

One human model in which a profound deficiency of leptin occurs, and for which leptin therapy is beneficial, is generalized lipodystrophy. Lipodystrophy is a rare human disorder characterized by a significant deficiency of adipose tissue, which results in a loss of triglyceride storage depots and reduced levels of circulating cytokines. Patients with this condition are hyperphagic and, because there is a lack of adipose tissue, develop unusual

locations for triglyceride stores. This type of ectopic triglyceride storage can occur in patients who take protease inhibitors for long periods for the human immunodeficiency syndrome; however, unlike generalized lipodystrophy—in which leptin levels are very low—men studied on antiretroviral therapy for human immunodeficiency do not appear to have reduced circulating leptin concentrations.¹⁴⁶ In a recent study of patients with generalized lipodystrophy, treatment with recombinant leptin replacement led to significant and sustained improvements in glycemia, dyslipidemia, and NAFLD, indicating that leptin is an effective therapy for most, but not all, forms of lipodystrophy.¹⁴⁷

### Resistin

Recently discovered, resistin is also known as ADSF or “adipose tissue-specific secretory factor.”¹⁴⁸,¹⁴⁹ The adipose-derived hormone resistin is postulated to link obesity to insulin resistance and diabetes. The infusion of either resistin or the resistin-like molecule-β was shown to rapidly induce severe hepatic but not peripheral insulin resistance. Importantly, the effects of resistin and resistin-like molecule-β on in vivo insulin action were completely accounted for by a marked increase in the rate of glucose production. These results support the notion that a novel family of fat- and gut-derived circulating proteins modulate hepatic insulin action.¹⁵⁰ A distinct pathophysiologic relationship between resistin-induced hepatic insulin resistance and NAFLD is not entirely clear. Although a recent retrospective case-control analysis revealed that a positive correlation was found between resistin and histologic inflammatory scores in patients with NAFLD;¹⁵¹ a direct relationship between resistin and insulin resistance or BMI in these patients could not be substantiated. Furthermore, a recent clinical study to assess intrahepatic fat in patients with NAFLD by (1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy, as well as measurements of serum correlates of fatty liver and insulin resistance were assessed. A higher percentage of subjects with increased hepatic fat content correlated with lower homeostatic model assessment scores (HOMA-2) and lower, not higher, serum resistin levels. Hence, these authors concluded that a fatty liver was inversely proportional to the serum resistin level and was not associated with hyperresistinemia.¹⁵² In summary, the role of resistin exacerbating insulin resistance and enhancing increased hepatocyte triglyceride storage is far from certain.

### Adiponectin

Adiponectin, also known as adipocyte complement-related protein or ACRP 30, is a 30-kilodalton protein hormone produced by omental fat.¹⁵³–¹⁵⁵ Adiponectin gene expression and secretion are also decreased in rodent and human obesity and are lower than age- and sex-matched controls in type 2 DM, insulin resistance, and other conditions associated with metabolic syndrome.

drome.¹⁵⁶ Low levels of adiponectin expression may predispose patients to the progressive form of NAFLD or NASH.¹⁵⁷ Adiponectin has been found to be positively associated with insulin sensitivity and negatively associated with intra-abdominal fat.¹⁵⁸ Adiponectin stimulates glucose utilization and fatty acid oxidation in the liver by activating adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase.¹⁵⁹ Adiponectin levels measured in patients with NAFLD or NASH were found to be lower than in age- and sex-matched controls¹⁶⁰ and correlate negatively with hepatic fat.¹⁶¹ The fundamental mechanism whereby PPARγ agonists work is to enhance adiponectin production by subcutaneous and visceral fat. Hence, although patients have improved glycemic control with these agents, the TZDs result in weight gain. Several recent studies point to the use of TZDs as an indication for the treatment of NAFLD; however, treatment periods have been short, limited numbers of patients have been enrolled, and modest changes in fibrosis scores were seen. Adiponectin has important therapeutic implications in NAFLD, however, in its own right. Adiponectin administration in one mouse study reversed hepatic steatosis and inflammation,¹⁶² and the combination of a diet high in saturated fat and alcohol in rats resulted in a robust increase in the phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase α, the first signaling element whereby the adiponectin receptor activates its respective signal transduction cascade, leading to increased capacity for hepatic fatty acid oxidation.¹⁶³

### Conclusion

NAFLD is the most common culprit for a patient to have an abnormal ALT level and be referred to a gastroenterologist in the United States today. The frequency of this potentially burdensome health problem rests with a group of other comorbidities in which it travels: obesity, type 2 DM, hypertriglyceridemia, essential hypertension, and low-LDL cholesterol, all of which are increasing with alarming frequency in most developed nations. From the pathophysiologic perspective, insulin resistance, and the consequent failure to handle properly either glucose or FFA loads in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and now the liver, appears to be the focus of much of the basic research currently being conducted related to the metabolic syndrome, particularly as it applies to hepatic steatosis. While systemic insulin resistance exacerbates hepatic insulin resistance, there is a dynamic interplay between ongoing hepatocyte triglyceride storage that antagonizes further both hepatic and systemic insulin resistance. Future research must examine how this vicious cycle can be disrupted. The discovery of adipose tissue as a potent endocrine organ underscores the critical importance of cross-discipline-related research related to fatty liver disease and may pave the way for more effective therapies.

WAT producing circulating cytokine hormones, adipokines, or adipocytokines including leptin and adiponectin definitely modulate insulin physiology. Although leptin is a promising therapy in generalized lipodystrophy—in which a clear deficiency of leptin is a component—leptin appears to exacerbate pathophysiologic derangements associated with systemic and hepatic insulin resistance and is found in high concentrations in patients with NAFLD. Adiponectin, another key adipocytokine, appears deficient in fatty liver disease associated with insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome. Future research endeavors must examine how adiponectin-mediated hepatic signaling can positively modulate hepatic insulin signaling. Because treatment strategies remain limited, novel approaches to examine gut peptides and other molecules—all of which are currently underway—will illuminate a path for understanding, screening, and future therapies for a disease problem that will severely strain already stressed health care systems worldwide.

### References

1. Angulo P. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med 2002; 346:1221–1231.
2. Falck-Ytter Y, Younossi ZM, Marchesini G, McCullough AJ. Clinical features and natural history of nonalcoholic steatosis syndromes. Semin Liver Dis 2001; 21:17–26.
3. Ruhl CE, Everhart JE. Determinants of the association of overweight with elevated serum alanine aminotransferase activity in the United States. Gastroenterology 2003; 124:71–79.
4. Ruhl CE, Everhart JE. Epidemiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver. Clin Liver Dis 2004; 8:501–519.
5. Alter MJ, Kruszon-Moran D, Nainan OV, McQuillan GM, Gao F, Moyer LA, Kaslow RA, Margolis HS. The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in the United States, 1988 through 1994. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:556–562.
6. Daniel S, Ben-Menachem T, Vasudevan G, Ma CK, Blumenkehl M. Prospective evaluation of unexplained chronic liver transaminase abnormalities in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients. Am J Gastroenterol 1999; 94:3010–3014.
7. Franzese A, Vajro P, Argenziano A, Puzziello A, Iannucci MP, Saviano MC, Brunetti F, Rubino A. Liver involvement in obese children. Ultrasonography and liver enzyme levels at diagnosis and during follow-up in an Italian population. Dig Dis Sci 1997; 42:1428–1432.
8. Tominaga K, Kurata JH, Chen YK, Fujimoto E, Miyagawa S, Abe I, Kusano Y. Prevalence of fatty liver in Japanese children and relationship to obesity. An epidemiological ultrasonographic survey. Dig Dis Sci 1995; 40:2002–2009.
9. Angulo P, Keach JC, Batts KP, Lindor KD. Independent predictors of liver fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology 1999; 30:1356–1362.
10. Lee RG. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a study of 49 patients. Hum Pathol 1989; 20:594–598.
11. Ludwig J, Viggiano TR, McGill DB, Oh BJ. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: Mayo Clinic experiences with a hitherto unnamed disease. Mayo Clin Proc 1980; 55:434–438.
12. Clark JM, Brancati FL, Diehl AM. The prevalence and etiology of elevated aminotransferase levels in the United States. Am J Gastroenterol 2003; 98:960–967.
13. Browning JD, Kumar KS, Saboorian MH, Thiele DL. Ethnic differences in the prevalence of cryptogenic cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol 2004; 99:292–298.

14. Caldwell SH, Harris DM, Patrie JT, Hespenheide EE. Is NASH underdiagnosed among African Americans? Am J Gastroenterol 2002; 97:1496–1500.
15. Solga SF, Clark JM, Alkhuraishi AR, Torbenson M, Tabesh A, Schweitzer M, Diehl AM, Magnuson TH. Race and comorbid factors predict nonalcoholic fatty liver disease histopathology in severely obese patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2005; 1:6–11.
16. Executive Summary of The Third Report of The National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, And Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol In Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA 2001; 285:2486–2497.
17. Hamaguchi M, Kojima T, Takeda N, Nakagawa T, Taniguchi H, Fujii K, Omatsu T, Nakajima T, Sarui H, Shimazaki M, Kato T, Okuda J, Ida K. The metabolic syndrome as a predictor of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Ann Intern Med 2005; 143: 722–728.
18. Marchesini G, Bugianesi E, Forlani G, Cerrelli F, Lenzi M, Manini R, Natale S, Vanni E, Villanova N, Melchionda N, Rizzetto M. Nonalcoholic fatty liver, steatohepatitis, and the metabolic syndrome. Hepatology 2003; 37:917–923.
19. Bellentani S, Saccoccio G, Masutti F, Croce LS, Brandi G, Sasso F, Cristanini G, Tiribelli C. Prevalence of and risk factors for hepatic steatosis in Northern Italy. Ann Intern Med 2000; 132: 112–117.
20. Silverman JF, O’Brien KF, Long S, Leggett N, Khazanie PG, Pories WJ, Norris HT, Caro JF. Liver pathology in morbidly obese patients with and without diabetes. Am J Gastroenterol 1990; 85:1349–1355.
21. Wanless IR, Lentz JS. Fatty liver hepatitis (steatohepatitis) and obesity: an autopsy study with analysis of risk factors. Hepatology 1990; 12:1106–1110.
22. Ruderman N, Chisholm D, Pi-Sunyer X, Schneider S. The metabolically obese, normal-weight individual revisited. Diabetes 1998; 47:699–713.
23. Jimba S, Nakagami T, Takahashi M, Wakamatsu T, Hirota Y, Iwamoto Y, Wasada T. Prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and its association with impaired glucose metabolism in Japanese adults. Diabet Med 2005; 22:1141–1145.
24. Poonawala A, Nair SP, Thuluvath PJ. Prevalence of obesity and diabetes in patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis: a case-control study. Hepatology 2000; 32:689–692.
25. Donati G, Stagni B, Piscaglia F, Venturoli N, Morselli-Labate AM, Rasciti L, Bolondi L. Increased prevalence of fatty liver in arterial hypertensive patients with normal liver enzymes: role of insulin resistance. Gut 2004; 53:1020–1023.
26. Ipekci SH, Basaranoglu M, Sonsuz A. The fluctuation of serum levels of aminotransferase in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2003; 36:371.
27. Yano E, Tagawa K, Yamaoka K, Mori M. Test validity of periodic liver function tests in a population of Japanese male bank employees. J Clin Epidemiol 2001; 54:945–951.
28. Sorbi D, Boynton J, Lindor KD. The ratio of aspartate aminotransferase to alanine aminotransferase: potential value in differentiating nonalcoholic steatohepatitis from alcoholic liver disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1999; 94:1018–1022.
29. Joy D, Thava VR, Scott BB. Diagnosis of fatty liver disease: is biopsy necessary? Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2003; 15:539–543.
30. Ryan CK, Johnson LA, Germin BI, Marcos A. One hundred consecutive hepatic biopsies in the workup of living donors for right lobe liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2002; 8:1114–1122.
31. Mottin CC, Moretto M, Padoin AV, Swarowsky AM, Toneto MG, Glock L, Repetto G. The role of ultrasound in the diagnosis of hepatic steatosis in morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg 2004; 14:635–637.
32. Saadeh S, Younossi ZM, Remer EM, Gramlich T, Ong JP, Hurley M, Mullen KD, Cooper JN, Sheridan MJ. The utility of radiological

imaging in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2002;123:745–750.

33. Siegelman ES, Rosen MA. Imaging of hepatic steatosis. Semin Liver Dis 2001;21:71–80.
34. Skelly MM, James PD, Ryder SD. Findings on liver biopsy to investigate abnormal liver function tests in the absence of diagnostic serology. J Hepatol 2001;35:195–199.
35. McCullough AJ. The clinical features, diagnosis and natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Liver Dis 2004; 8:521–533.
36. Hui JM, Kench JG, Chitturi S, Sud A, Farrell GC, Byth K, Hall P, Khan M, George J. Long-term outcomes of cirrhosis in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis compared with hepatitis C. Hepatology 2003;38:420–427.
37. Caldwell SH, Oelsner DH, lezzoni JC, Hespenheide EE, Battle EH, Driscoll CJ. Cryptogenic cirrhosis: clinical characterization and risk factors for underlying disease. Hepatology 1999;29: 664–669.
38. Contos MJ, Cales W, Sterling RK, Luketic VA, Shiffman ML, Mills AS, Fisher RA, Ham J, Sanyal AJ. Development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease after orthotopic liver transplantation for cryptogenic cirrhosis. Liver Transpl 2001;7:363–373.
39. Ong J, Younossi ZM, Reddy V, Price LL, Gramlich T, Mayes J, Boparai N. Cryptogenic cirrhosis and posttransplantation nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Liver Transpl 2001;7:797–801.
40. Adams LA, Lymp JF, St. Sauver J, Sanderson SO, Lindor KD, Feldstein A, Angulo P. The natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a population-based cohort study. Gastroenterology 2005;129:113–121.
41. Anagnostopoulos GK, Arvanitidis D, Tsiakos S, Margantinis G, Grigoriadis K, Kostopoulos P. Is hepatocellular carcinoma part of the natural history of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis? J Clin Gastroenterol 2003;37:88–89.
42. El-Serag HB, Tran T, Everhart JE. Diabetes increases the risk of chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2004;126:460–468.
43. Nair S, Mason A, Eason J, Loss G, Perrillo RP. Is obesity an independent risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis? Hepatology 2002;36:150–155.
44. Ratziu V, Bonyhay L, Di Martino V, Charlotte F, Cavallaro L, Sayegh-Tainturier MH, Giral P, Grimaldi A, Opolon P, Poynard T. Survival, liver failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma in obesity-related cryptogenic cirrhosis. Hepatology 2002;35:1485–1493.
45. Marrero JA, Fontana RJ, Su GL, Conjeevaram HS, Emick DM, Lok AS. NAFLD may be a common underlying liver disease in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in the United States. Hepatology 2002;36:1349–1354.
46. Davila JA, Morgan RO, Shaib Y, McGlynn KA, El-Serag HB. Diabetes increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in the United States: a population-based, case control study. Gut 2005;54:533–539.
47. Yuan JM, Govindarajan S, Arakawa K, Yu MC. Synergism of alcohol, diabetes, and viral hepatitis on the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in blacks and whites in the US. Cancer 2004;101: 1009–1017.
48. Adams LA, Sanderson S, Lindor KD, Angulo P. The histological course of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a longitudinal study of 103 patients with sequential liver biopsies. J Hepatol 2005;42: 132–138.
49. Fassio E, Alvarez E, Dominguez N, Landeira G, Longo C. Natural history of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a longitudinal study of repeat liver biopsies. Hepatology 2004;40:820–826.
50. Harrison SA, Torgerson S, Hayashi PH. The natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a clinical histopathological study. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98:2042–2047.


51. Teli MR, James OF, Burt AD, Bennett MK, Day CP. The natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver: a follow-up study. Hepatology 1995;22:1714–1719.
52. Silverman JF, Pories WJ, Caro JF. Liver pathology in diabetes mellitus and morbid obesity. Clinical, pathological, and biochemical considerations. Pathol Annu 1989;24:275–302.
53. Andersen T, Gluud C, Franzmann MB, Christoffersen P. Hepatic effects of dietary weight loss in morbidly obese subjects. J Hepatol 1991;12:224–229.
54. Capron JP, Delamarre J, Dupas JL, Braillon A, Degott C, Quenum C. Fasting in obesity: another cause of liver injury with alcoholic hyaline? Dig Dis Sci 1982;27:265–268.
55. Hamilton DL, Vest TK, Brown BS, Shah AN, Menguy RB, Chey WY. Liver injury with alcoholiclike hyalin after gastroplasty for morbid obesity. Gastroenterology 1983;85:722–726.
56. Luyckx FH, Desaive C, Thiry A, Dewe W, Scheen AJ, Gielen JE, Lefebvre PJ. Liver abnormalities in severely obese subjects: effect of drastic weight loss after gastroplasty. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1998;22:222–226.
57. Requarth JA, Burchard KW, Colacchio TA, Stukel TA, Mott LA, Greenberg ER, Weismann RE. Long-term morbidity following jejunoileal bypass. The continuing potential need for surgical reversal. Arch Surg 1995;130:318–325.
58. Wang RT, Koretz RL, Yee HF Jr. Is weight reduction an effective therapy for nonalcoholic fatty liver? A systematic review. Am J Med 2003;115:554–559.
59. Ueno T, Sugawara H, Sujaku K, Hashimoto O, Tsuji R, Tamaki S, Torimura T, Inuzuka S, Sata M, Tanikawa K. Therapeutic effects of restricted diet and exercise in obese patients with fatty liver. J Hepatol 1997;27:103–107.
60. American Gastroenterological Association Medical Position Statement: Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1702–1704.
61. Ioannides-Demos LL, Proietto J, Tonkin AM, McNeil JJ. Safety of drug therapies used for weight loss and treatment of obesity. Drug Saf 2006;29:277–302.
62. Foxcroft DR, Milne R. Orlistat for the treatment of obesity: rapid review and cost-effectiveness model. Obes Rev 2000;1:121–126.
63. Harrison SA, Fincke C, Helinski D, Torgerson S, Hayashi P. A pilot study of orlistat treatment in obese, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;20:623–628.
64. Harrison SA, Ramrakhiani S, Brunt EM, Anbari MA, Cortese C, Bacon BR. Orlistat in the treatment of NASH: a case series. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98:926–930.
65. Hatzitolios A, Savopoulos C, Lazaraki G, Sidiropoulos I, Haritanti P, Lefkopoulos A, Karagiannopoulou G, Tzioufa V, Dimitrios K. Efficacy of omega-3 fatty acids, atorvastatin and orlistat in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with dyslipidemia. Indian J Gastroenterol 2004;23:131–134.
66. McMahon FG, Fujioka K, Singh BN, Mendel CM, Rowe E, Rolston K, Johnson F, Mooradian AD. Efficacy and safety of sibutramine in obese white and African American patients with hypertension: a 1-year, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:2185–2191.
67. Bray GA, Blackburn GL, Ferguson JM, Greenway FL, Jain AK, Mendel CM, Mendels J, Ryan DH, Schwartz SL, Scheinbaum ML, Seaton TB. Sibutramine produces dose-related weight loss. Obes Res 1999;7:189–198.
68. Finer N, Bloom SR, Frost GS, Banks LM, Griffiths J. Sibutramine is effective for weight loss and diabetic control in obesity with type 2 diabetes: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Diabetes Obes Metab 2000;2:105–112.
69. Finer N, Ryan DH, Renz CL, Hewkin AC. Prediction of response to sibutramine therapy in obese non-diabetic and diabetic patients. Diabetes Obes Metab 2006;8:206–213.

70. Sabuncu T, Nazligul Y, Karaoglanoglu M, Ucar E, Kilic FB. The effects of sibutramine and orlistat on the ultrasonographic findings, insulin resistance and liver enzyme levels in obese patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Rom J Gastroenterol 2003;12:189–192.

71. NIH conference. Gastrointestinal surgery for severe obesity. Consensus Development Conference Panel. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:956–961.

72. Buchwald H, Avidor Y, Braunwald E, Jensen MD, Pories W, Fahrbach K, Schoelles K. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2004;292:1724–1737.

73. Lee WJ, Huang MT, Wang W, Lin CM, Chen TC, Lai IR. Effects of obesity surgery on the metabolic syndrome. Arch Surg 2004; 139:1088–1092.

74. Christou NV, Sampalis JS, Liberman M, Look D, Auger S, McLean AP, MacLean LD. Surgery decreases long-term mortality, morbidity, and health care use in morbidly obese patients. Ann Surg 2004;240:416–424.

75. Dixon JB, Bhathal PS, Hughes NR, O'Brien PE. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: improvement in liver histological analysis with weight loss. Hepatology 2004;39:1647–1654.

76. Clark JM, Alkhuraishi AR, Solga SF, Alli P, Diehl AM, Magnuson TH. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass improves liver histology in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Obes Res 2005; 13:1180–1186.

77. Mattar SG, Velcu LM, Rabinovitz M, Demetris AJ, Krasinskas AM, Barinas-Mitchell E, Eid GM, Ramanathan R, Taylor DS, Schauer PR. Surgically induced weight loss significantly improves nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and the metabolic syndrome. Ann Surg 2005;242:610–620.

78. Lin HZ, Yang SQ, Chuckaree C, Kuhajda F, Ronnet G, Diehl AM. Metformin reverses fatty liver disease in obese, leptin-deficient mice. Nat Med 2000;6:998–1003.

79. Marchesini G, Brizi M, Bianchi G, Tomassetti S, Zoli M, Melchionda N. Metformin in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Lancet 2001;358:893–894.

80. Uygun A, Kadayifci A, Isik AT, Ozgurtas T, Deveci S, Tuzun A, Yesilova Z, Gulsen M, Dagalp K. Metformin in the treatment of patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:537–544.

81. Nair S, Diehl AM, Wiseman M, Farr GH Jr, Perrillo RP. Metformin in the treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: a pilot open label trial. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;20:23–28.

82. Caldwell SH, Hespenheide EE, Redick JA, lezzoni JC, Battle EH, Sheppard BL. A pilot study of a thiazolidinedione, troglitazone, in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96: 519–525.

83. Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Brunt EM, Wehmeier KR, Oliver D, Bacon BR. Improved nonalcoholic steatohepatitis after 48 weeks of treatment with the PPAR-γ ligand rosiglitazone. Hepatology 2003;38:1008–1017.

84. Promrat K, Lutchman G, Uwaifo GI, Freedman RJ, Soza A, Heller T, Doo E, Ghany M, Premkumar A, Park Y, Liang TJ, Yanovski JA, Kleiner DE, Hoofnagle JH. A pilot study of pioglitazone treatment for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology 2004;39:188– 196.

85. Sanyal AJ, Mofrad PS, Contos MJ, Sargeant C, Luketic VA, Sterling RK, Stravitz RT, Shiffman ML, Clere J, Mills AS. A pilot study of vitamin E versus vitamin E and pioglitazone for the treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2004;2:1107–1115.

86. Belfort R, Harrison SA, Brown K, Darland C, Finch J, Hardies J, Balas B, Gastaldelli A, Tio F, Pulcini J, Berria R, Ma JZ, Dwivedi S, Havranek R, Fincke C, DeFronzo R, Bannayan GA, Schenker S, Cusi K. A placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in subjects with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2006;355: 2297–2307.

87. Marchesini G, Brizi M, Bianchi G, Tomassetti S, Bugianesi E, Lenzi M, McCullough AJ, Natale S, Forlani G, Melchionda N. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a feature of the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes 2001;50:1844–1850.

88. Bugianesi E, Gastaldelli A, Vanni E, Gambino R, Cassader M, Baldi S, Ponti V, Pagano G, Ferrannini E, Rizzetto M. Insulin resistance in non-diabetic patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: sites and mechanisms. Diabetologia 2005;48: 634–642.

89. Seppala-Lindroos A, Vehkavaara S, Hakkinen AM, Goto T, Westerbacka J, Sovijarvi A, Halavaara J, Yki-Jarvinen H. Fat accumulation in the liver is associated with defects in insulin suppression of glucose production and serum free fatty acids independent of obesity in normal men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:3023–3028.

90. Kahn CR. Banting lecture. Insulin action, diabetogenesis, and the cause of type II diabetes. Diabetes 1994;43:1066–1084.

91. Sanyal AJ, et al. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: association of insulin resistance and mitochondrial abnormalities. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1183–1192.

92. Tiikkainen M, Hakkinen AM, Korsheninnikova E, Nyman T, Makimattila S, Yki-Jarvinen H. Effects of rosiglitazone and metformin on liver fat content, hepatic insulin resistance, insulin clearance, and gene expression in adipose tissue in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53:2169–2176.

93. Kim SP, Ellmerer M, Van Citters GW, Bergman RN. Primacy of hepatic insulin resistance in the development of the metabolic syndrome induced by an isocaloric moderate-fat diet in the dog. Diabetes 2003;52:2453–2460.

94. Kim JK, Fillmore JJ, Chen Y, Yu C, Moore IK, Pypaert M, Lutz EP, Kako Y, Velez-Carrasco W, Goldberg IJ, Breslow JL, Shulman GI. Tissue-specific overexpression of lipoprotein lipase causes tissue-specific insulin resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98:7522–7527.

95. Fisher SJ, Kahn CR. Insulin signaling is required for insulin's direct and indirect action on hepatic glucose production. J Clin Invest 2003;111:463–468.

96. Tripathy D, Eriksson KF, Orho-Melander M, Fredriksson J, Ahlqvist G, Groop L. Parallel manifestation of insulin resistance and β-cell decompensation is compatible with a common defect in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2004;47:782–793.

97. Michael MD, Kulkarni RN, Postic C, Previs SF, Shulman GI, Magnuson MA, Kahn CR. Loss of insulin signaling in hepatocytes leads to severe insulin resistance and progressive hepatic dysfunction. Mol Cell 2000;6:87–97.

98. Nguyen MT, Satoh H, Favelyukis S, Babendure JL, Imamura T, Sbodio JI, Zalevsky J, Dahiyat BI, Chi NW, Olefsky JM. JNK and tumor necrosis factor-α mediate free fatty acid-induced insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J Biol Chem 2005; 280:35361–35371.

99. Sharma AM, Staels B. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) and adipose tissue—understanding obesity-related changes in regulation of lipid and glucose metabolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:386–395.

100. Stanger BZ, Stiles B, Lauwers GY, Bardeesy N, Mendoza M, Wang Y, Greenwood A, Cheng KH, McLaughlin M, Brown D, Depinho RA, Wu H, Melton DA, Dor Y. Pten constrains centrosome expansion and malignant transformation in the pancreas. Cancer Cell 2005;8:185–195.

101. Utzschneider KM, Kahn SE. The role of insulin resistance in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91:4753–4761.

102. Miyazaki Y, Glass L, Triplitt C, Wajcberg E, Mandarino LJ, DeFranzo RA. Abdominal fat distribution and peripheral and hepatic insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2002;283:E1135–E1143.

103. Reeds DN, Yarasheski KE, Fontana L, Cade WT, Laciny E, DeMoss A, Patterson BW, Powderly WG, Klein S. Alterations in liver, muscle, and adipose tissue insulin sensitivity in men with HIV infection and dyslipidemia. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006;290:E47–E53.

104. Subramanian S, DeRosa MA, Bernal-Mizrachi C, Laffely N, Cade WT, Yarasheski KE, Cryer PE, Semenkovich CF. PPARα activation elevates blood pressure and does not correct glucocorticoid-induced insulin resistance in humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006;291:E1365–E1371.

105. Begriche K, Igoudjil A, Pessayre D, Fromenty B. Mitochondrial dysfunction in NASH: causes, consequences and possible means to prevent it. Mitochondrion 2006;6:1–28.

106. Marchesini G, Brizi M, Morselli-Labate AM, Bianchi G, Bugianesi E, McCullough AJ, Forlani G, Melchionda N. Association of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease with insulin resistance. Am J Med 1999;107:450–455.

107. Sanyal AJ, Campbell-Sargent C, Mirshahi F, Rizzo WB, Contos MJ, Sterling RK, Luketic VA, Shiffman ML, Clore JN. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: association of insulin resistance and mitochondrial abnormalities. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1183–1192.

108. Kraegen EW, Clark PW, Jenkins AB, Daley EA, Chisholm DJ, Storlien LH. Development of muscle insulin resistance after liver insulin resistance in high-fat-fed rats. Diabetes 1991;40:1397–1403.

109. Samuel VT, Liu ZX, Qu X, Elder BD, Bilz S, Befroy D, Romanelli AJ, Shulman GI. Mechanism of hepatic insulin resistance in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Biol Chem 2004;279:32345–32353.

110. Wei Y, Wang D, Topczewski F, Pagliassotti MJ. Saturated fatty acids induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis independently of ceramide in liver cells. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006;291:E275–E281.

111. Kharroubi I, Ladriere L, Cardozo AK, Dogusan Z, Cnop M, Eizirik DL. Free fatty acids and cytokines induce pancreatic β-cell apoptosis by different mechanisms: role of nuclear factor-κB and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Endocrinology 2004;145:5087–5096.

112. Ozcan U, Cao Q, Yilmaz E, Lee AH, Iwakoshi NN, Ozdelen E, Tuncman G, Gorgun C, Glimcher LH, Hotamisligil GS. Endoplasmic reticulum stress links obesity, insulin action, and type 2 diabetes. Science 2004;306:457–461.

113. Shi Y, Taylor SI, Tan SL, Sonenberg N. When translation meets metabolism: multiple links to diabetes. Endocr Rev 2003;24:91–101.

114. Harding HP, Zhang Y, Ron D. Protein translation and folding are coupled by an endoplasmic-reticulum-resident kinase. Nature 1999;397:271–274.

115. Urano F, Wang X, Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Chung P, Harding HP, Ron D. Coupling of stress in the ER to activation of JNK protein kinases by transmembrane protein kinase IRE1. Science 2000;287:664–666.

116. Harding HP, Calfon M, Urano F, Novoa I, Ron D. Transcriptional and translational control in the Mammalian unfolded protein response. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2002;18:575–599.

117. Adams LA, Angulo P. Recent concepts in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Diabet Med 2005;22:1129–1133.

118. Pullinger CR, North JD, Teng BB, Rifici VA, Ronhild de Brito AE, Scott J. The apolipoprotein B gene is constitutively expressed in HepG2 cells: regulation of secretion by oleic acid, albumin, and insulin, and measurement of the mRNA half-life. J Lipid Res 1989;30:1065–1077.

119. Dashti N, Williams DL, Alaupovic P. Effects of oleate and insulin on the production rates and cellular mRNA concentrations of apolipoproteins in HepG2 cells. J Lipid Res 1989;30:1365–1373.


120. Lewis GF, Uffelman KD, Szeto LW, Steiner G. Effects of acute hyperinsulinemia on VLDL triglyceride and VLDL apoB production in normal weight and obese individuals. Diabetes 1993;42:833–842.

121. Cummings MH, Watts GF, Umpleby AM, Hennessy TR, Kelly JM, Jackson NC, Sonksen PH. Acute hyperinsulinemia decreases the hepatic secretion of very-low-density lipoprotein apolipoprotein B-100 in NIDDM. Diabetes 1995;44:1059–1065.

122. Charlton M, Sreekumar R, Rasmussen D, Lindor K, Nair KS. Apolipoprotein synthesis in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology 2002;35:898–904.

123. Tamura S, Shimomura I. Contribution of adipose tissue and de novo lipogenesis to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Clin Invest 2005;115:1139–1142.

124. Shimano H, Horton JD, Shimomura I, Hammer RE, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Isoform 1c of sterol regulatory element binding protein is less active than isoform 1a in livers of transgenic mice and in cultured cells. J Clin Invest 1997;99:846–854.

125. Yahagi N, Shimano H, Hasty AH, Matsuzaka T, Ide T, Yoshikawa T, Amemiya-Kudo M, Tomita S, Okazaki H, Tamura Y, Iizuka Y, Ohashi K, Osuga J, Harada K, Gotoda T, Nagai R, Ishibashi S, Yamada N. Absence of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) ameliorates fatty livers but not obesity or insulin resistance in Lep(ob)/Lep(ob) mice. J Biol Chem 2002;277:19353–19357.

126. Browning JD, Horton JD. Molecular mediators of hepatic steatosis and liver injury. J Clin Invest 2004;114:147–152.

127. Wolfrum C, Asilmaz E, Luca E, Friedman JM, Stoffel M. Foxa2 regulates lipid metabolism and ketogenesis in the liver during fasting and in diabetes. Nature 2004;432:1027–1032.

128. Romano M, Guagnano MT, Pacini G, Vigneri S, Falco A, Mari nopiccóli M, Manigrasso MR, Basili S, Davi G. Association of inflammation markers with impaired insulin sensitivity and coagulative activation in obese healthy women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:5321–5326.

129. Kern PA, Ranganathan S, Li C, Wood L, Ranganathan G. Adipose tissue tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-6 expression in human obesity and insulin resistance. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2001;280:E745–E751.

130. Coppack SW. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and adipose tissue. Proc Nutr Soc 2001;60:349–356.

131. Ruan H, Miles PD, Ladd CM, Ross K, Golub TR, Olefsky JM, Lodish HF. Profiling gene transcription in vivo reveals adipose tissue as an immediate target of tumor necrosis factor-α: implications for insulin resistance. Diabetes 2002;51:3176–3188.

132. Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L, Friedman JM. Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. Nature 1994;372:425–432.

133. Muoio DM, Dohm GL, Fiedorek FT Jr, Tapscott EB, Coleman RA. Leptin directly alters lipid partitioning in skeletal muscle. Diabetes 1997;46:1360–1363.

134. Friedman JM, Halaas JL. Leptin and the regulation of body weight in mammals. Nature 1998;395:763–770.

135. Halaas JL, Gajiwala KS, Maffei M, Cohen SL, Chait BT, Rabenowitz D, Lallone RL, Burley SK, Friedman JM. Weight-reducing effects of the plasma protein encoded by the obese gene. Science 1995;269:543–546.

136. Pelleymounter MA, Cullen MJ, Baker MB, Hecht R, Winters D, Boone T, Collins F. Effects of the obese gene product on body weight regulation in ob/ob mice. Science 1995;269:540–543.

137. Kim YB, Uotani S, Pierroz DD, Flier JS, Kahn BB. In vivo administration of leptin activates signal transduction directly in insulin-sensitive tissues: overlapping but distinct pathways from insulin. Endocrinology 2000;141:2328–2339.

138. Tartaglia LA, Dembski M, Weng X, Deng N, Culpepper J, Devos R, Richards GJ, Campfield LA, Clark FT, Deeds J, et al. Identification of the obese gene product.

cation and expression cloning of a leptin receptor, OB-R. Cell 1995;83:1263–1271.
139. Tartaglia LA. The leptin receptor. J Biol Chem 1997;272:6093–6096.
140. Schwartz MW, Seeley RJ, Campfield LA, Burn P, Baskin DG. Identification of targets of leptin action in rat hypothalamus. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1101–1106.
141. Zhou YT, Shimabukuro M, Koyama K, Lee Y, Wang MY, Trieu F, Newgard CB, Unger RH. Induction by leptin of uncoupling protein-2 and enzymes of fatty acid oxidation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:6386–6390.
142. Siegrist-Kaiser CA, Pauli V, Juge-Aubry CE, Boss O, Pernin A, Chin WW, Cusin I, Rohner-Jeanrenaud F, Burger AG, Zapf J, Meier CA. Direct effects of leptin on brown and white adipose tissue. J Clin Invest 1997;100:2858–2864.
143. Potter JJ, Womack L, Mezey E, Anania FA. Transdifferentiation of rat hepatic stellate cells results in leptin expression. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998;244:178–182.
144. Saxena NK, Ikeda K, Rockey DC, Friedman SL, Anania FA. Leptin in hepatic fibrosis: evidence for increased collagen production in stellate cells and lean littermates of ob/ob mice. Hepatology 2002;35:762–771.
145. Ikejima K, Takei Y, Honda H, Hirose M, Yoshikawa M, Zhang YJ, Lang T, Fukuda T, Yamashina S, Kitamura T, Sato N. Leptin receptor-mediated signaling regulates hepatic fibrogenesis and remodeling of extracellular matrix in the rat. Gastroenterology 2002;122:1399–1410.
146. Wunder D, Bersinger NA, Fux C, Weber R, Bernasconi E, Cavassini M, Bucher HC, Schiffer V, Schmid P, Furrer H. Plasma leptin levels in men are not related to the development of lipoatrophy during antiretroviral therapy. Aids 2005;19:1837–1842.
147. Javor ED, Cochran EK, Musso C, Young JR, DePaoli AM, Gordon P. Long-term efficacy of leptin replacement in patients with generalized lipodystrophy. Diabetes 2005;54:1994–2002.
148. Steppan CM, Bailey ST, Bhat S, Brown EJ, Banerjee RR, Wright CM, Patel HR, Ahima RS, Lazar MA. The hormone resistin links obesity to diabetes. Nature 2001;409:307–312.
149. Steppan CM, Brown EJ, Wright CM, Bhat S, Banerjee RR, Dai CY, Enders GH, Silberg DG, Wen X, Wu GD, Lazar MA. A family of tissue-specific resistin-like molecules. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:502–506.
150. Rajala MW, Obici S, Scherer PE, Rossetti L. Adipose-derived resistin and gut-derived resistin-like molecule-β selectively impair insulin action on glucose production. J Clin Invest 2003;111:225–230.
151. Pagano C, Soardo G, Pilon C, Milocco C, Basan L, Milan G, Donnini D, Faggian D, Mussap M, Plebani M, Avellini C, Feder- spil G, Sechi LA, Vettor R. Increased serum resistin in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is related to liver disease severity and not to insulin resistance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:1081–1086.
152. Perseghin G, Lattuada G, De Cobelli F, Ntali G, Esposito A, Burska A, Belloni E, Canu T, Ragogna F, Scifo P, Del Maschio A, Luzi L. Serum resistin and hepatic fat content in non-diabetic individuals. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:5122–5125.
153. Guerre-Millo M. Adipose tissue and adipokines: for better or worse. Diabetes Metab 2004;30:13–19.

154. Chen HC, Jensen DR, Myers HM, Eckel RH, Farese RV Jr. Obesity resistance and enhanced glucose metabolism in mice transplanted with white adipose tissue lacking acyl CoA:diacyl-glycerol acyltransferase 1. J Clin Invest 2003;111:1715–1722.
155. Tomas E, Tsao TS, Saha AK, Murray HE, Zhang CC, Itani SI, Lodish HF, Ruderman NB. Enhanced muscle fat oxidation and glucose transport by ACRP30 globular domain: acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibition and AMP-activated protein kinase activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:16309–16313.
156. Shklyaev S, Aslanidi G, Tennant M, Prima V, Kohlbrenner E, Kroutov V, Campbell-Thompson M, Crawford J, Shek EW, Scarpace PJ, Zolotukhin S. Sustained peripheral expression of transgene adiponectin offsets the development of diet-induced obesity in rats. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:14217–14222.
157. Baranova A, Gowder SJ, Schlauch K, Elariny H, Collantes R, Afendy A, Ong JP, Goodman Z, Chandhoke V, Younossi ZM. Gene expression of leptin, resistin, and adiponectin in the white adipose tissue of obese patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and insulin resistance. Obes Surg 2006;16:1118–1125.
158. Cnop M, Havel PJ, Utzschneider KM, Carr DB, Sinha MK, Boyko EJ, Retzlaff BM, Knopp RH, Brunzell JD, Kahn SE. Relationship of adiponectin to body fat distribution, insulin sensitivity and plasma lipoproteins: evidence for independent roles of age and sex. Diabetologia 2003;46:459–469.
159. Yamauchi T, Kamon J, Minokoshi Y, Ito Y, Waki H, Uchida S, Yamashita S, Noda M, Kita S, Ueki K, Eto K, Akanuma Y, Froguel P, Foufelle F, Ferre P, Carling D, Kimura S, Nagai R, Kahn BB, Kadowaki T. Adiponectin stimulates glucose utilization and fatty-acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase. Nat Med 2002;8:1288–1295.
160. Hui JM, Hodge A, Farrell GC, Kench JG, Kriketos A, George J. Beyond insulin resistance in NASH: TNF-α or adiponectin? Hepatology 2004;40:46–54.
161. Bugianesi E, Pagotto U, Manini R, Vanni E, Gastaldelli A, de lasio R, Gentilcore E, Natale S, Cassader M, Rizzetto M, Pasquali R, Marchesini G. Plasma adiponectin in nonalcoholic fatty liver is related to hepatic insulin resistance and hepatic fat content, not to liver disease severity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:3498–3504.
162. Xu A, Wang Y, Keshaw H, Xu LY, Lam KS, Cooper GJ. The fat-derived hormone adiponectin alleviates alcoholic and nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases in mice. J Clin Invest 2003;112:91–100.
163. You M, Considine RV, Leone TC, Kelly DP, Crabb DW. Role of adiponectin in the protective action of dietary saturated fat against alcoholic fatty liver in mice. Hepatology 2005;42:568–577.

Received December 29, 2006. Accepted February 2, 2007.
Address requests for reprints to: Frank A. Anania, MD, FACCP, AGAF, Associate Professor of Medicine, Director of Hepatology, Room 248, 615 Michael Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30322. e-mail: fanania@emory.edu; fax: (404) 712-2980.
Supported by the following US Public Health Service grants: DK062092, DK075397, and DK064399.
