
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

**Homeostatic chemokines increase survival of B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells through inactivation of transcription factor FOXO3a**

M Ticchioni${}^{1,2,6}$, M Essafi${}^{2,6}$, PY Jeandel${}^{3}$, F Davi${}^{4}$, JP Cassuto${}^{5}$, M Deckert${}^{2,6}$ and A Bernard${}^{1,2,6}$

${}^{1}$Département d'Immunologie, Hôpital de l'Archet, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France; ${}^{2}$Inserm, UMR576, Hôpital de l'Archet, Nice, France; ${}^{3}$Département de Médecine Interne, Hôpital de l'Archet, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France; ${}^{4}$Département d'Hématologie, Groupe Hospitalier de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France and ${}^{5}$Département d'Hématologie, Hôpital de l'Archet, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France

---

B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cell is characterized by the accumulation of long-lived CD5+ B lymphocytes, whose survival *in vivo* is in part dependent on exogenous factors such as cytokines and/or extracellular matrix proteins. Homeostatic chemokines are critical mediators of lymphoid cell trafficking. However, how they function in cell signaling and survival remains ill-defined. In this study, we have investigated the role of the homeostatic chemokines, CXCL12, CCL21, CCL19 and CXCL13, in B-CLL cell survival. Using primary leukemic cells isolated from 26 patients, we observed that each chemokine enhances cell survival. Chemokines induced the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p90RSK, and of Akt and its effectors GSK3 and FOXO3a. Consistently, inhibitors against mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibited chemokine-induced survival. Moreover, using a constitutively active mutated form of FOXO3a or siRNAs against FOXO3a in transfection experiments performed in primary B-CLL cells, we directly demonstrated the critical role of FOXO3a in both spontaneous and chemokine-induced B-CLL cell survival. Overall, our data support the notion that homeostatic chemokines contribute to B-CLL resistance to cell death through inactivation of the transcription factor FOXO3a, which may represent a novel therapeutic target in this hematopoietic malignancy.

Oncogene (2007) 26, 7081–7091; doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1210519; published online 14 May 2007

Keywords: B-CLL; chemokines; survival; Akt; FOXO3a

---

Correspondence: Dr M Ticchioni, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Hôpital de l'Archet, Route Saint-Antoine de Ginestière F-06202, Nice Cedex 3, France or Dr M Deckert, INSERM, UMR576, Hôpital de l'Archet, Route Saint-Antoine de Ginestière, Alpes-Maritimes, F-06202, Nice Cedex 3, France.  
E-mail: michel.ticchioni@unice.fr or deckert@unice.fr  

${}^{6}$These authors contributed equally to this work.  
Received 7 August 2006; revised 15 February 2007; accepted 28 March 2007; published online 14 May 2007

---

### Introduction

B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cell is defined by the accumulation in the periphery and the bone marrow of slowly dividing long-lived CD5+ B cells. This disease, the most frequent adult leukemia in Western countries, is heterogeneous and results mainly from a failure of cells to undergo apoptosis rather than by excessive cellular proliferation, as highlighted by an impaired balance between anti- and proapoptotic molecules such as Bcl-2 and Bax. In addition to genetic or epigenetic modifications that may alter their intrinsic survival capacities, interactions of neoplastic B cells with their environment, like cytokines or stroma, may enhance their resistance to apoptosis (Caligaris-Cappio and Hamblin, 1999; Kipps, 2003). Chemokines are low-molecular-weight molecules primarily involved in leukocyte trafficking. Physiological classification allows to distinguish between inflammatory chemokines, produced in inflamed tissues and specialized for the recruitment of effector cells, and homeostatic chemokines constitutively produced within discrete microenvironments and involved in maintaining physiological trafficking (von Andrian and Mackay, 2000; Moser and Loetscher, 2001). It is now well admitted that chemokines, in addition to trafficking, have much broader effects on their target cells, like cell growth, differentiation and survival/apoptosis (Luther and Cyster, 2001; Moser and Loetscher, 2001). However, their role in cell survival is still controversial in some cell types. For example, CXCL12 (previously known as the α-chemokine stromal-derived factor-1, SDF-1α) has been shown to enhance hematopoietic progenitor cell survival (Hodohara *et al.*, 2000; Lataillade *et al.*, 2002; Lee *et al.*, 2002), whereas other studies showed no effect on survival (Majka *et al.*, 2000; Glimm *et al.*, 2002). On T cells, CXCL12 was shown to either promote cell survival (Suzuki *et al.*, 2001) or induce apoptosis (Colamussi *et al.*, 2001). Trafficking of leukemic cells between blood and microenvironments (that is bone marrow or secondary lymphoid organs) allows them to interact sequentially and/or simultaneously with several homeostatic chemokines via expression of a specific set of receptors.

Thus, an important question is whether chemokines, in addition to regulating leukemic cell trafficking,

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL
M Ticchioni et al

provide survival signals to these cells. In this study, we have investigated the role of the homeostatic chemokines, CXCL12, CCL21, CCL19 and CXCL13, in B-CLL cell survival. We show that these chemokines provide survival signals to leukemic cells by activating the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and p90RSK, and of Akt and its effectors GSK3 and FOXO3a. The critical role of FOXO3a in both spontaneous and chemokine-induced B-CLL cell survival was further demonstrated using the transfection of either a constitutively active FOXO3a mutant or FOXO3a siRNA in primary leukemic cells. Our data emphasize the role of chemokines in B-CLL cell resistance to apoptosis and provide evidence that FOXO3a is a key mediator of this process.

Results

Homeostatic chemokines increase B-CLL cells survival

The effect of homeostatic chemokines on B-CLL cell survival was first investigated on B cells purified from 26 patients (Table 1). All patients included in this study expressed on their B cells the chemokine receptors CXCR4 (CXCL12 receptor), CCR7 (CCL19/CCL21 receptor) and CXCR5 (CXCL13 receptor). Figure 1a shows an example of the measurement of cell survival performed in one patient. Numbers in each quadrant, counter clockwise from the lower left quadrant, indicate the percentage of living, apoptotic and necrotic cells, respectively. Chemokine concentrations were determined after a dose response experiment performed on three patients (Figure 1b). Effects on cell survival from the 26 patients of this study for each chemokine and additional treatments are shown in Figure 1c. At 72h, the mean cell survival was 41.8 ± 17.7% (from 6.4 to 79.3%) in untreated cells; 55.4 ± 18.3% (14.2–83.2%) in cells preincubated with CXCL12; 52.3 ± 19.3% (8.7–82.2%) in cells preincubated with CCL21; 53.7 ± 19.5% (8.8–82%) in cells incubated with CXCL13; 63.7 ± 16.9% (24.8–84.7%) in cells incubated with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA); 50.3 ± 19.4% (13.8–79.0%) in cells incubated with anti-BCR antibodies. Differences between untreated and activated cells were statistically significant, and no statistical differences were observed between cells treated with chemokines and PMA or anti-BCR antibodies. In addition, the increase of cell survival was observed on a very large majority of patients. After 3 days of incubation, an increase of cell survival was observed in all cases in the presence of CXCL12 but one with the other chemokines. Thus, a very high proportion of patients responded to chemokines in just one direction. Note that spontaneous cell survival at 72h was also decreased in the presence of both Ly294002 (P < 0.001, 21 patients tested) and UO126 (P < 0.001, 21 patients tested; Figure 1c). By contrast, chemokines did not increase survival of peripheral normal blood B cells isolated from five healthy volunteers and cultured for 72h in the same conditions (Figure 1d).

In CLL, cell survival induced by chemokines is PI3K and ERK-dependent

Purified leukemic cells were activated for 5min by chemokines or PMA (Figure 2a). Immunoblot analysis

Table 1 Clinical characteristics of patients

| Patient no. | Sex | Age (years) | Rai | Binet | Matutes | CD38 (%) | ZAP-70 | IgVH | CCR7 (MFI)a | CXCR4 (MFI)a | CXCR5 (MFI)a |
|-------------|-----|-------------|-----|-------|---------|----------|--------|------|--------------|---------------|---------------|
| 1           | F   | 77          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 2        | Neg    | Unmut | 155          | 89            | 110           |
| 2           | F   | 53          | 0   | A     | 4/5     | 5        | Neg    | NA    | 10           | 151           | 11            |
| 3           | M   | 77          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 1        | Neg    | Mut   | 113          | 292           | 119           |
| 4           | M   | 53          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 4        | Neg    | Mut   | 83           | 179           | 96            |
| 5           | M   | 59          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 62       | Neg    | NA    | 88           | 126           | 195           |
| 6           | M   | 82          | 0   | A     | 4/5     | 2        | Neg    | Mut   | 148          | 116           | 186           |
| 7           | M   | 84          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 48       | Pos    | NA    | 123          | 235           | 214           |
| 8           | M   | 64          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 6        | Neg    | Unmut | 120          | 155           | 100           |
| 9           | M   | 77          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 6        | Neg    | Mut   | 147          | 80            | 243           |
| 10          | F   | 79          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 5        | Neg    | Mut   | 163          | 152           | 150           |
| 11          | F   | 63          | I   | A     | 5/5     | 10       | Neg    | Mut   | 93           | 151           | 268           |
| 12          | F   | 92          | I   | A     | 4/5     | 6        | Neg    | NA    | 5            | 45            | 36            |
| 13          | M   | 61          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 1        | Neg    | Mut   | 138          | 179           | 141           |
| 14          | M   | 84          | IV  | C     | 5/5     | 9        | Pos    | NA    | 100          | 225           | 59            |
| 15          | M   | 68          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 20       | Neg    | NA    | 130          | 86            | 113           |
| 16          | M   | 63          | I   | A     | 4/5     | 1        | Pos    | Unmut | 302          | 384           | 315           |
| 17          | M   | 72          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 58       | Pos    | Unmut | 132          | 100           | 100           |
| 18          | F   | 74          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 3        | Pos    | Mut   | 164          | 293           | 159           |
| 19          | M   | 78          | III | C     | 5/5     | 96       | Pos    | NA    | 99           | NA            | 139           |
| 20          | F   | 86          | II  | B     | 5/5     | 4        | Neg    | NA    | 124          | NA            | 63            |
| 21          | M   | 72          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 2        | Pos    | Mut   | 140          | NA            | 221           |
| 22          | M   | 64          | IV  | C     | 5/5     | 79       | Pos    | NA    | 36           | NA            | 24            |
| 23          | M   | 69          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 4        | Pos    | Mut   | 56           | NA            | 73            |
| 24          | M   | 77          | 0   | A     | 4/5     | 1        | Pos    | Unmut | 201          | 167           | 181           |
| 25          | M   | 60          | 0   | A     | 4/5     | 45       | Pos    | Unmut | NA           | NA            | NA            |
| 26          | M   | 77          | 0   | A     | 5/5     | 9        | Neg    | Mut   | NA           | NA            | NA            |

Abbreviation: NA, data not available. aMFI (mean fluorescence intensity) of irrelevant PE-IgG used for each patient as a negative control is consistently below 5.

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL
M Ticchioni et al

Figure 1 Homeostatic chemokines increase survival of B-CLL cells. (a) Purified leukemic B cells (10^6/ml) were incubated in medium or with CXCL12 (0.1 μg/ml), CCL21 (1 μg/ml), CXCL13 (1 μg/ml), PMA (0.1 μg/ml), anti-BCR (10 μg/ml), Ly294002 (25 μM) or U0126 (12.5 μM) for 72 h. Cell survival was then measured by annexin V/PI staining. The percentage of living, apoptotic and necrotic cells is shown in each quadrant. (b) Dose responses performed on cells isolated from three patients and cultured in the presence of different concentrations of CXCL12 for 24 h. Cell survival was measured by annexin V/PI staining and represented the mean of triplicate determinations. (c) Effects of CXCL12, CCL21 and CXCL13 on survival of purified leukemic B cells obtained from 26 patients at 72 h. The effect of PMA, anti-BCR, Ly294002 and U0126 treatment is also shown. The number of patients tested (n) and the P-value (using the non-parametric Wilcoxon-signed rank test) are shown at the top of each histogram. Cell survival was measured as in panel a, and results are expressed as the percentage of living cells. (d) Chemokine-induced cell survival on peripheral B cells isolated from five healthy volunteers and measured as above. The P-value is shown at the top of each histogram. B-CLL, B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia; PI, propidium iodide; PMA, phorbol myristate acetate.

using antibodies against phosphorylated Akt, ERK1/2 or p90RSK show that all the homeostatic chemokines tested induced their phosphorylation. The kinetics of phosphorylation was studied after activation of purified leukemic cells for different periods of time by CXCL12. Phosphorylation appears as early as 1 min after activation and was still present 30 min later (Figure 2b). The implication of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) in the activation of Akt was demonstrated by cell preincubation with the PI3K inhibitor Ly294002, before chemokine stimulation. The inhibition of Akt phosphorylation induced by chemokines, but not by PMA, suggested that in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), PI3K is a major component of Akt activation by chemokines (Figure 2a and b). The phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and p90RSK, a downstream kinase of ERK1/2, was also induced in a time-dependent manner by

CXCL12 (Figure 2b) and by other homeostatic chemokines (Figure 2c). These data are representative of 3 independent experiments and similar results have been obtained on CLL cells purified from 10 different patients. Finally, we measured cell survival in the presence of either Ly294002 or U0126 (a mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) inhibitor; Figure 2d). The effect of chemokines on cells preincubated in medium alone, in the presence of Ly294002 or in the presence of U0126 before addition of the different chemokines was tested on CLL cells purified from seven patients. The results show that both inhibitors decreased chemokine-induced cell survival. The effects on survival of leukemic cells preincubated or not with Ly294002 or U0126 were statistically different in the presence of chemokines as compared to conditions where cells were cultured in

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL
M Ticchioni et al

Figure 2 Effects of homeostatic chemokines on PI3K and ERK pathways. (a) Purified leukemic B cells (10^7/ml) were preincubated with medium, Ly294002 (25 μM) or U0126 (12.5 μM) for 3 h, then activated at 37°C for 5 min with PMA (0.1 μg/ml), CXCL12 (0.1 μg/ml), CCL21 (1 μg/ml), CCL19 (1 μg/ml), CXCL13 (1 μg/ml) or medium. Cell lysates were then analysed by immunoblotting using anti phospho-Ser473 Akt antibodies. Membranes were stripped and reblotted with anti-Akt antibody. (b) Purified leukemic B cells (10^7/ml) from one representative patient were preincubated with medium or Ly294002 (25 μM) for 3 h, then activated for different time periods with CXCL12 (0.1 μg/ml). Membranes were blotted using anti phospho-Akt or phospho-p90RSK antibodies before being stripped and reblotted with an anti-Akt antibody or an anti-ERK2 as loading control. (c) Same experiment as in panel a except that anti-BCR stimulation was used instead of CCL19. Membranes were blotted with either anti-phospho-ERK1/2 or phospho-p90RSK antibodies. Protein loading was controlled by anti-ERK2 and anti-β-actin blotting. (d) B-CLL cells purified from seven patients (10^6/ml) were preincubated with Ly294002 (12.5 μM) or U0126 (12.5 μM) for 3 h, then cultured in the presence or not of PMA, CXCL12, CCL21, CXCL13 for 72 h. Cell survival was measured by annexin-V/PI staining and represented the mean of triplicate determinations. The P-value (n = 7) is shown at the top of each histogram. ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; PI, propidium iodide; PMA, phorbol myristate acetate.

medium alone, with the only exception of cells treated with CXCL13 in the presence of Ly294002. Thus it appears that chemokine-induced cell survival requires both ERK and PI3K pathways.

Chemokines enhance Akt-mediated phosphorylation of FOXO3a in B-CLL cells

FOXO3a, a target of Akt, belongs to the Forkhead superfamily of transcription factors implicated in cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. In the presence of survival factors, FOXO3a is phosphorylated by Akt and sequestrated by 14-3-3 proteins in the cytosol, which prevents its nuclear translocation and thus activation of target genes (Birkenkamp and Coffer, 2003; Burgering and Medema, 2003). As shown in Figure 3a, FOXO3a was constitutively phosphorylated on its major Akt site, Threonine 32, in B-CLL cells from 14 patients out of 15. We found that homeostatic chemokines treatment of B-CLL cells increased further the phosphorylation of FOXO3a on Thr 32 (Figure 3b).

A time course performed with CXCL12 (Figure 3c) shows that FOXO3a was phosphorylated 1 min after stimulation, a kinetic compatible with the kinetics of Akt phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of FOXO3a was strongly inhibited by the preincubation of leukemic cells with Ly294002 (Figure 3c). These experiments are representative of experiments performed on CLL cells purified from 10 different patients. GSK3 represents another well-characterized Akt substrate (Eldar-Finkelman, 2002). We therefore monitored the phosphorylation status of GSK3 as an additional control of Akt activation in CLL cells following CXCL12 treatment. Similar to FOXO3a, the phosphorylation of GSK3 α/β Akt sites was increased upon CXCL12 treatment and blocked by Ly294002 (Figure 3c). Finally, glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-14-3-3 fusion proteins pull-down experiments on lysates of B-CLL cells activated or not with CXCL12 showed that phosphorylated FOXO3a associated with 14-3-3 proteins. This interaction was abrogated in cells treated by Ly294002 (Figure 3d). These data are representative of two independent

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL
M Ticchioni et al

a
B-CLL Patients
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

b
activated with
none CXCL 12 CXCL 13
P-FOXO3a PMA CCL 19 BCR
FOXO3a
P-Akt
Akt ERK 2
ERK 2

c
preincubated with
none LY294002
CXCL 12 (min)
0 1 5 30 0 1 5 30
P-FOXO3a
FOXO3a
P-GSK3α
P-GSK3β
GSK3α
GSK3β

d
LY294002 -
+ 
CXCL 12 (min) 0 1 0 1
GST-14-3-3 P-FOXO3a
input FOXO3a

Figure 3 Homeostatic chemokines increase FOXO3a phosphorylation. (a) Lysates from resting leukemic B cells (10⁶) from 15 patients were analysed for the phosphorylation status of FOXO3a and Akt using anti-Thr 32 and anti-Ser 473 phosphospecific antibodies, respectively. Membranes were stripped and blotted for total FOXO3a and Akt content. Protein loading was controlled by anti-ERK 2 blotting. (b) Purified leukemic B cells (10⁷/ml) were treated with medium, PMA, CXCL 12, CCL 19, CXCL 13 or anti-BCR for 5 min at 37°C. Cell lysates were then immunoblotted with anti-phospho-Thr 32 FOXO3a antibodies, before stripping and reblotting with anti-ERK 2 antibody. (c) B-CLL cells were preincubated with or without Ly 294002 (12.5 μM) for 3 h, then stimulated with CXCL 12 (0.1 μg/ml) for different times at 37°C. Lysates were analysed with anti-phospho-FOXO3a or phospho-GSK3α/β antibodies, before stripping and reblotting with an anti-GSK3 or anti-FOXO3a antibodies. (d) B-CLL cells (10 × 10⁶) were preincubated with or without Ly 294002 for 3 h, then stimulated with CXCL 12 (0.1 μg/ml) for 1 min at 37°C. Lysates were incubated with GST or GST-14-3-3 fusion proteins, and glutathione-sepharose beads. Precipitates were then analysed by immunoblotting with anti-phospho-FOXO3a antibodies. Input protein quantities were controlled by anti-FOXO3a blotting of total cell lysates. B-CLL, B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia; GST, glutathione-S-transferase; PMA, phorbol myristate acetate.

experiments and similar results have been obtained on CLL cells purified from three different patients. These results indicate that in B-CLL cells chemokines enhance the phosphorylation of Akt, which in turn phosphorylates FOXO3a allowing its interaction with 14-3-3 proteins, an event associated with a decreased pro-apoptotic activity of FOXO3a.

Expression of a constitutively activated FOXO3a mutant induces apoptosis in CLL

We examined the effect of CXCL 12 treatment on the transcriptional activation of a Bim-luciferase reporter construct transfected in CLL cells. As shown in Figure 4a, CXCL 12 treatment resulted in an important decrease of Bim-luciferase activity, indicating that CXCL 12 may affect the transcriptional activity of endogenous FOXO3a in CLL cells. These data are representative of experiments obtained on CLL cells purified from three different patients. We next over-expressed in primary B-CLL cells a mutated form of FOXO3a, FOXO3aTM (TM for triple mutant) tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP). This mutant is unable to be phosphorylated by Akt on Thr 32, Ser 253 and Ser 315 residues, and thus acts as a constitutively active protein (Brunet et al., 1999). We used an electroporation strategy, which consistently resulted in,

up to 30% of cells transfected with GFP-FOXO3a and showing high levels of expression (high, 17%) and low levels of expression (low, 13%; Figure 4b). Sub-cellular localization of GFP-FOXO3aTM protein was also assayed by confocal microscopy (Figure 4c). Co-transfection of forkhead-responsive element (FRE) or Bim promoter reporter constructs with plasmids encoding either GFP-FOXO3aTM or GFP alone showed that GFP-FOXO3aTM was functional in CLL cells, as shown by increased luciferase activities measured 18 h after transfection (Figure 4d). Cells transfected with GFP-FOXO3aTM or GFP alone were cultured in the presence of CXCL 12 or medium alone for different periods of time. Cells were then labeled with Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) and the fraction of GFP⁺ cells undergoing apoptosis was studied by flow cytometry (Figure 4e). In cells expressing high levels of GFP-FOXO3aTM (left panel), survival induced by CXCL 12 was almost abolished, as compared to cells expressing low levels of GFP-FOXO3aTM (right panel). By contrast, CXCL 12 increased survival in GFP-transfected cells. These data are representative of experiments obtained on CLL cells purified from three different patients. These results show that the survival effect triggered by chemokines is dramatically reduced when a form of FOXO3a mutated on Akt sites is expressed in CLL cells.

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL  
M Ticchioni et al  

**Figure 4** Expression of FOXO3a TM mutant increases B-CLL cell death. (a) Purified B-CLL cells were transfected with a Bim promoter luciferase reporter construct, then stimulated with CXCL12 (0.1 μg/ml). Luciferase assays were performed in triplicate 24 h after transfection. These data are representative of experiments obtained on CLL cells purified from three different patients. (b) Flow cytometry analysis of GFP-FOXO3aTM expression in transfected B-CLL cells (10 × 10⁷). Gates were set to analyse cells expressing high (high) and low levels (low) of GFP-FOXO3aTM. (c) B-CLL cells were transfected with GFP-FOXO3aTM cDNAs. Eighteen hours after transfection, cells were fixed and labeled with propidium iodide before being analysed by confocal microscopy (×63 magnification). (d) Purified B-CLL cells were transfected with GFP-FOXO3aTM or GFP cDNAs together with Forkhead response element (FRE) or Bim promoter luciferase reporter constructs. Luciferase assays were performed 18 h after transfection. (e) B-CLL cells were transfected with GFP-FOXO3aTM or GFP cDNAs and cultured for different periods of time in the presence or not of CXCL12. Cell survival was measured by flow cytometry following annexin-V/PI staining of cells expressing high (left) or low (right) levels of GFP alone or GFP-FOXO3aTM. These experiments are representative of experiments performed on CLL cells purified from three different patients. B-CLL; GFP, green fluorescent protein; PI, propidium iodide; TM, triple mutant.

**Suppression of FOXO3a expression enhances CLL spontaneous cell survival and diminishes chemokine-induced resistance to apoptosis**

Finally, we used siRNA directed against FOXO3a to suppress its expression in CLL cells. Cells were treated as above except that they were co-transfected with a pool of siRNA directed against FOXO3a and a fluorescent siRNA (siGLO) or control siRNA and fluorescent siRNA. Cells co-transfected with fluorescent siRNA were easily detectable as compared to cells electroporated in medium only (Figure 5a). After transfection, cells were kept in culture medium for 24 h to obtain a significant decrease of FOXO3a expression on siGLO+ purified cells (Figure 5b). CXCL12 was then added or not in the medium for different periods of time and cell survival was evaluated by flow cytometry as described above. As shown in Figure 5c, addition of CXCL12 for 48 or 72 h enhanced cell survival in CLL

**cells transfected with control siRNAs. By contrast, in cells transfected with siRNAs against FOXO3a, the reduction of FOXO3a expression significantly enhanced basal cell survival both at 48 and 72 h, whereas it almost abolished the increase of cell survival observed following CXCL12 treatment. These data are representative of experiments obtained on CLL cells purified from three different patients. Together, these results indicate that FOXO3a plays a key role in spontaneous CLL cell survival and in chemokine-induced cell survival.**

**Discussion**

It is known for long that microenvironment favors the growth and survival of malignant lymphocytes in CLL. In this work, we show that homeostatic chemokines, CXCL12, CXCL13, CCL21 and CCL19, which are all

Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL
M Ticchioni et al

---

**Figure 5** Effects of inhibition of FOXO3a expression on B-CLL cell survival. Purified B-CLL cells (10 × 10⁷) were transfected with medium only, a pool of four siRNA directed against FOXO3a and fluorescent siRNA (siGLO), or siRNA control and fluorescent siRNA. (a) Flow cytometry analysis of siGLO-associated fluorescence from a representative transfection. Gates were set to show fluorescent and non-fluorescent cells. (b) To evaluate the protein expression of FOXO3a on CLL cells transfected with siRNAs, siGLO⁺ cells were sorted by FACS 24h after the transfection. Lysates from purified siGLO⁺ cells were then subjected to immunoblotting analysis. (c) Cell survival was measured by flow cytometry analysis of annexin-V/PI staining on siGLO⁺ cells treated or not with CXCL12 for 48 and 72h. These experiments are representative of experiments performed on CLL cells purified from three different patients. B-CLL, B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting.

expressed by lymph nodes and involved in the physiological trafficking of B cells also provide strong survival signals to leukemic cells from B-CLL mainly through the inactivation of the proapoptotic transcription factor FOXO3a. Our results also indicate that spontaneous and chemokine-induced leukemic cells survival requires Akt-dependent inactivation of FOXO3a.

The chemokines tested in this study are likely to interact with leukemic cells *in vivo*, as they are all expressed in lymph nodes and play a critical role for B-cell entry into lymph nodes and Peyer's patches (Okada *et al.*, 2002). Recent data also show that chemokines participate in CLL resistance to apoptosis. Blood-derived nurse-like cells enhance leukemic cell survival through both production of CXCL12 and additional factors such as BAFF or APRIL (Burger *et al.*, 2000; Nishio *et al.*, 2005), whereas use of blocking peptides directed against CXCR4 inhibited a wide range of CXCL12 functions in CLL, including apoptosis (Burger *et al.*, 2005). These results and ours fit well with the current notion that chemokines in addition to their role in cell trafficking play broader functions in cellular physiology and physiopathology. It is noteworthy that homeostatic chemokines are present in multiple microenvironments such as bone marrow or secondary lymphoid organs like spleen or mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue. Whether other homeostatic chemokines specific to these locations or other extrinsic factors could act in concert to provide survival signals to leukemic cells remains to be determined.

We addressed the question of how these homeostatic chemokines mediate cell survival in CLL. The Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK MAP kinase pathway has been involved in several cellular responses, including apoptosis (Bacarini, 2002). In CLL, Pepper *et al.* (2003) reported that EB1089, a vitamin D3 analog induces apoptosis in B-CLL via suppression of ERK activity. In addition, inhibition of this pathway induces apoptosis in different hematopoietic cells such as the murine erythroleukemia SKT6 cells (Nagata and Todokoro, 1999), normal erythroid progenitor cells (Mori *et al.*, 2003) or in hairy cells of hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) (Kamiguti *et al.*, 2003). However, while ERK1/2 is constitutively phosphorylated in HCL, in CLL cells purified from three patients, ERK1/2 phosphorylation was absent in two cases and only weakly present in the third (Kamiguti *et al.*, 2003). These results are consistent with our data showing no or little constitutive phosphorylation of
Chemokines, FOXO3a and B-CLL  
M Ticchioni et al  

ERK 1/2. By contrast, CLL cells treatment with UO 126  
inhibited the survival effect promoted by chemokines  
and completely abrogated the phosphorylation of  
ERK 1/2. Interestingly, the level of ERK and p90RSK  
activation was lower in cells treated by LY 294002 than  
in untreated cells, suggesting that in B-CLL cells two  
pathways lead to ERK activation by chemokines, one  
being partially dependent on PI3K activity. A previous  
work showed that CXCL 12 induces the phosphorylation  
of ERK 1/2 in CLL (Burger et al., 2000). Our study  
further extends this observation to other homeostatic  
chemokines, namely CCL 21, CCL 19 and CXCL 13,  
establishing that chemokine-induced CLL cell survival  
is in part mediated through MAPK pathway activation.  
In this study, we have also investigated the implication  
of the PI3K/Akt pathway in chemokine-induced  
leukemic cell survival. The PI3K/Akt pathway has  
emerged during the past years as a key regulator of  
multiple cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation, metabolism and apoptosis, and several  
components of this pathway are dysregulated in several  
human cancers (Vivanco and Sawyers, 2002). However,  
its role in B-CLL cell survival is still unclear. We found  
that Akt is constitutively phosphorylated in B-CLL cells  
from 15 patients and that chemokines treatment further  
increases its phosphorylation in a PI3K-dependent  
manner, suggesting that Akt activity participates to the  
regulation of both spontaneous and chemokine-induced  
cell survival. In addition, Ly 294002 significantly decreased  
chemokine-induced cell survival, with the only  
exception of CXCL 13 treatment. This data seems to be  
contradictory with a previous study showing that PI3K-  
dependent B-CLL cell survival relied on PKCδ activation rather than Akt (Ringshausen et al., 2002). The  
explanation for this discrepancy is unclear and may  
come from different experimental approaches. However,  
in our study, constitutive Akt phosphorylation was  
directly assessed by comparison to chemokine, PMA  
and anti-BCR treatment. In addition, PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted in chromosome 10)  
which negatively regulates the PI3K/Akt pathway, is  
absent or diminished in almost 50% of CLL (Leupin  
et al., 2003). Although other mechanisms cannot be  
excluded, the absence of such a negative control is likely  
to account for a significant fraction of the sustained Akt  
phosphorylation found in leukemic cells from our study.  
One major way by which Akt mediates cell survival is  
through the phosphorylation and inactivation of Forkhead box class O (FOXO) proteins, a family of  
transcription factors regulating cell proliferation and  
survival, and stress responses (Brunet et al., 1999;  
Birkenkamp and Coffer, 2003; Burgering and Medema,  
2003). In hematopoietic cells, two major members,  
FOXO1 and FOXO3a, represent the FOXO family.  
Because the phosphorylation status of FOXO3a has  
been linked to increased resistance to cell death in a  
number of hematopoietic cells, we hypothesized that  
FOXO3a may represent an important regulator of  
B-CLL cell survival. Indeed, we found that FOXO3a  
is constitutively phosphorylated on its Akt target site  
Thr 32 in B-CLL cells. All homeostatic chemokines  

tested in this study increase the phosphorylation of  
FOXO3a on its Akt sites. This phosphorylation is  
largely Akt-dependent, with a kinetic fully compatible  
with chemokine-induced Akt phosphorylation, and it is  
largely inhibited by cell preincubation with the PI3K  
inhibitor LY 294002. In addition, we observed that  
FOXO3a was constitutively associated with 14-3-3  
proteins and that this interaction was enhanced following cell stimulation with CXCL 12. This event is likely  
to prevent its nuclear localization and thus activation  
by FOXO3a of proapoptotic target genes. Finally,  
the expression in B-CLL cells of a form of FOXO3a  
mutated on all Akt phosphorylation sites or siRNA-  
mediated suppression of FOXO3a expression dramatically decreased CXCL 12-induced cell survival. Overall,  
these data support the notion that a large part of the  
anti-apoptotic effect mediated by chemokines in CLL is  
FOXO3a-dependent.  
Interestingly, we observed that inhibition of FOXO3a  
expression also increases spontaneous cell survival,  
suggesting that a significant part of spontaneous CLL  
cell survival can be mediated through intrinsic modulation  
of FOXO3a phosphorylation/inactivation. Whether  
this process stems from aberrant Akt activity downstream PI3K (Ringshausen et al., 2002) and/or PTEN  
(Leupin et al., 2003) signaling remains to be determined.  
In our hands, pharmacological inhibition of PI3K in  
CLL does not completely decrease constitutive FOXO3a  
phosphorylation, suggesting the existence of PI3K-independent mechanisms. Indeed, in human breast tumors,  
the cytoplasm sequestration of FOXO3a has been  
reported to rely on the phosphorylation of FOXO3a  
Serine 644 residue by IKKβ (inhibitor of NF-κB  
kinase β; Hu et al., 2004), a process that remains to be  
investigated in CLL.  
In conclusion, our work shows that homeostatic  
chemokines, which are constitutively expressed in the  
different microenvironments leukemic cells circulate  
within, are involved in B-CLL survival through activation  
of MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways. Our data also  
demonstrate and emphasize the role of inactivation  
FOXO3a in both constitutive and chemokine-induced  
B-CLL cell resistance to apoptosis and suggests that it  
might constitute a therapeutic target in this disease.  

Materials and methods  

Patients  
Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 26 patients with  
B-CLL. All the patients included in this study gave their  
informed consent according to the Institutional Review Board  
at the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Nice. Diagnosis of  
B-CLL was based on clinical and immunophenotypic criteria.  
Patients included in this study were either untreated or had not  
received chemotherapy or steroids for a period of at least 3  
months before the investigation.  

Reagents, antibodies and plasmid constructs  
The chemokines used in this study (CXCL 12, CCL 21, CCL 19 and  
CXCL 13) were obtained from R&D Systems (Abingdon, UK).  
The following antibodies: anti-PE-CXCR 4, -CCR 7, -CXCR 5  
monoclonal antibody (mAb) were from R&D Systems; anti-IgM was from DakoCytomation (Trappes, France); anti-FITC-CD5, anti-APC-CD19, anti-PE-CD38, -CD56, -CD3 and anti-PE isotype mouse control IgG were from Becton-Dickinson (San Jose, CA, USA); anti-ZAP-70 was obtained from Upstate (Charlottesville, VA, USA), IgG2a isotype control and FITC-GAM were from Pharmingen (San Diego, CA, USA); anti-phospho-ERK1/2, anti-phospho-Akt, anti-Akt, anti-phospho-FOXO3a, anti-FOXO3a, anti-phospho-GSK3α/β polyclonal antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA) and anti-GSK3β was purchased from Alexis (San Diego, CA, USA). PMA was obtained from Sigma (St Louis, MI, USA), Ly294002 and U0126 were from Cell Signaling. Pools of four siRNA duplexes directed against FOXO3a, control siRNAs, fluorescent siRNAs (used in co-transfection experiments) were from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO, USA). FRE and Bim promoter luciferase reporter constructs were a generous gift from Anne Brunet (San Francisco, CA, USA) and Eric W Lam (London, UK), respectively. The GST-14-3-3τ plasmid was kindly provided by Y-C Liu (San Diego, CA, USA). To generate N-terminal GFP-tagged FOXO3a TM constructs, the cDNAs encoding FOXO3a TM was amplified from pcDNA3 HA-FOXO3a TM (Charvet *et al.*, 2003) by PCR using the following oligonucleotide primers: forward, 5′-catctcgagatggcagaggccaccggc-3′; reverse, 5′-gtcggatccgcctggcacccagctctg-3′. Following digestion with XhoI and BamHI, the PCR products were cloned into pEGFP-C3 vector (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) and sequenced.

**Cell preparation, culture and apoptosis assay**

Peripheral mononuclear cells were isolated from peripheral blood by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation. Leukemic B cells were then isolated by magnetic selection using magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. B-cell purity was >98%. After purification, cells were cultured at the concentration of 1 × 10^6/ml for 24 or 72 h in RPMI containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 1 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM pyruvate. Chemokines were added at the initiation of the culture at the following concentrations: CXCL12 100 ng/ml and CCL21, CCL19, CXCL13 at 1 μg/ml. Note that these chemokine concentrations were also found to induce the maximal migration index of B-CLL cells in a cell migration assay (data not shown; Ticchioni *et al.*, 2002). When used, inhibitors were first added 3 h before chemokines. The evaluation of living cells was done by double staining with annexin V-FITC and PI according to the manufacturer's instructions (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA, USA) and analysis was made by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur, Becton-Dickinson). In transfection experiments, we used annexin V-PE purchased from the same manufacturer (BD Biosciences).

**Cell transfection and reporter assays**

Transient transfections into human B-CLL cells were performed using the AMAXA nucleofection system (AMAXA GmbH, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, cells were thawed and cultured for 18 h in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS and glutamine. CLL cells (10^7) were washed and resuspended in 100 μl of Buffer V (AMAXA), mixed with 10–15 μg of plasmid DNA or 1 μM of siRNA duplex (control or against FOXO3a) and electroporated using program U-15 on AMAXA nucleofector device. Cells were rapidly transferred to 37°C preheated medium and incubated for 24–72 h at 37°C, 5% CO₂.

Luciferase reporter assays were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on lysates from B-CLL cells transfected with pEGFP or pEGFP-FOXO3aTM vectors, and the indicated reporter plasmid. Luciferase activities were measured using a luminometer (EG&G Berthold; PerkinElmer Life Sciences, Waltham, MA, USA). Normalization of transfection efficiency was performed by gating on GFP-positive cells. Normalized luciferase activities were determined in triplicate and expressed as fold increase relative to the basal activity seen in pEGFP vector-transfected cells.

**Immunoblot analysis and GST pull-down assay**

GST-14-3-3τ fusion proteins were produced as described previously (Charvet *et al.*, 2003). Cells (10^7/ml) in RPMI containing 10% FCS, and 25 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (pH 7.5), were stimulated at 37°C for the indicated time with different chemokines in the presence or not of pharmacological inhibitors. Activation was stopped by the addition of 1 ml of ice-cold stop buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM Na₂P₂O₇ and 2 mM Na₃VO₄). After centrifugation, cells were resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100 in 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 5 mM NaF, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) for 30 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15 000 g for 15 min at 4°C. For GST pull-down, lysates were incubated with 5 μg of GST-14-3-3τ for 3 h at 4°C, followed by incubation with glutathione-sepharose 4B beads (Pharmacia, GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) for 1 h before being washed three times in lysis buffer. Whole-cell lysates or precipitates were then separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), transferred to nitrocellulose filters and analysed by immunoblotting using enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham, GE Healthcare).

**Measurement of CD38 and ZAP-70 expression**

ZAP-70 expression was determined by flow cytometry on thawed lymphoid cells as described previously (Crespo *et al.*, 2003). Briefly, cells were first fixed and permeabilized using the Fix & Perm kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Caltag Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA), then incubated either with an anti-ZAP or an isotype control antibody followed by secondary antibody (FITC-GAM), before being incubated with PE-CD56, PE-CD3 and APC-CD19 mAbs. A CLL was considered as ZAP-70-positive, when more than 20% of the CD19 cells expressed ZAP-70. CD38 expression was measured by a three-color flow cytometry technique as described previously (Durig *et al.*, 2002).

**IgHV mutational status**

Analysis of IgHV genes was performed on leukemic cells obtained from peripheral blood after Ficoll Hypaque centrifugation. Briefly, amplification of immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable regions by PCR was performed on DNA with consensus primers for the VH framework region 1 and JH genes (Aubin *et al.*, 1995) or following the BIOMED-2 protocols (van Dongen *et al.*, 2003). Purified PCR products were sequenced either directly or after a cloning procedure using an automated DNA sequencer. Sequence data were analysed using IgBLAST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/igblast) and the ImMunoGeneTics database (IMGT, http://imgt.cines.fr). The sequences having 98% or higher homology with the closest germline counterpart were considered unmutated, and those with a homology less than 98% as mutated.

Statistical analysis

Statistical significances were determined using the non-parametric Wilcoxon-signed rank test and the Mann-Whitney test as appropriate. \( P < 0.05 \) was considered to be statistically significant. Data from groups of patients are expressed as mean ± s.d., whereas data from individual experiments are expressed as mean ± s.e.m.

Acknowledgements

We thank Frederic Brau for its help on confocal microscopy, Eric W-F Lam and Anne Brunet for Bim promoter and

References

Aubin J, Davi F, Nguyen-Salomon F, Leboeuf D, Debert C, Taher M *et al.* (1995). Description of a novel FR1 IgH PCR strategy and its comparison with three other strategies for the detection of clonality in B cell malignancies. *Leukemia* **9**: 471–479.

Baccarini M. (2002). An old kinase on a new path: Raf and apoptosis. *Cell Death Differ* **9**: 783–785.

Birkenkamp KU, Coffer PJ. (2003). FOXO transcription factors as regulators of immune homeostasis: molecules to die for? *J Immunol* **171**: 1623–1629.

Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS *et al.* (1999). Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. *Cell* **96**: 857–868.

Burger JA, Tsukada N, Burger M, Zvaifler NJ, Dell'Aquila M, Kipps TJ. (2000). Blood-derived nurse-like cells protect chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells from spontaneous apoptosis through stromal cell-derived factor-1. *Blood* **96**: 2655–2663.

Burger M, Hartmann T, Krome M, Rawluk J, Tamamura H, Fujii N *et al.* (2005). Small peptide inhibitors of the CXCR4 chemokine receptor (CD184) antagonize the activation, migration, and antiapoptotic responses of CXCL12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells. *Blood* **106**: 1824–1830.

Burgering BM, Medema RH. (2003). Decisions on life and death: FOXO Forkhead transcription factors are in command when PKB/Akt is off duty. *J Leukoc Biol* **73**: 689–701.

Caligaris-Cappio F, Hamblin TJ. (1999). B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a bird of a different feather. *J Clin Oncol* **17**: 399–408.

Charvet C, Alberti I, Luciano F, Jacquel A, Bernard A, Auberge P *et al.* (2003). Proteolytic regulation of Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a by caspase-3-like proteases. *Oncogene* **22**: 4557–4568.

Colamussi ML, Secchiero P, Gonelli A, Marchisio M, Zauli G, Capitani S. (2001). Stromal derived factor-1 alpha (SDF-1 alpha) induces CD4+ T cell apoptosis via the functional up-regulation of the Fas (CD95)/Fas ligand (CD95L) pathway. *J Leukoc Biol* **69**: 263–270.

Crespo M, Bosch F, Villamor N, Bellosillo B, Colomer D, Rozman M *et al.* (2003). ZAP-70 expression as a surrogate for immunoglobulin-variable-region mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. *N Engl J Med* **348**: 1764–1775.

Durig J, Naschar M, Schmucker U, Renzing-Kohler K, Holter T, Huttmann A *et al.* (2002). CD38 expression is an important prognostic marker in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. *Leukemia* **16**: 30–35.

Eldar-Finkelman H. (2002). Glycogen synthase kinase 3: an emerging therapeutic target. *Trends Mol Med* **8**: 126–132.

Glimm H, Tang P, Clark-Lewis I, von Kalle C, Eaves C. (2002). Ex vivo treatment of proliferating human cord blood stem cells with stroma-derived factor-1 enhances their ability to engraft NOD/SCID mice. *Blood* **99**: 3454–3457.

FRE luciferase reporter constructs, respectively, and Sophie Raynaud for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale, the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer and the Groupe d'Etudes et de Recherche Clinique, Biologique et Thérapeutique. ME is a recipient of a research fellowship from the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer (ML/MLD/CM-A03.04) and PYJ is a recipient of a research fellowship from the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale.

Hodohara K, Fujii N, Yamamoto N, Kaushansky K. (2000). Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) acts together with thrombopoietin to enhance the development of megakaryocytic progenitor cells (CFU-MK). *Blood* **95**: 769–775.

Hu MC, Lee DF, Xia W, Golfman LS, Ou-Yang F, Yang JY *et al.* (2004). IkappaB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. *Cell* **117**: 225–237.

Kamiguti AS, Harris RJ, Slupsky JR, Baker PK, Cawley JC, Zuzel M. (2003). Regulation of hairy-cell survival through constitutive activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. *Oncogene* **22**: 2272–2284.

Kipps TJ. (2003). Immunobiology of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. *Curr Opin Hematol* **10**: 312–318.

Lataillade JJ, Clay D, Bourin P, Herodin F, Dupuy C, Jasmin C *et al.* (2002). Stromal cell-derived factor 1 regulates primitive hematopoiesis by suppressing apoptosis and by promoting G(0)/G(1) transition in CD34(+) cells: evidence for an autocrine/paracrine mechanism. *Blood* **99**: 1117–1129.

Lee Y, Gotoh A, Kwon HJ, You M, Kohli L, Mantel C *et al.* (2002). Enhancement of intracellular signaling associated with hematopoietic progenitor cell survival in response to SDF-1/CXCL12 in synergy with other cytokines. *Blood* **99**: 4307–4317.

Leupin N, Cenni B, Novak U, Hugli B, Graber HU, Tobler A *et al.* (2003). Disparate expression of the PTEN gene: a novel finding in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL). *Br J Haematol* **121**: 97–100.

Luther SA, Cyster JG. (2001). Chemokines as regulators of T cell differentiation. *Nat Immunol* **2**: 102–107.

Majka M, Janowska-Wieczorek A, Ratajczak J, Kowalska MA, Vilaire G, Pan ZK *et al.* (2000). Stromal-derived factor 1 and thrombopoietin regulate distinct aspects of human megakaryopoiesis. *Blood* **96**: 4142–4151.

Mori M, Uchida M, Watanabe T, Kirito K, Hatake K, Ozawa K *et al.* (2003). Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases ERK1 and ERK2 induces Bcl-xL up-regulation via inhibition of caspase activities in erythropoietin signaling. *J Cell Physiol* **195**: 290–297.

Moser B, Loetscher P. (2001). Lymphocyte traffic control by chemokines. *Nat Immunol* **2**: 123–128.

Nagata Y, Todokoro K. (1999). Requirement of activation of JNK and p38 for environmental stress-induced erythroid differentiation and apoptosis and of inhibition of ERK for apoptosis. *Blood* **94**: 853–863.

Nishio M, Endo T, Tsukada N, Ohata J, Kitada S, Reed JC *et al.* (2005). Nurselike cells express BAFF and APRIL, which can promote survival of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells via a paracrine pathway distinct from that of SDF-1alpha. *Blood* **106**: 1012–1020.

Okada T, Ngo VN, Ekland EH, Forster R, Lipp M, Littman DR *et al.* (2002). Chemokine requirements for B cell entry to lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches. *J Exp Med* **196**: 65–75.

Pepper C, Thomas A, Hoy T, Milligan D, Bentley P, Fegan C. (2003). The vitamin D3 analog EB1089 induces apoptosis via a p53-independent mechanism involving p38 MAP kinase activation and suppression of ERK activity in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells *in vitro*. *Blood* 101: 2454–2460.

Ringshausen I, Schneller F, Bogner C, Hipp S, Duyster J, Peschel C *et al.* (2002). Constitutively activated phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K) is involved in the defect of apoptosis in B-CLL: association with protein kinase Cdelta. *Blood* 100: 3741–3748.

Suzuki Y, Rahman M, Mitsuya H. (2001). Diverse transcriptional response of CD4(+) T cells to stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1: cell survival promotion and priming effects of SDF-1 on CD4(+) T cells. *J Immunol* 167: 3064–3073.

Ticchioni M, Charvet C, Noraz N, Lamy L, Steinberg M, Bernard A *et al.* (2002). Signaling through ZAP-70 is required for CXCL12-mediated T-cell transendothelial migration. *Blood* 99: 3111–3118.

van Dongen JJ, Langerak AW, Bruggemann M, Evans PA, Hummel M, Lavender FL *et al.* (2003). Design and standardization of PCR primers and protocols for detection of clonal immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene recombinations in suspect lymphoproliferations: report of the BIOMED-2 Concerted Action BMH4-CT98–3936. *Leukemia* 17: 2257–2317.

Vivanco I, Sawyers CL. (2002). The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase AKT pathway in human cancer. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2: 489–501.

von Andrian UH, Mackay CR. (2000). T-cell function and migration. Two sides of the same coin. *N Engl J Med* 343: 1020–1034.
