
Nonhomologous  
End-Joining in Bacteria:  
A Microbial Perspective  

Robert S. Pitcher, Nigel C. Brissett,  
and Aidan J. Doherty  

Genome Damage and Stability Center, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RQ,  
United Kingdom; email: ajd21@sussex.ac.uk  

Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2007. 61:259–82  
First published online as a Review in Advance on  
June 7, 2007  

The Annual Review of Microbiology is online at  
micro.annualreviews.org  

This article's doi:  
10.1146/annurev.micro.61.080706.093354  

Copyright © 2007 by Annual Reviews.  
All rights reserved  
0066-4227/07/1013-0259$20.00  

**Key Words**  
double-strand break, Ku, ligase D, DNA repair  

**Abstract**  
In eukaryotic cells, repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway is critical for genomic stability. A functionally homologous repair apparatus, composed of Ku and a multifunctional DNA ligase (LigD), has recently been identified in many prokaryotes. Eukaryotic organisms employ a large number of factors to repair breaks by NHEJ. In contrast, the bacterial NHEJ complex is a two-component system that, despite its relative simplicity, possesses all of the break-recognition, end-processing, and ligation activities required to facilitate the complex task of DSB repair. Here, we review recent discoveries on the structure and function of the bacterial NHEJ repair apparatus. In particular, we discuss the evolutionary origins of this DSB repair pathway, how the diverse activities within the prokaryotic end-joining complex cooperate to facilitate DSB repair, the physiological roles of bacterial NHEJ, and finally, the essential function of NHEJ in the life cycle of mycobacteriophage.

Contents

OVERVIEW OF  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING REPAIR ………… 260  

IDENTIFICATION OF  
BACTERIAL Ku  
HOMOLOGUES …………………… 261  

BACTERIOPHAGE Ku ……………… 263  
Mycobacterial Ku Homologues … 263  
Bacteriophage Mu Gam ………… 263  

BACTERIAL  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING DNA  
LIGASES ……………………… 263  
Polymerase Activities of LigD … 264  
NHEJ Polymerase Preferentially  
Incorporates NTPs ……………… 264  
Structure of Bacterial NHEJ  
Polymerase …………………… 266  
DNA Binding and Extension of  
NHEJ Substrates by  
End-Joining Polymerases ……… 267  
Nuclease Activities of LigD …… 268  
Ligation Activity of LigD ……… 268  

A TWO-COMPONENT  
BACTERIAL  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING REPAIR  
COMPLEX ……………………… 269  

Reconstitution of Bacterial NHEJ  
In Vitro ………………………… 269  
Reconstitution of Bacterial NHEJ  
in Yeast ………………………… 269  

PROCESSING AND REPAIR OF  
NONHOMOLOGOUS ENDS ……… 270  
Precision of NHEJ Repair ……… 272  

PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLES OF  
THE BACTERIAL  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING PATHWAY ……… 273  
Resistance of *B. subtilis* to IR … 273  
Effects of IR on *M. smegmatis* … 274  
A Role for NHEJ in the  
Desiccation Resistance of  
Bacteria ………………………… 274  

ADDITIONAL ROLES FOR  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING …………………… 275  
NHEJ Facilitates Genome  
Circularization in  
Mycobacteriophage …………… 275  
Stationary-Phase Mutagenesis … 276  

REGULATION OF  
HOMOLOGOUS  
RECOMBINATION AND  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING …………………… 276  

---

OVERVIEW OF  
NONHOMOLOGOUS  
END-JOINING REPAIR  

**DSB**: double-strand break  
**IR**: ionizing radiation produces double-strand breaks in DNA  
**HR**: homologous recombination  
**NHEJ**: nonhomologous end-joining  

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are one of the most lethal forms of DNA damage, as even a single DSB is sufficient to kill a cell (13, 22, 43, 44). Incorrectly repaired or unrepaired DSBs can lead to gross chromosomal rearrangements, aneuploidy, and, ultimately, carcinogenesis and cell death in mammalian cells. DSBs are estimated to occur at a frequency of two to five times a day in mammalian cells. Breaks are generated by a variety of sources including endogenously produced reactive oxy-

gen species, exogenous agents such as ionizing radiation (IR), and radiomimetic drugs. They are also produced during DNA replication fork collapse and by specialized cellular processes, such as V(D)J recombination and meiosis. Two major pathways have evolved to repair DSBs and maintain genetic integrity: homologous recombination (HR) (10) and nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) (13, 22, 43, 44). In HR repair processes, an intact DNA duplex, homologous to the DSB site, acts as a template for the resynthesis of the broken strands. Conversely, in NHEJ repair, extensive homology between DNA duplexes

is not required, as the two DNA ends are re-joined directly together. This process is often facilitated by small-gapped DNA structures generated by microhomology alignment of DNA ends (42, 53, 70) that require resection and extension prior to ligation. The NHEJ pathway in eukaryotes is best defined by its core constituents that are strictly required for DSB repair under all circumstances: the Ku70/80 heterodimer (Yku70/Yku80 in yeast) and the ligase IV/XRCC4/XLF (LXX) complex (Dnl4/Lif1/Nej1 in yeast). Initially, Ku binds DNA ends at DSBs with high affinity in a sequence- and overhang-independent manner (6), potentially aligning the termini and protecting the ends from unspecific nucleolytic degradation (66, 82). Once bound to DNA, Ku recruits the LXX complex, thereby stimulating ligase IV activity. Higher eukaryotes also require the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) (44), although no homologue has been established in yeast. The MRX (Mre11/Rad50/Xrs2) complex is also required for NHEJ repair in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* (13). Additional factors, such as polymerases (*μ*, *λ*, and Pol4), nucleases (Artemis and Fen1), and other additional activities (polynucleotide kinase and phosphatase), are required to process DNA ends prior to ligation (13, 22, 43). Proteins with these activities are primarily recruited to the termini of DSBs through physical interactions with the Ku (or DNA-PK) complex (46, 47, 56), further highlighting the central position occupied by Ku in the NHEJ-mediated DSB repair pathway. Eukaryotic NHEJ has been reviewed extensively elsewhere, and therefore in this review we focus on the recent discovery of a related NHEJ DSB repair pathway in prokaryotic organisms and discuss the molecular processes that underpin this repair system.

**IDENTIFICATION OF BACTERIAL Ku HOMOLOGUES**

HR, in common with all of the major DNA repair pathways, was first described in prokary-

Phage Gam
Prokaryotic Ku
Eukaryotic Ku

vWa

SAP

**Figure 1**

Evolution of Ku proteins. The presence of Ku homologues in all kingdoms suggests that their existence predates the branching of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic domains of life. Primordial Ku probably existed as a homodimer, similar to the phage Ku-like proteins (Gam), that protected linear DNA ends from nucleolytic degradation. The next step in the evolution of Ku may have been driven by a necessity to interact with DNA ligase. This process gave rise to a two-component NHEJ repair complex. Gene duplication resulted in a heterodimeric prokaryotic Ku, and finally, the acquisition of additional domains (vWA and SAP) probably led to the evolution of the modular architecture and functional diversification epitomized by the eukaryotic Ku70/80 heterodimer.

Ku80 (23, 28), the overall fold of each Ku protein is similar. Ku70/80 forms a heterodimeric complex with an open ring-like structure through which the DNA end is threaded (Figure 1), explaining the preference of Ku for binding to DNA ends and hairpins. Although a structure of the bacterial Ku homologue has not been elucidated, sequence-threading analysis predicts that it forms a structurally related dimeric complex with a central ring-like structure (Figure 1) (8, 16).

Bacterial Ku homologues are present predominantly as single genes, suggesting that their protein products function as homodimers (4, 17). However, there are a number of exceptions, including the adjacent Ku genes (*mlr9624* and *mlr9623*) from *Mesorhizobium loti*, which have been proposed to represent a primordial heterodimeric Ku complex (17). Weller et al. (85) established that mycobacterial Ku forms homodimeric complexes in solution that bind preferentially to the ends of double-stranded (ds)DNA. Ku also has the ability to load onto linear DNA, in a length-dependent fashion, like beads on a string, suggesting it can passively translocate along DNA.

The discovery of Ku in bacteria suggests that it is an ancient protein whose existence predates the branching of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic domains of life, although Ku has only been identified in one archaeal species and appears otherwise absent from this kingdom. The primordial ancestor of Ku most likely existed as a homodimer and resembled the central core domain, conserved between eukaryotic and prokaryotic Ku proteins. Subsequently, gene duplication and domain fusion events probably led to the evolution of the more complex domain architecture found in the eukaryotic Ku70/80 heterodimers (Figure 1). The atypical bacterial Ku

complexes Sc-Ku and Ml-Ku may represent genetic snapshots of this evolutionary process.

**BACTERIOPHAGE Ku**

**Mycobacterial Ku Homologues**

A recent study has identified the Ku homologues Omega-Ku (Ω-Ku; gp206) and Corndog-Ku (CD-Ku; gp87) in the genomes of the two mycobacteriophages (Omega and Corndog) (57, 61). The amino acid sequences of the phage and mycobacterial Ku homologues are highly similar, suggesting that they were probably acquired by lateral gene transfer events. Although both phages were identified from environmental samples using a sacrificial host strain (*Mycobacterium smegmatis*), the natural hosts are unknown (57). Both phage Ku proteins form homodimers in solution and bind the termini of linear dsDNA comparably to other Ku proteins (61), consistent with in silico sequence and structural predictions. The bacteriophage Ku proteins have recently been implicated in viral genome circularization events (61), and this intriguing role for Ku is discussed below.

**Bacteriophage Mu Gam**

Bacteriophage Mu infects a number of enteric bacteria, including *Escherichia coli*. The Mu phage genome encodes a protein, Gam, that shares some sequence homology with eukaryotic and bacterial Ku homologues (11). Genes that encode Gam proteins have also been identified in the bacterial genomes of *Haemophilus influenzae*, *Salmonella typhi*, *Neisseria meningitidis*, and *E. coli* O157:H7, all of which contain near-complete Mu prophage sequences, suggesting that these Gam proteins are prophage in origin. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the Gam family represents a separate cluster that is distinct from eukaryotic, bacterial, or mycobacteriophage Ku proteins, although Gam and bacterial Ku homologues probably diverged from each other more recently. Gam, like bacterial Ku homologues, contains only the core dimerization and DNA binding domains of the larger eukaryotic Ku proteins. Gam homodimerizes and binds preferentially to linear dsDNA in a sequence- and overhang-independent manner, and it can transfer between adjacent DNA molecules (11).

Despite its similarity to Ku, there is no evidence implicating Gam in any NHEJ-related processes. Gam may simply protect the DNA ends of linear viral genomes from nucleolytic degradation by host exonucleases, upon injection into the host, prior to integration into the genome (11). It is interesting to speculate that the NHEJ repair pathway may have evolved from a related primordial Gam/Ku protein whose basic function was to bind to and protect the ends of linear DNA. Mu phage, *H. influenzae*, and *S. typhi* employ site-specific recombinases with homology to mammalian V(D)J recombinase Rag-1, and it will be of interest to discover if bacterial Gam can act in these processes in a manner similar to that of eukaryotic Ku in V(D)J recombination.

Gam-containing species of bacteria are naturally competent, enabling them to integrate foreign DNA into their chromosomes. Additionally, Mu phage-infected *E. coli* are significantly more competent than uninfected cells (2). This is highly reminiscent of *S. cerevisiae*, which can efficiently uptake and maintain linear DNA only when Ku is present (7). Bacterial evolution relies predominantly on lateral gene transfer events, often involving phage-mediated genetic transfer, and therefore it is tempting to speculate that Gam and Ku proteins may play a role in facilitating these exchange events.

**BACTERIAL NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING DNA LIGASES**

The first indication, other than the presence of Ku homologues, that a functional NHEJ pathway existed in bacteria came from the observation that the genes encoding bacterial Ku homologues are associated with putative

www.annualreviews.org • Nonhomologous End-Joining in Bacteria
ATP-dependent DNA ligase genes (ligase D, LigD), in a wide range of bacterial species (4, 17, 40, 84). The conservation of genetic associations between phylogenetically diverse bacteria often indicates that these genes are coexpressed together and that their products functionally interact in a common pathway (14). Putative Ku-LigD operons have now been identified in a large number of diverse bacterial genomes (4, 8, 84).

LigD is a member of the ATP-dependent DNA ligase family. However, in many bacterial species, LigD is a multidomain protein composed of polymerase (PolDom) and nuclease (NucDom) domains in addition to the core ligase domain (LigDom) (4, 84). The organization of these domains within LigD varies widely between bacterial species. In some bacteria, LigD exists as a single-domain ligase protein. In others, such as *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *M. smegmatis*, PolDoms and NucDoms are distal and proximal amino-terminal extensions of the LigDom, respectively (Figure 2). In *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (*Pae*) LigD, the NucDoms and PolDoms are amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal extensions, respectively, of the central LigDom. In *Bacillus subtilis* LigD (YkoU), the NucDom is absent and the PolDom is fused to the carboxy terminus of the LigDom. It remains to be discovered whether the stand-alone ligase, nuclease, and polymerase proteins interact in trans, reminiscent of eukaryotic NHEJ repair.

### Polymerase Activities of LigD

Most LigD proteins possess a PolDom in addition to the core LigDom. PolDom was initially identified on the basis of sequence homology to members of the archaeo-eukaryotic primase (AEP) superfamily (4, 37, 40, 84), and it is unrelated to the DnaG-like proteins that function as replicative primases in bacteria (5). PolDom contains the signature catalytic motifs (I–III) present in AEPs (Figure 2) (40, 84), which has recently been confirmed by the crystal structures of PolDom (59, 92).

PolDom is a unique polymerase, possessing a remarkable variety of distinct nucleotidyl transferase activities with the capacity, even in the absence of accessory domains and Ku, to recognize and extend a variety of NHEJ DNA intermediates (Figure 3) (15, 59, 89, 94). PolDom displays template-independent terminal transferase activity on single-stranded (ss)DNA and blunt-ended dsDNA substrates (15, 59, 94). Terminal transferase activity, which has also been implicated in eukaryotic NHEJ, is restricted to the addition of a few nucleotides (15, 59, 94). PolDom can also extend dsDNA (with 5′ overhangs) and fill in gapped dsDNA substrates in a template-dependent manner (15, 59, 62, 94), although PolDom incorporates nucleotides at a significantly slower rate and with much poorer fidelity compared with replicative DNA polymerases (59, 89). DNA-dependent RNA primase activity has also been demonstrated for Mt-PolDom (15, 62), although a requirement for primase activity during NHEJ-mediated DSB repair is unclear. Mutation of the two conserved aspartate residues involved in metal coordination abolished all polymerase activities, suggesting that one active site performs all these diverse extension activities (29, 62, 92, 94).

#### NHEJ Polymerase Preferentially Incorporates NTPs

The terminal transferase and polymerase activities of *Pae-*, *Ms-*, and *Mt*-PolDom display a marked preference for the insertion of nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) over dNTPs when presented with a variety of DNA substrates that mimic NHEJ intermediates (15, 59, 89, 94). Pitcher et al. (59) reported a 20-to 70-fold difference, depending on the templating base, in the preference of PolDom for incorporation of NTPs versus dNTPs. The preference of PolDom for incorporating NTPs in vitro and its lack of 2′ specificity reflect a catalytic plasticity that has also been maintained during the evolution of other unrelated NHEJ polymerases, such as Pol μ (55). It has been
a

PolDom                      NucDom                     LigDom
I II III K NT OB
Mt-LigD

b

Ku homodimer
Ku
DNA
PolDom
LigD
LigDom
NucDom

Figure 2

Schematic structural model of a bacterial NHEJ complex. (a) The domain organization of *M. tuberculosis* ligase D (LigD). The catalytic motifs of the polymerase domain (PolDom) (I–III) and the nucleotidyl transferase and oligo-binding subdomains plus the active-site lysine (K) of the ligase domain (LigDom) are highlighted. (b) A schematic structural model of two *M. tuberculosis* Ku-LigD complexes bound to DNA following the repair of a DSB. The Ku homodimer model is a homology-model based on human Ku70 and docked onto DNA from the Ku crystal structure (1JEY). The PolDom of LigD is taken from the crystal structure (2IRU) and docked onto DNA taken from the Pol λ crystal structure (2BCV). The NucDom is a homology model based on two folds (*i*) a P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase and (*ii*) a SH3-like barrel. The LigDom of LigD is from the crystal structure of Mt-LigDom (1VS0).

proposed that both eukaryotic and prokaryotic NHEJ polymerases incorporate NTPs to repair DSBs when intracellular pools of dNTPs are depleted (15, 55, 63), as is the case during stationary phase (81), when break repair cannot be accomplished using HR. However, PolDom is sensitive to the pentose sugar composition of the primer strand. dNTP and NTP incorporation is progressively inhibited by the presence of RNA tracts at the primer terminus, suggesting that PolDom activity requires contacts with dNTPs at the terminal position of the primer strand (89, 93). Ribonucleotide incorporation by PolDom could potentially inhibit nick-sealing; however, LigD can ligate DNA-containing ribonucleotides at the 3′-OH terminus (15, 89).

move RNA patches prior to replication. Accordingly, short stretches of RNA may signal sites of repair and activate other repair mechanisms, such as a type II RNase H-catalyzed short-patch repair pathway, which can remove ribonucleotides embedded in dsDNA (72). Moreover, a preference for NTP rather than dNTP incorporation might be an adaptive response, reflecting the presumed predominance of the NHEJ pathway during stationary phase, when the absence of a homologous donor precludes DSB repair by HR (15) (see below). Similarly, human pol μ, implicated in eukaryotic NHEJ, functions primarily as an RNA polymerase in vitro when nucleotide concentrations approximate cellular pools present in G₁ and noncycling cells (55).

**Structure of Bacterial NHEJ Polymerase**

Mutagenesis studies have recently been augmented by the elucidation of the crystal structures of Mt-PolDom and Pae-PolDom, both alone and complexed with nucleotides (59, 92). PolDoms are globular monomeric proteins that share a common structural core with members of the AEP family of DNA primases, derived from the RNA recognition motif fold that is present in the catalytic palm module of other DNA and RNA polymerases (Figure 2) (37). The conserved aspartate residues present in motifs I and III are involved in coordinating the divalent metal binding site, and conserved residues present in motif II contribute to the nucleotide binding site (37, 40, 59, 92). The architecture of the bacterial NHEJ polymerases is distinct from that of the eukaryotic NHEJ polymerases (Pol μ, λ, and TdT), which are members of the Pol X family (27, 52), although both families possess a triad of aspartate metal-chelating residues that are structurally superimposable (59). Conservation of the location of important active-site residues between members of the AEP and Pol X families suggests that they may have evolved by convergent evolution to use similar

Figure 3

LigD polymerase possesses a variety of nucleotidyl transferase activities. (a) PolDom can add several nucleotides at the end of ssDNA and blunt-ended dsDNA in a template-independent manner. (b) PolDom can also fill in short single-stranded gaps and extend 3′-resected DNA primers in a template-dependent manner. (c) PolDom efficiently inserts nucleotides opposite 8-oxoG and readily extends this base pair. (d) PolDom also efficiently dislocates and realigns the template strand. It can extend primers by inserting nucleotides that are complementary to templating bases that are distal to the primer terminus. This is important when encountering abasic sites. In all cases PolDom preferentially inserts ribonucleotides.

It remains unclear how short stretches of hybrid RNA/DNA duplexes are accommodated in vivo. Replicative polymerases may be capable of simply synthesizing through them, although considering the low fidelity of PolDom, it would be beneficial to re-

catalytic mechanisms. The binding mode of nucleosides in cocrystal structures of PolDom (with either NTP or dNTP) suggests a preference for NTP binding, consistent with biochemical observations (59, 92). Mutation of residues involved in base stacking in the nucleotide binding pocket also supports this hypothesis (92).

**DNA Binding and Extension of NHEJ Substrates by End-Joining Polymerases**

In addition to a wide variety of polymerase activities, PolDom possesses many other features that enable it to participate in unusual repair activities required during end-processing (Figure 4 and Figure 5). The major determinant for specific binding of PolDom to DNA is the presence of a 5′ phosphate, which is located at the single-/double-stranded junction on overhanging or gapped DNA molecules (59). Gapped DNA substrates mimic an important NHEJ intermediate, namely the bridging step of an end-joining reaction. This phosphate interaction significantly enhances polymerization and nucleotide selection with these substrates (59). Although unrelated structurally, the eukaryotic NHEJ polymerases (Pol μ and λ) possess a similar capacity to recognize 5′-phosphated ends, which bind via a helix-hairpin-helix domain (18, 27, 52). PolDom lacks this domain and must therefore utilize a novel structural element to facilitate interaction with the 5′-phosphate moiety.

Eukaryotic NHEJ polymerases can bridge two protruding 3′ DNA ends, depending on the level of microhomology (12, 46, 54). Pol μ can align ends without any homology, whereas Pol λ requires some complementarity (several base pairs) between the 3′-protruding ends. PolDom behaves more like Pol μ in this regard, forming a stable enzyme-DNA complex even in the absence of a primer strand, provided that a 5′ phosphate is present on the downstream strand (59). All three NHEJ polymerases preferentially bind DNA with a

**Figure 4**

Microhomology-mediated DSB repair. (a) DSBs with complementary undamaged overhangs can be aligned and religated directly. Apart from LigDom, the DNA-processing activities of LigD are not required. (b) When the ends are not complementary, the Ku-LigD searches for areas of microhomology to form a synaptic complex, which aligns the break, followed by resection, gap-filling, and ligation.

phosphate at the 5′-recessive end of a gap. It has been proposed that polymerases dealing with broken ends, and with 3′-protruding ends in particular, require a secure interaction with the 5′ phosphate at the recessive

end to initiate the first step of the end-joining process (59). The second step probably involves synapse of the two protruding 3′ ends. A potential role for PolDom in the synapsis of DSBs is discussed below.

PolDom has the ability to dislocate and realign the template, extending the primer by inserting nucleotides complementary to templating bases, distal to the primer terminus (Figure 3 and Figure 4) (59, 89). This behavior stems from the intrinsic capacity of PolDom to dislocate one or more proximal templating bases, generating base substitutions and frame-shift deletions. The ability to dislocate and accept distorting nucleotides is important in allowing the bridging of two protruding 3′ ends with limited complementarity. Pol μ also has a similar template dislocation activity and an ability to realign mismatched ends (71, 91). PolDom has the capacity to extend off mismatched ends, an activity associated with Pol λ (59), and can also catalyze nonmutagenic translesion synthesis on ends containing modified bases, such as 8-oxoG (59). Thus, NHEJ polymerases, unlike replicative polymerases, employ a number of molecular strategies to accommodate the variety of unstable DNA alignments that are encountered during NHEJ.

### Nuclease Activities of LigD

Many bacterial LigDs contain a NucDom (4, 84). Although the organization of the domains that compose LigD differs between species, when present, the NucDom is located as an N-terminal extension of the LigDom (Figure 2). The putative NucDom has significant homology to a putative single-domain protein (SC9H11.09c) from *S. coelicolor* (4, 84). The nuclease function was originally attributed to this region because of the presence of clusters of histidine and aspartate residues, predicted to form a metal-coordinating site within an all-β-strand fold, a structure suggestive of an enzymatic function (4, 84).

Della et al. (15) originally demonstrated that *Mt*-LigD displays an intrinsic 3′–5′ magnesium-dependent exonuclease activity capable of resecting dsDNA with either 3′ overhangs or flap structures. This activity was eliminated by mutation of predicted catalytic residues (15). The most detailed characterization of the NucDom has been undertaken on *Pae*-LigD. *Pae*-NucDom can remove either dNTPs or NTPs sequentially, releasing mononucleosides, from the 3′ end of duplexes provided that the penultimate base at the 3′ terminus is a ribonucleotide (93, 95, 96). *Pae*-NucDom also has 3′-phosphatase activity, removing the phosphate group at the 3′ end; however, this does not require a 2′-OH at the penultimate base and readily catalyzes 3′-phosphate removal from a template/primer substrate composed entirely of deoxyribonucleotides (93, 96). Both the 3′-nuclease and 3′-phosphatase activities of *Pae*-NucDom preferentially require Mn²⁺ and have a preference for resecting recessed 3′ ends (93, 95, 96). Extensive mutagenesis studies of residues conserved between LigD NucDoms have identified the essential constituents of both the 3′-nuclease and 3′-phosphatase active sites. Although the active sites overlap, they are not composed of identical residues as suggested by disparate requirements for the presence of a ribonucleotide adjacent to the terminal nucleotide (93, 95, 96). On the basis of this apparently unique biochemistry and lack of significant homology, beyond other bacterial LigD proteins, it has been proposed that the NucDom belongs to a novel phosphoesterase family (93).

### Ligation Activity of LigD

All bacterial genomes encode a highly homologous NAD⁺-dependent DNA ligase (LigA), which is only distantly related to the ATP-dependent ligases (3, 86, 87). LigA is responsible for the ligation of Okazaki fragments during DNA replication and is the functional equivalent of mammalian LigI; indeed *Mt*-LigA complements *S. cerevisiae cdc9*-null mutants (30). However, many bacterial species also contain ATP-dependent DNA

ligases in addition to LigA (30, 86). Bacterial ATP-dependent ligases can be grouped into three categories based on primary sequence analysis: LigB, LigC, and LigD. The presence of distinct ligase genes within many bacterial genomes also implies specialization and a division of labor in the cellular roles of these proteins, as occurs with eukaryotic ligases. However, whereas deletion of the gene encoding LigA is lethal, LigB, LigC, and LigD are dispensable for cell growth under normal conditions (29, 30, 41, 60, 85). Although LigD catalyzes the sealing of DSBs (29, 30, 41, 85), the physiological function of LigB and LigC remains to be established.

The C-terminal domain of Mt-LigD (Mt-LigDom) is responsible for ATP-dependent adenylization and the sealing of dsDNA breaks (Figure 2) (30, 62). Mutation of the active-site lysine in either Mt-LigD or Mt-LigDom prevents autoadenylation (covalent attachment of AMP onto the lysine), thus inhibiting ligation (1, 62). Although Ku stimulates the ligation activity of LigD, it does not interact with LigDom and most probably enhances end-joining by promoting association of the free ends. The crystal structure of the AMP-bound form of Mt-LigDom has been determined (1) and consists of an adenylization domain (residues 452–639) and an oligo binding domain (residues 640–759), both of which are similar to the equivalent domains in other DNA ligases (19, 79).

and specifically recruits the genetically associated LigD to the termini of DSBs, thereby stimulating the polymerase and end-joining activities of LigD (62, 85). Eukaryotic Ku also significantly stimulates the activity of the NHEJ ligase (LigIV) (66) and polymerases (μ and λ) (46, 47), indicating that Ku plays a direct functional role in NHEJ repair processes rather than acting merely as a DSB-targeting factor. Della et al. (15) subsequently demonstrated that the NHEJ repair of complex DSBs can be fully reconstituted in vitro by the addition of Ku and LigD, and by LigD alone (Figure 5), if the ends of the break are annealed together. However, Ku is absolutely essential for the repair of discontinuous DSBs.

The physical interaction between Ku and LigD (62) is mediated by PolDom in mycobacteria in vitro; presumably this interaction is responsible for the sequestration of full-length LigD to Ku-bound DSBs in vivo. Most prokaryotic LigDs retain a PolDom, signifying that this mode of recruitment may be conserved. The PolDom-Ku subcomplex may serve a number of purposes in the NHEJ process, in addition to recruitment of LigD to DSBs. PolDom extension at the termini of breaks is enhanced by Ku (62). PolDom has a strong preference for binding to the terminal 5′-phosphate group at broken ends, suggesting that it may perform a direct role, together with Ku, in the synapsis process that brings DSB ends together. The Ku-PolDom subcomplex may also coordinate the order of processing and repair events at DSBs. These additional roles are discussed below.

## A TWO-COMPONENT BACTERIAL NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING REPAIR COMPLEX

### Reconstitution of Bacterial NHEJ In Vitro

Weller et al. (85) demonstrated a functional and physical interaction between Mt-Ku and Mt-LigD, which together form a two-component NHEJ complex in vitro. Mt-Ku binds as a homodimer to the ends of dsDNA

### Reconstitution of Bacterial NHEJ in Yeast

Some of the most compelling evidence that the Ku-LigD complex is solely responsible for bacterial NHEJ comes from genetic complementation experiments performed in S. cerevisiae (15). Remarkably, ectopic coexpression of Mt-LigD and Mt-Ku, but not the individual genes, resulted in complementation of yeast NHEJ-deficient strains (dnl4

and *yku70*), restoring NHEJ to ~50% of  
wild-type yeast levels. Bacterial and yeast  
NHEJ could be differentiated on the ba-  
sis of differing signature patterns of pro-  
cessed joints, with bacterial NHEJ prefer-  
entially forming a defined DSB repair joint,  
rarely observed in wild-type yeast, even when  
yeast NHEJ was active. The unique signature  
of bacterial processed joints confirmed that  
bacterial NHEJ-processing steps are distinct  
from those of yeast NHEJ, indirectly impli-  
cating the PolDom and NucDom activities.  
Even in the absence of the yeast NHEJ appa-  
ratus, the bacterial proteins catalyzed the cre-  
ation of intact chromosomes from two discon-  
tinuous DSB ends, suggesting that no other  
bacterial proteins are required for NHEJ and  
unequivocally demonstrating that prokaryotic  
Ku and ligase proteins represent a bona fide  
NHEJ repair complex.

**PROCESSING AND REPAIR OF**  
**NONHOMOLOGOUS ENDS**

In higher eukaryotes a large number of fac-  
tors are required to repair DSBs by NHEJ  
(13, 22, 43, 44). Although great advances  
have been made in our understanding of how  
the NHEJ pathway operates, the underlying  
molecular mechanisms that coordinate resec-  
tion and resynthesis at DSBs remain elusive.  
The two-component prokaryotic NHEJ ap-  
paratus appears to possess all of the activi-  
ties required to remodel and repair DSBs and  
therefore represents an ideal model system to  
study the molecular choreography of the end-  
joining process. The bacterial NHEJ complex  
is sufficient to bring two discontinuous DNA  
ends together, process the termini, and ligate  
the resulting complementary ends (Figure 5)  
(15, 63). To understand the molecular events  
that coordinate these processes, we must first  
start with the direct forensic evidence, in  
the form of repaired DSBs. By examining  
the sequences of repaired break junctions, we  
can indirectly gain insights into the decision-  
making processes that drive NHEJ. During  
eukaryotic NHEJ, short stretches of sequence

**Figure 5**  
Mechanism of NHEJ repair in prokaryotes. After the binding of Ku to  
3′-protruding ends and further recruitment of LigD, it specifically  
recognizes the 5′ phosphate (P) and directly mediates via a specific loop  
the synapsis event required for end-joining. After microhomology  
pairing, nonextendable 3′ termini can be resected by the NucDom of  
LigD. Once the required nucleolysis has occurred, resynthesis by  
PolDom and ligation of nicks complete break repair.

homology, known as microhomologies, are often employed to align the termini of breaks, prior to the processing of the ends. The formation of microhomologies often leads to the production of small-gapped DNA structures that are subsequently filled in and ligated. Similarly, bacterial NHEJ also involves the preferential exploitation of recessed microhomologies, internal to the overhangs of incompatible ends, that facilitate synapsis, resection, resynthesis, and ligation of DSBs. LigD can efficiently fill in DNA duplexes containing gaps adjacent to regions of microhomology, before ligating these intermediates (15), indicating that the nucleotidyl transferase and ligase activities of LigD can be coordinated to repair NHEJ intermediates. Terminal transferase activity has also been implicated when blunt-ended DNA ends are joined to ends containing 3′ overhangs (15, 29). In this scenario, LigD (PolDom) cannot extend the 5′-recessed end, as polymerases operate in a 5′ → 3′ direction; therefore it adds nontemplated bases onto the 3′ terminus of the blunt end to establish some degree of microhomology. This activity is likely to be even more crucial when both ends are blunt ended. A role for the primase activity of PolDom has yet to be demonstrated in NHEJ but it could be useful in bypass lesion synthesis.

In addition to resynthesis, LigD can also remove 3′ phosphates and nucleotide flaps; the latter are often produced by microhomology-mediated synapsis (15). NucDom has a marked preference for cleaving recessed 3′-ends and is relatively poor at cleaving blunt-ended dsDNA (95). A role for 3′-phosphatase activity in DSB repair has been established. DNA breaks with 3′-phosphated termini can be generated directly by IR (35) and nucleolytic cleavage. The removal of 3′ phosphate is required to expose a 3′-hydroxyl group that acts as the essential nucleophile for nucleotide addition and ligation reactions. In contrast, a role for the 3′-resection activity in DSB repair appears less obvious, although this type of resection has been observed in various in vitro and in vivo LigD-dependent NHEJ assays

(1, 15, 29). PolDom has activities that likely promote the bridging of 3′-protruding ends. This process would give rise to a dsDNA synaptic intermediate, containing unpaired 3′ ends, that will require 3′ resectioning to enable the polymerase and ligase activities to complete the final steps of the break repair process. Although resection of the termini of DSBs is a critical NHEJ repair process, uncontrolled resection of breaks could lead to the loss of genetic information, and therefore the antagonistic remodeling activities that reside within LigD must be tightly regulated.

The key to understanding the coordination of NHEJ processing relies first on understanding how the ends are brought together to form the bridging (or synaptic) complex. There is evidence to suggest that Ku/DNA-PK plays an important role in this process in higher eukaryotes (44). However, DNA-PKcs is absent from bacteria and therefore Ku and LigD must mediate end-synapsis. Let us review the current evidence regarding this process. PolDom possesses many of the combined NHEJ activities present in Pol μ and Pol λ in a single active site. NHEJ polymerases, such as Pol μ and TdT, contain a surface-exposed structural loop (loop 1) that facilitates connectivity between two discontinuous ends (38, 54). A functionally analogous structural element has recently been identified in Mt-PolDom (N. Brissett, R. Pitcher, R. Juarez, A. Picher, L. Blanco & A. Doherty, unpublished results) and mutation of residues in this loop prevents the formation of the synaptic intermediate, thus supporting a direct role for LigD, and PolDom in particular, in the end-synapsis process. It is tempting to speculate that some kind of dimeric arrangement of NHEJ complexes may be required to facilitate the repair of difficult overhangs, such as 3′ ends (Figure 5).

We would like to propose, on the basis of the available evidence, that PolDom, together with Ku, acts as the NHEJ matchmaker that promotes the association of the estranged ends and, where possible, utilizes the homology of the opposing termini to

direct the synapsis process. Microhomology-mediated end-bridging is the preferred option, as it enables the ends to be realigned with the complementary sequence, if present, on the opposing termini, thus reducing loss of excessive genetic information. Additionally, it stabilizes the synaptic intermediate, an important prelude to end-processing and ligation. If microhomology is absent, e.g., in blunt-ended DSBs, LigD may employ other backup activities, such as terminal transferase, to create a connection between the termini. Once a stable synaptic complex is formed, only then are the termini ready to be processed in a sequential manner by the nuclease and polymerase activities prior to ligation (Figure 5). As well as promoting end-synapsis, PolDom and Ku may also prevent unwanted nucleolysis of the termini, by the associated 3′–5′ exonuclease activity of NucDom, by binding to the DNA ends, thereby minimizing loss of genetic information. Further biochemical and structural studies are required to elucidate how the coordination of NHEJ processing occurs; however, it is likely that a general set of common end-joining rules governs both prokaryotic and eukaryotic NHEJ repair pathways because, ultimately, it is the DNA that has driven the evolution of these analogous repair complexes.

**Precision of NHEJ Repair**

The question of precision during bacterial NHEJ repair is important, because it is generally regarded that eukaryotic NHEJ is a low-fidelity end-joining process. NHEJ-mediated DSB repair is commonly assayed by determining the efficiency and fidelity of repair of linearized plasmids transformed into cells. After transformation, the plasmids are recovered and the repaired junctions are analyzed. In this way it is possible to establish a before and after picture of DSB repair and therefore deduce the fidelity of the repair process.

In mycobacterial species, Ku and LigD are essential for the recircularization of plasmids with either blunt ends or overhangs, whereas

inactivation of RecA had no significant effect (29, 30, 41). Examination of processed joints derived from either blunt ends or 5′ overhangs revealed that both template-dependent and template-independent nucleotide additions, as well as nucleolytic resection, had variously occurred (29). Single nucleotide additions predominated at imprecise religated blunt-ended DSB substrates, and short unidirectional deletions accounted for the remainder. Similarly, NHEJ was mutagenic even when repairing DSBs with complementary overhangs (29). In this case, mutagenic joint analysis established that nucleotide insertion (template-dependent and template-independent) as well as resection occurred in equal proportions prior to ligation. The frequency of template-independent nucleotide insertions at mutagenic religated blunt-ended and 5′-tailed DSBs in the absence of LigD decreased dramatically, implicating LigD in this process (29). Consistent with the polymerase activity of LigD being responsible for these processes, mutation of the catalytic aspartates of PolDom abolished terminal transferase activity in vivo (92). Repair at precise site-specific chromosomal breaks in NHEJ-null yeast, catalyzed by Mt-LigD and Mt-Ku, was relatively more accurate than in the *M. smegmatis* system (15).

NHEJ repair can also be reconstituted in vitro in the presence of LigD, Ku, and linearized plasmid DNA. Examination of repaired junctions derived from various incompatible DNA ends in vitro also suggests that a common feature of NHEJ-mediated repair is the use of microhomology intermediates comprising several base pairs (15). Ligation also occurs in the presence of NTPs, demonstrating that a DNA/RNA hybrid duplex can be ligated by LigD (15). Furthermore, repaired plasmids that contain patches of RNA are readily propagated in *E. coli*, suggesting that a mechanism to remove or replicate through these hybrid duplexes operates in vivo (15).

Recircularization of plasmids by *M. smegmatis* is significantly reduced in a LigD-null

mutant background; however, a mutant LigD, in which the active-site lysine responsible for adenylation is replaced with an alanine residue, partially rescues this phenotype, inferring the involvement of another ligase, although LigD is apparently necessary for this secondary ligase to function (1). LigC is a possible candidate for this backup ligase. Genetic studies suggest that although LigC repairs blunt-ended DSBs at low levels when LigD is not present, ΔligC and ΔligC/ligD mutants are indistinguishable from wild-type and ΔligD strains, respectively, in regard to repair of DSBs with 5′-complementary overhangs (29). A physical interaction between Ku and LigC, or LigD and LigC, has not been demonstrated and yeast two-hybrid screens using Mt-LigD as bait against an *M. tuberculosis* genomic library provide evidence only for a direct interaction between LigD and the C-terminal portion of Ku (29), consistent with previous in vitro and in vivo results.

### PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLES OF THE BACTERIAL NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING PATHWAY

The NHEJ repair pathway is not conserved in all bacterial species, suggesting that it is nonessential (8). Indeed, deletion of the NHEJ complex from species that retain this pathway does not result in any obvious growth defects under normal growth conditions. Why then do so many species continue to maintain the NHEJ repair pathway? Many phylogenetically diverse prokaryotic species that possess Ku and LigD homologues spend much of their life cycle in stationary phase. Consequently, it has been speculated that these bacteria may rely on NHEJ during prolonged mitotic exit (8, 85, 88). In eukaryotes, the HR and NHEJ pathways are regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner. HR requires extensive homology between DNA duplexes and consequently predominates after DNA replication during S and G₂, whereas NHEJ does not and predominates in G₁ and noncycling cells (G₀). Reliance on these two pathways varies, with NHEJ and HR acting as the major DSB repair pathway in higher and lower eukaryotes, respectively.

Until recently, bacteria were thought to rely exclusively on HR-mediated DSB repair. However, it is likely that many bacterial populations exist for much of their life cycle in stationary phase in the natural environment, unlike in the laboratory, because of potent growth-limiting pressures, such as restricted nutrients, low temperature, acidity, dryness, and high osmolarity. Emerging evidence suggests that there is also a cell cycle-dependent role for NHEJ in bacteria (51, 60, 83) and we discuss these findings below.

#### Resistance of *B. subtilis* to IR

Weller et al. (85) originally described a phenotype for NHEJ-deficient DSB repair in *B. subtilis*. Ku (*ykoV*)- and LigD (*ykoU*)-null strains, grown to stationary phase, were mildly yet significantly sensitive to IR (85). They proposed that NHEJ is important for DSB repair during stationary phase and sporulation. It was subsequently established that spores rather than stationary-phase *B. subtilis* cells require NHEJ (48, 51, 83). Under nutrient-limiting conditions, *B. subtilis* forms dormant spores that contain a single copy of their genome, which can persist for millennia in a viable, yet metabolically inactive state (24, 74, 75). Spores accumulate DNA damage, including DSBs, that must be repaired during germination, elicited by more favorable conditions, before commencement of vegetative growth (74, 75, 83). Crucially, the presence of a single genome precludes HR-mediated repair during this process. Consistent with a role for NHEJ in DSB repair, during spore germination, the spores of *B. subtilis* NHEJ mutant strains are sensitive to IR and longer-wavelength UV light (51).

Transcriptional profiling experiments in *B. subtilis* suggest that while Ku (*ykoV*) expression is inhibited by the transcription factor Spo0A in the predivisional cell (25), Ku is

upregulated by RNA polymerase transcription factor σG in the forespore (83). Significantly, Ku expression appears to correlate with chromosome number during *B. subtilis* endospore formation (83). Furthermore, time course and cellular localization experiments using Ku fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP) are entirely consistent with Ku participating in DNA repair during germination, prior to DNA replication and nuclear partition (83). Phylogenetic distribution also supports a role for NHEJ-mediated repair in sporulating bacteria. Ku and LigD homologues are present in the endospore-forming bacteria *B. licheniformis*, *B. halodurans*, *Oceanobacillus iheyensis*, but significantly, not in *Listeria monocytogenes* or *L. innocua*, which despite being nonendospore-forming species are otherwise closely related to *B. subtilis* (83).

**Effects of IR on M. smegmatis**

In contrast to *B. subtilis*, *M. smegmatis* does not form spores and its cells do not enter a dormant state en masse during stationary phase (78). Nevertheless, *M. smegmatis* NHEJ mutant strains are significantly more sensitive to IR than wild-type cells during stationary phase, whereas exponentially growing NHEJ mutant and wild-type strains are equally viable after γ-irradiation (60). Like *B. subtilis* LigD and Ku, *M. smegmatis* LigD and Ku were dispensable under normal exponential growing conditions (29, 30, 41, 48, 60, 85). Furthermore, whereas *recA* and *recA/ku/ligD*-null mutants are equally sensitive to IR during exponential phase, their viabilities improved and worsened, respectively, during stationary phase (60). This suggests that NHEJ and HR are the preferred DSB repair pathways employed by *M. smegmatis* during stationary and logarithmic phases, respectively.

Little is known about LigD or Ku expression in *M. smegmatis* cells beyond the presence of LigD during exponential phase, implicated by its strict requirement for plaque formation after incubation with either Corndog or Omega phage (61). *M. tuberculosis* can survive within macrophages in a dormant state for many years while retaining the ability to initiate tuberculosis when the host is immunocompromised (39). Although expression profiles of *M. tuberculosis* cells suggest that LigD and Ku transcription is unregulated during infection (67), NHEJ may be important for survival of bacilli within macrophages, where they are continually exposed to genotoxic defense mechanisms of the cell, such as oxidative damage, that induce DSBs. This may explain why *M. tuberculosis* has retained a functional NHEJ repair apparatus that has been lost by other species.

**A Role for NHEJ in the Desiccation Resistance of Bacteria**

Although *B. subtilis* and *M. smegmatis* NHEJ-deficient strains are sensitive to IR-induced DSBs, there are no terrestrial environments that produce such high doses of IR. What naturally occurring processes are responsible for producing large amounts of DSB damage in prokaryotes? IR-resistant bacteria can be isolated from the environment by selecting for strains that are highly resistant to dehydration (73), suggesting that the resistance of certain bacteria to IR is a result of the adaptation of many bacterial species to a common physiological stress, namely desiccation (50). Bacterial NHEJ protects both *M. smegmatis* cells and *B. subtilis* spores against the harmful effects of desiccation and dry heat (51, 60, 83), physical processes that produce significant amounts of DSBs (20, 50, 65, 74). *Mycobacteria* species have a uniquely thick hydrophobic cell wall that reduces desiccation (65) and *B. subtilis* spores are highly resistant to desiccation, suggesting that desiccation is an environmentally relevant stress encountered by both species (74, 75). NHEJ may also protect *M. tuberculosis* present within airborne respiratory droplets, an important pathogenic vector (31), from the harmful effects of desiccation. This is a potentially vital role for NHEJ considering that *M. tuberculosis* resides exclusively inside its host and relies upon this mechanism for transmission.
The role performed by the NHEJ pathway in radioresistance in *M. smegmatis* and *B. subtilis* suggests that it may also represent one of the major mechanisms by which highly radioresistant strains of bacteria tolerate high levels of IR-induced DSBs. Notably, *Kineococcus radiotolerans* is resistant to high doses of IR, capable of surviving >3000 Gy, and is also resistant to prolonged periods of desiccation (58). Importantly, a Ku gene (KradDRAFT_1225) has been identified in the *K. radiotolerans* genome, suggesting that a functional NHEJ pathway possibly contributes to the extreme radio- and desiccation-resistance in this and related species of bacteria. However, other radioresistant bacteria such as *Deinococcus radiodurans* lack Ku homologues and utilize a distinct DSB repair pathway (90).

### ADDITIONAL ROLES FOR NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING

#### NHEJ Facilitates Genome Circularization in Mycobacteriophage

Viruses are obligate parasites that exploit the normal pathways of their host, including DNA repair, recombination, and replication, for propagation. Intriguingly, NHEJ proteins, including Ku, have also been proposed to play a role in viral DNA integration in eukaryotic cells (77) and in retrotransposition events in yeast (21), although the precise function of NHEJ in these processes remains obscure.

The bacteriophage Omega and Corndog genomes encode their own Ku homologues (Ω-Ku and CD-Ku) (57, 61). Although neither phage encodes a LigD homologue, both Ku homologues interact with the host ligase (*Ms*-LigD) and can stimulate end-joining by forming a two-component repair complex with the host LigD that is involved in NHEJ (61). Omega and Corndog phages are unable to propagate in LigD-deficient *M. smegmatis* strains. Pitcher et al. (61) have demonstrated that this repair complex is not involved in DSB rejoining but instead promotes circularization of the phage genomes by ligation of the ends (Figure 6), following infection of the host. Linear Corndog and Omega genomes are unable to circularize by self-association of their termini (4-base *cos* sites), which are insufficient to allow stable annealing. Both phages are unable to grow in LigD-deficient host strains presumably because they are unable to circularize their genome; circularization is necessary for rolling-circle replication. The phage Ku may be associated with the termini of the linear genomes, thereby protecting them from exonucleolytic degradation, and may explain why neither phage sequesters the entire host NHEJ machinery (8, 11, 61). This recent report establishes a new paradigm of host cell NHEJ repair function during viral infection.

**Figure 6**

NHEJ facilitates phage genome circularization. Mycobacteriophages Corndog and Omega contain linear dsDNA genomes. The ends are composed of four-nucleotide *cos* sites that possess insufficient annealing energy to drive genome circularization upon entry into the host cell. Consequently, phage Ku, bound at the genome ends, recruits the host LigD and stimulates end-joining. In the reverse reaction, phage-encoded terminase cleaves concatemeric circular viral genomes at *cos* sites and initiates the packaging of single linear dsDNA genomes into phage capsids.

---

**cos:** single-stranded complementary cohesive ends found at the termini of linear dsDNA genomes of bacteriophage
and emphasizes that circularization and the repair steps of viral life cycles are subject to the same rules as chromosomal DSBs, highlighting the importance of DSB repair processes in viral infection.

Many eukaryotic viral DNA genomes can undergo circularization (77), although it is unclear whether this is required for the lytic step of infection. The recent discovery of a role for NHEJ in the mycobacteriophage life cycle suggests that circularization events may be a natural part of the life cycle of many other viruses, with NHEJ playing an essential role in this process, especially given that many viral genomes contain noncohesive ends and the predominance of NHEJ pathways in eukaryotes.

**Stationary-Phase Mutagenesis**

Stationary-phase (or adaptive) mutagenesis has been extensively studied because of its importance in the genome diversification and evolution of microorganisms (9, 36, 49, 69, 80). DSB repair may be a possible mechanism for generating diversity, thereby providing growth advantages to bacteria under specific selection pressure (32–34, 64), via a process of stationary-phase mutagenesis that occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. It may also explain why NHEJ is maintained by some bacterial species. A significant amount of mutations is produced during stationary phase and there is evidence implicating DNA damage in this process (9, 32). However, the roles of DNA repair pathways, such as NHEJ, in these processes have not been elucidated.

**REGULATION OF HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION AND NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING**

The MRX complex uniquely participates in both HR and NHEJ and is thought to be involved in regulating DSB repair pathway utilization in haploid yeast cells, possibly via Cdc28-mediated control of its 5′-resection activity (13). This resectioning event may irreversibly commit DSBs to repair by the HR pathway, to the exclusion of NHEJ. Surprisingly, bacterial conferred NHEJ reconstitution in yeast is only slightly impaired in the absence of the yeast MRX complex (15). It remains unknown how regulation of these two pathways is accomplished in bacteria, but evidence suggests that the bacterial homologues of Rad50 and Mre11 (SbcC and SbcD, respectively) are not involved because bacterial NHEJ reconstituted in yeast does not require SbcC or SbcD (15). Furthermore, although disruption of the gene encoding YirY (SbcC homologue) in *B. subtilis* significantly affected DNA repair of exponentially grown cells exposed to MMC, stationary-phase SbcC-null cells are only mildly sensitive to IR and are epistatic with RecA-null mutants, indicating that SbcC is involved in the HR pathway (48). Further genetic and cellular localization experiments implicate SbcC in the repair of damaged DNA at stalled or collapsed replication forks (48) via HR and, significantly, independently of the RecBCD complex, which is responsible for resecting 5′ ends (76). There is currently little evidence to suggest that SbcC plays a role in NHEJ, although analysis of the responses of *B. subtilis* SbcC-null endospores to IR and MMC might be revealing, considering that a small level of interplay between HR- and NHEJ-mediated DSB repair elicited by MMC has been detected in *M. smegmatis* (41). Alternatively, regulation of HR and NHEJ may occur independently by cell cycle state or via direct modulation of the HR pathway by the NHEJ proteins, such as regulating RecBCD resection activity. The interplay and regulation of the HR and NHEJ pathways during the bacteria cell cycle remain poorly understood.

SUMMARY POINTS

1. Ku homologues are present in all domains of life, including viruses.
2. The bacterial NHEJ pathway is composed of two proteins: Ku and a multifunctional ATP-dependent DNA ligase (LigD).
3. Together, Ku and LigD form a two-component DNA repair complex that possesses all the break-recognition, end-processing, and ligation activities that repair DSBs.
4. The PolDom of LigD contains many of the activities required for processing the myriad of DNA end configurations encountered at DSBs.
5. Bacterial NHEJ polymerases, in conjunction with Ku, appear to be involved in promoting the bridging of discontinuous ends.
6. NHEJ is involved in DSB repair during stationary phase and may also play a role in stationary-phase mutagenesis.
7. NHEJ is utilized by some bacteriophage to facilitate genome circularization.
8. Less is known about how the balance between HR and NHEJ is achieved.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank L. Blanco, M. Della, J. Dziadek, A.J. Green, G.F. Hatfull, S.P. Jackson, B. Kysela, A.E. Tomkinson, L.M. Tonkin, H.M. Tseng, G.R. Weller and T.E. Wilson for many helpful discussions and contributions to this work. Research in the Doherty lab has been supported by grants from the BBSRC.

LITERATURE CITED

1. Akey D, Martins A, Aniukwu J, Glickman MS, Shuman S, Berger JM. 2006. Crystal structure and nonhomologous end-joining function of the ligase component of Mycobacterium DNA ligase D. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:13412–23
2. Akroyd J, Symonds N. 1986. Localization of the *gam* gene of bacteriophage Mu and characterisation of the gene product. *Gene* 49:273–82
3. Aravind L, Koonin EV. 1999. Gleaning nontrivial structural, functional and evolutionary information about proteins by iterative database searches. *J. Mol. Biol.* 287:1023–40
4. Aravind L, Koonin EV. 2001. Prokaryotic homologs of the eukaryotic DNA-end-binding protein Ku, novel domains in the Ku protein and prediction of a prokaryotic double-strand break repair system. *Genome Res.* 11:1365–74
5. Aravind L, Leipe DD, Koonin EV. 1998. Toprim—a conserved catalytic domain in type Ia and II topoisomerases, DnaG-type primases, OLD family nucleases and RecR proteins. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 26:4205–13
6. Bliss TM, Lane DP. 1997. Ku selectively transfers between DNA molecules with homologous ends. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:5765–73

www.annualreviews.org • Nonhomologous End-Joining in Bacteria

7. Boulton SJ, Jackson SP. 1996. *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* Ku70 potentiates illegitimate DNA double-strand break repair and serves as a barrier to error-prone DNA repair pathways. *EMBO J.* 15:5093–103

8. Bowater R, Doherty AJ. 2006. Making ends meet: repairing breaks in bacterial DNA by nonhomologous end-joining. *PLoS Genet.* 2:e8

9. Bridges BA. 1998. The role of DNA damage in stationary phase ('adaptive') mutation. *Mutat. Res.* 408:1–9

10. Cromie GA, Connelly JC, Leach DR. 2001. Recombination at double-strand breaks and DNA ends: conserved mechanisms from phage to humans. *Mol. Cell* 8:1163–74

11. d'Adda di Fagagna F, Weller GR, Doherty AJ, Jackson SP. 2003. The Gam protein of bacteriophage Mu is an orthologue of eukaryotic Ku. *EMBO Rep.* 4:47–52

12. Daley JM, Laan RL, Suresh A, Wilson TE. 2005. DNA joint dependence of pol X family polymerase action in nonhomologous end joining. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:29030–37

13. Daley JM, Palmbos PL, Wu D, Wilson TE. 2005. Nonhomologous end joining in yeast. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 39:431–51

14. Dandekar T, Snel B, Huynen M, Bork P. 1998. Conservation of gene order: a fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 23:324–28

15. Della M, Palmbos PL, Tseng HM, Tonkin LM, Daley JM, et al. 2004. Mycobacterial Ku and ligase proteins constitute a two-component NHEJ repair machine. *Science* 306:683–85

16. Doherty AJ, Jackson SP. 2001. DNA repair: how Ku makes ends meet. *Curr. Biol.* 11:920–24

17. Doherty AJ, Jackson SP, Weller GR. 2001. Identification of bacterial homologues of the Ku DNA repair proteins. *FEBS Lett.* 500:186–88

18. Doherty AJ, Serpell LC, Ponting CP. 1996. The helix-hairpin-helix DNA-binding motif: a structural basis for nonsequence-specific recognition of DNA. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 24:2488–97

19. Doherty AJ, Suh SW. 2000. Structural and mechanistic conservation in DNA ligases. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 28:4051–58

20. Dose K, Bieger-Dose A, Labusch M, Gill M. 1992. Survival in extreme dryness and DNA single-strand breaks. *Adv. Space Res.* 12:221–29

21. Downs JA, Jackson SP. 1999. Involvement of DNA end-binding protein Ku in Ty element retrotransposition. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 19:6260–68

22. Dudasova Z, Dudas A, Chovanec M. 2004. Non-homologous end-joining factors of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 28:581–601

23. Dynan WS, Yoo S. 1998. Interaction of Ku protein and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit with nucleic acids. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 26:1551–59

24. Errington J. 2003. Regulation of endospore formation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 1:117–26

25. Fawcett P, Eichenberger P, Losick R, Youngman P. 2000. The transcriptional profile of early to middle sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:8063–68

26. Featherstone C, Jackson SP. 1999. Ku, a DNA repair protein with multiple cellular functions? *Mutat. Res.* 434:3–15

27. Garcia-Diaz M, Bebenek K, Krahn JM, Blanco L, Kunkel TA, Pedersen LC. 2004. A structural solution for the DNA polymerase λ-dependent repair of DNA gaps with minimal homology. *Mol. Cell* 13:561–72

28. Gell D, Jackson SP. 1999. Mapping of protein-protein interactions within the DNA-dependent protein kinase complex. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 27:3494–502

29. Gong C, Bongiorno P, Martins A, Stephanou NC, Zhu H, et al. 2005. Mechanism of nonhomologous end-joining in mycobacteria: a low-fidelity repair system driven by Ku, ligase D and ligase C. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 12:304–12

30. Gong C, Martins A, Bongiorno P, Glickman M, Shuman S. 2004. Biochemical and genetic analysis of the four DNA ligases of mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:20594–606

31. Grosset J. 2003. *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* in the extracellular compartment: an underestimated adversary. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 47:833–36

32. He AS, Rohatgi PR, Hersh MN, Rosenberg SM. 2006. Roles of *E. coli* double-strand-break-repair proteins in stress-induced mutation. *DNA Repair* 5:258–73

33. Heidenreich E, Eisler H. 2004. Non-homologous end joining dependency of gamma-irradiation-induced adaptive frameshift mutation formation in cell cycle-arrested yeast cells. *Mutat. Res.* 556:201–8

34. Heidenreich E, Novotny R, Kneidinger B, Holzmann V, Wintersberger U. 2003. Non-homologous end joining as an important mutagenic process in cell cycle-arrested cells. *EMBO J.* 22:2274–83

35. Henner WD, Grunberg SM, Haseltine WA. 1983. Enzyme action at 3′ termini of ionizing radiation-induced DNA strand breaks. *J. Biol. Chem.* 258:15198–205

36. Hersh MN, Ponder RG, Hastings PJ, Rosenberg SM. 2004. Adaptive mutation and amplification in *Escherichia coli*: two pathways of genome adaptation under stress. *Res. Microbiol.* 155:352–59

37. Iyer LM, Koonin EV, Leipe DD, Aravind L. 2005. Origin and evolution of the archaeo-eukaryotic primase superfamily and related palm-domain proteins: structural insights and new members. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 33:3875–96

38. Juarez R, Ruiz JF, McElhinny SA, Ramsden D, Blanco L. 2006. A specific loop in human DNA polymerase mu allows switching between creative and DNA-instructed synthesis. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 34:4572–82

39. Karakousis PC, Yoshimatsu T, Lamichhane G, Woolwine SC, Nuermberger EL, et al. 2004. Dormancy phenotype displayed by extracellular *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* within artificial granulomas in mice. *J. Exp. Med.* 200:647–57

40. Koonin EV, Wolf YI, Kondrashov AS, Aravind L. 2000. Bacterial homologs of the small subunit of eukaryotic DNA primase. *J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* 2:509–12

41. Korycka-Machala M, Brzostek A, Rozalska S, Rumijowska-Galewicz A, Dziedzic R, et al. 2006. Distinct DNA repair pathways involving RecA and nonhomologous end joining in *Mycobacterium smegmatis*. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 258:83–91

42. Kramer KM, Brock JA, Bloom K, Moore JK, Haber JE. 1994. Two different types of double-strand breaks in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* are repaired by similar RAD52-independent, nonhomologous recombination events. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 14:1293–301

43. Krejci L, Chen L, van Komen S, Sung P, Tomkinson A. 2003. Mending the break: two DNA double-strand break repair machines in eukaryotes. *Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol.* 74:159–201

44. Lees-Miller SP, Meek K. 2003. Repair of DNA double strand breaks by nonhomologous end joining. *Biochimie* 85:1161–73

45. Lusetti SL, Cox MM. 2002. The bacterial RecA protein and the recombinational DNA repair of stalled replication forks. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 71:71–100

46. Ma Y, Lu H, Tippin B, Goodman MF, Shimazaki N, et al. 2004. A biochemically defined system for mammalian nonhomologous DNA end joining. *Mol. Cell* 16:701–13

47. Mahajan KN, Nick McElhinny SA, Mitchell BS, Ramsden DA. 2002. Association of DNA polymerase mu (pol mu) with Ku and ligase IV: role for pol mu in end-joining double-strand break repair. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 22:5194–202

48. Mascarenhas J, Sanchez H, Tadesse S, Kidane D, Krisnamurthy M, et al. 2006. *Bacillus subtilis* SbcC protein plays an important role in DNA interstrand cross-link repair. *BMC Mol. Biol.* 7:20

49. Matic I, Taddei F, Radman M. 2004. Survival versus maintenance of genetic stability: a conflict of priorities during stress. *Res. Microbiol.* 155:337–41

50. Mattimore V, Battista JR. 1996. Radioresistance of *Deinococcus radiodurans*: Functions necessary to survive ionizing radiation are also necessary to survive prolonged desiccation. *J. Bacteriol.* 178:633–37

51. Moeller R, Stackebrandt E, Reitz G, Berger T, Rettberg P, et al. 2007. Role of DNA repair by nonhomologous end joining in *Bacillus subtilis* spore resistance to extreme dryness, mono- and polychromatic UV and ionizing radiation. *J. Bacteriol.* 189:3306–11

52. Moon AF, Garcia-Diaz M, Bebenek K, Davis BJ, Zhong X, et al. 2007. Structural insight into the substrate specificity of DNA polymerase mu. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 14:45–53

53. Moore JK, Haber JE. 1996. Cell cycle and genetic requirements of two pathways of nonhomologous end-joining repair of double-strand breaks in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 16:2164–73

54. Nick McElhinny SA, Havener JM, Garcia-Diaz M, Juarez R, Bebenek K, et al. 2005. A gradient of template dependence defines distinct biological roles for family X polymerases in nonhomologous end joining. *Mol. Cell* 19:357–66

55. Nick McElhinny SA, Ramsden DA. 2003. Polymerase mu is a DNA-directed DNA/RNA polymerase. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 23:2309–15

56. Nick McElhinny SA, Snowden CM, McCarville J, Ramsden DA. 2000. Ku recruits the XRCC4-ligase IV complex to DNA ends. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 20:2996–3003

57. Pedulla ML, Ford ME, Houtz JM, Karthikeyan T, Wadsworth C, et al. 2003. Origins of highly mosaic mycobacteriophage genomes. *Cell* 113:171–82

58. Phillips RW, Wiegel J, Berry CJ, Fliermans C, Peacock AD, et al. 2002. *Kineococcus radiotolerans* sp. nov., a radiation-resistant, gram-positive bacterium. *Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.* 52:933–38

59. Pitcher RS, Brissett NC, Picher AJ, Andrade P, Juarez R, et al. 2007. Structure and function of a mycobacterial NHEJ DNA repair polymerase. *J. Mol. Biol.* 366:391–405

60. Pitcher RS, Green AJ, Brzostek A, Korycka-Machala M, Dziadek J, Doherty AJ. 2007. NHEJ protects mycobacteria in stationary phase against the harmful effects of desiccation. *DNA Repair*. In press

61. Pitcher RS, Tonkin LM, Daley JM, Palmbos PL, Green AJ, et al. 2006. Mycobacteriophage exploit NHEJ to facilitate genome circularization. *Mol. Cell* 23:743–48

62. Pitcher RS, Tonkin LM, Green AJ, Doherty AJ. 2005. Domain structure of a NHEJ DNA repair ligase from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 351:531–44

63. Pitcher RS, Wilson TE, Doherty AJ. 2005. New insights into NHEJ repair processes in prokaryotes. *Cell Cycle* 4:675–78

64. Ponder RG, Fonville NC, Rosenberg SM. 2005. A switch from high-fidelity to error-prone DNA double-strand break repair underlies stress-induced mutation. *Mol. Cell* 19:791–804

65. Potts M. 1994. Desiccation tolerance of prokaryotes. *Microbiol. Rev.* 58:755–805

66. Ramsden DA, Gellert M. 1998. Ku protein stimulates DNA end joining by mammalian DNA ligases: a direct role for Ku in repair of DNA double-strand breaks. *EMBO J.* 17:609–14

67. Rengarajan J, Bloom BR, Rubin EJ. 2005. Genome-wide requirements for *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* adaptation and survival in macrophages. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102:8327–32

68. Riha K, Heacock ML, Shippen DE. 2006. The role of the nonhomologous end-joining DNA double-strand break repair pathway in telomere biology. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 40:237–77

69. Rosenberg SM. 2001. Evolving responsively: adaptive mutation. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 2:504–15

70. Roth DB, Wilson JH. 1986. Nonhomologus recombination in mammalian cells: role of short sequence homologies in the joining reaction. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 6:4295–304

71. Ruiz JF, Lucas D, Garcia-Palomero E, Saez AI, Gonzalez MA, et al. 2004. Overexpression of human DNA polymerase mu (pol mu) in a Burkitt’s lymphoma cell line affects the somatic hypermutation rate. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 32:5861–73

72. Rydberg B, Game J. 2002. Excision of misincorporated ribonucleotides in DNA by RNase H (type 2) and FEN-1 in cell-free extracts. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99:16654–59

73. Sanders SW, Maxcy RB. 1979. Isolation of radiation-resistant bacteria without exposure to irradiation. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* 38:436–39

74. Setlow P. 1995. Mechanisms for the prevention of damage to DNA in spores of *Bacillus* species. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 49:29–54

75. Setlow P. 2003. Spore germination. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* 6:550–56

76. Singleton MR, Dillingham MS, Gaudier M, Kowalczykowski SC, Wigley DB. 2004. Crystal structure of RecBCD enzyme reveals a machine for processing DNA breaks. *Nature* 432:187–93

77. Skalka AM, Katz RA. 2005. Retroviral DNA integration and the DNA damage response. *Cell Death Differ.* 12(Suppl. 1):971–78

78. Smeulders MJ, Keer J, Speight RA, Williams HD. 1999. Adaptation of *Mycobacterium smegmatis* to stationary phase. *J. Bacteriol.* 181:270–83

79. Subramanya HS, Doherty AJ, Ashford SR, Wigley DB. 1996. Crystal structure of an ATP-dependent DNA ligase from bacteriophage T7. *Cell* 85:607–15

80. Sung HM, Yasbin RE. 2002. Adaptive, or stationary-phase, mutagenesis, a component of bacterial differentiation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Bacteriol.* 184:5641–53

81. Traut TW. 1994. Physiological concentrations of purines and pyrimidines. *Mol. Cell Biochem.* 140:1–22

82. Walker JR, Corpina RA, Goldberg J. 2001. Structure of the Ku heterodimer bound to DNA and its implications for double-strand break repair. *Nature* 412:607–14

83. Wang ST, Setlow B, Conlon EM, Lyon JL, Imamura D, et al. 2006. The forespore line of gene expression in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 358:16–37

84. Weller GR, Doherty AJ. 2001. A family of DNA repair ligases in bacteria? *FEBS Lett.* 505:340–42

85. Weller GR, Kysela B, Roy R, Tonkin LM, Scanlan E, et al. 2002. Identification of a DNA nonhomologous end-joining complex in bacteria. *Science* 297:1686–89

86. Wilkinson A, Day J, Bowater R. 2001. Bacterial DNA ligases. *Mol. Microbiol.* 40:1241–48

87. Wilkinson A, Smith A, Bullard D, Lavesa-Curto M, Sayer H, et al. 2005. Analysis of ligation and DNA binding by *Escherichia coli* DNA ligase (ligA). *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1749:113–22

88. Wilson TE, Topper LM, Palmbos PL. 2003. Non-homologous end-joining: Bacteria join the chromosome breakdance. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 28:62–66

89. Yakovleva L, Shuman S. 2006. Nucleotide misincorporation, 3′-mismatch extension, and responses to abasic sites and DNA adducts by the polymerase component of bacterial DNA ligase D. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:25026–40

82. Crystal structure of the Ku heterodimer bound to DNA provided insights into break recognition.

83. With References 51 and 60 provides important insights into the physiological role of the NHEJ pathway in bacteria.

85. Formal demonstration that a functional two-component NHEJ complex/pathway exists in bacteria.

92. With Reference 59 provided structural evidence that the NHEJ polymerase domain of LigD is a member of the primase family.

93. With Reference 15 established the key nucleolytic activities associated with the NucDom of LigD.

90. Zahradka K, Slade D, Bailone A, Sommer S, Averbeck D, et al. 2006. Reassembly of shattered chromosomes in *Deinococcus radiodurans*. *Nature* 443:569–73

91. Zhang Y, Wu X, Yuan F, Xie Z, Wang Z. 2001. Highly frequent frameshift DNA synthesis by human DNA polymerase mu. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 21:7995–8006

92. Zhu H, Nandakumar J, Aniukwu J, Wang LK, Glickman MS, et al. 2006. Atomic structure and nonhomologous end-joining function of the polymerase component of bacterial DNA ligase D. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:1711–16

93. Zhu H, Shuman S. 2005. Novel 3′-ribonuclease and 3′-phosphatase activities of the bacterial nonhomologous end-joining protein, DNA ligase D. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:25973–81

94. Zhu H, Shuman S. 2005. A primer-dependent polymerase function of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* ATP-dependent DNA ligase (ligD). *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:418–27

95. Zhu H, Shuman S. 2006. Substrate specificity and structure-function analysis of the 3′-phosphoesterase component of the bacterial NHEJ protein, DNA ligase D. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:13873–81

96. Zhu H, Wang LK, Shuman S. 2005. Essential constituents of the 3′-phosphoesterase domain of bacterial DNA ligase D, a nonhomologous end-joining enzyme. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:33707–15

Annual Review of  
Microbiology  

Volume 61, 2007  

Contents

Frontispiece  
*Margarita Salas* …………xiv  

40 Years with Bacteriophage φ29  
*Margarita Salas* …………1  

The Last Word: Books as a Statistical Metaphor for Microbial Communities  
*Patrick D. Schloss and Jo Handelsman* …………23  

The Mechanism of Isoniazid Killing: Clarity Through the Scope  
of Genetics  
*Catherine Vilchèze and William R. Jacobs, Jr.* …………35  

Development of a Combined Biological and Chemical Process for  
Production of Industrial Aromatics from Renewable Resources  
*F. Sima Sariaslani* …………51  

The RNA Degradosome of Escherichia coli: An mRNA-Degrading  
Machine Assembled on RNase E  
*Agamemnon J. Carpousis* …………71  

Protein Secretion in Gram-Negative Bacteria via the Autotransporter  
Pathway  
*Nathalie Dautin and Harris D. Bernstein* …………89  

Chlorophyll Biosynthesis in Bacteria: The Origins of Structural and  
Functional Diversity  
*Aline Gomez Maqueo Chew and Donald A. Bryant* …………113  

Roles of Cyclic Diguanylate in the Regulation of Bacterial Pathogenesis  
*Rita Tamayo, Jason T. Pratt, and Andrew Camilli* …………131  

Aggresomes and Pericentriolar Sites of Virus Assembly:  
Cellular Defense or Viral Design?  
*Thomas Wileman* …………149  

As the Worm Turns: The Earthworm Gut as a Transient Habitat for  
Soil Microbial Biomes  
*Harold L. Drake and Marcus A. Horn* …………169

Biogenesis of the Gram-Negative Bacterial Outer Membrane  
Martine P. Bos, Viviane Robert, and Jan Tommassen ………………………………………… 191  

SigB-Dependent General Stress Response in Bacillus subtilis and  
Related Gram-Positive Bacteria  
Michael Hecker, Jan Pané-Farré, and Uwe Völker ………………………………………… 215  

Ecology and Biotechnology of the Genus Shewanella  
Heidi H. Hau and Jeffrey A. Gralnick ……………………………………………………… 237  

Nonhomologous End-Joining in Bacteria: A Microbial Perspective  
Robert S. Pitcher, Nigel C. Brissett, and Aidan J. Doherty ……………………………… 259  

Postgenomic Adventures with Rhodobacter sphaeroides  
Chris Mackenzie, Jesus M. Eraso, Madhusudan Choudhary, Jung Hyeob Roh,  
Xiaohua Zeng, Patrice Bruscella, Ágnes Puskás, and Samuel Kaplan …………………… 283  

Toward a Hyperstructure Taxonomy  
Vic Norris, Tanneke den Blaauwen, Roy H. Doi, Rasika M. Harshey,  
Laurent Janniere, Alfonso Jiménez-Sánchez, Ding Jun Jin,  
Petra Anne Levin, Eugenia Mileykovskaya, Abraham Minsky,  
Gradimir Miscevic, Camille Ripoll, Milton Saier, Jr., Kirsten Skarstad,  
and Michel Thellier …………………………………………………………………………… 309  

Endolithic Microbial Ecosystems  
Jeffrey J. Walker and Norman R. Pace ……………………………………………………… 331  

Nitrogen Regulation in Bacteria and Archaea  
John A. Leigh and Jeremy A. Dodsworth …………………………………………………… 349  

Microbial Metabolism of Reduced Phosphorus Compounds  
Andrea K. White and William W. Metcalf ………………………………………………… 379  

Biofilm Formation by Plant-Associated Bacteria  
Thomas Danhorn and Clay Fuqua …………………………………………………………… 401  

Heterotrimeric G Protein Signaling in Filamentous Fungi  
Liande Li, Sara J. Wright, Svetlana Krystofova, Gyungsoon Park,  
and Katherine A. Borkovich ………………………………………………………………… 423  

Comparative Genomics of Protists: New Insights into the Evolution  
of Eukaryotic Signal Transduction and Gene Regulation  
Vivek Anantharaman, Lakshminarayan M. Iyer, and L. Aravind ………………………… 453  

Lantibiotics: Peptides of Diverse Structure and Function  
Joanne M. Willey and Wilfred A. van der Donk ………………………………………… 477  

The Impact of Genome Analyses on Our Understanding of  
Ammonia-Oxidizing Bacteria  
Daniel J. Arp, Patrick S.G. Chain, and Martin G. Klotz ………………………………… 503  

Morphogenesis in Candida albicans  
Malcolm Whiteway and Catherine Bachewich 529  

Structure, Assembly, and Function of the Spore Surface Layers  
Adriano O. Henriques and Charles P. Moran, Jr. 555  

Cytoskeletal Elements in Bacteria  
Peter L. Graumann 589  

Indexes  

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 57–61 619  

Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 57–61 622  

Errata  

An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Microbiology articles may be found  
at http://micro.annualreviews.org/
