
Leukemia (2007) 21, 1638–1647  
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0887-6924/07 $30.00  
www.nature.com/leu

**REVIEW**

**The emerging role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia**

J-H Mikesch, B Steffen, WE Berdel, H Serve and C Müller-Tidow  

*Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of Muenster, Münster, Germany*

Wnt signaling plays an important role in stem cell self-renewal and proliferation. Aberrant activation of Wnt signaling and its downstream targets are intimately linked with several types of cancer with colon cancer being the best-studied example. However, recent results also suggest an important role of Wnt signaling in normal as well as leukemic hematopoietic stem cells. Aberrant activation of Wnt signaling and downstream effectors has been demonstrated in acute myeloid leukemia. Here, mutant receptor tyrosine kinases, such as Flt3 and chimeric transcription factors such as promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor-α and acute myeloid leukemia1-ETO, induce downstream Wnt signaling events. These findings suggest that the Wnt signaling pathway is an important target in several leukemogenic pathways and may provide a novel opportunity for targeting leukemic stem cells.

Leukemia (2007) 21, 1638–1647; doi:10.1038/sj.leu.2404732; published online 7 June 2007

Keywords: AML; Wnt; β-catenin; plakoglobin; translocation product; Flt3

---

**Introduction**

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clonal disease resulting from a malignant transformation of a hematopoietic stem or progenitor cell. It is characterized by an abnormal accumulation of hematopoietic progenitor cells leading to progressive insufficiency of normal hematopoiesis. Over the last decades, considerable progress has been achieved in the elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis of this disease. The major types of genetic events in the development of AML comprise alterations in myeloid transcription factors and activating mutations of signal transduction intermediates leading to inappropriate gene expression and aberrant signal transduction, respectively. Both mechanisms are highly interdependent, resulting in reduced apoptosis, increased stem cell self-renewal and blocked differentiation of AML cells. It is supposed that AML arises from the malignant transformation of a normal hematopoietic stem or progenitor cell into a cancer stem cell. Normal embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) possess the unique properties of self-renewal and the ability to develop into multiple lineages with generation of more differentiated progenies. Therefore, HSCs are considered to be *bona fide* candidates for the accumulation of multistep, genetic mutations transforming them into a cancer stem cell. Another hypothesis is that hematopoietic progenitor cells may regain stem cell properties owing to oncogenic mutations finally leading to the initiation of leukemia. In various types of leukemia, cancer stem cells have been detected, and several features of these leukemia stem cells (LSCs) have been described. The LSC concept is well established in myeloid leukemia.

In many instances, AML initially responds well to chemotherapy but relapse of the disease occurs in the majority of patients. Relapse after eradication of bulk disease by chemotherapy is a common event in many types of solid malignant tumors and a plausible explanation might be a failure to eliminate cancer stem cells. Accordingly, in leukemia patients, LSCs have been shown not to be targeted by current chemotherapy regimens and thus might account for drug resistance and relapse. In this regard, the frequency of relapse in AML might be attributed to the persistence of LSCs. Similar to normal HSCs, LSCs harbor the potentials of self-renewal and continuous proliferation that may account for regrowth of the disease.

Within the last years, the critical role of Wnt signaling in stem cells has been elucidated. The Wnt pathway regulates cell fate and differentiation decisions during embryogenesis and in adult stem cells. The mechanisms of self-renewal and proliferation are tightly regulated in normal stem and progenitor cells. In various tissues, activation of Wnt signaling has been associated with cancer promoting the hypothesis that self-renewal and proliferation are subverted in cancer cells allowing malignant growth. Wnt signaling has also been implicated in self-renewal and proliferation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, suggesting an involvement in leukemogenesis. Recently, many studies confirmed a crucial role of Wnt signaling in leukemia, shifting this pathway progressively into the spotlight of AML research.

---

**The canonical Wnt pathway**

The Wnt pathway is evolutionary highly conserved and plays a critical role in the development of many organ systems. The human genome harbors almost 20 Wnt genes, all of which encode lipid-modified secreted glycoproteins regulating developmental processes. Three different intracellular Wnt signaling pathways have been described including the canonical pathway, an only partially understood pathway involving calcium ions, and the planar-cell-polarity pathway.

The non-canonical signaling pathways induced by Wnt have recently been reviewed by Veeman et al. Signaling of the canonical Wnt pathway is initiated by binding of Wnt ligands to their receptor complex, consisting of a receptor of the Frizzled family and a co-receptor of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-receptor-related-protein family LRP5 or LRP6.

The key mediator of the canonical Wnt pathway is β-catenin (Figure 1). β-Catenin is a cytoplasmic protein with a very short half-life owing to the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex that contains the tumor-suppressor gene products axin and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) as well as the serine/threonine kinases GSK3β (glycogen-synthase kinase 3β) and

Correspondence: Dr C Müller-Tidow, Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Street 33, 48129 Muenster, Germany.  
E-mail: muellerc@uni-muenster.de  
Received 9 January 2007; revised 30 March 2007; accepted 5 April 2007; published online 7 June 2007

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML
J-H Mikesch et al

Figure 1 The canonical Wnt pathway. Signaling of the canonical Wnt pathway is initiated by binding of Wnt ligands to their receptor complex consisting of a receptor of the Frizzled family and a co-receptor of the LDL-receptor-related protein family LRP5 or LRP6. The key mediator of the canonical Wnt pathway is β-catenin. Short half-life of β-catenin is due to the activity of a MDC containing axin, APC, GSK3β and CK1. In the absence of Wnt β-catenin is sequentially phosphorylated on several serine and threonine residues by CK1 and GSK3β leading to proteasomal degradation. Members of the TCF/LEF family remain inactivated in the nucleus due to grg. As a consequence of Wnt binding to Frizzled and LRP5/6 the MDC is destabilized, binding of GSK3β to β-catenin is disrupted and phosphorylation of β-catenin does not occur. Unphosphorylated β-catenin accumulates and subsequently translocates to the nucleus, where it replaces the groucho-related repressors and acts as a transcriptional co-activator for TCF/LEF target genes like cyclin D1 and c-myc. The transcriptional activity of β-catenin also depends on two additional nuclear proteins, PYGO and Bcl9. Bcl9 functions as an adaptor between PYGO and TCF-bound β-catenin. CK1, casein kinase 1; grg, groucho-related transcriptional repressors; GSK3β, glycogen-synthase kinase 3β; LRP5/6, LDL-receptor-related protein 5/6; LEF, lymphocyte-enhancer-binding factor; MDC, multiprotein destruction complex; PYGO, pygopus; TCF, T-cell factor.

CK1 (casein kinase 1).³⁷⁻³⁹ Despite some contradictory data partially favouring a positive signal transducing function of CK1 within the Wnt pathway,⁴⁰⁻⁴² this protein mainly appears to have an inhibiting role by promoting targeted β-catenin degradation.⁴³⁻⁴⁵ CK1 activity is regulated by various mechanisms, including autophosphorylation, dephosphorylation and proteolytic cleavage.⁴⁶⁻⁴⁹

In the absence of Wnt, after binding axin and APC, newly synthesized β-catenin is sequentially phosphorylated on several serine and threonine residues by CK1 and GSK3β. Phosphorylation results in the recognition by β-TRCP (β-transducin-repeat-containing protein), which leads to the ubiquitination and subsequently proteasomal degradation of β-catenin.⁵⁰ Members of the TCF (T-cell factor)/LEF (lymphocyte-enhancer-binding factor) family remain inactivated in the nucleus owing to groucho-related transcriptional repressors (grg). As a consequence of Wnt binding to Frizzled and LRP5/6 the multiprotein destruction complex is destabilized by an incompletely understood mechanism involving the direct interaction of axin with LRP5/6 and/or the actions of Dishevelled (DVL), an axin-binding molecule. It has been demonstrated that after Wnt signaling, DVL is recruited to the cell membrane, allowing dissociation of GSK3β from axin. This process is enhanced by Galpha protein signaling.⁵¹ When binding of GSK3β to β-catenin is disrupted, phosphorylation of β-catenin does not occur.⁵²⁻⁵⁴ Thus, unphosphorylated β-catenin accumulates and subsequently translocates to the nucleus, where it replaces the groucho-related repressors and acts as a transcriptional co-activator for TCF/LEF

target genes.⁵⁵,⁵⁶ The transcriptional activity of β-catenin also depends on two additional nuclear proteins, pygopus homologue (PYGO) and Bcl9, a putative proto-oncogene. Bcl9 functions as an adaptor between PYGO and TCF-bound β-catenin,⁵⁷⁻⁶⁰ a mechanism that is essential for transcriptional activation of TCF/LEF target genes.

The canonical Wnt pathway is regulated on different levels of the cascade. Various secreted molecules extracellularly interfere with Wnt ligand binding to its Frizzled-LRP5/6 receptor complexes. For example, the four mammalian homologues of Dickkopf (DKK), DKK1–4, are negative regulators of Wnt signaling by interacting with the Wnt co-receptor LRP5/6, thereby inhibiting signals that emanate from the Frizzled-LRP complex. Frizzled-related proteins (FRPs) are naturally occurring secreted forms of Frizzled, which contain the cysteine-rich domain of members of the Frizzled-family but do not dispose of a transmembrane region. Thus, they can bind Wnt proteins in solution and thereby abrogate the activity of Wnts. Furthermore, the transcriptional activity of the β-catenin-TCF complex is modulated within the nucleus. ICAT (inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF) and Chibby have been shown to inhibit β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation by competing with LEF1 for binding to β-catenin.⁶¹,⁶²

Moreover, the canonical Wnt pathway is inhibited by DVL-binding partners like Nkd and Stbm.⁶³,⁶⁴ Another DVL-binding partner is the adaptor molecule Disabled-2 (Dab2),⁶⁵ which has been shown to participate in regulation of several signaling pathways.⁶⁶,⁶⁷ Hocevar et al.⁶⁵ identified that the N-terminal

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML  
J-H Mikesch et al

domain of Dab2 interacts with Dishevelled-3 (DVL-3). Ectopic expression of Dab2 attenuates canonical Wnt/β-catenin-mediated signaling in NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts. They also showed that Wnt stimulation leads to a time-dependent dissociation of endogenous Dab2-DVL-3 and DVL-3-axin interactions in NIH-3T3 cells, while Dab2 overexpression leads to inhibition of cytosolic and nuclear β-catenin accumulation as well as to maintenance of Dab2-DVL-3 association and subsequent loss of DVL-3-axin interactions. Dab2-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts exhibit constitutive Wnt signaling as evidenced by increased levels of nuclear β-catenin/TCF/LEF-1-dependent gene induction.⁶⁵ Thus, Dab2 was identified as a negative regulator of canonical Wnt signaling by stabilizing the β-catenin degradation complex. Control of DVL-binding partners thus appears to be an important regulatory component of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Dysregulated Wnt signaling has been identified as a key factor in the initiation of various types of cancer. Several transcriptional targets of Wnt signaling are known oncogenes in the pathogenesis of epithelial cancers.⁶⁸ For example, two of the TCF/LEF target genes, c-myc and cyclin D1 are supposed to be involved in the oncogenic function of inappropriate Wnt signal activation.⁶⁹,⁷⁰ Wnt signals appear to provide antiapoptotic signals by inducing the antiapoptotic protein BCL-XL.⁷¹ Moreover, the Wnt signaling pathway has recently been implicated in self-renewal and proliferation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.²³,⁷²,⁷³

### Wnt signaling in HSCs

Similar to other stem cells, HSCs harbor the properties of self-renewal, asymmetric cell division and the potential to differentiate into multiple lineages. In recent years, the Wnt signaling pathway has been implicated to contribute to self-renewal and proliferation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.²³,²⁴,⁷²–⁷⁵

Austin et al.²³ demonstrated a role of Wnt signaling in the induction of proliferation of early murine hematopoietic cells. Transfection of stromal cells with mouse Wnt1, Wnt5a or Wnt10b resulted in proliferation of AA4⁺cKIT⁺SCA1⁺ mouse fetal liver cells, a cell population highly enriched in HSC activity. Moreover, treatment of mice with Wnt5A-conditioned medium resulted in increased human HSC re-population in a NOD-SCID xenotransplant model.⁷² Plakoglobin (γ-catenin), a target downstream of β-catenin within the Wnt pathway, accelerates cell cycle progression of HSCs.⁷⁶ Overexpression of plakoglobin leads to enhanced re-plating capacity of HSCs and selectively causes expansion of colonies of immature cells in vitro.⁷⁶ Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ectopic expression of axin results in decreased growth of HSCs in vitro and in vivo.⁷³ Differentiation of murine hematopoietic progenitor cells is inhibited by Wnt proteins.²³ Van den Berg et al.⁷⁷ demonstrated an increased frequency of CD34+ progenitor cells in bone marrow cells in the presence of Wnt-expressing stromal cell co-cultures. Cellular morphology indicated that co-culture of Wnt protein expressing cells resulted in higher numbers of less differentiated hematopoietic cells and fewer mature cells than in control cultures.⁷⁷

Self-renewal of HSCs is enhanced through the canonical Wnt pathway and mediated by the lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T-cell transcription factor (LEF-1/TCF) complex.⁷³ β-Catenin as well as purified Wnt3A protein can promote self-renewal of murine HSCs in vitro and increase their capacity to reconstitute the hematopoietic system of lethally irradiated mice in vivo.⁷³,⁷⁴

Wnt3a activates β-catenin by stabilizing it in the cytosol and induces known Wnt targets, such as Myc, cyclin D1 and MSX1.⁷⁴ Apparently, HSCs are able to synthesize Wnt proteins binding to the Frizzled-LRP 5/6-receptor complex, suggesting an autocrine or paracrine mechanism for the stimulation of self-renewal through Wnt signaling in those cells.⁷⁸–⁸⁰

Furthermore, recent findings indicate that Wnt proteins are not only produced by HSCs themselves but are also released from bone marrow stromal cells.²³,⁷⁷,⁸¹,⁸² Within the bone marrow, HSCs reside in small niches and are surrounded by other cells and matrix components constituting the microenvironment. The heterogeneous cell population of the HSC microenvironment includes fibroblasts, adipocytes, endothelial cells and osteoblasts, all derived from a common mesenchymal precursor.⁸³ Several studies revealed a critical role of Wnt signaling for communication between HSCs and cells of the microenvironment, and particularly with osteoblasts.⁷⁸–⁸⁰,⁸⁴,⁸⁵ These interactions also contribute to HSC self-renewal.

Other signaling pathways that increase self-renewal and proliferation of HSCs include sonic hedgehog⁸⁶ and Notch.⁸⁷ The Wnt signaling pathway interacts with the Notch pathway.⁸⁸ For example, Notch1 is upregulated in response to Wnt signaling in HSCs, raising the possibility that Wnt exerts its influence also by activating Notch1 target genes.⁷³,⁸⁹ The Wnt and Notch pathway have both been implicated in self-renewal of HSCs⁷⁵,⁸⁹,⁹⁰ and cooperation between Wnt and Notch in HSCs has recently been suggested by Duncan et al.⁸⁹

Recent studies have demonstrated that the Wnt/β-catenin pathway must be well controlled to assure normal hematopoiesis, because constitutive activation of Wnt signaling results in multilineage differentiation block and compromised HSC maintenance.⁹¹,⁹² Taken together, Wnt signaling mediates stimulation of self-renewal and enhanced proliferation of HSCs, as well as reduced differentiation. These are features, which might contribute to leukemogenesis.

### Wnt signaling in AML

Dysregulated Wnt signaling has become a hallmark in various types of epithelial cancers.⁵⁴,⁶⁸ The role of the Wnt pathway for survival, proliferation and differentiation of HSCs has raised the hypothesis that aberrant Wnt signaling might also contribute to the pathogenesis of leukemia.

AML is frequently associated with mutations of the Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) as well as with chromosomal translocations, such as t(15;17) and t(8;21), resulting in the generation of chimeric genes encoding specific transcription factors. Both, chromosomal translocations and Flt3 mutations have recently been reported to be associated with aberrant Wnt signaling in AML (Figure 2). However, some AML patients neither harbor chromosomal translocations nor Flt3-mutations but still show aberrant Wnt signaling, suggesting mechanisms of aberrant Wnt signaling in AML independent from these mutations.

### Activation of Wnt signaling by translocation products in AML

The AML-associated translocation products AML1-ETO, promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor-α(PML-RARα), and promyelocytic zink finger protein (PLZF)-RARα encode aberrant transcription factors that induce self-renewal capacity and a differentiation block in susceptible hematopoietic cells. Using high-density oligonucleotide, microarray analyses shared target

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML
J-H Mikesch et al

Figure 2 Wnt signaling in acute myeloid leukemia. Shared target genes of the AML-associated translocation products AML1-ETO, PML-retinoic acid receptor α, and PLZF-RAR α have been found to be associated with Wnt signaling. One of the positive transcriptional regulators strongly induced on the mRNA and protein level by all three fusion proteins was plakoglobin that is a co-activator of TCF and LEF transcription factors mediating Wnt signaling. Plakoglobin binds to TCF/LEF transcription factors, localizes to the nucleus and activates the transcription of target genes like cyclin D1, c-myc and PPARδ. Moreover, the AML fusion proteins induce expression of β-catenin. The Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (Wif-1) is an extracellular protein that negatively regulates the Wnt pathway by binding Wnt. Promoter methylation suppresses Wif-1 gene expression in some APL cells. Frizzled-4, one of the Wnt receptors, can be induced by Flt3-ITD in myeloid progenitor cells leading to significantly increased β-catenin protein levels. Increases in β-catenin protein levels are associated with increased TCF/LEF transcriptional activity as well as TCF-dependent induction of c-myc. Furthermore, a significant proportion of AML cases show aberrant expression of components of the Wnt pathway. β-Catenin, the key regulator of the Wnt pathway, is expressed at various protein levels in AML patients. SALL4 is an oncogene that is constitutively expressed in AML on the mRNA and the protein level. Two isoforms of SALL4 can bind to β-catenin and synergistically enhance the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. In addition, SALL4 is directly activated by TCF/LEF within the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. It is likely that other signal transduction pathways, for example the AKT and Notch pathway, closely interact with Wnt signaling. GSK3β, glycogen-synthase kinase 3β; grg, groucho-related transcriptional repressors; LEF, lymphocyte-enhancer-binding factor; LRP5/6, LDL-receptor-related-protein 5/6; MDC, multiprotein destruction complex; PYGO, pygopus; TCF: T-cell factor, Wif-1: Wnt inhibitory factor 1.

genes of the fusion proteins AML1–ETO, PML–RARα and PLZF–RARα in inducibly transfected U937 cells have recently been identified, and several of the genes regulated by all three fusion proteins have been found to be associated with Wnt signaling. One of the positive transcriptional regulators strongly induced on the mRNA and protein level by all three fusion proteins in U937 cells was plakoglobin. The plakoglobin promoter was cloned and shown to be induced by AML1-ETO in 32D cells. Primary blast cells carrying one of the fusion proteins also significantly overexpressed plakoglobin in vivo.

Plakoglobin is a co-activator of TCF and LEF transcription factors, and mediates Wnt signaling. Plakoglobin binds to TCF/LEF transcription factors, localizes to the nucleus and activates the transcription of target genes like cyclin D1, c-myc and PPARδ. Accordingly, enhanced transcriptional activity of plakoglobin by AML fusion proteins leads to induction of downstream signaling by transactivation of Wnt target genes in AML cells expressing AML1-ETO in vitro and in vivo. Enhanced formation of plakoglobin-LEF-1 and β-catenin-LEF-1 complexes contributed to TCF- and LEF-dependent promoter transactivation.

Induction of c-myc by plakoglobin has previously been reported. Our group could demonstrate plakoglobin binding to the c-myc promoter, c-myc promoter activity and increased

c-myc expression in AML cells carrying one of the fusion proteins. Moreover, the AML fusion proteins induced expression of β-catenin, the key regulator within the Wnt pathway, and cyclin D1. In addition to direct transcriptional activation, plakoglobin might compete with β-catenin for APC/axin binding and as a consequence lead to increased β-catenin-mediated transcription. Plakoglobin appears to be important in Wnt signaling induced by AML associated translocation products, since the colony-forming capacity of HSCs transduced with fusion proteins is abrogated upon plakoglobin inhibition through small interference RNA (siRNA) interference. Retroviral transduction of plakoglobin into primitive murine hematopoietic progenitor cells preserved the immature phenotype during colony growth, suggesting enhanced self-renewal. Furthermore, plakoglobin overexpression in myeloid 32D cells enhanced proliferation and clonal growth, and injection of plakoglobin-expressing 32D cells into syngeneic mice significantly accelerated the development of leukemia. Moreover, overexpression of plakoglobin in HSCs blocks differentiation and selects a subset of early stem cells that is unable to differentiate in the presence of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, respectively, granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, thus suggesting a leukemogenic potential of a constitutively activated Wnt signaling.

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML  
J-H Mikesch et al

These data provide evidence that AML associated fusion proteins contribute to leukemogenesis at least partially by inducing plakoglobin expression and therefore targeting the Wnt signaling pathway. Wnt signaling is a common feature of several balanced translocations in AML *in vitro* and *in vivo*. Wnt signaling in hematopoietic progenitors leads to expansion and self-renewal of HSCs and progenitor cells. ${}^{20,21,54}$ AML fusion proteins have been observed to function partially by enhancing self-renewal as well. ${}^{96,97}$ Therefore, it appears likely that the self-renewal capacity conferred by AML fusion proteins is at least partially mediated by Wnt signaling.

The Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (Wif-1) is an extracellular protein that negatively regulates the Wnt pathway by binding Wnt. ${}^{98}$ Thus, Wif-1 downregulation is supposed to contribute to Wnt pathway activation. In leukemias, promoter hypermethylation of genes involved in cell-cycle control and signaling is frequent. ${}^{99-102}$ Chim *et al.* ${}^{103}$ provided evidence that Wif-1 was methylated in 47% of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients and in the APL cell line NB4 but not in normal bone marrow samples. Demethylation treatment of the APL cell line NB4 with 5-azacytidine (5-AC) led to progressive upregulation of Wif-1 in these cells confirming that promoter methylation suppresses Wif-1 gene expression in APL. ${}^{103}$ Hence, downregulation of Wif-1 might be another mechanism leading to activation of the Wnt pathway in APL that is typically associated with PML-RARα or PLZF-RARα. Interestingly, in APL patients, Wif-1 methylation was associated with young age and a higher leukocyte count. Remission rates were comparable in patients with or without Wif-1 methylation, but the projected 3-year disease-free survival was significantly inferior in patients with Wif-1 methylation as compared to those without, ${}^{103}$ hinting at a prognostic relevance of Wnt signaling in APL.

Furthermore, GSK3β, a key player in canonical Wnt signaling, is inactivated by Akt(PKB; protein kinase B)-dependent phosphorylation. ${}^{111,112}$ The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K)/Akt cascade is activated in most AML cases. ${}^{113-116}$ In particular, it is activated by FLT3-ITD mutations, ${}^{117}$ suggesting that increased Wnt signaling in AML patients carrying such a mutation is at least partially due to GSK3β inactivation. Taken together, these results suggest that Flt3-ITD might mediate its leukemogenic effects partially by activation of the Wnt signaling pathway.

### Other mechanisms of aberrant Wnt signaling in AML

A considerable fraction of AML patients does show neither Flt3 mutations nor balanced translocations. Recent studies revealed aberrant Wnt signaling in AML cells that is independent from the occurrence of AML-associated fusion proteins or Flt3-ITD mutations.

Jamieson *et al.* ${}^{6}$ demonstrated that granulocyte macrophage progenitors have enhanced self-renewal capability as a result of aberrant activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in granulocytic blast crisis CML resembling AML. Results from Simon *et al.* ${}^{110}$ also suggested that aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway may contribute to the malignant phenotype in a high percentage of AML patients. A significant proportion of AML cases showed aberrant expression of components of the Wnt pathway, including Wnt-1, Wnt-2b and LEF-1 as potential mechanisms for an upregulation of β-catenin/TCF signaling. They also found that β-catenin expression is downregulated at days 5–7 of myelomonocytic differentiation of CD34-positive cells. ${}^{110}$ Retroviral transfection of a constitutively active β-catenin into normal primary human CD34+ cells leads to persistence of a more immature cell population as confirmed by morphological examination and flow cytometry. Activated β-catenin protected normal CD34+ progenitors from apoptosis. ${}^{110}$ In addition, increased transcriptional activity of the LEF/TCF factors was detected in 64% of AML samples in comparison to normal progenitor cells. ${}^{110}$ LEF-1 is a transcriptional mediator of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, and was observed to be involved in leukemogenesis by demonstration of a TCF- and LEF-dependent promoter transactivation by AML-associated fusion proteins as described above. ${}^{93}$ Studies of Li *et al.* ${}^{118}$ revealed another potential role of LEF-1 in leukemogenesis of AML. This group was able to show a cooperation of LEF-1 with CBFα *in vivo* leading to activation of ELA2, a gene that is involved in leukemogenesis of a hereditary AML predisposition syndrome, severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). ${}^{118}$ Moreover, Skokowa *et al.* ${}^{119}$ demonstrated that LEF-1 is crucial for neutrophil granulocytopenia. Its reduced expression plays a critical role in the defective maturation program of myeloid progenitor cells in patients with SCN. ${}^{119}$

β-Catenin, the key regulator of the Wnt pathway, is expressed at various protein levels in AML patients. ${}^{120,121}$ β-Catenin protein levels in AML cells differ from mRNA levels indicating translational and/or post-translational regulation by the Wnt pathway. β-Catenin expression was correlated with the clonogenic proliferation of AML-colony forming cells in methylcellulose, and more strikingly with self-renewal of leukemic cells, as assessed *in vitro* by a replating assay. ${}^{122}$ Furthermore, in survival analyses, β-catenin was suggested to be a new independent prognostic factor predicting poor event-free survival and shortened overall survival of AML patients. ${}^{121}$

Studies of breast and ovarian cancer, as well as pre-B-cell leukemia and multiple myeloma cells suggested that autocrine

### Cooperation of Flt3-ITD mutations with Wnt signaling in AML

Activating mutations of the type III RTK Flt3 occur in about 30% of patients with AML. ${}^{104}$ In-frame internal tandem duplications (ITD) at the juxtamembrane domain of the receptor are frequent. Flt3-ITD mutations result in ligand-independent kinase activation mediating proliferation and survival, block of myeloid differentiation, as well as induction of leukemic transformation in hematopoietic progenitor cell lines and primary mouse bone marrow. ${}^{76,105-107}$ The mechanisms of leukemic transformation through Flt3-ITD mutations are not fully understood. Genes that are differentially expressed upon expression of Flt3-ITD were identified in the myeloid progenitor cell line 32Dcl3. ${}^{108}$ It appears that mutant Flt3 not only leads to enhanced signaling but also alters the quality of the signal. As a consequence, several signaling pathways become activated by mutant Flt3 that are not altered by ligand-induced wild-type signaling. Microarray analyses indicated that Frizzled-4, one of the Wnt receptors, can be induced by Flt3 in myeloid progenitor cells 32D/Flt3-ITD cells. ${}^{108,109}$ Interestingly, hematopoietic cells either in cell culture or primary bone marrow blasts show significantly increased β-catenin protein levels. ${}^{109}$ The increases in β-catenin protein levels were associated with increased TCF/LEF transcriptional activity as well as TCF-dependent induction of c-myc. These findings were recently complemented by data from Simon *et al.* ${}^{110}$ who used a luciferase reporter plasmid that was activated in response to binding by TCF/LEF. Increased activation of Wnt signaling in comparison to normal progenitor cells was observed in six out of seven AML cases harboring Flt3-ITD mutations. ${}^{110}$

Wnt signals might contribute to the development of cancers.¹²²⁻¹²⁴ A similar mechanism is also conceivable in AML.

Recently, Ma *et al.*¹²⁵ detected that SALL4 is an oncogene that is constitutively expressed in AML. In humans, the SALL gene family is involved in normal development, as well as in tumorigenesis.¹²⁶⁻¹³² During normal hematopoiesis SALL4 isoforms are expressed in the CD34⁺ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell population, and they are rapidly turned off (SALL4B), respectively, downregulated (SALL4A) in normal human bone marrow and peripheral blood.¹²⁵ SALL4 isoforms were constitutively expressed on the mRNA and the protein level in all primary human AML samples tested, as well as in all AML cell lines. SALL4B transgenic mice developed myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-like features and subsequently AML.¹²⁵ Two isoforms of SALL4, SALL4A and SALL4B could bind to β-catenin and synergistically enhanced the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. In addition, SALL4 is directly activated by TCF/LEF within the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.¹³³ mRNA expression of two Wnt/β-catenin downstream target genes, c-myc and cyclin D1, is significantly upregulated in SALL4B transgenic mice. Therefore, constitutive expression of SALL4 causes MDS, respectively, AML most probably through the Wnt/β-catenin pathway.¹²⁵ In CML SALL4 expression was absent in the chronic phase, became detectable in the accelerated phase only in immature blasts, and was strongly positive in the blast phase,¹²⁵ a situation strongly resembling AML.

The idea of a crucial role of Wnt signaling in leukemogenesis was further supported by data from Ross *et al.*¹³⁴ who showed that Wnt signaling prevented adipocyte differentiation by inhibiting C/EBPα. C/EBPα is a major inducer of granulopoiesis and is frequently mutated in the FAB M2 subtype of AML.¹³⁵⁻¹³⁸

Taken together, these data provide evidence for the involvement of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in the pathogenesis of AML. Paradoxically, although in most instances Wnt proteins induce proliferation and are associated with leukemogenesis, a small subset of Wnt5a hemizygous mice develop lymphoid and myeloid leukemia.¹³⁹ Moreover, Wnt5a-mediated activation of the non-canonical Wnt-Ca²⁺ pathway can inhibit the canonical pathway, suppresses cyclin D1 and negatively regulates proliferation. Loss of this suppression may lead to hyperproliferation and leukemogenesis. Thus, Wnt5a appears to inhibit proliferation of hematopoietic cells and might function as a tumor suppressor in hematopoietic tissue. The hypothesis that Wnt signals not only contribute to proliferation and self-renewal in AML but partially also function as tumor suppressors is further supported by a study of de Toni *et al.*¹⁴¹ This group was able to show that addition of different antagonists of the canonical Wnt/β-catenin pathway, such as sFRP-1, Dkk-1 and Wnt5a to AML blasts or U937 cells induced resistance to daunorubicin, whereas incubation with the Wnt agonist Wnt3a increased chemosensitivity. Drug resistance mediated by sFRP-1 required GSK3β and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) suggesting a crosslink between Wnt signaling and NF-κB activation in AML.¹⁴¹ Osteoblasts that play a key role in the maintenance of the hematopoietic niche were shown to support drug resistance of U937 cells adhering onto osteoblasts by triggering sFRP-1 secretion.¹⁴¹ As a consequence Wnt proteins seem not only to support self-renewal and proliferation of AML cells but can also partially act as tumor suppressors and chemosensitizers. This controversy might be closely related to the effects of Wnt signaling on specific target cells. We have recently shown that Wnt signaling enhances migratory properties in monocytes.¹⁴² The importance of the target cell population is further emphasized by the finding that β-catenin induced self-renewal only occurred in a bcl-2 transgenic murine background.⁷³ This might even suggest that

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML

J-H Mikesch *et al.*

the outcome of Wnt signaling might be decided by additional stem cell regulatory factors.

Moreover, it is likely that other signal transduction pathways, for example the Akt and Notch pathway, closely interact with Wnt signaling.⁸⁹ Fukumoto *et al.*¹¹¹ could show that expression of Wnt or DVL increases Akt activity. Activation of Akt-signaling is involved in Wnt3a-induced proliferation of fibroblasts.¹⁴³ GSK3β that plays a major role within the Wnt pathway is a target of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K)/Akt cascade, which is also activated in most AML cases. On the one hand, Akt-dependent phosphorylation of GSK3β leading to its inactivation might be triggered by FLT3-ITD mutations as described above. Alternatively, GSK3β could be directly phosphorylated by integrin-linked kinase, which is also activated in AML by interactions with bone marrow stromal cells.¹⁴⁴ Thus, GSK3β might crosslink Wnt and PI3K/Akt pathways in AML. Indeed, Cheong *et al.*¹⁴⁵ could show that in some AML cases GSK3β is a target of Akt. However, this finding was not confirmed by other investigators.¹⁴⁶

Cooperation between Wnt and Notch in HSCs has recently been suggested by Duncan *et al.*⁸⁹ Furthermore, studies have demonstrated a role for Wnt and Notch in T-cell leukemias.¹⁴⁷ For example, Weng *et al.*¹⁴⁸ could show that over 50% of human T-ALL patients have activating mutations in Notch1. Deregulated T-cell proliferation might result from suppression of p53 and/or activation of the NF-κB by Notch.¹⁴⁹,¹⁵⁰ Both Notch and Wnt might also cooperate to contribute to leukemogenesis in AML.

### Conclusions and future perspectives

AML is often characterized by activation of Wnt signaling and downstream effectors. An important step forward will be to analyze the therapeutic potential of this pathway in acute leukemias. Activated Wnt signaling is frequently found in various human cancers. Therefore, inhibition of this pathway might be a promising therapeutic target for cancer therapy.¹⁵¹ Imatinib effectively inhibits constitutive activity of β-catenin signaling and suppresses proliferation of human colon cancer cells.¹⁵² In a conditional Wnt-1 transgenic mouse tumor model, reduction of Wnt-1 signaling resulted in the regression of the Wnt-1 initiated primary mammary tumors and lung metastasis.¹⁵³ Moreover, blockade of Wnt signaling by either siRNA or use of specific antibodies inhibits tumor growth and induces apoptosis of cancer cells.¹⁵³,¹⁵⁴ Mazieres *et al.*,¹⁵⁵ could show that inhibition of Wnt16 by the use of siRNA and an anti-Wnt16 antibody induces apoptosis in human ALL cells containing the t(1;19) translocation. Targeted Wnt blockage has to be handled with care to minimize risk for derogations of normal hematopoiesis. However, inhibition of Wnt signaling may provide a basis for the more selective targeting of cancer stem cells in leukemia.

### Acknowledgements

Research in our laboratory was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, José-Carreras Foundation, Deutsche Krebshilfe and the Interdisciplinary Center of Clinical Research at the University of Münster.

### References

1. Steffen B, Müller-Tidow C, Schwäble J, Berdel W, Serve H. The molecular pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia. *Crit Rev Oncol/Haematol* 2005; **56**: 195–221.

Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML  
J-H Mikesch et al

2 Jordan CT, Guzman ML, Noble M. Cancer stem cells. *N Engl J Med* 2006; **355**:1253–1261.

3 Bonnet D, Dick JE. Human acute leukemia is organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive haematopoietic cell. *Nat Med* 1997; **3**:730–737.

4 Huntly BJ, Gilliland DG. Blasts from the past: new lessons in stem cell biology from chronic myelogenous leukemia. *Cancer Cell* 2004; **6**:199–201.

5 Huntly BJ, Gilliland DG. Leukaemia stem cells and the evolution of cancer-stem-cell research. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2005; **5**:311–321.

6 Jamieson CH, Ailles LE, Dylla SJ, Muijtjens M, Jones C, Zehnder JL *et al.* Granulocyte-macrophage progenitors as candidate leukemic stem cells in blast-crisis CML. *N Engl J Med* 2004; **351**:657–667.

7 Cozzio A, Passegue E, Ayton PM, Karsunky H, Cleary ML, Weissman IL. Similar MLL-associated leukemias arising from self-renewing stem cells and short-lived myeloid progenitors. *Genes Dev* 2003; **17**:3029–3035.

8 Huntly BJ, Shigematsu H, Deguchi K, Lee BH, Mizuno S, Duclos N *et al.* MOZ-TIF2, but not BCR-ABL, confers properties of leukemic stem cells to committed murine haematopoietic progenitors. *Cancer Cell* 2004; **6**:587–596.

9 Krivtsov AV, Twomey D, Feng Z, Stubbs MC, Wang Y, Faber J *et al.* Transformation from committed progenitor to leukaemia stem cell initiated by MLL-AF9. *Nature* 2006; **442**:818–822.

10 Wang JC, Dick JE. Cancer stem cells: lessons from leukemia. *Trends Cell Biol* 2005; **15**:494–501.

11 Guzman ML, Jordan CT. Considerations for targeting malignant stem cells in leukemia. *Cancer Control* 2004; **11**:97–104.

12 Dick JE. Acute myeloid leukemia stem cells. *Ann NY Acad Sci* 2005; **1044**:1–5.

13 Holyoake TL, Jiang X, Drummond MW, Eaves AC, Eaves CJ. Elucidating critical mechanisms of deregulated stem cell turnover in the chronic phase of chronic myeloid leukemia. *Leukemia* 2002; **16**:549–558.

14 Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T, Caceres-Cortes J *et al.* A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukemia after transplantation into SCID mice. *Nature* 1994; **367**:645–648.

15 Sato N, Meijer L, Skaltsounis L, Greengard P, Brivanlou AH. Maintenance of pluripotency in human and mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK-3 specific inhibitor. *Nat Med* 2004; **10**:55–63.

16 Kielman MF, Rindapaa M, Gaspar C, van Poppel N, Breukel C, van Leeuwen S *et al.* Apc modulates embryonic stem-cell differentiation by controlling the dosage of β-catenin signaling. *Nat Genet* 2002; **32**:594–605.

17 Tsukamoto AS, Grosschedl R, Guzman RC, Parslow T, Varmus HE. Expression of the int-1 gene in transgenic mice is associated with mammary gland hyperplasia and adenocarcinomas in male and female mice. *Cell* 1988; **55**:619–625.

18 Korinek V, Barker N, Morin PJ, van Wichen D, de Weger R, Kinzler KW *et al.* Constitutive transcriptional activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC−/− colon carcinoma. *Science* 1997; **275**:1752–1753.

19 Morin PJ, Sparks AB, Korinek V, Barker N, Clevers H, Vogelstein B *et al.* Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in beta-catenin or APC. *Science* 1997; **275**:1787–1790.

20 Pardal R, Clarke MF, Morrison SJ. Applying the principles of stem-cell biology to cancer. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2003; **3**:895–902.

21 Al-Hajj M, Clarke MF. Self-renewal and solid tumor stem cells. *Oncogene* 2004; **23**:7274–7282.

22 Reya T, Clevers H. Wnt signalling in stem cells and cancer. *Nature* 2005; **434**:843–850.

23 Austin TW, Solar GP, Ziegler FC, Liem L, Matthews WA. A role for the Wnt gene family in hematopoiesis: expansion of multi-lineage progenitor cells. *Blood* 1997; **89**:3624–3635.

24 Brandon C, Eisenberg LM, Eisenberg CA. Wnt signaling modulates the diversification of haematopoietic cells. *Blood* 2000; **96**:4132–4141.

25 van Noort M, Clevers H. TCF transcription factors, mediators of Wnt-signaling in development and cancer. *Dev Biol* 2002; **244**:1–8.

26 Smalley MJ, Dale TC. Wnt signalling in mammalian development and cancer. *Cancer Metast Rev* 1999; **18**:215–230.

27 Malbon CC. Frizzleds: new members of the superfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors. *Front Biosci* 2004; **9**:1048–1058.

28 Wang HY. Wnt-frizzled signaling via cyclic GMP. *Front Biosci* 2004; **9**:1043–1047.

29 Kuhl M. The WNT/calcium pathway: biochemical mediators, tools and future requirements. *Front Biosci* 2004; **9**:967–974.

30 Clevers H. Wnt breakers in colon cancer. *Cancer Cell* 2004; **5**:5–6.

31 Wang HY, Malbon CC. Wnt-frizzled signaling to G-protein-coupled effectors. *Cell Mol Life Sci* 2004; **61**:69–75.

32 Veeman MT, Axelrod JD, Moon RT. A second canon. Functions and mechanisms of β-catenin independent Wnt signaling. *Dev Cell* 2003; **5**:367–377.

33 Pinson KI, Brennan J, Monkley S, Avery BJ, Skarnes WC. An LDL-receptor-related protein mediates Wnt signalling in mice. *Nature* 2000; **407**:535–538.

34 Tamai K, Semenov M, Kato Y, Spokony R, Liu C, Katsuyama Y *et al.* LDL-receptor-related proteins in Wnt signal transduction. *Nature* 2000; **407**:530–535.

35 Mao J, Wang J, Liu B, Pan W, Farr III GH, Flynn C *et al.* Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-5 binds to Axin and regulates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. *Mol Cell* 2001; **7**:801–809.

36 Mao B, Wu W, Li Y, Hoppe D, Stannek P, Glinka A *et al.* LDL-receptor-related protein 6 is a receptor for Dickkopf proteins. *Nature* 2001; **411**:321–325.

37 Behrens J, Jerchow BA, Wurtele M, Grimm J, Asbrand C, Wirtz R *et al.* Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with β-catenin, APC, and GSK3β. *Science* 1998; **280**:596–599.

38 Ikeda S, Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Murai H, Koyama S, Kikuchi A. Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and promotes GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin. *EMBO J* 1998; **17**:1371–1384.

39 Hart MJ, de los Santos R, Albert IN, Rubinfeld B, Polakis P. Downregulation of beta-catenin by human Axin and its association with the APC tumor suppressor, beta-catenin and GSK3beta. *Curr Biol* 1998; **8**:573–581.

40 Peters JM, McKay RM, McKay JP, Graff JM. Casein kinase I transduces Wnt signals. *Nature* 1999; **401**:345–350.

41 Sakanaka C, Leong P, Xu L, Harrison SD, Williams LT. Casein kinase iepsilon in the wnt pathway: regulation of beta-catenin function. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999; **96**:12548–12552.

42 Polakis P. Casein kinase 1: a Wnt'er of disconnect. *Curr Biol* 2002; **12**:R499–R501.

43 Amit S, Hatzubai A, Birman Y, Andersen JS, Ben-Shushan E, Mann M *et al.* Axin-mediated CKI phosphorylation of beta-catenin at Ser 45: a molecular switch for the Wnt pathway. *Genes Dev* 2002; **16**:1066–1076.

44 Liu C, Li Y, Semenov M, Han C, Baeg GH, Tan Y *et al.* Control of beta-catenin phosphorylation/degradation by a dual-kinase mechanism. *Cell* 2002; **108**:837–847.

45 Yanagawa S, Matsuda Y, Lee JS, Matsumayashi H, Sese S, Kadowaki T *et al.* casein kinase I phosphorylates the Armadillo protein and induces its degradation in Drosophila. *EMBO J* 2002; **21**:1733–1742.

46 Vacura A, Sessler A, Leichus B, Kuret J. A prenylation motif is required for plasma membrane localization and biochemical function of casein kinase I in budding yeast. *J Biol Chem* 1994; **269**:19271–19278.

47 Gietzen KF, Virshup DM. Identification of inhibitory autophosphorylation sites in casein kinase I epsilon. *J Biol Chem* 1999; **274**:32063–32070.

48 Cegielska A, Gietzen KF, Rivers A, Virshup DM. Autoinhibition of casein kinase I epsilon (CKI epsilon) is relieved by protein phosphatases and limited proteolysis. *J Biol Chem* 1998; **273**:1357–1364.

49 Rivers A, Gietzen KF, Vielhaber E, Virshup DM. Regulation of casein kinase I epsilon and casein kinase I delta by an in vivo futile phosphorylation cycle. *J Biol Chem* 1998; **273**:15980–15984.

50 Karim R, Tse G, Putti T, Scolyer R, Lee S. The significance of the Wnt pathway in the pathology of human cancers. *Pathology* 2004; **36**:120–128.

51 Liu X, Rubin JS, Kimmel AR. Rapid, Wnt-induced changes in GSK3beta associations that regulate beta-catenin stabilization are mediated by Galphaproteins. *Curr Biol* 2005; **15**:1989–1997.

52 Seto ES, Bellen HJ. The ins and outs of Wingless signaling. *Trend Cell Biol* 2004; **14**: 45–53.

53 Nelson WJ, Nusse R. Convergence of Wnt, β-catenin, and cadherin pathways. *Science* 2004; **303**: 1483–1487.

54 van Es JH, Barker N, Clevers H. You Wnt some, you lose some: oncogenes in the Wnt signaling pathway. *Curr Opin Genet Dev* 2003; **13**: 28–33.

55 Eastman Q, Grosschedl R. Regulation of LEF1/TCF transcription factors by Wnt and other signals. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 1999; **11**: 233–240.

56 Giles RH, van Es JH, Clevers H. Caught up in a Wnt storm: Wnt signaling in cancer. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2003; **1653**: 1–24.

57 Kramps T, Peter O, Brunner E, Nellen D, Froesch B, Chatterjee S et al. Wnt/wingless signaling requires BCL9/legless-mediated recruitment of pygopus to the nuclear β-catenin-TCF complex. *Cell* 2002; **109**: 47–60.

58 Townsley FM, Thompson B, Bienz M. Pygopus residues required for its binding to Legless are critical for transcription and development. *J Biol Chem* 2004; **279**: 5177–5183.

59 Townsley FM, Cliffe A, Bienz M. Pygopus and Legless target Armadillo/β-catenin to the nucleus to enable its transcriptional co-activator function. *Nat Cell Biol* 2004; **6**: 626–633.

60 Thompson BJ. A complex of Armadillo, Legless, and Pygopus coactivates dTCF to activate wingless targets genes. *Curr Biol* 2004; **14**: 458–466.

61 Daniels DL, Weis WI. ICAT inhibits β-catenin binding to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and the general coactivator p300 using independent structural modules. *Mol Cell* 2002; **10**: 573–584.

62 Takemaru K, Yamaguchi S, Lee YS, Zhang Y, Carthew RW, Moon RT. Chibby, a nuclear β-catenin-associated antagonist of the Wnt/Wingless pathway. *Nature* 2003; **422**: 905–909.

63 Yan D, Wallingford JB, Sun TQ, Nelson AM, Sakanaka C, Reinhard C et al. Cell autonomous regulation of Dishevelled dependent pathways by mammalian Nkd. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001; **98**: 3802–3807.

64 Park M, Moon RT. The planar cell-polarity gene stbm regulates cell behaviour and cell fate in vertebrate embryos. *Nat Cell Biol* 2002; **4**: 20–25.

65 Hocevar BA, Mou F, Rennolds JL, Morris SM, Cooper JA, Howe PH. Regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway by disabled-2 (Dab2). *EMBO J* 2003; **22**: 3084–3094.

66 Xu XX, Yi T, Tang B, Lambeth JD. Disabled-2 (Dab2) is an SH3 domain-binding partner of Grb2. *Oncogene* 1998; **16**: 1561–1569.

67 Hocevar BA, Smine A, Xu XX, Howe PH. The adaptor molecule Disabled-2 links the transforming growth factor beta receptors to the Smad pathway. *EMBO J* 2001; **20**: 2789–2801.

68 Polakis P. Wnt signaling and cancer. *Genes Dev* 2000; **14**: 1837–1851.

69 Behrens J, von Kries JP, Kuhl M, Bruhn L, Wedlich D, Grossschedl R et al. Functional interaction of beta-catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. *Nature* 1996; **382**: 638–642.

70 Pelengaris S, Khan M, Evan GI. c-MYC: more than just a matter of life and death. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2002; **2**: 764–776.

71 Ioannidis V, Beermann F, Clevers H, Held W. The β-catenin-TCF-1 pathway ensures CD4+CD8+ thymocyte survival. *Nat Immunol* 2001; **2**: 691–697.

72 Murdoch B, Chadwick K, Martin M, Shojaei F, Shah KV, Gallacher L et al. Wnt-5A augments repopulating capacity and primitive hematopoietic development of human blood stem cells in vivo. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2003; **100**: 3422–3427.

73 Reya T, Duncan AW, Ailles L, Domen J, Scherer DC, Willert K et al. A role for Wnt signalling in self-renewal of haematopoietic stem cells. *Nature* 2003; **423**: 409–414.

74 Willert K, Brown JD, Danenberg E, Duncan AW, Weissman IL, Reya T et al. Wnt proteins are lipid-modified and can act as stem cell growth factors. *Nature* 2003; **423**: 448–452.

75 Staal FJT, Clevers HC. Wnt signaling and haematopoiesis: a wnt-wnt situation. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2005; **5**: 21–30.

76 Zheng X, Beissert T, Kukoc-Zivojnov N, Puccetti E, Altschmied J, Strolz C et al. Gamma-catenin contributes to leukemogenesis induced by AML-associated translocation products by increasing the self-renewal of very primitive progenitor cells. *Blood* 2004; **103**: 3534–3543.


Role of Wnt signaling in the pathogenesis of AML

77 van den Berg DJ, Sharma AK, Bruno E, Hoffman R. Role of members of the Wnt gene family in human haematopoiesis. *Blood* 1998; **89**: 3189–3202.

78 Calvi LM, Adams GB, Weibrecht KW, Weber JM, Olson DP, Knight MC et al. Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche. *Nature* 2003; **425**: 841–846.

79 Zhang J, Niu C, Ye L, Huang H, He X, Tong WG et al. Identification of the haematopoietic stem cell niche and control of the niche size. *Nature* 2003; **425**: 836–841.

80 Rattis FM, Voermans C, Reya T. Wnt signaling in the stem cell niche. *Curr Opin Hematol* 2004; **11**: 88–94.

81 Reya T, O’Riordan M, Okamura R, Devaney E, Willert K, Nusse R et al. Wnt signalling regulates B lymphocyte proliferation through a LEF-1 dependent mechanism. *Immunity* 2000; **13**: 15–24.

82 Hackney JA, Charbord P, Brunk BP, Stoeckert CJ, Lemischka IR, Moore KA. A molecular profile of a hematopoietic stem cell niche. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2002; **99**: 13061–13066.

83 Pittenger MF, Mackay AM, Beck SC, Jaiswal RK, Douglas R, Mosca JD. Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells. *Science* 1999; **284**: 143–147.

84 Kiger AA, Jones DL, Schulz C, Rogers MB, Fuller MT. Stem cell self-renewal specified by JAK-STAT activation in response to a support cell cue. *Science* 2001; **294**: 2542–2545.

85 Moore KA. Recent advances in defining the haematopoietic stem cell niche. *Curr Opin Haematol* 2004; **11**: 107–111.

86 Bhardwaj G, Murdoch B, Wu D, Baker DP, Williams KP, Chadwick K et al. Sonic hedgehog induces the proliferation of primitive human hematopoietic cells via BMP regulation. *Nat Immunol* 2001; **2**: 172–180.

87 Varnum-Finney B, Xu L, Brashem-Stein C, Nourigat C, Flowers D, Bakkour S et al. Pluripotent, cytokine-dependent, hematopoietic stem cells are immortalized by constitutive Notch1 signaling. *Nat Med* 2000; **6**: 1278–1281.

88 Hing HK, Sun X, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Modulation of wingless signaling by Notch in Drosophila. *Mech Dev* 1994; **47**: 261–268.

89 Duncan AW, Rattis FM, DiMascio LN, Congdon KL, Pazianos G, Zhao C et al. Integration of Notch and Wnt signaling in haematopoietic stem cell maintenance. *Nat Immunol* 2005; **6**: 314–322.

90 Radtke F, Raj K. The role of Notch in tumorigenesis: oncogene or tumour suppressor? *Nat Rev Cancer* 2003; **3**: 756–767.

91 Kirstetter P, Anderson K, Porse BT, Jacobsen SEW, Nerlov C. Activation of the canonical Wnt pathway leads to loss of hematopoietic stem cell repopulation and multilineage differentiation block. *Nat Immunol* 2006; **7**: 1048–1056.

92 Scheller M, Huelsken J, Rosenbauer F, Takeo MM, Birchmeier W, Tenen DG et al. Hematopoietic stem cell and multilineage defects generated by constitutive β-catenin activation. *Nat Immunol* 2006; **7**: 1037–1047.

93 Müller-Tidow C, Steffen B, Cuavet T, Tickenbrock L, Ji P, Diederichs S et al. Translocation products in acute myeloid leukemia activate the Wnt signaling pathway in haematopoietic cells. *Mol Cell Biol* 2004; **24**: 2890–2904.

94 Zhurinsky J, Shtutman M, Ben-Ze'ev A. Plakoglobin and beta-catenin: protein interactions, regulation and biological roles. *J Cell Sci* 2000; **113**: 3127–3139.

95 Kolligs FT, Kolligs B, Hajra KM, Hu G, Tani M, Cho KR et al. gamma-catenin is regulated by the APC tumor suppressor and its oncogenic activity is distinct from that of beta-catenin. *Genes Dev* 2000; **14**: 1319–1331.

96 Mulloy JC, Cammenga J, MacKenzie KL, Berguido FJ, Moore MA, Nimer SD. The AML1-ETO fusion protein promotes the expansion of human hematopoietic stem cells. *Blood* 2002; **99**: 15–23.

97 Tonks A, Pearn L, Tonks AJ, Pearce L, Hoy T, Phillips S et al. The AML1-ETO fusion gene promotes extensive self-renewal of human primary erythroid cells. *Blood* 2003; **101**: 624–632.

98 Kawano Y, Kypta R. Secreted antagonists of the Wnt signalling pathway. *J Cell Sci* 2003; **116**: 2627–2634.

99 Chim CS, Liang R, Tam C, Kwong YL. P15 and P16 promoter methylation in acute promyelocytic leukemia. *J Clin Oncol* 2001; **19**: 2033–2040.

100 Chim CS, Liang R, Kwong YL. Gene promoter hypermethylation in hematologic malignancies. *Hematol Oncol* 2002; **20**: 167–176.

101 Agrawal S, Hofmann WK, Tidow N, Ehrich M, van den Boom D, Koschmieder S et al. The C/EBP{delta} tumor suppressor is silenced by hypermethylation in acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 2007; **9**:3895–3905.

102 Agrawal S, Unterberg M, Koschmieder S, Zur Stadt U, Brunnberg U, Verbeek W et al. DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes in clinical remission predicts the relapse risk in acute myeloid leukaemia. *Cancer Res* 2007; **67**:1370–1377.

103 Chim CS, Chan WWL, Pang A, Kwong YL. Preferential methylation of Wnt inhibitory factor-1 in acute promyelocytic leukemia: an independent poor prognostic factor. *Leukemia* 2006; **20**:907–909.

104 Gilliland DG, Griffin JD. The roles of FLT3 in hematopoiesis and leukemia. *Blood* 2002; **100**:1532–1542.

105 Zhao M, Kiyo H, Yamamoto Y, Ito M, Towatari M, Omura S et al. In vivo treatment of mutant FLT3-transformed murine leukemia with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. *Leukemia* 2000; **14**:374–378.

106 Levis M, Tse KF, Smith BD, Garrett E, Small D. A FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor is selectively cytotoxic to acute myeloid leukemia blasts harboring FLT3 internal tandem duplication mutations. *Blood* 2001; **98**:885–887.

107 Tse KF, Mukherjee G, Small D. Constitutive activation of FLT3 stimulates multiple intracellular signal transducers and results in transformation. *Leukemia* 2000; **14**:1766–1776.

108 Mizuki M, Schwäble J, Steur C, Choudhary C, Agrawal S, Sargin B et al. Suppression of myeloid transcription factors and induction of STAT response genes by AML-specific Flt3 mutations. *Blood* 2003; **101**:3164–3173.

109 Tickenbrock L, Schwäble J, Wiedehage M, Steffen B, Sargin B, Choudhary C et al. Flt3 tandem duplication mutations cooperate with Wnt signaling in leukemic signal transduction. *Blood* 2005; **105**:3699–3706.

110 Simon M, Grandage VL, Linch DC, Khwaja A. Constitutive activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway in acute myeloid leukemia. *Oncogene* 2005; **24**:2410–2420.

111 Fukumoto S, Hsieh CM, Maemura K, Layne MD, Yet SF, Lee KH. Akt participation in the Wnt signaling pathway through Dishevelled. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276**:17479–17483.

112 Sharma M, Chuang WW, Sun Z. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt stimulates androgen pathway through GSK3beta inhibition and nuclear beta-catenin accumulation. *J Biol Chem* 2002; **277**:30935–30941.

113 Kubota Y, Ohnishi H, Kitanaka A, Ishida T, Tanaka T. Constitutive activation of PI3K is involved in the spontaneous proliferation of primary acute myeloid leukemia cells: direct evidence of PI3K activation. *Leukemia* 2004; **18**:1438–1440.

114 Min YH, Eom JL, Cheong JW, Maeng HO, Kim JY, Jeung HK et al. Constitutive phosphorylation of Akt/PKB protein in acute myeloid leukaemia: its significance as a prognostic variable. *Leukemia* 2003; **17**:995–997.

115 Xu Q, Simpson SE, Scialla TJ, Bagg A, Carroll M. Survival of acute myeloid leukemia cells requires PI3 kinase activation. *Blood* 2003; **102**:972–980.

116 Zhao S, Konopleva M, Cabreira-Hansen M, Xie Z, Hu W, Milella M et al. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase dephosphorylates BAD and promotes apoptosis in myeloid leukemias. *Leukemia* 2004; **18**:267–275.

117 Brandts CH, Sargin B, Rode M, Biermann C, Lindtner B, Schwäble J et al. Constitutive activation of Akt by Flt3 internal tandem duplications is necessary for increased survival, proliferation, and myeloid transformation. *Cancer Res* 2005; **65**:9643–9650.

118 Li FQ, Person RE, Takemaru KI, Williams K, Meade-White K, Ozsahin AH et al. Lymphoid enhancer factor-1 links two hereditary leukemia syndromes through core-binding factor alpha regulation of ELA2. *J Biol Chem* 2004; **279**:2873–2884.

119 Skokowa J, Cario G, Uenalan M, Schambach A, Germeshausen M, Battmer K et al. LEF-1 is crucial for neutrophil granulocytopoiesis and its expression is severely reduced in congenital neutropenia. *Nat Med* 2006; **12**:1191–1197.

120 Serinsoz E, Neusch M, Busche G, Wasielewski R, Kreipe H, Bock O. Aberrant expression of beta-catenin discriminates acute myeloid leukaemia from acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. *Br J Haematol* 2004; **126**:313–319.

121 Ysebaert L, Chicanne G, Demur C, De Toni F, Prade-Houdellier N, Ruidavets JB et al. Expression of β-catenin by acute myeloid leukemia cells predicts enhanced clonogenic capacities and poor prognosis. *Leukemia* 2006; **20**:1211–1216.

122 Bafico A, Liu G, Goldin L, Harris V, Aaronson SA. An autocrine mechanism of constitutive Wnt pathway activation in human cancer cells. *Cancer Cell* 2004; **6**:497–506.

123 Mc Whirter JR, Neuteboom ST, Wancewicz EV, Monia BP, Downing JR, Murre C. Oncogenic homeodomain transcription factor E2A-Pbx1 activates a novel Wnt gene in pre-B acute lymphoblastoid leukemia. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 1999; **96**:11464–11469.

124 Derksen PW, Tijn E, Meijer H, Klok MD, MacGillavry MH, van Oers MH et al. Illegitimate WNT signaling promotes proliferation of multiple myeloma cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004; **24**:2890–2904.

125 Ma Y, Cui W, Yang J, Qu J, Di C, Amin HM et al. SALL4, a novel oncogene, is constitutively expressed in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and induces AML in transgenic mice. *Blood* 2006; **108**:2726–2735.

126 Al-Baradie R, Yamada K, St Hilaire C, Chan WM, Andrews C, McIntosh N et al. Duane radial ray syndrome (Okihiro syndrome) maps to 20q13 and results from mutations in SALL4, a new member of the SAL family. *Am J Hum Genet* 2002; **71**:1195–1199.

127 Ma Y, Li D, Chai L, Luciani AM, Ford D, Morgan J et al. Cloning and characterization of two promoters for the human HSAL2 gene and their transcriptional repression by the Wilms tumor suppressor gene product. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276**:48223–48230.

128 Ma Y, Singer DB, Gozman A, Ford D, Chai L, Steinhoff MM et al. Hsal1 is related to kidney and gonad development and is expressed in Wilms tumor. *Pediatr Nephrol* 2001; **16**:701–709.

129 Ma Y, Chai L, Cortez SC, Stopa EG, Steinhoff MM, Ford D et al. SALL1 expression in the human pituitary-adrenal/gonadal axis. *J Endocrinol* 2002; **173**:437–448.

130 Marlin S, Blanchard S, Slim R, Lacombe D, Denoyelle F, Alessandri JL et al. Townes-Brocks syndrome: detection of a SALL1 mutation hotspot and evidence for a position effect in one patient. *Hum Mutat* 1999; **14**:377–386.

131 Nishinakamura R, Matsumoto Y, Nakao K, Nakamura K, Sato A, Copeland NG et al. Murine homolog of SALL1 is essential for ureteric bud invasion in kidney development. *Development* 2001; **128**:3105–3115.

132 Kohlhase J, Schubert L, Liebers M, Rauch A, Becker K, Mohammed SN et al. Mutations at the SALL4 locus on chromosome 20 result in a range of clinically overlapping phenotypes, including Okihiro syndrome, Holt-Oram syndrome, acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and patients previously reported to represent thalidomide embryopathy. *J Med Genet* 2003; **40**:473–478.

133 Bohm J, Sustmann C, Wilhelm C, Kohlhase J. SALL4 is directly activated by TCF/LEF in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2006; **348**:898–907.

134 Ross SE, Hemati N, Longo KA, Bennett CN, Lucas PC, Erickson RL et al. Inhibition of adipogenesis by Wnt signaling. *Science* 2000; **289**:950–953.

135 Pabst T, Mueller BU, Harakawa N, Schoch C, Haferlach T, Behre G et al. AML1-ETO downregulates the granulocytic differentiation factor C/EBPalpha in t(8;21) myeloid leukemia. *Nat Med* 2001; **7**:444–451.

136 Radomska HS, Huebner CS, Zhang P, Cheng T, Scadden DT, Tenen DG. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha is a regulatory switch sufficient for induction of granulocytic development from bipotential myeloid progenitors. *Mol Cell Biol* 1998; **18**:4301–4314.

137 Tenen DG. Abnormalities of the CEBP alpha transcription factor: a major target in acute myeloid leukemia. *Leukemia* 2001; **15**:688–689.

138 Zhang DE, Zhang P, Wang ND, Hetherington CJ, Darlington GJ, Tenen DG. Absence of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor signaling and neutrophil development in CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha-deficient mice. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1997; **94**:569–574.

139 Liang H, Chen Q, Coles AH, Anderson SJ, Pihan G, Bradley A et al. Wnt5a inhibits B cell proliferation and functions as a

tumor suppressor in hematopoietic tissue. Cancer Cell 2003; 4: 349–360.

140 Topol L, Jiang X, Choi H, Garrett-Beal L, Carolan BJ, Yang Y. Wnt-5a inhibits the canonical Wnt pathway by promoting GSK-3-independent beta-catenin degradation. J Cell Biol 2003; 162: 899–908.

141 de Toni F, Racaud-Sultan C, Chicanne G, Mansat-De Mas V, Cariven C, Mesange F et al. A crosstalk between the Wnt and the adhesion-dependent signaling pathways governs the chemosensitivity of acute myeloid leukaemia. Oncogene 2006; 25: 3113–3122.

142 Tickenbrock L, Schwäble J, Strey A, Sargin B, Hehn S, Baas M et al. Wnt signaling regulates transendothelial migration of monocytes. J Leukoc Biol 2005; 79: 1306–1311.

143 Kim SE, Lee WJ, Choi KY. The PI3 kinase-Akt pathway mediates Wnt3a-induced proliferation. Cell Signal 2007; 19: 511–518.

144 Tabe Y, Jin L, Tsutsumi-Ishii Y, Xu Y, McQueen T, Priebe W et al. Activation of integrin-linked kinase is a critical prosurvival pathway induced in leukemic cells by bone marrow-derived stromal cells. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 684–694.

145 Cheong JW, Eom JL, Maeng HY, Lee ST, Hahn JS, Ko YW et al. Phosphatase and tensin homologue phosphorylation in the C-terminal regulatory domain is frequently observed in acute myeloid leukaemia and associated with poor clinical outcome. Br J Haematol 2003; 122: 454–456.

146 Grandage VL, Gale RE, Linch DC, Khwaja A. PI3-kinase/Akt is constitutively active in primary acute myeloid leukaemia cells and regulates survival and chemoresistance via NF-kappaB, Mapkinase and p53 pathways. Leukemia 2005; 19: 586–594.


147 Weerkamp F, van Dongen JJM, Staal FJT. Notch and Wnt signaling in T-lymphocyte development and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 2006; 20: 1197–1205.

148 Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris IV JP, Silverman LB, Sanchez-Irizarry C. Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Science 2004; 306: 269–271.

149 Beverly LJ, Felsher DW, Capobianco AJ. Suppression of p53 by Notch in lymphomagenesis: implications for initiation and regression. Cancer Res 2005; 65: 7159–7168.

150 Vacca A, Felli MP, Palermo R, Di Mario G, Calce A, Di Giovinine Met al. Notch3 and pre-TCR interaction unveils distinct NF-kappaB pathways in T-cell development and leukaemia. EMBO J 2006; 25: 1000–1008.

151 Herbst A, Kolligs FT. Wnt signaling as a therapeutic target for cancer. Methods Mol Biol 2007; 361: 63–91.

152 Zhou L, An N, Haydon RC, Zhou O, Cheng H, Peng Y et al. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI-571/Gleevec down-regulates the beta-catenin signaling activity. Cancer Letters 2003; 25: 161–170.

153 You L, Kim J, He B, Xu Z, McCormick F, Jablons DM. Wnt-1 signal as a potential cancer therapeutic target. Drug News Perspect 2006; 19: 27–31.

154 Verma UN, Surabhi RM, Schmaltieg A, Becerra C, Gaynor RB. Small interfering RNAs directed against beta-catenin inhibit the in vitro and in vivo growth of colon cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2003; 9: 1291–1300.

155 Mazieres J, You L, He B, Xu Z, Lee AY, Mikami I et al. Inhibition of Wnt16 in human acute lymphoblastoid leukemia cells containing the t(1;19) translocation induces apoptosis. Oncogene 2005; 24: 5396–5400.
