
JB Minireview

FOXO Transcription Factors in the Regulatory Networks of Longevity

Hiroaki Daitoku and Akiyoshi Fukamizu*

Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan

Received October 2, 2006; accepted November 1, 2006

FOXO (Forkhead box O) transcription factors constitute an evolutionarily conserved subgroup within the large Forkhead family of transcription regulators. FOXO factors are important regulators of the cell cycle, apoptosis, DNA repair, metabolism, oxidative stress resistance and longevity. Genetic studies of *Caenorhabditis elegans* demonstrated that FOXO factors are major targets of the insulin-like signalling implicated during the regulation of glucose metabolism and lifespan extension. Recently, emerging evidence has also shed light on signalling pathways under oxidative stress that regulate FOXO activity by various post-translational modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination. Thus, FOXO factors react to external stimuli by altering their modifications, modulating target gene expression that may be involved in longevity.

Key words: FOXO, lifespan regulation, oxidative stress, post-translational modification, transcription.

Forkhead box O (FOXO) transcription factors belong to the large Forkhead family of proteins, which are characterized by a conserved DNA-binding domain termed the 'forkhead box (FOX)' (1). Forkhead subgroups of the O class (FOXO) contain four members in mammals: FOXO1, FOXO3, FOXO4 and FOXO6 (2). FOXO subgroups have also been identified in other organisms including *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Drosophila melanogaster* (2). FOXO factors are associated with a wide range of biological processes, including cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, DNA repair, muscle atrophy, glucose metabolism, anti-oxidative stress and longevity (3, 4). One of the most intriguing functions of FOXO transcription factors is their conserved ability to increase lifespan (2, 5–7), which is correlated with the detoxification of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the repair of damaged DNA (8–11). In this review, we briefly summarize the current understanding of the roles of FOXO factors, paying special attention to their implication in oxidative stress response and lifespan regulation.

PI3K-Akt signalling pathway that responds to insulin/IGF-I and several other growth factors (13).

**Insulin-like Signalling Pathway—The initial evidence that FOXO might be a key downstream effector of the PI3K-Akt pathway was derived from genetic studies in *C. elegans* (14, 15). Inactivating mutations in the worm insulin receptor (*daf-2*) or PI3K (*age-1*) resulted in up to 3-fold extended longevity (16–19). This lifespan extension was reverted when the worm FOXO ortholog, *daf-16* was mutated (14, 15). These genetic studies revealed that the insulin-like signalling pathway is a major determinant of lifespan and that the FOXO factors comprise a critical downstream modulator that is negatively regulated by its upstream components. Moreover, DAF-16-dependent longevity in worms was reported to account for the detoxification of ROS by up-regulating the expression of free radical scavenging enzyme, such as Mn superoxide dismutase (MnSOD, SOD3 in worms) (20).**

Biochemical studies in mammalian cells, on the other hand, have shown that Akt (also called PKB) directly phosphorylates the FOXO transcription factors FOXO1, FOXO3 and FOXO4 at three regulatory sites (Thr24, Ser256 and Ser319 in the human FOXO1 sequence) that are both putative Akt recognition motifs (RXRXX(S/T)) and highly conserved between nematodes and mammals (13, 21, 22). In the absence of insulin/IGF-I or other growth factors, when Akt is inactive, FOXO factors are predominantly localized to the nucleus. When the PI3K-Akt cascade is activated by growth factors, the FOXO proteins are directly phosphorylated, resulting in their nuclear export and cytoplasmic retention via binding to 14-3-3 proteins (13, 23). 14-3-3 proteins are a family of cellular chaperones that interact with their protein ligands in a phosphorylation-dependent manner (24). In the nucleus, the interaction between 14-3-3 proteins and FOXO factors is dependent on the phosphorylation of two consensus sites by Akt (13, 23). Several mechanisms have been suggested

REGULATION OF FOXO ACTIVITY BY PHOSPHORYLATION

A crucial mechanism that strictly regulates FOXO activity is a shuttling system, which confines FOXO factors to either the nucleus or the cytoplasm. Shuttling of FOXO factors requires protein phosphorylation within several domains and association with 14-3-3 proteins and the nuclear transport machinery (12). Among the numerous transduction cascades, the first-identified and primary regulation signal for FOXO factors is the

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel/Fax: +81-29-853-6070, E-mail: akif@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp

to explain how the interaction of 14-3-3 proteins and FOXO factors promotes the exclusion of FOXO factors from the nucleus. A possible explanation is that 14-3-3 protein binding to FOXO factors may induce an interaction between Exportin/Crm1 and the FOXO nuclear export signal (NES) (23) and also prevent re-entry of FOXO factors into the nucleus by masking the FOXO nuclear localization signal (NLS) (25, 26). The interaction of 14-3-3 proteins and FOXO factors appears to be a determinant of FOXO subcellular localization by altering the relative rate of FOXO nuclear import and export.

JNK Signaling—Longevity is known to be coupled with increased oxidative stress resistance in a variety of organisms (27). It is therefore feasible that FOXO factors respond to oxidative stress stimuli via certain signalling pathways and thus allow an adaptive response to stress. A series of recent experiments indicated that JNK, a member of the MAPK superfamily, is a critical upstream modulator of FOXO factors in several organisms (28–30). The JNK signalling pathway is triggered by external stimuli, including UV radiation and oxidative stress, and the JNK cascade is evolutionary conserved. The first clues to the mechanism of JNK-dependent FOXO regulation came from a *Drosophila* study suggesting that JNK signalling is an important genetic factor for lifespan regulation (31). Further genetic analysis in flies established that JNK requires the fly FOXO ortholog dFOXO for lifespan extension (30). JNK promotes the nuclear translocation of dFOXO and induces the expression of small heat shock proteins, preventing the accumulation of protein aggregates caused by oxidative stress. In addition, JNK systemically antagonizes the insulin-like signalling pathway by activating dFOXO and repressing the expression of *dilp2*, a peptide that closely resembles human insulin (30). Whether JNK directly phosphorylates dFOXO in flies is not yet known. In *C. elegans*, the worm JNK ortholog JNK-1 binds and phosphorylates DAF-16 in response to heat stress, and this phosphorylation was implicated in the nuclear translocation of DAF-16 (29). Genetic studies have suggested that the JNK pathway acts in parallel but opposite fashion to the insulin-like signalling that regulates lifespan, and both pathways converge onto DAF-16 (29). On the other hand, human FOXO4 is phosphorylated by JNK at residues Thr447 and Thr451 via the oxidative stress-dependent activation of the small GTPase Ral (28). Although FOXO4 phosphorylation by JNK does not disrupt any interaction with 14-3-3 proteins in the cytoplasm, JNK has also been shown to phosphorylate 14-3-3 proteins directly, thereby releasing 14-3-3 substrates (32). Indeed, JNK activity promotes the nuclear translocation of FOXO4 and up-regulates the expression of MnSOD (28). The physiological relevance of the JNK-mediated FOXO4 phosphorylation has not yet been addressed in mammals. Taken together, the Akt and JNK pathways appear to finely modulate FOXO activity; specifically, Akt prevents FOXO nuclear localization and suppresses longevity while JNK accelerates FOXO nuclear localization and extends lifespan.

MST1 Signalling—Recently, the protein kinase MST1 was found to be a mediator of FOXO transcription factors and to be required for oxidative stress-induced cell death in primary mammalian neurons (33).

MST1 phosphorylates FOXO factors at a site within the forkhead domain of these proteins that is highly conserved from nematodes to mammals (33). In mammalian neurons, oxidative stress-activated MST1 phosphorylates FOXO3, which in turn disrupts the 14-3-3/FOXO3 protein complex in the cytoplasm, promoting nuclear translocation of FOXO3 and thereby inducing the expression of the pro-apoptotic FOXO target gene BIM (33). Genetic analysis in worms further demonstrated that knockdown of the nematode MST1 ortholog CST-1 accelerated aging and reduced lifespan, while overexpression of CST-1 prolonged lifespan and delayed aging (33). Importantly, the *cst-1*-induced lifespan extension occurs in a *daf-16*-dependent manner (33). These findings present an intimate and evolutionarily conserved signaling link between the MST1 and FOXO transcription factors that regulates cellular responses to oxidative stress in mammals and induces longevity in nematodes.

REGULATION OF FOXO ACTIVITY BY ACETYLATION/DEACETYLATION

A series of recent studies in mammalian cells indicates that the reversible acetylation of FOXO proteins by nuclear coactivators and corepressors provides another layer of regulation of nuclear FOXO transcriptional factors.

CBP/p300—The acetyltransferase protein, CBP (CREB-binding protein) and p300 have been shown to act as global transcriptional coactivators by associating with numerous transcription factors (34). Our group and others have demonstrated that CBP/p300 directly binds and acetylates FOXO proteins in mammalian cells (35–38). We have further shown that CBP modulates the transactivation function of FOXO proteins via its acetyltransferase activity (37, 38), but the consequence of acetylation on FOXO activity (activation or repression) is a still a matter of debate (39, 40). We hypothesize that CBP coactivates FOXO-mediated transcription, presumably by acetylating chromosomal histones surrounding target genes, thereby forming the pre-initiation complex; subsequent acetylation of FOXO, however, leads to its transcriptional attenuation (38). Because CBP-induced acetylation sites are primarily located in the forkhead domain of FOXO proteins, we considered that acetylation could interfere with FOXO binding to target DNA and thereby prevent FOXO-mediated transcription. Indeed, acetylation by CBP at the positively charged basic residues in the FOXO1 DNA-binding domain diminished its ability to interact with target gene DNA (41). Interestingly, acetylation promotes the phosphorylation of FOXO1 via the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway (41). These findings suggest a mechanism by which the acetylation of FOXO1 destabilizes the FOXO1-DNA complex, and hence Akt readily phosphorylates FOXO1 within the DNA-binding domain.

SIR2 (*SIRT1*)—SIR2 and its ortholog SIRT1, belong to a family of NAD-dependent protein deacetylases, called sirtuins, which respond to metabolic changes in the cellular environment, including the availability of nutrients/energy and cellular stress (42). A series of genetic studies has demonstrated that increased Sir2 activity extends the lifespan of (43), as well as the longevity

Regulation of FOXO Factors in Oxidative Stress and Longevity

Table 1. The mediators of FOXO proteins.

| Mediator | Modification         | Function                                      | Lifespan   |
|----------|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------|------------|
| Akt      | Phosphorylation     | Nuclear export                                | Decrease   |
| JNK      | Phosphorylation     | Nuclear import                                | Increase   |
| MST1     | Phosphorylation     | Inhibition of cytoplasmic retention           | Increase   |
|          |                     | Nuclear import                                |            |
| CBP/p300 | Acetylation         | Transcriptional coactivation                  | –          |
|          |                     | Reduction of DNA-binding ability              |            |
| SIRT1    | Deacetylation       | Gene-specific transcriptional modulation       | Increase   |
| Skp2     | Polyubiquitination   | Proteasomal degradation                       | –          |
| Unknown  | Monoubiquitination   | Nuclear import?                               | –          |
| USP7     | Deubiquitination    | Nuclear export                                | –          |
| β-catenin| –                   | Transcriptional coactivation                  | Increase   |
| SMK-1    | –                   | Gene-specific transcriptional modulation       | Increase   |
| 14-3-3   | –                   | Cytoplasmic retention                         | Increase   |
|          |                     | Transcriptional coactivation                  |            |

several recent articles have shown that the human Sir2 ortholog SIRT1 binds and deacetylates FOXO proteins at lysine residues that are acetylated by CBP/p300 (38, 46–49). Importantly, the interaction between SIRT1 and FOXO factors occurs in response to oxidative stress (39, 46, 48, 49). Although the effects of SIRT1 on FOXO function vary depending on FOXO target genes, the consensus that emerges from these studies is that SIRT1 may play a crucial role in tipping the balance of FOXO functions away from cell death and towards stress resistance (40). More recently, extensive genetic analysis with a newly developed sir-2 deleted strain revealed that sir-2 is required for lifespan extension due to calorie restriction, but is completely independent of the insulin-like signalling pathway (50). These genetic data suggests a model in which sir-2 and daf-16 have both overlapping and distinct functions with respect to the regulation of the lifespan of C. elegans (50).

The reversible acetylation of FOXO1 is also involved in protection against pancreatic β-cell failure (51). Chronic exposure to elevated glucose concentrations, the so-called ‘glucose toxicity’ that is commonly seen in type 2 diabetes, causes continual oxidative stress and consequently impairs insulin gene transcription in β-cells. Acetylation serves the dual purposes of increasing FOXO1 stability and targeting FOXO1 to PML nuclear bodies, where it is deacetylated by SIRT1 to enhance expression of the Ins2 gene transcription factors NeuroD and MafA (51).

REGULATION OF FOXO ACTIVITY BY POLYUBIQUITINATION, MONOUBIQUITINATION AND DEUBIQUITINATION

In addition to chemical modification, including phosphorylation and acetylation, we and others have found that FOXO transcription factors can be regulated by irreversible polyubiquitination and reversible monoubiquitination in mammalian cells.

Skp2—In response to insulin and serum growth factors, the polyubiquitination and subsequent degradation of FOXO factors occurs through the 26S proteasome (52–54). The polyubiquitination of FOXO factors requires both Akt-dependent phosphorylation and cytoplasmic

of worms (44) and flies (45). In C. elegans, the ability of sir-2 to prolong lifespan is entirely dependent on daf-16 (44). Given that daf-16 is required for the increased longevity of worms due to reduced insulin-like signalling activity, the genetic correlation between sir-2 and daf-16 suggests that SIR2 protein functionally interacts with one or more components of the insulin-like signalling pathway, including daf-16. As expected,

Vol. 141, No. 6, 2007

retention (52). A recent report identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that catalyses FOXO1 polyubiquitination (55). FOXO1 binds to the F-box protein Skp2, a subunit of the SCF (Skp1/Cul1/F-box) E3 ubiquitin ligase protein complex and consequently leads to the degradation of FOXO1 (55). The polyubiquitin-mediated degradation of FOXO factors represents an irreversible level of regulation.

USP7—Very recently, van der Horst *et al.* (56) revealed a novel regulatory mechanism of FOXO proteins via reversible monoubiquitination. Under oxidative stress, monoubiquitination of FOXO4 occurs rapidly and induces its nuclear localization and transcriptional activation. Interestingly, following rapid monoubiquitination, oxidative stress also results in the deubiquitination of FOXO4 by the deubiquitinating enzyme USP7. In contrast to the phospho-dependent polyubiquitination, this reversible monoubiquitination does not influence FOXO protein stability. Notably, monoubiquitination and acetylation compete, at least in part, for the same lysine residues of FOXO4. In view of that monoubiquitination of FOXO4 precedes oxidative stress-induced acetylation, the authors suggest a model of stress response of FOXO4 in which the initial activation of FOXO4 via monoubiquitination can be terminated by USP7-mediated deubiquitination and subsequent CBP/p300-mediated acetylation to prevent further monoubiquitination.

REGULATION OF FOXO ACTIVITY BY OTHER MEDIATORS

As described earlier, the activation of several signalling cascades in response to various external stimuli converges on FOXO factors in the form of multiple post-translational modifications, including phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination, thus regulating stress-resistance activities of FOXO factors. In this section, we focus on new mediators of longevity that regulate FOXO function directly but independent of post-translational modifications.

β-catenin—β-catenin is a multifunctional protein that mediates Wnt signalling by associating with TCF transcription factors. The molecular link between FOXO factors and β-catenin was shown by the observation that *C. elegans* mutants lacking the function of BAR-1, a β-catenin ortholog, exhibit defects in starvation-induced dauer formation (57). Because DAF-16 is required for both dauer development and normal longevity, Essers *et al.* (57) investigated whether BAR-1 is involved in DAF-16 function. As expected, genetic studies showed that BAR-1 is required for DAF-16 signalling during dauer development and lifespan regulation. Moreover, mammalian β-catenin binds to FOXO4 and augments its transcriptional activity in response to oxidative stress. These findings provide evidence that β-catenin plays an essential role in the regulation of the FOXO-mediated detoxification response in worms and mammalian cells, particularly under conditions of oxidative stress.

SMK-1—Although the transcriptional targets of DAF-16 include a large number of genes involved in dauer

formation, reproduction, heat-stress response, detoxification of oxidative stress and resistance to bacterial infection, the mechanism by which DAF-16 defines these different processes is unknown. Wolff *et al.* (58) searched for cofactors of DAF-16 that act specifically to regulate the aging process in *C. elegans* and identified a single gene, *smk-1*. Genetic, molecular, and physiological analysis showed that SMK-1 is indispensable for DAF-16-dependent longevity but does not regulate dauer formation or the reproductive functions of DAF-16. During the aging process, SMK-1 serves as a transcriptional coregulator specific for the regulation of oxidative stress, UV, and innate immunity, but is not required for the thermal response functions of DAF-16. Thus, SMK-1 appears specific to the regulation of insulin-like signaling-mediated longevity in *C. elegans*. Whether orthologs of SMK-1 proteins in diverse eukaryotic organisms such as yeasts, flies, worms, and mammals affect longevity and the stress response is not yet known.

14-3-3—As described in the ‘Insulin-like Signaling Pathway’ section, mammalian 14-3-3 proteins are known to form a complex with FOXO proteins via Akt-mediated phosphorylation, and the complex serves as a chaperone molecules that escorts FOXO proteins out of the nucleus. Therefore, it was proposed that 14-3-3 proteins are negative modulators of FOXO functions, including longevity. Surprisingly, however, two recent genetic studies in worms revealed that an increased dosage of 14-3-3 orthologs, PAR-5, or FTT-2, extends lifespan, and this extension requires DAF-16 (59, 60). Following heat stress, SIR2 interacts with DAF-16 in a 14-3-3-dependent manner. Notably, SIR2-mediated longevity can be canceled by the reduction of 14-3-3 proteins, but SIR2 and 14-3-3 proteins have no effect on the increased lifespan due to reduced insulin-like signaling activity. Finally, the authors have proposed the existence of a stress-dependent pathway in which 14-3-3 proteins positively regulate lifespan by cooperating with both SIR2 and DAF-16.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

This review highlights recent discoveries of FOXO transcription factor regulatory networks that have primarily emerged from genetic studies of lifespan regulation in worms and flies. Alternatively, biochemical studies have continued to elucidate a complex regulatory code, including phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination and other post-translational modifications, and how FOXO factors can specify precise programs of gene expression in response to diverse environmental cues. Further studies of the FOXO regulatory networks, using both genetic and biochemical strategies, will help us understand the complex molecular mechanism of this key molecule and provide important insight into the mechanisms of longevity.

Works in the author’s laboratory is supported, in part, by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research in Priority Areas ‘A nuclear system to DECODE’ from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

Regulation of FOXO Factors in Oxidative Stress and Longevity

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Kaestner, K.H., Knochel, W., and Martinez, D.E. (2000) Unified nomenclature for the winged helix/forkhead transcription factors. *Genes Dev.* 14, 142–146
2. Greer, E.L. and Brunet, A. (2005) FOXO transcription factors at the interface between longevity and tumor suppression. *Oncogene* 24, 7410–7425
3. Accili, D. and Arden, K.C. (2004) FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism, differentiation, and transformation. *Cell* 117, 421–426
4. Barthel, A., Schmoll, D., and Unterman, T.G. (2005) FoxO proteins in insulin action and metabolism. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* 16, 183–189
5. Coffer, P. (2003) OutFOXing the grim reaper: novel mechanisms regulating longevity by forkhead transcription factors. *Sci STKE* 2003, PE39
6. Morris, B.J. (2005) A forkhead in the road to longevity: the molecular basis of lifespan becomes clearer. *J. Hypertens.* 23, 1285–1309
7. Huang, H. and Tindall, D.J. (2006) FOXO factors: a matter of life and death. *Future Oncol.* 2, 83–89
8. Kops, G.J., Dansen, T.B., Polderman, P.E., Saarloos, I., Wirtz, K.W., Coffer, P.J., Huang, T.T., Bos, J.L., Medema, R.H., and Burgering, B.M. (2002) Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress. *Nature* 419, 316–321
9. Nemoto, S. and Finkel, T. (2002) Redox regulation of forkhead proteins through a p66shc-dependent signaling pathway. *Science* 295, 2450–2452
10. Tran, H., Brunet, A., Grenier, J.M., Datta, S.R., Fornace, A.J., Jr., DiStefano, P.S., Chiang, L.W., and Greenberg, M.E. (2002) DNA repair pathway stimulated by the forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a through the Gadd45 protein. *Science* 296, 530–534
11. Furukawa-Hibi, Y., Yoshida-Araki, K., Ohta, T., Ikeda, K., and Motoyama, N. (2002) FOXO forkhead transcription factors induce G(2)-M checkpoint in response to oxidative stress. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 26729–26732
12. Van Der Heide, L.P., Hoekman, M.F., and Smidt, M.P. (2004) The ins and outs of FoxO shuttling: mechanisms of FoxO translocation and transcriptional regulation. *Biochem. J.* 380, 297–309
13. Brunet, A., Bonni, A., Zigmond, M.J., Lin, M.Z., Juo, P., Hu, L.S., Anderson, M.J., Arden, K.C., Blenis, J., and Greenberg, M.E. (1999) Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. *Cell* 96, 857–868
14. Lin, K., Dorman, J.B., Rodan, A., and Kenyon, C. (1997) daf-16: An HNF-3/forkhead family member that can function to double the life-span of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Science* 278, 1319–1322
15. Ogg, S., Paradis, S., Gottlieb, S., Patterson, G.I., Lee, L., Tissenbaum, H.A., and Ruvkun, G. (1997) The Fork head transcription factor DAF-16 transduces insulin-like metabolic and longevity signals in *C. elegans*. *Nature* 389, 994–999
16. Johnson, T.E. (1990) Increased life-span of age-1 mutants in *Caenorhabditis elegans* and lower Gompertz rate of aging. *Science* 249, 908–912
17. Kenyon, C., Chang, J., Gensch, E., Rudner, A., and Tabtiang, R. (1993) A *C. elegans* mutant that lives twice as long as wild type. *Nature* 366, 461–464
18. Morris, J.Z., Tissenbaum, H.A., and Ruvkun, G. (1996) A phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase family member regulating longevity and diapause in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Nature* 382, 536–539
19. Kimura, K.D., Tissenbaum, H.A., Liu, Y., and Ruvkun, G. (1997) daf-2, an insulin receptor-like gene that regulates longevity and diapause in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Science* 277, 942–946
20. Honda, Y. and Honda, S. (1999) The daf-2 gene network for longevity regulates oxidative stress resistance and Mn-superoxide dismutase gene expression in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Faseb. J.* 13, 1385–1393
21. Biggs, W.H., 3rd, Meisenhelder, J., Hunter, T., Cavenee, W.K., and Arden, K.C. (1999) Protein kinase B/Akt-mediated phosphorylation promotes nuclear exclusion of the winged helix transcription factor FKHR1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96, 7421–7426
22. Takaishi, H., Konishi, H., Matsuzaki, H., Ono, Y., Shirai, Y., Saito, N., Kitamura, T., Ogawa, W., Kasuga, M., Kikkawa, U., and Nishizuka, Y. (1999) Regulation of nuclear translocation of forkhead transcription factor AFX by protein kinase B. *Proc. Natl. Sci. USA* 96, 11836–11841
23. Brunet, A., Kanai, F., Stehn, J., Xu, J., Sarbassova, D., Frangioni, J.V., Dalal, S.N., DeCaprio, J.A., Greenberg, M.E., and Yaffe, M.B. (2002) 14-3-3 transits to the nucleus and participates in dynamic nucleocytoplasmic transport. *J. Cell Biol.* 156, 817–828
24. Dougherty, M.K. and Morrison, D.K. (2004) Unlocking the code of 14-3-3. *J. Cell. Sci.* 117, 1875–1884
25. Brownawell, A.M., Kops, G.J., Macara, I.G., and Burgering, B.M. (2001) Inhibition of nuclear import by protein kinase B (Akt) regulates the subcellular distribution and activity of the forkhead transcription factor AFX. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 21, 3534–3546
26. Rena, G., Prescott, A.R., Guo, S., Cohen, P., and Unterman, T.G. (2001) Roles of the forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) phosphorylation sites in regulating 14-3-3 binding, transactivation and nuclear targeting. *Biochem. J.* 354, 605–612
27. Kirkwood, T.B. and Austad, S.N. (2000) Why do we age? *Nature* 408, 233–238
28. Essers, M.A., Weijzen, S., de Vries-Smits, A.M., Saarloos, I., de Ruiter, N.D., Bos, J.L., and Burgering, B.M. (2004) FOXO transcription factor activation by oxidative stress mediated by the small GTPase Ral and JNK. *EMBO J.* 23, 4802–4812
29. Oh, S.W., Mukhopadhyay, A., Svrzikapa, N., Jiang, F., Davis, R.J., and Tissenbaum, H.A. (2005) JNK regulates lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans* by modulating nuclear translocation of forkhead transcription factor/DAF-16. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102, 4494–4499
30. Wang, M.C., Bohmann, D., and Jasper, H. (2005) JNK extends lifespan and limits growth by antagonizing cellular and organism-wide responses to insulin signaling. *Cell* 121, 115–125
31. Wang, M.C., Bohmann, D., and Jasper, H. (2003) JNK signaling confers tolerance to oxidative stress and extends lifespan in *Drosophila*. *Dev. Cell* 5, 811–816
32. Sunayama, J., Tsuruta, F., Masuyama, N., and Gotoh, Y. (2005) JNK antagonizes Akt-mediated survival signals by phosphorylating 14-3-3. *J. Cell Biol.* 170, 295–304
33. Lehtinen, M.K., Yuan, Z., Boag, P.R., Yang, Y., Villen, J., Becker, E.B., DiBacco, S., de la Iglesia, N., Gygi, S., Blackwell, T.K., and Bonni, A. (2006) A conserved MST-FOXO signaling pathway mediates oxidative-stress responses and extends lifespan. *Cell* 125, 987–1001
34. Kimura, A., Matsubara, K., and Horikoshi, M. (2005) A decade of histone acetylation: marking eukaryotic chromosomes with specific codes. *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* 138, 647–662
35. Nasrin, N., Ogg, S., Cahill, C.M., Biggs, W., Nui, S., Dore, J., Calvo, D., Shi, Y., Ruvkun, G., and Alexander-Bridges, M.C. (2000) DAF-16 recruits the CREB-binding protein coactivator complex to the insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 promoter in HepG2 cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97, 10412–10417
36. Mahmud, D.L., G-Amlak, M., Deb, D.K., Platanias, L.C., Uddin, S., and Wickrema, A. (2002) Phosphorylation of

forkhead transcription factors by erythropoietin and stem cell factor prevents acetylation and their interaction with coactivator p300 in erythroid progenitor cells. *Oncogene* 21, 1556–1562

37. Fukuoka, M., Daitoku, H., Hatta, M., Matsuzaki, H., Umemura, S., and Fukamizu, A. (2003) Negative regulation of forkhead transcription factor AFX (Foxo4) by CBP-induced acetylation. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* 12, 503–508

38. Daitoku, H., Hatta, M., Matsuzaki, H., Aratani, S., Ohshima, T., Miyagishi, M., Nakajima, T., and Fukamizu, A. (2004) Silent information regulator 2 potentiates Foxo1-mediated transcription through its deacetylase activity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 10042–10047

39. van der Heide, L.P. and Smidt, M.P. (2005) Regulation of FoxO activity by CBP/p300-mediated acetylation. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 30, 81–86

40. Giannakou, M.E. and Partridge, L. (2004) The interaction between FOXO and SIRT1: tipping the balance towards survival. *Trends Cell Biol.* 14, 408–412

41. Matsuzaki, H., Daitoku, H., Hatta, M., Aoyama, H., Yoshimochi, K., and Fukamizu, A. (2005) Acetylation of Foxo1 alters its DNA-binding ability and sensitivity to phosphorylation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102, 11278–11283

42. Longo, V.D. and Kennedy, B.K. (2006) Sirtuins in aging and age-related disease. *Cell* 126, 257–268

43. Kaeberlein, M., McVey, M., and Guarente, L. (1999) The SIR2/3/4 complex and SIR2 alone promote longevity in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* by two different mechanisms. *Genes Dev.* 13, 2570–2580

44. Tissenbaum, H.A. and Guarente, L. (2001) Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Nature* 410, 227–230

45. Rogina, B. and Helfand, S.L. (2004) Sir2 mediates longevity in the fly through a pathway related to calorie restriction. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 15998–16003

46. Kobayashi, Y., Furukawa-Hibi, Y., Chen, C., Horio, Y., Isobe, K., Ikeda, K., and Motoyama, N. (2005) SIRT1 is critical regulator of FOXO-mediated transcription in response to oxidative stress. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* 16, 237–243

47. van der Horst, A., Tertoolen, L.G., de Vries-Smits, L.M., Frye, R.A., Medema, R.H., and Burgering, B.M. (2004) FOXO4 is acetylated upon peroxide stress and deacetylated by the longevity protein hSir2(SIRT1). *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 28873–28879

48. Motta, M.C., Divecha, N., Lemieux, M., Kamel, C., Chen, D., Gu, W., Bultsma, Y., McBurney, M., and Guarente, L. (2004) Mammalian SIRT1 represses forkhead transcription factors. *Cell* 116, 551–563

49. Brunet, A., Sweeney, L.B., Sturgill, J.F., Chua, K.F., Greer, P.L., Lin, Y., Tran, H., Ross, S.E., Mostoslavsky, R., Cohen, H.Y., Hu, L.S., Cheng, H.L., Jedrychowski, M.P., Gygi, S.P., Sinclair, D.A., Alt, F.W., and Greenberg, M.E. (2004) Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase. *Science* 303, 2011–2015

50. Wang, Y. and Tissenbaum, H.A. (2006) Overlapping and distinct functions for a *Caenorhabditis elegans* SIR2 and DAF-16/FOXO. *Mech. Ageing Dev.* 127, 48–56

51. Kitamura, Y.I., Kitamura, T., Kruse, J.P., Raum, J.C., Stein, R., Gu, W., and Accili, D. (2005) FoxO1 protects against pancreatic beta cell failure through NeuroD and MafA induction. *Cell Metab.* 2, 153–163

52. Matsuzaki, H., Daitoku, H., Hatta, M., Tanaka, K., and Fukamizu, A. (2003) Insulin-induced phosphorylation of FKHR (Foxo1) targets to proteasomal degradation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 11285–11290

53. Aoki, M., Jiang, H., and Vogt, P.K. (2004) Proteasomal degradation of the FoxO1 transcriptional regulator in cells transformed by the P3k and Akt oncoproteins. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 13613–13617

54. Plas, D.R. and Thompson, C.B. (2003) Akt activation promotes degradation of tuberin and FOXO3a via the proteasome. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 12361–12366

55. Huang, H., Regan, K.M., Wang, F., Wang, D., Smith, D.I., van Deursen, J.M., and Tindall, D.J. (2005) Skp2 inhibits FOXO1 in tumor suppression through ubiquitin-mediated degradation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102, 1649–1654

56. van der Horst, A., de Vries-Smits, A.M., Brenkman, A.B., van Triest, M.H., van den Broek, N., Colland, F., Maurice, M.M., and Burgering, B.M. (2006) FOXO4 transcriptional activity is regulated by monoubiquitination and USP7/HAUSP. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 10, 1064–1073

57. Essers, M.A., de Vries-Smits, L.M., Barker, N., Polderman, P.E., Burgering, B.M., and Korswagen, H.C. (2005) Functional interaction between beta-catenin and FOXO in oxidative stress signaling. *Science* 308, 1181–1184

58. Wolff, S., Ma, H., Burch, D., Maciel, G.A., Hunter, T., and Dillin, A. (2006) SMK-1, an essential regulator of DAF-16-mediated longevity. *Cell* 124, 1039–1053

59. Berdichevsky, A., Viswanathan, M., Horvitz, H.R., and Guarente, L. (2006) *C. elegans* SIR-2.1 interacts with 14-3-3 proteins to activate DAF-16 and extend life span. *Cell* 125, 1165–1177

60. Wang, Y., Oh, S.W., Deplancke, B., Luo, J., Walhout, A.J., and Tissenbaum, H.A. (2006) *C. elegans* 14-3-3 proteins regulate life span and interact with SIR-2.1 and DAF-16/FOXO. *Mech. Ageing Dev.* 127, 741–747
