
Presenilin-mediated signal transduction

Richard F. Cowburn *, Bogdan O. Popescu ¹, Maria Ankarcrona, Nodi Dehvari, Angel Cedazo-Minguez

Karolinska Institutet, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, KI-Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Novum, plan 5, S-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden

---

### Abstract

Presenilin proteins, mutated forms of which cause early onset familial Alzheimer’s disease, are capable of modulating various cell signal transduction pathways, the most extensively studied of which has been intracellular calcium signalling. Disease causing presenilin mutations can potentiate inositol(1,4,5)trisphosphate (InsP₃) mediated endoplasmic reticulum release due to calcium overload in this organelle, as well as attenuate capacitative calcium entry. Our own studies have shown a novel function for presenilins that involves regulation of acetylcholine muscarinic receptor-stimulated phospholipase C upstream of InsP₃ regulated calcium release. This article reviews the mechanisms by which presenilins modulate intracellular calcium signalling and the role that deregulated calcium homeostasis could play in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease.

© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Alzheimer’s disease; Presenilin; Calcium; Signal transduction

---

### 1. Introduction

This mini-review provides a brief summary of the role that presenilin proteins play in modulating cell signal transduction pathways important for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). We have placed an emphasis on presenilin modulation of calcium homeostasis and our own recent contributions to this field. For reviews of other aspects of presenilin-mediated signal transduction and extensive summaries of presenilin biology the reader is referred to Refs. [1–5].

### 2. The presenilins

Mutations in the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin PS1 and PS2 genes have been identified as causing early onset, autosomal dominant, familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD). Studies of the normal biology of these gene products as well as mechanism of action studies on FAD-causing gene mutations have in recent years given important insights as to the molecular mechanisms of this highly complex and heterogeneous disorder. In particular, the understanding of presenilin biology has enabled identification and characterisation of the γ-secretase complex, the activity of which provides the final step in APP cleavage to generate the highly fibrillogenic peptide known as β-amyloid (Aβ). Aβ exists as two major forms of 40 or 42 residues in length that in AD brain are heavily deposited in the parenchyma as extracellular diffuse and senile/neuritic plaques, in blood vessel walls, as well as within neurons [6].

Both PS1 and PS2 are multipass membrane proteins containing between 6 and 8 transmembrane (TM) domains and a large cytosolic hydrophilic loop between TM domains 6 and 7. The presenilins undergo endoproteolytic cleavage within the exon 9 encoded regions to give a 30 kDa N-terminal fragment (NTF) and a 20 kDa C-terminal fragment (CTF), the levels of which are tightly regulated. NTFs and CTFs re-associate to form heterodimers that are the main functional presenilin species within cells. Both PS1 and PS2 heterodimers form high molecular weight multimeric complexes with the Nicastrin, Aph-1 and Pen-2 proteins [2]. Within these complexes the presenilins provide γ-secretase activity that cleaves many type 1 transmembrane proteins including APP, Notch receptors and ligands

* *Corresponding author. AstraZeneca R&D Södertälje, Local Discovery RA CNS & Pain Control, Disease Biology, S-151 85 Södertälje, Sweden. Tel.: +46 8 553 22920; fax: +46 8 553 23840.*
* E-mail address: **richard.cowburn@astrazeneca.com** (R.F. Cowburn).
* ¹ Current address: Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine “Carol Davila”, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest Romania.

0031-9384/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.05.053
and the E- and N-cadherins [1]. Presenilin γ-secretase activity is critically dependent on the aspartyl residues D257 and D385 in TM domains 6 and 7 of the protein. Following ectodomain shedding by β-secretase cleaving enzyme (BACE), γ-secretase cleaves APP to generate Aβ and the APP intracellular domain (AICD). Of these, Aβ is secreted from cells, whereas the AICD translocates to the nucleus where it may modulate gene transcription. PS1 and PS2 mutations act on APP processing to give increased production of longer more fibrillogenic forms of Aβ. Such longer Aβ₄₂/₄₃ more rapidly deposits in the brain and according to the amyloid cascade hypothesis resultant increased Aβ accumulation drives the other Alzheimer’s disease pathologies of intracellular neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) formation, synaptic degeneration and inflammatory responses, leading to neuronal degeneration/dysfunction and eventual clinical dementia [7,8].

There are a number of evidences that presenilin mutations have multiple pathological effects in addition to generation of Aβ. Not least of these is the large number of presenilin/γ-secretase substrates that have been identified, the suggested functions of which include cell adhesion, lateral inhibition of cell fate decisions, neurotrophin signalling and cell differentiation [9]. Also, the identification of a novel PS1 mutation that causes Pick’s disease without accumulation of β-amyloid plaques [10] strongly suggests that the presenilins can modulate multiple pathways leading to eventual neurodegenerative disease.

That presenilins have a number of other functions besides providing γ-secretase enzyme activity is also suggested by the multiple cellular localisations of these proteins. Presenilins are mainly found in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus through which they are further trafficked in the secretory pathway to give the NTFs and CTFs. ER-associated presenilin functions include regulation of calcium homeostasis [11] and possibly also the unfolded protein response (UPR) to ER stress [12]. Presenilins have also been found in the nuclear envelope, plasma membrane and in lysosomes, whereas the very recent discovery of PS1 and γ-secretase activity in mitochondria [13] suggests a role in modulating the function of this organelle crucial for such functions as ATP generation, regulation of apoptosis and calcium buffering.

In addition to the presenilin-binding partners that form the γ-secretase complex, there are reports that the presenilins can bind to a range of other proteins (reviewed in [1]). These include glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) and its major substrates β-catenin and tau [14] that bind to the cytosolic loop domain of PS1. Of these GSK-3β has been implicated as a key protein kinase for tau protein hyperphosphorylation in AD [15] and as an important modulator of cell survival and apoptosis via β-catenin and Akt signalling pathways [14]. In this context, PS1 may act as a molecular chaperone to facilitate GSK-3β phosphorylation of β-catenin and tau. More recently, Baki et al. reported that PS1 promotes cell survival by interacting with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) that mediates the inhibitory regulation of GSK-3β [16]. This PS1/PI3K interaction gave an activation of PI3K and an expected decrease in the phosphorylation/inactivation of GSK-3β. This effect was in turn shown be both anti-apoptotic as well as to give a reduced tau protein phosphorylation. In contrast, a number of FAD PS1 mutations were shown to inhibit PS1-dependent PI3K activation with the negative consequence being a reduced GSK-3β inactivation [16].

Other presenilin-binding partners include proteins that are important for modulating calcium homeostasis. Both PS1 and PS2 bind via their C-termini to calsenilin, a calcium-binding protein hypothesised to mediate calcium-dependent apoptosis [17], whereas PS2, but not PS1, binds to sorcin that modulates calcium release by ryanodine receptors [18].

## 3. Presenilins and calcium signalling

The most extensively studied other function attributed to the presenilins is the modulation of calcium signalling in the ER [11]. A summary of the reported effects of presenilins on ER calcium is given in the figure and following text (Fig. 1). FAD PS1 and PS2 mutations have been shown to disrupt calcium signalling with such effects being seen either when overexpressing or knocking in mutant presenilin and when using a variety of cell systems including Xenopus oocytes, neuronal and non-neuronal cell lines, primary neurons from transgenic mice or fibroblasts from FAD presenilin mutant individuals [11]. Deregulated calcium signalling has been proposed as one of the mechanisms underlying the reported proapoptotic effects of PS1 and PS2 FAD mutations (for review see [19]). From a wider perspective, altered calcium signalling has also been shown to contribute to Aβ toxicity and to activation of protein kinases involved in phosphorylation of the tau protein, of which hyperphosphorylated forms provide the building blocks for NFTs.

The effects of Aβ on calcium homeostasis include the elevation of intracellular calcium concentrations by such mechanisms as formation of Aβ calcium-permeable pores and generation of oxidative damage [11]. Increasing the levels of cytosolic calcium also has consequences for APP processing and Aβ generation and release, although the magnitude and direction of effects remains controversial depending on the type of stimulus used to either increase influx of extracellular calcium or to modulate release and re-uptake of ER calcium stores [11].

A number of mechanisms could account for the presenilin regulation of ER calcium stores. The most widely accepted explanation is that presenilin mutations potentiate inositol(1,4,5) trisphosphate [InsP₃] mediated ER calcium release as a result of calcium overload in this organelle. Serial reports by Leissring and colleagues using high-resolution line-scanning confocal microscopy to image calcium release in Xenopus oocytes revealed that cells transfected with either PS1 or PS2 FAD mutations showed enhanced calcium signals due to caged InsP₃ that occurred by a mechanism that did not involve either an altered number or sensitivity of InsP₃ receptors. Using this Xenopus oocyte system it was also reported that transfecting cells with calsenilin could reverse effects due to mutant M146V PS1 suggesting that the C-terminus of presenilin is important for mediating effects of the protein on ER calcium stores and release (reviewed in [11]).

An intriguing explanation for the mechanism by which presenilins mediate ER calcium concerns the function of the
R.F. Cowburn et al. / Physiology & Behavior 92 (2007) 93–97

# Presenilin modulation of ER calcium

[Ca²⁺] = 100 nM

Ca²⁺  
PS1 RyR  
D Up-regulation  
A [Ca²⁺] = 100 - 500 μM  

E PLC PS1  
Ca²⁺ InsP₃  
InsP₃ R  
B  
ER  

C Ca²⁺  
SERCA pump  

Fig. 1. Presenilin modulation of ER calcium. As summarised in the text, a number of mechanisms have been described for presenilin modulation of ER calcium stores. FAD PS mutations give calcium overload in this organelle (A) that can be reversed by calsenilin (B). Calcium overloads and increased InsP₃ receptor-gated calcium release is accompanied by decreased CCE (C). Other FAD PS mutation effects include up-regulation of ryanodine receptor number and calcium responses gated by this receptor (D). Our data show that PS1 modulates PLC activity and subsequent InsP₃ receptor-mediated calcium responses in a γ-secretase-dependent manner (E).

APP intracellular domain (AICD) generated by presenilin/γ-secretase-dependent cleavage. Reduced AICD production as seen in embryonic fibroblasts from presenilin knockout mice, as well as with pharmacological inhibition of γ-secretase has been shown to attenuate bradykinin agonist-stimulated calcium release and to reduce ER calcium store levels [20]. Similar effects were seen in APP knockout fibroblasts and could be reversed following transfection of cells with AICD. This together with evidence that the AICD forms a transcriptionally active complex has led to the suggestion that this domain regulates calcium signalling by regulating the expression of genes involved in calcium homeostasis [20].

Other evidence for ER calcium overload due to presenilin mutations has come from studies of capacitative calcium entry (CCE). CCE provides the mechanism by which cells replenish ER calcium stores via store-operated calcium channels at the cell membrane and the sarcoplasmic reticulum ATPase (SERCA pump). Leissring et al. demonstrated that fibroblasts from PS1 M146V mutant knockin mice mutant mice show an attenuated CCE following bradykinin agonist stimulation of InsP₃ receptor-mediated ER calcium release. The same cells also showed markedly potentiated calcium transients due to bradykinin stimulation, supporting the idea that FAD presenilin mutations lead to an overfilling of ER calcium stores [21]. An attenuation of CCE has also been shown in primary cortical neurons from PS2 N141I transgenic mice [22] and in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells overexpressing either the PS2 N141I, PS1 M146L [22] or ΔE9 mutations [23]. In contrast, cortical neurons from embryonic PS1 knockout mice as well as SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells transfected with D257A or D385N loss-of-function PS1 aspartyl mutants show enhanced CCE [22]. Interestingly, pharmacological inhibition of CCE has been reported to enhance Aβ release from APP-transfected HEK-293 cells [22], thus providing a potential link between ER calcium overload, reduced CCE and increased Aβ generation.

As alluded to earlier, deregulated calcium signalling has been proposed as one of the mechanisms underlying the proapoptotic effects of PS1 and PS2 FAD mutations [19]. Following the original finding by Guo et al. that the L286V PS1 mutation perturbs calcium homeostasis in PC12 cells and sensitises them to death induced by Aβ peptide [24], there have been many reports linking presenilin mutation-induced disruption of calcium homeostasis and increased cell death [19]. That such increased cell death results from ER calcium overload is suggested from data showing that both PC12 cells overexpressing the PS1 L286V mutant as well as primary cortical neurons from PS1 M146V knockin mice show increased levels of ryanodine receptors and increased cell death and calcium responses to caffeine, an agent that induces calcium-induced calcium release via ER ryanodine receptors [25].

## 4. Presenilins and phospholipase C signalling

A large proportion of calcium mobilisation and regulation in neurons can be attributed to cholinergic neurotransmission. We recently identified a novel function for PS1/γ-secretase that involves regulation of acetylcholine muscarinic receptor-stimulated phospholipase C (PLC) upstream of InsP₃ regulated calcium release [26]. Using stably transfected SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, we showed that the PS1-ΔE9 mutation enhances basal intracellular calcium levels due to increased PLC activity [26]. In addition, carbachol muscarinic receptor agonist activation of PLC gave enhanced and sustained calcium responses in PS1-ΔE9 mutation cells as compared to responses seen in either non-transfected cells or cells transfected with wild-type PS1. The exaggerated calcium profiles seen in PS1-

ΔE9 mutation cells could be reversed to those resembling normal responses using both xestospongin C and dantrolene, thus indicating the involvement of both InsP₃ and ryanodine receptors (calcium-induced calcium release) in the mutation effect [26].

In extending this work we showed that PS1 regulation of PLC and ER calcium occurs due to γ-secretase activity of PS1 as seen by pharmacological inhibition and genetic abolition of γ-secretase by mutation of either the D257 or D385 residues critical for activity. Both γ-secretase inhibitor (DAPT and pepstatin A)-treated normal and PS1 wild-type transfected SH-SY5Y cells, as well as cells transfected with PS1 D257A or D385N loss-of-function mutants, showed blunted carbachol-stimulated PLC activities and calcium responses. We also demonstrated that the PS1 L250S and M146V mutations gave calcium responses that were similar to those seen in PS1-ΔE9 cells in terms of magnitude, duration, and sensitivity to InsP₃ and ryanodine receptor antagonism [27].

### 5. Discussion

As summarised above, published studies from a number of laboratories have provided a consensus that mutations in both the PS1 and PS2 genes result in increased calcium release as a result of endoplasmic reticulum calcium overload and a reduced CCE. However, studies from Pizzo and colleagues have led to a minor reappraisal of this calcium overload hypothesis for FAD pathogenesis. In initial studies, Zatti et al. showed that both fibroblasts from FAD PS2 M239I mutation carriers, as well as HEK293 and HeLa cells transfected with the PS2 M239I mutation, had lower calcium release responses following treatment with the SERCA pump antagonist cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) [28]. The same group subsequently reported that similar effects were seen with the PS2 T122R mutation [29]. In testing whether the effect of reduced calcium release was peculiar to the PS2 M239I and T122R mutations, Zatti recently reported a comparison of a range of PS1 and PS2 mutation effects on calcium homeostasis. This extensive comparison using different cell models, including human fibroblasts, SH-SY5Y neuroblastomas, HeLa, HEK293 and mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells, as well as rat primary neuronal cultures revealed that PS2 mutations were potent at reducing calcium release in response to the combination of CPA and a relevant InsP₃ generating agonist. In contrast, PS1 mutations were either without effect on CPA/agonist induced calcium release or gave only small reductions in release [30]. Interestingly, PS1/PS2 deficient MEF cells transfected with the γ-secretase “loss-of-function” PS2 D366A also showed reduced calcium release responses, a finding similar to that observed for genetic abolition of PS1-dependent γ-secretase [27]. Finally, the same study also showed that MEF cells transfected with PS1 had greater calcium release responses to the InsP₃ generating agonist ATP, as compared to PS1/PS2 deficient cells [30], consistent with the idea that PS1 is a positive modulator of InsP₃ generating signalling [27]. Although, these studies are consistent with the presenilin proteins having an important function in cellular calcium homeostasis, they also provide fuel to the debate as to whether mutations in the PS1 and

PS2 genes cause disease by a gain-of-negative function or loss-of-function mechanism. Given the complexity of cellular calcium homeostasis with multiple pools and many regulatory steps, there is a clear need for additional studies to further dissect out the site(s) and mechanism(s) by which PS1 and PS2 FAD mutations change the capability of neurons to handle intracellular calcium.

### 6. Concluding remarks

There is no doubt that the presenilin proteins have an important function in cellular calcium homeostasis. Our own studies suggest that PS1 can modulate calcium homeostasis by regulating upstream acetylcholine muscarinic receptor signalling via PLC. We are currently studying whether the PS2 protein has a similar function and also whether other aspects of acetylcholine muscarinic receptor signalling, specifically MAP kinase and protein kinase C are modulated by presenilins. Such studies will add to the growing idea that presenilins are important regulators of many signal transduction pathways, not only those involving intracellular calcium homeostasis.

### References

[1] Chen Q, Schubert D. Presenilin-interacting proteins. Exp Rev Mol Med 2002;22:1–18.

[2] De Strooper B. Aph-1, Pen-2, and Nicastrin with Presenilin generate an active gamma-Secretase complex. Neuron 2003;38:9–12.

[3] Haass C, Steiner H. Alzheimer disease gamma-secretase: a complex story of GxGD-type presenilin proteases. Trends Cell Biol 2002;12:556–62.

[4] Wolfe MS. The gamma-secretase complex: membrane-embedded proteolytic ensemble. Biochemistry 2006;45:7931–9.

[5] Mattson MP, Gary DS, Chan SL, Duan W. Perturbed endoplasmic reticulum function, synaptic apoptosis and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem Soc Symp 2001;67:151–62.

[6] Gouras GK, Almeida CG, Takahashi RH. Intraneuronal Abeta accumulation and origin of plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2005;26:1235–44.

[7] Hardy JA, Higgins GA. Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 1992;256:184–5.

[8] Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev 2001;81:741–66.

[9] Koo EH, Kopan R. Potential role of presenilin-regulated signaling pathways in sporadic neurodegeneration. Nat Med 2004;10:S26–33.

[10] Dermaut B, Kumar-Singh S, Engelborghs S, Theuns J, Rademakers R, Saersens J, et al. A novel presenilin 1 mutation associated with Pick’s disease but not beta-amyloid plaques. Ann Neurol 2004;55:617–26.

[11] LaFerla FM. Calcium dyshomeostasis and intracellular signalling in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2002;3:862–72.

[12] Katayama T, Imaizumi K, Sato N, Miyoshi K, Kudo T, Hitomi J, et al. Presenilin-1 mutations downregulate the signalling pathway of the unfolded-protein response. Nat Cell Biol 1999;1:479–85.

[13] Hansson CA, Frykman S, Farmery MR, Tjernberg LO, Nilsberth C, Pursglove SE, et al. Nicastrin, presenilin, APH-1, and PEN-2 form active gamma-secretase complexes in mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2004;279:51654–60.

[14] Grimes CA, Jope RS. The multifaceted roles of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta in cellular signaling. Prog Neurobiol 2001;65:391–426.

[15] Pei JJ, Braak E, Braak H, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K, Winblad B, Cowburn RF. Distribution of active glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) in brains staged for Alzheimer disease neurofibrillary changes. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999;58:1010–9.

[16] Baki L, Shioi J, Wen P, Shao Z, Schwarzman A, Gama-Sosa M, et al. PS1 activates PI3K thus inhibiting GSK-3 activity and tau overphosphorylation: effects of FAD mutations. EMBO J 2004;23:2586–96.

[17] Buxbaum JD, Choi EK, Luo Y, Lilliehook C, Crowley AC, et al. Calsenilin: a calcium-binding protein that interacts with the presenilins and regulates the levels of a presenilin fragment. Nat Med 1998;4:1177–81.

[18] Pack-Chung E, Meyers MB, Pettingell WP, Moir RD, Brownawell AM, Cheng I, et al. Presenilin-mediated modulation of capacitative calcium entry. J Biol Chem 2000;275:14440–5.

[19] Popescu BO, Ankarcrona M. Mechanisms of cell death in Alzheimer's disease: role of presenilins. J Alzheimer’s Dis 2004;6:123–8.

[20] Leissring MA, Murphy MP, Mead TR, Akbari Y, Sugarmam MC, Jannatipour M, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:4697–702.

[21] Leissring MA, Akbari Y, Fanger CM, Cahalan MD, Mattson MP, LaFerla FM. A physiologic signaling role for the gamma-secretase-derived intracellular fragment of APP. J Cell Biol 2000;149:793–8.

[22] Yoo AS, Cheng I, Chung S, Grenfell TZ, Lee H, Pack-Chung E, et al. Presenilin-mediated modulation of capacitative calcium entry. Neuron 2002;27:561–72.

[23] Smith IF, Boyle JP, Vaughan PF, Pearson HA, Cowburn RF, Peers CS. Ca(2+) stores and capacitative Ca(2+) entry in human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells expressing a familial Alzheimer’s disease presenilin-1 mutation. Brain Res 2002;949:105–11.

[24] Guo Q, Furukawa K, Sopher BL, Pham DG, Xie J, Robinson N, et al. Alzheimer’s PS-1 mutation perturbs calcium homeostasis and sensitizes

PC12 cells to death induced by amyloid beta-peptide. NeuroReport 1996;8:379–83.

[25] Chan SL, Mayne M, Holden CP, Geiger JD, Mattson MP. Presenilin-1 mutations increase levels of ryanodine receptors and calcium release in PC12 cells and cortical neurons. J Biol Chem 2000;275:18195–200.

[26] Cedazo-Minguez A, Popescu BO, Ankarcrona M, Nishimura T, Cowburn RF. The presenilin 1 deltaE9 mutation gives enhanced basal phospholipase C activity and a resultant increase in intracellular calcium concentrations. J Biol Chem 2002;277:36646–55.

[27] Popescu BO, Cedazo-Minguez A, Benedikz E, Nishimura T, Winblad B, Ankarcrona M, et al. Gamma-secretase activity of presenilin 1 regulates acetylcholine muscarinic receptor-mediated signal transduction. J Biol Chem 2004;279:6455–64.

[28] Zatti G, Ghidoni R, Barbiero L, Binetti G, Pozzan T, Fasolato C, Pizzo P. The presenilin 2 M239I mutation associated with familial Alzheimer’s disease reduces Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores. Neurobiol Dis 2004;15:269–78.

[29] Giacomello M, Barbiero L, Zatti G, Squitti R, Binetti G, Pozzan T, et al. Reduction of Ca²⁺ stores and capacitative Ca²⁺ entry is associated with the familial Alzheimer’s disease presenilin-2 T122R mutation and anticipates the onset of dementia. Neurobiol Dis 2005;18:638–48.

[30] Zatti G, Burgo A, Giacomello M, Barbiero L, Ghidoni R, Sinigala G, et al. Presenilin mutations linked to familial Alzheimer’s disease reduce endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus calcium levels. Cell Calcium 2006;39:539–50.
