
Parasite Immunology, 2007, 29, 331–338

Review Article

The role of the secretory immune response in the infection by Entamoeba histolytica

J. C. CARRERO,$^{1}$ C. CERVANTES-REBOLLEDO,$^{1}$ H. AGUILAR-DÍAZ,$^{1}$ M. Y. DÍAZ-GALLARDO,$^{2}$ J. P. LACLETTE$^{1}$ & J. MORALES-MONTOR$^{1}$

$^{1}$Departamento de Inmunología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México AP 70228, México,  
$^{2}$Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular. Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México

---

### SUMMARY

Intestinal infection with the protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica elicits a local immune response with rising of specific secretory IgA (sIgA) antibodies detectable in several compartments associated to mucosa. Anti-amoebic sIgA antibodies have been reported in faeces, saliva, bile and breast milk from dysenteric patients and research trying to elucidate their role in protection has recently intensified. IgA antibodies inhibit the in vitro adherence of E. histolytica trophozoites to epithelial cell monolayers by recognizing several membrane antigens, including the galactose-binding lectin (Gal-lectin), main surface molecule involved in adherence, and the serine and cystein-rich proteins, all of them potential vaccine candidates. In fact, the presence of sIgA anti-Gal lectin in faeces of patients recovered from amoebic liver abscess (ALA) was associated with immunity to E. dispar. Moreover, the combined nasal and intraperitoneal vaccination of C3H/HeJ mice with native and recombinant Gal-lectin protected mice against an intracecal challenge with virulent E. histolytica trophozoites, protection that seemed to be associated with the induction of specific intestinal sIgA antibodies. Therefore, the stimulation of intestinal secretory response by mucosal delivery of amoebic antigens has been positioned as a promising strategy for inducing protection against human amoebiasis.

Keywords amoebiasis, intestinal immunity, secretory IgA, vaccination

---

### INTRODUCTION

Entamoeba histolytica is a protozoan parasite that resides in human intestine causing amoebiasis, one of the main intestinal infections responsible for children morbidity and death worldwide. The parasite infects, together with the morphologically similar but not pathogenic *E. dispar*, around 10% of the world population and accounts for 100,000 deaths each year (1). Several aspects of this host-parasite relationship such as parasite virulence and host susceptibility are poorly understood, and no effective vaccination strategies exist in humans. Interestingly, only in few cases individuals infected with the pathogenic *E. histolytica* develop symptoms, and the asymptomatic individual course with an infection similar to that caused by the commensal *E. dispar* amoeba (a nonpathogenic commensal organism), and in children, with low level of *E. histolytica* intestinal re-infection and faster resolution of the intestinal amoebic disease. It is important to point out to the reader that, immunity developed against *E. histolytica*, cannot prevent a symptomatic *E. dispar* infection. Thus, we want to emphasize that, immunity developed against pathogenic amoeba, excludes a nonpathogenic commensal, such as *E. dispar* (2). The reason of this discrepancy is still unknown, but it has been associated to multiple phenotype variability in the virulence of isolates from different areas, to the differences in the susceptibility of the human population to the infection due to a natural resistant genetic background or the raising of a protective immune response. In this sense, the mucosal immune response and particularly the sIgA antibodies could mediate protection against this enteric parasite as has been demonstrated for other intestinal infections (3).

This review will attempt to briefly highlight what is known about the secretory immune response during the infection with *E. histolytica* and its possible role in protection against human intestinal amoebiasis.

---

Correspondence: Carrero Julio Cesar, Departamento de Inmunología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México AP 70228, México D.F. 04510 (e-mail: carrero@servidor.unam.mx).

Received: 21 February 2007  
Accepted for publication: 25 April 2007

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

J. C. Carrero et al.

**INTESTINAL INFECTION WITH ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA**

Despite a significant amount of research invested toward vaccine development, amoebiasis remains a common and debilitating parasitic infection throughout many parts of the developing world. Chemotherapy with metronidazole remains highly effective, but the high re-infection rate after treatment remains problematic. Estimates place the current number of infections at ~50 million people, with high number of children in developing countries considered at risk. However, though very conspicuous, this is not the most important intestinal infectious disease in children, and there are others infectious diseases, that can be much more threatening for children’s health, such as rotavirus.

The majority of work with amoebiasis and immunity has been in the hamster model. Infected hamsters with amoeba mount a vigorous Th-1 response, driven by high levels of IL-12, IL-2 and IFN-γ. These are likely the result of antigen presentation events mediated by activated APCs migrating to the lymph nodes from the site of trophozoite penetration. Immunity undergoes a well-documented shift toward a Th-2 type phenotype as the infection goes from acute to chronic, with increasing levels of IL-10 being recorded. As a consequence of this modulation hepatic-portal fibrosis is significantly reduced, suggesting an attempt by the host to attenuate pathology in affected tissues. In humans the mechanisms are less clear, although antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) involving a balance between IgG4 and IgE seems to play a larger role than in hamsters. As might be predicted, a balance between the Th-1 and Th-2 responses is suggested to present the optimal response.

Amoebiasis is acquired with the ingestion of water or food containing *E. histolytica* mature cysts. After reaching the last part of the small intestine and suffer a nuclear division, each cyst releases eight trophozoites that colonize the proximal part of the large intestine. As mentioned before, in most cases the *E. histolytica* trophozoites attach to the mucus and epithelial cells without penetrating the mucosa and therefore causing any symptom, similar to the infection with the nonpathogenic *E. dispar*. In the other cases, the trophozoites attach to the epithelium through the galactose-binding lectin (Gal-lectin) and begin an invasive process that depends on the release of cysteine proteases, amoebapore, collagenases, acid phosphatases and other hydrolytic enzymes, such as carbohydrate hydrolases (2,4). The invasion is followed by an acute inflammatory process that recruits neutrophils, plasma cells, eosinophils, macrophages and lymphocytes, which can contribute to the tissue damage by uncontrolled release of their toxic products (5). The mucosa is destroyed and the parasite spreads in the tissue forming a typical flask-shape ulcer associated with

diarrhoea containing mucus and blood (amoebic dysentery; AD). For a still unknown reason, in about 10% of *E. histolytica* infected patients, the trophozoites go beyond the submucosa and reach the mesenteric blood vessels, and through the portal vein, migrate to other organs, mainly the liver and occasionally to the lungs, brain and genitals, where they cause amoebic abscesses. Most lethal cases by *E. histolytica* are due to the amoebic liver abscess (ALA), which is three to four times more frequent in adult males than females, and almost absent in children and elder people, in contrast to the intestinal infection, which is rarely lethal and less frequent in adults (6,7). In any case, the trophozoites that reach the distal part of the large intestine suffer an encystment process, controlled by unknown luminal conditions that result in the formation of tretranucleated mature infective cysts which are passed with the faecal material. The complete process of intestinal infection by *E. histolytica*, whatever symptomatic or asymptomatic, is accompanied by the development of a secretory immune response characterized by the presence of specific anti-amoeba sIgA antibodies in several compartments of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT).

**SECRETORY IgA (sIgA) AND LOCAL IMMUNITY**

sIgA is considered the first line of specific defence against natural infections in the vast area occupied by mucosal surfaces (3). This immunoglobulin is mainly dimeric, with the two subunits joined by the J chain, and also containing the secretory component S responsible for its intracellular transportation in the epithelial cells and release to the secretory fluids. Together, they form a macromolecule highly resistant to the action of proteases, characteristic to the microenvironment where the sIgA antibodies exert their action. This immunoglobulin represents up to 90% of the antibodies present in secretions and has a broad spectrum of action against virus, bacteria, fungi and parasites, as well as environmental and dietary antigens (3,9). Mucins and sIgA can retain microorganisms inside the mucus layer avoiding their contact or inhibiting their adherence to the gut epithelium and allowing their elimination with the intestinal peristalsis. Multiple evidences suggest that human sIgA in colostrum and milk plays a critical role in the passive immune protection of the newborns against multiple oral and inhaled microorganisms until the production by the newborns of their own batch of specific sIgA antibodies (10,11). Therefore, the use of immunization strategies focused on inducing the production of specific sIgA antibodies at mucosal surfaces has largely been proposed as a potential mechanism for the development of vaccines against pathogens gaining entrance to the body through the oral, nasal and urogenital routes (12). The polio vaccine was

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Parasite Immunology*, **29**, 331–338

the earliest evidence in humans of an oral delivery resulting in the raising of mucosal anti-polio IgA antibodies that correlate with protection (13). Protection against bacteria such as *Neisseria meningitidis* (14), *Streptococcus pneumoniae* (15), enterotoxigenic *Escherichia coli* (16) and *Bordetella pertussis* (17) has been obtained with sIgA antibodies, alone or in combination with immune cells, and protection against the oral deposition of S mutants in mice has been achieved by using recombinant anti-adherent IgA antibodies produced in plants, suggesting a potential application in limiting dental caries (18). Moreover, immunity in mice against the nematodes *Trichuris muris* or *Trichinella britovi* by the passive transfer of specific sIgA monoclonal antibodies into the intraperitoneal cavity previous to the challenge has also been reported (19,20). Similar role in protection against *Giardia muris* has been derived from studies in mice genetically deficient for IgA production where the intestinal infection cannot be resolved, in comparison with nondeficient mice which easily resolve the infection during the early stages (21). The anti-giardial mechanism of sIgA antibodies appears to include detachment from the intestinal epithelium and/or immobilization of trophozoites, avoiding the colonization of the small intestine surface. The same anti-adherent mechanism appears to be responsible for the sIgA-dependent protection of orally immunized pigs against ocular keratitis caused by *Acanthamoeba castellanii*, a free-living amoeba. Thus, amoeba-specific sIgA antibodies in tears correlated with protection and inhibited the adherence to *A. castellanii* trophozoites to Chinese hamster corneal epithelial cells (22). Also, recently it has been discussed the possible use of an adherence-blocking vaccine against *E. histolytica* in different animal models (23).

SECRETORY IMMUNE RESPONSE IN THE INFECTION BY ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA

The pathogenicity of *E. histolytica* results from a complex set of events, including adhesion to the gut epithelium through the Gal-lectin, lysis of the epithelial cells via amebapore action, degradation of matrix by the action of neutral cysteine proteinases and other lytic enzymes, and penetration into the mucosa. Another mechanism of immune evasion used by the amoeba, is the proteolytic digestion of IgA by proteases (24). During this process, the activation of the immune response is induced due to the release of inflammatory cytokines by host epithelial cells, initiating an acute inflammatory process that has been studied in several animal models (25) and in human intestinal xenografts (26). Anti-amoeba humoral immune response can be elicited in both compartments, intestinal and systemic, depending on the level of intestinal and extraintestinal tissue invasion by this protozoan. Thus, seroepidemiologic studies have shown that most patients with invasive amoebiasis develop specific circulatory antibodies, basically of the IgG isotype, which may persist for several years (27). Moreover, 80% of patients with ALA also show high levels of anti-amoeba IgA antibodies in saliva (28) suggesting that sIgA antibodies are developed during the episode of intestinal infection previous or concomitant with the hepatic episode. However, the basic problem that the patients get the disease although they mount an IgA and IgG immune response has been explained by immune evasion mechanisms, such as the capping and shedding of surface-bound antibodies (29). On the other hand, almost all of invasive colonic infections elicit a mucosal anti-amoeba sIgA antibody response, from which about the half of patients also develop high levels of serum anti-amoeba IgG and IgA antibodies apparently due to the release of trophozoite antigens in the blood stream following the mucosal invasion (27). The anti-amoebic sIgA antibodies can be detected in secretions of several compartments belonging to the GALT such as ileum, colon and faeces of patients with ALA as well as colostrum, milk and saliva from patients with amoebic dysentery. Moreover, the search of those antibodies in the different body fluids has been intended as a diagnostic tool of intestinal amoebiasis (30).

Initial studies suggested that the sIgA response raised during the intestinal infection with *E. histolytica* was short-lasting, remaining just for few weeks. However, recent studies have demonstrated that this response is long-lasting, up to 1 year, and noteworthy, its persistence could protect against intestinal re-infection with *E. histolytica* in patients of endemic areas (28–31). Moreover, sIgA response, particularly evaluated against the Gal-lectin, was also sustained by over 18 months in patients cured of ALA and it was associated to immunity against the nonpathogenic *E. dispar*; however, immunity against *E. histolytica* could not be determined in that study (32). Thus, several evidences point out to sIgA antibodies as protectors against *E. histolytica* infection (Table 1). However, it should be pointed out that, whereas it has been shown in animal studies that IgG antibodies can protect from amoebic disease, this has not been demonstrated in the case of IgA antibodies, and most of the evidence regarding this issue is indirect.

Indirect evidence comes from one study showing that newborns living in an endemic area were protected against the amoebic intestinal infection during breastfeeding (33). Direct evidence comes from studies showing that sIgA isolated from salivas of patients with intestinal amoebiasis diminished *in vitro* the adhesion of virulent trophozoites to epithelial cells avoiding their destruction (34), purified sIgA reduce proteolytic activity of parasite extracts (35), and that the raising of this type of antibodies by immunization is associated with protection in experimental models against intestinal colonization (36) and, interestingly, against ALA

J. C. Carrero et al.

**Table 1 Evidences of sIgA-based protection against *E. histolytica* infection**

| Source of sIgA                  | Evidence                                      | Possible mechanism of action                          | sIgA specificity                     | Reference |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------|
| Human colostrums                 | Absence of intestinal infection in newborns while breastfeeding | Passive transference of anti-amoebic sIgA antibodies that prevent intestinal colonization | Multiple amoebic proteins          | 33        |
| Human saliva                    | Inhibition of adherence and cytolysis         | Blocking of surface adhesins                         | Multiple amoebic proteins          | 34        |
| Human saliva                    | Inhibition of amoeba proteolytic activity     | Steric blocking of active sites of proteases         | Cysteine proteases                 | 35        |
| Mice intestine (induction of sIgA by oral immunization) | Protection against intracecal challenge                | Inhibition of adherence and cecum colonization | Galactose-binding lectin          | 36        |
| Gerbil intestine (induction of sIgA by oral immunization) | Protection against amoebic liver abscess               | Induction of systemic immunity by oral route | Serine-rich Entamoeba histolytica protein (SREHP) | 37        |
| Human intestine                 | Reduction in re-infection rates and faster control of the infection | Inhibition of adherence and intestine colonization | Carbohydrate-recognition domain of the galactose-binding lectin | 31, 32, 38–41 |

(37). However, recent field studies in children suffering amoebiasis by the Petri group in Dhaka, Bangladesh, have provided the best evidence of association between the raising of sIgA anti-Gal lectin and development of acquired immunity against the intestinal infection with *E. histolytica*. In one of those studies, almost all the subjects (63 out of 64) containing faecal sIgA that recognize the carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) of the Gal-lectin, were protected against re-infection over a period of 1 year in comparison with the subjects lacking those antibodies (33 out of 246). In contrast, the incidence of intestinal infection was much lower in children lacking serum anti-Gal lectin IgG antibodies (4·3%) when compared to the children with such antibodies (17·8%), suggesting that no development of systemic acquired immunity occurs during an intestinal episode as consequence of no tissue invasion in those children (31). This interesting finding of immunity against intestinal *E. histolytica* colonization was corroborated by the same group in a 4-year prospective study looking for the incidence of *E. histolytica* diarrhoeal disease in 289 children from the same population (38, 39). During the first year of study, it was observed that only 14 out of 43 children recovered from a diarrhoeal event by *E. histolytica* but not *E. dispar*, experienced a second event with this parasite, suggesting the development of immunity against the disease by natural infection (38). After 4 years of monitoring, it was observed that most of the infections and diarrhoeal diseases by *E. histolytica* were self-limited and the raising of sIgA anti-Gal lectin CRD was short-lived; however, a clear correlation between those

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Parasite Immunology*, **29**, 331–338

based on the induction of protective sIgA antibodies. In this sense, a protection assay carried out in the C3H/HeJ mouse model of amoebic colitis (42) showed that the combination of oral and nasal immunization with the native Gal-lectin or a 64-kDa recombinant fragment (LecA) using cholera toxin and Freund's adjuvant conferred protection against amoebic intestinal colonization (36). Higher level of protection (100% in some cases) was obtained with the native Gal-lectin when it was compares to LecA. It is noteworthy that protection correlated with the development of faecal anti-Gal lectin IgA antibodies previous to the intracecal challenge with amoebas, as it was found in the human *in vivo* studies mentioned before. Moreover, a role for CD4+ T lymphocytes in cecal pathology was also found in the same model (43) suggesting a role for the cellular immune response in the tissue damage presented during invasive amoebiasis (43,44). However, it is also interesting to mention that, although the Gal-lectin could be a very good antigen to be used as a prototype vaccine, Lotter *et al.* showed that that induction of IgG antibodies against a particular fragment of the lectin was anti-protective (45), which opens up the possibility of the use not of the whole molecule, but only of the fragment that could has protective activity.

Although there are not a plethora of studies in which cellular immune response participation in amoebiasis have been described, it has been postulated the some cytokines are necessary to induce resistance in this infection. Thus, as reviewed by Ivory *et al.* (46), IL-10 has been postulated as one of the most important immune factors mediating nonhaemopoietic cells resistance in experimental models of amoebiasis. The IL-10 resistance in mouse experimental amoebiasis, it is associated to two lines of immune barriers: the first line of resistance is conferred by the intestinal epithelial lining and the second by the underlying immune cells. Thus, the contribution of IL-10 to innate resistance is through the physiological effects on intestinal epithelial cells and induction of a protective barrier to infection. Also this cytokine might inhibit the adverse effects of luminal amoebic antigens. One important aspect of the IL-10 effect in amoebiasis, is that there is no apparent correlation between inflammation and amoeba scores (46).

SECRETORY IgA (sIgA)-BASED VACCINE

One of the intricate puzzles in amoebiasis, is the role of inflammation. However, researches reach the consensus that mucosal inflammation helps to contain the infection at an early stage, at the cost of extensive mucosal destruction. The inflammation induced by amoeba infection in the gut, is driven by a T helper (Th)2 cell phenotype. Whether this inflammation is primarily because of the Th2 response or because of the enhanced parasite survival, resulting from

the lack of protective Th1 response has not been completely elucidated.

It is interesting to point out that it has been reported that multiple cytokines, including obligatory TGF-β and IL-10, IL-4, IL-5 and IL-6, are required to promote IgA class switching and maturation, and thus, induce protective mucosal immunity (47). This mucosal immunity may be closely related to the mucosal epithelium. In there, IgA may be able to function at different levels. There is the possibility of luminal sIgA preventing adhesion and entry of amoebic antigens into the epithelium, that IgA in the lamina propria binds and excretes amoebic antigens to the lumen or that IgA in its transit through the epithelium, could neutralize amoebic proinflammatory antigens or directly inhibiting amoeba reproduction. Another interesting intrinsic property of IgA, it is its ability to trigger the release of inflammatory cytokines (47). Thus, the necessity for development of a vaccine against amoebiasis is unquestionable. Amoebiasis is the third cause of death by protozoan parasites worldwide and its incidence is still increasing, probably due to the recent description of ALA cases unresponsive to metronidazole treatment (41). The nature of this resistance is unknown, but it could be due to development of a multidrug resistance phenotype (MDR) in trophozoites exposed to metronidazole, or to the natural existence of genetically resistant strains. In this sense, the study done in children from Dhaka mentioned before, demonstrated the presence of 62 PCR polymorphic variants of the *E. histolytica* serine-rich protein in 119 faecal samples (31), one of the proteins considered as vaccine candidate. Even when this variability increase the difficulty of designing a multiregional effective anti-amoebic vaccine, there are several issues related to the life cycle of this parasite that support the possibility of eradicate amoebiasis with a vaccine: (i) the parasite have only two stages, cyst and trophozoites; (ii) the human is the only definitive host; and (iii) there is no intermediary host, neither vectors, nor natural reservoirs. This means that an anti-colonizing vaccine should result in protection against invasive amoebiasis, inhibition or reduction in the encystment level, and decrease in the potential to transmit the infection into the population. As *E. histolytica* is an enteric invasive parasite, the vaccine has to prevent the adhesion of trophozoites to the colonic epithelium and their invasiveness by inducing the production of amoebic adherence-blocking sIgA antibodies at the intestinal mucosa. Therefore, an oral or nasal delivery system with a mucosal adjuvant will be the most convenient strategy in order to stimulate GALT. From the studies mentioned before and similar others it is clear that the Gal-binding lectin is the best candidate for the development of an anti-amoeba vaccine (36,49–51). The lectin, located in the surface of trophozoites, mediates the adherence of trophozoites to target cells and is the target of

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Parasite Immunology*, **29**, 331–338

J. C. Carrero et al.

sIgA-based protection against intestinal and hepatic experimental amoebiasis, among other important functions. However, other amoebic proteins are also recognized by human sIgA that confer protection, but at less extension (49,51, Table 1). One of them is the 29 kDa cysteine-rich protein, actually known as peroxiredoxin as it is mainly located on the surface of the amoeba (52). The other one is the 25 kDa serine-rich protein, a membrane protein with multiple octapeptide and dodecapeptide tandem repeats that appears to be involved in immune evasion. The serine-rich surface protein was originally described as 46/52 kDa, but it has a variable length due to different repeat numbers. Both proteins are highly immunogenic, conferring 50% and 100% of protection against ALA in gerbils, respectively (reviewed in (49,51)). Interestingly, both proteins were identified by immunoscreening with sIgA antibodies from saliva of patients with intestinal amoebiasis, suggesting that they are able to induce secretory immune responses in human mucosa (53). In addition, cytosolic proteins such as cyclophilin, 70 kDa heat-shock protein, enolase, l-α elongation and ribosomal protein L23a were also recognized by the human sIgA antibodies, suggesting that internal amoebic antigens are also immunogenic at mucosal surfaces (53). With the exception of the Gal-lectin, the potential of all these antigens in protection against intestinal amoebiasis has not been addressed.

The selection of a mucosal adjuvant or a delivery system suitable in humans that enhance the secretory response is also a crucial point (54). Most studies on protection against amoebiasis have used either complete or subunit B cholera toxin. However, their use as well as the use of analogs of cholera toxin and other bacterial toxins (i.e. heat-labile enterotoxin) is limited in humans. Microparticles and polymerized liposomes could be more acceptable alternatives; however, their potential as adjuvants is far lower than that of toxins. Other possibility is the use of noninfective viral or bacterial systems displaying the amoebic antigens on their surfaces that function as adjuvants by themselves (55), or the use of transgenic plants expressing the antigens in the edible fruits or infected with the transgenic virus (56,57). These systems of mucosal delivery antigens have been successfully used for protection against several infectious agents, from bacteria to protozoa, but not in amoebiasis. Therefore, the potential of these strategies for the delivery of an anti-amoeba vaccine in human have to be further considered.

CONCLUSIONS

The evidences presented above illustrate the importance of the secretory immune response during amoebiasis, and could give ways to possible new mechanisms of parasite control in an immunocompetent host. The above evidence

Figure 1 Proposed model of IgA-based protection against intestinal infection by *Entamoeba histolytica*. Following excystation, trophozoites move to the colon and attach to the mucosa surface by adhesins, including the galactose-binding lectin (1). Once bound, the active trophozoites release proteolytic enzymes that disrupt the epithelial tissue and let them penetrate the mucosa, at the same time that trophozoites phagocyte the tissular debris (2). In this model of protection, antigens secreted or released from lysed trophozoites are taken up by dendritic cells in Peyer's patches underlying the mucosa; the antigens are then processed and presented to local T and B lymphocytes (3). Activated B lymphocytes exit the Peyer's patches through lymphatic vessels, become plasma cells in peripheral blood and then return to the lamina propria by homing receptors (4). The plasmatic cells distributed in the lamina propria produce dimeric specific secretory IgA antibodies (5) that bind to the basal region of the enteric cells (secretory component, in green) and migrate throughout the enterocytes until reach the intestinal lumen, where are secreted (6). Finally, the secreted IgA antibodies bind to the amoebic surface adhesins preventing the adhesion of trophozoites to the lining epithelium, which results in the expulsion of the trophozoites with the faeces (7).

strongly suggests an important role for IgA in human and mouse intestinal amoebiasis. Possible interaction between the host secretory immune response, the amoeba parasite and the systemic immune system affects the final disease outcome. However, these interactions have not been well characterized during acute or chronic amoebiasis. The interaction between the secretory immune response and the establishment of the parasite in amoebiasis may have implications in the transmission control and treatment of this worldwide spread parasitic disease in humans.

The sIgA response developed against some antigens of *E. histolytica* trophozoites during the intestinal infection in humans and experimental rodents confers temporal protection against the re-infection, probably by inhibiting the adherence of the parasite to the colonic wall. Until now, the most feasible strategy for the development of a vaccine against intestinal amoebiasis is the use of one of the three antigens recognized by human sIgA and involved in the adherence of the parasite to colonic cells, Gal-lectin, CREHP and SREHP, or their combination as the constituents of a preparation that will be delivered by oral or nasal routes.

in combination with mucosal adjuvants or delivery systems in order to awake a secretory response blocking the adherence of amoebas to the intestinal wall (Figure 1). In practical matters, the complexity of the amoeba-host relationship suggests that all physiological factors (i.e. sex, age, developmental stage) should be taken into account in the design of vaccines and new drugs. Interventions aimed at the secretory immune response appear as a possible new therapeutic approach to control amoebiasis in its final host, and perhaps other enteric infections which secretory immune response is the first line of defence of the host.

**ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS**

Financial support: Grants 40072-Q (JMM) and 41693-M (JPL and JCC) from Programa de Fondos Sectoriales of The National Council of Science and Technology of México (CONACyT), grants IN-208103 (JMM) and IN206102-3 (JPL and JCC) from Programa de Apoyo a Proyectos de Investigación e Innovación Tecnológica (PAPIIT) de la Dirección General de Asuntos del Personal Académico (DGAPA), U.N.A.M., and a grant from Fundación Miguel Alemán, A.C. (JPL). CCR and HAD have a scholarship from CONACyT. We thank Dr Pavel Petrossian for English support.

**REFERENCES**

1. Walsh JA. Problems in recognition and diagnosis of amebiasis: estimation of the global magnitude of morbidity and mortality. *Rev Infect Dis* 1986; **8**: 228–238.
2. Espinosa-Cantellano M & Martínez-Palomo A. Pathogenesis of intestinal amebiasis: from molecules to disease. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 2000; **13**: 318–331.
3. Woof JM & Kerr MA. The function of immunoglobulin A in immunity. *J Pathol* 2006; **208**: 270–282.
4. Ackers JP & Mirelman D. Progress in research on *Entamoeba histolytica* pathogenesis. *Curr Opin Microbiol* 2006; **9**: 367–373.
5. Olivos-García A, Nequiz-Avendaño M, Tello E *et al.* Inflammation, complement, ischemia and amoebic survival in acute experimental amoebic liver abscesses in hamsters. *Exp Mol Pathol* 2004; **77**: 66–71.
6. Hughes MA & Petri WA Jr. Amebic liver abscess. *Infect Dis Clin North Am* 2000; **14**: 565–582.
7. Walsh JA. Epidemiology. In: Ravdin JI (eds): *Amebiasis. Human Infection by Entamoeba histolytica*. New York, Edinburg, London, Melbourne, Churchill Livingstone, 1988: 91–126.
8. Kelsall BL, Jackson TG, Gathiram V *et al.* Secretory immunoglobulin A antibodies to the galactose-inhibitable adherence protein in the saliva of patients with amebic liver disease. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 1994; **51**: 454–459.
9. Brandtzaeg P. Role of secretory antibodies in the defence against infections. *Int J Med Microbiol* 2003; **293**: 3–15.
10. Hanson LA & Korotkova M. The role of breastfeeding in prevention of neonatal infection. *Semin Neonatol* 2002; **7**: 275–281.
11. Morrow AL & Rangel JM. Human milk protection against infectious diarrhea: implications for prevention and clinical care. *Semin Pediatr Infect Dis* 2004; **15**: 221–228.
12. Holmgren J. Mucosal immunity and vaccination. *FEMS Microbiol Immunol* 1991; **4**: 1–9.
13. Onorato IM, Modlin JF, McBean AM, Thoms ML, Loonsky GA & Bernier RH. Mucosal immunity induced by enhanced potency inactivated and oral polio vaccines. *J Infect Dis* 1991; **163**: 1–6.
14. Vidarsson G, van der Pol WL, van den Elsen JM *et al.* Activity of human IgG and IgA subclasses in immune defense against *Neisseria meningitidis* serogroup B. *J Immunol* 2001; **166**: 6250–6256.
15. Lee CJ, Lee LH & Gu XX. Mucosal immunity induced by pneumococcal glycoconjugate. *Crit Rev Microbiol* 2005; **31**: 137–144.
16. Byrd W, de Lorimier A, Zheng ZR & Cassels FJ. Microencapsulated subunit vaccine approach to enterotoxigenic *Escherichia coli* and other mucosal pathogens. *Adv Drug Deliv Rev* 2005; **57**: 1362–1380.
17. Hellwig SM, van Spriel AB, Schellekens JF, Mooi FR & van de Winkel JG. Immunoglobulin A-mediated protection against *Bordetella pertussis* infection. *Infect Immun* 2001; **69**: 4846–4850.
18. Ma JK, Hikmat BY, Wycoff K *et al.* Characterization of a recombinant plant monoclonal secretory antibody and preventive immunotherapy in humans. *Nat Med* 1998; **4**: 601–606.
19. Roach TI, Else KJ, Wakelin D, McLaren DJ & Grencis RK. *Trichuris muris*: antigen recognition and transfer of immunity in mice by IgA monoclonal antibodies. *Parasite Immunol* 1991; **13**: 1–12.
20. Inaba T, Sato H & Kamiya H. Impeded establishment of the infective stage of *Trichinella* in the intestinal mucosa of mice by passive transfer of an IgA monoclonal antibody. *J Vet Med Sci* 2003; **65**: 1227–1231.
21. Heyworth MF. Intestinal IgA responses to *Giardia muris* in mice depleted of helper T lymphocytes and in immunocompetent mice. *J Parasitol* 1989; **75**: 246–251.
22. Leher H, Kinoshita K, Alizadeh H, Zaragoza FL, He Y & Niederkorn J. Impact of oral immunization with *Acanthamoeba* antigens on parasite adhesion and corneal infection. *Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci* 1998; **39**: 2337–2343.
23. Petri WA Jr, Chaudhry O, Haque R & Hought E. Adherence-blocking vaccine for amebiasis. *Arch Med Res* 2006; **37**: 288–291.
24. Kelsall BL & Ravdin JI. Degradation of human IgA by *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Infect Dis* 1993; **168**: 1319–1322.
25. Tsutsumi V. *In vivo* experimental models of amebiasis. *Gac Med Mex* 1994; **130**: 450–453.
26. Seydel KB, Li E, Swanson PE & Stanley SL Jr. Human intestinal epithelial cells produce proinflammatory cytokines in response to infection in a SCID mouse-human intestinal xenograft model of amebiasis. *Infect Immun* 1997; **65**: 1631–1639.
27. Ximenez C, Leyva O, Moran P *et al.* *Entamoeba histolytica:* antibody response to recent and past invasive events. *Ann Trop Med Parasitol* 1993; **87**: 31–39.
28. Valenzuela O, Ramos F, Moran P *et al.* Persistence of secretory antiamoebic antibodies in patients with past invasive intestinal or hepatic amoebiasis. *Parasitol Res* 2001; **87**: 849–852.
29. Calderon J, de Lourdes Munoz M & Acosta HM. Surface redistribution and release of antibody-induced caps in entamoebae. *J Exp Med* 1980; **151**: 184–193.
30. Del Muro R, Acosta E, Merino E, Glender W & Ortiz-Ortiz L. Diagnosis of intestinal amebiasis using salivary IgA antibody detection. *J Infect Dis* 1990; **162**: 1360–1364.

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Parasite Immunology*, **29**, 331–338

J. C. Carrero et al.

31 Haque R, Duggal P, Ali IM, *et al.* Innate and acquired resistance to amebiasis in Bangladeshi children. *J Infect Dis* 2002; **186**: 547–552.

32 Ravdin JI, Abd-Alla MD, Welles SL, Reddy S & Jackson TF. Intestinal antilectin immunoglobulin A antibody response and immunity to *Entamoeba dispar* infection following cure of amebic liver abscess. *Infect Immun* 2003; **71**: 6899–6905.

33 Islam A, Stoll BJ, Ljungstrom I, Biswas J, Nazrul H & Hultdt G. The prevalence of *Entamoeba histolytica* in lactating women and in their infants in Bangladesh. *Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg* 1988; **82**: 99–103.

34 Carrero JC, Diaz MY, Viveros M *et al.* Human secretory immunoglobulin a anti-*Entamoeba histolytica* antibodies inhibit adherence of amebae to MDCK cells. *Infect Immun* 1994; **62**: 764–767.

35 Guerrero-Manríquez GG, Sánchez-Ibarra F & Ávila EE. Inhibition of *Entamoeba histolytica* proteolytic activity by human salivary IgA antibodies. *APMIS* 1998; **106**: 1088–1094.

36 Hought E, Barroso L, Lockhart L *et al.* Prevention of intestinal amebiasis by vaccination with the *Entamoeba histolytica* Gal/GalNac lectin. *Vaccine* 2004; **22**: 611–617.

37 Zhang T & Stanley SL Jr. Oral immunization with an attenuated vaccine strain of *Salmonella typhimurium* expressing the serine-rich *Entamoeba histolytica* protein induces an antiamebic immune response and protects gerbils from amebic liver abscess. *Infect Immun* 1996; **64**: 1526–1531.

38 Haque R, Mondal D, Kirkpatrick BD *et al.* Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of acute diarrhea with emphasis on *Entamoeba histolytica* infections in preschool children in an urban slum of Dhaka, Bangladesh. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 2003; **69**: 398–405.

39 Haque R, Mondal D, Duggal P *et al.* *Entamoeba histolytica* infection in children and protection from subsequent amebiasis. *Infect Immun* 2006; **74**: 904–909.

40 Blessmann J, Ali IK, Nu PA *et al.* Longitudinal study of intestinal *Entamoeba histolytica* infections in asymptomatic adult carriers. *J Clin Microbiol* 2003; **41**: 4745–4750.

41 Abd-Alla MD, Jackson TF, Rogers T, Reddy S & Ravdin JI. Mucosal immunity to asymptomatic *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar* infection is associated with a peak intestinal anti-lectin immunoglobulin A antibody response. *Infect Immun* 2006; **74**: 3897–3903.

42 Ghosh PK, Mancilla R & Ortiz-Ortiz L. Intestinal amebiasis:

histopathologic features in experimentally infected mice. *Arch Med Res* 1994; **25**: 297–302.

43 Hought ER, Glembocki DJ, Obrig TG *et al.* The mouse model of amebic colitis reveals mouse strain susceptibility to infection and exacerbation of disease by CD4+ T cells. *J Immunol* 2002; **169**: 4496–4503.

44 Tsutsumi V, Mena-Lopez R, Anaya-Velazquez F & Martinez-Palomio A. Cellular bases of experimental amebic liver abscess formation. *Am J Pathol* 1984; **117**: 81–91.

45 Lotter H, Zhang T, Seydel KB, Stanley SL Jr & Tannich E. Identification of an epitope on the *Entamoeba histolytica* 170-kD lectin conferring antibody-mediated protection against invasive amebiasis. *J Exp Med* 1997; **185**: 1793–1801.

46 Ivory C, Kammanadiminti S & Chadee K. Innate resistance to *Entamoeba histolytica* in murine models. *Trends Parasitol* 2007; **23**: 46–48.

47 Corthesy B. Roundtrip ticket for secretory IgA: role in mucosal homeostasis? *J Immunol* 2007; **178**: 27–32.

48 Hanna RM, Dahniya MH, Badr SS & El-Betagy A. Percutaneous catheter drainage in drug-resistant amoebic liver abscess. *Trop Med Int Health* 2000; **5**: 578–581.

49 Stanley SL Jr. Progress towards development of a vaccine for amebiasis. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 1997; **10**: 637–649.

50 Petri WA Jr, Chaudhry O, Haque R & Hought E. Adherence-blocking vaccine for amebiasis. *Arch Med Res* 2006; **37**: 288–291.

51 Lotter H & Tannich E. The current status of an amebiasis vaccine. *Arch Med Res* 2006; **37**: 292–296.

52 Choi MH, Sajed D, Poole L *et al.* An unusual surface peroxiredoxin protects invasive *Entamoeba histolytica* from oxidative attack. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 2005; **143**: 80–89.

53 Carrero JC, Petrossian P, Acosta E, Sánchez-Zerpa M, Ortiz-Ortiz L & Laclette JP. Cloning and characterization of *Entamoeba histolytica* antigens recognized by human secretory IgA antibodies. *Parasitol Res* 2000; **86**: 330–334.

54 Singh M & O’Hagan D. Advances in vaccine adjuvants. *Nat Biotechnol* 1999; **17**: 1075–1081.

55 Fooks AR. Development of oral vaccines for human use. *Curr Opin Mol Ther* 2000; **2**: 80–86.

56 Thanavala Y, Huang Z & Mason HS. Plant-derived vaccines: a look back at the highlights and a view to the challenges on the road ahead. *Expert Rev Vaccines* 2006; **5**: 249–260.

57 Azad N & Rojanasakul Y. Vaccine delivery – current trends and future. *Curr Drug Deliv* 2006; **3**: 137–146.
