
Microbiology (2007), 153, 2159–2167

DOI 10.1099/mic.0.2007/004192-0

# A group of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica O antigens sharing a common backbone structure

Wei Wang,$^{1,2}$† Andrei V. Perepelov,$^{3}$† Lu Feng,$^{1,2}$† Sergei D. Shevelev,$^{3}$ Quan Wang,$^{1,2}$ Sof'ya N. Senchenkova,$^{3}$ Weiqing Han,$^{1,2}$ Yayue Li,$^{1,2}$ Alexander S. Shashkov,$^{3}$ Yuriy A. Knirel,$^{3}$ Peter R. Reeves$^{4}$ and Lei Wang$^{1,2}$

**Correspondence**

Lei Wang  
wanglei@nankai.edu.cn

$^{1}$TEDA School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, 23 Hongda Street, TEDA, Tianjin 300457, P. R. China  

$^{2}$Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics, Nankai University, 23 Hongda Street, TEDA, Tianjin 300457, P. R. China  

$^{3}$N. D. Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 Moscow, Russian Federation  

$^{4}$School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences (G08), University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia  

---

The O-antigen moiety of the LPS is one of the most variable cell surface components of the Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane. Variation is due to the presence of different sugars and sugar linkages. Here, it is reported that a group of *Escherichia coli* O serogroups (O17, O44, O73, O77 and O106), and the *Salmonella enterica* serogroup O:6,14 (H), share a common four-sugar backbone O-subunit structure, and possess almost identical O-antigen gene clusters. Whereas the *E. coli* O77 antigen does not have any substitutions, the other O antigens in this group differ by the addition of one or two glucose side branches at various positions of the backbone. The O-antigen gene clusters for all members of the group encode only the proteins required for biosynthesis of the common four-sugar backbone. The identification of three genes within a putative prophage in the *E. coli* O44 genome is also reported; these genes are presumably involved in the glucosylation of the basic tetrasaccharide unit. This was confirmed by deletion of one of the genes, which encodes a putative glucosyltransferase. Structural analysis of the O antigen produced by the mutant strain demonstrated the absence of glucosylation. An O-antigen structure shared by five *E. coli* and one *S. enterica* serogroups, all of which have a long evolutionary history, suggests that the common backbone may be important for the survival of *E. coli* strains in the environment, or for their pathogenicity.

---

## INTRODUCTION

The O antigen, which consists of many repeats of an oligosaccharide unit (O unit), is part of the LPS in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, and it contributes to major antigenic variability to the cell surface (Reeves & Wang, 2002). In *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella*, genes involved in O-antigen synthesis are usually clustered between *galF* and *gnd* in the chromosome. These genes encode proteins for the biosynthesis of nucleotide sugars, sugar transferases and proteins for the processing of O antigen, and they include genes encoding flippase (Wzx) and polymerase (Wzy) (Reeves & Wang, 2002). The different O-antigen forms are almost entirely due to genetic variations in their respective O-antigen gene clusters. Sequencing and comparison of various O-antigen gene clusters support the notion that interspecies and intraspecies gene transfers play an important role in the formation of new O-antigen forms (Shepherd *et al.*, 2000; Tarr *et al.*, 2000).

Shigella flexneri, a major cause of bacillary dysentery worldwide, is atypical, as 12 of its 13 serotypes share a

†These authors contributed equally to this paper.

Abbreviations: GlcNAc, N-acetyl-d-glucosamine; ROESY, rotating Overhauser effect spectroscopy; TOCSY, total correlation spectroscopy.

The GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession numbers for the sequences of *E. coli* O73, O77 and O106 O-antigen gene clusters are DQ000313, DO000314 and DQ000315, respectively.

common O-antigen backbone. The differences between serotypes are due to glucosyl and/or O-acetyl groups added to sugars in the backbone of the O unit by transferases encoded by genes mapping outside of the common O-antigen gene cluster (Allison & Verma, 2000).

In a study comparing restriction patterns of *E. coli* O-antigen gene clusters, it has been found that serogroups O17, O44, O73, O77 and O106 have almost identical patterns after *MboII* digestion of amplified PCR products of O-antigen gene clusters (Coimbra *et al.*, 2000), suggesting that they may also share a common gene cluster. Also, structures of *E. coli* O17, O44 and O77 (Masoud & Perry, 1996; Staaf *et al.*, 1995; Yildirim *et al.*, 2001) share the same O-repeat backbone (Fig. 1), which is a tetrasaccharide composed of one N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc) and three D-mannose residues. The *E. coli* O17

and O44 O antigens are modified by a single side-branch glucose residue attached at different positions of the backbone. The *Salmonella enterica* O:6,14 (H) O antigen also has the same backbone, with a glucose side chain at another position (di Fabio *et al.*, 1988). The O-antigen gene cluster of *S. enterica* has been sequenced (Fitzgerald *et al.*, 2003), showing that it encodes genes for the biosynthesis of tetrasaccharide backbone only, and not those for the glucose side-branch.

In this study, we determined the structure of *E. coli* O73 O-repeat unit, which has the same backbone as the O17, O44 and O77 O units, and two D-glucose side-branch residues. We also sequenced the O-antigen gene clusters of *E. coli* O73, O77 and O106. A comparison of these, and those of *E. coli* O17 and O44, and *S. enterica* O:6,14 (H), showed that the six gene clusters are almost identical. In addition,

---

### E. coli O77

$\rightarrow 6)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\beta-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { GlcNAc }-(1 \rightarrow$

---

### E. coli O17

$\begin{aligned}
& \rightarrow 6)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\beta-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { GlcNAc }-(1 \rightarrow \\
& \quad \uparrow \\
& \quad 6 \\
& \quad \downarrow \\
& \quad 1 \\
& \quad \alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Glc }
\end{aligned}$

---

### E. coli O44

$\begin{aligned}
& \rightarrow 6)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\beta-\mathrm{D}-\text { Man }-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { GlcNAc }-(1 \rightarrow \\
& \quad \uparrow \\
& \quad 4 \\
& \quad \downarrow \\
& \quad 1 \\
& \quad \alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Glc }
\end{aligned}$

---

### E. coli O73

$\begin{aligned}
& \alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Glcp }^{\mathrm{I}} \quad \alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Glcp }^{\mathrm{II}} \\
& \quad \downarrow \quad \downarrow \\
& \quad 1 \quad 1 \\
& \quad \downarrow \quad \downarrow \\
& \quad 4 \quad 3 \\
& \rightarrow 6)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Manp }^{\mathrm{I}}-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { Manp }^{\mathrm{II}}-(1 \rightarrow 2)-\beta-\mathrm{D}-\text { Manp }^{\mathrm{III}}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\mathrm{D}-\text { GlcpNAc }-(1 \rightarrow
\end{aligned}$

---

**Fig. 1. Structures of the O polysaccharides of *E. coli* O77, O17, O44 and O73. Substitution with the side-branch glucose residues in *E. coli* O73 is non-stoichiometric. The structure of *E. coli* O77 in bold is the core structure of the O77 group.**
we identified the glucosyltransferase gene for transfer of the side-branch glucose in *E. coli* O44. Our results support the proposal that these serotypes have a common sugar backbone encoded by a conserved O-antigen gene cluster, with variation due to side branches encoded by genes located elsewhere in the genome, as for *Shi. flexneri*. We named the serotypes the ‘O77 group’.

---

### METHODS

#### Bacteria and plasmids.
Plasmids used in this study were maintained in *E. coli* K-12 strain DH5α, which was purchased from the Beijing DingGuo Biotechnology Development Center. The *E. coli* O17, O44, O73, O77 and O106 type strains K12a, H702c, P12a, E10, H521a (laboratory stock numbers G1298, G1291, G1057, G1075 and G1255, respectively) were obtained from the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, Australia. Plasmid pKD20 was kindly provided by Patrick Higgins, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA.

#### Bacterial cultivation and isolation of LPS.
Bacterial cells were grown to late exponential phase in 8 l Luria–Bertani medium, using a 10 l fermenter (Biostat C-10; B. Braun Biotech International) under constant aeration at 37 °C and pH 7.0. Bacterial cells were washed and dried as described by Robbins & Uchida (1962). LPS of *E. coli* O73 and the *E. coli* O44-derived mutant strain H1408 (920 and 1000 mg, respectively) was isolated from dried cells (16.3 and 10.9 g, respectively) by the phenol/water method (Wang *et al.*, 2001a), and purified by precipitation of nucleic acids and proteins with aqueous 50% TCA, as described previously (Wang & Reeves, 2000).

#### Isolation of O polysaccharide.
Delipidation of the LPS of *E. coli* O73 and *E. coli* O44 mutant strain H1408 (124 and 130 mg, respectively) was performed with aqueous 2% acetic acid (6 ml) at 100 °C, until lipid A precipitation. The precipitate was removed by centrifugation (13 000 g, 20 min), and the supernatant was fractionated on a column (56 × 2.6 cm) of Sephadex G-50 (S) (Amersham Biosciences) in 0.05 M pyridinium acetate buffer, pH 4.5, and monitored using a differential refractometer (Knauer). High-molecular-mass polysaccharides were obtained in yields of 48 and 27% of the LPS weight of *E. coli* O73 and *E. coli* O44 mutant strain H1408, respectively.

#### Chemical analyses.
The polysaccharide of *E. coli* O73 was hydrolysed with 2 M CF₃CO₂H (120 °C, 2 h), and sugars were identified by GLC of the alditol acetates, using a Hewlett Packard 5890 chromatograph equipped with an Ultra-2 column (Supelco), and a temperature gradient of 160–290 °C at 3 °C min⁻¹. The absolute configurations of the monosaccharides were determined by GLC of the acetylated (−)-2-octyl glycosides, according to methods described by Gerwig *et al.* (1979) and Leontein *et al.* (1978). Methylation of the polysaccharide was performed with CH₃I in DMSO, in the presence of sodium methylsulfinylmethanide (Conrad, 1972). Partially methylated monosaccharides were derived by hydrolysis under the same conditions as those in the sugar analysis, and then reduced with NaBH₄, acetylated, and analysed by GLC-MS on a Hewlett Packard HP 5989A instrument equipped with a 30 m HP-5ms column (Hewlett Packard), under the same chromatographic conditions as described for GLC.

#### NMR spectroscopy.
Samples were deuterium-exchanged by freeze-drying twice from D₂O, and then examined as solutions in 99.96% D₂O at 27 °C. NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker DRX-500 spectrometer (Germany) using internal acetone (δH 2.225, δC 31.45)

as a reference. Two-dimensional NMR spectra were obtained using standard Bruker software, and the Bruker XWINNMR 2.6 program was used to acquire and process the NMR data. Mixing times of 200 and 100 ms were used in total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY) and rotating Overhauser effect spectroscopy (ROESY) experiments, respectively.

#### Construction of DNase I shotgun bank.
Chromosomal DNA was prepared as described by Bastin & Reeves (1995). Primers no. 1523 and no. 1524 (Wang *et al.*, 2001b), based on *galF* and *gnd* genes, respectively, were used to amplify the DNA of *E. coli* O73, O77 and O106 O-antigen gene clusters, using the Expand Long Template PCR system (Roche). The PCR cycles used were as follows: denaturation at 94 °C for 10 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and extension at 68 °C for 15 min. The PCR products were digested with DNase I, and the resulting DNA fragments were cloned into pGEM-T Easy to produce a bank, using the method described previously (Wang & Reeves, 1998).

#### Sequencing and analysis.
Sequencing was carried out by the Tianjin Biochip Corporation, using an ABI 3730 automated DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Sequence data were assembled using the Staden Package (Staden, 1996). Artemis (Rutherford *et al.*, 2000) was used to identify ORFs, and for annotation. BlockMaker was used to search for conserved motifs. BLAST and PSI-BLAST (Altschul *et al.*, 1997) were used for searching databases, including GenBank, COG and Pfam protein motif databases (Bateman *et al.*, 2002; Tatusov *et al.*, 2001). The SOSUI system (Hirokawa *et al.*, 1998) was used to identify potential transmembrane segments. Sequence alignment and comparisons were performed using the program CLUSTALW (www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw). The synonymous substitution rate (*Ks*) and nonsynonymous rate (*Ka*) were calculated using K-Estimator 6.0 (Comeron, 1999).

#### Deletion and complementation of the *E. coli* O77 *wzy* gene and the *E. coli* O44 *wbbG* gene.
The Red recombination system of λ phage was used to replace the *wzy* gene in *E. coli* O77 and the *wbbG* gene in *E. coli* O44; in both cases the gene was replaced by the *cat* gene, using the methods described by Datsenko & Wanner (2000). The *cat* gene was PCR amplified from plasmid pKK232-8 using primers binding to the 5′ and 3′ ends of the *cat* gene, with each primer carrying 40 bp based on the *E. coli* O77 DNA that flanks *wzy* (wl_4696/wl_4697, 5′-ATGCATAAGCAATATTACTCATTTGT-GCAATAAAATGGAGAAAAAATCACTGG-3′/5′-CTTACTGACC-ATGATAAATTATTATTTTAACAAGTAATGCCCTAAAAAAAAATTA-CGC-3′), or the *E. coli* O44 DNA that flanks *wbbG* (wl_5183/wl_5184, 5′-TAAGCAGCGTCCAAAGTATGTACTTAAGGGTAAAAATGA-TTCAGGAGCTAAGGAAGCTAAA-3′/5′-AAAGTGAACTCTATTCC-ATTTTCCAATAAGAACTTTTTTTACGCCCCCGCCCTGCCAC-TCA-3′). The PCR products were transformed, respectively, into *E. coli* O77 and *E. coli* O44 type strains carrying pKD20, and chloramphenicol-resistant transformants were selected after induction of the Red genes. The replacements were confirmed by PCR using one primer specific to the *cat* gene, and the other specific to the DNA flanking the *E. coli* O77 *wzy* gene, or the DNA flanking the *E. coli* O44 *wbbG* gene. Cloning of the *wzy* and *wbbG* genes was performed by PCR amplification from the *E. coli* O77 and *E. coli* O44 type strains, respectively, using primer pairs wl_4698/wl_4699 (5′-ATTACCATGGATAAGCAATATTACTCATTTG-3′/5′-CTGGGA-TCCAAATAAACCACTTACTGACC-3′) binding to the ends of *wzy*, and wl_5185/wl_5186 (5′-ACGCCATGGGATGAGCAAGAGCTTG-AGCTTT-3′/5′-CTGGGATCCCTAAAGTGAACTCTATTCCATT-3′) binding to the ends of *wbbG*. The PCR products were cloned into pTRC99A to make plasmid pLW1062 containing the *wzy* gene of *E. coli* O77, and plasmid pLW1180 containing the *wbbG* gene of *E. coli* O44. Membrane preparation, SDS-PAGE, and silver staining for

http://mic.sgmjournals.org   2161
W. Wang and others

visualization of the LPS of the various constructs, were carried out as described by Wang & Reeves (1994).

---

### RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

#### Elucidation of the structure of the *E. coli* O73 O antigen

Structures for *E. coli* O17, O44 and O77 antigens, and *S.* enterica O:6,14 (H) antigen, are known (Masoud & Perry, 1996; Staaf et al., 1995; Yildirim et al., 2001). The structure of the *E. coli* O73 O antigen was determined using O73 polysaccharide obtained by mild acid degradation of LPS isolated from dried cells by the phenol/water procedure (Wang et al., 2001a). Sugar analysis after full acid hydrolysis of the polysaccharide revealed glucose, mannose and glucosamine in the ratio 1.2 : 1 : 0.1. GLC of the acetylated glycosides with (-)-2-octanol showed that all sugars had the D configuration.

The ${}^{13}$C NMR spectrum of the polysaccharide (Fig. 2a) contained major signals for six monosaccharide residues, including those for six anomeri carbons at $\delta$ 98.3–102.9, one nitrogen-bearing carbon (C-2 of GlcN) at $\delta$ 54.4, and one $N$-acetyl group at $\delta$ 23.3 ($\mathrm{CH}_{3}$) and 174.8 (CO). Accordingly, the ${}^{1}$H NMR spectrum of the polysaccharide contained, inter alia, signals for six anomeri protons at $\delta$ 4.81–5.35, and one $N$-acetyl group at $\delta$ 2.03. The spectrum also contained minor signals, indicating one or more monosaccharides in non-stoichiometric amounts.

${}^{1}$H and ${}^{13}$C NMR spectra were analysed by 2D correlation spectroscopy, total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY), H-detected ${}^{1}$H, ${}^{13}$C heteronuclear single quantum correlation, and heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation-TOCSY (Table 1). Based on the coupling constant values estimated from the 2D spectra, the spin systems were assigned to three mannos residues (Man${}^{\text {I }}$–Man${}^{\text {III }}$), two glucose residues (Glc${}^{\text {I }}$ and Glc${}^{\text {II }}$), and one GlcNAc residue, all of which were in the pyranose form. The integral intensities of the signals for Glc${}^{\text {I }}$ and Glc${}^{\text {II }}$ were lower than those of the other sugar residues, and it was concluded that they were present in non-stoichiometric quantities (~80% of each residue; also, see methylation analysis data below).

The $J_{1,2}$ coupling constant values of ~3 Hz indicated that GlcNAc and both Glc residues were $\alpha$ linked. The NMR chemical shifts for H-5 and C-5, compared with published data (Jansson et al., 1989), showed that Man${}^{\text {I }}$ and Man${}^{\text {II }}$ were also $\alpha$ linked, whereas Man${}^{\text {III }}$ was $\beta$ linked. Significant down-field displacements, due to $\alpha$-glycosylation effects (Lipkind et al., 1988), of the signals for C-6 of Man${}^{\text {I}}$, C-2 and C-4 of Man${}^{\text {II }}$, and C-4 of

---

(a)

Anomeric carbons  
|  
Glc${}^{\text {I }}$ C-1  
Glc${}^{\text {II }}$ C-1  
Man${}^{\text {I }}$ C-1  
Man${}^{\text {II }}$ C-1  
Man${}^{\text {III }}$ C-1  
GlcN C-1  

Non-anomeric sugar-ring carbons  
|  
Man${}^{\text {I }}$ C-6  
Man${}^{\text {II }}$ C-6  
GlcN C-6  
Glc${}^{\text {I }}$ C-6  
Glc${}^{\text {II }}$ C-6  

(b)

Man${}^{\text {I }}$ C-1  
Man${}^{\text {II }}$ C-1  
Man${}^{\text {III }}$ C-1  
GlcN C-1  

Man${}^{\text {I }}$ C-6  
Man${}^{\text {II }}$ C-6  
GlcN C-6  

GlcN C-2  

105  100  95  90  85  80  75  70  65  60  55 p.p.m.

---

**Fig. 2.** ${}^{13}$C NMR spectra (125 MHz) of the O polysaccharides of *E. coli* O73 (a) and *E. coli* O44 mutant strain H1408 (b). The region of CO resonances is not shown. The spectra differ in the presence (*E. coli* O73) or absence (*E. coli* strain H1408) of signals for two side-branch non-stoichiometric glucose residues.

O antigens of the E. coli O77 group

Table 1. ${}^{1}$H and ${}^{13}$C NMR data of the E. coli O73 and E. coli O44 mutant strain H1408 O polysaccharides ($\delta$, p.p.m.)

The chemical shifts for NAc are $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$ 2.03 (Me), $\delta_{\mathrm{C}}$ 23.3 (Me) and 174.8 (CO) in E. coli O73; $\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$ 2.04 (Me), $\delta_{\mathrm{C}}$ 23.1 (Me) and 175.2 (CO) in H1408.

| Sugar residue | H-1   | H-2   | H-3   | H-4   | H-5   | H-6a  | H-6b  |
|---------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| **E. coli O73** |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| →6)-$\alpha$-D-Manp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 5.15 | 4.12 | 3.89 | 3.99 | 3.98 | 3.60 | 4.12 |
| →2,4)-$\alpha$-Manp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 5.35 | 4.09 | 4.30 | 3.94 | 3.85 | 3.78 | 3.87 |
| →2,3)-$\beta$-Manp${}^{\text{III}}$-(1→ | 4.81 | 4.07 | 3.85 | 3.87 | 3.44 | 3.75 | 3.94 |
| →3)-$\alpha$-GlcpNAc-(1→ | 4.89 | 4.03 | 3.95 | 3.53 | 3.76 | 3.78 | 3.87 |
| $\alpha$-Glcp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 5.24 | 3.56 | 3.65 | 3.43 | 3.76 | 3.78 | 3.87 |
| $\alpha$-Glcp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 5.23 | 3.58 | 3.54 | 3.43 | 3.76 | 3.78 | 3.87 |
| **E. coli O44 mutant strain H1408** |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| →6)-$\alpha$-D-Manp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 5.03 | 4.10 | 3.84 | 3.95 | 3.80 | 3.53 | 4.09 |
| →2)-$\alpha$-Manp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 5.30 | 4.06 | 4.01 | 3.75 | 3.97 | 3.82 | 3.82 |
| →2)-$\beta$-Manp${}^{\text{III}}$-(1→ | 4.75 | 3.95 | 3.70 | 3.64 | 3.40 | 3.74 | 3.93 |
| →3)-$\alpha$-GlcpNAc-(1→ | 4.86 | 4.07 | 3.93 | 3.54 | 3.74 | 3.78 | 3.86 |

| C-1   | C-2   | C-3   | C-4   | C-5   | C-6   |
|--------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| **E. coli O73** |       |       |       |       |       |
| →6)-$\alpha$-D-Manp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 102.9 | 71.5 | 77.0 | 67.3 | 72.9 | 66.3 |
| →2,4)-$\alpha$-Manp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 99.3 | 78.2 | 71.7 | 77.2 | 73.2 | 62.0 |
| →2,3)-$\beta$-Manp${}^{\text{III}}$-(1→ | 101.1 | 74.8 | 81.6 | 68.3 | 78.0 | 62.3 |
| →3)-$\alpha$-GlcpNAc-(1→ | 98.3 | 54.4 | 81.4 | 70.1 | 73.2 | 62.0 |
| $\alpha$-Glcp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 101.4 | 73.4 | 74.5 | 70.8 | 74.2 | 62.0 |
| $\alpha$-Glcp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 101.9 | 72.7 | 74.7 | 70.9 | 74.2 | 62.0 |
| **E. coli O44 mutant strain H1408** |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| →6)-$\alpha$-D-Manp${}^{\text{I}}$-(1→ | 103.8 | 71.1 | 71.9 | 67.1 | 72.7 | 66.0 |
| →2)-$\alpha$-Manp${}^{\text{II}}$-(1→ | 100.6 | 79.6 | 71.1 | 67.7 | 73.8 | 61.9 |
| →2)-$\beta$-Manp${}^{\text{III}}$-(1→ | 101.1 | 77.0 | 75.1 | 67.9 | 78.0 | 62.1 |
| →3)-$\alpha$-GlcpNAc-(1→ | 98.2 | 54.2 | 81.2 | 69.5 | 73.0 | 61.9 |

$\alpha$-GlcNAc, demonstrated the glycosylation pattern in the O unit. The sequence of the sugar residues in the O unit was determined by a 2D ROESY experiment, which revealed strong inter-residue cross-peaks between the following anomeric protons and protons at the linkage carbons: Man${}^{\text{I}}$ H-1/Man${}^{\text{II}}$ H-2, Man${}^{\text{II}}$ H-1/Man${}^{\text{III}}$ H-2, Man${}^{\text{III}}$ H-1/ GlcNAc H-3, GlcNAc H-1/Man${}^{\text{I}}$ H-6a, Glc${}^{\text{I}}$ H-1/Man${}^{\text{II}}$ H-4, and Glc${}^{\text{II}}$ H-1/Man${}^{\text{III}}$ H-3. This pattern was independently confirmed by a ${}^{1}$H, ${}^{13}$C heteronuclear multiple band correlation experiment.

Methylation analysis identified derivatives from terminal glucose, and 2,3-disubstituted, 2,4-disubstituted, 2-substituted and 6-substituted mannose, in the ratio 1.5:1:1:0.3:0.5, and a derivative from 3-substituted GlcNAc. A lower than stoichiometric content of the derivative from terminal glucose, and the occurrence of the derivative from 2-substituted mannose, confirmed incomplete substitution of the main chain with the side-branch glucose residues. A lower than expected content of a derivative from 6-substituted mannose could be accounted for by incomplete cleavage of the glycosidic linkage in the GlcNAc→Man disaccharide fragment.

Therefore, the O polysaccharide of E. coli O73 has a branched hexasaccharide repeating unit, with the structure shown in Fig. 1. The structure includes the O77 tetrasaccharide backbone and two side-branch glucose residues.

Based on the structural data, we conclude that E. coli O17, O44, O73 and O77, and S. enterica O:6,14 (H), share the O77 O-antigen backbone structure. Therefore, we refer to this group as the O77 group, which also includes E. coli O106 (see below).

### The O-antigen gene clusters of the O77 group

The DNA sequences of the O-antigen gene clusters from E. coli O73, O77 and O106 type strains are almost identical (>99% DNA identity), and they encode six genes transcribed from *galF* to *gnd* (Fig. 3). The sequence of the E. coli O44 O-antigen gene cluster, obtained from the genome sequence of E. coli strain 042 (www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/Escherichia_Shigella/), also shares >99% DNA identity with each of the O73, O77 and O106 sequences. The E. coli O17 gene cluster was not sequenced, but

W. Wang and others

| S. enterica O:6, 14 | orf0.13 | orf1.12 | manC | manB | wzy | wzx |
|----------------------|---------|---------|------|------|-----|-----|
| ORF no.             | 1       | 2       | 3    | 4    | 5   | 6   |
| G+C content (mol%)  | 28.9    | 32.9    | 36.4 | 37.5 | 30.8| 29.2|
| Protein identity (%)| 76      | 78      | 83   | 75   | 70  | 74  |
| DNA identity (%)    | 75      | 76      | 75   | 73   | 60  | 70  | 74 |

| E. coli O17/44/73/77/106 | galF | whaC | whaD | manC | manB | wzy | wzx | gnd |
|--------------------------|------|------|------|------|------|-----|-----|-----|
| ORF no.                 | 1    | 2    | 3    | 4    | 5    | 6   |     |     |
| G+C content (mol%)      | 53.3 | 31.5 | 33.7 | 40.1 | 38.2 | 31.5| 31.9| 51.9|

Fig. 3. Comparison of O-antigen gene clusters of S. enterica O:6, 14 (H) (AY334017) and E. coli O17/44/73/77/106 (this study). All genes are transcribed in a direction from galF to gnd. Dashed lines align genes or DNA segments that are homologous in these O-antigen gene clusters. Genes were assigned functions based on homology: wbaC, mannosyltransferase; wbaD, mannosyltransferase; manC, mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase; manB, phosphomannomutase; wzy, O-antigen polymerase; wzx, O-antigen flippase.

adjacent-gene PCR was carried out on the type strain using primers based on the genes (including galF and gnd) of E. coli O77. The PCR products produced by each primer pair had the same size in both E. coli O17 and O77 strains (data not shown), indicating that E. coli O17 has the same O-antigen gene cluster as the others. We also found that the O-antigen gene cluster of S. enterica O:6, 14 (H) (GenBank accession no. AY334017) has the same genes in the same order as that of E. coli O77 (Fitzgerald et al., 2003) (Fig. 3). Details of each gene in E. coli O77 O-antigen gene cluster are given below.

Orf1 and Orf2 belong to glycosyltransferase family 1 (PF00534). Orf1 shares 49% identity with the mannosyltransferase WbaC of S. enterica C1 (Lee et al., 1992). S. enterica C1 O unit has two adjacent D-Man-α(1→2)-D-Man linkages, as does the E. coli O77 O unit, and both have one fewer transferase gene than linkages. Therefore, orf1 is proposed to encode a mannosyltransferase for both of the D-Man-α(1→2)-D-Man linkages, and is named wbaC. Orf2 shares 52% identity with a putative glycosyltransferase involved in E. coli O6 O-antigen assembly. Since the D-Man-β(1→3)-D-GlcNAc linkage is the only linkage present in both E. coli O77 and O6 O antigens, orf2 is proposed to encode the transferase for the D-Man-β(1→3)-D-GlcNAc linkage, and given the name wbaD.

Orf3 and Orf4 were identified as ManC (mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase) and ManB (phosphomannomutase), respectively, which are involved in the synthesis of GDP-mannose, based on their high level identity to many known ManC and ManB proteins (identity between 60 and 83%). Therefore, orf3 and orf4 were named manC and manB, respectively.

Orf5 has 12 predicted transmembrane segments, with a large periplasmic loop of 61 aa residues which is a characteristic topology for O-antigen polymerases (Daniels et al., 1998). A mutant strain, H1236, in which orf5 was replaced by a cat gene, produced LPS that consisted of lipid A-core, and lipid A-core with one O unit only, while the E. coli O77 wild-type strain, and H1236 carrying plasmid pLW1062, which contains orf5, both produced the normal LPS (Fig. 4a). Therefore, orf5 was designated wzy, which is the O-antigen polymerase gene. Orf6 has 12 predicted transmembrane segments, with no large loops; this is a feature of Wzx proteins (Liu et al., 1996). Orf6 also shares 43% similarity to the Wzx protein of Yersinia enterocolitica O:8, and it was designated wzx, which is the O-antigen flippase gene.

Genetic analysis of the O-antigen clusters of the O77 group demonstrated that the only genes present are those involved in the synthesis of the common O unit backbone, including genes for GDP-mannose biosynthesis, sugar transfer, O-antigen flipping (Wzx) and O-antigen polymerization (Wzy). Genes for the synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc are located elsewhere in the chromosome (Reeves & Wang, 2002). GlcNAc is usually the first residue in E. coli O units, and is transferred by the product of the wecA gene located outside of the O-antigen gene cluster (Alexander & Valvano, 1994).

Location of the genes responsible for the side-branch glucosyl residues in E. coli O44

In Shi. flexneri, the addition of glucosyl residues to the O antigen is due to temperate bacteriophages that contain three genes: gtrA, gtrB and a serotype-specific glucosyltransferase gene (Allison & Verma, 2000). GtrB is thought to be a bactoprenol glucosyltransferase that catalyses the transfer of glucose from UDP-glucose to bactoprenol phosphate (UndP) to give UndP-glucose, and GtrA is

O antigens of the *E. coli* O77 group

(from 60 to 93%) to GtrA and GtrB proteins of *Shi.*  
flexneri and *S.* enterica. The products are therefore  
proposed to be GtrA and GtrB.

The product of the third gene shares 22% identity and  
40% similarity with GtrI of *Shi.* flexneri 1a; GtrI is  
responsible for the formation of the α(1→4) linkage  
between the added glucosyl group and GlcNAc. The  
product was also predicted to have 11 transmembrane  
segments, with a hydrophilic carboxy-terminal region of  
110 aa; this is the typical topological character of GtrI. We  
replaced this gene with the *cat* gene to make strain H1408.  
When compared with its parent on an SDS-PAGE gel, the  
bands of the ladder representing LPS with different  
numbers of O units of strain H1408 were closer together,  
as expected for a smaller O unit. H1408 was transcom-  
plemented to restore the LPS phenotype of the wild-type by  
plasmid pLW1180 containing the third gene, and the  
spacing returned to that of the O44 strain (Fig. 4b). The O  
polysaccharide was obtained from strain H1408, and  
studied by 1D ¹H and ¹³C spectroscopy, as described  
above for the *E. coli* O73 O polysaccharide (Fig. 2b). The  
¹H and ¹³C spectra of the mutant polysaccharide were  
identical to those reported earlier for the *E. coli* O77 O  
polysaccharide (Yildirim et al., 2001), showing that the *E.*  
coli O44 mutant strain H1408 possesses the same O antigen  
as that of *E. coli* O77, with no side-branch glucose  
substituents.

Both LPS size distribution and structural data indicated  
that the third gene is required for the attachment of the  
glucose residue to position 4 of the β-D-mannose residue of  
the O-antigen backbone. It is clear that these three genes  
constitute a typical set of genes for the addition of a side-  
branch glucose, and the third gene was named *wbbG*.  
Although we have data for O44 only, it is most likely that  
the proteins for the formation of side-branch glucose  
residues in O17 and O73 are encoded by similar sets of  
genes.

### The importance of the O77 group O antigens

It has been reported that the O antigen plays an important  
role in the virulence of *Shi.* flexneri (Morona et al., 2003;  
Van den Bosch & Morona, 2003), and O-antigen modifica-  
tion may also be an important factor in enhancing survival  
and pathogenicity (Allison & Verma, 2000; West et al.,  
2005). The situation for the O antigens of the O77 group is  
similar to that in *Shi.* flexneri, and the same may well apply  
to this much less-studied group of serovars. It is note-  
worthy that *E. coli* O17 and O73 antigens have been found


**Fig. 4.** Effects of deletion and complementation of the *E. coli* O77  
wzy gene (a) and *E. coli* O44 *wbbG* gene (b). LPS was run by  
SDS-PAGE, and visualized by silver staining. (a) Lanes: 1, *E. coli*  
O77 type strain E10; 2, H1236 (E10 missing the wzy gene); 3,  
H1237 (H1236 with plasmid pLW1062 carrying the *E. coli* O77  
wzy gene). (b) Lanes: 1, *E. coli* O44 type strain H702c; 2, H1408  
(H702c missing the *wbbG* gene); 3, H1409 (H1408 with plasmid  
pLW1180 carrying the *E. coli* O44 *wbbG* gene).


thought to be a flippase that translocates UndP-glucose to  
face the periplasmic space. Both GtrA and GtrB are highly  
conserved. The protein encoded by the third gene, which  
catalyses the linkage of a glucosyl group to the O-antigen  
backbone, is serotype specific (Allison & Verma, 2000).

For O44, we found a set of three genes in the *E. coli* strain  
O42 genome that fit the pattern of the *Shi.* flexneri genes.  
These genes are located in a prophage adjacent to *attL*,  
between *ybhB* and *ybhC* (Fig. 5), the normal insertion site  
of λ phage (Campbell, 2003). The products of the first two  
genes share 96 and 86% identity to GtrA and GtrB,  
respectively, of *E. coli* K-12, as well as high-level identity


**Fig. 5.** Organization of the putative O-antigen modification genes in *E. coli* O44. *attL* is the phage-attachment site.


http://mic.sgmjournals.org

in enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* (Bielaszewska *et al.*, 2004), and O44 and O77 antigens have been found in enter-  
oadhesive *E. coli* (Nataro & Kaper, 1998), and in both cases  
adaptation to virulence may be important.

It has been proposed that *E. coli* and *S. enterica* diverged  
from a common ancestor about 140 million years ago (Ochman & Wilson, 1987a, b), and proteins encoded by  
housekeeping genes in the two species share 93% identity  
on average, ranging from 76.3 to 100% (Sharp, 1991). The  
sequence differences between *E. coli* O77 and *S. enterica*  
O:6,14 (H) are consistent with the O77-group gene cluster  
having been in the common ancestor, and diverged as the  
species diverged, rather than having been independently  
acquired, or acquired by one species from the other. The  
apparent long history of this O antigen in *E. coli* and *S.*  
*enterica* is not typical, as most O antigens in each species  
are not found in the other. The survival of the O antigen  
indicates that it is highly adaptive in *E. coli* and *S.*  
*enterica*, with their rather different niches.

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the NSFC (National Natural Science  
Foundation of China) Key Program (30530010), NSFC General  
Programs (30370339, 30370023), and a grant from the Russian  
Foundation for Basic Research (05-04-48992-a).

### REFERENCES

Alexander, D. C. & Valvano, M. A. (1994). Role of the *rfc* gene in the  
biosynthesis of the *Escherichia coli* O7-specific lipopolysaccharide and  
other O-specific polysaccharides containing N-acetylglucosamine. *J*  
*Bacteriol* 176, 7079–7084.

Allison, G. E. & Verma, N. K. (2000). Serotype-converting bacteriophages and O-antigen modification in *Shigella flexneri*. *Trends*  
*Microbiol* 8, 17–23.

Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z.,  
Miller, W. & Lipman, D. J. (1997). Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new  
generation of protein database search programs. *Nucleic Acids Res* 25,  
3389–3402.

Bastin, D. A. & Reeves, P. R. (1995). Sequence and analysis of the O  
antigen gene (*rfb*) cluster of *Escherichia coli* O111. *Gene* 164, 17–23.

Bateman, A., Birney, E., Cerruti, L., Durbin, R., Eddy, S. R.,  
Griffiths-Jones, S., Howe, K. L., Marshall, M. & Sonnhammer, E. L.  
(2002). The Pfam protein families database. *Nucleic Acids Res* 30, 276–280.

Bielaszewska, M., Fell, M., Greune, L., Prager, R., Fruth, A., Tschape, H.,  
Schmidt, M. A. & Karch, H. (2004). Characterization of cytotoxin genes and expression in shiga toxin-producing *Escherichia coli* strains of non-O157 serogroups. *Infect Immun* 72,  
1812–1816.

Campbell, A. (2003). Prophage insertion sites. *Res Microbiol* 154,  
277–282.

Coimbra, R. S., Grimont, F., Lenormand, P., Burguiere, P., Beutin, L. &  
Grimont, P. A. (2000). Identification of *Escherichia coli* O-serogroups by restriction of the amplified O-antigen gene cluster (*rfb*-RFLP). *Res Microbiol* 151, 639–654.

Comeron, J. M. (1999). K-Estimator: calculation of the number of  
nucleotide substitutions per site and the confidence intervals. *Bioinformatics* 15, 763–764.

Conrad, H. E. (1972). Methylation of carbohydrates with methyl iodide in dimethyl sulfoxide in the presence of methylsulfinylanion. *Methods Carbohydr Chem* 6, 361–364.

Daniels, C., Vindurampulle, C. & Morona, R. (1998). Overexpression and topology of the *Shigella flexneri* O-antigen polymerase (Rfc/Wzy). *Mol Microbiol* 28, 1211–1222.

Datsenko, K. A. & Wanner, B. L. (2000). One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 97, 6640–6645.

di Fabio, J. L., Brisson, J. R. & Perry, M. B. (1988). Structure of the major lipopolysaccharide antigenic O-chain produced by *Salmonella carrau* (O:6, 14, 24). *Carbohydr Res* 179, 233–244.

Fitzgerald, C., Sherwood, R., Gheesling, L. L., Brenner, F. W. & Fields, P. I. (2003). Molecular analysis of the *rfb* O antigen gene cluster of *Salmonella enterica* serogroup O:6,14 and development of a serogroup-specific PCR assay. *Appl Environ Microbiol* 69, 6099–6105.

Gerwig, G. J., Kamerling, J. P. & Vliegenthart, J. F. G. (1979). Determination of the absolute configuration of monosaccharides in complex carbohydrates by capillary GLC. *Carbohydr Res* 77, 1–7.

Hirokawa, T., Boon-Chieng, S. & Mitaku, S. (1998). SOSUI: Classification and secondary structure prediction system for membrane proteins. *Bioinformatics* 14, 378–379.

Jansson, P. E., Kenne, L. & Widmalm, G. (1989). Computer-assisted structural analysis of polysaccharides with an extended version of CASPER using 1H- and 13C-n.m.r. data. *Carbohydr Res* 188, 169–191.

Lee, S. J., Romana, L. K. & Reeves, P. R. (1992). Sequence and structural analysis of the *rfb* (O antigen) gene cluster from a group C1 *Salmonella enterica* strain. *J Gen Microbiol* 138, 1843–1855.

Leontein, K., Lindberg, B. & Longren, J. (1978). Assignment of absolute configuration of sugars by GLC of their acetylated glycosides formed from chiral alcohols. *Carbohydr Res* 62, 359–362.

Lipkind, G. M., Shashkov, A. S., Knirel, Y. A., Vinogradov, E. V. & Kochetkov, N. K. (1988). A computer-assisted structural analysis of regular polysaccharides on the basis of 13C-n.m.r. data. *Carbohydr Res* 175, 59–75.

Liu, D., Cole, R. & Reeves, P. R. (1996). An O-antigen processing function for Wzx(RfbX): a promising candidate for O-unit flippase. *J Bacteriol* 178, 2102–2107.

Masoud, H. & Perry, M. B. (1996). Structural characterization of the O-antigenic polysaccharide of *Escherichia coli* serotype O17 lipopolysaccharide. *Biochem Cell Biol* 74, 241–248.

Morona, R., Daniels, C. & Van Den Bosch, L. (2003). Genetic modulation of *Shigella flexneri* 2a lipopolysaccharide O antigen modal chain length reveals that it has been optimized for virulence. *Microbiology* 149, 925–939.

Nataro, J. P. & Kaper, J. B. (1998). Diarrheagenic *Escherichia coli*. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 11, 142–201.

Ochman, H. & Wilson, A. C. (1987a). Evolution in bacteria: evidence for a universal substitution rate in cellular genomes. *J Mol Evol* 26, 74–86.

Ochman, H. & Wilson, A. C. (1987b). Evolutionary history of enteric bacteria. In *Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology*, pp. 1649–1654. Edited by F. C. Neidhardt and others. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology.

Reeves, P. P. & Wang, L. (2002). Genomic organization of LPS-specific loci. *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol* 264, 109–135.

Robbins, P. W. & Uchida, T. (1962). Studies on the chemical basis of the phage conversion of O-antigens in the E-group *Salmonella*. *Biochemistry* 1, 323–335.

Rutherford, K., Parkhill, J., Crook, J., Horsnell, T., Rice, P., Rajandream, M. A. & Barrell, B. (2000). Artemis: sequence visualization and annotation. *Bioinformatics* 16, 944–945.

Sharp, P. M. (1991). Determinants of DNA sequence divergence between *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*: codon usage, map position, and concerted evolution. *J Mol Evol* 33, 23–33.

Shepherd, J. G., Wang, L. & Reeves, P. R. (2000). Comparison of O-antigen gene clusters of *Escherichia coli* (*Shigella*) sonnei and *Plesiomonas shigelloides* O17: sonnei gained its current plasmid-borne O-antigen genes from *P. shigelloides* in a recent event. *Infect Immun* 68, 6056–6061.

Staaf, M., Widmalm, G., Weintraub, A. & Nataro, J. P. (1995). Structural elucidation of the O-antigenic polysaccharide from *Escherichia coli* O44:H18. *Eur J Biochem* 233, 473–477.

Staden, R. (1996). The Staden sequence analysis package. *Mol Biotechnol* 5, 233–241.

Tarr, P. I., Schoening, L. M., Yea, Y. L., Ward, T. R., Jelacic, S. & Whittam, T. S. (2000). Acquisition of the *rfb-gnd* cluster in evolution of *Escherichia coli* O55 and O157. *J Bacteriol* 182, 6183–6191.

Tatusov, R. L., Natale, D. A., Garkavtsev, I. V., Tatusova, T. A., Shankavaram, U. T., Rao, B. S., Kiryutin, B., Galperin, M. Y., Fedorova, N. D. & Koonin, E. V. (2001). The COG database: new developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete genomes. *Nucleic Acids Res* 29, 22–28.

Van den Bosch, L. & Morona, R. (2003). The actin-based motility defect of a *Shigella flexneri rmlD* rough LPS mutant is not due to loss of IcsA polarity. *Microb Pathog* 35, 11–18.


Wang, L. & Reeves, P. R. (1994). Involvement of the galactosyl-1-phosphate transferase encoded by the *Salmonella enterica rfbP* gene in O antigen subunit processing. *J Bacteriol* 176, 4348–4356.

Wang, L. & Reeves, P. R. (1998). Organization of *Escherichia coli* O157 O antigen gene cluster and identification of its specific genes. *Infect Immun* 66, 3545–3551.

Wang, L. & Reeves, P.R. (2000). The *Escherichia coli* O111 and *Salmonella enterica* O35 gene clusters: gene clusters encoding the same colitose-containing O antigen are highly conserved. *J Bacteriol* 182, 5256–5261.

Wang, L., Briggs, C. E., Rothemund, D., Fratamico, P., Luchansky, J. B. & Reeves, P. R. (2001a). Sequence of the *E. coli* O104 antigen gene cluster and identification of O104-specific genes. *Gene* 270, 231–236.

Wang, L., Qu, W. & Reeves, P. R. (2001b). Sequence analysis of four *Shigella boydii* O-antigen loci: implication for *Escherichia coli* and *Shigella* relationships. *Infect Immun* 69, 6923–6930.

West, N. P., Sansonetti, P., Mounier, J., Exley, R. M., Parsot, C., Guadagnini, S., Prevost, M.C., Prochnicka-Chalufour, A., Delepierre, M. & other authors (2005). Optimization of virulence functions through glucosylation of *Shigella* LPS. *Science* 307, 1313–1317.

Yildirim, H., Weintraub, A. & Widmalm, G. (2001). Structural studies of the O-polysaccharide from the *Escherichia coli* O77 lipopolysaccharide. *Carbohydr Res* 333, 179–183.

Edited by: D. L. Gally
