
J Mol Med (2007) 85:1187–1202  
DOI 10.1007/s00109-007-0227-9  

---

**REVIEW**

**Many faces of NF-κB signaling induced by genotoxic stress**

Zhao-Hui Wu · Shigeki Miyamoto

Received: 19 February 2007 / Revised: 20 April 2007 / Accepted: 22 May 2007 / Published online: 3 July 2007  
© Springer-Verlag 2007  

---

**Abstract** The nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) family of dimeric transcription factors plays pivotal roles in physiologic and pathologic processes, including immune and inflammatory responses and development and progression of various human cancers. Inactive NF-κB dimers normally exist in the cytoplasm in association with inhibitor proteins belonging to the inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) family of related proteins. Activation of NF-κB involves its release from IκB and subsequent nuclear translocation to induce expression of target genes. Intense research effort has revealed many distinct signaling pathways and mechanisms of NF-κB activation induced by immune and inflammatory stimuli. These aspects of NF-κB biology have been amply reviewed in the literature. However, those that involve DNA-damaging agents are less well understood, and multiple conflicting pathways and mechanisms have been described in the literature. In this review, we summarize the proposed mechanisms of NF-κB activation by various DNA-damaging agents, discuss the significance of such activation in the context of cancer treatment, and highlight some of the critical questions that remain to be addressed in future studies.

**Keywords** Nuclear factor-κB · DNA damage · Cancer · ATM · Cancer therapy

---

**Abbreviations**

| ATM | ataxia-telangiectasia mutated |
| --- | --- |
| ATR | ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 related |
| CK2 | casein kinase 2 |

| CPT | Camptothecin |
| --- | --- |
| Dox | Doxorubicin |
| DSB | DNA double-strand break |
| ELKS | protein enriched with glutamate, leucine, lysine, and serine |
| HED-ID | hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with severe immunodeficiency |
| HSP | heat-shock protein |

---

Z.-H. Wu · S. Miyamoto (✉)  
Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin–Madison,  
301 SMI, 1300 University Avenue,  
Madison, WI 53706, USA  
e-mail: smiyamot@wisc.edu  

---

ZHAO-HUI WU  
received his medical degree  
from Shanghai Medical University and his Ph.D. in Pathology  
and Pathophysiology from the Fudan University in Shanghai, China. He is presently a Research Associate of the Department of Pharmacology at the University of Wisconsin–Madison School of Medicine and Public Health. His research interests include cell stress response, NF-κB signaling, and biological function in cancer.

SHIGEKI MIYAMOTO  
received a Ph.D. degree in Cancer Research/Endocrinology  
from the University of California–Berkeley in 1990 and began his NF-κB study during postdoctoral training under Dr. Inder Verma at Salk Institute, San Diego. He is currently a Professor in the Department of Pharmacology at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. His group studies mechanisms and roles of NF-κB regulation by genotoxic agents, in B cell development/malignancies and by nucleocytoplasmic shuttling.

$I_{\kappa}B$ | inhibitor of NF-$\kappa$B
--- | ---
IKK | I$\kappa$B kinase
IR | ionizing radiation
MDC1 | mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1
MDR1 | multidrug resistance gene 1
NF-$\kappa$B | nuclear factor-kappa B
NEMO | NF-$\kappa$B essential modulator
NIK | NF-$\kappa$B inducing kinase
RIP | receptor-interacting protein kinase
TAK | TGF$\beta$ associated kinase
TRAF | TNF receptor-associated factor
IRAK | IL-1 receptor-associated kinase
p53BP1 | p53 binding protein 1
PIASy | protein inhibitor of activated STATy
PIDD | p53 induced protein with a death domain
ROS | reactive oxygen species
UV | ultraviolet radiation
XP | xeroderma pigmentosum

p65/I$\kappa$B$\alpha$ complex that exists in the cytoplasm as an inactive complex. The cytoplasmic localization of this complex is achieved by the balance of nuclear and cytoplasmic shuttling that favors nuclear export resulting in dominant cytoplasmic localization [5, 7, 8]. Upon stimulation with a wide variety of signals, such as TNF$\alpha$, IL-1$\beta$, ligands for Toll-like receptors (TLRs), and engagement of B cell and T cell antigen receptors, so-called canonical or classical pathway is induced, in which different signaling events lead to the activation of the cytoplasmic I$\kappa$B kinase (IKK) complex. The IKK complex is composed of two catalytic subunits, IKK$\alpha$/IKK1 and IKK$\beta$/IKK2 [9], and a regulatory subunit, IKK$\gamma$/NEMO (NF-$\kappa$B essential modulator) [10]. Although other components have been found in the IKK complex, such as HSP90, CDC37 [11], and ELKS [12], the precise composition of the IKK complex remains unclear. Activated IKK phosphorylates conserved serine 32 and 36 residues of I$\kappa$B$\alpha$, which create a docking site for the F-box protein $\beta$-TrCP, a component of an ubiquitin ligase (E3) Skp1-Cul1-F-box (SCF) complex. The recruitment of this E3 complex promotes K48-linked polyubiquitination at K21 and/or K22 of I$\kappa$B$\alpha$ and selective degradation by the S26 proteasome, thereby, liberating free NF-$\kappa$B to translocate into the nucleus [13, 14]. NF-$\kappa$B then binds to DNA sites (“$\kappa$B sites”), conforming to a consensus sequence (5′-GGGRNNYYCC-3′) at promoter or enhancer regions of an exceptionally large number of genes [4, 15–17]. To date, more than several hundred genes have been identified and/or implicated as NF-$\kappa$B target genes, including cytokines, immunoreceptors, cell-adhesion molecules, acute phase proteins, stress-response genes, apoptosis regulators, transcription factors, and others (see http://people.bu.edu/gilmore/nf-kb/target/index.html). Through regulation of target genes, NF-$\kappa$B regulates innate and adaptive immune responses, inflammation, cell proliferation, and cell death, thereby, functioning as a key modulator of the cell response to physiological and pathological stress conditions.

Recently, another conserved pathway has emerged that is currently known to respond to a smaller set of signals, including LT$\beta$, CD40, and BAFF [2, 3, 16]. In this so-called noncanonical or alternative pathway, signaling events lead to the activation of the NF-$\kappa$B-inducing kinase (NIK), which activates IKK$\alpha$ without the need for IKK$\beta$ and NEMO. IKK$\alpha$ then phosphorylates p100 at serine 865 and 869 residues, which induces $\beta$-TrCP-mediated polyubiquitination and subsequent 26S proteasome-mediated limited processing of the p100 C-terminal domain, thereby, liberating the N-terminal p52 subunit in association with RelB. A p52/RelB heterodimer then translocates into the nucleus and activates target genes through binding to a subset of $\kappa$B elements [6]. Notably, this noncanonical pathway requires new protein synthesis, unlike the canonical pathway that typically utilizes

Introduction

Since the report of its discovery in 1986, nuclear factor-$\kappa$B (NF-$\kappa$B) has attracted intense research interests due to its broad roles in regulating many physiological and pathological processes. Different aspects of NF-$\kappa$B regulation and function, including its signaling pathways, role of posttranslational modifications, cross-talk with other signaling pathways and others, have recently been reviewed extensively in two full journal issues, *Cell Death and Differentiation* [2006, 13(5): 685–876] and *Oncogene* [2006, 25(51): 6679–6899]. There are additional reviews that also cover similar and distinct aspects of NF-$\kappa$B regulation and functions [1–3]. In this review, we will specifically focus on our current understanding of the different NF-$\kappa$B signaling mechanisms that are induced by distinct genotoxic agents and the roles that these pathways play in modulating cancer cell survival.

Brief overview of the NF-$\kappa$B signaling system

NF-$\kappa$B generally refers to a family of transcription factors composed of structurally related proteins containing the Rel homology domain whose functions include dimerization, DNA binding, nuclear localization, and interaction with its inhibitor proteins belonging to the I$\kappa$B family [4, 5]. The NF-$\kappa$B family includes c-Rel, RelA (p65), RelB, NF-$\kappa$B1/p105 (p50 precursor), and NF-$\kappa$B2/p100 (p52 precursor), while the I$\kappa$B family consists of I$\kappa$B$\alpha$, I$\kappa$B$\beta$, I$\kappa$B$\varepsilon$, Bcl-3, p100/I$\kappa$B$\delta$, and p105/I$\kappa$B$\gamma$ [4–6]. Different I$\kappa$B family members show preference of binding to different NF-$\kappa$B dimers. The most studied NF-$\kappa$B/I$\kappa$B complex is the p50/
preexisting signaling components. The nature of the newly synthesized protein (or proteins) to permit the noncanonical pathway remains to be elucidated. The noncanonical pathway is particularly critical for the development of secondary lymphoid organs [6, 18, 19].

### Brief overview of cellular DNA damage response

DNA damage is a major risk to cellular homeostasis and genomic integrity. Cellular responses to DNA damage are crucial for cell survival and for preventing the development of cancer. DNA damage initiates multiple cellular responses, including the DNA repair pathways, the cell-cycle checkpoints, apoptotic pathways, and transcriptional responses in a complex, highly branched signaling network [20–22]. Of all DNA lesions, DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) are extremely cytotoxic and can be induced by IR, radiomimetic chemicals, topoisomerase I and II poisons, oxygen radicals formed in the course of normal metabolism, and also following replication fork stalling [20]. The early response to DSB in cells is the recruitment of multiple damage-response proteins. The Mre11–Rad50–Nbs1 complex is among the first to be recruited and is also regarded as a DSB sensor, leading to the recruitment and activation of the apical DSB signaling kinase ATM [23].

The ATM gene was discovered as a gene mutated in AT patients, leading to the loss of its kinase activity or expression [24]. AT is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple manifestations of phenotypes, including cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, developmental abnormalities, progressive neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, premature aging and predisposition to certain types of cancer [25]. ATM is normally localized in the nucleus as inactive homodimer [26]. This homodimer is recruited to the DSB site through binding to the C-terminal sequence of Nbs1 [27], resulting in intermolecular autophosphorylation at S1981, dimer dissociation, and ATM activation [26, 28]. Latest research also found additional critical modifications of ATM, such as autophosphorylation of S367 and S1893, as well as acetylation mediated by Tip60 acetylase, required for its activity [29, 30]. The role of S1981 phosphorylation is not entirely clear given that mice harboring ATM with a S1987A mutation (the murine S1981 counterpart mutated to alanine) failed to display any observable DNA damage signaling defects [31]. Nevertheless, in human AT cell lines, reconstitution with S1981A–ATM failed to complement AT defects unlike the wild-type ATM, indicating the possibility that S1981 phosphorylation might have different functions in mouse versus human systems [29, 30]. Reactivity to anti-phospho-S1981–ATM antibody is frequently employed as a marker of activated ATM. Activated ATM in turn phosphorylates, among others, histone H2AX, thereby, generating “γ-H2AX,” which propagates over megabases from the initial DSB site affording the strong recognition with anti-γ-H2AX antibody and nuclear DNA damage foci signals [32, 33]. γ-H2AX plays an important role in recruiting and anchoring the mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1 (MDC1) and p53-binding protein 1 (p53BP1) to the DNA damage site. The recruitment of MDC1 is required to sustain the binding of the MRN complex and to stabilize the association of activated ATM with the DNA damage sites. The chromatin-bound ATM phosphorylates downstream substrates, such as p53, BRCA1, and Chk2, which are also recruited to the damage site to orchestrate cellular DNA damage responses including cell-cycle arrest, DNA-repair machinery, and stress response [20, 34]. Moreover, ATM activation can also propagate diffusely into the nucleoplasm where activated ATM phosphorylates other substrates that are not localized to the DSB sites, such as cAMP response element-binding (CREB) and others [26].

#### Earlier studies linking ATM and NF-κB activation in response to DSB inducers

In 1995, the same year when the ATM gene was cloned [24], NF-κB was reported to be constitutively active in AT group D cell (AT5BIVA), and expression of N-terminally truncated IkBα rescued the radiation-inducible activation of NF-κB [35, 36]. ATM kinase activity, thus, appeared to be unnecessary for IR-inducible NF-κB activation. However, a later study reported that IR-inducible IkBα degradation and NF-κB activation were absent in the same cell system [37], suggesting that ATM was critical for NF-κB activation by IR. Moreover, NF-κB activation was found to be defective in liver and kidney obtained from IR-exposed ATM⁻/⁻ mice [38]. Additional chemical inhibitor and RNA interference (RNAi) studies further demonstrated the necessary role of ATM in IR-induced NF-κB activation [38–40]. While ATM appears to be mostly critical for NF-κB activation by IR in different cell systems, Basu et al. [41] have also implicated the role of DNA–PKcs based on the evidence that IR was unable to activate NF-κB in a DNA–PKcs-deficient MO59J cell line. It was reported that the expression of ATM in MO59J was extremely low [42], suggesting the possibility that the NF-κB activation defect might be in part due to ATM deficiency. There is also a line of evidence that NF-κB activation in vivo may be cell-type selective and dose dependent. After whole-body irradiation (8.5 Gy) of mice, NF-κB activation was detected only in spleen, mesenteric lymph nodes, bone marrow, and intestinal epithelial cells but not other tissues examined [43, 44]. In intestinal epithelial cells, the activation was detectable with 0.5 Gy and steadily increased up to 12 Gy [43]. However, NF-κBactivation was detected in the liver and kidney of mice exposed to 20 Gy of irradiation [38]. In the cerebral cortex of Sprague-Dawley rats, NF-κB activation was detectable at 5 Gy and increased steadily up to 30 Gy [45]. These observations indicate that different tissues possess different IR sensitivity to activate NF-κB in vivo. Whether or not these differential tissue sensitivities to IR-induced NF-κB activation derive from differential requirement of ATM is unknown.

The requirement of ATM in NF-κB activation by other agents that induce DSBs, such as Camptothecin (CPT) [46, 47], irinotecan (CPT-11), etoposide (VP16), and doxorubicin (Dox)/adriamycin [48], is also somewhat controversial. Piret et al. [49] demonstrated that NF-κB activation by CPT treatment was generally reduced in different AT cell lines compared to the wild-type counterpart. Expression of wild-type ATM restored the CPT-inducible NF-κB activation in AT cells, demonstrating the specific requirement of ATM, rather than some other defects that are present in AT cells possibly derived from genetic instability associated with the loss of ATM function. Interestingly, all AT cell lines also activated NF-κB in response to the anticancer drug daunomycin, a Topo II poison that also stimulates generation of free radicals and ceramide [49]. Moreover, Panta et al. found that a Topo II catalytic inhibitor AD288, which blocked Topo II activity without generating DSB, could activate NF-κB through DNA-PKcs, while Dox-induced NF-κB activation was still mediated by ATM in certain cell lines such as the (10)1 murine fibroblast cell line, HEK293 cells, and GM09607 AT cells [50]. Intriguingly, both ATM and DNA-PKcs activated NF-κB through a MEK/ERK/p90<sup>rsk1</sup> signaling cascade. It was also found that treatment with MEK inhibitor PD98059 could inhibit NF-κB activation by an extremely high IR dose of 80 Gy in 10(1) p53-null MEF cells. In contrast, depletion of ATM with small interfering RNA (siRNA) or inhibition of ATM kinase activity with chemical inhibitors totally blocked NF-κB activation by IR, VP16, Dox, and CPT in HEK293, CEM, and 70Z/3 cell lines [39, 51]. Thus, depending on the cell systems analyzed, different requirements for ATM appear to exist for NF-κB activation by different DSB inducers.

PKC in the human Ramos B cell line [53]. Antioxidants, such as pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) and N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), could inhibit IR- and Dox-induced NF-κB activation in human lymphoblastoid 244B cells, N-type neuroblastoma cells, HL-60 promyelocytes, and Jurkat T lymphoma cells [54–56], suggesting the requirement of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in NF-κB signaling. The proto-oncoprotein Ras was also proposed to play a direct role in IR-induced NF-κB signaling, based on the evidence that transduction of a number of human tumor cell lines with an adenovirus expressing a single-chain antibody fragment directed against Ras significantly inhibited IR-induced NF-κB activation and resulted in radiosensitization [57]. In addition, Lee et al. [37] and Jung et al. [58] observed that GST-IκBα-C (aa 198–302) could be phosphorylated in an ATM immunocomplex kinase assay and suggested that ATM was the IκBα C-terminal kinase in response to IR. Given many discrepant observations above, NF-κB activation by even one agent, IR, appears quite complex. When one also considers the contribution of events associated with different doses of IR, cell-type contexts, differences between normal or cancer cells, among others, dissection of the mechanisms of NF-κB activation by IR alone is quite daunting. It is unclear whether the IKK complex is directly involved in NF-κB activation in the above studies.

The critical evidence demonstrating the role of IKK in NF-κB activation by IR has been obtained [38, 59]. It was found that IR treatment activated IKKβ and induced IκBα degradation in HeLa cells [59]. A S32/36A-IκBα mutant is resistant to IR-induced degradation. In addition, transient expression of an IKKβ kinase inactive mutant was able to abrogate IκBα degradation and NF-κB activation in HeLa cells treated with 20 Gy of IR. Later, IKK activation was found to be defective in the liver and kidney isolated from IR-exposed ATM<sup>−/−</sup>, but not DNA-PKcs<sup>−/−</sup>, mice [38]. Similarly, NF-κB activation by CPT was shown to require the IKK components and the canonical mechanism [47]. In HeLa cells, both SN38, the active metabolite of CPT-11, and Dox activate NF-κB in an IKK-dependent manner [60]. Although Dox and AD288 were proposed to initiate the DNA-damage signaling through different kinases, ATM and DNA-PKcs, respectively, both signaling pathways resulted in NF-κB activation through canonical IKK-dependent mechanism [50]. As described below in more detail, there is emerging evidence that NF-κB activation by many different DNA-damaging agents can be mediated by a conserved signaling pathway that requires the convergence of DNA damage-induced ATM activation and a parallel stress pathway that causes small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 (SUMO-1) modification of NEMO to permit NF-κB activation. As will also be discussed below, given the complexity of variables mentioned above, further in-depth investigations

### IKK and NF-κB activation in response to DSB inducers

Multiple mechanisms have been described in the literature regarding NF-κB activation by IR. Brach et al. [52] implicated the involvement of PKC based on the effect seen with H7 inhibitor (a PKC inhibitor) and downregulation of PKC by prolonged TPA treatments in the human KG-1 myeloid leukemia cells. Later, protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) was suggested to mediate NF-κB activation in response to IR, possibly through activating
are needed to determine how many different ways NF-κB activation can be accomplished by different types of DNA-damaging agents in various cell types.

**A conserved NF-κB activation pathway by multiple genotoxic agents**

Sumoylation of NEMO induced by DNA-damaging agents

Our initial analyses to determine the role of IKK components revealed that NEMO is crucial for NF-κB activation by CPT [47]. Interestingly, when NEMO proteins harboring mutations in the C-terminal zinc-finger (ZF) domain were reconstituted into the NEMO-deficient 1.3E2 pre-B cell line, NF-κB activation by CPT and VP16 was abrogated [61]. The ZF domain was then found to be critical for NEMO modification by SUMO-1 in a manner dependent on the SUMO consensus sites K277 and K309, which was selectively induced by the DNA-damaging agents [39]. N-terminal fusion of SUMO-1 moiety was sufficient to complement the above NF-κB activation defects of the NEMO-ZF mutant, supporting the view that the sole function of the NEMO ZF in this signaling pathway was to permit SUMO-1 modification of NEMO. Importantly, these studies also established the initial evidence to support the notion that sumoylation of NEMO is a conserved event necessary for NF-κB activation by two very different DNA-damaging agents, CPT and VP16.

As most known SUMO-modified proteins are found in the nucleus, the subcellular localization of NEMO was also analyzed. NEMO is normally present in a complex with IKK in the cytoplasm. However, SUMO-1 fusion targeted free NEMO into the nucleus but IKK association prevented this nuclear translocation [39]. Moreover, CPT and VP16 caused nuclear targeting of NEMO, but not IKKβ, in a manner dependent on the ZF domain. Further studies found that protein inhibitor of activated STATy (PIASy) is a SUMO ligase for NEMO, and the PIASy-binding domain of NEMO overlapped with its IKKβ-binding region [62]. Co-expression of NEMO, PIASy, and IKKβ demonstrated that NEMO–PIASy interaction is mutually exclusive with NEMO–IKKβ interaction. These observations supported the idea that only free NEMO, but not IKKβ-bound NEMO, is capable of interacting with PIASy, thereby, explaining why only free NEMO is sumoylated upon genotoxic stress induction.

Janssens et al. [63] corroborated the above findings by demonstrating that p53-induced protein with a death domain (PIDD) and receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1) were also critical for NF-κB activation in Jurkat T and HEK293 cells by promoting NEMO sumoylation in response to DNA-damaging stimuli. RIP1 was previously found to be essential for NF-κB activation by adriamycin, CPT, and IR in mouse embryonic fibroblasts [64]. Interestingly, PIDD and RIP1 formed a nuclear complex with sumoylated NEMO [63]. These findings provided a model in which nuclear PIDD and RIP1 somehow promoted NEMO sumoylation, either by enhancing sumoylation by PIASy (or possibly some other SUMO E3) or protecting sumoylated NEMO from desumoylation by an unknown SUMO protease. Although nuclear DNA damage-induced ATM activation is required for NF-κB activation by IR, CPT, VP16, and Dox in multiple cell lines analyzed, sumoylation of NEMO induced by these agents does not require ATM [39, 62]. Moreover, our recent findings demonstrated that NEMO sumoylation can be induced by different non-genotoxic stress conditions [65] and oxidative stress or a related stress might be at least one signal that leads to sumoylation of NEMO after stimulation with DNA-damaging agents [62].

The convergence of sumoylated NEMO and active ATM in the nucleus

The finding that ATM is required for NF-κB activation by multiple DSB-inducing agents but not for NEMO sumoylation indicated that this nuclear kinase is situated either downstream of the NEMO sumoylation step or in a parallel position to promote downstream activation of IKK in the cytoplasm. How ATM is integrated into the genotoxic stress-induced NF-κB signaling pathway remained unclear. The identification of the ATM substrate in this signaling pathway would greatly clarify the molecular connections. Multiple lines of evidence were obtained to support the view that the nuclear NEMO is this missing piece of the puzzle [40]. It was found that ATM formed a stable complex with NEMO and phosphorylated the S85 residue. A S85A-NEMO mutant could not support NF-κB activation by all of the above DNA-damaging agents tested, but was fully capable of supporting LPS-induced activation in 1.3E2 cells reconstituted with the NEMO mutant. A phospho-S85-NEMO-specific antibody demonstrated that this phosphorylation was not induced in multiple AT cell lines analyzed, but was induced in a manner dependent on ATM in HEK293, 70Z/3, normal peripheral human T, and several other cell systems analyzed. Thus, these results provided compelling evidence that ATM-mediated phosphorylation at S85 of NEMO is a conserved mechanism for these disparate DNA-damaging agents in a wide range of human cell types.

Our previous study provided evidence that NEMO is modified not only by SUMO-1 but also by ubiquitin [39]. The time course analysis suggested that sumoylation of NEMO occurs earlier and transiently before ubiquitination of NEMO is observed. Moreover, although ATM was
dispensable for sumoylation, it was necessary for the subsequent ubiquitination step. Consistent with this idea, inhibition of NEMO sumoylation by PIASy RNAi also led to inhibition of NEMO S85 phosphorylation without interfering with ATM activation [62]. Thus, NEMO S85 phosphorylation seems to be situated downstream of sumoylation but perhaps upstream of ubiquitination. Indeed, S85A–NEMO was not ubiquitinated in response to VP16 in HEK293 cells [40]. Importantly, adding one ubiquitin moiety to this NEMO mutant complemented its activation defect not only by VP16 but also by IR, CPT, and Dox in the 1.3E2 cell system. These findings further suggested that S85 phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of NEMO is also a conserved mechanism of the NF-κB activation pathway induced by these different DNA-damaging agents.

Subcellular localization of S85A–NEMO and Ub–S85A–NEMO indicated that the former NEMO mutant entered the nucleus but did not exit back to the cytoplasm, but the latter entered and exited the nucleus with a similar kinetics with WT-NEMO [40]. Unlike N-terminally SUMO-1 fusion NEMO that localized to the nucleus, Ub–NEMO fusion protein preferentially localized to the cytoplasm even when it was overexpressed, while overexpression of WT–NEMO distributes to both nucleus and cytoplasm. These observations together suggested that monoubiquitination of NEMO targeted NEMO to the cytoplasm, possibly by promoting its nuclear export.

### Assembly of an ATM–NEMO–IKK complex in the cytoplasm

The above study suggested that ubiquitin fusion bypassed the requirement of ATM-dependent phosphorylation of NEMO at S85; however, ATM was found further required for Ub–S85A–NEMO-dependent NF-κB activation in 1.3E2 cells [40]. Thus, ATM appeared to have an additional function beyond phosphorylation of S85 of NEMO in this signaling pathway. Surprisingly, ATM was found in a cytoplasmic IKK complex following stimulation with VP16 in a manner dependent on NEMO export to the cytoplasm. While wild-type NEMO permitted the formation of the ATM-IKK complex, S85A-NEMO could not. Consistent with the reversal of the NF-κB activation defect, Ub–S85A–NEMO also promoted the ATM:IKK assembly. Cell fractionation studies provided evidence that a small fraction of ATM was exported to the cytoplasm following VP16 stimulation, which was blocked upon RNAi-mediated silencing of NEMO expression in HEK293 cells. The cytoplasmic ATM-IKK complex displayed a VP16-inducible IkBα kinase activity in a manner dependent on the S32 and S36 residues of IkBα [40]. This is reminiscent of the findings by Lee et al. [37] and Jung et al. [58] who showed

that immunoprecipitated ATM from IR-exposed cells possessed an IkBα C-terminal kinase activity. The obvious distinction between these ATM activities is that the ATM–IKK complex promotes S32 and S36 phosphorylation, whereas the site(s) of ATM phosphorylation in the earlier study is localized somewhere within the C-terminal domain. Finally, ELKS [a protein rich in glutamine (E), leucine (L), lysine (K), and serine (S)], a protein that was previously implicated in a cytokine-signaling pathway [12], was also found to be critical for ATM-dependent activation of IKK in the cytoplasm as determined by the inhibitory effect of ELKS RNAi in HEK293 cells [40]. These studies, along with the studies by Janssens et al. [63] provide the hypothetical model depicted in Fig. 1.

#### Other DNA lesions and NF-κB activation

Ultraviolet (UV)-C radiation induces two major DNA photolesions of di-thymidine (TpT), a (6–4) photoproduct [T(6–4)T] and a cis-syn cyclobutane thymidine dimer (T=T) [66]. These lesions can cause distortion of the DNA helix, stalled replication, gaps, and misincorporation. An earlier study demonstrated that, among UV wavelengths, 255–275 nm (UV-C) most potently activated HIV-LTR-driven transcription and NF-κB in human skin fibroblasts or HeLa cells [67]. Moreover, a far less UV-C dose (2 J/m²) was required to activate HIV-LTR in cells established from Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) group A (XPA) patient than those derived from a healthy person, which required 20 J/m². Because XPA cells are deficient in the removal of UV-C-induced photoproducts, the amount of nuclear DNA damage seemed to be a critical determinant for HIV-LTR/NF-κB activation by UV-C. This suggested the possible presence of a nucleus-initiated signaling pathway leading to cytoplasmic NF-κB activation. However, a later study demonstrated that HIV-LTR activation by UV-C is mediated by the p38 MAPK pathway, not by NF-κB in HeLa cells [68], suggesting the possibility that the relationship between activations of HIV-LTR and NF-κB by UV-C may not be stringent. Moreover, enucleated HeLa cytoplasts were permissive for UV-C-induced NF-κB activation, demonstrating the lack of the requirement for the nuclear DNA damage as a signaling intermediate [69].

These discrepant concepts were in part resolved by the observations from Bender et al. [70] who showed that NF-κB activation induced by UV–C irradiation consisted of two different mechanisms in human skin fibroblasts. Early IkBα degradation at 30 min to approximately 6 h was shown to involve UV–C-induced oxidative stress but not DNA damage and leads to inactivation of receptor tyrosine phosphatase at the plasma membrane. These phosphatases chronically keep receptor tyrosine kinases in check; thus,
J Mol Med (2007) 85:1187–1202

Fig. 1 NF-κB activation pathways. **a** In the “classical” or “canonical” pathway, the prototypical NF-κB complex, p65/p50 heterodimers, is associated with IκBα, which sequester p65/p50 as latent form in the cytoplasm. In response to stimulus such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interleukin-1 (IL-1), B cell or T cell antigens, and growth factors, activating signals are transduced through responsive receptors (TNF-receptor, Toll-like receptors, IL-1 receptor, etc.), leading to the activation of the IKK complex. Activated IKK, mainly IKKβ, in turn phosphorylates IκBα at Ser32/36. Phosphorylated IκBα provides a docking site for β-TrCP-SCF complex that promotes IκBα ubiquitination and 26S proteasome-dependent degradation. Free p65/p50 heterodimers then translocate into nucleus and bind to κB consensus sites, and activates transcription of its target genes. **b** NF-κB can also be activated by the “alternative” or “noncanonical” pathway in response to lymphotoxin β (LTβ), B-cell activating factor (BAFF), and CD40 treatment. The inactive NF-κB heterodimer in this pathway consists of RelB and p100. Signals are transduced through the cognate cell surface receptor to activate IKKα homodimers via NF-κB inducing kinase (NIK). Activated IKKα phosphorylates p100 at C-terminal Ser865/869 and induces β-TrCP-mediated p100 ubiquitination, which leads to processing by the 26S proteasome, yielding the N-terminal p52 portion. The resulting RelB/p52 heterodimers then translocate into nucleus and activate target gene expression. **c** DSB inducers such as IR and topoisomerase inhibitors initiate two branch signals. Some stress signal(s) (unknown whether or not DSB dependent or -independent) promote NEMO sumoylation at Lys277/309 via the SUMO ligase PIASy. NEMO sumoylation is also enhanced by p53-induced protein with death domain (PIDD) and receptor interacting protein kinase 1 (RIP1). DSBs causes activation of the nuclear kinase ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) by promoting its auto-phosphorylation and homodimer dissociation. Activated ATM associates with NEMO and phosphorylates Ser85 of NEMO, which, in turn, promotes NEMO mono-ubiquitination. Ubiquitination promotes nuclear export of NEMO. ATM appears to remain associated with NEMO and translocates into the cytoplasm, where ELKS joins the ATM:NEMO complex and facilitates ATM-dependent IKK activation. Activated IKK phosphorylates IκBα and leads to the proteasome-dependent degradation of IκBα protein, which releases p65/p50 heterodimer for nuclear translocation and regulation of target gene transcription.
oxidative stress-mediated inactivation of the former leads to the spontaneous activation of the latter in a ligand-independent fashion. While the mechanism of NF-κB activation by receptor tyrosine kinases is incompletely understood, an IKK-independent mechanism was proposed. In contrast, IkBα degradation and NF-κB activation induced at later time points (15–20 h after UV-C irradiation) were proposed to be mediated by caspase-1 activation and cleavage of IL-1β precursor, release of IL-1β, and autocrine/paracrine action of this cytokine. At this stage, IKK activity was required [70]. This later activation requires much less UV-C dose in XPA fibroblasts than normal ones, thus, indicating the likely involvement of DNA damage as an intermediate signaling step. A recent study also showed defective NF-κB activation in XPC and XPD fibroblasts that are defective for the repair enzyme necessary for the removal of T=T dimers [71]. This study suggested the possibility that XPC/D proteins might act upstream of NF-κB in response to UV-C. Similar to the above finding, IKK activity could not be detected in an in vitro kinase assay after UV-C treatment of HeLa cells, and an IkBα mutant with S32/S36 mutated to alanines to ablate IKK-dependent phosphorylation was still degraded in a proteasome dependent manner in this cell system [59].

However, similar to the case with IR, the mechanisms of NF-κB activation by UV-C appear to be more complex depending on the cell type analyzed. For example, Kato et al. [72] recently demonstrated that IkBα was inducibly phosphorylated by Casein kinase 2 (CK2) at the C-terminal sites in response to UV-C irradiation. CK2 activation was mediated by p38 and depletion of CK2 with siRNA abrogated UV-C-induced IkBα degradation in HeLa cells. In contrast, NF-κB activation upon UV-C treatment was found to be absent in IKKα/β-double knockout MEF cells and also abolished by the expression of S32/36A-IkBα mutant in the 70Z/3 pre-B cell line [61]. Moreover, a small amount of phosphorylated IkBα was detected in the presence of F-box-deleted β-TrCP, which served as a phospho-IkBα trap, in UV-C-stimulated HEK293 cells, although an in vitro IKK kinase assay did not reveal inducible kinase activity from any of these cell types. Recently, Wu et al. [51] showed that NF-κB activation by UV-C involves inhibition of the IkBα translation through protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), leading to an imbalance of NF-κB and IkBα protein synthesis, resulting in excess free NF-κB in MEF and MCF-7 cells. This degradation of IkBα was dependent on the basal IKK activity and dependent on intact S32 and S36 residues. Their finding explained how IkBα degradation can be induced in a manner dependent on S32 and S36 without an increase in detectable IKK kinase activity. It may be more complex than this, as basal IkBα degradation was previously shown not to depend on S32 and S36 and

polyubiquitination in Cos-7 cells [73]. Furthermore, we found that PIASy is critical for UV-C-induced NF-κB activation in HEK293 cells [62]. These findings, thus, suggest that in several cell systems, NF-κB activation by UV-C may also require an IKK-dependent mechanism in a manner more complex than the canonical IKK activation mechanism.

In contrast to UV-C, longer-wavelength UV irradiation (UV-B and UV-A) does not strongly induce thymidine photolesions but rather induce different cell stresses, including oxidative stress [74]. Because UV-C does not penetrate through the ozone layer, UV-A and UV-B are primarily implicated in skin cancer development in humans [75]. It was shown that UV-B caused NF-κB activation in cell-free cytosolic extracts isolated from human epidermoid carcinoma cells independent of chromosomal DNA damage [76]. Later, TNFR1 was shown to be critical for NF-κB activation through association with TRAF2 in response to UV-B treatment of keratinocytes, which was independent of ligand stimulation [77]. Furthermore, Reelfs et al. [78] demonstrated that exposure of human skin fibroblasts to UV-A resulted not only in immediate activation of NF-κB through degradation of IkBα protein but also resulted in a prolonged, iron-dependent, IkBα-independent activation of NF-κB. The authors proposed that the major targets of these effects were nuclear membranes, which served as a target for iron-mediated lipid peroxidation. Collectively, the nuclear DNA damage appears negligible for NF-κB activation by UV-A and UV-B, while the UV-C-induced activation may or may not involve nuclear DNA lesions depending on the cell systems analyzed.

### Biological roles of NF-κB activation by DNA-damaging agents

What are biological functions of NF-κB activation in response to DNA-damaging agents? Jung et al. [36] initially proposed that NF-κB contributed to the high radiosensitivity in SV40-transformed AT fibroblast cells. However, more recent evidence indicates that NF-κB activation frequently causes radioresistance, rather than radiosensitization. Wang et al. [79] found that inhibition of NF-κB activation by the stable expression of the ‘super-repressor’ IkBα mutant caused radiosensitization in HT1080 fibrosarcoma cell line when measured by the colony-formation assay. This finding has also been confirmed in the LOVO colorectal cancer cell line in vitro and in tumor volume reduction of its xenograft in vivo [80]. The pro-survival function of NF-κB was also seen in the A172, MO54, T94 human glioma cell lines, 3SB mouse lymphoma cell line, UM-SCC-9 head and neck carcinoma cell line, HeLa cells, HK18 human keratinocyte line, and the 70Z/3-derived
1.3E2 cell system with various doses of IR treatments [22, 40]. Moreover, the survival-promoting activity of NF-κB was observed after treatments with other cancer therapeutic agents such as CPT, VP16, and daunorubicin [15, 46, 47, 81, 82]. All of these results collectively indicated that NF-κB activation inhibits cell death induced by DNA-damaging anticancer drugs and radiation and, therefore, facilitates malignant cell survival and growth. Consistent with this view, NF-κB can augment expression of many antiapoptotic genes, such as Bcl-XL, c-FLIP, cIAPs, XIAP, Gadd45β, and Mn-SOD [83]. These genes can antagonize both intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of cell death. A recent unbiased microarray analysis demonstrated that NF-κB was the major antiapoptotic factor in IR-exposed mouse lymph nodes [84].

However, NF-κB does not always function as a cell survival factor. For example, NF-κB could activate proapoptotic genes, such as FAS after VP16 or UV exposure of Jurkat cells [85], and DR4, DR5, and Fas in MDA-MB-486 breast and DU145 prostate cancer cells exposed to retinoid 3-Cl-AHPC [86]. Recently, Perkins et al. found that tumor repressor p14ARF could induce phosphorylation of T505 within the p65 transactivation domain, which in turn switched p65 from a transcription activator to a repressor of the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-XL in U2-OS cells. The T505 phosphorylation is mediated by Chk1 and its upstream kinase ATR in U2-OS and Hs68 E2F1-ER cells [87]. The same group also found that, instead of transcriptional activation, the chromatin-bound p65 complex repressed expression of an anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-XL through association with histone acetylase, although UV-C and daunorubicin treatment promoted p65 nuclear translocation and DNA binding in U2-OS, Saos2, and MEF cells [88]. While both p14ARF and UV-C/daunorubicin induce the switch of p65 from a transcriptional activator to repressor, the latter does not seem to involve ATR/Chk1-mediated p65 phosphorylation in U2-OS cells [89]. Further, they found that the cancer therapeutic agent cisplatin could mimic the regulation of p14ARF on p65 to repress the transcription of Bcl-XL, but not XIAP, while another chemotherapeutic drug VP16 activated NF-κB and induced expression of both Bcl-XL and XIAP in U2OS cells [89]. Thus, Bcl-XL appears to be a critical anti-apoptotic gene downregulated by p65-mediated repression, rather than activation, in response to certain DNA-damaging agents in the above cell systems. Whether the pro-apoptotic activity induced by p65 phosphorylation is a conserved mechanism for different DNA-damaging agents in different cell types remains to be confirmed. Table 1 attempts to summarize some of the recent studies that implicate NF-κB's pro-survival or pro-death roles in different cellular systems in response to different genotoxic stimuli. At present, the unique features that distinguish the outcomes of NF-κB

activation in terms of promoting or inhibiting cell survival upon genotoxic agent exposure remain elusive.

### NF-κB and cancer therapy

Weinberg and Hanahan have recently summarized common features involved in human cancer development and progression: self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evading apoptosis, limitless replicative potential, sustained angiogenesis, and tissue invasion and metastasis [90]. NF-κB has been shown to contribute to all of these cancer-promoting cellular processes, at least under specific settings (recently reviewed in [1, 86, 91–93]). Numerous human cancer types have been shown to display constitutive NF-κB activity, as evidenced by nuclear localization of the NF-κB proteins, constitutive NF-κB DNA-binding activity, or by the pattern of gene expression consistent with NF-κB activation [91, 92]. Inhibition of constitutive NF-κB activity in various cancer cell types can cause cell-cycle arrest, cell death, and sensitization to chemo- and radiation therapeutic agents [15, 94]. In addition, the gene encoding the multi-drug resistance 1 (MDR1), which contributes to cancer drug resistance through blocking drug uptake, was found to contain a NF-κB consensus binding site, and NF-κB could activate MDR1 expression in vitro [95]. In the tumor cells lacking or with minimal constitutive NF-κB activity, genotoxic stress-induced NF-κB activation may promote the development of drug resistance. Such activation could also further enhance the survival of tumor cells with constitutive NF-κB activity. These multiple roles of NF-κB in promoting tumor development and drug resistance provide the rationales for targeting NF-κB activation pathways for the development of anticancer drugs.

Multiple different steps in NF-κB signaling pathways could potentially serve as anticancer drug development, including proteasome-dependent degradation of IκB proteins. Bortezomib/PS-341/Velcade is the first FDA-approved proteasome inhibitor for the treatment of relapsed multiple myeloma patients, and a clinical trial is currently under way to investigate its effects in mono- and combining treatment of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, solid tumors, and earlier presentations of myeloma [96]. The anticancer action of this drug is believed to include at least in part inhibition of NF-κB activation by perturbing both constitutive and signal-induced IκB degradation. In one study, pretreatment of Velcade before chemotherapy sensitized colorectal cancer cell lines to irinotecan treatment by inhibiting NF-κB activation and augmenting apoptosis [97]. It has been shown that a combination of Velcade and irinotecan effectively induced apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation in BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer xenografts [98]. Other

Table 1 Effects of NF-κB activation on cell survival after genotoxic agent treatment

| DNA-damaging agents (dose) | Cell line/animal model | Assay used for cell death determination | Effect to cell death increase (+) or decrease (-) | Reference |
|---------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| UVB (230 J/m²)/UVB+TNFα   | Keratinocytes          | Nuclear morphology                      | -65/-75%                                         | [104]     |
| UVC (10 J/m²)             | MEF and A431 cells     | TUNEL                                   | -65/-50%                                         | [105]     |
| UVB                       | Mouse keratinocyte Pam 212 cells |                                      |                                                  | [106]     |
| UVC (40 J/m²)             | SW 480 cells           | Annexin-V staining                      | -40%                                             | [107]     |
| UV (60 J/m²), IR (2 Gy), Cisplatin (1 μM) | LU 1205 cells | 4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), nuclear morphology | -75%; -50 and -60%, respectively | [108]     |
| UVB (500-1000 J/m²)       | Skin specific IkBa 32/36A mouse skin | PI staining, flow cytometry            | -50%                                             | [109]     |
| UVB (40-100 J/m²), Etoposide, Teniposide | Jurkat | PI staining, flow cytometry            | +2~4-folds                                       | [85]      |
| UV (300 J/m²)             | Normal keratinocytes HaCaT cells | PI staining, flow cytometry            | -90%                                             | [110]     |
| UVC (10 J/m²)             | MEF                    | Hoechst 33258 staining                  | +1.5~6-folds                                     | [111]     |
| UVB (350 J/m²)+IL-1       | KB cells               | Cell death detection ELISA              | +40~50%                                          | [112]     |
| UVB (600 J/m²)            | NHK, HaCaT cells       | MTT assay                               | +2.5-folds                                       | [113]     |
| UVC (40 J/m²), Doxorubicin, Daunorubicin | MEF | Trypan blue staining                   | +20%                                             | [88]      |
| UVC (50 J/m²)             | HeLa cells             | Annexin-V staining                      | +2.5-folds                                       | [114]     |
| UVC (60 J/m²)             | LU 1205 cells          | PI staining, flow cytometry             | +                                                | [115]     |
| UVA (250 KJ/m²), UVB (300 J/m²), Cisplatin | KB cells | Apoptosis ELISA                        | +30~50%                                          | [116]     |
| IR (15 Gy)                | Mouse lymphoid tissue  | Microarray analysis                     | -                                                | [84]      |
| IR (10 Gy)                | 267B1/K-ras cells      | MTT assay                               | -60%                                             | [117]     |
| IR (0–12 Gy)              | MCF 7 cells            | Clonogenic assay                        | -5-fold                                          | [118]     |
| IR (5 Gy)                 | Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) tumor | Annexin-V staining, FACS | -                                                | [119]     |
| IR (5 Gy)                 | MCF-7/ErbB2 cells      | Clonogenic assay                        | -5~10-fold                                       | [120]     |
| IR (10 Gy)                | ARO cells              | Clonogenic assay                        | -10-fold                                         | [121]     |
| IR (5–20 Gy)              | B88 cells              | MTT assay                               | -50%                                             | [122]     |
| IR (0–12 Gy)              | HK18 cells             | Clonogenic assay                        | -5~10-fold                                       | [123]     |
| IR (0–15 Gy)              | U1-Mel cells           | Clone forming assay                     | -10~1,000-fold                                   | [124]     |
| IR (0–3 Gy)               | 1.3E2 cells expressing human NEMO | Clonogenic assay | -20~50%                                          | [40]      |
| IR                        | Saos-2 cells           |                                          | -                                                | [125]     |
| IR (5 Gy)                 | SKOV3.ip1 cells        | MTT assay                               | -40~60%                                          | [126]     |
| Cisplatin                 | U2-OS cells            |                                          | +                                                | [127]     |
| CPT                       | Cultured cortical neuron | Nuclear counts                         | +25%                                             | [128]     |
| Etoposide, Teniposide, and UV | Jurkat T lymphocytes | PI stain, FACS                          | +20~40%                                          | [85]      |
| CPT, Etoposide, Thapsigargin | HEK 293 | FACS                                  | -40~60%                                          | [129]     |
| SN-38+TNF                 | MSTO-221H, IST-MES1, IST-MES2, MPP89, H28, H513, H2052, and H290 cells | Clonegenic assay, FACS, nucleic morphology, DNA ladder | -                                                | [130]     |
| Doxycycline/superoxide    | HCT116 and HEK293 cells | Clonegenic assay                        | +                                                | [131]     |

J Mol Med (2007) 85:1187–1202

Table 1 (continued)

| DNA-damaging agents (dose) | Cell line/animal model | Assay used for cell death determination | Effect to cell death increase (+) or decease (−) | Reference |
|----------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------|
| G/GO (Oxidative stress)     | AR42J cells           | Trypan blue staining                   | −65~85%                                     | [132]     |
| CPT                         | Embryonic hippocampal neuron | Counting viable neurons in premarked fields | −60%                                       | [133]     |
| Ara-C                       | HuT-78 and Jurkat cells | Lipid peroxidation, caspase activation, cytotoxicity, Bcl-2 degradation, and DNA fragmentation, MTT assay | −50%                                     | [134]     |
| BCNU, carboplatin, TNF-α, or SN-38 | U87 and U251 cells | TUNEL                                  | —                                           | [135]     |
| Doxorubicin                 | Mouse liver           | Tissue slide, liver cell morphology    | —                                           | [136]     |
| Doxorubicin, Melphalan      | Multiple myeloma cells | —                                      | −50~80%                                     | [137]     |
| Oxygen-glucose deprivation (oxidative stress) | Cerebral endothelial cells | MTT assay                              | −50%                                     | [138]     |
| Etoposide                   | A818-4, PancTu-1 and PT45-P1 cells | Annexin V-staining, FACS              | −50%                                     | [139]     |
| Gemcitabine                 | H157 cells            | DNA fragment                          | −60~90%                                     | [140]     |
| SN38, TNF                   | HeLa cells            | PI staining, subdiploid DNA analysis   | −30~60%                                     | [141]     |
| SN38, VP16                  | NSCLC-3 and NSCLC-5 cells | Soft agar clonogenic assay          | No Effect                                   | [142]     |
| Daunomycin                  | HCT116 cells          | Colorimetric WST-1 test               | No Effect                                   | [143]     |
| CPT                         | 70Z-CD14 cells        | FACS                                  | −50%                                     | [47]      |
| Triphenyltin chloride       | HL-60 cells           | +                                      |                                             | [144]     |

1.3E2 Mouse NEMO-deficient pre-B cells, 267Bl human prostate epithelial cells; 70Z-CD14 mouse pre-B cells stably expressing CD14, A431 human epithelial carcinoma cell line, A818-4 human pancreatic carcinoma cell line, AR42J rat pancreatic tumor cells, ARO thyroid cells, B88 human oral carcinoma cells, H157 nonsmall cell lung cancer cells, HeLa human cervical cancer cells, HaCaT human keratinocyte cell line, HCT116 human colorectal cancer cells, HL-60 human promyelocytic leukemia cell line, HUT-78 human T cell lymphoma cells, HK18 human keratinocyte line, Jurkat human T cell lymphoma cells, KB human epidermoid carcinoma cells, Lu1205 human melanoma cell line, MCF7 human breast cancer cells, MSTO-221H/IST-MESI/IST-MES2/MPP89/H28/H513/H2052/H290 human mesothelioma cell lines, NHK normal human keratinocytes, NSCLC-3/NSCLC-5 human nonsmall cell lung carcinoma cells, Pam212 mouse epidermal keratinocyte cell line, PancTuI human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line, PT45-P1 human pancreatic cancer cell line, Saos-2 osteoblast, SKOV3.ip1 human ovarian cancer cell line, SW480 human colon adenocarcinoma cell line, UI-Mel human melanoma cells, U2OS osteosarcoma cell, U87/U251 human astrocytoma cell line

NF-κB inhibiting drugs under development include IKK inhibitors (reviewed in [86, 94, 99]). Anti-inflammatory steroids (e.g., glucocorticoids), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., aspirin), and immunomodulatory drugs (e.g., thalidomide) have all been shown to attenuate NF-κB activation [99]. Recently, Gilmore and Herskovitch have complied a list of inhibitors that block NF-κB pathways mounting to 785 and more [100]. Clearly, there is a great interest in identification and development of inhibitors targeting NF-κB pathways.

Perspectives

The expanding literature has established the strong correlation between NF-κB and development of certain cancer types in model organisms and, thus, implicates a similar role in different human cancer types [92]. Additional studies suggest that NF-κB might be one major culprit contributing to cancer therapeutic resistance [15, 92]. Further understanding of the mechanisms and roles of NF-κB activation in tumorigenesis and resistance to cancer therapy will likely have significant impact on the future strategies to target NF-κB in cancer therapy.

Although there are many different mechanisms implicated in NF-κB activation by different genotoxic agents in different cell systems, a conserved mechanism has emerged with respect to multiple DSB-inducing agents. However, there are still many questions that remain to be resolved for this signaling pathway. How do genotoxic agents induce sumoylation of NEMO in a manner dependent on the ZF domain? How are PIDD and RIP1 integrated into the NEMO sumoylation step? What is the SUMO protease for NEMO? How is sumoylated NEMO targeted to ATM? Why is only SUMO-1, and not the other SUMO paralogs (SUMO-2/3), involved in NEMO sumoylation? What is the
ubiquitin ligase and conjugating enzyme that mediate ubiquitination of NEMO after S85 phosphorylation? What is the putative nuclear export receptor involved in the export of NEMO, and how is this export regulated? Is NEMO directly involved in the export of ATM? How does ATM activate IKK in a manner dependent on ELKS? What is the cytoplasmic substrate of ATM required for IKK activation? Is this signaling pathway conserved in different cell systems beyond the cell systems that have been analyzed so far, especially under the in vivo setting? Questions regarding the physiological significance of this pathway include: Does NEMO modulate ATM functions in the nucleus outside of NF-κB signaling? Does NEMO-associated ATM have additional substrates in the cytoplasm beyond the NF-κB pathway? Finally, what are the physiological signals, if such signals exist, that employ NEMO sumoylation, S85 phosphorylation, and putative cytoplasmic ATM to activate NF-κB in vivo? Answers to these and additional questions will not only greatly expand our current knowledge of cell signaling mechanisms in general and nuclear-to-cytoplasmic signaling in particular, but also provide avenues (as mentioned above) to selectively attenuate NF-κB activation by DNA-damaging anticancer agents to induce cancer cell death without compromising other important functions of this ubiquitous transcription factor family in normal cells.

Besides DSB inducers (i.e., IR, VP16, CPT, and Dox), other anti-cancer drugs or genotoxic agents that induce replication stress, such as hydroxyurea, aphidicolin, and fluorouracil, also damage chromosome DNA by DNA crosslinking, alkylation, or replication fork arresting. How do these replication stressors activate NF-κB? The replication stressors have been shown to principally activate ATR, rather than ATM [101], and ATR plays an important role in promoting p65 Thr505 phosphorylation in response to the treatments with cisplatin [89]. Because replication stress can lead to the indirect formation of DSB [102], it is also possible that an ATM-dependent mechanism plays a role under certain cellular settings.

As an adjuvant of conventional radio- and chemotherapy, inhibitors of NF-κB activation offer an attractive strategy to enhance treatment of many different malignancies. Due to the critical role of NF-κB in the regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses, there is a theoretical risk of severe immunodeficiency with a long-term use of general NF-κB inhibitors [103]. Thus, targeting specific events or mechanisms that are selectively employed to activate NF-κB in response to genotoxic anticancer agents would likely improve the specificity of cancer targeting without compromising other physiological functions of this important family of transcription factors in normal cells. Because the SUMO–ATM pathway described above appears to be

conserved for many different genotoxic agents frequently employed in the clinical settings, drugs that target the conserved steps upstream of IKK are expected to enhance anticancer effects without compromising other important NF-κB functions. Although PIASy has other substrates, this SUMO ligase might serve as a drug target to selectively prevent NF-κB activation by different genotoxic anticancer agents without interfering with the canonical NF-κB activation pathways in normal cells. Similarly, the yet-to-be identified ubiquitin ligase required for NEMO ubiquitination in response to genotoxic stimuli might also prove to be a potential anticancer drug target. It is also critical to consider that, in certain cancer settings, inhibition of NF-κB activation may be counterproductive because NF-κB might promote, rather than prevent, cell death in response to chemotherapeutic agents as described above.

Given the recent advancement and interest in understanding NF-κB activation by various genotoxic stress agents, rapid progress in further understanding of different faces of NF-κB signaling is expected, and drugs that interfere with them may be developed in the future as novel anticancer agents.

Acknowledgment We would like to apologize to the many researchers whose contributions were not covered or cited due to limitation of the space or our oversight. Related research in author’s laboratory is supported by NIH (R01CA077474 to S.M.), and a Special Fellowship from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society to Z.W.

## References

1. Karin M (2006) Nuclear factor-kappaB in cancer development and progression. Nature 441:431–436
2. Perkins ND (2007) Integrating cell-signalling pathways with NF-kappaB and IKK function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:49–62
3. Ghosh S, Karin M (2002) Missing pieces in the NF-kappaB puzzle. Cell 109(Suppl):S81–S96
4. Ghosh S, May MJ, Kopp EB (1998) NF-kappa B and Rel proteins: evolutionarily conserved mediators of immune responses. Annu Rev Immunol 16:225–260
5. Li Q, Verma IM (2002) NF-kappaB regulation in the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 2:725–734
6. Hayden MS, Ghosh S (2004) Signaling to NF-kappaB. Genes Dev 18:2195–2224
7. Huxford T, Huang DB, Malek S, Ghosh G (1998) The crystal structure of the IkappaBalpha/NF-kappaB complex reveals mechanisms of NF-kappaB inactivation. Cell 95:759–770
8. Huang TT, Miyamoto S (2001) Postrepression activation of NF-kappaB requires the amino-terminal nuclear export signal specific to IkappaBalpha. Mol Cell Biol 21:4737–4747
9. Zandi E, Rothwarf DM, Delhase M, Hayakawa M, Karin M (1997) The IkappaB kinase complex (IKK) contains two kinase subunits, IKKalpha and IKKbeta, necessary for IkappaB phosphorylation and NF-kappaB activation. Cell 91:243–252
10. Yamaoka S, Courtois G, Bessia C, Whiteside ST, Weil R, Agou F, Kirk HE, Kay RJ, Israel A (1998) Complementation cloning of NEMO, a component of the IkappaB kinase complex essential for NF-kappaB activation. Cell 93:1231–1240
11. Chen G, Cao P, Goeddel DV (2002) TNF-induced recruitment and activation of the IKK complex require Cdc37 and Hsp90. Mol Cell 9:401–410
12. Sigala JLD, Bottero V, Young DB, Shevchenko A, Mercurio F, Verma IM (2004) Activation of transcription factor NF-kappaB requires ELKS, an IkappaB kinase regulatory subunit. Science 304:1963–1967
13. Chen ZJ, Parent L, Maniatis T (1996) Site-specific phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha by a novel ubiquitination-dependent protein kinase activity. Cell 84:853–862
14. Chen ZJ (2005) Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-kappaB pathway. Nat Cell Biol 7:758–765
15. Baldwin AS (2001) Control of oncogenesis and cancer therapy resistance by the transcription factor NF-kappaB. J Clin Invest 107:241–246
16. Karin M, Ben-Neriah Y (2000) Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination: the control of NF-[kappa]B activity. Annu Rev Immunol 18:621–663
17. Karin M, Lin A (2002) NF-kappaB at the crossroads of life and death. Nat Immunol 3:221–227
18. Bonizzi G, Karin M (2004) The two NF-kappaB activation pathways and their role in innate and adaptive immunity. Trends Immunol 25:280–288
19. Xiao G, Harhaj EW, Sun SC (2001) NF-kappaB-inducing kinase regulates the processing of NF-kappaB2 p100. Mol Cell 7:401–409
20. Shiloh Y (2006) The ATM-mediated DNA-damage response: taking shape. Trends Biochem Sci 31:402–410
21. Shiloh Y (2003) ATM and related protein kinases: safeguarding genome integrity. Nat Rev Cancer 3:155–168
22. Criswell T, Leskov K, Miyamoto S, Luo G, Boothman DA (2003) Transcription factors activated in mammalian cells after clinically relevant doses of ionizing radiation. Oncogene 22:5813–5827
23. Lisby M, Barlow JH, Burgess RC, Rothstein R (2004) Choreography of the DNA damage response: spatiotemporal relationships among checkpoint and repair proteins. Cell 118:699–713
24. Savitsky K, Bar-Shira A, Gilad S, Rotman G, Ziv Y, Vanagaite L, Tagle DA, Smith S, Uziel T, Sfez S et al (1995) A single ataxia telangiectasia gene with a product similar to PI-3 kinase. Science 268:1749–1753
25. Lavin MF, Shiloh Y (1997) The genetic defect in ataxia-telangiectasia. Annu Rev Immunol 15:177–202
26. Bakkenist CJ, Kastan MB (2003) DNA damage activates ATM through intermolecular autophosphorylation and dimer dissociation. Nature 421:499–506
27. Falck J, Coates J, Jackson SP (2005) Conserved modes of recruitment of ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs to sites of DNA damage. Nature 434:605–611
28. Kitagawa R, Kastan MB (2005) The ATM-dependent DNA damage signaling pathway. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 70:99–109
29. Kozlov SV, Graham ME, Peng C, Chen P, Robinson PJ, Lavin MF (2006) Involvement of novel autophosphorylation sites in ATM activation. EMBO J 25:3504–3514
30. Sun Y, Jiang X, Chen S, Fernandes N, Price BD (2005) A role for the Tip60 histone acetyltransferase in the acetylation and activation of ATM. PNAS 102:13182–13187
31. Pellegrini M, Celeste A, Difilippantonio S, Guo R, Wang W, Feigenbaum L, Nussenzweig A (2006) Autophosphorylation at serine 1987 is dispensable for murine Atm activation in vivo.
32. Rogakou EP, Pilch DR, Orr AH, Ivanova VS, Bonner WM (1998) DNA double-stranded breaks induce histone H2AX phosphorylation on serine 139. J Biol Chem 273:5858–5868
33. Rogakou EP, Boon C, Redon C, Bonner WM (1999) Megabase chromatin domains involved in DNA double-strand breaks in vivo. J Cell Biol 146:905–916
34. McGowan CH, Russell P (2004) The DNA damage response: sensing and signaling. Curr Opin Cell Biol 16:629–633
35. Jung M, Dritschilo A (1996) Signal transduction and cellular responses to ionizing radiation. Semin Radiat Oncol 6:268–272
36. Jung M, Zhang Y, Lee S, Dritschilo A (1995) Correction of radiation sensitivity in ataxia telangiectasia cells by a truncated Ikappa B-alpha. Science 268:1619–1621
37. Lee SJ, Dimtchev A, Lavin MF, Dritschilo A, Jung M (1998) A novel ionizing radiation-induced signaling pathway that activates the transcription factor NF-kappaB. Oncogene 17:1821–1826
38. Li N, Banin S, Ouyang H, Li GC, Courtois G, Shiloh Y, Karin M, Rotman G (2001) ATM is required for Ikappa B kinase (IKK) activation in response to DNA double strand breaks. J Biol Chem 276:8898–8903
39. Huang TT, Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Wu ZH, Miyamoto S (2003) Sequential modification of NEMO/IKKgamma by SUMO-1 and ubiquitin mediates NF-kappaB activation by genotoxic stress. Cell 115:565–576
40. Wu ZH, Shi Y, Tibbetts RS, Miyamoto S (2006) Molecular linkage between the kinase ATM and NF-kappaB signaling in response to genotoxic stimuli. Science 311:1141–1146
41. Basu S, Rosenzweig KR, Youmell M, Price BD (1998) The DNA-dependent protein kinase participates in the activation of NF kappa B following DNA damage. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 247:79–83
42. Chan DW, Gately DP, Urban S, Galloway AM, Lees-Miller SP, Yen T, Allalunis-Turner J (1998) Lack of correlation between ATM protein expression and tumour cell radiosensitivity. Int J Radiat Biol 74:217–224
43. Wang Y, Meng A, Lang H, Brown SA, Konopa JL, Kindy MS, Schmiedt RA, Thompson JS, Zhou D (2004) Activation of nuclear factor kappaB In vivo selectively protects the murine small intestine against ionizing radiation-induced damage. Cancer Res 64:6240–6246
44. Zhou D, Brown SA, Yu T, Chen G, Barve S, Kang BC, Thompson JS (1999) A high dose of ionizing radiation induces tissue-specific activation of nuclear factor-kappaB in vivo. Radiat Res 151:703–709
45. Raju U, Gumin GJ, Tofilon PJ (2000) Radiation-induced transcription factor activation in the rat cerebral cortex. Int J Radiat Biol 76:1045–1053
46. Wang CY, Cusack JC Jr, Liu R, Baldwin AS Jr (1999) Control of inducible chemoresistance: enhanced anti-tumor therapy through increased apoptosis by inhibition of NF-kappaB. Nat Med 5:412–417
47. Huang TT, Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Seufzer BJ, Shumway SD, Kurama T, Boothman DA, Miyamoto S (2000) NF-kappaB activation by camptothecin. A linkage between nuclear DNA damage and cytoplasmic signaling events. J Biol Chem 275:9501–9509
48. Piret B, Piette J (1996) Topoisomerase poisons activate the transcription factor NF-kappaB in ACH-2 and CEM cells. Nucleic Acids Res 24:4242–4248
49. Piret B, Schoonbroodt S, Piette J (1999) The ATM protein is required for sustained activation of NF-kappaB following DNA damage. Oncogene 18:2261–2271
50. Panta GR, Kaur S, Cavin LG, Cortes ML, Mercurio F, Lothstein L, Sweatman TW, Israel M, Arsura M (2004) ATM and the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase activate NF-{kappa}B through a common MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase/p90rsk signaling pathway in response to distinct forms of DNA damage. Mol Cell Biol 24:1823–1835

51. Wu S, Tan M, Hu Y, Wang JL, Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ (2004) Ultraviolet light activates NFkappaB through translational inhibition of IkappaBalpha synthesis. J Biol Chem 279:34898–34902
52. Brach MA, Hass R, Sherman ML, Gunji H, Weichselbaum R, Kufe D (1991) Ionizing radiation induces expression and binding activity of the nuclear factor kappa B. J Clin Invest 88:691–695
53. Uckun FM, Schieven GL, Tuel-Ahlgren LM, Dibirdik I, Myers DE, Ledbetter JA, Song CW (1993) Tyrosine phosphorylation is a mandatory proximal step in radiation-induced activation of the protein kinase C signaling pathway in human B-lymphocyte precursors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:252–256
54. Mohan N, Meltz ML (1994) Induction of nuclear factor kappa B after low-dose ionizing radiation involves a reactive oxygen intermediate signaling pathway. Radiat Res 140:97–104
55. Bian X, McAllister-Lucas LM, Shao F, Schumacher KR, Feng Z, Porter AG, Castle VP, Opipari AW Jr (2001) NF-kappa B activation mediates doxorubicin-induced cell death in N-type neuroblastoma cells. J Biol Chem 276:48921–48929
56. Boland MP, Foster SJ, O'Neill LA (1997) Daunorubicin activates NFkappaB and induces kappaB-dependent gene expression in HL-60 promyelocytic and Jurkat T lymphoma cells. J Biol Chem 272:12952–12960
57. Russell JS, Raju U, Gumin GJ, Lang FF, Wilson DR, Huet T, Tofilon PJ (2002) Inhibition of radiation-induced nuclear factor-kappaB activation by an anti-Ras single-chain antibody fragment: lack of involvement in radiosensitization. Cancer Res 62:2318–2326
58. Jung M, Kondratyev A, Lee SA, Dimtchev A, Dritschilo A (1997) ATM gene product phosphorylates Ikappa B-alpha. Cancer Res 57:24–27
59. Li N, Karin M (1998) Ionizing radiation and short wavelength UV activate NF-kappaB through two distinct mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:13012–13017
60. Bottero V, Busuttil V, Loubat A, Magne N, Fischel JL, Milano G, Peyron JF (2001) Activation of nuclear factor kappaB through the IKK complex by the topoisomerase poisons SN38 and doxorubicin: a brake to apoptosis in HeLa human carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 61:7785–7791
61. Huang TT, Feinberg SL, Suryanarayanan S, Miyamoto S (2002) The zinc finger domain of NEMO is selectively required for NF-kappa B activation by UV radiation and topoisomerase inhibitors. Mol Cell Biol 22:5813–5825
62. Mabb AM, Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Miyamoto S (2006) PIASy mediates NEMO sumoylation and NF-kappaB activation in response to genotoxic stress. Nat Cell Biol 8:986–993
63. Janssens S, Tinel A, Lippens S, Tschopp J (2005) PIDD mediates NF-kappaB activation in response to DNA damage. Cell 123:1079–1092
64. Hur GM, Lewis J, Yang Q, Lin Y, Nakano H, Nedospasov S, Liu ZG (2003) The death domain kinase RIP has an essential role in DNA damage-induced NF-kappa B activation. Genes Dev 17:873–882
65. Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Nakamura Y, Seufzer BJ, Miyamoto S (2006) NF-kappaB activation by combinations of NEMO SUMOylation and ATM activation stresses in the absence of DNA damage. Oncogene
66. Cadet J, Sage E, Douki T (2005) Ultraviolet radiation-mediated damage to cellular DNA. Mutat Res 571:3–17
67. Stein B, Rahmsdorf HJ, Steffen A, Litfin M, Herrlich P (1989) UV-induced DNA damage is an intermediate step in UV-induced expression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, collagenase, c-fos, and metallothionein. Mol Cell Biol 9:5169–5181
68. Taher MM, Baumgardner T, Dent P, Valerie K (1999) Genetic evidence that stress-activated p38 MAP kinase is necessary but not sufficient for UV activation of HIV gene expression. Biochemistry 38:13055–13062

69. Devary Y, Rosette C, DiDonato JA, Karin M (1993) NF-kappa B activation by ultraviolet light not dependent on a nuclear signal. Science 261:1442–1445
70. Bender K, Gottlicher M, Whiteside S, Rahmsdorf HJ, Herrlich P (1998) Sequential DNA damage-independent and -dependent activation of NF-kappaB by UV. EMBO J 17:5170–5181
71. Muotri AR, Bottero V, Tergaonkar V, Correa RG (2006) UV-mediated NF-kappaB activation is abolished in deficient XPC/D primary fibroblasts. Cell Cycle 5:1085–1089
72. Kato J, Tomohisa, Delhase M, Hoffmann A, Karin M (2003) CK2 Is a C-Terminal I[kappa]B Kinase Responsible for NF-[kappa]B Activation during the UV Response. Mol Cell 12:829–839
73. Krappmann D, Wulczyn FG, Scheidereit C (1996) Different mechanisms control signal-induced degradation and basal turnover of the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaB alpha in vivo. EMBO J 15:6716–6726
74. Halliday GM (2005) Inflammation, gene mutation and photoimmunosuppression in response to UVR-induced oxidative damage contributes to photocarcinogenesis. Mutat Res 571:107–120
75. Terui T, Okuyama R, Tagami H (2001) Molecular events occurring behind ultraviolet-induced skin inflammation. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 1:461–467
76. Simon MM, Aragane Y, Schwarz A, Luger TA, Schwarz T (1994) UVB light induces nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B) activity independently from chromosomal DNA damage in cell-free cytosolic extracts. J Invest Dermatol 102:422–427
77. Tobin D, van Hogerlinden M, Toftgard R (1998) UVB-induced association of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor 1/TNF receptor-associated factor-2 mediates activation of Rel proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:565–569
78. Reelfs O, Tyrrell RM, Pourzand C (2004) Ultraviolet a radiation-induced immediate iron release is a key modulator of the activation of NF-kappaB in human skin fibroblasts. J Invest Dermatol 122:1440–1447
79. Wang CY, Mayo MW, Baldwin AS Jr (1996) TNF- and cancer therapy-induced apoptosis: potentiation by inhibition of NF-kappaB. Science 274:784–787
80. Russo SM, Tepper JE, Baldwin AS Jr, Liu R, Adams J, Elliott P, Cusack JC Jr (2001) Enhancement of radiosensitivity by proteasome inhibition: implications for a role of NF-kappaB. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50:183–193
81. Chang PY, Miyamoto S (2006) Nuclear factor-kappaB dimer exchange promotes a p21(waf1/cip1) superinduction response in human T leukemic cells. Mol Cancer Res 4:101–112
82. Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Chang PY, Berchtold C, Miyamoto S (2005) Enhanced G2-M arrest by nuclear factor-{kappa}B-dependent p21waf1/cip1 induction. Mol Cancer Res 3:345–353
83. Dutta J, Fan Y, Gupta N, Fan G, Gelinas C (2006) Current insights into the regulation of programmed cell death by NF-kappaB. Oncogene 25:6800–6816
84. Rashi-Elkeles S, Elkon R, Weizman N, Linhart C, Amariglio N, Sternberg G, Rechavi G, Barzilai A, Shamir R, Shiloh Y (2006) Parallel induction of ATM-dependent pro- and antiapoptotic signals in response to ionizing radiation in murine lymphoid tissue. Oncogene 25:1584–1592
85. Kasibhatla S, Brunner T, Genestier L, Echeverri F, Mahboubi A, Green DR (1998) DNA damaging agents induce expression of Fas ligand and subsequent apoptosis in T lymphocytes via the activation of NF-kappa B and AP-1. Mol Cell 1:543–551
86. Kim HJ, Hawke N, Baldwin AS (2006) NF-kappaB and IKK as therapeutic targets in cancer. Cell Death Differ 13:738–747
87. Rocha S, Garrett MD, Campbell KJ, Schumm K, Perkins ND (2005) Regulation of NF-kappaB and p53 through activation of ATR and Chkl by the ARF tumour suppressor. EMBO J 24:1157–1169

88. Campbell KJ, Rocha S, Perkins ND (2004) Active repression of antiapoptotic gene expression by RelA(p65) NF-kappa B. Mol Cell 13:853–865
89. Campbell KJ, Witty JM, Rocha S, Perkins ND (2006) Cisplatin mimics ARF tumor suppressor regulation of RelA (p65) nuclear factor-{kappa}B transactivation. Cancer Res 66:929–935
90. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA (2000) The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57–70
91. Aggarwal BB (2004) Nuclear factor-kappaB: the enemy within. Cancer Cell 6:203–208
92. Karin M, Cao Y, Greten FR, Li ZW (2002) NF-kappaB in cancer: from innocent bystander to major culprit. Nat Rev Cancer 2:301–310
93. Karin M, Lawrence T, Nizet V (2006) Innate immunity gone awry: linking microbial infections to chronic inflammation and cancer. Cell 124:823–835
94. Nakanishi C, Toi M (2005) Nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitors as sensitizers to anticancer drugs. Nat Rev Cancer 5:297–309
95. Bentires-Alj M, Barbu V, Fillet M, Chariot A, Relic B, Jacobs N, Gielen J, Merville MP, Bours V (2003) NF-kappaB transcription factor induces drug resistance through MDR1 expression in cancer cells. Oncogene 22:90–97
96. Richardson PG, Mitsiades C, Hideshima T, Anderson KC (2006) Bortezomib: proteasome inhibition as an effective anticancer therapy. Annu Rev Med 57:33–47
97. Cusack JC Jr, Liu R, Houston M, Abendroth K, Elliott PJ, Adams J, Baldwin AS Jr (2001) Enhanced chemosensitivity to CPT-11 with proteasome inhibitor PS-341: implications for systemic nuclear factor-kappaB inhibition. Cancer Res 61:3535–3540
98. Shah SA, Potter MW, McDade TP, Ricciardi R, Perugini RA, Elliott PJ, Adams J, Callery MP (2001) 26S proteasome inhibition induces apoptosis and limits growth of human pancreatic cancer. J Cell Biochem 82:110–122
99. Karin M, Yamamoto Y, Wang QM (2004) The IKK NF-kappa B system: a treasure trove for drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov 3:17–26
100. Gilmore TD, Herscovitch M (2006) Inhibitors of NF-[kappa]B signaling: 785 and counting. Oncogene 25:6887–6899
101. Abraham RT (2001) Cell cycle checkpoint signaling through the ATM and ATR kinases. Genes Dev 15:2177–2196
102. Stiff T, Walker SA, Cerosaletti K, Goodarzi AA, Petermann E, Concannon P, O'Driscoll M, Jeggo PA (2006) ATR-dependent phosphorylation and activation of ATM in response to UV treatment or replication fork stalling. EMBO J
103. Luo JL, Kamata H, Karin M (2005) The anti-death machinery in IKK/NF-kappaB signaling. J Clin Immunol 25:541–550
104. Albor A, El-Hizawi S, Horn EJ, Laederich M, Frosk P, Wrogemann K, Kulesz-Martin M (2006) The interaction of Piasy with Trim32, an E3-ubiquitin ligase mutated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H, promotes Piasy degradation and regulates UVB-induced keratinocyte apoptosis through NFkappaB. J Biol Chem 281:25850–25866
105. Luan B, Zhang Z, Wu Y, Kang J, Pei G (2005) Beta-arrestin2 functions as a phosphorylation-regulated suppressor of UV-induced NF-kappaB activation. EMBO J 24:4237–4246
106. Yokoyama S, Nakano H, Yamazaki T, Tamai K, Hanada K, Takahashi G (2005) Enhancement of ultraviolet-induced apoptosis by NF-kappaB decoy oligonucleotides. Br J Dermatol 153 (Suppl 2):47–51
107. Stark LA, Dunlop MG (2005) Nuclear sequestration of RelA (p65) regulates NF-kappaB-driven transcription and apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 25:5985–6004
108. Soldatenkov VA, Dritschilo A, Ronai Z, Fuchs SY (1999) Inhibition of homologue of Slimb (HOS) function sensitizes human melanoma cells for apoptosis. Cancer Res 59:5085–5088
109. van Hogerlinden M, Rozell BL, Ahrlund-Richter L, Toftgard R (1999) Squamous cell carcinomas and increased apoptosis in skin with inhibited Rel/nuclear factor-kappaB signaling. Cancer Res 59:3299–3303
110. Qin JZ, Chaturvedi V, Denning MF, Choubey D, Diaz MO, Nickoloff BJ (1999) Role of NF-kappaB in the apoptotic-resistant phenotype of keratinocytes. J Biol Chem 274:37957–37964
111. Liu J, Yang D, Minemoto Y, Leitges M, Rosner MR, Lin A (2006) NF-[kappa]B is required for UV-Induced JNK activation via induction of PKC[delta]. Mol Cell 21:467–480
112. Poppelmann B, Klimmek K, Strozyk E, Voss R, Schwarz T, Kulms D (2005) NF{kappa}B-dependent down-regulation of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated proteins contributes to interleukin-1-mediated enhancement of ultraviolet B-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem 280:15635–15643
113. Thyss R, Virolle V, Imbert V, Peyron JF, Aberdam D, Virolle T (2005) NF-kappaB/Egr-1/Gadd45 are sequentially activated upon UVB irradiation to mediate epidermal cell death. EMBO J 24:128–137
114. Fan C, Yang J, Engelhardt JF (2002) Temporal pattern of NFkappaB activation influences apoptotic cell fate in a stimuli-dependent fashion. J Cell Sci 115:4843–4853
115. Ivanov VN, Ronai Z (2000) p38 protects human melanoma cells from UV-induced apoptosis through down-regulation of NF-kappaB activity and Fas expression. Oncogene 19:3003–3012
116. Strozyk E, Poppelmann B, Schwarz T, Kulms D (2006) Differential effects of NF-kappaB on apoptosis induced by DNA-damaging agents: the type of DNA damage determines the final outcome. Oncogene 25:6239–6251
117. Kim BY, Kim KA, Kwon O, Kim SO, Kim MS, Kim BS, Oh WK, Kim GD, Jung M, Ahn JS (2005) NF-kappaB inhibition radiosensitizes Ki-Ras-transformed cells to ionizing radiation. Carcinogenesis 26:1395–1403
118. Wang T, Hu YC, Dong S, Fan M, Tamae D, Ozeki M, Gao Q, Gius D, Li JJ (2005) Co-activation of ERK, NF-kappaB, and GADD45beta in response to ionizing radiation. J Biol Chem 280:12593–12601
119. Weston VJ, Austen B, Wei W, Marston E, Alvi A, Lawson S, Darbyshire PJ, Griffiths M, Hill F, Mann JR, Moss PA, Taylor AM, Stankovic T (2004) Apoptotic resistance to ionizing radiation in pediatric B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia frequently involves increased NF-kappaB survival pathway signaling. Blood 104:1465–1473
120. Guo G, Wang T, Gao Q, Tamae D, Wong P, Chen T, Chen WC, Shively JE, Wong JY, Li JJ (2004) Expression of ErbB2 enhances radiation-induced NF-kappaB activation. Oncogene 23:535–545
121. Starenki D, Namba H, Saenko V, Ohtsuru A, Yamashita S (2004) Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB cascade potentiates the effect of a combination treatment of anaplastic thyroid cancer cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:410–418
122. Tamatani T, Azuma M, Ashida Y, Motegi K, Takashima R, Harada K, Kawaguchi S, Sato M (2004) Enhanced radio-sensitization and chemosensitization in NF-kappaB-suppressed human oral cancer cells via the inhibition of gamma-irradiation- and 5-FU-induced production of IL-6 and IL-8. Int J Cancer 108: 912–921
123. Chen X, Shen B, Xia L, Khalezkiy A, Chu D, Wong JY, Li JJ (2002) Activation of nuclear factor kappaB in radioresistance of TP53-inactive human keratinocytes. Cancer Res 62:1213–1221
124. Yang CR, Wilson-Van Patten C, Planchon SM, Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Davis TW, Cuthill S, Miyamoto S, Boothman DA (2000) Coordinate modulation of Sp1, NF-kappa B, and p53 in confluent human malignant melanoma cells after ionizing radiation. FASEB J 14:379–390

125. Eliseev RA, Zuscik MJ, Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ, Drissi H, Rosier RN (2005) Increased radiation-induced apoptosis of Saos2 cells via inhibition of NFkappaB: a role for c-Jun N-terminal kinase. J Cell Biochem 96:1262–1273

126. Shao R, Karunagaran D, Zhou BP, Li K, Lo SS, Deng J, Chiao P, Hung MC (1997) Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB activity is involved in E1A-mediated sensitization of radiation-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem 272:32739–32742

127. Campbell KJ, Witty JM, Rocha S, Perkins ND (2006) Cisplatin mimics ARF tumor suppressor regulation of RelA (p65) nuclear factor-kappaB transactivation. Cancer Res 66:929–935

128. Aleyasin H, Cregan SP, Iyirhiaro G, O'Hare MJ, Callaghan SM, Slack RS, Park DS (2004) Nuclear factor-(kappa)B modulates the p53 response in neurons exposed to DNA damage. J Neurosci 24:2963–2973

129. de Leseleuc L, Denis F (2006) Inhibition of apoptosis by Nur77 through NF-kappaB activity modulation. Cell Death Differ 13:293–300

130. Russo P, Catassi A, Malacarne D, Margaritora S, Cesario A, Festi L, Mule A, Ferri L, Granone P (2005) Tumor necrosis factor enhances SN38-mediated apoptosis in mesothelioma cells. Cancer 103:1503–1518

131. Li Z, Niu J, Uwagawa T, Peng B, Chiao PJ (2005) Function of polo-like kinase 3 in NF-kappaB-mediated proapoptotic response. J Biol Chem 280:16843–16850

132. Song JY, Lim JW, Kim H, Kim KH (2003) Role of NF-kappaB and DNA repair protein Ku on apoptosis in pancreatic acinar cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1010:259–263

133. Culmsee C, Siewe J, Junker V, Retiounskaiia M, Schwarz S, Camandola S, El-Metainy S, Behnke H, Mattson MP, Kriegstein J (2003) Reciprocal inhibition of p53 and nuclear factor-kappaB transcriptional activities determines cell survival or death in neurons. J Neurosci 23:8586–8595

134. Sreenivasan Y, Sarkar A, Manna SK (2003) Mechanism of cytosine arabinoside-mediated apoptosis: role of Rel A (p65) dephosphorylation. Oncogene 22:4356–4369

135. Weaver KD, Yeyeodu S, Cusack JC Jr, Baldwin AS Jr, Ewend MG (2003) Potentiation of chemotherapeutic agents following antagonism of nuclear factor kappa B in human gliomas. J Neuro-oncol 61:187–196

136. Lavon I, Pikarsky E, Gutkovich E, Goldberg I, Bar J, Oren M, Ben-Neriah Y (2003) Nuclear factor-kappaB protects the liver against genotoxic stress and functions independently of p53. Cancer Res 63:25–30

137. Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Richardson PG, Poulaki V, Tai YT, Chauhan D, Fanourakis G, Gu X, Bailey C, Joseph M, Libermann TA, Schlossman R, Munshi NC, Hideshima T, Anderson KC (2003) The proteasome inhibitor PS-341 potentiates sensitivity of multiple myeloma cells to conventional chemotherapeutic agents: therapeutic applications. Blood 101:2377–2380

138. Yin KJ, Chen SD, Lee JM, Xu J, Hsu CY (2002) ATM gene regulates oxygen-glucose deprivation-induced nuclear factor-kappaB DNA-binding activity and downstream apoptotic cascade in mouse cerebrovascular endothelial cells. Stroke 33:2471–2477

139. Arlt A, Vorndamm J, Muerkoster S, Yu H, Schmidt WE, Folsch UR, Schafer H (2002) Autocrine production of interleukin 1beta confers constitutive nuclear factor kappaB activity and chemoresistance in pancreatic carcinoma cell lines. Cancer Res 62:910–916

140. Jones DR, Broad RM, Comeau LD, Parsons SJ, Mayo MW (2002) Inhibition of nuclear factor kappaB chemosensitizes non-small cell lung cancer through cytochrome c release and caspase activation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 123:310–317

141. Bottero V, Busuttil V, Loubat A, Magne N, Fischel J-L, Milano G, Peyron J-F (2001) Activation of nuclear factor {kappa}B through the IKK complex by the topoisomerase poisons SN38 and doxorubicin: a brake to apoptosis in HeLa human carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 61:7785–7791

142. Tabata M, Tabata R, Grabowski DR, Bukowski RM, Ganapathi MK, Ganapathi R (2001) Roles of NF-kappa B and 26 S proteasome in apoptotic cell death induced by topoisomerase I and II poisons in human nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. J Biol Chem 276:8029–8036

143. Hellin AC, Bentires-Alj M, Verlaet M, Benoit V, Gielen J, Bours V, Merville MP (2000) Roles of nuclear factor-kappaB, p53, and p21/WAF1 in daunomycin-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 295:870–878

144. Marinovich M, Viviani B, Corsini E, Ghilardi F, Galli CL (1996) NF-[kappa]B activation by triphenyltin triggers apoptosis in HL-60 cells. Exp Cell Res 226:98–104
