
Cardiovascular Drug Reviews  
Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 146–161  
© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Inc.

# Lectin-like Oxidized Low-density Lipoprotein Receptor-1, a New Promising Target for the Therapy of Atherosclerosis?

Xiu-Ping Chen, Tian-Tai Zhang, and Guan-Hua Du

Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

---

Keywords: Antiatherosclerotic drugs — Atherosclerosis — LOX-1 — OX-LDL.

---

## ABSTRACT

Endothelial activation and dysfunction induced by oxidized modified low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) is one of the key steps in the initiation of atherosclerosis. Recent studies have shown that a new lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) mediates the recognition and internalization of ox-LDL. LOX-1 is the main receptor for ox-LDL and may play an important role in the pathogenesis of hypertension, diabetes, and, especially, of atherosclerosis. The potential role of LOX-1 in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis includes: endocytosis of ox-LDL, expression co-location with atherosclerosis enhanced by atherosclerosis-related risk factors, elevated LOX-1 protein in cardiovascular disease, effects related to atherosclerosis and eliminated by antiatherosclerotic drugs. Identification and regulation of LOX-1 and understanding its signal transduction pathways might improve our insight toward the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and provide a selective treatment approach. LOX-1 might be a potential and promising target for the development of novel antiatherosclerotic drugs. However, due to limited knowledge about LOX-1, there are still many questions to be answered.

---

Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Prof. Guan-Hua Du, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China; Tel. and Fax: 86-010-63165184, E-mail: dugh@imm.ac.cn  

Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflict of interest.

INTRODUCTION

Endothelial activation, dysfunction, and injury induced by oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) are key steps in the initiation of atherosclerosis (Ross 1999). It is widely accepted that there is a small amount of ox-LDL present in human plasma, although the quantity *in vivo* is very low and details of its formation have not yet been elucidated (Hiroyuki 2003). Endothelial cells take up, internalize, and degrade ox-LDL independent of macrophage scavenger receptors. It had been postulated that endothelial cells might take up ox-LDL through another receptor-mediated pathway. In 1997, Sawamura et al. discovered a new receptor for ox-LDL, the lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor (LOX-1) in bovine aortic endothelial cells. He described LOX-1 as the major receptor for ox-LDL in endothelial cells of large arteries, although other ox-LDL receptors have also been reported (Sawamura et al. 1997). Accumulated studies revealed that LOX-1 was expressed in different kinds of cells and could be regulated at the level of transcription. Enhanced expression of LOX-1 at mRNA and protein levels had been reported in several cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, myocardial ischemia, ischemia-reperfusion injury, cardiovascular complications of diabetes, (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002). Many researchers point out that LOX-1 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases, especially atherosclerosis (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002; Sawamura 2002b; Ando and Fujita 2004; Inoue et al. 2006; Mehta et al. 2006; Ranheim and Halvorsen 2006; Vohra et al. 2006). Identification, regulation, and understanding of LOX-1 signal transduction pathways might improve our insight toward the pathogenesis of some cardiovascular diseases and might provide a new and selective approach to treatment. LOX-1 might be a potential and promising target for cardiovascular drug research.

Several critical reviews focusing on LOX-1 have been published recently (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002; Ando and Fujita 2004; Mehta et al. 2006). However, little has been mentioned about the signal transduction pathways of LOX-1, and no pharmacological evaluation of LOX-1 as a potential antiatherosclerotic target was discussed in these reviews. This article reviews the signal transduction pathways of LOX-1 and its role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, and it prospects the possibility of LOX-1 as a new promising target for antiatherosclerotic drug research in the future.

Signal Transduction Pathways of LOX-1

Ten years have passed since the discovery of LOX-1. However, we still know little about its exact signal transduction pathways. Most of the information about the signal transduction pathways of LOX-1 came from the activation or inhibition of LOX-1 by ox-LDL and LOX-1 antibody. Using bovine aortic endothelial cells and CHO-K1 cells transfected with the LOX-1 gene (LOX-1-CHO-K1), Cominacini et al. (2000, 2001) revealed that the binding of ox-LDL to LOX-1 induces a sharp increase of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production determined by 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH₂-DA) assay as early as 5 minutes after the start of incubation with ox-LDL. Native LDL (nLDL), acetylated LDL (Ac-LDL) and malondialdehyde-modified LDL (MDA-LDL) show no effect. The same results were obtained in cultured bovine articular chondrocytes (Nishimura et al. 2004). Furthermore, the binding of ox-LDL to LOX-1 results in the quick activation of the transcription factor NF-κB in bovine aortic endothelial cells, LOX-1-CHO-K1 cells,
and articular chondrocytes as determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) (Cominacini et al. 2000; Nishimura et al. 2004). Incubation with ox-LDL also induced the increased production of intracellular superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide, which was also mediated by LOX-1 (Cominacini et al. 2000, 2001). It has also been shown that the binding of ox-LDL to LOX-1 decreases intracellular nitric oxide levels through an increased production of superoxide anion, which could inactivate nitric oxide (Cominacini et al. 2001). Both superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide are products of LOX-1 activation and inducers of LOX-1 expression (Nagase et al. 2001). The downstream changes included activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK), phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), and extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), which led to activation of the transcription factor NF-$\kappa$B (Li and Mehta 2000a; Tang et al. 2000; Li et al. 2001; Tanigawa et al. 2006). These steps play a crucial role in the subsequent cell injury. Enhanced activity and/or expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM 1), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), and P-and E-selectin lead to monocyte attachment and activation. Reduction in endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression and Bcl-2, together with induction of matrix metalloproteinases 1, 3, 9, and Fas result in endothelial cell injury, dysfunction, and apoptosis (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002). Thomas and Jürgen (2004) investigated the effects of ox-LDL on endothelial monooxygenases [cytochrome P450s (CYPs)] in human arterial coronary endothelial cells and explanted healthy and atherosclerotic aorta. They found that ox-LDL induces ROS production via NADPH oxidase, NOX4. Ox-LDL represses transcript levels of CYP genes and decreases production of endothelial-derived hyperpolarization factor (EDHF), a key regulator of vascular tone. Repression of CYP monooxygenases is reversed and production of EDHF normalized after treatment of endothelium with the LOX-1 antagonist, carrageenan, or blockade of LOX-1 with a specific antibody (Thomas and Jürgen 2004). More recently, Murphy et al. (2006) showed that human LOX-1 recognizes a key cellular phospholipid, phosphatidylserine (PS), in a Ca${}^{2+}$-dependent manner. LOX-1 mediated recognition of PS-containing apoptotic bodies was dependent on Ca${}^{2+}$ and was inhibited by bivalent-cation chelation, LOX-1-blocking antibodies, or PS-containing liposomes. Thus LOX-1 is a Ca${}^{2+}$-dependent phospholipid receptor. Ox-LDL has dual effects on cultured cells depending on its concentration and the exposure time. Ox-LDL induces proliferation at lower concentration and shorter exposure time, whereas at higher concentration and longer exposure time it induces apoptosis and even necrosis (Galle et al. 2001; Seibold et al. 2004). Galle et al. (2001) also showed that both the proliferative and apoptotic effects of ox-LDL are mediated by superoxide anion formation. Akagi et al. (2006) reported that the synergistic effects of cyclic tensile stretch load and ox-LDL on cell viability and proteoglycan synthesis may be mediated through enhanced expression of LOX-1 in cultured bovine chondrocytes. More recently, the same group reported that ox-LDL significantly reduced the human chondrocyte viability and proteoglycan synthesis, which were inhibited by pretreatment with antihuman LOX-1 monoclonal suggesting a potential role of LOX-1 in ox-LDL induced cell injury (Akagi et al. 2007). Kuhlmann et al. (2003) demonstrated that at low doses ox-LDL (10 $\mu$g/mL) causes a significant increase of endothelial Ca${}^{2+}$-activated K${}^{+}$-channel activity and cell proliferation, whereas preincubation with an antibody against LOX-1 abolishes activation of Ca${}^{2+}$-activated K${}^{+}$ channels. LOX-1 might in part mediate the ox-LDL-induced endothelial proliferation. The LOX-1 signal transduction pathways might also take part in the activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-$\gamma$). In cultured bovine

Cardiovascular Drug Reviews, Vol. 25, No. 2, 2007
articular chondrocytes, ox-LDL markedly increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression and protein release in time- and dose-dependent manners, which was significantly suppressed by anti-LOX-1 antibody pretreatment. Furthermore, anti-LOX-1 antibody inhibits ox-LDL induced PPAR-$\gamma$ activation and GW9662 (a specific PPAR-$\gamma$ inhibitor) suppressed ox-LDL-induced VEGF expression. These results suggest that oxidized LDL binding to LOX-1 upregulates VEGF expression through activation of PPAR-$\gamma$ (Kanata et al. 2006). We have grounds to predict that what we have known about the signal transduction pathways of LOX-1 might be just the tip of the iceberg and further studies are needed to elucidate them. The signal transduction pathways of LOX-1 are summarized in Figure 1.

# Potential Role of LOX-1 in Atherosclerosis

Since the discovery of LOX-1, its physiological and pathological significance has been extensively studied. The expression of LOX-1 is not constitutive but could be induced by proinflammatory, oxidative, and mechanical stimuli (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002). Upregulated LOX-1 is involved in the activation of endothelial cells, transformation of smooth muscle cells, and accumulation of lipids in macrophages, resulting in cell injury that facilitates the development of atherosclerosis.

The relationship between LOX-1 and atherosclerosis could be summarized as six e's: endocytosis of ox-LDL, expression co-location with atherosclerosis, enhanced by atherosclerosis-related risk factors, elevated LOX-1 protein in cardiovascular diseases, effects involved in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, and eliminated by antiatherosclerotic drugs.

# Endocytosis of Ox-LDL

It is well known that ox-LDL plays an important role in atherosclerosis. Oxidation of LDL by hydrogen peroxide, Cu²⁺, Fe²⁺, Co²⁺, or Mn²⁺, etc. has been studied extensively for decades *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Gunther et al. 1987; Hermann et al. 1990, 1992; Thomas 2000). Studies revealed that ox-LDL can induce numerous atherogenic effects. It is a chemoattractant for monocytes and it could induce endothelial cell secretion of monocyte chemoattractants and expression of monocyte adhesion molecules. It also promotes foam cell formation and alters the expression and secretion of a variety of growth factors and cytokines from vascular smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages. Furthermore, ox-LDL induces migration and proliferation of smooth muscle cells, impedes endothelial cell migration, interferes with endothelium-mediated relaxation, and promotes procoagulant properties of vascular cells by enhancing the expression of tissue factor in endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and macrophages (Colles et al. 2001). Finally, ox-LDL can induce both apoptosis and necrosis (Martinet and Kockx 2001; Mayr and Xu 2001; Benoist et al. 2002; Salvayre et al. 2002; Napoli 2003). Although the toxicity of ox-LDL has been recognized for a long time ago, the presence of ox-LDL in the plasma of patients with atherosclerosis was not discovered until recently (Itabe et al. 1996; Sattler et al. 1998). Several cell-surface receptors for ox-LDL have been identified, and their structure, ligand specificity, regulation, and function have been thoroughly reviewed by Steinbrecher et al.

150 X.-P. CHEN ET AL.

FIG. 1. The signal transduction pathways and pathophysiological significance of LOX-1. Ox-LDL, TNF-α, shear stress, ROS, ET-1 and AngII increase the expression of LOX-1. The binding of ox-LDL to LOX-1 activates the NADPH oxidase on the cell membrane through some unknown mechanisms that results in the quick increase of intracellular ROS including O₂⁻ and H₂O₂. Increased O₂⁻ could react with intracellular NO resulting in the decrease of intracellular NO. Activated LOX-1 could also decrease the CYP450 activity resulting in the decrease of CYP catalyzed oxidation that caused the decrease of EDHF. Both the decrease of intracellular NO and EDHF could cause the dysfunction of endothelial cells. The NF-κB was activated though p38MAPK and ERK1/2, PI3K pathways. Evaluated P-selectin, VCAM-1, ICAM-1, and MCP-1 expression result in the attachment and activation of monocytes. The expression of eNOS and Bcl-2 were decreased while the expression of MMP1, 3, 9, and Fas were enhanced which cause the injury and apoptosis of endothelial cells. The phagocytosis of ox-LDL makes macrophages to become foam cells. The binding of ox-LDL to LOX-1 could activate PPAR-γ resulting in the expression of VEGF. LOX-1 activation can also lead to cell proliferation. LOX-1, lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1; ox-LDL, oxidized low-density lipoprotein; ROS, reactive oxygen species; ET-1, endothelin-1; AngII, Angiotensin II; O₂⁻, superoxide anion; H₂O₂, hydrogen peroxide; NO, nitric oxide; PI3K, Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; p38MAPK, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase; ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; K(Ca), Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels; CYP450, cytochrome P450; EDHF, endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; ICAM-1, intercellular cell adhesion molecule-1; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; AT₁, Angiotensin II receptor type 1; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; MMP1,3,9, matrix metalloproteinases 1,3,9; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; PPAR-γ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ.

(1999), Dhaliwal and Steinbrecher (1999), and Nagase and Fujita (2000). The uptake of ox-LDL by macrophages and smooth muscle cells can be mediated by a variety of scavenger receptors, including SR-AI/II, CD36, and SR-BI (Steinbrecher 1999). However, these classical scavenger receptors are either absent or found at very low levels on endothelial cells (Mehta 2004). LOX-1 has been identified as the ox-LDL receptor that is present primarily in endothelial cells (Sawamura et al. 1997). As the major receptor for ox-LDL, LOX-1 mediates at least in part the toxicity of ox-LDL. The finding of ox-LDL *in vivo*

Cardiovascular Drug Reviews, Vol. 25, No. 2, 2007

and the recognition of LOX-1 as its main receptor might represent the milestones in our understanding of the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

# Expression of LOX-1 and its Co-location with Atherosclerotic Lesions

Atherosclerotic lesions are formed at preferred vascular locations and large arteries. Typically plaques occur at vascular bifurcations of large- and medium-sized vessels and areas of increased hemodynamic and shear stress (Lusis 2000; Davies et al. 2001). *In vivo* LOX-1 is expressed primarily in large arteries (e.g., aortic, carotid, thoracic, and coronary) and veins (Sawamura et al. 1997; Chen et al. 2002). LOX-1 is highly expressed in macrophages, vascular smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells (Moriwaki et al. 1998; Nagase et al. 1998a; Draude et al. 1999). The same types of cells are highly important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Furthermore, LOX-1 expression has been detected in atherosclerotic lesions of animals and humans. In nonatherosclerotic aorta, LOX-1 expression is undetectable, whereas endothelial cells covering early atherosclerotic lesions in carotid arteries were more frequently positive for LOX-1 expression than those in advanced atherosclerotic lesions. The endothelial cells in the intimal neovascularization of advanced lesions also express LOX-1. Macrophages and smooth muscle cells in the intima of advanced atherosclerotic plaques are positive for LOX-1, suggesting that LOX-1 might play a role in the early stages of atherosclerosis (Kataoka et al. 1999). Increased expression of LOX-1 was also observed in initial atherosclerotic lesions of Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits (WHHR) (Chen et al. 2000), and LOX-1 ligand accumulates in the plasma and atherosclerotic lesions of WHHR (Kakutani et al. 2001).

# Enhancement of LOX-1 Expression by Atherosclerosis-Related Risk Factors

*In vitro* the expression of LOX-1 can be induced or inhibited by many factors including chemicals, inflammatory cytokines, oxidized stress, pathological conditions, and physical action. Factors that regulate LOX-1 expression are summarized before (Chen et al. 2002; Chen and Du 2007).

TNF-$\alpha$, a proinflammatory cytokine, was found to be associated with plaque vulnerability (Barath et al. 1990; Tipping and Hancock 1993). Kume et al. (1998) showed that TNF-$\alpha$ increases LOX-1 expression in a concentration-dependent manner in bovine aortic endothelial cells. The time-course experiments showed that LOX-1 mRNA levels peaked at 2 hours and remained elevated for at least 21 hours. Nuclear run-off assay revealed that TNF-$\alpha$ appeared to activate the transcription of LOX-1. Moriwaki et al. (1998) showed that LOX-1 is expressed in human and murine macrophages and that its expression can be induced after differentiation *in vitro* in human peripheral blood monocytes and related THP-1 cells. Furthermore, LOX-1 expression can also be detected in resident peritoneal macrophages and can be upregulated by TNF-$\alpha$.

It is well known that the renin–angiotensin system is a critical factor in atherogenesis and that its inhibition by the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors is antiatherogenic. Most of the effects of angiotensin II (Ang II) are thought to be mediated by activation of
the Ang II type 1 receptor (AT₁). In cultured carotid arterial endothelial cells and human umbilical vein endothelial cells Ang II markedly increases, in a concentration-dependent manner, LOX-1 mRNA protein expression. This effect can be prevented by an AT₁ receptor antagonist (Li et al. 1999; Morawietz et al. 1999). Ang II has also been found to increase the expression of LOX-1 in human smooth muscle cells via a lipoxygenase-dependent pathway. Ang II increases the uptake of ox-LDL, causes endothelial cell injury, and potentiates ox-LDL-induced cell injury. Ox-LDL increases the expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme mediated by LOX-1 (Li et al. 2000, 2003). Furthermore, in ApoE knockout mice fed high-cholesterol diet and treated with rosuvastatin and candesartan in combination, there appears to be a crosstalk between dyslipidemia, the renin–angiotensin system, and LOX-1. The MAPKs appear to play an important role in this crosstalk (Chen et al. 2006).

Infections, such as those caused by *chlamydia pneumoniae*, *cytomegalovirus*, herpes simplex virus, and *Helicobacter pylori*, have been shown to be involved in atherosclerosis. Using an endothelial cells line, ECV304, Chirathaworn et al. found that herpes simplex virus 1 infection can lead to the increased expression of LOX-1 mRNA. As measured by luciferase assay LOX-1 promoter activity was also increased in the infected cells (Chirathaworn et al. 2004). In human umbilical vein endothelial cells infected *in vitro* with *C. pneumoniae*, a direct involvement of vascular endothelial cells in atherosclerosis was examined. The infection greatly enhances the uptake of ox-LDL, but not of Ac-LDL, and significantly amplifies the expression of LOX-1 (Yoshida et al. 2006).

## Elevated LOX-1 Protein in Cardiovascular Disease

In addition to mature LOX-1, a 35-kDa protein was detected. In TNF-α-activated bovine aortic endothelial cells and bLOX-1-CHO-K1, in addition to LOX-1, a 35-kDa protein was detected using anti-LOX-1 antibody and western blotting. This 35-kDa protein was proved to be a soluble form of LOX-1, sLOX-1 (Murase et al. 2000; Kume and Kita 2001b). In patients with coronary heart diseases, especially in acute coronary syndrome, the serum sLOX-1 levels were found to be significantly higher than in the control group. Furthermore, sLOX-1 can discriminate with high sensitivity and specificity an acute coronary syndrome from other conditions. This indicates that sLOX-1 might be a useful marker for early diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome (Hayashida et al. 2005).

## Effects Related to Atherosclerosis

LOX-1 mediates many pathophysiological effects in atherosclerosis. It functions as a cell-adhesion molecule mediating the platelet–endothelium interaction and is involved in endotoxin-induced inflammation that may initiate and promote atherosclerosis (Kakutani et al. 2000; Honjo et al. 2003). LOX-1 also supports adhesion of mononuclear leukocytes or monocyte-like THP-1 cells under either static or flow conditions (Hayashida et al. 2002). Ox-LDL upregulates expression of E- and P-selectins, VCAM-1, ICAM-1, metalloproteinase 1, 3, and 9 (MMP-1, 3, and 9) in human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs); these effects are mediated via LOX-1 (Kakutani et al. 2000; Li et al. 2002; Kakinuma et al. 2004). *In vivo*, in the rupture-prone shoulder areas of human atherosclerotic plaques, LOX-1 expression is co-localized with the expression of Bax *in vivo*. LOX-1 plays an important
role in ox-LDL-induced apoptosis by modulating Bax/Bcl-2 or decreasing the expression of antiapoptotic proteins, Bcl-2 and c-IAP-1 (Imanishi et al. 2002; Kataoka et al. 2001; Chen et al. 2004). LOX-1 supports cell adhesion to fibronectin in a divalent cation-independent fashion. It has been shown to promote adhesion of cultured endothelial cells to fibronectin-coated plates (Shimaoka et al. 2001a). In bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells, LOX-1 may be involved in the senescence of endothelial cells (Imanishi et al. 2004). In another study LOX-1 has been shown to play a role in the endothelial proliferation mediated by ox-LDL through modulation of endothelial Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels (Kuhlmann et al. 2003).

Vascular dysfunction, especially inappropriate or enhanced vasoconstriction, may be involved in the genesis of atherosclerosis (Zeiher and Schachinger 1994; Kaisner 1995). It had long been noticed that ox-LDL had direct effects on the vasomotor properties of blood vessels. Exposure of isolated blood vessels to ox-LDL inhibited vascular relaxation. This inhibitory effect of ox-LDL on blood vessels is endothelium dependent and NO mediated. Before the discovery of LOX-1, studies have suggested multiple mechanisms of this effect including: direct inactivation of NO, alteration in the bioactivity of released NO and a decrease in endothelial NO synthase mRNA levels, leading to decreased NO synthase protein levels and to decreased NO production (David and Marlene 1996). New research showed that LOX-1 might also involved. Xu et al. (2007) assessed the role of ox-LDL in endothelium in a murine model of atherosclerosis (ApoE KO mice). Anti-LOX-1 restored NO-mediated coronary arteriolar dilation in ApoE KO mice, but did not affect the endothelium-dependent vasodilation in controls which suggest that ox-LDL impairs endothelium-dependent NO-mediated dilation of coronary arterioles by activation of a signaling cascade involving LOX-1. The effects mediated by LOX-1 are summarized in Figure 1.

# The Effects of Antiatherosclerotic Drugs

LOX-1 expression in atherosclerosis lesions could be decreased or inhibited by antiatherosclerotic drugs leading to amelioration of vascular injury. Some antiatherosclerotic drugs such as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) inhibit the upregulation of LOX-1 induced by atherosclerosis-related factors. Statins inhibit ox-LDL-mediated LOX-1 expression, uptake of ox-LDL, adhesion molecule expression, and downregulation of eNOS. Therefore, inhibition of expression of LOX-1 might be one of the beneficial effects of statins in vascular diseases (Draude et al. 1999; Li et al. 2001; Mehta et al. 2001; Puccetti et al. 2005). More recently, Hofnagel et al. (2006) revealed that pravastatin downregulated LOX-1 expression in cultured human macrophages and aortic smooth muscle cells. Homozygous WHHR treated with pravastatin showed significantly reduced LOX-1 protein and mRNA expression in the aortic arch as compared with untreated rabbits. This study suggests that pleiotropic effect of pravastatin appears to involve the inhibition of LOX-1 expression, so that *in vivo* inhibition of LOX-1 might represent a mechanism of the antiatherogenic effect of pravastatin. Calcium channel blockers have been shown to limit the progression of atherosclerosis and to decrease the incidence of cardiovascular events. Two calcium channel blockers, amlodipine and manidipine significantly decrease Ang II-stimulated VCAM-1, ICAM-1, and MCP-1 expression in cultured rat aortic endothelial cells. They also prevent Ang-II-induced increase in LOX-1. The salutary effects of calcium channel blockers in atherogenesis include the inhibition of the expression of LOX-1 (Toba et al. 2006).

LOX-1 gene polymorphisms also suggest the potential role of LOX-1 in cardiovascular diseases. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), G501C, resulted in the missense mutation of K167N in LOX-1 protein. It has been discovered that myocardial infarction patients have a significantly higher frequency of 501G/C+501C/C than do healthy people (Tatsuguchi et al. 2003). Specific LOX-1 allelic polymorphisms confer protective effects by generating a new LOX-1 splice isoform lacking exon 5, called LOXIN. Macrophages carrying the “protective” LOX-1 haplotype display increased expression of LOXIN, which correlated with protection against ox-LDL-mediated apoptosis (Mango et al. 2005). LOX-1 gene allelic variants (3′UTR/T) have been related to cardiovascular events and reduced antiplatelet activity induced by statins. A retrospective study performed in 751 white hypercholesterolemic subjects treated with increasing doses of atorvastatin revealed that LOX-1 polymorphisms influence cardiovascular events rate during statin treatment (Puccetti et al. 2006).

Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting the involvement of LOX-1 in the destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. Rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque is probably a result of intense inflammatory response, and release of collagen degrading MMPs (Lee and Libby 1997; Pasterkamp et al. 2000). LOX-1 activation by ox-LDL stimulates endothelial MMP expression and activity. In addition, aspirin specifically inhibits LOX-1-mediated p38MAPK activation and subsequent MMP activity (Mehta 2004). This could prevent endothelial dysfunction and MMP-induced plaque destabilization. Studies *in vivo* with hypercholesterolemic rabbits also revealed that LOX-1 expression was positively correlated with the plaque instability index and MMP-9 expression. LOX-1 expression was more prominent in atherosclerotic plaques with thinner fibromuscular cap. Furthermore, LOX-1 expression was shown in the macrophage-rich lipid core area where MCP-1 expression and apoptotic events were prominent. These results indicate that enhanced LOX-1 expression was associated with histologically unstable atherosclerotic plaques, suggesting the involvement of LOX-1 in the destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques *in vivo* (Ishino et al. 2007).

# Possible Potential of LOX-1 as a New Antiatherosclerotic Drug Target

Drug target is one of the key factors for discovering and developing new drugs. We define the drug target as the biomolecules that a drug could bind with and produce therapeutic effects. We think that a specific drug target might have the following characteristics: (1) drug target is biomolecule(s), normally a protein that could exist in isolated or complex modality; (2) the biomolecules have special sites that match other molecules (commonly the small molecules with special structures); these molecules could be the endogenous or extraneous substances such as chemical molecules (drugs); (3) the biomolecular structure could be changed when it binds to small molecules and the changes in structures are normally reversed; (4) the change of biomolecular structure, leads to various physiological responses that induce regulation on the cell, organ, tissue or the body status; (5) the physiological responses triggered by the changes of biomolecular structure play a major role in the complex regulation and exert therapeutic effect in pathological conditions; (6) the expression, activities, and structures of the biomolecules could be changed during pathological processes (Du 2004).
After reviewing the 10 years of studies of LOX-1, we considered that LOX-1 is consistent with characteristics for a specific drug target: LOX-1 is a 50-kDa membrane protein that structurally belongs to the C-type lectin family with a short intracellular N-terminal hydrophilic domain and a long extracellular C-terminal hydrophilic domain (Sawamura et al. 1997). The lectin domain is the ligand recognition site, and the binding activity of LOX-1 to its ligands depends on the interaction of positively charged residues with negatively charged ligands (Chen et al. 2001; Shi et al. 2001). Based on the arrangement of critical binding residues on the LOX-1 structure and comparing the size of the dimer surface of LOX-1 with the diameter of LDL, the binding mode for the recognition of ox-LDL was proposed, which showed that it needs three LOX-1 molecules to bind one ox-LDL molecule (Ohki et al. 2005; Park et al. 2005). Furthermore, two different fragments of the ligand-binding domain of human LOX-1 have been crystallized and analyzed by X-ray (Ishigaki et al. 2005). The binding of LOX-1 to ox-LDL induces intracellular ROS production, p38 MAPK, and NF-$\kappa$B activation and expression of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and MCP-1. The changed expression of LOX-1 has been reported in several cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, myocardial ischemia, ischemia-reperfusion injury, cardiovascular complications of diabetes. (Chen et al. 2002; Mehta and Li 2002). Further study might provide more evidence to support LOX-1 as a promising drug target.

# LOX-1 Inhibition Study: In Vitro and In Vivo

An ideal drug target should be at the critical nodal point in the signal transduction pathways. LOX-1 blockade might seem to result in the clearance of ROS, the inhibition of MAPK, and NF-$\kappa$B activation induced by ox-LDL. Due to the absence of specific LOX-1 ligand, antibody and antisense oligodeoxynucleotides targeting LOX-1 became the most useful tools for LOX-1 inhibition study.

Li et al. (2000) studied the effect of antisense to LOX-1 on ox-LDL-mediated upregulation of MCP-1 and monocyte adhesion to HCAECs. Incubation of HCAECs with antisense LOX-1 could suppress both basal and ox-LDL-induced LOX-1 mRNA and protein expression. Ox-LDL mediated upregulation of MCP-1, and MAPK activation and monocyte adhesion to HCAECs were also suppressed by antisense LOX-1, whereas sense LOX-1 had no effect. Both antisense and sense LOX-1 showed no cytotoxicity, and antisense LOX-1, but not sense LOX-1, reduced ox-LDL of investigators mediated HCAEC injury. The same group also determined the role of LOX-1 in ox-LDL-induced apoptosis of cultured HCAECs using antisense LOX-1 mRNA and chemical inhibitors. Antisense LOX-1 inhibited ox-LDL-mediated apoptosis and abolished ox-LDL-induced activation of NF-$\kappa$B. Polyinosinic acid and carrageenan, two different chemical inhibitors of LOX-1, also decreased ox-LDL-mediated apoptosis (Li and Mehta 2000). LOX-1 expression can be induced in cardiomyocytes from anesthetized Sprague-Dawley rats subjected to myocardial ischemia-reperfusion. Administration of anti-LOX-1 antibody resulted in significant reduction in myocardial infarction size compared with that of normal IgG or saline group. Anti-LOX-1 also decreases cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by ischemia-reperfusion injury. These findings suggest that activation of the LOX-1 pathway is involved in determining the extent of myocardial damage and that inhibition of the LOX-1 pathway may provide a novel strategy for treatment of acute myocardial infarction in humans (Kataoka et al. 2003). Kataoka et al. (2003) also discovered that treatment of rats with LOX-1 antibody
prevented ischemia-reperfusion-induced upregulation of LOX-1, apoptosis, lipid peroxidation, reduced myocardial infarct size, and improved left ventricular function.

All these results *in vivo* and *in vitro* suggest that inhibition of LOX-1 might be beneficial in some cardiovascular diseases and that use of drugs targeting LOX-1 might be a promising direction to follow. However, due to limited data, there are also some concerns.

1) Among all the tissues, the expression of LOX-1 in large arteries was not the highest. Studies showed that LOX-1 is highly expressed *in vivo* in blood-vessel-rich organs such as placenta, lung, marrow, and spinal cord; moderately expressed in hippocampi, testicle, large artery (for example aortic, carotid, thoracic, coronary arteries, and veins), and kidney; and slightly expressed in heart, skeletal muscle, and ovary (Yamanaka et al. 1998). Although we have identified some roles of LOX-1 in endothelial cells, vascular smooth cells, macrophages, and large arteries, its roles in other organs are still unknown to us.

2) As the receptor expressed under normal conditions, as well as it might have some potential normal physiological functions. What we know now is only that LOX-1 can work as a cell surface receptor for gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (Shimaoka et al. 2001b), aged/apoptotic endothelial cells (Oka et al. 1998), and activated platelets (Kakutani et al. 2000). These results suggest that under basic physiological conditions, LOX-1 may serve to scavenge or clean up cellular debris and other related materials. Are there any side effects associated with inhibition or activation of LOX-1 and its ability to scavenge cellular debris? Is it safe enough to inhibit LOX-1?

3) The pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is rather complicated and involves many factors. Several theories have been proposed, such as the lipid theory, the hemodynamic theory, the fibrin incrustation theory, the nonspecific mesenchymal hypothesis, and the response to injury hypothesis (Tegos et al. 2001). None of these elucidate exact mechanisms satisfactorily. Role of LOX-1 in atherosclerosis is based on the observation that LOX-1 is the primary endothelial receptor for ox-LDL. However, the mechanism underlying ox-LDL deposits in the intima is not clear. The consensus is that LDL particles are either transported across the endothelial monolayer or traverse cell–cell junctions into the vascular intima in specific focal regions of large and medium-sized arteries (Lusis 2000). Furthermore, is there any relation between the LOX-1 mediated ox-LDL phagocytosis and the formation of macrophage-derived foam cells induced by phagocytosis of ox-LDL? How does LOX-1 work in ox-LDL deposition? Is LOX-1 inhibition as potent as we supposed in retarding or preventing the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis?

4) As mentioned previously, a close relation between LOX-1 and atherosclerosis has been observed. However, we still could not state with any certainty that LOX-1 is one of the key causes of atherosclerosis. Is LOX-1 the “ringleader” in atherosclerosis or just a “follower” or even a “bystander”?

5) LOX-1 transgenic (LOXtg) mouse models have raised further questions about LOX-1 vascular function: Is this solely a receptor for ox-LDL clearance or does it have additional functions? LOXtg mice are overexpressing LOX-1 but are lacking ApoE displayed accelerated intramyocardial vasculopathy; the area covered by atheroma-like lesions was also increased. LOX-1 expression was prominent in coronary vessels and cardiomyocytes, and enhancement of ox-LDL uptake in LOXtg mice was consistent with the increased levels of LOX-1. Levels of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 were elevated in both atherosclerotic lesions and normal vasculature of LOXtg mice (Inoue et al. 2005). This model needs to be interpreted cautiously because atherosclerotic lesions and LOX-1 are detected within regions of the myocardium that do not normally display these changes (Vohra et al. 2006).

CONCLUSIONS

As one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in developed and developing countries, atherosclerosis is afflicting thousands of people. However, the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is not fully elucidated, which makes effective prevention and treatment unlikely. As far as LOX-1 concerned, there are many “knowns” and even more “unknowns.” Discovery of LOX-1 provides a deeper insight into the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and a potential therapeutic approach to its therapy. Despite the complicated pathogenic factors and the need for further studies to elucidate these “unknowns,” drugs targeting LOX-1 might be a promising direction to follow or at least an interesting direction to explore.

REFERENCES

Akagi M, Kanata S, Mori S, Itabe H, Sawamura T, Hamanishi C (2007) Possible involvement of the oxidized low-density lipoprotein/lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 system in pathogenesis and progression of human osteoarthritis. *Osteoarthr Cartil* 15:281-290.

Akagi M, Nishimura S, Yoshida K, Kakinuma T, Sawamura T, Munakata H, Hamanishi (2006) Cyclic tensile stretch load and oxidized low density lipoprotein synergistically induce lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 in cultured bovine chondrocytes, resulting in decreased cell viability and proteoglycan synthesis. *J Orthop Res* 24:1782-1790.

Ando K, Fujita T (2004) Role of lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) in the development of hypertensive organ damage. *Clin Exp Nephrol* 8:178-182.

Barath P, Fishbein MC, Cao J, Berenson J, Hwlfant RH, Forrester JS (1990) Tumor necrosis factor gene expression in human vascular intimal smooth muscle cells detected by in situ hybridization. *Am J Pathol* 137:503-509.

Benoist H, Salvayre R, Negre-Salvayre A (2002) Oxidized LDL-induced apoptosis. *Subcell Biochem* 36:123-150.

Chen J, Li D, Schaefer R, Mehta JL (2006) Cross-talk between dyslipidemia and renin-angiotensin system and the role of LOX-1 and MAPK in atherogenesis studies with the combined use of rosuvastatin and candesartan. *Atherosclerosis* 184:295-301.

Chen M, Kakutani M, Minami M, Kataoka H, Kume N, Narumiya S, Kita T, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2000) Increased expression of lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1 in initial atherosclerotic lesions of watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 20:1107-1115.

Chen M, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2002) LOX-1, the receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein identified from endothelial cells: Implications in endothelial dysfunction and atherosclerosis. *Pharmacol Ther* 95:89-100.

Chen J, Mehta JL, Haider N, Zhang X, Narula J, Li D (2004) Role of caspases in Ox-LDL-induced apoptotic cascade in human coronary artery endothelial cells. *Circ Res* 94:370-376.

Chen M, Narumiya S, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2001) Conserved C-terminal residues within the lectin-like domain of LOX-1 are essential for oxidized low-density-lipoprotein binding. *Biochem J* 355(Pt 2):289-296.

Chen XP, Du GH (2007) Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1: Protein, ligands, expression and pathophysiological significance. *Clin Med J (Engl)* 120:421-426.

Chirathaworn C, Pongpanich A, Poovorawan Y (2004) Herpes simplex virus 1 induced LOX-1 expression in an endothelial cell line, ECV 304. *Viral Immunol* 17:308-314.

Colles SM, Maxson JM, Carlson SG, Chisolm GM (2001) Oxidized LDL-induced injury and apoptosis in atherosclerosis. Potential roles for oxysterols. *Trends Cardiovasc Med* 11:131-138.

Cominacini L, Pasini AF, Garbin U, Davoli A, Tosetti ML, Campagnola M, Rigoni A, Pastorino AM, Lo Cascio V, Sawamura T (2000) Oxidized low density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) binding to ox-LDL receptor-1 in endothelial cells induces the activation of NF-kappaB through an increased production of intracellular reactive oxygen species. *J Biol Chem* 275:12633-12638.

Cominacini L, Rigoni A, Fratta PA, Garbin U, Davoli A, Campagnola M, Pastorino AM, Lo Cascio V, Sawamura T (2001) The binding of oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) to ox-LDL receptor-1 in endothelial cells reduces the intracellular concentration of nitric oxide through an increased production of superoxide. *J Biol Chem* 276:13750-13755.

David AC, Marlene LC (1996) Effects of oxidized low-density lipoprotein on vascular contraction and relaxation: Clinical and pharmacological implications in atherosclerosis. *Pharmacol Rev* 48:3-19.

Davies PF, Shi C, Depaola N, Helmke BP, Polacek DC (2001) Hemodynamics and the focal origin of atherosclerosis: A spatial approach to endothelial structure, gene expression, and function. *Ann NY Acad Sci* 947:7-16.

Dhaliwal BS, Steinbrecher UP (1999) Scavenger receptors and oxidized low density lipoproteins. *Clin Chim Acta* 286:191-205.

Draude G, Hrboticky N, Lorenz RL (1999) The expression of the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1) on human vascular smooth muscle cells and monocytes and its down-regulation by lovastatin. *Biochem Pharmacol* 57:383-386.

Du GH (2004) Evaluation and validation of drug targets. *Acta Pharmacol Sin* 25:1566-1566.

Galle J, Heinloth A, Wanner C, Heermeier K (2001) Dual effect of oxidized LDL on cell cycle in human endothelial cells through oxidative stress. *Kidney Int Suppl* 78:120-123.

Gunther J, Henry TH, Guy MC, Hermann E (1987) Modification of human serum low density lipoprotein by oxidation-characterization and pathophysiological implications. *Chem Phys Lipid* 45:315-336.

Hayashida K, Kume N, Minami M, Kita T (2002) Lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) supports adhesion of mononuclear leukocytes and a monocyte-like cell line THP-1 cells under static and flow conditions. *FEBS Lett* 511:133-138.

Hayashida K, Kume N, Murase T, Minami M, Nakagawa D, Inada T, Tanaka M, Ueda A, Kominami G, Kambara H, Kimura T, Kita T (2005) Serum soluble lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 levels are elevated in acute coronary syndrome: a novel marker for early diagnosis. *Circulation* 112:812-818.

Hermann E, Janusz G, Herbert P, Gunther J (1992) The role of lipid peroxidation and antioxidants in oxidative modification of LDL. *Free Radic Biol Med* 13:341-390.

Hermann E, Martina DR, Georg W, Georg S, Gunther J (1990) Biochemical, structural, and functional properties of oxidized low-density lipoprotein. *Chem Res Toxicol* 2:77-92.

Hiroyuki ITAB (2003) Oxidized low-density lipoproteins what is understood and what remains to be clarified. *Biol Pharm Bull* 26:1-9.

Hofnagel O, Luechtenborg B, Eschert H, Weissen-Plenz G, Severs NJ, Robenek H (2006) Pravastatin inhibits expression of lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) in Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits: A new pleiotropic effect of statins. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 26:604-610.

Honjo M, Nakamura K, Yamashiro K, Kiryu J, Tanihara H, McEvoy LM, Honda Y, Butcher EC, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2003) Lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 is a cell-adhesion molecule involved in endotoxin-induced inflammation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 100:1274-1279.

Imanishi T, Hano T, Sawamura T, Nishio I (2004) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein induces endothelial progenitor cell senescence, leading to cellular dysfunction. *Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol* 31:407-413.

Imanishi T, Hano T, Sawamura T, Takarada S, Nishio I (2002) Oxidized low density lipoprotein potentiation of Fas-induced apoptosis through lectin-like oxidized-low density lipoprotein receptor-1 in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells. *Circ J* 66:1060-1064.

Inoue K, Arai Y, Kurihava H, Kita T, Sawamura T (2005) Overexpression of lectin-like Oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 induces intramyocardial vasculopathy in apolipoprotein E-null mice. *Circ Res* 97:176-184.

Inoue N, Fujita Y, Sawamura T (2006) Progress in the research on LOX-1 and its clinical relevance. *Nippon Yakurig Zass* 127:103-108.

Ishigaki T, Ohki I, Oyama T, Machida S, Morikawa K, Tate S (2005) Purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of the ligand-binding domain of human lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein. *Acta Crystallograph Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun* 61(Pt 5):524-527.

Ishino S, Mukai T, Kume N, Asano D, Ogawa M, Kuge Y, Minami M, Kita T, Shiomi M, Saji H (2007) Lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) expression is associated with atherosclerotic plaque instability—analysis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits. *Atherosclerosis* 2007 Jan 18; [Epub ahead of print].

Itabe H, Yamamoto H, Suzuki M, Kawai Y, Nakagawa Y, Suzuki A, Imanaka T, Takano T (1996) Oxidized phosphatidylcholines that modify proteins. Analysis by monoclonal antibody against oxidized low density lipoprotein. *J Biol Chem* 271:33208-33217.

Kaisner S (1995) Coronary artery spasm: Multiple causes and multiple roles in heart disease. *Biochem Pharmacol* 49:859-871.

Kakinuma T, Yasuda T, Nakagawa T, Hiramitsu T, Akiyoshi M, Akagi M, Sawamura T, Nakamura T (2004) Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 mediates matrix metalloproteinase 3 synthesis enhanced by oxidized low-density lipoprotein in rheumatoid arthritis cartilage. *Arthritis Rheum* 50:3495-3503.

Kakutani M, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2000) A platelet-endothelium interaction mediated by lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 97:360-364.

Kakutani M, Ueda M, Naruko T, Masaki T, Sawamura T (2001) Accumulation of LOX-1 ligand in plasma and atherosclerotic lesions of Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits: Identification by a novel enzyme immunoassay. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 282:180-185.

Kanata S, Akagi M, Nishimura S, Hayakawa S, Yoshida K, Sawamura T, Munakata H, Hamanishi C (2006) Oxidized LDL binding to LOX-1 upregulates VEGF expression in cultured bovine chondrocytes through activation of PPAR-gamma. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 348:1003-1010.

Kataoka H, Kume N, Miyamoto S, Minami M, Moriwaki H, Murase T, Sawamura T, Masaki T, Hashimoto N, Kita T (1999) Expression of lectin like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 in human atherosclerotic lesions. *Circulation* 99:3110-3117.

Kataoka H, Kume N, Miyamoto S, Minami M, Morimoto M, Hayashida K, Hashimoto N, Kita T (2001) Oxidized LDL modulates Bax/Bcl-2 through the lectin like Ox-LDL receptor-1 in vascular smooth muscle cells. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 21:955-960.

Kuhlmann CR, Schafer M, Li F, Sawamura T, Tillmanns H, Waldecker B, Wiecha J (2003) Modulation of endothelial Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels by oxidized LDL and its contribution to endothelial proliferation. *Cardiovasc Res* 60:626-634.

Kume N, Kita T (2001a) Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) in atherogenesis. *Trends Cardiovasc Med* 11:22-25.

Kume N, Kita T (2001b) Roles of lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 and its soluble forms in atherogenesis. *Curr Opin Lipidol* 12:419-423.

Kume N, Murase T, Moriwaki H, Aoyama T, Sawamura T, Masaki T, Kita T (1998) Inducible expression of lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 in vascular endothelial cells. *Circ Res* 83:322-327.

Lee RT, Libby P (1997) The unstable atheroma. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 17:1859-1867.

Li D, Chen H, Romeo F, Sawamura T, Saldeen T, Mehta JL (2002) Statins modulate oxidized low-density lipoprotein-mediated adhesion molecule expression in human coronary artery endothelial cells: Role of LOX-1. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* 302:601-605.

Li DY, Chen HJ, Mehta JL (2001) Statins inhibit oxidized-LDL-mediated LOX-1 expression, uptake of ox-LDL and reduction in PKB phosphorylation. *Cardiovasc Res* 52:217-225.

Li D, Liu L, Chen H, Sawamura T, Ranganathan S, Mehta J (2003a) LOX-1 mediates oxidized low-density lipoprotein-Induced expression of matrix metalloproteinases in human coronary artery endothelial cells. *Circulation* 107:612-617.

Li D, Mehta JL (2000a) Upregulation of endothelial receptor for oxidized LDL (LOX-1) by oxidized LDL and implications in apoptosis of human coronary artery endothelial cells: Evidence from use of antisense LOX-1 mRNA and chemical inhibitors. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 20:1116-1122.

Li DY, Mehta JL (2000b) Antisense to LOX-1 inhibits oxidized LDL-mediated upregulation of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and monocyte adhesion to human coronary artery endothelial cells. *Circulation* 101:2889-2895.

Li D, Saldeen T, Romeo F, Mehta JL (2000) Oxidized LDL upregulates angiotensin II type 1 receptor expression in cultured human coronary artery endothelial cells: the potential role of transcription factor NF-kB. *Circulation* 102:1970-1976.

Li D, Singh RM, Liu L, Chen H, Singh BM, Kazzaz N, Mehta JL (2003b) Oxidized-LDL through LOX-1 increases the expression of angiotensin converting enzyme in human coronary artery endothelial cells. *Cardiovasc Res* 57:238-243.

Li D, Williams V, Liu L, Chen H, Sawamura T, Romeo F, Mehta JL (2003c) Expression of lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptors during ischemia-reperfusion and its role in determination of apoptosis and left ventricular dysfunction. *J Am Coll Cardiol* 41:1048-1055.

Li DY, Zhang YC, Philips MI, Sawamura T, Mehta JL (1999) Upregulation of endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LOX-1) in cultured human coronary artery endothelial cells by angiotensin II type 1 receptor activation. *Circ Res* 84:1043-1049.

Lusis AJ (2000) Atherosclerosis. *Nature* 407:233-241.

Mango R, Biocca S, Del Vecchio F, Clementi F, Sanguolo F, Amati F, Filareto A, Grelli S, Spitalieri P, Filesi I, Favalli C, Lauro R, Mehta JL, Romeo F, Novelli G (2005) In vivo and in vitro studies support that a new splicing isoform of OLR1 gene is protective against acute myocardial infarction. *Circ Res* 97:152-158.

Martinet W, Kockx MM (2001) Apoptosis in atherosclerosis: Focus on oxidized lipids and inflammation. *Curr Opin Lipidol* 12:535-541.

Mayr M, Xu Q (2001) Smooth muscle cell apoptosis in arteriosclerosis. *Exp Gerontol* 36:969-987.

Mehta JL (2004) The role of LOX-1, a novel lectin-like receptor for oxidized low density lipoprotein, in atherosclerosis. *Can J Cardiol* 20:32B-36B.

Mehta JL, Chen J, Hermonat PL, Romeo F, Novelli G (2006) Lectin-like, oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1): A critical player in the development of atherosclerosis and related disorders. *Cardiovasc Res* 69:36-45.

Mehta JL, Chen J, Yu F, Li DY (2004) Aspirin inhibits OX-LDL-mediated LOX-1 expression and metalloproteinase-1 in human coronary endothelial cells. *Cardiovasc Res* 64:243-249.

Mehta JL, Li DY (2002) Identification, regulation of a novel lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor. *J Am Coll Cardiol* 9:1429-1435.

Mehta JL, Li DY, Chen HJ, Joseph J, Romeo F (2001) Inhibition of LOX-1 by statins may relate to upregulation of eNOS. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 289:857-861.

Morawietz H, Rueckschloss U, Niemann B, Duerrschmidt N, Galle J, Hakim K, Zerkowski HR, Sawamura T, Holtz J (1999) Angiotensin II induces LOX-1, the human endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein. *Circulation* 100:899-902.

Moriwaki H, Kume N, Kataoka H, Murase T, Nishi E, Sawamura T, Masaki T, Kita T (1998) Expression of lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1 in human and murine macrophages: Upregulated expression by TNF-a. *FEBS Lett* 440:29-32.

Murase T, Kume N, Kataoka H, Minami M, Sawamura T, Masaki T, Kita T (2000) Identification of soluble forms of lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 20:715-720.

Murphy JE, Tacon D, Tedbury PR, Hadden JM, Knowling S, Sawamura T, Peckham M, Phillips SE, Walker JH, Ponnambalam S (2006) LOX-1 scavenger receptor mediates calcium-dependent recognition of phosphatidylserine and apoptotic cells. *Biochem J* 393:107-115.

Nagase M, Abe J, Takahashi K, Ando J, Hirose S, Fujita T (1998a) Genomic organization and regulation of expression of the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1) gene. *J Biol Chem* 273:33702-33707.

Nagase M, Ando K, Nagase T, Kaname S, Sawamura T, Fujita T (2001) Redox-sensitive regulation of LOX-1 gene expression in vascular endothelium. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 281:720-725.

Nagase M, Fujita T (2000) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptors. *Nippon Rinsho* 58:210-213.

Nagase M, Hirose S, Fujita T (1998b) Unique repetitive sequence and unexpected regulation of expression of rat endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LOX-1). *Biochem J* 330:1417-1422.

Napoli C (2003) Oxidation of LDL, atherogenesis, and apoptosis. *Ann N Y Acad Sci* 1010:698-709.

Nishimura S, Akagi M, Yoshida K, Hayakawa S, Sawamura T, Munakata H, Hamanishi C (2004) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) binding to lectin-like ox-LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) in cultured bovine articular chondrocytes increases production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting in the activation of NF-kappaB. *Osteoarthritis Cartilage* 12:568-576.

Ohki I, Ishigaki T, Oyama T, Matsunaga S, Xie Q, Ohnishi-Kameyama M, Murata T, Tsuchiya D, Machida S, Morikawa K, Tate S (2005) Crystal structure of human lectin-like, oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 ligand binding domain and its ligand recognition mode to OxLDL. *Structure* 13:905-917.

Oka K, Sawamura T, Kikuta K, Itokawa S, Kume N, Kita T, Masaki T (1998). Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 mediates phagocytosis of aged/apoptotic cells in endothelial cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95:9535-9540.

Park H, Adsit FG, Boyington JC (2005) The crystal structure of the human oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor LOX-1. *J Biol Chem* 280:13593-13599.

Pasterkamp G, Schoneveld AH, Hijnen DJ, de Kleijn DP, Teepen H, Van Der Wal AC, Borst C (2000) Atherosclerotic arterial remodeling and the localization of macrophages and matrix metalloproteases 1, 2 and 9 in the human coronary artery. *Atherosclerosis* 150:245-253.

Puccetti L, Pasqui AL, Bruni F, Pastorelli M, Ciani F, Palazzuoli A, Pontani A, Ghezzi A, Auteri A (2006) Lectin-like oxidized-LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) polymorphisms influence cardiovascular events rate during statin treatment. *Int J Cardiol* 2006 Oct 12; [Epub ahead of print].

Puccetti L, Sawamura T, Pasqui AL, Pastorelli M, Auteri A, Bruni F (2005) Atorvastatin reduces platelet-oxidized LDL receptor expression in hypercholesterolaemic patients. *Eur J Clin Invest* 35:47-51.

Ranheim T, Halvorsen B (2006) LOX-1—an actor in cardiovascular disease? *Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen* 126:753-755.

Ross R (1999) Atherosclerosis—an inflammatory disease. *N Engl J Med* 340:115-126.

Sakurai K, Sawamura T (2003) Stress and vascular responses: Endothelial dysfunction via lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1: Close relationships with oxidative stress. *J Pharmacol Sci* 91:182-186.

Salvayre R, Auge N, Benoist H, Negre-Salvayre A (2002) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced apoptosis. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1585:213-221.

Sattler W, Malle E, Kostner GM (1998) Methodological approaches for assessing lipid and protein oxidation and modification in plasma and isolated lipoproteins. *Methods Mol Biol* 110:167-191.

Sawamura T (2002a) LOX-1: The oxidized LDL receptor expressed in vascular endothelial cells. *Seikagaku* 74:365-376.

Sawamura T (2002b) Molecular identification of LOX-1 and analysis of its pathophysiological role. *Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi* 119:145-154.

Sawamura T, Kume N, Aoyama T, Moriwaki H, Hoshikawa H, Ariba Y, Tanaka T, Miwa S, Katsura Y, Kita T, Masaki T (1997) An endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein. *Nature* 386:73-77.

Seibold S, Schurle D, Heinloth A, Wolf G, Wagner M, Galle J (2004) Oxidized LDL induces proliferation and hypertrophy in human umbilical vein endothelial cells via regulation of p27Kip1 expression: Role of RhoA. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 15:3026-3034.

Shi X, Niimi S, Ohtani T, Machida S (2001) Characterization of residues and sequences of the carbohydrate recognition domain required for cell surface localization and ligand binding of human lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor. *J Cell Sci* 114(Pt 7):1273-1282.

Shimaoka T, Kume N, Minami M, Hayashida K, Sawamura T, Kita T, Yonehara S (2001a) Lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) supports cell adhesion to fibronectin. *FEBS Lett* 504:65-68.

Shimaoka T, Kume N, Minami M, Hayashida K, Sawamura T, Kita T, Yonehara S (2001b) LOX-1 supports adhesion of Gram-positive LOX-1 supports adhesion of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. *J Immunol* 166:5108-5114.

Steinbrecher UP (1999) Receptors for oxidized low density lipoprotein. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1436:279-298.

Tang X, Downes CP, Whetton AD, Owen-Lynch PJ (2000) Role of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and specific protein kinase B isoforms in the suppression of apoptosis mediated by the Abelson protein-tyrosine kinase. *J Biol Chem* 275:3142-3148.

Tanigawa H, Miura S, Zhang B, Uehara Y, Matsuo Y, Fujino M, Sawamura T, Saku K (2006) Low-density lipoprotein oxidized to various degrees activates ERK1/2 through Lox-1. *Atherosclerosis* 188:245-250.

Tatsuguchi M, Furutani M, Hinagata J, Tanaka T, Furutani Y, Imamura S, Kawana M, Masaki T, Kasanuki H, Sawamura T, Matsuoka R (2003) Oxidized LDL receptor gene (OLR1) is associated with the risk of myocardial infarction. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 303:247-250.

Tegos T, Kalodiki E, Sabetai MM, Nicolaides AN (2001) The genesis of atherosclerosis and risk factors: A review. *Angiology* 52:89-98.

Thomas MJ (2000) Physiological aspects of low-density lipoprotein oxidation. *Curr Opin Lipidol* 11:297-301.

Thomas T, Jürgen B (2004) Mechanistic role of cytochrome P450 monooxy genases in oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced vascular injury therapy through LOX-1 receptor antagonism? *Circ Res* 94:1-13.

Tipping PG, Hancock WW (1993) Production of tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1 by macrophages from human atheromatous plaques. *Am J Pathol* 142:1721-1728.

Toba H, Shimizu T, Miki S, Inoue R, Yoshimura A, Tsukamoto R, Sawai N, Kobara M, Nakata T (2006) Calcium channel blockers reduce angiotensin II-induced superoxide generation and inhibit lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 expression in endothelial cells. *Hypertens Res* 29:105-116.

Vohra RS, Murphy JE, Walker JH, Ponnambalam S, Homer-Vanniasinkam S (2006) Atherosclerosis and the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein scavenger receptor. *Trends Cardiovasc Med* 16:60-64.

Xu X, Gao X, Potter BJ, Cao JM, Zhang C (2007) Anti-LOX-1 rescues endothelial function in coronary arterioles in atherosclerotic ApoE knockout mice. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 2007 Feb 1; [Epub ahead of print].

Yamanaka S, Zhang XY, Miura K, Kim S, Iwao H (1998) The human gene encoding the lectin-type oxidized LDL receptor (OLR1) is a novel member of the natural killer gene complex with a unique expression profile. *Genomics* 54:191-199.

Yoshida T, Koide N, Mori I, Ito H, Yokochi T (2006) Chlamydia pneumoniae infection enhances lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1) expression on human endothelial cells. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 260:17-22.

Zeiher AM, Schachinger V (1994) Coronary endothelial vasodilator dysfunction: Clinical relevance and therapeutic implications. *Z Kardiol* 83(suppl. 3):7-14.
