
REVIEW

# Coordinating TLR-activated signaling pathways in cells of the immune system

Ashish Banerjee and Steve Gerondakis

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling leads to the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor-κB signaling pathways. While the upstream signaling events initiated at the level of adaptors and the activation of the downstream signaling pathways have received a lot of attention, our understanding of how these signaling pathways are coordinated to regulate gene expression is poorly understood. This review gives a selective overview on our current understanding of signaling downstream of TLRs, with an emphasis on how the upstream kinases like the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (TAK1 and Tpl2) and inhibitor of κ-B kinase (IKK) coordinate the signaling events that steer the course of an immune response.

*Immunology and Cell Biology* (2007) 85, 420–424; doi:10.1038/sj.icb.7100098; published online 17 July 2007

Keywords: TLR signaling; Tpl2; ERK; NF-κB; gene regulation

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) comprise a family of conserved cell surface and intracellular proteins that serve as innate immune sensors of specific microbial components termed as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).¹ Through a series of adaptor proteins recruited to PAMP-activated TLRs, the engagement of a number of key downstream intracellular signaling pathways determines the specificity, intensity and duration of the specific patterns of gene expression that ultimately steer the course of the innate and subsequent adaptive immune responses.²⁻⁶ Signals emanating from TLRs diverge at the level of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAP3Ks), which act as activation nodes for nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38.⁷

The NF-κB family of transcription factors comprises homodimers and heterodimers of five related proteins [NF-κB1 (p105/p50), NF-κB2 (p100/p52), c-Rel, RelA (p65) and RelB].⁸ In unstimulated cells, they are held as inactive complexes in the cytoplasm by inhibitor of κB (IκB) proteins. TLR signaling via the MAP3K, TAK1 leads to the activation of the inhibitor of κB kinase (IKK) complex,⁷,⁹,¹⁰ comprising two catalytic (IKKα and IKKβ) and a regulatory (NEMO) subunit. IκK-mediated phosphorylation of IκB targets it for ubiquitin-dependent proteasome-mediated degradation, thereby releasing NF-κB to be translocated to the nucleus where it regulates the transcription of genes encoding inflammatory and immune mediators through the recognition and binding decameric sequences (κB elements) found in the regulatory regions of target genes.

The MAP kinase signaling pathways function as three-tiered kinase cascades resulting in the activation of the effector kinases, JNK, p38 and ERK. The initial step in TLR-induced MAPK activation involves two distinct MAP3Ks, TAK1 and Tpl2. While TAK1 activates JNK and p38 via the kinase intermediates (MAP2Ks), MKK3 and MKK6,⁷ Tpl2 phosphorylation of the MAP2Ks, MEK1 and MEK2 result in ERK activation.¹¹⁻¹³

This review while mainly focusing on the mechanisms by which MAPK- and NF-κB-dependent gene expression is co-coordinated in response to TLR signals, will also briefly highlight some recent findings concerning TLR signaling in immune responses.

## TLR SIGNALING: A TALE OF TWO MAP3Ks

To date, our most detailed understanding of how downstream signaling pathways are engaged by TLRs has come from the study of the universal adaptor protein MyD88. Ligand binding to TLRs that leads to MyD88 recruitment results in the formation of a signaling complex composed of the kinases, IRAK1 and IRAK4, plus the cytoplasmic adaptor TRAF6.¹⁴ Phosphorylation of IRAK1 by IRAK4 leads to the activation of TRAF6 that in turn recruits the Ubc13/Uev1E2 complex. Biochemical experiments provide strong evidence, the TRAF6/Ubc13/ Uev1 complex functions as an ubiquitin ligase that activates TAK1 in an ubiquitin-dependent manner.¹⁵ While TAK1 is necessary for activating IKK and therefore NF-κB, the mechanism by which TAK1 activates IKK remains unknown. TAK1 also phosphorylates two members of the MAP2K family, MKK3 and MKK6, which in turn phosphorylate the stress-activated protein kinases, p38 and JNK, respectively.¹⁶ Although this mode of MyD88-dependent NF-κB, JNK and p38 activation is utilized by almost all TLRs, TLR3 and TLR4 can also promote the activation of these signaling pathways by recruiting the alternate adaptor protein, TRIF.⁵ In the case of TLR4, TRIF does not directly interact with this TLR; another adaptor TRAM, which is necessary for TRIF-dependent signaling downstream of

---

Immunology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia  
Correspondence: Dr A Banerjee, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.  
E-mail: banerjee@wehi.edu.au  
Received 8 June 2007; accepted 12 June 2007; published online 17 July 2007

TLR4, appears to act as a bridge between TLR4 and TRIF.⁶ TLR3 on the other hand signals almost exclusively through TRIF, with TLR3-mediated signaling being relatively normal in *myd88⁻/⁻* cells. TRIF activates NF-κB through recruitment of RIP1, which in turn activates the IKK complex.¹⁷

Whereas TAK1 activates both JNK and p38, the MAP3K, Tpl2 appears to serve this role for the ERK pathway downstream of most, if not all TLRs.¹¹,¹³ Tpl2 was originally identified as a target for pro-viral integration in retrovirus-induced T-cell lymphomas and mammary carcinomas.¹⁸–²⁰ Although enforced overexpression of Tpl2 was shown to activate ERK, JNK and p38, plus the transcription factors NF-AT and NF-κB,²¹–²³ recent studies using *tpl2⁻/⁻* mice have established that Tpl2 specifically activates ERK in TLR-stimulated cells.¹²,²⁴ In non-stimulated cells, Tpl2 is bound to the NF-κB1 precursor protein p105.¹³,²⁵ While most of the p105 in a cell is converted into the mature 50 kDa NF-κB1 transcription factor, approximately one-third of the p105 pool is dedicated to regulating Tpl2-dependent ERK activation.²⁵,²⁶ Recent studies have established that the interaction between Tpl2 and p105 is essential for stabilizing Tpl2 and keeping it in an inactive state.²⁷ As well as the C terminus of both proteins being involved in this interaction, the Tpl2 kinase domain also interacts with the p105 death domain, raising the possibility that p105 may also be a Tpl2 target.²⁵ Despite biochemical evidence that p105 is phosphorylated by Tpl2, the biological significance of such an event remains unclear.²⁵,²⁸ Following TLR stimulation, the Tpl2 released from p105 is activated,¹³ a process thought to be linked to Tpl2 phosphorylation by as yet unknown kinases. Although this active form of Tpl2 is now able to phosphorylate MEK, the MAP2K upstream of ERK, TLR signals only result in a transient burst of ERK activity due to the rapid degradation of active Tpl2, which leads to the subsequent shutdown of the ERK pathway. In the absence of p105NF-κB1, steady-state levels of Tpl2 are undetectable in cells such as macrophages that normally express high levels of this MAP3K, due to its rapid turnover.¹³ As a consequence, *nfkb1⁻/⁻* macrophages fail to activate ERK in response to TLR ligands.¹¹ The finding that in *nfkb1⁻/⁻* macrophages phorbol ester activation of ERK is intact, is consistent with this stimulus operating via the alternate MAP3K, c-Raf.¹³

**Tpl2: GOING BEYOND MACROPHAGES AND TLRs**

The role of Tpl2 as the essential mediator of TLR-dependent ERK activation is not limited to macrophages. Follicular B cells from *nfkb1⁻/⁻* mice also exhibit an ERK activation defect when stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or CpG, the respective ligands for TLR4 and TLR9.¹¹ However, there is evidence to indicate that Tpl2 may not be the sole MAP3K necessary for TLR-dependent ERK activation in all cell types. Notably, keratinocytes do not express Tpl2 and consistent with this finding, TLR4 activation of ERK is normal in *nfkb1⁻/⁻* keratinocytes.¹¹ It has also been reported that ERK is activated in CpG-stimulated *tpl2⁻/⁻*-elicited peritoneal macrophages.²⁹ This later finding is particularly intriguing, given the failure to activate ERK in bone marrow-derived *tpl2⁻/⁻* or *nfkb1⁻/⁻* macrophages.¹¹,³⁰ Given the properties of these two types of macrophages differ markedly; these findings raise the possibility that Tpl2-dependent ERK activation in the monocytic lineage may be differentiation or activation status dependent.

In addition to Tpl2 cell-type dependency for TLR-induced ERK activity, certain non-TLR signals utilize Tpl2 for ERK induction. For example, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)-dependent ERK activation is defective in *tpl2⁻/⁻* embryonic fibroblasts,³¹ while isotype switching in CD40-stimulated *tpl2⁻/⁻* B cells is impaired.³² The finding that

both TNF-α and CD40, both ligands for the TNF receptor superfamily, can activate ERK in a Tpl2-dependent manner raises the possibility that other ligands in this receptor family may also activate ERK via Tpl2.

**THE IKK COMPLEX: COORDINATING NF-κB AND ERK SIGNALING**

Signals including those from TLRs, in addition to activating the classical NF-κB pathway via IKKβ-dependent IkBα phosphorylation and degradation also result in the proteolysis of the p105 NF-κB1 precursor. Indeed, LPS stimulation of a number of different cell types induces a modest increase in p50 levels as a consequence of p105 proteolysis.³³,³⁴ The p50 homodimers generated in this manner, despite lacking an intrinsic transcriptional transactivation domain, are capable of driving the transcription of a subset of genes by utilizing Bcl3 as a co-activator.³⁵,³⁶

As mentioned previously, with a proportion of the cellular pool of p105 forming a complex with Tpl2, IKKβ-mediated phosphorylation of p105 following TLR signaling is also critical for Tpl2 release and activation in order to trigger the ERK pathway.³⁷ Consequently, IKKβ serves as a critical switch for activating both the NF-κB and ERK signaling pathways, providing a mechanism whereby microbial signals can coordinate the induced expression of genes that are dependent on NF-κB and ERK-regulated transcription factors. One such example is the induction of interleukin-10 (IL-10) by LPS and CpG, in which optimal expression of this cytokine is dependent on NF-κB and ERK-regulated transcription factors.¹¹,³⁸

**TLR-REGULATED GENE EXPRESSION**

A common feature of signaling through all TLRs is that the induced expression of many of the pro-inflammatory cytokines and immune mediators is dependent on both NF-κB and MAP kinase-dependent transcription factors (Figure 1). Of the transcription factors activated by TLRs, activator protein 1 (AP-1) regulated by the JNK pathway and NF-κB have received the most attention.³⁹ A comprehensive discussion of these roles for AP-1 and NF-κB can be found elsewhere.³⁹ The role of the p38 signaling and particularly that of the ERK pathway in TLR-induced gene expression have received less attention, with both of these signaling pathways having been shown to regulate gene expression at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

The p38 signaling pathway has been shown to regulate gene expression at three distinct levels; at the transcriptional level through phosphorylation of transcription factors such as CREB, through chromatin modification by flagging the promoters of specific inflammatory genes for increased NF-κB recruitment and by post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA stability. One of the p38-dependent transcription factors CREB is phosphorylated on S133 by Msk1, a downstream kinase target of p38.⁴⁰ The TLR-dependent phosphorylation of CREB, which enhances its transactivation potential, is an important regulatory step in the transcriptional induction of many pro-inflammatory mediators, including cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox-2) and TNFα.²⁴ p38 signaling is also important in regulating the level of transcripts with AU-rich elements (AREs) in the 3′-untranslated region.⁴¹,⁴² AREs are mRNA destabilizing sequences that are characteristic feature of a majority of mRNAs encoding inflammatory proteins (for example, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, Cox-2 and TNF-α) and certain transcription factors (for example, c-fos).⁴²,⁴³ p38 activation following TLR stimulation leads to the stabilization of ARE-tagged mRNAs, possibly through mechanisms such as inhibition of proteins like tristetraprolin (TTP) that bind to the AREs and target the transcripts for degradation.⁴²,⁴⁴,⁴⁵

Coordination of TLR-activated signaling pathways  
A Banerjee and S Gerondakis  

emerge. It was shown recently that Tpl2-mediated ERK activation is required for LPS-induced production of TNF-$\alpha$, IL-1$\beta$ and Cox-2. ${ }^{12,24,30}$ While ERK regulation of TNF-$\alpha$ involves both transcriptional and post-transcriptional (nucleocytoplasmic transport of tnfa mRNA) mechanisms, ${ }^{12,29}$ its effect on Cox-2 induction appears to be transcriptional. ${ }^{24}$ More recently, a Tpl2-interacting protein, ABIN2, was shown to regulate Tpl2-mediated ERK activation, and macrophages from $abin2^{-/-}$ mice were shown to have lower levels of Tpl2 and to be deficient in ERK activation following stimulation with ligands for TLR2, TLR3, TLR4 and TLR9. ${ }^{26,30}$ However, ERK activation in LPS-stimulated $abin2^{-/-}$ DCs was only marginally reduced, indicating the role of ABIN2 in regulating ERK activation is cell-type specific. ${ }^{30}$ While the expression of IL-1$\beta$ was reduced, notably the levels of TNF-$\alpha$ and Cox-2 in LPS-stimulated $abin2^{-/-}$ macrophages was unaffected. ${ }^{30}$ Collectively, these data indicate that different thresholds of ERK activity are required for the expression of individual cytokines and pro-inflammatory mediators.

### TLR SIGNALING IN THE IMMUNE RESPONSE

It is now being increasingly appreciated that TLR signaling impinges on both the humoral and the cell-mediated arm of the immune system. Optimal TLR signals determine the production of the right combination of cytokines and immune mediators necessary to steer the course of a successful adaptive immune response. ${ }^{52}$ TLR regulation of immune responses can be broadly classified into antigen-presenting cell (APC) dependent and independent. During an infection, the innate elements of the immune system comprising macrophages and neutrophils are activated through TLRs to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines that initiate a local inflammatory reaction. Dendritic cells (DCs), the professional APCs of the immune system, also respond to TLR agonists during the infection by upregulating the surface expression of co-stimulatory molecules and depending on the nature of the TLR ligand can also regulate T helper 1/T helper 2 cell (Th1/Th2) differentiation. For example, Pam3Cys, a TLR2 ligand, promotes Th2 differentiation through its ability to induce stronger ERK activity in DC that in turn induces higher levels of IL-10 than IL-12. ${ }^{53}$ LPS, a TLR4 ligand, on the other hand, promotes Th1 differentiation because it induces weak ERK activity in DCs that leads to the preferential production of IL-12. ${ }^{52,54,55}$ Consistent with these findings, there is emerging data that show different TLRs agonists can be effectively used as adjuvants to prime the correct type of immune response during vaccination. ${ }^{55,56}$

In contrast to macrophages and DCs, the immunological consequences of TLR signaling in lymphocytes have received less attention. For B cells, signaling through TLRs, in addition to regulating antibody production in a T cell-independent fashion, has also been found to be crucial for the generation of T cell-dependent antigen-specific antibody responses. ${ }^{57,58}$ An examination of antigen-specific IgG production in $\mu$MT mice, which lack mature B cells, was found to be impaired when engrafted with TLR4- or MyD88-deficient B cells. ${ }^{57}$ TLRs are also expressed on CD4 ${ }^{+}$ T cells, raising the possibility that TLR ligands may directly control T-cells responses. ${ }^{59}$ Consistent with such a notion, it has been shown that ligands for TLR2, 4, 8 and 9 can directly enhance the proliferative response of CD3-stimulated CD4 ${}^{+}$ T cells. ${ }^{60-62}$ More recently, CpG DNA was shown to enhance the survival and proliferation of CD3-activated CD4T cells in a MyD88-dependent manner. ${ }^{63,64}$ Furthermore, TLR4 signaling is believed to enhance the suppressor function of CD4 ${}^{+}$ CD25 ${}^{+}$ T regulatory cells. ${ }^{65}$ Collectively, these observations strongly suggest that the direct regulation of lymphocyte function by TLR signaling *in vivo* should be taken into consideration when studying immune responses to pathogens.

Interestingly $ttp^{-/-}$ mice display an inflammatory phenotype caused by the expression of abnormally high levels of TNF-$\alpha$ and Cox-2, ${ }^{46}$ indicating that TTP is a negative regulator of inflammation but the precise mechanism of TTP regulation by p38 is poorly understood. Other proteins such as HuR and AUF1 have been implicated in the p38 regulation of inflammatory mRNAs, but like TTP the mechanism of regulation is largely unknown. ${ }^{47-50}$ Finally, p38 has also been shown to facilitate the binding of NF-$\kappa$B to its target sequence on promoters of IL-8 and MCP-1 by mediating the phosphorylation of histone H3 at S10. ${ }^{51}$

Of the MAP kinase pathways activated downstream of TLRs, the role of the ERK signaling pathway has largely been ignored and only now is its contribution to TLR-mediated gene expression beginning to

Figure 1 TLR signaling pathways. Engagement of TLRs leads to the recruitment of adaptor proteins. All TLRs except TLR3 engage the ubiquitous intracellular adaptor MyD88; TLR3 instead engages TRIF. The adaptors then recruit a supramolecular signaling complex composed of IRAK1, IRAK4 and TRAF6 that subsequently activates the MAP3Ks, TAK1 and Tpl2. TAK1 activates the IKK complex and the stress-activated protein kinases p38 and JNK through the intermediates MKK3 and MKK6, while Tpl2 activates the ERK signaling pathway via MKK1 and MKK2. TLR3, on the other hand, activates the IKK complex through RIP1. Transcription factors downstream of these signaling pathways (CREB, AP-1 and NF-$\kappa$B) then collaborate to regulate the expression of immune and inflammatory mediators. TLR, Toll-like receptor; MAP3Ks, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases; IKK, inhibitor of $\kappa$-B kinase; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; AP-1, activator protein 1; NF-$\kappa$B, nuclear factor-$\kappa$B.

CONCLUSION

Although the studies reported thus far have identified the individual roles of different signaling pathways initiated downstream of TLRs, little is known about the mechanisms coordinating gene expression controlled by the pathways such as NF-κB and ERK. The genetic models outlined above will continue to aid our understanding of the nature of the cross talk between these individual signaling pathways in regulating transcription. Future challenges in this area include understanding how epigenetic changes induced by TLR signals contribute to the transcription of genes that are co-regulated by ERK and NF-κB signaling pathways. Ultimately, an appreciation of the fine tuning of gene expression by different intracellular signaling pathways, in the context of TLR signaling, will help immensely in recognizing the determinants that ultimately shape the course of immune responses to microbes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Due to the extensive and overlapping nature of the literature encompassing this subject matter, it is inevitable that certain studies were not quoted and we apologize to colleagues for any such omissions. We also wish to acknowledge the ongoing support that the laboratory receives from the National Health and Medical Research Council (Australia) and the Leukaemia and Lymphoma Society (USA).

1 Akira S. TLR signaling. *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol* 2006; **311**:1–16.
2 Horng T, Barton GM, Medzhitov R. TIRAP: an adapter molecule in the Toll signaling pathway. *Nat Immunol* 2001; **2**:835–841.
3 Horng T, Barton GM, Flavell RA, Medzhitov R. The adaptor molecule TIRAP provides signalling specificity for Toll-like receptors. *Nature* 2002; **420**:329–333.
4 McGettrick AF, O'Neill LA. The expanding family of MyD88-like adaptors in Toll-like receptor signal transduction. *Mol Immunol* 2004; **41**:577–582.
5 Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Sanjo H et al. Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent Toll-like receptor signaling pathway. *Science* 2003; **301**:640–643.
6 Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Uematsu S, Hoshino K, Kaisho T et al. TRAM is specifically involved in the Toll-like receptor 4-mediated MyD88-independent signaling pathway. *Nat Immunol* 2003; **4**:1144–1150.
7 Barton GM, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptor signaling pathways. *Science* 2003; **300**:1524–1525.
8 Gerondakis S, Grumont R, Gugasyan R, Wong L, Isomura I, Ho W et al. Unravelling the complexities of the NF-kappaB signalling pathway using mouse knockout and transgenic models. *Oncogene* 2006; **25**:6781–6799.
9 Irie T, Muta T, Takeshige K. TAK1 mediates an activation signal from Toll-like receptor(s) to nuclear factor-kappaB in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages. *FEBS Lett* 2000; **467**:160–164.
10 Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Kishimoto K, Hiyama A, Inoue J, Cao Z, Matsumoto K. The kinase TAK1 can activate the NIK-I kappaB as well as the MAP kinase cascade in the IL-1 signalling pathway. *Nature* 1999; **398**:252–256.
11 Banerjee A, Gugasyan R, McMahon M, Gerondakis S. Diverse Toll-like receptors utilize Tpl2 to activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in hemopoietic cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2006; **103**:3274–3279.
12 Dumitru CD, Ceci JD, Tsatsanis C, Kontoyiannis D, Stamatakis K, Lin JH et al. TNF-alpha induction by LPS is regulated posttranscriptionally via a Tpl2/ERK-dependent pathway. *Cell* 2000; **103**:1071–1083.
13 Waterfield MR, Zhang M, Norman LP, Sun SC. NF-kappaB1/p105 regulates lipopoly-saccharide-stimulated MAP kinase signaling by governing the stability and function of the Tpl2 kinase. *Mol Cell* 2003; **11**:685–694.
14 Chen ZJ, Bhoj V, Seth RB. Ubiquitin, TAK1 and IKK: is there a connection? *Cell Death Differ* 2006; **13**:687–692.
15 Deng L, Wang C, Spencer E, Yang L, Braun A, You J et al. Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain. *Cell* 2000; **103**:351–361.
16 Wang C, Deng L, Hong M, Akkaraju GR, Inoue J, Chen ZJ. TAK1 is a ubiquitin-dependent kinase of MKK and IKK. *Nature* 2001; **412**:346–351.
17 Ea CK, Deng L, Xia ZP, Pineda G, Chen ZJ. Activation of IKK by TNFalpha requires site-specific ubiquitination of RIP1 and polyubiquitin binding by NEMO. *Mol Cell* 2006; **22**:245–257.
18 Ceci JD, Patriotis CP, Tsatsanis C, Makris AM, Kovatch R, Swing DA et al. Tpl-2 is an oncogenic kinase that is activated by carboxy-terminal truncation. *Genes Dev* 1997; **11**:688–700.
19 Erny KM, Peli J, Lambert JF, Muller V, Diggelmann H. Involvement of the Tpl-2/cot oncogene in MMTV tumorigenesis. *Oncogene* 1996; **13**:2015–2020.

20 Patriotis C, Makris A, Bear SE, Tsichlis PN. Tumor progression locus 2 (Tpl-2) encodes a protein kinase involved in the progression of rodent T-cell lymphomas and in T-cell activation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1993; **90**:2251–2255.
21 Chiariello M, Marinissen MJ, Gutkind JS. Multiple mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways connect the cot oncoprotein to the c-jun promoter and to cellular transformation. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000; **20**:1747–1758.
22 Salmeron A, Ahmad TB, Carlile GW, Pappin D, Narasimhan RP, Ley SC. Activation of MEK-1 and SEK-1 by Tpl-2 proto-oncoprotein, a novel MAP kinase kinase. *EMBO J* 1996; **15**:817–826.
23 Tsatsanis C, Patriotis C, Bear SE, Tsichlis PN. The Tpl-2 protooncoprotein activates the nuclear factor of activated T cells and induces interleukin 2 expression in T cell lines. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1998; **95**:3827–3832.
24 Eliopoulos AG, Dumitru CD, Wang CC, Cho J, Tsichlis PN. Induction of COX-2 by LPS in macrophages is regulated by Tpl2-dependent CREB activation signals. *EMBO J* 2002; **21**:4831–4840.
25 Belich MP, Salmeron A, Johnston LH, Ley SC. TPL-2 kinase regulates the proteolysis of the NF-kappaB-inhibitory protein NF-kappaB1 p105. *Nature* 1999; **397**:363–368.
26 Lang V, Symons A, Watton SJ, Janzen J, Soneji Y, Beinke S et al. ABIN-2 forms a ternary complex with TPL-2 and NF-kappa B1 p105 and is essential for TPL-2 protein stability. *Mol Cell Biol* 2004; **24**:5235–5248.
27 Beinke S, Deka J, Lang V, Belich MP, Walker PA, Howell S et al. NF-kappaB1 p105 negatively regulates TPL-2 MEK kinase activity. *Mol Cell Biol* 2003; **23**:4739–4752.
28 Babu GR, Jin W, Norman L, Waterfield M, Chang M, Wu X et al. Phosphorylation of NF-kappaB1/p105 by oncoprotein kinase Tpl2: implications for a novel mechanism of Tpl2 regulation. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2006; **1763**:174–181.
29 Sugimoto K, Ohata M, Miyoshi J, Ishizaki H, Tsuboi N, Masuda A et al. A serine/threonine kinase, Cot/Tpl2, modulates bacterial DNA-induced IL-12 production and Th cell differentiation. *J Clin Invest* 2004; **114**:857–866.
30 Papoutsopoulou S, Symons A, Tharmalingham T, Belich MP, Kaiser F, Kioussis D et al. ABIN-2 is required for optimal activation of Erk MAP kinase in innate immune responses. *Nat Immunol* 2006; **7**:606–615.
31 Das S, Cho J, Lambertz I, Kelliher MA, Eliopoulos AG, Du K et al. Tpl2/cot signals activate ERK, JNK, and NF-kappaB in a cell-type and stimulus-specific manner. *J Biol Chem* 2005; **280**:23748–23757.
32 Eliopoulos AG, Wang CC, Dumitru CD, Tsichlis PN. Tpl2 transduces CD40 and TNF signals that activate ERK and regulates IgE induction by CD40. *EMBO J* 2003; **22**:3855–3864.
33 Donald R, Ballard DW, Hawiger J. Proteolytic processing of NF-kappaB/I kappaB in human monocytes. ATP-dependent induction by pro-inflammatory mediators. *J Biol Chem* 1995; **270**:9–12.
34 Salmeron A, Janzen J, Soneji Y, Bump N, Kamens J, Allen H et al. Direct phosphorylation of NF-kappaB1 p105 by the IkappaB kinase complex on serine 927 is essential for signal-induced p105 proteolysis. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276**:22215–22222.
35 Heissmeyer V, Krappmann D, Hatada EN, Scheidereit C. Shared pathways of IkappaB kinase-induced SCF(betaTrCP)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation for the NF-kappaB precursor p105 and IkappaBAlpha. *Mol Cell Biol* 2001; **21**:1024–1035.
36 Heissmeyer V, Krappmann D, Wulczyn FG, Scheidereit C. NF-kappaB p105 is a target of IkappaB kinases and controls signal induction of Bcl-3-p50 complexes. *EMBO J* 1999; **18**:4766–4778.
37 Waterfield M, Jin W, Reiley W, Zhang M, Sun SC. IkappaB kinase is an essential component of the Tpl2 signaling pathway. *Mol Cell Biol* 2004; **24**:6040–6048.
38 Saraiva M, Christensen JR, Tsytyskova AV, Goldfeld AE, Ley SC, Kioussis D et al. Identification of a macrophage-specific chromatin signature in the IL-10 locus. *J Immunol* 2005; **175**:1041–1046.
39 Kawai T, Akira S. TLR signaling. *Cell Death Differ* 2006; **13**:816–825.
40 Caivano M, Cohen P. Role of mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades in mediating lipopolysaccharide-stimulated induction of cyclooxygenase-2 and IL-1 beta in RAW 264 macrophages. *J Immunol* 2000; **164**:3018–3025.
41 Clark AR, Dean JL, Saklatvala J. Post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression by mitogen-activated protein kinase p38. *FEBS Lett* 2003; **546**:37–44.
42 Dean JL, Sully G, Clark AR, Saklatvala J. The involvement of AU-rich element-binding proteins in p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway-mediated mRNA stabilisation. *Cell Signal* 2004; **16**:1113–1121.
43 Dean JL, Sarsfield SJ, Tsounakou E, Saklatvala J. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase stabilizes mRNAs that contain cyclooxygenase-2 and tumor necrosis factor AU-rich elements by inhibiting deadenylation. *J Biol Chem* 2003; **278**:39470–39476.
44 Carballo E, Lai WS, Blackshear PJ. Feedback inhibition of macrophage tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by tristetraprolin. *Science* 1998; **281**:1001–1005.
45 Lai WS, Carballo E, Strum JR, Kennington EA, Phillips RS, Blackshear PJ. Evidence that tristetraprolin binds to AU-rich elements and promotes the deadenylation and destabilization of tumor necrosis factor alpha mRNA. *Mol Cell Biol* 1999; **19**:4311–4323.
46 Taylor GA, Carballo E, Lee DM, Lai WS, Thompson MJ, Patel DD et al. A pathogenic role for TNF alpha in the syndrome of cachexia, arthritis, and autoimmunity resulting from tristetraprolin (TTP) deficiency. *Immunity* 1996; **4**:445–454.
47 Dean JL, Wait R, Mahtani KR, Sully G, Clark AR, Saklatvala J. The 3' untranslated region of tumor necrosis factor alpha mRNA is a target of the mRNA-stabilizing factor HuR. *Mol Cell Biol* 2001; **21**:721–730.
48 Fan XC, Steitz JA. Overexpression of HuR, a nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling protein, increases the in vivo stability of ARE-containing mRNAs. *EMBO J* 1998; **17**:3448–3460.

49 Lasa M, Mahtani KR, Finch A, Brewer G, Saklatvala J, Clark AR. Regulation of cyclooxygenase 2 mRNA stability by the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 signaling cascade. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000; **20**: 4265–4274.

50 Wilson GM, Lu J, Sutphen K, Sun Y, Huynh Y, Brewer G. Regulation of A+U-rich element-directed mRNA turnover involving reversible phosphorylation of AUF1. *J Biol Chem* 2003; **278**: 33029–33038.

51 Saccani S, Pantano S, Natoli G. p38-Dependent marking of inflammatory genes for increased NF-kappa B recruitment. *Nat Immunol* 2002; **3**: 69–75.

52 Pulendran B. Variegation of the immune response with dendritic cells and pathogen recognition receptors. *J Immunol* 2005; **174**: 2457–2465.

53 Dillon S, Agrawal A, Van Dyke T, Landreth G, McCauley L, Koh A *et al.* A Toll-like receptor 2 ligand stimulates Th2 responses *in vivo*, via induction of extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Fos in dendritic cells. *J Immunol* 2004; **172**: 4733–4743.

54 Agrawal A, Dillon S, Denning TL, Pulendran B. ERK1−/− mice exhibit Th1 cell polarization and increased susceptibility to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *J Immunol* 2006; **176**: 5788–5796.

55 Agrawal S, Agrawal A, Doughty B, Gerwitz A, Blenis J, Van Dyke T *et al.* Cutting edge: different Toll-like receptor agonists instruct dendritic cells to induce distinct Th responses via differential modulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Fos. *J Immunol* 2003; **171**: 4984–4989.

56 Pulendran B, Ahmed R. Translating innate immunity into immunological memory: implications for vaccine development. *Cell* 2006; **124**: 849–863.

57 Pasare C, Medzhitov R. Control of B-cell responses by Toll-like receptors. *Nature* 2005; **438**: 364–368.

58 Pasare C, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptors: linking innate and adaptive immunity. *Adv Exp Med Biol* 2005; **560**: 11–18.

59 Zarember KA, Godowski PJ. Tissue expression of human Toll-like receptors and differential regulation of Toll-like receptor mRNAs in leukocytes in response to microbes, their products, and cytokines. *J Immunol* 2002; **168**: 554–561.

60 Bendigs S, Salzer U, Lipford GB, Wagner H, Heeg K. CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides co-stimulate primary T cells in the absence of antigen-presenting cells. *Eur J Immunol* 1999; **29**: 1209–1218.

61 Caron G, Duluc D, Fremaux I, Jeannin P, David C, Gascan H *et al.* Direct stimulation of human T cells via TLR5 and TLR7/8: flagellin and R-848 up-regulate proliferation and IFN-gamma production by memory CD4+ T cells. *J Immunol* 2005; **175**: 1551–1557.

62 Peng G, Guo Z, Kiniwa Y, Voo KS, Peng W, Fu T *et al.* Toll-like receptor 8-mediated reversal of CD4+ regulatory T cell function. *Science* 2005; **309**: 1380–1384.

63 Gelman AE, LaRosa DF, Zhang J, Walsh PT, Choi Y, Sunyer JO *et al.* The adaptor molecule MyD88 activates PI-3 kinase signaling in CD4+ T cells and enables CpG oligodeoxynucleotide-mediated costimulation. *Immunity* 2006; **25**: 783–793.

64 Gelman AE, Zhang J, Choi Y, Turka LA. Toll-like receptor ligands directly promote activated CD4+ T cell survival. *J Immunol* 2004; **172**: 6065–6073.

65 Caramalho I, Lopes-Carvalho T, Ostler D, Zelenay S, Haury M, Demengeot J. Regulatory T cells selectively express Toll-like receptors and are activated by lipopolysaccharide. *J Exp Med* 2003; **197**: 403–411.
