
Molecular Microbiology (2007) 65(2), 231–249

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05791.x

# MicroReview

## Invasion of host cells by malaria parasites: a tale of two protein families

Jayasree Iyer,¹ Anne Charlotte Grüner,²³ Laurent Rénia,²³ Georges Snounou⁴ and Peter R. Preiser¹*

¹ Nanyang Technological University, School of Biological Sciences, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.

² Department of Immunology, Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

³ Inserm, U567, Paris, France.

⁴ Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Equipe Parasitologie Comparée et Modèles Expérimentaux USM 0307, CNRS IFR101, CP52, 61 Rue Buffon, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.

### Summary

Malaria parasites are obligate intracellular parasites whose invasive stages select and invade the unique host cell in which they can develop with exquisite specificity and efficacy. Most studies aimed at elucidating the molecules and the mechanisms implicated in the selection and invasion processes have been conducted on the merozoite, the stage that invades erythrocytes to perpetuate the pathological cycles of parasite multiplication in the blood. Bioinformatic analysis has helped identify the members of two parasite protein families, the reticulocyte-binding protein homologues (RBL) and erythrocyte binding like (EBL), in recently sequenced genomes of different *Plasmodium* species. In this article we review data from classical studies and gene disruption experiments that are helping to illuminate the role of these proteins in the selection-invasion processes. The manner in which subsets of proteins from each of the families act in concert suggests a model to explain the ability of the parasites to use alternate pathways of invasion. Future perspectives and implications are discussed.

### Introduction

*Plasmodium* the causative agent of malaria is an obligate intracellular parasite with a complex life cycle involving both an invertebrate and a vertebrate host. The invasive forms of the malaria parasites are like all members of the phylum Apicomplexa (Levine, 1971) characterized by a unique set of organelles the rhoptries, micronemes and dense granules that play a crucial role in the invasion process. The contents of these organelles are thought to be important in enabling the parasite to recognize the appropriate host cell, penetrate it effectively and develop successfully within it. During the life cycle of *Plasmodium* the parasite needs to invade a range of different host cells. The ookinete needs to penetrate the mosquito midgut endothelium while the sporozoite is required to both traverse mosquito salivary gland and traverse or invade skin and liver cells in the vertebrate host. The merozoite invades erythrocytes where they develop to generate more merozoites, the cyclical multiplication phase of the life cycle that is the cause of the disease symptoms typically associated with malaria. Variations in the contents of the apical organelles are thought to be responsible for the different invasion properties displayed by the invasive forms of *Plasmodium*.

The processes by which the invasive forms of the parasite recognize and penetrate a host cell are still not completely understood and most of our current knowledge is based on studies of the merozoite (Ladda *et al.*, 1969; Bannister *et al.*, 1975; Dvorak *et al.*, 1975; Aikawa *et al.*, 1978; Miller *et al.*, 1979; Mitchell and Bannister, 1988; Sherman, 1999). The main steps in the invasion process are: (i) initial merozoite binding, reorientation and deformation of erythrocyte, (ii) formation of a junction (the irreversible commitment of the parasite to invasion) and (iii) parasite entry. The preferred dogma for the initial interaction between a free merozoite and erythrocyte is by a random collision. Once in contact proteins located on the surface of the merozoite have been implicated in mediating a reversible interaction between parasite and erythrocyte. After binding to the erythrocyte, the merozoite reorients itself such that the apical end is in contact with the erythrocyte membrane. Simultaneously, the parasite

Accepted 14 May, 2007. *For correspondence. E-mail prpreiser@ntu.edu.sg; Tel. (65) 6316 2869; Fax (67) 6791 3856.*

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
induces locally the deformation of the erythrocyte. An indentation of the membrane at point of contact with the parasite is observed. Once reorientation has occurred micronemal and rhoptry proteins mediate specific host parasite interactions that lead to tight junction formation. Invasion rapidly proceeds with the discharge of the contents of micronemes, rhoptries and finally dense granules. It is thought that rhoptries are discharged after the micronemes and assist in the formation of the parasitophorous vacuole. To complete the process of invasion, merozoite serine proteases cleave erythrocyte membrane protein Band 3 and cause a localized disruption in the cytoskeleton, thus allowing the parasite to enter the host cell (Roggwiller *et al.*, 1996). A parasitophorous vacuole membrane forms in the junction area, and the junction becomes a small annulus through which the parasite moves to enter the expanding parasitophorous vacuole. Upon completion of the parasite entry, the tight junction disappears and the parasitophorous vacuole membrane and erythrocyte membrane fuse and separate, completing the entry process. The contents of the dense granules are thought to be discharged only after the parasite has completed its entry, and to be implicated in the modification of the host cell (Torii *et al.*, 1989; Culvenor *et al.*, 1991). The invasion process is now complete and the parasite resides and develops in the erythrocyte.

The parasite invades different host cells in the other stages of its life cycle. However, the mechanisms implicated in these experimentally relatively inaccessible stages have been much less well studied than those of the merozoite. In the mosquito vector, the ookinete penetrates the mosquito peritropic matrix and enters the midgut of the mosquito (Huber *et al.*, 1991). Ookinete invasion mechanisms differ from hepatic and erythrocytic invasion in that no recognizable rhoptries are found and no parasitophorous vacuole appears to form around the internalized parasite after invasion. After the oocyst develops in the midgut, it ruptures to release mature sporozoites (Meis *et al.*, 1992) into the haemocoelic cavity, which will migrate to, adhere to and invade the salivary glands (Vanderberg, 1974; Golenda *et al.*, 1990; Vaughan *et al.*, 1992). During a blood meal, mosquitoes deposit sporozoites in the host’s skin. The majority of these mobile parasites will traverse skin cells, enter the blood circulation to be carried to the liver where they will traverse Kupffer cells and hepatocytes until a suitable host hepatocyte is invaded. Different parasite proteins have been implicated in these processes, including proteins such as MAEBL, EBA175, and the apical complex protein Py235 (Grüner *et al.*, 2001; Preiser *et al.*, 2002; 2004) that are also involved in merozoite invasion.

Within the mammalian host, the parasite has to overcome two major hurdles in the invasion process. First it has to migrate to or attach quickly to its host cell in order to evade immune attack, and second it has to recognize

the hepatocyte or the red blood cell, where it can develop and multiply. Indeed this is the only time during an infection where the parasite is directly exposed to the host immune system. *In vitro* studies suggest that the sporozoites and merozoites are labile, as they appear to lose infectivity quickly if they do not invade a host cell (Johnson *et al.*, 1980). Whether this is the case *in vivo* still needs to be confirmed.

From a clinical point of view, the rate of successful invasion of red blood cells by merozoites is a major factor in the pathogenesis of malaria, as it has direct bearing on asexual blood stage parasite densities and dynamics. The process of red cell invasion is relatively easily amenable to laboratory studies, as compared with the invasion of hepatocytes or the invasive processes in the mosquito. Consequently, most data on host cell invasion by *Plasmodium* are centred on red blood cell invasion. We therefore confined ourselves to the events leading to the invasion of red blood cells by blood stage merozoites.

In normal peripheral blood, the two principal erythrocyte populations encountered are usually reticulocytes and normocytes. The reticulocyte is a submature red blood cell where active protein synthesis, mainly of haemoglobin, still takes place. The ribosomal content, which appears as a fine reticulum, hence the name, diminishes as the cell matures over a couple of days to form the normocyte, the principal blood erythrocyte population. Reticulocytes represent less than 1% of the erythrocyte population in normal peripheral blood. Different *Plasmodium* species show distinct preferences for the type of erythrocyte they invade (Garnham, 1966). These differences are clearly seen in the case of the four *Plasmodium* species known to infect humans. *Plasmodium vivax* only invades reticulocytes that are Duffy blood group positive while *Plasmodium falciparum*, associated with the most clinically severe forms of malaria, invades all erythrocytes regardless of age. *Plasmodium malariae* prefers mature erythrocytes and *Plasmodium ovale* is again restricted to reticulocytes. Similar variations in red cell preferences are also seen in non-human *Plasmodium* species. The simian *Plasmodium knowlesi* invades normocytes (Hegner, 1938) while *Plasmodium cynomolgi* can invade all erythrocytes but has a slight preference for reticulocytes. The rodent malaria parasite *Plasmodium berghei* invades preferentially reticulocytes, while *Plasmodium chabaudi* invades both reticulocytes and mature cells and *Plasmodium vinckei* infects mature erythrocytes. Differences in host cell preferences can even be observed in the same species, for example, the *Plasmodium yoelii* 17X YA and 17X YM lines (Fahey and Spitalny, 1984). YA infections yield a self-limiting, non-lethal infection in BALB/c mice, where the parasites are restricted to reticulocytes, whereas YM infections yield a fulminating almost always lethal infection with parasites found in erythrocytes of all ages. There seems to be some

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249
Table 1. The superfamilies of reticulocyte-binding protein homologues (RBLs) and the family of erythrocyte-binding proteins/ligands (EBLs) summarized in various *Plasmodium* spp.

| Organism       | Ligand (accession No.)                  | Receptor                                      | Erythrocyte binding properties                          | Antibodies                     |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| *P. falciparum*| RH1 (PFD0110w)                         | Sialic acid residues trypsin-resistant receptor Y | Shown                                                | Block binding                 |
|                | RH2a (PF13_0198)                       | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | Block invasion                |
|                | RH2b (MAL13P1.176)                     | Chymotrypsin-sensitive receptor Z, independent of other members | Shown                                                | Block invasion                |
|                | RH3 (PFL2520w)                         | Unknown                                       | NA (pseudogene)                                       | NA (pseudogene)               |
|                | RH4 PFD1150c                           | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
|                | RH5 (PFD1145c)                         | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
|                | EBA 175 (PF07_0128)                    | Glycophorin A                                 | Sialic acid residues on Glycophorin A                 | Block binding and invasion     |
|                | EBA 181/JESEBL (PFA0125c)              | Trypsin-resistant, chymotrypsin-sensitive, sialic acid-dependent receptor W | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
|                | EBA 165/PEBL (PFD1155w)                | Unknown                                       | NA (pseudogene)                                       | NA (pseudogene)               |
|                | EBA 140/BAEBL (MAL13P1.60)             | Glycophorin C                                 | Gerbich-positive erythrocytes                         | Block binding, inhibit ligand recognition |
|                | EBL1 (PFD1145c)                        | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
| *P. vivax*     | RBP-1 (Pv098585)                      | Unknown                                       | Shown                                                | ND                            |
|                | RBP-2 (Pv090325)                      | Unknown                                       | Shown                                                | ND                            |
|                | DBP (Pv110810)                         | Duffy antigen                                | Shown                                                | Block invasion                |
| *P. yoelii*    | Py235 (PY01365)                       | Chymotrypsin- and trypsin-sensitive receptor   | Shown                                                | Block invasion                |
|                | EBL (PY04764)                          | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
| *P. knowlesi*  | DBPα (M90466)                         | Duffy antigen                                | Sialic acid independent                               | Block invasion of human, and partial inhibition of rhesus RBC |
|                | DBPβ (M90694)                         | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
|                | DBPγ (M90964)                         | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
| *P. reichenowi*| RH                                    | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |
|                | EBL                                   | Unknown                                       | Not shown                                             | ND                            |

PlasmoDB (www.plasmodb.org) ORF names or alternatively GenBank accession numbers are given where available.

selection and the actual processes involved in invasion. However, only some would be key players that will allow the parasite to maintain a sufficient red blood cell invasion potential despite physiological and immunological alterations in the host. This will contribute to the persistence of the infection and consequently increase the chances of transmission. These proteins are likely to be the specific parasite ligands that are involved in the binding events at the erythrocyte surface that lead to successful invasion. The parasites proteins known to be implicated in red cell recognition/binding can be classed in two families. These are the family of RBLs and the family of EBLs summarized in Table 1. The RBL superfamily includes *P. yoelii* 235 kDa rhoptry proteins (Py235) (Holder and Freeman, 1981), *P. vivax* reticulocyte-binding proteins (PvRBP-1 and 2) (Galinski et al., 1992) and the *P. falciparum* rhoptry protein homologues (PfRH1, PfRH2a, PfRH2b, PfRH3, PfRH4 and PfRH5; Tsuboi et al., 1994; Rayner et al., 2000; 2001; Taylor et al., 2001; Triglia et al., 2001a; 2005; Kaneko et al., 2002; Stubbs et al., 2005; Cowman and Crabb, 2006). EBL homologues include the DBP of *P. vivax* and *P. knowlesi*, the *P. falciparum* EBA175, BAEBL (EBA140), EBL1, JESEBL (EBA181) and PEBL (EBA165) (Camus and Hadley, 1985a; Peterson and Wellemes, 2000; Mayer et al., 2001; Thompson et al., 2001; Triglia et al., 2001b; Lobo et al., 2003; Maier et al., 2003). Homologous cysteine-rich domains in single-copy genes have been observed in the rodent parasites *P. yoelii*, *P. chabaudi* and *P. berghei*, which indicate that a similar member of this family exists in these parasites (Kappe et al., 1997; Prasad et al., 2003; Hall et al., 2005).

Elegant work using gene knockouts in *P. falciparum* has shown that members of both these gene families seem to interact with specific receptors on the erythrocyte surface (Kaneko et al., 2000; Reed et al., 2000; Gilberger et al., 2003a). Furthermore, disruption or deletion of a specific member leads to the utilization of a different erythrocyte receptor by the parasite (Kaneko et al., 2000; Gilberger et al., 2003a). This change of receptor use is analogous to the previously observed *in vitro* selection of *P. falciparum* on enzymatically treated erythrocytes leading to the selection of parasites that utilize a different invasion pathway (Camus and Hadley, 1985b; Dolan et al., 1990; 1994; Gaur et al., 2003). This ability to change the host cell receptors used for invasion gives the merozoite a significant advantage for finding a suitable host cell. All the work published to date has focused on the specific interaction between a single parasite ligand and host cell receptor leading to the concept of one parasite ligand – one invasion pathway. In the case of *P. vivax* it is clear that members of both gene families are required for successful invasion as the parasite is only able to invade reticulocytes (mediated by RBP) that are Duffy blood group antigen positive (mediated by the DBP) (Galinski and

Barnwell, 1996), and recently the effect of one gene family member on another has been demonstrated in *P. falciparum* (Stubbs et al., 2005). It is therefore important when discussing invasion mechanisms of *Plasmodium* species that the role of both members of the two gene families are considered.

### The RBL homologues

The first member of the RBL superfamily of *Plasmodium* proteins involved in recognition of host cell receptors by the parasite was first discovered in *P. yoelii* (termed Py235), and could be directly involved in specific differentiation between red blood cell subtypes (reviewed by Grüner et al., 2004). Homologous proteins have since been discovered in other *Plasmodium* species including *P. vivax* and *P. falciparum*. These proteins are thought to play a crucial role in erythrocyte recognition and invasion (Table 1).

#### Plasmodium yoelii and other rodent malaria parasites.

The 235 kDa rhoptry protein family of *P. yoelii* (Py235) was first identified using monoclonal antibodies prepared from mice resistant to the virulent YM strain of *P. yoelii* (Freeman et al., 1980). Two of these antibodies were able to confer protection in passive transfer experiments by modulating the infection, restricting the YM parasites to predominantly reticulocytes, thereby ensuring the survival of the host mouse strain (Freeman et al., 1980). Immunofluorescence microscopy and subsequently immuno-electron microscopy showed that these antibodies recognized a protein located in the rhoptries of the *P. yoelii* merozoites (Freeman et al., 1980; Oka et al., 1984). Furthermore, vaccination of BALB/c with the immunopurified 235 kDa protein also protected against a subsequent challenge with the *P. yoelii* YM line, converting fulminating infections to a reticulocyte-restricted self-limiting infection (Holder and Freeman, 1981). This suggested that the antibody to this protein protected against challenge infection by preventing the entry of parasites into mature erythrocytes without affecting reticulocyte invasion. In addition, immunofluorescence reactivity of anti-Py235 antibodies to other malaria parasites indicated that the protein may be conserved in other rodent *Plasmodium* species (Holder and Freeman, 1984). Screening of an expression library using antibodies specific to Py235 led to the identification of the gene coding for this protein (Keen et al., 1990). Once the gene had been identified it became rapidly apparent that many distinct py235 genes were present in the genome of *P. yoelii*. The copy number was estimated to be between 20 and 50 based on PCR analysis and hybridization experiments (Borre et al., 1995; Khan et al., 2001a), somewhat higher than the 14 copies identified by the *P. yoelii* genome-sequencing

Invasion of host cells by malaria parasites 235

A

SS
DBL
C-cys TM
P. vivax
DBP

Putative cytoplasmic Domain

SS
DBL
DBL
C-cys TM
P. falciparum
Eg: EBA-175

Putative cytoplasmic Domain

B

SS
C-cys TM
P. vivax
Eg: RBP2

SS
C-cysTM
P. falciparum RH,
P. yoelii Py235.

500 aa homology region

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the EBLs and RBLs. Sequence comparisons between members showed high overall conservation denoted by (A) DBL domains between the EBLs and (B) orange regions in the RBLs. Regions of variability are interspersed throughout the coding region. Conserved cysteine-rich regions and the putative transmembrane are indicated.

project (Carlton et al., 2002). Recent work using quantitative PCR has confirmed a copy number closer to that predicted by the genome project in a range of P. yoelii strains (Iyer et al., 2006).

Sequence comparisons between py235 members showed high overall conservation with regions of variability interspersed throughout the coding region (Narum et al., 2001; Khan et al., 2001a) (Fig. 1). Chromosome mapping has shown that all py235 genes are located in the subtelomeric region of some but not all chromosomes (Owen et al., 1999). From the genome sequencing of other rodent parasites it has become apparent that orthologues of this family are present in P. berghei and P. chabaudi. A similar copy number was found in P. berghei while there seemed to be fewer members in P. chabaudi (Sanger Centre sequencing project). The predominant red blood cell-expressed member of Py235 recognized by the monoclonal antibody has been identified by Mass spectrometry (Ogun et al., 2006). Further evidence for the involvement of Py235 in red cell recognition came from the demonstration that the protein specifically bound to neuraminidase-resistant, chymotrypsin- and trypsin-sensitive erythrocyte receptors (Ogun and Holder, 1996; Ogun et al., 2000). The protective effect of anti-Py235 antibodies has given clear evidence that Py235 plays an important role in virulence. Differences in the py235 repertoires and transcription profile observed between the YM and YA lines are consistent with such a role (Preiser and Jarra, 1998; Khan et al., 2001a).

Whether these differences account for the different invasion phenotype and virulence observed still needs to be determined. Studies of the transcriptional profile of py235 in individual parasites have provided further insights into the role Py235 play in parasite biology. A new form of clonal phenotypic variation in which a single schizont produces merozoites that transcribe distinct members of py235 suggests that the parasite can adapt to variations in the host cell environment and evade host immunity (Preiser et al., 1999).

Plasmodium vivax. P. vivax only invades reticulocytes that are Duffy positive. There has recently been a report on P. vivax infections in a Duffy-negative population, indicating that alternative pathways may indeed be present for P. vivax (Ryan et al., 2006). While the recognition of the Duffy antigen is mediated by the DBP (see below) the recognition of the reticulocyte is mediated by another set of proteins called reticulocyte-binding proteins (RBP) 1 and 2 (Galinski et al., 1992). The PvRBP proteins have been localized to the apical end of the merozoite but it is not yet clear whether they are located in the micronemes or the rhoptries. PvRBP-1 and 2 have been postulated to form a complex that mediates adhesion and recognition of the reticulocyte and homologues are also found in the closely related simian parasite P. cynomolgi (McCutchan et al., 1984; Okenu et al., 2005). Sequence comparison with the py235 genes of P. yoelii showed that PvRBP-1 and PvRBP-2 shared weak but significant sequence identity.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

236 J. Iyer et al.

ity as well as structural features, including net charge and hydrophobicity (Galinski *et al.*, 2000). The importance of these conserved features is not yet clear.

Plasmodium falciparum. For *P. falciparum*, it had been difficult to establish whether members of RBL were also present because of low sequence homology and the lack of any cross-reactive immunological reagents with those known in other *Plasmodium* species. Once the *P. falciparum* genome sequence became available, six members of the RBL family were identified, the rhoptry protein homologue 1 (PfRH1) also named normocyte binding protein 1 (NBP1) (Rayner *et al.*, 2001), the reticulocyte-binding protein homologues 2a and 2b (PfRBP-2a and 2b) (Rayner *et al.*, 2000; Triglia *et al.*, 2001a), the rhoptry protein homologue 3 (PfRH3) a possible pseudogene in a number of laboratory cultured parasite isolates (Taylor *et al.*, 2001), the reticulocyte-binding homologue 4 (PfRH4) (Kaneko *et al.*, 2002) and the reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 5 (PfRH5) (Cowman and Crabb, 2006). For this review and for the sake of uniformity we will name them PfRH1, PfRH2a, PfRH2b, PfRH3, PfRH4 and PfRH5 respectively.

All *P. falciparum* members of the RBL family except PfRH-4 share an approximately 500-amino-acid high-homology region initially identified when comparing Py235 and PvRBP (Keen *et al.*, 1994) (Fig. 1). There is some conservation between *P. falciparum* and *P. vivax* RBL proteins (though less so for PvRBP-2) (Rayner *et al.*, 2005). Overall gene sequence homology between the different members is low but they contain a number of conserved blocks of amino acids which clearly identify them as members of this gene family. The expression pattern and apical location of all members are consistent with a role during the invasion process. While PfRH1 as well as PfRH2a and 2b seem to locate to the rhoptries of the merozoite PfRH-4 seems to have a micronemal location (Kaneko *et al.*, 2002), although recent evidence place it in the rhoptries (Stubbs *et al.*, 2005). There is some evidence that at least a small proportion of PfRH2a is moved to the merozoite apical pole after schizont rupture (Triglia *et al.*, 2001a), akin to the behaviour of Py235 (Oka *et al.*, 1984; Sam-Yellowe, 1996). *PFRH3* is considered to be a pseudogene and no corresponding protein is expressed during the erythrocytic cycle, although evidence suggests it may be expressed in sporozoites (Florens *et al.*, 2002). Little is known about *PfRH5*, apart from its gene sequence (Cowman and Crabb, 2006).

In both *P. yoelii* and *P. vivax* the RBL are believed to play an important role in the recognition of specific receptors on the red blood cell. Direct binding of the protein to the erythrocyte has been shown, and in the case of *P. yoelii* antibodies against Py235 have been shown to inhibit invasion (Table 1). PfRH1 has been shown to directly bind a sialic acid containing trypsin-resistant receptor on the erythrocyte and antibodies raised against this protein inhibit merozoite invasion of trypsin-treated erythrocytes (Rayner *et al.*, 2001). So far direct binding of PfRH2a or 2b to erythrocytes has not been demonstrated although there is evidence that antibodies can differentially inhibit invasion in some parasite strains, and certain peptide sequences from these proteins mediate stronger erythrocyte binding than others (see Table 1) (Triglia *et al.*, 2001a; Ocampo *et al.*, 2004). The most convincing evidence came from gene knockout experiments showing that PfRH2b recognizes a unique chymotrypsin-sensitive receptor and that it functions independently of other members (Duraisingh *et al.*, 2003a). Unlike *P. vivax*, PfRH2a and 2b may not form a complex as they appear to have distinct independent functions. At least one strain of *P. falciparum* lacks one gene, and disrupting one of the pair does not affect the other (Triglia *et al.*, 2001a; Duraisingh *et al.*, 2003a).

During the study of *P. falciparum* RBLs it became clear that different parasite lines display sequence variation between the same family members ranging from a few amino acid changes to large deletions (Taylor *et al.*, 2002; Lobo *et al.*, 2006). Furthermore, some members were found to be completely absent in some strains (Duraisingh *et al.*, 2003a). These variations might represent a type of antigenic diversity and/or mediate changes in the binding properties of the protein. The latter is supported by a recent study which associates different polymorphism in the RBL with changes in the invasion pathways used by the parasite (Lobo *et al.*, 2006). Further complexity arises due to the fact that the transcription and expression pattern of PfRBLs vary between different parasite lines (Taylor *et al.*, 2002; Duraisingh *et al.*, 2003a). These variations have implications in the way these proteins are utilized as changes in the expression of PfRBL could lead to the recognition of different receptors on the erythrocyte surface resulting in merozoites with different invasion potentials.

Plasmodium reichenowi. Comparison of the RBL gene family from the chimpanzee parasite *P. reichenowi* shed further light on the evolution as well as conservation of these parasite ligands. Like its most close relative *P. falciparum* it has five members of this gene family (Rayner *et al.*, 2004a). Overall the genes are conserved but there are some differences, most notably the orthologue of *PfRH1* has a large number of deletions as well as some insertions leading to over 200 stop codons, so that the longest ORF in *PrRH1* is only 645 base pairs compared with about 8 kb for the ORF of the *P. falciparum* gene. The *PrRH2b* gene, on the other hand, is highly conserved while for *PrRH2a* only the C-terminal end is conserved. *PrRH3* lacks the stop codons found in the

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

PfRH3 orthologue distinguishing it from the *P. falciparum* pseudogene, while overall conservation of PrRH4 is approximately 86% identity. The diversity between the members in *P. reichenowi* and *P. falciparum* indicate a high selection pressure (Rayner et al., 2004a).

### The EBL/DBP homologues

A number of *Plasmodium* proteins involved in adhesion of the parasite to host cell receptors are characterized by a conserved cysteine-rich domain of approximately 35 kDa that has been shown to directly mediate binding to host cell receptors (Fig. 1) (Chitnis et al., 1996). This domain was first described in the DBP of *P. vivax* and has therefore been named Duffy binding-like (DBL) domain (Fang et al., 1991). DBL domains have been identified in two groups of parasite-encoded ligands, the variant *P. falciparum* erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP-1) (Su et al., 1995) and the superfamily of EBLs expressed in the invasive stages of many *Plasmodium* species (see Table 1) (Adams et al., 2001).

Erythrocyte binding-like proteins are thought to play a crucial role in erythrocyte recognition, junction formation and invasion. All the EBLs are characterized by conserved exon–intron structures, splicing boundaries and contain two extracellular regions that have conserved cysteines and hydrophobic amino acid residues (Adams et al., 1992). This suggests a conserved three-dimensional structure of this domain, and a common evolutionary origin.

#### Plasmodium vivax

The unique restriction of *P. vivax* to Duffy-positive erythrocyte is mediated by a single-copy gene that codes for the 140 kDa DBP (Fang et al., 1991). This parasite-encoded ligand specifically binds the Duffy blood group antigen on human erythrocytes (Wertheimer and Barnwell, 1989). Subsequent work has shown that DBP specifically interacts with a 35-amino-acid-long region of the Duffy receptor (Chitnis et al., 1996) and that this interaction is independent of sialic acid. Competition experiments with purified Duffy glycoprotein or pretreatment of erythrocytes with a monoclonal antibody against a Duffy determinant (Wertheimer and Barnwell, 1989) indicated that DBP plays a role after merozoite reorientation during the invasion process (Miller et al., 1979). High levels of antibodies against DBP are detected in patients exposed to repeated doses of *P. vivax* (Fraser et al., 1997), and there is some evidence that there is some protection mediated by these antibodies

The extracellular domain of the PvDBP (and for that matter all members of the EBL gene family) can be divided into six regions (I to VI) based on amino acid homology to PkDBP (below) (Adams et al., 1990). Two cysteine-rich domains (in regions II and VI) contain con-

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

---

served cysteines and aromatic amino acid residues (Fig. 1). Erythrocyte binding assays have shown that specific sequences in one of the cysteine-rich domains (region II) in the DBP are involved in the binding to the Duffy antigen (Chitnis and Miller, 1994; Chitnis et al., 1996; Ranjan and Chitnis, 1999). Furthermore, recent work using site-directed mutagenesis has given a more detailed map of the essential amino acids that mediate the specific interaction (Vanbuskirk et al., 2004a; Hans et al., 2005). In *P. vivax* field isolates only limited sequence variability in the DBL domain of DBP has been observed (Tsuboi et al., 1994). None of the observed changes lead to alternate receptor specificity, but rather plays an important role in immune evasion (Vanbuskirk et al., 2004b). Structural motifs in this region have also been elucidated for receptor binding (Singh et al., 2003).

*Plasmodium knowlesi* and *P. cynomolgi*. Proteolytic cleavage of Duffy determinant from erythrocytes have been shown to inhibit *P. knowlesi* invasion of human erythrocytes (Miller et al., 1975; Mason et al., 1977; Wertheimer and Barnwell, 1989), indicating that this antigen is required by this simian parasite to invade human erythrocytes. On the other hand *P. knowlesi* invasion of rhesus erythrocytes is not dependent on the Duffy determinant demonstrating the ability of the parasite to utilize other simian-specific erythrocyte receptors for invasion. Erythrocyte binding assays identified a 135 kDa DBP (PkDBPs) of *P. knowlesi* (Miller et al., 1979) that was subsequently shown to be cross-reactive with the PvDBP (Haynes et al., 1988). Unlike the case for *P. vivax* it soon became clear that there were multiple members of DBPs in *P. knowlesi*. Antibodies to a PkDBP protein revealed the presence of a total of three PkDBPs, termed α, β and γ (Adams et al., 1990; 1992), all sharing conserved DBL domains with 70% homology to that of *P. vivax*. Only the DBL domain of PkDBPα has been shown to bind to the Duffy receptor while the DBLs of the other two proteins are thought to bind to so far uncharacterized receptors specific to the simian erythrocytes. Direct disruption of PkDBPα results in parasites that are unable to invade human erythrocytes while at the same time having no measurable effect on the invasion of rhesus red blood cells, confirming the existence of alternative invasion pathways in *P. knowlesi* (Singh et al., 2005). In the case of the PvDBP, it is region II of PkDBPα that mediated binding to the Duffy receptor. The fact that *P. knowlesi* has more than one DBP is thought to account for the ability of this parasite to utilize additional receptors. Antibodies raised against region II of PkDBPα effectively inhibit invasion of human erythrocytes as well as partially inhibit invasion of rhesus erythrocytes by *P. knowlesi* merozoites.

The simian parasite *P. cynomolgi* is thought to be phylogenetically more closely related to *P. vivax* than to

P. knowlesi (Waters et al., 1991; Escalante and Ayala, 1994; Escalante et al., 2005) and this is supported by the fact that the one EBL gene so far sequenced has the highest homology to the DBP of P. vivax (Okenu et al., 1997; Ozwara et al., 2001). On the other hand, Southern blot analysis has shown that unlike P. vivax, P. cynomolgi has at least two genes encoding EBL (Okenu et al., 1997; Ozwara et al., 2001). This would suggest that P. cynomolgi may also exhibit alternate invasion pathways, as do P. knowlesi and P. falciparum (see below).

Plasmodium falciparum. Unlike P. vivax, P. falciparum can invade Duffy-negative and -positive erythrocytes equally well and is known to utilize a number of distinct receptors (Miller et al., 1977; Mitchell et al., 1986; Perkins and Holt, 1988; Dolan et al., 1994). The ability of P. falciparum to utilize a wider range of erythrocyte receptors is at least in part due to the expansion of the number of EBL genes. Even before the completion of the P. falciparum genome-sequencing project multiple distinct EBL members had been identified. Currently, six members have been identified: EBA175 (Camus and Hadley, 1985b), BAEBL (EBA140) (Mayer et al., 2001; Lobo et al., 2003; Maier et al., 2003), JESEBL (EBA181) (Adams et al., 2001; Gilberger et al., 2003b; Mayer et al., 2004), PEBL (EBA165) (Triglia et al., 2001a), EBL1 (Peterson and Wellem, 2000) and MAEBL (Kappe et al., 1998). For consistency we will call them EBA175, EBA140, EBA181, EBA165, EBL1 and MAEBL. All members of this EBL superfamily with the exception of MAEBL contain a DBL domain indicating that MAEBL is not involved in DBL-mediated erythrocyte binding. The P. falciparum EBLs are all located in the subtelomeric region of different chromosomes (Gardner et al., 2002), a region that contains many genes associated with parasite virulence and pathology. Like other members of this superfamily the overall exon–intron structure and overall structural characteristics are conserved. While all DBL domains are characterized by 12 conserved cysteine residues, there are a number of differences that may have important functional implications. All P. falciparum EBLs have duplicated DBL domains (termed F1 and F2, Fig. 1), unlike the single copy in PvDBP (Sim et al., 1994), indicating more complex proteins (Adams et al., 2001). The dual DBL domain of EBA175 has been crystallized forming an interdomain channel, and shown to constitute a binding cleft (Tolia et al., 2005), although only the F2 region has been shown to have any binding activity (Sim et al., 1994; Ockenhouse et al., 2001). Based on current evidence EBA165 has to be considered an untranslated pseudogene as it contains a number of frameshift mutations and no evidence for a protein product has been obtained to date (Triglia et al., 2001a).

Receptor binding specificities have been shown for four EBLs of P. falciparum. Using a range of enzyme treatments

of erythrocytes it was clearly demonstrated that EBA175 binding to erythrocytes was dependent on the sialic acid components on Glycophorin A (Camus and Hadley, 1985b), indicating that Glycophorin A is a receptor for this protein. This was ultimately confirmed by the direct disruption of EBA175 in the parasite using gene knockouts. In this case the parasite was unable to utilize Glycophorin A as a receptor during the invasion process (Reed et al., 2000; Duraisingh et al., 2003b). Using similar approaches EBA140 which has a 30% homology to EBA175 was shown to bind to Glycophorin C (Mayer et al., 2001; Lobo et al., 2003; Maier et al., 2003). EBA181 which has a 37% similarity to EBA140 binds to an uncharacterized erythrocytic sialoglycoprotein (Gilberger et al., 2003b; Mayer et al., 2004). Additional evidence for the role of EBLs in erythrocyte binding and invasion came from the observation that antibodies against EBA175 and EBA140 can inhibit erythrocyte binding and invasion (Jakobsen et al., 1998; Sim, 1998; Narum et al., 2002). Furthermore, immunization with EBA175 gives some protection in a primate challenge model (Jones et al., 2001).

It seems that without selection pressure cultured parasites mostly use the EBA175/GlyA pathway, with a minority of parasites exhibiting alternate ligand receptor combinations. However, the parasite is able to use other receptors as treatment of erythrocytes with enzymes like Neuraminidase (to remove sialic acid) or trypsin to remove other protein components does not completely ablate invasion (Camus and Hadley, 1985b; Dolan et al., 1990; 1994; Rayner et al., 2001; Gaur et al., 2003). While overall parasite replication is greatly reduced on initial exposure to these treated erythrocytes, the parasite adapts with time and is eventually able to invade the treated erythrocytes with similar efficiency as when grown in untreated erythrocytes. This would indicate that the parasite adapts to utilize a new receptor on the erythrocyte, giving strong evidence that P. falciparum can use multiple different invasion pathways. Interestingly, if selection pressure is subsequently removed the parasite slowly reverts back to the Glycophorin A-dependent pathway. These in vitro observations using cultured parasites somewhat contrasts with some of the observations made recently using parasites directly obtained from infected individuals. Short-term culture-adapted field isolates from India (Okoyeh et al., 1999), Kenya (Nery et al., 2006) and Brazil (Lobo et al., 2004) show that alternate ligand receptor combinations are mostly used for invasion while similar studies performed in the Gambia (Baum et al., 2003a) and Tanzania (Bei et al., 2007) indicate that the conventional EBA175/Glycophorin A is the prevalent pathway utilized. It is clear from this that the parasite can switch invasion pathways depending on the host environment it encounters. Direct evidence for both the switching of the invasion pathway and the role of the EBLs in this process came from some elegant work
using parasite transfection. Disruption of EBA175, EBA140 and EBA181 prevents the interaction of the corresponding parasite ligand with its receptor forcing the parasite to use a different receptor. Nevertheless, these parasites are still able to invade erythrocytes efficiently (Reed *et al.*, 2000; Gilberger *et al.*, 2003a; Maier *et al.*, 2003; Stubbs *et al.*, 2005), indicating the flexibility that has evolved in this parasite. In the case of PvDBP it has been shown that any sequence variation of the DBL domain observed in different field isolates did not lead to any change in the receptor specificity but instead led to different antigenic variants (Vanbuskirk *et al.*, 2004b). This may not always be the case in the EBLs of *P. falciparum* where it had been shown that polymorphism in EBA140 may have arisen in response to mutations in the human erythrocyte receptor (Mayer *et al.*, 2002), and that furthermore changes in EBA140 and EBA181 allow for variations in binding characteristics to different erythrocyte receptors (Mayer *et al.*, 2002; 2004).

Plasmodium reichenowi. Even though *P. reichenowi* is considered in evolutionary terms most closely related to *P. falciparum* it cannot invade human erythrocytes. This is despite the fact that orthologue of EBA175 showing 83% predicted amino acid identity to the *P. falciparum* gene has been identified in *P. reichenowi* (Ozwara *et al.*, 2001). Modelling the crystal structure of PfEBA175 with the unique residues in the *P. reichenowi* homologue reveals differences in glycan binding sites that could explain the distinct host cells specificity of these parasites (Chattopadhyay *et al.*, 2006). In addition, *P. reichenowi* EBA140 (Baum *et al.*, 2003b), EBA181 and EBA165 (Rayner *et al.*, 2004b) homologues have been identified. The EBA140 fragment isolated has a 92% deduced amino acid identity to *P. falciparum* EBA140 with a duplicated DBL domain (Baum *et al.*, 2003b). Although *P. reichenowi* EBLs exhibit high sequence identity to its *P. falciparum* counterparts, these parasites do not bind to and invade human erythrocytes. This indicates that other parasite factors contribute to the specificity of the ligand to the host erythrocyte.

Plasmodium yoelii, P. berghei and P. chabaudi. Invasion assays of *P. yoelii* in Duffy knockout mice have revealed that the parasite uses the Duffy antigen to invade mature erythrocytes and an as yet unidentified receptor to invade reticulocytes (Swardson-Olver *et al.*, 2002). The fact that in *P. yoelii* a single ORF containing a DBL domain was identified based on its shared characteristics with PvDBP, PkDBPs and EBA175 (Prasad *et al.*, 2003) makes this a candidate protein for mediating this interaction. This is further supported by observation that it binds to mature erythrocytes using region II of its DBL domain (Prasad *et al.*, 2003). Analysis of the recently obtained *P. berghei*

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

Invasion of host cells by malaria parasites 239

and *P. chabaudi* genome databases had also revealed the presence of an EBL1 orthologue in each of these two species (Hall *et al.*, 2005).

Other proteins related to EBL. A highly conserved member of the EBLs, MAEBL has been found in all *Plasmodium* species analyses so far. As mentioned above, MAEBL is unique in that it does not contain a DBL domain but is instead a hybrid sharing identity to AMA1 within the tandem duplicated cysteine-rich domains and the carboxyl cysteine-rich domain of EBL (Kappe *et al.*, 1998; Blair *et al.*, 2002). The duplicated cysteine-rich domains conserved with the AMA1 regions have previously been shown to have erythrocyte binding activity (Kappe *et al.*, 1998). MAEBL, unlike the other EBLs, is located in the rhoptries of the merozoite indicating that it may have evolved a unique role in erythrocyte invasion (Noe and Adams, 1998).

Red blood cell selection and invasion: a multi-ligand model

The concept that complex ligand/receptor interactions must be implicated in the red cell selection/invasion process was raised by the discovery that *P. vivax*, a parasite with strong reticulocyte tropism, has an absolute requirement for the Duffy antigen that is present on all red blood cells. It is now known that the Duffy determinant is actually a chemokine receptor (DARC) whose expression is prevented in erythroid but not in non-erythroid cells as a result of mutation of the promoter at the GATA box (Tournamille *et al.*, 1995). The notion that a single ligand-receptor interaction determines the invasive phenotype was further questioned by investigations where red blood cells, whose surface was modified with different proteases, or with blood collected from individuals with specific red blood cell phenotypes, clearly demonstrated that merozoites from clonal parasite lines can adopt alternative invasion pathways (Dolan *et al.*, 1990; 1991). Today it is known that there are many ligands present in the parasite’s genome. Functional and molecular analyses of parasites that have been adapted to different red blood cell types, or where specific ligands were genetically disrupted, are revealing that complex modifications in the expression patterns of both the RBL and EBL genes belie the alternative invasion pathways. It should be noted that relatively few host receptors have been identified as compared with the number of known parasite ligands in a given *Plasmodium* species, although there are strong indications that each ligand binds to a distinct receptor. The cost of maintaining a large number of genes and complex mechanisms to regulate their expression must be compensated by a selective advantage to the parasite. First,
the human red blood cell surface exhibits a high degree of diversity between different individuals, and in a single person the red blood cell formula can vary by age and sex, and also in response to infection or other factors like nutrition (Henry, 1996; Berkow, 1997). Second, in endemic areas most individuals would have acquired a certain degree of immunity to the parasite that presumably encompass specific responses to ligands implicated in red blood cell invasion. Thus, a flexible invasive potential would enhance the parasite’s reproductive success as this would optimize its ability to establish an infection that will persist and be transmitted in any individual. It should be noted that this reasoning also applies to the other invasive stages of the parasite.

We propose that a mechanism for red blood cell recognition and invasion based on distinct combinations of two or more ligand–receptor interactions would offer a good solution for maintaining a broad invasive potential at a minimal cost in genetic complexity. We further propose that a situation where the combined ligands are selected from the two families (RBL and EBL) would be optimal. This hypothetical scheme has the potential to account for a number of features associated with malaria infections. First, reliance on at least two distinct host receptors for target cell identification would help ensure that the parasite will predominantly invade the cells suitable for its development. Second, a defined combination between two ligands, one from the RBL and the other from the EBL families, is likely to target a different set of host receptors from those targeted by another combination. Thus, each RBL/EBL pair would potentially define a distinct invasion pathway. For instance, in *P. falciparum* where there are five RBL and five EBL members, one might envisage that the merozoites would have the potential to adopt 25 different invasion pathways or, to be more precise, to identify 25 erythrocyte subsets each expressing one of 25 distinct receptor combinations. Third, a given RBL/EBL combination is likely to be immunologically distinct from others, thereby providing the parasite with a way to evade immune responses that might have arisen against some RBL/EBL combinations.

The signal to invade would then depend on the quality of the interaction between the merozoite ligands and the red blood cell receptors. The avidity of each ligand to its receptor and the number of ligand–receptor combinations would determine the overall strength of the interaction, and the process of invasion will be triggered when this reaches a certain threshold. If this were the case, then the predilection of different *Plasmodium* species to red blood cells of different ages (from reticulocytes to mature and possibly ageing normocytes) might well be accounted for by variations in the density of some receptors at the surface of the red blood cell. The fact that red blood cells are devoid of DNA does not preclude the appearance and

increase of surface receptor as the red cell ages, as it is known that age-related alteration of the membrane leads to the exposure of some proteins that were inaccessible in the young red blood cell (Killmann, 1964; Berlin and Berk, 1975; Ballas et al., 1986; Clark, 1988; Woolley et al., 2000). However, experimental approaches that aim to elucidate the nature of the parasite’s red blood cell tropism are actually quite restricted. Observations in natural infections of humans are clearly precluded on ethical grounds. Interpretation of data from *in vitro* cultivation, in addition to being restricted to *P. falciparum*, is confounded by the variable characteristics of the red blood cells used. The latter often originate from different donors, and are used after prolonged storage. This might explain why culture-adapted strains of *P. falciparum* tend to have relatively stable invasion phenotypes that are reflected in the RBL and the EBL expression profiles. Freshly isolated parasites by contrast which had been maintained in culture for a short time were shown to display a much broader range of invasion pathways (Okoyeh et al., 1999).

At present it is not known whether the EBL and RBL interact with their respective receptors in separate independent events, or whether this occurs in the context of a macromolecular complex comprising both ligands. It has been recently proposed that the *P. falciparum* RBLs have an initial sensing function that serves to characterize the erythrocyte as suitable (Duraisingh et al., 2003a). This initial positive interaction would then lead to the recruitment of the high-affinity ligands, such as EBA175 or another member of the EBL family (Fig. 2), ultimately resulting in the release of micronemal contents and junction formation which initiate the process of red blood cell invasion. This is consistent with current understanding of red cell invasion by *P. vivax* where reticulocyte identification precedes recruitment of the DBP (Galinski and Barnwell, 1996), and in line with the proposed mode of action of the *P. yoelii* Py235 protein (Khan et al., 2001b). It must be stated that establishing the timelines of the numerous steps of a process normally completed within minutes is fraught with technical and interpretational hurdles. Irrespective of the finer details, disruption of either the interaction mediated by RBL as well as EBL would significantly inhibit merozoite invasion.

Diversity of invasive potential: control and consequences

The invasive potential of merozoites might differ between *Plasmodium* species, or genetically distinct lines within a species, not only as a result of difference in the mix of RBL and EBL genes present in the genome, but also through the nature of the mechanisms that control their expression.

Invasion of host cells by malaria parasites 241

Merozoite

Nu

DG

Rh

Mn

RBL binding to receptor signals recruitment of EBLs.

Erythrocyte

EBLs form tight adhesions between merozoite and erythrocyte. Invasion continues

Legend

Nu = Nucleus

Rh = Rhoptry

Mn = Microneme

DG = Dense granule

Erythrocyte

Ligand

Receptor

Fig. 2. Sensing by RBLs and recruitment of EBLs. *P. falciparum* RBL may have an initial sensing function that serves to characterize the erythrocyte as suitable. This initial positive interaction would then lead to the recruitment of the high-affinity ligands, such as EBA175 or another member of the EBL family resulting in the release of micronemal contents and junction formation which initiate the process of red blood cell invasion.

Analysis of the *Plasmodium* genomes sequenced to date reveals that members of the RBL and EBL families differ substantially between species, whether this also occurs for different lines within a species awaits further sequencing. These differences imply that each *Plasmodium* species has adopted distinct evolutionary paths with respect to host cell invasion. At present it is not possible to conclude that a parasite whose genome has a large number of members in the RBL and/or EBL families would have a higher invasive potential than one with lower numbers, although this would be a logical consequence of the multi-ligand hypothesis. It would be tempting to suggest that the reduced virulence of *P. vivax* as compared with *P. falciparum* results from the presence of only 2 RBL + 1 EBL in the first and 5 RBL + 5 EBL in the second of these species. We feel that this should remain a matter of speculation until such a time where all the molecular players implicated in red blood cell selection are known, and when reliable means to measure invasive potential or indeed virulence reliably are devised. To date, there is no direct evidence that indicates that the presence or expression of a particular RBL and/or EBL is responsible for differences in the invasion potential of merozoites. There are nonetheless many studies suggestive of a role for these protein families in the modulation of host cell tropism.

In *P. yoelii*, where there are 14 RBL members (the Py235 family) but only a single EBL representative, investigations of Py235 expression uncovered a novel molecular strategy to generate merozoite diversity (*Preiser et al.*, 1999). Transcriptional analysis of single parasites revealed that each merozoite expresses one or a restricted set of the Py235 repertoire and merozoites within a single schizont can differ in the Py235 genes they express. If it assumed that differential expression does indeed lead to functional invasive differences, then this mechanism of clonal phenotypic variation would ensure that the parasite population maintains its overall invasive potential with time both in the face of immune pressure and in the face of changes of the host red cell population. Recent investigations in *P. yoelii* have further linked the total amount of Py235 expressed in merozoites with the

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

242 J. Iyer et al.

Starting Population of Merozoites

Population of Merozoites after Selection

Rounds of selection

Erythrocyte

Loss of specific ligand-receptor combination due to antibody or enzyme pretreatment of erythrocytes

Increased frequency of parasites expressing appropriate ligand

Fig. 3. Selection of parasites expressing appropriate ligands. The merozoite population will express a mosaic of invasion ligands. Loss of specific ligand–receptor interactions due to either antibody against the ligand or receptor or enzymatic treatment of red blood cells leads to only a small population of viable merozoites. After selection of the successfully invaded parasite population, subsequent generations of merozoites will express the appropriate ligand at a high frequency to ensure invasion potential. Colours signify different ligands expressed.

red blood cell invasion profile (Iyer et al., 2007). Parasite populations restricted to reticulocytes expressed low amounts of overall erythrocyte stage-expressed Py235, whereas those that invaded all red blood cells expressed high levels of Py235. It is interesting to note that modest increases (two- to threefold) in the expression level of a restricted subset of four Py235 genes were observed in P. yoelii populations restricted to reticulocytes by immunization with MSP8 (Shi et al., 2005). The functional significance of these alterations remains to be elucidated.

Investigations carried out using *in vitro* cultivated P. falciparum lines whose expression profiles were modified by enzymatically modified red blood cells are consistent with the selection of a parasite population which expresses appropriate ligands that can bind to the resultant erythrocyte receptor repertoire (Fig. 3). These experiments, along with others involving gene disruption of EBA175, uncovered an association between the upregulation of PfRH4 and the loss of sialic acid-dependent invasion (Stubbs et al., 2005). This reinforces the notion that regulating the expression of RBL and/or EBL might be one of the mechanisms used by different Plasmodium species to modulate merozoite invasive potential. Whether differential expression of these ligands, in a clonal phenotypic fashion akin to that observed for Py235 in P. yoelii, occurs in P. falciparum awaits detailed quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR studies of single parasites. Nonetheless, data from numerous investigations strongly indicate that in most cases each P. falciparum merozoite expresses the whole or a major portion of the RBL and EBL repertoires (Taylor et al., 2002; Duraisingh et al., 2003a; Stubbs et al., 2005; Cowman and Crabb, 2006). Despite this apparent multiplicity of ligands, these merozoite populations appear to utilize only one invasive pathway defined by a distinct subset of the expressed RBL-EBL genes. Assuming that all the transcribed genes lead to the translation of equivalent amounts of protein, this conundrum might be resolved if the subcellular location and/or accessibility of the ligands is taken into account, as previously hypothesized (Duraisingh et al., 2003a; Baum et al., 2005). Thus, it has been proposed that only one or a small subset of the EBL and/or RBL expressed can be exposed in any one merozoite at the site where interactions with red blood cell take

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 65, 231–249

Invasion of host cells by malaria parasites 243

A

Newly synthesized ligands move  
to developing apical organelles  

B                                                                 C

Active site

Loss of ligand from "active" site where erythrocyte interactions  
take place gives way to other ligands to occupy this position  

Active site  

Every merozoite has only a single unique ligand  
set expressed at the "active" site  

Fig. 4. Genesis of the apical complex.  
A. A merozoite expressing many RBLs and EBLs in the apical organelles.  
B. Loss of particular ligands (blue) from the ‘active’ site would liberate the place for another ligand (yellow).  
C. Only one ligand set of the EBL and RBL (either blue or red) is expressed at the site where the interactions with an erythrocyte take place.

place (Duraisingh et al., 2003a; Baum et al., 2005). This  
‘biased’ or selective exposure of a particular set of ligands  
might arise during the genesis of the apical complex. In  
this way, loss of a particular ligand from the ‘active site’  
would liberate the place for another ligand (Fig. 4), and  
would consequently lead to a switch in the invasion  
phenotype. The notion of maintaining a limited number of  
parasite ligands in an accessible position would be con-  
sistent with a strategy of immune evasion for the merozo-  
ite, a parasite form fully exposed to the host’s humoral  
defences.  
Finally, modulation of the invasive potential can also be  
brought about by genetic diversity of the ligands.  
Sequence analysis of different parasite isolates has  
revealed there are extensive polymorphisms for EBL and  
RBL genes (Taylor et al., 2002; Nery et al., 2006). The  
functional significance of these polymorphisms, in terms  
of receptor recognition or invasion profiles, is yet to be  
demonstrated. Nonetheless, it has been elegantly  
shown that mutation of a single amino acid in the binding  
domains of EBA140 and EBA181 was sufficient to signifi-  

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 65, 231–249

244 J. Iyer et al.

unlikely to provide full insight into the nature of red blood cell selection, unless it is associated with studies where the red blood cell receptors are also defined. The red blood cell variants that are naturally found in nature constitute a rich source of material for these studies, but these are likely to be insufficient. For those parasites that can be maintained routinely *in vitro* (*P. falciparum* and *P. knowlesi*) the challenge will be to devise ways to obtain reproducibly homogeneous population of red blood cells with defined receptor characteristics. Advances in the genetic manipulation of erythroblasts and in the generation of large numbers of erythrocytes from these progenitor cells might provide a solution.

The demonstration that switches to alternative invasion pathways where different ligands and receptors are implicated are easily obtained for *P. falciparum* under laboratory conditions, and evidence that this also occurs in parasites circulating in endemic residents, is of concern for malaria vaccines based on RBL or EBL proteins. The fact that parasites that do not express EBA175, the leading candidate for such vaccines, are still able to multiply (Duraisingh *et al.*, 2003b) might translate in the selection of escape variants if this vaccine is deployed. However, pessimism must be tempered as it is not actually known whether these variant parasite lines that grow under laboratory conditions would be viable *in vivo*. It has nonetheless become necessary to consider inclusion of two or more RBL and EBL ligands in any vaccine intended to prevent interactions between the merozoite and the red blood cell.

Finally, one of the central assumptions concerning the RBL and EBL proteins is that they are solely involved in the invasion of red blood cells. This has primarily arisen from the fact that these proteins were first found associated to merozoites. Moreover, for many of these proteins binding to red blood cells could be demonstrated, and for some a red blood cell receptor was identified. Finally antibodies raised against a number of these proteins can inhibit or alter the tropism and invasive profiles of merozoites. There are two relatively recent studies that question the validity of this assumption. First, the expression of distinct subsets of Py235 genes (RBL family) was demonstrated (both at the transcriptional and protein levels) in the sporozoite and in the hepatic parasite (Preiser *et al.*, 2002). Second, EBA175 (EBL family), an important *P. falciparum* anti-red blood cell invasion vaccine candidate, was also shown to be expressed on the surface of sporozoites and in the infected hepatocyte (Grüner *et al.*, 2001). Whereas expression of these proteins might be expected in hepatic merozoites that are destined to invade red blood cells, their role in the biology of the sporozoite, a parasite form that interacts with mosquito salivary glands, the cells in the skin where it is deposited by the infective bite before invading hepatocytes, is yet to be explored. Systematic studies to determine which of the other members of the RBL and EBL

families are expressed during the pre-erythrocytic stages of *Plasmodium* are currently underway. This might result in the identification of some ligands that specifically interact with a single host cell type, and others that might be part of the set of parasite proteins implicated in all invasive events.

In conclusion, elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying host cell tropism and invasion in *Plasmodium* parasites presents researchers with a formidable challenge, both technically and intellectually. The resources that would be required to achieve this goal are justified by the central role these processes play in the survival of the parasite and in the possibility that the knowledge to be gained might yield novel and efficient strategies to control the infection.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Z. Bozdech for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was in part supported by the Biomedical Research Council, Singapore (04/1/22/19/364) (P.R.P.) and by the European Union (MALINV project n°012199) (L.R.). J.I. was a recipient of the Singapore Millennium Foundation Scholarship.

## References

Adams, J.H., Hudson, D.E., Torii, M., Ward, G.E., Wellems, T.E., Aikawa, M., and Miller, L.H. (1990) The Duffy receptor family of *Plasmodium knowlesi* is located within the micronemes of invasive malaria merozoites. *Cell* **63**: 141–153.

Adams, J.H., Sim, B.K., Dolan, S.A., Fang, X., Kaslow, D.C., and Miller, L.H. (1992) A family of erythrocyte binding proteins of malaria parasites. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **89**: 7085–7089.

Adams, J.H., Blair, P.L., Kaneko, O., and Peterson, D.S. (2001) An expanding ebl family of *Plasmodium falciparum*. *Trends Parasitol* **17**: 297–299.

Aikawa, M., Miller, L.H., Johnson, J., and Rabbege, J. (1978) Erythrocyte entry by malarial parasites. A moving junction between erythrocyte and parasite. *J Cell Biol* **77**: 72–82.

Ballas, S.K., Flynn, J.C., Jr, Pauline, L.A., and Murphy, D.L. (1986) Erythrocyte Rh antigens increase with red cell age. *Am J Hematol* **23**: 19–24.

Bannister, L.H., Butcher, G.A., Dennis, E.D., and Mitchell, G.H. (1975) Structure and invasive behaviour of *Plasmodium knowlesi* merozoites *in vitro*. *Parasitology* **71**: 483–491.

Baum, J., Pinder, M., and Conway, D.J. (2003a) Erythrocyte invasion phenotypes of *Plasmodium falciparum*. The Gambia. *Infect Immun* **71**: 1856–1863.

Baum, J., Thomas, A.W., and Conway, D.J. (2003b) Evidence for diversifying selection on erythrocyte-binding antigens of *Plasmodium falciparum* and *P. vivax*. *Genetics* **163**: 1327–1336.

Baum, J., Maier, A.G., Good, R.T., Simpson, K.M., and Cowman, A.F. (2005) Invasion by *P. falciparum* merozoites suggests a hierarchy of molecular interactions. *PLoS Pathog* **1**: e37.
Bei, A.K., Membí, C.D., Rayner, J.C., Mubi, M., Ngasala, B., Sultan, A.A., *et al.* (2007) Variant merozoite protein expression is associated with erythrocyte invasion phenotypes in *Plasmodium falciparum* isolates from Tanzania. Mol Biochem Parasitol 153: 66–71.

Berkow, R. (1997) *Manual of Medical Information*. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories.

Berlin, N.I., and Berk, P.D. (1975) The biological life of the red cell. In *The Red Blood Cell*. Surgenor, D.M. (ed.). New York: Academic Press, pp. 957–1019.

Blair, P.L., Kappe, S.H., Maciel, J.E., Balu, B., and Adams, J.H. (2002) *Plasmodium falciparum* MAEBL is a unique member of the ebl family. Mol Biochem Parasitol 122: 35–44.

Borre, M.B., Owen, C.A., Keen, J.K., Sinha, K.A., and Holder, A.A. (1995) Multiple genes code for high-molecular-mass rhoptry proteins of *Plasmodium yoelii*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 70: 149–155.

Camus, D., and Hadley, T.J. (1985a) A *Plasmodium falciparum* antigen that binds to host erythrocytes and merozoites. Science 230: 553–556.

Camus, D., and Hadley, T.J. (1985b) A *Plasmodium falciparum* antigen that binds to host erythrocytes and merozoites. Science 230: 553–556.

Carlton, J.M., Angiuoli, S.V., Suh, B.B., Kooij, T.W., Pertea, M., Silva, J.C., *et al.* (2002) Genome sequence and comparative analysis of the model rodent malaria parasite *Plasmodium yoelii yoelii*. Nature 419: 512–519.

Chattopadhyay, D., Rayner, J., McHenry, A.M., and Adams, J.H. (2006) The structure of the *Plasmodium falciparum* EBA175 ligand domain and the molecular basis of host specificity. Trends Parasitol 22: 143–145.

Chitnis, C.E., and Miller, L.H. (1994) Identification of the erythrocyte binding domains of *Plasmodium vivax* and *Plasmodium knowlesi* proteins involved in erythrocyte invasion. J Exp Med 180: 497–506.

Chitnis, C.E., Chaudhuri, A., Horuk, R., Pogo, A.O., and Miller, L.H. (1996) The domain on the Duffy blood group antigen for binding *Plasmodium vivax* and *P. knowlesi* malarial parasites to erythrocytes. J Exp Med 184: 1531–1536.

Clark, M.R. (1988) Senescence of red blood cells: progress and problems. Physiol Rev 68: 503–554.

Cowman, A.F., and Crabb, B.S. (2006) Invasion of red blood cells by malaria parasites. Cell 124: 755–766.

Culvenor, J.G., Day, K.P., and Anders, R.F. (1991) *Plasmodium falciparum* ring-infected erythrocyte surface antigen is released from merozoite dense granules after erythrocyte invasion. Infect Immun 59: 1183–1187.

Dolan, S.A., Miller, L.H., and Wellem, T.E. (1990) Evidence for a switching mechanism in the invasion of erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum*. J Clin Invest 86: 618–624.

Dolan, S.A., Miller, L.H., and Wellem, T.E. (1991) Selection of genetic variants from *Plasmodium* clones. Acta Leiden 60: 93–99.

Dolan, S.A., Proctor, J.L., Alling, D.W., Okubo, Y., Wellem, T.E., and Miller, L.H. (1994) Glycophorin B as an EBA-175 independent *Plasmodium falciparum* receptor of human erythrocytes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 64: 55–63.

Duraisingh, M.T., Triglia, T., Ralph, S.A., Rayner, J.C., Barnwell, J.W., McFadden, G.I., and Cowman, A.F. (2003a)

---

Phenotypic variation of *Plasmodium falciparum* merozoite proteins directs receptor targeting for invasion of human erythrocytes. EMBO J 22: 1047–1057.

Duraisingh, M.T., Maier, A.G., Triglia, T., and Cowman, A.F. (2003b) Erythrocyte-binding antigen 175 mediates invasion in *Plasmodium falciparum* utilizing sialic acid-dependent and -independent pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 4796–4801.

Dvorak, J.A., Miller, L.H., Whitehouse, W.C., and Shiroishi, T. (1975) Invasion of erythrocytes by malaria merozoites. Science 187: 748–750.

Escalante, A.A., and Ayala, F.J. (1994) Phylogeny of the malarial genus *Plasmodium*, derived from rRNA gene sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91: 11373–11377.

Escalante, A.A., Cornejo, O.E., Freeland, D.E., Poe, A.C., Durrego, E., Collins, W.E., and Lal, A.A. (2005) A monkey’s tale: the origin of *Plasmodium vivax* as a human malaria parasite. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102: 1980–1985.

Fahey, J.R., and Spitalny, G.L. (1984) Virulent and nonvirulent forms of *Plasmodium yoelii* are not restricted to growth within a single erythrocyte type. Infect Immun 44: 151–156.

Fang, X.D., Kaslow, D.C., Adams, J.H., and Miller, L.H. (1991) Cloning of the *Plasmodium vivax* Duffy receptor. Mol Biochem Parasitol 44: 125–132.

Florens, L., Washburn, M.P., Raine, J.D., Anthony, R.M., Grainger, M., Haynes, J.D., *et al.* (2002) A proteomic view of the *Plasmodium falciparum* life cycle. Nature 419: 520–526.

Fraser, T., Michon, P., Barnwell, J.W., Noe, A.R., Al-Yaman, F., Kaslow, D.C., and Adams, J.H. (1997) Expression and serologic activity of a soluble recombinant *Plasmodium vivax* Duffy binding protein. Infect Immun 65: 2772–2777.

Freeman, R.R., Trejdosiewicz, A.J., and Cross, G.A. (1980) Protective monoclonal antibodies recognising stage-specific merozoite antigens of a rodent malaria parasite. Nature 284: 366–368.

Galinski, M.R., and Barnwell, J.W. (1996) *Plasmodium vivax* merozoites, invasion of reticulocytes and considerations for malaria vaccine development. Parasitol Today 12: 20–29.

Galinski, M.R., Medina, C.C., Ingravallo, P., and Barnwell, J.W. (1992) A reticulocyte-binding protein complex of *Plasmodium vivax* merozoites. Cell 69: 1213–1226.

Galinski, M.R., Xu, M., and Barnwell, J.W. (2000) *Plasmodium vivax* reticulocyte binding protein-2 (PvRBP-2) shares structural features with PvRBP-1 and the *Plasmodium yoelii* 235 kDa rhoptry protein family. Mol Biochem Parasitol 108: 257–262.

Gardner, M.J., Shallom, S.J., Carlton, J.M., Salzberg, S.L., Nene, V., Shoaibi, A., *et al.* (2002) Sequence of *Plasmodium falciparum* chromosomes 2, 10, 11 and 14. Nature 419: 531–534.

Garnham, P.C.C. (1966) *Malaria Parasites and Other Haemosporidia*. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Gaur, D., Storry, J.R., Reid, M.E., Barnwell, J.W., and Miller, L.H. (2003) *Plasmodium falciparum* is able to invade erythrocytes through a trypsin-resistant pathway independent of glycophorin B. Infect Immun 71: 6742–6746.

Gilberger, T.W., Thompson, J.K., Reed, M.B., Good, R.T., and Cowman, A.F. (2003a) The cytoplasmic domain of the *Plasmodium falciparum* ligand EBA-175 is essential for

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249
invasion but not protein trafficking. *J Cell Biol* 162: 317–327.

Gilberger, T.W., Thompson, J.K., Triglia, T., Good, R.T., Duraisingh, M.T., and Cowman, A.F. (2003b) A novel erythrocyte binding antigen-175 parologue from *Plasmodium falciparum* defines a new trypsin-resistant receptor on human erythrocytes. *J Biol Chem* 278: 14480–14486.

Golenda, C.F., Starkweather, W.H., and Wirtz, R.A. (1990) The distribution of circumsporozoite protein (CS) in *Anopheles stephensi* mosquitoes infected with *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria. *J Histochem Cytochem* 38: 475–481.

Grüner, A.C., Brahimi, K., Letourneur, F., Renia, L., Eling, W., Snounou, G., and Druihe, P. (2001) Expression of the erythrocyte-binding antigen 175 in sporozoites and in liver stages of *Plasmodium falciparum*. *J Infect Dis* 184: 892–897.

Grüner, A.C., Snounou, G., Fuller, K., Jarra, W., Renia, L., and Preiser, P.R. (2004) The Py235 proteins: glimpses into the versatility of a malaria multigene family. *Microbes Infect* 6: 864–873.

Hall, N., Karras, M., Raine, J.D., Carlton, J.M., Kooij, T.W., Berriman, M., et al. (2005) A comprehensive survey of the *Plasmodium* life cycle by genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic analyses. *Science* 307: 82–86.

Hans, D., Pattnaik, P., Bhattacharyya, A., Shakri, A.R., Yazdani, S.S., Sharma, M., et al. (2005) Mapping binding residues in the *Plasmodium vivax* domain that binds Duffy antigen during red cell invasion. *Mol Microbiol* 55: 1423–1434.

Haynes, J.D., Dalton, J.P., Klotz, F.W., McGinniss, M.H., Hadley, T.J., Hudson, D.E., and Miller, L.H. (1988) Receptor-like specificity of a *Plasmodium knowlesi* malarial protein that binds to Duffy antigen ligands on erythrocytes. *J Exp Med* 167: 1873–1881.

Hegner, R. (1938) Relative frequency of ring-stage plasmodia in reticulocytes and mature erythrocytes in man and monkey. *Am J Trop Med* 27: 690–718.

Henry, J.B. (1996) *Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods*. New York: W.B. Saunders.

Holder, A.A., and Freeman, R.R. (1981) Immunization against blood-stage rodent malaria using purified parasite antigens. *Nature* 294: 361–364.

Holder, A.A., and Freeman, R.R. (1982) Biosynthesis and processing of a *Plasmodium falciparum* schizont antigen recognized by immune serum and a monoclonal antibody. *J Exp Med* 156: 1528–1538.

Holder, A.A., and Freeman, R.R. (1984) Protective antigens of rodent and human bloodstage malaria. *Philos Trans R Soc Lon B Biol Sci* 307: 171–177.

Huber, M., Cabib, E., and Miller, L.H. (1991) Malaria parasite chitinase and penetration of the mosquito peritrophic membrane. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 88: 2807–2810.

Iyer, J.K., Amaladoss, A., Ganesan, S., and Preiser, P.R. (2007) Variable expression of the 235 kDa rhoptry protein of *Plasmodium yoelii* mediates host cell adaptation and immune evasion. *Mol Microbiol* 65: 333–346. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05786.x

Iyer, J.K., Fuller, K., and Preiser, P.R. (2006) Differences in the copy number of the py235 gene family in virulent and avirulent lines of *Plasmodium yoelii*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 150: 186–191.

Jakobsen, P.H., Heegaard, P.M., Koch, C., Wasniowska, K., Lemnge, M.M., Jensen, J.B., and Sim, B.K. (1998) Identification of an erythrocyte binding peptide from the erythrocyte binding antigen, EBA-175, which blocks parasite multiplication and induces peptide-blocking antibodies. *Infect Immun* 66: 4203–4207.

Johnson, J.G., Epstein, N., Shiroishi, T., and Miller, L.H. (1980) Factors affecting the ability of isolated *Plasmodium knowlesi* merozoites to attach to and invade erythrocytes. *Parasitology* 80: 539–550.

Jones, T.R., Narum, D.L., Gozalo, A.S., Aguiar, J., Fuhrmann, S.R., Liang, H., et al. (2001) Protection of *Aotus* monkeys by *Plasmodium falciparum* EBA-175 region II DNA prime-protein boost immunization regimen. *J Infect Dis* 183: 303–312.

Kaneko, O., Fidock, D.A., Schwartz, O.M., and Miller, L.H. (2000) Disruption of the C-terminal region of EBA-175 in the Dd2/Nm clone of *Plasmodium falciparum* does not affect erythrocyte invasion. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 110: 135–146.

Kaneko, O., Mu, J., Tsuboi, T., Su, X., and Torii, M. (2002) Gene structure and expression of a *Plasmodium falciparum* 220-kDa protein homologous to the *Plasmodium vivax* reticulocyte binding proteins. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 121: 275–278.

Kappe, S.H., Curley, G.P., Noe, A.R., Dalton, J.P., and Adams, J.H. (1997) Erythrocyte binding protein homologues of rodent malaria parasites. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 89: 137–148.

Kappe, S.H., Noe, A.R., Fraser, T.S., Blair, P.L., and Adams, J.H. (1998) A family of chimeric erythrocyte binding proteins of malaria parasites. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95: 1230–1235.

Keen, J., Holder, A., Playfair, J., Lockyer, M., and Lewis, A. (1990) Identification of the gene for a *Plasmodium yoelii* rhoptry protein. Multiple copies in the parasite genome. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 42: 241–246.

Keen, J., Sinha, K.A., Brown, K.N., and Holder, A.A. (1994) A gene coding for a high-molecular mass rhoptry protein of *Plasmodium yoelii*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 65: 171–177.

Khan, S.M., Jarra, W., Bayele, H., and Preiser, P.R. (2001a) Distribution and characterization of the 235 kDa rhoptry multigene family within the genomes of virulent and avirulent lines of *Plasmodium yoelii*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 114: 197–208.

Khan, S.M., Jarra, W., and Preiser, P.R. (2001b) The 235 kDa rhoptry protein of *Plasmodium (yoelii) yoelii*: function at the junction. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 117: 1–10.

Killmann, S.A. (1964) On the size of normal human reticulocytes. *Acta Med Scand* 176: 529–533.

Ladda, R., Aikawa, M., and Sprinz, H. (1969) Penetration of erythrocytes by merozoites of mammalian and avian malarial parasites. *J Parasitol* 55: 633–644.

Levine, N.D. (1971) Uniform terminology for the protozoan subphylum apicomplexa. *J Protozool* 18: 352–355.

Lobo, C.A., Rodriguez, M., Reid, M., and Lustigman, S. (2003) Glycophorin C is the receptor for the *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte binding ligand PfEBP-2 (baebl). *Blood* 101: 4628–4631.

Lobo, C.A., de Frazao, K., Rodriguez, M., Reid, M., Zalis, M., and Lustigman, S. (2004) Invasion profiles of Brazilian field

isolates of *Plasmodium falciparum*: phenotypic and genotypic analyses. *Infect Immun* **72**: 5886–5891.

Lobo, C.A., Rodriguez, M., Struchiner, C.J., Zalis, M.G., and Lustigman, S. (2006) Associations between defined polymorphic variants in the PfPH ligand family and the invasion pathways used by *P*. *falciparum* field isolates from Brazil. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **149**: 246–251.

McCutchan, T.F., Dame, J.B., Miller, L.H., and Barnwell, J. (1984) Evolutionary relatedness of *Plasmodium* species as determined by the structure of DNA. *Science* **225**: 808–811.

Maier, A.G., Duraisingh, M.T., Reeder, J.C., Patel, S.S., Kazura, J.W., Zimmerman, P.A., and Cowman, A.F. (2003) *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte invasion through glycophorin C and selection for Gerbich negativity in human populations. *Nat Med* **9**: 87–92.

Mason, S.J., Miller, L.H., Shiroishi, T., Dvorak, J.A., and McGinniss, M.H. (1977) The Duffy blood group determinants: their role in the susceptibility of human and animal erythrocytes to *Plasmodium knowlesi* malaria. *Br J Haematol* **36**: 327–335.

Mayer, D.C., Kaneko, O., Hudson-Taylor, D.E., Reid, M.E., and Miller, L.H. (2001) Characterization of a *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte-binding protein paralogous to EBA-175. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **98**: 5222–5227.

Mayer, D.C., Mu, J.B., Feng, X., Su, X.Z., and Miller, L.H. (2002) Polymorphism in a *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte-binding ligand changes its receptor specificity. *J Exp Med* **196**: 1523–1528.

Mayer, D.C., Mu, J.B., Kaneko, O., Duan, J., Su, X.Z., and Miller, L.H. (2004) Polymorphism in the *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte-binding ligand JESEBL/EBA-181 alters its receptor specificity. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **101**: 2518–2523.

Meis, J.F., Wismans, P.G., Jap, P.H., Lensen, A.H., and Ponnudurai, T. (1992) A scanning electron microscopic study of the sporogonic development of *Plasmodium falciparum* in *Anopheles stephensi*. *Acta Trop* **50**: 227–236.

Miller, L.H., Haynes, J.D., McAuliffe, F.M., Shiroishi, T., Duocher, J.R., and McGinniss, M.H. (1975) Evidence for differences in erythrocyte receptors for the malaria parasites, *Plasmodium falciparum* and *Plasmodium knowlesi*. *J Exp Med* **146**: 277–281.

Miller, L.H., McAuliffe, F.M., and Mason, S.J. (1977) Erythrocyte receptors for malaria merozoites. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* **26**: 204–208.

Miller, L.H., Aikawa, M., Johnson, J.G., and Shiroishi, T. (1979) Interaction between cytochalasin B-treated malarial parasites and erythrocytes. Attachment and junction formation. *J Exp Med* **149**: 172–184.

Mitchell, G.H., and Bannister, L.H. (1988) Malaria parasite invasion: interactions with the red cell membrane. *Crit Rev Oncol Hematol* **8**: 225–310.

Mitchell, G.H., Hadley, T.J., McGinniss, M.H., Klotz, F.W., and Miller, L.H. (1986) Invasion of erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum* malaria parasites: evidence for receptor heterogeneity and two receptors. *Blood* **67**: 1519–1521.

Narum, D.L., Green, J.L., Ogun, S.A., and Holder, A.A. (2001) Sequence diversity and antigenic polymorphism in *Plasmodium yoelii* p235 high molecular mass rhoptry proteins and their genes. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **112**: 193–200.


Narum, D.L., Fuhrmann, S.R., Luu, T., and Sim, B.K. (2002) A novel *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte binding protein-2 (EBP2/BAEBL) involved in erythrocyte receptor binding. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **119**: 159–168.

Nery, S., Deans, A.M., Mosobo, M., Marsh, K., Rowe, J.A., and Conway, D.J. (2006) Expression of *Plasmodium falciparum* genes involved in erythrocyte invasion varies among isolates cultured directly from patients. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **149**: 208–215.

Noe, A.R., and Adams, J.H. (1998) *Plasmodium yoelii* YM MAEBL protein is coexpressed and colocalizes with rhoptry proteins. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **96**: 27–35.

Ocampo, M., Vera, R., Rodriguez, L.E., Curtidor, H., Suarez, J., Garcia, J., *et al.* (2004) Identification of *Plasmodium falciparum* reticulocyte binding protein RBP-2 homologue a and b (PfRBP-2-Ha and -Hb) sequences that specifically bind to erythrocytes. *Parasitol Int* **53**: 77–88.

Ockenhouse, C.F., Barbosa, A., Blackall, D.P., Murphy, C.I., Kashala, O., Dutta, S., *et al.* (2001) Sialic acid-dependent binding of baculovirus-expressed recombinant antigens from *Plasmodium falciparum* EBA-175 to Glycophorin A. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **113**: 9–21.

Ogun, S.A., and Holder, A.A. (1996) A high molecular mass *Plasmodium yoelii* rhoptry protein binds to erythrocytes. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **76**: 321–324.

Ogun, S.A., Scott-Finnigan, T.J., Narum, D.L., and Holder, A.A. (2000) *Plasmodium yoelii*: effects of red blood cell modification and antibodies on the binding characteristics of the 235-kDa rhoptry protein. *Exp Parasitol* **95**: 187–195.

Ogun, S.A., Howell, S.A., Taylor, H.M., and Holder, A.A. (2006) A member of the py235 gene family of *Plasmodium yoelii* encodes an erythrocyte binding protein recognised by a protective monoclonal antibody. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **147**: 140–143.

Oka, M., Aikawa, M., Freeman, R.R., Holder, A.A., and Fine, E. (1984) Ultrastructural localization of protective antigens of *Plasmodium yoelii* merozoites by the use of monoclonal antibodies and ultrathin cryomicrotomy. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* **33**: 342–346.

Okenu, D.M., Malhotra, P., Lalitha, P.V., Chitnis, C.E., and Chauhan, V.S. (1997) Cloning and sequence analysis of a gene encoding an erythrocyte binding protein from *Plasmodium cynomolgi*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **89**: 301–306.

Okenu, D.M., Meyer, E.V., Puckett, T.C., Rosas-Acosta, G., Barnwell, J.W., and Galinski, M.R. (2005) The reticulocyte binding proteins of *Plasmodium cynomolgi*: a model system for studies of *P*. *vivax*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **143**: 116–120.

Okoyeh, J.N., Pillai, C.R., and Chitnis, C.E. (1999) *Plasmodium falciparum* field isolates commonly use erythrocyte invasion pathways that are independent of sialic acid residues of glycophorin A. *Infect Immun* **67**: 5784–5791.

Owen, C.A., Sinha, K.A., Keen, J.K., Ogun, S.A., and Holder, A.A. (1999) Chromosomal organisation of a gene family encoding rhoptry proteins in *Plasmodium yoelii*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* **99**: 183–192.

Ozwara, H., Kocken, C.H., Conway, D.J., Mwenda, J.M., and Thomas, A.W. (2001) Comparative analysis of *Plasmodium reichenowi* and *P*. *falciparum* erythrocyte-binding proteins reveals selection to maintain polymorphism in the

© 2007 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **65**, 231–249

erythrocyte-binding region of EBA-175. Mol Biochem Parasitol 116: 81–84.

Perkins, M.E., and Holt, E.H. (1988) Erythrocyte receptor recognition varies in *Plasmodium falciparum* isolates. Mol Biochem Parasitol 27: 23–34.

Peterson, D.S., and Wellems, T.E. (2000) EBL-1, a putative erythrocyte binding protein of *Plasmodium falciparum*, maps within a favored linkage group in two genetic crosses. Mol Biochem Parasitol 105: 105–113.

Peterson, M.G., Marshall, V.M., Smythe, J.A., Crewther, P.E., Lew, A., Silva, A., et al. (1989) Integral membrane protein located in the apical complex of *Plasmodium falciparum*. Mol Cell Biol 9: 3151–3154.

Prasad, C.D., Singh, A., Chitnis, C.E., and Sharma, A. (2003) A *Plasmodium yoelii yoelii* erythrocyte binding protein that uses Duffy binding-like domain for invasion: a rodent model for studying erythrocyte invasion. Mol Biochem Parasitol 128: 101–105.

Preiser, P.R., and Jarra, W. (1998) *Plasmodium yoelii*: differences in the transcription of the 235-kDa rhoptry protein multigene family in lethal and nonlethal lines. Exp Parasitol 89: 50–57.

Preiser, P.R., Jarra, W., Capiod, T., and Snounou, G. (1999) A rhoptry-protein-associated mechanism of clonal phenotypic variation in rodent malaria. Nature 398: 618–622.

Preiser, P.R., Khan, S., Costa, F.T., Jarra, W., Belnoue, E., Ogun, S., et al. (2002) Stage-specific transcription of distinct repertoires of a multigene family during *Plasmodium* life cycle. Science 295: 342–345.

Preiser, P., Renia, L., Singh, N., Balu, B., Jarra, W., Voza, T., et al. (2004) Antibodies against MAEBL ligand domains M1 and M2 inhibit sporozoite development *in vitro*. Infect Immun 72: 3604–3608.

Ranjan, A., and Chitnis, C.E. (1999) Mapping regions containing binding residues within functional domains of *Plasmodium vivax* and *Plasmodium knowlesi* erythrocyte-binding proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 14067–14072.

Rayner, J.C., Galinski, M.R., Ingravallo, P., and Barnwell, J.W. (2000) Two *Plasmodium falciparum* genes express merozoite proteins that are related to *Plasmodium vivax* and *Plasmodium yoelii* adhesive proteins involved in host cell selection and invasion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 9648–9653.

Rayner, J.C., Vargas-Serrato, E., Huber, C.S., Galinski, M.R., and Barnwell, J.W. (2001) A *Plasmodium falciparum* homologue of *Plasmodium vivax* reticulocyte binding protein (PvRBP1) defines a trypsin-resistant erythrocyte invasion pathway. J Exp Med 194: 1571–1581.

Rayner, J.C., Huber, C.S., Galinski, M.R., and Barnwell, J.W. (2004a) Rapid evolution of an erythrocyte invasion gene family: the *Plasmodium reichenowi* Reticulocyte Binding Like (RBL) genes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 133: 287–296.

Rayner, J.C., Huber, C.S., and Barnwell, J.W. (2004b) Conservation and divergence in erythrocyte invasion ligands: *Plasmodium reichenowi* EBL genes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 138: 243–247.

Rayner, J.C., Tran, T.M., Corredor, V., Huber, C.S., Barnwell, J.W., and Galinski, M.R. (2005) Dramatic difference in diversity between *Plasmodium falciparum* and Plasmo-

diun vivax reticulocyte binding-like genes. Am J Trop Med Hyg 72: 666–674.

Reed, M.B., Caruana, S.R., Batchelor, A.H., Thompson, J.K., Crabb, B.S., and Cowman, A.F. (2000) Targeted disruption of an erythrocyte binding antigen in *Plasmodium falciparum* is associated with a switch toward a sialic acid-independent pathway of invasion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 7509–7514.

Roggwiller, E., Betoulle, M.E., Blisnick, T., and Braun Breton, C. (1996) A role for erythrocyte band 3 degradation by the parasite gp76 serine protease in the formation of the parasitophorous vacuole during invasion of erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 82: 13–24.

Ryan, J.R., Stoute, J.A., Amon, J., Dunton, R.F., Mtalib, R., Koros, J., et al. (2006) Evidence for transmission of *Plasmodium vivax* among a duffy antigen negative population in Western Kenya. Am J Trop Med Hyg 75: 575–581.

Sam-Yellowe, T.Y. (1996) Rhoptry organelles of the apicomplexa: their role in host cell invasion and intracellular survival. Parasitol Today 12: 308–316.

Sherman, I.W. (1999) *Malaria. Parasite Biology, Pathogenesis and Protection*. American Society Microbiology.

Shi, Q., Cernetich, A., Daly, T.M., Galvan, G., Vaidya, A.B., Bergman, L.W., and Burns, J.M., Jr (2005) Alteration in host cell tropism limits the efficacy of immunization with a surface protein of malaria merozoites. Infect Immun 73: 6363–6371.

Sim, B.K. (1998) Delineation of functional regions on *Plasmodium falciparum* EBA-175 by antibodies eluted from immune complexes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 95: 183–192.

Sim, B.K.L., Chitnis, C.E., Wasniowska, K., Hadley, T.J., and Miller, L.H. (1994) Receptor and ligand domains for invasion of erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum*. Science 264: 1941–1944.

Singh, S.K., Singh, A.P., Pandey, S., Yazdani, S.S., Chitnis, C.E., and Sharma, A. (2003) Definition of structural elements in *Plasmodium vivax* and *P. knowlesi* Duffy-binding domains necessary for erythrocyte invasion. Biochem J 374: 193–198.

Singh, A.P., Ozwara, H., Kocken, C.H., Puri, S.K., Thomas, A.W., and Chitnis, C.E. (2005) Targeted deletion of *Plasmodium knowlesi* Duffy binding protein confirms its role in junction formation during invasion. Mol Microbiol 55: 1925–1934.

Stubbs, J., Simpson, K.M., Triglia, T., Plouffe, D., Tonkin, C.J., Duraisingh, M.T., et al. (2005) Molecular mechanism for switching of *P. falciparum* invasion pathways into human erythrocytes. Science 309: 1384–1387.

Su, X.-Z., Heatwole, V.M., Wertheimer, S.P., Guinet, F., Herfeldt, J.A., Peterson, D.S., et al. (1995) The large diverse gene family *var* encodes proteins involved in cytoadherence and antigenic variation of *Plasmodium falciparum*-infected erythrocytes. Cell 82: 89–100.

Swardson-Olver, C.J., Dawson, T.C., Burnett, R.C., Peiper, S.C., Maeda, N., and Avery, A.C. (2002) *Plasmodium yoelii* uses the murine Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines as a receptor for normocyte invasion and an alternative receptor for reticulocyte invasion. Blood 99: 2677–2684.

Taylor, H.M., Triglia, T., Thompson, J., Sajid, M., Fowler, R.,

Wickham, M.E., *et al.* (2001) *Plasmodium falciparum* homologue of the genes for *Plasmodium vivax* and *Plasmodium yoelii* adhesive proteins, which is transcribed but not translated. *Infect Immun* 69: 3635–3645.

Taylor, H.M., Grainger, M., and Holder, A.A. (2002) Variation in the expression of a *Plasmodium falciparum* protein family implicated in erythrocyte invasion. *Infect Immun* 70: 5779–5789.

Tewari, R., Ogun, S.A., Gunaratne, R.S., Crisanti, A., and Holder, A.A. (2005) Disruption of *Plasmodium berghei* merozoite surface protein 7 gene modulates parasite growth *in vivo*. *Blood* 105: 394–396.

Thompson, J.K., Triglia, T., Reed, M.B., and Cowman, A.F. (2001) A novel ligand from *Plasmodium falciparum* that binds to a sialic acid-containing receptor on the surface of human erythrocytes. *Mol Microbiol* 41: 47–58.

Tolia, N.H., Enemark, E.J., Sim, B.K., and Joshua-Tor, L. (2005) Structural basis for the EBA-175 erythrocyte invasion pathway of the malaria parasite *Plasmodium falciparum*. *Cell* 122: 183–193.

Torii, M., Adams, J.H., Miller, L.H., and Aikawa, M. (1989) Release of merozoite dense granules during erythrocyte invasion by *Plasmodium knowlesi*. *Infect Immun* 57: 3230–3233.

Tournamille, C., Colin, Y., Cartron, J.P., and Le Van Kim, C. (1995) Disruption of a GATA motif in the Duffy gene promoter abolishes erythroid gene expression in Duffy-negative individuals. *Nat Genet* 10: 224–228.

Triglia, T., Thompson, J., Caruana, S.R., Delorenzi, M., Speed, T., and Cowman, A.F. (2001a) Identification of proteins from *Plasmodium falciparum* that are homologous to reticulocyte binding proteins in *Plasmodium vivax*. *Infect Immun* 69: 1084–1092.

Triglia, T., Thompson, J.K., and Cowman, A.F. (2001b) An EBA175 homologue which is transcribed but not translated in erythrocytic stages of *Plasmodium falciparum*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 116: 55–63.

Triglia, T., Duraisingh, M.T., Good, R.T., and Cowman, A.F. (2005) Reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 1 is required for sialic acid-dependent invasion into human erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum*. *Mol Microbiol* 55: 162–174.

Tsuboi, T., Kappe, S.H., al-Yaman, F., Prickett, M.D., Alpers, M., and Adams, J.H. (1994) Natural variation within the principal adhesion domain of the *Plasmodium vivax* duffy binding protein. *Infect Immun* 62: 5581–5586.

Vanbuskirk, K.M., Sevova, E., and Adams, J.H. (2004a) Conserved residues in the *Plasmodium vivax* Duffy-binding protein ligand domain are critical for erythrocyte receptor recognition. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 101: 15754–15759.

Vanbuskirk, K.M., Cole-Tobian, J.L., Baisor, M., Sevova, E.S., Bockarie, M., King, C.L., and Adams, J.H. (2004b) Antigenic drift in the ligand domain of *Plasmodium vivax* duffy binding protein confers resistance to inhibitory antibodies. *J Infect Dis* 190: 1556–1562.

Vanderberg, J.P. (1974) Studies on the motility of *Plasmodium* sporozoites. *J Protozool* 21: 527–537.

Vaughan, J.A., Noden, B.H., and Beier, J.C. (1992) Population dynamics of *Plasmodium falciparum* sporogony in laboratory-infected *Anopheles gambiae*. *J Parasitol* 78: 716–724.

Waters, A., Higgins, O.G., and McCutchan, T.F. (1991) *Plasmodium falciparum* appears to have arisen as a result of lateral transfer between avian and human hosts. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 91: 11373–11377.

Wertheimer, S.P., and Barnwell, J.W. (1989) *Plasmodium vivax* interaction with the human Duffy blood group glycoprotein: identification of a parasite receptor-like protein. *Exp Parasitol* 69: 340–350.

Wooley, I.J., Hotmire, K.A., Sramkoski, R.M., Zimmerman, P.A., and Kazura, J.W. (2000) Differential expression of the duffy antigen receptor for chemokines according to RBC age and FY genotype. *Transfusion* 40: 949–953.
