
# Endocannabinoids in basal ganglia circuits
## Implications for Parkinson disease

Eduardo Benarroch, MD

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Eduardo Benarroch, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, West 8A Mayo Bldg or 811 Guggenheim Bldg, Rochester, MN 55905 Benarroch.eduardo@mayo.edu

Endocannabinoids are endogenous lipid messengers that bind the cannabinoid (CB) receptors. These receptors mediate the multiple behavioral effects of $l$-$\Delta^{9}$-tetrahydrocannabinol, the main psychoactive component of marijuana (cannabis). The endocannabinoid system has been implicated in a large variety of functions, including regulation of appetite and energy metabolism, pain and inflammation, neuroprotection, and modulation of basal ganglia circuits.¹ Not surprisingly, the endocannabinoid system has raised great interest as a potential pharmacologic target from management of disorders such as obesity, pain, nausea, and neurologic conditions such as multiple sclerosis and movement disorders. The aim of this article is to briefly review some basic concepts on the biochemistry, pharmacology, and synaptic modulatory role of the endocannabinoid system with focus on the basal ganglia circuits, and the potential implications for Parkinson disease (PD). These subjects have been covered in detail in several reviews.¹⁻⁶

### BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHARMACOLOGY OF THE ENDOCANNABINOID SYSTEM

The family of endocannabinoids includes at least five derivatives of arachidonic acid; the two best characterized are arachidonoyl ethanolamide (named anandamide after the Sanskrit word for bliss, ananda) and 2-arachydonol glycerol (2AG). These endocannabinoids are synthesized in postsynaptic targets on demand in response to increase in intracellular calcium ($\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$), triggered by either depolarization or activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors¹⁻³ (figure 1).

The cannabinoid receptors are G-protein coupled receptors and include the CB₁ receptors, which are present in the nervous system, and the CB₂ receptors, which are expressed primarily in the immune and hematopoietic systems.¹ The CB₁ and CB₂ receptors are coupled to $\mathrm{G}_{i/o}$ proteins, and their activation triggers complex transduction cascades (figure 1). These include inhibition of adenylate cyclase, inhibition of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ channels, activation of potassium ($\mathrm{K}^{+}$) channels, activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathways, and regulation of calcineurin and other phosphatases. In addition, anandamide may act via several non-G proteins coupled mechanisms, including direct activation of the vanilloid receptor 1 (VR₁) receptors.¹

Endocannabinoids are released from target neurons in response to synaptic depolarization and act as retrograde signals that regulate synaptic transmission.² Activation of presynaptic CB₁ receptors results in inhibition of release of glutamate, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and other neurotransmitters.³ The endocannabinoid signal is rapidly terminated by the selective uptake of anandamide or 2AG by neurons and glial cells via specific transporters and subsequent degradation (figure 1).

### ENDOCANNABINOID SYSTEM IN THE BASAL GANGLIA CIRCUITS

Endocannabinoids and their CB₁ receptors are highly expressed in the basal ganglia, and may have an important role in regulating motor function.⁴⁻⁶ Both endogenous and exogenous cannabinoids have a potent, primarily inhibitory effect on motor activity. The CB₁ receptors are primarily expressed in medium spiny GABAergic neurons of the striatum and are concentrated both in their dendrites and in their presynaptic axon terminals innervating the external (GPe) and internal (GPi) segments of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and pars compacta (SNc). There are also presynaptic CB₁ receptors in excitatory glutamatergic corticostriate terminals and in excitatory projections from the subthalamic nucleus (STN) to the GPi/SNr and SNc⁴⁻⁶ (figure 2).

The GPi and the SNr are the output nuclei of the basal ganglia and exert a tonic inhibitory control on the thalamus and brainstem motor areas.⁷ This inhibitory output is facilitated by projections from the STN to the GPi/SNr. Current evidence indicates that the tonic inhibitory effect of the basal ganglia output is regulated by the balanced activity of two parallel pathways, direct and indirect.⁷ These pathways involve two separate populations of medium

From the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Disclosure: The author reports no conflicts of interest.

Copyright © 2007 by AAN Enterprises, Inc.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Figure 1 Schematic representation of endocannabinoid signaling, as illustrated in this case for anandamide

Influx of calcium (Ca²⁺) in the postsynaptic cell activates phospholipase D (PLD), which acts on N-arachidonoyl phosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE) to produce anandamide. Anandamide is released into the synaptic cleft and acts via presynaptic cannabinoid 1 (CB₁) receptors. These receptors are guanine nucleotide binding (G) protein-coupled receptors coupled to Gᵢ/o transduction pathways, and their activation leads to inhibition of adenylate cyclase (AC), opening of presynaptic potassium (K⁺) channels, and inhibition of presynaptic Ca²⁺ channels. These effects result in inhibition of releases of glutamate or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) from presynaptic terminals. Anandamide is transported into the cell via the endocannabinoid transporter (ECT) and is degraded by the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) to arachidonic acid and ethanolamine.

spiny GABAergic neurons of the striatum that are activated by cortical inputs. The direct pathway involves striatal neurons that predominantly express D₁ dopamine receptors and project to the GPi/SNr. These striatal neurons elicit a phasic inhibition of the GPi/SNr, leading to disinhibition of the thalamus and brainstem motor areas. Thus, the direct pathway facilitates initiation of motor programs. The indirect pathway involves striatal neurons that express predominantly D₂ receptors and project to the GPe. Since the GPe tonically inhibits the STN, activation of the indirect pathway disinhibits the STN. The resulting increase in STN activity leads to an increase in inhibitory output from the GPi/SNr, resulting in inhibition or termination of motor programs. Dopaminergic inputs from the SNc modulate the activity of these pathways, exerting a net excitatory effect on the direct and a net inhibitory effect on the indirect pathway.⁷

Endocannabinoid signals exert a complex influence on motor activity via interactions with GABAergic, glutamatergic, and dopaminergic mechanisms within the basal ganglia circuits, as demonstrated by several studies in vitro.⁴⁻⁶ Activation of presynaptic CB₁ receptors reduces

Copyright © by AAN Enterprises, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.



Figure 2 Distribution of cannabinoid 1 (CB₁) receptors in the basal ganglia and their coexpression with dopamine D₁ and D₂ receptors

The CB₁ receptors are expressed presynaptically in excitatory corticostriate terminals and in inhibitory GABAergic terminals of striatal neurons innervating the external (GPe) and internal (GPi) segments of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), as well as the pars compacta (SNc, not shown). There are also presynaptic CB₁ receptors in excitatory terminals from the subthalamic nucleus (STN) innervating the GPi/SNr, as well as the GPe and SNc (not shown). CB₁ receptors are coexpressed with D₁ and D₂ receptors in the cell bodies of striatal neurons of both the direct and the indirect pathways.

glutamate release from cortical afferents to the striatum. This effect may be critical for long-term depression of corticostriate synapses, which has been implicated in motor learning and other forms of behavioral plasticity, including drug addiction.⁸⁹ Activation of presynaptic CB₁ receptors may increase local GABA levels in the GPe by reducing GABA reuptake from striatal afferents to this nucleus.¹⁰ In the GPi and SNr, presynaptic CB₁ receptors inhibit both release of GABA from striatal afferents and that of glutamate from subthalamic nucleus afferents.⁴⁻⁶ There are several interactions between the endocannabinoid and the dopamine system. Activation of presynaptic CB₁ receptors decreases GABA release from striatal afferents innervating dopaminergic neurons of the SNc, resulting in increased firing of these cells.¹¹ However, anandamide, acting via postsynaptic VR₁ receptors, may inhibit nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell activity.¹² There are also interactions between the endocannabinoid and dopamine systems at the level of the striatum. Both the CB₁ and D₂ receptors decrease glutamate release at corticostriate synapses. Activation of CB₁ receptors antagonizes D₁ receptor signaling in the medium spiny striatal neurons of the direct pathway. In contrast, interactions between


Neurology 69 July 17, 2007 307

Table: Localization and effects of CB₁ receptors in the basal ganglia circuits and potential implications for Parkinson disease (PD)

| Structure | CB₁ receptor location | Effect of CB₁ receptor activation | Potential implications for PD and LID |
|-----------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Striatum  | Corticostriate afferents | Decreases glutamate release* | Amelioration of PD; amelioration of LID |
|           | Medium spiny neurons of direct pathway | Antagonizes the effects of D₁ receptors | Worsening of PD; amelioration of LID |
|           | Medium spiny neurons of indirect pathway | Modifies the effects of D₂ receptors increasing activity† | Worsening of PD |
| GPe      | Striatal afferents | Increases GABA levels by reducing presynaptic reuptake | Worsening of PD |
| GPi      | Striatal afferents | Inhibits GABA release | Uncertain |
|           | STN afferents | Inhibits glutamate release | Uncertain |
| SNc      | Striatal afferents | Inhibits GABA release thereby increasing firing of dopaminergic neuron‡ | Potential benefit in PD |

*Potentiates the effects of dopamine acting via presynaptic D₂ receptors in corticostriate afferents.  
†Simultaneous activation of CB₁ and D₂ receptors increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation in vitro; if this occurs in vivo, it may increase activity of the indirect pathway.  
‡Anandamide, acting via postsynaptic vanilloid-type 1 (VR₁) receptors, inhibits activity of dopaminergic cells.  
LID = levodopa-induced dyskinesia; GPe = globus pallidus, external segment; GPi = globus pallidus, internal segment; STN = subthalamic nucleus; SNc = substantia nigra, pars compacta.

CB₁ and D₂ may result in activation of medium striatal neurons of the indirect pathway.⁴⁻⁶

**ENDOCANNABINOID SIGNALING AND POTENTIAL IMPLICATIONS FOR PARKINSON DISEASE**

The motor manifestations of PD result from reduced dopaminergic inputs to the striatum. This leads to enhanced corticostriate glutamatergic drive and overactivity of the indirect pathway, resulting in hypoactivity of the GPe. As a consequence, there is disinhibition of the STN and increased excitatory drive to the GPi and SNr. The final result is excessive inhibition of the motor thalamus and brainstem locomotor regions and abnormal synchronization of oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia circuits.⁷ In patients with PD, repeated levodopa replacement therapy is associated with functional changes in the direct and indirect pathways resulting in levodopa-induced dyskinesia.

Evidence from experimental models of PD in rodents and primates indicates that there are profound changes in CB₁ receptor signaling in the basal ganglia circuits both in the setting of dopamine depletion and following levodopa replacement therapy.⁴⁻⁶,¹³⁻¹⁶ Whereas some of the changes may reflect compensatory mechanisms, others may potentially worsen parkinsonism. For example, many studies suggest that parkinsonism is associated with overactivity of the endocannabinoid signaling system in the striatum, including increased levels of anandamide and 2AG and increased CB₁ receptor expression. Increased CB₁ receptor expression has also been found at postmortem in the striatum of PD patients.¹⁴ The increased CB₁ receptor expression may conceivably serve as a compensatory response to dopamine depletion in untreated PD, as presynaptic CB₁ receptors, like D₂ receptors,

reported improvement occurred only 2 months after the first use of cannabis.²⁰ In another small randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled exploratory trial, the CB₁ receptor antagonist rimonabant failed to improve motor function or reduce levodopa-induced dyskinesia in patients with PD.²¹ However, experimental evidence suggests that CB₁ receptor antagonists may only be beneficial in very advanced stages of disease.²² Furthermore, studies in parkin knockout mice, a model of early PD, showed gender-dependent differences both in levels of CB₁ receptors and motor responses to CB₁ receptor agonists and antagonists.²³

**PERSPECTIVE** Advances in defining the role of endocannabinoids in both normal basal ganglia function and in the pathophysiology of PD and levodopa-induced dyskinesia provide rationale for endocannabinoid targeted therapy for these and other movement disorders. However, experimental evidence indicates that the effects of CB₁ receptor agonists or antagonists in the basal ganglia circuits are site-specific and probably dose-dependent. Recent studies in models of PD also indicate the effects of these drugs depend on the severity of dopamine depletion, and, perhaps, gender. Given these multiple variables, the results of clinical trials assessing the efficacy of endocannabinoid receptor agonists or antagonists in PD and levodopa-induced dyskinesia still need to be interpreted with caution. So far, they have not provided consistent data to draw definite conclusions. However, the potential therapeutic value of these drugs, not only as adjunctive but also as potential neuroprotective therapy, warrant further studies to better define their use in PD and other movement disorders.

**REFERENCES**

1. Pacher P, Batkai S, Kunos G. The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. Pharmacol Rev 2006;58:389–462.
2. Wilson RI, Nicoll RA. Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. Science 2002;296:678–682.
3. Piomelli D. The molecular logic of endocannabinoid signaling. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003;4:873–884.
4. Brotchie JM. CB1 cannabinoid receptor signaling in Parkinson’s disease. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2003;3:54–61.
5. van der Stelt M, Di Marzo V. The endocannabinoid system in the basal ganglia and in the mesolimbic reward system: implications for neurological and psychiatric disorders. Eur J Pharmacol 2003;480:133–150.
6. Fernandez-Ruiz J, Gonzales S. Cannabinoid control of motor function at the basal ganglia. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2005:479–507.
7. DeLong MR, Wichmann T. Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia (review). Arch Neurol 2007;64:20–24.
8. Engler B, Freiman I, Urbanski M, Szabo B. Effects of exogenous and endogenous cannabinoids on GABAergic neurotransmission between the caudate-putamen and the globus pallidus in the mouse. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;316:608–617.
9. Ronesi J, Gerdeman GL, Lovinger DM. Disruption of endocannabinoid release and striatal long-term depression by postsynaptic blockade of endocannabinoid membrane transport. J Neurosci 2004;24:1673–1679.
10. Venderova K, Brown TM, Brotchie JM. Differential effects of endocannabinoids on [(3)H]-GABA uptake in the rat globus pallidus. Exp Neurol 2005;194:284–287.
11. Julian MD, Martin AB, Cuellar B, et al. Neuroanatomical relationship between type 1 cannabinoid receptors and dopaminergic systems in the rat basal ganglia. Neuroscience 2003;119:309–318.
12. de Lago E, de Miguel R, Lastres-Becker I, Ramos JA, Fernandez-Ruiz J. Involvement of vanilloid-like receptors in the effects of anandamide on motor behavior and nigrostriatal dopaminergic activity: in vivo and in vitro evidence. Brain Res 2004;1007:152–159.
13. Maccarrone M, Gubellini P, Bari M, et al. Levodopa treatment reverses endocannabinoid system abnormalities in experimental parkinsonism. J Neurochem 2003;85:1018–1025.
14. Lastres-Becker I, Cebeira M, de Ceballos ML, et al. Increased cannabinoid CB1 receptor binding and activation of GTP-binding proteins in the basal ganglia of patients with Parkinson’s syndrome and of MPTP-treated marmosets. Eur J Neurosci 2001;14:1827–1832.
15. van der Stelt M, Fox SH, Hill M, et al. A role for endocannabinoids in the generation of parkinsonism and levodopa-induced dyskinesia in MPTP-lesioned nonhuman primate models of Parkinson’s disease. Faseb J 2005;19:1140–1142.
16. Fox SH, Henry B, Hill M, Crossman A, Brotchie J. Stimulation of cannabinoid receptors reduces levodopa-induced dyskinesia in the MPTP-lesioned nonhuman primate model of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:1180–1187.
17. Melis M, Pillolla G, Bisogno T, et al. Protective activation of the endocannabinoid system during ischemia in dopaminergic neurons. Neurobiol Dis 2006;24:15–27.
18. Sieradzan KA, Fox SH, Hill M, Dick JP, Crossman AR, Brotchie JM. Cannabinoids reduce levodopa-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease: a pilot study. Neurology 2001;57:2108–2111.
19. Carroll CB, Bain PG, Teare L, et al. Cannabis for dyskinesia in Parkinson disease: a randomized double-blind crossover study. Neurology 2004;63:1245–1250.
20. Venderova K, Ruzicka E, Vorisek V, Visnovsky P. Survey on cannabis use in Parkinson’s disease: subjective improvement of motor symptoms. Mov Disord 2004;19:1102–1106.
21. Mesnage V, Houeto JL, Bonnet AM, et al. Neurokinin B, neurotensin, and cannabinoid receptor antagonists and Parkinson disease. Clin Neuropharmacol 2004;27:108–110.
22. Fernandez-Espejo E, Caraballo I, de Fonseca FR, et al. Cannabinoid CB1 antagonists possess antiparkinsonian efficacy only in rats with very severe nigral lesion in experimental parkinsonism. Neurobiol Dis 2005;18:591–601.
23. Gonzalez S, Mena MA, Lastres-Becker I, et al. Cannabinoid CB (1) receptors in the basal ganglia and motor response to activation or blockade of these receptors in parkin-null mice. Brain Res 2005;1046:195–206.

Copyright © by AAN Enterprises, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology®

Endocannabinoids in basal ganglia circuits: Implications for Parkinson disease  
Eduardo Benarroch  
Neurology 2007;69;306-309  
DOI 10.1212/01.wnl.0000267407.79757.75  

This information is current as of July 16, 2007  

| Updated Information & Services | including high resolution figures, can be found at: http://www.neurology.org/content/69/3/306.full.html |
| References                     | This article cites 22 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at: http://www.neurology.org/content/69/3/306.full.html##ref-list-1 |
| Citations                      | This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles: http://www.neurology.org/content/69/3/306.full.html##otherarticles |
| Permissions & Licensing        | Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or in its entirety can be found online at: http://www.neurology.org/misc/about.xhtml#permissions |
| Reprints                       | Information about ordering reprints can be found online: http://www.neurology.org/misc/addir.xhtml#reprintsus |

Neurology® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since 1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright. All rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
