
Annals of Medicine. 2007; 39: 335–345

REVIEW ARTICLE

# Sirtuins: The 'magnificent seven', function, metabolism and longevity

NASSIM DALI-YOUCEF${}^{1,3}$, MARIE LAGOUGE${}^{1}$, SÉBASTIEN FROELICH${}^{1,4}$, CHRISTIAN KOEHL${}^{3}$, KRISTINA SCHOONJANS${}^{1}$ & JOHAN AUWERX${}^{1,2,3}$

${}^{1}$Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de Strasbourg (IGBMC), INSERM/CNRS/ULP, Illkirch, France, ${}^{2}$Institut Clinique de la Souris, Genopole, Illkirch, France, ${}^{3}$Laboratoire de Biochimie Générale et Spécialisée, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, and ${}^{4}$Service de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital de Hautepierre, C.H.U. de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France

## Abstract

The sirtuin family of histone deacetylases (HDACs) was named after their homology to the *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* gene silent information regulator 2 (Sir2). In the yeast, Sir2 has been shown to mediate the effects of calorie restriction on the extension of life span and high levels of Sir2 activity promote longevity. Like their yeast homologs, the mammalian sirtuins (SIRT1-7) are class III HDACs and require NAD${}^{+}$ as a cofactor to deacetylate substrates ranging from histones to transcriptional regulators. Through this activity, sirtuins are shown to regulate important biological processes ranging from apoptosis, adipocyte and muscle differentiation, and energy expenditure to gluconeogenesis. We review here the current knowledge regarding the role of sirtuins in metabolism, longevity, and discuss the possible therapeutic applications that could result from the understanding of their function in different organs and pathologies.

## Key words: Calorie restriction, longevity, metabolism, SIRT

## Introduction

Histone acetylation is the main type of covalent histone modification and is achieved by a class of enzymes termed histone acetyltransferases (HATs) (1). HATs acetylate histones on lysines, whereas histone deacetylation involves another family of enzymes, the histone deacetylases (HDACs) ((2)), a review). These HDACs are classified in three groups on the basis of their homology with the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* HDACs: RPD3 (group I), HDA1 (group II), and Sir2 (group III). Class I and II enzymes are inhibited by trichostatin (TSA), whereas class III HDACs are not inhibited by TSA and are NAD${}^{+}$-dependent (3, 4), suggesting a regulation of Sir2 molecules by the metabolic state of the cells (reviewed in (5)). Since the Sir2 family of proteins are also able to exert their enzymatic activity not only on histones but also on numerous other proteins, such as the transcriptional regulators, they are involved in many cellular processes, ranging in

yeast from gene silencing, DNA repair, progression of the cell cycle, to the control of ageing.

The Sir2 protein first deacetylates histones and then localizes with the yeast protein Sir4, to form a tight silencing complex binding to the telomeres (6). The localization of Sir2 complex to the histone tails, initially identified to induce transcriptional repression of the silent mating type loci HML and HMR (homothallic mating-type loci left and right, respectively) (7,8), produces chromatin silencing, and a recent study reported that the Sir2 complex reduces the promoter occupancy by the transcription factors IIB and IIE (TFIIB, TFIIE) and the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preventing hence the proper assembly of the preinitiation complex of the transcriptional machinery (9). Most interesting was the fact that overexpression of the gene encoding the Sir2 protein leads to a decrease in histone acetylation (10) and an increase in life span in yeast (11), in the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* (12) and in metazoans (13). Likewise, Sir2-activating compounds

---

Correspondence: Johan Auwerx, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de Strasbourg (IGBMC), INSERM/CNRS/ULP, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch, France. E-mail: auwerx@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

ISSN 0785-3890 print/ISSN 1365-2060 online © 2007 Taylor & Francis

DOI: 10.1080/07853890701408194

Abbreviations

| SIR2 | silent information regulator 2 |
| --- | --- |
| HAT | histone acetyltransferase |
| HDAC | histone deacetylase |
| CR | calorie restriction |
| PKB/AKT | protein kinase B |
| GDP | guanosine diphosphate |
| GTP | guanosine triphosphate |
| NAD⁺ | nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide |
| NADH | reduced form of NAD⁺ |
| Pol II | RNA polymerase II |
| TFIIB | transcription factor IIB |
| TFIIE | transcription factor IIE |
| Daf-16 | 'dauer' larvae transcription factor-16 |
| FOXO | forkhead box subgroup 'O' transcription factor |
| HML | homothallic mating-type loci left |
| HMR | homothallic mating-type loci right |
| NFκB | nuclear factor kappa B transcription factor |
| PGC-1α | peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) coactivator-1α |

CR could affect metabolism and longevity in humans. To better understand the mechanisms by which CR extends lifespan, it is instructive to take a close look at studies carried out in various species.

Studies based on non-mammalian models

Studies in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*

In yeast, reduction in glucose levels in the media, mimicking CR, results in a substantial extension in lifespan, which is Sir2p- and NAD⁺-dependent, since mutants for Sir2p and nicotinate phosphoribosyl transferase (NPT1), an enzyme required for NAD⁺ formation, failed to reproduce this effect (19). In the same study, mutants for components of the glucose-signaling pathway, such as the GTP-GDP (guanosine triphosphate-guanosine diphosphate) exchange factor CDC25, the glucose sensing receptors gpr1 and gpa2, and hexokinase, the first enzyme in the glycolytic pathway, mimicked the CR-mediated increase in longevity. This lifespan extension due to CR was attributed to an increase in respiration (20). Indeed a mutation in the gene encoding the cytochrome c1 CYT1 is no longer able to promote CR-mediated longevity, suggesting that blocking the mitochondrial electron transport chain and respiration prevents lifespan extension. Moreover, overexpression of Hap4 in yeast, a gene known to cause a switch from fermentation to respiration, yielded a 35% extension in lifespan under normal glucose conditions. It is well established that respiration increases the NAD⁺/NADH ratio through oxidation of NADH by the NADH dehydrogenase (21).

The Sir2p-mediated conversion of NAD⁺ leads to the formation of nicotinamide (NAM), a powerful Sir2/SIRT1 inhibitor (17) and O-acetyl-ADP-ribose (O-AA-ribose) (22) (Figure 2A). Recent evidence demonstrated an active role of O-AA-ribose in the regulation of gene silencing by the Sir2/3/4 assembly complex (23). In yeast, an alternative route to synthesize NAD⁺, other than its *de novo* production from the amino acid tryptophan, and which starts from nicotinic acid (NA), is present under the form of the NAD⁺ salvage pathway. In the NAD⁺ salvage pathway, NAM obtained from NAD⁺ cleavage is deaminated to NA by the nicotinamidase PNC1. NA formed through the actions of PNC1 then undergoes a series of reactions giving successively rise to nicotinate mononucleotide (NAMN), nicotinate adenine dinucleotide (NAAD), and NAD⁺, that are catalyzed by the enzymes nicotinate phosphoribosyl transferase (NPT1), nicotinate mononucleotide adenyltransferases (NMAT1/2), and NAD⁺

(STACs), such as resveratrol, present in the skin of red grapes, promote longevity in yeast (14) and other organisms ranging from the worm and *Drosophila* (15) to the mouse (16). On the other hand, both mutations of the Sir2 gene and pharmacological inhibition of Sir2 protein by nicotinamide induces an acceleration of ageing in yeast (17). Although the functions of Sir2 have been relatively well established in yeast and *C. elegans*, their function in mammals remains rather elusive. This review will give an overview of the role of the sirtuin family of proteins in different species and their potential contribution to disease.

SIRT1/Sir2, caloric restriction, metabolism, neurodegeneration, and longevity

In the last few years, an increasing number of studies from *S. cerevisiae*, *C. elegans*, *Drosophila melanogaster*, and mouse models have linked caloric restriction (CR) and metabolism with longevity. The matter has been extensively reviewed by Bordone and Guarente (18); in this section we give an overview of how SIRT1, the mammalian Sir2 homolog, which is the best characterized sirtuin family member, and

yeast
glucose sensing
receptors
(gpr1, gpa2)

FGM
(glucose
and nutrients)

Calorie
restriction

PNC1

NADH

Sir2p

Sch9

ERCs

oxidative
stress

Gene
silencing

ageing

worm
Daf-2

Food
limitation

p65

AGE-1

Sir2.1

AKT

Daf-16

Induction
of ER stress
proteins

drosophila
Insulin receptor

Calorie
reduction

CHICO

Rpd3

dPI3K

dSir2

AKT

dFOXO

ageing

mammals
Insulin receptor
and IGF 1 receptor

-Fasting
-Resveratrol

IRS

PI3K

SIRT1

AKT

FOXO

Other effects
(Fig.2)

ageing

Figure 1. Sir2/SIRT1 and signaling pathways in different species. In yeast Sir2p activity is increased through increased expression of the NAD⁺ salvage pathway enzyme, nicotinamidase PNC1, but also by increasing the NAD⁺/NADH ratio (or lowering NADH levels) in response to calorie restriction (CR). Mutation of the glucose sensing receptors Gpr1 and Gpa2 mimics the CR effects on Sir2p, which inhibit the formation of the deleterious extrachromosomal circular DNA repeats (ERCs) and contribute to life span extension in yeast. The glucose and nutrients fermentation pathway activates the AKT-related kinase Sch9 which induces oxidative stress and participates in yeast ageing. Inactivation of this pathway promotes longevity in yeast. The longevity pathway is conserved amongst worms, flies and mammals. Activation of the insulin growth factor receptor IGFR (Daf-2/dIGFR) activates the insulin receptor substrate IRS (p65/CHICO), which stimulates phosphoinositol-3 kinase PI3K (AGE-1/dPI3K), which in turn phosphorylates the PKB/AKT kinase. AKT phosphorylates and inactivates FOXO (Daf-16/dFOXO). Inactivation of the insulin receptor pathway promotes longevity in worms, drosophila, and mammals through increased activity of FOXO. Sir2/SIRT1 activation induces life span extension through interaction with Daf-16/FOXO factors.

Gpr-1=G-protein coupled receptor-1; Gpa-2=G-alpha protein-2; FGM=Fermentable growth medium; PNC1=pyrazinamidase/Nicotinamidase 1; Sir2p=yeast silent information regulator 2; NADH=reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; Sch9=Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein kinase 9; ERCs=extrachromosomal circular DNA repeats; Daf-16='dauer' larvae transcription factor-16; AGE-1=worm homolog of the phosphoinositol-3 kinase; AKT=protein kinase B; Rpd3=reduced potassium dependence 3 (class II histone deacetylase); IGF-1=insulin growth factor-1; FOXO=forkhead box subgroup 'O' transcription factor; IRS=insulin receptor substrate; CHICO=drosophila homolog of IRS; SIRT1=sirtuin 1.

synthetase (QNS1), respectively (24). The newly recycled NAD⁺ then serves again as a cofactor for Sir2p-mediated deacetylation (Figure 2A).

Multiple protagonists of the NAD⁺ salvage pathway participate in lifespan extension in yeast. Furthermore, an intense debate about whether Sir2p-dependent CR lifespan extension could be due to a depletion in the noncompetitive Sir2p inhibitor NAM, rather than a modification in the NAD⁺/NADH ratio, is still ongoing. Interestingly,

CR increased the expression of PNC1 and hence PNC1 activity, which is required and sufficient to extend lifespan in yeast through Sir2p activation. Conversely, mutations in the yeast PNC1 gene accelerate cellular ageing (25). These observations hence suggested that NAM depletion, through the activation of PNC1, is sufficient to activate Sir2 and increase longevity in yeast. Moreover, mutation of PNC1 and overexpression of Nnt1, a NAM methyl-transferase which reduced the excess NAM levels,

338 N. Dali-Youcef et al.

A

NamPT1  
(PBEF/visfatin)  

NMN  

NA  

PNC1  

NPT1  
NMAT1/2  
QNS1  

NAD⁺ salvage  
pathway  

O-AA-ribose + NAM  

SIRT1  

Sir2p  

NAD⁺  

B  

Neuroprotection  

Insulin secretion  

Cardioprotection  

UCP-2  

NFκB  

-SIRT activating  
compounds  
(resveratrol)  
-Calorie restriction  

SIRT1  

PPARγ  

PGC-1α  

BAT  

Adipogenesis  

Muscle  

Energy  
expenditure  

Glugoneogenesis  

Figure 2. A: yeast and mammalian NAD⁺ salvage pathways. Yeast (red) Sir2p utilizes the cofactor NAD⁺ to deacetylate proteins and in this reaction produces nicotinamide (NAM) and O-acetyl-ADP-ribose (O-AA-ribose). NAM is deaminated by the nicotinamidase PNC1 to form nicotinic acid (NA). NA will give rise successively to nicotinate mononucleotide (NAMN), nicotinate adenine dinucleotide (NAAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD⁺) by the enzymes nicotinate phosphoribosyl-transferase (NPT1), nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMAT), and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide synthetase (QNS), respectively (red arrows). In mammals (blue) NAM is recycled to NAD⁺ in two steps through the formation of nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) by means of the NAM phosphoribosyltransferase NamPT (PBEF/visfatin) and nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT) (blue arrows). B: SIRT1 protective functions in metabolism and diseases. SIRT1 can be regulated positively by CR and SIRT-activating compounds and negatively by SIRT inhibitors. SIRT1 activation induces survival of cardiomyocytes, protects neurons from cell death, and favors insulin secretion by repressing the uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2). SIRT1 decreases white adipocyte tissue formation through repression of PPARγ and promotes gluconeogenesis in response to fasting through PGC-1α, and stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis in the brown adipose tissue (BAT) and the muscle through activation of PGC-1α. NA = nicotinic acid; NAD⁺ = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NAM = nicotinamide; NMN = nicotinamide mononucleotide; PNC1 = pyrazinamidase/Nicotinamidase 1; NamPT1 = nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase 1; NPT1 = nicotinate phosphoribosyl transferase 1; NMAT1/2 = nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase 1/2; QNS = NAD synthetase; NMNAT1 = nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase; O-AA-ribose = O-acetyl-ADP-ribose; UCP-2 = uncoupling protein 2; NFκB = nuclear factor kappa B; PPARγ = peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; PGC-1α = peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator-1 alpha; BAT = brown adipose tissue; SIRT1 = sirtuin 1.

restored the CR-induced life span extension in  
PNC1 mutants, suggesting that other factors (such  
as NADH lowering) might play a role in CR-  
mediated life span extension (26). Other compo-  
nents of the NAD⁺ salvage pathway, like NPT1, the  
rate-limiting enzyme in the NAD⁺ biosynthesis, have  
also been shown to regulate life span in yeast.  
Increased dosage of NPT1, but not of NMAT,  
enhanced the total cellular NAD⁺ levels and  
enhanced the transcriptional activity of the catalytic  
domain of Sir2p thereby extending yeast life span  
(27), whereas NPT1 mutations yielded a defect in  
silencing at silent mating-type loci, telomeres, and  
rDNA (28). Overexpression of two related mito-  
chondrial NADH dehydrogenases, Nde1 and Nde2,  

decreased NADH levels without changing NAD⁺  
levels, but still increased yeast life span both under  
normal glucose culture conditions (2%) and CR  
conditions (0.5%), suggesting that reducing the  
quantity of the competitive Sir2p inhibitor NADH  
might also contribute to the CR-induced increase in  
yeast longevity (26). Interestingly, Hst2, a Sir2  
homolog that contributes to rDNA stability, is  
another mediator of CR-induced life span extension  
in yeast, indicating that other Sir2 homologs could  
regulate longevity under CR conditions (29). Taken  
together, these data suggest that Sir2 requires NAD⁺  
availability induce Sir2-dependent life span

extension in the budding yeast (24). Under CR other pathways, such as a decrease in the competitive Sir2 inhibitor NADH (by increasing Nde activity) or the noncompetitive Sir2 inhibitor NAM (by increasing PNC1 activity), could contribute to control Sir2 activity. Furthermore, a Sir2-independent CR-mediated life span extension mechanism exists that is mediated via Hst2.

Three important factors are thought to participate in Sir2-mediated longevity. First, one of the consequences of increased Sir2 activity is the significant reduction in the number of extrachromosomal circular DNA repeats (ERCs) (11), whose accumulation is deleterious to yeast and accelerates ageing (30), probably through sequestration of transcription factors essential for their replication. The second mechanism that contributes to the yeast life span acts via the fermentable growth medium-induced (FGM) pathway. Under fermentation conditions, glucose and other nutrients activate a yet unknown pathway that activates Sch9, a kinase related to the mammalian protein kinase B (PKB)/AKT, a negative regulator of the stress resistance genes. This results in the subsequent accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby accelerating ageing (31). Interestingly, mutation of Sch9 yields a substantial increase in yeast life span probably through increasing stress resistance (32, 33) (Figure 1). It is at present not known whether this pathway is similar to Daf-16/FOXO signaling, which participates in the control of ageing in other organisms, and whether Sch9 mutations affect ERCs formation. Finally, yeast evolving in a high osmolarity live much longer than those in a balanced osmolarity medium. A high osmolarity shock activates a subset of osmotic responsive genes that change the metabolism to favor glycerol biosynthesis thereby generating more NAD⁺, the Sir2 cofactor necessary to mediate longevity (34).

### Studies in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster

In *C. elegans*, the yeast Sir2p ortholog, Sir2.1, extends life span through the forkhead transcription factor Daf-16 (homolog of mammalian FOXO) signaling pathway. Loss of function studies of components of the Daf-2 (homolog of the mammalian insulin receptor) signaling pathway, such as in Daf-2 or the homolog of the mammalian phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K), AGE-1, extend the worm's life span (Figure 1) (35, 36). This pathway controls the entry of worms in ‘dauer’, a larval developmental state of growth arrest that is induced upon food limitation, and which is a feature of young larvae before reproductive maturation (reviewed in (37)). Activation of Daf-2/AGE-1 signaling results in the phosphorylation of AKT kinase that sequesters Daf-16 in the cytoplasm resulting in its inactivation (38, 39). The long-lived mutants require the entry of Daf-16 into the nucleus to activate target genes necessary for dauer formation. Duplication of chromosomal regions containing Sir2.1 in the nematode extends life span by up to 50%. Interestingly, the Sir2.1-duplicated strains carrying a mutated Daf-16 displayed the same decreased life span as observed in Daf-16 mutants, proving that Sir2.1 acts upstream of Daf-16. In addition, Sir2.1-duplicated strains do not further extend life span of Daf-2 mutants indicating that extra copies of Sir2.1 promote longevity through the Daf-2/Daf-16 signaling pathway (12). A direct interaction between Sir2.1 and Daf-16, facilitated by the nematode 14-3-3 protein, furthermore suggests that these three proteins physically interact (40, 41).

Also dSir2, the drosophila Sir2 ortholog, controls life span extension under CR conditions, and mutants that remove or decrease dSir2 levels are no longer able to promote the CR-mediated longevity. The dSir2-mediated life extension seems to work in the same pathway as the Rpd3 histone deacetylase, since Rpd3 is thought to negatively regulate dSir2, and CR induces a decrease in Rpd3 expression (13). Moreover, long-lived Rpd3 mutant flies display high dSir2 expression levels (42). Interestingly, flies deficient in the homolog of the mammalian insulin receptor substrate (IRS) protein, CHICO, show a significant increase in life span (43). Recent studies showed that activation of dFOXO in the fly brain and/or fat body extends life span and inhibits the endogenous insulin-dependent signaling in the fat body (44, 45). Although both CR and downregulation of the insulin pathway participate in life span extension, it is still not proven that the two pathways work in concert and converge on dFOXO to promote longevity in drosophila.

### Studies in mammals

The mammalian NAD⁺ salvage pathway is different from the yeast pathway. NAM is directly transformed to nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) by the enzyme nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NamPT) (46), which then yields NAD⁺ through the action of nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyl transferase (NMNAT) (Figure 2A). NamPT was found to be the equivalent of the pre-B-cell-enhancing factor (PBEF), a protein that stimulated B-cell colony formation (47), and visfatin, an adipokine expressed in visceral fat with glucose-lowering properties (48).

Although some evidence exists that NamPT activates SIRT1 transcriptional activity (27), NamPT overexpression in mice would be necessary to determine whether NamPT is the functional homolog of yeast PNC1 in lifespan extension.

The role of the insulin-signaling pathway in the determination of mammalian lifespan has been studied in insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-R)-deficient mice. Although IGF-R⁻/⁻ mice die shortly after birth, IGF-R⁺/⁻ animals are viable, display reduced IGF-R levels, and live longer than IGF-R⁺/⁺ littermates. IGF-R⁺/⁻ animals exhibit low AKT kinase activity suggesting an increase in FOXO activity, reproducing features of the Daf-16-mediated longevity pathway in *C. elegans*. In addition, IGF-R⁺/⁻ mice are more resistant to oxidative stress. This phenotype was, however, gender-dependent since only IGF-R⁺/⁻ female mice displayed a significant increase in lifespan, whereas IGF-R⁺/⁻ males showed a modest, non-significant increase in longevity (49). Mice in which the insulin receptor was specifically inactivated in the adipose tissue also live longer and are protected against age-related obesity and its subsequent metabolic abnormalities (50).

In mammals, SIRT1 has been linked with metabolic control. The importance of SIRT1 in the nutrient control of glucose homeostasis was demonstrated to involve the modulation of the acetylation status and hence the stimulation of the activity of the metabolic coregulator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) coactivator-1α (PGC-1α). In the liver, SIRT1 in a complex including the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4) deacetylates and activates PGC-1α, promoting gluconeogenesis following fasting (51). SIRT1 also functions together with PGC-1α, beyond the liver. Indeed, activated PGC-1α promotes mitochondrial function in the skeletal muscle and the brown adipose tissue, leading to enhanced energy expenditure, increased exercise performance, and protection from diet-induced insulin resistance and hepato steatosis (16, 52). Although these studies suggest that PGC-1α is a privileged partner for SIRT1, other signaling pathways are also solicited (Figure 2B). For instance, in white adipose tissue, where the activation of SIRT1 by resveratrol decreased fat accumulation and its inhibition resulted in triglyceride accumulation, it was suggested that SIRT1 activation repressed the nuclear receptor PPARγ (53), an effect that, in addition to SIRT1, also involved the nuclear receptor corepressor (NcoR) and silencing mediator SMRT (54). A recent study also emphasized the role of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) signaling in CR-mediated increases in mitochondrial biogenesis and lifespan in

mice. CR animals showed an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis that correlated with an increase in the expression of SIRT1, PGC-1α and eNOS in various tissues. Interestingly, these effects were completely inhibited in eNOS⁻/⁻ animals in which lifespan was significantly reduced (55).

SIRT1 has also been demonstrated to augment insulin secretion in response to glucose in pancreatic β-cells of β-cell-specific SIRT1-overexpressing (BESTO) transgenic mice (56). This response was accompanied by a decrease in the expression of the uncoupling protein-2 (UCP-2) that could increase ATP production in the β-cells of BESTO transgenic mice. UCPs uncouple oxygen consumption from ATP generation by allowing leakage of protons (H⁺), thereby participating in the reduction of ROS generation. The SIRT1-mediated decrease in UCP-2 expression impedes H⁺ 'leakage' and allows a more efficient coupling of electron transport with the ATP production. Likewise, UCP-2⁻/⁻ mice also exhibit a similar phenotype with improved glucose tolerance and enhanced insulin secretion (57). SIRT1 achieves this effect on UCP-2 expression by directly binding to and repressing UCP-2 gene transcription in pancreatic β-cells (58). SIRT1 can also form a complex with FOXO1 and the promyelocytic leukemia protein PML to activate two insulin transcription factors, NeuroD and MafA, which may protect the pancreatic β-cell pathway from oxidative damage (59). An approach to increase SIRT1 dosage in pancreatic β-cells could hence be of potential interest to maintain a healthy β-cell function in diabetic patients.

SIRT1 and SIRT3 deacetylate acetyl coenzyme A synthetase (AceCS). AceCS catalyzes the formation of acetyl-CoA from acetate, coenzyme A, and ATP. Whereas SIRT1 has been shown to deacetylate the cytoplasmic AceCS1, whose activity controls acetyl-CoA levels in the cytoplasm for fatty acid synthesis, SIRT3 deacetylates the mitochondrial AceCS2 which regulates acetyl-CoA-requiring pathways in the mitochondria such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle (60). Since acetate metabolism is impaired in diabetes and ageing, it is legitimate to speculate on the potential role of SIRT1 and SIRT3 in the pathophysiology of these diseases through the regulation of AceCS1 and AceCS2. Further validation of these observations in *in vivo* models is still required.

A central role for SIRT1 in disease of the central nervous system has also been highlighted in animal models. In the Wallerian degeneration slow (*Wld*⁸) mouse model, SIRT1 activation protects axons against neuronal injury. This *Wld*⁸ mouse bears in fact a dominant mutation producing an

overexpressed chimeric Wld<sup>s</sup> protein composed of  
the ubiquitin assembly protein Ufd2a and the NAD<sup>+</sup>  
salvage pathway enzyme NMNAT1. Decreasing  
SIRT1 activity reduces the axonal protection originally observed, whereas SIRT1 activation by resver-  
atrol decreases the axonal degeneration after  
neuronal injury. This suggests that the neuroprotection in the Wld<sup>s</sup> mouse model is achieved by  
increasing the neuronal NAD<sup>+</sup> reserve and/or  
SIRT1 activity (61). Furthermore it has been  
reported that the SIRT1 agonist resveratrol protects  
C. elegans neurons expressing a fragment of the  
Huntington disease-associated protein huntingtin  
and mammalian neurons from mutant polyglutamate  
cytotoxicity in a HdhQ 111 knock-in mouse  
model of Huntington disease (62). In addition,  
SIRT1 activation significantly decreases neuronal  
cell death induced by amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptides  
through inhibition of NFκB signaling (63). Specific  
brain hSIRT1 overexpression in transgenic animals  
induces a significant increase in the α-secretase  
activity, an enzyme that cleaves the amyloid precursor peptide (APP) within the Aβ peptide,  
favoring thereby the nonamyloidogenic pathway of  
the APP processing (64). In addition, a recent study  
demonstrated the protective effect of CR against  
Alzheimer's disease-type brain amyloidosis in monkeys. Monkeys maintained on CR diet had significantly reduced contents of Aβ peptides in the  
temporal cortex that correlated with enhanced  
SIRT1 concentrations as compared to monkeys  
under normal diet (65). From these studies, it  
became clear that pharmacological strategies aiming  
at activating SIRT1 would impede Aβ peptide  
deposition in the brain and prevent the development  
of Alzheimer's disease.

From the animal studies discussed above, it was  
suggested that SIRT1 could contribute to the  
pathogenesis of some complex diseases. SIRT1  
could hence be considered as a serious candidate  
target for therapeutic interventions in metabolic and  
neurodegenerative disorders. In line with this  
hypothesis, genetic variants (SNPs) in the human  
SIRT1 gene have been shown to be tightly associated with energy expenditure (52). We predict that  
future human studies will link SIRT1 even more  
tightly with metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases, stimulating the development of therapeutics  
for their treatment.

Emerging functions for the other sirtuins  

SIRT2  

The tubulin-deacetylase protein SIRT2 (66) has  
been demonstrated to be downregulated in human  

gliomas, which are amongst the most frequent  
malignant brain tumors (67). The SIRT2 gene maps  
at chromosome 19q13.2, a region frequently deleted  
in human gliomas. Furthermore, ectopic expression  
of SIRT2 in a glioma cell line decreased colony  
formation suggesting a potential tumor suppressor  
role of SIRT2. This could be explained by the fact  
that SIRT2 plays an important role in the control of  
mitotic exit in the cell cycle where increased SIRT2  
activity severely delays cell cycle progression through  
mitosis (68), but also by the fact that SIRT2 acts as a  
mitotic checkpoint protein that prevents chromosomal  
instability and the formation of hyperploid cells  
in the early metaphase (69). Further studies such as  
SIRT2 brain-specific inactivation in genetically  
engineered mice should bring an insight into the  
mechanism and the role of SIRT2 in the pathophysiology of this aggressive type of brain cancer. Very  
recently, SIRT2 was described as an oligodendroglial cytoplasmic protein, localized to the outer and  
juxtanodal loops in the myelin sheath, that decreases  
cell differentiation through α-tubulin deacetylation  
suggesting a potential implication in myelinogenesis  
(70).

SIRT3  

The mitochondrial SIRT3 deacetylase (71, 72) has  
been linked with adaptative thermogenesis. SIRT3  
expression is induced in mice in both white and  
brown adipose tissue (BAT) by CR and in BAT  
upon cold exposure. SIRT3 furthermore activates  
known mitochondrial genes such as PGC-1α and  
UCP-1 suggesting an important role of SIRT3 in  
thermogenesis (73). In addition, the SIRT3 gene has  
been linked to longevity. In fact, the genotype  
defined by the G477T polymorphism in exon 3,  
was associated with survivorship (74). Furthermore,  
a VNTR (a 72-bp repeat core) polymorphism in  
intron 5 of the SIRT3 gene, that acts as an allele-  
specific enhancer activity on a reporter gene, was  
associated with longevity in male subjects (75). This  
VNTR might represent the functional variant that  
accounts for the association between the silent  
marker G477T and longevity in old male subjects.

SIRT4  

Although the mitochondrial expressed protein  
SIRT4 has a conserved sirtuin domain, it seems  
not to possess in vitro deacetylase activity (76).  
However, SIRT4 ADP-ribosylates and inhibits the  
mitochondrial glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH).  
GDH controls amino acid-stimulated insulin secretion by regulating glutamine and glutamate oxidative

Table I. Expression pattern, cellular distribution, and function of sirtuin deacetylases. Sirtuins are differentially expressed in different organs based on their transcripts.

| Gene   | High                                                                 | Low                                                                 | Cellular compartmentation | Putative target genes                                                                 | Potential link with diseases                                                                 |
|--------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| SIRT 1 | Br, Te, Sk, Ki(+++), Th, Ut(++)                                        | Li, Sp, HeLu, Ov, BM                                                  | Nuclear                   | p53, Ku70, NFκB, PGC-1α, MEF2D, MyoD, PPARγ, FOXO, p300, AceCS1, tat                              | ageing, obesity, Insulin resistance, inflammation, diabetes, heart failure, axonal degeneration, AIDS |
| SIRT 2 | Br, Sk(+++), Li, Te, Ki, He(++)                                        | Th, Lu, BM, Ut, Ov, Sp                                               | Cytoplasmic               | α-tubulin                                                                              | downregulated in human gliomas                                                                |
| SIRT 3 | Ov(+++), most other organs(++)                                         |                                                                      | Mitochondrial             | PGC-1α, AceCS2                                                                         | adaptive thermogenesis, overexpressed in node-positive breast cancer                                                             |
| SIRT 4 | Br, Te, He, Lu(+++), Li, Sk, Ki, Th, Ut, Ov(++)                         | BM, Sp                                                               | Mitochondrial             | Glutamate dehydrogenase                                                                | inhibits amino acid-stimulated insulin secretion                                                |
| SIRT 5 | Br, Te, Sk, Ki, He (+++) Li, Ov, Lu, Th, Ut, BM(++)                     | Sp                                                                   | Mitochondrial             | unknown                                                                               | unknown                                                                                       |
| SIRT 6 | Fetal Br(+++), Br, Li, Te, Sk, Ki, He, Ov(++)                          | Sp, Th, Ut, BM, Lu                                                   | Nuclear                   | DNA polβ                                                                              | age-related diseases                                                                          |
| SIRT 7 | Br, Te, Ki, Sp, Te, Li, Ki, Pa(proteins)                               | Lower in other organs Br, Sk, He (proteins)                           | Nuclear                   | RNA polymerase PolI                                                                    | highly expressed in thyroid cancers, overexpressed in node-positive breast cancer                                              |

Abbreviations: Br = Brain; He = heart; Ki = kidney; Sk = skeletal muscle; Li = liver; Te = testis; Lu = lung; Sp = spleen; Ov = ovary; Ut = uterus; BM = bone marrow; Th = thyroid.

metabolism. Inhibition of GDH activity by SIRT 4 decreases insulin secretion in mouse pancreatic β-cells in response to amino acids (76). Interestingly, the two different sirtuins SIRT 1 and SIRT 4 seem to work in opposite directions to control insulin secretion. Furthermore SIRT 4 expression is down-regulated in response to CR in β-cells, which is opposite to the regulation of SIRT 1 during CR. More studies are still needed to see whether SIRT 4 (and SIRT 1) can be integrated in the pathophysiology of type 1 and 2 diabetes that both are characterized by alterations in insulin secretion.

SIRT 6

Whereas little is known about the activity of SIRT 5, SIRT 6 is suggested to control genomic DNA stability and DNA repair. SIRT 6⁻/⁻ mice die prematurely and display severe defects including important lymphopenia, loss of subcutaneous fat, decreased bone mineral density, metabolic defects with a profound imbalance in glucose homeostasis and decreased IGF-1 levels. The phenotype of the SIRT 6⁻/⁻ mice mimics multiple pathologies found in elderly humans (77). Although SIRT 6 was originally described as an exclusive ADP-ribosyltransferase (78), it was recently demonstrated that

SIRT 6 deacetylates histones and the DNA repair enzyme, DNA polymerase β (polβ) in vitro (77). An effect on DNA repair was hence proposed to explain the phenotype in SIRT 6⁻/⁻ mice, and it was suggested that SIRT 6 could play an essential role in maintaining organ integrity as animals age.

SIRT 7

SIRT 7 is the only sirtuin to be localized in the nucleolus and is a component of the RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcriptional machinery. SIRT 7 interacts with RNA Pol I and histones, and positively regulates the transcription of rDNA during transcriptional elongation, which accounts for about 60% of total transcription in metabolically active cells in mammals (79). SIRT 7 overexpression increases Pol I-mediated transcription in a NAD⁺-dependent manner, whereas SIRT 7 inhibition induces a decrease in the transcription of Pol I and its association with rDNA (80). Depletion of SIRT 7 stopped cell proliferation and triggered apoptosis. It was suggested that SIRT 7 may regulate rDNA transcription by sensing cellular NAD⁺/NADH ratio might modulate SIRT 7 to link the cellular energy status with rRNA synthesis and

ribosome production. It is worth noting that SIRT1 negatively regulates RNA Pol I through deacetylation of TAFI68 (81), which goes opposite of SIRT7 action.

# Concluding remarks

In the last decade, sirtuin biology has come a long way from their original description as yeast NAD⁺-dependent class III HDACs, that control yeast lifespan. In mammals, seven orthologs of Sir2 have been identified, SIRT1 to 7, and the exact biological function of most of these sirtuins still remains only partially characterized. Of particular interest is the fact that SIRT1 not only deacetylates histones to mediate gene silencing, but is able to interact with and deacetylate some well known transcriptional regulators thereby modulating specifically various biological processes. Hence modulating the expression of SIRT1 or its activity, by using sirtuin-activating compounds such as resveratrol, will have pleiotropic effects. SIRT1 activation reduces fat accumulation and adipocyte differentiation through repression of the activity of the adipogenic nuclear receptor PPARγ. SIRT1 also promotes mitochondrial function and energy expenditure and consequently protects mice from diet-induced obesity, through deacetylation and subsequent activation of PGC-1α in the skeletal muscle and in the brown adipose tissue. The SIRT1/PGC-1α interaction is also important in the liver, where SIRT1 activation upon fasting induces gluconeogenesis and prevents against hepatosteatosis. In addition, SIRT1 significantly enhances insulin secretion in the pancreatic β-cells. In combination, these studies illustrate that SIRT1 is a major modulator of metabolism. SIRT1 activation also seems to be endowed with neuroprotective activities as suggested from the study of models of Huntington or Alzheimer's disease. Furthermore, other sirtuins might play important roles in some diseases, as illustrated by SIRT2, which is downregulated in human gliomas. Obviously, more studies, in animal models and humans, are still needed to define the exact role of sirtuins in the pathophysiology of human diseases. It can, however, be predicted that therapeutic interventions aiming at activating or blocking sirtuins, depending on the context, will one day become helpful in the treatment of human diseases.

# Acknowledgements

We thank greatly members of the Auwerx laboratory for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions. This work was supported by grants of

the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS); Institut National pour la Science et la Recherche Médicale (INSERM); National Institutes of Health (NIH); the European Union (EU) and the Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg.

# References

1. Chen H, Lin RJ, Xie W, Wilpitz D, Evans RM. Regulation of hormone-induced histone hyperacetylation and gene activation via acetylation of an acetylase. Cell. 1999;98:675–86.
2. Courey AJ, Jia S. Transcriptional repression: the long and the short of it. Genes Dev. 2001;15:2786–96.
3. Imai S, Johnson FB, Marciniak RA, McVey M, Park PU, Guarente L. Sir2: an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase that connects chromatin silencing, metabolism, and aging. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2000;65:297–302.
4. Imai S, Armstrong CM, Kaeberlein M, Guarente L. Transcriptional silencing and longevity protein Sir2 is an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase. Nature. 2000;403:795–800.
5. Lin SJ, Guarente L. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, a metabolic regulator of transcription, longevity and disease. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2003;15:241–6.
6. Hoppe GJ, Tanny JC, Rudner AD, Gerber SA, Danaie S, Gygi SP, et al. Steps in assembly of silent chromatin in yeast: Sir3-independent binding of a Sir2/Sir4 complex to silencers and role for Sir2-dependent deacetylation. Mol Cell Biol. 2002;22:4167–80.
7. Ivy JM, Klar AJ, Hicks JB. Cloning and characterization of four SIR genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Cell Biol. 1986;6:688–702.
8. Rine J, Herskowitz I. Four genes responsible for a position effect on expression from HML and HMR in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics. 1987;116:9–22.
9. Chen L, Widom J. Mechanism of transcriptional silencing in yeast. Cell. 2005;120:37–48.
10. Braunstein M, Rose AB, Holmes SG, Allis CD, Broach JR. Transcriptional silencing in yeast is associated with reduced nucleosome acetylation. Genes Dev. 1993;7:592–604.
11. Kaeberlein M, McVey M, Guarente L. The SIR2/3/4 complex and SIR2 alone promote longevity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms. Genes Dev. 1999;13:2570–80.
12. Tissenbaum HA, Guarente L. Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature. 2001;410:227–30.
13. Rogina B, Helfand SL. Sir2 mediates longevity in the fly through a pathway related to calorie restriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:15998–6003.
14. Howitz KT, Bitterman KJ, Cohen HY, Lamming DW, Lavu S, Wood JG, et al. Small molecule activators of sirtuins extend Saccharomyces cerevisiae lifespan. Nature. 2003;425:191–6.
15. Wood JG, Rogina B, Lavu S, Howitz K, Helfand SL, Tatar M, et al. Sirtuin activators mimic calorie restriction and delay ageing in metazoans. Nature. 2004;430:686–9.
16. Baur JA, Pearson KJ, Price NL, Jamieson HA, Lerin C, Kalra A, et al. Resveratrol improves health and survival of mice on a high-calorie diet. Nature. 2006;444:337–42.
17. Bitterman KJ, Anderson RM, Cohen HY, Latorre-Esteves M, Sinclair DA. Inhibition of silencing and accelerated aging by nicotinamide, a putative negative regulator of yeast sir2 and human SIRT1. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:45099–107.

344 N. Dali-Youcef et al.

18. Bordone L, Guarente L. Calorie restriction, SIRT1 and metabolism: understanding longevity. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:298–305.
19. Lin SJ, Defossez PA, Guarente L. Requirement of NAD and SIR2 for life-span extension by calorie restriction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Science. 2000;289:2126–8.
20. Lin SJ, Kaeberlein M, Andalis AA, Sturtz LA, Defossez PA, Culotta VC, et al. Calorie restriction extends Saccharomyces cerevisiae lifespan by increasing respiration. Nature. 2002;418:344–8.
21. Bakker BM, Overkamp KM, van Maris AJ, Kotter P, Luttik MA, van Dijken JP, et al. Stoichiometry and compartmentation of NADH metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2001;25:15–37.
22. Tanner KG, Landry J, Sternglanz R, Denu JM. Silent information regulator 2 family of NAD-dependent histone/protein deacetylases generates a unique product, 1-O-acetyl-ADP-ribose. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2000;97:14178–82.
23. Liou GG, Tanny JC, Kruger RG, Walz T, Moazed D. Assembly of the SIR complex and its regulation by O-acetyl-ADP-ribose, a product of NAD-dependent histone deacetylation. Cell. 2005;121:515–27.
24. Anderson RM, Bitterman KJ, Wood JG, Medvedik O, Cohen H, Lin SS, et al. Manipulation of a nuclear NAD+ salvage pathway delays aging without altering steady-state NAD+ levels. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:18881–90.
25. Anderson RM, Bitterman KJ, Wood JG, Medvedik O, Sinclair DA. Nicotinamide and PNC1 govern lifespan extension by calorie restriction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature. 2003;423:181–5.
26. Lin SJ, Ford E, Haigis M, Liszt G, Guarente L. Calorie restriction extends yeast lifespan by lowering the level of NADH. Genes Dev. 2004;18:12–6.
27. Revollo JR, Grimm AA, Imai S. The NAD biosynthesis pathway mediated by nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase regulates Sir2 activity in mammalian cells. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:50754–63.
28. Sandmeier JJ, Celic I, Boeke JD, Smith JS. Telomeric and rDNA silencing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are dependent on a nuclear NAD(+) salvage pathway. Genetics. 2002;160:877–89.
29. Lamming DW, Latorre-Esteves M, Medvedik O, Wong SN, Tsang FA, Wang C, et al. HST2 mediates SIR2-independent lifespan extension by calorie restriction. Science. 2005;309:1861–4.
30. Sinclair DA, Guarente L. Extrachromosomal rDNA circles—a cause of aging in yeast. Cell. 1997;91:1033–42.
31. Longo VD. The Ras and Sch9 pathways regulate stress resistance and longevity. Exp Gerontol. 2003;38:807–11.
32. Fabrizio P, Pozza F, Pletcher SD, Gendron CM, Longo VD. Regulation of longevity and stress resistance by Sch9 in yeast. Science. 2001;292:288–90.
33. Fabrizio P, Liou LL, Moy VN, Diaspro A, SilverstoneValentine J, Gralla EB, et al. SOD2 functions downstream of Sch9 to extend longevity in yeast. Genetics. 2003;163:35–46.
34. Kaeberlein M, Andalis AA, Fink GR, Guarente L. High osmolarity extends lifespan in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by a mechanism related to calorie restriction. Mol Cell Biol. 2002;22:8056–66.
35. Kimura KD, Tissenbaum HA, Liu Y, Ruvkun G. daf-2, an insulin receptor-like gene that regulates longevity and diapause in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science. 1997;277:942–6.
36. Morris JZ, Tissenbaum HA, Ruvkun G. A phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase family member regulating longevity and

diapause in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature. 1996;382:536–9.
37. Burnell AM, Houthoofd K, O'Hanlon K, Vanfleteren JR. Alternate metabolism during the dauer stage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Exp Gerontol. 2005;40:850–6.
38. Ogg S, Paradis S, Gottlieb S, Patterson GI, Lee L, Tissenbaum HA, et al. The Fork head transcription factor DAF-16 transduces insulin-like metabolic and longevity signals in C. elegans. Nature. 1997;389:994–9.
39. Lin K, Dorman JB, Rodan A, Kenyon C. daf-16: An HNF-3/forkhead family member that can function to double the lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans. Science. 1997;278:1319–22.
40. Berdichevsky A, Viswanathan M, Horvitz HR, Guarente L. C. elegans SIR-2.1 interacts with 14-3-3 proteins to activate DAF-16 and extend lifespan. Cell. 2006;125:1165–77.
41. Wang Y, Oh SW, Deplancke B, Luo J, Walhout AJ, Tissenbaum HA. C. elegans 14-3-3 proteins regulate lifespan and interact with SIR-2.1 and DAF-16/FOXO. Mech Ageing Dev. 2006;127:741–7.
42. Rogina B, Helfand SL, Frankel S. Longevity regulation by Drosophila Rpd3 deacetylase and caloric restriction. Science. 2002;298:1745.
43. Clancy DJ, Gems D, Harshman LG, Oldham S, Stocker H, Hafen E, et al. Extension of lifespan by loss of CHICO, a Drosophila insulin receptor substrate protein. Science. 2001;292:104–6.
44. Hwangbo DS, Gershman B, Tu MP, Palmer M, Tatar M. Drosophila dFOXO controls lifespan and regulates insulin signalling in brain and fat body. Nature. 2004;429:562–6.
45. Giannakou ME, Goss M, Junger MA, Hafen E, Levers SJ, Partridge L. Long-lived Drosophila with overexpressed dFOXO in adult fat body. Science. 2004;305:361.
46. Rongvaux A, Shea RJ, Mulks MH, Gigot D, Urbain J, Leo O, et al. Pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor, whose expression is up-regulated in activated lymphocytes, is a nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, a cytosolic enzyme involved in NAD biosynthesis. Eur J Immunol. 2002;32:3225–34.
47. Samal B, Sun Y, Stearns G, Xie C, Suggs S, McNiece I. Cloning and characterization of the cDNA encoding a novel human pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor. Mol Cell Biol. 1994;14:1431–7.
48. Fukuhara A, Matsuda M, Nishizawa M, Segawa K, Tanaka M, Kishimoto K, et al. Visfatin: a protein secreted by visceral fat that mimics the effects of insulin. Science. 2005;307:426–30.
49. Holzenberger M, Dupont J, Ducos B, Leneuve P, Geloen A, Even PC, et al. IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice. Nature. 2003;421:182–7.
50. Bluher M, Kahn BB, Kahn CR. Extended longevity in mice lacking the insulin receptor in adipose tissue. Science. 2003;299:572–4.
51. Rodgers JT, Lerin C, Haas W, Gygi SP, Spiegelman BM, Puigserver P. Nutrient control of glucose homeostasis through a complex of PGC-1alpha and SIRT1. Nature. 2005;434:113–8.
52. Lagouge M, Argmann C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Meziane H, Lerin C, Daussin F, et al. Resveratrol improves mitochondrial function and protects against metabolic disease by activating SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha. Cell. 2006;127:1109–22.
53. Picard F, Auwerx J. PPAR(gamma) and glucose homeostasis. Annu Rev Nutr. 2002;22:167–97.
54. Picard F, Kurtev M, Chung N, Topark-Ngarm A, Senawong T, Machado De Oliveira R, et al. Sirt1 promotes fat mobilization in white adipocytes by repressing PPAR-gamma. Nature. 2004;429:771–6.

55. Nisoli E, Tonello C, Cardile A, Cozzi V, Bracale R, Tedesco L, et al. Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by inducing the expression of eNOS. Science. 2005;310:314–7.

56. Moynihan KA, Grimm AA, Plueger MM, Bernal-Mizrachi E, Ford E, Cras-Meneur C, et al. Increased dosage of mammalian Sir2 in pancreatic beta cells enhances glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. Cell Metab. 2005;2:105–17.

57. Zhang CY, Baffy G, Perret P, Krauss S, Peroni O, Grujic D, et al. Uncoupling protein-2 negatively regulates insulin secretion and is a major link between obesity, beta cell dysfunction, and type 2 diabetes. Cell. 2001;105:745–55.

58. Bordone L, Motta MC, Picard F, Robinson A, Jhala US, Apfeld J, et al. Sirt1 regulates insulin secretion by repressing UCP2 in pancreatic beta cells. PLoS Biol. 2006;4:e31.

59. Kitamura YI, Kitamura T, Kruse JP, Raum JC, Stein R, Gu W, et al. FoxO1 protects against pancreatic beta cell failure through NeuroD and MafA induction. Cell Metab. 2005;2:153–63.

60. Hallows WC, Lee S, Denu JM. Sirtuins deacetylate and activate mammalian acetyl-CoA synthetases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;103:10230–5.

61. Araki T, Sasaki Y, Milbrandt J. Increased nuclear NAD biosynthesis and SIRT1 activation prevent axonal degeneration. Science. 2004;305:1010–3.

62. Parker JA, Arango M, Abderrahmane S, Lambert E, Tourette C, Catoire H, et al. Resveratrol rescues mutant polyglutamine cytotoxicity in nematode and mammalian neurons. Nat Genet. 2005;37:349–50.

63. Chen J, Zhou Y, Mueller-Steiner S, Chen LF, Kwon H, Yi S, et al. SIRT1 protects against microglia-dependent amyloid-beta toxicity through inhibiting NF-kappaB signaling. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:40364–74.

64. Qin W, Yang T, Ho L, Zhao Z, Wang J, Chen L, et al. Neuronal SIRT1 activation as a novel mechanism underlying the prevention of Alzheimer disease amyloid neuropathology by calorie restriction. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:21745–54.

65. Qin W, Chachich M, Lane M, Roth G, Bryant M, de Cabo R, et al. Calorie restriction attenuates Alzheimer's disease type brain amyloidosis in Squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus). J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;10:417–22.

66. North BJ, Marshall BL, Borra MT, Denu JM, Verdin E. The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase. Mol Cell. 2003;11:437–44.

67. Hiratsuka M, Inoue T, Toda T, Kimura N, Shirayoshi Y, Kamitani H, et al. Proteomics-based identification of differentially expressed genes in human gliomas: down-regulation of SIRT2 gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003;309:558–66.

68. Dryden SC, Nahhas FA, Nowak JE, Goustin AS, Tainsky MA. Role for human SIRT2 NAD-dependent

deacetylase activity in control of mitotic exit in the cell cycle. Mol Cell Biol. 2003;23:3173–85.

69. Inoue T, Hiratsuka M, Osaki M, Yamada H, Kishimoto I, Yamaguchi S, et al. SIRT2, a tubulin deacetylase, acts to block the entry to chromosome condensation in response to mitotic stress. Oncogene. 2007;26:945–57.

70. Li W, Zhang B, Tang J, Cao Q, Wu Y, Wu C, et al. Sirtuin 2, a mammalian homolog of yeast silent information regulator-2 longevity regulator, is an oligodendroglial protein that decelerates cell differentiation through deacetylating alpha-tubulin. J Neurosci. 2007;27:2606–16.

71. Onyango P, Cecic I, McCaffery JM, Boeke JD, Feinberg AP. SIRT3, a human SIR2 homologue, is an NAD-dependent deacetylase localized to mitochondria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:13653–8.

72. Schwer B, North BJ, Frye RA, Ott M, Verdin E. The human silent information regulator (Sir) 2 homologue hSIRT3 is a mitochondrial nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent deacetylase. J Cell Biol. 2002;158:647–57.

73. Shi T, Wang F, Stieren E, Tong Q. SIRT3, a mitochondrial sirtuin deacetylase, regulates mitochondrial function and thermogenesis in brown adipocytes. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:13560–7.

74. Rose G, Dato S, Altomare K, Bellizzi D, Garasto S, Greco V, et al. Variability of the SIRT3 gene, human silent information regulator Sir2 homologue, and survivorship in the elderly. Exp Gerontol. 2003;38:1065–70.

75. Bellizzi D, Dato S, Cavalcante P, Covello G, Di Cianni F, Passarino G, et al. Characterization of a bidirectional promoter shared between two human genes related to aging: SIRT3 and PSMD13. Genomics. 2007;89:143–50.

76. Haigis MC, Mostoslavsky R, Haigis KM, Fahie K, Christodoulou DC, Murphy AJ, et al. SIRT4 inhibits glutamate dehydrogenase and opposes the effects of calorie restriction in pancreatic beta cells. Cell. 2006;126:941–54.

77. Mostoslavsky R, Chua KF, Lombard DB, Pang WW, Fischer MR, Gellon L, et al. Genomic instability and aging-like phenotype in the absence of mammalian SIRT6. Cell. 2006;124:315–29.

78. Liszt G, Ford E, Kurtev M, Guarente L. Mouse Sir2 homolog SIRT6 is a nuclear ADP-ribosyltransferase. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:21313–20.

79. Grummt I, Pikaard CS. Epigenetic silencing of RNA polymerase I transcription. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003;4:641–9.

80. Ford E, Voit R, Liszt G, Magin C, Grummt I, Guarente L. Mammalian Sir2 homolog SIRT7 is an activator of RNA polymerase I transcription. Genes Dev. 2006;20:1075–80.

81. Muth V, Nadaud S, Grummt I, Voit R. Acetylation of TAF(I) 68, a subunit of TIF-IB/SL1, activates RNA polymerase I transcription. EMBO J. 2001;20:1353–62.
