
# A Molecular Caliper Mechanism for Determining Very Long-Chain Fatty Acid Length

**Vladimir Denic**${}^{1}$ **and Jonathan S. Weissman**${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco and California Institute of Quantitative Biomedical Research, San Francisco, CA 94158-2542, USA

*Correspondence: weissman@cmp.ucsf.edu*

DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2007.06.031

## SUMMARY

Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are essential lipids whose functional diversity is enabled by variation in their chain length. The full VLCFA biosynthetic machinery and how this machinery generates structural diversity remain elusive. Proteoliposomes reconstituted here from purified membrane components—an elongase protein (Elop), a novel dehydratase, and two reductases—catalyzed repeated rounds of two-carbon addition that elongated shorter FAs into VLCFAs whose length was dictated by the specific Elop homolog present. Mutational analysis revealed that the Elop active site faces the cytosol, whereas VLCFA length is determined by a lysine near the luminal end of an Elop transmembrane helix. By stepping the lysine residue along one face of the helix toward the cytosol, we engineered novel synthases with correspondingly shorter VLCFA outputs. Thus the distance between the active site and the lysine residue determines chain length. Our results uncover a mutationally adjustable, caliper-like mechanism that generates the repertoire of cellular VLCFAs.

## INTRODUCTION

Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are structurally diverse biological molecules with unusually long hydrocarbon chains, ranging from 20 to 36 carbons (C20–36) or more (Leonard et al., 2004). These lipids perform essential roles in a wide range of biological processes that cannot be supported by the more common shorter fatty acids (i.e., C16 and C18). For example, the chain length of certain VLCFAs allows them to simultaneously reside in both leaflets of the lipid bilayer, thereby stabilizing highly curved cellular membranes, such as those surrounding nuclear pore complexes (Schneiter et al., 2004, 1996).

Notably, the variation in VLCFA chain length across different species and different tissues has enabled the numerous functional specializations of these lipids. In *S. cerevisiae*, for example, while C22 is able to support the essential functions of VLCFAs, C26 is specifically required for a variety of membrane-based processes, including the formation of GPI lipid anchors and the trafficking of proteins in the secretory pathway (Dickson et al., 2006; Toulmay and Schneiter, 2007). Similarly, in mammals, VLCFAs with lengths greater than C30 allow the formation of a permeability barrier that is critical for the normal structure and function of the skin (McMahon et al., 2007; Vasireddy et al., 2007). Finally, VLCFAs and their derivatives act as signaling molecules (e.g., arachidonic acid; Leonard et al., 2002) and are dominant lipid constituents of certain tissues in animals (e.g., photoreceptor cells and myelin; Poulos et al., 1992) and plants (e.g., oils and waxes; Kunst and Samuels, 2003).

Efforts to understand the mechanistic principles enabling their structural diversity have been hampered by the inability to reconstitute VLCFA synthesis from purified components (Cinti et al., 1992; Jakobsson et al., 2006; Leonard et al., 2004). This has been largely due to the insoluble nature of the VLCFA biosynthetic machinery which has been known since the 1960s to consist of detergent-labile complexes embedded within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (for a historical overview see Cinti et al., 1992). These pioneering studies demonstrated that VLCFAs are synthesized by the elongation of shorter fatty acids (C16 and C18) that are produced in the cytosol by the well-characterized, multi-enzyme complex termed the fatty acid synthase (FAS; Jenni et al., 2007; Lomakin et al., 2007). VLCFA synthesis was shown to proceed by a four-step biochemical cycle (Figure 1B; Nugteren, 1965): (1) condensation of malonyl-CoenzymeA (CoA) with an acyl-CoA precursor; (2) reduction of the resulting 3-keto intermediate; (3) dehydration of the 3-hydroxy species; and (4) reduction of the enoyl product to yield a saturated FA chain that is two carbons longer than its precursor.

The above conceptual framework facilitated more recent genetic approaches in budding yeast that identified several ER membrane proteins required for VLCFA production. Specifically, Ybr159wp and Tsc13p are strong
candidates for the enzymes catalyzing the second and fourth steps of the elongation cycle, respectively, as they are homologous to known reductases and their inactivation leads to the accumulation of the expected keto and enoyl intermediates in the ER membrane (Beaudoin et al., 2002; Han et al., 2002; Kohlwein et al., 2001). Additionally, Fen1p and Sur4p are two yeast members (Oh et al., 1997) of a large family of proteins termed the Elops (Jakobsson et al., 2006) which are required for the first (condensation) step in the elongation cycle (Moon et al., 2001; Paul et al., 2006; Westerberg et al., 2006). Moreover, heterologous expression of Elop homologs in yeast demonstrated that these proteins determine the length of cellular VLCFA products. Hence, the proliferation and specialization of Elops has been responsible for the observed VLCFA chain length diversity across different organisms and cell types (Jakobsson et al., 2006; Leonard et al., 2004). The exact function of Elops in the elongation cycle is uncertain, however, as these proteins lack homology to known condensing enzymes. Therefore, it remains to be established whether Elops are members of a novel family of condensing enzymes or noncatalytic adapters for recruiting specific substrates to the actual condensing enzyme. Finally, no protein has been identified that is specifically required for the dehydratase reaction.

Based on these findings, we can now restate the question of VLCFA chain length determination in more specific mechanistic terms. Namely, how do Elops instruct the components of the elongation cycle to extend shorter FAs in two-carbon addition steps so as to yield VLCFA products of defined lengths? The observation that ER membranes containing a single Elop can convert substrates of different lengths to the same-length end product (Paul et al., 2006) argues against a length-determining mechanism that “counts” a fixed number of two-carbon additions. Conversely, ER membranes with different Elops allow for the elongation of the same substrate to different-length VLCFA products (Paul et al., 2006). Thus, Elops are able to specify VLCFA length in absolute terms. Efforts to understand the mechanism by which Elops achieve this and how evolutionary diversification of the Elop family has enabled the synthesis of VLCFAs of novel chain lengths have been hampered by the incomplete inventory of the components required for VLCFA synthesis (Paul et al., 2006). Moreover, the integral membrane nature of the enzymes involved has thus far obstructed the in vitro reconstitution of any step of the elongation cycle (Cinti et al., 1992; Jakobsson et al., 2006; Leonard et al., 2004).

Here we identify Phs1p as the VLCFA dehydratase and show that it is the final missing component of the elongation cycle by reconstituting robust VLCFA synthesis using purified Elops, Phs1p, Ybr159wp, and Tsc13p inserted into proteoliposomes. Moreover, we demonstrate that Elops are a novel family of condensing enzymes that specify VLCFA length by terminating processive rounds of the elongation cycle following the synthesis of defined length products. Finally, we exploit this reconstituted system to elucidate the logic by which Elops measure VLCFA length

and use this understanding to rationally design VLCFA synthase variants with dramatically altered product length outputs.

**RESULTS**

**Phs1p Is the Elongation Cycle Dehydratase**

In our previous large-scale genetic interactions study of the yeast early secretory pathway, we identified Phs1p as a highly conserved ER protein with six predicted transmembrane segments that plays an essential role in sphingolipid metabolism (Schuldiner et al., 2005). Several observations suggested to us that Phs1p might be a core component of the elongation cycle, the biosynthetic source of VLCFA substrates critical for the production of sphingolipids (Figure 1A). First, as expected following a block in VLCFA synthesis (Figure 1A; Beaudoin et al., 2002; Han et al., 2002; Kohlwein et al., 2001; Oh et al., 1997), reduction in Phs1p levels resulted in the accumulation of cellular long-chain bases (LCBs; Figure 2A). Second, cells with reduced Phs1p levels fail to grow in the presence of exogenously added myristic acid (C14) when FAS is chemically inhibited (Figure 2B), a hallmark of VLCFA mutants (Rossler et al., 2003). Lastly, Phs1p coimmunoprecipitates with Fen1p, Sur4p, Ybr159wp, and Tsc13p (Figure 2C).

To further define the role of Phs1p in fatty acid elongation, we incubated membranes that had been genetically depleted of Phs1p with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA in the presence of reducing cofactors (essential for the second and fourth steps of the elongation cycle). The products of this reaction were then separated on the basis of chain length by reverse-phase thin-layer chromatography. As previously seen (Paul et al., 2006), wild-type membranes elongated C18-CoA up to C26 (Figure 2D), the most abundant VLCFA in S. cerevisiae (Welch and Burlingame, 1973). In contrast, Phs1p-depleted membranes were strongly compromised for elongation and instead accumulated a fast-migrating (i.e., more hydrophilic) species (Figure 2D). Normal-phase TLC, a method better suited for resolving elongation cycle intermediates, identified this species as the 3-hydroxy intermediate (Figure 2E), which is the substrate for the third step in the cycle (Figure 1B). Notably, the first two steps (i.e., formation of the 3-keto intermediate in the absence of NAD(P)H and its reduction in the presence of NAD(P)H, respectively) were not compromised by Phs1p depletion (Figure 2E). Thus, Phs1p is specifically required for the dehydratase step of the elongation cycle.

As Phs1p lacks homology to known dehydratases, we sought to determine if it catalyzes the third step of the elongation cycle by purifying epitope-tagged Phs1p. Strikingly, coinubcation of either yeast- (Figure S1A) or bacterially produced Phs1p (Figure S1B) and a 3-hydroxy C18-CoA dehydratase substrate (Figure S2A) resulted in accumulation of the dehydrated enoyl-CoA (Figures 2B, S2B, and S2C). Taken together, these data establish that Phs1p is the founding member of a novel and

664 Cell 130, 663–677, August 24, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc.
activity in our detergent-solubilized preparations (data not shown). We therefore removed the detergent in the presence of synthetic phospholipids of a defined composition approximating that of the ER membrane (Matsuoka and Schekman, 2000). Remarkably, the resulting proteoliposomes, containing either Fen1p or Sur4p (Figure S3B), catalyzed formation of the 3-keto product (Figure 3A).

We next explored the mechanism by which Elops catalyze the condensation reaction. These membrane-embedded proteins lack an absolutely conserved cysteine-containing catalytic triad found in the condensing enzymes of FAS and FAS-like systems (Paul et al., 2006). Moreover, the cysteine-targeted FAS inhibitor cerulenin does not interfere with VLCFA synthesis (Figure 2B). We therefore examined absolutely conserved signature sequence motifs within the Elop family (Jakobsson et al., 2006) for their possible involvement in catalyzing the condensation reaction. Experimental analysis of Elop membrane topology (Figure 3B, see legend for details) raised the possibility that all Elop signature motifs were located within either a cytosolic loop or juxta-cytosolic transmembrane helix (TMH) regions (Figure 3B) and thus might be organized into a catalytic ring surrounding the entrance of an intramembrane substrate-binding pocket. Our attention was specifically drawn to the HXXHH motif that was proximal to several absolutely conserved lysine and arginine residues which, by analogy to other CoA-binding condensing enzymes, might interact with the phosphate moieties of CoA (Ferrer et al., 1999), thereby orienting the substrate for catalysis. Mutational analysis revealed that the HXXHH motif is not required for Elop incorporation into a multiprotein complex and thus is likely not critical for global folding (Figures 3C and S3C). However, this motif is essential for Elop function in vivo (Figure 3D) and 3-keto acyl-CoA synthase activity in vitro (Figure 3E; data not shown). While the experimental tools for determining the topology of membrane proteins are imperfect, other independent considerations argue that the Elop active site is located in or near the cytosol. Specifically, members of an unrelated family of plant condensing enzymes known to have a cytosolic active site, when expressed in yeast, are able to engage the core components of the elongation cycle machinery and bring about VLCFA synthesis (Paul et al., 2006). Additionally, VLCFA synthesis depends on malonyl-CoA synthesized by a cytosolic acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Ivesse et al., 1997). Collectively, these findings argue that Elops use a novel condensation mechanism to initiate two-carbon addition in (or near) the cytosol.

### Reconstitution of the Complete Elongation Cycle from Purified Components

We next used the reconstituted condensation reaction to explore the mechanism by which different Elops specify the chain length of VLCFAs. An earlier study (Oh et al., 1997) demonstrated that Δsur4 cells have undetectable levels of C26, the major budding yeast VLCFA species, and instead accumulate C22 as their longest VLCFA.

Figure 2. Phs1p Catalyzes the Third Step of the Elongation Cycle

(A) Wild-type cells or cells with Phs1p under the transcriptional control of the tetracycline-repressible promoter (downward arrow) were treated with doxycycline (a tetracycline derivative). Cellular LCBs were fluorescently labeled and analyzed by reverse-phase HPLC. * is the free fluorescent dye remaining after the labeling procedure. Chromatogram peaks correspond to various structurally diverse LCB species (data not shown).

(B) Serial dilutions (vertical dimension) of the indicated strains (horizontal dimension) were spotted onto plates containing glucose, –/+ cerulenin (cer), and myristic acid (C14). phs1 refers to a strain with GAL1 promoter-driven expression of PHS1 from its genomic locus. Promoter shutoff in the presence of glucose is incomplete and results in a partial loss-of-function phs1 allele (data not shown).

(C) Cells expressing Myc-tagged proteins from their genomic loci and either Phs1p or Phs1-FLAG on a plasmid (covering Δphs1), as indicated, were lysed and solubilized with digitonin. Following ultracentrifugation and immunoprecipitation (IP) with antiFLAG beads, bound material and input

666 Cell 130, 663–677, August 24, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc.

Notably, overexpression of Fen1p in these cells resulted in some C24 production but failed to restore C26. On the other hand, Δfen1 cells still had a significant level of C26 remaining compared to wild-type cells and this amount was increased by overexpression of Sur4p. A simple molecular explanation for these in vivo observations is that Sur4p is uniquely able to recruit C24 for VLCFA condensation in yeast. We were, however, surprised to find that both Fen1p and Sur4p efficiently catalyzed the condensation of substrates 16, 18, and 20 carbons long but showed limited reactivity toward longer substrates (Figure 4A).

How then is Sur4p able to support the repeated elongation of shorter substrates to yield C26 when, like Fen1p, it is unable to accept externally added C22/24 substrates? A possible explanation for this apparent discrepancy is that C26 synthesis occurs processively, such that Sur4p efficiently catalyzes condensation of only those C22/24 substrates that are channeled from the fourth step of a preceding elongation cycle. To address this issue and, more broadly, to enable the mechanistic exploration of VLCFA synthesis, we reconstituted the complete elongation cycle in vitro. We first purified epitope-tagged versions of Ybr159wp and Tsc13p (Figure S4A) as they were excellent candidates for the keto and enoyl reductase ([Beaudoin et al., 2002; Han et al., 2002; Kohlwein et al., 2001]), respectively. Incubation of proteoliposomes containing Sur4p alone with C18-CoA and radiolabeled malonyl-CoA generated the expected 3-keto C20 condensation product (Figure 4B). Under the same conditions, proteoliposomes containing Ybr159wp, Phs1p, and Tsc13p resulted in minimal incorporation of the label (Figure 4B). Strikingly, proteoliposomes reconstituted with Sur4p together with Ybr159wp, Phs1p, and Tsc13p supported four sequential rounds of elongation culminating with the production of a C26 product (Figure 4B). Time-course analysis revealed that C26 was present at even the earliest time point and its ratio to intermediate products, which as evidenced by normal-phase and argentation TLC analysis correspond to saturated shorter VLCFAs (Figure S4B), did not change significantly during the course of Sur4p-mediated elongation (Figure 4C). These observations are consistent with a processive elongation mechanism that releases a minor fraction of intermediates that are not efficiently re-engaged by the elongation machinery. In support of this interpretation, we did not observe efficient engagement of externally added substrates longer than C20 with either Sur4p reconstituted alone (Figure 4A) or together with the remaining elongation cycle components (Figure S4C). Collectively, these findings suggest that Sur4p specifies VLCFA length by efficiently terminating a processive elongation mechanism following the production of the C26 end product.

We next explored the utility of our reconstituted system for studying other Elops. Substituting Fen1p for Sur4p in our fully reconstituted system resulted in the elongation of either C16-CoA (Figure 4D) or C18-CoA (Figure 4E) to C22 (and to a lesser extent C24), thus recapitulating the VLCFA output of Fen1p in vivo. To more broadly test the flexibility of our in vitro system, we purified (Figure S4D), using our yeast expression system, the recently identified *T. brucei* Elop homolog, TbElo1p ([Lee et al., 2006]). As expected, Fen1p was unable to instruct the elongation of C4 and C6 precursors (Figure 4D). These short substrates were, however, efficiently elongated to the C10 product in the presence of TbElo1p as the source of the condensing activity (Figure 4D). This is in agreement with RNAi studies showing that TbElo1p is required for the synthesis of C10 in *T. brucei* ([Lee et al., 2006]). Taken together, these data establish that Ybr159wp, Phs1p, and Tsc13p act together as a versatile catalytic platform for the engagement of Elop condensing modules which specify the chain length of VLCFAs in the cell.

To further examine the suitability of our reconstituted system for studying the process of fatty acid elongation in vitro, we compared the elongation activity of ER-derived microsomes to that of proteoliposomes containing comparable amounts of the corresponding elongation cycle components (Figure 4E, see legend for details). Under conditions where VLCFA products were monitored using radiolabeled malonyl-CoA, proteoliposomes were significantly more efficient than microsomes at elongating the unlabeled acyl-CoA primer (Figure 4E). We observed a similar phenomenon when we used a radiolabeled primer with an excess of unlabeled malonyl-CoA (Figure 4F), a tracer approach better suited for measuring the fraction

fractions were resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by western analysis (W) with the indicated antibodies. Note that only full-length Tsc13p (*) was efficiently pulled down by Phs1-FLAG.

(D) Wild-type or genetically depleted Phs1p membranes (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures) were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA in the presence of reducing cofactors. Acyl-CoA reaction products were converted into FA methyl esters, resolved by reverse-phase TLC, and detected by phosphorimager analysis. * is the fast-migrating species that accumulated specifically in Phs1p-depleted membranes. Both membrane preparations lead to comparable incorporation of the label into species migrating faster than C20 (one of which comigrates with *) that disappeared upon preincubation of membranes with cerulenin (data not shown) and thus most likely represent LCFAs produced by copurifying FAS in our membrane preparations.

(E) Membranes, prepared as in (C), were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C20-CoA (similar results were seen using C18-CoA as the substrate, data not shown) in the absence or presence of reducing cofactors, NAD(P)H, as indicated. Acyl-CoA reaction products were converted into free FAs, resolved by normal-phase TLC, and detected by phosphorimager analysis.

(F) Purified Phs1-FLAG (yeast source), Phs1-HIS (bacterial source), or the corresponding mock elutions were incubated with a 3-hydroxy C18-CoA dehydratase substrate. CoA-containing molecules were fluorescently labeled and analyzed by reverse-phase HPLC. * is a nonspecific derivatization breakdown product of 3-hydroxy C18-CoA (data not shown).

Figure 3. Ellops Are a Novel Family of Membrane Condensing Enzymes

(A) Wild-type membranes or proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Fen1-FLAG or Sur4-FLAG were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA in the absence or presence of reducing cofactors, NAD(P)H, as indicated. Product analysis was carried out as in Figure 2E. No attempt was made to normalize the amount of purified Ellops to their amount in microsomes (for a better comparison see Figures 4E and 4F).

(B) The depicted seven-pass arrangement of Sur4p’s TMHs is based on a prediction from a global topology analysis of the yeast membrane proteome (Kim et al., 2006). The boxed regions correspond to the approximate positions of the Elop signature motifs (the HXXHH motif is colored green). The numbers indicate the amino acid positions at which the dual topology reporter (DTR) was inserted. Briefly, only strains in which the DTR is inserted within a cytosolic region are able to grow on SD-His plates containing histidinol. Whole-cell lysates from the indicated strains were either mock treated (-) or deglycosylated with Endo-glycosidase H (EndoH, +) and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Western analysis (W) of the DTR HA3 epitope revealed the glycosylation status of the fusion proteins as only insertion of the DTR within a luminal region leads to hyperglycosylation of the fusion protein.

(C) Cells expressing Fen1-Myc from its genomic locus and carrying empty vector (-) or vectors expressing FLAG-tagged wild-type and mutant versions of Fen1p and Sur4p, as indicated, were lysed and solubilized with digitonin. Following ultracentrifugation and IP with antiFLAG beads, bound material and input fractions were resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by western analysis (W) with the indicated antibodies.

(D) Δfen1Δsur4 cells carrying a URA-marked vector expressing Fen1-FLAG were transformed with an empty TRP-marked vector (vec) or one expressing a wild-type or mutant version of Fen1-FLAG and Sur4p-FLAG, as indicated. Following plasmid shuffle, cells were spotted onto the indicated plates. In the absence of both Elop activities, cells are unable to survive on 5-FOA.

(E) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Fen1-FLAG or Fen1H181A-FLAG were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA. Product analysis was carried out as in Figure 2E. Western analysis (W) revealed the amounts of wild-type and mutant Fen1-FLAG in the assay.
of the primer that gets converted to longer products. One possible explanation for the lower elongation efficiency of microsomes is that other biochemical systems in the ER membrane preparation siphon away substrates from the elongation machinery. Supporting this argument is the presence of multiple nonVLCFA products in the microsome reaction (Figures 4E and 4F) that are absent from our reconstituted system and most likely represent off-pathway species. Moreover, increasing the microsome concentration further decreased the efficiency of FA elongation (Figure 4E), whereas raising the Elop concentration in the in vitro system allowed for a virtually quantitative conversion of substrate to the final VLCFA product (Figure S4E). These data argue that we have biochemically defined the full complement of elongation cycle components.

### The Molecular Logic of VLCFA Length Determination

The reconstitution of fatty acid elongation allowed us to address two critical mechanistic issues pertaining to VLCFA synthesis. Namely, how do individual Elops specify the length of a VLCFA molecule, and what features of this mechanism make it well suited for evolving homologous mechanisms that enable VLCFA chain length diversity? To this end, we made chimeras between Fen1p and Sur4p, as these two Elops instructed in vitro the elongation of a C18-CoA substrate to C22 and C26, respectively. Initial in vivo screening of our chimeric constructs using gas chromatography coupled to product identification by mass spectrometry (GC/MS) established that the region of Sur4p extending from the middle of the sixth TMH (TMH6) to the C terminus contains sequence elements that are both necessary and sufficient for Sur4p’s ability to produce C26 (Figure 5A, compare chimeras I and II). Further refinement of this chimeric approach revealed that just two blocks of seven amino acids, mapping to the opposing luminal ends of Sur4p TMHs 6 and 7, were sufficient to recapitulate this transformation (Figure 5A, compare chimeras II, III, and IV). Enzymatic analysis using the reconstituted system directly demonstrated that a Fen1p chimera containing the critical Sur4p juxta-luminal TMH residues supported the elongation of C18-CoA to C26 (Figure 5B). Collectively, these data argue that, in contrast to new chain growth by two-carbon addition on the cytosolic side, the final chain length output of the membrane-embedded VLCFA synthase is specified by TMH regions proximal to the luminal face of the membrane.

To identify which juxta-luminal TMH residues are critical for determining VLCFA chain length, we aligned Elop homolog sequences from several yeast species. Notably, a residue near the luminal end of the TMH6, which we arbitrarily define as the 0 position (TMH6[0]), is occupied by a lysine residue that was conserved, but only in members of the Sur4p-like subfamily (Figure 6A). In contrast, members of the Fen1p-like subfamily have a lysine at the nearby –4 position (TMH6[–4]; i.e., four residues from 0 toward the cytosolic N-terminus of TMH6), while Sur4p and its homologs have a phenylalanine at the corresponding position (Figure 6A). To test whether these differences are functionally relevant for specifying the terminal length of VLCFA products, we purified a Sur4p mutant (F262K/K266L) containing the corresponding Fen1p residues at positions TMH6(0) and (–4). Strikingly, while Sur4p instructed the synthesis of the expected C26 product, the lysine-swap Sur4p mutant behaved like Fen1p and terminated elongation following the production of C22 (and to a lesser extent C24; Figure 6B). Consistent with this observation in vitro, GC/MS analysis revealed dramatically diminished C26 levels in Δsur4 cells expressing this mutant (Figure 6C). Therefore, placement of a conserved Sur4p TMH6 lysine residue closer to the site of two-carbon addition in the cytosol resulted in a shortening of the final VLCFA product.

The unusual presence of conserved lysine residues within an Elop TMH led us to more carefully examine their structural context. Notably, the spacing between TMH6(0) and (–4) places the lysines on the same face of the TMH6 alpha helix (Figure 7A). This helical arrangement is likely to be functionally relevant, as placing a lysine residues at TMH6(–2), a position on the opposite face of this helix (Figure 7A), did not cause Sur4p to terminate extension prior to reaching the C26 length (data not shown). We therefore examined the possibility that these lysines might be facing an intramembrane substrate-binding pocket that accepts a growing VLCFA chain. To this end, we shifted the lysine residue to positions TMH6(–8) and (–11) of Fen1p, locations that reside on the same face of the TMH6 but at two successive turns of the helix closer to the cytosol (Figure 7A). As expected, wild-type Fen1p enabled extension of either a C14 or a C16 substrate to C22 in vitro (Figure 7B). In contrast, the purified TMH6(–8) Fen1p mutant terminated elongation of both substrates following production of C18 and did not act on longer substrates (Figure 7B; data not shown). Further underscoring the idea that the distance between the juxtaluminal lysine residue and the cytosol determines VLCFA length, we observed that the TMH6(–11) Fen1p mutant elongated C14 to C16 but was unable to extend C16 (Figure 7B). Lastly, we attempted to expand the biosynthetic repertoire of yeast Elops by removing bulky residues from this region of Sur4p. Remarkably, a Sur4p mutant with smaller and uncharged residues at positions TMH6(0) and (–4) instructed the synthesis of a product longer than C26 in vitro (Figure 7C) that we confirmed by GC/MS analysis in vivo corresponded to a novel C30 species (Figure 7D). Thus, targeted mutations in Elops can be used to predictably engineer VLCFA synthesis over a remarkably broad range of chain lengths.

## DISCUSSION

Many complex biological molecules are synthesized as polymers from identical or structurally similar building blocks (Alberts et al., 2002). While well-suited for the production of chemical diversity, polymerization reactions pose a challenge to the enzymatic machinery that must

Cell 130, 663–677, August 24, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc. 669
Figure 4. Reconstitution of the Elongation Cycle with Purified Membrane Components of the Endoplasmic Reticulum

(A) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Fen1-FLAG or Sur4-FLAG were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled acyl-CoAs of different lengths, as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2E.

(B) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with the indicated purified proteins were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D. Western analysis revealed comparable concentrations of the corresponding proteins in the partial and fully reconstituted reactions (data not shown).

(C) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Sur4-FLAG, Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA. Products were removed at the indicated times and analyzed as in Figure 2D. Quantitation revealed that the C26 signal comprised 55%–70% of the total at all times.

Figure 5. Luminal Elop TMH Regions Specify the Length of VLCFAs

(A) FA species from Δsur4 cells expressing wild-type Fen1p or the indicated chimeras on a plasmid were converted into fatty acid methyl esters (FAMES), extracted, and analyzed by GC/MS. The retention times of VLCFAMESs in the top row chromatograms are slightly different from those in the bottom row due to analysis by different GC columns. All constructs were expressed at comparable levels (data not shown).

(B) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG along with either Fen1-FLAG or Fen1 chimera IV-FLAG (from [A]) were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and C18-CoA, as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

employ these iterative processes to synthesize molecules of defined lengths. In the case of DNA replication, transcription, and mRNA translation, the addition of each monomer is catalyzed by repeated use of the same catalytic machinery, and the problem of length determination is solved using an informational template with a defined

(D) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG along with either Fen1-FLAG or TbElo1-FLAG were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled acyl-CoAs of different lengths, as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

(E) ER-derived microsomes were prepared from Δphs1 cells expressing Phs1-FLAG on a plasmid. Proteoliposomes were reconstituted with purified Fen1p-FLAG, Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG. The concentration of Phs1-FLAG in the microsomes was adjusted to the concentration of Phs1-FLAG in the proteoliposomes by western analysis (W). x refers to a normalized unit of Phs1-FLAG expression in the two elongation systems. The other elongation cycle components in the proteoliposomes were present at approximately equimolar levels relative to Phs1-FLAG (data not shown). Following incubation with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and unlabeled C18-CoA, products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

(F) Membranes and proteoliposomes, prepared and normalized as in (E), were incubated with radiolabeled C16-CoA and unlabeled malonyl-CoA. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D. Note that the dominant microsomal reaction product (*) migrates faster (i.e., is more hydrophilic) than the C16-CoA precursor.

A

| TMH6 position | -11 | -8 | -4 | 0 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| S.c. | IGFIYFAVYQKAVHLYF |
| C.g. | IGFIYFAVYQKATHLYF |
| K.l. | ICFIYFAVWQKVATDYF |
| A.g. | IGFIYFATYTKLAYDYF |
| S.c. | LVFVYFATYTFYAHKYL |
| C.g. | LVFVYFATYTFYANKYF |
| K.l. | LVFVYFATYTFYANKYF |
| A.g. | LAFVYFGTYTFYAHKYF |

B

| Ybr159wp/Phs1p/Tsc13p | Sur4p | + | - |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Sur4p F262K/K266L | - | + |

C20—  
C22—  
C24—  
C26—

C

SUR4

SUR4 F262K/K266L

Abundance (arbitrary units)

C26  
C22  
C24  

WT mut  
W: FLAG  
W: HXK  

Retention time (minutes)

Figure 6. Conserved Lysine Residues near the Luminal End of TMH6 Determine the Chain Length Output of VLCFA Synthase

(A) ClustalW alignment of yeast EloP homolog sequences revealed one subfamily with members more closely related to Fen1p and another with members more closely related to Sur4p (data not shown). Shown here is the region of the full alignment corresponding to the luminal end of TMH6. S.c. indicates S. cerevisiae; C.g. indicates C. glabrata; K.l. indicates K. lactis; and A.g. indicates A. gossypii.

(B) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG along with either wild-type Sur4-FLAG or Sur4 F262K/K266L-FLAG mutant were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and C18-CoA, as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

(C) Δsur4 cells expressing either wild-type Sur4-FLAG or Sur4-FLAG F262K/K266L were analyzed as in Figure 5A. Western analysis (W) of cellular expression levels of wild-type and mutant (mut) Sur4-FLAG relative to hexokinase (HXK).

beginning and end. In contrast, each round of elongation during polyketide and nonribosomal peptide synthesis is typically catalyzed by a different set of enzymes (Cane et al., 1998). In this assembly-line strategy, a growing polymer chain moves along a large, multifunctional synthase whose number of catalytic modules determines the length of the product. VLCFAs, however, are a structurally diverse class of molecules whose lengths are specified by a distinct strategy. Here, every four-step round of monomer addition is mediated by the same set of active sites, yet there is no external template for guiding VLCFA synthesis. Thus, the information necessary for specifying

672 Cell 130, 663–677, August 24, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 7. Engineering the Chain Length Output of VLCFA Synthase

(A) Three-dimensional representation of an alpha helix depicting the relative positions of residues mutated in this study.

(B) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG along with either wild-type Fen1-FLAG or the Fen1-FLAG TMH6(−8) (A251K/K255F) and TMH6(−11) (I248K/K255F) mutants were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and acyl-CoAs of different lengths, as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

(C) Proteoliposomes reconstituted with purified Ybr159w-FLAG, Phs1-FLAG, and Tsc13-FLAG along with either wild-type Sur4-FLAG or Sur4 F262A/K266L-FLAG mutant were incubated with radiolabeled malonyl-CoA and C20-CoA (similar results were observed with C18-CoA, data not shown), as indicated. Products were analyzed as in Figure 2D.

(D) Δsur4 cells expressing wild-type Sur4-FLAG or Sur4-FLAG F262A/K266L mutant were analyzed as in Figure 5A. The retention times are different from those in the other figures because the elution gradient was modified to facilitate separation of VLCFA species longer than C26. Western analysis (W) of cellular expression levels of wild-type and mutant (mut) Sur4-FLAG relative to hexokinase (HXK).

(E) Model depicting how Elops act as molecular calipers to specify VLCFA length. See text for details.

product length must be contained within the biosynthetic machinery itself. This is similar to the problem faced by the FAS complex. In this case, a growing fatty acid chain is covalently attached to FAS, and elongation is terminated when an enzyme within the complex severs the chain attachment following production of C16 and C18 ([Smith et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305938200)). VLCFA synthesis, however, must rely on a different solution to the length-determination problem, as there appears to be no covalent attachment of elongation substrates to the biosynthetic machinery ([Cinti et al., 1992](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.267.10.6663)). How then does this machinery guide the synthesis of a VLCFA molecule from beginning to end, and what molecular principles allow structural diversification of the elongation mechanism leading to the production of new VLCFA species?

Our studies reveal a caliper-like mechanism in which different Elops measure VLCFA length as the distance between a fixed active site and a physically distinct region, subject to mutational “sliding,” that detects the FA methyl end (Figure 7E). Specifically, we have shown that catalysis of the condensation step occurs on the cytosolic face of the ER membrane, whereas lysine residues near the luminal end of an Elop TMH (TMH6) specify chain length. We propose that the acyl moiety of a substrate is inserted in the membrane, such that the repetitive addition of two-carbon units in the cytosol results in the progressive displacement of a substrate’s methyl end across the lipid bilayer toward the luminal face. The distance between the active site and the juxta-luminal lysine is approximately equal to the length of the terminal VLCFA product, arguing that termination of elongation is triggered upon the methyl end reaching the hydrophilic end of the pocket, as demarcated by a lysine residue. We tested this idea by stepping the lysine residue along one face of TMH6 toward the cytosol. When we did this for two successive turns, termination occurred earlier and led to the synthesis of VLCFA products four (C22) and eight (C18) carbons shorter, respectively, than the wild-type C26 length. Moreover, the elimination of bulky residues from this juxta-luminal face of TMH6 resulted in the production of a longer C30 species. Consistent with the notion that this is a physical measuring device, the distance between residues separated by one helical turn (5.4 Å) is in excellent agreement with the length of a four-carbon unit along a saturated hydrocarbon chain (5.3 Å). As yeast Elops do not efficiently accept substrates shorter than C14 (data not shown), we were unable to fully test this apparent “rule of fours” for products shorter than C18. However, positioning the lysine residue an additional rung closer to the cytosol resulted in an even lower chain length output characterized by reduced conversion of C14 to C16 and a complete inability to extend C16. Intriguingly, RNAi studies in trypanosomes have assigned the successive elongation of C4–C10, C14, and C18 to the tandem activity of three Elop homologs ([Lee et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M601884200)). The fact that TbElops instruct the synthesis of VLCFA products whose lengths vary in successive four-carbon steps raises the possibility that, despite significant sequence divergence from their yeast counterparts, TbElops also use an alpha helix-based measuring strategy for specifying VLCFA chain length. Our development of an in vitro system that works efficiently with Elop homologs from distant organisms, including a trypanosome Elop, should facilitate experimental investigation of this question as well as identification of other molecular measuring strategies that enable elongation of unsaturated ([Beaudoin et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.20.15108)) and branched substrates ([Kniazeva et al., 2004](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312953200)).

On a practical note, our findings should facilitate ongoing efforts to manipulate VLCFA synthesis in vivo. First, there has been a great deal of interest in engineering plants to produce nutritionally enhanced oils to serve as a sustainable source of therapeutically (e.g., omega-3) and commercially (e.g., erucic acid) valuable VLCFAs ([Graham et al., 2007; Puyaubert et al., 2005](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M609588200)). Transgenic overexpression of the full complement of elongation cycle components, including the long-sought-after VLCFA dehydratase, might now yield plant oils with higher VLCFA content than those previously obtained by overexpression of only a subset of the components ([Wu et al., 2005](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M502861200)). Moreover, rational design of Elop mutants, as illustrated here, now offers a new toolkit for expanding the VLCFA biosynthetic repertoire in order to generate plant factories of “unnatural” products with potentially novel bioactivities.

Second, human peroxisomal disorders are associated with alterations in VLCFA metabolism ([Poulos et al., 1992](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.267.10.6663)). Specifically, adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is caused by severe demyelination of the nervous system resulting from increased production of saturated C26 fatty acids ([Kemp et al., 2005; Tsuji et al., 1984](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305938200)). Attempts at ameliorating this disease by inhibiting the elongation process with a diet enriched in shorter monounsaturated species (“Lorenzo’s oil”) have suffered from our rudimentary understanding of what constitutes a selective Elop inhibitor. Namely, while this treatment normalizes the levels of saturated C26 fatty acids in ALD patients, this is accompanied by a concomitant increase in very long monounsaturated species and a failure to halt neurodegeneration ([Kemp et al., 2005](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305938200)).

Finally, in conjunction with the recent discovery of *T. brucei* Elop homologs that instruct the synthesis of short fatty acids critical for GPI anchoring of variable surface glycoproteins used by this parasite to evade the immune system ([Lee et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M601884200)), our work also suggests new avenues for development of antitrypanosomal drugs. Specifically, here we have shown that Elops catalyze the chemically well-understood Claisen-like condensation reaction, albeit with a novel requirement for the HXXHH motif, and that a trypanosome homolog is able to instruct the synthesis of short-chain fatty acids in vitro. Intriguingly, the HXXHH motif is known to coordinate metal ions in other proteins ([Shanklin et al., 1994](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.269.10.7355)). Assuming a similar ion requirement during Elop-mediated catalysis, selective inhibition of TbElops might be achieved using a small molecule comprising a short hydrocarbon chain attached to a metal-chelating group. Rational design of
such TbElop inhibitors could avoid side effects by a “double-sieve” strategy: FAS is spared since it does not rely on the HXXHH motif for catalysis, and inhibition of endogenous VLCFA systems is avoided since mammalian Elops do not act on short-chain substrates. A similar logic can be applied to the development of more selective drugs for treating other diseases caused by trypanosomatids. Specifically, the various parasite species responsible for the different types of leishmaniasis each have 14 Elop homologs (Livore et al., 2007) that might be great pharmacological targets in the treatment of these otherwise neglected diseases (Pecoul, 2004). More broadly, our ability to generate large quantities of pure and active Elops from a yeast expression system should facilitate future structural and mechanistic studies of this family of proteins that may lead to more effective VLCFA-targeted therapeutic strategies.

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Yeast Strains and Plasmids
All strains were derivatives of W303 and S288C. The open reading frames of *FEN1*, *SUR4*, and *PHS1* were deleted by one-step PCR disruption. C-terminal epitope taggings, promoter taggings, and Elop chimeras were made by standard PCR-based techniques. Topology mapping of Sur4p was performed by an extension of the approach described in Kim et al. (2006).

#### Protein Purifications, Proteoliposome Reconstitutions, and Elongation Cycle Assays
FLAG-tagged proteins were overexpressed in yeast using the 2 μ plasmid or the *TDH3* promoter. Cells were lysed by bead beating in HIB (50 mM HEPES-KOH 6.8, 150 mM KOAc, 2 mM MgOAc, and 1 mM CaCl₂) containing 0.2 M sorbitol and protease inhibitors. ER-derived membranes were isolated and solubilized with either 1% Triton X-100 or 2% digitonin as described in Denic et al. (2006) with some modifications. Purified proteins were reconstituted into proteoliposomes by removing detergent with SM2 Bio-Beads in the presence of synthetic phospholipids of a defined composition approximating that of the yeast ER membrane (11 mol% 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine [PC], 42 mol% dioleoyl-PC, 5 mol% 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine [PE], 18 mol% dioleoyl-PE, 4 mol% 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-phosphatidylserine [PS], 4 mol% dioleoyl-PS, 7 mol% phosphatidylinositol, 4 mol% phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate, and 5 mol% dioleoyl phosphatidic acid). Proteoliposomes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation, analyzed by western analysis, and assayed for elongation activity. Further details, as well as the description of the bacterial purification of Phs1p, the dehydratase assays, and the coimmunoprecipitation procedures, are available in the Supplemental Data.

#### Chromatographic Analyses
LCB analysis was carried out as in Lester and Dickson (2001) with some modifications. Normal- and reverse-phase TLC were carried out as described in Kohlwein et al. (2001) and Paul et al. (2006), respectively. GC/MS samples were prepared as in Browse et al. (1986) and analyzed as described in Van Gilst et al. (2005).

### Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data include Experimental Procedures, References, and four figures and can be found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/130/4/663/DC1/.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank F. Szoka and Y.-A. Moon for general advice on handling lipids; M. Van Gilst for introducing us to GC/MS and the Mass Spectrometry Facility at UC Berkeley for allowing us the extensive use of their instrument; H. Luecke for suggesting the chemical synthesis of the dehydratase substrate; N. Gushwa and J. Garrison for help with LC/MS; Z. Newby for insight into membrane protein expression in bacteria; R. Hegde for advice on reconstituting membrane proteins into proteoliposomes; S. Kreft for experimental tips on using the dual topology reporter; M. Schuldiner for initial studies into the function of Phs1p; W.J. Lennarz, P. Walter, and R. Stroud for reagents; B. Toyama for generous help with graphics; J. Taunton for encouragement and stimulating discussions; M. Nirenberg for drawing the parallel between Elops and calipers; D. Mullins, J. Taunton, D. Breslow, S. Collins, C. Patil, J. Newman, R. Farese, K. Ashrafi, and J. Cox as well as members of the Weissman lab for critical reading of the manuscript. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute supported this work.

Received: April 30, 2007  
Revised: May 31, 2007  
Accepted: June 12, 2007  
Published: August 23, 2007  

### REFERENCES
Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, M., Raff, M., Roberts, K., and Walter, P. (2002). Molecular Biology of the Cell, Fourth Edition (New York, NY: Garland Science, Taylor & Francis Group).

Beaudoin, F., Michaelson, L.V., Hey, S.J., Lewis, M.J., Shewry, P.R., Sayanova, O., and Napier, J.A. (2000). Heterologous reconstitution in yeast of the polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 6421–6426.

Beaudoin, F., Gable, K., Sayanova, O., Dunn, T., and Napier, J.A. (2002). A *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* gene required for heterologous fatty acid elongase activity encodes a microsomal beta-keto-reductase. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 11481–11488.

Bellec, Y., Harrar, Y., Butaeye, C., Darnet, S., Bellini, C., and Faure, J.D. (2002). Pasticcino2 is a protein tyrosine phosphatase-like involved in cell proliferation and differentiation in Arabidopsis. Plant J. 32, 713–722.

Browse, J., McCourt, P.J., and Somerville, C.R. (1986). Fatty acid composition of leaf lipids determined after combined digestion and fatty acid methyl ester formation from fresh tissue. Anal. Biochem. 152, 141–145.

Cane, D.E., Walsh, C.T., and Khosla, C. (1998). Harnessing the biosynthetic code: combinations, permutations, and mutations. Science 282, 63–68.

Cinti, D.L., Cook, L., Nagi, M.N., and Suneja, S.K. (1992). The fatty acid chain elongation system of mammalian endoplasmic reticulum. Prog. Lipid Res. 31, 1–51.

Da Costa, M., Bach, L., Landrieu, I., Bellec, Y., Catrice, O., Brown, S., De Veylder, L., Lippens, G., Inze, D., and Faure, J.D. (2006). Arabidopsis PASTICCINO2 is an antiphosphatase involved in regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase A. Plant Cell 18, 1426–1437.

Denic, V., Quan, E.M., and Weissman, J.S. (2006). A luminal surveillance complex that selects misfolded glycoproteins for ER-associated degradation. Cell 126, 349–359.

Dickson, R.C., Sumanasekera, C., and Lester, R.L. (2006). Functions and metabolism of sphingolipids in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Prog. Lipid Res. 45, 447–465.
Ferrer, J.L., Jez, J.M., Bowman, M.E., Dixon, R.A., and Noel, J.P. (1999). Structure of chalcone synthase and the molecular basis of plant polyketide biosynthesis. Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 775–784.

Graham, I.A., Larson, T., and Napier, J.A. (2007). Rational metabolic engineering of transgenic plants for biosynthesis of omega-3 polyunsaturates. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 18, 142–147.

Han, G., Gable, K., Kohlwein, S.D., Beaudoin, F., Napier, J.A., and Dunn, T.M. (2002). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae YBR159w gene encodes the 3-ketoreductase of the microsomal fatty acid elongase. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 35440–35449.

Ivessa, A.S., Schneiter, R., and Kohlwein, S.D. (1997). Yeast acetyl-CoA carboxylase is associated with the cytoplasmic surface of the endoplasmic reticulum. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 74, 399–406.

Jakobsson, A., Westerberg, R., and Jacobsson, A. (2006). Fatty acid elongases in mammals: their regulation and roles in metabolism. Prog. Lipid Res. 45, 237–249.

Jenni, S., Leibundgut, M., Boehringer, D., Frick, C., Mikolasek, B., and Ban, N. (2007). Structure of fungal fatty acid synthase and implications for iterative substrate shuttling. Science 316, 254–261.

Kemp, S., Valianpour, F., Denis, S., Ofman, R., Sanders, R.J., Mooyer, P., Barth, P.G., and Wanders, R.J. (2005). Elongation of very long-chain fatty acids is enhanced in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Mol. Genet. Metab. 84, 144–151.

Kim, H., Melen, K., Osterberg, M., and von Heijne, G. (2006). A global topology map of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae membrane proteome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 11142–11147.

Kniazeva, M., Crawford, Q.T., Seiber, M., Wang, C.Y., and Han, M. (2004). Monomethyl branched-chain fatty acids play an essential role in Caenorhabditis elegans development. PLoS Biol. 2, E257. 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020257.

Kohlwein, S.D., Eder, S., Oh, C.S., Martin, C.E., Gable, K., Bacikova, D., and Dunn, T. (2001). Tsc13p is required for fatty acid elongation and localizes to a novel structure at the nuclear-vacuolar interface in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 109–125.

Kunst, L., and Samuels, A.L. (2003). Biosynthesis and secretion of plant cuticular wax. Prog. Lipid Res. 42, 51–80.

Lee, S.H., Stephens, J.L., Paul, K.S., and Englund, P.T. (2006). Fatty acid synthesis by elongases in trypanosomes. Cell 126, 691–699.

Leonard, A.E., Kelder, B., Bobik, E.G., Chuang, L.T., Lewis, C.J., Kopchick, J.J., Mukerji, P., and Huang, Y.S. (2002). Identification and expression of mammalian long-chain PUFA elongation enzymes. Lipids 37, 733–740.

Leonard, A.E., Pereira, S.L., Sprecher, H., and Huang, Y.S. (2004). Elongation of long-chain fatty acids. Prog. Lipid Res. 43, 36–54.

Lester, R.L., and Dickson, R.C. (2001). High-performance liquid chromatography analysis of molecular species of sphingolipid-related long chain bases and long chain base phosphates in Saccharomyces cerevisiae after derivatization with 6-aminoquinolyl-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl carbamate. Anal. Biochem. 298, 283–292.

Livore, V.I., Tripodi, K.E., and Uttaro, A.D. (2007). Elongation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in trypanosomatids. FEBS J. 274, 264–274.

Lomakin, I.B., Xiong, Y., and Steitz, T.A. (2007). The Crystal Structure of Yeast Fatty Acid Synthase, a Cellular Machine with Eight Active Sites Working Together. Cell 129, 319–332.

Matsuoka, K., and Schekman, R. (2000). The use of liposomes to study COPII- and COPI-coated vesicle formation and membrane protein sorting. Methods 20, 417–428.

McMahon, A., Butovich, I.A., Mata, N.L., Klein, M., Ritter, R., 3rd, Richardson, J., Birch, D.G., Edwards, A.O., and Kedzierski, W. (2007). Retinal pathology and skin barrier defect in mice carrying a Stargardt disease-3 mutation in elongase of very long chain fatty acids-4. Mol. Vis. 13, 258–272.

Moon, Y.A., Shah, N.A., Mohapatra, S., Warrington, J.A., and Horton, J.D. (2001). Identification of a mammalian long chain fatty acyl elongase regulated by sterol regulatory element-binding proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 45358–45366.

Nugteren, D.H. (1965). The enzymic chain elongation of fatty acids by rat-liver microsomes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 106, 280–290.

Oh, C.S., Toke, D.A., Mandala, S., and Martin, C.E. (1997). ELO2 and ELO3, homologues of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ELO1 gene, function in fatty acid elongation and are required for sphingolipid formation. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 17376–17384.

Paul, S., Gable, K., Beaudoin, F., Cahoon, E., Jaworski, J., Napier, J.A., and Dunn, T.M. (2006). Members of the Arabidopsis FAE1-like 3-Ketoacyl-CoA synthase gene family substitute for the Elo proteins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 9018–9029.

Pecoul, B. (2004). New drugs for neglected diseases: from pipeline to patients. PLoS Med. 1, e6. 10.1371/journal.pmed.001006.

Pele, M., Tiret, L., Kessler, J.L., Blot, S., and Panthier, J.J. (2005). SINE exonic insertion in the PTPLA gene leads to multiple splicing defects and segregates with the autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy in dogs. Hum. Mol. Genet. 14, 1417–1427.

Poulos, A., Beckman, K., Johnson, D.W., Paton, B.C., Robinson, B.S., Sharp, P., Usher, S., and Singh, H. (1992). Very long-chain fatty acids in peroxisomal disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 318, 331–340.

Puyaubert, J., Garcia, C., Chevalier, S., and Lessire, R. (2005). Acyl-CoA elongase, a key enzyme in the development of high-erucic acid rapeseed? Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 107, 263–267.

Rossler, H., Rieck, C., Delong, T., Hoja, U., and Schweizer, E. (2003). Functional differentiation and selective inactivation of multiple Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes involved in very-long-chain fatty acid synthesis. Mol. Genet. Genomics 269, 290–298.

Schneiter, R., Hitomi, M., Ivessa, A.S., Fasch, E.V., Kohlwein, S.D., and Tartakoff, A.M. (1996). A yeast acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase mutant links very-long-chain fatty acid synthesis to the structure and function of the nuclear membrane-pore complex. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 7161–7172.

Schneiter, R., Brugger, B., Amann, C.M., Prestwich, G.D., Epand, R.F., Zellnig, G., Wieland, F.T., and Epand, R.M. (2004). Identification and biophysical characterization of a very-long-chain-fatty-acid-substituted phosphatidylinositol in yeast subcellular membranes. Biochem. J. 381, 941–949.

Schuldiner, M., Collins, S.R., Thompson, N.J., Denic, V., Bhamidipati, A., Punna, T., Ihmels, J., Andrews, B., Boone, C., Greenblatt, J.F., et al. (2005). Exploration of the function and organization of the yeast early secretory pathway through an epistatic miniarray profile. Cell 123, 507–519.

Shanklin, J., Whittle, E., and Fox, B.G. (1994). Eight histidine residues are catalytically essential in a membrane-associated iron enzyme, stearoyl-CoA desaturase, and are conserved in alkane hydroxylase and xylene monooxygenase. Biochemistry 33, 12787–12794.

Smith, S., Witkowski, A., and Joshi, A.K. (2003). Structural and functional organization of the animal fatty acid synthase. Prog. Lipid Res. 42, 289–317.

Toulmay, A., and Schneiter, R. (2007). Lipid-dependent surface transport of the proton pumping ATPase: a model to study plasma membrane biogenesis in yeast. Biochimie 89, 249–254.

Tsuji, S., Ohno, T., Miyatake, T., Suzuki, A., and Yamakawa, T. (1984). Fatty acid elongation activity in fibroblasts from patients with adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 96, 1241–1247.

Van Gilst, M.R., Hadjivassiliou, H., Jolly, A., and Yamamoto, K.R. (2005). Nuclear hormone receptor NHR-49 controls fat consumption and fatty acid composition in C. elegans. PLoS Biol. 3, e53. 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030053.

Vasireddy, V., Uchida, Y., Salem, N., Jr., Kim, S.Y., Mandal, M.N., Reddy, G.B., Bodepudi, R., Alderson, N.L., Brown, J.C., Hama, H., et al. (2007). Loss of functional ELOVL4 depletes very long-chain fatty acids (> or =C28) and the unique omega-O-acylceramides in skin leading to neonatal death. Hum. Mol. Genet. 16, 471–482.

Welch, J.W., and Burlingame, A.L. (1973). Very long-chain fatty acids in yeast. J. Bacteriol. 115, 464–466.

Westerberg, R., Mansson, J.E., Golozoubova, V., Shabalina, I.G., Backlund, E.C., Tvrdik, P., Retterstol, K., Capecchi, M.R., and Jacobsson, A. (2006). ELOVL3 is an important component for early onset of lipid recruitment in brown adipose tissue. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 4958–4968.

Wu, G., Truksa, M., Datla, N., Vrinten, P., Bauer, J., Zank, T., Cirpus, P., Heinz, E., and Qiu, X. (2005). Stepwise engineering to produce high yields of very long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in plants. Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1013–1017.
