
The missing piece of the type II fatty acid synthase system from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*

Emmanuelle Sacco*, Adrian Suarez Covarrubias†, Helen M. O’Hare‡, Paul Carroll§, Nathalie Eynard*, T. Alwyn Jones†, Tanya Parish§, Mamadou Daffé*, Kristina Bäckbro†, and Annaïk Quémard*¶

*Département des Mécanismes Moléculaires des Infections Mycobactériennes, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 31077 Toulouse, France; †Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden; ‡Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; and §Centre for Infectious Disease, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science at Barts and The London, London E1 2AT, United Kingdom

Edited by Christian R. H. Raetz, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, and approved July 20, 2007 (received for review May 4, 2007)

The *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* fatty acid synthase type II (FAS-II) system has the unique property of producing unusually long-chain fatty acids involved in the biosynthesis of mycolic acids, key molecules of the tubercle bacillus. The enzyme(s) responsible for dehydration of (3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP during the elongation cycles of the mycobacterial FAS-II remained unknown. This step is classically catalyzed by FabZ- and FabA-type enzymes in bacteria, but no such proteins are present in mycobacteria. Bioinformatic analyses and an essentiality study allowed the identification of a candidate protein cluster, Rv0635-Rv0636-Rv0637. Its expression in recombinant *Escherichia coli* strains leads to the formation of two heterodimers, Rv0635-Rv0636 (HadAB) and Rv0636-Rv0637 (HadBC), which also occurs in *Mycobacterium smegmatis*, as shown by split-Trp assays. Both heterodimers exhibit the enzymatic properties expected for mycobacterial FAS-II dehydratases: a marked specificity for both long-chain (≥C₁₂) and ACP-linked substrates. Furthermore, they function as 3-hydroxyacyl dehydratases when coupled with MabA and InhA enzymes from the *M. tuberculosis* FAS-II system. HadAB and HadBC are the long-sought (3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratases. The correlation between the substrate specificities of these enzymes, the organization of the orthologous gene cluster in different Corynebacterineae, and the structure of their mycolic acids suggests distinct roles for both heterodimers during the elongation process. This work describes bacterial monofunctional (3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratases belonging to the hydratase 2 family. Their original structure and the fact that they are essential for *M. tuberculosis* survival make these enzymes very good candidates for the development of antimycobacterial drugs.

(3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase | hydratase 2 | mycolic acid biosynthesis | fatty acid elongation | hot dog fold

Tuberculosis kills nearly two million people every year (i.e., one person every 20 seconds). Emergence of drug-resistant *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* (*Mtb*) is one of the main concerns in the treatment of this disease; the prevalence of cases resistant to four main drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, streptomycin, and ethambutol) is very high in some regions of the world (up to 30% for previously treated cases). Thus, the development of new drugs effective against the resistant strains has become a priority (1).

Mycobacteria possess a very thick lipid-rich envelope, which typically contains very long-chain (C₆₀–C₉₀) α-alkylated β-hydroxylated fatty acids (FAs) called mycolic acids (MAs) (2). These original lipids are found universally in the suborder of Corynebacterineae (including *Mycobacterium*, *Corynebacterium*, *Rhodococcus*, *Nocardia*, etc.) where each genus holds molecules of specific chain lengths. MAs are crucial for the architecture and the permeability of the mycobacterial envelope. They also play a role in the virulence and the persistence of the tubercle bacillus within infected organisms (3, 4). Their biosynthetic pathway, which is essential for the survival of mycobacteria, is the target of a frontline antituberculous drug, isoniazid. Therefore, this metabolic pathway represents a valuable source for potential new pharmacological targets (2).

Isoniazid inhibits the elongation process leading to the formation of the main (meromycolic) chain of MAs. The four steps of the elongation cycles are monitored by an acyl carrier protein (ACP)-dependent FA synthase type II (FAS-II) system (5). FAS-II systems are found in plants, bacteria, parasites, and mitochondria, where they usually perform *de novo* biosynthesis (6). However, the system from *Corynebacterineae* is unique because it elongates long-chain FAs (C₁₂–C₁₈) into very-long-chain FAs (5). In mycobacteria, enzymes catalyzing three of the four elongation steps have been characterized [supporting information (SI) Fig. 7]: the β-ketoacyl-ACP synthetases KasA and KasB (7, 8), the β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase MabA (9), and the trans-2-enoyl-ACP reductase InhA (10). However, the enzyme(s) involved in the third step of the cycle, corresponding to (3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase(s) (HAD), was still unknown. The peptidic domains or proteins carrying this function within both multifunctional syntheses and FAS-II systems have generally been the most difficult to identify (11, 12).

In FAS-II systems, the HAD activity is classically catalyzed by FabZ (dehydratase) or FabA (dehydratase-isomerase) enzymes (6). Yet we have previously shown that no FabZ/FabA-type protein was present in the tubercle bacillus (13). This indicated that the HADs in mycobacteria must present a different or distantly related catalytic sequence motif. After investigation of *Mtb* genome using bioinformatic tools, a pool of 11 putative (R)-specific enoyl hydratases/3-hydroxyacyl dehydratases has been identified (13, 14). Structural determination or modeling of three of them (13–15) suggested that they all belong or are related to the hydratase 2 protein family, where the underlying 3D structure of FabA/Z-type enzymes is maintained in the so-called hot dog fold but the catalytic site is distinct (16). One of these family members, Rv0636, has been proposed as a candidate for the FAS-II HAD on the basis of essentiality prediction (14). The purpose of the present work was to use complementary experimental strategies to determine which, if

---

Author contributions: E.S. and A.S.C. contributed equally to this work; H.M.O., T.P., K.B., and A.Q. designed research; E.S., A.S.C., H.M.O., P.C., N.E., T.P., K.B., and A.Q. performed research; H.M.O. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; E.S., A.S.C., H.M.O., T.A.J., T.P., M.D., K.B., and A.Q. analyzed data; and T.A.J., T.P., M.D., and A.Q. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

Abbreviations: ACP, acyl carrier protein; FA, fatty acid; FAS, FA synthase; HAD, (3R)-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase; H-HadA, His-tagged HadA; H-HadB, His-tagged HadB; MA, mycolic acid; *Mtb*, *M. tuberculosis*.

To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 205 Route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex, France. E-mail: annaik.quemard@ipbs.fr.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/0704132104/DC1.

© 2007 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

Table 1. In silico analysis of putative (R)-specific hydratases/dehydratases from Mtb

| Protein     | Size, Hydratase 2 motif* | Proximity† | Ubiquity among mycobacteria‡ | Corynebacterium§ | Rhodococcus sp.§ | Nocardia farcinica§ | Known or predicted structure† |
|-------------|--------------------------|------------|-------------------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------|
| Rv0130      | 16.0                     | +          | fbpC                        | –                | NCgl0284, ||44%   | Ro03023, 60%         | Nfa34100, 58%               | SHD                          |
| Rv0216      | 35.8                     | –          | –                           | +                | –                | Ro02873, 68%         | –                            | DHD                          |
| Rv0241c     | 30.2                     | ++         | fabG4                       | +                | JK0821, **42%     | Ro05198, 51%         | Nfa54620, 55%               | DHD                          |
| Rv0504c     | 18.4                     | +          | cmaA2                       | +                | –                | –                    | –                            | SHD                          |
| Rv0635HadA  | 17.4                     | –          | mmaA1-mmaA4                 | +                | –                | Ro01984, 53%         | Nfa51180, 53%               | SHD                          |
| Rv0636HadB  | 14.9                     | ++         | mmaA1-mmaA4                 | +                | –                | Ro01983, 63%         | Nfa51180, 63%               | SHD                          |
| Rv0637HadC  | 18.9                     | –          | mmaA1-mmaA4                 | +                | –                | –                    | –                            | SHD                          |
| Rv2499c     | 20.2                     | –          | –                           | –                | JK1548, **75%     | Ro06098, 76%         | Nfa50400, 78%               | SHD                          |
| Rv3389c     | 30.3                     | ++         | cmaA1                       | –                | –                | –                    | –                            | DHD                          |
| Rv3538      | 30.2                     | ++         | –                           | –                | –                | Ro04531, 62%         | Nfa4620, 59%               | DHD                          |
| Rv3542c     | 33.9                     | +          | –                           | –                | –                | ||Ro04486, 63%            | Nfa4510, 65%               | DHD                          |

*++*, strictly conserved motif [YF]-x(1,2)-[LIVG]-[STGC]-G-D-x-N-P-[LIV]-H-x(5)-[AS]; +, motif including at least a conserved basic catalytic motif [D]-x(4)-H; –, absent.

†Presence of ORF(s) demonstrated as or putatively involved in FA/MA biosynthesis or transfer.

‡–, absent or present as a pseudogene; +, conserved in all considered sequenced mycobacterial genomes (see SI Materials and Methods).

§Name of orthologous putative protein with the percentage identity as given by BlastP alignment [on the (quasi-)totality of the sequence]. The following genomes were analyzed: Rhodococcus sp. RHA1, Nocardia farcinica IFM 10152, Corynebacterium diphtheriae NCTC 13129, Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032, Corynebacterium jeikeium K411, and Corynebacterium efficiens YS-314.

||SHD, single hotdog fold [known (underlined) SHD, see ref. 15]; DHD, double hotdog fold [known (underlined) OHO, see ref. 14].

**Detected only in C. glutamicum.

***Detected only in C. jeikeium.

hadA-hadB-hadC
hadB-hadC

A<sub>280</sub>(mAU)

Elution volume (ml)

Fig. 1. Protein purification. SDS/PAGE and gel filtration chromatograms. The cloned genes are mentioned. Lane a, total soluble proteins; lane b, Ni Sepharose fraction; lanes c and d, Superdex 75 fractions. Monomeric sizes of proteins: H-HadA, 18.3 kDa; HadB, 14.8 kDa; H-HadB, 15.9 kDa; HadC, 18.9 kDa.

HadA (H-HadA) copurified with untagged HadB, whereas the presence of HadC was undetectable (Fig. 1). Moreover, when H-HadB and HadC were coproduced, H-HadB coeluted with untagged HadC (Fig. 1). These data strongly suggested that there were interactions between HadA and HadB and between HadB and HadC.

During gel filtration chromatography, performed at 4°C, the pool of Ni-column fractions containing both H-HadB and HadC displayed a profile with a major peak estimated at 65 kDa and a minor peak at ≈33 kDa (Fig. 1). Analyses by SDS/PAGE (Fig. 1) and peptide mapping demonstrated that the first elution peak corresponded to equimolar amounts of H-HadB and HadC, and the second one corresponded to H-HadB alone. A similar chromatogram was obtained with the fractions containing H-HadA and HadB, the major peak (at 65 kDa) holding both proteins and the minor peak holding only H-HadA (Fig. 1).

Data suggested that the heterocomplexes Rv0635-Rv0636 (HadAB) and Rv0636-Rv0637 (HadBC) formed tetramers.

- Trp + Trp
Dilution 1x 10x 1x 10x
Ntrp-HadB/HadA-Ctrp
Ntrp-HadB/HadC-Ctrp
Ntrp-HadA/HadC-Ctrp
Ntrp-HadA/HadA-Ctrp
Ntrp-HadB/HadB-Ctrp
Ntrp-HadC/HadC-Ctrp
Ntrp-Esat6/Cfp10-Ctrp

Fig. 2. Split-Trp growth assay in *M. smegmatis*. Recombinant *M. smegmatis* ΔhisA-expressing pairs of proteins fused to Ntrp and Ctrp were diluted 1- or 10-fold in water and spotted in parallel onto minimal medium and medium plus Trp. The pair of Ntrp-Esat6 and Cfp10-Ctrp was used as a positive control (the early secreted T cell antigens Esat6 and Cfp10 from *Mtb* form a tight, 1:1 complex). Negative controls and extra positive controls were performed (see **SI Materials and Methods**). Images were taken after a 3-week incubation.

V<sub>I</sub> (μmol/min/mg)
C4 C8 C12 C16 C20

V<sub>I</sub> (μmol/min/mg)
C4 C8 C12 C16 C20

V<sub>I</sub> (μmol/min/mg)
C4 C8 C12 C16 C20
Enoyl-CoA

Fig. 3. Chain length specificity profiles of HadAB and HadBC heterodimers. Assays were performed at fixed concentrations of substrate and enzyme. (A and B) HadAB with 2.5 μM enoyl-CoA (A) or 25 μM enoyl-CoA (B). (C) HadBC with 25 μM enoyl-CoA. Data are means ± SD. The activities measured for both heterodimers in the presence of short chain substrates (*C*<sub>4</sub> and *C*<sub>8</sub>) were not significantly above the control values (without enzyme). The large SDs obtained sometimes for long-chain substrates are due to solubility problems.

quaternary structure of HadAB was further examined by dynamic light scattering, which confirmed that it was a tetramer at a low temperature (8°C) (**SI Table 2**). However, at a higher temperature (20°C) it behaved as a dimer.

Study of Protein–Protein Interactions *in Vivo* by Using Split-Trp Method. To investigate the occurrence of interactions between proteins encoded by the *hadA-C* cluster in mycobacteria *in vivo*, the split-Trp method was used in *Mycobacterium smegmatis*. Briefly, a tryptophan auxotrophic Δ*hisA* strain of *M. smegmatis* was cotransformed with a pair of plasmids, each one encoding a target protein in fusion with either the N-terminal fragment (Ntrp) or the C-terminal fragment (Ctrp) of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* protein Trp1p involved in Trp biosynthesis. If an *in vivo* interaction occurs between the target proteins encoded by the pair of plasmids, Trp1p function will be restored and the recombinant strain will grow without exogenous Trp supply. In our experiments, heterotypic interactions (at 25°C) were observed in *M. smegmatis* between HadA and HadB and between HadB and HadC, but not between HadA and HadC (Fig. 2).

Fig. 4. Comparison of the specific activities in the presence of octenoyl-CoA and octenoyl-ACP. Assays were performed at 2 μM substrate and fixed concentrations of enzymes HadAB (A) and HadBC (B). Data are means ± SD. The activities measured for both heterodimers in the presence of C8:1-CoA were not significantly above the control values (without enzyme).

Weaker homotypic interactions were detected for HadA and HadB, although not consistently for the latter.

These results were in full agreement with the *in vitro* data. They altogether led to the conclusion that HadB interacts *in vitro* and *in vivo* with either HadA or HadC to form heterodimers (at a temperature ≥20°C).

Enzymatic Activity of HadAB and HadBC Heterodimers. Enzymes belonging to the (*R*)-specific enoyl hydratase/hydroxyacyl dehydratase family preferentially catalyze the hydration reaction when they are isolated from their enzymatic complex (6). Thus, their activities are most often studied in the presence of enoyl derivatives *in vitro*. The activities of HadAB and HadBC heterodimers were first measured in the presence of short-chain CoA derivatives, 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA (*C*₄), crotonoyl-CoA (*C*4:1), and trans-2-octenoyl-CoA (*C*8:1). HadBC did not display any significant activity with either substrate in the experimental conditions used, even by varying the enzyme concentration over a large range (see **SI Materials and Methods**). A slight activity of HadAB could be detected only in the presence of the *C*₈ substrate: 0.506 ± 0.001 μmol/min per milligram of protein at the highest enzyme concentration tested (280 nM).

Kinetic experiments were then realized in the presence of longer-chain derivatives, *C*₁₂–*C*₂₀ trans-2-enoyl-CoAs. To minimize the solubility problems encountered with such amphipathic molecules, the experiments were first performed at a fixed low substrate concentration (2.5 μM). HadAB heterodimer proved to be active in the presence of these medium- to long-chain molecules (Fig. 3*A*). In contrast, no signal was detected with HadBC in these conditions; it exhibited activity only at a higher substrate concentration (25 μM). The activity of HadBC increased with increasing chain length (Fig. 3*C*), whereas HadAB behaved differently with a specificity centered on the hexadecenoyl-CoA (*C*₁₆) (Fig. 3 *A* and *B*).

The behaviors of the enzymes in the presence of ACP or CoA derivatives were then compared by using either trans-2-octenoyl-ACP or trans-2-octenoyl-CoA as substrates. Both heterodimers displayed a strict specificity toward the enoyl-ACP (Fig. 4). Interestingly, HadB homodimer was not able to metabolize C8:1-ACP in conditions identical to those used for the heterodimers (data not shown).

Finally, both heterodimers were tested for their ability to function in coupled reactions in the presence of MabA and InhA, the FAS-II reductases that catalyze the reactions upstream and downstream of the dehydration step in the cycle (**SI Fig. 7**). The MabA reaction was performed first in the presence of 3-ketododecanoyl-CoA (*C*₁₂), and, after completion of the reaction, one of the heterodimers plus InhA were added. Aliquots of the reaction mixtures were taken at different time points (see

Sacco et al.

---

Fig. 5. Coupled assay of HadAB in the presence of MabA and InhA. Shown are the results of MALDI-TOF MS analyses of the reaction media containing 3-ketododecanoyl-CoA, NADPH, NADH, and MabA plus InhA (*A*), or plus 280 nM HadAB (*B*), or plus both HadAB and InhA (*C*). In *A* and *B*, the peaks at *m/z* 966, 988, 1,010, 1,032, and 1,054 stand for \[M + H\]+, \[M + Na\]+, \[M - H + 2Na\]+, \[M - 2H + 3Na\]+, and \[M - 3H + 4Na\]+ ions of 3-hydroxydodecanoyl-CoA (product of MabA), respectively. In *B*, the minor peaks at *m/z* 948, 970, 992, 1,014, and 1,036 stand for \[M + H\]+ ion and the monosodium to tetrasodium adducts of the unsaturated species, dodecenoyl-CoA. In *C*, the peaks at *m/z* 950, 972, 994, 1,016, and 1,038 stand for \[M + H\]+ ion and the monosodium to tetrasodium adducts of the saturated species, dodecanoyl-CoA. Insets in *A* and *C* display the kinetics of the respective reactions followed at 340 nm (oxidation of InhA coenzyme, NADH). The three spectra correspond to the time points of 3 min of reaction.

**SI Materials and Methods**). The MS analyses demonstrate that dodecanoyl-CoA, the saturated product of InhA, was very quickly formed (within 3 min) in the presence of HadAB (Fig. 5*C*). This biosynthesis did not occur in the absence of the heterodimer (Fig. 5*A*). In the absence of InhA, a small proportion of the intermediate dodecanoyl-CoA, a product of the dehydration reaction catalyzed by HadAB, appeared (Fig. 5*B*). This type of profile is reminiscent of what has been described for other HADs (6): in the absence of enoyl reductase, the reaction equilibrium is in favor of the hydration reaction. By comparison, the complete reaction in the presence of HadBC heterodimer went very slowly: the product of InhA began to appear after 30 min only, and the reaction arrived to completion between the 3-h and 24-h time points (**SI Fig. 10**). This weak activity correlates with the relatively poor specific activity of HadBC in the

Rhodococcus, Nocardia

$\mathrm{C}_{12-16}-\mathrm{CoA}$

$\downarrow$

$\mathrm{C}_{22-42}-\mathrm{ACP}$

Meromycolic chain

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid$

$\mid
Furthermore, we demonstrated that at least one gene of the *hadA-C* cluster was essential for *Mtb* survival, as is the case for most genes encoding FAS-II enzymes (18–20). This is consistent with transposon mutagenesis-based predictions of essentiality for *hadA* and *hadB* genes (22). Thus, like KasA (4, 23), HadAB is most likely involved in the early FA elongation cycles catalyzed by FAS-II in mycobacteria, but also in *Nocardia* and *Rhodococcus*, leading to the formation of intermediate-size meromycolic chains (Fig. 6). The preference of HadBC for longer substrates, as compared with HadAB, and the absence of HadC ortholog in genera bearing medium-chain MAs, and where a KasB ortholog is also absent, strongly suggest that HadBC would be implicated, as described for KasB (4, 23), in the late steps of the meromycolic chain biosynthesis occurring in mycobacteria (Fig. 6). Additionally, the *hadC* gene does not seem to be essential for *Mtb* growth *in vitro* (22). Consistently, *kasB* was shown to be nonessential in *Mtb* and *Mycobacterium marinum* (4, 23). Furthermore, HadC seems ubiquitous among mycobacteria. From these data, we propose that HadBC is necessary for the formation of the complete meromycolic chains of MA in mycobacteria (Fig. 6).

From our sequence analysis, only HadB bears a hydratase 2 motif (13, 14) and therefore would be the catalytic subunit of HadAB and HadBC heterodimers. Furthermore, the structural predictions strongly suggest that each of the three subunits has a single hot dog fold. Thus, they would organize as asymmetrical heterodimers that are reminiscent of the asymmetrical double hot dog fold of the R-hydratase domain of MFE-2 enzymes and probably of Rv3389c R-hydratase/dehydratase protein (13, 17). In such double hot dog folds, one domain contains the catalytic apparatus whereas the other would be necessary to stabilize the long acyl chain of the substrates. A role analogous to the latter can be proposed for HadA and HadC subunits. Consistently, structural predictions suggest that HadAB and HadBC would hold open active site tunnels (required for the long-chain meromycolate precursors), although a detailed description must await crystallographic data. In contrast, a closed substrate-binding pocket has been predicted for HadB homodimer (15). Furthermore, the absence of activity of HadB heterodimer in the presence of octenoyl-ACP suggests that the heterotypic partnerships between HadB and HadA or HadC may also play a role in the interaction with the ACP moiety of the substrate. To our knowledge, no asymmetrical hot dog folded heterodimer has been reported so far. From their organization into a single fused gene, it can be deduced that the orthologs of HadA and HadB in *Nocardia* are covalently bound. They would therefore adopt a topology equivalent to the predicted structure of Rv3389c (13, 14), with an intervening bridge between the two domains.

The present work is the first description of bacterial monofunctional HADs belonging to the hydratase 2 enzyme family. Thanks to an elegant experimental strategy, the first eukaryotic HAD has been discovered recently, that of the yeast mitochondrial FAS-II system (12). Strikingly, it corresponds to a hydratase 2-related double hot dog enzyme. The high level of sequence divergence between the mycobacterial and eukaryotic enzymes, together with the importance of this essential step in a metabolic pathway specific to *Mycobacterium* and related genera, makes HadAB and HadBC exciting new targets for drug discovery.

## Materials and Methods

Sequence analyses were done as described (13). The *Mtb* Rv0635-Rv0637-KO strain was constructed based on a previously reported strategy (20). DCOs were isolated from the single crossover (SCO) and merodiploid strains as previously described (24). Protein production and purification of HadB, HadAB, and HadBC were performed as described (14), except that expressions were induced at 37°C, no Triton was added in lysis buffers (see SI Table 3), and a Ni Sepharose FF (GE Healthcare) column was used. The split-Trp experiments were adapted from the procedure described in yeast (25). Enzyme assays and MS analyses of the reaction media were performed as described (13). Short-chain CoA derivatives were used at 25 μM (and also 75 μM for hydroxybutyryl-CoA). The octenoyl-ACP was prepared by using the commercially available *E. coli* holo-ACP (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), *trans*-2-octenoic acid, and *E. coli* acyl-ACP synthase as reported (26). The mycobacterial FAS-II system can use the *E. coli* ACP instead of its natural ACP, AcpM (SI Fig. 7) (5). See additional details in SI Materials and Methods.

We thank F. Laval, H. Montrozier, F. Viala (Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale), and L. Henry (Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne) for their precious help during MS analyses, substrate synthesis, figure preparation, and split-Trp experiments, respectively; A. Hartridge (Institute of Cell and Molecular Science) for technical assistance and the Expression Proteomics Facility (Uppsala University) for MS analyses; J. Shanklin (Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY) and J. Walker (Medical Research Council, Cambridge, U.K.) for their kind gifts of plasmid pAasH and *E. coli* C41(DE3), respectively; and S. Cole (Institut Pasteur, Paris, France) for total *Mtb* DNA and cosmid MTCY20H10. This work was supported in part by a doctoral fellowship (to E.S.) from the Fondation Pour la Recherche Médicale, by a Marie Curie fellowship, and by grants from the European Community (QLK2-CT-2001-02018 and LSHP-CT-2005-018923), the Foundation for Strategic Research, and the Swedish Research Council.

1. World Health Organization (2004) *Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Resistance in the World, Report No. 3* (WHO, Geneva).
2. Barry CE, III, Lee RE, Mdluli K, Sampson AE, Schroeder BG, Slayden RA, Yuan Y (1998) *Prog Lipid Res* **37**:143–179.
3. Dubnau E, Chan J, Raynaud C, Mohan VP, Lanéelle MA, Yu K, Quémard A, Smith I, Daffé, M (2000) *Mol Microbiol* **36**:630–637.
4. Bhatt A, Fujiwara N, Bhatt K, Gurcha SS, Kremer L, Chen B, Chan J, Porcelli SA, Kobayashi K, Besra GS, Jacobs WR, Jr (2007) *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **104**:5157–5162.
5. Bloch K (1977) *Adv Enzymol Relat Areas Mol Biol* **45**:1–84.
6. Rock CO, Cronan JE (1996) *Biochim Biophys Acta* **1302**:1–16.
7. Schaeffer ML, Agnihotri G, Volker C, Kallender H, Brennan PJ, Lonsdale JT (2001) *J Biol Chem* **276**:47029–47037.
8. Kremer L, Dover LG, Carrere S, Nampoothiri KM, Lesjean S, Brown AK, Brennan PJ, Minnikin DE, Locht C, Besra GS (2002) *Biochem J* **364**:423–430.
9. Marrakchi H, Ducasse S, Labesse G, Montrozier H, Margeat E, Emorine L, Charpentier X, Daffé M, Quémard A (2002) *Microbiology* **148**:951–960.
10. Quémard A, Sacchettini JC, Dessen A, Vilchèze C, Bittman R, Jacobs WR, Jr, Blanchard JS (1995) *Biochemistry* **34**:8235–8241.
11. Joshi AK, Smith S (1993) *J Biol Chem* **268**:22508–22513.
12. Kastaniotis AJ, Autio KJ, Sormunen RT, Hiltunen JK (2004) *Mol Microbiol* **53**:1407–1421.
13. Sacco E, Legendre V, Laval F, Zerbib D, Montrozier H, Eynard N, Guilhot C, Daffé M, Quémard A (2007) *Biochim Biophys Acta* **1774**:303–311.
14. Castell A, Johansson P, Unge T, Jones TA, Bäckbro K (2005) *Protein Sci* **14**:1850–1862.
15. Johansson P, Castell A, Jones TA, Bäckbro K (2006) *Protein Sci* **15**:2300–2309.
16. Hisano T, Tsuge T, Fukui T, Iwata T, Miki K, Doi Y (2003) *J Biol Chem* **278**:617–624.
17. Koski MK, Haapalainen AM, Hiltunen JK, Glumoff T (2004) *J Biol Chem* **279**:24666–24672.
18. Vilchèze C, Morbidoni HR, Weisbrod TR, Iwamoto H, Kuo M, Sacchettini JC, Jacobs WR, Jr (2000) *J Bacteriol* **182**:4059–4067.
19. Bhatt A, Kremer L, Dai AZ, Sacchettini JC, Jacobs WR, Jr (2005) *J Bacteriol* **187**:7596–7606.
20. Parish T, Roberts G, Laval F, Schaeffer M, Daffé M, Duncan K (2007) *J Bacteriol* **189**:3721–3728.
21. Qin YM, Haapalainen AM, Kilpeläinen SH, Marttila MS, Koski MK, Glumoff T, Novikov DK, Hiltunen JK (2000) *J Biol Chem* **275**:4965–4972.
22. Sassetti CM, Boyd DH, Rubin EJ (2003) *Mol Microbiol* **48**:77–84.
23. Gao LY, Laval F, Lawson EH, Groger RK, Woodruff A, Morisaki JH, Cox JS, Daffé M, Brown EJ (2003) *Mol Microbiol* **49**:1547–1563.
24. Parish T, Stoker NG (2000) *Microbiology* **146**:1969–1975.
25. Tafelmeyer P, Johnsson N, Johnsson K (2004) *Chem Biol* **11**:681–689.
26. Rock CO, Garwin JL (1979) *J Biol Chem* **254**:7123–7128.
