
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1784 (2008) 66–75

Review

Sphingosine kinase signalling in immune cells: Potential as novel therapeutic targets

Alirio J. Melendez*

Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Received 21 June 2007; received in revised form 24 July 2007; accepted 25 July 2007 Available online 14 August 2007

---

### Abstract

During the last few years, it has become clear that sphingolipids are sources of important signalling molecules. Particularly, the sphingolipid metabolites, ceramide and S1P, have emerged as a new class of potent bioactive molecules, implicated in a variety of cellular processes such as cell differentiation, apoptosis, and proliferation. Sphingomyelin (SM) is the major membrane sphingolipid and is the precursor for the bioactive products. Ceramide is formed from SM by the action of sphingomyelinases (SMase), however, ceramide can be very rapidly hydrolysed, by ceramidases to yield sphingosine, and sphingosine can be phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase (SphK) to yield S1P. In immune cells, the sphingolipid metabolism is tightly related to the main stages of immune cell development, differentiation, activation, and proliferation, transduced into physiological responses such as survival, calcium mobilization, cytoskeletal reorganization and chemotaxis. Several biological effectors have been shown to promote the synthesis of S1P, including growth factors, cytokines, and antigen and G-protein-coupled receptor agonists. Interest in S1P focused recently on two distinct cellular actions of this lipid, namely its function as an intracellular second messenger, capable of triggering calcium release from internal stores, and as an extracellular ligand activating specific G protein-coupled receptors. Inhibition of SphK stimulation strongly reduced or even prevented cellular events triggered by several proinflammatory agonists, such as receptor-stimulated DNA synthesis, Ca²⁺ mobilization, degranulation, chemotaxis and cytokine production. Another very important observation is the direct role played by S1P in chemotaxis, and cellular escape from apoptosis. As an extracellular mediator, several studies have now shown that S1P binds a number of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) encoded by endothelial differentiation genes (EDG), collectively known as the S1P-receptors. Binding of S1P to these receptors trigger a wide range of cellular responses including proliferation, enhanced extracellular matrix assembly, stimulation of adherent junctions, formation of actin stress fibres, and inhibition of apoptosis induced by either ceramide or growth factor withdrawal. Moreover, blocking S1P1-receptor inhibits lymphocyte egress from lymphatic organs. This review summarises the evidence linking SphK signalling pathway to immune-cell activation and based on these data discuss the potential for targeting SphKs to suppress inflammation and other pathological conditions.

© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Sphingosine kinase; Sphingosine-1-phosphate; Immune cell; Inflammation; Monocytes/macrophage; Neutrophil; Mast cell; Lymphocytes; Signalling

---

### 1. Introduction

Sphingolipids have emerged as the source of important signalling molecules [1], potentially involved in pathophysiological processes [2,3]. Sphingolipid metabolites, such as ceramide and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), belong to a new class of potent bioactive molecules, which have been shown to be involved in a variety of cellular processes, including cell differen-

* Medicine-Immunology, Infection and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, Scotland, UK. Tel.: +44 141 330 8415; fax: +44 141 330 4197.
E-mail address: A.Melendez-Romero@clinmed.gla.ac.uk.

1570-9639/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbapap.2007.07.013

A.J. Melendez / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1784 (2008) 66–75

Sphingomyelin  
$\underset{\text{Sphingomyelin Synthase}}{\uparrow}$  
$\underset{\text{Sphingomyelinase (SMase)}}{\downarrow}$  

Ceramide  
$\underset{\text{Ceramide Synthase}}{\uparrow}$  
$\underset{\text{Ceramidase}}{\downarrow}$  

Sphingosine  
$\underset{\text{S1P phosphatase}}{\uparrow}$  
$\underset{\text{LPP}}{\downarrow}$  
$\underset{\text{Sphingosine kinase (SphK)}}{\downarrow}$  

Sphingosine-1-phosphate  
$\underset{\text{S1P lyase}}{\searrow}$  
Hexadecanal  

Phosphoethanolamine  

Ceramide kinase  
$\underset{\text{LPP}}{\longleftrightarrow}$  
Ceramide-1-phosphate  

Fig. 1. Sphingolipid metabolic pathway. Sphingomyelin is hydrolyzed by sphingomyelinase to ceramide. Ceramide is metabolized by ceramidases to generate sphingosine, or can be phosphorylated by ceramide kinase to yield ceramide-phosphate, or it can be utilized by sphingomyelin synthase to generate sphingomyelin. Ceramide-phosphate can be dephosphorylated (by the general lipid phosphate phosphatase — LPP) to reverse back to ceramide. Sphingosine can be phosphorylated by Sphingosine kinase into sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), or it can be used by ceramide synthase to form ceramide. Sphingosine-1-phosphate can be dephosphorylated to yield sphingosine (by S1P phosphatases or the general lipid phosphate phosphatase — LPP), or it can be cleaved by S1P lyase to a hexadecanal and phosphoethanolamine.

chemotaxis and cytokine/chemokine generation [6–10]. Most of its extracellular functions are mediated by specific G-protein-coupled receptors: S1P₁, S1P₂, S1P₃, S1P₄, and S1P₅ [10,11].

So far, two mammalian SphKs have been cloned, sequenced and characterized. These kinases are encoded by two genes, SPHK1 [12–14], and SPHK2 [15]. Both SphK1 and SphK2 are capable of phosphorylating erythro-sphingosine, dihydrosphingosine and phytosphingosine (Fig. 3); however, no other lipids appear to be significantly phosphorylated by these enzymes [11–15]. Although SphKs can be inhibited by a number of compounds, the best-known inhibitors are analogues of sphingosine, such as $N,N$-dimethylsphingosine (DMS) and DL-threo-dihydrosphingosine (DHS) [16,17] (Fig. 3). However, these inhibitors are not specific for SphKs as they inhibit all the known isoforms and may even inhibit other enzymes such as protein kinase C, phospholipase A₂, and phospholipase D [1].

SphKs and S1P have been shown to play important roles in different cellular processes, such as in the regulation of intracellular calcium signals [18–21], in angiogenesis [22], in cell adhesion molecule expression [23], in apoptosis [24–27], and in chemotaxis [28,29]. Particularly, in immune cells, SphKs and S1P are tightly related to the main stages of immune cell activation and differentiation [reviewed in [3,4]], and are involved in physiological responses such as survival, calcium mobilization, cytoskeletal reorganization and chemotaxis [3–5,28,29]. Moreover, SphK1 is one of the earliest genes to be activated during IgE-mediated mast cell priming which is a prerequisite for allergic diseases [30].

Understanding of sphingolipid signal transduction pathways has helped to identify potential new therapeutic targets for the treatment of inflammatory conditions. An extensive amount of data strongly suggest that SphK activity and its product S1P are

A.J. Melendez / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1784 (2008) 66–75

Fig. 2. Receptor triggered activation of SphK, generation of S1P and regulation of Ca²⁺ signalling by intracellular S1P. S1P is formed from sphingosine (SP) by SphK. After stimulation of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR), receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK), antigen receptors (Antigen R, Fcγ/εR), and cytokine receptors (Cytokine R, TNFαR), SphK translocates from the cytosol to the membrane periphery where it phosphorylates SP to generate S1P. S1P mobilizes Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores by a so far unknown mechanism. S1P can also be secreted from the cells and act on its specific cell-surface receptors (five S1P receptors have been so far characterised these are commonly known as S1P₁, S1P₂, S1P₃, S1P₄, and S1P₅).

likely to enhance inflammation by triggering potent proinflammatory signals in immune effector cells including cytokine and prostaglandin production, as well as to mediate the mitotic and chemotactic responses of immune cells and the activation of vascular endothelial cells [reviewed in [3,4]].

In the last few years on SphK activity, the formation and functions of S1P have been extensively reported for different cell types. In this review, I will focus on the role of SphKs in mediating proinflammatory responses, discussing SphK’s potential as “novel” targets for therapeutic intervention.

### 2. Sphingosine kinases and S1P in signalling pathways

Several biological effectors have been shown to promote the activation of SphKs and the synthesis of S1P, including growth factors, cytokines, antigen and G-protein-coupled receptor agonists [3–5] (Fig. 2). S1P has been characterised as having two distinct signalling roles, as an intracellular second messenger and as an extracellular ligand for a specific G-protein-coupled receptor family [31–34]. A substantial number of studies have enforced the notion of S1P as an important intracellular second messenger [18–21,28,29,35–38]. Firstly, activation of various plasma membrane receptors, such as the PDGFR [29,37] FcεRI and Fc≠RI antigen receptors [19,35,36], as well as the fMLP [18] and C5a receptors [28,29], were found to rapidly increase intracellular S1P production through the activation of sphingosine kinase. Secondly, inhibition of sphingosine kinase strongly reduced or even blocked cellular events triggered by these receptors, such as receptor-stimulated DNA synthesis, Ca²⁺ mobilization and vesicular trafficking.

As an extracellular mediator, S1P is released by activated platelets during platelet activation [39] and can be detected in significant amounts in serum [39,40]. An increasing number of reports show that S1P binds a family of G-protein-coupled

Fig. 3. Structures of key sphingolipids: phytosphingosine, dihydrosphingosine, D-erythro-sphingosine (Sphingosine), and N,N-dimethyl-sphingosine.

receptors encoded by endothelial differentiation genes (EDG), collectively known as the S1P-receptors [32,33,41,42]. Binding of S1P to these receptors triggers a wide range of cellular responses including proliferation, enhanced extracellular matrix assembly, stimulation of adherent junctions, formation of actin stress fibres, and inhibition of apoptosis induced by either ceramide or growth factor withdrawal [42–46].

Sphingosine kinases are members of lipid kinases which include acyl-glycerol kinases and phosphoinositol-kinases [47]. SphKs are evolutionarily well conserved, holding common regions in protozoan, yeast, plant and mammals [47,48]. The first members of the SphK family were cloned, almost simultaneously from several different organisms including from mouse [12,49], the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* [50,51], the ciliated protozoan *Tetrahymena pyriformis* [52], the plant *Arabidopsis thaliana* [53], as well as two human homologues [13–15]. The murine and human kinases are encoded by two genes, SPHK1 [12–14] and SphK2 [15]. At the protein levels, SphK1 is smaller than SphK2. Other SphK isoforms have been suggested to exist and to possess different properties and cellular distribution [54].

The mammalian SphKs possess a conserved kinase catalytic domain that contains an ATP binding site, as well as five other conserved domains, C1 through C5 [12–15]. These domains may play a role in substrate recognition and perhaps subcellular localisation. Two recent elegant reviews address the domain structure, regulation, tissue distribution, substrate specificity, and general functions of sphingosine kinases [55,56].

### 2.1. Intracellular signalling role of SphKs and S1P in triggering intracellular calcium

Perhaps, the best-studied intracellular function involving SphK activity, in immune cell activation, is its potential role in triggering intracellular calcium signals [18–21,28,29]. Cytosolic Ca²⁺ is a ubiquitous intracellular messenger, pivotal in many signal transduction pathways [57–59]. It is used to control a wide diversity of cellular activities ranging from proliferation and differentiation to cell death [57]. Resting cells have a Ca²⁺ concentration of around 100 nM; this amount of intracellular Ca²⁺ is insufficient to trigger substantial cellular activities. Upon stimulation, the level of intracellular Ca²⁺ can rise very quickly reaching up to 1 μM, and Ca²⁺ triggered cellular activities occur [57,58]. It is well established that the increase in cytosolic Ca²⁺ can be temporally and spatially complex. This is due to the fact that different cells respond differently to a particular stimulus while each stimulus triggers a particular cell type differently. Hence, intracellular Ca²⁺ signals could be of a single burst, short-lived, long-lasting or oscillatory. All these may occur in a localized microenvironment and be triggered as a wide-spread event [58,59].

Cells generate their Ca²⁺ signals by using both internal and external sources of Ca²⁺. Internally, Ca²⁺ is stored in specialized compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), mitochondria or in small compartments known as calciosomes [78]. It is also known that endosomes and phagosomes could store calcium [60]. Ca²⁺ signals are controlled by the generation of intracellular second messengers which bind to specific receptors/channels. Different stimuli, coupling to different receptors, can trigger calcium release from internal stores via the generation of a number of second messengers (Fig. 4). There are several intracellular second messengers known to increase cytosolic levels of Ca²⁺; these include: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃); cyclic adenosine 5′-diphosphoribose (cADPR); nitric oxide (NO); hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂); superoxide (O₂⁻); nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP); diacylglycerol (DAG); arachidonic acid (AA); phosphatidic acid (PA); sphingosine; sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P); and Ca²⁺ itself [58]. Of these intracellular second messengers, some act on intracellular Ca²⁺ channels found on internal compartments for Ca²⁺ release, some act on Ca²⁺ entry channels found on the plasma membrane, while others may act on both release and entry of Ca²⁺ [57,58]. Due to the specificity of these second messengers, it is likely that they are several different types of intracellular Ca²⁺ release channels. However, only IP₃ receptors and ryanodine receptors (RYRs) have been well characterized to date. Upon stimulation of cell surface receptors, second messengers generated will determine which Ca²⁺ channels are activated. For instance, generated IP₃ binds to IP₃Rs on the ER resulting in the release of Ca²⁺ from the ER [57]. The activity of the RYRs is modulated by the generation of cADPR [57]; NAADP acts on a separate-uncharacterized channel [59]. Exactly how sphingosine-1-phosphate causes Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores is still unclear [58] (Fig. 4).

## 3. Sphingosine kinases and S1P signalling in the immune response, role of SphKs in specialised immune and other inflammatory cells

In many chronic inflammatory diseases, inflammation is characterized by the influx into the target tissue of immune cells such as T- and B-cells, granulocytes, and mononuclear phagocytes. This influx of inflammatory cells in the target tissue is associated with the proliferation of invading and resident cells, and frequently with destruction and remodelling of the extracellular matrix. Tissue destruction is ruled by proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and is controlled by many factors including cytokines, contact with extracellular matrix components and direct cell–cell contact [61–63]. T cells, in particular CD4+ T cells, have been implicated in mediating many aspects of inflammation such as RA and MS.

The relevance of T cells/monocyte interaction is illustrated by different chronic inflammatory diseases, affecting osteoarticular structures, lung parenchyma and the central nervous system, where T cells are likely to play a pivotal role [61–65]. T cells and macrophages lie in juxtaposition within and adjacent to cellular aggregates in the RA synovial membrane, providing for reciprocal cellular cross-talk. It has recently become clear that T cells in turn might be stimulatory to adjacent macrophages. Several results now indicate that cytokine-mediated ‘bystander’ activation can confer monocyte activatory capacity on memory T cells, representing a physiological ‘surrogate’ for

A.J. Melendez / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1784 (2008) 66–75

Fig. 4. Different receptors trigger calcium-release from intracellular stores in different ways. Calcium is released from cytosolic stores by signal transduction pathways triggered by a variety of ligands binding to its cell-surface receptors, including antigen receptors (Antigen-R), receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), integrin receptors (integrin-R), G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), and other type of receptors (Other-R). These receptors trigger the generation of second messengers that in turn trigger calcium release from internal stores, including: cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR) and nicotinic acid dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP), both generated from nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and its phosphorylated derivative NADP by ADP ribosyl cyclase; sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) generated from sphingosine by sphingosine kinase; and the most classical one, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate ($IP_3$) generated by the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P₂) by a family of phospholipase C enzymes (PLCγ, PLCβ). The intracellular calcium channels: the $IP_3$ receptor ($IP_3$R), ryanodine and NAADP receptors (RYR, NAADPR), and the putative sphingolipid $Ca^{2+}$ release-mediating protein of the ER (SCaMPER).

mitogen [61–65]. The cytokine-mediated activation (by IL-2, IL-15 and TNF-α) of resting human CD45RO+, CD4+ T cells can promote cytokine production and help form B cells in the absence of T cell receptor (TCR) ligation.

### 3.1. Sphingosine kinases and S1P in immune cell signalling

It has been observed that enhanced SphK activity promotes cell survival in Jurkat T cell in response to ceramide or Fas induced apoptosis [66]. Also, individual immunological responses of T helper cells are modulated by sphingosine and the balance between counter-regulatory lipids in the serum [4]. Resent studies have shown that S1P receptors are critical for lymphocyte egress from the lymph organs [67–69], and that an antagonist of S1P the leads to sequestration of lymphocytes in secondary lymphatic tissues and this prevents their access to inflammatory lesions and graft sites [68,69]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that SphK2 associates with the cytoplasmic region of IL-12-receptor beta chain and it is likely to positively modulate the effect of IL-12 on T cell response which leads to the generation of IFNγ [70]. Moreover, enhanced SphK activity promotes cell survival in Jurkat T cell after ceramide- or Fas-induced apoptosis [71].

Neutrophils contribute to the elimination of pathogenic micro-organisms; however, excessive respiratory burst by activated neutrophils could be harmful and results in cell and tissue destruction. Neutrophil infiltration is a prominent feature of many autoimmune lesions such as psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and RA, although their qualitative and quantitative contribution therein remains unclear. In RA, neutrophils constitute up to 90% of synovial fluid cells and are present also at the cartilage-pannus junction. Activated neutrophils secrete many of those cytokines, especially IL-8, IL-1β, TNFα and extracellular matrix-degradative enzymes implicated in RA pathogenesis [72,73]. Circulating neutrophils in RA patients exhibit several features indicative of partial activation [72,73]. Finally, cellular contact with activated T cells has been shown to be stimulated and prime neutrophil oxidative respiratory bursts [74] and this activity on neutrophils correlated that on human monocytic THP-1 cells, suggesting that similar factors at the surface of activated T cells were involved in the activation of neutrophils and monocytes.

Activated neutrophils generate a broad and a vigorous set of alterations in gene expression shaping the inflammatory response [75]. SPHK regulates neutrophil priming to provide an essential defence against infections [76]. However, early

acute neutrophil-mediated inflammatory response can also cause tissue damage if it is over activated or prevented from apoptosis control. The recruitment of circulating neutrophils to damaged tissue plays a critical role in a number of physiological and pathophysiological events, such as protection from invading pathogens and the development of the inflammatory process. During an inflammatory response, circulating neutrophils attach to the activated endothelial cells in blood vessels through various adhesion molecules, and then migrate through the endothelial cell layer into the injured sites, where they release and produce toxic substances, including active oxygen radicals, and a number of active enzymes that destroy infected as well as surrounding normal tissue. It has been shown that SPHK plays key roles in neutrophil activation including in neutrophil chemotaxis [29]. Moreover, it has also been reported that TNFα and fMLP-stimulated superoxide production can be regulated by SphK activity [18, 29, 77], and that after treating neutrophils with the SphK inhibitor DL-three-dihydrosphingosine, TNFα-induced superoxide production was inhibited [77].

Monocytes and macrophages have also been implicated in several pathologies, such as atherosclerosis [78], in rheumatoid arthritis or chronic inflammation and in cancer [79]. SphK activity has been shown to be activated in macrophages through a wide range of stimuli, and the product, S1P, has been reported to advance wound-healing processes in vitro and in vivo [80] and the macrophages are essential for this event [79]. SphK activity has also been shown to modulate the expression of vascular cell adhesion molecules by endothelial cell, essential for the recruitment of leukocytes during inflammation and the inflammatory response [3, 4]. Receptors for S1P are expressed on monocytes and macrophages. Our own laboratory has shown that activation of monocytes via the high-affinity IgG receptor (FcγRI) triggers SphK1 activity which is essential for the release of calcium from internal stores and regulates the monocyte NADPH oxidase activity [21, 36], as calcium is a key event in immune-receptor signalling the implications are that SphK1 may regulate a variety of responses triggered by these receptors on monocytes and macrophages. More recently we have shown that the anaphylatoxin C5a utilizes SphK1 in order to trigger several physiologically relevant events, on human macrophages, such as calcium release from internal stores, chemotaxis, degranulation, cytokine production [28].

The action of mast cell activation is not just limited to allergic responses but it also plays an important role in both innate and acquired immunity to bacterial and parasite infections [81]. It has been proposed that the differential ratio SP to S1P, in mast cells, regulates the activity of mast cells [82]. Thus, mast cells activation triggered by the high-affinity IgE-receptor (FcεRI) leads to the activation of SphK1 which changes the balance between SP towards S1P [19, 20, 82], and that these two lipids have opposite effects. While SP inhibits the activation of member of the MAP kinase family, SAPK and AP1, S1P activates these molecules, thereby inducing the proinflammatory action of mast cells, including the expression of TNF-α and IL-5 gene products [4]. Moreover, we and others have shown that FcεRI activates SphK-dependent Ca²⁺ mobilization in mast cells [19, 20], as well as SphK1 dependent mast cell degranulation

[19]. Recently Olivera et al. reported that SphK2 regulates mast cell activation whereas SphK1 enhances susceptibility to antigen challenge in vivo [83].

### 3.2. Sphingosine Kinases and S1P in new blood vessel formation and cell adhesion molecule expression

Angiogenesis or neovascularization refers to the formation of new blood vessels. Cells that are activated during tissue injury, such as platelets, have been shown to release S1P into the serum, where it can act as a mitogen promoting cell growth and potential neovascularization. For instance, it has been shown that in human platelets, basal SphK activity is high, and that S1P is stored in high concentrations inside human platelets, following stimulation S1P is released from platelets in the micromolar range [84]. The release of S1P may serve as an autocrine and/or paracrine factor with potential roles in endothelial-cell injury, inflammation, and angiogenesis [85]. S1P is also a high-affinity agonist for S1P-1, a gene induced during angiogenesis [94]. S1P exerts profound endothelial cell responses associated with angiogenesis, including liberation of endothelial cells from established monolayers, chemotactic migration, proliferation, adherens junction assembly and morphogenesis into capillary-like structures [86–88]. Furthermore, the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) stimulates SphK activity which has been proposed to be critical for the processes of angiogenesis [89]. In another study, TNF-α stimulation of endothelial cells has been shown to rapidly stimulate SphK activity and S1P generation [90], leading to the expression of cell adhesion molecules, VCAM-1 and E-selectin. The mechanism by which TNF-α couples the activation of SphK to cell adhesion molecule expression was demonstrated through the use of an analogue of sphingosine, N,N-dimethylsphingosine. This inhibitor strongly inhibited the TNFα induced activation of ERK and NFκB, as well as expression of cell adhesion molecules [90]. Recently we showed that, in human monocytes, TNFα-triggered cytosolic calcium, NFκB activity and cytokine production was dependent of SphK1 activity [91].

### 4. The expanding view of S1P and its functions in inflammation

The regulation of sphingolipids, in particular the role of S1P and its receptors are becoming a topic of intense research in immunology field. Apart from its cytosolic functions, S1P has extracellular signalling effects acting as a ligand for specific receptors. Five G protein-coupled receptors on cell surfaces (designated S1P1 to S1P5) have been identified to be highly specific for S1P [32–34, 41–43]. Both S1P and its dihydro analogue bind to them with a high affinity. In mammals, S1P1, S1P2, and S1P3 are found in all tissues, whereas S1P4 is restricted to lymphoid tissues and lung, and S1P5 to brain and skin.

In plasma, S1P concentration range between 0.2 and 1 μM, and can be found in association with the high-density lipoproteins (HDL) [80]. S1P is stored in relatively high concentrations
in human platelets, and it is released into the blood stream upon platelet activation [80]. Thus, S1P may have a critical role in platelet aggregation and thrombosis and could aggravate cardiovascular disease.

Interestingly, recent studies suggest that the prototype drug FTY720, a sphingosine analogue, is highly effective in prolonging allograft survival and in reducing the severity of autoimmune diseases in several animal models [92–94]. In addition, this drug is currently being tested in human trials for its therapeutic uses in renal transplantation and multiple sclerosis [95,96]. It is only now that the mode of action of this drug is becoming clear; FTY720 after being phosphorylated becomes activated, and disrupt lymphocyte trafficking by decreasing lymphocyte egress from lymphoid organs [92–96]. The precise mechanism by which this drug is phosphorylated is still under investigation, however, the only candidates right now are the sphingosine kinases, SphK1 and SphK2 [97,98]. Two recent elegant reports have shed light into which SphK isoform is responsible for the activation of FTY720 in vivo. One of these reports demonstrates that in mice knockout of SphK1 the phosphorylation and the effects of the drug are not impaired [99], suggesting that SphK1 is not the primary enzyme responsible for the activation of the drug in vivo. The other report, in which SphK2 has been knockout, shows that the effects of the FTY720 are impaired [100], demonstrating that SphK2, at least in this models, is the kinase responsible for the phosphorylation and thus activation of this drug.

Very recently Olivera et al. [83] showed a role for both SphK1 and SphK2 in mast cell activation, but that SphK1 was more important in the allergic response in vivo. Interestingly, another recent report showed that the SphK1 knockout mice exhibit normal inflammation during thioglycollate-induced peritonitis and a collagen-induced arthritis model of rheumatoid arthritis [101] suggesting that SphK1 is not required in the inflammatory response, this is in contrast to all the available cell-biology data [[21,28,29]] and reviewed in [3]. An explanation for these discrepancies is the possibility that mice, lacking the SphK1 gene during their embryonic development, adapt to compensate for the lack of this enzyme and use another pathway or another SphK, instead of SphK1, as has been shown to be the case for other intracellular signalling molecules [102]. An interesting observation of the KO studies is that the total serum amount of S1P in both knockout mice is around 50% of that in wild type, raising the question, which of these two enzymes is more important for the physiological roles attached to cellular activation?

Another interesting point is that several reports suggest that SphK1 and S1P play a role not only in inflammation but also in the interface with tumour immunology. For instance, TNFα has been shown to utilize SphK1 to induce cell adhesion molecule expression on endothelial cells, as well as to induce COX-2 activity and PGE₂ synthesis. All these mediators are involved in the inflammatory process, and TNF-α is known to play a major role in inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis [103]. Moreover, it has been shown that COX-2 inhibitors can reduce tumour size and metastasis spread [103], and thus, inhibition of

SphK1 could potentially be used as a novel therapeutic to treat not only inflammatory disorders, but also cancer.

## 5. Concluding remarks

Taken together, all the available data strongly suggest that Sphingosine kinases are indeed novel targets for the modulation of inflammatory conditions, we and others have shown that targeting sphingosine kinase activity in several immune cells inhibit their proinflammatory responses [reviewed in [3,4]]. Moreover, by generating S1P, SphKs further amplify the inflammatory response as S1P is, perhaps, a unique signalling molecule in that it can act both as intracellular second messenger, and as an extracellular ligand for several G-protein-coupled receptors [3,4].

Immune cell activities have shown to be modulated by the dynamic balance between ceramide, sphingosine and S1P [82]. Cell proliferation, differentiation, motility and survival have been attributed to S1P regulatory actions. Generation of S1P by SphKs promotes inflammatory diseases, but the roles of the individual SphK isoforms are still unclear. The recent report by Olivera et al. [83] suggests that while SphK2 regulates mast cell activation, SphK1 enhances susceptibility to antigen challenge in vivo [83]. In addition, S1P–S1P1 axis has the same ability as IL-23 to augment the number and IL-17 secretory activity of Th17 cells by a mechanism that is similarly susceptible to immune-specific suppression by IFNγ- and IL-4 and by IL-27 [104].

Furthermore, there is a potential role of SphK1 in autoimmune diseases. An approximate 50 cM region, on 17 q25, which harbours the stSG2854 (an EST found in the SPHK1 coding region) [13], has been implicated in several autoimmune and inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis [105], and psoriasis [106,107]. As the SphK1 gene has been mapped to this chromosomal region, SphK1 is a possible candidate for disease susceptibility.

The considerable progress achieved in a few years of research on the roles of SphKs in immune-cell responses reflects the importance of sphingolipid pathways in immune responses. Still many questions remain to be answered, the lack of specific inhibitors have made it difficult to properly validate the specific role(s) played by each isoform in physiology and/or pathophysiology. However, the search for SphK inhibitors continues, and with the aid of novel techniques such as RNAi, antisense oligonucleotides and conditional gene knock-out, there will undoubtedly be further validation of a therapeutic potential for SphK blockade to treat inflammatory and other diseases.

In conclusion the data reviewed here strongly suggest SphKs as afsppropriate therapeutic targets for interfering with excessive inflammatory responses usually seen in inflammatory, autoimmune and allergic diseases.

## References

[1] A.H. Merrill Jr., E.M. Schmelz, D.L. Dillehay, S. Spiegel, J.A. Shayman, J.J. Schroeder, R.T. Riley, K.A. Voss, E. Wang, Sphingolipids — the enigmatic lipid class: biochemistry, physiology, and pathophysiology, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 142 (1997) 208–225.
[2] Y.A. Hannun, The sphingomyelin cycle and the second messenger functions of Ceramide, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 3125–3128.

[3] T.H. Kee, P. Vit, A.J. Melendez, Sphingosine kinase signalling in immune cells, Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 32 (2005) 153–161.

[4] T. Baumruker, E.E. Prieschl, Sphingolipids and the regulation of the immune response, Semin. Immunol. 14 (2002) 57–63.

[5] S. Spiegel, Sphingosine 1-phosphate: a prototype of a new class of second messengers, J. Leukoc. Biol. 65 (1999) 341–344.

[6] S. Spiegel, S. Milstien, Sphingosine 1-phosphate, a key cell signaling molecule, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 25851–25854.

[7] J.R. Van Brocklyn, M.J. Lee, R. Menzelev, A. Olivera, L. Edsall, O. Cuvillier, D.M. Thomas, P.J. Coopman, S. Thangada, C.H. Liu, T. Hla, S. Spiegel, Dual actions of sphingosine-1-phosphate: extracellular through the Gi-coupled receptor Edg-1 and intracellular to regulate proliferation and survival, J. Cell Biol. 142 (1998) 229–240.

[8] S. Pyne, N.J. Pyne, Sphingosine 1-phosphate signalling in mammalian cells, Biochem. J. 349 (2000) 385–402.

[9] V.L. Ott, J.C. Cambier, Introduction: multifaceted roles of lipids and their catabolites in immune cell signalling, Semin. Immunol. 14 (2002) 1–6.

[10] H. Rosen, E.J. Goetzl, Sphingosine 1-phosphate and its receptors: an autocrine and paracrine network, Nat. Rev., Immunol. 5 (2005) 560.

[11] H. Ozaki, T. Hla, M.J. Lee, Sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling in endothelial activation, J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 10 (2003) 125–131.

[12] T. Kohama, A. Olivera, L. Edsall, M.M. Nagiec, R. Dickson, S. Spiegel, Molecular cloning and functional characterization of murine sphingosine kinase, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 23722–23728.

[13] A.J. Melendez, E. Carlos-Dias, M. Gosink, J.M. Allen, L. Takacs, Human sphingosine kinase: molecular cloning, functional characterization and tissue distribution, Gene 251 (2000) 19–26.

[14] S.M. Pitson, R.J. D’Andrea, L. Vandeleur, P.A. Moretti, P. Xia, J.R. Gamble, M.A. Vadas, B.W. Wattenberg, Human sphingosine kinase: purification, molecular cloning and characterization of the native and recombinant enzymes, Biochem. J. 350 (2000) 429–441.

[15] H. Liu, M. Sugiura, V.E. Nava, L.C. Edsall, K. Kono, S. Poulton, S. Milstien, T. Kohama, S. Spiegel, Molecular cloning and functional characterization of a novel mammalian sphingosine kinase type 2 isoform, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 19513–19520.

[16] B.M. Buehrer, R.M. Bell, Sphingosine kinase: properties and cellular functions, Adv. Lipid Res. 26 (1993) 59–67.

[17] L.C. Edsall, J.R. Van Brocklyn, O. Cuvillier, B. Kleuser, S. Spiegel, N,N-dimethylsphingosine is a potent competitive inhibitor of sphingosine kinase but not of protein kinase C: modulation of cellular levels of sphingosine 1-phosphate and Ceramide, Biochemistry 15 (1998) 301–304.

[18] R. Alemany, D. Meyer zu Heringdorf, C.J. Koppen, K.H. Jakobs, Formyl peptide receptor signaling in HL-60 cells through sphingosine kinase, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 3994–3999.

[19] A.J. Melendez, A.K. Khaw, Dichotomy of Ca²⁺ signals triggered by different phospholipid pathways in antigen stimulation of human mast cells, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 17255–17262.

[20] O.H. Choi, J.H. Kim, J.P. Kinet, Calcium mobilization via sphingosine kinase in signaling by the FcεRI antigen receptor, Nature 380 (1996) 634–636.

[21] A.J. Melendez, R.A. Floto, D.J. Gillooly, M.M. Harnett, J.M. Allen, FcγRI coupling to phospholipase D initiates sphingosine kinase mediated calcium mobilization and vesicular trafficking, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 9393–9402.

[22] D. English, Z. Welch, A.T. Kovala, K. Harvey, O.V. Volpert, D.N. Brindley, J.G. Garcia, Sphingosine 1-phosphate released from platelets during clotting accounts for the potent endothelial cell chemotactic activity of blood serum and provides a novel link between hemostasis and angiogenesis, FASEB J. 14 (2000) 2255–2265.

[23] X. Shu, W. Wu, R.D. Mosteller, D. Broek, Sphingosine kinase mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced activation of ras and mitogen-activated protein kinases, Mol. Cell. Biol. 22 (2002) 7758–7768.

[24] O. Cuvillier, Sphingosine in apoptosis signaling, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1585 (2002) 153–162.

[25] M. Maceyka, S.G. Payne, S. Milstien, S. Spiegel, Sphingosine kinase, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and apoptosis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1585 (2002) 193–201.

[26] A. Olivera, T. Kohama, L. Edsall, V. Nava, O. Cuvillier, S. Poulton, S. Spiegel, Sphingosine kinase expression increase intracellular sphingosine-1-phosphate and promotes cell growth and survival, J. Cell Biol. 147 (1999) 545–558.

[27] L.C. Edsall, O. Cuvillier, S. Twitty, S. Spiegel, S. Milstien, Sphingosine kinase expression regulates apoptosis and caspase activation in PC12 cells, J. Neurochem. 76 (2001) 1573–1584.

[28] A.J. Melendez, F.B.M. Ibrahim, Antisense knockdown of sphingosine kinase 1 in human macrophages inhibits C5a receptor-dependent signal transduction, Ca²⁺ signals enzyme release, cytokine production, and chemotaxis, J. Immunol. 173 (2004) 1596–1603.

[29] F.B.M. Ibrahim, S.-J. Pang, A.J. Melendez, Anaphylatoxin signaling in human neutrophils: a key role for sphingosine kinase, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 44802–44811.

[30] M. Jayapal, H.K. Tay, R. Reghunathan, L. Zhi, K.K. Chow, M. Rauff, A.J. Melendez, Genome-wide gene expression profiling of human mast cells stimulated by IgE or FcepsilonRI-aggregation reveals a complex network of genes involved in inflammatory responses, BMC Genomics 7 (2006) 210.

[31] J.R. Van Brocklyn, M.J. Lee, R. Menzelev, A. Olivera, L. Edsall, O. Cuvillier, D.M. Thomas, P.J. Coopman, S. Thangada, C.H. Liu, T. Hla, S. Spiegel, Dual actions of sphingosine-1-phosphate: extracellular through the Gi-coupled receptor Edg-1 and intracellular to regulate proliferation and survival, J. Cell. Biol. 142 (1998) 229–240.

[32] T. Hla, M.J. Lee, N. Ancellin, J.H. Paik, M.J. Kluk, Lysophospholipids — receptor revelations, Science 294 (2001) 1875–1878.

[33] E.J. Goetzl, S. An, Diversity of cellular receptors and functions for the lysosphospholipid growth factors lysophosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate, FASEB J. 12 (1998) 1589–1598.

[34] S. An, E.J. Goetzl, H. Lee, Signaling mechanisms and molecular characteristics of G protein-coupled receptors for lysophosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate, J. Cell Biochem. (Suppl. 30–31) (1998) 147–157.

[35] M.A. Beaven, Calcium signaling: sphingosine kinase versus phospholipase C, Curr. Biol. 6 (1996) 798–801.

[36] A.J. Melendez, R.A. Floto, D.J. Gillooly, M.M. Harnett, J.M. Allen, FcγRI coupling to phospholipase D initiates sphingosine kinase mediated calcium mobilization and vesicular trafficking, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 9393–9402.

[37] A. Olivera, L. Edsall, S. Poulton, A. Kazlauskas, S. Spiegel, Platelet-derived growth factor-induced activation of sphingosine kinase requires phosphorylation of the PDGF receptor tyrosine residue responsible for binding of PLCgamma, FASEB J. 13 (1999) 1593–1600.

[38] K.E. Bornfeldt, L.M. Graves, E.W. Raines, Y. Igarashi, G. Wayman, S. Yamamura, Y. Yatomi, J.S. Sidhu, E.G. Krebs, S. Hakomori, R. Ross, Sphingosine-1-phosphate inhibits PDGF-induced chemotaxis of human arterial smooth muscle cells: spatial and temporal modulation of PDGF chemotactic signal transduction, J. Cell Biol. 130 (1995) 193–206.

[39] D. English, Z. Welch, A.T. Kovala, K. Harvey, O.V. Volpert, D.N. Brindley, J.G. Garcia, Sphingosine 1-phosphate released from platelets during clotting accounts for the potent endothelial cell chemotactic activity of blood serum and provides a novel link between hemostasis and angiogenesis, FASEB J. 14 (2000) 2255–2265.

[40] T. Kimura, K. Sato, A. Kuwabara, H. Tomura, M. Ishiwara, I. Kobayashi, M. Ui, F. Okajima, Sphingosine 1-phosphate may be a major component of plasma lipoproteins responsible for the cytoprotective actions in human umbilical vein endothelial cells, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 31780–31785.

[41] J. Kon, K. Sato, T. Watanabe, H. Tomura, A. Kuwabara, T. Kimura, K. Tamama, T. Ishizuka, N. Murata, T. Kanda, I. Kobayashi, H. Ohta, M. Ui, F. Okajima, Comparison of intrinsic activities of the putative sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor subtypes to regulate several signaling pathways in their cDNA-transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 23940–23947.

[42] J.R. Van Brocklyn, B. Behbahani, N.H. Lee, Homodimerization and heterodimerization of S1P/EDG sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1582 (2002) 89–93.

[43] M.J. Lee, J.R. Van Brocklyn, S. Thangada, C.H. Liu, A.R. Hand, R. Menzelev, S. Spiegel, T. Hla, Sphingosine-1-phosphate as a ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor EDG-1, Science 279 (1998) 1552–1555.

[44] Q. Zhang, O. Peyruchaud, K.J. French, M.K. Magnusson, D.F. Mosher, Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates fibronectin matrix assembly through a Rho-dependent signal pathway, Blood 93 (1999) 2984–2990.

[45] M.J. Lee, S. Thangada, K.P. Claffey, N. Ancellin, C.H. Liu, M. Kluk, M. Volpi, R.I. Sha’afi, T. Hla, Vascular endothelial cell adherens junction assembly and morphogenesis induced by sphingosine-1-phosphate, Cell 99 (1999) 301–312.

[46] O. Cuvillier, G. Pirianov, B. Kleuser, P.G. Vanek, O.A. Coso, S. Gutkind, S. Spiegel, Suppression of ceramide-mediated programmed cell death by sphingosine-1-phosphate, Nature 381 (1996) 800–803.

[47] G. Labesse, D. Dougert, L. Assairi, A.M. Gilles, Diacylglyceride kinases, sphingosine kinases and NAD kinases: distant relatives of 6-phosphofructokinases, Trends Biochem. Sci. 27 (2002) 273–275.

[48] H. Liu, D. Chakravarty, M. Maceyka, S. Milstien, S. Spiegel, Sphingosine kinases: a novel family of lipid kinases, Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. 71 (2002) 493–511.

[49] H. Liu, M. Sugiura, V.E. Nava, L.C. Edsall, K. Kono, S. Poulton, S. Milstien, T. Kohama, S. Spiegel, Molecular cloning and functional characterization of a novel mammalian sphingosine kinase type 2 isoform, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 19513–19520.

[50] M.M. Lanterman, J.D. Saba, Characterization of sphingosine kinase (SK) activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and isolation of SK-deficient mutants, Biochem. J. 332 (1998) 525–531.

[51] M.M. Nagiec, M. Skrzypek, E.E. Nagiec, R.L. Lester, R.C. Dickson, The LCB4 (YOR171c) and LCB5 (YLR260w) genes of Saccharomyces encode sphingoid long chain base kinases, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 19437–19442.

[52] S. Wang, Y. Banno, Y. Nozawa, Two forms of membrane-bound sphingosine kinase in Tetrahymena and activity changes during growth and the cell cycle, J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 49 (2002) 305–311.

[53] H. Nishiura, K. Tamura, Y. Morimoto, H. Imai, Characterization of sphingolipid long-chain base kinase in Arabidopsis thaliana, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28 (2000) 747–748.

[54] S. Gijsbers, G. Van der Hoeven, P.P. Van Veldhoven, Subcellular study of sphingoid base phosphorylation in rat tissues: evidence for multiple sphingosine kinases, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1532 (2001) 37–50.

[55] R. Alemany, C.J. van Koppen, K. Danneberg, M. ter Braak, D. Meyer zu Henringdorf, Regulation and functional roles of sphingosine kinases, Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Arch. Pharmacol. 374 (2007) 413–428.

[56] S. Spiegel, S. Milstien, Functions of the multifaceted family of sphingosine kinases and some close relatives, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007) 2125–2129.

[57] M.J. Berridge, P. Lipp, M.D. Bootman, The versatility and universality of calcium signalling, Nat. Rev., Mol. Cell Biol. 1 (2000) 11–21.

[58] M.D. Bootman, M.J. Berridge, H.L. Roderick, Calcium signalling: more messengers, more channels, more complexity, Curr. Biol. 12 (2002) R563–R565.

[59] M.D. Bootman, P. Lipp, M.J. Berridge, The organisation and functions of local Ca²⁺ signals, J. Cell Sci. 114 (2001) 2213–2222.

[60] P.R. Pryor, B.M. Mullock, N.A. Bright, S.R. Gray, J.P. Luzio, The role of intraorganellar Ca²⁺ in late endosome-lysosome heterotypic fusion and in the reformation of lysosomes from hybrid organelles, J. Cell Biol. 149 (2000) 1053–1062.

[61] J.M. Dayer, D. Burger, Cell–cell interactions and tissue damage in rheumatoid arthritis, Autoimmun. Rev. 3 (Suppl. 1) (2004) S14.

[62] I.B. McInnes, B.P. Leung, F.Y. Liew, Cell–cell interactions in synovitis: Interactions between T lymphocytes and synovial cells, Arthritis Res. 2 (2000) 374.

[63] R. Hohlfeld, E. Meinl, F. Weber, F. Zipp, S. Schmidt, S. Sotgiu, N. Goebels, R. Voltz, S. Spuler, A. Iglesias, et al., The role of autoimmune T lymphocytes in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis, Neurology 45 (1995) S33.

[64] J.A. Gracie, R.J. Forsey, W.L. Chan, A. Gilmour, B.P. Leung, M.R. Greer, K. Kennedy, R. Carter, X.Q. Wei, D. Xu, M. Field, A. Foulis, F.Y. Liew, I.B. McInnes, A proinflammatory role for IL-18 in rheumatoid arthritis, J. Clin. Invest. 104 (1999) 1393.

[65] A.N. Vallejo, L.O. Mugge, P.A. Klimiuk, C.M. Weyand, J.J. Goronzy, Central role of thrombospondin-1 in the activation and clonal expansion of inflammatory T cells, J. Immunol. 164 (2000) 2947.

[66] M. Maceyka, S.G. Payne, S. Milstien, S. Spiegel, Sphingosine kinase, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and apoptosis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1585 (2002) 193–201.

[67] P.S. Jolly, H.M. Rosenfeldt, S. Milstein, S. Spiegel, The roles of sphingosine-1-phosphate in asthma, Mol. Immunol. 38 (2002) 1239–1245.

[68] K. Mori, M. Itoi, N. Tsukamoto, H. Kubo, T. Amagai, The perivascular space as a path of hematopoietic progenitor cells and mature T cells between the blood circulation and the thymic parenchyma, Int. Immunol. 19 (2007) 745–753.

[69] V. Brinkmann, D.D. Pinschewer, L. Feng, S. Chen, FTY720: altered lymphocyte traffic results in allograft protection, Transplantation 72 (2001) 764–769.

[70] T. Yoshimoto, M. Furuhata, S. Kamiya, M. Hisada, H. Miyaji, Y. Magami, K. Yamamoto, H. Fujiwara, J. Mizuguchi, Positive modulation of IL-12 signaling by sphingosine kinase 2 associating with the IL-12 receptor beta 1 cytoplasmic region, J. Immunol. 171 (2003) 1352–1359.

[71] A. Olivera, T. Kohama, L. Edsall, V. Nava, O. Cuvillier, S. Poulton, S. Spiegel, Sphingosine kinase expression increase intracellular sphingosine-1-phosphate and promotes cell growth and survival, J. Cell Biol. 147 (1999) 545–558.

[72] B.P. Leung, S. Culshaw, J.A. Gracie, D. Hunter, C.A. Canetti, C. Campbell, F. Cunha, F.Y. Liew, I.B. McInnes, A role for IL-18 in neutrophil activation, J. Immunol. 167 (2001) 2879.

[73] C.A. Canetti, B.P. Leung, S. Culshaw, I.B. McInnes, F.Q. Cunha, F.Y. Liew, IL-18 enhances collagen-induced arthritis by recruiting neutrophils via TNF-alpha and leukotriene B4, J. Immunol. 171 (2003) 1009.

[74] J.H. Zhang, A. Ferrante, A.P. Arrigo, J.M. Dayer, Neutrophil stimulation and priming by direct contact with activated human T lymphocytes, J. Immunol. 148 (1992) 177.

[75] X. Zhang, Y. Kluger, Y. Nakayama, R. Poddar, C. Whitney, A. DeTora, S.M. Weissman, P.E. Newburger, Gene expression in mature neutrophils: early responses to inflammatory stimuli, J. Leukoc. Biol. 75 (2004) 358.

[76] A.C. MacKinnon, A. Buckley, E.R. Chilvers, A.G. Rossi, C. Haslett, T. Sethi, Sphingosine kinase: a point of convergence in the action of diverse neutrophil priming agents, J. Immunol. 169 (2002) 6394.

[77] M. Niwa, O. Kozawa, H. Matsuno, Y. Kanamori, A. Hara, T. Uematsu, Tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated signal transduction in human neutrophils: involvement of sphingomyelin metabolites in the priming effect of TNF-alpha on the fMLP-stimulated superoxide production, Life Sci. 66 (2000) 245.

[78] M.E. Rosenfeld, R. Ross, Macrophage and smooth muscle cell proliferation in atherosclerotic lesions of WHHL and comparably hypercholesterolemic fat-fed rabbits, Arteriosclerosis 10 (1990) 680.

[79] C. Sunderkotter, K. Steinbrink, M. Goebeler, R. Bhardwaj, C. Sorg, Macrophages and angiogenesis, J. Leukoc. Biol. 55 (1994) 410.

[80] D. English, J.G. Garcia, D.N. Brindley, Platelet-released phospholipids link haemostasis and angiogenesis, Cardiovasc. Res. 49 (2001) 588.

[81] S.J. Galli, B.K. Wershil, The two faces of the mast cell, Nature 381 (1996) 21.

[82] E.E. Prieschl, R. Csonga, V. Novotny, G.E. Kikuchi, T. Baumruker, The balance between sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate is decisive for mast cell activation after Fcε receptor I triggering, J. Exp. Med. 190 (1999) 1–8.

[83] A. Olivera, K. Mizugishi, A. Tikhonova, L. Ciaccia, S. Odom, R.L. Proia, J. Rivera, The sphingosine kinase-sphingosine-1-phosphate axis is a determinant of mast cell function and anaphylaxis, Immunity 26 (2007) 287.

[84] Y. Yatomi, Y. Igarashi, L. Yang, N. Hisano, R. Qi, N. Asazuma, K. Satoh, Y. Ozaki, S. Kume, Sphingosine 1-phosphate, a bioactive sphingolipid abundantly stored in platelets, is a normal constituent of human plasma and serum, J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 121 (1997) 969–973.

[85] T. Hla, T. Maciag, An abundant transcript induced in differentiating human endothelial cells encodes a polypeptide with structural similarities to G-protein-coupled receptors, J. Biol. Chem. 265 (1990) 9308–9313.

[86] H. Ozaki, T. Hla, M.J. Lee, Sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling in endothelial activation, J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 10 (2003) 125–131.

[87] L. Rönstrand, C.H. Heldin, Mechanisms of platelet-derived growth factor-induced chemotaxis, Int. J. Cancer 91 (2001) 757–762.

[88] N. Ancellin, C. Colmont, J. Su, Q. Li, N. Mittereder, S.S. Chae, S. Stefansson, G. Liau, T. Hla, Extracellular export of sphingosine kinase-1 enzyme. Sphingosine 1-phosphate generation and the induction of angiogenic vascular maturation, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 6667–6675.

[89] X. Shu, W. Wu, R.D. Mosteller, D. Broek, Sphingosine kinase mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced activation of ras and mitogen-activated protein kinases, Mol. Cell. Biol. 22 (2002) 7758–7768.

[90] P. Xia, J.R. Gamble, K.A. Rye, L. Wang, C.S. Hii, P. Cockerill, Y. Khew-Goodall, A.G. Bert, P.J. Barter, M.A. Vadas, Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces adhesion molecule expression through the sphingosine kinase pathway, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95 (1998) 14196–14201.

[91] L. Zhi, B.P. Leung, A.J. Melendez, Sphingosine kinase 1 regulates pro-inflammatory responses triggered by TNF-α in primary human monocytes, J. Cell Physiol. 208 (2006) 109–115.

[92] Y. Yanagawa, K. Sugahara, H. Kataoka, T. Kawaguchi, Y. Masubuchi, K. Chiba, FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats. II. FTY720 prolongs skin allograft survival by decreasing T cell infiltration into grafts but not cytokine production in vivo, J. Immunol. 160 (1998) 5493–5499.

[93] Z. Yang, M. Chen, L.B. Fialkow, J.D. Ellett, R. Wu, V. Brinkmann, J.L. Nadler, K.R. Lynch, The immune modulator FTY720 prevents autoimmune diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice, Clin. Immunol. 107 (2003) 30–35.

[94] M. Matsuura, T. Imayoshi, T. Okumoto, Effect of FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, on adjuvant- and collagen-induced arthritis in rats, Int. J. Immunopharmacol. 4 (2000) 323–331.

[95] H. Tedesco-Silva, G. Mourad, B.D. Kahan, J.G. Boira, W. Weimar, S. Mulgaonkar, B. Nashan, S. Madsen, B. Charpentier, P. Pellet, Y. Vanrenterghem, FTY720, a novel immunomodulator: efficacy and safety results from the first phase 2A study in de novo renal transplantation, Transplantation 79 (2005) 1553–1560.

[96] B.C. Kieseier, H. Wiendl, B. Hemmer, H.P. Hartung, Treatment and treatment trials in multiple sclerosis, Curr. Opin. Neurol. 20 (2007) 286–293.

[97] S. Billich, F. Bornancin, P. Devay, D. Mechtcheriakova, N. Urtz, T. Baumruker, Phosphorylation of the immunomodulatory drug FTY720 by sphingosine kinases, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 7408–47415.

[98] S.W. Paugh, S.G. Payne, S.E. Barbour, S. Milstien, S. Spiegel, The immunosuppressant FTY720 is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase type 2, FEBS Lett. 554 (2003) 189–193.

[99] M.L. Allende, T. Sasaki, H. Kawai, A. Olivera, Y. Mi, G. van Echten-Deckert, R. Hajdu, M. Rosenbach, C.A. Keohane, S. Mandala, S. Spiegel, R. Proia, Mice deficient in sphingosine kinase 1 are rendered lymphopenic by FTY720, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 52487–52492.

[100] B. Zemann, B. Kinzel, M. Muller, R. Reuschel, D. Mechtcheriakova, N. Urtz, F. Bornancin, T. Baumruker, A. Billich, Sphingosine kinase type 2 is essential for lymphopenia induced by the immunomodulatory drug FTY720, Blood 107 (2006) 1454–1458.

[101] J. Michaud, M. Kohno, R.L. Proia, T. Hla, Normal acute and chronic inflammatory responses in sphingosine kinase 1 knockout mice, FEBS Lett. 580 (2006) 4607–4612.

[102] A.M. Cheng, I. Negishi, S.J. Anderson, A.C. Chan, J. Bolen, D.Y. Loh, T. Pawson, The Syk and ZAP-70 SH2-containing tyrosine kinases are implicated in pre-T cell receptor signaling, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 9797–9801.

[103] C.S. Williams, M. Mann, R.N. DuBois, The role of cyclooxygenases in inflammation, cancer, and development, Oncogene 18 (1999) 7908–7916.

[104] J.J. Liao, M.C. Huang, E.J. Goetzl, Cutting edge: alternative signaling of Th17 cell development by sphingosine 1-phosphate, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 5425.

[105] S. Kuokkanen, M. Gschwend, J.D. Rioux, M.J. Daly, J.D. Terwilliger, P.J. Tienari, J. Wikstrom, J. Palo, L.D. Stein, T.J. Hudson, E.S. Lander, E.A. Peltonen, Genomewide scan of multiple sclerosis in Finnish multiplex families, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (1997) 1379–1387.

[106] R.P. Nair, T. Henseler, S. Jenisch, P. Stuart, C.K. Bichakjian, W. Lenk, E. Westphal, S.W. Guo, E. Christophers, J.J. Voorhees, J.T. Elder, Evidence for two psoriasis susceptibility loci (HLA and 17q) and two novel candidate regions (16q and 20p) by genome-wide scan, Hum. Mol. Genet. 8 (1997) 1349–1356.

[107] F. Enlund, L. Samuelsson, C. Enerback, A. Inerot, J. Wahlstrom, M. Yhr, A. Torinsson, T. Martinsson, G. Swanbeck, Analysis of three suggested psoriasis susceptibility loci in a large Swedish set of families: confirmation of linkage to chromosome 6p (HLA region) and to 17q, but not to 4q, Hum. Hered. 1 (1999) 2–8.
