
How size is controlled: from Hippos to Yorkies

Laura A. Buttitta and Bruce A. Edgar

How do developing organs sense and limit their size? The recently discovered Hippo pathway might have a critical role in controlling organ size and homeostasis in many organisms from *Drosophila* to mammals.

The question of how an organism, or even an individual organ, knows when to stop growing is a fundamental unsolved problem in developmental biology. Although extrinsic nutritional and hormonal cues are clearly important for regulating organ size, tissue- and organ-intrinsic mechanisms are also involved. For example, a regenerating *Drosophila* wing disc transplanted into an adult host will stop growing once it has reached the proper size, despite the abundance of external nutrition and growth cues. Similarly, a damaged liver will stop regenerating once it has reached the correct size. In these cases, as well as during normal development, how do organs sense and limit their size?

More than thirty years ago W. S. Bullough suggested the existence of soluble molecules, which he called chalones, that would act as tissue-specific negative growth regulators. His idea was that once an organ reaches its target size, it produces a threshold amount of a chalone that acts autonomously of the organ to limit further growth¹. Because Bullough’s attempts to identify chalones that control liver growth never succeeded, his idea lay dormant for decades.

In a study published in *Cell*, Pan and colleagues come a step closer to answering the question of how liver growth is limited². Although they did not identify Bullough’s proposed chalone, Pan and his team show how the Hippo signalling pathway may be critical for limiting the growth of organs including the mammalian liver².

The Hippo pathway has been delineated during the past four years (for recent reviews, see refs 3–5). Although primarily worked out in *Drosophila*, homologues of the pathway components exist in organisms ranging from yeast to humans, in both of which several of the genetic and biochemical interactions have been confirmed (Fig. 1). Signalling through this pathway involves a kinase cascade in which the Ste-20-type kinase Hippo phosphorylates the nuclear Dbf-2-related-type kinase Warts (Wts; large tumour suppressor (LATS1/2) in mammals), which in turn phosphorylates and inactivates Yorkie (Yki; Yes-associated protein (YAP) in mammals), a transcriptional co-activator that modulates the expression of genes involved in cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis. The WW-repeat protein Salvador (Sav, WW45 in mammals) facilitates Hippo phosphorylation of Warts, while the protein Mats (Mob as tumour suppressor; MOB1 in mammals) potentiates Warts kinase activity. Both Salvador and Mats are thought to act as scaffold proteins that bind Hippo and Warts (reviewed in refs 3–5).

Mutations in Hippo, Wts, Sav and Mats, or aberrant activation of Yki by overexpression causes marked overgrowth phenotypes in multiple *Drosophila* epithelial tissues (reviewed in refs 3–5). This has led to the suggestion that this pathway controls organ size through inhibition of Yki activity. But what has been lacking is a description of the mechanism by which Hippo signalling regulates Yki, and a demonstration that Hippo’s signalling role in size control is conserved in other organisms. The new work by Pan and colleagues addresses both of these questions.

Through a series of biochemical experiments, localization studies and site-directed mutagenesis, Pan and colleagues demonstrate that Wts phosphorylates a specific site on Yki (Ser168) to promote its association with 14-3-3 proteins and subsequent shuttling out of the nucleus. Phosphorylation of this site by the mammalian Hippo pathway is also observed in the mammalian Yki homologue YAP at Ser127 and is followed by YAP shuttling out of the nucleus, which provides an explanation for how Hippo/MST1/2 signalling through Warts/LATS1/2 inactivates Yki/YAP.

The localization and biochemical interactions of Yki and YAP are conserved in mammals, and therefore Pan and colleagues went on to investigate whether the pathway also regulates growth in mice. They found that overexpression of YAP in the mouse liver causes a marked, rapid overgrowth of that organ. Although the effects of endogenous MST1/2, LATS1/2 and YAP in the liver were not tested, the overexpression result suggests that restraining YAP activity is essential for maintaining proper organ size. Strikingly, the YAP-induced overgrowth was reversed upon silencing YAP overexpression in adults. The effect of YAP on organ size in adult mice and its reversibility suggest that aside from controlling organ size during development, as indicated by the *Drosophila* studies, the Hippo pathway regulates organ size homeostasis in adults. Pan and colleagues went on to show that continued activation of YAP can eventually lead to tumorigenesis as also suggested by previous *Drosophila* studies.

How do the transcriptional co-activators Yki and YAP drive such marked tissue overgrowth? In *Drosophila*, it remains unclear which transcription factor(s) Yki associates with to mediate its effects, although a few transcriptional targets have been reported, including the microRNA bantam, Cyclin E and the *Drosophila* apoptosis inhibitor protein, dIAP⁶⁻⁸. These targets are not sufficient to explain the marked effects of Yki activation on growth, however, suggesting that additional targets must exist. In mammals, YAP binds and regulates numerous transcriptional regulators (such as p73, p53-binding protein-2 (p53BP2), RUNX2, SMAD7, ERBB4, PEBP2a and the TEAD/TEF transcription factors) (reviewed in ref. 3), but the relevance of these to Hippo/MST1/2 signalling remains unclear.

Using microarray analysis of samples from the liver, Pan and colleagues found that YAP overexpression leads to activation of several genes associated with liver growth including c-myc, Ki-67, Sox4 and H-19, as well as of apoptosis inhibitors cIAP1, MCL1 and survivin. RNA-interference-mediated knockdown of survivin reduced YAP-induced cell overproliferation in culture, suggesting this could be one relevant target. Determining the critical binding partners of YAP and Yki as well as identifying their important transcriptional targets will be a major avenue of future research.

Laura A. Buttitta and Bruce A. Edgar are at the Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.  
e-mail: bedgar@fhcrc.org

NEWS AND VIEWS

Drosophila                                                                 Mammals

Mer Ex                                                                 NF2 FDM6
Hpo Sav                                                                 Mst1/2 WW45
Fat                                                                 FatJ
Wts Mats                                                                 LATS1/2 Mob1
Yki                                                                 YAP
X → Growth                                                                 X → Growth
targets                                                                 targets
Nucleus                                                                 Nucleus

Mer Ex                                                                 NF2 FDM6
Fat                                                                 FatJ
Wts Mats                                                                 LATS1/2 Mob1
Yki                                                                 YAP
S168-P                                                                 S127-P
14-3-3                                                                 14-3-3
X → Growth                                                                 X → Growth
targets                                                                 targets
Nucleus                                                                 Nucleus

Figure 1 The conserved Hippo kinase cascade. Corresponding proteins in *Drosophila* and mammals are shown in the same colours. When organs are growing (Hippo pathway OFF), nuclear Yki/Yap binds to unknown DNA-binding factor(s) X and regulates the transcription of growth targets. When organs have reached the correct size (ON), the Hippo signalling pathway is activated (unknown ligand Y–Fat–Merlin–Expanded–Hippo interactions, in the *Drosophila* case; ligand Y–FatJ–NF2–FDM6–Mst1/2–Lats1/2 in mammals), and Yki and YAP is inactivated by localizing to the cytoplasm in response to Wts phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding. ? indicates regulatory relationships that still need to be investigated. Figure adapted from reference 2.

The development of phosphospecific antibodies to study Yki/YAP localization by Pan and colleagues provides a new and powerful tool to investigate how this pathway functions in organ growth, homeostasis and tumorigenesis. For instance, are Yki and YAP localized to the nuclei during stages of rapid tissue growth and shifted to the cytoplasm as growth slows later in development? Are the growth rates of different compartments or regions in organs correlated with Yki and YAP localization?

The spatial and temporal control of organ growth during development also begs an important question: which upstream signals regulate Hippo pathway activity? Recent studies in *Drosophila* have described two membrane-associated proteins that regulate Hippo pathway activity⁹: Merlin (Mer, NF2 in mammals) and Expanded (Ex, FDM6 in mammals), both of which are FERM-domain-containing proteins that are thought to interact with both transmembrane and cytoskeletal proteins and localize to the adherens junctions of epithelial cells (reviewed in refs 3, 4). Mer and Ex somehow promote the phosphorylation and activation of Warts by Hippo, but are also transcriptional targets of the pathway, inhibited by Hippo/Wts signalling, and activated by Yki⁹. Could this negative feedback loop underlie the rapid reversibility of YAP-induced overgrowth observed by Pan and colleagues? Although there is no evidence currently linking NF2 and FDM6 to the core Hippo pathway in mammals, this is certainly an area for further investigation.

Although an extracellular signal or a chalone controlling Hippo signalling organ-wide has yet to be identified, ongoing studies in *Drosophila* have identified the transmembrane protocadherin Fat (called FatJ in mammals) as an upstream input¹⁰⁻¹³. Fat is particularly intriguing because it is likely to act as a receptor, and might be the key to how extracellular molecules talk to the Hippo pathway. One study has identified the protocadherin Dachsous (Dchs1 in mammals) as a potential Fat ligand for Hippo signalling¹³, although it is unlikely that Dachsous mediates all the growth-regulatory functions of Hippo signalling. Thus, perhaps all hope is not lost for Bullough and his liver chalones. Future studies might yet identify soluble, or perhaps tethered, ligands that act through the conserved Hippo pathway to control organ growth and homeostasis.

1. Bullough, W. S. *Agents Actions* **2**, 1–7 (1971).
2. Dong, J. *et al.* *Cell* **130**, 1120–1133 (2007).
3. Saucedo, L. J. & Edgar, B. A. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **8**, 613–621 (2007).
4. Pan, D. *Genes Dev.* **21**, 886–897 (2007).
5. Harvey, K. & Tapon, N. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **7**, 182–191 (2007).

6. Nolo, R., Morrison, C. M., Tao, C., Zhang, X. & Halder, G. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1895–1904 (2006).
7. Thompson, B. J. & Cohen, S. M. *Cell* **126**, 767–774 (2006).
8. Huang, J., Wu, S., Barrera, J., Matthews, K. & Pan, D. *Cell* **122**, 421–434 (2005).
9. Hamaratoglu, F. *et al.* *Nature Cell Biol.* **8**, 27–36

10. Tyler, D. M. & Baker, N. E. *Dev. Biol.* **305**, 187–201 (2007).
11. Willecke, M. *et al.* *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2090–2100 (2006).
12. Silva, E., Tsatskis, Y., Gardano, L., Tapon, N. & McNeill, H. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2081–2089 (2006).
13. Cho, E. *et al.* *Nature Genet.* **38**, 1142–1150 (2006).


HtrA2 and Parkinson’s disease: think PINK?

Emad S. Alnemri

Mitochondrial dysfunction is primarily responsible for neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease. The Parkinson’s-disease-associated kinase PINK1 has been identified as an important regulator of the activity of the mitochondria-associated stress-protective protease HtrA2.

Exposure of cells to environmental or internal stress causes misfolding of or damage to many cellular proteins, and the ability of cells to respond to these stresses is paramount for survival. Cells have developed several mechanisms to detect, remove or correct misfolded or damaged proteins. One approach to removing damaged proteins depends on the activity of the widely conserved oligomeric HtrA protease family (reviewed in ref. 1). HtrA proteases contain one or two carboxy-terminal PDZ domains that activate the trypsin-like protease domain once it recognizes misfolded or damaged proteins².

The mammalian HtrA2 protease (also known as Omi) has received more attention than other HtrA family members because of its potential role in the regulation of apoptosis. In healthy cells HtrA2 resides in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria. On an apoptotic stimulus, it is released into the cytosol³⁻⁶ where it binds to cytosolic inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) and inactivates their caspase-inhibitory activity. HtrA2 proteolytic activity has also been suggested to trigger a caspase-independent cell death pathway.

In an unexpected turn, studies on mnd2, a mouse model of neurodegeneration with features resembling Parkinson’s disease (PD), revealed that this recessive disease results from a missense mutation that inactivates the proteolytic activity of HtrA2 (ref. 7). Further analysis showed that cells from these mice or from HtrA2 knockout mice⁸ exhibit a defective mitochondrial membrane potential that led to increased apoptosis especially in striatal neurons and, consequently, to neurodegeneration. Moreover, sequence analysis of the gene encoding HtrA2 from heterozygous patients with PD identified missense mutations that also seem to cause defective activation of the protease activity of HtrA2 (ref. 9). Collectively, this evidence supports the notion that HtrA2 functions primarily as a survival rather than a death protease. It is still unclear how HtrA2 protects the mitochondria from stress, but it could prevent the accumulation of misfolded or damaged proteins in the mitochondria directly, or activate a protective stress-response pathway to clear defective proteins¹² in a manner similar to its bacterial homologues DegP or DegS.

Downward and colleagues¹⁰ now report on page 1243 of this issue that phosphorylation of HtrA2 at serines adjacent to residues mutated in patients with PD might increase its proteolytic activity. They also report that this phosphorylation requires activation of the p38 stress kinase pathway. As with many other proteases, the proteolytic activity of HtrA2 is tightly regulated to prevent unwanted proteolysis. Structural studies showed that interactions between its protease domain and its regulatory PDZ domain keeps the proteolytic activity of HtrA2 in check until the PDZ domain is engaged by binding to C-terminal PDZ-binding peptides or internal hydrophobic stretches in misfolded proteins²,¹¹,¹². The findings of Downward and colleagues suggest that phosphorylation of residues in the protease or PDZ domain is another mechanism by which the proteolytic activity of HtrA2 is modulated in response to stress. Using an *in silico* phosphorylation site prediction tool, the authors identified Ser 142 in the protease domain and Ser 400 in the PDZ domain of HtrA2 as two potential phosphorylation sites for proline-directed serine/threonine kinases. They found that a phosphomimetic Ser 400 substitution increases the proteolytic activity of HtrA2 and confers enhanced protection against mitochondrial stress. Unfortunately, the authors were not able to confirm that the Ser 400 residue is phosphorylated in response to mitochondrial stress *in vivo*. Nevertheless, they focused on understanding the contribution of Ser 142 to the regulation of HtrA2 activity. As with Ser 400, a phosphomimetic substitution of Ser 142 resulted in increased HtrA2 activity and enhanced protection against mitochondrial stress and, more importantly, Ser 142 was found to be specifically phosphorylated in response to activation of the p38 stress kinase pathway. This pathway is activated in models of neurodegeneration, and the authors showed that phosphorylation of Ser 142 is increased in brain samples from patients with

---

Emad S. Alnemri is in the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Apoptosis Research, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.  
e-mail: E_Al nemri@lac.jci.tju.edu

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | NUMBER 11 | NOVEMBER 2007 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group
