
Calcium Cycling and Signaling in Cardiac Myocytes

Donald M. Bers

Department of Physiology and Cardiovascular Institute, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153; email: dbers@lumc.edu

Annu. Rev. Physiol. 2008. 70:23–49

First published online as a Review in Advance on November 7, 2007

The Annual Review of Physiology is online at http://physiol.annualreviews.org

This article's doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.70.113006.100455

Copyright © 2008 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

0066-4278/08/0315-0023$20.00

**Key Words**

Ca channels, sarcoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, contraction, calmodulin

**Abstract**

Calcium (Ca) is a universal intracellular second messenger. In muscle, Ca is best known for its role in contractile activation. However, in recent years the critical role of Ca in other myocyte processes has become increasingly clear. This review focuses on Ca signaling in cardiac myocytes as pertaining to electrophysiology (including action potentials and arrhythmias), excitation-contraction coupling, modulation of contractile function, energy supply-demand balance (including mitochondrial function), cell death, and transcription regulation. Importantly, although such diverse Ca-dependent regulations occur simultaneously in a cell, the cell can distinguish distinct signals by local Ca or protein complexes and differential Ca signal integration.

# INTRODUCTION

Calcium (Ca) is a ubiquitous intracellular second messenger throughout biology, involved in regulating diverse functions such as fertilization, electrical signaling, contraction, secretion, memory, gene transcription, and cell death. Some important systems in which Ca is important in cardiac myocytes are discussed here: $(a)$ electrophysiology [via ion currents and exchangers, the regulation of other channels or exchangers, the mediation of action potential (AP) shape, arrhythmogenic mechanisms, and the regulation of cell-cell communication]; $(b)$ excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling, which governs the Ca transient that drives contraction; $(c)$ contraction itself, in which Ca is the activating switch of the myofilaments and a modulator of key contractile properties (e.g., cooperativity, length-dependent activation, and frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation); $(d)$ energy consumption (by contraction and Ca transport) and production (via the regulation of mitochondrial ATP production); $(e)$ cell death by apoptosis or necrosis; and $(f)$ transcriptional regulation via, e.g., calmodulin (CaM)-dependent activation of calcineurin and the nuclear translocation of factors such as histone deacetylases. This is only a fraction of Ca-dependent systems in cardiac myocytes, but this scope is already large and will allow neither uniform depth nor comprehensiveness in references (1). However, here I attempt to integrate this array of Ca signaling in cardiac myocytes and identify some unanswered questions to encourage further work.

Many of the Ca-dependent processes described above involve an orchestrated symphony that produces the acute and reliable contractile function of the heart to perform the tasks of pumping blood on a beat-to-beat basis and the short-term modulation of this function upon changes in heart rate or workload (topics $a$–$d$ above). Acute malfunctions of these systems can result in both mechanical and electrical dysfunction (e.g., reduced cardiac output and arrhythmias). Longer-term adaptations and maladaptations to altered conditions involve altered protein expression, cell growth, and cell death (topics $e$ and $f$ above).

Ca-dependent regulation often works via specific Ca-binding proteins [such as CaM and troponin C (TnC)] and is also frequently mediated by very local intermolecular signaling in restricted spaces, rather than changes in global cytosolic [Ca] ([Ca]$_i$). Indeed, local Ca signaling allows multiple Ca-dependent pathways to sense spatially unique Ca signals simultaneously in the same cell.

# ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL Ca SIGNALING IN MYOCYTES

Ca carries and regulates ionic currents via channels and exchangers, thereby influencing AP configuration, arrhythmogenesis, and cell-cell communication (Figure 1).

## Ca Current ($I_{\text{Ca}}$)

The two classes of membrane potential ($E_m$)-dependent $I_{\text{Ca}}$ in cardiac myocytes, L-type ($I_{\text{Ca,L}}$) and T-type ($I_{\text{Ca,T}}$), can contribute to pacemaker activity, the AP upstroke and plateau phases, and arrhythmias [particularly early afterdepolarizations (EADs)]. Cardiac $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ (encoded by $\alpha_1G$ or $\alpha_1H$ genes) activates at more negative $E_m$ than $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ (encoded by $\alpha_1C$ or $\alpha_1D$ genes) but also inactivates more rapidly than $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ and independently of Ca influx. $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ is not present in most ventricular myocytes but is expressed mainly in conducting and pacemaker cells in the heart [and also in immature or developing ventricular myocytes (2)]. Even in myocytes that express $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$, the current density is often small in comparison with $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$. $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ and $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ apparently serve different functional roles.

The $\alpha_1D$ gene is expressed at relatively high levels in pacemaker-type cells (3), and it activates at an intermediate $E_m$ between that for $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ and $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ derived from $\alpha_1C$ (where the latter is the vast majority of cardiac $I_{\text{Ca}}$ and the only type in most ventricular myocytes).

Figure 1

Ca-dependent signaling to cardiac myocyte ion channels. Ca entry via $I_{\text{Ca}}$ activates sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca release via the ryanodine receptor (RyR), resulting in the activation of contraction. SR Ca uptake via the SR Ca-ATPase (ATP) and extrusion via Na/Ca exchange (NCX) allow relaxation. Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII) can phosphorylate phospholamban (PLB), causing enhanced SR Ca uptake, and also the RyR, enhancing spontaneous diastolic SR Ca release. That Ca release activates inward NCX current and arrhythmogenic delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs). CaMKII can also phosphorylate Ca and Na channel subunits, thereby altering $I_{\text{Ca}}$ and $I_{\text{Na}}$ gating, thereby prolonging APD and increasing the propensity for early afterdepolarizations (EADs). CaMKII can also modulate $I_{\text{to}}$, whereas calmodulin (CaM) itself can modulate RyR, $I_{\text{Ca}}$, and $I_{\text{Ks}}$ gating. Activation of β-adrenergic receptors (β-AR) activates adenylate cyclase (AC) to produce cyclic AMP (cAMP) and activate PKA. PKA phosphorylates PLB and regulates SR Ca uptake, $I_{\text{Ca}}$, $I_{\text{Ks}}$, and RyR, with a net increase in Ca transient amplitude. This is accepted to contribute to CaM and CaMKII activation, but there may also be a more direct, Ca-independent pathway by which β-AR can activate CaMKII. MF, myofilaments.

During diastolic pacemaker depolarization in spontaneously active cardiomyocytes [e.g., sinoatrial (SA) node cells], $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ can become activated relatively early in diastole and contribute to diastolic depolarization. As depolarization proceeds, $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ from $\alpha_{1D}$ and then $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ from $\alpha_{1C}$ are recruited and further contribute to depolarization, and $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ via $\alpha_{1C}$ drives the upstroke of the regenerative AP in pacemaker cells (vs the Na current $I_{\text{Na}}$, which dominates in atrial and ventricular myocytes).

Ca is also involved in pacemaker activity in other ways (4). Inward Na/Ca exchange current ($I_{\text{NCX}}$) during early diastolic depolarization is activated by $[\text{Ca}]_i$ from the previous beat as $[\text{Ca}]_i$ decline outlasts the SA node AP duration. Later during diastole, Ca is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) via ryanodine receptors (RyRs), which can be triggered by either $I_{\text{Ca,T}}$ (5) or early $I_{\text{Ca,L}}$ or can even occur spontaneously by an SR Ca release clock (6). That is, as the SR refills with Ca from the previous beat and the RyR recovers from refractoriness, the high luminal SR $[\text{Ca}]$ causes local SR Ca release events (Ca sparks) during diastolic depolarization. The SR Ca release itself does not produce a trans-sarcolemmal current, but the local rise in $[\text{Ca}]_i$ activates a second window of inward $I_{\text{NCX}}$ that contributes to late diastolic depolarization. Notably, this is mechanistically similar to the accepted mechanism of delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs), a major class of triggered arrhythmias (see below). There is also a finite
fraction (≤1%) of \(I_{\mathrm{f}}\) (typically considered a monovalent-selective channel) that is carried by \(\mathrm{Ca}\), and this can produce a detectable rise in \([\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}\) (7). \(\beta\)-Adrenergic agonists, which increase heart rate, accelerate \(I_{\mathrm{f}}\)-dependent depolarization in SA nodal cells but also shift \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) gating to more negative potentials (recruiting \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) earlier in diastolic depolarization) and increase peak \([\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}\) and the rate of SR Ca reuptake (thereby speeding the SR Ca release clock). Thus, several different currents carried by \(\mathrm{Ca}\) can contribute to normal and abnormal pacemaker activity in the heart. Normal pacemaker activity includes all the above and also some other \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-independent currents (4). Questions remain about the relative influence of these functionally overlapping and somewhat redundant mechanisms in normal heart rate control.

In ventricular myocytes \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) does not contribute substantially to the rapid rising phase of the AP. Although the \(I_{\mathrm{Na}}\)-dependent rapid depolarization activates \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) quickly, the amplitude of \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) is not maximal near the AP peak. This phenomenon occurs partly because \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) activation is time dependent, but it also results from a trade-off of the coexistence of relatively high channel conductance (\(g_{\mathrm{Ca}}\)) and low driving force (\(E_{\mathrm{m}} - E_{\mathrm{Ca}}\)), where \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) is the product of the two factors (8). Indeed, the maximum AP overshoot (~+40 mV) is relatively close to the \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) reversal potential (\(E_{\mathrm{Rev}}\)) that is typically measured under physiological conditions (+50 to +60 mV), so driving force is low at the AP peak. In contrast, the thermodynamic \(\mathrm{Ca}\) equilibrium potential (\(E_{\mathrm{Ca}}\)) is closer to +125 mV, and substantial \(\mathrm{Ca}\) influx via \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) occurs at potentials between \(E_{\mathrm{Rev}}\) and \(E_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) (9), but at \(E_{\mathrm{Rev}}\) the inward current carried by \(\mathrm{Ca}\) is exactly counterbalanced by outward K current through the channel. Thus, the electrophysiologically important measured \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) becomes negligible near the AP peak, despite some \(\mathrm{Ca}\) influx that may be important in E-C coupling. After the AP peak, there is an early repolarization phase owing to \(I_{\mathrm{Na}}\) inactivation and transient outward K currents (\(I_{\mathrm{to}}\)). This serves to

increase \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) driving force, such that peak \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) occurs after the peak of \(g_{\mathrm{Ca}}\). So one can almost consider that that \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) activates in two phases: a rapid rise in conductance and then an increase in driving force. This may be valuable in synchronizing SR Ca release during E-C coupling, and this synchrony is critical for optimal contractility, but the Ca release also influences \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) during the early AP.

\(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) turnoff during the AP is mediated by both voltage- and \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent inactivation, but the latter is by far predominant (1). Indeed, when monovalent cations carry the charge through \(\mathrm{Ca}\) channels in myocytes, inactivation is extremely slow (the time constant \(\tau\) is hundreds of milliseconds at 0 mV). It is now clear that \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent inactivation of \(I_{\mathrm{Ca,L}}\) is mediated by CaM, which preassociates with the C terminus of the \(\alpha_{1 \mathrm{C}}\) subunit even at diastolic \([\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}\) (10–12). When local \([\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}\) near the inner channel mouth rises owing to \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) and/or SR Ca release, \(\mathrm{Ca}\) binds to the preassociated CaM (at high-affinity \(\mathrm{Ca}\) sites on the carboxy end). This action causes \(\mathrm{Ca}-\mathrm{CaM}\) to bind to the \(\alpha_{1 \mathrm{C}}\) at a critical IQ motif that is near the apoCaM-binding site, thereby accelerating inactivation. DeMaria et al. (13) reported similar results for neuronal \(\mathrm{Ca}\) channels (\(\alpha_{1 \mathrm{~A}}\)), except that these researchers found that \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent inactivation was caused by \(\mathrm{Ca}\) binding to the low-affinity amino end of prebound CaM, whereas the carboxy lobe was important for \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) facilitation.

Cardiac myocytes also exhibit \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) facilitation, which depends on \(\mathrm{Ca}-\mathrm{CaM}\)-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII) (14–17). \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) facilitation happens over a longer timescale (from one beat to the next) and results in a moderate increase in \(I_{\mathrm{Ca}}\) amplitude and slowing of inactivation, which accumulates over 5–10 pulses at 1 Hz. The molecular mechanism is not fully resolved, but it seems unlikely that the CaM that activates CaMKII in this process is the same CaM that causes \(\mathrm{Ca}\)-dependent inactivation. CaMKII can associate directly with the \(\mathrm{Ca}\) channel (on the carboxy tail of \(\alpha_{1 \mathrm{C}}\)), and phosphorylation sites on both the$\alpha_{1 \mathrm{C}}$ itself and the accessory $\beta_{2}$ subunit have been implicated in mediating $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ facilitation (18, 19).

Ca-dependent $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ inactivation may function as a feedback system to limit Ca influx under conditions in which Ca influx or SR Ca release is high, and this may be a protection against cellular Ca overload, which can cause both arrhythmias and cell death. $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ facilitation may function as a minor component of a positive force-frequency relationship but may also serve to offset the negative effect of increased frequency on Ca channel availability (see below).

The amount of Ca entry via $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ during the cardiac AP varies among cell types and species and with the AP configuration and SR Ca release. In rat vs rabbit ventricular myocytes, the same square voltage clamp pulse admits more Ca in rat, but when species-appropriate APs are used, there is less integrated $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ in the rat (14 vs 21 μmol/l cytosol) because of the shorter AP duration (20). Although Ca entry via $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ induces substantial Ca-dependent inactivation, SR Ca release causes a further 50% reduction of integrated $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ during steady-state APs (21). $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ may typically become 90–95% inactivated during a normal AP with SR Ca release (22). As such, $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ deactivation (vs inactivation) only contributes appreciably to $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ decline during the late stages of repolarization (as $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ approaches –40 mV and below). This also means that $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ must recover from inactivation between APs.

The time constant τ for recovery from inactivation depends on both $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ and $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$ (typically 100–200 ms at –80 mV and low $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$). The $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ dependence has been more frequently characterized, but $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$ decline is incomplete at the time the AP has repolarized, such that the Ca dependence of recovery may be important (although harder to study). During increases in heart rate, the time at diastolic $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ shortens and may approach the recovery time for $I_{\mathrm{Ca}, \mathrm{L}}$. This shortening of diastole is partially mitigated by the intrinsic action potential duration (APD) shortening at higher heart rates (so repolarization happens sooner)

and also by frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation (FDAR) and $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$ decline, which lowers $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$ sooner. Under physiological conditions, these factors probably allow $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ to recover fully between beats, although this may not be true at extremely high heart rates. However, in heart failure (HF), in which the APD is prolonged and $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}$ declines more slowly, the frequency at which $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ availability becomes limiting may well occur at physiological heart rates (22, 23).

β-Adrenergic agonists [via cAMP and protein kinase A (PKA)] increase $I_{\mathrm{Ca}, \mathrm{L}}$ amplitude and shift activation to more negative $E_{\mathrm{m}}$. This may all occur via a local signaling complex in which β-adrenergic receptors, adenylate cyclase, cAMP, and PKA are all right at the channel (24, 25). Again, there is some controversy about whether the key phosphorylation site is on the $\alpha_{1 \mathrm{C}}$ subunit in the C terminus, possibly S1928 (26), or perhaps elsewhere on the C terminus (27) or on the $\beta$ subunit (28). Although β-adrenergic agonists can greatly increase $I_{\mathrm{Ca}, \mathrm{L}}$, the current also inactivates more rapidly (owing to the greater Ca influx and release), such that the integrated $I_{\mathrm{Ca}, \mathrm{L}}$ during the AP is increased by a smaller factor. In conclusion, $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ contributes to inward current during the AP but is under dynamic control by local $[\mathrm{Ca}]_{\mathrm{i}}, E_{\mathrm{m}}$, and regulatory kinases.

## Na/Ca Exchange

Na/Ca exchange (NCX) is the Ca transporter in the heart that is largely responsible for extruding the Ca that enters via $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$. NCX stoichiometry is generally accepted to be 3 Na:1 Ca (1; but see also References 29 and 30), such that the NCX transporter is electrogenic (the extrusion of 1 Ca is coupled to inward flux of 3 Na and one net charge) and carries ionic current ($I_{\mathrm{NCX}}$). $I_{\mathrm{NCX}}$ is reversible, and its direction and amplitude are controlled by [Na] and [Ca] on both sides of the membrane as well as by $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ (and $I_{\mathrm{NCX}}$ reverses at $E_{\mathrm{NCX}}=3 E_{\mathrm{Na}}-2 E_{\mathrm{Ca}}$, analogous to ion channels). At rest $E_{\mathrm{m}}$ is negative to $E_{\mathrm{NCX}}$ (typically –50 mV), such that Ca extrusion is favored thermodynamically, eventhough the low \([Ca]_{i}\) limits the absolute rate of  
\(Ca\) extrusion and diastolic inward \(I_{NCX}\). During the AP upstroke, \(E_{m}\) passes \(E_{NCX}\) so that  
\(Ca\) influx and outward \(I_{NCX}\) are favored and  
can occur briefly (31). However, this period is  
very short-lived because as soon as \(I_{Ca,L}\) is acti-  
vated and SR \(Ca\) release ensues, the very high  
local \([Ca]_{i}\) near the membrane drives \(E_{NCX}\)  
back above \(E_{m}\) such that \(I_{NCX}\) becomes inward  
and extrudes \(Ca\) again. Notably, the higher  
the \(Ca\) transient is and the further repolar-  
ization proceeds, the greater the inward cur-  
rent. Thus, \(I_{NCX}\) is an inward current through-  
out most of the AP under normal conditions,  
driven by \([Ca]_{i}\) but tempered by the positive  
\(E_{m}\) during the AP. However, if \(I_{Ca}\) does not oc-  
cur in a certain cellular region, \(Ca\) entry and  
outward \(I_{NCX}\) can continue. In HF, in which  
SR \(Ca\) release is low, \([Na]_{i}\) is elevated, and  
APD is long, the situation can be reversed,  
such that outward \(I_{NCX}\) and \(Ca\) influx occur  
throughout most of the AP (32).

In addition to the above-described regu-  
lation of NCX flux by the thermodynamics  
of ion gradients and the kinetic constraints  
related to substrate (\(Na\) and \(Ca\)) concentra-  
tions, there is also allosteric regulation medi-  
ated by \([Ca]_{i}\) and \([Na]_{i}\) (33). At high \([Na]_{i}\) the  
\(I_{NCX}\) is inactivated, much like \(E_{m}\)-dependent  
ion channels. This effect is most prominent  
at high \([Na]_{i}\), beyond the physiological range  
(\(>20\) mM), but it is unknown whether this  
Na-dependent inactivation occurs to a signif-  
icant extent under any relevant physiological  
conditions. In contrast, it is easy to see how  
this might occur and be beneficial in patho-  
physiological settings of glycoside toxicity or  
hypoxia, or ischemia and reperfusion, when  
\([Na]_{i}\) can rise to a very high level. That is, in-  
activation of NCX at very high \([Na]_{i}\) may pre-  
vent or limit a consequent cellular \(Ca\) overload  
(driven by outward \(I_{NCX}\)).

Allosteric activation of NCX results from  
elevated \([Ca]_{i}\), with an apparent \(K_{0.5} \sim 100\) nM  
\([Ca]_{i}\) in myocytes (33, 34). Without \([Ca]_{i}\),  
mammalian NCX does not work at all, even  
in the \(Ca\) influx direction. It makes sense that  
a \(Ca\) efflux mechanism would be turned off  

to prevent \([Ca]_{i}\) from falling too low and that  
\(Ca\) efflux should be more active when cellu-  
lar \([Ca]_{i}\) is high (to avoid \(Ca\) overload). How-  
ever, the actual physiological importance of  
this \(Ca\)-dependent regulation is not well un-  
derstood. The kinetics of \(Ca\)-dependent acti-  
vation are faster than those for deactivation  
(35), so in normal physiological conditions  
NCX may be fully activated at this site or  
have only a moderate residual range of regula-  
tion with alterations of heart rate or inotropic  
state. NCX is also regulated by intracellu-  
lar phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (\(PIP_{2}\))  
and ATP (36), but like Na-dependent inacti-  
vation, this may only be functionally impor-  
tant in heart under pathophysiological con-  
ditions. Protein kinase C (PKC) can activate  
NCX (37), and PKA also has been reported to  
stimulate NCX, but that remains highly con-  
troversial (38, 39).

\(I_{NCX}\) is sometimes inappropriately consid-  
ered to be a minor current during the cardiac  
AP. \(I_{NCX}\) can significantly influence AP shape,  
and the late plateau phase of most atrial and  
rodent ventricular APs can be almost entirely  
due to inward \(I_{NCX}\). The ability of NCX to  
carry both inward and outward \(I_{NCX}\) during  
the same AP and the central role of NCX  
in \(Ca\) fluxes, pacemaker action, and arrhyth-  
mias make it very important to understand this  
transporter in detail.

### Other Ca-Dependent Currents

There are numerous other \(Ca\)-regulated cur-  
rents that are relevant in cardiac electrophys-  
iology. There is a \(Ca\)-activated Cl current  
(\(I_{Cl(Ca)}\)), which is activated by high local \([Ca]_{i}\)  
during \(I_{Ca}\) and SR \(Ca\) release and contributes  
a transient outward current early during the  
AP, when local submembrane \([Ca]_{i}\) is high  
and \(E_{m}\) is very positive to \(E_{Cl}\) (40, 41). There  
have been reports of \(Ca\)-activated cation-  
nonselective current in cardiac myocytes (42),  
but we have been unable to detect this cur-  
rent in rabbit, rat, or human myocytes. Gap  
junction channels (connexons), which elec-  
trically connect all myocytes in the heart,  
are inhibited by prolonged high \([Ca]_i\), and CaM and local Ca signaling may be involved (43, 44). This may serve a valuable protective mechanism whereby potentially dying myocytes in severe Ca overload can electrically isolate themselves from the rest of the heart, avoiding the depolarizing and Ca-overloading influences on neighboring cells. It is less clear how much dynamic Ca-dependent regulation of gap junctions occurs in normal physiological conditions or how such regulation may influence electrical propagation in the heart.

The slowly activating delayed rectifier K current (\(I_{\text{Ks}}\)) is increased by elevated \([Ca]_i\) (45), and the channel protein KCNQ1 (or Kv7.1) is known to bind CaM, which appears to serve as the Ca sensor. Although the molecular mechanism of this Ca-CaM-dependent modulation of \(I_{\text{Ks}}\) is becoming better clarified (46, 47), there is still very little information about how physiologically dynamic changes in local \([Ca]_i\) during the AP influence the behavior of \(I_{\text{Ks}}\) during that or the next AP.

\(I_{\text{Na}}\) can also be modulated by Ca via CaM directly as well as by CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of the SNC5A channel-forming subunit. The direct Ca-CaM effect appears to involve an enhancement of slow inactivation (48, 49), although details remain to be worked out and some controversy remains (50). CaMKII also associates with the cardiac Na channel, phosphorylates the channel, and alters \(I_{\text{Na}}\) gating (51). CaMKII shifts \(I_{\text{Na}}\) availability to more negative \(E_m\), increases the accumulation of channels in intermediate inactivation, and slows recovery from inactivation. These are loss-of-function effects that would reduce \(I_{\text{Na}}\), especially at high heart rates (seen in, e.g., Brugada syndrome). CaMKII also increases late-inactivating or slowly inactivating \(I_{\text{Na}}\), which is a gain in function, and may prolong APD and cause long QT syndrome (LQTS), especially at low heart rates. Intriguingly, there is a human genetic mutation in SCN5A that causes almost the identical \(I_{\text{Na}}\) gating changes, and patients with this mutation exhibit combined Brugada syndrome and LQTS (52). Moreover, CaMKII is up-

regulated in HF. Thus, CaMKII-dependent \(I_{\text{Na}}\) regulation may create an acquired form of LQTS or Brugada syndrome in HF patients.

Cardiac \(I_{\text{to}}\) can also be modulated by CaMKII (53), and recent work has shown that CaMKII may slow \(I_{\text{to}}\) inactivation (54), and enhance recovery from inactivation for both the fast and slow components of \(I_{\text{to}}\), mediated by Kv4.2/4.3 and Kv1.4, respectively (55). These effects would enhance \(I_{\text{to}}\) and shorten APD. Ca-CaM also can control \(I_{\text{to}}\) channel expression via calcineurin- and CaMKII-dependent pathways, decreasing Kv4.2/4.3 expression and fast \(I_{\text{to}}\) function but enhancing Kv1.4 expression and slow \(I_{\text{to}}\) function (55, 56). Thus, Ca modulates numerous ion channels in the heart and can have complex electrophysiological effects.

## Arrhythmogenic Mechanisms

Triggered arrhythmias can occur as DADs, EADs, or increased automaticity, and all these events can be attributed in part to Ca signaling or transport. DADs, which take off from the resting \(E_m\) after AP repolarization, are widely accepted as being caused by spontaneous SR Ca release events that occur at relatively high SR Ca levels. This SR Ca release causes an aftercontraction and a transient inward current (\(I_{\text{ti}}\)) that depolarizes \(E_m\) toward threshold for an AP. Several Ca-activated currents (\(I_{\text{NCX}}, I_{\text{Cl(Ca)}}\), and a monovalent-nonspecific current) are candidates for \(I_{\text{ti}}\), but in human and rabbit ventricular myocytes, \(I_{\text{NCX}}\) appears to account fully for \(I_{\text{ti}}\) (57, 58). For a substantial DAD (approaching the AP threshold), the spontaneous SR Ca release probably needs to propagate in the cell as a Ca wave (vs simply an enhanced Ca spark frequency). A DAD in a single cell cannot cause a heart arrhythmia because neighboring cells would provide a current sink, dissipating the \(I_{\text{ti}}\). However, if DADs occur in a cluster of neighboring cells (e.g., the cells are relatively synchronized by the prior beat), the impulse can escape and propagate through the heart. This is
an important initiator of arrhythmias because human RyR and calsequestrin mutations associated with CPVT (catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia) make SR Ca release more readily activated at diastolic \([Ca]_{i}\) (59), and animals with these mutations show enhanced DADs and aftercontractions as well as CPVT (60, 61).

Inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate (\(InsP_{3}\)) receptors (\(InsP_{3}Rs\)) are low in number in ventricular myocytes (and are mainly in the nuclear envelope; see below). However, in atrial myocytes \(InsP_{3}Rs\) are much more numerous and coexist with RyR on the SR (62, 63). This allows G protein-coupled receptors (e.g., endothelin-1) to induce \(InsP_{3}\)-dependent local SR Ca release, which activates neighboring RyRs and precipitates DAD-like arrhythmias (see Figure 3, below). In HF, in which \(InsP_{3}Rs\) are upregulated in the ventricle, this atrial arrhythmogenic mechanism may also be relevant to ventricular myocytes.

EADs are depolarizations that take off during the AP plateau or phase 3 repolarization and are more likely during long APDs, LQTS, and bradycardia. EADs are thought to be mediated by the reactivation of \(I_{Ca}\) that has recovered from Ca-dependent inactivation during long APs near plateau \(E_{m}\) once \([Ca]_{i}\) has significantly declined (64, 65). Even in LQT3, during which mutant Na channels result in late \(I_{Na}\) and long APD, \(I_{Ca}\) (and not \(I_{Na}\)) reactivation may be responsible for EADs (66). Although \(I_{Ca}\) recovery remains widely accepted as the mechanism for EADs, some events that look like EADs are initiated by SR Ca release and are thus mechanistically like DADs (67, 68).

Electrical alternans (in which APD alternates between long and short) is thought to be a diagnostic precursor for more severe arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation. Although there are, in principle, many electrophysiological prospects to explain APD alternans, in many, if not most cases, the APD alternans is secondary to and dictated by Ca transient-amplitude alternans (69). Several aspects of Ca

handling have been implicated: incomplete \(I_{Ca}\) or RyR recovery and alternating SR Ca content. However, our recent work suggests that alternans induced by increasing pacing frequency are due mainly to the slow restitution of RyR availability (70). That is, slow RyR recovery after a large SR Ca release results in a smaller SR Ca release at the next beat such that the RyRs that did not fire are ready for activation on the next beat, which again has larger SR Ca release. When the larger Ca releases and Ca transients occur, there is more Ca extrusion via NCX and less Ca entry via \(I_{Ca}\) (and NCX) because of greater Ca-dependent inactivation of \(I_{Ca}\). This leads to an alternation of SR Ca content that accompanies and can enhance the extent of Ca alternans. \(I_{Ca}\) availability can also be involved, but probably only at even higher heart rates. So, how do Ca transient alternans cause APD alternans? Many Ca-dependent currents may contribute, but \(I_{Ca}\) and \(I_{NCX}\) are probably key. At the larger beat, there is more inward \(I_{NCX}\), which would prolong APD, but also less integrated \(I_{Ca}\) (and more inactivation), which would shorten APD. Normally in rabbit myocytes concordant alternans are seen (a large Ca transient and long APD coincide), implying that at the big beat, the greater \(I_{NCX}\) predominates over the smaller \(I_{Ca}\) integral (71). The terms concordant and discordant are also used to describe alternans spatially, for which spatially concordant means that longer APDs happen everywhere at the same beat. During spatially discordant alternans, which is a more immediate precursor of dangerous arrhythmias, APs in different regions are out of synch.

### **Ca AND EXCITATION-CONTRACTION COUPLING**

Each junction between the sarcolemma (T-tubule and surface) and SR, where 10–25 L-type Ca channels and 100–200 RyRs are clustered, constitutes a local Ca signaling complex, or couplon. When a Ca channel opens, local \([Ca]_{i}\) rises in <1 ms in the
junctional cleft to 10–20 μM, and this activates RyRs to release Ca from the SR. A single Ca channel opening can trigger Ca release, but typically several channels open during an AP, creating a safety margin to ensure effective coupling. Approximately 6–20 RyRs probably open at each couplon (1), on the basis of estimates of the SR Ca release flux and single-channel current. This release, which is synchronized by local Ca-induced Ca release among RyRs [and maybe by physical coupling between RyRs (72)] raises cleft \[Ca\]i to 200–400 μM. Ca diffuses from the cleft to the cytosol to activate the myofilaments. However, under normal conditions Ca released from one couplon does not activate the neighboring junction (which is ~1 μm away radially or 2 μm away longitudinally). This is because \[Ca\]i declines over that distance (i.e., the released Ca is diluted in the much larger volume). This independent function of couplons (each is under local control) means that for synchronous contractile activation, all 20,000 couplons in the cell must be simultaneously activated, which is normally accomplished by the AP and Ica activation.

When the SR Ca content is elevated, the RyR is more sensitive to \[Ca\]i. During systole this increased sensitivity can result in a greater fractional release for a given Ica trigger (73). During diastole it can result in increased SR Ca leak (74), frequency of Ca sparks [spontaneous Ca releases from individual couplons (75, 76)], and Ca waves, in which Ca release from one couplon activates neighboring couplons and propagates the length of the cell (and can lead to DADs). The increase in RyR sensitivity with higher SR Ca content has been attributed to the binding of Ca to calsequestrin, which binds to triadin and RyR inside the SR in a Ca-sensitive manner (77). In contrast, in calsequestrin knock-out mice fractional release is still enhanced by increased SR Ca content (78). Thus, RyR regulation by intra-SR Ca is important, but the details remain elusive.

Within a couplon, Ca release is positive feedback, but the fractional SR Ca release is only approximately 50–60% (79). So, what turns off SR Ca release before the SR is emptied? The two leading explanations are (a) RyR inactivation or adaptation that depends somehow on cleft \[Ca\]i (80) and (b) RyR regulation by luminal SR \[Ca\] (79, 81, 82). The issue is not resolved, but our working hypothesis is that luminal SR \[Ca\] is more critical, because enhanced SR Ca buffering capacity prolongs release (83), Ica cannot trigger release when the SR Ca load is approximately half-normal (73, 79), and direct measures of local intra-SR free \[Ca\] show a nadir at SR \[Ca\] ~ 0.4 mM, almost regardless of initial value (82). Thus, as release proceeds and \[Ca\]SR declines, the RyR gating properties strongly favor closure. This ensures that the SR never is fully depleted of Ca physiologically, although direct activation of RyR by caffeine can lead to full depletion.

Although it is clear now that Ica,L is the main physiological trigger of E-C coupling (for other proposed mechanisms, see Reference 1), it seems that NCX can modulate the process in three ways. First, submembrane \[Na\]i rises as a result of INa, which may drive Ca influx via NCX, thereby adding to the Ica trigger. We measured how much INa influences NCX, and this effect seems to be small (84) but may contribute functionally (85). Second, at the early AP peak, Ca channels are just getting activated, but NCX can bring Ca in right away (potentially pre-elevating cleft \[Ca\]i). Here, it is important to appreciate that once a Ca channel opens, Ca entry via NCX will normally reverse because of high local \[Ca\]. Third, if a Ca channel fails to open at a given couplon, Ca entry via NCX may eventually raise cleft \[Ca\]i to the point at which SR Ca release is triggered. Two factors that limit triggering via NCX are that (a) the unitary Ca flux rate via NCX is ~1000 times smaller than for Ica (so many NCX molecules would need to be in the right place) and (b) ultrastructural data suggest that, although L-type Ca channels and RyR are colocalized at couplons, neither NCX nor Na channels colocalize with RyR, or each other (86). More work
is required to understand fully how $I_{\mathrm{Na}}$ and NCX modulate E-C coupling.

Both PKA and CaMKII can phosphorylate and regulate $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and RyR. Also, both PKA and CaMKII can regulate SR Ca uptake via phospholamban phosphorylation and relief of the tonic SERCA2a inhibition by phospholamban. These kinases phosphorylate different sites on these proteins but in general activate each process. However, in our hands, PKA robustly activates $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and SR Ca uptake but has modest effects on RyR gating (87, 88). As such, the PKA-dependent inotropy is due mainly to increased $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and enhanced SR Ca uptake and content (where both enhanced $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and SR Ca content enhance fractional release). In contrast, CaMKII seems to activate RyR robustly (enhancing fractional release directly) while more modestly stimulating $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ (facilitation) and SR Ca uptake [owing to more limited phospholamban phosphorylation (89)]. Notably, there is some controversy about the effects of PKA and CaMKII on RyR, which require further clarification (90–92). Physiologically, sympathetic activation stimulates both PKA and CaMKII, which thus function synergistically. CaMKII is typically considered to be downstream of PKA and elevated Ca transients. However, this may be overly simplistic because $(a)$ β-adrenergic agonists appear to activate CaMKII effects on RYR independently of PKA or Ca (93) and $(b)$ CaMKII mediates long-term inotropic effects of β-adrenergic agonists after PKA loses efficacy (94).

Both Ca influx and SR Ca release contribute to the Ca transient, and Ca removal from the cytosol is by both the SR Ca-ATPase (SERCA) and sarcolemmal extrusion (mainly via NCX, with a very minor contribution by the plasma membrane Ca-ATPase). In the steady state, the amount of Ca taken up by the SR during relaxation must equal the amount released, and the amount that enters by $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and NCX must equal the amount extruded. The fraction of activating Ca that crosses the SR vs sarcolemma varies among species. In mouse and rat ventricles, 90–95% of the activator Ca cycles through the SR, with only 5–8% transported via $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ and NCX. In contrast, in rabbit, dog, cat, guinea pig, ferret, and human ventricles, this balance is closer to 70% SR and 25–28% sarcolemmal (1). In HF, in which typically SERCA function is decreased and NCX function is enhanced, this balance can be shifted closer to 50–50% (57, 95). This balance has important implications for understanding and modulating Ca transients in HF. It also places constraints on a popular index of E-C coupling, namely gain. Gain is experimentally defined in different ways, but in the strict sense, it is the amount of SR Ca release divided by the amount of trigger Ca influx (total Ca release/integrated $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$). Thus, the detailed quantitative analysis of Ca fluxes, which is easier to do on the extrusion side (1), indicates that the physiological gain of SR Ca release is 2.5–4 in most mammalian ventricular myocytes but is much higher in rat and mouse (in the range of 12 to 20). Rat and mouse ventricular myocytes also have an unusually short APD, lacking a prominent plateau, as well as a different balance of K currents and substantially higher $[\mathrm{Na}]_{i}$. These species differences in E-C coupling are important to keep in mind, especially because mouse and rat are frequently used animal models for cardiovascular studies.

NCX is crucial for extruding Ca from cardiac myocytes. So it was a surprise that the conditional knockout of NCX in adult mouse myocyte has a remarkably mild phenotype (96). However, these mice show an intriguing molecular adaptation to NCX ablation. There is no functional upregulation of sarcolemmal Ca-ATPase (the other Ca extrusion mechanism in myocytes). Instead, myocytes reduce $I_{\mathrm{Ca}, \mathrm{L}}$ and shorten the APD (via enhanced $I_{\mathrm{to}}$), which further decreases total Ca influx. Although this experiment has been done only in mouse, I wonder if a more human-like species with longer APD and greater trans-sarcolemmal Ca fluxes would make the same adaptation, and if it would suffice. Follow-up studies in these NCX knockout mice suggested that $I_{\mathrm{Ca}}$ was reduced because of
elevated cleft \([Ca]_i\), raising again the possibility that NCX is important in modulating cleft \([Ca]_i\) (97).

**Ca-DEPENDENT CONTRACTILE ACTIVATION**

The rise of \([Ca]_i\) activates contraction by the binding of Ca to TnC (which is similar to CaM), a part of the thin-filament regulatory complex (Figure 2). Upon Ca binding, TnC binds troponin I (TnI) more strongly, pulling TnI off its actin-binding site, such that the troponin/tropomyosin complex rolls deeper into the groove of the actin filament, allowing myosin heads to interact with actin. When a myosin head attaches, forming a crossbridge, it can push the troponin/tropomyosin complex even deeper into the groove, which facilitates the formation of crossbridges at neighboring actin sites and the binding of Ca at neighboring TnC sites. This contributes to the strong cooperativity observed in myofilament Ca sensitivity curves [Hill coefficients of 6–8 have been reported (98)]. Notably, the Ca-force interaction is reciprocal because crossbridge binding and force generation enhance the affinity of Ca binding to TnC, slowing Ca dissociation and thereby prolonging the active state.

It has been suggested that Ca dissociates rapidly from the myofilaments (paralleling \([Ca]_i\) decline) and that Ca-independent myofilament processes fully dictate relaxation kinetics and even maintain maximal systolic pressure (99) because of long-lived, Ca-free crossbridge cycling. However, this is based on indirect inferences about myofilament Ca binding, and true measures of TnC-bound Ca during normal contractions would be needed to test this hypothesis. I suspect that the increase in Ca affinity (and slowed Ca off-rate) during contraction can largely explain the time lag between \([Ca]_i\) decline and relaxation. Indeed, an acceleration of \([Ca]_i\) decline accelerates relaxation proportionally, whereas PKA-dependent TnI phosphorylation (accelerating TnC-Ca off-

rate without accelerating \([Ca]_i\) decline) has a much weaker lusitropic effect (100). Nevertheless, altering the off-rate of Ca binding to TnC does influence relaxation rate, especially under relatively isometric conditions (100–103). Overall, then, there is a dynamic interplay between Ca binding, crossbridge cooperativity, and myofilament deactivation, in which \([Ca]_i\) decline, TnC Ca affinity, and intrinsic crossbridge properties all influence relaxation.

The Frank-Starling law of the heart (greater diastolic filling leads to stronger contraction) was classically explained by sarcomere anatomy. That is, with increasing sarcomere length (SL), the overlap of thick and thin filaments is more optimal, allowing more crossbridges to form and greater force development. Furthermore, cardiac muscle becomes very stiff as SL increases to the optimum overlap, such that physiologically, the declining limb of the length-developed tension curve at which myofilament overlap would progressively decline would never be reached. In skeletal muscle SL is typically limited from entering the descending limb of the curve by the range of motion around joints (e.g., the biceps/elbow).

Although myofilament overlap contributes to the Frank-Starling law, increasing SL also dramatically increases myofilament Ca sensitivity (104, 105), and this Ca sensitization is an even more important factor (106). This raises the question, why does increasing SL increase myofilament Ca sensitivity? An attractive hypothesis, based on constancy of myocyte volume, is the following (107–109). As myocyte and SL increase, the width and filament lattice spacing decrease, bringing thick and thin filaments closer together and increasing the likelihood of crossbridge formation and cooperative Ca binding. Indeed, osmotic compression of the myofilament lattice can mimic the enhanced myofilament Ca sensitivity seen by increasing SL. Although lattice spacing is probably the dominant factor enhancing myofilament Ca sensitivity at longer SL, this may not be the whole story (109, 110), and the

Ventricular myocyte

Sarcolemma

Ca transport, myofilament Ca activation, and mitochondrial Ca handling. Ca influx and Ca-induced Ca release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) activate the myofilaments. Ca binding to troponin C (TnC) at its N terminus causes TnC to bind to the C terminus of troponin I (TnI), pulling TnI off its site on actin and allowing tropomyosin (Tm) and the third part of the troponin complex (TnT) to roll deeper into the groove between actin monomers. This allows myosin to bind to actin, and this further shifts Tm-TnT deeper into the groove, enhancing Ca binding and crossbridge formation at neighboring sites and resulting in cooperativity (myofilament depiction is modified from a version kindly supplied by Dr. R.J. Solaro, University of Illinois, Chicago). Ca can also enter mitochondria via a Ca uniporter and is extruded by a Na/Ca antiporter (NCX). This mitochondrial NCX is different from sarcolemmal NCX, and its stoichiometry is controversial (2–3Na:1Ca). Na is extruded from mitochondria by electroneutral Na/H exchange (NHX), and protons (H) are extruded by the electron transport chain [including cytochromes (Cyto)]. The mitochondrial F₀F₁-ATPase uses the energy in the inward H gradient to couple H influx to ATP synthesis. Increases in mitochondrial [Ca] activate dehydrogenases that supply reducing equivalents (as NADH) to stimulate ATP synthesis. The mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) is thought to be composed of the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT), and cyclophilin D (CycD). PLB, phospholamban; RyR, ryanodine receptor.

molecular details of this effect have yet to be delineated.

Frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation (FDAR) is likely a physiologically important mechanism in allowing ventricular refilling at increasing heart rates, but the molecular mechanism has been elusive. Early work showed that accelerated SR Ca uptake was involved and made a plausible case for frequency- and CaMKII-dependent phospholamban phosphorylation at Thr 17, which may match the time course of FDAR accumulation and washout (111, 112). However, FDAR was still present in phospholamban knockout mice but appeared to be CaMKII dependent, suggesting that CaMKII is involved but phospholamban phosphorylation is not required (113, 114). Whereas our studies have implicated CaMKII in FDAR [at least in part (115)] and shown parallel effects on \([Ca]_i\) decline and relaxation, some groups have failed to see effects of CaMKII inhibitors (116–118) and also raised the possibility of altered myofilament properties (118). It is fair to say that at this point the molecular mechanism remains unresolved. In a physiological context, heart rate increases via sympathetic activation, so intrinsic FDAR would synergize with PKA-dependent acceleration of \([Ca]_i\) decline (via phospholamban phosphorylation at Ser 16) and reduced Ca affinity of TnC to accelerate relaxation.

**Ca AND ENERGY BALANCE (MITOCHONDRIA)**

The two biggest consumers of myocyte ATP during the cardiac cycle are the Ca-dependent myofilament ATPase and ion transport ATPases (e.g., SR Ca-ATPase and Na/K-ATPase). Because more Na enters the myocyte via NCX (to extrude Ca) vs via Na channels and extrusion of that Na requires Na/K-ATPase activity, a vast majority of ATP consumption is either regulated by Ca or involved in transporting Ca. Mitochondria are of course the main producers of myocyte ATP, and the details of regulation of ATP production are beyond the scope of this review (Figure 2). However, micromolar intramitochondrial \([Ca]\) (\([Ca]_{Mito}\)) can activate the mitochondrial \(F_1F_0\) ATPase (119) and several key mitochondrial dehydrogenases (pyruvate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase) (120). Thus, mitochondrial Ca may provide important feedback between energy supply and demand. Indeed, when cardiac muscle work is increased (with glucose as the substrate), \([NADH]\) abruptly decreases, reflecting ATP consumption. However, if the increased workload was associated with a higher amplitude or frequency of Ca transients, \([NADH]\) recovered gradually, matching the time course of the slow rise in \([Ca]_{Mito}\). In contrast, if the imposed workload was not Ca dependent (e.g., mediated by increased SL), NADH declined but failed to recover (121, 122). This suggests that \([Ca]_{Mito}\)-dependent activation of dehydrogenases may be important in balancing energy supply to demand when increases in workload mediated by Ca occur (i.e., most inotropic mechanisms, but not Frank-Starling).

So how is myocyte \([Ca]_{Mito}\) regulated? Ca can enter mitochondria via a Ca uniporter, but the rate is extremely low under physiological conditions, such that during a normal Ca transient only ~1% of the Ca removed from the cytosol is taken up by mitochondria (123). At a steady-state beat this small amount of Ca must also be extruded from mitochondria to the cytosol, presumably late in diastole, because Ca extrusion via the Na/Ca antiporter (which differs from sarcolemmal NCX) is very slow. Indeed, mitochondria take many tens of seconds to extrude a moderate Ca load. Such a Ca load can be generated by increasing either the frequency or amplitude of Ca transients (such that efflux cannot keep up with the increased influx) or by the application of caffeine with NCX blocked (disabling the two dominant competitors of the uniporter in myocytes, SR Ca-ATPase and NCX). Moreover, this extrusion is up a huge electrochemical driving force for Ca entry (~180 mV

inside-vs-cytosolic potential; diastolic \([Ca]_{Mito}\) is similar to \([Ca]_i\) and is thus very expensive energetically.

This framework, in which beat-to-beat changes in \([Ca]_{Mito}\) are small but cumulative changes in \([Ca]_{Mito}\) over several or tens of seconds cause regulatory changes in ATP production, fits most of our data and much historical data from isolated mitochondria. However, Ca uptake via the Ca uniporter can be dramatically increased when \([Ca]_i\) levels are chronically elevated to greater than \(1 \mu M\) (\(K_m \sim 30 \mu M\)), although this activation seems to take time at high \([Ca]_i\). This may limit uniporter-mediated Ca uptake during normal E-C coupling conditions (allowing Ca use in contractile activation) but also permit mitochondria to accumulate large amounts of Ca during cellular Ca overload (to protect the cytosol from Ca overload).

This working model may be overly simplistic, and several critical controversies need to be resolved. First, \([Ca]_{Mito}\) may increase as fast as or faster than \([Ca]_i\) upon SR Ca release (124–127). One explanation for this is that the end of a mitochondrion is typically in close proximity to the site of SR Ca release, where local \([Ca]_i\) is much higher than bulk \([Ca]_i\). Indeed, mitochondria, like couplons, are packed around the myofilaments (whose course cannot be interrupted without mechanical consequence). This explanation may be correct, but none of these \([Ca]_{Mito}\) measurements have been calibrated, so it is difficult to know whether the phasic signals correspond to only the \(1\%\) of cytosolic Ca removal mentioned above. However, Maack et al. (127) suggested that mitochondrial Ca uptake may be even higher, possibly sufficient to limit the \([Ca]_i\) transient and contraction. Quantitative measurements will be required to resolve this issue. Second, the \([Ca]_{Mito}\) decline signal in some of these studies was comparable to or only 2.5 times slower than \([Ca]_i\) decline. This is more worrisome because it is inconsistent with known mitochondrial Ca efflux mechanisms (which are much slower than SR Ca-ATPase). This issue will be important

to resolve. Other issues requiring resolution include the still unknown molecular identities of the Ca uniporter and Na/Ca antiporter and a provocative, but controversial, report of a skeletal muscle RyR present in mitochondria that may mediate Ca fluxes (128).

Although mitochondria make most of the myocyte ATP, glycolytic enzymes cluster around both the SR Ca-ATPase and Na/K-ATPase [and the ATP-sensitive K channel (e.g., Reference 129)]. This is notable because glycolysis can keep local [ATP] high and local [ADP] low, both of which help these pumps develop high transmembrane \([Ca]\) and \([Na]/[K]\) gradients (as these gradients depend on \(\Delta G_{ATP}\) and hence on \([ADP][P_i]/[ATP])\).

### **Ca AND CELL DEATH**

Cell death can be by either necrosis, programmed cell death (apoptosis), or autophagy, but I restrict discussion here to the first two (130, 131). Myocyte and particularly mitochondrial Ca overload can be involved in both necrosis and apoptosis. As indicated above, when myocytes are overloaded with Ca (e.g., in reperfusion after ischemia), mitochondria (which occupy \(\sim 35\%\) of cell volume) can temporarily take up large amounts of Ca, thereby limiting hypercontraction, the activation of Ca-dependent proteases (calpains), and arrhythmias. However, mitochondrial Ca uptake occurs at the expense of ATP production. That is, the same mitochondrial membrane potential is used to drive uncoupled Ca influx as is used for proton influx that is coupled to ATP synthesis. In the extreme case, Ca uptake can depolarize mitochondria entirely. Thus, this is only a temporary solution because if most mitochondria in a myocyte have taken up an excess of Ca, the myocyte cannot function energetically.

High \([Ca]_{Mito}\) activates the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP), which is thought to be composed of the adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT), voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), and cyclophilin D (Figure 2). However, recent work
with knockouts of ANT, VDAC, and cyclophilin D has failed to abolish MPTP function (132–134), indicating that we do not understand adequately either which proteins comprise the MPTP or how it works functionally. The MPTP allows molecules of up to ~1500 Da to flow freely across the mitochondrial membrane. This immediately dissipates the mitochondrial membrane potential and releases Ca to the cytosol because the electrical gradient had driven \([Ca]_{Mito} > [Ca]_i\). This exacerbation of cytosolic Ca overload results in hypercontraction, ATP depletion, and cell death. For Ca-overload-induced cell death, what may distinguish necrosis from apoptosis is simply whether the cell runs out of ATP (leading to necrosis) or has sufficient ATP to follow the apoptotic pathway. The MPTP opening also uncouples oxidative phosphorylation and causes swelling of the internal mitochondrial matrix, leading to rupture of the outer mitochondrial membrane. This allows mitochondrial cytochrome \(c\) release, contributing to caspase activation and apoptosis [although cytochrome \(c\) release does not require MPTP activation (130)].

Ca-dependent proteases (calpains) may also be activated during Ca overload during ischemia-reperfusion, cleaving key proteins such as TnI and others, and this may be involved in long-term contractile dysfunction associated with myocardial stunning (135, 136). In ischemia-reperfusion, calpain also cleaves the proapoptotic BH3-only Bcl-2 family member Bid, which can trigger mitochondrial cytochrome \(c\) release and apoptosis (137). Thus, Ca-dependent signaling can be critically involved in cell death pathways.

### Ca-CaM-CaMK-HDAC Pathway

CaMK has been implicated in the regulation of various transcription factors, e.g., activation protein-1 (AP-1), activating transcription factor-1 (ATF-1), serum response factor (SRF), cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), and myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) (144). CREB can be phosphorylated by CaMKII and CaMKIV, but CREB phosphorylation levels were unaltered in transgenic mice overexpressing CaMKIIδB or CaMKIV that develop hypertrophy and HF (140, 145). This implied that CREB was not critical for CaMKII-dependent cardiac hypertrophy. In contrast, CaMK-dependent MEF2 activation is strongly implicated in hypertrophy (140), but not by phosphorylating MEF2. Rather, the CaMKII-MEF2 link seems to be via class II HDACs (as transcriptional repressors) (142, 143).

Most class II HDACs (HDAC4, -5, -7, and -9) are expressed in the heart and have a unique MEF2-binding domain in the N-terminal extension that is not in other HDACs (143). This N-terminal extension also contains two conserved serines that, when phosphorylated, bind to the chaperone 14-3-3 (masking a nuclear localization signal), and the complex is exported from the nucleus via CRM1 (chromosomal region maintenance protein 1) (thereby relieving MEF2 repression). HDAC activity is opposed by histone acetyltransferases (HATs), which compete with HDACs for the same binding site on MEF2. HATs acetylate core histones and relax chromatin structure, allowing transcriptional activation. Although Ca-CaM can bind to the MEF2-binding domain of HDACs and dissociate the MEF2-HDAC complex,

### Ca IN TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATION AND HYPERTROPHY

Ca-dependent signaling is also involved in transcriptional regulation and hypertrophic signaling in the heart. Transgenic overexpression of CaM causes hypertrophy (138), and CaM inhibition can block myocyte hypertro-
Figure 3

Ca-dependent transcriptional activation in cardiac myocytes. In addition to the Ca regulation in excitation-contraction coupling (top left, as in Figure 1), and potential role of InsP₃R (IP₃R) in triggered arrhythmias (top right), Ca-dependent signaling to the nucleus can modulate transcription. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) such as those for endothelin-1 (ET-1) or α-adrenergic agonists [phenylephrine (Phe)] and tyrosine kinase receptors (TKR) such as those activated by insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) can activate phospholipase C (PLC) to produce diacylglycerol (DAG) (which can activate PKC) and InsP₃ (IP₃). IP₃R in the nuclear envelope associate with calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase IIδ (CaMKIIδ), which can be activated by local IP₃R-mediated Ca release, resulting in histone deacetylase (HDAC) phosphorylation (which also occurs by PKD) and nuclear export. This relieves HDAC-dependent suppression of myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2)-driven transcription. Calcineurin (CaN) is activated by Ca-CaM and can dephosphorylate NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells). NFAT is then translocated to the nucleus, where, along with the transcription factor GATA, it can stimulate the transcription of genes contributing to hypertrophy. The orange clouds indicate where local [Ca] elevation is critical for signaling near RyR and InsP₃R. P indicates phosphorylation, MF denotes myofilaments, and Gα and βγ are subunits of the G protein Gq.

phosphorylation of the two conserved HDAC serines is probably the more important physiological mechanism to derepress MEF2, allowing transcriptional activation. CaMK is a class II HDAC kinase (143, 144).

Olson's group has characterized how G protein-coupled receptors (e.g., endothelin-1 and phenylephrine) regulate HDAC4 and HDAC5 phosphorylation in Cos cells and cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (143, 145–147). HDAC4 has a CaMKII docking site near the key phosphorylation sites, making CaMKII a privileged activator of HDAC4 nuclear export and HDAC4 a key CaMKII-dependent regulator of hypertrophy (148). Indeed, CaMKII-dependent HDAC4 phosphorylation causes hypertrophy, whereas overexpression of HDAC4 limits agonist-induced hypertrophy. However, there is no information about what specific Ca signals are involved in CaMKII-dependent HDAC4 phosphorylation. In their cellular expression systems, HDAC5 (which lacks the CaMKII docking site and a third phosphorylation site) does not seem to be activated by CaMKII. Rather, protein kinase D (PKD) mediates HDAC5 phosphorylation and export for both endothelin-1 and phenylephrine. Moreover, for phenylephrine, PKC is responsible for PKD-dependent HDAC5 phosphorylation, whereas for endothelin-1 PKD activation appears to be PKC independent (although how PKD is activated in this case is unclear) (147).

We studied HDAC5 translocation in adult rabbit and mouse ventricular myocytes and found that endothelin-1-induced HDAC5 nuclear export depends equally on CaMKII and PKD (149). Part of the difference may be that myocyte PKD expression dramatically decreases as neonatal myocytes mature to adult myocytes (150), and CaMKII may have greater access to HDAC5 in adult myocytes. We also examined the detailed Ca signaling in endothelin-1-induced HDAC5 phosphorylation in adult ventricular myocytes. Nuclear export required InsP₃ (and type 2 InsP₃Rs), Ca release from stores, CaM, and HDAC5 phosphorylation but was completely insensitive to the Ca transients associated with E-C coupling (cytosolic or nuclear) or PKC inhibition (149). Adult ventricular myocytes express almost only type 2 InsP₃Rs (which form a strong complex with CaMKIIδ), and these receptors are localized mainly on the nuclear envelope (151). Moreover, CaMKII-dependent InsP₃R phosphorylation inhibits InsP₃R channel activity (a type of negative feedback). We concluded that endothelin-1 induces InsP₃ production and diffusion to the nuclear InsP₃R, causing locally very high [Ca]i at the mouth of the channel to activate local CaMKII. CaMKII can then phosphorylate HDAC5. In this way myocytes can distinguish simultaneous local and global Ca signals involved in contractile activation from those targeting gene expression.

### **Ca-CaM-Calcineurin-NFAT Pathway**

Calcineurin (phosphatase 2B) has two subunits, CnA and CnB. CnA includes the CaM-binding and phosphatase domains but requires CnB for activity. Calcineurin has much higher Ca-CaM affinity than does CaMKII (Km ~ 0.1 vs 50 nM). Thus, whereas CaMKII may respond to high-amplitude (or frequent) Ca oscillations and require autophosphorylation for true signal integration, calcineurin may be better at sensing smaller sustained [Ca]i elevations, and the low off-rate allows intrinsic signal integration (152). Upon activation by Ca-CaM, calcineurin dephosphorylates NFAT, causing NFAT import into the nucleus, where NFAT can work cooperatively with the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 to activate hypertrophic gene transcription (153). Cardiac overexpression of activated calcineurin or NFAT causes massive cardiac hypertrophy and HF. In contrast, calcineurin inhibition (with numerous inhibitors and approaches) can prevent hypertrophy induced by a wide variety of stimuli in vivo and in vitro, and cardiac expression of dominant negative calcineurin or CnAβ knockout impairs
hypertrophic responses to pressure overload, angiotensin II, and isoproterenol infusion (141, 153–155). Whereas knockout of NFATc4 does not block hypertrophy, knockout of NFATc3 inhibits the hypertrophic response to aortic banding, angiotensin II infusion, or active calcineurin overexpression (156). Several kinases that are also implicated in hypertrophic signaling (p38, JNK, and glycogen synthase kinase-3β) can phosphorylate NFAT (153). Thus, the calcineurin-NFATc3 pathway is also a Ca-dependent nodal point in cardiac hypertrophic signaling.

Although calcineurin-NFAT is a Ca-CaM-driven pathway, there is remarkably little information in adult cardiac myocytes regarding the specific types of Ca signals that activate this system. In some lymphocyte studies, sustained global \([Ca]_i\) elevation seems key in activating NFAT signals (152, 157), whereas in others \([Ca]_i\) oscillations are more efficient NFAT activators (158, 159). In hippocampal neurons, L-type \(I_{Ca}\) induces NFAT translocation (160). In skeletal muscle, electrical stimulation with patterns typical of slow-twitch (but not fast-twitch) muscle caused calcineurin-dependent NFATc1 translocation to the nucleus (161). It will be valuable to get a better understanding of what specific subcellular Ca signals activate cardiac myocyte calcineurin and drive nuclear translocation of the different NFAT isoforms.

Finally, a novel Ca-related transcriptional regulatory pathway in neurons has been described. This pathway involves a cleaved C-terminal fragment of the L-type Ca channel (162). Maneuvers that lower \([Ca]_i\) cause nuclear translocation of this fragment, whereas \(I_{Ca}\) activity and elevated \([Ca]_i\) diminish nuclear localization. In the nucleus, this fragment appears to bind to proteins known to regulate transcription, and many genes are differentially regulated when this fragment is expressed. It will be interesting to see if this pathway is exhibited in cardiac my-

ocytes [where L-type Ca channels are similarly cleaved (163)] and how it is regulated by Ca.

These Ca-CaM-dependent excitation-transcription coupling pathways outlined above may alter the transcription of key Ca transport and regulatory proteins such as SERCA, phospholamban, NCX, RyR2, CaM, and CaMKII. This Ca-dependent regulation of Ca handling protein expression may be part of a long-term feedback loop. This may work by altered Ca signaling that triggers the altered expression of genes that may feedback to normalize cardiac myocyte function or contribute to the exacerbation of hypertrophic or HF phenotypes.

**CONCLUSIONS**

In summary, Ca participates as a critical signaling molecule in many different myocyte systems and on various timescales (milliseconds to hours or days) and in different spatial environments that allow a myocyte to distinguish between Ca signals that activate SR Ca release in E-C coupling, DADs, contraction, and gene transcription. I raise here a number of specific issues for which our understanding of Ca-dependent regulation is incomplete, and these individual questions merit further investigation. With the complex pleiotropic effects of Ca in cardiac myocytes, it also becomes more important to consider the integrative influences at the cellular and tissue levels of these individual molecular regulatory mechanisms. For example, how do the multiple effects of altered Ca handling and signaling impact the AP shape (and functional expression of key proteins) of different cells in the heart, and how do these predispose one to whole-heart arrhythmias in HF? This requires additional experimental work at multiple levels. Our understanding of these issues may also be assisted by improved mechanistic computational models to guide experiments and test our understanding.
LITERATURE CITED

1. Bers DM. 2001. *Excitation-Contraction Coupling and Cardiac Contractile Force*. Dordrecht, Neth.: Kluwer Acad. 427 pp. 2nd ed.
2. Chen X, Wilson RM, Kubo H, Berretta RM, Harris DM, et al. 2007. Adolescent feline heart contains a population of small, proliferative ventricular myocytes with immature physiological properties. *Circ. Res.* 100:536–44
3. Zhang Z, Xu Y, Song H, Rodriguez J, Tuteja D, et al. 2002. Functional roles of Caᵥ1.3 (α₁D) calcium channel in sinoatrial nodes: insight gained using gene-targeted null mutant mice. *Circ. Res.* 90:981–87
4. Bers DM. 2006. The beat goes on: diastolic noise that just won't quit. *Circ. Res.* 99:921–23
5. Lipsius SL, Huser J, Blatter LA. 2001. Intracellular Ca²⁺ release sparks atrial pacemaker activity. *News Physiol. Sci.* 16:101–6
6. Vinogradova TM, Zhou YY, Maltsev V, Lyashkov A, Stern M, et al. 2004. Rhythmic ryanodine receptor Ca²⁺ releases during diastolic depolarization of sinoatrial pacemaker cells do not require membrane depolarization. *Circ. Res.* 94:802–9
7. Yu X, Chen XW, Zhou P, Yao L, Liu T, et al. 2007. Calcium influx through Iᵢ channels in rat ventricular myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 292:C1147–55
8. Sah R, Ramirez RJ, Oudit GY, Gidrewicz D, Trivieri MG, et al. 2003. Regulation of cardiac excitation-contraction coupling by action potential repolarization: role of the transient outward potassium current (Iₜₒ). *J. Physiol.* 546:5–18
9. Zhou Z, Bers DM. 2000. Ca²⁺ influx via L-type Ca²⁺ channel during tail current and above current reversal potential in ferret ventricular myocytes. *J. Physiol.* 523:57–66
10. Pitt GS, Zühlke RD, Hudmon A, Schulman H, Reuter H, et al. 2001. Molecular basis of calmodulin tethering and Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation of L-type Ca²⁺ channels. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:30794–802
11. Erickson MG, Alseikhan BA, Peterson BZ, Yue DT. 2001. Preassociation of calmodulin with voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels revealed by FRET in single living cells. *Neuron* 31:973–85
12. Pate P, Mochca-Morales J, Wu Y, Zhang JZ, Rodney GG, et al. 2000. Determinants for calmodulin binding on voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channels. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:39786–92
13. DeMaria CD, Soong TW, Alseikhan BA, Alvania RS, Yue DT. 2001. Calmodulin bifurcates the local Ca²⁺ signal that modulates P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channels. *Nature* 411:484–89
14. Yuan W, Bers DM. 1994. Ca-dependent facilitation of cardiac Ca current is due to Ca-calmodulin dependent protein kinase. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 267:H982–93
15. Anderson ME, Braun AP, Schulman H, Premack BA. 1994. Multifunctional Ca/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase mediates Ca-induced enhancement of the L-type Ca current in rabbit ventricular myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 75:854–61
16. Xiao RP, Cheng H, Lederer WJ, Suzuki T, Lakatta EG. 1994. Dual regulation of Ca/calmodulin kinase II activity by membrane voltage and by calcium influx. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 91:9659–63
17. Dzhura I, Wu Y, Colbran RJ, Balser JR, Anderson ME. 2000. Calmodulin kinase determines calcium-dependent facilitation of L-type calcium channels. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2:173–77
18. Hudmon A, Schulman H, Kim J, Maltez JM, Tsien RW, et al. 2005. CaMKII tethers to L-type Ca²⁺ channels, establishing a local and dedicated integrator of Ca²⁺ signals for facilitation. *J. Cell Biol.* 171:537–47
19. Grueter CE, Abiria SA, Dzhura I, Wu Y, Ham AJ, et al. 2006. L-type Ca²⁺ channel facilitation mediated by phosphorylation of the β subunit by CaMKII. *Mol. Cell* 23:641–50

20. Yuan W, Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 1996. Comparison of sarcolemmal Ca channel current in rabbit and rat ventricular myocytes. *J. Physiol.* 493:733–46

21. Puglisi JL, Yuan W, Bassani JWM, Bers DM. 1999. Ca²⁺ influx through Ca²⁺ channels in rabbit ventricular myocytes during action potential clamp: influence of temperature. *Circ. Res.* 85:e7–16

22. Altamirano J, Bers DM. 2007. Effect of intracellular Ca²⁺ and action potential duration on L-type Ca²⁺ channel inactivation and recovery from inactivation in rabbit cardiac myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 293:H563–73

23. Sipido KR, Stankovicova T, Flameng W, Vanhaecke J, Verdonck F. 1998. Frequency dependence of Ca²⁺ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in human ventricular myocytes from end-stage heart failure. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 37:478–88

24. Davare MA, Avdonin V, Hall DD, Peden EM, Burette A, et al. 2001. A β₂ adrenergic receptor signaling complex assembled with the Ca²⁺ channel Cav1.2. *Science* 293:98–101

25. Hall DD, Feekes JA, Arachchige Don AS, Shi M, Hamid J, et al. 2006. Binding of protein phosphatase 2A to the L-type calcium channel Cav1.2 next to Ser1928, its main PKA site, is critical for Ser1928 dephosphorylation. *Biochemistry* 45:3448–59

26. Hulme JT, Westenbroek RE, Scheuer T, Catterall WA. 2006. Phosphorylation of serine 1928 in the distal C-terminal domain of cardiac Cav1.2 channels during β1-adrenergic regulation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:16574–79

27. Ganesan AN, Maack C, Johns DC, Sidor A, O’Rourke B. 2006. β-adrenergic stimulation of L-type Ca²⁺ channels in cardiac myocytes requires the distal carboxyl terminus of α1C but not serine 1928. *Circ. Res.* 98:e11–18

28. Bunemann M, Gerhardstein BL, Gao T, Hosey MM. 1999. Functional regulation of L-type calcium channels via protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of the β₂ subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:33851–54

29. Egger M, Niggli E. 2000. Paradoxical block of the Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger by extracellular protons in guinea-pig ventricular myocytes. *J. Physiol.* 523:353–66

30. Kang TM, Hilgemann DW. 2004. Multiple transport modes of the cardiac Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger. *Nature* 427:544–48

31. Weber CR, Piacentino V III, Ginsburg KS, Houser SR, Bers DM. 2002. Na/Ca exchange current and submembrane [Ca] during the cardiac action potential. *Circ. Res.* 90:182–89

32. Weber CR, Piacentino V III, Houser SR, Bers DM. 2003. Dynamic regulation of Na/Ca exchange function in human heart failure. *Circulation* 108:2224–29

33. Philipson KD, Nicoll DA. 2000. Sodium-calcium exchange: a molecular perspective. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 62:111–33

34. Weber CR, Ginsburg KS, Philipson KD, Shannon TR, Bers DM. 2001. Allosteric regulation of Na/Ca exchange current by cytosolic Ca in intact cardiac myocytes. *J. Gen. Physiol.* 117:119–31

35. Reeves JP, Condrescu M, Urbanczyk J, Chernysh O. 2007. New modes of exchanger regulation: physiological implications. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* 1099:64–77

36. Hilgemann DW, Ball R. 1996. Regulation of cardiac Na⁺,Ca²⁺ exchange and Kₐₜₚ potassium channels by PIP₂. *Science* 273:956–59

37. Iwamoto T, Pan Y, Nakamura TY, Wakabayashi S, Shigekawa M. 1998. Protein kinase C-dependent regulation of Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger isoforms NCX1 and NCX3 does not require their direct phosphorylation. *Biochemistry* 37:17230–38

38. Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 2005. Isoproterenol does not enhance Ca-dependent Na/Ca exchange current in intact rabbit ventricular myocytes. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 39:972–81

39. Lin X, Jo H, Sakakibara Y, Tambara K, Kim B, et al. 2006. β-adrenergic stimulation does not activate Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange current in guinea pig, mouse, and rat ventricular myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 290:C601–8

40. Zygmunt AC. 1994. Intracellular calcium activates a chloride current in canine ventricular myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 267:H1984–95

41. Trafford AW, Díaz ME, Eisner DA. 1998. Ca-activated chloride current and Na-Ca exchange have different timecourses during sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca release in ferret ventricular myocytes. *Pflügers Arch.* 435:743–45

42. Colquhoun D, Neher E, Reuter H, Stevens CF. 1981. Inward current channels activated by intracellular Ca in cultured cardiac cells. *Nature* 294:752–54

43. Peracchia C. 2004. Chemical gating of gap junction channels; roles of calcium, pH and calmodulin. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1662:61–80

44. Dakin K, Zhao Y, Li WH. 2005. LAMP, a new imaging assay of gap junctional communication unveils that Ca²⁺ influx inhibits cell coupling. *Nat. Methods* 2:55–62

45. Tohse N. 1990. Calcium-sensitive delayed rectifier potassium current in guinea pig ventricular cells. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 258:H1200–7

46. Ghosh S, Nunziato DA, Pitt GS. 2006. KCNQ1 assembly and function is blocked by long-QT syndrome mutations that disrupt interaction with calmodulin. *Circ. Res.* 98:1048–54

47. Shamgar L, Ma L, Schmitt N, Haitin Y, Peretz A, et al. 2006. Calmodulin is essential for cardiac IKs channel gating and assembly: impaired function in long-QT mutations. *Circ. Res.* 98:1055–63

48. Tan HL, Kupershmidt S, Zhang R, Stepanovic S, Roden DM, et al. 2002. A calcium sensor in the sodium channel modulates cardiac excitability. *Nature* 415:442–47

49. Kim J, Ghosh S, Liu H, Tateyama M, Kass RS, et al. 2004. Calmodulin mediates Ca²⁺ sensitivity of sodium channels. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:45004–12

50. Shah VN, Wingo TL, Weiss KL, Williams CK, Balser JR, et al. 2006. Calcium-dependent regulation of the voltage-gated sodium channel hH1: Intrinsic and extrinsic sensors use a common molecular switch. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:3592–97

51. Wagner S, Rasenack ECL, Dybkova LN, Zhang T, Heller-Brown J, et al. 2006. Ca/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) reduces cardiac Na channel availability and inactivation rate. *J. Clin. Invest.* 116:3127–38

52. Veldkamp MW, Viswanathan PC, Bezzina C, Baartscheer A, Wilde AA, et al. 2000. Two distinct congenital arrhythmias evoked by a multidysfunctional Na⁺ channel. *Circ. Res.* 86:E91–97

53. Tessier S, Karczewski P, Krause EG, Pansard Y, Acar C, et al. 1999. Regulation of the transient outward K⁺ current by Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases II in human atrial myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 85:810–19

54. Colinas O, Gallego M, Setien R, Lopez-Lopez JR, Perez-Garcia MT, et al. 2006. Differential modulation of Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 channels by calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in rat cardiac myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 291:H1978–87

55. Wagner S, Hacker E, Dybkova N, Fabritz L, Kirchhof P, et al. 2006. Ca/calmodulin kinase II differentially modulates transient outward potassium current in heart failure. *Circulation* 114:II-60

56. Perrier E, Perrier R, Richard S, Benitah JP. 2004. Ca²⁺ controls functional expression of the cardiac K⁺ transient outward current via the calcineurin pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:40634–39

57. Pogwizd SM, Schlotthauer K, Li L, Yuan W, Bers DM. 2001. Sodium-calcium exchange contributes to mechanical dysfunction and triggered arrhythmias in heart failure. *Circ. Res.* 88:1159–67

58. Bers DM, Pogwizd SM, Schlotthauer K. 2002. Upregulated Na/Ca exchange is involved in both contractile dysfunction and arrhythmogenesis in heart failure. *Basic Res. Cardiol.* 97(Suppl. 1):36–42

59. George CH, Jundi H, Thomas NL, Fry DL, Lai FA. 2007. Ryanodine receptors and ventricular arrhythmias: emerging trends in mutations, mechanisms and therapies. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 42:34–50

60. Liu N, Colombi B, Memmi M, Zissimopoulos S, Rizzi N, et al. 2006. Arrhythmogenesis in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: insights from a RyR2 R4496C knock-in mouse model. *Circ. Res.* 99:292–98

61. Terentyev D, Nori A, Santoro M, Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Kubalova Z, et al. 2006. Abnormal interactions of calsequestrin with the ryanodine receptor calcium release channel complex linked to exercise-induced sudden cardiac death. *Circ. Res.* 98:1151–58

62. Mackenzie L, Bootman MD, Laine M, Berridge MJ, Thuring J, et al. 2002. The role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in Ca²⁺ signalling and the generation of arrhythmias in rat atrial myocytes. *J. Physiol.* 541:395–409

63. Zima AV, Blatter LA. 2004. Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent Ca²⁺ signalling in cat atrial excitation-contraction coupling and arrhythmias. *J. Physiol.* 555:607–15

64. January CT, Riddle JM. 1989. Early afterdepolarizations: mechanism of induction and block. A role for L-type Ca²⁺ current. *Circ. Res.* 64:977–90

65. Sipido KR, Callewaert G, Carmeliet E. 1995. Inhibition and rapid recovery of Ca²⁺ current during Ca²⁺ release from sarcoplasmic reticulum in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 76:102–9

66. Clancy CE, Rudy Y. 2002. Na⁺ channel mutation that causes both Brugada and long-QT syndrome phenotypes: a simulation study of mechanism. *Circulation* 105:1208–13

67. Volders PG, Kulcsar A, Vos MA, Sipido KR, Wellens HJ, et al. 1997. Similarities between early and delayed afterdepolarizations induced by isoproterenol in canine ventricular myocytes. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 34:348–59

68. Choi BR, Burton F, Salama G. 2002. Cytosolic Ca²⁺ triggers early afterdepolarizations and Torsade de Pointes in rabbit hearts with type 2 long QT syndrome. *J. Physiol.* 543:615–31

69. Pruvot EJ, Katra RP, Rosenbaum DS, Laurita KR. 2004. Role of calcium cycling vs restitution in the mechanism of repolarization alternans. *Circ. Res.* 94:1083–90

70. Picht E, DeSantiago J, Blatter LA, Bers DM. 2006. Cardiac alternans does not rely on diastolic sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium content fluctuations. *Circ. Res.* 99:740–48

71. Weiss JN, Karma A, Shiferaw Y, Chen PS, Garfinkel A, et al. 2006. From pulsus to pulseless: the saga of cardiac alternans. *Circ. Res.* 98:1244–53

72. Kaftan E, Marks AR, Ehrlich BE. 1996. Effects of rapamycin on ryanodine receptor Ca²⁺-release channels from cardiac muscle. *Circ. Res.* 78:990–97

73. Shannon TR, Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 2000. Potentiation of fractional SR Ca release by total and free intra-SR Ca concentration. *Biophys. J.* 78:334–43

74. Shannon TR, Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 2002. Quantitative assessment of SR Ca leak-load relationships. *Circ. Res.* 91:594–600

75. Cheng H, Lederer WJ, Cannell MB. 1993. Calcium sparks: elementary events underlying excitation-contraction coupling in heart muscle. *Science* 262:740–44

76. Satoh H, Blatter LA, Bers DM. 1997. Effects of [Ca²⁺]i, SR Ca²⁺ load, and rest on Ca²⁺ spark frequency in ventricular myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 272:H657–68

77. Gyorke I, Hester N, Jones LR, Gyorke S. 2004. The role of calsequestrin, triadin, and junctin in conferring cardiac ryanodine receptor responsiveness to luminal calcium. *Bio-phys. J.* 86:2121–28

78. Knollmann BC, Chopra N, Hlaing T, Akin B, Yang T, et al. 2006. Casq2 deletion causes sarcoplasmic reticulum volume increase, premature Ca²⁺ release, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. *J. Clin. Invest.* 116:2510–20

79. Bassani JWM, Yuan W, Bers DM. 1995. Fractional SR Ca release is altered by trigger Ca and SR Ca content in cardiac myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 268:C1313–19

80. Sham JS, Song LS, Chen Y, Deng LH, Stern MD, et al. 1998. Termination of Ca²⁺ release by a local inactivation of ryanodine receptors in cardiac myocytes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 95(25):15096–101

81. Terentyev D, Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Valdivia HH, Escobar AL, Gyorke S. 2002. Lumenal Ca²⁺ controls termination and refractory behavior of Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release in cardiac myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 91:414–20

82. Shannon TR, Guo T, Bers DM. 2003. Ca²⁺ scraps: Local depletions of free [Ca²⁺] in cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum during contractions leave substantial Ca²⁺ reserve. *Circ. Res.* 93:40–45

83. Terentyev D, Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Gyorke I, Volpe P, Williams SC, et al. 2003. Calsequestrin determines the functional size and stability of cardiac intracellular calcium stores: mechanism for hereditary arrhythmia. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100:11759–64

84. Weber CR, Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 2003. Cardiac submembrane [Na⁺] transients sensed by Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchange current. *Circ. Res.* 92:950–52

85. Lines GT, Sande JB, Louch WE, Mørk HK, Grøttum P, et al. 2006. Contribution of the Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger to rapid Ca²⁺ release in cardiomyocytes. *Biophys. J.* 91:779–92

86. Scriven DRL, Dan P, Moore EDW. 2000. Distribution of proteins implicated in excitation-contraction coupling in rat ventricular myocytes. *Biophys. J.* 79:2682–91

87. Li Y, Kranias EG, Mignery GA, Bers DM. 2002. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor does not affect Ca sparks in permeabilized mouse ventricular myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 90:309–16

88. Ginsburg KS, Bers DM. 2004. Modulation of excitation-contraction coupling by isoproterenol in cardiomyocytes with controlled SR Ca load and \(I_{\text{Ca}}\) trigger. *J. Physiol.* 556:463–80

89. Huke S, Bers DM. 2007. Temporal dissociation of frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation and protein phosphorylation by CaMKII. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 42:590–99

90. Guo T, Zhang T, Mestril R, Bers DM. 2006. Ca/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II phosphorylation of ryanodine receptor does affect calcium sparks in mouse ventricular myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 99:398–406

91. Yang D, Zhu WZ, Xiao B, Brochet DX, Chen SR, et al. 2007. Ca²⁺/calmodulin kinase II-dependent phosphorylation of ryanodine receptors suppresses Ca²⁺ sparks and Ca²⁺ waves in cardiac myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 100:399–407

92. Bers DM, Eisner DA, Valdivia HH. 2003. Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca and heart failure: roles of diastolic leak and Ca transport. *Circ. Res.* 93:487–90

93. Curran J, Ríos E, Bers DM, Shannon TR. 2007. β-Adrenergic enhancement of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca leak in cardiac myocytes is mediated by Ca-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. *Circ. Res.* 100:391–98

94. Wang W, Zhu W, Wang S, Yang D, Crow MT, et al. 2004. Sustained β1-adrenergic stimulation modulates cardiac contractility by Ca²⁺/calmodulin kinase signaling pathway. *Circ. Res.* 95:798–806

95. Piacentino V III, Weber CR, Chen X, Weisser-Thomas J, Margulies KB, et al. 2003. Cellular basis of abnormal calcium transients of failing human ventricular myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 92:651–58

96. Pott C, Philipson KD, Goldhaber JI. 2005. Excitation-contraction coupling in Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger knockout mice: reduced transsarcolemmal Ca²⁺ flux. *Circ. Res.* 97:1288–95

97. Pott C, Yip M, Goldhaber JI, Philipson KD. 2007. Regulation of cardiac L-type Ca²⁺ current in Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger knockout mice: functional coupling of the Ca²⁺ channel and the Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger. *Biophys. J.* 92:1431–37

98. Yue DT, Marbán E, Wier WG. 1986. Relationship between force and intracellular [Ca²⁺] in tetanized mammalian heart muscle. *J. Gen. Physiol.* 87:223–42

99. Hinken AC, Solaro RJ. 2007. A dominant role of cardiac molecular motors in the intrinsic regulation of ventricular ejection and relaxation. *Physiology* 22:73–80

100. Li L, DeSantiago J, Chu G, Kranias EG, Bers DM. 2000. Phosphorylation of phospholamban and troponin-I in β-adrenergic-induced acceleration of cardiac relaxation. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 278:H769–79

101. Pena JR, Wolska BM. 2004. Troponin I phosphorylation plays an important role in the relaxant effect of β-adrenergic stimulation in mouse hearts. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 61:756–63

102. Kentish JC, McCloskey DT, Layland J, Palmer S, Leiden JM, et al. 2001. Phosphorylation of troponin I by protein kinase A accelerates relaxation and crossbridge cycle kinetics in mouse ventricular muscle. *Circ. Res.* 88:1059–65

103. Pi Y, Kemnitz KR, Zhang D, Kranias EG, Walker JW. 2002. Phosphorylation of troponin I controls cardiac twitch dynamics: evidence from phosphorylation site mutants expressed on a troponin I-null background in mice. *Circ. Res.* 90:649–56

104. Hibberd MG, Jewell BR. 1982. Calcium-and length-dependent force production in rat ventricular muscle. *J. Physiol.* 527–40

105. Kentish JC, ter Keurs HEDJ, Ricciardi L, Bucx JJJ, Noble MIM. 1986. Comparison between the sarcomere length-force relations of intact and skinned trabeculae from rat right ventricle. *Circ. Res.* 58:755–68

106. Moss RL, Buck SH. 2002. Regulation of cardiac contraction by Ca²⁺. In *Handbook of Physiology*, ed. E Page, HA Fozzard, RJ Solaro, pp. 420–54. New York: Oxford Univ. Press

107. Fuchs F, Wang YP. 1996. Sarcomere length vs interfilament spacing as determinants of cardiac myofilament Ca²⁺ sensitivity and Ca²⁺ binding. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 28:1375–83

108. McDonald KS, Moss RL. 1995. Osmotic compression of single cardiac myocytes eliminates the reduction in Ca²⁺ sensitivity of tension at short sarcomere length. *Circ. Res.* 77:199–205

109. Fuchs F, Martyn DA. 2005. Length-dependent Ca²⁺ activation in cardiac muscle: some remaining questions. *J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil.* 26:199–212

110. Farman GP, Walker JS, de Tombe PP, Irving TC. 2006. Impact of osmotic compression on sarcomere structure and myofilament calcium sensitivity of isolated rat myocardium. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 291:H1847–55

111. Schouten VJ. 1990. Interval dependence of force and twitch duration in rat heart explained by Ca²⁺ pump inactivation in sarcoplasmic reticulum. *J. Physiol.* 431:427–44

112. Bassani RA, MattiazzI A, Bers DM. 1995. CaMKII is responsible for activity-dependent acceleration of relaxation in rat ventricular myocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 268:H703–12

113. Li L, Chu G, Kranias EG, Bers DM. 1998. Cardiac myocyte calcium transport in phospholamban knockout mouse: relaxation and endogenous CaMKII effects. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 274:H1335–47

114. DeSantiago J, Maier LS, Bers DM. 2002. Frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation (FDAR) in heart depends on CaMKII, but not phospholamban. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 34:975–84

115. Picht E, DeSantiago J, Huke S, Kaetzel MA, Dedman JR, et al. 2007. CaMKII inhibition targeted to the sarcoplasmic reticulum inhibits frequency dependent acceleration of relaxation and $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ current facilitation. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 42:196–205

116. Hussain M, Drago GA, Colyer J, Orchard CH. 1997. Rate-dependent abbreviation of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transient in rat heart is independent of phospholamban phosphorylation. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 273:H695–706

117. Layland J, Kentish JC. 1999. Positive force- and $[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]_{i}$-frequency relationships in rat ventricular trabeculae at physiological frequencies. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 276:H9–18

118. Kassiri Z, Myers R, Kaprielian R, Banijamali HS, Backx PH. 2000. Rate-dependent changes of twitch force duration in rat cardiac trabeculae: property of the contractile system. *J. Physiol.* 524:221–31

119. Territo PR, Mootha VK, French SA, Balaban RS. 2000. $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ activation of heart mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation: role of $F_{0}/F_{1}$ ATPase. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 278:C423–35

120. Denton RM, McCormack JG. 1990. $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ as a second messenger within mitochondria of the heart and other tissues. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 52:451–66

121. Brandes R, Bers DM. 1997. Intracellular $[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]$ increases the mitochondrial NADH concentration during elevated work in intact cardiac muscle. *Circ. Res.* 80:82–87

122. Brandes R, Bers DM. 2002. Simultaneous measurements of mitochondrial NADH and $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ during increased work in intact rat heart trabeculae. *Biophys. J.* 83:587–604

123. Bassani JWM, Bassani RA, Bers DM. 1994. Relaxation in rabbit and rat cardiac cells: species-dependent differences in cellular mechanisms. *J. Physiol.* 476:279–93

124. Trollinger DR, Cascio WE, Lemasters JJ. 1997. Selective loading of Rhod 2 into mitochondria shows mitochondrial $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transients during the contractile cycle in adult rabbit cardiac myocytes. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 236:738–42

125. Sharma VK, Ramesh V, Franzini-Armstrong C, Sheu SS. 2000. Transport of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from sarcoplasmic reticulum to mitochondria in rat ventricular myocytes. *J. Bioenerg. Biomembr.* 32:97–104

126. Robert V, Gurlini P, Tosello V, Nagai T, Miyawaki A, et al. 2001. Beat-to-beat oscillations of mitochondrial $[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]$ in cardiac cells. *EMBO J.* 20:4998–5007

127. Maack C, Cortassa S, Aon MA, Ganesan AN, Liu T, et al. 2006. Elevated cytosolic $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ decreases mitochondrial $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ uptake during excitation-contraction coupling and impairs energetic adaptation in cardiac myocytes. *Circ. Res.* 99:172–82

128. Beutner G, Sharma VK, Lin L, Ryu SY, Dirksen RT, Sheu SS. 2005. Type 1 ryanodine receptor in cardiac mitochondria: transducer of excitation-metabolism coupling. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1717:1–10

129. Xu KY, Zweier JL, Becker LC. 1995. Functional coupling between glycolysis and sarcoplasmic reticulum $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ transport. *Circ. Res.* 77:88–97

130. Crow MT, Mani K, Nam YJ, Kitsis RN. 2004. The mitochondrial death pathway and cardiac myocyte apoptosis. *Circ. Res.* 95:957–70

131. Murphy E, Steenbergen C. 2007. Preconditioning: the mitochondrial connection. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 69:51–67

132. Kokoszka JE, Waymire KG, Levy SE, Sligh JE, Cai J, et al. 2004. The ADP/ATP translocator is not essential for the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. *Nature* 427:461–65

133. Baines CP, Kaiser RA, Purcell NH, Blair NS, Osinska H, et al. 2005. Loss of cyclophilin D reveals a critical role for mitochondrial permeability transition in cell death. *Nature* 434:658–62

134. Baines CP, Kaiser RA, Sheiko T, Craigen WJ, Molkentin JD. 2007. Voltage-dependent anion channels are dispensable for mitochondrial-dependent cell death. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 9:550–55

135. Bolli R, Marban E. 1999. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of myocardial stunning. *Physiol. Rev.* 79:609–34

136. Barta J, Toth A, Edes I, Vaszily M, Papp JG, et al. 2005. Calpain-1-sensitive myofibrillar proteins of the human myocardium. *Mol. Cell Biochem.* 278:1–8

137. Chen M, He H, Zhan S, Krajewski S, Reed JC, et al. 2001. Bid is cleaved by calpain to an active fragment in vitro and during myocardial ischemia/reperfusion. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:30724–28

138. Gruver CL, DeMayo F, Goldstein MA, Means AR. 1993. Targeted developmental overexpression of calmodulin induces proliferative and hypertrophic growth of cardiomyocytes in transgenic mice. *Endocrinology* 33:376–88

139. McDonough PM, Glembotski CC. 1992. Induction of natriuretic factor and myosin light chain-2 gene expression in cultured ventricular myocytes by electrical stimulation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:11665–68

140. Passier R, Zeng H, Frey N, Naya FJ, Nicol RL, et al. 2000. CaM kinase signaling induces cardiac hypertrophy and activates the MEF2 transcription factor in vivo. *J. Clin. Invest.* 105:1395–1406

141. Molkentin JD. 2000. Calcineurin and beyond: cardiac hypertrophic signaling. *Circ. Res.* 87:731–38

142. Zhang T, Brown JH. 2004. Role of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 63:476–86

143. Backs J, Olson EN. 2006. Control of cardiac growth by histone acetylation/deacetylation. *Circ. Res.* 98:15–24

144. Linseman DA, Bartley CM, Le SS, Laessig TA, Bouchard RJ, et al. 2003. Inactivation of the myocyte enhancer factor-2 repressor histone deacetylase-5 by endogenous Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent kinase II promotes depolarization-mediated cerebellar granule neuron survival. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:41472–81

145. McKinsey TA, Zhang CL, Olson EN. 2000. Activation of myocyte enhancer factor-2 transcription factor by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-stimulated binding of 14-3-3 to histone deacetylase 5. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:14400–5

146. Zhang CL, McKinsey TA, Chang S, Antos CL, Hill JA, et al. 2002. Class II histone deacetylases act as signal-responsive repressors of cardiac hypertrophy. *Cell* 110:479–88

147. Vega RB, Harrison BC, Meadows E, Roberts CR, Papst PJ, et al. 2004. Protein kinases C and D mediate agonist-dependent cardiac hypertrophy through nuclear export of histone deacetylase 5. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 24:8374–85

148. Backs J, Song K, Bezprozvannaya S, Chang S, Olson EN. 2006. CaM kinase II selectively signals to histone deacetylase 4 during cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. *J. Clin. Invest.* 116:1853–64

149. Wu X, Zhang T, Bossuyt J, Li X, McKinsey T, et al. 2006. Local InsP₃-dependent perinuclear Ca²⁺ signaling in cardiac myocytes excitation-transcription coupling. *J. Clin. Invest.* 116:675–82

150. Haworth RS, Goss MW, Rozengurt E, Avkiran M. 2000. Expression and activity of protein kinase D/protein kinase Cµ in myocardium: evidence for α1-adrenergic receptor- and protein kinase C-mediated regulation. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 32:1013–23

151. Bare DJ, Kettlun CS, Liang M, Bers DM, Mignery GA. 2005. Cardiac type-2 inositol trisphosphate receptor: interaction and modulation by CaMKII. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:15912–20

152. Dolmetsch RE, Lewis RS, Goodnow CC, Healy JI. 1997. Differential activation of transcription factors induced by Ca²⁺ response amplitude and duration. *Nature* 386:855–58

153. Molkentin JD. 2004. Calcineurin-NFAT signaling regulates the cardiac hypertrophic response in coordination with the MAPKs. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 63:467–75

154. Molkentin JD, Lu JR, Antos CL, Markham B, Richardson J, et al. 1998. A calcineurin-dependent transcriptional pathway for cardiac hypertrophy. *Cell* 93:215–28

155. Zou Y, Hiroi Y, Uozumi H, Takimoto E, Toko H, et al. 2001. Calcineurin plays a critical role in the development of pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy. *Circulation* 104:97–101

156. Wilkins BJ, De Windt LJ, Bueno OF, Braz JC, Glascock BJ, et al. 2002. Targeted disruption of NFATc3, but not NFATc4, reveals an intrinsic defect in calcineurin-mediated cardiac hypertrophic growth. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 22:7603–13

157. Timmerman LA, Clipstone NA, Ho SN, Northrop JP, Crabtree GR. 1996. Rapid shuttling of NF-AT in discrimination of Ca²⁺ signals and immunosuppression. *Nature* 383:837–40

158. Dolmetsch RE, Xu K, Lewis RS. 1998. Calcium oscillations increase the efficiency and specificity of gene expression. *Nature* 392:933–36

159. Li W, Llopis J, Whitney M, Zlokarnik G, Tsien RY. 1998. Cell-permeant caged InsP₃ ester shows that Ca²⁺ spike frequency can optimize gene expression. *Nature* 392:936–41

160. Graef IA, Mermelstein PG, Stankunas K, Neilson JR, Deisseroth K, et al. 1999. L-type calcium channels and GSK-3 regulate the activity of NF-ATc4 in hippocampal neurons. *Nature* 401:703–8

161. Liu Y, Cseresnyes Z, Randall WR, Schneider MF. 2001. Activity-dependent nuclear translocation and intranuclear distribution of NFATc in adult skeletal muscle fibers. *J. Cell Biol.* 155:27–39

162. Gomez-Ospina N, Tsuruta F, Barreto-Chang O, Hu L, Dolmetsch R. 2006. The C terminus of the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel Cav1.2 encodes a transcription factor. *Cell* 127:591–606

163. Hulme JT, Yarov-Yarovoy V, Lin TW, Scheuer T, Catterall WA. 2006. Autoinhibitory control of the Cav1.2 channel by its proteolytically processed distal C-terminal domain. *J. Physiol.* 576:87–102

Frontispiece  
*Joseph F. Hoffman* ………… XVI  

PERSPECTIVES, David Julius, Editor  
My Passion and Passages with Red Blood Cells  
*Joseph F. Hoffman* ………… 1  

CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY, Jeffrey Robbins, Section Editor  
Calcium Cycling and Signaling in Cardiac Myocytes  
*Donald M. Bers* ………… 23  

Hypoxia-Induced Signaling in the Cardiovascular System  
*M. Celeste Simon, Liping Liu, Bryan C. Barnhart, and Regina M. Young* ………… 51  

CELL PHYSIOLOGY, David E. Clapham, Associate and Section Editor  
Bcl-2 Protein Family Members: Versatile Regulators of Calcium  
Signaling in Cell Survival and Apoptosis  
*Yiping Rong and Clark W. Distelhorst* ………… 73  

Mechanisms of Sperm Chemotaxis  
*U. Benjamin Kaupp, Nachiket D. Kashikar, and Ingo Weyand* ………… 93  

ECOLOGICAL, EVOLUTIONARY, AND COMPARATIVE  
PHYSIOLOGY, Martin E. Feder, Section Editor  
Advances in Biological Structure, Function, and Physiology Using  
Synchrotron X-Ray Imaging  
*Mark W. Westneat, John J. Socha, and Wah-Keat Lee* ………… 119  

Advances in Comparative Physiology from High-Speed Imaging  
of Animal and Fluid Motion  
*George V. Lauder and Peter G.A. Madden* ………… 143

ENDOCRINOLOGY, Holly A. Ingraham, Section Editor

Estrogen Signaling through the Transmembrane G Protein–Coupled  
Receptor GPR30  
Eric R. Prossnitz, Jeffrey B. Arterburn, Harriet O. Smith, Tudor I. Oprea,  
Larry A. Sklar, and Helen J. Hathaway ………………………………………… 165  

Insulin-Like Signaling, Nutrient Homeostasis, and Life Span  
Akiko Taguchi and Morris F. White …………………………………………… 191  

The Role of Kisspeptins and GPR54 in the Neuroendocrine  
Regulation of Reproduction  
Simina M. Popa, Donald K. Clifton, and Robert A. Steiner …………………… 213  

GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY, James M. Anderson, Section Editor  

Gastrointestinal Satiety Signals  
Owais B. Chaudhri, Victoria Salem, Kevin G. Murphy, and Stephen R. Bloom … 239  

Mechanisms and Regulation of Epithelial Ca²⁺ Absorption in Health  
and Disease  
Yoshiro Suzuki, Christopher P. Landowski, and Matthias A. Hediger ………… 257  

Polarized Calcium Signaling in Exocrine Gland Cells  
Ole H. Petersen and Alexei V. Tepikin ………………………………………… 273  

RENAL AND ELECTROLYTE PHYSIOLOGY, Gerhard H. Giebisch,  
Section Editor  

A Current View of the Mammalian Aquaglyceroporins  
Aleksandra Rojek, Jeppe Praetorius, Jørgen Frøkiaer, Søren Nielsen,  
and Robert A. Fenton …………………………………………………………… 301  

Molecular Physiology of the WNK Kinases  
Kristopher T. Kahle, Aaron M. Ring, and Richard P. Lifton ………………… 329  

Physiological Regulation of Prostaglandins in the Kidney  
Chuan-Ming Hao and Matthew D. Breyer ……………………………………… 357  

Regulation of Renal Function by the Gastrointestinal Tract: Potential  
Role of Gut-Derived Peptides and Hormones  
A.R. Michell, E.S. Debnam, and R.J. Unwin ………………………………… 379  

RESPIRATORY PHYSIOLOGY, Richard C. Boucher, Jr., Section Editor  

Regulation of Airway Mucin Gene Expression  
Philip Thai, Artem Loukoianov, Shinichiro Wachi, and Reen Wu …………… 405  

Structure and Function of the Cell Surface (Tethered) Mucins  
Christine L. Hattrup and Sandra J. Gendler ………………………………… 431  

Structure and Function of the Polymeric Mucins in Airways Mucus  
David J. Thornton, Karine Rousseau, and Michael A. McGuckin ………… 459  

Regulated Airway Goblet Cell Mucin Secretion  
C. William Davis and Burton F. Dickey ………………………………………… 487  

SPECIAL TOPIC, OBESITY, Joel Elmquist and Jeffrey Flier, Special Topic Editors  

The Integrative Role of CNS Fuel-Sensing Mechanisms in Energy  
Balance and Glucose Regulation  
Darleen Sandoval, Daniela Cota, and Randy J. Seeley …………………… 513  

Mechanisms of Leptin Action and Leptin Resistance  
Martin G. Myers, Michael A. Cowley, and Heike Munzberg ……………… 537  

Indexes  

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 66–70 ………………… 557  
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 66–70 ……………………… 560  

Errata  

An online log of corrections to *Annual Review of Physiology* articles may be found at  
http://physiol.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
