
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

**S. aureus IgG-binding proteins SpA and Sbi: Host specificity and mechanisms of immune complex formation**

Karen L. Atkins${}^{a}$, Julia D. Burman${}^{a}$, Emily S. Chamberlain${}^{a,1}$, Jessica E. Cooper${}^{a,2}$, Bernard Poutrel${}^{b}$, Stefan Bagby${}^{a}$, A. Toby A. Jenkins${}^{c}$, Edward J. Feil${}^{a}$, Jean M.H. van den Elsen${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom  
${}^{b}$ Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), Infectiologie Animale et Santé Publique (IASP), F-37380 Nouzilly, France  
${}^{c}$ Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom  

Received 12 September 2007; received in revised form 3 October 2007; accepted 4 October 2007  
Available online 3 December 2007

---

### Abstract

The evasion of the host immune response is central to the pathogenicity of *Staphylococcus aureus*, and is facilitated by the ability of the cell wall-associated protein A (SpA) to bind immunoglobulin G Fc fragments, thereby impeding phagocytosis and classical pathway complement fixation. SpA also acts as a B-cell superantigen through interactions with the heavy-chain variable part of Fab fragments, and sequesters immunoglobulins by forming large insoluble immune complexes with human IgG.

Here we show that the formation of insoluble immune complexes is mediated by the binding of $(V_{\mathrm{H}} 3^{+})$Fab fragments in addition to Fc, and that SpA forms soluble complexes with IgG Fc fragments. We compared these results with those for Sbi, a second staphylococcal immunoglobulin-binding protein, and note that this protein requires only the Fc fragment for precipitation with human IgG. Homology models of immunoglobulin-binding domains of SpA and Sbi in complex with Fc reveal the molecular basis of the Fab-independent formation of insoluble complexes by Sbi. Finally, we compared the sequences of the *spa* and *sbi* genes from human strains to those infecting a range of animal hosts to determine whether Sbi and SpA have acquired specificity for host IgG. We note remarkable sequence conservation within the IgG-binding domains of these genes, consistent with a lack of host specificity.

The Fab-independent binding of IgG by Sbi could have significant clinical implications. The use of SpA in immunoadsorption therapy can cause severe side-effects, thought to be mediated by Fc$\gamma$R recognition and complement fixation. The formation of insoluble immune complexes with Sbi occurs only via Fc binding and free Fc regions are unlikely to be available for Fc$\gamma$R recognition and complement fixation.

© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: *Staphylococcus aureus*; IgG-binding proteins; SpA; Sbi; Immune complex formation; Host specificity

---

### 1. Introduction

A (SpA), one of the first of these proteins to be characterised, is a 42 kDa protein composed of four or five immunoglobulin-binding repeat domains (E, D, A, B, C). This protein is anchored to the bacterial cell surface via an LPXTG motif, which is typical of Microbial Surface Components that Recognize Adhesive Matrix Molecules (MSCRAMMs) of Gram-positive bacteria (*Schneewind et al.*, 1992, 1995; *Navarre and Schneewind*, 1994). The binding activity of SpA acts to effectively cloak the bacterial cell with IgG, thus blocking any interaction with Fc receptors on neutrophils and hindering phagocytosis (*Foster*, 2005). As well as binding the Fc region of immunoglobulin G, each individual SpA domain also interacts with $V_{\mathrm{H}} 3^{+}$ Fab fragments of many IgM, IgA, IgG, and IgE molecules via the heavy chain (*Sasso et al.*, 1991), although this does not interfere with the

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1225 383639; fax: +44 1225 386779.  
E-mail address: bssjmhve@bath.ac.uk (J.M.H. van den Elsen).

1. Current address: PAREXEL International Ltd., The Quays, 101-105 Oxford Road, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB8 1LZ, United Kingdom.

2. Current address: Veterinary Laboratories Agency Weybridge, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB, United Kingdom.

0161-5890/$-$ see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2007.10.021

antibody’s antigen-binding site (Jansson et al., 1998). Because of this ability to bind to Fab, SpA acts as a B-cell superantigen, inducing proliferation and subsequent depletion of the B-cell repertoire (Silverman et al., 2005). SpA-bound IgG also inhibits complement fixation by the classical pathway.

S. aureus is not restricted to humans, but can colonise a wide range of mammalian hosts. Although the pathogenic potential of S. aureus in non-human hosts is generally unclear, infection in cattle is a common cause of bovine mastitis and represents a significant commercial burden. Soluble SpA reacts with most, if not all, mammalian IgGs, in many cases sequestering IgGs from the serum pool by forming insoluble complexes (Kronvall et al., 1970). However, IgGs from other hosts form soluble complexes of varying stability. It has been suggested that these differences in reactivity are due to amino acid sequence variation of the IgG H-chains (Kronvall and Frommel, 1970), although the precise mechanisms remain unclear.

Sbi is a more recently discovered second immunoglobulin-binding protein from S. aureus. The putative extracellular region of Sbi (Sbi-E) is an elongated molecule consisting of four major globular domains (I, II, III and IV) (Burman et al., 2007). Two domains were predicted to bind IgG, one of which was originally confirmed experimentally (Zhang et al., 1998). More recently, β2-glycoprotein I was identified as the plasma component binding to a region of Sbi corresponding to domain IV. This membrane adhesion protein has been implicated in blood coagulation (Bouma et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 1999). Currently we are exploring our finding that Sbi domains III and IV are involved in interactions with complement factor C3. By binding to this central component of the innate immune system, Sbi is able to interfere with all three-complement pathways, via interaction with C3 subdomains C3a and C3dg (Burman et al., 2007).

Here we compare the binding characteristics of SpA and Sbi to human IgGs and IgG from animal sera using recombinant constructs based on sequences from human S. aureus isolates (Zhang et al., 1998). This approach in combination with molecular modelling provides further evidence concerning the basis underlying the formation of insoluble and soluble complexes with IgG. Finally, we compare the nucleotide sequences of the *spa* and *sbi* sequences from a range of isolates of animal and human disease and note that there is little evidence for host-specific IgG binding.

### 2. Experimental

#### 2.1. Materials and methods

##### 2.1.1. Double immunodiffusion assay

Double immunodiffusion experiments were performed on Petri dishes containing a 1% agarose gel. Wells were punched in the agar and individual wells filled with 100 μl of human, mouse, Guinea pig, rabbit, cow, goat, pig, horse or chicken serum IgG (Sigma–Aldrich) or human IgG Fc or Fab fragments (Bethyl Laboratories) at 1 mg/ml in PBS; or with recombinant SpA (Pierce) or Sbi-E at 1 mg/ml in PBS, and left to incubate for 48 h at room temperature. Insoluble ‘immune complexes’ formed at the zone of equivalence were visualised by Coomassie staining.

##### 2.1.2. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR)

Immunoglobulin-binding SPR measurements were recorded using an Autolab ESPRIT instrument (EcoChemie), with two flow cells. Dextran-NTA derivatised SPR sensor discs (Xan Tec Bioanalytics) were coated with nickel by dispensing 80 μl of a NiCl₂-containing buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 300 μM NiCl₂, 0.005% surfactant Tween 20) into each channel and mixing for approximately 5 min. Excess NiCl₂ was expelled by washing the cuvette with 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl 0.005% Tween 20. Recombinant constructs Sbi-E (amino acids 28–266), Sbi-I (amino acids 42–94), Sbi-II (amino acids 92–156) of the N-terminal region of Sbi (adjacent to the poly-proline region) were expressed and purified as described previously (Burman et al., 2007) and subsequently bound to the chip via their N-terminal 6× His tag. A baseline was established for a minimum of 60 s before binding experiments with the four human IgG subclasses were performed. IgG solutions were applied to channel 1, with an association time of 400 s and dissociation time of 20 s. BSA was applied to channel 2 as a negative control. Results were extracted using the differential data (channel 1–channel 2). Following each measurement, the sensor disc was regenerated with 0.35 M EDTA. All data analysis was performed using kinetic evaluation software (EcoChemie, Version 4.1.0 2004). The difference in binding between the two channels was fitted to a monophasic association curve in order to determine *k*~on~, which is the sum of the kinetic association constant *k*~ass~ and the dissociation constant, *k*~diss~: *k*~on~ = *k*~ass~[IgG] + *k*~diss~. Measurements of *k*~on~ were made with a minimum of five and a maximum of ten different IgG concentrations. A linear plot of *k*~on~ vs. IgG concentration thus yielded both *k*~ass~ and *k*~diss~.

##### 2.1.3. Size exclusion chromatography

Samples of IgG and IgG complexes were analysed by size exclusion chromatography using a Superdex HR 200 10/30 column (GE Healthcare) connected to an Äkta Purifier (GE Healthcare). Complexes of SpA or Sbi and IgG were incubated for 30 min prior to injection (ratio 1:1, stock concentrations of 10 mg/ml). The column was equilibrated with 20 mM Tris–HCL, pH 7, 200 mM NaCl. Injected proteins and their complexes were eluted with 1.5 column volumes (approximately 37 ml) of equilibration buffer. Peak sizes were analysed using a standard curve obtained with a calibration protein mixture (Sigma–Aldrich) consisting of aprotinin, cytochrome c, carbonic anhydrase, albumin, alcohol dehydrogenase, β-amylase and urease. The void volume of the column was determined with blue dextran (Sigma–Aldrich).

##### 2.1.4. Homology modelling

Solution structures of SpA domains B (PDB ID code 1BDC) and E (PDB ID code 1EDI) were used as templates for the generation of a homology model of Sbi domains I and II using the program MOE (Chemical Computing Group, Inc.). Structural models of the two-domain ‘Hanson and Schumaker’ SpA and Sbi–Fc complexes were generated using the X-ray

crystal structures of the SpA-B–Fc complex (PDB ID code 1FC2), the SpA-Z–Fc complex (PDB ID code 1OQO), the SpA-D–IgM–Fab complex (PDB ID code 1DEE) and the *ab initio* model of Sbi determined by small-angle X-ray scattering analysis (Burman et al., 2007).

### 2.1.5. Sequencing of *S*. aureus SpA and Sbi genes from farm animals isolates

#### 2.1.5.1. PCR amplification of Sbi and SpA genes.
The PCR mix consisted of 5 μl 10× Mg²⁺ free buffer, 5 μl MgCl₂, 1 μl 10 mM dNTPs, 0.2 μl Taq polymerase, 1 μl of each of the two primers at 100 pmol, 0.5 μl of DNA template, and made up to a reaction volume of 50 μl with sterile distilled water (SDW). A heating protocol of 5 min at 95 °C was followed by 34 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 50 °C for 30 s (55 °C for primer sets 1 and 2) and 72 °C for 60 s, and finally by 10 min at 72 °C. The primers used to amplify the SpA and Sbi genes from each strain in the collection are shown in Supplementary Table 1. Forward primer 4 and reverse primer 6 were used to amplify Sbi, while all six SpA primers were used for sequencing SpA due to the repetitive nature of the gene. Sbi was amplified in three fragments with the six different primers. The presence of the correct fragments from the amplification reaction was checked with a 0.8% agarose–ethidium bromide gel, run for 15–20 min at 200–250 V. The SpA PCR reactions produced a single fragment. The PCR products were purified by adding 50 μl of 95% ethanol and 2 μl sodium acetate to each sample, and frozen for 1 h. The samples were centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 1 h to pellet the PCR products. The supernatant was removed by inverting the 96-well plates onto paper towel and centrifuging at 500 rpm for 1 min. The pellets were washed in 150 μl of 70% ethanol and centrifuging at 3500 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was removed by inverting the 96-well plates onto paper towel and centrifuged at 750 rpm for 1 min. The samples were left to air dry for 10 min and the pellets were resuspended in 15 μl of SDW, vortexed for 2–3 min and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 1 min.

#### 2.1.5.2. Sequencing reactions.
One microliter of primer (either forward or reverse) was added to 2 μl of the purified PCR product and 2 μl of Big dye (Version 2.0, Applied Biosystems). Each Sbi PCR product reaction required two reaction mixtures (one forward primer, and one reverse primer), while the SpA PCR products required six reaction mixtures (three forward primers, and three reverse primers). The resulting products were purified as described above, except they were not resuspended in water, but were sealed and stored at –20 °C until they were loaded onto the ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer.

#### 2.1.5.3. Databases and programs.
Seqmen (DNASTAR, http://www.dnastar.com/web/r13.php) was used for trimming and alignment of the obtained sequences. Sequence alignments were further analysed using ClustalX, followed by manual inspection of variable sites. MEGA (Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analysis, Kumar et al., 1994) Version 2.1 was used to identify variable sites and calculate dN/dS ratios, using the modified Nei and Gojobori method (Gojobori and Nei, 1986) with Jukes Cantor correction. PAUP (Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony) Version 4.0b10 was used to construct Neighbour Joining Trees and maximum likelihood trees (Swofford, 2000). The Bellerophon server (http://foo.maths.uq.edu.au/~huber/bellerophon.pl) was used to identify chimeric sequences (Huber et al., 2004). Datamonkey (www.datamonkey.org) (Pond and Frost, 2005) was used to detect any areas of gene sequence that are subjected to positive or negative selection.

### 3. Results and discussion

#### 3.1. Complexes of SpA and Sbi with IgG from human serum

Sequence alignment of the Ig-binding domains E, D, A, B and C of SpA with domains I and II of Sbi (Fig. 1) reveals that almost all SpA amino acids involved in Fc-binding, involving helices 1 and 2 (Deisenhofer et al., 1978), are identical in Sbi domains Sbi-I and Sbi-II. The lack of sequence identity between Sbi and SpA’s Fab-binding region, involving helices 2 and 3 (Graille et al., 2000), also highlighted in Fig. 1, suggests that either Sbi has a different Vₕ family heavy-chain Fab specificity or that it does not bind Fab. To test this we performed a double immunodiffusion assay with recombinant SpA and Sbi-E against human serum IgG. An arched line of precipitate in the diffusion equivalence zone indicates that SpA and Sbi share some identical binding epitopes on human IgG (Fig. 2A). However, the spur formation of precipitate towards the Sbi well indicates that SpA


| Helix 1 | Helix 2 | Helix 3 | Linker |
|---------|----------|----------|---------|
| **SpA-E:** | AQQN**AFYQVL**NMPNLNADQRNGFIQS**LKDDPSQ**SANVLGEAQKL**NDS** | QAPKADAQQNNFNK | 14aa |
| **SpA-D:** | D...S....EI..... | EE | T......K....E.. | 11aa |
| **SpA-A:** | E...N....EI..... | EE | L.S...K....... | 11aa |
| **SpA-B:** | E...N....EI.HL... | EE | L.A...K....A... | 11aa |
| **SpA-C:** | E...N....EI.HL... | EEE | V.KEI.A...K....A... |  |
| **Sbi-I:** | D...K........HLKGITEE | ...QY.KT.REH.ERAQE.FS.S--K.. | KN.DRRV | 7aa |
| **Sbi-II:** | .....N..KND..T.QEK.NY.AQI.EN.DR.QQ.WV.S--VQS.K.K |  |  |  |

Fig. 1. Amino acid sequence alignment of SpA’s five immunoglobulin-binding domains E, D, A, B, C and Sbi-I and II. The entire sequence of SpA-D is given and identical amino acids in other domains are depicted with a dot (.). Positions of the three helices in the domain structure of SpA-D are overlaid and the linker regions are shown with their length indicated by the number of amino acid residues. Fc-interacting residues are highlighted in turquoise (light grey in the printed version) and Fab-interacting SpA-D residues in magenta (dark grey in the printed version) (residue 74 overlaps). Amino acid numbering follows the Sbi-I sequence.

K.L. Atkins et al. / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

Fig. 2. (A) Double immunodiffusion assay with recombinant SpA and Sbi-E against human serum IgG and IgG Fc fragment. The spur of precipitation, indicating partial identity between the IgG-binding epitopes of SpA and Sbi, is indicated by an arrow. (B) Double immunodiffusion assay with SpA and Sbi against human serum IgG and a mixture of Fab and Fc and (C) Fab alone.

possesses binding specificity for a human IgG epitope that is not shared by Sbi. In the absence of Fab, SpA’s capacity to form insoluble complexes with human IgG Fc is completely eliminated, while precipitation with Sbi does not require the presence of Fab (Fig. 2A). It has been reported previously that only intact IgG precipitates with SpA (Kronvall and Frommel, 1970) and here we show that the presence of Fab is essential for the formation of these insoluble immune complexes. Further evidence for the significance of Fab binding in intact IgG for the precipitin formation between SpA and IgG is shown in Fig. 2B. No typical precipitin line is formed between SpA and a mixture of unconnected Fab and Fc fragments, however a much fainter line appears very close to the well with the Fab–Fc mixture. This distinct band is only visible after Coomassie staining and is characteristic for a large but soluble complex formed with only a small fraction of the Fab–Fc mixture. Only 15% of pooled human serum IgG binds SpA (Sasso et al., 1991) and it is the low concentration of V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup> Fab fragments in this mixture that can explain the position of the precipitin band, located very close to the well with the Fab–Fc mixture (Fig. 2B). No precipitin formation was observed between either SpA or Sbi and Fab alone (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that unlike SpA, which requires the presence of both Fc and (V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup>) Fab for precipitating human IgG, Sbi only requires Fc.

### 3.2. Domains Sbi-I and Sbi-II both bind human IgG Fc fragment but do not bind Fab

To further analyse the IgG-binding characteristics of Sbi, constructs of functional immunoglobulin-binding domain Sbi-I (residues 42–94) and predicted immunoglobulin-binding domain Sbi-II (residues 92–156) were tested individually in SPR experiments with human IgG subclasses 1, 2, 3 and 4. In Fig. 3A we show that both domains bind human IgG with a high affinity for subclass IgG<sub>1</sub> (*K*<sub>A</sub> = 3.5 × 10<sup>7</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> for Sbi-I, 4.3 × 10<sup>7</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> for Sbi-II) that are an order of magnitude higher than those found for the binding of human Fc1 fragments by monovalent SpA domains (reported *K*<sub>A</sub> values in the range of 10<sup>5</sup>–10<sup>6</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> (Jendeberg et al., 1995; Li et al., 1998; Oda et al., 2003)). We found that both Sbi domains bind IgG<sub>4</sub> with similar affinity (7.6 × 10<sup>6</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> for Sbi-I, 6.3 × 10<sup>6</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> for Sbi-II). For IgG<sub>2</sub>, Sbi-I has a significantly higher affinity than Sbi-II (4 × 10<sup>7</sup> M<sup>−1</sup> vs. 3 × 10<sup>6</sup> M<sup>−1</sup>). As with SpA, neither Sbi-E nor the individual immunoglobulin-binding domains display any measurable

K.L. Atkins et al. / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

complexes were observed with serum IgG from cow, goat, sheep, horse or chicken for either SpA or Sbi. Size exclusion chromatography analysis of the complexes where no precipitin formation was seen revealed that Sbi forms soluble 1:1 molecular complexes with pig, cow and goat IgG (Fig. 5). SpA forms larger complexes with cow and goat IgG. No soluble complexes were observed for both Sbi and SpA in the presence of sheep or horse IgG, using this method.

The observed differences in reactivity of SpA and Sbi with mammalian IgGs have been explained as an expression of the amino acid sequences of IgG H-chain residues (Kronvall and Frommel, 1970). H435, for instance, plays a key role in the SpA–Fc complex formation (Deisenhofer et al., 1978; Jendeberg et al., 1997) because a H435R substitution at this position, observed in human IgG₃ and chicken IgG, completely eliminates the binding with SpA. A comparison of contact residues from precipitin-forming (human, pig, mouse, Guinea pig and rabbit) and non-precipitating IgGs (cow, sheep, goat, horse and chicken) indicates that the amino acid sequence variations at position 315 may be important (Table 1). While charged residues (D, K and R) are generally found at this location in precipitin-forming complexes, in non-precipitating Fcs this position is occupied by polar (Q and S) or non-polar (G) residues.

### 3.4. Fab-mediated binding also important in precipitation of animal sera by SpA

Having demonstrated that the presence of Fab is essential for the formation of insoluble immune complexes by SpA with human IgG, we then compared the Vᴴ Fab sequences of all tested animal IgGs. BLAST analysis of these sequences indicates that in the precipitin-forming complexes with SpA and these IgGs (mouse, pig, rabbit and Guinea pig), Fab may also act as a cross-linker. In mice, SpA is known to be mostly reactive with Fab of IgM, IgA, and IgG. These immunoglobulins belong to the S107 and J606 families that are related to the human Vᴴ genes of family 3 (Rathbun et al., 1989). Porcine Vᴴ genes belong to a small Vᴴ family that is also homologous to human Vᴴ3 (Sun et al., 1994), as are rabbit Vᴴ genes. Since no similarity was observed between human Vᴴ3 and Fabs from IgGs that form soluble complexes with SpA (cow, sheep, goat and horse IgG), we conclude that these complexes are only Fc-mediated. No Vᴴ3 sequences for Guinea pig are currently available in the databases.

### 3.3. Complexes of SpA and Sbi with IgGs from animal sera

We also performed double immunodiffusion assays with IgGs from a range of animal sera and compared the complexes formed with Sbi-E and SpA. Insoluble complexes were observed for both SpA and Sbi with serum IgGs from Guinea pig and mouse (Fig. 4A and B). Only SpA precipitated IgG from pig serum (Fig. 4D).

Sbi and rabbit IgG produced an obvious precipitin line (Fig. 4C) while with SpA only a faint and broad belt was observed, indicative of a heterogeneous mixture of soluble immune complexes. This faint belt of large soluble complexes, normally accompanying a sharp precipitin line (as seen in the presence of human, Fig. 2B; Guinea pig and pig IgGs, Fig. 4A and D, respectively), appears to be typical for SpA and mostly becomes visible only after Coomassie staining. No insoluble

K.L. Atkins et al. / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

Fig. 4. Double immunodiffusion assay with recombinant SpA and Sbi-E against serum IgG from (A) Guinea pig (Gp), (B) mouse (Mo), (C) rabbit (Ra) and (D) pig (Pi). In all assays human IgG (Hu) was used as positive control.

Table 1  
Alignment of IgG Fc contact residues in the SpA-Fc complex

| Species    | Fc contact residues in complex with SpA |
|------------|-----------------------------------------|
|            | 250                                    | 310                                    | 430                                    |
| Human      | KDTLMISR                               | TVLHQDWLNGK                            | HEALHNHY                               |
|            |                                        | N D                                    | R*                                     |
| Pig        | ...FQ                                  | PIQ...K                                | ...                                   |
| Guinea pig | ....L                                  | PIQ....R..                             | .....V                                 |
| Mouse      | ..V....L                               | PIQ....R..                             | ...GK                                  |
|            | ATT                                    | MM                                     |                                        |
| Rabbit     | ...                                   | PIT....R..                             | ...                                   |
|            | ...AE                                  |                                        |                                        |
| Cow        | ....G                                  | PIQ....Q..                             | ...R                                   |
|            | T                                      | TG                                     |                                        |
| Goat       | Data not available                     |                                        |                                        |
| Gheep      | ...T..G                                | PIQ....TG..                            | ...                                   |
| Horse      | ...V                                   | PIQ....S..                             | IRHT                                   |
|            |                                        | RKRR                                   | VEN                                    |
| Chicken    | GE-.Y..L                               | P.ST....S.E                            | ...PMRF                                |

IgG residues in contact with SpA are shown in bold and are based on the structure of the human Fc-SpA-B complex (1FC2.pdb). Precipitate forming complexes are shaded in grey (*Non SpA binding IgG₃).

model of the two IgG-binding domains of Sbi, presented here, superimposes well with the SAXS solution structure of Sbi-E.

### 3.6. Mechanism for Fc-mediated precipitin formation by Sbi

Fig. 7A pictorializes the soluble 2SpA:4Fc complex (left panel) and the proposed mechanism for V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup> mediated formation of insoluble immune complexes between human IgG and SpA, by cross-linking of soluble SpA–IgG complexes via their exposed Fab binding sites (right panel). The homology models presented here also provide an explanation for the immunoprecipitation of human IgG by Sbi in the absence of Fab binding. To avoid steric clashes between the bound Fc molecules (Fig. 7B, left panel) Sbi domains I and II must face away from each other. Such a complex will lead to exposure of binding sites for other Sbi molecules, consequently instigating the formation of a large Sbi–Fc network (Fig. 7B, right panel). This indicates that soluble Sbi–Fc complexes will only form when just one Sbi’s Ig-binding domain is occupied. This is confirmed by the results from size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 5). In contrast to SpA, where large soluble complexes can form in the absence of Fab binding, Sbi only 1:1 complexes can be observed (with pig, cow and goat IgGs). The two Ig-binding domains of Sbi are not as similar in sequence to each other as the SpA binding repeats are. The dissimilarity between the Fc-binding residues in Sbi-I and Sbi-II may well be the source of the 1:1 binding ratio with pig, cow and goat IgGs.

With the model of soluble 2SpA:4Fc complex pictured in Fig. 7 (left panel) we can now also explain the formation of the weak precipitin line between SpA and the Fab–Fc mixture in the double immunodiffusion experiment shown in Fig. 2B. While the soluble 2SpA:4Fc complex can freely diffuse between the two wells containing SpA and the Fab–Fc mixture, remaining undetected after Coomassie staining, the complex becomes part of a significantly larger ternary complex when Fab also binds. As is illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1 the 2SpA:4Fc complex has as many as eight exposed Fab binding sites and the binding of V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup> Fab molecules can potentially increase the size of the complex by a factor of 2.4, from approximately 284 kDa (2SpA = 84 kDa + 4Fc = 200 kDa) to a ternary complex of about 684 kDa (+8Fab = 400 kDa). The formation of this large SpA–Fc–Fab complex is very different from the molecular cross-linking seen between SpA and IgG and is only detected after Coomassie staining. This ternary complex is found close to the well of the Fab–Fc mixture because the bound Fab molecules originate from a small fraction of the Fab population.

### 3.7. Sequence comparisons of spa and sbi from human and non-human hosts

Although precipitation of human and animal IgGs occurs via different mechanisms in SpA (Fc- and V<sub>H</sub>3 Fab-mediated) and Sbi (Fc-mediated), both show similar specificity for human IgG and the rodent IgGs that we have tested here. We also show that both SpA and Sbi do not form insoluble precipitates with serum

K.L. Atkins et al. / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

**Fig. 6.** Homology models of two-domain SpA and Sbi molecules in complex with Fc. Both complexes are based on the SpA–IgG complex model, proposed by Hanson and Schumaker, with two Fc molecules sandwiched between two anti-parallel oriented SpA molecules. Positions of SpA’s and Sbi’s immunoglobulin-binding domains (IgBD, Sbi-I and Sbi-II) and linker regions are indicated.

---

**Fig. 7.** (A) *Left panel:* Pictorialized representation of the soluble 2SpA:4Fc complex with Fc molecules shown in dark blue (black in the printed version). The Fc binding face (helices 1 and 2) of the SpA domains are highlighted in turquoise (light grey in printed version) and the Fab-binding face (helices 2 and 3) in magenta (dark grey in printed version). *Right panel:* V<sub>H</sub>3 Fab-mediated cross-linking of soluble SpA–IgG complexes. For clarity V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup> Fab fragments are rendered opaque (light chains are shown in dark turquoise and heavy chains in purple (light grey and dark grey, respectively, in the printed version)), non-V<sub>H</sub>3 Fab fragments are transparent. *Inset:* positions of SpA binding regions on an intact V<sub>H</sub>3<sup>+</sup> IgG molecule. (B) *Left panel:* Representation of the 2Sbi:2Fc model. This complex between Sbi and human IgG Fc is unlikely to form because of steric clashes between the two bound Fc molecules, resulting in the formation of Fab-independent insoluble complexes of fragments (*right panel*). Fc molecules are shown in dark blue (black in printed version) and Sbi’s immunoglobulin-binding domains in green, with the Fc binding face (helices 1 and 2) in a darker shade of green (grey and darker shade of grey, respectively, in printed version).

IgGs from the ungulate species (cows, goats, horses and sheep). Although the pathogenic potential of *S.* aureus in these species is unclear, the economic burden caused by bovine mastitis points to the possibility that disease in non-human hosts is common and already cases of antibiotic resistance have been reported (de Neeling et al., 2007). This raises questions about the role of Ig-binding proteins and the importance of the formation of insoluble immune complexes in infection of these animal species. Thus far we (and others) have described the Ig-binding characteristics of Sbi and SpA and examined the molecular origin of the observed differences in IgG binding with recombinant SpA and Sbi proteins originating from an *S.* aureus strain (N315), isolated from a human patient. We then compared the nucleotide sequences of the *spa* and *sbi* genes from a sample of strain isolates from human and non-human disease in order to determine to what extent host adaptation is driving the evolution of these genes.

We generated 21 *spa* and 23 *sbi* sequences from a total of 28 strains isolated from human and animal hosts (pig, cow, goat, ewe, rabbit and poultry). These sequences were supplemented with those from five complete genomes, all of which were human-derived strains (8325, MW2, N315, MRSA252, and MSSA476; Supplementary Table 2). The size of the *sbi* gene ranged from 1311 to 1314 nucleotides, whereas the length of *spa* was much more variable, ranging from 1293 to 1624 bp.

The *sbi* sequences show high levels of conservation in both nucleotide and protein sequences. A total of 140 nucleotide changes was observed, corresponding to 60 amino acid changes; most of these changes (111/140; 47/60) were restricted to the C-terminal region (Fig. 8A). As in *sbi*, the most variable region of *spa* is in the C-terminal part but in this case the variation is entirely restricted to the first portion of this region, corresponding to the proline-rich octapeptide repeat region, characterised by the repeat motif XKPGKEDZ (where X is G or N, and Z is K or N). The number of repeats is highly variable, ranging from 4 to 16 in the strains sequenced. Other than the octapeptide

repeat region, the C-terminal of SpA is completely conserved (Fig. 8B). The variability in the number of 8-residue repeats has been used as a genomic fingerprint for genetic relatedness (Shopsin et al., 1999). The significance of this variability has not been established and there appears to be no relationship between the number of octapeptide repeats and the host species from which the strain was isolated (Table 2). As with Sbi, the Ig-binding domains of SpA are highly conserved, with between 9 and 23 nucleotide changes and 2–6 amino acid changes in any one domain. However, not all sequences contain all five Ig-binding domains; several strains lack a single SpA domain (Table 2). Domain D is absent in rabbit isolates D8-452.11, D8-526.03, and ewe strain D8-610.13, while in strains D2-95.40

(cow), D8-526.03 (rabbit) and H560 (human), domain B has been deleted. In human strain H116 a part of domain C is missing.

### 3.8. Selection for immunoglobulin binding

The sequence data reveal a high level of conservation within the Ig-binding domains of *spa* and *sbi* from strains recovered from a range of hosts. No variation was detected in the Ig-binding domains of *sbi*, and only a small number of changes were found in the binding domains for *spa*. The overall dN/dS ratios are <1, which is consistent with purifying, rather than diversifying, selection pressure. This strongly suggests that there

(A)


**Figure 8. Sequence analysis of *sbi* and *spa* of *S. aureus* strains isolated from animal hosts. Shown are the amino acid sequences of (A) *sbi* and (B) *spa* from human isolate N315. The substitutions found in the *sbi* and *spa* sequences and the number of *S. aureus* strains in which these substitutions occur are indicated. For clarity the domain regions of Sbi and SpA are shaded.**

(B)
M K K K N I Y S I R K L G V G I A S V T L G T L L I S G G V T P A A N A A Q H D E A Q Q N A F Y Q V
X X
1 1

SpA domain E
L N M P N L N A D Q R N G F I Q S L K D D P S Q S A N V L G E A Q K L N D S Q A P K A D A Q Q N N F
K E
9 3
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Table 2  
Occurrence of the five Ig-binding domains of spa in the analysed S. aureus strains  

| Strain | SpA Ig-binding domains | No. of octapeptide repeats |
|--------|-------------------------|---------------------------|
|        | E | D | A | B | C |           |
| 8325   | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 13    |
| C101   | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 11    |
| H116   | Human | × | × | × | × | & | 7     |
| H783   | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 13    |
| H560   | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| N315   | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| MW2    | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| MSSA 476 | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| MRSA 252 | Human | × | × | × | × | × | 13    |
| D8-520.26 | Pig | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| D8-522.05 | Pig | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| D2-95.40 | Cow | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| D4-135.45 | Cow | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| Etoile cow | × | × | × | × | × | 4     |
| D4-121.24 | Goat | × | × | × | × | × | 4     |
| D8-660.22 | Goat | × | × | × | × | × | 4     |
| D9-786.04 | Goat | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| D9-786.05 | Ewe | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| D8-610.13 | Ewe | × | × | × | × | × | 16    |
| D8-452.11 | Rabbit | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| D8-526.03 | Rabbit | × | × | × | × | × | 8     |
| D8-526.12 | Rabbit | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| D8-522.13 | Poultry | × | × | × | × | × | 12    |
| D8-522.18 | Poultry | × | × | × | × | × | 10    |
| D8-524.04 | Poultry | × | × | × | × | × | 13    |

For each strain the presence of each Ig-binding domain is indicated (×) together with the number of proline octapeptide repeats. Strain H116 (&) contains only a part of domain C.

conditions in whole blood (Pawar et al., 2004) and it was shown recently that SpA's IgG interacting residues bind with high affinity to Al domain of vWf (O'Seaghdha et al., 2006). SpA has also been indicated as a major trigger for staphylococcal pneumonia by activation of TNFR1 signalling through conserved IgG-binding residues (Gomez et al., 2006).

3.9. Clinical implications

SpA has been used therapeutically in immunoadsorption treatment of diseases mediated by pathogenic antibodies. Recent research has suggested that the severe side-effects of these therapies (Messerschmidt et al., 1989) are due to the fact that SpA can act as a B-cell superantigen and it was shown that the induction of this inflammatory response was dependent on the presence of V<sub>H</sub>3+IgG molecules (Kozlowski et al., 1998). Since SpA binds V<sub>H</sub>3+immunoglobulins independently of their heavy-chain isotype, the SpA induced immune complexes contain exposed Fc fragments that, analogous to antibody-antigen complexes formed in a normal Arthus reaction, can trigger complement fixation via the classical pathway and activate FcγR-bearing effector cells. Here we show that cross-linking of the immune complexes formed with Sbi is mediated only by Fc binding, free Fc regions are unlikely to be available for FcγR recognition or complement fixation. Sbi therefore could have great potential in immunoadsorption therapy.

Table 3  
Ratios of non-synonymous and synonymous changes (dN/dS) in sbi and spa  

| Gene or domain | dN/dS |
|----------------|-------|
| spa total      | 0.316 |
| Ig-binding domains |       |
| E              | 0.086 |
| D              | 0.088 |
| A              | 0.067 |
| B              | 0.067 |
| C              | 0.111 |
| sbi total      | 0.336 |
| Ig-binding domains |       |
| I              | n.a.  |
| II             | n.a.  |

dN/dS ratios are given for the complete genes or individual domains.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. M.C. Enright (Imperial College London) for providing S. aureus genomic DNA and Nick Jones for his contribution to the double immunodiffusion experiments. Prof. D.E. Isenman (University of Toronto) and Dr. J.T. Eaton (University of Bath) are gratefully acknowledged for their helpful discussions. This project was funded by Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council Research Grant BBS/B/12121 (JMHvdE). K.L.A. was funded by a Medical Research Council (MRC) studentship. J.E.C. was funded by an MRC Career development Fund awarded to E.J.F.

K.L. Atkins et al. / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 1600–1611

### Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2007.10.021.

### References

- Bouma, B., de Groot, P.G., van den Elsen, J.M., Ravelli, R.B., Schouten, A., Simmelink, M.J., Derksen, R.H., Kroon, J., Gros, P., 1999. Adhesion mechanism of human beta(2)-glycoprotein I to phospholipids based on its crystal structure. Embo J. 18 (19), 5166–5174.
- Burman, J.D., Leung, E., Atkins, K.L., O’Seaghdha, M.N., Lango, L., Bernadó, P., Bagby, S., Svergun, D.I., Foster, T.J., Isenman, D.E., van den Elsen, J.M.H. 2007. Interaction of human complement with Sbi, a staphylococcal immunoglobulin-binding protein: indications of a novel mechanism of complement evasion by *Staphylococcus aureus* (in review).
- de Neeling, A.J., van den Broek, M.J., Spalburg, E.C., van Santen-Verheuvel, M.G., Dam-Deisz, W.D., Boshuizen, H.C., van de Giessen, A.W., van Duijkeren, E., Huijsdens, X.W., 2007. High prevalence of methicillin resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* in pigs. Vet. Microbiol. 122, 366–372.
- Deisenhofer, J., Jones, T.A., Huber, R., Sjodahl, J., Sjoquist, J., 1978. Crystallization, crystal structure analysis and atomic model of the complex formed by a human Fc fragment and fragment B of protein A from *Staphylococcus aureus*. Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem. 359, 975–985.
- Foster, T.J., 2005. Immune evasion by staphylococci. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3, 948–958.
- Gojobori, T., Nei, M., 1986. Relative contributions of germline gene variation and somatic mutation to immunoglobulin diversity in the mouse. Mol. Biol. Evol. 3, 156–167.
- Gomez, M.I., O’Seaghdha, M., Magargee, M., Foster, T.J., Prince, A.S., 2006. *Staphylococcus aureus* protein A activates TNFR1 signaling through conserved IgG binding domains. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 20190–20196.
- Graille, M., Stura, E.A., Copper, A.L., Sutton, B.J., Taussig, M.J., Charbonnier, J.B., Silverman, G.J., 2000. Crystal structure of a *Staphylococcus aureus* protein A domain complexed with the Fab fragment of a human IgM antibody: structural basis for recognition of B-cell receptors and superantigen activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 5399–5404.
- Hanson, D.C., Schumaker, V.N., 1984. A model for the formation and interconversion of protein A-immunoglobulin G soluble complexes. J. Immunol. 132, 1397–1409.
- Huber, T., Faulkner, G., Hugenholtz, P., 2004. Bellerophon: a program to detect chimeric sequences in multiple sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 20, 2317–2319.
- Jansson, B., Uhlen, M., Nygren, P.A., 1998. All individual domains of staphylococcal protein A show Fab binding. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 20, 69–78.
- Jendeberg, L., Nilsson, P., Larsson, A., Denker, P., Uhlen, M., Nilsson, B., Nygren, P.A., 1997. Engineering of Fc(1) and Fc(3) from human immunoglobulin G to analyse subclass specificity for staphylococcal protein A. J. Immunol. Methods 201, 25–34.
- Jendeberg, L., Persson, B., Andersson, R., Karlsson, R., Uhlen, M., Nilsson, B., 1995. Kinetic analysis of the interaction between protein A domain variants and human Fc using plasmon resonance detection. J. Mol. Recognit. 8, 270–278.
- Kozlowski, L.M., Li, W., Goldschmidt, M., Levinson, A.I., 1998. In vivo inflammatory response to a prototypic B cell superantigen: elicitation of an Arthus reaction by staphylococcal protein A. J. Immunol. 160, 5246–5252.
- Kronvall, G., Frommel, D., 1970. Definition of staphylococcal protein A reactivity for human immunoglobulin G fragments. Immunochemistry 7, 124–127.
- Kronvall, G., Seal, U.S., Finstad, J., Williams Jr., R.C., 1970. Phylogenetic insight into evolution of mammalian Fc fragment of gamma G globulin using staphylococcal protein A. J. Immunol. 104, 140–147.
- Kumar, S., Tamura, K., Nei, M., 1994. MEGA: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis software for microcomputers. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 10, 189–191.
- Li, R., Dowd, V., Stewart, D.J., Burton, S.J., Lowe, C.R., 1998. Design, synthesis, and application of a protein A mimetic. Nat. Biotechnol. 16, 190–195.
- Messerschmidt, G.L., Henry, D.H., Snyder Jr., H.W., Bertram, J., Mittelman, A., Ainsworth, S., Fiore, J., Viola, M.V., Louie, J., Ambinder, E., et al., 1989. Protein A immunotherapy in the treatment of cancer: an update. Semin. Hematol. 26, 19–24.
- Navarre, W.W., Schneewind, O., 1994. Proteolytic cleavage and cell wall anchoring at the LPXTG motif of surface proteins in gram-positive bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 14, 115–121.
- O’Seaghdha, M., van Schooten, C.J., Kerrigan, S.W., Emsley, J., Silverman, G.J., Cox, D., Lenting, P.J., Foster, T.J., 2006. *Staphylococcus aureus* protein A binding to von Willebrand factor A1 domain is mediated by conserved IgG binding regions. Febs J. 273, 4831–4841.
- Oda, M., Kozono, H., Morii, H., Azuma, T., 2003. Evidence of allosteric conformational changes in the antibody constant region upon antigen binding. Int. Immunol. 15, 417–426.
- Pawar, P., Shin, P.K., Mousa, S.A., Ross, J.M., Konstantopoulos, K., 2004. Fluid shear regulates the kinetics and receptor specificity of *Staphylococcus aureus* binding to activated platelets. J. Immunol. 173, 1258–1265.
- Pond, S.L., Frost, S.D., 2005. Datamonkey: rapid detection of selective pressure on individual sites of codon alignments. Bioinformatics 21, 2531–2533.
- Rathbun, G., Berman, J., Yancopoulos, G., Alt, F.W., 1989. Organization and expression of the mammalian heavy-chain variable-region locus. In: Honjo, T., Alt, F.W., Rabbits, T.H. (Eds.), Immunoglobulin Genes. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL, pp. 63–90.
- Sasso, E.H., Silverman, G.J., Mannik, M., 1991. Human IgA and IgG F(ab′)2 that bind to staphylococcal protein A belong to the VHIII subgroup. J. Immunol. 147, 1877–1883.
- Schneewind, O., Fowler, A., Faull, K.F., 1995. Structure of the cell wall anchor of surface proteins in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Science 268, 103–106.
- Schneewind, O., Model, P., Fischetti, V.A., 1992. Sorting of protein A to the staphylococcal cell wall. Cell 70, 267–281.
- Shopsin, B., Gomez, M., Montgomery, S.O., Smith, D.H., Waddington, M., Dodge, D.E., Bost, D.A., Riehman, M., Naidich, S., Kreiswirth, B.N., 1999. Evaluation of protein A gene polymorphic region DNA sequencing for typing of *Staphylococcus aureus* strains. J. Clin. Microbiol. 37, 3556–3563.
- Silverman, G.J., Goodyear, C.S., Siegel, D.L., 2005. On the mechanism of staphylococcal protein A immunomodulation. Transfusion 45, 274–280.
- Sun, J., Kacskovics, I., Brown, W.R., Butler, J.E., 1994. Expressed swine VH genes belong to a small VH gene family homologous to human VHIII. J. Immunol. 153, 5618–5627.
- Swofford, D.L., 2000. PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis using Parsimony (*and Other Methods). Version 4.0b4a. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
- Zhang, L., Jacobsson, K., Strom, K., Lindberg, M., Frykberg, L., 1999. *Staphylococcus aureus* expresses a cell surface protein that binds both IgG and beta2-glycoprotein I. Microbiology 145 (Pt 1), 177–183.
- Zhang, L., Jacobsson, K., Vasi, J., Lindberg, M., Frykberg, L., 1998. A second IgG-binding protein in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Microbiology 144 (Pt 4), 985–991.
