
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**MDA5/RIG-I and virus recognition**

Osamu Takeuchi and Shizuo Akira

The innate immune system initially recognizes RNA virus infection and evokes antiviral responses by producing type I interferons (IFNs). Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytoplasmic retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like helicases (RLHs) are the two major receptor systems for detecting RNA viruses. The RLH signaling pathways play essential roles in the recognition of RNA viruses in various cells, with the exception of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, which utilize TLRs for virus recognition. The route of infection determines the cell types responsible for type I IFN production. Recent studies have suggested that TLRs are critical for activation of adaptive immune responses against several virus infections, although it may be premature to draw such a conclusion for virus infections in general. In this review, we will discuss recent advances toward clarifying the signaling pathways activated by RLHs and TLRs.

**Addresses**

Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan

Corresponding author: Akira, Shizuo (sakira@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp)

---

**Current Opinion in Immunology 2008, 20:17–22**

This review comes from a themed issue on Innate Immunity  
Edited by Wayne Yokoyama and Marco Colonna  

0952-7915/$ – see front matter  
Published by Elsevier Ltd.  

DOI **10.1016/j.coi.2008.01.002**

---

**Introduction**

Innate immunity is characterized by the use of germline-encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to sense components specific to micro-organisms [1–3]. Recent studies have identified three major classes of PRRs, designated Toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like helicases (RLHs) and nucleotide-oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs). In response to virus infections, viral components such as RNA and DNA are recognized by TLRs and RLHs, and cells are activated to produce type I interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory cytokines. Type I IFNs, comprised of multiple IFN-α isoforms and a single IFN-β, and other members, such as IFN-ω, IFN-ε and IFN-κ, are pleiotropic cytokines that are essential for antiviral immune responses [4]. They induce apoptosis of virus-infected cells and cellular resistance to virus infection, as well as activating natural killer (NK) and T cells.

---

TLRs are comprised of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic Toll/interleukin 1 receptor (IL-1R) homology (TIR) domain [1]. Among the 13 TLRs identified in mammals, TLR3, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 are involved in the recognition of microbial nucleotides. These TLRs are expressed on the surface of cytoplasmic vesicles such as endosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum with the LRR domain in the vesicular space. TLR3 detects double-stranded (ds) RNA, while TLR7 and TLR8 recognize single-stranded (ss) RNA and TLR9 recognizes unmethylated DNA with CpG motifs. TLR-mediated signaling pathways recruit TIR domain-containing adaptors such as MyD88 and TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-β (TRIF), thereby leading to the activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), which regulate the expression of genes that encode proinflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs, respectively. Since TLRs are transmembrane proteins, they are not able to detect viral components present in the cytoplasm of a cell.

RIG-I (also known as DDX58) was identified as a candidate for a cytoplasmic viral RNA detector [5]. RIG-I is comprised of two N-terminal caspase-recruitment domains (CARDs) followed by a DExD/H box RNA helicase domain. RIG-I forms the RLH family together with melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5; also known as helicard or IFIH1) and LGP2 based on the high similarities among their helicase domains [6,7]. The helicase domains of RLH family members are highly similar to that of mammalian Dicer. The expression of genes encoding RLHs is strongly induced by IFNs. RLHs interact with dsRNAs through their helicase domain, and dsRNA stimulation induces their ATP catalytic activity. A C-terminal portion of RIG-I, designated the repressor domain (RD), was shown to inhibit the triggering of RIG-I signaling in the steady state [8]. The N-terminal CARDs are responsible for activating downstream signaling pathways that mediate dsRNA-induced type I IFN production.

In this review, we will describe the functions and signaling pathways of RLHs, and discuss the relationships among RLHs and TLRs in antiviral immune responses.

---

**Recognition of RNA viruses by RLHs**

RNA virus infections generate dsRNA for virus replication in infected cells. Initially, both RIG-I and MDA5 were implicated in the recognition of polyinosinic polycytidylic acid (poly I:C), a synthetic analogue of viral dsRNA. However, analysis of RIG-I⁻/⁻ and MDA5⁻/⁻
mice revealed that MDA5, but not RIG-I, was responsible for the response to poly I:C stimulation [9**,10]. On the other hand, RIG-I, but not MDA5, recognizes 5′-triphosphate ssRNA synthesized by T7 polymerase *in vitro* [11**,12**]. RNAs from some viruses are 5′-triphosphorylated and uncapped, whereas the 5′ ends of host mRNAs are capped. Thus, RIG-I discriminates virus and host RNAs based on the differences in the 5′ ends of their RNAs.

RNA viruses are also differentially recognized by RIG-I and MDA5. RIG-I−/− cells do not produce type I IFNs in response to various RNA viruses, including paramyxoviruses, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and influenza virus [9**,13]. By contrast, MDA5−/− cells do not respond to infection with picornaviruses such as encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and Theiler’s virus. Cells infected with EMCV, but not influenza virus, generate dsRNA [12**]. Dephosphorylation of 5′-triphosphate RNA or the influenza genome results in a loss of their ability to induce IFNs, suggesting that recognition by RIG-I is mediated through 5′-triphosphate ssRNA. Consistent with defects in type I IFN production, RIG-I−/− and MDA5−/− mice are highly susceptible to inoculation with VSV and EMCV, respectively [9**]. Japanese encephalitis virus and hepatitis C virus, which both belong to the Flaviviridae family, are recognized by RIG-I. However, Dengue virus and West Nile virus, which also belong to the Flaviviridae family, were reported to induce type I IFN production even in the absence of either RIG-I or MDA5 [9**,14–16]. Furthermore, siRNA experiments suggested that Dengue virus was recognized by a combination of RIG-I and MDA5.

RIG-I-mediated signaling is positively and negatively controlled by ubiquitination of RIG-I. First, the CARDs of RIG-I undergo Lys 63-linked ubiquitination by tripartite motif (TRIM) 25, a ubiquitin E3 ligase composed of a RING finger domain, a B box/coiled-coil domain and a SPRY domain [17*]. This ubiquitination is necessary for efficient activation of the RIG-I signaling pathway, and TRIM25−/− cells display impaired production of type I IFNs against viral infection. On the other hand, RIG-I also undergoes ubiquitination by the ubiquitin ligase RNF125, which leads to its proteasomal degradation [18]. Thus, RIG-1 ubiquitination by RNF125 is considered to inhibit aberrant activation of RIG-I signaling.

RNase L, an endonuclease originally thought to cleave viral ssRNA, was reported to be involved in the production of IFN-β in response to RNA virus infection or dsRNA stimulation [19]. Briefly, 2′,5′-linked oligoadenylate generated by virus infection activates RNase L to cleave self RNA, resulting in the generation of small RNA products. These small RNAs are responsible for RIG-I/MDA5-mediated recognition and subsequent production of type I IFNs. However, the precise structures of the

---

RNAs generated by RNase L that are recognized by RIG-I/MDA5 need to be further investigated.

Since LGP2 lacks a CARD, it is suggested to function as a negative regulator of RIG-I/MDA5 signaling. Overexpression of LGP2 inhibits Sendai virus and Newcastle disease virus (NDV) signaling [6–8]. LGP2 also contains an RD, and this RD was found to interact with the RD of RIG-I and suppress its self-association. Recently, Lgp2−/− mice were generated and analyzed by Barber and coworkers [20]. Lgp2−/− mice show highly elevated induction of type I IFNs in response to poly I:C stimulation, and modestly increased IFN production in response to VSV infection. On the other hand, Lgp2−/− mice exhibit partially impaired type I IFN production in response to EMCV infection. The authors proposed that LGP2 is a negative regulator of RIG-I, but not of MDA5. However, given that both poly I:C and EMCV are recognized by MDA5, the difference cannot be simply explained by differential usage of LGP2 for RIG-I and MDA5 signaling.

### The RLH signaling pathway

The CARDs of RIG-I and MDA5 are responsible for initiating signaling cascades (*Figure 1*). RIG-I and MDA5 associate with an adaptor protein, IFN-β promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1; also known as MAVS, VISA or CARDIF), which also contains a CARD [21–24]. Overexpression of IPS-1 induces the activation of IFN gene promoters as well as NF-κB. IPS-1−/− mice are defective in producing type I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines in response to all RNA viruses recognized by either RIG-I or MDA5 [25,26]. These findings indicate that IPS-1 plays an essential role in RIG-I/MDA5 signaling. Interestingly, this protein is present in the outer mitochondrial membrane, suggesting that mitochondria may be important for IFN responses, in addition to their roles in metabolism and cell death [22]. Recently, IPS-1 and RIG-I were found to associate with Atg5–Atg12 conjugates, which are essential components for autophagy [27]. Atg5−/− mouse embryonic fibroblasts show increased type I IFN production in response to RNA virus infection, suggesting that the autophagic machinery directly affects the RIG-I signaling pathway in addition to autophagosome formation.

IPS-1 was found to associate with TNF-receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 3, an E3 ubiquitin ligase assembling lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin chains, through its C-terminal TRAF domain [28–30]. TRAF3−/− cells show severely impaired production of type I IFNs in response to virus infection. Recently, a deubiquitinase named DUBA was shown to deubiquitinate TRAF3 and suppress RLH signaling [31*]. TRAF3 recruits and activates two IKK-related kinases, designated TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and inducible IkB kinase (IKK-i; also known as IKKe), which phosphorylate IRF-3 and IRF-7
Figure 1

RNA Virus
Picornaviruses
West Nile virus
Dengue virus
paramyxoviruses
Influenza virus
VSV
Japanese encephalitis virus

dsRNA
dsRNA?
5′ Triphosphate
ssRNA
P P P

CARDs
MDA-5
Helicase

RIG-I
CARDs
Helicase
Ub
RD

IPS-1
TANK/NAP1/SINTBAD
TRAF3
Mitochondria

IKK-i
TBK1

FADD
DED
Processing
Caspase-8/-10

IRF3
IRF7

Type I IFNs

NF-κB

Proinflammatory
cytokines

Current Opinion in Immunology

RLH-mediated recognition of RNA viruses. RIG-I and MDA5 recognize 5′-triphosphate RNA and dsRNA from RNA viruses, and interact with IPS-1. TRAF3 is required for activation of IPS-1 signaling pathways, and K63-type polyubiquitination, which is controlled by the presence of DUBA. Subsequently, TRAF3 recruits TANK/NAP1/SINTBAD and TBK1/IKK-i, which phosphorylate IRF-3 and IRF-7. Next, nuclear translocation of IRFs takes place to induce the expression of type I IFN genes. NF-κB is also activated by IPS-1 via a FADD and caspase-8/caspase-10-dependent pathway.
[32,33]. However, IKK-i is also activated by IFN-β to directly phosphorylate STAT1, thereby controlling a set of IFN-inducible genes such as the dsRNA-activated adenosine deaminase gene (Adar1) [34].

TBK1 and IKK-i interact with TRAF family member-associated NF-κB activator (TANK), NAK-associated protein 1 (NAP1) and similar to NAP1 TBK1 adaptor (SINTBAD). These molecules show similarities with each other, and knockdown of any of them was reported to impair RLH signaling [35–37].

Phosphorylation of IRF-3 and IRF-7 by these kinases induces the formation of homodimers and/or heterodimers [38], which translocate into the nucleus and bind to IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs), thereby resulting in the expression of type I IFN genes and a set of IFN-inducible genes. In addition, FAS-associated death domain-containing protein (FADD) interacts with caspase-8, caspase-10 and IPS-1, and the FADD-dependent pathway is responsible for the activation of NF-κB downstream of IPS-1 [39].

### Type I IFN-producing cells in response to viral infection

Although RLHs play essential roles in the production of type I IFNs and cytokines in various cell types, such as fibroblasts and conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) produce cytokines in the absence of RLH signaling [13]. pDCs produce huge amounts of type I IFNs in response to virus infections, and TLR signaling is essential for type I IFN production by pDCs. TLR7 and TLR9 are highly expressed on pDCs, and stimulation with viral RNA and DNA induces the recruitment of a complex of MyD88, IRAK-1, IRAK-4, IKK-α and IRF-7 to the receptor, thereby leading to the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF-7 to activate the expression of IFN-inducible genes [40,41]. Although the importance of pDCs as a source of type I IFNs *in vivo* has been emphasized, direct identification of IFN-producing cells *in vivo* has not been achieved. Recently, a reporter mouse strain monitoring IFN-α6 (*Ifna6*^GFP/+^) has been established. Although pDCs are highly potent in expressing GFP upon systemic NDV infection, lung infection of *Ifna6*^GFP/+^ mice with NDV results in increases in GFP+ alveolar macrophages and cDCs, but not pDCs [42]. These observations indicate that cells other than pDCs can act as sources of type I IFNs depending on the route of infection. Interestingly, pDCs start to produce IFN-α when alveolar macrophages are depleted, suggesting that pDCs function when the first line of defense is broken.

### Roles of RLHs and TLRs in the activation of adaptive immune responses to viruses

Immediate innate responses are important for mounting acquired immune responses to viral infections. However,

it was not clear how the innate PRRs are involved in the activation of acquired immunity. Recently, two different virus infection models have been tested to examine the roles of RLHs and TLRs in the activation of acquired immune responses. The first model virus is lymphocytoid choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), an ambisense ssRNA virus belonging to the Arenaviridae family, which induces cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses in a type I IFN-dependent manner [43]. Using MyD88^−/−^ and IPS-1^−/−^ mice, the serum levels of type I IFNs and pro-inflammatory cytokines were found to mainly depend on the presence of MyD88, but not IPS-1. The generation of virus-specific CTLs was critically dependent on MyD88, but not IPS-1. Analyses of *Ifna6*^GFP/+^ reporter mice revealed that pDCs are the major sources of IFN-α in LCMV infection. These results suggest that recognition of LCMV by plasmacytoid DCs via TLRs is responsible for the production of type I IFNs *in vivo*. Furthermore, TLRs, but not RLHs, appear to be important for mounting CTL responses to LCMV infection.

Influenza virus has also been used to study the activation of adaptive immune responses [44]. Induction of type I IFNs in response to intranasal influenza A virus infection is abrogated in the absence of both MyD88 and IPS-1, although mice lacking either of these molecules are capable of producing type I IFNs. Induction of B cells or CD4 T cells specific for viral proteins is dependent on the presence of MyD88, but not IPS-1, whereas induction of nuclear protein Ag-specific CD8 T cells is not impaired in the absence of either MyD88 or IPS-1. These results suggest that adaptive immune responses to influenza A virus infection are governed by a TLR pathway.

The virus infection models tested to date support roles for TLRs, rather than RLHs, in instructing the adaptive immune system. However, further studies are required, since these two PRR systems provide different contributions depending on the viruses involved and also may depend on the route of infection.

### Conclusions

In this review, we have described the roles of RLHs, their signaling pathways and the relationships among RLHs and TLRs in responses against RNA viruses. Although recent studies have clarified the functions and signaling pathways of RLHs, the molecular structures of the RNAs recognized by MDA5 are not understood. In addition, it remains unclear whether RIG-I can recognize dsRNA in addition to 5′-triphosphate ssRNA. Although a previous report showed that small dsRNAs without 3′ overhangs induced IFN-inducible genes via RIG-I in certain cell types [45], chemically synthesized small dsRNAs (20–27 nucleotides) were only found to activate mouse fibroblasts and cDCs (OT and SA: unpublished observations). Thus, further investigations are required to clarify the structures of RIG-I and MDA5 ligands.
Furthermore, the mechanisms of DNA virus recognition are not well understood. Recently, the presence of a cytoplasmic DNA sensor was predicted [46,47], and a protein named DAI was proposed as a candidate for this sensor [48]. However, loss-of-function studies are still required to prove the importance of this protein. Although we focused on the mechanisms of innate responses and T cell activation toward RNA viruses in this review, many other cell types such as NK cells and NK T cells are involved in antiviral responses *in vivo*. Further studies are required to fully elucidate the complex regulation of antiviral responses *in vivo*.

### Acknowledgements

We thank M. Hashimoto for excellent secretarial assistance. This work was supported in part by grants from the Special Coordination Funds of the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, from the 21st Century Center of Excellence Program of Japan and from the NIH (P01 AI070167).

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O: Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. *Cell* 2006, **124**:783-801.
2. Beutler B, Eidenschenk C, Crozat K, Imler JL, Takeuchi O, Hoffmann JA, Akira S: Genetic analysis of resistance to viral infection. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2007, **7**:753-766.
3. Meylan E, Tschopp J, Karin M: Intracellular pattern recognition receptors in the host response. *Nature* 2006, **442**:39-44.
4. Honda K, Takaoka A, Taniguchi T: Type I interferon [corrected] gene induction by the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors. *Immunity* 2006, **25**:349-360.
5. Yoneyama M, Kikuchi M, Natsukawa T, Shinobu N, Imaizumi T, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Akira S, Fujita T: The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses. *Nat Immunol* 2004, **5**:730-737.
6. Yoneyama M, Kikuchi M, Matsumoto K, Imaizumi T, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Foy E, Loo YM, Gale M Jr, Akira S et al.: Shared and unique functions of the DExD/H-box helicases RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 in antiviral innate immunity. *J Immunol* 2005, **175**:2851-2858.
7. Rothenfusser S, Goutagny N, DiPerna G, Gong M, Monks BG, Schoenemeyer A, Yamamoto M, Akira S, Fitzgerald KA: The RNA helicase Lgp2 inhibits TLR-independent sensing of viral replication by retinoic acid-inducible gene-I. *J Immunol* 2005, **175**:5260-5268.
8. Saito T, Hirai R, Loo YM, Owen D, Johnson CL, Sinha SC, Akira S, Fujita T, Gale M Jr: Regulation of innate antiviral defenses through a shared repressor domain in RIG-I and LGP2. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2007, **104**:582-587.
9. Kato H, Takeuchi O, Sato S, Yoneyama M, Yamamoto M, Matsui K, Uematsu S, Jung A, Kawai T, Ishii KJ et al.: Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA viruses. *Nature* 2006, **441**:101-105.  
   This study demonstrated that RIG-I and MDA5 recognize different RNA viruses and RNA structures by generating mice deficient in RIG-I and MDA5. RIG-I⁻/⁻ and MDA5⁻/⁻ cells showed defective type I IFN production to viruses recognized by them. RIG-I⁻/⁻ and MDA5⁻/⁻ mice were susceptible to infection with VSV and EMCV, respectively, indicating that RLHs are critical for antiviral host defense *in vivo*.
10. Gitlin L, Barchet W, Gilfillan S, Cella M, Beutler B, Flavell RA, Diamond MS, Colonna M: Essential role of mda-5 in type I IFN

responses to polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid and encephalomyocarditis picornavirus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2006, **103**:8459-8464.
11. Hornung V, Ellegast J, Kim S, Brzozka K, Jung A, Kato H, Poeck H, Akira S, Conzelmann KK, Schlee M et al.: 5′-Triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. *Science* 2006, **314**:994-997.  
   This study, together with ref. 12, demonstrated that 5′-Triphosphate ssRNA synthesized by T7 RNA polymerase is recognized by RIG-I. Host RNA is capped, and IFN-inducing activity of the RNA was lost by capping of triphosphate ssRNA. Furthermore, dephosphorylation of viral genomic RNA abrogated RIG-I stimulating activity.
12. Pichlmair A, Schulz O, Tan CP, Naslund TI, Liljestrom P, Weber F, Reis e Sousa C: RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA bearing 5′-phosphates. *Science* 2006, **314**:997-1001.  
   Please see the comment to Ref [11**].
13. Kato H, Sato S, Yoneyama M, Yamamoto M, Uematsu S, Matsui K, Tsujimura T, Takeda K, Fujita T, Takeuchi O et al.: Cell type-specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response. *Immunity* 2005, **23**:19-28.
14. Sumpter R Jr, Loo YM, Foy E, Li K, Yoneyama M, Fujita T, Lemon SM, Gale M Jr: Regulating intracellular antiviral defense and permissiveness to hepatitis C virus RNA replication through a cellular RNA helicase, RIG-I. *J Virol* 2005, **79**:2689-2699.
15. Loo YM, Fornek J, Crochet N, Bajwa G, Perwitasari O, Martinez-Sobrido L, Akira S, Gill MA, Garcia-Sastre A, Katze MG et al.: Distinct Rig-I and Mda5 signaling by RNA viruses in innate immunity. *J Virol* 2008, **82**:335-345.
16. Fredericksen BL, Keller BC, Fornek J, Katze MG, Gale M Jr: Establishment and maintenance of the innate antiviral response to West Nile Virus involves both RIG-I and MDA5 signaling through IPS-1. *J Virol* 2008, **82**:609-616.
17. Gack MU, Shin YC, Joo CH, Urano T, Liang C, Sun L, Takeuchi O, Akira S, Chen Z, Inoue S et al.: TRIM25 RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase is essential for RIG-I-mediated antiviral activity. *Nature* 2007, **446**:916-920.  
   This study demonstrates that ubiquitin modification of RIG-I by TRIM25 positively regulates the RIG-I signaling. TRIM25 catalyzes K63-type polyubiquitination, and cells from TRIM25⁻/⁻ mice showed impaired production of type I IFNs to RNA virus infection.
18. Arimoto K, Takahashi H, Hishiki T, Konishi H, Fujita T, Shimotohno K: Negative regulation of the RIG-I signaling by the ubiquitin ligase RNF125. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2007, **104**:7500-7505.
19. Malathi K, Dong B, Gale M Jr, Silverman RH: Small self-RNA generated by RNase L amplifies antiviral innate immunity. *Nature* 2007, **448**:816-819.
20. Venkataraman T, Valdes M, Elsby R, Kakuta S, Caceres G, Saijo S, Iwakura Y, Barber GN: Loss of DExD/H box RNA helicase LGP2 manifests disparate antiviral responses. *J Immunol* 2007, **178**:6444-6455.
21. Kawai T, Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, Akira S: IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. *Nat Immunol* 2005, **6**:981-988.
22. Seth RB, Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ: Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF 3. *Cell* 2005, **122**:669-682.
23. Xu LG, Wang YY, Han KJ, Li LY, Zhai Z, Shu HB: VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling. *Mol Cell* 2005, **19**:727-740.
24. Meylan E, Curran J, Hofmann K, Moradpour D, Binder M, Bartenschlager R, Tschopp J: Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. *Nature* 2005, **437**:1167-1172.
25. Kumar H, Kawai T, Kato H, Sato S, Takahashi K, Coban C, Yamamoto M, Uematsu S, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O et al.: Essential role of IPS-1 in innate immune responses against RNA viruses. *J Exp Med* 2006, **203**:1795-1803.

26. Sun Q, Sun L, Liu HH, Chen X, Seth RB, Forman J, Chen ZJ: The specific and essential role of MAVS in antiviral innate immune responses. *Immunity* 2006, 24:633-642.

27. Jounai N, Takeshita F, Kobiayama K, Sawano A, Miyawaki A, Xin KQ, Ishii KJ, Kawai T, Akira S, Suzuki K et al.: The Atg5 Atg12 conjugate associates with innate antiviral immune responses. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2007, 104:14050-14055.

28. Hacker H, Redecke V, Blagoev B, Kratchmarova I, Hsu LC, Wang GG, Kamps MP, Raz E, Wagner H, Hacker G et al.: Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. *Nature* 2006, 439:204-207.

29. Oganesyan G, Saha SK, Guo B, He JQ, Shahangian A, Zarnegar B, Perry A, Cheng G: Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and independent antiviral response. *Nature* 2006, 439:208-211.

30. Saha SK, Pietras EM, He JQ, Kang JR, Liu SY, Oganesyan G, Shahangian A, Zarnegar B, Shiba TL, Wang Y et al.: Regulation of antiviral responses by a direct and specific interaction between TRAF3 and Cardif. *EMBO J* 2006, 25:3257-3263.

31. Kayagaki N, Phung Q, Chan S, Chaudhari R, Quan C, O'Rourke KM, Eby M, Pietras E, Cheng G, Bazan JF et al.: DUBA: A deubiquitinase that regulates Type I interferon production. *Science* 2007, 318:1628-1632.
This study identified a novel deubiquitinase named DUBA responsible for the negative regulation of the RLH signaling. DUBA associates with TRAF3 and cleaved the K63-linked polyubiquitin chain, resulting in the inhibition of TBK1.

32. Fitzgerald KA, McWhirter SM, Faia KL, Rowe DC, Latz E, Golenbock DT, Coyle AJ, Liao SM, Maniatis T: IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. *Nat Immunol* 2003, 4:491-496.

33. Sharma S, tenOever BR, Grandvaux N, Zhou GP, Lin R, Hiscott J: Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. *Science* 2003, 300:1148-1151.

34. TenOever BR, Ng SL, Chua MA, McWhirter SM, Garcia-Sastre A, Maniatis T: Multiple functions of the IKK-related kinase IKKepsilon in interferon-mediated antiviral immunity. *Science* 2007, 315:1274-1278.

35. Guo B, Cheng G: Modulation of the interferon antiviral response by the TBK1/IKKi adaptor protein TANK. *J Biol Chem* 2007, 282:11817-11826.

36. Sasai M, Shingai M, Funami K, Yoneyama M, Fujita T, Matsumoto M, Seya T: NAK-associated protein 1 participates in both the TLR3 and the cytoplasmic pathways in type I IFN induction. *J Immunol* 2006, 177:8676-8683.

37. Ryzhakov G, Randow F: SINTBAD, a novel component of innate antiviral immunity, shares a TBK1-binding domain with NAP1 and TANK. *EMBO J* 2007, 26:3180-3190.

38. Honda K, Yanai H, Negishi H, Asagiri M, Sato M, Mizutani T, Shimada N, Ohba Y, Takaoka A, Yoshida N et al.: IRF-7 is the master regulator of type-I interferon-dependent immune responses. *Nature* 2005, 434:772-777.

39. Takahashi K, Kawai T, Kumar H, Sato S, Yonehara S, Akira S: Roles of caspase-8 and caspase-10 in innate immune responses to double-stranded RNA. *J Immunol* 2006, 176:4520-4524.

40. Honda K, Yanai H, Mizutani T, Negishi H, Shimada N, Suzuki N, Ohba Y, Takaoka A, Yeh WC, Taniguchi T: Role of a transduction-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signalling. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2004, 101:15416-15421.

41. Kawai T, Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, Terai K, Matsuda M, Inoue J, Uematsu S et al.: Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. *Nat Immunol* 2004, 5:1061-1068.

42. Kumagai Y, Takeuchi O, Kato H, Kumar H, Matsui K, Morii E, Aozasa K, Kawai T, Akira S: Alveolar macrophages are the primary interferon-alpha producer in pulmonary infection with RNA viruses. *Immunity* 2007, 27:240-252.
This study demonstrated that IFN-a producing cells are different depending on the route of infection. Whereas pDCs, cDCs and macrophages are major IFN-a producer to systemic NDV infection, alveolar macrophages, but not pDCs, produced IFN-a to local lung infection of the same virus.

43. Jung A, Kato H, Kumagai Y, Kumar H, Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Akira S: Lymphocytoid choriomeningitis virus activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells and induces cytotoxic T cell response via MyD88. *J Virol* 2007.

44. Koyama S, Ishii KJ, Kumar H, Tanimoto T, Coban C, Uematsu S, Kawai T, Akira S: Differential role of TLR- and RLR-signaling in the immune responses to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. *J Immunol* 2007, 179:4711-4720.

45. Marques JT, Devosse T, Wang D, Zamanian-Daryoush M, Serbinowski P, Hartmann R, Fujita T, Behlke MA, Williams BR: A structural basis for discriminating between self and nonself double-stranded RNAs in mammalian cells. *Nat Biotechnol* 2006, 24:559-565.

46. Ishii KJ, Coban C, Kato H, Takahashi K, Torii Y, Takeshita F, Ludwig H, Sutter G, Suzuki K, Hemmi H et al.: A Toll-like receptor-independent antiviral response induced by double-stranded B-form DNA. *Nat Immunol* 2006, 7:40-48.

47. Stetson DB, Medzhitov R: Recognition of cytosolic DNA activates an IRF3-dependent innate immune response. *Immunity* 2006, 24:93-103.

48. Takaoka A, Wang Z, Choi MK, Yanai H, Negishi H, Ban T, Lu Y, Miyagishi M, Kodama T, Honda K et al.: DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune response. *Nature* 2007, 448:501-505.
