
Molecular Microbiology (2008) 67(6), 1307–1319

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06124.x  
First published online 13 February 2008

# Legionella translocates an E3 ubiquitin ligase that has multiple U-boxes with distinct functions

---

**Tomoko Kubori,**¹ **Akihiro Hyakutake**² **and Hiroki Nagai**¹*

¹ The 21st Century COE Program,  
² International Research Center for Infectious Diseases,  
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3–1, Suita, Osaka 565–0871, Japan.

---

## Summary

*Legionella pneumophila* has a Dot/Icm type IV secretion system used to translocate a number of ‘effector proteins’ which subvert host cell functions. In this study, we identified 19 novel Dot/Icm substrate proteins using a systematic screening technique. A BLAST analysis revealed that one of the substrates, which we named LubX (*Legionella* U-box protein), contains two domains that have a remarkable similarity to the U-box, a domain found in eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases. The expression of LubX is induced upon infection, and most of the LubX produced was translocated into the host cells. LubX has ubiquitin ligase activity in conjunction with UbcH5a or UbcH5c E2 enzymes and mediates polyubiquitination of host Clk1 (Cdc2-like kinase 1). We demonstrate that one of the U-boxes (U-box 1) is critical to the ubiquitin ligation, and the other U-box (U-box 2) mediates interaction with Clk1. Thus, the two U-boxes of LubX have distinct functions, and U-box 2 plays a non-canonical role in substrate binding. Although we demonstrate that inhibition of Clk kinase results in a marked reduction of *Legionella* growth within mouse macrophages, the consequence of Clk1 ubiquitination is still being elucidated. Together, these data suggest that Clk1 is the target host molecule which *Legionella* modulates during infection.

---

## Introduction

*Legionella pneumophila* is a Gram-negative bacterium ubiquitously found in freshwater environments (Fields, 1996). When inhaled by humans, *Legionella* enters the alveolar macrophages and establishes a replicative niche there, and can eventually cause a severe form of pneumonia (Fraser *et al.*, 1977; Horwitz and Silverstein, 1980). *Legionella* has a Dot/Icm type IV secretion system (T4SS) which is essential for a number of virulence traits including replication within the host cells (Segal *et al.*, 1998; Vogel *et al.*, 1998). The T4SS is one of the secretion systems used by many important bacterial pathogens to translocate ‘effector proteins’ that interact with host factors to subvert host cellular processes. It has been shown that substrates of *Legionella* Dot/Icm, *Agrobacterium* VirB/D and *Bartonella* VirB/D T4SSs have carboxy-terminal translocation signals, although the features of the translocation signals of these T4SSs are distinct from each other (Nagai *et al.*, 2005; Schulein *et al.*, 2005; Vergunst *et al.*, 2005). For example, we previously reported that a hydrophobic residue near the carboxy terminus (Leu372) is critical for translocation of the effector RalF by *Legionella* Dot/Icm T4SS (Nagai *et al.*, 2005), whereas positively charged residues play an important role in substrate translocation of *Agrobacterium* VirB/D T4SS (Vergunst *et al.*, 2000; 2005). In this study, we establish some characteristic features of the translocation signal of known *Legionella* Dot/Icm T4SS substrates. Using this information, we have successfully identified 19 novel Dot/Icm substrate proteins.

Emerging evidence demonstrate that bacterial pathogens, as well as viruses, exploit the host ubiquitin system (Angot *et al.*, 2007; Rytkonen and Holden, 2007). Ubiquitin, a small protein of 76 amino acids, is conjugated to substrate proteins through a cascade of reactions involving ubiquitin activating enzymes (E1), ubiquitin conjugating enzymes (E2) and ubiquitin ligases (E3). E3 ligases, in the forms of either a single peptide or a multi-subunit complex, bind to both E2 enzymes and substrates, and specifically transfer ubiquitin from the E2s to the substrates. In *Legionella* infections, it has been shown that anti-polyubiquitin antibodies decorate *Legionella*-containing vacuoles (LCVs) using immunofluorescence microscopic analysis, suggesting that significant amount of polyubiquitinated proteins exist on LCVs (Dorer *et al.*, 2006). The proteasome inhibitor MG132 was reported to adversely affect the intracellular growth of *Legionella* in mouse macrophages, illustrating the possibility that *Legionella* exploits the host ubiquitin-proteasome system (Dorer *et al.*, 2006).

---

Accepted 12 January, 2008. *For correspondence. E-mail hnagai@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp; Tel. (+81) 6 6879 8361; Fax (+81) 6 6879 8361.*

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

One of the novel Dot/Icm substrates we identified has a unique feature. Lpg2830 (also known as LegU2), which we named LubX (*Legionella* U-box protein), contains two domains that have a striking similarity to U-boxes. A U-box is a domain closely related to a RING finger, both found among a class of eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases (Koegl *et al.*, 1999; Aravind and Koonin, 2000) and serve as a docking site for E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzymes (Zheng *et al.*, 2000; Ohi *et al.*, 2003). The LubX orthologue in *L.* pneumophila strain Paris (Lpp2887) is the first and only annotated prokaryotic protein that has domains homologous to U-boxes at the primary sequence level (Cazalet *et al.*, 2004). Furthermore, to date no other protein, whether of eukaryotic or prokaryotic origin, is known to have multiple U-boxes. Here, we analyse the function of LubX and the roles played by the two U-boxes of LubX.

**Results**

**Screening of Dot/Icm T4SS substrate proteins**

We previously reported that a hydrophobic residue near the carboxy terminus of RalF (Leu372) is critical to its translocation by the *Legionella* Dot/Icm T4SS (Nagai *et al.*, 2005). When we aligned the putative translocation signals of known Dot/Icm T4SS substrate proteins, we noticed several features regarding the occurrence of amino acids near the hydrophobic residues with which the sequences were aligned (Fig. S1). One of the most striking characteristics was that amino acids having tiny side-chains (alanine, glycine, serine and threonine) are frequently found at –8th to –2nd residues (from the hydrophobic residue). At the –2nd residue, the frequency of tiny amino acids (in ~80% of known substrates) is extremely high compared with that of all open reading frames (ORFs) from *L.* pneumophila strain Philadelphia-1 (24%). Second, polar amino acids are clearly favoured at –13th to +1st residues (in 65% of known substrates compared with 48% of all ORFs). This may reflect the solvent-exposed nature of translocation signals. Encouraged by these findings, we established a program to calculate ‘similarity score to known Dot/Icm substrates’ for any given protein from the frequency of occurrences of particular kinds of amino acids in the carboxy-terminal region spanning from –11th to +1st residues after alignment on the hydrophobic residue. The distributions of the ‘similarity scores’ of all *Legionella* proteins and of known effector proteins are fairly well separated but have some overlap (Fig. S2). Thus, we would expect to find Dot/Icm substrates more frequently among *Legionella* proteins with higher ‘similarity scores’.

To evaluate the ‘similarity score’, we examined 52 proteins with the highest ‘similarity scores’ among *L.* pneumophila strain Philadelphia-1 proteins. We excluded: (i) four proteins (SidE, SidF, SidG and LidA) that had already been reported as Dot/Icm substrates, (ii) 16 housekeeping proteins that are conserved among many bacteria, (iii) six proteins that have more than two putative transmembrane domains or that are predicted to be outer membrane or periplasmic proteins and (iv) one protein that we had difficulty in cloning by polymerase chain reaction amplification. We constructed *Legionella* strains expressing Cya fusions to the remaining 25 proteins, and determined intracellular cAMP levels of CHO cells expressing FcγRII after infection with *Legionella*. Cya fusion is a remarkably sensitive reporter system to monitor protein translocation from bacteria to eukaryotic host cells, and it has now been widely used to examine protein translocation by *Legionella* (Sory and Cornelis, 1994; Chen *et al.*, 2004; Bardill *et al.*, 2005; Nagai *et al.*, 2005). As shown in Fig. 1, most Cya fusion proteins tested were translocated in a Dot/Icm T4SS-dependent manner with two exceptions (Lpg0563, Lpg1930). Among the remaining 23 proteins that we demonstrated are Dot/Icm substrates (Fig. 1), Lpg1958 (LegL5), Lpg1890 (LegLC8), Lpg2155 (SidJ) and Lpg2508 (SdjA) have been recently reported as Dot/Icm substrates by other groups as well (Table 1) (de Felipe *et al.*, 2005; Liu and Luo, 2007). These results illustrate that we are able to

**Fig. 1.** Identification of novel Dot/Icm substrates. CHO-FcγRII cells were challenged by *Legionella* strains expressing Cya fusion proteins to the indicated *Legionella* proteins. cAMP levels in infected cells were determined as described in Experimental procedures. Black bars denote cAMP level in cells infected by wild-type *Legionella* strains (Lp01) expressing Cya fusions. Grey bars denote cAMP levels in cells infected by *dot/icm* mutant strains. Translocation of Cya-Lpg0563 and Cya-Lpg1930 from the *dot/icm* mutant was not tested (asterisks). RalF is included as positive control. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation.

Table 1. Summary of identified Dot/lcm T4SS substrates in this study.

| Substrates | Orthologues in *L. pneumophila* | Homologues in Philadelphia-1 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Lpg No. | Alias | Philadelphia-1 | Paris | Lens | No. | Best E-value | Notes |
| 2830 | LubX | × | × | × | 0 |  | 2 U-boxes |
| 81 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 1751 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  | 1 CC |
| 365 |  | × | × | × | 1 | $2 \times 10^{-4}$ |  |
| 1148 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  | 1 CC, 2 TMD |
| 2744 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 2327 |  | × | × | × | >4 | $1 \times 10^{-27}$ | 3 CC |
| 1689 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  | 2 TMD |
| 963 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  | 2 TMD |
| 1158 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 1273 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 1717 |  | × | × |  | 1 | $3 \times 10^{-15}$ | 2 homologues in *Coxiella* |
| 2155 | SidJ | × | × | × | 1 | 0 |  |
| 634 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 2508 | SdjA | × | × | × | 1 | 0 |  |
| 2407 |  | × | × |  | 0 |  |  |
| 1958 | LegL5 | × | × |  | >4 | $5 \times 10^{-45}$ | 1 LRR |
| 1890 | LegLC8 | × | × | × | 1 | $4 \times 10^{-9}$ | 1 CC, 1 LRR |
| 294 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 2527 |  | × | × | × | 1 | $3 \times 10^{-15}$ | 1 CC |
| 518 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  | 2 TMD |
| 45 |  | × | × | × | 0 |  |  |
| 1588 | LegC6<sup>a</sup> | × | × | × | 3 | $2 \times 10^{-24}$ | 3 CC |

a. LegC6 was not shown to be a Dot/lcm substrate previously.  
CC, putative coiled-coil; TMD, transmembrane; LRR, leucine-rich repeat.

Fig. 2. Expression and translocation of endogenously encoded LubX.

A. Schematic drawing of LubX domain structure. LubX consists of two domains that have a remarkable similarity to U-boxes and its carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) contains a translocation signal.

B. Protein levels of LubX, RalF, DotD and GroEL in wild-type Legionella grown in AYE liquid media for various times after inoculation or grown for 2 days on CYE solid media.

C. LubX is expressed and translocated in infected CHO-FcγRII cells. CHO-FcγRII cells were challenged by Lp01 or isogenic ΔdotA or ΔlubX mutants. At 10 h after infection, cells were lysed in buffer containing 1% digitonin, and digitonin-insoluble and -soluble fractions were separated by centrifugation. LubX was pulled down by immunoprecipitation with anti-LubX antibody and immunoprecipitates were analysed by Western immunoblotting with anti-LubX antibody (IP: IB: LubX). As a control, pre-immunoprecipitation samples were analysed by Western immunoblotting with indicated antibodies (IB). GroEL and DotD are Legionella proteins. Hsp90 and β-tubulin are cytoplasmic proteins of CHO-FcγRII cells.

D. LubX levels in digitonin-soluble fractions prepared from CHO-FcγRII cells infected for 10 h with indicated strains were analysed as in C.

E. LubX levels in digitonin-soluble fractions prepared at indicated time points after infection from Lp01-infected CHO-FcγRII cells.

signal, and infection with the complemented strain (ΔlubX plubX) restored the signal (Fig. 2D). The time-course experiment demonstrated that LubX was readily detectable in digitonin-soluble fractions of infected CHO-FcγRII cells taken at 8, 10 and 12 h after infection (Fig. 2E). The ΔdotA strain that has defective Dot/Icm T4SS does not grow in CHO-FcγRII cells, resulting in lower levels of bacterial proteins detected (Fig. 2C). Thus, currently we are not sure whether LubX is expressed in the dot/icm mutant strain in infected cells. Importantly, LubX was detected only in the digitonin-soluble fraction, suggesting that the LubX protein is not in the bacterial cells but translocated to the host cells. LubX expression was also induced upon infection to U937 macrophages (Fig. S3A). In addition, luciferase activities of Legionella strain carrying the lubX-luciferase transcription fusion reporter were ~10-fold increased at 12 h after infection to mouse macrophages or CHO-FcγRII cells (Fig. S3B). From these results, we conclude that expression of endogenously encoded LubX is induced in infected cells, and the expressed LubX is mostly translocated into the host cells.

LubX is an E3 ubiquitin ligase

We hypothesized that LubX is an E3 ubiquitin ligase. To test this hypothesis, we carried out reconstitution experiments in vitro with purified ubiquitin, E1, E2 and a carboxy-terminal truncated form of LubX (LubXΔC). We used LubXΔC instead of full-length LubX because the purified full-length LubX forms large aggregates and the truncation resolved this problem (data not shown). The truncation removes the 25 carboxy-terminal amino acids that may carry the signal responsible for LubX translocation from bacteria, while retaining both U-boxes. Many U-box/RING finger type E3 ubiquitin ligases have autoubiquitination activity in vitro reactions in the absence of specific substrates. We examined UbcH2, UbcH3, UbcH5a, UbcH5b, UbcH5c, UbcH6, UbcH7 and UbcH10 as E2 enzymes, and found that in the presence of either UbcH5a or UbcH5c, polyubiquitin chains were formed in a LubX-dependent manner (Fig. 3A). Omission of any one component (E1, UbcH5a or LubXΔC) from the reactions completely abolished the formation of the polyubiquitin chains (Fig. 3B, IB:Ubiquitin). High-molecular-weight derivatives of LubXΔC were detected (Fig. 3B, IB:LubX), indicating that LubXΔC has autoubiquitination activity like many other U-box/RING finger E3 ligases. We thus conclude that LubX functions as a U-box/RING finger type E3 ubiquitin ligase in conjunction with an E2 enzyme, either UbcH5a or UbcH5c.

Fig. 3. LubX is an E3 ubiquitin ligase.

A. *In vitro* reactions containing purified ubiquitin, E1, the indicated E2 and LubXΔC were carried out as described in Experimental procedures. Samples were analysed by Western immunoblotting with anti-ubiquitin antibody (clone P4D1).

B. Reactions were reconstituted with the indicated components, and were analysed by Western immunoblotting with anti-ubiquitin, anti-LubX (E3) and anti-UbcH5 (E2) antibodies.

C. Multiple alignment of amino acid sequences of U-boxes from indicated U-box containing proteins. Residues that compose the hydrophobic patch important for E2 binding are shown in bold face. The site of the isoleucine to alanine substitutions is indicated by an asterisk. Sc Ufd2 and At PUB14 stand for *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* Ufd2 (swissprot accession P54860) and *Arabidopsis thaliana* PUB14 (swissprot accession Q8VZ40) respectively. Experimentally determined secondary structure of PUB14 is indicated above the alignment.

D. LubXΔC carrying the I39A mutation in U-box 1 is inactive in *in vitro* polyubiquitination formation. The I134A mutation in U-box 2 has no effect.

U-box 1 is critical for ubiquitin ligation

Next, we asked which U-box is responsible for the formation of polyubiquitin chains. U-box/RING finger domains have a hydrophobic patch that is critical for E2 binding (shown in bold letters in Fig. 3C) (Zheng et al., 2000; Ohi et al., 2003; Andersen et al., 2004). Alanine substitutions in these hydrophobic residues typically impair E2 binding and ubiquitin ligase activity. Alignment of the U-boxes of LubX along with eukaryotic U-box containing proteins revealed that U-box 1 retains all of these hydrophobic residues intact whereas U-box 2 lacks the invariant proline in Loop 2 (Fig. 3C). This raised the possibility that U-box 1 functions as an E2 binding domain whereas U-box 2 does not. To test this possibility, we introduced alanine substitutions to isoleucines 39 and 134 in U-boxes 1 and 2 respectively (shown by the asterisk in Fig. 3C). It has been shown that alanine substitutions of the corresponding residues of RING type E3 ligases BRCA1 and CNOT4 abolish E2 binding and/or ubiquitin ligase activity (Albert et al., 2002; Brzovic et al., 2003). As shown in Fig. 3D, the ubiquitin ligase activity of LubX is completely abolished by the introduction of the I39A mutation, suggesting that U-box 1 functions as E2 binding domain. Consistent with the lack of the invariant proline in U-box 2, the I134A mutation had no effect. These data demonstrate that U-box 1 is critical to the ubiquitin ligation by LubX.

Clk1 is a substrate of LubX ubiquitin ligase

As an E3 enzyme, LubX must have a binding site for a substrate protein or an adaptor molecule that interacts with a substrate as in the case of SCF (Skp1-Cullin-F-box protein) complexes. To identify such molecules, we conducted a yeast two-hybrid screening of a mouse cDNA library using LubXΔCI39A as bait. The I39A mutation was employed to suppress any possible polyubiquitination and degradation of a target protein. The screening revealed a two-hybrid interaction between LubX and Clk1(Cdc2-like kinase 1; Fig. 4A). Clk1 showed a two-hybrid interaction with wild-type LubXΔC, but the β-galactosidase readout of the interaction was significantly lower than with the I39A mutant (Fig. 4A). To confirm the interaction of LubX and Clk1 in mammalian cells, we conducted coimmunoprecipitation analysis. CHO cells were co-transfected with HA-tagged Clk1, and green fluorescent protein (GFP) alone, GFP-tagged LubX or LubXΔC and cell lysates were prepared at 24 h after transfection. As shown in Fig. 4B, HA-Clk1 was co-immunoprecipitated with anti-LubX anti-

Fig. 4. Interaction of LubX and Clk1.

A. Summary of yeast two-hybrid analysis of interaction of LubX and Clk1. Schematic drawings of bait LubX fusions are shown in left-most panel. The prey panel indicates the appearance of yeast cells (EGY48 pSH18-34) carrying indicated bait LubX and prey Clk1 plasmids grown on Xgal plate containing galactose to induce the expression of prey fusion products. Black bars in the graph denote β-galactosidase activity of yeast expressing indicated bait LubX and prey Clk1 fusions. Grey bars denote β-galactosidase activity of yeast carrying the indicated bait and prey vector plasmids.

B. Coimmunoprecipitation of mEGFP-LubX and HA-Clk1 ectopically expressed in CHO-FcγRII cells. CHO-FcγRII cells were co-transfected with expression plasmids of indicated proteins and cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-HA (clone 3F10) or anti-LubX antibodies (IP). Immunoprecipitates were analysed by Western immunoblotting with indicated antibodies (IB).

C. GST pull-down assay showing direct interaction of LubX U-box 2 and Clk1. Purified GST or GST-tagged LubX U-box 2 was mixed with purified Clk1mycHIS (input). The mixtures were incubated with glutathione beads, and unbound and bound proteins were analysed by Western immunoblotting using anti-myc antibody.

body from lysates of CHO cells coexpressing HA-Clk1 and GFP-LubX or GFP-LubXΔC, but not from lysate of cells coexpressing HA-Clk1 and GFP. GFP-LubXΔC appeared to be more potent to pull HA-Clk1 down than GFP-LubX (Fig. 4B), which raises the possibility that the carboxy-terminal domain of LubX could play a regulatory role in LubX function. Furthermore, we showed co-immunoprecipitation of HA-Clk1 with anti-myc antibody from lysates of CHO cells coexpressing HA-Clk1 and myc-LubXI39AΔC (Fig. S4), suggesting that the co-immunoprecipitations were not mediated by GFP or myc tag moieties of LubX fusion proteins. The data indicate that LubX interacts with Clk1 in mammalian cells as well as in yeast cells.

To further substantiate the interaction of LubX with Clk1 and, more importantly, to determine whether Clk1 is a substrate of the LubX ubiquitin ligase, we examined whether Clk1 is ubiquitinated in an in vitro ubiquitination assay. Clk1 with both carboxy-terminal myc and hexahistidine tags was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified, and included in in vitro ubiquitination reactions. High-molecular-weight products derived from Clk1mycHIS were detected in a LubX dose-dependent manner

(Fig. 5A). Omission of any single component (ubiquitin, E1, UbcH5a or LubXΔC) from the reaction totally abolished the production of the high-molecular-weight species (Fig. 5B). As expected, the I39A mutant form of LubXΔC did not support the production of the high-molecular-weight species (Fig. 5B). To examine whether the high-molecular-weight species contain ubiquitin, we immunoprecipitated Clk1mycHIS derivatives with anti-myc antibody, and immunoprecipitates were analysed by Western immunoblotting either with anti-myc antibody or with anti-ubiquitin antibody (Fig. 5C). The data indicate that high-molecular-weight species are composed of poly-ubiquitinated Clk1mycHIS.

We then examined whether LubX is able to ubiquitinate Clk1 in mammalian cells. HA-Clk1 was immunoprecipitated with anti-HA antibody from lysates of CHO cells coexpressing HA-Clk1 and GFP-LubXΔC or GFP-LubXΔCI39A. Immunoprecipitates were analysed by Western immunoblotting with either anti-HA or anti-ubiquitin antibodies. As shown in Fig. 5D, the amounts of polyubiquitinated HA-Clk1 were increased in lysates of cells producing HA-Clk1 and GFP-LubXΔC compared with lysates of cells producing HA-Clk1 and GFP-LubXΔCI39A.

Fig. 5. Clk1 is a substrate of LubX.

A–C. In vitro ubiquitination assays including ubiquitin, E1, UbcH5a as E2, LubXΔC as E3 and Clk1mycHIS.

A. In vitro reactions contain purified Clk1mycHIS and increasing amounts of LubXΔC (0–1.8 μM). Proteins in the reaction were analysed by Western immunoblotting using anti-myc antibody. High-molecular-weight species of Clk1mycHIS was generated in a LubX dose-dependent manner.

B. Reactions were reconstituted with the indicated components. The data demonstrate that all components (ubiquitin, E1, E2 and LubXΔC) were required for generation of high-molecular-weight species of Clk1mycHIS, and that introduction of the I39A mutation totally abolishes the generation of high-molecular-weight species of Clk1mycHIS.

C. Proteins in in vitro reactions were immunoprecipitated with anti-myc antibody and analysed by Western immunoblotting using anti-myc and anti-ubiquitin antibodies. The data indicate that Clk1mycHIS is polyubiquitinated in a LubX-dependent manner.

D. LubX-dependent polyubiquitination of HA-Clk1 in CHO-FcγRII cells. Immunoprecipitates with anti-HA antibody from lysates of CHO-FcγRII cells producing indicated proteins were analysed by Western immunoblotting with anti-HA or anti-ubiquitin antibodies (IP:HA IB:HA or IB:Ub). Two different exposures of the same sample (IP:HA IB:HA) were shown. Levels of HA-Clk1 and mEGFP-LubX were not affected by the I39A mutation (IP:HA IB:HA weak exposure and PreIP IB:LubX respectively).

By contrast, levels of HA-Clk1 and GFP-LubXΔC derivatives were not affected by the I39A mutation. It should be noted that proteasome inhibitor was not employed in this experiment because the treatment of cells expressing HA-Clk1 with MG132 or other proteasome inhibitors we tested resulted in a rapid loss of HA-Clk1 for unknown reasons (data not shown). This would explain, at least in part, the low abundance of polyubiquitinated HA-Clk1 detected in the experiment. We do not know why HA-Clk1 level is severely reduced in response to proteasome inhibitors, but it is possible that proteasome inhibitor treatment triggers the HA-Clk1 degradation via a proteasome-independent pathway such as a calpain protease pathway. Reduced levels of luciferase and β-galactosidase reporter proteins in response to proteasome inhibitor treatment have been reported (Deroo and Archer, 2002). We also examined ectopically expressed HA-Clk1 levels in CHO-FcγRII cells challenged with Legionella strains, and found that the HA-Clk1 levels were not significantly affected by the lubX deletion or LubX overexpression (data not shown). Thus, our data indicate that LubX is capable of catalysing polyubiquitination of Clk1 in CHO cells, although we were not able to determine whether the polyubiquitinated Clk1 is targeted to the proteasome system. Taken these results together, we conclude that Clk1 is a substrate of LubX ubiquitin ligase.

Non-canonical role of U-box 2 in substrate binding

LubX is a small protein consisting of two U-boxes and a small carboxy-terminal domain. As described above, U-box 1 serves as the E2 binding site, and the carboxy-

terminal domain is dispensable for interaction with poly-ubiquitination of Clk1. Moreover, the I39A mutation does not have an adverse effect on the interaction of LubX and Clk1. All of this is consistent with the model that U-box 2 is the binding site for Clk1. To confirm this, we constructed bait fusions containing U-box 1 alone and U-box 2 alone, and examined the two-hybrid interactions (Fig. 4A). The data clearly indicate that U-box 2, but not U-box 1, interacts with Clk1. Furthermore, we examined the direct interaction of Clk1 and LubX U-box 2 by GST pull-down assay using purified proteins (Fig. 4C). As expected, GST-U-box 2, but not GST, was able to pull down Clk1mycHIS. Together, we conclude that LubX has a non-canonical U-box domain that plays a critical role in substrate binding rather than in E2 binding.

**Clk kinases are required for maximum Legionella growth in mouse macrophages**

We were not able to detect any defect in virulence traits, including intracellular growth in mouse macrophages (Fig. 6A, open squares versus open circles), or in protozoan cells (data not shown) following LubX disruption. However, identification of Clk1 as a substrate of effector LubX raised the possibility that Clk1 plays a role in modulation of host cellular processes by *Legionella* infection. Clk kinases phosphorylate serine/arginine-rich proteins (SR proteins) (Colwill *et al.*, 1996), which in turn modulate alternative splicing-site selection (Prasad *et al.*, 1999; Hartmann *et al.*, 2001; Schwertz *et al.*, 2006). Mammalian cells have four Clk kinases (Clk1 to Clk4). Muraki *et al.* (2004) developed a highly specific and membrane-permeable inhibitor of Clk kinases, TG003. TG003 inhibits kinase activities of Clk1 and its closest homologue Clk4 *in vitro*, whereas it is less effective on Clk2 and it does not inhibit Clk3 or various other protein kinases examined (Muraki *et al.*, 2004). In the presence of 10 μM TG003, *Legionella* growth in mouse macrophages was reduced by 10 fold over 3 days after infection (Fig. 6A, filled circles). TG003 affected neither viability of macrophages (Fig. 6B) nor *Legionella* growth in AYE medium (Fig. 6C). These results suggest that Clk kinases play an important role in *Legionella* growth in macrophages.

**Discussion**

Effector proteins play a central role in bacterial pathogenesis. *Legionella* has the Dot/Icm T4SS to translocate effector proteins. Mutant *Legionella* that have defective Dot/Icm T4SS are avirulent, and show severe defects in many virulence traits and altered host responses. Recent studies conducted by many research groups have revealed that more than 30 proteins are translocated by the Dot/Icm T4SS (Ninio and Roy, 2007).

**Fig. 6.** Effect of Clk kinase inhibitor TG003 on *Legionella* growth in mouse macrophages.
A. *Legionella* growth in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages. 10 μM TG003 (filled symbols) or solvent DMSO (final 1%; open symbols) were added at 30 min before infection and kept throughout the experiment. Circles, squares and triangles denote wild-type Lp01, ΔlubX and ΔdotA mutants respectively.
B. TG003 did not affect macrophage viability. Macrophages were treated with 10 μM TG003 or 1% DMSO for indicated periods of time, followed by MTT assay to determine viability of macrophages.
C. TG003 did not affect *Legionella* growth in AYE medium. Wild-type strain was grown in AYE medium at 37°C and OD<sub>600</sub> of cultures were scored with a time-course.

However, with a few exceptions, the cellular functions of these putative effector proteins remain unknown. In this study, we identified novel Dot/Icm T4SS substrates by a systematic screening involving prefiltration of candidates by similarity in characteristics of translocation signals to known Dot/Icm substrates. Our strategy works fairly well, and we identified 19 novel Dot/Icm substrates by examining 52 candidate proteins selected by *in silico* pre-screening. The starting candidates contained eight previously reported substrates (SidE, SidF, SidG, LidA, LegL5, LegLC8, SidJ and SdjA) (Conover *et al.*, 2003;
Luo and Isberg, 2004; de Felipe *et al.*, 2005; Liu and Luo, 2007). Thus in this screening, the ratio of novel Dot/lcm substrates to previously identified substrates is roughly 2.5:1. If we simply extrapolate from this ratio and the number of previously identified Dot/lcm substrates, our prediction would be that *Legionella* has ~100 Dot/lcm substrates in total.

Most of the novel Dot/lcm substrates we identified have no significant homology to proteins or domains deposited in databases (Table 1). However, LubX is a clear exception to this situation. LubX has two domains that show remarkable similarity to U-boxes conserved among a class of eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases. Emerging evidence indicates that bacterial pathogens as well as viruses exploit the host ubiquitin system. Some bacterial effector proteins have been shown to mimic E3 ubiquitin ligase (Janjusevic *et al.*, 2006; Zhang *et al.*, 2006; Rohde *et al.*, 2007), or F-box protein in the SCF type ubiquitin ligase complex (Tzfira *et al.*, 2004; Angot *et al.*, 2006). As the body of genomic information on bacterial pathogens grows, it is becoming clear that pathogenic bacteria including *Legionella* have a number of putative F-box-containing proteins (Angot *et al.*, 2007). However, U-box-containing proteins are rarely found in the prokaryotic realm. Our attempt to find a prokaryotic U-box-containing protein, other than LubX and its orthologue, by sequence homology has failed. Recent studies demonstrated that the plant pathogen *Pseudomonas syringe* translocates the E3 ubiquitin ligase, AvrPtoB, to prevent programmed cell death of plant cells (Abramovitch *et al.*, 2006; Janjusevic *et al.*, 2006; Rosebrock *et al.*, 2007). A carboxy-terminal domain of AvrPtoB has remarkable structural homology to U-boxes, although AvrPtoB does not have significant sequence homology to U-boxes (Janjusevic *et al.*, 2006). This illustrates the possibility that bacterial pathogens have more proteins containing a domain that structurally and functionally mimics a U-box than one can currently predict from available genomic information.

Having two U-boxes is a distinctive feature of LubX and its orthologue that is not found in any other protein so far known. Our data indicate that one of the U-boxes (U-box 1) is a canonical U-box that is critical to ubiquitin ligase activity. U-box 2 interacts with Clk1 which is a substrate of LubX ubiquitin ligase. Why does the substrate binding site of LubX adopt a U-box? Some U-box/RING finger proteins have been shown to form homo- or heterodimers. Recent structural studies have demonstrated U-box-mediated dimerization of CHIP (carboxy terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein) and Prp19 U-box type E3 ubiquitin ligases (Zhang *et al.*, 2005; Vander Kooi *et al.*, 2006). Interestingly, a homodimer of CHIP was reported to arrange in an asymmetric manner (Zhang *et al.*, 2005). The important consequence of the asymmetric arrangement is that only one of the two U-boxes in the CHIP

homodimer is available for interaction with an E2 enzyme. Thus, the two U-boxes in a homodimer could have distinct functions in addition to serving as a dimerization interface. The two U-boxes of LubX could be arranged in the same way as U-boxes in CHIP or Prp19 homodimers, which bring substrate bound to U-box 2 in close proximity to the active site of E2 bound to U-box 1. Alternatively, substrate binding to U-box 2 could be reminiscent of protein–protein interaction between U-box/RING finger domains, although we failed to detect primary or higher-order structural similarity to U-box/RING finger in Clk1. In spite of accumulating knowledge from recent studies, the details of the ubiquitin ligation processes are not yet fully elucidated. Future structural studies of LubX will give new insight into the mechanism of ubiquitin conjugation by U-box/RING finger type E3 ubiquitin ligases.

The expression of LubX is regulated differently from those of known Dot/lcm substrates. We failed to detect LubX in bacterial cells grown in laboratory media. However, we demonstrated that LubX is expressed and translocated in infected cells, suggesting that expression is induced upon exposure to a host cell environment. To date, no Dot/lcm substrates have been reported to have a similar expression profile. The reason why LubX expression is repressed in free-living bacteria is not clear, but expression on demand makes sense if LubX functions in the host cells at a later stage of infection. Consistent with this idea, the microarray analysis of *Legionella* gene expression demonstrated that *lubX* expression is upregulated by approximately threefold at 14 h post infection in amoeba host *Acanthamoeba castellanii* compared with at 8 h post infection (Bruggemann *et al.*, 2006). Alternatively, the repression of LubX expression could be a strategy to avoid the formation of LubX aggregates that are likely to be transport-incompetent. However, we are currently uncertain whether (overexpressed) LubX forms aggregates in *Legionella* cells.

We demonstrated that Clk kinases are required for maximum *Legionella* growth in mouse macrophages (Fig. 6A). Together with being a substrate of LubX, Clk1 seems to be a host target protein which *Legionella* modulates during infection. Currently, the role of Clk1 modulation in *Legionella* virulence traits and the role of LubX in the Clk1 modulation remain unclear. Clk1 phosphorylates SR proteins and is involved in splicing site selection. *Legionella* modulation of Clk1 might affect gene expression of infected host cells at the splicing level. Alternatively, Clk1 might have a distinct role in signalling that is a target of *Legionella* subversion. The possibility of a signalling role has been suggested by the activation of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B by Clk1/2 (Moeslein *et al.*, 1999). It was recently reported that the IpaH family type III effectors, *Shigella* IpaH9.8 and *Salmonella* SspH1, are E3 ligases that target host cellular kinases involved

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **67**, 1307–1319
in MAPK and NF-κB signalling cascades respectively (Rohde *et al.*, 2007). It would be interesting to examine if Clk1 polyubiquitination by LubX has a signalling role. One possible explanation for why we were not able to detect any defect in virulence traits due to LubX disruption could be that *Legionella* employs a complicated mechanism to modulate Clk1 of which LubX is only a part. For example, *in silico* analysis revealed that *L.* *pneumophila* strain Philadelphia-1 has five putative F-box-containing proteins (Angot *et al.*, 2007). Some of the F-box proteins might participate in Clk1 ubiquitination as well. Although many questions remain, we believe that our results provide novel insights for understanding exploitation of the host ubiquitin system and Clk1 by bacterial pathogens.

### Experimental procedures

#### Bacterial and yeast strains, plasmids and media

All *Legionella* strains used in this study were derivatives of *L.* *pneumophila* strain Lp01 (Berger and Isberg, 1993), and were grown on CYE plates or in AYE broth as described previously (Feeley *et al.*, 1979). The strain defective in *dotA* gene was described (Zuckman *et al.*, 1999). In-frame deletion strains of Dot/lcm substrates were constructed by allelic exchange as described previously (Zuckman *et al.*, 1999). *E.* coli strain BL21 (strain B *lon ompT*) was used as an expression host strain for protein purification. Yeast strain EGY48 (*MATα trp1 his3 ura3 leu2::6 LexAop-LEU2*) was used for yeast two-hybrid analysis. Plasmids used in this study and details of plasmid construction are provided in Tables S1 and S2 respectively.

#### Cell culture

Mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages were cultured from A/J mice as described (Celada *et al.*, 1984). CHO-FcγRII cells were cultured at 37°C in 5% CO₂ in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS as described (Kagan and Roy, 2002).

#### Antibodies

Rabbit antisera against DotD, GroEL or LubX were raised by immunization of KHL-conjugated synthesized peptides CAKVEKVITPPSKDNTLT (DotD), CVVNKVAEHKDNYG-FNAA (GroEL) or purified LubXΔC respectively. Polyclonal antibodies against DotD, GroEL or LubX were purified from the antisera by affinity chromatography using peptide-conjugated SulfoLink resins (Pierce) or LubXΔC-conjugated CNBr-activated Sepharose (Sigma) respectively. The affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antibody against RalF was described previously (Nagai *et al.*, 2002). A horseradish peroxidase-conjugated mouse monoclonal antibody to ubiquitin (clone P4D1) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies against c-Myc (clone 9E10, Sigma), HA (clone 3F10, Roche), Hsp90 (BD Pharmingen) and β-tubulin (Sigma) were also purchased. Rabbit polyclonal antibody against *L.* *pneumophila* (ATCC33152) was purchased from Biodesign. Anti-

HA-agarose and mouse IgG-agarose were purchased from Sigma.

#### Screening of Dot/lcm substrates

For *in silico* pre-screening, a Perl script was written to calculate the ‘similarity score’ (see Results) of all *Legionella* putative ORFs. The score was calculated from frequencies of tiny amino acids (alanine, glycine, serine and threonine; residues –11 to –1), polar amino acids (aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, asparagine, glutamine, arginine, serine and threonine; residues –4 to –2) and amino acids (lysine, arginine, serine, threonine, asparagine and glutamine; residue +1). Translocation of Cya-fused proteins into CHO FcγRII cells after infection with *Legionella* was assayed as described previously (Nagai *et al.*, 2005) with minor modifications. Briefly, CHO-FcγRII cells replated in 48-well plates were challenged by *Legionella* strains expressing Cya fusions at moi 30 in the presence of opsonizing antibody (1:3000 dilution). One hour later, infected cells were lysed in 250 μl of lysis reagent 1B provided in cAMP Biotrak EIA System (GE Healthcare, RPN2251), and cAMP levels were determined as instructed by the manufacturer.

#### Fractionation of infected cells

CHO-FcγRII cells replated in a 6-well culture dish were challenged by *Legionella* strains at a moi of 30 in the presence of opsonizing antibody (1:3000 dilution). At 8 h post infection, the cells were washed three times with PBS and lysed in 150 μl of PBS containing 1% (w/v) of digitonin and protease inhibitor cocktail (1:100 dilution, Sigma). The cells were scraped off and collected into microfuge tubes and centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min at 4°C to separate the digitonin-soluble fraction containing translocated proteins and a digitonin-insoluble fraction containing internalized bacteria. Digitonin-soluble fractions were filtered through a 0.45 μm filter. Digitonin-insoluble pellets were dissolved in 10 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA by boiling for 3 min. Each fraction was diluted into 1 ml of Triton buffer [50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 2% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA], and the resulting mixtures were centrifuged as above to remove insoluble materials. Immunoprecipitation with anti-LubX antibody was carried out as described below. Immunoprecipitates and preimmunoprecipitation samples were analysed by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with the appropriate antibodies.

#### Protein purification

BL21 cell pellets expressing GST-LubX (or GST-LubXΔC) were suspended with 80 ml of PBS containing 1 mM EDTA, 0.4 mM PMSF (Sigma), 20 mg lysozyme (Wako Chemical) and stirred for 30 min at 4°C. The lysozyme-treated cells were lysed by sonication. Triton X-100 (to a final concentration of 1%) was added to the lysate and incubated for 30 min with gentle stirring. After centrifugation (16 000 g, 20 min) to remove unsolubilized materials, the supernatant fraction was incubated with 1 ml (bed volume) of glutathione-sepharose FF (GE Healthcare) for 30 min at room temperature. Resins
were washed three times with 10 ml of PBS containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100, once with 10 ml of PBS containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, once with 10 ml of PreScission buffer [50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT]. LubX (or LubXΔC) proteins were eluted from resins by incubation with GST-conjugated PreScission protease (GE Healthcare), and dialysed against PBS. GST and GST-U-box 2 were purified essentially in the same way, but were eluted with 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM reduced glutathione. GST-Clk1mycHIS was purified essentially as GST-LubX with some modifications. BL21 cells expressing GST-Clk1mycHIS were lysed in Tris-based buffer [50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT] containing 0.4 mM PMSF, and the Tris-based buffer was used instead of PBS during purification with glutathione-sepharose. The PreScission reaction was carried out in PreScission/HIS buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol]. Fractions containing eluted proteins were pooled and incubated with 100 μl of a 50% suspension of Ni-agarose (Qiagen) for 1 h at 4°C. Resins were washed three times with PreScission/HIS buffer containing 10 mM imidazole, and the Clk1mycHIS proteins were eluted with PreScission/HIS buffer containing 250 mM imidazole. Eluted proteins were concentrated by Microcon (Millipore) and dialysed against the Tris-based buffer.

### Ubiquitin ligase assays

The *in vitro* ubiquitin polymerization assay in the substrate-free system was performed as follows. Reaction mixtures (12.5 μl) containing 0.5 μg (1.8 μM) of purified LubXΔC or its mutant proteins (I39A or I134A), 100 nM recombinant rabbit E1 (Boston Biochem), 400 nM recombinant human E2 enzymes (Boston Biochem), and 5 μg of recombinant human ubiquitin (Boston Biochem), 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 2 mM MgCl₂, 120 mM NaCl, 2 mM ATP and 1 mM DTT were incubated for 2 h at 30°C. The reaction was stopped by adding 12.5 μl of 2× SDS sample buffer and boiling for 5 min. For the *in vitro* ubiquitin ligation assay to the substrate Clk1, 0.3 μg (500 nM) of purified Clk1mycHIS was added to the reaction mixtures. For immunoprecipitation analysis, the ubiquitin ligation was done in a 50 μl reaction volume and disrupted by adding 0.5 ml of Triton buffer. Two microlitres of anti-myc monoclonal antibody was added to the reaction mixture and incubated for 2 h at 4°C with gentle rocking. Immunocomplexes were then recovered with Protein G sepharose FF (GE Healthcare) for 1.5 h at 4°C, and washed five times with 1 ml of the lysis buffer (12 000 g, 20 s). The samples were finally washed with 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), and eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer without a reducing agent. The samples were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE in the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol and analysed by immunoblotting using a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated mouse monoclonal antibody to ubiquitin (P4D1, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or antibodies against LubX, Ubch5 (Boston Biochem) or myc.

### Yeast two-hybrid screening

The yeast two-hybrid screening was carried out using a DupLEX-A yeast two-hybrid system (OriGene Technologies)

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **67**, 1307–1319

with a mouse liver cDNA library based on pJG4-5 (OriGene Technologies) according to the manufacturer's instruction. β-Galactosidase activity was measured in liquid culture of the yeast strains grown in selection media to OD₆₀₀ of about 5. The culture was adjusted to OD₆₀₀ of 1.0 with selection media and assayed in triplicate using the Beta-Glo Assay System (Promega), and the signal was read in a luminometer.

#### Immunoprecipitation from cell lysates

For coimmunoprecipitation analysis, CHO-FcγRII cells plated on 10 cm dish (8 × 10⁵ cells) were co-transfected with 1.5 μg of pmEGFP or its LubX derivatives and 4.5 μg of pME-HA-Clk1 using 36 μl of Fugene 6 reagent (Roche). Twenty-four hours later, cells were washed with cold PBS three times and lysed in 1 ml of RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (1:100 dilution, Sigma), 50 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM glycerol 2-phosphate and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Lysates were centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min to remove insoluble materials.

To immunoprecipitate LubX or LubX-containing complexes, cleared lysates were incubated with 40 μl of a 50% suspension of nProtein A-sepharose FF (GE Healthcare) for 1 h to pre-absorb cross-reacting proteins. After removing the resin by centrifugation, 5 μg of affinity-purified anti-LubX antibody was added to the supernatant and incubated at 4°C overnight with gentle rotation. Complexes containing antibodies were pulled down by incubation for 1 h with 40 μl of a 50% suspension of nProtein A-sepharose FF. Resins were washed three times with Triton buffer (for LubX detection in Legionella-infected cells) or RIPA buffer (for coimmunoprecipitation of LubX and Clk1), once with 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), and immunoprecipitates were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer.

To immunoprecipitate HA-Clk1, cleared lysates were incubated with 40 μl of a 50% suspension of mouse IgG-agarose (Sigma) for 1 h to pre-absorb cross-reacting proteins. After removing the resin by centrifugation, 40 μl of a 50% suspension of anti-HA-agarose (Sigma) was added to the supernatant fraction and incubated at 4°C overnight with gentle rotation. Resins were washed three times with RIPA buffer, once with 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), and immunoprecipitates were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer.

#### GST pull-down

Purified GST or GST-U-box 2 (10 μg) were mixed with 1 μg of purified Clk1mycHIS in 400 μl of 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100. The mixtures were mixed with 100 μl of a 20% suspension of glutathione-sepharose FF and incubated for 2 h with gentle rotation. Unbound proteins were removed by centrifugation, and resins were washed three times with the same buffer. GST and interacting proteins were eluted with 50 μl of 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM reduced glutathione.

#### Intracellular growth assay

Intracellular growth assays in mouse macrophages were carried out as described (Zuckman *et al.*, 1999). 10 μMTG003 (Sigma) or solvent 1% DMSO was added at 30 min before infection and kept throughout the experiment. Macrophage viability was monitored by a MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, Sigma] assay as described (Kagan and Roy, 2002).

## Acknowledgements

We thank Masatoshi Hagiwara for Clk1 plasmids and discussion, May Macnab for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by Grants-In-Aid (to T.K. and H.N.) and the Program of Founding Research Centers for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases (to H.N.) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, Hayashi Memorial Foundation for Female Natural Scientists (to T.K.), and the Mitsubishi Foundation (to T.K.).

## References

Abramovitch, R.B., Janjusevic, R., Stebbins, C.E., and Martin, G.B. (2006) Type III effector AvrPtoB requires intrinsic E3 ubiquitin ligase activity to suppress plant cell death and immunity. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **103**: 2851–2856.

Albert, T.K., Hanzawa, H., Legtenberg, Y.I., de Ruwe, M.J., van den Heuvel, F.A., Collart, M.A., *et al.* (2002) Identification of a ubiquitin-protein ligase subunit within the CCR4-NOT transcription repressor complex. *EMBO J* **21**: 355–364.

Andersen, P., Kragelund, B.B., Olsen, A.N., Larsen, F.H., Chua, N.H., Poulsen, F.M., and Skriver, K. (2004) Structure and biochemical function of a prototypical Arabidopsis U-box domain. *J Biol Chem* **279**: 40053–40061.

Angot, A., Peeters, N., Lechner, E., Vailleau, F., Baud, C., Gentzbittel, L., *et al.* (2006) Ralstonia solanacearum requires F-box-like domain-containing type III effectors to promote disease on several host plants. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **103**: 14620–14625.

Angot, A., Vergunst, A., Genin, S., and Peeters, N. (2007) Exploitation of eukaryotic ubiquitin signaling pathways by effectors translocated by bacterial type III and type IV secretion systems. *PLoS Pathog* **3**: e3.

Aravind, L., and Koonin, E.V. (2000) The U box is a modified RING finger – a common domain in ubiquitination. *Curr Biol* **10**: R132–R134.

Bardill, J.P., Miller, J.L., and Vogel, J.P. (2005) IcmS-dependent translocation of SdeA into macrophages by the Legionella pneumophila type IV secretion system. *Mol Microbiol* **56**: 90–103.

Berger, K.H., and Isberg, R.R. (1993) Two distinct defects in intracellular growth complemented by a single genetic locus in Legionella pneumophila. *Mol Microbiol* **7**: 7–19.

Bruggemann, H., Hagman, A., Jules, M., Sismeiro, O., Dillies, M.A., Gouyette, C., *et al.* (2006) Virulence strategies for infecting phagocytes deduced from the in vivo transcriptional program of Legionella pneumophila. *Cell Microbiol* **8**: 1228–1240.

Brzovic, P.S., Keeffe, J.R., Nishikawa, H., Miyamoto, K., Fox, D., 3rd, Fukuda, M., *et al.* (2003) Binding and recognition in the assembly of an active BRCA1/BARD1 ubiquitin-ligase complex. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **100**: 5646–5651.

Cazalet, C., Rusniok, C., Bruggemann, H., Zidane, N., Magnier, A., Ma, L., *et al.* (2004) Evidence in the Legionella pneumophila genome for exploitation of host cell functions and high genome plasticity. *Nat Genet* **36**: 1165–1173.

Celada, A., Gray, P.W., Rinderknecht, E., and Schreiber, R.D. (1984) Evidence for a gamma-interferon receptor that regulates macrophage tumoricidal activity. *J Exp Med* **160**: 55–74.

Chen, J., de Felipe, K.S., Clarke, M., Lu, H., Anderson, O.R., Segal, G., and Shuman, H.A. (2004) Legionella effectors that promote nonlytic release from protozoa. *Science* **303**: 1358–1361.

Colwill, K., Pawson, T., Andrews, B., Prasad, J., Manley, J.L., Bell, J.C., and Duncan, P.I. (1996) The Clk/Sty protein kinase phosphorylates SR splicing factors and regulates their intranuclear distribution. *EMBO J* **15**: 265–275.

Conover, G.M., Derre, I., Vogel, J.P., and Isberg, R.R. (2003) The Legionella pneumophila LidA protein: a translocated substrate of the Dot/Icm system associated with maintenance of bacterial integrity. *Mol Microbiol* **48**: 305–321.

Deroo, B.J., and Archer, T.K. (2002) Proteasome inhibitors reduce luciferase and beta-galactosidase activity in tissue culture cells. *J Biol Chem* **277**: 20120–20123.

Derre, I., and Isberg, R.R. (2005) LidA, a translocated substrate of the Legionella pneumophila type IV secretion system, interferes with the early secretory pathway. *Infect Immun* **73**: 4370–4380.

Dorer, M.S., Kirton, D., Bader, J.S., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) RNA interference analysis of Legionella in Drosophila cells: exploitation of early secretory apparatus dynamics. *PLoS Pathog* **2**: e34.

Feeley, J.C., Gibson, R.J., Gorman, G.W., Langford, N.C., Rasheed, J.K., Mackel, D.C., and Blaine, W.B. (1979) Charcoal-yeast extract agar: primary isolation medium for Legionella pneumophila. *J Clin Microbiol* **10**: 437–441.

de Felipe, K.S., Pampou, S., Jovanovic, O.S., Pericone, C.D., Ye, S.F., Kalachikov, S., and Shuman, H.A. (2005) Evidence for acquisition of Legionella type IV secretion substrates via interdomain horizontal gene transfer. *J Bacteriol* **187**: 7716–7726.

Fields, B.S. (1996) The molecular ecology of legionellae. *Trends Microbiol* **4**: 286–290.

Fraser, D.W., Tsai, T.R., Orenstein, W., Parken, W.E., Beechan, H.J., Sharrar, R.G., *et al.* (1977) Legionnaires’ disease: description of an epidemic of pneumonia. *N Engl J Med* **297**: 1189–1197.

Hartmann, A.M., Rujescu, D., Giannakopoulos, T., Nikolakaki, E., Goedert, M., Mandelkow, E.M., *et al.* (2001) Regulation of alternative splicing of human tau exon 10 by phosphorylation of splicing factors. *Mol Cell Neurosci* **18**: 80–90.

Horwitz, M.A., and Silverstein, S.C. (1980) Legionnaires’ disease bacterium (Legionella pneumophila) multiplies intracellularly in human monocytes. *J Clin Invest* **66**: 441–450.

Janjusevic, R., Abramovitch, R.B., Martin, G.B., and Stebbins, C.E. (2006) A bacterial inhibitor of host programmed cell death defenses is an E3 ubiquitin ligase. *Science* **311**: 222–226.

Kagan, J.C., and Roy, C.R. (2002) Legionella phagosomes intercept vesicular traffic from endoplasmic reticulum exit sites. *Nat Cell Biol* **4**: 945–954.Koegl, M., Hoppe, T., Schlenker, S., Ulrich, H.D., Mayer, T.U., and Jentsch, S. (1999) A novel ubiquitination factor, E4, is involved in multiubiquitin chain assembly. *Cell* 96: 635–644.

Liu, Y., and Luo, Z.Q. (2007) The *Legionella pneumophila* effector SidJ is required for efficient recruitment of endoplasmic reticulum proteins to the bacterial phagosome. *Infect Immun* 75: 592–603.

Luo, Z.Q., and Isberg, R.R. (2004) Multiple substrates of the *Legionella pneumophila* Dot/Icm system identified by interbacterial protein transfer. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 101: 841–846.

Moeslein, F.M., Myers, M.P., and Landreth, G.E. (1999) The CLK family kinases, CLK1 and CLK2, phosphorylate and activate the tyrosine phosphatase, PTP-1B. *J Biol Chem* 274: 26697–26704.

Muraki, M., Ohkawara, B., Hosoya, T., Onogi, H., Koizumi, J., Koizumi, T., *et al.* (2004) Manipulation of alternative splicing by a newly developed inhibitor of Clks. *J Biol Chem* 279: 24246–24254.

Nagai, H., Kagan, J.C., Zhu, J., Kahn, R.A., and Roy, C.R. (2002) A bacterial guanine nucleotide exchange factor activates ARF on *Legionella* phagosomes. *Science* 295: 679–682.

Nagai, H., Cambronne, E.D., Kagan, J.C., Amor, J.C., Kahn, R.A., and Roy, C.R. (2005) A C-terminal translocation signal required for Dot/Icm-dependent delivery of the *Legionella* RalF protein to host cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 826–831.

Ninio, S., and Roy, C.R. (2007) Effector proteins translocated by *Legionella pneumophila*: strength in numbers. *Trends Microbiol* 15: 372–380.

Ohi, M.D., Vander Kooi, C.W., Rosenberg, J.A., Chazin, W.J., and Gould, K.L. (2003) Structural insights into the U-box, a domain associated with multi-ubiquitination. *Nat Struct Biol* 10: 250–255.

Prasad, J., Colwill, K., Pawson, T., and Manley, J.L. (1999) The protein kinase Clk/Sty directly modulates SR protein activity: both hyper- and hypophosphorylation inhibit splicing. *Mol Cell Biol* 19: 6991–7000.

Rohde, J.R., Breitkreutz, A., Chenal, A., Sansonetti, P.J., and Parsot, C. (2007) Type III secretion effectors of the IpaH family are E3 ubiquitin ligases. *Cell Host Microbe* 1: 77–83.

Rosebrock, T.R., Zeng, L., Brady, J.J., Abramovitch, R.B., Xiao, F., and Martin, G.B. (2007) A bacterial E3 ubiquitin ligase targets a host protein kinase to disrupt plant immunity. *Nature* 448: 370–374.

Rytkonen, A., and Holden, D.W. (2007) Bacterial interference of ubiquitination and deubiquitination. *Cell Host Microbe* 1: 13–22.

Schulein, R., Guye, P., Rhomberg, T.A., Schmid, M.C., Schroder, G., Vergunst, A.C., *et al.* (2005) A bipartite signal mediates the transfer of type IV secretion substrates of *Bartonella henselae* into human cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 856–861.

Schwertz, H., Tolley, N.D., Foulks, J.M., Denis, M.M., Risenmay, B.W., Buerke, M., *et al.* (2006) Signal-dependent

splicing of tissue factor pre-mRNA modulates the thrombogenicity of human platelets. *J Exp Med* 203: 2433–2440.

Segal, G., Purcell, M., and Shuman, H.A. (1998) Host cell killing and bacterial conjugation require overlapping sets of genes within a 22-kb region of the *Legionella pneumophila* genome. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95: 1669–1674.

Sory, M.P., and Cornelis, G.R. (1994) Translocation of a hybrid YopE-adenylate cyclase from *Yersinia enterocolitica* into HeLa cells. *Mol Microbiol* 14: 583–594.

Tzfira, T., Vaidya, M., and Citovsky, V. (2004) Involvement of targeted proteolysis in plant genetic transformation by *Agrobacterium*. *Nature* 431: 87–92.

Vander Kooi, C.W., Ohi, M.D., Rosenberg, J.A., Oldham, M.L., Newcomer, M.E., Gould, K.L., and Chazin, W.J. (2006) The Prp19 U-box crystal structure suggests a common dimeric architecture for a class of oligomeric E3 ubiquitin ligases. *Biochemistry* 45: 121–130.

Vergunst, A.C., Schrammeijer, B., den Dulk-Ras, A., de Vlaam, C.M., Regensburg-Tuink, T.J., and Hooykaas, P.J. (2000) VirB/D4-dependent protein translocation from *Agrobacterium* into plant cells. *Science* 290: 979–982.

Vergunst, A.C., van Lier, M.C., den Dulk-Ras, A., Stuve, T.A., Ouwehand, A., and Hooykaas, P.J. (2005) Positive charge is an important feature of the C-terminal transport signal of the VirB/D4-translocated proteins of *Agrobacterium*. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 832–837.

Vogel, J.P., Andrews, H.L., Wong, S.K., and Isberg, R.R. (1998) Conjugative transfer by the virulence system of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Science* 279: 873–876.

Zhang, M., Windheim, M., Roe, S.M., Peggie, M., Cohen, P., Prodromou, C., and Pearl, L.H. (2005) Chaperoned ubiquitylation – crystal structures of the CHIP U box E3 ubiquitin ligase and a CHIP-Ubc13-Uev1a complex. *Mol Cell* 20: 525–538.

Zhang, Y., Higashide, W.M., McCormick, B.A., Chen, J., and Zhou, D. (2006) The inflammation-associated *Salmonella* SopA is a HECT-like E3 ubiquitin ligase. *Mol Microbiol* 62: 786–793.

Zheng, N., Wang, P., Jeffrey, P.D., and Pavletich, N.P. (2000) Structure of a c-Cbl-UbcH7 complex: RING domain function in ubiquitin-protein ligases. *Cell* 102: 533–539.

Zuckman, D.M., Hung, J.B., and Roy, C.R. (1999) Pore-forming activity is not sufficient for *Legionella pneumophila* phagosome trafficking and intracellular growth. *Mol Microbiol* 32: 990–1001.

## Supplementary material

This material is available as part of the online article from: http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06124.x

(This link will take you to the article abstract).

Please note: Blackwell Publishing is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supplementary materials supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **67**, 1307–1319