
The FASEB Journal • Research Communication

# Dynorphin is a downstream effector of striatal BDNF regulation of ethanol intake

Marian L. Logrip,*,† Patricia H. Janak,*,†,‡ and Dorit Ron*,†,‡,1

*The Gallo Research Center, †Neuroscience Graduate Program, and ‡Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, Emeryville, California, USA

---

**ABSTRACT** We recently identified brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the dorsal striatum to be a major component of a homeostatic pathway controlling ethanol consumption (1, 2). We hypothesized that ethanol-mediated activation of the BDNF signaling cascade is required for the ethanol-related function of the neurotrophic factor. Here, we demonstrate that exposure of striatal neurons to ethanol results in the activation of the BDNF receptor TrkB, leading to the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) signaling pathway and the subsequent increase in the expression of preprodynorphin (Pdyn) *via* BDNF. Finally, we show that activation of the dynorphin receptor, the kappa opioid receptor (KOR), is required for the BDNF-mediated decrease in ethanol intake, illustrating a function of dynorphin in BDNF's homeostatic control of ethanol consumption. Taken together, these results demonstrate that BDNF regulates ethanol intake by initiation of MAP kinase signaling and the ensuing production of downstream gene products, including Pdyn.—Logrip, M. L., Janak, P. H., Ron, D. Dynorphin is a downstream effector of striatal BDNF regulation of ethanol intake. *FASEBJ*. 22, 2393–2404 (2008)

Key Words: MAP kinase · alcohol · addiction · TrkB · ERK

ALCOHOLISM IS A DEVASTATING DISEASE, with 8.5% of the American population—over 17 million adults—categorized as alcohol abusing or dependent (3). Yet 60 to 70% of the population has admitted to consuming alcohol in self-report surveys taken annually over the past 65 years (Gallup Poll, surveys conducted annually since 1939; ref. 4). The discrepancy between these two statistics suggests the existence of mechanisms that curb excessive ethanol intake such that the majority of social drinkers do not develop dependence.

The neurotrophic factor BDNF is a likely candidate for inhibiting the transition to addiction, as in humans, both chromosomal markers flanking the *BDNF* gene (5) and specific mutations in the gene (6) have been associated with the development of addiction to multiple drugs of abuse, including alcohol (ethanol). In addition, much evidence exists suggesting a role for BDNF in regulating neuronal responses to drugs of abuse, at both the molecular and behavioral levels (7, 8). BDNF infusion into the ventral tegmental area (VTA) blocks the development of

molecular adaptations to chronic morphine and cocaine treatment (9), and acute administration of (1, 10–13) or withdrawal from (14, 15) multiple drugs of abuse has been shown to increase *BDNF* levels in various brain regions. Importantly, reduction in BDNF expression results in increased ethanol intake (16–18). For instance, in the central and medial amygdala, reduction of BDNF by antisense oligonucleotides increases both ethanol intake and anxiety-like behaviors, indicating a possible role for amygdalar BDNF in drinking associated with anxiety relief. In addition, the same treatment with BDNF antisense that increased ethanol intake also reduced phosphorylation levels of proteins known to be downstream of BDNF signaling (18), demonstrating that BDNF may regulate anxiety and ethanol intake *via* activation of a downstream signaling cascade. Recently, cocaine has also been shown to increase BDNF levels and signaling in the nucleus accumbens although, unlike ethanol, blockade of BDNF decreased cocaine self-administration (19).

Previously, we found that BDNF in the dorsal striatum participates in a homeostatic pathway triggered in response to ethanol which, in turn, regulates behavioral responding to ethanol (1, 2). Specifically, we found that ethanol exposure increased *BDNF* expression in the dorsal striatum and that elevation of *BDNF* expression resulted in decreased ethanol intake (1). In addition, mice expressing half as much BDNF (*BDNF*⁺/⁻) displayed increased sensitivity to ethanol in multiple paradigms, showing increased preference for an ethanol-paired environment, increased locomotor sensitization to ethanol and higher ethanol intake following a period of deprivation, as compared to wild-type (WT) mice (1). Subsequently, we found that inhibition of BDNF signaling using the Trk inhibitor K252a increased ethanol intake, and this effect was abolished in *BDNF*⁺/⁻ mice, in which BDNF signaling is reduced compared to WT mice due to expression of half as much BDNF protein (2). Thus, we hypothesized that ethanol treatment activates a BDNF-mediated signaling cascade, leading to the up-regulation of down-

---

1 Correspondence: Ernest Gallo Research Center, 5858 Horton St. Ste. 200, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. E-mail: dorit.ron@ucsf.edu  
doi: 10.1096/fj.07-099135
stream proteins whose activities are responsible for BDNF’s ability to control ethanol consumption.

BDNF initiates signaling by binding to its receptor, TrkB, resulting in receptor autophosphorylation and subsequent activation of several signaling cascades, including the MAP kinase cascade (20). As BDNF-dependent activation of MAP kinase in neurons results in increased gene transcription (21) and acute administration of cocaine, morphine, or nicotine has been shown to increase striatal MAP kinase activity (22), we hypothesized that ethanol treatment would result in increased activation of the MAP kinase pathway and subsequent up-regulation of genes encoding downstream effectors of BDNF signaling. In addition, we hypothesized that the protein products of these downstream effector genes would be responsible for decreasing ethanol intake.

Because ethanol intake selectively increases BDNF in the dorsal striatum (1), we sought a downstream effector whose expression in the dorsal striatum could be increased in a BDNF-dependent fashion. Extended administration of BDNF into the striatum has been shown to increase the expression of *Pdyn*, the mRNA precursor of the dynorphin peptide (23), and mice heterozygous for BDNF also show reduced striatal *Pdyn* expression (24). Additionally, striatal MAP kinase activation is required for induction of *Pdyn* expression by amphetamine (25). Interestingly, multiple drugs of abuse, including ethanol, have been reported to increase dynorphin expression in the striatum (26–28). Increasing *Pdyn* expression in the nucleus accumbens by infusion of HSV-CREB resulted in place aversion to subthreshold doses of cocaine that was dependent on dynorphin signaling (29). In addition, dynorphin expression is higher in the striatum of DBA/2 mice, who drink lower quantities of alcohol, than in the high-drinking C57BL/6 strain (30). Additional evidence has implicated dynorphin and its receptor, the kappa opioid receptor (KOR) (31), in modulation of ethanol intake, as systemic administration of U50,488H, a KOR agonist, decreased two-bottle choice ethanol intake in rats (32), whereas systemic administration of nor-binaltorphimine (nor-BNI), a KOR antagonist, increased two-bottle-choice ethanol intake in rats (33). Importantly, polymorphisms in dynorphin and the KOR have been associated with increased risk of alcoholism in humans (34), indicating that dynorphin may be directly involved in protection against the development of alcohol addiction. In light of these data, we hypothesized that ethanol treatment activates BDNF signaling via the MAP kinase pathway, increasing the expression of dynorphin, whose activity would be responsible for BDNF’s ability to control ethanol consumption.

MN, USA). U0126 was purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA). Primary antibodies were obtained as follows: anti-TrkB and anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies from Upstate (Temecula, CA, USA), anti-phospho-Trk and anti-phospho-ERK1/2 antibodies from Cell Signaling, anti-GAD-67, anti-BDNF, and anti-MAP2 antibodies from Chemicon (Temecula, CA, USA), and normal rabbit IgG from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for Western blot detection were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. AlexaFluor-conjugated secondary antibodies and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, dilactate (DAPI), as well as all culture media, B-27 and GlutaMAX supplements, protein G agarose beads, and Nu-PAGE gels, were supplied by Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). VectaShield mounting medium was obtained from Vector Laboratories (Burlingame, CA, USA). Serum extender was obtained from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA). Protease and phosphatase inhibitors were obtained from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). TRIzol and the Reverse Transcription System were purchased from Promega Corp. (Madison, WI, USA). All real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) reagents, including TaqMan Gene Expression Assays, were obtained from Applied Biosystems, Inc. (Foster City, CA, USA). DNase and nor-binaltorphimine were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Tat-RACK1 fusion protein was expressed in *Escherichia coli* and purified as described previously (35).

### Animals

C57BL/6J mice (7 wk of age) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Sprague-Dawley pups for primary neuronal culture and Long-Evans rats for BDNF infusion were obtained from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN, USA). Animals were housed under a 12:12-h light-dark cycle, with lights on at 7:00 AM and lights off at 7:00 PM, and they were provided with continuous *ad libitum* access to food and water. All animal procedures were approved by the Gallo Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were conducted in agreement with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council (1996).

### Primary striatal neuronal culture

A litter of Sprague-Dawley rats was obtained on either the day of birth or the first postnatal day (P0-P1) and were euthanized by rapid decapitation. The striata were dissected out, pooled, and digested in a papain solution for 35 min. Following inhibition of digestion, cells were mechanically dissociated using flamed glass pipettes in Minimum Essential Medium containing 22 mM D-glucose, 5% fetal bovine serum, and serum extender. Neurons were plated on poly-D-lysine-coated plates or CC2-coated chamber slides in Neurobasal-A media (NB-A) containing B-27 and GlutaMax supplements, as well as penicillin and streptomycin. Cultures were maintained for 11 days *in vitro* (DIV), with 50% of the media changed at 1 DIV and 7 DIV. For phosphorylation studies, media were changed to Basal Medium Eagle (BME) containing penicillin and streptomycin on DIV 10; otherwise, cells remained in NB-A and 50% of the media was changed 3 h before treatment on DIV 11. In addition, 10 μM cytosine arabinoside (AraC) was added on DIV 1 to inhibit multiplication of glial cells.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Reagents

Recombinant human BDNF, TrkB-Fc, and the Fc fragment of human IgG were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis,

### Immunoprecipitation

Following treatment, media were removed and cells were harvested in RIPA buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% deoxycholic acid,and 2 mM EDTA, as well as protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Cell lysates were precleared for 1 h with protein G agarose, and precleared lysates were then incubated overnight with either TrkB antibodies or normal rabbit IgG. The following day, protein G agarose beads were added for 2 h incubation, then beads were washed thoroughly prior to addition of sample loading buffer. Immunoprecipitates were resolved on a 4–12% gradient reducing Nu-PAGE gel and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. Western blot analysis was performed with the appropriate antibodies; immunoreactivity was detected using ECL Plus (GE Bio-Sciences Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) and processed using the STORM System (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

### Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)

Primary striatal neurons or brain sections were homogenized in TRIzol and mRNA was isolated according to standard protocol. Samples were treated with DNase prior to reverse transcription using the Reverse Transcription System. The resulting cDNA samples were amplified by TaqMan quantitative PCR using commercially available primer/probe kits.

### Acute striatal slice treatment

Sprague-Dawley rats, aged 21–28 days at the time of experimentation, were anesthetized and euthanized by rapid decapitation. The brains were rapidly removed and placed immediately in ice-cold aCSF containing (in mM): 126 NaCl, 1.2 KCl, 1.2 NaH₂PO₄, 0.01 MgCl₂, 2.4 CaCl₂, 18 NaHCO₃, and 11 glucose, saturated with 95% O₂-5% CO₂. Coronal slices (175 μm) were cut on a vibratome (Leica, Nussloch, Germany); the dorsal striata were dissected out and transferred to rest in saturated aCSF (as above) at 25°C for 90 min before treatment. At the conclusion of treatment, slices were collected and immediately homogenized in TRIzol, followed by RNA extraction and analysis by qRT-PCR, as detailed above.

### Acute infusion of BDNF for *Pdyn* expression

Adult Long-Evans rats (weighing 350–550 g at the time of surgery) were anesthetized using isoflurane and placed in a standard stereotaxic frame. A 10-μl Hamilton syringe was used to infuse 1 μl BDNF (0.25 μg/μl) unilaterally into the dorsolateral striatum and vehicle (PBS) into the contralateral dorsal striatum (coordinates: anterioposterior +1.20 mm, mediolateral ±3.40 mm, dorsoventral –4.20 mm, relative to bregma). The hemisphere receiving BDNF (left or right) and the order of infusion (BDNF or vehicle first) were counterbalanced across subjects. The infusion was performed over 2 min, and the syringe was left in place an additional 2 min to allow for diffusion from the infusion site. Rats were maintained under anesthesia for 3 h after the BDNF infusion and were then sacrificed. A striatal punch of the region immediately surrounding the tip of the infusion track was collected and processed for mRNA expression by qRT-PCR as above.

### Immunofluorescence

Subsequent to treatment on DIV11, primary striatal neuronal cultures were washed briefly in PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature. The cells were then washed twice with PBS and once for 10 min with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBS-Triton). Cells were blocked for a minimum of 4 h with 3% normal donkey serum in PBS-Triton. Cells were incubated in primary antibodies

overnight at 4°C; primary antibodies were diluted in PBS-Triton containing 1% normal donkey serum at a dilution of 1:200 for phospho-ERK1/2 or 1:2000 for MAP2. The slides were then washed 3× in PBS-Triton, followed by incubation with AlexaFluor-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h in the dark. The slides were then washed in PBS twice, incubated in 300 nM DAPI for 2 min, and washed twice more in PBS. Slides were mounted in VectaShield and coverslipped prior to visualization with a laser-scanning confocal microscope (LSM 510 Meta; Carl Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood, NY, USA).

#### Image analysis

Neurons were located using MAP2 staining and selected at random for imaging. Quantified images represent the 1-μm-thick plane parallel to the coverslip and midway from the top and bottom of the nucleus. Care was taken to determine the exact center of the nuclear span based on the extent of DAPI staining prior to imaging. While the experimenter was not blind to treatment at the time of imaging, the phospho-ERK1/2 channel was never observed so that selection of neurons for imaging was not biased toward the expected response. Thus, the extent of phospho-ERK1/2 fluorescence was unknown prior to capturing each neuron’s final image, and no images were discarded from quantification. In addition, all images were quantified after removal of treatment labels, and quantification was confirmed by two independent observers who were blind to treatment conditions. Images were processed using a Zeiss LSM Image Browser (Carl Zeiss Microimaging), and average fluorescence intensity over the entire span of the nucleus, as selected based on colocalization with DAPI staining, was analyzed using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA).

#### Two-bottle choice ethanol consumption

C57BL/6J mice were individually housed in double-grommet cages and given *ad libitum* access to food and water. At least 1 wk after arrival, mice were given 24-h access to two bottles on the home cage: one containing 10% ethanol and the other containing water. Bottles were weighed and their positions were switched every other day to prevent side bias. After a stable level of ethanol intake was obtained (minimally 6 wk from the onset of ethanol exposure), drug treatments began. On the day prior to drug treatment, all mice were injected with vehicle (50% saline/50% PBS containing 10% glycerol). The following day, mice were treated with 4 mg/kg Tat-RACK1 or vehicle in combination with either saline or 30 mg/kg nor-binaltorphimine (nor-BNI). Both treatments were administered 3.5 h prior to lights out in a single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection. The time point was chosen to allow time for transcription and translation prior to lights out. The dose of Tat-RACK1 has previously been shown to decrease ethanol consumption (1) and the nor-BNI dose is within the range of doses selective for the KOR with minimal mu opioid receptor antagonism (36, 37). Bottles were returned to the cages 30 min after injection, and ethanol and water intake was measured 18 h later.

#### Statistical analysis

Data were analyzed using one- or two-way ANOVAs, as appropriate, followed by *post hoc* Bonferroni (*vs.* control) and Student-Neuman-Keuls (differences among treatment groups) tests. Gene expression data calculated as percent control were analyzed by one-sample *t* test (GraphPad Software, Inc., http://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/OneSampleT1.cfm), which infers variation for the control population based on variability in the sample set.

ETHANOL ACTIVATES MAPK AND DYNORPHIN VIA BDNF   2395
Figure 1. Establishment of a primary striatal culture model. Primary striatal neurons were obtained from pooled striata of P0 Sprague-Dawley rats and maintained in Neurobasal-A media for 11 days *in vitro*. A) Neurons display a medium spiny neuron-like morphology. Neuronal morphology visualized by staining with MAP2. B) Primary striatal neurons are GABAergic. Neurons were costained with MAP2 (red) to show processes and GAD-67 (green), demonstrating that the majority of the cultured neurons are GABAergic. GAD-67 was coexpressed in 88% of MAP2-positive neurons (*n* = 119 of 139 neurons counted from 8 fields selected at random from 4 separate cultures). C) Striatal primary neurons express TrkB receptors. Primary neurons were costained with TrkB (green) and MAP2 (red) antibodies. TrkB receptors were expressed in 100% of MAP2-positive neurons (*n* = 78). Scale bars = 20 μm.

---

**RESULTS**

Ethanol treatment of primary striatal neurons increases BDNF protein levels and TrkB receptor phosphorylation

Previously, we found that ethanol treatment of dorsal striatal slices increased *BDNF* mRNA levels, and that *in vivo* ethanol increased *BDNF* expression in the dorsal striatum (1). We hypothesized that this ethanol-mediated increase in *BDNF* mRNA expression would lead to an increase in the BDNF protein and the consequent activation of the BDNF signaling pathway. To test the hypothesis, we established primary striatal neurons as a model system. As shown in Fig. 1, most primary striatal neurons in culture display characteristics of medium spiny neurons, with medium-sized cell bodies and multiply branching dendrites (Fig. 1A), and express the 67-kDa isoform of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD-67) (Fig. 1B), an enzyme required for GABA synthesis that therefore identifies GABAergic neurons (38). In addition, all cells show high expression of the TrkB receptor (Fig. 1C), as seen in striatal neurons *in vivo* (39), thus making the culture system a suitable model for studying the role of BDNF signaling in the striatal response to ethanol.

We first set out to determine whether BDNF protein levels increased following ethanol treatment in striatal primary neurons, since the expression profiles of BDNF mRNA and protein are not always identical (40). Because ethanol treatment increased *BDNF*mRNA expression after 30 min (1), we hypothesized that BDNF protein expression would increase as well, but at a later time point due to the temporal constraints of protein synthesis. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we observed that 2 h ethanol exposure resulted in an increase in BDNF protein expression in striatal neurons.

Next, we determined whether ethanol treatment would also result in the activation of the BDNF receptor, TrkB. Binding of BDNF to the TrkB receptor results in receptor dimerization and autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the intracellular tail of the receptor (20). To determine the level of TrkB activation following ethanol treatment, TrkB was immunoprecipitated (IPed) and Western blot membranes were probed with antiphosphotyrosine antibodies. As shown in Fig. 3A, B, treatment of primary striatal neurons with ethanol for 4 h resulted in a significant activation of the TrkB receptor within the 4-h ethanol incubation period [main effect of treatment, *F*(1, 17) = 5.566; *P* < 0.05]. This was confirmed by immunofluorescent analysis of Trk phosphorylation, as ethanol treatment increased pTrk signal (Fig. 3C). These results suggest that exposure of striatal neurons to ethanol leads to the activation of the BDNF signaling cascade.

Ethanol treatment of striatal neurons leads to the activation of the MAP kinase pathway *via* BDNF-mediated activation and thus phosphorylation of the TrkB receptor activates MAP kinase signaling

---

Figure 2. Ethanol increases BDNF protein levels in primary striatal neuronal cell cultures. Primary striatal neurons were treated without or with 100 mM ethanol as indicated. Fixed cells were stained with anti-BDNF (red, left panels) and anti-MAP2 (green, middle panels). Right panels show merged images. Visible anti-BDNF fluorescence was observed in 16% of control neurons (*n* = 9 of 58 over 2 fields) and 85% of ethanol-treated neurons (*n* = 64 of 75 over 2 fields). Scale bars = 10 μm.

MEK1/2 then phosphorylates the MAP kinase extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) (42). Activated ERK1/2 can then translocate to the nucleus, where it can activate transcription factors to alter gene expression (43). BDNF signaling via the MAP kinase cascade has been shown to play a role in downstream gene expression after BDNF treatment of primary neurons (44–46). As ethanol treatment resulted in TrkB receptor phosphorylation, we hypothesized that the activation of the TrkB receptor would lead to the activation of the MAP kinase signaling cascade and thus to an increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation and nuclear localization. To test this possibility, we treated primary striatal neurons with ethanol for 4 h and visualized changes in the amount and nuclear localization of phospho-ERK1/2 using confocal microscopy. We quantified the level of phospho-ERK1/2 in the nucleus, which we isolated using DAPI as a nuclear marker. As shown in Fig. 4, ethanol treatment increased the level of phospho-ERK1/2 in primary striatal neurons (Fig. 4A left, top left panel (control) vs. bottom left panel (ethanol), with phospho-ERK1/2 shown in green). Importantly, we found that this activation of ERK1/2 by ethanol was BDNF-dependent, as addition of TrkB-Fc, a fusion protein that competes with endogenous TrkB receptors for BDNF binding (47), blocked the ethanol-induced ERK phosphorylation. [Fig. 4A, right bottom panel (ethanol+TrkB-Fc) vs. left bottom panel (ethanol alone)]. Quantitation of nuclear phospho-ERK1/2 levels revealed a main effect of treatment [F(3, 309)=4.000, P<0.01], which was accounted for by increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation in ethanol-treated cells as compared to all other groups (Fig. 4B). ERK phosphorylation was also observed after 2 h treatment with ethanol (data not shown, 50 mM ethanol, 35% over control, n=17 cells for control, 14 cells for 2 h ethanol treatment, P<0.005). Thus, at the time point at which ethanol increases BDNF expression, ERK phosphorylation also begins to increase. Taken together, these results show that ethanol exposure of striatal neurons leads to the activation of the MAP kinase signaling cascade via BDNF, yielding an increase in nuclear phospho-ERK1/2, suggesting that ethanol via BDNF may alter transcription of downstream genes.

Ethanol increases *Pdyn* expression in primary striatal neurons via a BDNF-dependent mechanism

Thus far, we have demonstrated that ethanol exposure of striatal neurons increases BDNF protein levels, resulting in an activation of the TrkB receptor, which leads to increased levels of phospho-ERK1/2 in the nucleus. As BDNF can increase expression of downstream genes via activation of the MAP kinase pathway (21, 44), and infusion of BDNF into the striatum increases *Pdyn* expression (23), we hypothesized that ethanol, via BDNF-mediated activation of ERK1/2, would increase *Pdyn* expression in primary striatal

ETHANOL ACTIVATES MAPK AND DYNORPHIN VIA BDNF

Figure 4. Ethanol increases ERK1/2 phosphorylation *via* BDNF. A) Representative confocal images showing the central nuclear plane of primary striatal neurons treated without or with 100 mM ethanol for 4 h or 25 ng/ml BDNF for 30 min as a positive control, in the absence or presence of the BDNF inhibitor TrkB-Fc (250 ng/ml). Fixed cells were stained with anti-pERK1/2 (green, left panels), anti-MAP2 (red) and DAPI to mark nuclei (blue); right panel for each treatment shows merged image. Scale bars = 2.5 μm. B) Quantitation of average nuclear pERK intensity. Histogram displays mean ± SE pERK intensity by treatment. *P < 0.05 vs. all other treatments; n = 71 for control; n = 82 for TrkB-Fc; n = 77 for ethanol; n = 80 for ethanol + TrkB-Fc. Nuclear images were obtained from 19–24 fields per condition from 2 independent experiments.

neurons. To test this, primary striatal neurons were treated with 100 mM ethanol for 2–4 h. Following treatment, total RNA was isolated from cells and mRNA expression was assessed using qRT-PCR. As shown in Fig. 5A, we found a time-dependent increase in *Pdyn*, with elevated *Pdyn* levels observable 2 h after ethanol treatment and with maximal expression following 4 h ethanol treatment [main effect of treatment length, F(3, 25) = 12.023, P < 0.001]. Importantly, we found 4 h of ethanol treatment to be effective at increasing *Pdyn* expression even at the lowest dose tested (10 mM) (Fig. 5B), a physiologically relevant concentration roughly equivalent to the blood alcohol level achieved following consumption of 1 or 2 alcoholic drinks (48).

Next, we set out to determine whether these observed increases in *Pdyn* expression were dependent on BDNF signaling *via* the MAP kinase pathway. To test this hypothesis, primary striatal neurons were treated with ethanol in the presence or absence of the BDNF inhibitor TrkB-Fc, or in the presence or absence of the MEK inhibitor U0126, to block the activation of ERK1/2. As shown in Fig. 6, we found a significant increase in *Pdyn* expression following ethanol treatment that was blocked by the addition of TrkB-Fc (Fig. 6B), demonstrating that ethanol treatment increases *Pdyn via* BDNF. In addition, we found that ethanol-induced increases in *Pdyn* expression were also blocked by the MEK inhibitor U0126 (Fig. 6C), indicating that ethanol treatment increases *Pdyn* by activating MAP kinase signaling.

Regulation of ethanol intake by BDNF requires dynorphin

Because increasing *BDNF* expression resulted in a decrease in ethanol consumption *in vivo* (1) and ethanol increased *Pdyn* expression *via* BDNF (Fig. 6B), we hypothesized that reduction of ethanol consumption by BDNF would require the expression of dynorphin and subsequent signaling *via* its receptor, the KOR (31). First, we determined whether BDNF would increase *Pdyn* in the dorsal striatum *in vivo*. Previous work from this laboratory has demonstrated a 2–3 h delay between increased *BDNF* expression and elevated expression of another downstream effector, the dopamine D3 receptor (1, 2). Therefore we infused BDNF into the dorsolateral striatum of rats and assessed changes in gene expression 3 h later (Fig. 6A). We found that BDNF infusion significantly increased *Pdyn* expression as compared to vehicle infusion [F(1, 15) = 6.716; P < 0.05]. Next, we assessed dynorphin’s involvement in the regulation of ethanol intake by BDNF. To increase *BDNF* expression, we used Tat-RACK1, a Tat fusion protein that we have shown increases *BDNF* expression in the striatum when administered systemically (1). RACK1 is a scaffolding protein that translocates to the nucleus on ethanol exposure (49), where it triggers increased transcription of genes, including *BDNF* (35, 50). The expression of RACK1 as a Tat fusion protein allows systemically delivered Tat-RACK1 to cross the blood-brain barrier (51) and increase *BDNF* mRNA expression in the brain (1). Importantly, we have shown that systemic administration of Tat-RACK1 significantly decreases ethanol intake *via* BDNF (1, 2) and that administration of Tat-RACK1 directly into the dorsal striatum decreases ethanol self-administration (2). Thus, we first determined the ability of Tat-RACK1 to increase striatal *Pdyn* expression and found that, as predicted, treatment of dorsal striatal slices with Tat-RACK1 for 4 h significantly increased *Pdyn* expression [Fig. 7A; F(1, 19) = 5.407; P < 0.05]. This dose and time point also increase *BDNF* expression in dorsal striatal slices (1). To test whether dynorphin is required for the reduction of ethanol intake by BDNF following Tat-RACK1 treatment, C57 mice con-

between the treatment groups on the drug injection day (P<0.05 for Tat-RACK1 vs. Tat-RACK1 + nor-BNI, P<0.05 for Tat-RACK1 vs. nor-BNI alone). Importantly, the Tat-RACK1 + nor-BNI group does not differ from the nor-BNI alone treatment group (P>0.05). We did observe a decrease in ethanol intake in the nor-BNI alone group as compared to vehicle control (P<0.005 for vehicle vs. nor-BNI); however, the direction of this effect cannot account for the normalizing effect of nor-BNI when given

Figure 5. Ethanol time- and dose-dependently increases Pdyn expression. A) Striatal primary neurons were treated without or with 100 mM ethanol for the times indicated. Data are expressed as mean ± SE percentage increase over control Pdyn/GAPDH expression. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.005; ***P < 0.001; n = 6. B) Striatal primary neurons were treated without or with ethanol for 4 h at the doses indicated. Data are expressed as mean ± SE percentage increase over control Pdyn/GAPDH expression. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.005; n = 6.

suming ethanol under a standard two-bottle choice paradigm were injected with vehicle or Tat-RACK1 concurrently with vehicle or nor-BNI, an antagonist of the KOR. As most ethanol consumption occurs during the dark cycle, treatments were given 3.5 h prior to dark cycle onset to allow sufficient time for expression of downstream genes such as Pdyn, and bottles were returned to the cages 30 min after injection. As previously reported (1, 2), mice injected with Tat-RACK1 showed a highly significant 61% reduction in ethanol consumption (Fig. 7B). However, when mice were given nor-BNI along with Tat-RACK1, they displayed only a 32% reduction in ethanol consumption (Fig. 7B). Two-way ANOVA found a significant effect of treatment [F(1, 23) = 168.8; P < 0.0001], and a significant treatment by group interaction [F(2, 23) = 15.36, P < 0.0001], but not a main effect of treatment [F(2, 23) = 0.651, P = 0.53]. The interaction is accounted for by differences between each treatment group and its vehicle control (all values of P < 0.005), as well as by differences

ETHANOL ACTIVATES MAPK AND DYNORPHIN VIA BDNF

Figure 6. BDNF and ethanol via BDNF increase Pdyn expression both in vivo and in vitro by activating the MAP kinase pathway. A) Infusion of 0.25 μg BDNF into the dorsolateral striatum increases Pdyn mRNA expression 3 h postinfusion. Data are expressed as mean ± SE Pdyn/GAPDH expression. *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-infused control; n = 8. B) Striatal primary neurons were treated without or with 100 mM ethanol or with 25 ng/ml BDNF in the absence or presence of the BDNF inhibitor TrkB-Fc (250 ng/ml). Data are expressed as mean ± SE percentage increase over control Pdyn/GAPDH expression. *P < 0.05; n = 6. C) Striatal primary neurons were treated without or with 100 mM ethanol or with 25 ng/ml BDNF in the absence or presence of the MEK inhibitor U0126 (20 μM, 30 min pretreatment). Data are expressed as mean ± SE percentage increase over control Pdyn/GAPDH expression. *P < 0.05 vs. control; #P < 0.05 vs. BDNF; n = 3.

of Pdyn via a BDNF- and MAP kinase-dependent mechanism. Importantly, we show that blockade of dynorphin signaling inhibited the ability of BDNF to reduce ethanol intake, suggesting that dynorphin is required, at least in part, for the reduction of ethanol intake by BDNF. Taken together, these results indicate that the BDNF homeostatic response to ethanol triggers activation of MAP kinase signaling, initiating production of the downstream effector dynorphin, whose expression and signaling is required for the reduction of ethanol intake by BDNF (Fig. 8).

### Ethanol increases BDNF protein levels and TrkB receptor activation

We have previously demonstrated increased striatal BDNF mRNA expression following acute ethanol treatment (1) and have provided *in vivo* evidence to suggest the involvement of TrkB signaling in the control of ethanol intake by BDNF (2). Here, we demonstrate that ethanol exposure increases BDNF protein levels and consequently increases activation of the TrkB receptor *via* a direct effect on striatal neurons. While others have demonstrated an involvement of striatal BDNF signaling in response to drugs of abuse (2, 10), as well as changes in cocaine self-administration in response to increases or decreases in BDNF (19), to our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that exposure to any drug of abuse triggers activation of striatal TrkB by BDNF produced within the striatum, as striatal primary cultures are devoid of cortical input, which has been shown to be a major source of BDNF for the striatum *in vivo* (52).

---

**Figure 7. Tat-RACK1 reduces ethanol intake by increasing dynorphin production and signaling.**  
A) Tat-RACK1 increases Pdyn expression in striatal slice. Dorsal striatal slices were treated with 1 μM Tat-RACK1 for 4 h. Data are expressed as mean ± SE percentage increase over control Pdyn/GAPDH expression. \(*P < 0.05\); \(n = 10\).  
B) Tat-RACK1 decreases ethanol intake *via* increased dynorphin signaling in C57BL/6J male mice. Mice were treated with vehicle or 4 mg/kg Tat-RACK1, with or without 30 mg/kg nor-BNI, as indicated. Ethanol intake was recorded over the 18-h period following injection. Histograms depict mean ± SE ethanol consumption (g/kg body weight) per 18 h. \(*P < 0.05\); \(* * P < 0.005\); \(n = 8 /\) group for Tat-RACK1 and Tat-RACK1 + nor-BNI; \(n = 10 /\) group for nor-BNI alone. For graphical purposes, only one vehicle bar is shown, containing average vehicle response from all 3 groups.

in combination of Tat-RACK1. This may be due to short-lived antagonism of the mu opioid receptor at the onset of ethanol access following nor-BNI treatment (37). Because neither treatment affected water intake, changes in total fluid consumption and ethanol preference match those described for ethanol consumption (data not shown). Thus, inhibition of the KOR significantly reduced the ability of Tat-RACK1 to alter ethanol intake, indicating that dynorphin is responsible, at least in part, for the ability of BDNF to control ethanol consumption.

---

**DISCUSSION**

Here, we show that ethanol treatment of primary striatal neurons results in activation of the BDNF receptor, TrkB, and subsequent activation of the MAP kinase cascade, in a BDNF-dependent fashion. We also identify dynorphin as a downstream effector of BDNF signaling in striatal neurons, as ethanol treatment results in increased production

---

**Figure 8. BDNF homeostatic regulation of ethanol intake *via* MAP kinase and dynorphin.** We propose the following model:  
1) ethanol increases BDNF protein production and release;  
2) BDNF binds to the TrkB receptor, resulting in receptor dimerization and autophosphorylation;  
3) the phosphorylated TrkB receptor activates downstream signaling *via* the MAP kinase pathway, resulting in 4) increased production of Pdyn; following translation, dynorphin is released and 5) acts *via* activation of the KOR, which, in turn, decreases ethanol intake.

MAP kinase activation by ethanol

Acute exposure to multiple drugs of abuse activates MAP kinase signaling in the striatum (22), and exposure to cocaine-related cues in withdrawal increases BDNF and MAP kinase activation (53). Additionally, evidence demonstrating the involvement of MAP kinase signaling downstream of BDNF in the central and medial nuclei of the amygdala in response to acute ethanol (18) indicates that BDNF may act *via* MAP kinase signaling in the striatum to control ethanol intake. We provide here direct evidence that ethanol activates MAP kinase signaling in striatal neurons in a BDNF-dependent fashion. Interestingly, we observed an increase in the phosphorylation of the MAP kinase ERK1/2 in a subset of the ethanol-treated neurons analyzed. This raises the possibility that ethanol-induced BDNF might act selectively on a subset of striatal neurons *in vivo*, in particular, the striatonigral projection neurons that express dynorphin (54). However, this suggestion should be taken cautiously, as cultured striatal neurons, in the absence of extrastriatal connections, may not necessarily maintain the subtype distinctions observed *in vivo* (57), and exogenous application of BDNF to the striatum increases both *Pdyn* and *preproenkephalin* (23), indicating that both subtypes of medium spiny neurons are capable of responding to BDNF. Alternatively, the induction of ERK phosphorylation in a subset of neurons following ethanol treatment may result from the quiescent nature of striatal cultures, as primary striatal neurons devoid of cortical input display limited network activity (58). Nonetheless, given the data presented here, investigating a subpopulation-selective striatal neuronal activation by BDNF would be an enlightening future study.

Increased expression of *Pdyn* by ethanol *via* BDNF and MAPK

Striatal dynorphin expression can be upregulated by cocaine (27, 28, 59–61) and amphetamine (61–63); however, responsiveness of striatal dynorphin expression to ethanol treatment has been mixed, with some reports showing increased expression (64) and others showing no change (59, 65). This may be due, in part, to differences in ethanol administration protocols and time points of analyses with respect to the final ethanol administration. In addition, some data have shown increases in dynorphin levels only upon ethanol withdrawal (26, 66–69); however, these changes were all found outside the dorsal striatum and thus may demonstrate intrinsic brain region-specific differences in regulation of dynorphin expression. We found that acute ethanol treatment, even at the pharmacologically relevant dose of 10 mM, increases *Pdyn* expression in primary striatal neurons *via* a BDNF- and MAP kinase-dependent mechanism. Importantly, this induction requires time, as ethanol must first increase *BDNF* mRNA and protein production and release to trigger the signaling cascade, which culminates in increased *Pdyn*

expression. It should be noted that our cultures do not specifically differentiate between dorsal and ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens), and a rapid increase in dynorphin release in the nucleus accumbens shell has been demonstrated following ethanol treatment (70). Therefore, a second longer-acting mechanism, as described here, may follow a rapid release mechanism.

Decreased ethanol intake due to increased BDNF is mediated *via* dynorphin signaling

While numerous studies have investigated the role of the kappa opioid system in modulating ethanol intake, to date, results have been somewhat divergent (32, 33, 71–77). However, we show that blockade of the KOR by the antagonist nor-BNI inhibits the ability of Tat-RACK1—which increases striatal BDNF expression in slices and *in vivo* (1) and *Pdyn* mRNA expression in striatal slices—to decrease ethanol intake. These results suggest an important role for endogenous dynorphin as a key regulator of the homeostatic control of ethanol intake by BDNF in the dorsal striatum. It is important to note that under our current paradigm, mice had been consuming ethanol voluntarily for more than 6 wk at the point of treatment. While it has been previously shown that mice do not develop ethanol dependence under a continuous access paradigm (78), and thus we believe this paradigm models social rather than dependent drinking, it would be an informative line of future study to determine the role that dynorphin plays in regulating the response to a single acute exposure to ethanol. Nonetheless, our data are in agreement with studies showing decreased two-bottle choice ethanol intake following administration the KOR agonist U50,488H in rats (32), as well as data demonstrating lower expression of dynorphin and the KOR in C57BL/6J mice, which drink more ethanol, as compared to low-drinking DBA mice (30). However, this contrasts with data from both preprodynorphin and KOR knockout mice (72, 73, 76), in which ethanol intake is decreased in male and female (72) or only female (73) knockout mice. It is possible that the effects observed in the knockout mice are due to compensatory changes in the remaining components of the opioid system, as the *Pdyn* knockout mice appear to have upregulated KOR signaling (79) and the KOR knockout mice may have similar developmental compensations. In addition, as the homeostatic control of ethanol intake by BDNF is dorsal striatum specific, the global deletion of dynorphin or the KOR may mask the effects of a dorsal striatum-specific role for these proteins due to alterations in signaling in other brain regions.

Possible mechanism of action for the dynorphin-mediated reduction in ethanol consumption

According to our model of homeostatic control of ethanol intake by BDNF and its downstream signaling partner dynorphin (Fig. 8), we hypothesize that dynorphin may modulate ethanol intake by providing post-ingestive feedback to regulate subsequent ethanol consumption bouts.
We theorize that BDNF homeostasis could break down over time, concomitant with the development of an addictive phenotype, such that in a state of ethanol dependence, each drinking bout will cease to result in increased BDNF and dynorphin production. This loss of dynorphin feedback could result in oversensitivity of the KOR system, as suggested by Walker and Koob (74), who demonstrated that the KOR antagonist nor-BNI decreased ethanol intake in ethanol-dependent rats but not in ethanol-experienced, nondependent rats. The inability of nor-BNI to alter ethanol intake in nondependent animals, as observed by ourselves and others (75, 80), even after a period of alcohol deprivation (71), supports a role for dynorphin in between-bout rather than within-bout regulation of ethanol intake. Research from Mitchell *et al.* (33) showing an increase in ethanol intake several days after nor-BNI administration may add additional support for this hypothesis, as the blockade of dynorphin feedback may require multiple ethanol intake sessions in nondependent animals to impact consumption.

How dynorphin functions to decrease ethanol intake is as yet unknown; however, the reduction of neurotransmitter release following activation of KOR signaling presents one possible mechanism (81, 82), as repeated administration of KOR agonists blocks cocaine-induced elevation of dopamine release (83). Like all drugs of abuse, acute ethanol induces dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens (84), which was reported to be increased by nor-BNI administration (75). As expected, KOR knockout mice show elevated ethanol-evoked dopamine release in the accumbens (85). Since acute ethanol treatment increases dynorphin release in the nucleus accumbens (70), and dynorphin, *via* activation of KOR signaling, decreases neurotransmitter release in the nucleus accumbens and striatum (86, 87), one function of the BDNF/dynorphin homeostatic feedback could be to protect against dysregulation of dopamine release following ethanol exposure, as ethanol-dependent rats show increased dopamine release while intoxicated but reduced basal dopamine tone in withdrawal (88). While acute ethanol induces dopamine release in the dorsal striatum as it does in the nucleus accumbens (89, 90), it is as yet unknown whether dopamine release in the dorsal striatum is altered in ethanol-dependent animals. Of particular interest is the possible progression to alteration of basal and/or stimulus-evoked dopamine release following extensive ethanol experience, which would be in line with both our hypothesis and the dysregulation of dynorphin signaling observed by Walker and Koob (74) in dependent rats. Thus, the production of dynorphin and the activation of the KOR may provide feedback regarding the previous ethanol consumption bout and possibly counteract the development of addiction by reducing overactivation of presynaptic neurotransmitter release. Note that an increase in *Pdyn* expression was observed following BDNF infusions directly into the dorsolateral striatum—a region implicated in habit formation (55). As addiction can be conceptualized as a persistent habit (56), this suggests that the proposed reduction in neurotransmitter release *via* dynorphin signaling may homeostatically regulate ethanol intake by preventing the

development of the habitual nature of alcohol intake, which characterizes the addictive phenotype. Further research to address the function of dynorphin in providing homeostatic feedback, as well as determination of the mechanism by which this system fails to control ethanol intake over time, shows promise not only for furthering our understanding of the neuronal changes underlying the development of addiction but also for finding a possible treatment for alcoholism—and possibly addiction to other drugs of abuse.

This work was supported by a National Research Service Award-National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism grant (F31 AA015462) (M.L.L.), and by the State of California for Medical Research on Alcohol and Substance Abuse through the University of California, San Francisco (P.H.J. and D.R.).

---

**REFERENCES**

1. McGough, N. N., He, D. Y., Logrip, M. L., Jeanblanc, J., Phamluong, K., Luong, K., Kharazia, V., Janak, P. H., and Ron, D. (2004) RACK1 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor: a homeostatic pathway that regulates alcohol addiction. *J. Neurosci.* **24**, 10542–10552
2. Jeanblanc, J., He, D. Y., McGough, N. N., Logrip, M. L., Phamluong, K., Janak, P. H., and Ron, D. (2006) The dopamine D3 receptor is part of a homeostatic pathway regulating ethanol consumption. *J. Neurosci.* **26**, 1457–1464
3. Grant, B. F., Dawson, D. A., Stinson, F. S., Chou, S. P., Dufour, M. C., and Pickering, R. P. (2004) The 12-month prevalence and trends in DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence: United States, 1991–1992 and 2001–2002. *Drug Alcohol Depend.* **74**, 223–234
4. Gallup Poll, annual surveys taken between 1939 and July 12–15, 2007, as found on http://www.galluppoll.com/content/default.aspx?ci=1582
5. Uhl, G. R., Liu, Q. R., Walther, D., Hess, J., and Naiman, D. (2001) Polysubstance abuse-vulnerability genes: genome scans for association, using 1,004 subjects and 1,494 single-nucleotide polymorphisms. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **69**, 1290–1300
6. Matsushita, S., Kimura, M., Miyakawa, T., Yoshino, A., Murayama, M., Masaki, T., and Higuchi, S. (2004) Association study of brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene polymorphism and alcoholism. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* **28**, 1609–1612
7. Pierce, R. C., and Bari, A. A. (2001) The role of neurotrophic factors in psychostimulant-induced behavioral and neuronal plasticity. *Rev. Neurosci.* **12**, 95–110
8. Bolanos, C. A., and Nestler, E. J. (2004) Neurotrophic mechanisms in drug addiction. *Neuromolecular Med.* **5**, 69–83
9. Berhow, M. T., Russell, D. S., Terwilliger, R. Z., Beitner-Johnson, D., Self, D. W., Lindsay, R. M., and Nestler, E. J. (1995) Influence of neurotrophic factors on morphine- and cocaine-induced biochemical changes in the mesolimbic dopamine system. *Neuroscience* **68**, 969–979
10. Le Foll, B., Diaz, J., and Sokoloff, P. (2005) A single cocaine exposure increases BDNF and D3 receptor expression: implications for drug-conditioning. *Neuroreport* **16**, 175–178
11. Liu, Q. R., Lu, L., Zhu, X. G., Gong, J. P., Shaham, Y., and Uhl, G. R. (2006) Rodent BDNF genes, novel promoters, novel splice variants, and regulation by cocaine. *Brain Res.* **1067**, 1–12
12. Meredith, G. E., Callen, S., and Scheuer, D. A. (2002) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression is increased in the rat amygdala, piriform cortex and hypothalamus following repeated amphetamine administration. *Brain Res.* **949**, 218–227
13. Zhang, D., Zhang, L., Lou, D. W., Nakabeppu, Y., Zhang, J., and Xu, M. (2002) The dopamine D1 receptor is a critical mediator for cocaine-induced gene expression. *J. Neurochem.* **82**, 1453–1464
14. Grimm, J. W., Lu, L., Hayashi, T., Hope, B. T., Su, T. P., and Shaham, Y. (2003) Time-dependent increases in brain-derived neurotrophic factor protein levels within the mesolimbic dopa-
mine system after withdrawal from cocaine: implications for incubation of cocaine craving. *J. Neurosci.* 23, 742–747

15. Tapia-Arancibia, L., Rage, F., Givalois, L., Dingeon, P., Arancibia, S., and Beauge, F. (2001) Effects of alcohol on brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA expression in discrete regions of the rat hippocampus and hypothalamus. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 63, 200–208

16. Hensler, J. G., Ladenheim, E. E., and Lyons, W. E. (2003) Ethanol consumption and serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor function in heterozygous BDNF (+/−) mice. *J. Neurochem.* 85, 1139–1147

17. Pandey, S. C., Roy, A., Zhang, H., and Xu, T. (2004) Partial deletion of the cAMP response element-binding protein gene promotes alcohol-drinking behaviors. *J. Neurosci.* 24, 5022–5030

18. Pandey, S. C., Zhang, H., Roy, A., and Misra, K. (2006) Central and medial amygdaloid brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling plays a critical role in alcohol-drinking and anxiety-like behaviors. *J. Neurosci.* 26, 8320–8331

19. Graham, D. L., Edwards, S., BachteLL, R. K., Dileone, R. J., Rios, M., and Self, D. W. (2007) Dynamic BDNF activity in nucleus accumbens with cocaine use increases self-administration and relapse. *Nat. Neurosci.* 10, 1029–1037

20. Patapoutian, A., and Reichardt, L. F. (2001) Trk receptors: mediators of neurotrophin action. *Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.* 11, 272–280

21. Marsh, H. N., Scholz, W. K., Lamballe, F., Klein, R., Nanduri, V., Barbacid, M., and Palfrey, H. C. (1993) Signal transduction events mediated by the BDNF receptor gp 145trkB in primary hippocampal pyramidal cell culture. *J. Neurosci.* 13, 4281–4292

22. Valjent, E., Pages, C., Herve, D., Girault, J. A., and Caboche, J. (2004) Addictive and non-addictive drugs induce distinct and specific patterns of ERK activation in mouse brain. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 19, 1826–1836

23. Croll, S. D., Wiegand, S. J., Anderson, K. D., Lindsay, R. M., and Nawa, H. (1994) Regulation of neuropeptides in adult rat forebrain by the neurotrophins BDNF and NGF. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 6, 1343–1353

24. Saylor, A. J., Meredith, G. E., Vercillo, M. S., Zahm, D. S., and McGinty, J. F. (2006) BDNF heterozygous mice demonstrate age-related changes in striatal and nigral gene expression. *Exp. Neurol.* 199, 362–372

25. Shi, X., and McGinty, J. F. (2006) Extracellular signal-regulated mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors decrease amphetamine-induced behavior and neuropeptide gene expression in the striatum. *Neuroscience* 138, 1289–1298

26. Lindholm, S., Ploj, K., Franck, J., and Nylander, I. (2000) Repeated ethanol administration induces short- and long-term changes in enkephalin and dynorphin tissue concentrations in rat brain. *Alcohol* 22, 165–171

27. Spangler, R., Unterwald, E. M., and Kreek, M. J. (1993) ‘Binge’ cocaine administration induces a sustained increase of prodynorphin mRNA in rat caudate-putamen. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 19, 323–327

28. Fagergren, P., Smith, H. R., Daunais, J. B., Nader, M. A., Porrino, L. J., and Hurd, Y. L. (2003) Temporal upregulation of prodynorphin mRNA in the primate striatum after cocaine self-administration. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 17, 2212–2218

29. Carlezon, W. A., Jr., Thome, J., Olson, V. G., Lane-Ladd, S. B., Brodkin, E. S., Hiroi, N., Duman, R. S., Neve, R. L., and Nestler, E. J. (1998) Regulation of cocaine reward by CREB. *Science* 282, 2272–2275

30. Jamensky, N. T., and Gianoulakis, C. (1997) Content of dynorphins and kappa-opioid receptors in distinct brain regions of C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. *Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res.* 21, 1455–1464

31. Chavkin, C., James, I. F., and Goldstein, A. (1982) Dynorphin is a specific endogenous ligand of the kappa opioid receptor. *Science* 215, 413–415

32. Lindholm, S., Werme, M., Brene, S., and Franck, J. (2001) The selective kappa-opioid receptor agonist U50,488H attenuates voluntary ethanol intake in the rat. *Behav. Brain Res.* 120, 137–146

33. Mitchell, J. M., Liang, M. T., and Fields, H. L. (2005) A single injection of the kappa opioid antagonist norbinaltorphimine increases ethanol consumption in rats. *Psychopharmacology (Berl.)* 182, 384–392

34. Xuei, X., Dick, D., Flury-Wetherill, L., Tian, H. J., Agrawal, A., Bierut, L., Goate, A., Bucholz, K., Schuckit, M., Nurnberger, J., Jr., Tischfield, J., Kuperman, S., Porjesz, B., Begleiter, H., Foroud, T., and Edenberg, H. J. (2006) Association of the kappa-opioid system with alcohol dependence. *Mol. Psychiatry* 11, 1016–1024

35. He, D. Y., Vagts, A. J., Yaka, R., and Ron, D. (2002) Ethanol induces gene expression via nuclear compartmentalization of receptor for activated C kinase 1. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 62, 272–280

36. Broadbear, J. H., Negus, S. S., Butelman, E. R., de Costa, B. R., and Woods, J. H. (1994) Differential effects of systemically administered nor-binaltorphimine (nor-BNI) on kappa-opioid agonists in the mouse writhing assay. *Psychopharmacology (Berl.)* 115, 311–319

37. Endoh, T., Matsuura, H., Tanaka, C., and Nagase, H. (1992) Nor-binaltorphimine: a potent and selective kappa-opioid receptor antagonist with long-lasting activity in vivo. *Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Ther.* 316, 30–42

38. Panula, P., Wu, J. Y., and Emson, P. (1981) Ultrastructure of GABA-neurons in cultures of rat neostriatum. *Brain Res.* 219, 202–207

39. Altar, C. A., Siuciak, J. A., Wright, P., Ip, N. Y., Lindsay, R. M., and Wiegand, S. J. (1994) In situ hybridization of trkB and trkC receptor mRNA in rat forebrain and association with high-affinity binding of [125I]BDNF, [125I]NT-4/5 and [125I]NT-3. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 6, 1389–1405

40. Nawa, H., Carnahan, J., and Gall, C. (1995) BDNF protein measured by a novel enzyme immunoassay in normal brain and after seizure: partial disagreement with mRNA levels. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 7, 1527–1535

41. Grewal, S. S., York, R. D., and Stork, P. J. (1999) Extracellular signal-regulated kinase signalling in neurons. *Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.* 9, 544–553

42. Huang, E. J., and Reichardt, L. F. (2003) Trk receptors: roles in neuronal signal transduction. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 72, 609–642

43. Davis, R. J. (1995) Transcriptional regulation by MAP kinases. *Mol. Reprod. Dev.* 42, 459–467

44. Barnea, A., and Roberts, J. (2001) Induction of functional and morphological expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY) in cortical cultures by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): evidence for a requirement for extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent and ERK-independent mechanisms. *Brain Res.* 919, 57–69

45. Alonso, M., Medina, J. H., and Pozzo-Miller, L. (2004) ERK1/2 activation is necessary for BDNF to increase dendritic spine density in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. *Learn. Mem.* 11, 172–178

46. Sato, M., Suzuki, K., and Nakanishi, S. (2001) NMDA receptor stimulation and brain-derived neurotrophic factor upregulate homer 1a mRNA via the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in cultured cerebellar granule cells. *J. Neurosci.* 21, 3797–3805

47. Shelton, D. L., Sutherland, J., Gripp, J., Camerato, T., Armanini, M. P., Phillips, H. S., Carroll, K., Spencer, S. D., and Levinson, A. D. (1995) Human trks: molecular cloning, tissue distribution, and expression of extracellular domain immunoadhesins. *J. Neurosci.* 15, 477–491

48. Eckardt, M. J., File, S. E., Gessa, G. L., Grant, K. A., Guerri, C., Hoffman, P. L., Kalant, H., Koob, G. F., Li, T. K., and Tabakoff, B. (1998) Effects of moderate alcohol consumption on the central nervous system. *Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res.* 22, 998–1040

49. Ron, D., Vagts, A. J., Dohrman, D. P., Yaka, R., Jiang, Z., Yao, L., Crabbe, J., Grisel, J. E., and Diamond, I. (2000) Uncoupling of betaIPKC from its targeting protein RACK1 in response to ethanol in cultured cells and mouse brain. *FASEB J.* 14, 2303–2314

50. Yaka, R., He, D. Y., Phamluong, K., and Ron, D. (2003) Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP(1–38)) enhances N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor function and brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression via RACK1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 9630–9638

51. Schwarze, S. R., Ho, A., Vocero-Akbani, A., and Dowdy, S. F. (1999) In vivo protein transduction: delivery of a biologically active protein into the mouse. *Science* 285, 1569–1572

52. Altar, C. A., Cai, N., Bliven, T., Juhasz, M., Conner, J. M., Acheson, A. L., Lindsay, R. M., and Wiegand, S. J. (1997) Anterograde transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and its role in the brain. *Nature* 389, 856–860

ETHANOL ACTIVATES MAPK AND DYNORPHIN VIA BDNF

53. Lu, L., Hope, B. T., Dempsey, J., Liu, S. Y., Bossert, J. M., and Shaham, Y. (2005) Central amygdala ERK signaling pathway is critical to incubation of cocaine craving. *Nat. Neurosci.* 8, 212–219

54. Gerfen, C. R., and Young, W. S., 3rd. (1988) Distribution of striatonigral and striatopallidal peptidergic neurons in both patch and matrix compartments: an in situ hybridization histochemistry and fluorescent retrograde tracing study. *Brain Res.* 460, 161–167

55. Yin, H. H., and Knowlton, B. J. (2006) The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 7, 464–476

56. Gerdeman, G. L., Partridge, J. G., Lupica, C. R., and Lovinger, D. M. (2003) It could be habit forming: drugs of abuse and striatal synaptic plasticity. *Trends Neurosci.* 26, 184–192

57. Falk, T., Zhang, S., Erbe, E. L., and Sherman, S. J. (2006) Neurochemical and electrophysiological characteristics of rat striatal neurons in primary culture. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 494, 275–289

58. Segal, M., Greenberger, V., and Korkotian, E. (2003) Formation of dendritic spines in cultured striatal neurons depends on excitatory afferent activity. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 17, 2573–2585

59. Mathieu-Kia, A. M., and Besson, M. J. (1998) Repeated administration of cocaine, nicotine and ethanol: effects on preprodynorphin, preprotachykinin A and preproenkephalin mRNA expression in the dorsal and the ventral striatum of the rat. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 54, 141–151

60. Schlussman, S. D., Zhou, Y., Bailey, A., Ho, A., and Kreek, M. J. (2005) Steady-dose and escalating-dose “binge” administration of cocaine alter expression of behavioral stereotypy and striatal preprodynorphin mRNA levels in rats. *Brain Res. Bull.* 67, 169–175

61. Turchan, J., Przewlocka, B., Lason, W., and Przewlocki, R. (1998) Effects of repeated psychostimulant administration on the prodynorphin system activity and kappa opioid receptor density in the rat brain. *Neuroscience* 85, 1051–1059

62. Wang, J. Q., Smith, A. J., and McGinty, J. F. (1995) A single injection of amphetamine or methamphetamine induces dynamic alterations in c-fos, zif/268 and preprodynorphin messenger RNA expression in rat forebrain. *Neuroscience* 68, 83–95

63. Smith, A. J., and McGinty, J. F. (1994) Acute amphetamine or methamphetamine alters opioid peptide mRNA expression in rat striatum. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 21, 359–362

64. Gulya, K., Orpana, A. K., Sikela, J. M., and Hoffman, P. L. (1993) Prodynorphin and vasopressin mRNA levels are differentially affected by chronic ethanol ingestion in the mouse. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 20, 1–8

65. Cowen, M. S., and Lawrence, A. J. (2001) Alterations in central preproenkephalin mRNA expression after chronic free-choice ethanol consumption by fawn-hooded rats. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 25, 1126–1133

66. Beadles-Bohling, A. S., Crabbe, J. C., and Wiren, K. M. (2000) Elevated prodynorphin expression associated with ethanol withdrawal convulsions. *Neurochem. Int.* 37, 463–472

67. Przewlocka, B., Turchan, J., Lason, W., and Przewlocki, R. (1997) Ethanol withdrawal enhances the prodynorphin system activity in the rat nucleus accumbens. *Neurosci. Lett.* 238, 13–16

68. Seizinger, B. R., Bovermann, K., Maysinger, D., Holtt, V., and Herz, A. (1983) Differential effects of acute and chronic ethanol treatment on particular opioid peptide systems in discrete regions of rat brain and pituitary. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* 18(Suppl. 1), 361–369

69. Ploj, K., Roman, E., Gustavsson, L., and Nylander, I. (2000) Basal levels and alcohol-induced changes in nociceptin/orphanin FQ, dynorphin, and enkephalin levels in C57BL/6J mice. *Brain Res. Bull.* 53, 219–226

70. Marinelli, P. W., Lam, M., Bai, L., Quirion, R., and Gianoulakis, C. (2006) A microdialysis profile of dynorphin A(1–8) release in the rat nucleus accumbens following alcohol administration. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 30, 982–990

71. Holter, S. M., Henniger, M. S., Lipkowski, A. W., and Spanagel, R. (2000) Kappa-opioid receptors and relapse-like drinking in long-term ethanol-experienced rats. *Psychopharmacology (Berl.)* 153, 93–102

72. Kovacs, K. M., Szakall, I., O’Brien, D., Wang, R., Vinod, K. Y., Saito, M., Simonin, F., Kieffer, B. L., and Vadasz, C. (2005) Decreased oral self-administration of alcohol in kappa-opioid receptor knock-out mice. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 29, 730–738

73. Blednov, Y. A., Walker, D., Martinez, M., and Harris, R. A. (2006) Reduced alcohol consumption in mice lacking preprodynorphin. *Alcohol* 40, 73–86

74. Walker, B. M., and Koob, G. F. (2007) Pharmacological evidence for a motivational role of kappa-opioid systems in ethanol dependence. *Neuropsychopharmacology* 33, 643–652

75. Doyon, W. M., Howard, E. C., Shippenberg, T. S., and Gonzales, R. A. (2006) Kappa-opioid receptor modulation of accumbal dopamine concentration during operant ethanol self-administration. *Neuropharmacology* 51, 487–496

76. Zapata, A., and Shippenberg, T. S. (2006) Endogenous kappa opioid receptor systems modulate the responsiveness of mesocumbral dopamine neurons to ethanol. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 30, 592–597

77. Spanagel, R. (1996) The influence of opioid antagonists on the discriminative stimulus effects of ethanol. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* 54, 645–649

78. Dole, V. P., Ho, A., and Gentry, R. T. (1985) Toward an analogue of alcoholism in mice: criteria for recognition of pharmacologically motivated drinking. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 82, 3469–3471

79. Chefer, V. I., and Shippenberg, T. S. (2006) Paradoxical effects of prodynorphin gene deletion on basal and cocaine-evoked dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nucleus accumbens. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 23, 229–238

80. Williams, K. L., and Woods, J. H. (1998) Oral ethanol-reinforced responding in rhesus monkeys: effects of opioid antagonists selective for the mu-, kappa-, or delta-receptor. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 22, 1634–1639

81. Spanagel, R., Herz, A., and Shippenberg, T. S. (1992) Oppositonically active endogenous opioid systems modulate the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 89, 2046–2050

82. You, Z. B., Herrera-Marschitz, M., and Terenius, L. (1999) Modulation of neurotransmitter release in the basal ganglia of the rat brain by dynorphin peptides. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 290, 1307–1315

83. Thompson, A. C., Zapata, A., Justice, J. B., Jr., Vaughan, R. A., Sharpe, L. G., and Shippenberg, T. S. (2000) Kappa-opioid receptor activation modifies dopamine uptake in the nucleus accumbens and opposes the effects of cocaine. *J. Neurosci.* 20, 9333–9340

84. Di Chiara, G., and Imperato, A. (1985) Ethanol preferentially stimulates dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of freely moving rats. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 115, 131–132

85. Zapata, A., Gonzales, R. A., and Shippenberg, T. S. (2006) Repeated ethanol intoxication induces behavioral sensitization in the absence of a sensitized accumbens dopamine response in C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice. *Neuropsychopharmacology* 31, 396–405

86. Spanagel, R., Herz, A., and Shippenberg, T. S. (1990) The effects of opioid peptides on dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens: an in vivo microdialysis study. *J. Neurochem.* 55, 1734–1740

87. Zhang, Y., Butelman, E. R., Schlussman, S. D., Ho, A., and Kreek, M. J. (2004) Effect of the endogenous kappa opioid agonist dynorphin A(1–17) on cocaine-evoked increases in striatal dopamine levels and cocaine-induced place preference in C57BL/6J mice. *Psychopharmacology (Berl.)* 172, 422–429

88. Hunt, W. A., Majchrowicz, E., Dalton, T. K., Swartzwelder, H. S., and Wixon, H. (1979) Alterations in neurotransmitter activity after acute and chronic ethanol treatment: studies of transmitter interactions. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 3, 359–363

89. Di Chiara, G., and Imperato, A. (1988) Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 85, 5274–5278

90. Signs, S. A., Yamamoto, B. K., and Schechter, M. D. (1987) In vivo electrochemical determination of extracellular dopamine in the caudate of freely-moving rats after a low dose of ethanol. *Neuropharmacology* 26, 1653–1656

Received for publication September 21, 2007. Accepted for publication February 7, 2008.
