
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER                                                                                                      PATHOLOGY
                                                                                                              RESEARCH AND PRACTICE
                                                                                                              www.elsevier.de/prp

**Pathology – Research and Practice 204 (2008) 589–597**

---

**ORIGINAL ARTICLE**

**Overexpression of cyclin D1, D3, and p21 in an infantile renal carcinoma with Xp11.2 TFE3-gene fusion**

J. Müller-Höcker${}^{a,*}$, G. Babaryka${}^{a}$, I. Schmid${}^{b}$, A. Jung${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, Thalkirchner Straße 36, 80337 München, Germany  
${}^{b}$Haunersches Kinderspital, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, Lindwurmstr 4, 80337 München, Germany  

Received 8 October 2007; accepted 22 January 2008

---

### Abstract

Renal carcinomas harboring the TFE-3 translocation are rare and occur predominantly in children and adolescents. Here, we report a case of infantile renal carcinoma with TFE3 translocation and show that the cell cycle is deregulated in this type of carcinoma. It is characterized by nuclear accumulation of cyclin D1 and D3 in combination with high levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21${}^{\text{Cip1/Waf1}}$ but without accumulation of p53, p16${}^{\text{INK4a}}$, or mdm2. The combined overexpression of p21, cyclin D1, and cyclin D3 was found exclusively in this type but not in other, more common types of renal carcinoma/oncocytoma ($n = 27$). These results further underscore that renal carcinomas with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3-gene fusion represent a special type of renal neoplasm showing deregulation of specific cell cycle components. The analysis of further cases has to prove whether the derangement of the cell cycle is uniform and correlates with the specific type of molecular genetic derangement.

© 2008 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** TFE3-renal carcinoma; Cell cycle proteins; Immunohistochemistry

---

### Introduction

Renal carcinomas are rare in children and young adults [12,22,49], with only about 1% of renal carcinomas occurring in this age group. They account for less than 5% of pediatric renal tumors [6]. Among these neoplasms, a special type of renal carcinoma exists, displaying fusion of the TFE-3 gene on chromosome X (p11.2) with the PRCC gene on chromosome 1 (q21) [4,18,33,41,47,52,53,63], the splicing factor genes PSF on chromosome 1 (p34.1) and NonO on X (q12) [16,19], the ASPL gene on chromosome 17 (q25) [5,28,56], or the CLTC (clathrin heavy chain)-gene on chromosome 17(q23) [9].

TFE3 is a 566 amino-acid protein and a member of the family of basic helix-loop-helix leucin zipper transcription factors. It is ubiquitously expressed and supposed to function as a general transcription factor in the regulation of gene expression, most of which remain to be identified [13,34,39,43]. In the kidney, native TFE3 has been shown to be involved in the regulation of the type II sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporter NPT2 in the proximal tubulus [34].

Nevertheless, the pathogenetic mechanisms in renal carcinomas with TFE3 translocation are still not completely understood. Renal carcinomas harboring the PRCC-TFE3 translocations display a complete loss of normal TFE3 transcripts [53]. But the transcriptional activity of the resulting fusion protein is elevated as

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +0049 89 5160 4051; fax: +0049 89 5160 4043.  
E-mail address: josef.mueller-hoecker@med.uni-muenchen.de (J. Müller-Höcker).

0344-0338/$-$ see front matter © 2008 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.prp.2008.01.010
compared with wild-type TFE3 [54,64]. This increased transcriptional activity correlates with overexpression of the TFE3-fusion protein. Due to this overexpression, TFE3 becomes detectable using immunohistochemistry [8]. The mechanisms underlying TFE3 overexpression remain, however, to be clarified. Furthermore, TFE3-PRCC-transfected cells show an impaired mitotic checkpoint control [14,62], whereas oncogenic PSF-TFE3 fusion proteins are supposed to inactivate wild-type TFE3 and p53 by cytoplasmic sequestration [40]. Thus, fusion proteins containing TFE3 seem to dysregulate the cell cycle. Finally translocated TFE3 could also alter the function of its translocation partner gene products [4].

In the present study, we analyzed cell cycle activating (cyclin D1, D3) and suppressing proteins (p16INK4a, p21Cip1/Waf1, p53, mdm2) in a renal carcinoma with TFE-3 overexpression, and compared the expression pattern of the cell cycle proteins analyzed with that of more common types of renal cell carcinomas such as clear cell, papillary, or chromophobe carcinomas and oncocytomas.

Our results demonstrate that renal carcinomas with the Xp11.2 translocation/TFE-3-gene fusion show a characteristic deregulation of the cell cycle proteins with accumulation of cyclin D1, D3, and p21Cip1/Waf1.

---

acid, and capecitabine was initiated. As the tumor progressed rapidly and was drug-refractory, antiproliferative chemotherapy applying ifosfamide, cisplatin, and doxorubicin was chosen. This resulted in tumor regression in the abdominal lymph nodes and a stable disease in the lung. Change of chemotherapy to topotecan, carboplatin, cisplation, and 5-fluouracil did not induce further tumor regression. The child is now 3 years old and in rather good clinical condition despite the tumor burden.

### Material and methods

#### Tumor specimens

In addition to the nephrectomy specimen of the index case, we examined 21 specimens of other renal carcinomas (10 clear cell carcinomas, 6 papillary carcinomas, and 5 chromophobe carcinomas) and 6 oncocytomas. All paraffin blocks chosen for immunohistochemical examination contained tumor tissue and normal parenchyma.

The mean age of these 27 patients was 61.1 years, 13 patients (44.8%) were female and 16 male (55.2%). Other clinical data were not available.

#### Antibodies and staining procedures

Immunohistochemical profiling included the study of Ki67, p16INK4a, p21Cip1/Waf1, p27Kip1, p53, p63, mdm2, cyclin D1 and cyclin D3, TFE3, CD 10, vimentin, E-Cadherin, and RCC using varying detection and antigen retrieval methods (Table 1).

Deparaffinized, rehydrated sections (4 μm) were incubated for 60 min at room temperature. For all staining reactions, microwave pretreatment (750W 2×15min) was applied, and aminoethylcarbazole (AEC, Zymed, Cat. no. 00-1122) was used as a chromogen. As negative controls, primary antibodies were omitted. Moreover, subclass-matched non-immunogenic immunoglobulins were used as isotype controls.

#### Evaluation of immunohistochemical staining

For evaluating the immunohistochemical results, the amount of stained cells and the intensity of the reactions (weak, moderate, strong) were taken into account. Immunoreactivity of p53, p21Cip1/Waf1, p27Kip1, p16INK4a, cyclin D1 and D3, as well as mdm2 in less than 10% of tumor cells was considered negative. For p27Kip1, loss of staining in more than 20% of cells was taken as valid.

---

### Case report

A 14-month-old girl came to clinical attention due to fever, loss of appetite, and fatigue. Magnetic resonance scan revealed an inhomogeneous large tumor of the right kidney with liquid, necrotic, and solid areas (7.6cm×7.0cm×8.0cm). Paraaortal lymph nodes were enlarged. Laboratory test demonstrated severe anemia (4.4mg/d/l) and a slightly elevated level of neuron-specific enolase (44.8μg/l normal <20μg/l) but no other abnormalities of serum levels of α-1-fetoprotein, β-human chorionic gonadotropin and lactate dehydrogenase, or urine levels of catecholamines. Nephroblastoma was diagnosed without biopsy, and preoperative chemotherapy using vincristine and actinomycin according to the current SIOP-protocol was started. Since the tumor did not respond to the therapeutic regimen in the following 4 weeks, a biopsy of the tumor was taken, followed by tumor nephrectomy and lymph node dissection (see Results). Staging examinations were done using a radionuclide bone scan and a magnetic resonance scan, which excluded metastases of the brain. However, a computer tomography of the chest demonstrated 3 small nodules in the right and two in the left lung, highly suspicious of lung metastases.

Postoperatively, a combined immunotherapy regimen using interferon-α, interleukin 2, 13-cis-retinoic
Table 1. List of antibodies

| Antigen       | Source          | Order No.    | Dilution | Method      | Pretreatment         | Incubation time (min RT) |
|---------------|-----------------|--------------|----------|-------------|----------------------|-------------------------|
| P16           | DB Phamingen    | 551153       | 1:100    | ABC-Elite   | 30'MW Protaqs I      | 60                      |
| P21           | Calbiochem      | OP64         | 1:100    | LSAB        | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| P27           | DAKO            | M7203        | 1:200    | ABC-Elite   | 30'MW Protaqs IV     | 60                      |
| P53           | DAKO            | M7001        | 1:50     | LSAB        | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| P63           | SANOVA          | C11163C      | 1:120    | LSAB        | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| CD10          | A.Menarini      | NCL-CD 10-270 | 1:60     | LSAB        | 15'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| CK7           | PROGEN          | 61025        | 1:200    | ABC-Elite   | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| CK14          | SEROTEC         | MCA 890      | 1:600    | ABC-Elite   | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| CK19          | PROGEN          | 0061010      | 1:1000   | Picture Mouse | 30'RT Protease XXIV | 60                      |
| E-Cadherin    | Zytomed         | 34000        | 1:1000   | ABC-Elite   | 15'MW AR             | 60                      |
| EMA           | DAKO            | MO613        | 1:100    | LSAB        | -                    | 60                      |
| KSP-Cadherin  | Zytomed         | 18-7383      | 1:20     | Picture Mouse | 30'MW TRS 9          | 60                      |
| RCC           | Linaris(Vector) | VP-R150      | 1:20     | Picture Mouse | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| TFE3          | SANTA CRUZ      | SC 5958      | 1:600    | ABC-Goat    | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| Cyclin D1     | DCS             | C1677-C01    | 1:70     | LSAB        | 30'MW TRS 9          | 60                      |
| Cyclin D3     | DAKO            | M7156        | 1:300    | ABC-E       | 30'MW Protaqs        | 60                      |
| Mdm2          | Calbiochem      | OP46         | 1:150    | ABC-E       | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |
| Vimentin      | DAKO            | M725         | 1:150    | APAAP       | 30'MW Citrate        | 60                      |
| Ki67          | DAKO            | M7240        | 1:100    | APAAP       | 30'MW TRS 6          | 60                      |

Histology revealed a mixture of solid tubular-cystic and papillary formations. The tumor cells displayed large, mostly clear cytoplasm with moderate to severe nuclear atypia. Psammoma bodies were most conspicuous (Fig. 2). There were large necrotic areas.

### Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry of the index case with the proposed TFE3 translocation revealed strong nuclear staining for TFE3 (Fig. 3A). We scored this strong expression of TFE-3 as an indicator of a translocation of the TFE-3 locus [4,5,8]. As all available tissues of the patient under investigation did not contain RNA of sufficient quality (supplemental Fig. 1), neither molecular support for the proposed TFE-translocation nor further sub-classification was possible. Furthermore, RCC-antigen and CD10 were also expressed (Figs. 3B and 4A).

Negative staining was found for various cytokeratin filaments (keratin (LU5), KL1, CK7, Ck14, Ck19), vimentin (Figs. 4B and 5A), HMB45, smooth muscle actin, desmin, E-cadherin, and kidney-specific cadherin). EMA was also negative. Ki67 expression was found in about 10% of tumor cells.

### Results

#### Morphology-Histology

The right kidney was extensively infiltrated by a whitish tumor mass (8cm diameter, Fig. 1) with nodular and cystic-hemorrhagic areas. The tumor tissue infiltrated into, but not through, the fibro-adipose capsule. Two regional lymph node metastases were found.

#### Cell cycle proteins

Immunohistochemical profiling of the cell cycle regulatory proteins provided an intensive reaction for p21Cip1/Waf1, cyclin D1, and cyclin D3 (Figs. 5B and 6) in more than 50% of tumor cells (Table 2). No staining

Fig. 2. Tumor histology: (A) a solid/glandular pattern predominates and (B) a papillary architecture is seen. The tumor cells characteristically exhibit a voluminous, often clear cytoplasm. Psammoma bodies are frequent.

was obtained when using antibodies specific for p27<sup>Kip1</sup> (Table 2), p53, p63, mdm2, and p16<sup>INK4a</sup>.

TFE3 and cell cycle proteins in other renal carcinomas and oncocytomas

TFE3 was detectable neither in the clear cell, papillary, or chromophobe cell type of renal carcinoma nor in oncocytomas of the kidney (Table 2).

### Cell cycle proteins: Table 2

In clear cell carcinomas, 9 of 10 cases displayed nuclear reactivity to cyclin D<sub>1</sub>. In 5 cases, over 50% of tumor cells were reactive as in the TFE3-positive carcinoma. An accumulation of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> or cyclin D<sub>3</sub> was not seen, and p27<sup>Kip1</sup> was significantly reduced in 9 of 10 cases. p53 was not accumulated. A similar reaction pattern was seen in papillary and chromophobe carcinomas, where 3 of 6 and 1 of 5 cases, respectively, presented a significant expression of cyclin D<sub>1</sub> in combination with reduction of p27<sup>Kip1</sup> reactivity. mdm2 and p53 were generally not detectable in significant amounts except in one papillary renal carcinoma. Moreover, p16<sup>INK4a</sup> expression did not

Fig. 3. Immunohistochemistry: (A) TFE3 and (B) RCC-antigen. Strong nuclear staining is seen for TFE3. RCC-antigen reacts in the cytoplasm and the cell membrane.

accumulate. Oncocytomas were generally areactive for these markers. In all but one tumor (clear cell carcinoma), the Ki67 index was below 10%. Thus, the immunohistochemical reaction profile of TFE3-negative and -positive renal carcinomas is clearly different from TFE3-positive renal carcinomas.

## Discussion

In the current WHO classification, renal carcinomas with a TFE3 translocation constitute a new subgroup of renal carcinomas [7]. They are most commonly found in childhood and young adults, and can take an indolent course as in the present patient, who presented with lymph node und lung metastasis. Their morphology is quite characteristic, showing a solid and papillary pattern of clear cells and psammoma body formation. Immunohistochemistry also provides conspicuous findings, as the expression of cytokeratins and vimentin is frequently lacking [4,5] as in the present case. Nevertheless, we found expression of the RCC protein, which represents a 200 kD glycoprotein protein of the proximal tubule [11,66]. In addition, there was

J. Müller-Höcker et al. / Pathology – Research and Practice 204 (2008) 589–597

Fig. 4. Immunohistochemistry: (A) CD10 and (B) keratin. The tumor cells are reactive for CD10 on the cell membrane but areactive for keratin. The normal tubular parenchyma regularly expresses keratin.

Fig. 5. Immunohistochemistry: (A) vimentin and (B) p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup>-protein. The tumor cells are areactive for vimentin. p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup>-protein is strongly expressed in the nuclei.

expression of CD10, which is found on the brush border of the tubular system [30] and is commonly used as a marker of proximal tubules [11,15,20,21]. These findings corroborate previous results [4], thus favoring an origin of this tumor from the proximal tubular system. This assumption is further substantiated by the lacking expression of Ck19 and kidney-specific cadherin in the present case [42,51].

These tumors are unique in that they consistently express TFE3-fusion proteins in their nuclei [3,4,8]. Our results support a previous study according to which other renal carcinomas, including clear cell, papillary and chromophobe renal carcinomas as well as renal oncocytomas, are areactive [8]. The only non-renal tumor entity so far known to overexpress TFE3 regularly is the alveolar soft tissue sarcoma [8,36], which fuses TFE3 with the ASPL gene at 17q25 but differs in so far as the translocation is unbalanced, and thus, TFE3-ASPL, the reciprocal fusion protein on chromosome X, is lacking.

Taken together, our findings illustrate that the immunohistochemical detection of the TFE3 fusion protein is highly specific and highly sensitive [8].

Unfortunately, our molecular approach to detect the TFE3-fusion transcript using RT-PCR failed when using paraffin-embedded tissue (see Appendix A). So far, detection has always been carried out on fresh tumor tissue (M. Ladanyi, personal communication). Only very recently was the detection of TFE3-ASPL translocations from paraffin-embedded tissue of alveolar soft part sarcomas described [10].

Based on the peculiar morphology of the tumor and the unequivocal immunohistochemical nuclear TFE3 expression, the diagnosis, however, is confirmatory. With respect to the large amount of psammoma bodies, the predominating papillary pattern consisting of voluminous cells often with clear cytoplasm, we favor the ASPL-TFE3 fusion type t(X;17)(p11.2;q25) as the underlying cause [5].

The pathogenetic mechanisms leading to the tumor formation are still unclear. Along with TFEB and TFEC, TFE3 belongs to the microphthalmia-TFE (MiT) subfamily of transcription factors with a basic helix-loop-helix leucin zipper motif, and has high homology with the microphthalmia gene [59]. The PRCC-TFE3 transfusion transcript has a three-fold

higher transactivating capacity than wild-type TFE3 [64] and reveals transformation-associated characteristics in cell culture upon transfection [61].

The ASPL gene at 17q25 is probably involved in the ubiquination pathway [36]. It shows no sequence homologies to PRCC, PSF, or nonO, the other fusion partners of TFE3 [5]. In the ASPL-TFE3 fusion protein, the DNA binding domain is retained. Therefore, transcriptional deregulation seems to be the most likely mechanism of action [36].

About 10 patients with renal carcinoma and ASPL-TFE3 translocation have been described [67]. Younger patients (1–17 years) often present advanced stages of the tumor [5] as did our patient.

To understand the mechanisms of tumorigenesis, study of the cell division cycle is of general interest. Concerning human renal carcinomas, however, only a few studies have been done [1,23–26,32,37,45,48,50]. Moreover, to our knowledge, carcinomas carrying TFE3 mutations have not been studied so far. Here, we give evidence that overexpression of cyclin D₁ and D₃ as well as accumulation of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> occurs in this subtype of renal carcinoma. This combination was unique and not found in our collection of 21 renal carcinomas belonging to other types, such as clear cell, papillary, or chromophobe tumors. Furthermore, there was loss of p27<sup>Kip1</sup> but no accumulation of p53, mdm2, or p16<sup>INK4a</sup>.

The CDK inhibitors p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> and p27<sup>Kip1</sup> are reversible inhibitors of the cell division cycle progression at the G1 and G2 checkpoints [17,27,38,44,57,60,65]. Functional p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> is essential for p53-mediated G1 arrest [60]. As the tumor suppressor gene p53 is frequently mutated in different types of human cancers, its roles in the arrest of the cell division cycle at the G1/S checkpoint and the induction of apoptosis are lost. p53-induced elevated levels of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> protein mediate the cell cycle arrest predominantly at the G1 phase by inhibiting the cyclin-dependent kinases [68]. Thus, upregulation of wild-type p53 might be responsible for the immunohistochemically observed expression of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> since we found no evidence of p53 protein expression, which is an indicator of functionally defective p53. This supports other observations according to which mutational inactivation of the p53 or p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> genes is rare in common types of renal cancer [31,35,46,55,58].

However, p53-independent pathways have been demonstrated to regulate p21 expression [2,68]. In vitro studies have shown that cyclin D₁ might induce the transcriptional activation of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> [29]. It may therefore be assumed that in TFE3-renal carcinomas, overexpression of cyclin D₁ may be involved in the overexpression of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup>. However, expression studies in renal cancer cell lines revealed a wide variation in p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> protein levels, suggesting aberrant regulation [46]. Furthermore, there is evidence that the antiproliferative effect of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> protein on the progression of the cell division cycle may be overridden by other mechanisms.

Fig. 6. Immunohistochemistry: (A) cyclin D1 and (B) cyclin D3. Both antigens display intensive nuclear staining.

Table 2. Immunohistochemical profile: TFE<sub>3</sub>+ carcinoma and other renal carcinomas/oncocytomas

| TFE<sub>3</sub> | Cyclin D₁ | Cyclin D₃ | p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> | p27<sup>Kip1</sup> loss |
|---------------|-----------|-----------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| TFE<sub>3</sub>-carcinoma | + | + | + | + |
| Clear cell carcinoma | – | 9/10 | 0/10 | 9/10 |
| Papillary carcinoma | – | 3/6 | 0/6 | 6/6 |
| Chromophobe carcinoma | – | 1/5 | 0/5 | 5/5 |
| Oncocytoma | – | 0/6 | 0/6 | 6/6 |

In a larger study encompassing 218 renal carcinomas [26], low levels of cyclin D₁ expression correlated with poor prognosis although in another study of 118 renal carcinomas, expression levels of cyclin D₁ and p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> were not significantly related to survival [1]. Thus, there are several possibilities explaining the deregulation of cyclin D₁ and p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup>. However, it remains elusive which mechanism operates in renal tumors with TFE3 translocation and what consequences follow for the process of tumorigenesis.

In summary, there is evidence of deregulation of cell division cycle proteins in TFE3 renal carcinoma over-expressing cell cycle-activating and -inhibiting proteins at the same time. In particular, the antiproliferative upregulation of p21<sup>Cip1/Waf1</sup> protein may be one explanation for the usually observed long-term course, even in clinically advanced stages of this special type of renal carcinoma. The analysis of further cases has to prove whether the derangement of the cell cycle is uniform and correlates with the specific type of molecular genetic derangement.

### Disclosure/Conflict of interests

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interests.

### Acknowledgments

The authors are indebted to Mrs. Andrea Sendelhofert and Anja Heier for their excellent technical assistance, and to Mrs. Maria Wittmeier for her careful help in the preparation of the manuscript.

### Appendix A. Supplementary materials

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.prp.2008.01.010.

### References

[1] S. Aaltomaa, P. Lipponen, M. Ala-Opas, M. Eskelinen, K. Syrjanen, V.M. Kosma, Expression of cyclins A and D and p21(waf1/cip1) proteins in renal cell cancer and their relation to clinicopathological variables and patient survival, Br. J. Cancer 80 (1999) 2001–2007.

[2] M. Akashi, M. Hachiya, Y. Osawa, K. Spirin, G. Suzuki, H.P. Koeffler, Irradiation induces WAF1 expression through a p53-independent pathway in KG-1 cells, J. Biol. Chem. 270 (1995) 19181–19187.

[3] G. Altinok, M.M. Kattar, A. Mohamed, J. Poulik, D. Grignon, R. Rabah, Pediatric renal carcinoma associated with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions and clinicopathologic associations, Pediatr. Dev. Pathol. 8 (2005) 168–180.

[4] P. Argani, C.R. Antonescu, J. Couturier, J.C. Fournet, R. Sciott, M. Debiec-Rychter, B. Hutchinson, V.E. Reuter, L. Boccon-Gibod, C. Timmons, N. Hafez, M. Ladanyi, PRCC-TFE3 renal carcinomas: morphologic, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and molecular analysis of an entity associated with the t(X;1)(p11.2;q21), Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 26 (2002) 1553–1566.

[5] P. Argani, C.R. Antonescu, P.B. Illei, M.Y. Lui, C.F. Timmons, R. Newbury, V.E. Reuter, A.J. Garvin, A.R. Perez-Atayde, J.A. Fletcher, J.B. Beckwith, J.A. Bridge, M. Ladanyi, Primary renal neoplasms with the ASPL-TFE3 gene fusion of alveolar soft part sarcoma: a distinctive tumor entity previously included among renal cell carcinomas of children and adolescents, Am. J. Pathol. 159 (2001) 179–192.

[6] P. Argani, M. Ladanyi, Recent advances in pediatric renal neoplasia, Adv. Anat. Pathol. 10 (2003) 243–260.

[7] P. Argani, M. Ladanyi, Renal carcinomas associated with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions, IARC Press, Lyon, 2004, p. 37, 38.

[8] P. Argani, P. Lal, B. Hutchinson, M.Y. Lui, V.E. Reuter, M. Ladanyi, Aberrant nuclear immunoreactivity for TFE3 in neoplasms with TFE3 gene fusions: a sensitive and specific immunohistochemical assay, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 27 (2003) 750–761.

[9] P. Argani, M.Y. Lui, J. Couturier, R. Bouvier, J.C. Fournet, M. Ladanyi, A novel CLTC-TFE3 gene fusion in pediatric renal adenocarcinoma with t(X;17)(p11.2;q23), Oncogene 22 (2003) 5374–5378.

[10] S. Aulmann, T. Longerich, P. Schirmacher, G. Mechtersheimer, R. Penzel, Detection of the ASPSCR1-TFE3 gene fusion in paraffin-embedded alveolar soft part sarcomas, Histopathology 50 (2007) 881–886.

[11] A.K. Avery, J. Beckstead, A.A. Renshaw, C.L. Corless, Use of antibodies to RCC and CD10 in the differential diagnosis of renal neoplasms, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 24 (2000) 203–210.

[12] J.C. Barrantes, K.R. Muir, C.E. Toyn, S.E. Parkes, A.H. Cameron, H.B. Marsden, F. Raafat, J.R. Mann, Thirty-year population-based review of childhood renal tumours with an assessment of prognostic features including tumour DNA characteristics, Med. Pediatr. Oncol. 21 (1993) 24–30.

[13] H. Beckmann, L.K. Su, T. Kadesch, TFE3: a helix-loop-helix protein that activates transcription through the immunoglobulin enhancer muE3 motif, Genes Dev. 4 (1990) 167–179.

[14] D. Bodmer, W. van den Hurk, J.J. van Groningen, M.J. Eleveld, G.J. Martens, M.A. Weterman, A.G. van Kessel, Understanding familial and non-familial renal cell cancer, Hum. Mol. Genet. 11 (2002) 2489–2498.

[15] P. Chu, D.A. Arber, Paraffin-section detection of CD10 in 505 nonhematopoietic neoplasms. Frequent expression in renal cell carcinoma and endometrial stromal sarcoma, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 113 (2000) 374–382.

[16] J. Clark, Y.J. Lu, S.K. Sidhar, C. Parker, S. Gill, D. Smedley, R. Hamoudi, W.M. Linehan, J. Shipley,

C.S. Cooper, Fusion of splicing factor genes PSF and NonO (p54nrb) to the TFE3 gene in papillary renal cell carcinoma, Oncogene 15 (1997) 2233–2239.

[17] S. Coats, W.M. Flanagan, J. Nourse, J.M. Roberts, Requirement of p27Kip1 for restriction point control of the fibroblast cell cycle, Science 272 (1996) 877–880.

[18] B. de Jong, I.M. Molenaar, J.A. Leeuw, V.J. Idenberg, J.W. Oosterhuis, Cytogenetics of a renal adenocarcinoma in a 2-year-old child, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 21 (1986) 165–169.

[19] T. Dijkhuizen, E. van den Berg, M. Wilbrink, M. Weterman, A. Geurts van Kessel, S. Storkel, R.P. Folkers, A. Braam, B. de Jong, Distinct Xp11.2 breakpoints in two renal cell carcinomas exhibiting X;autosome translocations, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 14 (1995) 43–50.

[20] D. Droz, D. Zachar, L. Charbit, J. Gogusev, Y. Chretein, L. Iris, Expression of the human nephron differentiation molecules in renal cell carcinomas, Am. J. Pathol. 137 (1990) 895–905.

[21] A. Gaulier, G. Lucas, P. Ronco, Tamm Horsfall protein expression by a small renal cell carcinoma presenting with metastases, Histopathology 17 (1990) 451–455.

[22] D.S. Hartman, C.J. Davis Jr., J.E. Madewell, A.C. Friedman, Primary malignant renal tumors in the second decade of life: Wilms tumor versus renal cell carcinoma, J. Urol. 127 (1982) 888–891.

[23] Y. Hedberg, E. Davoodi, B. Ljungberg, G. Roos, G. Landberg, Cyclin E and p27 protein content in human renal cell carcinoma: clinical outcome and associations with cyclin D, Int. J. Cancer 102 (2002) 601–607.

[24] Y. Hedberg, E. Davoodi, G. Roos, B. Ljungberg, G. Landberg, Cyclin-D1 expression in human renal-cell carcinoma, Int. J. Cancer 84 (1999) 268–272.

[25] Y. Hedberg, B. Ljungberg, G. Roos, G. Landberg, Expression of cyclin D1, D3, E, and p27 in human renal cell carcinoma analysed by tissue microarray, Br. J. Cancer 88 (2003) 1417–1423.

[26] Y. Hedberg, G. Roos, B. Ljungberg, G. Landberg, Cyclin D3 protein content in human renal cell carcinoma in relation to cyclin D1 and clinico-pathological parameters, Acta Oncol. 41 (2002) 175–181.

[27] L. Hengst, S.I. Reed, Translational control of p27Kip1 accumulation during the cell cycle, Science 271 (1996) 1861–1864.

[28] M.J. Hernandez-Marti, C. Orellana-Alonso, L. Badia-Garrabou, A. Verdeguer Miralles, A. Paradis-Alos, Renal adenocarcinoma in an 8-year-old child, with a t(X;17)(p11.2;q25), Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 83 (1995) 82–83.

[29] H. Hiyama, A. Iavarone, J. LaBaer, S.A. Reeves, Regulated ectopic expression of cyclin D1 induces transcriptional activation of the cdk inhibitor p21 gene without altering cell cycle progression, Oncogene 14 (1997) 2533–2542.

[30] P. Holm-Nielsen, G. Pallesen, Expression of segment-specific antigens in the human nephron and in renal epithelial tumors, APMIS Suppl. 4 (1988) 48–55.

[31] Y. Imai, T.G. Strohmeyer, M. Fleischhacker, D.J. Slamon, H.P. Koeffler, p53 mutations and MDM-2

amplification in renal cell cancers, Mod. Pathol. 7 (1994) 766–770.

[32] T. Itoi, K. Yamana, V. Bilim, K. Takahashi, F. Tomita, Impact of frequent Bcl-2 expression on better prognosis in renal cell carcinoma patients, Br. J. Cancer 90 (2004) 200–205.

[33] I. Kardas, A. Denis, M. Babinska, J. Gronwald, J. Podolski, S. Zajaczek, A. Kram, J. Lubinski, J. Limon, Translocation (X;1)(p11.2;q21) in a papillary renal cell carcinoma in a 14-year-old girl,, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 101 (1998) 159–161.

[34] S. Kido, K. Miyamoto, H. Mizobuchi, Y. Taketani, I. Ohkido, N. Ogawa, Y. Kaneko, S. Harashima, E. Takeda, Identification of regulatory sequences and binding proteins in the type II sodium/phosphate cotransporter NPT2 gene responsive to dietary phosphate, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 28256–28263.

[35] Y. Kikuchi, T. Kishi, M. Suzuki, M. Furusato, S. Aizawa, Polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis of the p53 gene in paraffin-embedded surgical material from human renal cell carcinomas, Virchows Arch. 424 (1994) 229–233.

[36] M. Ladanyi, M.Y. Lui, C.R. Antonescu, A. Krause-Boehm, A. Meindl, P. Argani, J.H. Healey, T. Ueda, H. Yoshikawa, A. Meloni-Ehrig, P.H. Sorensen, F. Mertens, N. Mandahl, H. van den Berghe, R. Sciot, P.D. Cin, J. Bridge, The der(17)t(X;17)(p11;q25) of human alveolar soft part sarcoma fuses the TFE3 transcription factor gene to ASPL, a novel gene at 17q25, Oncogene 20 (2001) 48–57.

[37] S. Lai, W.F. Benedict, S.A. Silver, A.K. El-Naggar, Loss of retinoblastoma gene function and heterozygosity at the RB locus in renal cortical neoplasms, Hum. Pathol. 28 (1997) 693–697.

[38] R.V. Lloyd, L. Jin, X. Qian, E. Kulig, Aberrant p27kip1 expression in endocrine and other tumors, Am. J. Pathol. 150 (1997) 401–407.

[39] K.C. Mansky, S. Sulzbacher, G. Purdom, L. Nelsen, D.A. Hume, M. Rehli, M.C. Ostrowski, The microphthalmia transcription factor and the related helix-loop-helix zipper factors TFE-3 and TFE-C collaborate to activate the tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase promoter, J. Leukoc. Biol. 71 (2002) 304–310.

[40] M. Mathur, S. Das, H.H. Samuels, PSF-TFE3 oncprotein in papillary renal cell carcinoma inactivates TFE3 and p53 through cytoplasmic sequestration, Oncogene 22 (2003) 5031–5044.

[41] A.M. Meloni, R.M. Dobbs, J.E. Pontes, A.A. Sandberg, Translocation (X;1) in papillary renal cell carcinoma. A new cytogenetic subtype, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 65 (1993) 1–6.

[42] R. Moll, C. Hage, W. Thoenes, Expression of intermediate filament proteins in fetal and adult human kidney: modulations of intermediate filament patterns during development and in damaged tissue, Lab. Invest. 65 (1991) 74–86.

[43] G. Motyckova, K.N. Weilbaecher, M. Horstmann, D.J. Rieman, D.Z. Fisher, D.E. Fisher, Linking osteopetrosis and pycnodysostosis: regulation of cathepsin K expression by the microphthalmia transcription factor family, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 5798–5803.

[44] J. Nourse, E. Firpo, W.M. Flanagan, S. Coats, K. Polyak, M.H. Lee, J. Massague, G.R. Crabtree, J.M. Roberts, Interleukin-2-mediated elimination of the p27Kip1 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor prevented by rapamycin, Nature 372 (1994) 570–573.

[45] V. Osipov, J.T. Keating, P.N. Faul, M. Loda, M.W. Datta, Expression of p27 and VHL in renal tumors, Appl. Immunohistochem. Mol. Morphol. 10 (2002) 344–350.

[46] C.N. Papandreou, T. Bogenrieder, F. Loganzo, A.P. Albino, D.M. Nanus, Expression and sequence analysis of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) gene in renal cancers, Urology 49 (1997) 481–486.

[47] C. Perot, J. Bougaran, L. Boccon-Gibod, S. Storkel, G. Leverger, J. van den Akker, J.L. Taillemite, J. Couturier, Two new cases of papillary renal cell carcinoma with t(X;1)(p11;q21) in females, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 110 (1999) 54–56.

[48] J.C. Presti Jr., V.E. Reuter, C. Cordon-Cardo, R.J. Motzer, A.P. Albino, S.C. Jhanwar, D.M. Nanus, Expression of the retinoblastoma gene product in renal tumors, Anticancer Res. 16 (1996) 549–556.

[49] A.A. Renshaw, S.R. Granter, J.A. Fletcher, H.P. Kozakewich, C.L. Corless, A.R. Perez-Atayde, Renal cell carcinomas in children and young adults: increased incidence of papillary architecture and unique subtypes, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 23 (1999) 795–802.

[50] A.A. Renshaw, K.R. Loughlin, A. Dutta, Cyclin A and MIB1 (Ki67) as markers of proliferative activity in primary renal neoplasms, Mod. Pathol. 11 (1998) 963–966.

[51] S.S. Shen, B. Krishna, R. Chirala, R.J. Amato, L.D. Truong, Kidney-specific cadherin, a specific marker for the distal portion of the nephron and related renal neoplasms, Mod. Pathol. 18 (2005) 933–940.

[52] J.M. Shipley, S. Birdsall, J. Clark, J. Crew, S. Gill, M. Linehan, J. Gnarra, S. Fisher, I.W. Craig, C.S. Cooper, Mapping the X chromosome breakpoint in two papillary renal cell carcinoma cell lines with a t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) and the first report of a female case, Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 71 (1995) 280–284.

[53] S.K. Sidhar, J. Clark, S. Gill, R. Hamoudi, A.J. Crew, R. Gwilliam, M. Ross, W.M. Linehan, S. Birdsall, J. Shipley, C.S. Cooper, The t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) translocation in papillary renal cell carcinoma fuses a novel gene PRCC to the TFE3 transcription factor gene, Hum. Mol. Genet. 5 (1996) 1333–1338.

[54] Y.M. Skalsky, P.M. Ajuh, C. Parker, A.I. Lamond, G. Goodwin, C.S. Cooper, PRCC, the commonest TFE3 fusion partner in papillary renal carcinoma is associated with pre-mRNA splicing factors, Oncogene 20 (2001) 178–187.

[55] Y. Suzuki, G. Tamura, Mutations of the p53 gene in carcinomas of the urinary system, Acta Pathol. Jpn. 43 (1993) 745–750.

[56] G.E. Tomlinson, P.D. Nisen, C.F. Timmons, N.R. Schneider, Cytogenetics of a renal cell carcinoma in a 17-month-old child. Evidence for Xp11.2 as a recurring breakpoint, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 57 (1991) 11–17.

[57] H. Toyoshima, T. Hunter, p27, a novel inhibitor of Gl cyclin-Cdk protein kinase activity, is related to p21, Cell 78 (1994) 67–74.

[58] T. Uchida, C. Wada, T. Shitara, S. Egawa, S. Mashimo, K. Koshiba, Infrequent involvement of p53 mutations and loss of heterozygosity of 17p in the tumorigenesis of renal cell carcinoma, J. Urol. 150 (1993) 1298–1301.

[59] C. Verastegui, C. Bertolotto, K. Bille, P. Abbe, J.P. Ortonne, R. Ballotti, TFE3, a transcription factor homologous to microphthalmia, is a potential transcriptional activator of tyrosinase and TyrpI genes, Mol. Endocrinol. 14 (2000) 449–456.

[60] T. Waldman, K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, p21 is necessary for the p53-mediated Gl arrest in human cancer cells, Cancer Res. 55 (1995) 5187–5190.

[61] M.A. Weterman, J.J. van Groningen, A. den Hartog, A. Geurts van Kessel, Transformation capacities of the papillary renal cell carcinoma-associated PRCCTFE3 and TFE3PRCC fusion genes, Oncogene 20 (2001) 1414–1424.

[62] M.A. Weterman, J.J. van Groningen, L. Tertoolen, A.G. van Kessel, Impairment of MAD2B-PRCC interaction in mitotic checkpoint defective t(X;1)-positive renal cell carcinomas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 13808–13813.

[63] M.A. Weterman, M. Wilbrink, A. Geurts van Kessel, Fusion of the transcription factor TFE3 gene to a novel gene, PRCC, in t(X;1)(p11;q21)-positive papillary renal cell carcinomas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 15294–15298.

[64] M.J. Weterman, J.J. van Groningen, A. Jansen, A.G. van Kessel, Nuclear localization and transactivating capacities of the papillary renal cell carcinoma-associated TFE3 and PRCC (fusion) proteins, Oncogene 19 (2000) 69–74.

[65] Y. Xiong, G.J. Hannon, H. Zhang, D. Casso, R. Kobayashi, D. Beach, p21 is a universal inhibitor of cyclin kinases, Nature 366 (1993) 701–704.

[66] S.O. Yoshida, A. Imam, Monoclonal antibody to a proximal nephrogenic renal antigen: immunohistochemical analysis of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human renal cell carcinomas, Cancer Res. 49 (1989) 1802–1809.

[67] E. Zambrano, M. Reyes-Mugica, Renal cell carcinoma with t(X;17): singular pediatric neoplasm with specific phenotype/genotype features, Pediatr. Dev. Pathol. 6 (2003) 84–87.

[68] Y.K. Zeng, W.S. el-Deiry, Regulation of p21WAF1/CIP1 expression by p53-independent pathways, Oncogene 12 (1996) 1557–1564.
