
Cellular Microbiology (2008) 10(6), 1209–1220

doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01145.x  
First published online 7 April 2008

# Microreview

## Host cell processes that influence the intracellular survival of *Legionella pneumophila*

### Sunny Shin* and Craig R. Roy

Section of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale University School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, Room 345, New Haven, CT 06536, USA.

---

### Summary

Key to the pathogenesis of intracellular pathogens is their ability to manipulate host cell processes, permitting the establishment of an intracellular replicative niche. In turn, the host cell deploys defence mechanisms that limit intracellular infection. The bacterial pathogen *Legionella pneumophila*, the aetiological agent of Legionnaire’s Disease, has evolved virulence mechanisms that allow it to replicate within protozoa, its natural host. Many of these tactics also enable *L. pneumophila’s* survival and replication inside macrophages within a membrane-bound compartment known as the *Legionella*-containing vacuole. One of the virulence factors indispensable for *L. pneumophila’s* intracellular survival is a type IV secretion system, which translocates a large repertoire of bacterial effectors into the host cell. These effectors modulate multiple host cell processes and in particular, redirect trafficking of the *L. pneumophila* phagosome and mediate its conversion into an ER-derived organelle competent for intracellular bacterial replication. In this review, we discuss how *L. pneumophila* manipulates host cells, as well as host cell processes that either facilitate or impede its intracellular survival.

---

### Introduction

The intracellular bacterial pathogen *Legionella pneumophila* is responsible for the severe pneumonia Legionnaire’s disease and the less severe flu-like disease Pontiac fever (McDade *et al.*, 1977; Kaufmann *et al.*, 1981). *L. pneumophila* is found ubiquitously in freshwater environments, where it replicates within protozoan hosts

Received 22 January, 2008; revised 10 March, 2008; accepted 10 March, 2008. *For correspondence. E-mail sunny.shin@yale.edu; Tel. (+1) 203 737 2409; Fax (+1) 203 737 2630.*

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

---

(Fields, 1996). However, modern technologies, such as air conditioning systems, that cause water aerosolization have enabled *L. pneumophila* to become an opportunistic human pathogen. Following inhalation of *L. pneumophila*-contaminated water droplets into the human lung, *L. pneumophila* infects alveolar macrophages (Horwitz, 1983a). *L. pneumophila* then establishes a replicative niche within an ER-derived compartment protected from endolysosomal destruction (Horwitz, 1983b). This ability to establish an intracellular replicative niche is vital to *L. pneumophila’s* pathogenesis, and its mechanistic basis is under active investigation.

---

### Evolution with protozoa

*Legionella pneumophila’s* natural habitat is freshwater environments, where it infects a wide range of protozoa (Fields, 1996). Phagocytosed bacteria are generally killed in lysosomes, where an acidic pH and lysosomal enzymes digest the bacteria, thus releasing nutrients for use by the protozoan host. Several bacteria, including *L. pneumophila*, have evolved strategies to prevent lysosome-mediated destruction and persist within amoebae. An intracellular symbiont of *Amoeba proteus*, X-bacteria (renamed Candidatus *Legionella jeonii*), is a relative of *L. pneumophila* (Park *et al.*, 2004). Therefore, *L. pneumophila* and its pathogen and symbiont relatives have acquired genes that enable their persistence within protozoan hosts. However, *L. pneumophila* has also obtained virulence factors essential for its pathogenesis in protozoa. Because *L. pneumophila* can infect a diversity of protozoan species, it is thought that *L. pneumophila* has compiled a large repertoire of virulence factors to deal with the unique allelic protein differences and intracellular conditions of each particular species.

The sequenced genomes of three *L. pneumophila* isolates, Philadelphia, Paris and Lens, revealed that the *L. pneumophila* genome is highly plastic and encodes a multitude of proteins containing eukaryotic protein motifs (Cazalet *et al.*, 2004; Chien *et al.*, 2004). Such genes may have been acquired either through horizontal gene transfer from a host cell or other bacteria or convergent evolution during *L. pneumophila’s* coevolution with its

protozoan hosts. Human to human transmission has not been reported, indicating that *L. pneumophila* has not yet evolved to overcome the strong selection pressure imposed by human immune responses. Given that many eukaryotic cellular processes are highly conserved, it is unsurprising that *L. pneumophila* uses similar strategies to establish infection in both amoeba and mammalian phagocytes (Gao *et al.*, 1997).

### L. pneumophila’s type II secretion system

*Legionella pneumophila* encodes a type II secretion system (Lsp) critical for intracellular replication (Hales and Shuman, 1999; Liles *et al.*, 1999; Rossier *et al.*, 2004; Cianciotto, 2005). Type II secretion involves a two-step process initiated by protein translocation across the bacterial inner membrane by the Sec or Tat pathway, followed by protein transport from the periplasm out to the exterior by an outer membrane secretin (Cianciotto, 2005). At least 20 Lsp-translocated substrates have been identified and display a variety of enzymatic activities (Hales and Shuman, 1999; Liles *et al.*, 1999; Aragon *et al.*, 2000; 2001; 2002; Flieger *et al.*, 2002; Rossier *et al.*, 2004; Banerji *et al.*, 2005; DebRoy *et al.*, 2006). However, *L. pneumophila* lacking individual Lsp substrates have a slight or no defect during infection (Szeto and Shuman, 1990; Moffat *et al.*, 1994; Aragon *et al.*, 2001; 2002; Flieger *et al.*, 2002; Banerji *et al.*, 2005), indicating functional redundancy or that additional unidentified type II substrates also contribute to *L. pneumophila* pathogenesis. A *L. pneumophila* mutant lacking a Lsp-transported chitinase, ChiA, was competent for intracellular replication but was significantly attenuated during mouse infection (DebRoy *et al.*, 2006). ChiA may degrade a mammalian compound with similarity to chitin, but the precise target of ChiA remains to be identified.

#### remodel its phagosome is essential to *L. pneumophila*’s ability to replicate intracellularly (Coers *et al.*, 1999).

It was predicted that *L. pneumophila* utilizes the Dot/Icm system to translocate bacterial effectors into the host cell. These effectors were envisaged to manipulate eukaryotic processes, enabling the establishment of a replicative vacuole and promoting intracellular survival. Over 70 Dot/Icm-translocated proteins have been identified through multiple approaches involving bioinformatics, genetic screens, and biochemistry (Nagai *et al.*, 2002; Conover *et al.*, 2003; Luo and Isberg, 2004; Campodonico *et al.*, 2005; de Felipe *et al.*, 2005; Ninio *et al.*, 2005; Shohdy *et al.*, 2005; Laguna *et al.*, 2006; Machner and Isberg, 2006; Murata *et al.*, 2006; VanRheenen *et al.*, 2006; Zusman *et al.*, 2007; Altman and Segal, 2008; Kubori *et al.*, 2008). The biochemical activities of several effectors have been elucidated and will be discussed below.

### Uptake into host cells and avoidance of the endocytic pathway

It is thought that uptake of *L. pneumophila* occurs by host-driven phagocytosis. However, the Dot/Icm system may modulate endocytic events as dot/icm mutants show significantly decreased uptake compared with WT *L. pneumophila* (Hilbi *et al.*, 2001), and uptake of WT but not dot/icm mutant *L. pneumophila* is independent of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity (Khelef *et al.*, 2001; Weber *et al.*, 2006) (Fig. 1). Immediately following uptake, a Dot/Icm-dependent event prevents fusion with the endolysosomal pathway (Roy *et al.*, 1998). These data indicate that upon host cell contact, Dot/Icm-translocated effectors promote uptake and prevent endolysosomal fusion. Studies with *L. pneumophila* mutants lacking IcmS and IcmW, which comprise a putative chaperone complex necessary for Dot/Icm-mediated translocation of a subset of effectors, have provided some insight into this process (Bardill *et al.*, 2005; Ninio *et al.*, 2005; Cambronne and Roy, 2007). *icmS* and *icmW* mutant LCVs recruit early secretory vesicles and can support limited replication (Coers *et al.*, 2000). However, *icmS* and *icmW* mutants eventually fuse with lysosomes (Coers *et al.*, 2000), indicating that some of the translocated effectors guided by IcmS/W are essential for blocking lysosomal fusion.

The Dot/Icm-translocated proteins VipA, VipD, and VipF may participate in blocking lysosomal fusion. These proteins were identified in a yeast screen for *L. pneumophila* proteins that cause vacuolar protein missorting (Shohdy *et al.*, 2005). VipA, VipD, and VipF inhibit yeast lysosomal protein trafficking (Shohdy *et al.*, 2005). However, *vipA/vipD* mutant *L. pneumophila* replicate normally inside cells (VanRheenen *et al.*, 2006). Therefore, it is uncertain whether these proteins prevent lysosomal fusion or

### L. pneumophila’s type IV secretion system

Following host cell entry, the *L. pneumophila*-containing phagosome bypasses the early and late endocytic pathway (Horwitz, 1983b; Horwitz and Maxfield, 1984). Essential to this process is a type IV secretion system encoded by the *dot/icm* genes (Marra *et al.*, 1992; Berger and Isberg, 1993; Segal *et al.*, 1998; Vogel *et al.*, 1998). Wild-type (WT) *L. pneumophila* initially resides in a Lamp-1-negative compartment surrounded by smooth host vesicles (Tilney *et al.*, 2001). After 4 h, the *Legionella*-containing vacuole (LCV) is studded with ribosomes (Horwitz and Silverstein, 1980; Horwitz, 1983a; Swanson and Isberg, 1995; Abu Kwaik, 1996; Tilney *et al.*, 2001; Kagan and Roy, 2002; Robinson and Roy, 2006) and contains resident ER markers (Tilney *et al.*, 2001; Kagan and Roy, 2002; Robinson and Roy, 2006). This ability to

Fig. 1. *L. pneumophila* uptake and replicative vacuole biogenesis. (a) A PI(3)kinase-dependent pathway mediates uptake of *dot/icm* mutants, which then traffic to the endosomal pathway. (b) WT *L. pneumophila* uptake is independent of PI(3)kinase activity. The LCV then immediately avoids endosomal fusion. (c) The Dot/Icm effectors RalF and DrrA (SidM) recruit the host factors Arf1 and Rab1 to the LCV. The t-SNARE Sec22b is also recruited. The LCV then intercepts ER-derived vesicles that normally traffic to the Golgi. (d) The Dot/Icm effectors SdhA and SidF appear to inhibit host cell death and (e) the Dot/Icm effector LubX ubiquitinates the host cell factor Clk1. (f) Eventually, the LCV becomes studded with ribosomes and contains resident ER markers. The Dot/Icm effector LepB removes Rab1 from the LCV. (g) *L. pneumophila* then begins to replicate. Following multiple rounds of replication, (h) *L. pneumophila* then exits the host cell with the aid of the Dot/Icm effectors LepA and B, allowing *L. pneumophila* to infect neighbouring cells. Dot/Icm-translocated effectors implicated in these processes are in green.

whether the absence of these genes is masked by other functionally redundant effectors.

*Legionella pneumophila* virulence determinants other than the Dot/Icm transporter or Dot/Icm-translocated substrates also contribute to early trafficking events. The flagellar sigma factor FliA, heat shock protein Hsp60, the locus *rtxA* and the tetratricopeptide repeat-containing proteins LpnE, EnhC and LidL influence host cell entry and/or trafficking to the endolysosomal pathway (Garduno *et al.*, 1998; Cirillo *et al.*, 2000; Molofsky *et al.*, 2005; Newton *et al.*, 2006; 2007).

### Remodelling the LCV into an ER-derived replicative organelle

The LCV intercepts early secretory vesicles prior to their transport to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) and Golgi (Kagan and Roy, 2002). Analysis of host factors recruited to the LCV revealed that Arf1 and Rab1, which are involved in regulating ER-Golgi traffic, are found on WT but not *dot/icm* mutant LCVs (Kagan and Roy, 2002; Derre and Isberg, 2004a; Kagan *et al.*, 2004). This suggested that Dot/Icm-injected substrates are responsible for the recruitment of these host factors.

Arf1 (ADP ribosylation factor-1), a small GTP-binding protein, is an important regulator of vesicle traffic from the ER and Golgi (Donaldson and Jackson, 2000). A search of the *L. pneumophila* genome revealed a gene, *ralF*, with a predicted Sec7-homology domain (Nagai *et al.*, 2002). Sec7 domains are found in eukaryotic Arf-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which catalyse nucleotide exchange on Arfs, thereby converting Arfs from the inactive, GDP-bound form into the active, GTP-bound form. RalF is a Dot/Icm-translocated effector that localizes to the LCV, is required for Arf1 recruitment to the LCV, and biochemically behaves as an Arf1-GEF (Nagai *et al.*, 2002).

Rab GTPases organize membranes and recruit effectors that facilitate the transport, tethering and fusion of vesicles (Zerial and McBride, 2001). It was hypothesized that another Dot/Icm effector was responsible for Rab1 recruitment to the LCV. One approach to identify such an effector searched for Rab1-binding partners using a Rab1 affinity column (Machner and Isberg, 2006). The other approach utilized a visual screen to identify *L. pneumophila* mutants that no longer recruit Rab1 (Murata *et al.*, 2006). This led to the simultaneous identification of the Dot/Icm-translocated effector DrrA (SidM). Biochemical analyses revealed that DrrA is a highly specific Rab1-GEF that catalyses the exchange of GDP for GTP on Rab1 (Machner and Isberg, 2006; Murata *et al.*, 2006). However, this did not entirely account for how DrrA could mediate Rab1 recruitment to the LCV.

Inactive GDP-bound Rabs are removed from membranes and maintained in the cytosol by GDP association inhibitor (GDI), which prevents spontaneous activation

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Cellular Microbiology*, **10**, 1209–1220

of Rab1 (Sasaki *et al.*, 1990; Ullrich *et al.*, 1993). It is believed that Rabs must be released from GDI by GDI displacement factors (GDFs) prior to Rab recruitment to the membrane and activation by GEFs (Soldati *et al.*, 1994; Sivars *et al.*, 2003). To complete the cycle, Rabs are inactivated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and extracted from the membrane by GDI. Thus, DrrA’s GEF activity was insufficient to explain its ability to recruit Rab1 to the LCV. Further studies revealed that DrrA is a bifunctional enzyme (Ingmundson *et al.*, 2007; Machner and Isberg, 2007). One region in DrrA is required for Rab1 recruitment to membranes and functions as a GDF, whereas the second region stimulates Rab1 activation by functioning as a GEF (Ingmundson *et al.*, 2007; Machner and Isberg, 2007).

An additional Dot/lcm effector also binds Rab1 (Ingmundson *et al.*, 2007). LepB inactivates Rab1 by stimulating GTP hydrolysis, indicating that LepB is a GAP that regulates removal of Rab1 from membranes (Ingmundson *et al.*, 2007). It is thought that accumulation of translocated LepB on the LCV membrane allows LepB’s GAP activity to facilitate the removal of Rab1. Further studies will likely reveal how the activities of DrrA and LepB are temporally co-ordinated to regulate Rab1 function.

Another Dot/lcm effector required for efficient replicative vacuole formation is LidA (Conover *et al.*, 2003; Derre and Isberg, 2005). Interestingly, LidA also binds Rab1, although LidA does not possess GEF or GAP activity (Machner and Isberg, 2006). Unlike DrrA and LepB, which show strict Rab1 binding and demonstrate nucleotide preference, LidA binds multiple Rabs regardless of the bound nucleotide (Machner and Isberg, 2006). How LidA contributes to replicative vacuole biogenesis is unknown. Perhaps it serves as a factor that is recruited to the LCV through its association with Rabs and assists in tethering ER vesicles to the LCV.

*Legionella pneumophila* lacking the Dot/lcm-translocated protein SidJ are temporally delayed in the recruitment of ER proteins to the LCV (Liu and Luo, 2007). Unlike many effector mutants, *sidJ* mutants have a significant replication defect in both macrophages and protozoa, but the mechanistic basis is unknown. Interestingly, *ralF* or *drrA* mutants replicate normally despite an inability to recruit Rab1 or Arf1 to the LCV (Nagai *et al.*, 2002; Machner and Isberg, 2006; Murata *et al.*, 2006). This indicates that *L. pneumophila* simultaneously targets multiple functionally redundant pathways, leading to the absence of a phenotype when any single pathway is disrupted. This is supported by data demonstrating that although ER-derived secretory vesicles are important for remodeling of the LCV, replicative vacuole biogenesis is completely blocked when ER vesicular traffic is inhibited (Kagan and Roy, 2002; Robinson and Roy, 2006). Additionally, RNA interference (RNAi) studies demonstrated

that knock-down of multiple regulators of secretory transport, including the transport protein particle (TRAPP) complex, was required to inhibit bacterial replication (Dorer *et al.*, 2006). The TRAPP complex is localized to the ERGIC and Golgi and may participate in ER-derived vesicle tethering and Rab1 activation. Thus, either the TRAPP complex or membrane traffic through the ERGIC may also contribute to replicative vacuole formation. Finally, *L. pneumophila* may have evolved multiple redundant effectors that autonomously mimic the activities of host cell factors.

It is expected that recruitment of ER-derived vesicles to the LCV requires factors necessary for the tethering and fusion of ER-derived vesicles. Membrane fusion requires the binding of target soluble *N*-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (t-SNAREs) on the target membrane to a v-SNARE on the vesicular membrane. Sec22b is a v-SNARE found on ER-derived vesicles. During ER-derived vesicle trafficking to the ERGIC, Sec22b normally binds its cognate t-SNARE, composed of Membrin, Syntaxin 5 and Bet1. Sec22b is recruited to the LCV in a Dot/lcm-dependent manner (Derre and Isberg, 2004a; Kagan *et al.*, 2004) and contributes to efficient replicative vacuole formation (Kagan *et al.*, 2004). It is anticipated that a cognate t-SNARE on the LCV binds Sec22b, thus tethering ER-derived vesicles to the LCV. Perhaps *L. pneumophila* Dot/lcm effectors mimic t-SNARE function. Alternatively, a t-SNARE complex present at the plasma membrane may be incorporated into the LCV during uptake.

*Legionella pneumophila* also appears to exploit phosphoinositide (PI) lipids during the establishment of the replicative vacuole. PI(4) phosphate [PI(4)P] is found on LCVs in a Dot/lcm-dependent manner (Weber *et al.*, 2006). The Dot/lcm-translocated substrate SidC binds to PI(4)P *in vitro*, and this affinity for PI(4)P influences SidC’s recruitment to the LCV *in vivo* (Weber *et al.*, 2006). This may represent a mechanism by which *L. pneumophila* anchors Dot/lcm effectors to the LCV.

ER-associated degradation machinery

The intimate association of the ER with the LCV during its remodeling and subsequent expansion suggests that other aspects of ER biology may contribute to establishment and maintenance of the replicative vacuole (Fig. 2). Indeed, recent RNAi studies have revealed that components of the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery and the proteasome are required for intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication (Dorer *et al.*, 2006). The ERAD pathway eliminates misfolded proteins from the ER by targeting them to the ER surface, where these proteins are ubiquitinated, removed by the Cdc48/p97 AAA ATPase and degraded by the proteasome. These

Fig. 2. Host cell processes that influence *L. pneumophila* replication. (a) The proteasome, Cdc48/p97, and ubiquitinated proteins are recruited to the LCV and are required for efficient *L. pneumophila* replication. (b) *L. pneumophila* modulates host cell survival by activating the NF-κB signalling pathway, leading to the induction of anti-apoptotic genes. (c) The Nod-LRR proteins Birc1e and Ipaf signal in response to Dot/Icm activity and lead to caspase-1 activation. Ipaf responds to macrophage detection of cytosolic flagellin. (d) Caspase-1 then proteolytically cleaves substrates that cause cell death, IL-1β production, trafficking of the LCV to Lamp-1 positive compartments, and the restriction of *L. pneumophila* replication.

studies also revealed that Cdc48/p97 and unidentified polyubiquitinated proteins associate with the LCV in a Dot/Icm-dependent manner.

How the ERAD machinery promotes *L. pneumophila* replication is unclear. Cdc48/p97 may behave as a mammalian chaperone that aids in translocating Dot/Icm effectors into the cytosol. Alternatively, Cdc48/p97 and the proteasome may direct the temporal turnover of Dot/Icm effectors, thus regulating LCV maturation. Intriguingly, the *L. pneumophila* genome encodes proteins containing homology to F- or U-box domains (Cazalet et al., 2004; Chien et al., 2004). F- and U-box domains are found in eukaryotic E3-ubiquitin ligases, which covalently attach ubiquitin to proteins, thus targeting them for degradation. Perhaps these putative F-or U-box proteins participate in the ubiquitination of proteins on the LCV. One such U-box-containing *L. pneumophila* effector, LubX, was shown to contain ubiquitin ligase activity and displayed specificity for Cdc2-like kinase 1 (Clk1; Kubori et al., 2008). Clk kinases phosphorylate serine/arginine-rich proteins, which are involved in alternate splicing. Pharmacological inhibition of Clk kinases inhibited *L. pneumophila* intracellular replication, indicating that Clk kinases contribute to *L. pneumophila’s* intracellular life cycle (Kubori et al., 2008). The precise role of this interaction during *L. pneumophila* infection remains to be determined.

ERAD is upregulated by ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR). The accumulation of unfolded proteins within the ER induces the UPR, which controls three key processes: (i) increased elimination of unfolded proteins by upregulation of ERAD machinery, (ii) down-regulation of protein synthesis and (iii) cell death, if the

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, **10**, 1209–1220

cells activate NF-κB signalling in a Dot/lcm-dependent manner, and NF-κB signalling promotes host survival (Losick and Isberg, 2006; Abu-Zant et al., 2007). This led to the proposal that Dot/lcm-translocated substrates modulate NF-κB signalling and host cell survival.

Intriguingly, two Dot/lcm-translocated proteins may fulfill a role in promoting host cell survival. *L. pneumophila* lacking the Dot/lcm-translocated protein SdhA are severely attenuated in intracellular replication (Laguna et al., 2006). *sdhA* mutant-infected cells undergo nuclear DNA fragmentation, a hallmark of caspase-3-driven apoptosis, and display caspase activation and disrupted mitochondrial morphology (Laguna et al., 2006). SidF, another Dot/lcm-translocated protein, may also promote host survival (Banga et al., 2007). *sidF* mutant-infected cells are more susceptible to apoptosis than WT *L. pneumophila*-infected cells (Banga et al., 2007). SidF interacts with BNIP3 and Bcl-rambo, proapoptotic members of the Bcl2 protein family (Banga et al., 2007). The replication defect observed for the *sidF* mutant is not as severe as that of *sdhA*, indicating that SidF and SdhA differ either in function or in the pathways they target.

Interestingly, NF-κB signalling and many components of apoptosis, such as BNIP3 and Bcl-rambo, are specific to higher eukaryotes and absent in protozoa. This raises the question of whether there is selection pressure on *L. pneumophila* by a mammalian host to evolve effectors that target higher eukaryotic pathways. Alternatively, *L. pneumophila* effectors might have specificity for protozoan proteins that bear some resemblance to mammalian proteins with mammalian-specific functions, thus resulting in the accidental targeting of mammalian pathways.

The permissive A/J and non-permissive C57BL/6 Birc1e proteins differ at 14 amino acid residues (Wright et al., 2003). A/J macrophages express less Birc1e relative to C57BL/6 macrophages (Diez et al., 2000), and silencing of *Birc1e* renders macrophages more susceptible to *L. pneumophila* replication (Wright et al., 2003). Therefore, differences in Birc1e sequence and/or expression appear to influence macrophage susceptibility to *L. pneumophila* infection.

Birc1e-dependent signalling in response to Dot/lcm activity restricts intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication in macrophages (Zamboni et al., 2006). Birc1e restriction involves Dot/lcm-dependent caspase-1 activation. C57BL/6 Casp-1⁻/⁻ macrophages and mice are permissive for *L. pneumophila* replication; in contrast, A/J Casp-1⁻/⁻ macrophages are equally as permissive as A/J Casp-1⁺/⁺ macrophages (Zamboni et al., 2006). This epistatic effect suggests that Birc1e and caspase-1 function together to prevent *L. pneumophila* replication. However, another study concluded that Birc1e restricted *L. pneumophila* growth independently of caspase-1 (Lamkanfi et al., 2007). Thus, the relationship between Birc1e and caspase-1 may be quite complex.

Recent work has shown that caspase-1 activation requires the assembly of multimeric complexes known as inflammasomes, which consist of adaptor proteins containing various homotypic protein–protein interaction domains that are utilized to recruit inactive caspase-1 (Mariathasan and Monack, 2007). The Nod-LRR protein Ipafl, an adaptor that recruits caspase-1 into inflammasomes, is required for restricting *L. pneumophila* replication (Zamboni et al., 2006). Interestingly, the inflammasome adaptor protein Asc is unnecessary for restricting *L. pneumophila* replication but is required for caspase-1-dependent processing of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1β downstream of *L. pneumophila* infection (Zamboni et al., 2006). This indicates that functionally distinct inflammasomes are formed in response to *L. pneumophila*.

Macrophage detection of flagellin also participates in the control of *L. pneumophila* infection. Flagellin-deficient *L. pneumophila* do not induce caspase-1 activation and can replicate in macrophages or mice expressing the non-permissive *Birc1e* allele (Molofsky et al., 2006; Ren et al., 2006). The innate immune receptor Toll-like receptor (TLR) 5, which senses flagellin, and the TLR signalling adaptor MyD88 are not required for cell-autonomous restriction of *L. pneumophila* (Molofsky et al., 2006; Ren et al., 2006), indicating that another signalling pathway is responsible. Detection of flagellin requires the presence of a functional Dot/lcm translocator (Molofsky et al., 2006; Ren et al., 2006), but whether flagellin is translocated by Dot/lcm is unclear. Ipafl is required for caspase-1 activation in response to the flagellin of several bacterial pathogens.

### Birc1e, Ipafl and flagellin

Although *L. pneumophila* promotes its intracellular survival and replication, mouse macrophages have developed cell-autonomous mechanisms to restrict intracellular infection. Macrophages from virtually all mouse genetic backgrounds, with the exception of A/J mice, are refractory to intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication (Yamamoto et al., 1988). Lgn1, an autosomal recessive locus that maps to the gene *Birc1e*, is responsible for this mouse strain-specific susceptibility (Beckers et al., 1995; Dietrich et al., 1995; Diez et al., 2003; Wright et al., 2003). Birc1e is a cytosolic protein that contains a nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (Nod) and a C-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain (Fortier et al., 2005). This homology to Nod-LRR proteins suggested that Birc1e plays a role in the cytosolic innate immune detection and restriction of microbial infection. Birc1e also contains three N-terminal baculovirus inhibitors of apoptosis repeat (BIR) domains, which typically bind and regulate caspases (Fortier et al., 2005).

gens, including *L. pneumophila* (Amer *et al.*, 2006; Franchi *et al.*, 2006; Miao *et al.*, 2006). However, it is unknown whether Ipaf directly recognizes flagellin or is a signalling adaptor downstream of the flagellin sensor. Interestingly, it has been shown that another *Legionella* species, *L. longbeachae*, is able to replicate in C57BL/6 macrophages and does not activate caspase-1 despite being flagellated (Izu *et al.*, 1999; Asare *et al.*, 2007). However, despite the presence of *dot/icm* genes, indicating that *L. longbeachae* contains a type IV secretion system, *L. longbeachae* does not have the same type of *in vitro* pore-forming activity exhibited by *L. pneumophila*, leading the authors to propose that perhaps the flagellin of *L. longbeachae* does not have access to the host cytosol (Asare *et al.*, 2007). Further comparison of these two strains will likely reveal insight into how flagellin causes caspase-1 activation.

Exactly how Birc1e, Ipaf and caspase-1 restrict *L. pneumophila* replication is uncertain, but multiple mechanisms have been implicated. C57BL/6 macrophages die more rapidly than A/J macrophages following *L. pneumophila* infection (Derre and Isberg, 2004b). Given that caspase-1 induces cell death in response to many pathogens, caspase-1-induced cell death may prematurely terminate *L. pneumophila* replication. Alternatively, caspase-1 may cleave host factors critical for *L. pneumophila* replication. Birc1e, Ipaf and caspase-1 also influence trafficking and maturation of the LCV. In non-permissive macrophages, LCVs display increased acquisition of lysosomal markers (Derre and Isberg, 2004b; Fortier *et al.*, 2007). Conversely, a higher percentage of LCVs avoid lysosomes in caspase-1-deficient or Ipaf-deficient macrophages (Amer *et al.*, 2006).

Given that both Birc1e and Ipaf control caspase-1 activation and cell-autonomous restriction of *L. pneumophila*, one must wonder whether Birc1e and Ipaf function together or in two separate pathways. Ipaf and Birc1e can form a complex *in vitro* (Zamboni *et al.*, 2006); whether this occurs *in vivo* is unknown. As described above, Ipaf is required for caspase-1 activation in response to flagellin, however, it is unknown whether Ipaf, Birc1e or another protein is the flagellin sensor. As Birc1e restriction requires Dot/Icm activity, Birc1e may sense a Dot/Icm substrate or a cellular perturbation induced by Dot/Icm activity. Additionally, type I interferon and TNFα signalling cooperate with Birc1e and Ipaf to restrict *L. pneumophila* replication (Coers *et al.*, 2007), indicating that multiple signalling pathways intersect to restrict *L. pneumophila* infection.

Autophagy

Autophagy is a metabolic pathway conserved from yeast to mammals whereby cells capture cytosolic material into

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Cellular Microbiology*, **10**, 1209–1220

membrane-bound vesicles that eventually fuse with lysosomes, where the cargo is degraded (Xie and Klionsky, 2007). Accumulating evidence indicates that cells utilize autophagy to control intracellular pathogens such as *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* (Gutierrez *et al.*, 2004). Some pathogens have therefore evolved mechanisms to evade autophagy. *Shigella flexneri* encodes an effector, IcsB, that prevents the autophagic protein Atg5 from recognizing another *Shigella* effector, VirG, and initiating autophagy (Ogawa *et al.*, 2005). Considering that autophagy is so highly conserved, it is feasible that *L. pneumophila* contains effectors that manipulate autophagy. It has been suggested that autophagy contributes to replicative vacuole biogenesis, as LCV maturation resembles the autophagic pathway (Swanson and Isberg, 1995; Swanson and Hammer, 2000; Dorn *et al.*, 2002; Swanson and Fernandez-Moreira, 2002). However, studies utilizing *Dictyostelium* strains lacking autophagy components indicate that autophagy is dispensable for intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication (Otto *et al.*, 2004). Additionally, systematic recruitment of autophagy components to the LCV was not observed (Otto *et al.*, 2004). Other data suggests that mouse macrophages utilize autophagy to control *L. pneumophila* infection. WT but not *dotA* mutant LCVs recruit the autophagy conjugation enzyme Atg7 and a second enzyme Atg8 (Amer *et al.*, 2005). It was proposed that this represents a host defence response, as non-permissive C57BL/6 macrophages induce autophagy in response to *L. pneumophila* with higher frequency than permissive A/J macrophages (Amer *et al.*, 2005).

Signal transduction and innate immunity

Many pathogens have evolved virulence mechanisms to enhance or disrupt signal transduction in cells. It has not been established whether *L. pneumophila* manipulates host signal transduction. As described above, it has been proposed that *L. pneumophila* manipulates NF-κB signalling to promote host cell survival. Interestingly, the *L. pneumophila* genome encodes putative serine/threonine protein kinases (Cazalet *et al.*, 2004; Chien *et al.*, 2004). It is attractive to postulate that they are Dot/Icm effectors that phosphorylate host cell proteins and thus modulate host signalling and downstream processes.

Protozoa contain several homologues of innate immune signalling proteins (Chen *et al.*, 2007). In particular, two proteins contain Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domains, which are found in highly conserved innate immune proteins that play a key role in signal transduction in response to detection of microbes. *Dictyostelium* lacking one of these proteins are more susceptible to killing by *L. pneumophila* (Chen *et al.*, 2007), suggesting both that these proteins have a role in protozoan resistance to bacterial pathogens and that *L. pneumophila* may

1216 S. Shin and C. R. Roy

have evolved effectors to subvert innate immune signaling in protozoa. As TIR domains are evolutionarily conserved in higher eukaryotes, it is conceivable that such effectors could target innate immune signalling in mammalian cells as well.

### Egress

Following completion of intracellular replication, *L. pneumophila* must exit the host cell in order to infect neighbouring cells. How this process occurs is not completely understood. Mutants defective in egress appear to be defective in pore-formation (Alli *et al.*, 2000; Molmeret *et al.*, 2002), leading to the proposal that *L. pneumophila* forms, in addition to the Dot/Icm transporter pore, a second cytotoxin/egress pore required for host cell lysis (Molmeret and Abu Kwaik, 2002). Two Dot/Icm effectors, LepA and LepB, were implicated in the active egress of *L. pneumophila* from protozoa, but not mammalian cells, through a non-lytic process (Chen *et al.*, 2004). LepA and LepB were initially identified based on their weak homology to SNAREs (Chen *et al.*, 2004), but how LepA and B promote egress is unknown. LepB is a Rab1-GAP involved in replicative vacuole biogenesis (Ingmundson *et al.*, 2007). However, LepB may contain other functional domains that contribute to egress.

### Conclusions

It is clear that *L. pneumophila* has evolved multiple mechanisms for subverting host cell function in order to promote its own intracellular survival. Recent studies have uncovered several Dot/Icm-translocated proteins which promote replicative vacuole biogenesis, appear to prevent host cell death and promote egress from the host cell. Additionally, studies have identified several eukaryotic processes that influence intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication. Additional host cell processes are likely to also be manipulated by *L. pneumophila*. The fact that *L. pneumophila* deficient in many of the known Dot/Icm effectors are minimally affected in their ability to replicate within host cells indicates that there are redundant effectors or host cell processes involved in the formation and maintenance of the LCV. Future studies will elucidate the contribution of additional host cell processes and virulence factors to intracellular *L. pneumophila* replication and provide insight into *L. pneumophila* pathogenesis.

### Acknowledgements

We would like to thank members of the Roy lab for helpful discussions and Dr Igor Brodsky for insightful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by the NIH (C.R.R.) and the Irvington Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship

Program of the Cancer Research Institute (S.S.). We apologize to those whose work we were unable to cite due to space limitations.

### References

Abu Kwaik, Y. (1996) The phagosome containing *Legionella pneumophila* within the protozoan *Hartmannella vermiformis* is surrounded by the rough endoplasmic reticulum. *Appl Environ Microbiol* **62**: 2022–2028.

Abu-Zant, A., Santic, M., Molmeret, M., Jones, S., Helbig, J., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (2005) Incomplete activation of macrophage apoptosis during intracellular replication of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect Immun* **73**: 5339–5349.

Abu-Zant, A., Jones, S., Asare, R., Sutelles, J., Price, C., Graham, J., and Kwaik, Y.A. (2007) Anti-apoptotic signalling by the Dot/Icm secretion system of *L. pneumophila*. *Cell Microbiol* **9**: 246–264.

Alli, O.A., Gao, L.Y., Pedersen, L.L., Zink, S., Radulic, M., Doric, M., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (2000) Temporal pore formation-mediated egress from macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells by *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect Immun* **68**: 6431–6440.

Altman, E., and Segal, G. (2008) The response regulator CpxR directly regulates the expression of several *Legionella pneumophila* icm/dot components as well as new translocated substrates. *J Bacteriol* **190**: 1985–1996.

Amer, A., Franchi, L., Kanneganti, T.D., Body-Malapel, M., Ozoren, N., Brady, G., *et al.* (2006) Regulation of *Legionella* phagosome maturation and infection through flagellin and host Ipaf. *J Biol Chem* **281**: 35217–35223.

Amer, A.O., Byrne, B.G., and Swanson, M.S. (2005) Macrophages rapidly transfer pathogens from lipid raft vacuoles to autophagosomes. *Autophagy* **1**: 53–58.

Aragon, V., Kurtz, S., Flieger, A., Neumeister, B., and Cianciotto, N.P. (2000) Secreted enzymatic activities of wild-type and pilD-deficient *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect Immun* **68**: 1855–1863.

Aragon, V., Kurtz, S., and Cianciotto, N.P. (2001) *Legionella pneumophila* major acid phosphatase and its role in intracellular infection. *Infect Immun* **69**: 177–185.

Aragon, V., Rossier, O., and Cianciotto, N.P. (2002) *Legionella pneumophila* genes that encode lipase and phospholipase C activities. *Microbiology* **148**: 2223–2231.

Asare, R., Santic, M., Gobin, I., Doric, M., Sutelles, J., Graham, J.E., *et al.* (2007) Genetic susceptibility and caspase activation in mouse and human macrophages are distinct for *Legionella longbeachae* and *L. pneumophila*. *Infect Immun* **75**: 1933–1945.

Banerji, S., Bewersdorf, M., Hermes, B., Cianciotto, N.P., and Flieger, A. (2005) Characterization of the major secreted zinc metalloprotease-dependent glycerophospholipid: cholesterol acyltransferase, PlaC, of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect Immun* **73**: 2899–2909.

Banga, S., Gao, P., Shen, X., Fiscus, V., Zong, W.X., Chen, L., and Luo, Z.Q. (2007) *Legionella pneumophila* inhibits macrophage apoptosis by targeting pro-death members of the Bcl2 protein family. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **104**: 5121–5126.

Bardill, J.P., Miller, J.L., and Vogel, J.P. (2005) IcmS-dependent translocation of SdeA into macrophages by the

Legionella pneumophila type IV secretion system. Mol Microbiol 56: 90–103.

Beckers, M.C., Yoshida, S., Morgan, K., Skamene, E., and Gros, P. (1995) Natural resistance to infection with Legionella pneumophila: chromosomal localization of the Lgn1 susceptibility gene. Mamm Genome 6: 540–545.

Berger, K.H., and Isberg, R.R. (1993) Two distinct defects in intracellular growth complemented by a single genetic locus in Legionella pneumophila. Mol Microbiol 7: 7–19.

Byrne, G.I., and Ojcius, D.M. (2004) Chlamydia and apoptosis: life and death decisions of an intracellular pathogen. Nat Rev Microbiol 2: 802–808.

Cambronne, E.D., and Roy, C.R. (2007) The Legionella pneumophila IcmSW complex interacts with multiple Dot/Icm effectors to facilitate type IV translocation. PLoS Pathog 3: e188.

Campodonico, E.M., Chesnel, L., and Roy, C.R. (2005) A yeast genetic system for the identification and characterization of substrate proteins transferred into host cells by the Legionella pneumophila Dot/Icm system. Mol Microbiol 56: 918–933.

Cazalet, C., Rusniok, C., Bruggemann, H., Zidane, N., Magnier, A., Ma, L., et al. (2004) Evidence in the Legionella pneumophila genome for exploitation of host cell functions and high genome plasticity. Nat Genet 36: 1165–1173.

Chen, J., de Felipe, K.S., Clarke, M., Lu, H., Anderson, O.R., Segal, G., and Shuman, H.A. (2004) Legionella effectors that promote nonlytic release from protozoa. Science 303: 1358–1361.

Chen, G., Zhuchenko, O., and Kuspa, A. (2007) Immune-like phagocyte activity in the social amoeba. Science 317: 678–681.

Chien, M., Morozova, I., Shi, S., Sheng, H., Chen, J., Gomez, S.M., et al. (2004) The genomic sequence of the accidental pathogen Legionella pneumophila. Science 305: 1966–1968.

Cianciotto, N.P. (2005) Type II secretion: a protein secretion system for all seasons. Trends Microbiol 13: 581–588.

Cirillo, S.L., Lum, J., and Cirillo, J.D. (2000) Identification of novel loci involved in entry by Legionella pneumophila. Microbiology 146: 1345–1359.

Coers, J., Monahan, C., and Roy, C.R. (1999) Modulation of phagosome biogenesis by Legionella pneumophila creates an organelle permissive for intracellular growth. Nat Cell Biol 1: 451–453.

Coers, J., Kagan, J.C., Matthews, M., Nagai, H., Zuckman, D.M., and Roy, C.R. (2000) Identification of Icm protein complexes that play distinct roles in the biogenesis of an organelle permissive for Legionella pneumophila intracellular growth. Mol Microbiol 38: 719–736.

Coers, J., Vance, R.E., Fontana, M.F., and Dietrich, W.F. (2007) Restriction of Legionella pneumophila growth in macrophages requires the concerted action of cytokine and Naip5/Ipafl signalling pathways. Cell Microbiol 9: 2344–2357.

Conover, G.M., Derre, I., Vogel, J.P., and Isberg, R.R. (2003) The Legionella pneumophila LidA protein: a translocated substrate of the Dot/Icm system associated with maintenance of bacterial integrity. Mol Microbiol 48: 305–321.

DebRoy, S., Dao, J., Soderberg, M., Rossier, O., and

L. pneumophila and host cell processes 1217

Cianciotto, N.P. (2006) Legionella pneumophila type II secretome reveals unique exoproteins and a chitinase that promotes bacterial persistence in the lung. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103: 19146–19151.

Derre, I., and Isberg, R.R. (2004a) Legionella pneumophila replication vacuole formation involves rapid recruitment of proteins of the early secretory system. Infect Immun 72: 3048–3053.

Derre, I., and Isberg, R.R. (2004b) Macrophages from mice with the restrictive Lgn1 allele exhibit multifactorial resistance to Legionella pneumophila. Infect Immun 72: 6221–6229.

Derre, I., and Isberg, R.R. (2005) LidA, a translocated substrate of the Legionella pneumophila type IV secretion system, interferes with the early secretory pathway. Infect Immun 73: 4370–4380.

Dietrich, W.F., Damron, D.M., Isberg, R.R., Lander, E.S., and Swanson, M.S. (1995) Lgn1, a gene that determines susceptibility to Legionella pneumophila, maps to mouse chromosome 13. Genomics 26: 443–450.

Diez, E., Yaraghi, Z., MacKenzie, A., and Gros, P. (2000) The neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (Naip) is expressed in macrophages and is modulated after phagocytosis and during intracellular infection with Legionella pneumophila. J Immunol 164: 1470–1477.

Diez, E., Lee, S.H., Gauthier, S., Yaraghi, Z., Tremblay, M., Vidal, S., and Gros, P. (2003) Birc1e is the gene within the Lgn1 locus associated with resistance to Legionella pneumophila. Nat Genet 33: 55–60.

Donaldson, J.G., and Jackson, C.L. (2000) Regulators and effectors of the ARF GTPases. Curr Opin Cell Biol 12: 475–482.

Dorer, M.S., Kirton, D., Bader, J.S., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) RNA interference analysis of Legionella in Drosophila cells: exploitation of early secretory apparatus dynamics. PLoS Pathog 2: e34.

Dorn, B.R., Dunn, W.A., Jr, and Progulske-Fox, A. (2002) Bacterial interactions with the autophagic pathway. Cell Microbiol 4: 1–10.

de Felipe, K.S., Pampou, S., Jovanovic, O.S., Pericone, C.D., Ye, S.F., Kalachikov, S., and Shuman, H.A. (2005) Evidence for acquisition of Legionella type IV secretion substrates via interdomain horizontal gene transfer. J Bacteriol 187: 7716–7726.

Fields, B.S. (1996) The molecular ecology of legionellae. Trends Microbiol 4: 286–290.

Flieger, A., Neumeister, B., and Cianciotto, N.P. (2002) Characterization of the gene encoding the major secreted lyso-phospholipase A of Legionella pneumophila and its role in detoxification of lysophosphatidylcholine. Infect Immun 70: 6094–6106.

Fortier, A., Diez, E., and Gros, P. (2005) Naip5/Birc1e and susceptibility to Legionella pneumophila. Trends Microbiol 13: 328–335.

Fortier, A., de Chastellier, C., Balor, S., and Gros, P. (2007) Birc1e/Naip5 rapidly antagonizes modulation of phagosome maturation by Legionella pneumophila. Cell Microbiol 9: 910–923.

Franchi, L., Amer, A., Body-Malapel, M., Kanneganti, T.D., Ozoren, N., Jagirdar, R., et al. (2006) Cytosolic flagellin requires Ipaf for activation of caspase-1 and interleukin

© 2008 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 10, 1209–1220

1beta in salmonella-infected macrophages. Nat Immunol 7: 576–582.

Gao, L.Y., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (1999a) Apoptosis in macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells during early stages of infection by *Legionella pneumophila* and its role in cytopathogenicity. Infect Immun 67: 862–870.

Gao, L.Y., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (1999b) Activation of caspase 3 during *Legionella pneumophila*-induced apoptosis. Infect Immun 67: 4886–4894.

Gao, L.Y., Harb, O.S., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (1997) Utilization of similar mechanisms by *Legionella pneumophila* to parasitize two evolutionarily distant host cells, mammalian macrophages and protozoa. Infect Immun 65: 4738–4746.

Garduno, R.A., Garduno, E., and Hoffman, P.S. (1998) Surface-associated hsp60 chaperonin of *Legionella pneumophila* mediates invasion in a HeLa cell model. Infect Immun 66: 4602–4610.

Gutierrez, M.G., Master, S.S., Singh, S.B., Taylor, G.A., Colombo, M.I., and Deretic, V. (2004) Autophagy is a defense mechanism inhibiting BCG and Mycobacterium tuberculosis survival in infected macrophages. Cell 119: 753–766.

Hagele, S., Hacker, J., and Brand, B.C. (1998) *Legionella pneumophila* kills human phagocytes but not protozoan host cells by inducing apoptotic cell death. FEMS Microbiol Lett 169: 51–58.

Hales, L.M., and Shuman, H.A. (1999) *Legionella pneumophila* contains a type II general secretion pathway required for growth in amoebae as well as for secretion of the Msp protease. Infect Immun 67: 3662–3666.

Hilbi, H., Segal, G., and Shuman, H.A. (2001) Icm/dot-dependent upregulation of phagocytosis by *Legionella pneumophila*. Mol Microbiol 42: 603–617.

Horwitz, M.A. (1983a) Formation of a novel phagosome by the Legionnaires’ disease bacterium (*Legionella pneumophila*) in human monocytes. J Exp Med 158: 1319–1331.

Horwitz, M.A. (1983b) The Legionnaires’ disease bacterium (*Legionella pneumophila*) inhibits phagosome-lysosome fusion in human monocytes. J Exp Med 158: 2108–2126.

Horwitz, M.A., and Silverstein, S.C. (1980) Legionnaires’ disease bacterium (*Legionella pneumophila*) multiplies intracellularly in human monocytes. J Clin Invest 66: 441–450.

Horwitz, M.A., and Maxfield, F.R. (1984) *Legionella pneumophila* inhibits acidification of its phagosome in human monocytes. J Cell Biol 99: 1936–1943.

Ingmundson, A., Delprato, A., Lambright, D.G., and Roy, C.R. (2007) *Legionella pneumophila* proteins that regulate Rab1 membrane cycling. Nature 450: 365–369.

Izu, K., Yoshida, S., Miyamoto, H., Chang, B., Ogawa, M., Yamamoto, H., et al. (1999) Grouping of 20 reference strains of *Legionella* species by the growth ability within mouse and guinea pig macrophages. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 26: 61–68.

Kagan, J.C., and Roy, C.R. (2002) *Legionella* phagosomes intercept vesicular traffic from endoplasmic reticulum exit sites. Nat Cell Biol 4: 945–954.

Kagan, J.C., Stein, M.P., Pypaert, M., and Roy, C.R. (2004) *Legionella* subvert the functions of Rab1 and Sec22b to create a replicative organelle. J Exp Med 199: 1201–1211.


Kaufmann, A.F., McDade, J.E., Patton, C.M., Bennett, J.V., Skaliy, P., Feeley, J.C., et al. (1981) Pontiac fever: isolation of the etiologic agent (*Legionella pneumophila*) and demonstration of its mode of transmission. Am J Epidemiol 114: 337–347.

Khelef, N., Shuman, H.A., and Maxfield, F.R. (2001) Phagocytosis of wild-type *Legionella pneumophila* occurs through a wortmannin-insensitive pathway. Infect Immun 69: 5157–5161.

Kirby, J.E., Vogel, J.P., Andrews, H.L., and Isberg, R.R. (1998) Evidence for pore-forming ability by *Legionella pneumophila*. Mol Microbiol 27: 323–336.

Kubori, T., Hyakutake, A., and Nagai, H. (2008) *Legionella* translocates an E3 ubiquitin ligase that has multiple U-boxes with distinct functions. Mol Microbiol 67: 1307–1319.

Laguna, R.K., Creasey, E.A., Li, Z., Valtz, N., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) A *Legionella pneumophila*-translocated substrate that is required for growth within macrophages and protection from host cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103: 18745–18750.

Lamkanfi, M., Amer, A., Kanneganti, T.D., Munoz-Planillo, R., Chen, G., Vandenabeele, P., et al. (2007) The Nod-like receptor family member Naip5/Birc1e restricts *Legionella pneumophila* growth independently of caspase-1 activation. J Immunol 178: 8022–8027.

Liles, M.R., Edelstein, P.H., and Cianciotto, N.P. (1999) The prepilin peptidase is required for protein secretion by and the virulence of the intracellular pathogen *Legionella pneumophila*. Mol Microbiol 31: 959–970.

Liu, Y., and Luo, Z.Q. (2007) The *Legionella pneumophila* effector SidJ is required for efficient recruitment of endoplasmic reticulum proteins to the bacterial phagosome. Infect Immun 75: 592–603.

Losick, V.P., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) NF-kappaB translocation prevents host cell death after low-dose challenge by *Legionella pneumophila*. J Exp Med 203: 2177–2189.

Luhrmann, A., and Roy, C.R. (2007) *Coxiella burnetii* inhibits activation of host cell apoptosis through a mechanism that involves preventing cytochrome c release from mitochondria. Infect Immun 75: 5282–5289.

Luo, Z.Q., and Isberg, R.R. (2004) Multiple substrates of the *Legionella pneumophila* Dot/Icm system identified by interbacterial protein transfer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101: 841–846.

Machner, M.P., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) Targeting of host Rab GTPase function by the intravacuolar pathogen *Legionella pneumophila*. Dev Cell 11: 47–56.

Machner, M.P., and Isberg, R.R. (2007) A bifunctional bacterial protein links GDI displacement to Rab1 activation. Science 318: 974–977.

Mariathasan, S., and Monack, D.M. (2007) Inflammasome adaptors and sensors: intracellular regulators of infection and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol 7: 31–40.

Marra, A., Blander, S.J., Horwitz, M.A., and Shuman, H.A. (1992) Identification of a *Legionella pneumophila* locus required for intracellular multiplication in human macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89: 9607–9611.

McDade, J.E., Shepard, C.C., Fraser, D.W., Tsai, T.R., Redus, M.A., and Dowdle, W.R. (1977) Legionnaires’


© 2008 The Authors

Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 10, 1209–1220

disease: isolation of a bacterium and demonstration of its role in other respiratory disease. *N Engl J Med* 297: 1197–1203.

Miao, E.A., Alpuche-Aranda, C.M., Dors, M., Clark, A.E., Bader, M.W., Miller, S.I., and Aderem, A. (2006) Cytoplasmic flagellin activates caspase-1 and secretion of interleukin 1beta via Ipaf. *Nat Immunol* 7: 569–575.

Moffat, J.F., Edelstein, P.H., Regula, D.P., Jr, Cirillo, J.D., and Tompkins, L.S. (1994) Effects of an isogenic Zn-metalloprotease-deficient mutant of *Legionella pneumophila* in a guinea-pig pneumonia model. *Mol Microbiol* 12: 693–705.

Molmeret, M., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (2002) How does *Legionella pneumophila* exit the host cell? *Trends Microbiol* 10: 258–260.

Molmeret, M., Alli, O.A., Zink, S., Flieger, A., Cianciotto, N.P., and Kwaik, Y.A. (2002) *icmT* is essential for pore formation-mediated egress of *Legionella pneumophila* from mammalian and protozoan cells. *Infect Immun* 70: 69–78.

Molmeret, M., Zink, S.D., Han, L., Abu-Zant, A., Asari, R., Bitar, D.M., and Abu Kwaik, Y. (2004) Activation of caspase-3 by the Dot/lcm virulence system is essential for arrested biogenesis of the *Legionella*-containing phagosome. *Cell Microbiol* 6: 33–48.

Molofsky, A.B., Shetron-Rama, L.M., and Swanson, M.S. (2005) Components of the *Legionella pneumophila* flagellar regulon contribute to multiple virulence traits, including lysosome avoidance and macrophage death. *Infect Immun* 73: 5720–5734.

Molofsky, A.B., Byrne, B.G., Whitfield, N.N., Madigan, C.A., Fuse, E.T., Tateda, K., and Swanson, M.S. (2006) Cytosolic recognition of flagellin by mouse macrophages restricts *Legionella pneumophila* infection. *J Exp Med* 203: 1093–1104.

Murata, T., Delprato, A., Ingmundson, A., Toomre, D.K., Lambright, D.G., and Roy, C.R. (2006) The *Legionella pneumophila* effector protein DrrA is a Rab1 guanine nucleotide-exchange factor. *Nat Cell Biol* 8: 971–977.

Nagai, H., Kagan, J.C., Zhu, X., Kahn, R.A., and Roy, C.R. (2002) A bacterial guanine nucleotide exchange factor activates ARF on *Legionella* phagosomes. *Science* 295: 679–682.

Newton, H.J., Sansom, F.M., Bennett-Wood, V., and Hartland, E.L. (2006) Identification of *Legionella pneumophila*-specific genes by genomic subtractive hybridization with *Legionella micdadei* and identification of *lpnE*, a gene required for efficient host cell entry. *Infect Immun* 74: 1683–1691.

Newton, H.J., Sansom, F.M., Dao, J., McAlister, A.D., Sloan, J., Cianciotto, N.P., and Hartland, E.L. (2007) Sel1 repeat protein LpnE is a *Legionella pneumophila* virulence determinant that influences vacuolar trafficking. *Infect Immun* 75: 5575–5585.

Ninio, S., Zuckman-Cholon, D.M., Cambronne, E.D., and Roy, C.R. (2005) The *Legionella IcmS-IcmW* protein complex is important for Dot/lcm-mediated protein translocation. *Mol Microbiol* 55: 912–926.

Ogawa, M., Yoshimori, T., Suzuki, T., Sagara, H., Mizushima, N., and Sasakawa, C. (2005) Escape of intracellular *Shigella* from autophagy. *Science* 307: 727–731.

Otto, G.P., Wu, M.Y., Clarke, M., Lu, H., Anderson, O.R.,


Hilbi, H., et al. (2004) Macroautophagy is dispensable for intracellular replication of *Legionella pneumophila* in *Dictyostelium discoideum*. *Mol Microbiol* 51: 63–72.

Park, M., Yun, S.T., Kim, M.S., Chun, J., and Ahn, T.I. (2004) Phylogenetic characterization of *Legionella*-like endosymbiotic X-bacteria in *Amoeba proteus*: a proposal for ‘Candidatus *Legionella jeonii*’ sp. nov. *Environ Microbiol* 6: 1252–1263.

Ren, T., Zamboni, D.S., Roy, C.R., Dietrich, W.F., and Vance, R.E. (2006) Flagellin-deficient *Legionella* mutants evade caspase-1- and Naip5-mediated macrophage immunity. *PLoS Pathog* 2: e18.

Robinson, C.G., and Roy, C.R. (2006) Attachment and fusion of endoplasmic reticulum with vacuoles containing *Legionella pneumophila*. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 793–805.

Rossier, O., Starkenburg, S.R., and Cianciotto, N.P. (2004) *Legionella pneumophila* type II protein secretion promotes virulence in the A/J mouse model of Legionnaires’ disease pneumonia. *Infect Immun* 72: 310–321.

Roy, C.R., Berger, K.H., and Isberg, R.R. (1998) *Legionella pneumophila* DotA protein is required for early phagosome trafficking decisions that occur within minutes of bacterial uptake. *Mol Microbiol* 28: 663–674.

Sasaki, T., Kikuchi, A., Araki, S., Hata, Y., Isomura, M., Kuroda, S., and Takai, Y. (1990) Purification and characterization from bovine brain cytosol of a protein that inhibits the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP to smg p25A, a ras p21-like GTP-binding protein. *J Biol Chem* 265: 2333–2337.

Segal, G., Purcell, M., and Shuman, H.A. (1998) Host cell killing and bacterial conjugation require overlapping sets of genes within a 22-kb region of the *Legionella pneumophila* genome. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95: 1669–1674.

Shohdy, N., Efe, J.A., Emr, S.D., and Shuman, H.A. (2005) Pathogen effector protein screening in yeast identifies *Legionella* factors that interfere with membrane trafficking. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 4866–4871.

Sivars, U., Aivazian, D., and Pfeffer, S.R. (2003) Yip3 catalyses the dissociation of endosomal Rab-GDI complexes. *Nature* 425: 856–859.

Soldati, T., Shapiro, A.D., Svejstrup, A.B., and Pfeffer, S.R. (1994) Membrane targeting of the small GTPase Rab9 is accompanied by nucleotide exchange. *Nature* 369: 76–78.

Swanson, M.S., and Isberg, R.R. (1995) Association of *Legionella pneumophila* with the macrophage endoplasmic reticulum. *Infect Immun* 63: 3609–3620.

Swanson, M.S., and Hammer, B.K. (2000) *Legionella pneumophila* pathogenesis: a fateful journey from amoebae to macrophages. *Annu Rev Microbiol* 54: 567–613.

Swanson, M.S., and Fernandez-Moreira, E. (2002) A microbial strategy to multiply in macrophages: the pregnant pause. *Traffic* 3: 170–177.

Szeto, L., and Shuman, H.A. (1990) The *Legionella pneumophila* major secretory protein, a protease, is not required for intracellular growth or cell killing. *Infect Immun* 58: 2585–2592.

Tilney, L.G., Harb, O.S., Connelly, P.S., Robinson, C.G., and Roy, C.R. (2001) How the parasitic bacterium *Legionella pneumophila* modifies its phagosome and transforms it into rough ER: implications for conversion of plasma membrane to the ER membrane. *J Cell Sci* 114: 4637–4650.

Ullrich, O., Stenmark, H., Alexandrov, K., Huber, L.A., Kaibuchi, K., Sasaki, T., *et al.* (1993) Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor as a general regulator for the membrane association of rab proteins. *J Biol Chem* **268**: 18143–18150.

VanRheenen, S.M., Luo, Z.Q., O’Connor, T., and Isberg, R.R. (2006) Members of a *Legionella pneumophila* family of proteins with ExoU (phospholipase A) active sites are translocated to target cells. *Infect Immun* **74**: 3597–3606.

Vogel, J.P., Andrews, H.L., Wong, S.K., and Isberg, R.R. (1998) Conjugative transfer by the virulence system of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Science* **279**: 873–876.

Voth, D.E., Howe, D., and Heinzen, R.A. (2007) *Coxiella burnetii* inhibits apoptosis in human THP-1 cells and monkey primary alveolar macrophages. *Infect Immun* **75**: 4263–4271.

Weber, S.S., Ragaz, C., Reus, K., Nyfeler, Y., and Hilbi, H. (2006) *Legionella pneumophila* exploits PI(4)P to anchor secreted effector proteins to the replicative vacuole. *PLoS Pathog* **2**: e46.

Wright, E.K., Goodart, S.A., Growney, J.D., Hadinoto, V., Endrizzi, M.G., Long, E.M., *et al.* (2003) Naip5 affects host susceptibility to the intracellular pathogen *Legionella pneumophila*. *Curr Biol* **13**: 27–36.

Xie, Z., and Klionsky, D.J. (2007) Autophagosome formation: core machinery and adaptations. *Nat Cell Biol* **9**: 1102–1109.

Yamamoto, Y., Klein, T.W., Newton, C.A., Widen, R., and Friedman, H. (1988) Growth of *Legionella pneumophila* in thioglycolate-elicited peritoneal macrophages from A/J mice. *Infect Immun* **56**: 370–375.

Zamboni, D.S., Kobayashi, K.S., Kohlsdorf, T., Ogura, Y., Long, E.M., Vance, R.E., *et al.* (2006) The Birc1e cytosolic pattern-recognition receptor contributes to the detection and control of *Legionella pneumophila* infection. *Nat Immunol* **7**: 318–325.

Zerial, M., and McBride, H. (2001) Rab proteins as membrane organizers. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* **2**: 107–117.

Zink, S.D., Pedersen, L., Cianciotto, N.P., and Abu-Kwaik, Y. (2002) The Dot/Icm type IV secretion system of *Legionella pneumophila* is essential for the induction of apoptosis in human macrophages. *Infect Immun* **70**: 1657–1663.

Zusman, T., Aloni, G., Halperin, E., Kotzer, H., Degtyar, E., Feldman, M., and Segal, G. (2007) The response regulator PmrA is a major regulator of the icm/dot type IV secretion system in *Legionella pneumophila* and *Coxiella burnetii*. *Mol Microbiol* **63**: 1508–1523.
