
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Cancer Letters 266 (2008) 99–115

Mini-review

**Cytogenetic and molecular aspects of gastric cancer: Clinical implications**

Anna D. Panani*

Critical Care Department, Medical School of Athens University, Cytogenetics Unit, “Evangelismos” Hospital, Ipsilandou 45-47, Athens 10676, Greece

Received 8 October 2007; received in revised form 5 February 2008; accepted 22 February 2008

---

### Abstract

Gastric cancer is of major importance world-wide being the second most common cause of cancer-related death in the world. According to Lauren's histological classification gastric cancer is divided in two groups, the better differentiated intestinal carcinomas and the poorly differentiated diffuse-type cancers. The genetic changes underlying the initiation and progression of gastric cancer are not well defined. Gastric carcinogenesis is a multistep process involving a number of genetic and epigenetic factors. Although it has been proposed that different genetic pathways exist for differentiated and undifferentiated carcinomas, the two histological subtypes of gastric cancer share some common genetic alterations. Currently, tumor histology and pathologic stage are the major prognostic variables used in the clinical practice for gastric cancer patients. However, it is known that tumors with similar morphology may differ in biological aggressiveness, prognosis and response to treatment. Molecular genetic analysis of gastric cancer revealed a number of associations of certain genetic changes with pathological features, tumor biological behavior and prognosis of gastric cancer patients, suggesting that these genetic abnormalities might play an important role in gastric tumorigenesis. Increasing evidence suggests that the molecular genetic changes could be helpful in the clinical setting, contributing to prognosis and management of patients. Regarding epigenetic events in gastric tumorigenesis, a number of methylating markers have been proposed for risk assessment, prognostic evaluation and as therapeutic targets. However, further research is required in order to systematically investigate the genetic changes in gastric cancer estimating also their usefulness in the clinical practice. A good understanding of the genetic changes underlying gastric carcinogenesis may provide new perspectives for prognosis and screening of high risk individuals. Some of the genetic alterations could definitely improve tumor classification and management of gastric cancer patients. Also, based on molecular data identified in gastric cancer novel therapeutics might help to improve the treatment of this disease.

© 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Gastric cancer; Cytogenetics; Molecular genetic alterations; Epigenetic events; Clinical implications

---

### 1. Introduction

Gastric cancer is of major importance world-wide. Statistical data on mortality rates have shown that gastric cancer represents the second most common cause of cancer-related death in the world [1,2].

* Tel./fax: +30 210 7259307.
* E-mail address: apanani@med.uoa.gr

0304-3835/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2008.02.053
Gastric adenocarcinomas are classified according to the site of tumor origin and the pathological characteristics of the lesion. Lauren's classification constitutes a histological classification, that is widely applied. According to this classification gastric adenocarcinomas are described as the better differentiated, intestinal-type carcinomas, with cohesive, glandular-like cell groups or the poorly differentiated, diffuse-type carcinomas, with infiltrating, non-cohesive tumor cells [3]. Differences exist in the pathways leading to these two types of gastric carcinomas. Intestinal tumors are progressed through a number of sequential steps. These steps begin with atrophic gastritis followed by intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and carcinoma. On the other hand, diffuse carcinomas are not characterized by preceding steps other than the chronic gastritis associated with the *Helicobacter pylori* infection [4,5].

The pathogenesis of gastric cancer represents a classic example of gene–environment interactions. Therefore, the geographical differences in gastric cancer frequency may be due to genetic, as well as environmental factors. Several epidemiological studies have shown that risk factors for gastric cancer development include gastric atrophy due to *H. pylori* infection, as well as smoking, alcohol, salty food and a lower intake of fresh fruits and vegetables. Regarding *H. pylori* related gastric cancer, it is now well recognized that the development of gastric cancer is strongly influenced by host genetic factors [5–9]. Unfortunately, there is no clear agreement on the genetic changes underlying the initiation and progression of this type of malignancy. Efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the process of gastric tumorigenesis have led to a number of cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies.

Conventional cytogenetic studies have shown recurrent abnormalities in gastric cancer [10–20]. However, the detection of recurring chromosomal aberrations by conventional cytogenetics is particularly problematic due both to the difficulty in preparing metaphase spread of adequate quality and the complex nature of the chromosomal abnormalities. Molecular cytogenetic techniques have been proven valuable in solving some of these problems. By these techniques consistent DNA copy-number gains or losses were found in gastric cancer [21–30]. Molecular studies addressing certain genes have supplied important information on the genetic events in gastric cancer. Therefore, the development and progression of gastric cancer

involves a number of genetic alterations of tumor suppressor and tumor-related genes. Among the genetic changes implicated in the multi-stage gastric carcinogenesis, amplification of c-myc, c-erbB 2, c-met and mutations of APC, TP53 and E-cadherin (CDH1) have been so far reported. Moreover, epigenetic events, such as promoter hypermethylation of a number of tumor suppressor and tumor-related genes, have been described in gastric cancer [5,31–38].

Gastric cancer is a genetically heterogeneous disease proceeding via different pathways of carcinogenesis and/or progression. However, the causes of this genetic heterogeneity have not been thoroughly investigated. Interestingly, it was shown that DNA changes may distinguish distinct tumor subtypes among histologically identical tumors [39].

Although, a number of associations of certain molecular genetic changes with pathological features, tumor biological behavior and prognosis of gastric cancer patients has been described, the clinical significance of the genetic changes for gastric carcinoma has not been as yet established. Therefore, the precise genetic parameters to predict the outcome of gastric cancer patients are not of particular diagnostic or prognostic help to date. This might partly be due to the fact that most of the studies focused on selected genetic abnormalities, while studies comparing clinicopathological parameters and genetic changes still remain limited and insufficient for drawing final conclusions [40–44]. A further understanding of the molecular changes underlying gastric cancer development and progression will have functional implications in suppressing gastric cancer progression and lead to new therapeutic strategies.

In this review, we summarize the most common cytogenetic and molecular genetic changes, as well as epigenetic events, described in gastric cancer, emphasizing also their possible usefulness in the clinical practice.

## 2. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis

Cytogenetic studies focused on the evaluation of recurrent chromosomal alterations in cancer cells are of major importance, providing entry points for molecular analyses and identification of specific genes involved in tumorigenesis. Moreover, the analysis of recurrent chromosomal aberrations has become an integral part of the diagnostic and prognostic workup in many cancers [45]. The detection
of recurrent genetic changes by conventional cytogenetics in solid tumors is particularly problematic due to complexity of the chromosomal abnormalities and the difficulty in preparing adequate metaphase spreads. The development and application of a number of fluorescence in situ hybridization and other related techniques, such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and multicolor karyotyping, yielded significant information on the genetic changes involved in carcinogenesis. Concerning banded cytogenetic studies of gastric cancer, only a small number of studies have been so far reported [10–20,46]. Recurrent chromosomal abnormalities have been detected in gastric cancer, but no specific aberration has been established to date. In some cases simple chromosomal abnormalities have been reported, whereas in other cases complex changes have been described. Among simple chromosomal abnormalities an extra X chromosome, trisomy 8, 9 and 19, del(7q) and i(8q) have been described in gastric cancer. In cases with complex karyotypes a preferential involvement of chromosomes 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 17 and 19 has been reported (Table 1). Regarding simple chromosomal abnormalities, an isochromosome i(8q) was described as a sole anomaly in a gastric cancer case with a long survival. Isochromosome i(8q) was considered as possibly specific change, associated with a good prognosis [15]. On the other hand, i(8q) has been reported in advanced gastric cancer and it was suggested, that this abnormality possibly represents a secondary change associated with tumor aggressiveness [47]. Interestingly, in seven out of eight gastric cancer cases studied by Rodriguez et al. [17] involvement of chromosome 11p13-15 was found and it was suggested that this abnormality is possibly specific. In a recent study, focused on structural chromosomal changes in 15 gastric cancer cases, structural abnormalities of chromosome 1, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14 and 17 were constantly found. Concerning chromosome 11 abnormalities the chromosomal region 11p15 was involved as add(11)(p15) in five cases [46].

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) techniques have shown also recurrent abnormalities in gastric cancer. The chromosomes 1, 7, 8, 9, 17, 20, X and Y were the most commonly involved in numerical aberrations [21–23,48]. Moreover, a number of FISH studies reported on the association of chromosomal abnormalities with clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer with different results [23,40,41,49–52]. In some studies no correlation between numerical chromosomal abnormalities and the clinicopathological characteristics of the tumor was found [49,50]. In contrast, other studies described a correlation between certain numerical chromosomal aberration and tumor clinicopathological features [23,40,41,51]. Onchi et al. [40] showed that polysomy 17 was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, while the percentage of hyperdiploid nuclei was identified as an independent prognostic factor for the postoperative survival of patients with invasive gastric cancer treated with radical gastrectomy. Terada et al. [41] described that the frequency of numerical aberrations of chromosome 17 was significantly correlated with the depth of invasion, lymph node metastasis, as well as the lymphatic and venous invasion. Kitayama et al. [51] showed that cases with numerical abnormalities of chromosomes 3, 10, 11, 12, 17 and Y had a worse prognosis.

A few studies have been reported on the genetic changes found by multicolor karyotyping [24,26,53]. By this technique hidden structural abnormalities including translocations can be detected. Application of multicolor FISH in two primary gastric adenocarcinomas, a well differentiated intestinal-type and a poorly differentiated diffuse type, revealed structural and numerical changes in both cases. Similarities between the two cases included partial loss of chromosome 17 and 18, polysomy 20, translocations on 1p and 9p, structural abnormalities of chromosome 12q, as well as of chromosome 8 with consistent loss of 8p material [26]. Yamashita et al. [53] studied by multicolor spectral karyotyping 10 established gastric cell lines

Table 1  
Frequent cytogenetic changes in gastric cancer  

| Conventional cytogenetics | Simple abnormalities | Complex karyotypes |
|---------------------------|----------------------|--------------------|
| Molecular cytogenetics     | Gains                | Losses             |
|                           | 3q, 7p, 7q, 8q, 13q, 17q, 20p, 20q | 4q, 9p, 17p, 18q |and seven cancerous ascetic fluids. They found recurrent chromosomal abnormalities including reciprocal and non-reciprocal translocations. The chromosomal bands 8q24 and 11q13 were the most commonly involved.

CGH is a powerful screening method for the detection of chromosomal copy-number changes leading to the rapid accumulation of cytogenetic information on solid tumors. To date, a number of studies have reported on the CGH or array-CGH analysis of gastric cancer. CGH/array-CGH studies have identified a complex pattern of gains and losses of many chromosomes. Although, the reported chromosomal findings by CGH are not consistent with each other, recurrent chromosomal abnormalities have been identified in gastric cancer. Therefore, the chromosomal aberrations that are constantly found in gastric cancer include gains of 3q, 7p, 7q, 8q, 13q, 17q, 20p, and 20q and losses of 4q, 9p, 17p, and 18q [27–29, 39, 54–57] (Table 1). Several studies by CGH have been reported on the association of DNA copy-number changes with clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer with different results [27–29, 42, 57–66]. Some studies reported that there was no correlation of specific DNA changes with histological type, while others described the opposite findings. Koo et al. [27] described gains in 18q and 20q material predominantly in the intestinal type, while amplifications in the 8q, 13q, and 17q regions were more common in the diffuse type of gastric cancer. Also, Wu et al. [28] studied by CGH 53 gastric tumors and correlated DNA copy-number aberrations with clinicopathological characteristics. In that study, gains on 8q, 17q, and losses on 3p and 5q were higher in the intestinal type than in diffuse type of gastric cancer, while gains on 13q were more common in the diffuse type. The frequent findings of gains on 8q and 17q in the intestinal-type of gastric cancer were in agreement with the results of Amadori et al. [57] and Kokkola et al. [29], whereas gains on 13q have previously been reported by Koizumi et al. [58] in diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. In a series of 62 gastric adenocarcinomas studied by Wu et al. [42] it was shown that gains on 20q more frequently occurred in the intestinal type, whereas gains on 3q were more common in diffuse type of gastric cancer. In contrast, van Grieken et al. [60] by CGH technique applied on 46 primary gastric tumors, did not find differences in DNA copy-number changes between the intestinal and diffuse-type carcinomas. Moreover, in another study of 12

mixed gastric carcinomas studied by array-CGH [61] no significant differences in copy-number changes between the diffuse and intestinal components of these tumors were found. The authors suggested, that the mechanism underlying the intestinal and diffuse histotypes of gastric cancer is not caused by DNA copy-number changes, but by other biological events not detectable by array-CGH. Interestingly, Peng et al. [62] supposed, that the cytogenetic differences, if any, between diffuse and intestinal types of gastric cancer might be masked by the accumulation of progression-related chromosomal aberrations at advanced stages. Peng et al. [62] taking into account that gastric cancers analyzed by CGH were mostly at advanced stages, considered that it might be important to discriminate between earlier and later events. They applied metaphase- and array-based CGH to 69 tumor samples taken from 19 cases of diffuse-type gastric cancer (eight early cancers and 11 advanced cancers). The analyses have disclosed earlier and later events in the tumorigenesis of diffuse-type gastric cancer. The earlier events, such as gains at 8q and losses at 17p, were largely common between early and advanced tumors, while gains at 7p, 7q and 15q and losses at 3p and 18q were significantly more common in advanced cancers. The results supported that the majority of advanced cancers derive from early cancers through the accumulation of various sideline changes in addition to stemline changes. In another study, it was shown that advanced gastric carcinomas demonstrated a higher prevalence of gains at 8q and losses at 16q than early gastric carcinomas [28].

Several studies were reported on the clinical and biological behavior of gastric cancer. The results are not consistent with each other. Different DNA copy-number changes were found to be associated with prognosis, lymph node status and metastasis. Kang et al. [63] detected some correlations between certain novel amplified or deleted regions and clinical status in 28 gastric adenocarcinomas studied by array-CGH. Losses at 9p23 or 14q31 were associated with lymph node status, while losses at 4q23 or 4q28 were related to metastasis. One of the notable aspects of that study was that the losses at 4q or 14q could be employed in the evaluation of the metastatic status of gastric cancer. Wu et al. [42] reported that loss of 3pl2 was associated with peritoneal metastasis of gastric carcinoma. Morohara et al. [64] described that gains of 5p14, 7q21, 7q31, and 7q36 and loss of 22q11 were significant in
gastric cancer cases with peritoneal dissemination and/or positive peritoneal cytology. The authors concluded, that the cytogenetic changes observed in the primary tumor could lead to useful information to guide the surgical treatment policies and determine the extent of postoperative chemotherapy. In another study [65] it was shown that the chromosomal copy-number changes in gastric tumors might predict lymph node status and survival in patients with gastric adenocarcinomas. The authors considered that the possibility to discriminate between patients with a high risk of lymph node metastasis could clinically be helpful for selecting patients for extended lymph node resection. Weiss et al. [66] examined by array-CGH 35 gastric adenocarcinomas comparing chromosomal changes with disease outcome. Interestingly, they found that gains of 1q32 and loss of 18q22 were associated with a bad prognosis indicating that these regions could harbor genes, that may determine aggressive tumor behavior and poor clinical outcome.

Several clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer have been described in relation to age of onset of this disease [67,68], but little is known about the genetic changes associated with the age of onset of gastric carcinomas. Buffart et al. [69] explored by array-CGH differences in DNA copy-number alterations in relation to age of onset of gastric cancer. They found that different genomic profiles were correlated significantly with the age. The chromosomal regions 6p21, 9q34, 11p15, 11q23, 17p13, 19p13 and 22q13 differed most significantly between young and old patients. The majority of tumors of young patients showed gains in all these chromosomal regions, while normal copy-number status was observed in the majority of old patients. The chromosome regions 11q23 and 19p13 contributed most to age-related differences in tumor profiles. The authors concluded that gastric cancers of young and old patients belong to groups with different genomic profiles, which likely reflect different pathogenic mechanisms of the disease.

It is apparent, that a number of studies have shown recurrent chromosomal abnormalities in gastric cancer and a remarkable effort was made by several investigators to correlate them with histological subtypes. Furthermore, based on DNA copy-number changes an attempt to characterize the clinical and biological behavior of gastric cancer was made. However, the results are still limited and insufficient for drawing final conclusions.


3. Molecular genetic events in gastric carcinogenesis

The development and progression of gastric cancer is generally driven by an accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. Due to novel techniques in biological research, gene deregulation and other molecular changes implicated in gastric carcinogenesis can now be studied in great detail. The molecular mechanisms underlying gastric cancer include alterations in oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, cell cycle regulators, cell adhesion molecules and DNA repair genes. Additionally, genetic instability and telomerase activation contribute to the multistep process of gastric carcinogenesis [4,5,31–35,70–72]. Tahara [4] reported that particular combinations of these genetic alterations differ in the two histological types of gastric cancer, indicating that well differentiated or intestinal-type and poorly differentiated or diffuse-type carcinomas have distinct carcinogenic pathways. However, the differentiated and undifferentiated tumor types must share some common genetic alterations, as a significant proportion of differentiated carcinomas progress to become undifferentiated cancers [31].

Two major genetic pathways seem to be involved in the sporadic gastric cancer. The first involves loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and the second involves widespread somatic alterations in simple repetitive genomic sequences, leading to microsatellite instability [31,35].

Analyses of gene expression profiles are approaches to identify tumor biological behavior and determine novel prognostic factors. Several studies have shown a possible association of certain molecular changes with pathological features, tumor biological behavior and prognosis of gastric cancer patients (Table 2). Moreover, possible applications of genetic changes in the clinical setting have been reported [31,32,43,70,71].

3.1. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH)

LOH studies have demonstrated the LOH frequencies and the degrees of allelic loss at specific chromosomal regions in tumors, facilitating the identification of tumor suppressor genes. Several LOH studies have been reported in gastric cancer, while some of them focused on the association of LOH with clinicopathological features. High LOH frequencies have been identified at chromosome arms 1p, 3p, 4p, 5q, 7p, 8p, 9p, 12q, 13q, 17p,

Table 2  
Frequent molecular genetic changes in gastric cancer  

| Genes       | Abnormalities                                      | Frequency (%)   | Frequent associated tumor staging features/tumor biological behavior/prognosis$^a$                                                                 |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|             |                                                   | Intestinal type | Diffuse type                                                                                                                                  |
| c-met       | Amplification/overexpression ~20                  | ~40             | Correlation with tumor invasion, lymph node metastasis, poor prognosis                                                                            |
| K-sam       | Amplification/overexpression                      | ~35             | Correlation with advanced tumor stage/poor prognosis                                                                                           |
| c-erbB 2    | Amplification/overexpression ~10–15               | –               | Correlation with advanced tumor stage, lymph node metastasis, liver metastases, poor prognosis                                                  |
| K-ras       | Mutation                                          | Low incidence   | ?                                                                                                                                              |
| c-myc       | Amplification/overexpression                      | ~40–45          | Correlation with poor clinical course/predictor of aggressiveness                                                                              |
| TP53        | LOH/mutation/hypermethylation                     | ~25–40          | Correlation of expression with proliferative rate/lymph node metastasis/shortened survival                                                    |
| APC         | Mutation                                          | ~50             | ?                                                                                                                                              |
| RARβ        | Hypermethylation/reduced expression               | ~60–65          | ?                                                                                                                                              |
| Bcl-2       | LOH, overexpression                               | ~12–35          | Negative correlation of expression with depth of invasion, lymph node metastasis and survival                                                 |
| RUNX 3      | Hemizygous deletion/hypermethylation/loss of expression | ~45–65          | ?                                                                                                                                              |
| PTEN        | LOH/mutation                                      | ?               | Correlation with advanced tumor stage/metastasis                                                                                               |
| E-cadherin (CDH1) | LOH/mutation/hypermethylation/reduced expression | –               | ~20–90 | Correlation of reduced expression with tumor metastatic ability and poor prognosis                                                              |
| Cyclin E    | Amplification/overexpression                      | ~15–20          | Correlation with disease aggressiveness/lymph node metastasis                                                                                  |
| p-27        | Reduced expression                                | ~40–50          | Correlation with advanced tumor stage/depth of invasion/lymph node metastasis                                                                  |
| p-16        | Reduced expression                                | ~12–30          | Correlation with tumor invasion/metastasis                                                                                                     |
| DNA repair genes/MSI | Mutation/hypermethylation/reduced expression | ~15–35          | Correlation with older age/low prevalence of lymph node metastasis/prolonged survival                                                         |

$^a$ Studies with conflicting results have been reported. The most frequent data described in the literature are shown.

18q and 22q in gastric carcinoma [73–81]. French et al. [77] reported a high rate of allelic imbalance of 8p in gastric cancers. Moreover, the authors demonstrated that allelic loss on 8p was associated with poorer survival in gastric cancer patients. Koo et al. [80] examined 38 patients with gastric carcinoma for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on five chromosomal arms comparing LOH genotyping with the clinicopathologic variables and investigating genetic differences between early and advanced gastric carcinoma. The findings suggested that LOH genotyping may be an independent prognostic indicator in gastric carcinoma and particularly the LOH on chromosome 6q could be associated with an unfavorable prognosis, while the LOH on chromosome 22q may be related to the histologic progression of gastric carcinoma. Suzuki et al. [81] examined DNA copy-number aberrations by quantitative microsatellite analysis in 30 patients with gastric cancer, comparing genetic changes with clinical outcome of the patients. They found a significant correlation between the loss of loci on 16q and reduced survival duration. Moreover, the simultaneous presence of gains at 8q and losses at 16q was considered as a significant and independent predictor of unfavorable prognosis.

3.2. Gene alterations

3.2.1. C-met gene
C-met gene encoding a receptor for hepatocyte growth factor, is amplified in intestinal as well as in diffuse-type gastric cancer in approximately 20% and 40% of the cases, respectively. Abnormal expression of c-met has been described to be well correlated with prognostic factors, such as tumor stage, depth of tumor invasion and lymph node metastasis. Thus, c-met expression provides a marker indicating a poor prognosis [82, 83].

3.2.2. K-sam gene
K-sam oncogene is frequently activated in gastric cancer. K-sam is preferentially amplified in advanced diffuse-type gastric cancer in approximately 35% of the cases, but not in intestinal type cancer. It was reported that overexpression of the K-sam gene is associated with a poor prognosis [5, 84].

3.2.3. C-erbB 2 gene
Activation of c-erbB 2 is observed in approximately 10–15% of the gastric tumors. This activation has been reported to be most frequent in advanced gastric carcinoma. Moreover, overexpression of c-erbB 2 is selectively found in intestinal tumors and may serve as a prognostic marker for tumor invasion and lymph node metastasis. It was also described that c-erbB 2 overexpression is correlated with poorer prognosis and liver metastases [85–88].

3.2.4. K-ras gene
K-ras mutations are seen in intestinal type and it is not a feature of diffuse-type carcinomas. The incidence of K-ras mutation is low in gastric cancer [89, 90].

3.2.5. C-myc gene
Gains of chromosome 8, in which c-myc is located, have been suggested as a mechanism accounting for the increase of c-myc copy number. Amplification leading to activation of c-myc has been described in gastric cancer. However, other studies did not detect concordance of c-myc overexpression with amplification in gastric carcinomas. C-myc overexpression was described in approximately 40–45% of the gastric cancer cases. Moreover, studies showed that c-myc overexpression may be associated with a poor clinical course of gastric cancer patients [91–96]. Burbano et al. [94] studied 21 primary gastric adenocarcinomas by CGH. They concluded that c-myc locus amplification may be a predictor of aggressiveness in intestinal type gastric cancer, playing an important role in its development and progression.

3.2.6. TP 53 gene
The p53 gene located at 17p13.1 encodes a nuclear protein, which involves in the cell cycle control, DNA repair, cell differentiation and programmed cell death. The function of p53 gene is usually altered through LOH, mutations and rarely by DNA methylation. Mutations of p53 is one of the most prevalent genetic alterations in human cancer including gastric cancer. More than one mutation may be present in a single tumor resulting in heterogeneity of the p53 mutational status within a given tumor. There are conflicting results with respect to the prevalence of p53 mutations and their relationship to histological tumor type or tumor stage. Some studies showed that mutations tend to affect intestinal type tumors, while others found that the incidence of mutation is similar in intestinal and diffuse-type tumors, ranging between 25% and 40% of the cases studied. Moreover, it was reported that p53 abnormalities appear to occur early in intestinal cancers. However, other studies showed that the frequency of p53 mutation in early and advanced differentiated gastric cancer is consistent at around 40% each, similar to that observed in advanced undifferentiated carcinomas, while p53 mutations rarely occur in early undifferentiated gastric cancers [34, 87, 97–104]. Regarding age of gastric cancer patients and p53 mutation status, it appears that young patients have a lower incidence of p53 mutation than older individuals [105].
Several studies reported on the association of p53 expression with the tumor biological behavior and prognosis of gastric cancer patients. However, the prognostic impact of p53 abnormalities in gastric cancer remains controversial. It was described that the degree of p53 expression correlates with the proliferative rate of the gastric tumors. Furthermore, a significant association between p53 overexpression and the metastatic spread to lymph nodes or shortened survival has been described by some investigators in gastric cancer, but not by others [43, 106–109].
Recent studies reported that mutations of p53 may contribute to the increased cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression, that is observed in malignant
tissues [110, 111]. Joo et al. [111] evaluated the expression of COX-2 and p53 in tissue specimens obtained from 119 gastric cancer patients. They found that COX-2 and p53 expressions were correlated significantly with depth of tumor invasion. No association was observed between COX-2 or p53 expression and survival, while p53 expression was not correlated with COX-2 expression. The authors concluded that tumor cell proliferation through the regulation of COX-2 in gastric cancer may not be dependent on p53 status.

Interestingly, a p53 polymorphism in the codon 72 have recently been associated with an increased risk of distal gastric cancer or other clinicopathological features of this disease [112–114].

### 3.2.7. APC gene

Mutation of APC gene involved in familial polyposis coli is also observed in over 50% of cases of intestinal type gastric cancer, but not in diffuse type. APC inactivation enhances the expression of β-catenin, which acts as an oncogene. However, the search for evidence that APC/β-catenin signaling is involved in the development of gastric cancer has yielded conflicting results. Likewise, views differ on the relevance of mutations of the APC gene in the development of gastric cancer [5, 31, 115].

### 3.2.8. RARβ gene

Hypermethylation with reduced expression of the RARβ gene is observed in approximately 60–65% of intestinal type gastric cancer, but this is not a feature of diffuse type [116].

### 3.2.9. Bcl-2 gene

LOH at the bcl-2 locus, an apoptosis inhibitor, is frequently seen in gastric cancer. Moreover, bcl-2 overexpression may have implications for the development of gastric adenocarcinomas. Alterations of bcl-2 gene have been described in approximately 12–35% of the gastric cancer cases. Regarding bcl-2 expression and tumor biological behavior, studies have shown that overexpression of bcl-2 gene suppresses the cellular proliferative activity and is correlated with less aggressive biological behavior of cancer [44, 117–120]. Lee et al. [44] investigated the prognostic significance of bcl-2 and p53 expression in 308 patients with gastric cancer. The authors showed a significant negative correlation of bcl-2 positive expression with depth of invasion and lymph node metastasis. Patients with bcl-2 positive tumors showed a rather better survival than those

with bcl-2 negative tumors. In combined assessment of p53 and bcl-2 expression the best survival was seen in patients with p53+/bcl-2+ tumors. Also, in another study [120] p53 and bcl-2 protein expression were investigated and correlated with clinicopathological parameters in a series of 52 gastric cancer patients. It was found that bcl-2 protein expression was inversely correlated with lymph node metastasis and tumor grade, whereas it had not significant influence on overall survival.

### 3.2.10. RUNX3 gene

The RUNX3 gene frequently shows loss of expression in gastric cancer due to hemizygous deletion and hypermethylation. Inactivation of RUNX3 by hypermethylation of the promoter CpG island is observed in about 45–65% of gastric cancer cases [121, 122].

### 3.2.11. PTEN gene

LOH and mutations of tumor suppressor gene PTEN are associated with infiltrating and metastatic gastric cancers [123]. Also, a recent study showed that PTEN expression is a molecular marker of advanced gastric cancer [124].

### 3.2.12. Cadherin gene (CDH1)

The Cadherin gene is a superfamily of calcium-mediated membrane glycoproteins forming one of the four classes of adhesion molecules. The cadherins are responsible for the homotypic cell-cell adhesion. It is known that E-cadherin, one of the members of the cadherins, not only acts as an adhesive molecule, but also plays an important role in growth development and carcinogenesis. Underexpression of E-cadherin is found in gastric cancer and correlates with infiltrative and metastatic ability. Hence the E-cadherin gene is named also invasion suppressor gene [32].

E-cadherin gene located at 16q22 can be inactivated by LOH, mutation, and hypermethylation. Decreased expression of E-cadherin has been described in gastric cancer ranging from about 20% to 90%, depending on the method used. Decreased expression of E-cadherin occurs preferentially in diffuse-type gastric cancer [32, 125–130]. Regarding E-cadherin expression and prognosis, it seems that patients with E-cadherin decreased expression show a poorer prognosis. Gabbert et al. [130] in a study of 413 gastric cancer patients showed that patients with E-cadherin positive
tumors had significantly better survival than
patients with E-cadherin negative tumors.
Interestingly, germline mutations in the E-cad-
herin gene have been identified in families in which
diffuse-type gastric cancer was frequently diag-
nosed. Therefore, the cancer predisposition syn-
drome HDGC (hereditary diffuse gastric cancer) is
caused by germline mutations of CDH1 gene
[131, 132]. Recently, More et al. [132] investigated
CDH1 mutations in 36 new diffuse gastric cancer
families. They detected nine different mutations,
seven of which were novel.

3.2.13. Cyclin E
The cell cycle regulator, cyclin E, is amplified and
overexpressed in 15–20% of gastric cancer cases.
Gene amplification or overexpression of cyclin E
are associated with aggressiveness and lymph node
metastasis [133].

3.2.14. p27 gene
The expression of the CDK inhibitor p27, that
inhibits kinase activity, is frequently reduced in gas-
tric cancer. Reduced p27 expression was reported in
approximately 40–50% of the gastric cancer cases.
Moreover, a correlation of reduced p27 expression
with advanced tumor stage, depth of invasion and
nodal metastasis was described [134–136].

3.2.15. p16 gene
Reduced expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p16
was described both in the intestinal and diffuse-type
gastric cancer in approximately 12–30% of the cases
studied. A correlation of reduced p16 expression
with the depth of invasion and the potential to
metastasize was reported in gastric cancer [70, 137].
Recently, He et al. [137] examined the expression
of p16 gene in 122 gastric cancers. They found that
reduced expression of p16 gene is related to the hist-
opathologic subtypes and lymph node metastasis.
However, no apparent relevance between p16 pro-
tein expression and the depth of invasion was found.

3.3. Microsatellite instability (MSI)
Microsatellites are short DNA sequence repeats,
that are scattered throughout of human genome.
The enhanced mutation rate can be identified by
the analysis of length variations in microsatellites.
Microsatellite instability (MSI) is defined as the
presence of spontaneous DNA replication errors
in simple repetitive microsatellite sequences and

because of defective DNA repair mechanisms these
errors can not be corrected. Defective DNA repair
mechanisms are caused by mutational inactivation
or epigenetic silencing of mismatch repair genes,
including hMLH1, hMSH2, hPMS1 and hPMS2.
MSI has been described in about 15–35% of gastric
cancer tumors of intestinal or diffuse type. How-
ever, the prevalence of MSI in gastric cancer varies
among different studies. Some studies showed that
differentiated carcinomas exhibit more frequent
MSI than undifferentiated, while other reports
observe the opposite findings [38, 138–144]. Regard-
ing association of the MSI phenotype and progno-
sis in gastric cancer patients conflicting results have
been reported. Some of the studies suggested that
the MSI phenotype is associated with older age,
lower prevalence of lymph node metastasis, less
aggressive behavior and prolonged survival. How-
ever, in other studies no significant correlation
between the presence of MSI and the clinicopatho-
logical features of gastric cancer was shown
[139, 144–147]. In a recent large study of molecular
analysis using the mononucleotide markers BAT25
and BAT26 the clinical significance of MSI in 510
sporadic gastric cancers was evaluated [147]. The
results were compared with the immunohistochem-
ical expression of the mismatch repair protein
Mlh1 and Msh2. MSI was present in 16% of the
cases. Multivariate analysis showed that the MSI
phenotype along with stage, location and age were
associated significantly with better survival. Inter-
estingly, when cancers subgrouped according to
stage, only stage II cancers showed an effect of
MSI status on survival. Moreover, MSI correlated
with intestinal histotype and less lymph node
involvement. Finally, comparison of the results of
immunohistochemical expression of the mismatch
repair protein Mlh1 and Msh2 with microsatellite
analysis showed concordant results in the vast
majority of patients. The authors concluded that
microsatellite analysis of gastric cancer has clinical
utility in determination of prognosis, but should be
determined in only stage II cancers in a routine
clinical setting.

It is apparent, that a number of associations of
certain molecular genetic changes with pathological
features, tumor biological behavior and prognosis
of gastric cancer patients has been described, sug-
gesting that these genetic abnormalities might play
an important role in gastric carcinogenesis. More-
over, molecular genetic changes could be helpful
in the clinical setting, contributing to improvement

of tumor classification, prognosis and management of patients.

4. Epigenetic events in gastric carcinogenesis

The field of epigenetics has gained great momentum in recent years and is now a rapidly advancing field of biological research. Advances in our understanding of DNA methylation, chromatin structure, transcriptional activity and histone modification have resulted in an integrated view of epigenetics. Epigenetic changes influence gene transcription without alterations in DNA sequence. Increasing evidence suggests that epigenetic changes play a key role in cancer including gastric cancer. A major category of epigenetic changes is the hypermethylation of CpG islands located in gene promoter regions. Abnormalities in DNA methylation patterns have been considered of particular interest, because of their potential effect on the expression of disease related genes. Therefore, hypermethylation of the CpG island in tumor-related genes is associated with loss of gene expression and is one of the most important epigenetic alterations in cancer development. Aberrant CpG island methylation in promoter regions of various tumor-related genes, such as the p16INK4A gene, the DNA mismatch repair gene hMLH1 and E-cadherin, has been described in gastric tumors. Methylation of hMLH1 promoter region CpG island is a frequent event in gastric cancer and is associated with the loss of hMLH1 expression in the majority of gastric cancers exhibiting MSI [38, 148–150]. Tumors with concurrent hypermethylation in multiple loci have been defined as CpG island methylation phenotype-high (CIMP-H) and may play an important role in gastric cancer progression. Interestingly, it was reported that concurrent hypermethylation of gene promoters is associated with a microsatellite instability-high phenotype in gastric cancer [151]. Among genes with aberrant methylation described in gastric cancer, transcriptional silencing of the nuclear retinoid acid receptor β gene (RARβ) is frequently reported in gastric carcinoma [116]. Furthermore, of the RUNX gene family, RUNX3 is often involved in gastric carcinogenesis. Loss of RUNX3 by hypermethylation of the promoter CpG island is observed in approximately 65% of gastric carcinomas. RUNX3 methylation is also a feature of chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia and gastric adenomas, but in lower frequencies [121, 122].

Studies showed that hypermethylation of gene promoters progressively increases with histopathologic progression from chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia and adenoma to gastric cancer, suggesting that the hypermethylation of gene promoters might be a distinct pathway in gastric tumorigenesis [35, 36, 121, 152]. Interestingly, Kang et al. [36] attempted to investigate methylation of multiple genes in a large sample collection of gastric cancer, gastric adenoma, intestinal metaplasia and chronic gastritis. Five different classes of methylation behaviors were found: (a) genes methylated in gastric cancer only (GSTP1 and RASSF1A), (b) genes showing significantly higher methylation frequency in gastric cancer than in other lesions (COX-2, hMLH1, p16), (c) genes with high and similar methylation frequency in all four lesions (APC, E-cadherin), (d) a gene with low and similar methylation frequency in four-step lesions (MGMT), and (e) genes showing an increasing methylation frequency in the progression of the disease (DAP-kinase, p14, THBS1 and TIMP-3). The authors suggested that tumor-related genes show a gene-type specific methylation profile along the multistep carcinogenesis.

The prognostic role of CIMP status in gastric cancer remains unclear. Some studies showed a correlation between gene hypermethylation and clinicopathological features. An et al. [151] evaluated the prognostic value of CpG island methylator phenotype and MSI in 83 patients with resected gastric carcinomas. The results indicated that there is an association between CpG island methylator phenotype status and MSI in gastric cancer. The authors showed also that concordant methylation of multiple genes/loci found in 31% of the tumors studied, was associated with better survival, but it was not an independent predictor of prognosis in gastric cancer. Regarding p16 gene, it was also reported that hypermethylation of the gene may predict the malignant potential of dysplasia, leading to early tumor identification [35, 150]. A number of studies reported on E-cadherin promoter methylation associated with reduced E-cadherin expression [37, 153–157]. Zazula et al. [157] described CDH1 promoter hypermethylation in 54.8% of the analyzed sporadic gastric carcinomas, while the results suggested that downregulation of E-cadherin, caused by promoter hypermethylation, might be associated with a worse prognosis. Also, Graziano et al. [37] investigated whether hypermethylation in the CDH1 promoter region is correlated with clinical outcome of patients with diffuse gastric cancer. CDH1 promoter

hypermethylationin was found in 54% of the cases and it was significantly associated with worse prognosis. Interestingly, it was reported that *H. pylori* infection was associated with E-cadherin methylation leading to downregulation of E-cadherin. More importantly, it was detected that *H. pylori* eradication therapy could reverse methylation in patients with chronic gastritis only and may halt the process of gastric carcinogenesis [32,153,154,156]. CDH4 gene, a member of the cadherin family, is methylated in high percentage of gastric cancers and it was suggested that CDH4 methylation may be an early event in tumor progression [158]. Aberrant methylation of the COX-2 gene has also been described in gastric cancer. An association between decreased COX-2 expression and aberrant methylation of a CpG island was shown in gastric cancer [159–161]. More recently, de Maat et al. [161] investigated whether silencing by promoter region hypermethylation in of the COX-2 gene contributes to disease outcome in gastric cancer. The results suggested that promoter hypermethylation is an important regulatory mechanism of COX-2 expression in gastric cancer and an important prognostic biomarker.

Hypomethylation contributes also to carcinogenesis including gastric tumorigenesis. Demethylation of some genes, such as MAGE and synuclein-γ (SNCG), has been described in gastric cancer [162,163]. Demethylation of both the MAGE-A1 and A3 promoters is more frequently observed in advanced clinical stages of gastric cancer and is associated with a worse prognosis [162]. Also, SNCG demethylation was found to be more frequent in gastric cancers with lymph node metastases than in metastasis negative carcinomas [163].

Histone acetylation seems to play an important role in transcriptional regulation and it was investigated in genes involved in gastric cancer. It appears that there is a positive correlation between the level of histone acetylation at specific loci and transcriptional activity. Mitani et al. [164] reported that histone H3 and H4 in both the promoter and coding region of the p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup> gene frequently show aberrant acetylation in gastric cancer tissues.

The detection of epigenetic events in gastric cancer seems to be of major importance. Thus, aberrant DNA methylation could be used both as a diagnostic marker to identify cancer cells from biological samples and as a prognostic marker indicating tumor biological behavior. Moreover, products of genes that are silenced by DNA aberrant methylation could be used as biomarkers of response to che-

motherapy, while demethylating drugs could reverse the neoplastic phenotype [35,150,155].

In conclusion, a variety of genetic and epigenetic alterations play an important role in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer. Currently, tumor histology and pathologic stage are the major prognostic variables used in the clinical practice for gastric cancer patients. However, it is known that tumors with similar morphology may differ in biological aggressiveness, prognosis and response to treatment. A number of associations of certain molecular genetic changes with pathological features, tumor biological behavior and prognosis of gastric cancer patients has been so far described, suggesting that these genetic abnormalities might play an important role in gastric tumorigenesis. Moreover, increasing evidence suggests that the molecular genetic changes could be helpful in the routine clinical setting, contributing to prognosis and management of patients. Regarding epigenetic events in gastric tumorigenesis, a number of methylating markers have been proposed for risk assessment, prognostic evaluation and as therapeutic targets. However, further research is required, in order to systematically investigate the genetic changes in gastric cancer, estimating also their usefulness in the clinical practice. A good understanding of the genetic changes underlying gastric carcinogenesis may provide new perspectives for prognosis and screening of high-risk individuals. Moreover, some of the genetic alterations could definitely improve tumor classification and provide data for management of gastric cancer patients. Also, based on molecular data identified in gastric cancer novel therapeutics might help to improve the treatment of this disease.

### References

[1] G.D. Luk, Tumors of the stomach, in: M. Feldman, B.F. Scharschmidt, M.H. Sleisenger (Eds.), Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Management, sixth ed., WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998, pp. 733–757.

[2] D.M. Parkin, P. Pisani, J. Ferlay, Estimates of the worldwide incidence of eighteen major cancers in 1985, Int. J. Cancer 54 (1993) 594–606..

[3] P. Lauren, The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma: diffuse and so-called intestinal type carcinoma. An attempt at a histological classification, Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. 64 (1965) 31–49.

[4] E. Tahara, Genetic pathways of two types of gastric cancer, IARC Sci. Publ. 157 (2004) 327–349.

[5] M.G. Smith, G.L. Hold, E. Tahara, E.M. El-Omar, Cellular and molecular aspects of gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 2979–2990.

[6] T. Ando, Y. Goto, O. Maeda, O. Watanabe, K. Ishiguro, H. Goto, Causal role of *Helicobacter pylori* infection in gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 181–186.

[7] N. Hamajima, M. Naito, T. Kondo, Y. Goto, Genetic factors involved in the development of *Helicobacter pylori*-related gastric cancer, Cancer Sci. 97 (2006) 1129–1138.

[8] A. Rocco, G. Nardone, Diet, *H. pylori* infection and gastric cancer: evidence and controversies, World J. Gastroenterol. 13 (2007) 2901–2912.

[9] L. Williams, G.J.S. Jenkins, S.H. Doak, P. Fowler, E.M. Parry, T.H. Brown, A.P. Griffiths, J.G. Williams, J.M. Parry, Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of chromosomal aberrations in gastric tissue: the potential involvement of *Helicobacter pylori*, Br. J. Cancer 92 (2005) 759–1766.

[10] A.D. Ferti-Passantonopoulou, A.D. Panani, J.D. Vlachos, S.A. Raptis, Common cytogenetic findings in gastric cancer, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 24 (1987) 63–73.

[11] A.D. Panani, A. Ferti, S. Malliaros, S. Raptis, Cytogenetic study of 11 gastric adenocarcinomas, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 81 (1995) 169–172.

[12] H. Ochi, H.O. Douglass, A.A. Sandberg, Cytogenetic studies in primary gastric cancer, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 22 (1986) 295–307.

[13] S. Xiao, J.S. Geng, X.L. Feng, X.Q. Liu, Q.Z. Liu, P. Li, Cytogenetic studies of eight primary gastric cancers, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 58 (1992) 79–84.

[14] J.-C. Xia, S. Lu, J.-S. Geng, S.-B. Fu, P.U. Li, Q.-Z. Liu, Direct chromosome analysis of ten primary gastric cancer, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 102 (1998) 88–90.

[15] A.D. Panani, A. Ferti, S. Malliaros, S. Raptis, Gastric cancer with an i(8q) and long survival, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 58 (1992) 214–215.

[16] L.A. Espinoza, J.B. Neto, C. Casartelli, Pathological and karyotypic abnormalities in advanced gastric carcinomas, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 109 (1999) 45–50.

[17] E. Rodriquez, P.H. Rao, M. Ladanyi, N. Altorki, A.P. Albino, D.P. Kelsen, S.C. Jhanwar, R.S.K. Chaganti, 11p<sub>13-15</sub> is a specific region of chromosomal rearrangement in gastric and esophageal adenocarcinomas, Cancer Res. 50 (1990) 6410–6416.

[18] H. Ochi, J. Takeuchi, H. Douglass, A.A. Sandberg, Trisomy X as a possible initial chromosome change in a gastric cancer, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 12 (1984) 57–61.

[19] R. Seruca, S. Castedo, C. Correia, P. Gomes, F. Carneiro, P. Soares, B. De Jong, M. Sobrinho-Simoes, Cytogenetic findings in eleven gastric carcinomas, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 68 (1993) 42–48.

[20] F. Mitelman, B. Johansson, F. Mertens, Mitelman database of chromosome aberration in cancer, 2006. Available from: <http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/Mitelman>.

[21] H.V. Dekken, J.G. Pizzolo, D.P. Kelsen, M.R. Melaled, Targeted cytogenetic analysis of gastric tumors by in situ hybridization with a set of chromosome-specific DNA probes, Cancer 66 (1990) 491–497.

[22] K. Han, E.J. Oh, S.Y. Kim, Y.G. Kim, Y.K. Lee, C.S. Kang, B.K. Kim, W.L. Kim, S.I. Shim, S.M. Kim, Chromosomal numerical aberrations in gastric carcinoma: analysis of 18 cases using in situ hybridization, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 92 (1996) 122–129.

[23] F. Beuzen, S. Dubois, J.F. Flejou, Chromosomal numerical aberrations are frequent in gastric and esophageal adeno-

carcinomas: a study using in situ hybridization, Histopathology 37 (2000) 241–249.

[24] Y.-H. Chun, J.-I. Kil, Y.-S. Suh, S.-H. Kim, H. Kim, S.-H. Park, Characterization of chromosomal aberrations in human gastric carcinoma cell lines using chromosome painting, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 110 (2000) 8–25.

[25] K.L. Gorringe, A. Boussioutas, The Melbourne Gastric Cancer Group, Peter Mac Microarray Facility, D.D.L. Bowtell, Novel regions of chromosomal at 6p21, 5p13 and 12q14 in gastric cancer identified by array comparative genomic hybridization, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 42 (2005) 247–259.

[26] M.I. Stamouli, A.D. Ferti, A.D. Panani, J. Raftakis, C. Consoli, S.A. Raptis, B.D. Young, Application of multiplex fluorescence in situ hybridization in the cytogenetic analysis of primary gastric carcinoma, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 135 (2002) 23–27.

[27] S.H. Koo, K.C. Kwon, S.Y. Shin, Y.M. Jeon, J.W. Park, S.H. Kim, S.M. Noh, Genetic alterations of gastric cancer: comparative genomic hybridization and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 117 (2000) 97–103.

[28] M.S. Wu, M.C. Chang, S.P. Huang, C.C. Tseng, J.C. Sheu, Y.M. Lin, C.T. Shun, M.T. Lin, J.T. Lin, Correlation of histologic subtypes and replication error phenotype with comparative genomic hybridization in gastric cancer, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 30 (2001) 80–86.

[29] A. Kokkola, O. Monni, P. Puolakkainen, M.L. Larramendy, M. Victorzon, S. Nordling, R. Haapiainen, E. Kivilaakso, S. Knuutila, 17q12-21 amplification, a novel recurrent genetic change in intestinal type of gastric carcinoma: a comparative genomic hybridization study, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 20 (1997) 38–43.

[30] R. Sud, D. Wells, I.C. Talbot, J.D.A. Delhanty, Genetic alterations in gastric cancers from British patients, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 126 (2001) 11–119.

[31] G. Tamura, Alterations of tumor suppressor and tumor-related genes in the development and progression of gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 192–198.

[32] A.O. Chun, E-cadherin in gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 199–203.

[33] M. Stock, F. Otto, Gene deregulation in gastric cancer, Gene 360 (2005) 1–19.

[34] C.M. Fenoglio-Preiser, J. Wang, G.N. Stemmermann, A. Noffsinger, TP53 and gastric carcinoma: a review, Hum. Mutat. 21 (2003) 258–270.

[35] P. Vogiatzi, C. Vindigni, F. Roviello, A. Renieri, A. Giordano, Deciphering the underlying genetic and epigenetic events leading to gastric carcinogenesis, J. Cell Physiol. 211 (2007) 287–295.

[36] G.H. Kang, S. Lee, J.S. Kim, H.Y. Jung, Profile of aberrant CpG island methylation along multistep gastric carcinogenesis, Lab. Invest. 83 (2003) 519–526.

[37] F. Graziano, F. Arduini, A. Ruzzo, I. Bearzi, B. Humar, A. More, R. Silva, et al., Prognostic analysis of E-cadherin gene promoter hypermethylation in patients with surgically resected, node-positive, diffuse gastric cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 10 (2004) 2784–2789.

[38] A.S. Fleisher, M. Esteller, S. Wang, G. Tamura, H. Suzuki, J. Yin, T.T. Zou, J.M. Abraham, D. Kong, et al., Hypermethylation of the hMLH1 gene promoter in human gastric

cancers with microsatellite instability, Cancer Res. 59 (1999) 1090–1095.

[39] S.C. Stocks, N. Pratt, M. Sales, D.A. Johnston, A.M. Thompson, F.A. Carey, N.M. Kernohan, Chromosomal imbalances in gastric and esophageal adenocarcinoma: specific comparative genomic hybridization detected abnormalities segregate with junctional adenocarcinomas, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 32 (2001) 50–58.

[40] H. Onchi, K. Hirose, A. Yamaguchi, S. Noriki, M. Fukuda, Prognostic value of numerical aberrations of chromosome 17 in differentiated gastric cancer: evaluation by multivariate regression analysis, Oncol. Rep. 7 (2000) 317–1322.

[41] R. Terada, T. Yasutake, E. Yamaguchi, T. Hisamatsu, S. Nakamura, H. Ayabe, Y. Tagawa, Higher frequencies of numerical aberrations of chromosome 17 in primary gastric cancers are associated with lymph node metastasis, J. Gastroenterol. 34 (1999) 11–17.

[42] C.W. Wu, G.D. Chen, C.S.J. Faun, A.F.Y. Lee, C.W. Chi, J.M. Liu, U. Weier, J.Y. Chen, Clinical implications of chromosomal abnormalities in gastric adenocarcinomas, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35 (2002) 219–231.

[43] Y. Kakeji, D. Korenaga, S. Tsujitani, H. Baba, H. Anai, Y. Machara, K. Sugimachi, Gastric cancer with p53 overexpression has high potential for metastasizing to lymph nodes, Br. J. Cancer 67 (1993) 589–593.

[44] H.-K. Lee, H.S. Lee, H.-K. Yang, W.H. Kim, K.U. Lee, K.J. Choe, J.-P. Kim, Prognostic significance of bcl-2 and p53 expression in gastric cancer, Int. J. Colorectal Dis. 18 (2003) 518–525.

[45] F. Mitelman, B. Johansson, N. Mandahl, F. Mertens, Clinical significance of cytogenetic findings in solid tumors, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 95 (1997) 1–8.

[46] A.D. Panani, C. Roussos, Non-random structural chromosomal changes in primary gastric cancer, Cancer Lett. 225 (2005) 291–295.

[47] S. Castedo, C. Correia, L. David, M. Sobrinho-Simoes, Isochromosome 8q. A recurrent change in gastric carcinoma, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 54 (1991) 137–138.

[48] Y. Takahashi, K. Shintaku, Y. Ishii, S. Asai, K. Ishikawa, M. Fujii, Analysis of MYC and chromosome 8 copy number changes in gastrointestinal cancer by dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 107 (1998) 61–64.

[49] P.P. Assumpcao, G. Ishak, E.S. Chen, S.S. Takeno, M.F. Leal, A.C. Guimaraes, D.Q. Calcano, A.S. Khayat, S. Demachki, M.A.C. Smith, R.R. Burbano, Numerical aberrations of chromosome 8 detected by conventional cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ hybridization in individuals from northern Brazil with gastric adenocarcinoma, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 169 (2006) 45–49.

[50] A.D. Panani, A.D. Ferti, A. Avgerinos, S.A. Raptis, Numerical aberrations of chromosome 8 in gastric cancer detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization, Anticancer Res. 24 (2004) 155–159.

[51] Y. Kitayama, H. Igarashi, F. Watanabe, Y. Maruyama, M. Kanamori, H. Sugimura, Nonrandom chromosomal numerical abnormality predicting prognosis of gastric cancer: a retrospective study of 51 cases using pathology archives, Lab. Invest. 83 (2003) 311–1320.

[52] B. Fringes, T.M. Mayhew, A. Reith, J. Gates, D.C. Ward, Numerical aberrations of chromosome 1 and 17 correlate with tumor site in human gastric carcinoma of the diffuse

and intestinal types. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis on gastric biopsies, Lab. Invest. 80 (2000) 1501–1508.

[53] Y. Yamashita, K. Nishida, T. Okuda, K. Nomura, Y. Matsumoto, S. Mitsufuji, S. Horiike, H. Hata, C. Sakakura, A. Hagiwara, H. Yamagishi, M. Taniwaki, Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements at bands 8q24 and 11q13 in gastric cancer as detected by multicolor spectral karyotyping, World J. Gastroenterol. 11 (2005) 5129–5135.

[54] C. Sakakura, T. Mori, T. Sakabe, Y. Ariyama, T. Shinomiya, K. Date, A. Hagiwara, T. Yamaguchi, T. Takayashi, Y. Nakamura, T. Abe, J. Inazawal, Gains, losses, and amplifications of genomic materials in primary gastric cancers analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 24 (1999) 299–305.

[55] M. Nakanishi, C. Sakakura, Y. Fujita, R. Yasuova, H. Aragane, K. Koide, A. Hagiwara, et al., Genomic alterations in primary gastric cancers analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization and clinicopathological factors, Hepatogastroenterology 47 (2000) 658–662.

[56] X.Y. Guan, S.B. Fu, J.C. Xia, Y. Fang, J.S. Shan, B.D. Du, H. Zhou, et al., Recurrent chromosome changes in 62 primary gastric carcinomas detected by comparative genomic hybridization, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 123 (2000) 27–34.

[57] D. Amadori, M. Maltoni, A. Volpi, O. Nanni, E. Scarpi, B. Renault, N.S. Pellegata, M. Gaudio, E. Magni, G.N. Ranzani, Gene amplification and proliferative kinetics in relation to prognosis of patients with gastric carcinoma, Cancer 79 (1997) 226–232.

[58] Y. Koizumi, S. Tanaka, R. Mou, H. Koganei, A. Kokawa, R. Kitamura, H. Yamauchi, K. Ookubo, T. Saito, S. Tominaga, K. Matsumura, H. Shimada, N. Tsuchida, H. Sckihara, Changes in DNA copy number in primary gastric carcinomas by comparative genomic hybridization, Clin. Cancer Res. 3 (1997) 1067–1076.

[59] Y. Kimura, T. Noguchi, K. Kawahara, K. Kashima, T. Daa, S. Yokoyama, Genetic alterations in 102 primary gastric cancers by comparative genomic hybridization: gain of 20q and loss of 18q are associated with tumor progression, Mod. Pathol. 17 (2004) 1328–1337.

[60] N.C.T. van Grieken, M.M. Weiss, G.A. Meijer, M.A. Hermens, G.H. Scholte, J. Linderman, M.E. Craanen, E. Bloemena, S.G. Meuwissen, J.P. Baak, E.J. Kuipers, Helicobacter pylori-related and non-related gastric cancers do not differ with respect to chromosomal aberrations, J. Pathol. 192 (2000) 301–306.

[61] B. Carvalho, T.E. Buffart, R.M. Reis, T. Mons, C. Moutinho, P. Silva, N.C.T. van Grieken, H. Grabsch, C.J.H. van de Velde, B. Ylstra, G.A. Meijer, F. Carneiro, Mixed gastric carcinomas show similar chromosomal aberrations in both their diffuse and glandular components, Cell. Oncol. 28 (2006) 283–294.

[62] D.-F. Peng, H. Sugihara, K. Mukaisho, Y. Tsubosa, T. Hatton, Alterations of chromosomal copy numbers during progression of diffuse-type gastric carcinomas: metaphase and array-based comparative genomic hybridization analyses of multiple samples from individual tumors, J. Pathol. 201 (2003) 439–450.

[63] J.U. Kang, J.J. Kang, K.C. Kwon, J.W. Park, T.E. Jeong, S.M. Noh, S.H. Koo, Genetic alterations in primary gastric carcinomas correlated with clinicopathological variables by

array comparative genomic hybridization, J. Korean Med. Sci. 21 (2006) 656–665.

[64] K. Morohara, K. Nakao, Y. Tajima, N. Nishimo, K. Yamazaki, T. Kaetsu, S. Suzuki, et al., Analysis by comparative genomic hybridization of gastric cancer with peritoneal dissemination and/or positive peritoneal cytology, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 161 (2005) 57–62.

[65] M.M. Weiss, E.J. Kuipers, C. Postma, A.M. Snijders, I. Siccama, D. Pinkel, J. Westerga, S.G.M. Meuwissen, D.G. Albertson, G.A. Meijer, Genomic profiling of gastric cancer predicts lymph node status and survival, Oncogene 22 (2003) 872–1879.

[66] M.M. Weiss, E.J. Kuipers, C. Postma, A.M. Snijders, D. Pinkel, S.G.M. Meuwissen, D.G. Albertson, G.A. Meijer, Genomic alterations in primary gastric adenocarcinomas correlate with clinicopathological characteristics and survival, Cell. Oncol. 26 (2004) 307–317.

[67] K. Kitamura, T. Yamagushi, H. Tamigushi, A. Hagiwara, T. Yamane, K. Sawai, et al., Clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer in the elderly, Br. J. Cancer 73 (1996) 798–802.

[68] Y. Machara, Y. Emi, S. Tomisaki, T. Oshiro, Y. Kakeji, Y. Ichiyoshi, et al., Age-related characteristics of gastric carcinoma in young and elderly patients, Cancer 77 (1996) 774–1780.

[69] T.E. Buffart, B. Carvalho, E. Hopmans, V. Brehm, E. Klein Kranenbarg, T.B.M. Schaiij-Visser, E.E. Eijk, N.C.T. van Grieken, B. Ylstra, C.J.H. van de Velde, G.A. Meijer, Gastric cancers in young and elderly patients show different genomic profiles, J. Pathol. 211 (2007) 45–51.

[70] K.-F. Becker, G. Keller, H. Hoefler, The use of molecular biology in diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer, Surg. Oncol. 9 (2000) 5–11.

[71] G. Tamura, Genetic and epigenetic alterations of tumor suppressor and tumor related genes in gastric cancer, Histol. Histopathol. 17 (2002) 323–329.

[72] G. Tamura, K. Sato, S. Akiyama, T. Tsuchiva, Y. Endon, O. Usuba, W. Kimura, S. Nishizuka, T. Motoyama, Molecular characterization of undifferentiated-type gastric carcinomas, Lab. Invest. 81 (2001) 593–598.

[73] G. Tamura, K. Sakata, S. Nishizuka, C. Maesawa, Y. Suzuki, M. Terashima, Y. Eda, R. Satodate, Allelotype of adenoma and differentiated adenocarcinoma of the stomach, J. Pathol. 180 (1996) 371–377.

[74] B.G. Schneider, D.R. Pulitzer, R.D. Brown, T.J. Prihoda, D.G. Bostwick, V. Saldivar, H.A. Roriquez-Martinez, M.E. Gutierrez-Diaz, P. O’Connel, Allelic imbalance in gastric cancer: an affected site on chromosome arm 3p, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 13 (1995) 263–271.

[75] C.M. Gleeson, J.M.S. loam, J.A. McGuigan, A.J. Ritchie, J.L. Weber, S.H.E. Russell, Allelotype analysis of adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia, Br. J. Cancer 76 (1997) 1455–1465.

[76] R. Baffa, R. Santoro, F. Bullrich, B. Mandes, H. Ishii, C.M. Croce, Definition and refinement of chromosome 8p regions of loss of heterozygosity in gastric cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 6 (2000) 1372–1377.

[77] A.J. French, G. Petroni, S.N. Thibideau, M. Smolkin, E. Bissonette, F. Roviello, J.C. Harper, B.R. Koch, S.A. Anderson, S.J. Hebbring, S.M. Powell, Allelic imbalance of 8p indicates poor survival in gastric cancer, J. Mol. Diagnost. 6 (2004) 243–252.

[78] S.W. Choi, K.Y. Lee, K.M. Kim, Y.J. Chung, M.G. Rhyu, Fractional allelic loss in gastric carcinoma correlates with growth patterns, Oncogene 17 (1998) 2655–2659.

[79] A.S. Yustein, J.C. Harper, G.R. Pertoni, O.W. Cummings, C.A. Moskaluk, S.M. Powell, Allelotype of gastric adenocarcinomas, Cancer Res. 59 (1999) 1437–1441.

[80] S.H. Koo, T.E. Jeong, J.U. Kang, K.C. Kwon, J.W. Park, S.M. Noh, Prognostic implications for gastric carcinoma based on loss of heterozygosity genotypes correlation with clinicopathologic variables, Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 153 (2004) 26–31.

[81] S. Suzuki, K. Egami, K. Sasajima, M. Ghazizadeh, H. Shimizu, H. Watanabe, H. Hasegawa, S. Iida, T. Matsuda, et al., Comparative study between DNA copy number aberrations determined by quantitative microsatellite analysis and clinical outcome in patients with stomach cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 10 (2004) 3013–3019.

[82] H. Kuniyasu, W. Yasui, Y. Kitadai, H. Yokozaki, H. Ito, E. Tahara, Frequent amplification of the c-met gene in scirrhouss type stomach cancer, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189 (1992) 227–232.

[83] H. Kuniyasu, W. Yasui, H. Yokozaki, Y. Kitadai, E. Tahara, Aberrant expression of c-met mRNA in human gastric carcinomas, Int. J. Cancer 55 (1993) 72–75.

[84] Y. Hattori, H. Odagiri, H. Nakatani, K. Miyagawa, K. Naito, H. Sakamoto, et al., K-sam an amplified gene in stomach cancer is a member of the heparin-binding growth factor receptor genes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87 (1990) 983–5987.

[85] N. Oda, T. Tsujino, T. Tsuda, K. Yoshida, H. Nakayama, W. Yasui, E. Tahara, DNA ploidy pattern and amplification of ERBB and ERBB2 genes in human gastric carcinomas, Virchows Arch. B 58 (1990) 273–277.

[86] Y. Yonemura, I. Nicomiya, S. Ohoyama, H. Kimura, A. Yamaguchi, S. Fushida, et al., Expression of c-erbB-2 oncprotein in gastric carcinoma. Immunoreactivity for c-erbB-2 protein is an independent indicator of poor short-term prognosis in patients with gastric carcinoma, Cancer 67 (1991) 2914–2918.

[87] C.T. Shun, M.S. Wu, J.T. Lin, S.Y. Chen, H.P. Wang, W.J. Lee, T.H. Wang, S.M. Chuang, Relationship of p53 and c-erbB-2 expression to histopathological features, Helicobacter pylori infection and prognosis in gastric cancer, Hepatogastroenterology 44 (1997) 604–609.

[88] A. Varis, A. Zaika, P. Puolakkainen, B. Nagy, I. Madrigal, A. Kokkola, et al., Coamplified and overexpressed genes at ERBB2 locus in gastric cancer, Int. J. Cancer 109 (2004) 548–553.

[89] K.H. Lee, J.S. Lee, C. Suh, S.W. Kim, S.B. Kim, J.H. Lee, M.S. Lee, M.Y. Park, H.S. Sun, S.H. Kim, Clinicopathologic significance of the K-ras gene codon 12 point mutation in stomach cancer. An analysis of 140 cases, Cancer 75 (1995) 2794–2801.

[90] J. Isogaki, K. Shinmura, W. Yin, T. Arai, K. Koda, T. Kimura, I. Kino, H. Sugimura, Microsatellite instability and K-ras mutations in gastric adenomas with reference to associated gastric cancer, Cancer Detect. Prev. 23 (1999) 204–214.

[91] L. Kozma, I. Kiss, J. Hajdu, Z. Szentkereszty, S. Szakall, I. Ember, C-myc amplification and cluster analysis in human gastric carcinoma, Anticancer Res. 21 (2001) 707–710.

[92] D.Q. Calcagno, M.F. Leal, A.D. Seabra, A.S. Khayat, E.S. Chen, S. Demachki, P.P. Assumpcao, M.H.G. Faria, S.H.B. Rabenhorst, M.V.P. Ferreira, M.A.C. Smith, R.R. Burbano, Interrelationship between chromosome 8 aneuploidy, c-myc amplification and increased expression in individuals from northern Brazil with gastric adenocarcinoma, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 6207–6211.

[93] S. Han, H.Y. Kim, K. Park, H.J. Cho, M.S. Lee, H.J. Kim, Y.D. Kim, C-Myc expression is related with cell proliferation and associated with poor clinical outcome in human gastric cancer, J. Korean Med. Sci. 14 (1999) 526–530.

[94] R.R. Burbano, P.P. Assumpcao, M.F. Leal, D.Q. Calcagno, A.C. Guimaraes, A.S. Khayat, S.S. Takeno, E.S. Chen, M.A.C. Smith, C-Myc locus amplification as metastasis predictor in intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinomas: CGH study in Brazil, Anticancer Res. 26 (2006) 2909–2914.

[95] S. Suzuki, T. Tenjin, H. Watanabe, S. Matsushima, T. Shibuya, S. Tanaka, Low level c-myc gene amplification in gastric cancer detected by dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, J. Surg. Oncol. 66 (1997) 173–178.

[96] B. Nakata, N. Onoda, Y.S. Chung, K. Maeda, S. Nishimura, M. Yashiro, et al., Correlation between malignancy of gastric cancer and c-myc DNA amplification or overexpression of c-myc protein, Gan To Kayaku Ryoho 22 (1995) 176–179.

[97] Y. Gomyo, M. Osaki, N. Kaibara, H. Ito, Numerical aberrations and point mutation of p53 gene in human gastric intestinal metaplasia and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma: analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR-SSCP, Int. J. Cancer 66 (1996) 594–599.

[98] B.V. Joypaul, E.L. Newman, D. Hopwood, A. Grant, S. Qureshi, D.P. Lane, A. Cuschieri, Expression of p53 protein in normal, dysplastic and malignant gastric mucosa: an immunohistochemical study, J. Pathol. 170 (1993) 279–283.

[99] J.F. Flejou, V. Gratio, F. Muzeau, R. Hamelin, P53 abnormalities in adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia and antrum, Mol. Pathol. 52 (1999) 263–268.

[100] H. Iwamatsu, K. Nihikura, H. Watanabe, Y. Ajioka, H. Hashidate, H. Kashimura, H. Asakura, Heterogeneity of p53 mutational status in the superficial spreading type of early gastric carcinoma, Gastric Cancer 4 (2001) 20–26.

[101] H. Yokozaki, H. Kuniyasu, Y. Kitadai, K. Nishimura, H. Todo, A. Ayhan, W. Yasui, H. Ito, E. Tahara, P53 point mutation in primary human gastric carcinomas, J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 119 (1992) 67–70.

[102] S. Uchino, M. Noguchi, A. Ochiai, T. Sato, M. Kobayashi, S. Hirohashi, P53 mutation in gastric cancer: a genetic model for carcinogenesis is common in gastric and colorectal cancer, Int. J. Cancer 54 (1993) 759–764.

[103] G.N. Ranzani, O. Luinetti, I.S. Padovan, D. Calistri, B. Renault, M. Burrel, D. Amadori, R. Fiocca, E. Solcia, P53 gene mutations and protein nuclear accumulation are early events in intestinal type gastric cancer but late events in diffuse type, Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 4 (1995) 223–231.

[104] X.P. Liu, K. Tsushimi, M. Tsushimi, S. Kawauchi, A. Oga, T. Furuya, K. Sasaki, Expression of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p53 proteins in gastric carcinoma: its relationship with cell proliferation activity and prognosis, Cancer Lett. 170 (2001) 183–189.

[105] M. Rugge, Y.-H. Shiao, G. Busatto, M. Cassaro, C. Strobbe, V.M. Russo, G. Leo, A.R. Parenti, et al., The p53 gene in patients under the age of 40 with gastric cancer: mutation rates are low, but are associated with a cardiac location, Mol. Pathol. 53 (2000) 207–210.

[106] Y. Yonemura, S. Fushida, K. Tsugawa, I. Ninimiya, I. Fonseca, A. Yamaguchi, I. Miyazaki, T. Urano, H. Shiku, Correlation of p53 expression and proliferative activity in gastric cancer, Anal. Cell. Pathol. 5 (1993) 277–288.

[107] M. Ikeguchi, H. Saito, A. Kondo, S. Tsujitani, M. Maeta, N. Kaihara, Mutated p53 protein expression and proliferative activity in advanced gastric cancer, Hepatogastroenterology 46 (1999) 2648–2653.

[108] B.V. Joypaul, D. Hopwood, E.L. Newman, S. Qureshi, A. Grant, S.A. Ogston, D.P. Lane, A. Cuschieri, The prognostic significance of the accumulation of p53 tumor suppressor gene protein in gastric adenocarcinoma, Br. J. Cancer 69 (1994) 943–946.

[109] E. Ioachim, A. Goussia, D. Stefanou, N.J. Agnantis, Expression of p53 protein in gastric cancer: an immunohistochemical study with correlation to proliferation activity, Anticancer Res. 17 (1997) 513–517.

[110] W.K. Leung, K.F. To, Y.P. Ng, T.L. Lee, J.Y. Lau, F.K. Chan, E.K. Ng, S.C. Chung, J.J. Sung, Association between cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression and missense p53 mutation in gastric cancer, Br. J. Cancer 84 (2001) 335–339.

[111] Y.-E. Joo, I.-J. Chung, Y.-K. Park, Y.-S. Koh, J.-H. Lee, C.-H. Park, W.-S. Lee, H.-S. Kim, S.-K. Choi, J.-S. Rew, C.-S. Park, S.-J. Kim, Expression of cyclooxygenase-2, p53 and Ki-67 in gastric cancer, J. Korean Med. Sci. 21 (2006) 871–876.

[112] G.I. Perez-Perez, F.J. Bosques-Padilla, M.L. Crosatti, R. Tijerina-Menchaca, E. Garza-Gonzalez, Role of p53 codon 72 polymorphism in the risk of development of distal gastric cancer, Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 40 (2005) 56–60.

[113] S.Y. Yi, W.J. Lee, A p53 genetic polymorphism of gastric cancer: difference between early gastric cancer and advanced gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 6536–6539.

[114] W.C. Chung, K.M. Lee, B.I. Lee, J.S. Chun, S.Y. Lee, U.I. Chang, S.H. Park, et al., P53 genetic polymorphism of gastric cancer in Korea, Korean J. Intern. Med. 21 (2006) 28–32.

[115] S. Nakatsura, A. Yanagisawa, S. Ichii, E. Tahara, Y. Kato, Y.NakamuraA. Horri, Somatic mutation of the APC gene in gastric cancer: frequent mutations in very well differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma, Hum. Mol. Genet. 1 (1992) 559–563.

[116] K. Hayashi, H. Yokozaki, S. Gudison, N. Oue, T. Suzuki, R. Lotan, W. Yasui, E. Tahara, Inactivation of retinoid acid receptor beta by promoter CpG hypermethylation in gastric cancer, Differentiation 68 (2001) 3–21.

[117] A. Ayhan, W. Yasui, H. Yokozaki, M. Seto, R. Ueda, E. Tahara, Loss of heterozygosity at the bcl-2 gene locus and expression of bcl-2 in human gastric and colorectal carcinomas, Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 85 (1994) 584–591.

[118] R.F. Klein, H.P. Vollmers, H.K. Muller-Hermelink, Different expression of bcl-2 in diffuse and intestinal type stomach carcinomas, Oncol. Rep. 69 (1994) 943–946.

[119] K. Aizawa, K. Ueki, S. Suzuki, H. Yabusaki, T. Kanda, T. Nishimaki, et al., Apoptosis and bcl-2 expression in gastric carcinoma: correlation with clinicopathological variables,

p53 expression, cell proliferation and prognosis, Int. J. Oncol. 14 (1999) 85–91.

[120] K. Zafirellis, A. Karameris, N. Milingos, G. Androulakis, Molecular markers in gastric cancer: can p53 and bcl-2 protein expressions be used as prognostic factors?, Anti-cancer Res 25 (2005) 3629–3636.

[121] T.Y. Kim, J.H. Lee, K.S. Hwang, M. Lee, J.W. Kim, Y.J. Bang, G.H. Kang, Methylation of RUNX3 in various types of human cancers and premalignant stages of gastric carcinoma, Lab. Invest. 84 (2004) 479–484.

[122] C. Sakakura, A. Hagiwara, K. Miyagawa, S. Nakashima, T. Yoshikawa, S. Kim, Y. Nakase, K. Ito, H. Yamagishi, S. Yazumi, T. Chiba, Y. Ito, Frequent downregulation of the runt domain transcription factors RUNX1, RUNX3 and their cofactor CBFB in gastric cancer, Int. J. Cancer 113 (2005) 221–228.

[123] Y.L. Li, Z. Tian, D.Y. Wu, B.Y. Fu, Y. Xin, Loss of heterozygosity on 10q23.3 and mutation of tumor suppressor gene PTEN in gastric cancer and precancerous lesions, World J. Gastroenterol. 11 (2005) 285–288.

[124] H. Deng, R.L. Wu, H.Y. Zhou, X. Huang, Y. Chen, L.J. Liu, Significance of surviving and PTEN expression in full lymph node examined gastric cancer, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 1013–1017.

[125] KF. Becker, M.J. Atkinson, U. Reich, I. Becker, H. Nekarda, J.R. Siewert, H. Hofler, E-cadherin gene mutations provide clues to diffuse type gastric carcinomas, Cancer Res. 54 (1994) 3845–3852.

[126] B. Mayer, J.P. Johnson, F. Leitl, K.W. Jauch, M.M. Heiss, F.W. Schidberg, W. Birchmeier, I. Funke, E-cadherin expression in primary and metastatic gastric cancer: down-regulation correlates with cellular dedifferentiation and glandular disintegration, Cancer Res. 53 (1993) 1690–1695.

[127] J.J. Ascano, H. Frierson, C.A. Moskaluk, J.C. Harper, F. Roviello, C.E. Jackson, W. El-Rifai, et al., Inactivation of the E-cadherin gene in sporadic diffuse-type gastric cancer, Mol. Pathol. 14 (2001) 942–949.

[128] L. Wang, F. Zhang, P.P. Wu, X.C. Jiang, L. Zheng, Y.Y. Yu, Disordered beta-catenin expression and E-cadherin/CDH1 promoter methylation in gastric carcinoma, World J. Gastroenterol. 12 (2006) 4228–4231.

[129] G. Tamura, J. Yin, S. Wang, A.S. Fleisher, T. Zou, J.M. Abraham, D. Kong, et al., E-cadherin gene promoter hypermethylation in primary human gastric carcinomas, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92 (2000) 569–573.

[130] H.E. Gabbert, W. Mueller, A. Schneider, S. Meier, R. Moll, W. Birchmeier, G. Hommel, Prognostic value of E-cadherin expression in 413 gastric carcinomas, Int. J. Cancer 69 (1996) 184–189.

[131] F. Graziano, B. Humar, P. Guilford, The role of E-cadherin gene (CDH1) in diffuse gastric cancer susceptibility: from the laboratory to clinical practice, Ann. Oncol. 14 (2003) 1705–1713.

[132] H. More, B. Human, W. Weber, R. Ward, A. Christian, C. Lintott, et al., Identification of seven novel germline mutations in the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene, Hum. Mutat. 28 (2007) 203–211.

[133] Y. Akama, W. Yasui, H. Yokozaki, H. Kuniyasu, K. Kitahara, T. Ishikawa, E. Tahara, Frequent amplification of the cyclin E gene in human gastric carcinomas, Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 86 (1995) 617–621.

[134] W. Yasui, Y. Kudo, S. Semba, H. Yokozaki, E. Tahara, Reduced expression of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip1 is associated with advanced stage and invasiveness of gastric carcinomas, Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 88 (1997) 625–629.

[135] W. Yasui, K. Naka, T. Suzuki, J. Fujimoto, K. Hayashi, N. Matsutani, H. Yokozaki, E. Tahara, Expression of p27kip1 cyclin E and E2F-1 in primary and metastatic tumors of gastric carcinoma, Oncol. Rep. 6 (1999) 983–987.

[136] D.H. Kim, H.I. Lee, E.S. Nam, H.S. Shin, J.H. Sohn, C.H. Park, D.S. Yoon, S.Y. Song, Y.E. Park, Reduced expression of the cell-cycle inhibitor p27kip1 is associated with progression and lymph node metastasis of gastric carcinoma, Histopathology 36 (2000) 245–251.

[137] X.-S. He, Y.-H. Rong, Q. Su, Q. Luo, D.-M. He, Y.-L. Li, Y. Chen, Expression of p16 gene and Rb protein in gastric carcinoma and their clinicopathological significance, World J. Gastroenterol. 11 (2005) 2218–2223.

[138] G. Keller, M. Rotter, H. Vogelsang, P. Bischoff, K.-F. Becker, J. Mueller, et al., Microsatellite instability in adenocarcinomas of the upper gastrointestinal tract, Am. J. Pathol. 147 (1995) 593–600.

[139] R. Seruca, N.R. Santos, L. David, M. Constancia, H. Barroca, F. Carneiro, M. Seixas, et al., Sporadic gastric carcinomas with microsatellite instability display a particular clinicopathologic profile, Int. J. Cancer 64 (1995) 32–36.

[140] J.D. Hayden, I.G. Martin, L. Cawkwell, P. Quirke, The role of microsatellite instability in gastric carcinoma, Gut 42 (1998) 300–303.

[141] H. Nakashima, H. Inoue, M. Mori, H. Ueo, M. Ikeda, T. Akiyoshi, Microsatellite instability in Japanese gastric cancer, Cancer 75 (Suppl.) (1995) 1503–1507.

[142] M.J. Baek, H. Kang, S.E. Kim, J.H. Park, J.S. Lee, Y.K. Paik, H. Kim, Expression of hMLH1 is inactivated in the gastric adenomas with enhanced microsatellite instability, Br. J. Cancer 85 (2001) 1147–1152.

[143] A.M. Chiaravalli, D. Furlan, C. Facco, M.G. Tibiletti, A. Dionigi, B. Casati, et al., Immunohistochemical pattern of hMSH2/hMLH1 in familial and sporadic colorectal, gastric, endometrial and ovarian carcinomas with instability in microsatellite sequences, Virchows Arch. 438 (2001) 39–48.

[144] M.S. Wu, C.W. Lee, J.C. Sheu, C.T. Shun, H.P. Wang, R.L. Hong, W.J. Lee, J.T. Lin, Alterations of BAT-26 identify a number of gastric cancers with distinct clinico-pathologic features and better postoperative prognosis, Hepatogastroenterology 49 (2002) 285–289.

[145] H.S. Lee, S.I. Choi, H.K. Lee, H.S. Kim, H.K. Yang, G.H. Kang, et al., Distinct clinical features and outcomes of gastric cancers with microsatellite instability, Mod. Pathol. 15 (2002) 632–640.

[146] T. Nakajima, Y. Akiyama, J. Shiraishi, T. Arai, Y. Yanagisawa, M. Ara, et al., Age-related hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter in gastric cancer, Int. J. Cancer 94 (2001) 208–211.

[147] S. Beghelli, G. de Manzoni, S. Barbi, A. Tomezzolli, F. Rovillo, C. Di Gregorio, et al., Microsatellite instability in gastric cancer is associated with better prognosis in only stage II cancers, Surgery 139 (2006) 347–356.

[148] S.Y. Leung, S.T. Yuen, L.P. Chung, K.M. Chu, A.S. Chan, J.C. Ho, hMLH1 promoter methylation and lack of hMLH1 expression in sporadic gastric carcinomas with

high frequency microsatellite instability, Cancer Res. 59 (1999) 159–164.

[149] J.G. Herman, S.B. Baylin, Gene silencing in cancer in association with promoter hypermethylation, N. Engl. J. Med. 349 (2003) 2042–2054.

[150] M. Esteller, Relevance of DNA methylation in the management of cancer, Lancet Oncol. 4 (2003) 351–358.

[151] C. An, I.-S. Choi, J.C. Yao, S. Worah, K. Xie, P.F. Mansfield, J.A. Ajani, A. Rashid, S.R. Hamilton, T.-T. Wu, Prognostic significance of CpG island methylator phenotype and microsatellite instability in gastric carcinoma, Clin. Cancer Res. 11 (2005) 656–663.

[152] J.H. Lee, S.J. Park, S.C. Abraham, J.S. Seo, J.H. Nam, C. Choi, et al., Frequent CpG island methylation in precursor lesions and early gastric adenocarcinomas, Oncogene 23 (2004) 4646–4654.

[153] A.O. Chan, S.K. Lam, B.C. Wong, W.M. Wong, M.F. Yuen, Y.H. Yuen, W.M. Hui, A. Rashid, Y.L. Kwong, Promoter methylation of E-cadherin gene in gastric mucosa associated with *Helicobacter pylori* infection and in gastric cancer, Gut 52 (2003) 502–506.

[154] A.M. Terres, J.M. Pajares, D. O'Tool, S. Ahern, D. Kelleher, *Helicobacter pylori* infection is associated with downregulation of E-cadherin, a molecule involved in epithelial cell adhesion and proliferation control, J. Clin. Pathol. 51 (1998) 410–412.

[155] F. Graziano, F. Arduini, A. Ruzzo, A. Mandolesi, I. Bearzi, R. Silva, et al., Combined analysis of E-cadherin gene (CDH1) promoter hypermethylation and E-cadherin protein expression in patients with gastric cancer: implications for treatment with demethylating drugs, Ann. Oncol. 15 (2004) 489–492.

[156] A.O. Chan, J.Z. Peng, S.K. Lam, W.M. Wong, M.F. Yuen, H.K.L. Chung, et al., Reversal of E-cadherin promoter hypermethylation status after *Helicobacter pylori* eradica-

tion-implication in gastric cancer chemoprevention, Gastroenterology 126 (2004), Suppl. A-38: 333.

[157] M. Zazula, A.M. Ferreira, J.P. Czopek, P. Kolodziejczyk, A. Sinczak-Kuta, A. Klimkowska, P. Wojcik, et al., CDH1 gene promoter hypermethylation in gastric cancer: relationship to Goseki grading, microsatellite instability status, and EBV invasion, Diagn. Mol. Pathol. 15 (2006) 24–29.

[158] E. Miotto, S. Sabbioni, A. Veronese, G.A. Calin, S. Gullini, A. Liboni, et al., Frequent aberrant methylation oh the CDH4 gene promoter in human colorectal and gastric cancer, Cancer Res. 64 (2004) 8156–8159.

[159] J. Yu, W.K. Leung, T.L. Lee, P.C. Tse, K.F. To, J.J. Sung, Promoter hypermethylation of cyclooxygenase-2 in gastric carcinoma, Int. J. Oncol. 22 (2003) 1025–1031.

[160] K. Hur, S.H. Song, H.S. Lee, W. Ho Kim, Y.J. Bang, H.K. Yang, Aberrant methylation of the specific CpG island portion regulates cyclooxygenase-2 gene expression in human gastric carcinomas, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 310 (2003) 844–851.

[161] M.F. de Maat, C.J. van de Veide, N. Umetani, P. de Heer, H. Putter, A.Q. van Hoesel, G.A. Meijer, et al., Epigenetic silencing of cyclooxygenase-2 affects clinical outcome in gastric cancer, J. Clin. Oncol. 25 (2007) 4865–4867.

[162] T. Honda, G. Tamura, T. Waki, S. Kawata, M. Terashima, S. Nishizuka, T. Motoyama, Demethylation of MAGE promoters during gastric cancer progression, Br. J. Cancer 90 (2004) 838–843.

[163] N. Yanagawa, G. Tamura, T. Honda, M. Endoh, S. Nishizuka, T. Motoyama, Demethylation of the synuclein gamma gene CpG island in primary gastric cancers and gastric cancer cell lines, Clin. Cancer Res. 10 (2004) 2447–2451.

[164] Y. Mitani, N. Oue, Y. Hamai, P.P. Aung, S. Matsumura, H. Nakayama, N. Kamata, W. Yasui, Histone H3 acetylation is associated with reduced p21WAF1/CIP1 expression by gastric carcinoma, J. Pathol. 205 (2005) 65–73.
