
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 72 (4), 959–967, 2008

# Enzymatic Characterization of 5-Methylthioribulose-1-phosphate Dehydratase of the Methionine Salvage Pathway in *Bacillus subtilis*

Hiroki ASHIDA,* Yohtaro SAITO,* Chojiro KOJIMA, and Akiho YOKOTA†

**Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST),**
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan

Received October 11, 2007; Accepted December 18, 2007; Online Publication, April 7, 2008  
[doi:10.1271/bbb.70651]

5-Methylthioribulose-1-phosphate (MTRu-1-P) dehydratase catalyzes the reaction from MTRu-1-P to 2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentyl-1-phosphate (DK-MTP-1-P) in the methionine salvage pathway in *Bacillus subtilis*. The properties of this enzyme remain to be determined. We characterized these properties using a recombinant protein. The enzyme, with a molecular mass of 90 kDa, was composed of four subunits. The \(K_m\) and \(V_{\text{max}}\) of the enzyme were 8.9 μM and 42.7 μmole min⁻¹ mg protein⁻¹ at 25°C respectively. Maximum activity was observed at pH 7.5 to 8.5 and 40°C. The activation energy of the reaction from MTRu-1-P to DK-MTP-1-P was 63.5 kJ mol⁻¹. The reaction product DK-MTP-1-P was labile, and decomposed at a rate constant of 0.048 s⁻¹ to an unknown compound that was not utilized by DK-MTP-1-P enolase, the enzyme catalyzing the next step. The function of this enzyme in the pathway is discussed.

Key words: 5-methylthioribulose-1-phosphate dehydratase; methionine salvage pathway; *Bacillus subtilis*; divalent metal ion-dependent Class II aldolase

The methionine salvage pathway is a metabolic pathway widely distributed among some eubacteria, yeast, plants, and animals that recycles reduced sulfur in 5′-methylthioadenosine (MTA) to methionine. MTA is the by-product of the synthesis of polyamines, ethylene, and mugineic acid from S-adenosylmethionine. This pathway is the only one in nature salvaging the reduced sulfur in MTA to methionine.

In the methionine salvage pathway of *Bacillus*, a nucleosidase hydrolyzes MTA to adenine and methylthioribose, which is then converted into MTR-1-phosphate (MTR-1-P) by MTR kinase (MtnK). MTR-1-P is metabolized to methylthioribulose-1-phosphate (MTRu-1-P) by an isomerase (MtnA), and is then dehydrated to 2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentyl-1-phosphate (DK-MTP-1-P) by MTRu-1-P dehydratase (MtnB).

(Fig. 1). DK-MTP-1-P is further metabolized to methionine through 2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopen-tenyl-1-phosphate (HK-MTPenyl-1-P), 2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentene, and 2-keto-4-methylthiobutyrate by sequential reactions of DK-MTP-1-P enolase (MtnW), 2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentenyl-1-phosphatase (MtnX), 2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentene dioxygenase (MtnD), and 2-keto-4-methylthiobutyrate aminotransferase (MtnE) (Fig. 1). The MtnW and MtnX reaction steps are catalyzed by a bifunctional enzyme, enolase-phosphatase (MtnC), in *Klebsiella* and eukaryotes (Fig. 1). Many of the enzymes functioning in the methionine salvage pathway were identified very recently and have not been well characterized. The enzymatic properties of the uncharacterized MTRu-1-P dehydratase attracted our interest, since this enzyme is utilized in the methionine salvaging metabolism in all organisms. This study dealt with the characterization of *B. subtilis* MtnB with its recombinant protein synthesized in *Escherichia coli*.

MtnB has homology to proteins belonging to the FucA/RhuA/RibE family, which comprises the divalent metal ion-dependent Class II aldolase-related enzymes L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase (FucA), L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase (RhuA), and L-ribulose-5-phosphate-4-epimerase (RibE). There has been no report on the dehydration activity of enzymes belonging to this family. In this, the enzymatic relationship of MtnB to this family of enzymes is discussed.

## Materials and Methods

### Bacterial strains and culture conditions.
*B. subtilis* 168 (trp C2) and *E. coli* DH5α and BL21 (DE3) were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at 37°C with shaking at 250 ppm. When required, ampicillin and chloramphenicol were added to the medium at 50 and 30 μg ml⁻¹ respectively.

---

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81-734-72-5560; Fax: +81-743-72-5569; E-mail: yokota@bs.naist.jp

**Abbreviations:** MTA, 5′-methylthioadenosine; MTR-1-P, 5-methylthioribose-1-phosphate; MTRu-1-P, 5-methylthioribulose-1-phosphate; DK-MTP-1-P, 2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentyl-1-phosphate; HK-MTPenyl-1-P, 2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentenyl-1-phosphate; FucA, L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase; RhuA, L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase; RibE, L-ribulose-5-phosphate-4-epimerase; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance

H. ASHIDA *et al.*

KMTB aminotransferase  
MtnE and YugE  

2-keto-4-methylthiobutyrate (KMTB)  

DHK-MTPene dioxygenase  
MtnD  

1,2-dihydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentene  
(DHK-MTPene)  

HK-MTPenyl-1-P phosphatase  
MtnX  

2-hydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentenyl-1-phosphate  
(HK-MTPenyl-1-P)  

DK-MTP-1-P enolase  
MtnW  

2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentyl-1-phosphate  
(DK-MTP-1-P)  

MTRu-1-P dehydratase  
MtnB  

Methylthioribulose-1-phosphate (MTRu-1-P)  

keto acid  
methionine  

s-adenosylmethionine (SAM)  

s-adenosylmethioninamine  

putrescine  
Spermidine synthase  

spermidine  

methylthioadenosine (MTA)  

MTA nucleosidase  
MtnN  

adenine  

methylthioribose (MTR)  

ATP  
MTR kinase  
MtnK  

ADP  

methylthioribose-1-phosphate (MTR-1-P)  

MTR-1-P isomerase  
MtnA  

Fig. 1. The Methionine Salvage Pathway in *B. subtilis*.  
In *Klebsiella* and eukaryotic organisms, the reaction steps from DK-MTP-1-P to DHK-MTPene are catalyzed by one bi-functional enzyme, enolase/phosphatase (MtnC).

**Construction of expression plasmids for recombinant proteins.** Genomic DNA was prepared from cells of *B. subtilis* grown on LB medium by the accepted method. Polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were performed against the extracted genomic DNA with the following primers:  
5′-GGAATTCCATATGACCCATTCATTTGCTG-3′ and  
5′-CGGGATCCAAATGAGCAAAGTCC-3′ for *mtnA*,  
5′-GAGCTCTCATATGAGTGAGTGAGTTATTAG-3′  
and 5′-GCGGATCCTCATACGGGCTTC-3′ for *mtnW*,  
and 5′-GGTACACATATGGCTGCAAAAACAAGAA-  
CG-3′ and 5′-GCGGATCCTTATTTAACAGCTGAT-  
GCTCGAGTG-3′ for *mtnB*, where restriction sequences for *NdeI* and *BamHI* were included at 5′-regions in the primers as shown by the underlining. PCR was performed for 30 cycles with KOD DNA polymerase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) where a cycle consisted of 98 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 4 s, and 74 °C for 75 s. The PCR product was subcloned into the pBC vector (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) digested with *EcoRV*, and the nucleotide sequence was checked by sequencing. The pBC vector carrying the correct gene was digested with *NdeI* and *BamHI*, and the insert was incorporated into the *NdeI*- and *BamHI*-digestion site of pET15b (Novagen, Madison, WI). *E. coli* BL21 (DE3) was transformed with the expression pET15b vector harboring the gene.

**Expression and purification of recombinant proteins.** *E. coli* BL21 (DE3) transformed with the expression vector was cultured overnight in liquid LB medium containing 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside. The cells, collected by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 20 min, were suspended in extraction buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and were then disrupted by sonication. The cell homogenate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min, and the His-tag fusion recombinant protein in the supernatant was purified with His-bind resin (Novagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The eluate, including MtnB, was passed through a PD-10 column (0.5 × 25 cm, GE Healthcare Bio-Science, Uppsala, Sweden) equilibrated with thrombin buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, and 2.5 mM CaCl₂, and cleaved overnight with 1 unit of thrombin protease (Novagen) for 1 mg of recombinant protein. The digest was applied to a column (1 × 30 cm) of Superose 6 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare Bio-Science) that had been equilibrated with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) and 1 mM MgCl₂. The fractions containing MtnB were combined and stored at −80 °C as 20% glycerol stocks until use. The buffer in the His-bind resin-purified MtnA, MtnK, and MtnW was changed to 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM MgCl₂ in a PD-10 column. These His-tagged recombinant proteins were also stored at −80 °C as 20% glycerol stocks until use.

**Synthesis of MTR-1-P.** MTR-1-P was synthesized from S-adenosylmethionine by hydrolysis of the adenine base with HCl, and C₁ of the ribose moiety was phosphorylated by ATP with MtnK, as reported previously.

viously.8) Purification and quantification of MTR-1-P were performed by the methods of Ashida *et al.*8)

Assay of DK-MTP-1-P dehydratase activity. The activity of MtnB was assayed by measuring the increase in absorbance at 280 nm of the HK-MTPenyl-1-P formed in a coupling reaction of MtnB and MtnW. The substrate MTRu-1-P was synthesized beforehand in the reaction mixture (100 μl) composed of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl₂, 32 μg of MtnA protein, various concentrations of MTR-1-P, and 18 μg of MtnW protein. The exact MTRu-1-P concentration in the reaction mixture was calculated from the reaction equilibrium constant between MTRu-1-P and MTR-1-P ([MTRu-1-P]/[MTR-1-P] = 6.0).20) The MtnB reaction was started by adding the limiting amount (0.8 μg in 2 μl) of MtnB protein to the reaction mixture, and was monitored at 280 nm with a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Hewlett Packard, Palo Alto, CA). Under these reaction conditions, the overall coupling reaction was severely limited by the amount of MtnB. The amount of the reaction product, HK-MTPenyl-1-P, was calculated from its molecular extinction coefficient (9.5 × 10³ M⁻¹ cm⁻¹ at 280 nm).20) MtnA was not removed before measurement of MtnB activity. The remaining MtnA in the assay mixture did not affect MtnB activity, since the MtnB activity was calculated using an absorbance change at 280 nm for the initial 20 s. The slope of the increase in absorbance at 280 nm for the initial 20 s in each measurement was linear. HK-MTPenyl-1-P formation was not done by MtnB or MtnW alone from MTR-1-P in the absence of MtnA, as reported previously.8)

Gel filtration for determination of the molecular mass of MtnB. A column (1 × 30 cm) of Superose 6 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare Bio-Science) equilibrated with 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 8.0) containing 150 mM NaCl was used in molecular mass determination. The same buffer was used in the development of the column. The following proteins from the Gel Filtration Calibration kit (Amersham Pharmacia USA) were used for calibration of the column: aldolase (158 kDa), ovalbumin (43 kDa), chymotrypsinogen A (25 kDa), and ribonuclease A (13.7 kDa).

Monitoring of DK-MTP-1-P degradation. The reaction mixture was the same as that for MtnB, except that the amount of MtnB protein used was 30 μg. The reaction was monitored by measuring the absorbance of DK-MTP-1-P spectrophotometrically at 270 nm. The amount of DK-MTP-1-P in the reaction mixture was measured by converting it into HK-MTPenyl-1-P by adding MtnW to the reaction mixture.

Results

The MtnB gene from *B. subtilis* was expressed as the (His)₆-tagged soluble main protein in *E. coli*. The expressed protein was purified to homogeneity using the attached His-tag. After cleaving the His-tag with thrombin, the MtnB protein was purified as a single band on SDS–PAGE gel by gel filtration. The molecular mass of the native form enzyme was determined to be 90 kDa. The molecular mass of the subunit monomer was deduced to be 23.8 kDa from its gene sequence, suggesting that the native form enzyme is a homo-tetramer.

The MTRu-1-P dehydratase activity of MtnB showed a broad pH dependence, between pH 7.5 and 8.5 (Fig. 2a). Thereafter, the enzymatic properties were analyzed at pH 7.5 and 25 °C. Enzyme activity increased with increasing concentrations of MTRu-1-P in a hyperbolic manner (Fig. 2b). The *K*ₘ and *V*ₘₐₓ values of the enzyme were calculated to be 8.9 ± 0.6 μM and 42.7 ± 1.3 μmol min⁻¹ mg of protein⁻¹ respectively. *k*ₐₜ was estimated to be 16.7 ± 0.5 s⁻¹ site⁻¹, and the reaction specificity, *k*ₐₜ/*K*ₘ, was 1.88 × 10⁶ M⁻¹ s⁻¹. MTRu-1-P dehydratase showed maximum activity at 40 °C, and lost most of its activity at 55 °C (Fig. 2c). Arrhenius plotting of the relationship between the enzyme activity and the reaction temperature demonstrated that the activation energy of the reaction from MTRu-1-P to DM-MTP-1-P was 63.5 kJ mol⁻¹ (Fig. 2d).

It has been reported that class II aldolase-related enzymes require divalent metal ions for catalysis.21,22) We examined to determine whether *Bacillus* MtnB required metal ions for its catalysis. A metal-free form of MtnB was prepared by treating the enzyme with EDTA-containing buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM EDTA), and the buffer was changed to metal-free buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5) using a PD-10 desalting column. The dehydratase activity of EDTA-treated MtnB was 16.5% of untreated MtnB (data not shown). This result suggests that MtnB requires metal ions for catalysis of the dehydratase reaction, but divalent metal ions could not be removed completely from MtnB by EDTA treatment because MtnB retained activity following EDTA treatment. In fact, the activity of MtnB was not changed by gel filtration in the presence of metal-free buffer (data not shown), suggesting that MtnB tightly binds metal ions.

Our previous report mentioned that the reaction product of MtnB, DK-MTP-1-P, was so labile that we could not isolate and analyze its chemical structure.8) In fact, the total amount of HK-MTPenyl-1-P production in a high ratio of MtnB to MtnW protein (3 μg of MtnB and 0.025 μg, 0.1 μg, and 0.2 μg of MtnW) was lower than that in a low ratio (3 μg of MtnB and 2 μg of MtnW) although the concentration of MTRu-1-P as the starting substrate was the same (Fig. 3). MtnW was saturated at 2 μg, since the produced amount of HK-MTPenyl-1-P calculated using its molecular extinction coefficient was the same as that of MTRu-1-P added to the reaction mixture on a phosphate basis. These results indicate that

H. ASHIDA *et al.*

Fig. 2. General Enzymatic Properties of MTRu-1-P Dehydratase of *B. subtilis*.

a, Effect of pH on the activity of MTRu-1-P dehydratase. Enzyme activity was measured with purified MTRu-1-P dehydratase in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer at pH 6.5–10.5. b, Michaelis-Menten kinetics of MTRu-1-P dehydratase. c, Temperature dependence of MTRu-1-P dehydratase activity. The enzyme activity was measured with purified MTRu-1-P dehydratase at different temperatures. d, Arrhenius plots of MTRu-1-P dehydratase activity using data from c. The solid line is the linear fit for the data to calculate the activation energy.

the efficiency of HK-MTPenyl-1-P production in a higher activity ratio of MtnB/MtnW was lower than that in a lower activity ratio of MtnB/MtnW. There are two possible explanations: One is inhibition or inactivation of MtnB and/or MtnW by DK-MTP-1-P accumulated at the higher ratios. The other is that DK-MTP-1-P not utilized by MtnW was gradually degraded of DK-MTP-1-P to another compound that no longer the substrate of MtnB. The addition of MtnB to the reaction mixture containing 55 μM MTRu-1-P and MtnW caused an increase in the absorbance of HK-MTPenyl-1-P at 280 nm (Fig. 4a). In contrast, the addition of MtnW to the reaction mixture in which 55 μM MTRu-1-P and MtnB had reacted for 360 s did not cause any increase in the absorbance at 280 nm (Fig. 4a). However, when 55 μM MTRu-1-P was added to the reaction mixture in which MtnW did not produce HK-MTPenyl-1-P any more, the absorbance at 280 nm increased almost at the same rate as that of the complete reaction system (Fig. 4a). These results indicate that the absence of HK-MTPenyl-1-P production when MtnW was added 360 s after the start of the reaction between MTRu-1-P and MtnB was due to the fact that MtnB and MtnW were not inhibited or inactivated by DK-MTP-1-P, while DK-MTP-1-P was degraded gradually to another compound. Considering the importance of gaining information on the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P in understanding the function of MtnB in the methionine salvage pathway, the degradation was further analyzed.

Fig. 3. Dependency of the MtnB-to-MtnW Protein Ratio on the Efficiency of HK-MTPenyl-1-P Production.

HK-MTPenyl-1-P production was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm with a UV-visible spectrophotometer following the method of the DK-MTP-1-P dehydratase activity assay. The assay was started by adding 3 μg of MtnB protein to the reaction mixture, containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl₂, 7.2 nmol MTRu-1-P, and various amounts of MtnW: 0.025 μg (dotted line), 0.1 μg (dashed-dot line), 0.2 μg (dashed line), or 2 μg (solid line).

Fig. 4. Gradual Degradation of DK-MTP-1-P.

a, Production of HK-MTPenyl-1-P was monitored as in Fig. 3. MTRu-1-P was synthesized before adding MtnB, as described in “Materials and Methods.” The reaction was started by adding 0.8 μg of MtnB to the reaction mixture, containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl₂, 55 μM MTRu-1-P, and 18 μg of MtnW (broken line). MtnW was added to the reaction mixture, in which the same concentrations of MTRu-1-P and MtnB as above were present for 360 s (solid line), and then after 600 s, the same amount of MTRu-1-P was added to the reaction mixture (dash-dot line). b, Production of DK-MTP-1-P was monitored by measuring spectral changes recorded at 5-s intervals, from the beginning with number 1, to number 5, with the maximum absorbance. The reaction solution was composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl₂, 0.75 mM MTRu-1-P, and 15 μg of MtnB. c, Spectral changes were recorded at 5-s intervals from number 5 to number 19 after finishing the production of DK-MTP-1-P in b. Number 5 was the spectrum at the turning point from the absorbance-increasing phase to the decreasing phase.


Fig. 5. Degradation Kinetics of DK-MTP-1-P.

a, Time course of the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P. b, The logarithm of the absorbance at 270 nm of DK-MTP-1-P plotted against reaction time. The time course of spontaneous degradation of DK-MTP-1-P was measured by monitoring the absorbance at 270 nm of DK-MTP-1-P. The assay was started by adding 60 μg of MtnB protein to the reaction mixture, containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl₂, and 0.1 (solid line), 0.2 (broken line), and 0.4 mM (dash-dot line) MTRu-1-P. The amount of MtnB protein was set to convert MTRu-1-P to DK-MTP-1-P immediately.

The light absorbance of DK-MTP-1-P at 270 nm increased transiently immediately after the start of the reaction (Fig. 4b), but thereafter decreased to zero with increasing reaction times (Fig. 4c). The temporal increase in absorbance at 270 nm and its subsequent disappearance suggests that DK-MTP-1-P formed by MtnB was gradually decomposed to another compound that was not recognized by MtnW. In fact, the addition of MtnW to the reaction mixture at the time of maximum absorbance caused the production of HK-MTPenyl-1-P, but not after the disappearance of light absorbance at 270 nm (data not shown).

Since the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P was relatively slow, we analyzed the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P

formed from MTRu-1-P by MtnB (Fig. 5a). The starting concentration of DK-MTP-1-P was varied by changing the concentration of MTR-1-P in the reaction mixture. In this analysis, we added enough MtnB to be sure that DK-MTP-1-P was formed immediately after the addition of these enzymes shown as in Fig. 5a. Note that the reactions of MtnB reached equilibrium soon after the addition of the enzymes. The rate of decay was dependent on the initial concentration of MTRu-1-P. Plotting the logarithm of absorbance at 270 nm of DK-MTP-1-P against the reaction time gave us linear, parallel lines depending on the initial MTRu1-1-P concentration, suggesting that the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P is a first-order reaction with a rate constant of 0.048 s⁻¹. t₁/₂ was 14.4 s (Fig. 5b).

# Discussion

The amino acid sequence of *B. subtilis* MtnB has homology to MtnB homolog proteins FucA, RibE, and RhuA. In the phylogenetic tree, these proteins are classified into four clades, the MtnB family including *B. subtilis* MtnB and MtnB homologs, and the FucA, RibE, and RhuA families (Fig. 6). The genes for the MtnB homologs of *Geobacillus kaustophilus* and *Bacillus anthracis* are members of the *mtnWXBD* operon as well as that of *B. subtilis* (Fig. 7a), and hence these genes must encode the MTRu-1-P dehydratase. In other bacteria, homologous genes, involved in methionine salvaging, presumably constitute an operon with *mtnB* homolog genes (Fig. 7a), hence *mtnB* homolog genes may also code MTRu-1-P dehydratase in these bacteria. Interestingly, *Tetrahymena thermophila* and *Arabidopsis thaliana* possess a gene for fusion proteins composed of MtnB and D and C respectively, indicating that the MtnB domain of fusion proteins functions as MTRu-1-P dehydratase (Fig. 7b).⁹ These facts are intriguing as to the molecular evolution of MtnB enzymes in the methionine salvage pathway.

The deduced amino acid sequence of *B. subtilis* MtnB showed 20.1%, 23.4%, and 18.7% homology to *E. coli* FucA, *B. subtilis* RibE, and *E. coli* RhuA. FucA, RibE, and RhuA are members of the divalent metal ion-dependent class II aldolase family.¹³⁻¹⁸ These proteins, including MtnB, possess three histidine residues binding a metal ion, a glutamate or aspartate residue subtracting a proton from their substrates, and residues binding the phosphate group from the substrate (Fig. 8).²³ In addition, MtnB is a homotetramer, as are the FucA, RibE, and RhuA enzymes.¹⁴,¹⁸,²⁴ These similarities suggest that MtnB is a new member of the FucA/RibE/RhuA family and that these enzymes are related to each other evolutionally. It has been reported that production of DK-MTP-1-P using MTRu-1-P dehydratase from *Klebsiella pneumoniae* has been carried out in reaction buffer containing the magnesium ion,²⁵ and we used this information in our analysis of *B. subtilis* MtnB. Our results suggest that MtnB requires metal ions for catalysis, but it is unclear what kind of metal ions bound to the MtnB purified from *E. coli* cells. Considering that FucA/RibE/RhuA-related enzymes require the zinc ion for optimal catalysis under physiological conditions and that recombinant class II aldolase enzymes expressed in *E. coli* cells were almost all of the Zn²⁺ form,¹⁴,²⁶ purified MtnB might also be of the Zn²⁺ form.

The reaction mechanism of MtnB (MTRu-1-P dehydratase) was not examined in detail in this study. However, common properties of conserved amino acid residues and the requirement for metal ions suggests that MtnB uses those residues essential to the reactions of the FucA/RibE/RhuA family of enzymes in its dehydratase reaction. In our previous report, it was predicted by ¹H-NMR analysis in D₂O buffer that the proton on C4 of MTRu-1-P was abstracted and that DK-MTP-1-P was formed by re-protonation using protons from solvent

**Fig. 6. Phylogenetic Tree of MtnB Homologs and FucA/RhuA/RibE Family Enzymes.**

The amino acid sequences were aligned with ClustalW program, and ClustalW alignment was presented by TREEVIEW. The length of the bar represents an evolutionary distance of 0.1 amino acid substitutions per site. The full names of the species are as follows: *B. subtilis*, Bacillus subtilis; *B. anthracis*, Bacillus anthracis; *G. kaustophilus*, Geobacillus kaustophilus; *G. oxydans*, Gluconobacter oxydans; *P. aeruginosa*, Pseudomonas aeruginosa; *X. fastidiosa*, Xylella fastidiosa; *S. avermitilis*, Streptomyces avermitilis; *Synechococcus* sp., Synechococcus sp. WH8102; *T. thermophila*, Tetrahymena thermophila; *A. thaliana*, Arabidopsis thaliana; *X. tropicalis*, Xenopus tropicalis; *D. melanogaster*, Drosophila melanogaster; *S. cerevisiae*, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; *Roseiflexus*, Roseiflexus sp. RS-1; *T. maritima*, Thermotoga maritima; *Y. pestis*, Yersinia pestis; *E. coli*, Escherichia coli; *L. plantarum*, Lactobacillus plantarum; *C. acetobutylicum*, Clostridium acetobutylicum; *S. enterica*, Salmonella enterica; *H. influenzae*, Haemophilus influenzae; *B. cereus*, Bacillus cereus; *C. tetani*, Clostridium tetani; *R. meliloti*, Rhizobium meliloti and *R. sphaeroides*, Rhodobacter sphaeroides. In order to perform alignment analysis, 162 and 190 amino acids were removed from the C-terminal of MtnB related protein from *A. thaliana* and *T. thermophila* respectively, because each protein was fused with other putative enzymes in its C-terminal region.

5-Methylthioribulose-1-phosphate Dehydratase of *Bacillus* 965

during the dehydratase reaction of MtnB.⁸) In fact, MtnB conserves the glutamate residue, which is involved in de-protonation and re-protonation in the reactions catalyzed by FucA and RhuA (Fig. 8), suggesting that MtnB utilizes this residue in its catalysis as well as the FucA/RibE/RhuA family of enzymes. However, it is not easy to identify a reaction step common to the enzymatic reactions catalyzed by the FucA/RibE/RhuA aldolase family and MtnB enzymes. It has been reported that in the RhuA aldolase reaction, the reaction product dihydroxyacetone phosphate, through its 1,2-enediol form, is converted into 1,2-dicarbonyl compound in a side oxygenase reaction.²⁶) Additional information is required to determine in detail the dehydratase and aldolase reactions of the enzymes included in this family.

The enzymological analysis in this study revealed that the reaction product of MtnB, DK-MTP-1-P, was labile and decomposed at a half-time of 14.4 s after enzymatic production of it. The MtnB reaction with the substrate MTRu-1-P was carried out in D₂O phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), and the reaction product was analyzed by ¹H-NMR. The ¹H-NMR of the reaction product was measured, as reported previously.⁸) We detected a peak at 2.1 ppm, which was assigned to the methyl group of the product, but the singlet peak at 2.7 ppm and the doublet peak at 3.9 ppm could not be assigned to


MtnB --MAAKQERWRELAEVKRELAERDWF PATSGNLSIKVTDEPLT--
E. coli FUCA ---MERNKLARQIIDTCLEMTRLGLNQGTAGNVS---VRYQDG---
H. influenzae FUCA ---MNRAELSQIIDTCLEMTKLGLNQTAGNVS---VRYKDG---
B. subtilis RIBE ----MLETLKKEVLAAANKLQEHQLVTFTWGNVSG-IDREKER----
E. coli RIBE ----MLEDLKRVLEANLALPKHNLVTLTWGNVSA-VDRERGV----
E. coli RHUA MQNITQSWFVQGMIKATTDAWLKGWDERNGGNLTTLRLDDADIA PYHDNFHQOPRYIPLSQPMPLLANTP


MtnB FLVTA**SG**------KDKRKETVEDFLVDQNGEPAESGHSLK-----PSAETLLHTHLYN-KTNAG-----
E. coli FUCA MLITP**TG**------IPYEKLTESHIVFIDGNG----KHEEGKL-----PSSREWRFHMAAYQSRPDAN-----
H. influenzae FUCA MLITP**TG**------MPYHLMKTENIVYVDGNG----KHEENKL-----PSSSEWQFHLSVYHTRPEAN-----
B. subtilis RIBE IVIKP**SG**------VEYSDLTADDLVVLNLDG--EVVEGSLK-----PSSDTPTHVYLYKAFPNIG-----
E. coli RIBE FVIKP**SG**------VDYSVMTADDMVVVSIETG-EVVEGTKK-----PSSDTPTHRLLYQAFPSIG-----
E. coli RHUA FIVTGS**GKFFRNVQLDPAANLGIVKVDSDGAGYHILWGLTNEAVPTS ELPAHFLSHERIKATNGK


MtnB CCL--**HVH**TVNNNVISELYGDQKITTFGQEI IKALGLWEENAEVTVP IIENPAHIP TLAALFAEEIS---
E. coli FUCA AVV--**HNH**AVHCTAVSILNRSTPAIHYMIAAAGGNSIPC AYATFGTRELSEHVALA----------L---
H. influenzae FUCA AVV--**HNH**SIHCAGLSILEKPIPAIHYMVA VSGTDHIPCVPYATFGSHKLASYVATG----------I---
B. subtilis RIBE GIV--**HIHS**QWATSWAQSGRDIPPL GTTHADYFDAIPCTREMYDEEI IHDYELNTGK VIAETFQHH---NY---
E. coli RIBE GIV--**HIHS**RHATIWAQAGQSIPATGTT HADYFYGTIPCTRKM TDAEINGEYEWE TGNVIVETF EKQGIDA---
E. coli RHUA DRVIM**HOH**ATNLIALTYVLENDTAVFTRQLWEGSTECLVVFP DGVGILPWMVPGTDEIG-------QATAQEM---


MtnB EDSGAVLIRNH**GI**TAWGKTAFEAKR VLEAYEFLFSYHLKLKTLEHQLVK-----------------
E. coli FUCA KNRKATLLQHH**GL**IACEVNLEKALWLAHEVEVLAQLYLTTLA ITDPVPVLSDEEIAV VLEKF KTYGLRIEE---
H. influenzae FUCA KESKATILLAHH**GL**ITCGENLDKALWL AQEVEVLASWYLKLLSTGLEIPLLSKEQM VVLGKFHTYGLRIEES---
B. subtilis RIBE EQVPGVLVNNH**GP**FCWGTDALNAIHNAV VLETVAEMAYHSIMLNKDVT PINTVLHEKH FYRGHGANAYYGQS---
E. coli RIBE AQMPGVLVHSH**GP**FAWGKNAEDAVHNAIVLEEVA YMGIFC RQLAPQLPDMQ QTLLDKHYLRKHGAKA YYGQ---
E. coli RHUA QKHSLVLWP EH**GV**FGSGPTLDETFGLIDTAEKSAQVLVKVYS MGGMKQTISREELIALGKRFGVTPLASALAL


Fig. 7. Tight Linkage between *mtnB* Homolog Genes and Other Genes for the Methionine Salvage Pathway.
a, The ORFs (white arrows) around MtnB homolog genes (black arrows) code the enzymes for the methionine salvage pathway in various bacteria. b, The genes of *T. thermophila* (THERM_00467500) and *A. thaliana* (At5g53850) encode a MtnB homolog (black) in the amino-terminal domain and another enzyme homolog (white) for the methionine salvage pathway in the carboxy-terminal domain as a fusion protein.


Fig. 8. Multiple Sequence Alignment of *B. subtilis* MtnB and Enzymes in the FucA/RhuA/RibE Family.
The amino acid residues involved in Zn²⁺ and phosphate binding in FucA/RhuA/RibE family enzymes are highlighted in black and surrounded by solid-line squares respectively. A possible general acid/base residue to de- and re-protonate in *E. coli* FucA and RhuA is shown in highlighted gray. Other conserved residues in all enzymes are surrounded by broken-line squares.

any proton, and we were unable to identify what the product (data not shown). DK-MTP-1-P has a dicarboxyl group, causing the compound to be labile. It is known, for example, that dicarbonyl group-harborin 2,3-diketo-L-gulonic acid is easily decomposed to L-threose, L-threonic acid, L-xylonic acid, L-erythrulose, and so on.^(27,28)^ Since the half-time of the decomposition of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonic acid was a few orders larger than that of DK-MTP-1-P,^(27)^ the degradation of DK-MTP-1-P to an unknown compound might be due to enzymatic catalysis of MtnA or MtnB in the reaction mixture. Future identification of the degradation product should be a clue to elucidation of the degradation reaction. On the other hand, in living *B. subtilis* cells, MtnW might trap DK-MTP-1-P efficiently for its enzymatic reaction to the next metabolic step without any degradation in salvaging the reduced sulfur in MTA in the methionine salvage pathway. In order to achieve efficient methionine salvage, the ratio of MtnB to MtnW protein should be strictly regulated, since production of HK-MTPenyl-1-P under low MtnB/W ratio conditions was more effective than under high MtnB/W ratio conditions (Fig. 3). The genes *mtnB* and *mtnW* in the same operon can be expressed in *B. subtilis* to meet this condition to make the most of the energy in the reduced sulfur in MTA in the methionine salvage pathway.

### Acknowledgments

The authors thank Dr. Antoine Danchin, Pasteur Institute, and Dr. Jun-ichi Azuma, Kyoto University, for helpful discussion. This work was supported partly by a Grant-in-Aid (17208031 and 18688021) for Scientific Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), partly by a grant (FY2004-2006) for General Science and Technology from the Asahi Glass Foundation, and partly by a grant (FY2005-2007) from the Nissan Science Foundation.

### References

1. Grundy, F. J., and Henkin, T. M., “*Bacillus subtilis* and Its Closest Relatives,” eds. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A., and Losick, R., Am. Soc. Microbiol., Washington, DC, pp. 245–254 (2002).
2. Sekowska, A., Kung, H. F., and Danchin, A., Sulfur metabolism in *Escherichia coli* and related bacteria: facts and fiction. *J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol.*, **2**, 145–177 (2000).
3. Marchitto, K. S., and Ferro, J. A., The metabolism of 5′-methylthioadenosine and 5-methylthioribose-1-phosphate in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *J. Gen. Microbiol.*, **131**, 2153–2164 (1985).
4. Kushad, M. M., Orvos, A., and Ferro, A. J., 5′-methylthioadenosine nucleosidase and 5-methylthioribose kinase activities in relation to stress-induced ethylene biosynthesis. *Physiol. Plant.*, **86**, 532–538 (1992).
5. Garcia-Castellano, J. M., Villanueva, A., Healey, J. H., Sowers, R., Cordon-Cardo, C., Huvos, A., Bertino, J. R.,
6. Meyers, P., and Gorlick, R., Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase gene deletions are common in osteosarcoma. *Clin. Cancer Res.*, **8**, 782–787 (2002).
7. Wray, J. W., and Abeles, R. H., The methionine salvage pathway in *Klebsiella pneumoniae* and rat liver: identification and characterization of two novel dioxygenases. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **270**, 3147–3153 (1995).
8. Negishi, T., Nakanishi, H., Yazaki, J., Kishimoto, N., Fujii, F., Shimbo, K., Yamamoto, K., Sakata, K., Sasaki, T., Kikuchi, S., Mori, S., and Nishizawa, N. K., cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression during Fe deficiency stress in barley suggests that polar transport of vesicles is implicated in phytosiderophore secretion in Fe-deficient barley roots. *Plant J.*, **30**, 83–94 (2002).
9. Ashida, H., Saito, Y., Kojima, C., Kobayashi, K., Ogasawara, N., and Yokota, A., A functional link between RuBisCO-like protein of *Bacillus* and photosynthetic RuBisCO. *Science*, **302**, 286–290 (2003).
10. Sekowska, A., Dénervaud, V., Ashida, H., Michoud, K., Haas, D., Yokota, A., and Danchin, A., Bacterial variations on the methionine salvage pathway. *BMC Microbiol.*, **4**, 9 (2004).
11. Ashida, H., Danchin, A., and Yokota, A., Was photosynthetic RuBisCO recruited by acquisitive evolution from RuBisCO-like proteins involved in sulfur metabolism? *Res. Microbiol.*, **156**, 611–618 (2005).
12. Wang, H., Pang, H., Bartlam, M., and Rao, Z., Crystal structure of human E1 enzyme and its complex with a substrate analog reveals the mechanism of its phosphatase/enolase activity. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **348**, 917–926 (2005).
13. Wang, H., Pang, H., Ding, Y., Li, Y., and Rao, Z., Purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of human enolase-phosphatase E1. *Acta Crystallogr. Sect. F Struct. Biol. Cryst. Commun.*, **61**, 521–523 (2005).
14. Dreyer, M. K., and Schulz, G. E., The spatial structure of the class II L-fucose-1-phosphate aldolase from *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **231**, 549–553 (1993).
15. Johnson, A. E., and Tanner, M. E., Epimerization via carbon-carbon bond cleavage. L-Ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase as a masked class II aldolase. *Biochemistry*, **37**, 5746–5754 (1998).
16. Lee, L. V., Poyner, R. R., Vu, M. V., and Cleland, W. W., Role of metal ions in the reaction catalyzed by L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase. *Biochemistry*, **39**, 4821–4830 (2000).
17. Luo, Y., Samuel, J., Mosimann, S. C., Lee, J. E., Tanner, M. E., and Strynadka, N. C. J., The structure of L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase: an aldolase-like platform for epimerization. *Biochemistry*, **40**, 14763–14771 (2001).
18. Samuel, J., Luo, Y., Morgan, P. M., Strynadka, N. C. J., and Tanner, M. E., Catalysis and binding in L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase: a comparison with L-fucose-1-phosphate aldolase. *Biochemistry*, **40**, 14772–14780 (2001).
19. Kroemer, M., Merkel, I., and Schulz, G. E., Structure and catalytic mechanism of L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase. *Biochemistry*, **42**, 10560–10568 (2003).
20. Saunders, C., Schmidt, B., Morot, M., Thompson, L., and Guyer, M., Use of chromosomal integration in the establishment and expression of *blaZ*, a Staphylococcus aureus β-lactamase gene, in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Bacter*

iol., 157, 718–726 (1984).

20) Saito, Y., Ashida, H., Kojima, C., Tamura, H., Matsumura, H., Kai, Y., and Yokota, A., Enzymatic characterization of 5-methylthioribose 1-phosphate isomerase from *Bacillus subtilis*. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 71, 2021–2028 (2007).

21) Horecker, B. L., Tsolas, O., and Lai, C. Y., “The Enzymes,” ed, Boyer, P. D., Academic Press, New York, pp. 213–258 (1972).

22) Fessner, W. D., Schneider, A., Held, H., Sinerius, G., Walter, C., Hixon, M., and Schloss, J. V., The mechanism of class II, metal dependent aldolases. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 35, 2219–2221 (1996).

23) Lee, L. V., Vu, M. V., and Cleland, W. W., 13C and deuterium isotope effects suggest an aldol cleavage mechanism for L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase. Biochemistry, 39, 4808–4820 (2000).

24) Joerger, A. C., Mueller-Dieckmann, C., and Schulz, G. E., Structures of L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase

mutants outlining motions during catalysis. J. Mol. Biol., 303, 531–543 (2000).

25) Furfine, E. S., and Abeles, R. H., Intermediates in the conversion of 5′-S-methylthioadenosine to methionine in *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. J. Biol. Chem., 263, 9598–9606 (1988).

26) Hixon, M., Sinerius, G., Schneider, A., Walter, C., Wolf-Dieter, F., and Schloss, J. V., Quo vadis photorespiration: a tale of two aldolases. FEBS Lett., 392, 281–284 (1996).

27) Li, M., Suzuki, E., and Kurata, T., Effect of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonic acid on the oxidation of yolk lipoprotein. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 65, 599–604 (2001).

28) Nishikawa, Y., Toyoshima, Y., and Kurata, T., Identification of 3,4-Dihydroxy-2-oxo-butanal (L-threosone) as an intermediate compound in oxidative degradation of dehydro-L-ascorbic acid and 2,3-diketo-L-gulonic acid in a deuterium oxide phosphate buffer. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 65, 1707–1712 (2001).
