
Cell Cycle

ISSN: 1538-4101 (Print) 1551-4005 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kccy20

# Molecular framework underlying pluripotency

Yuin-Han Loh, Jia-Hui Ng & Huck-Hui Ng

To cite this article: Yuin-Han Loh, Jia-Hui Ng & Huck-Hui Ng (2008) Molecular framework underlying pluripotency , Cell Cycle, 7:7, 885-891, DOI: 10.4161/cc.7.7.5636

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cc.7.7.5636

Published online: 08 Apr 2008.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 56

View related articles

Citing articles: 24 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kccy20

Download by: [94.242.228.108]
Date: 17 March 2016, At: 01:59

[Cell Cycle 7:7, 885-891; 1 April 2008]; © 2008 Landes Bioscience

**Perspective**

# Molecular framework underlying pluripotency

Yuin-Han Loh, ${}^{1,2,\dagger,*}$ Jia-Hui Ng ${}^{1,2,\dagger}$ and Huck-Hui Ng ${}^{1,2}$

Gene Regulation Laboratory; Genome Institute of Singapore; Singapore; ${}^{2}$ Department of Biological Sciences; National University of Singapore; Singapore

${}^{\dagger}$ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Keywords: pluripotency, embryonic stem cell, regulatory network, epigenetic, histone demethylase, reprogramming, trans-differentiation

---

Pluripotency is governed by the intricate interplay between genetic and epigenetic factors. Previous studies implicate Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog as core regulators of the transcriptional circuitry in pluripotent cells. The three transcription factors and their downstream target genes coordinately promote self-renewal and pluripotency. Significant inroads have also been made into elucidating the epigenetic mechanisms governing the exit from a self-renewal state. The recent success in reprogramming both mouse and human fibroblast cells into a pluripotent state has marked a new era in stem cell research and is pertinent to a comprehensive understanding of pluripotency. Reprogramming can be initiated by the introduction of few defined factors. However, the molecular mechanisms driving reprogramming remain largely obscure and await further investigations. Here, we explore the molecular framework governing pluripotency in the context of pluripotent ES cells and the reprogrammed iPSCs.

### Introduction

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are derived from the inner cell mass (ICM) of blastocyst-stage embryos. ${}^{1}$ ES cells are of great interest in modern biology and medicine due to several unique characteristics that distinguish them from other cell types. Firstly, ES cells have unlimited capacity for self-renewal and can proliferate extensively in vitro. Notably, and in contrast to transformed tumor cell lines with similar proliferative capacity, ES cells retain a normal karyotype after extensive passages in the laboratory. Secondly, ES cells are pluripotent and possess the capacity to differentiate into diverse functional cell types both in vivo and under appropriate culture conditions. The ability to derive multiple lineages from ES cells generated excitement about their potential use as a source of cells and tissues for transplantation in the treatment of a broad spectrum of diseases such as diabetes and Parkinson's disease.

It was previously surmised that as ES cells differentiate, they lose their ability to make cell fate decision and become more restricted in their potential. However, recent reports of somatic cell reprogramming have refuted the belief that differentiation and development are irreversible processes. In fact, pluripotency can be re-established in terminally differentiated fibroblast cells by the simple introduction of a few transcription factors. ${}^{2}$ The prospect of deriving patient-specific pluripotent stem cells from reprogrammed somatic cells has brought the concept of regenerative medicine and cell therapy closer to reality. In order to realize their great promise in regenerative medicine, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms that regulate pluripotency is necessary. In this review, we discuss recent progress made in understanding the roles of the transcription factor network and epigenetic processes in the control and maintenance of pluripotency in ES cells. Studies in ES cells have provided insights into the understanding of somatic cell reprogramming. We will highlight the current concepts in the molecular mechanisms underlying the process of reprogramming where developmental potential is reversed and re-established in the differentiated cell type.

#### Genetic Regulation of Pluripotency

Transcription factors that regulate pluripotency. Several transcription factors are currently known to play essential roles in both early development and maintenance of pluripotency of ES cells. Oct4 is a POU homeodomain transcription factor encoded by the *Pou5f1* gene. The lack of *Oct4* in early embryos results in the failure to develop the inner cell mass (ICM) and the embryos contain only trophectoderm cells. ${}^{3}$ Suppression of *Oct4* expression in mouse ES cells gives rise to differentiation along the trophoblast lineage. ${}^{4}$ *Sox2* is a member of the Sox (SRY-related HMG box) gene family that encodes transcription factors with a single HMG DNA-binding domain. *Sox2* loss-of-function in the embryo and ES cells results in defective epiblasts and differentiation into trophectoderm lineages. ${}^{5}$ Nanog was first functionally identified through its ability to maintain mouse ES cells in the absence of LIF and feeder layer. ${}^{6,7}$ In contrast to the induction of differentiation by overexpression of *Oct4*, overexpression of *Nanog* enhances self-renewal and maintenance of the undifferentiated state. ${}^{6,7}$ Mouse embryos deleted of *Nanog* fail to develop an epiblast whilst *Nanog*-depleted ES cells are driven towards extra-embryonic endoderm lineages. ${}^{7-9}$ Therefore, unlike Oct4 and Sox2, Nanog plays a pivotal role in the maintenance of the epiblast and ES cells by repressing differentiation along the primitive endoderm lineage. Sox2 is capable of heterodimerizing with Oct4 to mediate the transcription activities of several ES cell specific genes including *Nanog*. ${}^{10}$ Interestingly, Oct4 and Sox2 are also involved in reciprocal regulation of each other's expression. ${}^{11}$

*Correspondence to: Genome Institute of Singapore; 60 Biopolis Street; #02-01, Genome Building; Singapore 138672 Singapore; Tel.: (+65).6478.8143; Fax: (+65).6478.9004; Email: yuinhan_loh@scholars.a-star.edu.sg

Submitted: 01/21/08; Accepted: 01/22/08

Previously published online as a Cell Cycle E-publication: http://www.landesbioscience.com/journals/cc/article/5636
Together, these studies suggest that Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog may function in distinct pathways but operate inter-dependently to coordinate the specification of the ES cell state. Understanding the interactions among these transcription factors and their regulation of downstream genomic targets will be instrumental in delineating their specific roles in governing the maintenance of pluripotency and driving cell fate decision during the differentiation process.

Transcriptional regulatory networks of ES cells. Two groups have mapped the transcriptional regulatory networks in embryonic stem cells. ${ }^{8,12}$ Both studies have found Oct4 and Nanog to co-occupy and share a substantial portion of their target genes. In the mouse system, Nanog co-occupies 44.5% (345) of Oct4-bound genes ${ }^{8}$ while 353 genes are co-bound by NANOG, OCT4 and SOX2 in the human ES cells. ${ }^{12}$ These findings strongly suggest that the Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog converge and collaborate to regulate common genomic targets, which include both active and inactive genes (Fig. 1). ${ }^{8,12}$ One strategy that Oct4 and Nanog maintain pluripotency is by promoting the expression of downstream self-renewal genes while simultaneously repressing the activity of differentiation-promoting genes. Using RNAi-mediated knockdown, it was found that Esrrb, Rifl ${ }^{8}$ and Zic3 ${ }^{13}$ -depleted ES cells acquire flattened and fibroblast-like morphologies along with the loss of alkaline phosphatase activity. Thus these genes are downstream effectors of Oct4 and Nanog that propagate the effects of the Oct4 and Nanog networks (Fig. 1).

Since binding of transcription factor to DNA is not necessarily a predictor of function, it is imperative to validate the functional relevance of such bindings. Loh et al., ${ }^{8}$ perturbed the level of transcription factors of interest, and showed that only a subset of the bound genes is responsive to the downregulation of Oct4 and Nanog levels, indicating that only a fraction of the binding loci are functional. This approach however suffers from false positives due to indirect effects from RNAi perturbation. Matoba et al., ${ }^{14}$ attempted to overcome this problem by using a tet-inducible system to down-regulate Oct4 and analyzed the gene expression dynamics at different time-points. By combining such data with existing ChIP data, they have short-listed 372 genes as primary Oct4 targets and further identified an Oct4 downstream gene, Tcl1, as a critical regulator of stem cell proliferation (Fig. 1). ${ }^{14}$

The effectiveness of performing genetic manipulation in mouse ES cells has accelerated the identification of candidate genes that may play critical roles in ES cell biology. ${ }^{8,14}$ In another study, Ivanova et al., ${ }^{9}$ applied RNAi-mediated knockdown in a large-scale screen and identified 8 genes (Nanog, Oct4, Sox2, Tbx3, Esrrb, Tcl1, Dppa4 and Mm.343880) that are essential for sustaining an undifferentiated state of the ES cells. Expression profile analysis has also revealed that several developmental genes are preferentially upregulated in the knockdown cells. These genes include Otx2, Pitx2 and Sox18, which induced ES cells differentiation when overexpressed. Thus the mechanisms by which the 8 identified factors maintain pluripotency may include the direct repression of differentiation-promoting genes. ${ }^{9}$

To map the interactome that defines pluripotency, Wang et al., ${ }^{15}$ interrogated the protein interactions of key pluripotency genes. Interestingly, among the Nanog-associated proteins, factors with important roles in ES cell pluripotency including Oct4 are highly enriched. Moreover, the corresponding genes of numerous members in the interactome, including Esrrb, Rifl and Sall4, have also been identified as bound targets of Oct4, Sox2 or Nanog from the recent

genome-wide ChIP analyses. ${ }^{8,12}$ In an independent study, Wu et al., ${ }^{16}$ showed that Sall4 physically interacts with Nanog. ChIP analysis has further revealed considerable overlap in the binding sites of Nanog and Sall4, suggesting co-regulation of downstream target genes that include Nanog, Sall4, Oct4 and Sox2. ${ }^{16}$ Together, these findings demonstrated that auto-and co-regulatory feedback loops are common phenomena in the ES cell transcriptional circuitry (Fig. 1). Such a tightly inter-regulated pluripotency network that is intricately connected by protein-protein interactions may serve to stabilize gene expression patterns during self-renewal while ensuring a rapid response to differentiation cues.

The recurrence of factors such as Esrrb, Rif1, Zic3, Tbx3 and Sall4 identified in the various genome-wide studies ${ }^{8,9,12,14,15}$ is an indication of their importance in the pluripotency regulatory network. However, functional and mechanistic studies supporting specific roles of the newly identified pluripotency-associated genes are limited. The invention of Solexa sequencing technology capable of deep surveying of the transcription factor binding sites will undoubtedly expedite this discovery process. ${ }^{17}$ It is hopeful that emerging technologies for integrative global analyses will also facilitate the construction of a detailed and comprehensive transcription regulatory network that governs ES cell pluripotency.

### Regulation of Pluripotency by Epigenetic Processes

Chromatin structures and epigenetic features of pluripotent ES cells. An analysis of global chromatin dynamics in mouse ES cells supports a model whereby structural proteins are loosely associated with the chromatin in pluripotent cells, and this unique association may enable the rapid reorganization of the chromatin structure during cell differentiation. ${ }^{18}$ Post-translational modifications of core histones have been associated with chromatin states and the transcriptional status of genes. In general, histone acetylation and methylation of histone H3K4 are positively correlated to active transcription, while the methylation of H3K9 and H3K27 serves as repressive chromatin marks. ${ }^{18}$ ES cell chromatin displays an abundance of transcription-associated histone modifications and a low level of silencing modifications. Conversely, lineage specification is typified by a decrease in active marks and concomitant increase in transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin regions. Together, these observations suggest that ES cell chromatin is transcriptionally more permissive, and that differentiation is accompanied by a transition to a chromatin that is transcriptionally less active.

Recently, “bivalent domains” has been coined as a term for a novel histone modification pattern occurring in the most highly conserved noncoding elements (HCNEs) in mouse ES cells. ${ }^{19}$ These bivalent domains, which consist of large regions of H3K27me3 flanking smaller regions of H3K4me3, are found at a large set of developmentally important genes that are expressed at low levels in ES cells. Upon ES cell differentiation, these bivalent domains resolve to either H3K27me3orH3K4me3. ${ }^{19}$ An instructive model for the bivalent domains posits that lineage-specific genes are poised for transcriptional activation, but held in check by the repressive effects of H3K27me3, until appropriate cues are available for its activation during differentiation.

To examine the role of H3K27 histone demethylases in regulating differentiation processes, Lan et al., ${ }^{20}$ sought to use a genome-wide mapping strategy. They found that HOX gene clusters in
Molecular framework: pluripotency

Figure 1. An interplay of transcription and epigenetic factors in the regulation of pluripotency. The key transcription factors of pluripotency, Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog, co-occupy numerous downstream target genes that promote self-renewal and maintain pluripotency, while repressing developmentally-regulated genes that drive differentiation.8,12 Oct4 also regulates histone demethylases (HDM) that function in parallel to activate self-renewal genes such as Nanog and Tcl1.27 To prevent differentiation, PRC complexes co-localize with the core pluripotency regulators and label developmental genes with the repressive H3K27me3 marks.23 Upon exposure to differentiation cues, Oct4 is downregulated and the pluripotency program is shut down. Bivalent domains become resolved as H3K27me are progressively demethylated19 so that the developmental program leading to differentiation is turned on.

differentiated fibroblast cells but not in the ES cells are bound by UTX,20 which corresponds to the demethylation of H3K27me3 and a concomitant activation of the downstream genes (Fig. 1). An increased UTX occupancy also correlates with an MLL2-mediated increase in H3K4me3.21 Lastly, it has been suggested that UTX may modulate the binding of Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRC), which have been shown to regulate H3K27me3 at developmental genes including the HOX genes in ES cells.22,23

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins have been implicated to play an important role in maintaining pluripotency. Genome-wide studies have revealed that PcG proteins bind at many target genes containing H3K27me3 domains at their promoter regions (Fig. 1).22,23 These PcG-bound genes are repressed in ES cells, and are preferentially upregulated during cell differentiation. Furthermore, Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog co-occupy certain genes harboring bivalent domains19 with PcG protein binding23 (Fig. 1). This raises the possibility of the role for Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog in recruiting PcG proteins to their target sites.23

The functional significance of the bivalent domains was evaluated recently in three independent studies that performed global epigenetic mapping using a variety of platforms, in human or mouse ES cells.24-26 It was found that bivalent domains are present in differentiated cells and thus are not a unique feature of the epigenome of ES cells. Moreover, there is a prevalent occurrence of H3K4me3 modification that accompanies H3K27me3 mark on genes that do not have any roles in developmental processes. This raises the question of whether the bivalent domains are uniquely found at developmental genes. In summary, the role of bivalent domains in ES cell pluripotency remains controversial and awaits further confirmation.

Linking the genetic and epigenetic systems. Genome-wide location study revealed that Oct4 binds within Jmjd1a and Jmjd2c genes.8 These genes encode for histone demethylases of the JmjC family (JHDM). It was further confirmed by knockdown and reporter assays that Oct4 positively regulates the expression of these two HDMases (Fig. 1).27 Importantly, depletion of Jmjd1a and

Jmjd2c by means of RNAi resulted in cell differentiation, indicating that these HDMases play essential roles in pluripotency. Jmjd1a positively regulates the expression of Tcl1, a gene regulating self-renewal,9,14 by binding and demethylating H3K9me2 at its promoter regions.27 The induction of H3K9me2 at Tcl1 after Jmjd1a depletion resulted in reduced Oct4 binding to the Tcl1 promoter. On the other hand, Jmjd2c regulates the expression of Nanog by modulating the demethylation of H3K9me3 at its promoter region.27 In the absence of Jmjd2c, the chromatin of the Nanog promoter is marked with H3K9me3 which leads to the recruitment of repressor proteins HP1 and KAP1.27 These findings provide evidence for the regulation of chromatin accessibility in ES cell epigenome through the modulation of repressive H3K9me3 marks. It also presents a novel mechanism whereby Oct4 can upregulate the expression of its target genes indirectly by transcriptional activation of chromatin modifiers that keep target sites in a permissive chromatin state. Together, the study uncovers a novel regulatory pathway that bridges the ES cell transcription circuitry to histone demethylases to specify the pluripotent epigenetic landscape.

Activation of JHDMs by Oct4 may not be the sole mechanism that links genetic network to the epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Oct4 and Nanog have been shown to bind genes encoding chromatin-modifying complexes in both mouse (Ehmt1, Smarcad1, Myst2)8 and human ES cells (SET, SMARCAD1 and MYST).12 Incidentally, Zhou et al.,28 detected significant site enrichment of Oct4 and its co-regulators in the conserved upstream regions of Phc1-bound genes which are normally repressed in ES cells. This raises the possibility that Oct4 and its co-regulators may have a role in recruiting or modulating polycomb function. Other lines of evidence also support the connection between epigenetic system and transcriptional network. The protein interactome previously mapped for key transcriptional factors in mouse ES cell has uncovered the enrichment of chromatin modifiers in the interaction network.15 Specifically, histone deacetylase NuRD (p66b and HDAC2), polycomb group (YY1, Rnf2 and Rybp), SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling

www.landesbioscience.com                                                                 Cell Cycle                                                                 887

(BAF 155) complexes and co-repressor KAP1 (Tif1β) are found to interact either directly or indirectly with Oct4 and Nanog. Some of these chromatin modifiers, for example Rnf2 and KAP1 are known to play important roles in early development and knockout mice die between E6.5–8.5 days. These results suggest that Oct4 and Nanog may govern the chromatin state of pluripotent ES cells by regulating or interacting with chromatin modifiers.

### Cellular Reprogramming

Reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotent ES-like cells. Differentiation of pluripotent cells to defined lineages is accompanied by changes in gene expression and extensive modifications to the chromatin. These genetic and epigenetic transformations ensure the long-term stability and determination of cell fate of the specialized cell state. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) and cell fusion can however, erase these modifications and reprogram the differentiated nucleus back to the pluripotent state. The fact that ES cell karyoplasts, but not cytoplasts, can induce *Oct4* expression in the somatic genome upon cell fusion, suggests that nuclear factors are central to reprogramming somatic cells. This idea was further explored by Takahashi and Yamanaka who identified four factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc, as important players to re-establish a pluripotent state in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells that were selected based on expression of *Fbx15* could not be considered as fully pluripotent because no live chimeric mouse was obtained from the iPS cells. In contrast, iPS cells that were selected based on *Oct4* or *Nanog* expression had a global transcriptional profile and epigenetic pattern more similar to mouse ES cells. Importantly, Nanog iPS cells and Oct4 iPS cells could form viable chimaeras and are transmitted through the germ line.

In subsequent experiments, Takahashi et al., and Park et al., demonstrate that application of the same four factors, OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC, can also induce human iPS cells from fetal, neonatal and adult somatic cells. Despite the great potential of iPS cells in regenerative therapy, inherent problems could limit its application. For example, tumorigenicity provoked by the reactivation of retroviral-transduced c-Myc renders iPS cells unsuitable for transplantation. In this context, Nakagawa et al., have recently reproduced the mouse iPS cell derivation by introducing only Oct4, Sox2 and Klf4. Going one step further, Yu et al., extended the feasibility of carrying out human reprogramming without both KLF4 and c-MYC. In their system, KLF4 and c-MYC could be replaced with NANOG and LIN28 with apparent success in generating human iPS cells.

At present, reprogrammed iPS cells can be generated by either retro-viral or lenti-viral integration for stable transgene expression. The search for alternative means of inducing reprogramming factors in somatic cells, rather than virus-mediated induction, is necessary for translational applications. Transient transfection of Oct4 resulted in de-differentiation of mouse keratinocytes to a more ES cell-like state as evidenced by the re-activation of pluripotency genes like *Sox2* and *Nanog*. De-differentiated cells showed an increased developmental potential and could differentiate into the neuroectodermal lineage upon induction. These findings should encourage the development of similar transient transfection systems for the purpose of reprogramming. Furthermore, it is generally accepted that high amounts of the iPS inducing factors are required during the initial stage of iPS cell generation. However, once the iPS cells acquire an ES cell-like state, it is likely that a sustained high dosage of the iPS inducing factors will be detrimental for self-renewal. Hence, protocols based on a transient introduction of the factors may potentially overcome this drawback.

Alternatively small chemical molecules can be used to replace the iPS inducing gene factors for reprogramming. Previous work by Chen et al., has identified a chemical known as reversine that could reverse lineage commitment of murine myoblasts to a more primitive multipotent state. Reversine was selected from combinatorial libraries of 50,000 discrete small molecules for their ability to induce dedifferentiation in a high-throughput cell-based assay. Biochemicals, which improve the survival and maintain pluripotency of cells that are undergoing reprogramming, could also further enhance the efficiency of obtaining iPS cells. For example, the ROCK inhibitor protects dissociated human ES cells from apoptosis thus enhancing the survival of individual reprogrammed cells.

Finally, the demonstration of somatic cell reprogramming through defined factors evokes new opportunities in the engineering of cell fate through the trans-differentiation process (Fig. 2). How general are the gene factors that induce reprogramming to iPS cells? Could the same strategy with different combinations of factors aid in transdifferentiating a variety of somatic cell types to therapeutically useful stem cells? Similar to iPS reprogramming, transdifferentiation may be induced by the introduction or depletion of defined factors. It was shown that an overexpression of *MyoD* in hepatocyte induces cells with muscle phenotype. A cell fate switch from myoblasts to neuronal lineage is also possible by the ectopic expression of REST-VP16. It has also been demonstrated that *Pax5* deletion drives de-differentiation of mature B cells to early uncommitted progenitors, which can be re-specified into T cells that contribute functionally in vivo. A common thread through these experiments is the demonstration that cellular plasticity can be acquired through genetic manipulations (Fig. 2).

Functions of the iPS inducing factors. An important aspect relating to the utilization of iPS cells for future cell transplantation is the need to understand the genetic and epigenetic signals that occur during reprogramming, and the assessment of the functions and mechanisms of each inducing factor. The strategy used by Yu et al., suggests that NANOG and LIN28 can substitute for KLF4 and c-MYC in generating human iPS cells. Another recent report has further simplified and reduced the protocol to only three factors, Oct4, Sox2 and Klf4. The same study also uncovered the intricate redundancy between members of the family, and suggests that Sox1 and Sox3 can substitute Sox2 while Klf1, Klf2 and Klf5 can replace Klf4 as reprogramming factors.

One of the characteristic features common to the various studies is the invariable requirement of Oct4 as a reprogramming factor. Recent genome-wide studies have identified the downstream targets of Oct4 which include genes encoding for self-renewal factors, lineage-specific factors, signaling molecules and DNA damage response sensors. Thus Oct4 is implicated in a broad spectrum of cellular processes that collectively specify the self-renewal state of the ES cells. By introducing Oct4, Klf4 and c-Myc, iPS cells that are somewhat similar to ES cells in terms of morphology and proliferative rate could be obtained. However, the iPS cells without Sox2 failed to differentiate

Molecular framework: pluripotency

overlap in their genomic targets, and have similar DNA binding properties. While single or pair-wise depletion of Klf2, Klf4 and Klf5 resulted in no morphological changes in mouse ES cells, the triple knockdown induced differentiation. 44 Therefore, it was hypothesized that Klf2, Klf4 and Klf5 function redundantly to regulate self-renewal and pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Notably, these Klfs were found to bind to numerous genomic loci, and the genes that are co-bound by these Klfs encode regulators of diverse cellular functions such as DNA replication and cell cycle. 44 The functional redundancy and wide regulatory roles of these Klfs may explain why Klf2 and Klf5 could replace Klf4 as a reprogramming factor. 38 Another key finding by Jiang et al., 44 is that Klf2, Klf4 and Klf5 share many common targets with Nanog and this result links these Klf transcription factors to the Nanog transcriptional network. It is likely that one possible function of Klf4 in reprogramming is to act synergistically with Oct4 to restart the ES cell-specific gene expression program.

c-Myc is an oncogenic protein known to elicit transformation, 45 while Klf4 can function both as a tumor suppressor and an onco- gene. 46 Forced expression of Klf4 and c-Myc alone resulted in the formation of tumor cells that are not pluripotent. 2 It is believed that Oct4 and Sox2 are responsible for directing the iPS cells towards pluripotency. 36 Nevertheless, the requirement for Klf4 and c-Myc in iPS generation suggests some common mechanisms between the process of transformation and the induction of self-renewal. Klf4 promotes cell proliferation by suppressing p53. 46 This could counteract the effects of c-Myc in inducing p53-dependent apoptosis in primary fibroblasts. 45 On the other hand, Klf4 can suppress proliferation by activating p21, while c-Myc exerts an opposing effect by repressing p21. 45 Based on these observations, it was postulated that the balance between Klf4 and c-Myc may be important in regulating growth and self-renewal of the iPS cells. 2

Recent work indicates that NANOG can substitute the roles of KLF4 and c-MYC in human somatic cell reprogramming. 39 Klf4 promotes cell proliferation via the mediation of p53 suppression. 46 Since p53 is a negative regulator of Nanog, 48 Klf4 may have a functional role in the activation of Nanog during reprogramming. Therefore, overexpression of Nanog could negate the need for activation through the Klf4/p53 pathway. In addition, Klf4 cooperates with Oct4 and Sox2 to activate the Lefty1 core promoter in mouse ES cells. 49 Nanog was found to physically interact 15 with Oct4 and cooperate extensively with Oct4 and Sox2 in the core-transcriptional network. 8, 12 As a result, Nanog may be able to replace some function of Klf4 in the initiation of reprogramming via its interaction with Oct4 and Sox2.

Previous genome-wide studies have revealed that Nanog binds to Klf4 and Klf5 in mouse ES cells, 8 while KLF5 is co-bound by OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG in the human ES cells. 12 Thus it is tempting to speculate that the activation of KLF5 by OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG in the human system is sufficient to mitigate the lack of exogenous KLF4. Interestingly, c-Myc is a target of Nanog in the mouse ES cells. 8 Taken together, NANOG may regulate and recruit the downstream endogenous expression of KLF4 and c-MYC during human reprogramming. More recently, Klf2, Klf4 and Klf5 were shown to function redundantly in the activation of Nanog enhancer region in mouse ES cells. 44 This suggests a possibility for NANOG to act as a downstream effector of the KLF factors in human reprogramming. As a result, retroviral transfection of NANOG is sufficient

Figure 2. Cellular plasticity in reprogramming, differentiation and trans-differentiation process. Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent and retain the capacity to differentiate into the mesoderm, ectoderm and endoderm lineages. Several reports have shown that the addition or elimination of defined factors is sufficient to re-specify cell identity, as illustrated by Pax5, Rest-VP16, MyoD, C/EBPβ and Pdx1. Reprogramming, the reversion of cell fate commitment back to a pluripotent state, could also be induced by the forced expression of Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, Nanog and Lin28. 2, 38, 39 Amongst the various combinations of reprogramming factors, Oct4 and Sox factors are found to be indispensable for driving cells towards pluripotency.

and lacked the property of pluripotency. 2 This finding suggests three possibilities pertaining to the roles of Oct4 and Sox2. Firstly, Oct4 and Sox2 together are required to activate common downstream target genes that specify the pluripotent state. Secondly, Oct4 alone is not sufficient for proper cell fate specification and differentiation. Lastly, Sox2 may not be required for the initiation of reprogramming.

The role of Sox2 as a co-factor of Oct4 in regulating downstream target genes in ES cells is well recognized. Genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analyses revealed the widespread co-operative nature of the two transcription factors in regulating genomic targets. 12 However, it is likely that Sox2 also functions independently of Oct4 in cell fate determination and during the differentiation process. Unlike Oct4, Sox2 expression is not restricted to pluripotent ES cells but is also expressed in extraembryonic ectoderm and neuroectoderm. 5 Moreover, Sox2-null mice die at a later stage during the time of implantation due to a failure of epiblast formation, as compared to Oct4-null embryos that cannot form the ICM. Interestingly, while Oct1 and Oct6 cannot replace Oct4 as a reprogramming factor, 38 Sox1 and Sox3 can substitute Sox2 in the derivation of iPS cells. 38 Taken together, it appears that Sox2 may not be necessary for the process of reprogramming, but the activity of Sox2 is critical for pluripotency and proper differentiation of the reprogrammed iPS cells.

Nakagawa recently showed that Klf4 and c-Myc could be replaced by some members of the same protein family. 38 In an independent study, Jiang et al., 44 showed that Klf2, Klf4 and Klf5 share an extensive
to induce reprogramming in the absence of the introduced KLF factors. In agreement with the observation that Nanog overexpression promotes the proliferation of 3T3 fibroblast cells ${ }^{50}$ and improves the cloning efficiency of human ES cells, ${ }^{51}$ Yu et al., ${ }^{39}$ speculated that NANOG's function in reprogramming is mainly to increase the survival rate of early reprogrammed cells. These findings corroborate with the role of Klf4 and c-Myc in stimulating iPSC cell proliferation and self-renewal.

LIN28 is an RNA binding protein that is downregulated during ES cell differentiation. ${ }^{52}$ However, LIN28 has a modest effect on human reprogramming. ${ }^{39}$ Moreover, expression of LIN28 is absent from several iPSC clones recovered by Yu et al., ${ }^{39}$ confirming that it is neither essential for the initial reprogramming process, nor is it required for the stable expansion of reprogrammed iPSC cells.

The use of the current reprogramming factors (Oct4, Sox2, NANOG, Klf4, c-Myc, LIN28) (Fig. 2) stems from our understanding of the cellular and molecular pathways that regulate ES cells. These factors have been identified from large-scale RNAi screening (Oct4, Sox2, Nanog), ${ }^{9}$ transcriptional network mapping (Klf4, c-Myc), ${ }^{8,12}$ and differential expression studies in ES cells vis-a-vis somatic cells (LIN28). ${ }^{52}$ Thus it is likely that more reprogramming factors can be discovered by surveying data set from systematic studies. In particular, many recurring factors in the lists of genes pointed out in the earlier sections are prime candidates for reprogramming function.

Other than transcriptional factors, it is conceivable that epigenetic factors play crucial roles in the reprogramming process. The involvement of c-Myc in the maintenance of active chromatin modifications ${ }^{53}$ may provide an explanation to how c-Myc enhances the efficiency of the reprogramming process. ${ }^{38}$ By virtue of its numerous binding sites in the genome, ${ }^{45}$ c-Myc could have direct roles in regulating the global chromatin structure. Since c-Myc is dispensable for reprogramming, ${ }^{38}$ it is probable that the other reprogramming factors could substitute the epigenetic roles of c-Myc by activating downstream genes that function to provide an open chromatin structure for subsequent transcriptional regulation. Therefore, an analysis of the downstream targets of these reprogramming factors may help to identify novel epigenetic factors that could potentially enhance the reprogramming efficiency. For example, Oct4 positively regulates Jmjd1a and Jmjd2c, ${ }^{27}$ which in turn regulate self-renewal and pluripotency genes such as Tcl1 and Nanog. As previously discussed, Oct4 and Nanog are also found to co-occupy genes that encode epigenetic factors, ${ }^{8,12}$ as well as physically interact with chromatin modifiers. ${ }^{15}$ It remains to be determined if an exogenous expression of such chromatin modifiers may facilitate more rapid loosening of the chromatin structures, and provide transcriptional factors with a greater access to important pluripotency genes during the reprogramming process.

**Conclusion**

The advent of iPSC cells is a landmark discovery in stem cell research as the derivation of patient-derived stem cells becomes tantalizingly attainable. Importantly, iPSC cells also provide a platform for investigating the molecular network of pluripotency. The mechanistic roles and interactions among reprogramming factors are particularly relevant in this respect. In addition, other issues such as the delivery method and elimination of tumor-inducing genes

are critical in the translation of iPSC cells to the clinical scene. With the invention of powerful molecular tools that facilitate large-scale analyses with greater precision, it is optimistic that the molecular networks specifying pluripotency will be further established.

**Acknowledgements**

We are grateful to Biomedical Research Council of Agency of Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) for funding. J.H.N is supported by the A*STAR graduate scholarship. This work is supported in part by the Singapore Stem Cell Consortium. We thank Andrew Hutchins, Wai-leong Tam and Yan Junli for critical comments on the manuscript.

**References**

1. Evans MJ, Kaufman MH. Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse embryos. Nature 1981; 292:154-6.
2. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 2006; 126:663-76.
3. Nichols J, Zevnik B, Anastassiadis K, Niwa H, Klewe-Nebeius D, Chambers I, Scholer H, Smith A. Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo depends on the POU transcription factor Oct4. Cell 1998; 95:379-91.
4. Niwa H, Miyazaki J, Smith AG. Quantitative expression of Oct-3/4 defines differentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal of ES cells. Nat Genet 2000; 24:372-6.
5. Avilion AA, Nicolis SK, Pevny LH, Perez L, Vivian N, Lovell-Badge R. Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend on SOX2 function. Genes Dev 2003; 17:126-40.
6. Chambers I, Colby D, Robertson M, Nichols J, Lee S, Tweedie S, Smith A. Functional expression cloning of Nanog, a pluripotency sustaining factor in embryonic stem cells. Cell 2003; 113:643-55.
7. Mitsui K, Tokuzawa Y, Itoh H, Segawa K, Murakami M, Takahashi K, Maruyama M, Maeda M, Yamanaka S. The homeoprotein Nanog is required for maintenance of pluripotency in mouse epiblast and ES cells. Cell 2003; 113:631-42.
8. Loh YH, Wu Q, Chew JL, Vega VB, Zhang W, Chen X, Bourque G, George J, Leong B, Liu J, Wong KY, Sung KW, Lee CW, Zhao XD, Chiu KP, Lipovich L, Kuznetsov VA, Robson P, Stanton LW, Wei CL, Ruan Y, Lim B, Ng HH. The Oct4 and Nanog transcription network regulates pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 2006; 38:431-40.
9. Ivanova N, Dobrin R, Lu R, Kotenko I, Levorse J, DeCoste C, Schafer X, Lun Y, Lemischka IR. Dissecting self-renewal in stem cells with RNA interference. Nature 2006; 442:533-8.
10. Rodda DJ, Chew JL, Lim LH, Loh YH, Wang B, Ng HH, Robson P. Transcriptional regulation of Nanog by OCT4 and SOX2. J Biol Chem 2005; 280:24731-7.
11. Chew JL, Loh YH, Zhang W, Chen X, Tam WL, Yeap LS, Li P, Ang YS, Lim B, Robson P, Ng HH. Reciprocal transcriptional regulation of Pou5f1 and Sox2 via the Oct4/Sox2 complex in embryonic stem cells. Mol Cell Biol 2005; 25:6031-46.
12. Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine SS, Zucker JP, Guenther MG, Kumar RM, Murray HL, Jenner RG, Gifford DK, Melton DA, Jaenisch R, Young RA. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 2005; 122:947-56.
13. Lim LS, Loh YH, Zhang W, Li Y, Chen X, Wang Y, Bakre M, Ng HH, Stanton LW. Zic3 is required for maintenance of pluripotency in embryonic stem cells. Mol Biol Cell 2007; 18:1348-58.
14. Matoba R, Niwa H, Masui S, Ohtsuka S, Carter MG, Sharov AA, Ko MS. Dissecting Oct3/4-regulated gene networks in embryonic stem cells by expression profiling. PloS ONE 2006; 1:26.
15. Wang J, Rao S, Chu J, Shen X, Levasseur DN, Theunissen TW, Orkin SH. A protein interaction network for pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 2006; 444:364-8.
16. Wu Q, Chen X, Zhang J, Loh YH, Low TY, Zhang W, Zhang W, Sze SK, Lim B, Ng HH. Sall4 interacts with Nanog and co-occupies Nanog genomic sites in embryonic stem cells. J Biol Chem 2006; 281:24090-4.
17. Johnson DS, Mortazavi A, Myers RM, Wold B. Genome-wide mapping of in vivo protein-DNA interactions. Science 2007; 316:1497-502.
18. Meshorer E, Misteli T. Chromatin in pluripotent embryonic stem cells and differentiation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006; 7:540-6.
19. Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner A, Wernig M, Plath K, Jaenisch R, Wagschal A, Feil R, Schreiber SL, Lander ES. A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem cells. Cell 2006; 125:315-26.
20. Lan F, Bayliss PE, Rinn JL, Whetstine JR, Wang JK, Chen S, Iwase S, Alpatov R, Issaeva I, Canaani E, Roberts TM, Chang HY, Shi Y. A histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase regulates animal posterior development. Nature 2007; 449:689-94.
21. Lee MG, Villa R, Trojer P, Norman J, Yan KP, Reinberg D, Croce LD, Shiekhattar R. Demethylation of H3K27 regulates polycomb recruitment and H2A ubiquitination. Science 2007; 318:447-50.
22. Boyer LA, Plath K, Zeitlinger J, Brambrink T, Medeiros LA, Lee TI, Levine SS, Wernig M, Tajonar A, Ray MK, Bell GW, Otte AP, Vidal M, Gifford DK, Young RA, Jaenisch R. Polycomb complexes repress developmental regulators in murine embryonic stem cells. Nature 2006; 441:349-53.
Molecular framework: pluripotency

23. Lee TI, Jenner RG, Boyer LA, Guenther MG, Levine SS, Kumar RM, Chevalier B, Johnstone SE, Cole MF, Isono K, Koseki H, Fuchikami T, Abe K, Murray HL, Zucker JP, Yuan B, Bell GW, Herbolsheimer E, Hannett NM, Sun K, Odom DT, Otte AP, Volkert TL, Bartel DP, Melton DA, Gifford DK, Jaenisch R, Young RA. Control of developmental regulators by Polycomb in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 2006; 125:301-13.

24. Pan G, Tian S, Nie J, Yang C, Ruotti V, Wei H, Jonsdottir GA, Stewart R, Thomson JA. Whole-genome analysis of histone H3 lysine 4 and lysine 27 methylation in human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2007; 1:299-312.

25. Zhao XD, Han X, Chew JL, Liu J, Chiu KP, Choo A, Orlov YL, Sung WK, Shahab A, Kuznetsov VA, Bourque, Oh S, Ruan Y, Ng HH, Wei CL. Whole-genome mapping of histone H3 Lys 4 and 37 trimethylations reveals distinct genomic compartments in human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2007; 1:286-98.

26. Mikkelsen TS, Ku M, Jaffe DB, Issac B, Lieberman E, Giannoukos G, Alvarez P, Brockman W, Kim TK, Koche RP, Lee W, Mendenhall E, O'Donovan A, Presser A, Russ C, Xie X, Meissner A, Wernig M, Jaenisch R, Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Bernstein BE. Genome-wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage-committed cells. Nature 2007; 448:553-60.

27. Loh YH, Zhang W, Chen X, George J, Ng HH. Jmjd1a and Jmjd2c histone H3 Lys 9 demethylases regulate self-renewal in embryonic stem cells. Genes Dev 2007; 21:2545-57.

28. Zhou Q, Chipperfield H, Melton DA, Wong WH. A gene regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells. PNAS 2007; 104:16438-43.

29. Cammas F, Mark M, Dollé P, Dierich A, Chambon P, Losson R. Mice lacking the transcriptional corepressor TIF1beta are defective in early postimplantation development. Development 2000; 127:2955-63.

30. Voncken JW, Roelen BA, Roefs M, de Vries S, Verhoeven E, Marino S, Deschamps J, van Lohuizen M. Rnf2 (Ring1b) deficiency causes gastrulation arrest and cell cycle inhibition. PNAS 2003; 100:2468-73.

31. Wilmut I, Schnieke AE, McWhir J, Kind AJ, Campbell KH. Viable offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells. Nature 1997; 385:810-3.

32. Tada M, Takahama Y, Abe K, Nakatsuji N, Tada T. Nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells by in vitro hybridization with ES cells. Curr Biol 2001; 11:1553-8.

33. Okita K, Ichisaka T, Yamanaka S. Generation of germline-competent induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2007; 19:313-7.

34. Maherali N, Sridharan R, Xie W, Utikal J, Eminli S, Arnold K, Stadtfeld M, Yachechko R, Tchieu J., Jaenisch R., Plath K, Hochedlinger K. Directly reprogrammed fibroblasts show global epigenetic remodeling and widespread tissue contribution. Cell Stem Cell 2007; 1:55-70.

35. Wernig M, Meissner A, Foreman R, Brambrink T, Ku M, Hochedlinger K, Bernstein BE, Jaenisch R. In vitro reprogramming of fibroblasts into a pluripotent ES-cell-like state. Nature 2007; 448:318-24.

36. Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T, Tomoda K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 2007; 131:861-72.

37. Park IH, Zhao R, West JA, Yabuuchi A, Huo H, Ince TA, Lerou PH, Lensch MW, Daley GQ. Reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency with defined factors. Nature 2008; 451:141-6.

38. Nakagawa M, Koyanagi M, Tanabe K, Takahashi K, Ichisaka T, Aoi T, Okita K, Mochiduki Y, Takizawa N, Yamanaka S. Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells without Myc from mouse and human fibroblasts. Nat Biotechnol 2008; 318:1917-20.

39. Yu J, Vodyanik MA, Smuga-Otto K, Antosiewicz-Bourget J, Frane JL, Tian S, Nie J, Jonsdottir GA, Ruotti V, Stewart R, Slukvin II, Thomson JA. Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Lines Derived from Human Somatic Cells. Science 2007; 318:1917-20.

40. Grinnell KL, Yang B, Eckert RL, Bickenbach JR. De-differentiation of mouse interfollicular keratinocytes by the embryonic transcription factor Oct-4. J Invest Dermatol 2007; 127:372-80.

41. Chen S, Zhang Q, Wu X, Schultz PG, Ding S. J Am Chem Soc 2004; 126:410-1.

42. Watanabe K, Ueno M, Kamiya D, Nishiyama A, Matsumura M, Wataya T, Takahashi JB, Nishikawa S, Nishikawa S, Muguruma K, Sasai Y. A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells. Nat Biotechnol 2007; 25:682-6.

43. Li WC, Yu WY, Quinlan JM, Burke ZD, Tosh D. The molecular basis of transdifferentiation. J Cell Mol Med 2005; 9:569-82.

44. Jiang J, Chan YS, Loh YH, Cai J, Tong G, Lim CA, Robson P, Zhong S, Ng HH. A core Klfs circuitry that regulates self-renewal of embryonic stem cells. Nat Cell Biol 2008; 10:353-60.

45. Adhikary S, Eilers M. Transcriptional regulation and transformation by Myc proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6:635-45.

46. Rowland BD, Bernards R, Peiper DS. The KLF4 tumour suppressor is a transcriptional repressor of p53 that acts as a context-dependent oncogene. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7:1074-82.

47. Rowland BD, Peiper DS. KLF4, p21 and context-dependent opposing forces in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2006; 6:11-23.

48. Lin T, Chao C, Saito S, Mazur SJ, Murphy ME, Appella E, Xu Y. p53 induces differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by suppressing Nanog expression. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7:165-71.

49. Nakatake Y, Fukui N, Iwamatsu Y, Masui S, Takahashi K, Yagi R, Yagi K, Miyazaki J, Matoba R, Ko MS, Niwa H. Klf4 cooperates with Oct 3/4 and Sox2 to activate the Lefty1 core promoter in embryonic stem cells. Mol Cell Biol 2006; 26:7772-82.

50. Zhang J, Wang X, Chen B, Suo G, Zhao Y, Duan Z, Dai J. Expression of Nanog gene promotes NIH3T3 cell proliferation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005; 338:1098-102.

51. Darr H, Mayshar Y, Benvenisty N. Overexpression of NANOG in human ES cells enables feeder-free growth while inducing primitive ectoderm features. Development 2006; 133:1193-201.

52. Richards M, Tan SP, Tan JH, Chan WK, Bongso A. The transcriptome profile of human embryonic stem cells as defined by SAGE. Stem Cells 2004; 22:51-64.

53. Knoepfler PS, Zhang XY, Cheng PF, Gafken PR, McMahon SB, Eisenman RN. Myc influences global chromatin structure. EMBO J 2006; 25:2723-34.
