
# Molecular Pathways

## Targeting Ras in Myeloid Leukemias

### Benjamin S. Braun and Kevin Shannon

---

### Abstract

Ras proteins normally relay growth-promoting signals from many activated cell surface receptors, and they are altered by oncogenic point mutations in ~30% of human cancers. Activating KRAS and NRAS mutations are especially common in malignancies of the pancreas, lung, and colon, and in myeloid leukemia. Here, we discuss general strategies for targeting hyperactive Ras signaling in cancer cells with specific reference to myeloid malignancies.

---

### Background

Cancer is frequently characterized by mutations that subvert normal mechanisms for controlling survival, proliferation, and differentiation by deregulating cytoplasmic signaling networks. Ras proteins are signal switch molecules that relay growth-promoting signals from various activated cell surface receptors by cycling between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states (Ras•GTP and Ras•GDP; see Fig. 1; refs. 1–4). Guanine nucleotide exchange factors, such as SOS1, which are activated as a downstream consequence of ligand binding to growth factor receptors, displace guanine nucleotides from Ras. This is followed by passive guanine nucleotide binding, which effectively results in higher Ras•GTP levels because GTP is much more abundant than GDP in the cytosol. Ras•GTP interacts productively with effectors that include Raf proteins (A-Raf, B-Raf, and c-Raf), phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase, and RalGDS to activate downstream kinase cascades (reviewed in refs. 4–7). Signaling is terminated when Ras•GTP is hydrolyzed to Ras•GDP through a slow intrinsic GTPase activity, which is markedly accelerated by GTPase-activating proteins. Whereas Fig. 1 presents a simplified view of Ras signaling, recent data indicate extensive biochemical complexity with Ras as a central node in a molecular network that includes many positive and negative components, extensive feedback, crosstalk between linear pathways, and cell type specificity.

Somatic RAS point mutations that introduce amino acid substitutions at codons 12, 13, and 61 are found in ~30% of human cancers. These alleles encode Ras proteins that accumulate in the GTP-bound conformation due to both defective intrinsic GTP hydrolysis and resistance to GTPase-activating proteins. KRAS and NRAS mutations are especially prevalent in cancers of the pancreas, lung, and colon. They are also common in myeloid malignancies, which are clonal disorders of hematopoietic stem and/or progenitor cells that show significant genetic, morphologic, and biological heterogeneity. An increased number of myeloid blasts with suppression of normal hematopoiesis is the hallmark of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), whereas myeloproliferative disorders are associated with overproliferation of one or more lineages that retain the capacity to differentiate, and myelodysplastic syndrome is characterized by cytopenias and aberrant differentiation. Myeloproliferative disorders and myelodysplastic syndrome frequently progress to AML, which is likely due to the acquisition of cooperating mutations. NRAS or KRAS mutations occur in ~20% of AML specimens (8), and Ras signaling is deregulated by somatic mutations in the genes encoding the FLT3 and c-Kit receptor tyrosine kinases in an additional ~25% to 40% of cases (9–20).

Studies of patients with the monocytic myeloproliferative disorders, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, further underscore the role of hyperactive Ras in myeloid leukemogenesis (21, 22). Somatic RAS point mutations are found in ~40% of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and 30% of JMML cases, respectively. Interestingly, children with neurofibromatosis type 1, a dominant familial cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene, are at markedly increased risk of developing JMML with loss of the normal NF1 allele (23–26). The observation that NF1 encodes neurofibromin, a GTPase-activating protein for Ras, strongly implicated hyperactive Ras signaling as the initiating event in JMML (1, 27). This view is supported by recent studies showing that activating mutations in PTPN11, which encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, occur in ~35% of sporadic JMML (28, 29). SHP-2 potentiates Ras signaling in many systems (30), and RAS, NF1, and PTPN11 mutations are rarely found in the same patient. Together, there is strong genetic evidence that myelomonocytic myeloproliferative disorders are fundamentally diseases of hyperactive Ras signaling.

---

### Authors' Affiliation: Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco

Received 4/27/07; revised 5/22/07; accepted 6/7/07.

Grant support: NIH/National Cancer Institute K08 CA103868, American Society of Hematology Basic science scholar award, and V Foundation for Cancer Research Translational Grant (B.S. Braun); and NIH/National Cancer Institute R37 CA72614, U01 CA84221, R01 CA104282; the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society LLS 7019-04; US Army W81XWH-0510265; and V Foundation for Cancer Research Translational Grant (K. Shannon).

Requests for reprints: Benjamin S. Braun or Kevin Shannon, HSE 302, Box 0519, Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143. Phone: 415-476-2876; Fax: 415-502-5127; E-mail: braunb@peds.ucsf.edu or shannonk@peds.ucsf.edu.

© 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.

doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1005

---

www.aacrjournals.org 2249 Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(8) April 15, 2008

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on July 14, 2015. © 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.

Molecular Pathways

Fig. 1. A schematic of Ras signaling. Ras proteins transduce signals from extracellular growth factors by cycling between inactive GDP-bound and active GTP-bound states. Ras is activated when ligand-bound receptors nucleate a complex including adapter molecules [e.g., Src homology and collagen (Shc; protein), Gab2, and growth factor receptor binding protein 2 (Grb2)], the phosphatase SHP-2, and guanine nucleotide exchange factors (e.g., SOS). Guanine nucleotide exchange factors bind to Ras and catalyze guanine nucleotide dissociation, which results in increased Ras-GTP levels. Ras-GTP can then bind and activate a variety of downstream effectors. Further signaling through a complex biochemical network coordinately regulates cellular processes such as gene expression (β-catenin, FOXO, nuclear factor-κB, p53, ELK1, and AP1), translation (eIF4E and S6), and apoptosis (BAD). Ras activation is terminated by hydrolysis of GTP to GDP. This reaction is greatly accelerated by the GTPase-activating proteins p120GAP and neurofibromin. Proteins mutated in myeloid malignancies (numbered) and the approximate frequencies are indicated (for further detail, see reference 57). This simplified schematic does not illustrate some important facets of this complex system, including the following: (a) the full complement of immediate or distal Ras effectors, (b) redundancy at many levels, (c) the important role of scaffolding proteins in organizing and regulating signaling kinetics, (d) positive and negative feedback loops, (e) crosstalk between canonical effector modules, (f) regulation by subcellular localization, and (g) inputs from other types of receptor systems. GF, growth factor; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; GAP, p120 GTPase-activating protein; NF1, neurofibromin; MPD, myeloproliferative disorders; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin.

CCR Molecular Pathways

Clinical-Translational Advances

Normal and mutant Ras proteins undergo lipid modifications at the carboxyl terminus for localization to the plasma membrane and signaling function. Based on this observation, it was hoped that inhibition of the enzyme farnesyltransferase would prevent prenylation of oncogenic Ras and therefore inhibit its activity (reviewed in refs. 2, 32). However, the Ras isoforms most commonly involved in cancer, N-Ras and K-Ras4B, have alternative processing pathways that can substitute for farnesylation. This almost certainly explains the disappointing clinical efficacy of farnesyltransferase inhibitors. There is a common misconception that the failure of farnesyltransferase inhibitors in the clinic somehow invalidates oncogenic Ras as a therapeutic target in cancer. In truth, these drugs do not significantly inhibit the processing and membrane localization of either N-Ras or K-Ras4B at doses that are tolerable *in vivo*.

In light of the problems inherent to directly inhibiting oncogenic Ras, attention has turned toward inhibiting downstream components of Ras signaling pathways such as Raf, MAP/ERK kinase, extracellular signal-regulated kinase,

Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(8) April 15, 2008 2250 www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on July 14, 2015. © 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.

phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase, Akt, and mammalian target of rapamycin (see Fig. 1). This strategy presumes that a specific biochemical target is a major biological effector of oncogenic Ras activity, that cancer cells require its continued activation for survival, and that inhibition will not cause severe toxicity in normal tissues. Ongoing clinical trials using various small molecule inhibitors are testing this general strategy in myeloid malignancies and other cancers (33).

The need for therapeutic index poses significant challenges for the development of signal transduction inhibitors. In only rare cases will a mutant protein be targeted while sparing the normal isoform; the preference of gefitinib for an uncommon mutant epidermal growth factor receptor in lung cancer may be a rare example of this (34, 35). More commonly, small molecules can be expected to inhibit normal and mutant proteins with similar potency; an example of this is the inhibition of c-Abl and c-Kit by imatinib. When the targets are broadly required physiologically, as is the case for Ras and many of its effectors, toxicity may result.

On the other hand, cancer cells may remodel their signaling networks to become more dependent on these signals than are normal cells. Conceptually, signaling networks are often robust dynamic systems, and oncogenic activation may invoke a compensatory homeostatic response that desensitizes distal components (36). For example, chronic stimulation by oncogenic Ras may cause up-regulation of endogenous proteins that serve to attenuate or terminate signaling. Acutely inhibiting the oncogenic hyperstimulation with a drug would then leave the network dominated by these negative components and reduce the overall signal output to a level that is actually below the normal basal state. This in turn could lead to cell death or differentiation. Indirect evidence of this process has been observed in hematopoietic progenitors expressing oncogenic K-Ras, in which phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and S6 become relatively insensitive to stimulation with the cytokine stem cell factor despite being hypersensitive to stimulation with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (37). Such a mechanism can explain how cancer cells can become dependent on oncogenic signals and how malignant cells treated with a signal transduction inhibitor are preferentially killed, as occurs when normal hematopoietic cells recover in chronic myelogenous leukemia patients who receive imatinib.

Although hyperactive Ras is a common biochemical lesion in myeloid malignancies, it is not known how disease subtype (e.g., myeloproliferative disorders versus AML) or the specific genetic mechanism that results in hyperactive Ras (e.g., a FLT3 mutation versus a RAS mutation versus NF1 inactivation) might influence clinical response. Recent experience with small molecule inhibitors of mutant FLT3 (38–41) and the transient responses of patients with blast crisis chronic myelogenous leukemia to imatinib indicate that advanced cancers such as AML are less amenable to treatment with single targeted inhibitors than chronic myelogenous leukemia. Similarly, the order in which specific mutations occur during the development and progression of cancer will likely influence responses to targeted agents (42). Along these lines, it will be interesting to determine if inhibitors that target hyperactive Ras signaling will be differentially effective in JMML, where RAS, NF1, and PTPN11 mutations seem to initiate leukemic growth, versus AML, where RAS and FLT3 mutations are thought to represent

cooperating events. It is possible that the multiple genetic changes characteristic of AML qualitatively alter the structure or dynamics of cell signaling networks. If so, it will be helpful to determine how specific leukemia-associated mutations affect the behavior of signaling networks both alone and in combination. Myeloid malignancies are organized in a hierarchy of cells in which only a small fraction exhibits the capacity for long-term self-renewal (43–45). This property is restricted to a “leukemia stem cell” population, which is, by definition, required for maintenance of the malignant clone. Because expression of many signaling proteins changes during hematopoietic differentiation (46–50), the effects of a mutant protein may be different in leukemia stem cells than in blast cells. Therefore, the design of inhibitors will need to take into account the behavior of signaling networks in leukemia stem cells specifically. This goal has been impeded by the scarcity of leukemia stem cells and other types of cancer stem cells, and by technical challenges inherent in working with primary cells. These difficulties may be addressed by new technologies, such as multiparameter flow cytometry, which exploits cell surface antigens to identify subsets of cells while simultaneously assessing intracellular levels of cytokine-responsive phosphoproteins (51–53). Although technical hurdles remain, this is a promising strategy for directly interrogating signaling events of leukemia stem cells in the presence of various stimuli and inhibitors (37). Computational methods can infer biochemical network connections directly from such data (54).

Accurately characterizing oncogenic signaling networks will likely require studying primary tumor cells that express mutant proteins at endogenous levels. Many cell culture techniques introduce artifacts that can potentially undermine the biological relevance to primary cancer cells. Strains of genetically engineered mice can address this by providing a ready source of primary cells that can be compared biochemically to genetically identical normal controls. These are proving to be useful for investigating the effects of oncogenic mutations, alone or in combination, on cancer cell signaling. Studies in these model systems should help to establish the fundamental architecture of cancer signaling networks that will inform the analysis of primary human cancer cells. One surprising observation that has already emerged from studies of Ras signaling in genetically engineered mice is that Ras•GTP levels and the activation of downstream kinase cascades are less pronounced than would have been anticipated from experiments done in cultured cell lines (42, 55, 56). Moreover, mutant Ras networks are robustly activated by growth factors and are not constitutively saturated. Together, these findings support the idea that oncogenic Ras is not autonomous but requires extracellular inputs for maximal activity. These data have provocative implications regarding the growth of human cancer cells and suggest that inhibiting targets that are biochemically upstream of oncogenic Ras (e.g., activated growth factor receptors, adapter molecules, or exchange factors) is a potential therapeutic strategy.

The rationale for developing cancer therapies that counter the effects of RAS mutations remains compelling 35 years after the discovery of these oncogenes. The biomedical research community and pharmaceutical industry have compiled extensive genetic data from human cancers, identified many components of Ras-related signaling networks, and developed inhibitors of key signaling molecules. Further advances will yield a more sophisticated understanding of how this critical

biochemical network responds dynamically to stimuli, how it behaves in cancer stem cells, how it is modulated by cellular responses and cooperating mutations, and how it regulates effectors of cell fate. Hopefully, these insights will be a cornerstone for developing therapeutic strategies that exploit inherent differences between normal and malignant signaling pathways and thereby improve the therapeutic index of current cancer treatments.

### References

1. Donovan S, Shannon KM, Bollag G. GTPase activating poteins: critical regulators of intracellular signaling. BBA Rev Cancer 2002;1602:23–45.
2. Downward J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:11–22.
3. Malumbres M, Barbacid M. RAS oncogenes: the first 30 years. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:459–65.
4. Schubbert S, Shannon K, Bollag G. Hyperactive Ras in developmental disorders and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:295–308.
5. Repasky GA, Chenette EJ, Der CJ. Renewing the conspiracy theory debate: does Raf function alone to mediate Ras oncogenesis? Trends Cell Biol 2004;14: 639–47.
6. Shaw RJ, Cantley LC. Ras, PI(3)K and mTOR signaling controls tumour cell growth. Nature 2006;441: 424–30.
7. Vivanco I, Sawyers CL. The phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase AKT pathway in human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:489–501.
8. Bowen DT, Frew ME, Hills R, et al. RAS mutation in acute myeloid leukemia is associated with distinct cytogenetic subgroups but does not influence outcome in patients younger than 60 years. Blood 2005;106: 2113–9.
9. Small D. FLT3 mutations: biology and treatment. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2006: 178–84.
10. Care RS, Valk PJ, Goodeve AC, et al. Incidence and prognosis of c-KITand FLT3 mutations in core binding factor (CBF) acute myeloid leukaemias. Br J Haematol 2003;121:775–7.
11. Beghini A, Ripamonti CB, Cairoli R, et al. KIT activating mutations: incidence in adult and pediatric acute myeloid leukemia, and identification of an internal tandem duplication. Haematologica 2004;89:920–5.
12. Cairoli R, Beghini A, Grillo G, et al. Prognostic impact of c-KIT mutations in core binding factor leukemias: an Italian retrospective study. Blood 2006;107: 3463–8.
13. Nanri T, Matsuno N, Kawakita T, et al. Mutations in the receptor tyrosine kinase pathway are associated with clinical outcome in patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia harboring t(8;21)(q22;q22). Leukemia 2005;19:1361–6.
14. Wang YY, Zhou GB, Yin T, et al. AML1-ETO and C-KIT mutation/overexpression in t(8;21) leukemia: implication in stepwise leukemogenesis and response to Gleevec. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:1104–9.
15. Goemans BF, Zwaan CM, Miller M, et al. Mutations in KIT and RAS are frequent events in pediatric core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 2005;19:1536–42.
16. Schnittger S, Kohl TM, Haferlach T, et al. KIT-D816 mutations in AML1-ETO-positive AML are associated with impaired event-free and overall survival. Blood 2006;107:1791–9.
17. Shimada A, Taki T, Tabuchi K, et al. KIT mutations, and not FLT3 internal tandem duplication, are strongly associated with a poor prognosis in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;21): a study of the Japanese Childhood AML Cooperative Study Group. Blood 2006;107:1806–9.
18. Boissel N, Leroy H, Brethon B, et al. Incidence and prognostic impact of c-Kit, FLT3, and Ras gene mutations in core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML). Leukemia 2006;20:965–70.
19. Valk PJ, Bowen DT, Frew ME, Goodeve AC, Lowenberg B, Reilly JT. Second hit mutations in the RTK/RAS signaling pathway in acute myeloid leukemia with inv(16). Haematologica 2004;89:106.
20. Gari M, Goodeve A, Wilson G, et al. c-kit proto-oncogene exon 8 in-frame deletion plus insertion mutations in acute myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1999;105:894–900.
21. Emanuel PD, Shannon KM, Castleberry RP. Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia: molecular understanding and prospects for therapy. Mol Medicine Today 1996; 2:468475.
22. Arico M, Biondi A, Pui C-H. Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. Blood 1997;90:479–88.
23. Bader JL, Miller RW. Neurofibromatosis and childhood leukemia. J Pediatr 1978;92:925–9.
24. Stiller CA, Chessells JM, Fitchett M. Neurofibromatosis and childhood leukemia/lymphoma: a population-based UKCCSG study. Br J Cancer 1994;70: 969–72.
25. Shannon KM, O'Connell P, Martin GA, et al. Loss of the normal NF1 allele from the bone marrow of children with type 1 neurofibromatosis and malignant myeloid disorders. N Engl J Med 1994;330:597–601.
26. Miles DK, Freedman MH, Stephens K, et al. Patterns of hematopoietic lineage involvement in children with neurofibromatosis, type 1, and malignant myeloid disorders. Blood 1996;88:4314–20.
27. Kalra R, Paderanga D, Olson K, Shannon KM. Genetic analysis is consistent with the hypothesis that NF1 limits myeloid cell growth through p21ras. Blood 1994;84:3435–9.
28. Loh ML, Vattikuti S, Schubbert S, et al. Mutations in PTPN11 implicate the SHP-2 phosphatase in leukemogenesis. Blood 2004;103:2325–31.
29. Tartaglia M, Niemeyer CM, Fragale A, et al. Somatic mutations in PTPN11 in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. Nat Genet 2003;34:148–50.
30. Neel BG, Gu H, Pao L. The 'Shp'ing news: SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatases in cell signaling. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:284–93.
31. Vetter IR, Wittinghofer A. The guanine nucleotide-binding switch in three dimensions. Science 2001; 294:1299–304.
32. Le DT, Shannon KM. Ras processing as a therapeutic target in hematologic malignancies. Curr Opin Hematol 2002;9:308–15.
33. Sebolt-Leopold JS, Herrera R. Targeting the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade to treat cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:937–47.
34. Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy. Science 2004;304:1497–500.
35. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2129–39.
36. Friedman A, Perrimon N. Genetic screening for signal transduction in the era of network biology. Cell 2007;128:225–31.
37. Van Meter ME, Diaz-Flores E, Archard JA, et al. K-RasG12D expression induces hyperproliferation and aberrant signaling in primary hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Blood 2007;109:3945–52.
38. Knapper S, Burnett AK, Littlewood T, et al. A phase 2 trial of the FLT3 inhibitor lestaurtinib (CEP701) as first-line treatment for older patients with acute myeloid leukemia not considered fit for intensive chemotherapy. Blood 2006;108:3262–70.
39. Smith BD, Levis M, Beran M, et al. Single-agent CEP-701, a novel FLT3 inhibitor, shows biologic and clinical activity in patients with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 2004;103: 3669–76.
40. Fiedler W, Serve H, Döhner H, et al. A phase 1 study of SU11248 in the treatment of patients with refractory or resistant acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or not amenable to conventional therapy for the disease. Blood 2005;105:986–93.
41. Stone RM, DeAngelo DJ, Klimek V, et al. Patients with acute myeloid leukemia and an activating mutation in FLT3 respond to a small-molecule FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor, PKC412. Blood 2005;105: 54–60.
42. Braun BS, Tuveson DA, Kong N, et al. Somatic activation of oncogenic Kras in hematopoietic cells initiates a rapidly fatal myeloproliferative disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:597–602.
43. Holyoake TL, Jiang X, Drummond MW, Eaves AC, Eaves CJ. Elucidating critical mechanisms of deregulated stem cell turnover in the chronic phase of chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 2002;16: 549–58.
44. Warner JK, Wang JC, Hope KJ, Jin L, Dick JE. Concepts of human leukemic development. Oncogene 2004;23:7164–77.
45. Liesveld JL, Jordan CT, Phillips GL II. The hematopoietic stem cell in myelodysplasia. Stem Cells 2004; 22:590–9.
46. Kiel MJ, Yilmaz OH, Iwashita T, Yilmaz OH, Terhorst C, Morrison SJ. SLAM family receptors distinguish hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and reveal endothelial niches for stem cells. Cell 2005;121: 1109–21.
47. Ivanova NB, Dimos JT, Schaniel C, Hackney JA, Moore KA, Lemischka IR. A stem cell molecular signature. Science 2002;298:601–4.
48. Akashi K, He X, Chen J, et al. Transcriptional accessibility for genes of multiple tissues and hematopoietic lineages is hierarchically controlled during early hematopoiesis. Blood 2003;101:383–9.
49. Forsberg EC, Prohaska SS, Katzman S, Heffner GC, Stuart JM, Weissman IL. Differential expression of novel potential regulators in hematopoietic stem cells. PLoS Genet 2005;1:e28.
50. Huttmann A, Duhrsen U, Heydarian K, et al. Gene expression profiles in murine hematopoietic stem cells revisited: analysis of cDNA libraries reveals high levels of translational and metabolic activities. Stem Cells 2006;24:1719–27.
51. Perez OD, Nolan GP. Simultaneous measurement of multiple active kinase states using polychromatic flow cytometry. Nat Biotechnol 2002;20:155–62.
52. Irish JM, Kotecha N, Nolan GP. Mapping normal and cancer cell signaling networks: towards single-cell proteomics. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6: 146–55.
53. Krutzik PO, Irish JM, Nolan GP, Perez OD. Analysis of protein phosphorylation and cellular signaling events by flow cytometry: techniques and clinical applications. Clin Immunol 2004;110:206–21.
54. Sachs K, Perez O, Pe'er D, Lauffenburger DA, Nolan GP. Causal protein-signaling networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Science 2005;308: 523–9.
55. Tuveson DA, Shaw AT, Willis NA, et al. Endogenous oncogenic K-ras(G12D) stimulates proliferation and widespread neoplastic and developmental defects. Cancer Cell 2004;5:375–87.
56. Guerra C, Mijimolle N, Dhawahir A, et al. Tumor induction by an endogenous K-ras oncogene is highly dependent on cellular context. Cancer Cell 2003;4: 111–20.
57. Tefferi A, Gilliland DG. Oncogenes in myeloproliferative disorders. Cell Cycle 2007;6:550–66.

Clinical Cancer Research

Targeting Ras in Myeloid Leukemias

Benjamin S. Braun and Kevin Shannon

Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:2249-2252.

Updated version Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/8/2249

Cited articles This article cites 56 articles, 22 of which you can access for free at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/8/2249.full.html#ref-list-1

Citing articles This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/8/2249.full.html#related-urls

E-mail alerts Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Subscriptions Department at pubs@aacr.org.

Permissions To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.
