
# TRADD Protein Is an Essential Component of the RIG-like Helicase Antiviral Pathway

**Marie-Cécile Michallet**,¹⁷ **Etienne Meylan**,¹⁷ **Maria A. Ermolaeva**,² **Jessica Vazquez**,¹ **Manuele Rebsamen**,¹  
**Joseph Curran**,³ **Hendrik Poeck**,⁴ **Michael Bscheider**,⁵ **Gunther Hartmann**,⁴ **Martin König**,⁶ **Ulrich Kalinke**,⁶  
**Manolis Pasparakis**,² and **Jürg Tschopp**¹,*  

¹ Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland  
² Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Zulpicher Strasse 47, 50674 Cologne, Germany  
³ Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland  
⁴ Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany  
⁵ Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany  
⁶ Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Federal Agency for Sera and Vaccines, Paul-Ehrlich-Straße 51-59, 63225 Langen, Germany  
⁷ Present address: Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Building E17-517, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  
*Correspondence: jurg.tschopp@unil.ch  
DOI 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.03.013  

## SUMMARY

Upon detection of viral RNA, the helicases RIG-I and/or MDA5 trigger, via their adaptor Cardif (also known as IPS-1, MAVS, or VISA), the activation of the transcription factors NF-κB and IRF3, which collaborate to induce an antiviral type I interferon (IFN) response. FADD and RIP1, known as mediators of death-receptor signaling, are implicated in this antiviral pathway; however, the link between death-receptor and antiviral signaling is not known. Here we showed that TRADD, a crucial adaptor of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFRI), was important in RIG-like helicase (RLH)-mediated signal transduction. TRADD is recruited to Cardif and orchestrated complex formation with the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF3 and TANK and with FADD and RIP1, leading to the activation of IRF3 and NF-κB. Loss of TRADD prevented Cardif-dependent activation of IFN-β, reduced the production of IFN-β in response to RNA viruses, and enhanced vesicular stomatitis virus replication. Thus, TRADD is not only an essential component of proinflammatory TNFRI signaling, but is also required for RLH-Cardif-dependent antiviral immune responses.

## INTRODUCTION

Viruses are the most abundant and diverse pathogens that depend on host cellular machinery for survival and replication. A key aspect of the antiviral innate immune response is the rapid synthesis and secretion of type I interferons (IFN-α and IFN-β) (Isaacs and Lindenmann, 1957). It is now well established that rapid immune recognition depends on highly conserved, invariant structures of microbes that are distinct from the host

uncharacterized. Given that RIG-I and MDA5 contain caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-like structures, a CARD-containing adaptor protein, Cardif (also called IPS-1, MAVS, and VISA) was found to transmit the antiviral response downstream of RIG-I and MDA5 (Kawai et al., 2005; Meylan et al., 2005; Seth et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2005). RIG-I and MDA5 recruit Cardif through CARD homotypic interactions, leading to the activation of NF-κB and interferon regulating factor (IRF) 3 transcription factors, which are both critical for cellular antiviral responses. IRF3 activation requires phosphorylation by two kinases belonging to the IKK family, IKKε and TBK1, which results in its dimerization and nuclear translocation (Fitzgerald et al., 2003; Sharma et al., 2003). Activated, nuclear IRF3 and NF-κB transcription factors then trigger the expression of type I IFNs, which are subsequently secreted to bind their respective receptors on virus-infected and neighboring noninfected cells.

Fas-associated death domain (FADD) and receptor-interacting protein (RIP) 1 are two death domain (DD)-containing proteins originally described to have crucial roles in proinflammatory and proapoptotic signaling events because of their interaction with tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family members (Chinnaiyan et al., 1996; Hsu et al., 1996a; Kischkel et al., 2000; Stanger et al., 1995). Recently, however, cells lacking FADD were also shown to be defective in intracellular dsRNA-activated gene expression, including production of type I IFNs, resulting in increased susceptibility to viral infection (Balachandran et al., 2004; Kumar et al., 2006). Similar defects in dsRNA responses were observed in RIP1-deficient cells (Balachandran et al., 2004), suggesting that FADD and RIP1 form a complex that is essential in dsRNA-dependent signaling. Indeed, the first evidence of their role in the RLH signaling was the demonstration that Cardif interacted with FADD and RIP1 via its non-CARD region to facilitate downstream NF-κB activation (Kawai et al., 2005). Furthermore, cleavage of initiator caspases interacting with FADD, caspase-8, and caspase-10 has been reported during dsRNA stimulation, suggesting a role of these two proteases in antiviral immune responses in addition to their function in apoptosis (Takahashi et al., 2006). However, despite observations that FADD and RIP1 complex with Cardif and that caspases are cleaved in response to dsRNA, the mechanism of recruitment and the role of these proteins in RIG-I- or MDA5-mediated antiviral signaling remain ill defined.

Here we investigated the role of TNFR-associated death domain (TRADD) protein in RLH-dependent antiviral responses, which, similar to FADD and RIP1, is a crucial signaling adaptor mediating intracellular responses from TNFRI (Hsu et al., 1996b; Hsu et al., 1995). We found that TRADD interacts with Cardif, recruits the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF3 and the adaptor protein TANK, and forms a complex with FADD and RIP1, leading to the activation of IRF3 and NF-κB transcription factors. Silencing of TRADD expression resulted in a reduction of RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses as well as an enhanced vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) replication. Moreover, deficiency of TRADD prevented Cardif-dependent activation of IFN-β in fibroblasts and reduced the production of IFN-β in response to VSV and Sendai viruses in vitro. Finally, virally infected TRADD-deficient mice produced less IFN-β. Thus, TRADD serves not only TNF-dependent inflammatory but also RLH-mediated antiviral functions.


RESULTS

**TRADD Activates IRF3 and NF-κB Promoters and Interacts with Cardif**

As a first approach to investigate whether TRADD may play a role in the innate antiviral response, we overexpressed TRADD in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells and determined type I IFN responses. TRADD overexpression activated an IFN-β-responsive promoter in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 1A) as well as an IRF3-dependent interferon-stimulated regulatory element (ISRE of ISG54; Figure 1B). As expected, overexpressed TRADD also activated a NF-κB-dependent promoter (Figure 1C) (Hsu et al., 1995). Finally, we observed a synergistic effect on ISRE and NF-κB responses when TRADD was overexpressed with Cardif, MDA5 activated by poly(I:C) (a synthetic dsRNA that is commonly used to mimic viral infection, or RIG-I in the presence of poly(I:C) or its specific ligand 3pRNA (Figures 1D and 1E, and Figure S1 available online). This synergistic effect was also detected when TRADD was cotransfected with poly(I:C) alone and with IRF3 or IRF7 (Figure S2). Because TLR3 is not involved in cytoplasmic poly(I:C) recognition, it was likely that TRADD was involved in the RIG-I- or MDA5-mediated, Cardif-dependent signaling pathway. To substantiate this possibility, we coexpressed TRADD and Cardif and observed after immunoprecipitation an interaction between both proteins (Figure 1F). To map the TRADD-Cardif interaction, we used a series of Cardif deletion constructs previously described (Meylan et al., 2005). TRADD strongly interacted with a Cardif construct lacking the N-terminal CARD domain (ΔCARD) and more weakly with a construct lacking the C-terminal transmembrane region (ΔTM) that is known to target Cardif to the mitochondria (Figure 1F). No interaction was detected with a construct containing only the CARD domain (Figure 1F), indicating that TRADD associates with the intermediate region of Cardif. We also generated a TRADD construct lacking the DD, which interacted with Cardif to a similar extent as the full-length molecule (Figure 1G). These results show that neither the DD of TRADD nor the CARD of Cardif is implicated in the Cardif-TRADD interaction. We next investigated whether the interaction between TRADD and Cardif also occurs at the endogenous level. As shown in Figure 1H, Cardif ΔCARD was able to recruit endogenous TRADD protein. Importantly, specific formation of the TRADD- and Cardif-containing complex was dependent on the activation of RIG-I and/or MDA5 by poly(I:C) (Figure 1I), but never detected upon TNFRI activation (Figure S3). Finally, DAI (DLM-1 or ZBP1) has been recently identified as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor leading to the production of type I IFN (Takaoka et al., 2007). We therefore investigated whether TRADD may also play a role in the DAI-dependent pathway. However, TRADD siRNA had no effect on poly(A:T)-induced ISRE promoter activity (Figure S4). Thus, TRADD is recruited to Cardif upon stimulation of RIG-I or MDA5.

**TRADD Knockdown Inhibits RIG-I-Induced Antiviral Responses**

To examine the functional significance of the TRADD-Cardif interaction, we determined whether TRADD siRNA could inhibit RIG-I- or Cardif-induced IFN responses. TRADD knockdown with short-interfering RNA (siRNA) attenuated RIG-I-induced ISRE promoter activation (Figure 2A, Figure S5). Trif is an adaptor

Immunity

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

Figure 1. TRADD Interacts with Cardif and Induces NF-κB and IRF3 Promoter Activation

(A–C) HEK293T cells were transfected with an IFN-β, ISRE, or NF-κB reporter plasmid, together with an empty plasmid (Mock) or increasing amounts of TRADD constructs, and analyzed 24 hr later for (A) IFN-β-, (B) ISRE-, or (C) NF-κB-dependent luciferase activity, respectively.

(D and E) HEK293T cells were transfected with an (D) ISRE or (E) NF-κB reporter plasmid, together with an empty plasmid, TRADD, Cardif, RIG-I, and poly(I:C) at 50 ng/ml where indicated. Data are mean values ± standard deviation (SD) from one experiment representative of at least three independent experiments.

(F–H) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated VSV, Flag, or myc constructs, and the immunoprecipitates (IP) and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot (IB). Ig(H)* denotes immunoglobulin heavy chain, and * indicates nonspecific band.

(I) HEK293T cells were transfected with an empty plasmid (−) or TBK1 + poly(I:C) 50 ng/ml (TBK1 overexpression is needed to induce RLH expression), and the immunoprecipitates and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot. The anti-TRADD used for immunoprecipitation is a mouse IgG1 antibody, and an anti-mouse IgG1 was used as a control. The anti-TRADD used for immunoblot analysis of endogenous TRADD in (H) and (I) is a rabbit polyclonal IgG antibody. Data are representative of at least two independent experiments.

siRNA but not control siRNA resulted in a clear reduction of RIG-I-induced NF-κB activation (Figure 2B, Figure S5). A consistent reduction of Cardif- or RIG-I-induced NF-κB responses was also observed in HEK293T cells stably expressing a TRADD-specific short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) construct (Figure 2C). Interestingly, RIP1 siRNA had the same inhibitory effect as TRADD siRNA, demonstrating that RIP1, which is a binding partner of TRADD in the TNF signaling complex, is also essential for RIG-I-dependent NF-κB responses (Figure 2B). siRNA knockdown of both TRADD and RIP1 produced an additive effect, reducing RIG-I-induced NF-κB activation in a manner comparable to that observed after FADD deficiency (Kawai et al., 2005; Takahashi et al., 2006) (Figure 2B). Finally, to corroborate the role of TRADD in antiviral signaling, we determined Cardif-induced IFN responses in TRADD-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). As shown in Figures 2D and 2E, Cardif-induced ISRE and IFN-β responses were strongly decreased in MEFs from Tradd−/− mice. Moreover, IFN-β production as well as phosphorylation of the transcription factor IRF3 induced by Cardif overexpression were totally impaired in TRADD-deficient MEFs (Figure 2F). All of these results show that

protein that is essential for TLR3- and TLR4-dependent IFN responses. ISRE promoter activation by Trif activation was normal in the absence of TRADD, demonstrating a specific effect of TRADD on RIG-I IFN responses, but not TLR3 and TLR4 IFN responses.

Similar results were observed with FADD siRNA, in agreement with previously published results (Takahashi et al., 2006), and in the presence of RIP1 siRNA (Figure 2A, Figure S5). We next investigated whether RIG-I-dependent NF-κB responses may also be affected by TRADD deficiency. The presence of TRADD

**Immunity**

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

**Figure 2. RIG-I- and Cardif-Induced NF-κB and IFN Responses Are TRADD Dependent**

(A and B) HEK293T cells were transfected with 20 nM of indicated siRNAs or a control (scramble) and 24 hr later were retransfected with an (A) ISRE or (B) NF-κB reporter plasmid, together with an empty plasmid (Mock), Trif, or RIG-I [in combination with 50 ng/ml poly(I:C)]. Luciferase activity was measured 24 hr after the second transfection. Effectiveness of siRNAs is shown in Figure S5.

(C) HEK293T cells stably expressing shRNA construct directed against *Tradd* (same construct used in the experiment for Figure 5B) or the gene that encodes lamin (control) were transfected with an NF-κB reporter plasmid, together with Cardif, RIG-I [in combination with 50 ng/ml poly(I:C)], or an empty plasmid (Mock) and analyzed for NF-κB-dependent luciferase activity. All data are mean values ± SD from one experiment representative of at least three independent experiments.

(D and F) Wild-type (WT) or *Tradd*^−/−^ primary MEFs were transfected with an empty plasmid (Mock) or mouse Cardif (mCardif) with the Amaxa Nucleofection technology. An ISRE reporter plasmid was added in (D), and luciferase activity was measured 24 hr after electroporation. (F) Supernatants and cell extracts were collected 24 hr after electroporation to measure IFN-β production by ELISA and phosphorylation of IRF3 by immunoblot, respectively.

(E) Wild-type (WT) or *Tradd*^−/−^ transformed MEFs were transfected with an IFN-β reporter plasmid, together with an empty plasmid (Mock) or mCardif, through the use of lipofectamine 2000. Luciferase activity was measured 24 hr after transfection. LF denotes lipofectamine alone. Data are mean values ± SD from one experiment representative of at least two independent experiments.

TRADD plays a critical role in RIG-I-induced innate immune signaling that leads to IRF3 and NF-κB activation.

**TRADD Interacts with TRAF3 and TANK, Leading to IRF3 Activation**

Because the interaction between TRADD and Cardif has a functional impact on signaling pathways implicated in antiviral innate responses, we reasoned that TRADD might influence the formation of a complex containing other components present in the Cardif-signaling pathway. Because Cardif is recruited by RIG-I and MDA5, we first looked at whether TRADD interacted with these two helicases, which was not the case (Figure S6). Cardif was suggested to interact with several TRAF molecules (Saha et al., 2006; Seth et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2005); hence, we performed immunoprecipitation experiments between TRADD and the seven TRAF family members. As expected from previous reports, the specific binding of TRADD to TRAF1 and TRAF2 (Figure 3A) was observed, a complex operating in TNFRI-signaling cascades (Hsu et al., 1996b). An interaction between TRADD and TRAF3 was also seen (Figure 3A). This observation was interesting because TRAF3 is known to interact with Cardif and to be necessary for Cardif-induced type I IFN production (Saha et al., 2006). We therefore investigated whether TRADD interacted with other effectors that mediate the activation of IRF

transcription factors downstream of Cardif, such as the nonclassical IKKs, TBK1, and IKKε (Fitzgerald et al., 2003; Sharma et al., 2003). In contrast to TRAF members, no binding of TRADD to these kinases was detected (Figure 3A, Figure S7), suggesting that TRADD acts more upstream of these kinases in the Cardif signaling pathway. To validate this hypothesis, we investigated whether TRADD-induced IRF3 responses were affected by the absence of TRAF3 or Cardif. Overexpression of TRADD in HEK293T cells led to an increase of ISRE reporter activity, which was strongly inhibited by TRAF3 siRNA (Figure 3B). In contrast, Cardif siRNA had little effect (Figure 3B), confirming that TRADD most likely acts upstream of TRAF3 but downstream of Cardif. Finally, we determined whether TRADD may be involved in the formation of a complex containing TRAF3 and TANK (also called I-TRAF [Cheng and Baltimore, 1996; Rothe et al., 1996]), a protein shown to interact with TRAF3 and TBK1 (Li et al., 2002; Pomerantz and Baltimore, 1999). In immunoprecipitation experiments, TRADD interacted specifically with TANK (Figure 3C) in a complex that included TRAF3 (Figure 3C). We observed that overexpressed TRADD recruited endogenous TANK and TRAF3 molecules (Figure 3D). Taken together, these results show that RIG-I-mediated IRF responses are dependent on a molecular complex that contains at least TRADD, TRAF3, and TANK, which act downstream of Cardif but upstream of TBK1 and IKKε.

Immunity

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

**Figure 3. TRADD Interacts with TRAF3 and TANK**

(A) HEK293T cells were transfected with myc-TRADD together with the indicated Flag constructs where indicated, and the immunoprecipitates (IP) and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot (IB). * indicates nonspecific band.

(B) HEK293T cells were transfected with 20 nM of indicated siRNAs or a control (scramble) and 24 hr later were retransfected with an ISRE reporter plasmid, together with a TRADD construct or an empty plasmid (Mock). Luciferase activity was measured 24 hr after second transfection. Data are mean values ± SD from one experiment representative of at least three independent experiments.

(C) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated VSV or Flag constructs together with myc-TRADD where indicated, and the immunoprecipitates and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot. The anti-TRADD used for immunoblot analysis is the rabbit polyclonal IgG antibody.

(D) HEK293T cells were transfected with myc-TRADD, and the immunoprecipitates and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot. The anti-TRADD used for immunoblot analysis is the mouse IgG1 antibody. * indicates nonspecific band.

**TRADD Forms a Multiprotein Complex with FADD and RIP1 to Activate NF-κB**

FADD and RIP1 have been linked to dsRNA-induced antiviral responses (Balachandran et al., 2004) and also to Cardif-mediated NF-κB activation (Kawai et al., 2005). To determine the role of TRADD in Cardif-induced NF-κB responses, we performed immunoprecipitation experiments involving Cardif, TRADD, and RIP1. Interestingly, although TRADD and RIP1 coimmunoprecipitated with Cardif (Figure 4A), RIP1 overexpression enhanced the TRADD-Cardif interaction, supporting the notion that Cardif, TRADD, and RIP1 can form a complex (Figure 4A). This result was confirmed because endogenous TRADD and RIP1 were specifically recruited to Cardif upon RIG-I activation or when its expression was doxycycline induced (Figures 4B and 4C). In experiments that employed ΔDD constructs of TRADD and RIP1, the formation of the complex was unaffected (Figure 4A), indicating that TRADD and RIP1 interact with Cardif independently of their DDs.

We have previously shown that TRADD and RIP1 associate with FADD to form the so-called cytoplasmic complex II in the TNFRI-mediated signaling pathway (Micheau and Tschopp, 2003). We hypothesized that a similar complex may exist in the Cardif-induced NF-κB pathway. Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed, which demonstrated FADD recruitment to Cardif only in the presence of RIP1 and TRADD (Figure 4D, Figure S8). In contrast, no direct interaction between FADD and any Cardif construct could be detected (Figure S9). These results suggest that TRADD and RIP1 are adaptor proteins necessary for FADD to be recruited to Cardif. Furthermore, FADD recruitment was mediated through a DD homotypic interaction with TRADD and RIP1, because FADD was not precipitated with DD-deleted TRADD and RIP1 constructs (Figure 4D). Finally, we examined whether TRADD was involved in c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation, given the evidence that Cardif mediates JNK phosphorylation (Seth et al., 2005). TRADD

knockdown with siRNA had no effect on Cardif-induced JNK phosphorylation, as determined by immunoblotting with a phospho-specific JNK antibody (Figure S10). These results show that TRADD effects downstream of RIG-I and Cardif are restricted to IRF and NF-κB responses.

**TRADD Knockdown Enhances VSV Replication and Impairs IFN-β Responses to Sendai Virus**

The prior data strongly suggest that TRADD and its binding partners play a crucial role in type I IFN and NF-κB responses mediated by RIG-I and Cardif. Thus, it was expected that the absence of TRADD would have an effect on a viral infection. The amount of TRADD protein was modulated via shRNA or cDNA overexpression in cells infected with VSV, which is known to be sensed by RIG-I in most cell types (Kato et al., 2006). TRADD and Cardif overexpression comparably impaired VSV replication, as measured by a viral-plaque assay in HeLa cells, but also in Vero cells, which do not respond to IFN-β (Figure 5A, Figure S11). Consistent with this observation, TRADD knockdown or deficiency resulted in a 2- to 4-fold increase in virus titer compared to controls (Figures 5B and 5C). Importantly, when TRADD-deficient mice (M.A.E., M.-C.M., N. Papadopoulou, O. Utermöhlen, K. Kranidioti, G. Kollias, J.T. and M.P., unpublished data) were infected with VSV, the amounts of IFN-β 24 hr infection were substantially decreased (Figure 5D). In addition, TRADD-deficient MEFs infected with another RNA virus, Sendai virus (SeV), showed a partial reduction of antiviral IFN-β levels (Figure 5E). IFN-β production was totally abolished in MEFs from Cardif⁻/⁻ mice (Figure 5F, Figure S12). Altogether, these in vitro and in vivo findings indicate that TRADD is an important mediator of RLH-dependent responses.

**DISCUSSION**

The DD protein TRADD was originally identified as an adaptor in the TNFRI-signaling pathway because of its specific interaction with the DD of this death receptor (Hsu et al., 1995). Overexpression of TRADD leads to two major TNF-induced responses, apoptosis and activation of NF-κB (Hsu et al., 1995), which are dependent on its specific interaction with FADD and TRAF2, respectively (Hsu et al., 1996b). In the present study, we reveal an unexpected additional role for TRADD as a central mediator of RLH-induced antiviral immune responses that lead to the production of type I IFNs.

Activation of the NF-κB transcriptional program is a fundamental early step of the innate antiviral immune response, because it is one of the signaling pathways required for the synthesis of antiviral type-I IFNs. As a consequence, it represents a prime candidate for viral interference (Hiscott et al., 2006). In this context, the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is particularly active. The HCV serine protease NS3-4A, which is required to cleave the HCV polyprotein during virus replication, cleaves Cardif, causing

(D) HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-Cardif and various FADD, RIP1, and TRADD constructs, and the Flag-immunoprecipitates and cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblot. The anti-TRADD used for immunoprecipitation is the mouse IgG1 antibody, and an anti-mouse IgG1 was used as a control. The anti-TRADD used for immunoblot analysis of endogenous TRADD in (B) and (C) is the rabbit polyclonal IgG antibody. * indicates nonspecific band.

Immunity

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

Figure 5. TRADD Inhibits Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Replication and Is Required for Antiviral Responses and Impaired IFN-β Production to Sendai Virus in TRADD-Deficient Cells

(A) HEK293T cells were transfected with different amounts of TRADD, Cardif, or an empty plasmid (Mock) and 24 hr later infected with VSV as described in the Experimental Procedures. HeLa cells were used to determine VSV titer. Data are duplicates from one experiment representative of three independent experiments. PFU denotes plaque-forming units.

(B) HEK293T cells stably expressing shRNA constructs directed against the Tradd gene (two different constructs) or the gene that encodes lamin (control) were infected with VSV as described in the Experimental Procedures. HeLa cells were used to determine VSV titer. Data are duplicates from one experiment representative of three independent experiments.

(C) As (B), but TRADD WT or Tradd−/− MEFs were infected with VSV at a MOI of 0.1.

(D) Wild-type and Tradd−/− mice were infected with VSV (2 × 10⁶ PFU per mouse) via tail-vein injection. Sera were collected 24 hr after infection to measure IFN-β production by ELISA. Data are mean values ± SD from one representative experiment.

(E and F) Primary TRADD-deficient MEFs (E) and primary Cardif-deficient MEFs (F) were infected with SeV as described in the Experimental Procedures. Cell supernatants were recovered 24 hr after infection to measure IFN-β production by ELISA. ND denotes not detectable. Data are mean values ± SD from one experiment representative of at least two independent experiments.

manipulating TRADD expression or function, a virus will be able to modulate TNF-induced proinflammatory cytokine production, TNF-dependent apoptosis, and host antiviral immunity.

Our data also show that FADD and RIP1, in addition to TRADD, play a crucial role in RIG-I-induced NF-κB activation. This is in line with previous results where FADD- and RIP1-deficient cells were shown to be very susceptible to viral infection (Balachandran et al., 2004). Moreover, Kawai et al. (2005) demonstrated that overexpression of FADD and RIP1 stimulates NF-κB promoter activity, and that FADD and RIP1 interact with Cardif. Our data confirm the Cardif-RIP1 interaction but clearly reveal that FADD recruitment to Cardif is mediated by TRADD and RIP1. We failed to observe a direct interaction between FADD and Cardif. It has been suggested that FADD and RIP1 may function preferentially on the NF-κB axis, because their overexpression did not activate IFN-β promoter, and because overexpression of a mutant FADD-death-effector domain had no effect on IRF-dependent promoters (Kawai et al., 2005). However, our data show that FADD and RIP1 are likely to be implicated in IRF3 activation too, because FADD and RIP1 siRNAs strongly inhibited RIG-I-induced ISRE promoter activity.

Cell

**Immunity**

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

Figure 6. A Schematic Overview of the Signaling Pathways Triggered by RLH-Cardif and TNFRI

Viral RNA binds to RIG-I or MDA5, which transmit the downstream signals via Cardif to activate IRF3 and NF-κB. A central signaling unit is the TRADDosome, which consists of TRADD-RIP1 and FADD and is also crucial for TNFRI-mediated proinflammatory responses. See text for details.

pathway, NEMO recruitment, and IKKs, why does potent IRF3 activation occur only in the virally activated pathway? There are several possible explanations. The TNFRI and RLH pathways are clearly distinct with respect to the site of assembly. Although the TNFRI complex is formed at the cell membrane, Cardif needs to be anchored in the outer mitochondrial membrane to be active (Li et al., 2005; Seth et al., 2005), suggesting that proteins required for IRF activation, but not NF-κB activation, are present on the mitochondrial membrane. In support of this hypothesis, we observed that binding of Cardif to TRAF3, which is essential for IRF3 activation but not NF-κB activation, is dependent on Cardif's mitochondrial localization (data not shown).

Another open question remains as to the role of caspase-8 or -10 in the NF-κB signaling pathway. In the NF-κB signaling pathway emanating from the T cell receptor, caspase-8 was shown to be required for the processing of FLIP, which, in its processed form, recruits TRAF2 (Budd et al., 2006). A TRADDosome-TRAF modulating role of processed FLIP may therefore also be envisaged.

Viral infection remains a considerable health threat. Although antiviral drugs inhibiting replication of viruses have been developed, many viruses such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) mutate and produce drug-resistant strains. In this context, a better knowledge of antiviral signaling pathways exerted by host immune systems may lead to the development of new strategies aimed at combating viral infection. The identification of TRADD as a crucial player in the host antiviral response may contribute to the development of new therapeutic strategies for enhancing the immune response against viral diseases.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

### Expression Vectors

pCR3-RIP1-Flag, pCR3-Trif-Flag, Flag-tagged constructs of Cardif, and luciferase reporter constructs were previously described (Meylan et al., 2004; Meylan et al., 2005). shRNA constructs directed against the tradd gene in pLK0.1 vectors were obtained from Openbiosystems. Ha-IRF3 and pcDNA3-IRF7 were kindly provided by K. Fitzgerald and G.P. Dotto, respectively. Flag-RIG-I, Flag-TBK1, Flag-IKKε, Flag-TRAF7, Flag-JNK, ha-TRAF3, and VSV-FADD were gifts from T. Fujita, M. Nakanishi, T. Maniatis, H.B. Shu, C. Widmann, S. Rothenberger, and K. Burns, respectively. Flag-TRAF1–6 were previously described (Thome et al., 1999). pCR3-TRADD-myc was obtained by restriction of the pRK5-TRADD (provided by D.V. Goeddel, Tularik) and subsequently cloned into a derivative of pCR3 (Invitrogen), in frame with an N-terminal myc tag. Human TANK, human MDA5, and mouse Cardif were amplified from EST clones by standard PCR with Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen) and were subsequently cloned into a derivative of pCR3, in frame with an N-terminal VSV

658 Immunity 28, 651–661, May 2008 © 2008 Elsevier Inc.

or Flag tag. The RIP1 delta death domain (ΔDD) (amino acids 1–568) and the TRADDΔDD (amino acids 1–168) constructs were obtained by standard PCR of the pCR3-RIP1-VSV and appropriate restriction of the pCR3-TRADD-myc, respectively. The RIG-I 2CARD (amino acids 1–200), a constitutively active form of RIG-I, was amplified from pCR3-RIG-I-VSV by standard PCR. RIP1ΔDD, TRADDΔDD, and RIG-I 2CARD were subsequently cloned into a derivative of pCR3 (Invitrogen) in frame with an N-terminal VSV tag. The fidelity of all PCR amplifications was confirmed by sequencing.

### Mice, Cells, and Culture Conditions

The generation of Cardif $^{-/-}$ mice is described in the [Supplemental Data](Figure S12). Tradd$^{-/-}$ mice were generated and provided by M. Pasparakis. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from wild-type and mutant mice were prepared from day 13.5 embryos and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS and 100 μM β-mercaptoethanol. The HEK 293T, HeLa cells, Vero cells, fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells, HEK293T cells inducibly expressing Flag-Cardif upon doxycycline treatment (200 ng/ml), and HEK293T cells stably expressing shRNA constructs directed against the tradd gene were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS. The Flag-tagged TNF-$\alpha$ used for TNFRI complex analysis was obtained from Apotech.

### Transfections

Transient transfection of HEK293T cells was performed as previously described ([Thome et al., 1998](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.26.16402)). siRNAs and poly(I:C) (Invivogen) were also transfected into HEK293T cells via the calcium-phosphate precipitation method, at final concentrations of 20 nM and 50 ng/ml, respectively. siRNA oligonucleotides against RIP1 (5′-GGCGAAAGAUGAACAGA-3′), TRADD (5′-GGAGGAUGCUGCGAAAUUU-3′) ([Zheng et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M511805200)), FADD (5′-GAAGACCUGUGUGCAGCAUUU-3′), TRAF3 (5′-GGAGGUUACAAGGAAAAGUTT-3′) and Cardif (5′-CCCACAGGGGUCAGUUGUAUTT-3′) were obtained from Ambion. The synthetic DNA poly(dA-dT) (Sigma) was used at a concentration of 1.5 μg/ml after complex formation with lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) at a ratio of 1.0 μl lipofectamine to 1.0 μg DNA in Optimem (Invitrogen). Chemically synthesized 5′-triphosphate dsRNA (3pRNA) was generated and kindly provided by H. Poeck. Transient transfection of primary and immortalized MEFs was performed by electroporation with the Amaxa Nucleofection technology (Amaxa Biosystems) and lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), respectively, according to the manufacturers’ instructions.

### Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblot

For immunoblot analysis, transfected HEK293T cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.8], 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, 5 mM EDTA, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]) for 15 min on ice, and lysis was completed by three cycles of freeze and thaw. For coimmunoprecipitation experiments, lysates were incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel with anti-Flag (M2) beads (Sigma) or anti-VSV (P5D4, Sigma) bound to protein G. Beads were recovered and washed five times with lysis buffer before analysis by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. TNFRI complex analysis was performed as previously described ([Micicheau and Tschopp, 2003](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M300404200)). In brief, HT1080 cells were stimulated for the indicated times with 1 μg/ml of Flag-tagged TNF-$\alpha$ (Apotech) and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 250 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P40, 10% glycerol, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail) for 15 min on ice. Lysates were immunoprecipitated overnight with M2-Flag beads (Sigma) at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Beads were recovered and washed five times with lysis buffer before analysis by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Antibodies used for immunoblot analysis were anti-RIP1 (clone 38, Transduction Labs), anti-TRADD (mouse IgG1, catalog number T50320, Transduction Labs; rabbit polyclonal IgG, clone H-278, Santa Cruz), anti-TRAF3 (clone H-122, Santa-Cruz), anti-TANK (rabbit polyclonal, catalog number sc-8314, Santa Cruz), anti-FADD (mouse IgG1, catalog number 610400, BD PharMingen), anti-Cardif (mouse IgG2b, clone Adri-1, Alexis), anti-IκB (clone C-21, Santa Cruz), anti-phospho-IκB (mouse IgG1, Cell Signaling), anti-TNFRI (IgG2b, clone H5, Santa Cruz), anti-phospho-JNK (catalog number 9251, Cell Signaling), anti-phospho-IRF3 (4D4G rabbit, Cell Signaling), anti-myc (Upstate), anti-Flag, and anti-VSV (Sigma).

---

### Luciferase Reporter Assays

These assays were performed as previously described ([Meylan et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M200448200)).

### Plaque Assay

Virus yield was measured from culture supernatants collected from cells stably expressing cDNA or shRNA constructs infected for 6 hr with VSV at a multiplicity of infection of 1 or 2, respectively. HeLa or Vero cells were infected in duplicates with serial dilutions of recovered viruses for 1 hr and were overlaid with DMEM containing 0.3% agarose 1% FCS low-melting agarose. Viral plaques were counted after 24 hr of incubation.

### Viral Infections

Cells (MEFs) were seeded onto 12-well microtiter plates. When 50%–60% confluent, they were infected with the equivalent of 10 μl of a Sendai virus (SeV) DIH4 stock prepared in the allantoic cavity of embryonic eggs. Infections were performed in serum-free medium (1 ml per well) for 1 hr at 37°C. The infecting medium was then removed and replaced with 1 ml of normal growth medium. Cell supernatants were recovered 24 hr after infection and stored at –70°C until the analysis. Wild-type and Tradd$^{-/-}$ mice were infected with VSV (2 × 10⁶ plaque-forming unit [PFU] per mouse) via tail-vein injection. Sera were collected 24 hr after infection to measure IFN-$\beta$ production by ELISA. The ELISA kit for mouse IFN-$\beta$ was purchased from PBL Biomedical Laboratories.

---

### SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

Twelve figures are available at [http://www.immunity.com/cgi/content/full/28/5/651/DC1/](http://www.immunity.com/cgi/content/full/28/5/651/DC1/).

---

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank S. Lippens and D.A. Muruve for critical readings and discussions. J.T. is supported by grants of the Swiss National Science Foundation. M.-C.M. is a recipient of a fellowship from European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO). H.P. and M.B. are supported by Gradiertenkolleg 1202 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

Received: July 29, 2007  
Revised: January 15, 2008  
Accepted: March 4, 2008  
Published online: April 24, 2008  

---

### REFERENCES

Akira, S., Uematsu, S., and Takeuchi, O. (2006). Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. *Cell* 124, 783–801.  
Alexopoulou, L., Holt, A.C., Medzhitov, R., and Flavell, R.A. (2001). Recognition of double-stranded RNA and activation of NF-kappaB by Toll-like receptor 3. *Nature* 413, 732–738.  
Balachandran, S., Thomas, E., and Barber, G.N. (2004). A FADD-dependent innate immune mechanism in mammalian cells. *Nature* 432, 401–405.  
Budd, R.C., Yeh, W.C., and Tschopp, J. (2006). cFLIP regulation of lymphocyte activation and development. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 6, 196–204.  
Cheng, G., and Baltimore, D. (1996). TANK, a co-inducer with TRAF2 of TNF-and CD40L-mediated NF-kappaB activation. *Genes Dev.* 10, 963–973.  
Chinnaiyan, A.M., Tepper, C.G., Seldin, M.F., O'Rourke, K., Kischkel, F.C., Hellbardt, S., Krammer, P.H., Peter, M.E., and Dixit, V.M. (1996). FADD/MORT1 is a common mediator of CD95 (Fas/APO-1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor-induced apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 4961–4965.  
Creagh, E.M., and O'Neill, L.A. (2006). TLRs, NLRs and RLRs: A trinity of pathogen sensors that co-operate in innate immunity. *Trends Immunol.* 27, 352–357.  
Diebold, S.S., Kaisho, T., Hemmi, H., Akira, S., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2004). Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. *Science* 303, 1529–1531.

Fitzgerald, K.A., McWhirter, S.M., Faia, K.L., Rowe, D.C., Latz, E., Golenbock, D.T., Coyle, A.J., Liao, S.M., and Maniatis, T. (2003). IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. Nat. Immunol. 4, 491–496.

Gitlin, L., Barchet, W., Gilfillan, S., Cella, M., Beutler, B., Flavell, R.A., Diamond, M.S., and Colonna, M. (2006). Essential role of mda-5 in type I IFN responses to polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid and encephalomyocarditis picornavirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 8459–8464.

Heil, F., Hemmi, H., Hochrein, H., Ampenberger, F., Kirschning, C., Akira, S., Lipford, G., Wagner, H., and Bauer, S. (2004). Species-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA via toll-like receptor 7 and 8. Science 303, 1526–1529.

Hemmi, H., Takeuchi, O., Kawai, T., Kaisho, T., Sato, S., Sanjo, H., Matsumoto, M., Hoshino, K., Wagner, H., Takeda, K., et al. (2000). A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408, 740–745.

Hiscott, J., Nguyen, T.L., Arguello, M., Nakhaei, P., and Paz, S. (2006). Manipulation of the nuclear factor-kappaB pathway and the innate immune response by viruses. Oncogene 25, 6844–6867.

Honda, K., Yanai, H., Takaoka, A., and Taniguchi, T. (2005). Regulation of the type I IFN induction: A current view. Int. Immunol. 17, 1367–1378.

Hornung, V., Ellegast, J., Kim, S., Brzozka, K., Jung, A., Kato, H., Poeck, H., Akira, S., Conzelmann, K.K., Schlee, M., et al. (2006). 5′-Triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. Science 314, 994–997.

Hsu, H., Xiong, J., and Goeddel, D.V. (1995). The TNF receptor 1-associated protein TRADD signals cell death and NF-kappa B activation. Cell 81, 495–504.

Hsu, H., Huang, J., Shu, H.B., Baichwal, V., and Goeddel, D.V. (1996a). TNF-dependent recruitment of the protein kinase RIP to the TNF receptor-1 signaling complex. Immunity 4, 387–396.

Hsu, H., Shu, H.B., Pan, M.G., and Goeddel, D.V. (1996b). TRADD-TRAF2 and TRADD-FADD interactions define two distinct TNF receptor 1 signal transduction pathways. Cell 84, 299–308.

Isaacs, A., and Lindenmann, J. (1957). Virus interference. I. The interferon. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 147, 258–267.

Iwasaki, A., and Medzhitov, R. (2004). Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune responses. Nat. Immunol. 5, 987–995.

Janeway, C.A., Jr. (1989). Approaching the asymptote? Evolution and revolution in immunology. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 54, 1–13.

Kato, H., Sato, S., Yoneyama, M., Yamamoto, M., Uematsu, S., Matsui, K., Tsujimura, T., Takeda, K., Fujita, T., Takeuchi, O., et al. (2005). Cell type-specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response. Immunity 23, 19–28.

Kato, H., Takeuchi, O., Sato, S., Yoneyama, M., Yamamoto, M., Matsui, K., Uematsu, S., Jung, A., Kawai, T., Ishii, K.J., et al. (2006). Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA viruses. Nature 441, 101–105.

Kawai, T., Takahashi, K., Sato, S., Coban, C., Kumar, H., Kato, H., Ishii, K.J., Takeuchi, O., and Akira, S. (2005). IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. Nat. Immunol. 6, 981–988.

Kischkel, F.C., Lawrence, D.A., Chuntharapai, A., Schow, P., Kim, K.J., and Ashkenazi, A. (2000). Apo2L/TRAIL-dependent recruitment of endogenous FADD and caspase-8 to death receptors 4 and 5. Immunity 12, 611–620.

Kumar, H., Kawai, T., Kato, H., Sato, S., Takahashi, K., Coban, C., Yama moto, M., Uematsu, S., Ishii, K.J., Takeuchi, O., et al. (2006). Essential role of IPS-1 in innate immune responses against RNA viruses. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1795–1803.

Li, C., Ni, C.Z., Havert, M.L., Cabezas, E., He, J., Kaiser, D., Reed, J.C., Satterthwait, A.C., Cheng, G., and Ely, K.R. (2002). Downstream regulator TANK binds to the CD40 recognition site on TRAF3. Structure 10, 403–411.

Li, X.D., Sun, L., Seth, R.B., Pineda, G., and Chen, Z.J. (2005). Hepatitis C virus protease NS3/4A cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein off the mitochondria to evade innate immunity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 17717–17722.


Majumder, M., Ghosh, A.K., Steele, R., Zhou, X.Y., Phillips, N.J., Ray, R., and Ray, R.B. (2002). Hepatitis C virus NS5A protein impairs TNF-mediated hepatic apoptosis, but not by an anti-FAS antibody, in transgenic mice. Virology 294, 94–105.

Meylan, E., Martinon, F., Thome, M., Gschwendt, M., and Tschopp, J. (2002). RIP4 (DIK/PKK), a novel member of the RIP kinase family, activates NF-kappa B and is processed during apoptosis. EMBO Rep. 3, 1201–1208.

Meylan, E., Burns, K., Hofmann, K., Blancheteau, V., Martinon, F., Kelliher, M., and Tschopp, J. (2004). RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-kappa B activation. Nat. Immunol. 5, 503–507.

Meylan, E., Curran, J., Hofmann, K., Moradpour, D., Binder, M., Bartenschl ager, R., and Tschopp, J. (2005). Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. Nature 437, 1167–1172.

Meylan, E., and Tschopp, J. (2006). Toll-like receptors and RNA helicases: Two parallel ways to trigger antiviral responses. Mol. Cell 22, 561–569.

Micheau, O., and Tschopp, J. (2003). Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes. Cell 114, 181–190.

Miyasaka, Y., Enomoto, N., Kurosaki, M., Sakamoto, N., Kanazawa, N., Kohashi, T., Ueda, E., Maekawa, S., Watanabe, H., Izumi, N., et al. (2003). Hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 5A inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated apoptosis in Huh7 cells. J. Infect. Dis. 188, 1537–1544.

Pichlmair, A., Schulz, O., Tan, C.P., Naslund, T.I., Liljestrom, P., Weber, F., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2006). RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA bearing 5′-phosphates. Science 314, 997–1001.

Pomerantz, J.L., and Baltimore, D. (1999). NF-kappaB activation by a signaling complex containing TRAF2, TANK and TBK1, a novel IKK-related kinase. EMBO J. 18, 6694–6704.

Rothe, M., Xiong, J., Shu, H.B., Williamson, K., Goddard, A., and Goeddel, D.V. (1996). I-TRAF is a novel TRAF-interacting protein that regulates TRAF-mediated signal transduction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 8241–8246.

Saha, S.K., Pietras, E.M., He, J.Q., Kang, J.R., Liu, S.Y., Oganesyan, G., Shahangian, A., Zarnegar, B., Shiba, T.L., Wang, Y., et al. (2006). Regulation of antiviral responses by a direct and specific interaction between TRAF3 and Cardif. EMBO J. 25, 3257–3263.

Seth, R.B., Sun, L., Ea, C.K., and Chen, Z.J. (2005). Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF 3. Cell 122, 669–682.

Sharma, S., tenOever, B.R., Grandvaux, N., Zhou, G.P., Lin, R., and Hiscott, J. (2003). Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. Science 300, 1148–1151.

Stanger, B.Z., Leder, P., Lee, T.H., Kim, E., and Seed, B. (1995). RIP: A novel protein containing a death domain that interacts with Fas/APO-1 (CD95) in yeast and causes cell death. Cell 81, 513–523.

Takahashi, K., Kawai, T., Kumar, H., Sato, S., Yonehara, S., and Akira, S. (2006). Roles of caspase-8 and caspase-10 in innate immune responses to double-stranded RNA. J. Immunol. 176, 4520–4524.

Takaoka, A., Wang, Z., Choi, M.K., Yanai, H., Negishi, H., Ban, T., Lu, Y., Miyagishi, M., Kodama, T., Honda, K., et al. (2007). DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune response. Nature 448, 501–505.

Theofilopoulos, A.N., Baccala, R., Beutler, B., and Kono, D.H. (2005). Type I interferons (alpha/beta) in immunity and autoimmunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23, 307–336.

Thome, M., Hofmann, K., Burns, K., Martinon, F., Bodmer, J.L., Mattmann, C., and Tschopp, J. (1998). Identification of CARDIAK, a RIP-like kinase that associates with caspase-1. Curr. Biol. 8, 885–888.

Thome, M., Martinon, F., Hofmann, K., Rubio, V., Steiner, V., Schneider, P., Mattmann, C., and Tschopp, J. (1999). Equine herpesvirus-2 E10 gene product, but not its cellular homologue, activates NF-kappaB transcription factor and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 9962–9968.

Xu, L.G., Wang, Y.Y., Han, K.J., Li, L.Y., Zhai, Z., and Shu, H.B. (2005). VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling. Mol. Cell 19, 727–740.

**Immunity**

Antiviral Role of TRADD Protein

Yoneyama, M., Kikuchi, M., Natsukawa, T., Shinobu, N., Imaizumi, T., Miyagishi, M., Taira, K., Akira, S., and Fujita, T. (2004). The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses. Nat. Immunol. 5, 730–737.

Zheng, L., Bidere, N., Staudt, D., Cubre, A., Orenstein, J., Chan, F.K., and Lenardo, M. (2006). Competitive control of independent programs of tumor necrosis factor receptor-induced cell death by TRADD and RIP1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 26, 3505–3513.

Zhu, N., Ware, C.F., and Lai, M.M. (2001). Hepatitis C virus core protein enhances FADD-mediated apoptosis and suppresses TRADD signaling of tumor necrosis factor receptor. Virology 283, 178–187.
