
Clinical Cancer Research

Mechanisms of Acquired Resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

Jeffrey A. Engelman and Pasii A. Jänne

Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:2895-2899.

Updated version Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/10/2895

Cited Articles This article cites by 44 articles, 27 of which you can access for free at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/10/2895.full.html#ref-list-1

Citing articles This article has been cited by 69 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/14/10/2895.full.html#related-urls

E-mail alerts Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Subscriptions Department at pubs@aacr.org.

Permissions To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

# Molecular Pathways

## Mechanisms of Acquired Resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

Jeffrey A. Engelman¹ and Pasi A. Jänne²,³

### Abstract

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib are effective therapies for non–small cell lung cancer patients whose tumors harbor somatic mutations in *EGFR*. All patients, however, ultimately develop resistance to these agents. Thus, there is a great need to understand how patients become resistant to develop effective therapies for these cancers. Studies over the last few years have identified two different EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance mechanisms, a secondary mutation in *EGFR*, *EGFR* 790M, and amplification of the *MET* oncogene. These findings have led to clinical trials using newly designed targeted therapies that can overcome these resistance mechanisms and have shown promise in laboratory studies. Ongoing research efforts will likely continue to identify additional resistance mechanisms, and these findings will hopefully translate into effective therapies for non–small cell lung cancer patients.

### Background

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) gefitinib and erlotinib have been developed as therapeutic agents for non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment (1, 2, 3). Both agents were found to have evidence of antitumor activity in phase II clinical trials but only erlotinib was associated with a survival benefit in a phase III clinical trial (4, 5). Although the benefits of erlotinib were statistically significant, they were clinically modest (median survival of 6.7 months versus 4.7 months for erlotinib and placebo, respectively; \(P < 0.0001\)) and have prompted studies to identify those patients most likely to benefit from erlotinib therapy. In clinical studies, gefitinib and erlotinib are most effective in never-smokers with NSCLC (4, 5).

Subsequent molecular studies identified somatic mutations in *EGFR* as a major determinant underlying the dramatic clinical responses following treatment with gefitinib (6, 7) and erlotinib (8). Somatic mutations in *EGFR* are found in 10% to 15% of Caucasian and in 30% to 40% of Asian NSCLC patients. *EGFR* mutations are present more frequently in never-smokers, females, those with adenocarcinoma, and in patients of East Asian ethnicity (9). These are the same groups of patients previously clinically identified as most likely to benefit from gefitinib or erlotinib (1, 2, 4). *EGFR* mutations associated with increased response to gefitinib and erlotinib are found in the first four exons (exons 18-21) of the tyrosine kinase domain of *EGFR*. The mutations reported thus far have been predominantly of two types: 45% are deletions involving at least 12 nucleotides in exon 19, eliminating a conserved LREA motif, and 40% are single point mutations in exon 21 (L858R). The exon 19 deletions and L858R are the most common *EGFR* mutations and are also the ones that have been most extensively evaluated to date and closely linked to the sensitivity of gefitinib and erlotinib (reviewed in ref. 10).

Six prospective clinical trials treating chemotherapy-naive patients with *EGFR* mutations with gefitinib or erlotinib have been reported to date (11–16). Cumulatively, these studies have prospectively identified and treated more than 200 patients with *EGFR* mutations. Together, they show radiographic response rates ranging from 55% to 82% and median times to progression of 9.4 to 13.3 months in the patients treated with gefitinib and erlotinib. These outcomes are 3- to 4-fold greater than historically observed with platin-based chemotherapy (20% to 30% and 3-4 months, respectively) for advanced NSCLC (17). Despite the dramatic efficacy of erlotinib and gefitinib in NSCLC patients with *EGFR* mutations, however, all patients will ultimately develop resistance (i.e., acquired resistance) to these agents. It is critical to understand the mechanisms of acquired resistance because it may lead to the development of effective therapies for patients who clinically develop acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib.

Clinical studies have also shown that a small population of patients with amplified, wild-type *EGFR* lung cancers also benefit from gefitinib or erlotinib (18, 19). In addition, a significant portion of NSCLC patients develops stable disease after treatment with *EGFR* inhibitors (20). The mechanism(s)

---

**Authors' Affiliations:**  
¹Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center;  
²Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology Dana-Farber Cancer Institute;  
³Departments of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts  

Received 12/4/07; revised 1/11/08; accepted 1/11/08.  

**Grant support:** NIH grant 1R01CA114465-01 and Hazel and Sam Bellin Research Fund for Thoracic Oncology (P.A. Jänne), National Cancer Institute K08CA120060-01 (J.A. Engelman), and American Cancer Society RSG-06-102-01-CCE (P.A. Jänne and J.A. Engelman).  

**Requests for reprints:** Pasí A. Jänne, Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, D820A, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 617-632-6036; Fax: 617-582-7683; E-mail: pjanne@partners.org.  

© 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.  

doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-2248

www.aacrjournals.org 2895 Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(10) May 15, 2008

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on June 4, 2014. © 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.

of underlying sensitivity to gefitinib or erlotinib, however, are not well characterized in this patient population. Acquired resistance mechanisms have been studied most extensively in EGFR mutant cancers and will be the subject of this review. It remains to be determined if these resistance mechanisms are shared with wild-type EGFR cancers.

### EGFR Mutant Tumors Are Addicted to EGFR Signaling

To understand how EGFR mutant NSCLCs can develop resistance to EGFR TKIs, it is first critical to understand the normal signaling mechanisms in these tumors. EGFR mutant tumors are dependent or “addicted” to EGFR signaling for their growth and survival (21–23). Studies to date suggest that, in these cancers, several (if not all) of the critical downstream signaling pathways, including the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, signal transducers and activators of transcription, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 pathways, are solely controlled by EGFR. Thus, when the tumors are exposed to EGFR inhibitors, these intracellular pathways are turned off and the cancer cells undergo apoptosis (21, 22, 24, 25). In contrast, EGFR does not singularly regulate these pathways in most other lung cancers, and these cancers are impervious to EGFR inhibitors.

The detailed molecular events that lead to activation of these downstream signaling events are just beginning to be understood. This understanding facilitates the discovery of potential resistance mechanisms because cancers adopt novel ways of activating these pathways to circumvent the effects of EGFR inhibition (see below). EGFR is one of a family of four erbB family members. Two other family members, HER2 and erbB3, are highly implicated in promoting EGFR activation of downstream signaling. ErbB3 is a unique member of this family in that it is believed to be “kinase dead” (Fig. 1A). On heterodimerization with other erbB family members, however, ErbB3 is phosphorylated on tyrosines and serves as a scaffold to activate downstream signaling. In lung cancers that are sensitive to EGFR inhibitors, PI3K/Akt is activated by binding to phosphorylated erbB3 (26). In contrast, cancers that are not sensitive to EGFR inhibitors primarily use non-erbB3 mechanisms for activating PI3K (26). There are now several studies reporting a correlation between gefitinib sensitivity and erbB3 expression in NSCLC cell lines (25–27). In fact, erbB3 expression analysis identified patients that most benefited from EGFR inhibitors (28).

HER2 (erbB2) also seems to play a prominent role in EGFR mutant cancers. HER2 amplification, as determined by fluorescence *in situ* hybridization analysis, was identified as a positive predictor of response to EGFR TKIs (29). In a small study, the most powerful predictor of response was the presence of both HER2 amplification and an EGFR mutation (29). HER2 expression may increase EGFR recycling to the membrane and prevent its degradation. Furthermore, HER2 may increase signaling to erbB3 in an EGFR-dependent manner via lateral signaling (30).

It is also clear that EGFR activity regulates extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 signaling pathways as well in TKI-sensitive cancers. The detailed molecular mechanisms leading from EGFR kinase to extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 activation, however, remain to be elucidated. Similarly, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 seems to be active in

EGFR mutant cancers. Although a study found that EGFR kinase activity was not necessary for signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 tyrosine phosphorylation, it reported that EGFR kinase activity was necessary for its serine phosphorylation, a process often required for its full activation (31). In EGFR mutant cancers, it is clear that inhibition of EGFR turns off these downstream signaling events and, to become resistant, these cancers seem to find ways to maintain their activity.

#### Secondary EGFR Mutations

Two main mechanisms of acquired resistance have been identified. The first is a secondary EGFR mutation, T790M, that renders gefitinib and erlotinib ineffective inhibitors of EGFR kinase activity (Fig. 1B; refs. 32, 33). EGFR T790M has been detected both from tumors of EGFR mutant NSCLC patients who have developed clinical resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib and from *in vitro* gefitinib-resistant EGFR mutant cell lines (32–37). To date, the EGFR T790M mutation is found in ∼50% of tumors (24 of 48) from patients that have developed acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib (34–36). In one patient, another secondary EGFR mutation, D761Y, has also been reported (35).

The EGFR T790M mutation occurs in an analogous position to known resistance mutations to imatinib in other kinases (T315I in ABL, T674I in PDGFRA, and T670I in KIT; refs. 38–40). The conserved threonine residue among these different kinases, located near the kinase active site, is often referred to as the gatekeeper mutation. The exact mechanism through which T790M causes gefitinib/erlotinib resistance is not completely understood. In ABL, the T315I mutation causes a steric hindrance and causes imatinib binding (38, 41). Whether this same mechanism also occurs in EGFR T790M remains to be determined.

Cancers that become resistant to kinase inhibitors through a secondary mutation are still likely to be dependent on the activated kinase for their growth and survival. Thus, alternative strategies of inhibiting EGFR T790M may be therapeutically efficacious. This has prompted the preclinical and clinical development of second-generation kinase inhibitors (41). For EGFR, second-generation irreversible EGFR inhibitors have shown activity in gefitinib-resistant preclinical models of NSCLC containing EGFR T790M (42, 43). Irreversible inhibitors, including HKI-272 and PF00299804, are able to inhibit EGFR phosphorylation and lead to growth inhibition of NSCLC or Ba/F3 cell lines containing EGFR T790M (42, 43). These agents are also ATP mimetics similar to gefitinib and erlotinib but, unlike gefitinib or erlotinib, they covalently bind Cys-797 of EGFR. How the irreversible nature of these agents allows them to inhibit EGFR phosphorylation is unclear. It is possible that by covalently binding to EGFR, the local concentration of these agents increases substantially (compared with gefitinib or erlotinib, which is a reversible inhibitor), thus providing a means of inhibiting EGFR phosphorylation despite the presence of a T790M mutation.

#### Alternative Mechanisms for Activating Downstream Signaling

As mentioned previously, if an EGFR mutant cancer can maintain activity of downstream signaling pathways in the

presence of gefitinib or erlotinib, this may lead to resistance. Indeed, several preclinical studies have shown that continued activation of downstream signaling, especially the PI3K pathway, is sufficient to confer resistance to EGFR TKIs. Most, if not all, laboratory models of acquired resistance show

continued activation of the PI3K pathway despite TKI treatment (36, 37, 44, 45). Additionally, activation of PI3K/Akt signaling by an ectopically expressed p110α-activating mutant (PIK3CA) confers an EGFR mutant cancer resistant to TKIs (44). Similarly, in HER2-amplified breast cancers, the presence of an activating

Fig. 1. EGFR signaling in gefitinib/erlotinib–sensitive and gefitinib/erlotinib–resistant EGFR mutant NSCLCs. A, EGFR phosphorylates erbB3 to activate PI3K/Akt signaling in gefitinib/erlotinib–sensitive NSCLCs. In such cancers, following gefitinib/erlotinib treatment, EGFR, erbB3, and Akt phosphorylations are turned off. B, gefitinib/erlotinib are unable to inhibit EGFR phosphorylation in the presence of EGFR T790M. EGFR signaling persists in the presence of gefitinib/erlotinib, leading to persistent erbB3 and Akt phosphorylation. C, MET can also activate PI3K/Akt signaling through erbB3. In NSCLCs with MET amplification, gefitinib/erlotinib can still inhibit EGFR phosphorylation but not erbB3 phosphorylation. This leads to persistent activation of PI3K/Akt signaling via erbB3 in an EGFR-independent manner. D, other potential mechanisms of gefitinib/erlotinib resistance. These potential mechanisms include alternative ways of maintaining PI3K/Akt signaling, such as by an oncogenic PIK3CA or by other receptor tyrosine kinases that could activate PI3K/Akt signaling in an erbB3-independent fashion. In such cancers, gefitinib/erlotinib would be expected to inhibit EGFR and erbB3 phosphorylation but not Akt phosphorylation. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (Arteaga CL. HER3 and mutant EGFR meet MET. Nat Med 2007;13:675–7), copyright 2007.

www.aacrjournals.org 2897 Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(10) May 15, 2008

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on June 4, 2014. © 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
p110α mutation or PTEN loss predicts a lack of response to trastuzumab (46). Although loss of PTEN or acquisition of a PIK3CA mutation has not been identified as a mechanism of resistance in lung cancer specimens, these analogous findings and preclinical studies suggest that if a cancer can find a way to effectively activate PI3K independent of EGFR activity, it will become resistant to EGFR TKIs.

Recently, amplification of MET, a receptor tyrosine kinase, was identified as another acquired resistance mechanism (36). This was originally identified in the HCC827 cells (EGFR exon 19 mutation and amplified) that had been made resistant to gefitinib *in vitro*. Interestingly, MET causes resistance because it activates erbB3-dependent activation of PI3K (Fig. 1C). Furthermore, it was determined that MET signals through erbB3 in most MET-amplified cancers (36). This redundant activation of erbB3 permits the cells to transmit the same downstream signaling in the presence of EGFR inhibitors. Thus, concomitant inhibition of both EGFR and MET is required to kill the resistant cells. In the initial study, 22% (4 of 18) of NSCLCs with acquired resistance to gefitinib/erlotinib had MET amplification in the resistant specimens. It is interesting to speculate that MET amplification is a prevalent resistance mechanism because it activates PI3K signaling in the same way as EGFR, via erbB3.

EGFR T790M and MET amplification account for ~60% to 70% of all known causes of acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Thus, other mechanisms of acquired resistance are likely to be discovered. Based on the preclinical models to date, such mechanisms are likely to lead to maintenance of PI3K/Akt signaling in the presence of gefitinib/erlotinib. This could occur through erbB3 (such as for EGFR T790M or MET amplification) or by an erbB3-independent mechanism (Fig. 1D). It will be important to continue to study preclinical models and tumors from NSCLC patients that have developed gefitinib/erlotinib resistance to uncover novel resistance mechanisms.

resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib do not undergo repeated tumor biopsies at the time when their cancer develops resistance. This is critical in that the therapeutic strategy aimed at overcoming resistance may not be effective in all resistant patients. For example, irreversible EGFR inhibitors are not effective in preclinical models of gefitinib resistance that are mediated by *MET* amplification (43). A second challenge is that, unlike in preclinical models that focus on single mechanisms of resistance, multiple mechanisms of resistance can occur concurrently in the same patient. Both *MET* amplification and *EGFR* T790M have been detected in the same resistant tumor specimen (36, 49). In addition, they have been found to occur independently in different metastatic sites in the same patient (36). Thus, a therapeutic strategy aimed solely at inhibiting *EGFR* T790M or *MET* amplification may not be very effective or may lead only to regression of a subset of metastases that contains the particular mechanism of resistance. A more comprehensive and potentially effective strategy may be a combination of an irreversible EGFR and a *MET* kinase inhibitor. At present, there are no ongoing clinical trials combining these classes of agents. Alternatively, strategies such as Hsp90 inhibitors may also be effective as both EGFR and *MET* are known Hsp90 client proteins (47, 50). A third challenge relates to the biological definition and detection of resistance mechanisms. As most *EGFR* mutant NSCLCs also contain a concurrent copy gain at the *EGFR* locus, the *EGFR* T790M mutation can sometimes be present as a minor allele and yet be sufficient to cause drug resistance (18, 44). In such cases, *EGFR* T790M may go undetected by conventional sequencing techniques and more sensitive mutation detection methods are necessary for accurate identification of *EGFR* T790M (44). Similarly, there are challenges with the detection of *MET* amplification. The definition of what constitutes clinically significant *MET* amplification (i.e., that causes gefitinib/erlotinib resistance) is also not currently well defined. This too will be important in deciding on which patients should be treated with *MET* kinase inhibitors for their gefitinib/erlotinib-resistant NSCLC.

Gefitinib and erlotinib are effective therapies for patients with *EGFR* mutant NSCLC (11–16). It will continue to be important to identify and study the mechanisms of resistance that develop to these agents as a means of rationally designing the next-generation clinical studies.

### Clinical Translation Advances

Several clinical trials are under way, aimed at inhibiting known resistance mechanisms in NSCLC patients that have clinically developed acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Ongoing trials are evaluating irreversible EGFR inhibitors, the combination of EGFR and *MET* kinase inhibitors, or Hsp90 inhibitors as strategies to overcome acquired resistance in NSCLC patients (36, 42, 43, 47, 48). There are several challenges in translating the preclinical studies into effective clinical therapies, however. The first challenge is accurately identifying which patients have which mechanism of resistance. The vast majority of NSCLC patients who develop acquired

### Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

P.A. Jänne has received commercial research support from Pfizer, has consulted with AstraZeneca, Roche and Boehringer Ingelheim, and received royalties from Genzyme and is part of a pending patent application on *EGFR* mutations. J. A. Engleman has consulted with Roche.

### References

1. Kris MG, Natale RB, Herbst RS, et al. Efficacy of gefitinib, an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase, in symptomatic patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA 2003;290:2149–58.
2. Fukuoka M, Yano S, Giaccone G, et al. Multi-institutional randomized phase II trial of gefitinib for previously treated patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:2237–46.
3. Perez-Soler R, Chachoua A, Hammond LA, et al. Determinants of tumor response and survival with erlotinib in patients with non–small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:3238–47.
4. Shepherd FA, Pereira J, Ciuleanu TE, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of erlotinib in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) following failure of 1st line or 2nd line chemotherapy. A National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group (NCIC CTG) trial [abstract 7022]. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2004;23.
5. Thatcher N, Chang A, Parikh P, et al. Gefitinib plus best supportive care in previously treated patients with refractory advanced non-small-cell lung cancer:
results from a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicentre study (Iressa Survival Evaluation in Lung Cancer). Lancet 2005;366:1527–37.
6. Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, et al. *EGFR* mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy. Science 2004;304:1497–500.
7. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2129–39.
8. Pao W, Miller V, Zakowski M, et al. *EGF* receptor gene mutations are common in lung cancers from “never

Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(10) May 15, 2008 2898 www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on June 4, 2014. © 2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
smokers" and are associated with sensitivity of tumors
to gefitinib and erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2004;101:13306–11.

9. Shigematsu H, Lin L, Takahashi T, et al. Clinical and
biological features associated with epidermal growth
factor receptor gene mutations in lung cancers. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2005;97:339–46.

10. Janne PA, Engelman JA, Johnson BE. Epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in non-small-cell
lung cancer: implications for treatment and tumor bi-
ology. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:3227–34.

11. Inoue A, Suzuki T, Fukuhara T, et al. Prospective
phase II study of gefitinib for chemotherapy-naive
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
with epidermal growth factor receptor gene muta-
tions. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:3340–6.

12. Paz-Ares L, Sanchez JM, García-Velasco A, et al. A
prospective phase II trial of erlotinib in advanced non-
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (p) with
mutations in the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) [abstract
7020]. J Clin Oncol 2006;24.

13. Okamoto I, Kashii T, Urata Y, et al. EGFR mutation-
based phase II multicenter trial of gefitinib in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (pts):
results of West Japan Thoracic Oncology Group trial
(WJTOG 0403) [abstract 7073]. J Clin Oncol 2006;24.

14. Sutani A, Nagai Y, Udagawa K, et al. Phase II study
of gefitinib for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) gene mutations detected by PNA-LNA PCR
[abstract 7076]. J Clin Oncol 2006;24.

15. Morikawa N, Inoue A, Suzuki T, et al. Prospective
analysis of the epidermal growth factor receptor
gene mutations in non-small cell lung cancer in Japan
[abstract 7077]. J Clin Oncol 2006;24.

16. Sequist LV, Martins RG, Spiegel D, et al. iTARGET: a
phase II trial to assess the response to gefitinib in epi-
dermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutated non-
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors. J Clin Oncol
2007 ASCO Annu Meet Proc 2007;25; No18s (June
20 Supplement): 7504.

17. Schiller JH, Harrington D, Belani CP, et al. Comparison
of four chemotherapy regimens for advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2002;346:92–8.

18. Cappuzzo F, Hirsch FR, Rossi E, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor gene and protein and gefitinib
sensitivity in non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2005;97:643–55.

19. Tsao MS, Sakurada A, Cutz JC, et al. Erlotinib in lung
cancer: molecular and clinical predictors of outcome.
N Engl J Med 2005;353:133–44.

20. Shepherd FA, Rodrigues Pereira J, Ciuleanu T, et al.
Erlotinib in previously treated non-small-cell lung can-
cer. N Engl J Med 2005;353:123–32.

21. Sordella R, Bell DW, Haber DA, Settleman J. Gefiti-
nib-sensitizing EGFR mutations in lung cancer activate
anti-apoptotic pathways. Science 2004;305:1163–7.

22. Tracy S, Mukohara T, Hansen M, et al. Gefitinib indu-
ces apoptosis in the EGFRIL858R non-small-cell lung
cancer cell line H3255. Cancer Res 2004;64:7241–4.

23. Weinstein IB. Cancer. Addiction to oncogenes—the
Achilles heal of cancer. Science 2002;297:63–4.

24. Mukohara T, Engelman JA, Hanna NH, et al. Differential effects of gefitinib and cetuximab on non-
small-cell lung cancers bearing epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:
1185–94.

25. Amann J, Kalyankrishna S, Massion PP, et al. Aber-
rant epidermal growth factor receptor signaling and
enhanced sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer.
Cancer Res 2005;65:226–35.

26. Engelman JA, Janne PA, Mermel C, et al. ErbB-3
mediates phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity in gefiti-
nib-sensitive non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:3788–93.

27. Ono M, Hirata A, Kometani T, et al. Sensitivity to
gefitinib (Iressa, ZD1839) in non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines correlates with dependence on the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and EGF receptor/Akt
pathway for proliferation. Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:
465–72.

28. Fujimoto N, Wislez M, Zhang J, et al. High expres-
sion of ErbB family members and their ligands in lung
adenocarcinomas that are sensitive to inhibition of
epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Res 2005;
65:11478–85.

29. Cappuzzo F, Varella-Garcia M, Shigematsu H, et al. Increased HER2 gene copy number is associated with
response to gefitinib therapy in epidermal growth
factor receptor-positive non-small-cell lung cancer
patients. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:5007–18.

30. Engelman JA, Cantley LC. The role of the ErbB fam-
ily members in non-small cell lung cancers sensitive to
epidermal growth factor receptor kinase inhibitors.
Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:4372–6s.

31. Alvarez JV, Greulich H, Sellers WR, Meyerson M,
Frank DA. Signal transducer and activator of tran-
scription 3 is required for the oncogenic effects of
non-small-cell lung cancer-associated mutations of
the epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Res
2006;66:3162–8.

32. Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, et al. EGFR
mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung cancer
to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2005;352:786–92.

33. Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, et al. Acquired resis-
tance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib
is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR ki-
nase domain. PLoS Med 2005;2:1–11.

34. Kosaka T, Yatabe Y, Endoh H, et al. Analysis of epi-
dermal growth factor receptor gene mutation in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer and acquired
resistance to gefitinib. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:
5764–9.

35. Balak MN, Gong Y, Riely GJ, et al. Novel D761Y and
common secondary T790M mutations in epidermal
growth factor receptor-mutant lung adenocarcinomas
with acquired resistance to kinase inhibitors. Clin
Cancer Res 2006;12:6494–501.

36. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in
lung cancer by activating ERBB3 Signaling. Science
2007;316:1039–43.

37. Ogino A, Kitao H, Hirano S, et al. Emergence of
epidermal growth factor receptor T790M mutation

during chronic exposure to gefitinib in a non small
cell lung cancer cell line. Cancer Res 2007;67:
7807–14.

38. Shah NP, Nicoll JM, Nagar B, et al. Multiple BCR-
ABL kinase domain mutations confer polyclonal resis-
tance to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib (STI571)
in chronic phase and blast crisis chronic myeloid leu-
kemia. Cancer Cell 2002;2:117–25.

39. Tamborini E, Bonadiman L, Greco A, et al. A new
mutation in the KIT ATP pocket causes acquired resis-
tance to imatinib in a gastrointestinal stromal tumor
patient. Gastroenterology 2004;127:294–9.

40. Cools J, DeAngelo DJ, Gotlib J, et al. A tyrosine
kinase created by fusion of the PDGFRA and FIP1L1
genes as a therapeutic target of imatinib in idiopathic
hypereosinophilic syndrome. N Engl J Med 2003;348:
1201–14.

41. Weisberg E, Manley PW, Cowan-Jacob SW,
Hochhaus A, Griffin JD. Second generation inhibitors
of BCR-ABL for the treatment of imatinib-resistant
chronic myeloid leukemia. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:
345–56.

42. Kwak EL, Sordella R, Bell DW, et al. Irreversible
inhibitors of the EGF receptor may circumvent
acquired resistance to gefitinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2005;102:7665–70.

43. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Gale C-M, et al. PF00299804, an irreversible pan-ERBB inhibitor,
is effective in lung cancer models with EGFR and
ERBB2 mutations that are resistant to gefitinib. Cancer
Res 2008;67:11924–32.

44. Engelman JA, Mukohara T, Zejnullahu K, et al. Allelic
dilution obscures detection of a biologically significant
resistance mutation in EGFR-amplified lung cancer.
J Clin Invest 2006;116:2695–706.

45. Yamasaki F, Johansen MJ, Zhang D, et al. Acquired
resistance to erlotinib in A-431 epidermoid cancer
cells requires down-regulation of MMAC1/PTEN and
up-regulation of phosphorylated Akt. Cancer Res
2007;67:5779–88.

46. Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, et al. A func-
tional genetic approach identifies the PI3K pathway as
a major determinant of trastuzumab resistance in
breast cancer. Cancer Cell 2007;12:395–402.

47. Shimamura T, Lowell AM, Engelman JA, Shapiro GI. Epidermal growth factor receptors harboring kinase
domain mutations associate with the heat shock pro-
tein 90 chaperone and are destabilized following ex-
posure to geldanamycins. Cancer Res 2005;65:
6401–8.

48. Regales L, Balak MN, Gong Y, et al. Development
of new mouse lung tumor models expressing EGFR
T790M mutants associated with clinical resistance
to kinase inhibitors. PLoS ONE 2007;2:e810.

49. Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, et al. MET amplifica-
tion occurs with or without T790M mutations in
EGFR mutant lung tumors with acquired resistance
to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2007;104:20932–7.

50. Maulik G, Kijima T, Ma PC, et al. Modulation of
the c-Met/hepatocyte growth factor pathway in
small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:
620–7.
