
Review article

Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy: possible connections and treatments

Graziella Castellano, Flora Affuso, Pasquale Di Conza and Serafino Fazio

---

Myocarditis is an inflammatory heart muscle disease, resulting from various etiologies, both noninfectious and infectious, which may be associated or not with cardiac dysfunction. Its course is unpredictable: it may spontaneously resolve or evolve into dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure. A possible connection between myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy has long been postulated, but the intimate mechanisms linking these two conditions are still poorly understood. Viral myocarditis could induce a dilated cardiomyopathy through viral persistence and/or by triggering an autoimmune process. Understanding the mechanisms underlying the relationship between myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy will help in identifying an effective strategy of treatment aimed to stop and prevent cardiac damage. Specifically, we need to (a) evaluate the potential role of autoantibodies in disease prevention and progression, and understand their importance as markers of disease progression; (b) clarify the role of immunoregulation in exacerbating the disease.

*J Cardiovasc Med* 9:666–671 © 2008 Italian Federation of Cardiology.

Journal of Cardiovascular Medicine 2008, 9:666–671

Keywords: antigenic mimicry, autoimmunity, dilated cardiomyopathy, myocarditis

Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy

Correspondence to Professor Serafino Fazio MD, Department of Internal Medicine, University Federico II, Via S. Panzini, 5, 80131 Naples, Italy  
Tel: +39 081 7463737; e-mail: fazio@unina.it

Received 5 January 2007 Revised 16 October 2007  
Accepted 30 October 2007

---

### Introduction

Myocarditis is an inflammatory heart muscle disease associated or not with impaired cardiac function. It results from various etiologies, both noninfectious and infectious, but the most common etiology recognizes enteroviruses (coxsakievirus B3 and parvovirus B19) (Table 1) [1–11]. The clinical manifestations of myocarditis are varied: flu-like syndrome, arrhythmias, heart failure, chest pain or no symptoms. This large spectrum of clinical forms depends on several factors, such as genetic determinants of infective agents and host age, sex and immunocompetence.

The course of the viral myocarditis is unpredictable: it may evolve either into a chronic process or spontaneously resolve (Fig. 1) [12,13].

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by cardiac dilation and impaired contraction of the left ventricle or both ventricles, which clinically progresses to heart failure [1,12,14]. DCM can result from idiopathic, genetic, viral, immune or toxic etiology.

Although several authors assume that myocarditis and DCM could be two phases of the same disease, the mechanisms underlying a possible cause-and-effect relationship are largely unknown [15,16]. Viral myocarditis may evolve into DCM, even in the absence of viral persistence in the myocardium, by the activation of an autoimmune cascade, which involves both humoral and cellular responses [1]. Viral genomes and multiple viral infections of the myocardium are frequent findings in endomyocardial biopsies (EMBs) of patients with idiopathic systolic left ventricular dysfunction [5,12,17]. Kuhl *et al.* [17] enrolled 245 consecutive patients with idiopathic left ventricular dysfunction and proved that in 67.4% of these patients viral genomes could be amplified by polymerase chain reaction on EMBs: enterovirus in 9.4%, adenovirus in 1.6%, parvovirus B19 in 51.4%, human herpesvirus-6 in 21.6%, Epstein-Barr virus in 2%, human cytomegalovirus in 0.8% and multiple infections in 27.3% of cases.

### Mechanisms of cardiac injury in myocarditis

During the acute phase, the viral infection generally produces limited lesions of myocardial tissue, with a large heterogeneity of clinical features, from asymptomatic cases to sudden death from life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias. During the chronic phase, the persistence of the infection and/or the activation of the immune system cause more severe myocardial damage through direct and/or indirect mechanisms [2,9,18,19]. Specifically, viral proteases may directly alter cytoskeleton connections with extracellular matrix, thereby leading to myocyte reciprocal shift and ventricular dilatation. In addition, viral persistence may trigger adverse immune responses which, in turn, can aggravate myocyte damage resulting in chronic heart failure (CHF) [20]. Various

1558-2027 © 2008 Italian Federation of Cardiology

Copyright © Italian Federation of Cardiology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy Castellano et al. 667

The enteroviral protease-2A reduces contractile force and increases cellular permeability in myocardocytes by cleaving dystrophin [25]. Therefore, it seems clear that alterations of the contractile proteins, such as dystrophin, can potentially play an important role in the pathogenesis of postmyocarditis DCM [26,27].

Autoimmunity: mimicry and break of immunotolerance
The autoimmune response plays a key role in the progression of cardiac damage after viral myocarditis [3,14,28,29]. Infections cause a nonspecific facilitating effect in the induction of cardiac autoimmunity. The release of autoantigens after cellular damage and the activation of myocardial dendritic cells may disrupt immunotolerance and induce autoimmune myocarditis [1,12]. An additional postinfection autoimmune mechanism, demonstrated both in animal models and in humans, is the antigenic mimicry between myocardocytes and nonself-antigens [8,29]. Antibodies versus nonself-antigens cross-react with self-antigens causing chronic cardiac injury. The finding of amino acid sequences common to coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) in cardiac actin, myosin and heat-shock protein 60 of rats [4,14,29–33] is strongly supportive of this concept.

Circulating autoantibodies in patients affected by myocarditis and idiopathic DCM recognize the following epitopes of myosin heavy chain α and β isoforms; mitochondrial antigens; M₂ muscarinic receptors and β₁ adrenergic receptors [18,29,34,35]. The presence of antimyosin antibodies in patients with myocarditis is consistent with an autoimmune pathogenesis of cardiomyopathy [4,19,32]. Several studies [36,37] in animals have shown that immunization with α-myosin or α-myosin peptides can cause autoimmune myocarditis that shows the same histological aspects as a chronic viral myocarditis in humans. Autoantibodies against β₁ adrenergic receptors may activate or inhibit transduction of the intracellular sympathetic signal, thereby affecting chronotropy and inotropy. Markers of autoimmunity in patients with impaired cardiac function secondary to myocarditis are as follows: family aggregation; abnormal human leucocyte antigen II (HLA-II) expression on endothelial cells; mild but significant association with HLA-DR4 and autoantibodies in about 30% of patients with myocarditis and DCM [38].

Cell-mediated immune response
T cells play an important role in the pathogenesis of virus-induced chronic myocarditis [20]. The CD4+ population (T-helper lymphocytes) is a marker of both myocarditis progression and cardiac dysfunction. The CD8+ population (cytotoxic T lymphocytes) can directly damage and destroy cardiomyocytes through the granzyme/perforin system and the Fas ligand pathway [34]. Although CD4+ T cells seem to be critical for the development of autoimmune myocarditis, the role

Table 1 Myocarditis-inducing agents

| Aetiology          |                                                                                                                                         |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Infectious agents  | Adenovirus, coxsakievirus, parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV-1, orthomyxovirus, coxiella, haemophilus, mycoplasma, borrelia, leptospira, Toxoplasma gondii, Trypanosoma cruzi, leishmania, entamoeba, trichinella, histoplasma, nocardia |
| Toxic agents       | Amphetamines, anthracyclines, catecholamines, cocaine, IL-2, arsenicals, cyclophosphamide, barbiturates, antihypertensives                                                                                 |
| Systemic diseases   | Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, Kawasaki disease, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, cardiac rejection, giant-cell myocarditis, peripartum myocarditis                                              |
| Hypersensitivity    | Hydrochlorothiazide, methyl dopa, sulfadiazine, antibiotic (penicillin, streptomycin, tetracyclines)                                                                                                   |

immune mechanisms are involved in the inflammatory damage to the myocardium: activation of mononuclear cells, B and T lymphocytes, production of proinflammatory cytokines, release of toxic oxygen species and increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases. Matrix metalloproteinases weaken the structure of the myocardium and allow the inflammatory cells, attracted by virus, to infiltrate the myocardium, thereby contributing significantly to the development of heart failure [4,21].

Direct cytopathic effect
DCM is frequently linked to dystrophin gene mutations. Patients with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy and mice knocked out for the dystrophin gene are affected by DCM [22–24].

Fig. 1


Viral infection


Fulminating myocarditis


Myocarditis


Absence of virus


Presence of the virus


Recovery


Autoimmune
chronic
myocarditis


Chronic
viral
myocarditis


Dilated
Cardiomyopathy


Flowchart showing course of the viral myocarditis. Viral infection can cause either fulminant myocarditis or chronic myocarditis. In the absence of virus, myocarditis may resolve or trigger a cardiac autoimmune response that may progress to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). In the case of viral persistence, myocarditis may directly induce a dilated cardiomyopathy, or indirectly either through development of a chronic viral myocarditis or by triggering a cardiac chronic autoimmune process.

Copyright © Italian Federation of Cardiology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

of CD8+ T cells is less clear. CD4+ T cells can be divided into T-helper (Th)-1 and Th-2 subtypes, which are cross-regulated. An inflammatory Th-1 type immune response is responsible for autoimmune pathogenicity, whereas Th-2 type response inhibits disease development. Myocarditis is more severe when Th-1 subtype is dominant, rather than when Th-2 subtype prevails. Both Th-1 and Th-2 CD4+ T cells, however, contribute to immune-mediated heart disease [38]. Additional studies are needed to clarify the relation between Th-1 and Th-2 responses and whether CD4+ T cells have a direct role in cardiac damage.

**Role of proinflammatory cytokines**

Cytokines or growth factors are required to propagate and magnify the immune response [1, 13, 20, 39–44]. Cytokines recruit cells to the inflammatory area and stimulate cell division, proliferation, and differentiation. They, however, may also induce contractile dysfunction, uncouple myocardial β-adrenergic receptors and cause endothelial dysfunction. Studies [44] carried out in patients with CHF have shown elevated plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-6. As the increase in such cytokines is not balanced by a concomitant rise of anti-inflammatory mediators (transforming growth factor β, IL-10, IL-1 receptor antagonist and soluble TNF receptors), a condition of imbalance towards a proinflammatory pattern in the cytokine network prevails [43, 44].

In-vitro studies on myocytes have shown that TNF-α stimulates growth and protects myocardial cells from hypoxia [45, 46]. It has, however, been also reported that TNF-α mediates negative inotropic effects by calcium-dependent processes, impairment of β-adrenergic response and induces reversible myocardial dysfunction. Studies [47] on transgenic mice with cardiac-restricted overexpression of TNF-α have shown early hypertrophy, DCM and systolic dysfunction.

Normal myocardium does not release TNF-α, but it expresses both type 1 and 2 TNF-α receptors, whereas in CHF TNF-α increases and its receptors become downregulated [46, 47]. Furthermore, TNF-α activates myocardial dendritic cells that, presenting antigens on their surface, activate and exacerbate the autoimmune response [46, 47].

IL-1 is a key mediator in the cytokine network and controls important functions in the immune system during development, infection, inflammation, cell differentiation, tissue remodeling and cell death [20, 44]. In contrast, other cytokines can induce myocardial failure. Fas and its ligand (Fas-L) have recently been implicated in cardiomyocyte apoptosis and hence in progressive myocardial failure [44]. The role of Fas and Fas-L in CHF, however, has not yet been fully clarified.

Synergism between IL-1β and TNF-α results in impaired myocardial contractility [20, 41, 44].

Interestingly, whereas the enhanced stimulation of IL-6 and cardiotrophin-1 receptors on cardiomyocytes has been associated with ventricular hypertrophy, the knock-out of these receptors induces DCM and, in response to pressure overload, cardiomyocytes undergo apoptosis instead of compensatory hypertrophy [44].

Recently, it has been demonstrated that interferon-γ (IFN-γ), by promoting cell death and limiting the ongoing inflammatory process, protects against viral myocarditis [45]. IL-12 seems to be a key factor in the development of Th-1 responses and of T cell mediated autoimmune diseases [45].

In conclusion, a univocal behavior by the cytokine network cannot be demonstrated, but different cytokines can promote contrasting actions on myocardial function and structure. In the case of viral myocarditis, the cytokine network appears to be, however, unbalanced in favor of damage and progression towards DCM.

**Diagnosis and treatment**

The management and prognosis of cardiac dysfunction largely depends on the etiology of the disease. Despite a thorough evaluation, including history, physical examination, laboratory tests, echocardiography, coronary angiography and EMB, the etiology of DCM is identified in only 50% of patients [48]. The Dallas Criteria [49] shown below were proposed in 1986 to provide support to the diagnosis of myocarditis by using histopathology.

(1) Myocarditis: inflammatory infiltrate, associated myocyte necrosis or damage not characteristic of an ischemic event;

(2) Borderline myocarditis: less intense inflammatory infiltrate and no light microscopic evidence of myocyte destruction;

(3) No myocarditis.

Recent studies [48, 50], however, have shown that a histological diagnosis of myocarditis could be made only in 25% of patients when a single EMB was performed, whereas in more than 65% of patients five or more biopsies were needed to diagnose myocarditis according to the Dallas Criteria. Several facts suggest that the Dallas Criteria are no longer adequate (difficulty in getting an adequate sampling, variability and individual interpretation of the findings, interindividual variability in the activation of the immune response and changes induced by treatments). We should reconsider the criteria for the diagnosis of myocarditis. New criteria for diagnosis should include aspects of clinical presentation, histopathology, immunohistochemistry, reliable

Copyright © Italian Federation of Cardiology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

viral identification (the polymerase chain reaction), cardiac antibody assessment and imaging data.

Targets of myocarditis treatment are to prevent the cardiac damage and to stop or slow down the progression to DCM, to improve the prognosis of the disease.

### Immunosuppressive treatment

The enthusiasm that greeted the advent of immunosuppressive treatment was dampened by conflicting results [51–54]. In the Myocarditis Treatment Trial [52], survival and left ventricular function in patients affected by myocarditis did not improve after 6 months of treatment with immunosuppressive drugs (prednisolone and azathioprine). The trial, however, also involved patients with myocardial persistence of viruses; such patients could not clearly benefit from a therapy based on immunosuppressive drugs. Consistently with these findings, immunosuppressive treatment is now recommended only for the therapy of eosinophilic myocarditis, granulomatous myocarditis, giant-cell myocarditis and lymphocytic myocarditis associated with connective tissue disease or with the rejection of a transplanted heart [55].

Kuhl *et al.* [56] have reported that the cases of myocarditis with myocardial viral persistence are associated with greater functional impairment and worse prognosis than those without viral persistence. It has been found that IFN-β, subcutaneously administered at a weekly dose of 18 million units for 24 weeks to 22 patients with proven viral myocarditis and myocardial viral persistence, eliminated the myocardial viral genome and improved cardiac function and New York Health Association (NYHA) class [2].

A meta-analysis, performed on studies [57] involving patients with cardiac dysfunction secondary to myocarditis, compared the effects of immunosuppressive therapy in comparison to placebo. The end points were death from any cause, heart transplant for inflammatory cardiomyopathy, worsening of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and increase in end-diastolic volume. This study concluded that there was no evidence to suggest that immunosuppressive therapy could improve the survival of patients with cardiac dysfunction secondary to myocarditis.

More recently, Zimmermann *et al.* [58] have reported data related to the outcome of different treatments administered according to the findings of myocardial biopsies. The patients with DCM were divided into three groups: group A (48% of patients) with neither inflammation nor virus; group B (40%) with virus-negative inflammation; and group C (12%) with infection in the presence or absence of inflammation. Prednisolone in group B and IFN-β in group C were administered only in patients who showed no improvement or even

Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy Castellano *et al.* 669

exacerbation of symptoms, worsening in NYHA class and echocardiographic measurements after standard therapy for CHF according to American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines. The best outcome was observed in patients of group B, although these patients had the worst LVEF at the time of myocardial biopsy.

To date, there is no consensus about the therapy of DCM and cardiac dysfunction secondary to myocarditis; however, the data available suggest that only patients with virus-negative cardiomyopathy may benefit from immunosuppressive treatment and IFN may result in virus elimination and relevant clinical improvement in patients with virus-positive cardiomyopathy.

Major determinants of CHF progression are persistent neuroendocrine overactivation and activation of the inflammatory system (production and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, activation of complement, production of autoantibodies, overexpression of HLA-II complex molecules and adhesion molecules). Consequently, therapy, at the onset of the disease, should aim to attenuate the inflammatory state. Possible approaches might be intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), immunoadsorption or immunomodulation therapy.

#### Intravenous immunoglobulin

Gamma-globulins represent a natural anti-inflammatory and anti-injury response of the host to viral infection. The mechanisms by which IVIG modulates the immune system are not completely known. Several mechanisms have been proposed, that is Fc (fragment crystallizable of immunoglobulin) receptor blockade, neutralization of autoantibodies, modulation of cytokine activity and activation of an inhibitory Fc-receptor [44,46,59].

In the Intervention in Myocarditis and Acute Cardiomyopathy (IMAC) trial [46], LVEF did not improve in patients treated with high-doses of IVIG for 2 consecutive days, compared to placebo. In contrast, an additional trial [60] showed that LVEF increased and NYHA functional class improved in patients treated with IVIG for 6 months. The therapy with IVIG increased several anti-inflammatory peptides: IL-10 and the soluble receptors for IL-1 and TNF.

It is likely that, IVIG contributes to the restoration of the equilibrium in the cytokine network in CHF, with downregulation of inflammatory mediators combined with upregulation of anti-inflammatory ones.

#### Immunoadsorption and immunomodulation therapy

By immunoadsorption, it is possible to remove specific antibodies from the circulating plasma. It, however, remains to be established if the removal, for instance,

Copyright © Italian Federation of Cardiology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

of anti-β1-adrenoceptor antibodies is really beneficial [46].

Immunomodulation therapy (Celacade) consists of treating a sample of the patient’s blood (10 ml of whole citrated blood) *ex vivo* for 3 min at 42.5°C with a gaseous chemical oxidizing agent (14.5 μg/ml O₃ in medical oxygen) and ultraviolet light (wavelength, 253.7 nm). This procedure accelerates cell ‘senescence’. Soon after the 10 ml of blood manipulated are injected intramuscularly into the patient, circulating immune cells undergo apoptosis. Removal of apoptotic cells by the immune system stimulates a systemic anti-inflammatory response with downregulation of proinflammatory cytokine levels and upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines [46,61,62].

In a 6-month double-blind placebo-controlled trial, the 6-min walking test and LVEF did not differ in patients treated with Celacade in comparison to placebo. In contrast, compared to placebo, patients treated with Celacade showed an improvement in the NYHA grading of at least 1 class and in their quality of life (39% of Celacade-treated patients versus 24% of placebo-treated patients) [62]. Therefore, Celacade might be an effective adjunctive treatment. On the contrary, because of the absence of detrimental hemodynamic and other adverse effects, Celacade could be safely combined with standard therapies.

### Remarks and conclusions

Clarification of the physiopathological mechanisms underlying the relation between myocarditis and DCM is a prerequisite to specific and effective treatment of these conditions. For instance, a better understanding of the viral and immune mechanisms leading to acute inflammation will probably lead to more effective treatments of acute myocarditis. Until now immunosuppressive treatment, however, has failed to determine convincing clinical results, and therefore the therapeutic approach to symptomatic patients with left ventricular dysfunction is the standard treatment of heart failure.

Similarly, the steps involved in the progression from acute to chronic myocarditis and to DCM remain not clearly defined and they should be better understood to develop preventive treatments. Other obscure aspects remain the precipitating events that initiate myocarditis and the role of autoantigens in this phase; the role of autoantibodies in disease prevention and progression, and their possible utilization as markers of disease progression; and how immunoregulation works in modifying the disease intensity.

### References

1. Hjalmarson A, Fu M, Mobini R. Who are the enemies? Inflammation and autoimmune mechanisms. *Eur Heart J* 2002; 4 (Suppl G):27–32.
2. Pauschinger M, Chandrasekharan K, Noutsias M, Kuhl U, Schwimmbeck LP, Schultheiss HP. Viral heart disease: molecular diagnosis, clinical prognosis, and treatment strategies. *Med Microbiol Immunol (Berl)* 2004; 193:65–69.
3. Nakamura H, Kato T, Yamamura T, Yamamoto T, Umemoto S, Sekine T, *et al.* Characterization of T cell receptors beta chain of accumulating T cells in chronic ongoing myocarditis demonstrated by heterotopic cardiac transplantation in mice. *Jpn Circ J* 2001; 65:106–110.
4. Huber SA. Animal models of human disease. Autoimmunity in myocarditis: relevance of animal models. *Clin Immunol Immunopathol* 1997; 83:93–102.
5. Friman G. The incidence and epidemiology of myocarditis. *Eur Heart J* 1999; 20:1120–1125.
6. Higuchi ML, Benvenuti LA, Martins Reis M, Metzger M. Pathophysiology of the heart in Chagas’ disease: current status and new developments. *Cardiovasc Res* 2003; 60:96–107.
7. Pauschinger M, Doerner A, Kuehl U, Schwimmbeck PL, Poller W, Kandolf R, *et al.* Enteroviral RNA replication in the myocardium of patients with left ventricular dysfunction and clinically suspected myocarditis. *Circulation* 1999; 99:889–895.
8. Pauschinger M, Bowles NE, Fuentes-Garcia FJ, Pham V, Kuhl U, Schwimmbeck PL, *et al.* Detection of adenoviral genome in the myocardium of adult patients with idiopathic left ventricular dysfunction. *Circulation* 1999; 99:1348–1354.
9. Why HJ, Meany BT, Richardson PJ, Olsen EG, Bowles NE, Cunningham L, *et al.* Clinical and prognostic significance of detection of enteroviral RNA in the myocardium of patients with myocarditis or dilated cardiomyopathy. *Circulation* 1994; 89:2582–2589.
10. Kuhl U, Pauschinger M, Schwimmbeck PL, Seeberg B, Lober C, Noutsias M, *et al.* Parvovirus B19 infection mimicking acute myocardial infarction. *Circulation* 2003; 108:945–950.
11. Kandolf R, Sauter M, Aepinus C, Schnorr JJ, Selinka HC, Klingel K. Mechanisms and consequences of enterovirus persistence in cardiac myocytes and cells of the immune system. *Virus Res* 1999; 62: 149–158.
12. Calabrese F, Thiene G. Myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy: microbiological and molecular biological aspects. *Cardiovasc Res* 2003; 60:11–25.
13. Mason JW. Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy: an inflammatory link. *Cardiovasc Res* 2003; 60:5–10.
14. Takata S, Nakamura H, Umemoto S, Yamaguchil K, Sekine T, Kato T, *et al.* Identification of autoantibodies with the corresponding antigen for repetitive coxsackievirus infection-induced cardiomyopathy. *Circ J* 2004; 68:677–682.
15. Calabrese F, Van der Wal AC, Levi M. Infection and inflammation in the cardiovascular system. *Cardiovasc Res* 2003; 60:1–4.
16. Figulla HR. Transformation of myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy to idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: facts and fiction. *Med Microbiol Immunol (Berl)* 2004; 193:61–64.
17. Kuhl U, Pauschinger M, Noutsias M, Seeberg B, Bock T, Lassner D, *et al.* High prevalence of viral genomes and multiple viral infections in the myocardium of adults with ‘idiopathic’ left ventricular dysfunction. *Circulation* 2005; 111:887–893.
18. Mason JW. Viral latency: a link between myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy? *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2002; 34:695–698.
19. Eriksson U, Penninger JM. Autoimmune heart failure: new understanding of pathogenesis. *Int J Biochem Cell Biol* 2005; 37:27–32.
20. Rose NR, Hill SL. The pathogenesis of postinfectious myocarditis. *Clin Immunol Immunopathol* 1996; 80:92–99.
21. Pauschinger M, Chandrasekharan K, Li J, Poller W, Noutsias M, Tschope C, *et al.* Inflammation and extracellular matrix protein metabolism: two sides of myocardial remodelling. *Eur Heart J* 2002; 4 (Suppl I):49–53.
22. Finsterer J, Stollberger C. The heart in human dystrophinopathies. *Cardiology* 2003; 99:1–19.
23. Goodwin FC, Muntoni F. Cardiac involvement in muscular dystrophies: molecular mechanisms. *Muscle Nerve* 2005; 32:577–588.
24. Megeney LA, Kablar B, Perry RL, Ying C, May L, Rudnicki MA. Severe cardiomyopathy in mice lacking dystrophin and MyoD. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999; 96:220–225.
25. Badorff C, Lee GH, Lamphear BJ, Martone ME, Campbell KP, Rhoads RE, *et al.* Enteroviral protease 2A cleaves dystrophin: evidence of cytoskeletal disruption in an acquired cardiomyopathy. *Nat Med* 1999; 5:320–326.
26. Badorff C, Knowlton KU. Dystrophin disruption in enterovirus-induced myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy: from bench to bedside. *Med Microbiol Immunol* 2004; 193:121–126.
27. Xiong D, Lee GH, Bardoff C, Dorner A, Lee S, Wolf P, *et al.* Dystrophin deficiency markedly increases enterovirus-induced cardiomyopathy: a genetic predisposition to viral heart disease. *Nat Med* 2002; 8:872–877.

Copyright © Italian Federation of Cardiology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

28 Nakamura H, Yamamura T, Umemoto S, Fukuta S, Shioi T, Matsumori A, *et al.* Autoimmune response in chronic ongoing myocarditis demonstrated by heterotopic cardiac transplantation in mice. *Circulation* 1996; **94**:3348–3354.

29 Maisch B, Ristic AD, Hufnagel G, Pankuweit S. Pathophysiology of viral myocarditis: the role of humoral immune response. *Cardiovasc Pathol* 2002; **11**:112–122.

30 Spotnitz MD, Lesch M. Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy as a late complication of healed viral (coxsackie B virus) myocarditis: historical analysis, review of the literature, and a postulated unifying hypothesis. *Prog Cardiovasc Dis* 2006; **49**:42–57.

31 Bowles NE, Richardson P, Olsen GJ, Archard LC. Detection of coxsackie B virus-specific RNA sequences in myocardial biopsy samples from patients with myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy. *Lancet* 1986; **1**:1120–1123.

32 Rose NR, Hill SL. Autoimmune myocarditis. *Int J Cardiol* 1996; **54**:171–175.

33 Saraste A, Arola A, Vuorinen T, Kyto V, Kallajoki M, Pulkki K, *et al.* Cardiomyocyte apoptosis in experimental coxsackievirus B3 myocarditis. *Cardiovasc Pathol* 2003; **12**:255–262.

34 Afanasyeva M, Georgakopoulos D, Rose NR. Autoimmune myocarditis: cellular mediators of cardiac dysfunction. *Autoimmun Rev* 2004; **3**:476–486.

35 Caforio A, Mahon NJ, Tona F, McKenna WJ. Circulating cardiac autoantibodies in dilated cardiomyopathy and myocarditis: pathogenic and clinical significance. *Eur J Heart Fail* 2002; **4**:411–417.

36 Klingel K, Hohenadl C, Canu A, Albrecht M, Seemann M, Mall G, *et al.* Ongoing enterovirus-induced myocarditis is associated with persistent heart muscle infection: quantitative analysis of virus replication, tissue damage, and inflammation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1992; **89**:314–318.

37 Fairweather D, Kaya Z, Shellam G, Rlawson CM, Rose NR. From infection to autoimmunity. *J Autoimmun* 2001; **16**:175–186.

38 Eriksson U, Penninger JM, Kopf M. Mechanisms of autoimmune heart disease. *Drug Discov Today* 2004; **1**:283–288.

39 Aukrust P, Ueland T, Lien E, Bendtzen K, Muller F, Andreassen AK, *et al.* Cytokine network in congestive heart failure secondary to ischemic or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. *Am J Cardiol* 1999; **83**:376–382.

40 Kapadia S, Dibbs Z, Kurrelmeyer K, Kalra D, Seta Y, Wang F, *et al.* The role of cytokines in the failing human heart. *Cardiol Clin* 1998; **16**:645–656.

41 Matsumori A. Cytokines in myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy. *Eur Heart J* 2002; **4** (suppl I):42–45.

42 Furukawa Y, Kobuke K, Matsumori A. Role of cytokines in autoimmune myocarditis and cardiomyopathy. *Autoimmunity* 2001; **34**:165–168.

43 Petersen JW, Felker GM. Inflammatory biomarkers in heart failure. *Congest Heart Fail* 2006; **12**:324–328.

44 Gullestad L, Aukrust P. Review of trials in chronic heart failure showing broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory approaches. *Am J Cardiol* 2005; **95** (11A):17C–23C.

45 Afanasyeva M, Rose NR. Immune mediators in inflammatory heart disease: insights from a mouse model. *Eur Heart J* 2002; **4** (Suppl I):31–36.

46 Torre-Amione G. Immune activation in chronic heart failure. *Am J Cardiol* 2005; **95**:3C–8C.

47 Bryant D, Becker L, Richardson J, Shelton J, Franco F, Peshock R, *et al.* Cardiac failure in transgenic mice with myocardial expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha. *Circulation* 1998; **97**:1375–1381.

48 Baughman KL. Diagnosis of myocarditis: death of Dallas Criteria. *Circulation* 2006; **113**:593–595.

49 Aretz HT, Billingham ME, Edwards WD, Factor SM, Fallon JT, Fenoglio JJ Jr, *et al.* Myocarditis. A histopathologic definition and classification. *Am J Cardiovasc Pathol* 1987; **1**:3–14.

50 Magnani JW, Dec GW. Myocarditis: current trends in diagnosis and treatment. *Circulation* 2006; **113**:876–890.

51 Brown CA, O’Connell JB. Myocarditis and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. *Am J Med* 1995; **99**:309–314.

52 Mason JW. Immunopathogenesis and treatment of myocarditis: the United Myocarditis Treatment Trial. *J Card Fail* 1996; **2** (4 Suppl):S173–S177.

53 Kuhl U, Schultheiss HP. Treatment of chronic myocarditis with corticosteroids. *Eur Heart J* 1995; **16** (Suppl O):168–172.

54 Parrillo JE, Cunnion RE, Epstein SE, Parker MM, Suffredini AF, Brenner M, *et al.* A prospective, randomized, controlled trial of prednisone for dilated cardiomyopathy. *N Engl J Med* 1989; **321**:1061–1068.

55 Frustaci A, Pieroni M, Chimenti C. Immunosuppressive therapy in inflammatory cardiomyopathy. *Eur Heart J* 2002; **4** (Suppl I):69–72.

56 Kuhl U, Pauschinger M, Schwimmbbeck PL, Seeberg B, Lober C, Noutsias M, *et al.* Interferon-beta treatment eliminates cardiotropic viruses and improves left ventricular function in patients with myocardial persistence of viral genomes and left ventricular dysfunction. *Circulation* 2003; **107**:2793–2798.


57 Liu C, Chen J, Liu K. Immunosuppressive treatment for inflammatory cardiomyopathy. Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. *Int Heart J* 2005; **46**:113–122.

58 Zimmermann O, Kochs M, Zwaka TP, Kaya Z, Lepper PM, Bienek-Ziolkowski M, *et al.* Myocardial biopsy based classification and treatment in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. *Int J Cardiol* 2005; **104**:92–100.

59 Mann DL. Targeted anticytokine therapy and the failing heart. *Am J Cardiol* 2005; **95** (Suppl 1):9C–16C.

60 Gullestad L, Aass H, Fjeld JG, Wikeby L, Andreassen AK, Ihlen H, *et al.* Immunomodulating therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with chronic heart failure. *Circulation* 2001; **103**:220–225.

61 Bolton AE. Biologic effects and basic science of a novel immune-modulation therapy. *Am J Cardiol* 2005; **95** (Suppl 1):24C–29C.

62 Torre-Amione G, Sestier F, Radovancevic B, Young J. Broad modulation of tissue responses (immune activation) by celacade may favorably influence pathologic processes associated with heart failure progression. *Am J Cardiol* 2005; **95** (Suppl 1):30C–37C.
