
# Regulation of Intestinal Calcium Transport

**Ramesh C. Khanal**\* and **Ilka Nemere**

Department of Nutrition and Food Sciences and the Center for Integrated BioSystems,  
Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322; email: ilka.nemere@usu.edu

---

### Key Words

calcium channels, vesicular transport, facilitated diffusion,  
1,25(OH)₂D₃, parathyroid hormone

---

### Abstract

Calcium is an essential ion in all organisms and participates in a variety of structural and functional roles. Calcium (re)absorption occurs in epithelia, including the intestine, kidney, mammary glands, placenta, and gills of fish. Its transport is regulated by a complex array of processes that are mediated by hormonal, developmental, and physiological factors involving the gastrointestinal tract, bone, kidney, and the parathyroids. Here we review the calcium transport mechanisms—paracellular, which is energy independent, and transcellular, which is energy dependent—primarily focusing on the intestine. We provide a new perspective on the facilitated diffusion and vesicular transport models to account for the emerging concepts on transcellular calcium transport. Finally, we discuss how 1,25(OH)₂D₃ and parathyroid hormone regulate calcium transport.

---

Annu. Rev. Nutr. 2008. 28:179–96  
First published online as a Review in Advance on March 12, 2008  

The *Annual Review of Nutrition* is online at nutr.annualreviews.org  

This article’s doi: 10.1146/annurev.nutr.010308.161202  

Copyright © 2008 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved  

0199-9885/08/0821-0179$20.00  

*Current address: Department of Food Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72703*

lar calcium can undergo large, rapid changes due to either influx through the cell membrane or release from intracellular stores (9), whereas extracellular calcium remains relatively constant under normal circumstances (66). In this review, we focus on calcium transport across the intestine, including hormonal regulation by 1,25(OH)₂D₃ and parathyroid hormone (PTH), with occasional pertinent references to work done in kidney.

## PATHWAYS OF CALCIUM TRANSPORT

The two distinct processes involved in the absorption of Ca²⁺ across epithelia are paracellular and transcellular transport. The first one allows direct exchange of calcium ions between two compartments; the latter involves transport across at least two plasma membranes (54). Absorption of dietary Ca²⁺ through the transcellular pathway occurs predominantly in the duodenum, is to a large extent regulated by 1,25(OH)₂D₃, and requires energy. The paracellular route is a concentration-dependent diffusion of the ion that takes place throughout the length of the intestine (15) and does not depend on energy. When Ca²⁺ intake is low (<20 mM), transcellular transport in the duodenum accounts for approximately 80% of the absorbed Ca²⁺, but its contribution to overall Ca²⁺ transport is minor when Ca²⁺ intake is high (50 mM), primarily because of the short transit time (3 min in the duodenum) and downregulation of 1,25(OH)₂D₃-dependent Ca²⁺ channels and intestinal calbindin (15). The relative contribution of the para- and transcellular transport mechanisms to the overall Ca²⁺ transport is given in Table 1.

### Paracellular Calcium Transport

Polarized epithelial cells form intercellular tight junctions at specialized apical membrane domains. Diffusion of small molecules and ions past the tight junctions and into the extracellular space is known as paracellular transport. It has been suggested that tight junctions

---

## Contents

INTRODUCTION ..... 180  
PATHWAYS OF CALCIUM TRANSPORT ..... 180  
Paracellular Calcium Transport ..... 180  
Transcellular Calcium Transport ..... 181  
Vesicular Transport Model ..... 184  
ENDOCRINE REGULATION OF Ca²⁺ TRANSPORT ..... 186  
1,25(OH)₂D₃ ..... 186  
Parathyroid Hormone ..... 188  
Parathyroid Hormone Actions ..... 188  
24,25(OH)₂D₃ ..... 189  
CONCLUSIONS ..... 189  

---

## INTRODUCTION

Calcium is an essential ion in all organisms and participates in a variety of structural and functional roles ranging from the formation and maintenance of the skeleton to the temporal and spatial regulation of neuronal function and inhibition of proliferation of cancer cells. Intracellular calcium, particularly the cytosolic free calcium, is an important second messenger and cofactor for proteins and enzymes regulating key cellular processes such as neurotransmission, motility, hormonal secretion, and cellular proliferation. Extracellular calcium, on the other hand, is an integral part of the mineral phase of the bone, serves as a cofactor for adhesion molecules, clotting factors, and other proteins, and regulates neuronal excitability. The suitability of calcium in such diverse roles can be attributed to its physical properties (24).

Extracellular concentrations of unbound calcium are around 1 μM, whereas the intracellular free concentration under resting conditions is in the range of 0.1 μM, creating a steep gradient between intra- and extracellular concentrations. Such extreme differences between the two concentrations put severe constraints and demands on plasma membrane transport proteins to safeguard the integrity of the intracellular milieu. Moreover, intracellu-

### 1,25(OH)₂D₃: 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃

in epithelia manifest the same biophysical properties, such as ion and size selectivity, concentration-dependent ion permeability, pH sensitivity, and competition between permeable molecules (21, 127).

Tight junction permeability is constantly regulated under various physiological conditions (21, 52, 99) and modulated by cytokines, growth factors, bacterial toxins, hormones, protein kinase (PK) C, serine threonine kinase, and as yet unknown factors (8, 48, 53, 140, 146). Another important factor determining Ca²⁺ transport is the intestinal sojourn time, which is highest in the ileum (15), and where, under normocalcemic diets, the highest proportion of Ca²⁺ is absorbed (76). It should be noted that ileal cells contain no calbindins (15). Because intestinal sojourn time itself is a function of the length of the intestine, the overall contribution of paracellular Ca²⁺ transport in this organ may also vary among species. Although paracellular Ca²⁺ transport is the major route in the intestine with high-calcium diets, its importance has not been thoroughly investigated. Earlier findings suggest that it may be of vital significance in many disease states, such as familial hypomagnesemia (118), hypertension (145), and tumorigenesis, which may well be regulated by claudin (116)—a protein regulating tight junction integrity and function (146).

### Transcellular Calcium Transport

There are three possible cellular routes for calcium transport. The first to be conceived was diffusion through the cytoplasm, the second mechanism is vesicular transport along microtubules, and the third could be tunneling through the endoplasmic reticulum. Transcellular Ca²⁺ transport is generally envisaged as a three-step process consisting of passive entry of Ca²⁺ across the apical membrane, the transcellular movement of Ca²⁺ from the point of entry to the basolateral membrane (BLM), and its extrusion from the BLM into the circulatory system. Most of these models were formulated and evaluated as a function of 1,25(OH)₂D₃.

---

**Table 1 Relative (%) contribution of para- and transcellular pathways to calcium transport in absorptive epithelia**

| Absorptive region          | Paracellular | Transcellular |
|----------------------------|--------------|---------------|
| A. Kidney                  |              |               |
| Proximal distal tubule     | 90           | 10            |
| Distal convoluted tubule   | 0            | 100           |
| Thin ascending loop        | 50           | 50            |
| B. Intestine               |              |               |
| Duodenum                   |              |               |
| Low-Ca diet                | 20           | 80            |
| High-Ca diet               | >90          | <10           |
| Ileum                      | 100          | 0             |
| Jejunum                    | 80           | 20            |
| Large intestine            | ?            | ?             |
| Colon                      | ?            | ?             |

*References: 13, 16, 45, 58, 92, 98, 117, 131.*

*b In addition, some reports indicate transcellular Ca²⁺ transport in the ileum (46, 64), including human (136).

*c Although exact proportion not determined, transport occurs primarily via paracellular pathway in the large intestine, whereas a majority of Ca²⁺ transport in the colon occurs via transcellular pathway.

stimulated calcium transport, and thus are presented in that context.

#### Facilitated diffusion.

##### Entry at the apical membrane.
Calcium is postulated to enter the epithelial cells via selective Ca²⁺ channels at the luminal membrane under the influence of a steep, inwardly directed electrochemical gradient. Although there was some evidence indicating the existence of such channels in mediating Ca²⁺ entry in absorptive epithelia (59, 148), the molecular identity of such channels remained obscure for a long time. Moreover, apical administration of a variety of Ca²⁺ channel agonists failed to affect Ca²⁺ absorption (38). The classic approach for identification by purification and amino acid sequencing was hindered by the lack of a rich source of channel protein. Success was finally achieved with functional expression cloning using a rabbit primary connecting tubule/cortical collecting duct cDNA library in Xenopus laevis oocytes (54) for identification of a single transcript encoding for a novel epithelial Ca²⁺ channel,

ECaC, later renamed transient receptor potential of the vanilloid type (TRPV), receptor 5 (TRPV5) (78, 107), which is now accepted as exhibiting the defining properties of a Ca²⁺ transporter. Functional expression techniques successfully identified the Ca²⁺ transporter 1 (CaT1, ECaC2, or, more recently, TRPV6) from rat intestine, which shares about 80% amino acid sequence homology with TRPV5.

**Epithelial Ca²⁺ channels.** The proteins TRPV5 and TRPV6 form a distinct subfamily of TRPs. These nonvoltage-gated cation channels vary significantly in their ion selectivity and mode of activation (31, 78) and fulfill certain physiological functions ranging from phototransduction and olfaction to Ca²⁺ transport in the epithelia (17, 54). The rabbit TRPV5 contains an open reading frame of 2190 nucleotides encoding a protein of 730 amino acids, whereas a 2995-base-pair TRPV6 cDNA has an open reading frame of 2181 nucleotides encoding 727 amino acid residues (54, 100). Both of them have a predicted molecular mass of 83 kDa and have six membrane-spanning domains. The TRPV6 has four ankyrin repeats (providing interactions with the cytoskeleton; 149), an amino-terminal hydrophilic segment (326 amino acids), and one potential pore region formed by a hydrophobic stretch between domains 5 and 6. It also has one putative protein kinase A (PKA) and five putative protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation sites in the cytoplasmic domains, suggesting that Ca²⁺ transport may be regulated by phosphorylation, and no motifs in the carboxy terminus. However, TRPV5 has only three ankyrin repeats and no PKA phosphorylation site in the cytoplasmic domain, but it has three PKC and two PKA sites in its carboxy terminus. One N-glycosylation site is predicted in the first extracellular loop of TRPV5 (54). The two channels share a varying degree of sequence identity from one species to another and from one organ system to the other. They have a tetrameric stoichiometry and can combine with each other to form heteromultimeric channels

with novel properties (54). Genomic analysis reveals that the two channels originate from two genes juxtaposed on human chromosome 7q35 and mouse chromosome 6 (79). Extensive reviews on these proteins are presented in several other recent publications (40, 54, 95, 129).

The differences revealed after comparing the N- and C-termini of the two channels may account for their unique electrophysiological properties. The differences include faster initial inactivation in TRPV6 than in TRPV5, and the kinetic differences between Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ currents are more pronounced for TRPV6 than for TRPV5 (54).

Both TRPV5 and TRPV6 are subject to Ca²⁺-dependent feedback inhibition (54), including Ca²⁺-dependent binding of calmodulin to the carboxy terminus in TRPV6 (94). The EF-hands 3 and 4 of calmodulin appear to bind Ca²⁺ to positively affect TRPV6 activity (68). Although TRPV5 appears to be devoid of a calmodulin binding site, carboxyl-terminal truncations and mutations also modulate Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation of the protein (54). Recently, Chang et al. (27) have reported that β-glucuronidase activates TRPV5.

Brunette et al. (20) demonstrated that ATP directly enhances channel activity, whereas a novel protein, 80K-H, functions as a Ca²⁺ sensor controlling TRPV5 activity (51). A specific interaction of 80K-H protein and TRPV5 occurs with colocalization of both proteins in the kidney and transcriptional regulation by dietary Ca²⁺ (51). In addition, age, dietary Ca²⁺, and G proteins also appear to modulate Ca²⁺ channels (18, 20, 137). Negative regulators of TRPV5 and TRPV6 include, respectively, BSPRY and RGS2 (114, 135).

It has been established that acidification at the apical region inhibits transcellular Ca²⁺ transport, apparently through pH modulation of TRPV5 affinity for Ca²⁺ (54). Not much is known about pharmacological agents, except that ruthenium red and econazole (54) are both effective inhibitors of TRPV5 and TRPV6.

Some of the major characteristics of TRPV5 knockout mice include impaired Ca²⁺

reabsorption, hypercalciuria, hypervitaminosis D, hyperparathyroidism, rickets, and intestinal hyperabsorption of Ca²⁺ (109). Increased urinary Ca²⁺ excretion appears to be the result of defective Ca²⁺ reabsorption within the initial region of the distal convoluted tubule, where TRPV5 is mostly localized (54, 109). At the molecular level, there were reduced mRNA levels of renal calbindin -D₉K and -D₂₈K, and Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger (NCX) in TRPV5 knockout mice (109). The TRPV6 knockout mice have defective Ca²⁺ absorption in the intestine, increased urinary excretion, decreased bone mineral density, reduced weight gain, and reduced fertility (10). Although TRPV6 knockout mice have normal Ca²⁺ and increased PTH levels, they fail to further increase serum PTH and 1,25(OH)₂D₃ on a low-Ca²⁺ diet (10).

Downregulation of TRPV5 and TRPV6 is likely involved in the impaired Ca²⁺ (re)absorption during aging, and TRPV5(–/–) mice are likely to develop age-related hyperparathyroidism and osteoporosis at an earlier age than TRPV5(+/+) mice, suggesting an important role in overall Ca²⁺ homeostasis (54). The TRPV5(–/–) mice display reduced active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubules of kidney despite elevated levels of 1,25(OH)₂D₃ (54). Dysfunctional TRPV5 and TRPV6 may be associated with other multifunctional pathological disorders, such as stone disease and postmenopausal osteoporosis (95).

Several tissues have been shown to express TRPV5 and TRPV6. Although TRPV6 expression was confirmed in the intestine and kidney, TRPV5 was exclusively confined to kidney (97).

**Ca²⁺ carriers.** In addition to Ca²⁺ channels, there is some evidence that Ca²⁺ entry may be carrier-mediated (see 47 for review). One candidate is the H⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange (70), which is the primary means of sequestering Ca²⁺ by mitochondria (70), though demonstrating its presence in the plasma membrane has remained elusive. Another is Na⁺/H⁺ (103, 115) exchange that catalyzes H⁺/Ca⁺ exchange in membrane vesicles in *Escherichia coli* strain EP432 (42) and

has been demonstrated in rat distal convoluted tubules (50).

**Transcellular movement.** A large body of literature is available on the role of calbindin in 1,25(OH)₂D₃-mediated Ca²⁺ transport across epithelia at the whole animal, cellular, and molecular level (4, 26, 28, 30, 32). However, its role is largely confined to either being a ferry or acting as a buffer (6, 15, 56), and both roles have remained controversial.

Calbindin D₂₈K was first found in the chick duodenum (142, 143). Later, 1,25(OH)₂D₃-induced calbindin D₉K in mammalian duodenum was identified and characterized (44) and now has been reported in tissues such as brain, stomach, and prostate (29, 30). Although for many years there have been indications of calbindin not being involved in Ca²⁺ absorption (121, 123), these reports have largely been dismissed by those who feel that only the classical vitamin D receptor (VDR) is involved with 1,25(OH)₂D₃-mediated Ca²⁺ and phosphate transport across epithelia (96, 104).

Recently, DeLuca and coworkers (2, 67) created a calbindin D₉K-null 129/OlaHsd mouse. This mouse was indistinguishable from the wild type in phenotype and in serum Ca²⁺ level regardless of age or gender (2). These mice were fully capable of absorbing Ca²⁺ from the intestine in response to 1,25(OH)₂D₃, clearly proving that the protein is not needed for steroid-induced Ca²⁺ absorption. Moreover, these mice were also able to reproduce normally and had no impaired Ca²⁺ homeostasis (67). Earlier, Lee et al. (71) suggested that in humans, duodenal calbindin D₉K may not be involved in Ca²⁺ transport because of an increase in the protein with age even though blood Ca²⁺ levels decreased at the same time and no significant age-associated change in the VDR occurred. The “cytoplasmic ferry” model is cast into further doubt by the observation that the preponderance of calbindin D₂₈K in chicks is found in transport vesicles and is secreted during Ca²⁺ transport (85). Since lysosomes transport phosphate as well as calcium (see below), calbindin

NCX: Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger

may serve to prevent precipitation of the ions in transport vesicles.

**PMCA:** plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase

**Extrusion at the basal lateral membrane.** The efflux of Ca²⁺ at the serosal side of the cell occurs against a considerable electrochemical gradient, but is not considered a rate-limiting step (15). Two Ca²⁺ transporters have been identified at the BLM of absorptive epithelia to extrude Ca²⁺: the plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase (PMCA) and NCX.

The PMCA is a P-type ATPase that acts through formation of an aspartyl phosphate intermediate (25). It is a high-affinity Ca²⁺ efflux pump present in virtually all eukaryotic cells and is responsible for the maintenance and resetting of the resting intracellular Ca²⁺ levels (12, 126). However, its activity is highest in epithelia that exhibit appreciable rates of transcellular Ca²⁺ transport (43), and the activity is localized to the BLM (5, 12, 25, 50, 70). The high-affinity Ca²⁺-ATPase displays a mean affinity constant of 0.3 × 10⁻⁶ M, which is similar to that of other plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPases (25). Four genes encode separate isoforms of the enzyme designated PMCA1–4 (124). The putative Ca²⁺-binding domain lies on the cytoplasmic side of the pump molecule and spans the entire membrane (15). Differences among the isoforms are primarily at the 3′ end, which encodes a calmodulin-binding site and a consensus PKA phosphorylation site toward the carboxyl end. It is also suggested that PMCA1 and 4 are housekeeping isoforms involved in the maintenance of cellular Ca²⁺ homeostasis (124). The isoform PMCA1b is abundantly expressed in the intestine and is postulated to be the one involved in extrusion mechanism in the intestinal Ca²⁺ absorption (5, 54). Calcium is expelled through a channel-like opening formed by the transmembrane elements, and phosphorylation is believed to bring about the necessary conformational change such that Ca²⁺ bound to the enzyme is propelled through the opening (15). The estimated Vm of the intestinal enzyme is reported to be in the range of 20 to 30 nM Ca/min per mg protein (15). This is generally adequate to extrude

Ca²⁺ even at the highest rates of Ca²⁺ transport (119), and enzyme levels have been shown to increase after seco-steroid (143). However, plasma 1,25(OH)₂D₃ was not found to be correlated with PMCA1 expression in humans (138).

Some evidence supports a role for NCX (12, 131), although controversy exists (47). Three genes for NCX, designated NCX1, NCX2, and NCX3, have been identified (12). Sequence similarities indicate ~70% homology. The exchanger has an amino-terminal signal sequence, two sets of multiple transmembrane α-helices near the ends of the protein, and a large intracellular loop (12). Splicing of RNA transcripts would generate further diversity in the exchanger system. Of the three isoforms, NCX1 is widely distributed among different mammalian tissues, including absorptive epithelia (62, 132), whereas NCX2 and NCX3 are confined primarily to brain and skeletal muscle (73, 93). It has been demonstrated that NCX1 is the primary extrusion mechanism in the distal tubular cells (11, 132), but its role in the enterocytes may be of minor importance only (54). Unfortunately, targeted deletion of NCX1 appears to be not a suitable model to study this system since it leads to death in utero (63, 110). Figure 1 presents certain elements discussed above in schematic form.

### Vesicular Transport Model

**Entry at the apical membrane.** In the vesicular transport model (reviewed in 69), Ca²⁺-enriched vesicles can be formed by influx of Ca²⁺ through Ca²⁺ channels or transporters in the apical membrane. This rapid increase in Ca²⁺ concentration around the apical region can disrupt the actin filaments near the Ca²⁺ channels and initiate the formation of endocytic vesicles. Alternatively, influx through a Ca²⁺ channel may also promote the exocytic delivery of vesicles containing Ca²⁺ transporters (120), which are coupled to the formation of endocytic vesicles. Both TRPV5 and TRPV6 have been found to colocalize with Rab11a protein in vesicular structures underlying the

Lumen

Tight junction

Transcellular pathway

Free Ca²⁺
100nM

Ca²⁺
ECaC

Tight junction

Free Ca²⁺
1mM

Apical region

Blood

Na⁺ Ca²⁺ exchanger
3Na⁺ ← Ca²⁺

Paracellular pathway

Calbindin D9K/28K

ATP
PMCA1b
ADP

Ca²⁺

Paracellular pathway

Free Ca²⁺
1.2mM

Basolateral region

Figure 1

Molecular illustration of paracellular and transcellular Ca²⁺ transport pathways in epithelia (adapted and modified from 54). Paracellular transport is primarily a passive mechanism driven by Ca²⁺ concentration in the lumen and integrity of the tight junction. Transcellular transport is a three-step process: entry of Ca²⁺ into the cytoplasm at the apical region facilitated by epithelial Ca channels TRPV5 and TRPV6, movement across the cell, and extrusion at the basal lateral membrane.

apical plasma membranes of Ca²⁺-transporting epithelial cells (134), lending further credence to the vesicular transport model of Ca²⁺ in the epithelia. A third possibility is direct filling of a vesicle by the channel. The newly formed vesicles are then transported vectorially by microtubules, and some fuse with lysosomes (86).

**Transcellular movement.** Electron microscopy of chick duodenum led Jande & Brewer (55) to propose the vesicular transport model for intestinal Ca²⁺ absorption induced by 1,25(OH)₂D₃. Warner & Coleman (141), using x-ray probe analysis, found discrete localizations of Ca²⁺ under transport conditions rather than a diffuse cytoplasmic localization. These vesicles were subsequently identified as lysosomes (37). There was an increased Ca²⁺ concentration and lysosomal count in intestinal epithelial cells following treatment of rachitic animals with 1,25(OH)₂D₃ (35, 36). These organelles also showed increased acid phosphatase, a lysosomal marker enzyme, and stained intensely with pyroantimonate, indicating high Ca²⁺ content (37). These vesicular/vacuolar/lysosomal structures are membrane bound, move laterally, and eventually coalesce with the lateral plasma membrane, causing exocytosis of their contents (37). Several other studies implicated the involvement of not only lysosomes in the transcellular Ca²⁺ transport in intestinal epithelia (84–91) but also of microsomes (113).

Nemere et al. (84) used biochemical methods to determine subcellular Ca²⁺ localization in vitamin D-deficient chicks dosed with vehicle
or 1,25(OH)₂D₃ in vivo and found the highest levels of ⁴⁵Ca in a fraction containing lysosomes, mitochondria, Golgi, and basal lateral membranes. Very little calcium was found to be cytoplasmic. Further resolution of the postnuclear fraction on Percoll gradients implicated lysosomes as the Ca²⁺ carriers in 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated transport. In a time course study (86), net ⁴⁵Ca transport into the blood exactly paralleled levels of the radionuclide in lysosomes with regard to onset, maximum, and decline. At 43 h after 1,25(OH)₂D₃, both transport and lysosomal ⁴⁵Ca had decreased while calbindin levels remained elevated, thus bringing into question the role of calbindin D₂₈K as the most important carrier in transcellular Ca²⁺ transport.

**Extrusion at the basal lateral membrane.** In spite of the studies performed on Ca²⁺ extrusion proteins, it is possible that the ATPase and exchangers are involved in regulating signaling Ca²⁺ rather than transport Ca²⁺. In the vesicular transport model, exocytosis delivers Ca²⁺ at the BLM. Indeed, net transport of Ca²⁺ is inhibited by chloroquine, a drug known to interfere with lysosomal function (84), and the facilitated diffusion model does not explain this. Calcium transport is also accompanied by secretion of cathepsin B, a lysosomal proteinase (88) and vesicular calbindin (85). Moreover, a very rapid signaling response to 1,25(OH)₂D₃ is activation of a voltage-gated calcium channel on the basal lateral membrane (38, 39). Indeed, extracellular calcium at the BLM is required to initiate signaling for net calcium transport across the epithelium (38, 39), which further suggests that Ca²⁺ pumps turn the signal off. We have found instead that the PKC signaling pathway mediates exocytosis of transport calcium (81).

**Tunneling through intracellular stores.** The third and final model was demonstrated in pancreatic acinar cells (101; reviewed in 69) and may also constitute a possible route in epithelial cells. Ca²⁺ enters the cell through channels as in the preceding models and transport

to the BLM occurs through passive diffusion in the endoplasmic reticulum. It involves active buffering of Ca²⁺ rather than the passive buffering that occurs in facilitated diffusion. Extrusion of Ca²⁺ to extracellular media occurs through Ca²⁺-ATPases and Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchangers present in the BLM. Although this is at odds with microscopic observations (35–37, 141), it may be that the endoplasmic reticulum buds off transport vesicles filled with calcium. Indeed, a localization of calcium in endoplasmic reticulum was noted to occur within 1 min of initiating absorption, but not at later times (86). Figure 2 (69) depicts the three distinct but potentially complementary models of transcellular Ca²⁺ transport discussed above. All three models are probably coordinated to meet the short- and longer-term needs of the animal.

## ENDOCRINE REGULATION OF Ca²⁺ TRANSPORT

### 1,25(OH)₂D₃

The steroid hormone 1,25(OH)₂D₃ is made by sequential hydroxylations of the parent metabolite in liver and kidney. Regulation of epithelial Ca²⁺ transport by 1,25(OH)₂D₃ through genomic actions involving the classical VDR is widely recognized (14, 34, 57, 72, 96, 104, 139). Its nongenomic regulation through a separate membrane receptor—which has been identified as the 1,25D₃-MARRS (membrane-associated, rapid response, steroid-binding) protein (82, 112) and that has been reviewed recently (60, 61)—is also accepted now. The TRPV proteins are primarily regulated by 1,25(OH)₂D₃ (54, 97, 122, 138, 147). 1,25(OH)₂D₃ had no effect on TRPV5/6 in mice with mutant, nonfunctioning VDR even though a putative response element (VDRE) was detected in TRPV5 (54). In 1,25(OH)₂D₃-deficient rats, TRPV5 mRNA and protein levels of the kidney cortex were significantly decreased compared with replete controls (54). In Caco-2 cells, increased TRPV6 mRNA expression preceded by several hours the 1,25(OH)₂D₃-mediated induction of
Ca Channel/transporter

EV

Ly

Ca

CaBP

Ga

N

Na/Ca-exchanger

SERCA

ER

IP₃ or ryanodine
regulated Ca-channel

Ca-ATPase

---

**Figure 2**

Schematic illustration of vesicular Ca²⁺ movement in epithelia (adapted from 69). Calcium uptake occurs through a specific transporter/channel protein and can be directly routed either to vesicles or to endoplasmic reticulum (tunneling). The endocytic vesicles fuse with lysosomes (a means to concentrate calcium). Both vesicles and lysosomes contain calbindin. Vectorial transport occurs along microtubules to the basal lateral membrane, where exocytosis completes the transport process. Cytoplasmic-signaling calcium (from hormone stimulation) is removed by exchangers and pumps.

calbindin D₉ₖ (147). TRPV6 expression was 1,25(OH)₂D₃ dependent in men but not in older women, where expression of both TRPV6 and VDR were reduced (137, 138). However, the promoter region of the TRPV6 gene lacks recognizable VDREs, which suggests that TRPV6 gene expression may be controlled by a novel 1,25(OH)₂D₃-mediated mechanism (121). The possibility arises that the 1,25D₃-MARRS receptor/PDIA3/ERp57 is involved in this mechanism, since it is translocated to the nucleus after binding ligand (89).

In intestinal cells from vitamin D-sufficient adult chickens or cultures of young chicks, 1,25(OH)₂D₃ stimulates calcium uptake within minutes. We have discovered that agents that stimulate PKA activity promote the secretion of β-glucuronidase, an activator of TRPV5 (27). Treatment of isolated intestinal epithelial cells with β-glucuronidase in turn promotes calcium uptake. And transfection of cells with siRNA to either β-glucuronidase or TRPV6 abolish 1,25(OH)₂D₃-enhanced calcium uptake (R.C. Khanal, manuscr. submitted). These

data suggest further that one of the primary defects in vitamin D-deficient animals is the absence of 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated adenylate cyclase activity (33, 81) rather than the absence of calbindin. This would explain why a response to steroid is measured in hours rather than minutes under vitamin D-deficiency conditions.

The endocrine effects of 1,25(OH)₂D₃ on the BLM extrusion systems, NCX and PMCA, have been documented (47, 54, 144), but with conflicting results (54). For instance, 1,25(OH)₂D₃ induced increased levels of mRNA for NCX in one such study (75), whereas in another there was no response (56). Both vitamin D and 1,25(OH)₂D₃ have been found to increase PMCA mRNA and protein levels in intestine (22, 56). Van Abel et al. (132) and Van Cromphaut et al. (133) showed enhanced PMCA1b expression in intestine but not in kidney. These results suggested that the effect of the steroid on PMCA may be animal, organ, or tissue specific. The synthesis of the enzyme Ca²⁺-ATPase has not been shown to be 1,25(OH)₂D₃ dependent.

### Parathyroid Hormone

The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) in response to low serum calcium detected by Ca²⁺-sensing receptors (CaR; 18), utilizing a mechanism similar to those of G protein-coupled receptors (18, 21, 41, 49, 106, 111). This was later confirmed with the cloning of a G protein-coupled extracellular CaR from bovine parathyroid gland that encoded 1085 amino acids (1, 19). Abnormalities in PTH regulation have been found to be related to low expression of CaR (23). The detailed structure, function, occurrence, and many other patho-physiological aspects of CaR have been reviewed extensively (18, 108, 109).

### Parathyroid Hormone Actions

Actions of PTH can be divided into classical and nonclassical. The classical action is based on the initial belief that the major biological activities of PTH are subserved by the 34 residues in its N-terminal domain and that the PTH residues located beyond position 34 are largely irrelevant (105, 130). Nonclassical actions are now known to require additional regions of the peptide hormone and include binding of intact PTH to rat and avian osteoclasts (6, 77, 128), actions unique to intact PTH (reviewed in 80).

#### Intestinal calcium absorption.
We have previously summarized reports from many labs that intestinal epithelial cells contain functional PTH receptors and respond to the hormone with stimulated calcium transport in perfused duodenal loops and enhanced calcium uptake in isolated enterocytes (7, 83, 90, 91). Originally it was believed that PTH had only indirect effects on intestinal absorption since the models in use at the time were vitamin D-deficient animals. In retrospect, the absence of hormone-stimulated adenylate cyclase (33, 81) in vitamin D-deficient animals explains the lack of an effect by PTH.

In rat, the action of PTH was reportedly blocked by the Ca²⁺ channel antagonists verapamil and nitrendipine (see 83 and references therein). However, in chick intestine, voltage-regulated calcium channels are localized in the basal lateral membrane (38, 39)—and not the brush border—which suggests that the antagonists interfered with signaling rather than transport. The signal transduction pathway activated by PTH binding to its receptor includes PKA-mediated calcium uptake (125). Forskolin has been reported to stimulate calcium uptake in isolated enterocytes (102), and the antagonist RpcAMP has recently been demonstrated to block the actions of PTH in primary cultures of chick intestinal cells (129). Phorbol ester (an agonist of the PKC pathway) does not stimulate calcium uptake (R.C. Khanal, manuscr. submitted). Since these pathways have been conserved in both rats and chicks, they are most likely physiologically important. Indeed, the anabolic bone effects of small doses of PTH in humans (74) may very well be due

PGE₂  
Estrogen  
Aldosterone  
PTH  
Progesterone  

1,25(OH)₂D₃  
Prolactin Glucocorticoid  

AVP  
ANP  
Thyroid hormone  
Testosterone  

Transcellular Ca transport  

Stanniocalcin  
EP₃  
PGE₂  

Glucocorticoid  
ATP  

Calcitonin  

Paracellular Ca transport  

+ + + +  
Prolactin 1,25(OH)₂D₃ Glucocorticoid Estrogen  
Apical Aldosterone  

Schematic model for endocrine control of Ca transport in epithelial cells  

Figure 3  

An overview of endocrine effects on Ca²⁺ transport across epithelia. Some of the hormones have both positive and negative effects (glucocorticoid, thyroid hormone, and PGE₂), whereas some others have positive as well as no effects (testosterone). Varying effects of the same hormone probably depended on the cell (organ) system, physiological stage, and hormone concentration. See text for references.

in part to stimulated calcium absorption in the intestine.

### 24,25(OH)₂D₃

The metabolite 24,25(OH)₂D₃, made under conditions of vitamin D sufficiency, is an endogenous inhibitor of both 1,25(OH)₂D₃ and PTH-stimulated calcium transport. We have recently reviewed (60) the mechanism by which this occurs: 24,25(OH)₂D₃ binds to the enzyme catalase and decreases its activity with concomitant increases in H₂O₂ levels. This in turn leads to inactivation of the 1,25D₃-MARRS receptor (but not the VDR) as well as PKC. Figure 3 indicates additional hormones that contribute to the endocrine regulation of intestinal calcium transport.

### CONCLUSIONS

Many distinct proteins have been identified at the cell surface that may be involved in calcium transport across epithelia, although in most cases it is not known to what extent each contributes to the process. Notable exceptions are the recently identified TRPV channels/transporters. Basal lateral pumps are likely regulators of cytosolic calcium involved in signal transduction, but net calcium transport by facilitated diffusion now seems tenuous since calbindin-D₉ₖ is not necessary for the process, and calbindin-D₂₈ₖ is largely in membrane-delimited vesicles. And as noted above, facilitated diffusion does not explain the complete inhibition of 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated calcium transport by 

chloroquine within 30 min of introduction to the lumen. However, many plasma membrane proteins are dynamically inserted and retrieved by vesicular trafficking. Therefore, some clarification of each protein's contribution to the absorption process may be made by investigating its relationship to vesicular transport calcium.

### SUMMARY POINTS

1. TRPV channels are most likely to be responsible for calcium uptake into intestinal epithelium.
2. The PKA-signaling pathway, rather than calbindins, may be the rate-limiting step in initiating 1,25(OH)₂D₃-stimulated calcium transport in vitamin D–deficient animals.
3. There is little evidence to support the facilitated diffusion model of transport in comparison with the vesicular carrier model.
4. Basal lateral membrane proteins that extrude calcium may be for the regulation of signal-transduction calcium rather than transport calcium.

### FUTURE ISSUES

1. Tissue-specific knockouts of basal lateral calcium extrusion proteins are needed to determine their role in calcium transport.
2. Dissection is needed to determine how TRPV6 fills vesicular carriers.
3. The effect of siRNA knockdown to calbindin D₂₈k in cultured chick intestinal cells on calcium uptake should be evaluated.

### DISCLOSURES

The authors are not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

### LITERATURE CITED

1. Aida K, Koishi S, Tawata M, Onaya T. 1995. Molecular cloning of a putative Ca²⁺-sensing receptor cDNA from human kidney. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 214:524–29
2. Akhter S, Kutuzova GD, Christakos S, Deluca HF. 2007. Calbindin D9k is not required for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃-mediated Ca²⁺ absorption in small intestine. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 460:227–30
3. Anderson JM. 2001. Molecular structure of tight junctions and their role in epithelial transport. *News Physiol. Sci.* 16:126–30
4. Armbrecht HJ, Boltz MA, Bruns ME. 2003. Effect of age and dietary calcium on intestinal calbindin D-9k expression in the rat. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 420:194–200
5. Armbrecht HJ, Boltz MA, Kumar VB. 1999. Intestinal plasma membrane calcium pump protein and its induction by 1,25(OH)₂D₃ decrease with age. *Am. J. Physiol.* 277:G41–47
6. Barry EL, Gesek FA, Froehner SC, Friedman PA. 1995. Multiple calcium channel transcripts in rat osteosarcoma cells: selective activation of alpha 1D isoform by parathyroid hormone. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 92:10914–18

7. Barry EL, Gesek FA, Yu AS, Lytton J, Friedman PA. 1998. Distinct calcium channel isoforms mediate parathyroid hormone and chlorothiazide-stimulated calcium entry in transporting epithelial cells. *J. Membr. Biol.* 161:55–64

8. Benais-Pont G, Punn A, Flores-Maldonado C, Eckert J, Raposo G, et al. 2003. Identification of a tight junction-associated guanine nucleotide exchange factor that activates Rho and regulates paracellular permeability. *J. Cell Biol.* 160:729–40

9. Berridge MJ, Irvine RF. 1984. Inositol trisphosphate, a novel second messenger in cellular signal transduction. *Nature* 312:315–21

10. Bianco SD, Peng JB, Takanaga H, Suzuki Y, Crescenzi A, et al. 2007. Marked disturbance of calcium homeostasis in mice with targeted disruption of the Trpv6 calcium channel gene. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 22:274–85

11. Bindels RJ, Ramakers PL, Dempster JA, Hartog A, van Os CH. 1992. Role of Na<sup>+</sup>/Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchange in transcellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> transport across primary cultures of rabbit kidney collecting system. *Pflugers Arch.* 420:566–72

12. Blaustein MP, Lederer WJ. 1999. Sodium/calcium exchange: its physiological implications. *Physiol. Rev.* 79:763–854

13. Bomsztyk K, George JP, Wright FS. 1984. Effects of luminal fluid anions on calcium transport by proximal tubule. *Am. J. Physiol.* 246:F600–8

14. Bouillon R, Van Cromphaut S, Carmeliet G. 2003. Intestinal calcium absorption: molecular vitamin D-mediated mechanisms. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 88:332–39

15. Bronner F. 2003. Mechanisms and functional aspects of intestinal calcium absorption. *J. Exp. Zool.* 300:A47–52

16. Bronner F, Pansu D, Stein WD. 1986. An analysis of calcium transport in rat intestine. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* 208:227–34

17. Brown AJ, Krits I, Armbrecht HJ. 2005. Effect of age, vitamin D, and calcium on the regulation of rat intestinal epithelial calcium channels. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 437:51–58

18. Brown EM. 2000. The extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>-sensing receptor: central mediator of systemic calcium homeostasis. *Annu. Rev. Nutr.* 20:507–33

19. Brown EM, Gamba G, Riccardi D, Lombardi D, Butters R, et al. 1993. Cloning and characterization of an extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>-sensing receptor from bovine parathyroid. *Nature* 366:575–80

20. Brunette MG, Hilal G, Mailloux J, Leclerc M. 2000. G proteins regulate calcium channels in the luminal membranes of the rabbit nephron. *Nephron* 85:238–47

21. Butters RR Jr, Chattopadhyay N, Nielsen P, Smith CP, Mithal A, et al. 1997. Cloning and characterization of a calcium-sensing receptor from the hypercalcemic New Zealand white rabbit reveals unaltered responsiveness to extracellular calcium. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 12:568–79

22. Cai Q, Chandler JS, Wasserman RH, Kumar R, Penniston JT. 1993. Vitamin D and adaptation to dietary calcium and phosphate deficiencies increase intestinal plasma membrane calcium pump gene expression. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90:1345–49

23. Caadillas S, Canalejo A, Santamaria R, Rodriguez ME, Estepa JC, et al. 2005. Calcium-sensing receptor expression and parathyroid hormone secretion in hyperplastic parathyroid glands from humans. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* 16:2190–97

24. Carafoli E. 1987. Intracellular calcium homeostasis. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 56:395–433

25. Carafoli E. 1992. The Ca<sup>2+</sup> pump of the plasma membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:2115–18

26. Chandra S, Fullmer CS, Smith CA, Wasserman RH, Morrison GH. 1990. Ion microscopic imaging of calcium transport in the intestinal tissue of vitamin D-deficient and vitamin D-replete chickens: a 44Ca stable isotope study. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 87:5715–19

27. Chang Q, Hoefs S, van der Kemp AW, Topala CN, Bindels RJ, Hoenderop JG. 2005. The β-glucuronidase klotho hydrolyzes and activates the TRPV5 channel. *Science* 310:490–93

28. Christakos S, Barletta F, Huening M, Dhawan P, Liu Y, et al. 2003. Vitamin D target proteins: function and regulation. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 88:238–44

29. Christakos S, Gabrielides C, Rhoten WB. 1989. Vitamin D-dependent calcium binding proteins: chemistry, distribution, functional considerations, and molecular biology. *Endocr. Rev.* 10:3–26

30. Christakos S, Liu Y, Dhawan P, Peng X. 2005. In *Vitamin D*, ed. Feldman D, Pike JW, GLorieux FHW, pp. 721–35. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Acad. 2nd ed.

31. Clapham DE, Runnels LW, Strubing C. 2001. The TRP ion channel family. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 2:387–96

32. Colnot S, Ovejero C, Romagnolo B, Porteu A, Lacourte P, et al. 2000. Transgenic analysis of the response of the rat calbindin-D9k gene to vitamin D. *Endocrinology* 141:2301–8

33. Corradino RA. 1974. Embryonic chick intestine in organ culture: interaction of adenylate cyclase system and vitamin D₃-mediated calcium absorptive mechanism. *Endocrinology* 94:1607–14

34. Darwish HM, DeLuca HF. 1996. Analysis of binding of the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ receptor to positive and negative vitamin D response elements. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 334:223–34

35. Davis WL, Jones RG. 1981. Calcium lysosomes in rachitic and vitamin D₃ replete chick duodenal absorptive cells. *Tissue Cell* 13:381–91

36. Davis WL, Jones RG. 1982. Lysosomal proliferation in rachitic avian intestinal absorptive cells following 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. *Tissue Cell* 14:585–95

37. Davis WL, Jones RG, Hagler HK. 1979. Calcium containing lysosomes in the normal chick duodenum: a histochemical and analytical electron microscopic study. *Tissue Cell* 11:127–38

38. de Boland AR, Nemere I, Norman AW. 1990. Ca²⁺-channel agonist BAY K 8644 mimics 1,25(OH)₂-vitamin D₃ rapid enhancement of Ca²⁺ transport in chick perfused duodenum. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 166:217–22

39. de Boland AR, Norman AW. 1990. Influx of extracellular calcium mediates 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃-dependent transcalcitachia (the rapid stimulation of duodenal Ca²⁺ transport). *Endocrinology* 127:2475–80

40. den Dekker E, Hoenderop JG, Nilius B, Bindels RJ. 2003. The epithelial calcium channels, TRPV5 & TRPV6: from identification towards regulation. *Cell Calcium* 33:497–507

41. Diaz R, Hurwitz S, Chattopadhyay N, Pines M, Yang Y, et al. 1997. Cloning, expression, and tissue localization of the calcium-sensing receptor in chicken (*Gallus domesticus*). *Am. J. Physiol.* 273:R1008–16

42. Dibrov PA. 1993. Calcium transport mediated by NhaA, a Na⁺/H⁺ antiporter from *Escherichia coli*. *FEBS Lett.* 336:530–34

43. Doucet A, Katz AI. 1982. High-affinity Ca-Mg-ATPase along the rabbit nephron. *Am. J. Physiol.* 242:F346–52

44. Drescher D, DeLuca HF. 1971. Vitamin D stimulated calcium binding protein from rat intestinal mucosa. Purification and some properties. *Biochemistry* 10:2302–7

45. Duflos C, Bellaton C, Pansu D, Bronner F. 1995. Calcium solubility, intestinal sojourn time and paracellular permeability codetermine passive calcium absorption in rats. *J. Nutr.* 125:2348–55

46. Favus MJ. 1985. Factors that influence absorption and secretion of calcium in the small intestine and colon. *Am. J. Physiol.* 248:G147–57

47. Friedman PA, Gesek FA. 1995. Cellular calcium transport in renal epithelia: measurement, mechanisms, and regulation. *Physiol. Rev.* 75:429–71

48. Garcia NH, Ramsey CR, Knox FG. 1998. Understanding the role of paracellular transport in the proximal tubule. *News Physiol. Sci.* 13:38–43

49. Garrett JE, Capuano IV, Hammerland LG, Hung BC, Brown EM, et al. 1995. Molecular cloning and functional expression of human parathyroid calcium receptor cDNAs. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:12919–25

50. Gesek FA, Friedman PA. 1992. On the mechanism of parathyroid hormone stimulation of calcium uptake by mouse distal convoluted tubule cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* 90:749–58

51. Gkika D, Mahieu F, Nilius B, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2004. 80K-H as a new Ca²⁺ sensor regulating the activity of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel transient receptor potential cation channel V5 (TRPV5). *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:26351–57

52. Goodenough DA. 1999. Plugging the leaks. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96:319–21

53. Gopalakrishnan S, Dunn KW, Marrs JA. 2002. Rac1, but not RhoA, signaling protects epithelial adherens junction assembly during ATP depletion. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell. Physiol.* 283:C261–72

54. Hoenderop JG, Nilius B, Bindels RJ. 2005. Calcium absorption across epithelia. *Physiol. Rev.* 85:373–422

55. Jande SS, Brewer LM. 1974. Effects of vitamin D₃ on duodenal absorptive cells of chicks. An electron microscopic study. *Z. Anat. Entwicklungsgesch.* 144:249–65

56. Johnson JA, Kumar R. 1994. Renal and intestinal calcium transport: roles of vitamin D and vitamin D-dependent calcium binding proteins. *Semin. Nephrol.* 14:119–28

57. Jones G, Strugnell SA, DeLuca HF. 1998. Current understanding of the molecular actions of vitamin D. *Physiol. Rev.* 78:1193–231

58. Karbach U. 1994. New findings on the mechanism and regulation of intestinal calcium transport. *Z. Gastroenterol.* 32:500–13 (in German)

59. Kawahara K, Matsuzaki K. 1992. Activation of calcium channel by shear-stress in cultured renal distal tubule cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 184:198–205

60. Khanal RC, Nemere I. 2007. Membrane receptors for vitamin D metabolites. *Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Expr.* 17:31–47

61. Khanal RC, Nemere I. 2007. The ERp57/GRp58/1,25D₃-MARRS receptor: multiple functional roles in diverse cell systems. *Curr. Med. Chem.* 14:1087–93

62. Kikuchi K, Kikuchi T, Ghishan FK. 1988. Characterization of calcium transport by basolateral membrane vesicles of human small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol.* 255:G482–89

63. Koushik SV, Wang J, Rogers R, Moskophidis D, Lambert NA, et al. 2001. Targeted inactivation of the sodium-calcium exchanger (Ncx1) results in the lack of a heartbeat and abnormal myofibrillar organization. *FASEB J.* 15:1209–11

64. Krawitt EL, Schedl HP. 1968. In vivo calcium transport by rat small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol.* 214:232–36

65. Kretsinger RH, Mann JE, Simmons JG. 1982. Model of the facilitated diffusion of calcium by the intestinal calcium binding proteins. In *Vitamin D. Chemical, Biochemical and Clinical Endocrinology of Calcium Metabolism*, ed. AW Norman, K Schaefer, DV Herrath, H-G Grigoleit, pp. 233–48. Berlin: de Gruyter

66. Kurokawa K. 1994. The kidney and calcium homeostasis. *Kidney Int.* 44:S97–105

67. Kutuzova GD, Akhter S, Christakos S, Vanhooke J, Kimmel-Jehan C, DeLuca HF. 2006. Calbindin D9k knockout mice are indistinguishable from wild-type mice in phenotype and serum calcium level. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:12377–81

68. Lambers TT, Weidema AF, Nilius B, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2004. Regulation of the mouse epithelial Ca²⁺ channel TRPV6 by the Ca²⁺-sensor calmodulin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:28855–61

69. Larsson D, Nemere I. 2002. Vectorial transcellular calcium transport in intestine: integration of current models. *J. Biomed. Biotech.* 2:117–19

70. Lau K, Bourdeau JE. 1989. Evidence for cAMP-dependent protein kinase in mediating the parathyroid hormone-stimulated rise in cytosolic free calcium in rabbit connecting tubules. *J. Biol. Chem.* 264:4028–32

71. Lee GS, Choi KC, Park SM, An BS, Cho MC, Jeung EB. 2003. Expression of human calbindin-D(9k) correlated with age, vitamin D receptor and blood calcium level in the gastrointestinal tissues. *Clin. Biochem.* 36:255–61

72. Li YC, Bolt MJ, Cao LP, Sitrin MD. 2001. Effects of vitamin D receptor inactivation on the expression of calbindins and calcium metabolism. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* 281:E558–64

73. Li Z, Matsuoka S, Hryshko LV, Nicoll DA, Bersohn MM, et al. 1994. Cloning of the NCX2 isoform of the plasma membrane Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:17434–39

74. Lindsay R, Zhou H, Cosman F, Nieves J, Dempster DW, Hodsman AB. 2007. Effects of a one-month treatment with PTH(1–34) on bone formation on cancellous, endocortical, and periosteal surfaces of the human ilium. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 22:495–502

75. Lytton J, Lee SL, Lee WS, van Baal J, Bindels RJ, et al. 1996. The kidney sodium-calcium exchanger. *Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.* 779:58–72

76. Marcus CS, Lengemann FW. 1962. Absorption of Ca45 and Sr85 from solid and liquid food at various levels of the alimentary tract of the rat. *J. Nutr.* 77:155–60

77. May LG, Gay CV. 1997. Multiple G-protein involvement in parathyroid hormone regulation of acid production by osteoclasts. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 64:161–70

78. Montell C, Birnbaumer L, Flockerzi V, Bindels RJ, Bruford EA, et al. 2002. A unified nomenclature for the superfamily of TRP cation channels. *Mol. Cell* 9:229–31

79. Muller D, Hoenderop JG, Meij IC, van den Heuvel LP, Knoers NV, et al. 2000. Molecular cloning, tissue distribution, and chromosomal mapping of the human epithelial Ca²⁺ channel (ECaC1). *Genomics* 67:48–53

80. Murray TM, Rao LG, Divieti P, Bringhurst FR. 1995. Parathyroid hormone secretion and action: evidence for discrete receptors for the carboxyl-terminal region and related biological actions of carboxyl-terminal ligands. *Endocr. Rev.* 26:78–113

81. Nemere I, Campbell K. 2000. Immunochemical studies on the putative plasmalemmal receptor for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃. III. Vitamin D status. *Steroids* 65:451–57

82. Nemere I, Farach-Carson MC, Rohe B, Sterling TM, Norman AW, et al. 2004. Ribozyme knockdown functionally links a 1,25(OH)₂D₃ membrane binding protein (1,25D₃-MARRS) and phosphate uptake in intestinal cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101:7392–97

83. Nemere I, Larsson D. 2002. Does PTH have a direct effect on intestine? *J. Cell. Biochem.* 86:29–34

84. Nemere I, Leathers V, Norman AW. 1986. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D₃-mediated intestinal calcium transport. Biochemical identification of lysosomes containing calcium and calcium-binding protein (calbindin-D28K). *J. Biol. Chem.* 261:16106–14

85. Nemere I, Leathers V, Thompson BS, Luben RA, Norman AW. 1991. Redistribution of calbindin-D28k in chick intestine in response to calcium transport. *Endocrinology* 129:2972–84

86. Nemere I, Norman AW. 1988. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D₃-mediated vesicular transport of calcium in intestine: time-course studies. *Endocrinology* 122:2962–69

87. Nemere I, Norman AW. 1990. Transcaltachia, vesicular calcium transport, and microtubule-associated calbindin-D28K: emerging views of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃-mediated intestinal calcium absorption. *Miner. Electrolyte Metab.* 16:109–14

88. Nemere I, Norman AW. 1991. Redistribution of cathepsin B activity from the endosomal-lysosomal pathway in chick intestine within 3 min of calcium absorption. *Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.* 78:7–16

89. Nemere I, Ray R, McManus W. 2000. Immunochemical studies on the putative plasmalemmal receptor for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃: 1. Chick intestine. *Am. J. Phys.* 78:E1104–14

90. Nemere I, Szego CM. 1981. Early actions of parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol on isolated epithelial cells from rat intestine: I. Limited lysosomal enzyme release and calcium uptake. *Endocrinology* 108:1450–62

91. Nemere I, Szego CM. 1981. Early actions of parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol on isolated epithelial cells from rat intestine: II. Analyses of additivity, contribution of calcium, and modulatory influence of indomethacin. *Endocrinology* 109:2180–87

92. Ng RC, Rouse D, Suki WN. 1984. Calcium transport in the rabbit superficial proximal convoluted tubule. *J. Clin. Invest.* 74:834–42

93. Nicoll DA, Quednau BD, Qui Z, Xia YR, Lusis AJ, Philipson KD. 1996. Cloning of a third mammalian Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger, NCX3. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:24914–21

94. Niemeyer BA, Bergs C, Wissenbach U, Flockerzi V, Trost C. 2001. Competitive regulation of CaT-like-mediated Ca²⁺ entry by protein kinase C and calmodulin. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:3600–5

95. Nijenhuis T, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2005. TRPV5 and TRPV6 in Ca²⁺ (re)absorption: regulating Ca²⁺ entry at the gate. *Pflugers Arch.* 451:181–92

96. Norman AW. 2006. Minireview: vitamin D receptor: new assignments for an already busy receptor. *Endocrinology* 147:5542–48

97. Okano T, Tsugawa N, Morishita A, Kato S. 2004. Regulation of gene expression of epithelial calcium channels in intestine and kidney of mice by 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃. *J. Steroid. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 89–90:335–38

98. Pansu D, Bellaton C, Roche C, Bronner F. 1983. Duodenal and ileal calcium absorption in the rat and effects of vitamin D. *Am. J. Physiol.* 244:G695–700

99. Pappenheimer JR. 1988. Physiological regulation of epithelial junctions in intestinal epithelia. *Acta Physiol. Scand. Suppl.* 571:43–51

100. Peng JB, Chen XZ, Berger UV, Vassilev PM, Tsukaguchi H, et al. 1999. Molecular cloning and characterization of a channel-like transporter mediating intestinal calcium absorption. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:22739–46

101. Petersen OH, Fedirko NV. 2001. Calcium signalling: store-operated channel found at last. *Curr. Biol.* 11:R520–23

102. Phadnis R, Nemere I. 2003. Direct, rapid effect of 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃ on isolated intestinal cells. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 90:287–93

103. Philipson KD, Nicoll DA, Matsuoka S, Hryshko LV, Levitsky DO, Weiss JN. 1996. Molecular regulation of the Na<sup>+</sup>-Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchanger. *Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.* 779:20–28

104. Pike JW, Meyer MB, Watanuki M, Kim S, Zella LA, et al. 2007. Perspectives on mechanisms of gene regulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D<sub>3</sub> and its receptor. *J. Steroid. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 103:389–95

105. Potts JT Jr, Murray TM, Peacock M, Niall HD, Tregear GW, et al. 1971. Parathyroid hormone: sequence, synthesis, immunoassay studies. *Am. J. Med.* 50:639–49

106. Quarles LD. 2003. Extracellular calcium-sensing receptors in the parathyroid gland, kidney, and other tissues. *Curr. Opin. Nephrol. Hypertens.* 12:349–55

107. Raber G, Willems PH, Lang F, Nitschke R, van Os CH, Bindels RJ. 1997. Co-ordinated control of apical calcium influx and basolateral calcium efflux in rabbit cortical collecting system. *Cell Calcium.* 22:157–66

108. Raue F, Haag C, Schulze E, Frank-Raue K. 2006. The role of the extracellular calcium-sensing receptor in health and disease. *Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes* 114:397–405

109. Renkema KY, Nijenhuis T, van der Eerden BC, van der Kemp AW, Weinans H, et al. 2005. Hypervitaminosis D mediates compensatory Ca<sup>2+</sup> hyperabsorption in TRPV5 knockout mice. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* 16:3188–95

110. Reuter H, Henderson SA, Han T, Matsuda T, Baba A, et al. 2002. Knockout mice for pharmacological screening: testing the specificity of Na<sup>+</sup>-Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchange inhibitors. *Circ. Res.* 91:90–92

111. Riccardi D. 2002. Cell surface, ion-sensing receptors. *Exp. Physiol.* 87:403–11

112. Rohe B, Safford SE, Nemere I, Farach-Carson MC. 2005. Identification and characterization of 1,25D<sub>3</sub>-membrane-associated rapid response, steroid (1,25D<sub>3</sub>-MARRS)-binding protein in rat IEC-6 cells. *Steroids* 70:458–63

113. Rubinoff MJ, Nellans HN. 1985. Active calcium sequestration by intestinal microsomes. Stimulation by increased calcium load. *J. Biol. Chem.* 260:7824–28

114. Schoeber JP, Topala CN, Wang X, Diepens RJ, Lambers TT, et al. 2006. RGS2 inhibits the epithelial Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel TRPV6. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:29669–74

115. Schulze DH, Polumuri SK, Gille T, Ruknudin A. 2002. Functional regulation of alternatively spliced Na<sup>+</sup>/Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchanger (NCX1) isoforms. *Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.* 976:187–96

116. Sheehan GM, Kallakury BV, Sheehan CE, Fisher HA, Kaufman RP Jr, Ross JS. 2007. Loss of claudins-1 and -7 and expression of claudins-3 and -4 correlate with prognostic variables in prostatic adenocarcinomas. *Hum. Pathol.* 38:564–69

117. Sheikh MS, Ramirez A, Emmett M, Santa Ana C, Schiller LR, Fortran JS. 1988. Role of vitamin D-dependent and vitamin D-independent mechanisms in absorption of food calcium. *J. Clin. Investig.* 81:126–32

118. Simon DB, Lu Y, Choate KA, Velazquez H, Al-Sabban E, et al. 1999. Paracellin-1, a renal tight junction protein required for paracellular Mg<sup>2+</sup> resorption. *Science* 285:103–6

119. Slepchenko BM, Bronner F. 2001. Modeling of transcellular Ca transport in rat duodenum points to coexistence of two mechanisms of apical entry. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 281:C270–81

120. Smith RM, Baibakov B, Ikebuchi Y, White BH, Lambert NA, et al. 2000. Exocytotic insertion of calcium channels constrains compensatory endocytosis to sites of exocytosis. *J. Cell Biol.* 148:755–67

121. Song Y, Kato S, Fleet JC. 2003. Vitamin D receptor (VDR) knockout mice reveal VDR-independent regulation of intestinal calcium absorption and ECaC2 and calbindin D9k mRNA. *J. Nutr.* 133:374–80

122. Song Y, Peng X, Porta A, Takanaga H, Peng JB, et al. 2003. Calcium transporter 1 and epithelial calcium channel messenger ribonucleic acid are differentially regulated by 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D<sub>3</sub> in the intestine and kidney of mice. *Endocrinology* 144:3885–94

123. Spencer R, Charman M, Wilson P, Lawson E. 1976. Vitamin D-stimulated intestinal calcium absorption may not involve calcium-binding protein directly. *Nature* 263:161–63

124. Stauffer TP, Hilfiker H, Carafoli E, Strehler EE. 1993. Quantitative analysis of alternative splicing options of human plasma membrane calcium pump genes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268:25993–6003. Erratum, *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:32022

125. Sterling TM, Nemere I. 2007. Calcium uptake and membrane trafficking in response to PTH or 25(OH)D<sub>3</sub> in polarized intestinal epithelial cells. *Steroids* 72:151–57

126. Strehler EE, Zacharias DA. 2001. Role of alternative splicing in generating isoform diversity among plasma membrane calcium pumps. *Physiol. Rev.* 81:21–50

127. Tang VW, Goodenough DA. 2003. Paracellular ion channel at the tight junction. *Biophys. J.* 84:1660–73

128. Teti A, Rizzoli R, Zambonin Zallone A. 1991. Parathyroid hormone binding to cultured avian osteoclasts. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 174:1217–22

129. Thebault S, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2006. Epithelial Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ channels in kidney disease. *Adv. Chronic Kidney Dis.* 13:110–17

130. Tregear GW, Van Rietschoten J, Greene E, Keutmann HT, Niall HD, et al. 1973. Bovine parathyroid hormone: minimum chain length of synthetic peptide required for biological activity. *Endocrinology* 93:1349–53

131. Ullrich KJ, Rumrich G, Kloss S. 1976. Active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the proximal tubule of the rat kidney. Dependence on sodium- and buffer transport. *Pflugers Arch.* 364:223–28

132. van Abel M, Hoenderop JG, van der Kemp AW, Friedlaender MM, van Leeuwen JP, Bindels RJ. 2005. Coordinated control of renal Ca²⁺ transport proteins by parathyroid hormone. *Kidney Int.* 68:1708–21

133. Van Cromphaut SJ, Dewerchin M, Hoenderop JG, Stockmans I, Van Herck E, et al. 2001. Duodenal calcium absorption in vitamin D receptor-knockout mice: functional and molecular aspects. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:13324–29

134. van de Graaf SF, Chang Q, Mensenkamp AR, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2006. Direct interaction with Rab11a targets the epithelial Ca²⁺ channels TRPV5 and TRPV6 to the plasma membrane. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 26:303–12

135. van de Graaf SF, van der Kemp AW, van den Berg D, van Oorschot M, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ. 2006. Identification of BSPRY as a novel auxiliary protein inhibiting TRPV5 activity. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* 17:26–30

136. Vergne-Marini P, Parker TF, Pak CY, Hull AR, DeLuca HF, Fordtran JS. 1976. Jejunal and ileal absorption in patients with chronic renal disease. Effect of 1α-hydroxycholecalciferol. *J. Clin. Invest.* 57:861–66

137. Walters JR, Balesaria S, Chavele KM, Taylor V, Berry JL, et al. 2006. Calcium channel TRPV6 expression in human duodenum: different relationships to the vitamin D system and aging in men and women. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 21:1770–77

138. Walters JR, Balesaria S, Khair U, Sangha S, Banks L, Berry JL. 2007. The effects of Vitamin D metabolites on expression of genes for calcium transporters in human duodenum. *J. Steroid. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 103:509–12

139. Walters JR, Howard A, Lowery LJ, Mawer EB, Legon S. 1999. Expression of genes involved in calcium absorption in human duodenum. *Eur. J. Clin. Invest.* 29:214–19

140. Wang Y, Zhang J, Yi XJ, Yu FS. 2004. Activation of ERK1/2 MAP kinase pathway induces tight junction disruption in human corneal epithelial cells. *Exp. Eye Res.* 78:125–36

141. Warner RR, Coleman JR. 1975. Electron probe analysis of calcium transport by small intestine. *J. Cell Biol.* 64:54–74

142. Wasserman RH, Chandler JS, Meyer SA, Smith CA, Brindak ME, et al. 1992. Intestinal calcium transport and calcium extrusion processes at the basolateral membrane. *J. Nutr.* 122(Suppl. 3):662–71

143. Wasserman RH, Smith CA, Brindak ME, De Talamoni N, Fullmer CS, et al. 1992. Vitamin D and mineral deficiencies increase the plasma membrane calcium pump of chicken intestine. *Gastroenterology* 102:886–94

144. White KE, Gesek FA, Reilly RF, Friedman PA. 1998. NCX1 Na/Ca exchanger inhibition by antisense oligonucleotides in mouse distal convoluted tubule cells. *Kidney Int.* 54:897–906

145. Wilcox ER, Burton QL, Naz S, Riazuddin S, Smith TN, et al. 2001. Mutations in the gene encoding tight junction claudin-14 cause autosomal recessive deafness DFNB29. *Cell* 104:165–72

146. Wilson FH, Disse-Nicodeme S, Choate KA, Ishikawa K, Nelson-Williams C, et al. 2001. Human hypertension caused by mutations in WNK kinases. *Science* 293:1107–12

147. Wood RJ, Tchack L, Taparia S. 2001. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D₃ increases the expression of the CaT1 epithelial calcium channel in the Caco-2 human intestinal cell line. *BMC Physiol.* 1:11

148. Yu AS, Boim M, Hebert SC, Castellano A, Perez-Reyes E, Lytton J. 1995. Molecular characterization of renal calcium channel beta-subunit transcripts. *Am. J. Physiol. Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol.* 268:F525–31

149. Zhang X, Davis JQ, Carpenter S, Bennett V. 1998. Structural requirements for association of neurofascin with ankyrin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:30785–94

# Contents

Translating Nutrition Science into Policy as Witness and Actor  
Irwin H. Rosenberg ……………………………………………………………… 1  

The Efficiency of Cellular Energy Transduction and Its Implications  
for Obesity  
Mary-Ellen Harper, Katherine Green, and Martin D. Brand …………………… 13  

Sugar Absorption in the Intestine: The Role of GLUT2  
George L. Kellett, Edith Brot-Laroche, Oliver J. Mace, and Armelle Leturque … 35  

Cystic Fibrosis and Nutrition: Linking Phospholipids and Essential  
Fatty Acids with Thiol Metabolism  
Sheila M. Innis and A. George F. Davidson …………………………………… 55  

The Emerging Functions and Mechanisms of Mammalian Fatty  
Acid-Binding Proteins  
Judith Storch and Betina Corsico ……………………………………………… 73  

Where Does Fetal and Embryonic Cholesterol Originate  
and What Does It Do?  
Laura A. Woollett ……………………………………………………………… 97  

Nicotinic Acid, Nicotinamide, and Nicotinamide Riboside:  
A Molecular Evaluation of NAD+ Precursor Vitamins  
in Human Nutrition  
Katrina L. Bogan and Charles Brenner ………………………………………… 115  

Dietary Protein and Bone Health: Roles of Amino Acid-Sensing  
Receptors in the Control of Calcium Metabolism and Bone  
Homeostasis  
A.D. Conigrave, E.M. Brown, and R. Rizzoli ………………………………… 131  

Nutrigenomics and Selenium: Gene Expression Patterns, Physiological  
Targets, and Genetics  
John Hesketh …………………………………………………………………… 157  

Regulation of Intestinal Calcium Transport  
Ramesh C. Khanal and Ilka Nemere …………………………………………… 179  

Systemic Iron Homeostasis and the Iron-Responsive  
Element/Iron-Regulatory Protein (IRE/IRP) Regulatory Network  
Martina U. Muckenthaler, Bruno Galy, and Matthias W. Hentze ……………… 197

Eukaryotic-Microbiota Crosstalk: Potential Mechanisms for Health Benefits of Prebiotics and Probiotics  
**Norman G. Hord** ………………………………………… 215  

Insulin Signaling in the Pancreatic β-Cell  
**Ingo B. Leibiger, Barbara Leibiger, and Per-Olof Berggren** ………………………………………… 233  

Malonyl-CoA, a Key Signaling Molecule in Mammalian Cells  
**David Saggerson** ………………………………………… 253  

Methionine Metabolism and Liver Disease  
**José M. Mato, M. Luz Martínez-Chantar, and Shelly C. Lu** ………………………………………… 273  

Regulation of Food Intake Through Hypothalamic Signaling Networks Involving mTOR  
**Stephen C. Woods, Randy J. Seeley, and Daniela Cota** ………………………………………… 295  

Nutrition and Mutagenesis  
**Lynnette R. Ferguson and Martin Philpott** ………………………………………… 313  

Complex Genetics of Obesity in Mouse Models  
**Daniel Pomp, Derrick Nehrenberg, and Daria Estrada-Smith** ………………………………………… 331  

Dietary Manipulation of Histone Structure and Function  
**Barbara Delage and Roderick H. Dashwood** ………………………………………… 347  

Nutritional Implications of Genetic Taste Variation: The Role of PROP Sensitivity and Other Taste Receptors  
**Beverley J. Tepper** ………………………………………… 367  

Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism in the Human Newborn  
**Satish C. Kalhan and Dennis M. Bier** ………………………………………… 389  

Achieving a Healthy Weight Gain During Pregnancy  
**Christine M. Olson** ………………………………………… 411  

Age-Related Changes in Nutrient Utilization by Companion Animals  
**George C. Fahey Jr., Kathleen A. Barry, and Kelly S. Swanson** ………………………………………… 425  

Bioethical Considerations for Human Nutrigenomics  
**Manuela M. Bergmann, Ulf Görman, and John C. Mathers** ………………………………………… 447  

Indexes  

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 24–28 ………………………………………… 469  

Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 24–28 ………………………………………… 472  

Errata  

An online log of corrections to *Annual Review of Nutrition* articles may be found at  
http://nutr.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml

ANNUAL REVIEWS
It's about time. Your time. It's time well spent.

New From Annual Reviews:
**Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application**
Volume 1 • Online January 2014 • http://statistics.annualreviews.org

Editor: Stephen E. Fienberg, Carnegie Mellon University  
Associate Editors: Nancy Reid, University of Toronto  
Stephen M. Stigler, University of Chicago  

The Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application aims to inform statisticians and quantitative methodologists, as well as all scientists and users of statistics about major methodological advances and the computational tools that allow for their implementation. It will include developments in the field of statistics, including theoretical statistical underpinnings of new methodology, as well as developments in specific application domains such as biostatistics and bioinformatics, economics, machine learning, psychology, sociology, and aspects of the physical sciences.

Complimentary online access to the first volume will be available until January 2015.

TABLE OF CONTENTS:

- What Is Statistics? Stephen E. Fienberg
- A Systematic Statistical Approach to Evaluating Evidence from Observational Studies, David Madigan, Paul E. Stang, Jesse A. Berlin, Martijn Schuemie, J. Marc Overhage, Marc A. Suchard, Bill Dumouchel, Abraham G. Hartzema, Patrick B. Ryan
- The Role of Statistics in the Discovery of a Higgs Boson, David A. van Dyk
- Brain Imaging Analysis, F. DuBois Bowman
- Statistics and Climate, Peter Guttorp
- Climate Simulators and Climate Projections, Jonathan Rougier, Michael Goldstein
- Probabilistic Forecasting, Tilmann Gneiting, Matthias Katzfuss
- Bayesian Computational Tools, Christian P. Robert
- Bayesian Computation Via Markov Chain Monte Carlo, Radu V. Craiu, Jeffrey S. Rosenthal
- Build, Compute, Critique, Repeat: Data Analysis with Latent Variable Models, David M. Blei
- Structured Regularizers for High-Dimensional Problems: Statistical and Computational Issues, Martin J. Wainwright

- High-Dimensional Statistics with a View Toward Applications in Biology, Peter Bühlmann, Markus Kalisch, Lukas Meier
- Next-Generation Statistical Genetics: Modeling, Penalization, and Optimization in High-Dimensional Data, Kenneth Lange, Jeanette C. Papp, Janet S. Sinsheimer, Eric M. Sobel
- Breaking Bad: Two Decades of Life-Course Data Analysis in Criminology, Developmental Psychology, and Beyond, Elena A. Erosheva, Ross L. Matsueda, Donatello Telesca
- Event History Analysis, Niels Keiding
- Statistical Evaluation of Forensic DNA Profile Evidence, Christopher D. Steele, David J. Balding
- Using League Table Rankings in Public Policy Formation: Statistical Issues, Harvey Goldstein
- Statistical Ecology, Ruth King
- Estimating the Number of Species in Microbial Diversity Studies, John Bunge, Amy Willis, Fiona Walsh
- Dynamic Treatment Regimes, Bibhas Chakraborty, Susan A. Murphy
- Statistics and Related Topics in Single-Molecule Biophysics, Hong Qian, S.C. Kou
- Statistics and Quantitative Risk Management for Banking and Insurance, Paul Embrechts, Marius Hofert

Access this and all other Annual Reviews journals via your institution at www.annualreviews.org.
