
http://www.kidney-international.org

© 2008 International Society of Nephrology

**TRPV5: an ingeniously controlled calcium channel**

Theun de Groot¹, René J.M. Bindels¹ and Joost G.J. Hoenderop¹

¹Department of Physiology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Body Ca²⁺ homeostasis is tightly controlled and slight disturbances in renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption can lead to excessive urine Ca²⁺ excretion and promote kidney stone formation. The epithelial Ca²⁺ channel TRPV5 constitutes the rate-limiting step of active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the kidney. Elucidation of the molecular pathways controlling TRPV5 function provides important information for our understanding of renal Ca²⁺ handling, since active Ca²⁺ reabsorption fine-tunes the final amount of Ca²⁺ excreted into the urine. Over the last years, the molecular regulation of TRPV5 has been dismantled in detail. Various calciotropic hormones, known to alter renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption, affect the expression of TRPV5. Others stimulate the trafficking of TRPV5 to the plasma membrane, while a number of associated proteins and ions control channel activity at the plasma membrane. Dynamic cell surface presence of TRPV5 is largely mediated by endosomal recycling processes allowing internalized channels to reappear at the plasma membrane. We present recently identified factors shown to modulate TRPV5 activity by diverse mechanisms to ultimately control renal Ca²⁺ handling. The selected factors include klotho, tissue kallikrein, pH, Ca²⁺, Mg²⁺, PIP₂ and WNK4. This review covers the distinctive properties and regulation of the highly Ca²⁺-selective TRPV5 channel and highlights the implications for our understanding of the process of Ca²⁺ reabsorption.

Ca²⁺ ions play a crucial role in various cellular processes and extracellular Ca²⁺ levels are kept within a narrow range through a concerted interplay of several organs, including bone, intestine, and kidney. Disturbances in the overall Ca²⁺ balance could affect many vital physiological functions, including intracellular signaling, muscle contraction, neuron excitation, and bone mineralization. Ca²⁺ is absorbed from the diet to enter the blood compartment and excreted through the urine, which is tightly controlled by the kidney through the reabsorption of Ca²⁺ from the filtrate. The majority of Ca²⁺ reabsorption takes place in the proximal tubules and the thick ascending limb of Henle through the passive paracellular route. In this part of the nephron, Ca²⁺ follows local Na⁺ reabsorption and thus Ca²⁺ reabsorption is not specifically regulated here. The remaining ~15% of Ca²⁺ is taken up by means of active transcellular transport. The latter process is restricted to the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and the connecting tubule (CNT). Transepithelial Ca²⁺ reabsorption occurs in a series of consecutive steps driven by a highly favorable electrochemical driving force. Ca²⁺ enters the cell through the apical transient receptor potential vanilloid 5 (TRPV5) Ca²⁺ channel. In the cell, calbindin-D₂₈K binds Ca²⁺ and thereby enlarges the capacity for Ca²⁺ diffusion from the apical toward the basolateral compartment. The binding kinetics of calbindin-D₂₈K are such that it allows intracellular Ca²⁺ signaling to operate independently of transcellular Ca²⁺ movement. Finally, Ca²⁺ is transported over the basolateral membrane by the Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger (NCX1) and the plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase (PMCA1b) to re-enter the bloodstream (Figure 1).

TRPV5 belongs to the TRP superfamily, which consists of cation-selective ion channels with similar molecular structures. Of all TRP channels, TRPV6 holds the highest homology with TRPV5. These Ca²⁺-selective channels share biophysical properties highly distinct from other TRP channels but, in contrast to TRPV5, TRPV6 is more ubiquitously expressed. The critical role of TRPV5 in renal Ca²⁺ handling was demonstrated by the generation of mice lacking this Ca²⁺ channel. These mice displayed several phenotypic features related to a diminished active Ca²⁺ reabsorption. TRPV5-knockout (TRPV5⁻/-) mice exhibited marked hypercalciuria, albeit their blood Ca²⁺ levels were kept within the normal range. Additionally, a reduced trabecular and cortical bone thickness indicated disturbed

Correspondence: Joost G.J. Hoenderop, Department of Physiology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 286, PO Box 9101, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands. E-mail: j.hoenderop@ncmls.ru.nl

Received 25 February 2008; revised 4 April 2008; accepted 29 April 2008; published online 2 July 2008

Kidney International (2008) 74, 1241–1246

mini review

T de Groot et al.: TRPV5: an ingeniously controlled calcium channel

Apical

Ca²⁺
TRPV5
Dynamín
Clathrin-coated pit
Clathrin
Small internalized
vesicles
Adaptor
Rab11a
GTP
Recycling
Protein
breakdown
Endosomes with many
TRPV5 channels

Basolateral
PMCA1b
NCX1
Ca²⁺
Na⁺

Figure 1 | TRPV5 function and regulation in active renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption. After gene transcription and translation into protein, TRPV5 channels are assembled into functional tetrameric channels. Through the Golgi apparatus these channels reach the plasma membrane, where they allow the influx of Ca²⁺. Following Ca²⁺ entry through TRPV5, Ca²⁺ bound to calbindin-D₂₈k diffuses to the basolateral side, where it is extruded into the blood compartment through NCX1 and to a lesser extent PMCA1b. Shortly after the arrival of TRPV5 in the plasma membrane, the channels are internalized through dynamin- and clathrin-dependent processes. Internalized TRPV5 first appears in small vesicles after which they enter recycling endosomes or are degraded. By interaction with Rab11a proteins present in the recycling endosome, TRPV5 channels can reappear at the plasma membrane to undergo another round of Ca²⁺ influx.

bone morphology. Finally, intestinal Ca²⁺ absorption was significantly increased, likely compensating for the impaired renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption.⁵

TRPV5 HALLMARKS

The gene encoding TRPV5 consists of 15 exons, which translates into a protein of 729 amino acids in human.² This protein contains six putative transmembrane domains and an intracellular N and C tail. Functional TRPV5 channels exist as tetramers forming together a single Ca²⁺-selective pore.² The pore is formed by the hydrophobic region between TM5 and TM6.² The pore-residue aspartate-542 appeared to be crucial for high-affinity Ca²⁺ binding and selectivity. Mutation of this aspartate into an alanine abolished Ca²⁺ permeation, whereas the current carried by monovalent cations remained intact.⁶ Early patch clamp studies revealed a constitutively open channel, as no stimulus or ligand was required for TRPV5-mediated Ca²⁺ entry.⁶ Furthermore, the subcellular localization of TRPV5 was studied using fluorescence microscopy and enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)-tagged TRPV5. Surprisingly, distinct plasma membrane localization could not be detected, as eGFP-TRPV5 appeared to be primarily located in intracellular vesicles.⁷,⁸ Although not visible, cell surface expression of eGFP-TRPV5 was confirmed with biochemical and functional studies.⁸ A similar intracellular distribution was observed for endogenous TRPV5 in primary cultures of rabbit CNT and cortical collecting duct (CCD) cells.⁹ The existence of active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the CCD is specific for rabbit, whereas in other species active Ca²⁺ transport is predominantly located

in late DCT and CNT. Altogether, TRPV5 expression at the plasma membrane is limited providing a mechanism allowing controlled Ca²⁺ influx.

Investigations of the trafficking of TRPV5 to the plasma membrane have shed light on the cellular distribution of the channel. Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy revealed highly mobile eGFP-TRPV5-containing vesicles in the region close to the plasma membrane.⁸ Presence of TRPV5 in the plasma membrane appeared to be highly dynamic.⁸ After an irreversible block of TRPV5 channels present at the cell surface, the TRPV5 activity restored for ~50% within a 10 min recovery period.⁸ This likely resulted from rapid insertion of new, unblocked channels. In addition, Van de Graaf et al.⁷ recently identified several mechanisms underlying TRPV5 endocytosis. After reaching the cell surface, the TRPV5 channel was internalized through dynamin- and clathrin-dependent processes (Figure 1). First, TRPV5 appeared in numerous small vesicles, before entering larger vesicles, where it colocalized with Rab11a, a marker for recycling endosomes.⁷ The majority of internalized TRPV5 entered the recycling pathway, whereas only a minor part was degraded.⁷ TRPV5 channels present in recycling endosomes were able to reach the plasma membrane again through direct interaction with Rab11a (Figure 1). Moreover, the presence of a large and stable recycling pool of TRPV5 channels was demonstrated, as blocking protein biosynthesis did not reduce TRPV5-mediated Ca²⁺ influx. Currently, it is unknown whether TRPV5 is functional in recycling endosomes. Altogether, the continuous endosomal recycling of internalized TRPV5 channels enables TRPV5 reappearance at

1242
Kidney International (2008) **74**, 1241–1246
the plasma membrane providing a synthesis-independent pathway for the apical influx of Ca²⁺.

Facing the extracellular environment, TRPV5 channels exhibit closed and open states, during which Ca²⁺ enters the cell. The probability of a channel being open is termed open probability (P₀), whereas conductance is the amount of current during the open state. Taken together, conductance and P₀ determine TRPV5 single-channel activity. Here, we present an overview of factors shown to regulate TRPV5 function by changing plasma membrane abundance or single-channel activity. These factors include klotho, tissue kallikrein (TK), pH, Ca²⁺, PIP₂, Mg²⁺, and WNK4. Furthermore, cAMP-elevating hormones, such as parathyroid hormone (PTH), rapidly affect Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the distal part of the nephron.²,¹⁰,¹¹ The potential role of TRPV5 in this cAMP-dependent process will also be discussed.

### FACTORS REGULATING TRPV5 ACTIVITY

#### Klotho

Recent studies identified the antiaging hormone klotho as an important player in Ca²⁺ homeostasis. First, klotho-deficient mice exhibit a reduced bone mineral density and a mild hypercalcemia.¹² Second, the active form of vitamin D, released upon Ca²⁺ depletion, increased renal klotho expression.¹³ Klotho is a single-pass transmembrane protein containing a large extracellular domain, which exhibits β-glucuronidase activity upon cleavage.¹⁴ In 2005, Chang et al.¹⁵ demonstrated a stimulatory effect of klotho on TRPV5 activity, whereas overexpression of klotho markedly increased TRPV5-mediated ⁴⁵Ca²⁺ uptake. In agreement, transepithelial Ca²⁺ transport in primary cultures of CNT and CCD cells was significantly elevated after treatment with supernatant from klotho-secreting cells.¹⁵ This stimulatory effect of klotho was mimicked by extracellular application of purified β-glucuronidase, suggesting that the β-glucuronidase activity of klotho is responsible for TRPV5 activation.¹⁵ Together with the detection of klotho in urine and serum, these data suggested that this antiaging hormone operates from the extracellular compartment through its enzymatic activity. This was further substantiated by mutation of the conserved N-glycosylation site (N358) of TRPV5, located in the extracellular loop between TM1 and TM2. The activity of N358Q-TRPV5 was not different from wild-type TRPV5; however, the stimulatory effect of klotho was abolished.¹⁵ Cell surface protein biotinylation studies elucidated the molecular mechanism by which klotho stimulates TRPV5 activity. Klotho treatment for 16h resulted in significant elevation of TRPV5 channels present at the plasma membrane.¹⁵ Taken together, these data indicate that modification of TRPV5 glycosylation through locally excreted klotho induces channel accumulation in the plasma membrane of DCT and CNT. In the absence of klotho, TRPV5 may not be well expressed at the luminal membrane resulting in Ca²⁺ wasting as demonstrated by an increased fractional excretion of Ca²⁺ in klotho-deficient mice.¹⁶

#### Tissue kallikrein

A marked hypercalciuria as observed in TK-deficient mice, implicating TK as a potential regulator of TRPV5 activity.¹⁷ Indeed, TK was further identified as a stimulator of transcellular Ca²⁺ reabsorption by enhancing the plasma membrane expression of TRPV5.¹⁸ TK is a serine protease that is produced as an inactive precursor in the CNT. Upon cleavage, TK is secreted into the urine and can indirectly, through the conversion of kinogens to kinins, or directly by itself, activate kinin receptors like the bradykinin (BK) 2 receptor. Activation of the BK2 receptor is known to activate phospholipase C (PLC) by Gα signaling. This results in the formation of diacylglycerol, which in turn activates protein kinase C (PKC). To investigate whether TRPV5 activity was regulated through this pathway, first, cells were pretreated with the PLC inhibitor U73122. This abolished the previously observed stimulation of TRPV5 activity.¹⁸ Second, application of a cell permeable analog of diacylglycerol mimicked TK stimulation.¹⁸ Third, the role of PKC was investigated, by mutating six putative PKC phosphorylation sites in TRPV5 into alanines. Detailed functional analysis revealed two PKC phosphorylation sites to be essential for TK-mediated TRPV5 stimulation.¹⁸ This stimulatory effect is most probably due to an accumulation of TRPV5 at the plasma membrane, as shown by cell surface biotinylation studies.¹⁸ In addition, a delayed degradation of biotinylated TRPV5 channels was observed, suggesting that TK either delays TRPV5 retrieval from the plasma membrane or enhances the recycling capacity for TRPV5. Recently, Cha et al.¹⁹ demonstrated an essential role for caveolin-1 in the PKC-mediated TRPV5 plasma membrane accumulation. The TK effect was further studied in ex vivo conditions using primary cultures of rabbit CNT and CCD cells. Only apical application of TK elevated Ca²⁺ transport, as basolateral addition had no effect.¹⁸ Furthermore, urinary TK excretion was increased in TRPV5⁻/⁻ mice, suggesting a physiological feedback mechanism that activates TK secretion upon hypercalciuria. The difference in TK excretion between control and TRPV5⁻/⁻ mice was abolished when these mice were fed a high Ca²⁺ diet, which implies a role for TK in the maintenance of the Ca²⁺ balance.¹⁸ Taken together, these data indicate that TK acts in an autocrine/paracrine manner to increase active Ca²⁺ reabsorption through an increased TRPV5 plasma membrane expression.

#### pH

Changes in acid-base balance are known to affect Ca²⁺ homeostasis. Chronic metabolic acidosis induced Ca²⁺ loss from bone and elevated renal Ca²⁺ excretion.⁸ Alterations in acid-base status affected Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the DCT and CNT, as observed by micropuncture studies.²⁰ Further, transcellular Ca²⁺ transport at pH 5.6 in primary cultures of rabbit CNT and CCD cells was markedly lowered in comparison to transport measured at pH 7.5.²¹ In addition to transepithelial transport, the apical ⁴⁵Ca²⁺ influx in these renal cells exhibited a similar sensitivity to extracellular pH.
Recently, several molecular mechanisms underlying the pH-sensitive regulation of the active reabsorption of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ were identified by the discovery of multiple pH-dependent pathways directly controlling TRPV5. First, TRPV5 protein expression appeared to be under direct control of the acid-base states.²² Second, Lambers *et al.*⁸ proposed a dynamic insertion of TRPV5-containing vesicles into the plasma membrane as a new mechanism by which extracellular pH determines TRPV5 activity. Using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, the trafficking of eGFP-TRPV5-containing vesicles toward the plasma membrane was monitored at acidic (6.0) and alkaline (8.5) pH. Upon extracellular alkalinization, a pool of TRPV5-containing vesicles was rapidly recruited to the cell surface without collapsing into the plasma membrane, as reflected by the lack of fluorescence diffusion after reaching the plasma membrane. These vesicles contained functional TRPV5 channels as extracellular alkalinization was accompanied by an increased TRPV5 activity, as measured electrophysiologically and by $^{45}\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ uptake assays.⁸ A significant reduction of the pH readily induced the internalization of TRPV5-containing vesicles from the plasma membrane, diminishing the channel activity. Plasma membrane retrieval of TRPV5 has been verified by cell surface biotinylation and total internal reflection fluorescence analysis of the lateral motility of vesicles. Extracellular acidification strongly increased the motility of single vesicles, referring to TRPV5 internalization.⁸ In conclusion, the increased $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ excretion upon urinary acidosis is probably in part due to the dynamic retrieval of TRPV5-containing vesicles from the plasma membrane.

Third, both intra- and extracellular acidification reduced TRPV5 single-channel activity, resulting from a diminished $P_{\mathrm{o}}$ and single-channel conductance.²³ Two amino acids in the TRPV5 protein appeared to function as pH sensors. Binding of protons to glutamate-522 or lysine-607, which localize to the extra- and intracellular environment, respectively, resulted in decreased TRPV5 activity.²³,²⁴ Yeh *et al.*²⁴ proposed a model in which binding of protons to either sensor induces a conformational change of the TRPV5 pore helix, leading to a lowered channel activity. Mutating the extracellular pH sensor glutamate-522 into glutamine prevented the extracellular acidification-induced reduction of $P_{\mathrm{o}}$, whereas the single-channel conductance was not altered.²⁴ Also intracellular acidification mainly reduced the TRPV5 activity by decreasing $P_{\mathrm{o}}$.²⁵ Here, inside-out patch clamp recordings identified, besides closed and open states, a subconductance state in which the channel was only partial open. Upon lowering intracellular pH the occurrence of subconductance and full open states strongly diminished.²⁵ Thus, proton binding to both pH sensors reduced TRPV5 single-channel activity by negative modulation of $P_{\mathrm{o}}$. Mechanisms causing the decrease of single-channel conductance upon acidification remain to be identified. Altogether, regulation of TRPV5 single-channel activity provides a third mechanism for acidosis-induced down-regulation of TRPV5 activity leading to calciuresis.

$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$

The $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration varies between 1 and 1.5 mM in the luminal compartment of DCT and CNT, whereas under resting conditions the cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration in these cells is maintained around 100 nM. This concentration gradient is generated by $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-ATPases and NCX1, which transport $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from the cytosol into internal stores and out of the cell. In 2001 Nilius *et al.*²⁶ demonstrated that intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ acts as a negative feedback switch regulating TRPV5 activity. This mechanism was investigated by performing electrophysiological measurements in HEK 293 cells expressing TRPV5. In divalent cation-free solutions, these cells exhibited large TRPV5-mediated $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ currents.²⁶ Addition of 1 mM $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ elicited a $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ current, followed by a marked reduction in current, indicative of rapid channel inactivation.²⁶ The rate of this $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-dependent inactivation positively correlated with the flow of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ through the channel, achieved by enlarging the negative membrane potential or the extracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration.²⁶ Remarkably, increasing cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ levels appeared sufficient to induce channel inactivation.²⁶ As the intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration necessary for half-maximal inhibition ($\mathrm{IC}_{50}$) of TRPV5-mediated $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ currents (67 nM) was close to physiological cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ levels, this process is likely to occur *in vivo*. Channel inactivation was strongly diminished under conditions of strong cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ buffering with 10 mM BAPTA,²⁶ suggesting an additional role for calbindin-D₂₈K *in vivo*. However, these high BAPTA concentrations did not eliminate inactivation, in line with a $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-sensitive microdomain close to the channel pore. Mutational analysis in a follow-up study confirmed this assumption, as two main $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-sensing stretches were identified in the C terminus of TRPV5.²⁷ Deletion of the last 30 amino acids markedly desensitized the channel to $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-dependent inactivation. The second $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-sensing domain was located between residues 650 and 653.²⁷ Construction of a deletion mutant missing both stretches, generated a functional $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ channel, unable to inactivate in the presence of 1 μM intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$. As a dramatic consequence, cells expressing this deletion mutant only survived in culture conditions in which $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ influx was prevented.²⁷ Therefore, $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-dependent inactivation is an important process *in vivo*, as the absence of this negative feedback mechanism resulted in cell death.

A final aspect of TRPV5 regulation by intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration was established by investigating the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ dependency of TRPV5 recycling.⁷ Transient expression of TRPV5 in HEK293 cells induced a ~2-fold increase in cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ levels. Lowering cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ by the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ chelator BAPTA-AM did not affect internalization rates, whereas the reappearance of internalized TRPV5 at the plasma membrane was significantly reduced.⁷ Increase in the cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration might be a trigger to replace inactivated TRPV5 at the plasma membrane with active channels from the intracellular department.⁷ In conclusion, through the combined effect of channel inactivation and the tight control of TRPV5 recycling, intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ levels

serve to regulate channel function to maintain optimal Ca²⁺ reabsorption without excessive influx of Ca²⁺.

Intracellular Mg²⁺ and PIP₂

Intracellular Mg²⁺ reversibly inhibited TRPV 5 activity during negative membrane potentials in a slow (30–40 s) and concentration-dependent manner in HEK 293 cells expressing TRPV 5.²⁸ This inhibition likely resulted from conformational changes of TRPV 5 induced by direct Mg²⁺ binding to aspartate-542.²⁸ Further, the plasma membrane phospholipid PIP₂, known to regulate ion channels and transporters through PLC activation, significantly reduced TRPV 5 sensitivity for Mg²⁺.²⁸ This PIP₂ effect occurred without affecting Mg²⁺ binding to TRPV 5. Moreover, PIP₂ was also found to activate TRPV 5 independent of intracellular Mg²⁺.²⁸ Thus, TRPV 5 sensitivity for Mg²⁺ is indirectly determined by PIP₂, as this phospholipid likely stabilizes TRPV 5 in open conformation and thereby prevents conformational changes due to Mg²⁺ binding. A potential role for Mg²⁺ in vivo is supported by high intracellular Mg²⁺ concentrations in the order of 0.7 mmol/l. The physiological mechanism by which PIP₂ regulates TRPV 5 activity might be related to PLC-activating hormones.

WNK4

WNKs (With-No-Lysine [K]) are a recently discovered family of serine/threonine protein kinases that contain a uniquely structured catalytic domain. The role of WNK kinases in regulating ion transport was first demonstrated by findings that mutations in these kinases cause familial hyperkalemic hypertension.²⁹ WNK4 has been suggested to affect renal Ca²⁺ handling by regulating TRPV 5 function. Familial hyperkalemic hypertension patients harboring the Q565E mutation in WNK4, exhibit a marked hypercalciuria.³⁰ Using Xenopus laevis oocytes, WNK4 was found to enhance TRPV 5-mediated Ca²⁺ uptake due to an enhanced cell surface expression.³⁰

cAMP-elevating hormones

Renal micropuncture and microperfusion studies in a variety of species demonstrated that several calciotropic hormones,

including PTH, rapidly stimulate active Ca²⁺ reabsorption.¹⁰,³¹ PTH is released from the parathyroid glands at low extracellular Ca²⁺, which is sensed by the Ca²⁺-sensing receptor, and acts on the kidney and other tissues to maintain Ca²⁺ homeostasis. In the distal part of the nephron, PTH is suggested to affect Ca²⁺ reabsorption through the adenyl cyclase-cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA) pathway.¹⁰,³¹ In primary cultures of rabbit DCT and CNT cells, PTH elicited a marked accumulation of cAMP levels.¹¹ Furthermore, the stimulatory effects of PTH on active Ca²⁺ reabsorption could be mimicked by forskolin and plasma membrane permeable cAMP analogs, and were blocked by cAMP inhibitors.³² In addition, investigation of purified luminal membranes from the distal nephron demonstrated a marked increase in luminal Ca²⁺ uptake after PTH stimulation.³¹ Similar results were obtained by measuring intracellular Ca²⁺ levels in primary cultures of isolated rabbit DCT and CNT cells.³² Thus, a cAMP-mediated pathway stimulates Ca²⁺ reabsorption through increasing luminal Ca²⁺ uptake, likely through a PKA-dependent mechanism.¹⁰,³¹,³² As TRPV 5 constitutes the apical entry gate for Ca²⁺ in DCT and CNT, this channel might play a role in this process.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

Since the discovery of TRPV 5, various mechanisms affecting renal Ca²⁺ reabsorption through this epithelial Ca²⁺ channel have been elucidated. Besides the factors discussed in this review, various hormones and associated proteins control TRPV 5 function through modulation of protein expression and activity.² Establishing the molecular consequences of these factors in vivo remains difficult due to limited possibilities in the investigation of endogenous TRPV 5 channels. Native TRPV 5 currents have not yet been reported and detection methods should be improved to study intracellular processing of TRPV 5 in more detail. Furthermore, mechanisms controlling TRPV 5 recycling and plasma membrane abundance, as studied in various cell models, are currently not fully understood. A drawback in this perspective is the limited presence of TRPV 5 channels at the plasma membrane, as observed in overexpression studies and primary cultures expressing TRPV 5 endogenously. Is the

Table 1 | Molecular mechanisms of TRPV 5 channel regulation

| Factors regulating TRPV 5 activity | Cell surface abundance | Proposed mode of action | Single-channel activity | Proposed mode of action | Reference |
|-------------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|-----------|
| Klotho                             | +                      | Modification channel glycosylation | ND                     | NA                     | 15        |
| Tissue kallikrein                  | +                      | PKC-mediated channel phosphorylation | ND                     | NA                     | 18        |
| Acid pH                            | –                      | Dynamic plasma membrane trafficking | –                      | Proton binding to channel pH sensors | 8,23–25   |
| Ca²⁺                               | –                      | Channel recycling         | –                      | Feedback inhibition through channel C tail | 7,26,27   |
| Mg²⁺                               | ND                     | NA                       | –                      | Conformational change channel through Mg²⁺ binding | 28        |
| PIP₂                               | ND                     | NA                       | +                      | Stabilization channel open conformation | 28        |
| WNK4                               | +                      | ND                       | =                      | NA                     | 30        |

+ , increase; –, decrease; =, no detectable effect; NA, not applicable; ND, not determined; PKC, protein kinase C.

Overview of discussed factors regulating TRPV 5 cell surface abundance and single-channel activity together with the proposed mode of action.

limited TRPV5 plasma membrane abundance due to rapid internalization rates or do the majority of TRPV5 channels never reach the cell surface? Answering these questions might provide us with a general mechanism by which plasma membrane abundance of TRPV5 and other TRP channels is regulated. This review demonstrated the ingenious regulation of the TRPV5 channel through a multitude of molecular mechanisms controlling apical Ca²⁺ influx, assuring the maintenance of renal Ca²⁺ handling and overall body Ca²⁺ homeostasis (Table 1).

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This study was financially supported in part by grants from the Dutch Kidney Foundation (C03.6017 and C06.2170), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO-ALW 814.02.001 and NWO-CW 700.55.302), and the Dutch Stomach-Intestine-Liver foundation (MWO 03-19). JGJ Hoenderop is supported by an EURYI award. We thank Henrik Dimke for critical reading of this paper.

**REFERENCES**

1. Frick KK, Bushinsky DA. Molecular mechanisms of primary hypercalciuria. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 2003; **14**: 1082–1095.
2. Van de Graaf SF, Bindels RJ, Hoenderop JG. Physiology of epithelial Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ transport. *Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol* 2007; **158**: 77–160.
3. Koster HP, Hartog A, Van Os CH et al. Calbindin-D₂₈K facilitates cytosolic calcium diffusion without interfering with calcium signaling. *Cell Calcium* 1995; **18**: 187–196.
4. Montell C. The venerable invertebrate TRP channels. *Cell Calcium* 2003; **33**: 409–417.
5. Hoenderop JG, van Leeuwen JP, van der Eerden BC et al. Renal Ca²⁺ wasting, hyperabsorption, and reduced bone thickness in mice lacking TRPV5. *J Clin Invest* 2003; **112**: 1906–1914.
6. Nilius B, Vennekens R, Prenen J et al. The single pore residue Asp 542 determines Ca²⁺ permeation and Mg²⁺ block of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276**: 1020–1025.
7. Van de Graaf SF, Rescher U, Hoenderop JG et al. TRPV5 is internalized via clathrin-dependent endocytosis to enter a Ca²⁺-controlled recycling pathway. *J Biol Chem* 2007; **283**: 4077–4086.
8. Lambers TT, Oancea E, de Groot T et al. Extracellular pH dynamically controls cell surface delivery of functional TRPV5 channels. *Mol Cell Biol* 2007; **27**: 1486–1494.
9. van de Graaf SF, Chang Q, Mensenkamp AR et al. Direct interaction with Rab11a targets the epithelial Ca²⁺ channels TRPV5 and TRPV6 to the plasma membrane. *Mol Cell Biol* 2006; **26**: 303–312.
10. Shimizu T, Yoshitomi K, Nakamura M et al. Effects of PTH, calcitonin, and cAMP on calcium transport in rabbit distal nephron segments. *Am J Physiol* 1990; **259**: F408–F414.
11. Griffiths NM, Brick-Ghannam C, Siaume-Perez S et al. Effect of prostaglandin E2 on agonist-stimulated cAMP accumulation in the distal convoluted tubule isolated from the rabbit kidney. *Pflugers Arch* 1993; **422**: 577–584.
12. Kuro-o M. Klotho as a regulator of fibroblast growth factor signaling and phosphate/calcium metabolism. *Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens* 2006; **15**: 437–441.
13. Yoshida T, Fujimori T, Nabeshima Y. Mediation of unusually high concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in homozygous klotho mutant mice by increased expression of renal 1 alpha-hydroxylase gene. *Endocrinology* 2002; **143**: 683–689.
14. Tohyama O, Imura A, Iwano A et al. Klotho is a novel beta-glucuronidase capable of hydrolyzing steroid beta-glucuronides. *J Biol Chem* 2004; **279**: 9777–9784.
15. Chang Q, Hoefs S, van der Kemp AW et al. The beta-glucuronidase klotho hydrolyzes and activates the TRPV5 channel. *Science* 2005; **310**: 490–493.
16. Tsuruoka S, Nishiki K, Ioka T et al. Defect in parathyroid-hormone-induced luminal calcium absorption in connecting tubules of Klotho mice. *Nephrol Dial Transplant* 2006; **21**: 2762–2767.
17. Picard N, Van Abel M, Campone C et al. Tissue kallikrein-deficient mice display a defect in renal tubular calcium absorption. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 2005; **16**: 3602–3610.
18. Gkika D, Topala CN, Chang Q et al. Tissue kallikrein stimulates Ca²⁺ reabsorption via PKC-dependent plasma membrane accumulation of TRPV5. *EMBO J* 2006; **25**: 4707–4716.
19. Cha SK, Wu T, Huang CL. Protein kinase C inhibits caveolae-mediated endocytosis of TRPV5. *Am J Physiol Renal Physiol* 2008; **294**: F1212–F1221.
20. Sutton RA, Wong NL, Dirks JH. Effects of metabolic acidosis and alkalosis on sodium and calcium transport in the dog kidney. *Kidney Int* 1979; **15**: 520–533.
21. Bindels RJ, Hartog A, Abrahamse SL et al. Effects of pH on apical calcium entry and active calcium transport in rabbit cortical collecting system. *Am J Physiol* 1994; **266**: F620–F627.
22. Nijenhuis T, Renkema KY, Hoenderop JG et al. Acid-base status determines the renal expression of Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ transport proteins. *J Am Soc Nephrol* 2006; **17**: 617–626.
23. Yeh BI, Sun TJ, Lee JZ et al. Mechanism and molecular determinant for regulation of rabbit transient receptor potential type 5 (TRPV5) channel by extracellular pH. *J Biol Chem* 2003; **278**: 51044–51052.
24. Yeh BI, Kim YK, Jabbar W et al. Conformational changes of pore helix coupled to gating of TRPV5 by protons. *EMBO J* 2005; **24**: 3224–3234.
25. Cha SK, Jabbar W, Xie J et al. Regulation of TRPV5 single-channel activity by intracellular pH. *J Membr Biol* 2007; **220**: 79–85.
26. Nilius B, Prenen J, Vennekens R et al. Modulation of the epithelial calcium channel, ECaC, by intracellular Ca²⁺. *Cell Calcium* 2001; **29**: 417–428.
27. Nilius B, Weidema F, Prenen J et al. The carboxyl terminus of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel ECaC1 is involved in Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation. *Pflugers Arch* 2003; **445**: 584–588.
28. Lee J, Cha SK, Sun TJ et al. PIP2 activates TRPV5 and releases its inhibition by intracellular Mg²⁺. *J Gen Physiol* 2005; **126**: 439–451.
29. Wilson FH, Disse-Nicodeme S, Choate KA et al. Human hypertension caused by mutations in WNK kinases. *Science* 2001; **293**: 1107–1112.
30. Jiang Y, Ferguson WB, Peng JB. WNK4 enhances TRPV5-mediated calcium transport: potential role in hypercalciuria of familial hyperkalemic hypertension caused by gene mutation of WNK4. *Am J Physiol Renal Physiol* 2007; **292**: F545–F554.
31. Lajeunesse D, Bouhtiauy I, Brunette MG. Parathyroid hormone and hydrochlorothiazide increase calcium transport by the luminal membrane of rabbit distal nephron segments through different pathways. *Endocrinology* 1994; **134**: 35–41.
32. Lau K, Bourdeau JE. Evidence for cAMP-dependent protein kinase in mediating the parathyroid hormone-stimulated rise in cytosolic free calcium in rabbit connecting tubules. *J Biol Chem* 1989; **264**: 4028–4032.
