
Vol 454 | 10 July 2008 | doi:10.1038/nature07082

ARTICLES

# Structure of the Ebola virus glycoprotein bound to an antibody from a human survivor

Jeffrey E. Lee¹, Marnie L. Fusco¹, Ann J. Hessell¹, Wendelien B. Oswald¹, Dennis R. Burton¹ & Erica Ollmann Saphire¹

Ebola virus (EBOV) entry requires the surface glycoprotein (GP) to initiate attachment and fusion of viral and host membranes. Here we report the crystal structure of EBOV GP in its trimeric, pre-fusion conformation (GP1+GP2) bound to a neutralizing antibody, KZ52, derived from a human survivor of the 1995 Kikwit outbreak. Three GP1 viral attachment subunits assemble to form a chalice, cradled by the GP2 fusion subunits, while a novel glycan cap and projected mucin-like domain restrict access to the conserved receptor-binding site sequestered in the chalice bowl. The glycocalyx surrounding GP is likely central to immune evasion and may explain why survivors have insignificant neutralizing antibody titres. KZ52 recognizes a protein epitope at the chalice base where it clamps several regions of the pre-fusion GP2 to the amino terminus of GP1. This structure provides a template for unravelling the mechanism of EBOV GP-mediated fusion and for future immunotherapeutic development.

The EBOV is an enveloped, non-segmented, negative-strand RNA virus, which with Marburg virus makes up the Filoviridae family. The virus causes severe haemorrhagic fever associated with 50–90% human mortality¹. Four species of the virus (Zaire, Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and Reston ebolavirus) have thus far been identified, with the Zaire species typically associated with the highest human lethality². A fifth species was confirmed in a 2007 outbreak in Bundibugyo, Uganda³⁴. Infection with EBOV results in uncontrolled viral replication and multiple organ failure, with death occurring 6–9 days after onset of symptoms⁵. Fatal cases are associated with high viraemia and defective immune responses, whereas survival is associated with early and vigorous humoral and cellular immune responses⁶⁻⁹. Although preliminary vaccine trials in primates have been highly successful¹⁰⁻¹³, no vaccines, specific immunotherapeutics or post-exposure treatments are currently approved for human use. Since 1994, EBOV outbreaks have increased more than fourfold, thus necessitating the urgent development of vaccines and therapeutics for use in the event of an intentional, accidental or natural EBOV release.

The EBOV genome contains seven genes, which direct the synthesis of eight proteins. Transcriptional editing of the fourth gene (GP) results in expression of a 676-residue transmembrane-linked glycoprotein termed GP, as well as a 364-residue secreted glycoprotein termed sGP¹⁴,¹⁵. EBOV GP is the main target for the design of vaccines and entry inhibitors. GP is post-translationally cleaved by furin¹⁶ to yield disulphide-linked GP1 and GP2 subunits¹⁷. GP1 effects attachment to host cells, whereas GP2 mediates fusion of viral and host membranes¹⁶,¹⁸⁻²⁰. EBOV is thought to enter host cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis through clathrin-coated pits and caveolae²¹, followed by actin- and microtubule-dependent transport to the endosome²¹, where GP is further processed by endosomal cathepsins²²⁻²⁴. Essential cellular receptor(s) have not yet been identified, but DC-SIGN/L-SIGN²⁵, hMGL²⁶, β-integrins²⁷, folate receptor-α²⁸ and Tyro3 family receptors²⁹ have all been implicated as cellular factors in entry. Here we report the crystal structure of

EBOV GP, at 3.4-Å resolution, in its trimeric, pre-fusion conformation in complex with neutralizing antibody Fab KZ52.

## EBOV GP is in a pre-fusion conformation

In an effort to increase sample homogeneity and to promote crystal contacts, we excised the mucin-like and transmembrane domains (GP₃₃₋₆₃₂Δmuc), mutated two N-linked glycosylation sites (T42V/ T230V) and complexed the GP with Fab KZ52, which recognizes a conformational epitope. The resulting GP construct is fully capable of mediating virus entry and exhibits similar antibody neutralization profiles as wild type, when expressed with a transmembrane domain on vesicular stomatitis virus pseudovirions (Supplementary Methods and Fig. 1).

The EBOV GP trimer contains three non-covalently attached monomers (A, B and C) (Supplementary Fig. 2), which together adopt a chalice-like shape with overall dimensions of about 95 Å × 95 Å × 70 Å (Fig. 1). Each monomer consists of two disulphide-linked subunits, GP1 and GP2. GP trimerization is mediated through multiple GP1–GP2 and GP2–GP2 contacts and occludes an approximate 2,900 Å² surface area on each subunit. No major contacts are observed between neighbouring GP1 molecules. Three GP1 ectodomains together form a bowl-like structure encircled by helices of the three GP2 subunits (Fig. 1c).

EBOV GP is thought to assemble as a metastable trimer of heterodimers on the viral surface. Upon a yet unidentified trigger, GP undergoes an irreversible conformational change to a lower energy state, thereby merging the viral and host cell membranes. The low energy or post-fusion conformation is characterized by a six-helix bundle, in which the N terminus and fusion loop of GP2 are juxtaposed to its carboxy terminus in a hairpin conformation³⁰,³¹. Our EBOV GP structure likely corresponds to the metastable, pre-fusion conformation of EBOV GP, as GP2 forms a trimer intimately associated with GP1, rather than the post-fusion six-helix bundle conformation. In addition, crystals were grown at a neutral pH and the EBOV GP presented here contains no multimerization motifs

¹Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, Mail Drop IMM-2, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.
or recombinant constraints on quaternary structure that could artificially force the structure into a non-prefusion state.

# EBOV GP1

GP1 is responsible for cell-surface attachment, which is probably mediated by a region including residues 54–201 (ref. 32). It is composed of a single domain (approximately 65 Å × 30 Å × 30 Å), arranged in the topology shown in Fig. 2a, and can be further subdivided into the (I) base, (II) head and (III) glycan cap regions (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 3). The base (I) subdomain is composed of two sets of β-sheets, forming a semicircular surface that clamps the internal fusion loop and a helix of GP2 through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 2b). Moreover, this subdomain contains Cys 53, which is proposed to form an intermolecular disulphide bridge to Cys 609 of the GP2 subunit¹⁷. Cys 53 resides near GP2 in the β2–β3 loop at the viral membrane-proximal end of the base subdomain (Fig. 2a, b). Our EBOV GP contains an intact GP1–GP2 disulphide bridge, based on reducing and non-reducing SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. However, the region containing the counterpart GP2 cysteine is disordered, which may reflect functionally important mobility in the region. The head (II) is located between the base and glycan cap regions towards the host membrane surface. Two intramolecular disulphide bonds stabilize the head subdomain and confirm the biochemically determined disulphide bridge assignments¹⁷. Cys 108–Cys 135 connects a surface-exposed loop (β8–β9 loop) to strand β7, whereas Cys 121–Cys 147 bridges the β8–β9 and β9–β10 loops (Fig. 2a). The glycan cap (III) contains four predicted N-linked glycans (at N228, N238, N257 and N268) in an α/β-dome over the GP1 head subdomain (Figs 1b and 2a). This subdomain does not form any monomer–monomer contacts and is fully exposed on the upper and outer surface of the chalice. The central β-sheets from the head and glycan cap together form a fairly flat surface and, in the context of the GP trimer, form the three inner sides of the chalice bowl.

## EBOV GP2

GP2 is responsible for fusion of viral and host cell membranes and contains the internal fusion loop and the heptad repeat regions, HR1 and HR2. Many viral glycoproteins have fusion peptides, located at the N terminus of their fusion subunit, which are released upon cleavage of the precursor glycoprotein. In contrast, class II and class III fusion proteins, as well as class I glycoproteins from Ebola, Marburg, Lassa and avian sarcoma leukosis viruses, contain internal fusion loops lacking a free N terminus. The crystal structure reveals that the EBOV GP internal fusion loop, which encompasses residues 511–556, uses an antiparallel β-stranded scaffold to display a partly helical hydrophobic fusion peptide (L529, W531, I532, P533, Y534 and F535; Fig. 2c). The side chains of these hydrophobic residues pack into a region on the GP1 head of a neighbouring subunit in the trimer, reminiscent of the fusion peptide packing in the pre-fusion parainfluenza virus 5 F structure³³. A disulphide bond between Cys 511 at the base of β19 and Cys 556 in the HR1 helix covalently links the antiparallel β-sheet. This disulphide bond between the internal fusion loop and HR1 is conserved among all filoviruses, and is analogous to a pair of critical cysteines flanking the internal fusion loop in avian sarcoma leukosis virus³⁴,³⁵. Interestingly, the EBOV internal fusion loop has features more similar to those observed in class II and III viral glycoproteins (in particular to flaviviruses) than those previously observed for class I glycoproteins (Supplementary Fig. 4). It thus appears that regardless of viral protein class, internal fusion loops share a common architecture for their fusion function.

EBOV GP2 contains two heptad repeat regions (HR1 and HR2), connected by a 25-residue linker containing a CX₆CC motif and the internal fusion loop. The crystal structures of post-fusion GP2 fragments³⁰,³¹ have revealed that the two heptad repeat regions form antiparallel α-helices and that a CX₆CC motif forms an intrasubunit disulphide bond between Cys 601 and Cys 608 (Supplementary Fig.

![Figure 1 | Structure of Zaire EBOV GP. a, Domain schematic of GP. Domains observed in the crystal structure are coloured and numbered according to the description in the text. White and hash-marked regions designate crystallographically disordered and construct-deleted regions, respectively. SP, signal peptide; I, GP1 base; II, GP1 head; III, GP1 glycan cap; mucin, mucin-like domain; IFL, internal fusion loop; HR1, heptad repeat 1; HR2, heptad repeat 2; MPER, membrane-proximal external region; TM, transmembrane domain. Red Y-shaped symbols designate the predicted N-linked glycosylation sites; those sites marked with an asterisk were mutated. The final model includes EBOV GP residues 33–189, 214–278, 299–310 and 502–599. No electron density is observed for residues 190–213, 311–312, 464–501 and 600–632. Weak or discontinuous electron density is seen in the loop containing the GP1–GP2 disulphide bridge (residues 49–56) and the outer regions of the GP1 glycan cap (residues)](image.png)

268–278 and 299–310); these regions are modelled as poly-alanine fragments. b, Molecular surface of the GP trimer viewed on its side (left) and top (right), as viewed down the threefold axis. Monomer A is coloured according to the scheme in a, and monomers B and C of the trimer are shown in white and grey, respectively. Predicted N-linked oligosaccharides (N228, N238, N257 and N268) belonging to the glycan cap of monomer A are shown as grey ovals. The location of the N-linked glycan at N268 is tentative, as the sequence assignment in this region is ambiguous. c, Molecular surface of the EBOV GP chalice and cradle. The three GP1 subunits that form the chalice are shown in various shades of grey, and GP2 subunits forming the cradle are shown as ribbons, in various shades of orange, underneath the transparent molecular surface. The putative RBs are recessed in the inner bowl of the GP trimer.
5). In the pre-fusion EBOV GP, HR2 and the CX₆CC motif are disordered. In contrast, the HR1 region is well ordered and can be divided into four segments: HR1<sub>A</sub>, HR1<sub>B</sub>, HR1<sub>C</sub> and HR1<sub>D</sub> (Fig. 2c), which together assemble the cradle encircling GP1. Similarly, heptad repeat regions in influenza and parainfluenza viruses also contain multiple segments in their pre-fusion helices that substantially rearrange in their post-fusion conformations<sup>33,36,37</sup>.

The first two segments, HR1<sub>A</sub> and HR1<sub>B</sub> (residues 554–575), together form an α-helix with an approximate 40° kink at T565, which delineates HR1<sub>A</sub> from HR1<sub>B</sub>. Interestingly, the bend between HR1<sub>A</sub> and HR1<sub>B</sub> contains an unusual 3–4–4–3 stutter, which may act as a conformational switch<sup>31</sup>, rather than the typical 3–4 periodicity of heptad repeats (Supplementary Fig. 6). A similar stutter has also been noted in parainfluenza virus 5 F<sup>33</sup>. The EBOV HR1<sub>C</sub> (residues 576–582) forms an extended coil linking HR1<sub>B</sub> to the 14-residue α-helix of HR1<sub>D</sub> (residues 583–598). HR1<sub>D</sub> forms an amphipathic helix, and the hydrophobic faces of each HR1<sub>D</sub> join to form a three-helix bundle at the trimer interface. Although the breakpoint maps directly to a chloride-ion binding site in the post-fusion conformation of GP2<sup>30,31</sup> and at least two other viruses<sup>38,39</sup>, no chloride ion is observed here as HR1 and HR2 do not come together to form the six-helix bundle. Instead, the pre-fusion GP2 adopts a novel conformation, intimately curled around GP1 (Fig. 1c).

### EBOV GP-KZ52 interface

KZ52 is an antibody isolated from a human survivor of the 1995 outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire)<sup>40</sup>. This antibody neutralizes Zaire ebolavirus *in vitro*<sup>40</sup> and offers protection from lethal EBOV challenge in rodent models<sup>41</sup>, but has minimal effects on viral pathogenicity in non-human primates<sup>42</sup>. KZ52 is directed towards a vulnerable, non-glycosylated epitope at the base of the GP chalice, where it engages three discontinuous segments of EBOV GP: residues 42–43 at the N terminus of GP1, and 505–514 and 549–556 at the N terminus of GP2 (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 7). Although most of the GP surface buried by KZ52 belongs to GP2, the presence of both GP1 and GP2 is critical for KZ52 recognition<sup>43</sup>. It is likely that GP1 is required to maintain the proper pre-fusion conformation of GP2 for KZ52 binding. Indeed, KZ52 is the only antibody known to bridge both attachment (GP1) and fusion (GP2) subunits of any viral glycoprotein. Given that KZ52 requires a conformational epitope seen only in the GP2 pre-fusion conformation and that the KZ52 epitope is distant from the putative receptor binding site (RBS), KZ52 likely neutralizes by preventing rearrangement of the GP2 HR1<sub>A</sub>/HR1<sub>B</sub> segments and blocking host membrane insertion of the internal fusion loop. Alternatively, IgG KZ52 may sterically hinder access to the RBS or to a separate binding site of another cellular factor, especially if multiple attachment events are required for entry.

The KZ52 epitope of GP is convex and does not have a high shape complementarity to the antibody (surface complementarity index (Sc) of 0.63), although about 1,600 Å² of each GP monomer are occluded upon KZ52 binding. The antibody contacts a total of 15 GP residues by van der Waals interactions and 8 direct hydrogen bonds (Supplementary Fig. 7). Ten out of 15 residues in the structurally defined KZ52 epitope are unique to Zaire ebolavirus (Supplementary Fig. 6), thus explaining the specificity of KZ52.

### EBOV GP glycosylation

We generated a fully glycosylated molecular model of EBOV GP to illustrate the native GP trimer as it exists on the viral surface (Fig. 4). Most N-linked glycosylation sites are concentrated in the mucin-like domain and glycan cap of GP1. Given that the mucin-like domain is about 75 kDa in mass (protein and oligosaccharide), the volume of this domain is predicted to be similar to each GP monomer observed here. The crystal structure suggests that the mucin-like domain is

**Figure 2 | EBOV GP1 and GP2.**  
*a,* Ribbon diagram of the GP1 subunit. The base (I) subdomain (green) contains four discontinuous sections (residues 33–69, 95–104, 158–167 and 176–189), which form two mixed β-sheets with strands β3 and β13 shared between the two β-sheets. The head (II) subdomain (purple) is composed of residues from four discontinuous segments, 70–94, 105–157, 168–175 and 214–226, and forms a four-stranded, mixed β-sheet supported by an α-helix and a smaller, two-stranded, antiparallel β-sheet. The glycan cap (III) region (cyan) is composed of a continuous polypeptide chain, residues 227–310, and forms an α-helix packed against a four-stranded, mixed β-sheet. Intramolecular disulphide bridges between Cys 108–Cys 135 and Cys 121–Cys 147 are coloured red.  
*b,* Ribbon diagram of the EBOV GP trimer. Each GP1 subdomain is coloured according to panel *a*, and the three GP2 subunits are shown in grey. The GP1 base subdomain forms a clamp onto the GP2 internal fusion loop and HR1<sub>A</sub> helix through interactions with hydrophobic residues (inset). The GP1–GP2 disulphide bridge (Cys 53–Cys 609), CX₆CC motif and HR2 region are disordered in the structure and are marked and indicated by dashed lines.  
*c,* The pre-fusion conformation of EBOV GP2. The EBOV GP2 internal fusion loop contains a disulphide bond at its base (red), antiparallel β strand (grey) and a hydrophobic fusion peptide. The EBOV GP2 HR1 region is segmented into four parts (HR1<sub>A</sub>–HR1<sub>D</sub>). Note that the HR2 and the CX₆CC motif are disordered in the pre-fusion conformation.

**Figure 3 | EBOV GP-Fab KZ52 interactions.** KZ52 recognizes residues 505–514 (red) and 549–556 (orange) of GP2 and residues 42–43 (green) of GP1. The β17–β18 loop (residues 279–298) is disordered, but may interact with KZ52. One EBOV GP monomer is coloured and labelled according to Fig. 1b, and Fab heavy and light chains are shown in black and light grey, respectively. Side-chain interactions at the GP–KZ52 interface are magnified in the inset box. The putative RBS is outlined in a red circle on the EBOV GP ribbon diagram. Note that only selected residues from GP and KZ52 are shown for clarity, and residue 42 is a threonine in the wild-type Zaire ebolavirus sequence.
linked to the side of each monomer and may further build up the walls of the chalice, forming a deeper bowl (Fig. 4). Although a mixture of complex, oligomannose and hybrid-type glycans are found on intact, mucin-containing GP1⁴⁴, those glycans outside the mucin-like domain are likely to be complex in nature: the mucin-deleted GP used for crystallization is sensitive to PNGaseF, but not to EndoH treatment (Supplementary Fig. 8). Modelling of complex-type oligosaccharides on the EBOV GP indicates that most of the GP trimer is cloaked by a thick layer of oligosaccharide, even without the mucin-like domain (Fig. 4). The approximate 19 additional oligosaccharides on the full-length GP (17 on the mucin-like domain and 2 more on GP1, disordered here) further conceal the sides and top of the chalice. The KZ52 binding site and, presumably, the flexible regions of HR2 and the membrane-proximal external region remain exposed and perhaps vulnerable to binding of antibodies and inhibitors.

The development of neutralizing antibodies is limited in natural EBOV infection. Many survivors have low or insignificant titres¹⁷, and those antibodies that are elicited preferentially recognize a secreted version of the viral glycoprotein that features an alternative quaternary structure and lacks the mucin-like domain⁴³. The glyco-calyx surrounding EBOV GP likely forms a shield that protects it from humoral immune responses and/or confers stability inside or outside a host. The mucin-like domain and glycan cap sit together as an external domain to the viral attachment and fusion subunits, reminiscent of the glycan shields of HIV-1 gp120 (refs 45 and 46) and Epstein-Barr virus gp350 (ref. 47), perhaps pointing to a common theme for immune evasion. Alignment of filoviral sequences indicate that regions involved in immune evasion have a low degree of sequence conservation (that is, GP1 glycan cap (~5%) and mucin-like domain (0%)), but the N-glycosylation sites in the glycan cap are mostly conserved among all EBOV subtypes (Supplementary Fig. 6), indicating the functional importance of these post-translational modifications.

**Sites of receptor binding and cathepsin cleavage**

Although a definitive receptor for EBOV remains to be identified, previous studies³²,⁴⁸,⁴⁹ have determined that residues 54–201, which map to the base and head subdomains of GP1, form a putative RBS for attachment to host cells. Additional studies have identified at least 19 GP1 residues, assigned into four groups based on the location in the structure, that are critical for viral entry⁴⁸⁻⁵⁰ (Fig. 5). Many of these residues are apolar or aromatic and are involved in maintaining the structural integrity of GP1 for receptor binding or fusion. However, six residues (K114, K115, K140, G143, P146 and C147) cluster within an approximate 20 Å × 15 Å surface in the inner bowl of the chalice and may thus represent important receptor contact sites. All residues in the putative RBS are highly conserved among EBOV species (Supplementary Fig. 6).

Importantly, this putative RBS is recessed beneath the glycan cap and perhaps further masked by the mucin-like domain (Fig. 4), suggesting that additional conformational change or removal of the mucin-like domain could reveal additional surfaces required for receptor or cofactor binding. It has been demonstrated that endosomal proteolysis of EBOV GP by cathepsin L and/or B removes the mucin-like domain to produce a stable GP1 intermediate of about 18 kDa which has enhanced viral binding and infectivity²²⁻²⁴. The precise site of cathepsin cleavage is unknown and the role of cathepsins in natural infection is as yet unclear. However, formation of an approximate 18 kDa GP1 fragment implies that cathepsin may cleave near the GP1 β13–β14 loop (residues 190–213). Indeed, this loop is unresolved in the pre-fusion structure, suggesting enhanced mobility and accessibility to enzymatic cleavage. Cleavage within this loop

![Figure 5 | Sites of receptor binding and cathepsin cleavage. Residues coloured in cyan, green, royal blue and red were previously identified by mutagenesis to be important for viral entry⁴⁸⁻⁵⁰. Residues coloured in cyan (D55, L57, L63 and R64) reside at the base of the chalice, near the GP1–GP2 disulphide bond and HR1₄, and are likely important for fusion-mediated conformational changes rather than receptor binding. Residues coloured in red (F159, F160, Y162 and I170) are primarily buried hydrophobic amino acids that help to maintain the structural stability of GP1. Residues coloured in royal blue (G87, F88, F153 and H154) are in proximity to the putative RBS and pack against the hydrophobic residues from a neighbouring internal fusion loop (coloured orange). Mutations to these residues may affect viral entry by altering the structural integrity of the RBS and/or by affecting packing of the fusion loop. Residues coloured in green (K114, K115, K140, G143, P146 and C147) reside on or near the GP surface and may contribute to receptor binding. A molecular surface representation of a GP monomer, coloured and oriented according to the ribbon diagram, is presented in the inset. Indicated in this view: cleavage at a site on the loop (purple dots) between residues 190 and 213 would remove the entire glycan cap (purple) and the mucin-like domain (not shown), leaving GP2 and an approximate 18 kDa fragment of GP1.](image.png)

**Figure 4 | Model of the fully glycosylated GP.** N-linked bi-antennary complex-type glycans (Gal₂Man₃GlcNAc₄) were modelled onto the GP1 glycan-cap subdomain. Oligosaccharides are shown as yellow space-filling spheres and for clarity; only those glycans belonging to the purple monomer are labelled. Note that the glycans on N228 and N563 reside on the back of the purple monomer and are partly obscured. The glycans at N204 and N268 are found in regions that are poorly ordered in the structure and as a result: their tentative locations are shown as orange ovals. The C termini of the last ordered residues of GP1, to which mucin-like domains are linked, are marked with ‘C’ (top of the chalice), and coloured spheres (beige, pink and purple) outline the predicted positions of the mucin-like domains attached in each of these regions. Surface residues previously identified to be critical for viral entry, recessed in the chalice bowl and RBS, are coloured green. Fab KZ52 (grey) recognizes a non-glycosylated, predominantly GP2-containing epitope at the base of the chalice.would remove the entire mucin-like domain and glycan cap region (Fig. 5). As a result, β7–β9 strands and their associated loops would become exposed. These regions of GP are in proximity to the previously identified residues critical for viral entry. The fold, location and physicochemical properties of this site should now provide new leads in the search for the elusive filoviral receptor(s).

A summary of the EBOV mechanism of infection, including the events of cathepsin cleavage and conformational changes to GP2 during fusion, is presented in Supplementary Information and Supplementary Fig. 9.

### METHODS SUMMARY

T42V/T230V GP₃₃₋₆₃₂Δmuc was transiently expressed in HEK293T cells with an N-terminal haemagglutinin tag for purification by affinity chromatography. GP was natively deglycosylated using PNGaseF and complexed with a SeMet-containing KZ52 antibody. The resulting trimeric GP-Fab complex was purified by size exclusion chromatography. Crystals were grown in 8.5% (w/v) PEG 10,000, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 0.4 M sodium acetate and 10% (v/v) PEG 200 and diffracted to 3.4-Å resolution. Phases were obtained by combination of the Fab selenium anomalous signal and molecular replacement using an independently determined structure of the uncomplexed KZ52 Fab as a search model. Interpretable electron density maps with clear secondary structural elements and solvent boundaries were obtained after non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS)-averaged density modification. The structure was refined to final \(R_{\text{work}}\) and \(R_{\text{free}}\) values of 26.2% and 30.2%, respectively.

Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Received 21 February; accepted 14 May 2008.

1. Sanchez, A. *et al.* in *Fields Virology* (eds Knipe, D. M. & Howley, P. M.) 1279–1304 (Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2001).
2. Johnson, K. M., Lange, J. V., Webb, P. A. & Murphy, F. A. Isolation and characterization of a new virus causing acute hemorrhagic fever in Zaire. *Lancet* **1**, 569–571 (1977).
3. Alsop, Z. Ebola outbreak in Uganda ‘atypical’, say experts. *Lancet* **370**, 2085 (2007).
4. World Health Organization. Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Uganda. http://www.who.int/csr/don/2007_11_30a/en/index.html (2007).
5. Peters, C. J., Sanchez, A., Rollin, P. E., Ksiazek, T. G. & Murphy, G. A. in *Fields Virology* Vol. 1, 1161–1176 (eds Fields, B. N., Knipe, D. M. & Howley, P. M.) (Lippincott-Raven Press, Philadelphia, 1996).
6. Baize, S. *et al.* Defective humoral responses and extensive intravascular apoptosis are associated with fatal outcome in Ebola virus-infected patients. *Nature Med.* **5**, 423–426 (1999).
7. Ksiazek, T. G. *et al.* Clinical virology of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): virus, virus antigen, and IgG and IgM antibody findings among EHF patients in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995. *J. Infect. Dis.* **179** (suppl. 1), S177–S187 (1999).
8. Leroy, E. M. *et al.* Human asymptomatic Ebola infection and strong inflammatory response. *Lancet* **355**, 2210–2215 (2000).
9. Sanchez, A. *et al.* Analysis of human peripheral blood samples from fatal and nonfatal cases of Ebola (Sudan) hemorrhagic fever: cellular responses, virus load, and nitric oxide levels. *J. Virol.* **78**, 10370–10377 (2004).
10. Hampton, T. Vaccines against Ebola and Marburg viruses show promise in primate studies. *J. Am. Med. Assoc.* **294**, 163–164 (2005).
11. Jones, S. M. *et al.* Live attenuated recombinant vaccine protects nonhuman primates against Ebola and Marburg viruses. *Nature Med.* **11**, 786–790 (2005).
12. Kobinger, G. P. *et al.* Chimpanzee adenovirus vaccine protects against Zaire Ebola virus. *Virology* **346**, 394–401 (2006).
13. Sullivan, N. J. *et al.* Immune protection of nonhuman primates against Ebola virus with single low-dose adenovirus vectors encoding modified GPs. *PLoS Med.* **3**, e177 (2006).
14. Sanchez, A., Trappier, S. G., Mahy, B. W., Peters, C. J. & Nichol, S. T. The virion glycoproteins of Ebola viruses are encoded in two reading frames and are expressed through transcriptional editing. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 3602–3607 (1996).
15. Sanchez, A. *et al.* Biochemical analysis of the secreted and virion glycoproteins of Ebola virus. *J. Virol.* **72**, 6442–6447 (1998).
16. Volchkov, V. E., Feldmann, H., Volchkova, V. A. & Klenk, H. D. Processing of the Ebola virus glycoprotein by the proprotein convertase furin. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 5762–5767 (1998).
17. Jeffers, S. A., Sanders, D. A. & Sanchez, A. Covalent modifications of the Ebola virus glycoprotein. *J. Virol.* **76**, 12463–12472 (2002).
18. Feldmann, H., Klenk, H. D. & Sanchez, A. Molecular biology and evolution of filoviruses. *Arch. Virol.*, Suppl. 7, 81–100 (1993).

19. Takada, A. *et al.* A system for functional analysis of Ebola virus glycoprotein. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 14764–14769 (1997).
20. Wool-Lewis, R. J. & Bates, P. Characterization of Ebola virus entry by using pseudotyped viruses: identification of receptor-deficient cell lines. *J. Virol.* **72**, 3155–3160 (1998).
21. Sanchez, A. Analysis of filovirus entry into Vero E6 cells, using inhibitors of endocytosis, endosomal acidification, structural integrity, and cathepsin (B and L) activity. *J. Infect. Dis.* **196** (suppl. 2), S251–S258 (2007).
22. Chandran, K., Sullivan, N. J., Felbor, U., Whelan, S. P. & Cunningham, J. M. Endosomal proteolysis of the Ebola virus glycoprotein is necessary for infection. *Science* **308**, 1643–1645 (2005).
23. Kaletsky, R. L., Simmons, G. & Bates, P. Proteolysis of the Ebola virus glycoproteins enhances virus binding and infectivity. *J. Virol.* **81**, 13378–13384 (2007).
24. Schornberg, K. *et al.* Role of endosomal cathepsins in entry mediated by the Ebola virus glycoprotein. *J. Virol.* **80**, 4174–4178 (2006).
25. Alvarez, C. P. *et al.* C-type lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN mediate cellular entry by Ebola virus in cis and in trans. *J. Virol.* **76**, 6841–6844 (2002).
26. Takada, A. *et al.* Human macrophage C-type lectin specific for galactose and N-acetylgalactosamine promotes filovirus entry. *J. Virol.* **78**, 2943–2947 (2004).
27. Takada, A. *et al.* Downregulation of beta1 integrins by Ebola virus glycoprotein: implication for virus entry. *Virology* **278**, 20–26 (2000).
28. Chan, S. Y. *et al.* Folate receptor-alpha is a cofactor for cellular entry by Marburg and Ebola viruses. *Cell* **106**, 117–126 (2001).
29. Shimojima, M. *et al.* Tyro3 family-mediated cell entry of Ebola and Marburg viruses. *J. Virol.* **80**, 10109–10116 (2006).
30. Malashkevich, V. N. *et al.* Core structure of the envelope glycoprotein GP2 from Ebola virus at 1.9-Å resolution. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 2662–2667 (1999).
31. Weissenhorn, W., Carfi, A., Lee, K. H., Skehel, J. J. & Wiley, D. C. Crystal structure of the Ebola virus membrane fusion subunit, GP2, from the envelope glycoprotein ectodomain. *Mol. Cell* **2**, 605–616 (1998).
32. Kuhn, J. H. *et al.* Conserved receptor-binding domains of Lake Victoria Marburgvirus and Zaire Ebolavirus bind a common receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 15951–15958 (2006).
33. Yin, H. S., Wen, X., Paterson, R. G., Lamb, R. A. & Jardetzky, T. S. Structure of the parainfluenza virus 5 F protein in its metastable, prefusion conformation. *Nature* **439**, 38–44 (2006).
34. Delos, S. E. *et al.* Cysteines flanking the internal fusion peptide are required for the avian sarcoma/leukosis virus glycoprotein to mediate the lipid mixing stage of fusion with high efficiency. *J. Virol.* **82**, 3131–3134 (2008).
35. Delos, S. E. & White, J. M. Critical role for the cysteines flanking the internal fusion peptide of avian sarcoma/leukosis virus envelope glycoprotein. *J. Virol.* **74**, 9738–9741 (2000).
36. Bullough, P. A., Hughson, F. M., Skehel, J. J. & Wiley, D. C. Structure of influenza haemagglutinin at the pH of membrane fusion. *Nature* **371**, 37–43 (1994).
37. Wilson, I. A., Skehel, J. J. & Wiley, D. C. Structure of the haemagglutinin membrane glycoprotein of influenza virus at 3 Å resolution. *Nature* **289**, 366–373 (1981).
38. Fass, D., Harrison, S. C. & Kim, P. S. Retrovirus envelope domain at 1.7 angstrom resolution. *Nature Struct. Biol.* **3**, 465–469 (1996).
39. Rosenthal, P. B. *et al.* Structure of the haemagglutinin-esterase-fusion glycoprotein of influenza C virus. *Nature* **396**, 92–96 (1998).
40. Maruyama, T. *et al.* Ebola virus can be effectively neutralized by antibody produced in natural human infection. *J. Virol.* **73**, 6024–6030 (1999).
41. Parren, P. W. H. I., Geisbert, T. W., Maruyama, T., Jahrling, P. B. & Burton, D. R. Pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis of Ebola virus infection in an animal model by passive transfer of a neutralizing human antibody. *J. Virol.* **76**, 6408–6412 (2002).
42. Oswald, W. B. *et al.* Neutralizing antibody fails to impact the course of Ebola virus infection in monkeys. *PLoS Pathog.* **3**, 62–66 (2007).
43. Maruyama, T. *et al.* Recombinant human monoclonal antibodies to Ebola virus. *J. Infect. Dis.* **179** (suppl. 1), S235–S239 (1999).
44. Ritchie, G. E. The glycosylation of viral envelope glycoproteins and the effect of glycosidase inhibitors on virus replication and glycoprotein properties. DPhil thesis, Univ. Oxford (2005).
45. Kwong, P. D. *et al.* Structure of an HIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein in complex with the CD4 receptor and a neutralizing human antibody. *Nature* **393**, 648–659 (1998).
46. Wyatt, R. *et al.* The antigenic structure of the HIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein. *Nature* **393**, 705–711 (1998).
47. Szakonyi, G. *et al.* Structure of the Epstein-Barr virus major envelope glycoprotein. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **13**, 996–1001 (2006).
48. Brindley, M. A. *et al.* Ebola virus glycoprotein 1: identification of residues important for binding and postbinding events. *J. Virol.* **81**, 7702–7709 (2007).
49. Manicassamy, B., Wang, J., Jiang, H. & Rong, L. Comprehensive analysis of Ebola virus GP1 in viral entry. *J. Virol.* **79**, 4793–4805 (2005).
50. Mpanju, O. M., Towner, J. S., Dover, J. E., Nichol, S. T. & Wilson, C. A. Identification of two amino acid residues on Ebola virus glycoprotein 1 critical for cell entry. *Virus Res.* **121**, 205–214 (2006).

Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
ARTICLES

Acknowledgements We thank C. Kimberlin (The Scripps Research Institute), the staff at the Advanced Light Source beamlines 8.3.1, 5.0.2, 4.2.2, 8.2.2 and 12.3.1 and the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory beamlines 11-1 and 9-2 for data collection support, and D. Abelson and members of the Ollmann Saphire Laboratory for assistance, comments and suggestions. The Advanced Light Source and Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory are national user facilities operated on behalf of the US Department of Energy. We also thank A. Olson and J. Huntoon for generation of tangible molecular models for analysis of receptor-binding surfaces. E.O.S. and D.R.B. are funded by the US National Institutes of Health, and E.O.S. and J.E.L. are supported by a Career Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund and a fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, respectively. This is manuscript no. 19375 from The Scripps Research Institute.

Author Contributions E.O.S. designed the initial GP constructs, and prepared GP and the initial GP–KZ52 crystallization screening experiments. J.E.L. designed the GP mutants, and purified, crystallized and determined the GP–KZ52 structure in the laboratory of E.O.S. A.J.H. expressed native and SeMet-incorporated IgG KZ52. W.B.O. performed infectivity and KZ52 neutralization studies, both in the laboratory of D.R.B. J.E.L. and E.O.S. wrote the manuscript.

Author Information Atomic coordinates and structure factors for the reported crystal structure have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession number 3CSY. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.O.S. (erica@scripps.edu).

©2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

doi:10.1038/nature07082

**METHODS**

Expression of EBOV GP and antibody. Zaire ebolavirus (Mayinga strain) glycoprotein DNA was codon-optimized, whole-gene synthesized (Blue Heron Biotech) and cloned into the pDISPLAY vector (Invitrogen) with a stop codon introduced before the internal transmembrane segment of the vector. GP is composed of more than 50% oligosaccharides by weight, primarily because of a heavily glycosylated mucin-like domain that is non-essential for cellular attachment or entry<sup>51</sup>. In an effort to increase sample homogeneity and solubility, deletion of the mucin-like and transmembrane domains (residues 312–462 and 633–676) and mutations of two N-linked glycosylation sites (T42V and T230V) were created by overlap PCR and the QuikChange II site-directed mutagenesis kit, respectively. Large-scale expression of T42V/T230V GP<sup>33–632</sup>Δmuc was performed using HEK293T cells transfected by standard calcium phosphate precipitation in ten-layer CellStacks (Corning). The DNA–calcium phosphate mixture was added to 70% confluent cells grown in DMEM plus 1 × penicillin-streptomycin and 5% (v/v) fetal bovine serum. The supernatant was harvested four days post-transfection, concentrated using a Centramate tangential flow system, purified by anti-HA immunoaffinity chromatography and natively deglycosylated with PNGaseF in PBS supplemented with 1.5 M urea at 37 °C.

Recombinant IgG1 KZ52 was expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells in glutamine-free custom-formulated Glasgow minimum essential medium (GMEM) (MediaTech Cellgro). For large-scale tissue culture, media was supplemented with 3.5% (v/v) Ultra Low Bovine IgG Fetal Bovine Serum (Invitrogen) and grown in ten-layer CellStacks (Corning). The supernatants were centrifuged, sterile-filtered, purified over Protein A affinity matrix (GE Healthcare) and eluted in 0.1 M citric acid, pH 3.0. The pH of the eluted antibody was immediately brought to neutrality by the addition of 2 M Tris pH 9.0 and subsequently dialysed against phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). Antibody concentration was determined by absorbance at 280 nm. Purity (>98%) and concentrations were confirmed by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Selenomethionine-incorporated KZ52 was produced similarly, except cysteine- and methionine-free Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) (supplemented with 60 mg ml<sup>−1</sup> L-selenomethionine and 60 mg l<sup>−1</sup> L-cysteine) media were used for growth in T-225 cm2 tissue culture flasks (Corning). Supernatant was harvested every 4 days over 2 weeks and concentrated using the Centramate system before Protein A purification. IgG1 KZ52 was cleaved by standard papain digestion, the released Fc and uncleaved IgG were removed by Protein A chromatography and the resulting Fab fragments were further purified by MonoS ion exchange chromatography.

Preparation and crystallization of the GP–antibody complex. To promote the formation of crystal contacts, purified GP was mixed with excess Fab KZ52 and separated on a Superdex-200 GL 10/300 equilibrated with 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl. Fractions containing trimeric GP-Fab KZ52 were concentrated to about 8 mg ml<sup>−1</sup> and crystallized by hanging-drop vapour diffusion at 22 °C in 8.5% (w/v) PEG 10,000, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 0.4 M sodium acetate and 10% (v/v) PEG 200. These crystals were gently cross-linked with glutaraldehyde and cryoprotected with sequential soaks of 10%, 20%, 30% and 40% (v/v) glycerol plus mother liquor before flash cooling in liquid nitrogen. Although more than 800 crystals were screened at seven synchrotron beamlines, only three crystals diffracted to 4.0-Å resolution or better. Two complete data sets were collected at the Advanced Light Source beamline 5.0.2 from SeMet-derivatized Fab KZ52–GP crystals. All data were indexed, integrated and scaled using d*TREK<sup>52</sup> to 3.4- and 4.0-Å resolution, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). The T42V/T230V GP<sup>33–632</sup>Δmuc–KZ52 crystals belong to space group H32, with one and one-third trimers in the asymmetric unit.

Structure determination. Using an independently determined, uncomplexed Fab KZ52 structure as a search model, Phaser<sup>53</sup> identified one clear Fab solution residing on a threefold crystallographic axis (*z* score = 9.3). A trimeric arrangement of KZ52 Fab was generated by applying crystallographic symmetry, and the trimer of antibodies was subsequently used in a molecular replacement search while keeping the original Fab KZ52 solution fixed. Phaser identified a clear unique hit for the trimer (*z* score = 10.4). A difference Fourier anomalous electron-density map was calculated and selenium peaks for all 20 SeMet residues were picked manually using Xfit<sup>54</sup>. Phase calculation combining Fab KZ52 model phases with Se-SAD anomalous data from two crystals was performed in SHARP<sup>55</sup>. Initial phases from SHARP<sup>55</sup> were improved by solvent flipping, histogram matching and 1,500 cycles of NCS averaging using DM<sup>56</sup>. Strong electron density was seen for the central regions of GP1 and GP2 in all four monomers, whereas weaker density was associated with the outer regions of GP1. Using the DM-improved phases, Resolve<sup>57</sup> was used to initially trace poly-alanine fragments in the map. These starting fragments were extended manually using Coot (v. 0.3.3)<sup>58</sup>. All β-strands and α-helices were real-space refined with torsional secondary structural restraints. Calculation of B-value sharpened electron-density maps improved the resolution of side-chain electron density and was used to help build the model. Torsion-angle simulated-annealing refinement, starting at 5,000 K<sup>59</sup> with a maximum-likelihood amplitude target, NCS restraints and no σ-cutoffs, was used in CNS-SOLVE (v. 1.2)<sup>60</sup>. A final round of refinement using riding hydrogens, grouped atomic displacement and TLS parameters was implemented using Phenix.refine<sup>61</sup>. Identification of proper sequence registry was confirmed by secondary structural predictions and by anchoring N-linked glycosylation sequons to associated electron density. This strategy proved particularly useful as the N-linked glycan at N257 allowed initial assignment of the residues in the glycan cap (residues 214–267). Moreover, alternate sequence registers were considered in several portions of the GP1 and GP2 subunits, but these models could be eliminated based on inspection of σ<sub>A</sub>-weighted 2*F<sub>o</sub> – *F<sub>c</sub>* and *F<sub>o</sub> – F<sub>c</sub>* electron density maps. Procheck<sup>62</sup>, MolProbity<sup>63</sup> and composite omit electron-density maps (Supplementary Fig. 10) were used to validate the quality of the model. Although the protein used for crystallization was treated with protein N-glycosidase F (PNGaseF), two glycan chains at N257 on GP1 and N563 on GP2, resistant to deglycosylation, were retained. Electron density is visible for the chitobiose core and up to three mannose residues of these glycans (Supplementary Fig. 10). The pdb-care<sup>64,65</sup> and carp<sup>66</sup> servers were used to detect discrepancies in glycan connectivity, nomenclature and glycosidic torsion angles. The final model contains EBOV GP residues 33–189, 214–278, 299–310 and 502–599, and Fab KZ52 residues 1–228 (heavy chain) and 1–211 (light chain). Electron density is missing for GP residues 190–213, 311–312, 464–501 and 600–632. Weak or discontinuous electron density is observed in the outer regions of the glycan cap (residues 268–278 and 299–310) and the loop containing the GP1–GP2 disulphide bridge (residues 49–56); these regions are tentatively assigned as poly-alanine fragments. Interestingly, a small chain-like piece of electron density is visible near N512 in GP2, but is not sufficiently resolved for identification. Final refinement statistics and analysis are presented in Supplementary Table 1. Molecular surface and ribbon diagrams were generated using MacPyMOL<sup>67</sup>. For Fig. 4, N-linked complex-type glycans were modelled using the GlyProt server<sup>68</sup>. Atomic coordinates and structure factors are deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank under accession number 3CSY.

Methods describing the assays for EBOV GP infectivity and KZ52 recognition at low pH are described in the Supplementary Methods.

51. Yang, Z. Y. *et al.* Identification of the Ebola virus glycoprotein as the main viral determinant of vascular cell cytotoxicity and injury. *Nature Med.* **6**, 886–889 (2000).

52. Pflugrath, J. W. The finer things in X-ray diffraction data collection. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **55**, 1718–1725 (1999).

53. McCoy, A. J. *et al.* Phaser crystallographic software. *J. Appl. Cryst.* **40**, 658–674 (2007).

54. McRee, D. M. *Practical Protein Crystallography* (Academic Press, San Diego, 1993).

55. de La Fortelle, E. & Bricogne, G. Maximum-likelihood heavy-atom parameter refinement for multiple isomorphous replacement and multiwavelength anomalous diffraction methods. *Methods Enzymol.* **276**, 472–494 (1997).

56. Cowtan, K. Dm: an automated procedure for phase improvement by density modification. *Joint CCP4 ESF-EACBM Newsl. Protein Crystallogr.* **31**, 34–38 (1994).

57. Terwilliger, T. C. Automated main-chain model building by template matching and iterative fragment extension. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **59**, 38–44 (2003).

58. Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **60**, 2126–2132 (2004).

59. Brünger, A. T., Krukowski, A. & Erickson, J. W. Slow-cooling protocols for crystallographic refinement by simulated annealing. *Acta Crystallogr. A* **47**, 195–204 (1990).

60. Brünger, A. T. *et al.* Crystallography & NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **54**, 905–921 (1998).

61. Adams, P. D. *et al.* PHENIX: building new software for automated crystallographic structure determination. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **58**, 1948–1954 (2002).

62. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. *J. Appl. Cryst.* **26**, 283–291 (1993).

63. Davis, I. W., Murray, L. W., Richardson, J. S. & Richardson, D. C. MOLPROBITY: structure validation and all-atom contact analysis for nucleic acids and their complexes. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **32**, W615–W619 (2004).

64. Lütteke, T., Frank, M. & von der Lieth, C. W. Data mining the protein data bank: automatic detection and assignment of carbohydrate structures. *Carbohydr. Res.* **339**, 1015–1020 (2004).

65. Lütteke, T. & von der Lieth, C. W. pdb-care (PDB Carbohydrate RESidue check): a program to support annotation of complex carbohydrate structures in PDB files. *BMC Bioinformatics* **5**, 69 (2004).

66. Lütteke, T., Frank, M. & von der Lieth, C. W. Carbohydrate Structure Suite (CSS): analysis of carbohydrate 3D structures derived from the PDB. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **33**, D242–D246 (2005).

67. DeLano, W. L. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System (DeLano Scientific, Palo Alto, California, 2002).

68. Bohne-Lang, A. & von der Lieth, C. W. GlyProt: in silico glycosylation of proteins. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **33**, W214–W219 (2005).
