
Review

**Signaling at G-protein-coupled serotonin receptors: recent advances and future research directions**

Mark J. Millan¹, Philippe Marin²,³, Joël Bockaert²,³ and Clotilde Mannoury la Cour¹

¹ Institut de Recherche Servier, 125 Chemin de Ronde, 78290 Croissy-sur-Seine, Paris, France  
² Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, Universités de Montpellier, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unités Mixtes de Recherche 5203, Montpellier, F-34094, France  
³ Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U661, 141 rue de la Cardonille, Montpellier, F-34094, France  

The broadly distributed monoaminergic neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) exerts its actions via 14 classes of receptor. With the exception of 5-HT₃ receptors, which gate a cation-permeable ion channel, all 5-HT receptors are coupled to G proteins. The core features of transduction via 5-HT receptors are well established, but much still remains to be learned, in particular, with regard to native populations in the brain. In this article, we survey the current knowledge of cellular signaling at G-protein-coupled 5-HT receptors and focus on several novel (and surprising) insights that have emerged over the past few years. We also highlight several promising directions for future research that should improve the understanding of serotonin signaling and ultimately permit its therapeutic exploitation in the control of central nervous system disorders. In view of the diversity of transduction mechanisms engaged by 5-HT, much of this discussion is relevant to other classes of G-protein-coupled receptors.

### Introduction

The phylogenetically ancient monoamine 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), which is found in organisms as diverse as barnacles, bumble-bees, bears and bower-birds, fulfills a broad and species-specific role in the control of many vital functions.

In humans, 5-HT is derived from dietary tryptophan, which is transformed into 5-HT in the brain mainly by the neuron-specific ‘2’ isoform of tryptophan hydroxylase (Figure 1). Its actions are terminated by transporter-mediated reuptake into neurons, leading to catabolism by monoamine oxidase (Figure 1). 5-HT functions via 14 classes of receptor, which are all present (and differentially distributed) in the central nervous system (CNS), including the frontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, striatum, hypothalamus and dorsal horn [1–4]. Through actions at these multiple classes of receptor, 5-HT controls almost any core CNS function one might care to mention, such as mood, cognition, sleep, pain, motor function and endocrine secretion. Correspondingly, a disruption of serotonergic transmission is implicated in the pathogenesis of depression, anxiety, schizophrenia and chronic pain, and many agents used for their treatment function, at least partially, via serotonergic mechanisms [1,2].

An improvement of serotonergic therapeutics necessitates a better understanding both of the functional significance of multiple classes of 5-HT receptor and of their actions at the cellular level. Indeed, although the basic characteristics of serotonin signaling are now familiar, most studies have been performed on recombinant receptors individually expressed in non-neuronal cell lines [3–5] (Box 1 and Figure 1). As emphasized later, we are still woefully ignorant of how cerebral 5-HT receptors operate in real life: alone and in interaction with other sites, under physiological and pathological conditions, and in response to therapy.

The term ‘signaling’ is, in a sense, open ended. Ultimately, signaling is translated into changes of mood and behavior, whereas alterations in electrical activity and gene expression are relevant endpoints at the cellular level. However, integration of such information would render this review inordinately diffuse. Thus, the present article focuses on (i) the influence of G-protein-coupled 5-HT receptors upon soluble second messengers and (ii) the remarkable diversity of serotonergic signaling in the CNS. Several recently discovered insights into the cellular actions of 5-HT are highlighted, together with other novel themes likely to animate research in this field over the coming years.

### Recent developments: novel aspects of serotonergic signaling

#### New signaling pathways recruited by G-protein-coupled serotonin receptors

The principal signaling mechanisms recruited by 5-HT receptors are outlined in Box 1 and Figure 1, and the influence of post-transcriptional modification of 5-HT receptors upon transduction is summarized in Box 2. However, there are many variations on the core themes of serotonin transduction (Table 1), and the following recent observations are of special interest.

5-HT₆ receptors are well known to recruit Gαₛ and adenyl cyclase (AC), but their cellular pharmacology was recently enlivened by the finding that their activation triggers phosphorylation of Fyn, a member of the Src family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases. Fyn, in turn, activates the key intracellular modulator, extracellular regulated kinase

Corresponding author: Millan, M.J. (mark.millan@fr.netgrs.com).

Review                                                                 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences  Vol.29 No.9

Figure 1. An integrated view of signaling at serotonergic neurons. 5-HT is derived from tryptophan by an action of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (Tph₂), and it is deactivated by monoamine oxidase (MAO) A after release and reuptake via 5-HT transporters (SERT). Generation of 5-HT from tryptophan is an alternative to its conversion into melatonin (in the pineal gland), tryptamine (in neurons) and kynurenine (in astrocytes), which likewise function as neuromodulators in the brain. 5-HT receptors are localized both pre- and post-synaptically to serotonergic neurons, but all subtypes are not necessarily co-localized at the same postsynaptic location. 5-HT₁A and 5-HT₁B inhibitory autoreceptors are localized on cell bodies and terminals, respectively, and 5-HT₅a autoreceptors might also be present on the former. Characterization of non-neuronal 5-HT receptors is far from complete. (Note that ligand-gated ion-channel 5-HT₃ receptors, not considered herein, are present postsynaptically both on neurons and on non-neuronal cells.) The major modes of transduction are shown at the postsynaptic level and many receptors converge on specific signaling pathways. Moreover, individual subtypes recruit multiple cascades, for example 5-HT₂A receptors couple to Ca²⁺ channels, PLC and PLA₂. In addition, the GTPase exchange factor Epac is a recently identified downstream target of cAMP. Ion currents are an important mode for autoreceptor-feedback inhibition of serotonergic transmission. Serotonergic neurons also reveal two new modes of signaling: direct activation of neuronal nitric oxide (NO) synthase (nNOS) by SERTs and activation of a small G protein–GTPase, Rac-1, by 5-HT itself. Coupling patterns in non-neuronal cells show similarities and differences to neurons, but await further characterization. Abbreviations: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindole amino acid; DAG, diacylglycerol; Gly, glycine; GlyT1, glycine transporter; IP, inositol phosphate; PIP₂, phosphoinositol bisphosphate; D-Ser, D-serine; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter.

(ERK)1/2, via a classical Ras–Raf1–MEK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) cascade [6]. Reciprocally, in a form of positive feedback, binding of Fyn to the C terminus of 5-HT₆ receptors increases their cell-surface expression.

Further boosting interest in Gₛ-coupled 5-HT receptors, it was recently found that generation of cAMP activates the GTPase exchange factor, Epac (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP); stimulation of AC can, then, either recruit Epac and/or activate protein kinase (PK) A (Figure 1). Accordingly, Gₛ- and AC-coupled 5-HT₇ receptors induce ERK1/2 both via PKA and the Ras–Raf1–MEK cascade and via Epac, which initiates an alternative route to ERK phosphorylation. Furthermore, in primary cultures of cortical neurons, engagement of Epac by 5-HT₄ receptors activates α-secretases; these subsequently generate soluble amyloid precursor protein, which has neuroprotective and memory-enhancing properties [7].

An additional new twist to serotonergic signaling comprises the amiloride-sensitive Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger (NHE), which is omnipresent in membranes of mammalian cells (including serotonergic neurons in brain), where it regulates cellular volume and intracellular pH. NHE is G-protein activated by 5-HT₁A and 5-HT₂A receptors, yet (at least in the gut), inhibited by 5-HT₄ receptors [8–10]. 5-HT₁A and 5-HT₂A receptors exert an additional mode of facilitatory control via phosphorylation of the tyrosine kinase, Janus kinase-2 (JAK2), which, in turn, stimulates Ca²⁺-calmodulin binding to NHE [8]. Supporting the functional pertinence of NHE, its inactivation exacerbates vulnerability of serotonergic terminals to the recreational drug ecstasy [11].

Most remarkably, as discussed in the following paragraph, recent studies have unveiled roles for the 5-HT transporter (SERT) and for 5-HT itself in signaling.

Review

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.29 No.9

Box 1. Current status of serotonin signaling

Cloning of 5-HT receptors led to the recognition of several families differentially coupled via specific G proteins to 'prototypical' transduction pathways [3–5] (see Table 1 in the main text). All (intronless) 5-HT₁ receptors negatively couple to adenylyl cyclase (AC) via Gᵢ/o, whereas 5-HT₄, 5-HT₆ and 5-HT₇ receptors stimulate AC through Gₛ. Intron-rich 5-HT₄ receptors possess up to 10 C-terminal splice variants, but all share (despite some subtle differences) similar coupling profiles, including recruitment of Gₛ and AC. The same applies to the four C-terminal splice variants of 5-HT₇ receptors, although patterns of internalization differ. By contrast, the 5-HT₂ triplets (A, B and C) share recruitment of PLC via Gq/11 as their primordial mode of signaling. Uniquely, 5-HT₂C receptors display adenosine-to-inosine mRNA editing, which yields 15–20 isoforms possessing contrasting amino acid sequences (see Figure 2 in the main text). Non-edited, partially edited and fully edited isoforms are differentially distributed throughout the brain [21,31]. As pointed out later, editing has important consequences for signaling. No cardinal pathway is, as yet, recognized for 5-HT₅a receptors, but it seems that they primarily couple to Gᵢ/o [4,82].

Many effects of 5-HT receptors on ion currents are secondary to other transduction pathways [3,4] (see Table 1 in the main text). However, 5-HT₁A (and, perhaps, 5-HT₅a) autoreceptors directly recruit Kir.3 K⁺ channels (GIRKs) (and ERK1/2) via Gβγ subunits, leading to inhibition of raphe-localized serotonergic perikarya (see Figure 1 in the main text). This suppression of excitability is complemented by inhibition of (N and P/Q-type) Ca²⁺ channels [3,51]. Conversely, potentiation of Ca²⁺-dependent K⁺ channels contributes to the inhibitory influence of 5-HT₁B (and, possibly, 5-HT₁D) autoreceptors on serotonergic terminals and, hence, 5-HT release (see Figure 1 in the main text).

Innumerable variations on the above themes have been reported, as summarized in Table 1 (see the main text), and individual classes of receptor access multiple signals. For example, 5-HT₂C receptors function not only via PLC but also via PLA₂ and PLD [21,83] (see Figure 2 in the main text). Furthermore, some pathways are recruited independently of G proteins. Generally speaking, a specific 5-HT-receptor subtype influences several G proteins and downstream messengers ('divergence'). Moreover, multiple 5-HT receptors collectively impact ('convergence') individual signals such as AC and ERK, in addition to transcription factors such as cAMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB) [2,5] (see Figure 3 in the main text).

Thus, there are no absolute distinctions between 5-HT receptors in their signaling modes, and no individual subtype possesses just one single transduction mechanism.

Box 2. Post-translational modification of 5-HT receptors: influence on signaling

5-HT receptors possess sites susceptible to post-translational modification, which can markedly modify signaling. In certain cases, prolonged stimulation of 5-HT receptors leads to their phosphorylation by G-protein-receptor kinases and/or by PKA and PKC. Phosphorylation of 5-HT receptors can also be triggered heterologously by other co-localized GPCRs, which likewise recruit these classes of kinase. Phosphorylation is important because it modifies cell-surface expression, coupling profiles and interactions with protein partners, usually leading to blunted signaling [52]. Intriguingly, activation of 5-HT receptors can also promote phosphorylation of Gα proteins, which further attenuates transduction; for example, sustained activation of 5-HT₂A receptors is accompanied by phosphorylation of Gq/11 [51,84]. Note also that regulators of G-protein signaling (RGSs) blunt transduction by binding to Gα proteins, which accelerates GTP hydrolysis [79]. Glycosylation (addition of an oligosaccharide) of 5-HT receptors might also be important, and N-asparagine glycosylation is a requirement for insertion of 5-HT₅A receptors into the plasma membrane and coupling to transduction mechanisms [82]. Palmitoylation is the attachment of palmitate via a thioester link to cysteine residues. Agonist-enhanced palmitoylation of 5-HT₄ receptors modulates spontaneous coupling to Gₛ and affects sensitivity to phosphorylation and internalization [85]. Furthermore, palmitoylation of 5-HT₁A receptors enhances their retention in plasma-membrane-localized lipid rafts, thereby favoring coupling to Gᵢ/o and AC [86].

membrane insertion, and 5-HT reuptake is enhanced in mice genetically lacking nNOS, demonstrating that this interaction occurs in the brain. Finally, NO also exerts feedback actions on SERT via activation of PKG [2].

A further revelation is that 5-HT itself can affect signaling. In platelets, SERT-mediated accumulation of 5-HT results in its 'transamidation' to small GTPases such as Rho-A and Rab-4 [14]. Transamidation is catalyzed by transglutaminases, a family of Ca²⁺-dependent enzymes. This process of 'serotonylation' renders GTPases active, leading to α-granule exocytosis. Activation of 5-HT₂A receptors, which increases Ca²⁺ availability, synergizes with SERT to induce 5-HT transamidation [14]. Indicating that comparable events occur in brain, 5-HT₂A receptors enhance transamidation of 5-HT to another Rho-family GTPase, Rac-1, in cells derived from cortex [15] (Figure 1). Finally, transamidation participates in a negative loop that regulates 5-HT uptake [16]. Thus, exposure of platelets to 5-HT promotes association of the 5-HT-bound activated form of Rab-4 to the C-terminal domain of SERT, leading to its intracellular retention [16].

Direct modulation of signaling by SERTs and by 5-HT itself

Activation of 5-HT receptors and of other classes of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) triggers the phosphorylation of SERTs by PKC and PKG or p38. These kinases decrease and enhance SERT membrane expression, respectively, and, correspondingly, they reduce and accelerate, respectively, the kinetics of 5-HT uptake [2,12]. Thus, signaling is indirectly modified by altered availability of 5-HT. However, providing a new dimension to the relationship between SERT and transduction SERTs were recently found to directly control the activity of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) [13]. Thus, a proteomic approach showed that nNOS binds to the extreme C terminus of SERT and, in cells co-expressing SERT and nNOS, exposure to 5-HT generates nitric oxide (NO) and cGMP in a calmodulin-dependent manner. 5-HT-reuptake inhibitors block this action, showing that passage of 5-HT through SERT is necessary for nNOS recruitment. Reciprocally, association of nNOS with SERT restricts their

G-protein-dependent, ligand-directed signaling

At certain classes of GPCRs, agonists show contrasting signaling patterns. Some more efficaciously recruit one pathway versus another, whereas others display opposite profiles. These differences reflect induction (stabilization) of multiple conformational states, a phenomenon named 'ligand-directed trafficking or signaling' [17].

Accordingly, 5-HT₁A-receptor agonists show dissimilar efficacies at various isoforms of Gα protein (Gᵢ₂ versus Gᵢ₃, Gᵢ versus Gₛ) [3,18] and at specific ion currents (Kir.3 K⁺ channels, known as GIRKs, versus smooth inward-current channels, known as I_smooth) [19]. Furthermore, distinctive actions of agonists at pre- versus postsynaptic 5-HT₁A

Review                                                                                     Trends in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.29 No.9

Table 1. Coupling patterns of multiple classes of 5-HT receptor${}^{a}$

| Receptor (variant) | Population          | Principal G proteins                          | Principal signals                                      | Other G proteins | Other direct signals                                   | Downstream signal (mediator)${}^{b}$                                                                 |
|--------------------|---------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5-HT${}_{1A}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{i/o}$<br>$(G_{i1}, G_{i2}, G_{i3}, G_{o})$ | AC and PKA ($-$)<br>$gK^{+}$ (GIRK) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (N, P/Q) ($-$) | $G_{z}$           | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ and AA (+)<br>AC II (+)                      | pERK (Ras, PI3K) (+)<br>pAkt (PI3K) (+)<br>JNK (Rho) (+) [87]<br>NHE (Jak2 and CaM) (+)<br>$I_{\text{smooth}}$ (+) |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{i}$ (DRN)<br>$G_{o} > G_{i}$ (Cx, Hip, Hyp) | AC and PKA (Cx, Hip) ($-$)<br>$gK^{+}$ (GIRK) (DRN) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (N, P/Q) (DRN) ($-$) | $G_{z}$ (Hyp, Hip) | PLC (Hip) ($-$)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ (Hip) (+)                  | pERK (Hip, DRN) ($-$)<br>pERK (Hyp) (+)<br>pAkt (Hip) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (TWIK-1) (Ecx) [88] |
| 5-HT${}_{1B}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{i/o}$<br>$(G_{i1}, G_{i2}, G_{i3}, G_{o})$ | AC and PKA ($-$)                                       |                  | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)<br>nNOS (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ ($Ca^{2+}$ dependent) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (voltage dependent) ($-$) | pERK (Ras, PI3K) (+)<br>pAkt (PI3K and p70S6 kinase) (+)<br>pERK (+)                                                                 |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{i/o}$ (striatum)                          | AC and PKA (S. nigra) ($-$)                            |                  |                                                        | pERK (+)                                                                                   |
| 5-HT${}_{1D}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{i/o}$<br>$(G_{i1}, G_{i2}, G_{i3}, G_{o})$ | AC and PKA ($-$)                                       |                  | $gK^{+}$ ($Ca^{2+}$ dependent) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (voltage dependent) ($-$)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (N) ($-$) | pERK (+)                                                                                   |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{i/o}$ (Hip, Cx)                           | AC and PKA ($-$)                                       |                  |                                                        |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{2A}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{q/11}$                                    | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ and AA (+)    | $G_{i/o}$<br>$G_{12,13}$ | cAMP, PKC and CaM (+)<br>PLD (Arf1) (+)                 | pERK (many pathways) (+)<br>p38 kinase (RhoA) (+)<br>pAkt (PI3K) (+)<br>NHE (Jak2 and CaM) (+)<br>STAT3 (Jak2) (+)<br>pERK (Src and $\beta$-arrestin) (Cx) (+) [89]<br>$gNa^{+}$ (PKC) (Cx) ($-$) |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{q/11}$ (Cx)                               | PLC and $Ca^{2+}$ (Cx, striatum) (+)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ and AA (Cx, Hip) (+) | $G_{i}$ (Cx)     | NOS (Cx) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (L) (Cx) (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (voltage independent)<br>(Cx, astrocytes) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (delayed rectifying) (Cx) ($-$) |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{2B}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{q/11}$                                    | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)                             | $G_{13}$         | NOS (+)                                                | pERK (Src and Ras) (+)<br>Na${}^{+}$-K${}^{+}$-ATPase (PKC) ($-$)                              |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{q/11}$                                    | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (Cx, astrocytes) (+)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ and AA (+) |                  | NOS (+)                                                |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{2C}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{q/11}$                                    | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)<br>PLA${}_{2}$ and AA (+)    | $G_{12/13}$<br>$G_{i1}, G_{i3}, G_{o}$ | PLD (RhoA) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (GIRK, others) ($-$)<br>$gCl^{-}$ ($Ca^{2+}$ gated) (+)<br>NOS (choroid plexus) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (delayed rectifying)<br>(choroid plexus, striatum, Hyp) ($-$) [90] | pERK (many pathways) (+)<br>pAkt (PI3K) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (PKC) ($-$)<br>pERK (Src and $\beta$-arrestin) (Cx) (+) [89]<br>$gNa^{+}$ (PKC) (Cx) ($-$) |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{q/11}$                                    | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (choroids plexus, Cx) (+)       |                  |                                                        |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{4}$       | Recombinant         | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (+)                                         | $G_{13}$         | RhoA (+)<br>Epac/Rap1 (+)<br>$gCa^{2+}$ (L) (+)        | pERK (Src) (+)<br>pERK (PKA and Ras) (+)<br>NHE (Src and $Ca^{2+}$ dependent) ($-$) |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (colliculus) (+)                            | $G_{13}$         | RhoA (+)<br>TTX-insensitive $gNa^{+}$ (Hip, DRN) (+)<br>$g$Cation (globus pallidus) (+) [91] | pERK (Src) (colliculus) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (voltage and $Ca^{2+}$ dependent)<br>(PKA) (Hip, colliculus) ($-$)<br>$I_{\mathrm{H}}$ current (Hip) (+) |
| 5-HT${}_{5a}$      | Recombinant         | $G_{i/o}$                                     | AC and PKA ($-$)                                       |                  | PLC, $Ca^{2+}$ and PKC (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (GIRK and other K${}^{+}$-channel types) (+) |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{6}$       | Recombinant         | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (+)                                         |                  |                                                        | pERK (Fyn) (+)                                                                             |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (colliculus, striatum) (+)                  |                  | $gK^{+}$ (striatum) ($-$) [90]                         |                                                                                           |
| 5-HT${}_{7}$       | Recombinant         | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (+)                                         | $G_{12}$         | RhoA and Cdc42 (+)                                     | pERK (PKA and Epac) (+)<br>pAkt (cAMP and $Ca^{2+}$) (+)<br>p38 Kinase (PLCe) (+) |
|                    | Endogenous (brain) | $G_{s}$                                       | AC and PKA (Hip) (+)                                  | $G_{12}$ (Hip)   | RhoA and Cdc42 (Hip) (+)<br>$gK^{+}$ (striatum) ($-$) [90]<br>$g$Cation (globus pallidus) (+) [91] | pERK (Hip) (+)<br>$I_{\mathrm{H}}$ current (cAMP)<br>(Hip, striatum) (+) |

${}^{a}$Coupling to specific G-protein isoforms, soluble second messengers and ion channels is indicated. The table is not exhaustive. 5-HT${}_{1e}$ and 5-HT${}_{1f}$ receptors couple via $G_{i/o}$ to inhibition of AC and PKA, but almost no other information is available so they are not depicted. Observations in recombinant sites are differentiated from endogenously expressed and native cerebral receptors. Where known, the main mechanism(s) mediating the influence of 5-HT receptors on downstream signals is given. For ion channels, whether the route from receptor to current change is direct and/or via second messengers is often uncertain. For references see main text, reviews [3–5] and Refs [87–91].

${}^{b}$G-protein independent (non-G-protein-dependent pathways are in blue). ${}^{c}$Abbreviations: ($-$), inhibition; (+), stimulation; AA, arachidonic acid; Akt, protein kinase B; CaM, calmodulin; Cx, cortex; DRN, dorsal raphe nucleus; Ecx, entorhinal cortex; Epac is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor; Fyn and Arf1 are kinase partners of 5-HT${}_{6}$ and 5-HT${}_{7}$ receptors, respectively; g, channel; Hip, hippocampus; Hyp, hypothalamus; $I_{\mathrm{H}}$, hyperpolarisation-activated current; JNK, Jun-Kinase; JAK, Janus tyrosine kinase; L, N, P/Q, types of $Ca^{2+}$ channel; NHE, Na${}^{+}$/H${}^{+}$ exchanger; p, phosphorylated; Ras, Rap1, RhoA and Cdc42 are small GTPases; S. nigra, substantia nigra; Src is a tyrosine kinase; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; TTX, tetrodotoxin; TWIK, tandem pore domain weakly inwardly rectifying K${}^{+}$ channel.

receptors might reflect coupling to G<sub>i3</sub> versus G<sub>o</sub>, respectively [20].

By analogy, rank orders of agonist efficacy for recruiting human 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors differ for phospholipase (PL) C versus A<sub>2</sub> [21,22], and for G<sub>q/11</sub> versus G<sub>i3</sub> [23,24]. Contrasting agonist efficacies at PLC versus PLA<sub>2</sub> have also been observed for human 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors [25], and differential coupling patterns are related to the induction of head-twitches in rats, a proxy for hallucinations in humans [22]. Thus, non-hallucinogenic agonists such as lisuride (an antiparkinsonian agent) only stimulate G<sub>q</sub> in rat frontal cortex (FCX) [18,26], whereas hallucinogens such as psilocybin (found in magic mushrooms), mescaline (found in the peyote cactus) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) stimulate both G<sub>q/11</sub> and G<sub>i/o</sub> [26]. Supporting observations of ligand-directed signaling, hallucinogenic and non-hallucinogen 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> agonists also differentially influence FCX patterns of gene expression [26]. As if this was not complicated enough, hallucinogenic 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> agonists elicit head-twitches independently of β-arrestin, whereas administration of 5-hydroxytryptophan (a precursor of 5-HT) induces head-twitches by harnessing a β-arrestin-dependent pathway [27]. The relationship of multiple signaling pathways to function at 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors is clearly complex, but these observations help explain the paradox of why some 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> agonists elicit hallucinations whereas structurally related compounds do not.

It will be important to establish in more general terms whether agonist-directed trafficking is of broad physiological importance in the brain, whether its disruption is related to CNS disorders and whether it can be exploited for improving the efficacy and safety of novel therapeutic agents.

Interestingly, non- and partially edited 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors display more pronounced CA towards PLC than highly edited isoforms do [25,31,32], and CA is effector-dependent, being less marked for PLA<sub>2</sub> [25]. Furthermore, hinting at inverse ligand-directed signaling, drugs have been described that behave as inverse agonists at PLA<sub>2</sub>, but as neutral antagonists at PLC [25,33]. CA might be of functional significance as much as 5-HT<sub>2C</sub>-receptor inverse agonists more powerfully activate mesolimbic dopaminergic pathways (via GABAergic interneurons) than neutral antagonists [25,31]. Although CA is not pronounced at PLC-coupled human 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors, it can be amplified by overexpression of G<sub>q</sub> and by site-directed mutagenesis of amino acids in 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors known to interact with G<sub>q</sub> [25]. Interestingly, CA at cerebral 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors might explain impairment of associative learning by inverse agonists [25].

All splice variants of 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptors display CA, which is intensified upon truncation of the C terminus [4]. Spontaneous signaling remains unreported for human 5-HT<sub>6</sub> receptors, although mutations in intracellular loop 3 (which interacts with G<sub>s</sub>) render them constitutively active. Furthermore, native mouse 5-HT<sub>6</sub> receptors display CA for coupling to cAMP [34]. Native 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors (all variants) usually reveal CA at G<sub>s</sub> [34], and CA was likewise seen at an alternative pathway: coupling via G<sub>12</sub> to small Rho-family GTPases [35]. Several antipsychotics are inverse agonists at human 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors [34], but evidence for CA has not been obtained in the brain so functional importance remains unclear.

### Fine regulation of G-protein-dependent and -independent signaling by protein partners

Proteomic strategies have revealed that 5-HT receptors interact with numerous intracellular proteins in addition to G proteins [36]. These partners control the distribution of 5-HT receptors in specific cellular domains, their trafficking in and out of the plasma membrane and signal transduction. 5-HT-receptor-associated proteins include the ubiquitous GPCR-signaling modulators, β-arrestins and others that are specific to individual 5-HT subtypes. β-Arrestins direct the agonist-induced internalization of 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> and 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptors and, unprecedented for GPCRs, agonist-independent association with β-arrestins was reported for non-edited (and partially edited) 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors [37]. This interaction leads to constitutive internalization [37], an effect prevented by inverse agonists [32]. Intriguingly, although β-arrestins are implicated in hallucinogenic effects mediated by 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors (see earlier), their trafficking is independent of β-arrestin [38].

Conversely, PDZ (postsynaptic-density-95/disc-large/zonula-occludens-1)-domain-containing proteins profoundly influence internalization of both 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> and 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors, and PDZ proteins are essential for targeting 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors to dendrites in cortical neurons [39]. PDZ partners are both receptor- and function-specific. Thus, the specific sets of PDZ proteins that interact with 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> versus 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors differ. Although PSD-95 (postsynaptic-density-95) prevents 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptor internalization [40], it favours constitutive and agonist-dependent endocytosis of 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors [41]. Conversely,

MPP3 (membrane protein palmitoylated 3) stabilizes $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors at the plasma membrane [41] (Figure 2). Interactions with non-PDZ proteins also influence signal transduction, as illustrated by the $5-HT_{2A}$ receptor. Binding of calmodulin to its C terminus impedes phosphorylation by PKC, thereby preventing desensitization [42]. Conversely, association of p90-ribosomal S6 kinase-2 with $5-HT_{2A}$ receptors (at their intracellular 3 loop) silences signaling [43]. In addition, a caveolin-1 interaction, established both in cerebral synapses and in glioma cells, is essential for lipid-raft targeting of $5-HT_{2A}$ receptors and coupling to G$_q$ [44]. A similar role for caveolin-1 in the coupling of $5-HT_7$ receptors to G$_s$ was recently shown [45]. A further non-PDZ protein, p11, enhances the localization of postsynaptic $5-HT_{1B}$ receptors at the cell surface [46], and disruption of $5-HT_{1B}$-receptor-p11 interactions might contribute to depressive states.

Underlining their pleiotropic roles, protein partners also directly transduce cellular signals. For instance, β-arrestin contributes to activation of ERK by $5-HT_{2A}$ and $5-HT_{4}$ receptors (Table 1). In addition, in colliculi neurons, $5-HT_{4}$ receptors activate ERK independently of G$_s$, cAMP and β-arrestin via Src, which forms stable complexes with $5-HT_{4}$ receptors that persist upon endocytosis [47]. $5-HT_{4}$-receptor-mediated ERK stimulation contributes to long-term potentiation [48]. Finally, an interaction between the $5-HT_{2A}$ receptor C terminus and ADP ribosylation factor 1 (Arf1) is important for G$_{q/11}$-independent activation of PLD [49].

### Signaling crosstalk: from functional to physical interchanges between 5-HT receptors

Scope for interactions between 5-HT receptors and other GPCRs is immense (Figures 1 and 3). Examples can be cited at all levels of integration, from input (e.g., endogenous agonist) to output (e.g., ERK phosphorylation), via G proteins themselves (recruited by several classes of 5-HT receptors). Some interchanges are facilitatory (e.g., $5-HT_{4}$ and $5-HT_7$ receptors converging via G$_s$ onto AC), whereas others are antagonistic (e.g., $5-HT_{1A}$ inhibition of AC versus

---

**Figure 2. Signaling at $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors: a microcosm of cellular pharmacology.** $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors illustrate much of the complexity of serotonin signaling. They prototypically recruit phospholipase (PL)Cβ via the α subunit of G$_{q/11}$. In addition, they possess a further important axis of transduction via PLA$_2$, possibly triggered by G$_{12/13}$, that also indirectly activates PLD. PLA$_2$ itself recruits PLCγ and cyclooxygenase 2 resulting in the generation of arachidonic acid (AA). By contrast, stimulation of PLC and PLD ultimately converges onto PKC, then results in the phosphorylation of extracellular regulated kinase (ERK)1/2. A further route to ERK activation is provided by Gα$_{i/o}$, which induces the phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K)-Akt-glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3β cascade. Like ERK, this cascade controls gene transcription and it is also implicated in apoptosis and many other cellular functions. In addition to directing internalization by $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors, β-arrestin can activate ERK1/2. The preference of certain agonists for one transduction pathway over another is called ligand-directed signaling. Constitutive activity refers to spontaneous coupling in the absence of agonists and it is greatest for isoforms unaffected by adenosine-to-inosine mRNA editing. Although $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors link up with themselves to form homodimers, they probably assemble into heterodimers with other classes of GPCRs; however, this is not yet proven. Moreover, $5-HT_{2C}$ receptors associate with protein partners controlling membrane insertion, constitutive activity, and signaling: four proteins discussed in the text are depicted, but others are known [4]. Coupling to ion channels (probably involving βγ subunits) is not shown for reasons of clarity. Abbreviations: CaM, calmodulin; DAG, diacylglycerol; il-3, intracellular loop 3; IP$_3$, inositol triphosphate; RhoA, Ras homolog A; RhoGEF, Ras homolog guanine nucleotide exchange factor; SSV, Ser-Ser-Val. Akt is also known as protein kinase B. '?' denotes uncertainty.

Review

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.29 No.9

Con-divergent
Bi-parallel
Bi-fan

4/1A
Input
7
Redundancy (+) and/or
push–pull (−)
1A
5A
2C
PLC
cAMP
Integration
Gβγ
DAG
Ca²⁺
Pleiotropy
Gαᵢ/o
PKC
PKA
Output
Epac
GIRK
AC

The architecture of serotonergic signaling: functional modules

Positive feedback
Negative feedback
‘Fast’ feed-forward

6
2A
2A
Gₛ
Gαₚ
β-arrestin and/or
tyrosine kinase
Fyn
Long loop
Long loop
Short loop
PKC
ERK

Figure 3. Cellular configurations (motifs) employed for signaling via 5-HT receptors. Signaling at 5-HT receptors is a good example of a complex cellular network and, in trying to understand its organization and operation, it is instructive to characterize specific functional units, or ‘motifs’ [2]. Serotonin transduction involves multiple convergent inputs onto common integrative signals, which themselves display multiple (divergent) outputs. In this fundamental ‘con-divergent’ module, inputs might be similar (‘synergy’) or opposing (‘push-pull’). This is illustrated by the redundancy of 5-HT₇ and 5-HT₄ receptors, which synergistically activate adenylyl cyclase (AC), whereas 5-HT₄ and 5-HT₁A receptors function oppositely (push-pull) to activate and block AC, respectively. This mode of balanced control is a universal feature of complex (signaling and supra-cellular) networks; it is fundamental to homeostasis and favors resistance to disruption [2]. Similarly, the control of several pathways in a network by key links (nodes) is common; this is termed pleiotropy (multiple roles) and is exemplified by AC, which both activates PKA and recruits a further intracellular messenger, Epac. Certain other configurations used in serotonin signaling also incorporate modes of convergence and divergence (bi-parallel and bi-fan). Other motifs permit the well-known features of negative feedback, positive feedback or ‘fast’ feed-forward. All inputs are positive unless indicated. The number indicated in the circle corresponds to the subtype of 5-HT receptor. Abbreviations: DAG, diacylglycerol; TK, tyrosine kinase.

5-HT₄ stimulation). Although most exchanges are functional, recent work has revealed physical interactions. Several topical examples are outlined here.
The varying fates of tryptophan (Figure 1) emphasize crosstalk at the biosynthetic stage, and endogenous ligands represent a further surprising element of communication. Thus, tryptamine is a weak agonist of 5-HT receptors, its actions potentially mimicked by recently discovered thyronamine trace amines [2]. In addition, dopamine engages 5-HT₂A receptors and triggers their internalization [50].
Numerous cases of reciprocal phosphorylation-mediated crosstalk between 5-HT receptors and other classes of GPCR occur; these are usually mediated via

PKA and PKC, which thereby modulate plasma-membrane expression, coupling and interactions with protein partners [51,52]. In addition, common protein partners of two 5-HT receptors represent a potential mode of crosstalk. This might be involved in the reciprocal influence of co-expressed 5-HT₁B and 5-HT₂B receptors on their contrasting patterns of clathrin- or caveolin-controlled internalization [53].

Like other GPCRs, 5-HT receptors transactivate tyrosine-kinase receptors. For example, one pathway of 5-HT₂A-receptor-mediated ERK phosphorylation is dependent on Src, calmodulin and transactivation of epidermal growth-factor (in neuronal cells) or fibroblast-growth-factor receptors (in glial cells) [54,55]. In addition, trans-

activation of tyrosine-kinase receptors enhances the expression of neurotrophic factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor; this action might be involved in 5-HT-induced cell survival, proliferation and neurogenesis [2,5].

Oligomeric associations of GPCRs often comprise signaling units, and 5-HT<sub>1A</sub>, 5-HT<sub>1B</sub>, 5-HT<sub>1D</sub>, 5-HT<sub>4</sub> and 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors all form dimers [56,57]. In contrast to some classes of GPCRs, agonist binding does not greatly influence formation of 5-HT-receptor dimers, indicating constitutive assembly before membrane insertion. Underpinning this contention, 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors generate dimers in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi of living cells [58]. 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> dimers possess an interface between transmembrane helices IV and V, and dimer proximity is increased and decreased by agonists and inverse agonists, respectively [59]. Furthermore, analysis of functionally compensating, co-expressed mutant 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors linked to G<sub>q</sub> (fusion proteins) indicates that the dimer is asymmetric versus G<sub>q</sub>, with both subunits binding to 5-HT and having distinct roles during signaling [58,59]. 5-HT<sub>2C</sub>-receptor dimers comprise a conformational heterodimer, supporting the hunch [31] that they might, by analogy to 5-HT<sub>1B</sub> and 5-HT<sub>1D</sub> heterodimers [57], associate with other GPCRs. Indeed, 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> and metabotropic glutamate 2 (mGlu<sub>2</sub>) receptors assemble into heterodimers via a transmembrane-4 and -5 linking domain [60]. Intriguingly, mGlu<sub>2</sub> receptor agonists blunt heterodimer coupling to G<sub>i</sub> providing one substrate for their anti-hallucinogenic properties, although reduction of glutamate release from thalamocortical afferents might also be involved [60,61].

Direct evidence has been acquired for mGlu<sub>2</sub>–5-HT<sub>2A</sub> heterodimers in the human brain and for a reduced density in schizophrenics [60]. Nonetheless, this remains one of the few demonstrations of heterodimers in neuronal tissue. Future studies must focus on the putative heterodimerization of native 5-HT receptors *in situ* and on their pharmacological profiles in the hope of identifying novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Future research directions

#### Concretizing recent developments
One important avenue for future research will be the confirmation of these recent developments in serotonin signaling, their further characterization in the brain and clarification of their functional and therapeutic significance. The following topics are also likely to attract particular interest over the coming years.

#### Signaling at 5-HT receptors in the brain: return to the future
It is important to distinguish the plethora of data from solitary recombinant 5-HT receptors expressed in cell lines from rare observations on native brain populations in their 'natural' environment. Although harder to acquire, the latter are decisive in understanding real-life signaling pathways. Correspondingly, there is increasing interest in serotonin signaling where this all started, in the brain itself, albeit with the benefits of modern technologies. For example, studies showing that long-term antidepressant treatment desensitizes signaling at 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> and (presynaptic) 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors can be amplified by autoradiographic analyses of G-protein coupling and antibody-based studies of individual G-protein isoforms [2,51]. More work on the influence of drugs and stimuli such as stress on 5-HT-receptor coupling is needed, in particular in view of regional differences. For example, various populations of 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors differentially couple to distinct G-protein isoforms with hippocampal and raphe sites privileging G<sub>o</sub> (G<sub>z</sub>) versus G<sub>i3</sub>, respectively [20,51,62]. Moreover, pre-versus post-synaptic sites mainly signal via GIRK versus AC (*Figure 1*), and 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors in the hippocampus and hypothalamus are facilitatory and inhibitory to ERK phosphorylation, respectively [63]. Complementing studies of brain tissue, studies of primary neuronal cultures and cells bearing endogenously expressed receptors can also yield important information. For example, CA was recently demonstrated at 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors in cultured cortical neurons [32].

Finally, although human brain tissue is seldom available, signaling in humans can be monitored using peripheral markers, including platelets bearing SERTs and 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors. Furthermore, leukocytes express tryptophan hydroxylase, SERTs, 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors and several classes of G-protein-coupled 5-HT receptors displaying coupling patterns similar (although not identical) to those found in the brain [64–66].

#### Signaling in non-neuronal cells
Cytokine-releasing lymphocytes derived from the systemic circulation access the brain where they unite with resident microglia, the macrophages of the brain. Upon activation, microglia influence neuronal function and serotonin transmission by releasing cytokines, NO, glutamate and reactive oxygen species. Immune-competent cells are implicated in processes related to neurodegeneration, depression and schizophrenia. Microglial 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors couple via G<sub>s</sub> to the generation of interleukin-6 and, extrapolating from peripheral macrophages, microglia probably possess other 5-HT-receptor subtypes [67]. 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors are also expressed by T-lymphocytes, which they activate via an ERK-dependent pathway. Lymphocyte-localized 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors, likewise, stimulate ERK, and 5-HT<sub>1B</sub> receptors provoke T-cell proliferation [64].

Oligodendrocytes, which surround the axons of neurons, generate myelin, provide trophic support and modulate neurotransmission. Their dysregulation is implicated in schizophrenia and depression [68]. Supporting interest in serotonergic signaling at oligodendrocytes, their peripheral counterparts, Schwann cells, bear 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors activated by 5-HT released from endoneurial mast cells and coupled to Ca<sup>2+</sup> flux [69].

In addition to structural, energetic and ‘nursing’ roles, astrocytes modulate neurons, microglia and blood vessels by release of various mediators. Despite the long-established presence of mRNA for SERT and multiple 5-HT receptors (G-protein coupled and 5-HT<sub>3</sub>) in astrocytes [70], little is known of signaling. Nonetheless, what we do know is intriguing. Engagement of 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors in astrocytes triggers interleukin-6 synthesis by a p38- and PKCε-dependent pathway [71]. Curiously, 5-HT<sub>7</sub> coupling to AC is enhanced upon chronic exposure to antidepressants [2], and astrocytic 5-HT<sub>2B</sub> receptors, which control intracellu-
lar Ca²⁺, are also upregulated by fluoxetine [72,73]. 5-HT₂A receptors, likewise, couple to Ca²⁺ and PLC [72] and their recruitment transactivates fibroblast-growth-factor receptors to liberate glial-cell-derived neurotrophic factor, which is involved in neurogenesis [55]. Moreover, activation of 5-HT₁A receptors in astrocytes releases a neurite-extending growth factor, S-100b, independently of AC [74].

Interest in non-neuronal signaling is not confined to psychiatry. Modulation of GPCR-directed signals in lymphomas and gliomas, the major form of cerebral tumor, is attracting attention. Combined actions at 5-HT receptors and downstream kinases could lead to improved anticancer agents for the brain [2,66]. Finally, the polyomavirus JC virus (JCV) provokes multifocal leukoencephalopathy in immunocompromised patients after penetration of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes via 5-HT₂A receptor-mediated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis and ERK activation; 5-HT₂A antagonists abrogate infection [75].

### Signaling into function

A major challenge is to integrate serotonergic signaling with CNS function and disease. Knowing how a 5-HT receptor affects signaling in a specific class of cell is a step in this direction, hence the importance of characterizing transduction in defined neurons, like glutamatergic pyramidal cells in FCX and ventrotegmental dopaminergic neurons. Furthermore, pursuing cascades from 5-HT receptors through to functionally relevant outputs such as neuronal firing rates and transcription factors is instructive. However, it is necessary to directly illuminate the black box between coupling and behavior. For example, Gq-mediated signaling at 5-HT₂A receptors in FCX might be related to schizophrenia, an interpretation corroborated by a complementary strategy showing that hallucinogen-induced head twitches are abolished in mice lacking 5-HT₂A receptors [76]. A similar genetic approach has revealed a role for 5-HT₁A-receptor coupling to Gz in the modulation of endocrine function [51,62].

### Signaling into therapeutics

The ultimate goal is to translate improved knowledge of serotonergic signaling into therapeutics. Two complementary strategies envisage interventions: (i) at 5-HT receptors, and (ii) (more speculatively) downstream at signaling pathways. Conceptually speaking, multiple targets invite multi-target drugs, so network-based approaches are better adapted to modulation of serotonergic signaling than highly selective agents [2]. Accordingly, most targets are best modulated in combination with others.

For example, optimal recruitment of the AC–PKA–Epac axis could be achieved by mixed agonists at 5-HT₄ and 5-HT₇ receptors. In addition, stimulation of ERK1/2 and Akt by 5-HT₂A and 5-HT₇ receptors exploits complementary Ca²⁺- and cAMP-dependent mechanisms, and Epac is implicated in the enhancement by 5-HT₇ receptors of the ERK response to 5-HT₂A sites [77]. Although the therapeutic vocation of mixed 5-HT₂A and 5-HT₇ agonists is unclear, concomitant stimulation of 5-HT₁A receptors and blockade of 5-HT₂C receptors is a core effect of atypical antipsychotics such as ziprasidone [1]. Of particular interest are ligands specific for 5-HT₂A–mGlu₂ complexes, or

other putative heterodimers possessing distinctive binding and coupling profiles [60]. In regard to CA, antipsychotics behaving as 5-HT₂A inverse agonists might have efficacy against negative symptoms without evoking motor perturbation [1]. In addition, 5-HT₂C inverse agonists could be more powerful antidepressants than neutral antagonists; however, their discontinuation is more likely to provoke withdrawal [31]. Finally, with a view to exploiting ligand-directed signaling, 5-HT₂A-receptor agonists favoring Gq versus Gi activation and devoid of hallucinogenic properties are an attractive possibility.

Intracellular signals are inherently challenging targets because they are often ubiquitous; indeed, drug vectorization comes from GPCRs, not transduction pathways! Nonetheless, multi-target drugs acting at two key nodes in a signaling network offer one answer. For example, mixed 5-HT₄ agonists and phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors should primarily reinforce cAMP transduction in regions where 5-HT₄ receptors are activated, improving efficacy and safety of such pro-cognitive agents [2]. A further concept is manipulation of interactions between 5-HT receptors and protein partners. One concrete example is the use of small peptides to decouple 5-HT₂C receptors from their PDZ partners, mimicking the desensitization elicited by antidepressants [41]. Conversely, blocking interactions between 5-HT₂C receptors and the phosphatase PTEN (phosphatase with tensin homology) reproduces the inhibition by 5-HT₂C agonists of the excitation of mesolimbic dopaminergic neurons by cannabinoids, preventing their rewarding effects [78]. Hence, interference with the association between 5-HT₂C receptors and PTEN might counter drug addiction. Another possibility is simultaneous actions at 5-HT receptors and RGS-4, a susceptibility gene for schizophrenia that interacts with 5-HT₁A receptors [1,79]. Intriguingly, cellular prion protein modulates signaling crosstalk among 5-HT₁B, 5-HT₂A and 5-HT₂B receptors, and its pathological counterpart, scrapie prion protein, impacts serotonergic neurons. This indicates that serotonergic transduction might be a target for control of spongiform encephalopathies [80]. Finally, underscoring prospects that drugs can directly affect intracellular signals, agents blocking the interaction between 5-HT₆ receptors and Gs were recently unveiled [81].

### Concluding remarks

Signaling via G-protein-coupled 5-HT receptors is extraordinarily diverse, and the recent developments discussed here underline its complexity. There is an urgent need to further our understanding of serotonergic transduction in discrete cerebral regions, in defined classes of neurons, in response to therapy and under physiological and pathological conditions. Also, as accentuated here, signaling in non-neuronal cells should not be neglected. Finally, the functional significance of specific serotonergic signaling pathways awaits clarification. Improved knowledge of how 5-HT exerts its actions at the cellular level should ultimately permit therapeutic exploitation of innovative concepts like CA, heterodimers and agonist-directed signaling that, despite oceans of speculative ink, remain of unproven clinical relevance.

Much has been achieved, but still more remains to be learned if knowledge of serotonin signaling is to be trans-
Review

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.29 No.9

lated into tangible benefits for those with disorders related to its perturbation.

Acknowledgements
We thank Benjamin Di Cara for assistance with graphics.

References
1 Meltzer, H.Y. *et al.* (2003) Serotonin receptors: their key role in drugs to treat schizophrenia. *Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry* 27, 1159–1172
2 Millan, M.J. (2006) Multi-target strategies for the improved treatment of depressive states: conceptual foundations and neuronal substrates, drug discovery and therapeutic application. *Pharmacol. Ther.* 110, 135–370
3 Raymond, J.R. *et al.* (2001) Multiplicity of mechanisms of serotonin receptor signal transduction. *Pharmacol. Ther.* 92, 179–212
4 Bockaert, J. *et al.* (2006) Neuronal 5-HT metabotropic receptors: fine-tuning of their structure, signaling, and roles in synaptic modulation. *Cell Tissue Res.* 326, 553–572
5 Cowen, D.S. (2007) Serotonin and neuronal growth factors – a convergence of signaling pathways. *J. Neurochem.* 101, 1161–1171
6 Yun, H.M. *et al.* (2007) The novel cellular mechanism of human 5-HT<sub>6</sub> receptor through an interaction with Fyn. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 5496–5505
7 Lezoualc'h, F. (2007) 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptor and Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid connection. *Exp. Neurol.* 205, 325–329
8 Turner, J.H. *et al.* (2007) Ca<sup>2+</sup>-calmodulin and janus kinase 2 are required for activation of sodium-proton exchange by the G<sub>i</sub>-coupled 5-hydroxytryptamine 1a receptor. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 320, 314–322
9 Gill, R.K. *et al.* (2005) Serotonin inhibits Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchange activity via 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptors and activation of PKCα in human intestinal epithelial cells. *Gastroenterology* 128, 962–974
10 Magro, F. *et al.* (2007) Short-term effect on intestinal epithelial Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchanger by G<sub>i/o1,2</sub>-coupled 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> and G<sub>q/11</sub>-coupled 5-HT<sub>2</sub> receptors. *Life Sci.* 81, 560–569
11 Goni-Allo, B. *et al.* (2007) Studies on the mechanisms underlying amiloride enhancement of 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine-induced serotonin depletion in rats. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 562, 198–207
12 Launay, J.M. *et al.* (2006) Serotonin transport and serotonin transporter-mediated antidepressant recognition are controlled by 5-HT<sub>2B</sub> receptor signaling in serotonergic neuronal cells. *FASEB J.* 20, 1843–1854
13 Chanrion, B. *et al.* (2007) Physical interaction between the serotonin transporter and neuronal nitric oxide synthase underlies reciprocal modulation of their activity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 104, 8119–8124
14 Walther, D.J. *et al.* (2003) Serotonylation of small GTPases is a signal transduction pathway that triggers platelet alpha-granule release. *Cell* 115, 851–862
15 Dai, Y. *et al.* (2008) Transglutaminase-catalyzed transamidation: a novel mechanism for Rac1 activation by 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptor stimulation. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 326, 153–162 ([http://jpet.aspetjournals.org](http://jpet.aspetjournals.org))
16 Ahmed, B.A. *et al.* (2008) Serotonin transamidates rab4 and facilitates its binding to the C terminus of serotonin transporter. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283, 9388–9398
17 Kenakin, T. (2007) Functional selectivity through protean and biased agonism: who steers the ship? *Mol. Pharmacol.* 72, 1393–1401
18 Newman-Tancredi, A. *et al.* (2002) Antibody capture assay reveals bell-shaped concentration-response isotherms for h5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptor-mediated Gα<sub>i3</sub> activation: conformational selection by high-efficacy agonists, and relationship to trafficking of receptor signaling. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 62, 590–601
19 Heusler, P. *et al.* (2005) Differential ion current activation by human 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors in Xenopus oocytes: evidence for agonist-directed trafficking of receptor signalling. *Neuropharmacology* 49, 963–976
20 Mannoury la Cour, C. *et al.* (2006) Regional differences in the coupling of 5-hydroxytryptamine-1A receptors to G proteins in the rat brain. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 70, 1013–1021
21 Sanders-Bush, E. *et al.* (2003) Serotonin 5-HT<sub>2</sub> receptors: molecular and genomic diversity. *Mol. Interv.* 3, 319–330
22 Moya, P.R. *et al.* (2007) Functional selectivity of hallucinogenic phenethylamine and phenylisopropylamine derivatives at human

5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)<sub>2A</sub> and 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 321, 1054–1061
23 Cussac, D. *et al.* (2002) Differential activation of Gq/11 and Gi<sub>3</sub> proteins at 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2C</sub> receptors revealed by antibody capture assays: influence of receptor reserve and relationship to agonist-directed trafficking. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 62, 578–589
24 Berg, K.A. *et al.* (2008) A conservative, single-amino acid substitution in the second cytoplasmic domain of the human Serotonin<sub>2C</sub> receptor alters both ligand-dependent and -independent receptor signaling. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 324, 1084–1092
25 Berg, K.A. *et al.* (2005) Physiological relevance of constitutive activity of 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> and 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 26, 625–630
26 Gonzalez-Maeso, J. *et al.* (2007) Hallucinogens recruit specific cortical 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptor-mediated signaling pathways to affect behavior. *Neuron* 53, 439–452
27 Schmid, C.L. *et al.* (2008) Agonist-directed signaling of the serotonin 2A receptor depends on β-arrestin-2 interactions *in vivo*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 105, 1079–1084
28 Seifert, R. and Wenzel-Seifert, K. (2002) Constitutive activity of G-protein-coupled receptors: cause of disease and common property of wild-type receptors. *Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol.* 366, 381–416
29 Costa, T. and Cotecchia, S. (2005) Historical review: negative efficacy and the constitutive activity of G-protein-coupled receptors. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 26, 618–624
30 Martel, J.C. *et al.* (2007) Native rat hippocampal 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors show constitutive activity. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 71, 638–643
31 Millan, M.J. (2005) Serotonin 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors as a target for the treatment of depressive and anxious states: focus on novel therapeutic strategies. *Therapie* 60, 441–460
32 Chanrion, B. *et al.* (2008) Inverse agonist and neutral antagonist actions of antidepressants at recombinant and native 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2C</sub> receptors: differential modulation of cell surface expression and signal transduction. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 73, 748–757
33 Berg, K.A. *et al.* (2006) Differential effects of 5-methyl-1-[[2-(2-methyl-3-pyridyl)oxyl]-5-pyridyl]carbamoyl]-6-trifluoro methylindole (SB 243213) on 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2C</sub> receptor-mediated responses. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 319, 260–268
34 Purohit, A. *et al.* (2005) Stable expression of constitutively activated mutant h5HT6 and h5HT7 serotonin receptors: inverse agonist activity of antipsychotic drugs. *Psychopharmacology (Berl.)* 179, 461–469
35 Kvachnina, E. *et al.* (2005) 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptor is coupled to Ga subunits of heterotrimeric G12-protein to regulate gene transcription and neuronal morphology. *J. Neurosci.* 25, 7821–7830
36 Bockaert, J. *et al.* (2004) GPCR interacting proteins (GIP). *Pharmacol. Ther.* 103, 203–221
37 Marion, S. *et al.* (2004) RNA editing induces variation in desensitization and trafficking of 5-hydroxytryptamine 2c receptor isoforms. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 2945–2954
38 Bhatnagar, A. *et al.* (2001) The dynamin-dependent, arrestin-independent internalization of 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A (5-HT<sub>2A</sub>) serotonin receptors reveals differential sorting of arrestins and 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors during endocytosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 8269–8277
39 Xia, Z. *et al.* (2003) The PDZ-binding domain is essential for the dendritic targeting of 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> serotonin receptors in cortical pyramidal neurons *in vitro*. *Neuroscience* 122, 907–920
40 Xia, Z. *et al.* (2003) A direct interaction of PSD95 with 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> serotonin receptors regulates receptor trafficking and signal transduction. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 21901–21908
41 Gavarini, S. *et al.* (2006) Opposite effects of PSD-95 and MPP3 PDZ proteins on serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine2C receptor desensitization and membrane stability. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 17, 4619–4631
42 Turner, J.H. and Raymond, J.R. (2005) Interaction of calmodulin with the serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2A</sub> receptor. A putative regulator of G protein coupling and receptor phosphorylation by protein kinase C. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 30741–30750
43 Sheffler, D.J. *et al.* (2006) p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 2 exerts a tonic brake on G protein-coupled receptor signaling. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 103, 4717–4722
44 Bhatnagar, A. *et al.* (2004) Caveolin-1 interacts with 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> serotonin receptors and profoundly modulates the signaling of selected Gα<sub>q</sub>-coupled protein receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 34614–34623

Review

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.29 No.9

45 Sjogren, B. and Svenningsson, P. (2007) Caveolin-1 affects serotonin binding and cell surface levels of human 5-HT<sub>7(a)</sub> receptors. FEBS Lett. 581, 5115–5121

46 Svenningsson, P. *et al.* (2006) Alterations in 5-HT<sub>1B</sub> receptor function by p11 in depression-like states. Science 311, 77–80

47 Barthet, G. *et al.* (2007) 5-hydroxytryptamine 4 receptor activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway depends on Src activation but not on G protein or β-arrestin signaling. Mol. Biol. Cell 18, 1979–1991

48 Huang, Y.Y. and Kandel, E.R. (2007) 5-Hydroxytryptamine induces a protein kinase A/mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated and macromolecular synthesis-dependent late phase of long-term potentiation in the amygdala. J. Neurosci. 27, 3111–3119

49 Robertson, D.N. *et al.* (2003) Selective interaction of ARF1 with the carboxy-terminal tail domain of the 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptor. Mol. Pharmacol. 64, 1239–1250

50 Bhattacharyya, S. *et al.* (2006) Activation, internalization, and recycling of the serotonin 2A receptor by dopamine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 15248–15253

51 Hensler, J.G. (2003) Regulation of 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptor function in brain following agonist or antidepressant administration. Life Sci. 72, 1665–1682

52 Tobin, A.B. (2008) G-protein-coupled receptor phosphorylation: where, when and by whom. Br. J. Pharmacol. 153 (Suppl. 1), S167–S176

53 Janoshazi, A. *et al.* (2007) Modified receptor internalization upon coexpression of 5-HT<sub>1B</sub> receptor and 5-HT<sub>2B</sub> receptors. Mol. Pharmacol. 71, 1463–1474

54 Quinn, J.C. *et al.* (2002) Activation of extracellular-regulated kinase by 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2A</sub> receptors in PC12 cells is protein kinase C-independent and requires calmodulin and tyrosine kinases. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 303, 746–752

55 Tsuchioka, M. *et al.* (2008) Serotonin (5-HT) induces glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) mRNA expression via the transactivation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in rat C6 glioma cells. J. Neurochem. 106, 244–257

56 Berthouze, M. *et al.* (2007) Two transmembrane Cys residues are involved in 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptor dimerization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 356, 642–647

57 Lee, S.P. *et al.* (2000) Oligomerization of dopamine and serotonin receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology 23 (Suppl. 4), S32–S40

58 Herrick-Davis, K. *et al.* (2005) Inhibition of serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine2c receptor function through heterodimerization: receptor dimers bind two molecules of ligand and one G-protein. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 40144–40151

59 Mancia, F. *et al.* (2008) Ligand sensitivity in dimeric associations of the serotonin 5HT2c receptor. EMBO Rep. 9, 363–369

60 Gonzalez-Maeso, J. *et al.* (2008) Identification of a serotonin/glutamate receptor complex implicated in psychosis. Nature 452, 93–97

61 Zhang, C. and Marek, G.J. (2007) Group III metabotropic glutamate receptor agonists selectively suppress excitatory synaptic currents in the rat prefrontal cortex induced by 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>2A</sub> receptor activation. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 320, 437–447

62 van den Buuse, M. *et al.* (2007) Mice deficient in the α subunit of G<sub>Z</sub> show changes in pre-pulse inhibition, anxiety and responses to 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptor stimulation, which are strongly dependent on the genetic background. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 195, 273–283

63 Crane, J.W. *et al.* (2007) 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> receptors mediate +8-OH-DPAT-stimulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAP kinase) in vivo in rat hypothalamus: time dependence and regional differences. Brain Res. 1183, 51–59

64 Yin, J. *et al.* (2006) 5-HT<sub>1B</sub> receptors play a prominent role in the proliferation of T-lymphocytes. J. Neuroimmunol. 181, 68–81

65 Leon-Ponte, M. *et al.* (2007) Serotonin provides an accessory signal to enhance T-cell activation by signaling through the 5-HT7 receptor. Blood 109, 3139–3146

66 Barnes, N.M. and Gordon, J. (2008) Harnessing serotonergic and dopaminergic pathways for lymphoma therapy: evidence and aspirations. Semin. Cancer Biol. 18, 218–225

67 Mahe, C. *et al.* (2005) Serotonin 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors coupled to induction of interleukin-6 in human microglial MC-3 cells. Neuropharmacology 49, 40–47

68 Vostrikov, V.M. *et al.* (2007) Deficit of perineuronal oligodendrocytes in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and mood disorders. Schizophr. Res. 94, 273–280

69 Gaietta, G.M. *et al.* (2003) 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors in rat sciatic nerves and Schwann cell cultures. J. Neurocytol. 32, 373–380

70 Hirst, W.D. *et al.* (1998) Cultured astrocytes express messenger RNA for multiple serotonin receptor subtypes, without functional coupling of 5-HT<sub>1</sub> receptor subtypes to adenylyl cyclase. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 61, 90–99

71 Lieb, K. *et al.* (2005) Serotonin via 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors activates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and protein kinase C epsilon resulting in interleukin-6 synthesis in human U373 MG astrocytoma cells. J. Neurochem. 93, 549–559

72 Hagberg, G.B. *et al.* (1998) Stimulation of 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors on astrocytes in primary culture opens voltage-independent Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels. Neurochem. Int. 32, 153–162

73 Kong, E.K. *et al.* (2002) Up-regulation of 5-HT<sub>2B</sub> receptor density and receptor-mediated glycogenolysis in mouse astrocytes by long-term fluoxetine administration. Neurochem. Res. 27, 113–120

74 Azmitia, E.C. (2001) Modern views on an ancient chemical: serotonin effects on cell proliferation, maturation, and apoptosis. Brain Res. Bull. 56, 413–424

75 Elphick, G.F. *et al.* (2004) The human polyomavirus, JCV, uses serotonin receptors to infect cells. Science 306, 1380–1383

76 Garcia, E.E. *et al.* (2007) Role of G<sub>q</sub> protein in behavioral effects of the hallucinogenic drug 1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane. Neuropharmacology 52, 1671–1677

77 Johnson-Farley, N.N. *et al.* (2005) Enhanced activation of Akt and extracellular-regulated kinase pathways by simultaneous occupancy of G<sub>q</sub>-coupled 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors and G<sub>s</sub>-coupled 5-HT<sub>7A</sub> receptors in PC12 cells. J. Neurochem. 92, 72–82

78 Ji, S.P. *et al.* (2006) Disruption of PTEN coupling with 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors suppresses behavioral responses induced by drugs of abuse. Nat. Med. 12, 324–329

79 Gu, Z. *et al.* (2007) RGS4 modulates serotonin signaling in prefrontal cortex and links to serotonin dysfunction in a rat model of schizophrenia. Mol. Pharmacol. 71, 1030–1039

80 Mouillet-Richard, S. *et al.* (2007) Cellular prion protein signaling in serotonergic neuronal cells. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1096, 106–119

81 Choi, Y.H. *et al.* (2007) An inhibitory compound against the interaction between Ga<sub>s</sub> and the third intracellular loop region of serotonin receptor subtype 6 (5-HT<sub>6</sub>) disrupts the signaling pathway of 5-HT<sub>6</sub>. Exp. Mol. Med. 39, 335–342

82 Dutton, A.C. *et al.* (2008) Identification and functional significance of N-glycosylation of the 5-ht<sub>5A</sub> receptor. Neurochem. Int. 52, 419–425

83 Werry, T.D. *et al.* (2005) Characterization of serotonin 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptor signaling to extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2. J. Neurochem. 93, 1603–1615

84 Shi, J. *et al.* (2007) Agonist induced-phosphorylation of Gα<sub>11</sub> protein reduces coupling to 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> receptors. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 323, 248–256

85 Ponimaskin, E. *et al.* (2005) Palmitoylation of the 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>4a</sub> receptor regulates receptor phosphorylation, desensitization, and β-arrestin-mediated endocytosis. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 1434–1443

86 Papoucheva, E. *et al.* (2004) The 5-hydroxytryptamine<sub>1A</sub> receptor is stably palmitoylated, and acylation is critical for communication of receptor with Gi protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 3280–3291

87 Turner, J.H. *et al.* (2007) Serotonin 5-HT1A receptor stimulates c-Jun N-terminal kinase and induces apoptosis in Chinese hamster ovary fibroblasts. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1773, 391–399

88 Deng, P-Y. *et al.* (2007) Serotonin inhibits neuronal excitability by activating two-pore domain k+ channels in the entorhinal cortex. Mol. Pharmacol. 72, 208–218

89 Yuen, E.Y. *et al.* (2008) Activation of 5-HT<sub>2A/C</sub> receptors counteracts 5-HT<sub>1A</sub> regulation of NMDAR channels in pyramidal neurons of prefrontal cortex. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 17194–17204

90 Bonsi, P. *et al.* (2007) Endogenous serotonin excites striatal cholinergic interneurons via the activation of 5-HT2C, 5-HT6, and 5-HT7 serotonin receptors: implications for extrapyramidal side effects of serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Neuropsychopharmacology 32, 1840–1854

91 Chen, L. *et al.* (2008) 5-HT excites globus pallidus neurons by multiple receptor mechanisms. Neuroscience 151, 439–451
