
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Oct. 2008, p. 6927–6930
0021-9193/08/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/JB.00801-08
Copyright © 2008, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Paerucumarin, a New Metabolite Produced by the *pvc* Gene Cluster from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa***  
Michael F. Clarke-Pearson and Sean F. Brady*

Laboratory of Genetically Encoded Small Molecules, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065

Received 7 June 2008/Accepted 28 July 2008

The *pvc* gene cluster from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* has been linked to the biosynthesis of both the pyoverdine chromophore and pseudoverdine. Our reinvestigation of the role this gene cluster plays in *P. aeruginosa* secondary metabolite biosynthesis shows that its major product is actually paerucumarin, a novel isonitrile functionalized coumarin.

One of the most extensively studied families of secondary metabolites in pseudomonads is the pyoverdines, cyclic peptide siderophores that are important virulence factors in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (16, 19, 24, 25). Pyoverdines contain both a variable cyclic peptide moiety and a conserved tricyclic chromophore. In *P. aeruginosa*, the biosynthesis of the pyoverdine chromophore has been attributed to two different loci: a nonribosomal peptide synthase known as *pvdL* and a four-gene operon known as the *pvc* gene cluster (Fig. 1) (18, 22, 23). The *pvc* gene cluster is unique in that it is also reported to be involved in the biosynthesis of pseudoverdine, a fluorescent bicyclic metabolite that resembles the pyoverdine chromophore (15). Our recent observation that many homologs of *pvcA* are actually isonitrile synthases led us to reinvestigate the role that the *pvc* gene cluster plays in *P. aeruginosa* secondary metabolite biosynthesis (1, 2). Here we report the characterization of paerucumarin, an isonitrile functionalized coumarin that is produced by the *pvc* gene cluster, and demonstrate that the *pvc* genes are not required for pyoverdine production.

To better understand the role of the *pvc* cluster in *P. aeruginosa* secondary metabolite production, the *pvc* operon was PCR amplified and cloned into the broad-host-range expression vector pMMB67, and the resulting construct, pPVCAD, was conjugated into *P. aeruginosa* PAK (8, 13). A comparison of the ethyl acetate extracts derived from IPTG (isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside)-induced and uninduced cultures by silica gel thin-layer chromatography indicated that the overexpression of the *pvc* gene cluster led to the production of a single organic extractable metabolite. This compound was purified by silica gel flash chromatography, and the structure was elucidated by using a combination of mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance experiments (1). The final structure was confirmed by single crystal X-ray diffraction (Fig. 2) and found to be a novel isonitrile-functionalized dihydroxycoumarin, which we have given the trivial name paerucumarin (for *P. aeruginosa* coumarin).

The biosynthesis of paerucumarin can be easily rationalized from the general function predictions for each of the enzymes found in the *pvc* gene cluster (Fig. 1). PvcA is related to known isonitrile synthases (2), PvcB is related to amino acid oxidizing enzymes (2), and PvcC and D are related to HpaB- and HpaC-like two-component flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenases that have been shown to oxidize phenols to both dihydroxy phenols and catechols (9, 26). In the biosynthetic scheme proposed in Fig. 1b, PvcA generates an isonitrile-functionalized tyrosine (compound 3) that is oxidized by PvcB to give the unsaturated intermediate compound 4. Oxidation of intermediate compound 4 to a catechol (compound 5) by PvcC/D, followed by intermolecular cyclization of the catechol and the carboxylate, would give paerucumarin (compound 1).

In our initial thin-layer chromatography analyses of the extracts derived from *P. aeruginosa* cultures that overexpress the *pvc* gene cluster, we did not detect pseudoverdine, the N-formyl adduct of paerucumarin that was previously reported to arise from the overexpression of the *pvc* gene cluster (15). However, upon closer inspection of these extracts by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), we were able to identify a minor IPTG-inducible peak that corresponds to the predicted mass for pseudoverdine (molecular weight of 221) (Fig. 2). In *Escherichia coli*-based studies with other *pvcA* containing gene clusters, both isonitrile and N-formyl functionalized metabolites have also been observed, and in at least one case a *pvcA* homolog containing gene cluster was found to produce exclusively an N-formyl adduct (1). Isonitrile and N-formyl functional groups are very closely related, differing by only the addition or loss of water. The isolation of both isonitrile and N-formyl functionalized metabolites from cultures that express different *pvcA* containing gene clusters suggests that individual members of this family of enzymes may actually produce mixtures of these two functionalities. Although it is possible that paerucumarin was not found in earlier studies on the *pvc* gene cluster because isonitrile functionalized metabolites are unstable and often rapidly decompose during purification, it is also possible that different *pvc* gene clusters produce different ratios of isonitrile and N-formyl functionalized metabolites.

It is known that the *pvc* gene cluster is positively regulated by PtxR, a LysR transcription factor that also controls exotoxin A

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Laboratory of Genetically Encoded Small Molecules, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065. Phone: (212) 327-8280. Fax: (212) 327-8281. E-mail: sbrady@rockefeller.edu.
† Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://jb.asm.org/.
Published ahead of print on 8 August 2008.

FIG. 1. (a) pvc gene cluster. (b) Proposed biosynthetic scheme for paerucumarin. (c) Proposed biosynthetic scheme for the pyoverdine chromophore (6).

production through regA and homoserine lactone production through lasI (3–5, 7, 10, 21, 23). To investigate the products of pvc gene clusters from different P. aeruginosa strains, we over-expressed PtxR in PAO1, PAK, and PA14 strains. Culture broth extracts from each of these strains were then examined by LC-MS (for methods, see the supplemental material). The LC-MS analysis showed that each strain produced a different ratio of paerucumarin to pseudoverdine (Fig. 3). PAK and

FIG. 2. LC-MS (negative-ion electrospray ionization) traces of the ethyl acetate extracts derived from IPTG-induced and uninduced cultures of P. aeruginosa transformed with pPVCAD are shown.

TABLE 1. Pyoverdine and paerucumarin production by PAK strains

| Strain (genotype)/plasmid | Production$^a$ of: |
|---------------------------|--------------------|
|                           | Pyoverdine        | Paerucumarin      |
| PAK                       | +                  | -                 |
| PAK/pPVCAD                | +                  | +                 |
| PAK/pPTXR                 | +                  | +                 |
| PAK ($\Delta pvcA$)       | +                  | -                 |
| PAK ($\Delta pvcA-ptxR$)   | +                  | -                 |
| PAK ($\Delta pvcA$)/pPTXR  | +                  | -                 |
| PAK2 ($\Delta pvdI$)      | -                  | -                 |
| PAK2 ($\Delta pvdI$)/pPTXR | -                  | +                 |
| PAK2 ($\Delta pvdI$)/pPVCAD | -                  | +                 |

$^a$ Production of pyoverdine was monitored in SM medium. Production of paerucumarin was monitored in LB medium.

FIG. 3. LC-MS (negative-ion electrospray ionization) traces of ethyl acetate extracts from cultures of PAK (a), PAO1 (b), and PA14 (c) strains transformed with pPTXR and strain PAK (d) transformed with a vector control. Peaks for paerucumarin (peak 1) and pseudoverdine (peak 2) are marked.

PAO1 produce almost exclusively paerucumarin, while PA14 produces approximately a one-to-one mixture of paerucumarin and pseudoverdine. Neither paerucumarin nor pseudoverdine was detected in extracts from strains that did not overexpress PtxR, nor was either compound seen in extracts from $pvcA$ knockouts that overexpressed PtxR. $pvcA$ genes from different sequenced *P. aeruginosa* strains contain a small number of point mutations. Whether these mutations result in the strain-to-strain difference we observed, or whether other factors contribute to the observed differences will likely require a detailed structural analysis of at least one PvcA homolog.

In addition to its role in the biosynthesis of pseudoverdine and now paerucumarin the $pvc$ gene cluster has been reported to be involved in the biosynthesis of pyoverdine (22, 23). The catechol formation and intermolecular cyclization steps in the proposed biosynthetic scheme for paerucumarin are very similar to the biosynthetic steps that have been proposed for the formation of the pyoverdine chromophore (Fig. 2c) (6). To explore the possibility that the $pvc$ gene cluster might play a role in pyoverdine biosynthesis, we generated both $pvc$ gene cluster deletion mutants ($\Delta pvcA$ and $\Delta pvcA-ptxR$) and pyover-

FIG. 4. High-pressure liquid chromatography (UV) traces of the material extracted by solid-phase extraction from cultures of strains PAK (a), PAK ($\Delta pvcA$) (b), and PAK2 ($\Delta pvdI$) (c).

This study was supported by NIH grant GM077516.

**REFERENCES**

1. Brady, S. F., J. D. Bauer, M. F. Clarke-Pearson, and R. Daniels. 2007. Natural products from *isnA*-containing biosynthetic gene clusters recovered from the genomes of cultured and uncultured bacteria. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129:12102–12103.
2. Brady, S. F., and J. Clardy. 2005. Cloning and heterologous expression of isocyanide biosynthetic genes from environmental DNA. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 44:7063–7065.
3. Carty, N. L., N. Layland, J. A. Colmer-Hamood, M. W. Calfee, E. C. Pesci, and A. N. Hamood. 2006. PtxR modulates the expression of QS-controlled virulence factors in the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain PAO1. Mol. Microbiol. 61:782–794.
4. Colmer, J. A., and A. N. Hamood. 1999. Expression of *ptxR* and its effect on *toxA* and *regA* expression during the growth cycle of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain PAO1. Can. J. Microbiol. 45:1008–1016.
5. Colmer-Hamood, J. A., H. Aramaki, J. M. Gaines, and A. N. Hamood. 2006. Transcriptional analysis of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxA* regulatory gene *ptxR*. Can. J. Microbiol. 52:343–356.
6. Dorrestein, P. C., K. Poole, and T. P. Begley. 2003. Formation of the chromophore of the pyoverdine siderophores by an oxidative cascade. Org. Lett. 5:2215–2217.
7. Ferrell, E., N. L. Carty, J. A. Colmer-Hamood, A. N. Hamood, and S. E. West. 2008. Regulation of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa ptxR* by Vfr. Microbiology 154:431–439.
8. Furste, J. P., W. Pansegrau, R. Frank, H. Blocker, P. Scholz, M. Bagdasarian, and E. Lanka. 1986. Molecular cloning of the plasmid RP4 primase region in a multi-host-range tacP expression vector. Gene 48:119–131.
9. Gibello, A., M. Suarez, J. L. Allende, and M. Martin. 1997. Molecular cloning and analysis of the genes encoding the 4-hydroxyphenylacetate hydroxylase from *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. Arch. Microbiol. 167:160–166.
10. Hamood, A. N., J. A. Colmer, U. A. Ochsner, and M. L. Vasil. 1996. Isolation and characterization of a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* gene, *ptxR*, which positively regulates exotoxin A production. Mol. Microbiol. 21:97–110.
11. Hindre, T., H. Bruggemann, C. Buchrieser, and Y. Hechard. 2008. Transcriptional profiling of *Legionella pneumophila* biofilm cells and the influence of iron on biofilm formation. Microbiology 154:30–41.
12. Hoang, T. T., R. R. Karkhoff-Schweizer, A. J. Kutchma, and H. P. Schweizer. 1998. A broad-host-range Flp-FRT recombination system for site-specific excision of chromosomally located DNA sequences: application for isolation of unmarked *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants. Gene 212:77–86.
13. Ishimoto, K. S., and S. Lory. 1992. Identification of *pilR*, which encodes a transcriptional activator of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa pilin* gene. J. Bacteriol. 174:3514–3521.
14. Kilz, S., C. Lenz, R. Fuchs, and H. Budzikiewicz. 1999. A fast screening method for the identification of siderophores from fluorescent *Pseudomonas* spp. by liquid chromatography/electrospray mass spectrometry. J. Mass Spectrom. 34:281–290.
15. Longerich, I., K. Taraz, H. Budzikiewicz, L. Tsai, and J. M. Meyer. 1993. Pseudoverdin, a compound related to the pyoverdin chromophore from a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strain incapable to produce pyoverdins. Zentralbl. Naturforsch. C 48:425–429.
16. Meyer, J. M., A. Neely, A. Stintzi, C. Georges, and I. A. Holder. 1996. Pyoverdin is essential for virulence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Infect. Immun. 64:518–523.
17. Meyer, J. M. a. M. A. A. 1978. The Fluorescent Pigment of *Pseudomonas fluorescens*: biosynthesis, purification, and physicochemical properties. J. Gen. Microbiol. 107:319–328.
18. Mossialos, D., U. Ochsner, C. Baysse, P. Chablain, J. P. Pirnay, N. Koedam, H. Budzikiewicz, D. U. Fernandez, M. Schafer, J. Ravel, and P. Cornelis. 2002. Identification of new, conserved, nonribosomal peptide synthetases from fluorescent pseudomonads involved in the biosynthesis of the siderophore pyoverdine. Mol. Microbiol. 45:1673–1685.
19. Ravel, J., and P. Cornelis. 2003. Genomics of pyoverdine-mediated iron uptake in pseudomonads. Trends Microbiol. 11:195–200.
20. Rietsch, A., I. Vallet-Gely, S. L. Dove, and J. J. Mekalanos. 2005. ExsE, a secreted regulator of type III secretion genes in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:8006–8011.
21. Schell, M. A. 1993. Molecular biology of the LysR family of transcriptional regulators. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 47:597–626.
22. Stintzi, A., P. Cornelis, D. Hohnadel, J. M. Meyer, C. Dean, K. Poole, S. Kourambas, and V. Krishnapillai. 1996. Novel pyoverdine biosynthesis gene(s) of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO. Microbiology 142(Pt. 5):1181–1190.
23. Stintzi, A., Z. Johnson, M. Stonehouse, U. Ochsner, J. M. Meyer, M. L. Vasil, and K. Poole. 1999. The *pvc* gene cluster of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: role in synthesis of the pyoverdine chromophore and regulation by PtxR and PvdS. J. Bacteriol. 181:4118–4124.
24. Takase, H., H. Nitana, K. Hoshino, and T. Otani. 2000. Impact of siderophore production on *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* infections in immunosuppressed mice. Infect. Immun. 68:1834–1839.
25. Visca, P., F. Imperi, and I. L. Lamont. 2007. Pyoverdine siderophores: from biogenesis to biosignificance. Trends Microbiol. 15:22–30.
26. Xun, L., and E. R. Sandvik. 2000. Characterization of 4-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylase (HpaB) of *Escherichia coli* as a reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide-utilizing monooxygenase. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:481–486.
