
# Avoiding the void: cell-to-cell spread of human viruses

**Quentin Sattentau**

Abstract | The initial stages of animal virus infection are generally described as the binding of free virions to permissive target cells followed by entry and replication. Although this route of infection is undoubtedly important, many viruses that are pathogenic for humans, including HIV-1, herpes simplex virus and measles, can also move between cells without diffusing through the extracellular environment. Cell-to-cell spread not only facilitates rapid viral dissemination, but may also promote immune evasion and influence disease. This Review discusses the various mechanisms by which viruses move directly between cells and the implications of this for viral dissemination and pathogenesis.

As obligate intracellular parasites, viruses have evolved diverse mechanisms to enter into, and exit from, host cells. A requirement that is shared by all animal viruses is the use of cellular receptors for entry into cells to initiate viral infection. Receptors can function in viral attachment to the cell surface and can also mediate viral internalization and penetration of the cell-limiting membrane. Receptors are often grouped into ‘primary receptors’ and ‘secondary receptors’ or ‘co-receptors’ depending either on their function in the viral entry process or historical precedence. For example, HIV-1 uses CD4 as its primary receptor and a chemokine receptor — either CCR5 or CXCR4 — as its co-receptor (TABLE 1). The interactions between many viral glycoproteins and attachment receptors are highly specific, such as the HIV-1–CD4 interaction, whereas other interactions are less specific, such as the interaction between viral glycoproteins and cell-surface heparan sulphate proteoglycans^{1,2}. Viruses can also bind to cells using host cell-derived molecules that are incorporated into the viral envelope, such as adhesion molecules^{3}.

For the purpose of discussing animal virus entry into cells after attachment, viruses can be classified into two broad groups: enveloped and non-enveloped. To my knowledge, direct cell-to-cell spread has only been described for enveloped viruses, and so non-enveloped viruses will not be discussed further here. This lacuna may reflect an inability of non-enveloped viruses to spread directly from cell to cell (perhaps owing to their mode of viral exit) or may simply reflect the fact that this has not been studied. Enveloped viruses penetrate the host cell by fusing their lipid envelope with a host cell membrane. Fusion takes place through a pH-independent (for example, HIV-1) or a pH-dependent (for example, influenza A virus) mechanism (FIG. 1). Many viruses that enter cells through pH-independent routes fuse their membranes directly with the cell plasma membrane, whereas viruses that require a pH change to penetrate the lipid membrane of the cell are first internalized by an endocytic mechanism, before fusing with an endosomal membrane^{2,4,5}. Entry of enveloped viruses at the plasma membrane might require binding to one or more receptors that trigger signalling into the cell. Such signalling might activate viral endocytosis (reviewed in REF. 5), but also has important implications for viruses that fuse at the plasma membrane. For example, signalling that is triggered by the initial engagement of a low number of receptors by viral glycoproteins may lead to the active recruitment of additional viral receptors to the site of virus attachment. Thus, initial interactions of HIV-1 with its cell surface receptors results in cytoskeletal rearrangement that recruits additional receptors to the virus–cell interface to enable efficient membrane fusion and viral penetration^{6–9}. After entry, the virus uncoats and replicates to produce new infectious particles; in a fluid-phase dissemination model these particles are released from the cell into the extracellular medium (FIG. 1).

Virus particles contain all the necessary information to initiate a new productive infection, and all described modes of virus spread require the partial or complete assembly of virus particles. However, whether virions are released to diffuse and infect new host cells, or spread directly between adjacent cells, depends on the virus and the target cell or tissue. There are advantages and disadvantages of cell-free and cell-to-cell modes of virus spread. Cell-free virus spread enables host-to-host transmission when a virus needs to exit the infected host, disperse and

The Sir William Dunn School  
of Pathology, University of  
Oxford, South Parks Road,  
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.  
e-mail: Quentin.sattentau@  
path.ox.ac.uk  
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1972

Table 1 | Viruses that spread from cell to cell

| Virus          | Virus glycoproteins implicated in cell-to-cell spread | Known receptors                                                                 | In vivo cellular tropism                                      | Proposed mode of cell-to-cell spread                          | Refs |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|------|
| **Asfarvirus**  |                                                                                                           |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| ASFV           | Unknown                                         | Unknown                                                                         | Macrophages                                                   | Induction of filopodia                                        | 77    |
| **Flavivirus** |                                                                                                           |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| HCV            | E1 and E2                                       | CD81, CLDN1 and HSPG                                                            | Hepatocytes                                                    | Unknown                                                       | 109   |
| **Herpesviruses** |                                                                                                          |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| CMV            | gB, gH and gL                                   | CD13, egfR, DC-SIGN, HSPG and CMV integrin                                     | Epithelial, endothelial, fibroblast and leukocytes              | Cell–cell fusion                                              | 28    |
| HSV-1          | gB, gH, gL, gD and gE-gI                        | HveA, nectin 1, nectin 2 and HSPG                                               | Epithelial, fibroblast and neurons                             | Transfer across neural synapses                                | 42–44,52 |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Virion fusion across tight junctions                          | 58,59,62 |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Actin recruitment                                             | 74,75  |
| VZV            | gH, gL and gE                                   | IDE and HSPG                                                                    | Epithelial, fibroblast and neurons                            | Cell–cell fusion                                              | 24    |
| PRV            | gE-gI                                           | HveA, Prr1 and Prr2                                                             | Epithelial, fibroblast and neurons                             | Transfer across neural synapses                                | 48,50,51,53 |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Actin and tubulin induction                                    | 76    |
| **Paramyxoviruses** |                                                                                                         |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| MV             | H-F                                             | SLAM and CD46                                                                   | Epithelial, fibroblast, neurons and immune cells               | Cell–cell fusion                                              | 15–18  |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Transfer across neural synapses                               | 55–57  |
| RSV            | G                                                | Unknown                                                                         | Epithelial                                                     | Syncytium formation                                           | 54    |
| **Poxvirus**   |                                                                                                           |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| VV             | A36R                                            | HSPG                                                                            | Epithelial and fibroblast                                     | Induction of motility                                         | 72,73  |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Projection on actin tails                                     | 78,79  |
| **Retroviruses** |                                                                                                          |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| HIV-1          | Gp120-gp41                                      | CD4, CCR5 or CXCR4, DC-SIGN and HSPG                                            | T cells, macrophages, DCs and LCs                              | Virological synapses                                           | 96,106,132 |
|                |                                                 |                                                                                |                                                                | Nanotubes                                                     | 82    |
| HTLV-I         | Gp46                                            | Glut-1, HSPG and neuropilin                                                     | T cells                                                        | Virological synapses                                           | 89    |
| MLV            | Env                                             | mCat-1                                                                          | Epithelial and fibroblast                                     | Capture of filopodia                                          | 81    |
| **Rhabdovirus** |                                                                                                          |                                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                               |      |
| RV             | G                                                | p75NTR, NCAM and nAChR                                                         | Neurons                                                        | Transfer across neural synapse                                 | 37,38  |

ASFV, African swine fever virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DC, dendritic cell; DC-SIGN, DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HSPG, heparan sulphate proteoglycan; HTLV-I, human T-lymphotrophic virus; HSV-1, herpes simplex virus-1; IDE, insulin-degrading enzyme; LC, Langerhans cell; MLV, murine leukaemia virus; MV, measles virus; NCAM, neural cell adhesion molecule; PRV, pseudorabies virus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; RV, rabies virus; SLAM, signalling lymphocyte activation molecule; VV, vaccinia virus; VZV, varicella zoster virus.

remain infectious for a sufficient period of time to infect a new host. For example, if the virus has a fragile lipid envelope, the virus particle could be transmitted between hosts in a dispersed aqueous environment (for example, influenza A in a saliva droplet) or could resist drying out and spread through desquamated skin scales (for example, smallpox particles). Once inside a host, another advantage of cell-free spread is that viruses transit rapidly through the blood, lymph and cerebrospinal fluid to infect distant tissues.

However, cell-free spread has disadvantages, as viral particles are exposed to various biophysical, kinetic and immunological barriers. Biophysical barriers include mucous membranes and intrinsic virion liability

infected cells entering a new host could adhere to, and cross by transmigration, a mucosal epithelial barrier that would otherwise be impermeable to free virions. Once the initial infection has occurred, the cell-to-cell mode of viral spread enables direct infection of target cells by adjacent infected cells, which eliminates the rate-limiting step of fluid-phase diffusion. If cell–cell contact recruits viral receptors to the intercellular interface, then receptor engagement and viral entry can be efficient. A final advantage of cell-to-cell spread could be that the movement of a virus between cells shields the virus both sterically, and kinetically in terms of exposure time, from the innate and adaptive immune effector mechanisms described above.

This Review focuses on the diverse mechanisms that are used by viruses to spread from cell to cell and relates these mechanisms, when possible, to pathogenesis. Although much of this Review reports on *in vitro* data, I will consider *in vivo* results if available. The article concludes by relating some general concepts of direct cell-to-cell viral dissemination to possibilities for therapeutic intervention that might tackle this mode of spread and suggesting some future directions for study.

## Virus cell-to-cell spread

Viruses that can move directly from cell to cell are listed with their receptors and virally encoded receptor ligands (viral glycoproteins) in TABLE 1. Some general principles determine whether a virus can move directly from cell to cell or is limited to cell-free dissemination. For those viruses that lyse the host cell to release infectious progeny, such as the non-enveloped adenoviruses, picornaviruses and reoviruses, release of free virions is likely to be the only mode of spread between cells. Viruses that exit at the plasma membrane, either by budding (for example, paramyxoviruses, retroviruses and rhabdoviruses) or by a form of exocytosis (for example, hepadnaviruses and herpesviruses), can spread directly from cell to cell. Some viruses that remove their cellular receptors during exit (for example, the removal of host cell sialic acid by influenza virus neuraminidase) might be efficiently released from the infected cell and spread preferentially by fluid phase rather than cell-to-cell movement. Conversely, cell-associated viruses, such as certain forms of poxvirus, might be trapped during exit by interactions at cell surfaces, thereby promoting cell-to-cell spread. Whether a virus can exit one cell and immediately enter a new target cell will depend on the proximity of the cells within the tissue, whether the infected cell has in-built polarity (which might determine the route of viral exit; BOX 1) and whether the target cell expresses viral receptors at the intercellular interface. Viral assembly in polarized epithelial cells might target virus release towards the apical surface, away from junctions with other cells in the tissue, thereby favouring free virion spread. Some viruses have evolved mechanisms to subvert this process by targeting viral fusion proteins (paramyxoviruses) or viral assembly (herpesviruses) to basolateral surfaces of the cell (BOX 1), whereas others (retroviruses) can induce polarization of immune cell types with no fixed polarity, allowing directed assembly and spread of the virus from the infected cell towards an uninfected, receptor-expressing target cell (BOX 2).

Figure 1 | The generally accepted paradigm of virus infection. After fluid-phase diffusion, a cell-free, enveloped virus particle binds to the plasma membrane of an attachment receptor-bearing target cell (step 1). The virion diffuses laterally across the plasma membrane, recruiting a critical mass of internalization and/or entry receptors (step 2). For viruses that fuse directly at neutral pH at the plasma membrane, entry-receptor engagement is sufficient to drive virus–cell membrane fusion leading to entry of the virion into the cytoplasm of the cell (step 3a). For viruses that rely on internalization into the cell prior to membrane fusion, virion endocytosis is the next step (step 3b). Some viruses fuse from within vesicular compartments at neutral pH, whereas others require a subsequent reduction in pH that occurs as the endosome matures to trigger membrane fusion (step 3c). Entry of the virion replicative machinery into the cytoplasm leads to a sequence of events that, for a productive infection, allows the synthesis and assembly of new viral components, which may occur in the cytoplasm, nucleus or other intracellular organelle (step 4). Some viruses assemble and bud through intracellular membranes and leave the cell through exocytosis (step 5a), whereas others bud through the plasma membrane (step 5b). New virus particles are released into the extracellular medium to randomly diffuse until they encounter a new target cell (step 6).

that results in progressive loss of infectivity over time. Random fluid-phase diffusion has a kinetic penalty, as it takes time for the virus to encounter a target cell and engage attachment and entry receptors. This is particularly disadvantageous for viruses that have low avidity for their receptors, those that bind receptors expressed at low copy number and/or those that must engage more than one receptor to enter the cell (for example, HIV-1 [REF. 1]; TABLE 1). Immunological barriers to free virions during acute infection include innate humoral (natural antibodies, complement, chemokines and defensins) and cellular (macrophages) defences. During subsequent rounds of infection, free viruses are faced with adaptive immune responses, which comprise clonally activated lymphocytes and affinity-matured antibodies.

Viruses that spread directly from infected to uninfected cells can avoid many of the obstacles to infection described above for free virus particles. Virus transmission from an infected to an uninfected host by a cell-associated virus might be more efficient than free-virus spread. For example,

Sialic acid  
A terminal monosaccharide group on a cell-surface glycoprotein that imparts a negative charge and acts as a binding site for influenza virus.

REVIEWS

Box 1 | Cell polarization and viral spread

a Constitutively polarized cells

- Epithelial cell
  - Apical surface
  - Basolateral surface
  - Nucleus
  - Tight junction proteins
  - Apical sorting
  - Basolateral sorting

b Cells with regulated polarization

- Lymphocyte
- Macrophage
- Neuron
- Nerve terminals (synapses)

Most cell types differentiate into, and are fixed within, solid tissues. These cells have in-built polarity that allows cellular components to be transported to different regions of the cell membrane in a manner that depends on specific targeting signals. The route of viral exit from a cell is likely to affect whether that virus can spread from cell to cell or is only released into the extracellular milieu. Epithelial cells are prototypic for the study of constitutive cellular polarity, and have a limiting membrane that is divided into two surfaces (apical and basolateral) that are separated by a molecular barrier known as the tight junction (see the figure). Specific cytoplasmic signals target cellular-cargo-containing or viral-component-containing vesicles to either the apical or basolateral surfaces. Two examples of polarized cells are shown in the figure. An epithelial cell within an epithelial sheet would make intercellular contacts through tight junctions, which also divide the cell into the apical and basolateral surfaces (see the figure, part a). Vesicular material leaving the trans-Golgi apparatus would be sorted into that destined for the apical or basolateral surface. Orthomyxoviruses, such as influenza A, exit infected, polarized respiratory epithelial cells by assembling and budding at the apical surface, giving them access to the respiratory lumen but not to the underlying tissues through the basolateral surfaces of the cell [128]. In a nerve cell, the axon and nerve terminal broadly corresponds to the apical surface of an epithelial cell, and the cell body and dendrites broadly correspond to the basolateral surface. Herpesviruses, such as herpes simplex virus, can infect neurons and use the polarity of the cell to assemble and exit from axons and synaptic nerve termini. Immune cells, such as lymphocytes and macrophages, do not have fixed polarity, but polarize during directed homeostatic or immune response-driven migration and during contact with other immune cells that express cognate ligands (see the figure, part b). Communication between immune cells and their subsequent activation takes place by elaboration of a structure called an immunological synapse (BOX 2). Immune cells contain two types of secretory pathway, a non-polarized constitutive pathway and a regulated pathway that is activated during leukocyte migration and immunological synapse formation [91]. Retroviruses infect immune cells and may induce polarity by hijacking the cellular machinery for intercellular communication and effector mechanisms (BOX 2).

and herpesviruses, can partially fuse cells (so that only distinct patches of plasma membrane contain pores connecting cellular cytoplasms) to allow cell-to-cell spread without the induction of syncytium formation. Other more sophisticated mechanisms of cell-to-cell virus spread also exist. For example, viruses can direct viral assembly to tight intercellular junctions (herpesviruses), transfer virions or subviral particles across neural synapses (herpesviruses, paramyxoviruses and rhabdoviruses) and manifest various types of cytoskeletal subversion that take advantage of actin tails (poxviruses), filopodia (African swine fever virus (ASFV) and retroviruses), membrane nanotubes (retroviruses) and virological synapses (retroviruses), all of which are thought to enable direct cell-to-cell spread of viruses.

Most analyses of virus cell-to-cell spread have been carried out in tissue culture systems, and therefore the *in vivo* relevance and importance to pathogenesis of this mode of viral spread needs to be addressed. Some viruses induce clinical symptoms that are in part defined by cell-to-cell spread, such as the syncytium formation that is induced *in vivo* by paramyxoviruses, and the neurotropic spread of rhabdoviruses and herpesviruses. For several viruses, evidence for cell-to-cell spread has been obtained from animal models: in the CNS few, if any, free virions of rhabdoviruses, herpesviruses and paramyxoviruses are observed, but the viruses nevertheless transit efficiently between neurons and other cell types. In other systems, mutated viruses that are inefficient at cell-to-cell spread *in vitro* are attenuated *in vivo*. Thus, mutations in the poxvirus vaccinia virus (VV) that eliminate actin-tail formation *in vitro* also dramatically attenuate viral replication *in vivo* [10,11], and envelope glycoprotein-inactivated mutants of the herpesvirus pseudorabies virus (PRV), which cannot spread from cell to cell *in vitro*, are unable to disseminate transneuronally *in vivo* [12,13]. Some viruses, including the retrovirus human T-lymphotrophic virus-1 (HTLV-1), seem to disseminate within and between hosts entirely by cell-to-cell transfer, as infectious virions are rarely released from the cells [14].

### Cell–cell fusion

Fusion of cell plasma membranes can result in the formation of syncytia. In principle, any virus that expresses its fusion machinery on the surface of an infected cell that can contact another cell, such as the basolateral surfaces of polarized epithelial cells, and can undergo pH-independent fusion at the plasma membrane, can mediate cell–cell fusion. Viruses that replicate in the nucleus (for example, herpesviruses) could benefit from the presence of additional nuclei within a syncytium.

The main mechanisms that are used by viruses to spread from cell to cell are summarized in FIG. 2. Conceptually the simplest mechanism is the fusion of infected and uninfected cells, which can occur *in vitro* for herpesviruses, paramyxoviruses and retroviruses. Cell–cell fusion can result in a single, giant cell (syncytium), and therefore might not be considered to be true cell-to-cell spread. However, some viruses, such as paramyxoviruses

Syncytium  
A giant, multinucleated cell formed through the fusion of two or more cell plasma membranes.

Paramyxoviruses. Paramyxoviruses, such as measles virus (MV) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), induce classical multinucleate syncytia *in vitro* [15,16] and *in vivo* [17] in all cell types that they infect. However, MV tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP) can also spread without forming syncytia by inducing partial cell–cell fusion of neighbouring glial-cell processes [18].

Box 2 | Immunological and virological synapses

Although immune cells are not constitutively polarized they can form an immunological synapse that enables regulated polarization and secretion to occur after contact with other cells or the extracellular matrix<sup>91</sup>. Different types of immunological synapses have been described, including the antigen-presenting cell (APC)–T-cell activatory or regulatory immunological synapse and the target cell–killer cell immunological synapse. Initial encounters by two immune cells result in a transient adhesive contact that is stabilized if the T-cell receptor (TCR) on the T cell recognizes the peptide–MHC (pMHC) complex on the APC<sup>129</sup>. In the case of the killer cell immunological synapse, the clustering of receptors is accompanied by orientation of the microtubule organizing centre and other organelles proximal to the intercellular contact site, followed by directed transport of secretory lysosomes to the synapse<sup>130</sup>. Virological and immunological synapses share several common features:

- There is evidence for an adhesion molecule (lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1)–intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)) interaction at the cell–cell contact zone in the virological synapse, leading to stabilization of the HIV-1 virological synapse<sup>102</sup>.

- Receptor and viral antigen recruitment to virological synapses is actin and tubulin dependent<sup>131,132</sup>.

- The human T-lymphotrophic virus-1 (HTLV-1) synapse seems to have a defined architecture, analogous to that of the immunological synapse, with an inner zone on the cytoplasmic face of the synaptic membrane that contains viral Gag and is surrounded by talin, the LFA1-actin linker molecule<sup>89</sup>.

Other features of virological synapses are distinct from immunological synapses. The most studied virological synapse in retroviral cell-to-cell spread is that formed between T cells. However, T cells do not normally interact directly with one another through synapses, which indicates that this process is mediated by retroviral infection. Neither the HIV-1 nor the HTLV-1 virological synapse requires cognate TCR engagement to assemble and function, but in the HIV-1 virological synapse it is the interaction between Env on the infected cell and CD4 on the target cell that promotes virological synapse formation<sup>132</sup>.

Several studies have determined the rates of HIV-1 spread in culture through cell-to-cell and cell-free modes, and all confirm that cell-to-cell spread is more rapid<sup>112,133–135</sup>. We do not yet know the *in vivo* impact of the retroviral virological synapse, but indirect evidence implies that cell-to-cell spread is important. The earliest events in HIV-1 infection of vaginal mucosa have been recapitulated in a whole-organ culture system. In this study, virus was rapidly taken up by Langerhan’s cells and presented to CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, providing the first evidence for the presence of virological synapse-like structures *ex vivo*<sup>136</sup>. Grossman and colleagues<sup>137</sup> modelled cell-to-cell spread between activated T cells in compartmentalized foci within secondary lymphoid tissue when little cell-free virus was detectable. This model is consistent with experimental findings of viral heterogeneity between white pulps in the spleen, which is suggestive of compartmentalized viral amplification through cell-to-cell spread in infectious foci<sup>138,139</sup>.

---

All strains of MV use the cellular receptor human signaling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM), whereas laboratory-adapted strains use CD46, and the viral ligands are the haemagglutinin and fusion glycoproteins<sup>19</sup>. Although virus budding mainly takes place from the apical surface of polarized cells (BOX 1), the haemagglutinin and fusion glycoproteins are trafficked separately to the basolateral surface<sup>20</sup>. It is thought that apical budding from respiratory epithelia facilitates transmission between hosts through release of the virus in aerosol droplets, whereas fusion between cells at the basolateral surfaces allows systemic dissemination of MV<sup>21,22</sup>.

Herpesviruses. Alphaherpesviruses induce syncytium formation *in vitro* and *in vivo*<sup>23,24</sup>, and express a range of glycoproteins that have a role in cell–cell fusion. Cell–cell fusion by herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) requires the coordinated action of glycoproteins gB, gD and gH–gL on the virus-infected cell, with a further role for the gD receptor on the target cell<sup>25,26</sup>. Syncytial and non-syncytial cell-to-cell viral spread can be distinguished by the selective use of the gD receptor nectin 1 (REF. 27). However, syncytium formation by clinical isolates of HSV-1 is rarely observed *in vitro*, and seems instead to be linked to tissue-culture adaptation. By contrast, all clinical isolates of varicella zoster virus (VZV) form syncytia in culture<sup>24</sup>.

This difference might relate to mechanisms of viral dissemination: HSV-1 spreads readily in peripheral tissues by releasing free virions, whereas VZV mainly relies on cell-to-cell spread<sup>24</sup>. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) also disseminates by cell-to-cell spread *in vivo*: little free virus is detected and viruses seem to move directly between leukocytes, endothelial cells and fibroblasts<sup>28,29</sup>. In common with MV, CMV-induced cell–cell fusion does not necessarily result in syncytia. Foci of CMV-infected cells in the liver did not show evidence of syncytia<sup>30</sup> and electron-microscopy analysis revealed limited areas of membrane fusion between CMV-infected endothelial cells and leukocytes<sup>29</sup>.

Retroviruses. HIV-1 and HTLV-1 form syncytia in tissue culture. Although CCR5 and CXR4 co-receptor using HIV-1 can induce syncytia in T-cell and macrophage cultures, the relevance of this property for virus spread *in vivo* is unclear. Syncytia are rarely observed in *ex vivo* samples from HIV-1-infected individuals<sup>31</sup>, and the few available reports describe fusion between myeloid-derived cells, mainly in the brain<sup>32,33</sup> and adenoid<sup>34</sup>. Although there is no clear evidence that syncytium formation can enhance HIV-1 dissemination *in vivo*, it nevertheless contributes to cell death in tissue culture and *in vivo* by apoptosis and may contribute to HIV-1-associated dementia<sup>33</sup>.

Actin tail

Actin is a component of the cytoskeleton that acts to give cells shape and to mediate membrane motility. Actin tails are columns of clustered, branched actin fibres that propel poxviruses away from the plasma membrane of an infected cell.

REVIEW S

a                                                                 b                                                                 c                                                                 d

Cytoplasm
Plasma membrane

e                                                                 f                                                                 g

Movement across neural synapses
Rhabdoviruses. The rhabdovirus rabies virus (RV) infects neurons that express the viral receptors nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, neuronal cell-adhesion molecule and p75 neurotrophin receptor^{35,36}. Viral surface glycoprotein G binds to cellular receptors that define cellular tropism in a pH-dependent entry process in which fusion takes place in acidified endosomal vesicles^{35}. The first electron-microscopy images of polarized budding and the synaptic transmission of RV in mice and skunks were published more than 30 years ago^{37-39}. Virions budding from the axon terminal of postsynaptic cells into the synaptic cleft were taken up directly into the presynaptic cell by a form of endocytosis. Virus exit from other parts of the cell was rarely observed. RV also replicates in myocytes at the site of inoculation^{38}, with neuronal infection subsequently taking place at nerve endings across neuromuscular junctions^{36}. Although microscopic evidence is lacking, transfer of viruses across such neuromuscular junctions might also occur by direct cell-to-cell spread^{40,41}.

Herpesviruses. In common with other neurotropic viruses, herpesviruses enter sensory neurons at peripheral sites, such as the skin and mucous membranes, before being transported by retrograde traffic towards the cell body, where they replicate and become latent. The virus subsequently reactivates and disseminates through anterograde axonal transport and synaptic transfer^{42}. Initial replication in respiratory epithelia is followed by infection of neurons using the essential entry glycoproteins gB, gD and gH–gL^{43} (FIG. 3). gB and gE–gI are important for neurotropism *in vivo* and *in vitro*, whereas gD is not important for PRV^{43}. Because gD is essential for free PRV spread, but not for transneuronal spread, this glycoprotein differentiates between these two processes, which confirms the importance of cell-to-cell herpesvirus spread in the nervous system^{13}. Despite a substantial body of work, herpesvirus assembly within, and spread between, neurons remains incompletely understood, and there is controversy regarding the form of the virus that is trafficked along axons. Envelope glycoproteins and tegumented HSV capsids can be independently transported from the cell nucleus to the axon terminus, and only assemble at the synapse^{42-45}. Alternatively, virus particles may acquire glycoprotein envelopes in cell bodies and be transported and released at the axon termini, as proposed for PRV^{46,47}. The trafficking signals present in gE–gI that target these glycoproteins to the basolateral surfaces of epithelial cells (discussed above; BOX 1) might also target virus assembly to axon termini^{13,48}, but the mechanism that underlies such targeting is unclear, particularly because axon termini are considered to be the trafficking equivalent of an apical surface on epithelial cells^{49} (BOX 1).

Herpesvirus neuronal spread has also been observed at sporadic regions along the axon. Using wild-type and gD-deleted PRV-infected rat optic nerves, infected non-neuronal cells, such as glia, were observed at intervals along axons of infected neurons^{50}. This was confirmed in cultures in which HSV- or PRV-infected neurons infected epithelial cells, or other neurons, through direct

Figure 2 | Mechanisms of virus cell-to-cell spread. a | Cell–cell plasma-membrane fusion followed by movement of infectious viral material (shown as viral cores) into the uninfected target cell. This type of cell-to-cell spread could result in syncytium formation or might be restricted to localized ‘microfusion’ events that allow the fused cells to maintain structural independence. Herpesviruses, paramyxoviruses and retroviruses can spread by cell–cell plasma-membrane fusion. b | Passage of virions across a tight junction. The virus exits basolaterally from an infected cell and is trapped between the infected and uninfected cell membranes at the tight junctions. Using viral entry receptors that are located on the target cell within the tight junctions, virions fuse with and penetrate the uninfected target cell. Herpesviruses can move across tight junctions. c | Movement of virions across a neural synapse. Virions, either mature or incomplete (naked cores are shown), assemble in either the postsynaptic or presynaptic cell depending on the virus, and either bud through the membrane into the synaptic space or are released from synaptic vesicles into the cleft. Virions then either fuse directly with the opposing synaptic cell or are endocytosed. Rhabdoviruses, herpesviruses and paramyxoviruses move across neural synapses. d | Viral induction of actin- or tubulin-containing structures. Poxviruses project from infected to uninfected cells using actin tails (left). Infected cells produce cross-linked bundles of branched actin directly underneath the virus particle. The nucleation and growth of actin outwards then projects the virus particle out of the cell towards a neighbouring uninfected cell. Herpesviruses can induce actin- and tubulin-containing structures that project virions towards adjacent cells (middle). Asfivirus-induced actin-containing filopodia project African swine fever virus virions towards adjacent cells (right). e | Viral subversion of actin-containing structures. Filopodial bridges can join retrovirally infected and uninfected fibroblastic cells in culture. Murine leukaemia virus-infected cells stably anchor filopodia that project from uninfected cells, which allows virions to travel from an infected to an uninfected cell in an actin-myosin-dependent manner. Infection of the target cell requires expression of viral receptors, which is suggestive of virus–cell membrane fusion. Only retroviruses have so far been shown to use this method of spread. f | Membrane nanotube subversion. Nanotubes can form between immune cells, including myeloid and lymphocytic cells. Nanotubes appear to be continuous with the plasma membrane, contain actin but not tubulin and can join T cells at distances of up to 300 μm. Protein and organelle transport occurs along nanotubes, with speeds that are commensurate with actin motor-mediated movement. HIV-1 virions that bud from an infected cell can move along nanotubes and infect distant target cells in a receptor-dependent manner, which is suggestive of virus–cell membrane fusion. g | Virological synapses. Immune cells are not constitutively polarized, but contain machinery that allows them to polarize their secretory apparatus towards a second cell that is involved in an immunological synapse. This machinery can be subverted by retroviruses so that an infected cell can polarize viral budding towards the receptor-expressing target cell in a structure called a virological synapse. Virions bud from the infected cell into a synaptic cleft, from which they fuse with the target-cell plasma membrane.

Neuronal axon
Plasma membrane

gD

Towards
cell body
Presynaptic
varicosity

Cytoplasm

Non-neural cell

- Virus core
- Enveloped virus particle
- Synaptic vesicle

Figure 3 | Two modes of herpesvirus cell-to-cell spread. **a** | Cell-to-cell spread of herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) in nervous tissue, showing movement in, and between, axons and other cell types. Arrows show the direction of movement of viral material. Viral glycoproteins gB and gH–gL are always required for neuronal cell-to-cell spread, whereas gD is required for HSV-1, but not for pseudorabies virus, inter-neuron spread. Viral material travels from the cell body in an anterograde movement towards axon termini or to varicosities that can be induced by gD. Once at an axon terminal or varicosity, infectious virions are transferred across the synaptic space into an uninfected cell: either another neuron in a neural circuit or another cell type, such as a glial cell. **b** | HSV-1 virions arrayed at intercellular tight junctions. An HSV-1-infected cell is shown, with budding virions lined up along epithelial-cell tight junctions (upper panel). The lower panel shows a magnified version of the epithelial-cell tight junction to show the aligned viruses. Part **b** reproduced, with permission, from REF. 62 © 2001 American Society of Microbiology.

axonal contacts<sup>51</sup>. HSV-1 infection of cultured fetal dorsal root ganglia<sup>52</sup> or swine PRV infection of porcine trigeminal ganglial neurons<sup>53</sup> revealed virus assembly in varicosities. These varicosities form synaptic contacts and seem to be sites of cell-to-cell virus transmission to surrounding neuronal and non-neuronal cells (FIG. 3a). The authors speculate that recruitment of the herpesvirus receptor nectin 1 by gD might be sufficient to induce the formation of varicosities<sup>53</sup>.

**Paramyxoviruses.** Rare infection of the nervous system by MV causes a range of syndromes, including fatal subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). SSPE is characterized by the absence of cell-free MV and the presence of high titres of neutralizing antibody in the cerebrospinal fluid, which suggests that cell-to-cell spread might be the dominant mode of viral dissemination and persistence<sup>54</sup>. When infecting nervous tissue, MV switches receptor use from SLAM (and/or another unknown receptor) to a different receptor (possibly neu- rokinin 1) that is expressed on neurons<sup>55</sup>. This receptor switch is accompanied by loss of the viral haemagglu- tin protein, which is required for free virus infection but dispensable for subsequent cell-to-cell spread between neurons<sup>55</sup>. Immature budding structures that were observed in neurons led two groups to propose that MV moves from cell to cell rather than by release of free virions<sup>56,57</sup>. Mechanistically, this cell-to-cell movement was proposed to occur by vesicular release of infectious viral material, or immature virions, from the presynaptic cell followed by uptake by the postsynaptic cell<sup>57</sup>.

**Movement across tight junctions**

Tight junctions, which are mainly found between adherent epithelial cells, seal cells together to prevent small-molecule and particle exchange (BOX 1). They are formed by interactions between transmembrane adhesion proteins, the best characterized of which is claudin. Although tight junctions prevent pathogens from passing freely across epithelial barriers, they seem to have been subverted by some viruses to spread directly between cells. The alphaherpesviruses are the best-studied family that uses tight junctions, not only to spread by cell–cell fusion, but also to travel between cells in a neutralizing antibody-resistant manner in the absence of syncytium formation<sup>58</sup>. The glycoproteins that are required for this process are gB, gD, gH–gL and gE–gI<sup>58</sup>. Viruses that lacked gE or gI failed to cause disease in rodents and produced smaller lesions in the corneal epithelium than wild-type viruses<sup>59</sup>. Moreover, growth of the mutant viruses in culture resulted in smaller plaques, and reduced cell-to-cell spread as inferred from minimal viral replication in the presence of neutralizing antibody<sup>59</sup>. Subsequent studies confirmed this finding, extended it to VZV and PRV<sup>24,58,60–62</sup> and unequivocally showed that gE–gI are involved in trafficking virions through the trans- Golgi network to the basolateral surfaces of polarized cells<sup>62,63</sup> (FIG. 3b). The mechanism of diverted viral trafficking from apical to basolateral cell membranes (BOX 1) relies on gE–gI accumulation at intercellular junctions, potentially mediating interactions with as-yet-unidentified cellular receptors<sup>64</sup>.

**Neuromuscular junction**
The junction between a neuron and muscle that transforms nerve signals into motor activity.

**Varicosity**
An enlarged region of a vessel; in this case, a neural axon.

REVIEW S

Figure 4 | Interaction of viruses with actin-containing structures. **a** | Actin tails induced in vaccinia virus (VV)-infected cells. VV particles can be seen at the tips of actin tails, some of which are interacting with a neighbouring cell. The inset is a higher magnification image of an actin tail with VV at the tip. Actin is labelled green, VV protein A36R is labelled red and colocalization is shown in yellow. The scale bar represents 10 µm. **b** | Actin tails propel VV into adjacent cells. Thin section electron micrograph of a VV particle at the tip of an actin tail that has entered an adjacent cell. Arrows point to the actin tail and PM indicates the plasma membrane. The scale bar represents 0.5 µm. **c** | African swine fever virus (ASFV)-induced filopodia in an infected macrophage. Virions labelled in green at the tips of virus-induced actin-containing filopodia are labelled in red. The scale bar represents 8 µm. **d** | ASFV interacting with a neighbouring cell. Virions labelled in red are seen associating with actin fibres labelled in green within an adjacent cell. The scale bar represents 4 µm. **e** | Murine leukaemia virus (MLV) trafficking along filopodia to infect an adjacent cell. Actin-containing filiopodia (MLV receptor mCAT1 labelled in red) that extrude from an uninfected fibroblast are anchored to an infected neighbouring cell (plasma membrane labelled green with palmitylated YFP) via MLV envelope glycoprotein-receptor interactions. Virions travel in a retrograde manner from the infected to the uninfected cell. The scale bar represents 5 µm. **f** | HIV-1 infecting a CD4⁺ T cell across a nanotube. An HIV-1-infected T cell (bottom) is connected to an uninfected CD4⁺ T cell (top; CD4 is labelled in green) by a nanotube. HIV-1 Gag is labelled red and Env is labelled blue. Gag and Env can be seen trafficking along the nanotube and within the previously uninfected target cell. The scale bar represents 10 µm. Part **a** reproduced, with permission, from REF. 140 © (1999) American Society for Microbiology. Part **b** reproduced, with permission, from Nature REF. 78 © (1995) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved. Parts **c** and **d** reproduced, with permission, from REF. 77 © (2006) Blackwell Publishing. Part **e** reproduced, with permission, from Nature Cell Biology REF. 81 © (2007) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved. Part **f** courtesy of C. Jolly, University of Oxford, UK.

---

### Recruitment of actin-containing structures

#### Poxviruses. VV is proposed to spread between cells by several mechanisms. For example, the intracellular, mature form of the virus can be released through cell lysis, leading to direct infection of adjacent cells, or release of the extracellular enveloped form and immediate reinfection of neighbouring cells⁶⁵. However, by far the most efficient mode of cell-to-cell spread, which is resistant to neutralizing antibody, is actin-mediated movement of cell-associated enveloped particles using so-called actin tails (FIG. 4a). Mutations in VV that reduce the production of enveloped viral forms (either free extracellular or cell-associated) or viral gene products that mediate actin-tail formation result in virus particles that are inefficient at cell-to-cell spread⁶⁵. How VV induces actin tails is described in several recent reviews⁶⁵⁻⁶⁸ and so will not be discussed here. The mechanism by which virus that is attached to actin tails enters new target cells is unknown, but the same mechanism that allows the entry of extracellular enveloped virus is probably used: through loss of the outer envelope, either in a receptor-mediated manner at the cell surface⁶⁹ or through disruption within an endosomal compartment, followed by fusion of the inner membrane with a cellular-limiting membrane⁶⁸,⁷⁰,⁷¹.

VV can also increase cellular motility⁷² by expressing the F11L protein, which blocks the RhoA signalling cascade that regulates cellular adhesion and motility⁷³. The rapid, random movement of cells on which cell-associated virions are attached would, at least in principle, increase the number of cells infected within a tissue through direct cell–cell contact.

#### Herpesviruses. HSV-1 (REFS 74,75) and PRV⁷⁶ promote the formation of extended, actin-containing protrusions that contact neighbouring cells and that traffic virions in a neutralizing antibody-resistant manner. In PRV, the conserved US3 protein kinase induces the protrusions⁷⁶. Interestingly, inhibition of the Rho-associated kinase ROCK complemented US3-mediated projection formation in cells infected with a US3-deleted virus⁷⁶. This is the same pathway that is inhibited by VV F11L to enable cell motility and form long cellular projections that contact distant cells⁷³. Thus, two different families of viruses might have evolved distinct strategies to target the same cellular signalling pathway to increase cell-to-cell spread.

#### Asfarviruses. ASFV, the sole member of the asfarvirus family, can induce the formation of actin-containing filopodia-like protrusions at the surface of infected cells⁷⁷ (FIG. 4b). These ASFV-induced structures are distinct from those produced by poxviruses, in that the linear actin fibres are bundled into sheaths, contrasting with the extensively branched and cross-linked arrays of actin observed in VV⁷⁸,⁷⁹. After reaching the plasma membrane, ASFV induces localized actin nucleation in a process that requires as-yet-unidentified viral and/or host proteins⁷⁷.

#### Retroviruses. Retroviral subversion of actin-containing cellular structures for cell-to-cell spread has been reported for murine leukaemia virus (MLV) and HIV-1. An initial report showed that MLV bound preferentially to filopodia, then ‘surfed’ along the protrusion towards the cell body, where virus–cell fusion occurred⁸⁰. Subsequently, uninfected cells were shown to produce filopodia that were anchored through endocytosis into infected cells, resulting in stable associations across which the virus could infect receptor-expressing cells⁸¹. Filopodia from uninfected cells were associated at the infected cell plasma membrane by Env-receptor clusters (FIG. 4c). Virions moving from the infected cell remained associated with clusters of receptors, and the underlying receptor association with actin allowed retrograde flow towards the uninfected cell⁸¹. The role of the virus in these interactions differs from that reported for poxviruses and ASFV, in that infection did not induce actin polymerization and formation of cellular protrusions, but instead anchored existing actin-rich structures into uninfected cells.

REVIEW

**Virological synapses in the immune system**

T cell virological synapses. HTLV-1 and HIV-1 can spread directly between immune cells by forming an infectious, or virological, synapse [14,87,88]. Unlike most other cells in the body, immune cells are, in general, neither permanently fixed within a tissue nor constitutively polarized (BOX 1). Thus, exchange of information and material between these cells takes place by the formation of transient adhesive contacts and polarization of receptors and ligands at the intercellular interface. Some of the known molecular interactions that take place at the intercellular interface are shown in FIG. 5. Virological synapses are related to, but distinct from, immunological synapses (BOX 2). The observation that the microtubule organizing centre (MTOC) polarizes at HTLV-1 [REFS 89,90] and HIV-1 (Q.S., unpublished observations) virological synapses in T cells is consistent with the notion that the regulated secretory machinery of the T cell is activated by viral infection [89–91]. The signals that drive this mechanism have not been determined for HIV-1, but HTLV-1-infected T cells express the viral transactivator protein Tax, which accumulates at the MTOC. Engagement of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) on the infected cell by its cognate ligands initiates MTOC relocation by an as-yet-undefined pathway [90], and Tax seems to synergize with this pathway, resulting in efficient MTOC polarization to virological synapses [92].

**APC-T cell virological synapses.** The best studied form of immunological synapse is that assembled between antigen-presenting cells (APCs), particularly dendritic cells (DCs), and lymphocytes during lymphocyte activation [93]. HIV-1 has taken advantage of this interaction to move from DCs into T cells, and this has been proposed as a mechanism of early spread of HIV-1 from mucosal surfaces to secondary lymphoid tissue during mucosal virus transmission [94,95]. DCs can spread HIV-1 to T cells after DC infection with HIV-1 or after short-term DC ‘pulsing’, during which the virus seems to be ‘archived’ prior to DC encounter of the T cell [96–98]. The C-type lectin DC-SIGN (DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin) could act as a viral attachment receptor to keep HIV-1 at the DC surface [99] or could mediate internalization of the virus into an as-yet-undefined compartment in which the virus remains transiently infectious [100]. Other molecules, such as heparan sulphate proteoglycans [101], might have similar roles that could allow the virus to be trapped and presented to T cells during immunological synapse formation. Adhesion molecules could influence viral infectivity and formation of virological synapses: the integrin lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1) has been implicated in the capture of free virions through its cognate adhesion partner ICAM1 (REF. 3), which seems to be central to virological synapse assembly and stability [102]. A novel interaction in which the HIV-1 glycoprotein gp120 binds the α₄β₇ integrin, which is involved in the homing of T cells to gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), could provide insight into the dramatic tropism of HIV-1 for GALT during the acute infection [103]. The interaction of gp120 with α₄β₇ is proposed to activate LFA1, which could increase HIV-1 cell-to-cell spread across virological synapses in GALT [103].

---

**Figure 5 | Anatomy of a retroviral virological synapse.** A hypothetical virological synapse between a retrovirally infected T cell (left) and a receptor-expressing target cell (right). **a** | HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins (Env) are expressed on the infected cell plasma membrane and interact with the receptors CD4 and CCR5 or CXCR4 on the target cell [132]. The adhesion molecules intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) and lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1) engage to stabilize the cellular conjugate [102]. ICAM1 can signal into a human T-lymphotrophic virus-1 (HTLV-1)-infected cell to polarize the secretory apparatus [90]. The secretory apparatus, exemplified here by the microtubule organizing centre (MTOC), aligns proximal to the cell–cell contact zone. MTOC polarization is enhanced in HTLV-1-infected cells by the viral Tax protein, which associates with the MTOC [92]. **b** | In the HIV-1 virological synapse, viral assembly and budding are polarized towards the synapse, and virus is released into the synaptic cleft before fusing with the target cell plasma membrane [132].

---

Secondary lymphoid tissue  
Allows lymphocytes to communicate with antigen-presenting cells and divide in response to activation signals. Secondary lymphoid tissue is distinct from primary lymphoid tissue, which is the site of lymphocyte production.

Microtubule organizing centre  
Microtubules are part of the cytoskeleton and are involved in giving cells shape, in the transport of cargo (including viruses and viral components) within the cell, and in processes such as cell division. The microtubule organizing centre is the site of microtubule nucleation and is found close to the nucleus.

Analysis of HIV-1 movement between T cells revealed the use of actin-containing membrane nanotubes [82]. Membrane nanotubes are a new form of intercellular communication [83] that has been observed in cultures of neuronal cells [84], immune cells [85], myocytes and endothelial cells [86]. Intercellular exchange of materials, including calcium ions, lipids, proteins and organelles, takes place along nanotubes [83]. T-cell nanotubes form spontaneously *in vitro*, frequently following immunological synapse formation, and can be several hundred micrometres in length [82]. HIV-1 was shown to transfer along nanotubes from an infected to an uninfected T cell at a speed commensurate with actin-mediated transport. Virus then entered target cells in a receptor- and fusion-dependent manner [82] (FIG. 4d), which indicates that viruses are transported along the exterior of the nanotube before conventional receptor engagement and entry. As multiple T cells can be connected by linear and branching nanotubes, this mode of HIV-1 spread might be efficient in secondary lymphoid tissue, which is densely packed with susceptible target T cells.

REVIEWS

Dendritic cell  
A cell that forms part of the mammalian immune system. Dendritic cells detect pathogens and engulf and digest them, and present the pathogen fragments to cells of the adaptive immune system, such as T lymphocytes.

Cytidine deaminases  
A family of enzymes that are involved in modifying nucleic acids to introduce mutations into the genetic code. This function allows the immune system to introduce variety into antibody responses and acts as an intrinsic cellular defence against infection by some viruses.

Trim family  
A family of proteins that are involved in various cellular processes and can have anti-retroviral properties.

Macrophages can spread HIV-1 directly to T cells across a virological synapse-like interface<sup>104</sup>. Because macrophages are readily infected with HIV-1 and produce and/or store large amounts of the virus over extended periods of time, they might contribute substantially to HIV-1 cell-to-cell dissemination<sup>105</sup>. Notably, the macrophage–T cell synapse seems to be transient, as adherent T cells become rapidly infected and then spontaneously detach<sup>106</sup>. This implies that a single infected macrophage can infect high numbers of T cells over its lifespan, thought to be a number of weeks, *in vivo*.

**Perspectives and future directions**

The effects of cell-to-cell spread on viral pathogenicity extend beyond the efficiency of spread within and between tissues. One of the early operational definitions of cell-to-cell spread was that of neutralizing antibody resistance, as exhibited by some herpesviruses<sup>107</sup>, even though other viruses, such as CMV, might be neutralizing antibody sensitive<sup>30</sup>. Escape from neutralizing antibody inhibition of cell-to-cell viral dissemination has also been reported for poxviruses<sup>108</sup> and hepatitis C virus (HCV)<sup>109</sup>. For retroviruses, it is unclear whether antibodies can effectively neutralize virus spread from cell to cell. Some reports suggest that HIV-1 spread through this route is resistant to neutralization, whereas others imply HIV-1 is in fact neutralization susceptible<sup>110–112</sup>, and therefore more work is clearly required. Ultrastructural analysis of HTLV-1 virological synapses shows that the plasma membranes of the infected and target cells are tightly apposed, which could prevent access of antibodies and complement components to virions in transit between cells<sup>113</sup>. Whether the kinetic advantage imposed on viruses by cell-to-cell spread can reduce the impact of cell-mediated immunity remains to be seen: it is conceivable that the speed with which viruses assemble and pass directly between cells might reduce the ability of cytotoxic effector mechanisms to eliminate infected cells rapidly enough to prevent virus propagation. HIV-1 infection has been proposed to dysregulate immune responses beyond that expected by simple elimination of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. For example, the virus might disrupt the function of immunological synapses, as described for HIV-1 infected T cells<sup>114</sup>, potentially by disrupting signal transduction pathways shared by both virological and immunological synapses<sup>115</sup>.

Where is this field of virology heading? For herpesviruses, orthomyxoviruses, poxviruses and rhabdoviruses, cell-to-cell spread is an accepted mode of dissemination that is well characterized. For other viruses, such as HIV-1 and HCV, the mechanisms that underlie cell-to-cell spread have yet to be elucidated and its importance for viral transmission, tropism, immune evasion and overall pathogenesis *in vivo* remains unclear. Progress in understanding how viruses subvert cellular processes to move between cells will add to our knowledge of how receptors used by viruses signal into cells, how the cytoskeleton functions in health and disease<sup>8,9,116</sup>, and how non-polarized cells can be induced to polarize their secretory apparatuses<sup>91</sup>. This will be satisfying, as aspects of constitutive cell polarity were initially characterized in the context of viral protein trafficking 30 years ago<sup>117,118</sup>.

There are obvious parallels between viral and bacterial subversion of the cell cytoskeleton for infection and dissemination<sup>66,67</sup>. For example, the parallel strands of actin that propel Rickettsia spp. resemble those found in filopodia, and might therefore be analogous to the assemblies that are induced by ASFV<sup>77</sup> and herpesviruses<sup>76</sup>. Comparative analyses of the different types of interaction between viruses and prokaryotes and their host cells will enrich not only our understanding of microbial pathogenesis, but may also shed light on molecular mechanisms that underlie normal cellular processes.

Viruses are subject to intrinsic mechanisms of intra-cellular antiviral restriction. These are exemplified by the family of cytidine deaminases of which the prototype, APOBEC3G, interferes with retroviruses<sup>119</sup> and hepadnaviruses<sup>120</sup>, the TRIM family of inter-species retroviral restriction factors<sup>121,122</sup> and the newly described tetherins<sup>123</sup>. Some of these factors, such as the TRIMs, are saturable, meaning that if sufficient amounts of the virus can be introduced into a cell the restriction can be overcome. It will be interesting to see whether the enhanced efficiency of cell-to-cell spread, compared with cell-free spread, of viruses can overcome such resistance to infection.

Further characterization of the molecular basis of viral cell-to-cell spread will increase our understanding of viral pathogenesis and could help uncover new avenues of therapeutic interest, either in terms of novel viral targets that are specifically involved in cell-to-cell spread or cellular targets that facilitate this mode of virus dissemination. Genome-wide functional screens are already providing potential new antiviral targets<sup>124–127</sup> that could allow us to reduce or prevent cell-to-cell spread by human pathogenic viruses.

1. Ugolini, S., Mondor, I. & Sattentau, O. J. HIV-1 attachment: another look. *Trends Microbiol.* **7**, 144–149 (1999).
2. Dimitrov, D. S. Virus entry: molecular mechanisms and biomedical applications. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **2**, 109–122 (2004).
3. Cantin, R., Methot, S. & Tremblay, M. J. Plunder and stowaways: incorporation of cellular proteins by enveloped viruses. *J. Virol.* **79**, 6577–6587 (2005).
4. Smith, A. E. & Helenius, A. How viruses enter animal cells. *Science* **304**, 237–242 (2004).
5. Marsh, M. & Helenius, A. Virus entry: open sesame. *Cell* **124**, 729–740 (2006). Indispensable review on viral entry into cells.
6. Alfano, M., Schmidtmayerova, H., Amella, C. A., Pushkarsky, T. & Bukrinsky, M. The B-oligomer of pertussis toxin deactivates CC chemokine receptor 5 and blocks entry of M-tropic HIV-1 strains. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 597–605 (1999).
7. Jimenez-Baranda, S. *et al.* Filamin-A regulates actin-dependent clustering of HIV receptors. *Nature Cell Biol.* **9**, 838–846 (2007).
8. Naghavi, M. H. & Goff, S. P. Retroviral proteins that interact with the host cell cytoskeleton. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **19**, 402–407 (2007).
9. Fackler, O. T. & Krausslich, H. G. Interactions of human retroviruses with the host cell cytoskeleton. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* **9**, 409–415 (2006).
10. Parkinson, J. E. & Smith, G. L. Vaccinia virus gene A36R encodes a M<sub>r</sub> 43–50 K protein on the surface of extracellular enveloped virus. *Virology* **204**, 376–390 (1994).
11. Tscharke, D. C., Reading, P. C. & Smith, G. L. Dermal infection with vaccinia virus reveals roles for virus proteins not seen using other inoculation routes. *J. Gen. Virol.* **83**, 1977–1986 (2002).
12. Enquist, L. W., Dubin, J., Whealy, M. E. & Card, J. P. Complementation analysis of pseudorabies virus gE and gl mutants in retinal ganglion cell neurotropism. *J. Virol.* **68**, 5275–5279 (1994).
13. Mulder, W. *et al.* Glycoprotein D-negative pseudorabies virus can spread transneuronally via direct neuron-to-neuron transmission in its natural host, the pig, but not after additional inactivation of gE or gl. *J. Virol.* **70**, 1911–2200 (1996).
14. Bangham, C. R. The immune control and cell-to-cell spread of human T-lymphotropic virus type 1. *J. Gen. Virol.* **84**, 3177–3189 (2003).

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

15. Takeuchi, K., Miyajima, N., Nagata, N., Takeda, M. & Tashiro, M. Wild-type measles virus induces large syncytium formation in primary human small airway epithelial cells by a SLAM(CD150)-independent mechanism. *Virus Res.* **94**, 11–16 (2003).

16. Fugier-Vivier, I. *et al.* Measles virus suppresses cell-mediated immunity by interfering with the survival and functions of dendritic and T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 813–823 (1997).

17. McChesney, M. B. *et al.* Experimental measles. I. Pathogenesis in the normal and the immunized host. *Virology* **233**, 74–84 (1997).

18. Duprex, W. P., McQuaid, S., Hangartner, L., Billetter, M. A. & Rima, B. K. Observation of measles virus cell-to-cell spread in astrocytoma cells by using a green fluorescent protein-expressing recombinant virus. *J. Virol.* **73**, 9568–9575 (1999).

19. Dhiman, N., Jacobson, R. M. & Poland, G. A. Measles virus receptors: SLAM and CD46. *Rev. Med. Virol.* **14**, 217–229 (2004).

20. Maisner, A., Klenk, H. & Herrler, G. Polarized budding of measles virus is not determined by viral surface glycoproteins. *J. Virol.* **72**, 5276–5278 (1998). First description of differential trafficking of viral cores and envelope glycoproteins to apical and basolateral membrane domains, respectively, with implications for viral pathogenesis.

21. Moll, M., Pfeuffer, J., Klenk, H. D., Niewiesk, S. & Maisner, A. Polarized glycoprotein targeting affects the spread of measles virus *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *J. Gen. Virol.* **85**, 1019–1027 (2004).

22. Yanagi, Y., Takeda, M. & Ohno, S. Measles virus: cellular receptors, tropism and pathogenesis. *J. Gen. Virol.* **87**, 2767–2779 (2006).

23. Spear, P. G. in *Viral Fusion Mechanisms* (ed. J. Bentz) 201–232 (CRC, Florida, 1993).

24. Cole, N. L. & Grose, C. Membrane fusion mediated by herpesvirus glycoproteins: the paradigm of varicella-zoster virus. *Rev. Med. Virol.* **13**, 207–222 (2003).

25. Reske, A., Pollara, G., Krumbenacher, C., Chain, B. M. & Katz, D. R. Understanding HSV-1 entry glycoproteins. *Rev. Med. Virol.* **17**, 205–215 (2007).

26. Campadelli-Fiume, G. *et al.* The multipartite system that mediates entry of herpes simplex virus into the cell. *Rev. Med. Virol.* **17**, 313–326 (2007).

27. Cocchi, F., Menotti, L., Dubreuil, P., Lopez, M. & Campadelli-Fiume, G. Cell-to-cell spread of wild-type herpes simplex virus type 1, but not of syncytial strains, is mediated by the immunoglobulin-like receptors that mediate virion entry, nectin1 (PRR1/ HveC/HIgR) and nectin2 (PRR2/HveB). *J. Virol.* **74**, 3909–3917 (2000).

28. Sweet, C. The pathogenicity of cytomegalovirus. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* **23**, 457–482 (1999).

29. Gerna, G. *et al.* Human cytomegalovirus replicates abortively in polymorphonuclear leukocytes after transfer from infected endothelial cells via transient microfusion events. *J. Virol.* **74**, 5629–5638 (2000).

30. Wirtz, N. *et al.* Polyclonal cytomegalovirus-specific antibodies not only prevent virus dissemination from the portal of entry but also inhibit focal virus spread within target tissues. *Med. Microbial. Immunol.* **197**, 151–158 (2008).

31. Anderson, J. M. Multinucleated giant cells. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **7**, 40–47 (2000).

32. Fais, S. *et al.* The biological relevance of polykaryons in the immune response. *Immunol. Today* **18**, 522–527 (1997).

33. Nardacci, R. *et al.* Characterization of cell death pathways in human immunodeficiency virus-associated encephalitis. *Am. J. Pathol.* **167**, 695–704 (2005).

34. Frankel, S. S. *et al.* Replication of HIV-1 in dendritic cell-derived syncytia at the mucosal surface of the adenoid. *Science* **272**, 115–117 (1996).

35. Roche, S. & Gaudin, Y. Evidence that rabies virus forms different kinds of fusion machines with different pH thresholds for fusion. *J. Virol.* **78**, 8746–8752 (2004).

36. Lafon, M. Rabies virus receptors. *J. Neurovirol.* **11**, 82–87 (2005).

37. Iwasaki, Y. & Clark, H. F. Cell to cell transmission of virus in the central nervous system. II. Experimental rabies in mouse. *Lab. Invest.* **33**, 391–399 (1975). First ex vivo electron-microscopy demonstration of cell-to-cell synaptic transmission of a virus (RV) between neurons.

38. Charlton, K. M. & Casey, G. A. Experimental rabies in skunks: immunofluorescence light and electron microscopic studies. *Lab. Invest.* **41**, 36–44 (1979).

39. Murphy, F. A., Harrison, A. K., Winn, W. C. & Bauer, S. P. Comparative pathogenesis of rabies and

40. Burrage, T. G., Tignor, G. H. & Smith, A. L. Rabies virus binding at neuromuscular junctions. *Virus Res.* **2**, 273–289 (1985).

41. Lewis, P., Fu, Y. & Lentz, T. L. Rabies virus entry at the neuromuscular junction in nerve-muscle cocultures. *Muscle Nerve* **23**, 720–730 (2000).

42. Tomishima, M. J., Smith, G. A. & Enquist, L. W. Sorting and transport of α herpesviruses in axons. *Traffic* **2**, 429–436 (2001).

43. Mettenleiter, T. C. Pathogenesis of neurotropic herpesviruses: role of viral glycoproteins in neuroinvasion and transneuronal spread. *Virus Res.* **92**, 197–206 (2003).

44. Snyder, A., Bruun, B., Browne, H. M. & Johnson, D. C. A herpes simplex virus gD–YFP fusion glycoprotein is transported separately from viral capsids in neuronal axons. *J. Virol.* **81**, 8337–8340 (2007).

45. Snyder, A., Wisner, T. W. & Johnson, D. C. Herpes simplex virus capsids are transported in neuronal axons without an envelope containing the viral glycoproteins. *J. Virol.* **80**, 11165–11177 (2006).

46. Ch'ng, T. H. & Enquist, L. W. Efficient axonal localization of alphaherpesvirus structural proteins in cultured sympathetic neurons requires viral glycoprotein E. *J. Virol.* **79**, 8835–8846 (2005).

47. Antinone, S. E. & Smith, G. A. Two modes of herpesvirus trafficking in neurons: membrane acquisition directs motion. *J. Virol.* **80**, 11235–11240 (2006).

48. Enquist, L. W., Tomishima, M. J., Gross, S. & Smith, G. A. Directional spread of an α-herpesvirus in the nervous system. *Vet. Microbiol.* **86**, 5–16 (2002).

49. Kobayashi, T., Storrie, B., Simons, K. & Dotti, C. G. A functional barrier to movement of lipids in polarized neurons. *Nature* **359**, 647–650 (1992).

50. Tomishima, M. J. & Enquist, L. W. In vivo egress of an alphaherpesvirus from axons. *J. Virol.* **76**, 8310–8317 (2002).

51. Ch'ng, T. H., Spear, P. G., Struyf, F. & Enquist, L. W. Glycoprotein D-independent spread of pseudorabies virus infection in cultured PNS neurons in a compartmented system. *J. Virol.* **81**, 10742–10757 (2007).

52. Saksena, M. M. *et al.* Herpes simplex virus type 1 accumulation, envelopment, and exit in growth cones and varicosities in mid-distal regions of axons. *J. Virol.* **80**, 3592–3606 (2006).

53. De Regge, N. *et al.* α-herpesvirus glycoprotein D interaction with sensory neurons triggers formation of varicosities that serve as virus exit sites. *J. Cell Biol.* **174**, 267–275 (2006).

54. Rima, B. K. & Duprex, W. P. Morbilliviruses and human disease. *J. Pathol.* **208**, 199–214 (2006).

55. Makhortova, N. R. *et al.* Neurokinin-1 enables measles virus trans-synaptic spread in neurons. *Virology* **362**, 235–244 (2007).

56. McQuaid, S., Campbell, S., Wallace, I. J., Kirk, J. & Cosby, S. L. Measles virus infection and replication in undifferentiated and differentiated human neuronal cells in culture. *J. Virol.* **72**, 5245–5250 (1998).

57. Lawrence, D. M. *et al.* Measles virus spread between neurons requires cell contact but not CD46 expression, syncytium formation, or extracellular virus production. *J. Virol.* **74**, 1908–1918 (2000).

58. Johnson, D. C. & Huber, M. T. Directed egress of animal viruses promotes cell-to-cell spread. *J. Virol.* **76**, 1–8 (2002).

59. Dingwell, K. S. *et al.* Herpes simplex virus glycoproteins E and I facilitate cell-to-cell spread in vivo and across junctions of cultured cells. *J. Virol.* **68**, 834–845 (1994). Found that gE and gI are essential for herpesvirus cell-to-cell spread.

60. Tirabassi, R. S. & Enquist, L. W. Role of envelope protein gE endocytosis in the pseudorabies virus life cycle. *J. Virol.* **72**, 4571–4579 (1998).

61. Cohen, J. I. & Nguyen, H. Varicella-zoster virus glycoprotein I is essential for growth of virus in Vero cells. *J. Virol.* **71**, 6913–6920 (1997).

62. Johnson, D. C., Webb, M., Wisner, T. W. & Brunetti, C. Herpes simplex virus gE/gI sorts nascent virions to epithelial cell junctions, promoting virus spread. *J. Virol.* **75**, 821–833 (2001).

63. Farnsworth, A. & Johnson, D. C. Herpes simplex virus gE/gI must accumulate in the trans-Golgi network at early times and then redistribute to cell junctions to promote cell–cell spread. *J. Virol.* **80**, 3167–3179 (2006).

64. Polcicova, K., Goldsmith, K., Rainish, B. L., Wisner, T. W. & Johnson, D. C. The extracellular domain of herpes simplex virus gE is indispensable for efficient cell-to-cell spread: evidence for gE/gI receptors. *J. Virol.* **79**, 11990–12001 (2005).

65. Smith, G. L. & Law, M. The exit of vaccinia virus from infected cells. *Virus Res.* **106**, 189–197 (2004).

66. Gouin, E., Welch, M. D. & Cossart, P. Actin-based motility of intracellular pathogens. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* **8**, 35–45 (2005).

67. Frischknecht, F. & Way, M. Surfing pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization. *Trends Cell Biol.* **11**, 30–38 (2001).

68. Smith, G. L., Murphy, B. J. & Law, M. Vaccinia virus motility. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **57**, 323–342 (2003).

69. Law, M., Carter, G. C., Roberts, K. L., Hollinshead, M. & Smith, G. L. Ligand-induced and nonfusogenic dissolution of a viral membrane. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 5989–5994 (2006).

70. Moss, B. Poxvirus entry and membrane fusion. *Virology* **344**, 48–54 (2006).

71. Mercer, J. & Helenius, A. Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells. *Science* **320**, 531–535 (2008).

72. Sanderson, C. M., Way, M. & Smith, G. L. Virus-induced cell motility. *J. Virol.* **72**, 1235–1243 (1998).

73. Valderrama, F., Cordeiro, J. V., Schleich, S., Frischknecht, F. & Way, M. Vaccinia virus-induced cell motility requires F11L-mediated inhibition of RhoA signaling. *Science* **311**, 377–381 (2006).

74. La Boissiere, S., Izeta, A., Malcomber, S. & O'Hare, P. Compartmentalization of VP16 in cells infected with recombinant herpes simplex virus expressing VP16-green fluorescent protein fusion proteins. *J. Virol.* **78**, 8002–8014 (2004).

75. van Leeuwen, H., Elliott, G. & O'Hare, P. Evidence of a role for nonmuscle myosin II in herpes simplex virus type 1 egress. *J. Virol.* **76**, 3471–3481 (2002).

76. Favoreel, H. W., Van Minnebruggen, G., Adriaensen, D. & Nauwynck, H. J. Cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell extensions induced by the US3 kinase of an alphaherpesvirus are associated with enhanced spread. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 8990–8995 (2005).

Description of PRV-induced cellular protrusions that aid cell-to-cell viral spread.

77. Jouvenet, N. *et al.* African swine fever virus induces filopodia-like projections at the plasma membrane. *Cell. Microbiol.* **8**, 1803–1811 (2006).

78. Cudmore, S., Cossart, P., Griffiths, G. & Way, M. Actin-based motility of vaccinia virus. *Nature* **378**, 636–638 (1995).

Striking demonstration of actin tail-based VV motility with implications for cell-to-cell spread.

79. Cudmore, S., Reckmann, I., Griffiths, G. & Way, M. Vaccinia virus: a model system for actin-membrane interactions. *J. Cell Sci.* **109**, 1739–1747 (1996).

80. Lehmann, M. J., Sherer, N. M., Marks, C. B., Pypaert, M. & Mothes, W. Actin- and myosin-driven movement of viruses along filopodia precedes their entry into cells. *J. Cell Biol.* **170**, 317–325 (2005).

81. Sherer, N. M. *et al.* Retroviruses can establish filopodial bridges for efficient cell-to-cell transmission. *Nature Cell Biol.* **9**, 310–315 (2007).

82. Sowinski, S. *et al.* Membrane nanotubes physically connect T cells over long distances presenting a novel route for HIV-1 transmission. *Nature Cell Biol.* **10**, 211–219 (2008).

83. Gerdes, H. H., Bukoreshtliev, N. V. & Barroso, J. F. Tunneling nanotubes: a new route for the exchange of components between animal cells. *FEBS Lett.* **581**, 2194–2201 (2007).

84. Rustom, A., Saffrich, R., Markovic, I., Walther, P. & Gerdes, H. H. Nanotubular highways for intercellular organelle transport. *Science* **303**, 1007–1010 (2004).

85. Onfelt, B., Nedvetzki, S., Yanagi, K. & Davis, D. M. Cutting edge: membrane nanotubes connect immune cells. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 1511–1513 (2004).

86. Plotnikov, E. Y. *et al.* Cell-to-cell cross-talk between mesenchymal stem cells and cardiomyocytes in coculture. *J. Cell. Mol. Med.* 9 Dec 2007 (10.1111/j.1582-4934.2007.00205.x).

87. Piguet, V. & Sattentau, Q. Dangerous liaisons at the virological synapse. *J. Clin. Invest.* **114**, 605–610 (2004).

88. Jolly, C. & Sattentau, Q. J. Retroviral spread by induction of virological synapses. *Traffic* **5**, 643–650 (2004).

REVIEWS

89. Igakura, T. *et al.* Spread of HTLV-I between lymphocytes by virus-induced polarization of the cytoskeleton. *Science* **299**, 1713–1716 (2003). First study to describe a T-cell retroviral virological synapse that has implications for analogies between virological and immunological synapses.

90. Barnard, A. L., Igakura, T., Tanaka, Y., Taylor, G. P. & Bangham, C. R. Engagement of specific T-cell surface molecules regulates cytoskeletal polarization in HTLV-1-infected lymphocytes. *Blood* **106**, 988–995 (2005).

91. Jolly, C. & Sattentau, Q. J. Regulated secretion from CD4+ T cells. *Trends Immunol.* **28**, 474–481 (2007).

92. Nejmeddine, M., Barnard, A. L., Tanaka, Y., Taylor, G. P. & Bangham, C. R. Human T-lymphotropic virus, type 1, tax protein triggers microtubule reorientation in the virological synapse. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 29653–29660 (2005).

93. Dustin, M. L., Tseng, S. Y., Varma, R. & Campi, G. T cell–dendritic cell immunological synapses. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **18**, 512–516 (2006).

94. Piguet, V. & Steinman, R. M. The interaction of HIV with dendritic cells: outcomes and pathways. *Trends Immunol.* **28**, 503–510 (2007).

95. Lekkerkerker, A. N., van Kooyk, Y. & Geijtenbeek, T. B. Viral piracy: HIV-1 targets dendritic cells for transmission. *Curr. HIV Res.* **4**, 169–176 (2006).

96. McDonald, D. *et al.* Recruitment of HIV and its receptors to dendritic cell–T cell junctions. *Science* **300**, 1295–1297 (2003). First study to detect a DC–T-cell retroviral virological synapse that has implications for cell-to-cell spread in HIV-1 sexual transmission.

97. Turville, S. G. *et al.* Immunodeficiency virus uptake, turnover, and 2-phase transfer in human dendritic cells. *Blood* **103**, 2170–2179 (2004).

98. Arrighi, J. F. *et al.* DC-SIGN-mediated infectious synapse formation enhances X4 HIV-1 transmission from dendritic cells to T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 1279–1288 (2004).

99. Cavrois, M., Neidleman, J., Kreisberg, J. F. & Greene, W. C. *In vitro* derived dendritic cells trans-infect CD4 T cells primarily with surface-bound HIV-1 virions. *PLoS Pathog.* **3**, e4 (2007).

100. van Kooyk, Y. & Geijtenbeek, T. B. DC-SIGN: escape mechanism for pathogens. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **3**, 697–709 (2003).

101. de Witte, L. *et al.* Syndecan-3 is a dendritic cell-specific attachment receptor for HIV-1. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 19464–19469 (2007).

102. Jolly, C., Mitar, I. & Sattentau, Q. J. Adhesion molecule interactions facilitate human immunodeficiency virus type-1-induced virological synapse formation between T cells. *J. Virol.* **81**, 13916–13921 (2007).

103. Arthos, J. *et al.* HIV-1 envelope protein binds to and signals through integrin α<sub>4</sub>β<sub>7</sub>, the gut mucosal homing receptor for peripheral T cells. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 301–309 (2008).

104. Phillips, D. M. The role of cell-to-cell transmission in HIV infection. *AIDS* **8**, 719–731 (1994).

105. Sharova, N., Swingler, C., Sharkey, M. & Stevenson, M. Macrophages archive HIV-1 virions for dissemination *in trans*. *EMBO J.* **24**, 2481–2489 (2005).

106. Groot, F., Welsch, S. & Sattentau, Q. J. Efficient HIV-1 transmission from macrophages to T cells across transient virological synapses. *Blood* **111**, 4660–4663 (2008).

107. Favoreel, H. W., Van Minnebruggen, G., Van de Walle, G. R., Ficinska, J. & Nauwynck, H. J. Herpesvirus interference with virus-specific antibodies: bridging antibodies, internalizing antibodies, and hiding from antibodies. *Vet. Microbiol.* **113**, 257–263 (2006).

108. Law, M., Hollinshead, R. & Smith, G. L. Antibody-sensitive and antibody-resistant cell-to-cell spread by vaccinia virus: role of the A33R protein in antibody-resistant spread. *J. Gen. Virol.* **83**, 209–222 (2002).

109. Timpe, J. M. *et al.* Hepatitis C virus cell–cell transmission in hepatoma cells in the presence of neutralizing antibodies. *Hepatology* **47**, 17–24 (2008).

110. Ganesh, L. *et al.* Infection of specific dendritic cells by CCR5-tropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promotes cell-mediated transmission of virus resistant to broadly neutralizing antibodies. *J. Virol.* **78**, 11980–11987 (2004).

111. van Montfort, T., Nabatov, A. A., Geijtenbeek, T. B., Pollakis, G. & Paxton, W. A. Efficient capture of antibody neutralized HIV-1 by cells expressing DC-SIGN and transfer to CD4+ T lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **178**, 3177–3185 (2007).

112. Chen, P., Hubner, W., Spinelli, M. A. & Chen, B. K. Predominant mode of HIV transfer between T cells is mediated by sustained Env-dependent neutralization-resistant virological synapses. *J. Virol.* **81**, 12582–12595 (2007).

113. Majorovits, E. *et al.* Human T-lymphotropic virus-1 visualized at the virological synapse by electron tomography. *PLoS ONE* **3**, e2251 (2008).

114. Thoulouze, M. I. *et al.* Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 infection impairs the formation of the immunological synapse. *Immunity* **24**, 547–561 (2006).

115. Sol-Foulon, N. *et al.* ZAP-70 kinase regulates HIV cell-to-cell spread and virological synapse formation. *EMBO J.* **26**, 516–526 (2007).

116. Radtke, K., Dohner, K. & Sodeik, B. Viral interactions with the cytoskeleton: a hitchhiker’s guide to the cell. *Cell. Microbiol.* **8**, 387–400 (2006).

117. Boulan, E. R. & Sabatini, D. D. Asymmetric budding of viruses in epithelial monolayers: a model system for study of epithelial polarity. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **75**, 5071–5075 (1978).

118. Boulan, E. R. & Pendergast, M. Polarized distribution of viral envelope proteins in the plasma membrane of infected epithelial cells. *Cell* **20**, 45–54 (1980). The paradigm for distinct routes of viral trafficking in polarized epithelial cells.

119. Sheehy, A. M., Gaddis, N. C., Choi, J. D. & Malim, M. H. Isolation of a human gene that inhibits HIV-1 infection and is suppressed by the viral Vif protein. *Nature* **418**, 646–650 (2002).

120. Turelli, P., Mangeat, B., Jost, S., Vianin, S. & Trono, D. Inhibition of hepatitis B virus replication by APOBEC3G. *Science* **303**, 1829 (2004).

121. Stremlau, M. *et al.* The cytoplasmic body component TRIM5α restricts HIV-1 infection in Old World monkeys. *Nature* **427**, 848–853 (2004).

122. Nisole, S., Stoye, J. P. & Saib, A. TRIM family proteins: retroviral restriction and antiviral defence. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **3**, 799–808 (2005).

123. Neil, S. J., Zang, T. & Bieniasz, P. D. Tetherin inhibits retrovirus release and is antagonized by HIV-1 Vpu. *Nature* **451**, 425–430 (2008).

124. Nguyen, D. G. *et al.* Identification of novel therapeutic targets for HIV infection through functional genomic cDNA screening. *Virology* **362**, 16–25 (2007).

125. Brass, A. L. *et al.* Identification of host proteins required for HIV infection through a functional genomic screen. *Science* **319**, 921–926 (2008).

126. Randall, G. *et al.* Cellular cofactors affecting hepatitis C virus infection and replication. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 12884–12889 (2007).

127. Ng, T. I. *et al.* Identification of host genes involved in hepatitis C virus replication by small interfering RNA technology. *Hepatology* **45**, 1413–1421 (2007).

128. Tucker, S. P. & Compans, R. W. Virus infection of polarized epithelial cells. *Adv. Virus Res.* **42**, 187–247 (1993).

129. Dustin, M. L. Cell adhesion molecules and actin cytoskeleton at immune synapses and kinapses. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **19**, 529–533 (2007).

130. Stinchcombe, J. C., Majorovits, E., Bossi, G., Fuller, S. & Griffiths, G. M. Centrosome polarization delivers secretory granules to the immunological synapse. *Nature* **443**, 462–465 (2006).

131. Jolly, C., Mitar, I. & Sattentau, Q. J. Requirement for an intact T-cell actin and tubulin cytoskeleton for efficient assembly and spread of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. *J. Virol.* **81**, 5547–5560 (2007).

132. Jolly, C., Kashefi, K., Hollinshead, M. & Sattentau, Q. J. HIV-1 cell to cell transfer across an Env-induced, actin-dependent synapse. *J. Exp. Med.* **199**, 283–293 (2004). First description of an HIV-1 T-cell virological synapse with a requirement for virus–receptor interactions that is associated with the actin cytoskeleton.

133. Dimitrov, D. S. *et al.* Quantitation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection kinetics. *J. Virol.* **67**, 2182–2190 (1993).

134. Spouge, J. I., Shrager, R. I. & Dimitrov, D. S. HIV-1 infection kinetics in tissue cultures. *Math. Biosci.* **138**, 1–22 (1996).

135. Sourisseau, M., Sol-Foulon, N., Porrot, F., Blanchet, F. & Schwartz, O. Inefficient human immunodeficiency virus replication in mobile lymphocytes. *J. Virol.* **81**, 1000–1012 (2007).

136. Hladik, F. *et al.* Initial events in establishing vaginal entry and infection by human immunodeficiency virus type-1. *Immunity* **26**, 257–270 (2007).

137. Grossman, Z., Feinberg, M. B. & Paul, W. E. Multiple modes of cellular activation and virus transmission in HIV infection: a role for chronically and latently infected cells in sustaining viral replication. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 6314–6319 (1998).

138. Cheynier, R. *et al.* HIV and T cell expansion in splenic white pulps is accompanied by infiltration of HIV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. *Cell* **78**, 373–387 (1994).

139. Dumaurier, M. J., Gratton, S., Wain-Hobson, S. & Cheynier, R. The majority of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 particles present within splenic germinal centres are produced locally. *J. Gen. Virol.* **86**, 3369–3373 (2005).

140. Rottger, S., Frischknecht, F., Reckmann, I., Smith, G. L. & Way, M. Interactions between vaccinia virus IEV membrane proteins and their roles in IEV assembly and actin tail formation. *J. Virol.* **73**, 2863–2875 (1999).

Acknowledgements  
The author thanks D. Davis, M. Way, C. Jolly, P. J. Klasse and D. Johnson for reading the manuscript and for suggesting ideas. The author regrets that much important work could not be reviewed or cited because of space restrictions. The author is a Jenner Institute Fellow and his laboratory is supported by grants from the Medical Research Council (MRC), The Wellcome Trust, The International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the European Union.

DATABASES  
Entrez Genome: [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=genome](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=genome)  
ASFV | HCV | HIV-1 | HSV-1 | MLV | MV | RSV | RV | VV | HCV  

Entrez Protein: [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=protein](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=protein)  
F11L | ICAM1 | RhoA | Tax  

FURTHER INFORMATION  
Quentin Sattentau’s homepage: [http://www.path.ox.ac.uk/dirsci/molmicrobiology/sattentau](http://www.path.ox.ac.uk/dirsci/molmicrobiology/sattentau)  

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
