
PERSPECTIVES

OPINION

Turning anti-ageing genes against cancer

Valter D. Longo, Michael R. Lieber and Jan Vijg

Abstract | Recent studies in diverse organisms implicate proto-oncogenic pathways, including insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), Ras and AKT/protein kinase B in the ageing process. Although IGF-I is thought to contribute to cancer by promoting growth and preventing apoptosis, evidence from model organisms suggests that proto-oncogene homologues might contribute to the DNA mutations and chromosomal damage that are observed in tumour cells by increasing DNA damage, in both dividing and non-dividing cells, and involving error-prone systems in DNA repair. This raises the possibility that cancer can be reduced by chronic downregulation of pro-ageing pathways.

Phenotypes that are associated with ageing are among the most complex known. Ageing affects function at the molecular, organelle, cellular and extracellular levels, affects all tissues, and increases susceptibility to chronic diseases. The most accepted model proposes that ageing arises because of the greater emphasis placed by natural selection on early survival or reproduction compared with the maintenance of vigour at later ages. Therefore, species-specific lifespan and age-related susceptibility to disease might be determined by a trade-off between somatic maintenance and growth and reproduction¹. For example, genes that specify a powerful immunological response to infections have a high survival value but might contribute to inflammation, which is now considered to be a major health problem at older ages². Studies in yeast, worms, flies and mice suggest that longevity can be extended by mutations in genes that promote growth²,³, raising the possibility that age-related diseases, such as cancer, might be postponed or even prevented by a switch from a pro-growth and reproduction mode to a maintenance mode.

Lifespan extension seems to be mediated in part by increased cellular defence against somatic damage, including the upregulation of stress resistance genes and a reduction in the level of oxidants and oxidative damage⁴ (BOX 1). Of all the possible targets of somatic

contribute to cancer by allowing damaged cells to survive, grow and metastasize⁹,¹⁰. However, it is possible that proto-oncogenes that have not acquired the oncogenic mutation, and other homologues of genes that have been shown to promote ageing in various model systems, also contribute to cancer by increasing age-dependent genomic instability in both dividing and non-dividing cells. Age-dependent genomic instability involves continually arising DNA changes that alter the normal function of the DNA. The acquisition of oncogenic mutations that cause their constitutive activation might further enhance the rate of additional mutations that are required for tumour growth and metastasis, by decreasing protection, increasing replication- and repair-dependent damage, and inhibiting apoptosis (FIGS 1,2).

We review the role of recently discovered pro-ageing proteins in age-dependent DNA damage, with focus on oncogene homologues. A novel emerging scenario is that during the first round of replication, DNA damage accumulated in non-dividing cells attracts error-prone DNA-repair systems that can transform the damage into mutations and/or gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs) to avoid double-strand breaks (DSBs) or the stalling of the replication fork. In simple organisms, proto-oncogene homologues increase this DNA damage, whereas in mice they increase cancer incidence. It will be important to understand the role of DNA damage in non-dividing cells compared with DNA damage that is generated during cell growth and replication, and to identify the mechanisms that link pro-ageing pathways and cancer.

Genomic instability

How could IGF-I, Ras and AKT/PKB promote genome instability? It is possible that these proteins promote genome instability through their well-established role in regulating mitotic activity, which in turn might increase mutations that occur because of errors during replication across a site of unrepaired damage¹⁰ (FIGS 1,2). Dampening these pathways would almost certainly decrease cancer incidence by reducing the frequency of spontaneous mutagenesis, and it would probably decrease the incidence

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 9 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 903

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PERSPECTIVES

Box 1 | The insulin and IGF-I pathway from yeast to mammals

Genes that encode insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)-like receptors (IGF-IRs), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), AKT/protein kinase B (PKB), S6 kinase (S6K) or Ras were the first to be shown to promote ageing in nematodes and/or *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*⁴⁻⁹. In yeast and worms, homologues of the protein kinases AKT/PKB and S6K promote both growth and ageing and are among the key regulators of the entry into a stress resistant, anti-ageing mode⁴,⁶⁸⁻⁷⁰ (see figure, part a). The small GTPase Ras also promotes cell division and ageing in yeast²⁶,⁷¹,⁷², although it is not clear whether it modifies longevity in higher eukaryotes (see figure, part a). In *Caenorhabditis elegans*, dampening IGF-I-like (DAF-2) signalling confers its longevity-promoting effects through the inactivation of AKT/ PKB and serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase-1 (SGK-1) and the activation of a forkhead/winged helix transcription factor DAF-16 (REFS 73,74) (see figure, part a). DAF-16 affects the activities of genes that are involved in many processes, including metabolism, stress response and antimicrobial action. Mitochondrial superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2) and oxidative stress resistance are regulated by the DAF-2–DAF-16 pathway and are thought to have an important role in mediating lifespan extension⁷⁵. Analogously, chronological lifespan extension in yeast cells that lack RAS2 requires the stress resistance transcription factors Msn2 and Msn4 (REF. 4), and lifespan extension in mutants that are deficient in Ras or Sch9 (the yeast homologue of AKT1, AKT2 and SGK1 — although recent results suggest that it is more closely related to S6K⁷⁶) signalling requires the expression of the Ser/Thr kinase Rim15, the stress resistance transcription factor Gis1 and the antioxidant enzyme SOD2 (REFS 26,77,78) (see figure, part a). Notably, to understand the rate of ageing in an organism, lifespan and age-dependent mortality data should be accompanied by data on other factors, such as function and the accumulation of damage⁷⁹. For example, in the short-lived yeast mutants that lack SOD2, DNA mutations are increased and mitochondrial damage causes a loss in the ability to process non-fermentable carbon sources in young mutants¹²,¹³. By contrast, cells overexpressing SODs and mutants that lack RAS2 or SCH9 have a reduced frequency of DNA mutations at most of the ages tested¹⁹,²⁴,²⁶. An obvious trade-off observed in many long-lived mutants is a growth defect (see figure, part b; yeast, fly, and mouse dwarf long-lived mutants are on the right of each image). However, some long-lived mutants, such as yeast that are deficient in Ras2 and some worm *daf-2* mutants, do not have size defects. HSPs, heat-shock proteins; PKA, protein kinase A; PtdIns3P, phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate.

a

| Yeast | Worms | Flies | Mice | Humans |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Ligands** | Glucose | Insulin or IGF-I-like | Insulin or IGF-I-like | Growth hormone | Growth hormone |
| **Receptors** | Gprl | DAF-2 | INR | IGF-I | IGF-I |
| **G proteins** | Ras2 | CHICO | IGF-IR | Ras | RAS2 |
| **Second messengers** | Cyr1 (cAMP) | AGE-1 (PtdIns3P) | PI3K (PtdIns3P) | PI3K (PtdIns3P) | PI3K (PtdIns3P) |
| **Ser/Thr- kinases** | Sch9 PKA | SGK-1, AKT/PKB | AKT/PKB | AKT/PKB | AKT/PKB |
| **Stress-resistance transcription factors** | ↓Msn2, Msn4 | ↓DAF-16 | dFOXO | ? | ? |
| **Stress resistance** | ↓SOD, catalase, HSPs, glycogen accumulation and others? | ↓SOD, catalase, HSPs, fat and glycogen accumulation and others? | ↓SOD, fat accumulation and others? | ↓SOD, catalase, HSPs, fat accumulation and others? | ↓Fat accumulation? |
| **Ageing** | Ageing (growth) | Ageing (growth) | Ageing (growth) | Ageing, diseases (growth) | Unknown (growth) |

b

of other non-cancer ageing phenotypes. However, cell division is required for many processes and the reduction of growth might not be a feasible strategy to prevent cancer. The role of IGF-I, Ras, AKT/PKB and other pro-growth proteins in blocking apoptosis might also contribute to cancer by allowing cells with heavily damaged genomes to persist and undergo irreversible mutations¹⁰. The constitutive activation of pro-apoptotic pathways, however, would also be an unfeasible strategy to prevent the generation of a tumour.

The effect of proto-oncogenes and oncogenes in cell growth and the ability to prevent apoptosis of damaged cells are clearly important for cancer progression. But how do these functions compare to their ability to guide both dividing and non-dividing cells into states with different levels of protection? Although the key genetic (or epigenetic) changes in many cancers are suspected to arise in the dividing cells of older organisms, important genetic changes that are required for cancer might also occur at younger ages and in both dividing and non-dividing cells. This is particularly important because most cells that are not postmitotic also spend most of their life in an arrested state. In mammalian cells, data suggest that large genome rearrangements are as likely to occur in non-dividing cells as in dividing cells¹¹, and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* data are consistent with this idea (see below).

### Age-dependent oxidative DNA damage

In both dividing and non-dividing cells, pro-ageing gene products might increase the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production per cell and decrease resistance to ROS and carcinogens, as shown for Ras2 and Sch9 in *S. cerevisiae*⁴,¹² (BOX 1; FIG. 2). Crude estimates are that over 10²² ROS are produced in the human body per hour. If evenly distributed across the approximately 10¹³ cells of the human body, this would correspond to 10⁹ ROS per cell per hour. ROS can damage any macromolecule, but the only irreplaceable target of ROS is nuclear DNA⁵, which is the key target for cancer.

ROS-dependent DNA damage is likely to be a main mediator of age-dependent mutations and cancer. This conclusion is based on the types of mutations that have been identified in p53 (BOX 2), the high frequency of mutations that have been observed in *S. cerevisiae* mutants that lack superoxide dismutases (SODs)¹²,¹³, and increased DNA damage, mutations and cancer that has been observed in mice with reduced copper–zinc (CuZn)-SOD or manganese (Mn)-SOD¹⁴,¹⁵.

IGF-I and the downstream pathways could decrease protective enzymes that scavenge endogenous ROS and could also reduce cellular protection against chronic exposure to carcinogens. In fact, improved protection against oxidants and mutagens is observed in long-lived yeast, worms and mice² (BOX 1).

Thus, IGF-I, Ras and AKT/PKB might contribute to the initial oncogenic mutations in the genes that encode them by affecting growth and replication, apoptosis, ROS generation and protection and repair systems (BOX 1; FIGS 1,2). The same proteins could then mediate the pro-cancer role of their constitutively active oncogenes by increasing the rate of additional hits that are required for cancer growth and metastasis (FIGS 1,2). In fact, the list of primary common gene mutations in a wide range of tumours includes KRAS, HRAS and the phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN, which causes the activation of the AKT/PKB pathway)¹⁶.

**Error-prone DNA repair and cancer.**

Although remarkably effective, not one of the repair mechanisms for DNA damage is perfect. Therefore, the types of DNA-sequence changes in the genome reflect a given type of DNA damage, multiplied by the inefficiency of repair for that type of damage. The type and relative number of mutations in DNA might best be appreciated by examining the DNA mutations that occur in tumour suppressor genes, such as p53, in human cancers¹⁷ (BOX 2).

It seems that the main DNA-repair pathways are constitutively active and not modulated, except for the pathways that occur naturally during the cell cycle. Therefore, the cycling frequency of a cell is the greatest modulating factor of the ratio of the various types of repair. Evidence for an age-dependent decline in repair has been reported¹⁸, but there is no evidence for a large decline during ageing, and modest declines could simply be a result of a general reduction in mitotic activity. In S. cerevisiae, erroneous recombination has been shown to mediate age-dependent genomic instability in a RecQ helicase-deficient model for accelerated ageing syndromes¹⁹ (see below). The role of these error-prone systems was confirmed in multiple genetic backgrounds, which suggests that erroneous DNA repair has a central role in yeast age-dependent mutations.

One interesting possibility to be explored is whether mammalian pro-ageing pathways that include IGF-I, Ras and AKT/PKB might contribute to genomic instability and cancer by promoting a high level of DNA damage, which could recruit emergency error-prone

Figure 1 | A model for normal and oncogenic IGF-I, Ras and AKT/PKB in promoting DNA mutations. a, b | Traditional model for the role of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) in promoting cancer, based on its ability to promote mutations by increasing growth and protecting damaged cells that can lead to tumours by blocking apoptosis¹⁰. c | Proposed revised role of normal and oncogenic IGF-I, Ras and AKT/protein kinase B (PKB) in promoting DNA mutations in both dividing and non-dividing cells. In this model, higher IGF-I causes the DNA mutations that are required for tumorigenesis to occur earlier and more frequently during ageing. Early oncogenic mutations that cause the constitutive activation of the Ras, AKT/PKB or other related pathways might lock cells in a mode that promotes ageing but also promotes additional mutations and damage that are required for tumorigenesis. d | The first oncogenic mutation might occur at more advanced ages and at a reduced frequency in long-lived organisms with low IGF-I, Ras and AKT/PKB activities. Depending on the nature of the first oncogenic mutation, subsequent mutations and tumorigenesis might also be delayed by low IGF-I. Parts a and b reproduced, with permission, from Nature Reviews Cancer REF. 10 © 2004 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved.

systems to the damage site, such as non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or other erroneous repair systems. This could be caused by the direct activation of such error-prone systems by the pro-ageing pathways or simply by the preferential intervention or requirement for error-prone enzymes in the repair of oxidative or other age-dependent damage to DNA. In agreement with this hypothesis and with the results in S. cerevisiae

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

PERSPECTIVES

Endogenous,  
for example, ROS and  
nuclear enzymes  

Exogenous,  
for example,  
radiation and chemical  
carcinogens  

IGF-I  
Ras and  
AKT/PKB  

Protective  
systems  

DNA damage  

DNA replication and  
processing  

Point mutations, GCRs, insertions,  
deletions and epigenetic changes  

Cancer  

Apoptosis  

Ageing  

Figure 2 | IGF-I signalling, ageing and cancer. Based on the results in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other model organisms, insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and downstream proteins, including Ras, AKT/protein kinase B (PKB), target of rapamycin (TOR), and S6 kinase (S6K), can promote age-dependent oxidative and other forms of DNA damage in both dividing and non-dividing cells, in part by increasing the generation of oxidants and other toxins and also by downregulating stress resistance systems. Damaged DNA in non-dividing cells seems to give rise to point mutations, small insertions or deletions, and gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs) during the first round of replication, possibly by involving error-prone DNA-repair systems that attempt to prevent more severe damage, such as double-strand breaks. ROS, reactive oxygen species.

non-dividing S. cerevisiae during ageing. The prevalence of this type of DNA damage, however, remains at least one order of magnitude lower than that of point mutations¹⁹.

Similar to the mutation-driven outgrowth of cancerous cell lineages in humans and other mammals⁷, cancer-like subpopulations of mutant cells are generated in ageing S. cerevisiae cultures¹²,²³. Such regrowth can be easily detected in liquid cultures because a subpopulation can grow using limited nutrients, whereas normal cells are ageing and dying rapidly¹². The frequency of this regrowth phenotype is greatly reduced in yeast that lack the oncogene homologues SCH9 or RAS2, or in yeast cells that overexpress antioxidant enzymes¹². This suggests that proto-oncogene homologues might control age-dependent regrowth, not only by promoting growth but also by affecting the generation of one or multiple mutations that are necessary for regrowth in unfavourable conditions. The presence of a regrowth advantage mutation is supported by the early regrowth phenotype of cells that have been isolated from regrown populations¹².

The effect of Sch9 on DNA mutations might be due in part to the regulation of either antioxidant defences or to the generation of oxidants (FIG. 2). In S. cerevisiae cells that express oncogene-like, constitutively active RAS2Val¹⁹, the level of oxidants is higher, resistance to oxidants or mutagens is decreased and lifespan is also decreased²⁶,²⁷. Furthermore, mutants that lack RAS2 or SCH9 are highly protected against oxidative damage⁴,²² and the frequency of age-dependent regrowth is doubled in cells that lack cytosolic SOD, but is reduced in cells that overexpress antioxidant enzymes¹². Consistent with this model, a high frequency of nuclear mutations has been observed in ageing yeast cells that lack SOD2 or SOD1 (REFS 12, 13), and SOD1 mutants have one of the highest rates of accumulation of DNA mutations among the ~5,000 yeast deletion mutants tested²⁸. Thus, proto-oncogene homologues seem to contribute to the generation of oxidized DNA bases, such as 8-OHdG, in part by increasing the level of superoxide and in part by reducing antioxidant protection.

A protective effect of the diminished expression of oncogene homologues is also indicated by studies of yeast mutants that contain defects in SGS1, which encodes a RecQ homologue. Similar to observations in cells from human patients with Bloom (BLM) and Werner (WRN) syndromes, which are caused by defects in the BLM and WRN RecQ homologues, yeast sgs1Δ-mutant

a recent study suggests that the oxidized DNA-repair enzyme OGG1 initiates age-dependent CAG trinucleotide expansion in somatic cells²⁰.

DNA modifications, ageing and cancer. In addition to mutations and GCRs, cancer might also involve epigenetic alterations, which include changes in DNA methylation and histone modifications. DNA methylation patterns are mostly maintained from one cell to daughter cells, but these patterns can be modified during ageing. The precise assessment of genetic and epigenetic changes with age is still underway, although there are limited data to indicate that DNA methylation increases with age at some genomic loci²¹.

Genomic instability in yeast Ageing S. cerevisiae cells go through non-dividing phases followed by proliferative phases²². Similar to the situation in mammals¹⁴, the frequency of spontaneous mutations in S. cerevisiae increases with age. In populations of non-dividing cells, the frequency of spontaneous mutations can increase by threefold–fivefold by the time wild-type yeast populations (DBY746 and BY4741 strains) are at a survival level of ~10%¹²,¹³,²³. The deletion of SCH9 postpones this age-dependent increase in spontaneous mutations, whereas the deletion of both SCH9 and the gene encoding the NAD deacetylase Sir2 also reduces these mutations at advanced ages²⁴. In growing yeast cells, most spontaneous mutations are point mutations (65%) or frameshift mutations (25%)²⁵, whereas non-dividing yeast accumulate base substitutions, small insertions and deletions¹⁹. In agreement with the profile of mutations that has been observed in the p53 gene from human cancers¹⁷ (BOX 2), 50% of 7-day-old yeast with a mutation in the CAN1 gene, which encodes an Arg permease, had either a G–T or C–T base substitution¹⁹. The frequency of GCRs also increases rapidly in

906 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOLUME 9

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

Box 2 | The range of p53 mutations in cancer

Although the range of p53 mutations in cancer can vary substantially according to the tissue site, some trends can be noted<sup>80</sup>. Approximately 40% of the mutations are C–T substitutions, which can occur because of failed repair at sites in which 5-methyl cytosine (5MeC) has deaminated to T or in which C has deaminated to U. Oxidation-dependent deamination is one of the main causes of C–T transitions. Another important change is the G–T mutation, which can represent 10–50% of p53 mutations (depending on the type of cancer) and is probably due to failed repair at 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) sites (8-oxo-dG sites arise when a dG site is oxidized). Transitions and some additional transversions of various causes are also observed. A smaller number of mutations (<10%) are 1 nucleotide deletions or insertions in runs of any given nucleotide that are probably due to replication slippage. Another smaller group of mutations (<10%) are larger deletions that might be due to double-strand breaks (DSBs) that are repaired by the error-prone non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway. Among the last group, DSBs might arise directly (owing to ionizing radiation or reactive oxygen species (ROS)) or arise when a replication fork encounters a nick; nicks can be caused by ROS, incomplete sites of excision repair and ionizing radiation. A remarkably similar profile is observed in ageing Saccharomyces cerevisiae in which G–T and C–T substitutions are the two main types of age-dependent mutations, followed by small insertions or deletions and by less frequent gross chromosomal rearrangements<sup>19</sup>.

cells showed premature ageing, a large age-dependent increase in DNA mutations and GCRs, and elevated age-dependent regrowth<sup>19,29</sup>. In old cells that lack Sgs1, the frequency of GCRs was more than 100-fold higher than that generated during the initial population expansion<sup>19</sup>. Therefore, the few Sgs1-deficient cells that survived to old age were 100 times more likely to contain extensive chromosomal damage than young cells. Remarkably, virtually all of the defects observed in Sgs1-deficient cells were reversed by the lifespan extension mutation in SCH9 (REF. 19), but usually not by calorie restriction, which extends lifespan in many organisms<sup>30</sup>.

The characterization of the genes that become mutated in sgs1Δ mutants, and the large increase in homologous and homeologous (erroneous) recombination, suggest that much of the age-dependent damage in this BLM and WRN model is caused by errors made during sister chromatid recombination. The almost complete reversal of both the frequency of homologous and homeologous recombination in sch9Δ;sgs1Δ double mutants are consistent with a role for the oncogene homologue SCH9 in promoting DNA damage and promoting recombination errors that lead to age-dependent GCRs<sup>19</sup>. The inability of multiple rounds of division to increase further DNA mutations and GCRs after the ageing cells have exited G0 in sgs1Δ mutants suggests that the initial age-dependent DNA damage occurs in non-dividing cells, but the damage becomes a mutation or GCR during the first round of replication<sup>19</sup>.

A connection between oncogenes and genomic instability was also shown in mammalian cells. Di Micco et al<sup>31</sup>. showed that the activation of Ras augments the number of active replicons and alters DNA

replication-fork progression. Others showed that this Ras-dependent genomic instability occurs after G1-arrested cells undergo the first round of replication<sup>32</sup>. These studies agree with those in S. cerevisiae that suggest that oncogene-dependent DNA damage can occur in part independently of their effect on cell division, although it seems to require at least one round of replication.

In summary, the yeast Ras and Sch9 pathways can regulate resistance to mutagens and oxidative and other types of DNA damage that, together with the involvement of error-prone DNA repair systems, can generate age-dependent mutations and a cancer-like regrowth phenotype in ageing cells.

From worms and flies to mice

Oncogenes in worms and flies. Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster can also serve as model organisms to study cancer. In gld-1 C. elegans mutants, germ cells can overproliferate and form tumours<sup>33</sup>. As with mammalian cancer cells, gld-1-mutant germ cells grow independently of growth factors and are resistant to apoptosis. Longevity extension mutations in the IGF-I-receptor-like daf-2 gene were found to protect against tumours in gld-1 mutants, by reducing germ-cell number and stimulating apoptosis by a mechanism that requires daf-16 (FOXO in mammals) and the cep-1 (p53 in mammals) genes<sup>33</sup>. A number of the genes that are regulated by DAF-16 and are involved in both tumour growth and lifespan regulation are orthologues of mammalian oncogenes and tumour suppressors<sup>34</sup>.

In D. melanogaster, mutations that decrease the activity of the insulin receptor, which has been implicated in lifespan regulation<sup>35,36</sup>, also delay the growth of germline cysts by a cell autonomous mechanism<sup>37</sup>.

Furthermore, in D. melanogaster the DAF-16 orthologue FOXO, which is implicated in lifespan extension, blocks the stimulatory effect of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and AKT/PKB on cell size and number<sup>38</sup>, and constitutive activation of Ras by the oncogenic RAS<sup>Va112</sup> mutation induces benign tumours in the developing eye<sup>39</sup>. The activation of both Ras and JNK in flies promotes tumour growth and metastatic behaviour by switching the role of JNK from pro-apoptotic to anti-apoptotic<sup>39</sup>. Thus, downregulation of the IGF-I or insulin–AKT/PKB pathway and subsequent activation of FOXO transcription factors in worms and flies extends the lifespan but also blocks uncontrolled cell growth.

It will be important to determine whether part of the effects of these signal transduction genes on genomic instability is due to oxidative damage and/or the activation of error-prone DNA repair systems, as observed in S. cerevisiae.

GH, IGF-I, ageing and cancer in mice. Both an insulin and IGF-I pathway are present in most mammalian cells. These pathways have overlapping functions, with insulin mainly controlling metabolism and the growth hormone (GH) and IGF-I (hereafter referred to as GH/IGF-I) pathway that is involved in growth, development and longevity. In mice, mutations in the Prop1 or Pit1 genes, which prevent normal pituitary development and cause a large decrease in GH, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin, extend lifespan by 25–65% compared with that of the wild type. Mutations in Prop1 and Pit1 also cause dwarfism<sup>40,41</sup>. The GH and IGF-I deficiencies in these dwarf mice seem to mediate the effects of Prop1 and Pit1 mutations on longevity, because mice that cannot release GH in response to GH-releasing hormone also live longer<sup>42</sup>. Dwarf mice with high plasma GH, but a 90% lower IGF-I concentration (as seen in GH receptor/binding protein (BP)-null mice) and heterozygous IGF-I-receptor knockout mice live longer than the wild-type controls<sup>43,44</sup>.

Although null or dampening mutations in the Ras genes have not been implicated in lifespan extension in mammals, ablation of p66Shc adaptor protein, which might be implicated in the transmission of mitogenic signals to Ras, increases resistance to oxidative stress and extends the lifespan in mice<sup>45</sup>. Furthermore, KRAS4A isoform promotes apoptosis in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and epithelial cells that have been treated with apoptotic stimuli. However, no effect on cancer or lifespan was observed in mice that lack the KRAS4A<sup>46</sup>.

PERSPECTIVES

Table 1 | Tumour incidence in dwarf and control mice*

| Cause of death                  | Number of cases |
|---------------------------------|-----------------|
|                                 | Dwarf mice      | Control mice    |
| Fibrosarcoma                    | 2               | 1               |
| Haemangiosarcoma                | 6               | 9               |
| Histiocytic sarcoma             | 3               | 3               |
| Lymphoma                        | 2               | 9               |
| Mammary adenocarcinoma          | 1               | 8               |
| Other neoplastic tumours        | 4               | 9               |
| Other non-malignant tumours     | 6               | 3               |
| Unknown causes of death         | 21              | 3               |
| Total number of mice            | 45              | 45              |
| Death from tumours              | 40%             | 87%             |

*Growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)-deficient dwarf mice are long lived and have reduced lifetime tumour incidence⁴⁸. Data taken from REF. 48.

Dampening insulin or IGF-I signalling in mice not only increases their lifespan, but also delays or reduces ageing-related pathologies, particularly spontaneous tumours⁴⁷,⁴⁸ (TABLE 1). The reduction of ageing-related pathologies is consistent with the role of IGF-I in promoting growth, which is likely to be one of the drivers of cancer progression¹⁰. The mechanism behind the increased survival and lower tumour incidence that is associated with low IGF-I signals might involve an increased resistance to oxidative damage and mutagenesis, as shown in S. cerevisiae (see above) and other model systems that have defects in the insulin or IGF-I-like pathways². Indeed, dermal fibroblasts from long-lived adult Ames or Snell dwarf mice, and GH-receptor-knockout mice, are resistant to various toxic agents and mutagens *in vitro*, such as hydrogen peroxide and ultraviolet light⁴⁹. Moreover, hepatocytes from Ames dwarf mice more readily undergo apoptosis than wild-type cells following oxidative stress⁵⁰, and IGF-I reverses the beneficial effects of calorie restriction against a bladder carcinogen⁵¹. Therefore, cells that are exposed to reduced levels of IGF-I seem to be better protected against carcinogens and to be more efficient in eliminating damaged cells by apoptosis. Notably, both the level of IGF-I and the apoptotic response to genotoxic agents decline with age⁵².

A possibility to consider is that normal levels of GH and IGF-I might contribute to cancer by increasing spontaneous genomic instability, through a Ras- or AKT/PKB-dependent mechanism that is partly dependent and partly independent of cell division, as shown in yeast (see above). If the normal level of these proto-oncogenes promotes DNA damage, their hyperactivation by oncogenic mutations might greatly accelerate this ‘genomic destabilization’ process. This process could involve the well-established effect on growth and apoptosis by proto-oncogenes and also the regulation of antioxidant enzymes and error-prone DNA-repair systems, as observed in S. cerevisiae. This possibility is supported by observations that *Pten* inactivation in the mouse prostate, which causes constitutive activation of Akt/Pkb, triggers invasive prostate cancer, whereas *p53* mutations alone do not. However, *p53* mutations render the cancer lethal when combined with *Pten* mutations⁵³. *Pten* inactivation is associated with 70% of primary prostate tumours and with many other tumours, and therefore it is possible that Akt/Pkb or Ras activation promote mutations in *p53* by stimulating hyper-replication and by causing an increase in DNA damage and mutations independently of growth.

p44 on cellular senescence — replication-dependent entry into a non-dividing state — might be explained by a role of unrestrained IGF-I signals in activating cell-cycle arrest and replicative senescence through Ras and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21. This occurs in a manner that is analogous to oncogene-induced cellular senescence⁵⁶.

Decreased IGF-I signalling has been observed in several mouse models that show premature ageing owing to defects in genes that are involved in genome maintenance. For example, mice containing defects in the *Xpd* or *Erccl* genes, which are both involved in nucleotide excision repair, show multiple signs of premature ageing and reduced IGF-I signalling⁵⁷,⁵⁸. The same is true for mice with a defect in the NAD-dependent histone deacetylase gene, *Sirt6* (*Sirt6* is a survival factor that is possibly involved in base-excision repair⁵⁹). The attenuation of IGF-I signalling in these mice might reflect a compensatory mechanism to limit the onslaught of spontaneous DNA damage by re-allocating resources from growth towards protective maintenance⁶⁰,⁶¹. Indeed, reducing IGF-I signalling might be a general mechanism to cope with increased stress, including genotoxic stress, which is similar to the mechanism that underlies increased lifespan as a consequence of dampening IGF-I signalling in nematodes, flies or mice.

GH/IGF-I and human cancer

An important question is whether modulation of the GH/IGF-I pathway can be instrumental in alleviating the burden of disease that is associated with old age in humans. Based on a systematic review of population studies, Renehan *et al.*⁶² concluded that IGF-I level is related to the risk of several cancers, although associations were described to be modest. In a recent study, heterozygous mutations in the IGF-I receptor gene were shown to be overrepresented in centenarians, relative to controls that are associated with high serum IGF-I levels and reduced activity of the IGF-I receptor⁶³. These results indicate that genetic alterations in the human IGF-I receptor can protect against ageing and diseases, including cancer. A high level of IGF-I, which is released by human GH and stimulates growth throughout fetal and childhood development, is associated with an increased risk of colorectal, breast and prostate cancer in men and women who are older than 40 (REF. 10). Furthermore, an increased incidence of tumours is observed in patients with acromegaly, who have elevated IGF-I¹⁰.

IGF-I in models of premature ageing.

*p53* negatively regulates IGF-I signalling directly or through PTEN⁵⁴. Transgenic mice that overexpress p44, a p53 isoform that lacks an N-terminal region, show features of premature ageing⁵⁵. In these mice, plasma IGF-I levels and IGF-I receptor levels in mitotically active tissues were found to be higher than in control mice. Overexpressed p44 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts was found to stimulate transcription of the IGF-I receptor and in general to enhance IGF-I signalling. Maier *et al.*⁵⁵ postulated that overexpression of p44 compromises the ability of p53 to restrain IGF-I signalling (owing to the absence of the N terminus). The effects of

These results have raised concern about the use of exogenous GH to counter the natural decline in GH and the decrease of IGF-I with age. In fact, GH replacement trials in elderly individuals, in which GH increases the serum concentration of IGF-I, have not proven effective, might be harmful and might lead to an increased incidence of cancer. Although there is evidence that GH injections correct several defects that arise in the elderly, such as a reduction in muscle mass and a decrease in adipose tissue, these benefits are observed after short-term treatment and in patients with low plasma GH<sup>64</sup>.

### Conclusions and future perspectives

A therapy aimed at reducing GH and IGF-I to prevent cancer is not straightforward because GH and/or IGF-I deficiencies are associated with dwarfism, increased obesity and heart disease<sup>65</sup>. Among patients with Laron syndrome, in which base substitutions in the GH receptor gene cause low or no receptor activity, there are some that reach a normal and possibly longer lifespan<sup>66</sup>, which suggests that there are mutations or lifestyle changes that can overcome heart diseases in these subjects. To determine whether GH and/or IGF-I deficiencies reduce cancer risk we must await properly controlled studies of patients with Laron syndrome or similar populations. Such studies might also provide important clues as to the mechanisms that are responsible for the side effects and how to prevent them.

Notably, calorie restriction or reduced calorie intake are associated with reduced cancer incidence and reduced development of other diseases in humans and non-human primates<sup>67</sup>, which suggests that pharmacological mimicking of calorie restriction might reduce cancer incidence without major side effects. Therefore, an increased understanding of the mechanisms that connect the GH/IGF-I–Ras–AKT/PKB pathway to DNA damage, ageing and cancer might eventually produce novel, optimal modes of intervention that are designed to decrease age-dependent genomic instability and cancer while avoiding undesirable side effects.

Valter D. Longo and Michael R. Lieber are at the Andrus Gerontology Center, the Molecular and Computational Biology Department and the Norris Cancer Center, University of Southern California, 3715 McClintock Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90089-0191, USA.

Jan Vijg is at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Genetics, 1301 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Correspondence to V.D.L.  
e-mail: vlongo@usc.edu  
doi:10.1038/nrm2526

1. Kirkwood, T. B. Understanding the odd science of aging. *Cell* **120**, 437–447 (2005).
2. Longo, V. D. & Finch, C. E. Evolutionary medicine: from dwarf model systems to healthy centenarians? *Science* **299**, 1342–1346 (2003).
3. Kenyon, C. The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants. *Cell* **120**, 449–460 (2005).
4. Fabrizio, P., Pozza, F., Pletcher, S. D., Gendron, C. M. & Longo, V. D. Regulation of longevity and stress resistance by Sch9 in yeast. *Science* **292**, 288–290 (2001).
5. Lieber, M. R. & Karanjawala, Z. E. Ageing, repetitive genomes and DNA damage. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **5**, 69–75 (2004).
6. Hasty, P., Campisi, J., Hoeijmakers, J., van Steeg, H. & Vijg, J. Aging and genome maintenance: lessons from the mouse? *Science* **299**, 1355–1359 (2003).
7. Vijg, J. *Aging of the Genome*. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007).
8. Rodriguez-Viciana, P. *et al.* Cancer targets in the Ras pathway. *Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol.* **70**, 461–467 (2005).
9. Toker, A. & Yoeli-Lerner, M. Akt signaling and cancer: surviving but not moving on. *Cancer Res.* **66**, 3963–3966 (2006).
10. Pollak, M. N., Schernhammer, E. S. & Hankinson, S. E. Insulin-like growth factors and neoplasia. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **4**, 505–518 (2004).
11. Busuttil, R. A. *et al.* Intra-organ variation in age-related mutation accumulation in the mouse. *PLoS ONE* **2**, e876 (2007).
12. Fabrizio, P. *et al.* Superoxide is a mediator of an altruistic aging program in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *J. Cell Biol.* **166**, 1055–1067 (2004).
13. Longo, V. D., Liou, L. L., Valentine, J. S. & Gralla, E. B. Mitochondrial superoxide decreases yeast survival in stationary phase. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **365**, 131–142 (1999).
14. Busuttil, R. A. *et al.* Organ specific increase in mutation accumulation and apoptosis rate in CuZn-superoxide dismutase-deficient mice. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 11271–11275 (2005).
15. Van Remmen, H. *et al.* Life-long reduction in MnSOD activity results in increased DNA damage and higher incidence of cancer but does not accelerate aging. *Physiol. Genomics* **16**, 29–37 (2003).
16. Futreal, P. A. *et al.* A census of human cancer genes. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **4**, 177–183 (2004).
17. Greenblatt, M. S., Bennett, W. P., Hollstein, M. & Harris, C. C. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. *Cancer Res.* **54**, 4855–4878 (1994).
18. Imam, S. Z., Karahalil, B., Hogue, B. A., Souza-Pinto, N. C. & Bohr, V. A. Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA-repair capacity of various brain regions in mouse is altered in an age-dependent manner. *Neurobiol. Aging* **27**, 1129–1136 (2006).
19. Madia, F. *et al.* Longevity mutation in SCH9 prevents recombination errors and premature genomic instability in a Werner/Bloom model system. *J. Cell Biol.* **180**, 67–81 (2008).
20. Kovtun, I. V. *et al.* OGG1 initiates age-dependent CAG trinucleotide expansion in somatic cells. *Nature* **447**, 447–452 (2007).
21. Issa, J. P. Aging, DNA methylation and cancer. *Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol.* **32**, 31–43 (1999).
22. Fabrizio, P. & Longo, V. D. The chronological life span of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Aging Cell* **2**, 73–81 (2003).
23. Madia, F., Gattazzo, C., Fabrizio, P. & Longo, V. D. A simple model system for age-dependent DNA damage and cancer. *Mech. Ageing Dev.* **128**, 45–49 (2007).
24. Fabrizio, P. *et al.* Sir2 blocks extreme life-span extension. *Cell* **123**, 655–667 (2005).
25. Chen, C., Umezu, K. & Kolodner, R. D. Chromosomal rearrangements occur in *S. cerevisiae rfa1* mutator mutants due to mutagenic lesions processed by double-strand-break repair. *Mol. Cell* **2**, 9–22 (1998).
26. Fabrizio, P. *et al.* SOD2 functions downstream of Sch9 to extend longevity in yeast. *Genetics* **163**, 35–46 (2003).
27. Hlavata, L., Aguilaniu, H., Pichova, A. & Nyström, T. The oncogenic *RAS2<sup>val19</sup>* mutation locks respiration, independently of PKA, in a mode prone to generate ROS. *EMBO J.* **22**, 3337–3345 (2003).
28. Huang, M. E., Rio, A. G., Nicolas, A. & Kolodner, R. D. A genomewide screen in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* for genes that suppress the accumulation of mutations. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 11529–11534 (2003).

29. Sinclair, D. A., Mills, K. & Guarente, L. Accelerated aging and nuclear fragmentation in yeast sgs1 mutants. *Science* **277**, 1313–1316 (1997).
30. Weindruch, R. & Walford, R. *The Retardation of Aging and Disease by Dietary Restriction* (Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois, 1988).
31. Di Micco, R. *et al.* Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyperreplication. *Nature* **444**, 638–642 (2006).
32. Denko, N. C., Giaccia, A. J., Stringer, J. R. & Stambrook, P. J. The human Ha-ras oncogene induces genomic instability in murine fibroblasts within one cell cycle. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 5124–5128 (1994).
33. Pinkston, J. M., Garigan, D., Hansen, M. & Kenyon, C. Mutations that increase the life span of *C. elegans* inhibit tumor growth. *Science* **313**, 971–975 (2006).
34. Pinkston-Gosse, J. & Kenyon, C. DAF-16/FOXO targets genes that regulate tumor growth in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Nature Genet.* **39**, 1403–1409 (2007).
35. Clancy, D. J. *et al.* Extension of life-span by loss of CHICO, a *Drosophila* insulin receptor substrate protein. *Science* **292**, 104–106 (2001).
36. Tatar, M. *et al.* A mutant *Drosophila* insulin receptor homolog that extends life-span and impairs neuroendocrine function. *Science* **292**, 107–110 (2001).
37. LaFever, L. & Drummond-Barbosa, D. Direct control of germline stem cell division and cyst growth by neural insulin in *Drosophila*. *Science* **309**, 1071–1073 (2005).
38. Kramer, J. M., Davidge, J. T., Lockyer, J. M. & Staveley, B. E. Expression of *Drosophila* FOXO regulates growth and can phenocopy starvation. *BMC Dev. Biol.* **3**, 5 (2003).
39. Igaki, T., Pagliarini, R. A. & Xu, T. Loss of cell polarity drives tumor growth and invasion through JNK activation in *Drosophila*. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 1139–1146 (2006).
40. Brown-Borg, H. M., Borg, K. E., Meliska, C. J. & Bartke, A. Dwarf mice and the ageing process. *Nature* **384**, 33 (1996).
41. Flurkey, K., Papaconstantinou, J. & Harrison, D. E. The Snell dwarf mutation *Pit1<sup>dw</sup>* can increase life span in mice. *Mech. Ageing Dev.* **123**, 121–130 (2002).
42. Flurkey, K., Papaconstantinou, J., Miller, R. A. & Harrison, D. E. Lifespan extension and delayed immune and collagen aging in mutant mice with defects in growth hormone production. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 6736–6741 (2001).
43. Coschigano, K. T., Clemmons, D., Bellush, L. L. & Kopchick, J. J. Assessment of growth parameters and life span of GHR/BP gene-disrupted mice. *Endocrinology* **141**, 2608–2613 (2000).
44. Holzenberger, M. *et al.* IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice. *Nature* **421**, 182–187 (2003).
45. Migliaccio, E. *et al.* The p66shc adaptor protein controls oxidative stress response and life span in mammals. *Nature* **402**, 309–313 (1999).
46. Plowman, S. J. *et al.* The K-Ras 4A isoform promotes apoptosis but does not affect either lifespan or spontaneous tumor incidence in aging mice. *Exp. Cell Res.* **312**, 16–26 (2006).
47. Ikeno, Y., Bronson, R. T., Hubbard, G. B., Lee, S. & Bartke, A. Delayed occurrence of fatal neoplastic diseases in ames dwarf mice: correlation to extended longevity. *J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci.* **58**, 291–296 (2003).
48. Vergara, M., Smith-Wheelock, M., Harper, J. M., Sigler, R. & Miller, R. A. Hormone-treated Snell dwarf mice regain fertility but remain long lived and disease resistant. *J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci.* **59**, 1244–1250 (2004).
49. Salmon, A. B. *et al.* Fibroblast cell lines from young adult mice of long-lived mutant strains are resistant to multiple forms of stress. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* **289**, E23–E29 (2005).
50. Kennedy, M. A., Rakoczy, S. G. & Brown-Borg, H. M. Long-living Ames dwarf mouse hepatocytes readily undergo apoptosis. *Exp. Gerontol.* **38**, 997–1008 (2003).
51. Dunn, S. E. *et al.* Dietary restriction reduces insulin-like growth factor I levels, which modulates apoptosis, cell proliferation, and tumor progression in p53-deficient mice. *Cancer Res.* **57**, 4667–4672 (1997).
52. Suh, Y. *et al.* Aging alters the apoptotic response to genotoxic stress. *Nature Med.* **8**, 3–4 (2002).
53. Chen, Z. *et al.* Crucial role of p53-dependent cellular senescence in suppression of *Pten*-deficient tumorigenesis. *Nature* **436**, 725–730 (2005).

PERSPECTIVES

54. Levine, A. J., Feng, Z., Mak, T. W., You, H. & Jin, S. Coordination and communication between the p53 and IGF-1–AKT–TOR signal transduction pathways. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 267–275 (2006).

55. Maier, B. *et al.* Modulation of mammalian life span by the short isoform of p53. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 306–319 (2004).

56. Serrano, M., Lin, A. W., McCurrach, M. E., Beach, D. & Lowe, S. W. Oncogenic *ras* provokes premature cell senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. *Cell* **88**, 593–602 (1997).

57. Niedernhofer, L. J. *et al.* A new progeroid syndrome reveals that genotoxic stress suppresses the somatotroph axis. *Nature* **444**, 1038–1043 (2006).

58. Wijnhoven, S. W. *et al.* Accelerated aging pathology in ad libitum fed *Xpd<sup>TID</sup>* mice is accompanied by features suggestive of caloric restriction. *DNA Repair (Amst.)* **4**, 1314–1324 (2005).

59. Mostoslavsky, R. *et al.* Genomic instability and aging-like phenotype in the absence of mammalian SIRT6. *Cell* **124**, 315–329 (2006).

60. Vijg, J. & Suh, Y. Ageing: chromatin unbound. *Nature* **440**, 874–875 (2006).

61. Pluijm, S. M. *et al.* Unhealthy lifestyles during the life course: association with physical decline in late life. *Aging Clin. Exp. Res.* **19**, 75–83 (2007).

62. Renehan, A. G. *et al.* Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, IGF binding protein-3, and cancer risk: systematic review and meta-regression analysis. *Lancet* **363**, 1346–1353 (2004).

63. Suh, Y. *et al.* Functionally significant insulin-like growth factor I receptor mutations in centenarians. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 3438–3442 (2008).

64. Rudman, D. *et al.* Effects of human growth hormone in men over 60 years old. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **323**, 1–6 (1990).

65. Laughlin, G. A., Barrett-Connor, E., Criqui, M. H. & Kritz-Silverstein, D. The prospective association of serum insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-1 levels with all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality in older adults: the Rancho Bernardo Study. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **89**, 114–120 (2004).

66. Krzisnik C., K. Z., Battelino T., Brown M., Parks J. S. & Laron Z. The “little people” of the island of Krk — revisited. Etiology of hypopituitarism revealed. *J. Endocr. Genet.* **1**, 9–19 (1999).

67. Hursting, S. D., Lavigne, J. A., Berrigan, D., Perkins, S. N. & Barrett, J. C. Calorie restriction, aging, and cancer prevention: mechanisms of action and applicability to humans. *Annu. Rev. Med.* **54**, 131–152 (2003).

68. Hertweck, M., Gobel, C. & Baumeister, R. C. *elegans* SGK-1 is the critical component in the Akt/PKB kinase complex to control stress response and life span. *Dev. Cell* **6**, 577–588 (2004).

69. Paradis, S. & Ruvkun, G. *Caenorhabditis elegans* Akt/PKB transduces insulin receptor-like signals from AGE-1 PI3 kinase to the DAF-16 transcription factor. *Genes Dev.* **12**, 2488–2498 (1998).

70. Kaeberlein, M. *et al.* Regulation of yeast replicative life span by TOR and Sch9 in response to nutrients. *Science* **310**, 1193–1196 (2005).

71. Lin, S. J., Defossez, P. A. & Guarente, L. Requirement of NAD and *SIR2* for life-span extension by calorie restriction in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Science* **289**, 2126–2128 (2000).

72. Longo, V. *The chronological life span of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Studies of superoxide dismutase, Ras and Bcl-2.* Thesis, Univ. California Los Angeles (1997).

73. Ogg, S. *et al.* The Fork head transcription factor DAF-16 transduces insulin-like metabolic and longevity signals in *C. elegans*. *Nature* **389**, 994–999 (1997).

74. Lin, K., Dorman, J. B., Rodan, A. & Kenyon, C. *daf-16*: An HNF-3/forkhead family member that can function to double the life-span of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Science* **278**, 1319–1322 (1997).

75. Honda, Y. & Honda, S. The *daf-2* gene network for longevity regulates oxidative stress resistance and Mn-superoxide dismutase gene expression in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *FASEB J.* **13**, 1385–1393 (1999).

76. Urban, J. *et al.* Sch9 is a major target of TORC1 in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Mol. Cell* **26**, 663–674 (2007).

77. Longo, V. D., Gralla, E. B. & Valentine, J. S. Superoxide dismutase activity is essential for stationary phase survival in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Mitochondrial production of toxic oxygen species *in vivo*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 12275–12280 (1996).


78. Wei, M. *et al.* Life span extension by calorie restriction depends on Rim15 and transcription factors downstream of Ras/PKA, Tor, and Sch9. *PLoS Genet.* **4**, e13 (2008).

79. Partridge, L. & Gems, D. Benchmarks for ageing studies. *Nature* **450**, 165–167 (2007).

80. Pfeifer, GP. p53 mutational spectra and the role of methylated CpG sequences. *Mutat. Res.* **450**, 155–166 (2000).

**Acknowledgements**

Related work in the laboratory of V.D.L. has been supported by an American Federation for Aging Research (AFAR) grant, by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant AG20642 and AG025135, and by a Norris Cancer Center pilot grant. Related work has been supported by AG17242, AG20438, ES11044 and Ellison grant AG-SS-1496-05 in the laboratory of J.V. and by NIH grant CA100504 in the laboratory of M.R.L.


**DATABASES**

Entrez Gene: [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene)

HRAS | KRAS | PTEN

OMIM: [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM)

Bloom | Laron | Werner

UniProtKB: [http://www.uniprot.org](http://www.uniprot.org)

AKT | IGF-I | Ras


**FURTHER INFORMATION**

Valter D. Longo’s homepage: [http://www.usc.edu/programs/pibbs/site/faculty/longo_v.htm](http://www.usc.edu/programs/pibbs/site/faculty/longo_v.htm)

Michael R. Lieber’s homepage: [http://www.usc.edu/programs/pibbs/site/faculty/lieber_m.htm](http://www.usc.edu/programs/pibbs/site/faculty/lieber_m.htm)

Jan Vijg’s homepage: [http://www.aecom.yu.edu/home/faculty/profile.asp?id=11318](http://www.aecom.yu.edu/home/faculty/profile.asp?id=11318)

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF


**OPINION**

## Cyclin-dependent kinases and cell-cycle transitions: does one fit all?

Helfrid Hohegger, Shunichi Takeda and Tim Hunt

Abstract | Cell-cycle transitions in higher eukaryotes are regulated by different cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and their activating cyclin subunits. Based on pioneering findings that a dominant-negative mutation of CDK1 blocks the cell cycle at G2–M phase, whereas dominant-negative CDK2 inhibits the transition into S phase, a model of cell-cycle control has emerged in which each transition is regulated by a specific subset of CDKs and cyclins. Recent work with gene-targeted mice has led to a revision of this model. We discuss cell-cycle control in light of overlapping and essential functions of the different CDKs and cyclins.

The cell-division cycle of eukaryotic cells is conventionally divided into four phases and requires three switch-like transitions at the onset of S phase and at entry and exit of mitosis (FIG. 1a). At the heart of these switches are the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) — heterodimeric enzymes with a protein kinase subunit and a cyclin subunit that are regulated by various chemical changes<sup>1</sup>. In most cases, the concentration of the kinase subunit is relatively constant, whereas the concentration of the cyclin subunit oscillates. The kinase is completely inactive without its cyclin partner, but in addition to the binding of cyclin, activation of the holoenzyme requires the phosphorylation of a key residue in the activation loop of the kinase subunit (for example, Thr160 in CDK2)<sup>2</sup>. The active enzymes can be turned off in various ways. For example, the cyclin subunits can be degraded by highly specific ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis<sup>3</sup>, the holoenzyme might associate with a tight-binding inhibitor protein, or the holoenzyme can be subject to inhibitory phosphorylations, such as of Tyr15 and Thr14 in CDK1 (REF. 4).

As if the variety of activating and inactivating modifications did not already introduce a rich and complex way of modulating CDK activity, members of the CDK and cyclin families have mostly interchangeable binding surfaces that allow many different cyclin–CDK combinations to form in cells (FIG. 1b). Once formed, however, cyclin–CDK dimers are stable, with dissociation half-lives in the order of hours rather than seconds in the case of cyclin A–CDK1 and cyclin B–CDK1 (REF. 5) (other dimers have not been tested as far as we know).

According to the classical view (FIG. 1c), cyclin E–CDK2 is required to initiate S phase; cyclin A, together with CDK1 or CDK2, is then responsible for the continuation of S phase and for entry into mitosis; and the B-type cyclins, together with CDK1, catalyse entry into mitosis<sup>6</sup>. What was the basis for this view, which we now think is in need of revision? Evidence at the time was convincing: expression of kinase-dead CDK mutants in human cells caused G1 arrest in the case of CDK2, and G2 arrest in the case of CDK1 (REF. 7). Antibody injection and antisense
