
REVIEW

Crosstalk between small GTPases and polarity proteins in cell polarization

**Sandra Iden and John G. Collard**

Abstract | Cell polarization is crucial for the development of multicellular organisms, and aberrant cell polarization contributes to various diseases, including cancer. How cell polarity is established and how it is maintained remain fascinating questions. Conserved proteins of the partitioning defective (PAR), Scribble and Crumbs complexes guide the establishment of cell polarity in various organisms. Moreover, GTPases that regulate actin cytoskeletal dynamics have been implicated in cell polarization. Recent findings provide insights into polarization mechanisms and show intriguing crosstalk between small GTPases and members of polarity complexes in regulating cell polarization in different cellular contexts and cell types.

---

**GTPase effector**  
A protein that directly binds to the GTPase in a GTP-dependent manner, and mediates downstream signalling.

**Epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT)**  
A developmental programme, during which epithelial cells adopt a mesenchymal phenotype that is marked by the loss of intercellular adhesion and by increased cell migration. During EMT, epithelial marker proteins, such as E-cadherin, are downregulated, whereas mesenchymal markers, including vimentin, are upregulated.

Higher organisms are composed of different cell types, each with specific functions that often require the acquisition of particular cell shapes. For example, a neuron is involved in a complex signalling network with hundreds of connections to other cells. For the efficient transmission of neuronal signals to peripheral regions of the body it is advantageous to develop long axons. By contrast, the main function of epithelial cells is to establish a barrier that protects the body from its environment. For this, the formation of tightly packed cell sheets, which allow only limited and regulated transport of molecules, is of highest priority. Epithelial cells are therefore usually of compact shape and contain specialized cell junctions. Thus, depending on their function, cells optimize their morphology through the activation of specific cellular signalling programmes that lead to cellular asymmetry, which is also termed cell polarity.

Cell polarization is achieved by the concerted actions of polarity proteins. These molecules are conserved throughout evolution and can react to extrinsic or intrinsic polarity cues (for example, growth factor gradients or the microtubule cytoskeleton, respectively). By assembling multiprotein complexes, they induce downstream signalling to trigger the establishment of cellular asymmetry. Of the three described polarity protein complexes — partitioning defective (PAR), Crumbs and Scribble (BOX 1) — the PAR complex has the broadest function. In some polarization processes, these complexes cooperate to induce polarity, whereas in other systems they antagonize each other, thereby establishing or maintaining cellular asymmetry$^{1-3}$.

Several studies have now provided insights into the regulation of polarity complexes. Small GTPases of the Ras superfamily that function as molecular switches in many signalling pathways seem to have a crucial role in cell polarization processes. RAP1 is a close homologue of the Ras protein and functions in cell adhesion processes$^4$. The Rho (Ras homologous) family proteins of the Ras superfamily comprise over 20 members, including CDC42, RAC1 and RhoA$^5$. Rho GTPases regulate and coordinate cytoskeleton remodelling, for example, by inducing the polymerization of actin filaments to linear fibres or branched networks.

As with all small GTPases, the Rho proteins cycle between an active GTP-bound and an inactive GDP-bound state with the aid of guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs). GEFs activate Rho proteins, whereas GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) inactivate the Rho proteins (BOX 2). In addition to the high number of regulators, over 70 Rho GTPase effector proteins have been described (FIG. 1). Many of these effectors are kinases or function as scaffolding proteins to couple the activation of Rho GTPases to downstream signalling pathways (FIG. 1). Moreover, Rho GTPases can regulate each other’s activity through crosstalk. CDC42 can activate RAC1 (REF. 6) and RAC1 can downregulate RhoA activity$^{7,8}$. The temporal and spatial balance between the activities of different small GTPases is crucial for many cellular processes, such as cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesions, cell migration, cell polarization and epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT)$^5$. In general, the contractile forces that are induced by RhoA antagonize the adhesive forces that are induced by RAC1.

Division of Cell Biology,  
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121,  
1066 CX, Amsterdam,  
The Netherlands.  
e-mails: j.collard@nki.nl; s.iden@nki.nl  
doi:10.1038/nrm2521

846 | NOVEMBER 2008 | VOLUME 9  
www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio  

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Box 1 | Polarity proteins of the PAR3, Crumbs and Scribble complexes

Three conserved protein complexes—the partitioning defective (PAR), Crumbs and Scribble complexes—control many polarization processes in different organisms. The polarity proteins were initially studied in *Drosophila melanogaster* and *Caenorhabditis elegans*, but all of them have at least one homologue in mammals (for a comprehensive list, see REF. 2).

The *par* genes were first identified in *C. elegans* (see the main text). Two of these genes encode the PDZ-domain proteins PAR-3 and PAR-6 which, together with the Ser/Thr kinase atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), constitute the PAR complex (see figure). Isoforms of PAR-3, PAR-6 and aPKC are ubiquitously expressed and function in various cell polarization processes. The kinase activity of aPKC is required for a functional PAR complex, and aPKC-mediated phosphorylation of target proteins is a key event of downstream polarity signalling.

The Crumbs complex comprises the transmembrane protein Crumbs and the cytoplasmic scaffolding molecules PALS1 ((protein associated with LIN-7)-1) and PATJ (PALS1-associated tight-junction protein)<sup>116,117</sup>. *D. melanogaster* Crumbs regulates epithelial cell polarity and photoreceptor morphogenesis<sup>118,119</sup>. The mammalian homologue Crumbs-3 is mainly expressed in epithelial cells, in which it functions as an apical membrane determinant. Overexpression of Crumbs-3 induces tight-junction (TJ) formation in non-polarized epithelial cells<sup>120</sup>. PATJ is thought to connect the Crumbs-3 complex with structural tight-junction proteins in polarized epithelial cells<sup>121</sup>.

A genetic interaction of the cytoplasmic proteins Scribble, Discs large (DLG) and Lethal giant larvae (LGL) was first described in *D. melanogaster*. Epithelial tissues of *scrib*, *dlg*, *lgl* mutants lose their polarized morphology<sup>122</sup>, and all three proteins are involved in neuronal synapse formation or function<sup>123,124</sup>. In vertebrates, Scribble binds directly to LGL2 and indirectly to DLG1 (REF. 2). Scribble-complex proteins are considered tumour suppressors in both flies and mammals<sup>89</sup>.

In polarized mammalian epithelial cells, the PAR3 and Crumbs-3 complexes localize predominantly to tight junctions, whereas components of the Scribble complex show basolateral localization. Several molecular interactions between the three complexes have been identified<sup>2</sup>. Mutual exclusion of the Scribble complex and the apical junctional complexes controls apico-basal polarity, and aPKC-mediated phosphorylation of LGL2 and PAR1, another conserved polarity protein (not shown), maintains the asymmetric distribution of polarity regulators. AJ, adherens junction.

Recent studies indicate that polarity proteins cross-talk to RAP1 and to various Rho proteins to induce spatially restricted cytoskeletal remodelling, which is required for the polarization of many cell types. We discuss novel insights into the regulation of polarity machineries. We focus on the crosstalk between polarity proteins and Rho GTPases during the establishment and maintenance of mammalian cell polarization in different cell types, including neuronal, epithelial and T cells.

### Apico-basal polarity
The polarity axis along the apical (uppermost) plasma membrane domain and the basal plasma membrane. In epithelial cells, the basolateral plasma membrane contains different components than the apical plasma membrane, and vesicular trafficking in part occurs along different apical and basolateral routes.

### Asymmetric cell division
The first evidence for crosstalk between polarity proteins and the Rho GTPases in the regulation of cell polarity came from studies of asymmetric cell division in *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Drosophila melanogaster* (reviewed in REFS 9, 10). In these organisms, the asymmetric distribution of polarity proteins before cell division correlates with local differences in actomyosin contractility, which is regulated by Rho protein activity. Asymmetric divisions of progenitor cells allow the generation of daughter cells with different cell fates; these divisions occur during embryonic development and in adult organisms (for example, during the maintenance of stem-cell populations).

### Actomyosin contractility
Myosin-II multimers that are associated with actin filaments can generate contractility by antiparallel sliding of actin filaments. Actomyosin meshworks provide the cell with mechanical stability and are required during cell division, cell migration and cell polarization processes.

Genetic screens in *C. elegans* identified six *par* genes (BOX 1) that are required for the first asymmetric cell division of a fertilized egg<sup>11,12</sup>. Following fertilization, the one-cell embryo polarizes along an anterior-posterior axis to prepare for asymmetric division. PAR-3 and PAR-6 segregate to the anterior domain, whereas PAR-1 and PAR-2 distribute to the posterior domain. At the same time, the initially uniform actomyosin network becomes restricted to the anterior pole, thereby generating a contractile anterior and a non-contractile posterior domain. These differences in contractility are achieved by the asymmetric distribution of Rho-regulatory proteins, including the anterior RhoGEF ECT-2 and the posterior RhoGAP CYK-4 (REF. 13). The RhoGAPs RGA-3 and RGA-4 have recently been identified and regulate Rho activity during the polarization of the one-cell embryo<sup>14</sup>. The establishment of contractile polarity is required for the formation of anterior and posterior PAR domains. CDC42 is thought to link the actomyosin network to PAR asymmetry<sup>13</sup>, but the precise mechanisms that synchronize PAR and contractile polarity are unclear.

In *D. melanogaster*, the neuroblast is a stem-cell-like neuronal precursor that has restricted self-renewal and gives rise to small ganglion mother cells (GMCs).

REVIEWS

Box 2 | Rho family GTPases and their regulators

Neuroblasts delaminate from the polarized neuroepithelial layer and inherit apico-basal polarity. During neuroblast division, the apical cortex is enriched in the polarity proteins PAR3, atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) and PAR6, whereas the polarity proteins Scribble, Discs large (DLG) and Lethal giant larvae (LGL) regulate the alignment of the mitotic spindle along the apico-basal axis¹⁵. Concomitantly, cell-fate determinants, including Prospero and Numb, accumulate at the basal cortex and thereby segregate into the prospective basal daughter cell⁹,¹⁶. Similar to the first division of the *C. elegans* embryo, the basal targeting of cell-fate determinants depends on asymmetric actomyosin contractility at the apical cortex. The Scribble-complex protein LGL modulates the actomyosin network by binding to and inhibiting myosin-II (REFS 17,18). LGL is inhibited by aPKC-mediated phosphorylation at the apical cortex¹⁹, thereby providing a mechanism for the apical restriction of myosin-II activity. These data show how crosstalk between polarity proteins is coupled to effector pathways of Rho GTPases.

The systems described above implicate a more general role of polarity proteins and Rho GTPases in asymmetric cell divisions. Indeed, several recent studies in mammalian cells report an asymmetric distribution of PAR polarity proteins (for example, during polar body exclusion in maturing mouse oocytes²⁰, before asymmetric divisions of the eight-cell mouse embryo²¹, during the development of the murine cerebral cortex²² and in asymmetric divisions of basal epidermal cells during stratification²³). However, our current knowledge of molecular crosstalk between polarity proteins and Rho GTPases in mammalian asymmetric cell division is scarce. Further insights into the molecular mechanisms of this crosstalk have recently been established in polarization processes in neuronal cells, epithelial cells and T cells (see below). In the context of T-cell polarity, we address the antigen-dependent asymmetric division of activated T cells²⁴.

### Neuronal cell polarity

The neuron is a prime example of a polarized cell, and is an intriguing model with which to study the establishment of cellular asymmetry. A differentiated neuron exhibits multiple dendrites and a single axon, which can be more than 1 metre long in motor neurons. Receptor-mediated signals are received at the dendrites and translated into electrical signals, which are subsequently processed at the cell body and sent to the axonal tip. At the tip, the synaptic release of neurotransmitters results in the excitation or inhibition of neighbouring neurons.

Small GTPases function in many aspects of neuronal development and differentiation, including the outgrowth of neurites, axons and dendrites, and neuronal migration²⁵. In addition, several studies showed a function of polarity proteins in neuronal polarization. Recent data indicate that the PAR polarity complex communicates directly with Rho and Ras-like small GTPases to control axon specification and dendritic spine morphogenesis (see below).

Rho family GTPases function as molecular switches and cycle between an active, GTP-bound state that is predominantly associated with membranes, and an inactive, GDP-bound state that is present in the cytoplasm. GTP binding induces a conformational change in Rho GTPases, thereby promoting their interaction with many effector molecules that control downstream signalling pathways. The temporal and spatial regulation of GTPase activity is an important element in the control of Rho GTPase signalling and takes place at three levels: GDP-GTP exchange, GTP hydrolysis and inhibition of GDP dissociation (see figure).

The activation of Rho GTPases involves the exchange of GDP for GTP, which is stimulated by guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs). GEFs have various domains and determine Rho GTPase downstream signalling through binding and scaffolding of different effector molecules¹²⁵. For example, the Rac activator TIAM1 (T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1) binds to the polarity protein partitioning defective-3 (PAR3), and thereby connects Rac activity to polarity signalling³³,⁶⁹,⁷⁰.

The low intrinsic GTP hydrolysis activity of Rho GTPases is enhanced by the binding of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), resulting in an inactive GDP-bound GTPase and the shutdown of signalling. As with GEFs, most GAPs are multidomain proteins that can assemble multiprotein complexes.

The release of GDP from the GTPase is blocked by guanine nucleotide-dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). GDIs also prevent membrane translocation of Rho GTPases by masking their C-terminal motifs, which are required for the interaction of Rho GTPases with anchoring phospholipids in the plasma membrane. Therefore, GDI-bound Rho GTPases are sequestered in the cytosol.

In mammals, approximately 20 Rho family GTPases, 70 RhoGEFs, 60 RhoGAPs and three RhoGDIs have been identified. Some RhoGEFs have specificity for a single Rho GTPase, whereas others can activate multiple Rho GTPases. Some Rho GTPase regulators show restriction to certain tissues or developmental stages, and their activity is regulated by protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications. Rho GTPase regulators not only modulate Rho GTPase activity but often also define downstream signalling pathways by mediating interactions between Rho GTPases and specific effector molecules. This explains why the same Rho GTPase can exert multiple functions, depending on cellular context and intracellular localization.

GTPase

RhoA

Effector

Citron
PKN
PLC
ROCK
mDia
MRCK
N-WASP
PAK
PAR6
IQGAP
SRA1
WAVE
p67 phox

Outcome

Cytokinesis
Cell cycle
F-actin
stabilization
Second
messenger
production
Actomyosin
contraction
Actin
polymerization
Microtubule
stabilization
Microtubule
capture
Cell
polarity
Cell–cell
adhesion
NADPH
oxidation

CDC42
RAC1

Figure 1 | Effectors of Rho GTPases. Rho GTPases regulate many cellular events, including cytoskeletal organization, proliferation and gene expression. They function as molecular switches in response to the stimulation of receptors, including receptor Tyr kinases, G-protein-coupled receptors and adhesion receptors (such as integrins and cadherins)⁵. The best-characterized Rho GTPase proteins, RhoA, CDC42 and RAC1, and some of their main effector proteins are shown. Some of the Rho GTPase effectors possess kinase activity (grey). Effectors of active CDC42 and RAC1 mediate cell–cell adhesion and cell polarization through actin polymerization at cell protrusions, stabilization and the capture of microtubules, and also mediate positioning of the cytoskeleton and organelles (for example, the Golgi, centrosomes and the nucleus). The CDC42 and Rac effector proteins p21-activated kinases (PAKs) are important mediators of cytoskeletal organization. Processes that are regulated downstream of active RhoA signalling include membrane retraction by actomyosin-based stress fibre contraction, cell-cycle progression and cell division. For example, the Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinases (ROCKI and ROCKII) are RhoA-effector kinases that influence cell adhesion processes and cell migration through regulation of actomyosin-mediated contractility. RhoA binding to the formin mammalian diaphanous (mDia) or CDC42 binding to N-WASP (neural Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein) initiate the assembly of protein machineries that are required for actin polymerization¹²⁶. F-actin, filamentous actin; IQGAP, IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating protein; MRCK, myotonic dystrophy kinase-related CDC42-binding kinase; p67 phox, p67 phagocyte oxidase protein; PAR6, partitioning defective-6; PKN, protein kinase N; PLC, phospholipase C; SRA1, specifically RAC1-associated protein-1; WAVE, WASP-family verprolin-homologous protein.

Dendritic spine  
A small, actin-rich membrane extrusion that is found along dendrites and forms the postsynaptic terminal, a part of the neuronal synapse. Spines are frequently remodelled in response to neuronal signals.

Stress fibre  
A structure at the base of a cell that mediates contractile forces and consists of axial filamentous actin bundles that are associated with myosin-II molecules.

Lamellipodium  
A sheet-like cellular protrusion that is enriched in branched filamentous actin and is often observed at the front of migrating cells.

Filopodium  
A thin, actin-rich plasma membrane protrusion that is often observed in motile cells and sometimes precedes lamellipodium formation.

Growth cone  
The large cone-shaped motile tip of the developing axon or dendrite.

Neurite outgrowth and axon specification. To investigate polarization processes in detail, isolated hippocampal neurons have been intensively studied in cell culture. Immature neurons (FIG. 2, step 1,2) continuously extend and retract neurites until one such neurite receives dominant signals that promote its development into an axon (FIG. 2, step 3). All other neurites receive inhibitory signals to undergo dendritic development²⁶ (FIG. 2, step 4). By what mechanism is asymmetry initiated? And how is axonal fate determined?

A function for Rho GTPases in neuronal growth was described almost 10 years ago, but more recently it has become clear that Rho GTPases are also involved in the crucial steps of axon formation. CDC42 and RAC1 promote the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia at the neurite growth cone, whereas RhoA mediates growth-cone collapse and neurite retraction²⁷. The Rac-specific GEF T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1 (TIAM1) is supposed to balance the antagonistic function of RhoA and RAC1 in neurite outgrowth, by regulating Rac-dependent phosphorylation of myosin-II and therefore actomyosin disassembly²⁸. Moreover, interference with CDC42 and RAC1 activity blocks axon formation²⁹. Two different Rac activators regulate axon development through different pathways that regulate cytoskeletal dynamics: TIAM1 promotes Rac-mediated actin reorganization at the axonal tip³⁰, whereas the RAC1GEF DOCK7 (dedicator of cytokinesis protein-7) couples Rac activation to the inhibition of the microtubule-destabilizing protein stathmin (also known as oncoprotein-18 (Op18)) to promote axon formation²⁵. Stathmin is highly expressed in developing neurons and interferes with microtubule polymerization by sequestering free tubulin heterodimers³¹. The specific stabilization of microtubules in the shaft of the prospective axon seems to be essential for axon development³².

Recent studies show that the various small GTPases exert their function in neuronal polarity through crosstalk with polarity proteins of the PAR complex. Activation of RAP1B is the founding event of a signalling cascade that involves different small GTPases, their regulators and different members of the PAR polarity complex (FIG. 2a). From an initially symmetrical localization in all neurites, RAP1B becomes restricted to a single neurite before any morphological polarization is manifested (FIG. 2, step 2). At this stage, other proteins that are relevant for axon specification remain evenly distributed in all neurites. RAP1B is thought to activate CDC42 and the PAR complex by spatially restricting the PAR

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

VOLUME 9 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 849

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

1   Protrusion formation
2   Neurite outgrowth
3   Axon specification
4   Dendrite development
5   Dendritic spine morphogenesis

complex to the developing axon²⁹. Subsequently, RAC1 is activated downstream of CDC42 and the PAR complex, as a direct interaction between the Rac activators TIAM1 and STEF (SIF and TIAM1-like exchange factor; also known as TIAM2) with PAR3 couples CDC42–PAR-complex signalling to RAC1 activation (FIG. 2a). The formation of a CDC42–PAR6–PAR3–TIAM1–RAC1 complex seems to be crucial for the establishment of neuronal polarity³³.

The data described above reveal a hierarchical signalling cascade that underlies axon specification, but cannot explain how the distribution of RAP1B becomes restricted from an initially symmetrical distribution at the tips of all neurites to a localized distribution in a single neurite, before any morphological polarization becomes apparent. This restriction is accomplished in part by the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2. SMURF2 selectively targets inactive RAP1B–GDP for proteasome-mediated proteolysis³⁴ in neurites that are fated towards dendritic development. Throughout polarization, SMURF2 is present at the cell body and in the shaft of all neurites, and PAR3 is thought to recruit SMURF2 to neuronal growth cones through its interaction with the microtubule motor protein KIF3A³⁵,³⁶. This suggests a dual role for PAR3 in RAP1B-dependent neuronal polarization: PAR3 functions upstream of RAP1B to control its stability through the recruitment of SMURF2, whereas PAR3, together with aPKC, is also an effector of RAP1B-mediated polarity signalling. Proteasomal degradation is a common mode to spatially restrict small GTPase signalling. During neurite extension, for example, SMURF1 is recruited to sites of RhoA action probably through association with aPKC, resulting in the selective ubiquitylation and degradation of RhoA–GDP³⁴,³⁷.

Proteasomal degradation thus targets inactive RAP1B equally in all neurites, whereas active RAP1B only localizes at the future axon. The mechanism of this exclusive activation remains unclear but probably involves different activities of currently unknown GEFs or GAPs of RAP1B. Indeed, the activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) by growth factors at a single neuron, which probably involves Ras isoforms³⁸,³⁹, is thought to induce spatially confined production of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃) at the prospective axon. The PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ gradient is involved in the recruitment and activation of key players of downstream polarity signalling⁴⁰. Most GEFs show high affinity for PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ through their pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain. So, increased PI3K activity at the prospective axon might be a mechanism to recruit specific RAP1BGEFs to activate RAP1B and thereby initiate axon specification.

**Dendritic spine formation and maturation.** Following axon specification, neuronal development proceeds with the outgrowth of axonal and dendritic processes (FIG. 2). The formation and maturation of so-called dendritic spines is crucial for the establishment of neural circuits. Dendritic spines are highly motile, small protrusions found along the dendrites, and constitute the future

Figure 2 | Crosstalk between small GTPases and the PAR complex mediates different aspects of neuronal polarity. The development of hippocampal neurons can be divided into several stages: freshly isolated cells initially form lamellipodia (step 1), which subsequently form multiple processes called minor neurites (step 2). Of these processes, one becomes the axon (step 3), whereas the others develop into dendrites (step 4). With further maturation, dendrites branch and form small dendritic spines, which are the sites of postsynaptic contact to other neurons (step 5).

a | During axon specification, extrinsic stimuli such as growth factors induce spatially restricted activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), which results in a high local concentration of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃). This might activate RAP1B, a Ras-like GTPase that then initiates a signalling cascade that results in the formation of a single axon. Inactive RAP1B is targeted for degradation at the remaining neurites. CDC42 is activated downstream of RAP1B, which further activates the partitioning defective (PAR) complex and the Rac-specific guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) TIAM1 (T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1). Subsequent activation of Rac promotes actin polymerization and microtubule stabilization. b | During spine morphogenesis, PAR6 and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) inhibit RhoA-ROCK (Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase) signalling at the dendrite by activating the p190A RhoGAP. This results in decreased RhoA activity and actomyosin contractility, and thereby allows the formation of small actin-rich protrusions along the dendrite. This function of PAR6–aPKC is independent of PAR6 binding to CDC42. c | Further maturation into functional spines requires local TIAM1–RAC1 signalling. PAR3 colocalizes with TIAM1 at the spine head region and is thought to restrict TIAM1-mediated RAC1 activation to that site, thereby promoting actin polymerization in the spine head. This function of PAR3 is independent of direct binding to aPKC and PAR6. The mechanisms that lead to activation of aPKC and PAR3–TIAM1 in these processes are currently unclear.
sites of synaptic contacts. Spines also undergo continuous remodelling, and their morphology is important for normal brain function. Many neuronal disorders are accompanied by abnormal spine shape.

Similar to axon specification, spine morphogenesis requires orchestrated signalling by Ras superfamily GTPases. Consistent with its role in actin contraction, RhoA seems to have an inhibitory effect on spine morphogenesis${}^{41}$, whereas RAC1 promotes spine maturation and maintenance${}^{42,43}$. Rho GTPase function in spine morphogenesis also involves crosstalk with PAR polarity proteins (FIG. 2). In differentiated hippocampal neurons, PAR3, aPKC and PAR6 localize to spines, suggesting that they function in spine morphogenesis${}^{43,44}$. Indeed, the PAR3–TIAM1 interaction spatially restricts RAC1 activation to the spine head. Mislocalized Rac activation leads to increased protrusion formation all over the dendrite${}^{43}$. Intriguingly, this function of PAR3 in spine maturation does not depend on PAR3 binding to aPKC and PAR6 (REFS 43, 44). Instead, PAR6 and aPKC seem to function in the formation and maintenance (rather than the maturation) of dendritic spines, as expression of PAR6 or expression of constitutively active aPKCζ induces high spine density. Conversely, inhibition of PAR6 expression or impaired aPKCζ activity decreases the number of spines on the dendritic shaft${}^{44}$. The function of PAR6–aPKC is independent of CDC42 binding to PAR6, but involves crosstalk to RhoA and its regulator p190A RhoGAP. Inhibition of RhoA or its key effector Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase (ROCK) rescues impaired spine formation, which is observed following PAR6 silencing, suggesting that PAR6 negatively regulates RhoA activity. Indeed, PAR6–aPKC reduces RhoA activity, probably through the interaction of aPKC with p190A RhoGAP, leading to p190A RhoGAP activation. This activation thereby inhibits RhoA activity and therefore ROCK signalling, downstream of PAR6 (REF. 44). These findings suggest that Rho GTPases and the various components of the PAR complex contribute to spine morphogenesis through two different mechanisms. The binding of PAR6–aPKC to p190A RhoGAP suppresses RhoA function to stimulate spine formation, whereas the interaction between TIAM1 and PAR3 restricts RAC1 activation to the spine head region to promote spine maturation (FIG. 2b,c).

Similar to axon formation, RAP1 is required for dendritic spine formation. RAP1 is activated following N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor signalling${}^{45}$, and its activity is probably regulated by the RAP1GAP SPAR${}^{46}$. However, whether RAP1 functions upstream of CDC42, RAC1 and the PAR complex (as it does during axon formation) remains unclear.

**Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃)**  
A phospholipid component of cellular membranes that is involved in signalling processes and that serves as a binding site for pleckstrin homology domain-containing proteins.

**Pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain**  
A protein domain with high affinity for phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate.

**Uropod**  
A large membrane protrusion at the rear of polarized leukocytes that is implicated in many processes, including T-cell activation, cell–cell adhesion and leukocyte migration.

**T-cell polarity**

Immune cells require polarization in order to execute their specific functions. T and B lymphocytes have enormous diversity in antigen recognition, specificity and long-lasting immunological memory. T cells circulate in the blood and lymphatic vessels. Following stimulation by chemoattractants, T cells polarize and cross the endothelial barrier to enter secondary lymphoid organs or inflamed tissues. Activated T cells can initiate different immunological responses on encountering antigens. These responses range from activation of other immune cells to the elimination of infected cells or tumour cells.

**Chemokine-induced T-cell polarity.** T lymphocytes that circulate in blood vessels and lymphatic vessels have a round morphology. During adhesion, migration or cell–cell interactions, however, they polarize along an anterior–posterior axis. T cells form an actin-rich leading edge that is enriched in chemokine receptors and integrins, and a large uropod or tail at the rear. Various surface receptors, including the T-cell receptor (TCR), intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM), CD44 and ezrin, accumulate at the uropod, which mediates adhesion to other cells${}^{47,48}$ (FIG. 3a).

As T-cell polarization requires dramatic cytoskeletal rearrangements, it is not surprising that Rho GTPases have an important role in this process. RAC1 and CDC42 promote actin nucleation at the leading edge during chemokine-induced T-cell polarization and are required for T-cell spreading${}^{49–51}$. Instead, uropod formation requires activation of RhoA at the rear, and involves ROCK signalling${}^{52}$. In addition, RAP1A is essential for T-cell polarization and is activated within seconds of chemokine stimulation. Expression of constitutively active RAP1, but not wild-type RAP1, induces T-cell polarization in the absence of external stimuli. This indicates that RAP1 activation is an initiating event in the T-cell polarization process${}^{53,54}$.

It became clear only recently that small GTPases function in concert with polarity proteins during T-cell polarization. Components of the PAR, Scribble and Crumbs complexes localize asymmetrically in motile polarized T cells (FIG. 3a). DLG proteins and Scribble accumulate at the uropod, and knockdown of Scribble or blockage of DLG4 function inhibits both uropod formation and the polarized distribution of other polarity proteins. Furthermore, knockdown of Scribble abrogates the random migration of T cells${}^{55}$. A recent study showed the existence of a hierarchical signalling cascade between RAP1A, Rho GTPases and the PAR complex in the context of chemokine-induced T-cell polarization${}^{54}$ (FIG. 3b). Activated RAP1A, PAR3, aPKCζ and CDC42 colocalize with chemokine receptors at the leading front. Intriguingly, chemokine stimulation by stromal cell-derived factor-1α (SDF1α) activates RAP1A, followed by the activation of CDC42 and aPKCζ, which in turn is essential for downstream activation of RAC1. TIAM1 has an important role in this context, as TIAM1-deficient T lymphocytes show strongly reduced polarization in response to chemokines. Moreover, TIAM1 and the PAR complex are required for Rac-mediated chemotactic migration of T cells towards an SDF1α gradient. TIAM1 is a downstream effector of RAP1A–GTP, and probably links the PAR3 complex and RAC1 to RAP1A-mediated polarity signals by simultaneous binding to PAR3 and active RAP1A${}^{54}$ (FIG. 3b).
a T cell

| Uropod | Mid-body | Lamellipodium |
|--------|----------|---------------|
| ICAM   | RhoA     | CXCR4         |
| DLG1–4 | ROCK     | CDC42         |
| TCR    | Myosin   | RAC1          |
| Scribble | PAR3    | WAVE          |
| CD3    | WASP     | PAR3          |
| CD43   | Crumbs-3 | aPKC          |
| CD44   | LGL      | TIAM1         |

b

Figure 3 | Crosstalk between small GTPases and polarity proteins controls front-rear polarization of T cells.

a | Following chemokine stimulation, T cells become polarized and form an actin-rich protrusion (lamellipodium) towards the chemokine source and a large uropod at the rear. Polarity proteins, small GTPases and their regulators and effectors, surface receptors and cytoskeletal components are differentially recruited to these sites. Polarity proteins include partitioning-defective-3 (PAR3), PAR6, atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), Crumbs-3, Scribble, Lethal giant larvae (LGL) and Discs large (DLG)1–4. Small GTPase regulators and effectors include RAP1A, CDC42, RAC1, RhoA, T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1 (TIAM1) and Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase (ROCK). Surface receptors include intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM), T-cell receptor (TCR), CD3, CD43, CD44, integrins and C-X-C motif chemokine receptor-4 (CXCR4), and cytoskeletal components include Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), WASP-family verprolin-homologous protein (WAVE) and myosin. The indicated localization of these proteins is a generalized view based on studies in different T-cell systems, and in some cases, these indications are based on single studies.

b | Activation of RAP1A occurs immediately following chemokine stimulation, and induces the activation of CDC42. CDC42-GTP further stimulates aPKC, probably through PAR6. The Rac-specific guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) TIAM1 simultaneously associates with PAR3, RAP1A-GTP and RAC1, thereby connecting the activation of RAP1A to the activation of the PAR polarity complex and RAC1 (REF. 54). RAC1-GTP might induce T-cell polarization through localized protrusion (lamellipodium) formation at the leading edge. In addition, chemokines mediate the activation of RhoA and its effector protein ROCK, and RhoA-ROCK-dependent actomyosin contractility is required for proper uropod formation and for adherent contractility within the mid-body<sup>48</sup>. Scribble and DLG also contribute to uropod formation, probably by localizing other polarity-relevant proteins<sup>55</sup>, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The Rac-specific GEF DOCK2 also affects T-cell polarization (not shown)<sup>127</sup>; however, this signalling pathway probably does not involve the activation of RAP1 and PKCζ.

This suggests that RAP1A activates CDC42 following chemokine stimulation and recruits TIAM1 and the PAR complex to the site of activation. TIAM1 in turn couples RAP1A-CDC42-PAR-complex signalling to the localized activation of RAC1 to induce actin nucleation at the leading edge<sup>54</sup>. These findings show striking similarities to the signalling pathways that underlie axon specification and point to a general role for RAP1 upstream of Rho GTPases and the RAP complex in cell polarization.

Antigen-presenting cell  
An immune cell, such as a B cell, a dendritic cell or a macrophage, that presents fragments of foreign proteins on the cell surface to initiate an immune response. These fragments are bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules. T cells can recognize the MHC class II-antigen complex through their T-cell receptor, and might subsequently become activated.

Polarity aspects in immunological synapse formation.  
T-cell activation in response to an antigen involves the formation of the immunological synapse, a polarized, transient, adhesive contact between the T cell and an antigen-presenting cell. Extensive rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton are required for the establishment of an immunological synapse, and different studies report the activation of CDC42 and RAC1 at the immunological synapse following TCR engagement<sup>56,57</sup>. During immunological synapse formation, polarity proteins, such as DLG and Scribble, redistribute from the uropod to the immunological synapse and colocalize transiently with PAR3, Crumbs-3 and the TCR<sup>55</sup>. Knockdown of Scribble leads to defects in TCR-mediated polarization<sup>55</sup>, which suggests that polarity proteins have an important function in immunological synapse formation.

T cells remain in contact with an antigen-presenting cell for several hours, which implicates the immunological synapse in other functions besides its role in early T-cell activation. A recent study strongly suggests that long-term immunological synapse-induced polarity leads to asymmetric cell division. During this process, Scribble is segregated away from PKCζ, the PKCζ-containing daughter cell is fated towards the memory cell lineage and the Scribble-containing cell differentiates into an effector T cell<sup>24</sup>. This phenomenon

resembles the processes that are observed in asymmetric cell division of lower organisms (see above). Scribble has also been shown to interact with CRTAM, which is required to colocalize CDC42 and aPKCζ-containing complexes on TCR activation in a later phase of T-cell polarity<sup>58</sup>, thereby providing an alternative mechanism for the spatial restriction of Rho GTPase activity and actin polymerization to sites of polarity signalling. However, experimental data that show crosstalk between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins in immunological synapse formation and asymmetric cell division are lacking.

### Epithelial apico-basal cell polarity

Epithelial sheets cover organs and body cavities, such as the lung, gut or skin. They thereby impart mechanical protection or mediate secretion, absorption and sensory functions. Epithelial cells exhibit an asymmetric organization of junctional complexes. Strong cell–cell adhesion is mediated at adherens junctions (or zonula adherens) by classical cadherins, whereas tight junctions (or zonula occludens) create a diffusion barrier for soluble molecules between cells. Tight junctions also form a barrier for proteins and lipids in the membrane, thereby maintaining distinct compositions of apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains.

The formation of apico-basal polarity has been studied intensively in *D. melanogaster* and mammalian epithelial cells, and many contributing structural and signalling proteins have been identified. The apical PAR3 and Crumbs-3 complexes and the basolateral Scribble complex (BOX 1) function in the establishment and maintenance of cellular asymmetry in contacting epithelial cells. We focus on the interplay between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins (for a comprehensive discussion of apico-basal polarization, see REF. 59 and the review by Mellman and Nelson in this issue, and for discussions of molecular and functional interactions of polarity proteins, see REFS 1,2,60).

#### Adherens junction

An adhesive intercellular contact site that mediates mechanical stability. Cadherin molecules of adjacent cells bind to each other, and are coupled to the actin cytoskeleton by their cytoplasmic domains.

#### Classical cadherin

A Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent transmembrane adhesion protein that mediates intercellular adhesion in many different cell types. The extracellular domains of classical cadherins form homotypic dimers with cadherins on opposing cells, and the intracellular protein domain interacts with many cytoplasmic proteins, including members of the catenin family.

#### Tight junction

A selective barrier in epithelial cells that prevents the free diffusion of soluble molecules and membrane components through the intercellular space and within different membrane domains, respectively.

#### Nectin

A member of a family of Ca<sup>2+</sup>-independent, immunoglobulin-like, transmembrane molecules that mediate adhesion between cells.

of aPKC, and loss of TIAM1 impairs the establishment of functional tight junctions in keratinocytes<sup>70</sup>. Furthermore, RAC1 controls extracellular matrix-induced reorientation of apico-basal polarity in three-dimensional cultures of epithelial cysts in a PI3K- and aPKC-dependent manner<sup>71,72</sup>.

The contribution of CDC42 activity in the formation of apico-basal polarity is less clear. CDC42 is dispensable for polarization of epithelial monolayers in two-dimensional cultures<sup>70,73</sup>, whereas it participates in lumen formation of three-dimensional-cultured epithelial cysts<sup>74</sup>. Similarly, the function of RhoA in apico-basal polarity is still controversial. RhoA activity decreases with maturation of cell–cell contacts<sup>75</sup>, and RAC1 has been shown to suppress RhoA activity at adherens junctions by stimulating the association of p190 RhoGAP with cadherin-bound p120 catenin during cell–cell contact formation<sup>76</sup>. However, RhoA and actomyosin contractility are required for early cell–cell adhesion<sup>77</sup> and for the generation of a cortical actomyosin ring during apico-basal polarization<sup>78</sup>. This indicates that balanced activities of RhoA and RAC1 or CDC42 contribute to overall tissue stability<sup>79–81</sup>.

There is little evidence that the Scribble and Crumbs complexes exert their function in apico-basal polarization through communication with Rho GTPases. Although depletion of Scribble disrupts cell–cell adhesions, the role of Scribble in this process seems to be independent of binding to PAK-interacting exchange-factor-β (βPIX) and of RAC1 activation<sup>82</sup>. Furthermore, crosstalk between the Crumbs-complex proteins PALS1 ((protein associated with LIN-7)-1) and PATJ (PALS1-associated tight-junction protein; BOX 1) with CDC42 has been reported in the maintenance, rather than the formation, of tight junctions. PATJ and PALS1 are thought to recruit the CDC42GAP RICH1 (RhoGAP-interacting with CIP4 homologues protein-1) to establish tight junctions, in which RICH1 and the scaffold protein angiomotin (AMOT) control the CDC42-dependent sorting and recycling of tight-junction components<sup>83</sup>.

### Epithelial cell–cell contact formation and maintenance

The establishment of epithelial cell–cell contacts and the subsequent apico-basal polarization requires E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion<sup>61</sup>. Lamellipodia and filopodia of adjacent cells assemble to primordial adhesions that are positive for E-cadherin and several prospective tight-junction proteins<sup>62</sup> (FIG. 4A). Clustering of endogenous E-cadherin leads to activation of RAC1 (REF. 63). Moreover, E-cadherin dimerization activates CDC42 (REF. 64), whereas ligation of exogenous nectins activates both CDC42 and RAC1 (REFS 65,66). The maturation of primordial adhesions to linear apico-basal polarized cell–cell contacts with discrete adherens and tight junctions requires the stimulation of aPKC by crosstalk between Rho GTPases and the PAR complex (FIG. 4A). Binding of CDC42–GTP or RAC1–GTP to PAR6 releases an intrinsic ability of PAR6 to activate aPKC<sup>67</sup>, but there is strong evidence for a predominant function of RAC1 in the formation of epithelial apico-basal polarization<sup>68–70</sup>. The interaction between TIAM1 and PAR3 couples RAC1 activation to the activation

### Rho GTPases and polarity proteins in EMT

During organ morphogenesis, certain epithelial cell sheets undergo EMT. This is marked by the loss of apico-basal polarity and cell–cell adhesions, a change from a ‘cobble-stone’ to a spindle-like morphology, and increased migratory capacity<sup>84</sup>. Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) is a potent inducer of EMT, as it suppresses epithelial functions and promotes the expression of mesenchymal factors. The loss of tight junctions during TGFβ-induced EMT is in part achieved through interference in polarity protein and RhoA signalling (FIG. 4Ba–Bd). The TGFβ receptor (TGFβR) complex associates with and phosphorylates PAR6, which binds to SMURF1 and results in proteasomal degradation of RhoA and subsequent dissolution of tight junctions and EMT<sup>85</sup> (FIG. 4Bb). TGFβ-derived signalling can also downregulate PAR3 and Crumbs-3 protein levels, leading to tight-junction disassembly and EMT<sup>86,87</sup> (FIG. 4Bc,Bd).

Importantly, the behaviour of invasive and metastatic tumour cells strikingly resembles that of cells that undergo EMT. There is increasing evidence that deregulated polarity signalling contributes to the development and progression of cancer<sup>88,89</sup>. In support of this, Scribble, DLG and LGL are now considered tumour suppressor genes in

D. melanogaster and mammals; mutation or deletion of the corresponding genes results in neoplastic tissue outgrowth<sup>88,90,91</sup>. Similarly, aberrant Rho GTPase signalling is known to contribute to both the formation and progression of many cancers<sup>92–94</sup>. Considering the multifaceted interplay between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins in

A Apico-basal polarization

E-cadherin dimerization and recruitment of AJ and TJ proteins

Activation of Rho GTPases, activation of aPKC and phosphorylation of downstream targets

TJ formation and separation of membrane domains

Ba Loss of polarity

Crumbs-3, PATJ, PALS1 | PAR3, aPKC, PAR6

Actomyosin ring

Microtubules

Integrins

Extracellular matrix | Basement membrane

RhoA | E-cadherin

RhoA

TGFB

TGFBRII

TGFBRI

PAR3, PAR6

aPKC

SMURF1

RhoA

EMT

Actin polymerization

Snail

Crumbs-3

PATJ

PALS1

PAR3, PAR6

aPKC

Figure 4 | Crosstalk between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins during the formation and loss of epithelial apico-basal cell polarity. A | Simplified schematic of apico-basal polarization. Following epithelial (E)-cadherin clustering, structural proteins (those that form adherens junctions (AJs) and tight junctions (TJs)) and signalling proteins, including α-catenin, β-catenin, afadin and ZO1, are recruited to immature cell-cell contacts. Transmembrane proteins of the junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) and nectin family are implicated in localizing the partitioning defective (PAR) complex to primordial adhesions. Rho GTPases are activated downstream of cadherin clustering by unknown mechanisms. Through association with PAR3, T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1 (TIAM1) couples E-cadherin-dependent RAC1 activation to activation of atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), thereby inducing phosphorylation of downstream targets and subsequent polarization and maturation into fully polarized epithelium. Ba | Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through different mechanisms, including targeting of polarity proteins and Rho GTPases. Bb | Ligand-activated TGFβ receptor II (TGFβRII) phosphorylates PAR6, which in turn activates the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF1 and thereby induces proteasomal degradation of RhoA, loss of the actomyosin ring and breakdown of apico-basal polarity<sup>85</sup>. Bc | TGFβ also induces transcriptional downregulation of PAR3, resulting in the cytoplasmic localization of aPKC and PAR6, downregulation of E-cadherin and loss of TJs and AJs<sup>86</sup>. Bd | Furthermore, TGFβ activates the transcriptional repressor Snail, which inhibits Crumbs-3 expression, leading to the relocation of the Crumbs-3 complex proteins PALS1 (protein associated with LIN-7)-1 and PATJ (PALS1-associated tight-junction protein) as well as of the PAR complex, followed by loss of apico-basal polarity<sup>87</sup>. Another early event during EMT is the loss of basally localized RhoA activity, which results in the disassembly of basal microtubules, disruption of integrin-mediated adhesion and the subsequent breakdown of the basement membrane<sup>128</sup>.

a Epithelial cell, fibroblast and astrocyte

Direction  
of migration  

- Actomyosin  
  contraction  
- Integrin  
  engagement  
- Stable microtubules  
- Actin  
  polymerization  

| Rear | Front |
|------|-------|
| RhoA | PAR3   CDC42 |
| ROCK | aPKC   RAC1 |
| Myosin | βPIX |
| DLG | PAK |
| Scribble | APC |
| PATJ | |

b

- Leading-edge localization  
- Migratory stimuli  
- Leading-edge localization  

Scribble  
βPIX  

CDC42GEF  

Recruitment  

CDC42-GTP  

RhoA–GTP  

ROCK  

PAR6  

aPKC  
PAR3  

TIAM1  

p190 RhoGAP  

DLG1  

GSK3β  

Numb  

Centrosome  
and Golgi  
polarization  

Reduced integrin  
endocytosis at  
leading edge  

Front-rear  
polarization,  
MT stabilization,  
protrusion  
formation  

Figure 5 | Crosstalk between small GTPases and polarity proteins controls front-rear polarization of epithelial cells, astrocytes and fibroblasts. a | Migrating epithelial cells, astrocytes and fibroblasts migrate in a front-rear-polarized fashion. These cell types use similar polarization machineries; nevertheless, some signalling events might be cell-type specific. Polarity proteins of the partitioning defective (PAR), Scribble and Crumbs-3 complexes, the small GTPases CDC42, RAC1 and some of their regulator proteins are localized and activated at the leading edge³⁹⁵,¹⁰⁴. By contrast, active RhoA and its effector proteins localize mainly to the trailing rear⁹⁶. b | Following stimulation by growth factors or the extracellular matrix, CDC42 is activated through an unknown mechanism and is localized to the leading edge by the Scribble–βPIX (PAK-interacting exchange-factor-β) complex¹⁰². The dynein regulator Nudel renders CDC42 active by sequestering CDC42 GTPase-activating protein (GAP) at the leading edge¹⁰⁶ (dashed lines represent the net effect of successive inhibitory events). CDC42 induces spatial activation of atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), which initiates multiple downstream signalling events. aPKC activation is coupled to RAC1 activation through T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1 (TIAM1), and thus actin polymerization and microtubule (MT) stabilization⁹⁵,¹⁰⁷. aPKC-mediated phosphorylation of Numb decreases integrin turn-over at the front¹⁰⁵. Furthermore, aPKC phosphorylates and inactivates glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β), thereby promoting the association of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) with microtubules. APC and Discs large-1 (DLG1) regulate the repositioning of the centrosome, the Golgi and the nucleus¹¹⁰⁰. Glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β) also inhibits p190A RhoGAP¹⁰⁸, and therefore aPKC-mediated inactivation of GSK3β could suppress RhoA activity at the front of the cell. By contrast, at sites of high RhoA activity (at the rear of the cell) RhoA induces dissociation of the PAR complex through Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase (ROCK)-mediated phosphorylation of PAR3 (REF. 107). PATJ (PALS1 (protein associated with LIN-7)-1-associated tight-junction protein) is part of the Crumbs complex that is localized to the leading edge. ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase.

---

epithelial cell apico-basal and front-rear polarity (see below), it is conceivable that impaired crosstalk between these groups of signalling proteins influences different aspects of tumour formation and progression.

### Polarized migration of adherent cells

Cell polarization is essential for the migration of individual cells or groups of adherent cells during development, in the adult organism and in pathological situations, such as cancer. During brain development, for example, neurons migrate along glial cells to distinct parts of the brain. Migration of epithelial cells is essential during tissue morphogenesis and for the maintenance of the skin and the intestinal barrier in adult organisms. As tumour cells also migrate during metastasis, understanding the mechanisms by which cells migrate and invade tissues might help to develop specific drugs to interfere in the metastatic process.

Glial cell  
A non-neuronal cell of the brain  
(such as an astrocyte, an  
oligodendrocyte or a Schwann  
cell) that provides nutrients to  
neurons, forms myelin and  
contributes to axon guidance  
and neuronal signalling.

Cell migration is the net effect of CDC42- and RAC1-mediated expansion of cellular protrusions and cytoskeleton polarization in the direction of migration (the front of the cell) and RhoA-driven retraction of membrane and cell-matrix adhesions at the trailing edge (the rear of the cell)⁹⁵. Cells that persistently migrate thus exhibit a front-rear-polarized morphology with asymmetric distribution of surface receptors, adhesion proteins, signalling molecules, cytoskeletal components and vesicles. The direction and efficiency of cell migration is determined by soluble molecules, such as growth factors or chemokines, and environmental cues, such as extracellular matrices⁹⁶,⁹⁷. Recently, various studies have shown that proper polarization and directional migration of many cell types, including astrocytes, epithelial cells and fibroblasts requires coordinated crosstalk between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins (FIG. 5).

---

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY  
VOLUME 9 | NOVEMBER 2008 | 855  

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Wound-induced astrocyte polarization. Astrocytes are non-neuronal cells of the brain and have various functions, including the nutritional supply of neurons, neurotransmitter release, immune defence in the brain and repair of nerve-cell injury<sup>98</sup>. The signalling pathways involved in physical injury-induced astrocyte migration have been studied intensively in cultured rat astrocytes.

The formation of astrocyte protrusions and cell migration towards the free space of a wound is initiated following scratch wounding. This process involves increased actin nucleation at the leading edge, polarization and stabilization of microtubule filaments, and repositioning of the centrosome and Golgi apparatus towards the wound<sup>99</sup> (FIG. 5a). These cytoskeletal rearrangements are controlled by Rho GTPase signalling. CDC42 has been identified as a key regulator of astrocyte polarization during migration. In response to scratch-induced integrin engagement, CDC42 mediates cytoskeleton polarization, the direction of protrusions and Golgi and centrosome positioning. By contrast, RAC1 promotes the outgrowth of protrusion, whereas dominant-negative RhoA does not affect astrocyte polarization and protrusion outgrowth<sup>99</sup>.

Etienne-Manneville *et al.* revealed an intriguing molecular pathway that involves the concerted interplay of Rho GTPases and many polarity proteins during astrocyte polarization<sup>100,101</sup>. CDC42 localizes and activates PAR6 and aPKC at the leading edge, where aPKC phosphorylates and thereby inactivates the Ser/Thr kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β). This promotes the association of the tumour suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) with microtubule plus ends and allows for the subsequent interaction of APC with DLG1 at the leading edge. This interaction is required for front-directed polarization of the microtubule cytoskeleton and allows targeted vesicle transport to the leading edge<sup>100,101</sup> (FIG. 5b).

It is unclear which factors mediate the activation of CDC42. Intriguingly, the polarity protein Scribble functions upstream of the polarization processes described above. Through βPIX, Scribble localizes active CDC42 to the leading edge of polarizing astrocytes. This process requires both the catalytic GEF domain and the Scribble-binding motif of βPIX. However, CDC42 activation *per se* is independent of Scribble, which suggests that the Scribble–βPIX complex spatially restricts CDC42 function rather than activating CDC42 at the leading edge<sup>102</sup>. It is unclear whether RAP1 functions upstream of CDC42 to activate this GTPase, as has been shown in polarizing neurons<sup>29</sup> and T cells<sup>54</sup>.

Recent studies indicate that Rho GTPases collaborate with polarity proteins in fibroblasts and epithelial cells to control directional cell migration. Components of the PAR, Scribble and Crumbs complexes localize to the leading edge (FIG. 5a) and regulate front–rear polarization, chemotactic migration and wound-healing of cultured epithelial cells. Intriguingly, these components either seem to crosstalk directly to Rho GTPases or to control Rho GTPase activity through the modulation of their GEFs and GAPs (BOX 1). Scribble localizes CDC42 and RAC1 to the leading edge of epithelial cells, probably through βPIX, thereby promoting polarization of the Golgi apparatus and directional migration<sup>103</sup>. However, Scribble has also been shown to suppress epithelial cell migration by promoting E-cadherin-based cell–cell adhesions<sup>83</sup>. The polarity protein PATJ is thought to recruit PAR3 and aPKC polarity proteins to the leading edge of scratch-wounded epithelial cells<sup>104</sup>. CDC42 activates aPKC, probably through PAR6, and thereby initiates multiple downstream signalling events. For example, aPKC and PAR3, in conjunction with the Rac-specific GEF TIAM1, mediate stable front–rear polarization and chemotactic migration of keratinocytes through stabilization of microtubules<sup>95</sup>. Furthermore, PAR3 and aPKC spatially control integrin endocytosis through the endocytic adaptor protein Numb. aPKC-mediated phosphorylation of Numb prevents integrin endocytosis at the leading edge<sup>105</sup> and thereby maintains the stimulatory integrin adhesion signal that is required for polarized migration<sup>99</sup> (FIG. 5b).

Little is known about the factors that regulate CDC42 activity during polarized migration of fibroblasts or epithelial cells. No GEFs have been reported that specifically stimulate CDC42 in response to migratory signals. However, the CDC42 GAP is sequestered and inhibited at the leading edge by the dynein regulator Nudel, thereby rendering CDC42 active (FIG. 5b) and thus promoting CDC42-dependent centrosome polarization, persistent migration and wound healing<sup>106</sup>. Furthermore, the accumulation of PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> at the migrating front correlates with local CDC42 activation. A positive-feedback loop between CDC42 and PI3K is thought to maintain both high PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> levels and CDC42 activity at the leading edge, whereas the counteracting phosphatase PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue) is excluded from this region<sup>97</sup>. Considering the role of RAP1 in transmitting PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>-derived polarity signals to activation of CDC42 in neurons, it is conceivable that RAP1 mediates CDC42 activation in a similar way during polarized epithelial cell migration.

Migration of fibroblasts and epithelial cells. Most of our knowledge of Rho GTPase function in cell motility is derived from studies in fibroblasts. The migratory capacity of epithelial cells, however, is strongly influenced by the degree of their intercellular contacts, which prevent migration. Although several molecular mechanisms conferring fibroblast and epithelial motility seem to be similar, some of the signals described below might have a cell-type- and stimulus-specific relevance.

Dynein  
A minus-end-directed  
microtubule motor protein that  
consists of several subunits.  
Dynein is required for various  
cellular processes, including  
organelle positioning and  
vesicle transport along  
microtubules.

As discussed above, cell migration is achieved through the balance of CDC42 and RAC1 function at the front of the cell and RhoA function at the rear. Intriguingly, a recent study suggests that polarity proteins function in the antagonistic regulation of Rho GTPase activities. The Rho effector ROCK can phosphorylate PAR3 in its aPKC-binding region, which results in disruption of the PAR3–TIAM1–aPKC–PAR6 complex and leads to reduced cell migration<sup>107</sup> (FIG. 5b).

Figure 6 | The PAR complex has a central role in balancing GTPase function during cellular polarization.

Simplified schematic of crosstalk between Rho GTPases and partitioning defective (PAR) polarity complexes, using data integrated from the polarity systems that are discussed in this review. Certain regulatory steps might be cell-type specific. Following external cues that lead to increased local phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃) production, the Ras-like protein RAP1 is activated and further activates CDC42 and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC). The T-cell-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-1 (TIAM1)--PAR3 interaction couples activation of aPKC to RAC1 activation. Activation of RAC1 can also occur upstream of PAR-complex activation, as described for apico-basal cell polarity⁷⁰. PAR6 and aPKC have been shown to activate p190A RhoGAP⁴⁴, which enables RAC1 to downregulate RhoA activity through the PAR complex. In addition, aPKC might indirectly increase p190A RhoGAP activity by phosphorylating and inhibiting GSK3β¹⁰¹, a negative regulator of p190A RhoGAP¹⁰⁸. This route is therefore an alternative mode to downregulate RhoA activity in zones of high RAC1 and aPKC activity. RhoA in turn can suppress RAC1 activity through the PAR complex. Rho-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase (ROCK)-mediated phosphorylation of PAR3 causes the dissociation of the PAR3 complex, and therefore impairs cell polarization by inhibiting CDC42-induced and TIAM1-mediated activation of Rac¹⁰⁷. Proteins of the Scribble and Crumbs complexes presumably also contribute to Rho GTPase balance (see the main text). MT, microtubule; TJ, tight junction.

Thus, RhoA negatively controls CDC42-induced and RAC1-dependent cell migration by interfering with the PAR3 complex. However, aPKC also seems to restrict RhoA activity at the front of migrating cells. The p190A RhoGAP has recently been identified as target of GSK3β phosphorylation in migrating fibroblasts. GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of p190A RhoGAP results in the inhibition of its GAP activity towards RhoA¹⁰⁸. Together with previous studies that report GSK3β inhibition through aPKC¹⁰⁰,¹⁰⁹, it seems plausible that during cell migration a negative-feedback loop that consists of aPKC, GSK3β and p190A suppresses RhoA and ROCK activity (FIG. 5b), as shown recently for neuronal polarity⁴⁴.

### Conclusions and perspectives

Cell polarization is achieved by intricate communication between different classes of proteins, including small GTPases, polarity proteins and cytoskeletal components. These components are differentially distributed within a cell and in many cases they antagonize each other. Such opposing function, for example, between RhoA and RAC1 in cell migration or between the PAR and Scribble complexes in apico-basal polarization, is fundamental for the establishment of cellular asymmetry. Moreover, Rho GTPase signalling substantially controls signalling by polarity proteins and vice versa. It seems that there is a further level of interconnectedness of Rho GTPase and polarity protein signalling, whereby the PAR polarity complex has a central role in balancing Rho GTPase activity. On the one hand, PAR6 and aPKC promote RAC1 and CDC42 polarity signalling and suppress RhoA function, but on the other hand, the RhoA pathway can inhibit RAC1- and CDC42-mediated effects by interfering with the formation of a functional PAR complex (FIG. 6). Such mutual regulation allows for the spatial control of Rho GTPase activity at sites where there is overlapping expression of RhoA and RAC1 or CDC42. For example, despite its function in trailing edge retraction, active RhoA has also been detected at the leading edge of migrating cells¹⁰, whereas PAR3 has been reported to partially localize to the rear¹⁰⁷. Considering the large number of Rho GTPase regulators and effectors and the diversity of polarity proteins, it seems likely that additional modes of crosstalk between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins will be identified in the future. It might be that polarity proteins contribute to Rac-Rho antagonism in more polarization processes than are currently known.

It will be important to extend future studies to in vivo systems to examine the physiological relevance of the identified polarity signalling events and to investigate the consequences of deregulated polarity signalling in animal tumour models. Several laboratories have recently generated mice deficient for key players of Rho GTPase and polarity protein signalling. The constitutive deletion of many of these polarity regulators, including aPKCλ, PAR3, RAC1, CDC42 and ROCKII, is embryonic lethal¹¹¹⁻¹¹⁵, which highlights their importance for proper development. In this respect, research should focus on knocking-out the regulators of relevant Rho GTPases to further understand the complex interplay between Rho GTPases and polarity proteins in normal development and in various aspects of cancer.

1. Goldstein, B. & Macara, I. G. The PAR proteins: fundamental players in animal cell polarization. Dev. Cell 13, 609–622 (2007). Excellent review on the discovery of the PAR genes and the various functions of PAR proteins in different species and cell types.
2. Asemat, E., Bazellieres, E., Pallesi-Pocachard, E., Le Bivic, A. & Massey-Harroche, D. Polarity complex proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1778, 614–630 (2008).
3. Humbert, P. O., Dow, L. E. & Russell, S. M. The Scribble and Par complexes in polarity and migration: friends or foes? Trends Cell Biol. 16, 622–630 (2006).
4. Bos, J. L. Linking Rap to cell adhesion. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 17, 123–128 (2005).
5. Jaffe, A. B. & Hall, A. Rho GTPases: biochemistry and biology. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 21, 247–269 (2005).
6. Nobes, C. D. & Hall, A. Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell 81, 53–62 (1995).
7. Sander, E. E., ten Klooster, J. P., van Delft, S., van der Kammen, R. A. & Collard, J. G. Rac downregulates Rho activity: reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior. J. Cell Biol. 147, 1009–1022 (1999).
8. Nimnual, A. S., Taylor, L. J. & Bar-Sagi, D. Redox-dependent downregulation of Rho by Rac. Nature Cell Biol. 5, 236–241 (2003).
9. Knoblich, J. A. Mechanisms of asymmetric stem cell division. Cell 132, 583–597 (2008).
10. Gonczy, P. Mechanisms of asymmetric cell division: flies and worms pave the way. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 355–366 (2008).
11. Kemphues, K. J., Priess, J. R., Morton, D. G. & Cheng, N. S. Identification of genes required for cytoplasmic localization in early C. elegans embryos. Cell 52, 311–320 (1988).
12. Watts, J. L. et al. par-6, a gene involved in the establishment of asymmetry in early C. elegans embryos, mediates the asymmetric localization of PAR-3. Development 122, 3133–3140 (1996).
13. Cowan, C. R. & Hyman, A. A. Acto-myosin reorganization and PAR polarity in C. elegans. Development 134, 1035–1043 (2007).
14. Schonegg, S., Constantinescu, A. T., Hoege, C. & Hyman, A. A. The Rho GTPase-activating proteins RGA-3 and RGA-4 are required to set the initial size of PAR domains in Caenorhabditis elegans one-cell embryos. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 14976–14981 (2007).
15. Albertson, R. & Doe, C. Q.Dlg, Scrib and Lgl regulate neuroblast cell size and mitotic spindle asymmetry. Nature Cell Biol. 5, 166–170 (2003).
16. Betschinger, J. & Knoblich, J. A. Dare to be different: asymmetric cell division in Drosophila, C. elegans and vertebrates. Curr. Biol. 14, R674–R685 (2004).
17. Peng, C. Y., Manning, L., Albertson, R. & Doe, C. Q. The tumour-suppressor genes lgl and dlg regulate basal protein targeting in Drosophila neuroblasts. Nature 408, 596–600 (2000).
18. Ohshiro, T., Yagami, T., Zhang, C. & Matsuzaki, F. Role of cortical tumour-suppressor proteins in asymmetric division of Drosophila neuroblast. Nature 408, 593–596 (2000).
19. Betschinger, J., Mechtler, K. & Knoblich, J. A. The Par complex directs asymmetric cell division by phosphorylating the cytoskeletal protein Lgl. Nature 422, 326–330 (2003).
20. Duncan, F. E., Moss, S. B., Schultz, R. M. & Williams, C. J. PAR-3 defines a central subdomain of the cortical actin cap in mouse eggs. Dev. Biol. 280, 38–47 (2005).
21. Vinot, S. et al. Asymmetric distribution of PAR proteins in the mouse embryo begins at the 8-cell stage during compaction. Dev. Biol. 282, 307–319 (2005).
22. Costa, M. R., Wen, G., Lepier, A., Schroeder, T. & Gotz, M. Par-complex proteins promote proliferative progenitor divisions in the developing mouse cerebral cortex. Development 135, 11–22 (2008).
23. Lechler, T. & Fuchs, E. Asymmetric cell divisions promote stratification and differentiation of mammalian skin. Nature 437, 275–280 (2005).
24. Chang, J. T. et al. Asymmetric T lymphocyte division in the initiation of adaptive immune responses. Science 315, 1687–1691 (2007).
25. Watabe-Uchida, M., Govek, E. E. & Van Aelst, L. Regulators of Rho GTPases in neuronal development. J. Neurosci. 26, 10633–10635 (2006).
26. Arimura, N. & Kaibuchi, K. Neuronal polarity: from extracellular signals to intracellular mechanisms. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 8, 194–205 (2007).
27. Kozma, R., Sarner, S., Ahmed, S. & Lim, L. Rho family GTPases and neuronal growth cone remodelling: relationship between increased complexity induced by Cdc42Hs, Rac1, and acetylcholine and collapse induced by RhoA and lysosphatidic acid. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 1201–1211 (1997).
28. van Leeuwen, F. N., van Delft, S., Kain, H. E., van der Kammen, R. A. & Collard, J. G. Rac regulates phosphorylation of the myosin-II heavy chain, actinomyosin disassembly and cell spreading. Nature Cell. Biol. 1, 242–248 (1999).
29. Schwamborn, J. C. & Puschel, A. W. The sequential activity of the GTPases Rap1B and Cdc42 determines neuronal polarity. Nature Neurosci. 7, 923–929 (2004).
30. Kunda, P., Paglini, G., Quiroga, S., Kosik, K. & Caceres, A. Evidence for the involvement of Tiam1 in axon formation. J. Neurosci. 21, 2361–2372 (2001).
31. Curmi, P. A. et al. Stathmin and its phosphoprotein family: general properties, biochemical and functional interaction with tubulin. Cell Struct. Funct. 24, 345–357 (1999).
32. Witte, H., Neukirchen, D. & Bradke, F. Microtubule stabilization specifies initial neuronal polarization. J. Cell Biol. 180, 619–632 (2008).
33. Nishimura, T. et al. PAR-6–PAR-3 mediates Cdc42-induced Rac activation through the Rac GEFs STEF/ Tiam1. Nature Cell Biol. 7, 270–277 (2005). This work, together with that of reference 29, unravelled a signalling pathway that involves RAP1, CDC42, RAC1 and crosstalk of these GTPases to PAR polarity proteins during axonal specification.
34. Schwamborn, J. C., Muller, M., Becker, A. H. & Puschel, A. W. Ubiquitination of the GTPase Rap1B by the ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 is required for the establishment of neuronal polarity. EMBO J. 26, 1410–1422 (2007).
35. Nishimura, T. et al. Role of the PAR-3–KIF3 complex in the establishment of neuronal polarity. Nature Cell Biol. 6, 328–334 (2004).
36. Schwamborn, J. C., Khazaie, M. R. & Puschel, A. W. The interaction of mPar3 with the ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 is required for the establishment of neuronal polarity. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 35259–35268 (2007).
37. Wang, H. R. et al. Regulation of cell polarity and protrusion formation by targeting RhoA for degradation. Science 302, 1775–1779 (2003).
38. Fivaz, M., Bandara, S., Inoue, T. & Meyer, T. Robust neuronal symmetry breaking by Ras-triggered local positive feedback. Curr. Biol. 18, 44–50 (2008).
39. Oinuma, I., Katoh, H. & Negishi, M. R. Ras controls axon specification upstream of glycogen synthase kinase-3β through integrin-linked kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 303–318 (2007).
40. Shi, S. H., Jan, L. Y. & Jan, Y. N. Hippocampal neuronal polarity specified by spatially localized mPar3/mPar6 and PI 3-kinase activity. Cell 112, 63–75 (2003).
41. Tashiro, A., Minden, A. & Yuste, R. Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by the Rho family of small GTPases: antagonistic roles of Rac and Rho. Cereb Cortex. 10, 927–938 (2000).
42. Tashiro, A. & Yuste, R. Role of Rho GTPases in the morphogenesis and motility of dendritic spines. Methods Enzymol. 439, 285–302 (2008).
43. Zhang, H. & Macara, I. G. The polarity protein PAR-3 and TIAM1 cooperate in dendritic spine morphogenesis. Nature Cell Biol. 8, 227–237 (2006).
44. Zhang, H. & Macara, I. G. The PAR-6 polarity protein regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis through p190 RhoGAP and the Rho GTPase. Dev. Cell 14, 216–226 (2008). Shows that the PAR6–aPKC-mediated downregulation of RhoA involves p190 RhoGAP in the formation of dendritic spines.
45. Xie, Z., Huganir, R. L. & Penzes, P. Activity-dependent dendritic spine structural plasticity is regulated by small GTPase Rap1 and its target AF-6. Neuron 48, 605–618 (2005).
46. Pak, D. T., Yang, S., Rudolph-Correia, S., Kim, E. & Sheng, M. Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by SPAR, a PSD-95-associated RapGAP. Neuron 31, 289–303 (2001).
47. del Pozo, M. A. et al. ICAMs redistributed by chemokines to cellular uropods as a mechanism for recruitment of T lymphocytes. J. Cell Biol. 137, 493–508 (1997).
48. Krummel, M. F. & Macara, I. Maintenance and modulation of T cell polarity. Nature Immunol. 7, 1143–1149 (2006).
49. del Pozo, M. A., Vicente-Manzanares, M., Tejedor, R., Serrador, J. M. & Sanchez-Madrid, F. Rho GTPases control migration and polarization of adhesion molecules and cytoskeletal ERM components in T lymphocytes. Eur. J. Immunol. 29, 3609–3620 (1999).
50. D’Souza-Schorey, C., Boettner, B. & Van Aelst, L. Rac regulates integrin-mediated spreading and increased adhesion of T lymphocytes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 3936–3946 (1998).
51. Nurmi, S. M., Autero, M., Raunio, A. K., Gahmberg, C. G. & Fagerholm, S. C. Phosphorylation of the LFA-1 integrin β2-chain on Thr-758 leads to adhesion, Rac-1/Cdc42 activation, and stimulation of CD69 expression in human T cells. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 968–975 (2007).
52. Lee, J. H. et al. Roles of p-ERM and Rho–ROCK signaling in lymphocyte polarity and uropod formation. J. Cell Biol. 167, 327–337 (2004).
53. Shimonaka, M. et al. Rap1 translates chemokine signals to integrin activation, cell polarization, and motility across vascular endothelium under flow. J. Cell Biol. 161, 417–427 (2003).
54. Gerard, A., Mertens, A. E., van der Kammen, R. A. & Collard, J. G. The Par polarity complex regulates Rap1- and chemokine-induced T cell polarization. J. Cell Biol. 176, 863–875 (2007).
55. Ludford-Menting, M. J. et al. A network of PDZ-containing proteins regulates T cell polarity and morphology during migration and immunological synapse formation. Immunity 22, 737–748 (2005).
56. Labno, C. M. et al. Itk functions to control actin polymerization at the immune synapse through localized activation of Cdc42 and WASP. Curr. Biol. 13, 1619–1624 (2003).
57. Faure, S. et al. ERM proteins regulate cytoskeleton relaxation promoting T cell–APC conjugation. Nature Immunol. 5, 272–279 (2004).
58. Yeh, J. H., Sidhu, S. S. & Chan, A. C. Regulation of a late phase of T cell polarity and effector functions by Crtam. Cell 132, 846–859 (2008).
59. Yamada, S. & Nelson, W. J. Synapses: sites of cell recognition, adhesion, and functional specification. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 267–294 (2007).
60. Yamanaka, T. & Ohno, S. Role of Lgl/Dlg/Scribble in the regulation of epithelial junction, polarity and growth. Front. Biosci. 13, 6693–6707 (2008).
61. Gumbiner, B. & Simons, K. The role of uvomorulin in the formation of epithelial occluding junctions. Ciba Found. Symp. 125, 168–186 (1987).
62. Ebnet, K. Organization of multiprotein complexes at cell–cell junctions. Histochem. Cell Biol. 130, 1–20 (2008).
63. Nakagawa, M., Fukata, M., Yamaga, M., Itoh, N. & Kaibuchi, K. Recruitment and activation of Rac1 by the formation of E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion sites. J. Cell Sci. 114, 1829–1838 (2001).
64. Kim, S. H., Li, Z. & Sacks, D. B. E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell attachment activates Cdc42. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 36999–37005 (2000).
65. Fukuhara, T. et al. Activation of Cdc42 by trans interactions of the cell adhesion molecules nectins through c-Src and Cdc42–GEF FRG. J. Cell Biol. 166, 393–405 (2004).
66. Kawakatsu, T. et al. Trans-interactions of nectins induce formation of filopodia and Lamellipodia through the respective activation of Cdc42 and Rac small G proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 50749–50755 (2002).
67. Yamanaka, T. et al. PAR-6 regulates aPKC activity in a novel way and mediates cell–cell contact-induced formation of the epithelial junctional complex. Proposes a mechanism through which binding of CDC42 to PAR6 might lead to aPKC activation, which is a crucial event in several polarization processes.
68. Takaishi, K., Sasaki, T., Kotani, H., Nishioka, H. & Takai, Y. Regulation of cell–cell adhesion by rac and rho small G proteins in MDCK cells. J. Cell Biol. 139, 1047–1059 (1997).
69. Chen, X. & Macara, I. G. Par-3 controls tight junction assembly through the Rac exchange factor Tiam1. Nature Cell Biol. 7, 262–269 (2005).
70. Mertens, A. E., Rygiel, T. P., Olivo, C., van der Kammen, R. & Collard, J. G. The Rac activator Tiam1 controls tight junction biogenesis in keratinocytes through binding to and activation of the Par polarity complex. J. Cell Biol. 170, 1029–1037 (2005). References 69 and 70 show that TIAM1, in association with PAR3, controls tight-junction biogenesis in epithelial cells.

71. O'Brien, L. E. *et al.* Rac1 orientates epithelial apical polarity through effects on basolateral laminin assembly. *Nature Cell Biol.* **3**, 831–838 (2001).

72. Liu, K. D. *et al.* Rac1 is required for reorientation of polarity and lumen formation through a PI 3-kinase-dependent pathway. *Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol.* **293**, F1633–F1640 (2007).

73. Mertens, A. E., Pegtel, D. M. & Collard, J. G. Tiam1 takes PARt in cell polarity. *Trends Cell Biol.* **16**, 308–316 (2006).

74. Martin-Belmonte, F. *et al.* Cell-polarity dynamics controls the mechanism of lumen formation in epithelial morphogenesis. *Curr. Biol.* **18**, 507–513 (2008).

75. Noren, N. K., Niessen, C. M., Gumbiner, B. M. & Burridge, K. Cadherin engagement regulates Rho family GTPases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 33305–33308 (2001).

76. Wildenberg, G. A. *et al.* p120-catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell–cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho. *Cell* **127**, 1027–1039 (2006).

77. Yamada, S. & Nelson, W. J. Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell–cell adhesion. *J. Cell Biol.* **178**, 517–527 (2007).

78. Ivanov, A. I., Hunt, D., Utech, M., Nusrat, A. & Parkos, C. A. Differential roles for actin polymerization and a myosin II motor in assembly of the epithelial apical junctional complex. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **16**, 2636–2650 (2005).

79. Vaezi, A., Bauer, C., Vasioukhin, V. & Fuchs, E. Actin cable dynamics and Rho/Rock orchestrate a polarized cytoskeletal architecture in the early steps of assembling a stratified epithelium. *Dev. Cell* **3**, 367–381 (2002).

80. Sahai, E. & Marshall, C. J. ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adherens junctions downstream of Rho. *Nature Cell Biol.* **4**, 408–415 (2002).

81. Martin, P. & Parkhurst, S. M. Parallels between tissue repair and embryo morphogenesis. *Development* **131**, 3021–3034 (2004).

82. Qin, Y., Capaldo, C., Gumbiner, B. M. & Macara, I. G. The mammalian Scribble polarity protein regulates epithelial cell adhesion and migration through E-cadherin. *J. Cell Biol.* **171**, 1061–1071 (2005).

83. Wells, C. D. *et al.* A Rich1/Amot complex regulates the Cdc42 GTPase and apical-polarity proteins in epithelial cells. *Cell* **125**, 535–548 (2006).

84. Yang, J. & Weinberg, R. A. Epithelial–mesenchymal transition: at the crossroads of development and tumor metastasis. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 818–829 (2008).

85. Ozdamar, B. *et al.* Regulation of the polarity protein Par6 by TGFβ receptors controls epithelial cell plasticity. *Science* **307**, 1603–1609 (2005). Implicates PAR6-dependent proteasomal degradation of RhoA in the onset of TGFβ-induced EMT.

86. Wang, X. *et al.* Downregulation of Par-3 expression and disruption of Par complex integrity by TGF-β during the process of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in rat proximal epithelial cells. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1782**, 51–59 (2008).

87. Whiteman, E. L., Liu, C. J., Fearon, E. R. & Margolis, B. The transcription factor snail represses Crumbs3 expression and disrupts apico-basal polarity complexes. *Oncogene* **27**, 3875–3879 (2008).

88. Wodarz, A. & Nathke, I. Cell polarity in development and cancer. *Nature Cell Biol.* **9**, 1016–1024 (2007).

89. Lee, M. & Vasioukhin, V. Cell polarity and cancer-cell and tissue polarity as a non-canonical tumor suppressor. *J. Cell Sci.* **121**, 1141–1150 (2008).

90. Hariharan, I. K. & Bilder, D. Regulation of imaginal disc growth by tumor-suppressor genes in *Drosophila*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **40**, 335–361 (2006).

91. Dow, L. E. & Humbert, P. O. Polarity regulators and the control of epithelial architecture, cell migration, and tumorigenesis. *Int. Rev. Cytol.* **262**, 253–302 (2007).

92. Malliri, A. *et al.* Mice deficient in the Rac activator Tiam1 are resistant to Ras-induced skin tumours. *Nature* **417**, 867–871 (2002).

93. Sahai, E. & Marshall, C. J. RHO–GTPases and cancer. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **2**, 133–142 (2002).

94. Ellenbroek, S. I. & Collard, J. G. Rho GTPases: functions and association with cancer. *Clin. Exp. Metastasis* **24**, 657–672 (2007).

95. Pegtel, D. M. *et al.* The Par–Tiam1 complex controls persistent migration by stabilizing microtubule-dependent front-rear polarity. *Curr. Biol.* **17**, 1623–1634 (2007).

96. Ridley, A. J. *et al.* Cell migration: integrating signals from front to back. *Science* **302**, 1704–1709 (2003).

97. Raftopoulou, M. & Hall, A. Cell migration: Rho GTPases lead the way. *Dev. Biol.* **265**, 23–32 (2004).

98. Trentin, A. G. Thyroid hormone and astrocyte morphogenesis. *J. Endocrinol.* **189**, 189–197 (2006).

99. Etienne-Manneville, S. & Hall, A. Integrin-mediated activation of Cdc42 controls cell polarity in migrating astrocytes through PKCζ. *Cell* **106**, 489–498 (2001). References 99–102 identified the sequential signalling of CDC42 and of PAR and Scribble-complex components during wound-induced astrocyte migration.

100. Etienne-Manneville, S. & Hall, A. Cdc42 regulates GSK-3β and adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. *Nature* **421**, 753–756 (2003).

101. Etienne-Manneville, S., Manneville, J. B., Nicholls, S., Ferenczi, M. A. & Hall, A. Cdc42 and Par6–PKCζ regulate the spatially localized association ofDlg1 and APC to control cell polarization. *J. Cell Biol.* **170**, 895–901 (2005).

102. Osmani, N., Vitale, N., Borg, J. P. & Etienne-Manneville, S. Scrib controls Cdc42 localization and activity to promote cell polarization during astrocyte migration. *Curr. Biol.* **16**, 2395–2405 (2006).

103. Dow, L. E. *et al.* The tumour-suppressor Scribble dictates cell polarity during directed epithelial migration: regulation of Rho GTPase recruitment to the leading edge. *Oncogene* **26**, 2272–2282 (2007).

104. Shin, K., Wang, Q. & Margolis, B. PATJ regulates directional migration of mammalian epithelial cells. *EMBO Rep.* **8**, 158–164 (2007).

105. Nishimura, T. & Kaibuchi, K. Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR-3. *Dev. Cell* **13**, 15–28 (2007).

106. Shen, Y. *et al.* Nudel binds Cdc42GAP to modulate Cdc42 activity at the leading edge of migrating cells. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 342–353 (2008).

107. Nakayama, M. *et al.* Rho-kinase phosphorylates PAR-3 and disrupts PAR complex formation. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 205–215 (2008). Shows that Rho–ROCK induces disassembly of the PAR complex and thereby inhibits CDC42-induced RAC1 activation during cell migration.

108. Jiang, W. *et al.* p190A RHOGAP is a glycogen synthase kinase-3β substrate required for polarized cell migration. *J. Biol. Chem.* **283**, 20978–20988 (2008).

109. Cau, J. & Hall, A. Cdc42 controls the polarity of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons through two distinct signal transduction pathways. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 2579–2587 (2005).

110. Pertz, O., Hodgson, L., Klemke, R. L. & Hahn, K. M. Spatiotemporal dynamics of RhoA activity in migrating cells. *Nature* **440**, 1069–1072 (2006).

111. Soloff, R. S., Katayama, C., Lin, M. Y., Feramisco, J. R. & Hedrick, S. M. Targeted deletion of protein kinase C λ reveals a distribution of functions between the two atypical protein kinase C isoforms. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 3250–3260 (2004).

112. Hirose, T. *et al.* PAR3 is essential for cyst-mediated epicardial development by establishing apical cortical domains. *Development* **133**, 1389–1398 (2006).

113. Sugihara, K. *et al.* Rac1 is required for the formation of three germ layers during gastrulation. *Oncogene* **17**, 3427–3433 (1998).

114. Chen, F. *et al.* Cdc42 is required for PIP₂-induced actin polymerization and early development but not for cell viability. *Curr. Biol.* **10**, 758–765 (2000).

115. Thumkeo, D. *et al.* Targeted disruption of the mouse rho-associated kinase 2 gene results in intrauterine growth retardation and fetal death. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **23**, 5043–5055 (2003).

116. Makarova, O., Roh, M. H., Liu, C. J., Laurinec, S. & Margolis, B. Mammalian Crumbs3 is a small transmembrane protein linked to protein associated with Lin-7 (Pals1). *Gene* **302**, 21–29 (2003).

117. Roh, M. H. & Margolis, B. Composition and function of PDZ protein complexes during cell polarization. *Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol.* **285**, F377–F382 (2003).

118. Kowalczyk, A. P. & Moses, K. Photoreceptor cells in flies and mammals: Crumby homology? *Dev. Cell* **2**, 253–254 (2002).

119. Tepass, U., Tanentzapf, G., Ward, R. & Fehon, R. Epithelial cell polarity and cell junctions in *Drosophila*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **35**, 747–784 (2001).

120. Fogg, V. C., Liu, C. J. & Margolis, B. Multiple regions of Crumbs3 are required for tight junction formation in MCF10A cells. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 2859–2869 (2005).

121. Michel, D. *et al.* PATJ connects and stabilizes apical and lateral components of tight junctions in human intestinal cells. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 4049–4057 (2005).

122. Bilder, D., Li, M. & Perrimon, N. Cooperative regulation of cell polarity and growth by *Drosophila* tumor suppressors. *Science* **289**, 113–116 (2000).

123. Budnik, V. *et al.* Regulation of synapse structure and function by the *Drosophila* tumor suppressor gene *dlg*. *Neuron* **17**, 627–640 (1996).

124. Mathew, D. *et al.* Recruitment of scribble to the synaptic scaffolding complex requires GUK-holder, a novel DLG binding protein. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 531–539 (2002).

125. Mertens, A. E., Roovers, R. C. & Collard, J. G. Regulation of Tiam1–Rac signalling. *FEBS Lett.* **546**, 11–16 (2003).

126. Bishop, A. L. & Hall, A. Rho GTPases and their effector proteins. *Biochem. J.* **348**, 241–255 (2000).

127. Nombela-Arrieta, C. *et al.* Differential requirements for DOCK2 and phosphoinositide-3-kinase γ during T and B lymphocyte homing. *Immunity* **21**, 429–441 (2004).

128. Nakaya, Y., Sukowati, E. W., Wu, Y. & Sheng, G. RhoA and microtubule dynamics control cell–basement membrane interaction in EMT during gastrulation. *Nature Cell Biol.* **10**, 765–775 (2008).


**Acknowledgements**

We apologize to all those authors whose papers we could not cite because of space limitations. We thank A. Gerard for helpful comments. Work in our laboratory is supported by the Seventh Framework Program of the European Commission (TuMIC) and by grants from the Dutch Cancer Society to J.G.C.


**DATABASES**

UniProtKB: <http://www.uniprot.org>

aPKC | CDC42 | DLG | DOCK7 | LGL | Numb | PAR-1 | PAR-2 | PAR-3 | PAR-6 | Prospero | RAC1 | RAP1B | RhoA | Scribble | SMURF2 | stathmin | TIAM1


**FURTHER INFORMATION**

John G. Collard’s homepage: <http://www.nki.nl/Research/Faculty+and+Research/Divisions/Cell+Biology/Collard.htm>

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
