
Opinion

Mutant huntingtin and mitochondrial dysfunction

Ella Bossy-Wetzel, Alejandra Petrilli and Andrew B. Knott

University of Central Florida, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, 4000 Central Florida Boulevard, Orlando, FL 32816, USA

Huntington’s disease (HD) is a fatal, inherited neurodegenerative disorder that gradually robs affected individuals of memory, cognitive skills and normal movements. Although research has identified a single faulty gene, the huntingtin gene, as the cause of the disease, a cure remains elusive. Strong evidence indicates that mitochondrial impairment plays a key part in HD pathogenesis. Here, we highlight how mutant huntingtin (mtHtt) might cause mitochondrial dysfunction by either perturbing transcription of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins or by direct interaction with the organelle and modulation of respiration, mitochondrial membrane potential and Ca²⁺ buffering. In addition, we propose that mtHtt might convey its neurotoxicity by evoking defects in mitochondrial dynamics, organelle trafficking and fission and fusion, which, in turn, might result in bioenergetic failure and HD-linked neuronal dysfunction and cell death. Finally, we speculate how mitochondria might dictate selective vulnerability of long projection neurons, such as medium spiny neurons, which are particularly affected in HD.

Introduction

The discovery of the gene that causes Huntington’s disease (HD) in 1993 sparked tremendous hope that a cure was just around the corner [1]. However, this initial enthusiasm was soon diminished and a cure remains elusive as current treatments reduce the symptoms but do not prevent neuronal loss. Unexpectedly, the faulty gene product, mutant huntingtin (mtHtt), is an extremely large protein of 350 kDa and might act as a scaffold protein regulating vesicle and organelle trafficking and signaling pathways. Although the protein is mostly cytoplasmic, it is also present in smaller amounts in multiple subcellular compartments including the plasma membrane, nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, endocytic vesicles, Golgi and mitochondria, and it interferes with multiple cellular pathways [2–10]. Thus, these properties have made it difficult to pin down the normal and neurotoxic function(s) of huntingtin (Htt). Now, new evidence has emerged that implicates malfunctioning mitochondria in HD pathogenesis. Here, we focus on these new observations because they might bring us closer to effective treatments that can either slow or stall the relentless neuronal loss in HD. Specifically, we focus on the potential pathways by which mtHtt could cause mitochondrial dysfunction.

HD is an autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disorder that affects ~30,000 patients in the United States alone. Clinical symptoms of HD include progressive chorea (involuntary dance-like movements), rigidity, weight loss, dementia, seizures and psychiatric disturbances such as depression, withdrawal and irritability. Symptoms result from the selective loss of long projection neurons, known as medium spiny neurons, which are γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-releasing neurons in the striatal brain regions that control movement, memory and emotions. In addition, early neuronal loss and dysfunction occurs not only in the striatum but also in the cortex in HD patients [11]. HD is slowly progressive and patients succumb to the disease within 15–20 years of symptom onset.

HD is one of nine neurodegenerative disorders caused by an abnormal expansion of CAG repeats that encode a poly-glutamine stretch. A poly-glutamine expansion of <35 in the N terminus of Htt is normal and does not cause disease. However, Htt with an abnormal stretch of 36–39 glutamines results in incomplete penetrance, with some individuals developing HD whereas others do not, and 40 or more glutamines results in HD with full penetrance [12]. Clinical symptoms start in most cases between the ages of 30 and 40, but the disease can strike, in some rare cases, young patients whose Htt molecule has 60 or more glutamine residues [13]. Thus, there is an inverse relationship between the length of the poly-glutamine stretch and age of disease onset, with longer glutamine stretches resulting in earlier disease onset and increased severity.

A question that has long occupied neurologists is why disease onset is late despite the presence of the mutation at birth. In addition to the inherited CAG expansion, new observations indicate that somatic CAG expansions occur during aging in the striatum, the brain region that is most affected in HD, modulating the disease onset and progression [14]. The underlying mechanism responsible for the somatic expansion of CAG is activation of the error-prone base-pair-repair enzyme 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 (OGG1) that is induced by oxidative stress [14]. As oxidative damage accumulates with age, a somatic expansion of the CAG repeat might trigger the delayed onset of the disorder.

Mechanism of mtHtt action: gain or loss of function?

How mtHtt elicits neurodegeneration remains a mystery, but wild-type Htt exhibits anti-apoptotic properties [15,16]. Htt is a remarkably large molecule with ubiquitous expression. Its domain model does not indicate any

Corresponding author: Bossy-Wetzel, E. (ebossywe@mail.ucf.edu).

0166-2236/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2008.09.004 Available online 24 October 2008 609

Opinion

particular functions aside from three HEAT (Htt, elongation factor 3, regulatory A subunit of protein phosphatase 2A and TOR1) domains that might mediate protein interactions [17]. Indeed, numerous reports indicate that Htt interacts with >200 proteins, and abnormal protein interactions might, in part, mediate its toxicity [18,19]. For example, Htt interacts with transcription factors in the nucleus [19,20]. Specifically, Htt interacts with cAMP-response-element binding-protein (CREB)-binding protein and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) [18,19]. Furthermore, mtHtt reduces the binding of Sp1 to DNA [21,22]. In addition, Htt interacts with the tumor suppressor and transcription factor p53 [23]. Finally, a new study found that many Htt-interacting proteins are genetic modifiers of HD neurodegeneration [24].

Because HD inheritance is autosomal dominant, caused by a single copy of the mutant gene, the prevailing view is that mtHtt-mediated neuronal dysfunction results from a toxic gain of function. There is ample evidence supporting this view. For example, a common characteristic of HD pathology in both mice and humans is the formation of protein aggregates and inclusion bodies [25–27]. Although the mechanism of toxicity (if any) of these aggregates is unclear, their presence hints at a toxic gain of function in HD. Transgenic mouse models expressing full-length or exon 1 of mtHtt produce neuropathology resembling the human disorder and provide additional support for the toxic gain-of-function hypothesis [28].

The proposed mechanisms of mtHtt gain-of-function neurotoxicity include transcriptional modulation [19,20,29–31], protein aggregation [25–27,32] and excitotoxicity [33,34]. N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA)-receptor currents and Ca²⁺ are increased in medium spiny neurons of mtHtt transgenic mice [35–37]. In addition, caspase 6 cleavage of mtHtt is a required event for mtHtt-mediated toxicity, with the fragmented mtHtt conferring greater neurotoxicity [38].

Although the majority of the findings are consistent with a toxic gain of function for mtHtt, there is also evidence that mtHtt conveys neurodegeneration by a loss-of-function mechanism. For example, expression and transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) requires Htt, and mtHtt impairs BDNF-gene expression and BDNF vesicle trafficking [31]. Thus gain-of-function and loss-of-function mechanisms might co-exist and are not mutually exclusive, thereby adding to the complexity of the potential molecular pathways underlying HD.

Mitochondrial dysfunction

A crucial function of mitochondria is the conversion of food into energy or heat by a process known as oxidative phosphorylation. Neurons have intense energy demands that mitochondria must largely fill. Mitochondria in neurons support ATP-dependent processes such as plasma-membrane-potential maintenance, synaptic neurotransmitter release and re-uptake, and build-up of a reserve pool of vesicles for prolonged or high-frequency firing and axonal and dendritic transport of cargo and organelles [39–41]. Mitochondria also serve as important Ca²⁺ buffers, controlling cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ concentrations after neurotransmission [42]. Studies have implicated persistent high cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ levels in neuronal cell death [42–44]. In summary, mitochondria are crucial for normal neuronal function.

Despite the crucial role of mitochondria to neuronal health, some aspects of mitochondrial function can damage neurons. For example, mitochondria are the main source of free radicals, which are by-products of respiration that research indicates cause aging and neurodegeneration [45]. In addition, mitochondria also have an active role in the execution of cell death by the spill of apoptogenic factors from mitochondria [46].

Strong evidence indicates that mitochondrial malfunction plays a crucial part in HD pathogenesis [45]. First, HD patients exhibit profound weight loss despite normal or increased food intake [47]. Furthermore, there is a marked decrease in glucose metabolism and a corresponding increase in lactate in affected brain regions of HD patients, indicating a bioenergetic defect [48]. Indeed, postmortem brain samples of HD patients exhibit decreased activity of mitochondrial respiratory complexes II, III and IV [49]. Now, there is new evidence that indicates mitochondrial impairment occurs even in asymptomatic HD carriers; thus, mitochondrial defects might initiate disease onset [50]. Moreover, mitochondria isolated from lymphocytes of HD patients have decreased Ca²⁺-buffering capacity and their mitochondrial membrane potential depolarizes earlier at lower Ca²⁺ concentrations, possibly owing to a direct interaction between the poly-glutamine stretch in mtHtt and the mitochondria [10]. Striatal cells from mtHtt mice exhibit impairment of mitochondrial respiration and ATP synthesis [51]. Interestingly, expression of complex II subunits in striatal neurons expressing mtHtt exon 1 restores complex II respiratory activity and protects against cell death [52]. In addition, recent studies have reported ultrastructural changes in mitochondria in HD [10,53]. Finally, mitochondrial (mt)DNA deletions occur in HD patients during the progression of the disease [54,55].

Additional support for the notion that mitochondrial respiratory-chain inhibition has a key role in HD pathogenesis stems from experiments with 3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP), a selective inhibitor of succinate dehydrogenase and complex II. 3-NP recapitulates the loss of medium spiny neurons in the substantia nigra and HD-like symptoms in several vertebrate models [56]. In addition, humans exposed to 3-NP exhibit motor dysfunction similar to HD patients [28,57]. Finally, striatal cells expressing mtHtt exhibit increased susceptibility to 3-NP [58].

In summary, although there is clear evidence that profound mitochondrial impairment is an early and important event in HD pathogenesis, the molecular basis of this deficit remains unclear.

Link between transcriptional deregulation and mitochondrial dysfunction

Aberrant transcriptional regulation is one possible mechanism of mtHtt toxicity because cleaved mtHtt binds to several transcriptional regulators such as p53, Sp1, TAFII130 and CREB-binding protein and interferes with their function [19,20,29–31,59,60]. For instance, the tumor suppressor p53 regulates genes involved in mitochondrial function. mtHtt binds to p53 and increases p53 levels,

which, in turn, results in increased Bax and Puma expression and mitochondrial damage [23]. Inhibition of p53 prevents mitochondrial damage [23]. Similarly, p53 loss prevents mtHtt-mediated neurodegeneration in Drosophila [23]. Thus, altered mtHtt-induced p53 transcriptional activity results in mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal loss.

Studies with PGC-1α further support a mtHtt-mediated transcriptional block resulting in HD-linked mitochondrial deficits [61–63]. PGC-1α (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor [PPAR]-γ coactivator 1α) is a key transcriptional co-regulator and induces the transcription of cellular programs regulating mitochondrial respiration, oxidative stress defense and adaptive thermogenesis [64]. To regulate these programs, PGC-1α binds to transcription factors such as nuclear respiration factors -1 and -2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2) regulate nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes such as cytochrome c, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) and components of the respiratory chain complexes I–V. PGC-1α-gene knockout mice exhibit nervous system and striatal lesions, defective thermoregulation, hyperactivity and limb clasping, a behavioral indicator of neurodegeneration [65,66]. Three reports indicate that PGC-1α is a potent suppressor of free-radical production and becomes impaired during HD pathogenesis [61–63].

It was found that oxidative stress evoked by hydrogen peroxide triggers increased expression of PGC-1α and PGC-1β, a related gene [62]. Concomitant with this increase in PGC-1α is an increase in reactive-oxygen-species scavenging enzymes such as Zn and Cu SOD1, SOD2, catalase and glutathione peroxidase. Conversely, PGC-1α-gene knockdown cells exhibit lower SOD1, SOD2 and glutathione peroxidase expression in response to hydrogen peroxide. Furthermore, PGC-1α-gene knockout mice have lower SOD1 and SOD2 levels and are more

---

**Figure 1.** mtHtt impairs mitochondrial function by transcriptional dysregulation of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins and by direct effects on the organelle. (a) mtHtt blocks the PGC-1α promoter via inhibition of the CREB transcriptional activator, resulting in decreased PGC-1α expression. (b) Lowered PGC-1α will decrease PPARγ-mediated expression of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins that are necessary for respiration and oxidative-damage defense. (c) mtHtt can have direct effects on mitochondria, blocking the respiratory complex II, just as 3-NP does. Respiratory inhibition, in turn, leads to decreased energy production and ΔΨm in addition to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. The bioenergetic decline caused by transcriptional deregulation and direct effects of mtHtt on mitochondria can cause increased vulnerability to excitotoxic stimuli and amplification of the mitochondrial damage by Ca²⁺-mediated mitochondrial-permeability-transition-pore (mPTP) opening.

Abbreviations: CBP, CREB binding protein; cl–cV, respiratory complexes I–V; Cyt c, cytochrome c; Gpx1, glutathione peroxidase 1; IM, inner membrane; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; mtTFA, mitochondrial transcription factor A; OM, outer membrane.

sensitive to neurotoxicity induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), kainic acid and glutamate receptor agonist. Taken together, these findings indicate that PGC-1α loss might sensitize neurons to neurodegeneration in response to several neurotoxins.

The role of PGC-1α in HD pathogenesis was tested [61]. It was observed that PGC-1α was markedly decreased in medium spiny neurons, but not in interneurons, of HD transgenic mice, providing a potential explanation for the selective neuronal loss characteristic of HD. PGC-1α expression reduced neuronal loss in R6/2 HD mice. By contrast, PGC-1α reduction worsened the behavioral and neuropathological abnormalities of R6/2 mice. On the molecular level, mtHtt interferes with the PGC-1α promoter and the formation of CREB-TAF4 (TATA-binding protein [TBP]-associated factor 4) complexes, resulting in reduced PGC-1α transcription.

Further support for the idea that PGC-1α function is impaired in HD stems from findings by Weydt [63]. It was noticed that HD transgenic mice develop hypothermia. Uncoupling proteins (UCP) promote mitochondrial heat production by stimulating the production of heat at the expense of chemical energy. Recent reports indicate a neuroprotective function of UCPs [67]. It was found that mtHtt suppresses the UCP1 promoter [63]. Furthermore, HD mice had reduced food intake but increased energy expenditure, which might account for their low weight. Importantly, HD patients and mice exhibited reduced expression of PGC-1α target genes. Finally, striatal

neuronal cells expressing PGC-1α were less vulnerable to 3-NP, a complex II inhibitor. Collectively, these data indicate an inhibition of PGC-1α function by mtHtt and establish a link between transcriptional inhibition and mitochondrial dysfunction in HD.

Although the findings of transcriptional dysregulation by mtHtt are of high relevance, they cannot entirely explain all the mitochondrial defects observed in HD. For example, mtHtt binds directly to the mitochondrial outer membrane, forming large clusters [8–10]. Furthermore, mtHtt exon 1 directly impairs mitochondrial function, Ca²⁺ homeostasis and mitochondrial membrane potential in isolated mitochondria [8,68,69], and mitochondria in HD have altered ultrastructure and exhibit mtDNA deletions [54,55]. Thus, transcriptional inhibition of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins and direct inhibition of mitochondrial function by mtHtt might act in parallel to initiate metabolic defects and a neurodegenerative cascade in HD (Figure 1).

Mitochondrial trafficking deficits in HD

Although the bioenergetic deficits in HD are well known, recent studies indicate that impaired mitochondrial trafficking along axons and dendrites might also play a part in disease pathology. Mitochondria in healthy neurons form filaments of variable length (~2–25 μm), which move anterograde away from the cell body or retrograde toward the cell body along microtubule tracks (Figure 2). ATP-dependent motor proteins regulate mitochondrial movement.

Kinesins mediate anterograde transport and dynein-dynactin regulate retrograde transport [70] (Figure 2). Defects in proper positioning of mitochondria might profoundly affect normal neuronal function. Although mitochondrial distribution throughout the long neuronal processes (which extend up to one meter in motor neuron axons) is important, sites of high-energy demands, such as synapses and Nodes of Ranvier, possess densely packed mitochondrial populations [70]. Medium spiny neurons, the primary cell type affected by mtHtt, have long projections. Thus, one can speculate that polarized neurons with long axons might be more vulnerable than other cell types to trafficking defects.

Normal Htt protein regulates anterograde and retrograde transport of endocytic vesicles by interacting with several trafficking mediators: adaptin, Htt-interacting proteins (Hips) 1 and 14, Htt-associated proteins (HAPs) 1 and 40, SH3GL 3 (endophilin 3), clathrin and dynamin [18,24,71,72]. Wild-type Htt stimulates trafficking by binding to HAP1, which, in turn, leads to interaction with the molecular motor dynein-dynactin and kinesin and regulates microtubule-mediated BDNF vesicle transport and mitochondrial transport [73,74] (Figure 2). Phosphorylation of Htt serves as a molecular decision maker for anterograde versus retrograde direction of vesicle transport [75]. Whereas wild-type Htt promotes axonal BDNF vesicle trafficking, mtHtt interacts more tightly with HAP1 and dynactin. These interactions derail the molecular motors from the microtubule tracks and halt transport [73]. In addition, either loss of Htt or overexpression of mtHtt in *Drosophila* causes vesicle- and mitochondrial-movement defects [76].

Abnormal protein interaction of mtHtt with motor proteins has a role in trafficking defects in HD, but mtHtt aggregates might also act as physical roadblocks [9,77,78]. It was reported that mtHtt induces a change in mitochondrial morphology from elongated to round phenotype, which correlates with a blockage in mitochondrial movement [77]. Thus, aggregates in the narrow neuronal projections seem to prevent passage and fragmented mitochondria accumulate around mtHtt aggregates [77]. Besides blocking mitochondrial movement, it is also possible that mtHtt elicits an imbalance in mitochondrial fission and fusion, which might cause the mitochondrial defects underlying HD pathogenesis.

### Defects in mitochondrial fission and fusion balance in neurodegeneration

In addition to migration and movement, mitochondria undergo cycles of fusion (combination of two mitochondria) and fission (splitting of a mitochondrial filament into two or more new organelles). An evolutionarily conserved engine consisting of large GTPases of the dynamtin family of proteins regulates these processes [39–41]. The key mitochondrial fission regulator is dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), which is localized in the cytoplasm and cycles on and off mitochondria to mediate fission events. DRP1 forms large clusters on mitochondria at fission sites. Recent findings indicate that motor proteins such as dynein regulate mitochondrial fission by recruitment of DRP1 to mitochondria [79]. Disruption of dynein-dynactin results in loss of DRP1 from mitochondria [79]. Thus, there seems to be a link between mitochondrial motors and fission regulators. Recombinant DRP1 protein oligomerizes into large ring structures in vitro [80], and the yeast ortholog Dnm1 oligomerizes into spirals that have the diameter of mitochondria [81]. Thus, it has been proposed that DRP1 might function similar to dynamin by acting as a mechanoenzyme to constrict and divide mitochondria. Fission is important for mitochondrial renewal, redistribution and proliferation into synapses.

Mitofusins (MFN1 and MFN2) located on the mitochondrial outer membrane and optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) located on the inner membrane mediate mitochondrial fusion [82–84]. Fusion is important for mitochondrial interaction and communication, which facilitate mitochondrial movement and distribution across long distances.

An emerging concept in studies of neurodegeneration is that an imbalance of mitochondrial fission and fusion can initiate a neurodegenerative cascade [39–41]. The strongest support for this notion originates from studies of hereditary neurodegenerative disease in humans. Mutations in MFN2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome, a progressive peripheral neuropathy linked with axonal sensory and motor-neuron degeneration [85–87]. In addition, hereditary mutations in OPA1 cause autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA) characterized by retinal ganglion and optic nerve degeneration [85,88,89]. Whereas most mutations lead to vision loss, some mutations in OPA1 cause an ‘ADOA-plus’ phenotype, which is characterized by additional deafness, sensory-motor neuropathy and muscle weakness [90]. Because of the similarity of the phenotypes caused by MFN2 and OPA1 mutations, these two gene products might be functionally linked. Mutations in MFN2 and OPA1 have an impact on mitochondrial fusion, trafficking and bioenergetic functionality [39–41,91,92].

Expression of mtHtt causes abnormal mitochondrial ultrastructure [10,53], impaired Ca²⁺ buffering [10,93], bioenergetic defects [51,52] and mtDNA deletions [54,55]. In principle, all of these effects are consistent with a defect in maintaining mitochondrial fission and fusion balance, although this hypothesis has not been adequately explored [40]. Thus, we hypothesize malfunctions of the mitochondrial fission and fusion machinery might cause the HD-linked mitochondrial defects (Figure 3). The following observations support this hypothesis. First, mtHtt in transgenic mice forms aggregates on the tips or opposing sides of mitochondria in immuno electron microscopy [10]. This distribution pattern has striking similarities to DRP1 [94]. Thus, mtHtt might be part of a DRP1 complex. Second, Htt interacts with dynamin [24]. It is, therefore, conceivable that DRP1, in analogy to dynamin, might form a complex with Htt. Last, Htt interacts with endophilins [95]. Endophilins play a part in endocytosis and membrane scission [96,97]. Bax, a pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family, co-localizes at sites of mitochondrial division during apoptosis that also contain DRP1 and MFN2 [94]. Bax also binds Endophilin B1 and might regulate apoptotic fission [94,98–100]. Thus, one can speculate that Htt might regulate fission events by interaction with Endophilin family members. In summary, normal Htt

Normal

Huntington's disease

Figure 3. The hypothesis that mtHtt impinges on the mitochondrial fission and fusion engine by recruitment into the DRP1–MFN complexes. Mitochondrial fusion enables mixing of metabolites and mtDNA molecules. Fusion might prevent manifestation of mtDNA mutations (mtDNA<sup>mt</sup>) by complementation with wild-type mtDNA. mtHtt might abnormally interact with the mitochondrial fission and fusion GTPases DRP1 or MFN thereby preventing further mitochondrial fusion or continuous fission. This might have a profound impact on mitochondrial mobility, Ca<sup>2+</sup> handling, respiration, ATP production, free-radical production and mitochondrial membrane potential. It might also lead to the manifestation of mitochondrial DNA mutations and might sensitize neurons to Ca<sup>2+</sup>-mediated opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) and release of apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome c (Cyt c). The question marks denote that we do not know yet whether Htt or mtHtt interacts with Drp1 and Mfn2.

might regulate mitochondrial fission and fusion complexes and mtHtt might alter the assembly and function of these complexes. New investigations are needed to test this idea.

Selective neuronal loss

Why do long projection neurons selectively degenerate in HD when mtHtt is present in all cells? Several cell-type-specific characteristics might be responsible. For example, the loss of PGC-1α in medium spiny neurons and not other neurons (e.g. interneurons) might explain their selective loss [61]. Another possibility is that impaired mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> buffering affects medium spiny neurons more severely because of the lack of compensatory mechanisms [101]. Alternatively, there might be increased expression of cell death mediators in medium spiny neurons as compared with other cell types. Moreover, these neurons might be more sensitive to oxidative stress. Furthermore, because medium spiny neurons have long projections, it might render them more vulnerable to trafficking and mitochondrial fission and fusion defects. Finally, there is

increasing evidence that the mitochondrial proteome differs based on cell type [102].

Concluding remarks

Treatment regimes for HD relieve merely the symptoms but can neither restore neuronal function nor stop the insidious loss of neurons. Clearly, although a single gene mutation causes HD, the outcome is highly complex and it is unlikely that a single drug will undo the damage. Current treatments are nonspecific and include antidepressants, anti-psychotics and levodopa to ameliorate some of the movement defects. Because HD is an autosomal-dominant hereditary disorder with late onset, physicians can start potential treatment regimes before the symptomatic stage and follow treatment efficacy over time. New insights toward the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying HD in the past years have provided important clues for therapeutic intervention. Potential targets include restoring metabolism and mitochondrial function, blocking excitotoxicity, modulating transcription,

diminishing aggregate formation and, now, increasing axonal-organelle dynamics. Because of the complexity of the disease and its long duration, combinatorial treatments might hold the greatest promise.

**Acknowledgements**

We acknowledge the support of National Institutes of Health (www.nih.gov) grants R01 EY016164, R01 NS047456 and R01 NS055193 and the Hereditary Disease Foundation (www.hdfoundation.org). We apologize to the investigator's whose work we could not cite owing to space restrictions. We thank Adam Wilson for help with illustrations.

**References**

1. The Huntington’s Disease Collaboration Research Group (1993) A novel gene containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable on Huntington’s disease chromosomes. The Huntington’s Disease Collaborative Research Group. *Cell* 72, 971–983
2. Kegel, K.B. *et al.* (2002) Huntingtin is present in the nucleus, interacts with the transcriptional corepressor C-terminal binding protein, and represses transcription. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 7466–7476
3. Kegel, K.B. *et al.* (2005) Huntingtin associates with acidic phospholipids at the plasma membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 36464–36473
4. Rockabrand, E. *et al.* (2007) The first 17 amino acids of Huntingtin modulate its sub-cellular localization, aggregation and effects on calcium homeostasis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 16, 61–77
5. Strehlow, A.N. *et al.* (2007) Wild-type huntingtin participates in protein trafficking between the Golgi and the extracellular space. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 16, 391–409
6. Atwal, R.S. *et al.* (2007) Huntingtin has a membrane association signal that can modulate huntingtin aggregation, nuclear entry and toxicity. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 16, 2600–2615
7. Caviston, J.P. *et al.* (2007) Huntingtin facilitates dynein/dynactin-mediated vesicle transport. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 104, 10045–10050
8. Choo, Y.S. *et al.* (2004) Mutant huntingtin directly increases susceptibility of mitochondria to the calcium-induced permeability transition and cytochrome c release. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 13, 1407–1420
9. Orr, A.L. *et al.* (2008) N-terminal mutant huntingtin associates with mitochondria and impairs mitochondrial trafficking. *J. Neurosci.* 28, 2783–2792
10. Panov, A.V. *et al.* (2002) Early mitochondrial calcium defects in Huntington’s disease are a direct effect of polyglutamines. *Nat. Neurosci.* 5, 731–736
11. Rosas, H.D. *et al.* (2002) Regional and progressive thinning of the cortical ribbon in Huntington’s disease. *Neurology* 58, 695–701
12. Myers, R.H. (2004) Huntington’s disease genetics. *NeuroRx* 1, 255–262
13. Ribai, P. *et al.* (2007) Psychiatric and cognitive difficulties as indicators of juvenile huntington disease onset in 29 patients. *Arch. Neurol.* 64, 813–819
14. Kovtun, I.V. *et al.* (2007) OGG1 initiates age-dependent CAG trinucleotide expansion in somatic cells. *Nature* 447, 447–452
15. Leavitt, B.R. *et al.* (2001) Wild-type huntingtin reduces the cellular toxicity of mutant huntingtin *in vivo*. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* 68, 313–324
16. Rigamonti, D. *et al.* (2000) Wild-type huntingtin protects from apoptosis upstream of caspase-3. *J. Neurosci.* 20, 3705–3713
17. Andrade, M.A. and Bork, P. (1995) HEAT repeats in the Huntington’s disease protein. *Nat. Genet.* 11, 115–116
18. Li, S.H. and Li, X.J. (2004) Huntingtin-protein interactions and the pathogenesis of Huntington’s disease. *Trends Genet.* 20, 146–154
19. Sugars, K.L. and Rubinsztein, D.C. (2003) Transcriptional abnormalities in Huntington disease. *Trends Genet.* 19, 233–238
20. Thomas, E.A. (2006) Striatal specificity of gene expression dysregulation in Huntington’s disease. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 84, 1151–1164
21. Dunah, A.W. *et al.* (2002) Sp1 and TAFII130 transcriptional activity disrupted in early Huntington’s disease. *Science* 296, 2238–2243
22. Li, S.H. *et al.* (2002) Interaction of Huntington disease protein with transcriptional activator Sp1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 22, 1277–1287
23. Bae, B.I. *et al.* (2005) p53 mediates cellular dysfunction and behavioral abnormalities in Huntington’s disease. *Neuron* 47, 29–41

24 Kaltenbach, L.S. *et al.* (2007) Huntingtin interacting proteins are genetic modifiers of neurodegeneration. *PLoS Genet.* 3, e82
25 Davies, S.W. *et al.* (1997) Formation of neuronal intranuclear inclusions underlies the neurological dysfunction in mice transgenic for the HD mutation. *Cell* 90, 537–548
26 DiFiglia, M. *et al.* (1997) Aggregation of huntingtin in neuronal intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic neurites in brain. *Science* 277, 1990–1993
27 Sapp, E. *et al.* (1999) Axonal transport of N-terminal huntingtin suggests early pathology of corticostriatal projections in Huntington disease. *J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.* 58, 165–173
28 Rubinsztein, D.C. (2002) Lessons from animal models of Huntington’s disease. *Trends Genet.* 18, 202–209
29 Cha, J.H. (2000) Transcriptional dysregulation in Huntington’s disease. *Trends Neurosci.* 23, 387–392
30 Luthi-Carter, R. *et al.* (2000) Decreased expression of striatal signaling genes in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 9, 1259–1271
31 Zuccato, C. *et al.* (2001) Loss of huntingtin-mediated BDNF gene transcription in Huntington’s disease. *Science* 293, 493–498
32 Ross, C.A. (2004) Huntington’s disease: new paths to pathogenesis. *Cell* 118, 4–7
33 DiFiglia, M. (1990) Excitotoxic injury of the neostriatum: a model for Huntington’s disease. *Trends Neurosci.* 13, 286–289
34 Fan, M.M. and Raymond, L.A. (2007) N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function and excitotoxicity in Huntington’s disease. *Prog. Neurobiol.* 81, 272–293
35 Fernandes, H.B. *et al.* (2007) Mitochondrial sensitivity and altered calcium handling underlie enhanced NMDA-induced apoptosis in YAC128 model of Huntington’s disease. *J. Neurosci.* 27, 13614–13623
36 Zeron, M.M. *et al.* (2004) Potentiation of NMDA receptor-mediated excitotoxicity linked with intrinsic apoptotic pathway in YAC transgenic mouse model of Huntington’s disease. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* 25, 469–479
37 Zeron, M.M. *et al.* (2002) Increased sensitivity to N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated excitotoxicity in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. *Neuron* 33, 849–860
38 Graham, R.K. *et al.* (2006) Cleavage at the caspase-6 site is required for neuronal dysfunction and degeneration due to mutant huntingtin. *Cell* 125, 1179–1191
39 Chan, D.C. (2006) Mitochondria: dynamic organelles in disease, aging, and development. *Cell* 125, 1241–1252
40 Knott, A.B. *et al.* (2008) Mitochondrial fragmentation in neurodegeneration. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 9, 505–518
41 Knott, A.B. and Bossy-Wetzel, E. Impairing the mitochondrial fission and fusion balance: a new mechanism of neurodegeneration. *Annals of NYAS* (in press)
42 Budd, S.L. and Nicholls, D.G. (1996) Mitochondria, calcium regulation, and acute glutamate excitotoxicity in cultured cerebellar granule cells. *J. Neurochem.* 67, 2282–2291
43 Nicholls, D.G. and Ward, M.W. (2000) Mitochondrial membrane potential and neuronal glutamate excitotoxicity: mortality and millivolts. *Trends Neurosci.* 23, 166–174
44 Vesce, S. *et al.* (2004) Relationships between superoxide levels and delayed calcium deregulation in cultured cerebellar granule cells exposed continuously to glutamate. *J. Neurochem.* 90, 683–693
45 Lin, M.T. and Beal, M.F. (2006) Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. *Nature* 443, 787–795
46 Green, D.R. and Reed, J.C. (1998) Mitochondria and apoptosis. *Science* 281, 1309–1312
47 Djousse, L. *et al.* (2002) Weight loss in early stage of Huntington’s disease. *Neurology* 59, 1325–1330
48 Jenkins, B.G. *et al.* (2005) Effects of CAG repeat length, HTT protein length and protein context on cerebral metabolism measured using magnetic resonance spectroscopy in transgenic mouse models of Huntington’s disease. *J. Neurochem.* 95, 553–562
49 Gu, M. *et al.* (1996) Mitochondrial defect in Huntington’s disease caudate nucleus. *Ann. Neurol.* 39, 385–389
50 Saft, C. *et al.* (2005) Mitochondrial impairment in patients and asymptomatic mutation carriers of Huntington’s disease. *Mov. Disord.* 20, 674–679

51 Milakovic, T. and Johnson, G.V. (2005) Mitochondrial respiration and ATP production are significantly impaired in striatal cells expressing mutant huntingtin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 30773–30782

52 Benchoua, A. *et al.* (2006) Involvement of mitochondrial complex II defects in neuronal death produced by N-terminus fragment of mutated huntingtin. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 17, 1652–1663

53 Squitieri, F. *et al.* (2006) Severe ultrastructural mitochondrial changes in lymphoblasts homozygous for Huntington disease mutation. *Mech. Ageing Dev.* 127, 217–220

54 Horton, T.M. *et al.* (1995) Marked increase in mitochondrial DNA deletion levels in the cerebral cortex of Huntington’s disease patients. *Neurology* 45, 1879–1883

55 Banoei, M.M. *et al.* (2007) Huntington’s disease and mitochondrial DNA deletions: event or regular mechanism for mutant huntingtin protein and CAG repeats expansion?! *Cell. Mol. Neurobiol.* 27, 867–875

56 Brouillet, E. and Hantraye, P. (1995) Effects of chronic MPTP and 3-nitropropionic acid in nonhuman primates. *Curr. Opin. Neurol.* 8, 469–473

57 Sipione, S. and Cattaneo, E. (2001) Modeling Huntington’s disease in cells, flies, and mice. *Mol. Neurobiol.* 23, 21–51

58 Ruan, Q. *et al.* (2004) Striatal cells from mutant huntingtin knock-in mice are selectively vulnerable to mitochondrial complex II inhibitor-induced cell death through a non-apoptotic pathway. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 13, 669–681

59 Harjes, P. and Wanker, E.E. (2003) The hunt for huntingtin function: interaction partners tell many different stories. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 28, 425–433

60 Shimohata, T. *et al.* (2000) Expanded polyglutamine stretches interact with TAFII130, interfering with CREB-dependent transcription. *Nat. Genet.* 26, 29–36

61 Cui, L. *et al.* (2006) Transcriptional repression of PGC-1α by mutant huntingtin leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration. *Cell* 127, 59–69

62 St-Pierre, J. *et al.* (2006) Suppression of reactive oxygen species and neurodegeneration by the PGC-1 transcriptional coactivators. *Cell* 127, 397–408

63 Weydt, P. *et al.* (2006) Thermoregulatory and metabolic defects in Huntington’s disease transgenic mice implicate PGC-1α in Huntington’s disease neurodegeneration. *Cell Metab.* 4, 349–362

64 Puigserver, P. and Spiegelman, B.M. (2003) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α): transcriptional coactivator and metabolic regulator. *Endocr. Rev.* 24, 78–90

65 Leone, T.C. *et al.* (2005) PGC-1α deficiency causes multi-system energy metabolic derangements: muscle dysfunction, abnormal weight control and hepatic steatosis. *PLoS Biol.* 3, e101

66 Lin, J. *et al.* (2004) Defects in adaptive energy metabolism with CNS-linked hyperactivity in PGC-1α null mice. *Cell* 119, 121–135

67 Conti, B. *et al.* (2005) Uncoupling protein 2 protects dopaminergic neurons from acute 1,2,3,6-methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine toxicity. *J. Neurochem.* 93, 493–501

68 Bezprozvanny, I. and Hayden, M.R. (2004) Deranged neuronal calcium signaling and Huntington disease. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 322, 1310–1317

69 Tang, T.S. *et al.* (2005) Disturbed Ca²⁺ signaling and apoptosis of medium spiny neurons in Huntington’s disease. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 102, 2602–2607

70 Hollenbeck, P.J. and Saxton, W.M. (2005) The axonal transport of mitochondria. *J. Cell Sci.* 118, 5411–5419

71 Borrell-Pages, M. *et al.* (2006) Huntington’s disease: from huntingtin function and dysfunction to therapeutic strategies. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 63, 2642–2660

72 Wanker, E.E. (2002) Hip1 and Hippi participate in a novel cell death-signaling pathway. *Dev. Cell* 2, 126–128

73 Gauthier, L.R. *et al.* (2004) Huntingtin controls neurotrophic support and survival of neurons by enhancing BDNF vesicular transport along microtubules. *Cell* 118, 127–138

74 McGuire, J.R. *et al.* (2006) Interaction of Huntingtin-associated protein-1 with kinesin light chain: implications in intracellular trafficking in neurons. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 3552–3559

75 Colin, E. *et al.* (2008) Huntingtin phosphorylation acts as a molecular switch for anterograde/retrograde transport in neurons. *EMBO J.* 27, 2124–2134

76 Gunawardena, S. *et al.* (2003) Disruption of axonal transport by loss of huntingtin or expression of pathogenic polyQ proteins in Drosophila. *Neuron* 40, 25–40

77 Chang, D.T. *et al.* (2006) Mutant huntingtin aggregates impair mitochondrial movement and trafficking in cortical neurons. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 22, 388–400

78 Trushina, E. *et al.* (2004) Mutant huntingtin impairs axonal trafficking in mammalian neurons in vivo and in vitro. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24, 8195–8209

79 Varadi, A. *et al.* (2004) Cytoplasmic dynein regulates the subcellular distribution of mitochondria by controlling the recruitment of the fission factor dynamin-related protein-1. *J. Cell Sci.* 117, 4389–4400

80 Smirnova, E. *et al.* (2001) Dynamin-related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian cells. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 12, 2245–2256

81 Ingerman, E. *et al.* (2005) Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to fit mitochondria. *J. Cell Biol.* 170, 1021–1027

82 Chen, H. *et al.* (2003) Mitofusins Mfn1 and Mfn2 coordinately regulate mitochondrial fusion and are essential for embryonic development. *J. Cell Biol.* 160, 189–200

83 Ishihara, N. *et al.* (2004) Mitofusin 1 and 2 play distinct roles in mitochondrial fusion reactions via GTPase activity. *J. Cell Sci.* 117, 6535–6546

84 Olichon, A. *et al.* (2002) The human dynamin-related protein OPA1 is anchored to the mitochondrial inner membrane facing the intermembrane space. *FEBS Lett.* 523, 171–176

85 Carelli, V. *et al.* (2004) Mitochondrial dysfunction as a cause of optic neuropathies. *Prog. Retin. Eye Res.* 23, 53–89

86 Kijima, K. *et al.* (2005) Mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 mutation in Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A. *Hum. Genet.* 116, 23–27

87 Zuchner, S. *et al.* (2004) Mutations in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A. *Nat. Genet.* 36, 449–451

88 Alexander, C. *et al.* (2000) OPA1, encoding a dynamin-related GTPase, is mutated in autosomal dominant optic atrophy linked to chromosome 3q28. *Nat. Genet.* 26, 211–215

89 Delettre, C. *et al.* (2000) Nuclear gene OPA1, encoding a mitochondrial dynamin-related protein, is mutated in dominant optic atrophy. *Nat. Genet.* 26, 207–210

90 Amati-Bonneau, P. *et al.* (2008) OPA1 mutations induce mitochondrial DNA instability and optic atrophy ‘plus’ phenotypes. *Brain* 131, 338–351

91 Baloh, R.H. *et al.* (2007) Altered axonal mitochondrial transport in the pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease from mitofusin 2 mutations. *J. Neurosci.* 27, 422–430

92 Detmer, S.A. and Chan, D.C. (2007) Functions and dysfunctions of mitochondrial dynamics. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 8, 870–879

93 Milakovic, T. *et al.* (2006) Mutant huntingtin expression induces mitochondrial calcium handling defects in clonal striatal cells: functional consequences. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 34785–34795

94 Karbowski, M. *et al.* (2002) Spatial and temporal association of Bax with mitochondrial fission sites, Drp1, and Mfn2 during apoptosis. *J. Cell Biol.* 159, 931–938

95 Ralser, M. *et al.* (2005) Ataxin-2 and huntingtin interact with endophilin-A complexes to function in plastin-associated pathways. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 14, 2893–2909

96 Schuske, K.R. *et al.* (2003) Endophilin is required for synaptic vesicle endocytosis by localizing synaptojanin. *Neuron* 40, 749–762

97 Verstreken, P. *et al.* (2003) Synaptojanin is recruited by endophilin to promote synaptic vesicle uncoating. *Neuron* 40, 733–748

98 Cuddeback, S.M. *et al.* (2001) Molecular cloning and characterization of Bif-1. A novel Src homology 3 domain-containing protein that associates with Bax. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 20559–20565

99 Pierrat, B. *et al.* (2001) SH3GLB, a new endophilin-related protein family featuring an SH3 domain. *Genomics* 71, 222–234

100 Karbowski, M. *et al.* (2006) Role of Bax and Bak in mitochondrial morphogenesis. *Nature* 443, 658–662

101 Brustovetsky, N. *et al.* (2003) Increased susceptibility of striatal mitochondria to calcium-induced permeability transition. *J. Neurosci.* 23, 4858–4867

102 Johnson, D.T. *et al.* (2007) Tissue heterogeneity of the mammalian mitochondrial proteome. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 292, C689–C697
