
ARTICLE

Simultaneous Synthesis of 2-Phenylethanol and L-Homophenylalanine Using Aromatic Transaminase With Yeast Ehrlich Pathway

Joon-Young Hwang,$^{1}$ Jihyang Park,$^{1}$ Joo-Hyun Seo,$^{1,2}$ Minho Cha,$^{1,2}$ Byung-Kwan Cho,$^{1}$ Juhan Kim,$^{1}$ Byung-Gee Kim$^{1,2}$

$^{1}$School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea; telephone: 82-2-880-6774; fax: 82-2-872-7528; e-mail: byungkim@snu.ac.kr  
$^{2}$Institute of Bioengineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea  

Received 24 July 2008; revision received 8 October 2008; accepted 9 October 2008  
Published online 21 October 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI 10.1002/bit.22178

---

**ABSTRACT:** 2-Phenylethanol is a widely used aroma compound with rose-like fragrance and L-homophenylalanine is a building block of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor. 2-phenylethanol and L-homophenylalanine were synthesized simultaneously with high yield from 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and L-phenylalanine, respectively. A recombinant *Escherichia coli* harboring a coupled reaction pathway comprising of aromatic transaminase, phenylpyruvate decarboxylase, carbonyl reductase, and glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) was constructed. In the coupled reaction pathway, the transaminase reaction was coupled with the Ehrlich pathway of yeast; (1) a phenylpyruvate decarboxylase (YDR380W) as the enzyme to generate the substrate for the carbonyl reductase from phenylpyruvate (i.e., byproduct of the transaminase reaction) and to shift the reaction equilibrium of the transaminase reaction, and (2) a carbonyl reductase (YGL157W) to produce the 2-phenylethanol. Selecting the right carbonyl reductase showing the highest activity on phenylacetaldehyde with narrow substrate specificity was the key to success of the constructing the coupling reaction. In addition, NADPH regeneration was achieved by incorporating the GDH from *Bacillus subtilis* in the coupled reaction pathway. Based on 40 mM of L-phenylalanine used, about 96% final product conversion yield of 2-phenylethanol was achieved using the recombinant *E. coli*. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2009;102: 1323–1329.

© 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

**KEYWORDS:** 2-phenylethanol; aromatic transaminase; Ehrlich pathway; L-homophenylalanine; reaction coupling

---

### Introduction

Biotechnological productions of fine chemicals and large volume commodity chemicals are highly in demand not only to reduce the hazardous residual chemicals causing environmental problems, but also to provide basic chemicals from biomass for sustainable development, so-called biorefinery. Especially, in the production of pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, or food additives, biotechnological production becomes more important as biocatalysts perform stereo-specific and regio-specific reactions in mild reaction conditions (Serra et al., 2005).

2-Phenylethanol is a higher aromatic alcohol, which has rose-like fragrance. In nature, it is often found in the essential oils of many flowers and plants (Etschmann et al., 2002). Since the rose-like fragrance is highly popular, it has been widely used as an ingredient in perfume and in other cosmetics (Clark, 1990; Etschmann et al., 2002; Fabre et al., 1998). In spite of the preference of natural products in food additives and cosmetics to chemically synthesized ones, the low amount of 2-phenylethanol in natural sources makes difficult to produce this aromatic alcohol in industrial scale. By way of exception, rose oil contains 2-phenylethanol up to 60%, however, the high purity can only be obtained by solvent extraction with the significant loss caused by steam

Joon-Young Hwang’s present address is AmorePacific R&D Center, Giheung-Gu, Yongin-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, Republic of Korea.  
Jihyang Park’s present address is Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.  
Byung-Kwan Cho’s present address is Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.  
Juhan Kim’s present address is Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309.  
Correspondence to: B.-G. Kim  
Contract grant sponsor: KOSEF  
Contract grant number: R0A-2007-000-10007-0(2007)  
Contract grant sponsor: KOSEF (Nano Bioelectronics and Systems Research Center)  
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.

distillation (Bedoukian, 1986; Clark, 1990; Etschmann et al., 2002). Until now, major biotechnological process for synthesizing 2-phenylethanol is yeast fermentation, which converts L-phenylalanine to 2-phenylethanol via the Ehrlich pathway (Ehrlich, 1907) (Fig. 1). In the pathway, L-phenylalanine is transformed to phenylpyruvate, which is decarboxylated to phenylacetaldehyde and further reduced to 2-phenylethanol (Etschmann et al., 2002). Phenylpyruvate, the initial metabolite of the Ehrlich pathway, is supplied from phenylalanine by aromatic transaminase utilizing various amino acceptors such as 2-ketoglutarate.

We also have paid attention to the aromatic transaminase for the large-scale biosynthesis of enantiomerically pure unnatural amino acids via asymmetric synthesis due to its broad substrate specificity and no requirement of external cofactor regeneration (Cho et al., 2003; Fotheringham, 1998). One exceptional example of the unnatural amino acids is L-homophenylalanine, the product of transaminase reaction of 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and phenylalanine. L-homophenylalanine is an important unnatural amino acid used as the building block of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, such as lisinopril, enalapril, and quinapril (Hayashi et al., 1989; Ondetti and Cushman, 1981). We previously reported that the asymmetric synthesis of L-homophenylalanine using aromatic transaminase from 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid as an amino acceptor and L-glutamate as an amino donor (Cho et al., 2003). The L-homophenylalanine was continuously precipitated in the reaction media due to its low solubility (<2 mM), which derives the reaction equilibrium towards the product formation.

Here, we integrated the two valuable reactions; the transaminase pathway for the asymmetric synthesis of L-homophenylalanine using phenylalanine and 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and the Ehrlich pathway of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* for the synthesis of 2-phenylethanol from

---

**Materials and Methods**

### Chemicals

2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid was obtained from the CKD Research Institute (Cheonan, South Korea). L-homophenylalanine, L-phenylalanine, phenylpyruvate, phenylacetaldehyde, 2-phenylethanol, NADPH, D-glucose, thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), and all other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). HPLC-grade acetonitrile was obtained from Duksan Chemical Co. (Ansan, South Korea). Enzymes used for DNA manipulation were from Roche Applied Science (Mannheim, Germany). *Escherichia coli* BL21 (DE3) for the protein overexpression was purchased from Novagen (Madison, WI) and the pMALc2x (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA) was used for each enzyme expression and purification. His<sub>6</sub>-tag purification system was purchased from Qiagen (Valencia, CA).

### Plasmids and Gene Expression

The pET24ma vector donated by Dr. David Sourdivie (Pasteur Institute, France) was used for the construction of the plasmid carrying the aromatic transaminase gene (AroAT) from *Enterobacter sp.* (Cho et al., 2003) and the carbonyl reductases (YDR541C, YGL157W, YAL060W, YDR368W, YGL039W). The pETDuet (Novagen) was used for carrying the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase (YDR380W) and GDH. The pMALc2x (New England BioLabs) was used for enzyme purification and activity assay. The structural genes of carbonyl reductases, phenylpyruvate decarboxylase, and GDH were amplified from the genomic DNA of *S. cerevisiae* W303-1A and *B. subtilis* BB104 by PCR.

For the construction of plasmids containing two genes, the pETDuet plasmid carrying phenylpyruvate decarboxylase was digested by restriction enzymes and ligated with the amplified gene coding for GDH. For the construction of the pET24ma plasmids containing the both aromatic transaminase and carbonyl reductase, the carbonyl reductase gene was amplified from the recombinant plasmid carrying the reductase. As the 5′ primer was designed to contain the promoter region of pET24ma, the amplified gene contained the promoter, the ribosomal binding site and the untranslated region of pET24ma, as well as the structural gene of the carbonyl reductase. The digested fragments coding carbonyl reductases were inserted into pET24ma

---

**Figure 1.** 2-Phenylethanol biosynthetic pathway in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Details are described for Ehrlich pathway which is part of L-phenylalanine metabolism in *S. cerevisiae*.

Figure 2. Reaction scheme of the coupled reaction pathway comprising of transaminase reaction, the Ehrlich pathway and NADPH regeneration system.

carrying the aromatic transaminase (Fig. 3). Two plasmids were transformed into the *E. coli* BL21 (DE3) using the heat shock method (Sambrook et al., 1989) and transformants were selected by kanamycin (25 μg/mL) resistance for pET24ma and ampicillin (25 μg/mL) resistance for pETDuet and pMALc2x. All plasmid constructions were confirmed by DNA sequencing (Cosmo genetech, Seoul, South Korea).

Figure 3. Map of constructed plasmids. Detailed construction methods are described in Materials and Methods Section. [Color figure can be seen in the online version of this article, available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]

Hwang et al.: 2-Phenylethanol and Homophenylalanine Synthesis

Biotechnology and Bioengineering

Enzyme Expression and Purification

E.coli BL21 (DE3) harboring the plasmids was grown at 37°C in 50 mL Luria-Bertani broth supplemented with 25 μg/mL antibiotics. When the culture reached an absorbance of 0.6, the enzymes were induced by 1 mM isopropyl-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG). After overexpressing the enzymes for 6 h, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4°C and 2,600 g for 20 min. The cells were then washed twice with 25 mL of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended with 5 mL of the sonication buffer composed of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, and 0.01% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. The cells were then disrupted by sonication for 30 min in an ice-bath. The supernatant was harvested by centrifugation (16,600 g, 4°C, 20 min) and dialyzed against 1 L of the dialysis buffer composed of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 μM PMSF, and 0.001% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. The dialyzed cell extract was stored at –70°C for further study.

Maltose binding protein (MBP) fusion system was used to purify phenylpyruvate decarboxylase and carbonyl reductase for the analysis of the enzyme activity. For the purification of MBP fusion protein, 10 mL of crude extract was passed through a column containing 2 mL of amylose resin (New England Biolabs, Hilden, Germany). After the column was washed with 20 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT, the N-terminal MBP fusion protein was then eluted with 10 mL of Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM maltose. The elution fractions containing partially purified MBP fusion protein were concentrated by ultrafiltration using Centriplus YM-30 (Millipore, Bedford, MA) with molecular mass cutoff of 10 kDa. For the purification of aromatic transaminase, His₆-tag purification system was used according to manufacturer's manual.

Enzyme Activity Assay

The activity assay for decarboxylase was carried out at 25°C using NADPH-dependent carbonyl reductase (YGL157W) as a coupling enzyme. The assay mixture consisted of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 5 mM phenylpyruvate, 0.2 mM TPP, 5 mM MgCl₂, 2 mM NADPH, 40 μL purified phenylpyruvate decarboxylase, and 20 μL purified carbonyl reductase. The reduction of absorbance at 340 nm is monitored in a Multiskan® Spectrum Microplate Spectrophotometer (Thermo Labsystems, Vantaa, Finland). The activity of YGL157W was assayed by monitoring of the reduction of absorbance of NADPH at 340 nm. The assay mixture consisted of 50 mM potassium Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), various concentration of phenylacetaldehyde dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide, 2 mM of NADPH, and 10 μL purified YGL157W in a total volume of 100 μL. One unit of enzyme activity represents 1 μmol of NADPH consumed per min. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as the standard. The Kₘ and kₐt value of phenylpyruvate decarboxylase were analyzed using HPLC. The assay mixture comprised of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), various concentration of phenylpyruvate, 0.5 mM TPP, 5 mM MgCl₂, and 20 μL purified phenylpyruvate decarboxylase in a total volume of 100 μL. Decarboxylase was added to the reaction mixture to initiate the reaction and 50 μL acetonitrile was added to quench the reaction. To calculate the Kₘ and kₐt value of aromatic transaminase, the assay mixture comprised of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4), various concentrations of L-phenylalanine or OPBA and His₆-tag purified aromatic transaminase were used.

Analytical Methods

The quantitative analysis of 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid, phenylpyruvate, phenylacetaldehyde, and 2-phenylethanol were carried out with HPLC using Aminex® HPX-87H ion exclusion column (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Separation of compounds was achieved with an elution of 5 mM sulfuric acid at a flow rate 0.7 mL/min at 25°C and analyzed using UV detector at 254 and 213 nm. The quantitative analysis of 2-phenylethanol was carried out with HPLC using Symmetric® C18 5 μm column (Waters, Milford, MA) and Aminex® HPX-87H ion exclusion column (Bio-Rad). Separation 2-phenylethanol and other compounds were achieved with an isocratic elution of 40% acetonitrile solution at a flow rate 1.0 mL/min at 25°C and analyzed using UV detector at 254 and 213 nm.

Whole Cell Reaction

After the culture of 6 h, cells were harvested and washed with 25 mL of ice-cold PBS buffer twice. One hundred millimolar L-phenylalanine, 40 mM 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid, 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, 50 mM glucose, and 10 and 1 mM NADPH was dissolved in water, and the total reaction volume was 500 μL. Ten percent of total reaction volume wet cell was added to the reaction mixture, and the reaction mixture was vigorously mixed at 37°C. Reaction was quenched by adding 500 μL of acetonitrile, and the reaction mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at 16,600 g. The supernatant was analyzed by HPLC.

Result and Discussion

Construction of Recombinant E. coli Harboring Ehrlich and Transamination Pathways

To simultaneously synthesize L-homophenylalanine and 2-phenylethanol via whole cell reaction, we have constructed the recombinant E. coli strain harboring the coupled reaction pathway, which includes the aromatic transaminase for the asymmetric synthesis of L-homophenylalanine from phenylalanine and 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid, the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase in the Ehrlich pathway, and newly identified NADPH-dependent carbonyl reductase for
the synthesis of 2-phenylethanol from phenylpyruvate, and the GDH to regenerate the NADPH required in this coupled reaction pathway (Fig. 2).

A critical step in the Ehrlich pathway is the decarboxylase reaction, which is the first specific step to produce phenylacetaldehyde from phenylpyruvate. Recently, Vuralhan et al. (2003) have found that YDR380W encodes the main physiologically relevant phenylpyruvate decarboxylase activity in wild-type S. cerevisiae. However, carbonyl reductase participating in the conversion of phenylacetaldehyde to 2-phenylethanol has not been discovered. Therefore, we screened a carbonyl reductase for the construction of the coupled reaction pathway. It has been reported that there are various carbonyl reductases showing broad substrate specificities in S. cerevisiae (Stewart, 2001). Since its reactivity on 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and phenylpyruvate may decrease the yield of 2-phenylethanol, the main selection criteria was that the selected carbonyl reductase should not have reactivity on 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and phenylpyruvate, but on phenylacetaldehyde. We selected 6 carbonyl reductases among 22 reductases based on the substrate specificity reported by Kaluzna et al. (2004). Among the selected enzymes having reactivity on aromatic ketone compounds, YGL157W, YDR368W, YGL039W, and YGL541C met our goal. As YGL157W showed the highest activity on phenylacetaldehyde (refer to Supplementary data), we employed it for the construction of the coupled reaction pathway. For the transamination reaction in the coupled reaction pathway, the aromatic transaminase from Enterobacter sp. was chosen based on the previous reports (Cho et al., 2003). For the co-expression of the aromatic transaminase with other enzymes, we cloned the transaminase gene into pET24ma plasmids carrying YGL157W (Fig. 3).

Coupling of the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase and carbonyl reductase with the aromatic transaminase is attractive not only to alleviate limitations of enzyme reaction (e.g., product inhibition) but also to produce valuable chiral compounds (e.g., L-homophenylalanine). However, for the application of NADPH-dependent carbonyl reductase (YGL157W), an efficient NADPH regenerating step is required. In result, we incorporated the GDH from B. subtilis into the coupled reaction pathway (Yun et al., 2003).

### Validation of Each Enzyme Activity in the Coupled Reaction Pathway

Activity of each enzyme in the recombinant *E. coli* is an important factor to achieve high productivity. To validate each enzyme activity, we constructed recombinant *E. coli* harboring each enzyme and its activity was measured by HPLC. The aromatic transaminase produced 37.6 mM phenylpyruvate from 40 mM of 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid and 100 mM of L-phenylalanine as reactants. The conversion of phenylacetaldehyde by carbonyl reductase (YGL157W) to phenylethanol was 61% with 10 mM phenylacetaldehyde and 10 mM NADPH. In contrast, the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase (YDR380W) showed low activity. The conversion of phenylpyruvate to phenylacetaldehyde was 2.9% when 25 mM of phenylpyruvate was used as substrate, indicating that the decarboxylation reaction might be the rate-determining step of the coupled reaction pathway.

To assess the precise reaction properties of each enzyme, $K_{\mathrm{M}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$ was then determined with purified enzymes (Table I). Judged by the reaction properties (2.9% conversion and 0.35 min⁻¹ of $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$), the decarboxylation reaction was determined as the rate-determining step throughout the coupled reaction pathway. However, it is worthy to note that the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase links the transaminase reaction with the carbonyl reductase reaction via the conversion of phenylpyruvate to phenylacetaldehyde. The low solubility of product (i.e., L-homophenylalanine) drives the transamination reaction toward product formation, leading nearly complete conversion (~96%). In addition, the NADPH regeneration system helps to maintain the reaction rate of the carbonyl reductase activity by maintaining the NADPH concentration. Therefore, the in situ product removal and the maintenance of in vivo cofactor concentration made it possible to overcome the low enzyme activity of the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase.

### Simultaneous Synthesis of L-Homophenylalanine and 2-Phenylethanol

To investigate the effect of NADPH regeneration system on the coupled reaction pathway, the whole cell reactions were performed in the presence or the absence of the regeneration system. At 10 mM NADPH concentration and 24 h reaction time, the presence or absence of regeneration system showed largely different results. The recombinant *E. coli* harboring the regeneration system achieved 38.5 mM (96.3% conversion in reaction mixture) of 2-phenylethanol, while the recombinant without NADPH regeneration system produced only 9.4 mM (23.5% conversion in reaction mixture) of 2-phenylethanol. Based on the above

**Table I.** $K_{\mathrm{M}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$ values of enzymes.

| Enzyme | $K_{\mathrm{M}}$ (mM) | $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$ (min⁻¹) | $k_{\mathrm{cat}}/K_{\mathrm{M}}$ (min⁻¹ mM⁻¹) |
|--------|----------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Phenylpyruvate decarboxylase | 2.8                      | 0.35                                   | 0.13                                      |
| Carbonyl reductase           | 2.2                      | 1.2 × 10³                              | 5.5 × 10²                                 |
| Aromatic transaminase (for L-phenylalanine) | 6.9 | 4.4 × 10² | 63 |
| Aromatic transaminase (for OPBA) | 5.7 | 200 | 34 |

Hwang et al.: 2-Phenylethanol and Homophenylalanine Synthesis 1327

Biotechnology and Bioengineering
results, we confirmed whether NADPH regeneration system works properly for the coupled reaction at low NADPH concentration. The time-course concentrations of produced 2-phenylethanol were analyzed from the recombinant whole cell reaction, which was performed with 1 mM NADPH and for 24 h (Fig. 4). In spite of the low concentration of NADPH, the final concentration of 2-phenylethanol was 38.5 mM. For 2 h reaction, most of substrate was transformed to product, that is, L-homophenylalanine and 2-phenylethanol. Since 40 mM of L-phenylalanine was used, the reaction showed about 96.3% conversion. However, additional increase in product concentration was not observed after 2 h (Fig. 4).

### Problems in Recombinant E. coli System for the Production of 2-Phenylethanol

Biotechnological production of valuable compounds is promising alternative to petroleum chemistry based synthesis. Usually, the recombinant E. coli harboring many foreign genes in recombinant plasmids is widely used for the production of biochemical compounds. Chen et al. (2002) have reported the “superbug” for the production of α-gal epitope. Wandrey (2004) has reported “designer bug” for the production of biochemical compounds in tonnage scale. However, overexpression of all genes in soluble and active form has been always a bottleneck for the recombinant E. coli system harboring many foreign genes (Chen et al., 2002). Our system also showed similar behavior. Guaranteeing the stable and constant overexpression of all foreign genes in recombinant E. coli will be a key issue for the production of not only biochemical compounds but also for 2-phenylethanol.

---

**Conclusion**

Here, we showed the simultaneous synthesis of L-homophenylalanine and 2-phenylethanol via recombinant E. coli system harboring the aromatic transaminase, phenylpyruvate decarboxylase, carbonyl reductase, and GDH. To construct the coupled reaction pathway, we recruited the aromatic transaminase from Enterobacter sp., the decarboxylase and carbonyl reductase from S. cerevisiae, and GDH from B. subtilis. The \(K_{\text{M}}\) and \(k_{\text{cat}}\) values of the aromatic transaminase, decarboxylase, and carbonyl reductase indicated that the decarboxylation step in the coupled reaction pathway is the rate-determining step. The low \(k_{\text{cat}}\) value of the decarboxylase was overcome by shifting reaction equilibrium through the product removal and incorporating NADPH regeneration system into the coupled reaction pathway.

Typically, 2-phenylethanol has been produced via yeast fermentation. However, it had two major drawbacks; requiring (i) minimal media to make the Ehrlich pathway to be more active and (ii) lengthy reaction time (~16 h) to achieve high yield. According to the previous reports, the fed-batch process harvesting 1–3 g/L of yeast cell mass yielded maximum 81% conversion (453.1 mg/L) in optimized medium (Albertazzi et al., 1994; Huang et al., 2000). Moreover, in the yeast fermentation for the 2-phenylethanol, minimal media with a sole nitrogen source of L-phenylalanine can only suppress the formation of corresponding acetate (2-phenylethylacetate) by amino acid synthetic pathway (Albertazzi et al., 1994; Ayräpää, 1965). In contrast to those drawbacks, the recombinant E. coli capable of the coupled reaction took about 2 h to complete the reaction at higher conversion yield (~96.3%, ~4.7 g/L) without the requirement of the minimal media. Our study achieved 10-fold high productivity (~4.7 g/L vs. 453.1 mg/L) in about 1/8 reaction time (2 h vs. 16 h). Those values indicate that our system is 80-fold or more efficient than the best results until now. Although we achieved higher productivity than the previous reports, still there is room for the enhancement of productivity. Because the activity of decarboxylase was the bottleneck of our pathway, evolution of decarboxylase to high activity will increase our productivity.

Atsumi et al. (2008) have recently reported the non-fermentative production of higher alcohols such as butanol, isobutanol, and phenylethanol. They combined metabolic engineering and recombinant technology to provide corresponding keto acids as substrates derived from glucose and to produce the higher alcohols as the product. This appears to be a good example of white biotechnology. Similarly, our study using transaminase and coupled reactions also showed that the amino acid and aromatic alcohol can be synthesized simultaneously with high productivity. From the viewpoint of simultaneous synthesis of amino acid and alcohols, coupling transaminase and reduction pathway can be a successful model for the production of industrially valuable amino acids and alcohols.

---

**Figure 4.** Time-series concentration profile of 2-phenylethanol. Reaction conditions were 100 mM L-phenylalanine, 40 mM 2-oxo-4-phenylbutyric acid, 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7), 50 mM glucose, and 1 mM NADPH, and the total reaction volume was 500 μL. 10% (v/v) of wet cell was added to the reaction mixture and the reaction mixture was vigorously mixed at 37°C.

This work was partially supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No. R0A-2007-000-10007-0(2007)) and the Nano Bioelectronics and Systems Research Center by the Korean Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).

## References

Albertazzi E, Cardillo R, Servi S, Zucchi G. 1994. Biogeneration of 2-phenylethanol and 2-phenylethylacetate important aroma components. Biotechnol Lett 16:491–496.

Atsumi S, Hanai T, Liao JC. 2008. Non-fermentative pathways for synthesis of branched-chain higher alcohols as biofuels. Nature 451(7174):86–89.

Äyräpää T. 1965. The formation of phenethyl alcohol from ${}^{14}$C-labelled phenylalanine. J Inst Brew 71:341–347.

Bedoukian PZ. 1986. Phenyl ethyl alcohol. In perfumery and flavoring synthetics: Allured, Wheaton, p 370–383.

Chen X, Liu Z, Zhang J, Zhang W, Kowal P, Wang PG. 2002. Reassembled biosynthetic pathway for large-scale carbohydrate synthesis: Alpha-Gal epitope producing “superbug”. Chembiochem 3(1):47–53.

Cho BK, Seo JH, Kang TW, Kim BG. 2003. Asymmetric synthesis of L-homophenylalanine by equilibrium-shift using recombinant aromatic L-amino acid transaminase. Biotechnol Bioeng 83(2):226–234.

Clark GS. 1990. Phenethyl alcohol. Perfum Flavor 15:37–44.

Ehrlich F. 1907. Über die bedingungen der fuselölbildung und über ihren zusammenhang mit dem eiweißaufbau der Hefe. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges 40:1027–1047.

Etschmann MM, Blüemke W, Sell D, Schrader J. 2002. Biotechnological production of 2-phenylethanol. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 59(1):1–8.

Fabre CE, Blanc PJ, Goma G. 1998. 2-Phenylethyl alcohol: An aroma profile. Perfum Flavor 23:43–45.

Fotheringham IG. 1998. Improved transaminase biotransformation process, WO patent 98/53088.

Hayashi K, Nunami K, Kato J, Yoneda N, Kubo M, Ochiai T, Ishida R. 1989. Studies on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. 4. Synthesis and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitory activities of 3-acyl-1-alkyl-2-oxoimidazolidine-4-carboxylic acid derivatives. J Med Chem 32(2): 289–297.

Huang C, Jr., Lee SL, Chou CC. 2000. Production and molar yield of 2-phenylethanol by Pichia fermentans L-5 as affected by some medium components. J Biosci Bioeng 90(2):142–147.

Kaluzna IA, Matsuda T, Sewell AK, Stewart JD. 2004. Systematic investigation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae enzymes catalyzing carbonyl reductions. J Am Chem Soc 126(40):12827–12832.

Katz M, Frejd T, Hahn-Hagerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF. 2003. Efficient anaerobic whole cell stereoselective bioreduction with recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 84(5):573–582.

Ondetti MA, Cushman DW. 1981. Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system. A new approach to the therapy of hypertension. J Med Chem 24(4):355–361.

Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. 1989. Molecular cloning: A laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Serra S, Fuganti C, Brenna E. 2005. Biocatalytic preparation of natural flavours and fragrances. Trends Biotechnol 23(4):193–198.

Stewart JD. 2001. Dehydrogenases and transaminases in asymmetric synthesis. Curr Opin Chem Biol 5(2):120–129.

Vuralhan Z, Morais MA, Tai SL, Piper MD, Pronk JT. 2003. Identification and characterization of phenylpyruvate decarboxylase genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 69(8):4534–4541.

Wandrey C. 2004. Biochemical reaction engineering for redox reactions. Chem Rec 4(4):254–265.

Yun H, Yang YH, Cho BK, Hwang BY, Kim BG. 2003. Simultaneous synthesis of enantiomerically pure (R)-1-phenylethanol and (R)-alpha-methylbenzylamine from racemic alpha-methylbenzylamine using omega-transaminase/alcohol dehydrogenase/glucose dehydrogenase coupling reaction. Biotechnol Lett 25(10):809–814.
