
# Toll-like Receptor and RIG-1-like Receptor Signaling

**Taro Kawai and Shizuo Akira**

Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, and  
Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,  
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) constitute distinct families of pattern-recognition receptors that sense nucleic acids derived from viruses and trigger antiviral innate immune responses. TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9 are membrane proteins localized to the endosome that recognize viral double-stranded RNA, single-stranded RNA, and DNA, respectively, while RLRs, including RIG-I, Mda5, and LGP2, are cytoplasmic proteins that recognize viral RNA. Upon recognition of these nucleic acid species, TLRs and RLRs recruit specific intracellular adaptor proteins to initiate signaling pathways culminating in activation of NF-κB, MAP kinases, and IRFs that control the transcription of genes encoding type I interferon and other inflammatory cytokines, which are important for eliminating viruses. Here, we review recent insights into the signaling pathways initiated by TLR and RLR and their roles in innate and adaptive immune responses.

**Key words:** innate immunity; signal transduction; virus infection

## Introduction

The host evokes innate immune responses to eliminate invading pathogens by detecting the presence of infection. Cells in the innate immune system, such as macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), express a limited number of germline-encoded pattern-recognition receptors (PRR) that specifically recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) within microbes, which are unique to these microbes and not found in the host. Nucleic acids derived from viruses, including double-stranded (ds) RNA, single-stranded (ss) RNA, and DNA, serve as viral PAMPs, which are recognized by multiple PRRs. Following recognition of viral nucleic acids, PRRs initiate signaling pathways that lead to the synthesis of multiple cytokines including type I interferon (IFN), comprised of multiple IFNα subtypes and a single IFNβ, IFNω, IFNε, or IFNκ, and inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNFα, and IL-12. In particular, type I IFN plays an essential role in the elimination of viruses. It upregulates the transcription of many IFN-inducible genes that influence protein synthesis, growth arrest, and apoptosis to create an antiviral state. It also functions to enhance DC maturation, natural killer (NK) cell activation, antibody production, and differentiation of virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), which consequently facilitate adaptive immune responses.

The best-characterized family of PRRs that participates in the recognition of viral components is the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family. TLRs contain extracellular leucine-rich repeats that mediate the recognition of their respective PAMPs, a transmembrane domain that determines the cellular localization, and an intracellular domain similar to that of IL-1 receptor known as the Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain, which is required for triggering downstream signaling pathways. Currently, the TLR family

Address for correspondence: Prof. Shizuo Akira, Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Voice: +81-6-6879-8303; fax: +81-6-6879-8305. sakira@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1143: 1–20 (2008). © 2008 New York Academy of Sciences.  
doi: 10.1196/annals.1443.020

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. TLR- and RLR-mediated recognition of viral nucleic acids and signaling pathways. TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9 recognize dsRNA, ssRNA, and DNA, respectively, derived from viruses in the endosome. RIG-I, Mda5, and LGP2 recognize RNA in the cytoplasm. While TLR3 uses TRIF as an adaptor, TLR7 and TLR9 use MyD88. RIG-I and Mda5 use the adapter IPS-1, which is localized to mitochondria. TRIF- and IPS-1-dependent pathways lead to activation of IRF3 and NF-κB to induce type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines, respectively. MyD88-dependent pathways lead to activation of IRF7 and NF-κB to induce type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines, respectively.

consists of more than 13 members in mammals, each detecting different PAMPs. Within the family, TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 represent a subfamily that is localized to intracellular compartments, such as endosome and endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and recognizes viral nucleic acid species, unlike other TLRs (for example, TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, and TLR6) that are localized on the cell surface and mainly recognize bacterial cell wall components or viral particles (Fig. 1). The hallmark of these TLRs is that they potently promote type I IFN production, in addition to the production of inflammatory cytokines that are induced by all TLRs (Fig. 1).

The second group of PRRs involved in the recognition of viral nucleic acids is the RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), which are cytoplasmic RNA helicases, including RIG-I, Mda5, and LGP2 (Fig. 1). Unlike membrane-bound TLRs, RLRs reside in the cytoplasm and recognize RNA species produced in the cytoplasm. Whereas retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and Mda5 contain a DExD/H box RNA helicase domain and two caspase recruiting domain (CARD)-like domains required for eliciting downstream signaling pathways, LGP2 lacks the CARD-like domains. RIG-I and Mda5 are able to interact with viral RNA, albeit with different ligand specificity, and elicit signaling leading to the transcription of type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines.

Additionally, several other PRRs participate in sensing intracellular nucleic acids. An IFN-inducible protein kinase PKR is implicated in recognizing RNA with short stem-loops in an RLR-independent manner. Recent studies have revealed that host cells respond to intracellular dsDNA released by DNA viruses, bacteria, or host dying cells to trigger type I IFN induction, which occurs through a TLR-and RLR-independent mechanism. A recently identified molecule termed DAI has been implicated as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor that binds dsDNA and induces type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines. However, cells derived from DAI-deficient mice indeed respond to dsDNA to produce cytokines, suggesting a

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

DAI-independent mechanism for sensing dsDNA.¹⁵

In this review, we focus on the recognition mechanisms and signaling pathways of TLR and RLR, and their function in antiviral innate and adaptive immune responses.

### Recognition of Viruses by TLR3

The role of TLR3 in the recognition of dsRNA was demonstrated in a study of TLR3-deficient mice, which show reduced production of type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines in response to genomic RNA purified from dsRNA viruses such as reovirus and a synthetic analog of dsRNA, polyIC, which has been used to mimic viral infection.¹⁶ TLR3 is also implicated in recognizing dsRNA produced during the course of replication of ssRNA viruses, such as the respiratory syncytial virus, encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and West Nile virus (WNV).¹⁷ Moreover, TLR3 is implicated in the recognition of small interfering (si) RNA. A recent report has shown that siRNA can bind to TLR3 in a sequence-independent manner and induce the production of IL-12 and IFNγ, which efficiently suppress angiogenesis in a mouse model of choroidal neovascularization.¹⁸ Thus, siRNA-induced, TLR3-mediated innate immune responses, rather than the action to suppress target gene expression, are important for the inhibition of angiogenesis.

TLR3 is expressed by conventional DCs (cDCs) and macrophages as well as nonimmune cells including fibroblasts and epithelial cells. TLR3 is localized on intracellular vesicles in cDCs, while it is localized to the cell surface as well as intracellular vesicles in fibroblasts and epithelial cells. The intracellular vesicles wherein TLR3 is localized are suggested to be the early endosome.¹⁹ Strong expression of TLR3 mRNA is found in CD8α⁺CD4⁻DCs, a DC subpopulation with high phagocytic activity. These DCs take up the apoptotic bodies of virus-infected or dsRNA-loaded cells, allowing intracellular TLR3 to contact the dsRNA. This triggers a cross-presentation, which is important for the induction of CTL response against viruses that do not infect DCs, suggesting an importance of TLR3 in establishing adaptive immune responses.²⁰

A protective role of TLR3 against virus infection has been suggested in mice and humans. Deficiency of the TLR3 protein in human was associated with susceptibility to herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) infection.²¹ However, the role of TLR3 in the generation of effective antiviral immune responses in mice is still controversial. It was reported that TLR3-deficient mice are capable of inducing specific CD4 and CD8T cell responses against vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), and reovirus infections, similar to wild-type mice.²² Accordingly, susceptibilities to infection with these viruses were comparable between TLR3-deficient mice and wild-type mice. In the case of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection, TLR3-deficient mice show a higher viral load in the spleen and are consistently more susceptible than wild-type mice, accompanied by reduced production of type I IFN, IL-12p 40, and IFNγ and a reduction of NK and Natural killer T (NKT) cell activation, suggesting a protective role of TLR3.²³ However, another report showed that there is no significant impairment in antiviral responses against MCMV in TLR3-deficient mice.²² It was also reported that TLR3-mediated responses contribute to pathogenesis, rather than protection, in case of other viruses. WNV, a single-stranded RNA flavivirus, was shown to induce inflammatory responses in a TLR3-dependent manner. Importantly, this response triggers a breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, which results in enhanced brain infection. TLR3-deficient mice are accordingly more resistant to lethality than wild-type mice as a result of reduced virus entry into the brain.¹⁷ Similarly, TLR3-deficient mice infected with influenza A virus display decreased levels of inflammatory cytokines, which result in increased survival despite higher viral loads in the lung.²⁴

Recognition of Viral Nucleic Acids by TLR 7, TLR 8, and TLR 9

TLR 7 was initially identified to recognize imidazoquinoline derivatives such as imiquimod and resiquimod (R-848), and guanine analogues such as loxoribine, all of which have antiviral and antitumor properties. Guanosine-and uridine-rich ssRNAs derived from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and influenza virus were subsequently identified as natural ligands for TLR 7. In addition, TLR 7 recognizes synthetic polyU RNA and certain siRNAs. TLR 8 is phylogenetically the most similar to TLR 7. Human TLR 8 preferentially recognizes ssRNA derived from HIV and R-848, although TLR 8-deficient mice respond normally to these molecules, suggesting a species-specific function of TLR 8. TLR 9 was originally identified to recognize unmethylated 2'-deoxyribo(cytidine-phosphate-guanosine) (CpG) DNA motifs that are frequently present in bacteria, but are rare in vertebrates. Subsequently, TLR 9 was found to recognize viral DNA. TLR 7 and TLR 9 are localized in the endosome, and endosomal acidification is required for the ligand recognition as well as signaling.

TLR 7 and TLR 9, but not TLR 3, are selectively expressed by plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs; also known as IFN-producing cells), which are a subset of DCs with a plasmacytoid morphology and unique in their capacity to rapidly secrete vast amounts of type I IFN in response to viral infection, suggesting that TLR 7 and TLR 9 serve as major PRRs recognizing viral nucleic acids in these cells. Accordingly, IFNα production by pDCs after infection with influenza virus or VSV was abrogated in TLR 7-deficient mice. Moreover, IFNα production by pDCs following infection with DNA viruses, such as MCMV, HSV-1, and HSV-2, depended on TLR 9. Thus, it is likely that pDCs preferentially survey virus infection using TLR 7 and TLR 9.

The molecular basis for the secretion of large amounts of type I IFN by pDCs has been investigated. Synthetic CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) are largely classified into three groups based on their biological activities. A/D-type ODNs induce secretion of type I IFN by pDCs, but they have low ability to induce B cell activation and IL-12 production. By contrast, B/K-type ODNs simulate B cell activation and IL-12 production, but poorly induce type I IFN. C-type ODNs have the ability to induce both type I IFN secretion and B cell activation. It was shown that A/D-type CpG ODNs colocalize with the TLR 9 signaling complex in endosomes in pDCs, but are rapidly transferred and degraded in the lysosome in cDCs. However, when A/D-type CpG ODNs were relocalized to the endosome in cDCs using a cationic lipid, these cells produced IFNα. Moreover, B/K-type CpG ODNs also induce IFNα production if manipulated to be retained in the endosomes of cDCs for longer periods. These findings suggest that retention of the CpG DNA-TLR 9 complex in the endosome might be responsible for the induction of robust IFNα production. Furthermore, the intracellular localization of TLR 9 is responsible for discrimination between self and nonself DNA, which is fundamentally important to maintain self tolerance as well as regulate immune responses. It was shown that a chimeric protein composed of the extracellular domain of TLR 9 and the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of TLR 4 is trafficked to the plasma membrane. Although this chimeric protein can respond to CpG DNA, it is unable to sense viral DNA. Instead, when expressed on macrophages, it responds to DNA derived from self, which cannot activate intact TLR 9. Intracellular localization of TLR 9 is therefore important to prevent cells from contacting inappropriate DNA, which causes type I IFN production and leads to the development of autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and polyarthritis.

It was shown that the induction of type I IFN by pDCs does not require replication of

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

enveloped viruses, including influenza and herpes viruses. These viruses are likely to be taken up by endocytosis and retained in the endosomal compartments, where the viral particles are subsequently degraded, allowing the nucleic acids to contact TLR7 and TLR9. On the contrary, a recent report has demonstrated that TLR7 senses VSV that enters the cytoplasm.³⁸ Autophagy, a process for lysosomal degradation of cellular organelles or pathogens, has been shown to mediate the delivery of cytosolic replication intermediates to lysosomes, where TLR7-mediated recognition occurs. Consistently, pDCs derived from Atg5-deficient mice failed to produce IFNα after VSV infection, and autophagosome formation occurs constitutively in pDCs.³⁸ Thus, pDC also recognize replicating viruses through autophagy.

Signaling via intracellular TLR7, TLR9, and TLR3 is abrogated in mutant 3d mice, which have a single missense mutation in the gene encoding UNC-93B, a twelve-membrane-spanning protein that resides in the ER.³⁹ These mice show defective cytokine production as well as reduced upregulation of costimulatory molecules in response to ligands for these intracellular TLRs. Furthermore, these mice have no ability to present peptides derived from exogenous antigens on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules, and the mice were accordingly more susceptible to MCMV infection than wild-type mice. Mutations in the UNC-93B gene were also found in two patients with severe HSV encephalitis.⁴⁰ UNC-93B interacts with all three of these TLRs in the ER via the transmembrane domains of the TLRs, and is responsible for delivering TLR7 and TLR9 from the ER to endolysosomes.⁴¹

Recognition of Viruses by RLRs

Numerous studies have provided clear evidence for TLR-independent mechanisms of sensing virus infection in the cytoplasm. For example, induction of IFNβ following polyIC stimulation by a transfection reagent or infection with RNA viruses is normally observed in the absence of TLR3 or its intracellular adapter molecule TIR domain-containing adapter protein inducing interferon-beta (TRIF).⁴²,⁴³ In this regard, RIG-I was isolated as a clone that has the ability to enhance polyIC-mediated activation of the IFNβ promoter following overexpression.⁴⁴ Structurally, RIG-I contains two repeats of a CARD-like region at its N-terminus, which function as in interactions with other CARD-containing proteins and are required to trigger downstream signaling. The middle portion contains the DExD/H helicase domain with an ATP-binding motif. The C-terminal region contains a repressor domain (RD), which inhibits downstream signaling.⁴⁵ The second RLR, Mda5, also contains two CARD-like regions, a DExD/H helicase domain, and a C-terminal region similar to the RD of RIG-I.⁴⁶ However, it is not clear whether the C-terminal region of Mda5 functions as an RD. The third RLR is LGP2, which contains a DExD/H helicase domain and a RD, but lacks the CARD-like region. LGP2 was suggested to serve as a negative regulator of RNA virus-induced responses, because the LGP2RD binds the RIG-IRD and suppresses signaling as a consequence of interfering with the self-association of RIG-I.⁴⁶,⁴⁷

The roles of RLR in the recognition of virus infection and antiviral innate immune responses have been elucidated through analyses of mice individually lacking RLRs. RIG-I is essential for the recognition of a series of ssRNA viruses, which include paramyxoviruses, influenza virus, VSV, and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV). Whereas Mda5 null cells display normal responses to these viruses, Mda5 is required for the recognition of other RNA viruses, including picornaviruses such as EMCV, Mengo virus, and Theiler's virus.⁴⁸⁻⁵⁰ Furthermore, Mda5, but not RIG-I, participates in the recognition of polyIC.⁴⁹,⁵⁰ Mice deficient for RIG-I and Mda5 are consistently more highly susceptible to infection with

respective viruses than wild-type mice. These observations strongly suggest that RIG-I and Mda5 have specificities in their detection of RNA viruses. While initial studies implicated LGP2 as a negative regulator, LGP2-deficient mice exhibit complicated phenotypes. That is, LGP2 null cells show elevated levels of type I IFN in response to polyIC and VSV, while they show decreased type I IFN production after EMCV infection, suggesting that LGP2 negatively or positively regulates RIG-I and Mda5 responses, depending on types of RNA viruses.

RNA is present in abundance in host cells, but host cellular RNA fails to stimulate innate immune responses, unlike virus-derived RNA. Therefore, RLRs must possess mechanisms to discriminate molecular features between host and virus RNA species. In this regard, it was shown that type I IFN induction by *in vitro* synthesized ssRNA requires a 5′-triphosphate moiety, and RIG-I binds to this structure. Likewise, ssRNA of influenza virus, which contains a 5′-triphosphate and is uncapped, directly interacts with RIG-I and is responsible for the induction of type I IFN. These observations suggest that RIG-I recognizes the 5′-end modifications of ssRNA, allowing RIG-I to discriminate between self and nonself RNA. Biochemical analyses have recently revealed the recognition mechanism of RIG-I. Recombinant RIG-I protein binds to dsRNA, the end structure of which is either blunt end, 5′-overhang or 3′-overhang, in addition to ssRNA bearing 5′-triphosphate. While blunt ended and 5′-overhanging dsRNA forms a stable complex with RIG-I, 3′-overhanging dsRNA is rapidly unwound by RIG-I via its helicase activity, and therefore it neither forms a stable complex nor activates signaling. Notably, the C-terminal region involving the RD in RIG-I is required for the recognition of ssRNA as well as dsRNA, and this recognition increases ATPase activity. It has been proposed, therefore, that a stable complex between RNA and RIG-I in the presence of ATP may induce a conformational change in this pro-

tein that allows the CARD-like regions to bind downstream signaling molecules.

Cellular RNA serves as a ligand that stimulates the RLR pathway during viral infection. Viral RNA stimulates 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthetase (2′-5′ OAS) to promote activation of an endonuclease, RNaseL, which subsequently cleaves self RNA to make small RNA species. The cleaved RNA, which contains a 3′ monophosphate group, serves as the ligand for RIG-I and Mda5 to initiate signaling leading to type I IFN production. These observations suggest that this RLR-mediated recognition may be a host defense mechanism to efficiently amplify type I IFN responses. Further investigations are required to understand the mechanisms by which RIG-I recognizes these cellular RNAs.

### Transcriptional Control of the IFNβ Gene

The transcription of IFNβ is rapidly induced following virus infection (or other stimuli such as bacteria and stress) through a cooperative binding of three distinct families of transcription factors, including NF-κB, Activating Transcription Factor 2 (ATF2)/c-Jun and Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs), to the positive regulatory domain (PRD) of the promoter. Both TLR and RLR signaling pathways culminate in the activation of these transcription factors.

The NF-κB family consists of five members: RelA (p65), RelB, C-Rel, p105 (NF-κB1; a precursor of p50), and p100 (NF-κB2; a precursor of p52) in mammals. NF-κB forms a homodimer or heterodimer and controls expression of distinct but overlapping genes. In TLR and RLR signaling, a heterodimer composed of RelA and p50 is the most frequently activated form. In unstimulated cells, the RelA-p50 heterodimer is kept in the cytoplasm as a latent and inactive form by a direct interaction with IkB proteins such as IkBa and IkBβ. Stimulation with TLR or RLR ligands rapidly catalyzes the phosphorylation of IkB proteins by a multiprotein complex termed the IKK complex, which consists of two catalytic

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

components, IKKα and IKKβ, and a regulatory component, NEMO (also known as IKKγ). IkB proteins phosphorylated by the IKK complex are subsequently polyubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome, allowing NF-κB to move into the nucleus. Genetic studies have revealed that IKKβ, rather than IKKα, plays an essential role in the activation of NF-κB during TLR and RLR signaling.56,57

ATF2/c-Jun is a component of AP-1, which belongs to a dimeric basic region leucine zipper protein family that binds TPA-response elements or cAMP-response elements present in various cytokine genes. AP-1 activation during TLR signaling is controlled through phosphorylation by MAP kinases (MAPK), such as c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), p38, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). These MAPKs are activated with similar kinetics after TLR engagement or viral infection.

While NF-κB and MAPKs are activated in response to numerous stimuli, including inflammation, IRFs are mainly activated during virus infection and are likely to determine the specificity of type I IFN induction.5 Among IRFs (IRF1–IRF9), IRF3 is critically involved in the initial induction of IFNβ when cells are infected by viruses. IRF3 is a constitutively expressed protein that resides in the cytoplasm in unstimulated cells, but virus infection triggers IRF3 phosphorylation at serine/threonine clusters in the C-terminal regulatory regions by virus-activated kinases (VAKs), which allows IRF3 to form a homodimer, translocate into the nucleus, and bind to DNA to regulate expression of IFNβ and other IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs).5 IRF7 is structurally the most similar to IRF3, whose activation is also controlled by phosphorylation in the C-terminal region. Unlike the constitutive expression of IRF3, the expression of IRF7 is weak in unstimulated cells but dramatically induced by stimulation with type I IFN or other stimuli. Thus, the initial induction of IFNβ is largely dependent on IRF3 activation, and secreted IFNβ acts on neighboring cells and activates the Janus Kinase (JAK)-Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) pathway via type I IFN receptor to induce IRF7 expression, which may result in the amplification of type I IFN induction through a positive feedback mechanism.

Two additional members of the IKK family, IKKi (also known as IKKe) and TBK1 (also known as T2K or NAK), have been identified based on their similarities to canonical IKKs or their interactions with TRAF-related proteins.58–62 Despite initial implications of roles for these proteins in NF-κB activation by modulating tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) family proteins or IKKβ activity,63,59,61,62 mice lacking these kinases exhibit normal NF-κB activation in response to viral infection.43,64,65 However, TBK1 and IKKi were discovered to be essential VAKs that phosphorylate and activate IRF3 and IRF7.66,67 Accordingly, embryonic fibroblast cells derived from TBK1-deficient mice show reduced IRF3 nuclear translocation with a concomitant decrease in IFNβ production in response to virus infection.43,64,65 By contrast, IKKi-deficient mice show no obvious changes with respect to IRF3 activation and IFNβ induction. However, cells deficient in both TBK1 and IKKi exhibit a complete loss of IRF3 activation and IFNβ induction, indicating an involvement of IKKi in IRF3 activation.43 IKKi expression is restricted to immune cells and is upregulated in response to various stimuli, such as lipopolysaccharide,58 suggesting the possibility that IKKi controls antiviral responses during the late phase of infection. IKKi-deficient mice were found to be highly susceptible to virus infection because of the decreased induction of a set of ISGs, despite normal amounts of IFNβ.68 In these cells, the DNA binding activity of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex (ISGF3) was impaired. IKKi is capable of phosphorylating serine residues of STAT1, a component of ISGF3. This phosphorylation is critical for the transcriptional activity of STAT1. Thus, IKKi is likely to act as a STAT1 kinase in IFN signaling, controlling the onset of

expression of ISGs. TBK1 and IKKi interact numerous signaling pathways, including those
with TRAF family member-associated NF-κB downstream of IL-1 receptor and CD 40.73
activator (TANK) family proteins, which are TRAF6 is a RING-domain E3 ubiquitin ligase
modulators of TRAF proteins. These include that, together with E2, Ubc13, and Ubiquitin-
TANK (also known as I-TRAF), NAP1 (also conjugating enzyme E2 variant 1 isoform A
known as AZ2), and SINTBAD (also known as (Uev1A), promotes lysine 63-linked polyubi-
TBKBP1).63,59,69–71 They are likely to facilitate uitination of target proteins, including TRAF 6
the activity of these kinases, much like NEMO, itself and NEMO.74,75 Lysine 63-linked ubiq-
which is essential for IKK activity, although uitination is important for protein interactions,
the physiological functions of these proteins activation of signaling pathways and subcellu-
in antiviral immune responses await further lar localization.76 Ubiquitinated NEMO and
investigation.

TRAF6 subsequently recruit a protein kinase
TLR 3 Signaling complex involving TAK1 (a member of the
MAP3K protein family) and TAB proteins
Following PAMP recognition, TLRs recruit (TAB1, TAB2, and TAB3). TAK1 is suggested
a specific combination of TIR domain- to phosphorylate IKKB, thereby increasing its
containing adapters, including myeloid differ- enzymatic activity.75 Cells derived from TAK1-
entiation primary response gene 88 deficient mice consistently display reduced in-
(MyD88), TIR-containing adaptor protein flammatory cytokine production as well as im-
(TIRAP)/MyD88-adaptor-like (MAL), TRIF/ paired NF-κB activation in response to multiple
TIR domain-containing adaptor molecule 1 TLR ligands.77,78 However, cells derived from
(TICAM1), and TRIF-related adaptor mole- TAB1-or TAB2-deficient mice displayed nor-
cule (TRAM)/TICAM2.1,72 In TLR5, TLR7, mal NF-κB activation, while the in vivo roles of
and TLR9 signaling, the response to ligands, TAB3 are unclear.79,78 Thus, TAK1, but not
including inflammatory cytokine induc- TAB1 and TAB2, plays an essential and nonre-
tion, is defective in MyD88-deficient mice. dundant role in the activation of NF-κB.
However, the response does not require An alternative pathway leading to NF-
TIRAP, TRIF, or TRAM, indicating that κB activation is mediated by the TRIF
MyD88 is used as the sole adapter by these C-terminal region, which contains the Rip ho-
TLRs. TLR2 also uses MyD88, but requires motypic interaction motif (RHIM) responsible for the interaction of TRIF with RIP1,
TIRAP as an additional adapter that links a member of the RIP family involved in
between MyD88 and TLR2. TLR3 is the only TNF receptor-mediated NF-κB activation.80
TLR that does not use MyD88. Instead, TLR3 In RIP1-deficient cells, TLR3-mediated NF-
uses TRIF. TLR4 uses all four adapters— κB activation is reduced. It was suggested that
MyD88, TIRAP, TRIF, and TRAM. TRAM RIP1 is inducibly polyubiquitinated to form
serves to link between TRIF and TLR4. a complex with TRAF6 and TAK1, resulting
Collectively, TLR signaling is largely divided in NF-κB activation.81 Thus, TRIF recruits TRAF6 and RIP1 via distinct regions,
into MyD88-dependent and TRIF-dependent and these molecules cooperatively facilitate
pathways. While both these pathways com- TAK1 activation. However, TRAF6 is reported
monly induce inflammatory cytokines, each to be dispensable for TRIF-dependent NF-
pathway can induce type I IFN.72 κB activation in macrophages, implying a cell
The TLR3-TRIF pathway activates NF-κB type-specific contribution of TRAF6 in TRIF-
via two separate pathways. It was found that the dependent NF-κB activation.82
N-terminal region of TRIF contains three pu- It has been suggested that TAK1 phosphorylates two members of the MAP kinase
tative motifs that mediate binding to TRAF6,
an adaptor implicated in NF-κB activation in

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

kinase family, MKK3 and MKK6, which subsequently activate JNK and p38; consistently, these MAPKs were not activated in response to various TLR ligands in TAK1-null cells. 77 Similarly, ERK activation, which is controlled by MEK1 and MEK2, is reduced by TAK1 deficiency. 77 Thus, TAK1 is required for the activation of all of these MAPK family members in TLR signaling as well. While Ubc13 has been suggested to control NF-κB activation, studies using mice with a conditionally deleted Ubc13 gene demonstrated a role for this molecule in MAPK activation rather than NF-κB activation. 83 Macrophages lacking Ubc13 exhibited a marked reduction in inflammatory cytokine production in response to various TLR ligands, and B cells lacking Ubc13 showed defective MAPK activation, whereas they showed normal NF-κB activation. Moreover, TAK1 activation and TRAF6 ubiquitination occur normally in Ubc13-null fibroblast cells. These findings suggest that Ubc13 stimulates MAPK activation independently of TAK1 and TRAF6. Notably, NEMO ubiquitination was impaired in the absence of Ubc13, suggesting that Ubc13 controls MAPK activation via NEMO ubiquitination. 83

IRF3 activation and IFNβ induction after polyIC stimulation is impaired in TRIF-deficient mice, indicating that IRF3 activation is controlled by the TRIF-dependent pathway. 42,84 The TRIF N-terminal region that shares binding with TRAF6 was shown to be sufficient to interact with TBK1 (and possibly IKKi). 73 Furthermore, overexpression of a kinase-negative mutant of TBK1 blocked TRIF-induced IFNβ promoter activation. 73 TRAF3, a member of the TRAF family, was shown to play a critical role in TRIF-mediated IRF3 activation by serving as a link between TRIF and TBK1, and TRAF3-deficient mice fail to induce IFNβ in response to polyIC, despite normal NF-κB activation. 85,86 Taken together, these findings suggest that TLR3 uses the TRIF-TRAF3-TBK1-IRF3 axis to induce IFNβ and develop an antiviral state.

TLR7 and TLR9 Signaling

The signaling pathways downstream of TLR7 and TLR9 have been intensively investigated to understand the molecular mechanisms by which pDCs rapidly produce high amounts of type I IFN. TLR7 and TLR9 use MyD88 as an essential adaptor for the activation of NF-κB and MAPK (Fig. 2). 72 MyD88 is composed of a TIR-domain and a death domain. Through the death domain, MyD88 interacts with the death domains of members of the IRAK family of protein kinases, including IRAK1, IRAK2, IRAK4, and IRAK-M. IRAK4 is initially activated, which in turn activates IRAK1 and IRAK2. IRAK-M, which lacks intrinsic kinase activity, has been suggested to negatively regulate TLR signaling by preventing the dissociation of IRAK4 and IRAK1 from MyD88. Subsequently, IRAKs dissociate from MyD88 and interact with TRAF6. TRAF6 then activates the TAK1 complex, which results in the activation of NF-κB and MAPKs. These pathways control the induction of inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 2). 72 Among IRAKs, IRAK4 is an essential molecule controlling NF-κB activation, while IRAK1 is dispensable.

Type I IFN induction through TLR7 and TLR9 entirely depends on MyD88, unlike TLR3, which uses TRIF. 87,88 Moreover, this induction occurs independently of IRF3, suggesting a contribution of other IRF family members. 89 It was shown that IRF7 is constitutively expressed in pDCs and that IRF7-deficient mice fail to produce IFNα from pDCs in response to these stimuli. 89 IRF7 was identified to bind MyD88 and form a signaling complex with IRAK4 and TRAF6. 90,91 Within this complex, IRF7 becomes phosphorylated, dissociates from the complex, and translocates into the nucleus (Fig. 2). 90,91 Notably, IFNα production in response to TLR7 and TLR9 ligands occurs normally in TBK1-and IKKi-deficient pDCs. 90,92

It was shown that IRAK1 is critically involved in IRF7 phosphorylation. IRAK1, but not IRAK4, physically interacts with IRF7. 93

Figure 2. Signaling pathways downstream of TLR7 and TLR9. TLR7 and TLR9 reside in the ER and interact with UNC-93B. Upon stimulation by viral nucleic acids, these TLRs localize to the endosome to contact nucleic acids and recruit a signaling complex consisting of MyD88, IRAK4, and TRAF6. TRAF6 in turn activates TAK1. TAK1, together with TABs (TAB1, TAB2, TAB3), subsequently activates the IKK complex (IKKα, IKKβ, and NEMO) to catalyze phosphorylation of IkB proteins. IkB proteins are degraded by the proteasome pathway, allowing NF-κB to translocate to the nucleus. TAK1 simultaneously activates the MAPK pathway. NF-κB and MAPK pathways control inflammatory responses by inducing inflammatory cytokines. MyD88 forms a signaling complex with IRAK1, IKKα, TRAF3, OPN-i, and IRF7 in pDCs. IRF7 is phosphorylated in an IRAK1- and IKKα-dependent manner and translocates to the nucleus to regulate the expression of type I IFN genes. IRF8 participates in the secondary induction of type I IFN. IRF5 and IRF1 interact with MyD88 and participate in the induction of inflammatory cytokines and type I IFN, respectively, in cDCs.

IRAK1 is capable of phosphorylating the C-terminal region of IRF7 required for its transcriptional activity. pDCs derived from IRAK1-deficient mice have defects in IRF7 nuclear translocation as well as IFNα induction. On the contrary, NF-κB activation and inflammatory cytokine induction is normal in IRAK1-deficient pDCs, unlike IRAK4-deficient mice that have defects in both IRF7 and NF-κB activation. These findings strongly suggest that IRAK1 specifically serves as the protein kinase responsible for IRF7 phosphorylation downstream of IRAK4 (Fig. 2).

Defective IRF7 activation and IFNα induction in response to TLR7 and TLR9 ligands were also observed in pDCs derived from IKKα-deficient mice. IKKα physically binds and phosphorylates IRF7 *in vitro*, as does IRAK1. However, the ability of IKKα to phosphorylate IRF7 is weaker than the abilities of TBK1 and IKKi. Moreover, optimal production of inflammatory cytokines and NF-κB activation was slightly decreased in IKKα-deficient pDC, which was in marked contrast to IRAK1-deficient mice that display relatively normal activation of NF-κB. These findings show that IKKα is involved in IRF7 activation and to some degree in NF-κB activation in pDCs (Fig. 2). The functional relationships between IRAK1 and IKKα remain unclear.

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

In purified human pDCs, the induction of IFNα requires phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) activation because treatment with a PI3K inhibitor selectively abrogates TLR7- and TLR9-dependent IRF7 nuclear translocation and IFNα production but does not affect NF-κB activation, although the precise mechanisms behind the PI3K activation remain to be determined.⁹⁵

Several additional components of the MyD88-IRF7 complex in pDCs have been identified. In addition to its critical role in TRIF-dependent IRF3 activation, TRAF3 is involved in MyD88-dependent IRF7 activation. TRAF3 reportedly binds MyD88 and IRAK1, and TRAF3 deficiency results in defective type I IFN induction during TLR7 and TLR9 signaling (Fig. 2).⁸⁶ Osteopontin (OPN) is a secreted protein involved in diverse cellular functions such as inflammation and Th1 polarization. OPN expression is induced by TLR9 ligands, and pDCs derived from OPN-deficient mice fail to induce type I IFN in response to a TLR9 ligand, whereas IL-6 production is unaffected.⁹⁶ A precursor of OPN (OPN-i) is sequestered in the cytoplasm, and OPN-i interacts and colocalizes with MyD88 (Fig. 2).

IRF8 is a nuclear protein expressed highly by pDCs and other DC populations. pDCs derived from IRF8-deficient mice show a loss of TLR9-mediated induction of type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines. These cells show decreased NF-κB DNA binding in response to a TLR9 ligand, suggesting the possibility that IRF8 controls NF-κB DNA-binding activity for the induction of inflammatory cytokines.⁹⁷ The other aspect of IRF8 in the control of type I IFN is that it is required for the second, amplifying phase of IFN induction by viruses, which is an important feedback mechanism of efficient IFN production, in both pDCs and cDCs (Fig. 2).⁹⁸ Although the regulatory mechanisms by which IRF8 is recruited to the promoter regions of type I IFN genes remain elusive, post-translational modification is involved. IRF8 was found to physically interact with Ro52 (also known as TRIM21), an IFN-inducible protein belonging to the tripartite motif (TRIM) family and an autoantigen typically present in patients with SLE and Sjögren's syndrome.⁹⁹ Ro52 targets IRF8 for ubiquitination, and this modification enhances the transcriptional activity of IRF8, which results in increased IL-12p40 induction in macrophages. Although elucidation of roles of Ro52 in pDCs with regards to type I IFN induction will be required, this finding suggests that Ro52 may act as an inducible activator for IRF8 that facilitates the second phase of type I IFN induction.

cDCs also produce considerable amounts of type I IFN in response to viruses. However, the regulatory mechanism of type I IFN induction seems to be differentially controlled between pDCs and cDCs. In cDCs deficient for IRF1, the induction of IFNβ in response to TLR9 ligands is impaired, while pDCs derived from these mice produce normal amounts of IFNβ and IFNα.¹⁰⁰,¹⁰¹ IRF1 interacts with MyD88 and is released into the nucleus in response to stimulation. It is known that IFNγ stimulation induces IRF1 expression and enhanced cytokine production in response to TLR ligands. Thus, IFNγ-induced IRF1 is recruited to MyD88, and TLR stimulation triggers translocation of IRF1 and induction of IFNβ in cDCs. IRF5 is also reportedly involved in TLR7 and TLR9 signaling in cDCs. IRF5-deficient cDCs exhibit impaired inflammatory cytokine production in response to multiple TLR ligands, despite normal secretion of type I IFN by pDCs.¹⁰² IRF5 binds MyD88 and TRAF6 and translocates to the nucleus following phosphorylation. IRF5 binds ISRE motifs in the promoter regions of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines to induce their expression.

### RLR Signaling

RLR signaling pathways converge at NF-κB, MAPK, and IRFs for a robust induction of type I IFN. Interferon beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1) [also known as mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS), CARD adaptor inducing interferon beta (Cardif), or virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA)] was discovered as

an adaptor for RLR that provides a link
between RLR and downstream signaling
molecules. ${ }^{103-106}$ IPS-1 contains an N-terminal
CARD-like domain sharing homology with
those of RIG-I and Mda5. Overexpression of
IPS-1 activates IFNα4, IFNα6, and NF-κB pro-
moters as well as the IFNβ promoter and re-
sults in production of type I IFN that is suffi-
cient for inhibition of viral replication. The in-
duction of IFNβ by IPS-1 requires TBK1 and
IKKi, as cells lacking these kinases together fail
to activate the IFNβ promoter following IPS-1
overexpression. ${ }^{103}$
Studies on MAVS found that it contains
a transmembrane domain in the C-terminal
tail required for mitochondria targeting. ${ }^{104}$ No-
tably, deletion of this region of IPS-1 abrogates
IRF3 and NF-κB activation, suggesting that sig-
naling from mitochondria plays an important
role in the antiviral immune response. It was
reported that the NS3/4A serine protease in
the hepatitis C virus (HCV) targets IPS-1 for
cleavage. ${ }^{105,107-110}$ There is a putative cleav-
age site adjacent to the transmembrane domain
(Cys-508), and HCV infection results in cleav-
age of IPS-1 and abrogates downstream sig-
naling. Moreover, IPS-1 was found to be local-
ized in the cytoplasm, but not mitochondria, in
the livers of patients infected with HCV, and
inhibitors of NS3/4A blocked IPS-1 cleav-
age as well as increased innate responses to
HCV. ${ }^{111,109}$ NS3/4A is likely to change the
cellular localization of IPS-1 from mitochon-
dria to the cytoplasm by cleavage, thereby sup-
pressing the host antiviral response. In addi-
tion, NS3/4A also mediates the cleavage of
TRIF to inhibit the TLR3-dependent antiviral
response. ${ }^{112,113}$
IPS-1-deficient mice have been gener-
ated. ${ }^{114,115}$ Unlike RIG-I-deficient mice, which
show embryonic lethality because of liver de-
generation, ${ }^{48}$ IPS-1-deficient mice are viable
and develop normally. Macrophages, cDCs,
and embryonic fibroblasts derived from IPS-
1-deficient mice fail to activate NF-κB and
IRF3 with a concomitant loss of type I IFN
and inflammatory cytokine induction after in-
fection with RNA viruses recognized by RIG-
I or Mda5. Cytokine induction in response
to polyIC or synthesized dsRNA is also im-
paired in IPS-1-deficient mice. IPS-1-deficient
mice are consistently susceptible to infection
with RNA viruses, indicating the importance
of IPS-1 in antiviral responses *in vivo*. How-
ever, IPS-1 is dispensable for type I IFN induc-
tion by cytosolic dsDNA, DNA virus, *Listeria*
*monocytogenes*, or various TLR ligands. ${ }^{114,115}$ In
pDCs, type I IFN production was unaffected
by IPS-1 deficiency, indicating that TLRs con-
tribute more preferentially than RLRs to viral
recognition in pDCs. In other cell types, such
as cDCs, macrophages, and fibroblast cells,
RLRs play central roles in viral recognition
and subsequent induction of antiviral immune
responses. ${ }^{114,115}$
It is controversial whether IPS-1 directly
interacts with TBK1 and IKKi. However, it
was reported that TRAF3 acts as a link be-
tween IPS-1 and TBK1/IKKi for the induc-
tion of type I IFN. ${ }^{116}$ TRAF3 directly binds
both IPS-1 and TBK1/IKKi, and TRAF3
deficiency results in impaired type I IFN in-
duction in response to RNA virus infection.
The TRAF3-mediated antiviral immune re-
sponse is negatively regulated by the recently
identified deubiquitinase DUBA, which is ca-
pable of deubiquitinating TRAF3 to suppress
RLR signaling. ${ }^{117}$ IPS-1 also interacts with
receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP-1) and Fas-
associated death domain protein (FADD), a
death domain-containing protein involved in
death receptor signaling. ${ }^{103}$ Cells deficient in
FADD display reduced induction of IFNβ
and inflammatory cytokines in response to
polyIC. ${ }^{118}$ FADD was found to form a com-
plex with caspase-10 and caspase-8, and polyIC
stimulation triggers the cleavage of these cas-
pases. ${ }^{119}$ The cleaved fragment encoding a
death effector domain of these caspases dra-
matically activates NF-κB but not IFNβ pro-
moter. Cells lacking caspase-8 accordingly
show reduced NF-κB activation and inflamma-
tory cytokine induction in response to polyIC
(Fig. 3). ${ }^{119}$

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

dsRNA
Picornaviruses

5' triphosphate RNA
Paramyxoviruses
VSV
Influenza virus

LGP2
Mda5
RIG-I
TRIM25
RNF125
A20
FADD
Caspase8/10
NEMO
IKKa/IKKβ
IkB
NF-κB
NF-κB
IRF3
Pin1
cytoplasm
NLRX1
mitochondria
IPS-1
ATG12-ATG5
TRAF3
DUBA
TANK/NAP1/SINTBAD
TBK1/IKKi
IRF3
nuclei
Inflammatory
cytokines
Type I IFN

Figure 3. Signaling pathways downstream of RLRs. Following recognition of the listed viral components, RIG-I and Mda5 associate with the adapter IPS-1 via CARD-like domains. IPS-1 is localized to mitochondria and initiates signaling leading to activation of IRF3 and NF-κB via TBK1/IKKi and IKKa/IKKB, respectively. A FADD, caspase-8, and caspase-10 complex is implicated in IPS-1-dependent NF-κB activation, whereas TRAF3 interacts with IPS-1 and TBK1/IKKi to activate IRF3. FADD is also implicated in IRF3 activation. TRIM25a binds RIG-I and facilitates IPS-1-mediated signaling. IPS-1 is negatively regulated by NLRX1 and the Atg12-Atg5 conjugate, while RIG-I is negatively regulated by IFN-inducible RNF125 and A20. The TRAF3-dependent pathway is negatively controlled by DUBA. Pin1 suppresses IRF3 activation.

TRIM25a, a member of the TRIM protein family that contains a RING-finger domain, a B box/coiled-coil domain, and a SPRY domain, was shown to be involved in RIG-I-mediated signaling. The SPRY domain of TRIM25a binds RIG-I CARD. Importantly, this interaction induces Lys-63-linked ubiquitination of the CARD of RIG-I (Lys 172 residue), which facilitates an interaction with IPS-1 to activate downstream signaling molecules. Accordingly, cells lacking TRIM25a display a loss of RIG-I ubiquitination as well as impaired antiviral responses. Thus, TRIM25a positively regulates antiviral responses by promoting RIG-I ubiquitination. By contrast, the RIG-I-mediated pathway is negatively regulated by ubiquitination. A20 is an NF-κB-target gene, which has both deubiquitin and ubiquitin ligase activities. A20 overexpression blocks RIG-I- and IPS-1-mediated activation of NF-κB and IRF3, and this inhibition requires its ubiquitin ligase activity. RNF125, an E3 ubiquitin ligase with a RING-finger domain, was found to interact with RIG-I, Mda5, and IPS-1 and promote ubiquitination of these proteins. This ubiquitination induces degradation of RIG-I. As expression of A20 and RNF125 is inducible, these proteins may play roles in attenuating antiviral responses. The cytoplasmic peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase Pin1, which catalyzes the cis-trans isomerization of peptide bonds located N-terminal to proline, binds IRF3 when it is phosphorylated, triggering ubiquitination.

and consequent degradation of IRF 3 by
a proteasome-dependent pathway.¹²⁴ Pin1-
deficient cells consistently exhibit a reduction
of viral replication accompanied by enhanced
IFNβ production. Moreover, Pin1 also partici-
pates in negative regulation of IRF 3 in TLR 3
signaling (Fig. 3).¹²⁴

NLRX1, a member of the NOD-like re-
ceptor (NLR) family involved in the cytoplas-
mic recognition of pathogens such as bacteria
and viruses, was recently discovered to regu-
late IPS-1-mediated signaling pathways. Un-
like other NLR members that contain the
CARD or pyrin domain at their N-terminus,
NLRX1 contains neither of these domains.
Instead, it contains a mitochondrial-targeting
sequence, and it localizes to the outer mem-
brane of mitochondria via this region.¹²⁵ It was
shown that the NACHT domain of NLRX1
can bind to the CARD of IPS-1. Overex-
pression of NLRX1 disrupts interactions be-
tween RLR and IPS-1, resulting in decreases
in polyIC-induced IFNβ-and NF-κB-promoter
activities; conversely, siRNA-mediated reduc-
tion of NLRX1 expression results in enhanced
IFNβ expression following Sendai virus infec-
tion.¹²⁵ These findings suggest that NLRX1
serves as a modulator of RLR signaling rather
than intracellular PRRs (Fig. 3). On the con-
trary, another report suggests that there is
no inhibitory function of NLRX1 on IFNβ
and NF-κB promoter activation. However,
it was proposed that NLRX1 participates
in amplification of NF-κB and JNK activ-
ity.¹²⁶ NLRX1 overexpression increased reac-
tive oxygen species (ROS) production following
stimulation with TNFα, Shigella, and polyIC.
Moreover, removal of a putative mitochondria-
targeting sequence of NLRX1 results in a fail-
ure to induce ROS, suggesting the importance
of mitochondria localization in its function. Al-
together, these findings suggest that NLRX1
negatively and positively regulates antiviral im-
mune responses. It is possible that NLRX1
functions as a negative regulator that prevents
interaction between IPS-1 and RLR in the
steady state, but in response to stimulation it

maybe converted to a positive regulator of host
defenses through induction of ROS produc-
tion and subsequent activation of NF-κB and
JNK.

Another negative regulation of RLR sig-
naling is mediated by an Atg12–Atg5 conju-
gate.¹²⁷ In Atg5- and Atg7-deficient embryonic
fibroblasts, in which Atg12–Atg5 conjugate for-
mation is impaired, RIG-I-mediated antiviral
responses are significantly increased. In vitro
experiments implicated that the Atg12–Atg5
conjugate directly interacts with the CARD-
like region of both RIG-I and IPS-1, result-
ing in the repression of type I IFN induction.
Thus, fibroblasts utilize autophagy for the sup-
pression of RLR-triggering antiviral responses,
which is in marked contrast to pDCs, which uti-
lize autophagy for mounting TLR 7-triggered
type I IFN response. The mechanisms underly-
ing these differential utilizations of autophagy
with regard to antiviral responses need to be
clarified.

Contribution of TLR and RLR Signaling to
the Generation of Adaptive Immunity

Initial innate responses to viral infection oc-
cur through TLRs and RLRs, but it is unclear
how these pathways control the generation of
highly specific, long-lasting adaptive immune
responses against viruses *in vivo*. The roles of
TLR- and RLR-mediated pathways in mount-
ing adaptive immunity have been investigated
by using various viruses.

LCMV is an ambisense ssRNA virus known
to induce CTL responses in a type I IFN-
dependent fashion. Generation of virus-specific
CD8⁺T cells following LCMV infection was
abrogated in MyD88-deficient mice, but not
in IPS-1-deficient mice.¹²⁸ In MyD88-deficient
mice, the production of type I IFN was im-
paired. The sources of IFNα following LCMV
infection are likely to be pDCs, suggesting that
TLR recognition of LCMV by pDCs plays an
important role in the efficient development of
antiviral adaptive immune responses.

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

The contribution of IRAK4, a kinase downstream of MyD88 required for TLR-mediated production of inflammatory cytokines and type I IFN, remains controversial. Unlike MyD88-deficient mice, IRAK4-deficient mice show normal expansion of LCMV-specific tetramer-positive CD8⁺T cells as well as CTL activity, suggesting redundant roles for other IRAK family members. Another report has shown the importance of IRAK4 in T cell responses to LCMV. It was found that the total numbers of CD8⁺T cells after virus infection, expansion of tetramer-positive CD8⁺T cells, and CTL activity were significantly reduced in IRAK4-deficient mice or mice expressing kinase-negative IRAK4. The reason for these discrepancies remains unclear.

Influenza A virus has been also used to evaluate the contribution of TLR and RLR in B and T cell responses. Intranasal infection upregulates type I IFN genes in mice lacking either MyD88 or IPS-1, although the induction was entirely abrogated in mice lacking both, suggesting that both pathways are required for the induction of type I IFN in the lung. However, the production of antibodies specific to influenza A virus and CD4⁺T cell responses are reduced in MyD88-deficient mice, but not in IPS-1-deficient mice. Accordingly, vaccination of MyD88-deficient mice with inactivated influenza A virus failed to protect against subsequent infection. These findings suggest that the MyD88-dependent pathway, rather than an IPS-1-dependent pathway, contributes to the induction of effective antiviral adaptive immune responses. However, mice lacking either MyD88 or IPS-1 normally developed antigen-specific CD8⁺T cells, suggesting a MyD88 and IPS-1-independent mechanism for CTL induction.

By contrast, the importance of RLR pathways, rather than TLR pathways, in the generation of adaptive immunity has been demonstrated by the use of polyIC, which is recognized by TLR3 and Mda5. Through analyses of the adjuvant effect of polyIC in IPS-1-and TRIF-deficient mice, it was found that IPS-1-deficient mice had severe defects in polyIC-enhanced antigen-specific antibody production, whereas TRIF-deficient mice displayed normal production. In accordance with previous reports showing that signaling through IFNR is indispensable for polyIC-enhanced production of antigen-specific antibodies, the levels of serum type I IFN after polyIC challenge were severely impaired in IPS-1-deficient mice, whereas they were normal in TRIF-deficient mice. By contrast, the expansion of antigen-specific CD8⁺T cells and the production of IFNγ from CD8⁺T cells were decreased at similar levels in IPS-1-deficient and TRIF-deficient mice. IFNγ production by CD8⁺T cells during viral infection was reported to require type I IFN. By contrast, TRIF-deficient mice produce considerable amounts of serum type I IFN. However, IL-12p40 production was diminished in TRIF-deficient mice, whereas it was normal in IPS-1-deficient mice. Therefore, the reduced responses in TRIF-deficient mice might be due to defective production of IL-12p40, which is also important for IFNγ production. Notably, all these responses were entirely impaired in IPS-1-and TRIF-double deficient mice, indicating that a combinational recognition of polyIC by TLR and RLR is essential for robust innate and adaptive immune responses. In addition, the TRIF-dependent pathway is implicated in antitumor NK cell activation in a mouse tumor implant model. The activation of NK cells is independent of IL-12 and IFNα, but requires DC and NK cell interactions. The identification of molecules responsible for NK cell activation that are induced by polyIC will be required.

### Conclusion

Two separate classes of PRRs, TLRs and RLRs, appear to be utilized for antiviral immune responses. These PRRs are expressed in different cellular compartments and recognize different, but overlapping, nucleic acids. TLR3 recognizes dsRNA that is released into

the endosome. By contrast, RLRs are expressed in the cytoplasm in a variety of cells, including immune and nonimmune cells, and recognize RNA produced as a consequence of viral replication. TLR 7 and TLR 9 are exclusively expressed by pDCs and act as sensors for viral ssRNA and DNA. Although these PRRs all ultimately induce type I IFN, the signaling pathways proximal to these receptors are distinct. TLR 3 relies on the adapter TRIF, while TLR 7 and TLR 9 use MyD88 as an adapter. IPS-1 serves as a common adapter for RLR. To multiply within infected cells, many viruses encode proteins that counteract the activation of TLR and RLR signaling pathways. As described here, the NS3/4A protease of HCV inhibits the IPS-1 and TRIF pathways. Moreover, vaccinia virus (VV)-encoded A46R and A52R as well as HCV NS5A proteins antagonize TLR signaling by modulating the functions of TLR adapter proteins, whereas the V proteins of paramyxoviruses directly interact with Mda5 to block RLR signaling. The VV E3L protein has a Z-DNA-binding property, which is responsible for the inhibition of type I IFN induction, suggesting the possibility that E3L targets as-yet-unknown DNA sensor signaling pathways for inhibition of host antiviral responses. Thus, modulation of PRR signaling pathways as well as knowledge of the viral strategies to counteract PRR signaling will improve therapeutic strategies aimed at limiting viral replication.

To shape adaptive immune responses, activation of either TLR or RLR signaling, or both, is required, depending on the particular viruses and perhaps the route of infection. Elucidating the molecular pathways by which TLRs and RLRs (and other PRRs) control the generation of adaptive immune responses will be required for the development of effective vaccines or adjuvants against viruses.

### Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

---

### References

1. Akira, S., S. Uematsu & O. Takeuchi. 2006. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. *Cell* **124**:783–801.
2. Beutler, B. *et al.* 2007. Genetic analysis of resistance to viral infection. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **7**:753–766.
3. Meylan, E., J. Tschopp & M. Karin. 2006. Intracellular pattern recognition receptors in the host response. *Nature* **442**:39–44.
4. Kawai, T. & S. Akira. 2006. Innate immune recognition of viral infection. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**:131–137.
5. Honda, K., A. Takaoka & T. Taniguchi. 2006. Type I interferon gene induction by the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors. *Immunity* **25**:349–360.
6. Pichlmair, A. & C. Reis e Sousa. 2007. Innate recognition of viruses. *Immunity* **27**:370–383.
7. Theofilopoulos, A.N. *et al.* 2005. Type I interferons (alpha/beta) in immunity and autoimmunity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**:307–336.
8. Medzhitov, R. 2007. Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the immune response. *Nature* **449**:819–826.
9. Meylan, E. & J. Tschopp. 2006. Toll-like receptors and RNA helicases: two parallel ways to trigger antiviral responses. *Mol. Cell* **22**:561–569.
10. Yoneyama, M. & T. Fujita. 2007. Function of RIG-I-like receptors in antiviral innate immunity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**:15315–15318.
11. Nallagatla, S.R. *et al.* 2007. 5′-triphosphate-dependent activation of PKR by RNAs with short stem-loops. *Science* **318**:1455–1458.
12. Ishii, K.J. *et al.* 2006. A Toll-like receptor-independent antiviral response induced by double-stranded B-form DNA. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**:40–48.
13. Stetson, D.B. & R. Medzhitov. 2006. Recognition of cytosolic DNA activates an IRF3-dependent innate immune response. *Immunity* **24**:93–103.
14. Takaoka, A. *et al.* 2007. DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune response. *Nature* **448**:501–505.
15. Ishii, K.J. *et al.* 2008. TANK-binding kinase-1 delineates innate and adaptive immune responses to DNA vaccines. *Nature* **451**:725–729.
16. Alexopoulou, L. *et al.* 2001. Recognition of double-stranded RNA and activation of NF-kappaB by Toll-like receptor 3. *Nature* **413**:732–738.
17. Wang, T. *et al.* 2004. Toll-like receptor 3 mediates West Nile virus entry into the brain causing lethal encephalitis. *Nat. Med.* **10**:1366–1373.
18. Kleinman, M.E. *et al.* 2008. Sequence-and target-independent angiogenesis suppression by siRNA via TLR3. *Nature* **452**:591–597.

Kawai & Akira: TLR and RLR Signaling

19. Matsumoto, M. *et al.* 2003. Subcellular localization of Toll-like receptor 3 in human dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* **171**: 3154–3162.

20. Schulz, O. *et al.* 2005. Toll-like receptor 3 promotes cross-priming to virus-infected cells. *Nature* **433**: 887–892.

21. Zhang, S.Y. *et al.* 2007. TLR 3 deficiency in patients with herpes simplex encephalitis. *Science* **317**: 1522–1527.

22. Edelmann, K.H. *et al.* 2004. Does Toll-like receptor 3 play a biological role in virus infections? *Virology* **322**: 231–238.

23. Tabetta, K. *et al.* 2004. Toll-like receptors 9 and 3 as essential components of innate immune defense against mouse cytomegalovirus infection. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**: 3516–3521.

24. Le Goffic, R. *et al.* 2006. Detrimental contribution of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) 3 to influenza A virus-induced acute pneumonia. *PLoS Pathog.* **2**: e53.

25. Hemmi, H. *et al.* 2002. Small anti-viral compounds activate immune cells via the TLR7 MyD88-dependent signaling pathway. *Nat. Immunol.* **3**: 196–200.

26. Diebold, S.S. *et al.* 2004. Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR 7-mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. *Science* **303**: 1529–1531.

27. Heil, F. *et al.* 2004. Species-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA via toll-like receptor 7 and 8. *Science* **303**: 1526–1529.

28. Hornung, V. *et al.* 2005. Sequence-specific potent induction of IFN-alpha by short interfering RNA in plasmacytoid dendritic cells through TLR 7. *Nat. Med.* **11**: 263–270.

29. Hemmi, H. *et al.* 2000. A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. *Nature* **408**: 740–745.

30. Lund, J. *et al.* 2003. Toll-like receptor 9-mediated recognition of Herpes simplex virus-2 by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **198**: 513–520.

31. Colonna, M., G. Trinchieri & Y.J. Liu. 2004. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells in immunity. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**: 1219–1226.

32. Liu, Y.J. 2005. IPC: Professional Type 1 Interferon-Producing Cells and Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell Precursors. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**: 275–306.

33. Lund, J.M. *et al.* 2004. Recognition of single-stranded RNA viruses by Toll-like receptor 7. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**: 5598–5603.

34. Krug, A. *et al.* 2004. TLR 9-dependent recognition of MCMV by IPC and DC generates coordinated cytokine responses that activate antiviral NK cell function. *Immunity* **21**: 107–119.

35. Krug, A. *et al.* 2004. Herpes simplex virus type 1 activates murine natural interferon-producing cells through toll-like receptor 9. *Blood* **103**: 1433–1437.

36. Honda, K. *et al.* 2005. Spatiotemporal regulation

of MyD88-IRF-7 signalling for robust type-I interferon induction. *Nature* **434**: 1035–1040.

37. Barton, G.M., J.C. Kagan & R. Medzhitov. 2006. Intracellular localization of Toll-like receptor 9 prevents recognition of self DNA but facilitates access to viral DNA. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**: 49–56.

38. Lee, H.K. *et al.* 2007. Autophagy-dependent viral recognition by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. *Science* **315**: 1398–1401.

39. Tabetta, K. *et al.* 2006. The Unc93bl mutation 3 disrupts exogenous antigen presentation and signaling via Toll-like receptors 3, 7 and 9. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**: 156–164.

40. Du, X. *et al.* 2006. Herpes simplex virus encephalitis in human UNC-93B deficiency. *Science* **314**: 308–312.

41. Kim, Y.M. *et al.* 2008. UNC93B1 delivers nucleotide-sensing toll-like receptors to endolysosomes. *Nature* **452**: 234–238.

42. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* 2003. Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. *Science* **301**: 640–643.

43. Hemmi, H. *et al.* 2004. The roles of two IkappaB Kinase-related kinases in lipopolysaccharide and double stranded RNA signaling and viral infection. *J. Exp. Med.* **199**: 1641–1650.

44. Yoneyama, M. *et al.* 2004. The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**: 730–737.

45. Saito, T. *et al.* 2007. Regulation of innate antiviral defenses through a shared repressor domain in RIG-I and LGP2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**: 582–587.

46. Yoneyama, M. *et al.* 2005. Shared and Unique Functions of the DExD/H-Box Helicases RIG-I, MDA 5, and LGP2 in Antiviral Innate Immunity. *J. Immunol.* **175**: 2851–2858.

47. Rothenfusser, S. *et al.* 2005. The RNA helicase Lgp2 inhibits TLR-independent sensing of viral replication by retinoic acid-inducible gene-I. *J. Immunol.* **175**: 5260–5268.

48. Kato, H. *et al.* 2005. Cell type specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response. *Immunity* **23**: 19–28.

49. Kato, H. *et al.* 2006. Differential role of MDA 5 and RIG-I in the recognition of RNA viruses. *Nature* **441**: 101–105.

50. Gitlin, L. *et al.* 2006. Essential role of mda-5 in type I IFN responses to polyriboinosinic: polyribocytidylic acid and encephalomyocarditis picornavirus. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**: 8459–8464.

51. Venkataraman, T. *et al.* 2007. Loss of DExD/H box RNA helicase LGP2 manifests disparate antiviral responses. *J. Immunol.* **178**: 6444–6455.

52. Hornung, V. *et al.* 2006. 5'-Triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. *Science* **314**: 994–997.

53. Pichlmair, A. *et al.* 2006. RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA bearing 5′-phosphates. *Science* **314**: 997–1001.

54. Takahasi, K. *et al.* 2008. Nonself RNA-sensing mechanism of RIG-I helicase and activation of antiviral immune responses. *Mol. Cell* **29**: 428–440.

55. Malathi, K. *et al.* 2007. Small self-RNA generated by RNase L amplifies antiviral innate immunity. *Nature* **448**: 816–819.

56. Karin, M. & F.R. Greten. 2005. NF-kappaB: linking inflammation and immunity to cancer development and progression. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **5**: 749–759.

57. West, A.P., A.A. Koblansky & S. Ghosh. 2006. Recognition and signaling by toll-like receptors. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **22**: 409–437.

58. Shimada, T. *et al.* 1999. IKK-i, a novel lipopolysaccharide-inducible kinase that is related to IkappaB kinases. *Int. Immunol.* **11**: 1357–1362.

59. Pomerantz, J.L. & D. Baltimore. 1999. NF-kappaB activation by a signaling complex containing TRAF2, TANK and TBK1, a novel IKK-related kinase. *EMBO J.* **18**: 6694–6704.

60. Peters, R.T., S.M. Liao & T. Maniatis. 2000. IKKepsilon is part of a novel PMA-inducible IkappaB kinase complex. *Mol. Cell* **5**: 513–522.

61. Tojima, Y. *et al.* 2000. NAK is an IkappaB kinase-activating kinase. **404**: 778–782.

62. Bonnard, M. *et al.* 2000. Deficiency of T2K leads to apoptotic liver degeneration and impaired NF-kappaB-dependent gene transcription. *EMBO J.* **19**: 4976–4985.

63. Nomura, F. *et al.* 2000. NF-kappaB activation through IKK-i-dependent I-TRAF/TANK phosphorylation. *Genes Cells* **5**: 191–202.

64. Perry, A.K. *et al.* 2004. Differential requirement for TANK-binding kinase-1 in type I interferon responses to Toll-like receptor activation and viral infection. *J. Exp. Med.* **199**: 1651–1658.

65. McWhirter, S.M. *et al.* 2004. IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent gene expression is defective in Tbk1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**: 233–238.

66. Sharma, S. *et al.* 2003. Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. *Science* **300**: 1148–1151.

67. Fitzgerald, K.A. *et al.* 2003. IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. *Nat. Immunol.* **4**: 491–496.

68. Tenovever, B.R. *et al.* 2007. Multiple functions of the IKK-related kinase IKKepsilon in interferon-mediated antiviral immunity. *Science* **315**: 1274–1278.

69. Fujita, F. *et al.* 2003. Identification of NAP1, a regulatory subunit of IkappaB kinase-related kinases

that potentiates NF-kappaB signaling. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **23**: 7780–7793.

70. Ryzhakov, G. & F. Randow. 2007. SINTBAD, a novel component of innate antiviral immunity, shares a TBK1-binding domain with NAP1 and TANK. *EMBO J.* **26**: 3180–3190.

71. Sasai, M. *et al.* 2006. NAK-associated protein 1 participates in both the TLR3 and the cytoplasmic pathways in type I IFN induction. *J. Immunol.* **177**: 8676–8683.

72. Kawai, T. & S. Akira. 2007. TLR signaling. *Semin Immunol.* **19**: 24–32.

73. Sato, S. *et al.* 2003. Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and TANK-binding kinase 1, and activates two distinct transcription factors, NF-kappaB and IFN-regulatory factor-3, in the Toll-like receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **171**: 4304–4310.

74. Chen, F. *et al.* 2006. Finding NEMO by K63-linked polyubiquitin chain. *Cell Death Differ.* **13**: 1835–1838.

75. Adhikari, A., M. Xu & Z.J. Chen. 2007. Ubiquitin-mediated activation of TAK1 and IKK. *Oncogene* **26**: 3214–3226.

76. Chen, Z.J. 2005. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-kappaB pathway. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **7**: 758–765.

77. Sato, S. *et al.* 2005. Essential function for the kinase TAK1 in innate and adaptive immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**: 1087–1095.

78. Shim, J.H. *et al.* 2005. TAK1, but not TAB1 or TAB2, plays an essential role in multiple signaling pathways in vivo. *Genes Dev.* **19**: 2668–2681.

79. Sanjo, H. *et al.* 2003. TAB2 is essential for prevention of apoptosis in fetal liver but not for interleukin-1 signaling. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **23**: 1231–1238.

80. Meylan, E. *et al.* 2004. RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-kappaB activation. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**: 503–507.

81. Cusson-Hermance, N. *et al.* 2005. Rip1 mediates the Trif-dependent toll-like receptor 3 and 4-induced NF-kappaB activation but does not contribute to IRF-3 activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**: 36560–36566.

82. Gohda, J., T. Matsumura & J. Inoue. 2004. TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 6 is essential for MyD88-dependent pathway but not toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)-dependent pathway in TLR signaling. *J. Immunol.* **173**: 2913–2917.

83. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* 2006. Key function for the Ubc13E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme in immune receptor signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**: 962–970.

84. Hoebe, K. *et al.* 2003. Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling. *Nature* **424**: 743–748.

85. Hacker, H. *et al.* 2006. Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. *Nature* **439**: 204–207.

86. Oganesyan, G. *et al.* 2006. Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. *Nature* **439**: 208–211.

87. Hoshino, K. *et al.* 2002. Differential involvement of IFN-beta in Toll-like receptor-stimulated dendritic cell activation. *Int. Immunol.* **14**: 1225–1231.

88. Hemmi, H. *et al.* 2003. The roles of Toll-like receptor 9, MyD88, and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit in the effects of two distinct CpG DNAs on dendritic cell subsets. *J. Immunol.* **170**: 3059–3064.

89. Honda, K. *et al.* 2005. IRF-7 is the master regulator of type-I interferon-dependent immune responses. *Nature* **434**: 772–777.

90. Kawai, T. *et al.* 2004. Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**: 1061–1068.

91. Honda, K. *et al.* 2004. Role of a transcriptional-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signaling. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**: 15416–15421.

92. Matsui, K. *et al.* 2006. Role of TANK-binding kinase 1 and inducible IkappaB kinase in IFN responses against viruses in innate immune cells. *J. Immunol.* **177**: 5785–5789.

93. Uematsu, S. *et al.* 2005. Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinase-1 (IRAK-1) plays an essential role for TLR7- and TLR9-mediated interferon-a_induction. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**: 915–923.

94. Hoshino, K. *et al.* 2006. IkappaB kinase-alpha is critical for interferon-alpha production induced by Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. *Nature* **440**: 949–953.

95. Guiducci, C. *et al.* 2008. PI3K is critical for the nuclear translocation of IRF-7 and type I IFN production by human plasmacytoid predendritic cells in response to TLR activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **205**: 315–322.

96. Shinohara, M.L. *et al.* 2006. Osteopontin expression is essential for interferon-alpha production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**: 498–506.

97. Tsujimura, H. *et al.* 2004. Toll-like receptor 9 signaling activates NF-kappaB through IFN regulatory factor-8/IFN consensus sequence binding protein in dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* **172**: 6820–6827.

98. Tailor, P. *et al.* 2007. The feedback phase of type I interferon induction in dendritic cells requires interferon regulatory factor 8. *Immunity* **27**: 228–239.

99. Kong, H.J. *et al.* 2007. Autoantigen Ro52 is an interferon-inducible E3 ligase that ubiquitinates IRF-8 and enhances cytokine expression in macrophages. *J. Immunol.* **179**: 26–30.

100. Negishi, H. *et al.* 2006. Evidence for licensing of IFN-gamma-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 transcription factor by MyD88 in Toll-like receptor-dependent gene induction program. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**: 15136–15141.

101. Schmitz, F. *et al.* 2007. Interferon-regulatory-factor 1 controls Toll-like receptor 9-mediated IFN-beta production in myeloid dendritic cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **37**: 315–327.

102. Takaoka, A. *et al.* 2005. Integral role of IRF-5 in the gene induction programme activated by Toll-like receptors. *Nature* **434**: 243–249.

103. Kawai, T. *et al.* 2005. IPS-1; an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**: 981–988.

104. Seth, R.B. *et al.* 2005. Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF3. *Cell* **122**: 669–682.

105. Meylan, E. *et al.* 2005. Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. *Nature* **437**: 1167–1172.

106. Xu, L.G. *et al.* 2005. VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling. *Mol. Cell* **19**: 727–740.

107. Li, X.D. *et al.* 2005. Hepatitis C virus protease NS3/4A cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein off the mitochondria to evade innate immunity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**: 17717–17722.

108. Lin, R. *et al.* 2006. Dissociation of a MAVS/IPS-1/VISA/Cardif-IKKepsilon molecular complex from the mitochondrial outer membrane by hepatitis C virus NS3-4A proteolytic cleavage. *J. Virol.* **80**: 6072–6083.

109. Loo, Y.M. *et al.* 2006. Viral and therapeutic control of IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 during hepatitis C virus infection. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**: 6001–6006.

110. Johnson, C.L., D.M. Owen & M.J. Gale. 2007. Functional and therapeutic analysis of hepatitis C virus NS3.4A protease control of antiviral immune defense. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**: 10792–10803.

111. Cheng, G., J. Zhong & F.V. Chisari. 2006. Inhibition of dsRNA-induced signaling in hepatitis C virus-infected cells by NS3 protease-dependent and -independent mechanisms. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**: 8499–8504.

112. Li, K. *et al.* 2005. Immune evasion by hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease-mediated cleavage of the Toll-like receptor 3 adaptor protein TRIF. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**: 2992–2997.

113. Ferreon, J.C. *et al.* 2005. Molecular determinants of TRIF proteolysis mediated by the hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**: 20483–20492.

114. Kumar, H. *et al.* 2006. Essential role of IPS-1 in innate immune responses against RNA viruses. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**: 1795–1803.

115. Sun, Q. *et al.* 2006. The specific and essential role of MAVS in antiviral innate immune responses. *Immunity* **24**: 633–642.

116. Saha, S.K. *et al.* 2006. Regulation of antiviral responses by a direct and specific interaction between TRAF3 and Cardif. *EMBO J.* **25**: 3257–3263.

117. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* 2007. DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon production. *Science* **318**: 1628–1632.

118. Balachandran, S., E. Thomas & G.N. Barber. 2004. A FADD-dependent innate immune mechanism in mammalian cells. *Nature* **432**: 401–405.

119. Takahashi, K. *et al.* 2006. Roles of Caspase-8 and Caspase-10 in antiviral innate immune responses. *J. Immunol.* **176**: 4520–4524.

120. Gack, M.U. *et al.* 2007. TRIM25 RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase is essential for RIG-I-mediated antiviral activity. *Nature* **446**: 916–920.

121. Saitoh, T. *et al.* 2005. A20 is a negative regulator of IFN regulatory factor 3 signaling. *J. Immunol.* **174**: 1507–1512.

122. Lin, R. *et al.* 2006. Negative regulation of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-induced antiviral state by the ubiquitin-editing protein A20. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**: 2095–2103.

123. Arimoto, K. *et al.* 2007. Negative regulation of the RIG-I signaling by the ubiquitin ligase RNF125. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**: 7500–7505.

124. Saitoh, T. *et al.* 2006. Negative regulation of interferon-regulatory factor 3-dependent innate antiviral response by the prolyl isomerase Pin1. *Nat. Immunol.* **7**: 598–605.

125. Moore, C.B. *et al.* 2008. NLRX1 is a regulator of mitochondrial antiviral immunity. *Nature* **451**: 573–577.

126. Tattoli, I. *et al.* 2008. NLRX1 is a mitochondrial NOD-like receptor that amplifies NF-kappaB and

127. Jounai, N. *et al.* 2007. The Atg5Atg12 conjugate associates with innate antiviral immune responses. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**: 14050–14055.

128. Jung, A. *et al.* 2008. Lymphocytoid choriomeningitis virus activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells and induces a cytotoxic T-cell response via MyD88. *J. Virol.* **82**: 196–206.

129. Kawagoe, T. *et al.* 2007. Essential role of IRAK-4 protein and its kinase activity in Toll-like receptor-mediated immune responses but not in TCR signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* **204**: 1013–1024.

130. Lye, E. *et al.* 2008. IRAK-4 kinase activity is required for IRAK-4-dependent innate and adaptive immune responses. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **38**: 870–876.

131. Koyama, S. *et al.* 2007. Differential role of TLR-and RLR-signaling in the immune responses to influenza A virus infection and vaccination. *J. Immunol.* **179**: 4711–4720.

132. Kumar, H. *et al.* 2008. Cooperation of IPS-1- and TRIF-dependent pathways in poly IC-enhanced antibody production and cytotoxic T cell responses. *J. Immunol.* **180**: 683–687.

133. Akazawa, T. *et al.* 2007. Antitumor NK activation induced by the Toll-like receptor 3-TICAM-1 (TRIF) pathway in myeloid dendritic cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**: 252–257.

134. Stack, J. *et al.* 2005. Vaccinia virus protein A46R targets multiple Toll-like-interleukin-1 receptor adaptors and contributes to virulence. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**: 1007–1018.

135. Harte, M.T. *et al.* 2003. The poxvirus protein A52R targets Toll-like receptor signaling complexes to suppress host defense. *J. Exp. Med.* **197**: 343–351.

136. Abe, T. *et al.* 2007. Hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 5A modulates the toll-like receptor-MyD88-dependent signaling pathway in macrophage cell lines. *J. Virol.* **81**: 8953–8966.

137. Andrejeva, J. *et al.* 2004. The V proteins of paramyxoviruses bind the IFN-inducible RNA helicase, mda-5, and inhibit its activation of the IFN-beta promoter. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**: 17264–17269.
