
Review

Kisspeptins and GnRH neuronal signalling

William H. Colledge

Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EG, UK

Kisspeptin binding to its G-protein-coupled receptor KISS1R (also known as GPR54), which is expressed by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, stimulates GnRH release and activation of the mammalian reproductive axis. Kisspeptin neurons make close contact with GnRH neurons acting at both the cell body and the nerve terminals. Kisspeptin can act directly on GnRH neurons and/or indirectly via synaptic input from other neurons to inhibit inwardly rectifying potassium channels and activate non-specific cation channels, with the effect of long-lasting depolarization and increased action potential firing rate. This review covers the recent advances in the molecular consequences of kisspeptin action on GnRH neurons and how these neuronal circuits are integrated in different species. These studies provide insight into the mechanism by which kisspeptin regulates the reproductive axis.

Introduction

Activation of the reproductive axis at puberty is driven by neuroendocrine events within the hypothalamus. Kisspeptins, an overlapping set of RF-amide peptides between 10 and 54 amino acids in length, have a crucial role in the initiation and maintenance of mammalian fertility (for review, see Ref. [1]). Kisspeptins, encoded by the *Kiss1* gene, are potent stimulators of gonadotropin release in all mammalian species examined including humans [2,3], monkeys [4,5], sheep [6,7], rats [8–12] and mice [6,13]. This gonadotropin release is mediated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion, as directly demonstrated in ewes [6] and female Rhesus monkeys [14] and by inhibition of kisspeptin responses in rodents by administration of GnRH antagonists. Consistent with this, the majority of GnRH neurons express the receptor for kisspeptin (KISS1R, or GPR54) [6,15–17] and mice lacking this receptor cannot respond to kisspeptin. Mice with disruption of either *Gpr54* [18–22] or *Kiss1* [19,23] fail to initiate puberty. Mutant mice of either sex are infertile and show poor gonadal growth (hypogonadism) and low gonadotropic hormone levels in the bloodstream (hypogonadotropism) (Box 1). The phenotype of the mutant mice is caused by abnormal secretion of GnRH from the hypothalamus [24] and failure to stimulate appropriate release of the gonadotropic hormones luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone from the anterior pituitary [18,20–23]. Thus, kisspeptins are essential regulators of GnRH release and play a pivotal part in the control of reproduction. The precise details of how kisspeptinergic neurons communicate with GnRH neurons to regulate GnRH secretion in different species are gradually being elucidated and are the subject of this review.

Location of kisspeptin neurons in the hypothalamus

To understand the mechanisms by which kisspeptins regulate GnRH secretion, information is required about the distribution of kisspeptin-expressing cells in the hypothalamus and the way in which they interact with GnRH neurons. In considering these interactions, it is important to bear in mind the anatomical differences that exist in the distribution of GnRH neurons between species [25]. In rodents, the majority of GnRH cell bodies are scattered as a continuum from the medial septum and diagonal band of Broca to the medial preoptic area (POA) but are rarely found within the arcuate (ARC) nucleus of the hypothalamus (Figure 1a). In sheep, GnRH cell bodies are found both in the POA and in the ARC nucleus (Figure 1b). In monkeys, a few GnRH cell bodies are found in the POA, but the majority are located lateral to the ARC nucleus in the ventral hypothalamic tract of the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) [26] (Figure 1c). The significance of these differences in the distribution of GnRH neurons is not known but must be considered when mapping the functional connections with kisspeptin neurons and comparing the physiological consequences of kisspeptin stimulation between species.

In situ hybridization studies have mapped *Kiss1* expression to the ARC nucleus in all species examined (for review, see Ref. [1]). In rodents, *Kiss1* expression has also been found in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) region of the anterior hypothalamus [27,28], but it has rarely been found in this region in monkeys and humans [29]. In ewes and monkeys, *Kiss1* neurons have been localized by in situ hybridization to the ARC and the POA regions [30,31] with a greater cell density in the ARC nucleus, particularly in primates (Figure 1). In rodents, kisspeptin neurons in the AVPV, but not the ARC nucleus, display a sex difference (with more kisspeptin cell bodies in the female [32–34]), which is dependent upon exposure to testosterone during perinatal development [32].

Localization of kisspeptin neurons has been assisted by the development of several anti-kisspeptin antibodies, although these vary in the extent to which they have been validated for specificity. Brailoiu et al. [35] used a commercially available antibody against human Kp10 to localize kisspeptin-immunoreactive (Kp-ir) cell bodies to the ARC nucleus, but staining in other regions such as the

Corresponding author: Colledge, W.H. (whc23@cam.ac.uk).

Review

Box 1. Mutant mouse models to study kisspeptin and KISS1R physiology

Transgenic mice with mutations in kisspeptin or its receptor have played an important part in defining the function of these proteins in regulation of the mammalian reproductive axis [62]. These animal models continue to be valuable for determining how these molecules interact *in vivo* and the upstream signals that integrate kisspeptin expression with known modulators of fertility such as metabolism and adiposity, seasonal breeding, sexual dominance hierarchy, and stress. Four transgenic mouse lines have been published (a fifth remains unpublished) that have mutations in the *Kiss1r* gene, and two lines with mutations in the *Kiss1* gene have been published as well. In general, all these lines show infertility and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, indicating a lack of functional redundancy in this ligand-receptor pair. Phenotypic differences, such as the ability to show a preovulatory LH surge [18,40], between the mutant lines are probably attributable to experimental protocol differences between laboratories. It is also possible, however, that phenotypic differences might reflect environmental or genetic background differences between the mutant lines or the type of mutation carried by each line. The mutant lines vary in the extent of the gene deletion and in some cases, it is theoretically possible for them to produce a low level of functional protein. A detailed molecular characterization of transcripts from the targeted locus will help to resolve this possibility.

paraventricular and ventromedial nuclei, where *Kiss1* expression has not been detected by *in situ* hybridization, indicates that this antibody might also cross-react with other RF-amide peptides. Similarly, a report claiming kisspeptin expression by GnRH neurons in the POA of sheep [36] has not been substantiated and is generally accepted as non-specific reactivity of anti-kisspeptin antisera.

A monoclonal antibody raised against an amidated rat kisspeptin sequence (CEKDMSAYNWNSFGLRY-NH2) showed kisspeptin cell bodies in the ARC and AVPV regions of adult female rats [34,37]. A more detailed analysis of the distribution of Kp10-ir cell bodies has been performed by the Herbison group [33] using an antibody raised against an amidated mouse Kp10 sequence (YNWNSFGLRY-NH2) [38]. This antibody detected many kisspeptin cell bodies in the ARC nucleus with lower numbers in the AVPV and dorsomedial nucleus (DMN) of adult mice [33]. Kisspeptin cell bodies were found in regions extending caudally from the AVPV into the preoptic periventricular nucleus to form a continuum in the rostral periventricular area of the third ventricle (RP3V) [39,40]. In ewes, Kp-ir cell bodies have been mainly found in the ARC, POA and DMN regions [38]. In male Rhesus monkeys, the majority of kisspeptin cell bodies are found in the ARC region and they are found only rarely in the POA [29,41]. If kisspeptin neurons in the POA of sheep and monkeys show the same sexual dimorphisms as in the AVPV region of rodents, then males would be expected to have less kisspeptin neurons in this region than females. Therefore, the difference in the number of kisspeptin cell bodies in the POA of sheep and monkeys is probably a sex-specific rather than a species difference. Consistent with the POA having a sexually dimorphic difference in Rhesus monkeys are the findings that males have very low expression of *Kiss1* mRNA in this region compared to the ARC nucleus [42], whereas females have similar levels of *Kiss1* mRNA expression in the POA and the ARC nucleus [43].

Figure 1. Location of GnRH neuronal cell bodies in relation to kisspeptin neuronal cell bodies in different species. GnRH cell bodies (green) reside as a scattered continuum between the medial septum, diagonal band of Broca, the medial preoptic area (POA) and the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH). The number of GnRH cell bodies in the POA and the MBH varies between species. (a) In rodents, GnRH cell bodies are rarely found in the arcuate (ARC). (b) In sheep, GnRH cell bodies are found in both the POA and the ARC regions. (c) In primates, GnRH cell bodies are less common in the POA and are mainly found in the MBH lateral to the ARC in the ventral hypothalamic tract (VHT). Although kisspeptin cell bodies (purple) are found in the ARC nucleus region of all species, their distribution varies in other regions between species. (a) In rodents, kisspeptin neurons are also located in the rostral periventricular 3rd ventricle (RP3V) continuum region, which includes the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV). (b) and (c) In sheep and primates, kisspeptin cell bodies are rarely found in the AVPV region but are located in the POA region close to the GnRH cell bodies. The distribution of kisspeptin fibres is not shown, but these can make close appositions with both GnRH cell bodies and GnRH axons. Abbreviations: 3V, 3rd ventricle; ME, median eminence; Pit, pituitary.

By contrast, during the LH surge phase of the oestrus cycle, when kisspeptin expression should be highest, female horses show a distribution of kisspeptin cell bodies in the ARC nucleus but none in the POA [44]. Thus, clear

species differences can also exist in the number of kisspeptin neurons in the POA, irrespective of gender.

Thus, the consensus is that kisspeptin cell bodies are localized to the ARC nucleus and the POA or AVPV regions of most species, although horses seem to lack kisspeptin cell bodies in the POA region. Furthermore, in sheep and primates, the kisspeptin cell bodies are located closer to the GnRH cell bodies than in rodents (Figure 1). In rodents, the RP3V kisspeptin neurons are probably responsible for generating the estradiol-mediated GnRH and LH surge required for ovulation because these neurons show *c-fos* activation at this point in the cycle and ovulation can be inhibited by injecting anti-kisspeptin antibodies into this region [34,40]. In female Rhesus monkeys and sheep, however, the site of positive feedback action of estradiol that stimulates the preovulatory GnRH surge resides within the MBH, and the ARC nucleus seems to be a crucial component of the surge mechanism [45,46]. Perhaps the kisspeptin neurons in the ARC nucleus of monkeys and sheep consist of two distinct populations (analogous to the ARC and the AVPV kisspeptin neurons of rodents) that can function independently to mediate both negative and positive feedback actions of estradiol on kisspeptin and GnRH release. These different populations of kisspeptin neurons would be predicted to send fibre projections to GnRH neurons in the MBH region to control negative or positive feedback effects on GnRH secretion in monkeys and sheep.

Whether the kisspeptin immunoreactivity observed in the DMN is authentic is a matter of debate. Some commercially available anti-kisspeptin antibodies show cross-reactivity with gonadotropin-inhibiting hormone, which is expressed by neurons in the DMN [47]. Kisspeptin expression in the DMN region, however, has not been detected by *in situ* hybridization or by immunohistochemistry using different antibodies. In addition, we have not detected kisspeptin expression in this region in transgenic mice in which the *Kiss1* gene is tagged with a *LacZ* reporter gene under conditions in which clear expression is found in the ARC [23]. However, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence, and kisspeptin expression in DMN neurons might simply be below the detection threshold in some of these assays. Notably, kisspeptin immunoreactivity in the DMN using the Caraty antibody raised against an amidated mouse Kp10 sequence (YNWNSFGLRY-NH2) [38] is abolished in *Kiss1*-knockout mice, indicating that this represents authentic kisspeptin expression in these neurons (Clarkson and Herbison, personal communication).

---

**Connections between Kiss1 and GnRH neurons**

Immunofluorescence data support the hypothesis that kisspeptin neurons stimulate GnRH neurons via a direct connection. Brailoiu and colleagues [47] found Kp-ir fibres in regions of the rat hypothalamus that contain GnRH cell bodies but did not report direct connectivity. Kinoshita and colleagues [37] showed kisspeptin-immunoreactive fibres in the POA of adult female rats in close association with GnRH neuronal cell bodies, and similar associations have been shown in mice [33]. In female sheep, Kp10-ir fibres were found in the POA region where the GnRH neurons

---

reside, although co-localization studies were not reported [38]. Kisspeptin fibres were also found to extend from the ARC into the external neurosecretory zone of the median eminence [36,38]. These terminals might be responsible for the kisspeptin that has been found in the hypophysial portal blood of ewes [48] and in the stalk median eminence in female Rhesus monkeys [14].

In Rhesus monkeys, kisspeptin fibres made only sparse contact (<1 contact per perikarya) with approximately 25–50% of GnRH cell bodies in the MBH [26]. By contrast, within the internal layer of the median eminence, the fibres of kisspeptin and GnRH neurons were intimately associated. Similarly, in mares, Kp-ir fibres were found in the POA, ARC nucleus and median eminence with few appositions to GnRH cell bodies but numerous appositions with GnRH fibres in the median eminence [44]. The functional significance of these connections is unknown but they have led to speculation that kisspeptins might have a non-synaptic action at the level of the median eminence to stimulate GnRH release [26]. Consistent with this hypothesis is the observation that kisspeptin can stimulate GnRH release from mouse MBH explants that contain GnRH nerve terminals but lack GnRH cell bodies [24]. In addition, kisspeptin is also released in a pulsatile manner in the stalk-median eminence region of female Rhesus monkeys, and this release increases at puberty [14]. Thus, there is increasing evidence that kisspeptin can act directly at the level of the median eminence.

Another recent study examined the development of kisspeptin inputs to GnRH neurons during puberty [33]. Dual-labelling immunofluorescence microscopy was used to detect Kp expression relative to GnRH neurons tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP). In adult female mice, 40% of GnRH cell bodies on the POA had kisspeptin fibre contacts. By contrast, adult male mice only showed ~10% of GnRH cell bodies with associated kisspeptin fibre contacts [33]. These appositions were co-localized to the same focal plane by confocal microscopy, indicating very close connection between kisspeptin fibres and GnRH cell bodies (Figure 2). No kisspeptin fibre appositions to GnRH cell bodies were found before puberty, but such kisspeptin appositions gradually increased during the pubertal period in both sexes. It is not yet clear whether these appositions exist before puberty and are only visualized by the increase in kisspeptin expression at puberty or whether fibre outgrowth occurs during puberty. This issue will only be resolved when additional protein markers of kisspeptin neurons are identified to enable visualization independent of kisspeptin expression.

---

**Action of kisspeptin on GnRH neurons**

Kisspeptin can act directly on GnRH neurons to initiate a sustained depolarization event. The ability of GnRH neurons to respond to kisspeptin is developmentally regulated, with the percentage of responsive GnRH neurons increasing from 25% in prepubescent animals to more than 90% in adults [17]. This increase in GnRH responsiveness during the pubertal period reflects an increase in *Kiss1* gene expression rather than expression of *Kiss1r* [17]. Electrophysiological recordings of GFP-tagged GnRH neurons in the POA of brain slices from

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism Vol. 20 No. 3

A detailed biophysical and pharmacological characterization of NSCC activity indicates that these ion channels are probably formed by members of the transient receptor potential cation (TRPC) channel family [52]. TRPC channels consist of heteromeric tetramers encoded by a family of seven genes (TRPC1–7). The dynamics of the I–V relationship for the kisspeptin-induced current and the reversal potential under different conditions was analogous to that found in HEK cells that express TRPC channels. The inward current was also inhibited by several TRPC channel blockers: 80% inhibition by 2-APB, 50% inhibition by SKF96365, 69% inhibition by Cd+ and 90% inhibition by FFA. Single-cell reverse-transcription PCR showed that individual GnRH neurons express multiple TRPC transcripts, although some heterogeneity exists in the expression pattern with different combinations of TRPC subunit expression in each neuron. Thus, the activity of each TRPC channel might be slightly different between individual GnRH neurons depending upon subunit composition.

It was originally shown in a heterologous cell expression system that kisspeptin binding to KISS1R couples to the G-protein Gq/11 to activate phospholipase C (PLC) and increase intracellular Ins(1,4,5)P3 and Ca2+ release, arachidonic acid release, and activation of extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways [54]. To establish whether the same signalling pathway is involved in kisspeptin-stimulated GnRH secretion, hypothalamic explants from female rats were tested with pharmacological blockade of relevant intracellular signalling pathways [55]. In this ex vivo system, kisspeptin-stimulated GnRH release was reduced by a PLC inhibitor or depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores, as well as inhibition of ERK1/2 or p38 MAPK pathways. Recent studies have extended these data by examining the signalling pathways that operate directly within GnRH neurons. Pharmacological inhibition of PLC reduced kisspeptin responses in most adult GnRH neurons and reduced the inward current by approximately 60% [49,52]. Consistent with PLC activation, kisspeptin was also found to transiently increase intracellular Ca2+ levels in GnRH neurons [49] (Figure 3).

The responses of prenatal GnRH neurons to kisspeptin differ from those of adult GnRH neurons. GnRH neurons isolated from the nasal pits of E11.5 mouse fetuses show kisspeptin signalling through the Gq/11–PLC pathway, but neuronal depolarization involves activation of tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels [56], which are not found in adult GnRH neurons [49]. In addition, kisspeptin stimulates plasma-membrane-driven Ca2+ oscillations in mouse prenatal GnRH neurons that are maintained for several minutes, whereas the Ca2+ increase in adult GnRH neurons is transient. The functional significance of these differences is not clear but they indicate caution when comparing immature and adult GnRH neuronal responses.

How the final messengers of the Gq/11–PLC-signalling pathway interact with Kir and NSCC channels to depolarize the GnRH membrane has not been established fully. Zhang et al. [52] did not observe any inhibition of GnRH responses after selectively inhibiting the Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptor by introducing 2-APB into the cell via the patch

---

**Figure 2.** Kisspeptin fibres make close appositions to GnRH neurons. Confocal image showing a single GnRH neuron (green) surrounded and apposed with kisspeptin (red) fibres. Points of apposition within the same focal plane are shown in yellow (marked by white arrows). Scale bar = 10 μm. Image kindly provided by Jenny Clarkson and Allan Herbison.

adult mice have shown that kisspeptin causes membrane depolarization ranging from 5 mV to 22 mV in approximately 90% of GnRH neurons [17,49–51]. Depolarization was concentration dependent with an EC50 of approximately 3 nM, consistent with the known potency of kisspeptin [51,52]. No sex differences were found in the number of GnRH neurons that responded to kisspeptin, indicating that KISS1R expression by GnRH neurons is not sexually dimorphic [49]. Depolarization was also sustained, lasting for up to 30 min after removal of kisspeptin. In addition, during the depolarization phase, the rate of action potential firing increased [17]. The GnRH neurons were refractory to subsequent kisspeptin stimulation after recovery from the depolarization phase, indicating a possible downregulation of the receptor and/or the signalling pathway. Kisspeptin-mediated depolarization and increased firing also has been found in GnRH neurons isolated from fetal rats at day 18 of gestation, indicating that GnRH neuronal responsiveness to kisspeptin is present before birth [53].

Pharmacological studies and an assessment of the current-voltage (I–V) relationships indicates that depolarization is caused by inhibition of inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) and activation of sodium-dependent non-selective cation channels (NSCC). Thus, inhibition of Kir by extracellular barium (Ba2+) or intracellular caesium reduced the number of GnRH neurons responding to kisspeptin by approximately 50% [49] and strongly affected the reversal potential at hyperpolarized potentials [52]. Inhibition of NSCC activity with flufenamic acid (FFA) also reduced the number of GnRH neurons responding to kisspeptin by approximately 50% [49] and inhibited the kisspeptin-induced inward current by 90% [52]. Treatment with both Ba2+ and FFA reduced the GnRH neuronal response rate to only 17% [49]. The small number of GnRH neurons that still respond to kisspeptin under these conditions could indicate a third class of ion channels that contribute to the depolarization event.

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism Vol.20 No.3

Kisspeptin
↓
GPR54

TRPC
non-selective
cation channel

Cations

K<sub>ir</sub> channel
K⁺

Phospholipase C

Gq/11

DAG

IP3

PIP2

Ca²⁺

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Ca²⁺

Calmodulin

Figure 3. Proposed mechanism of GnRH neuronal depolarization by kisspeptin. (i) Kisspeptin binding to its receptor (KISS1R or GPR54) activates the G-protein Gq/11 and phospholipase C to cleave phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). (ii) Membrane depolarization is caused by activation (+) of non-selective TRPC cation channels possibly involving DAG and (iii) inhibition (-) of inwardly rectifying potassium channels (K<sub>ir</sub>). The activity of these channels might also be modulated (orange lines) by changes in PIP2 or intracellular Ca²⁺ by activation of calmodulin-dependent protein kinase activity.

pipette. Although absence of Ca²⁺ release was not measured under these conditions, their data indicate that Ca²⁺ mobilization might be required for GnRH depolarization. Certainly, sustained Ca²⁺ release is not required because Ca²⁺ mobilization is transient (2–3 min) whereas membrane depolarization is prolonged (20–30 min). Rather than being directly involved in the initial depolarization event, the increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ might be required for calmodulin-mediated phosphorylation events to maintain the sustained depolarization. The increase in Ca²⁺ is probably also involved in activating small-conductance potassium channels to limit the firing frequency of action potentials and regulate after hyperpolarization of activated GnRH neurons [50].

In addition, a membrane-permeable analogue of diacylglycerol (DAG) only produced a very small inward current in GnRH neurons, indicating that DAG is probably not the final messenger responsible for activating NSCC channels [52]. It is known that phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) acts as a positive regulator of K<sub>ir</sub> [57] and also as an inhibitor of a TRPC4 isoform [58], so a fall in intracellular PIP2 after PLC activation might contribute to both the inhibition of K<sub>ir</sub> channels and the activation of TRPC channels (Figure 3).

Role of gonadal steroids in modulating kisspeptin action

Given the potent physiological effects of kisspeptins on stimulating GnRH secretion, substances that alter kisspeptin production in the AVPV or ARC nucleus would be expected to influence GnRH release. Testosterone and oestrogen both modulate the action of kisspeptin on GnRH neurons by altering the expression of *Kiss1* in the hypothalamus. Gonadal steroids have been shown to alter *Kiss1* gene expression in rodents [27,28], sheep [36] and Rhesus monkeys [42]. In rodents, sex steroids suppress *Kiss1* gene expression in the ARC nucleus and enhance *Kiss1* expression in the AVPV. This modulation has physiological relevance because it has been shown that the positive feedback effects of oestrogen required for the preovulatory LH surge require kisspeptin signalling from the AVPV region [34,40].

In addition to having direct effects on GnRH neurons, kisspeptins might also have indirect effects, possibly through trans-synaptic communication with other neurons in the hypothalamus that express KISS1R [35,59,60]. Indeed, human Kp10 has been shown to increase the firing rate of non-GnRH neurons in the mPOA of adult female mice [51]. To discriminate between direct

Review

Box 2. Unanswered questions

- What are the individual roles of the AVPV, DMN and ARC nucleus kisspeptinergic neurons in regulating the reproductive axis? This can be addressed by specific ablation of these neuronal populations in transgenic mice or by selective siRNA downregulation of Kiss1 gene expression. For genetic ablation experiments, markers that are specific for each kisspeptinergic neuronal population will be required to induce expression of a suicide gene to appropriate neurons. Kisspeptin neurons in the ARC nucleus of the ewe have been shown to express neurokinin B and dynorphin [63], but further markers will be required.
- Do AVPV kisspeptinergic neurons have a role in male rodents?
- How do kisspeptin neurons in the MBH of sheep and primates regulate both the negative and the positive feedback actions of sex steroids on GnRH neurons? Are there two different populations of kisspeptin neurons in the MBH that mediate this feedback?
- Are the appositions between kisspeptinergic and GnRH neurons functional? This will require detailed electron microscopy studies to identify synapse formation and viral tracing from GnRH neurons to kisspeptin neurons.
- Which regions of the GnRH neurons are innervated by the AVPV and ARC nucleus kisspeptinergic neurons in rodents?
- Does peripheral kisspeptin act on GnRH cell bodies or only at GnRH nerve terminals in the median eminence?
- Is the action of kisspeptin at GnRH nerve terminals direct or indirect? Localization of the KISS1R at GnRH nerve terminals awaits the development of specific antibodies.
- What is the subunit composition of individual TRPC channels in each GnRH neuron, and how does this affect the function of GnRH neurons?
- What is the mechanism by which kisspeptin stimulation of GnRH neurons causes the long depolarization event, and how can this generate GnRH pulsatility?

and indirect actions of kisspeptins on GnRH neurons, electrophysiological responses were measured under conditions in which trans-synaptic input was blocked by inhibitors of ionotropic γ-aminobutyric acid and glutamate receptors [51]. GnRH neurons still responded to kisspeptin in ovariectomized mice, but these responses were enhanced by estradiol. Blockade of fast synaptic transmission decreased the firing rate of GnRH neurons in estradiol-treated ovariectomized mice but did not significantly affect the firing rate in non-treated ovariectomized mice. These data indicate that part of the GnRH response to kisspeptin is mediated by a trans-synaptic input that is potentiated by estradiol. Estradiol is known to modulate synaptic density in the hippocampus of rats [61], and it is possible that a similar mechanism might regulate trans-synaptic effects of kisspeptin on GnRH neurons.

Concluding remarks

GnRH neurons represent the final conduit for a variety of neuroendocrine signals that regulate GnRH secretion and mammalian fertility. It is now clear that kisspeptin neuro-peptides are a key regulator of fertility, acting both directly and indirectly on GnRH neurons to modulate GnRH secretion. Direct action occurs through the G-protein-coupled receptor, KISS1R (GPR54), to depolarize GnRH neurons and increase firing rates. Recent studies have highlighted a physical association between kisspeptin and GnRH neurons and provided mechanistic insights into how kisspeptins initiate GnRH depolarization. There are still many unanswered questions, however (Box 2), including ‘What upstream signals regulate kisspeptin expression at puberty?’ and ‘How do physiological and environmental cues integrate with the kisspeptin-GnRH axis?’ The answers to these questions will provide a fundamental understanding of the central control processes that regulate the activation and maintenance of the mammalian reproductive axis.

Acknowledgements

I am indebted to Allan Herbison and Tony Plant for comments on the manuscript, to Xavier d’Angelemont de Tassigny for feedback and drawing Figure 1, and to Mike Mason for scientific discussions about ion channel physiology. I am also grateful to the BBSRC (grant BB/FO1936X/1), Takeda Cambridge and the Ford Physiology Fund for continued support of the research in my group.

References

1. Popa, S.M. *et al.* (2008) The role of kisspeptins and GPR54 in the neuroendocrine regulation of reproduction. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 70, 213–238
2. Dhillon, W.S. *et al.* (2005) Kisspeptin-54 stimulates the hypothalamic-pituitary gonadal axis in human males. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 90, 6609–6615
3. Dhillon, W.S. *et al.* (2007) Kisspeptin-54 stimulates gonadotrophin release most potently during the preovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle in women. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 92, 3958–3966
4. Seminara, S.B. *et al.* (2006) Continuous human metastin 45–54 infusion desensitizes G protein-coupled receptor 54-induced gonadotropin-releasing hormone release monitored indirectly in the juvenile male Rhesus monkey (*Macaca mulatta*): a finding with therapeutic implications. *Endocrinology* 147, 2122–2126
5. Plant, T.M. *et al.* (2006) Repetitive activation of hypothalamic G protein-coupled receptor 54 with intravenous pulses of kisspeptin in the juvenile monkey (*Macaca mulatta*) elicits a sustained train of gonadotropin-releasing hormone discharges. *Endocrinology* 147, 1007–1013
6. Messager, S. *et al.* (2005) Kisspeptin directly stimulates gonadotropin-releasing hormone release via G protein-coupled receptor 54. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 102, 1761–1766
7. Caraty, A. *et al.* (2007) Kisspeptin synchronizes preovulatory surges in cyclic ewes and causes ovulation in seasonally acyclic ewes. *Endocrinology* 148, 5258–5267
8. Navarro, V.M. *et al.* (2005) Effects of KiSS-1 peptide, the natural ligand of GPR54, on follicle-stimulating hormone secretion in the rat. *Endocrinology* 146, 1689–1697
9. Thompson, E.L. *et al.* (2004) Central and peripheral administration of kisspeptin-10 stimulates the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. *J. Neuroendocrinol.* 16, 850–858
10. Thompson, E.L. *et al.* (2006) Chronic subcutaneous administration of kisspeptin-54 causes testicular degeneration in adult male rats. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* 291, E1074–E1082
11. Navarro, V.M. *et al.* (2005) Characterization of the potent luteinizing hormone-releasing activity of KiSS-1 peptide, the natural ligand of GPR54. *Endocrinology* 146, 156–163
12. Navarro, V.M. *et al.* (2004) Developmental and hormonally regulated messenger ribonucleic acid expression of KiSS-1 and its putative receptor, GPR54, in rat hypothalamus and potent luteinizing hormone-releasing activity of KiSS-1 peptide. *Endocrinology* 145, 4565–4574
13. Gottsch, M.L. *et al.* (2004) A role for kisspeptins in the regulation of gonadotropin secretion in the mouse. *Endocrinology* 145, 4073–4077
14. Keen, K.L. *et al.* (2008) An increase in kisspeptin-54 release occurs with the pubertal increase in luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone-1 release in the stalk-median eminence of female rhesus monkeys *in vivo*. *Endocrinology* 149, 4151–4157
15. Parhar, I.S. *et al.* (2004) Laser captured single digoxigenin-labeled neurons of gonadotropin-releasing hormone types reveal a novel G protein-coupled receptor (Gpr54) during maturation in cichlid fish. *Endocrinology* 145, 3613–3618
16. Irwig, M.S. *et al.* (2004) Kisspeptin activation of gonadotropin releasing hormone neurons and regulation of KiSS-1 mRNA in the male rat. *Neuroendocrinology* 80, 264–272

Review

17 Han, S.K. *et al.* (2005) Activation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons by kisspeptin as a neuroendocrine switch for the onset of puberty. *J. Neurosci.* 25, 11349–11356

18 Dungan, H.M. *et al.* (2007) The role of kisspeptin-GPR54 signaling in the tonic regulation and surge release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone/luteinizing hormone. *J. Neurosci.* 27, 12088–12095

19 Funes, S. *et al.* (2003) The KiSS-1 receptor GPR54 is essential for the development of the murine reproductive system. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 312, 1357–1363

20 Kauffman, A.S. *et al.* (2007) The kisspeptin receptor GPR54 is required for sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior. *J. Neurosci.* 27, 8826–8835

21 Lapatto, R. *et al.* (2007) Kiss1⁻/⁻ mice exhibit more variable hypogonadism than gpr54⁻/⁻ mice. *Endocrinology* 148, 4927–4936

22 Seminara, S.B. *et al.* (2003) The GPR54 gene as a regulator of puberty. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 349, 1614–1627

23 d'Anglemont de Tassigny, X. *et al.* (2007) Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in mice lacking a functional Kiss1 gene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 104, 10714–10719

24 d'Anglemont de Tassigny, X. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin can stimulate gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release by a direct action at GnRH nerve terminals. *Endocrinology* 149, 3926–3932

25 Herbison, A.E. (2006) Physiology of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuronal network. In Knobil and Neill's *Physiology of Reproduction* (3rd edn) (Neill, J.D., ed.), pp. 1415–1482, Academic Press

26 Ramaswamy, S. *et al.* (2008) Structural interactions between kisspeptin and GnRH neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus of the male rhesus monkey (*Macaca mulatta*) as revealed by double immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. *Endocrinology* 149, 4387–4395

27 Smith, J.T. *et al.* (2005) Differential regulation of KiSS-1 mRNA expression by sex steroids in the brain of the male mouse. *Endocrinology* 146, 2976–2984

28 Smith, J.T. *et al.* (2005) Regulation of *Kiss1* gene expression in the brain of the female mouse. *Endocrinology* 146, 3686–3692

29 Rometo, A.M. *et al.* (2007) Hypertrophy and increased kisspeptin gene expression in the hypothalamic infundibular nucleus of postmenopausal women and ovariectomized monkeys. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 92, 2744–2750

30 Smith, J.T. *et al.* (2007) KiSS-1 messenger ribonucleic acid expression in the hypothalamus of the ewe is regulated by sex steroids and season. *Endocrinology* 148, 1150–1157

31 Estrada, K.M. *et al.* (2006) Elevated KiSS-1 expression in the arcuate nucleus prior to the cyclic preovulatory gonadotrophin-releasing hormone/lutenising hormone surge in the ewe suggests a stimulatory role for kisspeptin in oestrogen-positive feedback. *J. Neuroendocrinol.* 18, 806–809

32 Kauffman, A.S. *et al.* (2007) Sexual differentiation of *Kiss1* gene expression in the brain of the rat. *Endocrinology* 148, 1774–1783

33 Clarkson, J. and Herbison, A.E. (2006) Postnatal development of kisspeptin neurons in mouse hypothalamus; sexual dimorphism and projections to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. *Endocrinology* 147, 5817–5825

34 Adachi, S. *et al.* (2007) Involvement of anteroventral periventricular metastin/kisspeptin neurons in estrogen positive feedback action on luteinizing hormone release in female rats. *J. Reprod. Dev.* 53, 367–378

35 Brailoiu, G.C. *et al.* (2005) KiSS-1 expression and metastin-like immunoreactivity in the rat brain. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 481, 314–329

36 Pompolo, S. *et al.* (2006) Colocalization of kisspeptin and gonadotropin-releasing hormone in the ovine brain. *Endocrinology* 147, 804–810

37 Kinoshita, M. *et al.* (2005) Involvement of central metastin in the regulation of preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge and estrous cyclicity in female rats. *Endocrinology* 146, 4431–4436

38 Franceschini, I. *et al.* (2006) Kisspeptin immunoreactive cells of the ovine preoptic area and arcuate nucleus co-express estrogen receptor alpha. *Neurosci. Lett.* 401, 225–230

39 Herbison, A.E. (2008) Estrogen positive feedback to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons in the rodent: the case for the rostral periventricular area of the third ventricle (RP3V). *Brain Res. Rev.* 57, 277–287

40 Clarkson, J. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin-GPR54 signaling is essential for preovulatory gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron activation and the luteinizing hormone surge. *J. Neurosci.* 28, 8691–8697

41 Ramaswamy, S. *et al.* (2007) Effect of continuous intravenous administration of human metastin 45–54 on the neuroendocrine activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis in the adult male rhesus monkey (*Macaca mulatta*). *Endocrinology* 148, 3364–3370

42 Shibata, M. *et al.* (2007) Evidence that downregulation of hypothalamic KiSS-1 expression is involved in the negative feedback action of testosterone to regulate luteinising hormone secretion in the adult male rhesus monkey (*Macaca mulatta*). *J. Neuroendocrinol.* 19, 432–438

43 Kim, W. *et al.* Postmenopausal increase in KiSS-1, GPR54, and luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH-1) mRNA in the basal hypothalamus of female rhesus monkeys. *Peptides* (in press)

44 Decourt, C. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin immunoreactive neurons in the equine hypothalamus: interactions with GnRH neuronal system. *J. Chem. Neuroanat.* 36, 131–137

45 Plant, T.M. *et al.* (1978) The arcuate nucleus and the control of gonadotropin and prolactin secretion in the female rhesus monkey (*Macaca mulatta*). *Endocrinology* 102, 52–62

46 Caraty, A. *et al.* (1998) Evidence that the mediobasal hypothalamus is the primary site of action of estradiol in inducing the preovulatory gonadotropin releasing hormone surge in the ewe. *Endocrinology* 139, 1752–1760

47 Greives, T.J. *et al.* (2007) Environmental control of kisspeptin: implications for seasonal reproduction. *Endocrinology* 148, 1158–1166

48 Smith, J.T. *et al.* (2008) Variation in kisspeptin and RFamide-related peptide (RFRP) expression and terminal connections to GnRH neurons in the brain: a novel medium for seasonal breeding in the sheep. *Endocrinology* 149, 5770–5782

49 Liu, X. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin excites gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons through a phospholipase C/calcium-dependent pathway regulating multiple ion channels. *Endocrinology* 149, 4605–4614

50 Liu, X. and Herbison, A.E. (2008) Small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels control excitability and firing dynamics in gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons. *Endocrinology* 149, 3598–3604

51 Pielecka-Fortuna, J. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin acts directly and indirectly to increase gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron activity and its effects are modulated by estradiol. *Endocrinology* 149, 1979–1986

52 Zhang, C. *et al.* (2008) Kisspeptin depolarizes gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons through activation of TRPC-like cationic channels. *J. Neurosci.* 28, 4423–4434

53 Quaynor, S. *et al.* (2007) Expression of a functional GPR54-kisspeptin autoregulatory system in hypothalamic GnRH neurons. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 21, 3062–3070

54 Kotani, M. *et al.* (2001) The metastasis suppressor gene KiSS-1 encodes kisspeptins, the natural ligands of the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR54. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 34631–34636

55 Castellano, J.M. *et al.* (2006) Ontogeny and mechanisms of action for the stimulatory effect of kisspeptin on gonadotropin-releasing hormone system of the rat. *Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.* 257–258, 75–83

56 Constantin, S. *et al.* Kisspeptin-10 facilitates a plasma membrane-driven calcium oscillator in GnRH-1 neurons. *Endocrinology* (in press)

57 Huang, C.L. *et al.* (1998) Direct activation of inward rectifier potassium channels by PIP2 and its stabilization by Gβγ. *Nature* 391, 803–806

58 Otsuguro, K. *et al.* (2008) Isoform-specific inhibition of TRPC4 channel by phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283, 10026–10036

59 Muir, A.I. *et al.* (2001) AXOR12, a novel human G protein-coupled receptor, activated by the peptide KiSS-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 28969–28975

60 Lee, D.K. *et al.* (1999) Discovery of a receptor related to the galanin receptors. *FEBS Lett.* 446, 103–107

61 Woolley, C.S. and McEwen, B.S. (1992) Estradiol mediates fluctuation in hippocampal synapse density during the estrous cycle in the adult rat. *J. Neurosci.* 12, 2549–2554

62 Colledge, W.H. Transgenic mouse models to study Gpr54/kisspeptin physiology. *Peptides* (in press)

63 Goodman, R.L. *et al.* (2007) Kisspeptin neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the ewe express both dynorphin A and neurokinin B. *Endocrinology* 148, 5752–5760
