
Review

No TRAP, no invasion

Belinda J. Morahan${}^{1,2}$, Lina Wang${}^{1}$ and Ross L. Coppel${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$ Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia  
${}^{2}$ Current address: Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Illinois, USA  

Host-cell invasion by apicomplexan parasites is a unique process that is powered by the gliding motility motor and requires a transmembrane link between the parasite cytoskeleton and the host cell. The thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) from *Plasmodium* plays such a part during sporozoite invasion by linking to actin through its cytoplasmic tail while binding to hepatocytes via its extracellular portion. In recent years, there have been major advances in the identification and characterization of TRAP-family proteins in the other invasive stages of *Plasmodium* as well as other Apicomplexa. This review summarizes the recent experimental data on these TRAP-family proteins, focusing on their structure and function.

### Apicomplexan motility and cell invasion

The apicomplexan phylum contains obligate intracellular parasites, such as *Plasmodium*, *Toxoplasma* and *Cryptosporidium*, that are major pathogens of humans and livestock. A definitive morphological feature of this phylum is the presence of specialized secretory organelles located at the apical prominence. These organelles (namely, the micronemes, rhoptries and dense granules) contain many of the key proteins that mediate parasite motility and cell invasion [1]. All Apicomplexa invade host cells by a form of substrate-dependent locomotion, called gliding motility, that is powered by the parasite’s actin–myosin motor located between the parasite plasma membrane and the inner membrane complex (for a review, see Ref. [2]). This motor is connected to host-cell receptors through transmembrane proteins that belong to a protein family defined by the thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) from *Plasmodium*. Whereas the actin–myosin motor is conserved across apicomplexan parasites [3,4], the transmembrane proteins are species- and stage-specific, enabling the parasites to infect different host cells using the same molecular mechanisms. *Plasmodium* TRAP is the most extensively studied transmembrane protein of this type and is essential for sporozoite motility and hepatocyte invasion. Its homologues have been identified in other invasive stages of *Plasmodium*, as well as in other apicomplexan parasites. These proteins are characterized by the presence of one or more thrombospondin type-I repeat (TSR) domain (Box 1) and/or von Willebrand factor (vWF)-like A domain (Box 2) in their extracellular portion and a cytoplasmic tail domain (CTD) with a sub-terminal tryptophan residue. The presence of this protein family throughout the apicomplexan phylum and their association with the parasite’s motility and invasion make them attractive drug and vaccine targets. This review considers these TRAP-family proteins, focusing on their structure and function in invasion.

#### Thrombospondin-related anonymous protein

TRAP is a type-I transmembrane protein that contains a TSR domain, a vWF-like A domain and a short acidic CTD (Figures 1a and 2). It was first found in *Plasmodium falciparum*, and homologues were subsequently identified in all other *Plasmodium* species [5,6]. TRAP is stored within the micronemes of sporozoites, released onto the cell surface at the anterior tip upon contact with a host cell and translocated to the posterior pole of the sporozoite along its surface during penetration. Its essential role is to link the actin–myosin motor through its cytoplasmic domain while binding to hepatocytes via its extracellular portion (for a review, see Ref. [7]).

TRAP binds to hepatocytes through a dual-ligand system that involves both the TSR and vWF-like A domains. The TSR domain of TRAP was shown to bind to heparin sulphate proteoglycans on the hepatocyte cell surface [8–10], whereas the hepatocyte receptor for the vWF-like A domain has yet to be identified, although it is known to be heparin mediated [11,12]. Using surface-plasmon-resonance-based sensor technology, Akhouri et al. [12] showed that the affinity of the vWF-like A domain for heparin was twofold lower than when both TRAP adhesive domains acted together, confirming a role for both the TSR and the vWF-like A domains in hepatocyte invasion. This is consistent with findings of an independent study that showed that sporozoites bearing mutations in either the TSR or the vWF-like A domain had decreased invasion (approximately threefold and tenfold, respectively), whereas those bearing mutations in both domains were non-invasive [13].

The CTD of TRAP is rich in acidic residues and contains a sub-terminal tryptophan residue and an YXXφ motif (where φ is any hydrophobic residue) [14]. It has two potential functions: first, as a recognition signal for the trafficking machinery to sort the protein to the micronemes and second, as a link to the actin–myosin motor of the parasite. Experimental data showed that abrogating the YXXφ motif could substantially reduce micronemal and cell-surface localization of TRAP and inhibit infectivity of the mutant parasites [15]. Deletion of the CTD precluded sporozoite gliding and cell invasion, whereas point mutations in the distal part did not abolish but modified the gliding phenotype, indicating that TRAP CTD has a direct role in gliding and cell invasion [16]. Subsequent studies demonstrated that interaction between the TRAP CTD and the actin–myosin motor was bridged by the glycolytic enzyme aldolase and the interaction was

Corresponding author: Coppel, R.L. (<ross.coppel@med.monash.edu.au>).

Review

Box 1. Thrombospondin type-I domains

Thrombospondin type I (TSR) domains were initially identified in the glycoprotein thrombospondin I and subsequently identified in a diverse family of extracellular matrix and transmembrane proteins, many of which have functions related to regulating matrix organization, cell–cell interactions and cell guidance (for a review, see Ref. [65]). TSR domains are ~60 residues with the central motif commonly consisting of Trp-Ser-Xaa-Trp (where ‘Xaa’ can be any amino acid) followed by Cys-Ser-Xaa-Thr-Cys-Gly. The structure of TSR domains has been resolved as three anti-parallel strands held together by stacked layers of conserved tryptophan and arginine residues between cysteine disulphide bonds [66]. TSR domains can be divided into two major groups based on linkages between the strands: in group I TSR domains, the second and third strands are linked by a disulphide bond, whereas strand 2 and the N terminus are linked by two hydrogen bonds. In group II TSR domains, a disulphide bond directly links strand 3 and the N terminus [66].

The TSR domain for the *Plasmodium* thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) is categorized as group II; it has an elongated structure stabilized by an array of tryptophan and arginine residues as well as disulfide bonds similar to the thrombospondin I TSR domains [67]. TRAP TSR mediates the binding of TRAP to sulphated glyconjugates on the hepatocyte cell surface [9,10]; the binding site is located in the N-terminal half of the structure, the layered side chains forming an integral part of the site [67].

dependent on the sub-terminal tryptophan residue, in addition to two non-contiguous stretches of negatively charged residues [4,17,18]. After translocation of TRAP from the anterior to the posterior end of the sporozoite, the protein is cleaved within its transmembrane domain by the rhomboid protease PfROM4 [19], releasing the extracellular portion and, thus, enabling completion of host-cell invasion.

The importance of TRAP during sporozoite invasion was established by gene-targeting studies, in which disruption of the TRAP gene impaired sporozoite gliding motility, salivary gland invasion and sporozoite infectivity [8,20]. Because of these essential roles, TRAP has been investigated as a target for protective immunity. Conflicting results were reported on the inhibitory effect of TRAP antibodies on sporozoite invasion, ranging from strong [21,22] to moderate [23] to no inhibitory activity [24]. Nevertheless, TRAP is under development as a component of a multivalent subunit vaccine [25].

**TRAP-family proteins in Plasmodium**

Circumsporozoite and TRAP-related protein (CTRP) comprises six vWF-like A domains and seven TSR domains in its extracellular portion and a short CTD with a sub-terminal tryptophan residue [26] (Figures 1a and 2). Its transmembrane domain contains the conserved motif recognized by rhomboid proteases and was shown to be cleaved by PfROM4 [19]. As is the case with TRAP, homologues of CTRP have been identified in all *Plasmodium* species [27].

CTRP is expressed in motile ookinetes and associated with the micronemes of a mature ookinete during its movement from the endoperitrophic space to the basal lamina of the midgut epithelium [28–30]. It was found most abundantly at the site of contact between the apical end of an ookinete and the basal lamina of an epithelial

Box 2. von Willebrand Factor-like A Domain

vWF-like A domain was first identified in the plasma protein von Willebrand factor; it now defines a superfamily of soluble proteins, extracellular matrix proteins and integral membrane proteins (for a review, see Ref. [68]). Each vWF-like A domain is ~200 residues in length and is an independently folded protein unit that acquires a classic α/β Rossman fold consisting of a parallel β-sheet surrounded by amphipathic α-helices. Many vWF-like A domains contain a metal ion-dependent adhesion site (MIDAS) motif necessary for ligand recognition. This motif is composed of five non-contiguous amino acids, Asp-Xaa-Ser-Xaa-Ser (where ‘Xaa’ can be any amino acid), that are brought together to accommodate a divalent cation. It is likely to play a part in divalent cation binding, receptor recognition and cell adhesion.

A three-dimensional structure of the vWF-like A domain from *Plasmodium* thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) has been determined, which shows two distinct ligand-binding surfaces [12]. One surface contains the MIDAS motif, whereas the other surface is a putative heparin-binding site. The TRAP vWF-like A domain has been shown to bind to heparin on hepatocyte line HepG2, in a way independent of the MIDAS motif [11,12].

cell, indicating its function as an adhesion molecule that promotes ookinete movement into the midgut lumen and epithelial cell [29]. These suggested functions were examined by several groups using targeted gene disruption [28,30,31]. Dessens et al. [30] showed that CTRP-disrupted *Plasmodium berghei* parasites formed ookinetes that had reduced motility, failed to invade the midgut epithelium and did not develop into oocysts. Similar results were reported by Yuda et al. and Templeton et al. [28,31], who showed that disruption of the CTRP gene, in either *P. berghei* or *P. falciparum*, resulted in the failure of oocyst formation in the mosquito midgut. However, if parasites lacking CTRP were introduced directly into the mosquito haemocoel, they were capable of transforming from ookinetes to oocysts [32], indicating that the role of CTRP is motility and/or invasion at the ookinete cell surface within the mosquito midgut, in agreement with the role of TRAP in sporozoites.

Consistent with this role, the TSR domains of CTRP bind to laminin, a major component of the basal lamina [33], whereas its CTD interacts with aldolase and complements the function of TRAP CTD [34]. By using membrane-feeding assays, Li et al. [35] showed that antibodies against the first vWF-like A domain of *Plasmodium gallinaceum* CTRP could substantially reduce the infectivity of parasites to mosquitoes, supporting the concept of CTRP as a candidate for transmission-blocking vaccines.

**Merozoite TRAP**

Merozoite TRAP (MTRAP) contains two TSR domains and an acidic CTD with a recessed terminal tryptophan residue (Figures 1a and 2). No vWF-like A domain is present in the molecule. MTRAP is expressed in middle-to-late asexual blood stages and is localized initially in the micronemes and released onto the merozoite surface before invasion [4]. It is cleaved twice during invasion: once within its extracellular domain and once within the transmembrane domain by rhomboid protease PfROM4 [4,19,36]. Evidence that the MTRAP gene was unable to be disrupted using standard protocols and the presence of homologues in other *Plasmodium* species indicate that it plays an essential part

Review                                                                 Trends in Parasitology  Vol.25 No.2

(a)
| Gene    | Acc#          | Stage of expression |
|---------|---------------|---------------------|
| TRAP    | (PF13_0201)   | Sporozoite          |
| TLP     | (PFF0800w)    | Sporozoite          |
| S6      | (PF14_0404)   | Sporozoite          |
| MTRAP   | (PF10_0281)   | Merozoite           |
| CTRP    | (PFC0640w)    | Ookinetes           |

(b)
| Gene        | Acc#          | Stage of expression |
|-------------|---------------|---------------------|
| TgMIC2      |               |                     |
| NcMIC2      |               |                     |
| BbTRAP      |               |                     |
| TRAP-C1     |               |                     |
| EtMIC1      |               |                     |
| EmTFP250    |               |                     |

(c)
| Gene    | Acc#          | Stage of expression |
|---------|---------------|---------------------|
| CSP     | (PFC0210c)    | Sporozoite          |
| SPATR   | (PFB0570w)    | Multiple stages     |
| TRSP    | (PFA0200w)    | Sporozoite          |
| PTRAMP  | (PFL0870w)    | Merozoite           |
| WARP    | (PF08_0136b)  | Ookinetes           |

Figure 1. Schematic representation (not to scale) of apicomplexan TRAP-family proteins. (a) TRAP-family proteins from *Plasmodium*. (b) TRAP-family proteins in other apicomplexan parasites. (c) *Plasmodium* proteins that share functional domains with TRAP. The black boxes represent secretion signals and the grey boxes represent predicted transmembrane domains. The vWF-like A domains are shown as pentagons labelled 'A', TSR domains are shown as rectangles labelled 'T', EGF-like domains are shown as triangles labelled 'E', Apple domains are shown as circles labelled 'P', acidic cytoplasmic tail domains are shown as open hexagons and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor is shown as a diamond. Asterisks indicate the presence of a tryptophan residue close to the C terminus. The GenBank™ accession numbers of the genes and the stages in which the proteins are predominantly expressed are shown at the left side, and the sizes of the proteins (number of amino acids) are shown at the right side. BbTRAP, *Babesia bovis* TRAP; CSP, circumsporozoite surface protein; CTRP, circumsporozoite and TRAP-related protein; EmTFP250, *Eimeria maxima* TRAP-family protein 250 kDa; EtMIC, *Eimeria tenella* micronemal protein 1; MTRAP, merozoite TRAP; NcMIC2, *Neospora caninum* micronemal protein 2; PTRAMP, *Plasmodium* thrombospondin-related apical merozoite protein; S6, sporozoite-specific protein; SPATR, secreted protein with an altered TSR domain; TgMIC2, *Toxoplasma gondii* micronemal protein 2; TLP, TRAP-like protein; TRAP, thrombospondin-related anonymous protein; TRAP-C1, TSP-related adhesive protein of *Cryptosporidium*-1; TRSP, thrombospondin-related sporozoite protein; WARP, von Willebrand factor A domain-related protein.

Review

Trends in Parasitology Vol. 25 No. 2

(a)
TRAP WDEWS-PCSVTCGKGTRS--RKR
TLP WSEWS-PCSVTCNMGYHF--SKR
S6 WSEWSGPCFER--------RQR
MTRAP (2nd) WGEWS-ECKDGR---------MHR
CTRP(3rd) WSDWS-SCSKTCGYST----RSR
TgMIC2(3rd) WAAWS-DCTVTCGGGNRH--RVR
NcMIC2(1st) WSEWS-PCSATCGVGTQG--RTR
BbTRAP WAEWS-SCNGECGVPGK---RTR
TRAP-C1(4th) WSSWS-PCSVTCGCGTTT--RNR
EtMIC1(1st) WSEWSTTCGTAT--------RKR
EmTFP250(12th) WSEWT-SCSLVNEEGGYF--RTR
CSP STEWS-PCSVTCGNGI----QVR
SPATR WSDWS-ACKNNTQKRYR---KVR
TRSP WSEWS-ACSKTCDYGI----KIR
PTRAMP WGEWS-NCSMDCDHPDNVQIRER

(b)
TRAP VCN-DEVDLYLLMDCSGSIRRHNWVNHAVPLAMKLIRQQLNLNDNAIHLYASVFSNNAREIIRLHSDASKN
TLP(2nd) ICNIYMDISILLDDSSNITLESWNKYIIPFVRKFITHFNINNNQINFSLTTYSSHTYNWFNFNSNVLSKD
CTRP(2nd) FCE-DYYDLTLILDESRSITLDKWKKDVVPFAEKVLNNLNIDKDKIHVGIMRAKSMKTDIGYEQETRYM
TgMIC2 GCT-NQLDICFLIDSSGSIGIQNFRLO-VKQFLHTFLMVLPIGPEEVNNAVVTYSTDVHLQWDLQSPNAVD
NcMIC2 GCT-SQLDICFLVDSSGSIGEAHYEE-VKQFLHAFLSKLPIGNDEVNTSLVIFSTTVHPHWSLRANNASD
BbTRAP QCK-KQLDFSIVVDESASISDDQWEGQMIPFLRNNLIHTVDLDNTDIRLSLTTYSTPTRQIFTFLDAASS
EtMIC1 VCT-SLLDVMLVVDESGSIGTSNFRK-VRQFIEDFVNSMPIPEDVRVGLITFATRSKVRWNLSDPKATN
WARP YCS-NYYDITLVVEESSFVQKDYWLKGTIPTFLESMVFNSNVSKDKAHMSVVLFAGKQRVVVPFTDESSQD
TRAP KEKALIIIKSLLSTNLPYGKTNLTDALLQVRKHLNDRIN-RENANQLVVILTDGI
TLP(2nd) KDKLLTYLEFFKFNFG-SS-TKNIKQAIQYMNDHVLNTRYRNDAKKIMLIINSG
CTRP(2nd) KNDLIKLVRELKDKYGYGGAHLVDALQYSLKTFRHPNNRVDAKPVTILFTDGN
TgMIC2 KQLAAHAVLEMPYKKG-STNTSDGLKACKQILFTGSRPG-REHVPKLVIGMTDGE
NcMIC2 KETAMQDVLTIYPHGG-TTNITAAGLQTCNQMLFDYPREE-RQTVPKLVIAMTDGE
BbTRAP TRLALTKLDWMNGTKARYGMTYTGRALNYVRKAILPYG--RKNVPKALLLITDGV
EtMIC1 PSLAISAARSLSYSTG-VTYTHYLQDAKKLLYDTNAGA-RNNVPKLVLVMTDGA
WARP KNMLLEKINSIDEGIATSSDTLYVNALKYAIENVIFGDGTRKDAPKVAVLFYYGF

(c)
TRAP KYKIAGGIAGG-LALLACAGLAYKFVVPGAATPYAGEPAPFDETLGEEDKDLDEP---EQFRLPEENE--WN------
TLP VYKYAASFTLA-AILFLGLSL-YFINNRKGNKIVDAKESNDAVSTNVKEETSSK---EQNIEIMNDTQ--WK------
S6 TFKYAGATVLAGLFVLLASVLVFKKVKGFTYKNNDYTNDLQYHFNSVILL-DEEKGKTD CGTISYMDESWS--------
MTRAP KLYIASGVAT--LVLLGGSITFYFLRKEKTEKVVOEETKEENFEVMFNDDALKG---KDNKAMDEEEF--WALE-----
CTRP KVSLAAGVIG--LVALAAGGLIYGYN TLNGGEPPHSSNMEEVENNSGTEEEN---EDFEVVDADDPMWN---------
TgMIC2 AGAIAGGVIGGLILLGAAGGASYHYYLSSSVGPSAE-IEYEADDGATKVVMEEE--KETLVPVDDDSDMWME-------
NcMIC2 VAAIAGGIVGGLILLGAAGGAYYYFGGGKANESLAE-MDFDVDGATKVVMEEE--KETLVPVDDDSDMWGADH------
BbTRAP TTKIAGGALLGLLLLGGAGGG--YAMYKKNKTPPTVETG-SGDTYGADESSEPMKEG---DTYTVTEFDNNIWGEAA-----
TRAP-C1 TLAIAVGLPVG-ILGLCIITAG-SLFLIGGRSGDQEEDETNYQYFDQSSATLDDQDS---EYVOEIGPESQN WAS--------
EtMIC1 TAAVAGGVAGGVLAAAGAGAFYGLSGGSAAAATEAGAEVMT-EAGTSNAAEVEKES---LISAGEQSEM WAS--------
EmTFP250 TAAVAGGVGGV-LLIAAVGGG-VAFTSGGGGAGAQEAEQVEFEGEDTGAAATAETPEADTVIDITDED DYWADSGDIQ

TRENDS in Parasitology

Figure 2. Alignment of the conserved domains of apicomplexan TRAP-family proteins. (a) The central motif of TSR domains with the conserved tryptophans and the central di-cysteine motif highlighted in red. (b) The MIDAS motif portion of vWF-like A domains with the important residues highlighted in red. (c) The predicted transmembrane domains (orange) and the cytoplasmic tails. The putative rhomboid cleavage sites are underlined, the YXXΦ-sorting motifs (where Φ is any hydrophobic residue) are highlighted in green, the acidic residues are highlighted in blue and the sub-terminal tryptophan residues are highlighted in red. For the proteins with multiple vWF-like A or TSR domains, the domains used for alignment are indicated in parentheses. For abbreviations for the proteins, see legend to Figure 1.

during asexual blood-stage development and might act as a
putative adaptor protein between the merozoite invasion
TRAP counterpart in this stage. Baum *et al.* [4] showed
machinery and the surface proteins that mediate erythro-
that the MTRAP CTD bound the actin-binding protein
cyte adhesion [34,38,39].
aldolase and this interaction was reduced when the trypto-
phan residue was mutated. The same authors, however,
were unable to demonstrate direct binding of MTRAP to
the erythrocyte surface; they suggested that MTRAP might
bind the erythrocytes indirectly via association with other
protein(s). It is interesting to note that erythrocyte-binding
antigen 175 (EBA-175), a major merozoite surface protein
that is capable of binding erythrocytes [37], does not
directly interact with the parasite motor because its
CTD cannot complement the function of TRAP CTD [34],
although TRAP CTD can replace that of EBA-175 [38].
This raises the possibility that MTRAP might act as a
TRAP-like protein
Recently, identification of a fourth TRAP-family member
named TRAP-like protein (TLP) was reported by two
groups [34,40]. TLP contains one TSR domain and two
vWF-like A domains in its extracellular portion and an
acidic CTD (Figures 1a and 2). Its transmembrane domain
contains a rhomboid-protease-cleavage site, which was
shown to be cleavable by PfROM4, as seen in TRAP, CTRP
and MTRAP [19]. The CTD of TLP was able to bind
aldolase with the interaction dependent on the sub-term-
inal tryptophan residue [34]. Moreover, it was able to
complement the function of TRAP CTD, providing evidence that TLP is a member of the TRAP family [34]. TLP homologues are present in all *Plasmodium* species studied so far, indicating that it has a conserved function within the parasite life cycle [34, 40].

TLP is expressed predominantly, but perhaps not exclusively, in salivary gland sporozoites [34, 40]. Gene-disruption studies in *P. berghei* showed that TLP was not essential for either the asexual blood stage or the sexual stages in mosquitoes. However, independent studies have reached different conclusions on the function of TLP. Moreira et al. [40] showed that TLP played a part in cell traversal of sporozoites and, therefore, *in vivo* infectivity, whereas Heiss et al. [34] concluded that TLP was redundant to other TRAP-family proteins. These discrepancies have been discussed in a recent commentary by Lacroix et al. [41], who also proposed three possible functions for TLP: to anchor the sporozoite when it glides inside a cell via specific ligands, to assist the sporozoite in crossing endothelial barriers and moving between or through cells using its adhesive domains, or to act during cell traversal by directly breaching membranes [41]. The exact contribution of TLP to sporozoite infectivity remains to be determined.

### Sporozoite-specific protein

Sporozoite-specific protein (S6) was identified by Kaiser et al. [42] when analyzing sporozoite-specific transcripts using suppression subtractive hybridization. S6 contains a TSR domain in its extracellular portion, whereas at the C terminus there is a transmembrane domain with a predicted rhomboid-cleavage site and an acidic CTD with a terminal tryptophan residue. Owing to its stage-specific expression and the domain organization, the authors speculate that S6 might function as a TRAP-family protein during hepatocyte invasion, but as yet, no experimental evidence is available.

### TRAP-family proteins in other Apicomplexa

It has been suggested that the same actin–myosin motor complex drives cell motility and invasion across all apicomplexans. Accordingly, orthologues for the contributing genes have been identified in all of the available apicomplexan genomes [4]. Several of the TRAP orthologues have been characterized, including *Toxoplasma gondii* micronemal protein 2 (TgMIC2), *Neospora caninum* micronemal protein 2 (NcMIC2), *Babesia TRAP* (BbTRAP and BgTRAP), TSP-related adhesive protein of *Cryptosporidium* 1 (EtMIC1) and *Eimeria maxima* TRAP-family protein 250kDa (EmTFP250). All of these proteins share the structural features characteristic of *Plasmodium* TRAP, including an N-terminal secretion signal, one or more TSR domains in the extracellular portion, a transmembrane region with a rhomboid-cleavage site and an acidic CTD with a tryptophan residue close to the C terminus (Figures 1b and 2). The vWF-like A domain is present in most of the proteins, except TRAP-C1 and EmTFP250, which contain two Apple domains and multiple EGF-like domains in their extracellular portion, respectively. Both the Apple and EGF-like domains are proposed to be involved in protein interactions during parasite attachment and host-cell invasion and might act as a replacement for the vWF-like A domain.

TgMIC2 has been studied extensively for its role in parasite gliding motility and host-cell invasion (for a review, see Ref. [43]). Like TRAP, TgMIC2 binds to heparin, probably mediated by its vWF-like A and TSR domains, whereas its CTD interacts with aldolase and can complement the function of TRAP CTD [16, 17, 44]. TgMIC2 has also been shown to bind to intracellular adhesion molecule 1, which facilitates parasite transmigration across cellular barriers [45]. After translocation to the posterior end, TgMIC2 is cleaved at its transmembrane domain by the rhomboid protease TgROM5 [46], analogous to the cleavage of TRAP by PfROM4 [19]. However, unlike TRAP (which is thought to act on its own), TgMIC2 interacts with TgMIC2-associated protein (TgM2AP) and is present as a hetero-hexameric complex throughout its trafficking to the micronemes, secretion onto the apical surface and relocation to the posterior end, and even after cleavage by TgROM5 [46]. Genetic disruption of TgM2AP reduced targeting of TgMIC2 to the micronemes and substantially reduced parasite invasion [47], indicating that the TgMIC2–M2AP complex is necessary for invasion to occur. Because of its essential role in *T. gondii* motility and invasion, deletion of the *TgMIC2* gene has not been possible. Alternatively, conditional suppression of *TgMIC2* was feasible and resulted in mistrafficking of TgM2AP, markedly defective host-cell attachment and invasion, the loss of helical gliding motility, and a subsequent reduction in invasion efficiency [48]. These studies demonstrate that the TgMIC2 protein complex is a major virulence determinant for *Toxoplasma* infection and indicate that if it is possible to generate MIC2-deficient parasites, they might constitute an effective live-attenuated vaccine for toxoplasmosis.

NcMIC2 is localized to the micronemes of *N. caninum* and a form of NcMIC2 secreted into the medium lacks its CTD, consistent with the protein being proteolytically cleaved after invasion [49]. An orthologue of TgM2AP has been identified in *N. caninum*, named NcM2AP. It probably forms a similar complex with NcMIC2 and plays an essential role in host-cell invasion by *N. caninum*.

In *Babesia*, a TRAP orthologue was first identified in *Babesia bovis* (BbTRAP) [50] and later in *Babesia gibsoni* (BgTRAP) [51]. Both are expressed during the asexual blood stage and both localize predominantly to the apical end of merozoites. BgTRAP was shown to bind intact canine erythrocytes in a bivalent cation-independent manner, and antibodies directed to the ectodomain of BbTRAP inhibited erythrocyte invasion *in vitro* [51].

TRAP-C1 expression peaks at both early and late stages of infection and is localized at the apical end of *Cryptosporidium parvum* sporozoites [52, 53]. Its homologues have been identified in other *Cryptosporidium* species, indicating a conserved role for the protein in host-cell invasion [52]. However, an *in vitro* invasion-inhibition assay using monoclonal antibodies to the TRAP-C1 functional domains resulted in only limited reduction in the number of *C. parvum* development stages [54]. It is possible that multiple invasion pathways could be used by *C. parvum*
to invade host cells and that TRAP-C1 represents only one of them [53].

Two typical TRAP-family proteins are identified in *Eimeria*: EtMIC1 and EmTFP250 [55, 56]. EtMIC1 is expressed in sporozoites and merozoites, whereas the expression of EmTFP250 is confined to the asexual stages with both proteins localized to the micronemes. EtMIC1 forms a complex with EtMIC2 that is analogous to the TgMIC2-M2AP complex in *T. gondii*. The EtMIC1-2 complex is presumably mobilized from the micronemes to the parasite surface during attachment and is redistributed towards the posterior end of the parasite during penetration of the host cell [57].

### Other *Plasmodium* proteins that share functional domains with TRAP

Several *Plasmodium* proteins contain part, but not all, of the structural features of TRAP (Figures 1c and 2). The von Willebrand factor A domain-related protein (WARP) contains a vWF-like A domain as its main component, whereas circumsporozoite protein (CSP), secreted protein with an altered TSR domain (SPATR), *Plasmodium* thrombospondin-related apical merozoite protein (PTRAMP) and thrombospondin-related sporozoite protein (TRSP) all contain one TSR domain in their molecule. These proteins have been shown or suggested to function in host-cell recognition and invasion but are not classified as TRAP-family proteins because of the absence of an acidic CTD and a sub-terminal tryptophan residue, the hallmark of TRAP-family proteins.

WARP is expressed in ookinetes with a micronemal localization [35, 58]. It has been identified in several *Plasmodium* species and is suggested to act as an adhesive substrate connecting ookinete surface and midgut molecules during ookinete midgut invasion [58]. Antibodies against recombinant WARP could substantially reduce (by 95%-100%) the infectivity of *P. falciparum* to *Anopheles* mosquitoes, indicating that WARP is an immunological target that could potentially be used as a transmission-blocking vaccine [35].

CSP is the most abundant protein on the sporozoite surface and has been studied extensively (for a review, see Ref. [7]). It is anchored to the sporozoite surface via a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor and has multiple functions during the parasite life cycle, one of which is the crucial role in sporozoite infection of hepatocytes mediated by the binding of its TSR domain to heparin sulphate proteoglycans.

SPATR was first identified in salivary gland sporozoites of *P. yoelii* and has since been found in other *Plasmodium* species [59, 60], as well as in *T. gondii* [61]. It was reported to be expressed at multiple life-cycle stages [59, 60]. Recombinant SPATR is able to bind HepG2, indicating its role as a parasite ligand during sporozoite invasion of liver cells [59, 60]. SPATR is immunogenic during natural infection, and antibodies against it can block the invasion of sporozoites [60].

PTRAMP is localized to the micronemes of merozoites and subsequently redistributed onto the merozoite surface [62]. It undergoes a proteolytic processing event upon invasion of erythrocytes by the subtilisin-like protease

PfSUB2 [63]. Homologues of PTRAMP are present in all *Plasmodium* species, indicating a conserved function during asexual development. This is supported by the fact that attempts to disrupt PTRAMP by homologous replacement using well-established genetic transformation methods have been unsuccessful [62]. PTRAMP has a short acidic and highly charged CTD with an aromatic tyrosine residue present at the sub-terminal position instead of tryptophan; as such, it binds aldolase only weakly [4].

TRSP is expressed in oocyst and salivary gland sporozoites with an apical localization [42]. It has an extremely short CTD, comprising only five amino acid residues. Depletion of TRSP in *P. berghei* had no effect on the gliding motility of sporozoites, nor did it affect sporozoite formation and subsequent salivary gland invasion. However, the TRSP-deficient parasites exhibited a substantial defect in their ability to enter hepatocytes *in vitro*, resulting in a 40%-84% reduction of *in vivo* infectivity [64].

### Concluding remarks

*Plasmodium* TRAP is the essential transmembrane protein required for sporozoite motility and hepatocyte invasion and defines a family of related proteins conserved across the parasite life cycle. CTRP has been demonstrated to be the homologue of TRAP during the ookinete stage, whereas MTRAP is suggested as the counterpart for the merozoite stage, although its interaction with erythrocytes has not been established. TLP is implicated to function in gliding motility and cell traversal at the sporozoite stage but with no evidence to support a further role in cell invasion. The motile parasites of different *Plasmodium* stages have their own specialized behaviour. Merozoites do not demonstrate gliding motility but invade erythrocytes using the same actin-myosin motor. Ookinetes show gliding motility; they traverse but do not invade the mosquito midgut, whereas sporozoites are able to glide, traverse and invade cells [39]. The molecular mechanisms underlying these differences remain largely unknown. It is not known whether the divergence relates to the specificity and avidity of the receptor-ligand interaction, the timing or extent of protease cleavage, or the extent of linkage of the molecular motor. It seems that *Plasmodium* utilizes multiple TRAP proteins as the functional homologues in different life-cycle stages.

A common molecular machinery seems to underlie motility and invasion in Apicomplexa. This is supported by the evidence that a conserved motor complex is present across the phylum, including *Plasmodium*, *Toxoplasma*, *Cryptosporidium*, *Theileria*, *Eimeria* and *Babesia* [4], as is the presence of multiple TRAP-family proteins. The characterization of the TRAP orthologues, especially TgMIC2, has shed light on the understanding of this family of proteins in cell invasion. There is a real need for further functional studies on these proteins, including the identification of their cellular receptors. Emerging technologies, such as glycan microarrays, might have real utility in identifying such receptors if they belong to the same class of molecules recognized by TRAP. In addition, there seems to be several missing components in the story, such as a partner for MTRAP that binds erythrocytes and possibly even a *Plasmodium* orthologue for TgM2AP. All of these

proteins with the associated motor complex could be new
targets for vaccine and/or drug development, with the most
attractive ones being the rhomboid proteases because of
the general tractability of proteases as targets in other
diseases.

Acknowledgements
We apologize to many researchers in this field whose work we were
unable to cite directly because of space limitations. This work was
supported by the malaria programme grant from the National Health and
Medical Research Council of Australia.

References

1 Kats, L.M. *et al.* (2008) Protein trafficking to apical organelles of
   malaria parasites—building an invasion machine. *Traffic* 9, 176–186
2 Sibley, L.D. (2004) Intracellular parasite invasion strategies. *Science*
   304, 248–253
3 Jones, M.L. *et al.* (2006) *Plasmodium falciparum* erythrocyte invasion:
   a conserved myosin associated complex. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 147,
   74–84
4 Baum, J. *et al.* (2006) A conserved molecular motor drives cell invasion
   and gliding motility across malaria life cycle stages and other
   apicomplexan parasites. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 5197–5208
5 Templeton, T.J. and Kaslow, D.C. (1997) Cloning and cross-species
   comparison of the thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP)
   gene from *Plasmodium knowlesi*, *Plasmodium vivax* and *Plasmodium*
   gallinaceum. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 84, 13–24
6 Robson, K.J. *et al.* (1998) Natural polymorphism in the
   thrombospondin-related adhesive protein of *Plasmodium*
   *falciparum*. *Am. J. Trop. Med.* 58, 81–89
7 Menard, R. (2000) The journey of the malaria sporozoite through its
   hosts: two parasite proteins lead the way. *Microbes Infect.* 2, 633–642
8 Sultan, A.A. *et al.* (1997) TRAP is necessary for gliding motility and
   infectivity of *Plasmodium* sporozoites. *Cell* 90, 511–522
9 Robson, K.J. *et al.* (1995) Thrombospondin-related adhesive protein
   (TRAP) of *Plasmodium falciparum*: expression during sporozoite
   ontogeny and binding to human hepatocytes. *EMBO J.* 14, 3883–3894
10 Muller, H.M. *et al.* (1993) Thrombospondin related anonymous protein
    (TRAP) of *Plasmodium falciparum* binds specifically to sulfated
    glycoconjugates and to HepG2 hepatoma cells suggesting a role for
    this molecule in sporozoite invasion of hepatocytes. *EMBO J.* 12, 2881–
    2889
11 McCormick, C.J. *et al.* (1999) Identification of heparin as a ligand for
    the A-domain of *Plasmodium falciparum* thrombospondin-related
    adhesion protein. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 100, 111–124
12 Akhouri, R.R. *et al.* (2004) Structural and functional dissection of the
    adhesive domains of *Plasmodium falciparum* thrombospondin-related
    anonymous protein (TRAP). *Biochem. J.* 379, 815–822
13 Matuschewski, K. *et al.* (2002) *Plasmodium* sporozoite invasion into
    insect and mammalian cells is directed by the same dual binding
    system. *EMBO J.* 21, 1597–1606
14 Robson, K.J. *et al.* (1988) A highly conserved amino-acid sequence in
    thrombospondin, properdin and in proteins from sporozoites and blood
    stages of a human malaria parasite. *Nature* 335, 79–82
15 Bhanot, P. *et al.* (2003) Defective sorting of the thrombospondin-related
    anonymous protein (TRAP) inhibits *Plasmodium* infectivity. *Mol.*
    *Biochem. Parasitol.* 126, 263–273
16 Kappe, S. *et al.* (1999) Conservation of a gliding motility and cell invasion
    machinery in Apicomplexan parasites. *J. Cell Biol.* 147, 937–944
17 Jewett, T.J. and Sibley, L.D. (2003) Aldolase forms a bridge between
    cell surface adhesins and the actin cytoskeleton in apicomplexan
    parasites. *Mol. Cell* 11, 885–894
18 Buscaglia, C.A. *et al.* (2003) Sites of interaction between aldolase and
    thrombospondin-related anonymous protein in *Plasmodium*. *Mol. Biol.*
    *Cell* 14, 4947–4957
19 Baker, R.P. *et al.* (2006) Two *Plasmodium* rhomboid proteases
    preferentially cleave different adhesins implicated in all invasive
    stages of malaria. *PLoS Pathog.* 2, e113
20 Wengelnik, K. *et al.* (1999) The A-domain and the thrombospondin-
    related motif of *Plasmodium falciparum* TRAP are implicated in the
    invasion process of mosquito salivary glands. *EMBO J.* 18, 5195–5204

21 Rogers, W.O. *et al.* (1992) Characterization of *Plasmodium falciparum*
    sporozoite surface protein 2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 89, 9176–
    9180
22 Spaccapelo, R. *et al.* (1997) Thrombospondin-related adhesive protein
    (TRAP) of *Plasmodium berghei* and parasite motility. *Lancet* 350, 335
23 Charoenvit, Y. *et al.* (1997) Development of two monoclonal antibodies
    against *Plasmodium falciparum* sporozoite surface protein 2 and
    mapping of B-cell epitopes. *Infect. Immun.* 65, 3430–3437
24 Gantt, S. *et al.* (2000) Antibodies against thrombospondin-related
    anonymous protein do not inhibit *Plasmodium* sporozoite infectivity
    *in vivo*. *Infect. Immun.* 68, 3667–3673
25 Moorthy, V.S. *et al.* (2004) A randomised, double-blind, controlled
    vaccine efficacy trial of DNA/MVA ME-TRAP against malaria
    infection in Gambian adults. *PLoS Med.* 1, e33
26 Trottein, F. *et al.* (1995) Molecular cloning of a gene from *Plasmodium*
    *falciparum* that codes for a protein sharing motifs found in adhesive
    molecules from mammals and plasmodia. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 74,
    129–141
27 Kaneko, O. *et al.* (2006) The *Plasmodium vivax* homolog of the ookinete
    adhesive micronemal protein. *CTRP. Parasitol. Int.* 55, 227–231
28 Templeton, T.J. *et al.* (2000) Developmental arrest of the human
    malaria parasite *Plasmodium falciparum* within the mosquito
    midgut via CTRP gene disruption. *Mol. Microbiol.* 36, 1–9
29 Limviroj, W. *et al.* (2002) Immuno-electron microscopic observation of
    *Plasmodium berghei* CTRP localization in the midgut of the vector
    mosquito *Anopheles stephensi*. *J. Parasitol.* 88, 664–672
30 Dessens, J.T. *et al.* (1999) CTRP is essential for mosquito infection by
    malaria ookinetes. *EMBO J.* 18, 6221–6227
31 Yuda, M. *et al.* (1999) Targeted disruption of the *Plasmodium berghei*
    CTRP gene reveals its essential role in malaria infection of the vector
    mosquito. *J. Exp. Med.* 190, 1711–1716
32 Nacer, A. *et al.* (2008) The microneme proteins CTRP and SOAP are not
    essential for *Plasmodium berghei* ookinete to oocyst transformation in
    vitro in a cell free system. *Malar. J.* 7, 82
33 Mahairaki, V. *et al.* (2005) The *Anopheles gambiae* gamma 1 laminin
    directly binds the *Plasmodium berghei* circumsporozoite- and TRAP-
    related protein (CTRP). *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 140, 119–121
34 Heiss, K. *et al.* (2008) Functional characterization of a redundant
    *Plasmodium* TRAP family invasin, TRAP-like protein, by aldolase
    binding and a genetic complementation test. *Euk. Cell* 7, 1062–1070
35 Li, F. *et al.* (2004) *Plasmodium* ookinete-secreted proteins secreted
    through a common micronemal pathway are targets of blocking
    malaria transmission. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 26635–26644
36 Urban, S. and Freeman, M. (2003) Substrate specificity of rhomboid
    intramembrane proteases is governed by helix-breaking residues in
    the substrate transmembrane domain. *Mol. Cell* 11, 1425–1434
37 Sim, B.K. *et al.* (1994) Receptor and ligand domains for invasion of
    erythrocytes by *Plasmodium falciparum*. *Science* 264, 1941–1944
38 Gilberger, T.W. *et al.* (2003) The cytoplasmic domain of the
    *Plasmodium falciparum* ligand EBA-175 is essential for invasion
    but not protein trafficking. *J. Cell Biol.* 162, 317–327
39 Baum, J. *et al.* (2008) Host-cell invasion by malaria parasites: insights
    from *Plasmodium* and *Toxoplasma*. *Trends Parasitol.* 24, 557–563
40 Moreira, C.K. *et al.* (2008) The *Plasmodium* TRAP/MIC2 family
    member, TRAP-like protein (TLP), is involved in tissue traversal by
    sporozoites. *Cell. Microbiol.* 10, 1505–1516
41 Lacroix, C. and Menard, R. (2008) TRAP-like protein of *Plasmodium*
    sporozoites: linking gliding motility to host-cell traversal. *Trends*
    *Parasitol.* 24, 431–434
42 Kaiser, K. *et al.* (2004) Differential transcriptome profiling identifies
    *Plasmodium* genes encoding pre-erythrocytic stage-specific proteins.
    *Mol. Microbiol.* 51, 1221–1232
43 Brossier, F. and David Sibley, L. (2005) *Toxoplasma gondii*: microneme
    protein MIC2. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* 37, 2266–2272
44 Starnes, G.L. *et al.* (2006) Two separate, conserved acidic amino acid
    domains within the *Toxoplasma gondii* MIC2 cytoplasmic tail are
    required for parasite survival. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 30745–30754
45 Barragan, A. *et al.* (2005) Transepithelial migration of *Toxoplasma*
    *gondii* involves an interaction of intercellular adhesion molecule 1
    (ICAM-1) with the parasite adhesin MIC2. *Cell. Microbiol.* 7, 561–568
46 Brossier, F. *et al.* (2005) A spatially localized rhomboid protease cleaves
    cell surface adhesins essential for invasion by *Toxoplasma*. *Proc. Natl.*
    *Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 102, 4146–4151

47 Huynh, M.H. *et al.* (2003) Rapid invasion of host cells by *Toxoplasma* requires secretion of the MIC2-M2AP adhesive protein complex. *EMBO J.* 22, 2082–2090

48 Huynh, M.H. and Carruthers, V.B. (2006) *Toxoplasma* MIC2 is a major determinant of invasion and virulence. *PLoS Pathog.* 2, e84

49 Lovett, J.L. *et al.* (2000) Molecular characterization of a thrombospondin-related anonymous protein homologue in *Neospora caninum*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 107, 33–43

50 Gaffar, F.R. *et al.* (2004) A *Babesia bovis* merozoite protein with a domain architecture highly similar to the thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) present in *Plasmodium* sporozoites. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 136, 25–34

51 Zhou, J. *et al.* (2006) Characterization of the *Babesia gibsoni* P18 as a homologue of thrombospondin related adhesive protein. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 148, 190–198

52 Spano, F. *et al.* (1998) Molecular cloning and expression analysis of a *Cryptosporidium parvum* gene encoding a new member of the thrombospondin family. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 92, 147–162

53 Deng, M. *et al.* (2002) *Cryptosporidium parvum* genes containing thrombospondin type 1 domains. *Infect. Immun.* 70, 6987–6995

54 Camero, L. *et al.* (1999) Characterization of new monoclonal antibodies against *Cryptosporidium parvum* sporozoites. *J. Eukaryot. Microbiol.* 46, 58S–59S

55 Witcombe, D.M. *et al.* (2003) Molecular characterisation of EmTFP250: a novel member of the TRAP protein family in *Eimeria maxima*. *Int. J. Parasitol.* 33, 691–702

56 Clarke, L.E. *et al.* (1990) Regions of an *Eimeria tenella* antigen contain sequences which are conserved in circumsporozoite proteins from *Plasmodium* spp. and which are related to the thrombospondin gene family. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 41, 269–279

57 Tomley, F.M. *et al.* (1996) Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel acidic microneme protein (Etmic-2) from the apicomplexan protozoan parasite, *Eimeria tenella*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 79, 195–206

58 Yuda, M. *et al.* (2001) von Willebrand Factor A domain-related protein, a novel microneme protein of the malaria ookinete highly conserved throughout *Plasmodium* parasites. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 116, 65–72

59 Mahajan, B. *et al.* (2005) Identification, cloning, expression, and characterization of the gene for *Plasmodium knowlesi* surface protein containing an altered thrombospondin repeat domain. *Infect. Immun.* 73, 5402–5409

60 Chattopadhyay, R. *et al.* (2003) PfSPATR, a *Plasmodium falciparum* protein containing an altered thrombospondin type I repeat domain is expressed at several stages of the parasite life cycle and is the target of inhibitory antibodies. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 25977–25981

61 Kawase, O. *et al.* (2007) Proteomic analysis of calcium-dependent secretion in *Toxoplasma gondii*. *Proteomics* 7, 3718–3725

62 Thompson, J. *et al.* (2004) PTRAMP; a conserved *Plasmodium* thrombospondin-related apical merozoite protein. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 134, 225–232

63 Green, J.L. *et al.* (2006) *Plasmodium* thrombospondin related apical merozoite protein (PTRAMP) is shed from the surface of merozoites by PfSUB2 upon invasion of erythrocytes. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 150, 114–117

64 Labaied, M. *et al.* (2007) Depletion of the *Plasmodium berghei* thrombospondin-related sporozoite protein reveals a role in host cell entry by sporozoites. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 153, 158–166

65 Tucker, R.P. (2004) The thrombospondin type 1 repeat superfamily. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* 36, 969–974

66 Tan, K. *et al.* (2002) Crystal structure of the TSP-1 type 1 repeats: a novel layered fold and its biological implication. *J. Cell Biol.* 159, 373–382

67 Tossavainen, H. *et al.* (2006) The layered fold of the TSR domain of *P. falciparum* TRAP contains a heparin binding site. *Protein Sci.* 15, 1760–1768

68 Whittaker, C.A. and Hynes, R.O. (2002) Distribution and evolution of von Willebrand/integrin A domains: widely dispersed domains with roles in cell adhesion and elsewhere. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 13, 3369–3387
