
T Cell Activation

Jennifer E. Smith-Garvin,$^{1}$ Gary A. Koretzky,$^{1,2,3}$ and Martha S. Jordan$^{1,2}$

$^{1}$Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, $^{2}$Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, $^{3}$Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104; email: smithje@mail.med.upenn.edu, koretzky@mail.med.upenn.edu, jordanm@mail.med.upenn.edu

---

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2009. 27:591–619

First published online as a Review in Advance on January 8, 2009

The *Annual Review of Immunology* is online at immunol.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132706

Copyright © 2009 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

0732-0582/09/0423-0591\$20.00

---

### Key Words

signal transduction, immunoreceptor, integrin

---

### Abstract

This year marks the 25th anniversary of the first *Annual Review of Immunology* article to describe features of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR). In celebration of this anniversary, we begin with a brief introduction outlining the chronology of the earliest studies that established the basic paradigm for how the engaged TCR transduces its signals. This review continues with a description of the current state of our understanding of TCR signaling, as well as a summary of recent findings examining other key aspects of T cell activation, including cross talk between the TCR and integrins, the role of costimulatory molecules, and how signals may negatively regulate T cell function.

**INTRODUCTION**

Twenty-five years ago, *Annual Review of Immunology* published its first review describing features of the structure we now know as the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) (1). In recognition of this anniversary, this article begins by highlighting a sampling of seminal observations made in the decade following the initial description of the TCR. The discoveries made during this period established the basic paradigm for how TCR engagement initiates the earliest biochemical events leading to cellular activation, described nicely in an *Annual Review of Immunology* article in 1996 (2) (Figure 1a). This historical perspective sets the stage for a discussion of our current state of understanding of the molecular and biochemical events critical for T cell activation that have emerged from the work of multiple laboratories.

**DESCRIBING THE TCR COMPLEX**

In the early 1980s, several groups began experiments to identify and characterize the antigen receptor on T cells. One approach used newly developed molecular techniques, ultimately leading to the identification of the genes responsible for the antigen-binding proteins (3–5). An even earlier approach relied on immunization of mice with T cell clones of a defined specificity, hybridomas, or clonal T cell tumors in the hope that antibodies would be generated that would react with the receptor responsible for binding to antigen (6–8). Such antibodies were produced and were then used first to demonstrate interference with antigenic responses and later to perform the initial biochemical characterization of the receptor itself. These studies revealed a complicated cell surface structure that included proteins reactive with antibodies against the nonpolymeric CD3 proteins (initially thought of as three polypeptides, γ, δ, and ε) (9), as well as variable proteins designated α and β.

The antigen-binding function of αβ was obvious early on, by inference owing to their highly polymorphic nature and similarity to immunoglobulin and experimentally owing to early gene transfer experiments that demonstrated that antigen/major histocompatibility complex (MHC) reactivity tracked with expression of these receptor components (10, 11). However, it was less obvious what role the CD3 proteins played in TCR function. Several lines of evidence suggested that the CD3 molecules were critical for signal transduction: Unlike αβ, the CD3 molecules had long cytoplasmic tails, and anti-CD3 antibodies resulted in T cell activation, although it was difficult to demonstrate signaling function conclusively. One early

---

**Figure 1**

TCR proximal signaling then and now: filling in the gaps. Then (*a*): TCR signaling mid-1990s (adapted from Reference 2). Ligation of the TCR/CD3 results in activation of Src and Syk family PTKs associated with the intracellular CD3 domains that then activate PLCγ1 and Ras-dependent pathways. PLCγ1 hydrolyzes PIP₂ to form IP₃ and DAG. Now (*b*–*d*): Current understanding of how the TCR couples to downstream pathways (*b*), the molecular basis for Ca²⁺ influx (*c*), and the positive feedback loop responsible for Ras activation (*d*). (*b*) The link between PTKs and downstream pathways is a multimolecular signaling complex nucleated by the adapter proteins LAT, Gads, and SLP-76. Lck activates ZAP-70 to phosphorylate (p) tyrosine residues on LAT, which then recruits Gads and its constitutive binding partner SLP-76. ZAP-70-mediated phosphorylation of SLP-76 results in the recruitment of multiple SH2 domain-containing effector molecules (*circles*) and adapter proteins (*octagons*). SH3 domains (*shaded overlapping areas*) also link effectors to adapters and contribute to stabilization of the complex. (*c*) The link between depletion of ER Ca²⁺ stores and CRAC channel activation is STIM. TCR-induced IP₃ production (see *b*) results in the activation of IP₃ receptors (IP₃R), which release Ca²⁺ from the ER into the cytoplasm. STIM contains paired EF hands within the ER lumen, which bind a single Ca²⁺ molecule. Upon depletion of ER stores, Ca²⁺-free STIM molecules oligomerize and move to areas of ER/plasma membrane proximity, where they colocalize with and induce dimerization of Orai dimers, resulting in a functional CRAC channel and subsequent influx of Ca²⁺. (*d*) Activation of Ras involves two Ras GEFs (SOS and RasGRP) in a positive feedback loop. TCR-induced production of DAG (see *b*) results in the membrane recruitment of RasGRP, where it is phosphorylated and activated by PKCθ. RasGRP then facilitates the removal of GDP from Ras, which can then bind GTP and become activated. GTP-bound Ras then binds SOS, which is bound constitutively to GRB2 and is inducibly recruited to LAT, increasing its GEF activity, resulting in a positive feedback loop and robust Ras activity.

NOW: Current understanding of TCR signaling

THEN: Mid-1990s understanding of TCR signaling

a

TCR

b

Proximal signaling complex

c

Calcium

d

Ras activation

www.annualreviews.org • T Cell Activation 593

PKC: protein kinase C  
PLC: phospholipase C  
PTK: protein tyrosine kinase  
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM): a short peptide sequence in the cytoplasmic tails of key surface receptors on hematopoietic cells that is characterized by tyrosine residues that are phosphorylated by Src family PTKs, enabling the ITAM to recruit activated Syk family kinases  

effort involved an attempt to create cell lines expressing αβ without CD3 or CD3 without αβ, thereby creating reagents to investigate the independent role of the receptor components. These experiments were not successful, as it became clear that there is an obligatory coexpression of αβ with CD3 (12). These studies did result, however, in the creation of the first in a long line of genetically altered Jurkat T cells that have been instrumental in our understanding of how the TCR complex couples to its signaling machinery (13).

**EARLY SIGNALING STUDIES**

Initial investigations into how the TCR transduces its signals began with the observation that TCR-deficient Jurkat T cells could be stimulated pharmacologically with the combination of phorbol esters and Ca²⁺ ionophores (14). This observation led to speculation that engagement of the TCR might stimulate the same signals that these reagents induced. This notion was tested directly in experiments demonstrating increases in intracellular free Ca²⁺ following CD3 or TCR stimulation in both Jurkat cells and primary T cells. The source of the Ca²⁺ increase was shown to be a combination of Ca²⁺ released from an intracellular pool in response to inositol trisphosphate (IP₃) production and influx of Ca²⁺ from outside of the cell (15). It was presumed that phorbol esters were important because of their ability to activate protein kinase C (PKC, now known to be a family of enzymes), whose activity is regulated physiologically by diacylglycerol (DAG). Concurrent studies in other systems had demonstrated that a single enzymatic reaction, hydrolysis of the membrane PI(4,5)P₂ (phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate) by phospholipase C (PLC), generates both IP₃ and DAG, suggesting that the TCR may function to regulate PLC activity.

Testing this notion proved somewhat difficult at first, as PLC regulation was initially described downstream of heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins associated with seven-transmembrane domain receptors. An exhaustive but unsuccessful search ensued for the GTP-binding protein critical for coupling the TCR to PLC activation. Insight into how the TCR may initiate PLC activation emerged from a confluence of discoveries in immune cells and other lineages. For example, stimulation of the TCR results in changes in protein phosphorylation, including inducible phosphorylation of the newly described ζ chain of the CD3 complex (16). Furthermore, growth factor receptors with intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) activity also stimulate PLC function. In contrast to seven-transmembrane domain receptors, however, receptor PTKs stimulate another PLC isoform, PLCγ. Although none of the TCR components possessed enzymatic activity themselves, cytosolic PTKs of the Src family (in particular Lck and Fyn) were being described in T cells. These PTKs were associated either with the TCR (17) or with the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors (18, 19), both important for TCR signaling. These observations, coupled with the new knowledge that T cell activation requires PTK function (20), led to a new TCR signaling paradigm in which the TCR recruits cytosolic PTKs to activate key second messengers.

**HOW CD3 TRANSDUCES ITS SIGNALS**

Testing this model led to a search for additional substrates of the TCR-stimulated PTKs. Among the most attractive candidates were tyrosines within the CD3 molecules themselves that fell within a motif present once within CD3 ε, γ, and δ and in triplicate within each ζ chain and also in key immunoreceptors on other immune cell lineages. The signature of these motifs (21), eventually designated immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), is two tyrosines flanking a series of amino acids, including key leucine/isoleucines with stereotypic spacing. Numerous laboratories demonstrated that the ITAM tyrosines are in fact phosphorylated upon TCR ligation, but defining the importance of this

posttranslational modification for TCR function was not trivial. Because the CD3 molecules could not be expressed without the αβ chains, several groups created chimeric molecules fusing the cytoplasmic domains of individual CD3 chains to extracellular and transmembrane domains from other proteins (22–25). These cDNAs in chimeric proteins were then transfected into T cell lines selected for TCR loss. Antibody crosslinking of the extracellular domain of the chimeras recapitulated all the known TCR-mediated signaling events leading to cellular activation. Mutation of the key ITAM tyrosines (or altering their spacing) abrogated the ability of the chimeras to activate the cells, thus demonstrating that tyrosine phosphorylation of the CD3 ITAMs is an early and requisite step for TCR-mediated T cell activation.

Studies of the CD3 chimeras led naturally to the question of the purpose for ITAM phosphorylation. Unlike growth factor receptors whose intrinsic enzymatic activity is enhanced by tyrosine phosphorylation, the CD3 molecules have no such effector function on their own. Investigators speculated, therefore, that tyrosine phosphorylation of the ITAMs might serve as docking sites for interactions with other proteins. Indeed, it was soon shown that phosphorylated CD3ζ (and later other ITAM-containing proteins) is a recruitment site of a 70-kDa phosphoprotein, the Syk kinase family member ZAP-70 (ζ-associated protein of 70 kDa) PTK (26). A model therefore emerged that engagement of the TCR leads to Src family PTK activity resulting in ITAM phosphorylation and recruitment of ZAP-70. This converted the TCR with no intrinsic enzymatic function to an active PTK able to phosphorylate a spectrum of substrates leading to a myriad of downstream signals that, when integrated appropriately (along with signals from other coreceptors), lead to T cell activation (27).

The basic tenets of this model have stood the test of intensive investigation. In the 15 years since ZAP-70 was cloned, investigators have filled in many of the gaps between the TCR and initiation of effector functions. Much has

---

### ARGUING BY ANALOGY: COMPARING AND CONTRASTING SIGNALING PATHWAYS BY MULTIPLE RECEPTORS AND LINEAGES

Key insights important for understanding T cell activation have come from studies in nonimmune mammalian cells and cells of lower organisms, including the observation that PTKs could link to the phosphatidylinositol pathway and the paradigm describing adapter proteins as integrators of signal transduction. T cell biologists have also provided unique insights to their nonimmunologist colleagues. Examples include a mechanism for recruitment of nonreceptor PTKs to enzymatically inactive surface receptors and the notion that protein tyrosine phosphatases may be positive as well as negative regulators of PTK pathways.

Within the immune system, biologists studying TCR signaling have been the donors and recipients of information that has been useful for investigators examining the signaling pathways of other cell surface receptors (e.g., integrins) and other hematopoietic lineages. It is clear that, although basic paradigms may be similar, each cell type and receptor utilizes unique ways to regulate signal transduction cascades. Additionally, recent studies have demonstrated that pathways thought to be distinct (e.g., integrins and immunoreceptors) instead intersect at multiple levels. Future insights into how diverse signaling pathways are integrated to result in the appropriate biologic response will undoubtedly continue to benefit from comparing and contrasting activation events downstream of multiple receptors in different immune and nonimmune cell lineages.

been learned about substrates of the PTKs (including Src, Syk, and more recently Tec family members) activated by the TCR and how these molecules participate in T cell activation, about how signaling complexes are organized by adapter proteins to bring effector proteins together, and about the unexpected intersection of particular signaling pathways (see also the side bar, Arguing by Analogy: Comparing and Contrasting Signaling Pathways by Multiple Receptors and Lineages). With the accumulation of data, it has also become clear that signaling via the TCR complex is not a linear event starting at the receptor and ending in the nucleus. Instead, there appears to be complex feedback and feedforward regulation at each step. Ironically, one of the most central

---

**Adapter protein:** cellular protein that functions to bridge molecular interactions via characteristic domains able to mediate protein/protein or protein/lipid interactions

www.annualreviews.org • T Cell Activation 595

signaling questions that remains is how receptor binding translates most proximally into an activating signal. Many models have been proposed, but none has yet withstood the rigor of subsequent investigation. This review summarizes our current understanding of many of these issues and poses some of the intriguing questions that remain.

**INITIATING TCR SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION**

Since identification of the TCR as a complex consisting of the variable αβ chains noncovalently associated with the nonpolymorphic CD3 proteins, considerable work has gone into defining the stoichiometry of these interacting molecules. We now know that the CD3 proteins exist as a series of dimers including γε, δε, and ζζ associated with a single αβ heterodimer. Although it has been clear for more than 15 years that CD3 transduces signals from the engaged receptor via its ITAMs, exactly how ligation of the TCR is translated into the first signal remains controversial. Current models suggest that both TCR aggregation and conformational changes may play roles in signal initiation.

Two separate but not mutually exclusive conformational changes within the CD3 cytoplasmic tails have been proposed as mechanisms for TCR-inducible ITAM phosphorylation. The first mechanism is based on the observation that, in the presence of acidic lipid designed to mimic the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, the cytoplasmic tails of CD3ε, and to a lesser extent of CD3ζ, fold or interact with the lipid in such a way as to prevent phosphorylation. Conversely, in aqueous solution or in the presence of zwitterionic lipid, the CD3 tails are more readily able to be phosphorylated by Lck (28, 29). These findings have led to the hypothesis that in resting T cells the CD3ζ and/or CD3ε tails are tightly associated with the lipid-rich inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, rendering them inaccessible to Lck phosphorylation, but following TCR ligation, they are released from the membrane and phosphorylated. Investigations have begun to test this hypothesis in T cells, and recently the interaction of the CD3ε cytoplasmic domain with the plasma membrane has been confirmed in resting Jurkat T cells by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) (29). A second possible conformational change in CD3ε has garnered much attention following the observation that upon TCR ligation a proline-rich region (PRR) in CD3ε is exposed and available to recruit an SH3 domain of the adapter protein noncatalytic tyrosine kinase (Nck). Importantly, this occurs prior to CD3ζ and CD3ε ITAM phosphorylation (30). Investigators speculated that Nck could then recruit and activate effector molecules required for subsequent ITAM phosphorylation. However, recent data using mice with retrogenic or knockin mutations of the CD3ε PRR have failed to show a requirement for the CD3ε/Nck interaction in the activation of peripheral T cells (31, 32). This observation must be considered in light of the T cell developmental abnormalities in the knockin mice. Resolving the importance of the PRR for mature T cell function requires temporal control of expression of the mutant.

Although the seminal finding that there is a non-ITAM region in CD3 that is critical for TCR signaling appears firm, several controversies remain regarding the CD3ε PRR. There is disagreement regarding whether the interaction between Nck and CD3ε is constitutive rather than inducible (31, 33–35). The role of the CD3ε/Nck interaction in mature T cells is also controversial, as it has been suggested that the interaction (*a*) is not required for mature T cell activation (32), (*b*) is required for signal amplification and ITAM phosphorylation following weak TCR ligation (34), or (*c*) is required for regulation of TCR activity by inhibiting ITAM phosphorylation and promoting TCR degradation (35). Ongoing work will provide insights into these controversies.

Although CD3 conformational changes may explain the initiation of the intracellular kinase cascade, we do not know how peptide/MHC (pMHC)/TCR interactions result in conformational changes in the intracellular regions of the CD3 complex. Models based

**pMHC:** peptide major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complex

Table 1 Recent models for initial TCR triggering

| Model               | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Piston-like movement | An external force from the APC/T cell interaction pushes the TCR/CD3 complex in a piston-like fashion perpendicular to the plasma membrane, exposing activating motifs on the intracellular regions of CD3 chains |
| Receptor deformation | The force of the motility of the T cell as it moves over an APC induces TCR triggering only when pMHC/TCR interactions are of a high enough affinity to withstand the force long enough to undergo a conformational change |
| Permissive geometry  | pMHC dimers bind TCR/CD3 dimers inducing a rotational scissor-like conformational change in CD3 chain(s) that reveal previously hidden intracellular activation motif(s) |
| Kinetic segregation  | Signal initiation occurs because of exclusion of inhibitory molecules in the tight contact zone between the T cell and the APC, thereby shifting the enzymatic steady state toward an activating state |
| Diffusion trapping   | Expanded kinetic segregation model in which the affinity/diffusion coefficient of the pMHC/TCR dictates the valency of TCRs required to trap the complex in the tight contact zone and therefore initiate a productive signal |
| Pseudodimer         | Agonist pMHC/TCR recruits a second TCR via interaction with its associated CD4, the second TCR then binds a coagonist endogenous pMHC forming a stable pseudodimer that triggers signaling via proximity of ITAMs to CD4-associated Lck and/or by conformational change |

on ligand-induced conformational changes in the TCR and/or TCR aggregation have been proposed (Table 1). The crystal structures of several pMHC/TCR complexes have revealed little conformational changes in the TCR heterodimer outside of the binding domain (reviewed in 36). However, owing to the current technical limitations of crystallography and protein nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, only pMHC/TCR structures in the absence of transmembrane domains and CD3 components have been elucidated. Therefore, changes between the components of the TCR/CD3 complex in relation to one another or to the plasma membrane cannot be ruled out. The rigid, rod-like transmembrane domain of the CD3εγ could mediate a piston-like movement of the TCR complex perpendicular to the plasma membrane after ligand binding, in a manner similar to that reported for the aspartate receptor (37). Such a model would require external forces that could be provided by cell-to-cell contact, but this possibility is difficult to reconcile with the ability of soluble ligands to activate the TCR. Similarly, an external force is required for the recently proposed receptor deformation model, in which the movement of the T cell as it travels across the antigen-presenting cell (APC) exerts a force

on transient pMHC/TCR interactions. Only when the force required to induce conformational changes in the TCR is less than the force required to break the pMHC/TCR interaction will TCR triggering occur (38). Alternatively, the permissive geometry model for TCR triggering predicts that dimeric pMHCs bind two TCR/CD3 complexes (39). This interaction results in a rotation of the TCR heterodimers around one another, displacing the extracellular domains of the associated CD3 molecules. The transmembrane interactions between the CD3 and TCR dimers serve as pivot points, and the CD3 movement is scissor-like, exposing previously shielded ITAMs and/or other functionally important domains. This model is consistent with studies that suggest that TCR aggregation is required for TCR triggering.

TCR aggregation has long been implicated as a mechanism for TCR triggering. In the classic aggregation model, crosslinking of TCR/CD3 complexes with multimeric pMHC enables close contact and transphosphorylation between the CD3 tails and associated PTKs. Clustering of several TCR complexes also may result in competition for membrane lipid between the CD3 chains, resulting in dissociation of the cytoplasmic domains from the membrane and subsequent ITAM phosphorylation

(28). Aggregation is supported strongly by observations that soluble multimeric but not monomeric pMHC can trigger TCR activation. However, recent biochemical and microscopic studies suggest that preformed TCR aggregates are present on nonactivated T cells (reviewed in 40). In the kinetic segregation model, adhesion and other accessory molecules with short extracellular domains such as CD2 initiate close contact zones between an APC and a T cell (41). Inhibitory phosphatases with long extracellular domains such as CD45 are excluded because of their size. TCR complexes that engage pMHC on the APC surface remain in the close contact zone, where they are segregated from phosphatases and are able to initiate signaling. TCR complexes that do not engage pMHC are free to diffuse outside of the close contact zone. Shortening the extracellular domains of inhibitory molecules or lengthening the extracellular domains of adhesion or accessory molecules can abrogate TCR signaling, suggesting that kinetic segregation is an important aspect of TCR signal initiation (reviewed in 41). This notion was expanded with the diffusion trapping model in which immobilization or trapping of pMHC/TCRs in the close contact zones is responsible for TCR signal initiation (42). The valency, or degree of aggregation, of the pMHC/TCR required for trapping and therefore triggering depends on the affinity and diffusion coefficient of the pMHC/TCR interaction. Another model has been proposed that suggests that endogenous pMHCs amplify signals produced by the rare agonist pMHCs by promoting TCR aggregation and a subsequent phosphorylation cascade (40). Similarly, the pseudodimer model proposes that an agonist pMHC/TCR can recruit a second TCR in a CD4-dependent manner, and this second TCR binds a coagonist endogenous pMHC, forming a stable pseudodimer that could trigger signaling through ITAM/Lck proximity or through CD3 conformational changes (43). Many of these models are not mutually exclusive, and it is likely that TCR aggregation, conformational changes within the TCR complex, and exclusion of inhibitory molecules are all required

for TCR triggering, perhaps in a stepwise fashion.

### PROXIMAL SIGNALING COMPLEX

The earliest step in intracellular signaling following TCR ligation is the activation of Src (Lck and Fyn) PTKs, leading to phosphorylation of the CD3 ITAMs. Recruitment of ZAP-70 follows, leading to a cascade of phosphorylation events. The past decade has seen the description of a subcellular assembly and activation of an adapter protein nucleated multimolecular signaling complex (Figure 1b). This complex is responsible for propagating the TCR/PTK signal into multiple and diverse distal signaling pathways.

Among the most important of the ZAP-70 targets are the transmembrane adapter protein linker for the activation of T cells (LAT) and the cytosolic adapter protein Src homology 2 (SH2) domain–containing leukocyte phosphoprotein of 76 kDa (SLP-76) (44, 45). These two adapters form the backbone of the complex that organizes effector molecules in the correct spatiotemporal manner to allow for the activation of multiple signaling pathways. The importance of these adapters is underscored by studies showing that the loss of either LAT or SLP-76 results in a near complete loss of TCR signal transduction reminiscent of Syk/ZAP-70 or Lck/Fyn double-deficient T cells (46–48).

LAT contains nine tyrosines that are phosphorylated upon TCR engagement, which bind the C-terminal SH2 domain of PLCγ1, the p85 subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and the adapters growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) and GRB2-related adapter downstream of Shc (Gads) (reviewed in 47). SLP-76 is then recruited to phosphorylated LAT via their mutual binding partner Gads (49). SLP-76 itself contains three modular domains: an N-terminal acidic domain with three phosphorylatable tyrosines that interact with the SH2 domains of Vav1, Nck, and IL-2-induced tyrosine kinase (Itk); a PRR that binds constitutively Gads and PLCγ1; and a

C-terminal SH2 region that can bind adhesion and degranulation-promoting adapter protein (ADAP) and hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 (HPK1) (reviewed in 46). Although LAT and SLP-76 serve to nucleate this large signaling complex, the effector molecules themselves also are important for stabilizing the complex. For example, the Tec family kinase Itk is required in a kinase-independent manner for the recruitment of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Vav1 to the APC contact site, whereas Vav1 is required for optimal SLP-76 phosphorylation and recruitment to LAT as well as for Itk activation (50–52). These and other data suggest that the formation of the complex is more complicated than the linear model most often invoked for simplicity. For example, PLCγ1 directly binds to SLP-76, LAT, and Vav1 as well as to its activating kinase Itk (reviewed in 53). It is thought that these interactions collectively are required to stabilize PLCγ1 in the correct conformation within the complex to allow for its optimal activity (54). Advances in biochemical and structural techniques are needed to elucidate the precise allosteric and perhaps stoichiometric changes within the multimolecular complex that allow for signal transduction.

To investigate more precisely the importance of these complex interactions in primary T cells, several laboratories have generated mice expressing transgenic or knockin mutations in specific binding regions in various molecules involved in proximal signaling (55–57). Tyrosine to phenylalanine mutations in SLP-76 at residues 112 and 128 or 145 in primary thymocytes and T cells do not result in a loss of SLP-76/Vav1/Nck/Itk interactions, as would be expected from earlier phosphopeptide mapping studies and studies in cell lines (57). However, these tyrosine mutations still result in severe defects in downstream signaling pathways consistent with defective Vav1 or Itk activity. Similarly, mutation of tyrosines of Vav1 does not result in a loss of interaction with their proposed binding partners, although it does result in dysregulated Vav1-dependent signaling (55). Although the continued interactions of these

proteins seen by immunoprecipitation experiments are likely due to tertiary interactions with other domains or other molecules, these studies suggest that SH2/phosphotyrosine interactions may play important regulatory roles for the activation of effector molecules. Indeed, structural studies have suggested that the interaction between the SH2 domain of Itk and a phosphotyrosine results in a conformational switch allowing kinase activity (58). Consistent with these data, investigators recently showed in Jurkat T cell lines that an Itk/SLP-76 interaction is required for Itk kinase activity, although we do not yet know if it is specifically the SH2/phosphotyrosine interaction that mediates this kinase activity (59). Further studies are required to determine how the activities of molecules beyond Itk are affected by specific domain/domain interactions within the complex.

The proximal signaling complex results in the activation of PLCγ1-dependent pathways including Ca²⁺- and DAG-induced responses, cytoskeletal rearrangements, and integrin activation pathways. Ligation of costimulatory receptors such as CD28 augments these pathways. Below, we discuss the mechanisms by which these pathways are activated and regulated.

### **PLCγ1 ACTIVATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION**

Following TCR ligation, PLCγ1 is found in the proximal signaling complex bound to SLP-76, Vav1, and LAT, where it is phosphorylated and activated by Itk. Activated PLCγ1 then hydrolyzes the membrane lipid PI(4,5)P₂, producing the second messengers IP₃ and DAG. These two messengers are essential for T cell function, and therefore the regulation of PLCγ1 activation has been the subject of intensive studies. Localization of PLCγ1 to the proximal signaling complex is dependent on LAT and the Gads-binding region of SLP-76 (54). Activation of PLCγ1 is dependent on Itk kinase activity that, in turn, is dependent on Vav1, Lck, ZAP-70, LAT, and SLP-76 (52, 60, 61).

Following TCR ligation, Itk is recruited to the membrane through PH domain interactions with PIP₃, which has been locally generated by Lck-induced PI3K activity (reviewed in 61). At the membrane, Lck phosphorylates Itk, and the SH2 and SH3 domains of Itk interact with phosphorylated tyrosine 145 and the PRR of SLP-76, respectively (62–64). The role of Vav1 and ZAP-70 in Itk activation is not understood but may relate to their involvement in the phosphorylation of SLP-76 or PI3K activation (45, 51, 52). A second Tec family kinase, Rlk, can also phosphorylate PLCγ1, resulting in a relatively mild defect in Itk-deficient mice and requiring the study of Rlk/Itk double-deficient mice to better understand the role of Tec kinases in T cell activation (reviewed in 61).

**DAG-MEDIATED SIGNALING PATHWAYS**

TCR-induced production of DAG results in the activation of two major pathways involving Ras and PKCθ. Ras is a guanine nucleotide-binding protein and is required for the activation of the serine-threonine kinase Raf-1, which initiates a mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation and activation cascade. Raf-1 is a MAPK kinase kinase (MAPKKK) that phosphorylates and activates MAPK kinases (MAPKKs), which in turn phosphorylate and activate the MAPK's extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (Erk1) and Erk2. Erk kinase activity results in the activation of the transcription factor Elk1, which contributes to the activation of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) (Jun/Fos) transcription complex via regulation of Fos expression. Additionally, Erk activity can result in the transcriptional activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and in the serine phosphorylation of Lck (reviewed in 65).

Ras is only active in the GTP-bound state, and its activation is facilitated by GEFs and is suppressed by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Two Ras GEFs are present in T cells, son of sevenless (SOS) and Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein (RasGRP).

RasGRP appears more dominant for early activation of Ras, as SOS cannot compensate for RasGRP deficiency (66–68). RasGRP is inducibly recruited to the membrane through a DAG-binding domain (69), where it is phosphorylated by PKCθ (70). SOS is constitutively bound to the adapter protein GRB2, and upon TCR stimulation, the GRB2 SH2 domain is recruited to and binds phosphorylated tyrosines on LAT, thereby bringing SOS into the proximal signaling complex, where it can facilitate the localized activation of Ras (71). The significance of these two modes of Ras activation was unclear until recently, when it was shown that RasGRP-dependent RasGTP production catalyzes SOS activity, resulting in a positive feedback loop and robust TCR-induced Ras activation (72) (Figure 1c). This unified model explains the RasGRP dominance, as RasGRP would be required to initiate the production of RasGTP, which upon reaching threshold levels would catalyze SOS activity and further amplify the signal.

The second major signaling pathway regulated by DAG is mediated by PKCθ, a PKC family member that contains a lipid-binding domain specific for DAG, which is important for recruiting PKCθ to the plasma membrane following T cell activation. However, phosphorylation of PKCθ by Lck (reviewed in 73) may be required to induce a conformational change that enables binding to the lipid phosphatidyl serine (PS), which in turn enhances binding to DAG, resulting in PKCθ activation (74). Other proximal signaling molecules, including Vav1, PI3K, and 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1), also play roles in PKCθ localization, but details of their contributions are not completely defined (73).

One critical pathway that PKCθ regulates is NF-κB activation. Because both the canonical and noncanonical activation of this pathway in T cells is described in detail in this volume of *Annual Review of Immunology* [see review by Karin and colleagues (75)], we highlight only the major steps in the classical activation of NF-κB downstream of the TCR. The NF-κB
family of transcription factors consists of five members. In resting cells, NF-κB is found in the cytosol associated with inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) family members that keep NF-κB from moving into the nucleus. Upon T cell activation, IκB is phosphorylated by the IκB kinase (IKK) complex, ubiquitinated, and degraded, allowing NF-κB to translocate into the nucleus, where it activates genes involved in the function, survival, and homeostasis of T cells (reviewed in 76). Although we have known the general pathway of NF-κB activation for some time, the specifics of how PKCθ activation leads to nuclear import of NF-κB in T cells are still being elucidated.

Over the past several years, the identification and characterization of a lymphocyte-specific activation complex have provided some insight into this question. Following TCR stimulation, a trimolecular complex forms between CARMA1 [caspase recruitment domain (CARD) and membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK)-containing scaffold protein], the CARD-containing adapter protein Bcl10, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation gene 1 (MALT1) (73, 76). The assembly of this CBM complex (CARMA1/Bcl10/MALT1) is regulated by PKCθ through its phosphorylation of CARMA1, which is required for CARMA1 oligomerization and association with Bcl10 (77, 78). MALT1 binds to Bcl10 and contributes to the degradation of the regulatory subunit of the IKK complex (IKKγ) by facilitating its polyubiquitination, possibly via activation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) (79, 80). Degradation of this regulatory subunit allows for phosphorylation of IκB by the IKK catalytic subunits, subsequent IκB degradation, and release of NF-κB, resulting in NF-κB nuclear localization and gene activation. Recently, MALT1 was shown to enhance NF-κB signaling through its ability to degrade the deubiquitinating enzyme A20, a negative regulator of NF-κB activation (81, 82).

One additional component of the complex that was recently identified as a CARMA1-

associating protein is ADAP (83). ADAP, originally defined as a SLP-76-binding partner, associates with the MAGUK domain of CARMA1 following T cell stimulation. Investigators proposed that this interaction might alter the conformation of CARMA1 and enhance its association with Bcl10 and MALT1 and/or stabilize the CBM complex.

$\textbf{Ca}^{2+}\text{-MEDIATED SIGNALING PATHWAYS}$

Ca²⁺ ions are universal second messengers in eukaryotic cells. The IP₃ generated by TCR-stimulated PLCγ1 activity stimulates Ca²⁺-permeable ion channel receptors (IP₃R) on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, leading to the release of ER Ca²⁺ stores into the cytoplasm. Depletion of ER Ca²⁺ triggers a sustained influx of extracellular Ca²⁺ through the activation of plasma membrane Ca²⁺ release-activated Ca²⁺ (CRAC) channels in a process known as store-operated Ca²⁺ entry (SOCE) (reviewed in 84) (Figure 1d). For decades the CRAC channels had only been identified by their biophysical properties, and it has just been in the past few years that the pore-forming subunit of the channels was identified as the four-transmembrane domain-containing molecule Orai1 (85–87). Additionally, studies in the past few years have revealed the sensor for depleted ER Ca²⁺ stores and the activator of CRAC channels as stromal interaction molecule (STIM) (88, 89). STIM is an ER-resident transmembrane protein with a C-terminal cytoplasmic coiled-coil motif and, within the ER lumen, an N-terminal sterile α motif (SAM) and paired EF hands, where one hand binds a single Ca²⁺ ion with low affinity (88, 89). Two STIM proteins, STIM1 and STIM2, are found in mammals, and recent work has shown that STIM1 is important for the initial robust phase of SOCE, whereas STIM2 is important for maintaining basal Ca²⁺ levels and sustaining the late phase of SOCE (90, 91). Following ER Ca²⁺ depletion, STIM1 molecules aggregate in clusters that preferentially localize to sites of ER plasma membrane

www.annualreviews.org • T Cell Activation 601
apposition, where they colocalize with clusters of Orai1, forming punctae (92–94). The biochemical mechanism by which STIM1 couples Ca²⁺ depletion to CRAC activation is not yet fully understood and is an area of intense investigation. Recent work has shown that STIM1 oligomerization is sufficient to induce punctae formation and CRAC channel activation independent of Ca²⁺ store depletion (95). Further studies showed that the C-terminal coiled-coil domain of STIM1 alone can induce dimerization of Orai1 dimers, which is sufficient for CRAC channel activation independent of punctae formation and store depletion (96). How STIM1 oligomers translocate to areas of ER plasma membrane apposition and how, once there, they induce the Orai1 tetramerization remain unknown. Interestingly, the WASp family verprolin homologous protein (WAVE2) complex is also required for SOCE activity, through a mechanism that remains to be fully elucidated, although independent of its function in actin remodeling (97, 98). CRAC channels appear to be the dominant mode of Ca²⁺ entry in T cells, but other Ca²⁺ channels exist. Their relevance remains unclear (reviewed in 84).

TCR-induced increases in intracellular Ca²⁺ levels result in the activation of Ca²⁺ and calmodulin-dependent transcription factors, including myocyte-enhancing factor 2 (MEF2) and downstream regulatory element antagonist modulator (DREAM), as well as signaling proteins, including the phosphatase calcineurin and the Ca²⁺-calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK), that in turn activate a variety of transcription programs (reviewed in 99). Activated calcineurin dephosphorylates members of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family, leading to their translocation to the nucleus. In the nucleus, NFAT isoforms can form cooperative complexes with a variety of other transcription factors, thereby integrating signaling pathways, resulting in differential gene expression patterns and functional outcomes, depending on the context of the TCR signal. The most well-studied interaction is NFAT/AP-1, which integrates Ca²⁺ and Ras signals and results in the expression of

**NFAT:** nuclear factor  
of activated T cells  

genes important for T cell activation including IL-2. In contrast, NFAT activity in the absence of AP-1 activation induces a pattern of gene expression that ultimately results in T cell anergy and a characteristic lack of IL-2 production (100). It is still unclear whether NFAT isoforms are cooperating with other transcription factors or are functioning as dimers to induce the anergic transcriptional pattern (reviewed in 101). The regulatory T cell lineage-specific transcription factor forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3) also cooperates with NFAT and antagonizes NFAT/AP-1 gene transcription, resulting in Treg functional gene expression and a lack of IL-2 production (102). Finally, NFAT family members can also cooperate with STAT proteins to induce either Th1 or Th2 differentiation through expression of T-bet or GATA3, respectively (99).

## ACTIN AND CYTOSKELETAL RESPONSES

When a T cell is presented with cognate antigen by an APC, signals from the TCR initiate a program of actin cytoskeletal rearrangements that results in polarization and activation of the T cell (reviewed in 104). Actin reorganization is essential for T cell function, as actin polymerization inhibitors impede T cell/APC interactions (105) and abolish proximal TCR signals (106).

T cell/APC conjugation results in morphological changes, as the stimulated T cell rounds up and accumulates filamentous actin (F-actin) at the stimulatory interface. These changes are thought to depend on a TCR-induced increase in plasma membrane fluidity and a decrease in cellular motility. Cessation of motility is associated with TCR-induced Ca²⁺-dependent phosphorylation and deactivation of the myosin motor protein MyH9; however, the signaling pathway linking the TCR to this event has not yet been defined fully (107). Plasma membrane fluidity is increased, in part, by the TCR- and Vav1-dependent transient dephosphorylation of ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) proteins, resulting in the loss of their ability to link the

plasma membrane to the actin cytoskeleton (108). Ca²⁺ signaling and integrin activation downstream of the TCR result in additional modifications of actin-associated proteins that may play roles in altering plasma membrane rigidity (104).

Accumulation of F-actin at the T cell/APC interface is the result of TCR-induced localized activation of multiple actin regulatory and polymerizing pathways, the best studied of which involves the actin-related proteins 2/3 (Arp2/3) complex, although Arp2/3-independent pathways also contribute to this process (109). Activation of Arp2/3 requires its interaction with nucleation-promoting factors (NPF) including Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp), WAVE2, and hematopoietic cell lineage-specific protein 1 (HS1). WASp is recruited to the site of TCR activation through its interaction with the SLP-76-associated adapter protein Nck, where it is activated via Vav1-dependent stimulation of the Rho family GTPase Cdc42 (110). Vav1-mediated activation of a second Rho family GTPase, Rac1, results in the activation of WAVE2 (104). Given the proposed reliance of WASp and WAVE2 on Vav1-mediated GTPase activation, it is interesting that actin-dependent processes that are defective in Vav1-deficient T cells can be rescued with the expression of a GEF-inactive Vav1 mutant, suggesting that other Rac and Cdc42 GEFs may be able to support TCR-induced actin changes (55). This result also suggests that other Vav1 functions are important for TCR-induced actin changes. Consistent with this is the observation that, through its protein interaction domains, Vav1 may contribute to WAVE2 and WASp activation through the recruitment of Dynamin2, a GTPase that is important for TCR-induced actin dynamics (111).

Activation of the T cell in response to an APC also results in the polarization of the T cell, whereby the microtubular organizing center (MTOC) moves toward the T cell/APC contact site (112). Although polarization of the MTOC has long been observed as a hallmark of productive T cell/APC conjugation, the signal-

ing mechanisms responsible for this movement remain undefined. Recent data suggest, however, that the adapter protein ADAP (a component of the SLP-76-nucleated complex) may play a role through its interaction with the microtubule motor protein dynein (113). Movement of the MTOC appears essential for the formation of the immunological synapse (IS).

The IS is an organized structure that develops at the contact site between the T cell and the APC. It is composed of two concentric regions based on molecular composition: the TCR-rich central supramolecular activation cluster (cSMAC), surrounded by the integrin-rich peripheral SMAC (pSMAC) (114, 115). Although the IS was described approximately 10 years ago, its precise role in T cell activation remains unclear. Initially, the concentration of receptors in the cSMAC led to the proposal that the cSMAC is the site of enhanced receptor engagement and prolonged signaling (115). However, later studies showed that TCR signals peak prior to cSMAC formation and suggested that the cSMAC is primarily the site of TCR degradation (116, 121, 122). More recently, it has been proposed that the cSMAC is the site of both TCR signal enhancement and TCR degradation, and the balance between these two processes is determined by the quality of the antigen such that the cSMAC can serve to amplify weak agonist signals (117). Most studies of the cSMAC have focused on the TCR and its associated molecules. However, a newly defined subregion of the cSMAC that is rich in CD28, a costimulatory molecule (see below), and PKCθ but relatively devoid of the TCR points to the potential importance of the cSMAC for costimulatory molecule signal transduction (118).

Although the precise roles of the cSMAC remain controversial, it is now well accepted that the initiation of TCR signals occurs in peripheral microclusters that begin to form prior to IS formation. pMHC/TCR ligation results in the formation of intracellular microclusters that contain the TCR complex and associated signaling molecules, including LAT and SLP-76 (120). These clusters initiate and can sustain Ca²⁺ signals (121). The clusters persist

cSMAC: central supramolecular activation cluster  
pSMAC: peripheral supramolecular activation cluster

for a short time, after which they converge toward the cSMAC (121, 122). Formation and translocation of the clusters are dependent on F-actin dynamics, and new clusters continue to form even after the mature IS is established (121–123). Integrins play a key role in sustaining microclusters, emphasizing their importance for T cell activation (124).

Opposite the MTOC and IS, another ordered structure forms, known as the distal pole complex (DPC). Although the role of the DPC is not known for certain, investigators speculate that the DPC is critical for sequestering negative regulators away from the TCR activation complex (104). Additionally, the DPC may contribute to the polarization of key signaling molecules that may be required for distinguishing memory versus effector fate decisions in recently divided cells (125). Formation of this complex is dependent on F-actin and the rephosphorylation of ERM proteins that migrate to the distal pole linking signaling molecules to the cytoskeleton (126).

TCR signaling cascades and pathways downstream of actin reorganization are intertwined and difficult to tease apart, as many of the effector molecules involved have multiple enzymatic and adapter functions. WASp, WAVE2, and Vav1 signals play roles in TCR-induced signaling that appear to be independent of their roles in actin responses (52, 97, 127). Therefore, loss of different actin regulators may result in complex TCR signaling defects (128). Future studies are required to understand fully the feedforward and feedback mechanisms that define the interdependence between cytoskeletal dynamics and T cell activation.

**TCR INSIDE-OUT SIGNALING TO INTEGRINS**

Integrins are αβ heterodimeric receptors responsible for mediating cell/cell or cell/matrix adhesions. Key T cell integrins include leukocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) and very late antigen-4 (VLA-4), which bind their respective ligands intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) and vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and fibronectin on other immune cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and extracellular matrix proteins. Activation of integrins (increasing their affinity and avidity for ligand) is critically dependent on biochemical events initiated by the TCR, a process designated inside-out signaling (129). Although the pathway from the TCR to integrin activation has not been completely elucidated, TCR-mediated activation of several key signaling molecules as well as TCR-induced actin/cytoskeletal changes have been implicated in this process.

A central regulator of inside-out signaling is the small GTPase Ras-proximity-1 (Rap1). Rap1 enhances T cell activation by mediating TCR-induced adhesion to ICAM-1. This conclusion is based on studies utilizing overexpression of dominant-negative and constitutively active forms of Rap1 (130, 131) and more recently by analysis of mice deficient in Rap1A, in which TCR-induced adhesion to ICAM-1 is markedly reduced (132). The importance of understanding the role of Rap1 is clear, as mutations in Rap1-mediated integrin activation have been linked to leukocyte adhesion-deficiency syndrome, a disease that can lead to severe bacterial infections (reviewed in 129).

Many proximal signaling molecules that comprise the early TCR signalosome, including LAT, SLP-76, and PLCγ1, are required for integrin and Rap1 activation (reviewed in 129) (Figure 2). However, there are downstream effectors that have a more selective role in integrin activation, including the adapter protein ADAP. T cells from ADAP-deficient mice are defective in TCR-induced LFA-1 clustering and adhesion to ICAM (133). The association of ADAP with SLP-76 appears to be required for integrin activation, as overexpression of ADAP but not a mutant of ADAP that cannot bind to SLP-76 enhances integrin function following TCR ligation (134, 135). Although mice expressing the reciprocal mutation in the SH2 domain of SLP-76 have been generated and share several characteristics with ADAP-deficient mice, TCR-induced integrin activation in these mice has not yet been reported.

Inside-out signaling

TCR/CD3

Integrins

PTK
LAT
GADS
PLCγ1
SLP-76
VAV1
ITK
ADAP
WAVE2
ARP
2/3

Pathway C
DAG
PKCθ
PKD1
RAPL
TALIN
RIAM
SKAP55
ADAP
RIAM
SKAP55
ADAP
RAP1

Actin reorganization

Figure 2

A model of integrin activation. Upon TCR ligation, the LAT/SLP-76-nucleated signalosome assembles. This complex allows for the activation of three pathways necessary for inside-out activation of integrins. Vav1 and Itk contribute to the actin reorganization required for integrin mobility (pathway A). Mobilization of the ADAP/SKAP55/RIAM complex is necessary for activated Rap1 plasma membrane localization (pathway B). An active Rap1/RIAM complex induces the association of talin with integrin β tails, perhaps resulting in altered integrin affinity. Thirdly, PLCγ1-mediated generation of DAG leads to PKD1 activation and association with Rap1 (pathway C). This interaction is required for Rap1 activation and contributes to Rap1 recruitment. Rap1 in turn recruits RAPL, and subsequent RAPL binding to αL subunits results in integrin clustering and affinity changes.

In addition to its inducible interaction with SLP-76, ADAP constitutively associates with Src kinase-associated phosphoprotein of 55 kDa (SKAP55). The ADAP/SKAP55 complex is important for proper localization of activated Rap1 (134). How ADAP and SKAP55 recruit Rap1 to the membrane was unclear until recently when investigators showed that a third adapter, Rap1-GTP-interacting adapter molecule (RIAM), which is also constitutively bound to SKAP55, associates with activated Rap1 upon TCR ligation, resulting in Rap1 movement to the membrane (136). How RIAM itself relocates to the plasma membrane following T cell stimulation is currently unknown, although it is hypothesized that recruitment may be through the inducible interaction of PI(3,4)P₂ (a product of T cell activation) and the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of RIAM (137).

In addition to mobilization of the ADAP/SKAP55/RIAM complex that is downstream of early TCR signals and is likely SLP-76 dependent, Rap1-mediated integrin activation is also dependent on other TCR-triggered signals, including those leading to activation of PKC. One PKC target important for Rap1 activation is the serine-threonine kinase protein kinase D1 (PKD1) (also known as PKCμ). Following TCR stimulation, Rap1 associates with the PH domain of PKD1 (138). Interestingly, it is this interaction and not the kinase activity of PKD1 that is required for Rap1 membrane recruitment and activation. Because PKD1 also inducibly recruits the Rap1 GEF C3G (Crk SH3 domain GEF) to the membrane in a TCR-dependent fashion, it is tempting to speculate that this event contributes to the dependence of Rap1 on PKD1 for its activation (138).

Activated Rap1 can also associate with the effector regulator of cell adhesion and polarization enriched in lymphoid tissues (RAPL). This interaction is coincident with RAPL membrane localization and necessary for binding of RAPL to the αL subunit of LFA-1. In cell line models, this association is important for LFA-1 clustering as well as affinity modulation (139).

In addition to regulating the activation of Rap1, signals from the TCR also regulate cytoskeletal attachments to integrins. One cytoskeletal binding protein important for integrin activation is talin. Recent studies in platelets have demonstrated that Rap1 activity enhances the association of talin with β-integrin subunits through association with RIAM (140). It is possible that formation of a talin/RIAM/Rap1 complex may enable talin to bind integrins, which may induce the high-affinity ligand-binding state. Talin is not the only actin-binding protein implicated in TCR-induced integrin activation. Vinculin, WAVE2 (98), and the Arp2/3 complex also play roles in this process, and defining the precise steps that link early TCR signals to activation of these molecules is an area of active investigation.

**COSTIMULATION**

One central tenet of T cell activation is that signaling solely through the TCR results in a nonresponsive state (anergy) in which T cells are refractory to restimulation. Coligation of other cell surface receptors provides additional signals required for anergy avoidance and productive T cell activation. Although many cell surface receptors can enhance signaling through the TCR, CD28 does so more robustly than other costimulatory molecules.

Numerous studies have shown that CD28 promotes T cell proliferation, cytokine production (via gene transcription and mRNA stability), cell survival, and cellular metabolism (reviewed in 141). One key effector downstream of CD28 is PI3K. Following binding of CD28 to its ligands CD80 or CD86 on APCs, the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K associates with a pYMN motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of CD28 (142). This regulatory subunit recruits the p110 catalytic subunit of PI3K, which converts PIP₂ to phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) trisphosphate (PIP₃) at the membrane. Localized PIP₃ generation serves as a docking site for the PH domains of PDK1 (3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1) and its target Akt.

Akt phosphorylates multiple proteins, enabling it to affect numerous cellular responses. Activation of Akt enhances the nuclear translocation of NF-κB, which has positive effects on the expression of pro-survival genes including Bcl-xL. Emerging data suggest that Akt accomplishes this function by associating with CARMA1 and facilitating the assembly of the CBM complex (143, 144), a step critical for NF-κB activation (see above). The ability of Akt to promote pro-survival gene expression, coupled with the ability of Akt to inhibit transcription factors that promote cell cycle arrest, results in Akt-driven cell survival and proliferation (141). Akt also affects optimal transcription of NFAT-regulated genes, such as IL-2. One well-known target of Akt is GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3), a serine-threonine kinase that promotes nuclear export of NFAT (145). Thus, inactivation of GSK-3 by Akt might be one pathway responsible for prolonged NFAT nuclear localization and thus IL-2 transcription following CD28 costimulation. Recently, a GSK-3-independent mechanism by which Akt may regulate NFAT activity was suggested. This model posits that phosphorylated NFAT is bound by the scaffolding protein Homer, thus inhibiting access of calcineurin to NFAT (146). Investigators proposed that CD28 ligation induces Akt-mediated phosphorylation of Homer, resulting in its dissociation from pNFAT. Unbound pNFAT would then be susceptible to calcineurin phosphatase activity and nuclear entry. Whether this pathway is Akt dependent remains to be rigorously tested. Lastly, TCR/CD28 coligation increases the cell surface expression of the insulin transporter Glut1, leading to increased glucose uptake and glycolysis (147, 148), which is also mediated by Akt. Together, these data provide a framework for

how Akt mediates T cell growth and survival downstream of CD28.

The CD28-mediated generation of PIP₃ also serves as a docking site for the PH domain of Itk. Although Itk inducibly associates with the LAT/SLP-76/Gads/PLCγ1 complex that forms following TCR ligation, its localization and activation also depends on PI3K-generated PIP₃ (61). Itk can also associate directly with CD28 via the CD28 proximal PxxP motif (61). It is possible that this interaction keeps Itk close to Lck (which binds to the distal PxxP motif of CD28), allowing for Lck-mediated phosphorylation and activation of Itk (149) and enhanced Ca²⁺ flux, another characteristic of CD28-mediated signaling. Despite the fact that Itk and CD28 associate with one another, studies in Itk-deficient T cells demonstrate that some CD28 signaling is still intact in the absence of Itk, suggesting that this interaction may not be that critical for CD28 signaling (150). Although the proline motifs in the tail of CD28 are required for CD28-mediated proliferation and IL-2 production, these motifs are dispensable for Bcl-xL upregulation (151). This function appears to be more reliant on the proximal YMNMP85 binding site (151). Thus, CD28 can differentially regulate proliferation and survival in activated T cells.

Another more recently described function of CD28 is induction of arginine methylation. Following CD28 ligation, protein arginine methyltransferase activity increases, and arginine methylation of multiple proteins, including Vav1, is induced. Vav1 arginine methylation appears to occur in the nucleus and correlates with IL-2 production (152). Although the precise biologic significance of this posttranslational modification is unknown, this pathway may provide yet another mechanism by which CD28 regulates TCR signaling.

Many of the pathways described above are activated by TCR ligation alone; however, the magnitude of the response is considerably augmented with CD28 coligation. This observation has led to speculation that CD28 engagement results primarily in a quantitative rather than a qualitative change in T cell activation parameters (141). Although this appears to be true, it is also true that quantitative differences in signaling can result in qualitatively distinct functional outcomes.

CD28-deficient mice exhibit dampened immune responses to a variety of infectious agents (reviewed in 141). Although these studies demonstrate the importance of costimulation by CD28, not all immune responses are severely impacted by its loss (153). Such observations indicate that molecules other than CD28 can provide costimulation for T cells. Indeed, multiple surface receptors have been described as having costimulatory functions. Included among these are CD2, CD5, CD30, 4-1BB, OX40, inducible costimulator (ICOS), and LFA-1. For this review, we focus on the CD28-related protein ICOS and two members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family to provide examples of how costimulatory molecules can link to downstream effectors, either directly or through adapter proteins.

Unlike CD28, which is expressed at constant levels on both resting and activated T cells, ICOS is inducibly expressed on activated T cells (154). ICOS deficiency results in impaired immune responses, similar to yet not as severe as those observed in CD28 knockout models, suggesting that these two molecules may function in similar pathways (155). Indeed, ICOS shares several structural features with CD28, including a YMXM motif in its cytoplasmic tail that associates with p85 (155). This site is presumed to be responsible for PI3K-driven Akt and/or Itk activation observed downstream of CD3/ICOS stimulation, which likely contributes to the similarities seen in CD3/CD28 and CD3/ICOS-stimulated cells (156). ICOS does not induce IL-2 gene transcription as CD28 does. Failure to induce IL-2 has been attributed, at least in part, to the inability of the YxxM motif of ICOS to associate with Grb2, an association that is present via this motif in CD28 (157). Therefore, although ICOS activates genes similar to those induced by CD28, there are differences in the degree to which particular genes are expressed. These differences have in vivo relevance, as mice doubly deficient

in CD28 and ICOS are severely defective in generating immune responses (158).

Outside of the CD28 family of costimulatory molecules, the OX40 (CD134) and 4-1BB (CD137) members of the TNFR family provide costimulation upon engagement with their ligands OX40L and 4-1BBL. Like CD28, OX40 or 4-1BB ligation induces activation of PI3K/Akt, NF-κB, JNK, and p38 MAPK (159). However, unlike CD28 and ICOS, OX40 and 4-1BB do not directly associate with protein kinases but rather link to downstream signaling through the TRAF (TNFR-associated factor) family of adapter proteins. The proteins involved in linking TRAF signaling to NF-κB and the JNK/p38 pathways have not been completely elucidated in primary T cells. However, studies in other systems implicate TRAFs themselves in the direct recruitment of the IKK complex as well as of serine/threonine kinases that initiate signaling to JNK and p38 (reviewed in 160).

Many of the same genes are regulated downstream of CD28 and TNFR family members. One reason for such overlap may be due to the timing of receptor expression. CD28 is expressed early and is critical for induction of an immune response. It promotes expression of several other costimulatory molecules including ICOS, OX40, and 4-1BB. Once expressed, these receptors prolong or sustain an immune response and, in the case of OX40 and 4-1BB, are important for memory T cell formation (159). The use of alternative means by which to activate these similar pathways, e.g., direct binding to kinases versus use of adapter proteins, may also allow for differential negative regulation of these pathways. In fact, some TRAF proteins negatively regulate NF-κB; thus, association of TNFRs with different TRAF family members can modulate the immune response (160). Lastly, a role for many costimulatory molecules, including ICOS and 4-1BB, in the development and/or function of regulatory T cells is becoming increasingly apparent (161). This layer of complexity will have to be taken into account when deciphering the roles of costimulatory molecules in vivo.

---

**NEGATIVE REGULATION OF TCR SIGNALING**

As outlined above, signaling through the TCR triggers an array of signals that activate multiple effector pathways. Activation of these pathways is regulated to ensure that T cells respond to appropriate ligands and for the proper duration. As with positive regulation of T cell signaling, negative regulation is mediated through both TCR-generated signals and those emanating from other cell surface receptors (Table 2).

Even the most proximal TCR signaling events are actively regulated. For example, multiple proteins contribute to the regulation of Lck activity. C-terminal Src kinase (Csk) is responsible for phosphorylating Lck on its inhibitory tyrosine residue (Y505) and maintaining Lck in an inactive state (162, reviewed in 163). Countering this is the phosphatase CD45 that dephosphorylates the inhibitory site allowing for Lck autophosphorylation and activation. Interestingly, CD45 can also limit Lck activity by dephosphorylating its active site (163). Whether CD45 negatively or positively impacts TCR signaling is likely to be controlled by its proximity to TCR-stimulated effector molecules during TCR engagement and whether CD45 itself is in an enzymatically favorable conformation.

An additional layer of Lck regulation initiated by TCR signals has been proposed. As a means to explain how the TCR can distinguish between strong and weak ligands, investigators showed that weak or antagonistic TCR ligation results in rapid Lck-mediated phosphorylation of SHP1 (SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase) (164). SHP1 then dephosphorylates the active site of Lck, resulting in cessation of the TCR signal. Conversely, in the presence of strong or agonistic TCR ligation, Erk is rapidly activated and phosphorylates Lck on Ser59. This activity is thought to prevent SHP1 binding, thus keeping Lck active to sustain TCR signals and further amplify Erk activity. The extent to which this regulatory loop operates in vivo in the context of agonist stimulation awaits the generation and analysis

Smith-Garvin • Koretzky • Jordan

Table 2 Sampling of inhibitors of TCR signaling

| Molecule | Interactions and/or function | Deficiency phenotype |
|----------|-----------------------------|---------------------|
| Csk(162, 163) (kinase) | Phosphorylates inhibitory Y505ofLck | Csk knockdown in primary T cells: increased proliferation and IL-2 production |
| HPK 1(169, 170) (kinase) | Phosphorylates SLP-76 providing 14-3-3 binding site | Increased SLP-76, PLCγ1, LAT, ZAP-70, Vav1 phosphorylation Enhanced T cell proliferation Enhanced disease in EAE model |
| SHP 1(164, 165) (phosphatase) | Dephosphorylates Lck and ZAP-70 Association with Lck inhibited by Erk activation | Defective positive selection Splenomegaly, lymphadonopathy Alopecia, inflamed tissues |
| Sts-1(171, 172, 174) (phosphatase) | Dephosphorylates ZAP-70 Binds c-Cbl and ubiquitinated proteins | Sts-1⁻/⁻Sts-2⁻/⁻: hyperproliferative T cells and increased susceptibility to EAE |
| Dok-1, Dok-2(167, 168) (adapters) | Binds Csk, RasGAP, SHIP-1 PTB domain can associate with CD3ζ ITAMs | Dok-1⁻/⁻Dok-2⁻/⁻: increased T cell cytokine production, enhanced pZAP-70, pLAT, and pErk Lupus-like renal disease Production of antidualle-stranded DNA antibodies |
| c-Cbl, Cbl-b(175-177) (E3 ligase) | Catalyzes attachment of ubiquitin to proteins Promotes TCR downregulation | c-Cbl⁻/⁻: splenomegaly, increased TCR expression and ZAP-70 phosphorylation Cbl-b⁻/⁻: multiorgan lymphocytic infiltration, increased IL-2 production, autoantibody production |
| CTLA-4(179, 182) (inhibitory receptor) | Binds ligands CD80 and CD86 Recruits phosphatases SHP1 and PPA2 | Multiorgan lymphocytic infiltrates Splenomegaly Elevated serum immunoglobulin |
| PD-1(180, 181) (inhibitory receptor) | Binds ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 Recruits SHP1 | Lupus-like disease Increased serum immunoglobulin |

a Abbreviations: Csk, C-terminal Src kinase; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4; Dok, downstream of kinase; HPK1, hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; LAT, linker for the activation of T cells; PD-1, programmed death-1; PD-L1/PD-L2, PD-1 ligands; PLC, phospholipase C; PPA2, protein phosphatase A2; PTB, phosphotyrosine-binding domain; RasGAP, Ras GTPase-activating protein; SHIP-1, SH2 domain-containing inositol phosphatase 1; SHP1, SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 1; SLP-76, SH2 domain-containing leukocyte phosphoprotein of 76 kDa; Sts-1, suppressor of T cell receptor signaling; ZAP-70, ζ-associated protein of 70 kDa.

of mice harboring a mutation at the indicated Lck serine residue.
The importance of SHP1 function is evident, as mice deficient in SHP1 develop severe autoimmunity (165). SHP1 can be recruited quickly to the TCR complex via its association with Lck. However, SH2 domain-containing phosphatases are typically recruited to phosphorylated ITIMs (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs) present in the cytoplasmic tails of cell surface receptors. Recently, the ITIM-bearing inhibitory receptor carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1) was identified as a potential candidate for SHP1 recruitment in human T cells (166). CEACAM1 upregulation occurs hours after stimulation; thus, SHP1 likely regulates initial TCR signaling events as well as late signaling termination events. Given the impact SHP1 activity has on immune regulation, it will be important to understand exactly how SHP1 is recruited into the TCR-ligated signaling complex.
Adapter proteins also play a critical role in negatively regulating TCR signals. The downstream of kinase (Dok) adapter proteins,
Dok-1 and -2, are expressed in T cells. Coordinated deletion or knockdown of these proteins results in increased TCR cytokine production and proliferation; prolonged phosphorylation of ZAP-70, LAT, SLP-76, and Akt; and the development of a lupus-like renal disease with high antidouble-stranded DNA antibody titers (167, 168). Dok can associate with several negative regulators including SHIP-1 (SH2 domain–containing inositol phosphatase), Csk, and Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP); however, how these associations mediate the negative regulatory role of Dok proteins remains to fully elucidated. Recent structure/function studies in T cell lines showed that the phosphotyrosine-binding domain (PTB) of Dok-1 and -2 can bind the ITAM motif in CD3ζ, making it tempting to speculate that Dok may compete with ZAP-70 for ITAM binding (167). Whether this interaction is relevant in vivo remains to be shown. Dok proteins can also be recruited inducibly to a LAT-, Grb2-, and SHIP-1–containing molecular complex (168). This finding is intriguing and begs the question as to how LAT participates in both positive and negative signaling pathways. Determining the domains necessary for the assembly of this negative regulatory complex and whether it is separate from or a part of the stimulatory LAT-containing complex may provide insight into how early phosphorylation events are regulated.

It has been suggested that SLP-76 can also be a target of negative regulation. The serine/threonine kinase HPK1 inducibly binds to the SH2 domain of SLP-76. This kinase has both positive and negative effects on TCR signal transduction; however, its role as a prominent negative regulator was confirmed recently by the description of HPK1-deficient mice. HPK1-deficient T cells exhibit enhanced phosphorylation of several early signaling molecules, and HPK1-deficient mice are more susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) than are wild-type mice (169). As a possible explanation for these phenotypes, two groups have shown that

HPK1 can phosphorylate a serine residue in SLP-76 that mediates recruitment of 14-3-3 family members (169, 170). 14-3-3 proteins have been implicated in the regulation of several signaling pathways. Thus, although the precise mechanism by which HPK1 disrupts TCR signal transduction remains unclear, identification of a SLP-76/14-3-3 interaction may indicate that this mechanism involves a conserved method of signal transduction regulation.

The role of a novel family of proteins in regulating TCR signaling has become appreciated more recently. The suppressor of T cell receptor signaling (Sts) family of proteins contains two members, Sts-1 (TULA2) and -2 (TULA). Combined deficiency in these proteins leads to hyperproliferative T cells and an increased susceptibility to autoimmunity (171). When the phenotype of Sts-1 and -2 knockout mice was described, the mechanism of negative regulation was unclear. Although still not understood fully, the C-terminal phosphoglycerate mutase domain of Sts-1 acts as a phosphatase with specificity for Syk and, to a lesser degree, Src family members, thus providing a model for how Sts-1 may negatively regulate TCR signal transduction (172). Interestingly, Sts-2 has very little phosphatase activity and, in cell line models, can enhance ZAP-70 activation (173). Recent studies demonstrating that Sts-2 can bind to and induce the degradation of c-Cbl (a negative regulator of TCR signaling; see below) have provided a mechanism by which Sts-2 may act as a positive regulator of T cell activation (174). Whether net ZAP-70 activity is ultimately increased or decreased in response to an in vivo challenge likely depends on the relative expression of these two family members.

Cbl proteins play an important role as negative regulators of T cell signaling. Two family members, c-Cbl and Cbl-b, are immune modulators, as deletion of each gene in vivo leads to hypercellularity and, in the case of Cbl-b, spontaneous multorgan infiltration (175, 176). Both c-Cbl and Cbl-b facilitate the ubiquitination of proteins, targeting them for degradation. They also mediate the downregulation of the TCR
following stimulation with antigenic peptides
and have been recently shown to play a role in
the dissipation of the early signaling complex
(176–178). Thus, Cbl proteins, by way of their
ability to regulate protein degradation, provide
an example of yet another means by which TCR
signaling is terminated.

Similar to the necessity of signals provided
by the TCR to be complemented by costim-
ulatory molecules, TCR-generated regulatory
signals are also aided by coreceptor signals.
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4)
and programmed death-1 (PD-1) are two ex-
amples of such receptors that limit the ex-
pansion and activation of TCR-triggered T
cells. These molecules are found on activated
T cells with peak expression 24–48 h after
stimulation. Genetic studies have documented
the importance of both for maintaining self-
tolerance. By 5–6 days after birth, CTLA-4-
deficient mice exhibit activated peripheral T
cells, splenomegaly, and lymphocytic infiltrates
into nonlymphoid organs (179). Although less
striking, PD-1-deficient mice also develop au-
toimmune features, including the development
of a lupus-like disease by 6 months of age (180).
Like costimulatory receptors, inhibitory recep-
tors utilize motifs and molecular pathways simi-
lar to those used by the TCR when propagating
a negative signal; they may even provide dock-
ing sites for these shared molecules (181, 182).
Another mode by which inhibitory receptors
have been proposed to function is to utilize the
same ligand and/or signaling molecules as cos-
timulatory receptors, thus setting up the poten-
tial for competition or sequestration of ligands
or key substrates. This means is best illustrated
by CTLA-4 and CD28, which share the lig-
ands CD80 and CD86 and counter each other
in the regulation of cell cycle proteins, cytokine
expression, and Cbl-b expression.


# CONCLUSIONS

As in the first 10 years after identification of
the TCR, the past 15 years have seen a dra-
matic expansion in our understanding of the
biochemical pathways triggered downstream of
the TCR. We now appreciate more fully how
PTKs couple to effectors and second messen-
gers via the utilization of adapter proteins, how
Ras and NF-κB pathways are activated, how
Ca²⁺ ions are sensed, that TCR signaling can be
required for the activation of other cell surface
receptors, and that the actin cytoskeleton does
more than just dictate cell shape. Studies inves-
tigating signal transduction by costimulatory
molecules have highlighted the importance of
signal amplification, and discoveries of spon-
taneous or induced models of autoimmunity
have brought negative regulation of these sig-
naling pathways to the forefront. However, as
often noted in this review, links between many
signaling molecules and cellular outcomes re-
main poorly defined. Future studies will be
required to fill gaps in our knowledge and
likely will reveal new and unexpected interac-
tions between currently known and unknown
molecules.

This review primarily focused on the signal
transduction pathways in naive T cells. Over
the next 15 years, it will be important to ap-
ply current and new knowledge to other T cell
lineages, including T regulatory cells, natural
killer T cells, and memory T cells, to estab-
lish whether these paradigms are universal. In
the coming years, the population-based analy-
ses that established the field of signal transduc-
tion will be driven toward single cell analyses.
We can anticipate that this technological shift
will allow for better analysis of human T cells
and the application of basic science to human
disease.


# DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Christopher P. Garvin for figure design, Dr. Art Weiss for helpful comments, and Justina Stadanlick for editorial assistance.

# LITERATURE CITED

1. Haskins K, Kappler J, Marrack P. 1984. The major histocompatibility complex-restricted antigen receptor on T cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 2:51–66
2. Cantrell D. 1996. T cell antigen receptor signal transduction pathways. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 14:259–74
3. Yanagi Y, Yoshikai Y, Leggett K, Clark SP, Aleksander I, Mak TW. 1984. A human T cell-specific cDNA clone encodes a protein having extensive homology to immunoglobulin chains. *Nature* 308:145–49
4. Hedrick SM, Cohen DI, Nielsen EA, Davis MM. 1984. Isolation of cDNA clones encoding T cell-specific membrane-associated proteins. *Nature* 308:149–53
5. Malissen M, Minard K, Mjolsness S, Kronenberg M, Goverman J, et al. 1984. Mouse T cell antigen receptor: structure and organization of constant and joining gene segments encoding the beta polypeptide. *Cell* 37:1101–10
6. Allison JP, McIntyre BW, Bloch D. 1982. Tumor-specific antigen of murine T-lymphoma defined with monoclonal antibody. *J. Immunol.* 129:2293–300
7. Haskins K, Kubo R, White J, Pigeon M, Kappler J, Marrack P. 1983. The major histocompatibility complex-restricted antigen receptor on T cells. I. Isolation with a monoclonal antibody. *J. Exp. Med.* 157:1149–69
8. Meuer SC, Fitzgerald KA, Hussey RE, Hodgdon JC, Schlossman SF, Reinherz EL. 1983. Clonotypic structures involved in antigen-specific human T cell function. Relationship to the T3 molecular complex. *J. Exp. Med.* 157:705–19
9. Borst J, Coligan JE, Oettgen H, Pessano S, Malin R, Terhorst C. 1984. The delta- and epsilon-chains of the human T3/T-cell receptor complex are distinct polypeptides. *Nature* 312:455–58
10. Dembic Z, Haas W, Weiss S, McCubrey J, Kiefer H, et al. 1986. Transfer of specificity by murine α and β T-cell receptor genes. *Nature* 320:232–38
11. Saito T, Germain RN. 1987. Predictable acquisition of a new MHC recognition specificity following expression of a transfected T-cell receptor β-chain gene. *Nature* 329:256–59
12. Weiss A, Stobo JD. 1984. Requirement for the coexpression of T3 and the T cell antigen receptor on a malignant human T cell line. *J. Exp. Med.* 160:1284–99
13. Abraham RT, Weiss A. 2004. Jurkat T cells and development of the T-cell receptor signalling paradigm. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 4:301–8
14. Weiss A, Imboden JB. 1987. Cell surface molecules and early events involved in human T lymphocyte activation. *Adv. Immunol.* 41:1–38
15. Imboden JB, Stobo JD. 1985. Transmembrane signalling by the T cell antigen receptor. Perturbation of the T3-antigen receptor complex generates inositol phosphates and releases calcium ions from intracellular stores. *J. Exp. Med.* 161:446–56
16. Samelson LE, Patel MD, Weissman AM, Harford JB, Klausner RD. 1986. Antigen activation of murine T cells induces tyrosine phosphorylation of a polypeptide associated with the T cell antigen receptor. *Cell* 46:1083–90
17. Samelson LE, Phillips AF, Luong ET, Klausner RD. 1990. Association of the fyn protein-tyrosine kinase with the T-cell antigen receptor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 87:4358–62
18. Veillette A, Bookman MA, Horak EM, Bolen JB. 1988. The CD4 and CD8 T cell surface antigens are associated with the internal membrane tyrosine-protein kinase p56lck. *Cell* 55:301–8
19. Barber EK, Dasgupta JD, Schlossman SF, Trevillyan JM, Rudd CE. 1989. The CD4 and CD8 antigens are coupled to a protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck) that phosphorylates the CD3 complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 86:3277–81
20. June CH, Fletcher MC, Ledbetter JA, Schieven GL, Siegel JN, et al. 1990. Inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation prevents T-cell receptor-mediated signal transduction. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 87:7722–26

21. Reth M. 1989. Antigen receptor tail clue. *Nature* 338:383–84

22. Irving BA, Weiss A. 1991. The cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor ζ chain is sufficient to couple to receptor-associated signal transduction pathways. *Cell* 64:891–901

23. Romeo C, Amiot M, Seed B. 1992. Sequence requirements for induction of cytosis by the T cell antigen/Fc receptor ζ chain. *Cell* 68:889–97

24. Wegener AM, Letourneur F, Hoeveler A, Brocker T, Luton F, Malissen B. 1992. The T cell receptor/CD3 complex is composed of at least two autonomous transduction modules. *Cell* 68:83–95

25. Letourneur F, Klausner RD. 1992. Activation of T cells by a tyrosine kinase activation domain in the cytoplasmic tail of CD3ε. *Science* 255:79–82

26. Chan AC, Iwashima M, Turck CW, Weiss A. 1992. ZAP-70: a 70 kd protein-tyrosine kinase that associates with the TCR ζ chain. *Cell* 71:649–62

27. Iwashima M, Irving BA, van Oers NS, Chan AC, Weiss A. 1994. Sequential interactions of the TCR with two distinct cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases. *Science* 263:1136–39

28. Aivazian D, Stern LJ. 2000. Phosphorylation of T cell receptor ζ is regulated by a lipid dependent folding transition. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* 7:1023–26

29. Xu C, Gagnon E, Call ME, Schnell JR, Schwieters CD, et al. 2008. Regulation of T cell receptor activation by dynamic membrane binding of the CD3epsilon cytoplasmic tyrosine-based motif. *Cell* 135:702–13

30. Gil D, Schamel WW, Montoya M, Sanchez-Madrid F, Alarcon B. 2002. Recruitment of Nck by CD3ε reveals a ligand-induced conformational change essential for T cell receptor signaling and synapse formation. *Cell* 109:901–12

31. Mingueneau M, Sansoni A, Gregoire C, Roncagalli R, Aguado E, et al. 2008. The proline-rich sequence of CD3ε controls T cell antigen receptor expression on and signaling potency in preselection CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:522–32

32. Szymczak AL, Workman CJ, Gil D, Dilioglou S, Vignali KM, et al. 2005. The CD3ε proline-rich sequence, and its interaction with Nck, is not required for T cell development and function. *J. Immunol.* 175:270–75

33. Gil D, Schrum AG, Daniels MA, Palmer E. 2008. A role for CD8 in the developmental tuning of antigen recognition and CD3 conformational change. *J. Immunol.* 180:3900–9

34. Tailor P, Tsai S, Shameli A, Serra P, Wang J, et al. 2008. The proline-rich sequence of CD3ε as an amplifier of low-avidity TCR signaling. *J. Immunol.* 181:243–55

35. Takeuchi K, Yang H, Ng E, Park SY, Sun ZY, et al. 2008. Structural and functional evidence that Nck interaction with CD3ε regulates T-cell receptor activity. *J. Mol. Biol.* 380:704–16

36. Rudolph MG, Stanfield RL, Wilson IA. 2006. How TCRs bind MHCs, peptides, and coreceptors. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 24:419–66

37. Sun ZJ, Kim KS, Wagner G, Reinherz EL. 2001. Mechanisms contributing to T cell receptor signaling and assembly revealed by the solution structure of an ectodomain fragment of the CD3εγ heterodimer. *Cell* 105:913–23

38. Ma Z, Janmey PA, Finkel TH. 2008. The receptor deformation model of TCR triggering. *FASEB J.* 22:1002–8

39. Minguet S, Schamel WW. 2008. A permissive geometry model for TCR-CD3 activation. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 33:51–57

40. Alarcon B, Swamy M, van Santen HM, Schamel WW. 2006. T-cell antigen-receptor stoichiometry: preclustering for sensitivity. *EMBO Rep.* 7:490–95

41. Davis SJ, Van Der Merwe PA. 2006. The kinetic-segregation model: TCR triggering and beyond. *Nat. Immunol.* 7:803–9

42. Varma R. 2008. TCR triggering by the pMHC complex: valency, affinity, and dynamics. *Sci. Signal* 1:pe21

43. Krogsgaard M, Li QJ, Sumen C, Huppa JB, Huse M, Davis MM. 2005. Agonist/endogenous peptide-MHC heterodimers drive T cell activation and sensitivity. *Nature* 434:238–43

44. Zhang W, Sloan-Lancaster J, Kitchen J, Trible RP, Samelson LE. 1998. LAT: the ZAP-70 tyrosine kinase substrate that links T cell receptor to cellular activation. *Cell* 92:83–92

45. Bubeck Wardenburg J, Fu C, Jackman JK, Flotow H, Wilkinson SE, et al. 1996. Phosphorylation of SLP-76 by the ZAP-70 protein-tyrosine kinase is required for T-cell receptor function. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:19641–44

46. Koretzky GA, Abtahian F, Silverman MA. 2006. SLP76 and SLP65: complex regulation of signalling in lymphocytes and beyond. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 6:67–78

47. Sommers CL, Samelson LE, Love PE. 2004. LAT: a T lymphocyte adapter protein that couples the antigen receptor to downstream signaling pathways. *Bioessays* 26:61–67

48. LAT$^{-/-}$ mice reveal a complete block in T cell development that, along with studies describing SLP-76$^{-/-}$ mice, exemplifies in vivo the essential role of adapter proteins for signal transduction.

48. Zhang W, Sommers CL, Burshytyn DN, Stebbins CC, DeJarnette JB, et al. 1999. Essential role of LAT in T cell development. *Immunity* 10:323–32

49. Liu SK, Fang N, Koretzky GA, McGlade CJ. 1999. The hematopoietic-specific adaptor protein Gads functions in T-cell signaling via interactions with the SLP-76 and LAT adaptors. *Curr. Biol.* 9:67–75

50. Dombroski D, Houghtling RA, Labno CM, Precht P, Takesono A, et al. 2005. Kinase-independent functions for Itk in TCR-induced regulation of Vav and the actin cytoskeleton. *J. Immunol.* 174:1385–92

51. Reynolds LF, de Bettignies C, Norton T, Beeser A, Chernoff J, Tybulewicz VL. 2004. Vav1 transduces T cell receptor signals to the activation of the Ras/ERK pathway via LAT, Sos, and RasGRP1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:18239–46

52. Reynolds LF, Smyth LA, Norton T, Freshney N, Downward J, et al. 2002. Vav1 transduces T cell receptor signals to the activation of phospholipase C-$\gamma$1 via phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent and -independent pathways. *J. Exp. Med.* 195:1103–14

53. Qi Q, August A. 2007. Keeping the (kinase) party going: SLP-76 and ITK dance to the beat. *Sci. STKE* 2007:pe39

54. Beach D, Gonen R, Bogin Y, Reischl IG, Yablonski D. 2007. Dual role of SLP-76 in mediating T cell receptor-induced activation of phospholipase C-$\gamma$1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:2937–46

55. Miletic AV, Sakata-Sogawa K, Hiroshima M, Hamann MJ, Gomez TS, et al. 2006. Vav1 acidic region tyrosine 174 is required for the formation of T cell receptor-induced microclusters and is essential in T cell development and activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:38257–65

56. Sommers CL, Lee J, Steiner KL, Gurson JM, Depersis CL, et al. 2005. Mutation of the phospholipase C-$\gamma$1-binding site of LAT affects both positive and negative thymocyte selection. *J. Exp. Med.* 201:1125–34

57. Jordan MS, Smith JE, Burns JC, Austin JE, Nichols KE, et al. 2008. Complementation in trans of altered thymocyte development in mice expressing mutant forms of the adaptor molecule SLP76. *Immunity* 28:359–69

58. Pletneva EV, Sundd M, Fulton DB, Andreotti AH. 2006. Molecular details of Itk activation by pro-lyl isomerization and phospholigand binding: the NMR structure of the Itk SH2 domain bound to a phosphopeptide. *J. Mol. Biol.* 357:550–61

59. Bogin Y, Ainey C, Beach D, Yablonski D. 2007. SLP-76 mediates and maintains activation of the Tec family kinase ITK via the T cell antigen receptor-induced association between SLP-76 and ITK. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104:6638–43

60. Liu KQ, Bunnell SC, Gurniak CB, Berg LJ. 1998. T cell receptor-initiated calcium release is uncoupled from capacitative calcium entry in Itk-deficient T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 187:1721–27

61. Berg LJ, Finkelstein LD, Lucas JA, Schwartzberg PL. 2005. Tec family kinases in T lymphocyte development and function. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 23:549–600

62. Shan X, Wang RL. 1999. Itk/Emt/Tsk activation in response to CD3 cross-linking in Jurkat T cells requires ZAP-70 and Lat and is independent of membrane recruitment. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:29323–30

63. Bunnell SC, Diehn M, Yaffe MB, Findell PR, Cantley LC, Berg LJ. 2000. Biochemical interactions integrating Itk with the T cell receptor-initiated signaling cascade. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:2219–30

64. Su YW, Zhang Y, Schweikert J, Koretzky GA, Reth M, Wienands J. 1999. Interaction of SLP adaptors with the SH2 domain of Tec family kinases. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 29:3702–11

65. Genot E, Cantrell DA. 2000. Ras regulation and function in lymphocytes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 12:289–94

66. Ebinu JO, Stang SL, Teixeira C, Bottorff DA, Hooton J, et al. 2000. RasGRP links T-cell receptor signaling to Ras. *Blood* 95:3199–203

67. Egan SE, Giddings BW, Brooks MW, Buday L, Sizeland AM, Weinberg RA. 1993. Association of Sos Ras exchange protein with Grb2 is implicated in tyrosine kinase signal transduction and transformation. *Nature* 363:45–51

68. Dower NA, Stang SL, Bottorff DA, Ebinu JO, Dickie P, et al. 2000. RasGRP is essential for mouse thymocyte differentiation and TCR signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* 1:317–21

69. Ebinu JO, Bottorff DA, Chan EY, Stang SL, Dunn RJ, Stone JC. 1998. RasGRP, a Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein with calcium- and diacylglycerol-binding motifs. *Science* 280:1082–86

70. Roose JP, Mollenauer M, Gupta VA, Stone J, Weiss A. 2005. A diacylglycerol-protein kinase C-RasGRP1 pathway directs Ras activation upon antigen receptor stimulation of T cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 25:4426–41

71. Finco TS, Kadlecik T, Zhang W, Samelson LE, Weiss A. 1998. LAT is required for TCR-mediated activation of PLC-γ1 and the Ras pathway. *Immunity* 9:617–26

72. Roose JP, Mollenauer M, Ho M, Kurosaki T, Weiss A. 2007. Unusual interplay of two types of Ras activators, RasGRP and SOS, establishes sensitive and robust Ras activation in lymphocytes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 27:2732–45

73. Hayashi K, Altman A. 2007. Protein kinase C theta (PKCθ): a key player in T cell life and death. *Pharmacol. Res.* 55:537–44

74. Melowic HR, Stahelin RV, Blatner NR, Tian W, Hayashi K, et al. 2007. Mechanism of diacylglycerol-induced membrane targeting and activation of protein kinase Cθ. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:21467–76

75. Vallabhapurapu S, Karin M. 2009. Regulation and function of NFκB transcription factors in the immune system. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 27:693–733

76. Schulze-Luehrmann J, Ghosh S. 2006. Antigen-receptor signaling to nuclear factor κB. *Immunity* 25:701–15

77. Matsumoto R, Wang D, Blonska M, Li H, Kobayashi M, et al. 2005. Phosphorylation of CARMA1 plays a critical role in T cell receptor-mediated NFκB activation. *Immunity* 23:575–85

78. Sommer K, Guo B, Pomerantz JL, Bandaranayake AD, Moreno-Garcia ME, et al. 2005. Phosphorylation of the CARMA1 linker controls NFκB activation. *Immunity* 23:561–74

79. Sun L, Deng L, Ea CK, Xia ZP, Chen ZJ. 2004. The TRAF6 ubiquitin ligase and TAK1 kinase mediate IKK activation by BCL10 and MALT1 in T lymphocytes. *Mol. Cell* 14:289–301

80. Zhou H, Wertz I, O’Rourke K, Ultsch M, Seshagiri S, et al. 2004. Bcl10 activates the NF-κB pathway through ubiquitination of NEMO. *Nature* 427:167–71

81. Coornaert B, Baens M, Heyninck K, Bekaert T, Haegman M, et al. 2008. T cell antigen receptor stimulation induces MALT1 paracaspase-mediated cleavage of the NF-κB inhibitor A20. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:263–71

82. Rebeaud F, Hailfinger S, Posevitz-Fejfar A, Tapernoux M, Moser R, et al. 2008. The proteolytic activity of the paracaspase MALT1 is key in T cell activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:272–81

83. Medeiros RB, Burbach BJ, Mueller KL, Srivastava R, Moon JJ, et al. 2007. Regulation of NFκB activation in T cells via association of the adapter proteins ADAP and CARMA1. *Science* 316:754–58

84. Oh-Hora M, Rao A. 2008. Calcium signaling in lymphocytes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 20:250–58

85. Zhang SL, Yeromin AV, Zhang XH, Yu Y, Safrina O, et al. 2006. Genome-wide RNAi screen of Ca²⁺ influx identifies genes that regulate Ca²⁺ release-activated Ca²⁺ channel activity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:9357–62

86. Feske S, Gwack Y, Prakriya M, Srikanth S, Puppel SH, et al. 2006. A mutation in Orai1 causes immune deficiency by abrogating CRAC channel function. *Nature* 441:179–85

87. Vig M, Peinelt C, Beck A, Koomoa DL, Rabah D, et al. 2006. CRACM1 is a plasma membrane protein essential for store-operated Ca²⁺ entry. *Science* 312:1220–23

88. Roos J, DiGregorio PJ, Yeromin AV, Ohlsen K, Lioudyno M, et al. 2005. STIM1, an essential and conserved component of store-operated Ca²⁺ channel function. *J. Cell Biol.* 169:435–45

89. Liou J, Kim ML, Heo WD, Jones JT, Myers JW, et al. 2005. STIM is a Ca²⁺ sensor essential for Ca²⁺-store-depletion-triggered Ca²⁺ influx. *Curr. Biol.* 15:1235–41

90. Oh-Hora M, Yamashita M, Hogan PG, Sharma S, Lamperti E, et al. 2008. Dual functions for the endoplasmic reticulum calcium sensors STIM1 and STIM2 in T cell activation and tolerance. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:432–43

91. Brandman O, Liou J, Park WS, Meyer T. 2007. STIM2 is a feedback regulator that stabilizes basal cytosolic and endoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ levels. *Cell* 131:1327–39

92. Liou J, Fivaz M, Inoue T, Meyer T. 2007. Live-cell imaging reveals sequential oligomerization and local plasma membrane targeting of stromal interaction molecule 1 after Ca²⁺ store depletion. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104:9301–6

93. Wu MM, Buchanan J, Luik RM, Lewis RS. 2006. Ca²⁺ store depletion causes STIM1 to accumulate in ER regions closely associated with the plasma membrane. *J. Cell Biol.* 174:803–13

94. Luik RM, Wu MM, Buchanan J, Lewis RS. 2006. The elementary unit of store-operated Ca²⁺ entry: local activation of CRAC channels by STIM1 at ER-plasma membrane junctions. *J. Cell Biol.* 174:815–25

95. Luik RM, Wang B, Prakriya M, Wu MM, Lewis RS. 2008. Oligomerization of STIM1 couples ER calcium depletion to CRAC channel activation. *Nature* 454:538–42

96. Penna A, Demuro A, Yeromin AV, Zhang SL, Safrina O, et al. 2008. The CRAC channel consists of a tetramer formed by Stim-induced dimerization of Orai dimers. *Nature* 456:116–20

97. Nolz JC, Gomez TS, Zhu P, Li S, Medeiros RB, et al. 2006. The WAVE2 complex regulates actin cytoskeletal reorganization and CRAC-mediated calcium entry during T cell activation. *Curr. Biol.* 16:24–34

98. Nolz JC, Medeiros RB, Mitchell JS, Zhu P, Freedman BD, et al. 2007. WAVE2 regulates high-affinity integrin binding by recruiting vinculin and talin to the immunological synapse. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 27:5986–6000

99. Savignac M, Mellstrom B, Naranjo JR. 2007. Calcium-dependent transcription of cytokine genes in T lymphocytes. *Pflugers Arch.* 454:523–33

100. Macian F, Garcia-Cozar F, Im SH, Horton HF, Byrne MC, Rao A. 2002. Transcriptional mechanisms underlying lymphocyte tolerance. *Cell* 109:719–31

101. Bandyopadhyay S, Soto-Nieves N, Macian F. 2007. Transcriptional regulation of T cell tolerance. *Semin. Immunol.* 19:180–87

102. Wu Y, Borde M, Heissmeyer V, Feuerer M, Lapan AD, et al. 2006. FOXP3 controls regulatory T cell function through cooperation with NFAT. *Cell* 126:375–87

103. Dolmetsch RE, Lewis RS, Goodnow CC, Healy JI. 1997. Differential activation of transcription factors induced by Ca²⁺ response amplitude and duration. *Nature* 386:855–58

104. Burkhardt JK, Carrizosa E, Shaffer MH. 2008. The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 26:233–59

105. Henney CS, Bubbers JE. 1973. Antigen-T lymphocyte interactions: inhibition by cytochalasin B. *J. Immunol.* 111:85–90

106. Holsinger LJ, Graef IA, Swat W, Chi T, Bautista DM, et al. 1998. Defects in actin-cap formation in Vav-deficient mice implicate an actin requirement for lymphocyte signal transduction. *Curr. Biol.* 8:563–72

107. Jacobelli J, Chmura SA, Buxton DB, Davis MM, Krummel MF. 2004. A single class II myosin modulates T cell motility and stopping, but not synapse formation. *Nat. Immunol.* 5:531–38

108. Faure S, Salazar-Fontana LI, Semichon M, Tybulewicz VL, Bismuth G, et al. 2004. ERM proteins regulate cytoskeleton relaxation promoting T cell-APC conjugation. *Nat. Immunol.* 5:272–79

109. Gomez TS, Kumar K, Medeiros RB, Shimizu Y, Leibson PJ, Billadeau DD. 2007. Formins regulate the actin-related protein 2/3 complex-independent polarization of the centrosome to the immunological synapse. *Immunity* 26:177–90

110. Zeng R, Cannon JL, Abraham RT, Way M, Billadeau DD, et al. 2003. SLP-76 coordinates Nck-dependent Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein recruitment with Vav-1/Cdc42-dependent Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein activation at the T cell-APC contact site. *J. Immunol.* 171:1360–68

111. Gomez TS, Hamann MJ, McCarney S, Savoy DN, Lubking CM, et al. 2005. Dynamin 2 regulates T cell activation by controlling actin polymerization at the immunological synapse. *Nat. Immunol.* 6:261–70

112. Kupfer A, Swain SL, Singer SJ. 1987. The specific direct interaction of helper T cells and antigen-presenting B cells. II. Reorientation of the microtubule organizing center and reorganization of the membrane-associated cytoskeleton inside the bound helper T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 165:1565–80

113. Combs J, Kim SJ, Tan S, Ligon LA, Holzbaur EL, et al. 2006. Recruitment of dynein to the Jurkat immunological synapse. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:14883–88

114. Monks CR, Freiberg BA, Kupfer H, Sciaky N, Kupfer A. 1998. Three-dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells. *Nature* 395:82–86

115. Grakoui A, Bromley SK, Sumen C, Davis MM, Shaw AS, et al. 1999. The immunological synapse: a molecular machine controlling T cell activation. *Science* 285:221–27

116. Lee KH, Holdorf AD, Dustin ML, Chan AC, Allen PM, Shaw AS. 2002. T cell receptor signaling precedes immunological synapse formation. *Science* 295:1539–42

117. Cemerski S, Das J, Giurisato E, Markiewicz MA, Allen PM, Chakraborty AK, Shaw AS. 2008. The balance between T cell receptor signaling and degradation at the center of the immunological synapse is determined by antigen quality. *Immunity* 29:414–22

118. Yokosuka T, Kobayashi W, Sakata-Sogawa K, Takamatsu M, Hashimoto-Tane A, et al. 2008. Spatiotemporal regulation of T cell costimulation by TCR-CD28 microclusters and protein kinase Cθ translocation. *Immunity* 29:589–601

119. Dustin ML. 2008. T-cell activation through immunological synapses and kinapses. *Immunol. Rev.* 221:77–89

120. Bunnell SC, Hong DI, Kardon JR, Yamazaki T, McGlade CJ, et al. 2002. T cell receptor ligation induces the formation of dynamically regulated signaling assemblies. *J. Cell Biol.* 158:1263–75

121. Yokosuka T, Sakata-Sogawa K, Kobayashi W, Hiroshima M, Hashimoto-Tane A, et al. 2005. Newly generated T cell receptor microclusters initiate and sustain T cell activation by recruitment of Zap70 and SLP-76. *Nat. Immunol.* 6:1253–62

122. Varma R, Campi G, Yokosuka T, Saito T, Dustin ML. 2006. T cell receptor-proximal signals are sustained in peripheral microclusters and terminated in the central supramolecular activation cluster. *Immunity* 25:117–27

123. Campi G, Varma R, Dustin ML. 2005. Actin and agonist MHC-peptide complex-dependent T cell receptor microclusters as scaffolds for signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* 202:1031–36

124. Nguyen K, Sylvain NR, Bunnell SC. 2008. T cell costimulation via the integrin VLA-4 inhibits the actin-dependent centralization of signaling microclusters containing the adaptor SLP-76. *Immunity* 28:810–21

125. Chang JT, Palanivel VR, Kinjyo I, Schambach F, Intlekofer AM, et al. 2007. Asymmetric T lymphocyte division in the initiation of adaptive immune responses. *Science* 315:1687–91

126. Allenspach EJ, Cullinan P, Tong J, Tang Q, Tesciuba AG, et al. 2001. ERM-dependent movement of CD43 defines a novel protein complex distal to the immunological synapse. *Immunity* 15:739–50

127. Zhang W, Irvin BJ, Trible RP, Abraham RT, Samelson LE. 1999. Functional analysis of LAT in TCR-mediated signaling pathways using a LAT-deficient Jurkat cell line. *Int. Immunol.* 11:943–50

128. Billadeau DD, Nolz JC, Gomez TS. 2007. Regulation of T-cell activation by the cytoskeleton. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 7:131–43

129. Menasche G, Kliche S, Bezman N, Schraven B. 2007. Regulation of T-cell antigen receptor-mediated inside-out signaling by cytosolic adapter proteins and Rap1 effector molecules. *Immunol. Rev.* 218:82–91

130. Katagiri K, Hattori M, Minato N, Irie S, Takatsu K, Kinashi T. 2000. Rap1 is a potent activation signal for leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 distinct from protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20:1956–69

131. Sebzda E, Bracke M, Tugal T, Hogg N, Cantrell DA. 2002. Rap1A positively regulates T cells via integrin activation rather than inhibiting lymphocyte signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* 3:251–58

132. Duchniewicz M, Zemojtel T, Kolanczyk M, Grossmann S, Scheele JS, Zwartkruis FJ. 2006. Rap1A-deficient T and B cells show impaired integrin-mediated cell adhesion. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 26:643–53

133. Peterson EJ, Woods ML, Dmowski SA, Derimanov G, Jordan MS, et al. 2001. Coupling of the TCR to integrin activation by Slap-130/Fyb. *Science* 293:2263–65

134. Kliche S, Breitling D, Togni M, Pusch R, Heuer K, et al. 2006. The ADAP/SKAP55 signaling module regulates T-cell receptor-mediated integrin activation through plasma membrane targeting of Rap1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 26:7130–44

135. Wang H, McCann FE, Gordon JD, Wu X, Raab M, et al. 2004. ADAP-SLP-76 binding differentially regulates supramolecular activation cluster (SMAC) formation relative to T cell-APC conjugation. *J. Exp. Med.* 200:1063–74

136. Menasche G, Kliche S, Chen EJ, Stradal TE, Schraven B, Koretzky G. 2007. RIAM links the ADAP/SKAP-55 signaling module to Rap1, facilitating T-cell-receptor-mediated integrin activation. Mol. Cell Biol. 27:4070–81

137. Lafuente EM, van Puijenbroek AA, Krause M, Carman CV, Freeman GJ, et al. 2004. RIAM, an Ena/VASP and profilin ligand, interacts with Rap1-GTP and mediates Rap1-induced adhesion. Dev. Cell 7:585–95

138. Medeiros RB, Dickey DM, Chung H, Quale AC, Nagarajan LR, et al. 2005. Protein kinase D1 and the β1 integrin cytoplasmic domain control β1 integrin function via regulation of Rap1 activation. Immunity 23:213–26

139. Katagiri K, Maeda A, Shimonaka M, Kinashi T. 2003. RAPL, a Rap1-binding molecule that mediates Rap1-induced adhesion through spatial regulation of LFA-1. Nat. Immunol. 4:741–48

140. Han J, Lim CJ, Watanabe N, Soriani A, Ratnikov B, et al. 2006. Reconstructing and deconstructing agonist-induced activation of integrin αIIbβ3. Curr. Biol. 16:1796–806

141. Acuto O, Michel F. 2003. CD28-mediated co-stimulation: a quantitative support for TCR signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:939–51

142. Pages F, Ragueneau M, Rottapel R, Truneh A, Nunes J, et al. 1994. Binding of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase to CD28 is required for T-cell signalling. Nature 369:327–29

143. Narayan P, Holt B, Tosti R, Kane LP. 2006. CARMA1 is required for Akt-mediated NF-κB activation in T cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 26:2327–36

144. Qiao G, Li Z, Molinero L, Alegre ML, Ying H, et al. 2008. T-cell receptor-induced NFκB activation is negatively regulated by E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28:2470–80

145. Beals CR, Sheridan CM, Turck CW, Gardner P, Crabtree GR. 1997. Nuclear export of NF-ATc enhanced by glycogen synthase kinase-3. Science 275:1930–34

146. Huang GN, Huso DL, Bouyain S, Tu J, McCorkell KA, et al. 2008. NFAT binding and regulation of T cell activation by the cytoplasmic scaffolding Homer proteins. Science 319:476–81

147. Frauworth KA, Riley JL, Harris MH, Parry RV, Rathmell JC, et al. 2002. The CD28 signaling pathway regulates glucose metabolism. Immunity 16:769–77

148. Jacobs SR, Herman CE, Maciver NJ, Wofford JA, Wieman HL, et al. 2008. Glucose uptake is limiting in T cell activation and requires CD28-mediated Akt-dependent and independent pathways. J. Immunol. 180:4476–86

149. Heyeck SD, Wilcox HM, Bunnell SC, Berg LJ. 1997. Lck phosphorylates the activation loop tyrosine of the Itk kinase domain and activates Itk kinase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 272:25401–8

150. Li CR, Berg LJ. 2005. Itk is not essential for CD28 signaling in naive T cells. J. Immunol. 174:4475–79

151. Burr JS, Savage ND, Messah GE, Kimzey SL, Shaw AS, et al. 2001. Cutting edge: distinct motifs within CD28 regulate T cell proliferation and induction of Bcl-XL. J. Immunol. 166:5331–35

152. Blanchet F, Cardona A, Letimier FA, Hershfield MS, Acuto O. 2005. CD28 costimulatory signal induces protein arginine methylation in T cells. J. Exp. Med. 202:371–77

153. Bachmaier K, Pummerer C, Shahinian A, Ionescu J, Neu N, et al. 1996. Induction of autoimmunity in the absence of CD28 costimulation. J. Immunol. 157:1752–57

154. Hutloff A, Dittrich AM, Beier KC, Eljaschewitsch B, Kraft R, et al. 1999. ICOS is an inducible T-cell co-stimulator structurally and functionally related to CD28. Nature 397:263–66

155. Coyle AJ, Lehar S, Lloyd C, Tian J, Delaney T, et al. 2000. The CD28-related molecule ICOS is required for effective T cell-dependent immune responses. Immunity 13:95–105

156. Arimura Y, Kato H, Dianzani U, Okamoto T, Kamekura S, et al. 2002. A co-stimulatory molecule on activated T cells, H4/ICOS, delivers specific signals in Th cells and regulates their responses. Int. Immunol. 14:555–66

157. Harada Y, Ohgai D, Watanabe R, Okano K, Koiwai O, et al. 2003. A single amino acid alteration in cytoplasmic domain determines IL-2 promoter activation by ligation of CD28 but not inducible costimulator (ICOS). J. Exp. Med. 197:257–62

158. Suh WK, Tafuri A, Berg-Brown NN, Shahinian A, Plyte S, et al. 2004. The inducible costimulator plays the major costimulatory role in humoral immune responses in the absence of CD28. J. Immunol. 172:5917–23

159. Watts TH. 2005. TNF/TNFR family members in costimulation of T cell responses. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 23:23–68

160. Chung JY, Park YC, Ye H, Wu H. 2002. All TRAFs are not created equal: common and distinct molecular mechanisms of TRAF-mediated signal transduction. *J. Cell Sci.* 115:679–88

161. So T, Lee SW, Croft M. 2008. Immune regulation and control of regulatory T cells by OX40 and 4-1BB. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 19:253–62

162. Vang T, Abrahamsen H, Myklebust S, Enserink J, Prydz H, et al. 2004. Knockdown of C-terminal Src kinase by siRNA-mediated RNA interference augments T cell receptor signaling in mature T cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 34:2191–99

163. Hermiston ML, Xu Z, Weiss A. 2003. CD45: a critical regulator of signaling thresholds in immune cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 21:107–37

164. Stefanova I, Hemmer B, Vergelli M, Martin R, Biddison WE, Germain RN. 2003. TCR ligand discrimination is enforced by competing ERK positive and SHP-1 negative feedback pathways. *Nat. Immunol.* 4:248–54

165. Tsui HW, Siminovitch KA, de Souza L, Tsui FW. 1993. Motheaten and viable motheaten mice have mutations in the haematopoietic cell phosphatase gene. *Nat. Genet.* 4:124–29

166. Nagaishi T, Pao L, Lin SH, Iijima H, Kaser A, et al. 2006. SHIP1 phosphatase-dependent T cell inhibition by CEACAM1 adhesion molecule isoforms. *Immunity* 25:769–81

167. Yasuda T, Bundo K, Hino A, Honda K, Inoue A, et al. 2007. Dok-1 and Dok-2 are negative regulators of T cell receptor signaling. *Int. Immunol.* 19:487–95

168. Dong S, Corre B, Foulon E, Dufour E, Veillette A, et al. 2006. T cell receptor for antigen induces linker for activation of T cell-dependent activation of a negative signaling complex involving Dok-2, SHIP-1, and Grb-2. *J. Exp. Med.* 203:2509–18

169. Shui JW, Boomer JS, Han J, Xu J, Dement GA, et al. 2007. Hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 negatively regulates T cell receptor signaling and T cell-mediated immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* 8:84–91

170. Di Bartolo V, Montagne B, Salek M, Jungwirth B, Carrette F, et al. 2007. A novel pathway down-modulating T cell activation involves HPK-1-dependent recruitment of 14-3-3 proteins on SLP-76. *J. Exp. Med.* 204:681–91

171. Carpino N, Turner S, Mekala D, Takahashi Y, Zang H, et al. 2004. Regulation of ZAP-70 activation and TCR signaling by two related proteins, Sts-1 and Sts-2. *Immunity* 20:37–46

172. Mikhailik A, Ford B, Keller J, Chen Y, Nassar N, Carpino N. 2007. A phosphatase activity of Sts-1 contributes to the suppression of TCR signaling. *Mol. Cell* 27:486–97

173. Agrawal R, Carpino N, Tsygankov A. 2008. TULA proteins regulate activity of the protein tyrosine kinase Syk. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 104:953–64

174. Feshchenko EA, Smirnova EV, Swaminathan G, Teckchandani AM, Agrawal R, et al. 2004. TULA: an SH3- and UBA-containing protein that binds to c-Cbl and ubiquitin. *Oncogene* 23:4690–706

175. Bachmaier K, Krawczyk C, Kozieradzki I, Kong YY, Sasaki T, et al. 2000. Negative regulation of lymphocyte activation and autoimmunity by the molecular adaptor Cbl-b. *Nature* 403:211–16

176. Naramura M, Jang IK, Kole H, Huang F, Haines D, Gu H. 2002. c-Cbl and Cbl-b regulate T cell responsiveness by promoting ligand-induced TCR down-modulation. *Nat. Immunol.* 3:1192–99

177. Murphy MA, Schnall RG, Venter DJ, Barnett L, Bertonecello I, et al. 1998. Tissue hyperplasia and enhanced T-cell signalling via ZAP-70 in c-Cbl-deficient mice. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18:4872–82

178. Balagopalan L, Barr VA, Sommers CL, Bar da-Saad M, Goyal A, et al. 2007. c-Cbl-mediated regulation of LAT-nucleated signaling complexes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 27:8622–36

179. Waterhouse P, Penninger JM, Timms E, Wakeham A, Shahinian A, et al. 1995. Lymphoproliferative disorders with early lethality in mice deficient in *Ctla-4*. *Science* 270:985–88

180. Nishimura H, Okazaki T, Tanaka Y, Nakatani K, Hara M, et al. 2001. Autoimmune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD-1 receptor-deficient mice. *Science* 291:319–22

181. Chemnitz JM, Parry RV, Nichols KE, June CH, Riley JL. 2004. SHP-1 and SHP-2 associate with immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif of programmed death 1 upon primary human T cell stimulation, but only receptor ligation prevents T cell activation. *J. Immunol.* 173:945–54

182. Teft WA, Kirchhof MG, Madrenas J. 2006. A molecular perspective of CTLA-4 function. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 24:65–97

Frontispiece  
Marc Feldmann  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aire  
Diane Mathis and Christophe Benoist 287  

Regulatory Lymphocytes and Intestinal Inflammation  
Ana Izcue, Janine L. Coombes, and Fiona Powrie 313  

The Ins and Outs of Leukocyte Integrin Signaling  
Clare L. Abram and Clifford A. Lowell 339  

Recent Advances in the Genetics of Autoimmune Disease  
Peter K. Gregersen and Lina M. Olsson 363  

Cell-Mediated Immune Responses in Tuberculosis  
Andrea M. Cooper 393  

Enhancing Immunity Through Autophagy  
Christian Miünz 423  

Alternative Activation of Macrophages: An Immunologic Functional Perspective  
Fernando O. Martinez, Laura Helming, and Siamon Gordon 451  

IL-17 and Th17 Cells  
Thomas Korn, Estelle Bettelli, Mohamed Oukka, and Vijay K. Kuchroo 485  

Immunological and Inflammatory Functions of the Interleukin-1 Family  
Charles A. Dinarello 519  

Regulatory T Cells in the Control of Host-Microorganism Interactions  
Yasmine Belkaid and Kristin Tarbell 551  

T Cell Activation  
Jennifer E. Smith-Garvin, Gary A. Koretzky, and Martha S. Jordan 591  

Horror Autoinflammaticus: The Molecular Pathophysiology of Autoinflammatory Disease  
Seth L. Masters, Anna Simon, Ivona Aksentijevich, and Daniel L. Kastner 621  

Blood Monocytes: Development, Heterogeneity, and Relationship with Dendritic Cells  
Cedric Auffray, Michael H. Sieweke, and Frederic Geissmann 669  

Regulation and Function of NF-κB Transcription Factors in the Immune System  
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu and Michael Karin 693
