
# GATA3 and the T-cell lineage: essential functions before and after T-helper-2-cell differentiation

**I-Cheng Ho**, **Tzong-Shyuan Tai** and **Sung-Yun Pai**

**Abstract** | Many advances in our understanding of the molecules that regulate the development, differentiation and function of T cells have been made over the past few years. One important regulator of T-cell differentiation is the transcription factor GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3). Although the main function of GATA3 is to act as a master transcription factor for the differentiation of T helper 2 ($\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$) cells, new research has helped to uncover crucial functions of GATA3 in T cells that go beyond $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell differentiation and that are important at earlier stages of haematopoietic and lymphoid-cell development. This Review focuses on the functions of GATA3 from early thymocyte development to effector T-cell differentiation. In addition, we discuss the interactions between GATA3 and other transcription factors and signalling pathways, and highlight the functional significance of the GATA3 protein structure.

---

### Zinc-finger motif
A DNA-binding domain in which cysteine and histidine residues are coordinated by zinc atoms and thereby form ‘fingers’ that bind to DNA.

The GATA family of transcription factors consists of conserved proteins that contain one or two C2–C2-type zinc-finger motifs that recognize the consensus DNA sequence WGATAR (in which W denotes A or T, and R denotes A or G) ${ }^{1,2}$. The six members of the mammalian GATA family (GATA-binding protein 1 (GATA1)–GATA6) contain two zinc-finger motifs, which probably arose by gene duplication (FIG. 1). The different GATA proteins have distinct and restricted patterns of tissue expression and can be divided into the haematopoietic factors (GATA1–GATA3) and the endodermal factors (GATA4–GATA6). The GATA proteins have a common structure, which comprises distinct amino-terminal regions that have transactivating activity, highly conserved zinc-finger motifs in the carboxy-terminal region, conserved basic regions that are located immediately after the second zinc finger and distinct C-terminal regions of varying lengths (FIG. 1). GATA3 is the main GATA family member that is expressed by immune cells and can be easily detected in developing and mature T cells, natural killer (NK) cells and CD1-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells ${ }^{3-5}$. Indeed, several recent studies have revealed an emerging role for GATA3 in invariant NKT cells (BOX 1). By contrast, mature mast cells express GATA1 and GATA2, but not GATA3 (REFS 6,7). Beyond the immune system, GATA3 is expressed by many embryonic and adult tissues, including the adrenal glands, kidneys, central nervous system, inner ear, hair follicles, skin and breast tissue, and important functions for GATA3 in several of these tissues have been shown in knockout and conditional knockout mouse models ${ }^{8-15}$.

In immune cells, GATA3 is best known to function as a master regulator of T helper 2 ($\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$)-cell differentiation. However, in recent years GATA3 has been found to have additional crucial functions in early T-cell commitment, β-selection and CD4 + T-cell development. In this Review, we highlight these newly described roles for GATA3 in T-cell development and differentiation, discuss the relationship of GATA3 with other transcription factors and pathways, particularly T-helper-inducing POZ/Kruppel-like factor (ThPOK; also known as cKROX) and the Notch signalling pathway (BOX 2), and describe the recent structural studies that have provided insight into the function of GATA3 in $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells.

## GATA3 before T-cell lineage commitment

GATA3 was discovered in a screen that sought to identify factors that bind to the human T-cell receptor-α (TCRA) enhancer ${ }^{3}$. It is among the earliest genes that are expressed by progenitor cells following commitment to the T-cell lineage. As germline deletion of *Gata3* results in embryonic lethality ${ }^{16}$, analysis of the role of GATA3 in T-cell development required the generation of chimeric mice by supplementing immunodeficient (recombination-activating gene 2 (*Rag2*) ${ }^{-/-}$) blastocysts

---

**Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy,**  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

**Division of Pediatric Haematology–Oncology,**  
Children’s Hospital and Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Correspondence to I.-C.H.  
e-mail: iho@partners.org  
doi:10.1038/nri2476  
Published online 19 January 2009

Figure 1 | Functional domains and essential amino acids in mouse GATA-binding protein 3. GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) has two amino-terminal transactivation domains, TA1 and TA2, and two zinc-finger motifs, each of which is followed by a conserved basic region. The carboxy-terminal (distal) zinc-finger motif binds the canonical GATA motif, WGATAR (in which W denotes A or T, and R denotes A or G). The N-terminal (proximal) zinc-finger motif seems to have broader specificity, such that the fourth position of the GATA motif can be any nucleotide<sup>111</sup>. Amino acid residues marked in blue were shown in a recent crystal structure of the distal zinc-finger motif to make direct contact with DNA bases<sup>111</sup>. Arginine 364 inserts deeply into the minor groove of DNA, and mutation of this residue to alanine significantly disrupts binding to the WGATAR motif<sup>111</sup>. Residues marked in red have been shown to be involved in GATA3 function. For example, mutation of the amino acids KRR between the two zinc-finger motifs confers dominant negative or hypomorphic function. The YxKxHxxxRP motif (in which x indicates any amino acid) is conserved between species, and mutation of any amino acid in this motif abrogates T helper 2 (T<sub>H</sub>2)-type cytokine production and DNA binding<sup>107</sup>. Methionine 368 in GATA3 (which is equivalent to proline 321 in GATA4) seems to be involved in the efficient induction of interleukin-13 (IL-13) production by GATA3 (REF. 70). The NRPL motif that follows the distal zinc-finger motif forms the interface between two GATA3 molecules recognizing DNA sequences that contain closely arranged GATA motifs, which indicates that it may have a role in GATA3 homodimerization<sup>111</sup>.

with Gata3<sup>-/-</sup> embryonic stem cells<sup>17</sup>. In these chimeric mice, T cells were not detected in the spleen and thymus, and there was negligible contribution by Gata3<sup>-/-</sup> embryonic stem cells to the generation of the rudimentary Rag2<sup>-/-</sup> thymus. By contrast, B-cell and NK-cell development were unaffected. These data led to the conclusion that GATA3 is necessary for T-cell development.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells  
A subpopulation of T cells that expresses both NK- and T-cell markers. In the C57BL/6 mouse strain, NKT cells express the NK1.1 (NKRP1C) molecule and the T-cell receptor (TCR). Some NKT cells recognize CD1d-associated lipid antigens and express a restricted repertoire of TCRs. After TCR stimulation of naive mice, NKT cells rapidly produce interleukin-4 and interferon-γ.

β-selection  
The controlled developmental transition beyond the double negative 3 (DN3) stage to the double-positive stage that is limited to T cells which have successfully rearranged their T-cell receptor (TCR) β-chain. The conditional developmental arrest encountered at the DN3 stage is termed the β-selection checkpoint.

cells can induce developmental programmes that are normally controlled by other GATA family proteins (such as GATA1 and GATA2). For example, overexpression of GATA3 in mouse HSCs diverted these cells to develop into erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages, which are cell fates that are usually specified by GATA1 (REF. 24). So, although GATA3 is clearly required for T-cell lineage development, its function before T-cell commitment remains unclear. The physiological role of GATA3 in early progenitor-cell populations (such as HSCs, which co-express GATA3 and GATA2 (REF. 19)) must be defined in the future by conditional knockout approaches to discriminate the non-redundant functions of related GATA proteins.

During early T-cell development, Gata3 mRNA is detectable in HSCs, and the mRNA levels increase as development proceeds through the lymphoid-progenitor and double negative (DN)-subset (DN1, DN2 and DN3) stages<sup>26,27</sup>. This expression pattern led to the suggestion that GATA3 expression occurs downstream of the Notch signalling pathway, which is known to be crucial for T-cell development. Indeed, uncommitted precursors that are cultured with OP9 stromal cells which express the Notch ligand Delta-like ligand 1 (DLL1; the OP9–DLL1 culture system)<sup>28</sup> are forced to develop into T cells and their expression of GATA3 is upregulated<sup>29–31</sup>; this effect is reversed when the Notch ligands are removed<sup>31</sup>. As the Notch signalling pathway is both necessary and sufficient for T-cell

Box 1 | Emerging roles for GATA-binding protein 3 in invariant natural killer T cells

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells express both Thelper 1 ($\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$1)-type and $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$2-type cytokines rapidly in response to lipid antigens that are presented by CD1 molecules ${ }^{112,113}$. Unlike conventional T cells, overexpression of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) in iNKT cells leads to little change in $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$2-type cytokine production, implying that GATA3 may not be crucial for this function in iNKT cells ${ }^{114}$. However, recent loss-of-function studies have shown that GATA3 has important roles in the development and function of peripheral iNKT cells.

Mice in which Gata3 is deleted using Cd4-Cre were found to have near normal numbers of thymic iNKT cells, although they matured abnormally and, interestingly, had a selective loss of CD4+ iNKT cells despite preserving double negative (DN) iNKT-cell numbers ${ }^{115}$, which is reminiscent of the loss of conventional CD4+ T cells ${ }^{39}$. In contrast to the normal number of iNKT cells in the thymus, there was a sixfold reduction in the number of iNKT cells in the spleen and an almost complete lack of iNKT cells in the liver. Those peripheral iNKT cells that did develop did not mature normally, as shown by a failure to upregulate CD69 expression and a higher rate of apoptosis, which might explain the decreased iNKT-cell numbers. Finally, peripheral iNKT cells from GATA3-deficient mice were unresponsive to the exogenous agonist α-galactosylceramide in vivo. The refractory state could be overcome by stimulation with phorbol myristate acetate and ionomycin, which indicates that the defect was at the level of receptor-proximal signalling, but only for the production of interferon-γ (REF. 115). Stimulated GATA3-deficient cells still produced low levels of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$2-type cytokines, including interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, which suggests that GATA3 has a similar role in iNKT cells and conventional T cells ${ }^{94,95}$.

---

commitment in vivo ${ }^{32,33}$, a simple model would predict that Notch signals in the thymus promote T-cell commitment by directly or indirectly upregulating GATA3 expression and by suppressing B-cell commitment through the inactivation of B-cell-specifying factors.

Fetal thymic organ culture (FTOC). A system for culturing fetal thymi on a filter that is suspended over culture medium. FTOC allows the growth of the organ for a longer period than would be allowed by the viability of the embryo and/or under various experimental conditions (for example, by the addition of growth factors to the medium).

Double negative (DN) subset The most immature thymocytes, which lack expression of the co-receptors CD4 and CD8. This compartment can be further subdivided on the basis of CD44 and CD25 expression into four subpopulations: DN1 (CD25−CD44+), DN2 (CD25+CD44+), DN3 (CD25+CD44−) and DN4 (CD25−CD44−).

OP9–DLL1 culture system A culture system in which stromal cells that are derived from osteopetrotic $O p / O p$ mice (OP9 cells) are stably transduced to overexpress the Notch ligand Delta-like ligand 1 (DLL1) to promote T-cell lineage development of co-cultured progenitor cells. OP9 cells are useful in co-cultures that are initiated with myeloid progenitor cells because they do not produce macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1, which can cause excessive generation of macrophages and prevent the development of lymphoid cells.

mast-cell genes and a characteristic mast-cell morphology ${ }^{34}$. Overexpression of GATA3 by cells at the later, DN3 stage of development did not lead to the induction of the mast-cell developmental programme, indicating that the window for the diversion of progenitor cells to the mast-cell lineage by GATA3 expression is narrow. As GATA1 and GATA2, but not GATA3, are normally expressed by mast cells, the forced overexpression of GATA3 that was used in this study does not necessarily indicate a physiological role for GATA3 during the terminal stages of mast-cell development. The finding that GATA proteins induce their own expression ${ }^{36,37}$ may be relevant in this setting, as GATA3 overexpression probably induces the mast-cell developmental programme indirectly through autoactivation of GATA1 and/or GATA2 expression. These studies show that keeping the expression of GATA3 (or perhaps of any GATA protein) at the appropriate level in DN1 and DN2 cells is essential to suppress their development into alternative cell lineages. Together, these data suggest that Notch signals regulate thymocyte development by maintaining the expression of T-cell-specific genes, by preventing the induction of non-T-cell-specific transcriptional programmes and, if necessary, by leading to the death of cells that express GATA3 at high levels. Although it is clear that Notch signalling precedes the upregulation of GATA3 expression by DN thymocytes, there is no evidence indicating that GATA3 expression is directly regulated by Notch. So, in the presence of Notch signalling, the developmental outcome of regulated GATA3 expression seems to be influenced by other cell-type and stage-specific factors.

GATA3 after T-cell-lineage commitment

The life of a T cell can be said to begin after the β-selection checkpoint, when DN3 thymocytes are tested for ‘fitness’ based on their ability to rearrange and express a functional pre-TCR. Signalling through the pre-TCR in DN3 thymocytes first induces the downregulation of CD25 expression to become DN4 cells. After a period of rapid proliferation, DN4 cells upregulate their expression of the CD4 and CD8 co-receptors following signalling through the pre-TCR.

Box 2 | The Notch signalling pathway

Notch is part of an ancient signalling pathway that has a crucial role in T-cell development and is conserved from *Caenorhabditis elegans* to mammals (reviewed in REFS 116,117). Notch proteins are a family of type I transmembrane proteins. There are four Notch receptors (Notch1, Notch2, Notch3 and Notch4) in mammals that can interact with five transmembrane ligands, Delta-like ligand 1 (DLL1), DLL3, DLL4, Jagged1 and Jagged2.

In the canonical mammalian Notch signalling pathway, ligand binding triggers the cleavage of Notch by ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family protease, which results in the release of the Notch extracellular domain. The remaining membrane-tethered fragment of Notch undergoes two intramembranous cleavage events by the γ-secretase activity of a membrane protein complex containing presenilin, which yields the Notch intracellular domain. The intracellular domain of Notch can translocate to the nucleus and interact with the transcription co-repressor recombination-signal-binding protein for immunoglobulin-κ J region (RBPJ; also known as CSL). The interaction between intracellular Notch and RBPJ converts RBPJ into an activator complex. Recruitment of co-activators, such as p300 and Mastermind-like proteins, results in the transcription of target genes.

---

Positive selection  
The process by which immature CD4⁺CD8⁺ thymocytes expressing T-cell receptors with low affinity and/or avidity for self-peptide–MHC complexes are induced to differentiate into mature CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ thymocytes.

Negative selection  
The process by which CD4⁺CD8⁺ thymocytes expressing potentially autoreactive T-cell receptors are induced to undergo apoptosis in the thymus.

Cre-loxP technology  
A site-specific recombination system that is used to delete a gene in mouse cells using Cre recombinase. Two short DNA sequences (loxP sites) are engineered to flank the target DNA. Expression of Cre recombinase leads to excision of the intervening sequence. Depending on the type of promoter, Cre can be expressed at specific times during development or by specific sets of cells, including embryonic stem cells.

Annexin V  
A molecule that binds phosphatidylserine, which is usually located on the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane but flips to the outer leaflet during apoptosis. Positive staining with annexin V is an indicator of apoptosis.

which a dominant-negative form of the Notch signalling co-activator Mastermind-like 1 (MAML1) was linked to green-fluorescent protein (GFP) and expressed in a conditional manner under the control of the proximal Lck promoter. In this model, expression of the dominant-negative form of MAML1 would prevent the transcription of Notch target genes and cells that were incapable of Notch signalling would be detected by GFP expression. By excluding ~50% of the DN3 cells that did not express dominant-negative MAML1 (GFP⁻ DN3 cells) and then injecting the GFP⁺ DN3 cells into the thymus of irradiated recipient mice, Maillard et al. showed that defective Notch signalling in thymocytes resulted in a complete block in the generation of DP cells, which contrasts with the partial block that had been reported previously^{41,42,45}. They also observed that loss of Notch signalling causes a downregulation of the expression of CD25, which is a potential direct target of Notch. These data indicate that the ‘DN4’ cells (as defined by their CD25⁻CD44⁻ phenotype) that were shown to lack TCRβ expression in Lck-Cre-driven Notch1-deficient (or GATA3-deficient) mice were not true DN4 cells but instead were DN3 cells that had failed to develop further and had downregulated CD25 expression. Therefore, the failure of DN3 thymocyte development may be more complete than the Lck-Cre-driven deletion models would suggest, and lack of TCRβ expression may not be the cause of the block in development. Indeed, forced expression of *Tcrab* transgenes to restore TCRβ levels failed to correct the block in thymocyte development in Notch1- and GATA3-conditional-knockout mice^{39,45}. These observations indicate that GATA3 either is required for the effects of pre-TCR signalling or functions in parallel with pre-TCR signalling, perhaps by promoting cell survival or inhibiting apoptosis. A role for GATA3 in the inhibition of apoptosis is supported by our recent findings that annexin V staining is increased and proliferation is decreased (as indicated by lower rates of 7-aminoactinomycin D uptake) in GATA3-deficient ‘DN4’ cells compared with wild-type DN4 cells^{39} (S.-Y.P. and I.-C.H., unpublished observations). So, although GATA3 is required for optimal β-selection, the exact mechanism by which GATA3 mediates β-selection remains unclear.

This leads to the formation of double positive (DP) thymocytes, in which the *TCRA* locus is rearranged. TCRαβ-expressing thymocytes then undergo positive selection, negative selection and commitment to the CD4 or CD8 single positive (SP) lineages.

The expression of GATA3 is upregulated in thymocytes between the DN3 and DN4 stages^{38}, although the levels of *Gata3* mRNA do not change markedly after β-selection and tend to decrease by the DN4 stage^{26,27}. Using mice in which *Gata3* was specifically deleted in thymocytes at the DN3 stage of development, GATA3 was shown to be required for optimal β-selection *in vivo*^{39}. Deletion of *Gata3* led to an accumulation of DN3 cells and a reduction of DN4, DP and SP cells. DN3 cells that lack GATA3 expression failed to undergo the increase in cell size that accompanies pre-TCR expression, and most DN4 cells lacked TCRβ expression^{39}.

It remains unclear how a lack of GATA3 impairs β-selection. Interestingly, conditional inactivation of Notch1, of the Notch signalling co-repressor recombination-signal-binding protein for immunoglobulin-κ J region (RBPJ; also known as CSL) or of the transcription factor MYB at the DN3 stage of development also led to a partial block in development and an accumulation of TCRβ⁻ DN4 cells^{40–42}. In two of these studies, the developmental block was associated with defective *Tcrb* gene rearrangement^{40,42}. By contrast, GATA3-deficient DN3 thymocytes have intact rearrangement and normal levels of *Tcrb* mRNA but no TCRβ protein, which suggests that GATA3 controls the expression of TCRβ at a post-transcriptional level. These data are consistent with the idea that during β-selection, Notch signalling and GATA3 function sequentially, such that Notch1 controls *Tcrb* gene rearrangement and GATA3 controls TCRβ protein expression.

However, these studies should be interpreted with caution owing to the known limitations of models that are based on the conditional deletion of genes using Cre-loxP technology under the control of the proximal Lck promoter, which can result in incomplete or delayed excision of the targeted gene^{39,43,44}. Maillard et al.^{45} used an alternative strategy to abolish all Notch signalling, in

GATA3 and CD4⁺ T-cell development

Rearrangement of the *TCRa* locus following β-selection is the first step towards positive selection, negative selection and CD4- or CD8-lineage choice. Although these processes occur simultaneously in DP thymocytes, the regulation of each process is distinct at the transcriptional level. We refer the reader to the many excellent reviews on CD4/CD8-lineage choice that have been published recently^{46–51}, and focus here on several recent advances in our understanding of CD4⁺ T-cell development. More specifically, we compare and contrast the roles of thymocyte selection-associated high-mobility group box (TOX), ThPOK and MYB with the role of GATA3 in CD4⁺ T-cell development. These factors are involved in different stages of CD4⁺ T-cell development: modulation of positive selection, control of CD4- or CD8-lineage determination and support of CD4⁺ T-cell survival following lineage commitment.

**Modulating positive selection.** Both positive selection and lineage determination require engagement of the TCR with MHC molecules, and the duration and/or strength of the signals transduced, together with the contribution of co-receptor-mediated enhancement of TCR–MHC interactions, are thought to influence the outcome of self antigen recognition ${ }^{52-54}$. Short-lived or weak interactions in the context of CD8 co-receptor downregulation are thought to lead to CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell commitment, whereas prolonged or strong interactions are thought to lead to CD4 ${}^{+}$ T-cell commitment ${ }^{55-57}$. Cells undergoing positive selection show alterations in their surface expression of receptors by initially downregulating both CD4 and CD8 (resulting in cells with a CD4 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ phenotype) and then by upregulating CD69 and the TCR to generate a population of transitional or post-selection thymocytes (CD4 ${}^{\text {hi }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ CD69 ${}^{\text {hi }}$ TCR ${}^{\text {mid }}$ ) that ultimately give rise to CD4 and CD8 SP thymocytes in an MHC-dependent manner ${ }^{55,58-60}$.

Recently, the Kaye laboratory ${ }^{61}$ showed that mice lacking the transcription factor TOX undergo partial positive selection, arresting at the CD4 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ stage of development, and that they lack post-selection transitional cells. Interestingly, only mature CD8 SP thymocytes developed in these mice. This finding might be explained by the lack of a specific CD4-lineage commitment factor, the ability of CD4 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ cells to differentiate into CD8 SP thymocytes without the transitional intermediate stage and/or the absence of transitional cells that have received sufficient signals to direct thymocytes to the CD4 lineage ${ }^{61}$.

**Controlling CD4-lineage commitment.** A naturally occurring strain of mouse, known as the helper-deficient mouse strain, lacks CD4 ${}^{+}$ T cells but maintains CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell development ${ }^{62}$. Positive selection is intact in these mice, but thymocytes that are destined for the CD4 lineage divert to the CD8 lineage, which suggests that the processes that regulate positive selection and lineage determination are distinct ${ }^{63}$. Analysis of these mice by independent investigators using different approaches showed that the phenotype of the helper-deficient mice was caused by a point mutation in $Zbtb7b$ (zinc-finger- and BTB-domain-containing 7B). They also observed that ThPOK (the transcription factor that is encoded by $Zbtb7b$ ) was both necessary and sufficient for the specification of the CD4 lineage ${ }^{64,65}$. Indeed, CD4 SP thymocytes developed in helper-deficient mice that were transgenic for both wild-type ThPOK and any of three different MHC class I-restricted TCRs, which shows that ThPOK is sufficient for directing the development of positively selected cells to the CD4 lineage ${ }^{64,65}$. In addition, two recent publications have shown that ThPOK prevents the downregulation of CD4 expression, stabilizes its own expression and inhibits the expression of runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), which promotes the development of CD8-lineage cells ${ }^{66,67}$.

**Supporting post-commitment CD4 ${}^{+}$ T-cell survival.** In contrast to ThPOK deficiency, which abrogates CD4-lineage commitment, GATA3 deficiency impairs CD4 ${}^{+}$ T-cell survival or maintenance after lineage commitment.

Transgenic expression of GATA3 in adult mice suppressed CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell development but did not promote CD4 ${}^{+}$ T-cell development ${ }^{68}$. By contrast, retroviral expression and knockdown studies in fetal thymocytes showed that GATA3 promotes CD4 ${}^{+}$ T-cell development at the expense of CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell development ${ }^{69,70}$. Mice in which GATA3 expression is conditionally ablated under the control of $Cd4$-Cre have normal maturation of CD8 SP thymocytes but show a marked reduction in the number and percentage of CD4 SP thymocytes ${ }^{39}$. Transitional post-selection thymocytes and CD8 ${}^{+}$ T cells developed nearly normally in these mice, which indicated that positive selection did take place. Indeed, GATA3-deficient DP thymocytes in this study showed normal early TCR signalling, as measured by protein tyrosine phosphorylation and the upregulation of CD69 expression. In addition, CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell numbers were not increased, which implied that lineage determination was also not impaired. When the GATA3-deficient mice were crossed with mice that express the MHC class II-restricted TCR transgenes AND or DO11.10, neither CD4 nor CD8 SP thymocytes developed, thereby showing that GATA3 deficiency did not divert developing CD4 ${}^{+}$ thymocytes to the CD8 lineage ${ }^{39}$ (I.-C.H. and S.-Y.P., unpublished observations). So, these results led us to propose that GATA3 is not required for lineage commitment but instead is necessary for the maintenance of CD4 SP thymocytes after lineage commitment has occurred.

The idea that factors such as ThPOK regulate lineage commitment, whereas factors such as GATA3 regulate the survival and maintenance of CD4 SP thymocytes following lineage commitment is further supported by studies of mice that are deficient in MYB. $Cd4$-Cre-mediated T-cell-specific deletion of $Myb$ also led to a reduction in the CD4 ${}^{+}$ to CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell ratio ${ }^{40}$, mainly owing to a decrease in the number of CD4 SP cells. Similarly to observations in $Gata3$-conditional-knockout mice, introduction of an MHC class II-restricted TCR transgene (OT-II) to $Myb$-conditional-knockout mice did not rescue the development of CD4 SP cells or divert the development of transgene-positive cells into the CD8 ${}^{+}$ T-cell lineage. In addition, overexpression of a constitutively active form of MYB resulted in a block in the development of CD8 SP cells ${ }^{71}$, an effect that is similar to that observed following forced expression of GATA3 in fetal thymocytes. Interestingly, the upregulation of GATA3 expression by positively selecting TCR signals is reduced in MYB-deficient DP thymocytes, suggesting that MYB and GATA3 work sequentially ${ }^{71}$. Consistent with this observation, chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays showed that MYB binds directly to the $Gata3$ promoter ${ }^{71}$.

**Crosstalk between GATA3 and other factors: beyond a sequential model.** On the basis of these studies, a simple model could be proposed to assign a role for each transcription factor at different stages of CD4 SP thymocyte development. In this model, TOX drives CD4 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ thymocytes to become CD4 ${}^{\text {hi }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ cells, expression of ThPOK by these CD4 ${}^{\text {hi }}$ CD8 ${}^{\text {mid }}$ cells then specifies CD4-lineage commitment and committed CD4 SP cells

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY

VOLUME 9 | FEBRUARY 2009 | 129

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
are maintained by the expression of GATA3 and MYB (FIG. 2). However, this model has been challenged by a recent publication that supports a more complicated relationship between GATA3 and ThPOK. In contrast to previous work, Wang *et al.*⁷² show that GATA3-deficient mice that are crossed with mice expressing the high-affinity MHC class II-restricted TCR transgene 5CC7 develop MHC class II-restricted CD8⁺ T cells, albeit 10–20-fold less efficiently than when ThPOK is absent. They also found that GATA3 binds to the *Zbtb7b* promoter and that GATA3-deficient positively selected CD69⁺ thymocytes had a marked decrease in ThPOK protein levels. These observations suggested that GATA3 controls the expression of ThPOK, possibly by direct transactivation, and raised the possibility that the failure of GATA3-deficient CD4 SP thymocytes to develop is due to the lack of ThPOK upregulation. Indeed, the lack of CD4 SP thymocyte development in GATA3-deficient mice³⁹ could be due to an inability of these cells to commit to the CD4 lineage rather than a failure to survive after lineage commitment. However, when a *Zbtb7b* transgene was introduced into GATA3-deficient thymocytes under the control of the *Cd2* promoter to ensure expression by developing thymocytes, the development of mature CD4 SP thymocytes was not restored, although the development of mature CD8 SP thymocytes was still inhibited⁷². Therefore, GATA3 seems to act both upstream and downstream of ThPOK during CD4⁺ T-cell development, but is dispensable for ThPOK-mediated inhibition of CD8⁺ T-cell development. This model is consistent with the observation that TCR stimulation upregulates GATA3 expression

in DP thymocytes⁶⁹, but only induces ThPOK expression in the small subset of positively selected transitional thymocytes⁷². Therefore, although GATA3 is required for the upregulation of ThPOK expression, the finding that ThPOK overexpression could not restore CD4 SP thymocyte development indicates that GATA3 has additional roles in supporting the survival of CD4 SP thymocytes after lineage commitment.

Recent data provide further insight into the possibility of crosstalk between GATA3, ThPOK and other transcription factors. The low level ThPOK expression that is normally present in CD4<sup>mid</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> thymocytes is absent in *Tox⁻/⁻* mice, which suggests that TOX upregulates ThPOK in thymocytes at this stage of development⁶¹. A 500 base pair regulatory element that is located at the 5′ end of the *Zbtb7b* locus was recently found to be required for the suppression of ThPOK expression in cells other than transitional and CD4⁺ SP cells. This region was sufficient to drive lineage-specific ThPOK expression and therefore can be said to have both silencer and enhancer activity⁷³,⁷⁴. The region contains binding sites for RUNX, GATA3, E-box-binding proteins and nuclear factor-κB⁷³,⁷⁴. Together with the observation that GATA3 is required for the expression of ThPOK, we propose that GATA3 cooperates with prolonged TCR signals in transitional thymocytes to upregulate the expression of ThPOK, which in turn might cooperate with GATA3 in promoting post-commitment survival.

**GATA3 in T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation and function**

Following triggering of the TCR by antigen ligation, peripheral naive CD4⁺ T cells differentiate into effector T cells that produce high levels of cytokines. Based on the cytokines they produce, effector T cells can be divided into T<sub>H</sub>1-, T<sub>H</sub>2-, T<sub>H</sub>17- and regulatory T-cell subsets. The cytokine milieu, signalling transduction pathways and key transcription factors that are required for the differentiation of each functional CD4⁺ T-cell subset have been the subject of intense investigation (for reviews, see REFS 75–79 and others in this issue of Nature Reviews Immunology⁸⁰,⁸¹).

**STAT6-dependent pathway.** A role for GATA3 in T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation is well known, as expression of GATA3 is induced by the T<sub>H</sub>2-cell-inducing cytokine interleukin-4 (IL-4) in a signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6)-dependent manner⁸². Ligation of the TCR in naive CD4⁺ T cells leads to the upregulation of the levels of IL4 mRNA within several hours⁸³ and of *Gata3* mRNA within 24 hours⁸⁴. GATA3 facilitates the conversion of the *IL4–IL5–IL13* locus to an open conformation; this allows other transcription factors that are involved in T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation to access this locus⁸⁵–⁸⁸. GATA3 also inhibits the expression of interferon-γ (IFNγ) and directly transactivates *IL5* and *IL13*. A positive-feedback loop that further induces the expression of GATA3 and reinforces the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells is established through the production of high levels of IL-4 and the autoactivation of GATA3 expression³⁶ (FIG. 3). The source of the initial IL-4 that begins the STAT6-dependent positive-feedback loop during *in vivo* T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses is still unclear. Current

Figure 2 | Transcriptional regulation of positive selection, CD4- or CD8-lineage commitment and post-commitment development of thymocytes. Positive selection and CD4- or CD8-lineage commitment of developing thymocytes are depicted occurring sequentially. The transition from the CD4<sup>mid</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> stage to the CD4<sup>hi</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> stage is controlled by the transcription factor thymocyte selection-associated high-mobility group box (TOX). In the absence of TOX expression, CD4<sup>mid</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> cells develop by default into CD8 single positive (SP) thymocytes. The commitment of CD4<sup>hi</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> cells to the CD4 SP lineage requires the expression of the transcription factor T-helper-inducing POZ/Kruppel-like factor (ThPOK), whereas commitment to the CD8 SP lineage requires the expression of runt-related transcription factor (RUNX). Recent data show that the expression of ThPOK by CD4<sup>hi</sup>CD8<sup>mid</sup> cells is controlled by GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3)⁷². The further maturation of committed CD4 SP thymocytes depends on MYB and GATA3.

data suggest that the initial IL-4 may be contributed by memory CD4⁺CD44⁺ T cells, naive CD4⁺ T cells and innate immune cells, such as basophils^{84,89–91} (FIG. 3).

Although the important role of GATA3 in STAT6-dependent T_H2-cell differentiation has been known for some time^{36,82,92,93}, more recent studies in GATA3-deficient mouse models have provided further confirmation that GATA3 is important for T_H2-cell differentiation *in vitro* and *in vivo*^{94,95}. GATA3-deficient T_H cells showed a marked defect in their ability to differentiate into T_H2 cells and instead differentiated into IFNγ-producing cells even in conditions that were optimized for T_H2-cell polarization. Interestingly, however, GATA3 was shown to be required for the continuous production of IL-5 and IL-13, but not for maintaining the expression of IL-4 and IL-10 by T_H2 cells^{95} (S.-Y.P. and I.-C.H., unpublished observations).

STAT6-independent pathway: Notch signalling promotes T_H2-cell differentiation through GATA3. The observation that T_H2-cell differentiation can still occur in the absence of STAT6, albeit at markedly reduced efficiency^{96–98}, led to the suggestion that STAT6-independent pathways of T_H2-cell differentiation and GATA3 expression exist. Consistent with this hypothesis, two recent studies indicate that Notch signals directly regulate the transcription of *Gata3* and are essential for mounting T_H2-cell responses^{99,100}. In one of the studies^{99}, Notch signals were abrogated by a T-cell-specific deletion of the co-repressor RBPJ or of both Notch1 and Notch2. In the second report^{100}, conditional expression of dominant-negative MAML1 was used to inhibit Notch signals in naive CD4⁺ T cells. Both studies showed that T_H2-cell responses *in vivo* (as indicated by basal levels of the T_H2-cell-dependent antibody isotypes IgE and IgG1) and/or

a
Basophil, memory  
T cell or naive  
CD4⁺ T cell  

b  

Figure 3 | GATA-binding protein 3 is required for both STAT6-dependent and STAT6-independent pathways of T-helper-2-cell differentiation. a | Thelper 2 (T_H2)-cell differentiation can be initiated by interleukin-4 (IL-4) that is derived from activated T_H cells, which triggers signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6)-dependent signalling; this, in turn, induces the upregulation of GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) expression. T_H2-cell differentiation can also be initiated independently of STAT6 signalling. Various Notch ligands that are expressed by antigen-presenting cells can interact with Notch expressed by naive CD4⁺ T cells, leading to the cleavage of transmembrane Notch and consequently the release of the active intracellular domain of Notch. Intracellular Notch then interacts with recombination-signal-binding protein for immunoglobulin-κ J region (RBPJ) and converts it into a transcriptional activator. This allows RBPJ to recruit Mastermind-like 1 (MAML1) and p300. The intracellular-Notch–RBPJ–MAML1–p300 complex can bind to and transactivate the distal promoter of *Gata3*, which is located upstream of exon 1a, leading to the production of IL-4 by the newly activated CD4⁺ T cells. IL-2 can activate STAT5A, which binds to two DNase I hypersensitive sites in the second intron of *IL4*, resulting in the production of IL-4. Signals through the T-cell receptor (TCR) can also induce early IL-4 production, a process that is probably mediated by nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). The binding sites for STAT6 or NF-κB in *Gata3* remain to be determined. b | The initial burst of GATA3 and IL-4 expression (induced dependently or independently of STAT6) then reinforces the expression of GATA3 through a positive-feedback loop or through GATA3 autoactivation. The cis-acting element that is responsible for GATA3 autoactivation is unknown. GATA3 modifies the *IL4–IL13–IL5* locus to create a conformation that is accessible to various other transcription factors that are involved in driving the differentiation of T cells into T_H2 cells. γ_c, common cytokine-receptor γ-chain; IL-4R, IL-4 receptor.
T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation *in vitro* were markedly impaired in the absence of Notch signals under physiological or non-polarizing conditions. Using a reciprocal approach, forced expression of the intracellular domain of Notch increased IL-4 production and GATA3 expression, even in STAT6-deficient T cells.

Gata3 transcription can be initiated from two promoters, which are positioned ~10 kb apart, generating two distinct non-coding first exons that become spliced to a common second exon<sup>101</sup>. Both promoters are used to transcribe Gata3 in T cells, whereas the distal promoter (upstream of exon 1a) is mainly used in brain tissue. The distal promoter upstream of exon 1a was shown to contain a consensus binding site for RBPJ and was responsible for the induction of Gata3 transcription by Notch signalling<sup>99</sup>.

Intracellular Notch and GATA3 have been shown to cooperate in the induction of GATA3 and IL-4 expression through a STAT6-independent mechanism<sup>100</sup>. Although GATA3 can induce T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation independently of Notch signalling, Notch signals require GATA3 expression to promote T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses, as overexpression of intracellular Notch in T<sub>H</sub> cells that are deficient in GATA3 or that express a dominant-negative form of GATA3 resulted in little IL-4 production.

### STAT6-independent pathway: IL-2 receptor signalling boosts early IL-4 production

A second STAT6-independent pathway of T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation has been described by William Paul’s group<sup>84,102,103</sup>, which has provided extensive evidence for a crucial role for IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) signalling through STAT5A in T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation. Exposure of naive T cells to exogenous IL-2 or forced expression of a constitutively active form of STAT5A (STAT5A1*6) in non-polarizing or T<sub>H</sub>1-cell-polarizing conditions (that is, in cells that express low but detectable levels of GATA3) led to increased T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation<sup>102</sup>. Accordingly, T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation *in vitro* and *in vivo* was impaired in the absence of IL-2R signalling through STAT5A<sup>84,103</sup>. A role for IL-2R signalling in T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation is consistent with the observation that T<sub>H</sub>2 cells express higher levels of CD25 (the α-chain of IL-2R) and are therefore more sensitive to IL-2 than T<sub>H</sub>1 cells<sup>104</sup>. The effect of STAT5A1*6 in promoting T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation was still apparent, albeit to a lesser degree, in STAT6-deficient T cells<sup>103</sup>, suggesting that the mechanism by which STAT5A1*6 promotes T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation does not depend on STAT6. IL-2-induced STAT5A activation resulted in epigenetic modifications of IL4 at locations that were different to those modified by GATA3, and this led to the induction of IL-4 production by T<sub>H</sub> cells<sup>103</sup>. In addition, STAT5A and GATA3 were found to cooperate in the promotion of T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation<sup>103</sup>. One unexpected finding was that forced expression of STAT5A1*6 was sufficient to cause the production of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokines and the inhibition of expression of the T<sub>H</sub>1-cell-associated transcription factor T-bet, but did not induce GATA3 expression<sup>102</sup>. This suggests that the IL-2R–STAT5A signalling pathway can drive T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation in a GATA3-independent manner. However, forced expression of STAT5A1*6 alone was not sufficient to induce the differentiation of GATA3-deficient T cells into T<sub>H</sub>2 cells<sup>95</sup>. These paradoxical observations fail to explain how IL-2R–STAT5A signalling promotes T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation in the absence of STAT6 (therefore, in the absence of the IL-4–STAT6 positive-feedback loop) despite inducing the expression of IL-4 but not of GATA3 (therefore, in the absence of GATA3 autoactivation).

Together, these studies indicate that T<sub>H</sub>2-cell-polarizing signals other than IL-4 can promote T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation through STAT6-independent mechanisms. Notch signals promote T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation by driving the expression of GATA3 (and subsequently IL-4), and IL-2R–STAT5A signals by directly inducing the production of IL-4 in newly activated naive T cells. These findings, together with data showing that IL-4 production hours after TCR triggering is abrogated in GATA3-deficient naive T cells<sup>84</sup>, indicate that both STAT6-dependent and STAT6-independent pathways of IL-4 production require GATA3 (FIG. 3).

## Structural insights into GATA3 function

The six mammalian GATA family members are highly homologous, sharing the GATA-binding motif and their general structural organization (FIG. 1). Here, we review studies that delineate the important structural elements of GATA3. We also discuss the hypothesis that GATA3 has evolved structural features that are distinct from other GATA family members and that are involved in controlling the production of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokines.

Most structure–function studies have investigated the ability of GATA3 mutants in which large domains have been deleted to induce the production of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokines when expressed in developing T<sub>H</sub>1 cells (TABLE 1). Deletion of the transactivation domains, which were defined in early reporter-assay studies, abrogated GATA3 function, as did deletion of the distal zinc-finger motif<sup>87,105,106</sup>. The function of the proximal zinc-finger motif is less clear, as two groups found that it was dispensable<sup>87,106</sup> and another found that it was required<sup>105</sup> for the production of IL-4. The apical C-terminal amino acids of GATA3 (371–443) were found to be dispensable for T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokine production<sup>70,107</sup> (FIG. 1).

Studies of GATA3 in which the three amino acids at positions 305–307 between the two zinc-finger motifs have been mutated (referred to as the KRR mutant) (FIG. 1) have provided insights into the function of GATA3. The KRR mutant was shown to have dominant-negative activity in reporter assays<sup>108</sup>, impaired binding to GATA doublet elements (as found in the IL5 promoter) and reduced ability to induce IL-5 and IL-13 production *in vivo* when expressed as a transgene, probably by acting as a competitive inhibitor of endogenous GATA3 (REF. 109). In many contexts, however, the KRR mutant functions as a hypomorphic mutant of GATA3, inducing T-cell differentiation in early pre-committed lymphocyte precursors, development of thymocytes to the CD4 lineage and IL4 locus remodelling in T<sub>H</sub>1 cells, although less efficiently than native GATA3 (REFS 34, 69, 82, 106).
Table 1 | Effects of various GATA-binding protein mutants on the function and differentiation of T helper cells

| GATA protein* | Cytokine production† | IL4–IL13–IL5 locus remodelling | DNA binding | Autoactivation | Refs |
|---------------|----------------------|---------------------------------|--------------|----------------|------|
|               | IL-4                 | IL-5                           | IL-13        | IFNγ           |      |      |
| Wild-type GATA3 | ↑                   | ↑                              | ↑            | ↓              | Yes  | Yes   | 36,82,87 |
| GATA3 ΔTA1    | ↔                    | ND                             | ND           | ↓              | ND   | Yes   | No    | 105     |
| GATA3 ΔTA2    | ↔                    | ND                             | ND           | ↓              | ND   | No    | Yes   | 105     |
| GATA3 ΔTA1+TA2 | ↔                    | ↔                              | ↔            | ↔              | Yes (of IL13) | Yes  | ND    | 87,106  |
| GATA3 ΔNf     | ↑ and ↔§             | ↔                              | ↔            | ↓              | Yes  | Yes and no§ | No    | 87,105,106 |
| GATA3 ΔCf     | ↔                    | ↔                              | ↔            | ↔              | No   | No    | No    | 87,105,106 |
| GATA3 ΔYxKxHxxxRPⅡ | ↔                  | ↔                              | ↔            | ↔              | No   | No    | ND    | 107     |
| GATA3 KRR→AAA | ↑ and ↓§             | ↑ and ↓§                       | ↑ and ↓§     | ↓              | Yes  | Yes   | Yes   | 82,87,106, 108,109 |
| Wild-type GATA4 | ↑                   | ↔                              | ↔            | ↓              | Yes  | Yes and no§ | 70,105 |
| GATA4 P321M   | ↑                    | ↔                              | ↑            | ↓              | ND   | No    | ND    | 70      |

*Δ denotes a deletion mutation. †↑ Denotes increased expression, ↓ denotes decreased expression and ↔ denotes no change. §Studies using different approaches show different results. ‡In which x denotes any amino acid. Cf, carboxy-terminal zinc-finger motif; GATA3, GATA-binding protein 3; IFNγ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; ND, not determined; Nf, amino-terminal zinc-finger motif; TA, transactivation domain.

More recently, key amino acids in the region following the second zinc-finger motif (residues 342–370) have been identified (FIG. 1). In mouse T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, deletion of amino acids 349–355 or point mutations in this region, which has a conserved YxKxHxxxRP motif (in which x denotes any amino acid) abrogates all GATA3 functions, including the induction of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokine production and histone hyperacetylation of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokine loci, and reduces DNA binding *in vitro*<sup>107</sup>. Further downstream of the YxKxHxxxRP motif, amino acids NRKMSS (365–370) are also essential for T<sub>H</sub>2-cell function, as a deletion mutant that lacks the C-terminal tail up to and including these six residues could not induce the production of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokines or suppress IFNγ production. By contrast, a mutant that includes NRKMSS has activity that is comparable to that of wild-type GATA3 (REF. 70).

Comparison of the activity of GATA3 with the activity of related GATA family members that are not normally expressed in T cells showed that the region following the zinc-finger motifs of GATA3 specifically drives the production of IL-13 in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells<sup>70</sup>. The T-cell-specific expression of GATA3 raises the question of whether the unique functions of GATA3 are a result of its expression pattern or of biochemical features that distinguish it from other GATA family members. To address this question directly, we tested whether another GATA family member, GATA4, or GATA fusion proteins could substitute for the T-cell-specific functions of GATA3 (REF. 70). We found that GATA4 supported CD4<sup>+</sup> thymocyte development in reaggregated FTOCs and suppressed IFNγ production and GATA3 expression in developing T<sub>H</sub>1 cells. However, GATA4 induced less IL-4 production than GATA3 and did not induce IL-5 or IL-13 production<sup>70</sup>. Interestingly, we found that replacing the entire zinc-finger motif and post-zinc-finger region of GATA4 with that of GATA3 restored the production of IL-13 without affecting IL-4 or IL-5 production. In addition, a single amino-acid substitution in GATA4 that replaced proline 321 with methionine (equivalent to methionine 368 of GATA3) had the same effect<sup>70</sup>. Therefore, different structural features of GATA3 are important for the production of IL-13. A study showing that protein inhibitor of activated STAT1 (PIAS1) binds to GATA3 in T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and controls IL-13 production, but not IL-5 or IL-4 production, indicates that distinct co-activators may be recruited for the expression of individual cytokines<sup>110</sup>.

### Conclusions and future directions

In this Review, we have discussed recent data that have expanded the role of GATA3 beyond T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation, highlighting how Notch signals are incompatible with high levels of GATA3 expression in early pro-T cells, act at discrete steps in β-selection and directly induce GATA3 during T<sub>H</sub>2-cell development. The Notch signalling pathway and GATA3 intersect, but the extent of the relationship differs according to the developmental context. Although the direct effect of Notch on the Gata3 promoter during T<sub>H</sub>2-cell development has been described, the molecular mechanisms that underlie the Notch–GATA3 relationship at earlier stages of T-cell development remain to be elucidated.

The level of GATA3 expression must be tightly regulated, as shown by the findings that GATA3 overexpression has cytotoxic effects and that inappropriate expression of GATA family transcription factors can divert the development of progenitors into alternative lineages. Although GATA3 is continually expressed during T-cell-lineage development, it is not clear how this single transcription factor directs distinct stage-specific transcriptional programmes. Specifically, the molecular mechanism that modulates the expression levels of GATA3, which increase progressively from early thymocytes to CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells to differentiated T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, remains elusive; the *cis*-acting element that is responsible for the autoactivation of GATA3 has not been identified.

Furthermore, it is not clear how different levels of GATA3 result in distinct functional outcomes. A recent report describing the crystal structure of the distal zinc-finger motif of mouse GATA3 suggests that recognition of adjacent DNA-binding sites can involve either both the proximal and the distal zinc-finger motifs from the same molecule or the distal zinc-finger motifs from two molecules that are self-associated<sup>111</sup>. This study also suggests that, depending on the concentration of GATA3, one or two GATA3 molecules can bind to DNA sequences that contain two GATA motifs<sup>108</sup>. This finding provides an interesting structural explanation for the distinct functional outcomes of low and high levels of expression of GATA3.

At present, the direct transcriptional targets of GATA3 in pro-T cells, CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells and invariant NKT cells, in which the levels of expression are much lower than in T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, remain largely undefined. Studies using chromatin immunoprecipitation and genome-wide profiling are technically challenging when protein levels are low and depend on antibodies. Therefore, new methods to delineate the transcriptional programme that is mediated by GATA3 will be required in the future, together with further studies using stage-specific genetic deletion. Understanding the mechanisms by which varied GATA3 expression in a developmentally regulated chromatin landscape induces distinct genetic programmes will increase our ability to dissect and modulate immune responses.

1. Ko, L. & Engel, J. DNA-binding specificities of the GATA transcription factor family. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **13**, 4011–4022 (1993).
2. Merika, M. & Orkin, S. DNA-binding specificity of GATA family transcription factors. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **13**, 3999–4010 (1993).
3. Ho, I. *et al.* Human GATA-3: a lineage-restricted transcription factor that regulates the expression of the T cell receptor alpha gene. *EMBO J.* **10**, 1187–1192 (1991).
4. Oosterwegel, M., Timmerman, J., Leiden, J. & Clevers, H. Expression of GATA-3 during lymphocyte differentiation and mouse embryogenesis. *Dev. Immunol.* **3**, 1–11 (1992).
5. Samson, S. I. *et al.* GATA-3 promotes maturation, IFN-γ production, and liver-specific homing of NK cells. *Immunity* **19**, 701–711 (2003).
6. Zon, L. I. *et al.* GATA-binding transcription factors in mast cells regulate the promoter of the mast cell carboxypeptidase A gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 22948–22953 (1991).
7. Solymar, D. C., Agarwal, S., Bassing, C. H., Alt, F. W. & Rao, A. A 3′ enhancer in the IL-4 gene regulates cytokine production by Th2 cells and mast cells. *Immunity* **17**, 41–50 (2002).
8. Asselin-Labat, M. L. *et al.* Gata-3 is an essential regulator of mammary-gland morphogenesis and luminal-cell differentiation. *Nature Cell Biol.* **9**, 201–209 (2007).
9. de Guzman Strong, C. *et al.* Lipid defect underlies selective skin barrier impairment of an epidermal-specific deletion of Gata-3. *J. Cell Biol.* **175**, 661–670 (2006).
10. Kaufman, C. K. *et al.* GATA-3: an unexpected regulator of cell lineage determination in skin. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 2108–2122 (2003).
11. Kouros-Mehr, H. *et al.* GATA-3 links tumor differentiation and dissemination in a luminal breast cancer model. *Cancer Cell* **13**, 141–152 (2008).
12. Kouros-Mehr, H., Slorach, E. M., Sternlicht, M. D. & Werb, Z. GATA-3 maintains the differentiation of the luminal cell fate in the mammary gland. *Cell* **127**, 1041–1055 (2006).
13. Lim, K. C. *et al.* Gata3 loss leads to embryonic lethality due to noradrenaline deficiency of the sympathetic nervous system. *Nature Genet.* **25**, 209–212 (2000).
14. Tong, Q. *et al.* Function of GATA transcription factors in preadipocyte–adipocyte transition. *Science* **290**, 134–138 (2000).
15. Ho, I. C. & Pai, S. Y. GATA-3 — not just for Th2 cells anymore. *Cell. Mol. Immunol.* **4**, 15–29 (2007).
16. Pandolfi, P. P. *et al.* Targeted disruption of the GATA3 gene causes severe abnormalities in the nervous system and in fetal liver haematopoiesis. *Nature Genet.* **11**, 40–44 (1995).
17. Ting, C. N., Olson, M. C., Barton, K. P. & Leiden, J. M. Transcription factor Gata-3 is required for development of the T-cell lineage. *Nature* **384**, 474–478 (1996). This paper establishes the crucial role of GATA3 in T-cell lineage commitment by showing that *Rag*<sup>−/−</sup> blastocysts complemented with *Gata3*<sup>−/−</sup> embryonic stem cells generate B cells but not T cells.
18. Zhong, J. F. *et al.* Gene expression profile of murine long-term reconstituting vs. short-term reconstituting hematopoietic stem cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 2448–2453 (2005).
19. Bertrand, J. Y. *et al.* Characterization of purified intraembryonic hematopoietic stem cells as a tool to define their site of origin. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 134–139 (2005).
20. Kobayashi-Osaki, M. *et al.* GATA motifs regulate early hematopoietic lineage-specific expression of the *Gata2* gene. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 7005–7020 (2005).
21. Labastie, M. C., Cortés, F., Roméo, P. H., Dulac, C. & Péalut, B. Molecular identity of hematopoietic precursor cells emerging in the human embryo. *Blood* **92**, 3624–3635 (1998).
22. Mouthon, M. A. *et al.* Expression of tal-1 and GATA-binding proteins during human hematopoiesis. *Blood* **81**, 647–655 (1993).
23. Dias, S., Silva, H., Cumano, A. & Vieira, P. Interleukin-7 is necessary to maintain the B cell potential in common lymphoid progenitors. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 971–979 (2005).
24. Chen, D. & Zhang, G. Enforced expression of the GATA-3 transcription factor affects cell fate decisions in hematopoiesis. *Exp. Hematol.* **29**, 971–980 (2001).
25. Taghon, T. *et al.* Enforced expression of GATA-3 severely reduces human thymic cellularity. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 4468–4475 (2001).
26. David-Fung, E. S. *et al.* Progression of regulatory gene expression states in fetal and adult pro-T-cell development. *Immunol. Rev.* **209**, 212–236 (2006).
27. Tydell, C. C. *et al.* Molecular dissection of prethymic progenitor entry into the T lymphocyte developmental pathway. *J. Immunol.* **179**, 421–438 (2007).
28. Schmitt, T. M. & Zúñiga-Pflücker, J. C. Induction of T cell development from hematopoietic progenitor cells by Delta-like-1 *in vitro*. *Immunity* **17**, 749–756 (2002).
29. Höflinger, S. *et al.* Analysis of Notch1 function by *in vitro* T cell differentiation of Pax5 mutant lymphoid progenitors. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 3935–3944 (2004).
30. Schmitt, T. M. *et al.* Induction of T cell development and establishment of T cell competence from embryonic stem cells differentiated *in vitro*. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 410–417 (2004).
31. Taghon, T. N., David, E. S., Zúñiga-Pflücker, J. C. & Rothenberg, E. V. Delayed, asynchronous, and reversible T-lineage specification induced by Notch/Delta signaling. *Genes Dev.* **19**, 965–978 (2005).
32. Pui, J. C. *et al.* Notch1 expression in early lymphopoiesis influences B versus T lineage determination. *Immunity* **11**, 299–308 (1999).
33. Radtke, F. *et al.* Deficient T cell fate specification in mice with an induced inactivation of Notch1. *Immunity* **10**, 547–558 (1999).
34. Taghon, T., Yui, M. A. & Rothenberg, E. V. Mast cell lineage diversion of T lineage precursors by the essential T cell transcription factor GATA-3.
35. Hozumi, K. *et al.* Notch signaling is necessary for GATA3 function in the initiation of T cell development. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **38**, 977–985 (2008).
36. Ouyang, W. *et al.* Stat6-independent GATA-3 auto-activation directs IL-4-independent Th2 development and commitment. *Immunity* **12**, 27–37 (2000).
37. Tsai, S.-F., Strauss, E. & Orkin, S. Functional analysis and *in vivo* footprinting implicate the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 as a positive regulator of its own promoter. *Genes Dev.* **5**, 919–931 (1991).

38. Hendriks, R. W. *et al.* Expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 is required for the development of the earliest T cell progenitors and correlates with stages of cellular proliferation in the thymus. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 1912–1918 (1999).
39. Pai, S. Y. *et al.* Critical roles for transcription factor GATA-3 in thymocyte development. *Immunity* **19**, 863–875 (2003). Using mice in which thymocytes were rendered deficient in GATA3 at the DN3 and DP stages of development, these authors show that GATA3 is required for optimal β-selection and for CD4 SP thymocyte development.
40. Bender, T. P., Kremer, C. S., Kraus, M., Buch, T. & Rajewsky, K. Critical functions for c-Myb at three checkpoints during thymocyte development.
41. Tanigaki, K. *et al.* Regulation of αβ/γδ T cell lineage commitment and peripheral T cell responses by Notch/RBP-J signaling. *Immunity* **20**, 611–622 (2004).
42. Wolfer, A., Wilson, A., Nemir, M., MacDonald, H. R. & Radtke, F. Inactivation of Notch1 impairs VDJβ rearrangement and allows pre-TCR-independent survival of early αβ lineage thymocytes. *Immunity* **16**, 869–879 (2002).
43. Neilson, J. R., Winslow, M. M., Hur, E. M. & Crabtree, G. R. Calcineurin B1 is essential for positive but not negative selection during thymocyte development. *Immunity* **20**, 255–266 (2004).
44. Gu, H., Marth, J. D., Orban, P. C., Mossmann, H. & Rajewsky, K. Deletion of a DNA polymerase beta gene segment in T cells using cell type-specific gene targeting. *Science* **265**, 103–106 (1994).
45. Maillard, I. *et al.* The requirement for Notch signaling at the β-selection checkpoint *in vivo* is absolute and independent of the pre-T cell receptor. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 2239–2245 (2006).
46. Aliahmad, P. & Kaye, J. Commitment issues: linking positive selection signals and lineage diversification in the thymus. *Immunol. Rev.* **209**, 253–273 (2006).
47. Bosselut, R. CD4/CD8-lineage differentiation in the thymus: from nuclear effectors to membrane signals. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **4**, 529–540 (2004).
48. He, X. & Kappes, D. J. CD4/CD8 lineage commitment: light at the end of the tunnel? *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **18**, 135–142 (2006).
49. Kappes, D. J., He, X. & He, X. Role of the transcription factor Th-POK in CD4:CD8 lineage commitment. *Immunol. Rev.* **209**, 237–252 (2006).
50. Laky, K. & Fowlkes, B. J. Receptor signals and nuclear events in CD4 and CD8 T cell lineage commitment. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **17**, 116–121 (2005).
51. Singer, A., Adoro, S. & Park, J. H. Lineage fate and intense debate: myths, models and mechanisms of CD4-versus CD8-lineage choice. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **8**, 788–801 (2008).
52. Hedrick, S. M. T cell development: bottoms-up. *Immunity* **16**, 619–622 (2002).
53. Hogquist, K. A. Signal strength in thymic selection and lineage commitment. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **13**, 225–231 (2001).
54. Singer, A. New perspectives on a developmental dilemma: the kinetic signaling model and the importance of signal duration for the CD4/CD8 lineage decision. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **14**, 207–215 (2002).

55. Brugnera, E. *et al.* Coreceptor reversal in the thymus: signaled CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>+</sup> thymocytes initially terminate CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. *Immunity* **13**, 59–71 (2000).

56. Matechak, E. O., Killeen, N., Hedrick, S. M. & Fowlkes, B. J. MHC class II-specific T cells can develop in the CD8 lineage when CD4 is absent. *Immunity* **4**, 337–347 (1996).

57. Sarafova, S. D. *et al.* Modulation of coreceptor transcription during positive selection dictates lineage fate independently of TCR/coreceptor specificity. *Immunity* **23**, 75–87 (2005).

58. Bosselut, R., Guinter, T. I., Sharrow, S. O. & Singer, A. Unraveling a revealing paradox: why major histocompatibility complex I-signaled thymocytes “paradoxically” appear as CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>lo</sup> transitional cells during positive selection of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **197**, 1709–1719 (2003).

59. Lucas, B. & Germain, R. N. Unexpectedly complex regulation of CD4/CD8 coreceptor expression supports a revised model for CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>+</sup> thymocyte differentiation. *Immunity* **5**, 461–477 (1996).

60. Lundberg, K., Heath, W., Köntgen, F., Carbone, F. R. & Shortman, K. Intermediate steps in positive selection: differentiation of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>int</sup> TCR<sup>int</sup> thymocytes into CD4<sup>+</sup>TCR<sup>hi</sup> thymocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* **181**, 1643–1651 (1995).

61. Aliahmad, P. & Kaye, J. Development of all CD4 T lineages requires nuclear factor TOX. *J. Exp. Med.* **205**, 245–256 (2008).

62. Dave, V. P., Allman, D., Keefe, R., Hardy, R. R. & Kappes, D. J. HD mice: a novel mouse mutant with a specific defect in the generation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 8187–8192 (1998).

63. Keefe, R., Dave, V., Allman, D., Wiest, D. & Kappes, D. J. Regulation of lineage commitment distinct from positive selection. *Science* **286**, 1149–1153 (1999). References 62 and 63 describe the phenotype of the helper-deficient mouse strain, which lacks CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell development and supports the diversion of MHC class II-restricted T cells into the CD8 lineage when crossed with AND TCR-transgenic mice.

64. He, X. *et al.* The zinc finger transcription factor Th-POK regulates CD4 versus CD8 T-cell lineage commitment. *Nature* **433**, 826–833 (2005).

65. Sun, G. *et al.* The zinc finger protein cKrox directs CD4 lineage differentiation during intrathymic T cell positive selection. *Nature Immunol.* **6**, 373–381 (2005). References 64 and 65 identify Zbtb7b as the gene that is mutated in helper-deficient mice. Transgenic expression of ThPOK is sufficient to divert the development of MHC class I-restricted thymocytes to the CD4 lineage.

66. Egawa, T. & Littman, D. R. ThPOK acts late in specification of the helper T cell lineage and suppresses Runx-mediated commitment to the cytotoxic T cell lineage. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 1131–1139 (2008).

67. Muroi, S. *et al.* Cascading suppression of transcriptional silencers by ThPOK seals helper T cell fate. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 1113–1121 (2008).

68. Nawijn, M. C. *et al.* Enforced expression of GATA-3 during T cell development inhibits maturation of CD8 single-positive cells and induces thymic lymphoma in transgenic mice. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 715–723 (2001).

69. Hernandez-Hoyos, G., Anderson, M. K., Wang, C., Rothenberg, E. V. & Alberola-Ila, J. GATA-3 expression is controlled by TCR signals and regulates CD4/CD8 differentiation. *Immunity* **19**, 83–94 (2003). Using overexpression and knockdown of GATA3 expression in fetal thymocytes, the authors show that GATA3 promotes CD4 SP thymocyte development.

70. Pai, S. Y. *et al.* Distinct structural requirements of GATA-3 for the regulation of thymocyte and Th2 cell differentiation. *J. Immunol.* **180**, 1050–1059 (2008).

71. Maurice, D., Hooper, J., Lang, G. & Weston, K. c-Myb regulates lineage choice in developing thymocytes via its target gene Gata3. *EMBO J.* **26**, 3629–3640 (2007).

72. Wang, L. *et al.* Distinct functions for the transcription factors GATA-3 and ThPOK during intrathymic differentiation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 1122–1130 (2008). This paper shows that GATA3 upregulates ThPOK expression in post-selection thymocytes and that GATA3 can function as a lineage-determining factor. The finding that restoration of ThPOK expression in GATA3-deficient mice failed to restore the development of CD4 SP thymocytes suggests that GATA3 has additional roles in the survival of CD4 SP thymocytes after lineage commitment.

73. He, X. *et al.* CD4–CD8 lineage commitment is regulated by a silencer element at the ThPOK transcription-factor locus. *Immunity* **28**, 346–358 (2008).

74. Setoguchi, R. *et al.* Repression of the transcription factor Th-POK by Runx complexes in cytotoxic T cell development. *Science* **319**, 822–825 (2008).

75. Dong, C. T<sub>H</sub>17 cells in development: an updated view of their molecular identity and genetic programming. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **8**, 337–348 (2008).

76. Reiner, S. L. Development in motion: helper T cells at work. *Cell* **129**, 33–36 (2007).

77. Ansel, K. M., Djuretic, I., Tanasa, B. & Rao, A. Regulation of Th2 differentiation and IL4 locus accessibility. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **24**, 607–656 (2006).

78. Mowen, K. A. & Glimcher, L. H. Signaling pathways in Th2 development. *Immunol. Rev.* **202**, 203–222 (2004).

79. Zhu, J., Yamane, H., Cote-Sierra, J., Guo, L. & Paul, W. E. GATA-3 promotes Th2 responses through three different mechanisms: induction of Th2 cytokine production, selective growth of Th2 cells and inhibition of Th1 cell-specific factors. *Cell Res.* **16**, 3–10 (2006).

80. Amsen, D., Antov, A. & Flavell, R. A. The different faces of Notch in T-helper-cell differentiation. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **9**, 116–125 (2009).

81. Collins, A., Littman, D. R. & Taniuchi, I. RUNX proteins in transcription factor networks that regulate T-cell lineage choice. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **9**, 106–115 (2009).

82. Ouyang, W. *et al.* Inhibition of Th1 development mediated by GATA-3 through an IL-4-independent mechanism. *Immunity* **9**, 745–755 (1998).

83. Grogan, J. L. *et al.* Early transcription and silencing of cytokine genes underlie polarization of T helper cell subsets. *Immunity* **14**, 205–215 (2001).

84. Yamane, H., Zhu, J. & Paul, W. E. Independent roles for IL-2 and GATA-3 in stimulating naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to generate a Th2-inducing cytokine environment. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 793–804 (2005).

85. Avni, O. *et al.* T<sub>H</sub> cell differentiation is accompanied by dynamic changes in histone acetylation of cytokine genes. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 643–651 (2002).

86. Lee, G. R., Fields, P. E. & Flavell, R. A. Regulation of IL-4 gene expression by distal regulatory elements and GATA-3 at the chromatin level. *Immunity* **14**, 447–459 (2001).

87. Lee, H. J. *et al.* GATA-3 induces T helper cell type 2 (Th2) cytokine expression and chromatin remodeling in committed Th1 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 105–115 (2000).

88. Spilianakis, C. G. & Flavell, R. A. Long-range intrachromosomal interactions in the T helper type 2 cytokine locus. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 1017–1027 (2004).

89. Tanaka, S. *et al.* The interleukin-4 enhancer CNS-2 is regulated by Notch signals and controls initial expression in NKT cells and memory-type CD4 T cells. *Immunity* **24**, 689–701 (2006).

90. Xin, J., Ohmori, K., Nishida, J., Zhu, Y. & Huang, H. The initial response of CD4<sup>+</sup> IL-4-producing cells. *Int. Immunol.* **19**, 305–310 (2007).

91. Sokol, C. L., Barton, G. M., Farr, A. G. & Medzhitov, R. A mechanism for the initiation of allergen-induced T helper type 2 responses. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 310–318 (2008).

92. Zhang, D. H., Cohn, L., Ray, P., Bottomly, K. & Ray, A. Transcription factor Gata-3 is differentially expressed murine Th1 and Th2 cells and controls Th2-specific expression of the interleukin-5 gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 21597–21603 (1997).

93. Zheng, W. P. & Flavell, R. A. The transcription factor Gata-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells. *Cell* **89**, 587–596 (1997).

94. Pai, S. Y., Truitt, M. L. & Ho, I. C. GATA-3 deficiency abrogates the development and maintenance of T helper type 2 cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 1993–1998 (2004).

95. Zhu, J. *et al.* Conditional deletion of Gata3 shows its essential function in T<sub>H</sub>1-T<sub>H</sub>2 responses. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 1157–1165 (2004). References 94 and 95 use conditional deletion of GATA3 to confirm the requirement for GATA3 in the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells *in vitro* and *in vivo*.

96. Kaplan, M. H., Schindler, U., Smiley, S. T. & Grusby, M. J. Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for development of Th2 cells. *Immunity* **4**, 313–319 (1996).

97. Shimoda, K. *et al.* Lack of IL-4-induced Th2 response and IgE class switching in mice with disrupted Stat6 gene. *Nature* **380**, 630–633 (1996).

98. Takeda, K. *et al.* Essential role of Stat6 in IL-4 signalling. *Nature* **380**, 627–630 (1996).

99. Amsen, D. *et al.* Direct regulation of Gata3 expression determines the T helper differentiation potential of Notch. *Immunity* **27**, 89–99 (2007).

100. Fang, T. C. *et al.* Notch directly regulates Gata3 expression during T helper 2 cell differentiation. *Immunity* **27**, 100–110 (2007).

References 99 and 100 show that Notch signals directly induce the transcription of GATA3 from exon 1a and that in the presence of GATA3, Notch signals can promote T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation in a STAT6-independent manner.

101. Asnagli, H., Afkarian, M. & Murphy, K. M. Cutting Edge: identification of an alternative GATA-3 promoter directing tissue-specific gene expression in mouse and human. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 4268–4271 (2002).

102. Zhu, J., Cote-Sierra, J., Guo, L. & Paul, W. E. Stat5 activation plays a critical role in Th2 differentiation. *Immunity* **19**, 739–748 (2003). This is the first report showing that IL-2R signalling through STAT5A can promote T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation in a STAT6-independent manner.

103. Cote-Sierra, J. *et al.* Interleukin 2 plays a central role in Th2 differentiation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 3880–3885 (2004).

104. Hwang, E. S., White, I. A. & Ho, I. C. An IL-4-independent and CD25-mediated function of c-maf in promoting the production of Th2 cytokines. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 13026–13030 (2002).

105. Ranganath, S. & Murphy, K. Structure and specificity of GATA proteins in Th2 development. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **21**, 2716–2725 (2001).

106. Takemoto, N., Arai, K. & Miyatake, S. Cutting Edge: the differential involvement of the N-finger of GATA-3 in chromatin remodeling and transactivation during Th2 development. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 4103–4107 (2002).

107. Shinnakasu, R. *et al.* Critical YxKxHxxxRP motif in the C-terminal region of GATA3 for its DNA binding and function. *J. Immunol.* **177**, 5801–5810 (2006).

108. Smith, V. M., Lee, P. P., Szychowski, S. & Winoto, A. Gata-3 dominant negative mutant — functional redundancy of the T cell receptor α and β enhancers. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 1515–1520 (1995).

109. Zhang, D.-H. *et al.* Inhibition of allergic inflammation in a murine model of asthma by expression of a dominant-negative mutant of GATA-3. *Immunity* **11**, 473–482 (1999).

110. Zhao, X. *et al.* Interaction between GATA-3 and the transcriptional coregulator Pias1 is important for the regulation of Th2 immune responses. *J. Immunol.* **179**, 8297–8304 (2007).

111. Bates, D. L., Chen, Y., Kim, G., Guo, L. & Chen, L. Crystal structures of multiple GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA reveal new insights into DNA recognition and self-association by GATA. *J. Mol. Biol.* **381**, 1292–1306 (2008).

112. Bendelac, A., Savage, P. B. & Teyton, L. The biology of NKT cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **25**, 297–336 (2007).

113. Godfrey, D. I. & Berzins, S. P. Control points in NKT-cell development. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **7**, 505–518 (2007).

114. Wang, Z. Y. *et al.* Regulation of Th2 cytokine expression in NKT cells: unconventional use of Stat6, GATA-3, and NFAT2. *J. Immunol.* **176**, 880–888 (2006).

115. Kim, P. J. *et al.* GATA-3 regulates the development and function of invariant NKT cells. *J. Immunol.* **177**, 6650–6659 (2006).

116. Maillard, I., Fang, T. & Pear, W. S. Regulation of lymphoid development, differentiation, and function by the Notch pathway. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**, 945–974 (2005).

117. Osborne, B. A. & Minter, L. M. Notch signalling during peripheral T-cell activation and differentiation. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **7**, 64–75 (2007).


### Acknowledgements

Owing to space constraints, we could not include every relevant reference and apologize to our colleagues whose work we did not mention. This work is supported by a R01 grant AI054451 (to I.-C.H.) and a K08 award (AI050601 (to S.-Y.P.) from the National Institutes of Health, USA, a Charles H. Hood Foundation Child Health Research Grant (to S.-Y.P.), and a Merit Scholarship (to T.-S.T.) from National Science Council, Taiwan.


### DATABASES

Entrez Gene: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene>

DLL1 | GATA1 | GATA2 | GATA3 | GATA4 | IL-4 | IL-5 | IL-13 | MAML1 | MYB | Notch | RBPI | STAT5A | STAT6 | TOX | Zbtb7b


### FURTHER INFORMATION

I-Cheng Ho’s homepage: <http://www.hms.harvard.edu/dms/immunology/fac/Ho_Icheng.html>

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
