
INFECTION AND IMMUNITY, Apr. 2009, p. 1276–1284
0019-9567/09/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/IAI.01185-08
Copyright © 2009, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

MINIREVIEW

Host-Parasite Interactions in Trypanosomiasis: on the Way to an Antidisease Strategy

Nicolas Antoine-Moussiaux,$^{1,2*}$ Philippe Büscher,$^{3}$ and Daniel Desmecht$^{2}$

Tropical Veterinary Institute, Veterinary College, University of Liege, 20 Boulevard de Colonster, B43, 4000 Liege, Belgium$^{1}$; Department of Animal Pathology, Veterinary College, University of Liege, 20 Boulevard de Colonster, B43, 4000 Liege, Belgium$^{2}$; and Parasite Diagnostics Unit, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp, Nationalestraat 155, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium$^{3}$

---

### TOWARD AN ANTIDISEASE STRATEGY

African trypanosomiasis (AT) is a family of parasitic conditions affecting both humans and livestock, impairing development in sub-Saharan Africa, throughout the 10 million-km² habitat zone of the common vector, *Glossina* spp. According to the WHO's estimations (2), 300,000 to 500,000 people are affected by AT and annual economic losses due to animal AT are about $4.5 billion (U.S. dollars). AT also represents an economic constraint in other parts of the world, despite the absence of tsetse flies in these other locations. Some AT-related *Trypanosoma* species are indeed adapted to mechanical transmission, which does not require any biological cycle to be completed in the vector and thus allows transmission by non-tsetse blood-feeding flies. In the quest to control AT, various control methods have been developed, although chemotherapy still represents the principal one. Because of the ongoing dissemination of trypanocide-resistant trypanosome strains, the research for alternative control methods has been intensified. Among these, the development of a vaccine has long been impeded by the existence of the variable surface glycoprotein (VSG) coat switch, which will probably keep frustrating this project for many years (126). Trypanotolerant breeds represent a real hope for the development of more efficient animal production in the tsetse belt. Besides a better control of parasite multiplication in the vascular compartment, these breeds are able to limit the amount of lesion development for a given parasite burden. As the complete elimination of the agent from the infected organism is rendered impossible by VSG coat switch, animals showing some ability to limit consequences of infection (trypanotolerance) are thus favored through natural selection. Over the past decade, the new concept of an antidisease vaccine has gained in popularity since its introduction by Playfair et al. (127) in the context of malaria. The goal of such a vaccine is no longer to allow a rapid elimination of the parasite but to neutralize the pathological effects of trypanosomal factors. Furthermore, where classic chemotherapy fails or is poorly sustainable, support treatments can be envisaged,

which would aim at countering part of the pathogenesis. For these so-called “antidisease strategies,” precise knowledge of host-parasite interactions and parasitic factors involved in pathogenesis is needed. Significant work has been achieved in this field since the last paper reviewing biologically active parasite products was published in 1978 (151). The present paper thus aims at presenting recent advances regarding parasite factors involved in AT, with special reference to prospects for curative or preventive interventions at the level of host-parasite interaction.

---

### AT AND COMPARATIVE PATHOLOGY

The definition of AT actually encompasses very different types of pathogenesis (4), relating to the broad range of trypanosome species belonging to three different subgenera (*Trypanozoon*, *Dutonella*, and *Nanomonas*). In the present context, it is crucial that this fact be kept in mind, as one therapeutic agent or a vaccine could be potent for only one of these various trypanosome species. On the other hand, the species within the *Trypanosoma* genus naturally share an important core genome and proteome. Although interactions involving parasite factors might ultimately differ between them, it seems reasonable to envisage the potential role of a factor in one trypanosome species if this factor is described to play some role in another. As great achievements in AT have been made by using comparisons with malaria and leishmaniasis, such a comparative approach among trypanosomiases could be fruitful (62, 79, 146). In this context, the Tritryp project, which involves jointly analyzing genomes and proteomes of *T. brucei*, *Trypanosoma cruzi*, and *Leishmania major*, highlights the remarkably conserved genetic core between these species (23, 38, 62, 125). Several genome projects are also under way for *T. brucei gambiense*, *T. congolense*, and *T. vivax* (62). Besides the significant success of the *T. cruzi* proteome project (6), the recent description of the *T. brucei* plasma membrane subproteome was a unique breakthrough (24, 60). These achievements should bring insights into host-parasite interactions and the identification of new vaccine candidates or chemotherapeutic targets. New insights are already being gained from research into the trypanosome flagellar pocket, the main host-parasite interface (51). As divergences should not mask convergences and vice versa, in an attempt to leave a place for such comparative thinking, the authors will briefly men-

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Tropical Veterinary Institute, Veterinary College, University of Liege, 20 Boulevard de Colonster, B43, 4000 Liege, Belgium. Phone: 3243664128. Fax: 3243664565. E-mail: nantoine@ulg.ac.be.
Published ahead of print on 21 January 2009.

Vol. 77, 2009

**THE MAJOR CANDIDATES**

VSGs and Glycosyl-Inositol-Phosphate Anchors. The immune response and immunopathology in AT have been thoroughly investigated during the last few decades (84, 146). In addition to the fascinating VSG switch immune evasion mechanism (126), immune suppression is a classical feature of AT, a phenomenon upon which much research effort has been concentrated (9, 84, 114, 146). Macrophage activation has been highlighted as a critical point of immune function or dysfunction in both *T. brucei brucei* and *T. congolense* infection mouse models (9, 114).

Pathogenesis is partly related to macrophage overactivation and uncontrolled production of harmful substances, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which induces immune suppression, anemia, organ lesions, and cachexia (32, 78, 81). While soluble VSGs (sVSGs), actively shed by live parasites, have been identified as major TNF-inducing factors through the glycosyl-inositol-phosphate (GIP) moiety, membrane-fixed VSGs, which are abundantly released into the bloodstream at each parasite lysis phase, have been shown to contribute to macrophage overactivation through their dimyristoylglycerol compound (146). TNF does not, however, play the same pathological role based on the disease-causing species (105). This difference could relate directly to differences in VSG structure leading to different abilities to trigger TNF production, with GIP-associated galactose side chains being potentially involved (80). Moreover, phospholipase C (PLC), which is responsible for sVSG release by live *T. brucei brucei*, might not have the same role in *T. congolense* or *T. vivax* infection, minimizing the role played by sVSG in pathogenesis in *T. vivax*. A PLC-deleted *T. brucei brucei* strain (*PLC⁻/⁻*) has shown this enzyme to be necessary to affect the accurately timed and controlled macrophage activation needed for defense (9).

Cysteine Peptidases. Cysteine peptidases (CPs), which are known to play a role in the pathogenesis of *T. cruzi* and *Leishmania* spp. infections (91), could also be involved in AT-induced immune depression, anemia, thrombocytopenia, or central nervous system (CNS) invasion (7, 8, 42, 63, 111, 152). In addition, CPs are considered potential targets for future drug design (trypanocide and antidis ease) as well as antidis ease vaccine candidates (29, 64, 92). Although most of the literature has dealt with *T. cruzi* CP (cruza in or cruzipain), CPs from *T. brucei brucei*, *T. congolense*, and *T. brucei rhodesiense* have also been extensively studied (8, 28, 42, 56, 67, 90, 119, 134, 152). Progress in proteomics and genomics will further allow rapid evolution in the field, as several new proteases are already available in gene databanks. Simultaneously, important efforts are being undertaken for the development of CP-inhibiting molecules for *T. congolense*, *T. brucei brucei*, and *T. brucei rhodesiense* (34, 35, 48, 49, 59, 82, 157).

Most work on CPs from an antidis ease point of view has been conducted in *T. congolense*, based on the initial observation of a better immune response directed against these molecules in trypanotolerant cattle in comparison with susceptible breeds (8). Structurally, *T. congolense* CPs have a molecular mass of about 33 kDa and contain two major domains: a catalytic domain and a C-terminal extension, which is not present in mammalian homologs and which is not involved in enzymatic activity (22). Two families of related CPs have been described, CP1 and CP2, for which distinct roles in pathogenesis have been suspected from an immunization study conducted in cattle (7). This study suggests a greater role for CP2, which could contribute to anemia as well as to immunosuppression, while the role of CP1 is more restricted to the housekeeping duties in the cell. This greater role for CP2 was linked by those authors to its capacity to degrade protein substrates at physiological pH. Procongopain (*T. congolense* CP precursor) has also been shown to be processed at basic pH (141). A similar observation has been made regarding the *T. brucei rhodesiense* CP, rhodesain (and cruzain of *T. cruzi*), which have been found to retain significant activity and stability up to pH 8, and this is thus said to be consistent with a possible extracellular function (28). Interestingly, *T. brucei brucei* CP has been shown to be released extracellularly by viable, actively motile, intact, and highly infective trypanosomes (117, 119). The pH activity profile for this protease has also been shown to range from 7.0 to 9.0. However, doubts regarding the possible activity of CPs released into a host's bloodstream arise from their sensitivity to plasmatic inhibitors, such as cystatin, α-macroglobulin, and kininogen (152). Quite surprisingly, activation of a *T. brucei* CP by a kininogen-like molecule from rat serum (called rat trypanopain modulator) has also been reported (69). Recently, the first report of the in vivo activity of bloodstream-released CP has been published with a description of a pyroglutamyl peptidase (PGP) type I from *T. brucei brucei* (96). In that study, this enzyme showed optimal activity at bloodstream pH and proved to be insensitive to plasma CP inhibitors. Substrates for PGP are N-terminally blocked with the pyroglutamyl moiety, such as tyrotropin-releasing hormone or gonadotrophin-releasing hormone. Both hormones show dramatically reduced activity in infected hosts, and PGP proved to be responsible for total reduction of tyrotropin-releasing hormone activity and partial reduction for gonadotropin-releasing hormone.

Oligopeptidases. CPs are not the only parasite protease family to be possibly involved in AT (135). Several other peptidases have now been described in *T. brucei brucei*, *T. congolense*, or *T. evansi* which are suspected of playing a role in pathogenesis (95, 98, 99, 101). Trypanosomal serine oligopeptidases (OPs) were first described in *T. brucei brucei* (152). This family (composed of 80-kDa proteins) is known to catalyze the degradation of several peptide hormones, such as neurotensin or atrial natriuretic peptide. They have further been shown to retain full catalytic activity in the bloodstream of an infected host, being insensitive to plasma peptidase inhibitors (97, 101, 152). The release of OP into the bloodstream is thought to occur during parasite lysis phases, as no active secretion has been observed in vitro (the protein lacks a signal peptide) (97). Thus, OPs are strongly thought to be responsible for the observed endocrine dysfunctions following parasite lysis (144) and more precisely, for the reduction in plasma levels of atrial natriuretic factor (107). This reduction would explain the reported hypervolemia (3, 155), and thereby the cardiomyopathy, known to occur in early AT (19). In vivo treatments with

OP inhibitors have been shown to improve the survival rate during *T. brucei brucei* infection. However, no correlation between inhibitory potency and in vitro trypanocidal effect has been observed (100). Inhibitors are thus now thought to act by neutralizing free released enzymes, rather than through an intraparasitic effect (97). Recently, tropolysin, a newly described OP of *T. brucei brucei* and *T. congolense*, has been shown to abrogate bradykinin prohypotensive properties in vivo and to contribute to the dysregulated kinin metabolism in an infected host (101).

### NEW CANDIDATES

**Anemia and Sialidases.** The pathogenesis of anemia in AT is not completely understood. Different nonexclusive mechanisms are thought to be involved: impaired erythropoiesis, increased erythrophagocytosis, and direct alteration of red blood cells (RBC) (146). The first mechanism might involve nitric oxide secretion (75), while the second has been shown to be induced by macrophage overactivation in the spleen and liver (104). These mechanisms have more or less importance according to the trypanosome species involved. In this respect, it is currently well-known that anemia in *T. brucei brucei* infection is TNF dependent (macrophage overactivation) (81), while anemia in *T. congolense* is not (105). Interestingly, in a *T. evansi* model, only late anemia was shown to partially depend on TNF (15).

In infections by *T. congolense*, *T. vivax*, and potentially *T. evansi*, direct alteration of RBC is thus expected to be an important mechanism, in which parasite sialidases could play a central role. RBC surface alterations have indeed been shown to be caused by bloodstream *T. vivax*, *T. congolense*, and *T. evansi* sialidases, thus leading to their subsequent phagocytosis (26, 40, 115, 116). Although the experimental demonstration of sialidase activity in *T. congolense* bloodstream forms was quite recent (116), a direct interaction of this trypanosome with RBC resulting in alteration of these cells had already been shown in earlier studies (13, 14). *T. vivax* sialidase was shown to present some host specificity, desialating camel, goat, and zebu RBC, while those from mice, dogs, and N'Dama bulls were shown to be resistant (26). In *T. evansi*, an isolated sialidase was found to desialate ghost RBC in the following order of efficiency: mouse, rat, camel, goat, and dog (115). This host specificity could be linked to different sialic acid compositions between hosts, as was shown to be the case between N'Dama and zebu cattle (143). Indeed, sialic acid was shown to contain less *O*-acetyl than glycolyl groups in zebu cattle, while the inverse situation occurred in trypanotolerant N'Dama cattle. Characterization of bloodstream *T. congolense*, *T. evansi*, and *T. vivax* sialidases showed pH optima of 6, 5.5, and 6.5, respectively, and a common optimum temperature of 37°C (26, 115, 116). Sialidases can, moreover, be considered in the context of alterations other than anemia and are known to desialate thrombocytes, leukocytes, and brain cells as well (115). In the first case, subsequent phagocytosis of altered platelets could result in thrombocytopenia. This lesion is clinically important in all ATs (33), but a real hemorrhagic syndrome is particularly reported in some *T. vivax* infections, this trypanosome species being long known to present strong sialidase activity (5, 40, 44). Because surface sialic acids of lymphocytes can be resynthesized within a few hours, sialidases are not thought to affect destruction by phagocytosis (65). Sialidase treatment of macrophages, however, has been shown to result in a loss of their binding capacity, which could contribute to trypanosome-induced immune depression (65). To date, no report has been made of treatments using sialidase inhibitors or immunization assays.

In *T. cruzi*, the involvement of a trans-sialidase in leukocyte apoptosis has been reported (102). However, trans-sialidase activity has not been found in any bloodstream form of African trypanosomes.

**The Brain-Blood Barrier and CNS Lesions.** The role of parasite soluble products in AT-induced CNS disturbances has been considered over the last few years. The involvement of parasite products has been proposed both in the passage across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and in the induction of lesions through apoptosis.

The involvement of sVSG has been suggested in BBB passage due to its ability to increase the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF, interleukin-6 [IL-6], IL-8, and NO) and adhesion molecules (intracellular adhesion molecule 1, E-selectin, and vascular adhesion molecule-1) shown in cultured endothelial cells (47). In addition, human bone marrow endothelial cell layers (an in vitro model for BBB) have been shown to increase the permeability coefficient when cultured with live *T. brucei gambiense*, parasite culture supernatant, or sVSG (47). In this regard, the facilitating role of gamma interferon (IFN-γ) in CNS invasion by *T. brucei brucei* has been well-described and must be considered (87).

Changes in BBB permeability, however, are commonly accepted to be multifactorial, and the roles of other parasite products, such as proteases (CPs), phosphatases, endotoxins, procyclin, or cytokine-like factors, in this process have not been ruled out (18, 68). A crucial role for CPs was first suspected from the greater ability of *T. brucei gambiense* to cross the BBB in comparison with *T. brucei brucei*, which was shown to express lower CP levels (110). CPs have indeed been shown to play a crucial role in this phenomenon in a human bone marrow epithelial cell model, with CP inhibitors abrogating epithelium crossing by *T. brucei gambiense* and CP-enriched fractions enhancing it (111). OPs from *T. brucei brucei* and *T. congolense* have also been presented as potential BBB disruptors through the cleavage of atrial natriuretic factor, this hormone being the ligand of high-affinity receptors localized on cells of the BBB, which constitutes the end organ of atriopeptin control for water balance in the CNS (68).

Procyclin (a surface protein expressed in procyclic forms of trypanosomes), and also procyclin derivatives, has been identified as a factor inducing apoptosis (trypanosome apoptotic factor) in mouse and human brain vascular endothelial cells, being produced by *T. brucei brucei* bloodstream forms (148). The involvement of trypanosome apoptotic factor is thus proposed not only in the entry of parasites into the CNS through endothelial cell apoptosis but also in immune evasion, targeting immune cells, and in the induction of extensive lesions in the cerebellum and brainstem. Such lesions have been found to occur during peak parasitemia in mice infected by *T. brucei brucei* (147) and have also been shown to occur in mice inoculated intraperitoneally with *T. brucei brucei* culture supernatant, suggesting an early role for this factor in pathogenesis.

(148). Apoptosis has also been described in brain endothelial and microglial cells, which are both constituents of the BBB, when exposed to cerebrospinal fluid from patients in the early hemolyphatic stage (stage 1) or late encephalitic stage (stage 2) of AT (46). Microglial cells display macrophage-related functions and constitute an example of an immune target for African trypanosome apoptosis-inducing factor. Interestingly, apoptosis depends on different mechanisms in endothelial and microglial cells, the latter being more sensitive to sFasL apoptosis induction and occurring only during stage 2, while endothelial apoptosis has been found in both stages and was proven not to involve BBB disruption (46).

**Lymphopenia and Apoptosis.** T-lymphocyte unresponsiveness observed in AT is thought to result from a depression of IL-2 and IL-2 receptor production, which are induced by suppressor macrophages (84). In addition to T- and B-cell unresponsiveness, however, true lymphopenia is reported at the onset of the first parasitemia wave during early infection by *T. congolense*, *T. vivax*, and *T. cruzi* (39, 77, 86, 89). In sheep, *T. evansi* infection has been shown to provoke a decrease in CD4⁺ T cells with an increase in CD8⁺ T cells in the most susceptible individuals, while opposite modifications have been shown in more resistant individuals, suggesting that CD4⁺ lymphocyte depletion is one of the cornerstones of parasite survival (123). Recently, parasitemia-associated B-cell apoptosis was shown in a murine model of *T. brucei* infection (128). This parasite-induced B-cell dysfunction was, moreover, shown to disable the host’s capacity to raise a long-lasting specific protective antiparasite antibody response and to abrogate a vaccine-induced protective response to nonrelated pathogens, which is a classical feature of AT (54, 55, 124, 136).

In *T. cruzi* infection models, the parasite has been shown directly to induce lymphocyte death through apoptosis (36). Apoptosis induction has been shown to affect CD4⁺ T cells in particular (70–73, 85). Specific factors have been implicated, such as HSP70, trans-sialidases, and a protein called Tc52, sharing functional and structural properties with the thioredoxin and glutaredoxin family (20, 21, 85, 102). B-cell apoptosis in *T. cruzi* infection has also been described (162, 163).

**Peptidase Inhibitors.** African trypanosomes possess protease inhibitors, which modulate endogenous enzyme activity. Initially described in *T. cruzi*, a family of CP inhibitors has been named chagasin, but the inhibitors are also referred to as inhibitors of cysteine peptidases (ICPs). ICPs are distinct from the cystatin family, which is present in mammals and plants but absent in kinetoplastids (1). To date, few studies concerning ICPs in AT are available. A recent study involving ICP-deleted *T. brucei* parasites highlighted the importance of CPs for their virulence and their ability to delete parasites, inducing higher parasitemia (140). However, as cystatins or cystatin-like molecules present immunomodulatory properties, ICPs should constitute a promising research field for AT (159).

**Complement-Activating Factors.** Complement occupies a central role in trypanosomiasis pathogenesis, of which hypocomplementemia is known to be a characteristic feature both in humans and animals (50, 109, 137, 153). Abnormal complement activation has long been known to be linked to trypanosome-released products (31, 108, 110, 142). These early studies characterized two complement-activating factors, called CAF-T in *T. congolense* (and *T. lewisi*) and SCAF in *T. cruzi*. Both components were shown to be nonproteinaceous, and the molecular mass of SCAF was 23 kDa. More recently, anticomplement properties have been found in different parasite factors, constituting an evasion strategy from complement-mediated lysis. In *T. cruzi*, these identified factors are T-DAF (C3 convertase decay accelerating factor, homologous to mammalian DAF), gp160, gp58/68, a complement regulatory protein (CRP), and gp63 surface protease (160). gp63 surface protease is also present in African trypanosomes and *Leishmania* spp., in which it was originally identified as a protein involved in cell invasion (37).

A recent review was dedicated to another *T. cruzi* complement-modulating factor: calreticulin (TcCRT), a 45-kDa calcium-binding protein (41). Thought to cause classical pathway inhibition through interaction with the C1q complement component, TcCRT provides a plausible explanation for the known inability of classical pathway activation to result in efficient *T. cruzi* lysis. As a calreticulin ortholog is present in African trypanosomes (GenBank accession number Tc00.1047053509011.40) (16), a similar role could also be suspected.

The role of complement is conceived of as much wider than just immune defense through opsonization or cell lysis. Complement components are also involved in tissue regeneration, growth factors for T and B cells, and in hematopoiesis and inflammation (58). Blood parasites might thus not only be resistant to complement system attack but might also use some of its properties to their own benefit.

**OTHER CANDIDATES: MYTHS AND CONTROVERSIES**

**Trypanosome Lymphocyte Triggering Factor and IFN-γ.** The trypanosome lymphocyte-triggering factor (TLTF) is a 185-kDa protein which was first found to be released by *T. brucei brucei* (120). Since its discovery in *T. brucei brucei*, TLTF has been shown to also be produced by *T. brucei rhodesiense*, *T. brucei gambiense*, and *T. evansi* (10, 112). It has been proposed that TLTF mediates the production of IFN-γ by T cells, which would in turn act as a growth factor for the parasite and stimulate TLTF production (11, 53, 120, 121). IFN-γ-induced TLTF production has, moreover, been shown to be variable between parasite species, with trypanosomes with a better productive response being characterized by better proliferation and a longer infection time (112).

In fact, this immunomodulatory function of TLTF is highly controversial, as is the role of IFN-γ as a parasite growth factor; many independent efforts to reproduce these results are known to have failed. Isolation of the TLTF gene and production of a 54-kDa recombinant protein have allowed the determination of its localization in vesicles near the flagellar pocket (154). Some more recent studies have highlighted the role of TLTF, now called trypanin, as a component of the flagellar dynein regulatory complex (129, 130). As such, trypanin was shown to be necessary to parasite survival and multiplication, probably through its role in cell motility, with incorrect cell division resulting from impeded motility (25, 129, 130). While many researchers would restrict trypanin to its cytoskeletal function, some authors continue to mention it as an immunomodulatory cytoskeleton-associated protein (18, 158).

**B-Cell Mitogen.** Polyclonal B-cell activation (PBA) is a major immunosuppressive event in a variety of pathogens, as it is

believed to divert the specific response against the parasite (133). The production of nonspecific or even autoreactive immunoglobulin M (IgM) could furthermore be associated in AT with anemia and lesions in kidneys, in articulations, or in the CNS (57, 61, 156). However, while research into *T. cruzi* has yielded several identified candidate parasite mitogens, among which TcPA45 (a proline racemase) is considered a vaccine candidate (43, 93, 94, 133), in AT this phenomenon is still poorly described. Nevertheless, interesting similarities between PBA in Chagas' disease and AT have been raised. These include the description of a cell cycle arrest both in *T. cruzi* and in *T. brucei brucei* infection models and the importance of CD5⁺ B cells in nonspecific IgM production in *T. cruzi*, *T. evansi*, and *T. congolense* infections in mouse, sheep, and cattle, respectively (27, 52, 93, 138, 162). In AT, early studies showed that PBA resulting from stimulation by *T. brucei rhodesiense* and *T. brucei brucei* extracts was mediated by spleen macrophages or T cells (118, 139). However, there is an obvious lack of information regarding PBA for different African trypanosomes. In this regard, the report of a direct mitogenic effect of *T. brucei brucei* and *T. congolense* extracts on rabbit normal lymphocytes in vitro is quite intriguing, while in the same study, no direct effect was observed in mouse, rat, or guinea pig lymphocytes (83). Some level of importance of the animal model used to investigate this point of pathogenesis should not be ruled out. Recently, Namangala et al. (106) revived the hypothesis of a B-cell mitogen-like molecule from a *T. congolense* murine model.

### ANTIDISEASE TREATMENTS

#### Vaccination Trials
In AT, the only example available of an “antidisease vaccine” is a cattle immunization strategy using congopain (7). Immunization resulted in a statistically significant beneficial effect on anemia and immunosuppression during infection. However, this protective effect proved to be too limited to be practical, and other antidisease vaccine candidates are needed to enhance efficacy.

For *T. cruzi*, immunization trials (as a protective or therapeutic vaccine) based on a cysteine protease or a trans-sialidase have been mentioned (30, 76, 161).

Although this does not constitute an antidisease vaccine, interesting results have been obtained in protection against *T. brucei brucei*, *T. brucei rhodesiense*, *T. evansi*, and *T. congolense* through the immunization of mice using tubulin-rich preparations or microtubule-associated proteins (12, 66, 74, 132). Microtubule-associated proteins are a family unique to trypanosomes, binding subpellicular microtubules one to another and to the plasma membrane (131).

#### Immunomodulatory Treatments
The important role of GIP as a pathogenesis-inducing factor has led to trials consisting of the treatment of mice with GIP molecules before infection (145). These trials were successful in reducing weight loss, liver damage, acidosis, and anemia during infections by *T. brucei*. This reduction in pathology was associated with a reduced TNF production and an increased level of IL-10, along with the expression of alternatively activated macrophage markers. This protective action of GIP treatment was not dependent on B cells and immunoglobulin production and, therefore, cannot be considered as a vaccination, in contrast to the case of GIP treatments in malaria. Quite strikingly, these GIP treatments were also efficient in pathology alleviation, particularly of anemia, in *T. congolense* and *T. evansi* infection models, in which TNF has been shown not to play the same role in pathogenesis in general and in acute anemia in particular (15, 105). This points out that the role of GIP in pathogenesis must not be considered to be solely through the overproduction of TNF.

Despite the controversial role of TLTF as an immunomodulatory factor, in vivo neutralization trials in *T. brucei brucei*-infected mice have been briefly mentioned (11). Those authors showed that repeated injections of a monoclonal antibody previously shown to impede in vitro triggering of IFN-γ production by TLTF resulted in a significant suppression of parasite growth and prolonged survival.

As far as the involvement of immune imbalance in the pathogenesis of AT is concerned, direct treatment with immunomodulatory molecules can be considered, as illustrated by the early report of the beneficial effect of an injection of immunostimulants prior to or at trypanosome inoculation (103). Another trial consisting of the treatment of *T. congolense*-infected sheep with levamisole was also conducted but was not successful (17).

In this regard, several studies aimed at elucidating immunopathology of AT have made use of diverse tools to neutralize detrimental immune pathways or to enhance beneficial ones. Briefly, one example reported the treatment of *T. congolense*-infected mice (chimeric SCID mice possessing a bovine immune system) with anti-CD40 antibodies in an attempt to promote correct global immunoglobulin production and a switch to IgG, as these last two factors have been described as characteristics of bovine trypanotolerance (52).

Given the known central involvement of TNF in *T. brucei* pathogenesis, countering this response could be an interesting option. In this regard, the shedding of soluble TNF receptor 2 (P75) in the murine model has proved to correlate with pathogenesis reduction (81). Thus, different TNF-α inhibitors (monoclonal antibodies, such as Infliximab or Adalimumab, or of type P75, such as Etanercept) could be proposed for human AT, as these are already registered for the treatment of human inflammatory diseases. Nevertheless, this track should not be considered economically practical in breeding stocks.

Recently, TGF-β use in *T. congolense*-infected mice has also been reported in the context of the development of alternative treatments (106). A triple intraperitoneal injection of human recombinant TGF-β1 (days −5, −1, and +3 relative to infection) resulted in a significant reduction in early anemia, a reduction in the first parasitemia peak, the absence of acute splenomegaly, and finally a delayed mortality. However, after the first parasite wave, no effect of the treatment could be observed, the protection being thus limited to the early stages, delaying pathogenesis. Interestingly, similar results have been obtained for murine malaria (122). TGF-β1 was shown to operate in a very transient way, possibly through an enhancement of the role of NK cells in the first response to infection. Taking this into account and given its very narrow therapeutic range and the side effects of a potential long-term treatment, TGF-β1 should not be considered as constituting a viable treatment on its own. Nevertheless, immunomodulatory intervention appears to be an interesting alternative which deserves further investigation. Immunomodulatory cocktail protocols,

which would help the host to manage correctly its own inflammatory response, could thus be envisaged.

A last treatment trial using heparin in *T. brucei gambiense*-infected rats can also be cited in this category (113). In this study, it was shown that the significant inhibition of parasite growth upon heparin treatment probably resulted from an increase in serum levels of high-density lipoprotein and haptoglobin, which are known to possess trypanocide properties. Heparin thus acted as an enhancer of natural immunity.

Anemia and EPO. Treatment of anemia in *T. congolense*-infected mice was also recently tried through injections of recombinant human erythropoietin (5,000 U/kg of body weight) (150). This treatment was successful at impeding anemia development in the acute phase, in contrast with a pentamidine treatment. Survival rates were dramatically improved in EPO-treated mice: all untreated animals died by day 9 of infection, while 100% of EPO-treated mice survived until day 20 and 50% survived until day 40. These authors proposed the use of such a treatment in conjunction with classical trypanocide treatments, as their mechanisms are obviously different. Interestingly, in the trypanotolerant N'Dama cattle, Epo transcript levels in the kidney during *T. congolense* infection have been shown not to be statistically different from those in infected Boran cattle (149). By contrast, Epo receptor transcript levels in bone marrow were downregulated in the Boran cattle in comparison with the N'Dama. This was attributed by the authors to the increased IFN-γ response in the Boran breed.

BBB Crossing and Minocycline. Preventing BBB passage is of great importance in human AT, as the arsenical treatment presently available for late neurological stages presents high toxicity, and even mortality (5%). Based on the similarities between the mechanisms underlying BBB crossings by trypanosomes and leukocytes, the use of minocycline (a tetracycline derivative) has been proposed in AT, given the efficacy of this pleiotropic molecule in experimental allergic encephalitis (88). This treatment showed remarkable efficacy in a murine model (87) and could thus be proposed for use in human or domestic animals in conjunction with other trypanocide or antidis ease treatments.

## SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

As parasite strains resistant to chemotherapy are being disseminated around the world, new methods will be needed to improve our control of AT. From this point of view, the “antidis ease strategy” is of major interest. This strategy implies a need for accurate knowledge regarding host-parasite interactions so that targets may be located at the level at which chemotherapy or vaccination can act. Important achievements have already been reported and opportunities for research remain vast. Promising progress in *Trypanosoma* spp. genomics, proteomics, and comparative pathology studies using the mouse model will certainly bring forth exciting new pathways and challenges for research in the near future.

### REFERENCES

1. Abrahamson, M., M. Alvarez-Fernandez, and C. Nathanson. 2003. Cystatins. Biochem. Soc. Symp. 2003:179–199.
2. Anonymous. 2005. Human African trypanosomiasis. Seventeenth Program Report of the UNICEF/UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Program for Research & Training in Tropical Diseases: making health research for poor people, progress 2003–2004. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
3. Anosa, V., and T. Isoun. 1976. Serum proteins, blood and plasma volumes in experimental Trypanosoma vivax infections of sheep and goats. Trop. Anim. Health Prod. 8:14–19.
4. Antoine-Moussiaux, N., S. Magez, and D. Desmecht. 2008. Contributions of the mouse model to understanding African trypanosomiasis. Trends Parasitol. 24:411–418.
5. Assoku, R., and P. Gardiner. 1989. Detection of antibodies to platelets and erythrocytes during infection with haemorrhage-causing Trypanosoma vivax in Ayrshire cattle. Vet. Parasitol. 31:199–216.
6. Atwood, J. R., D. Weatherly, T. Minning, B. Bundy, C. Cavola, F. Opperdoes, R. Orlando, and R. Tarleton. 2005. The Trypanosoma cruzi proteome. Science 309:473–476.
7. Authié, E., A. Boulangé, D. Muteti, G. Lalmanach, F. Gauthier, and A. Musoke. 2001. Immunisation of cattle with cysteine proteinases of Trypanosoma congolense: targeting the disease rather than the parasite. Int. J. Parasitol. 31:1429–1433.
8. Authié, E., D. Muteti, Z. Mbawa, J. Lonsdale-Eccles, P. Webster, and C. Wells. 1992. Identification of a 33-kilodalton immunodominant antigen of Trypanosoma congolense as a cysteine protease. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 56:103–116.
9. Baetselier, P., B. Namangala, W. Noël, L. Brys, E. Pays, and A. Beschin. 2001. Alternative versus classical macrophage activation during experimental African trypanosomosis. Int. J. Parasitol. 31:575–587.
10. Bakhiet, M., P. Büscher, R. Harris, K. Kristensson, H. Wigzell, and T. Olsson. 1996. Different trypanozoan species possess CD8 dependent lymphocyte triggering factor-like activity. Immunol. Lett. 50:71–80.
11. Bakhiet, M., T. Olsson, C. Edlund, B. Höjeberg, K. Holmberg, J. Lorentzen, and K. Kristensson. 1993. A Trypanosoma brucei brucei-derived factor that triggers CD8⁺ lymphocytes to interferon-gamma secretion: purification, characterization and protective effects in vivo by treatment with a monoclonal antibody against the factor. Scand. J. Immunol. 37:165–178.
12. Balaban, N., H. Waithaka, A. Njogu, and R. Goldman. 1995. Intracellular antigens (microtubule-associated protein copurified with glycosomal enzymes)—possible vaccines against trypanosomiasis. J. Infect. Dis. 172:845–850.
13. Banks, K. 1979. In vitro binding of Trypanosoma congolense to erythrocytes. J. Protozool. 26:103–108.
14. Banks, K. 1980. Injury induced by Trypanosoma congolense adhesion to cell membranes. J. Parasitol. 66:34–37.
15. Baral, T., P. De Baetselier, F. Brombacher, and S. Magez. 2007. Control of Trypanosoma evansi infection is IgM mediated and does not require a type I inflammatory response. J. Infect. Dis. 195:1513–1520.
16. Beucher, M., and K. Norris. 2008. Sequence diversity of the Trypanosoma cruzi complement regulatory protein family. Infect. Immun. 76:750–758.
17. Bisalla, M., N. D. G. Ibrahim, I. A. Lawal, and K. A. N. Esievo. 2007. Serum total proteins, albumin and albumin globulin ratio in Yankasa sheep experimentally infected with Trypanosoma congolense and immunomodulated with levamisole. J. Protozool. Res. 17:39–43.
18. Bisser, S., O. Ouwe-Missi-Oukem-Boyero, F. Toure, Z. Taoufiq, B. Bouteille, A. Buguet, and D. Mazier. 2006. Harbouring in the brain: a focus on immune evasion mechanisms and their deleterious effects in malaria and human African trypanosomiasis. Int. J. Parasitol. 36:529–540.
19. Biswas, D., A. Choudhury, and K. Misra. 2001. Histopathology of Trypanosoma (Trypanozoon) evansi infection in bandicoot rat. I. Visceral organs. Exp. Parasitol. 99:148–159.
20. Borges, M., A. Cordeiro-da-Silva, B. Vergnes, D. Sereno, and A. Ouaissi. 2005. Conversion of Trypanosoma cruzi Tc52 released factor to a protein inducing apoptosis. Tissue Cell 37:469–478.
21. Borges, M., A. Da Silva, D. Sereno, and A. Ouaissi. 2003. Peptide-based analysis of the amino acid sequence important to the immunoregulatory function of Trypanosoma cruzi Tc52 virulence factor. Immunology 109:147–155.
22. Boulangé, A., C. Serveau, M. Brillard, C. Minet, F. Gauthier, A. Diallo, G. Lalmanach, and E. Authié. 2001. Functional expression of the catalytic domains of two cysteine proteinases from Trypanosoma congolense. Int. J. Parasitol. 31:1435–1440.
23. Brenchley, R., H. Tariq, H. McElhinney, B. Szöor, J. Huxley-Jones, R. Stevens, K. Matthews, and L. Tabernero. 2007. The TriTryp phosphatome: analysis of the protein phosphatase catalytic domains. BMC Genomics 8:434.
24. Bridges, D., A. Pitt, O. Hanrahan, K. Brennan, H. Voorheis, P. Herzyk, H. de Koning, and R. Burchmore. 2008. Characterisation of the plasma membrane subproteome of bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei. Proteomics 8:83–99.
25. Broadhead, R., H. Dawe, H. Farr, S. Griffiths, S. Hart, N. Portman, M. Shaw, M. Ginger, S. Gaskell, P. McKean, and K. Gull. 2006. Flagellar motility is required for the viability of the bloodstream trypanosome. Nature 440:224–227.
26. Buratai, L., A. Nok, S. Ibrahim, I. Umar, and K. Esievo. 2006. Characterization of sialidase from bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma vivax. Cell Biochem. Funct. 24:71–77.
27. Buza, J., M. Sileghem, P. Gwakisa, and J. Naessens. 1997. CD5⁺ B lym

phocytes are the main source of antibodies reactive with non-parasite antigens in Trypanosoma congolense-infected cattle. Immunology 92:226–233.

28. Caffrey, C., E. Hansell, K. Lucas, L. Brinen, A. Alvarez Hernandez, J. Cheng, S. N. Gwaltney, W. Roush, Y. Stierhof, M. Bogyo, D. Steverding, and J. McKerrow. 2001. Active site mapping, biochemical properties and subcellular localization of rhodesain, the major cysteine protease of Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiensis. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 118:61–73.

29. Caffrey, C., S. Scory, and D. Steverding. 2000. Cysteine proteinases of trypanosome parasites: novel targets for chemotherapy. Curr. Drug Targets 1:155–162.

30. Cazorla, S., P. Becker, F. Frank, T. Ebensen, M. Sartori, R. Corral, E. Malchiodi, and C. Guzmán. 2008. Oral vaccination with Salmonella enterica as a cruzipain-DNA delivery system confers protective immunity against Trypanosoma cruzi. Infect. Immun. 76:324–333.

31. Cunningham, D., T. Brewer, R. Kuhn, and W. Craig. 1981. Partial characterization of a Trypanosoma cruzi-released decomplementing factor. J. Parasitol. 67:475–480.

32. Darji, A., A. Beschin, M. Sileghem, H. Heremans, L. Brys, and P. De Baetselier. 1996. In vitro simulation of immunosuppression caused by Trypanosoma brucei: active involvement of gamma interferon and tumor necrosis factor in the pathway of suppression. Infect. Immun. 64:1937–1943.

33. Davis, C. 1982. Thrombocytopenia: a uniform complication of African trypanosomiasis. Acta Trop. 39:123–133.

34. Desai, P., A. Patny, J. Gut, P. Rosenthal, B. Tekwani, A. Srivastava, and M. Avery. 2006. Identification of novel parasitic cysteine protease inhibitors by use of virtual screening. 2. The available chemical directory. J. Med. Chem. 49:1576–1584.

35. Desai, P., A. Patny, Y. Sabinis, B. Tekwani, J. Gut, P. Rosenthal, A. Srivastava, and M. Avery. 2004. Identification of novel parasitic cysteine protease inhibitors using virtual screening. 1. The ChemBridge database. J. Med. Chem. 47:6609–6615.

36. DosReis, G., C. Freire-de-Lima, M. Nunes, and M. Lopes. 2005. The importance of aberrant T-cell responses in Chagas disease. Trends Parasitol. 21:237–243.

37. El-Sayed, N., and J. Donelson. 1997. African trypanosomes have differentially expressed genes encoding homologues of the Leishmania GP63 surface protease. J. Biol. Chem. 272:26742–26748.

38. El-Sayed, N., P. Myler, G. Blandin, M. Berriman, J. Crabtree, G. Aggarwal, E. Caler, H. Renauld, E. Worthey, C. Hertz-Fowler, E. Ghedin, C. Peacock, D. Bartholomeu, B. Haas, A. Tran, J. Wortman, U. Alsmark, S. Angiuoli, A. Anupama, J. Badger, F. Bringaud, E. Cadag, J. Carlton, G. Cerqueira, T. Creasy, A. Delcher, A. Djikeng, T. Embley, C. Hauser, A. Ivens, S. Kumarfeld, J. Pereira-Leal, D. Nilsson, J. Peterson, S. Salzberg, J. Shallom, J. Silva, J. Sundaram, S. Westenberger, O. White, S. Melville, J. Donelson, B. Andersson, K. Stuart, and N. Hall. 2005. Comparative genomics of trypanosomatid parasitic protozoa. Science 309:404–409.

39. Esievo, K., and D. Saror. 1983. Leukocyte response in experimental Trypanosoma vivax infection in cattle. J. Comp. Pathol. 93:165–169.

40. Esievo, K., D. Saror, A. Ilemobade, and M. Hallaway. 1982. Variation in erythrocyte surface and free serum sialic acid concentrations during experimental Trypanosoma vivax infection in cattle. Res. Vet. Sci. 32:1–5.

41. Ferreira, V., M. Molina, W. Schwaeble, D. Lemus, and A. Ferreira. 2005. Does Trypanosoma cruzi calreticulin modulate the complement system and angiogenesis? Trends Parasitol. 21:169–174.

42. Fish, W., Z. Nkhungulu, C. Muriuki, D. Ndegwa, J. Lonsdale-Eccles, and J. Steyaert. 1995. Primary structure and partial characterization of a life-cycle-regulated cysteine protease from Trypanosoma (Nannomonas) congolense. Gene 161:125–128.

43. Gao, W., H. Wortis, and M. Pereira. 2002. The Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase is a T cell-independent B cell mitogen and an inducer of non-specific Ig secretion. Int. Immunol. 14:299–308.

44. Gardiner, P., R. Assoku, D. Whitelaw, and M. Murray. 1989. Haemorrhagic lesions resulting from Trypanosoma vivax infection in Ayrshire cattle. Vet. Parasitol. 31:187–197.

45. Reference deleted.

46. Girard, M., S. Bisser, B. Courtioux, C. Vermot-Desroches, B. Bouteille, J. Wijdenes, J. Preud'homme, and M. Jauberteau. 2003. In vitro induction of microglial and endothelial cell apoptosis by cerebrospinal fluids from patients with human African trypanosomiasis. Int. J. Parasitol. 33:713–720.

47. Girard, M., S. Giraud, B. Courtioux, M. Jauberteau-Marchan, and B. Bouteille. 2005. Endothelial cell activation in the presence of African trypanosomes. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 139:41–49.

48. Godat, E., S. Chowdhury, F. Lecaille, M. Belghazi, E. Purisima, and G. Lalmanach. 2005. Inhibition of a cathepsin L-like cysteine protease by a chimeric propeptide-derived inhibitor. Biochemistry 44:10486–10493.

49. González, F., J. Izquierdo, S. Rodríguez, J. McKerrow, and E. Hansell. 2007. Dipeptidyl-alpha, beta-epoxyesters as potent irreversible inhibitors of the cysteine proteases cruzain and rhodesain. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 17:6697–6700.

50. Greenwood, B., and H. Whittle. 1976. Complement activation in patients with Gambian sleeping sickness. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 24:133–138.

51. Gull, K. 2003. Host-parasite interactions and trypanosome morphogenesis: a flagellar pocketful of goodies. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 6:365–370.

52. Haas, K., K. Taylor, N. MacHugh, J. Kreeger, and D. Estes. 2001. Enhancing effects of anti-CD40 treatment on the immune response of SCID-bovine mice to Trypanosoma congolense infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 70:931–940.

53. Hamadien, M., M. Bakhiet, and R. Harris. 2000. Interferon-gamma induces secretion of trypanosome lymphocyte triggering factor via tyrosine protein kinases. Parasitology 120:281–287.

54. Holland, W., T. Do, N. Huong, N. Dung, N. Thanh, J. Vercruysse, and B. Goddeeris. 2003. The effect of Trypanosoma evansi infection on pig performance and vaccination against classical swine fever. Vet. Parasitol. 111:115–123.

55. Holland, W., L. My, T. Dung, N. Thanh, P. Tam, J. Vercruysse, and B. Goddeeris. 2001. The influence of T. evansi infection on the immunoresponsiveness of experimentally infected water buffaloes. Vet. Parasitol. 102:225–234.

56. Huet, G., C. Richet, D. Demeyer, H. Bisiau, B. Soudan, D. Tetaert, K. Han, and P. Degand. 1992. Characterization of different proteolytic activities in Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1138:213–221.

57. Hunter, C., F. Jennings, J. Tierney, M. Murray, and P. Kennedy. 1992. Correlation of autoantibody titres with central nervous system pathology in experimental African trypanosomiasis. J. Neuroimmunol. 41:143–148.

58. Inal, J. 2004. Parasite interaction with host complement: beyond attack regulation. Trends Parasitol. 20:407–412.

59. Jaishankar, P., E. Hansell, D. Zhao, P. Doyle, J. McKerrow, and A. Renslo. 2008. Potency and selectivity of P2/P3-modified inhibitors of cysteine proteases from trypanosomes. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 18:624–628.

60. Jones, A., A. Faldas, A. Foucher, E. Hunt, A. Tait, J. Wastling, and C. Turner. 2006. Visualisation and analysis of proteomic data from the procyclic form of Trypanosoma brucei. Proteomics 6:259–267.

61. Kirrstetter, M., C. Lerin-Lozano, H. Heintz, C. Manegold, W. Gross, and P. Lamprecht. 2004. Trypanosomiasis in a woman from Cameroon mimicking systemic lupus erythematosus. Dtsch. Med. Wochenschr. 129:1315–1317.

62. Kissinger, J. 2006. A tale of three genomes: the kinetoplastids have arrived. Trends Parasitol. 22:240–243.

63. Knowles, G., S. Black, and D. Whitelaw. 1987. Peptidase in the plasma of mice infected with Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Parasitology 95:291–300.

64. Lalmanach, G., A. Boulangé, C. Serveau, F. Lecaille, J. Scharfstein, F. Gauthier, and E. Authié. 2002. Congopain from Trypanosoma congolense: drug target and vaccine candidate. Biol. Chem. 383:739–749.

65. Lee, H., S. Kelm, J. Michalski, and R. Schauer. 1990. Influence of sialic acids on the galactose-recognizing receptor of rat peritoneal macrophages. Biol. Chem. Hoppe Seyler 371:307–316.

66. Li, S., M. Fung, S. Reid, N. Inoue, and Z. Lun. 2007. Immunization with recombinant beta-tubulin from Trypanosoma evansi induced protection against T. evansi, T. equiperdum and T. b. brucei infection in mice. Parasite Immunol. 29:191–199.

67. Lonsdale-Eccles, J., and D. Grab. 1987. Lysosomal and non-lysosomal peptidyl hydrolases of the bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Eur. J. Biochem. 169:467–475.

68. Lonsdale-Eccles, J., and D. Grab. 2002. Trypanosome hydrolases and the blood-brain barrier. Trends Parasitol. 18:17–19.

69. Lonsdale-Eccles, J., G. Mpimbaza, Z. Nkhungulu, J. Olobo, L. Smith, O. Tosomba, and D. Grab. 1995. Trypanosomatid cysteine protease activity may be enhanced by a kininogen-like moiety from host serum. Biochem. J. 305:549–556.

70. Lopes, M., V. da Veiga, A. Santos, M. Fonseca, and G. DosReis. 1995. Activation-induced CD4⁺ T cell death by apoptosis in experimental Chagas’ disease. J. Immunol. 154:744–752.

71. Lopes, M., and G. DosReis. 1995. Apoptosis as a cause of T-cell unresponsiveness in experimental Chagas’ disease. Braz J. Med. Biol. Res. 28:913–918.

72. Lopes, M., and G. DosReis. 1996. Trypanosoma cruzi-induced immunosuppression: selective triggering of CD4⁺ T-cell death by the T-cell receptor-CD3 pathway and not by the CD69 or Ly-6 activation pathway. Infect. Immun. 64:1559–1564.

73. Lopes, M., M. Nunes, A. Henriques-Pons, N. Giese, H. R. Morse, W. Davidson, T. Araújo-Jorge, and G. DosReis. 1999. Increased susceptibility of Fas ligand-deficient gld mice to Trypanosoma cruzi infection due to a Th2-biased host immune response. Eur. J. Immunol. 29:81–89.

74. Lubega, G., D. Byarugaba, and R. Prichard. 2002. Immunization with a tubulin-rich preparation from Trypanosoma brucei confers broad protection against African trypanosomosis. Exp. Parasitol. 102:9–22.

75. Mabbott, N., and J. Sternberg. 1995. Bone marrow nitric oxide production and development of anemia in Trypanosoma brucei-infected mice. Infect. Immun. 63:1563–1566.

76. Machado, A., J. Cardoso, C. Claser, M. Rodrigues, R. Gazzinelli, and O. Bruna-Romero. 2006. Long-term protective immunity induced against Trypanosoma cruzi infection after vaccination with recombinant adenoviruses encoding amastigote surface protein-2 and trans-sialidase. Hum. Gene Ther. 17:898–908.

77. Mackenzie, P., W. Boyt, V. Nesham, and E. Pirie. 1978. The aetiology and

significance of the phagocytosis of erythrocytes and leucocytes in sheep infected with Trypanosoma congolense (Broden, 1904). Res. Vet. Sci. 24: 4–7.

78. Magez, S., R. Lucas, A. Darji, E. Songa, R. Hamers, and P. De Baetselier. 1993. Murine tumour necrosis factor plays a protective role during the initial phase of the experimental infection with Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Parasite Immunol. 15:635–641.

79. Magez, S., B. Stijlemans, T. Baral, and P. De Baetselier. 2002. VSG-GPI anchors of African trypanosomes: their role in macrophage activation and induction of infection-associated immunopathology. Microbes Infect. 4:999–1006.

80. Magez, S., B. Stijlemans, M. Radwanska, E. Pays, M. Ferguson, and P. De Baetselier. 1998. The glycosyl-inositol-phosphate and dimyristoylglycerol moieties of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor of the trypanosome variant-specific surface glycoprotein are distinct macrophage-activating factors. J. Immunol. 160:1949–1956.

81. Magez, S., C. Truyens, M. Merimi, M. Radwanska, B. Stijlemans, P. Brouckaert, F. Brombacher, E. Pays, and P. De Baetselier. 2004. P75 tumor necrosis factor-receptor shedding occurs as a protective host response during African trypanosomiasis. J. Infect. Dis. 189:527–539.

82. Mallari, J., A. Shelat, T. Obrien, C. Caffrey, A. Kosinski, M. Connelly, M. Harbut, D. Greenbaum, J. McKerrow, and R. Guy. 2008. Development of potent purine-derived nitrile inhibitors of the trypanosomal protease Tbc atB. J. Med. Chem. 51:545–552.

83. Mansfield, J., S. Craig, and G. Stelzer. 1976. Lymphocyte function in experimental African trypanosomiasis: mitogenic effects of trypanosome extracts in vitro. Infect. Immun. 14:976–981.

84. Mansfield, J., and D. Paulnock. 2005. Regulation of innate and acquired immunity in African trypanosomiasis. Parasite Immunol. 27:361–371.

85. Marañón, C., L. Planelles, C. Alonso, and M. López. 2000. HSP70 from Trypanosoma cruzi is endowed with specific cell proliferation potential leading to apoptosis. Int. Immunol. 12:1685–1693.

86. Marcondes, M., P. Borelli, N. Yoshida, and M. Russo. 2000. Acute Trypanosoma cruzi infection is associated with anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and bone marrow hypoplasia: reversal by nifurtimox treatment. Microbes Infect. 2:347–352.

87. Masocha, W., M. Rottenberg, and K. Kristensson. 2007. Migration of African trypanosomes across the blood-brain barrier. Physiol. Behav. 92: 110–114.

88. Masocha, W., M. Rottenberg, and K. Kristensson. 2006. Minocycline impedes African trypanosome invasion of the brain in a murine model. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50:1798–1804.

89. Maxie, M., G. Losos, and H. Tabel. 1979. Experimental bovine trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma vivax and T. congolense). I. Symptomatology and clinical pathology. Tropenmed. Parasitol. 30:274–282.

90. Mbawa, Z., I. Gumm, E. Shaw, and J. Lonsdale-Eccles. 1992. Characterisation of a cysteine protease from bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma congolense. Eur. J. Biochem. 204:371–379.

91. McKerrow, J., C. Caffrey, B. Kelly, P. Loke, and M. Sajid. 2006. Proteases in parasitic diseases. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 1:497–536.

92. McKerrow, J., J. Engel, and C. Caffrey. 1999. Cysteine protease inhibitors as chemotherapy for parasitic infections. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 7:639–644.

93. Minoprio, P. 2001. Parasite polyclonal activators: new targets for vaccination approaches? Int. J. Parasitol. 31:588–591.

94. Montes, C., E. Acosta-Rodríguez, J. Mucci, E. Zuniga, O. Campetella, and A. Gruppi. 2006. A Trypanosoma cruzi antigen signals CD11b⁺ cells to secrete cytokines that promote polyclonal B cell proliferation and differentiation into antibody-secreting cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 36:1474–1485.

95. Morty, R., E. Authié, L. Troeberg, J. Lonsdale-Eccles, and T. Coetzer. 1999. Purification and characterisation of a trypsin-like serine oligopeptidase from Trypanosoma congolense. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 102:145–155.

96. Morty, R., P. Bulau, R. Pellé, S. Wilk, and K. Abe. 2006. Pyroglutamyl peptidase type I from Trypanosoma brucei: a new virulence factor from African trypanosomes that de-blocks regulatory peptides in the plasma of infected hosts. Biochem. J. 394:635–645.

97. Morty, R., J. Lonsdale-Eccles, R. Mentele, E. Auerswald, and T. Coetzer. 2001. Trypanosome-derived oligopeptidase B is released into the plasma of infected rodents, where it persists and retains full catalytic activity. Infect. Immun. 69:2757–2761.

98. Morty, R., J. Lonsdale-Eccles, J. Morehead, E. Caler, R. Mentele, E. Auerwald, T. Coetzer, N. Andrews, and B. Burleigh. 1999. Oligopeptidase B from Trypanosoma brucei, a new member of an emerging subgroup of serine oligopeptidases. J. Biol. Chem. 274:26149–26156.

99. Morty, R., R. Pellé, I. Vadász, G. Uzcanga, W. Seeger, and J. Bubis. 2005. Oligopeptidase B from Trypanosoma evansi. A parasite peptidase that inactivates atrial natriuretic factor in the bloodstream of infected hosts. J. Biol. Chem. 280:10925–10937.

100. Morty, R., L. Troeberg, J. Powers, S. Ono, J. Lonsdale-Eccles, and T. Coetzer. 2000. Characterisation of the antitrypanosomal activity of peptidyl alpha-aminoalkyl phosphonate diphenyl esters. Biochem. Pharmacol. 60: 1497–1504.

101. Morty, R., I. Vadász, P. Bulau, V. Dive, V. Oliveira, W. Seeger, and L.

Juliano. 2005. Tropolysin, a new oligopeptidase from African trypanosomes. Biochemistry 44:14658–14669.

102. Mucci, J., M. Risso, M. Leguizamón, A. Frasch, and O. Campetella. 2006. The trans-sialidase from Trypanosoma cruzi triggers apoptosis by target cell sialylation. Cell Microbiol. 8:1086–1095.

103. Murray, M., and W. Morrison. 1979. Non-specific induction of increased resistance in mice to Trypanosoma congolense and Trypanosoma brucei by immunostimulants. Parasitology 79:349–366.

104. Naessens, J. 2006. Bovine trypanotolerance: a natural ability to prevent severe anaemia and haemophagocytic syndrome? Int. J. Parasitol. 36:521– 528.

105. Naessens, J., H. Kitani, Y. Nakamura, Y. Yagi, K. Sekikawa, and F. Iraqi. 2005. TNF-alpha mediates the development of anaemia in a murine Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiensis infection, but not the anaemia associated with a murine Trypanosoma congolense infection. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 139:405–410.

106. Namangala, B., C. Sugimoto, and N. Inoue. 2007. Effects of exogenous transforming growth factor beta on Trypanosoma congolense infection in mice. Infect. Immun. 75:1878–1885.

107. Ndung’u, J., N. Wright, F. Jennings, and M. Murray. 1992. Changes in atrial natriuretic factor and plasma renin activity in dogs infected with Trypanosoma brucei. Parasitol. Res. 78:553–556.

108. Nielsen, K., and J. Sheppard. 1977. Activation of complement by trypanosomes. Experientia 33:769–771.

109. Nielsen, K., J. Sheppard, W. Holmes, and I. Tizard. 1978. Experimental bovine trypanosomiasis. Changes in serum immunoglobulins, complement and complement components in infected animals. Immunology 35:817–826.

110. Nielsen, K., J. Sheppard, I. Tizard, and W. Holmes. 1978. Complement activating factor(s) of Trypanosoma lewisi: some physicochemical characteristics of the active components. Can. J. Comp. Med. 42:74–79.

111. Nikolskaia, O., A. de Lima, Y. Kim, J. Lonsdale-Eccles, T. Fukuma, J. Scharfstein, and D. Grab. 2006. Blood-brain barrier traversal by African trypanosomes requires calcium signaling induced by parasite cysteine protease. J. Clin. Investig. 116:2739–2747.

112. Nishimura, K., K. Hamashita, Y. Okamoto, F. Kawahara, H. Ihara, S. Kozaki, Y. Ohnishi, and S. Yamasaki. 2004. Differential effects of interferon-gamma on production of trypanosome-derived lymphocyte-triggering factor by Trypanosoma brucei gambiense and Trypanosoma brucei brucei. J. Parasitol. 90:740–745.

113. Nishimura, K., K. Shima, M. Asakura, Y. Ohnishi, and S. Yamasaki. 2005. Effects of heparin administration on Trypanosoma brucei gambiense infection in rats. J. Parasitol. 91:219–222.

114. Noël, W., G. Hassanzadeh, G. Raes, B. Namangala, I. Daems, L. Brys, F. Brombacher, P. Baetselier, and A. Beschin. 2002. Infection stage-dependent modulation of macrophage activation in Trypanosoma congolense-resistant and -susceptible mice. Infect. Immun. 70:6180–6187.

115. Nok, A., H. Nzeli be, and S. Yako. 2003. Trypanosoma evansi sialidase: surface localization, properties and hydrolysis of ghost red blood cells and brain cells—implications in trypanosomiasis. Z Naturforsch. C 58:594–601.

116. Nok, A., and E. Balogun. 2003. A bloodstream Trypanosoma congolense sialidase could be involved in anemia during experimental trypanosomiasis. J. Biochem. 133:725–730.

117. Nwagu, M., D. Okenu, T. Olusi, and R. Molokwu. 1988. Trypanosoma brucei releases proteases extracellularly. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 82:577.

118. Oka, M., and Y. Ito. 1987. Polyclonal B-cell-activating factors produced by spleen cells of mice stimulated with a cell homogenate of Trypanosoma gambiense. Infect. Immun. 55:3162–3167.

119. Okenu, D., K. Opara, R. Nwuba, and M. Nwagu. 1999. Purification and characterisation of an extracellularly released protease of Trypanosoma brucei. Parasitol. Res. 85:424–428.

120. Olsson, T., M. Bakhiet, C. Edlund, B. Höjeberg, P. Van der Meide, and K. Kristensson. 1991. Bidirectional activating signals between Trypanosoma brucei and CD8⁺ T cells: a trypanosome-released factor triggers interferon-gamma production that stimulates parasite growth. Eur. J. Immunol. 21: 2447–2454.

121. Olsson, T., M. Bakhiet, B. Höjeberg, A. Ljungdahl, C. Edlund, G. Anderson, H. Ekre, W. Fung-Leung, T. Mak, and H. Wigzell. 1993. CD8 is critically involved in lymphocyte activation by a T. brucei brucei-released molecule. Cell 72:715–727.

122. Omer, F., and E. Riley. 1998. Transforming growth factor beta production is inversely correlated with severity of murine malaria infection. J. Exp. Med. 188:39–48.

123. Onah, D., J. Hopkins, and A. Luckins. 2000. Effects of the depletion of CD8⁺ T cells and monocytes on the proliferative responses of peripheral blood leucocytes from Trypanosoma evansi-infected sheep. Vet. Parasitol. 92:25–35.

124. Onah, D., and D. Wakelin. 2000. Murine model study of the practical implication of trypanosome-induced immunosuppression in vaccine-based disease control programmes. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 74:271–284.

125. Parsons, M., E. Worthey, P. Ward, and J. Mottram. 2005. Comparative

analysis of the kinomes of three pathogenic trypanosomatids: Leishmania major, Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma cruzi. BMC Genomics 6:127.

126. Pays, E. 2006. The variant surface glycoprotein as a tool for adaptation in African trypanosomes. Microbes Infect. 8:930–937.

127. Playfair, J., J. Taverne, C. Bate, and J. de Souza. 1990. The malaria vaccine: anti-parasite or anti-disease? Immunol. Today 11:25–27.

128. Radwanska, M., P. Guirnalda, C. De Trez, B. Ryffel, S. Black, and S. Magez. 2008. Trypanosomiasis-induced B cell apoptosis results in loss of protective anti-parasite antibody responses and abolishment of vaccine-induced memory responses. PLoS Pathog. 4:e1000078.

129. Ralston, K., and K. Hill. 2006. Trypanin, a component of the flagellar dynein regulatory complex, is essential in bloodstream form African trypanosomes. PLoS Pathog. 2:e101.

130. Ralston, K., A. Lerner, D. Diener, and K. Hill. 2006. Flagellar motility contributes to cytokinesis in *Trypanosoma brucei* and is modulated by an evolutionarily conserved dynein regulatory system. Eukaryot. Cell 5:696–711.

131. Rasooly, R., and N. Balaban. 2002. Structure of p15 trypanosome microtubule-associated protein. Parasitol. Res. 88:1034–1039.

132. Rasooly, R., and N. Balaban. 2004. Trypanosome microtubule-associated protein p15 as a vaccine for the prevention of African sleeping sickness. Vaccine 22:1007–1015.

133. Reina-San-Martín, B., W. Degrave, C. Rougeot, A. Cosson, N. Chamond, A. Cordeiro-Da-Silva, M. Arala-Chaves, A. Coutinho, and P. Minoprio. 2000. A B-cell mitogen from a pathogenic trypanosome is a eukaryotic proline racemase. Nat. Med. 6:890–897.

134. Robertson, C., M. North, B. Lockwood, and G. Coombs. 1990. Analysis of the proteinases of *Trypanosoma brucei*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 136:921–925.

135. Rosenthal, P. 1999. Proteases of protozoan parasites. Adv. Parasitol. 43:105–159.

136. Rurangirwa, F. R., A. J. Musoke, V. M. Nantulya, and H. Tabel. 1983. Immune depression in bovine trypanosomiasis-effects of acute and chronic *Trypanosoma congolense* and chronic *Trypanosoma vivax* infections on antibody response to Brucella abortus vaccine. Parasite Immunol. 5:267–276.

137. Rurangirwa, F. R., H. Tabel, G. Losos, and I. R. Tizard. 1980. Hemolytic complement and serum C-3 levels in Zebu cattle infected with *Trypanosoma congolense* and *Trypanosoma vivax* and the effect of trypanocidal treatment. Infect. Immun. 27:832–836.

138. Sacco, R., M. Hagen, J. Donelson, and R. Lynch. 1994. B lymphocytes of mice display an aberrant activation phenotype and are cell cycle arrested in G₀/G₁ₐ during acute infection with *Trypanosoma brucei*. J. Immunol. 153:1714–1723.

139. Sacks, D., G. Bancroft, W. Evans, and B. Askonas. 1982. Incubation of trypanosome-derived mitogenic and immunosuppressive products with peritoneal macrophages allows recovery of biological activities from soluble parasite fractions. Infect. Immun. 36:160–168.

140. Santos, C., G. Coombs, A. Lima, and J. Mottram. 2007. Role of the *Trypanosoma brucei* natural cysteine peptidase inhibitor ICP in differentiation and virulence. Mol. Microbiol. 66:991–1002.

141. Serveau, C., A. Boulangé, F. Lecaille, F. Gauthier, E. Authié, and G. Lalmanach. 2003. Procongopain from *Trypanosoma congolense* is processed at basic pH: an unusual feature among cathepsin L-like cysteine proteases. Biol. Chem. 384:921–927.

142. Sheppard, J., K. Nielsen, I. Tizard, and W. Holmes. 1978. Direct activation of complement by trypanosomes. J. Parasitol. 64:544–546.

143. Shugaba, A., I. Umar, J. Omege, N. Ibrahim, J. Andrews, A. Ukoha, D. Saror, and K. Esievo. 1994. Biochemical differences (O-acetyl and glycolyl groups) in erythrocyte surface sialic acids of trypanotolerant N'dama and trypanosusceptible Zebu cattle. J. Comp. Pathol. 110:91–95.

144. Soudan, B., D. Tetaert, M. Hublart, A. Racadot, D. Croix, and A. Boersma. 1993. Experimental “chronic” African trypanosomiasis: endocrine dysfunctions generated by parasitic components released during the tryptanolytic phase in rats. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. 101:166–172.

145. Stijlemans, B., T. Baral, M. Guilliams, L. Brys, J. Korf, M. Drennan, J. Van Den Abbeele, P. De Baetselier, and S. Magez. 2007. A glycosylphosphatidylinositol-based treatment alleviates trypanosomiasis-associated immunopathology. J. Immunol. 179:4003–4014.

146. Stijlemans, B., M. Guilliams, G. Raes, A. Beschin, S. Magez, and P. De Baetselier. 2007. African trypanosomosis: from immune escape and immunopathology to immune intervention. Vet. Parasitol. 148:3–13.

147. Stiles, J., J. Meade, Z. Kucerova, D. Lyn, W. Thompson, Z. Zakeri, and J. Whittaker. 2001. *Trypanosoma brucei* infection induces apoptosis and up-regulates neuroleukin expression in the cerebellum. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 95:797–810.

148. Stiles, J., J. Whittaker, B. Sarfo, W. Thompson, M. Powell, and V. Bond. 2004. Trypanosome apoptotic factor mediates apoptosis in human brain vascular endothelial cells. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 133:229–240.

149. Suliman, H., L. Logan-Henfrey, P. Majiwa, O. Ole-Moiyoi, and B. Feldman. 1999. Analysis of erythropoietin and erythropoietin receptor genes expression in cattle during acute infection with *Trypanosoma congolense*. Exp. Hematol 27:37–45.

150. Suzuki, T., Y. Ueta, N. Inoue, X. Xuan, H. Saitoh, and H. Suzuki. 2006. Beneficial effect of erythropoietin administration on murine infection with *Trypanosoma congolense*. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 74:1020–1025.

151. Tizard, I., K. Nielsen, J. Seed, and J. Hall. 1978. Biologically active products from African Trypanosomes. Microbiol. Rev. 42:664–681.

152. Troeberg, L., R. Pike, R. Morty, R. Berry, T. Coetzer, and J. Lonsdale-Eccles. 1996. Proteases from *Trypanosoma brucei brucei*. Purification, characterisation and interactions with host regulatory molecules. Eur. J. Biochem. 238:728–736.

153. Uche, U. E., and T. W. Jones. 1992. Complement (C3) levels and activation in rabbits experimentally infected with *Trypanosoma evansi*. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 86:475–480.

154. Vaidya, T., M. Bakhiet, K. Hill, T. Olsson, K. Kristensson, and J. Donelson. 1997. The gene for a T lymphocyte triggering factor from African trypanosomes. J. Exp. Med. 186:433–438.

155. Valli, V., C. Forsberg, and B. McSherry. 1978. The pathogenesis of *Trypanosoma congolense* infection in calves. II. Anemia and erythroid response. Vet. Pathol. 15:732–745.

156. van Velthuysen, M., J. Bruijn, E. van Leer, and G. Fleuren. 1992. Pathogenesis of trypanosomiasis-induced glomerulonephritis in mice. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 7:507–515.

157. Vicik, R., V. Hoerr, M. Glaser, M. Schultheis, E. Hansell, J. McKerrow, U. Holzgrabe, C. Caffrey, A. Ponte-Sucre, H. Moll, A. Stich, and T. Schirmeister. 2006. Aziridine-2,3-dicarboxylate inhibitors targeting the major cysteine protease of *Trypanosoma brucei* as lead trypanocidal agents. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 16:2753–2757.

158. Vincendeau, P., and B. Bouteille. 2006. Immunology and immunopathology of African trypanosomiasis. An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. 78:645–665.

159. Vray, B., S. Hartmann, and J. Hoebeke. 2002. Immunomodulatory properties of cystatins. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 59:1503–1512.

160. Zambrano-Villa, S., D. Rosales-Borjas, J. Carrero, and L. Ortiz-Ortiz. 2002. How protozoan parasites evade the immune response. Trends Parasitol. 18:272–278.

161. Zapata-Estrella, H., C. Hummel-Newell, G. Sanchez-Burgos, J. Escobedo-Ortegon, M. Ramirez-Sierra, A. Arjona-Torres, and E. Dumonteil. 2006. Control of *Trypanosoma cruzi* infection and changes in T-cell populations induced by a therapeutic DNA vaccine in mice. Immunol. Lett. 103:186–191.

162. Zuñiga, E., C. Motran, C. Montes, F. Diaz, J. Bocco, and A. Gruppi. 2000. *Trypanosoma cruzi*-induced immunosuppression: B cells undergo spontaneous apoptosis and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) arrests their proliferation during acute infection. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 119:507–515.

163. Zuñiga, E., C. Motran, C. Montes, H. Yagita, and A. Gruppi. 2002. *Trypanosoma cruzi* infection selectively renders parasite-specific IgG⁺ B lymphocytes susceptible to Fas/Fas ligand-mediated fraticide. J. Immunol. 168:3965–3973.
