
Cardiovascular Research (2009) 83, 247–261  
doi:10.1093/cvr/cvp033  

**Loss of cardioprotection with ageing**

Kerstin Boengler, Rainer Schulz, and Gerd Heusch*

Institut für Pathophysiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 45122 Essen, Germany

Received 19 December 2008; revised 21 January 2009; accepted 23 January 2009; online publish-ahead-of-print 28 January 2009

Time for primary review: 20 days

---

### KEYWORDS
- Cardioprotection;
- Ischaemic preconditioning;
- Ischaemic postconditioning;
- Myocardial infarction;
- Myocardial ischaemia;
- Reperfusion;
- Ageing

Not only the prevalence, but also the mortality due to ischaemic cardiovascular disease is higher in older than in young humans, and the demographic shift towards an ageing population will further increase the prevalence of age-related cardiovascular disease. In order to develop strategies aimed to limit reversible and irreversible myocardial damage in older patients, there is a need to better understand age-induced alterations in protein expression and cell signalling. Cardioprotective phenomena such as ischaemic and pharmacological pre and postconditioning attenuate ischaemia/reperfusion injury in young hearts. Whether or not pre and postconditioning are still effective in aged organs, animals, or patients, i.e. under conditions where such cardioprotection is most relevant, is still a matter of debate; most studies suggest a loss of protection in aged hearts.

The present review discusses changes in protein expression and cell signalling important to ischaemia/reperfusion injury with myocardial ageing. The efficacy of cardioprotective manoeuvres, e.g. ischaemic pre and postconditioning in aged organs and animals will be discussed, and the development of strategies aimed to antagonize the age-induced loss of protection will be addressed.

---

### 1. Introduction

The incidence and prevalence of myocardial infarction increase with age, and the developed countries are faced with an increasingly ageing population. Not only is there an increase in incidence and prevalence of myocardial infarction with ageing, but also possibly a loss of endogenous protection against infarction. Ischaemic pre and postconditioning are powerful cardioprotective phenomena, in which infarct size is reduced by one or several short episodes of myocardial ischaemia with reperfusion preceding or following, respectively, the infarct-inducing sustained ischaemia.¹ Both phenomena have been identified in all species studied so far, including man; they are relevant in the context of interventional and surgical coronary revascularization, but also in preinfarction angina.²⁻⁵ In a number of experimental studies, the power of these cardioprotective interventions waned with ageing, and the present review will address evidence and potential mechanisms of attenuated cardioprotection with ageing, as well as the potential relevance to humans.

### 2. Ageing and cardiomyocytes

During ageing, cardiomyocytes undergo complex changes which finally result in loss of contractile function and loss of endogenous protection against irreversible injury.

---

* Corresponding author. Tel: +49 201 723 4480; fax: +49 201 723 4481.  
E-mail address: gerd.heusch@uk-essen.de

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. © The Author 2009.  
For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
The focus of the present review is on the prerequisites for cardioprotection in aged hearts, e.g. the cardioprotective stimulus, the duration of ischaemia/reperfusion, and finally the differential gene/protein expression; Table 1 therefore summarizes data on the differential expression and/or activity of those proteins in aged hearts, which are central to ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Of note, these proteins include sarcolemmal receptors, downstream kinases and phosphatases, and proinflammatory cytokines.

The ageing cardiomyocyte develops decreased tolerance to stress, decreased mitochondrial function, decreased contractile function, and increased susceptibility to apoptosis and necrosis (for review see 12). The enhanced rates of apoptosis and necrosis in the ageing heart reduce the total number of cardiomyocytes. Consequently, collagen deposition increases, and the remaining cardiomyocytes develop adaptive hypertrophy. All cardiomyocyte alterations converge and accumulate into a loss of cardiac function, which is characterized e.g. by decreased left ventricular systolic and diastolic function, decreased peak cardiac output, and a blunted response to catecholamines. A decreased expression level of the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase and the sodium/calcium exchanger possibly contribute to the delayed relaxation of aged (20 months) cardiomyocytes.

### 3. Ageing and mitochondrial function

According to the free radical theory of ageing, ROS are causal for the process of ageing. Ageing cardiomyocytes are subjected to enhanced oxidative stress, which damages mitochondria and—possibly by reducing mitochondrial fission—contributes to their enlargement. With increasing age, larger mitochondria are not removed by autophagy with the same effectiveness than smaller mitochondria and therefore accumulate within cells. These giant mitochondria often contain mutated DNA and accordingly mutated proteins of the respiratory chain and therefore contribute to excessive ROS formation and further oxidative protein damage. Indeed, an age-dependent (from 2 to 12 months) increase in ROS formation was detected in mouse mitochondria, which was the predominant cellular source of ROS. The amount of ROS is critical for cell survival, since low amounts of ROS function as signalling molecules and are central for cardioprotective signalling cascades, whereas high amounts of ROS are detrimental by opening the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP), which induces mitochondrial swelling, depolarization, and ultimately cell death.

Several mechanisms contribute to enhanced mitochondrial ROS formation in aged myocardium. The amount of hydrogen peroxide, which is produced by the reduction of superoxide anions, is increased in mitochondria isolated

---

### Table 1 Age-related changes in the expression/activity of proteins involved in cardioprotection

| Protein                | Species | Age         | Tissue/cell                          | Expression/activity                  | Reference               |
|------------------------|---------|-------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Bradykinin receptor    | Rat     | 24m         | Total heart                          | ↑ B1 receptor                        | Kintsurashvili et al.   |
|                        |         |             |                                      | ↓ B2 receptor                        |                         |
| IGF, IGFR              | Rat     | 26m         | LV cardiomyocytes                   | ↓ IGF-1                              | Leri et al.             |
|                        |         |             |                                      | ↓ IGFR                               |                         |
| IL-6                   | Mouse   | 24–26m      | Total heart                          | ↓                                    | Hacham et al.           |
| TNFα                   | Mouse   | 28–31m      | Total heart                          | ↑                                    | Batkai et al.           |
| PKCe                   | Mouse   | >13m        | RV                                   | No change                            | Boengler et al.         |
|                        | Rat     | 24m         | Total heart, soluble fraction        | ↓                                    | Korzick et al.          |
| ERK1/2                 | Rat     | 18m         | LV                                   | ↓                                    | Aoyagi and Izumo        |
| Akt                    | Rat     | 23m         | LV                                   | Phospho↑, total ↓                   | Hunter et al.           |
|                        | Mouse   | 26–28m      | LV                                   | Total ↓                              | Fang et al.             |
| GSK3β                  | Rat     | 23m         | LV                                   | ↓                                    | Hunter et al.           |
| MKP-1                  | Mouse   | 20–24m      | Total heart                          | ↑                                    | Przyklenk et al.        |
| PTP1B                  | Mouse   | 26–28m      | LV                                   | ↑                                    | Fang et al.             |
| PP2A                   | Rat     | 21–22m      | LV, RV                               | ↑                                    | Fenton et al.           |
| Cx43                   | Mouse   | >13m        | LV, RV myocardium, and LV mitochondria | ↓                                    | Boengler et al.         |
| MnSOD                  | Rat     | 24m         | Total heart                          | ↓                                    | Ferrara et al.          |
|                        | Rat     | 31–34m      | Total heart                          | No change in protein level, ↓ SOD activity | van der Loo et al.      |
| Catalase               | Rat     | 24m         | Total heart                          | ↓                                    | Ferrara et al.          |
| STAT3                  | Mouse   | >13m        | RV                                   | ↓                                    | Boengler et al.         |
| iNOS                   | Mouse   | 16m         | Total heart                          | ↑                                    | Yang and Larson         |
|                        | Mouse   | 28–31m      | Total heart                          | ↑                                    | Batkai et al.           |
|                        | Rat     | 25–32m      | LV                                   | ↑                                    | Llorens et al.          |
| Sirt1                  | Rat     | 24m         | Total heart                          | ↓                                    | Ferrara et al.          |

---

### Abbreviations: 
Akt, protein kinase B; Cx43, connexin 43; ERK1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2; GSK3β, glycogen synthase kinase 3 β; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; IGFR, insulin-like growth factor receptor; IL-6, interleukin 6; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; LV, left ventricle; m, months; MKP-1, mitogen-activated kinase phosphatase 1; MnSOD, manganese superoxide dismutase; PKCe, protein kinase C ε; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2A; PTP1B, protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B; RV, right ventricle; Sirt1, sirtuin 1; STAT3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor α; ↑, increased expression/activity with aging; ↓, decreased expression/activity with aging. The factors/proteins are listed according to their sequence in the scheme of Figure 1.
from 14 and 18 months old rat hearts<sup>19</sup> and in subsarcolemmal mitochondria from 24 months old rat hearts<sup>20</sup> over that of young hearts (3 or 6 months, respectively). Also, monoamine oxidases (MAO) in the outer mitochondrial membrane produce ROS by transferring electrons from amine compounds to oxygen. The age-induced increase in hydrogen peroxide in heart homogenates is accordingly abolished by inhibition of MAO-A.<sup>21</sup> The protein p66<sup>Shc</sup>, which can be translocated into the mitochondria, oxidizes cytochrome c and thereby catalyzes the reduction of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide (for review see 22). p66<sup>Shc</sup> knockout mice have a reduced production of ROS and an increased life span.<sup>23</sup> Apart from mitochondria, ROS are generated by NADPH oxidases, and the expression of the cytosolic subunit p47<sup>phox</sup>, which determines the activity of the enzyme, is increased in aged (24–26 months) mouse myocardium.<sup>24</sup> Not only enhanced ROS formation, but also a progressive decrease in the antioxidant capacity from young (3–4 or 6 months) to middle-aged (13–15 months) and aged (>24 months) myocardium contributes to the elevated cellular ROS level in rat hearts.<sup>25,26</sup>

ROS damage macromolecules such as DNA or proteins and thereby contribute to cellular dysfunction and ultimately to cell death. The proximity of mitochondrial DNA to the production site of ROS, the lack of protection of mitochondrial DNA by histones, and the limited capacity of repair mechanisms render the mitochondrial DNA highly susceptible to oxidative stress. During ageing, mutations accumulate in the nuclear as well as in the mitochondrial DNA.<sup>27,28</sup> Mutations in mitochondrial DNA may contribute to the process of ageing, as demonstrated in transgenic mice with a proof-reading-deficient mitochondrial DNA-polymerase, which acquire point mutations and deletions in mitochondrial DNA and develop symptoms of ageing already within 25–40 weeks of age and have a reduced lifespan.<sup>29</sup> The oxidative stress-induced damage of mitochondrial DNA leads to transcription and translation of defective proteins, predominantly subunits of respiratory chain complex I, and accordingly induces dysfunction of the respiratory chain. Protein oxidation in mouse hearts is increased with age (young: 2 months, aged: 24–26 months),<sup>24</sup> and the enhanced oxidative protein modifications of respiratory complexes with ageing (young: 3–5 months, middle-aged: 12–14 months, aged: 20–22 months) further decrease the activity of the respiratory chain.<sup>30</sup> The age-induced decrease of respiratory complex IV activity and oxidative phosphorylation in interfibrillar mitochondria of 24 months old rat hearts are reversed by acetylcarnitine, which acts presumably via increased transcription and translation of mitochondrially encoded proteins.<sup>31</sup>

Whether or not the increased level of ROS in the aged heart contributes to a decline in mitochondrial oxygen consumption is still under debate (for review see 32). A decline in ADP-stimulated respiration in cardiac mitochondria isolated from rats older than 20 months has been described more than 30 years ago<sup>33</sup> and been confirmed later in 24 months old rats.<sup>34</sup> However, other studies failed to demonstrate an influence of age on mitochondrial oxygen consumption.<sup>35,36</sup> These divergent results are possibly reconciled in that cardiomyocytes contain two subpopulations of mitochondria, subsarcolemmal, and interfibrillar mitochondria, which differ in their respiratory capacity. When the two subpopulations were analysed separately, ADP-stimulated

respiration declined specifically in rat interfibrillar mitochondria with age (young: 6 months, aged: 24 months).<sup>20,37</sup> Thus, oxidative stress induces mitochondrial dysfunction in a DNA-dependent and independent manner. According to di Lisa and Bernardi,<sup>38</sup> mitochondria are involved in the amplification, accumulation, and spreading of oxidative stress within and among neighbouring cells.

### 4. Ischaemia/reperfusion injury in the aged myocardium

With ageing, baseline cardiac function declines. When the aged heart is exposed to various forms of stress, an amplification of damage, i.e. a further deterioration of cardiomyocyte function is observed. Whereas the ischaemic threshold and the area at risk are not affected by age, the tolerance to ischaemic injury is reduced,<sup>39,40</sup> suggesting that ageing decreases the intrinsic tolerance to ischaemia. The loss of intrinsic myocardial tolerance to ischaemia in mouse myocardium begins during middle-age (12 months) and becomes more manifest with ageing (18 months and 24–28 months).<sup>41</sup> Whereas infarct size was increased after 30 min ischaemia and 24 h reperfusion in 20 months old C57/Bl6 mice<sup>42</sup> and after 45 min ischaemia and 4 h reperfusion in 22–24 months old C57/Bl6 mice,<sup>43</sup> age had no impact on infarct size from 30 min ischaemia and 2 h reperfusion in C57/Bl6 mice of about 13 months.<sup>40</sup> Ageing also increased ischaemic injury of isolated rat hearts (24 vs. 6 months), as determined by impaired haemodynamic recovery and enhanced release of creatine kinase after 25 min ischaemia and 30 min reperfusion.<sup>44</sup> Studies to identify the mechanisms responsible for the enhanced susceptibility of the aged heart to ischaemia/reperfusion injury revealed greater and more prolonged accumulation of calcium during ischaemia and early reperfusion in cardiomyocytes from aged rat hearts (24 months) than in young (3 months) cardiomyocytes.<sup>45</sup>

In human atrial myocardium, no impact of age was detected when creatine kinase release after 90 min ischaemia and 120 min reoxygenation was compared in tissue from patients 30–49, 50–69, and 70–90 years of age.<sup>46</sup> However, when the recovery of developed force was studied after 30 min hypoxia or simulated ischaemia followed by 30 min reoxygenation, the capacity to recover contractile function was decreased in human atrial trabeculae isolated from 60–69- and 70–89-year-old patients compared to that of 34–59-year-old patients.<sup>47</sup>

Ischaemia/reperfusion enhances the formation of ROS, which damage the phospholipid cardiolipin. This reduction of cardiolipin contributes to reduced activities of respiratory chain complexes and ADP-stimulated respiration.<sup>48,49</sup> Since oxidative damage is further enhanced in the aged rat heart (24 months),<sup>50</sup> strategies aimed to limit ischaemia/reperfusion injury in the aged heart have focussed on attenuation of oxidative stress. Aged rat hearts (24 months) subjected to 45 min ischaemia and 30 min reperfusion had less protein oxidation when reperfused with the antioxidative enzymes superoxide dismutase and catalase, resulting in improved recovery of contractile function.<sup>51</sup> Also, in patients (66 ± 9 years) undergoing coronary artery bypass, ROS scavenging by N-acetylcysteine reduced oxidative stress.<sup>52</sup>

Aged rat hearts (24 months) treated with acetyl carnitine, which may impact on mitochondrial DNA transcription and translation (see above), had better contractile recovery during reperfusion and less tissue damage after ischaemia/reperfusion, as evaluated by lactate dehydrogenase release, than untreated hearts.³¹

Taken together, ageing decreases the tolerance of the heart to ischaemia/reperfusion; this increased susceptibility to ischaemia/reperfusion is likely a consequence of enhanced oxidative stress, and antioxidative strategies may be protective.

## 5. Ischaemic and pharmacological preconditioning in aged myocardium

### 5.1 Ischaemic and pharmacological preconditioning in aged mammalian myocardium

Myocardial damage by ischaemia/reperfusion can be limited by the activation of endogenous cardioprotective mechanisms. One of these mechanisms is ischaemic preconditioning (IP), i.e. the infarct size reduction by brief non-lethal episodes of ischaemia/reperfusion preceding a period of sustained ischaemia/reperfusion.⁵³ The cardioprotection by IP occurs in several phases, an acute phase or first window, in which an infarct size reduction is achieved during the first 1–3 h of reperfusion following the preconditioning ischaemic episodes, and a late phase or second window, in which IP’s protection is manifest after 24–72 h.⁵⁴ In pig myocardium with coronary microembolization, there is also a third window of IP after 6 h.⁵⁵ Since its first description in 1986, many studies have attempted to unravel the molecular mechanisms of IP.⁵ The complex signal transduction cascade of IP involves activation of receptors in the plasma membrane, which transduce their signals via activation of multiple protein kinases.⁵⁶⁻⁵⁸ Mitochondria are central elements in the cardioprotective signalling pathway.⁵⁹,⁶⁰ Small amounts of mitochondrial ROS function as trigger molecules of IP’s cardioprotection. The formation of small amounts of ROS depends on the opening of mitochondrial ATP-dependent potassium channels (mitoK<sub>ATP</sub>) in the inner mitochondrial membrane,¹⁷,⁶¹ which, in turn, are regulated by protein kinases C (PKC) and/or G (PKG).⁶²,⁶³ The ROS production induced by diazoxide, which is cardioprotective presumably by opening mitoK<sub>ATP</sub> channels,⁶⁴ is dependent on the amount of mitochondrial Cx43.⁶⁵ Uncoupling of mitochondria—i.e. proton influx into the mitochondrial matrix without phosphorylation of ADP—also contributes to ROS formation.⁶⁶ ROS are involved in cardioprotection potentially by activating protein kinases such as protein kinase C⁶⁷ or p38 MAP kinase and nuclear translocation of NFκB.⁶⁸ Apart from their function in the trigger phase, mitochondria have been suggested to act as end-effectors of cardioprotection by IP.⁶⁹ The MPTP, a voltage-dependent, high conductance mitochondrial membrane channel, opens when exposed to high concentrations of ROS (radical burst) and calcium at a normal intracellular pH. Inhibition of MPTP opening is important for cardiomyocyte survival and the cardioprotection by IP.⁷⁰,⁷¹ The signalling cascade of IP, especially that of late preconditioning, comprises changes in the transcription of genes, which encode proteins involved in cardioprotection. One of the factors regulating transcription is STAT3 (signal transducer

and activator of transcription 3). STAT3 is central for IP’s cardioprotection, since STAT3-deficient mouse hearts and isolated cardiomyocytes cannot be preconditioned (for review see 72). The details of the signal transduction cascade of IP are reviewed elsewhere.⁵,⁷³,⁷⁴ A schematic representation of the signal transduction pathways of cardioprotection, including age-related changes in the expression and/or activity of the involved proteins, is shown in Figure 1.

The cardioprotection by IP can be mimicked pharmacologically by various agents such as diazoxide, or anaesthetics such as isoflurane, as well as by exogenous administration of endogenous mediators such as adenosine, bradykinin, or opioids.⁷³

The majority of studies designed to identify the signal transduction cascades of ischaemic and pharmacological preconditioning with protection from infarction as endpoint have been performed in young and healthy animals and/or hearts.⁷⁵ The relevance of age for the prevention of ischaemia/reperfusion injury by IP has been extensively studied (Table 2). Loss of infarct size reduction by IP was observed already in middle-aged rat hearts (12–13 months), demonstrating that the loss of cardioprotection manifests earlier than only in senescence.⁷⁶ An increase of the preconditioning stimulus strength preserved cardioprotection by IP in middle-aged rat hearts (12 months).⁷⁷ However, cardioprotection by IP was lost in aged rat hearts (18–20 months), independent of the strength of the preconditioning stimulus and the endpoint analysed.

Whereas the results of the in vitro studies indicate loss of cardioprotection by IP in the aged heart, the data obtained in in vivo experiments are not as consistent. In 2- and 4-year-old rabbit hearts in vivo, IP reduced infarct size.⁷⁸ Also, IP reduced infarct size equally in 0.5–1-year-old and in 6–8-year-old sheep.⁷⁹ However, when looking at the maximal life span of these species (13 years for rabbits and 20 years for sheep, Figure 2), it was questioned whether 4-year-old rabbits represent a suitable model of ageing.⁸⁰ The same argument applies to the use of 6–8-year-old sheep. In contrast to the aforementioned studies, a loss of the cardioprotective effect of IP was observed in middle-aged (13 months) mouse hearts in vivo.⁴⁰

Anaesthetic preconditioning was effective in middle-aged (10–12 months), but not in aged (20–24 months) rat hearts,⁸¹,⁸² indicating that the loss of cardioprotection with advancing age was not specific for IP. Pharmacological preconditioning with adenosine or delta opioid receptor stimulation activates signalling cascades similar to those involved in IP (for review see 5,58,83). Cardioprotection by adenosine receptor stimulation was lost in aged rat hearts (18–20 months).⁷⁷ Also, activation of PKC or opening of mitoK<sub>ATP</sub> channels, both downstream in the adenosine-mediated signalling cascade, did not elicit cardioprotection in aged rat hearts (18–20 months).⁷⁷ In contrast, morphine given directly before ischaemia was not protective, whereas morphine given for 5 days before ischaemia induced cardioprotection in aged mouse hearts,⁸⁴ suggesting persistence of late pharmacological preconditioning in aged hearts.

The effectiveness of anaesthetic and pharmacological preconditioning in aged hearts is summarized in Table 3.

Loss of cardioprotection with ageing

Figure 1 Protein kinase activation in cardioprotection. (A) GPCR/NPR-AKT-eNOS-PKG pathway. (B) RISK pathway. (C) gp130-JAK-STAT pathway. Abbreviations: AMPK, AMP-activated kinase; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; CB-R, cannabinoid receptor; Cx43, connexin 43; eNOS, endothelial NO synthase; ERK, extracellular regulated kinase; FGF-2, fibroblast growth factor 2; gp130, glycoprotein 130; GPCR, G-protein-coupled receptor; GSK3β, glycogen synthase kinase 3 β; H11K, H11 kinase; IGF, insulin-like growth factor 1; IL-6, interleukin 6; iNOS, inducible NO synthase; JAK, janus kinase; KATP, ATP-dependent potassium channel; MnSOD, manganese superoxide dismutase; MPTP, mitochondrial permeability transition pore; NO, nitric oxide; NPR, natriuretic peptide receptor; p38, p38 mitogen activated protein kinase; P70S6K, p70 ribosomal S6 protein kinase; pGC, particulate guanylyl cyclase; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PKG, protein kinase G; ROS, reactive oxygen species; sGC, soluble guanylyl cyclase; SIRT1, sirtuin 1; STAT3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; TNF-R, tumour necrosis factor receptor; UCN, urocortins; factors/proteins affected with aging are shown in yellow. Modified from Ref. 5.

### 5.2 Impact of age on the signalling cascades mediating ischaemic or pharmacological preconditioning

To investigate the mechanisms responsible for the loss of cardioprotection in aged hearts, genes and/or proteins known to be important for the cardioprotection by IP were analysed in young and aged myocardium (Table 1). Apart from and in addition to decreased protein expression in the aged heart, also blunted responses in terms of activation or inhibition of a signalling molecule by a cardioprotective stimulus may contribute to loss of cardioprotection in aged hearts. For example, the stress-induced increase in heat shock protein 70 content was abrogated in aged myocardium (for review see 85).

An impaired response to a cardioprotective stimulus in aged hearts may originate from a decreased level of the extracellular ligand, and indeed reduced levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 and IL-6 were found in aged hearts (24–26 months old mice or 26 months old rats).<sup>86,87</sup> The next level at which ageing may impair the response of the heart to a cardioprotective stimulus is the expression level of the respective sarcolemmal receptors. Not only the ligand level, but also the expression of the IGF-1 receptor was decreased in aged rat hearts.<sup>86</sup> Studies analysing the expression of the bradykinin receptors 1 and 2 in aged (24 months) rat hearts found a decreased level of the bradykinin

receptor 2, which mediates cardioprotection.<sup>88</sup> However, loss of adenosine-induced cardioprotection in aged hearts was not associated with a decreased expression of adenosine receptors, but rather with impaired downstream signalling elements (for review see 89). PKC, which is present in multiple cellular compartments, is central for the cardioprotection by IP and by adenosine, presumably by its activation of mitoK<sub>ATP</sub>-channels.<sup>90</sup> IP is associated with a translocation of PKCε from the cytosol to the particulate fraction.<sup>91</sup> Whereas age does not impact on the level of PKCε in total protein extracts from middle-aged mouse hearts (13 months),<sup>40</sup> PKCε content is decreased in the soluble fraction of aged rat hearts (21 months),<sup>92</sup> and PKC translocation in response to IP is impaired and possibly contributes to loss of cardioprotection with ageing (50 weeks old rat hearts).<sup>93</sup> However, the importance of PKC translocation has been questioned in aged (4 years old) rabbit hearts, in which IP was still effective in reducing infarct size despite a lack of PKC translocation.<sup>94</sup>

Cx43 is located not only at the gap junctions but also in mitochondria,<sup>95</sup> and can be phosphorylated by PKC isoforms.<sup>96,97</sup> Since the cardioprotection by IP is dependent on a normal protein level of Cx43,<sup>98,99</sup> the age-associated decrease of Cx43 (13 months), especially in mitochondria, is proposed to contribute to the loss of cardioprotection in aged mouse hearts (13 months).<sup>40</sup> Cx43-deficiency impairs ROS formation in response to diazoxide and thereby limits

Table 2 Cardioprotection by ischaemic preconditioning in young vs. aged mammal hearts

| Species | Model | Age | IP stimulus | Duration of index isch./rep. | Endpoint | IP protective in aged hearts | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | In vitro | Young |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | In vivo | middle-aged |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | old |  |  |  |  |  |
| Rat | Isolated cardiomyocytes | 3m | 24m | 1×5min isch./10min rep. | 30min isch./30min rep. | Cell viability (trypan blue exclusion) | No | O'Brien et al.⁴⁵ |
| Rat | Isolated heart | 12w | 50w | 3×5min isch./5min rep. | 20min isch. young, 15min isch. MA/ 30min rep. | LVDP, LVEDP, ATP, CK release | No | Tani et al.¹⁷⁰ |
| Rat | Isolated heart | 6m | 24m | 1×2min isch./10min rep.; 4×5min isch./5min rep. | 20min isch./40min rep. | LVDP, LVEDP | No | Abete et al.¹⁷¹ |
| Rat | Isolated heart | 3-4m; 7-8m | 12-13m | 2×5min isch./5min rep. | 35min isch./120min rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | No | Ebrahim et al.⁷⁶ |
| Rat | Isolated heart | 3m | 22m | 2×5min isch./5min rep. | 45min isch./2-3h rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | No | Fenton et al.¹⁷² |
| Rat | Isolated heart | 3m | 12m | 1×5min isch./5min rep.; 3×5min isch., 5min rep. | 35min isch./120min rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes; 3×5min isch./rep. in MA, no: in old | Schulman et al.⁷⁷ |
| Rabbit | Isolated heart | >135w |  | 1×5min isch./5min rep. | 30min isch./120min rep. | LVEDP, infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes | McCully et al.¹⁷³ |
| Mouse | LAD occlusion and rep. | <3m | >13m | 1×10min isch./10min rep. | 30min isch./120min rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | No | Boengler et al.⁴⁰ |
| Rabbit | LCx occlusion and rep. | 4-6m | 2 year; 4 year | 1×5min isch./10min rep. | 30min isch./3h rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes | Przyklenk and Whittaker⁷⁸ |
| Sheep | LAD occlusion and rep. | 0.5-1 year | 5.7-8 year | 3×5min isch./5min rep. | 60min isch./150min rep. | Infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes | Burns et al.⁷⁹ |

Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; Cx, circumflex artery; isch., ischaemia; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LVDP, left ventricular developed pressure; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; m, months; MA, middle-aged; rep., reperfusion; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium-chloride; w, weeks.

Loss of cardioprotection with ageing

Mouse Rat  
0 2 40 42 44 46 48 Months  

Rabbit Sheep Dog Pig Human  
0 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 120 122 124 years  

Figure 2 Maximal life span of mammals (data according to Ref. 178).

the amount of these signalling molecules for the cardioprotection by IP.⁶⁴

The cardioprotection by IP is characterized by enhanced phosphorylation of protein kinases such as ERK1/2 (extracellular signal regulated kinase), Akt, GSK3β (glycogen synthase kinase 3 β), or p38.¹⁰⁰ Blunted activation of these kinases by a cardioprotective stimulus in aged hearts secondary to their decreased expression has been suggested to impair the efficiency of ischaemic and pharmacological preconditioning. The reduced activation of p38 mitogen-activated kinase and its downstream target heat shock protein 27 in response to a delta opioid agonist contributed to the loss of protection in aged (24–26 months) mouse hearts.¹⁰¹ ROS are known to activate p38,⁶⁸ and an attenuation of ROS formation by isoflurane may at least in part be responsible for the loss of anaesthetic preconditioning in aged (20–24 months) rat hearts.⁸¹

A decreased phosphorylation status of signalling proteins in aged myocardium can be the result of either impaired phosphorylation by protein kinases or of enhanced dephosphorylation by protein phosphatases. Indeed, an upregulation of protein phosphatases such as mitogen-activated kinase phosphatase 1 (MKP-1), protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 1B, or protein phosphatase 2A was observed in aged mouse (20–24 months) or rat (21–22 months) hearts.¹⁰²,¹⁰³ The inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A activity by okadaic acid partially restored the protective effect of IP in aged (21–22 months) rat hearts *in vitro*, supporting the idea of failure of protein phosphorylation being responsible for the lack of cardioprotection by IP in aged hearts.¹⁰³

In contrast to acute preconditioning, late preconditioning is dependent on the activation of transcription of genes, which encode proteins important for the cardioprotection. Activation of STAT3 is central for the cardioprotection by late preconditioning, since inhibition of STAT3 abrogates the infarct size reduction by late preconditioning and the enhanced transcription of STAT3 target genes such as iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase),¹⁰⁴ which are central to late IP. Low levels of NO increase ventricular function and are central for the cardioprotection by late preconditioning.¹⁰⁵–¹⁰⁷ A decreased level of STAT3 in aged hearts may impact on the expression level of STAT3 target genes. Indeed, the expression of MnSOD (manganese superoxide dismutase) is decreased in aged (24 months) rat hearts.¹⁰⁸ However, mRNA and protein levels of the STAT3 target iNOS are elevated with age (16 or 28–31 months old mice).¹⁰⁹,¹¹⁰ Presumably, increased levels of tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα) in aged mouse hearts (28–31 months) contribute to the enhanced transcription of iNOS via enhanced superoxide formation and subsequent NFκB activation.¹¹⁰ Since the cardioprotection by late ischaemic and opioid

preconditioning is dependent on iNOS,¹¹¹,¹¹² the enhanced iNOS levels may contribute to the preservation of late cardioprotection in aged (78 weeks rat or 24–26 months mouse) hearts.

The function of mitochondria from young hearts is better preserved by IP.⁵⁹,¹¹³ The ADP-stimulated (state 3) respiration is improved by IP.¹¹³,¹¹⁴ Whether or not the impairment of respiration in mitochondria from aged hearts can also be reversed by IP, has not been studied up to now. Clearly, several cardioprotective signal transduction cascades converge on the MPTP and prevent their opening, however, evidence that MPTP opening is affected by age is lacking.

### 5.3 Ischaemic preconditioning in aged patients

Since the most rigorous endpoint of IP, infarct size, is not easily available in controlled, prospective studies in humans for obvious ethical reasons, the existence and significance of IP in humans are less clear than in animal studies.²,¹¹⁵ In clinical studies, surrogate endpoints such as ST-segment shifts in the surface or intracoronary ECG, metabolic markers such as ATP or lactate, or release of creatine kinase or troponin are used. Apart from potentially unreliable endpoints, clinical studies inducing IP by percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty are confounded by the potential of collateral recruitment, which may attenuate ischaemia and its consequences independently of any preconditioning.

In patients, IP—as reflected by preinfarction angina within 24 h prior to infarction—was protective when the clinical endpoints mortality, heart failure, arrhythmias (mean age: preinfarction angina 59 ± 9 years; control 58 ± 11 years;¹¹⁶ preinfarction angina 59 ± 1 year; control 59 ± 1 years;¹¹⁷ preinfarction angina 59 ± 11 years; control 61 ± 8 years¹¹⁸) or the laboratory endpoints creatine kinase release and left ventricular dilation (mean age 59 ± 12 years)¹¹⁹ were evaluated. Cardiac enzymes and the in-hospital outcomes death, recurrent ischaemia, heart failure, and atrioventricular block were similar in patients with preinfarction angina 48 h prior to acute myocardial infarction (56 ± 12 years) compared with patients without preinfarction angina (57 ± 10 years).¹²⁰ In contrast, Abete *et al.*¹²¹ demonstrated a protective effect of preinfarction angina 48 h prior myocardial infarction against in-hospital death and heart failure or shock in patients younger than 65 years. The retrospective analysis of patients without or with angina before myocardial infarction does not allow to distinguish between the cardioprotection by early and late IP.

IP performed during cardiac surgery was associated with reduced ventricular arrhythmias, inotrope requirements, and intensive care unit stay,¹²² with an improvement in cardiac index (mean age without IP: 65 ± 2 years, mean age with IP: 62 ± 2 years),¹²³ reduced release of troponin T (mean age without IP: 62 ± 2 years, mean age with IP: 57 ± 2 years),¹²⁴ and preservation of the myocardial ATP levels (age of patients not specified).¹²⁵ However, the use of cardiopulmonary bypass *per se* has been suggested to confer cardioprotection.¹²⁶

The impact of age on IP induced during surgery or in isolated human tissue *in vitro* remains controversial, since both loss and preservation of cardioprotection have been

Table 3 Cardioprotection by anaesthetic or pharmacological preconditioning (PC) in young and aged mammalian hearts

| Species | Model     | Age           | Preconditioning stimulus                                                                 | Duration of index isch./rep.         | Endpoint                          | PC protective in aged hearts | Reference          |
|---------|-----------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------|
|         | In vitro  | Young         |                                                                                        |                                      |                                   |                         |                    |
|         | In vivo   | Middle-aged   |                                                                                        |                                      |                                   |                         |                    |
|         |           | Old           |                                                                                        |                                      |                                   |                         |                    |
| Acute preconditioning |               |                             |                                                                                                  |                                   |                               |                         |                    |
| Mouse   | Isolated heart | 2m        | 25 μM adenosine                                                                         | 20 min isch./60 min rep.             | LVDP                              | No                        | Willems et al.⁸⁹  |
| Mouse   | Isolated heart | 10-14w    | 1 mM [D-pen²,⁵] enkephalin (delta opioid agonist)                                         | 25 min isch./45 min rep.             | LVDP, -dP/dt                      | No                        | Peart et al.¹⁰¹   |
| Rat     | Isolated heart | 2-4m      | 2.5% sevoflurane for 10 min, 5 min washout                                                | 25 min isch./60 min rep.             | LVDP, CK release, infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes, in MA; no, in old | Sniecinski and Liu⁸² |
| Rat     | LAD occlusion and rep. | 3-5m    | 30 min 1 minimum alveolar anaesthetic concentration isoflurane                           | 30 min isch./120 min rep.            | Infarct size (TTC staining)       | No                        | Nguyen et al.⁸¹    |
| Rat     | LAD occlusion and rep. | 2-3m      | 3 × 5 min 70% helium, 5 min washout                                                   | 25 min isch./20 min rep.             | Infarct size (TTC staining)       | No                        | Heinen et al.¹⁷⁴   |
| Rat     | Isolated heart | 3m        | 30 μM diazoxide for 10 min, 5 min washout                                                 | 35 min isch./120 min rep.            | Infarct size (TTC staining)       | No                        | Schulman et al.⁷⁷  |
| Rat     | Isolated heart | 3m        | 200 nM CCPA (adenosine A₁ receptor agonist) for 10 min, 5 min washout                       | 35 min isch./120 min rep.            | Infarct size (TTC staining)       | No                        | Schulman et al.⁷⁷  |
| Rat     | Isolated heart | 3m        | 30 μM DOG (PKC analog) for 10 min, 5 min washout                                           | 35 min isch./120 min rep.            | Infarct size (TTC staining)       | No                        | Schulman et al.⁷⁷  |
| Rabbit  | Isolated heart | >135w    | 1 mM adenosine                                                                          | 30 min isch./120 min rep.            | LVEDP, infarct size (TTC staining) | Yes                       | McCully et al.¹⁷³  |
| Late preconditioning |               |                             |                                                                                                  |                                   |                               |                         |                    |
| Mouse   | Isolated heart | 10-14w    | 30 μM morphine acute, 75 mg morphine pellet 5 d prior to isch./rep.                       | 25 min isch./45 min rep.             | LVDP, LVEDP, LDH release         | Yes, in 5d morphine; no, in acute morphine | Peart and Gross⁸⁴ |
| Rat     | Isolated heart | 12w      | BW337U 86 (delta opioid receptor agonist), 24 h prior to ischaemia                         | 20 min isch./20 min rep.             | LVDP, CK release, lactate dehydrogenase activity | Yes                       | Shinmura et al.¹⁷⁵ |

Abbreviations: CCPA, 2-chloro-N⁶-cyclopentyladenosine; CK, creatine kinase; DOG, 1,2-dioctanyl-sn-glycerol; isch., ischaemia; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LVDP, left ventricular developed pressure; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; m, months; MA, middle-aged; PKC, protein kinase C; rep., reperfusion; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium-chloride; w, weeks.

Loss of cardioprotection with ageing

Table 4 Cardioprotection by ischaemic preconditioning in young and aged human atrial tissue and in patients

| Model | Age | IP stimulus | Duration of index isch./rep. | Endpoint | IP protective in aged hearts | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Right atrial appendages from patients undergoing elective coronary artery surgery or aortic valve replacement | 30–49 y | 1 × 5 min isch./5 min rep. | 90 min isch./120 min rep. | CK release, MTT reduction | Yes | Loubani et al. 46 |
| Right atrial appendages from patients undergoing elective coronary artery surgery | 37–55 y | 1 × 5 min isch./10 min rep. | 30 min isch. with 3 Hz stimulation/90 min rep. with 1 Hz stimulation | Recovery of contractile force | No | Bartling et al. 176 |
| Patients with three vessel disease undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery | < 69 y | 2 × 2 min isch./3 min rep. | nd | Right ventricular ejection fraction, cardiac index, serum cardiac troponin I, ST segment shift, chest pain score, lactate extraction | No | Wu et al. 177 |
| Patients undergoing angioplasty for a major epicardial coronary artery | < 55 y (35–55 y) > 65 y (65–78) | 1 × 3 min isch./5 min rep., 2 min isch./5 min rep. | nd | No, 2 min isch. stimulus; yes, 3 min isch. stimulus | Lee et al. 129 |
| Retrospective analysis of patients with myocardial infarction | < 65 y > 65 y | Angina within 48 h prior infarction | nd | In hospital death, heart failure, or shock | No | Abete et al. 121 |

described (Table 4). Depending on the endpoint analysed and the duration of the index ischaemia, IP was protective or not in atrial appendage preparations of patients undergoing elective coronary artery surgery. Anaesthetic preconditioning with isoflurane was more effective in preserving the respiratory function of isolated mitochondria after hypoxia/reoxygenation and in reducing cell death induced by hydrogen peroxide in right atrial appendages from adult (mean age 54 years) than from old (mean age 74 years) patients. The loss of cardioprotection with ageing cannot be attributed to a differential expression of genes important for cardioprotection, since the expression of cardioprotective genes, such as heat shock protein 70 (HSp70), Bcl-2/-xL, or IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis protein), in right atrial appendages from patients older than 70 years was preserved. Similar to IP in aged rat hearts, patients older than 65 years undergoing coronary angioplasty benefited from a stronger preconditioning stimulus.

Apart from age and concomitant cardiovascular diseases, the analysis of the effectiveness of IP in patients is further complicated by confounding factors such as medical treatment e.g. inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme, which has been demonstrated to confer cardioprotection via inhibition of bradykinin breakdown, or sulfonylureas which may inhibit mitoKATP channels.

In summary, the aged mammalian and human heart is characterized by loss of cardioprotection by ischaemic or pharmacological preconditioning. The defects in the signalling cascades occur at several levels, ranging from changes in the expression and/or activity of extracellular ligands, sarcolemmal receptors, protein kinases to mitochondrial proteins, and mitochondrial function.

## 6. Ischaemic postconditioning in aged myocardium

### 6.1 Ischaemic postconditioning in aged myocardium of laboratory mammals

Ischaemic postconditioning is the infarct size reduction by brief cycles (5–60 s) of ischaemia/reperfusion following a sustained ischaemic insult. The phenomenon of ischaemic postconditioning was first described in dogs, subsequently in other species, and can also be recruited clinically in humans to reduce infarct size. The signal transduction pathways of ischaemic pre and postconditioning share some, but not all signalling elements. Activation of the so-called RISK (reperfusion injury salvage kinase) pathway, which includes the phosphorylation of Akt, ERK1/2, p70S6 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K), and GSK3β was suggested to be causal for the cardioprotection by ischaemic postconditioning. However, the importance of RISK phosphorylation has been recently questioned, notably its relevance in larger mammals. The infarct size reduction by ischaemic postconditioning depends both on number and duration of the reocclusions (for review see 140). The dependence of cardioprotection on the postconditioning algorithm is seen not only in young but also in aged hearts. In young C57/BL6 mice (< 3 months), ischaemic postconditioning by either five cycles of 5 s ischaemia and 5 s reocclusion (5 × 5) or by three cycles of 10 s ischaemia and 10 s reocclusion (3 × 10)

Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; isch., ischaemia; nd, not determined; MTT, 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide; rep., reperfusion; y, years.

reduced infarct size, whereas in middle-aged mice (>13 months) the cardioprotection by the 5 × 5 postconditioning algorithm was maintained but that of the 3 × 10 protocol was abolished,^{141} supporting the idea that the stimulus strength is important. The loss of infarct size reduction by 3 × 10 ischaemic postconditioning was associated with reduced expression and phosphorylation of STAT3 in aged (>13 months) mouse hearts.^{141,142} Also, in hearts isolated from 20 to 24 months old C57/Bl6 mice ischaemic postconditioning by either three cycles of 10 s ischaemia/10 s reperfusion or six cycles of 10 s ischaemia/10 s reperfusion failed to reduce infarct size.^{102} In this study, the loss of cardioprotection by ischaemic postconditioning was associated with increased levels of the phosphatase MKP-1 in aged (20–24 months) mouse hearts. The infusion of sodium orthovanadate, which inhibits protein tyrosine phosphatases and adenosine triphosphatases, reduced the increased levels of MKP-1 and restored the cardioprotection by ischaemic postconditioning in aged hearts. The phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is a target protein of MKP-1, was enhanced by the postconditioning manoeuvre in young, but once more not in aged hearts. However, in aged hearts treated with sodium orthovanadate ischaemic postconditioning once again restored ERK1/2 phosphorylation.^{102} Therefore, impaired ERK1/2 phosphorylation by ischaemic postconditioning in aged hearts may interfere with downstream signalling proteins such as STAT3 and thereby limit the resistance of the aged heart against ischaemia/reperfusion injury.

Taken together, the aged heart is not only characterized by an impaired response to a pre, but also to a postconditioning stimulus. The loss of cardioprotection by ischaemic postconditioning is associated with a loss of activity of parts of the signal transduction pathways.

### 6.2 Ischaemic postconditioning in human myocardium

After the initial description of the phenomenon of ischaemic postconditioning in dog myocardium, the effectiveness of ischaemic postconditioning's cardioprotection was also shown in humans. In patients with acute myocardial infarction undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention (mean age control: 56 ± 3 years; mean age postconditioning: 58 ± 4 years), repeated inflation and deflation of the angioplasty balloon after stenting conferred cardioprotection in terms of creatine kinase release.^{134} The beneficial effects of postconditioning persisted for at least 1 year.^{4} The involvement of inhibition of MPTP opening at reperfusion, which is cardioprotective in animal studies, was confirmed in patients with myocardial infarction, who received a bolus of the MPTP inhibitor cyclosporine A before the percutaneous coronary intervention (mean age control: 57 ± 2 years, mean age cyclosporine A: 58 ± 2 years).^{143} Here, creatine kinase release and the area of hyperenhancement on MRI imaging, which reflects infarcted tissue, were attenuated compared to the control group receiving saline.

In general, postconditioning is beneficial in human myocardium, however, data on a possible age-dependency of postconditioning are still lacking.

---

### 7. Strategies to prevent the loss of cardioprotection in aged hearts

#### 7.1 Caloric restriction

Caloric restriction is an established intervention to attenuate cellular ageing by inducing transcriptional reprogramming^11 and to promote longevity.^144 Since caloric restriction also increases the tolerance to ischaemia,^145 the potential impact of caloric restriction to restore or maintain the ability of the aged heart to respond to a preconditioning stimulus has been investigated. Most studies on caloric restriction and IP in aged hearts have focussed on ventricular function and not on infarct size. Whereas the recovery of left ventricular function after reperfusion *per se* was improved and the release of creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase *per se* was reduced by short-term caloric restriction (90% caloric intake for 2 weeks, then 65% caloric intake for 2 weeks) both in young (6 months) and in aged (24 months) rat hearts, the protection by IP was not restored by caloric restriction in aged hearts.^146 In isolated rat hearts (10 months), IP had no effect on postischaemic cardiac output, whereas in calorically restricted rats (40% food reduction for 6 months) IP significantly improved postischaemic cardiac output.^147 IP improved the recovery of developed pressure and this protection was lost with ageing, but partially preserved in 24 months old calorically restricted isolated rat hearts.^148,149

The analysis of the mechanisms involved in the potential preservation of IP by caloric restriction in aged hearts has focussed on the adipokine adiponectin. Adiponectin-knockout mice have larger infarcts and enhanced apoptosis after ischaemia/reperfusion. On the signal level, higher concentrations of superoxide and peroxynitrite were detected in adiponectin-deficient mice than in controls, suggesting that adiponectin is cardioprotective by reducing oxidative/nitrative stress.^150 Evidence for the involvement of adiponectin and AMPK (AMP-activated kinase) in the cardioprotective signalling induced by caloric restriction has been provided in adiponectin-antisense transgenic mice.^151 Whereas short-term caloric restriction improved the recovery of left ventricular function after ischaemia/reperfusion, reduced infarct size, and enhanced AMPK phosphorylation, the protective effects of caloric restriction were abolished in the adiponectin-antisense transgenic mice. Recombinant adiponectin restored the protective effect of caloric restriction in adiponectin-deficient mice, and inhibition of AMPK phosphorylation in wild-type mice abrogated the cardioprotection induced by caloric restriction. The concentration of serum adiponectin induced by caloric restriction was higher in young (6 months) than in aged (24–26 months) rats, and loss of adiponectin inducibility by caloric restriction in aged rats was only partially compensated by a higher degree of caloric restriction.^152 Caloric restriction restored the protective effect of IP in 12 months old rat hearts, and the cardioprotection was associated with a nitric oxide-dependent increase of the histone deacetylase Sirt1 (sirtuin 1).^153 A moderate Sirt1 overexpression protected the heart from oxidative stress and retarded ageing.^154 Therefore, the enhanced nuclear translocation of Sirt1 by caloric restriction may be involved in the restoration of IP in aged hearts and underlying mechanisms may relate to reduced oxidative stress and apoptosis. Along this line,

long-term caloric restriction decreases mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide formation at complex I, lowers oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA in aged (24 months) rat hearts, and possibly thereby contributes to attenuated ageing.¹⁵⁵

### 7.2 Exercise

Exercise confers cardioprotection against ischaemia/reperfusion injury (for review see 156). The improved tolerance to ischaemia is sex-dependent and greater in male than in female hearts.¹⁵⁷ Studies aimed at identifying the mechanisms mediating the protection by exercise revealed a reduction of mitochondrial ROS formation,¹⁵⁸ an increased antioxidant capacity, and a differential gene/protein expression, such as an enhanced expression of heat shock proteins (for review see 159) or cardiac telomere-stabilizing proteins and IGF-1.⁶ Exercise improves the recovery of function and reduces apoptosis both in young (4 months) and in aged (21 or 24 months, respectively) rat hearts subjected to ischaemia/reperfusion.¹⁶⁰,¹⁶¹ In aged rat hearts (24 months), the lost cardioprotection by IP was partially restored by exercise alone and more completely restored by the combination of exercise and caloric restriction.¹⁴⁹ Whereas the improved postischaemic recovery of developed pressure by IP was lost in aged (24 months) compared to that in adult (6 months) rat hearts, 6 weeks of swim training preserved the cardioprotective effect of IP in aged hearts.¹⁶² Exercise enhanced the oxidative defence, since the levels of Sirt1, manganese superoxide dismutase, and catalase, which were decreased in aged rat hearts (24 months), were restored by training.¹⁰⁸ The protective effect of 12 week treadmill training in aged rat hearts (24 months) subjected to ischaemia/reperfusion was attributed to limited protein oxidation and enhanced myocardial protein levels of Hsp70 and eNOS.¹⁶³

The beneficial effect of exercise on the cardioprotection by IP in aged hearts was confirmed in patients older than 65 years (mean age about 72 years).¹⁶⁴ Here, the protection by preinfarction angina against in hospital mortality was present only in elderly patients with higher levels of physical activity.

In summary, the loss of cardioprotection with ageing is not irreversible. Caloric restriction, exercise, or both contribute to the preservation of cardioprotection in aged hearts.

### 8. Conclusion

Structural and functional changes during ageing render the heart more susceptible to cell death from ischaemia/reperfusion. Cardioprotective manoeuvres such as ischaemic pre- and postconditioning lose their effectiveness with ageing. The mechanisms responsible for the loss of protection in the aged heart include alterations in gene/protein expression, signal transduction cascades, and mitochondrial function (e.g. ROS formation, respiration). As human life expectancy increases due to effective treatment of cardiovascular and other diseases, there is a need for the development of strategies designed to preserve the efficiency of cardioprotective mechanisms in the aged heart. Caloric restriction and physical exercise may contribute to the prevention of the age-induced loss of cardioprotection.

Conflict of interest. None declared.

---

### References

1. Skyschally A, Schulz R, Heusch G. Pathophysiology of myocardial infarction: protection by ischemic pre- and postconditioning. *Herz* 2008;33: 88–100.
2. Heusch G. Nitroglycerin and delayed preconditioning in humans. Yet another new mechanism for an old drug? *Circulation* 2001;103: 2876–2878.
3. Yellon DM, Hausenloy DJ. Myocardial reperfusion injury. *N Engl J Med* 2007;357:1121–1135.
4. Thibault H, Piot C, Staat P, Bontemps L, Sportouch C, Rioufol G et al. Long-term benefit of postconditioning. *Circulation* 2008;117: 1037–1044.
5. Heusch G, Boengler K, Schulz R. Cardioprotection: nitric oxide, protein kinases, and mitochondria. *Circulation* 2008;118:1915–1919.
6. Werner C, Hanhoun M, Widmann T, Kazakov A, Semenov A, Poss J et al. Effects of physical exercise on myocardial telomere-regulating proteins, survival pathways, and apoptosis. *J Am Coll Cardiol* 2008;52:470–482.
7. Leri A, Malhotra A, Liew CC, Kajstura J, Anversa P. Telomerase activity in rat cardiac myocytes is age and gender dependent. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2000;32:385–390.
8. Cawthon RM, Smith KR, O’Brien E, Sivatchenko A, Kerber RA. Association between telomere length in blood and mortality in people aged 60 years or older. *Lancet* 2003;361:393–395.
9. Chimenti C, Kajstura J, Torella D, Urbanek K, Heleniak H, Colussi C et al. Senescence and death of primitive cells and myocytes lead to premature cardiac aging and heart failure. *Circ Res* 2003;93:604–613.
10. Bodyak N, Kang PM, Hiromura M, Sulijoadikusumo I, Horikoshi N, Khrapko K et al. Gene expression profiling of the aging mouse cardiac myocytes. *Nucleic Acids Res* 2002;30:3788–3794.
11. Lee CK, Allison DB, Brand J, Weindruch R, Prolla TA. Transcriptional profiles associated with aging and middle age-onset caloric restriction in mouse hearts. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2002;99:14988–14993.
12. Bernhard D, Laufer G. The aging cardiomyocyte: a mini-review. *Gerontology* 2008;54:24–31.
13. Goldspink DF, Burniston JG, Tan LB. Cardiomyocyte death and the ageing and failing heart. *Exp Physiol* 2003;88:447–458.
14. Harman D. Free radical theory of aging: an update: increasing the functional life span. *Ann N Y Acad Sci* 2006;1067:10–21.
15. Terman A, Brunk UT. Autophagy in cardiac myocyte homeostasis, aging, and pathology. *Cardiovasc Res* 2005;68:355–365.
16. Wenzel P, Schuhmacher S, Kienhofer J, Müller J, Hortmann M, Oelze M et al. Manganese superoxide dismutase and aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency increase mitochondrial oxidative stress and aggravate age-dependent vascular dysfunction. *Cardiovasc Res* 2008;80:280–289.
17. Pain T, Yang X-M, Critz SD, Yue Y, Nakano A, Liu GS et al. Opening of mitochondrial KATP channels triggers the preconditioned state by generating free radicals. *Circ Res* 2000;87:460–466.
18. Di Lisa F, Canton M, Menabo R, Kaludercic N, Bernardi P. Mitochondria and cardioprotection. *Heart Fail Rev* 2007;12:249–260.
19. Muscari C, Calderera CM, Guarneri C. Age-dependent production of mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide, lipid peroxides and fluorescent pigments in the rat heart. *Basic Res Cardiol* 1990;85:172–178.
20. Judge S, Jang YM, Smith A, Hagen T, Leeuwenburgh C. Age-associated increases in oxidative stress and antioxidant enzyme activities in cardiac interfibrillar mitochondria: implications for the mitochondrial theory of aging. *FASEB J* 2005;19:419–421.
21. Maurel A, Hernandez C, Kunduzova O, Bompart G, Cambon C, Parini A et al. Age-dependent increase in hydrogen peroxide production by cardiac monoamine oxidase A in rats. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2003;284:H1460–H1467.
22. Cosentino F, Francia P, Camici GG, Pellicci PG, Lüscher TF. Final common molecular pathways of aging and cardiovascular disease: role of the p66Shc protein. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol* 2008;28:622–628.
23. Migliaccio E, Giorgio M, Mele S, Pellicci G, Reboidi P, Pandolfi PP et al. The p66shc adaptor protein controls oxidative stress response and lifespan in mammals. *Nature* 1999;402:309–313.
24. Li SY, Du M, Dolence EK, Fang CX, Mayer GE, Ceylan-Isik AF et al. Aging induces cardiac diastolic dysfunction, oxidative stress, accumulation of advanced glycation endproducts and protein modification. *Aging Cell* 2005;4:57–64.
25. Savitha S, Tamilselvan J, Anusuyadevi M, Panneerselvam C. Oxidative stress on mitochondrial antioxidant defense system in the aging process: role of DL-alpha-lipoic acid and L-carnitine. *Clin Chim Acta* 2005;355:173–180.

26. Sivonova M, Tatarkova Z, Durackova Z, Dobrota D, Lehotsky J, Matakova T et al. Relationship between antioxidant potential and oxidative damage to lipids, proteins and DNA in aged rats. *Physiol Res* 2007;56:757–764.

27. Herrero A, Portero-Otin M, Bellmunt MJ, Pamplona R, Barja G. Effect of the degree of fatty acid unsaturation of rat heart mitochondria on their rates of H2O2 production and lipid and protein oxidative damage. *Mech Ageing Dev* 2001;122:427–443.

28. Khaidakov M, Heflich RH, Manjanatha MG, Myers MB, Aidoo A. Accumulation of point mutations in mitochondrial DNA of aging mice. *Mutat Res* 2003;526:1–7.

29. Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, Spelbrink JN, Rovio AT, Bruder CE et al. Premature ageing in mice expressing defective mitochondrial DNA polymerase. *Nature* 2004;429:417–423.

30. Choksi KB, Papaconstantinou J. Age-related alterations in oxidatively damaged proteins of mouse heart mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes. *Free Radic Biol Med* 2008;44:1795–1805.

31. Lesnefsky EJ, He DC, Moghaddas S, Hoppel CL. Reversal of mitochondrial defects before ischemia protects the aged heart. *FASEB J* 2006;20:E840–E845.

32. Judge S, Leeuwenburgh C. Cardiac mitochondrial bioenergetics, oxidative stress, and aging. *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol* 2007;292:C1983–C1992.

33. Chen JC, Warshaw JB, Sanadi DR. Regulation of mitochondrial respiration in senescence. *J Cell Physiol* 1972;80:141–148.

34. Jahangir A, Ozcan C, Holmuhamedov EL, Terzic A. Increased calcium vulnerability of senescent cardiac mitochondria: protective role for a mitochondrial potassium channel opener. *Mech Ageing Dev* 2001;122:1073–1086.

35. Manzelmann MS, Harmon HJ. Lack of age-dependent changes in rat heart mitochondria. *Mech Ageing Dev* 1987;39:281–288.

36. Cocco T, Sgobbo P, Clemente M, Lopriore B, Grattagliano I, Di PM et al. Tissue-specific changes of mitochondrial functions in aged rats: effect of a long-term dietary treatment with N-acetylcysteine. *Free Radic Biol Med* 2005;38:796–805.

37. Fannin SW, Lesnefsky EJ, Slabe TJ, Hassan MO, Hoppel CL. Aging selectively decreases oxidative capacity in rat heart interfibrillar mitochondria. *Arch Biochem Biophys* 1999;372:399–407.

38. Di Lisa F, Bernardi P. Mitochondrial function and myocardial aging. A critical analysis of the role of permeability transition. *Cardiovasc Res* 2005;66:222–232.

39. Abete P, Cioppa A, Calabrese C, Pascucci I, Cacciatore F, Napoli C et al. Ischemic threshold and myocardial stunning in the aging heart. *Exp Gerontol* 1999;34:875–884.

40. Boengler K, Konietzka I, Buechert A, Heinen Y, Garcia-Dorado D, Heusch G et al. Loss of ischemic preconditioning’s cardioprotection in aged mouse hearts is associated with reduced gap junctional and mitochondrial levels of connexin 43. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2007;292:H1764–H1769.

41. Willems L, Zatta A, Holgren K, Ashton KJ, Headrick JP. Age-related changes in ischemic tolerance in male and female mouse hearts. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 1996;38:245–256.

42. Zhang H, Tao L, Jiao X, Gao E, Lopez BL, Christopher TA et al. Nitrative thioredoxin inactivation as a cause of enhanced myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury in the aging heart. *Free Radic Biol Med* 2007;43:39–47.

43. Azhar G, Gao W, Liu L, Wei JY. Ischemia-reperfusion in the adult mouse heart influence of age. *Exp Gerontol* 1999;34:699–714.

44. Lesnefsky EJ, Gallo DS, Ye J, Whittingham TS, Lust WD. Aging increases ischemia-reperfusion injury in the isolated, buffer-perfused heart. *J Lab Clin Med* 1994;124:843–851.

45. O’Brien JD, Ferguson JH, Howlett SE. Effects of ischemia and reperfusion on isolated ventricular myocytes from young adult and aged Fischer 344 rat hearts. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2008;294:H2174–H2183.

46. Loubani M, Ghosh S, Galinanes M. The aging human myocardium: tolerance to ischemia and responsiveness to ischemic preconditioning. *J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg* 2003;126:143–147.

47. Mariani J, Ou R, Bailey M, Rowland M, Nagley P, Rosenfeldt F et al. Tolerance to ischemia and hypoxia is reduced in aged human myocardium. *J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg* 2000;120:660–667.

48. Paradies G, Petrosillo G, Pistolese M, Di Venosa N, Federici A, Ruggiero FM. Decrease in mitochondrial complex I activity in ischemic/reperfused rat heart. Involvement of reactive oxygen species and cardiolipin. *Circ Res* 2004;94:53–59.

49. Petrosillo G, Ruggiero FM, Di Venosa N, Paradies G. Decreased complex III activity in mitochondria isolated from rat heart subjected to ischemia and reperfusion: role of reactive oxygen species and cardiolipin. *FASEB J* 2003;17:714–716.

50. Lesnefsky EJ, Hoppel CL. Cardiolipin as an oxidative target in cardiac mitochondria in the aged rat. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2008;1777:1020–1027.

51. Besse S, Bulteau AL, Boucher F, Riou B, Swynghedauw B, de Leiris J. Antioxidant treatment prevents cardiac protein oxidation after ischemia-reperfusion and improves myocardial function and coronary perfusion in senescent hearts. *J Physiol Pharmacol* 2006;57:541–552.

52. Tossios P, Bloch W, Huebner A, Raji MR, Dodos F, Klass O et al. N-acetylcysteine prevents reactive oxygen, species-mediated myocardial stress in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. *J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg* 2003;126:1513–1520.

53. Murry CE, Jennings RB, Reimer KA. Preconditioning with ischemia: a delay of lethal cell injury in ischemic myocardium. *Circulation* 1986;74:1124–1136.

54. Marber MS, Latchman DS, Walker JM, Yellon DM. Cardiac stress protein elevation 24 h after brief ischemia or heat stress is associated with resistance to myocardial infarction. *Circulation* 1993;88:1264–1272.

55. Skyschally A, Gres P, Hoffmann S, Haude M, Erbel R, Schulz R et al. Bidirectional role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in coronary microembolization: progressive contractile dysfunction versus delayed protection against infarction. *Circ Res* 2007;100:140–146.

56. Yellon DM, Downey JM. Preconditioning the myocardium: from cellular physiology to clinical cardiology. *Physiol Rev* 2003;83:1113–1151.

57. Shi Y, Rafiee P, Su J, Pritchard KA, Tweddell JS, Baker JE. Acute cardioprotective effects of erythropoietin in infant rabbits are mediated by activation of protein kinases and potassium channels. *Basic Res Cardiol* 2004;99:173–182.

58. Cohen MV, Downey JM. Adenosine: trigger and mediator of cardioprotection. *Basic Res Cardiol* 2008;103:203–215.

59. Murphy E. Primary and secondary signaling pathways in early preconditioning that converge on the mitochondria to produce cardioprotection. *Circ Res* 2004;94:7–16.

60. Murphy E, Steenbergen C. Preconditioning: the mitochondrial connection. *Annu Rev Physiol* 2007;69:51–67.

61. Andrukhiv A, Costa AD, West IC, Garlid KD. Opening mitoKATP increases superoxide generation from complex I of the electron transport chain. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2006;291:H2067–H2074.

62. Costa ADT, Garlid KD. Intramitochondrial signaling—interactions among mitoKATP, PKCe, ROS, and MPT. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2008;295:H874–H882.

63. Costa ADT, Garlid KD, West IC, Lincoln TM, Downey JM, Cohen MV et al. Protein kinase G transmits the cardioprotective signal from cytosol to mitochondria. *Circ Res* 2005;97:329–336.

64. Heinzel FR, Luo Y, Li X, Boengler K, Buechert A, García-Dorado D et al. Impairment of diazoxide-induced formation of reactive oxygen species and loss of cardioprotection in connexin 43 deficient mice. *Circ Res* 2005;97:583–586.

65. Rodriguez-Sinovas A, Boengler K, Cabestrero A, Gres P, Morente M, Ruiz-Meana M et al. Translocation of connexin 43 to the inner mitochondrial membrane of cardiomyocytes through the heat shock protein 90-dependent TOM pathway and its importance for cardioprotection. *Circ Res* 2006;99:93–101.

66. Sack MN. Mitochondrial depolarization and the role of uncoupling proteins in ischemia tolerance. *Cardiovasc Res* 2006;72:210–219.

67. Baines CP, Goto M, Downey JM. Oxygen radicals released during ischemic preconditioning contribute to cardioprotection in the rabbit myocardium. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 1997;29:207–216.

68. Das DK, Maulik N, Sato M, Ray PS. Reactive oxygen species function as second messenger during ischemic preconditioning of heart. *Mol Cell Biochem* 1999;196:59–67.

69. Garcia-Dorado D, Rodriguez-Sinovas A, Ruiz-Meana M, Agulló L, Cabestrero A. The end-effectors of preconditioning protection against myocardial cell death secondary to ischemia-reperfusion. *Cardiovasc Res* 2006;70:274–285.

70. Javadov SA, Clarke S, Das M, Griffiths EJ, Lim KH, Halestrap AP. Ischemic preconditioning inhibits opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores in the reperfused rat heart. *J Physiol* 2003;549:513–524.

71. Hausenloy DJ, Maddock HL, Baxter GF, Yellon DM. Inhibiting mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening: a new paradigm for myocardial preconditioning? *Cardiovasc Res* 2002;55:534–543.

72. Boengler K, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Drexler H, Heusch G, Schulz R. The myocardial JAK/STAT pathway: from protection to failure. Pharmacol Ther 2008;120:172–185.
73. Downey JM, Davis AM, Cohen MV. Signaling pathways in ischemic preconditioning. Heart Fail Rev 2007;12:181–188.
74. Murphy E, Steenbergen C. Mechanisms underlying acute protection from cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury. Physiol Rev 2008;88:581–609.
75. Ferdinand P, Schulz R, Baxter GF. Interaction of cardiovascular risk factors with myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury, preconditioning, and postconditioning. Pharmacol Rev 2007;59:418–458.
76. Ebrahim Z, Yellon DM, Baxter GF. Ischemic preconditioning is lost in aging hypertensive rat heart: independent effects of aging and long-standing hypertension. Exp Gerontol 2007;42:807–814.
77. Schulman D, Latchman DS, Yellon DM. Effect of aging on the ability of preconditioning to protect rat hearts from ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2001;281:H1630–H1636.
78. Przyklenk K, Li G, Whittaker P. No loss in the in vivo efficacy of ischemic preconditioning in middle-aged and old rabbits. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;38:1741–1747.
79. Burns PG, Krunkenkamp IB, Calderone CA, Kirvaitis RJ, Gaudette GRLS. Is the preconditioning response conserved in senescent myocardium? Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:925–929.
80. Abete P, de Santis D, Condorelli M, Napoli C, Rengo F. A four-year-old rabbit cannot be considered the right model for investigating cardiac senescence. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;39:1701–1702.
81. Nguyen LT, Rebecchi MJ, Moore LC, Glass PS, Brink PR, Liu L. Attenuation of isoflurane-induced preconditioning and reactive oxygen species production in the senescent rat heart. Anesth Analg 2008;107:776–782.
82. Sniecinski R, Liu H. Reduced efficacy of volatile anesthetic preconditioning with advanced age in isolated rat myocardium. Anesthesiology 2004;100:589–597.
83. Gross GJ. Role of opioids in acute and delayed preconditioning. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2003;35:709–718.
84. Peart JN, Gross GJ. Chronic exposure to morphine produces a marked cardioprotective phenotype in aged mouse hearts. Exp Gerontol 2004;39:1021–1026.
85. Taylor RP, Starnes JW. Age, cell signalling cardioprotection. Acta Physiol Scand 2003;178:107–116.
86. Leri A, Kajstura J, Li B, Sonnenblick EH, Beltrami CA, Anversa Pet al. Cardiomyocyte aging is gender-dependent: the local IGF-1-IGF-1R system. Heart Dis 2000;2:108–115.
87. Hacham M, White RM, Argov S, Segal S, Apte RN. Interleukin-6 and interleukin-10 are expressed in organs of normal young and old mice. Eur Cytokine Netw 2004;15:37–46.
88. Kintsurashvili E, Duka A, Ignjacev I, Pattakos G, Gavras I, Gavras H. Age-related changes of bradykinin B1 and B2 receptors in rat heart. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005;289:H202–H205.
89. Willems L, Ashton KJ, Headrick JP. Adenosine-mediated cardioprotection in the aging myocardium. Cardiovasc Res 2005;66:245–255.
90. Wang Y, Takashi E, Xu M, Ayub A, Ashraf M. Downregulation of protein kinase C inhibits activation of mitochondrial KATP channels by diazoxide. Circulation 2001;104:85–90.
91. Ping P, Zhang Y, Tang X-L, Manchikalapudi S, Cao X, Bolli R. Ischemic preconditioning induces selective translocation of protein kinase C isoforms ε and η in the heart of conscious rabbits without subcellular redistribution of total protein kinase C activity. Circ Res 1997;81:404–414.
92. Korzick DH, Holiman DA, Boluyt MO, Laughlin MH, Lakatta EG. Diminished α-adrenergic-mediated contraction and translocation of PKC in senescent rat heart. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2001;281:H581–H589.
93. Tani M, Honma Y, Hasegawa H, Tamaki K. Direct activation of mitochondrial K (ATP) channels mimics preconditioning but protein kinase C activation is less effective in middle-aged rat hearts. Cardiovasc Res 2001;49:56–68.
94. Przyklenk K, Li G, Simkhovich BZ, Klioner RA. Mechanisms of myocardial ischemic preconditioning are age related: PKC-ε does not play a required role in old rabbits. Am J Physiol 2003;95:2563–2569.
95. Boengler K, Dodoni G, Ruiz-Meana M, Cabestrero A, Rodriguez-Sinovas A, Garcia-Dorado Det al. Connexin 43 in cardiomyocyte mitochondria and its increase by ischemic preconditioning. Cardiovasc Res 2005;67:234–244.
96. Doble BW, Ping P, Kardami E. The ε subtype of protein kinase C is required for cardiomyocyte connexin-43 phosphorylation. Circ Res 2000;86:293–301.
97. Bowling N, Huang X, Sandusky GE, Fouts RL, Mintze K, Esterman Met al. Protein kinase C-α and -ε modulate connexin-43 phosphorylation in human heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2001;33:789–798.
98. Schwanke U, Konietzka I, Duschin A, Li X, Schulz R, Heusch G. No ischemic preconditioning in heterozygous connexin43-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002;283:H1740–H1742.
99. Li X, Heinzel FR, Boengler K, Schulz R, Heusch G. Role of connexin 43 in ischemic preconditioning does not involve intercellular communications through gap junctions. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2004;36:161–163.
100. Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM. Survival kinases in ischemic preconditioning and postconditioning. Cardiovasc Res 2006;70:240–253.
101. Peart JN, Gross ER, Headrick JP, Gross GJ. Impaired p38 MAPK/HSP27 signaling underlies aging-related failure in opioid-mediated cardioprotection. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2007;42:972–980.
102. Przyklenk K, Maynard M, Darling CE, Whittaker P. Aging mouse hearts are refractory to infarct size reduction with post-conditioning. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:1393–1398.
103. Fenton RA, Dickson EW, Dobson JG Jr. Inhibition of phosphatase activity enhances preconditioning and limits cell death in the ischemic/reperfused aged rat heart. Life Sci 2005;77:3375–3388.
104. Xuan Y-T, Guo Y, Han H, Zhu Y, Bolli R. An essential role of the JAK-STAT pathway in ischemic preconditioning. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:9050–9055.
105. Rassaf T, Poll LW, Brouzos P, Lauer T, Totzeck M, Kleinbongard Pet al. Positive effects of nitric oxide on left ventricular function in humans. Eur Heart J 2006;27:1699–1705.
106. Bolli R. Cardioprotective function of inducible nitric oxide synthase and role of nitric oxide in myocardial ischemia and preconditioning: an overview of a decade of research. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2001;33:1897–1918.
107. West MB, Rokosh G, Obal D, Velayutham M, Xuan YT, Hill BG et al. Cardiac myocyte-specific expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase protects against ischemia/reperfusion injury by preventing mitochondrial permeability transition. Circulation 2008;118:1970–1978.
108. Ferrara N, Rinaldi B, Corbi G, Conti V, Stiuso P, Boccuti S et al. Exercise training promotes SIRT1 activity in aged rats. Rejuvenation Res 2008;11:139–150.
109. Yang B, Larson DF, Watson RR. Modulation of iNOS activity in age-related cardiac dysfunction. Life Sci 2004;75:655–667.
110. Batkai S, Rajesh M, Mukhopadhyay P, Hasko G, Liaudet L, Cravatt BF et al. Decreased age-related cardiac dysfunction, myocardial oxidative stress, inflammatory gene expression, and apoptosis in mice lacking fatty acid amide hydrolase. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2007;293:H909–H918.
111. Patel HH, Hsu AK, Gross GJ. COX-2 and iNOS in opioid-induced delayed cardioprotection in the intact rat. Life Sci 2004;75:129–140.
112. Bolli R, Li QH, Tang XL, Guo Y, Xuan YT, Rokosh G et al. The late phase of preconditioning and its natural clinical application—gene therapy. Heart Fail Rev 2007;12:189–199.
113. Crestanello JA, Doliba NM, Babsky AM, Niibori K, Osbakken MD, Whitmann GJ. Mitochondrial function during ischemic preconditioning. Surgery 2002;131:172–178.
114. Yabe K, Nasa Y, Sato M, Iijima R, Takeo S. Preconditioning preserves mitochondrial function and glycolytic flux during an early period of reperfusion in perfused rat hearts. Cardiovasc Res 1997;33:677–685.
115. Yellon DM, Dana A. The preconditioning phenomenon. A tool for the scientist or a clinical reality? Circ Res 2000;87:543–550.
116. Tokac M, Ozdemir A, Yazici M, Altunkeser BB, Duzenli A, Reisli I et al. Is the beneficial effect of preinfarction angina related to an immune response? Jpn Heart J 2004;45:205–215.
117. Kloner RA, Shook T, Przyklenk K, Davis VG, Junio L, Matthews RV et al. Previous angina alters in-hospital outcome in TIMI 4. A clinical correlate to preconditioning? Circulation 1995;91:37–47.
118. Papadopoulos CE, Karvounis HI, Gourasas IT, Parharidis GE, Louridas GE. Evidence of ischemic preconditioning in patients experiencing first non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). Int J Cardiol 2003;92:209–217.
119. Solomon SD, Anavekar NS, Greaves S, Rouleau JL, Hennekens C, Pfeffer MA. Angina pectoris prior to myocardial infarction protects against subsequent left ventricular remodeling. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:1511–1514.
120. Psychari SN, Iliodromitis EK, Hamodraka E, Liakos G, Velissaridou A, Apostolou TS et al. Preinfarction angina does not alter infarct size and in hospital outcome after acute myocardial infarction with ST elevation. Int J Cardiol 2004;94:187–191.
121. Abete P, Ferrara N, Cacciatore F, Madrid A, Bianco S, Calabrese C et al. Angina-induced protection against myocardial infarction in adult and

elderly patients: a loss of preconditioning mechanism in the aging heart? J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;30:947–954.

122. Walsh SR, Tang TY, Kullar P, Jenkins DP, Dutka DP, Gaunt ME. Ischaemic preconditioning during cardiac surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis of perioperative outcomes in randomised clinical trials. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2008;34:985–994.

123. Illes RW, Swoyer KD. Prospective, randomized clinical study of ischemic preconditioning as an adjunct to intermittent cold blood cardioplegia. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:748–753.

124. Jenkins DP, Pugsley WB, Alkhulaifi AM, Kemp M, Hooper J, Yellon DM. Ischaemic preconditioning reduces troponin T release in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery. Heart 1997;77:314–318.

125. Yellon DM, Alkhulaifi AM, Pugsley WB. Preconditioning the human myocardium. Lancet 1993;342:276–277.

126. Ghosh S, Galinanes M. Protection of the human heart with ischemic preconditioning during cardiac surgery: role of cardiopulmonary bypass. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2003;126:133–142.

127. Mio Y, Bienengraeber MW, Marinovic J, Gutterman DD, Rakic M, Bosnjak ZJ et al. Age-related attenuation of isoflurane preconditioning in human atrial cardiomyocytes: roles for mitochondrial respiration and sarcolemmal adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel activity. Anesthesiology 2008;108:612–620.

128. Bartling B, Hilgefort C, Friedrich I, Silber RE, Simm A. Cardio-protective determinants are conserved in aged human myocardium after ischemic preconditioning. FEBS Lett 2003;555:539–544.

129. Lee T-M, Su S-F, Chou T-T, Lee Y-T, Tsai C-H. Loss of preconditioning by attenuated activation of myocardial ATP-sensitive potassium channels in elderly patients undergoing coronary angioplasty. Circulation 2002;105:334–340.

130. Jaberansari MT, Baxter GF, Muller CA, Latouf SE, Röth E, Opie LH et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition enhances a subthreshold stimulus to elicit delayed preconditioning in pig myocardium. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;37:1996–2001.

131. Ebrahim Z, Baxter GF, Yellon DM. Omapatrilat limits infarct size and lowers the threshold for induction of myocardial preconditioning through a bradykinin-mediated mechanism. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 2004;18:127–134.

132. Loubani M, Fowler A, Standen NB, Galinanes M. The effect of gliclazide and glibenclamide on preconditioning of the human myocardium. Eur J Pharmacol 2005;515:142–149.

133. Zhao Z-Q, Corvera JS, Halkos ME, Kerendi F, Wang N-P, Guyton RA et al. Inhibition of myocardial injury by ischemic postconditioning during reperfusion: comparison with ischemic preconditioning. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2003;285:H579–H588.

134. Staat P, Rioufol G, Piot C, Cottin Y, Cung TT, L’Huillier I et al. Postconditioning the human heart. Circulation 2005;112:2143–2148.

135. Tsang A, Hausenloy DJ, Mocanu MM, Yellon DM. Postconditioning: a form of ‘Modified Reperfusion’ protects the myocardium by activating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt pathway. Circ Res 2004;95:230–232.

136. Bopassa J-C, Ferrera R, Gateau-Roesch O, Couture-Lepetit E, Ovize M. PI 3-kinase regulates the mitochondrial transition pore in controlled reperfusion and postconditioning. Cardiovasc Res 2006;69:178–185.

137. Darling CE, Jiang R, Maynard M, Whittaker P, Vinten-Johansen J, Przyklenk K. Postconditioning via stuttering reperfusion limits myocardial infarct size in rabbit hearts: role of ERK1/2. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005;289:H1618–H1626.

138. Nishino Y, Webb IG, Davidson SM, Ahmed AI, Clark JE, Jacquet S et al. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 inactivation is not required for ischemic preconditioning or postconditioning in the mouse. Circ Res 2008;103:314.

139. Skyschally A, van Caster P, Boengler K, Gres P, Musiolik J, Schilawa D et al. Ischemic postconditioning in pigs no causal role for risk activation. Circ Res 2009;104:15–18.

140. Vinten-Johansen J, Zhao Z-Q, Zatta AJ, Kin H, Halkos ME, Kerendi F. Postconditioning. A new link in nature’s armor against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Basic Res Cardiol 2005;295:295–310.

141. Boengler K, Buechert A, Heinen Y, Roeskes C, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Heusch G et al. Cardioprotection by ischemic postconditioning is lost in aged and STAT3-deficient mice. Circ Res 2008;102:131–135.

142. Smith RM, Suleman N, Lacerda L, Opie LH, Akira S, Chien KR et al. Genetic depletion of cardiac myocyte STAT-3 abolishes classical preconditioning. Cardiovasc Res 2004;63:611–616.

143. Piot C, Croisille P, Staat P, Thibault H, Rioufol G, Newton N et al. Effect of cyclosporine on reperfusion injury in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2008;359:473–481.

144. Redman LM, Rood J, Anton SD, Champagne C, Smith SR, Ravussin E. Calorie restriction and bone health in young, overweight individuals. Arch Intern Med 2008;168:1859–1866.

145. Broderick TL, Driedzic WR, Gillis M, Jacob J, Belke T. Effects of chronic food restriction and exercise training on the recovery of cardiac function following ischemia. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56:B33–B37.

146. Shinmura K, Tamaki K, Bolli R. Short-term caloric restriction improves ischemic tolerance independent of opening of ATP-sensitive K+ channels in both young and aged hearts. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2005;39:285–296.

147. Long P, Nguyen Q, Thurow C, Broderick TL. Caloric restriction restores the cardioprotective effect of preconditioning in the rat heart. Mech Ageing Dev 2002;123:1411–1413.

148. Abete P, Testa G, Ferrara N, de Santis D, Capaccio P, Viati L et al. Cardioprotective effect of ischemic preconditioning is preserved in food-restricted senescent rats. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002;282:H1978–H1987.

149. Abete P, Testa G, Galizia G, Mazzella F, Della MD, de Santis D et al. Tandem action of exercise training and food restriction completely preserves ischemic preconditioning in the aging heart. Exp Gerontol 2005;40:43–50.

150. Tao L, Gao E, Jiao X, Yuan Y, Li S, Christopher TA et al. Adiponectin cardioprotection after myocardial ischemia/reperfusion involves the reduction of oxidative/nitrative stress. Circulation 2007;115:1408–1416.

151. Shinmura K, Tamaki K, Saito K, Nakano Y, Tobe T, Bolli R. Cardioprotective effects of short-term caloric restriction are mediated by adiponectin via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. Circulation 2007;116:2809–2817.

152. Niemann B, Silber RE, Rohrbach S. Age-specific effects of short- and long-term caloric restriction on the expression of adiponectin and adiponectin receptors: influence of intensity of food restriction. Exp Gerontol 2008;43:706–713.

153. Shinmura K, Tamaki K, Bolli R. Impact of 6-mo caloric restriction on myocardial ischemic tolerance: possible involvement of nitric oxide-dependent increase in nuclear Sirt1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2008;295:H2348–H2355.

154. Alcendor RR, Gao S, Zhai P, Zablocki D, Holle E, Yu X et al. Sirt1 regulates aging and resistance to oxidative stress in the heart. Circ Res 2007;100:1512–1521.

155. Gredilla R, Sanz A, Lopez-Torres M, Barja G. Caloric restriction decreases mitochondrial free radical generation at complex I and lowers oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA in the rat heart. FASEB J 2001;15:1589–1591.

156. Powers SK, Quindry JC, Kavazis AN. Exercise-induced cardioprotection against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Free Radic Biol Med 2008;44:193–201.

157. Thorp DB, Haist JV, Leppard J, Milne KJ, Karmazyn M, Noble EG. Exercise training improves myocardial tolerance to ischemia in male but not in female rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007;293:R363–R371.

158. Starnes JW, Barnes BD, Olsen ME. Exercise training decreases rat heart mitochondria free radical generation but does not prevent Ca2+ -induced dysfunction. J Appl Physiol 2007;102:1793–1798.

159. Powers SK, Quindry J, Hamilton K. Aging, exercise, and cardioprotection. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1019:462–470.

160. Starnes JW, Taylor RP, Park Y. Exercise improves postischemic function in aging hearts. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2003;285:H347–H351.

161. Quindry J, French J, Hamilton K, Lee Y, Mehta JL, Powers S. Exercise training provides cardioprotection against ischemia-reperfusion induced apoptosis in young and old animals. Exp Gerontol 2005;40:416–425.

162. Abete P, Calabrese C, Ferrara N, Cioppa A, Pisanelli P, Cacciatore F et al. Exercise training restores ischemic preconditioning in the aging heart. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;36:643–650.

163. Le Page C, Noirez P, Courty J, Riou B, Swynghedauw B, Besse S. Exercise training improves functional post-ischemic recovery in senescent heart. Exp Gerontol 2008; doi:10.1016/j.exger.2008.10.003.

164. Abete P, Ferrara N, Cacciatore F, Sagnelli E, Manzi M, Carnovale V et al. High level of physical activity preserves the cardioprotective effect of preinfarction angina in elderly patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;38:1357–1365.

165. Aoyagi T, Izumo S. Hemodynamic overload-induced activation of myocardial mitogen-activated protein kinases in vivo-augmented responses in young spontaneously hypertensive rats and diminished responses in aged Fischer 344 rats. Hypertension 2001;37:52–57.

166. Hunter JC, Kostyak JC, Novotny JL, Simpson AM, Korzick DH. Estrogen deficiency decreases ischemic tolerance in the aged rat heart: roles of PKCdelta, PKCepsilon, Akt, and GSK3beta. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007;292:R800–R809.
167. Fang CX, Doser TA, Yang X, Sreejayan N, Ren J. Metallothionein antagonizes aging-induced cardiac contractile dysfunction: role of PTP1B, insulin receptor tyrosine phosphorylation and Akt. Aging Cell 2006;5: 177–185.
168. van der Loo B, Bachschmid M, Labugger R, Schildknecht S, Kilo J, Hahn R et al. Expression and activity patterns of nitric oxide synthases and antioxidant enzymes reveal a substantial heterogeneity between cardiac and vascular aging in the rat. Biogerontology 2005;6: 325–334.
169. Llorens S, Salazar FJ, Nava E. Assessment of the nitric oxide system in the heart, aorta and kidney of aged Wistar-Kyoto and spontaneously hypertensive rats. J Hypertens 2005;23:1507–1514.
170. Tani M, Suganuma Y, Hasegawa H, Shinmura K, Hayashi Y, Guo X et al. Changes in ischemic tolerance and effect of ischemic preconditioning in middle-aged rat hearts. Circulation 1997;95:2559–2566.
171. Abete P, Ferrara N, Cioppa A, Ferrara P, Bianco S, Calabrese C et al. Preconditioning does not prevent dysfunction in aging heart. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;27:1777–1786.
172. Fenton RA, Dickson EW, Meyer TE, Dobson JG Jr. Aging reduces the cardioprotective effect of ischemic preconditioning in the rat heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2000;32:1371–1375.
173. McCully JD, Uematsu M, Parker RA, Levitsky S. Adenosine-enhanced ischemic preconditioning provides enhanced cardioprotection in the aged heart. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:2037–2043.
174. Heinen A, Huhn R, Smeele KM, Zuurbier CJ, Schlack W, Preckel B et al. Helium-induced preconditioning in young and old rat heart: impact of mitochondrial Ca(2+) -sensitive potassium channel activation. Anesthesiology 2008;109:830–836.
175. Shinmura K, Nagai M, Tamaki K, Bolli R. Gender and aging do not impair opioid-induced late preconditioning in rats. Basic Res Cardiol 2004;99: 46–55.
176. Bartling B, Friedrich I, Silber RE, Simm A. Ischemic preconditioning is not cardioprotective in senescent human myocardium. Ann Thorac Surg 2003;76:105–111.
177. Wu ZK, Pehkonen E, Laurikka J, Kaukinen L, Honkonen EL, Kaukinen S et al. The protective effects of preconditioning decline in aged patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2001;122:972–978.
178. Barja G, Herrero A. Oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA is inversely related to maximum life span in the heart and brain of mammals. FASEB J 2000;14:312–318.
