
CHAPTER 3

# Diversity in Bacterial Chemotactic Responses and Niche Adaptation

Lance D. Miller,* Matthew H. Russell,* and Gladys Alexandre*†

---

## Contents

I. Introduction                                                                                       54  
II. Molecular Mechanisms of Bacterial Chemotaxis                                                      55  
   A. Chemotaxis: Control of the motility pattern                                                     55  
   B. Molecular mechanisms of chemotaxis: The *E. coli* paradigm                                      57  
   C. *Bacillus subtilis*, another model for chemotaxis signal transduction                           59  
III. Diversity in Chemotaxis                                                                         61  
   A. Complete genome sequencing projects and the diversity in chemotaxis                              61  
   B. Chemotaxis in bacterial species colonizing diverse niches                                       63  
IV. Characterizing the Chemotaxis Response: Qualitative and Quantitative Assays                       64  
   A. Temporal gradient assays                                                                       65  
   B. Spatial gradient assays                                                                        66  
   C. Use of chemotaxis assays to characterize new microbial functions                                70  
V. Conclusions and Future Prospects                                                                  70  
Acknowledgments                                                                                      71  
References                                                                                           71  

---

* Department of Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996  
† Department of Microbiology, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996  

Advances in Applied Microbiology, Volume 66  
ISSN 0065-2164, DOI: 10.1016/S0065-2164(08)00803-4  
© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstract
The ability of microbes to rapidly sense and adapt to environmental changes plays a major role in structuring microbial communities, in affecting microbial activities, as well as in influencing various microbial interactions with the surroundings. The bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction system is the sensory perception system that allows motile cells to respond optimally to changes in environmental conditions by allowing cells to navigate in gradients of diverse physicochemical parameters that can affect their metabolism. The analysis of complete genome sequences from microorganisms that occupy diverse ecological niches reveal the presence of multiple chemotaxis pathways and a great diversity of chemoreceptors with novel sensory specificities. Owing to its role in mediating rapid responses of bacteria to changes in the surroundings, bacterial chemotaxis is a behavior of interest in applied microbiology as it offers a unique opportunity for understanding the environmental cues that contribute to the survival of bacteria. This chapter explores the diversity of bacterial chemotaxis and suggests how gaining further insights into such diversity may potentially impact future drug and pesticides development and could inform bioremediation strategies.

I. INTRODUCTION

The ability of unicellular organisms to survive, to grow, and to compete with other microorganisms in changing environments is dependent on sensing and adapting to changes by modifying their cellular physiology. Bacteria are capable of detecting a wide range of environmental stimuli, including osmolarity, pH, temperature, and chemical ligands of diverse physicochemical properties (Wadhams and Armitage, 2004). Bacteria have evolved several ways of responding to their environment and thereby maintaining optimum physiological states for growth. Sensing and adapting to changes is thus anticipated to play a major role in structuring microbial communities, in affecting dynamic changes in microbial activities, as well as in influencing various microbial interactions with the surroundings. At the cellular level, two-component signal transduction systems mediate specific changes in cellular physiology in response to environmental stimuli. At the molecular level, two-component signal transduction systems typically consist of a sensor histidine kinase that detects specific cues and a cognate response regulator that mediates the response (Lukat and Stock, 1993). One major way bacteria respond to environmental stimuli is by regulating gene expression—either increasing or decreasing expression of a gene or set of genes. Chemotaxis is another way motile bacteria respond to their environment. In fact, most understanding on signal transduction in prokaryotes comes

from studying the two-component regulatory system that controls chemotaxis in motile bacteria, such as *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium* (Hazelbauer et al., 2008). Motile bacteria will first detect a cue and then navigate in its direction, if the cue perceived corresponds to an attractant signal or away from it if the cue corresponds to a repellent signal. The bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction system is the sensory perception system that allows motile cells to respond optimally to changes in environmental conditions by facilitating motion towards small-molecule chemoattractants and away from repellents (Wadhams and Armitage, 2004). Thus, chemotaxis provides motile bacteria with an effective means to navigate their environment and to localize in niches that support optimum growth. Such an advantage provided by chemotaxis was observed very early on by Engelmann in the late nineteenth century. Engelmann noticed that bacteria observed under the microscope were actively swimming toward and accumulating near sources of oxygen (algae or air bubbles), but when a harmful chemical was added, the cells slowed down and were no longer capable of actively locating in these niches (Engelmann, 1881). Owing to its role in mediating rapid responses of bacteria to changes in the surroundings, bacterial chemotaxis is a behavior of interest in applied microbiology and it has been previously used to isolate microorganisms with desirable metabolic abilities, especially in bioremediation. This chapter will explore the diversity in bacterial chemotaxis and how such diversity could possibly be used in bioremediation, agriculture, or biosensor applications.

## II. MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF BACTERIAL CHEMOTAXIS

### A. Chemotaxis: Control of the motility pattern

#### 1. Biasing the random walk
The ability to swim and navigate the surrounding environment by chemotaxis confers motile bacteria with a competitive advantage in that it allows the cells to maintain and occupy niches that are optimum for growth and survival. In chemotaxis, motile bacteria constantly sample their environment and will detect and process only certain signals as cues. If the cue perceived corresponds to an attractant signal, the cells will move in the direction of the cue, but if the cue provides a repellent signal they will move away from it. The bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction system is the sensory perception system that allows motile cells to respond optimally to changes in environmental conditions by facilitating motion towards small-molecule chemoattractants and away from repellents (Adler and Tso, 1974). Bacteria swim by rotating their flagella and navigate in the environment with a swimming pattern that resembles a
three-dimensional walk (Berg, 2000). In a homogeneous chemical environment, cells move along their long axis in relatively straight paths (runs) that are punctuated by brief reorientation events (reversals) where forward motion stops. Reversals are followed by runs in a new and randomly determined direction. In an increasing concentration of a chemical attractant, the cells tend to suppress the reversals and swim longer in the direction of the attractant. Conversely, in an increasing gradient of a repellent, the cells tend to reverse more frequently when swimming towards the repellent and run longer when swimming away from it. Therefore, motile bacteria bias their swimming pattern by modulating the probability of reversals. Such behavior allows motile bacteria to respond efficiently to what are perceived as temporal changes in their environmental conditions. Whether or not a change in a concentration of a stimulus will result in change in swimming pattern is controlled at the level of sensory perception. The fundamental principles of sensory or signal perception and transduction have mostly been studied in model organisms such as *E. coli*. The general principles of signal perception and transduction are conserved in bacteria and archaea despite the diversity of flagellation patterns and mechanisms of flagellar rotation and directional changes (Wadhams and Armitage, 2004).

## Spatial and temporal sensing

It is often said that bacteria are too small to sense chemical gradients spatially. This may not be true in either theory or experience. The theoretical size limit for spatial sensing has been proposed to be <1 μm (Dusenbery, 1998), and evidence has been found suggesting that a Gram-negative vibriod performs aerotaxis via spatial sensing of steep oxygen gradients (Thar and Kuhl, 2003). Moreover, some cyanobacteria exhibit phototaxis in response to spatial gradients along the length of the cell (Hader, 1987). However, temporal sensing may be more efficient for bacteria, despite the estimated 10% loss in velocity towards increasing attractant gradients due to the biased random walk. Bacteria tend to inhabit chemically heterogeneous environments. What is important for the bacterium may not be to always move up the gradient of the strongest chemoattractant. For instance, a gradient of attractant could coincide with a repellent gradient. In this situation, it would be disadvantageous to merely follow the attractant gradient. Instead, it may be more advantageous for a bacterium to seek a niche with a balance of different chemoattractants optimized for its individual physiology. This is particularly true provided that energy taxis is the dominant behavior of some organisms (Alexandre and Zhulin, 2001; Alexandre et al., 2000, 2004). Instead of sensing chemical gradients spatially, bacteria use a temporal sensing mechanism that compares the instantaneous concentration of an
attractant or repellent to that of a few seconds prior. Based on this comparison, a “decision” is made which results in adjusting the probability of random changes in the swimming direction (reversals). Controlling the frequency at which these instances of reorientation occur, cells are able to bias their movement towards environments most suitable for growth and division.

B. Molecular mechanisms of chemotaxis: The *E. coli* paradigm

1. The chemotaxis signal transduction excitation and adaptation pathways

At the center of the protein regulatory network that controls chemotaxis lies a two-component system (TCS). TCS are typically comprised of a membrane-bound sensor histidine kinase coupled with a cytoplasmic cognate response regulator (Stock and Da Re, 2000; Zapf et al., 1998). TCS can sense a wide range of environmental stimuli and usually result in a change in gene expression although they can regulate other cellular processes. Until recently, TCS were thought to be the dominant mechanism for prokaryotic signal transduction. However, a recent study has found that so-called one-component systems consisting of a single protein with both input and output domains are more numerous and likely represent the evolutionary precursors to TCS (Ulrich and Zhulin, 2005).

In *E. coli*, the TCS at the core of the chemotactic system consists of CheA, the sensor histidine kinase, and CheY, the response regulator (Fig. 3.1). Environmental stimuli are sensed by chemosensory proteins (or chemoreceptors), so-called methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins or MCPs that are embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane. An N-terminal sensory domain protrudes into the periplasm and receives signals that are then transmitted to the C-terminal signaling domain localized in the cytoplasm. CheW is a linker protein that connects the histidine kinase CheA to the MCPs. When CheA is activated, it autophosphorylates at a conserved histidine residue and in turn phosphorylates its cognate response regulator CheY. Phosphorylated CheY, CheY-P, then freely diffuses through the cytoplasm and binds FliM, the switch protein of the flagellar motor thus effecting a change in the direction of rotation. The signal is terminated by dephosphorylation of CheY-P by CheZ, a phosphatase. The system allowing for the temporal comparison of attractant or repellent concentrations is comprised of CheB and CheR, a methylesterase and methyltransferase, respectively. CheR is constitutively active, constantly adding methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to the conserved methylation sites on the chemoreceptors. Increasing methylation of MCPs results in a suppression of signaling. CheB becomes active after it is phosphorylated by CheA. Once activated, CheB removes methyl

FIGURE 3.1 Schematic diagram of the E. coli chemotactic signal transduction pathway. Methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins, MCPs, transduce signals from chemoeffectors in the periplasmic space thereby modulating the activity of the histidine kinase, CheA, which is linked to the MCPs by CheW. CheA phosphorylates the response regulators CheB and CheY whose phosphorylated forms interact with the MCPs and the flagellar motor, respectively. CheR also interacts with the MCPs whereas the dephosphatase CheZ dephosphorylates CheY.

groups from MCPs thus restoring their ability to signal (Fig. 3.1). CheB and CheR act in concert to allow the cell to adapt to its present level of stimulation. This adaptation system allows a cell to navigate gradients of either attractants or repellents over a wide range of concentrations over several orders of magnitude ranging from the nanomolar to millimolar.

2. Sensing the environment and the chemoreceptors repertoire

The first step in adaptation to the environment is sensing its changes. In motile bacteria, environmental cues are sensed in the extracellular environment by transmembrane receptors (chemoreceptors) that transmit the signal to a cytoplasmic two-component signal transduction pathway controlling the direction of flagellar rotation and chemotaxis (Hazelbauer et al., 2008). Signal perception and transduction are mediated by a series of conformational changes that are transmitted from the N-terminal sensory domain of the chemoreceptor to the C-terminal signaling domain that interacts with CheW and CheA (Ottemann et al., 1998, 1999). In E. coli,
trimers of dimers of chemoreceptors are clustered at the cell poles in a large lattice that interacts with the cytoplasmic CheA and CheW proteins to form a large array that can be observed under specific conditions by electron microscopy (Zhang *et al.*, 2007). The organization of chemoreceptors into an array and the association of the clustered chemoreceptors' signaling tips with CheA and CheW allow sensory information from multiple chemoreceptors of various sensing capabilities (inputs) to be collected into a single output and trigger coordinated changes in rotational direction of the flagellar motors (Cluzel *et al.*, 2000; Gestwicki and Kiessling, 2002; Jasuja *et al.*, 1999).

The chemoreceptor repertoire is responsible for the specificity of the signal sensed and appears to be quite different in bacteria that occupy different ecological niches. The model organism for chemotaxis, *E. coli* inhabits the mammalian digestive tracts, including human, and it responds chemotactically mainly to amino acids via a metabolism-independent mechanism, where the response is triggered by the amino acid binding to specific transmembrane receptors. *E. coli* possesses four membrane-spanning chemoreceptors (Tsr, Tar, Trg, and Tap) that measure the concentrations of specific chemicals, such as amino acids (serine, leucine, and aspartate), sugars (ribose, galactose, mannose), dipeptides, and also heavy metals, such as cobalt and nickel. It also possesses a fifth chemoreceptor, Aer, that monitors changes in the redox state of the electron transport system and is thus an energy transducer that detects changes in intracellular energy levels (Bespalov *et al.*, 1996; Bibikov *et al.*, 2000; Greer-Philips *et al.*, 2003; Rebbapragada *et al.*, 1997; Repik *et al.*, 2000). Chemotaxis receptors are extremely sensitive and detect chemicals over a wide range of concentrations. For example, the Tar receptor responds to aspartate in a concentration range from 0.1 μM to 100 mM. Many other bacterial species possess a large number of different chemoreceptors (typically 10–20).

### C. Bacillus subtilis, another model for chemotaxis signal transduction

Similar to *E. coli*, *Bacillus subtilis* possesses a single chemotaxis operon, but it possesses additional accessory proteins that participate in chemotaxis, CheC, CheD, and CheV. CheC functions in adaptation and signal termination. CheD is a deamidase that functions in receptor maturation by deamidating specific glutamine residues of MCPs. This function is carried out by CheB in *E. coli* (Fig. 3.2A). CheV also has a role in adaptation and in coupling CheA to the chemotaxis transducers (Szurmant and Ordal, 2004).
FIGURE 3.2 Examples of diversity in chemotactic signal transduction pathways.

(A) Schematic representation of the chemotactic signal transduction pathways in *B. subtilis* and (B) in *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*. The number of chemotaxis-like pathways, the number and diversity of chemoreceptors vary in different bacterial species. Note that the putative sensory domains of chemoreceptors are different the two examples shown to illustrate the diversity in chemosensory systems.

III. DIVERSITY IN CHEMOTAXIS

A. Complete genome sequencing projects and the diversity in chemotaxis

1. Diversity in the number of chemotaxis signal transduction pathways

The majority of bacteria whose genomes have been completely sequenced are motile and possess complex chemotaxis sensory machinery that differ from the model microorganisms studied so far. In addition, these chemotaxis pathways possess additional chemotaxis genes that are not present in the genomes of either *E. coli* or *B. subtilis* and whose functions remain to be determined (Park *et al.*, 2004; Rajagopala *et al.*, 2007) (Fig. 3.2). However, many studies have demonstrated that the principles of signal transduction and perception are conserved among diverse bacteria, although there are some variations on this theme (Szurmant and Ordal, 2004; Wadhams and Armitage, 2004) (Figs. 3.2A and B). The conserved set of CheAWYBRZ proteins and five MCPs comprising the chemotaxis protein network of *E. coli* is a streamlined version resulting from the evolutionary loss of chemotaxis proteins still present in the chemotaxis systems of other organisms (Zhulin, personal communication). The analysis of completely sequenced genomes also revealed that most bacteria possess more than one chemotaxis-like signal transduction pathway (Table 3.1). However, the function of redundant signal transduction pathways cannot be predicted from sequence analysis alone. The chemotaxis operons in these organisms can regulate flagellar and pili-mediated motility as well as perform other cellular functions such as regulation of gene expression and cellular differentiation (Berleman and Bauer, 2005a,b; Bible *et al.*, 2008; Kirby and Zusman, 2003; Vlamakis *et al.*, 2004).

2. Chemoreceptors diversity

Variations in the sensory specificity of the N-terminal domains of the chemoreceptors tailor them to a particular sensory function (Galperin *et al.*, 2001) and the diversity in the sequence of the N-terminal sensory domains reflects the diversity of cues a microorganism can detect and respond to. Therefore, it is not surprising that the greatest diversity in the chemotaxis system is seen in the set of chemoreceptors (Alexandre and Zhulin, 2001). Chemotaxis receptors are extremely sensitive naturally occurring biosensors that allow bacteria to monitor their environments and to detect chemicals over wide concentration ranges. The number of chemoreceptors per microbial genome correlates with the genome size and the metabolic versatility of the bacteria (Alexandre *et al.*, 2004) (Table I).

TABLE 3.1 Number of chemotaxis-like operons and chemoreceptors (MCPs) in completely sequenced genome of selected organisms$^a$

| Organisms                              | Number of chemotaxis-like operons | Number of chemoreceptors |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Escherichia coli                       | 1                                | 5                        |
| Bacillus subtilis                      | 1                                | 10                       |
| Helicobacter pylori                    | 1                                | 4                        |
| Borrelia burgdorferi                   | 2                                | 5                        |
| Shewanella oneidensis                  | 3                                | 27                       |
| Rhodobacter sphaeroides                | 3                                | 11                       |
| Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae     | 2                                | 27                       |
| Sinorhizobium meliloti                 | 2                                | 10                       |
| Ralstonia eutropha JMP134 (pJP4)       | 3                                | 22                       |
| Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough   | 3                                | 28                       |
| Geobacter metallireducens GS-15        | 5                                | 17                       |
| Dechloromonas aromatica                | 4                                | 25                       |
| Vibrio cholera                         | 3                                | 45                       |
| Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum       | 3                                | 61                       |

$^a$ The chemotaxis-like operons and chemoreceptors homologs were identified using the MiST database at http://genomics.ornl.gov/mist/ (Ulrich and Zhulin, 2007).

Interestingly, the substrate specificity of bacterial chemoreceptors is known for only a few of them, mainly from enteric bacteria. However, microbial genome sequencing projects reveal the presence of hundreds of different chemoreceptors: some are restricted to few bacteria, whereas others are widespread. The diversity in their sensory abilities is yet to be discovered. Because of their role in bacterial adaptation, establishing the substrate specificity for chemotaxis receptors will lead to the identification of the signals important for the survival of bacteria in different environments and will potentially impact future drug and pesticides development and could inform bioremediation strategies. However, to date, there are few experimental tools available to systematically analyze the sensory specificity of chemoreceptors and methods that usually work well in model organisms may not work well or not at all in other bacteria.

3. Predicting chemotaxis behavior from completely sequenced genomes

The observation that orthologous chemotaxis operons perform different functions in different organisms further complicates the prediction of their role in the biology of the organisms based on sequence comparisons alone.

For example, the dominant chemotaxis operon in the rhizobial species *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* and *Sinorhizobium meliloti* controls chemotaxis and motility, but it does not appear to be a major regulator of chemotaxis under laboratory conditions in *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* (Armitage and Schmitt, 1997; Wright et al., 1998).

In addition, various experimental data indicate that multiple chemotaxis pathways may modulate the motility swimming pattern of organisms that possess several chemotaxis-like operons encoded in their genome. In *R. sphaeroides*, *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*, and *Azospirillum brasiliense*, chemosensory components from at least two operons are required for chemotaxis (Bible et al., 2008; Fernandez et al., 2002; Miller et al., 2007; Porter and Armitage, 2002, 2004; Stephens et al., 2006).

## B. Chemotaxis in bacterial species colonizing diverse niches

### 1. Ecological advantage provided by chemotaxis

The widespread presence of chemotaxis operons in the complete genomes of bacteria and archaea is evidence of the evolutionary and biological benefits of chemotaxis. Since bacteria inhabit almost every conceivable environmental niche in the biosphere and are capable of undergoing complex cellular differentiation processes in order to live, grow, and divide in different environments, the ecological role of chemotaxis has long been of interest. Studies are beginning to address the question of what role chemotaxis plays in structuring microbial communities and under which environmental conditions chemotaxis provides a competitive advantage (Alexandre et al., 2004). The obvious advantage that chemotaxis provides the cells with is the ability to simultaneously monitor multiple cues and rapidly navigate in the environment. The chemotaxis two-component signal transduction systems are unique compared to other TCSs in that they function with a “molecular memory” provided by the adaptation system which endows cells with the ability to make temporal comparisons about the chemical composition of the environment by modulating sensory sensitivity of the chemoreceptors (Kentner and Sourjik, 2006). As a result of the activity of the adaptation system, cells are able to respond to changes over a wide range of background conditions and they may initiate changes in behavior when thresholds are reached instead of responding to the presence of a dedicated cue as in other TCSs. This level of control is analogous to a lamp controlled by a rheostat compared to a simple on/off switch. The advantage provided by the ability to temporally sample the environment has been recognized by several authors as the main advantages provided by chemotaxis-like signal transduction pathways (Bible et al., 2008; Kirby and Zusman, 2003; Wadhams and Armitage, 2004).

2. Bacterial chemotaxis enhances competitiveness and facilitates adaptation

The ability to sense and navigate towards niches that are optimal for growth is a likely prerequisite for motile bacteria in order to colonize new environments. Therefore, motility and chemotaxis, by allowing the cells to navigate along gradients so that they can localize in optimum environments, have long been proposed to play a major role in the ability to compete for resources (Alexandre *et al.*, 2004). Consistent with this hypothesis, bacterial chemotaxis has repeatedly been shown to be essential for the competitive ability of beneficial, as well as pathogenic, bacteria to colonize their eukaryotic host. For example, chemotaxis was shown to be essential for the beneficial association of *A. brasilense* with wheat (Greer-Phillips *et al.*, 2004), for the symbiotic association of *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* with the common pea plant (Miller *et al.*, 2007), and for the persistent association of *Helicobacter pylori* within a narrow zone of the stomach (Foynes *et al.*, 2000; McGee *et al.*, 2005; Schweinitzer *et al.*, 2008). In contrast, the human pathogen *Vibrio cholerae* appears to require motility but not chemotaxis to establish infection (Butler and Camilli, 2004; Gardel and Mekalanos, 1994) and chemotaxis genes are downregulated in stool isolates from infected humans providing further evidence that motility but not chemotaxis is required for infection by *V. cholerae* (Butler *et al.*, 2006; Merrell *et al.*, 2002). Such a negative effect of chemotaxis in host colonization has not been identified in any other system studied to date.

Chemotaxis allows bacteria to navigate towards ecological niches that support their metabolism. Chemotaxis could thus be used to “enrich” certain environments with bacteria that possess desirable properties in bioremediation. In fact, such a principle has been applied previously to chemotactically attract certain motile bacteria to environmental pollutants that they can degrade (Harms and Wick, 2006; Lanfranconi *et al.*, 2003; Pandey and Jain, 2002). In a few cases, dedicated chemoreceptors specific to certain pollutants have been identified (Iwaki *et al.*, 2007; Kim *et al.*, 2006).

IV. CHARACTERIZING THE CHEMOTAXIS RESPONSE: QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE ASSAYS

Insight into chemotaxis diversity and the potential application of this behavior to bioremediation, agriculture, or health-related fields is dependent on the ability to accurately describe the behavior and the development of quantitative methods that enable the determination of parameters that best describe the characteristics of bacterial motion.

Characterization of the motility behavioral responses in nonmodel bacteria requires the development of sensitive qualitative and quantitative methods to measure the chemotaxis response. This was recognized very early on in the study of bacterial chemotaxis since Pfeffer (Pfeffer, 1884) who first used glass capillaries filled with attractant solutions to demonstrate that bacteria accumulated first outside then inside the capillary.

Since then, numerous qualitative and quantitative methods have been developed for chemotaxis and several computerized motion-analysis systems are commercially available (HobsonTracking, Inc., UK; CellTrack, Santa Rosa, CA, etc.) to assist in the characterization and the statistical analysis of bacterial motion parameters.

There are two general types of behavioral assays used to measure bacterial chemotaxis, namely, temporal or spatial gradient assays. In a temporal assay, usually an attractant or repellent is abruptly added to a bacterial suspension to measure the chemotactic response of the motile bacteria. The same compound is then abruptly removed after a given time to measure the bacterial response, usually by examining reversal frequency of cells. However, in spatial chemotaxis assays, cells have to respond to much more shallow gradients, and in the case of the soft-agar plate assay, cells are responding to gradients which they created by metabolizing provided chemicals around the inoculation point (usually a nitrogen or carbon source, or both).

### A. Temporal gradient assays

The most common temporal assay measures the probability of changes in the swimming direction (also called cell reversal frequency or reorientation frequency) of free-swimming bacteria when a potential attractant or repellent is added to the suspension. This is the most direct way to assay chemotaxis since one must directly observe the effect of a chemical on the swimming behavior of individual cells. A change in the number of directional changes per second (changes in the reversal frequency) relative to steady-state conditions indicates a chemotactic response to the stimulus. A decrease in reversal frequency (i.e., cells change their swimming direction less frequently) indicates the stimulus is an attractant while an increase in reversal frequency (i.e., cells tend to change swimming directions more frequently) is indicative of a repellent response (Berg and Brown, 1972; Segall et al., 1986). The addition and removal of a stimulus is hardly physiological and would not typically be observed within a bacterium's normal environment but it is a good approach to directly screen the effect of a chemical stimulus on swimming behavior. This assay requires that the bacteria can be tracked and that their mode of changing swimming direction be easily identified, usually with the help of a
computerized motion-tracking system. These restrictions limit the use of these assays to only a few bacterial species.

### B. Spatial gradient assays

#### 1. Soft agar plate assay

Several spatial behavioral assays are used to screen chemotaxis in motile bacteria (Table 3.2). These assays test for chemotactic responses to supplied chemical stimuli, predominantly nitrogen or carbon to help determine their sensing specificity (Hartmann and Zimmer, 1994). One such assay is the swarm, or soft-agar, plate assay (Fig. 3.3). In this assay, a culture inoculum is placed in the center of a semisolid agar plate, usually 0.2–0.3% agar (w/v), in which the cells can swim (Adler, 1966a; Alexandre et al., 2000). As the cells grow and deplete the agar of the supplied nitrogen and carbon source, they generate a gradient, and if they are motile and chemotactic, they will form typical chemotactic rings at some distance from the inoculation point, indicative of a positive chemotactic response. As the cells continue to metabolize the provided nutrients, the migration outward from the inoculation point continues and the “chemotactic” ring expands with time. Therefore, chemotactic rings are observed in this assay if the cells are able to sense and navigate in the chemical gradient formed as a result of metabolism. In this assay, mutants affected in metabolism, motility, or chemotaxis will fail to form a chemotactic ring. Figure 3.3 shows some examples of typical results and their interpretation. In Fig. 3.3A, the bacteria inoculated were able to metabolize the nutrients provided in the plates and grow within the agar and thus they formed a typical sharp chemotactic ring as indicated by the arrow. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 3.3B, the bacteria inoculated were able to grow but did not move outward from the inoculation point. This result indicates that the bacteria are unable to respond chemotactically.

#### 2. Chemical-in-plug assay

The chemical-in-plug assay also utilizes semisolid agar, but unlike the swarm plate assay, cell metabolism is not required to generate a chemical gradient and cells are judged solely on their ability to sense spatial gradients of attractants or repellents (chemotaxis per se). In this assay, a solid (1.5%, w/v) agar plug containing a specific concentration of chemical attractant or repellent in buffer is placed in a semi-soft buffered medium containing a high concentration of motile cells to be tested. A gradient is formed by diffusion of the chemical from the hard agar plug to the surrounding semi-soft agar medium where cells are present. If the cells’ sense and respond positively to the chemical stimulus, a ring
TABLE 3.2 Spatial chemotaxis assays and their applications in diverse microorganisms

| Methods                     | Organisms                                                                 | References                                                                 |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Capillary assay             | $E. coli$                                                                | Adler (1966a, 1966b, 1973)                                                 |
|                             | $B. subtilis$                                                            | Ordal and Gibson (1977), Ordal and Goldman (1975)                         |
|                             | $Pseudomonas aeruginosa$                                                | Kato et al. (1992)                                                       |
|                             | $Pseudomonas fluorescens$                                               | Singh and Arora (2001)                                                    |
|                             | $B. burgdorferi$                                                        | Shi et al. (1998)                                                        |
|                             | $Ralstonia$ sp. SJ98                                                     | Pandey et al. (2002)                                                     |
|                             | $Bradyrhizobium japonicum$                                               | Chuiko et al. (2002), Kurdish et al. (2001)                               |
|                             | $Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans$                                        | Meyer et al. (2002)                                                      |
|                             | $D. Vulgaris$                                                           | Meyer et al. (2002)                                                      |
| Modified capillary assay${}^{a}$ | $Pseudomonas putida G7$ and $Pseduomonas$ sp. NCIB 9816–4 | Grimm and Harwood (1997)                                                  |
| Soft agar (Swarm) plate     | $E. coli$                                                               | Adler (1966a), Hazelbauer et al. (1969)                                   |
|                             | $R. sphaeroides$                                                        | Hamblin et al. (1997), Porter et al. (2002)                              |
|                             | $R. leguminosarum$ bv. $viciae$                                         | Miller et al. (2007)                                                     |
|                             | $R. eutropha$ JMP134 (pJP4)                                             | Hawkins and Harwood (2002)                                               |
|                             | $Vibrio fischeri$                                                       | DeLoney-Marino et al. (2003)                                             |
| Chemical-in-plug assay      | $E. coli$                                                               | Tso and Adler (1974)                                                     |
|                             | $B. burgdorferi$                                                        | Shi et al. (1998)                                                        |
|                             | $Halobacterium salinarum$                                               | Hyung and Yu (1997)                                                      |
| Drop assay                  | $E. coli$                                                               | Fahrner et al. (1994)                                                    |
|                             | $P. putida$ G7 and $Pseudomonas$ sp. NCIB 9816–4 | Grimm and Harwood (1997)                                                  |

${}^{a}$ Assay used for chemicals poorly soluble in chemotaxis buffer. These chemicals include petroleum-based products and polyaromatic hydrocarbons such as toluene and naphthalene.

FIGURE 3.3 Examples of typical results obtained using the soft agar plate and chemical-in-plug assays. (A) Soft agar plate result with bacteria positive for chemotaxis under the conditions provided. Arrow indicates location of outer chemotactic ring, true ring specific for the provided nutrients in the plate. (B) Soft agar plate showing growth but no chemotaxis under conditions provided.

will form around the plug within a few hours (Tso and Adler, 1974). If the chemical is a repellent, a zone of clearing, where no bacteria are present, will form around the chemical plugs. Controls should also be used with this assay including a hard plug containing only buffer as a negative control as well as any nonchemotactic or nonmotile strains which may be available for the organism being tested.

### 3. Capillary assay

The capillary assay as described by Julius Adler (Adler, 1973) is the most widely used method to quantitatively measure chemotaxis in bacteria. Several modifications have been made to Adler's original assay, but it remains the primary assay to measure directed motility in a wide variety of microorganisms (Fig. 3.4). In this method, chemotaxis towards a potential attractant is measured by comparing the number of bacteria from a suspension in buffer that enter a glass capillary tube filled with the potential chemical attractant with the number entering a capillary tube filled with buffer alone. Quantitation is obtained by emptying the bacteria

Cover slip

Capillary

Microscope slide

Glass U-shaped tube

Bacterial suspension

FIGURE 3.4 Setup of Adler's capillary assay. Diagram showing the setup of the capillary assay described by **Adler (1973)**. The bacterial suspension is in the space between cover slip and microscope slide. The glass U-shaped tube is used to keep the suspension within the reservoir created. Prepared solutions of the chemical being tested are loaded within the capillary and placed within the bacterial suspension and placed on the microscope for viewing.

that accumulated in the capillary and plating serial dilutions to determine the number of cells that entered the tube. This assay is also valuable for determining the sensitivity of bacteria towards an attractant by finding the threshold concentration required for a chemotactic response. The primary limitation of the capillary assay is the requirement for the test compound to be soluble in an aqueous solution. A modification of this method by Harwood and colleagues allows for a qualitative observation of chemotaxis in bacteria to poorly soluble compounds, including poly-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) like toluene or naphthalene (**Grimm and Harwood, 1997**). In this modified assay, a buffer solution is taken up into a glass capillary followed by pressing the open end of the capillary into a mound of finely granulated crystals of the PAH prior to placing the capillary in the bacterial suspension reservoir. The chemotactic response is judged positive if a visible cloud or mass of cells accumulates near the opening of the capillary. Another useful method for poorly soluble substrates is the drop assay in which a crystal of the compound is added to the center of a viscous cell suspension and chemotaxis is observed as an accumulation of cells encircling the crystal (**Fahrner et al., 1994; Grimm and Harwood, 1997**).

The capillary aerotaxis assay is useful in testing the cell’s ability to sense a spatial oxygen gradient. A flat capillary tube is filled with a suspension of motile cells to be tested. A dense band of cells forms a certain distance from the air–water interface (meniscus) where the cells are essentially trapped. For example, *A. brasiliense* is a microaerophilic soil bacterium and seeks an environment with a low optimum oxygen concentration which is suitable for maximum energy production (**Zhulin et al., 1996**). For

A. brasilense, oxygen is both an attractant and repellent, resulting in a dense aerotactic band of cells at the distance corresponding to its preferred oxygen concentration. Any perturbation in sensing oxygen, by a chemotaxis mutant for instance, results in a change in the distance between the meniscus and the dense cell band (Alexandre et al., 2000).

### C. Use of chemotaxis assays to characterize new microbial functions

Chemotaxis assays are not only used to screen for the range of chemicals to which motile bacteria respond. These assays are also useful in determining the sensory specificity of individual chemoreceptors, providing that isogenic mutants are available for the bacterial strain and the chemoreceptor(s) under study. These assays can also be modified to isolate motile bacteria with metabolic abilities desirable for bioremediation or agriculture. For example, the soft agar assay has previously been used to isolate microaerophilic nitrogen-fixing bacteria from the rhizosphere of cereals (Chowdhury et al., 2007; Doroshenko et al., 2007; Tarrand et al., 1978) or to isolate bacteria capable of degrading specific organic contaminants found in a gas oil-contaminated soil (Lanfranchi et al., 2003; Marx and Aitken, 2000a; Parales, 2004). Bacterial chemotaxis is also being considered as a microbially-driven strategy to increase the bioavailability of certain contaminants (Marx and Aitken, 2000b; Pandey and Jain, 2002).

## V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

Bacterial chemotaxis provides an obvious ecological advantage to motile bacteria since it allows motile cells to rapidly navigate in chemical gradients that may affect their survival and growth. The ecological advantages that chemotaxis provides to motile bacteria is reflected in the observation that the great majority of motile bacteria are chemotactic and that the most metabolically versatile bacterial species that also have the largest genomes possess multiple chemotaxis-like operons (Alexandre et al., 2004; Szurmant and Ordal, 2004; Wadhams and Armitage, 2004). There are few examples where motile flagellated bacteria lack complete chemotaxis signal transduction pathways. However, in these few cases, the gene loss seems to be limited to certain strains within the species. It is possible that motility per se may be required for dispersion while the ability to actively direct the movement (chemotaxis) may not endow the cells with a particular competitive advantage, thereby favoring the loss of this function (Badger et al., 2006; Deckert et al., 1998; Glockner et al., 2003; Moran et al., 2004). Bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction is arguably one of the few biological systems known in great detail and thus it offers a

unique opportunity for understanding the environmental cues that contribute to the shaping of bacterial communities. However, several challenges must be overcome, including the characterization of the function of multiple chemotaxis systems in phylogenetically diverse microbial species that have different swimming strategies and inhabit distinct ecological niches. Such analysis would greatly enhance our understanding of the evolution of this signal transduction pathway and it would also facilitate the development of algorithms for the prediction of the function of these pathways in completely sequenced genomes of bacterial species that may not be easily amenable to classical microbial physiology experiments. A particularly intriguing question is what ecological advantage(s) do multiple chemotaxis systems provide the cells with? In addition, the sensory specificity of chemoreceptors is a potential treasure's trove for novel biosensors and for understanding how bacteria couple sensing environmental cues with cellular adaptation. Characterizing the sensory specificity of diverse chemoreceptors remains challenging but it is an attainable objective in the near future owing to the development of sensitive high throughput biochemical methods.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank NSF (CAREER, MCB-0622777) for support and the University of Tennessee, Knoxville for generous start-up funds.

# REFERENCES

Adler, J. (1966a). Chemotaxis in bacteria. *Science* 153, 708–711.

Adler, J. (1966b). Effect of amino acids and oxygen on chemotaxis in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 92, 121–128.

Adler, J. (1973). Method for measuring chemotaxis and use of method to determine optimum conditions for chemotaxis by *Escherichia coli*. *J. Gen. Microbiol.* 74, 77–91.

Adler, J., and Tso, W. W. (1974). “Decision”-making in bacteria: Chemotactic response of *Escherichia coli* to conflicting stimuli. *Science*. 184, 1292–1294.

Alexandre, G., and Zhulin, I. B. (2001). More than one way to sense chemicals. *J. Bacteriol.* 183, 4681–4686.

Alexandre, G., Greer, S. E., and Zhulin, I. B. (2000). Energy taxis is the dominant behavior in *Azospirillum brasilense*. *J. Bacteriol.* 182, 6042–6048.

Alexandre, G., Greer-Phillips, S., and Zhulin, I. B. (2004). Ecological role of energy taxis in microorganisms. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 28, 113–126.

Armitage, J. P., and Schmitt, R. (1997). Bacterial chemotaxis: *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* and *Sinorhizobium meliloti*—variations on a theme? *Microbiology* 143, 3671–3682.

Badger, J. H., Hoover, T. R., Brun, Y. V., Weiner, R. M., Laub, M. T., Alexandre, G., Mrazek, J., Ren, Q., Paulsen, I. T., Nelson, K. E., Khouri, H. M., Radune, D., *et al.* (2006). Comparative genomic evidence for a close relationship between the dimorphic prosthecate bacteria *Hyphomonas neptunium* and *Caulobacter crescentus*. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 6841–6850.

Berg, H. C. (2000). Motile behavior of bacteria. *Phys. Today* 53, 24–29.

Berg, H. C., and Brown, D. A. (1972). Chemotaxis in *Escherichia coli* analyzed by 3-dimensional tracking. *Nature* **239**, 500–504.

Berleman, J. E., and Bauer, C. E. (2005a). A Che-like signal transduction cascade involved in controlling flagella biosynthesis in *Rhodospirillum centenum*. *Mol. Microbiol.* **55**, 1390–1402.

Berleman, J. E., and Bauer, C. E. (2005b). Involvement of a Che-like signal transduction cascade in regulating cyst cell development in *Rhodospirillum centenum*. *Mol. Microbiol.* **56**, 1457–1466.

Bespalov, V. A., Zhulin, I. B., and Taylor, B. L. (1996). Behavioral responses of *Escherichia coli* to changes in redox potential. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 10084–10089.

Bibikov, S. I., Barnes, L. A., Gitin, Y., and Parkinson, J. S. (2000). Domain organization and flavin adenine dinucleotide-binding determinants in the aerotaxis signal transducer Aer of *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 5830–5835.

Bible, A. N., Stephens, B. B., Ortega, D. R., Xie, Z., and Alexandre, G. (2008). Function of a chemotaxis-like signal transduction pathway in modulating motility, cell clumping and cell length in the alpha-proteobacterium *Azospirillum brasilense*. *J. Bacteriol.* **190**, 6365–6375.

Butler, S. M., and Camilli, A. (2004). Both chemotaxis and net motility greatly influence the infectivity of *Vibrio cholerae*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 5018–5023.

Butler, S. M., Nelson, E. J., Chowdhury, N., Faruque, S. M., Calderwood, S. B., and Camilli, A. (2006). Cholera stool bacteria repress chemotaxis to increase infectivity. *Mol. Microbiol.* **60**, 417–426.

Chowdhury, S. P., Schmid, M., Hartmann, A., and Tripathi, A. K. (2007). Identification of diazotrophs in the culturable bacterial community associated with roots of *Lasiurus sindicus*, a perennial grass of thar desert, India. *Microb. Ecol.* **54**, 82–90.

Chuiko, N. V., Antonyuk, T. S., and Kurdish, I. K. (2002). The chemotactic response of *Bradyrhizobium japonicum* to various organic compounds. *Microbiology* **71**, 391–396.

Cluzel, P., Surette, M., and Leibler, S. (2000). An ultrasensitive bacterial motor revealed by monitoring signaling proteins in single cells. *Science* **287**, 1652–1655.

Deckert, G., Warren, P. V., Gaasterland, T., Young, W. G., Lenox, A. L., Graham, D. E., Overbeek, R., Snead, M. A., Keller, M., Aujay, M., Huber, R., Feldman, R. A., et al. (1998). The complete genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium *Aquifex aeolicus*. *Nature* **392**, 353–358.

DeLoney-Marino, C. R., Wolfe, A. J., and Visick, K. L. (2003). Chemoattraction of *Vibrio fischeri* to serine, nucleosides, and N-acetylneuraminic acid, a component of squid light-organ mucus. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **69**, 7527–7530.

Doroshenko, E. V., Boulygina, E. S., Spiridonova, E. M., Tourova, T. P., and Kravchenko, I. K. (2007). Isolation and characterization of nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the genus *Azospirillum* from the soil of a *Sphagnum* peat bog. *Microbiology* **76**, 93–101.

Dusenbery, D. B. (1998). Spatial sensing of stimulus gradients can be superior to temporal sensing for free-swimming bacteria. *Biophys. J.* **74**, 2272–2277.

Engelmann, T. W. (1881). *Bacterium photometricum*: An article on the comparative physiology of the sense for light and colour. *Arch. Ges. Physiol. Bonn.* **30**, 95–124.

Fahrner, K. A., Block, S. M., Krishnaswamy, S., Parkinson, J. S., and Berg, H. C. (1994). A mutant hook-associated protein (HAP3) facilitates torsionally induced transformations of the flagellar filament of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.* **238**, 173–186.

Ferrandez, A., Hawkins, A. C., Summerfield, D. T., and Harwood, C. S. (2002). Cluster II che genes from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* are required for an optimal chemotactic response. *J. Bacteriol.* **184**, 4374–4383.

Foynes, S., Dorrell, N., Ward, S. J., Stabler, R. A., McCollm, A. A., Rycroft, A. N., and Wren, B. W. (2000). *Helicobacter pylori* possesses two CheY response regulators and a histidine kinase sensor, CheA, which are essential for chemotaxis and colonization of the gastric mucosa. *Infect. Immun.* **68**, 2016–2023.

Galperin, M. Y., Nikolskaya, A. N., and Koonin, E. V. (2001). Novel domains of the prokaryotic two-component signal transduction systems. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 203, 11–21.

Gardel, C. L., and Mekalanos, J. J. (1994). Modus operandi of Vibrio cholerae-swim to arrive-stop to kill-the relationship among chemotaxis, motility and virulence. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 56, 65.

Gestwicki, J. E., and Kiessling, L. L. (2002). Inter-receptor communication through arrays of bacterial chemoreceptors. *Nature* 415, 81–84.

Glockner, F. O., Kube, M., Bauer, M., Teeling, H., Lombardot, T., Ludwig, W., Gade, D., Beck, A., Borzym, K., Heitmann, K., Rabus, R., Schlesner, H., et al. (2003). Complete genome sequence of the marine planctomycete Pirellula sp. strain 1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 8298–8303.

Greer-Phillips, S. E., Alexandre, G., Taylor, B. L., and Zhulin, I. B. (2003). Aer and Tsr guide Escherichia coli in spatial gradients of oxidizable substrates. *Microbiology* 149, 2661–2667.

Greer-Phillips, S. E., Stephens, B. B., and Alexandre, G. (2004). An energy taxis transducer promotes root colonization by Azospirillum brasiliense. *J. Bacteriol.* 186, 6595–6604.

Grimm, A. C., and Harwood, C. S. (1997). Chemotaxis of Pseudomonas spp. to the polyaromatic hydrocarbon naphthalene. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* 63, 4111–4115.

Hader, D. P. (1987). Photosensory behavior in prokaryotes. *Microbiol. Rev.* 51, 1–21.

Hamblin, P. A., Maguire, B. A., Grishanin, R. N., and Armitage, J. P. (1997). Evidence for two chemosensory pathways in Rhodobacter sphaeroides. *Mol. Microbiol.* 26, 1083–1096.

Harms, H., and Wick, L. Y. (2006). Dispersing pollutant-degrading bacteria in contaminated soil without touching it. *Eng. Life Sci.* 6, 252–260.

Hartmann, A., and Zimmer, W. (1994). Physiology of Azospirillum. In “Azospirillum/Plant Associations” (Y. Okon, ed.), pp. 15–41. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Hawkins, A. C., and Harwood, C. S. (2002). Chemotaxis of Ralstonia eutropha JMP134(pJP4) to the Herbicide 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetate. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* 68, 968–972.

Hazelbauer, G. L., Falke, J. J., and Parkinson, J. S. (2008). Bacterial chemoreceptors: High-performance signaling in networked arrays. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 33, 9–19.

Hyung, S., and Yu, M. A. (1997). An agarose-in-plug bridge method to study chemotaxis in the Archaeon Halobacterium salinarum. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 156, 265–269.

Iwaki, H., Muraki, T., Ishihara, S., Hasegawa, Y., Rankin, K. N., Sulea, T., Boyd, J., and Lau, P. C. K. (2007). Characterization of a pseudomonad 2-nitrobenzoate nitroreductase and its catabolic pathway-associated 2-hydroxylaminobenzoate mutase and a chemoreceptor involved in 2-nitrobenzoate chemotaxis. *J. Bacteriol.* 189, 3502–3514.

Jasuja, R., Yu, L., Trentham, D. R., and Khan, S. (1999). Response tuning in bacterial chemotaxis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96, 11346–11351.

Kato, J., Ito, A., Nikata, T., and Ohtake, H. (1992). Phosphate taxis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. *J. Bacteriol.* 174, 5149–5151.

Kentner, D., and Sourjik, V. (2006). Spatial organization of the bacterial chemotaxis system. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* 9, 619–624.

Kim, H.-E., Shitashiro, M., Kuroda, A., Takiguchi, N., Ohtake, H., and Kato, J. (2006). Identification and characterization of the chemotactic transducer in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 for positive chemotaxis to trichloroethylene. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 6700–6702.

Kirby, J. R., and Zusman, D. R. (2003). Chemosensory regulation of developmental gene expression in Myxococcus xanthus. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 2008–2013.

Kurdish, I. K., Antonyuk, T. S., and Chuiko, N. V. (2001). Influence of environmental factors on the chemotaxis of Bradyrhizobium japonicum. *Microbiology* 70, 91–95.

Lanfranconi, M. P., Alvarez, H. M., and Studdert, C. A. (2003). A strain isolated from gas oil-contaminated soil displays chemotaxis towards gas oil and hexadecane. *Environ. Microbiol.* 5, 1002–1008.

Lukat, G. S., and Stock, J. B. (1993). Response regulation in bacterial chemotaxis. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 51, 41–46.

Marx, R. B., and Aitken, M. D. (2000a). A material-balance approach for modeling bacterial chemotaxis to a consumable substrate in the capillary assay. *Biotechnol. Bioeng.* **68**, 308–315.

Marx, R. B., and Aitken, M. D. (2000b). Bacterial chemotaxis enhances naphthalene degradation in a heterogeneous aqueous system. *Environ. Sci. Technol.* **34**, 3379–3383.

McGee, D. J., Langford, M. L., Watson, E. L., Carter, J. E., Chen, Y. T., and Ottemann, K. M. (2005). Colonization and inflammation deficiencies in Mongolian gerbils infected by *Helicobacter pylori* chemotaxis mutants. *Infect. Immun.* **73**, 1820–1827.

Merrell, D. S., Butler, S. M., Qadri, F., Dolganov, N. A., Alam, A., Cohen, M. B., Calderwood, S. B., Schoolnik, G. K., and Camilli, A. (2002). Host-induced epidemic spread of the cholera bacterium. *Nature* **417**, 642–645.

Meyer, G., Schneider-Merck, T., Bohme, S., and Sand, W. (2002). A simple method for investigations on the chemotaxis of *Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans* and *Desulfuovibrio vulgaris*. *Acta Biotechnol.* **22**, 391–399.

Miller, L. D., Yost, C. K., Hynes, M. F., and Alexandre, G. (2007). The major chemotaxis gene cluster of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* is essential for competitive nodulation. *Mol. Microbiol.* **63**, 348–362.

Moran, M. A., Buchan, A., Gonzalez, J. M., Heidelberg, J. F., Whitman, W. B., Kiene, R. P., Henriksen, J. R., King, G. M., Belas, R., Fuqua, C., Brinkac, L., Lewis, M., et al. (2004). Genome sequence of *Silicibacter pomeroyi* reveals adaptations to the marine environment. *Nature* **432**, 910–913.

Ordal, G. W., and Gibson, K. G. (1977). Chemotaxis toward amino-acids by *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Bacteriol.* **129**, 151–155.

Ordal, G. W., and Goldman, D. J. (1975). Chemotaxis away from uncouplers of oxidative-phosphorylation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Science* **189**, 802–805.

Ottemann, K. M., Thorgeirsson, T. E., Kolodziej, A. F., Shin, Y. K., and Koshland, D. E. (1998). Direct measurement of small ligand-induced conformational changes in the aspartate chemoreceptor using EPR. *Biochemistry* **37**, 7062–7069.

Ottemann, K. M., Xiao, W. Z., Shin, Y. K., and Koshland, D. E. (1999). A piston model for transmembrane signaling of the aspartate receptor. *Science* **285**, 1751–1754.

Pandey, G., and Jain, R. K. (2002). Bacterial chemotaxis toward environmental pollutants: Role in bioremediation. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **68**, 5789–5795.

Pandey, G., Chauhan, A., Samanta, S. K., and Jain, R. K. (2002). Chemotaxis of a *Ralstonia sp.* SJ98 toward co-metabolizable nitroaromatic compounds. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* **299**, 404–409.

Parales, R. E. (2004). Nitrobenzoates and aminobenzoates are chemoattractants for *Pseudomonas* strains. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **70**, 285–292.

Park, S. Y., Chao, X. J., Gonzalez-Bonet, G., Beel, B. D., Bilwes, A. M., and Crane, B. R. (2004). Structure and function of an unusual family of protein phosphatases: The bacterial chemotaxis proteins CheC and CheX. *Mol. Cell* **16**, 563–574.

Pfeffer, W. (1884). Locomotorische Richtungsbewegungen durch chemische Reize. *Unters Bot Inst Tiibingen* **1**, 363.

Porter, S. L., and Armitage, J. P. (2002). Phosphotransfer in *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* chemotaxis. *J. Mol. Biol.* **324**, 35–45.

Porter, S. L., and Armitage, J. P. (2004). Chemotaxis in *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* requires an atypical histidine protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 54573–54580.

Rajagopala, S. V., Titz, B., Goll, J., Parrish, J. R., Wohlbold, K., McKevitt, M. T., Palzkill, T., Mori, H., Finley, R. L., and Uetz, P. (2007). The protein network of bacterial motility. *Mol. Syst. Biol.* **3**, 1–13.

Rebbapragada, A., Johnson, M. S., Harding, G. P., Zuccarelli, A. J., Fletcher, H. M., Zhulin, I. B., and Taylor, B. L. (1997). The Aer protein and the serine chemoreceptor Tsr independently sense intracellular energy levels and transducer oxygen, redox, and energy signals for *Escherichia coli* behavior. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 10541–10546.

Repik, A., Rebbapragada, A., Johnson, M. S., Haznedar, J. O., Zhulin, I. B., and Taylor, B. L. (2000). PAS domain residues involved in signal transduction by the Aer redox sensor of *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. **36**, 806–816.

Schweinitzer, T., Mizote, T., Ishikawa, N., Dudnik, A., Inatsu, S., Schreiber, S., Suerbaum, S., Aizawa, S. I., and Josenhans, C. (2008). Functional characterization and mutagenesis of the proposed behavioral sensor TlpD of *Helicobacter pylori*. J. Bacteriol. **190**, 3244–3255.

Segall, J. E., Block, S. M., and Berg, H. C. (1986). Temporal comparisons in bacterial chemotaxis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **83**, 8987–8991.

Shi, W. Y., Yang, Z. M., Geng, Y. Z., Wolinsky, L. E., and Lovett, M. A. (1998). Chemotaxis in *Borrelia burgdorferi*. J. Bacteriol. **180**, 231–235.

Singh, T., and Arora, D. K. (2001). Motility and chemotactic response of *Pseudomonas fluorescens* toward chemoattractants present in the exudate of *Macrophomina phaseolina*. Microbiol. Res. **156**, 343–351.

Stephens, B. B., Loar, S. N., and Alexandre, G. (2006). The role of CheB and CheR in a complex chemotaxis and aerotaxis pathway in *Azospirillum brasilense*. J. Bacteriol. **188**, 4759–4768.

Stock, J., and Da Re, S. (2000). Signal transduction: Response regulators on and off. Curr. Biol. **10**, R420–R424.

Szurmant, L., and Ordal, G. W. (2004). Diversity in chemotaxis mechanisms among the bacteria and archaea. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. **68**, 301–319.

Tarrand, J. J., Krieg, N. R., and Dobereiner, J. (1978). Taxonomic study of *Spirillum lipoferum* group, with descriptions of a new genus, *Azospirillum* gen-NOV and 2 species, *Azospirillum lipoferum* (Beijerinck) comb Nov and *Azospirillum brasilense* sp-NOV. Can. J. Microbiol. **24**, 967–980.

Thar, R., and Kuhl, M. (2003). Bacteria are not too small for spatial sensing of chemical gradients: An experimental evidence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **100**, 5748–5753.

Tso, W. W., and Adler, J. (1974). Negative chemotaxis in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **118**, 560–576.

Ulrich, L. E., and Zhulin, I. B. (2005). Four-helix bundle: a ubiquitous sensory module in prokaryotic signal transduction. Bioinformatics **21**, 45–48.

Ulrich, L. E., and Zhulin, I. B. (2007). MiST: A microbial signal transduction database. Nucleic Acids Res. **35**, D386–D390.

Vlamakis, H. C., Kirby, J. R., and Zusman, D. R. (2004). The Che4 pathway of *Myxococcus xanthus* regulates type IV pilus-mediated motility. Mol. Microbiol. **52**, 1799–1811.

Wadhams, G. H., and Armitage, J. P. (2004). Making sense of it all: Bacterial chemotaxis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. **5**, 1024–1037.

Wright, E. L., Deakin, W. J., and Shaw, C. H. (1998). A chemotaxis cluster from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Gene **220**, 83–89.

Zapf, J., Madhusudan, C. E., Grimshaw, C. E., Hoch, J. A., Varughese, K. I., and Whiteley, J. M. (1998). Source of response regulator autophosphatase activity: The critical role of a residue adjacent to the SpoOF autophosphorylation active site. Biochemistry **37**, 7725–7732.

Zhang, P. J., Weis, R. M., Peters, P. J., and Subramaniam, S. (2007). Electron tomography of bacterial chemotaxis receptor assemblies. In “Methods in Cell Biology” (J. R. McIntosh, ed.), Vol. 79, pp. 373–384. Academic Press, San Diego.

Zhulin, I. B., Bespalov, V. A., Johnson, M. S., and Taylor, B. L. (1996). Oxygen taxis and proton motive force in *Azospirillum brasilense*. J. Bacteriol. **178**, 5199–5204.
