
Transition state analogs of 5′-methylthioadenosine nucleosidase disrupt quorum sensing

Jemy A Gutierrez, Tamara Crowder, Agnes Rinaldo-Matthis, Meng-Chiao Ho, Steven C Almo & Vern L Schramm

5′-Methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase (MTAN) is a bacterial enzyme involved in S-adenosylmethionine-related quorum sensing pathways that induce bacterial pathogenesis factors. Transition state analogs MT-DADMe-Immucillin-A, EtT-DADMe-Immucillin-A and BuT-DADMe-Immucillin-A are slow-onset, tight-binding inhibitors of *Vibrio cholerae* MTAN (*VcMTAN*), with equilibrium dissociation constants of 73, 70 and 208 pM, respectively. Structural analysis of *VcMTAN* with BuT-DADMe-Immucillin-A revealed interactions contributing to the high affinity. We found that in *V. cholerae* cells, these compounds are potent MTAN inhibitors with IC₅₀ values of 27, 31 and 6 nM for MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-Immucillin-A, respectively; the compounds disrupt autoinducer production in a dose-dependent manner without affecting growth. MT- and BuT-DADMe-Immucillin-A also inhibited autoinducer-2 production in enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 with IC₅₀ values of 600 and 125 nM, respectively. BuT-DADMe-Immucillin-A inhibition of autoinducer-2 production in both strains persisted for several generations and caused reduction in biofilm formation. These results support MTAN’s role in quorum sensing and its potential as a target for bacterial anti-infective drug design.

Bacteria communicate with each other by a process known as quorum sensing. When the population density reaches critical levels, they produce and detect signaling molecules known as autoinducers (AIs) to coordinate gene expression and regulate processes beneficial to the microbial communities¹. With the growing global threat of multidrug resistance, nonconventional anti-infective discovery approaches are being explored that are nonlethal to bacteria where the potential to develop resistance is assumed to be less significant. Quorum sensing is an ideal target for bacterial anti-infective design, as many bacterial species use this mechanism to regulate virulence²⁻⁵. Several mutant bacterial strains defective in quorum sensing create less potent infections. Quorum sensing–deficient intranasal *Streptococcus pneumoniae* infections in mice are less effective at spreading to the lungs and the bloodstream⁶. In an infant rat *Neisseria meningitidis* infection model, a quorum sensing–deficient strain is unable to produce viable bacteria in the blood⁷. These findings, among others, suggest that a number of bacterial infections could be controlled by impeding quorum sensing.

MTANs have a crucial role in maintaining homeostasis in bacteria. MTANs are tightly linked to S-adenosylmethionine pathways that involve methylation reactions yielding S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH, 1) and polyamine biosynthesis producing methylthioadenosine (MTA, 2) (Fig. 1). MTANs catalyze the hydrolytic deadenylation of MTA and SAH and provide a major route for their metabolism in bacteria; accumulation of MTA and SAH is thought to inhibit related pathways. In addition, MTANs are directly involved in the biosynthesis of autoinducers. AI-1 and AI-2 are two classes of autoinducers synthesized from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM, 3) (Fig. 1). AI-1 is a family of acylhomoserine lactones (AHLs, such as hydroxybutanoyl-l-homoserine lactone, 4) believed to provide signaling molecules for intraspecies communication. AI-2 includes derivatives of 4,5-dihydroxy-2,3-pentanedione (DPD, 5) believed to be responsible for interspecies communication. Thus, MTAN inhibition may provide a method of blocking both AI-1 and AI-2 production, thereby disrupting quorum sensing.

5′-Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) is the counterpart to MTAN in humans and functions similarly in metabolizing MTA but uses phosphate as a nucleophile instead of water. MTAP has been identified as an anticancer target owing to its involvement in polyamine biosynthesis and in purine and SAM salvage pathways⁸,⁹. The transition state structures of human MTAP as well as MTANs from *E. coli* (*EcMTAN*), *S. pneumoniae* (*SpMTAN*) and *N. meningitidis* (*NmMTAN*) have been solved using kinetic isotope effects¹⁰⁻¹³. They all have dissociative S_N1 transition states with ribooxacarbenium ion character, which could either be ‘late’ transition states with fully broken N-glycosidic bonds (that is, C1′-N9 distance of 3.0 Å or greater) or ‘early’ transition states with C1′-N9 distances of 2.0 Å or less (Fig. 2a).

Transition state analysis provides blueprints for the design of stable analogs, which in the study of purine nucleoside phosphorylases has yielded extremely potent inhibitors currently in clinical trials for autoimmune disease and cancer¹⁴,¹⁵. The same drug design approach has been extended to MTAP and MTANs¹⁰⁻¹³. Derivatized Immucillin-A (ImmA) and DADMe-ImmA provide two generations

Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to V.L.S. (vern@aecom.yu.edu).

Received 12 December 2008; accepted 4 February 2009; published online 8 March 2009; doi:10.1038/nchembio.153

ARTICLES

Figure 1 Role of MTAN in bacterial utilization of SAM. The scheme shows the pathways connecting DNA and other methylations (red box), polyamine synthesis (blue box), autoinducer production (yellow boxes) and methionine and adenine salvage. AHL synthase catalyzes the transfer of the amino acid moiety of SAM to an acyl acceptor to produce homoserine lactones in the synthesis of AI-1 molecules, which produces MTA as a byproduct. In methyltransferase reactions, SAM produces SAH, which is a precursor in the tetrahydrofuran synthesis of AI-2 molecules (shown here as furanosyl boron diester, 14). Blocking MTAN activity is expected to cause accumulation of MTA, resulting in product inhibition of AI-1 production by AHL synthase⁴⁹. In addition, inhibition of MTAN can directly block the formation of S-ribosylhomocysteine (SRH, 15), the precursor of AI-2. AI-1 and AI-2 are autoinducers used in bacterial quorum sensing, and MTAN offers a means to block formation of these signaling molecules. MTR (17), 5'-methylthioribose.

RESULTS

DADMe-ImmAs are picomolar inhibitors of VcMTAN

VcMTAN has substrate specificity for hydrolysis of both MTA and SAH. We obtained a $K_{\text{m}}$ of 3 μM for MTA and a $k_{\text{cat}}$ of 2 s⁻¹. For SAH, the $K_{\text{m}}$ and $k_{\text{cat}}$ values were 24 μM and 0.5 s⁻¹, respectively. With a $k_{\text{cat}}/K_{\text{m}}$ ratio of 6.6 × 10⁵ M⁻¹ s⁻¹ for MTA, VcMTAN's catalytic efficiency was 60-fold greater than that of the *S. pneumoniae* isoform and 14-fold less than that of *E. coli* MTAN¹⁸,²⁰. The transition state analogs 5'-methylthio-DADMe-Immucillin-A (MT-DADMe-ImmA, 7), 5'-ethylthio-DADMe-Immucillin-A (EtT-DADMe-ImmA, 8) and 5'-butylthio-DADMe-Immucillin-A (BuT-DADMe-ImmA, 9) (Fig. 2b) inhibited VcMTAN activity with dissociation constants in the mid-picomolar range (Table 1); in comparison, the compounds inhibited *E. coli* MTAN activity with dissociation constants in the low picomolar range, and they inhibited *S. pneumoniae* MTAN activity with dissociation constants in the nanomolar range¹⁸,²⁰. The same transition state analogs inhibited VcMTAN with an affinity intermediate to that for *E. coli* and *S. pneumoniae* MTANs, as predicted by the catalytic enhancement provided by the enzymes. Reaction progress curves in the presence of various concentrations of MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA revealed time-dependent, slow-onset inhibition, yielding overall dissociation constants of 73, 70 and 208 pM, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 1a online).

A method for predicting the transition state structure for MTANs was reported recently, using dissociation constants for known transition state analogs²¹. This method classifies MTANs as having either early or late dissociative transition states, depending on the ratio of the MTAN's dissociation constants for 5'-substituted ImmAs and DADMe-ImmAs. Dissociation constants were determined for VcMTAN with methylthio-ImmA (10), ethylthio-ImmA (11), benzylthio-ImmA (12) and $p$-chlorophenylthio-ImmA (13) (Supplementary Table 1 online). For the MT-ImmA/MT-DADMe-ImmA inhibitor pair, VcMTAN gave a $K_{\text{ImmA}}/K_{\text{DADMe-ImmA}}$ of 137, which indicates a strong preference for the transition state analog that resembles a late transition state. This analysis predicts a late dissociative transition state for VcMTAN that is similar to that of *E. coli* and *S. pneumoniae*. In addition to the ImmA dissociation constants being higher than their DADMe-ImmA counterparts, there was no slow-onset phase in their inhibition profiles. Thus, the DADMe-ImmA compounds are better mimics of VcMTAN's transition state, which strongly suggests that it is late and dissociative.

Crystal structure of the VcMTAN–BuT-DADMe-ImmA complex

To define the determinants responsible for inhibitor binding, we solved the crystal structure of VcMTAN in complex with BuT-DADMe-ImmA to 2.3 Å resolution (Fig. 3). The final atomic model

to Oδ2 of Asp198 (2.6 Å) and places the side chain in an orientation favorable for catalysis. The amide nitrogen of Val199 may also orient Asp198 for catalysis by hydrogen bonding to Oδ1 of Asp198.

The pyrrolidine moiety participates in interactions with Met9, Phe208 and Met174 on both sides of this ribosyl mimic. The pyrrolidine moiety shares hydrogen bonds with Glu175 and the proposed catalytic water (WAT3) (Fig. 3d). The Oε1 of Glu175 hydrogen bonds to the 3′-hydroxyl of the pyrrolidine with a distance of 2.7 Å. The protonated N1′ nitrogen of the pyrrolidine donates a hydrogen bond to WAT3 (2.7 Å). WAT3 is further stabilized by several potential hydrogen bonds with Oε2 of Glu175 (2.9 Å), Oε2 of Glu12 (2.9 Å), and NH1 of Arg194 (2.7 Å). The side chain of Ser76 is also within hydrogen bond distance to Oε2 of Glu12 (2.8 Å) and is involved in holding Glu12 in place for catalysis.

The 5′-butylthio group is surrounded by hydrophobic residues including Met9, Ile50, Val102, Phe105, Ala113, Phe152, Met174, Tyr107 and Phe208 (Fig. 3c). Both subunits form the catalytic site, and Tyr107, Phe105, Ala113 and Val102 reside on the adjacent subunit.

### Inhibition of cellular MTAN activity

We cultured *V. cholerae* N16961 overnight in the presence of the transition state analogs and saw no effect on cell growth as demonstrated by the invariant optical density at 600 nm (OD~600~) at concentrations up to 1 μM—14,000 times the *K~i~* value (Supplementary Fig. 1b). We took the cleared lysates from washed cells and incubated with radiolabeled MTA, and found MTAN activity from cells cultured without inhibitor to be 89 ± 3 pmol per min per OD~600~ unit, which reflects the variability in the cell density attained by overnight cultures, as well as the amount of active MTAN in extracts. In the presence of the transition state analogs, we saw dose-dependent inhibition of adenine conversion, giving half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (*IC*~50~) for the loss of cellular MTAN activity of 27, 31 and 6 nM for MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA, respectively (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1c).

### Inhibition of autoinducer production

Under the same conditions used to assay the inhibition of cellular MTAN activity, we measured autoinducer production by *V. cholerae* N16961 as a function of inhibitors (Table 1). *V. cholerae* N16961 growth medium induced luminescence in quorum-sensing *V. harveyi* reporter strains BB170 and BB120 by a factor of 13.5 ± 4.5 and 2.3 ± 1.0, respectively, compared with blank medium. BB170 responds to the presence of AI-2 alone, whereas BB120 responds to both AI-1 and AI-2. Marginal induction in BB120 was previously observed for other strains of *V. cholerae* subjected to the same assay^23^. It was postulated that in the presence of system 1 (response system for AI-1) in *V. harveyi* BB120 strain, system 2 (response system for AI-2) is less sensitive to induction^23^. The AI response signal became progressively

**Table 1** Inhibition constants for purified MTAN activity, cellular MTAN activity and AI production

| R group | Purified enzyme inhibition *K~i~* (pM) | Cellular MTAN inhibition *IC*~50~ (nM) | AI inhibition *IC*~50~ (nM) |
|---------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------|
|         |                                        |                                       |                           |
| MT (7)  | 73 ± 5                                | 27 ± 4                               | 0.94 ± 0.13               |
| EtT (8) | 70 ± 4                                | 31 ± 7                               | 11.0 ± 2.0                |
| BuT (9) | 208 ± 46                              | 6 ± 1                                | 1.4 ± 0.3                 |

Inhibition constants were determined as described in the Methods. BB170 is a reporter strain for only AI-2, and not AI-1, whereas BB120 is a reporter strain for both AI-1 and AI-2.

ARTICLES

Figure 3 Crystal structure of VcMTAN in complex with BuT-DADMe-ImmA. (a) Overall structure of VcMTAN showing the asymmetric unit content with the inhibitor BuT-DADMe-ImmA bound in the active sites. (b) The active site of VcMTAN with a $2F_{o} - F_{c}$ map contoured at $1.2\sigma$ surrounding the BuT-DADMe-ImmA inhibitor and the proposed nucleophilic water molecule. (c) Space-filling picture of the active site of VcMTAN with BuT-DADMe-ImmA in the active site. Grey represents hydrophobic regions of the protein, which interact with hydrophobic parts of the inhibitor. The red color shows parts of the protein that contain charged residues interacting with polar groups of the inhibitor, and green represents loop regions. (d) Schematic drawing of the BuT-DADMe-ImmA inhibitor bound in the active site of VcMTAN showing catalytic contacts.

BuT-DADMe-ImmA, induction was reduced to sixfold (Fig. 4a), and the extent of AI-2 induction for the MTAN knockout was negligible. Genetic interruption of MTAN in *E. coli* shows that it is not essential for growth, although it is important for synthesis of quorum sensing molecules. Wild-type *E. coli* treated with BuT-DADMe-ImmA produced the same phenotype as the MTAN knockout strain, which supports MTAN as the target for action of the transition state analog in the cell.

Suppression of quorum sensing is persistent

Pathogenic strains of *E. coli* and *V. cholerae* maintained sensitivity to BuT-DADMe-ImmA suppression of autoinducer-2 production for sustained growth cycles. With LB as growth medium, *E. coli* O157:H7 achieved 195-fold light induction in the *V. harveyi* BB170 reporter (Fig. 4b). After 26 generations of growth (that is, $2^{26}$ expansion of cell number) in the presence of 1 μM or 2.5 μM inhibitor, we saw that light induction in BB170 was suppressed to near basal levels of 1.4- and 2.2-fold, respectively. In *V. cholerae* N16961, the quorum sensing signal after 26 generations was 540-fold relative to control, and showed substantial inhibition to 4.2- and 1.3-fold in the presence of 1 μM and 2.5 μM BuT-DADMe-ImmA, respectively (Fig. 4c). Again, we observed that growth of both strains remained uninhibited under these conditions (Supplementary Fig. 2b,c).

weaker as MTAN inhibitor concentration increased, and it was completely inhibited at 1 μM inhibitor concentration (Supplementary Fig. 1d). We obtained IC₅₀ values for suppression of light induction in BB170 of 0.94, 11 and 1.4 nM for MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA, respectively, whereas in BB120 the IC₅₀s were 10.5, 14 and 1 nM for the same inhibitors (Table 1). Inhibitors alone at concentrations present in AI detection assays had no effect on light output from the reporter strains, providing support that the effect of the transition state analogs on autoinducer production is mediated by action of the inhibitors on MTAN of *V. cholerae* cells.

Autoinducer production in MTAN knockout *E. coli*

We cultured *E. coli* O157:H7 and an MTAN knockout strain in the presence of up to 0.5 μM MT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA and found no growth defects in autoinducer (AB) medium (Supplementary Fig. 2a online). AI induction in BB170 reached 37-fold for the wild-type pathogenic strain compared with blank, and administration of MT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of AI-2 induction with IC₅₀s of 600 ± 50 nM and 125 ± 24 nM, respectively. We found that at only four times the IC₅₀ value for

Figure 4 Effect of BuT-DADMe-ImmA on AI-2 production in pathogenic *E. coli* and *V. cholerae* upon short-term and long-term inhibitor treatment, and on static biofilm formation. (a) *E. coli* O157:H7 ± 0.5 μM BuT-DADMe-ImmA and an MTAN knockout strain were grown static in AB medium for >5 generations before the spent medium was assayed for AI-2 production. (b,c) *E. coli* O157:H7 (b) and *V. cholerae* N16961 (c) were grown shaken in LB for 26 generations, and AI-2 in the spent media was measured. Cultures were prepared in triplicate, and data represent mean values ± s.d. from at least six replicates. (d,e) Biofilm formation studies on *E. coli* O157:H7 (d) and *V. cholerae* N16961 (e) ± 1 μM BuT-DADMe-ImmA grown static in LB medium at 25 °C for 24 h on 96-well format. Data represent mean values ± s.d. The observed difference in biofilm formation due to BuT-DADMe-ImmA was statistically significant at $t = 5.044$, ***P < 0.001, d.f. = 14 for *E. coli*; and $t = 26.689$, ***P < 0.001, d.f. = 14 for *V. cholerae*.

Inhibition of biofilm formation

We used a 96-well plate format for the detection of biofilm formation in both *E. coli* O157:H7 and *V. cholerae* N16961. *E. coli* O157:H7 formed biofilm at the bottom of the plate, whereas *V. cholerae* N16961 produced biofilm both at the bottom and at the air-liquid interface. Growth of the planktonic cells reached a modest OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.5 for *E. coli* and 0.4 for *V. cholerae* under static growth conditions and at 25 °C (Supplementary Fig. 2d,e), and *V. cholerae* produced threefold more biofilm than did *E. coli*.

BuT-DADMe-ImmA (1 μM) did not inhibit growth of cells in the assay but reduced biofilm production by 18% in *E. coli* and 71% in *V. cholerae* (Fig. 4d,e).

DISCUSSION

The slow-onset, tight-binding inhibition of VcMTAN by MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA exhibits some of the highest binding affinities for targets in quorum sensing pathways. Slow-onset inhibition is typical for transition state analogs where binding to enzyme equilibrates the protein to a new conformation within seconds to minutes. The enzyme-inhibitor complex is characterized by a slow dissociation rate because of a highly stable inhibited form. *K*<sub>m</sub>/*K*<sub>i</sub> values for all three inhibitors are approximately 10<sup>4</sup>, showing strong preference for the transition state analogs over the substrate MTA.

MTANs have dual substrate specificity for MTA and SAH, and are expected to accommodate both methylthio and homocysteine groups in a manner proportional to their *K*<sub>m</sub> values. Transition state analogs that differ only in their 5′ substituents permit direct comparison of VcMTAN’s preference for these groups. MT and EtT groups were equally favored at this position, and were also equivalent in blocking quorum sensing *in vitro* (Table 1). The dissociation constant increases threefold, however, in going from ethyl- to butyl-substituted DADMe-ImmA, which suggests modest size specificity within the 5′ binding pocket.

The crystal structure of BuT-DADMe-ImmA in complex with VcMTAN is similar to the crystal structure of EcMTAN in complex with MT-DADMe-ImmA (Supplementary Fig. 3a online)<sup>22</sup>. The inhibitors in the two structures exhibit nearly identical poses for the 9-deazaadenine and the pyrrolidine ribocation mimic. Much like EcMTAN, tight binding in the VcMTAN complex is proposed to originate mainly from the conformation adopted by the pyrrolidine group of the inhibitor, which allows for the cation at N1′ to be in close proximity to the putative water nucleophile, which organizes the geometry of Ser76, Glu12, Arg194 and Glu175 around the catalytic site. The p*K*<sub>a</sub> of the N1′ pyrrolidine nitrogen is 8, making it cationic at physiological pH. The DADMe-ImmA inhibitors lack the 2′-hydroxyl moiety present in ribosyl groups, which allows the presumed catalytic water to be close to the N1′, with a distance of 2.7 Å. This distance is similar to 2.6 Å in the case of the EcMTAN–MT-DADMe-ImmA structure<sup>22</sup>. Based on the favorable hydrophobic interactions between the 5′-butylthio group and the hydrophobic pocket in the protein, additional binding affinity would be anticipated relative to MT-DADMe-ImmA. The threefold decrease in affinity for the BuT inhibitor relative to the MT inhibitor may be attributable to the loss of entropy encountered upon binding the flexible butyl group at the catalytic site.

BuT-DADMe-ImmA binds 1,000 times stronger to EcMTAN than to VcMTAN. Comparisons of the structures overall and the active sites do not reveal obvious explanations for the difference (Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). The two structures share 59% sequence identity and have almost identical active sites. However, recent studies have demonstrated that residues remote from the active site of purine nucleoside

phosphorylase contribute to transition state structure and catalytic efficiency through dynamic motion<sup>24</sup>. The enhanced catalytic efficiency and inhibitor binding specificity of EcMTAN may also involve the full dynamic architecture of the protein.

The biological effectiveness of MTAN inhibitors in the context of the cell was measured in cell lysates of a virulent strain of *V. cholerae* (N16961) grown in the presence of inhibitors. Direct measurements of MTAN activity that yielded nanomolar IC<sub>50</sub> values for MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA demonstrate cell permeability for the inhibitors, most notably in the case of BuT-DADMe-ImmA. Despite having a threefold lower affinity with purified VcMTAN, BuT-DADMe-ImmA inhibited cellular VcMTAN activity fivefold better than its MT and EtT counterparts (Table 1). Although tightly bound *in vitro*, BuT-DADMe-ImmA inhibition of VcMTAN activity in the cell required a 30-fold increase above the *K*<sub>i</sub><sup>*</sup>, which suggests a significant diffusion barrier. With MT- and EtT-DADMe-ImmA, the diffusion barrier required a gradient close to 500-fold above *K*<sub>i</sub><sup>*</sup> to inhibit VcMTAN in growing cells.

Despite the significant diffusion barrier, all three MTAN transition state analogs were potent inhibitors of autoinducer production in *V. cholerae* N16961, inhibiting quorum sensing induction in both *V. harveyi* reporter strains.

The role of quorum sensing in enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* O157:H7 EDL933 has also been extensively studied<sup>25–27</sup>. It is a highly pathogenic strain of *E. coli* that causes mortality and morbidity in vulnerable populations by producing Shiga toxins and lesions on intestinal epithelial cells. It uses autoinducers generated at high cell density to modulate concerted biological functions and succeed in host infection. MT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA are potent inhibitors of *E. coli* MTAN with dissociation constants of 2 and 0.3 pM, respectively<sup>18</sup>. Similar to results from *V. cholerae*, both MT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA were able to cross the *E. coli* cellular membrane and cause nontoxic inhibition of AI-2 production. Notably, AI-2 inhibition in *E. coli* cells was not as efficient as in *V. cholerae*, despite the fact that inhibition of EcMTAN enzyme activity was at least 100-fold stronger than in VcMTAN. A barrier to inhibitor permeability in *E. coli* may explain this discrepancy.

A concern in targeting MTAN to suppress quorum sensing is that overexpression of the quorum sensing pathway (or alternative pathways) might overcome the effect of MTAN inhibitors. Bacterial changes in gene expression in response to cellular signals generally occur rapidly, on the time scale of minutes to a few cell generation times. Serial transfer experiments showed that sensitivity toward BuT-DADMe-ImmA suppression of AI-2 production was maintained in both *V. cholerae* N16961 and *E. coli* O157:H7 through progressive passaging of cells. This suggests that inhibition of quorum sensing was not only immediate but also persisted for several generations.

Biofilm formation is an important bacterial strategy that is tightly linked to quorum sensing<sup>27,28</sup>. It is a vital survival mechanism for *V. cholerae*, in both its infective and noninfective lifestyles<sup>29,30</sup>. The current model for *V. cholerae* asserts that at high cell density in the abundance of autoinducers, biofilm formation is impaired by repression of the critical exopolysaccharide regulators HapR and c-di-GMP (refs. 31,32). Whereas most *V. cholerae* El Tor strains have a uniquely inverted quorum sensing mechanism to increase survival and infectivity<sup>32,33</sup>, the El Tor N16961 strain carries a natural frame-shift mutation in the *hapR* gene<sup>33,34</sup> that abolishes repression on biofilm formation and cholera toxin production<sup>33</sup>. This makes it conceivable for biofilm formation to be suppressed by BuT-DADMe-ImmA under conditions that also inhibit autoinducer production in this strain.

In *E. coli*, it has been shown that AI-2 added to cell cultures in microtiter plates increases biofilm formation 30-fold, and that a quorum sensing mutant produces 50% less biofilm than the isogenic wild-type strain³⁵. As in the case of *V. cholerae* N16961, biofilm formation in *E. coli* O157:H7 was suppressed by an MTAN inhibitor that disrupts quorum sensing.

Transition state theory has been useful in the development of powerful inhibitors with *in vivo* effects against target enzymes. MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA are transition state analogs of bacterial MTANs, and they show high potency in disrupting quorum sensing molecules in pathogenic strains of *V. cholerae* and *E. coli*. *S. pneumoniae*, *N. meningitidis*, *Klebsiella pneumoniae*, *Staphylococcus aureus* and *Helicobacter pylori* are some of the most aggressive human pathogens, and published evidence supports quorum sensing as promoting pathogenesis in these species⁷,³⁶⁻⁴⁰. Each of these bacterial species expresses MTAN, and the transition state analogs described here are potent in inhibiting purified MTANs from these sources¹⁸,²⁰,²¹. The potential of inhibiting quorum sensing by targeting MTAN is expected to extend to other pathogens beyond *V. cholerae* and *E. coli*.

### METHODS

#### [8-¹⁴C]MTA, DADMe-ImmAs.
[8-¹⁴C]MTA and DADMe-ImmAs were synthesized as described previously⁹,¹⁷.

#### VcMTAN expression and purification.
VcMTAN was expressed in *E. coli* as a His-tagged recombinant protein, as described in Supplementary Methods online.

#### VcMTAN kinetics and inhibition.
Kinetic constants were determined by following loss of MTA at 274 nm (Δε₂₇₄ = 1.6 mM⁻¹ cm⁻¹). Reactions were carried out at 25 °C in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 and 50 mM KCl at various MTA concentrations, and initiated by 10–12 nM VcMTAN. Inhibition constants were obtained using a xanthine oxidase-coupled reaction described previously¹⁸. Reaction mixtures contained 1–2 mM MTA and various concentrations of MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA. Samples were prepared at standard buffer conditions, with ~0.5 units of xanthine oxidase (Sigma) and 12 nM VcMTAN to initiate the reaction at 25 °C, monitored on a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Varian) at 293 nm. The equilibrium dissociation constant (*Kᵢ*⁺) was obtained using equation (1) for competitive inhibition using KaleidaGraph 3.6 (Synergy Software):

\[
v_s'/v_s = \frac{K_m + [S]}{K_m + [S] + K_m[I]/K_i^*}
\]

where \( v_s' \) and \( v_s \) are steady state rates with and without inhibitor, respectively; \( K_m \) is the Michaelis constant for MTA; and [S] and [I] are the concentrations of MTA and inhibitor, respectively. If the concentration of inhibitor is less than ten times the concentration of enzyme, equation (2) was used for correction:

\[
I' = I - (1 - v_0'/v_0)E_t
\]

where \( I' \) is the effective inhibitor concentration; \( I \) is the inhibitor concentration used in the assay; \( v_0' \) and \( v_0 \) are initial rates with and without inhibitor, respectively; and \( E_t \) is total MTAN concentration.

#### Crystallization of the BuT-DADMe-ImmA-MTAN complex.
Purified VcMTAN was concentrated to 15 mg ml⁻¹, incubated with 1 mM BuT-DADMe-ImmA and crystallized using sitting drop vapor diffusion at 18 °C against an 80 μl reservoir containing 0.2 M potassium iodide and 20% (w/v) PEG3350, where 1 μl of the protein solution was mixed with 1 μl of the reservoir solution.

#### Data collection.
Crystals were soaked in reservoir solution supplemented with 20% (v/v) glycerol and cooled to –178 °C before data collection at beamline X29A at the National Synchrotron Light Source, Brookhaven National Laboratory using a Quantum 315 detector (Area Detector Systems Corporation) and 1.10010 Å radiation. Each frame was exposed for 10 s with an oscillation range

of 1°. The HKL2000 suite was used for integration and scaling of the data (Supplementary Table 2 online)⁴¹.

#### Structure determination and refinement.
The structure of the VcMTAN-BuT-DADMe-ImmA complex was solved by molecular replacement using *E. coli* MTAN (Protein Data Bank (PDB) code 1Z5P, without water) as search model. Molecular replacement with MOLREP and refinement with REFMAC5 were done using the CCP4i package⁴²⁻⁴⁴. COOT was used for molecular modeling⁴⁵. Clear features in \( F_o - F_c \) maps contoured at 3.5σ were consistent with BuT-DADMe-ImmA and allowed for this ligand to be readily fit in the electron density. Most residues (89%) are located in the most favored region of the Ramachandran plot, while the remaining 11% are in the allowed region. Data processing and refinement statistics are summarized in Supplementary Table 2. All figures were made using PyMOL⁴⁶.

#### Inhibition of cellular MTAN activity.
*V. cholerae* N16961 (American Type Culture Collection) was grown at 37 °C to stationary phase in LB medium for 16 h with and without 1–1,000 nM MT-, EtT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA. Cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed with BugBuster reagent (Novagen). Cleared lysate was incubated with [8-¹⁴C]MTA in 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl at 25 °C for 20 min and quenched with perchloric acid to 20% (w/v) final concentration. Reaction components were separated using reverse-phase HPLC as detailed in Supplementary Methods, and MTAN activity was evaluated based on ¹⁴C-adenine counts.

#### Autoinducer assay.
Autoinducers secreted by *V. cholerae* N16961 treated with inhibitors were measured using *V. harveyi* bioluminescence assay⁴⁷ (described in Supplementary Methods), where reporter *V. harveyi* strains produce light in response to autoinducers in *V. cholerae* spent media. The magnitude of induction is taken as the ratio of light output induced by the *V. cholerae* filtrate relative to blank, and was plotted against inhibitor concentration and fitted to equation (3) to obtain the IC₅₀:

\[
y = y_0 - \frac{c[I]}{\text{IC}_{50} + [I]}
\]

where \( y \) is the magnitude of induction at inhibitor concentration [I]; \( y_0 \) is the magnitude of induction without inhibitor (untreated sample); \( c \) is the maximum difference between treated and untreated sample; and IC₅₀ is the inhibitor concentration representing half maximal induction. The average of at least six replicates was taken, with outliers greater than two s.d. removed from analysis.

AI-2 production was measured similarly for enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* O157:H7 EDL933 (American Type Culture Collection) grown in autoinducer medium with 5–500 nM MT- and BuT-DADMe-ImmA, and for an *E. coli* MTAN knockout strain without inhibitor treatment.

To evaluate the effects of prolonged incubation with BuT-DADMe-ImmA on the growth and autoinducer production of *V. cholerae* N16961 and *E. coli* O157:H7, initial cell culture of these strains was prepared from a 1:100 dilution of overnight seed grown in LB medium at 37 °C, with and without 1 and 2.5 μM BuT-DADMe-ImmA. Cells were grown to stationary phase, and aliquots were taken for OD₆₀₀ and autoinducer-2 assays. Treated and untreated cells were serially diluted from dense cultures into fresh media, and grown under the same conditions of growth and inhibitor concentration for 26 generations. Cultures were prepared in triplicate, and for the bioluminescence assay, the average of 6–8 replicates was taken.

#### Biofilm assay.
*V. cholerae* N16961 and *E. coli* O157:H7 were diluted 1:100 from overnight seed cultures grown in LB medium in sterile, nontreated 96-well plates⁴⁸. The plates were covered and grown static for 24 h at 25 °C with and without 1 μM BuT-DADMe-ImmA. After removing the cell suspension and measuring OD₆₀₀, the plates were rinsed and stained with crystal violet solution for 10 min. Once the dye was removed and the plate rinsed, the stained biofilm was solubilized using 1:4 acetone:ethanol for *E. coli* and DMSO for *V. cholerae*. The extent of biofilm formation was obtained from the OD₅₇₀ values, and the average from at least six replicates was reported.

#### Accession codes.
Protein Data Bank: The coordinates and structure factors of the VcMTAN-BuT-DADMe-ImmA complex are deposited under accession

code 3DP9. The *E. coli* MTAN structure was deposited under accession code 1Z5P as part of a previous study.

Note: [Supplementary information](https://www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology/) and [chemical compound information](https://www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology/) is available on the Nature Chemical Biology website.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge R.H. Furneaux, G.B. Evans, D.H. Lenz, G.F. Painter and P.C. Tyler of Industrial Research Laboratory, Inc. for supplying the DADMe-Immucillins; M.G. Surette (University of Calgary) for providing *V. harveyi* strains BB120 and BB170; C. Bradbeer (University of Virginia) for the *E. coli* MTAN knockout; and the US National Institutes of Health grant GM41916 for funding. Data for this study were collected at beamline X29A of the National Synchrotron Light Source. Financial support comes principally from the Offices of Biological and Environmental Research and of Basic Energy Sciences of the US Department of Energy, and from the National Center for Research Resources of the US National Institutes of Health.

### AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

J.A.G. performed the inhibition assays on recombinant VcMTAN and on *E. coli* and *V. cholerae* cells, and co-wrote the manuscript. T.C. expressed, purified and measured activity of the recombinant VcMTAN. A.R.-M., M.-C.H. and S.C.A. did the structure determination, refinement and characterization for the VcMTAN-BuT-DADMe-ImmA complex. V.L.S. designed the experiments and co-wrote the manuscript.

### COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT

The authors declare competing financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology/.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology/ Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/

---

1. Fuqua, W.C., Winans, S.C. & Greenberg, E.P. Quorum sensing in bacteria: the LuxR-LuxI family of cell density-responsive transcriptional regulators. *J. Bacteriol.* **176**, 269–275 (1994).
2. Sperandio, V. Novel approaches to bacterial infection therapy by interfering with bacteria-to-bacteria signaling. *Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther.* **5**, 271–276 (2007).
3. Vendeville, A., Winzer, K., Heurlier, K., Tang, C.M. & Hardie, K.R. Making ‘sense’ of metabolism: autoinducer-2, LuxS and pathogenic bacteria. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* **3**, 383–396 (2005).
4. Cegelski, L., Marshall, G.R., Eldridge, G.R. & Hultgren, S.J. The biology and future prospects of antivirulence therapies. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* **6**, 17–27 (2008).
5. Winzer, K. & Williams, P. Quorum sensing and the regulation of virulence gene expression in pathogenic bacteria. *Int. J. Med. Microbiol.* **291**, 131–143 (2001).
6. Stroeher, U.H., Paton, A.W., Oggunniyi, A.D. & Paton, J.C. Mutation of luxS of *Streptococcus pneumoniae* affects virulence in a mouse model. *Infect. Immun.* **71**, 3206–3212 (2003).
7. Winzer, K. *et al.* Role of *Neisseria meningitidis* luxS in cell-to-cell signaling and bacteremic infection. *Infect. Immun.* **70**, 2245–2248 (2002).
8. Harasawa, H. *et al.* Chemotherapy targeting methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) deficiency in adult T cell leukemia (ATL). *Leukemia* **16**, 1799–1807 (2002).
9. Basu, I. *et al.* A transition state analogue of 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase induces apoptosis in head and neck cancers. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 21477–21486 (2007).
10. Singh, V., Lee, J.E., Nunez, S., Howell, P.L. & Schramm, V.L. Transition state structure of 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase from *Escherichia coli* and its similarity to transition state analogues. *Biochemistry* **44**, 11647–11659 (2005).
11. Singh, V. & Schramm, V.L. Transition-state analysis of S-pneumoniae 5′-methylthioadenosine nucleosidase. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **129**, 2783–2795 (2007).
12. Singh, V., Luo, M., Brown, R.L., Norris, G.E. & Schramm, V.L. Transition-state structure of *Neisseria meningitides* 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **129**, 13831–13833 (2007).
13. Singh, V. & Schramm, V.L. Transition-state structure of human 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **128**, 14691–14696 (2006).
14. Balakrishnan, K., Nimmanapalli, R., Ravandi, F., Keating, M.J. & Gandhi, V. Forodesine, an inhibitor of purine nucleoside phosphorylase, induces apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. *Blood* **108**, 2392–2398 (2006).
15. Robak, T., Lech-Maranda, E., Koerycka, A. & Robak, E. Purine nucleoside analogs as immunosuppressive and antineoplastic agents: mechanism of action and clinical activity. *Curr. Med. Chem.* **13**, 3165–3189 (2006).
16. Evans, G.B., Furneaux, R.H., Schramm, V.L., Singh, V. & Tyler, P.C. Targeting the polyamine pathway with transition-state analogue inhibitors of 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase. *J. Med. Chem.* **47**, 3275–3281 (2004).

17. Evans, G.B. *et al.* Second generation transition state analogue inhibitors of human 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase. *J. Med. Chem.* **48**, 4679–4689 (2005).
18. Singh, V. *et al.* Femtomolar transition state analogue inhibitors of 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase from *Escherichia coli*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 18265–18273 (2005).
19. Singh, V. *et al.* Picomolar transition state analogue inhibitors of human 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase and X-ray structure with MT-Immucillin-A. *Biochemistry* **43**, 9–18 (2004).
20. Singh, V. *et al.* Structure and inhibition of a quorum sensing target from *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. *Biochemistry* **45**, 12929–12941 (2006).
21. Gutierrez, J.A. *et al.* Picomolar inhibitors as transition-state probes of 5′-methylthioadenosine nucleosidases. *ACS Chem. Biol.* **2**, 725–734 (2007).
22. Lee, J.E. *et al.* Structural rationale for the affinity of pico- and femtomolar transition state analogues of *Escherichia coli* 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 18274–18282 (2005).
23. Bassler, B.L., Greenberg, E.P. & Stevens, A.M. Cross-species induction of luminescence in the quorum-sensing bacterium *Vibrio harveyi*. *J. Bacteriol.* **179**, 4043–4045 (1997).
24. Saen-Oon, S., Ghanem, M., Schramm, V.L. & Schwartz, S.D. Remote mutations and active site dynamics correlate with catalytic properties of purine nucleoside phosphorylase. *Biophys. J.* **94**, 4078–4088 (2008).
25. Anand, S.K. & Griffiths, M.W. Quorum sensing and expression of virulence in *Escherichia coli O157:H7*. *Int. J. Food Microbiol.* **85**, 1–9 (2003).
26. Sperandio, V., Mellies, J.L., Nguyen, W., Shin, S. & Kaper, J.B. Quorum sensing controls expression of the type III secretion gene transcription and protein secretion in enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 15196–15201 (1999).
27. Li, J. *et al.* Quorum sensing in *Escherichia coli* is signaled by AI-2/LsrR: effects on small RNA and biofilm architecture. *J. Bacteriol.* **189**, 6011–6020 (2007).
28. Herzberg, M., Kaye, I.K., Peti, W. & Wood, T.K. YdgG (TqsA) controls biofilm formation in *Escherichia coli* K-12 through autoinducer 2 transport. *J. Bacteriol.* **188**, 587–598 (2006).
29. Zhu, J. & Mekalanos, J.J. Quorum sensing-dependent biofilms enhance colonization in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Dev. Cell* **5**, 647–656 (2003).
30. Matz, C. *et al.* Biofilm formation and phenotypic variation enhance predation-driven persistence of *Vibrio cholerae*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 16819–16824 (2005).
31. Hammer, B.K. & Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing controls biofilm formation in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Mol. Microbiol.* **50**, 101–114 (2003).
32. Waters, C.M., Lu, W., Rabinowitz, J.D. & Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing controls biofilm formation in *Vibrio cholerae* through modulation of cyclic di-GMP levels and repression of vpsT. *J. Bacteriol.* **190**, 2527–2536 (2008).
33. Zhu, J. *et al.* Quorum-sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 3129–3134 (2002).
34. Joellsson, A., Liu, Z. & Zhu, J. Genetic and phenotypic diversity of quorum-sensing systems in clinical and environmental isolates of *Vibrio cholerae*. *Infect. Immun.* **74**, 1141–1147 (2006).
35. Gonzalez Barrios, A.F. *et al.* Autoinducer 2 controls biofilm formation in *Escherichia coli* through a novel motility quorum-sensing regulator (MqsR, B3022). *J. Bacteriol.* **188**, 305–316 (2006).
36. Surette, M.G. & Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing in *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 7046–7050 (1998).
37. Dunny, G.M. & Leonard, B.A.B. Cell-cell communication in gram-positive bacteria. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **51**, 527–564 (1997).
38. Balestrino, D., Haagensen, J.A.J., Rich, C. & Forestier, C. Characterization of type 2 quorum sensing in *Klebsiella pneumoniae* and relationship with biofilm formation. *J. Bacteriol.* **187**, 2870–2880 (2005).
39. Joyce, E.A. *et al.* LuxS is required for persistent Pneumococcal carriage and expression of virulence and biosynthesis genes. *Infect. Immun.* **72**, 2964–2975 (2004).
40. Rader, B.A., Campagna, S.R., Semmelhack, M.F., Bassler, B.L. & Guillemin, K. The quorum-sensing molecule autoinducer 2 regulates motility and flagellar morphogenesis in *Helicobacter pylori*. *J. Bacteriol.* **189**, 6109–6117 (2007).
41. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. *Methods Enzymol.* **276**, 307–326 (1997).
42. Potterton, E., Briggs, P., Turkenburg, M. & Dodson, E. A graphical user interface to the CCP4 program suite. *Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.* **59**, 1131–1137 (2003).
43. Vagin, A. & Teplyakov, A. MOLREP: an automated program for molecular replacement. *J. Appl. Crystallogr.* **30**, 1022–1025 (1997).
44. Murshudov, G.N., Vagin, A.A. & Dodson, E.J. Refinement of macromolecular structures by the maximum-likelihood method. *Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.* **53**, 240–255 (1997).
45. Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. Model-building tools for molecular graphics. *Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.* **60**, 2126–2132 (2004).
46. DeLano, W.L. *The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System* (DeLano Scientific, Palo Alto, California, USA, 2002).
47. Greenberg, E.P., Hastings, J.W. & Ulitzur, S. Induction of luciferase synthesis in *Beneckea harveyi* by other marine bacteria. *Arch. Microbiol.* **120**, 87–91 (1979).
48. O'Toole, G.A. *et al.* Genetic approaches to study of biofilms. *Methods Enzymol.* **310**, 91–109 (1999).
49. Parsek, M.R., Val, D.L., Hanzelka, B.L., Cronan, J.E. & Greenberg, E.P. Acyl homoserine-lactone quorum-sensing signal generation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 4360–4365 (1999).
