
JACS
COMMUNICATIONS

Published on Web 03/02/2009

# Timing of the Δ<sub>10,12</sub>-Δ<sub>11,13</sub> Double Bond Migration During Ansamitocin Biosynthesis in *Actinosynnema pretiosum*

Florian Taft,<sup>†</sup> Marco Brünjes,<sup>†</sup> Tobias Knobloch,<sup>†</sup> Heinz G. Floss,<sup>‡</sup> and Andreas Kirschning<sup>†,*</sup>

*Institut für Organische Chemie and Zentrum für Biomolekulare Wirkstoffe (BMWZ), Leibniz Universität Hannover, D-30167 Hannover, Germany, and Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1700, USA*

Received November 12, 2008; E-mail: andreas.kirschning@oci.uni-hannover.de

The plant-derived maytansinoids<sup>1</sup> and their microbial counterparts, the ansamitocins **1–3** (Figure 1),<sup>2</sup> are extraordinarily potent antitumor agents *in vitro* and in tumor-bearing animals, blocking the assembly of tubulin into functional microtubules.<sup>3</sup> Their biosynthesis in *Actinosynnema pretiosum* involves the assembly of a polyketide by chain extension of the starter unit 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (AHBA, **4**)<sup>4</sup> by three molecules each of malonyl-CoA and 2-methylmalonyl-CoA and one molecule of 2-methoxymalonyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) on a type I modular polyketide synthase (*asm* PKS) (Scheme 1).<sup>5</sup> Its product proansamitocin is then converted by six tailoring steps into the bioactive end product, ansamitocin P-3 **2** (AP-3).<sup>6</sup>

In ansamitocin the position of the diene moiety at C-11 and C-13 is shifted by one carbon from the position where normal PKS processing would place these double bonds, obliterating the stereocenter at C-14. It has been proposed that migration of the double bonds already occurs during processing on the PKS.<sup>6</sup>

Recently, we determined the cryptic configuration of the stereocenter at C-14 by synthesizing the two enantiomers of the intermediate diketide **II** as their *N*-acetylcysteamine (SNAC) thioesters and demonstrating that only the (*R*)-enantiomer complements an AHBA-nonproducing mutant *A. pretiosum* HGF073 to restore ansamitocin formation.<sup>7</sup> Surprisingly, AP-3 production could not be restored by supplementation with a racemic mixture of the triketide **5**. We now report the synthesis and feeding of the respective SNAC esters of the enantiopure triketide (*R*)-**5** and of the two isomeric tetraketides (*R*)-**6** and **7** to gain insight into the biosynthetic logic of diene migration.

*N*-Acetylcysteamine ester **5** was synthesized by Evans alkylation<sup>8</sup> of the protected benzyl iodide **8** (Scheme 2). After auxiliary removal, aldehyde **10** was directly converted into the SNAC ester (*R*)-**5** by a Wittig olefination using ylide **11**<sup>9,10</sup> followed by deprotection. Aldehyde **10** also served to prepare tetraketide **6**. Wittig olefination using ylide **12** resulted in aldehyde **13** after a short reduction/oxidation sequence. This aldehyde was subjected to a second olefination protocol using the new phosphonate **14**, which already bears the methoxy group in the right place as well as the SNAC moiety. Deprotection finally yielded the target tetraketide (*R*)-**6**.

The isomeric tetraketide **7** was prepared from known vinyl iodide **16**<sup>11</sup> which was subjected to a Heck reaction with alkene **18** (Scheme 3). This butene derivative was prepared according to Trost’s palladium-catalyzed kinetic resolution by ring opening of vinyl oxirane **15** in the presence of ligand **17**.<sup>12</sup> The Heck reaction yielded the desired diene **19** which was further converted into the target SNAC ester **7** by standard functional group transformations.

Compounds (*R*)-**5** (15 μmol) and (*R*)-**6** and **7** (21 μmol) were then each fed to cultures of *A. pretiosum* mutant HGF073 (Figure 2).<sup>13</sup> AP-3 was detected in cultures supplemented with the (*R*)-triketide SNAC **5** and with tetraketide SNAC **7**. ESI-MS spectral comparison of the biosynthetic samples with authentic AP-3 showed them to be identical, with a parent ion at *m/z* 635 (M+H)<sup>+</sup> and

---

<sup>†</sup> Leibniz Universität.
<sup>‡</sup> University of Washington.

3812 ■ J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2009, 131, 3812–3813

10.1021/ja8088923 CCC: $40.75 © 2009 American Chemical Society

Scheme 2. Synthesis of Triketide 5 and Tetraketide 6

tetraketide intermediate is fixed in conformation 21. This could be achieved by coordination of the aromatic moiety via F/Y residues and additionally by H-bonding of the catalytic histidine residue with the oxygen of the methoxy group, thereby preventing a possible α,β-syn-dehydration. Another histidine residue, possibly situated in the second subunit of the presumably dimeric DH domain, would be required to carry out deprotonation at C-6. Since an *A. pretiosum* mutant incorporating malonyl-CoA instead of 2-methoxymalonyl-ACP was able to produce 10-desmethoxy-AP-3 in low yields, the methoxy substituent is no prerequisite for vinyllogous elimination but may increase its efficiency. Similar to tetraketide 6, any products of an α,β-dehydration would not be further processed by the downstream enzymes. The low yield of 10-desmethoxy-AP-3 formation is probably due to poor transfer of the abnormal substrate analogue to module 4. The poor incorporation of SNAC derivatives 5 and 7 (relative to AHBA), due to inefficient loading of such polyketides onto the cognate PKS modules, appears to be a rather general phenomenon.

In conclusion, our results lead us to conclude that the unusually positioned Δ₁₁,Δ₁₃ diene system in AP-3 is installed during processing of the nascent polyketide on module 3 of the asmPKS, with KS4 acting as a gatekeeper which accepts only the rearranged IVb, but not the unrearranged tetraketide IVa for further processing.

Acknowledgment. We thank the U.S. National Institutes of Health (Grant CA 76461), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Grant Ki 397/7-1 and Ki 397/13-1), and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie for financial support.

Supporting Information Available: Synthesis and spectra of 5, 6, and 7; protocols of feeding experiments; and their analysis. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

References

(1) Kupchan, S. M.; Komoda, Y.; Court, W. A.; Thomas, G. J.; Smith, R. M.; Karim, A.; Gilmore, C. J.; Haltiwanger, R. C.; Bryan, R. F. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1972**, 94, 1354–1356.

(2) Higashide, E.; Asai, M.; Ootsu, K.; Tanida, S.; Kozai, Y.; Hasegawa, T.; Kishi, T.; Sugino, Y.; Yoneda, M. *Nature* **1977**, 270, 721–722.

(3) Review Cassady, J. M.; Chan, K. K.; Floss, H. G.; Leistner, E. *Chem. Pharm. Bull.* **2004**, 52, 1–26.

(4) Hatano, K.; Akiyama, S.-L; Asai, M.; Rickards, R. W. *J. Antibiot.* **1982**, 35, 1415–1417.

(5) Yu, T.-W.; Bai, L.; Clade, D.; Hoffmann, D.; Toelzer, S.; Trinh, K. Q.; Xu, J.; Moss, S. J.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. *Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **2002**, 99, 7968–7973.

(6) Spiteller, P.; Bai, L.; Shang, G.; Carroll, B. J.; Yu, T.-W.; Floss, H. G. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2003**, 125, 14236–14237.

(7) Kubota, T.; Brünjes, M.; Frenzel, T.; Xu, J.; Kirschning, A.; Floss, H. G. *ChemBioChem* **2006**, 7, 1221–1225.

(8) (a) Evans, D. A.; Ennis, M. D.; Mathre, D. J. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1982**, 104, 1737–1739. (b) Andrus, M. B.; Meredith, E. L.; Somar Sekhar, B. B. V. *Org. Lett.* **2001**, 3, 259–262.

(9) Gilbert, I. H.; Ginty, M.; O’Neill, J. A.; Simpson, T. J.; Staunton, J. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **1995**, 5, 1587–1590.

(10) Formation of other diastereomers was not detected (¹H/¹³C NMR) after purification by flash column chromatography.

(11) Frenzel, T.; Brünjes, M.; Quitschalle, M.; Kirschning, A. *Org. Lett.* **2006**, 8, 135–138.

(12) Trost, B. M.; McEachern, E. J.; Toste, F. D. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1998**, 120, 12702–12703.

(13) See Supporting Information.

(14) Wu, J.; Zaleski, T. J.; Valenzano, C.; Khosla, C.; Cane, D. E. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2005**, 127, 17393–17404.

(15) Smith, S.; Tsai, S.-C. *Nat. Prod. Rep.* **2007**, 24, 1041–1072.

(16) The configuration at this center is opposite from that predicted based on the origin of the precursor, methoxymalonyl-ACP, from 1,3-bisphospho-D-glycerate and the known inversion of configuration in KS-catalyzed Claisen condensations. Therefore, an epimerization must take place at this center at some stage in the biosynthesis prior to loading onto KS4.

(17) Dorrestein, P. C.; Van Lanen, S. G.; Li, W.; Zhao, C.; Deng, Z.; Shen, B.; Kelleher, N. L. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2006**, 128, 10386–10387.

(18) Weissman, K. J.; Timoney, M.; Bycroft, M.; Grice, P.; Hanefeld, U.; Staunton, J.; Leadlay, P. F. *Biochemistry* **1997**, 36, 13849–13855.

(19) (a) Caffrey, P. *Chem. Biol.* **2003**, 10, 1060–1062. (b) Reid, R.; Piagentini, M.; Rodriguez, E.; Ashley, G.; Viswanathan, N.; Carney, J.; Santi, D. V.; Hutchinson, R.; McDaniel, R. *Biochemistry* **2003**, 42, 72–79.

(20) Castonguay, R.; Valenzano, C. R.; Chen, A. Y.; Keatinge-Clay, A.; Khosla, C.; Cane, D. E. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2008**, 130, 11598–11599.

(21) Carroll, B. J.; Moss, S. J.; Bai, L.; Kato, Y.; Toelzer, S.; Yu, T.-W.; Floss, H. G. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2002**, 124, 4176–4177.
