
Opinion

**Secretion and subcellular localizations of bacterial proteins: a semantic awareness issue**

Mickaël Desvaux¹, Michel Hébraud¹, Régine Talon¹ and Ian R. Henderson²

¹ INRA (Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique), UR454 Microbiologie, Centre de Recherche Clermont-Ferrand, F-63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France  
² The University of Birmingham, School of Biosciences, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK  

Extracellular proteins are a subject of intense interest because of their essential roles in bacterial lifestyles. However, several terms related to secretion are used confusingly in the literature, and this is a topical issue in genomics and proteomics. Defining a secreted protein as actively translocated via a secretion system, here, we put into perspective that homologous translocation systems can result in radically different subcellular localizations of a secreted protein. We propose using standardized nomenclature for secretion systems from type I to type VIII for Gram-negative bacteria only, whereas the terms 'Sec' (secretion), 'Tat' (twin-arginine translocation), 'FEA' (flagella export apparatus), 'FPE' (fimbrillin-protein exporter), 'holin' (hole forming) and 'Wss' (WXG100 secretion system) should be applied to translocation systems across the cytoplasmic membrane of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Finally, we discuss why the term 'exoproteome' should be favoured over 'secretome' when describing the subset of proteins present in the extracellular milieu.

### Protein secretion: terminology and ontology issues

Secreted proteins (e.g. degradative enzymes in saprophytic bacteria or virulence factors in pathogenic bacteria [1]) are the main tools that bacteria use to interact with their environment. Because of these functional roles, secreted proteins offer potential commercial and therapeutic benefits. In the past, nomenclature issues have resulted in much confusion in the field of bacterial protein secretion – for example, the use of the descriptor 'type IV secretion system' (T4SS) to describe two completely different protein-secretion systems [2], confusion between the general secretary pathway (GSP) and the type II secretion system (T2SS) [3], and the use of 'type III secretion system' (T3SS) in Gram-positive bacteria when referring to cytolyin-mediated translocation [4,5]. It is also clear that over the years, the term 'secreted' has been used confusingly in scientific literature. Thus, it is useful to reinforce, and remind the reader of, some basic definitions that relate to secretion, secreted proteins and bacterial cell envelope organization, with reference to recent advances in the fast-moving area of bacterial protein secretion. Indeed, in science (as in philosophy), defining a term or concept is an essential prerequisite to developing coherent, logical and rational thinking. This article aims to provide some arguments about what the terminology of 'secreted protein', 'secretion' and 'extracellular protein' should and should not cover. This is of topical significance in genomics and proteomics, in which issues related to controlled vocabularies (i.e. ontologies) are recurrent [6].

#### Secreted proteins and final subcellular localization

The most important intention of this article is to define what the terms 'translocation', 'export', 'secretion' and 'secreted protein' actually refer to in the context of the bacterial cell (Box 1). With respect to the field of protein transport, the term 'translocation' generically refers to the movement of a protein across a lipid bilayer. By contrast, 'protein secretion' refers more specifically to the active transport of a protein from an interior cellular compartment to the exterior of the cell. As a consequence of this active process, a secreted protein is entirely outside of the outermost lipid bilayer and can exist as a soluble (free) protein, a surface-associated protein or a subunit part of a surface appendage [4]. To be able to contextualize these terms, one must appreciate the basic structure of the bacterial cell and, more specifically, the organization of biological membranes. In the context of protein transport, the terms 'monoderm bacteria' (one lipid bilayer) and 'diderm bacteria' (two lipid bilayers) are much more appropriate and less ambiguous than the equivalent terms 'Gram-positive bacteria' and 'Gram-negative bacteria', respectively [7,8] (Box 2).

The essential and universally distributed Sec translocon is a perfect case study to illustrate the difference between protein export and protein secretion in monoderm and diderm bacteria. In the monoderm bacteria, the Sec system can translocate a protein to the exterior of the cell and, thus, it is a *bona fide* protein-secretion mechanism within these organisms (Figure 1). By contrast, in diderm bacteria, the Sec translocon by itself cannot translocate a protein to the exterior of the cell, and proteins are, instead, targeted to the periplasmic compartment between the cytoplasmic membrane (CM) and the outer membrane (OM). In diderm bacteria, this event corresponds to export (i.e. active transport from the cytoplasmic space); in monoderms, export is synonymous with secretion. To effect

Corresponding author: Desvaux, M. (mdesvaux@clermont.inra.fr).

Box 1. Proposed vocabulary for protein trafficking in bacteria

**Secretion**: active transport from the interior to the exterior of a cell.

**Export**: active transport from the cytoplasm.

**Translocation**: active transport across a lipid bilayer, resulting in a change of location.

**Secreted protein**: protein actively transported via a secretion system.

**Exoprotein**: protein present in the extracellular milieu.

**Secretome**: components of the translocation systems and their substrates.

**Exoproteome**: subset of proteins present in the extracellular milieu.

Proposed definitions in use

Protein secretion and export necessarily involve translocation events.

Although in Gram-positive (monoderm) bacteria, protein secretion and export are plain synonyms (Figure 1a), in Gram-negative (diderm) bacteria, export corresponds to the translocation of a protein in the periplasm and secretion requires a second translocation event for a protein to cross the outer membrane (Figure 1b).

While a secreted protein is not inevitably present in the extracellular milieu, an exoprotein is not necessarily translocated. Indeed, some exoproteins can be released after cell lysis or burst membrane vesicles budding, which cannot be considered as secretion systems *sensu stricto*. By extension, this distinction also applies to secretome and exoproteome. Ultimately, the term secretome should not be restricted to proteins but should enclose the rich range of molecules secreted by a cell (carbohydrates, metabolites and so on).

---

**Figure 1. Protein translocation, export and secretion in bacteria. (a) Gram-positive (monoderm) bacteria. (b) Gram-negative (diderm) bacteria. Abbreviations: Ext, extracellular milieu; CW, cell wall; IWZ, inner wall zone; CM, cytoplasmic membrane; Cyto, cytoplasm; OM, outer membrane; Peri, periplasm; IM, inner membrane.**

- **(a) Gram-positive (monoderm)**
  - Ext
  - CW
  - IWZ
  - CM
  - Cyto

- **(b) Gram-negative (diderm)**
  - Ext
  - OM
  - Peri
  - IM (CM)
  - Cyto

---

secretion of the target protein in diderms, the Sec translocon must further engage additional proteinaceous machinery, such as the T2SS or type V secretion system (T5SS) [3], to effect translocation across the OM (Figure 2). Thus, the distinction between protein secretion and export is only of importance in diderm bacteria; ‘protein secretion’ refers specifically to active translocation of a substrate protein to the exterior of the cell, whereas ‘protein export’ refers specifically to active translocation of the protein to the periplasm.

In addition to defining the terms related to protein translocation, it is imperative to define the term ‘secreted protein’. The literature and some genomic annotations and proteomic databases might be a source of confusion because authors often use the qualitative ‘secreted’ only for soluble proteins present in the culture medium (extracellular milieu). Indeed, it must be emphasized again that (for both monoderms and diderms), once translocated across the outermost membrane, a secreted protein can remain anchored to the membrane, associate covalently or non-covalently with cell-wall components in monoderm bacteria or OM components in diderm bacteria, assemble into macromolecular structures on the cell surface (e.g. flagella and pili), be injected into a host cell, or be released in the extracellular milieu [1,7] (Figure 1,2). To make it even more explicit, we propose defining a secreted protein as a protein transported via a secretion system – therefore, the term ‘secreted protein’ does not refer exclusively to those proteins present in the extracellular milieu but includes all of those existing outside of the outermost lipid bilayer, as described above. Following the recommendations of the Gene Ontology (GO) Consortium [6], ‘protein subcellular localization’ should refer to cytoplasm (GO:0005737), cytoplasmic membrane (GO:0005886), cell wall (GO:0005618), periplasm (GO:0042597), outer membrane (GO:019867) or extracellular milieu (GO:0005576), to avoid any ambiguities.

**Bacterial protein-secretion systems: diderm versus monoderm bacteria**

Historically, protein secretion has been more thoroughly investigated in diderm bacteria; six major protein

Box 2. What are Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria?

As the structural and functional unit of all known living organisms, a cell is delimited by a lipid bilayer, a so-called biological membrane. From a morphological point of view, the most fundamental dichotomy within bacteria is related to the number of membranes. Some bacteria are bound by a single biological membrane (the cytoplasmic membrane, or CM), whereas others are bound by two concentric but topologically different membranes (i.e. the CM – also called the inner membrane, or IM – and the outer membrane, or OM) [48]; as a result, the second group possess an additional cellular compartment, termed the periplasm (Box 1) [49]. The two groups of organisms are normally referred to as Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, respectively. Sensu stricto, there is no periplasmic space in Gram-positive bacteria because there is only one biological membrane, but a so-called inner wall zone has been observed between the CM and the mature cell wall in at least some of them [50]. However, qualifying a bacterium as Gram positive or Gram negative can refer to three distinct aspects:

- **Staining result**: using the famous staining method developed originally by Danish pharmacologist and physician Hans Christian Jaochim Gram, bacteria can be differentiated by their ability or inability to retain the stain and, thus, are called Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria, respectively.
- **Cell-envelope organization**: the difference in staining was further related to profound divergence in structural organization of the bacterial cell envelope. Whereas the CM is surrounded by a thick cell wall in Gram-positive bacteria, in Gram-negative bacteria, the CM (or IM) is surrounded by a thin cell wall beneath the OM (Box 1).
- **Taxonomic group**: molecular analyses further revealed that, in contrast to Gram-negative bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria constitute a phylogenetically coherent grouping of prokaryotes within the domain Bacteria. Gram-positive bacteria are divided into low G+C% Gram-positive bacteria (phylum BXIII Firmicutes) and high G+C% Gram-positive bacteria (phylum BXIV Actinobacteria).

The ambiguity in this terminology arises from the fact that some bacterial species do not meet these three criteria at once. Some bacteria taxonomically related to Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. *Mycoplasma*) do not retain Gram staining. Other bacteria retain the Gram staining but are not associated with the taxonomic group of Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. among the phylum BLV Deinococcus-Thermus). Some bacteria with a Gram-negative-like cell-envelope architecture are, in fact, members of phyla taxonomically related to Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. some members of the genus *Selenomonas* within the phylum Firmicutes). Therefore, when using the terms 'Gram-positive' or 'Gram-negative', it is extremely important to specify what it refers to – namely, a staining result, a cell-envelope organization and/or a taxonomic group.

In the field of bacterial protein secretion, transport across lipid bilayers (i.e. translocation) is the universal and essential event that governs secretion mechanisms because it can arise several times in the course of secretion (Box 1; Figure 1, Box 1; Figure 1,2). In addition, when referring only to the presence of one or two lipid bilayers (which is particularly relevant to this field of research), the respective terms of 'monoderm bacteria' and 'diderm bacteria' are much more appropriate and unambiguous than 'Gram-positive bacteria' and 'Gram-negative bacteria'.

monoderm bacteria, they cannot be considered as bona fide secretion systems in diderm bacteria.

The universal nature of Sec in all living organisms gave rise to the notion of a GSP. This has led to confusing statements in the scientific literature, particularly in relation to diderm bacteria [3]. The confusion arises from two opposing points of view on how protein secretion in bacteria should be classified. One view holds that the classification of secretion systems should primarily be based on translocation mechanisms across the CM. This early view derived principally from observations of *E. coli* when Sec was the only CM translocation system known. In those early days, the Sec system was thought to be systematically involved in the subsequent translocation of proteins across the OM. This belief, coupled with the limited understanding of protein-secretion mechanisms in Gram-negative bacteria and the discovery of a conserved protein-secretion complex (now termed the T2SS) gave rise to the notion of a main terminal branch (MTB) of the GSP, a pathway used by the majority of exoproteins [11]. At that time, most studies were exclusively devoted to the *E. coli* K12 strain, which has proved to be a poor representative of the species [12]. An alternative view of classification arose from researchers investigating protein-secretion systems in a wider range of pathogenic diderm bacteria. These investigations proved fruitful because they enabled the discovery of distinctly different and functionally important protein-secretion systems in diderm bacteria, demonstrating that the so-called MTB was only one of many routes to translocation across the OM. Thus, an alternative classification based on protein translocation mechanisms across the OM was proposed and, subsequently, numbered from T1SS to T5SS. The numerical classification system has now been adopted for describing OM translocation systems [13]. As a result, the terms MTB and GSP are now obsolete and have been largely abandoned when referring to the T2SS [3]. The classification of secretion systems by their OM translocation pathway should continue to be universally adopted and encouraged within the literature.

Based on the above viewpoint, the generically defined WXG100-secretion system (Wss) [10,14], named the Esat-6-secretion system in *Mycobacterium* spp. but also characterized in *Staphylococcus aureus* and *Bacillus anthracis*, has incorrectly been proposed as a type VII secretion system [15]. Indeed, because the numerical categorization of protein-secretion systems was designed originally for diderm bacteria, renaming Wss with this type of classification is neither coherent with the fact that Wss has only been identified in monoderm bacteria nor coherent with the fact that the numerical classification is not applied to describe other protein translocation systems across the CM found in diderm and monoderm bacteria (i.e. Sec, Tat or holins). Approaching it from another point of view, the T1SS to T6SS systematically involve protein components present in the OM, which are, by definition, absent from monoderm bacteria and thus from the Wss system. Previous attempts to apply the numerical nomenclature to monoderm bacteria have already proved unwise. For example, cytotoxin-mediated translocation was tentatively named 'T3SS' in Gram-positive bacteria [16], a term that was clearly misleading because it lacked structural,

Opinion

Trends in Microbiology Vol.17 No.4

Figure 1. Schematic representation of final subcellular localizations of secreted proteins in monoderm (Gram-positive) bacteria in relation to the translocation systems involved. In monoderm bacteria, secreted proteins can be (i) anchored to the CM (i.e. lipoproteins); (ii) attached to the CW either covalently (i.e. LPXTG proteins) or non-covalently (i.e. by exhibiting LysM, GW, CWBD1, CWBD2, SLHD or WXL motifs); (iii) part of cell-surface appendages, such as cellulosomes or pili (the subunits of which are secreted via Sec), competence pseudo-pili (assembled via FPE) or flagella (assembled via FEA); (iv) released into the extracellular milieu via Sec, Tat, holin or Wss; or (v) translocated into a host cell after secretion via Sec of a cholesterol-dependent cytolysin, which further integrates into the plasmatic membrane of a host cell and then permits transport of secreted effectors in a process named cytolysin-mediated translocation (CMT). Black arrows indicate routes of proteins targeted to CM exhibiting an N-terminal signal peptide, whereas blue arrows are routes used by proteins lacking such a signal peptide. Red arrows are related to secretion, and violet arrows are related to integration of membrane protein (IMP). Secreted proteins are blue. Abbreviations: Cyto, cytoplasm; CM, cytoplasmic membrane; CW, cell wall; OM, outer membrane; Ext, extracellular milieu.

sequence and functional similarity with the T3SS characterized in diderms [4,5].

Sortases have also been misleadingly described as protein-secretion systems in monoderm bacteria [5,17]. Because sortases are enzymes that recognize sorting signals borne C-terminally (i.e. the LPXTG-like motif) and enable covalent cell-wall anchoring of secreted proteins to the cell wall, they are clearly not involved in protein translocation across the CM per se. Instead, sortase should be considered as an extension of the Sec pathway because proteins exhibiting an LPXTG motif also systematically exhibit an N-terminal signal peptide processed by signal peptidase in the course of translocation via the Sec translocon before being further matured by sortases [10,18]. Thus, sortases are simply involved in post-translational modification of some proteins in the course of secretion but do not have an active role in the process of transport.

As a general recommendation, we suggest that bacterial protein-transport systems characterized in the CM should retain their usual descriptive names (i.e. Sec, Tat, FPE, FEA, holins and Wss). When encoded in monoderm bacteria, such systems truly enable protein secretion, whereas when present in diderm bacteria, they are involved in protein export if no other protein complex is present in the OM. Importantly, even though they bear homology with the T2SS and T3SS in diderm bacteria, the respective FPE and FEA systems do not fit with the numerical definitions because the components required for crossing of the OM are obviously absent in monoderm bacteria [4,19–21]. Moreover, the use of these descriptive terms generate no confusion or ambiguity because they can be encoded in both monoderm and diderm bacteria (i.e. Sec, Tat and holins) [22], be exclusively present in monoderm bacteria (i.e. Wss) [15] or share homology with some components of protein-secretion systems described in diderm bacteria (i.e. FPE with T2SS and FEA with T3SS) [23].

Like the protein translocation system of the CM, the nomenclature for the OM translocation systems of diderms has been fraught with confusion. Again, from T1SS to T6SS, these terminologies refer to protein secretion in diderm bacteria and not to protein export. By definition, the T1SS is composed of three parts: namely, an ABC transporter, a membrane-fusion protein and an outer

Opinion

Trends in Microbiology Vol.17 No.4

Figure 2. Schematic representation of final subcellular localizations of secreted proteins in diderm (Gram-negative) bacteria in relation to the translocation systems involved. In diderm bacteria, secreted proteins can be (i) cell-surface localized when anchored to the OM via Omp85, including some autotransporter proteins of T5SS; (ii) part of cell-surface appendages such as flagella (namely, T3bSS) or pili-like structures (namely, type 4 pilus via T2SS, injectisome via T3aSS, pilus T via T4SS, type 1 pilus via the chaperone-usher pathway [T7SS] or curli via the extracellular nucleation-precipitation pathway [T8SS]); (iii) released extracellularly via T1SS to T6SS; or (iv) directly injected into a eukaryotic or bacterial host cell, namely via T3aSS or T4SS. In diderm bacteria, exported proteins can be (a) released into the periplasm via CM protein translocation systems (i.e. Sec, Tat or holin); (b) lipoproteins anchored either to the CM or to the OM on the periplasmic side via Lol system; or (c) further subjected to a second translocation event across the OM via the T2SS, T4SS, T5SS, T7SS or T8SS. Black arrows indicate routes of proteins targeted to CM and exhibiting an N-terminal signal peptide, whereas blue arrows are routes used by proteins lacking such a signal peptide. Red arrows are related to secretion, violet arrows are related to integration of membrane protein (IMP), and green arrows are related to export (which is not synonymous with secretion in diderm bacteria). Secreted proteins are blue, and exported proteins are green. Abbreviations: Cyto, cytoplasm; CM, cytoplasmic membrane; Peri, periplasm; OM, outer membrane; Ext, extracellular milieu.

membrane protein (OMP) [24]. Thus, for T1SS, it must be stressed that this system must not be simply referred to as an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter. Indeed, in monoderm bacteria, ABC transporters are not *stricto sensu* involved in protein secretion; they can, at best, translocate peptides [9,19]. Furthermore, it should be noted that subdivisions have been introduced in the numerical nomenclature of the diderm protein-secretion systems. The T4SS was the first system in which a dichotomy between T4aSS and T4bSS was proposed to discriminate those systems assembled from VirB homologues and those from Tra homologues, respectively [25]. In the same vein, T3SS was split into T3aSS, referring to the injectisome (non-flagellar system), and T3bSS, referring to the flagellar protein export system [4]. T5SS has been divided into three subgroups: T5aSS, referring to autotransporters of type 1; T5bSS, describing the two-partner secretion system; and T5cSS, for trimeric autotransporters [1,20]. These alphanumerical classifications are based on structural and sequence homology. Besides enabling future classification of other homologous systems with respect to their mechanism of secretion, alphanumerical classification refrains from increasing the number of secretion mechanisms uncontrollably.

Based on phylogenetic analysis of the OMP, inner membrane protein (IMP) and ATPase components of the T2SS, the type 4 piliation system (T4P) and the tight-adherence piliation system (Tad), it is clear that the latter secretion systems are homologous to the T2SS and, thus, should be considered a part of T2SS [23]. Because these systems fall into discrete phylogenetic clusters, we propose that these systems are classified on the alphanumerical model as subtypes of T2SS – namely, the classical secreton-dependent T2SS as T2aSS [26], T4P as T2bSS [27] and Tad as T2cSS [28].

In addition to the numerically classified secretion systems of the diderms described above, several other protein-secretion systems exist: for example, the chaperone-usher

(CU) pathway and the extracellular nucleation-precipitation (ENP) pathway. Although the long-known and well-characterized CU fimbrial biogenesis system presents several vague similarities in structure and mechanism to the T5SS [29], it should not be considered a subtype of the T5SS because these similarities are based on analogy rather than homology. Indeed, recent structural investigations have clearly demonstrated the lack of structural and sequence homology between the CU system and members of the T5SS [29,30]. In light of these findings, it is clear that the CU system represents a distinct protein-secretion system on its own and, thus, we propose that this system be referred to as the type VII secretion system (T7SS).

In the same vein, the ENP pathway involved in secretion and assembly of curli could be proposed as the type VIII secretion system (T8SS) [31,32]. Concerning the alternative chaperone (AC) pathway involved in morphogenesis of colonization-factor-antigen-I-related fimbriae, the assembly mechanism shares some common features with the CU, but no clear homology could be evidenced either between class 1 and class 5 pili or between the chaperones involved in the course of their assembly by CU and AC, respectively [33,34]. Because the nature of the OM translocator involved in AC remains elusive, it cannot be decided whether the AC is an additional and distinct secretion system or a system related to CU and, thus, a T7SS subtype.

Over the years, an alphanumeric system has been adopted, somewhat by default, for the protein-secretion systems of diderm bacteria, whereas descriptive names have been retained for the protein translocation systems across the CM of both diderm and monoderm organisms. We strongly recommend that this dichotomy in nomenclature is maintained to avoid confusion and to make it as clear as possible to the scientific community at large that one set of mechanisms relates to protein translocation across the CM and one set of mechanisms relates to protein translocation across the OM.

### Signal peptide: a guarantee for extracellular localization?

The presence of an N-terminal signal peptide indicates that a protein is targeted to the cytoplasmic membrane. *In silico* predictions of signal peptides largely agree with the experimental evidence [35], and several well-established bioinformatic tools, such as the popular SignalP server [36], are available for the identification of signal peptides. However, the identification of such an N-terminal signal peptide is sometimes wrongly interpreted as an indicator of extracellular localization in the culture medium. As such, it is important to emphasize that the presence of an N-terminal signal peptide does not systematically indicate a protein is targeted to Sec; some signal peptides can target proteins to Tat or FPE, the latter being involved in competence pseudopilus assembly in monoderm bacteria [37] (Figure 1). Furthermore, proteins translocated via the Sec translocon can be attached to the CM (i.e. IMPs or lipoproteins), released in the periplasmic space in diderm bacteria, associated covalently or non-covalently with the cell wall in monoderm bacteria (e.g. LPXTG protein or GW proteins), or anchored to the OM in diderm bacteria

(e.g. some autotransporters or lipoproteins) (Figure 1). Thus, final prediction of protein localization must take into account all of these possible fates [8]. It should also be mentioned that translocated proteins via Sec might not necessarily exhibit an N-terminal signal peptide, as suggested for SecA2-dependent secretion of some proteins in monoderm bacteria [38]. Another frequent misconception is to define an N-terminal signal peptide as cleavable, whereas, in fact, this is not systematic because it can serve as a cytoplasmic membrane anchor [39,40]. In the end, to predict final localization of a protein, further analyses must be performed by combining different prediction tools in a rational way [8]; among them, LocateP is certainly one of the latest and most comprehensive tools developed [41].

#### Secretome: what's in the name?

Following the etymological meaning of the suffix ‘-ome’ (from Greek ‘σωμ(ατ)-’ = body) [42], secretome should mean the totality of the molecules secreted by an organism. As such, it could not be restricted to secreted proteins but should include carbohydrates and other molecules and, importantly, it should refer to secreted molecules (i.e. those actively translocated out of the cell). Although ‘secretome’ was originally proposed as a term to include both the components of the pathways for protein secretion and the secreted proteins [9,43], some authors argue that the definition should be restricted to the population of gene products that are secreted from the cell [44]. Moreover, in the literature, the term secretome is often used to describe proteins that are only present in the extracellular milieu. In this context, it is misused and even misleading because some proteins present in the extracellular milieu might result from cell lysis (e.g. autolysis or tightly controlled lysis, such as allolysis [45]), or from burst membrane vesicles budding [46]. Although these phenomena could account, in part, for the presence of exoproteins as predicted by SecretomeP, it should be stressed that unknown protein-secretion systems could also be involved [47].

We propose that the subset of proteins localized in the extracellular milieu, whether they are actively secreted or not, should be most rigorously described by using the terms ‘extracellular proteome’ or ‘exoproteome’. As a result, we suggest that the term ‘secretome’ should be broadened to deal with the rich tapestry of secreted molecules synthesized by any given bacterium (proteins, glucides, metabolites and so on), including those molecules that are surface localized, are parts of surface appendages or are released into the extracellular milieu, as well as their related transport systems. In any event where these other molecules are not considered further, the term ‘secretome’ should be used and retained to describe components of the translocation systems and their protein substrates.

#### Concluding remarks

As revealed by the essential nature of the Sec translocon in all living cells, protein secretion is a universal process that occurs in a diverse range of systems in all bacterial phyla. Once equipped with a more precise nomenclature, bacteriologists have much to gain from studying the rich diversity of these remarkable secretion systems, as well as their substrates, in a wide range of bacterial species.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by INRA (French National Institute for Agronomical Research). The authors gratefully thank anonymous reviewers for their supportive and constructive comments.

References
1. Henderson, I.R. *et al.* (2004) Type V protein secretion pathway: the autotransporter story. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 68, 692–744
2. Henderson, I.R. *et al.* (2000) Renaming protein secretion in the Gram-negative bacteria. *Trends Microbiol.* 8, 352
3. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2004) The general secretary pathway: a general misnomer? *Trends Microbiol.* 12, 306–309
4. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2006) Type III secretion: what's in a name? *Trends Microbiol.* 14, 157–160
5. Economou, A. *et al.* (2006) Secretion by numbers: protein traffic in prokaryotes. *Mol. Microbiol.* 62, 308–319
6. Harris, M.A. *et al.* (2004) The Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 32, D258–D261
7. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2006) Protein cell surface display in Gram-positive bacteria: from single protein to macromolecular protein structure. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 256, 1–15
8. Desvaux, M. and Hébraud, M. (2008) Analysis of cell envelope proteins. In *Handbook of Listeria monocytogenes* (Dongyou, L., ed.), pp. 359–393, CRC Press
9. Tjalsma, H. *et al.* (2000) Signal peptide-dependent protein transport in *Bacillus subtilis*: a genome-based survey of the secretome. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 64, 515–547
10. Desvaux, M. and Hébraud, M. (2006) The protein secretion systems in *Listeria*: inside out bacterial virulence. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 30, 774–805
11. Pugsley, A.P. (1993) The complete general secretary pathway in Gram-negative bacteria. *Microbiol. Rev.* 57, 50–108
12. Hobman, J.L. *et al.* (2007) Laboratory strains of *Escherichia coli*: model citizens or deceitful delinquents growing old disgracefully? *Mol. Microbiol.* 64, 881–885
13. Salmond, G.P. and Reeves, P.J. (1993) Membrane traffic wardens and protein secretion in Gram-negative bacteria. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 18, 7–12
14. Pallen, M.J. (2002) The ESAT-6/WXG100 superfamily- and a new Gram-positive secretion system? *Trends Microbiol.* 10, 209–212
15. Abdallah, A.M. *et al.* (2007) Type VII secretion – mycobacteria show the way. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 5, 883–891
16. Madden, J.C. *et al.* (2001) Cytolysin-mediated translocation (CMT): a functional equivalent of type III secretion in Gram-positive bacteria. *Cell* 104, 143–152
17. Papanikou, E. *et al.* (2007) Bacterial protein secretion through the translocase nanomachine. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 5, 839–851
18. Marraffini, L.A. *et al.* (2006) Sortases and the art of anchoring proteins to the envelopes of Gram-positive bacteria. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 70, 192–221
19. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2005) Genomic analysis of the protein secretion systems in *Clostridium acetobutylicum* ATCC824. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* 1745, 223–253
20. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2003) Le système de sécrétion de type V chez les bactéries Gram-négatives. *Biofutur* 237, 34–37
21. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2004) Type V protein secretion: simplicity gone awry? *Curr. Issues Mol. Biol.* 6, 111–124
22. Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2005) Protein secretion systems in *Fusobacterium nucleatum*: genomic identification of type 4 piliation and complete type V pathways brings new insight in mechanisms of pathogenesis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* 1713, 92–112
23. Peabody, C.R. *et al.* (2003) Type II protein secretion and its relationship to bacterial type 4 pili and archaeal flagella. *Microbiology* 149, 3051–3072
24. Delepelaire, P. (2004) Type I secretion in Gram-negative bacteria. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* 1694, 149–161

25 Christie, P.J. and Vogel, J.P. (2000) Bacterial type IV secretion: conjugation systems adapted to deliver effector molecules to host cells. *Trends Microbiol.* 8, 354–360
26 Voulhoux, R. *et al.* (2001) Involvement of the twin-arginine translocation system in protein secretion via the type II pathway. *EMBO J.* 20, 6735–6741
27 Mattick, J.S. (2002) Type 4 pili and twitching motility. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 56, 289–314
28 Tomich, M. *et al.* (2007) The tad locus: postcards from the widespread colonization island. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 5, 363–375
29 Thanassi, D.G. *et al.* (2005) Protein secretion in the absence of ATP: the autotransporter, two-partner secretion and chaperone/usher pathways of gram-negative bacteria. *Mol. Membr. Biol.* 22, 63–72
30 Remaut, H. *et al.* (2008) Fiber formation across the bacterial outer membrane by the chaperone/usher pathway. *Cell* 133, 640–652
31 Kostakioti, M. *et al.* (2005) Mechanisms of protein export across the bacterial outer membrane. *J. Bacteriol.* 187, 4306–4314
32 Stathopoulos, C. *et al.* (2000) Secretion of virulence determinants by the general secretary pathway in Gram-negative pathogens: an evolving story. *Microbes Infect.* 2, 1061–1072
33 Sakellaris, H. and Scott, J.R. (1998) New tools in an old trade: CS1 pilus morphogenesis. *Mol. Microbiol.* 30, 681–687
34 Soto, G.E. and Hultgren, S.J. (1999) Bacterial adhesins: common themes and variations in architecture and assembly. *J. Bacteriol.* 181, 1059–1071
35 Desvaux, M. *et al.* (2007) A conserved extended signal peptide region directs posttranslational protein translocation via a novel mechanism. *Microbiology* 153, 59–70
36 Bendtsen, J.D. *et al.* (2004) Improved prediction of signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. *J. Mol. Biol.* 340, 783–795
37 Chen, I. *et al.* (2006) A macromolecular complex formed by a pilin-like protein in competent *Bacillus subtilis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 21720–21727
38 Braunstein, M. *et al.* (2003) SecA2 functions in the secretion of superoxide dismutase A and in the virulence of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 48, 453–464
39 Goder, V. and Spiess, M. (2001) Topogenesis of membrane proteins: determinants and dynamics. *FEBS Lett.* 504, 87–93
40 Martoglio, B. and Dobberstein, B. (1998) Signal sequences: more than just greasy peptides. *Trends Cell Biol.* 8, 410–415
41 Zhou, M. *et al.* (2008) LocateP: genome-scale subcellular-location predictor for bacterial proteins. *BMC Bioinformatics* 9, 173
42 Lederberg, J. and McCray, A.T. (2001) ‘Ome sweet ‘omics – a genealogical treasury of words. *Scientist* 15, 8
43 Antelmann, H. *et al.* (2001) A proteomic view on genome-based signal peptide predictions. *Genome Res.* 11, 1484–1502
44 Greenbaum, D. *et al.* (2001) Interrelating different types of genomic data: from proteome to secretome: Oming in on function. *Genome Res.* 11, 1463–1468
45 Guiral, S. *et al.* (2005) Competence-programmed predation of noncompetent cells in the human pathogen *Streptococcus pneumoniae*: genetic requirements. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 102, 8710–8715
46 Mashburn-Warren, L.M. and Whiteley, M. (2006) Special delivery: vesicle trafficking in prokaryotes. *Mol. Microbiol.* 61, 839–846
47 Bendtsen, J.D. *et al.* (2005) Non-classical protein secretion in bacteria. *BMC Microbiol.* 5, 58
48 Gupta, R.S. (1998) Protein phylogenies and signature sequences: a reappraisal of evolutionary relationships among archaebacteria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* 62, 1435–1491
49 Cavalier-Smith, T. (2002) The neomuran origin of archaebacteria, the negibacterial root of the universal tree and bacterial megaclassification. *Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.* 52, 7–76
50 Zuber, B. *et al.* (2006) Granular layer in the periplasmic space of gram-positive bacteria and fine structures of *Enterococcus gallinarum* and *Streptococcus gordonii* septa revealed by cryo-electron microscopy of vitreous sections. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 6652–6660
