
Review Article

Cytoskeleton Rearrangements During *Listeria* Infection: Clathrin and Septins as New Players in the Game

Serge Mostowy${}^{1,2,3}$ and Pascale Cossart${}^{1,2,3*}$

${}^{1}$Institut Pasteur, Département de Biologie Cellulaire et Infection, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, F-75015 France  
${}^{2}$Inserm, U604, Paris, F-75015 France  
${}^{3}$INRA, USC2020, Paris, F-75015 France  

The study of an infection process can reveal how microbes exploit the host, and can illuminate unknown host cellular functions. Invasive pathogens have evolved efficient strategies to promote their internalization within normally non-phagocytic host cells. The so-called “zippering” bacteria present to host cell receptors molecules that mimic endogenous ligands, thereby inducing specific intracellular signaling cascades ultimately resulting in actin polymerization and uptake. Here we review how the bacterial pathogen *Listeria monocytogenes* enters into cells, and present a series of studies revealing that in addition to actin rearrangements this bacterium exploits the clathrin-mediated endocytosis machinery together with septins, a novel cytoskeleton element. The challenge is now to decipher how all of these components orchestrate themselves to permit entry into normally non-phagocytic cells. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 66: 816–823, 2009. © 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: cytoskeleton; clathrin; entry; *Listeria*; septin

INTRODUCTION

Invasive bacteria induce their own uptake by non-phagocytic host cells using two well-differentiated mechanisms referred to as “zippering” and “triggering” [Cossart and Sansonetti, 2004; Pizarro-Cerda and Cossart, 2006] (Fig. 1A). Zippering bacteria present molecules that mimic endogenous ligands to host cell receptors, and subsequent internalization results from envelopment of the plasma membrane around the incoming microbe. How *Listeria monocytogenes* enters into non-phagocytic cells has been investigated in great detail, and is now considered as a paradigm of the zipper model [Cossart and Sansonetti, 2004]. The zipper mechanism is mechanistically and morphologically distinct from the trigger mechanism. Triggering bacteria such as *Salmonella typhimurium* or *Shigella flexneri* directly inject effectors into the cytosol of host cells via the type III secretion system that hijack cellular proteins involved in

*Correspondence to: Pascale Cossart, Institut Pasteur, Département de Biologie Cellulaire et Infection, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, F-75015 France. E-mail: pco ssart@pasteur.fr

Received 14 January 2009; Accepted 19 February 2009

Published online 18 March 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

DOI: 10.1002/cm.20353

© 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Actin, Clathrin and Septins in *Listeria* Entry 817

A Zipper mechanism Trigger mechanism

InlA/E-cadherin InlB/Met

Fig. 1. Mechanisms of bacterial entry. A: The zipper mechanism. From left to right: X-ray structure of InlA (Cap domain in pink, LRR-domain in violet, and Ig-like interrepeat domain in blue) with human E-cadherin (E-cadherin in green with strands indicated by letters); X-ray structure of InlB (comprising a Cap, a variable number of LRRs, and an interrepeat (IR) region) with Met (N-terminal domain of Met featuring a semaphoring (Sema) domain, a small cysteine-rich (PSI) domain, and immunoglobulin-like domains Ig1 and Ig2); scanning electron micrograph of *Listeria* entering into Caco2 cells human epithelial cells. The trigger mechanism. From left to right: reconstitution of the type III secretion system; scanning electron micrograph of *Shigella* entering into cells. These images are adapted from [Cossart and Sansonetti, 2004; Niemann et al., 2007; Schubert et al., 2002].

B: The InlA and InlB signaling pathways leading to actin rearrangement and subsequent *Listeria* entry into non-phagocytic cells. The receptor for InlA is E-cadherin, and components involved in adherens junction formations are recruited to the site of InlA-mediated *Listeria* entry where the cytoskeletal rearrangements that are required for invasion take place. The receptor for InlB is Met, and Met signaling stimulated by InlB induces cytoskeletal rearrangements that are important for the InlB-mediated entry of *Listeria*. In both the InlA and InlB signaling pathways, clathrin and other components of the endocytic machinery are recruited to the site of entry. The link between the cytoskeletal machinery and the endocytic machinery is still unclear. This figure is adapted from [Cossart and Veiga, 2008].

review we focus on the *Listeria* model and the lessons learned from its study.

# The Listeria Model: An Overview

*L. monocytogenes* is an opportunistic pathogen as it typically produces disease in immunocompromised individuals [Vazquez-Boland et al., 2001; Khelef et al., 2006; Hamon et al., 2006]. Disease is due to *Listeria's* ability to cross three host barriers: the intestinal barrier, the blood-brain barrier, and the materno-fetal barrier. It is also due to the capacity of *Listeria* to resist intracellular killing when phagocytosed by macrophages, and to invade a variety of non-phagocytic cell types. The internalization of *Listeria* leads to the formation of a phagocytic vacuole that is rapidly lysed, releasing *Listeria* in the cytosol of the infected cell. Here the bacterium replicates and can also move, intra- and inter-cellularly, via polymerization of the host cell’s actin. Thus, entry of bacteria into cells and their intracytosolic replication represent initiating events for tissue dissemination, and a strategy to replicate in a protected environment, thereby presumably avoiding various antibacterial host defenses.

*L. monocytogenes* employs a variety of proteins, and in particular members of a protein family known as the internalins, to adhere to and invade host cells. Internalins are members of the Leucine Rich Repeat (LRR) superfamily, a diverse group of proteins characterized by tandem arrays of LRRs [Bierne and Cossart, 2007]. The two major invasion proteins are internalin (InlA) and InlB. The receptor for InlA is E-cadherin [Mengaud et al., 1996], and the receptors for InlB are gClqR/p32 (the receptor for the globular part of complement component C1q), Met/hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor, and glycosaminoglycans [Braun et al., 2000; Shen et al., 2000; Jonquières et al., 2001].

## The InlB/Met Pathway of Listeria Entry

In cells where E-cadherin is not present, *Listeria* enters via interaction with Met, a tyrosine kinase and the receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) [Shen et al., 2000]. Met belongs to the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, and is involved in multiple cellular functions including scattering, invasion, proliferation, morphogenesis, and angiogenesis [Birchmeier et al., 2003; Benvenuti and Comoglio, 2007]. Met is also implicated in tumorigenesis when Met is overexpressed or constitutively activated. After ligand (i.e. HGF) binding, cells normally stop signaling downstream of Met via ligand-dependent endocytosis and subsequent degradation of the activated receptor [Bache et al., 2004].

A series of studies have shown that InlB behaves both as a growth factor and an invasin as it efficiently induces actin rearrangements [Bierne and Cossart, 2002] (Fig. 1B). Stimulation by InlB triggers the classical phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase pathway [Ireton et al., 1996], via recruitment of Gab1, Cbl, and Shc on phosphorylated residues of the intracytoplasmic portion of Met. How this pathway then activates the small G proteins Rac and Cdc42 is currently unknown, although the organization of the membrane in micro-domains is critical for Rac activation probably by controlling the distribution of 3′-PIs generated by PI 3-kinase [Seveau et al., 2007]. Rac and Cdc42 then activate WAVE and/or N-WASP, which then activate the Arp2/3 complex to drive the polymerization of actin.

The structural details of the interaction between InlB and Met have recently been described by co-crystallization studies [Niemann et al., 2007] (Fig. 1A). Interestingly, the interactions between InlB and Met do not strictly mimic that of HGF/Met. InlB interacts with Met via its LRR region which does not exist in HGF, and it is rather functional mimicry that *Listeria* uses to exploit the properties of its host cell receptor [Cossart et al., 2003].

## Involvement of the Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis Machinery in Bacterial Entry

Endocytosis is characterized by the internalization of molecules from the cell surface into intracellular membrane compartments. Several internalization pathways have been described, including the classic, clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway and the non-classic, clathrin-independent route which is often lipid-raft dependent [Conner and Schmid, 2003]. Clathrin-coated vesicles arise from the self-polymerization of clathrin into a lattice around budding vesicles [Sorkin, 2004]. Clathrin in coated vesicles is structured as a triskelion with three heavy (192 kDa) and three light (25–29 kDa) chains that bind to each other in a polyhedral lattice [Fotin et al., 2004]. An important finding concerning the mechanisms underlying bacterial invasion has been the recent discovery that clathrin, a molecule thought only to be involved in internalization of macromolecules, was involved in the entry of *Listeria* [Veiga and Cossart, 2005, 2006; Veiga et al., 2007].

## A Role for Clathrin During the Entry of Listeria and Other Zippering Pathogens

Given the role of ubiquitination during clathrin-mediated endocytosis [Haglund et al., 2003], and the fact that other tyrosine kinase receptors are ubiquitinated upon endocytosis, our laboratory asked whether Met was ubiquitinated after incubation of cells with purified InlB, or upon infection of cells with *Listeria* [Veiga and Cossart, 2005]. Indeed, Met was monoubiquitinated upon InlB stimulation in a Cbl-dependent fashion, and purified InlB induced the endocytosis of Met. These results suggested that InlB-mediated entry by *Listeria* could hijack the clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway.

Actin, Clathrin and Septins in *Listeria* Entry 819

Extracellular  
**Listeria**

Total *Listeria*

Clathrin

Merge

Fig. 2. Localization of endogenous clathrin during *Listeria* infection. Recruitment of clathrin at *L. monocytogenes* entry sites into HeLa cells. Extracellular bacteria are in blue, total bacteria in green, and clathrin in red. In the panel corresponding to the merged images, extracellular bacteria are shown in cyan, intracellular bacteria in green, and clathrin in red. Areas indicated by the arrows are magnified to better show clathrin-*Listeria* colocalization. Scale bar = 6 μm. These images are adapted from Veiga and Cossart [2005].

Functional knockdown by siRNA of several proteins involved in endocytosis revealed that hallmark proteins of endocytosis, including clathrin and dynamin, were essential for InlB-mediated particle entry. From this it was concluded that upon interaction of InlB with Met, *Listeria*-bound Met is ultimately internalized within the cell by clathrin-mediated endocytosis revealing that clathrin can internalize objects much larger than previously anticipated (Fig. 2).

Is clathrin-mediated endocytosis restricted to InlB-dependent entry, or is it a widespread mechanism of bacterial entry? This question was addressed using different zippering and triggering bacteria [Veiga et al., 2007]. All zippering bacteria tested (i.e. *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*, *Staphylococcus aureus*, and *Listeria innocua* expressing InlA) recruited clathrin and dynamin at the site of entry, and siRNA against several proteins of the endocytic machinery prevented internalization. In contrast, clathrin did not colocalize with any of the trigger- ing bacteria tested (i.e. *Salmonella* and *Shigella*), and siRNA experiments had no significant effect on their entry. Thus, exploitation of the clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway can be considered a widespread mechanism of bacterial entry, but is restricted to zippering bacteria.

The second pathway of entry of *Listeria* into cells, the InlA/E-cadherin pathway, also exploits the endocytosis mechanism [Bonazzi et al., 2008, 2009].

### The InlA/E-Cadherin Pathway of *Listeria* Entry

Epithelial cell-cell junctions are maintained by adhesion proteins and the underlying actin cytoskeleton. E-cadherin is a 120 kDa transmembrane glycoprotein that belongs to the family of classical cadherins and mediates adherens junction formation [Halbleib and Nelson, 2006]. When InlA interacts with E-cadherin, it initiates a series of events to stimulate actin polymerization and bacterial entry (Fig. 1B). β- and α-catenins are recruited to the site of bacterial entry by the cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin [Lecuit et al., 2000]. ARHGAP10, a recently identified GTPase-activating protein, interacts with α-catenin to make possible its recruitment [Sousa et al., 2005]. Myosin VIIa and its ligand vezatin [Sousa et al., 2004] are additionally required for the InlA-mediated internalization of *Listeria*. The non-RTK Src is also activated, resulting in the recruitment of the Src substrate, cortactin, which in turn activates Arp2/3 to drive actin polymerization. Recent work has shown that Src also initiates successive post-translational modifications of E-cadherin which are required for the recruitment of the ubiquitin ligase Hakai and the ubiquitination of E-cadherin [Bonazzi et al., 2008]. InlA-mediated entry uses caveolin, a protein normally involved in receptor independent endocytosis, to cluster E-cadherin in the initial step of the entry process, whereas ubiquitination of E-cadherin is critical for the clathrin-mediated internalization of *Listeria*. Alternatively, *Listeria* entry via the InlA pathway can be mediated by caveolin alone [Bonazzi et al., 2008].

The molecular details of the interaction between InlA and human E-cadherin have been provided by X-ray crystallographic studies [Schubert et al., 2002; Wollert et al., 2007] (Fig. 1A) and have shown that InlA interacts with E-cadherin via its LRRs different from homotypic E-cadherin/E-cadherin interactions. Despite these recognition differences, it is now accepted that InlA-mediated internalization exploits the same downstream molecules used by mammalian cells in the actin-dependent remodeling of the plasma membrane during adherens junction formation [Bonazzi et al.,

2009]. Just as the interaction between InlB and Met does not structurally mimic that of HGF/Met, InlA and E-cadherin does not structurally mimic that of E-cadherin/E-cadherin.

# Role of the Cytoskeleton in Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis

It was long thought that clathrin-mediated endocytosis was actin-independent, but studies performed in yeast have shown that actin is also involved in endocytosis [Engqvist-Goldstein and Drubin, 2003]. Interestingly, in the case of *Listeria*, the actin polymerization necessary for *Listeria* InlB-mediated entry follows the recruitment of clathrin [Veiga et al., 2007]. How clathrin is recruited is currently unknown, but the clathrin adaptor AP-1 is also critical for *Listeria* entry [Pizarro-Cerda et al., 2007]. It is possible that clathrin mediates entry by recruiting dynamin that in turn interacts with cortactin to induce actin polymerization via Arp2/3. The molecular connection between clathrin-mediated endocytosis and the cytoskeleton remains to be determined.

The study of bacterial entry into non-phagocytic cells has thus led to the discovery that contrary to the well-established dogma, clathrin may have roles besides internalization of macromolecules or small particles. Thus, clathrin is potentially a much more versatile protein than previously considered [Pauly and Drubin, 2007]. Future work should focus on a better understanding of the dynamics of clathrin coat assembly, and to identify the proteins that link the clathrin coat to the actin cytoskeleton at the pathogen-host interface.

# Septins: A Novel Component of the Cytoskeleton

Septins are increasingly being recognized as novel components of the cytoskeleton [Spiliotis and Nelson, 2006]. Septins are GTP-binding proteins of 30–65 kDa required in many organisms for the completion of cell division [Kinoshita, 2003a, 2003b; Spiliotis and Nelson, 2006; Weirich et al., 2008]. In mammalian cells, studies have suggested that septins have other cellular functions including roles in membrane dynamics, vesicle fusion events, and the recruitment of signaling complexes at the plasma membrane [Beites et al., 1999; Hsu et al., 1998; Joo et al., 2005; Kinoshita, 2006; Huang et al., 2008]. Although implicated in several human diseases [Hall and Russell, 2004], the molecular functions of septins are poorly understood, in part because they are notoriously difficult proteins to study.

Fourteen septins have been identified in humans, and are classified into four different groups on the basis of sequence identity [Kinoshita, 2003a; Weirich et al., 2008]. Septins from different groups polymerize into hetero-oligomeric protein complexes, form filaments, and are regarded as an unconventional cytoskeletal system because they associate with cellular membranes, actin filaments, and microtubules [Kinoshita, 2006; Spiliotis and Nelson, 2006]. In vitro, bundles of septin complexes have an intrinsic capacity to organize into rings of approximately 0.6 μm in outer diameter [Kinoshita et al., 2002]. The crystal structure of the SEPT2-SEPT6-SEPT7 complex was recently solved and revealed that septins form non-polar filaments unlike actin and microtubules [Sirajuddin et al., 2007]. Despite the significance of these structural insights [Barral and Kinoshita, 2008; Weirich et al., 2008], it remains to be determined how septins function as a distinct component of the cytoskeleton.

## Septins Modulate Bacterial Entry Into Host Cells

In contrast to the well-established role of actin during the infection process, septin function during microbial invasion had not previously been investigated. We originally identified SEPT9 associated with InlB-bead phagosomes in mammalian cells [Pizarro-Cerda et al., 2002], and investigated the role of different septins in *Listeria* infection [Mostowy et al., 2009b]. By infecting human cell lines, we discovered the recruitment of septin filaments during *Listeria* entry. Strikingly, septins appear as 0.6 μm collars resembling the geometry of ring structures observed at the yeast mother-bud neck [Kinoshita, 2006; Weirich et al., 2008]. Septin rings were similarly detected at the site of entry for other zippering and triggering bacteria tested, suggesting that septin recruitment is a general occurrence wherever there is actin polymerization (Figs. 3A and 3B). We then used siRNA to establish that SEPT2, a binding partner of SEPT9 central to septin complex and filament formation, significantly contributes to the bacterial entry process. Specifically, we could reveal that SEPT2 modulated the InlB/Met-mediated entry of *L. monocytogenes*, and could suggest an effect of SEPT2-depletion on the interaction of InlB with its host receptor Met [Mostowy et al., 2009b]. Alternatively, SEPT11, a septin considered replaceable by other SEPT6 group members [Ono et al., 2005], was revealed as dispensable for the InlB/Met-mediated entry of *Listeria* and the signaling cascade in response to Met stimulation by InlB [Mostowy et al., 2009a]. Moreover, siRNA experiments have even suggested that SEPT11 somehow limits the process of internalization. Taken together, these findings distinguish unique septin roles in regulating the efficiency of receptor-mediated bacterial invasion [Mostowy et al., 2009a].

The mechanisms by which septins modulate properties of the Met receptor are not yet clear. Immunoprecipitation experiments on HeLa cells stimulated or not with purified InlB using antibodies for SEPT9 or Met did not reveal a direct interaction between Met and SEPT9 (our unpublished observations). However, very few

Actin, Clathrin and Septins in *Listeria* Entry 821

A ('Zippering' pathogen *Listeria monocytogenes*)

| Phase | DAPI | F-actin | SEPT11 | Merge |

B ('Triggering' pathogen *Shigella flexneri*)

| Phase | DAPI | F-actin | SEPT9 | Merge |

Fig. 3. Septin recruitment at the bacterial entry site in human non-phagocytic cells. A: Septin recruitment at the site of entry for zipper-ing bacteria. Human epithelial JEG-3 cells were infected with *L. monocytogenes* expressing an InlB derivative covalently anchored at the bacterial surface (and hence enter cells via Met), and then fixed for microscopy. Endogenous septin was stained with anti-SEPT11 antibody (red). Actin was stained with anti-F-actin (green), and bacteria were marked using DAPI (blue). Inset images highlight the septin collar-like recruitment around bacteria to which the white arrows are pointing. Scale bar indicates 1 μm. B: Septin recruitment to the site of entry for triggering bacteria. Human epithelial HeLa cells were infected with *Shigella flexneri*, which enter cells via the type III secretion system, and then fixed for microscopy. Endogenous septin was stained with anti-SEPT9 antibody (red). Actin was stained with anti-F-actin (green), and bacteria were marked using DAPI (blue). Inset images highlight the septin collar-like recruitment around bacteria to which the white arrows are pointing. Scale bar indicates 1 μm. Experimental procedures for bacterial infections are described in Mostowy et al. [2009], where similar recruitment was obtained when labeling for SEPT2, SEPT9, or SEPT11.

direct interaction partners have been identified for septins [Drees et al., 2001], possibly because septin-binding partners interact with specific conformations of higher order septin assemblies and not with individual septins or septin complexes [Barral and Kinoshita, 2008].

## With Which Proteins do Septins Interact During Bacterial Entry?

The mechanisms underlying septin recruitment at the site of particle entry, and more generally how septins interact with membranes, the actin cytoskeleton, and potentially the clathrin coat, requires further investigation. Pretreatment of cells with cytochalasin D, a pharmacological inhibitor of actin polymerization, resulted in prevention of both actin and septin recruitment at the site of *Listeria* invasion [Mostowy et al., 2009b]. Thus, accumulation of septins at the phagocytic cup is intimately linked to the accumulation of actin, albeit in an unknown fashion [Huang et al., 2008; Mostowy et al., 2009b] (Fig. 1B). It is now critical to determine how septins play a role in the actin polymerization pathway, or if activation of this pathway regulates septin recruitment. How the clathrin coat and other signaling events could influence septin assembly to regulate the efficiency of bacterial entry is an exciting research direction. Ultimately, it will be informative to analyze the spatio-temporal recruitment of both the endocytic proteins and the cytoskeleton molecules at the site of pathogen entry to definitively establish the unique roles of different cytoskeleton components in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

### Perspectives

Due to long co-existence with their hosts, pathogens have evolved to maximally exploit host cellular machineries to invade and replicate. Our studies on bacterial entry have revealed unsuspected host cellular protein functions. As shown in this review, *Listeria* has recently helped to discover novel functions for clathrin and septins in mammalian cells. It is now important to investigate how clathrin is recruited, and what proteins link the clathrin coat to the actin cytoskeleton at the pathogen-host interface. Are there different roles for actin and septin, and the different septins, in bacterial entry, and more specifically in clathrin-mediated endocytosis? It is clear that high resolution imaging approaches will play a key role in these investigations.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Dr. Matteo Bonazzi for critical reading of this manuscript. S.M. is supported by a long-term fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Canadian Foundation Louis Pasteur. P.C. is an international research scholar from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

Bache KG, Slagsvold T, Stenmark H. 2004. Defective downregulation of receptor tyrosine kinases in cancer. EMBO J 23:2707–2712.

Barral Y, Kinoshita M. 2008. Structural insights shed light onto septin assemblies and function. Curr Opin Cell Biol 20:12–18.

Beites CL, Xie H, Bowser R, Trimble WS. 1999. The septin CDCrel-1 binds syntaxin and inhibits exocytosis. Nat Neurosci 2:434–439.

Benvenuti S, Comoglio PM. 2007. The MET receptor tyrosine kinase in invasion and metastasis. J Cell Physiol 213:316–325.

Bierne H, Cossart P. 2002. InlB, a surface protein of *Listeria monocytogenes* that behaves as an invasin and a growth factor. J Cell Sci 115:3357–3367.

Bierne H, Cossart P. 2007. *Listeria monocytogenes* surface proteins: from genome predictions to function. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 71:377–397.

Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Gherardi E, Vande Woude GF. 2003. Met, metastasis, motility and more. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4:915–925.

Bonazzi M, Veiga E, Pizarro-Cerdá J, Cossart P. 2008. Successive post-translational modifications of E-cadherin are required for InlA-mediated internalization of *Listeria monocytogenes*. Cell Microbiol 10:2208–2222.

Bonazzi M, Lecuit M, Cossart P. 2009. *Listeria monocytogenes* internalin and E-cadherin: from structure to pathogenesis. Cell Microbiol: in press.

Braun L, Ghebrehiwet B, Cossart P. 2000. gC1q-R/p32, a C1q-binding protein, is a receptor for the InlB invasion protein of *Listeria monocytogenes*. EMBO J:1458–1466.

Conner SD, Schmid SL. 2003. Regulated portals of entry into the cell. Nature 422:37–44.

Cossart P, Sansonetti PJ. 2004. Bacterial invasion: the paradigms of enteroinvasive pathogens. Science 304:242–248.

Cossart P, Veiga E. 2008. Non-classical use of clathrin during bacterial infections. J Microsc 231:524–528.

Cossart P, Pizarro-Cerda J, Lecuit M. 2003. Invasion of mammalian cells by *Listeria monocytogenes*: functional mimicry to subvert cellular functions. Trends Cell Biol 13:23–31.

Drees BL, Sundin B, Brazeau E, Caviston JP, Chen G-C, Guo W, Kozminski KG, Lau MW, Moskow JJ, Tong A, Schenkman LR, McKenzie A 3rd, Brennwald P, Longtine M, Bi E, Chan C, Novick P, Boone C, Pringle JR, Davis TN, Fields S, Drubin DG. 2001. A protein interaction map for cell polarity development. J Cell Biol 154:549–576.

Engqvist-Goldstein AEY, Drubin DG. 2003. Actin assembly and endocytosis: from yeast to mammals. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19:287–332.

Fotin A, Cheng Y, Grigorieff N, Walz T, Harrison SC, Kirchhausen T. 2004. Structure of an auxilin-bound clathrin coat and its implications for the mechanism of uncoating. Nature 432:649–653.

Galan JE, Wolf-Watz H. 2006. Protein delivery into eukaryotic cells by type III secretion machines. Nature 444:567–573.

Haglund K, Sigismund S, Polo S, Szymkiewicz I, Di Fiore PP, Dikic I. 2003. Multiple monoubiquitination of RTKs is sufficient for their endocytosis and degradation. Nat Cell Biol 5:461–466.

Halbleib JM, Nelson WJ. 2006. Cadherins in development: cell adhesion, sorting, and tissue morphogenesis. Genes Dev 20:3199–3214.

Hall PA, Russell HSE. 2004. The pathobiology of the septin gene family. J Pathol 204:489–505.

Hamon M, Bierne H, Cossart P. 2006. *Listeria monocytogenes*: a multifaceted model. Nat Rev Micro 4:423–434.

Hsu S-C, Hazuka CD, Roth R, Foletti DL, Heuser J, Scheller RH. 1998. Subunit composition, protein interactions, and structures of the mammalian brain sec6/8 complex and septin filaments. Neuron 20:1111–1122.

Huang Y-W, Yan M, Collins RF, DiCiccio JE, Grinstein S, Trimble WS. 2008. Mammalian septins are required for phagosome formation. Mol Biol Cell 19:1717–1726.

Ireton K, Payrastre B, Chap H, Ogawa W, Sakaue H, Kasuga M, Cossart P. 1996. A role for phosphoinositide 3-kinase in bacterial invasion. Science 274:780–782.

Jonquieres R, Pizarro-Cerdá J, Cossart P. 2001. Synergy between the N- and C-terminal domains of InlB for efficient invasion of non-phagocytic cells by *Listeria monocytogenes*. Mol Microbiol 42:955–965.

Joo E, Tsang CW, Trimble WS. 2005. Septins: traffic control at the cytokinesis intersection. Traffic 6:626–634.

Khelef N, Lecuit M, Buchrieser C, Cabanes D, Dussurget O, Cossart P. 2006. *Listeria monocytogenes* and the genus Listeria. In: Dwarkin M, Falkow S, Rosenberg E, Schleifer K-H, Stackebrandt E, editors. The Prokaryotes, 3rd ed. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag: p 404–476.

Kinoshita M. 2003a. Assembly of mammalian septins. J Biochem (Tokyo) 134:491–496.

Kinoshita M. 2003b. The septins. Genome Biol 4:236.

Kinoshita M. 2006. Diversity of septin scaffolds. Curr Opin Cell Biol 18:54–60.

Kinoshita M, Field CM, Coughlin ML, Straight AF, Mitchison TJ. 2002. Self- and actin-templated assembly of mammalian septins. Dev Cell 3:791–802.

Lecuit M, Hurme R, Pizarro-Cerda J, Ohayon H, Geiger B, Cossart P. 2000. A role for [alpha]- and [beta]-catenins in bacterial uptake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:10008–10013.

Mengaud J, Ohayon H, Gounon P, Mège R-M, Cossart P. 1996. E-cadherin is the receptor for internalin, a surface protein required for entry of *L. monocytogenes* into epithelial cells. Cell 84:923–932.

Mostowy S, Danckaert A, Nam Tham T, Machu C, Guadagnini S, Pizarro-Cerda J, Cossart P. 2009a. SEPT11 restricts InlB-mediated invasion by *Listeria*. J Biol Chem: in press; M900231200.

Mostowy S, Nam Tham T, Danckaert A, Guadagnini S, Boisson-Dupuis S, Pizarro-Cerda J, Cossart P. 2009b. Septins regulate bacterial entry into host cells. PLoS ONE 4:e4196.

Niemann HH, Jager V, Butler PJG, van den Heuvel J, Schmidt S, Ferraris D, Gherardi E, Heinz DW. 2007. Structure of the human receptor tyrosine kinase Met in complex with the *Listeria* invasion protein InlB. Cell 130:235–246.

Ogawa M, Handa Y, Ashida H, Suzuki M, Sasakawa C. 2008. The versatility of Shigella effectors. Nat Rev Microbiol 6:11–16.

Ono R, Ihara M, Nakajima H, Ozaki K, Kataoka-Fujiwara Y, Taki T, Nagata K-i, Inagaki M, Yoshida N, Kitamura T, Hayashi Y, Kinoshita M, Nosaka T. 2005. Disruption of Sept6, a fusion partner gene of MLL, does not affect ontogeny, leukemogenesis induced by MLL-SEPT6, or phenotype induced by the loss of Sept4. Mol Cell Biol 25:10965–10978.

Pauly BS, Drubin DG. 2007. Clathrin: an amazing multifunctional dreamcoat? Cell Host Microbe 2:288–290.

Pizarro-Cerda J, Cossart P. 2006. Bacterial adhesion and entry into host cells. Cell 124:715–727.

Pizarro-Cerda J, Jonquieres R, Gouin E, Vandekerckhove J, Garin J, Cossart P. 2002. Distinct protein patterns associated with *Listeria monocytogenes* InlA- or InlB-phagosomes. Cell Microbiol 4:101–115.

Pizarro-Cerda J, Payrastre B, Wang Y-J, Veiga E, Yin HL, Cossart P. 2007. Type II phosphatidylinositol 4-kinases promote *Listeria*

monocytogenes entry into target cells. Cell Microbiol 9:2381–2390.

Schubert W-D, Urbanke C, Ziehm T, Beier V, Machner MP, Domann E, Wehland J, Chakraborty T, Heinz DW. 2002. Structure of internalin, a major invasion protein of *Listeria monocytogenes*, in complex with its human receptor E-cadherin. Cell 111:825–836.

Seveau S, Tham TN, Payrastre B, Hoppe AD, Swanson JA, Cossart P. 2007. A FRET analysis to unravel the role of cholesterol in Rac1 and PI 3-kinase activation in the InlB/Met signalling pathway. Cell Microbiol 9:790–803.

Shen Y, Naujokas M, Park M, Ireton K. 2000. InlB-dependent internalization of Listeria is mediated by the Met receptor tyrosine kinase. Cell 103:501–510.

Sirajuddin M, Farkasovsky M, Hauer F, Kuhlmann D, Macara IG, Weyand M, Stark H, Wittinghofer A. 2007. Structural insight into filament formation by mammalian septins. Nature 449:311–315.

Sorkin A. 2004. Cargo recognition during clathrin-mediated endocytosis: a team effort. Curr Opin Cell Biol 16:392–399.

Sousa S, Cabanes D, El-Amraoui A, Petit C, Lecuit M, Cossart P. 2004. Unconventional myosin VIIa and vezatin, two proteins crucial for Listeria entry into epithelial cells. J Cell Sci 117:2121–2130.

Sousa S, Cabanes D, Archambaud C, Colland F, Lemichez E, Popoff M, Boisson-Dupuis S, Gouin E, Lecuit M, Legrain P, Cossart P. 2005. ARHGAP10 is necessary for [alpha]-catenin recruitment at adherens junctions and for Listeria invasion. Nat Cell Biol 7:954–960.


Spiliotis ET, Nelson WJ. 2006. Here come the septins: novel polymers that coordinate intracellular functions and organization. J Cell Sci 119:4–10.

Spiliotis ET, Nelson WJ. 2008. Septin functions in the mammalian cytoskeleton. In: Hall PA, Russell HSE, Pringle JR, editors. The Septins. Wiley-Blackwell. p 229–246.

Vazquez-Boland JA, Kuhn M, Berche P, Chakraborty T, Dominguez-Bernal G, Goebel W, Gonzalez-Zorn B, Wehland J, Kreft J. 2001. Listeria Pathogenesis and molecular virulence determinants. Clin Microbiol Rev 14:584–640.

Veiga E, Cossart P. 2005. Listeria hijacks the clathrin-dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells. Nat Cell Biol 7:894–900.

Veiga E, Cossart P. 2006. The role of clathrin-dependent endocytosis in bacterial internalization. Trends Cell Biol 16:499–504.

Veiga E, Guttman JA, Bonazzi M, Boucrot E, Toledo-Arana A, Lin AE, Enninga J, Pizarro-Cerda J, Finlay BB, Kirchhausen T, Cossart P. 2007. Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co-opt host clathrin for infection. Cell Host Microbe 2:340–351.

Weirich CS, Erzberger JP, Barral Y. 2008. The septin family of GTPases: architecture and dynamics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:478–489.

Wollert T, Pasche B, Rochon M, Deppenmeier S, van den Heuvel J, Gruber AD, Heinz DW, Lengeling A, Schubert W-D. 2007. Extending the host range of *Listeria monocytogenes* by rational protein design. Cell 129:891–902.
