
Hum Genet (2009) 125:467–491  
DOI 10.1007/s00439-009-0654-5  

---

**REVIEW ARTICLE**

**Molecular genetics of atherosclerosis**

Himadri Roy · Shalini Bhardwaj · Seppo Yla-Herttuala

Received: 23 December 2008 / Accepted: 4 March 2009 / Published online: 20 March 2009  
© Springer-Verlag 2009

---

**Abstract** Atherosclerosis is a complex multifocal arterial disease involving interactions of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Advances in techniques of molecular genetics have revealed that genetic polymorphisms significantly influence susceptibility to atherosclerotic vascular diseases. A large number of candidate genes, genetic polymorphisms and susceptibility loci associated with atherosclerotic diseases have been identified in recent years and their number is rapidly increasing. In this review we focus on some of the major candidate genes and genetic polymorphisms associated with human atherosclerotic vascular diseases.

**Introduction**

Atherosclerosis is a complex multifocal disease of medium and large size arteries resulting from the interactions of various genetic and environmental factors, and it is the leading cause of mortality and disability in the developed countries, while in the developing countries its incidence is rapidly increasing (Laukkanen and Ylä-Herttuala 2002; Lusis et al. 2004b). Atherosclerosis can cause stenosis or occlusion of arteries and is the primary underlying pathology in coronary artery disease (CAD), peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and carotid artery disease. Likewise atherosclerosis in mesenteric and renal arteries can produce mesenteric and renal ischemia, respectively. Moreover, atherosclerosis can also produce aneurysmal disease in arteries. Risk factors for atherogenesis include genetic background, disorders of lipid metabolism, hypertension and diabetes mellitus (Lusis et al. 2004b). Endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, abnormal lipoprotein and homocysteine metabolism, as well as dysfunctional coagulation and fibrinolysis (Fig. 1) are known to play important roles in the development of atherosclerotic lesions (Doevendans et al. 2001; Rader and Daugherty 2008). The association between genes and atherosclerosis is complex with the heritable component of cardiovascular diseases in most populations varying between 40 and 60%, and the majority of cardiovascular disorders being influenced by interactions between multiple genes and environmental factors (Tuomisto et al. 2005).

Recent advances in molecular genetics have highlighted the role of genetic polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic vascular disorders (Hamsten and Eriksson 2008; Knowles et al. 2007a). Common methods used to study the molecular genetics of atherosclerosis are candidate gene association studies, genome wide linkage studies and genome wide association scans (Arnett et al. 2007; Chen et al. 2007; Hamsten and Eriksson 2008; Knowles et al. 2007a; Tuomisto et al. 2005). Various molecular genetics techniques have identified genes and genetic polymorphisms that influence atherosclerosis. Although the relationship between genetic polymorphisms and atherosclerosis has been extensively studied but the results from different studies have been often conflicting. In this review we discuss major susceptibility genes (Table 1) and genetic polymorphisms associated with human atherosclerotic vascular disorders.

---

H. Roy · S. Bhardwaj · S. Yla-Herttuala (✉)  
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology,  
A.I. Virtanen Institute, University of Kuopio,  
P.O. 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland  
e-mail: Seppo.Ylaherttuala@uku.fi  

H. Roy  
e-mail: himadri.roy@uku.fi

Fig. 1 Key molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in atherosclerosis. Pathogenesis of atherosclerosis involves multiple interactions at cellular and molecular levels. Endothelial dysfunction, lipid accumulation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, LDL oxidation modification, and inflammation, are early events in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and migration, increased lipid accumulation, enhanced inflammation, cellular apoptosis and necrosis, and vascular remodeling further contribute to plaque propagation. In late stages plaque angiogenesis, calcification, plaque rupture and thrombus formations occur.

Genes associated with lipid metabolism

Lipoproteins levels in the blood and some lipid metabolism disorders are closely associated with the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. In addition to the monogenic lipid disorders (Table 2), associations between polymorphisms in several groups of genes involved in lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis have been identified.

Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol metabolism

High levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) are strongly associated with increased risk of atherosclerosis (Brewer 1989; Nam et al. 2006) and therefore some genes that affect LDL metabolism and influence LDL-C levels have been implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene family consists of LDLR, the very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), LDL receptor-related protein (LRP), LRP1b, megalin/LRP2, multiple epidermal growth factor-containing protein 7 (MEGF7)/LRP4, LRP5, LRP6 and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (apoER2)/LRP8 (Boucher and

Gotthardt 2004; Leigh et al. 2008). Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by deficiency or defective function of LDLR. Its heterozygotic form affects around 1 in 500 individuals worldwide. Mutations in the LDLR genes lead to impaired uptake and processing of LDL resulting in high levels of LDL-C and increased predisposition to accelerated atherosclerosis. Over a thousand LDLR variants from FH patients are now listed, and these mutations have been found in all functional domains of the LDLR protein (Leigh et al. 2008). An autosomal recessive type of hypercholesterolemia (ARH) occurs in a small number of families with severe hypercholesterolemia (Soutar et al. 2003). Mutations in LDL receptor adaptor protein 1 (LDLRAP1 also known as ARH) were identified in these patients (Soutar et al. 2003). The LDLRAP1 is an accessory adaptor protein, which interacts with the LDL receptor and is involved in the endocytosis of the LDL receptor (Garcia et al. 2001). The CAD prevalence is relatively lower in ARH as compared to the autosomal dominant FH (Pisciotta et al. 2006).

LRP is a multifunctional receptor, which is involved in several biological processes pertinent to the development of

Hum Genet (2009) 125:467–491

Table 1 Genes reported to be associated with human atherosclerotic vascular diseases (CAD, MI, PAD, carotid atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke)

| Pathophysiological processes | Susceptibility genes |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|
| Lipid and cholesterol metabolism |
| LDL metabolism                | LDLR, LDLRAP1, LRP, LRP6, APOB, APOE, PCSK9, CYP7A1, SREBP-2/SCAP, USF1, PSRC1 and CELSR2 |
| HDL metabolism                | LCAT, apoA-1, ABCA1, SR-B1, PON, LIPC, CETP |
| Triglyceride metabolism       | LPL, apoA5, apoC-III |
| Lipoprotein(a)                | Apo(a) |
| Endothelial dysfunction       | NOS3, MnSOD, KDR |
| Oxidative stress              | CYBA, MPO, EC-SOD, GPX1, GST, UCP2, HO-1 |
| Inflammation                  | Interleukins: IL-1, IL-1Ra, IL-6, IL-10 |
|                               | Cytokines and cytokines receptors: TNF-α, TNF-receptor, LTA |
|                               | Adhesion molecules: selectins, ICAM-I, VCAM-I, PECAM |
|                               | Chemokines and chemokine receptors: CX3CR1, CCR5, CCR2, CXCL12, RANTES, MCP-1 |
|                               | Eicosanoids: ALOX5, ALOX5AP, LTA4H, LTC4S, PTGS1, PTGS2, L-PGDS |
|                               | Others: Connexin 37, MEF2A, TLR-4, CRP, TNFS4, MHC2TA |
| Vascular remodeling           | TGF-β1, MMP-1, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-9, MMP-12 |
| Arterial thrombosis           | Hemostatic system: fibrinogen, prothrombin, factor V, factor VII, Factor XIII, thrombomodulin |
|                               | Fibrinolytic system: PAI-1, TAFI, t-PA |
|                               | Platelet surface receptors: glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, Ia/IIa and Ib |
| Cell cycle regulators         | CDKN2A, CDKN2B |
| Vascular progenitor cell regulators | CXCL12, GATA2 |
| Miscellaneous                 | PPARγ, PPARα, thrombospondins, ACE, angiotensin II type 1 receptor, angiotensinogen, MTHFR, PDE4D, ANRIL, VAMP8, HNRNPU1, KIF6 |

Table 2 Monogenic lipid metabolism disorders associated with premature atherosclerosis

| Gene        | Disease                                      | Mode of inheritance and biochemical/clinical presentations |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| LDLR        | Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH)            | Autosomal dominant, high LDL                              |
| APOB        | Familial ligand-defective apoB-100            | Autosomal dominant, high LDL                              |
| PCSK9       | Familial hypercholesterolemia                 | Autosomal dominant, high LDL                              |
| LDLRAP1     | Familial hypercholesterolemia                 | Autosomal recessive, high LDL                             |
| CYP7A1      | Familial hyperlipidemia                       | Autosomal recessive, high LDL, triglycerides               |
| ABCG8, ABCG5 | Sitosterolemia                               | Autosomal recessive, Hypercholesteremic, increased phytosterols |
| LCAT        | Familial LCAT deficiency                     | Rare, autosomal recessive, low HDL; hypertriglyceridemia, early atherosclerosis presentation is uncommon |
| ABCA1       | Tangier disease                              | Autosomal codominant, absent or very low HDL               |
| APOA1       | Familial apolipoprotein A-I deficiency        | Autosomal recessive, very low HDL-C level in the presence of normal VLDL cholesterol and LDL-C levels |
| LRP6        | Familial CAD                                 | Rare, autosomal dominant, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes, osteoporosis |

atherosclerosis (Schulz et al. 2003). LRP gene polymorphisms, particularly the relatively common exon 22, C200T polymorphism, were significantly associated with risk of premature CAD in Caucasians (Pocathikorn et al. 2003). In a recent linkage study of a family with autosomal dominant early CAD a missense mutation in LRP6, which encodes a co-receptor in the Wnt signaling pathway was identified and linked to CAD. The mutation that substitutes cysteine for arginine at a highly conserved residue of an epidermal growth factor-like domain impairs Wnt signaling (Mani et al. 2007). Apolipoprotein B (apoB) is a key glycoprotein involved in the lipoprotein metabolism. The apoB gene is characterized
by multiple polymorphic sites. Missense mutations in the LDL-receptor-binding domain of apoB gene cause familial ligand-defective apoB-100, characterized by hypercholesterolemia and premature CAD. Other mutations in apoB gene can cause familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, characterized by hypocholesterolemia and resistance to atherosclerosis (Whitfield et al. 2004). Three polymorphisms in apoB gene, including two due to the presence/absence of the cutting site of the restriction enzymes (XbaI and EcoRI) and one insertion/deletion polymorphism (SpIns/Del) of 9-bp that produce the addition or deletion of three amino acids in the signal peptide of the apoprotein have been frequently associated with CAD and/or MI. A meta-analysis of the published studies suggested that the A allele of EcoRI polymorphism, the D allele of SpIns/Del polymorphism and homozygous TT genotype of XbaI polymorphism in apoB gene were associated with increased CAD/MI risk (Chiodini et al. 2003).

Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is the primary component of very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). The apoE4 allele is associated with elevated LDL cholesterol levels and increased risk of coronary atherosclerosis (Wilson et al. 1996). The presence of the apoE2 or apoE4 alleles in men was associated with significantly greater CAD risk (Lahoz et al. 2001). However, apoE2/E3 heterozygotes have lower LDL levels (Grönroos et al. 2007) and lower risk of atherosclerosis (Hixson 1991; Slooter et al. 2001). An epidemiological review of apoE polymorphism and cardiovascular diseases concluded that the apoE genotype yields poor predictive values when screening for clinically defined atherosclerosis (Eichner et al. 2002). A synergistic effect of apoE polymorphism with cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), apoC-3 (Muendlein et al. 2008) and apoA-1 (Rai et al. 2008) gene polymorphisms can increase CAD risk.

Mutations in a gene that encodes for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) were associated with a rare form of severe autosomal dominant familial hypercholesterolemia. PCSK9 encodes neural apoptosis regulated convertase, a human subtilase that is highly expressed in the liver and contributes to cholesterol homeostasis (Abifadel et al. 2003). PCSK9 interacts with the first epidermal growth factor-like repeat homology domain in the human LDLR and acts by reducing the amount of LDLR protein in hepatocytes (Li et al. 2007). PCSK9 is internalized together with the LDLR, thereby promoting its degradation. The internalization process depends on the presence of the ARH adaptor protein (Lagace et al. 2006). Some sequence variations of the PCSK9 gene have been associated with premature atherosclerosis (Naoumova et al. 2005). Conversely, some other sequence variants were associated with low LDL cholesterol levels and reduced incidence of coronary events (Cohen et al. 2006). The E670G single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in PCSK9 was identified as an important determinant of plasma LDL-C levels and was associated with the severity of coronary atherosclerosis (Chen et al. 2005) and large-vessel atherosclerosis stroke (Abboud et al. 2007).

Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase catalyzes the initial step in cholesterol catabolism and bile acid synthesis. Deletion mutation in CYP7A1 gene that encodes the enzyme cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase has been shown to cause a rare form of hyperlipidemia in homozygous and heterozygous individuals (Pullinger et al. 2002). The CC genotype of the A278C polymorphism in the CYP7A1 increases the progression of atherosclerosis (Hofman et al. 2005).

The sterol-regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) that are activated by a SREBP cleavage-activating protein (SCAP) regulate cholesterol and fatty acids metabolism. The SREBP-2 G1784C polymorphism was associated with an increased intima media thickness (IMT) in carotid arteries (Robinet et al. 2003) and a risk of early onset myocardial infarction (MI), while the SCAPA2386G polymorphism seems to modify the associations of SREBP-2 genotype with MI (Friedlander et al. 2008).

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) is another disease characterized by elevated levels of triglycerides or cholesterol or both and early CAD. It is a common cause of hyperlipidemia affecting about 2% of population, and about 20% cases of middle-aged MI patients have FCHL (Lusis et al. 2004a). FCHL was linked with the gene encoding upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) which is known to regulate several genes of glucose and lipid metabolism (Pajukanta et al. 2004). Allelic variants of USF1 were recently found to be associated with coronary atherosclerosis. A haplotype comprised of the common alleles of several intronic SNPs (including rs2073657, rs2073658, and rs3737787) within the gene encoding USF1 was associated with lower cholesterol levels and decreased risk of early onset coronary atherosclerosis in young adults but was associated with increased pro-inflammatory marker levels and increased mortality in older adults (Reiner et al. 2007). The T allele of the SNP rs2516839 correlates with an increased probability of severe atherosclerosis. On the other hand, homozygous C allele of this SNP seems to protect from advanced atherosclerotic lesions (Kristiansson et al. 2008).

High-density lipoprotein cholesterol metabolism

Inverse association between high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and atherosclerosis is well recognized, (Goldbourt et al. 1997) but not all people with low HDL-C are necessarily at risk of premature coronary heart disease (CHD) (Rader et al. 1993). Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) is a key enzyme in reverse cholesterol transport and HDL-C metabolism. Mutations in LCAT gene infamilial LCAT deficiency are associated with low HDL levels; however, premature atherosclerosis remains an unusual clinical complication in familial LCAT deficiency subjects (Kuivenhoven et al. 1997). The P143L polymorphism in exon 4 of the LCAT gene was associated with decreased HDL-C levels and an increased risk of dyslipidemia and CAD (Zhang et al. 2004).

Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) is a key constituent of HDL and the antiatherogenic properties of HDL mainly originate from apoA-I (Barter and Rye 2006). Patients with premature atherosclerosis and mutations in genes encoding apoAI associated with deficiency of apoA-I and extremely low concentrations of HDL cholesterol have been described (Karathanasis et al. 1987; Matsunaga et al. 1991; Ordovas et al. 1989). The apoA-1 G75GA polymorphism has been associated with coronary atherosclerosis (Chhabra et al. 2005; Reguero et al. 1998; Wang et al. 1996).

The family of adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transporters represents a gene family that includes 48 members which belong to seven subfamilies (Efferth 2003). Around 50 mutations and a number of SNPs have been identified in the ABCA1 gene (Singaraja et al. 2003). ABCA1 mediates the cellular efflux of phospholipids and cholesterol to lipid-poor apoA1 and plays a significant role in HDL metabolism (Oram and Lawn 2001). Mutations in ABCA1 gene cause Tangier disease which is characterized by absent HDL and premature atherosclerosis (Bodzioch et al. 1999; Brooks-Wilson et al. 1999; Rust et al. 1999). The common R219K SNP in ABCA1 gene has been associated with a protective role in CAD, MI and carotid atherosclerosis (Clee et al. 2001; Evans and Beil 2003; Sandhofer et al. 2008; Tregouet et al. 2004), whereas the G3456C, the C477T and the C565T SNPs were associated with increased risk of CAD (Brousseau et al. 2001; Kyriakou et al. 2005; Lutucuta et al. 2001). Mutations in the genes encoding for ABCG8 and ABCG5 transporters cause a rare, autosomal recessive disorder called sitosterolemia. ABCG5 and ABCG8 help in limiting intestinal absorption and promote biliary excretion of sterols. Patients with sitosterolemia are frequently hypercholesterolemic, and develop xanthomas and premature CAD (Berge et al. 2000). Polymorphisms in ABCG5 and ABCG8 transporters influence plasma lipid levels (Hubacek et al. 2004) but their association with atherosclerosis has not been determined.

The scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) is a HDL receptor that plays a pivotal role in HDL-mediated reverse cholesterol transport by mediating the selective uptake of free cholesterol as well as of native and oxidized cholesteryl esters (Zhang et al. 2005). The CLA-1 (CD36 and lysosomal integral membrane protein-II analogous-1) gene is the human homologue of the murine SR-B1 gene. SR-B1/CLA-1 polymorphism has been associated with increased susceptibility to CAD and PAD in humans (Ritsch et al. 2007; Rodríguez-Esparragón et al. 2005).

Paraoxonase have antioxidant properties and have the ability to hydrolyze oxidized lipids in LDL. The paraoxonase (PON) family consists of three members PON1, PON2 and PON3. PON1 and PON3 are HDL-associated proteins expressed primarily in liver and contribute to the anti-atherogenic effects of HDL (Reddy et al. 2008). Unlike PON1, PON3 expression is not regulated by oxidized lipids (Reddy et al. 2001). PON2 though not associated with HDL, is ubiquitously expressed and exerts its antioxidant functions at the cellular level (Ng et al. 2001). Association between PON1 polymorphisms and atherosclerosis is controversial. The M55L and Q192R polymorphisms in PON1 gene were shown to be associated with CAD (Imai et al. 2000) and increased carotid atherosclerosis (Fortunato et al. 2003; Gnasso et al. 2002). The C107T and the Q192R polymorphisms in PON1 gene were associated with risk of stroke in some studies (Voetsch et al. 2004; Ranade et al. 2005). However, an analysis of various polymorphisms in three PON genes (PON1, PON2 and PON3) in the Caucasian population failed to identify a role for individual PON gene polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke (Pasdar et al. 2006). Some other studies suggest that the PON1M55L polymorphism may actually protect high-risk patients against atherosclerosis (Malin et al. 2001; Oliveira et al. 2004). A recent study concluded that the PON1-Q192R and the PON2-C311S polymorphisms are independent risk factors for acute MI in the Spanish population (Guxens et al. 2008). Most of the individual studies of PON polymorphisms have generally been too small to confirm or refute the genetic effects on atherosclerosis.

Hepatic lipase catalyzes hydrolysis of lipoprotein triglycerols and phospholipids. It participates, with surface proteoglycans, SR-B1 and LRP as a ligand in promoting hepatic uptake of lipoproteins, including triglycerides-rich lipoprotein remnants, LDL and HDL particles. Though the role of hepatic lipase in lipoprotein catabolism is well established, its role as an anti or proatherogenic factor is still controversial. The anti- or pro-atherogenic role is likely to be modulated by the concurrent presence of other lipid abnormalities (Zambon et al. 2003). Four common polymorphisms, namely, G250A, C514T, T710C, and A763G in the promoter region of hepatic lipase gene (LIPC) have been reported (Guerra et al. 1997). These four hepatic lipase promoter SNPs are associated with increased HDL cholesterol and paradoxically, an increased risk of CHD (Andersen et al. 2003). The C514T allele has been most widely investigated and was found to be associated with coronary atherosclerosis (Allen et al. 2005; Dugi et al. 2001; Fan et al. 2007a, b) and carotid IMT (Rundek et al. 2002), whereas the G250A polymorphism was associated with PAD (Eller et al. 2005).CETP facilitates exchange of cholesteryl esters for triglycerides between HDL and triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Low-plasma levels of CETP are associated with elevated levels of HDL-C and elevated CETP levels have been linked with an increasing risk of CAD (Boekholdt et al. 2004b). The CETP gene locus is highly polymorphic, and SNPs in the CETP gene locus were significantly associated HDL-C concentrations (Hinds et al. 2004). The CETP gene variant studies have so far not provided a clear insight into the relationship between CETP and atherosclerosis (Boekholdt et al. 2004a; de Grooth et al. 2004). The common CETP polymorphism, TaqIB in intron 1 was associated with reduced levels of plasma CETP, increased HDL-C levels and lower CAD risk in people with the B2 allele (Brousseau et al. 2002; McCaskie et al. 2007; Ordovas et al. 2000). But other studies have associated CETP SNPs with increased carotid atherosclerosis (Kakko et al. 2000), CAD (Boekholdt et al. 2005; Borggreve et al. 2006) and MI (Meiner et al. 2008).

### Triglyceride metabolism

The serum triglyceride level is an important independent risk factor for atherosclerotic heart disease (Malloy and Kane 2001). Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is a key enzyme for the catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particles, using apoC-II as a cofactor. Reduced activity of LPL leads to elevated levels of triglycerides (Okubo et al. 2007). More than 60 LPL gene mutations have been identified but there has been no consistent relationship of these to the risk of CHD. The D9N and N291S variants of LPL were associated with increased risk of coronary atherosclerosis (Hu et al. 2006; Jukema et al. 1996).

The newly discovered apoA-5 has been shown to affect triglyceride levels and the apoA-5 gene polymorphisms have been associated with hypertriglyceridemia but the relationship with atherosclerosis has not been consistent (Bi et al. 2004; Dallongeville et al. 2006; Hsu et al. 2006; Martinelli et al. 2007; Tang et al. 2006). In addition, several polymorphisms in the apoC-III gene were also associated with hypertriglyceridemia and the T455C variant of apoC-III gene was associated with a significantly increased risk of CAD (Olivieri et al. 2002).

High serum concentrations of lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is an independent risk factor for premature atherosclerosis (Cullen et al. 1998; Kronenberg et al. 1999; Matsumoto et al. 1998). Lp(a) consists of an LDL-like particle and a unique apoprotein, apo(a), which is covalently bound to the ApoB of the LDL like particle. The apo(a) gene is highly polymorphic and has specific domains so-called Kringle (K) 4 and K5 repeats. The number of K4 repeats (12 to ~50) in apo(a) gene is inversely proportional to the serum levels of Lp(a) (Berglund and Ramakrishnan 2004). Lp(a)

concentration and apo(a) isoform size are risk factors for atherosclerosis and related disorders (Berglund and Ramakrishnan 2004; Kronenberg et al. 1999; Pati and Pati 2000; Rifai et al. 2004) and the I4399M SNP in the protease-like domain of the Lp(a) gene was associated with severe CAD (Luke et al. 2007).

#### Genes associated with endothelial functions

Endothelial dysfunction plays a key role in the development and progression of atherosclerosis (Verma and Anderson 2002). Reduced bioavailability of nitric oxide (NO) produced from endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) results in impairment of endothelial derived relaxation of arteries (Kawashima and Yokoyama 2004). NO also inhibits platelet aggregation, leukocyte adhesion to endothelium and vascular smooth muscle cell (VSCM) growth (Simionescu 2007). eNOS is encoded by the NOS3 gene on chromosome 7q35/q36 region (Marsden et al. 1993). Polymorphisms in NOS3 gene have been associated with atherosclerosis. The G894T SNP located in the exon 7 and the T786C SNP in the promoter region of the NOS3 gene were associated with carotid IMT (Paradossi et al. 2004) and the NOS3 4a allele was also associated with carotid atherosclerosis (Fatini et al. 2004). An association between the G894T polymorphism and CAD/MI was observed in some studies (Agema et al. 2004; Hingorani et al. 1999; Shimasaki et al. 1998) but not in the others (Jeerooburkhan et al. 2001; Poirier et al. 1999). A meta-analysis of data from 26 studies that evaluated association between common NOS3 polymorphisms and CAD showed that the G894T polymorphism and the 4a allele, but not the T786C polymorphism, were risk factors for CAD (Casas et al. 2004).

The manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is an antioxidant enzyme, which catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide radicals in mitochondria, producing hydrogen peroxide and oxygen (Fujimoto et al. 2008). MnSOD deficiency increases endothelial dysfunction (Ohashi et al. 2006). The valine/valine genotype of the A16V variant of MnSOD was associated with carotid atherosclerosis (Kakko et al. 2003) and CAD (Fujimoto et al. 2008). It has been proposed that the alanine variant increases the mitochondrial MnSOD activity and protects macrophages against oxLDL-induced apoptosis, suppresses atherosclerosis and stabilizes the plaque and reducing the risk of CAD (Fujimoto et al. 2008).

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor-2/kinase-insert domain receptor (KDR) is the primary receptor transmitting VEGF signals in endothelial cells. Besides endothelial cells, VEGFR-2 is also expressed by circulating endothelial progenitor cells (Roy et al. 2006a). Variations in KDR gene may alter the biological function of KDR.The SNP T604C (rs2071559) in the promoter region of KDR gene, SNP G1192A (rs2305948) in exon 7 and SNP A1719T (rs1870377) in exon 11 were associated with increased risk of CHD (Wang et al. 2007b). It is known that the VEGF/VEGF receptors play an important role in plaque angiogenesis and may be associated with increased atherogenesis and unstable vulnerable plaques (Roy et al. 2006a, b). The associations of VEGFs/VEGF receptors SNPs with atherosclerosis should be further explored.

### Genes associated with oxidative stress

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are intricately involved in the development of atherosclerosis (Berliner et al. 1995). The nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)/nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase system, which is a key source of superoxide anions in blood vessels, influences lipid peroxidation and atherosclerosis (Soccio et al. 2005). CYBA gene encodes p22phox, a component of NADPH oxidase. The C242T polymorphism of the CYBA gene modulates superoxide production and the T allele is associated with decreased NADPH oxidase activity and decreased production of ROS (Guzik et al. 2000). The relationship of the C242T polymorphism in the p22-phox gene with atherosclerosis has been investigated with conflicting results (Soccio et al. 2005). The C242T mutation has been associated with either a protective effect in atherosclerosis (Fan et al. 2007a, b; Hayaishi-Okano et al. 2003; Inoue et al. 1998), an increased risk of early CAD (Cai et al. 1999; Nasti et al. 2006) or no effect on atherosclerosis (Gardemann et al. 1999; Saha et al. 1999). A recent meta-analysis of data from studies evaluating association between the C242T polymorphism of the p22phox component of NADPH oxidase and CAD suggests that the T allele does not have a significant effect in the Caucasians but may have a protective role in the Asian population (Di Castelnuovo et al. 2008).

Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is an enzyme which is primarily produced by activated neutrophils and monocytes. MPO generates several ROS and is an active mediator of atherogenesis (Nicholls and Hazen 2005). The G463A SNP in the promoter region of the MPO gene regulates MPO expression. The G-to-A base substitution creates the high (G/G) and the low-expression (A/A, A/G) alleles (Mäkelä et al. 2008). The A/A and A/G alleles were associated with a decreased risk of CAD (Nikpoor et al. 2001), conversely, a recent study suggests that G/G allele may have a protective role in carotid atherosclerosis (Mäkelä et al. 2008).

Extracellular superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) is an antioxidant enzyme found in high concentrations in blood vessels. In the Danish population the R213G polymorphism in EC-SOD was associated with an increased CHD risk. Presumably the impaired binding of EC-SOD to the interstitial matrix in the R213G heterozygotes results in decreased EC-SOD concentrations in the arterial wall (Juul et al. 2004).

Glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) participates in limiting cellular damage caused by oxidation and its deficiency can result in endothelial dysfunction (Forgione et al. 2002). Decreased GPX-1 activity is associated with increased risk of atherosclerosis (Espinola-Klein et al. 2007). The GPX1 gene polymorphisms associated with decreased GPX1 enzymatic activity have been associated with increased risk of atherosclerosis (Hamanishi et al. 2004; Nemoto et al. 2007; Tang et al. 2008; Winter et al. 2003). Glutathione s-transferase (GST) is another enzyme that plays a key role in cellular antioxidant defence mechanisms. The GSTM1 and GSTT1 encode the cytosolic enzymes GST-μ and GST-θ, respectively, and it has been suggested that variation in the GSTM1 or GSTT1 genes may alter the susceptibility to atherosclerosis (Stephens et al. 2008).

Uncoupling protein 2 which (UCP2) regulates the production of ROS in macrophages and presumably has a protective role in atherosclerosis (Blanc et al. 2003). The G866A polymorphism in UCP2 gene was associated with carotid atherosclerosis (Oberkofler et al. 2005) and increased risk of CAD (Dhamrait et al. 2004).

Heme oxygenase (HO) is a rate-limiting enzyme in heme degradation that has been associated with a protective role in CAD (Mayer 2000). The human HO-1 gene has been mapped to chromosome 22q12 (Kutty et al. 1994), and a (GT)n repeat has been identified in the promoter region (Kimpara et al. 1997). Short (GT)n repeats in the human HO-1 gene promoter increase transcriptional activity in response to oxidative stress and lowers the risk of CAD (Kaneda et al. 2002) while long (GT)n repeats in the human HO-1 gene promoter increases the risk of CAD in diabetics (Chen et al. 2002).

### Genes associated with inflammation

Atherosclerosis is regarded as a chronic inflammatory disease and inflammatory processes are crucial in the development of atherosclerotic plaques (Libby 2002). An intricate interaction between cellular and molecular immune/inflammatory components occurs at various stages of atherosclerosis (Hansson et al. 2006). The association between the immune/inflammatory genes and atherosclerosis is complex but recent human genetic studies have provided a significant insight in the role of immune/inflammatory molecules in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Evidently the alterations in the genetics of the inflammatory system can modulate the risk of atherosclerosis.

Local and systemic low-grade inflammation is a key feature in atherogenesis, and increased plasma levels of inflammatory biomarkers such as C-reactive protein (CRP)and fibrinogen have been associated with increased cardiovascular risk. CRP is an acute phase reactant and has a prognostic value in atherosclerotic diseases (Rifai and Ridker 2001). Polymorphisms in the CRP gene that were associated with marked increases in CRP levels could predict increase in the risk of ischemic vascular disease (Hingorani et al. 2009; Zacho et al. 2008). The presence of high producer CRP genotype was also demonstrated to be associated with subclinical carotid artery atherosclerosis in young Finnish men (Eklund et al. 2008). However, in another European study, CRP haplotypes were not associated with cerebral small vessel disease in an older population (Reitz et al. 2007). Though the serum CRP levels are an important marker of atherosclerotic diseases but a causal role of CRP in atherosclerosis has not been firmly established.

Plasma fibrinogen concentrations are recognized as an independent predictor of MI. In addition to its role as a nonspecific marker of inflammation, fibrinogen may also have a direct role in atherogenesis and thrombogenesis by acting as a bridging molecule for many types of cell–cell adhesion events critical for atherogenesis (Mannila et al. 2007). Several SNPs and haplotypes of the fibrinogen gene-cluster (fibrinogen chains alpha-FGA and beta-FGB) were significantly associated with fibrinogen levels in post-MI patients (Jacquemin et al. 2008). Some fibrinogen haplotypes but not individual SNPs were associated with risk of MI, independent of the plasma fibrinogen concentration (Mannila et al. 2005). It has been suggested that the association between fibrinogen haplotypes and MI is partly mediated through pleiotropic effects on the serum interleukin (IL)-6 concentrations (Mannila et al. 2007).

Interleukins are a large group of cytokines with a wide range of inflammatory and immune functions. Genetic variations within the IL-1 gene cluster have been implicated in pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerotic diseases (Iacoviello et al. 2005; Oda et al. 2007). On the contrary other studies show that IL-1 gene variations have no relationship to atherosclerotic diseases (Vohnout et al. 2003; Zee et al. 2008). Variations in the gene coding for IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) represent susceptibility to the development of carotid atherosclerosis (Worrall et al. 2003) and MI (van Minkelen et al. 2009). The IL-6 gene polymorphisms were associated with PAD (Flex et al. 2002) and carotid atherosclerosis (Chapman et al. 2003; Rauramaa et al. 2000; Rundek et al. 2002; Tanaka et al. 2005), but there was no clear association between IL-6 gene SNPs and MI (Bennet et al. 2003). In a recent study, polymorphisms in IL-6 and endotoxin receptor (CD14) gene loci and a combined haplotype of linked polymorphisms in IL-1 and IL1-Ra, were associated with early carotid atherosclerosis (Markus et al. 2006). IL-18 is a proinflammatory cytokine and increased circulating IL-18 concentrations increase risk of CAD. Variations in the IL-18 gene affect IL-18 concen-

trations and thus may influence the atherosclerosis progression (Thompson et al. 2007). IL-10 has anti-inflammatory properties and an association with the A4259G, G1082A, C592A, and the G2849A SNPs in IL-10 gene with the coronary and cerebrovascular atherosclerosis susceptibility was observed (Trompet et al. 2007). Furthermore, the G1082A, the C819CT and the C592A IL-10 promoter SNPs were associated with aortic atherosclerosis (Blanco et al. 2008; Trompet et al. 2007). However, in other studies the G1082A, the C819CT and the C592A IL-10 promoter polymorphism were not associated with risk of CAD/MI (Koch et al. 2001), and the common G1082A SNP was not associated with carotid atherosclerosis (Crivello et al. 2006).

Pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-$\alpha$ influences endothelial function, coagulation, insulin resistance and lipid metabolism. Lymphotoxin-$\alpha$ (LTA also known as TNF-$\beta$) is a cytokine with multiple functions in regulation of the immune system and inflammatory reactions. The role of TNF-$\alpha$, TNF-$\beta$ and TNF-receptor genes polymorphisms in atherosclerotic diseases has been controversial (Allen et al. 2001; Benjafield et al. 2001; Keso et al. 2001; Oda et al. 2007; Um et al. 2003; Vendrell et al. 2003). A genome wide association study in Japan concluded that functional SNPs in LTA gene were significantly associated with MI (Ozaki et al. 2002). The C804A polymorphism in LTA gene was also associated with CAD in Europeans (PROCARDIS Consortium 2004). However, in a case-control association study in Japan, no associations of the LTA A252G and the C804A polymorphisms with MI were observed (Yamada et al. 2004).

The adherence of circulating monocytes and lymphocytes to activated arterial endothelium is one of the earliest detectable events in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and associations of PECAM-1, selectins, VCAM-I and ICAM-I gene polymorphism with atherosclerotic vascular diseases have been observed (Elrayess et al. 2003; Gaetani et al. 2002; Sasaoka et al. 2001; Volcik et al. 2007; Wenzel et al. 1996). Associations of genetic polymorphisms in chemokines with atherosclerosis have also been investigated. The V249I variant of the CX3C chemokine fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) was found to be an independent genetic risk factor for CAD (Moatti et al. 2001) and acute coronary syndrome (Niessner et al. 2005). In addition, the I allele of the V249I polymorphism was associated with carotid plaque stability, and the M allele of the CX3CR1 T280M polymorphism has been described as a genetic risk factor for carotid artery occlusive disease (Ghilardi et al. 2004). Polymorphisms in other chemokines and chemokine receptors including chemokine receptor (CCR) 5, CCR2 (Cha et al. 2007; Sharda et al. 2008), RANTES (Jang et al. 2007) and MCP-1 gene (McDermott et al. 2005) have also been associated with atherosclerotic diseases.Eicosanoids play an important role in inflammatory processes. The 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) pathway generates leukotrienes (LT) while the cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway yields three prostanoids (Soberman and Christmas 2003). Recent human genetic studies indicate that the variants of LT pathway genes influence the risk of atherosclerosis. Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) also known as 5-LO is an enzyme that transforms arachidonic acid into LT, which is a biologically active metabolite of arachidonic acid that has been implicated in a variety of inflammatory responses. The 5-LO-activating protein (FLAP) activates ALOX5 and is an essential regulator of the LT biosynthesis (Dixon et al. 1990). The ALOX5-activating protein (ALOX5AP) gene encodes FLAP. In a genome-wide association scan in families with high risk of MI and CAD, variants of ALOX5AP were associated with greater risk of MI and stroke (Helgadottir et al. 2004). The study identified 4-SNP haplotype named HapA, and another 4-SNP haplotype named HapB as risk factors for MI and stroke in the Icelandic population. However, subsequent studies in different population groups have produced conflicting results, with some showing an association of ALOX5 and ALOX5AP variants with stroke (Lõhmussaar et al. 2005), carotid atherosclerosis (Dwyer et al. 2004) and CAD (Girelli et al. 2007), while in other studies there was no significant association with stroke, MI (Maznyczka et al. 2008; Meschia et al. 2005; Zee et al. 2006) or CAD (Assimes et al. 2008).

Leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H) is a protein in the same biochemical pathway as ALOX5AP. A haplotype (HapK) spanning the LTA4H gene was associated with risk of MI especially in African-Americans (Helgadottir et al. 2006). The association of the A444C and the G1072A polymorphisms in gene encoding LTC4 synthase to risk of ischemic stroke was recently reported (Freiberg et al. 2008). This study shows that the LTC4 synthase–1072AA genotype predicts increased risk, whereas –444CC genotype predicts decreased risk of ischemic stroke. Conversely, another study has reported an association of –444CC genotype with increased CAD and carotid atherosclerosis risk in women (Iovannisci et al. 2007).

COX enzymes catalyze formation of prostaglandins (PG) that could contribute to inflammatory processes in atherosclerotic lesions. The COX-1 is a constitutive enzyme expressed in most cells while the COX-2 is an inducible enzyme, expressed at the sites of inflammation. Unregulated COX-2 expression and PG synthesis influences atherosclerosis and its complications (Uchida 2008). The G765C polymorphism of the COX-2 gene (PTGS2) was associated with a decreased risk of MI and stroke. This polymorphism presumably reduces COX-2 expression and activity in plaque macrophages (Cipollone et al. 2004). The C allele of the G765C COX-2 polymorphism was associated with lower COX-2 expression, and reduced carotid IMT (Orbe et al. 2006). Conversely, the C allele of the G765C polymorphism in the human COX-2 gene was associated with larger and complicated atherosclerotic lesions in Finnish men (Huuskonen et al. 2008) and increased risk of stroke in African-Americans (Kohsaka et al. 2008; Lee et al. 2008). An association between the G1006A polymorphism in COX-1 gene (PTGS1) and cerebral ischemic stroke was also observed in Caucasians. The –1006A allele carriers have lower COX-1 metabolic activity that presumably impairs cerebral blood flow (Lee et al. 2008). The lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase (L-PGDS) which synthesizes PGD2 from PGH2 has been implicated in atherogenesis, and the A4111C polymorphism in L-PGDS gene was associated with carotid atherosclerosis in Japanese hypertensive patients (Miwa et al. 2004).

Connexin 37 is a gap junctional protein uniquely expressed in endothelial cells and has a major role in myoendothelial gap junctional intercellular communication. It protects against atherosclerosis by regulating monocyte adhesion (Chanson and Kwak 2007; Wong et al. 2006). The C1019T polymorphism in Connexin 37 gene has been associated with atherosclerosis and both the –1019C allele (Boerma et al. 1999; Han et al. 2008; Wong et al. 2007) and the –1019T allele (Listi et al. 2005; Yamada et al. 2002; Yeh et al. 2001) were associated with carotid IMT, CAD and MI. However, in other studies the C1019T polymorphism was not associated with CAD, MI (Horan et al. 2006) and sub-clinical atherosclerosis (Collings et al. 2007).

Myocyte enhancer factor-2A (MEF2A) is a transcription factors that can interact with a variety of protein factors, to regulate the expression of the downstream target genes. A genome-wide association study in a family suffering from autosomal dominant form of CAD identified a 21-base pair deletion on exon 11 in MEF2A gene in family members with CAD/MI (Wang et al. 2003). Three novel mutations in exon 7 of MEF2A gene were later identified in less than 2% patients with CAD (Bhagavatula et al. 2004), and an increased risk of MI was observed with the P279L variant in the MEF2A gene (González et al. 2006). However, other studies found no linkage or association of MEF2A gene with MI/CAD (Kajimoto et al. 2005; Lieb et al. 2008; Weng et al. 2005).

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the immune receptors that distinguish between different patterns of pathogens and activate innate immune responses. TLRs can also be activated by host-derived molecules. It has been proposed that TLRs could be a key link between cardiovascular disease development and the immune system (Frantz et al. 2007). The expression of TLRs is upregulated in the endothelial cells and macrophages of atherosclerotic lesions (Edfeldt et al. 2002). The A299G polymorphism in TLR-4 gene, which attenuates TLR-4 signaling and diminishes theinflammatory response to gram-negative pathogens, was associated with a decreased risk of carotid atherosclerosis (Kiechl et al. 2002), acute coronary syndrome (Ameziane et al. 2003) and MI (Balistreri et al. 2004). But other studies suggest that the A299G and the T399I polymorphisms in the TLR-4 gene were not major players in the progression of carotid atherosclerosis (Labrum et al. 2007; Norata et al. 2005).

Genes involved in T cell antigen presentation have been associated with atherosclerotic vascular disease. The tumor necrosis factor superfamily member 4 (TNFSF4) gene encodes a cytokine that belongs to the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) ligand family. This cytokine is a ligand for receptor TNFRSF4/OX4 and is found to be involved in T cell antigen-presenting cell interactions. A less common G allele of SNP (rs3850641) in TNFSF4 was found to be significantly more frequent in individuals with myocardial infarction than in controls (Wang et al. 2005b). However, results from a recent study indicate no relationship between TNFSF4 SNPs (C921T, rs3850641) and risk of future cardiovascular events in apparently healthy women (Mälarstig et al. 2008).

MHC2TA or class II, major histocompatibility complex, transactivator gene encodes a protein that acts as a positive regulator of class II major histocompatibility complex gene transcription. Antigen presentation to T cells by MHC molecules is essential for adaptive immune responses and expression of MHC class II molecules can be elicited by inflammatory stimuli. The A168G polymorphism in the type III promoter of MHC2TA was associated with increased susceptibility to several complex inflammatory diseases including myocardial infarction, as well as reduced expression of MHC2TA (Swanberg et al. 2005). However, in another study that described associations of the A168AG polymorphism in MHC2TA with cardiovascular mortality and predictors of cardiovascular mortality, no association of the A168AG polymorphism and MI was observed (Lindholm et al. 2006). Therefore, the roles of TNFSF4 and MHC2TA genes in atherogenesis needs to be further clarified.

### Genes associated with vascular remodeling

Changes in the structure and composition of the extracellular matrix occur in atherosclerosis. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and transforming growth factor (TGF) β1 are crucial determinants of vascular remodeling and are known to be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis (Bobik 2006; Kuzuya and Iguchi 2003). TGF-β1, which is involved in a variety of processes including tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, immune responses and inflammation, has been extensively studied for its role in atherosclerosis (Gringer 2007). Polymorphisms in the TGF-β1 gene have been described as a risk factor for genetic susceptibility to MI (Cambien et al. 1996; Yokota et al. 2000), ischemic stroke (Kim and Lee 2006; Sie et al. 2006) and carotid atherosclerosis (Crivello et al. 2006) but were not associated with the angiographically assessed CAD (Cambien et al. 1996; Crivello et al. 2006; Syrris et al. 1998). However, two recently concluded large studies have demonstrated association of TGF-β1 gene polymorphisms with MI in patients with angiographically proven CAD (Koch et al. 2006) and autopsy-proven atherosclerosis (Oda et al. 2007), therefore implicating TGF-β1 as a susceptibility locus for atherosclerosis.

Several association studies have been conducted to explore the relationship between polymorphisms in different MMP genes and atherosclerosis. A common polymorphism in the stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) gene promoter region in which one allele has a stretch of six adenines (6A) and another five adenosines (5A) was described. The 6A allele had a lower promoter activity than the 5A allele (Ye et al. 1996). The 6A/6A genotype was significantly associated with greater progression of CAD (Humphries et al. 1998; Ye et al. 1995) and carotid atherosclerosis (Djuric et al. 2008; Ghilardi et al. 2002). It has also been suggested that the 5A allele which has high activity could predispose to plaque rupture and MI (Abilleira et al. 2006; Samnegård et al. 2005). The 1G/2G polymorphism in the MMP-1 gene could influence risk of CAD (Ye et al. 2003) and the MMP-1 2G/2G genotype in combination with stromelysin-1 6A/6A genotype significantly increased the risk factor for carotid artery atherosclerosis (Ghilardi et al. 2002). The MMP9 (Gelatinase B) C1562T polymorphism was also associated with CAD risk (Cho et al. 2002; Ghilardi et al. 2002; Zhang et al. 1999). In a large study an association of composite C1562T/R279Q polymorphisms in MMP-9 gene with MI was observed. The same study also reported an association between combined polymorphisms in MMP-1/MMP-3 genes and CAD (Horne et al. 2007). The association of genetic polymorphism in other MMPs with atherosclerosis has been also investigated. The A181G and the C153T polymorphisms in the MMP-7 gene and the A82G polymorphism in the MMP-12 gene influenced coronary artery luminal dimensions (Jormsjö et al. 2000, 2001). The available data suggest that some common SNPs in the MMP-1, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-9 and MMP-12 genes are possible risk factors for atherosclerosis.

### Genes associated with arterial thrombosis

The formation of a thrombus in atherosclerotic lesions triggers acute cardiovascular events like acute coronary syndrome and acute occlusive PAD. Thrombosis not onlyleads to major symptomatic manifestations of atherosclerosis but thrombin formation and clot dissolutions presumably also contribute to the initial phase of atherosclerosis (Horne et al. 2007; Tuomisto et al. 2005). Inflammatory processes and extracellular proteases play an important role in plaque rupture, which exposes the subendothelial layer of the artery to the thrombogenic elements in blood and results in thrombus formation (Libby and Theroux 2005; Rader and Daugherty 2008). An interaction between the cellular and the molecular components of the coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways is essential for thrombus formation. Numerous studies have investigated association of polymorphisms in genes encoding various coagulation factors, fibrinolytic factors and platelet surface receptors with atherosclerosis (Voetsch and Loscalzo 2004). The synergistic effects of multiple hemostatic genes polymorphisms on atherosclerotic diseases have also been investigated (Atherosclerosis and Group 2003; Boekholdt et al. 2001; Knowles et al. 2007b). To resolve apparently conflicting results from various studies, a meta-analysis was performed which included 191 studies, investigating association of common polymorphism in hemostatic genes and CAD. This meta-analysis concluded that the G1691A variant of the factor V gene and the G20210A variant of the prothrombin gene were moderately associated with the risk of CAD. Factor VII, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and three platelet glycoprotein receptor variants, were not significantly associated with CAD/MI (Ye et al. 2006). In addition to fibrinolysis, PAI-1 participates in the regulation of several plasmin-mediated processes including intima proliferation, angiogenesis and vascular remodeling; therefore, its role in atherosclerosis pathology has been extensively examined. A recent study has described that the PAI-1 4G/4G gene polymorphism confers an increased risk for MI in patients with known coronary atherosclerosis (Onalan et al. 2008).

Thrombomodulin is an endothelial glycoprotein that decreases thrombin activity. The G33A polymorphism in thrombomodulin gene reduces promoter activity and was significantly associated with MI (Ireland et al. 1997; Park et al. 2002), CAD (Li et al. 2000) and carotid atherosclerosis (Li et al. 2001). Conversely, in another study no association between the G33A polymorphism and CAD/MI was observed (Zhao et al. 2005).

Genetic variations in the hemostatic genes likely have modest effects on the risk of atherosclerosis but can modulate the delicate equilibrium between coagulation and fibrinolysis thereby affecting vulnerability to occluding thrombosis in atherosclerotic arteries. Combined effects of prothrombotic polymorphisms in predicting MI in patients with advanced CAD were recently described (Martinelli et al. 2008).

---

Other genes modulating susceptibility to atherosclerosis

Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR)$\gamma$ is a member in the nuclear receptor superfamily that helps in regulating fatty-acid metabolism and adipocyte differentiation. PPAR$\gamma$ has a critical role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome. Recently novel roles of PPAR$\gamma$ signaling in inflammation and atherosclerosis were described (Heikkinen et al. 2007; Marx et al. 2004). The P12A polymorphism in PPAR$\gamma$ gene has been commonly associated with atherosclerotic disorders. Several studies have described that the $-12A$ allele has a protective role in carotid atherosclerosis (Al-Shali et al. 2004; Iwata et al. 2003; Temelkova-Kurktschiev et al. 2004) and MI (Doney et al. 2004; Temelkova-Kurktschiev et al. 2004). However, in a recent study no significant association between P12A polymorphism and prevalence or severity of CAD was observed (Rhee et al. 2007). The PPAR$\gamma$ C161T polymorphism was also associated with a reduced CAD risk (Liu et al. 2007; Wang et al. 1999). The T allele of the C1431T polymorphism was independently associated with an increased risk of MI in diabetics (Doney et al. 2004). PPAR$\alpha$ regulates genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism, inflammation and presumably also has a role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis (Marx et al. 2004). The L162V polymorphism in PPAR$\alpha$ gene could have a protective role against the development of atherosclerosis or CHD in patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus (Gouni-Berthold et al. 2004). Although most studies suggest an association of PPAR$\gamma$ and PPAR$\alpha$ polymorphisms with atherosclerotic disorders, a conclusive verdict will require further studies.

Thrombospondins consist of five extracellular multifunctional matrix glycoproteins. They have important roles in cell adhesion, coagulation and angiogenesis and serve as key ligands for CD36, and integrins (Topol et al. 2001). In studies conducted primarily in Caucasian populations the A387P polymorphism in the thrombospondin-4 gene and the N700S polymorphism in the thrombospondin-1 gene were associated with early MI and CAD (Cui et al. 2006; Topol et al. 2001; Zwicker et al. 2006), while the T>G substitution in the 3′ untranslated region of thrombospondin-2 had a protective effect against MI (Boekholdt et al. 2002; Topol et al. 2001). However, in studies conducted in the Han Chinese population, the A387P polymorphism in the thrombospondin-4 gene (Zhou et al. 2004a) and the N700S polymorphism in the thrombospondin-1 gene (Zhou et al. 2004b) were not associated with MI. The association of common polymorphisms in the thrombospondin-1 and thrombospondin-4 genes with atherosclerosis remains controversial.

The renin–angiotensin system is a key player in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. The roles of
insertion-deletion polymorphism in angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene, the A1166C polymorphism of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene and the M235T polymorphism in angiotensinogen gene have been extensively investigated for their association with atherosclerosis but the results have been inconsistent (Wang and Staessen 2000). A meta-analysis of 46 studies including a total of 32,715 Caucasian subjects concluded that the insertion-deletion polymorphism in ACE gene was not associated with increased risk of MI, CAD, or ischemic cerebrovascular disease (Agerholm-Larsen et al. 2000). It has been suggested that a combination of genotype variants of the renin-angiotensin system genes could be a significant determinant of ischemic events (van Geel et al. 2001) and CAD (Kretowski et al. 2007).

Elevated homocysteine levels in plasma are a risk factor for atherosclerosis (Genest et al. 1990). Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a crucial enzyme in homocysteine metabolism and a common polymorphism in MTHFR gene was identified as a possible genetic risk factor for atherosclerosis (Frosst et al. 1995). The association of the C677T polymorphism in MTHFR gene and atherosclerotic diseases has been comprehensively investigated. A restricted meta-analysis indicated that all the three C677T genotypes were associated with varying degrees of atherosclerosis risk (Kluijtmans and Whitehead 2001) while other meta-analyses have concluded that the TT genotype could influence susceptibility to CAD (Klerk et al. 2002) and ischemic stroke (Kelly et al. 2002). Two large meta-analyses studies have, however, determined that the C677T polymorphism does not increase CAD risk (Brattström et al. 1998; Lewis et al. 2005). The role of MTHFR gene polymorphism in atherosclerosis is still debatable.

Phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) selectively degrades second messenger cAMP, which has a central role in signal transduction and regulation of physiological responses. PDE4D gene was identified as a novel gene that predisposes to carotid and cardioembolic ischemic stroke independent of conventional risk factors. Association of six SNPs and a combined SNP and short tandem repeat marker haplotype in the 5′ region of PDE4D gene with ischemic stroke was observed. It was proposed that the lower cAMP levels in vascular cells contribute to the development of the atherosclerotic plaque or to its instability (Gretarsdottir et al. 2003). An association between PDE4D gene polymorphism and cardioembolic ischemic stroke has been observed in some studies (Bevan et al. 2005; Woo et al. 2006) but not in other studies (Kuhlenbäumer et al. 2006; Lõhmussaar et al. 2005; Nilsson-Ardnor et al. 2005). Moreover, no association between PDE4D gene polymorphisms and carotid atherosclerosis was observed (Bevan et al. 2005). The PDE4D polymorphisms presumably influence ischemic stroke risk but an association with atherosclerosis is contentious.

Recent developments

Several genome wide association studies have shown that a locus on chromosome 9p21 was significantly associated with the risk of CAD and MI (Helgadóttir et al. 2007; McPherson et al. 2007; Samani et al. 2007). The genes nearest to SNPs that were highly associated to the risk of CAD and MI included cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes CDKN2A (encoding INK4 protein p16INK4a) and CDKN2B (encoding p15INK4b). Furthermore, PSRC1 gene (encoding a proline-rich protein) on chromosome 1p13.3, melanoma inhibitory activity 3 (MIA3) gene on chromosome 1q41, SMAD3 gene on chromosome 15q22.33, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1-like protein (MTHFD1L) gene on chromosome 6q25.1 and CXCL12 gene on chromosome 10q11.21 were identified near the loci that were associated with CAD or MI. INK4 proteins belong to a family of cell cycle suppressors and the genes identified in the other loci—PSRC1, MIA3, and SMAD3—also play a role in cell growth or inhibition. These findings strongly imply a role of cell cycle regulation in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis (Samani et al. 2007).

The observations from a follow up study suggest that the novel CAD-associated locus in the vicinity of the PSRC1 and CELSR2 genes on chromosome 1 probably enhances CAD risk through an effect on plasma LDL-C (Samani et al. 2008). A recent meta-analysis of three genome wide scans identified several SNPs associated with increased LDL-C concentrations, which were present in increased frequency in CAD cases (Willer et al. 2008). These recent results implicate polymorphisms in novel genes regulating LDL-C metabolism to CAD pathogenesis.

The CXCL12 gene which has been associated with CAD (Samani et al. 2007) has a role in mobilization, homing and differentiation of vascular progenitor cells in response to vascular injury. Moreover, the SNPs in GATA2 gene were associated with CAD (Connelly et al. 2006). GATA2 transcription factor is essential for the development and differentiation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. These observations suggest that the genes and transcription factors that regulate hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells have a role in atherosclerosis/pathogenesis of CAD. GATA2 is expressed both in endothelial cells and VSMCs and is known to regulate several other endothelial-specific genes that are linked to CAD (Connelly et al. 2006). SNPs in KALRN gene located close to GATA2 gene on chromosome 3 were also associated with CAD. KALRN belongs to the Rho GTPase-signaling pathway. KALRN protein has many functions, including the inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase and guanine-exchange-factor activity (Wang et al. 2007a).

A large antisense non-coding RNA gene (ANRIL) was identified as the prime candidate gene for CAD susceptibility

locus on chromosome 9p21. Biological functions of ANRIL are largely unknown but it is expressed in tissues and cell types that are affected by atherosclerosis (Broadbent et al. 2008). Variants in 2 genes: VAMP8, which is involved in platelet degranulation, and HNRPUl1, which encodes a ribonuclear protein were associated with early onset MI (Shiffman et al. 2006). The -719R allele of kinesin family member 6 (KIF6) gene was associated with increased risk of CAD/MI. Kinesins are a large family of proteins involved in intracellular transport (Iakoubova et al. 2008; Shiffman et al. 2008). Identification of these novel genes their exact functions and genetic polymorphisms will enhance our understanding of molecular mechanisms of atherosclerosis.

**Future prospects**

Advancements in genetics of atherosclerosis are expected to be based on combined approaches. Availability of powerful molecular genetic techniques like genome wide association scans is likely to reveal novel genes and genetic polymorphisms associated with atherosclerosis and will enhance our understanding about the pathophysiology of atherosclerotic vascular diseases. The new generation high-density genotyping arrays provide improved resolution for an unbiased genome-wide assessment of common polymorphisms associated with atherosclerosis. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping in mice has been used to identify possible candidate genes for human atherosclerotic diseases. More than 60% of human atherosclerosis QTLs are located in the regions homologous to mouse atherosclerosis QTLs, suggesting that these mouse and human atherosclerosis QTLs have the same underlying genes. Once QTL genes are identified in mice, they can be tested in human association studies for their relevance in human atherosclerotic disease (Wang et al. 2005a). The TNFSF4 and MHC2TA genes were derived from QTL studies in mice models and later tested in human association studies. Genome-wide association studies are an excellent complement to QTL mapping. Combining the two techniques can provide information about individual genes or even nucleotides that contribute to the phenotype of interest (Miles and Wayne 2008).

Gene expression profiling by microarray techniques have been efficiently used to study the transcriptional changes in human atherosclerotic tissues and in animal models. New generation DNA microarrays allow the simultaneous analysis of thousands of transcripts in a single assay. Interpretation of the results from these high output techniques is often difficult and requires careful analysis. However, these studies can provide a wealth of information and sometimes unexpected results. Microarrays can also be used to study effects of treatment at molecular levels. Gene

expression studies are likely to play important role in designing future diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic strategies for atherosclerotic vascular diseases. Role of epigenetic modifications in atherosclerosis pathogenesis is also likely to come into focus. Better tools for downstream functional analysis of genes and genetic variants are also required in future (Hamsten and Eriksson 2008).

Recent years have also seen an increasing interest in systems biology research that focuses not on the molecular components themselves but on their interactions within networks. It has been suggested that candidate gene approaches generate fragmented knowledge for complex traits and therefore systems biological approaches are better for complex disorders like atherosclerosis. With the availability of tools to measure the activity of the entire genome systems biology approaches can be used to define the regulation and interplay between atherosclerosis phenotypes and pathways of atherosclerosis development. Using computerized algorithms, it is possible to identify gene networks of atherosclerosis development (Tegnér et al. 2007). It is likely that in long term systems biology approaches will be increasingly used to investigate the molecular mechanisms that underlie the complex and heterogeneous phenotypes of human atherosclerosis. Our present systems level understanding of the linked networks of interacting genes, gene products and metabolic processes that determine complex atherosclerotic phenotypes is limited. Therefore in short term most human studies will continue to focus on intermediate and biochemical phenotypes that are relatively easy to analyze.

There is also an increasing recognition of the role of genetic variations in modulating therapeutic responses to drugs which is likely to result in opening of new avenues for individualized treatments for patients suffering from atherosclerotic vascular diseases. However, the role of genetic testing in predicting atherosclerosis is debatable. Genetic screening tests for some monogenic atherosclerotic disorders like FH have been successfully used to identify presymptomatic relatives and have been shown to be cost-effective. The genetic testing for screening monogenic atherosclerotic disorders is likely to become more popular in coming years. In non-monogenic atherosclerosis the effect of any single variant of an individual gene on the clinical end points of atherosclerosis is relatively modest (Humphries et al. 2004). But use of a panel of appropriate genetic tests in combination with the risk factors (Yang et al. 2003) for complex non-monogenic atherosclerosis can substantially improve the ability to predict the risk of development of atherosclerosis. Research is required to ascertain an optimum panel of genes best suited for a particular objective. The cost-effectiveness of multiple genetic tests in panels for predicting development of non-monogenic atherosclerosis also has to be determined.

Conclusions

Rapid progress in sequencing of human genome and molecular genetic techniques has helped in mapping and identifying susceptibility loci and candidate genes associated with atherosclerosis and associated diseases. Association of a large number of susceptibility genes with atherosclerosis reflects the tremendous complexity of the disease. Multiple factors including endothelial dysfunction, defects in lipid metabolism, inflammation and immune responses, oxidative stress, cellular proliferation, tissue remodelling and haemostatic defects are involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Presence of other genetic and environmental factors like diabetes, hypertension, smoking, diet, exercise and stress further complicates the scenario.

A lack of consistent results from different studies and population groups tends to create an ambiguity about the role of genetic variations in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. A likely reason is that many of the individual genetic variations have only a modest effect on the risk of atherosclerotic disorders but their effects are enhanced in synergy with other genetic and environmental factors. Moreover, the variations among population groups, including variations in age, sex, ethnicity and sample size, and differences in clinical end points can significantly influence the results of genetic association studies. However, in spite of these confounding factors several major susceptibility genes, genetic polymorphisms and haplotypes associated to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis have already been identified.

Acknowledgments This study was supported by Finnish Academy, Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular diseases, and EU lymphangiogenomics (LSHG-CT-2004-503573).

References

Abboud S, Karhunen PJ, Lütjohann D, Goebeler S, Luoto T, Friedrichs S, Lehtimäki T, Pandolfo M, Laaksonen R (2007) Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) gene is a risk factor of large-vessel atherosclerosis stroke. PLoS ONE 2:e1043

Abifadel M, Varret M, Rabès JP, Allard D, Ouguerram K, Devillers M, Cruaud C, Benjannet S, Wickham L, Erlich D, Derré A, Villégier L, Farnier M, Beucler I, Bruckert E, Chambaz J, Chanu B, Lecerf JM, Luc G, Moulin P, Weissenbach J, Prat A, Krempf M, Junien C, Seidah NG, Boileau C (2003) Mutations in PCSK9 cause autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia. Nat Genet 34:154–156

Abilleira S, Bevan S, Markus HS (2006) The role of genetic variants of matrix metalloproteinases in coronary and carotid atherosclerosis. J Med Genet 43:897–901

Agema WR, de Maat MP, Zwinderman AH, Kastelein JJ, Rabelink TJ, van Boven AJ, Feskens EJ, Boer JM, van der Wall EE, Jukema JW (2004) An integrated evaluation of endothelial constitutive nitric oxide synthase polymorphisms and coronary artery disease in men. Clin Sci (Lond) 107:255–261

Allen RA, Lee EM, Roberts DH, Park BK, Pirmohamed M (2001) Polymorphisms in the TNF-alpha and TNF-receptor genes in patients with coronary artery disease. Eur J Clin Invest 31:843–851

Allen A, Belton C, Patterson C, Horan P, McGlinchey P, Spence M, Evans A, Fogarty D, McKeown P (2005) Family-based association studies of lipid gene polymorphisms in coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol 96:52–55

Al-Shali KZ, House AA, Hanley AJ, Khan HM, Harris SB, Zinman B, Mamakeesick M, Fenster A, Spence JD, Hegele RA (2004) Genetic variation in PPARG encoding peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma associated with carotid atherosclerosis. Stroke 35:2036–2040

Ameziane N, Beillat T, Verpillat P, Chollet-Martin S, Aumont MC, Seknadji P, Lamotte M, Lebret D, Ollivier V, de Prost D (2003) Association of the Toll-like receptor 4 gene Asp299Gly polymorphism with acute coronary events. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 23:e61–e64

Andersen RV, Wittrup HH, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Steffensen R, Schnohr P, Nordestgaard BG (2003) Hepatic lipase mutations, elevated high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and increased risk of ischemic heart disease: the Copenhagen City Heart Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 41:1972–1982

Arnett DK, Baird AE, Barkley RA, Basson CT, Boerwinkle E, Ganesh SK, Herrington DM, Hong Y, Jaquish C, McDermott DA, O'Donnell CJ, American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart Association Stroke Council; Functional Genomics and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Group (2007) Relevance of genetics and genomics for prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, the Stroke Council, and the Functional Genomics and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation 115:2878–2901

Assimes TL, Knowles JW, Priest JR, Basu A, Volcik KA, Southwick A, Tabor HK, Hartiala J, Alleyee H, Grove ML, Tabibiazar R, Sidney S, Fortmann SP, Go A, Hlatky M, Iribarren C, Boerwinkle E, Myers R, Risch N, Quertermous T (2008) Common polymorphisms of ALOX5 and ALOX5AP and risk of coronary artery disease. Hum Genet 123:399–408

Atherosclerosis Thrombosis, Group Vascular Biology Italian Study (2003) No evidence of association between prothrombotic gene polymorphisms and the development of acute myocardial infarction at a young age. Circulation 107:1117–1122

Balistreri CR, Candore G, Colonna-Romano G, Lio D, Caruso M, Hoffmann E, Franceschi C, Caruso C (2004) Role of Toll-like receptor 4 in acute myocardial infarction and longevity. JAMA 292:2339–2340

Barter PJ, Rye KA (2006) The rationale for using apoA-I as a clinical marker of cardiovascular risk. J Intern Med 259:447–454

Benjajfield AV, Wang XL, Morris BJ (2001) Tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 gene (TNFRSF1B) in genetic basis of coronary artery disease. J Mol Med 79:109–115

Bennett AM, Prince JA, Fei GZ, Lyrenäs L, Huang Y, Wiman B, Frostegård J, Faire U (2003) Interleukin-6 serum levels and genotypes influence the risk for myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis 171:359–367

Berge KE, Tian H, Graf GA, Yu L, Grishin NV, Schultz J, Kwiterovich P, Shan B, Barnes R, Hobbs HH (2000) Accumulation of dietary cholesterol in sitosterolemia caused by mutations in adjacent ABC transporters. Science 290:1771–1775

Berglund L, Ramakrishnan R (2004) Lipoprotein(a): an elusive cardiovascular risk factor. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24:2219–2226

Berliner JA, Navab M, Fogelman AM, Frank JS, Demer LL, Edwards PA, Watson AD, Lusis AJ (1995) Atherosclerosis: basic mechanisms. Oxidation, inflammation, and genetics. Circulation 91:2488–2496

Bevan S, Porteous L, Sitzer M, Markus HS (2005) Phosphodiesterase 4D gene, ischemic stroke, and asymptomatic carotid atherosclerosis. Stroke 36:949–953

Bhagavatula MR, Fan C, Shen GQ, Cassano J, Plow EF, Topol EJ, Wang Q (2004) Transcription factor MEF2A mutations in patients with coronary artery disease. Hum Mol Genet 13:3181–3188

Bi N, Yan SK, Li GP, Yin ZN, Chen BS (2004) A single nucleotide polymorphism –1131T>C in the apolipoprotein A5 gene is associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease and alters triglyceride metabolism in Chinese. Mol Genet Metab 83:280–286

Blanc J, Alves-Guerra MC, Esposito B, Rousset S, Gourdy P, Ricquier D, Tedgui A, Miroux B, Mallat Z (2003) Protective role of uncoupling protein 2 in atherosclerosis. Circulation 107:388–390

Blanco E, Moñux G, Mas A, Serrano FJ, de la Concha EG, Urcelay E (2008) Role of IL-10 promoter polymorphisms in the development of severe aorto-iliac occlusive disease. Hum Immunol 69(10):651–654

Bobik A (2006) Transforming growth factor-betas and vascular disorders. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:1712–1720

Bodzioch M, Orso E, Klucken J, Langmann T, Bottcher A, Diederich W, Drobnik W, Barlage S, Buchler C, Porsche-Ozcurumez M, Kaminski WE, Hahmann HW, Oette K, Rothe G, Aslanidis C, Lackner KJ, Schmitz G (1999) The gene encoding ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 is mutated in Tangier disease. Nat Genet 22:347–351

Boekholdt SM, Bijsterveld NR, Moons AH, Levi M, Büller HR, Peters RJ (2001) Genetic variation in coagulation and fibrinolytic proteins and their relation with acute myocardial infarction: a systematic review. Circulation 104:3063–3068

Boekholdt SM, Trip MD, Peters RJ, Engelen M, Boer JM, Feskens EJ, Zwinderman AH, Kastelein JJ, Reitsma PH (2002) Thrombospondin-2 polymorphism is associated with a reduced risk of premature myocardial infarction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 22:e24–e27

Boekholdt SM, Kuivenhoven JA, Hovingh GK, Jukema JW, Kastelein JJ, van Tol A (2004a) CETP gene variation: relation to lipid parameters and cardiovascular risk. Curr Opin Lipidol 15:393–398

Boekholdt SM, Kuivenhoven JA, Wareham NJ, Peters RJ, Jukema JW, Luben R, Bingham SA, Day NE, Kastelein JJ, Khaw KT (2004b) Plasma levels of cholesteryl ester transfer protein and the risk of future coronary artery disease in apparently healthy men and women: the prospective EPIC (European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and nutrition)-Norfolk population study. Circulation 110:1418–1423

Boekholdt SM, Sacks FM, Jukema JW, Shepherd J, Freeman DJ, McMahon AD, Cambien F, Nicaud V, de Grooth GJ, Talmud PJ, Humphries SE, Miller GJ, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason V, Kauma H, Kakko S, Savolainen MJ, Arca M, Montali A, Liu S, Lanz HJ, Zwinderman AH, Kuivenhoven JA, Kastelein JJ (2005) Cholesteryl ester transfer protein TaqIB variant, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, cardiovascular risk, and efficacy of pravastatin treatment: individual patient meta-analysis of 13,677 subjects. Circulation 111:278–287

Boerma M, Forsberg L, Van Zeijl L, Morgenstern R, De Faire U, Lemne C, Erlinge D, Thulin T, Hong Y, Cotgreave IA (1999) A genetic polymorphism in connexin 37 as a prognostic marker for atherosclerotic plaque development. J Intern Med 246:211–218

Borggreve SE, Hillege HL, Wolfenbuttel BH, de Jong PE, Zuurman MW, van der Steege G, van Tol A, Dullaart RP, PREVEND Study Group (2006) An increased coronary risk is paradoxically associated with common cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene variations that relate to higher high-density lipoprotein cholesterol: a population-based study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:3382–3388

Boucher P, Gotthardt M (2004) LRP and PDGF signaling: a pathway to atherosclerosis. Trends Cardiovasc Med 14:55–60

Brattström L, Wilcken DE, Ohrvik J, Brudin L (1998) Common methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutation leads to hyperhomocysteinemia but not to vascular disease: the result of a meta-analysis. Circulation 98:2520–2526

Brewer HB Jr (1989) Clinical significance of plasma lipid levels. Am J Cardiol 64:3G–9G

Broadbent HM, Peden JF, Lorkowski S, Goel A, Ongen H, Green F, Clarke R, Collins R, Franzosi MG, Tognoni G, Seedorf U, Rust S, Eriksson P, Hamsten A, Farrall M, Watkins H, PROCARDIS consortium (2008) Susceptibility to coronary artery disease and diabetes is encoded by distinct, tightly linked SNPs in the ANRIL locus on chromosome 9p. Hum Mol Genet 17:806–814

Brooks-Wilson A, Marcil M, Clee SM, Zhang LH, Roomp K, van Dam M, Yu L, Brewer C, Collins JA, Molhuizen HO, Loubser O, Ouelette BF, Fichter K, Ashbourne-Excoffon KJ, Sensen CW, Scherer S, Mott S, Denis M, Martindale D, Frohlich J, Morgan K, Koop B, Pimstone S, Kastelein JJ, Hayden MR (1999) Mutations in ABC1 in Tangier disease and familial high-density lipoprotein deficiency. Nat Genet 22:336–345

Brousseau ME, Bodzioch M, Schaefer EJ, Goldkamp AL, Kielar D, Probst M, Ordovas JM, Aslanidis C, Lackner KJ, Bloomfield Rubins H, Collins D, Robins SJ, Wilson PW, Schmitz G (2001) Common variants in the gene encoding ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 in men with low HDL cholesterol levels and coronary heart disease. Atherosclerosis 154:607–611

Brousseau ME, O'Connor JJ Jr, Ordovas JM, Collins D, Otvos JD, Massov T, McNamara JR, Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Schaefer EJ (2002) Cholesteryl ester transfer protein TaqI B2B2 genotype is associated with higher HDL cholesterol levels and lower risk of coronary heart disease end points in men with HDL deficiency: Veterans Affairs HDL Cholesterol Intervention Trial. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 22:1148–1154

Cai H, Duarte N, Wilcken DE, Wang XL (1999) NADH/NADPH oxidase p22phoxC242T polymorphism and coronary artery disease in the Australian population. Eur J Clin Invest 29:744–748

Cambien F, Ricard S, Troesch A, Mallet C, Générénaz L, Evans A, Arveiler D, Luc G, Ruidavets JB, Poirier O (1996) Polymorphisms of the transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene in relation to myocardial infarction and blood pressure. The Etude Cas-Temoin de l'Infarctus du Myocarde (ECTIM) Study. Hypertension 28:881–887

Casas JP, Bautista LE, Humphries SE, Hingorani AD (2004) Endothelial nitric oxide synthase genotype and ischemic heart disease: meta-analysis of 26 studies involving 23028 subjects. Circulation 109:1359–1365

Cha SH, Lee JK, Lee JY, Kim HT, Ryu HJ, Han BG, Kim JW, Oh B, Kimm K, Shin HD, Park BL, Park S, Park HY, Jang Y (2007) Association of CCR2 polymorphisms with the number of closed coronary artery vessels in coronary artery disease. Clin Chim Acta 382:129–133

Chanson M, Kwak BR (2007) Connexin37: a potential modifier gene of inflammatory disease. J Mol Med 85:787–795

Chapman CM, Beilby JP, Humphries SE, Palmer LJ, Thompson PL, Hung J (2003) Association of an allelic variant of interleukin-6 with subclinical carotid atherosclerosis in an Australian community population. Eur Heart J 24:1494–1499

Chen YH, Lin SJ, Lin MW, Tsai HL, Kuo SS, Chen JW, Charng MJ, Wu TC, Chen LC, Ding YA, Pan WH, Jou YS, Chau LY (2002) Microsatellite polymorphism in promoter of heme oxygenase-1 gene is associated with susceptibility to coronary artery disease in type 2 diabetic patients. Hum Genet 111:1–8

Chen SN, Ballantyne CM, Gotto AM Jr, Tan Y, Willerson JT, Marian AJ (2005) A common PCSK9 haplotype, encompassing the E670G coding single nucleotide polymorphism, is a novel genetic

marker for plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and severity of coronary atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 45:1611–1619

Chen Y, Rollins J, Paigen B, Wang X (2007) Genetic and genomic insights into the molecular basis of atherosclerosis. Cell Metab 6:164–179

Chhabra S, Narang R, Lakshmy R, Das N (2005) APOA1-75G to A substitution associated with severe forms of CAD, lower levels of HDL and apoA-I among Northern Indians. Dis Markers 21:169–174

Chiodini BD, Barlera S, Franzosi MG, Beceiro VL, Introna M, Tognoni G (2003) APO B gene polymorphisms and coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Atherosclerosis 167:355–366

Cho HJ, Chae IH, Park KW, Ju JR, Oh S, Lee MM, Park YB (2002) Functional polymorphism in the promoter region of the gelatinase B gene in relation to coronary artery disease and restenosis after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Hum Genet 47:88–91

Cipollone F, Toniato E, Martinotti S, Fazia M, Iezzi A, Cuccurullo C, Pini B, Ursi S, Vitullo G, Averna M, Arca M, Montali A, Campagna F, Ucchino S, Spigoniardo F, Taddei S, Virdis A, Ciabattoni G, Notarbartolo A, Cuccurullo F, Mezzetti A (2004) A polymorphism in the cyclooxygenase 2 gene as an inherited protective factor against myocardial infarction and stroke. Identification of New Elements of Plaque Stability (INES) Study Group. JAMA 291:2221–2228

Clee SM, Zwinderman AH, Engert JC, Zwarts KY, Molhuizen HO, Roomp K, Jukema JW, van Wijland M, van Dam M, Hudson TJ, Brooks-Wilson A, Genest J Jr, Kastelein JJ, Hayden MR (2001) Common genetic variation in ABCA1 is associated with altered lipoprotein levels and a modified risk for coronary artery disease. Circulation 103:1198–1205

Cohen JC, Boerwinkle E, Mosley TH Jr, Hobbs HH (2006) Sequence variations in PCSK9, low LDL, and protection against coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med 354:1264–1272

Collings A, Islam MS, Juonala M, Rontu R, Kähönen M, Hutri-Kähönen N, Laitinen T, Marniemi J, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Lehtimäki TJ (2007) Associations between connexin 37 gene polymorphism and markers of subclinical atherosclerosis: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Atherosclerosis 195:379–384

Connelly JJ, Wang T, Cox JE, Haynes C, Wang L, Shah SH, Crosslin DR, Hale AB, Nelson S, Crossman DC, Granger CB, Haines JL, Jones CJ, Vance JM, Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ, Kraus WE, Hauser ER, Gregory SG (2006) GATA2 is associated with familial early-onset coronary artery disease. PLoS Genet 2:e139

Crivello A, Giacalone A, Scola L, Forte GI, Nuzzo D, Giacconi R, Cipriano C, Candore G, Mocchegiani E, Colonna-Romano G, Lio D, Caruso C (2006) Frequency of polymorphisms of signal peptide of TGF-beta1 and −1082G/A SNP at the promoter region of Il-10 gene in patients with carotid stenosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1067:288–293

Cui J, Randell E, Renouf J, Sun G, Green R, Han FY, Xie YG (2006) Thrombospondin-4 1186G>C (A387P) is a sex-dependent risk factor for myocardial infarction: a large replication study with increased sample size from the same population. Am Heart J 152:543.e1–543.e5

Cullen P, Funke H, Schulte H, Assmann G (1998) Lipoproteins and cardiovascular risk-from genetics to CHD prevention. Eur Heart J 19:C5–C11

Dallongeville J, Cottel D, Montaye M, Codron V, Amouyel P, Helbecque N (2006) Impact of APOA5/A4/C3 genetic polymorphisms on lipid variables and cardiovascular disease risk in French men. Int J Cardiol 106:152–156

de Grooth GJ, Klerkx AH, Stroes ES, Stalenhoef AF, Kastelein JJ, Kuivenhoven JA (2004) A review of CETP and its relation to atherosclerosis. J Lipid Res 45:1967–1974

Dhamrait SS, Stephens JW, Cooper JA, Acharya J, Mani AR, Moore K, Miller GJ, Humphries SE, Hurel SJ, Montgomery HE (2004) Cardiovascular risk in healthy men and markers of oxidative stress in diabetic men are associated with common variation in the gene for uncoupling protein 2. Eur Heart J 25:468–475

Di Castelnuovo A, Soccio M, Iacoviello L, Evangelista V, Consoli A, Vanuzzo D, Diviacco S, Carluccio M, Rignanese L, De Caterina R (2008) The C242T polymorphism of the p22phox component of NAD(P)H oxidase and vascular risk. Two case-control studies and a meta-analysis. Thromb Haemost 99:594–601

Dixon RA, Diehl RE, Opas E, Rands E, Vickers PJ, Evans JF, Gillard JW, Miller DK (1990) Requirement of a 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein for leukotriene synthesis. Nature 343:282–284

Djurić T, Zivković M, Radak D, Jekić D, Radak S, Stojković L, Raičević R, Stanković A, Alavantić D (2008) Association of MMP-3 5A/6A gene polymorphism with susceptibility to carotid atherosclerosis. Clin Biochem 41:1326–1329

Doevendans PA, Jukema W, Spiering W, Defesche JC, Kastelein JJ (2001) Molecular genetics and gene expression in atherosclerosis. Int J Cardiol 80:161–172

Doney AS, Fischer B, Leese G, Morris AD, Palmer CN (2004) Cardiovascular risk in type 2 diabetes is associated with variation at the PPARG locus: a Go-DARTS study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24:2403–2407

Dugi KA, Brandauer K, Schmidt N, Nau B, Schneider JG, Mentz S, Keiper T, Schaefer JR, Meissner C, Kather H, Bahner ML, Fiehn W, Kreuzer J (2001) Low hepatic lipase activity is a novel risk factor for coronary artery disease. Circulation 104:3057–3062

Dwyer JH, Allayee H, Dwyer KM, Fan J, Wu H, Mar R, Lusis AJ, Mehrabian M (2004) Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase promoter genotype, dietary arachidonic acid, and atherosclerosis. N Engl J Med 350:29–37

Edfeldt K, Swedenborg J, Hansson GK, Yan ZQ (2002) Expression of Toll-like receptors in human atherosclerotic lesions: a possible pathway for plaque activation. Circulation 105:1158–1161

Efferth T (2003) Adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter genes in ageing and age-related diseases. Ageing Res Rev 2:11–24

Eichner JE, Dunn ST, Perveen G, Thompson DM, Stewart KE, Stroehla BC (2002) Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and cardiovascular disease: a HuGE review. Am J Epidemiol 155:487–495

Eklund C, Kivimäki M, Islam MS, Juonala M, Kähönen M, Marniemi J, Lehtimäki T, Viikari J, Raitakari OT, Hurme M (2008) C-reactive protein genetics is associated with carotid artery compliance in men in The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Atherosclerosis 196:841–848

Eller P, Schgoer W, Mueller T, Tancevski I, Wehinger A, Ulmer H, Foeger B, Haltmayer M, Ritsch A, Patsch JR (2005) Hepatic lipase polymorphism and increased risk of peripheral arterial disease. J Intern Med 258:344–348

Elrayess MA, Webb KE, Flavell DM, Syvänen M, Taskinen MR, Frick MH, Nieminen MS, Kesäniemi YA, Pasternack A, Jukema JW, Kastelein JJ, Zwinderman AH, Humphries SE (2003) A novel functional polymorphism in the PECAM-1 gene (53G>A) is associated with progression of atherosclerosis in the LOCAT and REGRESS studies. Atherosclerosis 168:131–138

Espinola-Klein C, Rupprecht HJ, Bickel C, Schnabel R, Genth-Zotz S, Torzewski M, Lackner K, Munzel T, Blankenberg S, AtheroGene Investigators (2007) Glutathione peroxidase-1 activity, atherosclerotic burden, and cardiovascular prognosis. Am J Cardiol 99:808–812

Evans D, Beil FU (2003) The association of the R219K polymorphism in the ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 (ABCA1) gene with coronary heart disease and hyperlipidaemia. J Mol Med 81:264–272

Fan M, Raitakari OT, Kähönen M, Juonala M, Hutri-Kähönen N, Marniemi J, Rontu R, Pörsti I, Viikari J, Lehtimäki T (2007a) CYBAC242T gene polymorphism and flow-mediated vasodilation

in a population of young adults: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young
Finns Study. J Hypertens 25:1381–1387
Fan YM, Lehtimäki T, Rontu R, Ilveskoski E, Goebeler S, Kajander O,
Mikkelsen J, Viiri LE, Perola M, Karhunen PJ (2007b) The
hepatic lipase gene C-480T polymorphism in the development of
early coronary atherosclerosis: the Helsinki Sudden Death Study.
Eur J Clin Invest 37:472–477
Fatini C, Sofi F, Gensini F, Sticchi E, Lari B, Pratesi G, Pulli R, Dorigo
W, Pratesi C, Gensini GF, Abbate R (2004) Influence of eNOS
gene polymorphisms on carotid atherosclerosis. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg 27:540–544
Flex A, Gaetani E, Pola R, Santoliquido A, Aloï F, Papaleo P, Dal Lago
A, Pola E, Serricchio M, Tondi P, Pola P (2002) The –174 G/C
polymorphism of the interleukin (IL)-6 gene promoter is associ-
ated with peripheral artery occlusive disease. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg 24:264–268
Forgione MA, Weiss N, Heydrick S, Cap A, Klings ES, Bierl C,
Eberhardt RT, Farber HW, Loscalzo J (2002) Cellular glutathione
peroxidase deficiency and endothelial dysfunction. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 282:H1255–H1261
Fortunato G, Rubba P, Panico S, Trono D, Tinto N, Mazzaccara C, De
Michele M, Iannuzzi A, Vitale DF, Salvatore F, Sacchetti L
(2003) A paraoxonase gene polymorphism, PON1 (55), as an
independent risk factor for increased carotid intima-media thick-
ness in middle-aged women. Atherosclerosis 167:141–148
Frantz S, Ertl G, Bauersachs J (2007) Mechanisms of disease: Toll-like
receptors in cardiovascular disease. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc
Med 4:444–454
Freiberg JJ, Tybjærg-Hansen A, Sillesen H, Jensen GB, Nordestgaard
BG (2008) Promoter polymorphisms in leukotriene C4 synthase
and risk of ischemic cerebrovascular disease. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 28:990–996
Friedlander Y, Schwartz SM, Durst R, Meiner V, Robertson AS, Erez
G, Leitersdorf E, Siscovick DS (2008) SREBP-2 and SCAP iso-
forms and risk of early onset myocardial infarction. Atherosclero-
sis 196:896–904
Frosst P, Blom HJ, Milos R, Goyette P, Sheppard CA, Matthews RG,
Boers GJ, den Heijer M, Kluijtmans LA, van den Heuvel LP (1995)
A candidate genetic risk factor for vascular disease: a common muta-
tion in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Nat Genet 10:111–113
Fujimoto H, Taguchi J, Imai Y, Ayabe S, Hashimoto H, Kobayashi H,
Ogasawara K, Aizawa T, Yamakado M, Nagai R, Ohno M (2008)
Manganese superoxide dismutase polymorphism affects the oxi-
dized low-density lipoprotein-induced apoptosis of macrophages
and coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J 29:1267–1274
Gaetani E, Flex A, Pola R, Papaleo P, De Martini D, Pola E, Aloï F,
Flore R, Serricchio M, Gasbarrini A, Pola P (2002) The K469E
polymorphism of the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-
1) gene is a risk factor for peripheral arterial occlusive disease.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 13:483–488
Garcia CK, Wilund K, Arca M, Zuliani G, Fellin R, Maioli M,
Calandra S, Bertolini S, Cossu F, Grishin N, Barnes R, Cohen JC,
Hobbs HH (2001) Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia
caused by mutations in a putative LDL receptor adaptor protein.
Science 292:1394–1398
Gardemann A, Mages P, Katz N, Tillmanns H, Haberbosch W (1999)
The p22phox A640G gene polymorphism but not the C242T
gene variation is associated with coronary heart disease in young-
er individuals. Atherosclerosis 145:323
Genest JJ Jr, McNamara JR, Salem DN, Wilson PW, Schaefer EJ,
Malinow MR (1990) Plasma homocyst(e)ine levels in men with pre-
mature coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 16:1114–1119
Ghilardi G, Biondi ML, DeMonti M, Turri O, Guagnellini E, Scorza R
(2002) Matrix metalloproteinase-1 and matrix metalloproteinase-
3 gene promoter polymorphisms are associated with carotid artery
stenosis. Stroke 33:2408–2412

Ghilardi G, Biondi ML, Turri O, Guagnellini E, Scorza R (2004) Inter-
nal carotid artery occlusive disease and polymorphisms of fractal-
kine receptor CX3CR1: a genetic risk factor. Stroke 35:1276–1279
Girelli D, Martinelli N, Trabetti E, Olivieri O, Cavallari U, Malerba G,
Busti F, Friso S, Pizzolo F, Pignatti PF, Corrocher R (2007)
ALOX5AP gene variants and risk of coronary artery disease: an
angiography-based study. Eur J Hum Genet 15:959–966
Gnasso A, Motti C, Irace C, Di Gennaro I, Pujia A, Leto E, Ciamei M,
Crivaro A, Bernardini S, Federici G, Cortese C (2002) The Arg al-
lele in position 192 of PON1 is associated with carotid atheroscle-
rosis in subjects with elevated HDLs. Atherosclerosis 164:289–
295
Goldburt U, Yaari S, Medalie JH (1997) Isolated low HDL chole-
sterol as a risk factor for coronary heart disease mortality. A 21-
year follow-up of 8,000 men. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
17:107–113
González P, García-Castro M, Reguero JR, Batalla A, Ordóñez AG,
Palop RL, Lozano I, Montes M, Alvarez V, Coto E (2006) The
Pro279Leu variant in the transcription factor MEF2A is associ-
ated with myocardial infarction. J Med Genet 43:167–169
Gouni-Berthold I, Giannakidou E, Müller-Wieland D, Faust M,
Kotzka J, Berthold HK, Krone W (2004) Association between the
PPARalpha L162V polymorphism, plasma lipoprotein levels, and
atherosclerotic disease in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2
and in nondiabetic controls. Am Heart J 147:1117–1124
Grainger DJ (2007) TGF-beta and atherosclerosis in man. Cardiovasc
Res 74:213–222
Gretarsdottir S, Thorleifsson G, Reynisdottir ST, Manolescu A,
Jonsdottir S, Jonsdottir T, Gudmundsdottir T, Bjarnadottir SM,
Einarsson OB, Gudjonsdottir HM, Hawkins M, Gudmundsson G,
Gudmundsdottir H, Andrason H, Gudmundsdottir AS, Sigurdar-
dottir M, Chou TT, Nahmias J, Goss S, Sveinbjörnsdottir S, Val-
dimarsson EM, Jakobsson F, Agnarsson U, Gudnason V,
Thorgeirsson G, Fingerle J, Gurney M, Gudbjartsson D, Frigge
ML, Kong A, Stefansson K, Gulcher JR (2003) The gene encod-
ing phosphodiesterase 4D confers risk of ischemic stroke. Nat
Genet 35:131–138
Grönroos P, Raitakari OT, Kähönen M, Hutri-Kähönen N, Marniemi J,
Viikari J, Lehtimäki T (2007) Influence of apolipoprotein E poly-
morphism on serum lipid and lipoprotein changes: a 21-year fol-
low-up study from childhood to adulthood. The Cardiovascular
Risk in Young Finns Study. Clin Chem Lab Med 45:592–598
Guerra R, Wang S, Grundy S, Cohen J (1997) A hepatic lipase (LIPC)
allele associated with high plasma concentrations of high density
lipoprotein cholesterol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:4532–4537
Guxens M, Tomás M, Elosua R, Aldasoro E, Segura A, Fiol M, Sala J,
Vila J, Fullana M, Senti M, Vega G, de la Rica M, Marrugat J,
Investigadores del estudio IBERICA (2008) Association between
paraoxonase-1 and paraoxonase-2 polymorphisms and the risk of
acute myocardial infarction. Rev Esp Cardiol 61:269–275
Guzik TJ, West NE, Black E, McDonald D, Ratnatunga C, Pillai R,
Channon KM (2000) Functional effect of the C242T polymor-
phism in the NAD(P)H oxidase p22phox gene on vascular super-
oxide production in atherosclerosis. Circulation 102:1744–1747
Hamanishi T, Furuta H, Kato H, Doi A, Tamai M, Shimomura H,
Sakagashira S, Nishi M, Sasaki H, Sanke T, Nanjo K (2004)
Functional variants in the glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPx-1) gene
are associated with increased intima-media thickness of carotid
arteries and risk of macrovascular diseases in Japanese type 2 dia-
betic patients. Diabetes 53:2455–2460
Hamsten A, Eriksson P (2008) Identifying the susceptibility genes for
coronary artery disease: from hyperbole through doubt to cautious
optimism. J Intern Med 263:538–552
Han Y, Xi S, Zhang X, Yan C, Yang Y, Kang J (2008) Association of
connexin 37 gene polymorphisms with risk of coronary artery dis-
ease in northern Han Chinese. Cardiology 110:260–265

Hansson GK, Robertson AK, Söderberg-Nauclér C (2006) Inflammation and atherosclerosis. Annu Rev Pathol 1:297–329

Hayaishi-Okano R, Yamasaki Y, Kajimoto Y, Sakamoto K, Ohtoshi K, Katakami N, Kawamori D, Miyatsuka T, Hatazaki M, Hazama Y, Hori M (2003) Association of NAD(P)H oxidase p22 phox gene variation with advanced carotid atherosclerosis in Japanese type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 26:458–463

Heikkinen S, Auwerx J, Argmann CA (2007) PPARgamma in human and mouse physiology. Biochim Biophys Acta 1771:999–1013

Helgadóttir A, Manolescu A, Thorleifsson G, Gretarsdóttir S, Jonsdottir H, Thorsteinsdóttir U, Samani NJ, Gudmundsson G, Grant SF, Thorgeirsson G, Sveinbjörnsdóttir S, Valdimarsson EM, Matthiasson SE, Johannsson H, Gudmundsdóttir O, Gurney ME, Sainz J, Thorhallsdóttir M, Andressdóttir M, Frigge ML, Topol EJ, Kong A, Gudnason V, Hakonarson H, Gulcher JR, Stefansson K (2004) The gene encoding 5-lipoxygenase activating protein confers risk of myocardial infarction and stroke. Nat Genet 36:233–239

Helgadóttir A, Manolescu A, Helgason A, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdóttir U, Gudbjartsson DF, Gretarsdóttir S, Magnusson KP, Gudmundsson G, Hicks A, Jonsson T, Grant SF, Sainz J, O’Brien SJ, Sveinbjörnsdóttir S, Valdimarsson EM, Matthiasson SE, Levey AI, Abramson JL, Reilly MP, Vaccarino V, Wolfe ML, Gudnason V, Quyyumi AA, Topol EJ, Rader DJ, Thorgeirsson G, Gulcher JR, Hakonarson H, Kong A, Stefansson K (2006) A variant of the gene encoding leukotriene A4 hydrolase confers ethnicity-specific risk of myocardial infarction. Nat Genet 38:68–74

Helgadóttir A, Thorleifsson G, Manolescu A, Gretarsdóttir S, Blondal T, Jonasdóttir A, Jonasdóttir A, Sigurdsson A, Baker A, Palsson A, Masson G, Gudbjartsson DF, Magnusson KP, Andersen K, Levey AI, Backman VM, Matthiasdóttir S, Jonsdóttir T, Palsson S, Einarsdóttir H, Gunnarsdóttir S, Gylfason A, Vaccarino V, Hooper WC, Reilly MP, Granger CB, Austin H, Rader DJ, Shah SH, Quyyumi AA, Gulcher JR, Thorgeirsson G, Thorsteinsdóttir U, Kong A, Stefansson K (2007) A common variant on chromosome 9p21 affects the risk of myocardial infarction. Science 316:1491–1493

Hinds DA, Seymour AB, Durham LK, Banerjee P, Ballinger DG, Milos PM, Cox DR, Thompson JF, Frazer KA (2004) Application of pooled genotyping to scan candidate regions for association with HDL cholesterol levels. Hum Genomics 1:421–434

Hingorani AD, Liang CF, Fatibene J, Lyon A, Monteith S, Parsons A, Haydock S, Hopper RV, Stephens NG, O’Shaughnessy KM, Brown MJ (1999) A common variant of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (Glu298→Asp) is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease in the UK. Circulation 100:1515–1520

Hingorani AD, Shah T, Casas JP, Humphries SE, Talmud PJ (2009) C-reactive protein and coronary heart disease: predictive test or therapeutic target? Clin Chem 55:239–255

Hixson JE (1991) Apolipoprotein E polymorphisms affect atherosclerosis in young males. Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth (PDAY) Research Group. Arterioscler Thromb 11:1237–1244

Hofman MK, Princen HM, Zwinderman AH, Jukema JW (2005) Genetic variation in the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol catabolism (cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase) influences the progression of atherosclerosis and risk of new clinical events. Clin Sci (Lond) 108:539–545

Horan PG, Allen AR, Patterson CC, Spence MS, McGlinchey PC, McKeown PP (2006) The connexin37 gene polymorphism and coronary artery disease in Ireland. Heart 92:395–396

Horne BD, Camp NJ, Carlquist JF, Muhlestein JB, Kolek MJ, Nicholas ZP, Anderson JL (2007) Multiple-polymorphism associations of 7 matrix metalloproteinase and tissue inhibitor metalloproteinase genes with myocardial infarction and angiographic coronary artery disease. Am Heart J 154:751–758

Hsu LA, Ko YL, Chang CJ, Hu CF, Wu S, Teng MS, Wang CL, Ho WJ, Ko YS, Hsu TS, Lee YS (2006) Genetic variations of apolipoprotein A5 gene is associated with the risk of coronary artery disease among Chinese in Taiwan. Atherosclerosis 185:143–149

Hu Y, Liu W, Huang R, Zhang XA (2006) A systematic review and meta-analysis of the relationship between lipoprotein lipase Asn291Ser variant and diseases. J Lipid Res 47:1908–1914

Hubáček JA, Berge KE, Stefková J, Pitha J, Skodová Z, Lánská V, Poledne R (2004) Polymorphisms in ABCG5 and ABCG8 transporters and plasma cholesterol levels. Physiol Res 53:395–401

Humphries SE, Luong LA, Talmud PJ, Frick MH, Kesäniemi YA, Pasternack A, Taskinen MR, Syvänen M (1998) The 5A/6A polymorphism in the promoter of the stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) gene predicts progression of angiographically determined coronary artery disease in men in the LOCAT gemfibrozil study. Lopid Coronary Angiography Trial. Atherosclerosis 139:49–56

Humphries SE, Ridker PM, Talmud PJ (2004) Genetic testing for cardiovascular disease susceptibility: a useful clinical management tool or possible misinformation? Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24:628–636

Huuskonen KH, Kunnas TA, Tanner MM, Mikkelsson J, Ilveskoski E, Karhunen PJ, Nikkari ST (2008) COX-2 gene promoter polymorphism and coronary artery disease in middle-aged men: the Helsinki sudden death study. Mediators Inflamm 2008:289453

Iacoviello L, Di Castelnuovo A, Gattone M, Pezzini A, Assanelli D, Lorenzet R, Del Zotto E, Colombo M, Napoleone E, Amore C, D’Orazio A, Padovani A, de Gaetano G, Giannuzzi P, Donati MB, IGIGI Investigators (2005) Polymorphisms of the interleukin-1beta gene affect the risk of myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke at young age and the response of mononuclear cells to stimulation in vitro. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:222–227

Iakoubova OA, Tong CH, Rowland CM, Kirchgessner TG, Young BA, Arellano AR, Shiffman D, Sabatine MS, Campos H, Packard CJ, Pfeffer MA, White TJ, Braunwald E, Shepherd J, Devlin JJ, Sacks FM (2008) Association of the Trp719Arg polymorphism in kinesin-like protein 6 with myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease in 2 prospective trials: the CARE and WOSCOPS trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 51:435–443

Imai Y, Morita H, Kurihara H, Sugiyama T, Kato N, Ebihara A, Hamada C, Kurihara Y, Shindo T, Oh-hashi Y, Yazaki Y (2000) Evidence for association between paraoxonase gene polymorphisms and atherosclerotic diseases. Atherosclerosis 149:435–442

Inoue N, Kawashima S, Kanazawa K, Yamada S, Akita H, Yokoyama M (1998) Polymorphism of the NADH/NADPH oxidase p22 phox gene in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation 97:135–137

Iovannisci DM, Lammer EJ, Steiner L, Cheng S, Mahoney LT, Davis PH, Lauer RM, Burns TL (2007) Association between a leukotriene C4 synthase gene promoter polymorphism and coronary artery calcium in young women: the Muscatine Study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27:394–399

Ireland H, Kunz G, Kyriakoulis K, Stubbs PJ, Lane DA (1997) Thrombomodulin gene mutations associated with myocardial infarction. Circulation 96:15–18

Iwata E, Yamamoto I, Motomura T, Tsubakimori S, Nohnen S, Ohmoto M, Igarashi T, Azuma J (2003) The association of Pro12Ala polymorphism in PPARgamma2 with lower carotid artery IMT in Japanese. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 62:55–59

Jacquemin B, Antoniades C, Nyberg F, Plana E, Müller M, Greven S, Salomaa V, Sunyer J, Bellander T, Chalamandaris AG, Pistelli R, Koenig W, Peters A (2008) Common genetic polymorphisms and haplotypes of fibrinogen alpha, beta, and gamma chains affect fibrinogen levels and the response to proinflammatory stimulation in myocardial infarction survivors: the AIRGENE study. J Am Coll Cardiol 52:941–952

Jang Y, Chae JS, Hyun YJ, Koh SJ, Kim JY, Ko MJ, Rim SJ, Shin HJ, Ordovas JM, Lee JH (2007) The RANTES –403G>A promoter polymorphism in Korean men: association with serum RANTES concentration and coronary artery disease. Clin Sci (Lond) 113:349–356

Jeerooburkhan N, Jones LC, Bujac S, Cooper JA, Miller GJ, Vallance P, Humphries SE, Hingorani AD (2001) Genetic and environmental determinants of plasma nitrogen oxides and risk of ischemic heart disease. Hypertension 38:1054–1061

Jormsjö S, Ye S, Moritz J, Walter DH, Dimmeler S, Zeiher AM, Henney A, Hamsten A, Eriksson P (2000) Allele-specific regulation of matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene activity is associated with coronary artery luminal dimensions in diabetic patients with manifest coronary artery disease. Circ Res 86:998–1003

Jormsjö S, Whatling C, Walter DH, Zeiher AM, Hamsten A, Eriksson P (2001) Allele-specific regulation of matrix metalloproteinase-7 promoter activity is associated with coronary artery luminal dimensions among hypercholesterolemic patients. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 21:1834–1839

Jukema JW, van Boven AJ, Groenemeijer B, Zwinderman AH, Reiber JH, Bruschke AV, Henneman JA, Molhoek GP, Bruin T, Jansen H, Gagné E, Hayden MR, Kastelein JJ (1996) The Asp9 Asn mutation in the lipoprotein lipase gene is associated with increased progression of coronary atherosclerosis. REGRESS Study Group, Interuniversity Cardiology Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Regression Growth Evaluation Statin Study. Circulation 94:1913–1918

Juul K, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Marklund S, Heegaard NH, Steffensen R, Sillesen H, Jensen G, Nordestgaard BG (2004) Genetically reduced antioxidative protection and increased ischemic heart disease risk: the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Circulation 109:59–65

Kajimoto K, Shioji K, Tago N, Tomoike H, Nonogi H, Goto Y, Iwai N (2005) Assessment of MEF2A mutations in myocardial infarction in Japanese patients. Circ J 69:1192–1195

Kakko S, Tamminen M, Päivänsalo M, Kauma H, Rantala AO, Lilja M, Reunanen A, Kesäniemi YA, Savolainen MJ (2000) Cholesterol ester transfer protein gene polymorphisms are associated with carotid atherosclerosis in men. Eur J Clin Invest 30:18–25

Kakko S, Päivänsalo M, Koistinen P, Kesäniemi YA, Kinnula VL, Savolainen MJ (2003) The signal sequence polymorphism of the MnSOD gene is associated with the degree of carotid atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 168:147–152

Kaneda H, Ohno M, Taguchi J, Togo M, Hashimoto H, Ogasawara K, Aizawa T, Ishizaka N, Nagai R (2002) Heme oxygenase-1 gene promoter polymorphism is associated with coronary artery disease in Japanese patients with coronary risk factors. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 22:1680–1685

Karathanasis SK, Ferris E, Haddad IA (1987) DNA inversion within the apolipoproteins AI/CIII/AIV-encoding gene cluster of certain patients with premature atherosclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:7198–7202

Kawashima S, Yokoyama M (2004) Dysfunction of endothelial nitric oxide synthase and atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24:998–1005

Kelly PJ, Rosand J, Kistler JP, Shih VE, Silveira S, Plomaritoglou A, Furie KL (2002) Homocysteine, MTHFR 677C>T polymorphism, and risk of ischemic stroke: results of a meta-analysis. Neurology 59:529–536

Keso T, Perola M, Laippala P, Ilveskoski E, Kunnas TA, Mikkelsen J, Penttilä A, Hurme M, Karhunen PJ (2001) Polymorphisms within the tumor necrosis factor locus and prevalence of coronary artery disease in middle-aged men. Atherosclerosis 154:691–697

Kiechl S, Lorenz E, Reindl M, Wiedermann CJ, Oberhollenzer F, Bonora E, Willeit J, Schwartz DA (2002) Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms and atherogenesis. N Engl J Med 347:185–192

Kim Y, Lee C (2006) The gene encoding transforming growth factor beta 1 confers risk of ischemic stroke and vascular dementia. Stroke 37:2845

Kimpara T, Takeda A, Watanabe K, Itoyama Y, Ikawa S, Watanabe M, Arai H, Sasaki H, Higuchi S, Okita N, Takase S, Saito H, Takahashi K, Shibahara S (1997) Microsatellite polymorphism in the human heme oxygenase-1 gene promoter and its application in association studies with Alzheimer and Parkinson disease. Hum Genet 100:145–147

Klerk M, Verhoef P, Clarke R, Blom HJ, Kok FJ, Schouten EG, MTHFR Studies Collaboration Group (2002) MTHFR 677C>T polymorphism and risk of coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis. JAMA 288:2023–2031

Kluijtmans LA, Whitehead AS (2001) Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genotypes and predisposition to atherothrombotic disease; evidence that all three MTHFR C677T genotypes confer different levels of risk. Eur Heart J 22:294–299

Knowles JW, Assimes TL, Li J, Quertermous T, Cooke JP (2007a) Genetic susceptibility to peripheral arterial disease: a dark corner in vascular biology. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27:2068–2078

Knowles JW, Wang H, Itakura H, Southwick A, Myers RM, Iribarren C, Fortmann SP (2007b) Association of polymorphisms in platelet and hemostasis system genes with acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J 154:1052–1058

Koch W, Kastrati A, Böttiger C, Mehilli J, von Beckerath N, Schömig A (2001) Interleukin-10 and tumor necrosis factor gene polymorphisms and risk of coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis 159:137–144

Koch W, Hoppmann P, Mueller JC, Schomig A, Kastrati A (2006) Association of transforming growth factor-beta1 gene polymorphisms with myocardial infarction in patients with angiographically proven coronary heart disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:1119

Kohsaka S, Volcik KA, Folsom AR, Wu KK, Ballantyne CM, Willerson JT, Boerwinkle E (2008) Increased risk of incident stroke associated with the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) G-765C polymorphism in African-Americans: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. Atherosclerosis 196:926–930

Kretowski A, McFann K, Hokanson JE, Maahs D, Kinney G, Snell-Bergeon JK, Wadwa RP, Eckel RH, Ogden L, Garg S, Li J, Cheng S, Erlich HA, Rewers M (2007) Polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin system genes predict progression of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis. Diabetes 56:863–871

Kristiansson K, Ilveskoski E, Lehtimäki T, Peltonen L, Perola M, Karhunen PJ (2008) Association analysis of allelic variants of USF1 in coronary atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28:983–989

Kronenberg F, Kronenberg MF, Kiechl S, Trenkwalder E, Santer P, Oberhollenzer F, Egger G, Utermann G, Willeit J (1999) Role of lipoprotein(a) and apolipoprotein(a) phenotype in atherogenesis: prospective results from the Bruneck study. Circulation 100:1154–1160

Kuhlenbäumer G, Berger K, Huge A, Lange E, Kessler C, John U, Funke H, Nabavi DG, Stögbauer F, Ringelstein EB, Stoll M (2006) Evaluation of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the phosphodiesterase 4D gene (PDE4D) and their association with ischaemic stroke in a large German cohort with ischaemic stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 77:521–524

Kuivenhoven JA, Pritchard H, Hill J, Frohlich J, Assmann G, Kastelein J (1997) The molecular pathology of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) deficiency syndromes. J Lipid Res 38:191–205

Kutty RK, Kutty G, Rodriguez IR, Chader GJ, Wiggert B (1994) Chromosomal localization of the human heme oxygenase genes: heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) maps to chromosome 22q12 and heme oxygenase-2 (HMOX2) maps to chromosome 16p13. Genomics 20:513–516

Kuzuya M, Iguchi A (2003) Role of matrix metalloproteinases in vascular remodeling. J Atheroscler Thromb 10:275–282

Kyriakou T, Hodgkinson C, Pontefract DE, Iyengar S, Howell WM, Wong YK, Eriksson P, Ye S (2005) Genotypic effect of the –565C>T polymorphism in the ABCA1 gene promoter on ABCA1 expression and severity of atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:418–423

Labrum R, Bevan S, Sitzer M, Lorenz M, Markus HS (2007) Toll receptor polymorphisms and carotid artery intima-media thickness. Stroke 38:1179–1184

Lagace TA, Curtis DE, Garuti R, McNutt MC, Park SW, Prather HB, Anderson NN, Ho YK, Hammer RE, Horton JD (2006) Secreted PCSK9 decreases the number of LDL receptors in hepatocytes and in livers of parabiotic mice. J Clin Invest 116:2995–3005

Lahoz C, Schaefer EJ, Cupples LA, Wilson PW, Levy D, Osgood D, Parpos S, Pedro-Botet J, Daly JA, Ordovas JM (2001) Apolipoprotein E genotype and cardiovascular disease in the Framingham Heart Study. Atherosclerosis 154:529–537

Laukkanen J, Yli-Herttuala S (2002) Genes involved in atherosclerosis. Exp Nephrol 10:150–163

Lee CR, North KE, Bray MS, Couper DJ, Heiss G, Zeldin DC (2008) Cyclooxygenase polymorphisms and risk of cardiovascular events: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Clin Pharmacol Ther 83:52–60

Leigh SE, Foster AH, Whittall RA, Hubbart CS, Humphries SE (2008) Update and analysis of the university college London low density lipoprotein receptor familial hypercholesterolemia database. Ann Hum Genet 72:485–498

Lewis SJ, Ebrahim S, Davey Smith G (2005) Meta-analysis of MTHFR 677C→T polymorphism and coronary heart disease: does totality of evidence support causal role for homocysteine and preventive potential of folate? BMJ 331:1053

Li YH, Chen JH, Wu HL, Shi GY, Huang HC, Chao TH, Tsai WC, Tsai LM, Guo HR, Wu WS, Chen ZC (2000) G-33A mutation in the promoter region of thrombomodulin gene and its association with coronary artery disease and plasma soluble thrombomodulin levels. Am J Cardiol 85:8–12

Li YH, Chen CH, Yeh PS, Lin HJ, Chang BI, Lin JC, Guo HR, Wu HL, Shi GY, Lai ML, Chen JH (2001) Functional mutation in the promoter region of thrombomodulin gene in relation to carotid atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 154:713–719

Li J, Tumanut C, Gavigan JA, Huang WJ, Hampton EN, Tumanut R, Suen KF, Trauger JW, Spraggon G, Lesley SA, Liu G, Yowe D, Harris JL (2007) Secreted PCSK9 promotes LDL receptor degradation independently of proteolytic activity. Biochem J 406:203–207

Libby P (2002) Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Nature 420:868–874

Libby P, Theroux P (2005) Pathophysiology of coronary artery disease. Circulation 111:3481–3488

Lieb W, Mayer B, König IR, Borwitzky I, Götz A, Kain S, Hengstenberg C, Linsel-Nitschke P, Fischer M, Döring A, Wichmann HE, Meitinger T, Kreutz R, Ziegler A, Schunkert H, Erdmann J (2008) Lack of association between the MEF2A gene and myocardial infarction. Circulation 117:185–191

Lindholm E, Melander O, Almgren P, Berglund G, Agardh CD, Groop L, Orho-Melander M (2006) Polymorphism in the MHC2TA gene is associated with features of the metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular mortality. PLoS ONE 1:e64

Listi F, Candore G, Lio D, Russo M, Colonna-Romano G, Caruso M, Hoffmann E, Caruso C (2005) Association between C1019T polymorphism of connexin37 and acute myocardial infarction: study in patients from Sicily. Int J Cardiol 102:269–271

Liu Y, Yuan Z, Liu Y, Zhang J, Yin P, Wang D, Wang Y, Kishimoto C, Ma A (2007) PPARgamma gene C161T substitution is associated with reduced risk of coronary artery disease and decreased proinflammatory cytokine expression. Am Heart J 154:718–724

Lõhmussaar E, Gschwendtner A, Mueller JC, Org T, Wichmann E, Hamann G, Meitinger T, Dichgans M (2005) ALOX5AP gene and the PDE4D gene in a central European population of stroke patients. Stroke 36:731–736

Luke MM, Kane JP, Liu DM, Rowland CM, Shiffman D, Cassano J, Catanese JJ, Pullinger CR, Leong DU, Arellano AR, Tong CH, Movsesyan I, Naya-Vigne J, Noordhof C, Feric NT, Malloy MJ, Topol EJ, Koschinsky ML, Devlin JJ, Ellis SG (2007) A polymorphism in the protease-like domain of apolipoprotein(a) is associated with severe coronary artery disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27:2030–2036

Lusis AJ, Fogelman AM, Fonarow GC (2004a) Genetic basis of atherosclerosis: part I: new genes and pathways. Circulation 110:1868–1873

Lusis AJ, Mar R, Pajukanta P (2004b) Genetics of atherosclerosis. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 5:189–218

Lutucuta S, Ballantyne CM, Elghannam H, Gotto AM Jr, Marian AJ (2001) Novel polymorphisms in promoter region of atp binding cassette transporter gene and plasma lipids, severity, progression, and regression of coronary atherosclerosis and response to therapy. Circ Res 88:969–973

Mäkelä R, Loimaala A, Nenonen A, Mercuri M, Vuori I, Huhtala H, Oja P, Bond G, Koivula T, Lehtimäki T (2008) The association of myeloperoxidase promoter polymorphism with carotid atherosclerosis is abolished in patients with type 2 diabetes. Clin Biochem 41:532–537

Mälarstig A, Eriksson P, Rose L, Diehl KA, Hamsten A, Ridker PM, Zee RY (2008) Genetic variants of tumor necrosis factor superfamily, member 4 (TNFSF4), and risk of incident atherothrombosis and venous thromboembolism. Clin Chem 54:833–840

Malin R, Loimaala A, Nenonen A, Mercuri M, Vuori I, Pasanen M, Oja P, Bond G, Koivula T, Lehtimäki T (2001) Relationship between high-density lipoprotein paraoxonase gene M/L55 polymorphism and carotid atherosclerosis differs in smoking and nonsmoking men. Metabolism 50:1095–1101

Malloy MJ, Kane JP (2001) A risk factor for atherosclerosis: triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Adv Intern Med 47:111–136

Mani A, Radhakrishnan J, Wang H, Mani A, Mani MA, Nelson-Williams C, Carew KS, Mane S, Najmabadi H, Wu D, Lifton RP (2007) LRP6 mutation in a family with early coronary disease and metabolic risk factors. Science 315:1278–1282

Mannila MN, Eriksson P, Lundman P, Samnegård A, Boquist S, Ericsson CG, Tornvall P, Hamsten A, Silveira A (2005) Contribution of haplotypes across the fibrinogen gene cluster to variation in risk of myocardial infarction. Thromb Haemost 93:570–577

Mannila MN, Eriksson P, Leander K, Wiman B, de Faire U, Hamsten A, Silveira A (2007) The association between fibrinogen haplotypes and myocardial infarction in men is partly mediated through pleiotropic effects on the serum IL-6 concentration. J Intern Med 261:138–147

Markus HS, Labrum R, Bevan S, Reindl M, Egger G, Wiedermann CJ, Xu Q, Kiechl S, Willeit J (2006) Genetic and acquired inflammatory conditions are synergistically associated with early carotid atherosclerosis. Stroke 37:2253–2259

Marsden PA, Heng HH, Scherer SW, Stewart RJ, Hall AV, Shi XM, Tsui LC, Schappert KT (1993) Structure and chromosomal localization of the human constitutive endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene. J Biol Chem 268:17478–17488

Martinelli N, Trabetti E, Bassi A, Girelli D, Friso S, Pizzolo F, Sandri M, Malerba G, Pignatti PF, Corrocher R, Olivieri O (2007) The –1131 T>C and S19W APOA5 gene polymorphisms are associated with high levels of triglycerides and apolipoprotein C-III, but not with coronary artery disease: an angiographic study. Atherosclerosis 191:409–417

Martinelli N, Trabetti E, Pinotti M, Olivieri O, Sandri M, Friso S, Pizzolo F, Bozzini C, Caruso PP, Cavallari U, Cheng S, Pignati PF,

Bernardi F, Corrocher R, Girelli D (2008) Combined effect of hemostatic gene polymorphisms and the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with advanced coronary atherosclerosis. PLoS ONE 3:e1523

Marx N, Duez H, Fruchart JC, Staels B (2004) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and atherogenesis: regulators of gene expression in vascular cells. Circ Res 94:1168–1178

Matsumoto Y, Daida H, Watanabe Y, Sunayama S, Mokuno H, Yokoi H, Yamaguchi H (1998) High level of lipoprotein(a) is a strong predictor for progression of coronary artery disease. J Atheroscler Thromb 5:47–53

Matsunaga T, Hiasa Y, Yanagi H, Maeda T, Hattori N, Yamakawa K, Yamanouchi Y, Tanaka I, Obara T, Hamaguchi H (1991) Apolipoprotein A-I deficiency due to a codon 84 nonsense mutation of the apolipoprotein A-I gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:2793–2797

Mayer M (2000) Association of serum bilirubin concentration with risk of coronary artery disease. Clin Chem 46:1723–1727

Maznyczka A, Braund P, Mangino M, Samani NJ (2008) Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) promoter genotype and risk of myocardial infarction: a case-control study. Atherosclerosis 199:328–332

McCaskie PA, Beilby JP, Chapman CM, Hung J, McQuillan BM, Thompson PL, Palmer LJ (2007) Cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene haplotypes, plasma high-density lipoprotein levels and the risk of coronary heart disease. Hum Genet 121:401–411

McDermott DH, Yang Q, Kathiresan S, Cupples LA, Massaro JM, Keaney JF Jr, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Hirschhorn JN, O'Donnell CJ, Murphy PM, Benjamin EJ (2005) CCL2 polymorphisms are associated with serum monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 levels and myocardial infarction in the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation 112:1113–1120

McPherson R, Pertsemlidis A, Kavaslar N, Stewart A, Roberts R, Cox DR, Hinds DA, Pennacchio LA, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Folsom AR, Boerwinkle E, Hobbs HH, Cohen JC (2007) A common allele on chromosome 9 associated with coronary heart disease. Science 316:1488–1491

Meiner V, Friedlander Y, Milo H, Sharon N, Ben-Avi L, Shpitzen S, Leitersdorf E, Siscovick DS, Schwartz SM (2008) Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) genetic variation and early onset of non-fatal myocardial infarction. Ann Hum Genet 72:732–741

Meschia JF, Brott TG, Brown RD Jr, Crook R, Worrall BB, Kissela B, Brown WM, Rich SS, Case LD, Evans EW, Hague S, Singleton A, Hardy J, SWISS Study Group; ISGS Study Group; MSGD Study Group (2005) Phosphodiesterase 4D and 5-lipoxygenase activating protein in ischemic stroke. Ann Neurol 58:351–361

Miles C, Wayne M (2008) Quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis. Nat Educ 1:1

Miwa Y, Takiuchi S, Kamide K, Yoshii M, Horio T, Tanaka C, Banno M, Miyata T, Sasaguri T, Kawano Y (2004) Identification of gene polymorphism in lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase and its association with carotid atherosclerosis in Japanese hypertensive patients. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 322:428–433

Moatti D, Faure S, Fumeron F, Mel-W Amara, Seknadji P, McDermott DH, Debré P, Aumont MC, Murphy PM, de Prost D, Combadière C (2001) Polymorphism in the fractalkine receptor CX3CR1 as a genetic risk factor for coronary artery disease. Blood 97:1925–1928

Muendlein A, Saely CH, Marte T, Schmid F, Koch L, Rein P, Langer P, Aczel S, Drexel H (2008) Synergistic effects of the apolipoprotein E epsilon3/epsilon2/epsilon4, the cholesterol ester transfer protein TaqIB, and the apolipoprotein C3 –482C>T polymorphisms on their association with coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis 199:179–186

Nam BH, Kannel WB, D'Agostino RB (2006) Search for an optimal atherogenic lipid risk profile: from the Framingham Study. Am J Cardiol 97:372–375

Naoumova RP, Tosi I, Patel D, Neuwirth C, Horswell SD, Marais AD, van Heyningen C, Soutar AK (2005) Severe hypercholesterolemia in four British families with the D374Y mutation in the PCSK9 gene: long-term follow-up and treatment response. Atheroscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:2654–2660

Nasti S, Spallarossa P, Altieri P, Garibaldi S, Fabbi P, Polito L, Bacino L, Brunelli M, Brunelli C, Barsotti A, Ghigliotti G (2006) C242T polymorphism in CYBA gene (p22phox) and risk of coronary artery disease in a population of Caucasian Italians. Dis Markers 22:167–173

NBT-HA Agerholm-Larsen B (2000) ACE gene polymorphism in cardiovascular disease: meta-analyses of small and large studies in whites. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 20:484–492

Nemoto M, Nishimura R, Sasaki T, Hiki Y, Miyashita Y, Nishioka M, Fujimoto K, Sakuma T, Ohashi T, Fukuda K, Eto Y, Tajima N (2007) Genetic association of glutathione peroxidase-1 with coronary artery calcification in type 2 diabetes: a case control study with multi-slice computed tomography. Cardiovasc Diabetol 6:23

Ng CJ, Wadleigh DJ, Gangopadhyay A, Hama S, Grijalva VR, Navab M, Fogelman AM, Reddy ST (2001) Paraoxonase-2 is a ubiquitously expressed protein with antioxidant properties and is capable of preventing cell-mediated oxidative modification of low density lipoprotein. J Biol Chem 276:44444–44449

Nicholls SJ, Hazen SL (2005) Myeloperoxidase and cardiovascular disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:1102–1111

Niessner A, Marculescu R, Haschemi A, Endler G, Zorn G, Weyand CM, Maurer G, Mannhalter C, Wojta J, Wagner O, Huber K (2005) Opposite effects of CX3CR1 receptor polymorphisms V249I and T280M on the development of acute coronary syndrome. A possible implication of fractalkine in inflammatory activation. Thromb Haemost 93:949–954

Nikpoor B, Turecki G, Fournier C, Theroux P, Rouleau GA (2001) A functional myeloperoxidase polymorphic variant is associated with coronary artery disease in French-Canadians. Am Heart J 142:336–339

Nilsson-Ardnor S, Wiklund PG, Lindgren P, Nilsson AK, Janunger T, Escher SA, Hallbeck B, Stegmayr B, Asplund K, Holmberg D (2005) Linkage of ischemic stroke to the PDE4D region on 5q in a Swedish population. Stroke 36:1666–1671

Norata GD, Garlaschelli K, Ongari M, Raselli S, Grigore L, Benvenuto F, Maggi FM, Catapano AL (2005) Effect of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) variants on intima-media thickness and monocyte-derived macrophage response to LPS. J Intern Med 258:21–27

Oberkofler H, Iglseider B, Klein K, Unger J, Haltmayer M, Kremlper F, Paulweber B, Patsch W (2005) Associations of the UCP2 gene locus with asymptomatic carotid atherosclerosis in middle-aged women. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:604–610

Oda K, Tanaka N, Arai T, Araki J, Song Y, Zhang L, Kuchiba A, Hosoi T, Shirasawa T, Muramatsu M, Sawabe M (2007) Polymorphisms in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine genes and susceptibility to atherosclerosis: a pathological study of 1,503 consecutive autopsy cases. Hum Mol Genet 16:592–599

Ohashi M, Runge MS, Faraci FM, Heistad DD (2006) MnSOD deficiency increases endothelial dysfunction in ApoE-deficient mice. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:2331–2336

Okubo M, Horinishi A, Saito M, Ebara T, Endo Y, Kaku K, Murase T, Eto M (2007) A novel complex deletion-insertion mutation mediated by Alu repetitive elements leads to lipoprotein lipase deficiency. Mol Genet Metab 92:229–233

Oliveira SA, Mansur AP, Ribeiro CC, Ramires JA, Annichino-Bizzachi JM (2004) PON1 M/L55 mutation protects high-risk patients against coronary artery disease. Int J Cardiol 94:73–77

Olivieri O, Stranieri C, Bassi A, Zaia B, Girrelli D, Pizzolo F, Trabetti E, Cheng S, Grow MA, Pignatti PF, Corrocher R (2002) ApoC-III gene polymorphisms and risk of coronary artery disease. J Lipid Res 43:1450–1457

Onalan O, Balta G, Oto A, Kabakci G, Tokgozoglu L, Aytemir K, Altay C, Gurgey A, Nazli N (2008) Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 4G/4G genotype is associated with myocardial infarction but not with stable coronary artery disease. J Thromb Thrombolysis 26:211–217

Oram JF, Lawn RM (2001) ABCA1. The gatekeeper for eliminating excess tissue cholesterol. J Lipid Res 42:1173–1179

Orbe J, Beloqui O, Rodriguez JA, Belzunce MS, Roncal C, Páramo JA (2006) Protective effect of the G-765C COX-2 polymorphism on subclinical atherosclerosis and inflammatory markers in asymptomatic subjects with cardiovascular risk factors. Clin Chim Acta 368:138–143

Ordovas JM, Cassidy DK, Civeira K, Bisgaier CL, Schaefer EJ (1989) Familial apolipoprotein A-I, C-III, and A-IV deficiency and premature atherosclerosis due to deletion of a gene complex on chromosome 11. J Biol Chem 264:16339–16345

Ordovas JM, Cupples LA, Corella D, Otvos JD, Osgood D, Martinez A, Lahoz C, Coltell O, Wilson PW, Schaefer EJ (2000) Association of cholesteryl ester transfer protein-TaqIB polymorphism with variations in lipoprotein subclasses and coronary heart disease risk: the Framingham study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 20:1323–1329

Ozaki K, Ohnishi Y, Iida A, Sekine A, Yamada R, Tsunoda T, Sato H, Sato H, Hori M, Nakamura Y, Tanaka T (2002) Functional SNPs in the lymphotoxin-alpha gene that are associated with susceptibility to myocardial infarction. Nat Genet 32:650–654

Pajukanta P, Lilja HE, Sinsheimer JS, Cantor RM, Lusis AJ, Gentile M, Duan XJ, Soro-Paavonen A, Naukkarinen J, Saarela J, Laakso M, Ehnholm C, Taskinen MR, Peltonen L (2004) Familial combined hyperlipidemia is associated with upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1). Nat Genet 36:371–376

Paradossi U, Ciofini E, Clerico A, Botto N, Biagini A, Colombo MG (2004) Endothelial function and carotid intima-media thickness in young healthy subjects among endothelial nitric oxide synthase Glu298→Asp and T-786→C polymorphisms. Stroke 35:1305–1309

Park HY, Nabika T, Jang Y, Kwon HM, Cho SY, Masuda J (2002) Association of G-33A polymorphism in the thrombomodulin gene with myocardial infarction in Koreans. Hypertens Res 25:389–394

Pasdar A, Ross-Adams H, Cumming A, Cheung J, Whalley L, St Clair D, MacLeod MJ (2006) Paraoxonase gene polymorphisms and haplotype analysis in a stroke population. BMC Med Genet 7:28

Pati U, Pati N (2000) Lipoprotein(a), atherosclerosis, and apolipoprotein(a) gene polymorphism. Mol Genet Metab 71:87–92

Pisciotta L, Priore Oliva C, Pes GM, Di Scala L, Bellocchio A, Fresa R, Cantafora A, Arca M, Calandra S, Bertolini S (2006) Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) and homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH): a phenotypic comparison. Atherosclerosis 188:398–405

Pocathikorn A, Granath B, Thiry E, Van Leuven F, Taylor R, Mamotte C (2003) Influence of exonic polymorphisms in the gene for LDL receptor-related protein (LRP) on risk of coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis 168:115–121

Poirier O, Mao C, Mallet C, Nicaud V, Herrmann SM, Evans A, Rudavets JB, Arveiler D, Luc G, Tiret L, Soubrier F, Cambien F (1999) Polymorphisms of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene—no consistent association with myocardial infarction in the ECTIM study. Eur J Clin Invest 29:284–290

PROCARDIS Consortium (2004) A trio family study showing association of the lymphotoxin-alpha N26 (804A) allele with coronary artery disease. Eur J Hum Genet 12:770–774

Pullinger CR, Eng C, Salen G, Shefer S, Batta AK, Erickson SK, Verhagen A, Rivera CR, Mulvihill SJ, Malloy MJ, Kane JP (2002) Human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) deficiency has a hypercholesterolemic phenotype. J Clin Invest 110:109–117

Rader DJ, Daugherty A (2008) Translating molecular discoveries into new therapies for atherosclerosis. Nature 451:904–913

Rader DJ, Ikewaki K, Duverger N, Feuerstein I, Zech L, Connor W, Brewer HB Jr (1993) Very low high-density lipoproteins without coronary atherosclerosis. Lancet 342:1455–1458

Rai TS, Khullar M, Sehrawat BS, Ahuja M, Sharma PK, Vijayvergiya R, Grover A (2008) Synergistic effect between apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein A1 gene polymorphisms in the risk for coronary artery disease. Mol Cell Biochem 313:139–146

Ranade K, Kirchgessner TG, Iakoubova OA, Devlin JJ, DelMonte T, Vishnupad P, Hui L, Tsuchihashi Z, Sacks FM, Sabatine MS, Braunwald E, White TJ, Shaw PM, Dracopoli NC (2005) Evaluation of the paraoxonases as candidate genes for stroke: Gln192Arg polymorphism in the paraoxonase 1 gene is associated with increased risk of stroke. Stroke 36:2346–2350

Rauramaa R, Väisänen SB, Luong LA, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Penttilä IM, Bouchard C, Töyrä J, Humphries SE (2000) Stromelysin-1 and interleukin-6 gene promoter polymorphisms are determinants of asymptomatic carotid artery atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 20:2657–2662

Reddy ST, Wadleigh DJ, Grijalva V, Ng C, Hama S, Gangopadhyay A, Shih DM, Lusis AJ, Navab M, Fogelman AM (2001) Human paraoxonase-3 is an HDL-associated enzyme with biological activity similar to paraoxonase-1 protein but is not regulated by oxidized lipids. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 21:542–547

Reddy ST, Devarajan A, Bourquard N, Shih D, Fogelman AM (2008) Is it just paraoxonase 1 or are other members of the paraoxonase gene family implicated in atherosclerosis? Curr Opin Lipidol 19:405–408

Reguero JR, Cubero GI, Batalla A, Alvarez V, Hevia S, Cortina A, Coto E (1998) Apolipoprotein A1 gene polymorphisms and risk of early coronary disease. Cardiology 90:231–235

Reiner AP, Carlson CS, Jenny NS, Durda JP, Siscovick DS, Nickerson DA, Tracy RP (2007) USF1 gene variants, cardiovascular risk, and mortality in European Americans: analysis of two US cohort studies. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27:2736–2742

Reitz C, Berger K, de Maat MP, Stoll M, Friedrichs F, Kardys I, Witteman JC, Breteler MM (2007) CRP gene haplotypes, serum CRP, and cerebral small-vessel disease: the Rotterdam Scan Study and the MEMO Study. Stroke 38:2356–2359

Rhee EJ, Kwon CH, Lee WY, Kim SY, Jung CH, Kim BJ, Sung KC, Kim BS, Oh KW, Kang JH, Park SW, Kim SW, Lee MH, Park JR (2007) No association of Pro12Ala polymorphism of PPAR-gamma gene with coronary artery disease in Korean subjects. Circ J 71:338–342

Rifai N, Ridker PM (2001) High-sensitivity C-reactive protein: a novel and promising marker of coronary heart disease. Clin Chem 47:403–411

Rifai N, Ma J, Sacks FM, Ridker PM, Hernandez WJ, Stampfer MJ, Marcovina SM (2004) Apolipoprotein(a) size and lipoprotein(a) concentration and future risk of angina pectoris with evidence of severe coronary atherosclerosis in men: the Physicians’ Health Study. Clin Chem 50:1364–1371

Ritsch A, Sonderegger G, Sandhofer A, Stanzl U, Tancevski I, Eller P, Schgoer W, Wehinger A, Mueller T, Haltmayer M, Patsch JR (2007) Scavenger receptor class B type I polymorphisms and peripheral arterial disease. Metabolism 56:1135–1141

Robinet P, Védie B, Chironi G, Gariépy J, Simon A, Moatti N, Paul JL (2003) Characterization of polymorphic structure of SREBP-2 gene: role in atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 168:381–387

Rodríguez-Esparragón F, Rodríguez-Pérez JC, Hernández-Trujillo Y, Macías-Reyes A, Medina A, Caballero A, Ferrario CM (2005) Allelic variants of the human scavenger receptor class B type 1 and paraoxonase 1 on coronary heart disease: genotype-phenotype correlations. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 25:854–860

Roy H, Bhardwaj S, Ylä-Herttuala S (2006a) Biology of vascular endothelial growth factors. FEBS Lett 580:2879–2887

Roy H, Bhardwaj S, Babu M, Kokina I, Uotila S, Ahtialansaari T, Laitinen T, Hakumaki J, Laakso M, Herzig KH, Ylä-Herttuala S (2006b) VEGF-A, VEGF-D, VEGF receptor-1, VEGF receptor-2, NF-kappaB, and RAGE in atherosclerotic lesions of diabetic Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits. FASEB J 20:2159–2161

Rundek T, Elkind MS, Pittman J, Boden-Albala B, Martin S, Humphries SE, Juo SH, Sacco RL (2002) Carotid intima-media thickness is associated with allelic variants of stromelysin-1, interleukin-6, and hepatic lipase genes: the Northern Manhattan Prospective Cohort Study. Stroke 33:1420–1423

Rust S, Rosier M, Funke H, Real J, Amoura Z, Piette JC, Deleuze JF, Brewer HB, Duverger N, Denefle P, Assmann G (1999) Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding ATP-binding cassette transporter 1. Nat Genet 22:352–355

Saha N, Sanghera DK, Kamboh MI (1999) The p22 phox polymorphism C242T is not associated with CHD risk in Asian Indians and Chinese. Eur J Clin Invest 29:999–1002

Samani NJ, Erdmann J, Hall AS, Hengstenberg C, Mangino M, Mayer B, Dixon RJ, Meitinger T, Braund P, Wichmann HE, Barrett JH, König IR, Stevens SE, Szymczak S, Tregouet DA, Iles MM, Pahlke F, Pollard H, Lieb W, Cambien F, Fischer M, Ouwehand W, Blankenberg S, Balmforth AJ, Baessler A, Ball SG, Strom TM, Braenne I, Gieger C, Deloukas P, Tobin MD, Ziegler A, Thompson JR, Schunkert H, WTCCC, the Cardiogenics Consortium (2007) Genome-wide association analysis of coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 357:443–453

Samani NJ, Braund PS, Erdmann J, Götz A, Tomaszewski M, Linsel-Nitschke P, Hajat C, Mangino M, Hengstenberg C, Stark K, Ziegler A, Caulfield M, Burton PR, Schunkert H, Tobin MD (2008) The novel genetic variant predisposing to coronary artery disease in the region of the PSRC1 and CELSR2 genes on chromosome 1 associates with serum cholesterol. J Mol Med 86:1233–1241

Samnegård A, Silveira A, Lundman P, Boquist S, Odeberg J, Hulthe J, McPheat W, Tornvall P, Bergstrand L, Ericsson CG, Hamsten A, Eriksson P (2005) Serum matrix metalloproteinase-3 concentration is influenced by MMP-3 –1612 5A/6A promoter genotype and associated with myocardial infarction. J Intern Med 258:411–419

Sandhofer A, Iglseeder B, Kaser S, Morè E, Paulweber B, Patsch JR (2008) The influence of two variants in the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter 1 gene on plasma lipids and carotid atherosclerosis. Metabolism 57:1398–1404

Sasaoka T, Kimura A, Hohta SA, Fukuda N, Kurosawa T, Izumi T (2001) Polymorphisms in the platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) gene, Asn563Ser and Gly670Arg, associated with myocardial infarction in the Japanese. Ann N Y Acad Sci 947:259–269

Schulz S, Birkenmeier G, Schagdarsurengin U, Wenzel K, Müller-Werdan U, Rehfeld D, Süss T, Kabisch A, Werdan K, Gläser C (2003) Role of LDL receptor-related protein (LRP) in coronary atherosclerosis. Int J Cardiol 92:137–144

Sharda S, Gilmour A, Harris V, Singh VP, Sinha N, Tewari S, Ramesh V, Agrawal S, Mastana S (2008) Chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) deletion polymorphism in North Indian patients with coronary artery disease. Int J Cardiol 124:254–258

Shiffman D, Rowland CM, Louie JZ, Luke MM, Bare LA, Bolonick JI, Young BA, Catanese JJ, Stiggins CF, Pullinger CR, Topol EJ, Malloy MJ, Kane JP, Ellis SG, Devlin JJ (2006) Gene variants of VAMP8 and HNRPUL1 are associated with early-onset myocardial infarction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:1613–1618

Shiffman D, Chasman DI, Zee RY, Jakubova OA, Louie JZ, Devlin JJ, Ridker PM (2008) A kinesin family member 6 variant is

associated with coronary heart disease in the Women’s Health Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 51:444–448

Shimasaki Y, Yasue H, Yoshimura M, Nakayama M, Kugiyama K, Ogawa H, Harada E, Masuda T, Koyama W, Saito Y, Miyamoto Y, Ogawa Y, Nakao K (1998) Association of the missense Glu298Asp variant of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 31:1506–1510

Sie MP, Uitterlinden AG, Bos MJ, Arp PP, Breteler MM, Koudstaal PJ, Pols HA, Hofman A, van Duijn CM, Witteman JC (2006) TGF-beta 1 polymorphisms and risk of myocardial infarction and stroke: the Rotterdam Study. Stroke 37:2667–2671

Simionescu M (2007) Implications of early structural-functional changes in the endothelium for vascular disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27:266–274

Singaraja RR, Brunham LR, Visscher H, Kastelein JJ, Hayden MR (2003) Efflux and atherosclerosis: the clinical and biochemical impact of variations in the ABCA1 gene. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 23:1322–1332

Sluiter AJC, Bots ML, Havekes LM, del Sol AI, Cruts M, Grobbee DE, Hofman A, Van Broeckhaven C, Witteman JCM, van Duijn CM (2001) Apolipoprotein E and carotid artery atherosclerosis: the Rotterdam Study. Stroke 32:1947–1952

Soberman RJ, Christmas P (2003) The organization and consequences of eicosanoid signaling. J Clin Invest 111:1107–1113

Soccio M, Toniato E, Evangelista V, Carluccio M, De Caterina R (2005) Oxidative stress and cardiovascular risk: the role of vascular NAD(P)H oxidase and its genetic variants. Eur J Clin Invest 35:305–314

Soutar AK, Naoumova RP, Traub LM (2003) Genetics, clinical phenotype, and molecular cell biology of autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 23:1963–1970

Stephens JW, Bain SC, Humphries SE (2008) Gene-environment interaction and oxidative stress in cardiovascular disease. Atherosclerosis 200:229–238

Swanberg M, Lidman O, Padyukov L, Eriksson P, Akesson E, Jagodic M, Lobell A, Khademi M, Börjesson O, Lindgren CM, Lundman P, Brookes AJ, Kere J, Luthman H, Alfredsson L, Hillert J, Klareskog L, Hamsten A, Piehl F, Olsson T (2005) MHC2TA is associated with differential MHC molecule expression and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis and myocardial infarction. Nat Genet 37:486–494

Syrris P, Carter ND, Metcalfe JC, Kemp PR, Grainger DJ, Kaski JC, Crossman DC, Francis SE, Gunn J, Jeffery S, Heathcote K (1998) Transforming growth factor-beta1 gene polymorphisms and coronary artery disease. Clin Sci (Lond) 95:667

Tanaka C, Mannami T, Kamide K, Takiuchi S, Kokubo Y, Katsuya T, Kawano Y, Miyata T, Ogihara T, Tomoike H (2005) Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the interleukin-6 gene associated with blood pressure and atherosclerosis in a Japanese general population. Hypertens Res 28:35–41

Tang Y, Sun P, Guo D, Ferro A, Ji Y, Chen Q, Fan L (2006) A genetic variant c.553G>T in the apolipoprotein A5 gene is associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease and altered triglyceride levels in a Chinese population. Atherosclerosis 185:433–437

Tang NP, Wang LS, Yang L, Gu HJ, Sun QM, Cong RH, Zhou B, Zhu HJ, Wang B (2008) Genetic variant in glutathione peroxidase 1 gene is associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease in a Chinese population. Clin Chim Acta 395:89–93

Tegnér J, Skogsberg J, Björkegren J (2007) Thematic review series: systems biology approaches to metabolic and cardiovascular disorders. Multi-organ whole-genome measurements and reverse engineering to uncover gene networks underlying complex traits. J Lipid Res 48:267–277

Temelkova-Kurktschiev T, Hanefeld M, Chinetti G, Zawadzki C, Haulon S, Kubaszek A, Koehler C, Leonhardt W, Staels B,

Laakso M (2004) Ala12Ala genotype of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma2 protects against atherosclerosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:4238–4242

Thompson SR, McCaskie PA, Beilby JP, Hung J, Jennens M, Chapman C, Thompson P, Humphries SE (2007) IL18 haplotypes are associated with serum IL-18 concentrations in a population-based study and a cohort of individuals with premature coronary heart disease. Clin Chem 53:2078–2085

Topol EJ, McCarthy J, Gabriel S, Moliterno DJ, Rogers WJ, Newby LK, Freedman M, Metivier J, Cannata R, O'Donnell CJ, Kottke-Marchant K, Murugesan G, Plow EF, Stenina O, Daley GQ (2001) Single nucleotide polymorphisms in multiple novel thrombospondin genes may be associated with familial premature myocardial infarction. Circulation 104:2641–2644

Tregouet DA, Ricard S, Nicaud V, Arnould I, Soubigou S, Rosier M, Duverger N, Poirier O, Macé S, Kee F, Morrison C, Denèfle P, Tiret L, Evans A, Deleuze JF, Cambien F (2004) In-depth haplotype analysis of ABCA1 gene polymorphisms in relation to plasma ApoA1 levels and myocardial infarction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24:775–781

Trompet S, Pons D, De Craen AJ, Slagboom P, Shepherd J, Blauw GJ, Murphy MB, Cobbe SM, Bollen EL, Buckley BM, Ford I, Hyland M, Gaw A, Macfarlane PW, Packard CJ, Norrie J, Perry IJ, Stott DJ, Sweeney BJ, Twomey C, Westendorp RG, Jukema JW (2007) Genetic variation in the interleukin-10 gene promoter and risk of coronary and cerebrovascular events: the PROSPER study. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1100:189–198

Tuomisto TT, Binder BR, Ylä-Herttuala S (2005) Genetics, genomics and proteomics in atherosclerosis research. Ann Med 37:323–332

Uchida K (2008) A lipid-derived endogenous inducer of COX-2: a bridge between inflammation and oxidative stress. Mol Cells 25:347–351

Um JY, An NH, Kim HM (2003) TNF-alpha and TNF-beta gene polymorphisms in cerebral infarction. J Mol Neurosci 21:167–171

van Geel PP, Pinto YM, Zwinderman AH, Henning RH, van Boven AJ, Jukema JW, Bruschke AV, Kastelein JJ, van Gilst WH (2001) Increased risk for ischaemic events is related to combined RAS polymorphism. Heart 85:458–462

van Minkelen R, Wettinger SB, de Visser MC, Vos HL, Reitsma PH, Rosendaal FR, Bertina RM, Doggen CJ (2009) Haplotypes of the interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist mRNA levels and the risk of myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis 203:201–205

Vendrell J, Fernandez-Real JM, Gutierrez C, Zamora A, Simon I, Bardaji A, Ricart W, Richart C (2003) A polymorphism in the promoter of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene (-308) is associated with coronary heart disease in type 2 diabetic patients. Atherosclerosis 167:257–264

Verma S, Anderson TJ (2002) Fundamentals of endothelial function for the clinical cardiologist. Circulation 105:546–549

Voetsch B, Loscalzo J (2004) Genetics of thrombophilia: impact on atherogenesis. Curr Opin Lipidol 15:129–143

Voetsch B, Benke KS, Panhuysen CI, Damasceno BP, Loscalzo J (2004) The combined effect of paraoxonase promoter and coding region polymorphisms on the risk of arterial ischemic stroke among young adults. Arch Neurol 61:351–356

Vohnout B, Di Castelnuovo A, Trotta R, D'Orazio A, Panniteri G, Montali A, Donati MB, Arca M, Iacoviello L (2003) Interleukin-1 gene cluster polymorphisms and risk of coronary artery disease. Haematologica 88:54–60

Volcik KA, Ballantyne CM, Coresh J, Folsom AR, Boerwinkle E (2007) Specific P-selectin and P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 genotypes/haplotypes are associated with risk of incident CHD and ischemic stroke: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Atherosclerosis 195:e76–e82

Wang JG, Staessen JA (2000) Genetic polymorphisms in the renin-angiotensin system: relevance for susceptibility to cardiovascular disease. Eur J Pharmacol 410:289–302

Wang XL, Liu SX, McCredie RM, Wilcken DE (1996) Polymorphisms at the 5′-end of the apolipoprotein AI gene and severity of coronary artery disease. J Clin Invest 98:372–377

Wang XL, Oosterhof J, Duarte N (1999) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma C161→T polymorphism and coronary artery disease. Cardiovasc Res 44:588–594

Wang L, Fan C, Topol SE, Wang Q (2003) Mutation of MEF2A in an inherited disorder with features of coronary artery disease. Science 302:1578–1581

Wang X, Ishimori N, Korstanje R, Rollins J, Paigen B (2005a) Identifying novel genes for atherosclerosis through mouse-human comparative genetics. Am J Hum Genet 77:1–15

Wang X, Ria M, Kelmenson PM, Eriksson P, Higgins DC, Samnegård A, Petros C, Rollins J, Bennet AM, Wiman B, de Faire U, Wennberg C, Olsson PG, Ishii N, Sugamura K, Hamsten A, Forsman-Semb K, Lagercrantz J, Paigen B (2005b) Positional identification of TNFSF4, encoding OX40 ligand, as a gene that influences atherosclerosis susceptibility. Nat Genet 37:365–372

Wang L, Hauser ER, Shah SH, Pericak-Vance MA, Haynes C, Crosslin D, Harris M, Nelson S, Hale AB, Granger CB, Haines JL, Jones CJ, Crossman D, Seo D, Gregory SG, Kraus WE, Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ, Vance JM (2007a) Peakwide mapping on chromosome 3q13 identifies the kalirin gene as a novel candidate gene for coronary artery disease. Am J Hum Genet 80:650–663

Wang Y, Zheng Y, Zhang W, Yu H, Lou K, Zhang Y, Qin Q, Zhao B, Yang Y, Hui R (2007b) Polymorphisms of KDR gene are associated with coronary heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 50:760–767

Weng L, Kavaslar N, Ustaszewska A, Doelle H, Schackwitz W, Hébert S, Cohen JC, McPherson R, Pennacchio LA (2005) Lack of MEF2A mutations in coronary artery disease. J Clin Invest 115:1016–1020

Wenzel K, Ernst M, Rohde K, Baumann G, Speer A (1996) DNA polymorphisms in adhesion molecule genes—a new risk factor for early atherosclerosis. Hum Genet 97:15–20

Whitfield AJ, Barrett PH, van Bockxmeer FM, Burnett JR (2004) Lipid disorders and mutations in the APOB gene. Clin Chem 50:1725–1732

Willer CJ, Sanna S, Jackson AU, Scuteri A, Bonnycastle LL, Clarke R, Heath SC, Timpson NJ, Najjar SS, Stringham HM, Strait J, Duren WL, Maschio A, Busonero F, Mulas A, Albai G, Swift AJ, Mor ken MA, Narisu N, Bennett D, Parish S, Shen H, Galan P, Meneton P, Hercberg S, Zelenika D, Chen WM, Li Y, Scott LJ, Scheet PA, Sundvall J, Watanabe RM, Nagaraja R, Ebrahim S, Lawlor DA, Ben-Shlomo Y, Davey-Smith G, Shuldiner AR, Collins R, Bergman RN, Uda M, Tuomilehto J, Cao A, Collins FS, Lakatta E, Lathrop GM, Boehnke M, Schlessinger D, Mohlke KL, Abecasis GR (2008) Newly identified loci that influence lipid concentrations and risk of coronary artery disease. Nat Genet 40:161–169

Wilson PW, Schaefer EJ, Larson MG, Ordovas JM (1996) Apolipoprotein E alleles and risk of coronary disease. A meta-analysis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 16:1250–1255

Winter JP, Gong Y, Grant PJ, Wild CP (2003) Glutathione peroxidase 1 genotype is associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease. Coron Artery Dis 14:149–153

Wong CW, Christen T, Roth I, Chadjichristos CE, Derouette JP, Foglia BF, Chanson M, Goodenough DA, Kwak BR (2006) Connexin 37 protects against atherosclerosis by regulating monocyte adhesion. Nat Med 12:950–954

Wong CW, Christen T, Pfenniger A, James RW, Kwak BR (2007) Do allelic variants of the connexin37 1019 gene polymorphism differentially predict for coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction? Atherosclerosis 191:355–361

Woo D, Kaushal R, Kissela B, Sekar P, Wolujewicz M, Pal P, Alwell K, Haverbusch M, Ewing I, Miller R, Kleindorfer D, Flaherty M, Chakraborty R, Deka R, Broderick J (2006) Association of Phosphodiesterase 4D with ischemic stroke: a population-based case-control study. Stroke 37:371–376

Worrall BB, Azhar S, Nyquist PA, Ackerman RH, Hamm TL, DeGraba TJ (2003) Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene polymorphisms in carotid atherosclerosis. Stroke 34:790–793

Yamada Y, Izawa H, Ichihara S, Takatsu F, Ishihara H, Hirayama H, Sone T, Tanaka M, Yokota M (2002) Prediction of the risk of myocardial infarction from polymorphisms in candidate genes. N Engl J Med 347:1916–1923

Yamada A, Ichihara S, Murase Y, Kato T, Izawa H, Nagata K, Murohara T, Yamada Y, Yokota M (2004) Lack of association of polymorphisms of the lymphotoxin alpha gene with myocardial infarction in Japanese. J Mol Med 82:477–483

Yang Q, Khoury MJ, Botto L, Friedman JM, Flanders WD (2003) Improving the prediction of complex diseases by testing for multiple disease-susceptibility genes. Am J Hum Genet 72:636–649

Ye S, Watts GF, Mandalia S, Humphries SE, Henney AM (1995) Preliminary report: genetic variation in the human stromelysin promoter is associated with progression of coronary atherosclerosis. Br Heart J 73:209–215

Ye S, Eriksson P, Hamsten A, Kurkinen M, Humphries SE, Henney AM (1996) Progression of coronary atherosclerosis is associated with a common genetic variant of the human stromelysin-1 promoter which results in reduced gene expression. J Biol Chem 271:13055–13060

Ye S, Gale CR, Martyn CN (2003) Variation in the matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene and risk of coronary heart disease. Eur Heart J 24:1668–1671

Ye Z, Liu EH, Higgins JP, Keavney BD, Lowe GD, Collins R, Danesh J (2006) Seven haemostatic gene polymorphisms in coronary disease: meta-analysis of 66,155 cases and 91,307 controls. Lancet 367:651–658

Yeh HI, Chou Y, Liu HF, Chang SC, Tsai CH (2001) Connexin 37 gene polymorphism and coronary artery disease in Taiwan. Int J Cardiol 81:251–255

Yokota M, Ichihara S, Lin TL, Nakashima N, Yamada Y (2000) Association of a T29-NC polymorphism of the transforming growth factor-beta1 gene with genetic susceptibility to myocardial infarction in Japanese. Circulation 101:2783–2787

Zacho J, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Jensen JS, Grande P, Sillesen H, Nordestgaard BG (2008) Genetically elevated C-reactive protein and ischemic vascular disease. N Engl J Med 359:1897–1908

Zambon A, Deeb SS, Pauletto P, Crepaldi G, Brunzell JD (2003) Hepatic lipase: a marker for cardiovascular disease risk and response to therapy. Curr Opin Lipidol 14:179–189

Zee RY, Cheng S, Hegener HH, Erlich HA, Ridker PM (2006) Genetic variants of arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein, and risk of incident myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke: a nested case-control approach. Stroke 37:2007–2011

Zee RY, Hennessey H, Michaud SE, Ridker PM (2008) Genetic variants within the interleukin-1 gene cluster, and risk of incident myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke: A nested case-control approach. Atherosclerosis

Zhang B, Ye S, Herrmann SM, Eriksson P, de Maat M, Evans A, Arveiler D, Luc G, Cambien F, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Henney AM (1999) Functional polymorphism in the regulatory region of gelatinase B gene in relation to severity of coronary atherosclerosis. Circulation 99:1788–1794

Zhang K, Zhang S, Zheng K, Hou Y, Liao L, He Y, Zhang L, Nebert DW, Shi J, Su Z, Xiao C (2004) Novel P143L polymorphism of the LCAT gene is associated with dyslipidemia in Chinese patients who have coronary atherosclerotic heart disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 318:4–10

Zhang Y, Da Silva JR, Reilly M, Billheimer JT, Rothblat GH, Rader DJ (2005) Hepatic expression of scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) is a positive regulator of macrophage reverse cholesterol transport in vivo. J Clin Invest 115:2870–2874

Zhao J, Zhou X, Huang J, Chen J, Gu D (2005) Association study of the thrombomodulin –33G>A polymorphism with coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction in Chinese Han population. Int J Cardiol 100:383–388

Zhou X, Huang J, Chen J, Zhao J, Ge D, Yang W, Gu D (2004a) Genetic association analysis of myocardial infarction with thrombospondin-1 N700S variant in a Chinese population. Thromb Res 113:181–186

Zhou X, Huang J, Chen J, Zhao J, Yang W, Wang X, Gu D (2004b) Thrombospondin-4 A387P polymorphism is not associated with coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction in the Chinese Han population. Clin Sci (Lond) 106:495–500

Zwicker JI, Peyvandi F, Palla R, Lombardi R, Canciani MT, Cairo A, Ardissino D, Bernardinelli L, Bauer KA, Lawler J, Mannucci P (2006) The thrombospondin-1 N700S polymorphism is associated with early myocardial infarction without altering von Willebrand factor multimer size. Blood 108:1280–1283
