
Regulation and Function  
of NF-κB Transcription  
Factors in the Immune System  

Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu and Michael Karin  

Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Departments of Pharmacology  
and Pathology, Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, California 93093;  
email: karinoﬃce@ucsd.edu  

Key Words  
IKK, IκB, NIK, p100, TRAF  

Abstract  
The mammalian Rel/NF-κB family of transcription factors, including  
RelA, c-Rel, RelB, NF-κB1 (p50 and its precursor p105), and NF-κB2  
(p52 and its precursor p100), plays a central role in the immune sys-  
tem by regulating several processes ranging from the development and  
survival of lymphocytes and lymphoid organs to the control of im-  
mune responses and malignant transformation. The five members of the  
NF-κB family are normally kept inactive in the cytoplasm by interac-  
tion with inhibitors called IκBs or the unprocessed forms of NF-κB1  
and NF-κB2. A wide variety of signals emanating from antigen recep-  
tors, pattern-recognition receptors, receptors for the members of TNF  
and IL-1 cytokine families, and others induce diﬀerential activation of  
NF-κB heterodimers. Although work over the past two decades  
has shed signiﬁcant light on the regulation of NF-κB transcription fac-  
tors and their functions, much progress has been made in the past two  
years revealing new insights into the regulation and functions of NF-κB.  
This recent progress is covered in this review.

INTRODUCTION

NF-κB was first identified about 20 years ago as a transcription factor that binds to the intronic enhancer of the kappa light chain gene (the κB site) in B cells (1, 2). Soon thereafter, NF-κB emerged as a major regulator of innate and adaptive immunity and inflammatory responses (3–6). Subsequent studies focused on how the immune system responds to pathogens by activating NF-κB and on the mechanisms by which NF-κB regulates transcription of inflammatory genes. However, the observations that many common diseases, including cancer, atherosclerosis, and diabetes, are associated with dysregulation of NF-κB sparked a broad interest in this transcription factor and in the signaling pathways that control its activity. Importantly, the lessons learned from studying NF-κB signaling in immune and inflammatory cells are broadly applicable to other cell types and organ systems. As a large number of excellent reviews have already covered the role of NF-κB transcription factors in immunity and inflammation (3, 5–12), this review focuses mainly on recent progress in our understanding of both positive and negative regulatory mechanisms that control NF-κB activity during immune and inflammatory responses, the cross talk between the classical and alternative NF-κB activation pathways, and their role in immunity, inflammation, lymphocyte differentiation, and lymphoid malignancies.

The NF-κB family of transcription factors consists of NF-κB1 (p50 and its precursor p105), NF-κB2 (p52 and its precursor p100), RelA (also called p65), c-Rel, and RelB, all of which are characterized by presence of an N-terminal Rel homology domain (RHD) responsible for homo- and heterodimerization as well as for sequence-specific DNA binding (Figure 1). RelA, c-Rel, and RelB also contain a C-terminal transcription activation domain (TAD), whereas the p52 and p50 subunits do not and therefore rely on interactions with other factors to positively regulate transcription (12) (Figure 1). Whereas RelB preferentially heterodimerizes with p100 (13)

as well as its processed form p52 (14, 15), RelA and c-Rel predominantly heterodimerize with p50 (10). Unlike other NF-κB family members, RelB also has a leucine zipper (LZ) motif in its N terminus, which plays an important transcriptional regulatory role (12). However, whether the LZ confers additional functional specificity to RelB, including its heterodimerization with NF-κB2 or other possible partners, remains to be determined. Most NF-κB dimers have been crystallized and their structures solved, thus establishing that the RHD is composed of two immunoglobulin-like folds, one engaged in dimerization and the other in DNA recognition (16). Small differences in dimer interfaces and solvent-exposed surfaces dictate partner preferences and DNA sequence selectivity (16). A number of posttranslational modifications at different parts of these molecules, including phosphorylations and acetylations, further modulate DNA binding and transcriptional activities (17) (Figure 1). Recent work that has identified ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3) as a DNA-binding partner for certain NF-κB dimers suggests that high-affinity DNA binding and sequence specificity may depend on interaction of NF-κB dimers with auxiliary proteins (18). RPS3, which is a KH domain protein, translocates to the nucleus concomitantly with RelA upon lymphocyte activation and binds to RelA homodimers as well as p50:RelA heterodimers on the DNA to form part of the NF-κB complex at specific regulatory sites (18).

INHIBITORS OF NF-κB: THE IκB FAMILY

The most important NF-κB-interacting proteins are the inhibitors of NF-κB, the IκB proteins (10, 12). IκBs retain NF-κB dimers in the cytoplasm of nonstimulated cells and form a small family including IκBα, IκBβ, and IκBε, which are classical IκBs, as well as a few “novel” IκBs that are discussed below. The IκBs can serve different functions and are characterized by the presence of multiple ankyrin repeats (Figure 2) that mediate binding to NF-κB dimers and can interfere with the function of

RelA
RHD
TAD

c-Rel
RHD
TAD

RelA
LZ
RHD
TAD

p100/p52
RHD
ANK
DD

p105/p50
RHD
ANK
DD

Figure 1

The NF-κB family. Schematic diagram for different NF-κB members is shown. Different domains including Rel homology domain (RHD), transcription activation domain (TAD), leucine zipper motif (LZ), glycine-rich region (GRR), and ankyrin repeats (ANK) are shown. Posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation, and ubiquitination at indicated amino acid positions are shown by P, Ac, and Ub, respectively. p105 is ubiquitinated at multiple sites.

the nuclear localization signals (NLS) present in the latter. The C-terminal halves of p105 and p100 also harbor multiple ankyrin repeats that allow them to serve an IkB-like function (13, 19). The p105 C-terminal ankyrin repeats (also called IkBy) selectively bind p50 (the processed form of p105), RelA, and c-Rel and retain them in the cytoplasm (19–21). Proteasome-mediated processing removes the C-terminal half of p105 to generate the p50 subunit (22). p105 processing primarily occurs constitutively in nonstimulated cells (22, 23). However, upon cell stimulation with cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α or interleukin (IL)-1, p105 is phosphorylated and undergoes rapid and complete proteasomal proteolysis without p50 production (24, 25). This results in

the release of p105-bound Rel subunits that can now migrate to the nucleus. The major function of p105, however, appears to be a reservoir for production and regulation of the p50:p50 homodimer (19). Unlike p105, the C terminus of p100 (also called IkBδ) preferentially binds to RelB to keep it in the cytoplasm. Previously, p100 was thought not to have a major effect on other NF-κB family members (3, 13–15, 26). However, recent reports argue that p100 also plays an important role in regulating RelA homodimers (27). Furthermore, in the absence of all three typical IkBs, p100 levels are highly elevated, and most of the NF-κB subunits remain in the cytoplasm, suggesting that p100 may have a role in the inhibition of classical NF-κB dimers as well (28). New insights into

ANRV 371-IY 27-24 ARI 9 February 2009 8:15

| IkBα | Ub | Ub | P | P | ANK | PEST |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 21 | 22 | 32 | 36 |  |  |  |

| IkBβ | Ub | P | P | PEST |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 9 | 19 | 23 |  |  |

| IkBε | Ub | P | P |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 6 | 18 | 22 |  |  |

| IkBζ |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| Bcl-3 | P | P |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 394 | 398 |  |  |

**Figure 2**

The IkB family. Schematic diagram showing different IkB proteins that contain several ankyrin repeats (ANK). Phosphorylation and ubiquitination at specific amino acid residues are indicated. Proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S), and threonine (T) domains are indicated as PEST.

the mechanism of signal-induced p100 processing are discussed below.

Although the IkBs are similar in structure (Figure 2), they each have their own binding preferences and are subject to differential transcriptional regulation by NF-κB family members (29, 30). For instance, on the one hand, classical RelA:p50 heterodimers are predominantly regulated by IkBα, the best studied IkB family member (10). On the other hand, IkBε preferentially regulates RelA:RelA as well as c-Rel:RelA dimers (29, 31, 32). The role of IkBβ is less well understood, although it was shown to bind RelA:p50 heterodimers associated with κB sites on DNA, suggesting it may regulate their nuclear function (33, 34). The three major IkBs undergo signal-induced proteasomal degradation with different kinetics (35). IkBα, for example, is degraded most rapidly in response to inflammatory stimuli such as TNF-α and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and is resynthesized in an NF-κB-dependent manner to

constitute a negative feedback loop in which newly synthesized IkBα enters the nucleus to associate with deacetylated RelA:p50 heterodimers and shuttle them back to the cytoplasm (36, 37). Therefore, the absence of IkBα impairs the termination of NF-κB activity following stimulation with TNF-α or LPS (38). By comparison, signal-induced IkBβ and IkBε degradation and resynthesis occur at much slower kinetics (35). These temporal differences in IkB degradation and resynthesis seem to play major roles in determining their functional characteristics in regulation of NF-κB activity.

In addition to these classical IkB family members, the novel or atypical IkB-like proteins, which include BCL3 (B cell CLL/lymphoma 3), IkBζ, and IkBNS, are subject to a different form of regulation and serve very different functions. While a few reports suggest that BCL3 interacts with and participates in the removal of p50 and p52 homodimers from DNA and thereby terminates the

696 Vallabhapurapu • Karin

transcriptional repressive effects of these TAD-
lacking dimers (39–41), other studies indicate
that BCL3 interacts with p52 and p50 to con-
fer upon them transcriptional activity (42–45).
However, BCL3 may actually facilitate the re-
pressive function of p50 by stabilizing p50 ho-
modimers and thereby preventing the access
of TAD-containing dimers to κB sites occu-
pied by p50 homodimers, a process thought to
contribute to LPS tolerance (46). One possible
explanation for this apparent contradiction is
that the ability of BCL3 to form transcription-
ally active complexes with p50 and p52 homo-
dimers may depend on its signal-induced phos-
phorylation (47). Owing to its ability to regulate
NF-κB activity, BCL3 has been implicated in
cancer development, where it acts as a crit-
ical regulator of cyclin D1 transcription (48,
49). BCL3 also inhibits p53 activity by in-
ducing transcription of the *Hdm2/Mdm2* gene,
which codes for a ubiquitin ligase that targets
p53 to proteasomal degradation (50). However,
whether BCL3 carries this function through as-
sociation with p50 or p52 homodimers remains
to be determined. BCL3-knockout mice are
viable but exhibit impaired humoral immune
responses and lack splenic germinal centers,
suggesting a critical role for BCL3 in B cell
development (51).

IkBζ is a recently identified IkB with a weak
homology to other family members and is ex-
pressed in an inducible manner in response
to LPS (52, 53). IkBζ also acts in the nu-
cleus, but, unlike other IkBs, IkBζ seems to
potentiate the transcriptional activity of NF-
κB dimers, which is surmised because, in the
absence of IkBζ, induction of several NF-κB
target genes in response to LPS or IL-1 is im-
paired (54). However, IkBζ also associates with
p50 homodimers and may function as a coac-
tivator in a similar manner to BCL3 (54). Yet
IkBζ also negatively regulates RelA-containing
dimers (54, 55). Thus, the function of IkBζ
may be quite similar to that of BCL3. The
presence of NF-κB- and c/EBP-binding sites
in the target gene promoter appear to be re-
quired for rendering the gene promoter sub-
ject to IkBζ-dependent regulation (56). Inter-
estingly, expression of c/EBPδ is also induced
in response to LPS in an NF-κB-dependent
manner (57, 58), and thus the coordinated in-
duction of c/EBPδ and IkBζ may be responsi-
ble for expanding or altering the set of NF-κB
target genes that are activated during the course
of an innate immune response.

IkBNS is another unique IkB-like protein
that is also rapidly induced, in this case upon
ligation of the T cell receptor (TCR) in thy-
mocytes (59). Correspondingly, IkBNS plays
an important role in negative selection of T
cells (59). Like IkBζ, IkBNS inhibits tran-
scriptional activation by NF-κB dimers during
thymocyte negative selection (59). Recent re-
ports have shown that in addition to regulating
TCR-induced NF-κB activity, IkBNS also neg-
atively regulates LPS-induced NF-κB activity
in macrophages and in dendritic cells (DCs)
(60). Interestingly, macrophages lacking IkBNS
exhibit prolonged NF-κB activity at specific
promoters in response to LPS stimulation (60),
suggesting that IkBNS is a gene-specific termi-
nator of NF-κB activity. IkBNS-deficient mice
are highly susceptible to endotoxic shock and
intestinal inflammation, presumably owing to
hyperexpression of selective Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-induced inflammatory genes, such as
IL-6 and IL-12p40 (60). Further studies are re-
quired to understand the mechanism by which
IkBNS is targeted to NF-κB subunits at selec-
tive gene promoters.

**ACTIVATION OF NF-κB**

Many different stimuli activate NF-κB tran-
scription factors to induce their nuclear ac-
cumulation (3, 8). The major and most well-
studied activation pathway used by most
stimuli is the canonical NF-κB signaling path-
way, which mainly impinges upon RelA:p50
and c-Rel:p50 heterodimers. This pathway cen-
ters around activation of the trimeric IkB ki-
nase (IKK) complex comprising the catalytic
subunits IKKα and IKKβ and the regulatory/
scaffold subunit IKKγ (also called NEMO
for NF-κB essential modulator) (10). The
mechanism by which the IKK complex is
activated, as is discussed below, is quite complex and is different from one receptor to another. As mentioned above, binding of IκBs to NF-κB dimers keeps the latter in the cytoplasm. When bound to RelA:p50, IκBα masks the RelA NLS but not the p50 NLS (10). However, owing to the presence of a strong nuclear export signal in IκBα, the IκBα:RelA:p50 trimer is predominantly cytoplasmic, although a constant shuttling of this complex between the cytoplasm and nucleus has been documented (61, 62).

Receptor engagement results in IKK activation, and the activated IKK complex phosphorylates IκBα on Ser32 and Ser36, leading to its polyubiquitination at Lys19 by the Skp1, Cdc53/Cullin1, and F-box protein β transducin repeat-containing protein (βTRCP) SCF<sup>IκB</sup> E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, which catalyzes the formation of degradative Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains (10). The ubiquitinated IκBα is degraded via the 26S proteasome, thereby exposing the strong NLS on RelA and inducing nuclear translocation of RelA:p50 dimers (10). This pathway also applies to complexes retained by IκBβ and IκBε, which also serve as IKK substrates (63). However, differences in the relative affinity of IKK to IκBs results in degradation of each IκB with distinct kinetics. The IKK complex may also phosphorylate the TADs of RelA and c-Rel while still in the cytoplasm and thus may enhance their transcriptional activity as well as their turnover in the nucleus (17, 64).

Of the two catalytic IKK subunits, IKKβ is the one that is responsible for the majority of IκB kinase activity in most cell types. Yet in the absence of IKKβ, IKKα can provide residual IκB kinase activity (65), whereas deletion of IKKα in IKKβ-expressing cells has nearly no effect on classical IKK activity (66). Nonetheless, there are situations, for instance in RANKL-stimulated mammary epithelial cells, in which IκB phosphorylation and degradation are mainly IKKα dependent (67). However, in osteoclast progenitors and macrophages, RANKL activates classical NF-κB dimers mainly via IKKβ (68). As mentioned above, IKKα can also phosphorylate RelA and c-Rel in the cytoplasm of activated

macrophages, and this phosphorylation contributes to the termination of NF-κB activation by innate immune stimuli (64). The nuclear ubiquitin ligase that recognizes the IKKα-phosphorylated RelA and c-Rel proteins remains to be identified.

An important and unique function of IKKα is activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway, which is based on inducible processing of p100 and activation of RelB:p52 heterodimers (3, 14, 15). Interestingly, the classical IKK signaling pathway described above feeds into the alternative pathway through upregulation of NF-κB2 expression, but the processing of p100 is strictly dependent on its phosphorylation by IKKα and activation of the latter by the NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) (14, 69). The alternative NF-κB pathway is activated in response to a small subset of TNF family members, including CD40L, LTαβ, BAFF (B cell–activating factor), RANKL (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand), and TWEAK (TNF-related weak inducer of apoptosis) (14, 15, 70–73), and is regulated quite differently from the classical pathway. Substantial progress has been made in our understanding of the mechanism by which this pathway is regulated both in nonstimulated and receptor-stimulated cells, and this progress is described in detail below. In the alternative pathway, NIK-activated IKKα dimers phosphorylate p100 at specific serine residues within its C-terminal ankyrin repeat domain (63, 74) (Figure 1). This phosphorylation event allows recognition of p100 by the SCF<sup>IκB</sup> E3 ligase complex resulting in its polyubiquitination (74, 75). However, because of the presence of a specific STOP signal located between the p52 N-terminal portion and the p100 C-terminal ankyrin repeat domain, the ubiquitinated p100 molecule undergoes only partial degradation, resulting in release of the N-terminal p52 fragment bound to RelB. The alternative NF-κB pathway has been implicated in lymphoid organogenesis as well as in B cell development and survival (14, 76). Several recent reports indicate that the alternative NF-κB signaling is mainly regulated through the control of NIK turnover. Moreover, aberrant NIK
turnover appears to be associated with certain B cell malignancies. We discuss these details below.

**NEGATIVE REGULATION OF CANONICAL NF-κB**

Prompt activation of NF-κB is required for a successful immune response, but this response cannot last forever and needs to be properly terminated to avoid tissue damage and even death owing to shock and organ failure. In addition, uncontrolled inflammation can increase the risk of cancer and autoimmune disease (5). A number of distinct mechanisms are involved in terminating NF-κB activation, and they exert their effects at different levels. As discussed above, the major regulators of NF-κB activity are the IκBs, and several of them are also involved in feedback inhibition of NF-κB (36). For instance, one of the earliest NF-κB target genes is *NfkBia*, which encodes IκBα (77). Newly synthesized IκBα enters the nucleus as a monomer, where it associates with DNA-bound p50:RelA dimers, leading to their inactivation and export into the cytoplasm. This forms a simple negative feedback loop that prevents irreversible activation of NF-κB. However, recent reports suggest that negative regulation of NF-κB activity is much more complicated. First, it was postulated that NF-κB dimers are in an equilibrium on and off the DNA and that IκBα only binds NF-κB dimers that are not in actual contact with the DNA rather than by removing DNA-bound NF-κB dimers from the DNA (78). Second, even without IκBα, classical NF-κB activation can still be terminated (78). Third, proteasome inhibition after IκBα has been degraded and NF-κB has entered the nucleus results in elevated expression of NF-κB target genes (78). These observations suggest the operation of additional mechanisms that terminate the NF-κB response that may involve degradation of DNA-bound NF-κB subunits. Indeed, recent reports demonstrated that after initial activation by inflammatory cytokines or innate immune stimuli, promoter-bound RelA is targeted to proteasomal degradation, which terminates the NF-κB response (78). However, it is not clear whether degradation of promoter-bound RelA also depends on NF-κB transcriptional activity or whether this mechanism is orchestrated by posttranslational modification of RelA and other NF-κB subunits. In fact, IKKα has an unexpected negative regulatory role in activated macrophages, where it is required for proper termination of the NF-κB response (64). In its negative regulatory capacity, IKKα phosphorylates RelA, while still in the cytoplasm, at Ser<sup>236</sup>, a modification that accelerates the proteasomal degradation of nuclear RelA and contributes to termination of RelA-dependent transcriptional responses (64). In this case, IKKα is activated by the same stimuli that activate IKKβ and that trigger classical NF-κB signaling. Interestingly, NIK, which has long been thought to act upstream of IKKα in the alternative NF-κB pathway, is also required to terminate the NF-κB response downstream of inflammatory signals (S. Vallabhapurapu & M. Karin, unpublished data). Whether NIK functions via IKKα or by a different mechanism to negatively regulate NF-κB signaling remains to be further investigated.

Recent reports have described additional players and E3 ubiquitin ligases involved in the nuclear degradation of RelA (78). COMMD1 (copper metabolism gene MURR1 domain), which is a ubiquitously expressed inhibitor of NF-κB (79), can induce degradation of nuclear RelA (80). Furthermore, COMMD1 acts as an important component of an EC2S multisubunit E3 ubiquitin ligase complex (81). EC2S resembles the SCF multisubunit E3 ubiquitin ligase complex and is composed of elongins B and C, cullins 2 or 5, the RING finger protein Rbx1 (RING box-1), and a suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) protein (78). COMMD1 seems to link SOCS1, which serves as the substrate recognition subunit of the complex, to RelA (81). However, the predominant cytoplasmic localization of SOCS1 raises questions as to whether it is involved in nuclear RelA degradation. Nevertheless, one cannot rule out the possibility that some EC2S translocates to the nucleus upon macrophage activation. It would
be of interest to determine whether IKKα and/or NIK control the recruitment of the EC2S ubiquitin ligase complex to nuclear RelA.

Further adding to the complexity of negative regulation, PDLIM2, a LIM domain protein, promotes degradation of nuclear RelA in response to inflammatory signals (82). PDLIM2 has a PDZ domain that has a chaperone function, and it promotes the incorporation of RelA into insoluble promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies that are rich in proteasome function (83). The PDLIM2 LIM domain, which is structurally similar to RING finger domains, causes the polyubiquitination of RelA in promyelocytic leukemia bodies and thereby downregulates nuclear NF-κB activity (82). It is not clear whether both E3 ligases (COMMD1-EC2S and PDLIM2) are required to downregulate NF-κB activity in the same cell type in response to the same stimulus. One possibility is that the two ubiquitin ligases are signal and cell type specific. Indeed, in the absence of PDLIM2, LPS-induced polyubiquitination of nuclear RelA in DCs is completely absent, suggesting that in these cells PDLIM2 cannot be replaced by other E3 ligases (78).

In addition to degrading nuclear RelA, other negative regulatory mechanisms target the DNA-binding function of nuclear RelA by a protein called PIAS1 (protein inhibitor of activated STAT1) (84). PIAS1 directly interacts with RelA and prevents it from binding to DNA. In line with the negative regulatory role of PIAS1, mice lacking this factor exhibit elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and increased NF-κB DNA binding (84). However, PIAS1 appears to effect only a subset of NF-κB target genes, and a recent report showed that another member of the PIAS family, PIASY, also negatively regulates both STAT1 and NF-κB signaling by cooperating with PIAS1 (85). However, the physiological importance of negative regulation of NF-κB by these factors is not completely clear.

NF-κB signaling is also regulated by other negative regulatory mechanisms that mainly target receptor proximal events. A major negative regulator of NF-κB signaling is A20, first discovered in 1990 as an NF-κB-induced feedback regulator. A20 is characterized by the presence of both a deubiquitinase domain (DUB) and a C2/C2 zinc finger E3 ligase domain (86, 87). Because of the presence of these functionally opposing domains, investigators have proposed that A20 acts via a two-step mechanism. First, the A20 DUB domain removes the K63-linked polyubiquitin chains from RIP1, an adapter protein kinase essential for NF-κB activation by TNF-α (87). Second, the A20 E3 ligase domain promotes K48-linked polyubiquitination of RIP1, leading to its proteasomal degradation, thus terminating the transmission of signals from TNF receptors (TNFR) to the IKK complex (87). Interestingly, it appears that the initial removal of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains from RIP1 is a prerequisite for the K48-linked polyubiquitination of the same molecule (87). Additional factors may control the A20-mediated inhibition of IKK signaling. Enesa et al. (88) demonstrated that Cezanne (cellular zinc finger anti-NF-κB) is involved in RIP1 deubiquitination following TNFR activation and thus contributes to attenuation of NF-κB signaling. Moreover, TAXBP1, which first was identified as a protein that interacts with the HTLV TAX protein (89), interacts with A20 and facilitates its interaction with RIP1 (90). However, the HECT domain ubiquitin ligase Itch binds A20 via TAXBP1 and thereby promotes K48-linked RIP1 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation (91). According to this recent study, A20 acts as an adapter protein that links RIP1 to Itch, which is the actual ubiquitin ligase responsible for K48-linked polyubiquitination of RIP1. Moreover, ABIN proteins, which were previously identified as inhibitors of NF-κB activation, also interact with A20 (92). However, the mechanism by which ABIN modulates A20 function is not yet clear. Nevertheless, it appears that ubiquitination and deubiquitination of key factors in the NF-κB signaling pathway allow fine-tuning of the NF-κB activation response and may also be important for the resolution of inflammation.

K63-linked ubiquitination of IKKγ/NEMO and TNFR-associated factors (TRAFs) is an
important aspect of IKK and NF-κB activation (93–95). The tumor suppressor CYLD (cylindromatosis) may inhibit NF-κB activation by removing K63-linked polyubiquitin chains from IKKγ/NEMO as well as from TRAF2 (96, 97). In the absence of CYLD, in addition to enhanced TRAF2 ubiquitination, TNF-α induces more rapid degradation of IκBα, thereby leading to enhanced NF-κB activity (98). CYLD-mediated removal of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains from BCL3 also inhibits cyclin D1 expression by limiting BCL3:p50-and BCL3:p52-mediated transcriptional activation (98). CYLD-mediated inhibition of BCL3 and cyclin D1 gene expression impairs tumor cell growth (98). Interestingly, a mouse strain has been described that solely expresses a natural splice variant of CYLD that is shorter in length (sCYLD) and lacks both IKKγ/NEMO- and TRAF2-binding domains (99). Owing to the lack of IKKγ/NEMO- and TRAF2-binding domains, sCYLD cannot negatively regulate NF-κB, and B cells from these mice express elevated levels of several NF-κB target genes, including IκBα, p100, and RelB (99). Although p100 levels are increased in sCYLD-expressing B cells, p100 processing is not elevated. Despite the high levels of p100, both cytosolic and nuclear RelB levels are increased in these B cells (99), which could probably be due to an overall increase in RelB expression.

**ACTIVATION OF IKK AND CLASSICAL NF-κB SIGNALING**

NF-κB activation depends on the IKK catalyzed phosphorylation of IκB proteins. In addition to its three core subunits—IKKα, IKKβ, and IKKγ/NEMO—the IKK complex was suggested to contain other components, whose functions are either not NF-κB specific or not fully characterized. One such protein is ELKS, a 105-kDa polypeptide found to coprecipitate with IKKβ (100). siRNA-mediated silencing of ELKS interfered with TNF-α- and IL-1-induced IκB phosphorylation (100). ELKS may serve as a substrate-recruiting subunit that facilitates the phosphorylation of IκBs by IKK (100). However, whether ELKS has an additional role in IKK activation was not investigated, and ELKS-deficient mice are yet to be described. More recent studies suggest that ELKS may participate in IKK activation by the DNA damage-responsive kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated following genotoxic stress (101). Two other proteins may be part of the IKK complex: Cdc37 and HSP90 (102). However, HSP90 interacts with many other protein kinases and seems to serve primarily as a chaperone that controls proper protein folding. Thus, HSP90 is unlikely to have a specific function in IKK and NF-κB signaling.

By contrast to these IKK-associated proteins, the role of the core IKK subunits has been well established by a variety of genetic experiments, most importantly gene ablations in mice (38). Based on these experiments, it is undisputable that IKKγ/NEMO is obligatory for classical NF-κB signaling, as in its absence the IKK complex can no longer be activated (103, 104). IKKγ/NEMO has no role in activation of the alternative IKKα-dependent signaling pathway, however (3, 71, 105). Of the two catalytic subunits, IKKβ is the major IκB kinase in most cell types, and IKKβ-deficient cells or mice exhibit severe NF-κB activation defects (65). As mentioned above, one exception is mammary epithelial cells stimulated by RANKL, in which IκB degradation is IKKα dependent (67). However, in macrophages and preosteoclasts RANKL signaling to NF-κB is IKKβ dependent (68). By contrast to IKKβ and IKKγ/NEMO, IKKα is essential for activation of the alternative NF-κB signaling pathway (14).

IKKα and IKKβ also have NF-κB-independent functions. It was first demonstrated that IKKα regulates formation of the mammalian epidermis independently of NF-κB by regulating production of a soluble keratinocyte differentiation factor (kDIF) and expression of terminal differentiation genes (106). The identity of kDIF is still unknown, but recent experiments provide clear insights
into the mechanism by which IKKα controls epidermal differentiation as well as skeletal and craniofacial morphogenesis (107). Both functions of IKKα require its nuclear accumulation in epidermal keratinocytes, which depends on an NLS unique to IKKα and absent in IKKβ (107). Defective skeletal and craniofacial morphogenesis in *Ikkα*−/− mice stems from elevated levels of FGF8 produced by IKKα-deficient keratinocytes (107). Exactly how nuclear IKKα controls FGF8 expression is still unknown, but recent studies have identified a number of important IKKα target genes in keratinocytes (108). These genes encode negative regulators of Myc function and expression, namely *Mad1*, *Mad2*, and *Ovol1*. The negative regulation of these genes requires the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β-induced interaction of IKKα with the TGF-β-responsive Smad2 and Smad3 transcription factors (108). The TGF-β-induced repression of both *Mad1* and *Ovol1* does not depend on the protein kinase activity of IKKα but does require its nuclear accumulation and promoter recruitment (108). Whether IKKα is also involved in TGF-β signaling in immune cells remains to be seen.

The kinase function of nuclear IKKα is important for controlling expression of other genes, however. It was first suggested that nuclear IKKα controls gene transcription by phosphorylating histone H3 (109, 110). Although IKKα can phosphorylate histone H3 in vitro, its effects on histone H3 phosphorylation in vivo are most likely indirect and exerted through recruitment of other histone modifiers. IKKα kinase activity is also required in the nucleus for repression of the antimetastatic gene *Maspin* (111). The IKKα-mediated repression of *Maspin* transcription strongly enhances the metastatic activity of prostate cancer cells. Interestingly, the nuclear accumulation of IKKα in these cells correlates with infiltration of T cells into advanced prostate tumors (111). The kinase activity of nuclear IKKα also regulates transcription by derepressing the silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT)-HDAC3 corepressor complex (112). In response to TNF-α, IKKα simultaneously phosphorylates RelA at S536 and SMRT at S2410 and thereby displaces the SMRT-HDAC3 corepressor complex and allows acetylation of RelA by p300, which results in efficient RelA-mediated transactivation (112). Interestingly, a recent report indicated that in colorectal tumor cells IKKα associates with target sites on chromatin and causes removal of SMRT-mediated repression by phosphorylating SMRT. This results in elevated expression of Notch target genes, such as *Hes1*, *Hes5*, and *Herp2*, which enhances colorectal tumorigenesis (113). Curiously, the same phosphorylation site (S536) used by IKKα to stimulate RelA transcriptional activity in cancer cells is also the site through which IKKα accelerates RelA turnover in activated macrophages (64).

IKKβ also has NF-κB-independent functions. IKKβ physically interacts with TSC1, a tumor suppressor and a repressor of the mTOR pathway (114). This interaction results in suppression of TSC1:TSC2 activity and may activate mTOR signaling, resulting in enhanced angiogenesis and tumor development (114). IKKβ may also enhance tumorigenesis by direct phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor FOXO3a, leading to its ubiquitination and degradation (115). Although neither of these functions has been demonstrated in IKKβ-deficient mice and their physiological relevance remained ambiguous, a recent study provided a more physiological NF-κB-independent role for IKKβ in IgE-mediated anaphylaxis as well as in IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation by phosphorylating SNAP-23 (116).

Despite their distinct functions, IKKα and IKKβ are very similar in structure and exhibit 50% sequence identity overall (Figure 3). A notable difference between the two subunits, other than the NLS that is unique to IKKα, lies in their C-terminal NEMO-binding domain, which in the case of IKKβ exhibits much greater affinity to IKKγ/NEMO (117). Thus, in the absence of IKKβ, IKKα may not interact very

Vallabhapurapu • Karin
effectively with IKKγ/NEMO, thus explaining  
its weak IkB kinase activity.  
IKKγ/NEMO is a 48-kDa regulatory  
subunit that contains a kinase-binding do-  
main (KBD) at its N terminus and a  
ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD) as well as LZ  
and ZF motifs at its C terminus (Figure 3) (11,  
63). Different regions within the KBD of IKKγ  
mediate interactions with IKKα and IKKβ (11,  
63). Although the exact biochemical function  
of IKKγ in regulating IKK activity is still enig-  
matic, its major roles appear to be the assembly  
of a hexameric IKK complex containing four  
catalytic subunits and two IKKγ molecules, as  
well as linking this complex to upstream reg-  
ulators (11, 63). This connection most likely  
relies on the UBD of IKKγ, which interacts  
with the K63-linked polyubiquitinated form of  
RIP1 (118, 119). Furthermore, a core frag-  
ment of IKKγ is sufficient for assembly of the  
large holo-IKK complex (120). Targeting of this  
fragment to the membrane using a myristoyl  
group was sufficient for constitutive IKK sig-  
naling in Jurkat T cells (120). As discussed be-  
low, this membrane recruitment may mimic the  
natural process of TCR-mediated IKK activa-  
tion. Recently, IKKγ was found to have IKK-  
independent functions. It is required for acti-  
vation of the MAP kinases (MAPK) JNK and  
p38 by members of the TNF family (121). This  
function is mediated through the participation  
of IKKγ in formation of a large multisubunit  
signaling complex required for recruitment of  
the MAPK kinase kinases (MAP3K) MEKK1  
and TAK1 to activated TNFR family mem-  
bers (122). IKKγ also has a role in activation  
of the interferon (IFN) response, where it acts  
through a poorly defined mechanism to pro-  
mote activation of the IFN response factors  
(IRFs) following viral infection (123). Thus,  
IKKγ/NEMO may serve a scaffold or adapter  
function in several signaling pathways, and the  
pathophysiological effects of its deficiencies in  
mice (103, 104) or humans (124–126) may be  
due to inactivation of these pathways in addi-  
tion to the well-documented defects in NF-κB  
signaling.

---

**Figure 3**

IKK subunits. Schematic representation of individual IKK subunits. Structural  
and functional motifs that are common and unique to these proteins are shown  
as indicated. Abbreviations: KD, kinase domain; LZ, leucine zipper motif;  
HLH, helix loop helix motif; NBD, NEMO-binding domain; NLS, nuclear  
localization signal; KBD, kinase-binding domain; UBD, ubiquitin-binding  
domain; ZF, zinc finger motif.

---

**CLASSICAL NF-κB SIGNALING BY  
MEMBERS OF THE TNFR FAMILY**

Much of our current but still incomplete un-  
derstanding of the classical NF-κB pathway  
comes from studies of TNF-α signaling. TNF-  
α is the prototypic member of a large fam-  
ily of trimeric cytokines and is one of the  
most potent activators of inflammation and  
classical NF-κB signaling. TNF-α binds to  
two receptors, TNFR1 and TNFR2, of which  
TNFR1 plays a much broader role in NF-κB  
activation. TNFR1 ligation induces receptor  
trimerization and recruitment of the adapter  
protein TNFR1-associated DEATH domain  
protein (TRADD) that binds to a specific re-  
gion in the cytoplasmic domain of TNFR1  
(127, 128). Recent studies of TRADD-deficient  
mice have demonstrated its important role  
in IKK activation (129). Initially, TRADD  
was thought to be required for the recruit-  
ment of RIP1, TRAF2, TRAF5, and the ac-  
tivated TNFR1 (130). However, TRADD ab-  
lation studies revealed that in the absence  
of TRADD a residual amount of RIP1 is  
still recruited to the ligated TNFR1, and this  
amount may suffice for a low level of sig-  
naling in cells, such as macrophages, that ex-  
press high amounts of RIP1 (129). Although

www.annualreviews.org • Regulation of NF-κB Transcription Factors 703
RIP1 is a member of a small family of related protein kinases, only RIP1 is required for NF-κB activation downstream of TNFR1 (131, 132). Curiously, however, reconstitution of RIP1-deficient cells with a kinase-inactive variant of RIP1 restores NF-κB signaling, indicating that RIP1 does not function as a protein kinase in the NF-κB activation process (132). Most likely (and as we discuss below), RIP1 is an adapter that enhances IKK recruitment to the activated receptor through an interaction between polyubiquitinated RIP1 and IKKγ (11, 118, 119). Receptor engagement results in two types of RIP1 polyubiquitination: a rapid formation of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains and a delayed formation of K48-linked polyubiquitin (87, 119). The initial K63-linked ubiquitination of RIP1 seems to be important in IKK and NF-κB activation as the K63-linked polyubiquitin on RIP1 stabilizes the association with the UBD-containing IKKγ subunit (118, 119). However, not all TNFR family members engage RIP1, and in the case of CD40 or BAFF-R the recruitment of IKK to the receptor complex may be mediated by TRAF2 and TRAF6 (133, 134).

The ubiquitin ligase responsible for RIP1 K63-linked ubiquitination has not been formally identified, but TRAF2 is a good candidate (119). All TRAF proteins, with the exception of TRAF1, contain a RING finger at their N-terminal region, followed by a variable number of ZF motifs that may be involved in binding of polyubiquitin chains (135, 136). At their C-terminal half, all TRAF proteins, including TRAF1, contain a TRAF domain that mediates binding to adapter proteins, such as TRADD, or direct binding to the cytoplasmic segments of those TNFR family members that do not rely on adapter proteins, such as CD40 or BAFF-R (135, 136). How the binding of IKKγ to the K63-linked polyubiquitin chains of RIP1 triggers IKK activation is unknown. While we proposed that receptor or membrane recruitment of IKK complexes can result in their activation through trans-autophosphorylation (137), others have suggested that upstream kinases may be responsible for IKK activation. One such ki-

nase, MEKK3, interacts with RIP1, and fibroblasts lacking MEKK3 exhibit defective NF-κB activation in response to TNF-α or IL-1 (131, 132, 138). It was therefore suggested that RIP1 functions as an adapter that recruits MEKK3 to the activated TNFR1 signaling complex, where MEKK3 phosphorylates IKKα and IKKβ at their activation loops (139). However, MEKK3 is not unequivocally an essential IKK kinase in immune cells, and it remains to be shown that MEKK3-deficient mice have major defects in IKK and NF-κB activation. Another putative IKK kinase is TAK1 (140, 141). TAK1, with its regulatory subunits TAB1, TAB2, and TAB3 (140, 141), appears to be recruited to TNFR signaling complexes via the TRAF2-dependent polyubiquitination of RIP1 and to phosphorylate the activation loops of the IKK catalytic subunits (142, 143). Receptors that do not rely on RIP1 may recruit TAK1 more directly via TRAF2 or TRAF6. However, the analysis of TAK1- and TAB1/2-deficient mice has also not provided unequivocal support for a ubiquitous and general role for TAK1 in IKK activation (144). TAK1 is a critical MAP3K responsible for activation of JNK and p38 MAPK cascades downstream of TNFR family members and other inflammatory/immune receptors, however (122, 144). The involvement of TAK1 or MEKK3 in IKK activation may therefore be cell type specific, and these kinases may be responsible for amplifying IKK signaling after the initial activation of IKK via trans-autophosphorylation (Figure 4).

Consistent with this proposal, engagement of TNFR1 or CD40 results in the very rapid recruitment of IKK to the activated receptor, where IKKβ undergoes rapid activation detectable by phosphorylation of its activation loop (122, 145, 146). In the case of TNFR1, receptor recruitment of IKK may be mediated by TRAF2/5 and RIP1 (11, 146) and, in the case of CD40, by TRAF2/6 (133, 134). Although MEKK1 and TAK1 are also recruited to CD40, their activating phosphorylation occurs in the cytoplasm and not on the receptor, and it is considerably delayed relative to IKK activation

704  
Vallabhapurapu • Karin
(122). Thus, it is not certain whether TAK1 or any other upstream kinase is involved in IKK activation, rather than IKK itself.

**ACTIVATION OF THE CLASSICAL NF-κB PATHWAY BY TLR/IL-1R SIGNALING**

Members of the TLR/IL-1R family are also potent activators of classical NF-κB signaling. The cytoplasmic regions of TLR/IL-1R family members share a common motif called the TIR domain (147, 148). Similar to TNFRs, TIR-containing receptors do not have intrinsic catalytic activity and rely on recruitment of adapter proteins, ubiquitin ligases, and protein kinases to generate and transduce signals that broadcast their activation. Two major TIR domain-containing adapters, MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88) and TRIF (TIR domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-β), play important roles in TLR/IL-1R signaling (147). While TLR2 and TLR4 bind to MyD88 or TRIF via intermediary adapters such as TIRAP (Toll/interleukin-1 receptor adapter protein, also referred to as MAL) or TRAM, other TLRs, such as TLR9 and TLR3, appear to bind their respective adapters, MyD88 and TRIF, directly (147, 149). Whereas TLR4 uses both TRIF and MyD88, TLR3 and TLR9 signal exclusively through TRIF and MyD88, respectively (147, 150). The recruitment of different adapters to distinct TLRs is probably determined by the folding pattern and the surface properties of TIR domain-containing adapters. It appears that the BB and DD loops present in the TIR domains of TLRs and the TIR-containing adapters allow them to interact with each other (151, 152). Supporting this notion, the BB of TLR2 and the DD loop of MyD88 are required for the two proteins to interact (151, 152). In addition, receptor dimerization occurs via interaction of the BB loop of one TLR with the DD loop of another.

In the case of MyD88, investigators recently demonstrated that, in addition to the BB and DD loops, a region called the Poc site (Ile179)

---

**Figure 4**

Activation of classical NF-κB signaling by TNF-α. Ligation of TNFR1 results in TRADD-dependent TRAF2/TRAF5 and RIP1 recruitment. TRAF2 causes K63-linked ubiquitination of RIP1 and also recruits IKK to the receptor complex, where binding of IKKγ to ubiquitinated RIP1 stabilizes IKK interaction with the receptor complex. This may also lead to a conformational change of the IKK complex. TAB2 and TAB3 interact with TRAF2 and TAK1, leading to TAK1 activation that may then phosphorylate IKKβ. Alternatively, MEKK3, which is brought near the receptor complex presumably by RIP1 may also phosphorylate and activate IKK. On the other hand, IKK may also be activated by autophosphorylation. Activated IKK phosphorylates IkBα at specific serine residues, leading to the proteasome-mediated degradation of the latter. Degradation of IkBα releases the NF-κB heterodimers, which then migrate to the nucleus and regulate gene expression.
(named after the phenotype Pococurante) is critical for the interaction of MyD88 and the BB loop of the interacting TLRs. Thus, a mutation in the Poc site impairs the signaling by receptors that interact with MyD88 (153). However, TLR2:TLR6 dimers, which interact with MyD88, seem to require either a BB loop or the Poc site of MyD88. As described above, some TLRs can directly interact with MyD88 or TRIF, whereas others, such as TLR2 and TLR4, depend on TIRAP or TRAM. This is presumably due to the electrostatic surfaces of the TIR domains present in the receptors and different adapters. For instance, for both TLR4 and MyD88, the TIR domain is highly electropositive, and therefore direct interaction is not possible. The TIR domain of TIRAP, on the other hand, is highly electronegative, allowing efficient interaction with the electropositive TIR domain of TLR4. TIRAP thereby forms a bridge between TLR4 and MyD88 (152).

Similar to TIRAP, TRAM, which is specifically required for TLR4 signaling, may function as a bridging factor between TLR4 and TRIF (154, 155). However, LPS signaling is more impaired in TRAM-deficient cells than in TRIF-deficient cells, indicating that TRAM has roles beyond being a bridging factor. The function of TRAM depends on two important biochemical modifications: $(a)$ N-terminal myristoylation, which is required for membrane tethering; and $(b)$ phosphorylation by PKC$\varepsilon$ at a site proximal to the myristoylation. Mutation of either of these sites impairs TRAM function, although how phosphorylation regulates signaling through TRAM is unclear (156, 157).

The MyD88-dependent pathway leads to activation of IKK and NF-$\kappa$B via TRAF6, which is recruited to MyD88 in a manner dependent on IRAK1 (IL-1R-associated kinase 1) (147, 158, 159). The related protein kinase IRAK4 is also involved in TLR/IL-1R-mediated IKK and NF-$\kappa$B activation (147), and its absence causes severe immunodeficiency in humans (160). The IRAKs and RIP1 share structural features, and, like RIP1, the kinase functions of IRAK1 and IRAK4 are dispensable for NF-$\kappa$B activation (161). The IRAKs also undergo K63-linked ubiquitination following receptor activation (162), and it appears that TRAF6 is the ubiquitin ligase responsible for IRAK1/4 ubiquitination (162). However, the IRAKs are not only substrates for TRAF6 but are also involved in its recruitment to the activated receptor (163, 164).

Following recruitment by IRAKs, TRAF6 binds to the TAB1/2/3 complex, leading to TAK1-mediated IKK activation (Figure 5) (140, 141, 163–165). However, as discussed above, the role of the TAK1:TAB1/2/3 complex in IKK activation remains controversial, although it is generally agreed that this complex is needed for JNK and p38 activation (144). Indeed, a TAK1:TAB1 fusion protein is constitutively active and capable of stimulating AP-1 activity (166). Another TRAF protein that is recruited to MyD88 and TRIF signaling complexes upon TLR/IL-1R engagement is TRAF3 (167, 168). TRAF3 is not involved in classical IKK activation (11), but it is required for activation of the IKK-related kinases TBK1 and IKK$\varepsilon$, which regulate IFN gene induction (167, 168). However, IFN induction plays an important role in activating the full NF-$\kappa$B transcriptional response in IFN-producing cells because of transcriptional cooperation between the IRFs and NF-$\kappa$B (169–171). Moreover, during the response to LPS, the interaction between IRF3 and NF-$\kappa$B dimers enhances NF-$\kappa$B-mediated activation of select gene promoters (172). Subsequent studies have shown that IRF3 and IRF5 are involved in TLR-induced production of TNF-$\alpha$ that may lead to secondary and delayed activation of NF-$\kappa$B (173, 174). Thus, functional cross talk between IFN and NF-$\kappa$B signaling appears to amplify and prolong the NF-$\kappa$B activity. A full discussion of IFN signaling, however, is beyond the scope of the current review.

Despite significant advances in understanding the role of TLR family members in pathogen recognition (175, 176), detailed insights into their biochemical mode of action are lacking. Part of the complexity in understanding the biochemistry of TLR signaling relates

706  
Vallabhapurapu • Karin
to the presence of different TLRs in different
intracellular compartments with distinct lipid
and protein compositions (175). It was recently
suggested that the lipid microenvironment sur-
rounding each receptor may have major effects
on its mode of signaling (175, 177).

In addition to TLRs, other microbial
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs), includ-
ing nucleotide binding and oligomerization
domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs) and
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like re-
ceptors also provide innate immune responses
via activation of NF-κB (178–180). NLRs
are a family of intracellular PRRs that are
characterized by presence of the conserved
NOD domain. NLRs are found in both mice
and humans, and their general domain or-
ganization includes either (*a*) an N-terminal
CARD domain, (*b*) a pyrin domain, or (*c*) a
baculovirus inhibitor repeat domain, plus a
NOD domain in the middle and a C-terminal
leucine-rich repeat motif, which detects micro-
bial patterns (178, 180). Different NLRs vary
in their N-terminal domains, but the NOD
domain and the leucine-rich repeat are con-
served among all the NLRs. Although the ma-
jor function of the NLRs appears to be acti-
vation of the inflammasomes (178–180), some
NLRs such as NOD1 and NOD2 activate
the NF-κB pathway (181, 182). Upon binding
to γ-D-glytanyl-meso-diaminopimelic acid
(iE-DAP) and muramyl dipeptide (MDP), re-
spectively, NOD1 and NOD2, via CARD in-
teractions, recruit RIP2, a CARD-containing
serine-threonine kinase (179, 183, 184). RIP2
directly binds and facilitates K63-linked polyu-
biquitination of NEMO/IKKγ and activates
TAK1, which might directly phosphorylate and
activate IKKβ and thereby activate the classical
NF-κB pathway (185–187).

RIG-like helicases are involved in sensing
the viral dsRNA. Three members of this fam-
ily were identified that include two CARD-
containing proteins, RIG1 and MDA5, and the
third member, LGP2, is devoid of a CARD do-
main (179). Upon activation by dsRNA or viral
infection, both RIG1 and MDA5 bind dsRNA
and trigger NF-κB activation by recruiting a

**Figure 5**

Ligand binding by TLRs results in the recruitment of receptor-specific
adapters and induces activation of NF-κB. In the case of TLR4, ligand binding
results in NF-κB activation via both TRIF- and MyD88-dependent pathways.
TIRAP (also known as MAL) and TRAM are recruited and presumably serve as
bridging factors to recruit MyD88 and TRIF, respectively. MyD88 recruits
TRAF6 and members of the IRAK family, leading to oligomerization and
self-ubiquitination of TRAF6 as well as recruitment of TAB2 and TAB3, which
in turn activate TAK1. Activated TAK1 may then directly phosphorylate IKKβ
to activate the IKK complex, resulting in IkBα degradation and NF-κB
activation. TRIF also recruits TRAF6 by direct interaction. TRAF6 then
activates TAK1, culminating in IKK and NF-κB activation in a manner similar
to the MyD88-dependent pathway. In addition to recruiting TRAF6, TRIF
also recruits RIP1, which might cooperate with TRAF6 to facilitate TAK1
activation.

www.annualreviews.org • Regulation of NF-κB Transcription Factors 707

mitochondrial-anchored protein called Cardif, which in turn recruits and activates IKK, leading to NF-κB activation (188).

**ACTIVATION OF CLASSICAL NF-κB SIGNALING BY ANTIGEN RECEPTORS**

Engagement of antigen receptors on B and T lymphocytes also results in IKK and NF-κB activation. Recently, significant progress has been made in understanding the mechanism of IKK activation by both the TCR and BCR. The protein kinase C isozy mes PKCθ in T cells (189) and PKCβ in B cells (190) play central roles in recruiting additional factors and in IKK activation. Genetic studies have identified several additional factors that play important roles in TCR-mediated NF-κB activation, including kinases of the Src (Lck and Fyn) and Syk (ZAP70) families, as well as adapters such as LAT and SLP-76, and intracellular signaling components including phospholipase C (PLC) γ1, Vav1, BCL10, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1), CARMA1 [caspase recruitment domain (CARD) membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) protein 1], and MALT1 (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 1) (191, 192). Recent biochemical studies led to the postulation that TCR activation results in sequential recruitment of these factors to the immunological synapse (IS) as well as PKCθ-dependent formation of a complex between CARMA1, BCL10, and MALT1 (reviewed in 11, 192, 193). This complex, called CBM, promotes the K63-linked polyubiquitination of IKKγ/NEMO and subsequent IKK activation (194).

Triggering the TCR/CD3 complex results in the recruitment of the Src family kinases Fyn and Lck, and the latter (Lck) causes phosphorylation of the conserved immunoreceptor tyrosine activation motifs (ITAMs) on the CD3 subunit of the TCR (192). Subsequent recruitment of the Syk tyrosine kinases ZAP70 and Syk results in phosphorylation of the adapter molecules LAT and SLP-76, leading to their interaction via the adapter GADS and

recruitment of other adapters, such as Grb2, the p85 subunit of PI3K PLCγ1, the Tec family tyrosine kinase Itk, and the nucleotide exchange factor Vav1 (192, 193). Phosphorylation of SLP-76 upon TCR triggering induces its binding to Vav1, and their interaction facilitates NF-κB activation in response to TCR activation (195). The Vav1-SLP6-Itk complex also activates PLCγ1, leading to the release of diacylglycerol (DAG), which stimulates PKCs (196). Costimulatory signals from CD28 also play an important role in PI3K activation, which induces recruitment to the plasma membrane of Pleckstrin homology domain proteins such as PDK1 and AKT, as well as PDK1-mediated phosphorylation and translocation of PKCθ to the IS (196, 197). Vav1 is also involved in this recruitment in a PI3K- and AKT-dependent manner (191, 196). Vav1 may be required for effective PI3K activation and sustained Ca²⁺ signaling, and it may also be involved in NFAT and JNK activation (198, 199).

Upon translocation to the IS, PKCθ undergoes conformational changes, presumably owing to phosphorylation by Lck as well as by PDK1, allowing PKCθ to interact directly with IKK (191, 200, 201). Eventually, a large signaling complex is formed at the engaged receptor within the lipid rafts, leading to activation of the PI3K-AKT and the Ras-MAPK pathways (192). As stated above, activation of PI3K results in activation of PDK1, which in turn activates PKCθ. Activated PKCθ was proposed to phosphorylate CARMA1, leading to a conformational change that allows CARMA1 to associate with BCL10 (192). In addition to activating PKCθ, PDK1 also interacts with CARMA1, which is now bound to MALT1-associated BCL10 (192). The active CBM complex thus formed leads to IKK activation through an ill-defined mechanism, which may involve IKK trans-autophosphorylation, as suggested for TNFR and TLR/IL-1R signaling pathways (Figure 6). Recently, TRAF2 and TRAF6, which were thought to be predominantly involved in TNFR and TLR/IL-1R-mediated IKK activation, were shown to be involved in TCR-mediated IKK activation (202).

Figure 6

Stimulation of the TCR results in recruitment and activation of the Src (Lck and Fyn) and Syk (ZAP70) family kinases. ZAP70 then phosphorylates adapter proteins LAT and SLP-76, resulting in formation of a multimolecular complex containing PLCγ1 and nucleotide exchange factor Vav1. Activation of PLCγ1 results in generation of IP3 and Ca²⁺, as well as DAG, which in turn stimulates PKCθ. Signals from TCR and CD28 costimulation result in activation of PI3K, which facilitates recruitment of PKCθ to the immunological synapse (IS). Vav1 also plays a role in the recruitment of PKCθ to the membrane. Phosphorylation of the phosphoinositides by PI3K leads to membrane recruitment of PDK1, which phosphorylates and activates PKCθ to control the recruitment of IKK and CARMA1 into the signaling complex. Phosphorylation of CARMA1 by PKCθ results in the recruitment of BCL10 and MALT1, thus leading to formation of a stable CBM complex. A poorly defined mechanism involving ubiquitination of IKKγ and activation of IKKβ presumably by TAK1 then leads to activation of IKK complex, which phosphorylates IkBα, leading to its degradation and activation of NF-κB.
MALT1 was found to interact with TRAF6 and stimulate its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity toward IKKγ, resulting in K63-linked polyubiquitination of the latter and IKK activation (202). Moreover, TRAF6 autoubiquitination activates TAK1, which may directly phosphorylate IKKβ. However, the role of TAK1 in TCR-mediated NF-κB activation seems to be important only in thymocytes and not in peripheral T cells (11, 203). Interestingly, IKK recruitment to the CBM complex appears also to depend on caspase 8, and T lymphocytes lacking caspase 8 display defective NF-κB activation in response to antigen receptor engagement (204). However, whether caspase 8 participates in proteolytic events that are required for IKK activation by these receptors remains to be determined.

It appears that several of the intracellular signaling molecules and adapters involved in TCR-mediated NF-κB activation are rapidly recruited into spatially and temporally organized structures called supra-molecular activation clusters (SMACs) (192). Although the temporal compositions of SMAC and the IS are not clear, it is evident that PKCθ, which is central to TCR-mediated NF-κB activation, as well as the CBM complex are both rapidly recruited to the SMAC when the TCR is triggered (201, 205, 206). Costimulatory signals from CD28 are postulated to facilitate translocation of these factors to the SMAC (192, 205). In support of the argument that the components of TCR signaling need to localize to these specialized structures, investigators showed that artificial tethering of NEMO to the IS is sufficient to activate NF-κB (120). Furthermore, CARMA1 is essential for recruitment of IKK to the SMAC (205, 207).

TCR triggering might also induce NF-κB activation via AKT, which phosphorylates Cot/Tpl2, a serine/threonine kinase involved in IKK activation (208). AKT-mediated phosphorylation of Cot/Tpl2 at serine 400 is critical for the latter to stimulate IKK (208). Interestingly, Cot/Tpl2-mediated IKK activation seems to depend on NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK), which normally is not involved in the

activation of the classical pathway (15, 209). In addition to activating the classical NF-κB pathway, AKT may also phosphorylate p65, resulting in enhanced transcription by NF-κB (210). However, other studies using Jurkat T cells revealed that AKT does not have a significant effect on p65 (211).

Although PKCθ is central for TCR-mediated NF-κB activation, some recent studies from two groups using mice lacking the *PKCθ* gene revealed contradictory results: Whereas the first group clearly showed that lack of PKCθ impairs NF-κB activation, the second group showed that absence of PKCθ resulted in complete abrogation of NFAT activation, while activation of NF-κB was only partially impaired (212). Whether these differences were due to the strategies used to inactivate the *PKCθ* gene or to the genetic background of the mice needs to be clarified by further studies.

Finally, activation of NF-κB by the TCR and BCR is downregulated by targeting BCL10 to cIAP2 and Itch-mediated ubiquitination and degradation in the lysosomes followed by IKKβ-mediated phosphorylation (213). This results in the disruption of BCL10-MALT1 complex leading to downregulation of NF-κB activation. In addition, phosphorylation of TCR by PKCθ results in its internalization, which in turn leads to reduction of NF-κB activity (214).

### ACTIVATION OF IKKα AND THE ALTERNATIVE NF-κB PATHWAY VIA NIK STABILIZATION

NIK was first identified as a protein kinase whose overexpression results in NF-κB activation (215). However, the analyses of *aly/aly* mice, which carry an inactivating point mutation in the *Nik* gene (216) and *Nik⁻/⁻* mice (217) revealed that NIK is mainly involved in activation of the IKKα-dependent alternative pathway, as the phenotypes of these mice are very similar to those of *Ikkα*<sup>AA</sup> mice, in which IKKα cannot be activated because of replacement of its phosphoaccepting serines with alanines (14). Subsequently, NIK was foundto be responsible for activation of IKKα and induction of p100 processing (14, 15, 69). Additional work revealed that NIK is an unstable protein that is subject to rapid turnover in nonstimulated cells (218). Stimulation of B cells with certain TNF family members, such as CD40L, that are capable of inducing NF-κB2/ p100 processing also causes NIK stabilization, leading to the proposal that accumulation of stabilized NIK results in its activation via trans-autophosphorylation and subsequent IKKα activation (218). The mechanism of receptor-induced NIK stabilization has remained a mystery for quite some time, but it was noted to correlate with receptor-induced TRAF3 degradation, whose mechanism was not understood either (218). Traf3−/− mice exhibit NIK stabilization and constitutive activation of alternative NF-κB signaling, which accounts for postnatal inflammation and mortality (219). Inactivation of either the Nik or NfkB2 genes in these mice prevents the inflammatory response and postnatal lethality (219, 220).

TRAF3 overexpression in HEK293T cells induces NIK ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, leading to the proposal that TRAF3 may be a NIK-targeting ubiquitin ligase (218). A TRAF3-binding site is present within the N terminus of NIK, and a NIK-binding site is located in the TRAF domain of TRAF3, and both of these sites are important for TRAF3-induced NIK degradation (218). Like other TRAFs, TRAF3 harbors a RING finger at its N terminus, leading to the hypothesis that its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity targets NIK to proteasomal degradation. However, the RING finger of TRAF3 is not required for induction of NIK degradation, which depends on the TRAF domain of TRAF3 (220). Interestingly, the RING finger of TRAF3 is essential for preventing constitutive p100 processing in Traf3−/− cells (221). Despite the contradictory nature of these findings, other studies support the concept that TRAF3 functions as an adapter that links NIK to another E3 ligase responsible for the K48-linked ubiquitination of NIK and is not a NIK ubiquitin ligase itself (222–225).

Some of the new insights into the mechanism of NIK turnover come from studies on the plasma cell cancer multiple myeloma (MM). Many MM cell lines harbor mutations in the TRAF3 and NIK loci that prevent the interaction between their products, thereby resulting in NIK accumulation (222, 223). Other MM cell lines were found to have large deletions that encompass the linked cIAP1 and cIAP2 loci (BIRC2 and BIRC3), and these mutations were also linked to NIK accumulation (222). The products of these loci, cIAP1 and cIAP2, were previously known as NF-κB-inducible antiapoptotic proteins that interact with TRAF2 (226). Another protein that binds to cIAP1 and cIAP2 is the proapoptotic mediator SMAC, which is released from damaged mitochondria and can induce the rapid degradation of cIAP1 and cIAP2 (227). This finding led to development of small molecule SMAC mimics that bind both cIAP1 and cIAP2 and also induce their ubiquitin-dependent degradation (224, 225, 228). Curiously, SMAC mimics that were developed for induction of apoptosis in cancer cells also induce NIK stabilization and activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway (224, 225), an effect also seen upon the cIAP1/2 deletions in MM (222). These results suggest that cIAP1/2 and TRAF3 somehow induce the rapid turnover of NIK and thereby inhibit alternative NF-κB signaling in resting cells.

TRAF3 is not the only TRAF protein involved in NIK turnover, however. TRAF2 also negatively regulates p100 processing and alternative NF-κB signaling in B cells (229, 230). Furthermore, deletion of TRAF2 also results in elevated NIK expression in B cells and fibroblasts (220, 225). Similar to TRAF3, overexpression of TRAF2 also induces NIK degradation, but unlike TRAF3, the RING finger of TRAF2 is required for this process (220). Interestingly, both Traf2−/− and Traf3−/− mice exhibit an almost identical phenotype, characterized by perinatal inflammation, atrophy of lymphoid organs, and early mortality (104, 231), which in the case of Traf3−/− mice is due to uncontrolled activation of alternative NF-κB signaling (219). Correspondingly,
inactivation of the Nik gene prevents the perinatal lethality and splenic atrophy of both Traf2−/− and Traf3−/− mice (220). Consistent with the involvement of TRAF2, TRAF3, and cIAP1/2 in NIK turnover, NIK is associated in nonstimulated B cells with a ubiquitin ligase complex containing TRAF2, TRAF3, and

cIAP1/2 (220). siRNA-mediated knockdown of TRAF3 prevented formation of this complex, suggesting that TRAF3 functions as an adapter that links NIK to a TRAF2:cIAP1/2 E3 ligase complex (Figure 7). This adapter function is provided by the TRAF domain of TRAF3, and, as mentioned above, its N-terminal portion is

---

**RESTING CELL**

- **CD40**
- **TRAF2**
- **TRAF3**
- **cIAP1/2**
- **NIK**
- **p100**
- **RelB**

---

**ACTIVATED CELL**

- **CD40L**
- **CD40**
- **TRAF3**
- **TRAF2**
- **cIAP1/2**
- **TRAF3 degradation**
- **NIK stabilization and activation**
- **IKKα**
- **p100 processing**
- **p52 RelB**

---

**Figure 7**

Activation of alternative NF-κB signaling by CD40. In resting cells (*left*), p100, via its C-terminal ankyrin repeats, binds and keeps RelB in the cytosol. NIK, which is an essential kinase involved in the phosphorylation and proteasome-mediated C-terminal processing of p100, is maintained at very low levels owing to rapid proteasome-dependent degradation. TRAF3 links NIK to an E3 complex containing TRAF2 and cIAP1/2, thereby promoting cIAP1/2-mediated K48-linked NIK polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. TRAF3 also undergoes a low level of K48-linked polyubiquitination under resting conditions. Activation of CD40 by CD40L (*right*) leads to recruitment of the cIAP1/2:TRAF2:TRAF3 complex to the receptor, where cIAP1/2 undergoes TRAF2-dependent K63-linked polyubiquitination. TRAF2 also undergoes K63-linked self-ubiquitination. K63-linked ubiquitination of cIAP1/2 enhances their K48-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase activity toward TRAF3, leading to proteasomal degradation of the latter. As a result, TRAF3 levels in the cell drop below a critical threshold, and NIK can no longer be recruited to the cIAP1/2:TRAF2 complex. This leads to stabilization and accumulation of newly synthesized NIK and its activation presumably via autophosphorylation, resulting in activation of IKKα. Activated IKKα phosphorylates p100, leading to proteasome-mediated processing of p100 to p52. C-terminal truncation of p100 releases the p52:RelB heterodimer, which migrates to the nucleus and regulates transcription of its target genes.

fully dispensable for NIK turnover and complex formation (220). In contrast to TRAF3, TRAF2 does not interact with NIK directly, and its ability to induce NIK degradation depends both on its C-terminal TRAF domain, which interacts with TRAF3, and on its N-terminal RING finger. However, TRAF2 is not directly responsible for the degradative K48-linked polyubiquitination of NIK. Instead, this task is carried out by cIAP1/2, which are potent K48-specific NIK E3 ubiquitin ligases (224, 225). Moreover, cIAP1/2 interact with TRAF2 and are recruited to NIK in a TRAF2-dependent manner (224, 232).

Although these findings explain how cIAP1/2, TRAF2, and TRAF3 induce NIK degradation in resting cells, a few questions remain: (a) What is the exact role of TRAF2 in this process? (b) How is basal NIK turnover modulated in response to receptor engagement? Varfolomeev et al. (224) suggested that, in response to TWEAK stimulation of cancer cells, cIAP1/2 undergoes degradation in a manner analogous to the action of SMAC mimics and that cIAP1/2 degradation is the critical event that accounts for NIK stabilization. However, neither CD40L nor BAFF, both of which induce NIK stabilization and p100 processing in B cells, can induce substantial cIAP1/2 degradation (220). Instead, the most dramatic protein degradation event induced by these cytokines was TRAF3 degradation (220). The engagement of either CD40 or BAFF-R causes K48-linked polyubiquitination of TRAF3, leading to its degradation in a cIAP1/2-dependent manner (122, 220). Although TRAF2 is required for CD40-induced TRAF3 degradation (233), TRAF2 can only catalyze the formation of nondegradative K63-linked polyubiquitin chains (142, 234). Indeed, the requirement for TRAF2 can be explained by its ability to induce the K63-linked ubiquitination of cIAP1/2, resulting in strong enhancement of their K48-specific ubiquitin ligase activity toward TRAF3 (220). TRAF2 also recruits TRAF3 to cIAP1/2, and it is needed for recruitment of cIAP1/2 to CD40 and other receptors

(122). These findings illustrate the existence of a unique protein ubiquitination cascade in which TRAF2 ubiquitinates cIAP1/2 through a K63-linkage and thereby leads to activation of their K48-specific ubiquitin ligase activity toward TRAF3 (Figure 7).

Interestingly, stabilization of NIK also induces classical NF-κB signaling by activating IKKβ (223, 235). Moreover, p100 processing regulates nuclear localization of RelA in addition to RelB (27). Consistent with these reports, TRAF3-deficient cells, which exhibit elevated NIK levels and constitutive p100 processing, also exhibit increased nuclear RelA as well as RelB amounts. However, TRAF2-deficient cells, despite elevated levels of NIK and constitutive p100 processing, exhibit elevated nuclear levels of RelB but not RelA. This is puzzling because, if p100 processing regulates RelA nuclear translocation, how is TRAF2 involved in this process? One possible explanation is that activation of the RelB:p52 complex upon p100 processing might induce expression and release of cytokines that might activate TRAF2-dependent classical NF-κB signaling, culminating in the nuclear translocation of RelA. Further studies are required to clearly address how this cross talk between the alternative and classical pathway is regulated.

Another factor that may be involved in NIK turnover is NLR family member MONARCH-1 (236, 237). MONARCH-1 is a myeloid-specific protein (238), and whether MONARCH-1 impacts the cIAP1/2:TRAF2:TRAF3:NIK complex or induces NIK degradation through some other means is unclear. The physiological role of MONARCH-1 in the alternative pathway and whether MONARCH-1 regulates alternative NF-κB signaling in a cell type– and signal-specific manner remain to be studied.

**NF-κB IN LYMPHOCYTE AND MYELOID DIFFERENTIATION**

Many of the receptors that activate either the classical or the alternative NF-κB pathways are expressed on hematopoietic cell types,
suggesting that NF-κB might play an important role in their development and activation. Most of our current knowledge regarding the role of NF-κB in hematopoietic cell survival and differentiation comes from analysis of mice deficient for different NF-κB family members as well as mice lacking different NF-κB inhibitors or IKK subunits (38). For instance, the absence of both c-Rel and RelA affects erythrocyte differentiation, and as a result lethally irradiated wild-type mice that were reconstituted with fetal liver cells from $c-Rel^{-/-}Rela^{-/-}$ double-knockout embryos suffered from severe anemia (239). In addition, the combined absence of c-Rel and RelA causes impaired monocyte differentiation in vitro (38). However, lack of either c-Rel or RelA alone does not significantly impair differentiation of major lymphocyte or myeloid cell types (38). Likewise, the absence of either IKKβ or IKKγ does not have a direct effect on differentiation of such cells, although these IKK deficiencies impact the formation of B cells by compromising the survival of B cell progenitors (240, 241). A recent study revealed that the loss of IKKβ in the myeloid lineage can result in massive neutrophilia (231). However, this neutrophilia is probably not due to a differentiation defect per se and is likely to be related to the paradoxical increase in IL-1β production that is associated with the IKKβ-NF-κB deficiency in myeloid cells (231). Nonetheless, the granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSF-R), which controls the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells into granulocytes and macrophages, interacts with IKKβ, suggesting that NF-κB may be more intimately involved in myeloid differentiation (242). However, this involvement may be due mainly to induction of cell survival, with only a small contribution to cell maturation, as suggested for osteoclast formation (68).

$\alpha\beta$ T cells. These early precursors, which are CD4−CD8− double negative (DN), undergo a differentiation process that can be separated into four stages, characterized by expression of surface markers such as CD44 and CD25. Once they reach a CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP) stage, they then undergo further maturation upon interaction with MHC to reach a CD4+ or CD8+ stage (243). Within the thymus, positive selection of developing thymocytes occurs in the cortex, whereas negative selection occurs in the medulla (243). Interestingly, NF-κB family members are differentially expressed between the cortex and the medulla, with RelA being predominantly expressed in the cortex, whereas RelB and c-Rel are primarily expressed in the medulla (244). These findings suggest that different NF-κB family members may function during different stages of T cell development. Subsequent studies in several knockout and transgenic mouse models revealed stage-specific regulation of T cell development by NF-κB signaling.

Although mice lacking individual NF-κB subunits did not exhibit gross T cell developmental defects (38), $Relb^{-/-}$ mice show severely impaired negative selection (245). This defect stems from atrophy of the thymic medulla and lack of thymic DCs and is not a T cell-intrinsic defect (246, 247). Investigators have suggested that a cell autonomous requirement for classical NF-κB signaling activated by the pre-TCR during thymocyte development may allow the survival of those T cell precursors that express functional pre-TCR (248, 249). However, NF-κB was also reported to have a proapoptotic function in DP thymocytes (250, 251). Yet a different study suggested that NF-κB has an antiapoptotic function during peptide-induced negative selection (59), further complicating the issue of whether NF-κB provides pro- or antiapoptotic function during thymocyte development.

As mentioned above, mainstream CD4+ or CD8+ $\alpha\beta$ T cell development is not significantly impaired in the absence of individual NF-κB proteins. However, the thymus is also the site for development and maturation

### NF-κB IN T CELL DIFFERENTIATION

Early thymocyte precursors enter the thymus via the bloodstream, where they differentiate into either CD4+ or CD8+ mainstream
of unconventional T cells such as γδ T cells and natural killer T (NKT) cells that bear invariant TCR reactive to lipid antigens (252–255). Proper development of γδ T cells may depend on LTβ receptor signaling, which activates both the classical and alternative NF-κB pathways (15, 256, 257). Recent reports indicate that different NF-κB family members in distinct thymic compartments have important roles during early and late stages of NKT cell development (209, 258). NKT cells have unique maturation requirements. First, they express an invariant TCR formed by the rearrangement of the Vα14 and Jα18 gene segments and are therefore termed Va14i NKT cells (253). Second, they are positively selected by the MHC class I-like molecule CD1d, which presents lipid antigens (253). Moreover, unlike mainstream T cells, NKT cells are positively selected by CD4+CD8+ DP thymocytes instead of by thymic epithelial cells (253). Interestingly, classical NF-κB signaling is required within developing NKT cells for postselection maturation, whereas alternative NF-κB signaling is required in thymic stromal cells to support the early stages of NKT cell development (209, 258). Further studies have demonstrated that p50:RelA, but not p50:c-Rel, heterodimers are required for NKT cell maturation, as is IL-15-and/or IL-7-induced proliferation of NKT cell precursors (209, 259). Signaling through the cytokine receptor common γ chain (γc) has been implicated in terminal NKT maturation (characterized by acquisition of NK markers such as NK1.1) (260). Transgenic mice in which classical NF-κB was inhibited in a T cell-specific manner as well as mice that lack RelA in T cells have highly reduced numbers of NK.1.1+ NKT cells, while containing normal numbers of NK1.1− NKT cell precursors, suggesting that classical NF-κB regulates terminal NKT cell maturation (209, 259). Continuous TCR signaling is required for postpositive selection maturation of NKT cells to the NK1.1+ stage (261), raising the possibility that NF-κB might link TCR signaling to γc expression or activation. Indeed, TCR activation results in increased γc expression on NKT cells in an

NF-κB-dependent manner (259). NF-κB binds to an intronic site within the γc gene in a TCR-inducible manner and may regulate its expression directly (259). Elevated γc on the NKT cell surface may increase the signal threshold through which γc facilitates maturation to the NK1.1+ stage. These findings suggest a molecular mechanism by which NF-κB regulates terminal NKT cell maturation (259). There are other factors such as T-bet (262) involved in the terminal maturation of NKT cells to the NK1.1+ stage, and whether those factors cooperate with classical NF-κB signaling in this process remains to be studied. Studies in mice lacking IKKβ indicated that NF-κB signaling might also play a role in the proper development of regulatory T cells as well as of memory T cells (263). Moreover, mutations in the IKKy/NEMO gene in human patients have revealed an important role for NF-κB signaling in human T cell development, as these patients suffer from a severe immunodeficiency (124).

Defects in Fas or its ligand (Fas-L) lead to development of abnormal B220+Thy1+ T cells that accumulate in secondary lymphoid organs. Defects in Fas or Fas-L cause lethal autoimmune disorders called lymphoproliferative disorder (lpr), and generalized lymphoproliferative disorder (gld), respectively (264). Interestingly, T cell-specific inhibition of NF-κB impaired the development of these abnormal T cells and prevented their accumulation in peripheral lymphoid tissues, thereby rescuing gld/gld mice (265). However, the mechanism by which NF-κB supports development of these abnormal T cells remains to be determined.

**NF-κB IN NK CELL DEVELOPMENT**

NK cells are involved in killing infectious agents by perforin- and granzyme-mediated mechanisms as well as by secreting inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and IFN-γ (266). NK cells are also involved in killing tumors (266). NF-κB plays a critical role in the development of NK cells (267). Although NK cell

precursors exhibit constitutive NF-κB activity, the combined deletion of IkBα and IkBε results in reduced numbers of NK cells (267). However, further studies are required to explain how NF-κB regulates NK cell maturation. Studies on human patients with IKKγ/NEMO mutations revealed that in addition to its role in NK cell maturation, IKKγ-dependent classical NF-κB activity is also required for their killer function (268).

**NF-κB IN B CELL DEVELOPMENT**

Development of B cells depends on a series of transcriptional regulatory events (269–271) that control progression of B cell progenitors in the bone marrow via the pro-B and pre-B stages into immature B cells that leave the bone marrow to undergo terminal maturation in peripheral lymphoid organs (271–273). Immature B cells are divided into the T1 and T2 stages (274, 275). Activation of classical NF-κB signaling by the pre-BCR appears to provide a survival signal that is critical during early B cell development in the bone marrow (273). In contrast, BAFF-activated alternative NF-κB signaling mainly affects late B cell development in the spleen during the T1 to T2 transition (273, 275). In addition, alternative NF-κB activation provides a survival signal to mature B cells (273). Moreover, NIK and RelB, which are the major players in alternative NF-κB signaling, are required for proper development of marginal zone B (MZB) cells (276, 277). In accordance with the role of this alternative pathway in MZB cell development, BAFF transgenic mice accumulate huge numbers of MZB cells in their spleens, resulting in autoimmunity (278–280). The development or survival of these autoreactive B cells requires that the marginal zone exist, so removal of the spleen, whose follicles are the only ones that contain a proper marginal zone, prevents autoimmunity (278). In addition, the alternative NF-κB pathway is required for expression of B cell integrins that retain MZB cells in the marginal zone (278). Interestingly, expression of the ligands for these integrins, VCAM1 and

ICAM1, in splenic stromal cells is controlled by the classical pathway (278, 281). B cell-specific deletion of IKKγ/NEMO also results in impaired survival of T1 B cells, resulting in reduced numbers of transitional and mature B cells (241). Moreover, the combined deletion of RelA and c-Rel also results in highly reduced numbers of B cells owing to increased apoptosis (282), suggesting that both the classical and the alternative NF-κB signaling pathways coordinately regulate B cell survival and maturation.

Curiously, however, uncontrolled activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway in mice that lack the C-terminal region of p100 culminates in aberrant early B cell development in the bone marrow because of a defective pro-B to pre-B (CD19⁻ to CD19⁺) transition (283), which is regulated by the B cell-specific transcription factor Pax5 (271). Pax5 expression is highly reduced in bone marrow B cells from these mice, and deletion of one RelB allele rescued Pax5 expression as well as normal B cell development (283). However, because the defects described above could be due to elevated production of glucocorticoids, which kill B cell progenitors, it is unclear whether RelB is a direct regulator of Pax5. Mice lacking TRAF2 or TRAF3 also exhibit constitutive alternative NF-κB signaling (219, 230) and display similar B cell developmental defects that are rescuable by deletion of NIK (220, 232). Traf2⁻/⁻ and Traf3⁻/⁻ mice as well as mice lacking the C-terminal region of p100 all have very high levels of serum cortisol (219, 284), and cortisol is known to kill B cell precursors in the bone marrow (285). Thus, the impaired B cell development in all these mutant mice could be the consequence of excessive glucocorticoid production.

In addition to the defects in early bone marrow B cell development, Traf2⁻/⁻ and Traf3⁻/⁻ mice exhibit abnormalities in peripheral B cells. Splenic B cells from both these mice have a survival advantage, and, similar to BAFF transgenic mice, the Traf2⁻/⁻ and Traf3⁻/⁻ mice accumulate large numbers of MZB cells and exhibit autoimmune features (229, 230, 286). Mice lacking the C-terminal region of p100 also accumulate large numbers of MZB cells
(287). These results suggest that uncontrolled activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway results in accumulation of MZB cells and results in autoimmunity.

### **NF-κB AND LYMPHOID MALIGNANCIES**

Physiological activation of NF-κB during lymphocyte maturation and activation mediates expression of genes involved in proliferation and survival as well as genes involved in immunity to infection (6). However, dysregulated NF-κB activation results in aberrant expression of its target genes that regulate cell proliferation or survival, including cyclin D1, cyclin D2, c-Myc, c-Myb (288–290), BCL2, and BCL-XL (8), as well as cytokines such as IL-2, IL-6, and CD40-L that regulate growth and proliferation of lymphocytes. Not surprisingly, constitutively active NF-κB has been implicated in various lymphoid malignancies. The first link between NF-κB and lymphoid malignancies came from studies on the viral oncogene v-Rel (homolog of the cellular c-Rel) that can cause aggressive leukemia and lymphoma (291). Subsequent studies revealed a number of genetic alterations affecting NF-κB activity in different forms of B and T cell malignancies (292, 293). Constitutively active NF-κB has been reported in malignant cells from patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia, MM, chronic myelogenous leukemia, as well as in myelodysplastic syndromes (292). In several forms of Hodgkin's lymphoma, which is characterized by Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, constitutive NF-κB mainly composed of RelA was also seen (294, 295). In some HRS cells, transcriptionally active forms of p50 homodimers complexed with BCL3 were also detected (296). Other studies suggest that elevated NF-κB in HRS cells is due to constitutive activation of cell surface receptors such as CD30, CD40, RANK, and Notch1 (297). Surprisingly, in large B cell lymphoma, CD40 was found to form complexes with c-Rel in the nucleus and thereby enhance expression of NF-κB target genes, including CD154, Blys/BAFF, and Bfl-1/A1, indicating

that cooperation between nuclear CD40 and c-Rel is important in regulating growth, survival, and proliferation of lymphoma cells (298). Curiously, CD40 contains an NLS, and its nuclear localization was found in normal and neoplastic B cells (299). However, whether association of CD40 with c-Rel is restricted to malignant cells remains to be studied. Although CD30, CD40, and RANK are well-known NF-κB activators, Notch1 also regulates the expression of *RelB* and *NfkB2* and activates IKK by direct interaction leading to NF-κB activation; it thereby induces T cell leukemia (300). Moreover, pre-TCR signaling that provides survival signals to maturing thymocytes can result in aberrant NF-κB activation in cooperation with Notch3 upon dysregulation in T cell lymphoma (301, 302).

Antigen receptor signaling (which normally activates NF-κB) if dysregulated could lead to a malignant transformation of T and B cells. Triggering the TCR or BCR, as discussed above, recruits the CBM complex (composed of CARMA1, BCL10, and MALT1) and activates the IKK complex. In cases of lymphomas such as activated B cell-like diffuse large B cell lymphoma (ABC-DLBCL) and MALT lymphoma, these signaling complexes are constitutively activated. In the case of MALT lymphoma, which is normally associated with *Helicobacter pylori* infection and is predominantly seen in the gastric mucosa, NF-κB activation is due to chromosomal translocations, resulting in the expression of IAP2-MALT1 fusion protein as well as misregulated expression of MALT1 or BCL10 genes under the control of immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer (293, 303). These chromosomal translocations cause the constitutive activation of the BCL10-MALT1 complex independently of signals from the antigen receptor and lead to constitutive IKK activation (293, 304). Similarly, the IAP2-MALT1 fusion protein also causes constitutive IKK activation, presumably by NEMO/IKKγ ubiquitination (305). In the case of ABC-DLBCL, based on a siRNA-mediated knock-down approach, constitutive NF-κB activation is due to activation of components of the CBM

www.annualreviews.org • Regulation of NF-κB Transcription Factors 717
complex, CARMA1, BCL10, and MALT1 (306). However, it is not clear how CARMA1 is activated in ABC-DLBCL.

Other forms of DLBCL, such as germinal center-like DLBCL (GC-DLBCL) and unclassified group of DLBCLs, also exhibit constitutive activation of NF-κB. Many DLBCLs respond to pharmacological IKKβ inhibitors and undergo apoptosis. The exception is GC-DLBCL, in which activation of NF-κB is due to amplified expression of c-Rel (293, 307). Given that amplified expression of c-Rel results in its IKK-independent activation, GC-DLBCL cells are refractory to IKKβ inhibitors. Although most of these mutations cause malignancies owing to the activation of the canonical pathway, in some cases DLBCL deletion mutations in the NFKB2 gene leading to deletion of its 3′ end result in the expression of a truncated form of p100 lacking its ankyrin repeats, leading to constitutive activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway (308).

Several oncogenic viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), induce NF-κB activation and thereby lead to lymphomagenesis. Specifically, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of EBV activates both the classical and alternative NF-κB pathways (309). Accordingly, LMP1 alone is sufficient to induce lymphomagenesis in B cell-specific LMP1 transgenic mice (310). Malignant cells from these mice exhibit elevated nuclear c-Rel. LMP1 can also induce NIK-dependent processing of p100 to p52 (311–313), but it is not clear whether LMP1-induced activation of alternative NF-κB signaling is critical in lymphoma development in EBV-infected individuals. Nonetheless, NFKB2 gene deletion that results in expression of truncated p100 variants were observed in several lymphomas (314), suggesting that activation of alternative NF-κB signaling may be a key oncogenic event, as recently found in MM (see below). Future studies in animal models by crossing LMP1 transgenic mice to Nik−/− or mice lacking different subunits of IKK will address whether classical or alternative NF-κB signaling or both play a critical role in LMP1-induced lymphomagenesis.

In addition to EBV, two other viruses—Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and the human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV)—cause primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and adult T cell lymphoma (ATL), respectively (315, 316). In the case of PEL, which is a B cell malignancy caused by KSHV infection, IKK is constitutively activated by interacting with a viral protein, vFLIP, a homolog of the cellular FLIP protein (317). Constitutive activation of IKK by vFLIP thus appears to be an important step in the malignancy caused by KSHV because siRNA-mediated knockdown of vFLIP induces death of KSHV-infected cells (318). In the case of ATL caused by HTLV, a viral expressed protein called Tax binds directly to NEMO/IKKγ and activates the IKK complex, resulting in the activation of the classical NF-κB pathway (319). Curiously, Tax can activate the alternative NF-κB pathway by interacting with p100 and inducing its processing (320). Although in many of these cases treatment with IKK inhibitors, which mainly target the classical pathway, results in apoptosis of infected cells, genetic studies are required to precisely address whether the classical or alternative pathway or both are essential for tumorigenesis by HTLV and other viruses.

In addition to mutations that affect IKK activity, in several cases of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, NF-κB was found to be activated independently of IKK activity. This is because mutations in the IκBs lead to inactivation or truncation of their C-terminal repeats, resulting in constitutive activation of classical NF-κB pathway (321, 322). However, as discussed above, recent reports indicate that even upon deletion of IκBα, IκBβ, and IκBε, RelA is still largely cytoplasmic, presumably because of elevated levels of p100 and its interaction with RelA (27, 28). Thus, it remains to be studied whether the elevated NF-κB activity seen in Hodgkin’s lymphoma associated with IκB mutations is complemented by additional dysregulations in the NF-κB pathway.

Although many studies have reported aberrations in the classical NF-κB pathway as being the cause for several forms of lymphoid
malignancies, some recent reports shed light on the role of alternative signaling in B cell malignancies. While mutations in the NFkB2 gene resulting in truncation of p100 (as described above) are known to be associated with some lymphomas, several recent studies have shown that malignant cells from MM patients harbor mutations in several genes whose products are involved in NIK turnover in nonstimulated B cells (222, 223). All these mutations result in NIK stabilization and constitutive p100 processing. Some of these mutations in either TRAF3 or NIK disrupt the interaction between TRAF3 and NIK (222), which, as mentioned above, results in stabilization of NIK owing to impaired recruitment of the cIAP2:TRAF2 complex. In addition, deletions of the closely linked cIAP1 and cIAP2 loci leading to NIK stabilization were observed in other cases of MM (222, 223). Despite the constitutive activation of alternative p52:RelB heterodimers in such cells, which is due to NIK stabilization, the key oncogenic event may actually be the activation of classical NF-kB signaling. This activation has also been observed in MM, which harbors mutations that lead to NIK stabilization (223). Although prolonged activation of alternative NF-kB signaling may result in production of cytokines that activate classical NF-kB signaling, a more likely scenario is that the high levels of NIK that are expressed in such cells may result in direct activation of the IKK complex through phosphorylation of IKKB. Indeed, IKKB inhibitors inhibit the proliferation and induce the death of MM cells, whereas depletion of IKKa has no affect on survival of MM cells expressing high levels of NIK (223, 323). These findings further indicate that activation of classical NF-kB signaling is the major oncogenic event in MM. Consistent with the high oncogenic activity of classical NF-kB signaling in MM, deletion of CYLD, which is a known negative regulator of NF-kB signaling, was also observed in MM, leading to high NF-kB activity (223). The actual utility of IKKB inhibitors in the treatment of MM and other lymphoid malignancies will have to await the completion of carefully planned clinical trials. However, in other cases of lymphoid malignancies, specific inhibition of alternative NF-kB signaling might be required to induce death of the malignant cells. Interestingly, a recent report showed that RelB, whose activity is regulated by the alternative NF-kB pathway, is required in radiation-resistant stromal cells to promote T cell leukemia (324). Thus, in addition to its role in cancer cells, the alternative NF-kB signaling also plays a critical pro-oncogenic role in nonhematopoietic stromal cells by regulating their cross talk with the leukemic cells. Therefore, it is important to develop NIK inhibitors to target alternative NF-kB signaling specifically as well as to target NIK-mediated activation of IKKB. Such specific targeting will test the inhibitors' utility in the treatment of lymphoid malignancies associated with NIK activation.

**CONCLUDING REMARKS**

NF-kB signaling is regulated by different mechanisms in a cell type-and stimulus-specific manner. Although significant advances have been made in our understanding of classical as well as alternative NF-kB signaling, many aspects are still not clear. For instance, activation of IKK is still an enigma, and the factors that are involved in the receptor proximal IKK activation are not fully understood. Similarly, although NIK turnover by cIAP2:TRAF2:TRAF3 seems to be a critical step in the regulation of alternative NF-kB signaling, further studies are required to address how cIAP1/2 target TRAF3 instead of NIK to proteasomal degradation upon receptor ligation. Although TRAF2-mediated K63-linked ubiquitination of cIAP1/2 might be the regulatory step in this process, additional factors are likely involved. Moreover, the E2 enzymes involved in the ubiquitination of NIK and TRAF3 are still not known. As discussed above, NF-kB signaling is both positively and negatively regulated, predominantly via various posttranslational modifications. Dysregulation of positive or negative NF-kB activation is involved in several genetic disorders, including lymphoid

www.annualreviews.org • Regulation of NF-kB Transcription Factors 719malignancies. Thus, it is important to thoroughly understand each step of NF-κB signal regulation. Perhaps detailed insight into the proteomics of both classical and alternative

NF-κB signaling by different stimuli will enhance our understanding of this master regulator of cell survival, inflammation, immunity, and cancer.

**DISCLOSURE STATEMENT**

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported by NIH grants to M.K.

**LITERATURE CITED**

1. Sen R, Baltimore D. 1986. Multiple nuclear factors interact with the immunoglobulin enhancer sequences. *Cell* 46:705–16
2. Sen R, Baltimore D. 1986. Inducibility of kappa immunoglobulin enhancer-binding protein NF-κB by a posttranslational mechanism. *Cell* 47:921–28
3. Bonizzi G, Karin M. 2004. The two NF-κB activation pathways and their role in innate and adaptive immunity. *Trends Immunol.* 25:280–88
4. Ruland J, Mak TW. 2003. Transducing signals from antigen receptors to nuclear factor κB. *Immunity Rev.* 193:93–100
5. Karin M, Greten FR. 2005. NF-κB: linking inflammation and immunity to cancer development and progression. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 5:749–59
6. Li Q, Verma IM. 2002. NF-κB regulation in the immune system. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2:725–34
7. Courtois G, Gilmore TD. 2006. Mutations in the NF-κB signaling pathway: implications for human disease. *Oncogene* 25:6831–43
8. Ghosh S, Karin M. 2002. Missing pieces in the NF-κB puzzle. *Cell* 109(Suppl.):S81–96
9. Karin M. 2006. Nuclear factor-κB in cancer development and progression. *Nature* 441:431–36
10. Karin M, Ben-Neriah Y. 2000. Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination: the control of NF-κB activity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18:621–63
11. Hacker H, Karin M. 2006. Regulation and function of IKK and IKK-related kinases. *Sci. STKE* 2006:re13
12. Hayden MS, Ghosh S. 2008. Shared principles in NF-κB signaling. *Cell* 132:344–62
13. Dobrzanski P, Ryseck RP, Bravo R. 1995. Specific inhibition of RelB/p52 transcriptional activity by the C-terminal domain of p100. *Oncogene* 10:1003–7
14. Senftleben U, Cao Y, Xiao G, Greten FR, Krahn G, et al. 2001. Activation by IKKα of a second, evolutionary conserved, NF-κB signaling pathway. *Science* 293:1495–99
15. Yilmaz ZB, Weih DS, Sivakumar V, Weih F. 2003. RelB is required for Peyer’s patch development: differential regulation of p52-RelB by lymphotoxin and TNF. *EMBO J.* 22:121–30
16. Hoffmann A, Natoli G, Ghosh G. 2006. Transcriptional regulation via the NF-κB signaling module. *Oncogene* 25:6706–16
17. Perkins ND. 2006. Post-translational modifications regulating the activity and function of the nuclear factor κB pathway. *Oncogene* 25:6717–30
18. Wan F, Anderson DE, Barnitz RA, Snow A, Bidere N, et al. 2007. Ribosomal protein S3: a KH domain subunit in NF-κB complexes that mediates selective gene regulation. *Cell* 131:927–39
19. Liou HC, Nolan GP, Ghosh S, Fujita T, Baltimore D. 1992. The NF-κB p50 precursor, p105, contains an internal IkB-like inhibitor that preferentially inhibits p50. *EMBO J.* 11:3003–9
20. Mercurio F, DiDonato JA, Rosette C, Karin M. 1993. p105 and p98 precursor proteins play an active role in NF-κB-mediated signal transduction. *Genes Dev.* 7:705–18

720 **Vallabhapurapu** • **Karin**
21. Capobianco AJ, Chang D, Mosialos G, Gilmore TD. 1992. p105, the NF-κB p50 precursor protein, is one of the cellular proteins complexed with the v-Rel oncoprotein in transformed chicken spleen cells. *J. Virol.* 66:3758–67

22. Palombella VJ, Rando OJ, Goldberg AL, Maniatis T. 1994. The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is required for processing the NF-κB1 precursor protein and the activation of NF-κB. *Cell* 78:773–85

23. Beinke S, Ley SC. 2004. Functions of NF-κB1 and NF-κB2 in immune cell biology. *Biochem. J.* 382:393–409

24. Heissmeyer V, Krappmann D, Hatada EN, Scheidereit C. 2001. Shared pathways of IkB kinase-induced SCF(βTrCP)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation for the NF-κB precursor p105 and IkBα. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 21:1024–35

25. Lang V, Janzen J, Fischer GZ, Soneji Y, Beinke S, et al. 2003. βTrCP-mediated proteolysis of NF-κB p105 requires phosphorylation of p105 serines 927 and 932. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 23:402–13

26. Solan NJ, Miyoshi H, Carmona EM, Bren GD, Paya CV. 2002. RelB cellular regulation and transcriptional activity are regulated by p100. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:1405–18

27. Basak S, Kim H, Kearns JD, Tergaonkar V, O’Dea E, et al. 2007. A fourth IkB protein within the NF-κB signaling module. *Cell* 128:369–81

28. Tergaonkar V, Correa RG, Ikawa M, Verma IM. 2005. Distinct roles of IkB proteins in regulating constitutive NF-κB activity. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 7:921–23

29. Whiteside ST, Israel A. 1997. IkB proteins: structure, function and regulation. *Semin. Cancer Biol.* 8:75–82

30. Weil R, Whiteside ST, Israel A. 1997. Control of NF-κB activity by the IkBβ inhibitor. *Immunobiology* 198:14–23

31. Li Z, Nabel GJ. 1997. A new member of the IkB protein family, IkBε, inhibits RelA (p65)-mediated NF-κB transcription. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 17:6184–90

32. Whiteside ST, Epinat JC, Rice NR, Israel A. 1997. IkBε, a novel member of the IkB family, controls RelA and cRel NF-κB activity. *EMBO J.* 16:1413–26

33. Suyang H, Phillips R, Douglas I, Ghosh S. 1996. Role of unphosphorylated, newly synthesized IkBβ in persistent activation of NF-κB. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 16:5444–49

34. Thompson JE, Phillips RJ, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Ghosh S. 1995. IkB-β regulates the persistent response in a biphasic activation of NF-κB. *Cell* 80:573–82

35. Hoffmann A, Levchenko A, Scott ML, Baltimore D. 2002. The IkB-NF-κB signaling module: temporal control and selective gene activation. *Science* 298:1241–45

36. Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Turpin P, Rodriguez M, Thomas D, Hay RT, et al. 1997. Nuclear localization of IkBα promotes active transport of NF-κB from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. *J. Cell Sci.* 110(Pt. 3):369–78

37. Chen L, Fischle W, Verdin E, Greene WC. 2001. Duration of nuclear NF-κB action regulated by reversible acetylation. *Science* 293:1653–57

38. Gerondakis S, Grumont R, Gugasyan R, Wong L, Isomura I, et al. 2006. Unravelling the complexities of the NF-κB signalling pathway using mouse knockout and transgenic models. *Oncogene* 25:6781–99

39. Hatada EN, Nieters A, Wulczyn FG, Naumann M, Meyer R, et al. 1992. The ankyrin repeat domains of the NF-κB precursor p105 and the protooncogene bcl-3 act as specific inhibitors of NF-κB DNA binding. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 89:2489–93

40. Naumann M, Wulczyn FG, Scheidereit C. 1993. The NF-κB precursor p105 and the proto-oncogene product Bcl-3 are IkB molecules and control nuclear translocation of NF-κB. *EMBO J.* 12:213–22

41. Franzoso G, Bours V, Azarenko V, Park S, Tomita-Yamaguchi M, et al. 1993. The oncoprotein Bcl-3 can facilitate NF-κB-mediated transactivation by removing inhibiting p50 homodimers from select κB sites. *EMBO J.* 12:3893–901

42. Bours V, Franzoso G, Azarenko V, Park S, Kanno T, et al. 1993. The oncoprotein Bcl-3 directly transactivates through κB motifs via association with DNA-binding p50B homodimers. *Cell* 72:729–39

43. Fujita T, Nolan GP, Liou HC, Scott ML, Baltimore D. 1993. The candidate proto-oncogene bcl-3 encodes a transcriptional coactivator that activates through NF-κB p50 homodimers. *Genes Dev.* 7:1354–63

44. Caamaño JH, Perez P, Lira SA, Bravo R. 1996. Constitutive expression of Bcl-3 in thymocytes increases the DNA binding of NF-κB1 (p50) homodimers in vivo. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 16:1342–48

45. Chang CC, Zhang J, Lombardi L, Neri A, Dalla-Favera R. 1995. Rearranged NFKB-2 genes in lymphoid neoplasms code for constitutively active nuclear transactivators. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 15:5180–87

46. Carmody RJ, Ruan Q, Palmer S, Hilliard B, Chen YH. 2007. Negative regulation of toll-like receptor signaling by NF-κB p50 ubiquitination blockade. *Science* 317:675–78

47. Viatour P, Merville MP, Bours V, Chariot A. 2004. Protein phosphorylation as a key mechanism for the regulation of BCL-3 activity. *Cell Cycle* 3:1498–501

48. Park SG, Chung C, Kang H, Kim JY, Jung G. 2006. Up-regulation of cyclin D1 by HBx is mediated by NF-κB2/BCL3 complex through κB site of cyclin D1 promoter. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:31770–77

49. Westerheide SD, Mayo MW, Anest V, Hanson JL, Baldwin AS Jr. 2001. The putative oncoprotein Bcl-3 induces cyclin D1 to stimulate G(1) transition. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 21:8428–36

50. Kashatus D, Cogswell P, Baldwin AS. 2006. Expression of the Bcl-3 proto-oncogene suppresses p53 activation. *Genes Dev.* 20:225–35

51. Schwarz EM, Krimpenfort P, Berns A, Verma IM. 1997. Immunological defects in mice with a targeted disruption in Bcl-3. *Genes Dev.* 11:187–97

52. Kitamura H, Kanehira K, Okita K, Morimatsu M, Saito M. 2000. MAIL, a novel nuclear IκB protein that potentiates LPS-induced IL-6 production. *FEBS Lett.* 485:53–56

53. Haruta H, Kato A, Todokoro K. 2001. Isolation of a novel interleukin-1-inducible nuclear protein bearing ankyrin-repeat motifs. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:12485–88

54. Yamamoto M, Yamazaki S, Uematsu S, Sato S, Hemmi H, et al. 2004. Regulation of Toll/IL-1-receptor-mediated gene expression by the inducible nuclear protein IkBζ. *Nature* 430:218–22

55. Motoyama M, Yamazaki S, Eto-Kimura A, Takeshige K, Muta T. 2005. Positive and negative regulation of nuclear factor-κB-mediated transcription by IkB-ζ, an inducible nuclear protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:7444–51

56. Matsuo S, Yamazaki S, Takeshige K, Muta T. 2007. Crucial roles of binding sites for NF-κB and C/EBPs in IkB-ζ-mediated transcriptional activation. *Biochem. J.* 405:605–15

57. Liu YW, Chen CC, Tseng HP, Chang WC. 2006. Lipopolysaccharide-induced transcriptional activation of interleukin-10 is mediated by MAPK- and NF-κB-induced CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein δ in mouse macrophages. *Cell Signal* 18:1492–500

58. Rabek JP, Scott S, Hsieh CC, Reisner PD, Papaconstantinou J. 1998. Regulation of LPS-mediated induction of C/EBP δ gene expression in livers of young and aged mice. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1398:137–47

59. Fiorini E, Schmitz I, Marissen WE, Osborn SL, Touma M, et al. 2002. Peptide-induced negative selection of thymocytes activates transcription of an NF-κB inhibitor. *Mol. Cell* 9:637–48

60. Kuwata H, Matsumoto M, Atarashi K, Morishita H, Hirotani T, et al. 2006. IkBNS inhibits induction of a subset of Toll-like receptor-dependent genes and limits inflammation. *Immunity* 24:41–51

61. Johnson C, Van Antwerp D, Hope TJ. 1999. An N-terminal nuclear export signal is required for the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of IkBa. *EMBO J.* 18:6682–93

62. Huang TT, Kudo N, Yoshida M, Miyamoto S. 2000. A nuclear export signal in the N-terminal regulatory domain of IkBα controls cytoplasmic localization of inactive NF-κB/IkBα complexes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:1014–19

63. Scheidereit C. 2006. IkB kinase complexes: gateways to NF-κB activation and transcription. *Oncogene* 25:6685–705

64. Lawrence T, Bebien M, Liu GY, Nizet V, Karin M. 2005. IKKα limits macrophage NF-κB activation and contributes to the resolution of inflammation. *Nature* 434:1138–43

65. Li ZW, Chu W, Hu Y, Delhase M, Deerinck T, et al. 1999. The IKKβ subunit of IkB kinase (IKK) is essential for nuclear factor κB activation and prevention of apoptosis. *J. Exp. Med.* 189:1839–45

66. Hu Y, Baud V, Delhase M, Zhang P, Deerinck T, et al. 1999. Abnormal morphogenesis but intact IKK activation in mice lacking the IKKα subunit of IkB kinase. *Science* 284:316–20

67. Cao Y, Bonizzi G, Seagroves TN, Greten FR, Johnson R, et al. 2001. IKKα provides an essential link between RANK signaling and cyclin D1 expression during mammary gland development. *Cell* 107:763–75

68. Ruocco MG, Maeda S, Park JM, Lawrence T, Hsu LC, et al. 2005. IkB kinase (IKK){β}, but not IKKα, is a critical mediator of osteoclast survival and is required for inflammation-induced bone loss. *J. Exp. Med.* 201:1677–87

69. Xiao G, Harhaj EW, Sun SC. 2001. NF-κB-inducing kinase regulates the processing of NF-κB2 p100. *Mol. Cell* 7:401–9

70. Coope HJ, Atkinson PG, Huhse B, Belich M, Janzen J, et al. 2002. CD40 regulates the processing of NF-κB2 p100 to p52. *EMBO J.* 21:5375–85

71. Claudio E, Brown K, Park S, Wang H, Siebenlist U. 2002. BAFF-induced NEMO-independent processing of NF-κB2 in maturing B cells. *Nat. Immunol.* 3:958–65

72. Saitoh T, Nakayama M, Nakano H, Yagita H, Yamamoto N, Yamaoka S. 2003. TWEAK induces NF-κB2 p100 processing and long lasting NF-κB activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:36005–12

73. Novack DV, Yin L, Hagen-Stapleton A, Schreiber RD, Goeddel DV, et al. 2003. The IkB function of NF-κB2 p100 controls stimulated osteoclastogenesis. *J. Exp. Med.* 198:771–81

74. Liang C, Zhang M, Sun SC. 2006. β-TrCP binding and processing of NF-κB2/p100 involve its phosphorylation at serines 866 and 870. *Cell Signal* 18:1309–17

75. Amir RE, Haecker H, Karin M, Ciechanover A. 2004. Mechanism of processing of the NF-κB2 p100 precursor: identification of the specific polyubiquitin chain-anchoring lysine residue and analysis of the role of NEDD8-modification on the SCF(β-TrCP) ubiquitin ligase. *Oncogene* 23:2540–47

76. Weih F, Caamaño J. 2003. Regulation of secondary lymphoid organ development by the nuclear factor-κB signal transduction pathway. *Immunol. Rev.* 195:91–105

77. Sun SC, Ganchi PA, Ballard DW, Greene WC. 1993. NF-κB controls expression of inhibitor IκB α: evidence for an inducible autoregulatory pathway. *Science* 259:1912–15

78. Natoli G, Chiocca S. 2008. Nuclear ubiquitin ligases, NF-κB degradation, and the control of inflammation. *Sci. Signal* 1:pe1

79. Ganesh L, Burstein E, Guha-Niyogi A, Louder MK, Mascola JR, et al. 2003. The gene product Murr1 restricts HIV-1 replication in resting CD4+ lymphocytes. *Nature* 426:853–57

80. Maine GN, Mao X, Komarck CM, Burstein E. 2007. COMMD1 promotes the ubiquitination of NF-κB subunits through a cullin-containing ubiquitin ligase. *EMBO J.* 26:436–47

81. Ryo A, Suizu F, Yoshida Y, Perrem K, Liou YC, et al. 2003. Regulation of NF-κB signaling by Pin1-dependent prolyl isomerization and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis of p65/RelA. *Mol. Cell* 12:1413–26

82. Tanaka T, Grusby MJ, Kaisho T. 2007. PDLIM2-mediated termination of transcription factor NF-κB activation by intranuclear sequestration and degradation of the p65 subunit. *Nat. Immunol.* 8:584–91

83. von Mikecz A. 2006. The nuclear ubiquitin-proteasome system. *J. Cell Sci.* 119:1977–84

84. Liu B, Yang R, Wong KA, Getman C, Stein N, et al. 2005. Negative regulation of NF-κB signaling by PIAS1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 25:1113–23

85. Tahk S, Liu B, Chernishof V, Wong KA, Wu H, Shuai K. 2007. Control of specificity and magnitude of NF-κB and STAT1-mediated gene activation through PIASy and PIAS1 cooperation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA* 104:11643–48

86. Heyninck K, Van Huffel S, Kreike M, Beyaert R. 2004. Yeast two-hybrid screening for proteins interacting with the antiapoptotic protein A20. *Methods Mol. Biol.* 282:223–41

87. Wertz IE, O’Rourke KM, Zhou H, Eby M, Aravind L, et al. 2004. De-ubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-κB signalling. *Nature* 430:694–99

88. Enesa K, Zakkar M, Chaudhury H, Luong le A, Rawlinson L, et al. 2008. NF-κB suppression by the deubiquitinating enzyme Cezanne: a novel negative feedback loop in proinflammatory signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283:7036–45

89. Chun AC, Zhou Y, Wong CM, Kung HF, Jeang KT, Jin DY. 2000. Coiled-coil motif as a structural basis for the interaction of HTLV type 1 Tax with cellular cofactors. *AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses* 16:1689–94

90. Shembade N, Harhaj NS, Liebl DJ, Harhaj EW. 2007. Essential role for TAX1BP1 in the termination of TNF-α-, IL-1- and LPS-mediated NF-κB and JNK signaling. *EMBO J.* 26:3910–22

91. Shembade N, Harhaj NS, Parvatiyar K, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, et al. 2008. The E3 ligase Itch negatively regulates inflammatory signaling pathways by controlling the function of the ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:254–62

92. Wagner S, Carpentier I, Rogov V, Kreike M, Ikeda F, et al. 2008. Ubiquitin binding mediates the NF-κB inhibitory potential of ABIN proteins. *Oncogene* 27:3739–45

93. Sebban H, Yamaoka S, Courtois G. 2006. Posttranslational modifications of NEMO and its partners in NF-κB signaling. *Trends Cell Biol.* 16:569–77

94. Israel A. 2006. NF-κB activation: Nondegradative ubiquitination implicates NEMO. *Trends Immunol.* 27:395–97

95. Pineda G, Ea CK, Chen ZJ. 2007. Ubiquitination and TRAF signaling. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* 597:80–92

96. Kovalenko A, Chable-Bessia C, Cantarella G, Israel A, Wallach D, Courtois G. 2003. The tumor suppressor CYLD negatively regulates NF-κB signaling by deubiquitination. *Nature* 424:801–5

97. Trompouki E, Hatzivassiliou E, Tsichritzis T, Farmer H, Ashworth A, Mosialos G. 2003. CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme that negatively regulates NF-κB activation by TNFR family members. *Nature* 424:793–96

98. Massoumi R, Chmielarska K, Hennecke K, Pfeifer A, Fassler R. 2006. Cyld inhibits tumor cell proliferation by blocking Bcl-3-dependent NF-κB signaling. *Cell* 125:665–77

99. Hovelmeyer N, Wunderlich FT, Massoumi R, Jakobsen CG, Song J, et al. 2007. Regulation of B cell homeostasis and activation by the tumor suppressor gene CYLD. *J. Exp. Med.* 204:2615–27

100. Ducut Sigala JL, Bottero V, Young DB, Shevchenko A, Mercurio F, Verma IM. 2004. Activation of transcription factor NF-κB requires ELKS, an IkB kinase regulatory subunit. *Science* 304:1963–67

101. Wu ZH, Shi Y, Tibbetts RS, Miyamoto S. 2006. Molecular linkage between the kinase ATM and NF-κB signaling in response to genotoxic stimuli. *Science* 311:1141–46

102. Chen G, Cao P, Goeddel DV. 2002. TNF-induced recruitment and activation of the IKK complex require Cdc37 and Hsp90. *Mol. Cell* 9:401–10

103. Makris C, Godfrey VL, Krahn-Sentfleben G, Takahashi T, Roberts JL, et al. 2000. Female mice heterozygous for IKKγ/NEMO deficiencies develop a dermatopathy similar to the human X-linked disorder incontinentia pigmenti. *Mol. Cell* 5:969–79

104. Rudolph D, Yeh WC, Wakeham A, Rudolph B, Nallainathan D, et al. 2000. Severe liver degeneration and lack of NF-κB activation in NEMO/IKKγ-deficient mice. *Genes Dev.* 14:854–62

105. Dejardin E, Droin NM, Delhase M, Haas E, Cao Y, et al. 2002. The lymphotoxin-β receptor induces different patterns of gene expression via two NF-κB pathways. *Immunity* 17:525–35

106. Hu Y, Baud V, Oga T, Kim KI, Yoshida K, Karin M. 2001. IKKα controls formation of the epidermis independently of NF-κB. *Nature* 410:710–14

107. Sil AK, Maeda S, Sano Y, Roop DR, Karin M. 2004. IkB kinase-α acts in the epidermis to control skeletal and craniofacial morphogenesis. *Nature* 428:660–64

108. Descargues P, Sil AK, Sano Y, Korchynskyi O, Han G, et al. 2008. IKKα is a critical coregulator of a Smad4-independent TGFβ-Smad2/3 signaling pathway that controls keratinocyte differentiation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 105:2487–92

109. Anest V, Hanson JL, Cogswell PC, Steinbrecher KA, Strahl BD, Baldwin AS. 2003. A nucleosomal function for IkB kinase-α in NF-κB-dependent gene expression. *Nature* 423:659–63

110. Yamamoto Y, Verma UN, Prajapati S, Kwak YT, Gaynor RB. 2003. Histone H3 phosphorylation by IKK-α is critical for cytokine-induced gene expression. *Nature* 423:655–59

111. Luo JL, Tan W, Ricono JM, Korchynskyi O, Zhang M, et al. 2007. Nuclear cytokine-activated IKKα controls prostate cancer metastasis by repressing Maspin. *Nature* 446:690–94

112. Hoberg JE, Popko AE, Ramsey CS, Mayo MW. 2006. IkB kinase α-mediated derepression of SMRT potentiates acetylation of RelA/p65 by p300. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 26:457–71

113. Fernandez-Majada V, Aguilera C, Villanueva A, Vilardell F, Robert-Moreno A, et al. 2007. Nuclear IKK activity leads to dysregulated notch-dependent gene expression in colorectal cancer. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104:276–81

114. Lee DF, Kuo HP, Chen CT, Hsu JM, Chou CK, et al. 2007. IKK β suppression of TSC1 links inflammation and tumor angiogenesis via the mTOR pathway. *Cell* 130:440–55

115. Hu MC, Lee DF, Xia W, Golfman LS, Ou-Yang F, et al. 2004. IkB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. *Cell* 117:225–37

116. Suzuki K, Verma IM. 2008. Phosphorylation of SNAP-23 by IkB kinase 2 regulates mast cell degranulation. *Cell* 134:485–95

117. May MJ, Marienfeld RB, Ghosh S. 2002. Characterization of the IkB-kinase NEMO binding domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:45992–6000

118. Wu CJ, Conze DB, Li T, Srinivasula SM, Ashwell JD. 2006. Sensing of Lys 63-linked polyubiquitination by NEMO is a key event in NF-κB activation [corrected]. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 8:398–406

119. Ea CK, Deng L, Xia ZP, Pineda G, Chen ZJ. 2006. Activation of IKK by TNFα requires site-specific ubiquitination of RIP1 and polyubiquitin binding by NEMO. *Mol. Cell* 22:245–57

120. Weil R, Schwamborn K, Alcover A, Bessia C, Di Bartolo V, Israel A. 2003. Induction of the NF-κB cascade by recruitment of the scaffold molecule NEMO to the T cell receptor. *Immunity* 18:13–26

121. Yamamoto M, Okamoto T, Takeda K, Sato S, Sanjo H, et al. 2006. Key function for the Ubc13 E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme in immune receptor signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* 7:962–70

122. Matsuzawa A, Tseng PH, Vallabhapurapu S, Luo JL, Zhang W, et al. 2008. Essential cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling complex. *Science* 321:663–68

123. Zhao T, Yang L, Sun Q, Arguello M, Ballard DW, et al. 2007. The NEMO adaptor bridges the nuclear factor-κB and interferon regulatory factor signaling pathways. *Nat. Immunol.* 8:592–600

124. Nishikomori R, Akutagawa H, Maruyama K, Nakata-Hizume M, Ohmori K, et al. 2004. X-linked ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency caused by reversion mosaicism of NEMO reveals a critical role for NEMO in human T-cell development and/or survival. *Blood* 103:4565–72

125. Courtois G, Israel A. 2000. NF-κB defects in humans: the NEMO/incontinentia pigmenti connection. *Sci. STKE* 2000:PE1

126. Smahi A, Courtois G, Vabres P, Yamaoka S, Heuertz S, et al. 2000. Genomic rearrangement in NEMO impairs NF-κB activation and is a cause of incontinentia pigmenti. The International Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP) Consortium. *Nature* 405:466–72

127. Micheau O, Tschopp J. 2003. Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes. *Cell* 114:181–90

128. Hsu H, Shu HB, Pan MG, Goeddel DV. 1996. TRADD-TRAF2 and TRADD-FADD interactions define two distinct TNF receptor 1 signal transduction pathways. *Cell* 84:299–308

129. Pobezinskaya YL, Kim YS, Choksi S, Morgan MJ, Li T, et al. 2008. The function of TRADD in signaling through tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 and TRIF-dependent Toll-like receptors. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:1047–54

130. Chen G, Goeddel DV. 2002. TNF-R1 signaling: a beautiful pathway. *Science* 296:1634–35

131. Meylan E, Burns K, Hofmann K, Blancheteau V, Martinon F, et al. 2004. RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-κB activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 5:503–7

132. Ting AT, Pimentel-Muinos FX, Seed B. 1996. RIP mediates tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 activation of NF-κB but not Fas/APO-1-initiated apoptosis. *EMBO J.* 15:6189–96

133. Hsing Y, Hostager BS, Bishop GA. 1997. Characterization of CD40 signaling determinants regulating nuclear factor-κB activation in B lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* 159:4898–906

134. Pullen SS, Dang TT, Crute JJ, Kehry MR. 1999. CD40 signaling through tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs). Binding site specificity and activation of downstream pathways by distinct TRAFs. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:14246–54

135. Bishop GA. 2004. The multifaceted roles of TRAFs in the regulation of B-cell function. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 4:775–86

136. Bradley JR, Pober JS. 2001. Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs). *Oncogene* 20:6482–91

137. Rothwarf DM, Karin M. 1999. The NF-κB activation pathway: a paradigm in information transfer from membrane to nucleus. *Sci. STKE* 1999:RE1

138. Yang J, Lin Y, Guo Z, Cheng J, Huang J, et al. 2001. The essential role of MEKK3 in TNF-induced NF-κB activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 2:620–24

139. Blonska M, You Y, Geleziunas R, Lin X. 2004. Restoration of NF-κB activation by tumor necrosis factor α receptor complex-targeted MEKK3 in receptor-interacting protein-deficient cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24:10757–65

140. Wang C, Deng L, Hong M, Akkaraju GR, Inoue J, Chen ZJ. 2001. TAK1 is a ubiquitin-dependent kinase of MKK and IKK. *Nature* 412:346–51

141. Ishitani T, Takaesu G, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Shibuya H, Gaynor RB, Matsumoto K. 2003. Role of the TAB2-related protein TAB3 in IL-1 and TNF signaling. *EMBO J.* 22:6277–88

142. Chen ZJ. 2005. Ubiquitin signalling in the NF-κB pathway. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 7:758–65

143. Kanayama A, Seth RB, Sun L, Ea CK, Hong M, et al. 2004. TAB2 and TAB3 activate the NF-κB pathway through binding to polyubiquitin chains. *Mol. Cell* 15:535–48

144. Sato S, Sanjo H, Takeda K, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Yamamoto M, et al. 2005. Essential function for the kinase TAK1 in innate and adaptive immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* 6:1087–95

145. Zhang SQ, Kovalenko A, Cantarella G, Wallach D. 2000. Recruitment of the IKK signalosome to the p55 TNF receptor: RIP and A20 bind to NEMO (IKKγ) upon receptor stimulation. *Immunity* 12:301–11

146. Devin A, Cook A, Lin Y, Rodriguez Y, Kelliher M, Liu Z. 2000. The distinct roles of TRAF2 and RIP in IKK activation by TNF-R1: TRAF2 recruits IKK to TNF-R1 while RIP mediates IKK activation. *Immunity* 12:419–29

147. Kawai T, Akira S. 2007. Signaling to NF-κB by Toll-like receptors. *Trends Mol. Med.* 13:460–69

148. Martin MU, Wesche H. 2002. Summary and comparison of the signaling mechanisms of the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor family. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1592:265–80

149. Kopp E, Medzhitov R. 2003. Recognition of microbial infection by Toll-like receptors. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 15:396–401

150. Yamamoto M, Akira S. 2005. TIR domain-containing adaptors regulate TLR signaling pathways. *Adv. Exp. Biol.* 560:1–9

151. Xu Y, Tao X, Shen B, Horng T, Medzhitov R, et al. 2000. Structural basis for signal transduction by the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domains. *Nature* 408:111–15

152. Dunne A, Ejdeback M, Ludidi PL, O'Neill LA, Gay NJ. 2003. Structural complementarity of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domains in Toll-like receptors and the adaptors Mal and MyD88. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:41443–51

153. Jiang Z, Georgel P, Li C, Choe J, Crozat K, et al. 2006. Details of Toll-like receptor:adapter interaction revealed by germ-line mutagenesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:10961–66

154. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Uematsu S, Hoshino K, et al. 2003. TRAM is specifically involved in the Toll-like receptor 4-mediated MyD88-independent signaling pathway. *Nat. Immunol.* 4:1144–50

155. Oshiumi H, Sasai M, Shida K, Fujita T, Matsumoto M, Seya T. 2003. TIR-containing adapter molecule (TICAM)-2, a bridging adapter recruiting to Toll-like receptor 4 TICAM-1 that induces interferon-beta. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:49751–62

156. Rowe DC, McGettrick AF, Latz E, Monks BG, Gay NJ, et al. 2006. The myristoylation of TRIF-related adaptor molecule is essential for Toll-like receptor 4 signal transduction. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:6299–304

157. McGettrick AF, Brint EK, Palsson-McDermott EM, Rowe DC, Golenbock DT, et al. 2006. Trif-related adapter molecule is phosphorylated by PKCε during Toll-like receptor 4 signaling. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103:9196–201

158. Cao Z, Xiong J, Takeuchi M, Kurama T, Goeddel DV. 1996. TRAF6 is a signal transducer for interleukin-1. *Nature* 383:443–46

159. Takatsuna H, Kato H, Gohda J, Akiyama T, Moriya A, et al. 2003. Identification of TIFA as an adapter protein that links tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) to interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase-1 (IRAK-1) in IL-1 receptor signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:12144–50

160. Ku CL, von Bernuth H, Picard C, Zhang SY, Chang HH, et al. 2007. Selective predisposition to bacterial infections in IRAK-4-deficient children: IRAK-4-dependent TLRs are otherwise redundant in protective immunity. *J. Exp. Med.* 204:2407–22

161. Knop J, Martin MU. 1999. Effects of IL-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) expression on IL-1 signaling are independent of its kinase activity. *FEBS Lett.* 448:81–85

162. Conze DB, Wu CJ, Thomas JA, Landstrom A, Ashwell JD. 2008. Lys63-linked polyubiquitination of IRAK-1 is required for interleukin-1 receptor- and Toll-like receptor-mediated NF-κB activation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 28:3538–47

163. Takaesu G, Kishida S, Hiyama A, Yamaguchi K, Shibuya H, et al. 2000. TAB2, a novel adaptor protein, mediates activation of TAK1 MAPKKK by linking TAK1 to TRAF6 in the IL-1 signal transduction pathway. *Mol. Cell* 5:649–58

164. Qian Y, Commane M, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Matsumoto K, Li X. 2001. IRAK-mediated translocation of TRAF6 and TAB2 in the interleukin-1-induced activation of NFκB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:41661–67

165. Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Kishimoto K, Hiyama A, Inoue J, Cao Z, Matsumoto K. 1999. The kinase TAK1 can activate the NIK-I κB as well as the MAP kinase cascade in the IL-1 signalling pathway. *Nature* 398:252–56

166. Sakurai H, Nishi A, Sato N, Mizukami J, Miyoshi H, Sugita T. 2002. TAK1-TAB1 fusion protein: a novel constitutively active mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase that stimulates AP-1 and NF-κB signaling pathways. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 297:1277–81

167. Oganesyan G, Saha SK, Guo B, He JQ, Shahangian A, et al. 2006. Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. *Nature* 439:208–11

168. Hacker H, Redecke V, Blagoev B, Kratchmarova I, Hsu LC, et al. 2006. Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. *Nature* 439:204–7

169. Liu J, Ma X. 2006. Interferon regulatory factor 8 regulates RANTES gene transcription in cooperation with interferon regulatory factor-1, NF-κB, and PU.1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:19188–95

170. Sgarbanti M, Remoli AL, Marsili G, Ridolfi B, Borsetti A, et al. 2008. IRF-1 is required for full NF-κB transcriptional activity at the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat enhancer. *J. Virol.* 82:3632–41

171. Hiscott J. 2007. Convergence of the NF-κB and IRF pathways in the regulation of the innate antiviral response. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 18:483–90

172. Leung TH, Hoffmann A, Baltimore D. 2004. One nucleotide in a κB site can determine cofactor specificity for NF-κB dimers. *Cell* 118:453–64

173. Paun A, Reinert JT, Jiang Z, Medin C, Balkhi MY, et al. 2008. Functional characterization of murine interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) and its role in the innate antiviral response. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283:14295–308

174. Werner SL, Barken D, Hoffmann A. 2005. Stimulus specificity of gene expression programs determined by temporal control of IKK activity. *Science* 309:1857–61

175. Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R. 2004. Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* 5:987–95

176. Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O. 2006. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. *Cell* 124:783–801

177. Kagan JC, Su T, Horng T, Chow A, Akira S, Medzhitov R. 2008. TRAM couples endocytosis of Toll-like receptor 4 to the induction of interferon-β. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:361–68

178. Kanneganti TD, Lamkanfi M, Nunez G. 2007. Intracellular NOD-like receptors in host defense and disease. *Immunity* 27:549–59

179. Meylan E, Tschopp J, Karin M. 2006. Intracellular pattern recognition receptors in the host response. *Nature* 442:39–44

180. Rietdijk ST, Burwell T, Bertin J, Coyle AJ. 2008. Sensing intracellular pathogens-NOD-like receptors. *Curr. Opin. Pharmacol.* 8:261–6

181. Ogura Y, Inohara N, Benito A, Chen FF, Yamaoka S, Nunez G. 2001. Nod2, a Nod1/Apaf-1 family member that is restricted to monocytes and activates NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:4812–8

182. Inohara N, Koseki T, del Peso L, Hu Y, Yee C, et al. 1999. Nod1, an Apaf-1-like activator of caspase-9 and nuclear factor-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:14560–7

183. Inohara N, Ogura Y, Fontalba A, Gutierrez O, Pons F, et al. 2003. Host recognition of bacterial muramyl dipeptide mediated through NOD2. Implications for Crohn’s disease. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:5509–12

184. Viala J, Chaput C, Boneca IG, Cardona A, Girardin SE, et al. 2004. Nod1 responds to peptidoglycan delivered by the *Helicobacter pylori* cag pathogenicity island. *Nat. Immunol.* 5:1166–74

185. Abbott DW, Wilkins A, Asara JM, Cantley LC. 2004. The Crohn’s disease protein, NOD2, requires RIP2 in order to induce ubiquitinylation of a novel site on NEMO. *Curr. Biol.* 14:2217–27

186. Windheim M, Lang C, Peggie M, Plater LA, Cohen P. 2007. Molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of cytokine production by muramyl dipeptide. *Biochem. J.* 404:179–90

187. Hasegawa M, Fujimoto Y, Lucas PC, Nakano H, Fukase K, et al. 2008. A critical role of RICK/RIP2 polyubiquitination in Nod-induced NF-κB activation. *EMBO J.* 27:373–83

188. Meylan E, Curran J, Hofmann K, Moradpour D, Binder M, et al. 2005. Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. *Nature* 437:1167–72

189. Sun Z, Arendt CW, Ellmeier W, Schaeffer EM, Sunshine MJ, et al. 2000. PKC-theta is required for TCR-induced NF-κB activation in mature but not immature T lymphocytes. *Nature* 404:402–7

190. Su TT, Guo B, Kawakami Y, Sommer K, Chae K, et al. 2002. PKC-β controls I κB kinase lipid raft recruitment and activation in response to BCR signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* 3:780–86

191. Weil R, Israel A. 2006. Deciphering the pathway from the TCR to NF-κB. *Cell Death Differ.* 13:826–33

192. Schulze-Luehrmann J, Ghosh S. 2006. Antigen-receptor signaling to nuclear factor κB. *Immunity* 25:701–15

193. Weil R, Israel A. 2004. T-cell-receptor- and B-cell-receptor-mediated activation of NF-κB in lymphocytes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 16:374–81

194. Zhou H, Wertz I, O’Rourke K, Ultsch M, Seshagiri S, et al. 2004. Bcl10 activates the NF-κB pathway through ubiquitination of NEMO. *Nature* 427:167–71

195. Herndon TM, Shan XC, Tsokos GC, Wange RL. 2001. ZAP-70 and SLP-76 regulate protein kinase C-θ and NF-κB activation in response to engagement of CD3 and CD28. *J. Immunol.* 166:5654–64

196. Villalba M, Bi K, Hu J, Altman Y, Bushway P, et al. 2002. Translocation of PKCθ in T cells is mediated by a nonconventional, PI3-K- and Vav-dependent pathway, but does not absolutely require phospholipase C. *J. Cell Biol.* 157:253–63

197. Lee KY, D’Acquisto F, Hayden MS, Shim JH, Ghosh S. 2005. PDK1 nucleates T cell receptor-induced signaling complex for NF-κB activation. *Science* 308:114–18

198. Costello PS, Walters AE, Mee PJ, Turner M, Reynolds LF, et al. 1999. The Rho-family GTP exchange factor Vav is a critical transducer of T cell receptor signals to the calcium, ERK, and NF-κB pathways. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96:3035–40

199. Cao Y, Janssen EM, Duncan AW, Altman A, Billadeau DD, Abraham RT. 2002. Pleiotropic defects in TCR signaling in a Vav-1-null Jurkat T-cell line. *EMBO J.* 21:4809–19

200. Sedwick CE, Altman A. 2004. Perspectives on PKCq in T cell activation. *Mol. Immunol.* 41:675–86

201. Bi K, Tanaka Y, Coudronniere N, Sugie K, Hong S, et al. 2001. Antigen-induced translocation of PKC-θ to membrane rafts is required for T cell activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 2:556–63

202. Sun L, Deng L, Ea CK, Xia ZP, Chen ZJ. 2004. The TRAF6 ubiquitin ligase and TAK1 kinase mediate IKK activation by BCL10 and MALT1 in T lymphocytes. *Mol. Cell* 14:289–301

203. Wan YY, Chi H, Xie M, Schneider MD, Flavell RA. 2006. The kinase TAK1 integrates antigen and cytokine receptor signaling for T cell development, survival and function. *Nat. Immunol.* 7:851–58

204. Misra RS, Russell JQ, Koenig A, Hinshaw-Makepeace JA, Wen R, et al. 2007. Caspase-8 and c-FLIPL associate in lipid rafts with NF-κB adaptors during T cell activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:19365–74

205. Wang D, Matsumoto R, You Y, Che T, Lin XY, Gaffen SL, Lin X. 2004. CD3/CD28 costimulation-induced NF-κB activation is mediated by recruitment of protein kinase C-θ, Bcl10, and IkB kinase beta to the immunological synapse through CARMA1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24:164–71

206. Gaide O, Favier B, Legler DF, Bonnet D, Brissoni B, et al. 2002. CARMA1 is a critical lipid raft-associated regulator of TCR-induced NF-κB activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 3:836–43

207. Hara H, Bakal C, Wada T, Bouchard D, Rottapel R, et al. 2004. The molecular adapter Carma1 controls entry of IkB kinase into the central immune synapse. *J. Exp. Med.* 200:1167–77

208. Kane LP, Mollenauer MN, Xu Z, Turck CW, Weiss A. 2002. Akt-dependent phosphorylation specifically regulates Cot induction of NF-κB-dependent transcription. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 22:5962–74

209. Sivakumar V, Hammond KJ, Howells N, Pfeffer K, Weih F. 2003. Differential requirement for Rel/nuclear factor κB family members in natural killer T cell development. *J. Exp. Med.* 197:1613–21

210. Madrid LV, Wang CY, Guttridge DC, Schottelius AJ, Baldwin AS Jr, Mayo MW. 2000. Akt suppresses apoptosis by stimulating the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-κB. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20:1626–38

211. Kane LP, Weiss A. 2003. The PI-3 kinase/Akt pathway and T cell activation: pleiotropic pathways downstream of PIP3. *Immunol. Rev.* 192:7–20

212. Pfeifhofer C, Kofler K, Gruber T, Tabrizi NG, Lutz C, et al. 2003. Protein kinase C θ affects Ca²⁺ mobilization and NFAT cell activation in primary mouse T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 197:1525–35

213. Scharschmidt E, Wegener E, Heissmeyer V, Rao A, Krappmann D. 2004. Degradation of Bcl10 induced by T-cell activation negatively regulates NF-κB signaling. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24:3860–73

214. von Essen M, Nielsen MW, Bonefeld CM, Boding L, Larsen JM, et al. 2006. Protein kinase C (PKC) α and PKC θ are the major PKC isotypes involved in TCR down-regulation. *J. Immunol.* 176:7502–10

215. Malinin NL, Boldin MP, Kovalenko AV, Wallach D. 1997. MAP3K-related kinase involved in NF-κB induction by TNF, CD95 and IL-1. *Nature* 385:540–44

216. Shinkura R, Kitada K, Matsuda F, Tashiro K, Ikuta K, et al. 1999. Alymphoplasia is caused by a point mutation in the mouse gene encoding NF-κB-inducing kinase. *Nat. Genet.* 22:74–77

217. Yin L, Wu L, Wesche H, Arthur CD, White JM, et al. 2001. Defective lymphotoxin-β receptor-induced NF-κB transcriptional activity in NIK-deficient mice. *Science* 291:2162–65

218. Liao G, Zhang M, Harhaj EW, Sun SC. 2004. Regulation of the NF-κB-inducing kinase by tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3-induced degradation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:26243–50

219. He JQ, Zarnegar B, Oganesyan G, Saha SK, Yamazaki S, et al. 2006. Rescue of TRAF3-null mice by p100 NF-κB deficiency. *J. Exp. Med.* 203:2413–18

220. Vallabhapurapu S, Matsuzawa A, Zhang W, Tseng PH, Keats JJ, et al. 2008. Nonredundant and complementary functions of TRAF2 and TRAF3 in a ubiquitination cascade that activates NIK-dependent alternative NF-κB signaling. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:1364–70

221. He JQ, Saha SK, Kang JR, Zarnegar B, Cheng G. 2007. Specificity of TRAF3 in its negative regulation of the noncanonical NF-κB pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:3688–94

222. Keats JJ, Fonseca R, Chesi M, Schop R, Baker A, et al. 2007. Promiscuous mutations activate the noncanonical NF-κB pathway in multiple myeloma. *Cancer Cell* 12:131–44

223. Annunziata CM, Davis RE, Demchenko Y, Bellamy W, Gabrea A, et al. 2007. Frequent engagement of the classical and alternative NF-κB pathways by diverse genetic abnormalities in multiple myeloma. *Cancer Cell* 12:115–30

224. Varfolomeev E, Blankenship JW, Wayson SM, Fedorova AV, Kayagaki N, et al. 2007. IAP antagonists induce autoubiquitination of c-IAPs, NF-κB activation, and TNFα-dependent apoptosis. *Cell* 131:669–81

225. Vince JE, Wong WW, Khan N, Feltham R, Chau D, et al. 2007. IAP antagonists target cIAP1 to induce TNFα-dependent apoptosis. *Cell* 131:682–93

226. Vaux DL, Silke J. 2005. IAPs, RINGs and ubiquitylation. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 6:287–97

227. Hu S, Yang X. 2003. Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis 1 and 2 are ubiquitin ligases for the apoptosis inducer Smac/DIABLO. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:10055–60

228. Li L, Thomas RM, Suzuki H, De Brabander JK, Wang X, Harran PG. 2004. A small molecule Smac mimic potentiates TRAIL- and TNFα-mediated cell death. *Science* 305:1471–74

229. Gardam S, Sierra F, Basten A, Mackay F, Brink R. 2008. TRAF2 and TRAF3 signal adapters act cooperatively to control the maturation and survival signals delivered to B cells by the BAFF receptor. *Immunity* 28:391–401

230. Grech AP, Amesbury M, Chan T, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R. 2004. TRAF2 differentially regulates the canonical and noncanonical pathways of NF-κB activation in mature B cells. *Immunity* 21:629–42

231. Greten FR, Arkan MC, Bollrath J, Hsu LC, Goode J, et al. 2007. NF-κB is a negative regulator of IL-1β secretion as revealed by genetic and pharmacological inhibition of IKKB. *Cell* 130:918–31

232. Zarnegar BJ, Wang Y, Mahoney DJ, Dempsey PW, Cheung HH, et al. 2008. Noncanonical NF-κB activation requires coordinated assembly of a regulatory complex of the adaptors cIAP1, cIAP2, TRAF2 and TRAF3 and the kinase NIK. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:1371–78

233. Hostager BS, Haxhinasto SA, Rowland SL, Bishop GA. 2003. Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2)-deficient B lymphocytes reveal novel roles for TRAF2 in CD40 signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:45382–90

234. Xia ZP, Chen ZJ. 2005. TRAF2: a double-edged sword? *Sci. STKE* 2005:pe7

235. Zarnegar B, Yamazaki S, He JQ, Cheng G. 2008. Control of canonical NF-κB activation through the NIK-IKK complex pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 105:3503–8

236. Lich JD, Williams KL, Moore CB, Arthur JC, Davis BK, et al. 2007. Monarch-1 suppresses noncanonical NF-κB activation and p52-dependent chemokine expression in monocytes. *J. Immunol.* 178:1256–60

237. Ye Z, Lich JD, Moore CB, Duncan JA, Williams KL, Ting JP. 2008. ATP binding by monarch-1/NLRP12 is critical for its inhibitory function. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 28:1841–50

238. Wang L, Manji GA, Grenier JM, Al-Garawi A, Merriam S, et al. 2002. PYPAF7, a novel PYRIN-containing Apaf1-like protein that regulates activation of NF-κB and caspase-1-dependent cytokine processing. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:29874–80

239. Grossmann M, Metcalf D, Merryfull J, Beg A, Baltimore D, Gerondakis S. 1999. The combined absence of the transcription factors Rel and RelA leads to multiple hemopoietic cell defects. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96:11848–53

240. Kim S, La Motte-Mohs RN, Rudolph D, Zuniga-Pflucker JC, Mak TW. 2003. The role of nuclear factor-κB essential modulator (NEMO) in B cell development and survival. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100:1203–8

241. Pasparakis M, Schmidt-Supprian M, Rajewsky K. 2002. IkB kinase signaling is essential for maintenance of mature B cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 196:743–52

242. Ebner K, Bandion A, Binder BR, de Martin R, Schmid JA. 2003. GMCSF activates NF-κB via direct interaction of the GMCSF receptor with IkB kinase β. *Blood* 102:192–99

243. Germain RN. 2002. T-cell development and the CD4-CD8 lineage decision. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2:309–22

244. Schmidt-Ullrich R, Memet S, Lilienbaum A, Feuillard J, Raphael M, Israel A. 1996. NF-κB activity in transgenic mice: developmental regulation and tissue specificity. *Development* 122:2117–28

245. Barton D, HogenEsch H, Weih F. 2000. Mice lacking the transcription factor RelB develop T cell-dependent skin lesions similar to human atopic dermatitis. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 30:2323–32

246. Weih F, Carrasco D, Durham SK, Barton DS, Rizzo CA, et al. 1995. Multiorgan inflammation and hematopoietic abnormalities in mice with a targeted disruption of RelB, a member of the NF-κB/Rel family. *Cell* 80:331–40

247. Burkly L, Hession C, Ogata L, Reilly C, Marconi LA, et al. 1995. Expression of relB is required for the development of thymic medulla and dendritic cells. *Nature* 373:531–36

248. Voll RE, Jimi E, Phillips RJ, Barber DF, Rincon M, et al. 2000. NF-κB activation by the pre-T cell receptor serves as a selective survival signal in T lymphocyte development. *Immunity* 13:677–89

249. Aifantis I, Gounari F, Scorrano L, Borowski C, von Boehmer H. 2001. Constitutive pre-TCR signaling promotes differentiation through Ca²⁺ mobilization and activation of NF-κB and NFAT. *Nat. Immunol.* 2:403–9

250. Ren H, Schmalstieg A, van Oers NS, Gaynor RB. 2002. I-κB kinases α and β have distinct roles in regulating murine T cell function. *J. Immunol.* 168:3721–31

251. Gerondakis S, Grossmann M, Nakamura Y, Pohl T, Grumont R. 1999. Genetic approaches in mice to understand Rel/NF-κB and IkB function: transgenics and knockouts. *Oncogene* 18:6888–95

252. Xiong N, Raulet DH. 2007. Development and selection of γδ T cells. *Immunol. Rev.* 215:15–31

253. Bendelac A, Rivera MN, Park SH, Roark JH. 1997. Mouse CD1-specific NK1 T cells: development, specificity, and function. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 15:535–62

254. Bendelac A, Savage PB, Teyton L. 2007. The biology of NKT cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 25:297–336

255. Kronenberg M. 2005. Toward an understanding of NKT cell biology: progress and paradoxes. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 23:877–900

256. Elewaut D, Ware CF. 2007. The unconventional role of LT αβ in T cell differentiation. *Trends Immunol.* 28:169–75

257. Silva-Santos B, Pennington DJ, Hayday AC. 2005. Lymphotoxin-mediated regulation of γδ cell differentiation by αβ T cell progenitors. *Science* 307:925–28

258. Elewaut D, Shaikh RB, Hammond KJ, De Winter H, Leishman AJ, et al. 2003. NIK-dependent RelB activation defines a unique signaling pathway for the development of V α 14i NKT cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 197:1623–33

259. Vallabhapurapu S, Powolny-Budnicka I, Riemann M, Schmid RM, Paxian S, et al. 2008. Rel/NF-κB family member RelA regulates NK1.1⁻ to NK1.1⁺ transition as well as IL-15-induced expansion of NKT cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 38:3508–19

260. Lantz O, Sharara LI, Tilloy F, Andersson A, DiSanto JP. 1997. Lineage relationships and differentiation of natural killer (NK) T cells: intrathymic selection and interleukin (IL)-4 production in the absence of NKR-P1 and Ly49 molecules. *J. Exp. Med.* 185:1395–401

261. McNab FW, Berzins SP, Pellicci DG, Kyparissoudis K, Field K, et al. 2005. The influence of CD1d in postselection NKT cell maturation and homeostasis. *J. Immunol.* 175:3762–68

262. Townsend MJ, Weinmann AS, Matsuda JL, Salomon R, Farnham PJ, et al. 2004. T-bet regulates the terminal maturation and homeostasis of NK and Va14i NKT cells. *Immunity* 20:477–94

263. Schmidt-Supprian M, Tian J, Grant EP, Pasparakis M, Maehr R, et al. 2004. Differential dependence of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory and natural killer-like T cells on signals leading to NF-κB activation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101:4566–71

264. Cohen PL, Eisenberg RA. 1991. Lpr and gld: single gene models of systemic autoimmunity and lymphoproliferative disease. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 9:243–69

265. Vallabhapurapu S, Ryseck RP, Malewicz M, Weih DS, Weih F. 2001. Inhibition of NF-κB in T cells blocks lymphoproliferation and partially rescues autoimmune disease in gld/gld mice. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 31:2612–22

266. Vivier E, Tomasello E, Baratin M, Walzer T, Ugolini S. 2008. Functions of natural killer cells. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:503–10

267. Samson SI, Memet S, Vosshenrich CA, Colucci F, Richard O, et al. 2004. Combined deficiency in IkBα and IkBε reveals a critical window of NF-κB activity in natural killer cell differentiation. *Blood* 103:4573–80

268. Orange JS, Brodeur SR, Jain A, Bonilla FA, Schneider LC, et al. 2002. Deficient natural killer cell cytotoxicity in patients with IKK-γ/NEMO mutations. *J. Clin. Invest.* 109:1501–9

269. Fuxa M, Skok JA. 2007. Transcriptional regulation in early B cell development. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 19:129–36

270. Schebesta M, Heavey B, Busslinger M. 2002. Transcriptional control of B-cell development. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 14:216–23

271. Busslinger M. 2004. Transcriptional control of early B cell development. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 22:55–79

272. Cobaleda C, Schebesta A, Delogu A, Busslinger M. 2007. Pax5: the guardian of B cell identity and function. *Nat Immunol* 8:463–70

273. Siebenlist U, Brown K, Claudio E. 2005. Control of lymphocyte development by nuclear factor-κB. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 5:435–45

274. Su TT, Guo B, Wei B, Braun J, Rawlings DJ. 2004. Signaling in transitional type 2 B cells is critical for peripheral B-cell development. *Immunol. Rev.* 197:161–78

275. Thomas MD, Srivastava B, Allman D. 2006. Regulation of peripheral B cell maturation. *Cell. Immunol.* 239:92–102

276. Weih DS, Yilmaz ZB, Weih F. 2001. Essential role of RelB in germinal center and marginal zone formation and proper expression of homing chemokines. *J. Immunol.* 167:1909–19

277. Yamada T, Mitani T, Yorita K, Uchida D, Matsushima A, et al. 2000. Abnormal immune function of hemopoietic cells from alymphoplasia (aly) mice, a natural strain with mutant NF-κB-inducing kinase. *J. Immunol.* 165:804–12

278. Enzler T, Bonizzi G, Silverman GJ, Otero DC, Widhopf GF, et al. 2006. Alternative and classical NF-κB signaling retain autoreactive B cells in the splenic marginal zone and result in lupus-like disease. *Immunity* 25:403–15

279. Thien M, Phan TG, Gardam S, Amesbury M, Basten A, et al. 2004. Excess BAFF rescues self-reactive B cells from peripheral deletion and allows them to enter forbidden follicular and marginal zone niches. *Immunity* 20:785–98

280. Lesley R, Xu Y, Kalled SL, Hess DM, Schwab SR, et al. 2004. Reduced competitiveness of autoantigen-engaged B cells due to increased dependence on BAFF. *Immunity* 20:441–53

281. Bonizzi G, Bebien M, Otero DC, Johnson-Vroom KE, Cao Y, et al. 2004. Activation of IKKα target genes depends on recognition of specific κB binding sites by RelB:p52 dimers. *EMBO J.* 23:4202–10

282. Grossmann M, O’Reilly LA, Gugasyan R, Strasser A, Adams JM, Gerondakis S. 2000. The antiapoptotic activities of Rel and RelA required during B-cell maturation involve the regulation of Bcl-2 expression. *EMBO J.* 19:6351–60

283. Guo F, Tanzer S, Busslinger M, Weih F. 2008. Lack of NF-κB2/p100 causes a RelB-dependent block in early B lymphopoiesis. *Blood* 112:551–59

284. Ishikawa H, Carrasco D, Claudio E, Ryseck RP, Bravo R. 1997. Gastric hyperplasia and increased proliferative responses of lymphocytes in mice lacking the COOH-terminal ankyrin domain of NF-κB2. *J. Exp. Med.* 186:999–1014

285. Igarashi H, Medina KL, Yokota T, Rossi MI, Sakaguchi N, et al. 2005. Early lymphoid progenitors in mouse and man are highly sensitive to glucocorticoids. *Int. Immunol.* 17:501–11

286. Xie P, Stunz LL, Larison KD, Yang B, Bishop GA. 2007. Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 is a critical regulator of B cell homeostasis in secondary lymphoid organs. *Immunity* 27:253–67

287. Guo F, Weih D, Meier E, Weih F. 2007. Constitutive alternative NF-κB signaling promotes marginal zone B-cell development but disrupts the marginal sinus and induces HEV-like structures in the spleen. *Blood* 110:2381–89

288. Hinz M, Krappmann D, Eichten A, Heder A, Scheidereit C, Strauss M. 1999. NF-κB function in growth control: regulation of cyclin D1 expression and G0/G1-to-S-phase transition. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 19:2690–98

289. Toth CR, Hostutler RF, Baldwin AS Jr, Bender TP. 1995. Members of the nuclear factor κB family transactivate the murine c-myb gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:7661–71

290. Duyao MP, Kessler DJ, Spicer DB, Bartholomew C, Cleveland JL, et al. 1992. Transactivation of the c-myc promoter by human T cell leukemia virus type 1 tax is mediated by NF κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:16288–91

291. Gilmore TD. 1999. Multiple mutations contribute to the oncogenicity of the retroviral oncoprotein v-Rel. *Oncogene* 18:6925–37

292. Braun T, Carvalho G, Fabre C, Grosjean J, Fenaux P, Kroemer G. 2006. Targeting NF-κB in hematologic malignancies. *Cell Death Differ.* 13:748–58

293. Jost PJ, Ruland J. 2007. Aberrant NF-κB signaling in lymphoma: mechanisms, consequences, and therapeutic implications. *Blood* 109:2700–7

294. Bargou RC, Leng C, Krappmann D, Emmerich F, Mapara MY, et al. 1996. High-level nuclear NF-κB and Oct-2 is a common feature of cultured Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells. *Blood* 87:4340–47

295. Bargou RC, Emmerich F, Krappmann D, Bommert K, Mapara MY, et al. 1997. Constitutive nuclear factor-κB-RelA activation is required for proliferation and survival of Hodgkin’s disease tumor cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* 100:2961–69

296. Mathas S, Johrens K, Joos S, Lietz A, Hummel F, et al. 2005. Elevated NF-κB p50 complex formation and Bcl-3 expression in classical Hodgkin, anaplastic large-cell, and other peripheral T-cell lymphomas. *Blood* 106:4287–93

297. Thomas RK, Re D, Wolf J, Diehl V. 2004. Part I: Hodgkin’s lymphoma—molecular biology of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells. *Lancet Oncol.* 5:11–18

298. Zhou HJ, Pham LV, Tamayo AT, Lin-Lee YC, Fu L, et al. 2007. Nuclear CD40 interacts with c-Rel and enhances proliferation in aggressive B-cell lymphoma. *Blood* 110:2121–27

299. Lin-Lee YC, Pham LV, Tamayo AT, Fu L, Zhou HJ, et al. 2006. Nuclear localization in the biology of the CD40 receptor in normal and neoplastic human B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:18878–87

300. Vilimas T, Mascarenhas J, Palomero T, Mandal M, Buonamici S, et al. 2007. Targeting the NF-κB signaling pathway in Notch1-induced T-cell leukemia. *Nat. Med.* 13:70–77

301. Bellavia D, Campese AF, Alese E, Vacca A, Felli MP, et al. 2000. Constitutive activation of NF-κB and T-cell leukemia/lymphoma in Notch3 transgenic mice. *EMBO J.* 19:3337–48

302. Vacca A, Felli MP, Palermo R, Di Mario G, Calce A, et al. 2006. Notch3 and pre-TCR interaction unveils distinct NF-κB pathways in T-cell development and leukemia. *EMBO J.* 25:1000–8

303. Liu H, Ruskon-Fourmestraux A, Lavergne-Slove A, Ye H, Molina T, et al. 2001. Resistance of t(11;18) positive gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma to *Helicobacter pylori* eradication therapy. *Lancet* 357:39–40

304. Lucas PC, Yonezumi M, Inohara N, McAllister-Lucas LM, Abazeed ME, et al. 2001. Bcl10 and MALT1, independent targets of chromosomal translocation in malt lymphoma, cooperate in a novel NF-κB signaling pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:19012–19

305. Zhou H, Du MQ, Dixit VM. 2005. Constitutive NF-κB activation by the t(11;18)(q21;q21) product in MALT lymphoma is linked to deregulated ubiquitin ligase activity. *Cancer Cell* 7:425–31

306. Ngo VN, Davis RE, Lamy L, Yu X, Zhao H, et al. 2006. A loss-of-function RNA interference screen for molecular targets in cancer. *Nature* 441:106–10

307. Rosenwald A, Wright G, Chan WC, Connors JM, Campo E, et al. 2002. The use of molecular profiling to predict survival after chemotherapy for diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 346:1937–47

308. Neri A, Chang CC, Lombardi L, Salina M, Corradini P, et al. 1991. B cell lymphoma-associated chromosomal translocation involves candidate oncogene lyt-10, homologous to NF-κB p50. *Cell* 67:1075–87

309. Eliopoulos AG, Young LS. 2001. LMP1 structure and signal transduction. *Semin. Cancer Biol.* 11:435–44

310. Thornburg NJ, Kulwichit W, Edwards RH, Shair KH, Bendt KM, Raab-Traub N. 2006. LMP1 signaling and activation of NF-κB in LMP1 transgenic mice. *Oncogene* 25:288–97

311. Luftig M, Yasui T, Soni V, Kang MS, Jacobson N, et al. 2004. Epstein-Barr virus latent infection membrane protein 1 TRAF-binding site induces NIK/IKK α-dependent noncanonical NF-κB activation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101:141–46

312. Atkinson PG, Coope HJ, Rowe M, Ley SC. 2003. Latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus stimulates processing of NF-κ B2 p100 to p52. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:51134–42

313. Eliopoulos AG, Caamano JH, Flavell J, Reynolds GM, Murray PG, et al. 2003. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent infection membrane protein 1 regulates the processing of p100 NF-κB2 to p52 via an IKKγ/NEMO-independent signalling pathway. *Oncogene* 22:7557–69

314. Kim KE, Gu C, Thakur S, Vieira E, Lin JC, Rabson AB. 2000. Transcriptional regulatory effects of lymphoma-associated NFKB2/lyt10 protooncogenes. *Oncogene* 19:1334–45

315. Ceseran E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles DM. 1995. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-related body-cavity-based lymphomas. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 332:1186–91

316. Poiesz BJ, Ruscetti FW, Reitz MS, Kalyanaraman VS, Gallo RC. 1981. Isolation of a new type C retrovirus (HTLV) in primary uncultured cells of a patient with Sezary T-cell leukaemia. *Nature* 294:268–71

317. Liu L, Eby MT, Rathore N, Sinha SK, Kumar A, Chaudhary PM. 2002. The human herpes virus 8-encoded viral FLICE inhibitory protein physically associates with and persistently activates the IkB kinase complex. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:13745–51

318. Keller SA, Schattner EJ, Ceseran E. 2000. Inhibition of NF-κB induces apoptosis of KSHV-infected primary effusion lymphoma cells. *Blood* 96:2537–42

319. Carter RS, Geyer BC, Xie M, Acevedo-Suarez CA, Ballard DW. 2001. Persistent activation of NF-κB by the tax transforming protein involves chronic phosphorylation of IkB kinase subunits IKKβ and IKKγ. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:24445–48

320. Xiao G, Cvijic ME, Fong A, Harhaj EW, Uhlik MT, et al. 2001. Retroviral oncoprotein Tax induces processing of NF-κB2/p100 in T cells: evidence for the involvement of IKKalpha. *EMBO J.* 20:6805–15

321. Krappmann D, Emmerich F, Kordes U, Scharschmidt E, Dorken B, Scheidereit C. 1999. Molecular mechanisms of constitutive NF-κB/Rel activation in Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells. *Oncogene* 18:943–53

322. Cabannes E, Khan G, Aillet F, Jarrett RF, Hay RT. 1999. Mutations in the *IkBα* gene in Hodgkin’s disease suggest a tumour suppressor role for IkBα. *Oncogene* 18:3063–70

323. Hideshima T, Neri P, Tassone P, Yasui H, Ishitsuka K, et al. 2006. MLN120B, a novel IkB kinase β inhibitor, blocks multiple myeloma cell growth in vitro and in vivo. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 12:5887–94

324. dos Santos NR, William M, Gachet S, Cormier F, Janin A, et al. 2008. RelB-dependent stromal cells promote T-cell leukemogenesis. *PLoS ONE* 3:e2555

Frontispiece  
Marc Feldmann  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aire  
Diane Mathis and Christophe Benoist 287  

Regulatory Lymphocytes and Intestinal Inflammation  
Ana Izcue, Janine L. Coombes, and Fiona Powrie 313  

The Ins and Outs of Leukocyte Integrin Signaling  
Clare L. Abram and Clifford A. Lowell 339  

Recent Advances in the Genetics of Autoimmune Disease  
Peter K. Gregersen and Lina M. Olsson 363  

Cell-Mediated Immune Responses in Tuberculosis  
Andrea M. Cooper 393  

Enhancing Immunity Through Autophagy  
Christian Miünz 423  

Alternative Activation of Macrophages: An Immunologic Functional Perspective  
Fernando O. Martinez, Laura Helming, and Siamon Gordon 451  

IL-17 and Th17 Cells  
Thomas Korn, Estelle Bettelli, Mohamed Oukka, and Vijay K. Kuchroo 485  

Immunological and Inflammatory Functions of the Interleukin-1 Family  
Charles A. Dinarello 519  

Regulatory T Cells in the Control of Host-Microorganism Interactions  
Yasmine Belkaid and Kristin Tarbell 551  

T Cell Activation  
Jennifer E. Smith-Garvin, Gary A. Koretzky, and Martha S. Jordan 591  

Horror Autoinflammaticus: The Molecular Pathophysiology of Autoinflammatory Disease  
Seth L. Masters, Anna Simon, Ivona Aksentijevich, and Daniel L. Kastner 621  

Blood Monocytes: Development, Heterogeneity, and Relationship with Dendritic Cells  
Cedric Auffray, Michael H. Sieweke, and Frederic Geissmann 669  

Regulation and Function of NF-κB Transcription Factors in the Immune System  
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu and Michael Karin 693
