
# Molecular Pathways

## Novel Therapeutic Inhibitors of the c-Met Signaling Pathway in Cancer

Joseph Paul Eder,$^{1}$ George F. Vande Woude,$^{2}$ Scott A. Boerner,$^{3}$ and Patricia M. LoRusso$^{3}$

### Abstract

A wide variety of human malignancies exhibit sustained c-Met stimulation, overexpression, or mutation, including carcinomas of the breast, liver, lung, ovary, kidney, and thyroid. Notably, activating mutations in c-Met have been positively identified in patients with a particular hereditary form of papillary renal cancer, directly implicating c-Met in human tumorigenesis. Aberrant signaling of the c-Met signaling pathway due to dysregulation of the c-Met receptor or overexpression of its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), has been associated with an aggressive phenotype. Extensive evidence that c-Met signaling is involved in the progression and spread of several cancers and an enhanced understanding of its role in disease have generated considerable interest in c-Met and HGF as major targets in cancer drug development. This has led to the development of a variety of c-Met pathway antagonists with potential clinical applications. The three main approaches of pathway-selective anticancer drug development have included antagonism of ligand/receptor interaction, inhibition of the tyrosine kinase catalytic activity, and blockade of the receptor/effect interaction. Several c-Met antagonists are now under clinical investigation. Preliminary clinical results of several of these agents, including both monoclonal antibodies and small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors, have been encouraging. Several multitargeted therapies have also been under investigation in the clinic and have demonstrated promise, particularly with regard to tyrosine kinase inhibition.

### Background

Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are key regulators of critical cellular processes such as cell growth, differentiation, neovascularization, and tissue repair. In addition to their importance in normal physiology, aberrant expression of certain RTKs has been implicated in the development and progression of many types of cancer. These RTKs have emerged as promising drug targets for cancer therapy.

The RTK c-Met is the cell surface receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), also known as scatter factor (1, 2). HGF is a 90 kD multidomain glycoprotein that is highly related to members of the plasminogen serine protease family. It is secreted as a single-chain, inactive polypeptide by mesenchymal cells and is cleaved to its active α/β heterodimer extracellular form by a number of proteases (3). The α chain

NH₂-terminal portion contains the high-affinity c-Met receptor-binding domain, but the β chain is required to interact with the c-Met receptor for receptor activation (4). The c-Met receptor, like its ligand, is a disulfide-linked heterodimer consisting of extracellular α and β chains (Fig. 1). The α chain, heterodimerized to the amino-terminal portion of the β chain, forms the major ligand-binding site in the extracellular domain. The transmembrane domain, and the juxtamembrane region containing the receptor downmodulation c-Cbl-binding domain, is adjacent to the kinase domain and the carboxy-terminal tail that is essential for downstream signaling (5). HGF binding induces c-Met receptor homodimerization and phosphorylation of two tyrosine residues (Y1234 and Y1235) within the catalytic site, regulating kinase activity (6). The carboxy-terminal tail includes tyrosines Y1349 and Y1356, which, when phosphorylated, serve as docking sites for intracellular adaptor proteins, leading to downstream signaling (7, 8). The c-Met receptor is expressed in the epithelial cells of many organs during embryogenesis and in adulthood, including the liver, pancreas, prostate, kidney, muscle, and bone marrow.

HGF-mediated activation of c-Met results in a complex genetic program referred to as “invasive growth,” consisting of a series of physiological processes, including proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis, that occur under normal physiological conditions during embryonic development and postnatal hepatic and cardiac injury repair, and pathologically during oncogenesis (9–12). Hypoxia has been demonstrated to activate c-Met transcription and amplify HGF signaling in vitro and in vivo (13, 14). Signaling through c-Met promotes proliferation and survival through a variety of downstream effectors. Signaling for mitogenesis and growth occurs through

---

**Authors’ Affiliations:** $^{1}$AstraZeneca LP, Waltham, Massachusetts; $^{2}$Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan; and $^{3}$Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan

Received 11/13/08; accepted 11/24/08; published OnlineFirst 3/24/09.

**Grant support:** P. LoRusso has received commercial research grants from Amgen, Array Biopharma, Ariad, AstraZeneca, Boeringer-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Endocyte, Exelixis, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, ImClone, Merck, Nereus, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, and Ziopharm. Research supported in part by the Van Andel Foundation.

**Requests for reprints:** Patricia M. LoRusso, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University, 4100 John R, Mail Code: HW04HO, Detroit, MI 48201. Phone: 313-576-8749; Fax: 313-576-8719; E-mail: lorussop@karmanos.org.

© 2009 American Association for Cancer Research.

doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1306

www.aacrjournals.org 2207 Clin Cancer Res 2009;15(7) April 1, 2009

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on January 12, 2019. © 2009 American Association for Cancer Research.

Molecular Pathways

HGF antagonists or neutralizers  
block interaction of HGF with  
receptor  

Dominant-negative c-Met  
construct prevents effective  
receptor dimerization  

ATP Competitors block  
c-Met kinase activity  

Inhibitors of specific downstream  
transducers target members of  
the c-Met intracellular pathway  

Cell survival  

Cell invasion,  
motility, Epithelial-  
mesenchymal  
transitions  

Cell proliferation  

CCR Molecular Pathways  

Fig. 1. Major signaling pathways activated through c-Met, interactions between c-Met and other membrane receptors, and c-Met signaling inhibition strategies. HGF binding results in c-Met autophosphorylation of tyrosines Y1234 and Y1235 within the activation loop of the kinase domain and subsequent phosphorylation of tyrosines Y1349 and Y1356 near the -COOH terminus. Important adapter proteins and direct kinase substrates activated downstream in the c-Met pathway include growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2), Grb2-associated adaptor protein 1 (GAB1), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), son of sevenless (SOS), rat sarcoma oncogene homolog (RAS), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3/5 (STAT 3/5), SRC, SRC homology protein tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2), SRC homology domain c-terminal adaptor homolog (SHC), phospholipase c-γ (PLC), Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (RAC1), p21-activated kinase (PAK), focal adhesion kinase (FAK), AKT, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Crosstalk between c-Met and various membrane protein partners, including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), the plexin B family, α6β4 integrin, and CD44, results in additional signaling response modulation.

the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway and plays an essential role in morphogenesis, the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition that results from loss of intracellular adhesion via cadherins, focal adhesion kinase, and integrins, with change in cell shape (11). Activation of the HGF/c-Met axis prevents apoptosis through activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3 kinase) and subsequent Akt activation (15–17). Crosstalk through the PI3 kinase-Akt pathway and the RAS-MAPK pathway has been implicated to promote survival (18, 19). Crosstalk between c-Met and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has also been implicated in several biological systems (Fig. 1) (ref. 20). c-Met is also known to interact with other membrane proteins on the surface of the cell (13), including the laminin receptor α6β4 integrin, the semaphorin receptors of the plexin B family, and the v6 splice variant of the hyaluronan receptor CD44 (13, 21). Crosstalk between c-Met and membrane partners assists in modulating the activation of c-Met and allows for the integration of signals present in the extracellular environment (22).

In tumor cells, c-Met activation causes the triggering of a diverse series of signaling cascades resulting in cell growth, proliferation, invasion, and protection from apoptosis (3, 23). Data from cellular and animal tumor models suggest that the underlying biological mechanisms for tumorigenicity of c-Met are typically achieved in three different ways: (a) with the establishment of HGF/c-Met autocrine loops; (b) via c-Met or HGF overexpression; and (c) in the presence of kinase-activating mutations in the c-Met receptor coding sequence (3, 24–26). Overexpression of HGF and c-Met is indicative of the increased aggressiveness of tumors and poor prognostic signs in cancer patients (11). ${}^{4}$ HGF/c-Met signaling induces

${}^{4}$ Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor, Met and cancer references. Last Revised: 9/16/2008 [Available from: http://www.vai.org/met/].

Clin Cancer Res 2009;15(7) April 1, 2009 2208 www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on January 12, 2019. © 2009 American Association for Cancer Research.

tumor angiogenesis by inducing proliferation and migration in
endothelial cells; by inducing expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a key proangiogenic factor; as well
as by dramatically downregulating thrombospondin 1 (TSP-1),
a negative regulator of angiogenesis (27, 28).

HGF and c-Met expression have been observed in tumor
biopsies of most solid tumors, and c-Met signaling has been
documented in a wide range of human malignancies, including
bladder, breast, cervical, colorectal, gastric, head and neck,
liver, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate, renal, and thyroid
cancers, as well as in various sarcomas, hematopoietic
malignancies, and melanoma (3, 29, 30). Most notably,
activating mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of c-Met
have been positively identified in patients with a hereditary
form of papillary renal cancer, directly implicating c-Met in
human tumorigenesis (26, 31). Amplification of c-Met has
been implicated in the development of acquired resistance to
erlotinib and gefitinib chemotherapies in non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients (32–34).

Important Recent Work

Several recent advances in the field of HGF/c-Met signaling
have occurred, further elucidating the role of c-Met in normal
cellular function and oncogenesis.

• Silencing the endogenous Met proto-oncogene has been
shown to result in lack of tumor growth, regression of
established metastases, and decreased generation of new
metastases, indicating the importance of persistent Met
expression in the early phases of cancer progression (35).
• c-Met has been shown to be a sensor of adverse micro-
environmental conditions (such as hypoxia) and drives
cell invasion and metastasis through the transcriptional
activation of a set of genes that control blood coagulation
(11).
• The c-Met receptor and VEGF receptor (VEGFR) have been
found to cooperate to promote tumor survival, and c-Met
has additional roles in tumor angiogenesis, as an
independent angiogenic factor and one that may interact
with the angiogenic proliferation and survival signals
promoted through VEGF and other angiogenic proteins.
Hypoxia increases hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α,
which subsequently increases HGF expression in tumor
and surrounding normal interstitial cells with an increase
in Met expression in endothelial and tumor cells. HGF/
c-Met signaling increases VEGF levels in tumor and
VEGFR2 on endothelial cells (36, 37). Increased HGF/
c-Met signaling decreases thrombospondin 1 (TSP-1), the
major endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis (27). The
increased HGF/c-Met signaling cooperates with VEGF
signaling to increase the expression level of VEGF-
regulated genes, as well as cooperating to express novel
transcripts in endothelial cells (38). Combined VEGF and
HGF/c-Met signaling has a greater effect on the prevention
of endothelial cell apoptosis and the increase of vascular

Table 1. Summary of HGF/c-Met inhibitors in clinical development

| Compound Name | Type | Company | Target(s) | Phase of Development |
|----------------|------|----------|------------|-----------------------|
| AMG 102 (76)   | Antibody | Amgen | human HGF | Phase I/II |
| MetMAb (23, 54, 77) | Monovalent antibody | Genentech | human c-Met | Phase I |
| ARQ 197 (23, 59, 60) | Selective kinase inhibitor, non-ATP competitive | ArQule | c-Met | Phase I/II |
| JNJ-38877605 (61) | Selective kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Johnson and Johnson | c-Met | Phase I |
| PF-04217903 (62) | Selective kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Pfizer | c-Met | Phase I |
| SGX 523 (63) | Selective kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | SGX Pharmaceuticals | c-Met | Discontinued* |
| PF-02341066 (23, 66) | Multikinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Pfizer | c-Met, ALK | Phase I/II |
| XL184 (71, 72) | Broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Exelixis | c-Met, VEGFR1-3, Ret, Kit, Flt-3, Tie-2 | Phase I/II/III |
| XL880 (67, 69, 78, 79) | Broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Exelixis | c-Met, Ron, VEGFR1-3, PDGFR, Kit, Flt-3, Tie-2 | Phase I/II |
| MP470 (23, 73) | Broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | SuperGen | c-Met, Ret, Rad51, mutant forms of Kit, PDGFR, Flt-3 | Phase I |
| MGCD 265 (74) | Broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor, ATP competitive | Methylgene | c-Met, VEGFR1-3, Tie-2, Ron, Kit, Flt-3 | Phase I |
| MK-2461 (75) | Broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor | Merck | c-Met, KDR, FGFR1-3, and Flt1, 3, 4. | Phase I/II |

NOTE: Inhibitor clinical development information current as of November 2008 from the United States National Institutes of Health registry
of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. [Available from: http://
www.clinicaltrials.gov].

Abbreviations: HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; ALK, anaplastic lymphoma kinase; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; Ret,
rearranged during transfection; Flt-3, FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3; Tie-2, angiopoietin receptor 2; Ron, recepteur d'origine nantais; PDGFR,
platelet-derived growth factor receptor; Rad51, E.coli RecA homolog; KDR, kinase insert domain receptor; FGFR1-3, fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1-3.
*Clinical development of SGX 523 was discontinued by the company as of May 2008 after initial Phase I trials. [Available from: http://
www.biospace.com/news_story.aspx?NewsEntityId=96099].

tubulogenesis *in vitro*, the formation of capillaries *in vivo*, and the increase of the microvessel density (MVD) within tumors (27). Thus, targeting inhibition of HGF/c-Met is both a means of enhanced VEGF/VEGFR axis-mediated inhibition of angiogenesis at the time of initial therapy and a response to the expected hypoxia within tumors induced by antiangiogenic therapy.

- c-Met and c-Src have been implicated in cooperating as mediators of EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation and cell growth in the presence of EGFR inhibitors (39). Thus, c-Met inhibition, either alone or in combination with an EGFR inhibitor, may confer clinical benefit in the setting of EGFR inhibitor resistance.
- The combination of a c-Met inhibitor plus the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib more potently inhibited NSCLC tumor xenograft growth in mice compared with either inhibitor alone, indicating that simultaneous targeting of c-Met and EGFR may have a great impact on NSCLC tumors in which coactivation of these receptor pathways is frequently observed (40).
- Preclinical and clinical c-Met diagnostics: The large number of patients who might benefit from Met-targeted therapies raises the issue of how best c-Met might be identified in the tumor. Few antibodies have been shown to work well for detecting c-Met in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues (41). Recently, however, a monoclonal antibody, MET4, that is directed against the extracellular domain of human MET has been described. MET4 has been shown to accurately and reproducibly detect c-MET in FFPE tissues, and the MET4 reagent displays high sensitivity with low background (42).

summary of the latest advances in therapies involving HGF/c-Met inhibition is provided here.

### Competitors of MET/HGF

Binding of HGF ligand to the c-Met receptor can be inhibited by subregions of HGF or c-Met that can act as decoys or antagonists. These decoys and antagonists stoichiometrically compete with the ligand or receptor without leading to c-Met activation, thereby preventing activation of downstream pathways and biological outcomes. Several HGF and c-Met variants have been validated experimentally as antagonists both *in vitro* and *in vivo* and work by blocking ligand binding or preventing c-Met dimerization (13, 21). In addition, molecular analogs to HGF that have been shown to compete with HGF in Met binding have been developed. Preclinical work with NK4, a variant comprised solely of the N-terminal region and four kringle domains of HGF, has demonstrated c-Met inhibitory activity *in vitro* and *in vivo* (4). A soluble, recombinant, enzymatically inactive decoy c-Met molecule corresponding to the entire c-Met intracellular domain has been engineered and was shown to interact with both HGF and full-length c-Met to block ligand binding and prevent receptor dimerization (43). Preclinical experiments have shown that both decoy c-Met and NK4 synergize with radiotherapy in inducing tumor regression (43).

### Monoclonal Antibodies Directed against HGF and c-Met

The use of HGF- or c-Met-specific antibodies prevents ligand/receptor binding, resulting in growth inhibition and tumor regression by inhibiting proliferation and enhancing apoptosis. A combination of three monoclonal antibodies (A-mix) displayed high neutralizing activity to HGF *in vitro* and *in vivo* and showed significant tumor growth inhibition against autocrine HGF-Met-expressing glioma xenograft tumors (44). The strategy of using monoclonal antibodies allows for exclusive specificity against HGF/c-Met, a relatively long half-life compared to small-molecule kinase inhibitors, and the potential to elicit a host immune response against tumor cells (23). Unfortunately, the use of antibodies also carries a high manufacturing cost and may result in suboptimal tumor penetration compared to other strategies.

AMG102 (Amgen, Inc.), is a fully human IgG₂ monoclonal antibody that selectively binds and neutralizes HGF, thereby preventing its binding to c-Met and subsequent activation (45, 46). AMG102 in preclinical paracrine HGF models shows potent inhibition of Met-dependent tumor growth (47). Phase I trials of AMG102 have been completed with an acceptable safety profile. Recently reported interim results from a Phase II trial of AMG102 in patients with glioblastoma multiforme showed 1 partial and 1 minor response and 2 reports of stable disease in the first 20 patients treated (48). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were observed in five patients: peripheral edema (*n* = 2), hypophosphatemia (*n* = 3), and deep venous thrombosis (*n* = 1). AMG102 has been shown to enhance the effects of various standard chemotherapeutic agents such as temozolomide and docetaxel *in vitro* and in xenografts when combined (49). A Phase I study of AMG102 administered in combination with the antiangiogenesis agents bevacizumab or motesanib

### Clinical-Translational Advances

The c-Met receptor, once activated, signals various pathways leading to tumorigenesis. Hence, it has been proposed that targeting the c-Met receptor by novel biological agents will inhibit cancer progression at the molecular level. Several different strategies are being explored to reach this goal, including the development of (a) competitors of MET/HGF, (b) monoclonal antibodies directed against HGF and c-Met, and (c) small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors directed against c-Met. Besides the use of selective inhibitors, strategies to inhibit multiple targets involved in the c-Met signaling pathway are currently under study. This is especially relevant for the role of HGF/c-Met inhibition in angiogenesis with VEGF inhibition. Inhibition of multiple targets is achieved in two ways. Highly selective agents can be combined to create a broader spectrum of inhibition and maximize the benefit while minimizing unwanted toxicity with the greatest possible precision. Another approach is to utilize a single agent that targets multiple specific members of the c-Met signaling pathway or other signaling pathways involved in crosstalk with c-Met, thereby inhibiting crosstalk as a mechanism of resistance. The use of a broad-spectrum agent would lessen the possibility of drug-drug interactions, but it may affect other unintended kinases, given kinome family structural relationships. Several selective and broad-spectrum c-Met and HGF inhibitors have entered clinical trials (Table 1). A brief
showed a decrease in the sum of tumor diameters and a best response of stable disease in 8 of 10 evaluable patients without dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) (ref. 50).

One-armed 5D5 (OA5D5, MetMAb; Genentech) is a humanized, monovalent, antagonistic anti-c-Met antibody derived from the agonistic monoclonal antibody 5D5 (51–53). MetMAb binds to c-Met with high affinity and remains on the cell surface with c-Met, preventing HGF binding and subsequent c-Met phosphorylation as well as downstream signaling activity and cellular responses. Recent preclinical studies show that MetMAb is a potent anti-c-Met inhibitor that has promise as a therapeutic antibody in human cancer, especially in combination with EGFR and/or VEGF inhibitors (40, 54, 55). In preclinical ligand-independent and ligand-dependent models, a triple combination of MetMAb with an EGFR and VEGF inhibitor had more robust antitumor effects than any two agents alone (56). Notably, local treatment of MetMAb on glioblastomas containing a c-Met-activating mutation resulted in near complete inhibition of intracerebral glioblastoma growth in a mouse model (55). Phase I clinical studies of MetMAb have begun, and results from an initial Phase I trial indicate that MetMAb is safe and well tolerated as a single agent at doses up to 30 mg/kg (57).

### Small-Molecule Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors

The known roles of intracellular effectors in cellular transformation have led to the testing of therapies that limit their interactions in the hope of disrupting c-Met-driven tumorigenesis. Small-molecule inhibitors of c-Met target the catalytic activity of the receptor, whereas a variety of other inhibitors target downstream effectors in the c-Met signaling pathway. Because crosstalk between c-Met and other membrane receptors may lead to activation of the receptor without ligand binding, a strategy of targeting c-Met along with downstream effectors may yield the best results (22). Such strategies will likely be tumor dependent, predicated on the presence of c-Met mutations versus receptor overexpression.

ARQ197 (ArQule) is a non-ATP-competitive agent highly selective for the c-Met receptor. When ARQ197 was biochemically assessed in a panel of 230 kinases, only c-Met was inhibited to any appreciable extent (58). In preclinical experiments, ARQ197 potently inhibited HGF-stimulated and constitutive c-Met phosphorylation in multiple human cancer cell lines and decreased phosphorylation of several c-Met downstream effectors, including AKT, MAPK, and STAT-3 (58). A Phase I dose-escalation study of ARQ197 in metastatic patients who failed standard therapy showed that ARQ197 was well tolerated, and no DLT was observed (59). Of 33 evaluable patients, 2 achieved a partial response and 19 reported stable disease. Another Phase I trial examining the pharmacodynamics of ARQ197 in patients with advanced, safely biopsiable, solid tumors reported 1 DLT (grade 3 fatigue) in 14 patients treated to date (60). Inhibition of c-Met phosphorylation was observed. Several Phase I and Phase II studies of ARQ197, alone or in combination, are currently ongoing.

Three other selective c-Met inhibitors have recently entered initial clinical evaluations. JNJ-38877605 (Johnson and Johnson) is a small-molecule, ATP-competitive inhibitor of the catalytic activity of c-Met. JNJ-38877605 showed ~600-fold selectivity for c-Met compared with a panel of ~250 diverse tyrosine and serine-threonine kinases and was found to potently inhibit HGF-stimulated and constitutively activated c-Met phosphorylation *in vitro* (61). PF-04217903 (Pfizer) is an orally available, ATP-competitive small-molecule inhibitor of c-Met that demonstrated selectivity of >1000-fold for c-Met compared with a screening panel of >150 protein kinases (62). Clinical evaluations of JNJ-38877605 and PF-04217903 have just begun, and no data are yet available. ${}^{5}$ SGX523 (SGX Pharmaceuticals) is another highly selective, ATP-competitive inhibitor of c-Met. SGX523 showed >1,000-fold selectivity for c-Met over all other kinases in a screening panel of 213 protein kinases and demonstrated potent antitumor activity when dosed orally in human xenograft models with no overt toxicity (63, 64). However, unexpected toxicity was observed in early Phase I studies, including compromised kidney function, as evidenced by increased serum creatinine. ${}^{6}$ Analysis of patient samples from these clinical studies revealed a metabolism profile that differed markedly from that observed in preclinical experiments. As a result of the observed toxicity, further clinical development of SGX523 has been discontinued. ${}^{6}$

PF-02341066 (Pfizer) is a multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor with activity against both c-Met and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (refs. 65, 66). PF-2341066 potently inhibited c-Met phosphorylation and c-Met-dependent proliferation, migration, or invasion of human tumor cells *in vitro* as well as inhibited HGF-stimulated endothelial cell survival or invasion and serum-stimulated tubulogenesis *in vitro*, suggesting that this agent also exhibits antiangiogenic properties. PF-02341066 more potently inhibited a variety of diverse mutant variants of c-Met in cellular assays compared to wild-type c-Met, suggesting that different mutant variants of c-Met may be preferentially targeted by different c-Met inhibitors (66). Phase I trials are ongoing.

GSK 1363089/XL880 (Exelixis) targets c-Met at an IC${}_{50}$ of 0.4 nM. Binding affinity is high to both c-Met and VEGFR2, causing a conformational change in the kinase to move XL880 deeper into the ATP-binding pocket. The time on target is >24 hours for both receptors (67). In preclinical experiments, XL880 caused central necrosis and peripheral hemorrhage in tumors and produced regressions at all tumor sizes *in vivo*. XL880 has good oral bioavailability, and it is a CYP450 substrate, but not an inhibitor or inducer (68). Two Phase I clinical trials examined different administration schedules of XL880, either on a 5 day on/9 day off schedule (Study 1) or as a fixed daily dose (Study 2). The DLT was schedule dependent (Study 1 only); reversible increases in hepatic transaminases and pancreatic lipase were seen (67, 69). Hypertension was seen in >27% of patients, but was grade 3 in only 5% and was manageable with medication. Of 41 patients reported in Study 1, 4 had confirmed partial responses (>30% shrinkage of tumor by RECIST criteria), 4 had minor responses (RECIST response >20% and <30%), and 7 patients had stable disease.

---

${}^{5}$ United States National Institutes of Health. Registry of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. [Available from: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov].

${}^{6}$ Biospace.com. SGX Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (SGXP) Discontinued Development of SGX523; Announces First Quarter Financial Results 5/13/2008. [Available from: http://www.biospace.com/news_story.aspx?NewsEntityId=96099].The longest response is over 54 months. Thus, the spectrum of selectivity for XL880 differs from the extended spectrum agents that target angiogenesis, like sorafenib and sunitinib, which act within a single therapeutic area at one point in time (with significant clinical benefits in certain tumor types). It also differs from the angiogenesis inhibitors vandetanib and XL647, which act on two separate pathways that may or may not have overlapping effects in tumor cells. XL880 acts on two cooperating pathways for proliferation and survival at different points in time, already providing a therapeutic solution for tumor response to the initial assault on tumor angiogenesis. Phase II trials have started in multiple tumor types, including papillary renal cancer, gastric cancer, and head and neck cancers.

XL184 (Exelixis) is a novel, orally administered, small-molecule anticancer compound that, in preclinical models, has demonstrated potent inhibition of both MET and VEGFR2. XL184 has also exhibited potent inhibition of other important RTKs that have been implicated in various forms of cancer, including Ret, Kit, Flt-3, and Tie-2. In preclinical efficacy studies, XL184 has inhibited tumor growth and induced the regression of large tumors in a broad range of human tumor xenograft models, including breast cancer, lung cancer, and glioma. XL184 has also been recently suggested to resensitize cells resistant to the EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib; the combination of XL184 with EGFR inhibitors was found to have impressive synergistic activity compared to either drug alone in preclinical cellular and xenograft models (70). Early clinical experience has indicated promising signs of antitumor activity at doses not associated with toxicity (71, 72). Most notably, results of 17 patients with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) treated with XL184 indicated a >50% response rate and a 100% disease control rate. Of the patients with MTC, nine were previously treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

MP470 (SuperGen) is a novel, orally bioavailable small molecule with inhibitory activity against c-Met as well as several other protein tyrosine kinase targets, including mutant forms of c-Kit, mutant PDGFRα, and mutant Flt-3 (73). In addition, MP470 sensitizes cancer cells to platinum-based DNA-damaging agents and to radiation therapy, presumably through the suppression of Rad51, a key component of the cellular repair machinery in response to DNA double-strand breaks. Early clinical data indicated that MP470 was well tolerated and that Rad51 expression was modulated in a dose-dependent manner, supporting the rationale for combining MP470 with DNA-damaging agents due to the ability of MP470 to suppress the Rad51 DNA repair mechanism (73). Additional clinical studies, including combination studies with standard chemotherapies, are ongoing.

The clinical evaluation of other novel broad-spectrum c-Met inhibitors has recently begun. MGCD265 (Methylgene) potentially inhibits c-Met, Ron, VEGFRs, and Tie-2 enzymatic activities in vitro and has been reported to abrogate HGF-dependent cellular endpoints, such as cell scatter and wound healing, as well as VEGF-dependent responses such as in vitro angiogenesis and in vivo vascular permeability (74). MK-2461 (Merck) is a potent inhibitor of c-Met, KDR, FGFR1/2/3, and Flt 1/3/4 that is especially active in preclinical models with Met gene amplification, in which c-Met is constitutively phosphorylated. MK-2461 has been well tolerated in early Phase I evaluation (75).

### Conclusions

In the last several years, the introduction of molecularly targeted agents in cancer has achieved impressive results. Inhibition of RTKs that initiate (i.e., Bcr-abl in chronic myelogenous leukemia) or sustain (i.e., EGFR<sup>mut</sup> in NSCLC; c-Kit in gastrointestinal stromal tumors) tumor survival by small, targeted molecules as single agents has demonstrated significant clinical benefit in cancer patients in several select circumstances. Highly selective monoclonal antibodies have also shown efficacy in a broader number of human cancers when combined with other agents, especially cytotoxic chemotherapy. The inhibition achieved by tyrosine kinase inhibitors of multiple factors and pathways involved in tumor angiogenesis (i.e., VEGFR2, PDGFR) has demonstrated clinical benefit in renal cell cancer as well. The HGF/c-Met axis offers a potentially high-value target for cancer drug development. Although HGF/c-Met is the driving mutation in hereditary and papillary renal cancer, as well as some glioblastomas, gastric, hepatocellular, and soft tissue cancers, overexpression of HGF and c-Met in a very high percentage of patients with solid tumors are associated with a poor outcome and could benefit from Met-targeted therapies. The known biological consequences of c-Met activation are invasion, cellular morphogenesis, motility, metastasis, immortalization, and angiogenesis, and they read like a list of the most undesirable properties associated with cancer. In addition to its own unique effects, c-Met signaling enhances tumor angiogenesis mediated by the VEGF axis. The response to hypoxia that increases HGF release and c-Met signaling enhances metastasis in untreated tumors and may be important in the resistance to VEGF-targeted agents in cancer therapy. EGFR/Met inhibitors in combination can have synergistic activity, and simultaneous targeting of c-Met and VEGF, if achieved in a balanced manner by either a combination of agents or a single dually targeted agent, may offer benefits that exceed the inhibition of either target alone.

### Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

P. LoRusso has received commercial research grants from Amgen, Array Biopharma, Ariad, AstraZeneca, Boeringer-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Endocyte, Exelixis, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, ImClone, Merck, Nereus, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, and Ziopharm. She is a consultant for Takeda, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Genentech, and she is a member of the speakers’ bureau of Aventis, Genentech, and GlaxoSmithKline.

## References

1. Cooper CS, Park M, Blair DG, et al. Molecular cloning of a new transforming gene from a chemically transformed human cell line. Nature 1984;311:29–33. PubMed doi:10.1038/311029a0.
2. Bottaro DP, Rubin JS, Faletto DL, et al. Identification of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor as the c-met proto-oncogene product. Science 1991;251:802–4. PubMed doi:10.1126/science.1846706.
3. Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Gherardi E, Vande Woude GF. Met, metastasis, motility and more. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003;4:915–25. PubMed doi:10.1038/nrm1261.

Clin Cancer Res 2009;15(7) April 1, 2009 2212 www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on January 12, 2019. © 2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
4. Matsumoto K, Nakamura T. NK 4 (HGF-antagonist/angiogenesis inhibitor) in cancer biology and therapeutics. Cancer Sci 2003;94:321–7. PubMed doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01440.x.
5. Peschard P, Ishiyama N, Lin T, Lipkowitz S, Park M.A conserved DpYR motif in the juxtamembrane domain of the Met receptor family forms an atypical c-Cbl/Cbl-b tyrosine kinase binding domain binding site required for suppression of oncogenic activation. J Biol Chem 2004;279:29565–71. PubMed doi:10.1074/jbc.M403954200.
6. Longati P, Bardelli A, Ponzetto C, Naldini L, Comoglio PM. Tyrosines 1234–1235 are critical for activation of the tyrosine kinase encoded by the MET proto-oncogene (HGF receptor). Oncogene 1994;9:49–57. PubMed.
7. Ponzetto C, Bardelli A, Maina F, et al. A novel recognition motif for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase binding mediates its association with the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:4600–8. PubMed.
8. Ponzetto C, Bardelli A, Zhen Z, et al. A multifunctional docking site mediates signaling and transformation by the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor family. Cell 1994;77:261–71. PubMed doi:10.1016/0092-8674(94)90318-2.
9. Nakamura T, Mizuno S, Matsumoto K, Sawa Y, Matsuda H, Nakamura T. Myocardial protection from ischemia/reperfusion injury by endogenous and exogenous HGF. J Clin Invest 2000;106:1511–9. PubMed doi:10.1172/JCI10226.
10. Comoglio PM, Boccaccio C. Scatter factors and invasive growth. Semin Cancer Biol 2001;11:153–65. PubMed doi:10.1006/scbi.2000.0366.
11. Boccaccio C, Comoglio PM. Invasive growth: a MET-driven genetic programme for cancer and stem cells. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:637–45. PubMed doi:10.1038/nrc1912.
12. Huh CG, Factor VM, Sanchez A, Uchida K, Conner EA, Thorgeirsson SS. Hepatocyte growth factor/c-met signaling pathway is required for efficient liver regeneration and repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:4477–82. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.0306068101.
13. Knudsen BS, Vande Woude G. Showering c-MET-dependent cancers with drugs. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008;18:87–96. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.gde.2008.02.001.
14. Pennacchietti S, Michieli P, Galluzzo M, Mazzone M, Giordano S, Comoglio PM. Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene. Cancer Cell 2003;3:347–61. PubMed doi:10.1016/S1535-6108(03)00085-0.
15. Fan S, Ma YX, Wang JA, et al. The cytokine hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor inhibits apoptosis and enhances DNA repair by a common mechanism involving signaling through phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase. Oncogene 2000;19:2212–23. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1203566.
16. Derksen PW, de Gorter DJ, Meijer HP, et al. The hepatocyte growth factor/Met pathway controls proliferation and apoptosis in multiple myeloma. Leukemia 2003;17:764–74. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.leu.2402875.
17. Xiao GH, Jeffers M, Bellacosa A, Mitsuuchi Y, Vande Woude GF, Testa JR. Anti-apoptotic signaling by hepatocyte growth factor/Met via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:247–52. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.011532898.
18. Zeng Q, Chen S, You Z, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor inhibits anoikis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells by activation of ERK and Akt signaling independent of NFκB. J Biol Chem 2002;277:25203–8. PubMed doi:10.1074/jbc.M201598200.
19. Tulasne D, Foveau B. The shadow of death on the MET tyrosine kinase receptor. Cell Death Differ 2008;15:427–34. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4402229.
20. Guo A, Villen J, Kornhauser J, et al. Signaling networks assembled by oncogenic EGFR and c-Met. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:692–7. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.0707270105.
21. Comoglio PM, Giordano S, Trusolino L. Drug development of MET inhibitors: targeting oncogene addiction and expedience. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008;7:504–16. PubMed doi:10.1038/nrd2530.
22. Migliore C, Giordano S. Molecular cancer therapy: can our expectation be MET? Eur J Cancer 2008;44:641–51. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.ejca.2008.01.022.
23. Liu X, Yao W, Newton RC, Scherle PA. Targeting the c-MET signaling pathway for cancer therapy. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2008;17:997–1011. PubMed doi:10.1517/13543784.17.7.997.
24. Benvenuti S, Comoglio PM. The MET receptor tyrosine kinase in invasion and metastasis. J Cell Physiol 2007;213:316–25. PubMed doi:10.1002/jcp.21183.
25. Gentile A, Trusolino L, Comoglio PM. The Met tyrosine kinase receptor in development and cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2008;27:85–94. PubMed doi:10.1007/s10555-007-9107-6.
26. Schmidt L, Duh FM, Chen F, et al. Germline and somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET proto-oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas. Nat Genet 1997;16:68–73. PubMed doi:10.1038/ng0597-68.
27. Zhang YW, Su Y, Volpert OV, Vande Woude GF. Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor mediates angiogenesis through positive VEGF and negative thrombospondin 1 regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:12718–23. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.2135113100.
28. Rosen EM, Goldberg ID. Scatter factor and angiogenesis. Adv Cancer Res 1995;67:257–79. PubMed doi:10.1016/S0065-230X(08)60715-0.
29. Trusolino L, Comoglio PM. Scatter-factor and semaphorin receptors: cell signalling for invasive growth. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:289–300. PubMed doi:10.1038/nrc779.
30. Peruzzi B, Bottaro DP. Targeting the c-Met signaling pathway in cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:3657–60. PubMed doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0818.
31. Jeffers M, Schmidt L, Nakaigawa N, et al. Activating mutations for the met tyrosine kinase receptor in human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:11445–50. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.94.21.11445.
32. Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, et al. MET amplification occurs with or without T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung tumors with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:20932–7. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.0710370104.
33. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science 2007;316:1039–43. PubMed doi:10.1126/science.1141478.
34. Engelman JA, Janne PA. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:2895–9. PubMed doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-2248.
35. Corso S, Migliore C, Ghiso E, De Rosa G, Comoglio PM, Giordano S. Silencing the MET oncogene leads to regression of experimental tumors and metastases. Oncogene 2008;27:684–93. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1210697.
36. Bottaro DP, Liotta LA. Cancer: out of air is not out of action. Nature 2003;423:593–5. PubMed doi:10.1038/423593a.
37. Xin X, Yang S, Ingle G, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor enhances vascular endothelial growth factor-induced angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Am J Pathol 2001;158:1111–20. PubMed.
38. Gerritsen ME, Tomlinson JE, Zlot C, Ziman M, Hwang S. Using gene expression profiling to identify the molecular basis of the synergistic actions of hepatocyte growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in human endothelial cells. Br J Pharmacol 2003;140:595–610. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0705494.
39. Mueller KL, Hunter LA, Ethier SP, Boerner JL. Met and c-Src cooperate to compensate for loss of epidermal growth factor receptor kinase activity in breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 2008;68:3314–22. PubMed doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0132.
40. Merchant M, Zhang Y-W, Su Y, et al. Combination efficacy with MetMAb and erlotinib in a NSCLC tumor model highlight therapeutic opportunities for c-Met inhibitors in combination with EGFR inhibitors. Presented at 99th AACR Annual Meeting; 2008 Apr 12–16; San Diego (CA): Abstr 1336.
41. Pozner-Moulis S, Cregger M, Camp RL, Rimm DL. Antibody validation by quantitative analysis of protein expression using expression of Met in breast cancer as a model. Lab Invest 2007;87:251–60. PubMed doi:10.1038/labinvest.3700515.
42. Knudsen BS, Zhao P, Resau J, et al. A Novel Multi-purpose Monoclonal Antibody for Evaluating Human c-Met Expression in Preclinical and Clinical Settings. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. Epub ahead of print 2008.
43. Michieli P, Mazzone M, Basilico C, et al. Targeting the tumor and its microenvironment by a dual-function decoy Met receptor. Cancer Cell 2004;6:61–73. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2004.05.032.
44. Cao B, Su Y, Oskarsson M, et al. Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) display antitumor activity in animal models. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:7443–8. PubMed doi:10.1073/pnas.131200498.
45. Kakkar T, Ma M, Zhuang Y, Patton A, Hu Z, Mounho B. Pharmacokinetics and safety of a fully human hepatocyte growth factor antibody, AMG 102, in cynomolgus monkeys. Pharm Res 2007;24:1910–8. PubMed doi:10.1007/s11095-007-9316-2.
46. Burgess T, Coxon A, Meyer S, et al. Fully human monoclonal antibodies to hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met-dependent human tumors. Cancer Res 2006;66:1721–9. PubMed doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-3329.
47. Gao CF, Xie Q, Zhang YW, et al. Therapeutic potential of neutralizing antibodies to HGF/SF against human c-MET driven human tumors. In: AACR Annual Meeting; 2006; Washington (DC); 2006. p. LB229.
48. Reardon DA, Cloughsey TF, Raizer JJ, et al. Phase II study of AMG 102, a fully human neutralizing antibody against hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor, in patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 2051.
49. Jun HT, Sun J, Rex K, et al. AMG 102, a fully human anti-hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor neutralizing antibody, enhances the efficacy of temozolomide or docetaxel in U-87 MIG cells and xenografts. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:6735–42. PubMed doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-2969.
50. Rosen PJ, Sweeney CJ, Park DJ, et al. AMG 102, an HGF/SF antagonist, in combination with anti-angiogenesis targeted therapies in adult patients with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 3570.
51. Merchant M, Zheng Z, Romero M, et al. One-armed 5D5 (0A5D5) is a potent humanized HGF-blocking anti-c-Met monovalent antibody that inhibits HGF-dependent activity in vitro and demonstrates anti-tumor efficacy in vivo. Presented at 98th AACR Annual Meeting; 2007 Apr 14–18; Los Angeles (CA): Abstr LB-372.
52. Ohashi K, Marion PL, Nakai H, et al. Sustained survival of human hepatocytes in mice: a model for in vivo infection with human hepatitis B and hepatitis delta viruses. Nat Med 2000;6:327–31. PubMed doi:10.1038/73187.
53. Nguyen TH, Loux N, Dagher I, et al. Improved gene transfer selectivity to hepatocarcinoma cells by retrovirus vector displaying single-chain variable fragment antibody against c-Met. Cancer Gene Ther 2003;10:840–9. PubMed doi:10.1038/sj.cgt.7700640.
54. Jin H, Yang R, Zheng Z, et al. MetMAb, the one-armed 5D5 anti-c-Met antibody, inhibits orthotopic pancreatic tumor growth and improves survival. Cancer Res 2008;68:4360–8. PubMed doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5960.
55. Martens T, Schmidt NO, Eckerich C, et al. A novel one-armed anti-c-Met antibody inhibits glioblastoma growth in vivo. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:6144–52. PubMed doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-05-1418.

56. Merchant M, Zhang Y, Su Y, et al. MetMAb significantly enhances anti-tumor activity of anti-VEGF and/or erlotinib in several animal tumor models. Presented at the 20th Annual AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics; 2008 Oct 21–24; Geneva (Switzerland): Abstr 556.

57. Salgia R, Peterson A, Eppler S, et al. A Phase I, open label, dose escalation study of the safety and pharmacology of MetMAb, A monovalent antagonist antibody to the receptor c-Met, administered IV in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Presented at the 20th Annual AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics; 2008 Oct 21–24; Geneva (Switzerland): Abstr 411.

58. Jeay S, Munshi N, Hill J, et al. ARQ 197, a highly selective small molecule inhibitor of c-Met, with selective antitumor properties in a broad spectrum of human cancer cells. Presented at the 98th AACR Annual Meeting; 2007 Apr 14–18; Los Angeles (CA): Abstr 2369.

59. Garcia A, Rosen L, Cunningham CC, et al. Phase I study of ARQ 197, a selective inhibitor of the c-Met RTK in patients with metastatic solid tumors reaches recommended phase 2 dose. J Clin Oncol 2007;25: Abstr 3525.

60. Yap TA, Harris D, Barriuso J, et al. Phase I trial to determine the dose range for the c-Met inhibitor ARQ 197 that inhibits c-Met and FAK phosphorylation, when administered by an oral twice-a-day schedule. J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 3584.

61. Perera T, Lavrijssen T, Janssens B, et al. JNJ-38877605: a selective Met kinase inhibitor inducing regression of Met-driven tumor models. Presented at the 99th AACR Annual Meeting; 2008 Apr 12–16; San Diego (CA): Abstr 4837.

62. Zou H, Li Q, Joseph L, et al. PF-04217903, a novel selective c-Met kinase inhibitor with potent antitumor and anti-angiogenic properties *in vitro* and *in vivo*. Presented at the 99th AACR Annual Meeting; 2008 Apr 12–16; San Diego (CA): Abstr 4841.

63. Jessen K, Froning K, Felce J, et al. *In vitro* and *in vivo* antitumor activities of SGX523, a novel MET

inhibitor. Presented at the AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics; 2007 Oct 22–26; San Francisco (CA): Abstr B233.

64. Gessert S, Aubol B, Do T, et al. Selective inhibition of MET protein receptor tyrosine kinase by SGX523. Presented at the AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics; 2007 Oct 22–26; San Francisco (CA): Abstr C198.

65. Christensen JG, Zou HY, Arango ME, et al. Cytoreductive antitumor activity of PF-2341066, a novel inhibitor of anaplastic lymphoma kinase and c-Met, in experimental models of anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Mol Cancer Ther 2007;6:3314–22. PubMed doi:10.1158/1535–7163.MCT-07–0365.

66. Zou HY, Li Q, Lee JH, et al. An orally available small-molecule inhibitor of c-Met, PF-2341066, exhibits cytoreductive antitumor efficacy through antiproliferative and antiangiogenic mechanisms. Cancer Res 2007;67:4408–17. PubMed doi:10.1158/0008–5472.CAN-06–4443.

67. Eder JP, Heath E, Appleman L, et al. Phase I experience with c-MET inhibitor XL880 administered orally to patients (pts) with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2007;25: Abstr 3526.

68. Lo Russo P, Appleman L, Zhu A, et al. Pharmacodynamics of XL880, a novel spectrum selective kinase inhibitor (SSKI) administered orally in patients with advanced solid tumors (AST). Eur J Cancer Suppl 2006;4: Abstr 404.

69. Eder JP, Appleman L, Heath E, et al. A phase I study of a novel spectrum selective kinase inhibitor (SSKI), XL880, administered orally in patients (pts) with advanced solid tumors (STs). J Clin Oncol 2006;24: Abstr 3041.

70. Jänne PA, Wax M, Leach J, Engelman JA. Targeting MET with XL184 to reverse EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistance in NSCLC: impact of preclinical studies on clinical design. European Journal of Cancer 2008;6: Abstr 552.

71. Salgia R, Hong DS, Camacho LH, et al. A phase I dose-escalation study of the safety and pharmacoki-

netics (PK) of XL184, a VEGFR and MET kinase inhibitor, administered orally to patients (pts) with advanced malignancies. J Clin Oncol 2007;25: Abstr 14031.

72. Salgia R, Sherman S, Hong DS, et al. A phase I study of XL184, a RET, VEGFR2, and MET kinase inhibitor, in patients (pts) with advanced malignancies, including pts with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 3522.

73. Tolcher A, Berk G, Fine G, et al. MP470, a potent oral Rad51 suppressor is safe and tolerable in first-in-human study. Presented at the 99th AACR Annual Meeting; 2008 Apr 12–16; San Diego (CA): Abstr 4083.

74. Beaulieu N, Beaulieu C, Dupont I, et al. Preclinical development of MGCD265, a potent orally active c-Met/VEGFR multi-target kinase inhibitor. Presented at the 99th AACR Annual Meeting; 2008 Apr 12–16; San Diego (CA): Abstr 4838.

75. Camacho LH, Moulder SL, Lo Russo PM, et al. First in human phase I study of MK-2461, a small molecule inhibitor of c-Met, for patients with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 14657.

76. Gordon MS, Mendelson DS, Sweeney C, et al. Interim results from a first-in-human study with AMG102, a fully human monoclonal antibody that neutralizes hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), the ligand to c-Met receptor, in patients (pts) with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2007;25: Abstr 3551.

77. Merchant M, Zheng Z, Romero M, et al. One-armed 5D5 (OA5D5) is a potent humanized HGF-blocking anti-c-Met monovalent antibody that inhibits HGF-dependent activity *in vitro* and demonstrates anti-tumor efficacy *in vivo*. 2007. p. LB-372.

78. Srinivasan R, Choueiri TK, Vaishampayan U, et al. A phase II study of the dual MET/VEGFR2 inhibitor XL880 in patients (pts) with papillary renal carcinoma (PRC). J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 5103.

79. Jhawer MP, Kindler HL, Wainberg ZA, et al. Preliminary activity of XL880, a dual MET/VEGFR2 inhibitor, in MET amplified poorly differentiated gastric cancer (PDGC): interim results of a multicenter phase II study. J Clin Oncol 2008;26: Abstr 4572.

Clinical Cancer Research

Novel Therapeutic Inhibitors of the c-Met Signaling Pathway in Cancer

Joseph Paul Eder, George F. Vande Woude, Scott A. Boerner, et al.

Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:2207-2214.

| Updated version | Access the most recent version of this article at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/15/7/2207 |
| --- | --- |

| Cited articles | This article cites 51 articles, 21 of which you can access for free at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/15/7/2207.full#ref-list-1 |
| Citing articles | This article has been cited by 50 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/15/7/2207.full#related-urls |

| E-mail alerts | Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal. |
| Reprints and Subscriptions | To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at pubs@aacr.org. |
| Permissions | To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/15/7/2207. Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's (CCC) Rightslink site. |

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on January 12, 2019. © 2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
