
ELSEVIER

INSTITUT PASTEUR

Microbes and Infection 11 (2009) 599–611

www.elsevier.com/locate/micinf

---

### Forum

#### Signal transduction and Th17 cell differentiation

**John J. O'Shea** ${}^{a}$, **Scott M. Steward-Tharp** ${}^{a,b,*}$, **Arian Laurence** ${}^{a}$, **Wendy T. Watford** ${}^{a}$, **Lai Wei** ${}^{a}$, **Adewole S. Adamson** ${}^{a,c}$, **Samuel Fan** ${}^{a,d}$

${}^{a}$ Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institutes of Arthritis, and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA  
${}^{b}$ Howard Hughes Medical Institute-National Institutes of Health Research Scholars Program, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA  
${}^{c}$ Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Boston, MA 02115, USA  
${}^{d}$ Department of Biology, Bradley University, Peoria, IL 61625, USA  

Available online 18 April 2009

---

### Abstract

The paradigm of effector T helper cell differentiation into either Th1 or Th2 lineages has been notably shaken by the discovery of a third lineage of cells that selectively produce interleukin (IL)-17. Characterization of this new subset, referred to as Th17, has provided exciting new insights into immunoregulation, host defense and the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Additionally, the discovery of this T cell subset has offered a fresh look at such concepts as lineage commitment and terminal differentiation. The transcriptional regulatory events and epigenetic modifications that control these processes are diverse and complex, and despite the rapid pace at which data continue to accumulate, many questions remain to be answered. Here we review our current understanding of the signaling pathways, molecular interactions and transcriptional events that lead to Th17 differentiation and effector function, as well as the epigenetic modifications that accompany them.

Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

---

### Keywords: Th17; IL-17; Signal transduction; Transcription factor; Lymphocyte differentiation; Cytokines; Chromatin

---

### 1. Introduction

Successful host defense relies on communication between cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems. The seminal studies initiated by Coffman and Mosmann and expanded by many others, provided the first clues of how helper T cells orchestrate proper innate and adaptive responses to microbial pathogens [1–3]. These studies also provided considerable insight into our understanding of T cell activation and the selective regulation of gene expression, providing robust models for understanding mechanisms of gene regulation and T cell fate determination [2,4–6]. Despite its utility, a simple, static Th1/Th2 view of T cell differentiation implies rather inflexible responses, but recent discoveries have emphasized that T cells are anything but static in their responses.

We now appreciate that IL-17-producing helper T cells or Th17 cells represent another subset of CD4${}^{+}$ T cells. These cells have critical roles in host defense against extracellular bacteria and also play pivotal roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease. Th17 cells produce a range of cytokines including TNF, IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21 and IL-22, but a simplistic view of these cells as merely another “lineage” of T cells unravels somewhat when one considers a number of points. First, it is apparent in vitro and in vivo that some T cells can produce both IFN-$\gamma$ and IL-17; exactly where these cells fit in the spectrum of Th17 and Th1 cells is unclear. In humans, IL-17/IFN-$\gamma$ double producers and IL-17 single producers can be distinguished by their chemokine receptor expression [7]. Second, although IL-21 and IL-22 are produced by Th17 cells, they can also be produced in the absence of IL-17 [8–10]. Third, we now recognize that Th17 cells, as well as other T cell subsets produce the

* Corresponding author at: 10 Center Dr RM 13C103, Bethesda, MD 20892-1930, USA. Tel.: +1 301 402 4886; fax: +1 301 480 6372.
* E-mail address: stewartharpsm@mail.nih.gov (S.M. Steward-Tharp).

1286-4579/$ - see front matter Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.  
doi:10.1016/j.micinf.2009.04.007

immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10; as a result, not all Th17 cells are “pathogenic” [11]. Finally, there is evidence that another critical subset of CD4⁺ T cells, regulatory T (Treg) cells, is related to Th17 cells [12]. Treg cells are CD4⁺CD25⁺ cells found in the thymus and in the periphery, which express the forkhead box protein transcription factor, Foxp3. We now know that some of the factors that contribute to the differentiation of Tregs also drive Th17 differentiation, and there is evidence indicating that Treg cells can become pathogenic Th17 cells. Additionally, there are data indicating that Th17 cells can express Foxp3 and that the respective Th17 and Treg lineage “master regulators” interact.

In this review, we will discuss the receptors and signaling pathways that promote the differentiation of Th17 cells, bearing in mind that the concept of a Th17 cell may be a moving target. Th17 cells are capable of producing a range of cytokines and may not always constitute a stable “lineage”. Consequently, understanding the regulation of IL-17 is not synonymous with “lineage commitment” or terminal differentiation of Th17 cells — if indeed, this concept is appropriate.

antagonized IL-17 production, the data suggest that there may be subtleties that are not yet appreciated. Closely related to T-bet is the transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes). In CD8⁺ T cells Eomes is the major regulator of IFN-γ production. CD8⁺ T cells doubly deficient in Eomes and T-bet, showed marked up-regulation of the Th17 associated factors RORγt, IL-17, IL-21, IL-22 and IL-23R in the context of a lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection. Additionally, mice with T cells lacking both T-bet and Eomes developed a progressive inflammatory and wasting syndrome characterized by multi-organ infiltration of neutrophils, a hallmark of Th17-mediated disease. CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ cells deficient in both factors inappropriately polarized into IL-17 secreting cells [22].

A major pathway activated by the TCR is the production of intracellular calcium and the activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). Not surprisingly, the proximal promoter of the human *IL17A* gene contains two NFAT binding sites that appear to be important in the regulation of IL-17 [23]. Four isoforms of NFAT exist with incomplete redundancy [24]. Mice deficient in both NFATc2 and NFATc3 massively overproduce Th2 cytokines [25, 26], but relatively little has been done to investigate the roles of NFAT isoforms in IL-17 production. It has been found that mice deficient in NFATc2 produced splenic and lymph node cells that exhibited increased secretion of IL-4 and IL-5 in response to infection by *Nocardia brasiliensis* [27]. Accordingly, these mice did not develop oxazolone-mediated colitis and had impaired IL-6 and IL-17 production [28]. TCR signaling also induces the activation of the transcription factors NF-κB and AP-1. AP-1 is known to form a complex with NFAT proteins, but the role of these transcription factors in IL-17 production is not known. Nonetheless, it would be surprising if they did not play important roles.

Co-stimulatory signaling, especially through molecules like ICOS, also contributes to the regulation of IL-17 expression as CD3-induced IL-17 production is enhanced when anti-CD28 is added [29, 30]. However, the pathways and transcription factors responsible are poorly understood.

### 2. T cell receptor signaling

For any T cell, the first steps in the activation process occur as consequences of antigen binding to the T cell receptor (TCR). For naïve CD4⁺ T cells, TCR signal strength is a well-known factor influencing Th1 versus Th2 differentiation [13]. Strong TCR signaling upregulates the Th1-associated transcription factor T-bet, which is a major regulator of IFN-γ production, whereas weak signals favor IL-4 production. TCR-dependent signals also play an important role in Th17 differentiation and IL-17 production, as exemplified by the findings that invariant NK T cells, gamma-delta T cells, and memory CD4⁺ T cells all produce IL-17 in response to TCR occupancy [14–16]. However, the importance of “strong” versus “weak” TCR signals in Th17 differentiation has not been established, and T-bet has been reported to have contrasting roles in Th17 differentiation. Mathur et al. showed that T-bet⁻/⁻ memory CD4⁺ T cells had a greater propensity to produce IL-17 in response to IL-23 [17]. Accordingly, ectopic T-bet expression promoted IFN-γ secretion but inhibited IL-17 production. Similarly, in a model of autoimmune myocarditis, T-bet was found to suppress production of IL-17 [17, 18]. Paradoxically, administration of a small interfering RNA specific for T-bet in a model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) was associated with reduced numbers of IL-17-producing cells. It was also reported that T-bet positively regulated expression of the IL-23 receptor (IL-23R), potentially enhancing the response to IL-23, a signal promoting Th17 differentiation [19]. Lastly, and most recently reported, CD4⁺CD62L^High^ cells from T-bet⁻/⁻ and control mice at 3 and 7 days post-stimulation had similar fractions of Th17 cells [20].

Of note is that Th17 cells isolated from humans can produce both IL-17 and IFN-γ; such cells also express T-bet [7, 16, 21]. Thus, while one might predict that T-bet’s role in promoting IFN-γ production would naturally lead to

### 3. Stat family transcription factors in Th17 differentiation

In addition to presenting antigen and activating T cells through their antigen receptors, dendritic cells (DCs) also modulate the adaptive immune response through the production of cytokines. Indeed, this is critical for immunoregulation, and the importance of the cytokine milieu for CD4⁺ T cell differentiation was well established in classic studies on Th1 and Th2 cells. Specifically, IL-12, produced by DCs in response to Toll receptor ligands or other pattern recognition receptors, is a major factor that drives Th1 differentiation. Conversely, IL-4, produced by other innate immune cells such as basophils and mast cells, promotes Th2 differentiation.

It is now generally agreed that IL-6, which can also be produced by activated DCs, is a key factor in promoting Th17 differentiation of naïve CD4⁺ T cells. IL-6⁻/⁻ mice have reduced but not absent Th17 differentiation [31]. Another

cytokine, IL-21, which is produced by Th17 cells, also contributes to Th17 differentiation and may have a role in sustaining this lineage [9,10,31,32]. However, more recent findings have cast doubt on the relative importance of IL-21 in vivo however [33,34]. IL-23 was initially thought to be the critical inducer of Th17 differentiation; it is now recognized that this is not so. Supporting this concept is the finding that naive CD4⁺ T cells do not express IL-23R. This raises the question, if IL-6 induces Th17 cells and IL-21 sustains them, what is the role of IL-23? Memory T cells express the IL-23 receptor, and IL-23 is now viewed as being more important for the in vivo pathogenicity of Th17s [30,35,36].

Type I and II cytokines such as IL-12, IL-4, IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23 all activate Janus family kinases (Fig.1). Tyk2 is important for signaling by IL-12 and IL-23, and mice lacking this kinase have been generated. Although responses to IL-23 have not been carefully analyzed, IL-12 responsiveness is dramatically affected by loss of Tyk2 [37,38]. Notably, a single human with a severe primary immunodeficiency syndrome was found to have Tyk2 mutations and was noted to have profound impairments in IL-12 signaling [39,40].

The Stat (signal transducer and activator of transcription) family of DNA-binding proteins is critical for transmitting signals from Type I/II cytokine receptors. The importance for Stat1, Stat4 and Stat6 for IFNs, IL-12 and IL-4 expression, respectively, is well established. Functionally, they have critical roles in mediating anti-viral responses and immunoregulation including Th1/Th2 differentiation [41,42]. As expected, Stat targets include cytokine genes. Stat4, for instance, is known to bind the *Ifng* gene [43]. Other Stat4 target genes include *Map3k8* and *Furin*. Map3k8 is induced by TCR and cytokine signals. It promotes IFN-γ production by enhancing expression of T-bet and Stat4 [44]. In contrast, furin is essential for maintenance of peripheral tolerance through its essential role in processing TGF-β1 in effector and Treg cells [45]. A number of other Stat target genes have been identified, but with the advent of ChIP-on-Chip (chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarray) and ChIP-Seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation and massive parallel sequencing), we will soon have a comprehensive understanding of direct Stat targets [46,47]. With the genetic tools available (Stat-deficient mice), this will unquestionably continue to be a robust system to define the roles of transcription factors in programming cellular responses.

The Th17 promoting cytokines IL-6, IL-21, and IL-23 all preferentially activate Stat3 (Fig.1). The first evidence of the importance of Stat3 in regulating IL-17 production came from the demonstration that the *Il17A-Il17F* locus has multiple putative Stat binding sites. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, it was determined that Stat3 directly binds to this promoter [48]. Furthermore, in vitro Th17 differentiation is greatly impaired in Stat3-deficient T cells [17,49,50]. Conversely, retroviral overexpression of constitutively active Stat3 results in increased production of IL-17 [17]. Thus Stat3 appears to be a direct regulator of IL-17. Additionally though, Stat3 may have other roles in promoting Th17 differentiation. IL-6-mediated production of IL-21 is also Stat-3 dependent, and Stat3 appears to be a direct regulator of IL-21 production as it binds to the *Il21* promoter [32]. Furthermore, IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23 can upregulate expression of the IL-23R, and this too appears to be Stat3-dependent [9,10,16]. At present, Stat3 is a critical factor for Th17 differentiation in at least four ways: regulation of IL-17, IL-21, IL-23R and RORγt, a critical transcription factor for Th17 cells (discussed below); the genes encoding the first two factors appear to be direct Stat targets. We have performed microarray analysis on Th17 cells and have noted ~500 genes to be preferentially expressed [32]; of these, 50% are Stat3-dependent. Clearly, in the future it will be important to carefully define direct Stat3 targets in Th17 cells and dissect the interactions between Stat3 and other factors that are important for this subset of T cells.

In general, the factors that regulate human Th17 cells are similar to the factors that drive mouse Th17 differentiation, although there are some inconsistencies among the various cytokine recipes. This is not surprising given the inherent variability between human donors and the difficulty of obtaining naïve T cells. However, despite the inconsistencies, a common feature between groups is the importance of including a Stat3-dependent cytokine (IL-6, IL-21 or IL-23) in cultures [7,51,52]. While Stat3 was known to be essential for mouse Th17 differentiation, until recently it was not possible to assess the importance of Stat3 in human Th17 differentiation.

Hyper IgE syndrome (HIES) is a primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by the susceptibility to fungal and staphylococcal infections, elevated IgE serum concentration, dermatitis and bony abnormalities [53]. HIES has recently been found to be due to heterozygous mutations of Stat3, which produce a dominant negative protein that can block binding of the wild type Stat3 to candidate DNA-binding sites [54,55]. We and others have shown that patients with HIES Stat3 mutations are unable to generate Th17 cells [56]. How much this inability to produce Th17 cells accounts for the patients' inability to clear bacterial and fungal infections remains to be determined.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (Socs3) is a cytokine-inducible negative regulator of Stat3; indeed Socs proteins are among the most prominent Stat-regulated genes [57]. Interestingly, deletion of Socs3 is associated with enhanced Stat3 phosphorylation and increased IL-17 production [48,58]. Deletion of Socs3 is also associated with multi-organ inflammatory disease characterized as neutrophil infiltration and overexpression of factors regulated by IL-17 (G-CSF, chemokines, IL-6). These findings further support the critical functions of Stat3 in regulating IL-17.

In addition to positive roles in regulating Th17 differentiation, cytokines that bind Type I/II cytokine receptors also have important roles in negatively regulating Th17 differentiation. In the early studies in which Th17 cells were proposed as a new Th lineage, data were provided indicating that IFN-γ and IL-4 inhibit IL-17 production. This counter-regulation was consistent with previous work indicating that IFN-γ and IL-4 also antagonize Th2 and Th1 differentiation respectively. IL-27 is

J.J. O'Shea et al. / Microbes and Infection 11 (2009) 599–611

IL-4R
$\alpha \gamma$

IL-2R
$\alpha \beta \gamma$

IL-21R
$\alpha \gamma$

IL-12R
$\beta 1 \beta 2$

IL-23R
$\beta 1 23 R$

IL-6R
$\alpha$ gp130

IL-4
Jak1
Jak3

IL-2
Jak1
Jak3

IL-21
Jak1
Jak3

p40
Tyk2
p35
Jak2

p40
Tyk2
p19
Jak2

IL-6
Jak1
Jak2

STAT 6
$pY$
STAT 6
$pY$

STAT 5
$pY$
STAT 5
$pY$

STAT 1
$pY$
STAT 1
$pY$

STAT 3
$pY$
STAT 3
$pY$

STAT 4
$pY$
STAT 4
$pY$

STAT 3
$pY$
STAT 3
$pY$

Fig. 1. Jak/STAT targets of cytokines involved in T helper cell differentiation. The receptors of Type I and Type II cytokines associate with Janus kinases (Jaks). Cytokine binding activates the Jaks, which phosphorylate the receptors, allowing the recruitment of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs). Recruited STATs are phosphorylated and subsequently form dimers. STAT dimers translocate to the nucleus, where they regulate gene expression. Many cytokines are known to activate more than one STAT pair. The receptor components and downstream Jak/STAT targets of IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-12, IL-21 and IL-23 are diagrammed above. Major and minor signaling pathways are represented with solid and dashed arrows respectively.

an IL-12-related cytokine that consists of two subunits, p28 and EBI3. Like IL-6, its receptor is composed of gp130, but in addition has a ligand-specific subunit termed WSX-1. Despite its similarities to IL-6, IL-27 has the opposite effect in regulating IL-17 expression; it is a critical negative regulator of Th17 differentiation [59,60].

This may be explained by the finding that similar to the inhibitory, IFN-$\gamma$, but in contrast to IL-6, IL-27 activates Stat1. In Stat1-deficient mice the inhibitory effect of IL-27 is abrogated and Stat1-deficient helper T cells have a greater propensity to produce IL-17 [36,59,60]. Additionally, after viral infection, mice lacking Stat1 develop airway disease associated with increased IL-17 expression [62]. IFN-$\gamma$ and IL-27 also upregulate T-bet [63,64], and T-bet expression is significantly reduced in Th17 cells [36,65–67]. As indicated above, T-bet may be a negative regulator of Th17 cells, but this issue has not been fully resolved [17,19,36,68].

Strongly activated by IL-12, Stat4 is well-known as a critical positive regulator of Th1 differentiation and IFN-$\gamma$ production. As both IL-12 and IFN-$\gamma$ suppress IL-17 production, similar to Stat1, the expectation might be that Stat4 would negatively regulate IL-17 expression. However,

two studies have reported that IL-17 production is decreased in Stat4-deficient T cells, arguing for a positive role of Stat4 for IL-17 production [69,70]. The decreased IL-17 production in Stat4-deficient T cells might be related to the impaired IL-23 signaling, as IL-23 also activates Stat4. It will be of interest to further examine the role of Stat4 in Th17 differentiation.

IL-2 is a well-known T cell growth factor in vitro, but the deficiency of IL-2 results in severe multi-organ autoimmune disease. This is due in part to its role in promoting the differentiation of Tregs, but it is also now clear that another essential role of IL-2 is to negatively regulate Th17 differentiation [49,61]. Stat5a/b are two related transcription factors that are critical for IL-2 signaling. Like $I l 2^{-/-}$ mice, Stat5-deficient mice have autoimmune disease that is associated with a loss of Treg cells and expansion of Th17 cells. Thus, Stat5a/b appear to be essential for Foxp3 expression and in constraining Th17 cells [49,71]. However, the mechanisms underlying the blockade of Th17 differentiation by IL-2 via Stat5 are not entirely clear. It is possible that this is mediated indirectly via Foxp3; however, Stat5 also binds to the $I l 17 A$ gene [49], so it is possible that Stat5a/b might directly repress $I l 17 A$ transcription. While it appears that some Stats (Stat3)

directly activate genes involved in Th17 differentiation (Il17A, Il17F, and Il21r), it has not been established that others (e.g. Stat1 and Stat5a/b) directly repress these genes; this issue is also clearly worthy of additional investigation. Other possibilities are that Stat5a/b might negatively regulate RORγt, which in turn would downregulate IL-17 expression.

Ets-1 is a transcription factor that associates with T-bet and can directly bind to the *Ifng* promoter. Of note, Ets-1 deficiency results in enhanced Th17 differentiation, along with increased levels of mRNA for IL-22 and IL-23R [72]. However, Ets-1's actions do not appear to be direct, as no binding of Ets-1 to the *Il17* promoter was observed. Rather, Ets-1 appears to negatively regulate Th17 differentiation through effects on IL-2. Specifically, Ets-1 deficient T cells were found to secrete less IL-2 and have impaired responsiveness to this cytokine.

### 4. Complex role of TGF-β1 signaling in Th17 cells

There are three isoforms of transforming growth factor β, TGF-β1-3, with TGF-β1 being the most immunologically relevant. The essential immunosuppressive functions of TGF-β1 are best illustrated in mice lacking the cytokine, its receptor subunits, or key signaling molecules, which have fatal, systemic autoimmune disease [73–75]. Yet despite these essential immunosuppressive functions, it is also clear that this cytokine serves a proinflammatory role, being critical for Th17 differentiation [67,76]. This begs the question as to exactly how TGF-β signaling contributes to the regulation of IL-17 expression.

The receptor for TGF-β is structurally very different from those of Type I/II cytokine receptors. Its receptor comprises two chains, TGF-β type 1 receptor (TGF-βRI) and TGF-β type 2 receptor (TGF-βRII), both of which are receptor serine-threonine kinases. Two of each receptor chains associate with the ligand to initiate signaling. This activates receptor-associated latent cytosolic transcription factors known as Smads (Smad2 or Smad3), which become phosphorylated and dimerize with Smad4 — also referred to as a Co-Smad— to form heterodimers. This complex binds Smad-binding elements of its target genes, but in addition, Smads can associate with many other DNA-binding cofactors including Jun and Stat3.

Mice expressing a mutated form of the TGF-β receptor (CD4dnTGFRⅡ) fail to generate Th17 cells in vitro and are protected from the development of EAE [77]. Despite the clear role in Th17 differentiation in vitro and in vivo, how TGF-β regulates Th17 differentiation is unknown. At present, there are no data indicating that Smads directly bind to the *Il17A*, *Rorc*, *Il21*, or *Il23r* genes. While Smads are critical signal transducers of most TGF-β signaling pathways, Smad-independent pathways do exist (e.g. MAPK, Rho, and PI3K), but their roles in Th17 regulation have also not been determined [78]. Regardless though, stimulation of cells with TGF-β1 enhances RORγt expression. While it has been reported that activated Stat3 or Rorγt alone is a poor inducer of IL-17 in the absence of TGF-β1, other work argues against this possibility [10,70]. At this point, it is not certain how TGF-β and Stat signals are coordinated.

Whereas stimulation of cells with TGF-β and IL-6 induces Rorγt, the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β upregulates Foxp3. Foxp3 directly binds a number of genes, serving as a putative activator or repressor [79], but can also associate with other transcription factors. In this regard, it is notable that Foxp3 also interacts with Rorγt and that Rorγt and Foxp3 are co-expressed in lamina propria T cells and in naive CD4⁺ T cells exposed to TGF-β [80,81]. In this way, TGF-β can regulate Th17/Treg polarization in a concentration-dependent manner. Specifically, at low concentrations, TGF-β synergizes with IL-6 and IL-21 to promote IL-23R expression. Additionally, IL-6 represses Foxp3 in a Stat3-dependent manner [71,76]. Conversely, high concentrations of TGF-β repress IL23R expression and enhance Foxp3 expression. In addition, TGF-β down-regulates expression of both the Th1 and Th2 associated “master-regulators” T-bet and Gata3 [65,82], and also inhibits IL-2 production, thus supporting Th17 differentiation [49]. Also of note is that IL-17 and IL-22 appear to differ in their requirement for TGF-β [83].

Despite its role in murine Th17 differentiation, TGF-β has been reported to be dispensable for human Th17 differentiation and has been reported to inhibit IL-17 production [7,51]. This conundrum may be resolved with the recognition of the importance of the concentration of TGF-β in regulating the Th17/Treg balance [52,84]. These results have additional implications. Since TGF-β1 can promote both Th17 and Treg differentiation, and TGF-β produced by Treg cells can also promote Th17 differentiation [67,85], it appears that the balance between Treg and Th17 cells is more fluid than we initially considered. Again, this speaks to a very different model from the simplistic Th1/2 dichotomy, which implies more options and more flexibility for differentiating T cells. This more complex view of T cells also might provide a better conceptual framework for understanding autoimmune disease but is also a cautionary note for the therapeutic use of Tregs [86,87].

Production and secretion of TGF-β are more complex than for many other cytokines. It is synthesized as a pre-cursor protein, called pro-TGF-β, which must be proteolytically cleaved and activated by the endoprotease furin in the Golgi apparatus prior to secretion [88]. The cleaved TGF-β remains associated with latency associated protein, which must also be removed to generate the active cytokine. Failure to properly process TGF-β results in widespread autoimmune disease [45,89].

### 5. IL-1 and Th17 differentiation

Another inflammatory cytokine reported to positively regulate Th17 development is IL-1. This has been documented in both mouse and human cells where it synergizes with IL-6 and IL-23 [67,90]. Whereas IL-6 alone causes transient induction of Rorγt, the combination of IL-1 and IL-6 results in sustained induction. Accordingly, IL-1RI⁻/⁻ mice have impaired Th17 cell differentiation and reduced incidence of

EAE, associated with failure to induce autoantigen-specific Th17 cells [91].

The IL-1 receptor has homology to Toll-like receptors, and IL-1 engagement of its receptor results in activation of a complex that comprises the adapter MyD88 and IL-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAK). This complex recruits another adapter molecule, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF)-6. This leads to the activation of other kinases including Jun kinase (Jnk) and inhibitor of kappa-B kinases (IKKs). Jnk phosphorylates the transcription factor Jun, which dimerizes with Fos to form the transcription factor AP-1. IKKs phosphorylate the inhibitor of kappa B, which is then degraded, allowing NF-kB to translocate to the nucleus. The role of these various factors in Th17 differentiation has not been determined but is clearly an important area of ongoing research.

### 6. Retinoid receptors and Th17 cells

RORγt belongs to the superfamily of steroid nuclear receptors and is most closely related to a retinoic acid receptor (RAR) subfamily of transcription factors [92]. The family consists of nine members grouped into three sub-families, RARs, RXRs and RORs. The first two members bind metabolites of retinoic acid (RA), the active metabolite of vitamin A, whereas the ligand(s) for ROR members are unknown.

RORγ is important in lymphoid organogenesis and in thymopoiesis as evidenced by the fact that *Rorc*⁻/⁻ mice exhibit reduced numbers of double positive and CD4⁺ single-positive thymocytes. *Rorc*⁻/⁻ mice also show a lack of lymph nodes and Peyer patches [93–95]. RORγt is a splice variant of RORγ that results from initiation by a distinct promoter, resulting in products that differ in their amino termini [96]. In the normal state, RORγt is predominantly expressed in lamina propria T cells. However, *Rorc*⁻/⁻ mice have reduced Th17 differentiation and are less susceptible to EAE indicating that this transcription factor is also important in disease pathogenesis [97]. Conversely, overexpression of RORγt promotes IL-17 expression; in this regard RORγt acts similarly to transcription factors such as T-bet and GATA3 and therefore has been proposed to be a “master regulator” for Th17 differentiation.

Precisely how RORγt regulates IL-17 production is only beginning to be understood. Multiple functional RORγt binding sites are present in the *Il17A* promoter, and through the use of chromatin immunoprecipitation, RORγt has been found to bind the *Il17A* gene [81]. How *Rorc* and its splice variant are regulated is also not clear. One important means of regulating RORγt expression is through antigen receptor stimulation in the presence of Th17 inducing cytokines including IL-6. Stat3 mediates IL-6 regulation of RORγt, but it has not been established that Stat3 binds the *Rorc* gene. Overexpression of active Stat3 in *Rorc*-deficient cells resulted in poor IL-17 induction, indicating that Stat3 is necessary but not sufficient for IL-17 expression. However, overexpression of RORγt failed to induce IL-17 secretion, suggesting that these two transcription factors act in parallel to some extent

[80]. Identification of Rorγt targets is unquestionably an important challenge in understanding the biology of Th17 cells.

Another related retinoic acid nuclear receptor, RORα, has also been found to be upregulated in Th17 cells. RORα deletion in mice had a minimal effect on IL-17 production, however deficiency of both RORα and RORγt completely abolished IL-17 production and protected against EAE [98]. Co-expression of the two factors enhanced the number of IL-17-producing cells. Collectively, the findings suggest that, though not the major player, RORα seems to synergize with RORγt to promote Th17 differentiation.

RORγt and RORα are not the only members of the retinoic acid receptor family to influence the induction of Th17 cells, however. A series of recent studies show that RA produced by mucosal DC reciprocally regulates Th17 and Treg differentiation [99–103]. That is, addition of RA inhibits Th1, Th2 and Th17 differentiation. RA also down-regulates expression of RORγt, and enhances the expression of Foxp3. Moreover, T cells cultured in RA and TGF-β are functionally immunosuppressive even in the absence of IL-2 in vitro. Conversely, an RAR antagonist inhibited Foxp3 expression, indicating that expression of this key transcription factor may be dependent upon endogenous production of RA and the positive effect of RARs. These new data suggest that the balance of Treg versus Th17 differentiation might be influenced by the actions of RAR and RORγt and modulated by the production of RA and other unknown ligands. The data also suggest that the induction of Foxp3 in developing Th17 cells might curtail differentiation of this lineage. Supporting this is evidence that Foxp3 binds to the *Il17A* promoter [80]. IL-17 and IL-21 are down-regulated in Foxp3-expressing cells [104], but it is not known if Foxp3 also directly binds the *Rorc* or *Il21* promoters.

As mentioned, we know the ligands that bind and activate some retinoid receptors, but in the case of Rorγt the ligand is unknown. This begs the obvious question as to whether a secreted product of immune cells can activate this transcription factor, and in so doing, regulate T cell differentiation. It is of note in this regard that dendritic cells from the gut-associated lymphoid organs tend to be immunosuppressive. Importantly, mucosal DCs also produce retinoic acid (RA) which, among other actions, enhances the expression of α4β7 integrin and CCR9 on activated T cells, promoting gut tropism [99–101,105]. DC-derived RA negatively regulates Th17 differentiation, so one might hypothesize that other DCs could produce RORγt ligands and promote Th17 differentiation.

### 7. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) belongs to a basic-helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM family of transcription factors. AHR in its ligand-free state is a cytosolic transcription factor, associated with the chaperone Hsp90. AHR has a number of ligands, some endogenous (also referred to as ‘natural’) and others exogenous (also referred to as ‘synthetic’). The natural ligands include metabolites of tryptophan and arachidonic acids, as well as dietary flavonols and
kaempferols [106,107]. Synthetic ligands include both planar and aryl hydrocarbons, found in environmental toxins. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is the most toxic member of a large group of structurally similar halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons polychlorinated dibenzodioxin congeners (PCDDs) as well as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs). Dioxins are most infamously known as products of the defoliant, Agent Orange. Upon ligand binding, AHR dissociates with its chaperone and translocates to the nucleus. Here, AHR associates with the aryl receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and the resulting heterodimeric complex is responsible for regulating gene expression [108].

There is a large body of literature related to the effects of TCDD on immune responses and many reports indicate that the compound is profoundly immunosuppressive [109]. Recently, it has been reported that activation of AHR by TCDD expands CD25⁺ Foxp3⁺ Treg cells, which suppress EAE [110]. Conversely though, it has been found that Th17 cells preferentially express AHR. In contrast to the effect of TCDD, the tryptophan-derived photoproduct 6-formylindolo[3,2-b] carbazole (FICZ), a high affinity endogenous ligand for the AHR, upregulated expression of IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 [111]. Accordingly, mice lacking AHR were resistant to EAE. T cells from these mice were able to develop into Th17 cells, but they were unable to express IL-22 [112]. How two different AHR agonists, TCDD and FICZ, could have such distinct effects remains a puzzle, but it is possible that ‘synthetic’ and ‘natural’ ligands could have distinct functions [113]. How AHR is regulated in Th17 cells remains to be fully delineated; but regardless of the existing controversies, the discovery that Th17 cells preferentially express AHR provides new clues as to how environmental toxins might contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease. This is particularly intriguing, considering that factors such as cigarette smoking are associated with an increased risk of autoimmune diseases like RA [114,115].

An additional new wrinkle is the finding that AHR selectively associates with Stat1 and Stat5, but not with Stat3 or Stat6. AHR deficiency was associated with prolonged Stat1 phosphorylation, so it is conceivable that induction of AHR provides a counter-regulatory mechanism that would attenuate the effects of cytokines like IFN-γ and IL-27 that activate Stat1 [116].

### 8. Runx transcription factors

Runx transcription factors represent another family of proteins that regulate CD4⁺ helper cell differentiation. There are three mammalian Runt domain transcription factors, Runx1, Runx2, and Runx3 [117]. These factors form heterodimers with an obligatory non-DNA-binding partner termed Cbfβ protein. AML1/Runx1 is crucial for normal hematopoiesis including thymic T cell development [118]. Additionally, both Runx1 and Runx3 are reported to serve as repressors of CD4 and Zbtb7b (a transcription factor that regulates CD4⁺ differentiation), but at different stages of thymocyte development [118–120]. Runx3 also functions as a CD4 silencer in CD8⁺ T cells and is involved in a feed-forward regulatory circuit in which T-bet induces Runx3 and then ‘partners’ with Runx3 to direct activation of Ifng and silencing of Il4 [121,122].

AML1/Runx1 also binds the N-terminus of Foxp3. Disrupting this interaction impairs the Foxp3-dependent suppression of IL-2 production and attenuates suppressive activity [123]. Recent work has indicated that Runx1 also interacts with Rorγt to drive Th17 differentiation [124]. In this way, distinct functional partners associated with Runx1 may decide the cell fate in a stimulus-dependent manner. AML1/Runx1 has been reported to bind the Il2 promoter at a site upstream of NFAT, AP-1, and NF-κB binding sites.

### 9. IRF4 and Th17 differentiation

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors is yet another group of proteins that influence T helper differentiation. IRF4 was originally implicated as a key inducer of GATA3 expression and Th2 lineage differentiation [125–127]. More recently, deficiency of IRF4 was shown to impair IL-17 production despite stimulation with TGF-β and IL-6 [128]. Moreover, *IRF4⁻/⁻* mice are resistant to EAE, which is overcome by the transfer of wild type CD4⁺ T cells, indicative of an intrinsic T cell defect. However, *IRF4⁻/⁻* mice show a degree of resistance to EAE in excess of IL-17, IL-23, RORγt or Stat3 null animals, implying that there are additional effects of IRF deficiency. It has been suggested that IRF4 might co-operate with Stat3 to induce RORγt expression, but IRF4 is also known to interact with NFATc1 and c2 [125,127] suggesting its effects on Th17 cells may be related to its effects on other Th cell lineages. It is of note that this is a rare example of a factor required for both Th17 and Th2 development, which is in contrast with the previously accepted links with Th17 and Th1 development via IL-23 [36] and Th17 and Treg development via TGF-β [76] (Fig. 2).

### 10. Regulation of IL-17 production by G-protein coupled receptors

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is an abundant lysosphospholipid in blood and lymph that regulates T cell trafficking and egress from lymphoid structures [129]. The importance of this mechanism is underscored by the utility of the immunosuppressive drug FTY720 (fingolimod). Addition of S1P to cultures of splenic CD4⁺ T cells has been reported to increase IL-17 and reduce IFN-γ and IL-4 production [130]. Accordingly, transgenic overexpression of an S1P receptor was also associated with enhanced IL-17 production [131]. S1P receptors are members of the seven-transmembrane, or G-protein coupled, receptor family. Whether S1P is a physiologically important regulator of Th17 differentiation has yet to be determined; nonetheless, the findings raise the intriguing possibility that ligands for other G-protein coupled receptors might also influence T cell fate determination. In this regard, it is possible that chemokines utilize this class of receptors and
Fig. 2. Signaling pathways and transcription factors that regulate Th17 differentiation. In helper T cells, TCR stimulation activates NFAT, which is thought to directly regulate IL-17 expression. Cytokines such as IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23 activate STAT3, which in turn binds the *IL17A*, *IL17F* and *IL21* genes. STAT3 is also thought to regulate RORγt expression and is inhibited by the cytokine-inducible Socs3. Although uncertain, IRF4 is thought to co-operate with STAT3 to induce RORγt expression. TGF-β1 signaling involves the activation of SMAD proteins, although the mechanism by which it promotes both iTreg and Th17 differentiation remains unknown. The mechanism by which IL-1 signaling via MyD88 promotes Th17 differentiation is also unknown; one possibility is via NF-κB. RORγt and RORα regulation of IL-17 production is poorly understood, although RORγt has been found to bind the *IL17A* gene. Binding of the AHR ligand FICZ causes dissociation of the receptor with cytoplasmic chaperones, enabling it to translocate to the nucleus, heterodimerize and promote IL-17 and IL-22 expression. Discouraging Th17 differentiation, IL-2, IL-4, IL-27 and IFN-γ inhibit STAT3 activity through STATs 5, 6 and 1 respectively. Notably, STAT5 also regulates Foxp3 expression. RA, acting through its cognate receptors, down-regulates RORγt expression and upregulates Foxp3 expression. Runx1 associates with both RORγt and Foxp3 and possibly regulates differentiation towards either the iTreg or Th17 lineage. Abbreviations: AHR: aryl hydrocarbon receptor; ARNT: aryl receptor nuclear translocator; Co-SMAD: co-mediator SMAD; FICZ: 6-formylindolo[3,2-b] carbazole; R-SMAD: receptor-regulated SMAD; RA(R): retinoic acid (receptor).

might have similar actions. Ligand binding to G-protein coupled receptors activates a number of biochemical pathways, but there is no information presently on how signaling influences IL-17 expression.

Prostaglandins are another class of lipids that regulate cell function by acting on GPCRs. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been reported to promote the expansion of IL-17-producing cells. Culture of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells with PGE2 and IL-23 resulted in high levels of production of IL-17 and C-C chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20), with less IFN-γ and IL-22 [132]. In vivo administration of PGE2 induced IL-23-dependent IL-17 production of human cells and exacerbated collagen-induced arthritis and IL-17 production in mice

[133]. It has been argued that PGE2 promotes IL-23 production in DCs, so it is unclear at this time whether the effect of PGE2 is direct or indirect [134,135].

### 11. Epigenetic regulation of Th17 cells

While transcription factors play critical roles in regulating gene expression, work from many systems has emphasized that the acquisition of heritable traits in cell differentiation can be highly regulated by epigenetic modifications of genes. In the nucleus, DNA forms nucleosomes through its association with histone proteins; this complex of DNA and protein is referred to as chromatin. Epigenetic regulation refers to DNA

methylation, chromatin remodeling, histone modifications and incorporation of histone variants that alter gene expression.

The heritable selective expression of cytokine genes in activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells represents an excellent example of how transcription factors and epigenetic regulation influence gene expression. A key feature of Th1 and Th2 cells is the silencing of the gene encoding the signature cytokine of the opposing fate—in this respect, Th1 and Th2 cells appear to be terminally differentiated. As a result, Th1 and Th2 cells develop into mature effectors with rather stable phenotypes. Generally, once a CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell has committed to one of these two lineages, limited conversion to the other lineage occurs. The *Ifng* locus has been studied for a number of years and we have a reasonably comprehensive understanding of the regulatory elements that are spread over a region of about 100 kb flanking the gene [136,137]. These include multiple DNase hypersensitivity sites and conserved noncoding sequences (CNS), which include sites that bind Stats, NFAT and T-bet. Epigenetic marks, such as histone modification and DNA methylation throughout the *Ifng* locus, are critical in maintaining the gene in a transcriptionally accessible state, and it appears that Stat4 is essential for these modifications [138]. Overexpression of T-bet also promotes epigenetic modifications [139]. Conversely, silencing of the *Ifng* locus in differentiating Th2 cells is dependent upon GATA3 and Stat6 [136,137,140]. Similarly, the Th2 locus, which encompasses 140 kb and includes genes encoding IL-4, IL-13, Rad50, and IL-5, also undergoes a number of lineage-specific epigenetic modifications. In addition, the *Ifng* and *Il4*, *Il5*, *Il13* loci undergo intra- and interchromosomal interactions [141].

Our understanding of the epigenetic control of the *Il17* locus is quite primitive. The *Il17A* gene is linked to the *Il17F* gene on chromosome 1 (human chromosome 6) in a tail-to-tail configuration. Expression of these two cytokines is linked, although there are some circumstances in which there is selective expression of one or the other. The promoter regions of both the *Il17A* and *Il17F* genes have been found to undergo histone H3 acetylation and K4 tri-methylation in response to TGF-β and IL-6, implying increased accessibility of the locus [142]. In addition, there are eight conserved noncoding sequences in this locus, four of which reside in the intergenic region, which also undergo preferential histone acetylation. The mechanisms through which TGF-β, in combination with IL-6, promotes accessibility to this locus are entirely unknown. Additionally, whether and how Rorγt and Stat3 contribute to the chromatin modifications in the *Il17A–Il17F* locus has not been determined. One also wonders whether interchromosomal interactions between the *Il17A–Il17F* locus and the *Ifng*, Th2, or *Foxp3* loci also exist and how interchromosomal and intrachromosomal interactions might change with the activation and differentiation status of T cells.

In contrast to the signature cytokine loci, relatively little is known about the epigenetic regulation of the “master regulators” that control Th differentiation. It will obviously be important to understand how T-bet, GATA3, Rorγt and Foxp3 themselves are regulated, such that lineage specification is preserved or if flexibility is permitted.


12. Conclusions

The past several years have witnessed an explosion of information pertaining to CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell differentiation. In addition to disrupting the classic Th1/Th2 paradigm with the inclusion of Treg (natural and inducible) and Th17 cells, we have now learned that a number of cytokines once thought to be lineage specific (IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-22) can be produced by several different cell types. These findings have brought to the forefront questions of ‘plasticity’ and the inter-relatedness of various cytokine-producing subsets. Studies on Th17 differentiation have fueled this fire, showing that TGF-β regulates Th17/Treg polarization in a concentration-dependent manner. Further interconnecting these two lineages are the findings that RORγt and Foxp3 can not only interact, but also are co-expressed, and that Runx1 has been shown to interact with both factors. Additionally, ligands for both the RAR and AHR can drive differentiation into either lineage.

However, most of our understanding of these phenomena is only superficial. We have a severely limited understanding of the mechanism of TGF-β action and whether or not Smads are direct regulators of IL-17, IL-21, IL-23R or Foxp3. Additionally, the regulation of the supposed ‘master-regulator’, RORγt, has not been elucidated. Other factors that we now understand to promote Th17 differentiation could be working through two or more mechanisms; e.g. IRF4 could be working through either NFAT-mediated TCR signals or Stat-mediated cytokine signals. Stats appear to be involved in AHR regulation, but the mechanism is unknown. Finally, regulation of the IL-17 locus is becoming increasingly complicated with both inhibitory (Stat5, Foxp3) and stimulatory (Stat3, RORγt) factors being recruited to it. Answering these questions and understanding the molecular basis of these processes will be key to gaining a better understanding of T cell differentiation and to ultimately applying it to questions of ‘plasticity’ and lineage commitment as they relate to host defense and the immune response.


Acknowledgments

A.S.A. is funded through the Clinical Research Training Program, a public-private partnership supported jointly by the NIH and Pfizer Inc (via a grant to the Foundation for NIH from Pfizer Inc). W.T.W. is supported by NIH grant 1K22 AR053953-01.


References

[1] R.L. Coffman, J. Carty, A T cell activity that enhances polyclonal IgE production and its inhibition by interferon-gamma, J. Immunol. 136 (1986) 949–954.

[2] T.R. Mosmann, H. Cherwinski, M.W. Bond, M.A. Giedlin, R.L. Coffman, Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins, J. Immunol. 136 (1986) 2348–2357.

[3] R.L. Coffman, Origins of the T(H)1–T(H)2 model: a personal perspective, Nat. Immunol. 7 (2006) 539–541.

[4] A.K. Abbas, K.M. Murphy, A. Sher, Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes, Nature 383 (1996) 787–793.

[5] K.M. Murphy, S.L. Reiner, The lineage decisions of helper T cells, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2 (2002) 933–944.

[6] G.R. Lee, S.T. Kim, C.G. Spilianakis, P.E. Fields, R.A. Flavell, T helper cell differentiation: regulation by cis elements and epigenetics, Immunity 24 (2006) 369–379.

[7] E.V. Acosta-Rodriguez, L. Rivino, J. Geginat, D. Jarrossay, M. Gattorno, A. Lanzavecchia, F. Sallusto, G. Napolitani, Surface phenotype and antigenic specificity of human interleukin 17-producing T helper memory cells, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 639–646.

[8] S.C. Liang, X.Y. Tan, D.P. Luxenberg, R. Karim, K. Dunussi-Joannopoulos, M. Collins, L.A. Fouser, Interleukin (IL)-22 and IL-17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and cooperatively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides, J. Exp. Med. 203 (2006) 2271–2279.

[9] R. Nurieva, X.O. Yang, G. Martinez, Y. Zhang, A.D. Panopoulos, L. Ma, K. Schluns, Q. Tian, S.S. Watowich, A.M. Jetten, C. Dong, Essential autocrine regulation by IL-21 in the generation of inflammatory T cells, Nature 448 (2007) 480–483.

[10] L. Zhou, Ivanov II, R. Spolski, R. Min, K. Shenderov, T. Egawa, D.E. Levy, W.J. Leonard, D.R. Littman, IL-6 programs T(H)-17 cell differentiation by promoting sequential engagement of the IL-21 and IL-23 pathways, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 967–974.

[11] M.J. McGeachy, K.S. Bak-Jensen, Y. Chen, C.M. Tato, W. Blumenschein, T. McClanahan, D.J. Cua, TGF-beta and IL-6 drive the production of IL-17 and IL-10 by T cells and restrain T(H)-17 cell-mediated pathology, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 1390–1397.

[12] A. Awasthi, G. Murugaiyan, V.K. Kuchroo, Interplay between effector Th17 and regulatory T cells, J. Clin. Immunol. (2008).

[13] J. Zhu, W.E. Paul, CD4 T cells: fates, functions, and faults, Blood 112 (2008) 1557–1569.

[14] M.L. Michel, A.C. Keller, C. Paget, M. Fujio, F. Trottein, P.B. Savage, C.H. Wong, E. Schneider, M. Dy, M.C. Leite-de-Moraes, Identification of an IL-17-producing NK1.1(neg) iNKT cell population involved in airway neutrophilia, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 995–1001.

[15] M.A. Stark, Y. Huo, T.L. Burcin, M.A. Morris, T.S. Olson, K. Ley, Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils regulates granulopoiesis via IL-23 and IL-17, Immunity 22 (2005) 285–294.

[16] Z. Chen, C.M. Tato, L. Muul, A. Laurence, J.J. O’Shea, Distinct regulation of interleukin-17 in human T helper lymphocytes, Arthritis Rheum. 56 (2007) 2936–2946.

[17] A.N. Mathur, H.C. Chang, D.G. Zisoulis, R. Kapur, M.L. Belladonna, G.S. Kansas, M.H. Kaplan, T-bet is a critical determinant in the instability of the IL-17-secreting T-helper phenotype, Blood 108 (2006) 1595–1601.

[18] M. Rangachari, N. Mauermann, R.R. Marty, S. Dirnhofer, M.O. Kurrer, V. Kommenovic, J.M. Penninger, U. Eriksson, T-bet negatively regulates autoimmune myocarditis by suppressing local production of interleukin 17, J. Exp. Med. 203 (2006) 2009–2019.

[19] A.R. Gocke, P.D. Cravens, L.H. Ben, R.Z. Hussain, S.C. Northrop, M.K. Racke, A.E. Lovett-Racke, T-bet regulates the fate of Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes in autoimmunity, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 1341–1348.

[20] S. Furuta, S. Kagami, T. Tamachi, K. Ikeda, M. Fujiwara, A. Suto, K. Hirose, N. Watanabe, Y. Saito, I. Iwamoto, H. Nakajima, Overlapping and distinct roles of STAT4 and T-bet in the regulation of T cell differentiation and allergic airway inflammation, J. Immunol. 180 (2008) 6656–6662.

[21] F. Annunziato, L. Cosmi, V. Santarlasci, L. Maggi, F. Liotta, B. Mazzinghi, E. Parente, L. Fili, S. Ferri, F. Frosali, F. Giudici, P. Romagnani, P. Parronchi, F. Tonelli, E. Maggi, S. Romagnani, Phenotypic and functional features of human Th17 cells, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1849–1861.

[22] A.M. Intlekofer, A. Banerjee, N. Takemoto, S.M. Gordon, C.S. Dejong, H. Shin, C.A. Hunter, E.J. Wherry, T. Lindsten, S.L. Reiner, Anomalous type 17 response to viral infection by CD8+ T cells lacking T-bet and eomesodermin, Science 321 (2008) 408–411.

[23] X.K. Liu, X. Lin, S.L. Gaffen, Crucial role for nuclear factor of activated T cells in T cell receptor-mediated regulation of human interleukin-17, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 52762–52771.

[24] Z. Pancer, M.D. Cooper, The evolution of adaptive immunity, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 24 (2006) 497–518.

[25] J. Rengarajan, B. Tang, L.H. Glimcher, NFATc2 and NFATc3 regulate T(H)2 differentiation and modulate TCR-responsiveness of naive T(H)cells, Nat. Immunol. 3 (2002) 48–54.

[26] M. Klein, S. Klein-Hessling, A. Palmetshofer, E. Serfling, C. Tertilt, T. Bopp, V. Heib, M. Becker, C. Taube, H. Schild, E. Schmitt, M. Stassen, Specific and redundant roles for NFAT transcription factors in the expression of mast cell-derived cytokines, J. Immunol. 177 (2006) 6667–6674.

[27] K.J. Erb, T. Twardzik, A. Palmetshofer, G. Wohlleben, U. Tatsch, E. Serfling, Mice deficient in nuclear factor of activated T-cell transcription factor c2 mount increased Th2 responses after infection with *Nippostrongylus brasiliensis* and decreased Th1 responses after mycobacterial infection, Infect. Immun. 71 (2003) 6641–6647.

[28] B. Weigmann, H.A. Lehr, G. Yancopoulos, D. Valenzuela, A. Murphy, S. Stevens, J. Schmidt, P.R. Galle, S. Rose-John, M.F. Neurath, The transcription factor NFATc2 controls IL-6-dependent T cell activation in experimental colitis, J. Exp. Med. 205 (2008) 2099–2110.

[29] X.K. Liu, J.L. Clements, S.L. Gaffen, Signaling through the murine T cell receptor induces IL-17 production in the absence of costimulation, IL-23 or dendritic cells, Mol. Cells 20 (2005) 339–347.

[30] H. Park, Z. Li, X.O. Yang, S.H. Chang, R. Nurieva, Y.H. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Hood, Z. Zhu, Q. Tian, C. Dong, A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by producing interleukin 17, Nat. Immunol. 6 (2005) 1133–1141.

[31] T. Korn, E. Bettelli, W. Gao, A. Awasthi, A. Jager, T.B. Strom, M. Oukka, V.K. Kuchroo, IL-21 initiates an alternative pathway to induce proinflammatory T(H)17 cells, Nature 448 (2007) 484–487.

[32] L. Wei, A. Laurence, K.M. Elias, J.J. O’Shea, IL-21 is produced by Th17 cells and drives IL-17 production in a STAT3-dependent manner, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007) 34605–34610.

[33] I. Sonderegger, J. Kisielow, R. Meier, C. King, M. Kopf, IL-21 and IL-21R are not required for development of Th17 cells and autoimmunity in vivo, Eur. J. Immunol. 38 (2008) 1833–1838.

[34] J.M. Coquet, S. Chakravarti, M.J. Smyth, D.I. Godfrey, Cutting edge: IL-21 is not essential for Th17 differentiation or experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, J. Immunol. 180 (2008) 7097–7101.

[35] S. Aggarwal, N. Ghilardi, M.H. Xie, F.J. de Sauvage, A.L. Gurney, Interleukin-23 promotes a distinct CD4 T cell activation state characterized by the production of interleukin-17, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 1910–1914.

[36] L.E. Harrington, R.D. Hatton, P.R. Mangan, H. Turner, T.L. Murphy, K.M. Murphy, C.T. Weaver, Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages, Nat. Immunol. 6 (2005) 1123–1132.

[37] M. Karaghiosoff, H. Neubauer, C. Lassnig, P. Kovarik, H. Schindler, H. Pircher, B. McCoy, C. Bogdan, T. Decker, G. Brem, K. Pfeffer, M. Muller, Partial impairment of cytokine responses in Tyk2-deficient mice, Immunity 13 (2000) 549–560.

[38] K. Shimoda, K. Kato, K. Aoki, T. Matsuda, A. Miyamoto, M. Shibamori, M. Yamashita, A. Numata, K. Takase, S. Kobayashi, S. Shibata, Y. Asano, H. Gondo, K. Sekiguchi, K. Nakayama, T. Nakayama, T. Okamura, S. Okamura, Y. Niho, K. Nakayama, Tyk2 plays a restricted role in IFN alpha signaling, although it is required for IL-12-mediated T cell function, Immunity 13 (2000) 561–571.

[39] Y. Minegishi, M. Saito, T. Morio, K. Watanabe, K. Agematsu, S. Tsuchiya, H. Takada, T. Hara, N. Kawamura, T. Ariga, H. Kaneko, N. Kondo, I. Tsuge, A. Yachie, Y. Sakiyama, T. Iwata, F. Besso, T. Ohishi, K. Joh, K. Imai, K. Kogawa, M. Shinohara, M. Fujieda, H. Wakiguchi, S. Pasic, M. Abinun, H.D. Ochs, E.D. Renner, A. Jansson, B.H. Belohradsky, A. Metin, N. Shimizu, S. Mizutani, T. Miyawaki, S. Nonoyama, H. Karasuyama, Human tyrosine kinase 2 deficiency reveals its requisite roles in multiple cytokine signals

involved in innate and acquired immunity, Immunity 25 (2006) 745–755.

[40] W.T. Watford, J.J. O’Shea, Human tyk2 kinase deficiency: another primary immunodeficiency syndrome, Immunity 25 (2006) 695–697.

[41] W.E. Paul, Interleukin 4: signalling mechanisms and control of T cell differentiation, Ciba Found. Symp. 204 (1997) 208–216 discussion 216–209.

[42] W.T. Watford, B.D. Hissong, J.H. Bream, Y. Kanno, L. Muul, J.J. O’Shea, Signaling by IL-12 and IL-23 and the immunoregulatory roles of STAT4, Immunol. Rev. 202 (2004) 139–156.

[43] K.B. Nguyen, W.T. Watford, R. Salomon, S.R. Hofmann, G.C. Pien, A. Morinobu, M. Gadina, J.J. O’Shea, C.A. Biron, Critical role for STAT4 activation by type 1 interferons in the interferon-gamma response to viral infection, Science 297 (2002) 2063–2066.

[44] W.T. Watford, B.D. Hissong, L.R. Durant, H. Yamane, L.M. Muul, Y. Kanno, C.M. Tato, H.L. Ramos, A.E. Berger, L. Mielke, M. Pesu, B. Solomon, D.M. Frucht, W.E. Paul, A. Sher, D. Jankovic, P.N. Tsichlis, J.J. O’Shea, Tpl2 kinase regulates T cell interferon gamma production and host resistance to *Toxoplasma gondii*, J. Exp. Med 205 (2008) 2803–2812.

[45] M. Pesu, W.T. Watford, L. Wei, L. Xu, I. Fuss, W. Strober, J. Andersson, E.M. Shevach, M. Quezado, N. Bouladoux, A. Roebroek, Y. Belkaid, J. Creemers, J.J. O’Shea, T-cell-expressed proprotein convertase furin is essential for maintenance of peripheral immune tolerance, Nature 455 (2008) 246–250.

[46] A.G. Robertson, M. Bilenky, A. Tam, Y. Zhao, T. Zeng, N. Thiessen, T. Cezard, A.P. Fejes, E.D. Wederell, R. Cullum, G. Euskirchen, M. Krzywinski, I. Birol, M. Snyder, P.A. Hoodless, M. Hirst, M.A. Marra, S.J. Jones, Genome wide relationship between histone H3 lysine 4 mono- and tri-methylation and transcription factor binding, Genome Res. (2008).

[47] G. Robertson, M. Hirst, M. Bainbridge, M. Bilenky, Y. Zhao, T. Zeng, G. Euskirchen, B. Bernier, R. Varhol, A. Delaney, N. Thiessen, O.L. Griffith, A. He, M. Marra, M. Snyder, S. Jones, Genome-wide profiles of STAT1 DNA association using chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel sequencing, Nat. Methods 4 (2007) 651–657.

[48] Z. Chen, A. Laurence, Y. Kanno, M. Pacher-Zavisin, B.M. Zhu, C. Tato, A. Yoshimura, L. Hennighausen, J.J. O’Shea, Selective regulatory function of Soc3 in the formation of IL-17-secreting T cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (2006) 8137–8142.

[49] A. Laurence, C.M. Tato, T.S. Davidson, Y. Kanno, Z. Chen, Z. Yao, R.B. Blank, F. Meylan, R. Siegel, L. Hennighausen, E.M. Shevach, J.J. O’Shea, Interleukin-2 signaling via STAT5 constrains T helper 17 cell generation, Immunity 26 (2007) 371–381.

[50] X.O. Yang, A.D. Panopoulos, R. Nurieva, S.H. Chang, D. Wang, S.S. Watowich, C. Dong, STAT3 regulates cytokine-mediated generation of inflammatory helper T cells, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007) 9358–9363.

[51] N.J. Wilson, K. Boniface, J.R. Chan, B.S. McKenzie, W.M. Blumenschein, J.D. Mattson, B. Basham, K. Smith, T. Chen, F. Morel, J.C. Lecron, R.A. Kastelein, D.J. Cua, T.K. McClanahan, E.P. Bowman, R. de Waal Malefyt, Development, cytokine profile and function of human interleukin 17-producing helper T cells, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 950–957.

[52] L. Yang, D.E. Anderson, C. Baecher-Allan, W.D. Hastings, E. Bettelli, M. Oukka, V.K. Kuchroo, D.A. Hafler, IL-21 and TGF-beta are required for differentiation of human T(H)17 cells, Nature 454 (2008) 350–352.

[53] A.F. Freeman, S.M. Holland, The hyper-IgE syndromes, Immunol. Allergy Clin. North Am. 28 (2008) 277–291 viii.

[54] S.M. Holland, F.R. DeLeo, H.Z. Elloumi, A.P. Hsu, G. Uzel, N. Brodsky, A.F. Freeman, A. Demidowich, J. Davis, M.L. Turner, V.L. Anderson, D.N. Darnell, P.A. Welch, D.B. Kuhns, D.M. Frucht, H.L. Malech, J.I. Gallin, S.D. Kobayashi, A.R. Whitney, J.M. Voyich, J.M. Musser, C. Woellner, A.A. Schaffer, J.M. Puck, B. Grimbacher, STAT3 mutations in the hyper-IgE syndrome, N. Engl. J. Med. 357 (2007) 1608–1619.

[55] Y. Minegishi, M. Saito, S. Tsuchiya, I. Tsuge, H. Takada, T. Hara, N. Kawamura, T. Ariga, S. Pasic, O. Stojkovic, A. Metin,

H. Karasuyama, Dominant-negative mutations in the DNA-binding domain of STAT3 cause hyper-IgE syndrome, Nature 448 (2007) 1058–1062.

[56] J.D. Milner, J.M. Brenchley, A. Laurence, A.F. Freeman, B.J. Hill, K.M. Elias, Y. Kanno, C. Spalding, H.Z. Elloumi, M.L. Paulson, J. Davis, A. Hsu, A.I. Asher, J. O’Shea, S.M. Holland, W.E. Paul, D.C. Douek, Impaired T(H)17 cell differentiation in subjects with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome, Nature 452 (2008) 773–776.

[57] A. Yoshimura, T. Naka, M. Kubo, SOCS proteins, cytokine signalling and immune regulation, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7 (2007) 454–465.

[58] P.K. Wong, P.J. Egan, B.A. Croker, K. O’Donnell, N.A. Sims, S. Drake, H. Kiu, E.J. McManus, W.S. Alexander, A.W. Roberts, I.P. Wicks, SOCS-3 negatively regulates innate and adaptive immune mechanisms in acute IL-1-dependent inflammatory arthritis, J. Clin. Invest. 116 (2006) 1571–1581.

[59] M. Batten, J. Li, S. Yi, N.M. Kljavin, D.M. Danilenko, S. Lucas, J. Lee, F.J. de Sauvage, N. Ghilardi, Interleukin 27 limits autoimmune encephalomyelitis by suppressing the development of interleukin 17-producing T cells, Nat. Immunol. 7 (2006) 929–936.

[60] J.S. Stumhofer, A. Laurence, E.H. Wilson, E. Huang, C.M. Tato, L.M. Johnson, A.V. Villarino, Q. Huang, A. Yoshimura, D. Sehy, C.J. Saris, J.J. O’Shea, L. Hennighausen, M. Ernst, C.A. Hunter, Interleukin 27 negatively regulates the development of interleukin 17-producing T helper cells during chronic inflammation of the central nervous system, Nat. Immunol. 7 (2006) 937–945.

[61] I. Kryczek, S. Wei, L. Zou, S. Altuwaijri, W. Szeliga, J. Kolls, A. Chang, W. Zou, Cutting edge: Th17 and regulatory T cell dynamics and the regulation by IL-2 in the tumor microenvironment, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 6730–6733.

[62] K. Hashimoto, J.E. Durbin, W. Zhou, R.D. Collins, S.B. Ho, J.K. Kolls, P.J. Dubin, J.R. Sheller, K. Goleniewska, J.F. O’Neal, S.J. Olson, D. Mitchell, B.S. Graham, R.S. Peebles Jr., Respiratory syncytial virus infection in the absence of STAT 1 results in airway dysfunction, airway mucus, and augmented IL-17 levels, J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 116 (2005) 550–557.

[63] A.A. Lighvani, D.M. Frucht, D. Jankovic, H. Yamane, J. Aliberti, B.D. Hissong, B.V. Nguyen, M. Gadina, A. Sher, W.E. Paul, J.J. O’Shea, T-bet is rapidly induced by interferon-gamma in lymphoid and myeloid cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98 (2001) 15137–15142.

[64] T. Owaki, M. Asakawa, F. Fukai, J. Mizuguchi, T. Yoshimoto, IL-27 induces Th1 differentiation via p38 MAPK/T-bet- and intercellular adhesion molecule-1/LFA-1/ERK1/2-dependent pathways, J. Immunol. 177 (2006) 7579–7587.

[65] L. Gorelik, S. Constant, R.A. Flavell, Mechanism of transforming growth factor beta-induced inhibition of T helper type 1 differentiation, J. Exp. Med. 195 (2002) 1499–1505.

[66] P.R. Mangan, L.E. Harrington, D.B. O’Quinn, W.S. Helms, D.C. Bullard, C.O. Elson, R.D. Hatton, S.M. Wahl, T.R. Schoeb, C.T. Weaver, Transforming growth factor-beta induces development of the T(H)17 lineage, Nature 441 (2006) 231–234.

[67] M. Veldhoen, R.J. Hocking, C.J. Atkins, R.M. Locksley, B. Stockinger, TGFbeta in the context of an inflammatory cytokine milieu supports de novo differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells, Immunity 24 (2006) 179–189.

[68] D.J. Cua, J. Sherlock, Y. Chen, C.A. Murphy, B. Joyce, B. Seymour, L. Lucian, W. To, S. Kwan, T. Churakova, S. Zurawski, M. Wiekowski, S.A. Lira, D. Gorman, R.A. Kastelein, J.D. Sedgwick, Interleukin-23 rather than interleukin-12 is the critical cytokine for autoimmune inflammation of the brain, Nature 421 (2003) 744–748.

[69] K.M. Hildner, P. Schirmacher, I. Atreya, M. Dittmayer, B. Bartsch, P.R. Galle, S. Wirtz, M.F. Neurath, Targeting of the transcription factor STAT4 by antisense phosphorothioate oligonucleotides suppresses collagen-induced arthritis, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 3427–3436.

[70] A.N. Mathur, H.C. Chang, D.G. Zisoulis, G.L. Stritesky, Q. Yu, J.T. O’Malley, R. Kapur, D.E. Levy, G.S. Kansas, M.H. Kaplan, Stat3 and Stat4 direct development of IL-17-secreting Th cells, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 4901–4907.

[71] Z. Yao, Y. Kanno, M. Kerenyi, G. Stephens, L. Durant, W.T. Watford, A. Laurence, G.W. Robinson, E.M. Shevach, R. Morrigl, L. Hennighausen, C. Wu, J.J. O’Shea, Nonredundant roles for Stat5a/b in directly regulating Foxp3, Blood (2007).

[72] J. Moisan, R. Grenningloh, E. Bettelli, M. Oukka, I.C. Ho, Ets-1 is a negative regulator of Th17 differentiation, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 2825–2835.

[73] J.J. Letterio, A.B. Roberts, Regulation of immune responses by TGF-beta, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 16 (1998) 137–161.

[74] M.M. Shull, I. Ormsby, A.B. Kier, S. Pawlowski, R.J. Diebold, M. Yin, R. Allen, C. Sidman, G. Proetzel, D. Calvin, et al., Targeted disruption of the mouse transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene results in multifocal inflammatory disease, Nature 359 (1992) 693–699.

[75] X. Yang, J.J. Letterio, R.J. Lechleider, L. Chen, R. Hayman, H. Gu, A.B. Roberts, C. Deng, Targeted disruption of SMAD3 results in impaired mucosal immunity and diminished T cell responsiveness to TGF-beta, EMBO J. 18 (1999) 1280–1291.

[76] E. Bettelli, Y. Carrier, W. Gao, T. Korn, T.B. Strom, M. Oukka, H.L. Weiner, V.K. Kuchroo, Reciprocal developmental pathways for the generation of pathogenic effector TH17 and regulatory T cells, Nature 441 (2006) 235–238.

[77] M. Veldhoen, R.J. Hocking, R.A. Flavell, B. Stockinger, Signals mediated by transforming growth factor-beta initiate autoimmune encephalomyelitis, but chronic inflammation is needed to sustain disease, Nat. Immunol. (2006).

[78] M.O. Li, R.A. Flavell, TGF-beta: a master of all T cell trades, Cell 134 (2008) 392–404.

[79] Y. Zheng, A.Y. Rudensky, Foxp3 in control of the regulatory T cell lineage, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 457–462.

[80] L. Zhou, J.E. Lopes, M.M. Chong, Ivanov II, R. Min, G.D. Victora, Y. Shen, J. Du, Y.P. Rubtsov, A.Y. Rudensky, S.F. Ziegler, D.R. Littman, TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17 cell differentiation by antagonizing RORgammat function, Nature 453 (2008) 236–240.

[81] K. Ichiyama, H. Yoshida, Y. Wakabayashi, T. Chinen, K. Saeki, M. Nakaya, G. Takaesu, S. Hori, A. Yoshimura, T. Kobayashi, Foxp3 inhibits RORgammat-mediated IL-17A mRNA transcription through direct interaction with RORgammat, J. Biol. Chem. 283 (2008) 17003–17008.

[82] L. Gorelik, P.E. Fields, R.A. Flavell, Cutting edge: TGF-beta inhibits Th type 2 development through inhibition of GATA-3 expression, J. Immunol. 165 (2000) 4773–4777.

[83] Y. Zheng, D.M. Danilenko, P. Valdez, I. Kasman, J. Eastham-Anderson, J. Wu, W. Ouyang, Interleukin-22, a T(H)17 cytokine, mediates IL-23-induced dermal inflammation and acanthosis, Nature 445 (2007) 648–651.

[84] N. Manel, D. Unutmaz, D.R. Littman, The differentiation of human T(H)-17 cells requires transforming growth factor-beta and induction of the nuclear receptor RORgammat, Nat. Immunol. 9 (2008) 641–649.

[85] L. Xu, A. Kitani, I. Fuss, W. Strober, Cutting edge: regulatory T cells induce CD4+ CD25− Foxp3− T cells or are self-induced to become Th17 cells in the absence of exogenous TGF-beta, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 6725–6729.

[86] S.E. Allan, R. Broady, S. Gregori, M.E. Himmel, N. Locke, M.G. Roncarolo, R. Bacchetta, M.K. Levings, CD4+ T-regulatory cells: toward therapy for human diseases, Immunol. Rev. 223 (2008) 391–421.

[87] T.M. Brusko, A.L. Putnam, J.A. Bluestone, Human regulatory T cells: role in autoimmune disease and therapeutic opportunities, Immunol. Rev. 223 (2008) 371–390.

[88] F. Blanchette, R. Day, W. Dong, M.H. Laprise, C.M. Dubois, TGFbeta1 regulates gene expression of its own converting enzyme furin, J. Clin. Invest. 99 (1997) 1974–1983.

[89] M.A. Travis, B. Reizis, A.C. Melton, E. Masteller, Q. Tang, J.M. Proctor, Y. Wang, X. Bernstein, X. Huang, L.F. Reichardt, J.A. Bluestone, D. Sheppard, Loss of integrin alpha(v)beta8 on dendritic cells causes autoimmunity and colitis in mice, Nature 449 (2007) 361–365.

[90] E.V. Acosta-Rodriguez, G. Napolitani, A. Lanzavecchia, F. Sallusto, Interleukins 1beta and 6 but not transforming growth factor-beta are essential for the differentiation of interleukin 17-producing human T helper cells, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 942–949.

[91] C. Sutton, C. Brereton, B. Keogh, K.H. Mills, E.C. Lavelle, A crucial role for interleukin (IL)-1 in the induction of IL-17-producing T cells that mediate autoimmune encephalomyelitis, J. Exp. Med. 203 (2006) 1685–1691.

[92] G. Eberl, D.R. Littman, The role of the nuclear hormone receptor RORgammat in the development of lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches, Immunol. Rev. 195 (2003) 81–90.

[93] Z. Sun, D. Unutmaz, Y.R. Zou, M.J. Sunshine, A. Pierani, S. Brenner-Morton, R.E. Mebius, D.R. Littman, Requirement for RORgamma in thymocyte survival and lymphoid organ development, Science 288 (2000) 2369–2373.

[94] S. Kurebayashi, E. Ueda, M. Sakaue, D.D. Patel, A. Medvedev, F. Zhang, A.M. Jetten, Retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma (RORgamma) is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and controls apoptosis during thymopoiesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97 (2000) 10132–10137.

[95] G. Eberl, S. Marmon, M.J. Sunshine, P.D. Rennert, Y. Choi, D.R. Littman, An essential function for the nuclear receptor ROR-gamma(t) in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells, Nat. Immunol. 5 (2004) 64–73.

[96] Y.W. He, M.L. Deftos, E.W. Ojala, M.J. Bevan, RORgamma t, a novel isoform of an orphan receptor, negatively regulates Fas ligand expression and IL-2 production in T cells, Immunity 9 (1998) 797–806.

[97] Ivanov II, B.S. McKenzie, L. Zhou, C.E. Tadokoro, A. Lepelley, J.J. Lafaille, D.J. Cua, D.R. Littman, The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17(+) T helper cells, Cell 126 (2006) 1121–1133.

[98] X.O. Yang, B.P. Pappu, R. Nurieva, A. Akimzhanov, H.S. Kang, Y. Chung, L. Ma, B. Shah, A.D. Panopoulos, K.S. Schluns, S.S. Watowich, Q. Tian, A.M. Jetten, C. Dong, T helper 17 lineage differentiation is programmed by orphan nuclear receptors ROR alpha and ROR gamma, Immunity 28 (2008) 29–39.

[99] J.L. Coombes, K.R. Siddiqui, C.V. Arancibia-Carcamo, J. Hall, C.M. Sun, Y. Belkaid, F. Powrie, A functionally specialized population of mucosal CD103+ DCs induces Foxp3+ regulatory T cells via a TGF-beta and retinoic acid-dependent mechanism, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1757–1764.

[100] C.M. Sun, J.A. Hall, R.B. Blank, N. Bouladoux, M. Oukka, J.R. Mora, Y. Belkaid, Small intestine lamina propria dendritic cells promote de novo generation of Foxp3 T reg cells via retinoic acid, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1775–1785.

[101] M.J. Benson, K. Pino-Lagos, M. Rosemblatt, R.J. Noelle, All-trans retinoic acid mediates enhanced T reg cell growth, differentiation, and gut homing in the face of high levels of co-stimulation, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1765–1774.

[102] D. Mucida, Y. Park, G. Kim, O. Turovskaya, I. Scott, M. Kronenberg, H. Cheroutre, Reciprocal TH17 and regulatory T cell differentiation mediated by retinoic acid, Science 317 (2007) 256–260.

[103] K.M. Elias, A. Laurence, T.S. Davidson, G. Stephens, Y. Kanno, E.M. Shevach, J.J. O’Shea, Retinoic acid inhibits Th17 polarization and enhances FoxP3 expression through a Stat-3/Stat-5 independent signaling pathway, Blood 111 (2008) 1013–1020.

[104] M.A. Gavin, J.P. Rasmussen, J.D. Fontenot, V. Vasta, V.C. Manganillo, J.A. Beavo, A.Y. Rudensky, Foxp3-dependent programme of regulatory T-cell differentiation, Nature 445 (2007) 771–775.

[105] M. Iwata, A. Hirakiyama, Y. Eshima, H. Kagechika, C. Kato, S.Y. Song, Retinoic acid imprints gut-homing specificity on T cells, Immunity 21 (2004) 527–538.

[106] M.S. Denison, S.R. Nagy, Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by structurally diverse exogenous and endogenous chemicals, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 43 (2003) 309–334.

[107] H.P. Ciolino, P.J. Daschner, G.C. Yeh, Dietary flavonols quercetin and kaempferol are ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor that affect

CYP1A1 transcription differentially, Biochem. J. 340 (Pt 3) (1999) 715–722.

[108] J.V. Schmidt, G.H. Su, J.K. Reddy, M.C. Simon, C.A. Bradfield, Characterization of a murine Ahr null allele: involvement of the Ah receptor in hepatic growth and development, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93 (1996) 6731–6736.

[109] N.I. Kerkvliet, Recent advances in understanding the mechanisms of TCDD immunotoxicity, Int. Immunopharmacol. 2 (2002) 277–291.

[110] F.J. Quintana, A.S. Basso, A.H. Iglesias, T. Korn, M.F. Farez, E. Bettelli, M. Caccamo, M. Oukka, H.L. Weiner, Control of T(reg) and T(H)17 cell differentiation by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Nature 453 (2008) 65–71.

[111] A. Rannug, E. Fritsche, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and light, Biol. Chem. 387 (2006) 1149–1157.

[112] M. Veldhoen, K. Hirota, A.M. Westendorf, J. Buer, L. Dumoutier, J.C. Renauld, B. Stockinger, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links TH17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to environmental toxins, Nature 453 (2008) 106–109.

[113] P.P. Ho, L. Steinman, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a regulator of Th17 and Treg cell development in disease, Cell Res. 18 (2008) 605–608.

[114] S. Kobayashi, H. Okamoto, T. Iwamoto, Y. Toyama, T. Tomatsu, H. Yamanaka, S. Momohara, A role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and the dioxin TCDD in rheumatoid arthritis, Rheumatology (Oxford) 47 (2008) 1317–1322.

[115] P. Stolt, C. Bengtsson, B. Nordmark, S. Lindblad, I. Lundberg, L. Klareskog, L. Alfredsson, Quantification of the influence of cigarette smoking on rheumatoid arthritis: results from a population based case-control study, using incident cases, Ann. Rheum. Dis. 62 (2003) 835–841.

[116] A. Kimura, T. Naka, K. Nohara, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, T. Kishimoto, Aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulates Stat1 activation and participates in the development of Th17 cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105 (2008) 9721–9726.

[117] I. Taniuchi, D.R. Littman, Epigenetic gene silencing by Runx proteins, Oncogene 23 (2004) 4341–4345.

[118] I. Taniuchi, M. Osato, T. Egawa, M.J. Sunshine, S.C. Bae, T. Komori, Y. Ito, D.R. Littman, Differential requirements for Runx proteins in CD4 repression and epigenetic silencing during T lymphocyte development, Cell 111 (2002) 621–633.

[119] R. Setoguchi, M. Tachibana, Y. Naoe, S. Muroi, K. Akiyama, C. Tezuka, T. Okuda, I. Taniuchi, Repression of the transcription factor Th-POK by Runx complexes in cytotoxic T cell development, Science 319 (2008) 822–825.

[120] T. Egawa, R.E. Tillman, Y. Naoe, I. Taniuchi, D.R. Littman, The role of the Runx transcription factors in thymocyte differentiation and in homeostasis of naive T cells, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1945–1957.

[121] I.M. Djuretic, D. Levanon, V. Negreanu, Y. Groner, A. Rao, K.M. Ansel, Transcription factors T-bet and Runx3 cooperate to activate Ifng and silence Il4 in T helper type 1 cells, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 145–153.

[122] Y. Naoe, R. Setoguchi, K. Akiyama, S. Muroi, M. Kuroda, F. Hatam, D.R. Littman, I. Taniuchi, Repression of interleukin-4 in T helper type 1 cells by Runx/Cbf beta binding to the Il4 silencer, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 1749–1755.

[123] H. Hu, I. Djuretic, M.S. Sundrud, A. Rao, Transcriptional partners in regulatory T cells: Foxp3, Runx and NFAT, Trends Immunol. 28 (2007) 329–332.

[124] F. Zhang, G. Meng, W. Strober, Interactions among the transcription factors Runx1, RORgammat and Foxp3 regulate the differentiation of interleukin 17-producing T cells, Nat. Immunol. 9 (2008) 1297–1306.

[125] C.M. Hu, S.Y. Jang, J.C. Fanzo, A.B. Pernis, Modulation of T cell cytokine production by interferon regulatory factor-4, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 49238–49246.

[126] M. Lohoff, H.W. Mittrucker, S. Prechtl, S. Bischof, F. Sommer, S. Kock, D.A. Ferrick, G.S. Duncan, A. Gessner, T.W. Mak, Dysregulated T helper cell differentiation in the absence of interferon regulatory factor 4, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (2002) 11808–11812.

[127] J. Rengarajan, K.A. Mowen, K.D. McBride, E.D. Smith, H. Singh, L.H. Glimcher, Interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) interacts with NFATc2 to modulate interleukin 4 gene expression, J. Exp. Med. 195 (2002) 1003–1012.

[128] A. Brustle, S. Heink, M. Huber, C. Rosenplanter, C. Stadelmann, P. Yu, E. Arpaia, T.W. Mak, T. Kamradt, M. Lohoff, The development of inflammatory T(H)-17 cells requires interferon-regulatory factor 4, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 958–966.

[129] H. Rosen, E.J. Goetzl, Sphingosine 1-phosphate and its receptors: an autocrine and paracrine network, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5 (2005) 560–570.

[130] J.J. Liao, M.C. Huang, E.J. Goetzl, Cutting edge: alternative signaling of Th17 cell development by sphingosine 1-phosphate, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 5425–5428.

[131] M.C. Huang, S.R. Watson, J.J. Liao, E.J. Goetzl, Th17 augmentation in OTII TCR plus T cell-selective type 1 sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor double transgenic mice, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 6806–6813.

[132] C. Chizzolini, R. Chicheportiche, M. Alvarez, C. de Rham, P. Roux-Lombard, S. Ferrari-Lacraz, J.M. Dayer, Prostaglandin E2 synergistically with interleukin-23 favors human Th17 expansion, Blood 112 (2008) 3696–3703.

[133] A.F. Sheibanie, T. Khayrullina, F.F. Safadi, D. Ganea, Prostaglandin E2 exacerbates collagen-induced arthritis in mice through the inflammatory interleukin-23/interleukin-17 axis, Arthritis Rheum. 56 (2007) 2608–2619.

[134] A.F. Sheibanie, I. Tadmori, H. Jing, E. Vassiliou, D. Ganea, Prostaglandin E2 induces IL-23 production in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells, FASEB J. 18 (2004) 1318–1320.

[135] T. Khayrullina, J.H. Yen, H. Jing, D. Ganea, In vitro differentiation of dendritic cells in the presence of prostaglandin E2 alters the IL-12/IL-23 balance and promotes differentiation of Th17 cells, J. Immunol. 181 (2008) 721–735.

[136] J.R. Schoenborn, M.O. Dorschner, M. Sekimata, D.M. Santer, M. Shnyreva, D.R. Fitzpatrick, J.A. Stamatoyannopoulos, C.B. Wilson, Comprehensive epigenetic profiling identifies multiple distal regulatory elements directing transcription of the gene encoding interferon-gamma, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 732–742.

[137] S. Chang, T.M. Aune, Dynamic changes in histone-methylation ‘marks’ across the locus encoding interferon-gamma during the differentiation of T helper type 2 cells, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 723–731.

[138] P.E. Fields, S.T. Kim, R.A. Flavell, Cutting edge: changes in histone acetylation at the IL-4 and IFN-gamma loci accompany Th1/Th2 differentiation, J. Immunol. 169 (2002) 647–650.

[139] T. Usui, J.C. Preiss, Y. Kanno, Z.J. Yao, J.H. Bream, J.J. O’Shea, W. Strober, T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription, J. Exp. Med. 203 (2006) 755–766.

[140] C.G. Spilianakis, R.A. Flavell, Epigenetic regulation of Ifng expression, Nat. Immunol. 8 (2007) 681–683.

[141] C.G. Spilianakis, M.D. Lalioti, T. Town, G.R. Lee, R.A. Flavell, Interchromosomal associations between alternatively expressed loci, Nature 435 (2005) 637–645.

[142] A.M. Akimzhanov, X.O. Yang, C. Dong, Chromatin remodeling of interleukin-17 (IL-17)—IL-17F cytokine gene locus during inflammatory helper T cell differentiation, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007) 5969–5972.
