
FGFR2 Abnormalities Underlie a Spectrum of Bone, Skin, and Cancer Pathologies

Masaru Katoh¹

Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) 2 is regulated on the basis of the balance of FGFs, heparan-sulfate proteoglycans, FGFR2 isoforms, endogenous inhibitors, and microRNAs. FGFR2 signals cross-talk with hedgehog, bone morphogenetic protein, and other regulatory networks. Some cases of congenital skeletal disorders with an FGFR2 mutation show skin phenotypes, including acne, cutis gyrata, and acanthosis nigricans. Gain-of-function mutations or variations of human FGFR2 occur in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, diffuse-type gastric cancer, and endometrial uterine cancer. Oral administration of AZD2171 or Ki23057 inhibits *in vivo* proliferation of cancer cells with aberrant FGFR2 activation in rodent therapeutic models. However, loss-of-function mutations of FGFR2 are reported in human melanoma. Conditional *Fgfr2b* knockout in the rodent epidermis leads to increased macrophage infiltration to the dermis and adipose tissue, epidermal thickening accompanied by basal-layer dysplasia and parakeratosis, and the promotion of chemically induced squamous-cell carcinoma. Dysregulation of FGFR2 results in a spectrum of bone and skin pathologies and several types of cancer.

*Journal of Investigative Dermatology* (2009) 129, 1861–1867; doi:10.1038/jid.2009.97; published online 23 April 2009

---

### INTRODUCTION

FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, and FGFR4 genes encode receptors for fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) that are involved in fetal morphogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, and tumorigenesis (Dailey *et al.*, 2005; Eswarakumar *et al.*, 2005; Grose and Dickson, 2005; Wilkie, 2005; Chaffer *et al.*, 2007). The BAG4-PPAPDC1B-FGFR1-TACC1 locus at human chromosome 8p11-p12 and the BAG3-PPAPDC1A-FGFR2-TACC2 locus at human chromosome 10q26.12-q26.13 are syntenic blocks generated by ancient whole-genome duplications during vertebrate evolution (Katoh and Katoh, 2003b; Itoh and Ornitz, 2004). FGFR1 and FGFR2 are paralogs in the FGFR gene family.

The FGFR2 gene encodes several splice variants by alternative splicing (Dionne *et al.*, 1990; Miki *et al.*, 1991; Savagner *et al.*, 1994; Katoh and Katoh, 2003a). Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)2b and FGFR2c are representative

FGFR2 isoforms among several splice variants derived from the FGFR2 gene. FGFR2b, in epithelial cells, and FGFR2c, in mesenchymal cells, are almost identical transmembrane-type receptors with extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains and cytoplasmic tyrosine-kinase domain. FGFR2b functions as the receptor for FGF1, FGF3, FGF7, FGF10, and FGF22, whereas FGFR2c functions as the receptor for FGF1, FGF2, FGF4, FGF6, FGF9, FGF16, FGF17, FGF18, and FGF20 (Ornitz *et al.*, 1996; Eswarakumar *et al.*, 2005; Zhang *et al.*, 2006). As the latter half of the third immunoglobulin-like domain of FGFR2b and FGFR2c is completely different because of alternative splicing of mutually exclusive exons, FGFR2b and FGFR2c show distinct ligand specificity.

Heparan-sulfate proteoglycan is a scaffolding protein that mediates the interaction of FGFs and FGFR2 in a tissue-specific manner (Mohammadi *et al.*, 2005; Luo *et al.*, 2006). FGFs that are associated with heparan sulfate proteoglycan induce dimerization and autophosphorylation of FGFR2 on Y657 in the activation loop of the tyrosine kinase domain to release FGFR2 from autoinhibition (Dailey *et al.*, 2005; Eswarakumar *et al.*, 2005; Chen *et al.*, 2007). FGFR2 then phosphorylates fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate (FRS)2/FRS2α/Sucl-associated neurotrophic factor target 1 (Wang *et al.*, 1996; Hadari *et al.*, 2001) to recruit growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 for the activation of the SOS—Ras-Raf—MEK(MAPK) (mitogen-activated protein kinase)/ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) or the Gab1-phosphoinositide-3 kinase –Akt signaling cascade. Activated FGFR2 directly recruits phospholipase C-γ to catalyze phosphatidylinositol diphosphate to inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol. Inositol triphosphate induces Ca²⁺ release from the endoplasmic reticulum,

---

¹ Genetics and Cell Biology Section, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan

Correspondence: Dr Masaru Katoh, Genetics and Cell Biology Section, National Cancer Center, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo Ward, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.  
E-mail: mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp  

Abbreviations: BCC, basal cell carcinoma; ER, estrogen receptor; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; miRNA, microRNA; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism  

Received 22 December 2008; revised 1 March 2009; accepted 5 March 2009; published online 23 April 2009

© 2009 The Society for Investigative Dermatology www.jidonline.org 1861

M Katoh

FGFR2 Genetics and Skin Phenotypes

Figure 1. FGFR2 signaling cascades. Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)2b functions as a receptor for fibroblast growth factor (FGF)1, FGF3, FGF7, FGF10 and FGF22, whereas FGFR2c functions as a receptor for FGF1, FGF2, FGF4, FGF6, FGF9, FGF16, FGF17, FGF18 and FGF20. FGFR2 transduces FGF signals to Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase(ERK), phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)-Akt, Ca²⁺, and diacylglycerol (DAG) signaling cascades. The FGF-ERK signaling cascade is involved in cell proliferation. The FGF-PI3K signaling cascade is involved in cell survival and polarity control. Sprouty inhibits the FGF-ERK signaling cascade at growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 and Raf, whereas dual-specificity phosphatase inhibits the FGF-ERK signaling cascade at ERK. FGFR2 is regulated on the basis of the balance of FGFs, heparan-sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG), FGFR2 isoforms, and endogenous inhibitors.

whereas diacylglycerol activates protein kinase C, protein kinase D, or RasGRP (guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein) signaling cascades. FGFR2 transduces FGF signals to Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase, phosphoinositide-3 kinase-Akt, Ca²⁺, and diacylglycerol signaling cascades (Figure 1). FGFR2 is regulated on the basis of the balance of FGFs, heparan-sulfate proteoglycans, FGFR2 isoforms, and endogenous inhibitors (Figure 1). Sprouty inhibits the FGF-extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling cascade at growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 and Raf, whereas dual-specificity phosphatase inhibits the FGF-extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling cascade at extracellular signal-regulated kinase. microRNAs (miRNAs) are emerging as crucial regulators of various signaling networks (Bartel, 2004; Negrini et al., 2007; Grosshans and Filipowicz, 2008; Katoh and Katoh, 2008). MiR-433 represses translation of FGF20 in individuals with the C allele of the rs12720208 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (Wang et al., 2008), whereas miR-21 represses translation of functions of FGFR signaling inhibitor, Spry1 (Thum et al., 2008). Germline Fgfr2b-knockout mice die shortly after birth because of multiple-

senchymal condensation process. FGFR2 is also expressed on preosteoblasts and osteoblasts during the later phase of bone formation (Eswarakumar et al., 2002). The nuclear factor-Y transcription factor binds to the evolutionarily conserved CCAAT motif in the proximal promoter region of FGFR2 gene, and is involved in basal expression of FGFR2 (Sun et al., 2009). Bone morphogenetic protein 2 induces FGFR2 upregulation in C3H10T1/2 embryonic-fibroblast cells; however, the mechanism of the FGFR2 induction by bone morphogenetic protein-Smad signaling remains unclear. As FGFR2 is involved in bone formation, FGFR2 is a causative gene for several congenital skeletal disorders manifested by short-limbed bone dysplasia or craniosynostosis (Passos-Bueno et al., 1999; Kan et al., 2002; Wilkie, 2005).

The FGFR2 gene is mutated in Crouzon syndrome (Reardon et al., 1994), Jackson-Weiss syndrome (Jabs et al., 1994), Apert syndrome (Wilkie et al., 1995), Pfeiffer syndrome (Rutland et al., 1995), Beare-Stevenson syndrome (Przylepa et al., 1996), and Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (Paznekas et al., 1998). Missense mutations of FGFR2 in congenital skeletal disorders are clustered around the third immunoglobulin-like domain or within the tyrosine kinase domain (Figure 2). Amino-acid substitutions around the third immunoglobulin-like domain induce autocrine FGFR2 activation through altered FGF-binding specificity (Yu et al., 2000), whereas those in the tyrosine kinase domain induce ligand-independent FGFR2 activation by the releasing FGFR2 from autoinhibition (Chen et al., 2007).

Breast cancer Gene amplification of the FGFR2 gene occurs in primary breast cancer (Adnane et al., 1991). FGFR2 gene amplification results in overexpression of the FGFR2 gene products, especially C-terminally truncated FGFR2 protein, because of the exclusion of the last exon from the amplicon during the gene amplification process (Katoh and Katoh, 2003a). C-terminally truncated FGFR2 induces constitutive activation of FGFR2 signaling cascades in a

HUMAN DISORDERS OR DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH FGFR2

Congenital skeletal disorders FGFR2c is expressed on mesenchymal cells during the early phase of long-bone formation, known as the me-

Table 1. Genetic variations and alterations of FGFR2

| Disease                     | Germ or soma          | Genetic alteration or variation         | Reference               |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| **Cancer**                 |                       |                                        |                         |
| Breast cancer              | Somatic               | Copy-number gain                      | Adnane et al. (1991)    |
|                            | Somatic               | Missense mutation                     | Stephens et al. (2005)  |
|                            | Germ-line             | Intronic regulatory SNPs              | Easton et al. (2007)    |
| Gastric cancer             | Somatic               | Copy-number gain                      | Nakatani et al. (1990)  |
|                            | Somatic               | Missense mutation                     | Jang et al. (2001)      |
| Endometrial uterus cancer   | Somatic               | Missense mutation                     | Pollock et al. (2007)   |
| Lung cancer                | Somatic               | Missense mutation                     | Davies et al. (2005)    |
| Melanoma                   | Somatic               | Missense mutation                     | Gartside et al. (2009)  |
| **Non-cancerous disease**  |                       |                                        |                         |
| Crouzon syndrome           | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Reardon et al. (1994)   |
| Jackson-Weiss syndrome     | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Jabs et al. (1994)      |
| Apert syndrome             | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Wilkie et al. (1995)    |
| Pfeiffer syndrome          | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Rutland et al. (1995)   |
| Beare-Stevenson syndrome   | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Przylepa et al. (1996)  |
| Saethre-Chotzen syndrome   | Germ-line             | Missense mutation                     | Paznekas et al. (1998)  |
| Atopic dermatitis          | Germ-line             | Intronic marker SNPs                  | Park et al. (2008)      |

FGFR2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 2; SNPs, single-nucleotide polymorphisms.

ligand-independent manner (Moffa and Ethier, 2007). R203C missense mutation of the FGFR2 gene also occurs in primary breast cancer (Stephens et al., 2005). FGFR2 signaling is aberrantly activated in breast cancer through genetic alterations of FGFR2.

Genome-wide association studies and candidate-approach association studies showed that rs35054928, rs2981578, rs2912778, rs2912781, rs35393331, rs10736303, rs7895676, and rs33971856 SNPs in intron 2 of the FGFR2 gene are associated with breast cancer (Easton et al., 2007; Huijts et al., 2007; Hunter et al., 2007; Meyer et al., 2008; Stacey et al., 2008). A putative estrogen receptor (ER)-binding site is created on the risk allele of rs10736303 (Easton et al., 2007). FGFR2 is preferentially upregulated in ER-positive primary breast cancer (Tozlu et al., 2006), and the FGFR2 risk allele is associated with ER-positive breast cancer (Stacey et al., 2008).

Gastric cancer

Gastric cancer is classified into the intestinal type and the diffuse type (Lauren, 1965). The ERBB2 gene is preferentially amplified in the intest-

inal-type gastric cancer, frequently associated with liver metastasis, whereas the FGFR2 gene is preferentially amplified in the diffuse-type gastric cancer, frequently associated with peritoneal dissemination. The two types of gastric cancer, with distinct clinicopathological features, show type-specific genetic alterations (Katoh and Terada, 1993; Katoh and Katoh, 2004).

FGFR2 signaling is aberrantly activated in diffuse-type gastric cancer because of gene amplification or missense mutations (Nakatani et al., 1990; Jang et al., 2001). Small-molecule FGFR inhibitor Ki23057 inhibits proliferation and peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer cells with FGFR2 gene amplification, mainly by inhibitory effects on the MAPK signaling cascade (Nakamura et al., 2006). Small-molecule FGFR inhibitors PD173074 and AZD2171 also show similar effects (Mohammadi et al., 1998; Wedge et al., 2005).

The association between SNPs in intron 2 of the FGFR2 gene and diffuse-type gastric cancer remains unknown. As diffuse-type gastric cancer is enriched in reproductive females, it is speculated that diffuse-type gastric

cancer might be associated with ER signaling at least in reproductive females. Therefore, large-scale stratified analyses should be carried out on FGFR2 SNPs and ER status in diffuse-type gastric cancer.

Endometrial uterine cancer

Missense mutations of the FGFR2 gene also occur in endometrial uterine cancer, resulting in amino-acid substitutions around the third immunoglobulin-like domain (S252W, K310R, S373C, Y376C, C383R, M392R), and those in the tyrosine-kinase domain (I547V, N549K, K659E) (Pollock et al., 2007). These FGFR2 mutations result in aberrant activation of FGFR2 signaling as mentioned above. The small-molecule FGFR inhibitor PD173074 inhibits proliferation and survival of endometrial uterine-cancer cells with FGFR2 mutations (Dutt et al., 2008).

The breast cancer risk allele of rs2981578 SNP in intron 2 of the FGFR2 gene is associated with a decreased, rather than increased, risk of endometrial uterine cancer (McGrath et al., 2008). As the uterus is an estrogen-responsive organ, large-scale stratified analyses should also be carried out on FGFR2 SNPs and ER status in endometrial uterine cancer.

CUTANEOUS PHENOTYPES OF FGFR2 ALTERATION OR VARIATION

Cutaneous FGFR2b

FGFR2b is expressed in epidermal keratinocytes, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands (Danilenko et al., 1995; auf dem Keller et al., 2004). FGF7, FGF10, and FGF22 are FGFR2b ligands secreted by fibroblast, smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, skin dermis, and γδT cells to induce proliferation and differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes (Finch et al., 1989; Smola et al., 1993; Boismenu and Havran, 1994; Winkles et al., 1997; Marchese et al., 2001). For example, FGF7 expression in mesenchymal cells is upregulated by platelet-derived growth factor derived from platelets and by IL-1, IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α derived from polymorphonuclear leukocytes or macrophages (Werner et al., 1992; Brauchle et al., 1994; Chedid et al., 1994). FGFR2b ligands are

M Katoh
FGFR2 Genetics and Skin Phenotypes

Altered ligand affinity
Hinge between Ig-like domains
S252W, S252F, P253R, H254W, etc.
Around C278 of 3rd Ig-like domains
P263L, C278Y, Y281C, W290C, etc.
Around C342 of 3rd Ig-like domains
Y340C, C342F, S347C, S351C, etc.

Altered kinase activity
WT
K526E
D530N
N549H
N549T
E565A
E565G
K641R
I642V
A648T
K669N
G663E
R678G

Conditional-FGFR2b knockout in the skin epidermis leads to an increased incidence of SCC in mice treated with 7,12-dimethylbenz[α]anthracene and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (Grose et al., 2007). Intraepithelial γδT cells are involved in the production of FGFR2 ligand during the wound-healing process, and mice lacking γδT cells also show an increased incidence of 7,12-dimethylbenz[α]anthracene/12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced SCC (Girardi et al., 2001). As FGFR2b is involved in the maintenance of cutaneous homeostasis and in wound healing, inactivation of FGFR2b results in enhanced sensitivity of the mouse skin to chemical carcinogenesis.

Acne
The FGFR2 gene is mutated in Apert syndrome, as mentioned above (Wilkie et al., 1995). Apert-syndrome patients with craniosynostosis show early onset of severe acne, spreading in an unusual pattern to the extensor aspects of the forearms (Solomon et al., 1970). Epidermal FGFR2 mutations because of genetic mosaicism also result in severe acne, which is characterized as unilateral acneiform nevus (Munro and Wilkie, 1998).

As androgen receptor (AR)-induced upregulation of FGF7 or FGF10 in skin mesenchymal cells results in FGFR2b activation in the sebaceous gland, FGFR2 is predicted to be involved in the pathogenesis of acne (Melnik and Schmitz, 2008).

Cutis gyrata and acanthosis nigricans
The FGFR2 gene is mutated in Beare-Stevenson syndrome, as mentioned above (Przylepa et al., 1996). Beare-Stevenson syndrome is featured by craniosynostosis and skin phenotypes, such as cutis gyrata and acanthosis nigricans (Hall et al., 1992). Cutis gyrata is characterized by skin furrows of corrugated appearance, particularly on the face, near the ears, and sometimes on the palms and soles. Acanthosis nigricans is characterized by pigmented velvety areas on the hands, feet, or genital region. The mechanisms by which cutis gyrata and acanthosis nigricans are induced

Figure 2. Domain architecture and mutations of FGFR2. Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)2b and FGFR2c are transmembrane-type receptors with extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains and cytoplasmic tyrosine-kinase domain. Wild-type FGFR2 kinase is autoinhibited in the absence of FGF signaling by the kinase hinge, constituted by N549, E565 and K641, and it is activated in the presence of FGF signaling by autophosphorylation of Y657 in the activation loop. Missense mutations around the third immunoglobulin-like domain results in altered ligand affinity. Some missense mutations in the kinase domain increase the kinase activity in congenital skeletal disorders and in endometrial cancer, whereas other missense mutations in the kinase domain decrease kinase activity at least in vitro.

upregulated in the skin by cytokines and growth factors during physiological and pathological processes (auf dem-Keller et al., 2004).

Melanoma
Recently, missense mutations of FGFR2c around the third immunoglobulin-like domain or in the tyrosine-kinase domain were also reported in melanoma (Gartside et al., 2009). FGFR2c mutations in melanoma around the third immunoglobulin-like domain are involved in altered ligand specificity, which is similar to congenital skeletal diseases and other types of cancer (Figure 2). FGFR2c mutations in melanoma in the tyrosine kinase domain, such as D530N, I642V, and A648T, are associated with decreased, rather than increased, kinase activity in vitro, but they are not associated with decreased tumorigenicity in vivo (Gartside et al., 2009). The D530N mutation is predicted to affect the structure of the kinase hinge, whereas I642V and A648T mutations are predicted to affect the structure of the autophosphorylation loop (Figure 2).

Mouse cutaneous SCC
Epidermal growth and hair-follicle morphogenesis are severely hampered in the skin of the germline-Fgfr2b-knockout mice (Revest et al., 2001; Petiot et al., 2003). Conditional-knock-out technology expressing Cre recombinase under the control of bovine keratin 5 promoter (Cre-K5) in FGFR2b<sup>flox/flox</sup> mice was then applied to elucidate the role of FGFR2b during skin homeostasis. Mice lacking FGFR2b in the skin epidermis manifest a thin and silky coat, sebaceous gland atrophy, increased macrophage infiltration to the dermis and the adipose tissue, and epidermal thickening accompanied by basal-layer dysplasia and parakeratosis (Grose et al., 2007).
by the FGFR2 mutations remain unclear.

Atopic dermatitis

Atopic dermatitis is a chronic, relapsing, inflammatory skin disorder characterized by enhanced IgE responses to common environmental allergens (Cooper, 1994). Genetic predisposition and environmental insult result in altered epidermal structure and function, and the hyper-activated immune system then disrupts skin-barrier homeostasis (Elias and Steinhoff, 2008). On the basis of a candidate-approach association study using 525 cases of atopic dermatitis, it was recently claimed that a haplotype of SNPs in intron 17 of the FGFR2 gene is associated with atopic dermatitis with a P-value of 0.01 (Park et al., 2008). As the association is not strong, a large-scale confirmatory study is necessary to draw conclusions.

PERSPECTIVES ON THE DERMATOLOGICAL GENETICS OF FGFR2

Melanoma

FGFR2c mutations identified in melanoma are informative for understanding the regulatory mechanisms of FGFR2 kinase (Figure 2). However, as FGF2 signaling through FGFR1c plays a pivotal role in the proliferation and survival of melanoma cells (Halaban, 1996; Wang and Becker, 1997), loss-of-function mutations of FGFR2c in melanoma might be passenger mutations. Bi-allelic analyses of FGFR2c mutations or deletions in human melanoma, as well as in vivo analyses using conditional FGFR2-knockout and a mutant FGFR2c transgenic mouse model, are necessary to elucidate the biological role of FGFR2c mutations in melanoma.

Human cutaneous SCC

As mouse genetics indicates that FGFR2b functions as a tumor suppressor in the skin epidermis, as mentioned above, it is predicted that decreased FGFR2b signaling is favorable for the development of SCC in human skin. Breast cancer risk alleles of FGFR2 SNPs might be inversely correlated with the risk of human cutaneous SCC. Alternatively, deletions or loss-of-function mutations of the FGFR2

gene might occur in human cutaneous SCC. Therefore, genetic and genomic analyses of the FGFR2 gene are necessary to clarify the association between FGFR2b inactivation and human cutaneous SCC.

BCC

BCC is one of most common malignancies among Caucasians (Bastiaens et al., 1998). BCC occurs because of genetic predispositions and environmental insults by UV light. Nevvoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is characterized by cutaneous BCC, epidermal cysts, palmar pits, jaw keratocysts, calcified dural folds, skeletal anomalies, cleft lip, and other tumors such as medulloblastoma and meningioma (Gorlin, 1995). Loss-of-function mutations of the patched/PTCH1 gene and gain-of-function mutations of the smoothened/SMO gene occur in nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, as well as in sporadic BCC (Gailani et al., 1996; Hahn et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 1996; Reifenberger et al., 1998; Wicking et al., 1999). Patched is a receptor for the hedgehog family members (Stone et al., 1996), whereas smoothened is a signal transducer of the hedgehog signaling cascade (van den Heuvel and Ingham, 1996). Hedgehog signaling activation is the driving force of BCC (Epstein, 2008). As the FGF-FGFR2b signaling cascade cross-talks with the hedgehog signaling cascade (Bellusci et al., 1997; Revest et al., 2001; Spencer-Dene et al., 2006), the combined effects of FGFR2 SNPs and environmental factors in BCC should be further investigated in the future.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The identification of a large number of mutations in the FGFR2 gene has provided fascinating insight into the etiology of several skin and bone diseases, as well as some malignancies. The spectrum of disorders is underscored by a range of germline or somatic gain-of-function mutations or loss-of-function mutations in FGFR2. With regard to carcinogenesis, FGFR2 can have a dual role, acting either as an oncogene or as a tumor-suppressor gene. Observations in rodent models that oral administration of AZD2171 or

Ki23057 inhibits in vivo proliferation of cancer cells with aberrant FGFR2 signaling activation provide a rationale for exploring the therapeutic potential of similar FGFR2 inhibitors in humans with malignancies associated with activating FGFR2 mutations or FGFR2 gene amplification. Nevertheless, FGFR2 inhibitors have the potential to disrupt several beneficial homeostatic processes, including cytoprotective mechanisms against environmental insults, such as UV irradiation, X-ray irradiation, chronic infection, and tobacco smoke. Consequently, any future pre-clinical studies on FGFR2 inhibitors will carefully need to consider the risk-benefit ratio, notwithstanding the considerable therapeutic modification these drugs might have on disease and tumor biology.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The author states no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

Adnane J, Gaudray P, Dionne CA, Crumley G, Jaye M, Schlessinger J et al. (1991) BEK and FLG, two receptors to members of the FGF family, are amplified in subsets of human breast cancers. *Oncogene* 6:659–63

auf demKeller U, Krampert M, Kümin A, Braun S, Werner S (2004) Keratinocyte growth factor: effects on keratinocytes and mechanisms of action. *Eur J Cell Biol* 83:607–12

Bartel DP (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. *Cell* 116:281–97

Bastiaens MT, Hoefnagel JJ, Bruijn JA, Westendorp RG, Vermeer BJ, Bouwes Bavinck JN (1998) Differences in age, site distribution, and sex between nodular and superficial basal cell carcinoma indicate different types of tumors. *J Invest Dermatol* 110:880–4

Bellusci S, Grindley J, Emoto H, Itoh N, Hogan BL (1997) Fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10) and branching morphogenesis in the embryonic mouse lung. *Development* 124:4867–78

Boismenu R, Havran WL (1994) Modulation of epithelial cell growth by intraepithelial γδT cells. *Science* 266:1253–5

Brauchle M, Angermeyer K, Hübner G, Werner S (1994) Large induction of keratinocyte growth factor expression by serum growth factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines in cultured fibroblasts. *Oncogene* 9:3199–204

Chaffer CL, Dopheide B, Savagner P, Thompson EW, Williams ED (2007) Aberrant fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling in bladder and other cancers. *Differentiation* 75:831–42

Chedid M, Rubin JS, Csaky KG, Aaronson SA (1994) Regulation of keratinocyte growth

www.jidonline.org 1865
M Katoh
FGFR2 Genetics and Skin Phenotypes

factor gene expression by interleukin 1.
J Biol Chem 269:10753–7

Chen H, Ma J, Li W, Eliseenkova AV, Xu C,
Neubert TA *et al.* (2007) A molecular brake
in the kinase hinge region regulates the
activity of receptor tyrosine kinases.
*Mol Cell* 27:717–30

Cooper KD (1994) Atopic dermatitis: recent trends
in pathogenesis and therapy.
*J Invest Dermatol* 102:128–37

Dailey L, Ambrosetti D, Mansukhani A, Basilico C
(2005) Mechanisms underlying differential
responses to FGF signaling.
*Cytokine Growth Factor Rev* 16:233–47

Danilenko DM, Ring BD, Yanagihara D, Benson
W, Wiemann B, Starnes CO *et al.* (1995)
Keratinocyte growth factor is an important
endogenous mediator of hair follicle growth,
development, and differentiation. Normal-
ization of the nu/nu follicular differentiation
defect and amelioration of chemotherapy-
induced alopecia.
*Am J Pathol* 147:145–54

Davies H, Hunter C, Smith R, Stephens P,
Greenman C, Bignell G *et al.* (2005) Somatic
mutations of the protein kinase gene family
in human lung cancer.
*Cancer Res* 65:7591–5

De Moerlooze L, Spencer-Dene B, Revest JM,
Hajihosseini M, Rosewell I, Dickson C
(2000) An important role for the IIIb isoform
of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2
(FGFR2) in mesenchymal-epithelial signal-
ling during mouse organogenesis.
*Development* 127:483–92

Dionne CA, Crumley G, Bellot F, Kaplow JM,
Searfoss G, Ruta M *et al.* (1990) Cloning and
expression of two distinct high-affinity re-
ceptors cross-reacting with acidic and basic
fibroblast growth factors.
*EMBO J* 9:2685–92

Dutt A, Salvesen HB, Chen TH, Ramos AH,
Onofrio RC, Hatton C *et al.* (2008) Drug-
sensitive FGFR2 mutations in endometrial
carcinoma.
*Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 105:8713–7

Easton DF, Pooley KA, Dunning AM, Pharoah PD,
Thompson D, Ballinger DG *et al.* (2007)
Genome-wide association study identifies
novel breast cancer susceptibility loci.
*Nature* 447:1087–93

Elias PM, Steinhoff M (2008) “Outside-to-inside”
(and now back to “outside”) pathogenic
mechanisms in atopic dermatitis.
*J Invest Dermatol* 128:1067–70

Epstein EH (2008) Basal cell carcinomas: attack of
the hedgehog.
*Nat Rev Cancer* 8:743–54

Eswarakumar VP, Lax I, Schlessinger J (2005)
Cellular signaling by fibroblast growth factor
receptors.
*Cytokine Growth Factor Rev* 16:139–49

Eswarakumar VP, Monsonego-Ornan E, Pines M,
Antonopoulou I, Morriss-Kay GM, Lonai P
(2002) The IIIc alternative of Fgfr2 is a
positive regulator of bone formation.
*Development* 129:3783–93

Finch PW, Rubin JS, Miki T, Ron D, Aaronson SA
(1989) Human KGF is FGF-related with
properties of a paracrine effector of epithelial
cell growth.
*Science* 245:752–6

Gailani MR, Ståhle-Bäckdahl M, Leffell DJ, Glynn
M, Zaphiropoulos PG, Pressman C *et al.*
(1996) The role of the human homologue of
*Drosophila patched* in sporadic basal cell
carcinomas.
*Nat Genet* 14:78–81

Gartside MG, Chen H, Ibrahim OA, Byron SA,
Curtis AV, Wellens CL *et al.* (2009) Loss-of-
function fibroblast growth factor receptor-2
mutations in melanoma.
*Mol Cancer Res* 7:41–54

Girardi M, Oppenheim DE, Steele CR, Lewis JM,
Glusac E, Filler R *et al.* (2001) Regulation of
cutaneous malignancy by γδ T cells.
*Science* 294:605–9

Gorlin RJ (1995) Nevvoid basal cell carcinoma
syndrome.
*Dermatol Clin* 13:113–25

Grose R, Dickson C (2005) Fibroblast growth
factor signaling in tumorigenesis.
*Cytokine Growth Factor Rev* 16:179–86

Grose R, Fantl V, Werner S, Chioni AM, Jarosz M,
Rudling R *et al.* (2007) The role of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2b in skin home-
ostasis and cancer development.
*EMBO J* 26:1268–78

Grosshans H, Filipowicz W (2008) Molecular
biology: the expanding world of small RNAs.
*Nature* 451:414–6

Hadari YR, Gotoh N, Kouhara H, Lax I, Schles-
singer J (2001) Critical role for the docking-
protein FRS2a in FGF receptor-mediated
signal transduction pathways.
*Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 98:8578–83

Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG, Gailani
MR, Shanley S, Chidambaram A *et al.* (1996)
Mutations of the human homolog of *Droso-
phila patched* in the nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.
*Cell* 85:841–51

Halaban R (1996) Growth factors and melano-
mas.
*Semin Oncol* 23:673–81

Hall BD, Cadle RG, Golabi M, Morris CA, Cohen
MM Jr (1992) Beare-Stevenson cutis gyrata
syndrome.
*Am J Med Genet* 44:82–9

Huijts PE, Vreeswijk MP, Kroeze-Jansema KH,
Jacobi CE, Seynaeve C, Krol-Warmerdam EM
*et al.* (2007) Clinical correlates of low-risk
variants in FGFR2, TNRC9, MAP3K1, LSP1
and 8q24 in a Dutch cohort of incident
breast cancer cases.
*Breast Cancer Res* 9:R78

Hunter DJ, Kraft P, Jacobs KB, Cox DG, Yeager M,
Hankinson SE *et al.* (2007) A genome-wide
association study identifies alleles in FGFR2
associated with risk of sporadic postmeno-
pausal breast cancer.
*Nat Genet* 39:870–4

Itoh N, Ornitz DM (2004) Evolution of the *Fgf* and
*Fgfr* gene families.
*Trends Genet* 20:563–9

Jabs EW, Li X, Scott AF, Meyers G, Chen W,
Eccles M *et al.* (1994) Jackson-Weiss and
Crouzon syndromes are allelic with muta-
tions in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2.
*Nat Genet* 8:275–9

Jang JH, Shin KH, Park JG (2001) Mutations in
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 and fibro-
blast growth factor receptor 3 genes asso-
ciated with human gastric and colorectal
cancers.
*Cancer Res* 61:3541–3

Johnson RL, Rothman AL, Xie J, Goodrich LV,
Bare JW, Bonifas JM *et al.* (1996) Human
homolog of *patched*, a candidate gene for

the basal cell nevus syndrome.
*Science* 272:1668–71

Kan SH, Elanko N, Johnson D, Cornejo-Roldan L,
Cook J, Reich EW *et al.* (2002) Genomic
screening of fibroblast growth-factor receptor
2 reveals a wide spectrum of mutations in
patients with syndromic craniosynostosis.
*Am J Hum Genet* 70:472–86

Katoh M (2008) Cancer genomics and genetics of
FGFR2.
*Int J Oncol* 33:233–7

Katoh M, Katoh M (2003a) FGFR2 and WDR11
are neighboring oncogene and tumor sup-
pressor gene on human chromosome 10q26.
*Int J Oncol* 22:1155–9

Katoh M, Katoh M (2003b) Recombination cluster
around FGFR2-WDR11-HTPAPL locus on
human chromosome 10q26.
*Int J Mol Med* 11:579–83

Katoh M, Katoh M (2004) Pharmacogenomics on
gastric cancer.
*Cancer Biol Ther* 3:566–7

Katoh M, Terada M (1993) Oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. In: Gastric Cancer. (Nishi M,
*et al.*, eds), Tokyo: Springer-Verlag, 196–208

Katoh Y, Katoh M (2008) Hedgehog signaling,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
miRNA.
*Int J Mol Med* 22:271–5

Lauren P (1965) The two histological main types
of gastric carcinoma: diffuse and so-called
intestinal-type carcinoma. An attempt at a
histo-clinical classification.
*Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand* 64:31–49

Luo Y, Ye S, Kan M, McKeehan WL (2006)
Control of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 7-
and FGF1-induced mitogenesis and down-
stream signaling by distinct heparin octasac-
charide motifs.
*J Biol Chem* 281:21052–61

Marchese C, Felici A, Visco V, Lucania G,
Igarashi M, Picardo M *et al.* (2001) Fibroblast
growth factor 10 induces proliferation and
differentiation of human primary cultured
keratinocytes.
*J Invest Dermatol* 116:623–8

McGrath M, Lee IM, Buring J, Hunter DJ, De Vivo
I (2008) Novel breast cancer risk alleles and
endometrial cancer risk.
*Int J Cancer* 123:2961–4

Melnik B, Schmitz G (2008) FGFR2 signaling and
the pathogenesis of acne.
*J Dtsch Dermatol Ges* 6:721–8

Meyer KB, Maia AT, O’Reilly M, Teschendorff AE,
Chin SF, Caldas C *et al.* (2008) Allele-
specific up-regulation of FGFR2 increases
susceptibility to breast cancer.
*PLoS Biol* 6:e108

Miki T, Fleming TP, Bottaro DP, Rubin JS, Ron D,
Aaronson SA (1991) Expression cDNA clon-
ing of the KGF receptor by creation of a
transforming autocrine loop.
*Science* 251:72–5

Moffa AB, Ethier SP (2007) Differential signal
transduction of alternatively spliced FGFR2
variants expressed in human mammary
epithelial cells.
*J Cell Physiol* 210:720–31

Mohammadi M, Froem S, Hamby JM, Schroeder
MC, Panek RL, Lu GH *et al.* (1998) Crystal
structure of an angiogenesis inhibitor bound
to the FGF receptor tyrosine kinase domain.
*EMBO J* 17:5896–904

1866 Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2009), Volume 129
Mohammadi M, Olsen SK, Goetz R (2005) A protein canyon in the FGF-FGF receptor dimer selects from an à la carte menu of heparan sulfate motifs. *Curr Opin Struct Biol* 15:506–16

Munro CS, Wilkie AOM (1998) Epidermal mosaicism producing localized acne: somatic mutation in FGFR2. *Lancet* 352:704–5

Nakamura K, Yashiro M, Matsuoka T, Tendo M, Shimizu T, Miwa A *et al.* (2006) A novel molecular targeting compound as K-samll/FGF-R2 phosphorylation inhibitor, Ki23057, for ScirrhouS gastric cancer. *Gastroenterology* 131:1530–41

Nakatani H, Sakamoto H, Yoshida T, Yokota J, Tahara E, Sugimura T *et al.* (1990) Isolation of an amplified DNA sequence in stomach cancer. *Jpn J Cancer Res* 81:707–10

Negrini M, Ferracin M, Sabbioni S, Croce CM (2007) MicroRNAs in human cancer: from research to therapy. *J Cell Sci* 120:1833–40

Ornitz DM, Xu J, Colvin JS, McEwen DG, MacArthur CA, Coulier F *et al.* (1996) Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth factor family. *J Biol Chem* 271:15292–7

Park HK, Park HW, Jeon SG, Shin ES, Gho YS, Cho SH *et al.* (2008) Distinct association of genetic variations of vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor-β, and fibroblast growth factor receptors with atopy and airway hyperresponsiveness. *Allergy* 63:447–53

Passos-Bueno MR, Wilcox WR, Jabs EW, Sertie AL, Alonso LG, Kitoh H (1999) Clinical spectrum of fibroblast growth factor receptor mutations. *Hum Mutat* 14:115–25

Paznekas WA, Cunningham ML, Howard TD, Korf BR, Lipson MH, Grix AW *et al.* (1998) Genetic heterogeneity of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, due to TWIST and FGFR mutations. *Am J Hum Genet* 62:1370–80

Petiot A, Conti FJ, Grose R, Revest JM, Hodivala-Dilke KM, Dickson C (2003) A crucial role for Fgfr2-Illb signalling in epidermal development and hair follicle patterning. *Development* 130:5493–501

Pollock PM, Gartside MG, Dejeza LC, Powell MA, Mallon MA, Davies H *et al.* (2007) Frequent activating FGFR2 mutations in endometrial carcinomas parallel germline mutations associated with craniosynostosis and skeletal dysplasia syndromes. *Oncogene* 26:7158–62

Przylepa KA, Paznekas W, Zhang M, Golabi M, Bias W, Bamshad MJ *et al.* (1996) Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 mutations in Beare-Stevenson cutis gyrata syndrome. *Nat Genet* 13:492–4

Reardon W, Winter RM, Rutland P, Pulleyn LJ, Jones BM, Malcolm S (1994) Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene cause Crouzon syndrome. *Nat Genet* 8:98–103

Reifenberger J, Wolter M, Weber RG, Megahed M, Ruzicka T, Lichter P *et al.* (1998)

Missense mutations in SMOH in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central nervous system. *Cancer Res* 58:1798–803

Revest JM, Spencer-Dene B, Kerr K, De Moerlooze L, Rosewell I, Dickson C (2001) Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2-Illb acts upstream of Shh and Fgf4 and is required for limb bud maintenance but not for the induction of Fgf8, Fgf10, Msx1, or Bmp4. *Dev Biol* 231:47–62

Rutland P, Pulleyn LJ, Reardon W, Baraitser M, Hayward R, Jones B *et al.* (1995) Identical mutations in the FGFR2 gene cause both Pfeiffer and Crouzon syndrome phenotypes. *Nat Genet* 9:173–6

Savagner P, Vallés AM, Jouanneau J, Yamada KM, Thiery JP (1994) Alternative splicing in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 is associated with induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in rat bladder carcinoma cells. *Mol Biol Cell* 5:851–62

Smola H, Thiekötter G, Fusenig NE (1993) Mutual induction of growth factor gene expression by epidermal-dermal cell interaction. *J Cell Biol* 122:417–29

Solomon LM, Fretzin D, Pruzansky S (1970) Pilosebaceous abnormalities in Apert’s syndrome. *Arch Dermatol* 102:381–5

Spencer-Dene B, Sala FG, Bellusci S, Gschmeissner S, Stamp G, Dickson C (2006) Stomach development is dependent on fibroblast growth factor 10/fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b-mediated signaling. *Gastroenterology* 130:1233–44

Stacey SN, Manolescu A, Sulem P, Thorlacius S, Gudjonsson SA, Jonsson GF *et al.* (2008) Common variants on chromosome 5p12 confer susceptibility to estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. *Nat Genet* 40:703–6

Stephens P, Edkins S, Davies H, Greenman C, Cox C, Hunter C *et al.* (2005) A screen of the complete protein kinase gene family identifies diverse patterns of somatic mutations in human breast cancer. *Nat Genet* 37:590–2

Stone DM, Hynes M, Armanini M, Swanson TA, Gu Q, Johnson RL *et al.* (1996) The tumour-suppressor gene patched encodes a candidate receptor for Sonic hedgehog. *Nature* 384:129–34

Sun F, Xie Q, Ma J, Yang S, Chen Q, Hong A (2009) NF-Y is required for basal activation and chromatin accessibility of FGFR2 promoter in osteoblast-like cells. *J Biol Chem* 284:3136–47

Thum T, Gross C, Fiedler J, Fischer T, Kissler S, Bussen M *et al.* (2008) MicroRNA-21 contributes to myocardial disease by stimulating MAP kinase signalling in fibroblasts. *Nature* 456:980–4

Tozlu S, Girault I, Vacher S, Vendrell J, Andrieu C, Spyratos F *et al.* (2006) Identification of novel genes that co-cluster with estrogen receptor α in breast tumor biopsy specimens,

using a large-scale real-time reverse transcription-PCR approach. *Endocr Relat Cancer* 13:1109–20

van den Heuvel M, Ingham PW (1996) *smoothened* encodes a receptor-like serpentine protein required for hedgehog signalling. *Nature* 382:547–51

Wang G, van der Walt JM, Mayhew G, Li YJ, Züchner S, Scott WK *et al.* (2008) Variation in the miRNA-433 binding sites of FGF20 confers risk for Parkinson disease by over-expression of α-synuclein. *Am J Hum Genet* 82:283–9

Wang JK, Xu H, Li HC, Goldfarb M (1996) Broadly expressed SNT-like proteins link FGF receptor stimulation to activators of Ras. *Oncogene* 13:721–9

Wang Y, Becker D (1997) Antisense targeting of basic fibroblast growth factor and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 in human melanomas blocks intratumoral angiogenesis and tumor growth. *Nat Med* 3:887–93

Wedge SR, Kendrew J, Hennequin LF, Valentine PJ, Barry ST, Brave SR *et al.* (2005) AZD2171: a highly potent, orally bioavailable, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor for the treatment of cancer. *Cancer Res* 65:4389–400

Werner S, Peters KG, Longaker MT, Fuller-Pace F, Banda M, Williams LT (1992) Large induction of keratinocyte growth factor expression in the dermis during wound healing. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 89:6896–900

Wicking C, Smyth I, Bale A (1999) The hedgehog signalling pathway in tumorigenesis and development. *Oncogene* 18:7844–51

Wilkie AO (2005) Bad bones, absent smell, selfish testes: the pleiotropic consequences of human FGF receptor mutations. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev* 16:187–203

Wilkie AO, Slaney SF, Oldridge M, Poole MD, Ashworth GJ, Hockley AD *et al.* (1995) Apert syndrome results from localized mutations of FGFR2 and is allelic with Crouzon syndrome. *Nat Genet* 9:165–72

Winkles JA, Alberts GF, Chedid M, Taylor WG, Demartino S, Rubin JS (1997) Differential expression of the keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and KGF receptor genes in human vascular smooth muscle cells and arteries. *J Cell Physiol* 173:380–6

Yu K, Herr AB, Waksman G, Ornitz DM (2000) Loss of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 ligand-binding specificity in Apert syndrome. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 97:14536–41

Zhang X, Ibrahim OA, Olsen SK, Umemori H, Mohammadi M, Ornitz DM (2006) Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth factor family: the complete mammalian FGF family. *J Biol Chem* 281:15694–700

www.jidonline.org 1867