
ARTICLES

nature  
structural &  
molecular biology  

---

**A conserved structural motif mediates formation of the periplasmic rings in the type III secretion system**

Thomas Spreter¹, Calvin K Yip¹,⁸, Sarah Sanowar², Ingemar André³, Tyler G Kimbrough⁴,⁸, Marija Vuckovic¹, Richard A Pfuetzner², Wanyin Deng⁵, Angel C Yu¹, B Brett Finlay⁵, David Baker³, Samuel I Miller²,⁶,⁷ & Natalie C J Strynadka¹

The type III secretion system (T3SS) is a macromolecular ‘injectisome’ that allows bacterial pathogens to transport virulence proteins into the eukaryotic host cell. This macromolecular complex is composed of connected ring-like structures that span both bacterial membranes. The crystal structures of the periplasmic domain of the outer membrane secretin EscC and the inner membrane protein PrgH reveal the conservation of a modular fold among the three proteins that form the outer membrane and inner membrane rings of the T3SS. This leads to the hypothesis that this conserved fold provides a common ring-building motif that allows for the assembly of the variably sized outer membrane and inner membrane rings characteristic of the T3SS. Using an integrated structural and experimental approach, we generated ring models for the periplasmic domain of EscC and placed them in the context of the assembled T3SS, providing evidence for direct interaction between the outer membrane and inner membrane ring components and an unprecedented span of the outer membrane secretin.

The T3SS is a multicomponent macromolecular assembly essential for the virulence of many important Gram-negative bacterial pathogens¹. More than 20 conserved proteins constitute the T3SS apparatus, which allows for the delivery of bacterial virulence proteins directly into host cells. The structural foundation of this apparatus is composed of a connected series of variably sized ring structures and a protruding ‘needle’²⁻⁷. Three conserved proteins form these homooligomeric ring assemblies (Fig. 1a): a highly conserved EscJ/PrgK/YscJ family member (from enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC), *Salmonella typhimurium* and *Yersinia* spp., respectively) forms the prominent inner membrane ring²⁻⁷. Recent studies on EscJ and PrgK, including the crystal structure of oligomeric EscJ and supporting biochemical data, established a 170-Å 24-subunit ring structure that is positioned on the periplasmic face of the inner membrane and anchored by an N-terminal lipidation and a C-terminal transmembrane helix⁸⁻¹⁰ (Fig. 1a). The EscD/PrgH/YscD family of bitopic membrane proteins, most well characterized in *S. typhimurium* (PrgH) consists of an N-terminal cytoplasmic domain and a larger C-terminal periplasmic domain¹⁻⁷,¹¹ (Fig. 1a). The C-terminal domain has been proposed to form a second distinct ring structure (of 18–24 subunits) that encompasses the adjacent EscJ/PrgK ring²⁻⁶,⁸,¹⁰. Finally, the highly conserved EscC/InvG/YscC T3SS component, which belongs to the secretin family of proteins, forms the sole outer membrane ring⁵⁻⁷,¹² (Fig. 1a).

Secretins are integral membrane proteins that function as the outer membrane portal common to several bacterial export pathways, including type II protein secretion, type III protein secretion, type IV pilus biogenesis and filamentous phage release¹²⁻¹⁸. Despite the diversity of these systems, secretins share a markedly similar overall structure and organization, with 12–14 subunits forming a ring structure of ~110 Å in diameter¹³⁻¹⁹. The secretin ring not only provides a channel for extrusion of bacterial proteins across the outer membrane, but also presents a crucial structural interface with other components of the various export apparatus at its periplasmic face. As such, all secretins consist of two major regions, as defined by sequence analysis: an N-terminal periplasmic region and a highly conserved, protease-resistant C-terminal region (often termed the ‘secretin homology region’) that is embedded in the outer membrane¹² (Fig. 1a). Comparison of EM maps of the full-length and protease-digested PulD secretin oligomer and nano-gold-labeling EM studies on the pIV secretin identified the localization and dimension of a protease-resistant C-terminal domain embedded within the outer membrane (gray box, Figs. 1–3) and furthermore defined the region on the periplasmic face of this protease-resistant core to be occupied by the N-terminal region, including the nano-gold-labeled N terminus of the secretin¹⁵,¹⁸ (black arrow, Figs. 1b and 3b).

---

¹Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Center for Blood Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.  
²Department of Genome Sciences, ³Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and ⁴Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. ⁵Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. ⁶Department of Microbiology and ⁷Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. ⁸Present addresses: Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA (C.K.Y.); Department of Otolaryngology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA (T.G.K.). Correspondence should be addressed to N.C.J.S. (natalie@byron.biochem.ubc.ca).

Received 21 November 2008; accepted 8 April 2009; published online 26 April 2009; doi:10.1038/nsmb.1603

VOLUME 16   NUMBER 5   MAY 2009   NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

of the two domains as well as a conservation of both the linker and the interface of the two small domains, implying that the fold of the N-terminal region of T3SS-specific secretins is highly analogous (Supplementary Fig. 1 online). The structure of the inner membrane PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> monomer, shown in Figure 2c, also shows a modular architecture of three topologically similar α/β domains (domain 1 (yellow) contains residues 170–224, domain 2 (green) contains residues 225–295 and domain 3 (orange) contains residues 296–362) that are connected by short linkers. These modular domains together fold into a ‘boot’-shaped structure (Fig. 2c).

### EscC, PrgH and EscJ share a common fold

Despite a complete lack of detectable sequence identity, a comparative structural analysis of the inner membrane PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> reveals strong similarity to the other inner membrane ring component EscJ/PrgK, as well the outer membrane ring component EscC<sub>21–174</sub> (ref. 8; Fig. 2). Superposition of EscC<sub>21–174</sub>, PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> and EscJ shows that the three proteins that constitute the T3SS basal body rings share a similar modular domain architecture with particular resemblance in the domains shown in orange and green in Figure 2 (Supplementary Fig. 2 online). The domains of EscC and EscJ depicted in orange superimpose with a Dali Z-score of 4.8, the domains of PrgH and EscJ shown in green superimpose with a Dali Z-score of 4.9 and the orange-colored domain of PrgH superimposes with both EscC and EscJ with lower structural homology (Z-scores of 3.9 and 3.2 respectively). These particular domains have an analogous wedge-shaped structure, with two α-helices folding against a β-sheet. In EscJ, these domains mediate intersubunit interactions, assembling into a 24-subunit homo-oligomeric symmetrical structure<sup>8,9</sup> (Figs. 1b and 2b). This strong similarity in fold and architecture between the three proteins suggests the conservation of a wedge-shaped fold that potentially provides a common ring-building motif for the assembly of the symmetrical ring structures that constitute the T3SS basal body. At the same time, the sequence variation between the three individually conserved ring family proteins allows for unique differences that mediate formation of rings with varying oligomerization number, overall size and distinct surface features necessary for T3SS assembly and function.

EM on the assembled T3SS has considerably advanced our understanding of its overall architecture, but the complexity and membrane-spanning nature of this macromolecular assembly has hampered structural characterization of the molecular details, essential to further investigate this clinically important apparatus. The integrated approach described here, of combining X-ray crystallography, EM, molecular modeling, *in vivo* analysis and site-directed mutagenesis, allowed us to begin a process of piecing together a structural picture of the T3SS basal body.

### RESULTS

#### Crystal structures of EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and PrgH<sub>170–362</sub>

In the first stage of our analysis we have determined the crystal structures of the periplasmic domains of two integral T3SS basal body components: (i) the outer membrane secretin EscC from EPEC and (ii) the inner membrane protein PrgH from S. typhimurium (Fig. 1b). The crystal structure of the outer membrane secretin EscC<sub>21–174</sub> monomer reveals a modular fold of two small domains (domain 1 (blue) contains residues 21–104 and domain 2 (orange) contains residues 106–174) that are connected by a linker centered at residue 105 (Fig. 2a). The two domains are tilted toward each other and form a prominent hydrophobic interface, comprising several aromatic residues. Structure-based sequence analysis of EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and other T3SS species variants reveals a conservation of residues within the core

NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 NUMBER 5 MAY 2009 469

Figure 2 EscC, PrgH and EscJ share a common fold for the assembly of the T3SS multiring basal body. (a) Ribbon representation of the EscC<sub>21–174</sub> crystal structure, highlighting the two-domain fold and the connecting hinge region. (b) Ribbon representation of the EscJ crystal structure (PDB 1YJ7)<sup>8</sup>. Monomeric EscJ is shown above, and the ring structure below shows the assembled 24-mer oligomeric structure of EscJ, which has been previously described<sup>8,9</sup>. (c) Ribbon representation of the crystal structure of monomeric PrgH<sub>170–362</sub>. (d) Superposition of both the outer membrane secretin EscC<sub>21–174</sub> (left) and the inner membrane protein PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> (right) to EscJ (PDB 1YJ7). Highlighted in orange and green are the conserved folds shared among the three proteins. The coloring scheme corresponds to the structures of EscC, EscJ and PrgH in a–c. The schematic illustrates the integrated approach, based on the crystal structures and the observed conservation of molecular modeling, experimental validation and docking into the EM density maps of the S. typhimurium needle complex (EMDB 1224 and 1100)<sup>5,21</sup>. PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> was manually docked into the EM maps. The previously published EscJ structure and the EscC<sub>21–174</sub> models are automatically docked as described in Methods.

The N-terminal secretin domain in the context of the T3SS

To understand the relevance of these models, we first attempted to better delineate the boundaries of the N- and C-terminal secretin regions within the context of the published cryo-EM maps of the S. typhimurium T3SS needle complex. Our analysis was based on analogy with the previously proposed position for the C-terminal protease-resistant core and the secretin N terminus, deduced from a combination of proteolysis, EM and nano-gold labeling on the PulD and pIV secretin, as described above (Fig. 1). Notably, our tryptic digestion of both the isolated secretin InvG and the fully assembled T3SS needle complexes from S. typhimurium, as followed by MS, identified an equivalent C-terminal domain fragment of InvG, with residue Lys269 demarcating the boundary of the protease-resistant C-terminal secretin homology region (data not shown), showing the comparability of the domain organization and exposure of a T3SS secretin in its isolated and needle complex-assembled forms. Sequence comparison shows that this position directly aligns with the trypsin-cleavage site of PulD, thereby confirming the equivalence of the C-terminal protease-resistant core of PulD and InvG (Supplementary Fig. 7 online). Furthermore, our averaged negative-stain EM analysis of purified InvG complexes from S. typhimurium emphasizes the similar overall structure of the T3SS secretin InvG to PulD and pIV<sup>15,18</sup> (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 8 online). Collectively, these results indicate the relative boundaries of the N- and C-terminal regions of the secretin within the assembled T3SS EM mask (Fig. 1).

The short linker connecting the two EscC domains (centered around residue 105) was treated as flexible in the modeling approach to account for possible conformational variability of the two domains toward each other. This molecular modeling approach led to a set of energetically and structurally plausible ring models with an overall bilobal appearance (see Methods).

To evaluate the biological relevance of each of the potential ring models, we performed limited biotinylation experiments on extracted S. typhimurium T3SS needle complexes (which contain the basal rings of the inner and outer membrane as well as the connecting rod and protruding needle filaments) to specifically identify accessible and buried lysine residues of the assembled secretin within the intact needle complex (Supplementary Fig. 3 online). This information was used in conjunction with our additional site-directed mutagenesis data to evaluate the generated ring models (see Methods and Supplementary Figs. 4–6 online for detailed information on the evaluation and filtering process). This procedure led to an ensemble of ring models for EscC<sub>21–174</sub> that satisfy all structural and experimental constraints, demonstrating that the observed ring-building motif has the potential to mediate ring formation.

Figure 3 EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and the T3SS-specific N-terminal secretin region within the T3SS needle complex. (a) Negative-stain EM of isolated InvG complexes from S. typhimurium. A raw image and representative class averages showing the top and side view of the complex. Scale bar represents 50 nm. (b) Comparison of the side view of isolated InvG to the docked EscC ring models and the previously published EM reconstruction of the T3SS needle complex<sup>5</sup>. The docked EscC<sub>21–174</sub> ring models represent the ensemble of final models, which fulfill all structural and biochemical constraints and show the highest correlation to the periplasmic region of the EM density maps (EMDB 1224 and 1100). The docked models in orange and blue (both 12-mers) are localized directly adjacent to the C-terminal protease-resistant core, with a notable match to the bilobal structure observed in the EM map and which also encompasses the periplasmic region previously suggested to contain the N-terminal domain, as described above. Also shown is a slightly larger ring model in green with 14-fold symmetry that localizes more toward the inner membrane rings, but for which less biochemical support currently exists. The orange and blue models are favored by existing literature and have thus been used as the representative docked EscC model shown in Figures 1, 2 and 4.

Figure 4 EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and the T3SS specific N-terminal secretin region within the T3SS needle complex. (a) Representative EscC model in the EM density maps of the S. typhimurium basal body and the fully assembled T3SS needle complex containing in addition the stalk and needle, which are built up by the proteins InvJ, PrgJ, PrgI (EMDB 1224; 1100 (refs. 5,21); the docked EscC model is equivalent to the model shown in orange in Fig. 3b). The blue bar highlights the important region that undergoes considerable structural rearrangement during the needle complex assembly process<sup>5,21</sup>. (b) Effects of EscC mutations on type III secretion in EPEC. Shown are the Tir/EspB secretion profiles in secretion assays of escC-deficient EPEC strains complemented with the EscC mutants. The proteins were detected with respective monoclonal antibodies. (c) Effects of InvG mutation on type III secretion in S. typhimurium. Secreted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue from wild-type and chromosomal InvG (E106P) S. typhimurium strains. Western blots of secreted proteins were performed with respective monoclonal antibodies. Needle complexes were isolated, separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie (molecular weight reference shown on the left in kilodaltons). Levels of InvG in the needle complex were detected with a polyclonal antibody.

Docking of EscC<sub>21–174</sub> ring models into the T3SS needle complex

Guided by this information, the ensemble of experimentally validated EscC<sub>21–174</sub> ring models were then docked to the cryo-EM maps of the S. typhimurium T3SS basal body and needle complex using the automated EM map-fitting algorithm COLORES of the SITUS program package, and we analyzed them for overall complementarity to the periplasmic density regions between the defined C-terminal secretin core and the inner membrane rings<sup>5,20</sup> (Fig. 3b). Figure 3b illustrates a representative subset of the validated final models resulting from this procedure (Supplementary Fig. 8). The docked models (both 12-mers) shown in orange and blue in Figure 3b are localized directly adjacent to the C-terminal protease-resistant core, with a notable match to the bilobal structure that is observed in the EM map and that also encompasses the periplasmic region previously suggested to contain the N-terminal domain<sup>15,18</sup> (the model in orange was chosen to represent the subset of potential ring models in Figs. 1, 2 and 4). Although we favor this localization of the docked ring model because of its compatibility with existing data from type III and other secretin families, we acknowledge that the limited effective resolution of the molecular modeling approach and the EM maps to which the models were fit limits definitive conclusions based on orientation,

atomic details and localization. For example, we note in Figure 3b an alternative generated model, albeit of slightly higher oligomerization number and size (14-mer), localized optimally to a distinct region of the periplasm (in an unassigned region of EM density toward the inner membrane components PrgH and PrgK). What is unequivocal from our data, however, is that, regardless of the predicted possible localizations, our experimental structures and accompanying biochemical data clearly indicate that the span of the N-terminal secretin region must be substantially further into the periplasm than previously understood, suggesting a close interaction of the outer membrane secretin and the inner membrane components (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 8).

Importance of the linker in EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and InvG<sub>21–175</sub>

Specifically, the EscC ring models are localized to a region of the needle complex EM maps, which in S. typhimurium has been implicated to accommodate factors that modulate assembly and regulation of the needle filament<sup>5,21</sup>. During the assembly process of the T3SS needle complex and the insertion of the needle components, considerable structural rearrangement in this region has been observed by EM (Fig. 4a shows a comparison of the EM densities of the T3SS

Figure 5 Illustration of conformational sampling during protein-protein docking simulations. (a) Conformational sampling of the hinge region (residue 102–108) of EscC. The position of the α-carbon of residue 162 in a random selection of docking models after a hinge-perturbation protocol is shown in red spheres. The yellow spheres indicate a subset of docking models with more than 300 contacts across an interface, and green indicates the 10% lowest-energy subset of the yellow spheres. The wheat-colored domain 2 corresponds to the orientation of the model best fitting the experimental data, and the magenta sphere is the α-carbon of residue 162 of this model. When a smaller-sized hinge perturbation is used, spheres cluster around the magenta sphere, which roughly coincides with the position of residue 162 in the crystal structure. To pick out the best models out of the green ensemble (and correspondingly in other simulations), geometric information and biotinylation data was used as a filter (Fig. 6). (b) Symmetrical docking of the N-terminal EscC domain (21–101) into 12-mer ring models. The plot shows the Rosetta full atom energy versus backbone r.m.s. deviation for three consecutive subunits relative to the model selected as best fitting with the experimental data.

Figure 6 Illustration of the evaluation process of the ring models. The predicted models (Fig. 5) are further discriminated by experimentally derived data of accessible and buried lysine residues, identified by limited biotinylation (Supplementary Fig. 3). The models in a–f show a representative subset of models to illustrate the process in detail. Solvent-accessible residues are rendered in green and buried in yellow spheres. In addition, we used site-directed mutagenesis data on two negatively charged patches of EscC that show defects in type III secretion upon mutation (residues in orange spheres) (Supplementary Fig. 4). The illustrated process identifies a subset of models that all satisfy both the modeling and structural constraints and the experimental data (the models a, b, c, d and e are representative for the identified subset; the model f can be excluded because it does not meet the experimental data). This ensemble of validated models was further evaluated by docking to the EM density maps of the T3SS basal body and needle complex from *S.* typhimurium<sup>5,21</sup>. This process led to a set of final models that fulfill all structural and modeling, experimental and docking constrains. In the representative subset above, only models a and b show considerable complementarity to the periplasmic regions of the EM density maps and satisfy all imposed criteria (Supplementary Fig. 8). These two models and their docking positions are equivalent to the models described in Figure 3b.

The equivalent chromosomal mutant of InvG (E106P) in *S.* typhimurium also abolished type III secretion, confirming the importance of the conformation of the N-terminal domains in T3SS function (Fig. 4c). To investigate this further, we prepared and analyzed needle complexes from the InvG (E106P) mutant. The results revealed that oligomeric InvG was present at a slightly reduced level in needle complex preparations, and the amounts of the core inner membrane ring components PrgK and PrgH were severely depleted (Fig. 4c). To test whether the decrease in inner membrane components resulted from changes in amounts and/or localization of InvG, we assessed the cellular and membrane levels of the linker mutant secretin. Cells carrying the mutant InvG (E106P) showed similar cellular and membrane protein levels to cells carrying wild-type InvG, indicating that abundance and localization remained unaltered (data not shown). Additionally, protein levels and localization of the inner membrane PrgH also remained similar (data not shown), indicating that abundance and localization of PrgH is not affected by InvG (E106P). Cumulatively, these results indicate that the proline mutation prevents proper T3SS assembly at the stage of basal body formation. This observation highlights the importance of the conformation of the T3SS N-terminal secretin domains for its function within the T3SS and implies a potential role of the secretin and its N-terminal region in stabilizing the precursor inner membrane ring structures during T3SS assembly.

Structure and localization of PrgH<sub>170–362</sub>

The predicted span and disposition of the secretin EscC N-terminal region within the T3SS is, furthermore, in agreement with the high-resolution structure of the periplasmic domain of PrgH, determined

basal body and the fully assembled needle complex containing the needle and the connecting stalk)<sup>5,21</sup>. We propose that these rearrangements are mediated by changes in relative disposition between the two flexibly linked domains we observe in the EscC<sub>21–174</sub> structure. Notably, the recently published crystal structure of the octameric outer membrane export protein Wza shows a similar modular architecture of flexibly linked symmetrical rings that constitute a large periplasmic pore structure<sup>22</sup> (Supplementary Fig. 9 online). This modular architecture of ring structures connected by conserved linker regions implies that both of these elements are important requirements for the function of the assembled oligomeric complex, and it is tempting to speculate that this architecture might facilitate structural rearrangements in the fully assembled complex through variations in the connecting linker and resulting conformational changes between the rings.

To address this hypothesis and its functional implications on T3SS, we performed site-directed mutagenesis in EPEC and *S.* typhimurium on the residue Glu105 and Glu106, respectively, which is positioned in the linker connecting the two small N-terminal domains (residues 21–104 and 106–174) and, furthermore, is conserved in all T3SS-specific secretins (Fig. 4a). Analysis of escC-deficient EPEC complemented with either wild-type EscC or mutant EscC showed that a proline mutation (E105P) completely abolished type III secretion, whereas the corresponding alanine mutation (E105A) did not cause substantial secretion defects, suggesting that a conformational rather than electrostatic requirement is crucial for linker function (Fig. 4b).
here: the bitopic inner membrane protein PrgH is localized to the inner membrane by a single transmembrane helix (residues 141–165), and the C-terminal periplasmic domain of PrgH (residues 166–392) forms a complex with PrgK<sup>4,8</sup> (Fig. 1a). Our structure of PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> from *S.* typhimurium shows a distinctive boot shape, which was consistently observed in 12 individual copies of the protein in the asymmetric units of our crystal structures. The boot shape shows a compelling complementarity to the expected localization in the EM map, and the orientation of the docked structure accommodates the predicted position of the N-terminal transmembrane helix (residues 141–165) (Figs. 1 and 2c). Furthermore, the docked model explains the previously observed solvent inaccessibility of both PrgK and PrgH in the assembled T3SS needle complex, with PrgH encompassing PrgK<sup>4,8</sup>. The structures of PrgH<sub>170–362</sub>, EscJ<sub>24–190</sub> and EscC<sub>21–174</sub> thus account for the most of the observed periplasmic EM density and suggest a close disposition of the outer and inner membrane T3SS rings (Fig. 1).

### DISCUSSION

The crystal structures of the essential T3SS proteins EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> reveal an unpredicted conservation of a wedge-shaped motif between the outer and inner membrane components of the multiring T3SS basal body (Fig. 2). For the inner membrane protein EscJ, this conserved fold has previously been shown to assemble into a symmetrical ring structure that constitutes part of the inner membrane T3SS rings. The high degree of conservation of this modular fold between all three proteins that form the T3SS basal body suggests that the topologically similar, but sequence-diverse, folds provide a common ring-building motif that allows for the assembly of the variably sized outer and inner membrane rings characteristic of the T3SS.

Earlier nano-gold-labeling studies of the intact pIV secretin labeled at its N terminus revealed a ring-like arrangement<sup>18</sup>. Although, like other outer membrane proteins, the driving force for oligomerization is derived from the membrane-spanning C-terminal secretin homology domain<sup>19,23</sup>, the nano-gold study clearly implies an ordered ring structure for the N-terminal domain, as well in the context of full-length secretin. Using molecular modeling, limited biotinylation, protease digestion, EM and site-directed mutagenesis, we have generated experimentally validated ring models for the secretin N-terminal domain and demonstrated that the conserved motif has the potential to mediate ring formation. The ring models have in a subsequent analysis been placed in the context of EM maps of the T3SS needle complex, resulting in an ensemble of experimentally validated final ring models within the assembled T3SS (Fig. 3).

Despite the limitations, our integrated approach allows for the prediction of the highly conserved and functionally essential N-terminal secretin domain within the assembled export system, a domain that has previously been shown to be difficult to study by conventional means<sup>24</sup> (Supplementary Fig. 8). Furthermore it reveals the relative span of the T3SS secretins within the needle complex and implies direct interactions of the outer membrane secretin and the inner membrane components. Together with the crystal structure of the complete periplasmic domain of PrgH, determined here, our analysis provides a new structural framework for functional studies on the T3SS.

Comparison to the octameric transport protein Wza, which forms the outer membrane portal of the Wza-Wzc capsular polysaccharide secretion system, supports the relative periplasmic location and span of the EscC models in the T3SS and, moreover, emphasizes a similar modular architecture of small wedge-shaped periplasmic domains

facilitating the assembly of connected symmetrical rings that constitute large pore structures<sup>22</sup> (Supplementary Fig. 9). The observed modular architecture of ring structures connected by conserved linker regions implies that both of these elements are important requirements for the function of the assembled oligomeric complex. It is tempting to speculate that this conserved architecture might facilitate structural rearrangements in the fully assembled complex through variations in the connecting linker and resulting conformational changes between the rings. In support of this hypothesis, introduction of a proline residue into the connecting linker markedly reduced the number of assembled needle complexes, although oligomeric InvG was essentially maintained. As no inner membrane components associated with the mutant InvG oligomer, these data support the hypothesis that binding of other components of the export apparatus to the secretin, like the inner membrane base components PrgH/PrgK or the regulatory factors InvJ/PrgJ/PrgI, is required for assembly and oligomerization of inner membrane needle complex components, and subsequently the intact T3SS. Therefore, rings linked by flexible elements may be a common theme in providing the necessary regulation to perform complex assemblies of apparatuses that deliver substrates to the extracellular space.

During the review of this manuscript, the crystal structure of the periplasmic domain of the type II secretion system secretin GspD from enterotoxigenic *E.* coli (ETEC) was published<sup>25</sup>. Although the N-terminal regions of secretins from different export systems are only distantly related, the structure and architecture of EscC and GspD are unexpectedly similar and seem to be conserved for all secretins. The GspD structure resembles the modular architecture of conserved α/β folds connected by flexible linkers and, moreover, reveals the same conserved structural motif, which we have identified here as a common ring-building domain for the assembly of modular ring structures. The notable similarity in fold and architecture of the distantly related N-terminal secretin region of type II and type III secretins supports our hypothesis of a conserved motif mediating the formation of the secretin rings and flexibly linked ring structures as a potentially common theme.

### METHODS

#### Protein expression, purification and crystallization.
We carried out cloning, protein expression and purification using standard techniques as described<sup>8</sup>. EscC<sub>21–174</sub> crystallized in microbatch under the conditions of 2.0 M ammonium sulfate and 0.1 M sodium acetate, pH 4.5, or 0.1 M Bis-Tris, pH 6.5. PrgH<sub>170–392</sub> crystals were obtained in 16% (w/v) PEG 3350, 0.2 M triammonium citrate and 0.1 M Tris, pH 8.0. PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> crystallized in an orthorhombic (2.8 M NaCl, 0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, 0.01 M cupric chloride) and a trigonal crystal form (30% (w/v) PEG 1500, 0.1 M lithium sulfate, 0.1 M Tris, 8.5, 0.109 M octanoyl-n-hydroxyethylglucamide).

#### Structure determination of EscC<sub>21–174</sub>, PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> and PrgH<sub>170–392</sub>.
We determined the crystal structures of EscC<sub>21–174</sub> and PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> by SAD at the selenium edge using crystals of the selenomethionine-incorporated proteins. The structure of PrgH<sub>170–392</sub> was subsequently solved by molecular replacement. Data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in Table 1 and detailed in the accompanying Supplementary Methods.

#### Computational methodology.
We carried out prediction of the oligomeric structure of EscC and homology modeling of InvG using the computational modeling software Rosetta<sup>26</sup>. We assumed that EscC adopts a ring structure with cyclical symmetry consisting of 12–14 subunits. The protocol for symmetrical protein-protein docking using Rosetta has been described<sup>9,27</sup>. The described protocol was modified to allow backbone flexibility in the hinge region of EscC. We used two variants, one aggressive and one conservative. In the aggressive variant, the conformational space of the linker is explored using
ARTICLES

Table 1 Data collection, phasing and refinement statistics for EscC<sub>21-174</sub>, PrgH<sub>170-362</sub> and PrgH<sub>170-392</sub>

| Data collection | EscC<sub>21-174</sub> SeMet (peak) | PrgH<sub>170-362</sub> SeMet (peak) | PrgH<sub>170-362</sub> native | PrgH<sub>170-392</sub> native |
|-----------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Space group     | P6<sub>5</sub>22                   | P2<sub>1</sub>2<sub>1</sub>2       | P3<sub>1</sub>              | C222<sub>1</sub>            |
| Cell dimensions | a, b, c (Å)                       |                                   |                            |                            |
|                 | 90.6, 90.6, 133.4                  | 87.0, 106.6, 55.5                | 53.3, 53.3, 282.5          | 79.6, 188.7, 305.6         |
| Resolution (Å)  | 2.05 (2.05–2.1)*                   | 2.8 (2.8–2.87)                   | 2.3 (2.3–2.36)             | 2.8 (2.8–2.87)             |
| R<sub>merge</sub>| 0.072 (0.501)                      | 0.074 (0.275)                    | 0.037 (0.137)              | 0.069 (0.293)              |
| I/σI            | 31.9 (5.9)                         | 29.4 (9.9)                       | 20.6 (5.5)                 | 27.5 (4.2)                 |
| Completeness (%) | 99.8 (99.8)                        | 100 (100)                        | 94.1 (71.0)                | 96.5 (75.2)                |
| Redundancy      | 20.9 (19.6)                        | 13.9 (14.4)                      | 3.1 (2.0)                  | 11.5 (5.2)                 |

| Refinement | EscC<sub>21-174</sub> SeMet (peak) | PrgH<sub>170-362</sub> SeMet (peak) | PrgH<sub>170-362</sub> native | PrgH<sub>170-392</sub> native |
|------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Resolution (Å) | 2.05                              | 2.3                               | 2.8                          |                            |
| No. reflections | 20,941                           | 39,588                           | 55,188                      |                            |
| R<sub>work</sub>/R<sub>free</sub> | 0.215/0.251                     | 0.206/0.255                     | 0.247/0.295                |                            |
| No. atoms |                                      |                                   |                             |                            |
| Protein   | 1,237                              | 6,080                            | 12,624                      |                            |
| Water     | 77                                 | 231                              | –                           |                            |
| B-factors (Å²) |                                  |                                   |                             |                            |
| Protein   | 41.6                               | 23.2                             | 54.16                       |                            |
| Water     | 43.3                               | 33.4                             | –                           |                            |
| r.m.s. deviations |                                |                                   |                             |                            |
| Bond lengths (Å) | 0.032                           | 0.013                            | 0.014                       |                            |
| Bond angles (°) | 2.10                            | 1.33                             | 1.55                        |                            |

*Values in parentheses are for highest-resolution shell.

rigid-body conformation protocol were further refined by the hinge-refinement protocol. Models were selected first on the number of contacts in the interface to identify models that are well packed, and this subset was ranked based on Rosetta full-atom energy. For each run, the oligomerization state was fixed in the range 12–14, and between 5 × 10³ and 3 × 10⁴ structures were generated. The model identified as the most probable based on the fit with experimental data has a monomeric structure that is similar to the crystal structure (0.4-Å backbone r.m.s. deviation) and was generated after a hinge-refinement run with relatively small conformational changes relative to the native structure.

Figure 5 shows the conformational search space generated by the hinge-refinement protocol and the effect of selection of models with large number of interface contacts and low energy. Figure 5a was generated by superposition of single subunits extracted from the docking models onto a specific orientation of domain 1, and it shows how the conformational space is reduced by adding more energetic and experimental constraints. Figure 5b shows the result of symmetrical docking of domain 1 as 12-mer rings. The plot shows the energy versus backbone r.m.s. deviation for three consecutive subunits relative the model selected as best fitting with the experimental data. The result shows that many conformations are sampled during docking of the N-terminal ring, and the docking of the N- and C-terminal domains cannot be treated as independent problems in order to generate the model that best fits the experimental data, because the low r.m.s. deviation values (below 2 Å) are not sampled by this procedure. Although the orientation found in the model for the full protein construct that best fits with the experimental data is not the lowest-energy conformation, the lowest-energy models are found in the vicinity of this model.

The crystallized portion of EscC (residues 21–174) does not oligomerize on its own in solution and is expected to be weakly interacting in isolation. In addition, it is likely that the crystal structure will adopt a slightly different backbone conformation in the context of the intact macromolecular complex, and we have explored such conformational flexibility by allowing the linker to adjust. Owing to the relatively weak interactions and conformational flexibility, a strong energy signal is not expected for a near-native conformation. To identify an ensemble of feasible models, a set of evaluation criteria was used: the N and C termini must point to solution and be able to connect to the rest of the EscC structure, and the dimensions of the ring must fit at least one portion of the region of the cryo-EM map that can be attributed to the secretin. Finally, the models were filtered by how well they match experimentally determined biotinylation data reporting on the exposure of lysine residues on the assembled secretin within the needle complex (Fig. 6).

The accuracy of the proposed models is dependent on the resolution of the experimental data and the correctness of the assumptions about the degree of flexibility that must be incorporated to go from the crystallographically determined conformation to the conformation in the intact needle complex. Given the assumptions about flexibility described above, the experimental data pick out a limited ensemble of low-energy models, which are the solution to the modeling problem as posed. It must be recognized that, if our assumptions about flexibility are incorrect and there are much larger conformational changes in forming the intact needle complex, these models could be considerably in error.

Because the experimental biotinylation was performed on the T3SS needle complexes from S. typhimurium and, therefore, the secretin ortholog InvG, we generated a homology model of InvG from the structure of EscC to interpret the biotinylation data (Supplementary Fig. 5). The general protocol has been described<sup>28</sup>. The sequences of EscC and InvG were aligned using ClustalW, and only regions with loop secondary structure in EscC were rebuilt<sup>29</sup>.

fragment insertion in the linker region (residues 102–108), where backbone conformations are generated with a simulated annealing protocol as used in ab initio structure prediction with Rosetta<sup>26</sup>. The monomeric structure generated by the fragment insertion is used as a starting point for the oligomer-assembly protocol described above. In the coarse-grained search part, not only the rigid-body orientation but also the linker backbone is optimized. This is achieved by adding torsion-angle perturbations (small moves) in the Monte Carlo search. A torsion-angle perturbation consists of φ and ψ changes of up to 1.8° in the hinge region. Before the high-resolution refinement step, the residues in the linker region are repacked. The high-resolution Monte Carlo minimization consists of three perturbations: small, rigid body and shear moves. Shear moves consists of random φ and ψ perturbations of up to 2° in helix or strand regions or 3° in loop regions, and the preceding ψ is perturbed by the same amount of degrees in the opposite direction to produce a compensatory shear motion in the peptide plane. The conservative involves the same steps as the aggressive protocol, but excludes the fragment insertion. In all simulations described so far, symmetry is maintained for rigid body, backbone and side chain degrees of freedom throughout at all stages of the run.

We used several types of simulations with different protein constructs to create models of the oligomeric structure of EscC. In the most conservative approach, the backbone conformation of EscC was kept in the crystallographically determined state. Backbone flexibility was introduced by allowing the backbone to adjust during the simulation using the hinge-refinement protocol described above. When large-scale conformational changes in the hinge region were sampled, a limited number of initial binding modes were explored. These were selected by running rigid-body docking simulations of the N-terminal domain (residues 21–101) and clustering the structures generated by this procedure. We selected the clusters with the most members and used simple filters to reduce the number of starting binding modes. These filters require, for example, that the hinge region does not point into the binding interface region of the next subunit.

Three different starting orientations of the domain 1 were sampled in the fragment-insertion protocol (described above) devised to sample large-scale conformational changes in the linker. Models generated starting from a random
Docking of oligomeric EscC models and EscJ into electron microscopy density maps. The ensemble of validated symmetrical ring models of EscC<sub>21–174</sub> were docked into the published EM density maps of the S. typhimurium T3SS needle complex and basal body (Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/) 1100, 1224 and 1214 respectively), using the automated FFT Accelerated 6D Exhaustive Search protocol implemented in the program COLORES of the SITUS package<sup>5,20</sup>. The docked models were analyzed for overall complementarity to the periplasmic density regions between the defined C-terminal secretin core and the inner membrane rings. Figure 3b shows a representative subset of the validated final models resulting from this procedure. We acknowledge that the 20-fold symmetry imposed on the only available cryoEM map of the S. typhimurium needle complex may alter the observed surface features in the docking process. However, the overall dimensions and shape of this region, the main structural constraints for the docking procedure in addition to the experimentally derived constraints, will not be substantially altered. Rotational differences of the map were not considered in the docking procedure.

The previously published EscJ ring model was docked in the same manner (PDB 1YJ7)<sup>8,9</sup>. The structure of monomeric PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> was manually docked into the EM maps (Figs. 1 and 2). The docked models were analyzed in PyMol (http://pymol.sourceforge.net) and Chimera<sup>30</sup>.

Purification of InvG complexes from S. typhimurium. InvG was expressed in a S. typhimurium prgH-deletion strain under conditions previously described<sup>2</sup>. The cells were lysed in the presence of 20% (w/v) sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, lysozyme and 0.4% (w/v) CHAPS. Oligomeric InvG was extracted from the collected membranes in 1% (w/v) n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM) buffer and further purified in DDM by anion- and cation-exchange chromatography. The purified complex was finally subjected to gel filtration in either DDM or n-octyl-β-D-glucoside (βOG).

Electron microscopy and image processing. Samples were prepared by conventional negative staining with 0.75% (w/v) uranyl formate as described<sup>31</sup>. Using BOXER, the display program associated with the EMAN software package<sup>32</sup>, 4,591 particles were interactively selected from 88 images of InvG. Individual particles were windowed into 80 × 80-pixel images. Using the SPIDER software package<sup>33</sup>, the particles were rotationally and translationally aligned and subjected to ten cycles of multireference alignment. Each round of multireference alignment was followed by *k* means classification, specifying 50 output classes. The references used for the first multireference alignment were randomly chosen from the raw images.

Trypsin proteolysis of purified S. typhimurium needle complexes. Purified needle complex was incubated with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Sigma) at 100:1 mass:mass for 16 h at 22 °C. The reaction was stopped with SDS sample buffer. The reaction mixture was run on a 12% (w/v) SDS-PAGE gel and unique bands were excised and incubated with trypsin. The peptides were analyzed by LC MS on a QTOF instrument.

Surface-accessibility analysis of S. typhimurium InvG secretin component of needle complex with limited biotinylation and matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. Purified needle complex was biotinylated and analyzed as described<sup>8</sup>.

Mutagenesis, complementation and secretion assays in EPEC. Secretion assays were performed on these complemented strains and wild-type EPEC as described<sup>34</sup>.

Strain construction and bacterial growth conditions for S. typhimurium. S. typhimurium strains ATCC 14028s and needle complex-overexpressing strain TK385 were used for secreted protein analysis and needle complex purification, respectively<sup>2</sup>. Salmonella strains were grown in LB medium, and LB supplemented with 300 mM sodium chloride for needle complex purification. Bacterial strains were constructed using the λ-RED system<sup>35</sup>.

Secreted protein and S. typhimurium needle complex protein-component analysis. Secreted proteins were prepared for S. typhimurium as described<sup>2</sup>.

Needle complexes were purified as described<sup>2</sup>. Protein samples were run on SDS-PAGE and western blotted as described<sup>36</sup>.

Accession codes. Protein Data Bank: Structure factors and atomic coordinates for EscC<sub>21–174</sub>, PrgH<sub>170–362</sub> and PrgH<sub>170–392</sub> have been deposited with accession codes 3GR5, 3GR0 and 3GR1, respectively.

Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Structural & Molecular Biology website.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the staff at the Advanced Light Source beamlines 8.2.2 and 8.3.1 for data collection, time and assistance. C.K.Y. thanks the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research (MSFHR). I.A. is supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg foundation. S.S. thanks the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for postdoctoral funding. N.C.J.S. and B.B.F. thank the Howard Hughes International Scholar program and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) for funding. N.C.J.S. also thanks the MSFHR and Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI) for infrastructure funding support. This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant P20 GM076222 to D.B. and by NIH grants U54 AI05741 and RO1 AI030479 to S.I.M. We thank T. Walz (Harvard Medical School) for providing resources for the EM measurements, E.E. Galyov (University of Leicester) for providing the SipA, SipB and SipC antibodies and V. Koronakis (University of Cambridge) for providing the InvG antibody. We thank H. Felise, S. Schafer and D. Goodlett for technical advice and assistance.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

C.K.Y., M.V. and A.C.Y. cloned, purified and crystallized the EscC and PrgH constructs, and C.K.Y. determined the crystal structures; molecular modeling was carried out by I.A., and the models were analyzed, interpreted and docked into the EM maps by T.S. and I.A; S.S. did the biochemical characterization in S. typhimurium, and W.D. performed the experiments in EPEC; T.S. established the purification protocol for InvG; T.S. and N.C.J.S. wrote the paper; I.A. prepared Figure 5 and the computational methods; S.S. prepared Figure 4c and Supplementary Figure 3; W.D. prepared Figure 4b and Supplementary Figure 4; all authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript; D.B. supervised all computational analysis; S.I.M. and B.B.F. provided resources for the biochemical characterizations in S. typhimurium and EPEC, respectively; N.C.J.S. provided resources for all data other than Figures 4b,c and 5 and Supplementary Figures 3 and 4.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/nsmb/

Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/

1. Ghosh, P. Process of protein transport by the type III secretion system. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev* **68**, 771–795 (2004).

2. Kimbrough, T.G. & Miller, S.I. Contribution of *Salmonella typhimurium* type III secretion components to needle complex formation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 11008–11013 (2000).

3. Sukhan, A., Kubori, T., Wilson, J. & Galan, J.E. Genetic analysis of assembly of the *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium type III secretion-associated needle complex. *J. Bacteriol.* **183**, 1159–1167 (2001).

4. Kimbrough, T.G. & Miller, S.I. Assembly of the type III secretion needle complex of *Salmonella typhimurium*. *Microbes Infect.* **4**, 75–82 (2002).

5. Marlovits, T.C. *et al.* Structural insights into the assembly of the type III secretion needle complex. *Science* **306**, 1040–1042 (2004).

6. Blocker, A. *et al.* Structure and composition of the *Shigella flexneri* “needle complex”, a part of its type III secretor. *Mol. Microbiol.* **39**, 652–663 (2001).

7. Ogino, T. *et al.* Assembly of the type III secretion apparatus of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* **188**, 2801–2811 (2006).

8. Yip, C.K. *et al.* Structural characterization of the molecular platform for type III secretion system assembly. *Nature* **435**, 702–707 (2005).

9. André, I., Bradley, P., Wang, C. & Baker, D. Prediction of the structure of symmetrical protein assemblies. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 17656–17661 (2007).

10. Sani, M *et al.* Structural organization of the needle complex of the type III secretion apparatus of *Shigella flexneri*. *Micron.* **38**, 291–301 (2007).

11. Pallen, M.J., Beatson, S.A. & Bailey, C.M. Bioinformatics analysis of the locus for enterocyte effacement provides novel insights into type-III secretion. *BMC Microbiol.* **5**, 9–21 (2005).

12. Genin, S. & Boucher, C.A. A superfamily of proteins involved in different secretion pathways in Gram-negative bacteria: modular structure and specificity of the N-terminal domain. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **243**, 112–118 (1994).
13. Crago, A.M & Koronakis, V. *Salmonella* InvG forms a ring-like multimer that requires the InvH lipoprotein for outer membrane localization. *Mol. Microbiol.* **30**, 47–56 (1998).

14. Burghout, P. *et al.* Structure and electrophysiological properties of the YscC secretin from the type III secretion system of *Yersinia enterocolitica*. *J. Bacteriol.* **186**, 4645–4654 (2004).

15. Chami, M. *et al.* Structural insights into the secretin PulD and its trypsin-resistant core. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 37732–37741 (2005).

16. Collins, R.F. *et al.* Structure of the *Neisseria meningitidis* outer membrane PilQ secretin complex at 12 Å resolution. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 39750–39756 (2004).

17. Bitter, W. Secretins of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: large holes in the outer membrane. *Arch. Microbiol.* **179**, 307–314 (2003).

18. Opalka, N. *et al.* Structure of the filamentous phage pIV multimer by cryo-electron microscopy. *J. Mol. Biol.* **325**, 461–470 (2003).

19. Brok, R. *et al.* The C-terminal domain of the *Pseudomonas* secretin XcpQ forms oligomeric rings with pore activity. *J. Mol. Biol.* **294**, 1169–1179 (1999).

20. Chacón, P. & Wranglers, W. Multi-resolution contour-based fitting of macromolecular structures. *J. Mol. Biol.* **317**, 375–384 (2002).

21. Marlovits, T.C. *et al.* Assembly of the inner rod determines needle length in the type III secretion injectosome. *Nature* **441**, 637–640 (2006).

22. Dong, C. *et al.* Wza the translocon for *E. coli* capsular polysaccharides defines a new class of membrane protein. *Nature* **444**, 226–229 (2006).

23. Guilvout, I. *et al.* Bacterial outer membrane secretin PulD assembles and inserts into the inner membrane in the absence of its pilotin. *EMBO J.* **25**, 5241–5249 (2006).

24. Krehenbrink, M. *et al.* Artificial binding proteins (Affitins) as probes for conformational changes in secretin PulD. *J. Mol. Biol.* **383**, 1058–1068 (2008).

25. Korotkov, K.V., Pardon, E., Steyaert, J. & Hol, W.G. Crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of the secretin GspD from ETEC determined with the assistance of a nanobody. *Structure* **17**, 255–265 (2009).

26. Rohl, C.A., Strauss, C.E., Misura, K.M. & Baker, D. Protein structure prediction using Rosetta. *Methods Enzymol.* **383**, 66–93 (2004).

27. Kuhlman, B. & Baker, D. Native protein sequences are close to optimal for their structures. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 10383–10388 (2000).

28. Qian, B. *et al.* High-resolution structure prediction and the crystallographic phase problem. *Nature* **450**, 259–264 (2007).

29. Chenna, R. *et al.* Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of programs. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **31**, 3497–3500 (2003).

30. Pettersen, E.F. *et al.* UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. *J. Comput. Chem.* **25**, 1605–1612 (2004).

31. Ohi, M., Li, Y., Cheng, Y. & Walz, T. Negative stain and image classification—powerful tools in modern electron microscopy. *Biol. Proced. Online* **6**, 23–34 (2004).

32. Ludtke, S.J., Baldwin, P.R. & Chiu, W. EMAN: semiautomated software for high-resolution single-particle reconstructions. *J. Struct. Biol.* **128**, 82–97 (1999).

33. Frank, J. *et al.* SPIDER and WEB: processing and visualization of images in 3D electron microscopy and related fields. *J. Struct. Biol.* **116**, 190–199 (1996).

34. Deng, W. *et al.* Dissecting virulence: systematic and functional analyses of a pathogenicity island. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 3597–3602 (2004).

35. Datsenko, K.A. & Wanner, B.L. One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 6640–6645 (2000).

36. Pegues, D.A., Hantman, M.J., Behlau, I. & Miller, S.I. PhoP/PhoQ transcriptional repression of *Salmonella typhimurium* invasion genes: evidence for a role in protein secretion. *Mol. Microbiol.* **17**, 169–181 (1995).
