
Forum

# Molecular Mechanisms of Psychostimulant Addiction

Jin-Chung Chen, PhD; Pei-Chun Chen¹, PhD; Yao-Chang Chiang, PhD

Drug addiction represents a pathological form of neuroplasticity along with the emergence of aberrant behaviors involving a cascade of neurochemical changes mainly in the brain's *rewarding* circuitry. The aberrant behavioral phenotypes can be assessed by an animal model of drug-induced behavioral sensitization, which is characterized by an *initiation* stage that is formed in the ventral tegmental area and a behavioral *expression* stage determined mainly in the nucleus accumbens. Numerous studies during past decades demonstrate that the mesocorticolimbic dopamine pathway plays an essential role in the development of behavioral sensitization. Moreover, a series of cellular signaling pathways and gene expression determine the severity of addictive behaviors. In addition to the well-characterized dopamine D₁ receptor-mediated cAMP/protein kinase A up-regulation in the nucleus accumbens, recent reports indicate the cellular mediator dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32) and transcription regulator ΔFosB are associated with the accumbal PKA pathway to modulate the development of behavioral sensitization. The finding of cAMP-independent and dopamine D₂ receptor-mediated Akt/GSK3 in activation in the nucleus accumbens of behaviorally sensitized animals implies that a signal cascade down-stream of both dopamine D₁ and D₂ receptors comprises the mainstay of the addiction network. This review outlines the cellular pathways that have been demonstrated to participate in psychostimulant addiction, focused particularly in the nucleus accumbens. (*Chang Gung Med J* 2009;32:148-54)

Key words: drug addiction, (meth) amphetamine, dopamine, glutamate, nucleus accumbens

Drug addiction could be simply defined as an abnormal behavioral outcome, i.e. after repetitive drug intake, the addict experiences compulsive drug intake, despite profound adverse effects.⁵ Prolonged use of abused drugs, such as morphine, cocaine, (meth) amphetamine, cannabinoids or alcohol may contribute to behavioral abnormalities that can last for months or even years after discontinuation of drug consumption.³ Animal models that simulate this behavioral phenotype by repeated administration of the drug, usually result in an enhanced behavioral response during subsequent drug exposure.⁴ This phenomenon is called behavioral sensitization, which is recognized as an enduring structural change and also a form of drug-induced neural plasticity.⁵ Over the past decade, numerous studies have provided fruitful information regarding the potential substrates underlying the development of drug-triggered behavioral sensitization. These include various membrane receptors, cellular signaling pathways and nuclear gene expression.⁶ Understanding the molecular mechanism of behavioral sensitization would help us to develop therapeutic programs against drug addiction and/or relapse. This review briefly outlines the essential neural circuitry and cellular mechanisms that are currently known to play a central role

From the Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; ¹School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A.

Received: Jul. 12, 2007; Accepted: May 21, 2008

Correspondence to: Prof. Jin-Chung Chen, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University. 259, Wunhua 1st Rd., Gueishan Township, Taoyuan County 333, Taiwan (R.O.C.) Tel.: 886-3-2118800 ext. 5282; Fax: 886-3-2118700; E-mail: Jinchen@mail.cgu.edu.tw

in psychostimulant-induced behavioral sensitization, especially with cocaine and (meth) amphetamine.

### Role of mesocorticolimbic dopamine and glutamate in behavioral sensitization

The mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic pathway, which originates from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and projects to the nucleus accumbens (NAc), amygdala, prefrontal cortex (PFC) and other forebrain regions, plays an essential role during the development of behavioral sensitization.^(4,7)^ The early action of psychostimulants in the VTA is considered to be a critical cellular event for initiation of behavioral sensitization.^(7)^ After repetitive drug exposure, the neural circuitry in the ventral striatum (mainly the NAc) is recruited for behavioral expression.^(8)^ According a previous report, rats receiving repeated doses of amphetamine in the VTA exhibited potentiated locomotor responses to peripheral or intra-accumbens administered amphetamine.^(9)^ Conversely, repeated administration of amphetamine into the NAc increased locomotor activity, but could not sensitize the locomotor effect to systemic amphetamine injections.^(10)^ It is thus concluded that neurons in the VTA are crucial for the induction (or initiation) phase of amphetamine sensitization, while the NAc (shell and core) is essential for its behavioral expression.^(11)^ In the VTA, enhanced dopamine neuronal activity is an essential step for consequent behavioral changes. Furthermore, a list of receptors that are known to modulate VTA dopamine activity may affect the severity of behavioral sensitization. For instance, antagonists of dopamine D₁ and glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors or agonists of GABA_B receptors administered locally in the VTA could arrest the induction of amphetamine sensitization.^(12,13)^ During behavioral expression, the VTA dopamine activity returned to the basal level, however enhanced dopamine release in the NAc, particularly at late withdrawal time, contributed to behavioral augmentation.^(14)^ The persistent dopamine release in the NAc along with induction of preproenkephalin and preprodynorphin expression suggests that enduring postsynaptic neuronal events occur during amphetamine sensitization.^(15)^

In addition to dopamine,^(16)^ a glutamate-dependent cellular mechanism is also involved in the neuroadaptive processes of drug addiction. In particular this is true in regard to drug-associated learning

and memory.^(17)^ Glutamatergic neurons, mainly from the PFC and other limbic regions innervate both the VTA and NAc, where glutamate either drives dopamine activity or modulates the neuronal activity of dopamineceptive neurons (median spiny neuron; MSN), respectively.^(18)^ The requirement of glutamate to activate midbrain dopamine transmission led to the findings that long-term potentiation (LTP) could be formed in both VTA dopamine neurons and MSN of the NAc.^(16,19)^ This sensitized neuronal event is postulated to be mediated through enhanced AMPA glutamate receptor responsiveness, which requires the induction of GluR1 and/or GluR2 receptor subunits and altered AMPA receptor trafficking.^(20)^ The facts that NMDA antagonist prevented both LTP and behavioral sensitization, and that drug-induced LTP in behaviorally sensitized animals simulates LTP formation in the hippocampus during learning/memory or epilepsy, suggest that drug addiction can be viewed as a form of neuronal plasticity.

#### The involvement of cAMP-PKA-CREB-ΔFosB signal in psychostimulant-induced behavioral sensitization

In the NAc, both dopamine D₁- and D₂-like receptors as well as glutamate NMDA and AMPA receptors located on the MSNs are primary targets for altered neurotransmission upon amphetamine or cocaine challenge.^(15,21)^ In behavior-sensitized animals, D₁ dopamine receptor supersensitivity occurs in the NAc.^(22)^ This cellular event could affect the down-stream Gs protein coupling and induce up-regulation of adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A (PKA) signals. Consequently, the D₁ dopamine receptor-mediated cellular signaling cascade would enhance phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the expression of immediate-early genes, such as Fos, Jun and ΔFosB.^(23,24)^ Induction of expression of these genes is rapid and mostly transient, and forms homo- or hetero-dimer in order to bind to the AP-1 binding site (with a consensus sequence of TGA(G/C)TCA) to evoke subsequent gene expression.^(25)^ Activation of CREB by phosphorylation at Ser133 by PKA and other protein kinases is a common neuronal adaptation in the NAc to psychostimulants.^(26)^ Once phosphorylated, CREB forms a dimer and binds to specific CRE sites of target genes, such as dynorphin.^(27)^ Previous studies suggest that drug-
induced CREB activation/phosphorylation in the NAc comprises a negative feedback mechanism which dampens behavioral sensitivity to subsequent drug exposure.^(28)^ In support of this notion, phospho-CREB-induced dynorphin in the NAc was found to bind to κ opioid receptor through a receptor-mediated aversive reaction to produce an antagonistic effect on measures of drug reward.^(29)^ On the other hand, ΔFosB (a Fos family protein) accumulation in the NAc represents a universal phenomenon after chronic exposure to various abused drugs. It is known that over-expression of ΔFosB in the NAc increases the behavioral response to cocaine and amphetamine. Additionally the amount of ΔFosB accumulation in the nucleus determines the duration and intensity of drug-induced behavioral sensitization.^(30)^ Similar to the effects of CREB transcription factor, over-expression of ΔFosB induces the AMPA GluR2 subunit in the NAc, which accounts for the reduced sensitivity of NAc neurons to glutamate.^(31)^ Hence, similar to CREB-regulated dynorphin, ΔFosB–regulated GluR2 expression represents an alternative negative feedback pathway to compensate for the heightened behavioral sensitization. Since the ultimate changes occur at the transcriptional level, dopamine D₁ receptor-mediated nuclear signaling is viewed as a predominant factor for long-lasting behavioral sensitization.

### Significance of DARPP-32 and Cdk5 in drug addiction

As addressed above, it is well known that a significant portion of behavioral changes after chronic psychostimulant treatment is mediated through striatal dopamine D₁ receptors.^(32,33)^ Down-stream of D₁ receptor-mediated cAMP accumulation and PKA activation, a cellular substrate named DARPP-32 (dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa) plays an important role in D₁ receptor-dependent neuronal function.^(6)^ DARPP-32, which is enriched in both the dorsal (nucleus caudate/putamen) and ventral striatum, can be phosphorylated by PKA at Thr34 thus converting this molecule into a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1 (PP-1).^(34)^ Acute stimulation with cocaine or methamphetamine activates the dopamine D₁ receptors, consequently leading to DARPP-32/Thr34 phosphorylation in the striatum.^(35,36)^ Several studies have shown that DARPP-32 participates in the progressive development of behavioral sensitization to cocaine and amphetamine.^(6)^ Knock-out of DARPP-32 or DARPP-32 mutation (threonine 34 was replaced by alanine) in mice attenuated the hyperlocomotor activity induced by acute cocaine treatment.^(37,38)^ Moreover, chronic treatment with cocaine or methamphetamine decreased Thr34, but increased Thr75 phosphorylation.^(35,39)^ This latter effect was due to enhanced Cdk5 (a cellular kinase that phosphorylates DARPP-32 at Thr75 residue) activity driven by trafficking of the Cdk5 activator, p35, from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane.^(39)^ Keeping in mind that DARPP-32/Thr75 phosphorylation would inhibit the PKA activity,^(40)^ it was postulated that chronic treatment of psychostimulants via Cdk5 activation and DARPP-32/Thr75 phosphorylation would inhibit PKA-dependent signaling. This represents a homeostatic feedback mechanism to counterbalance the over-reactive cAMP/PKA/DARPP-32/Thr34 signaling and behavioral sensitization. In agreement with this hypothesis,^(41)^ inhibition of Cdk5 has been found to enhance cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization.^(35)^

#### Significance of Akt/GSK-3 signaling in behavioral sensitization

Other than classical dopamine D₁ receptor-mediated cAMP-PKA-DARPP-32 and nuclear CREB-ΔFosB signaling, recent investigations have shown that dopamine D₂-like receptors initiate a cAMP-independent pathway that affects the development of behavioral sensitization.^(42)^ Initial studies of dopamine transporter (DAT)-knockout mice revealed that persistent elevation of extracellular dopamine levels led to a reduction of Akt phosphorylation as well as activity in these spontaneously hyperactive mice.^(43)^ The inactivation of Akt in these mice reduced the phosphorylation levels of its downstream substrates, GSK-3α and GSK-3β, thus activating GSK-3 activity in the striatum.^(43)^ The evidence that the antipsychotic haloperidol caused enhanced Akt phosphorylation and reduced GSK-3 activity in wild-type mice indicates that striatal Akt-GSK3 signaling is regulated through dopamine D₂ receptors under physiological conditions.^(44)^ Interestingly, administration of amphetamine also results in an inhibition of Akt phosphorylation/activation.^(45)^ This not only confirms the regulation of Akt-GSK3 by dopamine input but also suggests that
this signaling pathway participates in psychostimulant-induced behavioral activation. In concert with this notion, a GSK-3 inhibitor was demonstrated to reduce hyperactivity in both DAT-knockout mice and amphetamine-treated wild-type mice. (43,46) Genetically engineered GSK-3β heterozygote mice exhibited a diminished behavioral response to amphetamine compared to wild-type mice, while constitutively active GSK-3β mutants exhibited locomotor hyperactivity. Both lines of evidence support the idea that the Akt-GSK3 pathway is involved in dopamine-dependent behavior. Recently, a human genetic study that associated Akt1 haplotypes with schizophrenia suggested that loss of Akt1 function in schizophrenia may be a cause of aberrant behaviors. (44) Finally, Akt and GSK-3 have been associated with the action of the anti-mania drug lithium, which is an inhibitor of GSK-3 but also an Akt activator. (47,48) Administration of lithium inhibits brain GSK-3 activity in mice, and in turn suppresses dopamine-dependent locomotor hyperactivity. (43) Whether the dopamine D₂ receptor-dependent Akt-GSK-3 pathway is involved in the development of psychostimulant-induced behavioral sensitization remains unclear and requires further investigation.

Prospective treatment against drug relapse

In conclusion, understanding the molecular mechanisms of behavioral sensitization as indicated in the Fig. 1 would facilitate the discovery of drug therapy programs against addiction. However, most of the clinical progress in addiction treatment is focused on the elimination of physical dependence and withdrawal syndromes, and does not target the core symptoms of addiction, i.e. drug craving and relapse (manifested by either drug cues or stress) (49) during abstinence. (23) Treatments have attempted to block the drug targets, such as the use of naltrexone for opioid addicts/alcoholics or the development of cocaine or nicotine vaccines, or to modulate receptor activity (receptor agonist or partial agonist). (23,50) The latter is the opposite of the target blockade concept, however its efficacy has been demonstrated against opioid (methadone) and nicotine (nicotine patch or chewing gum) addiction. Unfortunately, at present there is no available method to treat psychostimulant craving and relapse through the known molecular mechanism. Considering the general concept that midbrain DA is essential for the development of drug

Chang Gung Med J Vol. 32 No. 2  
March-April 2009

REFERENCES

1. Nestler EJ. Is there a common molecular pathway for addiction? Nat Neurosci 2005; 8: 1445-9.
2. Vezina P. Sensitization of midbrain dopamine neuron reactivity and the self-administration of psychomotor stimulant drugs. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2004; 27: 827-39.
3. Paulson PE, Camp DM, Robinson TE. Time course of transient behavioral depression and persistent behavioral sensitization in relation to regional brain monoamine concentrations during amphetamine withdrawal in rats. Psychopharmacology 1991; 103: 480-92.
4. Robinson TE, Becker JB. Enduring changes in brain and behavior produced by chronic amphetamine administration: a review and evaluation of animal models of amphetamine psychosis. Brain Res 1986; 11: 157-98.
5. Kalivas PW, Nakamura M. Neural systems for behavioral activation and reward. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999; 9: 223-7.
6. Borgkvist A, Fisone G. Psychoactive drugs and regulation of the cAMP/PKA/DARPP-32 cascade in striatal medium spiny neurons. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2007; 31: 79-88.
7. Kalivas PW, Stewart J. Dopamine transmission in the initiation and expression of drug- and stress-induced sensitization of motor activity. Brain Res Rev 1991; 16: 223-44.
8. Cador M, Bjijou Y, Stinus L. Evidence of a complete independence of the neurobiological substrates for the induction and expression of behavioral sensitization to amphetamine. Neuroscience 1995; 65: 385-95.
9. Perugini M, Vezina P. Amphetamine administration to the ventral tegmental area sensitizes rats to the locomotor effects of nucleus accumbens amphetamine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994; 270: 690-6.
10. Hooks MS, Jones GH, Liem BJ, Justice JB Jr. Sensitization and individual differences to intraperitoneal amphetamine, cocaine or caffeine following repeated intracranial amphetamine infusions. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1992; 43: 815-23.
11. Di Chiara G, Bassareo V, Fenu S, De Luca MA, Spina L, cadoni C, Acquas E, Carboni E, Valentini V, Lecca D. Dopamine and drug addiction: the nucleus accumbens shell connection. Neuropharmacology 2004; 47: 227-41.
12. Kalivas PW, Alesdatter JE. Involvement of NMDA receptor stimulation in the VTA and amygdala in behavioral sensitization to cocaine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993; 267: 486-95.
13. Vezina P. D₁ dopamine receptor activation is necessary for the induction of sensitization by amphetamine in the ventral tegmental area. J Neurosci 1996; 16: 2411-20.
14. Wolf ME, White FJ, Nassar R, Brooderson RJ, Khansa MR. Differential development of autoreceptor subsensitivity and enhanced dopamine release during amphetamine sensitization. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993; 264: 249-55.
15. Hyman SE, Malenka RC, Nestler EJ. Neural mechanisms

of addiction: the role of reward-related learning and memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 2006; 29: 565-98.
16. Jones S, Bonci A. Synaptic plasticity and drug addiction. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2005; 5: 20-5.
17. Wolf ME, Sun X, Mangiavacchi S, Chao SZ. Psychomotor stimulants and neuronal plasticity. Neuropharmacology 2004; 47: 61-79.
18. Carr DB, Sesack SR. Projections from the rat prefrontal cortex to the ventral tegmental area: target specificity in the synaptic associations with mesoaccumbens and mesocortical neurons. J Neurosci 2000; 20: 3864-73.
19. Malenka RC. Synaptic plasticity and AMPA receptor trafficking. Ann NY Acad Sci 2003; 1003: 1-11.
20. Bredt DS, Nicoll RA. AMPA receptor trafficking at excitatory synapses. Neuron 2003; 40: 361-79.
21. Montague PR, Hyman SE, Cohen JD. Computational roles for dopamine in behavioral control. Nature 2004; 431: 760-7.
22. Nestler EJ, Aghajanian GK. Molecular and cellular basis of addiction. Science 1997; 278: 58-63.
23. Nestler EJ. From neurobiology to treatment: progress against addiction. Nat Neurosci 2002; 5: 1076-9.
24. Waters CL, Kuo YC, Blendy JA. Differential distribution of CREB in the mesolimbic dopamine reward pathway. J Neurochem 2003; 87: 1237-44.
25. Zhang XF, Odom DT, Koo SH, Conkright MD, Canettieri G, Best J, Chen HM, Jenner R, Herbolsheimer E, Jacobsen E, Kadam S, Ecker JR, Emerson B, Hogenesch JB, Unterman T, Young RA, Montminy M. Genome-wide analysis of cAMP-response element binding protein occupancy, phosphorylation, and target gene activation in human tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102: 4459-64.
26. Impey S, McCorkle SR, Cha-Monlstad H, Dwyer JM, Yochum GS, Boss JM, McWeeney S, Dunn JJ, Mandel G, Goodman RH. Defining the CREB regulon: a genome-wide analysis of transcription factor regulator regions. Cell 2004; 119: 1041-54.
27. Cole RL, Konradi C, Douglass J, Hyman SE. Neuronal adaptation to amphetamine and dopamine: molecular mechanisms of prodynorphin gene regulation in rat striatum. Neuron 1995; 14: 813-23.
28. Carlezon WA Jr, Duman RS, Nestler EJ. The many faces of CREB. Trends Neurosci 2005; 28: 436-45.
29. Olsen VG, Zabetian CP, Bolanos CA, Edwards S, Barrot M, Eisch AJ, Hughes T, Self DW, Neve RL, Nestler EJ. Regulation of drug reward by cAMP response element-binding protein: evidence for two functionally distinct subregions of the ventral tegmental area. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 5553-62.
30. McClung CA, Ulery PG, Perrotti LI, Zachariou V, Berton O, Nestler EJ. ΔFosB: a molecular switch for long-term adaptation in the brain. Mol Brain Res 2004; 132: 146-54.
31. Peakman MC, Colby C, Perrotti LI, Tekumalla P, Carle T, Ulery P, Chao J, Duman C, Steffen C, Monteggia L, Allen MR, Stock JL, Duman RS, McNeish JD, Barrot M, Self

DW, Nestler EJ, Schaffer E. Inducible, brain region specific expression of a dominant negative mutant of c-Jun in transgenic mice decreases sensitivity to cocaine. Brain Res 2003;970:73-86.

32. Drago J, Gerfen CR, Westphal H, Steiner H. D1 dopamine receptor-deficient mouse: cocaine-induced regulation of immediate-early gene and substance P expression in the striatum. Neuroscience 1996;74:813-23.

33. Neisewander JL, Fuchs RA, O'Dell LE, Khroyan TV. Effects of SCH 23390 on dopamine D1 receptor occupancy and locomotion produced by intraaccumbens cocaine infusion. Synapse 1998;30:194-204.

34. Nishi A, Bibb JA, Snyder GL, Higashi H, Nairn AC, Greengard P. Amplification of dopaminergic signaling by a positive feedback loop. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:12840-5.

35. Bibb JA, Chen J, Taylor JR, Svenningsson P, Nishi A, Snyder GL, Yan Z, Sagawa ZK, Ouimet CC, Nairn AC, Nestler EJ, Greengard P. Effects of chronic exposure to cocaine are regulated by the neuronal protein Cdk5. Nature 2001;410:376-80.

36. Svenningsson P, Fienberg AA, Allen PB, Le Moine C, Lindskog M, Fisone G, Greengard P, Fredholm BB. Dopamine D1 receptor-induced gene transcription is modulated by DARPP-32. J Neurochem 2000;75:248-57.

37. Fienberg AA, Hiroi N, Mermelstein P, Song WJ, Snyder GL, Nishi A, Cheramy A, O'Callaghan JP, Miller DB, Cole DG, Corbett R, Haile CN, Cooper DC, Onn SP, Grace AA, Ouimet CC, White FJ, Hyman SE, Surmeier DJ, Girault JA, Nestler EJ, Greengard P. DARPP-32: regulator of the efficacy of dopaminergic neurotransmission. Science 1998;281:838-42.

38. Zachariou V, Sgambato-Faure V, Sasaki T, Svenningssn P, Berton O, Fienberg AA, Narin AC, Greengard P, Nestler EJ. Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 at threonine-34 is required for cocaine action. Neuropsychopharmacology 2006;31:555-62.

39. Chen PC, Chen JC. Enhanced Cdk5 activity and p35 translocation in the ventral striatum of acute and chronic methamphetamine-treated rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 2005;30:538-49.

40. Nishi A, Snyder GL, Greengard P. Bidirectional regulation of DARPP-32 phosphorylation by dopamine. J Neurosci 1997;17:8147-55.

41. Nestler EJ. Molecular basis of long-term plasticity underlying addiction. Nat Rev Neurosci 2001;2:119-28.

42. Beaulieu JM, Tirotta E, Sotnikova TD, Masri B, Salahpour A, Gainetdinov RR, Borrelli E, Caron MG. Regulation of Akt signaling by D2 and D3 dopamine receptors in vivo. J Neurosci 2007;27:881-5.

43. Beaulieu J-M, Sotnikova TD, Yao WD, Kockeritz L, Woodgett JR, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG. Lithium antagonizes dopamine-dependent behaviors mediated by an Akt/glycogen synthase kinase 3 signaling cascade. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:5099-104.

44. Emamian ES, Hall D, Bimbaum MJ, Karayiorgou M, Gogos JA. Convergent evidence for impaired Akt1-GSK3β signaling in schizophrenia. Nat Genet 2004;36:131-7.

45. Beaulieu J-M, Sotnikova TD, Marion S, Lefkowitz RJ, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG. An Akt/β-arrestin 2/PP2A signaling complex mediates dopaminergic neurotransmission and behavior. Cell 2005;122:261-73.

46. Gould TD, Einat H, Bhat R, Manji HK. AR-A014418, a selective GSK-3 inhibitor, produces antidepressant-like effects in the forced swim test. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2004;7:387-90.

47. Chalecka-Franaszek E, Chuang DM. Lithium activates the serine/threonine kinase Akt-1 and suppresses glutamate-induced inhibition of Akt-1 activity in neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:8745-50.

48. Phil CJ, Klein PS. Molecular targets of lithium action. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001;41:789-813.

49. Shalev U, Grimm JW, Shaham Y. Neurobiology of relapse to heroin and cocaine seeking: a review. Pharmacol Rev 2002;54:1-42.

50. Kantak KM, Collins SL, Bond J, Fox BS. Time course of changes in cocaine self-administration behavior in rats during immunization with the cocaine vaccine IPC-1010. Psychopharmacology 2001;153:334-40.

51. Cornish JL, Kalivas PW. Cocaine sensitization and craving: differing roles for dopamine and glutamate in the nucleus accumbens. J Addict Dis 2001;20:43-54.

52. Self DW, Barnhart WJ, Lehman DA, Nestler EJ. Opposite modulation of cocaine-seeking behavior by D1-like and D2-like dopamine receptor agonists. Science 1996;271:1586-9.

# 成癮性興奮藥物的分子作用機制

陳景宗 陳珮君¹ 江耀璋

藥物成癮是一種神經可塑性的改變，涉及大腦內部成癮迴路中物性與化性的變異，因而影響到個體外觀的行爲表徵。過去在動物實驗上的諸多研究，讓我們有機會得以窺視建構「藥物成癮」的分子作用基礎。本篇文章利用興奮性藥物當作例子，說明安非他命類物質成癮所涉及的神經傳導物質以及訊號傳遞；首先以成癮迴路中多巴胺－麩胺酸－GABA 神經間的互動做基礎，再探討由多巴胺第一亞型 (D₁) 受體所啓動的 cAMP-PKA-CREB-ΔFosB 訊息以及由多巴胺第二亞型受體策動的 Akt/GSK3 訊號在成癮的動物模式－行爲致敏化形成時所扮演的角色。最後，介紹個體對藥物成癮所誘發的負迴饋訊號 Cdk5-DARPP32 的作用機制，並藉由目前對這些作用機轉的瞭解探討可能研發的藥癮治療方式。(長庚醫誌 2009;32:148-54)

關鍵詞：藥物成癮，(甲基) 安非他命，多巴胺，麩胺酸，依核

---

長庚大學 醫學院 生理暨藥理學科，¹美國威斯康辛麥迪遜分校 藥學系  
受文日期：民國96年7月12日；接受刊載：民國97年5月21日  
通訊作者：陳景宗教授，長庚大學 生理暨藥理學科。桃園縣333龜山鄉文化一路259號。Tel.: (03)2118800轉5282; Fax: (03)2118700; E-mail: Jinchen@mail.cgu.edu.tw
