
# Clinical Studies on Pituitary Tumorigenesis

Horm Res 2009;71(suppl 2):116–122  
DOI: 10.1159/000192448  
Published online: April 29, 2009  

## Genetic, Molecular and Clinical Features of Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas

### Adrian F. Daly Maria A. Tichomirowa Albert Beckers

Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium

---

### Key Words

Acromegaly • AIP • FIPA • Pituitary • Prolactinoma

---

### Abstract

Pituitary adenomas occur in a familial setting in about 5% of all cases, and over half of these are due to multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and Carney’s complex (CNC). Non-MEN1/CNC familial pituitary tumours of all tumour phenotypes, known as familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA), were first described in the late 1990s. Clinical features of FIPA differ from those of sporadic pituitary adenomas, as patients with FIPA have a younger age at diagnosis and larger tumours. About 15% of patients with FIPA have mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene (AIP), which indicates that FIPA may have a diverse genetic pathophysiology. This article describes the clinical features of FIPA, the tumour pathologies found in this setting and the genetic/molecular data that have recently been reported in FIPA.

---

### Introduction

Pituitary adenomas that occur in a hereditary setting are uncommon and have been described most often in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and Carney complex (CNC). MEN1, an autosomal dominant condition, is associated with parathyroid, enteropancreatic and anterior pituitary tumours [1]. Other endocrine-inactive tumours, such as lipomas and angiofibromas, are also frequently seen in patients with MEN1. The gene that causes MEN1 was first localized to chromosome 11q13 [2], and later identified as *MEN1*, a gene that encodes the nuclear protein, menin [3]. To date, over 1,300 instances of various mutations in the *MEN1* gene have been described with 500 or 50 mutations being unique [4], most of which predict a truncated menin protein. However, 30% of cases suggestive of MEN1 clinically have a normal *MEN1* sequence. *MEN1* appears to act as a tumour suppressor gene, and recent data suggest that menin can potentially interact with thousands of genes [5], 3′ sites and regions outside of genes [6].

About 40% of patients with MEN1 have pituitary adenomas, and 17% of cases present with a pituitary tumour as their first tumour [7, 8]. Patients with pituitary tumours present 7 years earlier than patients presenting with other MEN1 tumours. In families with MEN1, pituitary tumours are more frequent than in sporadic MEN1 (59 vs. 34%, respectively). From a clinical perspective, MEN1-associated pituitary adenomas are more aggressive than sporadic (i.e. non-MEN1) tumours. Pituitary adenomas in MEN1 are macroadenomas in 85% of cases, compared with just over 40% of sporadic cases. The rate of hormonal control in MEN1-associated pituitary tumours is also lower than in sporadic cases. The proportions of the various subtypes of pituitary tumours are approximately the same

---

### KARGER

Fax +41 61 306 12 34  
E-Mail karger@karger.ch  
www.karger.com  

© 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel  
0301-0163/09/0718-0116$26.00/0  
Accessible online at: www.karger.com/hre  

Prof. Albert Beckers, MD, PhD  
Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire  
Domaine Universitaire Sart-Tilman  
BE-4000 Liège (Belgium)  
Tel. +32 4 366 7084, Fax +32 4 366 7261, E-Mail albert.beckers@chu.ulg.ac.be

Table 1. Familial pituitary adenoma syndromes

| Condition | Gene | Molecular pathology | Pituitary tumour |
|-----------|------|---------------------|------------------|
| MEN 1     | MEN1 (Ch11q13) | Decreased menin expression/function | All pituitary tumour types (prolactinomas, non-secreting adenomas and GH-secreting adenomas most frequent) |
| MEN 4     | CDKN1B (Chr12p13) | Decreased p27 levels in tumour | Associated only with acromegaly and Cushing's disease in two patients to date |
| CNC       | PPKR1A (Ch17q22-24)?(Ch2p16) | Decreased protein kinase A regulatory subunit Ia expression/function | GH and GH/prolactin secreting adenomas |
| FIPA      | AIP (Ch11q13.32) in 15% of cases (50% of familial acromegaly) Other genes? | Decreased mRNA and protein in some mutated tissues ?Altered regulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor or phosphodiesterase function | All pituitary adenoma subtypes involved; AIP mutation-associated cases include somatotropinomas, prolactinomas, mixed GH/prolactin tumours, non-secreting adenomas |

in MEN1 and sporadic populations, with prolactinomas predominating. However, in MEN1, prolactinomas are overwhelmingly macroadenomas (84%), and these respond poorly to dopamine agonists (normalization rate, 44%), which is in contrast to the findings with sporadic prolactinomas.

CNC occurs much more infrequently than MEN1, with about 500 cases reported to date worldwide [9]. CNC consists of patients (70% familial) with a complex of skin pigmentation, cardiac myxomas, endocrine hypersecretion and schwannomas [10]. The primary genetic cause of CNC is mutation of the protein kinase A1A regulatory subunit gene (PRKAR1A) on chromosome 17q22-24 [11]. Acromegaly occurs in the setting of CNC, although infrequently. Most patients have some evidence of abnormal growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) or prolactin levels.

A MEN1-like syndrome (MEN4) has been reported in rats and humans, and relates to mutations in the CDKN1B gene (encodes p27kip1) [12, 13]. To date, only one family with acromegaly, hyperparathyroidism, and renal and testicular cancer has been reported. Georgitsi et al. reported a sporadic case in the Netherlands in a patient with Cushing's disease, a cervical carcinoid tumour and hyperparathyroidism [14]. No other cases have yet been reported in other studies of large series of patients [15].

Apart from syndromes with a known genetic pathophysiology, familial acromegaly has been described for over a century [16]. A total of about 50 familial acromegaly kindreds (>120 individuals) have been described in the literature. Tumours in these patients are, almost without exception, macroadenomas, and they may occur

in younger individuals. Genetic linkage studies in familial acromegaly pointed to a region of chromosome 11q13.1-q13.3 [17–19]. In 2006, Vierimaa et al. reported that mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene (AIP) occurred in association with familial acromegaly kindreds [20]. However, this has explained only a limited proportion of cases of familial acromegaly and other genetic culprits presumably remain (table 1).

### Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas

Pituitary tumours that occur in a familial setting due to MEN1, CNC or familial acromegaly account for a minority of pituitary tumours; <3% are due to MEN1 [21]. Our experience suggests that a further 2% of cases of pituitary tumours have family links. It is recognized that pituitary tumours of all types can occur in multiple members of a single kindred in the absence of MEN1/CNC, a condition that we termed familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) in 1999. To date, we have identified >130 FIPA kindreds in our collaborative series [22], and FIPA families have also been reported by separate research groups [23, 24]. Importantly, FIPA is not limited to the phenotype of acromegaly, and represents a clinical framework within which potential new causes and features of familial pituitary adenomas can be studied.

Clinical Features of FIPA

In the setting of FIPA, pituitary tumours of the same type can present in all affected family members (homogeneous presentation), or affected members can have different types of tumours (heterogeneous presentation). In an international study performed from 2000 to 2005, we identified a total of 64 FIPA families [25]. All families were MEN1 negative and, in familial acromegaly kindreds, one affected member of each family underwent PRKAR1A screening. The characteristics of the FIPA kindreds were then compared with a matched group of patients with sporadic pituitary tumours who were managed at referral centres in Liège, Belgium, and L'Aquila, Italy.

To date, FIPA kindreds with up to four affected members (i.e. individuals with pituitary tumours) have been described [22]. Females predominate (62%), which is related to the fact that prolactinomas are the most frequent tumour seen in the setting of FIPA and most of these occur in women. The frequencies of the various different tumour types in FIPA are: prolactinoma (41%), somatotropinoma (30%), non-secreting tumour (13%), somatolactotropinoma (7%), gonadotropinoma (4%), Cushing's disease (4%) and thyrotropinoma (1%). Virtually all FIPA kindreds have at least one prolactinoma, somatotropinoma or somatolactotrope tumour in an affected member. The cohort is comprised equally of families with the same (homogeneous) tumour type in all affected members and kindreds with heterogeneous tumour types among affected members. A first-degree relationship between affected members within families occurs in approximately 75% of FIPA families. Patients with FIPA present with pituitary tumours 4 years earlier than those with sporadic pituitary tumours. In families with multiple affected generations, the children/grandchildren presented significantly earlier (20 years) than their parents/grandparents. Macroadenomas are seen in 63% of cases in FIPA kindreds. In terms of specific tumour types, prolactinomas in FIPA are mainly microadenomas occurring in women, whereas males invariably have macroadenomas; this pattern largely reflects the characteristics of sporadic prolactinomas [26]. Prolactinomas in heterogeneous FIPA have higher rates of extension and invasion compared with those in sporadic cases. In somatotropinoma patients from FIPA families, half occur as homogeneous acromegaly families, and 50% in combination with other tumour types (heterogeneous families). Non-secreting pituitary tumours occur in heterogeneous FIPA families, are diagnosed 8 years earlier and have a higher rate of extension/invasion than sporadic tumours. Gonadotropinomas and Cushing's disease rarely occur in a homogeneous familial setting.

In 2006, Vierimaa et al. reported the results of a comprehensive genetic study that identified mutations in the AIP gene as being associated with the familial presentation of somatotropinomas and prolactinomas [20]. Loss of heterozygosity at the AIP locus in tumour samples indicated that these tumours had lost the function of the normal allele in a 'second hit' according to the Knudson model. Other families tested negative for AIP mutations. We undertook a study of our cohort to examine the frequency of AIP mutations in the FIPA setting [27]. Among 73 FIPA families from nine countries, 15% of the cohort had germline mutations in AIP. Ten separate mutations were found, one of which (R304X) was found in a FIPA family that is apparently unrelated to a family from the same country (Italy) with the same mutation reported by Vierimaa et al. [20]. Those patients with AIP mutations were significantly younger at diagnosis (12 years younger) than patients with FIPA who were without AIP mutations. Tumours were larger in the AIP mutation-positive groups compared with the remainder of the cohort. Only 50% of those with homogeneous acromegaly had AIP mutations. Importantly, we have found that kindreds with strong familiality for pituitary tumours (three or four affected members) can be negative for mutations in AIP (and CDKN1B/MEN4), which indicates strongly that other genes may be involved in the causation of FIPA.

Further analysis of the disease characteristics of patients with FIPA who had AIP mutations indicates that, even among those phenotypically acromegalic, the tumour and hormonal data are heterogeneous. Over 60% of AIP mutation-positive patients with somatotropinomas had increased GH/IGF-I levels only and the remaining 38% also had elevated prolactin. Somatotropinoma patients with AIP mutations can be immunohistochemically positive for GH alone (59%), GH and prolactin (33%), or GH and follicle-stimulating hormone (8%). Immunohistochemistry for AIP itself has been suggested as a useful diagnostic tool in pituitary tumour banks and in routine pathological practice. However, whereas the absence of AIP protein is likely with early truncating mutations, it is less clear how strongly other mutated forms of AIP are expressed at the protein level in pituitary tumours. Also, the epitopes used for AIP detection should be appropriate for detecting a range of mutated AIP proteins.

Since these initial studies, a number of publications have assessed aspects of AIP in FIPA and sporadic pituitary tumours, and in other endocrine and non-endocrine cancers. Many AIP mutations have been described

Fig. 1. Mutations in the AIP gene reported in patients with FIPA and sporadic pituitary tumours, as of June 2008. AhR = Aryl hydrocarbon receptor; FKBP-PPI = FK506 binding protein-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase; hsp90 = heat-shock protein 90; TPR = tetratricopeptide repeat domain.

in the FIPA setting (fig. 1). FIPA families with AIP mutations have also been reported by other groups [24, 28, 29]. Vierimaa et al. reported initially that patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas exhibited Q14X and an exon 4 splice acceptor site mutation [20]. The Q14X mutation has been found with high frequency in Finland, but was not found in populations of sporadic adenomas from across the world, indicating that it is a founder mutation [30, 31]. Although patients with sporadic pituitary tumours infrequently have AIP mutations [31], they are not entirely absent as was suggested at first. Overall, patients with sporadic pituitary tumours who have AIP mutations seem to present at a young age and mainly with somatotropinomas, although other pituitary tumour types do occur [32]. Cazabat et al. reported that, of a total of 154 patients with sporadic pituitary tumours who have acromegaly, five patients (3.2%) demonstrated AIP mutations [33]. Studies in other tumours have revealed no firm evidence of germline AIP mutations as a potentially causative or contributory factor [34].

The manner in which AIP mutations cause pituitary adenomas in FIPA and apparently sporadic cases is largely unknown. Many AIP mutations described to date would involve truncations of the AIP protein, with the loss of a tetratricopeptide repeat domain and the carboxyl terminal that are important for interactions with other proteins such as heat-shock protein 90 (hsp90) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor [35–39]. Other missense mutations involve highly conserved amino acids, which may alter AIP

function in other ways. Whether various mutated versions of AIP are actually expressed or undergo mRNA degradation is unknown at this time. A variety of cellular effects are potentially related to AIP activity, of which modulation of phosphodiesterase PDE4A5 and phosphodiesterase PDE2A activities are perhaps the most promising molecular leads to explain tumorigenesis [40, 41]. Recently, an international group reported specific in vitro data on the potential involvement of PDE4A5 in pituitary cellular abnormalities associated with AIP expression levels [24]. Leontiou and colleagues found that overexpression of wild-type AIP in human fibroblast and pituitary (GH3) cell lines led to marked reductions in measures of cell proliferation. When a variety of mutated forms of AIP were expressed in the cell lines (including a number of mutations described in the setting of FIPA), suppression of cell proliferation was negated. Separate experiments demonstrated that a protein-protein interaction between AIP and PDE4A5 was interfered with by mutations in AIP, which gives support to the role of PDE4A5 (and cyclic adenosine monophosphate levels) in adenoma formation in this setting. Another important step will come from detailed study of pituitary and other tissues in AIP/Ara9 knockout mice, a model that has recently been developed and described in detail [42]. Given the frequency of pituitary tumours in rodents, it may be that conditional knockouts at the level of the pituitary might provide more useful evidence applicable to the situation in humans.

Table 2. Summary of clinical aspects relating to FIPA and AIP mutations

- Up to 5% of pituitary adenomas occur in a familial setting
- FIPA is defined as the occurrence of pituitary adenomas of any tumour type among ≥2 related family members in the absence of MEN1 or Carney complex
- FIPA may be either homogeneous (same pituitary tumour type in all affected members) or heterogeneous (various pituitary tumour types in the same family). More than 120 FIPA families have been described
- In FIPA, patients present at a younger age and with more aggressive tumours than patients with sporadic pituitary tumours. In multi-generational FIPA families, children/grand-children present with pituitary tumours over a decade earlier than their parents/grandparents
- Mutations in the AIP gene are seen in a minority (15%) of FIPA families, and 50% of homogeneous acromegaly families have AIP mutations
- Evidence is accruing that AIP mutations are associated with sporadic pituitary adenomas that occur in younger patients with more aggressive tumours
- Genetic screening for mutations in AIP should, for the time being, be limited to cases with a reasonably high index of clinical suspicion: FIPA families and young patients (children, adolescents and young adults) with large or aggressive pituitary adenomas

Among FIPA families with AIP mutations, the penetrance of pituitary adenomas remains an open question that requires long-term follow-up in large cohorts. Current evidence would suggest that at least 33% of those carrying an AIP mutation also have a pituitary tumour [43]. However, from a research and a practical clinical perspective, it is valuable to consider testing for AIP mutations in at least one affected member of all families that meet the definition of FIPA. As tumours in individuals with AIP mutations are more aggressive and occur at an earlier age, there is potential value in identifying carriers for the purpose of performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and hormonal testing. In the absence of a tumour on MRI, follow-up of carriers of mutations can be performed on a regular basis (yearly), relying predominantly on clinical symptoms and basal hormonal tests (IGF-I and prolactin). Evidence to date suggests that young patients with aggressive pituitary tumours are also more likely to carry AIP mutations, and testing for AIP mutations among apparently sporadic populations should at this time be limited to such young patients (table 2). It must also be borne in mind that a minority (15%) of FIPA families have an AIP mutation, so further in-depth genetic studies are clearly required to elucidate the pathophysiology of FIPA comprehensively.

## Disclosure Statement

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

## Conclusions

The study of FIPA and its molecular and genetic characteristics has progressed rapidly. From a clinical perspective, it should be emphasized that clinically relevant pituitary adenomas are more common than previously thought and occur in a familial setting in about 5% of cases overall. Therefore, careful questioning regarding the family history of pituitary disease should be part of the work-up of all patients with pituitary adenomas, not just those with acromegaly. FIPA is a useful clinical framework to undertake further study of the features of pituitary adenomas that occur in a familial setting, as it encompasses all tumour phenotypes and heterogeneous/homogeneous expression among affected family members (table 2). The discovery of AIP as a factor predisposing to pituitary adenomas has led to a description of a large number of novel AIP mutations among FIPA cohorts by our group and other researchers. Families bearing AIP mutations have more aggressive pituitary tumours in affected members, and are often seen at a much younger age than is usual in the sporadic setting.

## References

1. Agarwal SK, Lee Burns A, Sukhodolets KE, Kennedy PA, Obungu VH, Hickman AB, Mullenore ME, Whitten I, Skarulis MC, Simonds WF, Mateo C, Crabtree JS, Scacheri PC, Ji Y, Novotny EA, Garrett-Beal L, Ward JM, Libutti SK, Richard Alexander H, Cerrato A, Parisi MJ, Santa Anna-AS, Oliver B, Chandrasekharappa SC, Collins FS, Spiegel AM, Marx SJ: Molecular pathology of the MEN1 gene. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1014:189–198.
2. Larsson C, Skogseid B, Oberg K, Nakamura Y, Nordenskjold M: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene maps to chromosome 11 and is lost in insulinoma. Nature 1988;332:85–87.
3. Chandrasekharappa SC, Guru SC, Manickam P, Olufemi SE, Collins FS, Emmert-Buck MR, Debelenko LV, Zhuang Z, Lubensky IA, Liotta LA, Crabtree JS, Wang Y, Roe BA, Weisemann J, Boguski MS, Agarwal SK, Kester MB, Kim YS, Heppner C, Dong Q, Spiegel AM, Burns AL, Marx SJ: Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia-type 1. Science 1997;276:404–407.

4 Lemos MC, Thakker RV: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1): analysis of 1336 mutations reported in the first decade following identification of the gene. Hum Mutat 2008;29:22–32.

5 Scacheri PC, Davis S, Odom DT, Crawford GE, Perkins S, Halawi MJ, Agarwal SK, Marx SJ, Spiegel AM, Meltzer PS, Collins FS: Genome-wide analysis of menin binding provides insights into MEN1 tumorigenesis. PLoS Genet 2006;2:e51.

6 Agarwal SK, Impey S, McWeeney S, Scacheri PC, Collins FS, Goodman RH, Spiegel AM, Marx SJ: Distribution of menin-occupied regions in chromatin specifies a broad role of menin in transcriptional regulation. Neoplasia 2007;9:101–107.

7 Vergès B, Boureille F, Goudet P, Murat A, Beckers A, Sassolas G, Cougard P, Chambe B, Montvernay C, Calender A: Pituitary disease in MEN type 1 (MEN1): data from the France-Belgium MEN1 multicenter study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:457–465.

8 Beckers A, Betea D, Valdes Socin H, Stevenaert A: The treatment of sporadic versus MEN1-related pituitary adenomas. J Int Med 2003;253:599–605.

9 Boikos SA, Stratakis CA: Carney complex: the first 20 years. Curr Opin Oncol 2007;19:24–29.

10 Stratakis CA, Kirschner LS, Carney JA: Clinical and molecular features of the Carney complex: diagnostic criteria and recommendations for patient evaluation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:4041–4046.

11 Casey M, Mah C, Merliss AD, Kirschner LS, Taymans SE, Denio AE, Korf B, Irvine AD, Highes A, Carney JA, Stratakis CA, Basson CT: Identification of a novel genetic locus for familial cardiac myxomas and Carney complex. Circulation 1998;98:2560–2566.

12 Fritz A, Walch A, Piotrowska K, Rosemann M, Schäffer E, Weber K, Timper A, Wildner G, Graw J, Höfler H, Atkinson MJ: Recessive transmission of a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome in the rat. Cancer Res 2002;62:3048–3051.

13 Pellegata NS, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Siggelkow H, Samson E, Bink K, Höfler H, Fend F, Graw J, Atkinson MJ: Germ-line mutations in p27Kip1 cause a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome in rats and humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:15558–15563.

14 Georgitsi M, Raitila A, Karhu A, van der Luijt RB, Aalfs CM, Sane T, Vierimaa O, Mäkinen MJ, Tuppurainen K, Paschke R, Gimm O, Koch CA, Gundogdu S, Lucassen A, Tischkowitz M, Izatt L, Aylwin S, Bano G, Hodgson S, De Menis E, Launonen V, Vahteristo P, Altonen LA: Germline CDKN1B/p27Kipl mutation in multiple endocrine neoplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:3321–3325.

15 Ozawa A, Agarwal SK, Mateo CM, Burns AL, Rice TS, Kennedy PA, Quigley CM, Simonds WF, Weinstein LS, Chandrasekharappa SC, Collins FS, Spiegel AM, Marx SJ: The parathyroid/pituitary variant of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 usually has causes other than p27Kip1 mutations. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:1948–1951.

16 Sternberg M: Acromegaly (transl. FRB Atkins). London, The New Sydenham Society [No. 169], 1899.

17 Teh BT, Kytölä S, Farnebo F, Bergman L, Wong FK, Weber G, Hayward N, Larsson C, Skogseid B, Beckers A, Phelan C, Edwards M, Epstein M, Alford F, Hurley D, Grimmond S, Silins G, Walters M, Stewart C, Cardinal J, Khodaei S, Parente F, Tranebjaerg L, Jorde R, Menon J, Khir A, Tan TT, Chan SP, Zaini A, Khalid BAK, Sandelin K, Thompson N, Brandi ML, Warth M, Stock J, Leisti J, Cameron D, Shepherd JJ, Öberg K, Nordenskjöld M, Salmela P: Mutation analysis of the MEN1 gene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, familial acromegaly and familial isolated hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:2621–2626.

18 Poncin J, Abs R, Velkeniers B, Bonduelle M, Abramowicz M, Legros JJ, Verloes A, Meurisse M, Van Gaal L, Verellen C, Koulischer L, Beckers A: Mutation analysis of the MEN1 gene in Belgian patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related diseases. Hum Mut 1999;13:54–60.

19 Luccio-Camelo DC, Une KN, Ferreira RE, Khoo SK, Nickolov R, Bronstein MD, Vaisman M, Teh BT, Frohman LA, Mendonca BB, Gadelha MR: A meiotic recombination in a new isolated familial somatotropinoma kindred. Eur J Endocrinol 2004;150:643–648.

20 Vierimaa O, Georgitsi M, Lehtonen R, Vahteristo P, Kokko A, Raitila A, Tuppurainen K, Ebeling TM, Salmela PI, Paschke R, Gundogdu S, De Menis E, Makinen MJ, Lauonen V, Karhu A, Altonen LA: Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by germline mutations in the AIP gene. Science 2006;312:1228–1230.

21 Scheithauer BW, Laws ER Jr, Kovacs K, Horvath E, Randall RV, Carney JA: Pituitary adenomas of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type I syndrome. Semin Diagn Pathol 1987;4:205–211.

22 Beckers A, Daly AF: The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of familial isolated pituitary adenomas. Eur J Endocrinol 2007;157:371–382.

23 Villa C, Magri F, Morbini P, Falchetti A, Scagnelli P, Lovati E, Locatelli D, Canevari FR, Necchi V, Gabellieri E, Guabello G, Chiovato L, Solcia E: Silent familial isolated pituitary adenomas: histopathological and clinical case report. Endocr Pathol 2008 Mar 4 [Epub ahead of print].

24 Leontiou CA, Gueorguiev M, van der Spuy J, Quinton R, Lolli F, Hassan S, Chahal HS, Igreja SC, Jordan S, Rowe J, Stolbrink M,

25 Daly AF, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Ciccarelli A, Valdes-Socin H, Rohmer V, Tamburrano G, Borson-Chazot C, Estour B, Ciccarelli E, Brue T, Ferolla P, Emy P, Colao A, De Menis E, Lecomte P, Penfornis F, Delemer B, Bertherat J, Wemeau JL, De Herder W, Archambeaud F, Stevenaert A, Calender A, Murat A, Cavagnini F, Beckers A: Clinical characterization of familial isolated pituitary adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:3316–3323.

26 Ciccarelli A, Daly AF, Beckers A: The epidemiology of prolactinomas. Pituitary 2005;8:3–6.

27 Daly AF, Vanbellinghen JF, Khoo SK, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Naves LA, Guitelman MA, Murat A, Emy P, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Tamburrano G, Raverot G, Barlier A, De Herder W, Penfornis A, Ciccarelli E, Estour B, Lecomte P, Gatta B, Chabre O, Sabaté MI, Bertagna X, Garcia Basavilbaso N, Stalldecker G, Colao A, Ferolla P, Wémeau JL, Caron P, Sadoul JL, Oneto A, Archambeaud F, Calender A, Sinilnikova O, Montañana CF, Cavagnini F, Hana V, Solano A, Deletieres D, Luccio-Camelo DC, Basso A, Rohmer V, Brue T, Bours V, Teh BT, Beckers A: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations in familial isolated pituitary adenomas: analysis in 73 families. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:1891–1896.

28 Iwata T, Yamada S, Mizusawa N, Golam HM, Sano T, Yoshimoto K: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene is rarely mutated in sporadic GH-secreting adenomas. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2007;66:499–502.

29 Toledo RA, Lourenco DM Jr, Liberman B, Cunha-Neto MB, Cavalcanti MG, Moyses CB, Toledo SP, Dahia PL: Germline mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene in familial somatotropinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:1934–1937.

30 Yu R, Bonert V, Saporta I, Raffel LJ, Melmed S: AIP variants in sporadic pituitary adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:5126–5129.

31 Barlier A, Vanbellinghen JF, Daly AF, Silvy M, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Trouillas J, Tamagno G, Cazabat L, Bours V, Brue T, Enjalbert A, Beckers A: Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene are not highly prevalent among subjects with sporadic pituitary adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:1952–1955.

32 Georgitsi M, Raitila A, Karhu A, Tuppurainen K, Makinen MJ, Vierimaa O, Paschke R, Saeger W, van der Luijt RB, Sane T, Robledo M, De Menis E, Weil RJ, Wasik A, Zielinski G, Lucewicz O, Lubinski J, Launonen V, Vahteristo P, Aaltonen LA: Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:4101–4105.

33 Cazabat L, Libé R, Perlemoine K, René-Corail F, Burnichon N, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Dupasquier-Fediaevsky L, Bertagna X, Clauser E, Chanson P, Bertherat J, Raffin-Sanson ML: Germline inactivating mutations of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene in a large cohort of sporadic acromegaly: mutations are found in a subset of young patients with macroadenomas. Eur J Endocrinol 2007;157:1–8.

34 Georgitsi M, Karhu A, Winqvist R, Visakorpi T, Waltering K, Vahteristo P, Launonen V, Aaltonen LA: Mutation analysis of aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene in colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers. Br J Cancer 2007;96:352–356.

35 Petrulis JR, Perdew GH: The role of chaperone proteins in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor core complex. Chem Biol Interact 2002; 141:25–40.

36 Bell DR, Poland A: Binding of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) to AhR-interacting protein. The role of hsp90. J Biol Chem 2000; 275:36407–36414.

37 Meyer BK, Petrulis JR, Perdew GH: Aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor levels are selectively modulated by hsp90-associated immunophilin homolog XAP2. Cell Stress Chaperones 2000;5:243–254.

38 Carver LA, LaPres JJ, Jain S, Dunham EE, Bradfield CA: Characterization of the Ah receptor-associated protein, ARA9. J Biol Chem 1998;273:33580–33587.

39 Meyer BK, Perdew GH: Characterization of the AhR-hsp90-XAP2 core complex and the role of the immunophilin-related protein XAP2 in AhR stabilization. Biochemistry 1999;38:8907–8917.

40 Bolger GB, Peden AH, Steele MR, McKenzie C, McEwan DG, Wallace DA, Huston E, Baillie GS, Houslay MD: Attenuation of the activity of the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4A5 by interaction with the immunophilin XAP2. J Biol Chem 2003;278: 33351–33363.

41 de Oliveira SK, Hoffmeister M, Gambaryan S, Muller-Esterl W, Guimaraes JA, Smolen ski AP: Phosphodiesterase 2a forms a complex with the co-chaperone XAP2 and regulates nuclear translocation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. J Biol Chem 2007;282: 13656–13663.

42 Lin BC, Sullivan R, Lee Y, Moran S, Glover E, Bradfield CA: Deletion of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-associated protein 9 leads to cardiac malformation and embryonic lethality. J Biol Chem 2007;282:35924–35932.

43 Naves LA, Daly AF, Vanbellinghen JF, Casu lari LA, Spilioti C, Magalhães AV, Azevedo MF, Giacomini LA, Nascimento PP, Nunes RO, Rosa JW, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Bours V, Beckers A: Variable pathological and clinical features of a large Brazilian family harboring a mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene. Eur J Endocrinol 2007;157:383–391.

Copyright: S. Karger AG, Basel 2009. Reproduced with the permission of S. Karger AG, Basel. Further reproduction or distribution (electronic or otherwise) is prohibited without permission from the copyright holder.
