
Mol Biol Rep (2010) 37:1787–1791  
DOI 10.1007/s11033-009-9611-6  

---

# The bifunctional role of LiuE from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, displays additionally HIHG-CoA lyase enzymatic activity

**Mauricio Chávez-Avilés · Alma Laura Díaz-Pérez · Jesús Campos-García**

Received: 3 April 2009 / Accepted: 1 July 2009 / Published online: 14 July 2009  
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009  

## Abstract  
*Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is able to utilize leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes as sole carbon sources. Key enzymes which play an important role in these catabolic pathways are 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (CoA) lyase (EC 4.1.3.4; HMG-CoA lyase) and the 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA lyase (EC 4.1.2.26; HIHG-CoA lyase), respectively. HMG-CoA lyase is encoded by the *liuE* gene while the gene for HIHG-CoA lyase remains unidentified. A mutant in the *liuE* gene was unable to utilize both leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes indicates an involvement of *liuE* in both catabolic pathways (Chávez-Avilés et al. 2009, FEMS Microbiol Lett 296:117–123). The LiuE protein was purified as a His-tagged recombinant protein and in addition to show HMG-CoA lyase activity (Chávez-Avilés et al. 2009, FEMS Microbiol Lett 296:117–123), also displays HIHG-CoA lyase activity, indicating a bifunctional role in both the leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes catabolic pathways.

## Keywords  
Leucine catabolism · Acyclic terpenes · HMG-CoA lyase · *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*

## Introduction  
*Pseudomonas aeruginosa* has the ability to grow on leucine/ isovalerate and acyclic terpenes by the respective routes (Fig. 1). The enzymes involved in the leucine/isovalerate catabolic pathway are encoded by the *liuRABCDE* gene cluster, while the enzymes involved in acyclic terpenes catabolism are encoded in the *atuRABCDEFGH* gene cluster (Fig. 1), which have been described in *P. aeruginosa* and *P. citronellolis* [1–3, 5, 6]. Both catabolic pathways converge in the 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA metabolite (Fig. 1). In the leucine/isovalerate pathway, HMG-CoA lyase the last enzyme of the route is encoded by the *liuE* gene; this enzyme carries out the cleavage of 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA to acetyl-CoA and acetoacetate [3]. The four last steps of the leucine catabolic pathway (Liu) have been suggested as analogue reactions with the acyclic terpenes catabolic pathway (Atu) (Fig. 1) [1, 3, 5, 6]. However, in the Atu pathway, the homologue *liuE* gene is not present; also, an homologue *liuE* gene is absent in the *P. aeruginosa* genome, suggesting that *liuE* encodes the lyase which could catalyze the last reaction in both the leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes catabolic pathways [1–3]; however, the last supposition for this activity remain unknown. Previous mutagenesis and bioinformatic analysis carried out by our group suggests that LiuE displays a bifunctional, showing both HMG-CoA lyase and 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HIHG-CoA lyase) activities) (Fig. 1) [1–3]. In addition, has been reported that HIHG-CoA lyase converts 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA to 7-methyl-3-oxo-6-octenyl-CoA in the acyclic terpenes catabolic pathway [12]; however, the gene and enzyme remain unknown, although it has been suggested that HIHG-CoA lyase could be encoded by the *atuA* gene [5].

This work describes the initial characterization of the bifunctional role of LiuE from *P. aeruginosa* able to display HMG-CoA lyase and additionally HIHG-CoA lyase activity, as a first approximation to study the role of this enzyme in both leucine and acyclic terpenes catabolic pathways.

---

M. Chávez-Avilés · A. L. Díaz-Pérez · J. Campos-García (✉)  
Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Edif. B-3, Ciudad Universitaria, CP 58030 Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico  
e-mail: jcgarcia@umich.mx

reverse oligonucleotide (5'GAAGCTTCTGGGCCAGAC CGGCTTGCG 3'), designed to introduce a HindIII restriction site (underlined) at the 3' end of the *atuE* gene, were used. PCR amplification was carried out using the total DNA from *P. aeruginosa* PAO1SM as template and Taq Platinum Pfx DNA polymerase (Invitrogen) under the supplier's recommendations. The amplified fragment was cloned into pGEM-T Easy rendering the pGAtuE plasmid. The last plasmid was subjected to digestion with BamHI and HindIII enzymes and the fragment containing the *atuE* gene was subcloned into expression vector pTrcHis2A rendering the pTrcAtuE plasmid. Plasmid constructs was transferred to *E. coli* JM101 electrocompetent cells, rendering the *E. coli*(pTrcAtuE) strain, and it was analyzed by restriction with endonucleases and by DNA sequencing. The strains used in this work were grown at 30°C in Luria Bertani broth (LB) or in M9 minimal medium under conditions described [1–3, 10].

Expression and purification of recombinant proteins

The *E. coli*(pTrcAtuE) strain was used for AtuE recombinant protein (IHG-CoA hydratase) purification. Expression and purification of LiuE and AtuE recombinant proteins were carried out using the protocol previously described [3]. Geranyl-CoA carboxylase (GCCase; AtuC/AtuF) enzyme was obtained as described by Aguilar et al. [2]. Protein was quantified by Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad). Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing conditions was carried out as described [11].

Determination of HIHG-CoA lyase activity in an enzymes coupled system

HIHG-CoA lyase activity was determined by the disappearance of cis-geranyl-Coenzyme A (G-CoA) in a coupled reaction (see Fig. 1). The coupled system consisted in mixing the purified recombinant enzymes from *P. aeruginosa* in presence of the initial available substrate, the cis-geranyl-CoA was obtained as described [2]. Isohexenyl-glutaconyl-CoA hydratase (IHG-CoA hydratase, AtuE protein), suggested to be encoded by *atuE* gene and the LiuE proteins were purified as described above. Reaction mix contained 50 mM of K₂HPO₄ buffer at pH 7.6, 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM ATP, 10 mM NaHCO₃, 30 μg of each GCCase and IHG-CoA hydratase, with or without 1 μg of purified LiuE recombinant protein. The reaction was started by the addition of 1 mM of G-CoA in a final reaction volume of 100 μl and incubated at 37°C for 10 min and was stopped by adding 3 μl of 25% (v/v) HCl. Precipitated protein was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was neutralized adding 10 μl of K₂HPO₄ (2M) solution at pH 8.8 and filtered by 0.22 μ membranes. G-CoA was immediately quantified as

Fig. 1 Participation of LiuE protein in the leucine/isovalerate and acyclic monoterpenes catabolic pathways of *P. aeruginosa* PAO1. LiuA, isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase; LiuB/LiuD, 3-methyl-crotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCase); LiuC, 3-methyl-glutaconyl-CoA hydratase; LiuE, 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA lyase/3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HMG-CoA lyase and HIHG-CoA lyase, respectively); AtuD, citronellyl-CoA dehydrogenase; AtuC/AtuF, geranyl-CoA carboxylase (GCCase); AtuE, isohexenyl-glutaconyl-CoA hydratase (IHG-CoA hydratase). Dashed arrow indicates the coupled reaction used for HIHG-CoA lyase activity determination [adapted from 1–3, 6–8]

Materials and methods

Bacterial strains, plasmids, and culture conditions

The bacterial strains used in this work were: *Escherichia coli* JM101 [11], *E. coli*(pTLE2011) [3], *E.coli*(pTrcAtuC) and *E.coli*(pTrcAtuF) [2], *E.coli*(pTrcAtuE), *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1SM wild type [13], and *P. aeruginosa* PAMliuE a mutant strain obtained by a mutagenic in the *liuE* gene [4]. Plasmids used in this work were pGEM-T Easy (Promega) and pTrcHis2A (Invitrogen). Plasmid DNA extraction, manipulation and agarose gel electrophoresis were carried out by standard methods [11]. For *atuE* gene (ORF PA2890) amplification oligonucleotides AtuEB forward (5'AGGATCCCATGAGCCTGCCGGCAT TGCGAG 3'), designed to introduce a 5'BamHI restriction site (underlined) upstream of the start codon, and AtuEH

CoA thioesters by HPLC as described below [9]. Enzymatic assays were performed by duplicate and the activity was calculated by: HIHG-CoA lyase activity = [G-CoA<sub>initial</sub>] – [G-CoA<sub>final</sub>]·min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> of LiuE protein.

CoA thioesters were detected at 260 nm UV by a ProStar 335 Photodiode Array Detector (DAD) using a ProStar HPLC system (Varian Inc.). Separation was carried out using a Microsorb-MV 100-5 C<sub>18</sub> reverse phase column (Varian Inc.) under the following separation program: (90:10) B:A solutions, flow 1 ml min<sup>−1</sup> for 5 min; linear gradient until 40:60, flow 1 ml min<sup>−1</sup> for 15 min; linear gradient until 10:90, flow 1 ml min<sup>−1</sup> in for 5 min; linear gradient until 90:10, flow 1 ml min<sup>−1</sup> for 5 min, and equilibration of 5 min to flow 1 ml min<sup>−1</sup>. Solution A was 50 mM (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> buffer at pH 6.7 and Solution B 100% acetonitrile. Solutions were filtered and degassed. A calibration curve was done using standard solutions with 0.03125, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 mM of *cis*-geranyl-CoA (G-CoA) injecting 20 μl in the HPLC system. A correlation coefficient of \( R^2 = 0.995 \) was obtained.

encoded by *atuE* gene), and LiuE protein, all expressed as His-tag proteins in *E. coli* and purified by affinity chromatography (Fig. 2). The reaction was started adding G-CoA and the HIHG-CoA lyase activity was quantified by disappearing of G-CoA. Reactions with GCCase plus IHG-CoA hydratase and LiuE purified proteins showed enzymatic activity of 1,200 nmoles min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> of G-CoA hydrolysis, measured as disappearing of G-CoA, while when only the GCCase and IHG-CoA hydratase were used, 66 nmoles min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> of G-CoA hydrolysis was obtained (Table 1). In controls with only LiuE or without any enzyme the G-CoA disappearing was not detected (Table 1). These results suggest that AtuE protein was functional for the IHG-CoA hydratase activity as has been suggested [1–3, 5, 6], and further indicate that the LiuE protein, in addition to the HMG-CoA lyase activity [3], also shows enzymatic activity of HIHG-CoA lyase.

Additionally, in cultures of the PAM*liuE* mutant grown on M-9 with glucose and the acyclic terpenol, citronellol; it has been found the accumulation of metabolites of the acyclic terpenes route, in contrast with the PAO1 wild type where these compounds were undetected [3]. This finding confirms that the LiuE protein is involved in both leucine/ isovalerate and acyclic terpenes catabolic pathways. The bifunctional behavior of the LiuE is not surprising, because others enzymes of this catabolic pathway also has been described with similar bifunctional properties, as occurs for

Results and discussion

The growth of *P. aeruginosa* PAM*liuE* mutant has been evaluated on solid media with carbon sources [3]. As expected, the PAO1SM wild type strain is able to grow on glucose, leucine/isovaleric acid as well as in acyclic terpenes citronellol, citronellic acid, and geranic acid as sole carbon and energy source. In contrast, the *liuE* mutant is unable to grow on both leucine/isovaleric acid, as expected, and also in acyclic terpenes, as previously described [1, 3]. In addition, the inability to grow on leucine and acyclic terpenes of the PAM*liuE* mutant was restored by the introduction of the *liu* gene cluster cloned in the pMO013850 cosmid [3]. These results confirm the essential role of *liuE* gene in both leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes utilization as carbon sources and suggest that the LiuE protein could play an essential role in both catabolic routes.

LiuE protein expression was carried out and HMG-CoA lyase activity was demonstrated as previously described [3]. The recombinant LiuE-His tagged protein with molecular mass of 33 kDa, a purification of >98% was obtained [3]. Once demonstrated that LiuE protein shows enzymatic activity of HMG-CoA lyase, we decide to test if it shows also HIHG-CoA lyase activity.

HIHG-CoA lyase enzymatic activity determination was carried out using a coupled enzymatic method involving the quantification of the *cis*-geranyl-CoA (G-CoA) consumed in the reaction mix. The coupled reaction contains the enzymes geranyl-CoA carboxylase (GCCase) [2], the iso-hexenyl-glutaconyl-CoA hydratase (IHG-CoA hydratase,

kDa | 1 | 2 | M | 3 | 4
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
116 |  |  |  |  |
66 |  |  |  |  |
45 |  |  |  |  |
35 |  |  |  |  |
18 |  |  |  |  |

Fig. 2 Electrophoretic analysis of the recombinant proteins used for determination of the HIHG-CoA lyase activity in the coupled reaction. Coomassie blue-stained SDS–PAGE analysis of recombinant proteins expressed in *E. coli* JM101 strain and purified using affinity chromatography as described in Materials and methods. Lanes: 1 LiuE (33 kDa), 2 AtuE (31 kDa), 3 AtuC (63 kDa), 4 AtuF (74 kDa), and *M* molecular mass markers. Proteins are indicated with the arrows

Table 1 Enzymatic activity of 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HIHG-CoA lyase) for LiuE of *P. aeruginosa*

| Enzyme mix$^a$ | HIHG-CoA lyase activity$^b$ (nmol min$^{-1}$ mg$^{-1}$ of LiuE) |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| LiuE only      | 0                                                           |
| GCCase + IHG-CoA hydratase | 66                                                          |
| GCCase + IHG-CoA hydratase + LiuE | 1200                                                       |

$^a$ Coupled reactions containing enzyme mix, 30 μg of GCCase carboxylase (AtuC/AtuF), 30 μg of IHG-CoA hydratase (AtuE), and 1 μg of LiuE protein, under the conditions described in Materials and methods

$^b$ Specific activity corresponds to nmol of cis-geranyl-CoA disappearing by 15 min at 37°C. Data given are the average of duplicate values obtained in two independent assays with variation less than 10%

Fig. 3 Enzymatic activities proposed for LiuE protein of *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 in the leucine/isovalerate (a) and acyclic monoterpenes (b) catabolic pathways [adapted from 1–3, 6–8]

(A)

     COO-
       OH
CO-SCoA

LiuE
HMG-CoA Lyase

CH₃-CO-SCoA + Acetoacetate
Acetyl-CoA


(B)

     COO-
       OH
CO-SCoA

LiuE
HIHG-CoA Lyase

7-methyl-3-oxo-6-octenyl-CoA + Acetate


GCCase from *P. aeruginosa* which displays carboxylase activity with both geranyl-CoA and 3-methyl-crotonyl-CoA substrates [2].

In conclusion, the *P. aeruginosa liuE* gene (ORF PA2011) encodes for the LiuE protein of 33 kDa showed enzymatic activity of HMG-CoA lyase [3] and also HIHG-CoA lyase activity (Fig. 3). The results obtained indicate that LiuE displays a bifunctional and essential role in the leucine/isovalerate and acyclic terpenes catabolic pathways.

Acknowledgments This research was funded from grants CONACYT (P-46547-Z), C.I.C.-UMSNH 2.14, and COECyT CB 070229-2 to JCG. M. Chávez-Avilés was supported by a fellowship from CONACYT.

References

1. Aguilar JA, Zavala AN, Díaz-Pérez C, Cervantes C, Díaz-Pérez AL, Campos-García J (2006) The *atu* and *liu* clusters are involved in the catabolic pathways for acyclic monoterpenes and leucine in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:2070–2079

2. Aguilar JA, Díaz-Pérez C, Díaz-Pérez AL, Rodríguez-Zavala JS, Nikolau BJ, Campos-García J (2008) Substrate specificity of the 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA and geranyl-CoA carboxylases from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 190:4888–4893

3. Chávez-Avilés MN, Díaz-Pérez AL, Reyes de la Cruz H, Campos-García J (2009) The *Pseudomonas aeruginosa liuE* gene encodes the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase, involved in leucine and acyclic terpene catabolism. FEMS Microbiol Lett 296:117–123

4. Díaz-Pérez AL, Zavala-Hernández NA, Cervantes C, Campos-García J (2004) The *gnyRDBHAL* cluster is involved in acyclic isoprenoid degradation in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:5102–5110

5. Forster-Fromme K, Chattopadhyay A, Jendrossek D (2008) Biochemical characterization of AtuD from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, the first member of a new subgroup of acyl-CoA dehydrogenases with specificity for citronellyl-CoA. Microbiology 154:789–796

6. Forster-Fromme K, Höschle B, Mack C, Armbruster MW, Jendrossek D (2006) Identification of genes and proteins necessary for catabolism of acyclic terpenes and leucine/isovalerate in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:4819–4828

7. Forster-Fromme K, Jendrossek D (2006) Identification and characterization of the acyclic terpene utilization gene cluster of *Pseudomonas citronellolis*. FEMS Microbiol Lett 264:220–225

8. Forster-Fromme K, Jendrossek D (2008) Biochemical characterization of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (LiuA) of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and the importance of *liu* genes for a functional catabolic pathway of methyl-branched compounds. FEMS Microbiol Lett 286:78–84

9. Hosokawa Y, Shimomura Y, Harris RA, Ozawa T (1986) Determination of short-chain acyl-coenzyme A esters by high-performance liquid chromatography. Anal Biochem 153:45–49

10. Martin RR, Marshall VD, Sokatch JR, Unger L (1973) Common enzymes of branched-chain amino acid catabolism in *Pseudomonas putida*. J Bacteriol 115:198–204

11. Sambrook J, Russell DW (2001) Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor

Mol Biol Rep (2010) 37:1787–1791

12. Seubert W, Fass E (1964) Studies on the bacterial degradation of isoprenoids. IV. The purification and properties of beta-isohexenylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase and beta-hydroxy-beta-isohexenylglutaryl-CoA lyase. Biochem Z 341:23–34

13. Wong SM, Mekalanos JJ (2000) Genetic footprinting with mariner-based transposition in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:10191–10196
