
Developmental Cell
Article

# Mitochondria-Anchored Receptor Atg32 Mediates Degradation of Mitochondria via Selective Autophagy

Koji Okamoto${}^{1,2,3,*}$ Noriko Kondo-Okamoto${}^{1,2,3}$ and Yoshinori Ohsumi${}^{1,3,*}$

${}^{1}$Division of Molecular Cell Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan  
${}^{2}$These authors contributed equally to this work  
${}^{3}$Present address: Advanced Research Organization, Integrated Research Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, 226-8503, Japan  

*Correspondence: kokamoto@iri.titech.ac.jp (K.O.), yohsumi@iri.titech.ac.jp (Y.O.)  
DOI 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.013*

## SUMMARY

Mitochondria are essential organelles that produce most of the energy for a cell, but concomitantly accumulate oxidative damage. Degradation of damaged mitochondria is critical for cell homeostasis, and this process is thought to be mediated by mitophagy, an autophagy-related pathway specific for mitochondria. However, whether mitochondria are selectively degraded, and how the autophagic machinery is targeted to mitochondria, remain largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that, in post-log phase cells under respiratory conditions, a substantial fraction of mitochondria are exclusively sequestered as cargoes and transported to the vacuole, a lytic compartment in yeast, in an autophagy-dependent manner. Interestingly, we found Atg32, a mitochondria-anchored protein essential for mitophagy that is induced during respiratory growth. In addition, our data suggest that Atg32 interacts with Atg8 and Atg11, autophagy-related proteins critical for recognition of cargo receptors. We propose that Atg32 acts as a mitophagy-specific receptor and regulates selective degradation of mitochondria.

## INTRODUCTION

Degradation of excess or dysfunctional organelles is one of the major problems that eukaryotes face in maintaining cell integrity and adapting cellular activities to environmental changes. To solve this fundamental issue, cells utilize autophagy, which is a self-eating system that generates double-membrane vesicles called autophagosomes, sequesters cytoplasmic components as cargoes, and transports them to lysosomes (vacuoles in yeast) for degradation (Mizushima, 2007; Mizushima et al., 2008; Nakatogawa et al., 2009; Suzuki and Ohsumi, 2007; Xie and Klionsky, 2007). Although autophagy is widely recognized as a bulk, nonselective process that is induced by nutrient starvation, accumulating evidence demonstrates that specific cargoes are selectively eliminated through autophagy-related pathways (Bernales et al., 2006; Kraft et al., 2008; Xie and Klionsky, 2007; Yu et al.,

Developmental Cell 17, 87–97, July 21, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.

However, it is not clear whether Uth1 and Aup1 interact with some of autophagy-related (Atg) proteins and directly mediate mitophagy. Although a recent study reported that mitophagy in yeast requires Atg11, a scaffold protein required for selective autophagy (Kanki and Klionsky, 2008), whether mitochondria are specifically sequestered by autophagosome-like membranes, and whether other cytoplasmic constituents are excluded from the mitochondria-containing vesicles, remain to be addressed. In addition, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which selective autophagy is targeted to mitochondria.

Here we show that a substantial fraction of mitochondria are exclusively sequestered as cargoes and transported to the vacuole in post-log phase cells under respiratory conditions. Our genome-wide visual screen reveals Atg32, a protein essential for mitophagy that localizes to mitochondria and interacts with Atg8 and Atg11, proteins critical for recognition of cargo receptors. Our findings suggest that Atg32 functions as a mitochondrial receptor that directly participates in selective degradation of mitochondria.

**RESULTS**

**Mitochondria Are Degraded through a Selective Autophagy-Related Process**

To investigate transport of mitochondria to the vacuole, we observed yeast cells lacking the vacuolar proteases Pep4 and Prb1. In these mutants, autophagic bodies, the inner membrane structures of the autophagosomes, are kept largely intact and accumulate in the vacuolar lumen (Takeshige et al., 1992). When grown in nonfermentable glycerol medium, cells contain mitochondria that are active in respiration. In those cells, we visualized mitochondria and vacuoles using green fluorescent protein (GFP) and red fluorescent protein (RFP) markers (mito-GFP and vac-RFP), respectively (Figure 1A). We found that, in log phase cells, the mitochondria formed tubular networks that had almost no overlaps with the vacuole. When the cells reached to post-log phase, their mitochondria were converted from tubules to fragments. Notably, a substantial fraction of mitochondria were transported to the vacuole in those cells. This event was dependent on Atg7, an essential factor for autophagy. Electron microscopy revealed that many electron-dense bodies as well as some autophagic bodies, both of which were 200–300 nm in diameter, accumulated within the vacuole in an Atg7-dependent manner (Figure 1B). Importantly, in contrast to autophagic bodies, those electron-dense bodies did not contain cytoplasmic ribosomes. Instead, they appeared to enclose double membrane-bound structures, in which cristae-like patterns were sometimes visible. Immunoelectron microscopy using antibodies specific to the mitochondrial protein Atp2 indicated that those structures were mitochondria (see Figure S1 available online). Together, these findings demonstrate that mitochondrial autophagy selectively occurs in post-log phase cells under respiratory conditions.

We often detected structures similar to isolation membranes, cup-shaped enveloping membranes (autophagosome intermediates), in close proximity to mitochondrial fragments in the cytoplasm. These structures are likely to represent the generation of “mitophagosomes,” a process similar to macroautophagy (Figure S2A). In addition, we examined cells lacking Ypt7, a GTPase essential for homotypic vacuole fusion. Although autophagosomes are formed normally in this mutant, they do not fuse to vacuoles and accumulate in the cytosol (Kirisako et al., 1999). When atg5Δ ypt7Δ cells in stationary phase under respiratory conditions were shifted to fresh glucose medium, nearly all mitochondrial fragments were converted to tubular networks by fusion (Figure S2B). Under the same condition, a substantial fraction of mitochondrial fragments were found in ypt7Δ cells. This observation indicates that those fragments were excluded from tubular networks, likely because they were enclosed by autophagosome-like membranes through “macromitophagy.”

To determine which Atg proteins are essential for mitophagy, we examined patterns of mito-GFP in cells lacking each of 28 ATG genes (Table 1). In mitophagy-positive cells, green vacuolar staining patterns are detected, because when mitochondria are degraded, GFP retains its fluorescence in the vacuole containing Pep4 and Prb1. Fourteen of the core Atg proteins that are essential for both bulk autophagy and the cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting (Cvt) pathway, an autophagy-related transport process selective for the vacuolar enzymes Ape1 and Ams1 (Nair and Klionsky, 2005), were also indispensable for mitophagy. In addition, we found that mitophagy required Atg11, an essential adaptor protein for pexophagy and the Cvt pathway (Kim et al., 2001). Similar results were reported in a recent study (Kanki and Klionsky, 2008). By contrast, mitophagy occurred in cells lacking Atg13, a core factor that activates the Atg1 protein kinase (Kamada et al., 2000). Under the same condition, atg13Δ cells exhibited partial and severe defects in the Cvt pathway and bulk autophagy, respectively (Figures S3A and S3B). In addition, Atg17, Atg29, and Atg31 specific for bulk autophagy (Kawamata et al., 2008), and Atg proteins specific for the Cvt pathway were not essential for mitophagy. These results suggest that mitophagy is a bona fide autophagy-related process that is mechanistically distinct from bulk autophagy and the Cvt pathway.

We further analyzed cells lacking Atg11 and Atg17, scaffold proteins required for the Cvt pathway and bulk autophagy, respectively, under respiratory conditions. Cells expressing the mitochondria-targeted dehydrofolate reductase–GFP (mito-DHFR–GFP) marker were grown in glycerol medium, and observed in log and post-log phase. The processing of mito-DHFR–GFP and Ape1, a Cvt cargo, indicated their transport to the vacuole (Figure 1C). We found that, although less efficient than in wild-type cells, mito-DHFR–GFP and Ape1 were transported to the vacuole in the absence of Atg17. By contrast, the mito-DHFR–GFP processing was completely blocked in cells lacking Atg11. Electron microscopy revealed that autophagic and mitochondria-containing (mitophagic) bodies accumulated in the absence of Atg11 and Atg17, respectively, in vacuolar protease-deficient cells (Figure 1D). Taken together, these data support the notion that, under respiratory conditions, mitophagy occurs independently from bulk autophagy.

**Atg32 Is a Protein Essential for Mitophagy**

To identify proteins acting in mitophagy, we used a nonessential gene deletion array containing ~5150 strains, and performed a genome-wide visual screen for mutants that were defective in transporting mito-GFP to the vacuole. Our initial screen isolated 53 mitophagy-defective strains (30 mutants that are known to be defective in autophagy and/or the Cvt pathway, and 23 mutants that have not been implicated in those processes)

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

**Figure 1. Mitochondrial Degradation Selectively Occurs in Post-Log Phase Cells under Respiratory Conditions**

(A) Mitochondrial GFP- and vacuolar RFP-expressing (mito-GFP and vac-RFP) *pep4Δ prb1Δ* and *atg7Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ* cells were grown to log and post-log phase (1 and 5 days, respectively) in glycerol medium, and investigated using fluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 2 μm.

(B) *pep4Δ prb1Δ* and *atg7Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ* cells were grown for 5 days in glycerol medium, and examined by transmission electron microscopy. AB, autophagic body; MB, mitophagic body. Scale bars, 200 nm.

(C) Mitochondria-targeted DHFR–GFP-expressing (mito-DHFR–GFP, depicted by arrow) wild-type, *atg7Δ*, *atg11Δ*, *atg17Δ*, *atg11Δ atg17Δ*, and *pep4Δ prb1Δ* cells were grown for 1 and 3 days in glycerol medium, and subjected to western blotting. Generation of free GFP (depicted by arrowhead) indicates transport of the marker to the vacuole. Precursor (p) Ape1 is transported to the vacuole via the Cvt pathway, and processed to a mature (m) form. Pkg1 was monitored as a loading control.

(D) *atg11Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ*, *atg17Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ*, and *atg11Δ atg17Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ* cells were grown for 5 days in glycerol medium, and examined as in (B). AB, autophagic body; MB, mitophagic body. Scale bars, 200 nm.

(Tables 1 and S1 [available online]). The latter group consists of strains lacking proteins that act in diverse pathways including membrane trafficking, protein modification and degradation, lipid metabolism, and mitochondrial metabolism. Thus, it is likely that mitophagy is a complex process that involves a variety of proteins and cellular functions. We found that Aup1 and Uth1, proteins that have been suggested to be required for mitophagy, were not essential for selective degradation of mitochondria under our conditions (data not shown). Intriguingly, a mutant lacking

ECM37 (YIL146C), an uncharacterized gene that has been reported in a large-scale analysis (*Lussier et al.*, 1997), displayed a near-complete loss of mitophagy. Thus, we called this gene as ATG32. Cells lacking Atg32 exhibited no obvious defects in mitochondrial and vacuolar morphology, and growth on fermentable and nonfermentable media (Figures S4A and S4B).

We first confirmed that mito-GFP did not colocalize with vac-RFP in post-log phase cells lacking Atg32 under respiratory conditions (Figure 2A). Electron microscopy revealed that

Developmental Cell 17, 87–97, July 21, 2009 © 2009 Elsevier Inc. 89

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

Table 1. ATG Gene Requirements for Autophagy-Related Pathways in the Budding Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

| Genotype | Mitophagy | Cvt Pathway | Autophagy |
|----------|-----------|-------------|-----------|
| atg1Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg2Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg3Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg4Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg5Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg6Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg7Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg8Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg9Δ    | –         | –           | –         |
| atg10Δ   | –         | –           | –         |
| atg11Δ   | –         | –           | +++       |
| atg12Δ   | –         | –           | –         |
| atg13Δ   | ++        | –           | –         |
| atg14Δ   | –         | –           | –         |
| atg15Δ   | +++       | +++         | +++       |
| atg16Δ   | –         | –           | –         |
| atg17Δ   | ++        | +++         | –         |
| atg18Δ   | –         | –           | –         |
| atg19Δ   | +++       | –           | +++       |
| atg20Δ   | +         | –           | +++       |
| atg21Δ   | +++       | –           | +++       |
| atg22Δ   | +++       | +++         | +++       |
| atg23Δ   | ++        | –           | ++        |
| atg24Δ   | +         | –           | +++       |
| atg26Δ   | +++       | +++         | +++       |
| atg27Δ   | ++        | ++          | ++        |
| atg29Δ   | +++       | +++         | –         |
| atg31Δ   | +++       | +++         | –         |

Mitophagy was assayed in mito-GFP-expressing cells grown in glycerol medium for 5 days. The requirement of the Cvt pathway and autophagy for certain ATG genes has previously been described (Xie and Klionsky, 2007; Nakatogawa et al., 2009). Phenotypes are indicated with plus and minus signs as follows: ++++, wild-type-like; ++, slightly defective; +, partially defective; –, completely defective.

Atg32 Is Induced during Respiratory Growth

How do cells initiate mitochondrial degradation? Based on our finding that Atg32 is essential for mitophagy under respiratory conditions, we assumed that the Atg32 levels would increase during respiratory growth. The steady-state levels of Atg32–3HAn and mitophagy-dependent processing of mito-DHFR–GFP were simultaneously monitored in early to post-log phase (Figure 4A). We found that the Atg32 levels in mid-log phase cells (30 hr of growth) were increased 5- to 10-fold compared with cells grown in glucose medium (0 hr of growth), and then decreased through late to post-log phase (36–72 hr of growth). The slightly delayed disappearance of Atg32 was seen in atg7Δ cells. In addition, even when expressed under a strong, constitutive promoter, the Atg32 levels were eventually reduced in post-log phase (data not shown). Together, these data suggest that Atg32 is temporally upregulated prior to mitophagy under respiratory conditions, and subsequently degraded in an autophagy-dependent and autophagy-independent manner.

What affects the expression of Atg32? Assuming that mitophagy contributes to removal of damaged mitochondria, we speculated that the Atg32 levels might increase in response to oxidative stress during respiration. Hence, we investigated whether N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a precursor form of the antioxidant glutathione and a scavenger of free radicals, could suppress the Atg32 induction (Figure 4B). Interestingly, maximal Atg32 levels in NAC-treated cells were reduced 2- to 3-fold compared

Atg32 Is Anchored to the Mitochondrial Surface

ATG32 is predicted to encode a 59 kDa protein containing a transmembrane domain (TMD), although its localization and topology have not yet been experimentally determined. Because Atg32 is required specifically for mitophagy, we speculated that this protein is anchored on the surface of mitochondria. Consis-

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

Figure 2. Atg32 Is Essential for Mitophagy

(A) Mito-GFP- and vac-RFP-expressing wild-type, atg7Δ, and atg32Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium for 5 days, and investigated using fluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 2 μm.

(B) atg32Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ cells were grown as in (A), and examined by transmission electron microscopy. AB, autophagic body. Scale bars, 200 nm.

(C) Mito-DHFR–GFP-expressing wild-type, atg7Δ, and atg32Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium, and collected at the indicated time points, and subjected to western blotting. The processing of Ape1 from the precursor (p) to mature (m) forms was examined as described in Figure 1C. Pkg1 was monitored as a loading control.

(D) Wild-type, atg7Δ, and atg32Δ cells expressing a cytosol-localized variant of a vacuolar alkaline phosphatase were grown under nutrient-rich conditions (YPD), and then nitrogen-starved (SD–N) for 4.5 hr. Autophagy in these cells was analyzed by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assays. ALP activities were measured in three experiments. Data represent the averages with bars indicating standard deviations.

(E) The processing of Ape1 in wild-type, atg7Δ, and atg32Δ cells incubated as in (D) was examined by western blotting.

with untreated cells. By contrast, the levels of Por1, a mitochondrial protein, were not decreased by NAC treatment. Consistent with this result, mitophagy was significantly suppressed in the presence of NAC (Figure 4C). The Ape1 maturation occurred efficiently in both NAC-treated and untreated cells, indicating that the functions of Atg11 and the core Atg proteins are not altered in the presence of this antioxidant. Collectively, our data support the idea that oxidative stress triggers the Atg32 induction and positively affects mitophagy. It should, however, be noted that the moderate expression of Atg32 in cells grown in galactose medium (fermentable but nonrepressive) did not result in mitochondrial degradation (data not shown). Thus, it is possible that other factors are expressed and/or activated to promote mitophagy under respiratory conditions.

Atg32 Interacts with Atg8 and Atg11

How does mitochondria-anchored Atg32 mediate mitophagy? It is tempting to speculate that Atg32 serves as a mitochondrial receptor for directly recruiting certain Atg proteins that are essential for de novo formation of isolation membranes. In this scenario, the Atg32-Atg interactions might contribute to cargo (mitochondria) recognition. In yeast, Atg19 is a receptor protein specific for the Cvt pathway that binds cargoes (Ape1 and Ams1) and interacts with Atg8 and Atg11 (Shintani et al., 2002). Similarly, p62/SQSTM1, a scaffold protein containing an ubiquitin binding-associated domain, binds cargoes (polyubiquitinated proteins) and interacts with LC3, an Atg8 homolog, in mammalian cells (Pankiv et al., 2007). Recent studies have revealed that both Atg19 and p62/SQSTM1 contain WXXL, a conserved motif crucial for their direct interactions with Atg8 and LC3, respectively (Ichimura et al., 2008; Noda et al., 2008; Pankiv et al., 2007). Interestingly, the Atg32 cytosolic domain contains a WXXL motif that is conserved among the yeast homologs (Figure 5A). Therefore, we tested the Atg32-Atg8 and -Atg11 interactions, and found that Atg32 bound both Atg proteins in yeast two-hybrid systems (Figure 5B). Thus, it seems likely that Atg8 and Atg11 play direct roles in Atg32-mediated mitophagy. Importantly, Atg32AQAA, a WXXL mutant containing W86A and I89A substitutions, did not bind Atg8, but was capable of Atg11 binding. Consistent with these observations, cells expressing Atg32AQAA displayed partial defects in mitophagy (Figure 5C). Moreover, an Atg8 mutant that is defective in its interaction with

Developmental Cell 17, 87–97, July 21, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc. 91

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

Figure 3. Atg32 Is Anchored to the Mitochondrial Surface

(A) Mito-RFP-expressing atg32Δ cells were transformed with a low-copy plasmid that encodes Atg32–3HAn or an untagged Atg32 with the ATG32 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs), grown in glycerol medium for 30 hr, and analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 2 μm.

(B) Schematic representation of GFP–Atg32 truncated variants. A predicted transmembrane domain (TMD) is highlighted in blue (upper panel). Mito-RFP-expressing atg32Δ cells were transformed with a low-copy plasmid that encodes these GFP–Atg32 fusions with the strong TEF2 promoter, grown to log phase in glucose medium, and observed using fluorescence microscopy (lower panel). Scale bar, 2 μm.

(C) atg32Δ cells were transformed with a low-copy plasmid that encodes untagged Atg32, Atg32–2HAc, or Atg32–3HAn with the ATG32 5′ and 3′ UTRs, grown to log phase in galactose medium, and subjected to subcellular fractionation. The whole-cell homogenate (W) was separated into the post-mitochondrial supernatant (PMS) and mitochondria-enriched pellet (M). Pkg1 and Por1 were monitored as cytosolic and mitochondrial markers, respectively.

(D) The mitochondrial fractions in (C) were treated with (+) or without (−) proteinase K (PK) under isotonic conditions. Tom70 and Tim50 were monitored as outer membrane and intermembrane space markers, respectively.

(E) The mitochondrial fractions (M) in (C) were treated with Na₂CO₃, and separated into the soluble supernatant (S) and membrane pellet (P). Por1, Tim44, and Mge1 were monitored as an integral membrane, a peripheral membrane, and a soluble protein, respectively.

(F) Atg32 is predicted to localize to the outer membrane (OM) of mitochondria, exposing its N- and C-terminal domains to the cytosol (CYTO) and intermembrane space (IMS), respectively.

the Atg19 WXXL motif was only partially functional in mitophagy (data not shown). Collectively, our results suggest that the Atg32 WXXI motif, at least to some extent, acts in cargo (mitochondria) recognition via its interaction with Atg8.

We next investigated the localization patterns of Atg8 during mitophagy. Previous studies have demonstrated that Atg8 localizes to the preautophagosomal structure (PAS), a perivacuolar dynamic assembly at which most of the core Atg proteins localize under nutrient-rich and starvation conditions (Suzuki et al., 2001). Atg8 also serves as an autophagosome/Cvt vesicle marker, and is transported into the vacuolar lumen (Kirisako et al., 1999). In mid-log phase cells under respiratory conditions, GFP–Atg8 was found as discrete dots near the vacuole (data not shown). Those dot-like structures were likely to be the PAS. Notably, a fraction of GFP–Atg8 dots in late-log phase cells localized to mitochondria in an Atg32-dependent manner (Figures 5D and 5E). Those mitochondrial GFP–Atg8 dots were often found away from the vacuole. These observations

92 Developmental Cell 17, 87–97, July 21, 2009 © 2009 Elsevier Inc.

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

A
[p-ATG32-3HAn] + [p-mito-DHFR-GFP]
atg32Δ
atg7Δ atg32Δ
0 18 24 30 36 42 48 72
0 18 24 30 36 42 48 72
anti-HA
anti-GFP
anti-Pgk1

B
atg32Δ [p-ATG32-3HAn]
NAC
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
Growth (h)
0 18 24 30 36 42 48 72
0 18 24 30 36 42 48 72
anti-HA
anti-Por1
anti-Pgk1

C
[p-mito-DHFR-GFP]
Wild-type
atg7Δ
NAC
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
Growth (h)
0 24 48 72 24 48 72
0 24 48 72 24 48 72
anti-GFP
anti-Ape1
anti-Pgk1

Figure 4. Atg32 Is Induced during Respiratory Growth
(A) Atg32–3HAn- and mito-DHFR–GFP-expressing (depicted by arrow) atg32Δ and atg7Δ atg32Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium, collected at the indicated time points, and subjected to western blotting. Generation of free GFP (depicted by arrowhead) indicates the transport of the mitochondrial marker to the vacuole. Pkg1 was monitored as a loading control.
(B) Atg32–3HAn-expressing atg32Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium in the presence (+) or absence (−) of 10 mM N-acetylcysteine (NAC), collected at the indicated time points, and analyzed as in (A).
(C) Mito-DHFR–GFP-expressing wild-type and atg7Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium with (+) or without (−) 10 mM NAC, collected at the indicated time points, and analyzed as in (A). The processing of Ape1 from the precursor (p) to mature (m) forms was examined as described in Figure 1C.

raise the possibility that Atg8 and Atg32 cooperatively act in mitophagy on the mitochondrial surface.
To further examine the interaction of Atg32 with Atg8 and Atg11 in vivo, we used strains expressing Atg32 or functional Atg32–3HAn under the endogenous promoter. When mitochondria-enriched fractions obtained from those cells grown in glycerol medium were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-HA antibodies, the endogenous Atg8 and Atg11 coimmunoprecipitated with Atg32–3HAn (Figure 5F). The cytosolic Pgk1 and mitochondrial Por1 were hardly detected under the same conditions, indicating that the Atg32-Atg8 and -Atg11 interactions were specific. The low efficiency of the coimmunoprecipitation might be due to their transient or labile interactions. These results suggest that Atg32 forms complexes with Atg8 and Atg11 during respiratory growth.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrate that autophagy-dependent selective degradation of mitochondria occurs in a manner distinct from bulk autophagy in yeast. This selective process requires Atg32, a mitochondria-anchored protein that might act as a mitophagy receptor.
Our extensive studies using electron microscopy provide compelling evidence that, under respiratory conditions, mitochondrial fragments are solely enclosed by autophagosome-like vesicles and transported to the vacuole. This selective process is in striking contrast to starvation-induced autophagy that sequesters cytoplasmic constituents including mitochondria in a nonselective manner (Takeshige et al., 1992). Mitophagy does not require Atg17 essential for bulk autophagy, whereas bulk autophagy does not require Atg11 essential for mitophagy (and other selective autophagy-related pathways). These findings suggest that, although mitophagy and bulk autophagy occur simultaneously in post-log phase cells under respiratory conditions, these processes take place independently from each other. However, because Atg11 interacts with Atg17 (Yorimitsu and Klionsky, 2005), we do not exclude the possibility that these two Atg proteins might cooperatively participate in both mitophagy and bulk autophagy.
Notably, mitophagy occurs in cells lacking Atg13, a protein essential for autophagosome formation. How can mitophagy be mediated without this core Atg protein? Atg13 interacts with the Atg1 protein kinase and promotes activation of Atg1, particularly upon nutrient starvation (Kamada et al., 2000). Although we do not rule out thoroughly the involvement of Atg13 in mitophagy, it is possible that, under respiratory conditions, Atg1 can be activated in a manner independent of Atg13. Because Atg11 also interacts with Atg1 (Kamada et al., 2000), one possibility is that Atg11 contributes to activation of Atg1 during respiratory growth. In addition, a yet unknown factor(s) might activate Atg1 under respiratory conditions. Alternatively, the basal activity of Atg1 might be enough to mediate mitophagy, a process that is much less drastic and rapid than starvation-induced autophagy.
Our genome-wide screen led us to identify Atg32, a protein essential for selective degradation of mitochondria. Several lines of evidence support the idea that Atg32 acts as a mitophagy receptor. First, deletion of ATG32 causes loss of mitophagy, but does not affect bulk autophagy and the Cvt pathway. Second, Atg32 localizes to mitochondria as an integral outer membrane protein. Third, Atg32 interacts with Atg8 and Atg11, two Atg proteins that are known to bind the Cvt receptor Atg19 in yeast (Shintani et al., 2002). Fourth, Atg32 contains a conserved Atg8-binding motif and a region required for Atg11 interaction (data not shown) in its N-terminal domain facing the cytoplasm. This topology allows Atg32 to recruit these Atg proteins to the surface of mitochondria. Fifth, a fraction of Atg8 is targeted to mitochondria in an Atg32-dependent manner. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that Atg32 defines the selectivity of mitochondrial autophagy.
Although the detailed mechanism of Atg32-mediated mitophagy is not entirely understood, we speculate that this membrane-anchored protein recruits the autophagic machinery to the mitochondrial surface and participates in formation of the

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

Figure 5. Atg32 Interacts with Atg8 and Atg11

(A) Schematic representation of the Atg32 domain structure. The WXXI motif and transmembrane domain (TMD) are highlighted in red and blue, respectively (upper panel). An amino acid sequence alignment of the WXXI motifs and their flanking regions from yeast Atg32 homologs is shown. Sc, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Ag, Ashbya gossypii; Kl, Kluyveromyces lactis; and Cg, Candida glabrata.

(B) Cells were transformed with two yeast two-hybrid assay plasmids pGAD and pGBD, which encode the indicated proteins or empty vector (empty), and grown on +His and –His+3AT plates. The Atg32AQAA mutant contains W86A and I89A substitutions.

(C) Mito-GFP-expressing atg32Δ cells were transformed with a low-copy plasmid that encodes no protein (p-empty), wild-type Atg32 (p-WT), or Atg32AQAA (p-AQAA) with the ATG32 5′ and 3′ UTRs, grown in glycerol medium, and observed using fluorescence microscopy at the indicated time points. GFP patterns were quantified in 100 cells in three experiments. Data represent the averages of all experiments, with bars indicating standard deviations.

(D) GFP–Atg8- and mito-RFP-expressing wild-type and atg32Δ cells were grown in glycerol medium for 42 hr, treated with CellTracker Blue CMAC (for vacuolar staining), and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 2 μm.

(E) At least 100 cells of each strain exhibiting GFP–Atg8 dots observed in (D) were scored. Data represent the averages of all experiments, with bars indicating standard deviations.

(F) Mitochondria-enriched fractions were obtained from Atg32–3HAn- or Atg32-expressing atg32Δ pep4Δprb1Δ cells grown in glycerol medium for 33 hr, solubilized, and subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-HA antibody-conjugated agarose. The solubilized fractions (input) and eluted immunoprecipitates (elute) were analyzed by western blotting.

Atg32 might also act in yet unknown pathway(s) related to mitochondrial function(s). Experiments are currently underway to investigate how cells control the level and activity of Atg32, and whether Atg32 is also involved in other cellular processes.

Mitophagy is a fundamental process essential for cell homeostasis. Although we have found Atg32 homologs only among yeasts, this protein contains an evolutionarily conserved WXXI/L motif critical for interactions with the Atg8 family members, suggesting the existence of Atg32 functional homologs in other eukaryotes. It will be interesting to find human mitophagy receptor(s) with the following features: mitochondrial localization, LC3 interaction, WXXI/L motif, and single membrane-spanning topology with N and C termini facing the cytoplasm and intermembrane space, respectively.

Obviously, additional experiments are needed to further understand the mechanisms by which cells control selective degradation of mitochondria, and the physiological significance of mitophagy. Future studies in yeast will address these important questions.

# Developmental Cell

## Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Strains and Growth Conditions
Yeast strains and plasmids used in this study are described in [Supplemental Data](https://www.cell.com/developmental-cell/supplemental/S1534-5807(09)00254-8). Standard genetic and molecular biology methods were used for yeast and bacterial strains. Yeast cells were grown at 30°C in rich medium (YPD; 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose), and synthetic media (0.17% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 0.5% casamino acids) containing 2% dextrose (SDCA), 0.1% dextrose plus 2% galactose (SGalCA), or 0.1% dextrose plus 3% glycerol (SGlyCA), supplemented with necessary amino acids. For mitophagy induction, cells grown to mid-log phase in YPD or SDCA were incubated at 30°C in SGalCA. For autophagy induction, cells grown to mid-log phase in YPD were incubated at 30°C in starvation medium (SD–N; 0.17% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 2% dextrose) for 4.5 hr. For isolation of mitochondria, cells were grown to mid-log phase at 30°C in SGalCA.

#### Microscopy and Live Cell Imaging
Cells were observed using an inverted microscope (IX81; Olympus) equipped with differential interference contrast optics, epifluorescence capabilities, a 100X objective lens (UPlanApo 100X, NA: 1.35; Olympus), a monochrome CCD camera (CoolSNAP HQ; Roper), and filter sets for GFP, RFP, and 7-amino-4-chloromethylcoumarin (CMAC) staining (U-MGFPHQ, U-MWlY2, and U-MINUA2, respectively; Olympus). Images were captured using image acquisition and analysis software (MetaMorph 7.0r4; Molecular Devices).

#### Electron Microscopy
Ultrastructural analysis of yeast cells was performed by Tokai-EMA Inc. essentially based on plunge freezing and freeze-substitution fixation methods as described elsewhere ([Baba et al., 1994](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-3495(94)90545-7)). Briefly, cells were collected by centrifugation, sandwiched with an EM grid between two copper disks, and quickly frozen with liquid propane using a rapid freezing device (EM CPC; Leica). The frozen cells were subjected to substitution fixation using 2% osmium tetroxide in acetone solution containing 3% H₂O. For immunoelectron microscopy, substitution fixation was carried out using 0.2% glutaraldehyde in acetone solution containing 3% H₂O. Ultrathin sections of the fixed cells were incubated with rabbit anti-Atp2 (F1β) polyclonal antibody (1:200 dilution) at 4°C overnight.

#### Immunoblotting
Samples corresponding to 0.1–0.2 OD₆₀₀ units of cells were separated by SDS-PAGE followed by western blotting and immunodecoration. After treatment with enhanced chemiluminescence reagents, proteins were detected using a luminescent image analyzer (LAS-4000 mini; Fujifilm).

#### Enzymatic Measurement of Autophagic Activity
Cells derived from the KOY137 strain background were subjected to an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay as reported previously ([Noda et al., 1995](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90376-7)). The autophagic activity was estimated by ALP assays using 1-naphthyl phosphate disodium salt as a fluorogenic substrate. One unit was defined as the activity to release 1 μmol naphthol/min/mg protein.

#### Indirect Immunofluorescence Microscopy
The localization of Atg32 expressed under the endogenous promoter was analyzed as described previously ([Kondo-Okamoto et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.021)) with some modifications. Cells were grown in SGlyCA for 30 h, and fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 30 min at 30°C. Then 5–10 OD₆₀₀ units of cells were collected by centrifugation, washed once with H₂O, and resuspended in 0.2 ml TD buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl [pH 9.4], 10 mM DTT) at 30°C. After incubation for 10 min, cells were collected by centrifugation, and resuspended in 0.2 ml SP buffer (20 mM potassium phosphate buffer [pH 7.4], 1.2 M sorbitol) containing 2.5 μg/ml Zymolyase 100T (120493; Seikagaku). After digestion for 15 min at 30°C, cells were washed twice with buffer A (0.1 M Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], 1 M sorbitol), and applied to polylysine-coated multiwell slides. Cells were blocked in a signal enhancer reagent (Image-iT FX, I36933; Molecular Probes) for 30 min, and incubated with primary antibody for 60 min. The primary antibody, mouse anti-HA (University of Utah Core Facility), was diluted to 1:500 in buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl). Cells were washed three times with buffer B, and incubated with the fluorescent secondary antibody for 60 min. The secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (A11001; Molecular Probes), was diluted to 1:10,000 in buffer B. Cells were washed four times with buffer B. All steps were performed at room temperature. Image capturing and data processing were performed as described in the Microscopy and Live Cell Imaging section of [Experimental Procedures](https://www.cell.com/developmental-cell/supplemental/S1534-5807(09)00254-8).

#### Biochemical Fractionation
Cells were grown to mid-log phase in SGalCA, and the whole-cell homogenates were separated into post-mitochondrial supernatant and mitochondria-enriched pellet fractions by differential centrifugation as described previously ([Kondo-Okamoto et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.021)). Mitochondrial fractions were then subjected to protease protection and carbonate extraction assays based on the previously reported procedures ([Kondo-Okamoto et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.021)).

#### Yeast Two-Hybrid Assays
Open reading frames of ATG32, atg32^AQAA^ containing W86A and I89A mutations, ATG8, ATG11, ATG19, were cloned into pGAD-C1 and pGBD-C1 ([James et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(96)90586-1)). The cloned constructs were co-introduced into the indicator strain PJ69-4A ([James et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(96)90586-1)). The transformants were spotted on SD (0.17% yeast nitrogen base w/o amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 2% dextrose, amino acids as required) agar plates lacking Leu and Trp for maintenance of the plasmids, and those additionally lacking His with 6 mM 3-aminotriazole to suppress background, and grown at 30°C for 3 days.

#### Quantification of Mitophagy and Atg8 Localization
For a mitophagy assay, mito-GFP-expressing cells were grown in SGlyCA, and observed at indicated time points. Cells exhibiting vacuolar-staining patterns of GFP signals were scored as “mitophagy-positive.” Phenotypes were quantified in 100 cells per sample, and the standard deviation was calculated from three individual experiments. Data represent the averages of all experiments (n = 300), with bars indicating standard deviations. For an Atg8 localization assay, GFP–Atg8- and mito-RFP-expressing cells were grown in SGlyCA for 42 hr, and further incubated for 15 min in SGlyCA containing 10 μM CellTracker Blue CMAC (Molecular Probes) for vacuolar staining. Images of the CMAC-stained cells were captured, and GFP–Atg8 dots that localized to mitochondria were scored. The standard deviation was calculated from 8–12 individual images. Data represent the averages of the number of GFP–Atg8 dots per cell (n = 100), with bars indicating standard deviations.

#### Immunoprecipitation
Coimmunoprecipitation assays were performed using atg32Δ pep4Δ prb1Δ strains expressing Atg32 or Atg32–3HAn from a low-copy plasmid with the ATG32 promoter. Mitochondria-enriched fractions were obtained from the 80 OD₆₀₀ units of cells grown in SGlyCA for 33 hr as described previously ([Kondo-Okamoto et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.021)), solubilized in 0.5 ml IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, and 0.4% protease inhibitor cocktail [P8340; Sigma]) at 4°C for 5 min, and subjected to centrifugation (15,000 × g) at 4°C for 5 min. The supernatant was incubated with 20 μl anti-HA agarose conjugate (A2095; Sigma) at 4°C for 12 hr with gentle agitation. The beads were washed three times with 0.5 ml phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.2% protease inhibitor cocktail, and collected by centrifugation (15,000 × g) at 4°C for 1 min. Immunoprecipitates were eluted with SDS-sample buffer, and analyzed by western blotting. The solubilized fractions and eluted immunoprecipitates loaded per lane were 1.5% and 33% of the total extracts subjected to incubation with anti-HA-conjugated agarose, respectively.

### SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Supplemental Data include four figures and three tables and can be found with this article online at [http://www.cell.com/developmental-cell/supplemental/S1534-5807(09)00254-8](http://www.cell.com/developmental-cell/supplemental/S1534-5807(09)00254-8).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We appreciate discussions with the lab members of Y.O. We thank Rie Ichi- kawa, Junko Ishii, Chika Kondo, Kaori Niimi, and Ikuko Takahashi for their technical support, as well as the NIBB Center for Analytical Instruments for technical assistance. We are grateful to Toshiya Endo (Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan) and Janet Shaw (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA) for gifts of antibodies and plasmids. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (20059034) (K.O.), Scientific Research (C) (20570144) (K.O.), and Specially Promoted Research (19002015) (Y.O.).

Received: March 2, 2009  
Revised: May 8, 2009  
Accepted: June 25, 2009  
Published: July 20, 2009  

REFERENCES

Baba, M., Takeshige, K., Baba, N., and Ohsumi, Y. (1994). Ultrastructural analysis of the autophagic process in yeast: detection of autophagosomes and their characterization. J. Cell Biol. 124, 903–913.

Bernales, S., McDonald, K.L., and Walter, P. (2006). Autophagy counterbalances endoplasmic reticulum expansion during the unfolded protein response. PLoS Biol. 4, e423. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040423.

Bjorkoy, G., Lamark, T., Brech, A., Outzen, H., Perander, M., Overvatn, A., Stenmark, H., and Johansen, T. (2005). p62/SQSTM1 forms protein aggregates degraded by autophagy and has a protective effect on huntingtin-induced cell death. J. Cell Biol. 171, 603–614.

Campbell, C.L., and Thorsness, P.E. (1998). Escape of mitochondrial DNA to the nucleus in yme1 yeast is mediated by vacuolar-dependent turnover of abnormal mitochondrial compartments. J. Cell Sci. 111, 2455–2464.

Farre, J.C., Manjithaya, R., Mathewson, R.D., and Subramani, S. (2008). PpAtg30 tags peroxisomes for turnover by selective autophagy. Dev. Cell 14, 365–376.

Ichimura, Y., Kumanomidou, T., Sou, Y.S., Mizushima, T., Ezaki, J., Ueno, T., Kominami, E., Yamane, T., Tanaka, K., and Komatsu, M. (2008). Structural basis for sorting mechanism of p62 in selective autophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 22847–22857.

James, P., Halladay, J., and Craig, E.A. (1996). Genomic libraries and a host strain designed for highly efficient two-hybrid selection in yeast. Genetics 144, 1425–1436.

Kamada, Y., Funakoshi, T., Shintani, T., Nagano, K., Ohsumi, M., and Ohsumi, Y. (2000). Tor-mediated induction of autophagy via an Apg1 protein kinase complex. J. Cell Biol. 150, 1507–1513.

Kanki, T., and Klionsky, D.J. (2008). Mitophagy in yeast occurs through a selective mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 32386–32393.

Kawamata, T., Kamada, Y., Kabeya, Y., Sekito, T., and Ohsumi, Y. (2008). Organization of the pre-autophagosomal structure responsible for autophagosome formation. Mol. Biol. Cell 19, 2039–2050.

Kim, I., Rodriguez-Enriquez, S., and Lemasters, J.J. (2007). Selective degradation of mitochondria by mitophagy. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 462, 245–253.

Kim, J., Kamada, Y., Stromhaug, P.E., Guan, J., Hefner-Gravink, A., Baba, M., Scott, S.V., Ohsumi, Y., Dunn, W.A., Jr., and Klionsky, D.J. (2001). Cvt9/Gsa9 functions in sequestering selective cytosolic cargo destined for the vacuole. J. Cell Biol. 153, 381–396.

Kirisako, T., Baba, M., Ishihara, N., Miyazawa, K., Ohsumi, M., Yoshimori, T., Noda, T., and Ohsumi, Y. (1999). Formation process of autophagosome is traced with Apg8/Aut7p in yeast. J. Cell Biol. 147, 435–446.

Kissova, I., Deffieu, M., Manon, S., and Camougrand, N. (2004). Uth1p is involved in the autophagic degradation of mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 39068–39074.

Kissova, I., Salin, B., Schaeffer, J., Bhatia, S., Manon, S., and Camougrand, N. (2007). Selective and non-selective autophagic degradation of mitochondria in yeast. Autophagy 3, 329–336.

Komatsu, M., Waguri, S., Ueno, T., Iwata, J., Murata, S., Tanida, I., Ezaki, J., Mizushima, N., Ohsumi, Y., Uchiyama, Y., et al. (2005). Impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive autophagy in Atg7-deficient mice. J. Cell Biol. 169, 425–434.

Kondo-Okamoto, N., Ohkuni, K., Kitagawa, K., McCaffery, J.M., Shaw, J.M., and Okamoto, K. (2006). The novel F-box protein Mfb1p regulates mitochondrial connectivity and exhibits asymmetric localization in yeast. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 3756–3767.

Kraft, C., Deplazes, A., Sohrmann, M., and Peter, M. (2008). Mature ribosomes are selectively degraded upon starvation by an autophagy pathway requiring the Ubp3p/Bre5p ubiquitin protease. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 602–610.

Lemasters, J.J. (2005). Selective mitochondrial autophagy, or mitophagy, as a targeted defense against oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and aging. Rejuvenation Res. 8, 3–5.

Lussier, M., White, A.M., Sheraton, J., di Paolo, T., Treadwell, J., Southard, S.B., Horenshtein, C.I., Chen-Weiner, J., Ram, A.F., Kapteyn, J.C., et al. (1997). Large scale identification of genes involved in cell surface biosynthesis and architecture in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 147, 435–450.

Mizushima, N. (2007). Autophagy: process and function. Genes Dev. 21, 2861–2873.

Mizushima, N., Levine, B., Cuervo, A.M., and Klionsky, D.J. (2008). Autophagy fights disease through cellular self-digestion. Nature 451, 1069–1075.

Nair, U., and Klionsky, D.J. (2005). Molecular mechanisms and regulation of specific and nonspecific autophagy pathways in yeast. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 41785–41788.

Nakatogawa, H., Suzuki, K., Kamada, Y., and Ohsumi, Y. (2009). Dynamics and diversity in molecular mechanisms of autophagy: lessons from yeast studies. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 458–467.

Narendra, D., Tanaka, A., Suen, D.F., and Youle, R.J. (2008). Parkin is recruited selectively to impaired mitochondria and promotes their autophagy. J. Cell Biol. 183, 795–803.

Noda, N.N., Kumeta, H., Nakatogawa, H., Satoo, K., Adachi, W., Ishii, J., Fujioka, Y., Ohsumi, Y., and Inagaki, F. (2008). Structural basis of target recognition by Atg8/LC3 during selective autophagy. Genes Cells 13, 1211–1218.

Noda, T., Matsuura, A., Wada, Y., and Ohsumi, Y. (1995). Novel system for monitoring autophagy in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 210, 126–132.

Nowikovsky, K., Reipert, S., Devenish, R.J., and Schwien, R.J. (2007). Mdm38 protein depletion causes loss of mitochondrial K+/H+ exchange activity, osmotic swelling and mitophagy. Cell Death Differ. 14, 1647–1656.

Pankiv, S., Clausen, T.H., Lamark, T., Brech, A., Bruun, J.A., Outzen, H., Overvatn, A., Bjorkoy, G., and Johansen, T. (2007). p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by autophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 24131–24145.

Priault, M., Salin, B., Schaeffer, J., Vallette, F.M., di Rago, J.P., and Martinou, J.C. (2005). Impairing the bioenergetic status and the biogenesis of mitochondria triggers mitophagy in yeast. Cell Death Differ. 12, 1613–1621.

Sakai, Y., Koller, A., Rangell, L.K., Keller, G.A., and Subramani, S. (1998). Peroxisome degradation by microautophagy in Pichia pastoris: identification of specific steps and morphological intermediates. J. Cell Biol. 141, 625–636.

Sakai, Y., Oku, M., van der Klei, I.J., and Kiel, J.A. (2006). Pexophagy: autophagic degradation of peroxisomes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1763, 1767–1775.

Sandoval, H., Thiagarajan, P., Dasgupta, S.K., Schumacher, A., Prchal, J.T., Chen, M., and Wang, J. (2008). Essential role for Nix in autophagic maturation of erythroid cells. Nature 454, 232–235.

Schweers, R.L., Zhang, J., Randall, M.S., Lloyd, M.R., Li, W., Dorsey, F.C., Kundu, M., Opferman, J.T., Cleveland, J.L., Miller, J.L., et al. (2007). NIX is required for programmed mitochondrial clearance during reticulocyte maturation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 19500–19505.

Developmental Cell

Mitophagy-Specific Transmembrane Receptor

Scott, S.V., Guan, J., Hutchins, M.U., Kim, J., and Klionsky, D.J. (2001). Cvt19 is a receptor for the cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting pathway. Mol. Cell 7, 1131–1141.

Shintani, T., Huang, W.P., Stromhaug, P.E., and Klionsky, D.J. (2002). Mechanism of cargo selection in the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting pathway. Dev. Cell 3, 825–837.

Suzuki, K., Kamada, Y., and Ohsumi, Y. (2002). Studies of cargo delivery to the vacuole mediated by autophagosomes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Dev. Cell 3, 815–824.

Suzuki, K., Kirisako, T., Kamada, Y., Mizushima, N., Noda, T., and Ohsumi, Y. (2001). The pre-autophagosomal structure organized by concerted functions of APG genes is essential for autophagosome formation. EMBO J. 20, 5971–5981.

Suzuki, K., and Ohsumi, Y. (2007). Molecular machinery of autophagosome formation in yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett. 581, 2156–2161.

Takeshige, K., Baba, M., Tsuboi, S., Noda, T., and Ohsumi, Y. (1992). Autophagy in yeast demonstrated with proteinase-deficient mutants and conditions for its induction. J. Cell Biol. 119, 301–311.

Tal, R., Winter, G., Ecker, N., Klionsky, D.J., and Abeliovich, H. (2007). Aup1p, a yeast mitochondrial protein phosphatase homolog, is required for efficient stationary phase mitophagy and cell survival. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 5617–5624.

Tatsuta, T., and Langer, T. (2008). Quality control of mitochondria: protection against neurodegeneration and ageing. EMBO J. 27, 306–314.

Twig, G., Elorza, A., Molina, A.J., Mohamed, H., Wikstrom, J.D., Walzer, G., Stiles, L., Haigh, S.E., Katz, S., Las, G., et al. (2008a). Fission and selective fusion govern mitochondrial segregation and elimination by autophagy. EMBO J. 27, 433–446.

Twig, G., Hyde, B., and Shirihai, O.S. (2008b). Mitochondrial fusion, fission and autophagy as a quality control axis: the bioenergetic view. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1777, 1092–1097.

Xie, Z., and Klionsky, D.J. (2007). Autophagosome formation: core machinery and adaptations. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 1102–1109.

Yen, W.L., and Klionsky, D.J. (2008). How to live long and prosper: autophagy, mitochondria, and aging. Physiology (Bethesda) 23, 248–262.

Yorimitsu, T., and Klionsky, D.J. (2005). Atg11 links cargo to the vesicle-forming machinery in the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting pathway. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 1593–1605.

Yu, L., Strandberg, L., and Lenardo, M.J. (2008). The selectivity of autophagy and its role in cell death and survival. Autophagy 4, 567–573.
