
Review

The effect of oral lipids and circulating lipoproteins on the metabolism of drugs

Jigar P Patel & Dion R Brocks<sup>†</sup>

University of Alberta, 3118 Dentistry/Pharmacy Centre, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2N8, Canada

The oral bioavailability of many lipophilic drugs is known to increase when coadministered with fatty meals. Although such a phenomenon is typically ascribed to increased solubilization and absorption of drug, in some cases this increase in systemic exposure may be in part due to the influence of lipids on the presystemic metabolism of the affected drug. Oral lipids on their absorption may interfere with the drug metabolizing enzymes expressed in the small intestine and/or liver. Fatty acids incorporated in dietary triglyceride can modulate the expression and activity of drug metabolizing enzymes within the small intestine. Lipoproteins, which are the major carriers of lipids in the systemic circulation, can become associated with lipophilic drugs. Such a combination may influence the metabolism of lipophilic drugs through limiting their uptake into the cells thereby decreasing their metabolism. In a contrary manner, an increased uptake and metabolism of lipoprotein-bound drug may be facilitated by lipoprotein receptors mediated uptake. The components of lipoproteins may also modulate the expression or activity of hepatic and extrahepatic drug metabolizing enzymes.

Keywords: amiodarone, antivirals, cyclosporine, cytochrome P450, drug transport, enzyme inhibition, halofantrine, lipoproteins, oral lipids

Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. (2009) 5(11):1385-1398

### 1. Introduction

Drug metabolism is an important consideration in the drug discovery and development process. Metabolism of the drug following its administration is a major determinant of its duration and potency of pharmacological response. Drug metabolism in humans and other animal species is mediated through an array of Phase I and II enzymes located either in endoplasmic reticulum or cytosolic fraction of the cell [1,2]. Cytochrome P450 (CYP450) are the major enzymes involved in the metabolism of drugs and xenobiotics. At least 57 human P450 CYP genes which belong to 18 families and 43 subfamilies have been identified and characterized [1-3]. Of these, the CYP1, CYP2 and CYP3 subfamilies are involved in the metabolism of drugs and xenobiotics [1,2]. The expression and activity of the CYP enzymes involved in drug metabolism are known to be modulated through a variety of internal and external factors [2]. Coingestion of food is capable of influencing the pharmacokinetics [4-6], including the metabolism, of drugs [7-9]. From the vantage of metabolism, the basis of food–drug interactions is most likely secondary to the ability of food components, including proteins and their constituent amino acids, carbohydrates and nucleic acids, to competitively interact with the enzymes or cofactors necessary for metabolism of the coadministered drug [8].

Lipids represent a major dietary source of energy to mammals and act as an essential structural component of the cell membrane providing insulation to the cells and hence protection from physical injury and heat loss. Edible oils and animal fats constitute the major dietary source of lipids in humans. Apart from dietary

The effect of oral lipids and circulating lipoproteins on the metabolism of drugs

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of lipoprotein transport and receptor mediated pathways of lipoprotein metabolism. Following the ingestion of high fat meal, CM are assembled in enterocytes and secreted into lymph vessels which eventually empty into the systemic circulation through the thoracic duct. Removal of fatty acids from circulating CM by LPL bound to blood capillaries results in CM remnants which are sequestered by liver. VLDL, synthesized by the liver, transport endogenous TG to tissues. Over time, LPL reduces VLDL to IDL which in turn is transformed into LDL. An important role of LDL is to transport cholesterol to peripheral tissues. LDL is taken up by liver through binding of its constituent apoproteins to LDL receptors. HDL synthesized by liver transports cholesterol from peripheral tissues back to liver. A, B, C and E represent types of apolipoproteins embedded within the lipoprotein outer core.

Adapted from reference [34].

CM: Chylomicron; FFA: Free fatty acid; HDL: High-density lipoprotein; IDL: Intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT: Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL: Low-density lipoprotein; LPL: Lipoprotein lipase; TG: Triglyceride; VLDL: Very low-density lipoprotein.

sources, lipids which are used as a vehicle for lipophilic drugs in oral and parenteral formulation may also contribute to the exogenous pool of lipids [10,11]. Lipids are components of the mixed function oxidase system, in which they play an important role in anchoring the CYP enzymes, facilitating substrate binding and transfer of electrons [2]. The activity of the CYP450 mixed function oxidase system is, therefore, dependent on the lipid content which includes their specific phospholipid matrix, fatty acid composition, cholesterol content and minor constituents such as vitamin E [12]. Apart from altering CYP function through changes in lipid microenvironment, fatty acids liberated on hydrolysis of triglycerides can also impart competitive or mechanism based inhibition of drug metabolism.

Due to their favorable properties of tissue penetration and potency, many existing and newly marketed drugs are lipophilic in nature [13]. Given their lipophilic nature, such drugs can associate with circulating lipid-containing particles, called lipoproteins, and with other plasma proteins. However, abnormal levels of lipids in the body may occur through genetic lipid disorder [14,15] or secondarily through dietary habits [16,17], alcohol consumption [18], concomitant diseases [19-24] and medications [25]. This may potentially influence the pharmacokinetic properties of the drug through various mechanisms, including distribution and metabolism.

Until now, a number of articles have focused on the effect of drugs and diseases on metabolism of lipids. However, relatively little attention has been directed towards the reverse, namely how lipids might affect the metabolism of drugs. In this article, we review and discuss the current state of knowledge on the ability of lipids and lipoproteins to modulate the metabolism of drugs using specific examples from the published literature wherever possible.

## 2. Lipids and lipoproteins

Any discussion of the effect of lipids on drug metabolism would be incomplete without consideration of the physiology of lipids. Transport of triglycerides and cholesterol in the systemic circulation is restricted due to their aqueous insolubility. The transport of these essential nutrients in the aqueous environment of the body is accomplished through circulating lipoproteins (Figure 1). Lipoproteins are macromolecular complexes composed of an outer hydrophilic coat made up of amphipathic phospholipids and apolipoproteins and an inner hydrophobic core comprised of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides [26-28]. Apolipoproteins embedded on the outer coat of lipoproteins assist in maintenance of their structural integrity, facilitate enzymatic reactions involved in lipid metabolism and serve as ligands for lipoprotein receptors on the cell surface of the tissues [28]. Lipoproteins which differ in their protein and lipid contents are classified into five groups based on their size, density and type of embedded apolipoproteins, in order of the lowest to highest density, chylomicrons (CM), very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), intermediate-density

Patel & Brocks

Nascent HDL
ABCA1
Apo B
Rough ER
B-48
A-IV
A-I
MTP
P-gp
NPC1L1
Golgi
CE
TG
PL
ACAT-2
MGAT
DGAT
PL enzymatic system
Smooth ER
Free cholesterol &
plant sterols
FFA, MAG & Lyso phospholipids
CM
A-IV
B-48
A-I

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the formation and release of CM in enterocytes following the absorption of lipid digestion products from brush border membrane of small intestine. Transport of cholesterol is regulated by both P-glycoprotein and NPC1L1 on the apical side of the enterocytes whereas ABCA1 is expressed on the basolateral side of the enterocytes. FFA, MAG, lysophospholipids, cholesterol and plant cholesterol are transported to smooth ER where esterification of cholesterol to CE is catalyzed by ACAT-2 whereas formation of TG takes place through action of MGAT–DGAT complex. Formation of PL is catalyzed by phosphoglyceride-synthesizing enzymes. Formation of nascent CM, catalyzed by MTP, takes place through assembling of lipids (TG, PL and CE) with apoB-48 in rough ER. These nascent CM are then transferred from rough ER to Golgi apparatus where final assembling takes place before they are exocytosed into intracellular space after the fusion of Golgi apparatus with basolateral membrane. It is apparent that there is an important contribution of smooth endoplasmic reticulum to the metabolism of the lipid components, leaving open possible interferences with drug metabolism, which is largely facilitated by metabolizing enzymes such as CYP located within the same organelle.

Adapted from [52].

ACAT-2: Acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase 2; CE: Cholesteryl ester; CM: Chylomicron; DGAT: Diacylglycerol acyltransferase; ER: Endoplasmic reticulum;
FFA: Free fatty acid; HDL: High-density lipoprotein; MAG: Monoacylglycerol; MGAT: Monoacylglycerol acyltransferase; MTP: Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein;
PL: Phospholipid; TG: Triglyceride.

lipoproteins (IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) [26-28]. For each of these lipoproteins, lower density is also associated with larger size.

Dietary lipids are mainly composed of long chain triglycerides, with smaller proportions of phospholipids and cholesterols [11]. Under normal conditions, the small intestine can digest 95% of the triglycerides with only a small loss to the feces. Acylation of one, two or three fatty acid moieties on glycerol backbone results in the formation of monoglycerides, diglycerides or triglycerides, respectively [11,29]. Fatty acids are generally classified based on their length (short, medium or long chain) and presence/or absence of double bonds (saturated or unsaturated) between carbon atoms. Digestion of these triglycerides into monoglycerides, diglycerides and free fatty acids by the action of pancreatic lipase is an essential step for their absorption from the intestinal lumen; triglycerides are not directly absorbable by the enterocytes [11,29]. Absorption of long-chain triglycerides is facilitated through the collective action of bile salts, phospholipids, lipase (salivary, gastric and pancreatic) and colipase [11,29]. On absorption, the products of the lipid digestion are transferred from the brush border membrane to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum by fatty acid binding protein in which CYP enzymes are expressed (Figure 2) [30]. In the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, the re-esterification of

Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. (2009) 5(11)
1387

free fatty acids and monoglycerides cumulates in the intestinal formation of triglycerides. Similarly, formation of cholesteryl ester and phosphatidylcholine takes place through acylation of free cholesterol and lysophosphatidylcholine [11, 31]. These lipids migrate from the smooth endoplasmic reticulum to the rough endoplasmic reticulum where addition of apolipoproteins takes place to form nascent CM [11, 32]. These nascent CM are then transported to Golgi apparatus where final assembling takes place before their extrusion in the intracellular space through the attachment of the Golgi vesicles containing CM to the plasma membrane (Figure 2) [33].

The primary role of VLDL is to transport endogenously produced triglycerides from liver to extrahepatic tissues (Figure 1). Removal of triglycerides from VLDL and CM released from liver and small intestine, respectively, by lipoprotein lipase on the vascular endothelium results in CM remnants and IDL. CM remnants are taken up by the liver whereas IDL are converted further into smaller and more stable LDL. The LDL particles serve as a major carrier of cholesterol from liver to the peripheral tissues. HDL, commonly recognized as 'good cholesterol', is the smallest and densest of all lipoprotein classes with highest protein content. It serves as a major carrier of cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver [26, 27, 34].

### 3. Oral lipids and drug metabolism

The small intestine serves as the major gateway of entry into the systemic circulation for many nutrients and xenobiotics including orally administered drugs. On their absorption, drugs may be metabolized through numerous pathways involving both Phase I and II metabolic reactions. Major intestinal CYP enzymes involved in drug metabolism include CYP3A1, CYP2B1 and CYP1A1 [35]. Until now, many studies have shown that bioavailability of lipophilic drugs is known to increase on coadministration with high fat diet or fatty acids alone. High fat meals can affect the oral bioavailability of lipophilic drugs through increased solubilization of drug in the intestines, interference with drug transport protein activity [36-38] and hepatic metabolism [39], bypass of the liver first-pass metabolism of drug associated with CM through lymphatics into systemic circulation [40] or combination of these events. Apart from dietary fatty acids, surfactants present along with lipids in pharmaceutical formulations can also inhibit the activity of CYP enzymes and transporters expressed in the small intestinal tissues. For instance, certain non-ionic surfactants belonging to macrogolglyceride family such as Labrasol®, Gelucire® 44/14 and Labrafil® (mixture of mono-, di- and triglycerides and polyethylene glycol) can impart inhibitory effects on drug metabolizing enzymes as a result of fatty acid liberation after digestion by gastric and pancreatic lipases present in gastrointestinal tract [41, 42]. Cremophor EL (polyethoxylated castor oil) used as a surfactant in many commercially available formulations has also been shown to liberate fatty acids on digestion by pancreatic lipases [43, 44]. However, it should be noted that the degree of effect is attributed to the type of

fatty acids present in the surfactants. Effects of oral lipids on the metabolism of drugs are discussed below stratified by specific drug examples and also summarized in Table 1.

#### 3.1 Specific drug examples

##### 3.1.1 Halofantrine

Halofantrine (HF) is a chiral, highly lipophilic anti-malarial drug active against chloroquine-sensitive and -resistant strains of *Plasmodium falciparum* [45]. HF is metabolized to its active and chiral metabolite desbutylhalofantrine (DHF) through CYP3A1/2, 1A1, 2C11, 2C6, 2B1/2 and 2D1/2. Of these, CYP3A1/2 and CYP2C11 are primary isoenzymes involved in the metabolism of HF [46].

Oral coadministration of lipids with racemic HF has been shown to increase the oral bioavailability of HF in humans and animal species [4, 47, 48]. For instance, administration of peanut oil 30 min before oral administration of HF HCl resulted in two to threefold increase in plasma AUC of HF enantiomers in the rat [4]. Intraduodenal infusion of HF formulated with oleic acid has been shown to reduce the enterocyte based metabolism of HF in rats [49]. In humans, coadministration of HF HCl with high fat meal resulted in a threefold increase in the mean relative oral bioavailability of HF compared to fasted state [47]. In fasted male beagle dogs, absolute oral bioavailability of HF HCl was low (<10%) but increased substantially (~12-fold) when administered postprandially [48]. It was observed that the increase in plasma AUC values of DHF in humans [47] and beagle dogs [48] was not in proportion to the increase in HF concentrations. It was thought that the transport of the drug from the enterocytes to the systemic circulation through the lymphatic vessels allowing the drug to bypass a hepatic first-pass effect was responsible for these less than proportional increases in the DHF AUC values. However, for a low extraction ratio drug such as HF, lymphatic shunting could not fully explain the discordance in metabolite:drug AUC ratio in the fatty meal compared to fasted states. Even if the drug entered the portal vein directly instead of being shunted into the mesenteric lymphatic drainage, most of the drug would still gain access to the hepatic vein circulation as unmetabolized drug. Unless the fatty meal markedly reduced the metabolic capability of the liver, the most likely candidate explanation for the lower than expected metabolite:drug ratio in the postprandial state is an inhibition of HF metabolism presystemically within the gastrointestinal tract.

Recently, it was reported that hydrolyzed soybean oil emulsion causes a significant reduction (~71%) in the formation of the (-) enantiomer of DHF, but not (+)-DHF by everted rat intestinal sacs. The incubations were performed in simulated bile solutions [9]. This reduction in the metabolism by soybean oil may have been due to its 60% composition of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), including linoleic acid and linolenic acid [50]. Both of these PUFAs are known to competitively inhibit human CYP isoenzymes such as CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 and also to a lesser extent, CYP1A2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 (Figure 3) [51]. Due to the homology between

Table 1. Summary of the effect of oral lipids or lipoproteins on the metabolism and/or pharmacokinetics of drugs discussed in this paper.

| Drugs            | Treatment/disease          | Species                     | Effect                                                                 |
|------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Halofantrine     | High fat meal              | Humans                      | Threefold increase in mean relative oral bioavailability [47]               |
|                  | High fat meal              | Beagle dogs                 | 12-Fold increase in absolute oral bioavailability [48]                       |
|                  | Oral peanut oil            | Rats                        | Two to threefold increase in plasma AUC [4]                               |
|                  | Soybean oil emulsion       | Rat everted small intestine | Decreased intestinal metabolism [9]                                    |
|                  | High fat meal              | Beagle dogs                 | Decreased clearance and volume of distribution [93]                      |
|                  | Hyperlipidemia             | Rat liver microsomes        | No change in hepatic metabolism [81]                                   |
| Amiodarone       | High fat meal              | Humans                      | Increased bioavailability [57]                                         |
|                  | Oral peanut oil            | Rats                        | 1.83-Fold increase in plasma AUC [6]                                    |
|                  | Oral peanut oil            | Rat everted small intestine | Decreased intestinal metabolism [7]                                    |
|                  | Hyperlipidemia             | Rat liver microsomes        | Decreased hepatic metabolism [88]                                      |
| Saquinavir       | DHA                        | Rats                        | Fourfold increase in bioavailability [60]                               |
| Cyclosporine     | High fat meal              | Humans                      | 3.8-Fold increase in bioavailability [65, 66]                            |
|                  | DHA                        | Rats                        | 2.2-Fold increase in bioavailability [61]                                |
|                  | Coincubation with oleic acid, human LDL and HDL | Rat hepatocytes | Decreased uptake and metabolism [94]                                 |
|                  | Coincubation with human LDL perfusate | Rat isolated liver perfusion | Decreased uptake and metabolism [95]                                 |
| Midazolam        | DHA                        | Rats                        | 1.5-Fold increase in bioavailability [62]                                |
| Diosgenin        | Hyperlipidemia             | Rats                        | Decreased clearance [70]                                               |
| PPAR agonist MRL-I and II | -                          | Obese Zucker rats           | Decreased glucuronidation [89]                                       |

DHA: Docosahexaenoic acid; HDL: High-density lipoprotein; LDL: Low-density lipoprotein.

Figure 3. Inhibitory effect of PUFA (µM) on the metabolic reactions catalyzed by human CYP isoenzymes.
Figure constructed based on data presented in Table 2 of [51].
AA: Arachidonic acid; DHA: Docosahexaenoic acid; EPA: Eicosapentaenoic acid;
LA: Linoleic acid; LN: Linolenic acid; PUFA: Polyunsaturated fatty acid.

is a known substrate of ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters. For instance, P-glycoprotein (ABCB1) expressed on the brush border membrane of small intestine regulates the amount of cholesterol absorption through efflux of internalized cholesterol (Figure 2) [52, 53]. HF is known to be a substrate of P-glycoprotein homologue in malarial parasites [54]. Therefore, it is possible that the increased intestinal concentration of HF was due to the competitive inhibition of P-glycoprotein efflux transport of HF enantiomers by cholesterol. Coincidentally, liver CYP3A4 is implicated in the metabolism of cholesterol to 4β-hydroxycholesterol [3, 55]. Following the uptake into enterocytes, shunting of intracellular cholesterol from brush border membrane to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum [52] where CYP enzymes are localized might result in competitive inhibition of CYP3A1 mediated metabolism of HF enantiomers. However, the relative affinity of cholesterol for CYP3A1 in small intestine may be lower than HF. Therefore, the higher DHF:HF ratios in the intestinal tissues incubated with high cholesterol content could reflect inhibition of P-glycoprotein efflux of HF enantiomers.

### 3.1.2 Amiodarone

Amiodarone (AM) is a highly lipophilic class III antiarrhythmic drug used in the treatment of life-threatening ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias [56]. Similar to HF, AM when coadministered with high fat meal caused higher increase in AM concentration compared to its active metabolite desethylamiodarone (DEA) in healthy subjects [57]. Metabolism of AM in the rat small intestine is mediated through CYP1A1 and CYP3A1 [58, 59]. Unlike DHF, reduction in the formation of DEA was not observed when AM was incubated with everted rat intestinal sacs in the presence of hydrolyzed soybean oil emulsion and simulated bile solution [7]. AM differs from HF because its dealkylation is facilitated by CYP1A1 to a much greater relative extent, with a relative rate of formation being ~2:1 for CYP3A1 compared to CYP1A1 [59] (ratio for HF is ~24 [46]). Therefore, it is possible that competitive inhibition of CYP3A1 by PUFAs present in the soybean oil is compensated by CYP1A1 activity. In the everted gut sacs pretreated with oral peanut oil containing 1% cholesterol, a decrease in the formation of DEA was observed [7]. However, no change was observed in the formation of DEA on incubation of AM in microsomes prepared from peanut oil treated small intestine [7]. When microsomes are prepared, most cellular components, including most non-membrane bound lipids, are removed. Therefore, decreased metabolism observed after peanut oil treatment was apparently due to the presence of the residual lipids in the intestinal tissues after their oral absorption. It was felt that these residual lipids could have competitively inhibited the CYP enzymes involved in the metabolism of AM.

Apart from coadministration with high fat meal, as was seen with AM [6, 57], bioavailability of drugs may increase when coadministered with individual fatty acids [60-62]. Cis-4, 7, 10, 13, 16 and 19-docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an essential

PUFA present in fish oil, breast milk, flaxseed oil, canola oil, walnuts and phytoplankton [63], are known to increase bioavailability of saquinavir [60], cyclosporine A (CyA) [61] and midazolam [62]. There was no significant effect of orally administered DHA on pharmacokinetic profiles of these drugs administered intravenously suggesting that DHA increased their bioavailability through inhibition of presystemic metabolism of these drugs in the small intestine [60-62].

#### 3.1.3 Saquinavir

Saquinavir, a potent human immunodeficiency virus-protease inhibitor, has bioavailability of ~4% in the fed and 1% in the fasted state [64]. It has been reported that 90% of its metabolism takes place through hydroxylation of CYP3A isoenzymes [64]. Incubation of DHA with saquinavir in rat liver microsomes has been shown to inhibit the metabolism of saquinavir in a dose-dependent manner. Bioavailability of saquinavir was increased ~fourfold (from 6.5 to 26.4%) on oral coadministration with DHA when compared to control (2% carboxymethyl cellulose sodium). Oral administration of DHA did not affect the kinetic parameters of saquinavir when administered intravenously, which indirectly suggested that DHA increased the bioavailability of saquinavir through its inhibitory effect on gut CYP3A [60].

#### 3.1.4 Cyclosporine A

CyA, an immunosuppressive lipophilic agent widely used in prevention of organ graft rejection, is a substrate for CYP3A and P-glycoprotein. It has been reported previously that bioavailability of CyA was increased (~3.8-fold) with high fat meal in healthy volunteers [65, 66]. In plasma, CyA binds extensively to lipoprotein fractions. Based on typical binding of a low hepatic extraction ratio drug such as CyA to blood components, increased lipoprotein levels after ingestion of high fat meal would be expected to result in a decreased unbound fraction and hence decreased clearance and volume of distribution of the drug. However, intravenous administration of CyA after high fat meal to healthy volunteers behaved in a contrary fashion, and a marked increase in both the clearance (1.5-fold) and volume of distribution (1.6-fold) of CyA were observed [65, 66]. This inverse relationship was attributed to the increased transport of CyA associated with lipoproteins across cell membranes through the action of lipoprotein receptors [65, 66]. These results were somewhat mirrored in rats given oral doses of peanut oil 30 min before and 2 h after oral and intravenous administration of CyA, in which increases in area under the plasma concentration versus time curve was expected. In contrast there was no significant change in AUC, and there seemed to be a trend towards a decrease in AUC [5].

Some studies have also shown that fish oil and its components when used as a vehicle for CyA can increase bioavailability and limit its toxicity [67, 68]. Coadministration of CyA with DHA resulted into marked dose-dependent increase in CyA blood concentration. DHA has been shown to inhibit
the formation of 6β-hydroxytestosterone from testosterone mediated through activity of CYP3A enzymes in rat liver microsomes in a competitive manner [61]. A significant increase (130%) in the bioavailability of CyA on oral coadministration with DHA could, therefore, result from an inhibitory effect of DHA on the CYP3A isoenzymes involved in CyA metabolism. The lack of effect of DHA on basolateral to apical transport of radiolabeled CyA in Caco-2 monolayer confirmed that DHA has no inhibitory effect on P-glycoprotein mediated efflux [61].

### 3.1.5 Midazolam

Midazolam, a preoperative anesthetic agent, is extensively metabolized by gut CYP3A4 isoenzymes. Co-incubation of midazolam with DHA in the everted gut experiments resulted in decrease in the extraction ratio of midazolam by intestinal tissue with increasing concentration of DHA. In the same experiments, it was also apparent that DHA by itself did not affect P-glycoprotein activity in the gut tissues. Formation of 1'-OH and 4-OH midazolam was decreased by the intestinal microsomes with increasing concentration of DHA. Lineweaver-Burk plot for the inhibition of both metabolite formation demonstrated that DHA caused a competitive inhibition of the CYP3A activity in the small intestine. Significantly higher plasma AUC values of midazolam were observed after its oral coadministration with DHA. However, there was no significant effect of oral DHA on the AUC of midazolam administered intravenously. Bioavailability of midazolam was increased by 53% compared to control with DHA coadministration. Olive oil was used as a non-DHA control lipid in this study [62].

### 3.1.6 Simvastatin

In contrast to single dose study with lipids or fatty acids, oral coadministration of prescription ω-3-acid ethyl esters 4 g (four capsules) containing primarily eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA with 80 mg (one tablet) simvastatin (CYP3A4 substrate) to healthy volunteers for 14 days showed no significant effect on steady-state pharmacokinetics of simvastatin [69].

### 3.1.7 Diosgenin

Oral administration of diosgenin to hyperlipidemic rats (rendered hyperlipidemic by feeding high fat diet for 4 weeks) resulted in 423% increase in AUC and 80% decrease in clearance of diosgenin, which could be attributed to high fat-induced reduction in the first-pass intestinal extraction or efflux transport of diosgenin [70].

### 3.2 Effect of fatty acids on CYP isoenzymes

The inhibition of liver CYP isoenzymes by fatty acids present in dietary oils (Table 2) is mainly dependent on the degree of unsaturation and length of the fatty acid chains [71]. The order of inhibition for fatty acids is usually saturated < mono-unsaturated < PUFAs [71]. For instance, saturated fatty acids have weak inhibitory effect on CYP3A mediated metabolism

of testosterone 6β-hydroxylation in rat liver microsomes. On the contrary, unsaturated fatty acids potently inhibited hepatic CYP3A mediated metabolism [61, 71]. Saturated fatty acids were devoid of inhibitory effects on activity of human CYP isoenzymes (CYP1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4) at concentrations up to 200 μM. PUFA had potent inhibitory effect on the activity of CYP2C9 and 2C19 but less potent effects on CYP1A2, 2E1 and 3A4 (Figure 3) [51]. Arachidonic acid, the main product of α-linolenic acid, had a significant inhibitory effect on CYP1A1, 1A2, 2C8 and 2C19 in human liver microsomal preparations [72]. In another study, oleic acid, linoleic acid, linolenic acid and arachidonic acid each inhibited the rat liver microsomal mediated formation of the O-demethylated metabolite of p-nitroanisole. Similar results were observed with hexobarbitone in the same study. Metabolism of both p-nitroanisole and hexobarbitone was strongly inhibited by arachidonic acid, the most unsaturated of all fatty acids used in this study [73]. All of the above results were from acute *in vitro* incubations of fatty acids which resulted in competitive inhibition of metabolic reactions mediated through CYP isoenzymes.

Long-term treatment with oils has resulted in reports of induction or suppression of some drug metabolizing enzymes (Table 3). For instance, oral administration of 1 ml/(kg d) corn, olive, sesame and soybean oil for 7 days to Sprague-Dawley rats resulted in a significant induction of hepatic CYP3A2 by soybean oil, but inhibition of CYP2C11 by corn and olive oil [50]. In another instance, CYP2E1 activity was induced in rat after treatment with high PUFA containing corn and menhaden oil (5 and 20% dietary composition each) for 4 days compared to lard and olive oil, which are high in saturated fatty acids and monounsaturated fatty acids [74]. Hepatic CYP450s (CYP1A2, 2B2, 2E1 and 3A) were induced and pulmonary CYP2B1 was suppressed following treatment with 20% corn oil for 4 days [75].

It is possible that long-term treatment with oils could have resulted from altered regulation of drug metabolizing enzymes. At the molecular level, gene expression of various drug metabolizing enzymes is regulated through interaction of xenobiotics or nutrients with nuclear receptors. For instance, the expression of CYP1 genes are regulated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor whereas expression of CYP2B and CYP3A genes are regulated by constitutive androstane (CAR) and pregnane X receptors belonging to a steroid family of orphan receptors [76]. Recently, arachidonic acid, linoleic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA at a concentration of 100 μM were shown to down-regulate the phenobarbital induced expression of the CYP2B1 gene in rat primary hepatocytes. The effect was most pronounced with arachidonic acid and DHA treatments [77]. In another study, DHA has shown to downregulate the phenobarbital-induced expression of the CYP2B1 gene in rat primary hepatocytes, through its inhibition of CAR translocation from cytosol to nucleus dose-dependently [78].

In human hepatocytes, hepatic nuclear factor-4α (HNF-4α) seems to play a major role in the expression of transcription
The effect of oral lipids and circulating lipoproteins on the metabolism of drugs

Table 2. Fatty acid composition of common dietary oils (wt%).

| Oils         | Saturated, % | Monounsaturated, % | Polyunsaturated, % |
|--------------|---------------|--------------------|---------------------|
| Corn [12]    | 15.0          | 27.5               | 57.4                |
| Olive [12]   | 17.3          | 77.4               | 8.50                |
| Hazelnut [12]| 8.30          | 69.7               | 20.2                |
| Fish [12]    | 35.7          | 28.8               | 34.2                |
| Peanut [98]  | 12.9          | 81.5               | 5.66                |
| Soybean [50] | 9.0           | 28.0               | 60.0                |

Table 3. Effect of long-term consumption of common dietary oils on CYP enzymes involved in the metabolism of drugs and xenobiotics.

| Oils            | Dose       | Treatment duration (days) | Effect on CYP 450 isoenzymes |
|-----------------|------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------|
|                 |            |                           | Induction                    |
|                 |            |                           | Inhibition                   |
| Corn [50, 74, 75]| 1 ml/(kgd) | 7                         | -                             | 2C 11 (hepatic)              |
|                 | 5%         | 4                         | 2E 1 (hepatic)                | -                             |
|                 | 20%        | 4                         | 2E 1, 1A 2, 2B 2 and 3A (hepatic)| 2B 1 (lung)                  |
| Menhaden [74]   | 5%         | 4                         | 2E 1 (hepatic)                | -                             |
|                 | 20%        | 4                         | 2E 1 (hepatic)                | -                             |
| Olive [50]      | 1 ml/(kgd) | 7                         | -                             | 2C 11 (hepatic)              |
| Sesame [50]     | 1 ml/(kgd) | 7                         | -                             | -                             |
| Soybean [50]    | 1 ml/(kgd) | 7                         | 3A 2 (hepatic)                | -                             |

factors such as CAR and pregnane X receptors, drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP2A 6, 2B 6, 2C 8, 2C 9, 2C 19, 2D 6, 3A 4, uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 1A 1, 1A 9 and sulfotransferase 2A 1) and transporters (ABC transporter B 1, B 11, C 2, organic anion transport protein 1B 1 and organic cation transport protein 1) [79]. The fatty acyl-CoA thioesters (long hydrocarbon chains between C 12 and C 20 linked through thioester to coenzyme A) have been reported to be the ligands of HNF-4α [80]. Induction or inhibition of HNF-4α is mainly dependent on the chain length and the degree of saturation of fatty acyl-CoA ligands. For instance, saturated fatty acyl-CoA (chain length of 14 and 16 carbon atoms) are agonists of HNF-4α whereas ω-3 and ω-6 poly-unsaturated fatty acyl-CoAs and saturated (C 18:0)-CoA have antagonistic effect on HNF-4α expression [80]. Thus, it can be concluded that fatty acids can modulate the metabolism of drug through direct competition with drug molecules or indirectly through modulation of expression of drug metabolizing enzymes.

4. Lipoproteins and drug metabolism

Drugs in the systemic circulation undergo binding with plasma proteins such as albumin, α-1 acid glycoproteins and globulins.
lipoprotein concentrations are always in a state of flux in the systemic circulation, affected by dietary intake and redistribution, liver, where most drug metabolizing enzymes are expressed, is considered as a terminal site of catabolism for lipoproteins containing apoB (CM, LDL and VLDL) through their recognition through LDL receptors [86, 87]. Liberation of fatty acids following the catabolism of lipoproteins in the hepatocytes could directly reduce the metabolism of drug bound to the lipoproteins [51, 61, 71]. Thus, lipoproteins can decrease the metabolism of drug through modulation of CYP expression or through decreased unbound fraction, which in turn results into decreased load of drug into tissues. Both of these possibilities can result in a net reduction in the metabolism of drug in the presence of lipoproteins.

HL like any other disease can potentially affect the expression of drug metabolizing enzymes in the liver and other tissues. In the poloxamer 407 rat model of HL, it was observed that total CYP content in the liver microsomal protein was 1.94-fold lower compared to normolipidemic (NL) Sprague-Dawley rats [88]. Western blot analysis of these samples demonstrated significant decreases in the expression of CYP2C11, CYP3A1 and CYP3A2. Expression of CYP1A2, 2B1/2, 2C6 and 2D1 did not change [88]. This was not a poloxamer specific change, however, as in another study involving obese hyperlipidemic Zucker rats significant decreases were likewise observed in the expression of a number of drug metabolizing enzymes such as CYP3A1, CYP2C11, uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases 1A1, 1A6 and 2B1, glutathione S-transferase A2 and quinine reductase. Significant reduction in the expression of transport proteins such as multi-drug resistance-associated protein 2 and organic anion transport protein 2 were also observed in obese Zucker rats compared to lean Sprague-Dawley rats [89]. In the Zucker obese rats, expression of the CYP3A regulator, CAR, was significantly lower than in control lean rats [90]. In addition, downregulation of hepatic CYP3A expression after high fat intake was attributed to reduced expression of CAR and retinoid X receptor [39].

Both CYP2C11 and CYP3A1/2 are regulated by the transcription factors such as CAR and pregnane X receptor [91]. Therefore, it can be postulated that downregulation of CYP2C11 and CYP3A1/2 in HL could have resulted from decreased expression of both transcription factors. Unlike Sprague-Dawley rats, however, Wistar rats rendered hyperlipidemic by poloxamer 407 did not show changes in their CYP3A expression in liver or intestine [83]. This could be possibly due to apparent differences observed in the expression of hepatic CYP450 enzymes between Sprague-Dawley rats and Wistar rats. For instance, high mRNA expressions of CYP1A2 (threefold) and CYP3A2 (twofold) were observed in Wistar rats compared to Sprague-Dawley rats. There were no significant differences noted in mRNA levels of other CYP isoenzymes (CYP2B1/2, 2C6, 2D2, 3A1 and 4A1) tested between Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats [92]. The effect of lipoproteins on the metabolism of specific drug examples discussed below are summarized in Table 1.

### 4.1 Specific drug examples

#### 4.1.1 Halofantrine
Postprandial administration of intravenous dose of racemic HF to beagle dogs resulted in decrease clearance (15%) and volume of distribution (21%) of HF due to the association of HF with triglyceride rich lipoproteins in the fed state compared to fasted state [93]. In another study, the unbound fraction of each HF enantiomer was decreased ~10-fold when administered as racemate intravenously to rats given poloxamer 407 to induce HL. This resulted in decrease in clearance and volume of distribution of HF enantiomers. Recently, similar results were also observed with nelfinavir [83] and atazanavir [84], both highly lipophilic human immunodeficiency virus protease inhibitors, in the same rat model of HL. However, there was either increase or no change in the concentration of HF enantiomers in HL compared to NL liver [81]. Given that both CYP2C11 and CYP3A1 were downregulated in poloxamer 407 model of HL [88], both of which are involved in HF metabolism to its major metabolite DHF [46], HF metabolism was expected to be reduced in HL compared to NL. However, the kinetic parameters ($V_{\text{max}}$; maximal rate of formation and $Cl_{\text{int}}$, intrinsic clearance) of formation of DHF enantiomers did not significantly differ between NL and HL. A two enzyme model, with low and high efficiencies, respectively, was found to best fit to the data for DHF enantiomer formation [81]. Other CYP besides 2C11 and 3A1 with lower efficiency have been observed to metabolize HF to DHF including 2D1/2, 2C6 and 1A1, none of which are known to be inhibited by HL [46]. This may have accounted for the lack of change in DHF formation *in vitro* in the presence of HL.

#### 4.1.2 Amiodarone
Similar to (+)-HF, a significant increase (~2.5-fold) in the liver concentrations of AM were noted in HL compared to NL rats [88]. When incubated with liver microsomes prepared from NL and HL rats, the formation of DEA from AM fitted best to a sigmoidal Michaelis-Menten model with one enzyme. Rates of DEA formation were higher in NL than in HL. There were no significant differences observed between affinity constant ($K_m$) and $V_{\text{max}}$ of NL and HL rat liver microsomes. However, clearance through DEA formation in HL livers was significantly lower than in NL livers. Addition of poloxamer 407 directly to the microsomal incubates resulted in no significant impact on the formation of DEA from AM suggesting that poloxamer 407 by itself does not have any effect on the CYP450 enzymes and that the decrease in metabolism was due to the HL caused by the agent [88].

#### 4.1.3 Cyclosporine A
CyA when incubated with suspensions of rat hepatocytes in the presence of oleic acid, LDL and HDL resulted in a significant decrease in the uptake and metabolism of CyA. In this experiment, the effect of human LDL was found to be more pronounced than oleic acid and human HDL [94]. Another study with isolated rat liver perfusion also showed that uptake
and metabolism of CyA was decreased when perfused with LDL [95]. Together, these results suggest that association of CyA to the LDL particles restricts the amount of CyA accessible to drug metabolizing enzymes in the liver, thus, resulting in decreased metabolism of CyA. These conclusions were at odds with the increase in the clearance observed by the same group in healthy volunteers given high fat meals [65, 66]. They are also inconsistent with data from *in vivo* administration of CyA to HL rats, in which a trend towards increased clearance was apparent, and where hepatic uptake was increased in HL compared to NL rats [96]. One possible confounding aspect of these *in vitro* studies involving rat liver [94, 95] is that human LDL and HDL rather than rat lipoproteins were used. Although lipid from human LDL is taken up by rat liver, the uptake is less rapid and efficient than from rat LDL [97].

### 4.1.4 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists

Intravenous administration of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonists MRL-I and MRL-II to obese Zucker and lean Sprague-Dawley rats resulted in a significant decrease in clearance of MRL-I (~ fivefold) and MRL-II (~ twofold) in obese Zucker rats compared to lean Sprague-Dawley rats [89]. There was no significant change observed in volume of distribution between the two strains of rats. When kinetic parameters for metabolism of MRL-I and MRL-II were evaluated using liver microsomes from both strains of rats, significant decrease in \( V_{\text{max}} \) (~ 1.5-fold) and \( CL_{\text{int}} \) (~ twofold) of the formation of acyl glucuronide of MRL-I and MRL-II was observed in obese Zucker rats compared to lean Sprague-Dawley rats. \( K_m \) values did not differ between the two strains. These results were in line with observed decreases in the expression of drug metabolizing enzymes in the obese Zucker rats [89].

---

### Expert opinion

Unfortunately, lipoprotein binding of drugs has been poorly studied, and when reported is underappreciated in terms of the influence that it can potentially impart to the disposition of drugs. In terms of its influence on pharmacokinetic properties, lipoprotein binding is normally viewed in the same light as other types of binding events to plasma proteins such as albumin or α1-acid glycoprotein. Binding to lipoproteins, however, can potentially result in sometimes unexpected consequences on the properties of drug disposition, largely secondary to the influence of lipoprotein receptors, which can modify the tissue uptake of drug. This includes access to drug to their eliminating organs, which can have consequences on the metabolism of the drug.

As has been reviewed here, metabolism of drugs can be directly modified by oral lipids and plasma lipoproteins through different means. Oral lipids, by themselves or through the action of their constituent fatty acids subsequent to hydrolysis of triglycerides, have been shown in experimental rodent models to alter expression and activity of various drug metabolizing enzymes. The composition of fatty acids present in dietary lipids and their duration of exposure are important considerations when interpreting the effect of oral lipids on the metabolism of drugs.

An understanding of disease states on the blood levels of drugs can help to explain variability between individuals in their response to drug therapy. Lipoprotein levels are subject to chronic elevation in cases of familial HL, in other conditions such as metabolic disorders (diabetes) and obesity, or as a consequence of certain drug therapies. In other cases, lipoprotein levels may be decreased as a consequence of clinical conditions such as malnutrition or drug therapy. Despite the relatively sparse data available in this regard for effects of lipids and lipoproteins on drug metabolism, as reviewed here, there is evidence to support the notion that alterations in the lipid intake or blood levels can impart an effect on drug metabolism at both the presystemic and systemic levels. In this light, further study is warranted to provide more complete insight into the effects of lipid constituents on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs.

---

### Declaration of interest

The authors state no conflict of interest and have received no payment in preparation of this manuscript.

Bibliography

Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest (•) or of considerable interest (••) to readers.

1. Yengi LG, Leung L, Kao J. The evolving role of drug metabolism in drug discovery and development. Pharm Res 2007;24(5):842-58
2. Danielson PB. The cytochrome P450 superfamily: biochemistry, evolution and drug metabolism in humans. Curr Drug Metab 2002;3(6):561-97
3. Pikuleva IA. Cytochrome P450s and cholesterol homeostasis. Pharmacol Ther 2006;112(3):761-73
   • A comprehensive review on the role of P450 in the cholesterol biosynthesis and metabolism.
4. Brocks DR, Wasan KM. The influence of lipids on stereoselective pharmacokinetics of halofantrine: important implications in food-effect studies involving drugs that bind to lipoproteins. J Pharm Sci 2002;91(8):1817-26
5. Brocks DR, Ala S, Aliabadi HM. The effect of increased lipoprotein levels on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine A in the laboratory rat. Biopharm Drug Dispos 2006;27(1):7-16
6. Shayeganpour A, Jun AS, Brocks DR. Pharmacokinetics of Amiodarone in hyperlipidemic and simulated high fat-meal rat models. Biopharm Drug Dispos 2005;26(6):249-57
   • These studies [4-6] demonstrated the impact of oral lipids and plasma lipoproteins on the pharmacokinetics of lipophilic drugs halofantrine, cyclosporine A and amiodarone in rats.
7. Shayeganpour A, Hamdy DA, Brocks DR. Effects of intestinal constituents and lipids on intestinal formation and pharmacokinetics of desethylamiodarone formed from amiodarone. J Pharm Pharmacol 2008;60(12):1625-32
8. Yang CS, Brady JF, Hong JY. Dietary effects on cytochromes P450, xenobiotic metabolism, and toxicity. Faseb J 1992;6(2):737-44
9. Patel JP, Korashy HM, El-Kadi AO, Brocks DR. Effect of bile and lipids on the stereoselective metabolism of halofantrine by rat everted-intestinal sacs. Chirality 2009 [E-pub ahead of print]
   • These in vitro studies [7,9] conducted in everted rat small intestines demonstrate the inhibitory effects of oral lipids on the presystemic metabolism of amiodarone and halofantrine.
10. Porter CJ, Charman WN. Lipid-based formulations for oral administration: opportunities for bioavailability enhancement and lipoprotein targeting of lipophilic drugs. J Recept Signal Transduct Res 2001;21(2-3):215-57
11. Shen H, Howles P, Tso P. From interaction of lipdic vehicles with intestinal epithelial cell membranes to the formation and secretion of chylomicrons. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;50(Suppl 1):S103-25
    • A review with detailed description on assembling and secretion of chylomicrons in the enterocytes after their absorption by small intestine.
12. Lutz M, Bonilla S, Concha J, et al. Effect of dietary oils, cholesterol and antioxidant vitamin supplementation on liver microsomal fluidity and xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in rats. Ann Nutr Metab 1998;42(6):350-9
13. van de Waterbeemd H, Smith DA, Jones BC. Lipophilicity in PK design: methyl, ethyl, futile. J Comput Aided Mol Des 2001;15(3):273-86
14. Hegele RA. Plasma lipoproteins: genetic influences and clinical implications. Nat Rev Genet 2009;10(2):109-21
15. Pollex RL, Hegele RA. Genetic determinants of plasma lipoproteins. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med 2007;4(11):600-9
16. Kris-Etherton PM, Krummel D, Russell ME, et al. The effect of diet on plasma lipids, lipoproteins, and coronary heart disease. J Am Diet Assoc 1988;88(11):1373-400
17. Lichtenstein AH, Kennedy E, Barrier P, et al. Dietary fat consumption and health. Nutr Rev 1998;56(5Pt 2):S3-19; discussion S-28
18. Rakic V, Puddey IB, Dimmitt SB, et al. A controlled trial of the effects of pattern of alcohol intake on serum lipid levels in regular drinkers. Atherosclerosis 1998;137(2):243-52
19. Wanner C, Quaschning T. Dyslipidemia and renal disease: pathogenesis and

Patel & Brocks

clinical consequences. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2001;10(2):195-201
20. Wanner C, Krane V. Uremia-specific alterations in lipid metabolism. Blood Purif 2002;20(5):451-3
21. Panza F, D'Introno A, Colacicco AM, et al. Lipid metabolism in cognitive decline and dementia. Brain Res Rev 2006;51(2):275-92
22. Duntas LH, Wartofsky L. Cardiovascular risk and subclinical hypothyroidism: focus on lipids and new emerging risk factors. What is the evidence? Thyroid 2007;17(11):1075-84
23. Adibhatla RM, Hatcher JF. Altered lipid metabolism in brain injury and disorders. Subcell Biochem 2008;49:241-68
24. Kreisberg RA. Diabetic dyslipidemia. Am J Cardiol 1998;82(12A):67U-73U; discussion 85U-6U
25. Mantel-Teeuwisse AK, Kloosterman JM, Maitland-van der Zee AH, et al. Drug-Induced lipid changes: a review of the unintended effects of some commonly used drugs on serum lipid levels. Drug Saf 2001;24(6):443-56
26. Wasan KM, Brocks DR, Lee SD, et al. Impact of lipoproteins on the biological activity and disposition of hydrophobic drugs: implications for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008;7(1):84-99
   • A recently published review article describing the impact of lipoprotein-drug complex on the pharmacokinetics and biological activity of the hydrophobic drugs.
27. Salter AM, Brindley DN. The biochemistry of lipoproteins. J Inherit Metab Dis 1988;11(Suppl 1):4-17
   • A comprehensive review on lipoproteins and their structures.
28. Chung NS, Wasan KM. Potential role of the low-density lipoprotein receptor family as mediators of cellular drug uptake. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004;56(9):1315-34
   • A review article on how lipoprotein receptors act as mediators in the uptake of lipoprotein bound drug.
29. Ros E. Intestinal absorption of triglyceride and cholesterol. Dietary and pharmacological inhibition to reduce cardiovascular risk. Atherosclerosis 2000;151(2):357-79
30. Storch J, Thumser AE. The fatty acid transport function of fatty acid-binding

The effect of oral lipids and circulating lipoproteins on the metabolism of drugs

proteins. Biochim Biophys Acta
2000;1486(1):28-44

31. Field FJ. Intestinal cholesterol esterase:
intracellular enzyme or contamination of
cytosol by pancreatic enzymes? J Lipid Res
1984;25(4):389-99

32. Nordskog BK, Phan CT, Nutting DF,
Tso P. An examination of the factors
affecting intestinal lymphatic transport
of dietary lipids. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2001;50(1-2):21-44

33. Levy E, Menard D. Developmental aspects
of lipid and lipoprotein synthesis and
secretion in human gut. Microsc Res Tech
2000;49(4):363-73

34. Olson RE. Discovery of the lipoproteins,
their role in fat transport and their
significance as risk factors. J Nutr
1998; 128 (2 Suppl) :439S-43S

35. Kaminsky LS, Zhang QY. The small
intestine as a xenobiotic-metabolizing
organ. Drug Metab Dispos
2003;31(12):1520-5
• A review of xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes expressed in small intestine.

36. Custodio J, Benet LZ. Intestinal transporter
function may be decreased following
high fat ingestion. AAPS J 2005; 7:
Abstract R6234

37. Sachs-Barrable K, Lee SD, Wasan EK, et al.
Enhancing drug absorption using lipids:
a case study presenting the development
and pharmacological evaluation of a
novel lipid-based oral amphotericin B
formulation for the treatment of systemic
fungal infections. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2008;60(6):692-701

38. Barta CA, Sachs-Barrable K, Feng F,
Wasan KM. Effects of monoglycerides on
P-glycoprotein: modulation of the activity
and expression in Caco-2 cell monolayers.
Mol Pharm 2008; 5(5) :863-75
• [36-38] demonstrated the inhibitory
effect of lipids on the activity of
transporters in small intestine.

39. Yoshinari K, Takagi S, Yoshimasa T,
et al. Hepatic CYP3A expression is
attenuated in obese mice fed a high-fat
diet. Pharm Res 2006; 23(6) :1188-200
• This study performed in obese mice fed
a high fat diet shows the inhibitory effect
of oral lipids on expression of hepatic
CYP3A.

40. Caliph SM, Charman WN, Porter CJ.
Effect of short-, medium-, and long-chain
fatty acid-based vehicles on the absolute
oral bioavailability and intestinal lymphatic

transport of halofantrine and assessment of
mass balance in lymph-cannulated and
non-cannulated rats. J Pharm Sci
2000;89(8):1073-84

41. Fernandez S, Rodier JD, Ritter N, et al.
Lipolysis of the semi-solid self-emulsifying
excipient Gelucire 44/14 by digestive
lipases. Biochim Biophys Acta
2008;1781(8):367-75

42. Larsen A, Holm R, Pedersen ML,
Mullertz A. Lipid-based formulations
for danazol containing a digestible
surfactant, Labrafil M2125CS: in vivo
bioavailability and dynamic in vitro
lipolysis. Pharm Res
2008;25(12):2769-77

43. Cuine JF, Charman WN, Pouton CW,
et al. Increasing the proportional content of
surfactant (Cremophor EL) relative to lipid
in self-emulsifying lipid-based formulations
of danazol reduces oral bioavailability in
beagle dogs. Pharm Res 2007; 24(4) :748-57

44. Sek L, Boyd BJ, Charman WN, Porter CJ.
Examination of the impact of a range of
Pluronic surfactants on the in-vitro
solubilisation behaviour and oral
bioavailability of lipidic formulations
of atovaquone. J Pharm Pharmacol
2006;58(6):809-20

45. Brocks DR, Mehvar R. Stereoselectivity
in the pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics of the chiral
antimalarial drugs. Clin Pharmacokinet
2003;42(15):1359-82

46. Gharavi N, Sattari S, Shayeganpour A,
et al. The stereoselective metabolism
of halofantrine to desbutylhalofantrine
in the rat: evidence of tissue-specific
enantioselectivity in microsomal
metabolism. Chirality 2007; 19(1) :22-33

47. Milton KA, Edwards G, Ward SA,
et al. Pharmacokinetics of halofantrine
in man: effects of food and dose size.
Br J Clin Pharmacol 1989; 28(1) :71-7
• In this study, coadministration of
halofantrine with high fat meal to
healthy volunteers resulted in less than
proportional increase in the plasma
AUC values of desbutylhalofantrine
(metabolite of halofantrine) compared
to halofantrine.

48. Humberstone AJ, Porter CJ, Charman WN.
A physicochemical basis for the effect of
food on the absolute oral bioavailability of
halofantrine. J Pharm Sci 1996; 85(5) :525-9
• Another study in which coadministration
of halofantrine with food in beagle dogs

resulted in a less than proportional
increase in AUC of desbutylhalofantrine
in comparison to halofantrine.

49. Trevaskis NL, Porter CJ, Charman WN.
An examination of the interplay between
enterocyte-based metabolism and
lymphatic drug transport in the rat.
Drug Metab Dispos 2006; 34(5) :729-33

50. Brunner LJ, Bai S. Effect of dietary oil
intake on hepatic cytochrome P450 activity
in the rat. J Pharm Sci 2000; 89(8) :1022-7
• In this study, oral administration of
dietary oils (1 ml/(kg day)) for 7 days to
rats resulted in altered expression and
activity of hepatic P450.

51. Yao HT, Chang YW, Lan SJ, et al.
The inhibitory effect of polyunsaturated
fatty acids on human CYP enzymes.
Life Sci 2006; 79(26) :2432-40
• A recent study demonstrating the effect of
saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids
on human CYP isoenzymes.

52. Levy E, Spahis S, Sinnett D, et al. Intestinal
cholesterol transport proteins: an update
and beyond. Curr Opin Lipidol
2007;18(3):310-8

53. Wang E, Casciano CN, Clement RP,
Johnson WW. Cholesterol interaction
with the daunorubicin binding site of
P-glycoprotein. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2000; 276(3) :909-16
• This study shows that cholesterol
is a substrate of P-glycoprotein.

54. Sidhu AB, Uhlemann AC, Valderramos SG,
et al. Decreasing pfmdrl copy number
in plasmodium falciparum malaria
heightens susceptibility to mefloquine,
lumefantrine, halofantrine, quinine,
and artemisinin. J Infect Dis
2006;194(4):528-35

55. Bodin K, Bretillon L, Aden Y, et al.
Antiepileptic drugs increase plasma
levels of 4beta-hydroxycholesterol in
humans: evidence for involvement of
cytochrome P4503A4. J Biol Chem
2001;276(42):38685-9
• This study provides evidence of
cholesterol being metabolized by
CYP3A4.

56. Vassallo P, Trohman RG. Prescribing
amiodarone: an evidence-based review
of clinical indications. JAMA
2007;298(11):1312-22

57. Meng X, Mojaverian P, Doedee M, et al.
Bioavailability of amiodarone tablets
administered with and without food in

healthy subjects. Am J Cardiol 2001;87(4):432-5

• This study shows that food increases the oral bioavailability of amiodarone in healthy humans.

58. Shayeganpour A, El-Kadi AO, Brocks DR. Determination of the enzyme(s) involved in the metabolism of amiodarone in liver and intestine of rat: the contribution of cytochrome P4503A isoforms. Drug Metab Dispos 2006; 34(1): 43-50

59. Elsherbiny ME, El-Kadi AO, Brocks DR. The metabolism of amiodarone by various CYP isoenzymes of human and rat, and the inhibitory influence of ketoconazole. J Pharm Sci 2008; 11(1): 147-59

60. Hirunpanich V, Sato H. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) inhibits saquinavir metabolism in-vitro and enhances its bioavailability in rats. J Pharm Pharmacol 2006; 58(5): 651-8

61. Hirunpanich V, Katagi J, Sethabouppha B, Sato H. Demonstration of docosahexaenoic acid as a bioavailability enhancer for CYP3A substrates: in vitro and in vivo evidence using cyclosporin in rats. Drug Metab Dispos 2006; 34(2): 305-10

62. Hirunpanich V, Murakoso K, Sato H. Inhibitory effect of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) on the intestinal metabolism of midazolam: in vitro and in vivo studies in rats. Int J Pharm 2008; 351(1-2): 133-43

• These recent studies [60-62] showed that a single polyunsaturated fatty acid inhibited the metabolism of CYP3A substrates (saquinavir, cyclosporine A and midazolam).

63. Horrocks LA, Yeo YK. Health benefits of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Pharmacol Res 1999; 40(3): 211-25

64. Noble S, Faulds D. Saquinavir. A review of its pharmacology and clinical potential in the management of HIV infection. Drugs 1996; 52(1): 93-112

65. Gupta SK, Benet LZ. High-fat meals increase the clearance of cyclosporine. Pharm Res 1990; 7(1): 46-8

66. Gupta SK, Manfro RC, Tomlanovich SJ, et al. Effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine in healthy subjects following oral and intravenous administration. J Clin Pharmacol 1990; 30(7): 643-53

• These studies [65, 66] showed that the absorption, clearance and volume of distribution of cyclosporine A is enhanced in the presence of food.

67. Thakkar RR, Wang OL, Zerouga M, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid reverses cyclosporin A-induced changes in membrane structure and function. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000; 1474(2): 183-95

68. Busnach G, Stragliotto E, Minetti E, et al. Effect of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on cyclosporine pharmacokinetics in kidney graft recipients: a randomized placebo-controlled study. J Nephrol 1998; 11(2): 87-93

69. McKenney JM, Swearingen D, Di Spirito M, et al. Study of the pharmacokinetic interaction between simvastatin and prescription omega-3-acid ethyl esters. J Clin Pharmacol 2006; 46(7): 785-91

• A clinical study demonstrating the pharmacokinetic interaction between polyunsaturated fatty acids and simvastatin.

70. Xu L, Liu Y, Wang T, et al. Development and validation of a sensitive and rapid non-aqueous LC-ESI-MS/MS method for measurement of diosgenin in the plasma of normal and hyperlipidemic rats: a comparative study. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2009; 877(14-15): 1530-6

71. Hirunpanich V, Sethabouppha B, Sato H. Inhibitory effects of saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids on the cytochrome P4503A activity in rat liver microsomes. Biol Pharm Bull 2007; 30(8): 1586-8

• In this study, inhibitory effects of saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids on CYP3A in rat liver microsomes were evaluated.

72. Yamazaki H, Shimada T. Effects of arachidonic acid, prostaglandins, retinol, retinoic acid and cholecalciferol on xenobiotic oxidations catalysed by human CYP 450 enzymes. Xenobiotica 1999; 29(3): 231-41

• This study shows that arachidonic acid inhibits human CYP 450 enzymes.

73. Di Augustine RP, Fouts JR. The effects of unsaturated fatty acids on hepatic microsomal drug metabolism and cytochrome P-450. Biochem J 1969; 115(3): 547-54

• One of the first studies showing evidence of inhibitory effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids on activity of CYP enzymes

74. Yoo JS, Ning SM, Pantuck CB, et al. Regulation of hepatic microsomal cytochrome P450IIIE1 level by dietary

Patel & Brocks

lipids and carbohydrates in rats. J Nutr 1991; 121(7): 959-65

• This study is focused on effect of dietary lipids and carbohydrates on CYP2E1 in rat liver microsomes.

75. Yoo JS, Smith TJ, Ning SM, et al. Modulation of the levels of cytochromes P450 in rat liver and lung by dietary lipid. Biochem Pharmacol 1992; 43(12): 2535-42

• A study about effect of dietary lipids on the expression of CYP in rat liver and lung.

76. Rushmore TH, Kong AN. Pharmacogenomics, regulation and signaling pathways of Phase I and II drug metabolizing enzymes. Curr Drug Metab 2002; 3(5): 481-90

77. Li CC, Lii CK, Liu KL, et al. n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids down-regulate cytochrome P-4502B1 gene expression induced by phenobarbital in primary rat hepatocytes. J Nutr Biochem 2006; 17(10): 707-15

78. Li CC, Lii CK, Liu KL, et al. DHA down-regulates phenobarbital-induced cytochrome P4502B1 gene expression in rat primary hepatocytes by attenuating CAR translocation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007; 225(3): 329-36

• [77, 78] focused on inhibitory mechanism of n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on CYP2B1 expression in primary rat hepatocytes.

79. Kamiyama Y, Matsubara T, Yoshinari K, et al. Role of human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha in the expression of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in human hepatocytes assessed by use of small interfering RNA. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2007; 22(4): 287-98

80. Hertz R, Magenheim J, Berman I, Bar-Tana J. Fatty acyl-CoA thioesters are ligands of hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha. Nature 1998; 392(6675): 512-6

81. Patel JP, Fleischer JG, Wasan KM, Brocks DR. The effect of experimental hyperlipidemia on the stereoselective tissue distribution, lipoprotein association and microsomal metabolism of (+/-)-halofantrine. J Pharm Sci 2009; 98(7): 2516-28

• This study is focused on the effect of increased levels of lipoproteins on the tissue distribution and metabolism of halofantrine in rat liver microsomes.

The effect of oral lipids and circulating lipoproteins on the metabolism of drugs

82. Brocks DR, Ramaswamy M, MacInnes AI, Wasan KM. The stereoselective distribution of halofantrine enantiomers within human, dog, and rat plasma lipoproteins. Pharm Res 2000; 17(4): 427-31

83. Sugioka N, Haraya K, Maeda Y, et al. Pharmacokinetics of human immunodeficiency virus protease inhibitor, nelfinavir, in poloxamer 407-induced hyperlipidemic model rats. Biol Pharm Bull 2009; 32(2): 269-75

84. Fukushima K, Shibata M, Mizuhara K, et al. Effect of serum lipids on the pharmacokinetics of atazanavir in hyperlipidemic rats. Biomed Pharmacother 2009 [E-pub ahead of print]

85. Gershkovich P, Hoffman A. Effect of a high-fat meal on absorption and disposition of lipophilic compounds: the importance of degree of association with triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Eur J Pharm Sci 2007; 32(1): 24-32

86. Hussain MM, Strickland DK, Bakillah A. The mammalian low-density lipoprotein receptor family. Annu Rev Nutr 1999; 19: 141-72

87. Havel RJ. Functional activities of hepatic lipoprotein receptors. Annu Rev Physiol 1986; 48: 119-34

88. Shayeganpour A, Korashy H, Patel JP, et al. The impact of experimental hyperlipidemia on the distribution and metabolism of amiodarone in rat. Int J Pharm 2008; 361(1-2): 78-86
   - This study shows that elevated levels of lipoproteins decreased the metabolism of amiodarone by rat liver CYP and the expression of liver 3A1/2 and 2C11.

89. Kim MS, Wang S, Shen Z, et al. Differences in the pharmacokinetics of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists in genetically obese Zucker and sprague-dawley rats: implications of decreased glucuronidation in obese Zucker rats. Drug Metab Dispos 2004; 32(9): 909-14
   - A study comparing pharmacokinetics and metabolism of PPAR agonists in obese hyperlipidemic Zucker rats. Metabolizing and transport protein expressions were decreased in these rats.

90. Xiong H, Yoshinari K, Brouwer KL, Negishi M. Role of constitutive androstane receptor in the in vivo induction of Mrp3 and CYP2B1/2 by phenobarbital. Drug Metab Dispos 2002; 30(8): 918-23

91. Pascussi JM, Gerbal-Chaloin S, Drocourt L, et al. The expression of CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 genes: a tangle of networks of nuclear and steroid receptors. Biochim Biophys Acta 2003; 1619(3): 243-53

92. Kishida T, Muto S, Hayashi M, et al. Strain differences in hepatic cytochrome P4501A and 3A expression between Sprague-Dawley and Wistar rats. J Toxicol Sci 2008; 33(4): 447-57

93. Humberstone AJ, Porter CJ, Edwards GA, Charman WN. Association of halofantrine with postprandially derived plasma lipoproteins decreases its clearance relative to administration in the fasted state. J Pharm Sci 1998; 87(8): 936-42

94. Prueksaritanont T, Koike M, Hoener BA, Benet LZ. Transport and metabolism of cyclosporine in isolated rat hepatocytes.

95. Prueksaritanont T, Hoener BA, Benet LZ. Effects of low-density lipoprotein and ethyl estradiol on cyclosporine metabolism in isolated rat liver perfusions. Drug Metab Dispos 1992; 20(4): 547-52
   - Both these *in vitro* studies [94, 95] demonstrated decreased hepatic uptake and metabolism of cyclosporine on coincubation with lipoprotein.

96. Aliabadi HM, Spencer TJ, Mahdipoor P, et al. Insights into the effects of hyperlipoproteinemia on cyclosporine A biodistribution and relationship to renal function. AAPS J 2006; 8(4): E672-81

97. Chao YS, Windler EE, Chen GC, Havel RJ. Hepatic catabolism of rat and human lipoproteins in rats treated with 17 alpha-ethyl estradiol. J Biol Chem 1979; 254(22): 11360-6

98. Venkatachalam M, Sathe SK. Chemical composition of selected edible nut seeds. J Agric Food Chem 2006; 54(13): 4705-14

Affiliation
Jigar P Patel & Dion R Brocks† PhD
† Author for correspondence
Professor,
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Alberta,
3118 Dentistry/Pharmacy Centre,
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2N8, Canada
Tel: +001 780 492 2953; Fax: +001 780 492 1217;
E-mail: dbrocks@pharmacy.ualberta.ca
