
Bio-Techne is offering Travel Grants
to IMMUNOLOGY 2015™

R&D SYSTEMS
a biotechne brand
>Apply Now

The Journal of
Immunology

B Cell Receptor and BAFF Receptor
Signaling Regulation of B Cell Homeostasis

Wasif N. Khan

J Immunol 2009; 183:3561-3567;
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0800933
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/183/6/3561

This information is current as
of March 4, 2015.

References This article cites 75 articles, 43 of which you can access for free at:
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/183/6/3561.full#ref-list-1

Subscriptions Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at:
http://jimmunol.org/subscriptions

Permissions Submit copyright permission requests at:
http://www.aai.org/ji/copyright.html

Email Alerts Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up at:
http://jimmunol.org/cgi/alerts/etoc

The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by
The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.,
9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994.
Copyright © 2009 by The American Association of
Immunologists, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0022-1767 Online ISSN: 1550-6606.

# B Cell Receptor and BAFF Receptor Signaling Regulation of B Cell Homeostasis¹

## Wasif N. Khan²

B lymphocyte homeostasis depends on tonic and induced BCR signaling and receptors sensitive to trophic factors, such as B cell-activating factor receptor (BAFF-R or BR3) during development and maintenance. This review will discuss growing evidence suggesting that the signaling mechanisms that maintain B cell survival and metabolic fitness during selection at transitional stages and survival after maturation rely on cross-talk between BCR and BR3 signaling. Recent findings have also begun to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying this crosstalk. In this review I also propose a model for regulating the amplitude of BCR signaling by a signal amplification loop downstream of the BCR involving Btk and NF-κB that may facilitate BCR-dependent B cell survival as well as its functional coupling to BR3 for the growth and survival of B lymphocytes. *The Journal of Immunology*, 2009, 183: 3561–3567.

a fundamentally important mechanism to regulate B cell survival. Although critical components and events downstream of the BCR are well known, the emerging mechanisms of BCR signaling through a positive feedback signaling loop and its role in the reinforcement of BR3 function are subjects of intense research and will be discussed in this review.

### BCR signaling in transitional and mature B cell populations

The maturation process of early transitional (T1) into late transitional (T2) and mature B cells is hampered by the presence of self-reactive BCRs that were not selected against in the bone marrow. Clonotypes bearing these BCRs must either be silenced or eliminated. Thus, negative selection of self-reactive immature B cells likely operates at the T1 stage and can occur by multiple mechanisms, including deletion, anergy, or receptor editing upon Ag encounter (5–7). In vivo, strong BCR signals are proposed to drive these processes, whereas transition into a T2 B cell may occur through weak BCR engagements or in a ligand-independent fashion through tonic BCR signaling (8–11). Analysis of the peripheral B cell repertoire, both in mice and humans, supports the model in which the formation of a mature B cell repertoire is also regulated by a positive selection checkpoint that likely occurs at later stages of transitional B cell development (5, 8–14). However, in lieu of an identified ligand or ligands, it remains possible that selection into a mature B cell pool is regulated by developmental stage-specific quantitative and qualitative alterations in BCR signaling. Thus, alterations in BCR signaling during T1 to T2 transition play a critical role in B cell maturation. A hypothesis is that the T1 cell clones that do not undergo apoptosis due to a strong BCR signal increase basal or tonic BCR signaling by a developmentally regulated default pathway. These T1 cells gradually increase the expression of BR3 and BCR coreceptors and perhaps intracellular signaling proteins. Thus, upon differentiation, T2 cells display enhanced expression of CD19, CD21, and BR3 (Ref. 15 and data not shown). This increases BCR signaling competence and BAFF-dependent survival potential of T2 relative to T1 B cells as was recently suggested (4). Regardless of the mechanism of selection, a failure to implement transitional B cell checkpoints

---

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136

Received for publication December 4, 2008. Accepted for publication June 25, 2009.

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked *advertisement* in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

¹ This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health AI060729 (to W.N.K.).

² Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Wasif N. Khan, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine, 1600 Northwest Tenth Avenue,

www.jimmunol.org/cgi/doi/10.4049/jimmunol.0800933

3147A Rosenstiel Medical Science Building, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136. E-mail address: wnkhan@med.miami.edu

³ Abbreviations used in this paper: BAFF, B cell-activating factor; BR3, BAFF receptor; Btk, Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; DAG, diacylglycerol; Fo, follicular; int, intermediate; IKK, IkB kinase; IP₃, inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate; LSM, lipid second messenger; MZ, marginal zone; PKC, protein kinase C; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; T1, early transitional type 1 (B cell); T2, late transitional type 2 (B cell); TACI, transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating/cyclophilin ligand-interacting protein.

Copyright © 2009 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/09/$2.00

BRIEF REVIEWS: BCR/BR3 REGULATION OF B CELL BIOLOGY

Splenic transitional B cells

Mature B cells

Bone  
Marrow  
Immature B  

T1  

T2  

T2-preMZ  

= BCR  

= BAFF-R or BR3  

FoBI  

FoBI  

MZB  

FIGURE 1. A model of peripheral B cell development. Immature B cells are generated from precursor B cells in the bone marrow. Upon surface expression of IgM (BCR), the immature B cells leave the bone marrow and emigrate to the spleen as T1 B cells. In the spleen, T1 B cells develop into T2 B cells, which in turn are thought to serve as the precursor to either subsequent transitional (T2-preMZ) or mature FoBI and FoBII B cells. The T2-preMZ cells likely give rise to MZ B cells. An analogous pathway of B cell maturation has been recently described to exist in the bone marrow (19, 20).

is associated with human autoimmune diseases such as SLE, as reflected by a disproportionate increase in T1 cells in SLE patients (16, 17).

The cellular and molecular basis by which checkpoints during transitional to mature B cell development is implemented is the subject of intensive research. Based on currently available information, there are at least three subpopulations of transitional B cells; T1 (AA4⁺IgMhighIgD⁻CD23⁻), T2 (AA4⁺IgMhighIgDhigh CD23⁺CD21int; where “int” is intermediate), and T2- preMZ (AA4⁺IgMhighIgD⁻CD23⁺CD21high) (1, 13, 15, 18–21) before their selection into mature Fo or MZ B cells (Fig. 1). According to this scheme, T1 B cells develop into T2 B cells, which in turn are thought to serve as the precursor to either subsequent transitional (T2-preMZ) or mature follicular (FoBI: IgMintIgDhighCD23⁺CD21int; FoBII: IgMhighIgDhighCD23⁺CD21int) B cells (4, 19, 20). The T2-preMZ cells likely give rise to MZ B cells (4, 19, 20).

The distinct biological consequences in T1 and T2 B cells to BCR engagement do suggest differences in the nature of intracellular signaling, the downstream targets, or both in the two transitional B cell subpopulations (22–24). Consistently, recent investigations have shed some light on potential differences in the intracellular signaling responses within transitional B cell populations to BCR engagement. Furthermore, analyses of the B cells in genetic models of defective BCR signaling suggest stage-specific functions for some of the signaling components. However, the biochemical evidence of a stage-specific function

for BCR signaling is largely lacking. Our proteomics analysis of biochemically enriched lipid rafts from T1 and T2 cells after BCR cross-linking did not reveal any major qualitative differences among the known signaling components (J. Llanes and W. N. Khan, unpublished results). Thus, quantitative differences in BCR signaling may determine distinct biological outcomes within the transitional B cell subpopulations. Conceptually, quantitative differences in the signaling programs can implement distinct thresholds or strengths of BCR signaling, which is considered to be the major mechanism of B cell fate decisions. Consistent with this, potential positive regulatory mechanisms gain strength in BCR signaling as T1 cells progress through T2 and mature B cell stages (discussed below).

Because of the significance of phosphoinositide metabolism in BCR signaling and control of B cell biological responses, others and we have investigated BCR induction of inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (IP₃) and diacylglycerol (DAG) lipid second messengers (LSMs) in immature or transitional B cell subsets (15, 25–27). We found that BCR stimulation in vitro induced the accumulation of DAG and IP₃ in T2 and mature Fo B cells, but not in T1 or Btk-deficient B cells (15, 25, 26). However, the reduced accumulation of LSM metabolism in T1 relative to T2 B cells does not seem to affect the NF-κB signaling pathway, at least at early time points after BCR stimulation (28–30). Consistent with this hypothesis T1, T2, and mature B cell populations can activate IkB kinase (IKK) and induce degradation of IkBa, processes that require the activation of

protein kinase C (PKC) β by DAG and Ca²⁺. In addition, NF-κB DNA binding is also comparable among T1, T2, and mature B cell populations at early time points (Refs. 28 and 31 and unpublished data). Despite NF-κB activation, genes encoding antiapoptotic A1 and Bcl-xL proteins are not induced in T1 but are induced in T2 and mature B cells, suggesting the existence of a T1 stage-specific gene suppression mechanism that selectively affects gene expression in response to BCR but not to TLR stimulation (28, 31).

The comparable activation of NF-κB in transitional and mature B cell subsets may be explained by the complex regulation of LSMs after their formation, which is differentially regulated in T1 vs more mature B cells. For example, despite reduced BCR-induced levels of IP₃, T1 cells can however increase intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca²⁺]i) in response to BCR engagement (15, 32). This conflict could possibly be explained by the more rapid breakdown of DAG and the formation of higher order inositol phosphates from IP₃ in T1 than in T2 and mature B cells by the rapid action of DAG kinases and IP₃ kinases (15, 32–35). Whether the transient levels of DAG and IP₃ are responsible for activating NF-κB in response to BCR remains to be determined.

We recently described how, in addition to the classical NF-κB activation discussed above, a second phase of NF-κB activation occurs in B cells after long-term BCR stimulation via transcriptional activation of c-rel gene and c-Rel protein synthesis (28). This long-term c-Rel induction coincides with increased levels of antiapoptotic genes as well as up-regulation of BR3 and its substrate, p100 (NF-κB2), in T2 and mature B cells. Thus, in T2 and mature B cells two distinct NF-κB-dependent mechanisms control B cell survival; the initial activation of the classical NF-κB pathway followed by the long-term induction of c-Rel. The mechanisms that control c-Rel nuclear activity independently of the classical NF-κB pathway remain unknown. Together, these two phases of gene regulation provide sufficient levels of antiapoptotic proteins for extended periods for NF-κB to be effective as an antiapoptotic transcription factor. Consistently, the promoter regions of antiapoptotic genes associated with B cell survival, A1 and Bcl-xL, are direct targets of the c-Rel subunit of NF-κB. We propose that sustained induction of c-Rel in T2 and mature B cells is a critical regulator of differential survival of T1 and T2 B cells (28).

**Btk and NF-κB positive autoregulatory loop downstream of BCR**

Btk and the transcription factor NF-κB are central in the regulation of B cell apoptosis (3, 4, 30, 36–38). Recent evidence suggests that Btk levels change with BCR stimulation, which may regulate the strength and extent of BCR signaling. Intracellular levels of Btk may play an important role in a quantitative increase in BCR signaling with B cell maturation. Nisitani et al. showed that Btk protein levels in splenic B cells are maximally increased (7- to 10-fold) within 4 h of BCR stimulation by a posttranscriptional mechanism involving Btk and PI3K (39). This up-regulation also occurs in vivo after T cell-dependent or T cell-independent immunization. The in vivo studies suggested that, in addition to BCR signaling, Btk induction also involves other receptors in B cells. Furthermore, NF-κB activation contributes to Btk gene transcription, suggesting that the BCR/Btk signaling axis constitutes a positive autoregulatory loop (40). Because genetic evidence indicates that B cell dependence on NF-κB increases with maturation, it stands to reason

that BCR signaling via Btk would lead to an increase in intracellular levels of Btk and increased activation of its signaling pathways, including NF-κB. If this is true, the Btk-NF-κB positive feedback loop could lead to maturation of the BCR signaling apparatus and a quantitative increase in BCR signaling potential as transitional B cells develop into mature B cells. This is significant because Btk dosage is a genetically defined parameter in mediating BCR function, and Btk levels are rate limiting in the transmission of certain BCR signal transduction pathways, including c-Rel induction (28, 41). Indeed, the ability to activate NF-κB in a sustained manner, particularly the c-Rel NF-κB subunit, increases with B cell maturation (28). In contrast to T1 cells, BCR-induced c-Rel signaling in T2 and mature B cells regulates the expression and function of BR3, enhancing and reinforcing pro-survival signaling under BR3 control (28, 42, 43).

**Unique contributions of sustained c-Rel activation to B cell survival**

It is notable that NF-κB-responsive antiapoptotic genes, including Bcl-xL and A1, which are induced in T2 and mature Fo B cells are directly controlled by the c-Rel subunit of NF-κB (44–46). A critical role for c-Rel in B cell survival was also documented in experiments silencing the c-Rel gene in tumor B cell lines (47). Thus, we investigated the possibility that T1 B cells may be unable to activate c-Rel to the extent and/or duration necessary to induce an antiapoptotic program and, thus, render them sensitive to BCR-induced apoptosis. This model would also predict that apoptosis-resistant T2 and mature B cells are capable of long-term c-Rel response. Consistent with this model, BCR signaling in mature B cells induced long-term nuclear expression of c-Rel, which coincided with the stable expression of antiapoptotic genes. A similar c-Rel response was also observed in T2 and mature Fo B cells in response to BCR stimulation, whereas T1 cells failed to do so (28). This long-term c-Rel expression required de novo c-Rel synthesis in a Btk-dependent manner. Like Btk-deficient B cells, T1 cells also failed to up-regulate sustained c-Rel expression, whereas sustained c-Rel expression was evident in T2 cells (28). A requirement for Btk, and by inference DAG and IP₃, in BCR-induced de novo c-Rel synthesis suggests the involvement of NF-AT and NF-κB in c-Rel gene transcription. Binding sites for both transcription factors have been identified in the c-Rel promoter; however, it is controversial as to which sites contribute to constitutive vs Ag receptor-induced c-Rel gene expression (48, 49). Because basal c-Rel expression is regulated by PI3K, the BCR/PI3K pathway likely forms a BCR signaling module that regulates resting B cell survival, whereas Btk regulates the expression of c-Rel in response to active BCR signaling (28, 50). Thus, the BCR/Btk signaling module would be more relevant in BCR-induced B cell survival, which may include positive selection of T2 cells and activation of mature B cells. We propose that the ability to sustain nuclear c-Rel by the two BCR signaling modules is of paramount importance in the apoptotic vs survival response of B cells at the resting state and to BCR engagement.

**Functional coupling of BCR and BR3**

It is clear from the above discussion that BCR signaling differentially controls survival in T1 and T2 cells and thus regulates

3564

BRIEF REVIEWS: BCR/BR3 REGULATION OF B CELL BIOLOGY

A

B

FIGURE 2. Schematic of BCR signal amplification and BCR reinforcement of BR3 survival signaling. A, BCR signaling leads to activation of the classical NF-κB pathway via Btk-dependent mechanisms. BCR signaling increases the levels of Btk protein via posttranscriptional as well as NF-κB-mediated transcriptional up-regulation of the gene encoding Btk (40). In this model, successive increases of Btk and the NF-κB positive autoregulatory loop would lead to a quantitative increase in the BCR signaling potential in T2 and mature B cells that do not undergo rapid apoptosis. Additionally, enhanced and stable BCR signaling produces long-term nuclear expression of c-Rel and its target antiapoptotic genes (e.g., AI and Bcl-xL) promote B cell survival. The sustained c-Rel response also results in expression of BR3 and its substrate, p100, enhancing and re-enforcing BR3 survival signaling through activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway. B, BAFF engagement with BR3 also activates the classical NF-κB pathway via a Btk-dependent mechanism, resulting in an increase in BR3 and p100 (67). This affords BR3 with self-sufficiency in an autoregulatory feedback mechanism for low-level sustained activation of both NF-κB pathways, further strengthening BR3-mediated B cell survival.

the entrance of select B cell clones into the mature B cell compartment based on BCR specificities and/or stage-specific alterations in the strength of BCR signaling (5, 10, 13, 14). Evidence suggests that trophic or environmental signals influence these outcomes significantly, and inappropriate effects may lead to the development of autoimmune diseases (51–53). BAFF, also known as TNFSF13B, BLys, TALL-1, THANK, or zTNF4, is the most critical of these trophic factors affecting the regulation of B cell maturation and the subsequent maintenance of mature B cells (2, 54). Discovery of the BAFF/BR3 system has reshaped our thinking of how the size of the B lymphocyte compartment is managed. BAFF-transgenic mice have greatly increased numbers of peripheral B cells as well as serum Abs. With age, they develop SLE-like autoimmune disease (55–57). Consistent with this, overproduction of BAFF has been shown to be associated with human autoimmune diseases and B cell malignancies. Emerging evidence suggests that BR3 is as critical for B cell survival as the BCR, and that BCR and BR3 are functionally linked in the regulation of B cell survival (28, 43, 54).

Three TNF receptors are known to bind BAFF: the B cell maturation Ag (BCMA), a transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating/cyclophilin ligand-interacting protein (TACI), and BR3 (54). BR3 and TACI are expressed on all B cell subsets (lowest level on T1 B cells, highest levels on T2 and MZ B cells), whereas BCMA is expressed primarily on plasma cells and, hence, is dispensable for the development of primary B cell repertoire (58). Targeted gene deletion of BR3 profoundly reduces the numbers of transitional as well as mature B cells in the spleen; however, all subpopulations are detected (59, 60). A naturally occurring mutation (A/WySnJ) in the BR3 cytoplasmic tail results in a similar B cell deficiency (61, 62). Consistent with this, treatment of BR3-deficient mice with BAFF does not increase mature splenic B cells (58). In contrast, mice deficient for TACI have increased splenic B cells and serum Igs, which was suggested to mean a potential negative regulatory role for TACI in B cell survival (63). However, a simpler explanation might be that the lack of TACI allows more circulating BAFF to become available, which can bind to BR3 and increase B cell numbers.

Recent reports demonstrate that BCR regulates the expression of BR3 (42). Thus, BCR may also control B cell survival and sensitivity to environmental cues indirectly via this prosurvival receptor (28, 43, 54). Others and we have examined how BCR signaling influences BR3 expression and function. We found that BCR-induced expression of BR3 requires Btk and sustained c-Rel activation. Thus, Btk and c-Rel are not only important in the regulation of B cell survival directly by inducing the expression of antiapoptotic genes but also indirectly via increasing the expression and function of BR3 (28, 43). It is interesting to note that Btk-deficient mice (Fig. 2A) have a specific deficiency of FoBI cells, presumably due to its active role in the positive selection, whereas MZ B cells are present. One interpretation is that, in the absence of Btk, BCR generates weaker signals that favor the development of MZ B cells (19, 20). The other but not mutually exclusive possibility is that circulating BAFF is increased due to reduced Fo BI cells in Btk-deficient mice. The increased BAFF may support MZ B cell survival in this relatively B lymphopenic environment. Consistent with this idea, preferential expansion of MZ B cells has been observed in other lymphopenic mice.

Like BCR, BR3 is also biochemically linked to NF-κB (64, 65). However, unlike BCR, BR3 has been shown to activate both the classical and alternative NF-κB pathways (Fig. 2B). Among the three BAFF receptors, only BR3 activates the alternative NF-κB pathway. Also, the alternative pathway is more robustly activated than the classical NF-κB pathway by BR3 signaling (64, 66, 67). The activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway involves NF-κB-inducing kinase and activation of IKKα, which phosphorylates p100 and leads to its processing into p52 (64, 65). The observation that primary B cells lacking p50 or p52 (Fig. 2) display defective in vitro survival in the presence of soluble BAFF

The Journal of Immunology

FIGURE 3. Schematic of BAFF receptor (BR3) survival signaling. Interaction of BR3 with BAFF leads to activation of the PI3K/Akt, ERK, and Pim-2 signaling pathways via IKKα, apparently via mechanisms independent of transcriptional activity of the NF-κB pathway. Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and PKCβ are also implicated in Akt activation in response to BAFF (54). Following activation, Akt targets the phosphorylation and cytoplasmic sequestration of the Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a, which, when in the nucleus, targets the expression of the proapoptotic gene Bim. ERK activity further reduces cellular levels of the Bim protein by phosphorylation and degradation. Concomitantly, Akt induces transcriptional induction of the antiapoptotic gene Mcl-1 and blocks the inhibition of protein translation by 4E-BP1, including that of the Mcl-1 protein. Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and Pim-2 signaling implements this inhibition of 4E-BP1 in response to BAFF. In addition to skewing the balance toward prevalence of antiapoptotic proteins, Akt plays a critical role in cellular growth and anabolism via the rapamycin-sensitive mTOR pathway. Another mechanism through which BAFF interaction with BR3 prevents cell death is by blocking the entry of proapoptotic PKCδ to the nucleus. Thus, BAFF regulates B cell survival and growth by preventing apoptosis at multiple levels and by mobilizing a major cellular metabolic pathway involving mTOR under Akt control (71).

suggests that NF-κB is at least partially responsible for BAFF-mediated B cell survival and that both the classical and alternative pathways are involved in this process (64, 66–68). Recently a novel mode of NF-κB-dependent gene expression by BR3 was discovered. In this unexpected mechanism, BR3 associates with IKKβ/c-Rel and histone H3 in the nucleus where IKKβ phosphorylates histone H3 and regulates gene expression (69).

What is the significance of activating multiple NF-κB pathways? A hypothesis would be that the quantity and quality of the specific NF-κB DNA binding subunits that translocate to the nucleus and activate genes may be critically important in determining the distinct biological outcomes in different transitional and mature B cell populations. Because BCR signaling is at the center of all B cell selection processes, the regulation and extent of BCR signaling to NF-κB (and other signaling pathways) in B cells undergoing negative selection, positive selection, or maintenance must be clearly different and may influence NF-κB subunit composition and the extent of DNA binding to distinct target genes, including BR3. This delicate regulation combined with BR3-mediated activation of primarily the alternative NF-κB pathway may produce specific responses in distinct B cell populations.

Yet another mechanism that promotes the intersection of BCR with BR3 signaling and strengthens their functional coupling is BCR regulation of the BR3 substrate, p100 (Fig. 2).

BAFF interaction with BR3 activates the alternative NF-κB pathway, which involves IKKα-mediated phosphorylation and the subsequent proteolytic processing of p100 (NF-κB2) to p52, which preferentially dimerizes with RelB, and p52/RelB translocate to the nucleus (64, 65). Because proteolysis is an irreversible process, conversion to p52 results in the elimination of the precursor protein p100; therefore, sustained activation of the alternative pathway must require continuous production of p100. Consistent with this model, recent studies show that BCR tonic and induced signaling produces de novo synthesis of p100 (28, 43). p100 is regulated at the transcriptional level via Btk- and c-Rel-dependent mechanisms (28). These results suggest that one mechanism for providing a p100 supply for the sustained activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway involves BCR signaling through the classical NF-κB pathway and c-Rel (28). Indeed, loss of p50 results in a decrease in BCR-induced expression of BR3 as well as p100 (67).

In addition to the significance of concomitant BCR and BR3 signaling in B cell development, independent contribution of these receptors is evident by genetic studies with mice partially defective in both BCR (btk−/−) and BR3 (A/WySnJ) signaling; they display a complete block at the T1 stage with the absence of all peripheral B cells (K. L. Hoek, G. Carlesso, and W. N. Khan, manuscript in preparation). The functional link between BCR and BR3 also has ramifications for the development of B cell pathologies, including autoimmunity and the survival of B cell lymphomas. This suggests that when BCR signaling is perturbed, deregulation would influence BR3 expression and function and, thus, inappropriate B cell survival. Because TLRs are potent activators of the classical NF-κB pathway, they also induce the expression of BR3 and its downstream substrate, p100 (G. Carlesso, K. L. Hoek, and W. N. Khan, unpublished data), thus facilitating activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway by BR3. This regulation of BR3 expression and function raises the possibility that TLR engagement in B cells in an inappropriate context may lead to the development of autoimmune conditions, breakdown in B cell tolerance, or development of B cell lymphomas.

In addition to receiving re-enforcement from the BCR-induced expression of p100, BR3 is also self-sufficient in maintaining the signaling loop between classical and alternative NF-κB pathways (66, 67). Several observations are consistent with this possibility. First, BR3 is also capable of activating the classical NF-κB pathway in a Btk- and phospholipase C-γ2-dependent manner and proceeds via the phosphorylation of IKKβ and degradation of IκBa (67, 70). Furthermore, BR3 engagement with BAFF up-regulated transcriptional activation of the genes encoding BR3, as well as p100 and RelB. Unlike BCR, however, BR3 required p50/RelA heterodimers but did not require c-Rel for these processes. Although the survival of resting mature B cells is dependent on BCR signaling, these findings suggest that BR3 has the potential to maintain long-term activity of the alternative NF-κB pathway through activation of the classical NF-κB pathway. This model is consistent with the findings that Btk- or p50-deficient B cells survive poorly relative to wild-type controls in in vitro cultures containing BAFF (66, 67).

Although this review is focused on the NF-κB aspect of BR3 signaling, several other mechanisms of BR3-mediated B cell survival have been described that are independent of NF-κB

transcriptional activity (Fig. 3; 71). These include down-regulation of the proapoptotic molecule Bim and up-regulation of Mcl-1 via the ERK and Akt pathways, which are activated by a novel IKKα function (72–74). BAFF-induced activation of Akt/mTOR and Pim-2 signaling pathways are essential for the regulation of B cell growth and overall metabolic fitness (75). Akt is activated by PKCβ and phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 targeting of Ser<sup>473</sup> and Thr<sup>308</sup> downstream of PI3K in response to BAFF (74, 75). The implications of the levels of BR3 discussed in this review should be applicable to the NF-κB-independent mechanisms as well.

# Conclusions

The rules that govern B cell responses to BCR and BR3 signaling are context dependent with the stage of B cell development. Multiple outcomes, including apoptosis, survival, growth, differentiation, and proliferation in B cells, take place following engagement of these receptors. Although mechanisms regulating signal transduction pathways downstream of BCR have been elucidated, the mechanisms of BR3 signaling as well as the mechanisms of integrated BCR and BR3 signaling are currently the focus of intensive research. The current understanding is that T1 cells in the spleen die upon BCR engagement due to a failure to activate transcription factors or transcription of antiapoptotic genes. Potential positive selection of T2 cells is regulated by gain of resistance to BCR-induced apoptosis. This change from T1 to T2 cells is accompanied by an ability to induce sustained activation of c-Rel and the stable expression of antiapoptotic genes. This mode of c-Rel activation also endows T2 cells with the ability to grow and survive in response to BAFF by regulating the expression of BR3 and its substrate p100 and hence, re-enforcing the long-term activation of the alternative NF-κB pathway. These survival characteristics are retained after maturation in Fo B cells. However, in the resting state PI3K-mediated c-Rel expression may regulate B cell survival. Thus, therapeutic intervention of the positive signal amplification loop in BCR-induced Btk expression, its positive consequences on c-Rel activation, and BCR re-enforcement of the growth and survival function of BR3 may provide potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and B cell lymphomas.

# Acknowledgments

I thank Dr. Emily S. Clark for careful reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions and Jacqueline A. Wright for helpful discussions.

# Disclosures

The authors have no financial conflict of interest.

# References

1. Su, T. T., B. Guo, B. Wei, J. Braun, and D. J. Rawlings. 2004. Signaling in transitional type 2 B cells is critical for peripheral B-cell development. *Immunol. Rev.* 197: 161–178.
2. Stadanlick, J. E., and M. P. Cancro. 2008. BAFF and the plasticity of peripheral B cell tolerance. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 20: 158–161.
3. Gerondakis, S., and A. Strasser. 2003. The role of Rel/NF-κB transcription factors in B lymphocyte survival. *Semin. Immunol.* 15: 159–166.
4. Sen, R. 2006. Control of B lymphocyte apoptosis by the transcription factor NF-κB. *Immunity* 25: 871–883.
5. Cyster, J. G., J. I. Healy, K. Kishihara, T. W. Mak, M. L. Thomas, and C. C. Goodnow. 1996. Regulation of B-lymphocyte negative and positive selection by tyrosine phosphatase CD45. *Nature* 381: 325–328.
6. Gay, D., T. Saunders, S. Camper, and M. Weigert. 1993. Receptor editing: an approach by autoreactive B cells to escape tolerance. *J. Exp. Med.* 177: 999–1008.
7. Melamed, D., R. J. Benschop, J. C. Cambier, and D. Nemazee. 1998. Developmental regulation of B lymphocyte immune tolerance compartmentalizes clonal selection from receptor selection. *Cell* 92: 173–182.
8. Bannish, G., E. M. Fuentes-Panana, J. C. Cambier, W. S. Pear, and J. G. Monroe. 2001. Ligand-independent signaling functions for the B lymphocyte antigen receptor and their role in positive selection during B lymphopoiesis. *J. Exp. Med.* 194: 1583–1596.
9. Cancro, M. P., and J. F. Kearney. 2004. B cell positive selection: road map to the primary repertoire? *J. Immunol.* 173: 15–19.
10. Gu, H., D. Tarlinton, W. Muller, K. Rajewsky, and I. Forster. 1991. Most peripheral B cells in mice are ligand selected. *J. Exp. Med.* 173: 1357–1371.
11. Kraus, M., M. B. Alimzhanov, N. Rajewsky, and K. Rajewsky. 2004. Survival of resting mature B lymphocytes depends on BCR signaling via the Igα/β heterodimer. *Cell* 117: 787–800.
12. Levine, M. H., A. M. Haberman, D. B. Sant’Angelo, L. G. Hannum, M. P. Cancro, C. A. Janeway, Jr., and M. J. Shlomchik. 2000. A B-cell receptor-specific selection step governs immature to mature B cell differentiation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97: 2743–2748.
13. Meyer-Bahlburg, A., S. F. Andrews, K. O. Yu, S. A. Porcelli, and D. J. Rawlings. 2008. Characterization of a late transitional B cell population highly sensitive to BAFF-mediated homeostatic proliferation. *J. Exp. Med.* 205: 155–168.
14. Wardemann, H., S. Yurasov, A. Schaefer, J. W. Young, E. Meffre, and M. C. Nussenzweig. 2003. Predominant autoantibody production by early human B cell precursors. *Science* 301: 1374–1377.
15. Hoek, K. L., P. Antony, J. Lowe, N. Shinners, B. Sarmah, S. R. Wente, D. Wang, R. M. Gerstein, and W. N. Khan. 2006. Transitional B cell fate is associated with developmental stage-specific regulation of diacylglycerol and calcium signaling upon B cell receptor engagement. *J. Immunol.* 177: 5405–5413.
16. Sims, G. P., R. Ettinger, Y. Shirota, C. H. Yarboro, G. G. Illei, and P. E. Lipsky. 2005. Identification and characterization of circulating human transitional B cells. *Blood* 105: 4390–4398.
17. Sutter, J. A., J. Kwan-Morley, J. Dunham, Y. Z. Du, M. Kamoun, D. Albert, R. A. Eisenberg, and E. T. Luning Prak. 2008. A longitudinal analysis of SLE patients treated with rituximab (anti-CD20): factors associated with B lymphocyte recovery. *Clin. Immunol.* 126: 282–290.
18. Allman, D., R. C. Lindsley, W. DeMuth, K. Rudd, S. A. Shinton, and R. R. Hardy. 2001. Resolution of three nonproliferative immature splenic B cell subsets reveals multiple selection points during peripheral B cell maturation. *J. Immunol.* 167: 6834–6840.
19. Allman, D., and S. Pillai. 2008. Peripheral B cell subsets. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 20: 149–157.
20. Cariappa, A., C. Boboila, S. T. Moran, H. Liu, H. N. Shi, and S. Pillai. 2007. The recirculating B cell pool contains two functionally distinct, long-lived, posttransitional, follicular B cell populations. *J. Immunol.* 179: 2270–2281.
21. Loder, F., B. Mutschler, R. J. Ray, C. J. Paige, P. Sideras, R. Torres, M. C. Lamers, and R. Carsetti. 1999. B cell development in the spleen takes place in discrete steps and is determined by the quality of B cell receptor-derived signals. *J. Exp. Med.* 190: 75–89.
22. Weiss, A., and J. C. Cambier. 2004. Lymphocyte activation. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 16: 285–287.
23. Kurosaki, T. 2003. Checks and balances on developing B cells. *Nat Immunol.* 4: 13–15.
24. Kurosaki, T. 2000. Functional dissection of BCR signaling pathways. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 12: 276–281.
25. Benschop, R. J., K. Aviszus, X. Zhang, T. Manser, J. C. Cambier, and L. J. Wysocki. 2001. Activation and anergy in bone marrow B cells of a novel immunoglobulin transgenic mouse that is both hapten specific and autoreactive. *Immunity* 14: 33–43.
26. Buhl, A. M., C. M. Pleiman, R. C. Rickert, and J. C. Cambier. 1997. Qualitative regulation of B cell antigen receptor signaling by CD19: selective requirement for PI3-kinase activation, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate production and Ca2<sup>+</sup> mobilization. *J. Exp. Med.* 186: 1897–1910.
27. King, L. B., A. Norvell, and J. G. Monroe. 1999. Antigen receptor-induced signal transduction imbalances associated with the negative selection of immature B cells. *J. Immunol.* 162: 2655–2662.
28. Castro, I., J. A. Wright, B. Damdinsuren, K. L. Hoek, G. Carlesso, N. P. Shinners, R. M. Gerstein, R. T. Woodland, R. Sen, and W. N. Khan. 2009. B cell receptor-mediated sustained c-Rel activation facilitates late transitional B cell survival through control of B cell activating factor receptor and NF-κB2. *J. Immunol.* 182: 7729–7737.
29. Petro, J. B., and W. N. Khan. 2001. Phospholipase C-γ2 couples Bruton’s tyrosine kinase to the NF-[kappa]B signaling pathway in B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276: 1715–1719.
30. Petro, J. B., S. M. Rahman, D. W. Ballard, and W. N. Khan. 2000. Bruton’s tyrosine kinase is required for activation of IkB kinase and nuclear factor κB in response to B cell receptor engagement. *J. Exp. Med.* 191: 1745–1754.
31. Andrews, S. F., and D. J. Rawlings. 2009. Transitional B cells exhibit a B cell receptor-specific nuclear defect in gene transcription. *J. Immunol.* 182: 2868–2878.
32. Benschop, R. J., E. Brandl, A. C. Chan, and J. C. Cambier. 2001. Unique signaling properties of B cell antigen receptor in mature and immature B cells: implications for tolerance and activation. *J. Immunol.* 167: 4172–4179.
33. Buhl, A. M., D. Nemazee, J. C. Cambier, R. Rickert, and M. Hertz. 2000. B-cell antigen receptor competence regulates B-lymphocyte selection and survival. *Immunol. Rev.* 176: 141–153.
34. Luo, B., S. M. Prescott, and M. K. Topham. 2004. Diacylglycerol kinase zeta regulates phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase Iα by a novel mechanism. *Cell. Signal.* 16: 891–897.
35. Miller, A. T., P. P. Chamberlain, and M. P. Cooke. 2008. Beyond IP3: roles for higher order inositol phosphates in immune cell signaling. *Cell Cycle* 7: 463–467.
36. Anderson, J. S., M. Teutsch, Z. Dong, and H. H. Wortis. 1996. An essential role for Bruton’s [corrected] tyrosine kinase in the regulation of B-cell apoptosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93: 10966–10971.

37. Petro, J. B., I. Castro, J. Lowe, and W. N. Khan. 2002. Bruton’s tyrosine kinase targets NF-κB to the Bcl-x promoter via a mechanism involving phospholipase C-γ2 following B cell antigen receptor engagement. *FEBS Lett.* 532: 57–60.

38. Petro, J. B., R. M. Gerstein, J. Lowe, R. S. Carter, N. Shinners, and W. N. Khan. 2002. Transitional type 1 and 2 B lymphocyte subsets are differentially responsive to antigen receptor signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277: 48009–48019.

39. Nisitani, S., A. B. Satterthwaite, K. Akashi, I. L. Weissman, O. N. Witte, and M. I. Wahl. 2000. Posttranscriptional regulation of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase expression in antigen receptor-stimulated splenic B cells. [Published erratum appears in 2000 *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97: 5679]. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97: 2737–2742.

40. Yu, L., A. J. Mohamed, O. E. Simonson, L. Vargas, K. E. Blomberg, B. Bjorkstrand, H. J. Arteaga, B. F. Nore, and C. I. Smith. 2008. Proteasome-dependent autoregulation of Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk) promoter via NF-κB. *Blood* 111: 4617–4626.

41. Satterthwaite, A. B., H. Cheroutre, W. N. Khan, P. Sideras, and O. N. Witte. 1997. Btk dosage determines sensitivity to B cell antigen receptor cross-linking. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94: 13152–13157.

42. Smith, S. H., and M. P. Cancro. 2003. Cutting edge: B cell receptor signals regulate BLyS receptor levels in mature B cells and their immediate progenitors. *J. Immunol.* 170: 5820–5823.

43. Stadanlick, J. E., M. Kaileh, F. G. Karnell, J. L. Scholz, J. P. Miller, W. J. Quinn, III, R. J. Brezski, L. S. Treml, K. A. Jordan, J. G. Monroe, et al. 2008. Tonic B cell antigen receptor signals supply an NF-κB substrate for prosurvival BLyS signaling. *Nat Immunol.* 9: 1379–1387.

44. Pohl, T., R. Gugasyan, R. J. Grumont, A. Strasser, D. Metcalf, D. Tarlinton, W. Sha, D. Baltimore, and S. Gerondakis. 2002. The combined absence of NF-κB1 and c-Rel reveals that overlapping roles for these transcription factors in the B cell lineage are restricted to the activation and function of mature cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99: 4514–4519.

45. Feng, B., S. Cheng, C. Y. Hsia, L. B. King, J. G. Monroe, and H. C. Liou. 2004. NF-κB inducible genes BCL-X and cyclin E promote immature B-cell proliferation and survival. *Cell. Immunol.* 232: 9–20.

46. Tumang, J. R., A. Owyang, S. Andjelic, Z. Jin, R. R. Hardy, M. L. Liou, and H. C. Liou. 1998. c-Rel is essential for B lymphocyte survival and cell cycle progression. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 28: 4299–4312.

47. Tian, W., and H. C. Liou. 2009. RNAi-mediated c-Rel silencing leads to apoptosis of B cell tumor cells and suppresses antigenic immune response in vivo. *PLoS One* 4: e5028.

48. Grumont, R. J., I. B. Richardson, C. Gaff, and S. Gerondakis. 1993. rel/NF-kappa B nuclear complexes that bind kB sites in the murine c-rel promoter are required for constitutive c-rel transcription in B-cells. *Cell Growth Differ.* 4: 731–743.

49. Viswanathan, M., M. Yu, L. Mendoza, and J. J. Yunis. 1996. Cloning and transcription factor-binding sites of the human c-rel proto-oncogene promoter. *Gene* 170: 271–276.

50. Matsuda, S., Y. Mikami, M. Ohtani, M. Fujiwara, Y. Hirata, A. Minowa, Y. Terauchi, T. Kadowaki, and S. Koyasu. 2008. Critical role of class IA PI3K for c-Rel expression in B lymphocytes. *Blood* 113: 1037–1044.

51. Binard, A., L. Le Pottier, A. Saraux, V. Devauchelle-Pensec, J. O. Pers, and P. Youinou. 2008. Does the BAFF dysregulation play a major role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus? *J. Autoimmun.* 30: 63–67.

52. Lesley, R., Y. Xu, S. L. Kalled, D. M. Hess, S. R. Schwab, H. B. Shu, and J. G. Cyster. 2004. Reduced competitiveness of autoantigen-engaged B cells due to increased dependence on BAFF. *Immunity* 20: 441–453.

53. Thien, M., T. G. Phan, S. Gardam, M. Amesbury, A. Basten, F. Mackay, and R. Brink. 2004. Excess BAFF rescues self-reactive B cells from peripheral deletion and allows them to enter forbidden follicular and marginal zone niches. *Immunity* 20: 785–798.

54. Mackay, F., and P. Schneider. 2009. Cracking the BAFF code. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 9: 491–502.

55. Brink, R. 2006. Regulation of B cell self-tolerance by BAFF. *Semin. Immunol.* 18: 276–283.

56. Khare, S. D., I. Sarosi, X. Z. Xia, S. McCabe, K. Miner, I. Solovyev, N. Hawkins, M. Kelley, D. Chang, G. Van, et al. 2000. Severe B cell hyperplasia and autoimmune disease in TALL-1 transgenic mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97: 3370–3375.

57. Mackay, F., S. A. Woodcock, P. Lawton, C. Ambrose, M. Baetscher, P. Schneider, J. Tschopp, and J. L. Browning. 1999. Mice transgenic for BAFF develop lymphocytic disorders along with autoimmune manifestations. *J. Exp. Med.* 190: 1697–1710.

58. Shulga-Morskaya, S., M. Dobles, M. E. Walsh, L. G. Ng, F. MacKay, S. P. Rao, S. L. Kalled, and M. L. Scott. 2004. B cell-activating factor belonging to the TNF family acts through separate receptors to support B cell survival and T cell-independent antibody formation. *J. Immunol.* 173: 2331–2341.

59. Gorelik, L., A. H. Cutler, G. Thill, S. D. Miklasz, D. E. Shea, C. Ambrose, S. A. Bixler, L. Su, M. L. Scott, and S. L. Kalled. 2004. Cutting edge: BAFF regulates CD21/35 and CD23 expression independent of its B cell survival function. *J. Immunol.* 172: 762–766.

60. Sasaki, Y., S. Casola, J. L. Kutok, K. Rajewsky, and M. Schmidt-Supprian. 2004. TNF family member B cell-activating factor (BAFF) receptor-dependent and -independent roles for BAFF in B cell physiology. *J. Immunol.* 173: 2245–2252.

61. Amanna, I. J., J. P. Dingwall, and C. E. Hayes. 2003. Enforced bcl-xL gene expression restored splenic B lymphocyte development in BAFF-R mutant mice. *J. Immunol.* 170: 4593–4600.

62. Thompson, J. S., S. A. Bixler, F. Qian, K. Vora, M. L. Scott, T. G. Cachero, C. Hession, P. Schneider, I. D. Sizing, C. Mullen, et al. 2001. BAFF-R, a newly identified TNF receptor that specifically interacts with BAFF. *Science* 293: 2108–2111.

63. Seshasayee, D., P. Valdez, M. Yan, V. M. Dixit, D. Tumas, and I. S. Grewal. 2003. Loss of TACI causes fatal lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity, establishing TACI as an inhibitory BLyS receptor. *Immunity* 18: 279–288.

64. Claudio, E., K. Brown, S. Park, H. Wang, and U. Siebenlist. 2002. BAFF-induced NEMO-independent processing of NF-κB2 in maturing B cells. *Nat. Immunol.* 3: 958–965.

65. Senftleben, U., Y. Cao, G. Xiao, F. R. Greten, G. Krahn, G. Bonizzi, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, A. Fong, S. C. Sun, and M. Karin. 2001. Activation by IKKα of a second, evolutionary conserved, NF-κB signaling pathway. *Science* 293: 1495–1499.

66. Hatada, E. N., R. K. Do, A. Orlofsky, H. C. Liou, M. Prystowsky, I. C. MacLennan, J. Caamaño, and S. Chen-Kiang. 2003. NF-κB1 p50 is required for BLyS attenuation of apoptosis but dispensable for processing of NF-κB2 p100 to p52 in quiescent mature B cells. *J. Immunol.* 171: 761–768.

67. Shinners, N. P., G. Carlesso, I. Castro, K. L. Hoek, R. A. Corn, R. T. Woodland, M. L. Scott, D. Wang, and W. N. Khan. 2007. Bruton’s tyrosine kinase mediates NF-κB activation and B cell survival by B cell-activating factor receptor of the TNF-R family. *J. Immunol.* 179: 3872–3880.

68. Enzler, T., G. Bonizzi, G. J. Silverman, D. C. Otero, G. F. Widhopf, A. Anzelon-Mills, R. C. Rickert, and M. Karin. 2006. Alternative and classical NF-κB signaling retain autoreactive B cells in the splenic marginal zone and result in lupus-like disease. *Immunity.* 25: 403–415.

69. Fu, L., Y. C. Lin-Lee, L. V. Pham, A. T. Tamayo, L. C. Yoshimura, and R. J. Ford. 2009. BAFF-R promotes cell proliferation and survival through interaction with IKKB and NF-κB/c-Rel in the nucleus of normal and neoplastic B-lymphoid cells. *Blood* 113: 4627–4636.

70. Hikida, M., S. Johmura, A. Hashimoto, M. Takezaki, and T. Kurosaki. 2003. Coupling between B cell receptor and phospholipase C-γ2 is essential for mature B cell development. *J. Exp. Med.* 198: 581–589.

71. Woodland, R. T., M. R. Schmidt, and C. B. Thompson. 2006. BLyS and B cell homeostasis. *Semin. Immunol.* 18: 318–326.

72. Craxton, A., K. E. Draves, A. Gruppi, and E. A. Clark. 2005. BAFF regulates B cell survival by downregulating the BH3-only family member Bim via the ERK pathway. *J. Exp. Med.* 202: 1363–1374.

73. Otipoby, K. L., Y. Sasaki, M. Schmidt-Supprian, A. Patke, R. Gareus, M. Pasparakis, A. Tarakhovsky, and K. Rajewsky. 2008. BAFF activates Akt and Erk through BAFF-R in an IKK1-dependent manner in primary mouse B cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 105: 12435–12438.

74. Patke, A., I. Mecklenbrauker, H. Erdjument-Bromage, P. Tempst, and A. Tarakhovsky. 2006. BAFF controls B cell metabolic fitness through a PKCβ- and Akt-dependent mechanism. *J. Exp. Med.* 203: 2551–2562.

75. Woodland, R. T., C. J. Fox, M. R. Schmidt, P. S. Hammerman, J. T. Opferman, S. J. Korsmeyer, D. M. Hilbert, and C. B. Thompson. 2008. Multiple signaling pathways promote B lymphocyte stimulator dependent B-cell growth and survival. *Blood* 111: 750–760.
