
Update

Research Focus

The role of specific *Toxoplasma gondii* molecules in manipulation of innate immunity

Angela M. Pollard${}^{1}$, Laura J. Knoll${}^{1}$ and Dana G. Mordue${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$ Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA  
${}^{2}$ Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA  

Infection with the parasite *Toxoplasma gondii* stimulates an innate immune response in the host. *T. gondii* also induces alterations in infected monocytes and dendritic cells that probably contribute to its ability to disseminate and ultimately to establish persistent infection. Recent progress has linked specific parasite molecules to immune stimulation or the ability of the parasite to subvert intracellular signaling pathways in infected cells to evade immunity.

### Toxoplasma gondii and innate immunity

Immunity to *T. gondii* is dependent on interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) induced by interleukin (IL)-12 production by a variety of cell types and cell-mediated immunity. IL-10 is also important in regulation of the immune response. As an intracellular pathogen, *T. gondii* has mechanisms to interfere with host signaling pathways to subvert innate immunity [1,2]. *T. gondii* has proved to be a model system to study host immunity to intracellular parasites; however, parasite molecules that stimulate or manipulate immune responses are largely unknown. Only recently have studies begun to link specific *T. gondii* molecules to effects on host cell function (Table 1; Figure 1).

#### Cytokine production via Toll-like receptors

Innate immunity is elicited by diverse pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) stimulating host pattern recognition receptors including the family of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). TLR engagement triggers intracellular signaling cascades via the common adapter myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) with the exception of TLR3. The discovery that MyD88-deficient mice, but not IL-1 or IL-18 that also signal through MyD88, are unable to control *T. gondii* infection due to an impaired IL-12 and IFN-γ response indicates that TLRs must recognize *T. gondii* molecules to initiate effective immunity. Mice deficient in individual TLRs, including TLR2, 4 and 11, are only modestly more susceptible to *T. gondii* infection when compared with wild type mice [2]. This indicates that a number of diverse TLRs and PAMPs probably contribute to the importance of MyD88-dependent immune stimulation. *T. gondii* profilin promotes parasite actin assembly, contributes to gliding motility, invasion and egress, and is a PAMP for TLR11 [2,3]. Mice that lack TLR11 have a decreased IL-12 response to purified profilin and are slightly more susceptible to *T. gondii*. Profilin is relatively conserved in Apicomplexa, but *Plasmodium* profilin is, at most, a weak inducer of TLR11. It is important to note that TLR11 is not functionally expressed in humans [2]. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins on the surface of *T. gondii* trigger TNF-α production from macrophages in a TLR2/TLR4/MyD88-dependent manner [4] similar to GPIs from *Trypanosoma cruzi* and *Plasmodium falciparum* [2].

MyD88 signaling is clearly important to induce a rapid anti-*Toxoplasma* response required to survive parasite challenge, but a strong Th1-based immunity to the parasite can be induced by a vaccine strain of the parasite independent of MyD88 [5]. MyD88 dependency can vary based on the parasite genotype and the cell type infected [2]. Parasite molecules that are responsible for stimulation of the host immune system during infection might depend on a multitude of factors [5,6]. Different responses can be elicited by the parasite molecules based on the type of inflammatory cells recruited, degree of parasite invasion and replication, and number of parasites degraded or phagocytosed.

#### Cytokine production via Cys-Cys chemokine receptor CCR5

*T. gondii* also stimulates IL-12 production from dendritic cells (DCs) via host CCR5, a transmembrane receptor expressed by multiple cell types including DCs that transmit signals through G$_i$-like proteins [1,7]. CCR5-deficient mice produce less IL-12 and IFN-γ, and have an increased susceptibility to *T. gondii* infection. However, the impaired immune response of CCR5-deficient mice is probably a combination of impaired production of DC IL-12 and loss of CCR5-mediated recruitment of natural killer (NK) cells to sites of *T. gondii* infection independent of CCR5 effects on IL-12 [8]. *T. gondii* cyclophilin C-18 is a secreted peptidyl-prolyl isomerase that binds CCR5 and stimulates DC IL-12 production. Purified C-18 causes a partial IL-12 response in DCs, indicating that additional factors might be required for optimal IL-12 production. Host lipoxin A${}_4$ (LXA${}_4$) acts via CCR5 to suppress IL-12 production by DCs during *T. gondii* infection to dampen inflammation. *T. gondii* lacks an endogenous substrate for lipoxygenase but it produces a lipoxygenase that generates LXA${}_4$ in the presence of exogenous arachidonic acid, suggesting that the primary purpose of this molecule might be immune regulation [7].

#### Inhibition of host cell signaling cascades

*T. gondii* has developed numerous techniques to modulate its host cell [9,10]. It blocks apoptosis of infected cells,

Corresponding author: Mordue, D.G. (Dana_Mordue@nymc.edu).

Update

Trends in Parasitology Vol. 25 No. 11

Table 1. Summary of T. gondii molecules identified to date that regulate the innate immune response$^a$

| T. gondii molecule | Host target | Effect in host | References |
|--------------------|-------------|----------------|------------|
| Profilin           | TLR 11      | IL-12 production through MyD88 | Reviewed in Ref. [2] |
| GPI                | TLR 2 and TLR 4 | Induction of TNF-$\alpha$ through NF-$\kappa$B and upregulation of MHC class I and class II | Reviewed in Ref. [2] |
| Cyclophilin        | CCR 5       | IL-12 production through CCR 5 | Reviewed in Ref. [7] |
| Lipoygenase        | Unknown     | Downregulation of CCR 5; decrease in IL-12 | Reviewed in Ref. [7] |
| ROP16              | Unknown     | Type I and type II strains induce STAT 3/6; decrease in IL-12 | [21] |
| ROP18              | Unknown     | Infection by strain carrying type I or type II allele results in increased mortality | [20, 22, 23] |
| HSP70              | Unknown     | Can inhibit NF-$\kappa$B nuclear translocation and iNOS | [26] |

$^a$ The T. gondii molecule (first column) is followed by its host target (second column). The primary effect observed in the host (in vivo and/or in vitro) as a result of the T. gondii molecule is summarized in column 3 and the references for the corresponding study are given in column 4.

---

Figure 1. Representation of the interactions between T. gondii molecules and host innate immunity signaling. (a) Free GPI of T. gondii binds with TLR2 or TLR4, resulting in transcription of TNF-$\alpha$ through NF-$\kappa$B. (b) T. gondii profilin induces IL-12 via TLR11/MyD88. (c) T. gondii cyclophilin interacts with CCR5 that signals via a G$_i$-like protein to increase IL-12 transcription. (d) ROP16 is released into the host cell on T. gondii penetration causing activation of STAT3/6 which results in a decrease of IL-12. (e) T. gondii has lipoygenase activity. A decrease in IL-12 is observed in response to the downregulation of CCR5 by lipoxin A$_4$ generated by soybean lipoygenase.

interferes with the function of host cell transcription factors including STAT1 and NF-$\kappa$B, and inhibits production of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-$\alpha$ and IL-12. Conversely, T. gondii increases the activity of other transcription factors including STAT3/6, hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1) and early growth response 2 (EGR2). Activation of STAT3 and EGR2 require viable parasites, whereas induction of HIF-1 is due to a short-lived diffusible product, suggesting that multiple mechanisms operate to alter host cell transcription. T. gondii interferes with phosphorylation and acetylation of histone H3 to prevent chromatin remodeling surrounding the TNF-$\alpha$ promoter following TLR stimulation to inhibit TNF-$\alpha$ production from infected cells [11]. Parasite molecules that directly or indirectly target histone modification at inducible promoters could provide an explanation for widespread suppressive effects of the parasite on proinflammatory gene transcription in response to lipopolysaccharide and other stimuli.

Parasite inhibition of STAT1 underlies the ability of the parasite to downregulate surface major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II on infected cells [12]. IFN-$\gamma$ regulates many downstream effector proteins through the transcription factor STAT1 including increased expression of p47GTPases, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and surface MHC class I and class II [13, 14]. Consequently, inhibition of STAT1-signaling might contribute to the ability of T. gondii to survive in host cells during infection. The parasite products responsible for inhibition of STAT1 are unknown. Viable parasites and lysates, but not heat-killed parasites, induce downregulation of MHC class II, but their mechanisms might differ as they affect different IFN-$\gamma$ responsive promoters downstream of STAT1 [15]. Debierre-Grockiego et al. [16] tested the hypothesis that parasite GPI-anchored proteins contribute to T. gondii downregulation of surface MHC class II. Co-culture of bone marrow-derived macrophages with GPIs slightly increased expression of MHC class I and class II as well as enhancing antigen presentation to CD8 T-cells [16]. These results suggest that T. gondii downregulation of surface MHC class I and class II is not dependent on parasite GPIs, unless their activity on the

intact parasite is markedly different than the purified molecules.

### Effect of parasite genotype on infection and host cell signaling

*T. gondii* has a largely clonal population structure which in Europe and North America consists largely of three genotypic lineages, each with distinct properties in terms of virulence and effects on host cell signaling [17]. Type I is distinct in its pronounced virulence in mice during the acute stage of infection. Types II and III are relatively less virulent and readily establish chronic infections [18]. Type II, but not types I or III, strains induce murine macrophages to produce high levels of IL-12 [19].

Genetic crosses to map loci crucial for strain specific differences in *T. gondii* virulence and host cell signaling identified two rhoptry kinases, ROP16 and 18. The proteins are secreted during parasite invasion and mediate key functional differences between the genotypes [20–23]. Whereas types I, II and III parasites all induce rapid phosphorylation of STAT3/6 (1h post-infection) [21,24], only types I and III maintain STAT3/6 activation 18 h later [21]. The strain-specific difference in maintaining STAT3/6 activation is dependent on *T. gondii* ROP16, which traffics to the host cell nucleus after secretion by the parasite rhoptries during invasion. Types I and III, but not type II, isoforms of the ROP16 kinase induce activation of STAT3/6 and suppress IL-12 production from macrophages. Expression of type II ROP16 in a type I strain resulting in a decrease in STAT3/6 activation and an increase in IL-12 production. Although the key difference between the two ROP16 alleles and the target are unknown, their expression level, secretion and nuclear localization are similar [21]. ROP18 is expressed in type I and most type II strains but is poorly expressed in type III strains. Increased expression of ROP18 correlates strongly with virulence [20,22,23]. Expression of type I or type II ROP18 allele in a type III strain increased virulence in mice [20,23]. ROP18 is a confirmed serine threonine kinase that localizes to the parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM), where it could interact with proteins in the host cell cytosol [23,25].

### Concluding remarks and future directions

*T. gondii* extensively modifies its host cell environment, including affecting diverse signaling cascades to disseminate and establish a chronic infection. Secreted products from specialized secretory organelles of *T. gondii* (micronemes, rhoptries and dense granules) probably mediate many effects on host cell signaling pathways. To date, parasite products identified that affect host cell function and traffic to the host cell nucleus or the PVM are largely rhoptry proteins secreted during parasite invasion. It is possible that other rhoptry secreted kinases and kinase-like proteins, of which more than 70 are predicted in the genome, also have effects on host cell functions. It will be interesting to determine whether other parasite molecules are required post-invasion to maintain host cell changes or whether the affects are permanently established during parasite invasion. As parasite molecules are identified that interface with the host cell, a key challenge will be dis-

---

**Box 1. Outstanding questions**

- What *T. gondii* molecules are recognized as PAMPs by human cells?
- Does profilin act as a PAMP in humans, which lack TLR11?
- Are CCR5 or identified TLRs the primary signaling mechanism for *T. gondii* immunity?
- How do the effects of parasite molecules on host cells *in vitro* translate to their role in toxoplasmosis?
- Does a *T. gondii* lipoygenase suppress host cell IL-12 production?
- What parasite molecules are involved in altering host cell transcriptional responses through STAT1 or other transcription factors?
- What are the host cell targets of ROP16 and 18?
- Are additional molecules necessary for maintaining host cell control post-parasite invasion?

secting their function, as many predicted genes of the parasite have little homology to guide investigators. In this regard, forward genetics can continue to be a fruitful avenue for linking parasite effects on host cells to parasite molecules. Although progress is being made, many questions remain (Box 1).

### Acknowledgements

We thank our colleagues in the *T. gondii* field for their pioneering work and regret that space restraints for this update limited the number of manuscripts that we could reference. We also thank the American Cancer Society (RSG-07-202-01-MBC to L.J.K.) and the National Institutes of Health (AI072817 to A.M.P. and AI072028 to D.G.M.) for their financial support.

### References

1. Denkers, E.Y. (2003) From cells to signaling cascades: manipulation of innate immunity by *Toxoplasma gondii*. *FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol.* 39, 193–203
2. Egan, C.E. *et al.* (2009) Functional aspects of Toll-like receptor/MyD88 signaling during protozoan infection: focus on *Toxoplasma gondii*. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* 156, 17–24
3. Plattner, F. *et al.* (2008) *Toxoplasma* profilin is essential for host cell invasion and TLR11-dependent induction of an interleukin-12 response. *Cell Host Microbe* 3, 77–87
4. Debierre-Grockiego, F. *et al.* (2007) Activation of TLR2 and TLR4 by glycosylphosphatidylinositols derived from *Toxoplasma gondii*. *J. Immunol.* 179, 1129–1137
5. Sukhumavasi, W. *et al.* (2008) TLR adaptor MyD88 is essential for pathogen control during oral *Toxoplasma gondii* infection but not adaptive immunity induced by a vaccine strain of the parasite. *J. Immunol.* 181, 3464–3473
6. Kim, L. *et al.* (2006) *Toxoplasma gondii* genotype determines MyD88-dependent signaling in infected macrophages. *J. Immunol.* 177, 2584–2591
7. Aliberti, J. (2005) Host persistence: exploitation of anti-inflammatory pathways by *Toxoplasma gondii*. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 5, 162–170
8. Khan, I.A. *et al.* (2006) CCR5 is essential for NK cell trafficking and host survival following *Toxoplasma gondii* infection. *PLoS Pathog.* 2, 484–500
9. Blader, I.J. and Saeij, J.P. (2009) Communication between *Toxoplasma gondii* and its host: impact on parasite growth, development, immune evasion, and virulence. *Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Immunol. Scand.* 117, 458–476
10. Laliberte, J. and Carruthers, V.B. (2008) Host cell manipulation by the human pathogen *Toxoplasma gondii*. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 65, 1900–1915
11. Leng, J. *et al.* (2009) *Toxoplasma gondii* prevents chromatin remodeling initiated by TLR-triggered macrophage activation. *J. Immunol.* 182, 489–497
12. Luder, C.G. *et al.* (2001) *Toxoplasma gondii* down-regulates MHC class II gene expression and antigen presentation by murine macrophages via interference with nuclear translocation of STAT1alpha. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 31, 1475–1484

Update

13 Boehm, U. *et al.* (1997) Cellular responses to interferon-γ. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 15, 749–795  
14 Platanias, L.C. (2005) Mechanisms of type-I- and type-II-interferon-mediated signaling. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 5, 375–386  
15 Lang, C. *et al.* (2006) Diverse mechanisms employed by *Toxoplasma gondii* to inhibit IFN-gamma-induced major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression. *Microbes Infect.* 8, 1994–2005  
16 Debierre-Grockiego, F. *et al.* (2009) *Toxoplasma gondii* glycosylphosphatidylinositols up-regulate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule expression on primary murine macrophages. *Innate Immun.* 15, 25–32  
17 Sibley, L.D. and Ajioka, J.W. (2008) Population structure of *Toxoplasma gondii*: clonal expansion driven by infrequent recombination and selective sweeps. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 62, 329–351  
18 Sibley, L.D. and Boothroyd, J.C. (1992) Virulent strains of *Toxoplasma gondii* comprise a single clonal lineage. *Nature* 359, 82–85  
19 Robben, P.M. *et al.* (2004) Production of IL-12 by macrophages infected with *Toxoplasma gondii* depends on parasite genotype. *J. Immunol.* 172, 3686–3694  

20 Saeij, J.P.J. *et al.* (2006) Polymorphic secreted kinases are key virulence factors in toxoplasmosis. *Science* 314, 1780–1783  
21 Saeij, J.P.J. *et al.* (2007) *Toxoplasma* co-opts host gene expression by injection of a polymorphic kinase homologue. *Nature* 445, 324–327  
22 Khan, A. *et al.* (2009) Selection at a single locus leads to widespread expansion of *Toxoplasma gondii* lineages that are virulent in mice. *PLoS Genet.* 5, 1–14  
23 Taylor, S. *et al.* (2006) A secreted serine-threonine kinase determines virulence in the eukaryotic pathogen *Toxoplasma gondii*. *Science* 15, 1776–1780  
24 Butcher, B.A. *et al.* (2005) IL-10-independent STAT3 activation by *Toxoplasma gondii* mediates suppression of IL-12 and TNF-alpha in host macrophages. *J. Immunol.* 174, 3148–3152  
25 El Hajj, H. *et al.* (2007) ROP18 is a rhoptry kinase controlling the intracellular proliferation of *Toxoplasma gondii*. *PLoS Pathog.* 3, 200–211  
26 Dobbin, C.A. *et al.* (2002) Heat shock protein 70 is a potential virulence factor in murine *Toxoplasma* infection via immunomodulation of host NF-κB and nitric oxide. *J. Immunol.* 169, 958–965  

1471-4922/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.pt.2009.07.009 Available online 9 September 2009


Research Focus

Caught in action: mechanistic insights into antibody-mediated inhibition of *Plasmodium* merozoite invasion

Moritz Treeck${}^{1}$, Marco Tamborrini${}^{2}$, Claudia A. Daubenberger${}^{2}$, Tim W. Gilberger${}^{1}$ and Till S. Voss${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$ Bernhard-Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359 Hamburg, Germany  
${}^{2}$ Swiss Tropical Institute, 4051 Basel, Switzerland  

Apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) plays an essential role in host cell invasion by apicomplexan parasites. A recent study by Collins *et al.* investigated the mode of action of an anti-AMA1 invasion-inhibitory antibody. They demonstrated the interference of this antibody with invasion complex formation, which was dependent in turn on a single conserved tyrosine residue in AMA1. Their findings reveal important new insights into parasite biology and are highly relevant for rational vaccine design.

Active host cell invasion by apicomplexan parasites

Two fundamentally different pathways exist by which intracellular pathogens enter their host cells: (i) passive uptake or (ii) active invasion. Active invasion is used by obligate intracellular parasites of the phylum Apicomplexa and has been studied in detail in *Plasmodium* and *Toxoplasma gondii*. The overall strategy of cell invasion by apicomplexan parasites is mediated by a succession of conserved and highly specialized molecular events. In preparation for parasite entry, several functionally diverse proteins are stored in apical organelles called micronemes, rhoptries, dense granules and exonemes. Processing and secretion of these factors occurs in a timely and spatially coordinated manner to facilitate parasite release, interaction with host cell receptors, molecular motor-driven active invasion and formation of the parasitophorous vacuole in which parasites reside after invasion (reviewed in Refs. [1,2]). In *P. falciparum*, after parasite egress from the infected red blood cell, the extracellular merozoites can complete invasion into new red blood cells within less than a minute. Indeed, it is not surprising that evolution boosted the invasion process to become highly efficient and speedy, as surface antigens at this stage are particularly prone to immune attack.

Apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1), a type 1 transmembrane protein unique to apicomplexans, represents one of the best-studied invasion proteins in *Plasmodium* (reviewed in Ref. [3]). The continuing interest in understanding the role of PfAMA1 in parasite biology and acquired immunity was started by three key observations, which placed PfAMA1 at the top of a list of promising vaccine candidates. First, anti-PfAMA1 antibodies inhibit both merozoite and sporozoite invasion [4,5]. Second, vaccination with PfAMA1 can protect against blood-stage challenge (see Ref. [3] and references therein). Third, AMA1 plays an essential role in the invasion process and thus in the survival of the parasite [6–8]. Despite decades of intensive research, however, our understanding of the precise role of PfAMA1 in invasion and the mode of action of anti-PfAMA1 invasion-inhibitory antibodies is

Corresponding author: Voss, T.S. (till.voss@unibas.ch).
