
autoimmunity and self-destruction.

In summary, the nT<sub>H</sub>-17 cells described by Craft and colleagues underscore the importance of the ‘selfish’ thymus not only for weeding out self-reactive cells and positively selecting cells with intermediate reactivity for self but also for the critical shaping and ‘education’ of ‘earnestly’ self-reactive T cells that contribute to the establishment and maintenance of self-tolerance (Fig. 1). It is clear that the identification of these T cells brings a new appreciation of thymus self antigen-mediated selection and underscores

the need to refine the foundation of concepts on which immune tolerance and adaptive immunity have been erected.

1. Ehrlich, P. *Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.* **66**, 424–448 (1900).
2. Jerne, N.K. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **41**, 849–857 (1955).
3. Burnet, F.M. *Austr. J. Sci.* **20**, 67–69 (1957).
4. Marks, B.R. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **10**, 1125–1132 (2009).
5. Bendelac, A. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**, 557–558 (2004).
6. Kappler, J.W., Roehm, N. & Marrack, P. *Cell* **49**, 273–280 (1987).
7. Bluthmann, H. *et al.* *Nature* **334**, 156–159 (1988).

8. Kisielow, P., Bluthmann, H., Staerz, U.D., Steinmetz, M. & von Boehmer, H. *Nature* **333**, 742–746 (1988).
9. Kisielow, P., Teh, H.S., Bluthmann, H. & von Boehmer, H. *Nature* **335**, 730–733 (1988).
10. Sakaguchi, S., Fukuma, K., Kuribayashi, K. & Masuda, T. *J. Exp. Med.* **161**, 72–87 (1985).
11. Jordan, M.S. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **2**, 301–306 (2001).
12. Leishman, A.J. *et al.* *Immunity* **16**, 355–364 (2002).
13. van Santen, H.M., Benoist, C. & Mathis, D. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 1221–1230 (2004).
14. Bettelli, E. *et al.* *Nature* **441**, 235–238 (2006).
15. Poussier, P., Ning, T., Banerjee, D. & Julius, M. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 1491–1497 (2002).
16. Zhou, X. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **10**, 1000–1007 (2009).

---

# New DNA-sensing pathway feeds RIG-I with RNA

Xuetao Cao

Cytosolic DNA sensors have remained poorly defined so far. Two recent studies identify a previously undefined cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway that depends on the RNA polymerase III-mediated conversion of microbial DNA into 5′-triphosphate double-stranded RNA that activates the RNA helicase RIG-I.

The detection of invading microbes and initiation of innate immune responses, including the production of type I interferons and proinflammatory cytokines, are critical for the host defense against infection. Of the different kinds of microbial components recognized by host pattern-recognition receptors, nucleic acids stimulate the innate immune response by one of several pathways. In addition to the Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent nucleic acid-sensing system, cytosolic nucleic acid sensors—especially the RNA helicase domain-containing proteins retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (Mda5), which respond to different types of RNA molecules—have attracted much attention<sup>1</sup> (Fig. 1). As for DNA sensors, DAI (DNA-dependent activation of interferon regulatory factors) and AIM2 (absent in melanoma 2) have been reported<sup>2,3</sup>. However, DAI-deficient cells and mice produce near wild-type amounts of type I interferon in response to cytosolic DNA, and AIM2, although able to bind to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) to induce the production of interleukin 1β (IL-1β) via the inflammasome, does not trigger the

production of type I interferon (Fig. 1). Two new studies, one in this issue of *Nature Immunology*, by Ablaster *et al.*<sup>4</sup>, and the other in *Cell*, by Chiu *et al.*<sup>5</sup>, have identified a previously unknown DNA-sensing pathway by which RNA polymerase III efficiently triggers the production of type I interferon by transcribing microbial DNA templates into dsRNA containing 5′-triphosphate, which is a potent activator of RIG-I. The two studies thus independently provide new insights into the molecular mechanism by which cytosolic DNA triggers the production of type I interferon.

Although previous work has indicated that induction of type I interferon by dsDNA in mouse cells is RIG-I independent, other reports have suggested that cytosolic dsDNA and even nonviral pathogens, including the intracellular bacterium *Legionella pneumophila*, can induce the production of interferon-β (IFN-β) in certain human cell lines via RIG-I-dependent and/or signaling adaptor IPS-1-dependent pathways<sup>6–8</sup>. However, precisely how microbial DNA could activate the RNA sensor RIG-I and why dsDNA-triggered production of type I interferon is related to RIG-I and/or IPS-1 in human cells have remained big questions.

Ablaster *et al.* approach these questions during a functional investigation of recognition of the single-stranded RNA paramyxovirus Sendai virus by known RNA sensors in 293T cells; unexpectedly, they find that the control dsDNA mimetic poly(dA:dT), just like Sendai virus, fails to induce production of type I interferon in 293T cells in which RIG-I or IPS-1 is silenced. Ablaster *et al.* next demonstrate that poly(dA:dT) activates RIG-I-dependent production of type I interferon through an endogenous RNA intermediate, specifically a dsRNA containing 5′-triphosphate that is present in the cytosol of poly(dA:dT)-transfected 293T cells. Inspired by other reports in which poly(dA:dT) has been used to study promoter-independent transcription by RNA polymerase III, Ablaster *et al.* successfully identify RNA polymerase III in the cytosol as the enzyme responsible for transcribing the poly(dA:dT) DNA templates into dsRNA containing 5′-triphosphate, which in turn activates RIG-I and triggers the production of type I interferon. RNA polymerase III normally transcribes 5S rRNA, tRNA and other small noncoding RNA molecules produced from specific promoter regions in the nucleus.

Chiu *et al.* use a different approach to look for the cytosolic DNA sensor responsible for triggering the production of type I interferon. They also identify dsRNA containing 5′-triphosphate as the interferon-inducing RNA intermediate in poly(dA:dT)-transfected cells. However, they then develop a cell-free system to generate interferon-inducing RNA from poly(dA:dT) using cytoplasmic extracts of human and mouse cells. After eight steps of conventional chromatography, Chiu *et al.* purify from these

Xuetao Cao is in the National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.  
e-mail: caoxt@public3.sta.net.cn

NEWS AND VIEWS

RNA sensor system                               DNA sensor system

Cytoplasm  
5′-ppp-dsRNA  
5′-ppp-ssRNA  
ssRNA  
Short dsRNA  
Long dsRNA  

Mitochondrion  

Nucleus  

Figure 1 Intracellular nucleic acid sensors for triggering innate immune responses. In response to infection with viruses and nonviral pathogens, the intracellular nucleic acid–sensing system will detect microbial RNA and DNA and subsequently activate ‘downstream’ signaling pathways for the induction of type I interferons and proinflammatory cytokines. TLR3, TLR7 and TLR9, the membrane-associated nucleic acid–sensing pattern-recognition receptors in endosomes, recognize dsRNA, single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) and CpG DNA, respectively. TLR3 triggers adaptor protein TRIF–dependent activation of a pathway consisting of the kinase TBK1 and transcription factor IRF3 for the induction of type I interferon. TLR9 and TLR7 trigger a pathway consisting of the adaptor MyD88 and the kinase IRAK to activate the transcription factors NF-κB and IRF7, which leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferon. RIG-I and Mda5 are cytosolic RNA sensors that bind the adaptor protein IPS-1 and then activate the TBK1-IRF3 pathway to induce type I interferon. DAI and AIM2 are the two cytosolic sensors for DNA, reported before, which induce the production of type I interferon or IL-1β via the TBK1-IRF3 or inflammasome pathway, respectively. The two studies discussed here^4,5^ identify a previously unknown cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway in which cytosolic RNA polymerase III (Pol III) can sense microbial DNA in the cytosol and transcribe the DNA templates into 5′-triphosphate (5′-ppp) dsRNA, the RNA species being sensed by RIG-I, thus triggering RIG-I activation and the production of type I interferon. Additional unknown cytosolic DNA sensors for the direct recognition of foreign DNA to trigger the production of type I interferon may exist and remain to be discovered. dsAt-rich, poly(dA:dT); ASC, adaptor protein; TRAF6, ubiquitin ligase.

extracts RNA polymerase III as the component necessary for production of the interferon-inducing RNA species. Experiments in which the expression of RNA polymerase III is ‘knocked down’ confirm their conclusion that RNA polymerase III is required for generation of the RIG-I-stimulating RNA intermediate. Importantly, both of the studies also use ML-60218, a specific chemical inhibitor of RNA polymerase III, to confirm the critical role of this enzyme in the detection of dsDNA and triggering of type I interferon production.

In addition to identifying a previously unknown DNA-sensing pathway, these studies reveal a nonclassical function for RNA polymerase III. As mentioned above, RNA polymerase III typically transcribes small noncoding RNA molecules in the nucleus. Although RNA polymerase III was also found in the cytosol 30 years ago, any function for this cytosolic RNA polymerase III has remained unclear until now.

Type I interferons can be induced by viruses and many kinds of nonviral pathogens and are important for the control or even pathogenesis of infection. Ablaser et al. detect production of IFN-α protein dependent on RNA polymerase III and RIG-I in 293T cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells stimulated with poly(dA:dT). Chiu et al. convincingly confirm that IFN-β production is triggered by the RNA polymerase III–RIG-I pathway in cells infected with DNA viruses (adenovirus and herpes simplex virus 1) and a Gram-negative facultative intracellular bacterium (*L. pneumophila*). More importantly, Chiu et al. show that RNA polymerase III–triggered IFN-β expression is required for the suppression of bacterial replication in target cells. The discovery of this previously unknown pathway for detecting microbial DNA and inducing the production of type I interferon may help in the design of therapies to prevent and treat infectious diseases.

These two independent studies open a new window for studies of cytosolic DNA-sensing systems. Investigation is just beginning of the physiological and/or pathophysiological roles of the RNA polymerase III–RIG-I pathway and the detailed mechanisms by which this pathway senses DNA viruses and other pathogenic microbes. DNase-deficient mice develop autoimmune diseases possibly due to defective clearance of the apoptotic cells and activation of immune responses by self DNA^9^. In addition, infection with viruses such as Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and the subsequent induction of type I interferon have been proposed to promote the pathogenesis of certain kinds of autoimmune diseases such as lupus^10^. Also, large amounts of EBV-encoded small RNA are found in EBV-immortalized B cell lines and EBV-positive Burkitt lymphoma cell lines, which constitutively produce type I interferon; these EBV-encoded small RNA molecules, which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, are endogenous activators of RIG-I (ref. 11). Notably, Ablaser et al. and Chiu et al. document less production of type I interferon by human EBV-positive cell lines treated with the RNA polymerase III inhibitor ML-60218. Whether this RNA polymerase III–RIG-I pathway contributes to autoimmune disease remains to be determined.

New questions in the field of DNA-sensing pattern-recognition receptors arising from this new work should be further explored. Is this DNA-sensing pathway of RNA polymerase III and RIG-I generally involved in innate immune responses to a large spectrum of pathogens? Might other DNA viruses, bacteria and other kinds of pathogens such as fungi and parasites induce type I interferon through this pathway? How does RNA polymerase III distinguish between microbial DNA and self DNA? How is the RNA polymerase III–RIG-I pathway spatially and temporally regulated?

particular subunits of RNA polymerase III as being important for the recognition and transcription of dsDNA. Chiu *et al.* isolate RNA from the cytosol and nucleus and show that only cytosolic RNA induces IFN-β production. This finding is consistent with the idea that cellular RNA transcribed in the nucleus is further processed to remove or modify (for example, cap) 5′-triphosphate before transport to the cytoplasm and thus loses the ability to activate the interferon pathway. Although both studies find that the interferon-inducing activity of RNA isolated from cells transfected with dsDNA is located mainly in the cytosol, it is still not clear whether RNA isolated from the nucleus of target cells infected with DNA virus or bacteria would be similarly devoid of interferon-inducing activity.

Finally, are any unknown factors or cofactors required for cytosolic RNA polymerase III-mediated sensing and transcription of foreign DNA? Are there additional cytosolic DNA sensors that remain to be discovered? The finding that induction of type I interferon by dsDNA in mouse cells does not depend on the RIG-I pathway suggests the presence of another sensor for direct recognition of foreign DNA to trigger the production of type I interferon.

---

### A defining factor for natural killer cell development

#### James P Di Santo

Transcription factors are critical regulators of cell fate in the hematopoietic system. New evidence indicates that the basic leucine zipper transcription factor E4BP4 (also known as NFIL3) is essential for natural killer cell specification.

Lymphocyte development from hematopoietic stem cells is a carefully orchestrated process that integrates signals (both cell-associated, membrane-bound factors and soluble factors) elaborated by stromal cells in the bone marrow and thymic microenvironments. These extrinsic signals converge in the nuclei of responding hematopoietic precursors and regulate a multitude of transcriptional targets necessary to guide the cells along distinct differentiation pathways leading to lymphoid precursors and later to fully differentiated B cells, T cells or natural killer (NK) cells. Central to this process are a variety of transcription factors that have the ability to form higher-ordered, multiprotein complexes that interact with DNA and modify the transcriptional activity of particular target genes. ‘Master’ transcription factors essential for the development of B cells and T cells (including αβ T cells, γδ T cells and NKT cells) have been identified, which has provided key information about how these lymphoid subsets are generated (Fig. 1). In contrast, a defining factor for NK cell development has remained elusive, and it has remained possible that NK cell development represents a ‘default pathway’ used when other lymphoid lineages are not directly specified. In this issue of *Nature Immunology*, Brady and colleagues put this issue to rest by identifying E4BP4 (E4-binding protein 4; also known as NFIL3 (nuclear factor interleukin 3 (IL-3) regulated)), a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcriptional activator, as a critical transcription factor required for NK cell development. These landmark observations provide a framework for further delineation of the processes involved in NK cell lineage commitment and indicate involvement of this bZIP-family transcription factor in the differentiation of NK cells.

James P. Di Santo is in the Cytokines and Lymphoid Development Unit, Institut Pasteur, and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U668, Paris, France.  
e-mail: disanto@pasteur.fr

**Figure 1** Transcription factor control of lymphoid lineage development. The key transcription factors E4BP4, Id2, Notch, GATA-3, EBF, Pax5, Th-POK, PLZF and SOX13 have been identified as being essential for the development of various lymphoid cell types. HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; ELP, early lymphoid precursor; TSP, thymus-settling cell; pro-B, pro-B cell; pro-T, pro-T cell; B, B cell; T, T cell.

(and perhaps other lymphocytes with innate characteristics).

E4BP4 was initially identified by its ability to repress viral transcription and to promote IL-3-dependent survival of pro-B cells. Subsequent molecular characterization has demonstrated that E4BP4 contains a canonical bZIP motif, which places this transcription factor in the extended bZIP protein family that includes several hundred members in different species, including CREB, ATF, AP1 and C/EBP proteins; E4BP4 belongs to the proline- and acid-rich subfamily. The bZIP proteins are critically involved in the control of diverse developmental processes in and outside the hematopoietic system, which suggests E4BP4

1. Takeuchi, O. & Akira, S. *Immunol. Rev.* **227**, 75–86 (2009).
2. Takaoka, A. *et al.* *Nature* **448**, 501–505 (2007).
3. Schroder, K., Muruve, D.A. & Tschopp, J. *Curr. Biol.* **19**, R262–R265 (2009).
4. Ablasser A. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **10**, 1065–1072 (2009).
5. Chiu, Y.H., Macmillan, J.B. & Chen, Z.J. *Cell* **138**, 576–591 (2009).
6. Cheng, G., Zhong, J., Chung, J. & Chisari, F.V. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 9035–9040 (2007).
7. Ishii, K.J. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **7**, 40–48 (2006).
8. Opitz, B. *et al.* *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 36173–36179 (2006).
9. Yoshida, H., Okabe, Y., Kawane, K., Fukuyama, H. & Nagata, S. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**, 49–56 (2005).
10. Ronnblom, L. & Pascual, V. *Lupus* **17**, 394–399 (2008).
11. Samanta, M., Iwakiri, D., Kanda, T., Imaizumi, T. & Takada, K. *EMBO J.* **25**, 4207–4214 (2006).
