
BMC Genomics

Research article
Reciprocal regulation by the CepIR and CciIR quorum sensing systems in *Burkholderia cenocepacia*

Eoin P O'Grady¹, Duber F Viteri¹, Rebecca J Malott¹,² and Pamela A Sokol*¹

Address: ¹Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada and ²Current address: Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Email: Eoin P O'Grady - epogrady@ucalgary.ca; Duber F Viteri - dfviteri@ucalgary.ca; Rebecca J Malott - rebecca.malott@utoronto.ca; Pamela A Sokol* - psokol@ucalgary.ca

* Corresponding author

Published: 17 September 2009
Received: 26 June 2009
Accepted: 17 September 2009

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 doi:10.1186/1471-2164-10-441

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

© 2009 O'Grady et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

---

### Abstract

**Background:** *Burkholderia cenocepacia* belongs to a group of closely related organisms called the *B. cepacia* complex (Bcc) which are important opportunistic human pathogens. *B. cenocepacia* utilizes a mechanism of cell-cell communication called quorum sensing to control gene expression including genes involved in virulence. The *B. cenocepacia* quorum sensing network includes the CepIR and CciIR regulatory systems.

**Results:** Global gene expression profiles during growth in stationary phase were generated using microarrays of *B. cenocepacia cepR*, *cciR* and *cepRcciR* mutants. This is the first time CciR was shown to be a global regulator of quorum sensing gene expression. CepR was primarily responsible for positive regulation of gene expression while CciR generally exerted negative gene regulation. Many of the genes that were regulated by both quorum sensing systems were reciprocally regulated by CepR and CciR. Microarray analysis of the *cepRcciR* mutant suggested that CepR is positioned upstream of CciR in the quorum sensing hierarchy in *B. cenocepacia*. A comparison of CepIR-regulated genes identified in previous studies and in the current study showed a substantial amount of overlap validating the microarray approach. Several novel quorum sensing-controlled genes were confirmed using qRT-PCR or promoter::lux fusions. CepR and CciR inversely regulated flagellar-associated genes, the nematocidal protein AidA and a large gene cluster on Chromosome 3. CepR and CciR also regulated genes required for iron transport, synthesis of extracellular enzymes and surface appendages, resistance to oxidative stress, and phage-related genes.

**Conclusion:** For the first time, the influence of CciIR on global gene regulation in *B. cenocepacia* has been elucidated. Novel genes under the control of the CepIR and CciIR quorum sensing systems in *B. cenocepacia* have been identified. The two quorum sensing systems exert reciprocal regulation of many genes likely enabling fine-tuned control of quorum sensing gene expression in *B. cenocepacia* strains carrying the cenocepacia island.

---

### Background
*Burkholderia cenocepacia* is a member of a group of closely related organisms called the *B. cepacia* complex (Bcc), which are important opportunistic pathogens in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) or chronic granulomatous disease [1-5]. *B. cenocepacia* and *B. multivorans* are the

most common members of the Bcc isolated from lungs of CF patients [6,7]. Infections with *B. cenocepacia* can lead to what is termed "cepacia syndrome", a rapid decline in lung function associated with necrotizing pneumonia, bacteremia and sepsis which can result in death [8]. *B. cenocepacia* is intrinsically resistant to antibiotic therapy and often impossible to eradicate from lungs of infected CF patients [9].

Quorum sensing (QS) is an intricate cell-cell signaling system used by a diverse range of microbial species to communicate with neighbouring cells to regulate gene expression. In Gram-negative bacteria, homologs of the LuxI protein family synthesize signaling molecules termed *N*-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) that are bound by homologs of the LuxR protein family which act as transcriptional regulators (for reviews see [10] and [11]). *B. cenocepacia* has two pairs of QS systems, the CepIR system which is present in all species of the Bcc [12-15] and the CciIR system, which is only present in *B. cenocepacia* containing the *cenocepacia* island (cci) found in highly transmissible ET12 strains [13]. CepI is primarily responsible for the synthesis of C8-HSL [14] and minor amounts C6-HSL [15]. CciI primarily synthesizes C6-HSL with lesser amounts of C8-HSL produced [16]. At the genomic level, *cepI* and *cepR* are divergently transcribed from each other while *cciI* and *cciR* form a transcriptional unit [16]. The QS systems are arranged in a hierarchical fashion as CepR is required for the transcription of the *cciIR* operon [16]. However, CciR negatively regulates the expression of *cepI* thus allowing negative regulatory feedback on the CepIR system [16]. Additionally, CepR activity can be inhibited by excess amounts of C6-HSL [17]. *B. cenocepacia* also contains a third LuxR homolog, CepR2, that lacks an associated AHL synthase gene [18]. CepR2 negatively regulates its own expression and is negatively regulated by CciR. We have recently identified several CepR2-regulated genes, including virulence factors, and demonstrated that CepR2 can influence gene expression in the absence of AHLs [18].

The CepIR system in *B. cenocepacia* and *B. cepacia* positively influences virulence in murine, nematode, wax moth, alfalfa and onion infection models [19-22]. *B. cenocepacia* CepIR negatively regulates genes involved in the biosynthesis of the siderophore ornibactin [14], but positively regulates expression of the *zmpA* and *zmpB* extracellular zinc metalloprotease genes [14,19,20]. CepIR also positively influences swarming motility [21], biofilm formation and maturation [21,23]. Several studies have shown that CepR positively regulates the expression of AidA, a protein involved in nematode virulence [17,24-26].

Several global approaches have been used to identify the CepIR regulon. A *B. cepacia* ATCC 25416 random promoter library screened in *E. coli* identified 20 ORFs that were positively regulated by CepR in the presence of C8-HSL including a malate synthase gene and oxidative stress induced genes [24]. A random promoter library approach was employed for *B. cenocepacia* K56-2, using a K56-2 *cepI* mutant as a host, that identified 58 or 31 genes with increased or decreased expression, respectively, in the presence of C8-HSL [27], including genes involved in type II and type III secretion systems, catalase activity, cold shock proteins and genes with regulatory functions [27]. Transposon mutagenesis strategies in a *B. cenocepacia cepI* mutant identified seven [17] and six genes [28], differentially regulated by CepR, including the *huw* (*phu*) heme uptake system, a TonB-dependent siderophore receptor, and *aidA* [17,28]. Bioinformatic analysis of known CepR-regulated gene promoters was used to predict a consensus *cep* box motif sequence. An *in silico* screen of the *B. cenocepacia* genome identified promoters containing the *cep* box motif that are potentially regulated by CepIR including genes involved in type V secretion and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis. CepR was shown to regulate promoters containing a *cep* box upstream of genes now known to encode proteins of the *B. cenocepacia* type VI secretion system (T6SS) [28,29] as well as several other genes including transcriptional regulators [28]. Additionally, a proteomics approach in *B. cenocepacia* H111, which lacks *cciIR*, identified differential expression of 11 proteins, including AidA, FimA, and SodB, when C8-HSL was added to cultures of a H111*cepI* mutant [26]. These combined approaches have facilitated the delineation of genes regulated by the CepIR system; however, there has been relatively little overlap in the genes identified using different approaches which suggests that our knowledge of the CepIR QS regulon is not complete.

Considerably less is known about the genes regulated by the CciIR QS system. A *B. cenocepacia cciI* mutant exhibited reduced virulence in a murine chronic respiratory infection model [13]. Reduced expression of *zmpA* was observed in *B. cenocepacia cciI* and *cciR* mutants [16]. Expression of *zmpB* was shown to be increased and decreased, respectively, in *B. cenocepacia cciI* and *cciR* mutants although a *cciIR* mutant had similar levels to the parent strain [19]. Swarming motility was decreased in a *cciI* mutant but unchanged in a *cciR* mutant [16]. Both the CepIR and CciIR systems regulate *orbI* which is involved in ornibactin synthesis [27].

Studies of expression of individual genes in *cepIR* or *cciIR* mutants have suggested that some genes are co-regulated by these two QS systems, but that other genes are independently regulated. A genome-wide investigation of the contribution of the CciIR system to gene regulation in *B.*

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

cenocepacia has not yet been undertaken. Furthermore, the identification of CepIR-regulated genes is incomplete since differential expression of genes that would account for some observed phenotypes of cepI or cepR mutants have not yet been reported. In this study, global gene expression profiling was performed using B. cenocepacia microarrays in order to more fully comprehend the extent of gene regulation exerted by both CepIR and CciIR. These data provide evidence of the individual, overlapping and opposing roles played by each of the QS systems in the regulation of global gene expression in B. cenocepacia.

### Results

#### Identification of genes differentially expressed in cepR, cciR and cepRccilR mutants

Transcriptional profiling using a custom B. cenocepacia oligonucleotide microarray was used to identify genes differentially expressed in stationary phase cultures of strain K56-2 cepR, cciR and cepRccilR mutants compared to wildtype K56-2. Both CepR and CciR were determined to positively and negatively regulate gene expression, and both QS systems influenced gene expression on all three chromosomes as well as the plasmid (Fig. 1A). Using a 2-fold difference in expression as a cut-off, 646 open reading frames (ORFs) were identified that were positively regulated by CepR and 214 ORFs were identified that were negatively regulated by CepR. CciR positively influenced the expression of 100 ORFs and negatively regulated the expression of 495 ORFs. In the cepRccilR mutant, 313 ORFs exhibited decreased expression and 176 ORFs showed increased expression compared to wildtype (See Additional File 1: Genes with increased or decreased expression in cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to K56-2). Both QS systems regulated genes involved in a range of biological processes including virulence, surface structures, transport or secretion, metabolism and regulation.

Subsets of unique ORFs independently regulated by CepR or CciR were identified in the microarray data (Fig. 1B). CepR was primarily a positive regulator while CciR generally was a negative regulator of gene expression. Although the majority of differentially expressed genes appeared to be independently regulated by either CepR or CciR, 196 ORFs were identified that were regulated by both CepR and CciR (Fig. 1C). Of these 196 ORFs, 167 were positively regulated by CepR and negatively regulated by CciR. Other patterns of co-regulation were observed including negative regulation by CepR and positive regulation by CciR, positive regulation by both QS systems or negative regulation by both QS systems. More than one quarter of the unique ORFs that were reciprocally regulated by CepR and CciR showed the same trend in regulation in the cepR and cepRccilR mutants. Other ORFs showed the same regulation pattern in the cepR and cepRccilR mutants but no change in the cciR mutant. Together, these data indicate that positive regulation is more frequently performed by CepR compared to CciR, that the majority (92%) of co-regulated genes were inversely regulated by CepR and CciR and that CepR regulation can be dominant over CciR regulation.

---

**Figure 1**

Genes regulated in QS mutants of B. cenocepacia according to microarray analysis. (A) Total number of genes showing positive or negative regulation in cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to K56-2. (B) Number of genes showing independent regulation in the cepR or cciR mutants compared to K56-2. (C) Number of genes exhibiting co-regulation were grouped as follows: positive regulation by CepR and negative regulation by CciR (cep+cci-), negative regulation by CepR and positive regulation by CciR (cep-cci+), positive regulation by both CepR and CciR (cep+cci+) and negative regulation by both CepR and CciR (cep-cci-).

---

### CepR gene regulation

To validate the transcriptome data we first compared genes differentially regulated between K56-2 and the cepR mutant to data from previous studies on CepRI regulation

in this strain. Previously we used a random promoter library to identify promoter::lux fusions differentially expressed between K56-2 and acepI mutant [27]. Comparison of transcriptome data of K56-2 and the cepR mutant to the promoter fusion data for K56-2 and the cepI mutant revealed that there was an overlap of at least 10 genes or operons identified using the two approaches (Table 1). Regulation of these genes by CepR was usually in the same direction and fold change was generally similar between the two studies. In some cases, genes were identified as differentially regulated in the transcriptome analysis that are predicted to be in the same operon as genes previously identified using the promoter fusion approach also suggesting a correlation between the approaches (data not shown). Two genes were identified for which opposite regulation by the CepIR system was observed between the promoter::lux fusions and the transcriptome analysis. For example, opposite results between the promoter fusion and microarray data were observed for BCAL1814 expression in the cepR mutant (Table 1). Subsequent investigation using qRT-PCR confirmed the microarray data showing reduced BCAL1814 expression in both the cepR and cciR mutants compared to K56-2 indicating co-regulation (Table 2).

In another previous study, we used a bioinformatics approach to search the B. cenocepacia J2315 genome with a cep box consensus sequence to identify potential CepIR-regulated genes [28]. Twenty-nine ORFs identified to be CepR-regulated by microarray analysis were previously shown to have a cep box motif in their predicted promoter region or were located in a putative operon downstream from an ORF with a cep box motif (Table 3). These genes included cepI, zmpA, aidA, and genes of the T6SS. Taken together, the data suggest the three different experimental approaches were complementary and that the data obtained by transcriptome analysis are valid since many of the genes identified as CepR-regulated using microarray analysis have been confirmed by other approaches.

Regulation of genes adjacent to cepI and cepR

The genomic location of cepI and the downstream ORF (BCAM1871) suggests they are part of the same operon. Expression of cepI and BCAM1871 was reduced in the cepR and cepRcciLR mutants compared to K56-2 (Tables 3 and 4). BCAM1869 is located between cepR and cepI and is divergently transcribed from cepR. Expression of BCAM1869 was reduced in the cepR mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 4). While the function of these proteins is not yet known, genomic locations are conserved for

Table 1: Comparison of genes (or operons) showing differential expression in microarray analysis and previously determined to be CepIR regulated using transcriptional fusions.

| Gene        | Function<sup>a</sup>                          | Change (fold) for K56-dl2(cepl) vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-R2(cepR) vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cciR vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cepRcciLR vs K56-2 |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| BCAL0111    | putative TPR domain                           | -3.7                                     | -2.2                                     | NC                                      | -2.2                                       |
| BCAL0380    | ABC transporter ATP-binding subunit           | -2.7                                     | -2.3                                     | NC                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAL0812    | sigma 54 modulation protein                   | -2.0                                     | -2.8                                     | NC                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAL1814<sup>d</sup> | MerR family regulatory protein          | 2.2                                      | -2.9                                     | -2.7                                     | NC                                         |
| BCAL1990    | glucose-6-phosphate isomerase Pgi             | -2.2                                     | -2.6                                     | NC                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAL2244    | urocanate hydratase HutU                      | -2.2                                     | -2.1                                     | NC                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAL2931<sup>d</sup> | radical SAM superfamily protein         | 3.2                                      | 2.0                                      | NC                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAL3006<sup>d</sup> | cold shock-like protein CspA            | -1.9                                     | -5.6                                     | 2.8                                      | -4.9                                       |
| BCAS0221    | ABC transporter ATP-binding protein AfcB      | -1.7                                     | -3.6                                     | 2.9                                      | NC                                         |
| BCAS0409    | zinc metalloprotease ZmpA                     | -2.6                                     | -5.3                                     | 4.0                                      | -4.5                                       |

<sup>a</sup> Function derived from B. cenocepacia J2315 [34].

<sup>c</sup> Change in 16-h cultures of cepI mutant compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by promoter fusion Subsin et al. 2007 [27].

<sup>c</sup> Change in 16-h cultures of cepR, cciR or cepRcciLR mutants compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by microarray analysis with at least two biological replicates (NC, no change).

<sup>d</sup> Presence of a cep box motif was identified by Subsin et al. 2007 [27] for this gene.

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

Table 2: Microarray and qRT-PCR analysis of selected genes showing differential expression in cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to K56-2.

| Gene       | Function<sup>a</sup>                          | Change (fold) for K56-R2 (cepR) vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cciR vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cepRccilR vs K56-2 |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
|            |                                             | microarray<sup>b</sup>                    | qRT-PCR<sup>c</sup>                   | microarray<sup>b</sup>                     | qRT-PCR<sup>c</sup>                       |
| BCAS 0409  | zinc metalloprotease ZmpA                      | -5.3                                     | -5.3                                 | 4.0                                       | 2.5                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | -4.5                                      | -3.3                                      |
| BCAL 1814  | MerR family regulatory protein                 | -2.9                                     | -1.4                                 | -2.7                                      | -1.4                                      |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | 2.7                                       |
| BCAM 0189  | AraC family regulatory protein                 | -2.1                                     | -1.3                                 | NC                                        | -2.6                                      |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -3.4                                      |
| BCAM 0191  | putative non-ribosomal peptide synthetase      | -2.3                                     | -7.4                                 | NC                                        | -2.1                                      |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -6.8                                      |
| BCAM 0199  | outer membrane efflux protein                  | 2.1                                      | 1.6                                  | NC                                        | -1.5                                      |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | 1.8                                       |
| BCAS 0293  | nematocidal protein AidA                       | -88.7                                    | -6647                                | NC                                        | 1.7                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | -214.9                                   | -4632                                     |
| BCAL 0114  | flagellin (type II) protein FliC               | -2.4                                     | -164.1                               | 2.2                                       | 7.7                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -127.9                                    |
| BCAS 0225  | Shiny variant regulator ShvR                   | -3.6                                     | -2.6                                 | NC                                        | 1.5                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | -2.3                                     | -2.2                                      |
| BCAS 0220  | putative permease                              | -3.0                                     | -2.5                                 | 2.8                                       | 1.7                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -1.2                                      |
| BCAS 0204  | ABC transporter ATP-binding protein            | -7.4                                     | -1.7                                 | 3.7                                       | 4.0                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -1.6                                      |
| BCAM 1420  | RND family efflux system transporter protein    | -4.8                                     | -1.3                                 | 10.3                                      | 3.0                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | -7.4                                     | -1.8                                      |
| BCAM 1418  | two-component regulatory system, response      | NC                                       | -10.7                                | 11.3                                      | 3.0                                       |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | NC                                        | -2.1                                      |
| BCAM 2626  | heme receptor protein HuvA                     | 3.4                                      | 2.2                                  | -2.2                                      | -2.0                                      |
|            |                                             |                                          |                                      | 2.7                                       | 2.6                                       |

<sup>a</sup> Function derived from *B. cenocepacia* J2315 [34].

<sup>b</sup> Change in 16-h cultures of cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by microarray analysis with at least two biological replicates (NC, no change).

<sup>c</sup> Change in 16-h cultures of cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by qRT-PCR.

orthologs of BCAM1869 and BCAM1871 in many *B. cenocepacia* and other *Burkholderia* strains [30]. Expression of some of the genes encoding for components of this pump was also increased during growth of *B. cenocepacia* in CF sputum [31].

### CciR exerts global gene regulation

The percentage of genes showing differential expression in the cciR mutant was 8.3% of the genome compared to 12.0% for the cepR mutant (See Additional File 1). The proportion of CciR-regulated genes was similar on each chromosome (7.9 to 8.6%) while 3 genes (3.1%) were regulated on the plasmid indicating CciR regulation is global in *B. cenocepacia*.

A large number of genes independently regulated by CciR were identified (See Additional File 1). CciR negatively regulated expression of 25 unique ORFs encoding ribosomal proteins only two of which were positively regulated by CepR. The majority of these ribosomal proteins form a large cluster from BCAL 0233-0261. Expression of ORFs forming part of the putative AmrA-AmrB-BCAL 1676 efflux pump was increased in the cciR mutant compared

CciR reciprocally regulated many genes previously reported to be CepR-regulated [27, 28] (Tables 1 & 3). Examples include increased expression of the cold shock-like protein CspA and the majority of genes in the BCAL0340-0348 T6SS operon in the cciR mutant compared to the cepR mutant. Additionally, CciR negatively regulated expression of pBCA055 (*bqiC*) which encodes a hypothetical protein with GGDEF and EAL domains (Table 4). Weingart et al. [17] reported CepR positively regulated expression of pBCA055 which was confirmed in the cepR and cepRccilR mutants (Table 4).

### Regulation of genes on the cenocepacia island

The cciR genes are located on a genomic island only found in strains of the ET12 lineage [13]. Mutations in two additional genes located on this island, amil

Gene        Function^a                                                                 cep box motif name or genomic context of downstream gene^b                          Change (fold) for K 56-R 2 (cepR) vs K56-2^c   Change (fold) for K 56-2cciR vs K56-2^c   Change (fold) for K 56-2cepRccilR vs K56-2^c
BCAL0051    periplasmic solute-binding protein                                          MST2001                                                                 -2.1                                      2.5                                      NC
BCAL0052    putative oxidoreductase                                                     downstream from MST2001                                                -2.2                                      2.7                                      NC
BCAL0232    elongation factor Tu                                                        MST2002                                                                 -2.1                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL0340    putative lipoprotein of T6SS                                                 MST005&MST2004                                                          -2.8                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL0341    putative type VI secretion system protein TssB                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -2.5                                      NC                                       -2.1
BCAL0342    putative type VI secretion system protein TssC                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -3.1                                      NC                                       -2.3
BCAL0343    putative type VI secretion system protein TssD                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -3.2                                      2.1                                      NC
BCAL0344    putative type VI secretion system protein TssE                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -2.7                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL0345    putative type VI secretion system protein TssF                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -5.1                                      2.8                                      -2.1
BCAL0346    putative type VI secretion system protein TssG                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -2.9                                      2.1                                      -2.1
BCAL0347    putative type VI secretion system protein TssH (ClpB)                      downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        NC                                       2.1                                      NC
BCAL0348    putative type VI secretion system protein TssA                             downstream from MST005 &MST2004                                        -2.7                                      2.1                                      -2.2
BCAL0831    putative storage protein                                                    MST2009                                                                 -5.2                                      NC                                       -4.0
BCAL0832    poly-beta-hydroxy-butyrate storage protein PhaA                            downstream from MST2009                                                -2.4                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL0833    putative acetoacetyl-CoA reductase PhbB                                    downstream from MST2009                                                -2.6                                      NC                                       -3.6
BCAL0834    hypothetical protein                                                        downstream from MST2009                                                -2.4                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL0999    sigma-E factor negative regulatory protein 2 RseA2                         MST2013                                                                 NC                                       NC                                       -3.4
BCAL1124    conserved hypothetical protein                                              MST2014                                                                 2.0                                       NC                                       NC
BCAL1354    conserved hypothetical protein                                              MST2020                                                                 NC                                       NC                                       -2.2
BCAL1562    hypothetical phage protein                                                  MST2024                                                                 NC                                       2.7                                      NC
BCAL2871    sigma-E factor negative regulatory protein I RseA1                         MST2036                                                                 NC                                       NC                                       NC
BCAL2870    sigma-E factor regulatory protein RseB precursor I MucBI                   downstream from MST2036                                                NC                                       NC                                       -3.5
BCAL3190    lclR family regulatory protein                                             MST2039                                                                 NC                                       2.3                                      2.6
BCAL3205^c  hypothetical protein                                                       MST2040                                                                 -2.0                                      NC                                       NC
BCAL3419    3-dehydroquinate dehydratase AroQI                                           MST2043                                                                 -2.0                                      NC                                       NC
BCAM1015    putative porin                                                             MST2050                                                                 -2.3                                      NC                                       NC
BCAM1405    levansucrase                                                               MST2055                                                                 -2.9                                      NC                                       NC
BCAM1502    hypothetical protein                                                       MST2056                                                                 -2.8                                      NC                                       NC
BCAM1870    N-acylhomoserine lactone synthase CepI                                      MST2059                                                                 -67.0                                     NC                                       -6.9
BCAM1871    hypothetical protein                                                       downstream from MST2059                                                -37.6                                     NC                                       -20.2
BCAM2502    3-dehydroquinate dehydratase AroQ (similar to BCAL3419)                     MST2064                                                                 -2.1                                      NC                                       NC

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

Table 3: Comparison of genes (or operons) showing differential expression in microarray analysis and identified to have a cep box motif. (Continued)

| BCAM 2626 | putative heme receptor protein HuvA | MST 2066 | 3.4 | -2.2 | 2.7 |
|-----------|------------------------------------|----------|-----|------|-----|
| BCAM 2627 | putative hemin ABC transport system protein HmuS | downstream from MST 2066 | 3.1 | NC | 2.9 |
| BCAS 0293 | nematocidal protein AidA | MST 2069 | -88.7 | NC | -214.9 |
| BCAS 0292 | hypothetical protein | downstream from MST 2069 | -137.3 | NC | -278.2 |
| BCAS 0409 | zinc metalloprotease ZmpA | MST 2070 | -5.3 | 4.0 | -4.5 |

a Function derived from B. cenocepacia J2315 [34].

b cep box motif name from Chambers et al. 2006 [28] or genomic context of downstream.

c Change in 16-h cultures of cepR, cciR or cepRcciIR mutants compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by microarray analysis with at least two biological replicates (NC, no change).

(BCAM0265) and opcl (BCAM0267), were found to reduce virulence in respiratory infections [13]. It was of interest to determine if CciR regulated these genes or others present on the genomic island. CciR did not influence expression of amiI or opcl; however it did influence expression of several other genes on the island (See Additional File 1). CciR positively regulated BCAM0233, the first gene in an arsenic resistance operon, and negatively regulated a putative ion transporter (BCAM0238) (Table 4).

Microarray analysis showed CciR negatively regulated its own expression, and that of cciI, as has previously been reported using cciR::lux promoter fusions [16]. Although the cciI and cciR genes were shown to be co-transcribed [16], cciI expression was markedly more increased than the expression of cciR in the cciR mutant (Table 4). Microarray analysis showed cciR expression was decreased in the cepRcciIR mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 4). Expression of neither cciI nor cciR was changed in the cepR mutant grown in LB although we have previously demonstrated that CepR was required for cciIR expression in PTSB medium using cciR::lux promoter fusions [16].

Regulation of genes encoding extracellular enzymes by CepR and CciR

We have previously shown decreased expression of zmpA in the cepR mutant compared to K56-2 [20,27]. Microarray and qRT-PCR analysis confirmed that zmpA expression was reduced in the cepR mutant (Tables 1 & 2) and demonstrated that zmpA expression was reduced in the cepRcciIR mutant (Tables 1 & 2) confirming phenotypic data for these mutants [16]. Decreased expression of zmpA in the cciR mutant compared to K56-2 was previously demonstrated in PTSB medium using promoter::lacZ fusions [16]. In the current study, zmpA expression was increased in the cciR mutant compared to K56-2 in cultures grown in LB medium for 16 h, by both microarray and qRT-PCR analysis (Tables 1 & 2).

Expression of zmpB was previously shown to be decreased in cepR, cciR and cepRcciIR mutants but increased in a cciI mutant compared to K56-2 using promoter::lux fusions [19]. Positive regulation of zmpB, was confirmed in the cepR and cepRcciIR mutants by microarray analysis (Table 4); however, zmpB expression was increased in the cciR mutant compared to K56-2. Although LB medium was used in both cases, data from the promoter::lux fusions was generated at 20 h growth while data from the microarray analysis was performed on cultures grown for 16 h. Several attempts were made to quantitate zmpB expression levels by qRT-PCR but a high degree of variability was observed for this weakly expressed transcript. In fact, zmpB was the most weakly expressed transcript in the majority of the microarray samples. Together, these data indicate zmpA and zmpB expression is positively influenced by CepR under all conditions examined and that growth medium and phase of growth influence regulation by CciR.

Genes encoding the exported lipase LipA (BCAM0949) and the lipase chaperone LipB (BCAM0950, previously called limA) are required for lipase production [32]. Expression of both lipA and lipB was decreased in the cepR mutant compared to K56-2, but was unchanged in the cciR or cepRcciIR mutants (Table 4). Lipase activity was previously shown to be reduced in a cepR mutant compared to K56-2 [14].

BCAL1722 encoding a putative exported chitinase showed decreased expression in the cepR mutant compared to K56-2 but no change in expression in the cciR or cepRcciIR mutants (Table 4). Chitinase activity has been shown to be CepIR-regulated in B. cenocepacia H111, with lower activity reported in B. cenocepacia H111 cepI and cepR mutants [21].

CepR and CciR regulate genes adjacent to cepR2

We have recently shown that the B. cenocepacia orphan LuxR homolog CepR2 is involved in negative regulation of genes adjacent to itself [18]. Additionally, cepR2 expression is increased in the cciR mutant [18]. Several CepR2-regulated genes and operons also showed differential

| Gene         | Function                                                                 | Change (fold) for K56-R2 (cepR) vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cciR vs K56-2 | Change (fold) for K56-2cepRccilR vs K56-2 |
|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| BCAL1369     | Sigma factor 70EcfC (FecI)                                               | 4.6                                    | NC                                       | 3.0                                            |
| BCAL1370     | Iron uptake regulatory protein FecR                                      | 2.7                                    | NC                                       | 2.1                                            |
| BCAL1520     | Putative lipoprotein                                                     | -2.1                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAL1528     | Flp type pilus assembly protein                                          | -2.1                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAL1530     | Flp type pilus assembly protein                                          | -3.2                                   | NC                                       | -2.0                                           |
| BCAL1531     | Flp type pilus assembly protein                                          | -2.2                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAL1532     | Flp type pilus assembly protein                                          | NC                                     | NC                                       | -2.2                                           |
| BCAL1533     | Putative lipoprotein                                                     | -2.1                                   | 2.3                                      | NC                                             |
| BCAL1534     | Putative exported protein                                               | -3.3                                   | 2.6                                      | NC                                             |
| BCAL1368     | Probable porin                                                          | -2.4                                   | 2.5                                      | -2.1                                           |
| BCAL1677     | Putative type-I fimbrial protein                                         | -2.3                                   | 3.1                                      | NC                                             |
| BCAL1688     | sigma factor 70EcfI (OrbS)                                              | NC                                     | -2.5                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAL1689     | MbtH-like protein OrbH                                                  | NC                                     | -2.2                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAL1690     | putative dioxygenase OrbG                                               | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.5                                            |
| BCAL1692     | iron transport-related membrane protein OrbD                             | NC                                     | NC                                       | 3.0                                            |
| BCAL1693     | iron transport-related membrane protein OrbF                             | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.1                                            |
| BCAL1694     | iron transport-related exported protein OrbB                            | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.4                                            |
| BCAL1696     | ornibactin biosynthesis non-ribosomal peptide synthase OrbI              | NC                                     | -2.4                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAL1697     | ornibactin biosynthesis non-ribosomal peptide synthase OrbJ              | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.4                                            |
| BCAL1698     | ornibactin biosynthesis protein OrbK                                     | NC                                     | -2.8                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAL1699     | L-ornithine 5-monooxygenase PvdA                                        | NC                                     | -2.8                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAL1700     | ornibactin receptor precursor OrbA                                      | NC                                     | -2.2                                     | 2.2                                            |
| BCAL1701     | ornibactin synthetase OrbF                                              | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.2                                            |
| BCAL1702     | ornibactin biosynthesis protein OrbL                                    | NC                                     | NC                                       | 2.5                                            |
| BCAL1722     | Putative exported chitinase                                             | -2.8                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAL2757     | Superoxide dismutase SodB                                               | -2.3                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAL3297     | Ferretin DPS-family DNA-binding protein                                 | -2.8                                   | NC                                       | -3.8                                           |
| BCAL3298     | Conserved hypothetical protein                                           | -2.1                                   | NC                                       | -2.8                                           |
| BCAL3299     | Peroxidase/catalase KatB                                                | -2.3                                   | NC                                       | -4.0                                           |
| BCAM0184     | Lectin                                                                  | NC                                     | 2.0                                      | -2.1                                           |
| BCAM0186     | Lectin BclA                                                             | -7.5                                   | 3.1                                      | -3.2                                           |
| BCAM0233     | ArsR family regulatory protein                                           | NC                                     | -2.0                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAM0238     | Putative ion transporter                                                 | NC                                     | 2.0                                      | NC                                             |
| BCAM0239a    | N-acylhomoserine lactone synthase CciI                                   | NC                                     | 52.1                                     | NC                                             |
| BCAM0240     | N-acylhomoserine lactone dependent regulatory protein CciR                | NC                                     | 4.0                                      | -23.5                                          |
| BCAM0949     | Exported lipase LipA                                                    | -3.1                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAM0950     | Lipase chaperone LipB                                                   | -2.5                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAM1869     | Conserved hypothetical protein                                           | -5.9                                   | NC                                       | NC                                             |
| BCAM1871     | Conserved hypothetical protein                                           | -37.6                                  | NC                                       | -20.2                                          |
| BCAM2307     | Zinc metalloprotease ZmpB                                                | -2.3                                   | 2.1                                      | -2.4                                           |
| pBCA055      | Putative membrane protein                                                | -12.0                                  | 2.4                                      | -9.1                                           |

a Function derived from *B. cenocepacia* J2315 [34].

b Change in 16-h cultures of cepR, cciR or cepRccilR mutants compared to 16-h cultures of K56-2 as determined by microarray analysis with at least two biological replicates (NC, no change).

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441

expression in the current study (See Additional File 1). These genes included BCAM0189 (AraC family regulatory protein), BCAM0191 (putative non-ribosomal peptide synthetase) and BCAM0199 (outer membrane efflux protein). Expression of BCAM0189 and BCAM0191 were decreased but expression of BCAM0199 was increased in the cepR mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 2). This trend in regulation was confirmed for all three genes using qRT-PCR (Table 2). BCAM0189, BCAM0191 and BCAM0199 expression levels were similar between the cciR and cepRcciR mutants compared to K56-2 by microarray; however, qRT-PCR analysis indicated that expression of these genes was decreased in the cciR mutant, but the expression pattern was similar between the cepRcciR and cepR mutants (Table 2). CepR2 negatively regulates expression of the lectin-encoding gene, bclA, [33] which lies adjacent to two other co-transcribed lectin-encoding genes (BCAM0185-0184) [18]. Expression of bclA was decreased in the cepR mutant (Table 4). Expression of both bclA and BCAM0184 was increased in the cciR mutant and decreased in the cepRcciR mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 4).

### CciR negatively regulates aidA expression

Several studies illustrated that CepR positively regulates the expression of the nematocidal protein, AidA [17,24-26]. Expression levels of aidA and BCAS0292 were reduced in the cepR and cepRcciR mutants (Table 2). Measurement of aidA expression using qRT-PCR confirmed reduced expression in the cepR and cepRcciR mutants and indicated increased expression in the cciR mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 2). Negative regulation of aidA expression by CciR was also demonstrated using a promoter::lux fusion which showed significantly increased aidA expression in the cciR mutant between 12 and 16 h of growth (*P* < 0.05, unpaired *t*-test, Welch corrected) (Fig. 2).

### QS regulation of flagellar and motility genes

Previously it was demonstrated that the cepR mutant exhibits reduced swarming motility while the cciR mutant has similar swarming motility compared to K56-2 [16]. Expression levels of 31 genes in nine operons involved in flagellar motility were analyzed. The overall trend showed decreased expression of these genes in the cepR and cepRcciR mutants but increased expression in cciR mutant compared to K56-2 (Fig. 3A). Investigation of fliC (BCAL0114) expression using qRT-PCR confirmed this trend in regulation (Table 2). Separately, activity of a fliC promoter::lux fusion confirmed fliC expression was positively regulated by CepR and negatively regulated by CciR (data not shown). No obvious difference in flagellin protein expression was detected by Western blot in the QS mutants compared to wildtype (data not shown). Mutations in cepI or cepR were previously reported not to alter swimming motility of B. cenocepacia H111 growing at

Figure 2  
Expression of aidA in the cciR mutant compared to K56-2. Expression was monitored throughout growth in PTSB plus 100 μg/ml of Tp. The expression of aidA::lux (pAidA) is significantly greater in K56-2cciR than K56-2 from 12 to 16 h along the time course (*, P < 0.05, unpaired t-test, Welch corrected). All values are the means ± SD of triplicate cultures and are representative of three individual trials: Black Square:, K56-2; White Square: K56-2cciR.

37°C [21]. Strain K56-2cepR and cepRcciR mutants exhibited significantly reduced swimming motility at 22°C and 28°C compared to K56-2 (*P* < 0.001, two-way ANOVA) (Fig. 3BC), whereas swimming motility was significantly increased in the cciR mutant at 22°C and 28°C compared to K56-2 (*P* < 0.001, two-way ANOVA) (Fig. 3BC).

#### Flp type pilus and fimbrrial proteins

Bacterial pili and fimbriae are frequently involved in binding eukaryotic cells and have been shown to play a role in infection in many pathogenic bacteria. A flp type pilus cluster containing two putative operons from BCAL1524-1520 and BCAL1525-1537 has been identified [34]. Several genes in these operons showed decreased expression in the cepR and cepRcciR mutants while two genes showed increased expression in the cciR mutant (Table 4) suggesting reciprocal regulation of this cluster. It is likely that the BCAL1525 operon is similar to that of clone P15 which was positively regulated by CepR in *B. cepacia* [24]. BCAL1677, which was positively regulated by CepR and negatively regulated by CciR (Table 4), encodes a putative type-1 fimbrrial protein and was shown to be CepIR-regulated in *B. cenocepacia* H111 [26].

#### QS controls a regulator involved in virulence (ShvR) and proteins of unknown function

Many ORFs located in a genomic region of approximately 27 kb on Chromosome 3 were differentially expressed in the QS mutants compared to K56-2 (Fig. 4A). Part of this QS-regulated gene cluster included BCAS0225, which regulates the rough-shiny morphotype and contributes to vir-

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

A

BCAL0114 flagellin (type II)
BCAL0124 flagellar regulon master regulator subunit FlhD
BCAL0125 flagellar regulon master regulator subunit FlhC
BCAL0129 chemotaxis two-component sensor kinase CheA
BCAL0133 putative chemoreceptor glutamine deamidase cheD
BCAL0135 chemotaxis protein CheY
BCAL0140 flagellar biosynthetic protein FlhB
BCAL0142 putative flagellar biosynthesis protein
BCAL0143 putative flagellar biosynthesis protein
BCAL0144 RNA polymerase sigma factor for flagellar
BCAL0520 putative flagellar hook-length control protein
BCAL0521 flagellar FliJ protein
BCAL0522 flagellum-specific ATP synthase FliI
BCAL0523 flagellar assembly protein FliH
BCAL0525 flagellar M-ring protein FliF
BCAL0526 flagellar hook-basal body complex protein FliE
BCAL0564 flagellar basal-body rod protein FlgB
BCAL0565 flagellar basal-body rod protein FlgC
BCAL0566 basal-body rod modification protein FlgD
BCAL0567 flagellar hook protein 1 FlgE1
BCAL0568 flagellar basal-body rod protein FlgF
BCAL0569 flagellar basal-body rod protein FlgG
BCAL0570 flagellar L-ring protein precursor
BCAL0571 flagellar P-ring protein precursor
BCAL0572 peptidoglycan hydrolase FlgJ (muramidase FlgJ)
BCAL0577 flagellar hook-associated protein 3 (HAP3)
BCAL3501 flagellar biosynthetic protein FliR
BCAL3505 flagellar motor switch protein FliN
BCAL3506 flagellar motor switch protein FliM
BCAL3507 flagellar FliL protein
BCAS0104 A-type flagellar hook-associated protein 2

-3.4 2.5 -2.2 Mean change (displayed set of genes)

B

K56-2
K56-2cepR
K56-2cciR
K56-2cepRccilR

C

K56-2
K56-2cepR
K56-2cciR
K56-2cepRccilR

Figure 3

Regulation of flagellar-associated genes and swimming motility. (A) Cluster analysis of flagellar-associated genes with decreased (green), increased (red) or no change (black) in expression in each mutant compared to K56-2 according to microarray analysis. Arrows indicate putative (dashed lines) or experimentally-determined (solid lines) transcriptional units. Gene name and function are derived from *B. cenocepacia* [34]. Mean change (fold) in expression is indicated for the displayed group of genes for each mutant. Swimming motility was assessed by measuring zones of growth of cultures at (B) 22°C or (C) 28°C. Significantly different swimming motilities were observed for the QS mutants compared to K56-2 at 22°C and 28°C (***, P < 0.001, two-way ANOVA) (Fig. 3). All values are the means ± SEM of triplicate cultures and are representative of two individual trials.

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

A

| BCAS0202 | putative membrane protein |
| BCAS0203 | ABC transporter protein |
| BCAS0204 | ABC transporter ATP-binding protein |
| BCAS0205 | TauD/TfdA taurine catabolism dioxygenase family |
| BCAS0206 | putative methyltransferase family protein |
| BCAS0207 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0208 | putative acyl-CoA dehydrogenase |
| BCAS0209 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0210 | putative AMP-binding enzyme |
| BCAS0211 | putative pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylase |
| BCAS0212 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0213 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0214 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0215 | putative exported protein |
| BCAS0216 | putative acyl carrier protein |
| BCAS0217 | conserved hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0218 | hypothetical protein |
| BCAS0219 | putative exported protein |
| BCAS0220 | putative permease |
| BCAS0221 | ABC transporter ATP-binding protein AfcB |
| BCAS0223 | putative fatty acid desaturase AfcC |
| BCAS0224 | conserved hypothetical protein AfcD |
| BCAS0225 | LysR family regulatory protein ShvR |
| BCAS0226 | putative hydrolase |

-5.6 2.5 -2.7 Mean change (displayed set of genes)

B


Figure 4
Regulation of a 27 kb gene cluster on Chromosome 3. (A) Cluster analysis of genes in the *afcA* and *shvR* genomic regions with decreased (green), increased (red) or no change (black) in expression in each mutant compared to K56-2 according to microarray analysis. Arrows indicated putative (dashed lines) or experimentally-determined (solid lines) transcriptional units. Gene name and function are derived from *B. cenocepacia* [34]. Mean change (fold) in expression is indicated for the displayed group of genes for each mutant. (B) Expression of *afcA* was monitored throughout growth in K56-2Δ*cepR* and K56-2*ccilR* mutants compared to K56-2 in PTSB plus 100 μg/ml of Tp. The expression of *afcA::lux* (*pAfcA*) is significantly greater in K56-2*ccilR* than K56-2 from 6 to 10 h along the time course (*P* < 0.05, unpaired *t*-test, Welch corrected). All values are the means ± SD of triplicate cultures and are representative of two individual trials.

ulence in K56-2 [35]. Expression of BCAS0225 (which we now refer to as *shvR* for shiny variant regulator) was decreased in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants compared to K56-2 (Table 2). Lower expression of *shvR* was confirmed using qRT-PCR in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants while increased expression was observed in the *cciR* mutant (Table 2).

In *B. cepacia* BC11, *AfcA* and *AfcCD* are responsible for production of an antifungal compound [36]. Orthologs of these genes are present in *B. cenocepacia* as part of two putative transcriptional units; *afcA* (BCAS0222) to BCAS0202 and *afcCD* [30]. In the *afcA* genomic region, expression of the majority of ORFs was decreased in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants but increased in the *cciR* mutant compared to K56-2 (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, qRT-PCR analysis of BCAS0204 and BCAS0220 confirmed this trend in the *cepR*, *cciR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants (Table 2). Although a difference in *afcA* expression was not detectable in these mutants by microarray analysis, an *afcA::lux* promoter fusion had lower expression in the *cepR* mutant and significantly higher expression in the *cciR* mutant compared to K56-2 between 6 and 10 h of growth (*P* < 0.05, unpaired *t*-test, Welch corrected) (Fig. 4B). Previously, CepR was also shown to positively regulate an *afcB::lux* reporter fusion [27] (Table 1).

### Transcriptional control of a resistance-nodulation division family efflux pump

*B. cenocepacia* is known to exhibit high levels of intrinsic resistance to antimicrobials [9]. At least 14 potential resistance-nodulation division (RND) family efflux pumps [37] have been identified in *B. cenocepacia* [37,38]. We recently demonstrated CepR2 positively regulates expression of BCAM1420, part of a putative RND efflux pump [18]. Expression of BCAM1420 and several adjacent regulatory genes was lower in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants but increased in the *cciR* mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 2) (See Additional File 1). The expression patterns of BCAM1420 and BCAM1418 (two-component regulatory system, response regulator) were confirmed by qRT-PCR (Table 2). Antibiotic susceptibility is not significantly different in peg-formed biofilms of *cepR* or *cciR* mutants compared to K56-2 [23]. No differences in resistance to a selection of heavy metals were observed between the QS mutants and K56-2 (data not shown).

### Reciprocal QS regulation of iron transport genes

We have shown CepR negatively regulates ornibactin synthesis in *B. cenocepacia* strains K56-2 and H111 [15,18]. No change in expression was detected for any gene in the *orbI* (BCAL1696) or *ecfI* (*orbS*, BCAL1688) operons in the *cepR* mutant (Table 4); however, expression of several genes in these operons was decreased in the *cciR* mutant and increased in the *cepRcciIR* mutant compared to K56-2

(Table 4). This indicates that CciR positively regulates ornibactin synthesis and transport genes, and suggests CepIR is dominant over CciIR, since these genes are negatively regulated in the *cepRcciIR* mutant as has previously been reported in the *cepR* mutant.

*B. cenocepacia* contains a FecIR-like system potentially involved in iron uptake [39]. Increased expression of *fecI* (*ecfC*, BCAL1369) and *fecR* (BCAL1370) was detected in *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants compared to K56-2 indicating that CepR also negatively regulates ferric citrate transport (Table 4). Divergently transcribed from *efcC* is a probable porin gene that showed lower expression in *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants compared to K56-2 (Table 4). This appears to be similar to clone P57 identified by Aguilar et al. 2003 [24] that was positively regulated by CepR in *B. cepacia*. Expression of a putative oxidoreductase (BCAL0269) and a ferric reductase-like transmembrane component (BCAL0270) was decreased in the *cepRcciIR* mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 4). It was recently reported that expression of BCAL0270, was increased during growth of *B. cenocepacia* in CF sputum [31].

We previously demonstrated that genes involved in heme transport are positively regulated by the CepIR QS system and that *huvA* (BCAM2626) contained a *cep* box in its promoter region [28] (Table 3). In this study *huvA* expression was increased in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants and decreased in the *cciR* mutant compared to wildtype. This trend in regulation for *huvA*, which contradicts the data obtained previously with *huvA* transcriptional fusions was independently confirmed using qRT-PCR (Table 2).

### CepR regulation of oxidative stress genes

*B. cenocepacia* contains a major catalase/peroxidase protein, KatB (BCAL3299), important for resistance to hydrogen peroxide [40]. Expression of a putative three-gene operon consisting of *katB* and two downstream ORFs was decreased in the *cepR* and *cepRcciIR* mutants compared to K56-2 (Table 4). Expression of superoxide dismutase *sodB* (BCAL2757), previously shown to be CepR-regulated in *B. cenocepacia* H111 [26], was also reduced in the *cepR* mutant compared to K56-2 (Table 4).

### QS regulation of phage-related genes

Recently, an epidemic strain of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* with mutations in prophage and genomic island sequences was shown to have reduced ability to compete with the parent strain in a rat lung infection model [41]. *B. cenocepacia* J2315 possesses 5 prophages contained on 14 genomic islands (termed BcenGI) [34]. Twenty-four differentially regulated phage-related genes were identified in the *cepR* mutant, twenty genes were differentially expressed in the *cepRcciIR* mutant, whereas only 5 phage-

related genes showed changes in expression in the *cciR* mutant (See Additional File 1).

# Discussion

In this study we characterized the contributions of CepR and CciR to global gene regulation in *B. cenocepacia*. Elucidation of the CciR regulon indicates that it is a global regulator of QS gene expression in *B. cenocepacia*. Many CepR-regulated genes identified in prior studies were also identified as CepR-regulated using microarrays. This approach facilitated the identification of novel genes regulated by the CepIR and CciIR QS systems. Genes independently regulated by CepR or CciR, as well as co-regulated genes, were identified. Importantly, the majority of co-regulated genes were reciprocally regulated by CepR and CciR. This pattern of regulation was independently confirmed for a number of these genes using qRT-PCR or promoter::lux fusions.

CepR-regulation of AidA has been consistently identified in previous studies [17,24-26] suggesting tight regulation by CepR. The putative two-gene operon comprising *aidA* and the downstream ORF (BCAS0292) contained the most highly regulated genes in the *cepR* and *cepRccilIR* mutants compared to K56-2. Promoter::lux fusions showed that *aidA* expression was negatively regulated by the CciIR system. Other genes, including *cepI*, *ccil*, pBCA055 and BCAM1871 also showed high levels of QS regulation (12- to 67-fold) using microarrays. The majority of genes showed low levels of QS regulation consistent with previous studies in *B. cenocepacia* K56-2 [27,28]. A 2-fold change in expression was selected as a cut-off for microarray analysis which was consistent with the degree of differential expression of a number of previously-identified CepR-regulated genes in strain K56-2 [17,27,28]. These changes in gene expression have also been correlated with changes in some phenotypes such as protease activity and siderophore production [15,19,20]. Furthermore, some CepR-regulated genes identified in *B. cenocepacia* H111 or *B. cepacia* ATCC 25416 were shown to be CepR regulated in strain K56-2, suggesting that QS-mediated regulation of many genes is conserved in the Bcc [24,26].

The interrelationship between the CepIR and CciIR systems is complex. Although we previously reported that CciR negatively regulated *cepI* in PTSB medium [16], no change in *cepI* expression was detectable in the transcriptome analysis of the *cciR* mutant grown in LB medium; however, consistent with previous data, CciR negatively regulated expression of the *cciIR* operon. We previously demonstrated that CepR was required for expression of a *cciIR* promoter::lux fusion in PTSB medium [16], but similar results were not obtained in this study with cultures grown in LB medium. These data suggest that the regulatory relationship between the two QS systems varies depending on growth conditions and nutrient availability.

Presence of cci has been associated with several transmissible *B. cenocepacia* strains [13]. The cci can be found in strains belonging to the ET12 lineage [13], but is absent from genomes of other *B. cenocepacia* strains, including representatives of the transmissible PHDC lineage (AU1054, HI2424) and strain H111 [26,34]. Our study now shows that presence of CciIR in certain *B. cenocepacia* strains has major implications for QS-regulated genes across the genome; most notably genes reciprocally regulated by CepIR and CciIR. Three master regulators of CepR have been identified in *B. cenocepacia* H111 [42]. It is unknown if other regulatory factors (other than GciR, SuhB, YciL and YciR) exist which can limit the influence of CepR and thus provide balance to QS-mediated gene expression. This may have important consequences during infection to fine tune expression of virulence factors in response to particular environmental cues.

It has previously been shown that LasR, RhlR and QscR, components of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* QS network, have overlapping but distinct regulons [43]. The presence of las-rhl box-like sequences in the promoter regions of many QS-regulated genes has been demonstrated [44]. A subsequent study showed a consensus motif could be more easily identified for genes regulated by RhlR rather than LasR and that a single conserved motif could not be identified for QS-regulated promoters [45]. Recently, it was shown that *rhlR* is expressed in the absence of LasR in *P. aeruginosa* [46] and that RhlR exerts regulation over genes that were thought to be specifically LasR-regulated including *lasI*.

In our study we confirmed CepR regulation for a number of genes which contain a *cep* box motif in their promoters [28]. We do not know if CepR and CciR bind the same promoter motif. There were no genes with a *cep* box in their promoters that showed only CciR regulation. Negative regulation by CciR occurs in genes with or without a *cep* box in their promoters suggesting this motif is not required for regulation by CciR and opens the possibility that CciR recognizes a distinct motif. Gene regulation in the *cepRccilIR* mutant more closely resembled gene regulation in the *cepR* mutant than the *cciR* mutant. This suggests CepR is the more dominant regulator and very likely acts upstream from CciR. Direct binding of CepR to two promoters has been demonstrated [17]. CepR and CciR promoter binding studies might provide insight into the reciprocal regulation of co-regulated genes. It is possible that CciR could inactivate CepR by forming heterodimers as has been suggested as a mechanism for negative regulation by QscR [47]. The majority of C8-HSL or C6-HSL is

produced by CepI and CciI, respectively [14-16]. Therefore, QS-regulation by CepR and CciR may also be strictly dependent on the relative abundance of the signaling molecules.

Flagella are recognized as important virulence factors for human and plant pathogens [48]. A clear change in expression was observed at the transcriptional level for many flagellar-associated genes in the QS mutants compared to wildtype. Differences in swimming motility were found when cultures were grown at 22°C and 28°C confirming the reciprocal regulation of flagellar-associated genes and swimming motility by the CepIR and CciIR systems. A change in flagellin protein expression was not apparent in the QS mutants grown at 37°C. Positive control of flagella formation by QS is observed in *B. glumae*. However, lack of flagella formation in a *B. glumae tofI* mutant can be overcome by incubation at 28°C indicating other factors are involved [49]. Reduced biosurfactant production, as opposed to improper flagella formation, is responsible for reduced swarming in an AHL-deficient mutant of *Serratia liquefaciens* [50]. Reduced swarming observed in the *B. cenocepacia* H111*cepR* mutant can be restored by addition of exogenous surfactants. An endogenously-produced biosurfactant has not yet been described in *B. cenocepacia*. From an evolutionary perspective, flagella share common features with the type 3 secretion system (T3SS) [51] which we have also shown to be positively regulated by CepIR [27]. The expression of flagellar-associated and T3SS genes was increased in *B. cenocepacia* grown in CF sputum indicating conditions promoting their expression may be present during infection [31].

The majority of genes in the *afcA* genomic region have not been studied in detail in *Burkholderia* species, although some of these genes in *B. cepacia* BC11 are responsible for production of an antifungal with inhibitory activity against *Rhizoctonia solani* [36]. Antifungal production was highest in stationary phase and under low aeration growth conditions [36]. Expression of three putative operons containing *afcA*-BCAS0202, *afcCD* and *shvR*-BCAS0226 is induced in a *B. cenocepacia* agricultural field isolate (strain HI2424) growing under soil-like conditions compared to CF-like conditions but was unchanged in a *B. cenocepacia* CF isolate (strain AU1054) in these conditions [52]. We have now clearly shown that both CepR and CciR regulate many genes in the *afcA* genomic region.

Our recent characterization of the *B. cenocepacia* orphan LuxR homolog CepR2 [18] facilitated the incorporation of its regulon into the current study. A number of CepR2-regulated genes were also regulated by CepR and CciR, including genes in the genomic region adjacent to *cepR2*. A larger number of co-regulated genes may have been

identified if the experiments were conducted at the same time in growth as opposed when CepR2 expression is maximal (mid-log phase) and when CepR and CciR expression is maximal (late stationary phase).

Intrinsic antibiotic resistance due to efflux pumps is a major problem associated with the treatment of *B. cenocepacia* infections. Presence of multiple efflux pumps with redundant functions is suggested by the lack of difference in *cepR* or *cciR* mutants compared to wildtype in resistance to antibiotics and heavy metals [23] (this study). However, QS regulation of efflux pumps may have other consequences. Efflux pumps are also involved in the efflux of QS molecules in *P. aeruginosa* [53] and *B. pseudomallei* [54]. QS regulation of efflux pumps may be more important in certain environments than in others. Growth of *B. cenocepacia* in CF sputum was shown to increase expression of a component of the BCAM0199-0201 putative multi-drug efflux pump [31] which we showed was negatively regulated by CepR and positively regulated by CciR and CepR2 [18] (this study).

Iron is an essential cofactor in many metabolic pathways however iron availability is usually limited in the host [55]. *B. cenocepacia* produce the siderophores ornibactin and pyochelin to sequester iron. CepR2 and indirectly CepR positively regulate pyochelin biosynthesis in *B. cenocepacia* H111 [18]. Pyochelin biosynthesis does not occur in *B. cenocepacia* K56-2 because a point mutation exists in the pyochelin synthetase gene *pchF* [34]. In this study we demonstrate that the CepR and CciR systems inversely regulate genes involved in ornibactin biosynthesis and uptake, as well as regulate genes involved in other iron transport systems including heme and the FecIR uptake systems. QS regulation of multiple iron transport mechanisms may facilitate growth in specific environmental niches where resources are limited. Some ornibactin genes were poorly expressed, most likely due to the fact cultures for microarray analysis were grown in LB medium compared to cultures with promoter::lux fusions which were grown in low-iron TSB-DC medium [56]. The difference in media may explain the difference in regulation for some of these iron acquisition genes between the current and previous studies [28], since we also demonstrated that the expression of *cepI* and *cciIR* varied depending on the media. Different media are also known to influence *lasIR*, *rhlIR* and QS-regulated genes in *P. aeruginosa* [57].

Evidence of a link between oxidative stress and QS was shown in the regulation of *katA*, *sodA* and *sodB* by the *las* and *rhl* systems in *P. aeruginosa* [58]. In *B. pseudomallei*, the response to oxidative stress occurs through QS regulation of *dpsA* expression [59]. In this study we demonstrated that CepR regulates *katB* (BCAL3299) and a downstream gene BCAL3297 encoding a putative ferritin DPS-family

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

DNA binding protein in *B. cenocepacia*. Genomic analysis suggests that BCAL3297 is a homolog of the ORF designated *dpsA* positioned downstream from *katG* (clone P80), which is CepR-regulated in *B. cepacia* [24].

QS-regulated phage-related genes included a large proportion of genes contained on prophage BcenGI12. We have not investigated the consequences of QS regulation on phage activity in *B. cenocepacia*; however, mutation of phage components in *P. aeruginosa* has important consequences for bacterial competition in vivo [41]. It is enticing to consider that unidentified virulence factors may be carried on genomic islands/prophages and that expression of these is under QS control. It is also possible that cell density-dependent regulation of phage elements facilitates genomic rearrangement within a species or horizontal gene transfer between mixed bacterial populations.

### Conclusion

The CepIR and CciIR QS systems regulate expression of multiple genes at the transcriptional level in *B. cenocepacia*, including potential virulence genes. QS-regulated genes involved in motility, biofilm formation/adhesion, extracellular enzymes, secretion systems, iron transport, stress response and antibiotic resistance are summarized in Fig. 5. The CepIR system is primarily responsible for positive regulation while the opposite is true for the CciIR system. The majority of the co-regulated QS-controlled genes are subject to reciprocal regulation by CepR and CciR. Until now the scale of this inverse regulation was not fully appreciated. The antagonistic influence of CepR and CciR ensures that QS-regulated gene expression in *B. cenocepacia* is tightly regulated. Novel gene clusters, not previously shown to be QS-regulated, were identified, facilitating the future examination of these genes in relation to pathogenesis. This work provides significant advances for understanding QS-mediated regulation of virulence genes in *B. cenocepacia*. A detailed picture of the QS network is required to facilitate the development of therapies aimed at interfering with cell-cell communication systems to control bacterial infection.

### Methods

#### Strains and growth conditions

The bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table 5. Cultures were routinely grown at 37°C, in Miller's Luria broth (LB) (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON) with shaking or on 1.5% Lennox LB agar plates. For promoter::lux assays, strains were grown in 0.25% trypticase soy broth (Difco, Franklin Lakes, NJ) with 5% Bacto-Peptone (Difco) (PTSB). Swimming motility assays were performed as previously described [35] except that overnight cultures were normalized to an OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.4 prior to inoculation and growth was assessed at 22°C or 28°C. When appropriate, the following concentrations of antibiotics were used: 100 μg/ml of trimethoprim (Tp) and 200 μg/ml of tetracycline (Tc). Antibiotics were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Canada Ltd. (Oakville, ON).

#### DNA manipulations

DNA manipulations were performed using standard techniques as described by Sambrook et al. [60]. Genomic DNA was isolated as described by Ausubel et al. [61] or Walsh et al. [62]. Oligonucleotide primers (See Additional File 2: Oligonucleotide primers used in this study) were designed with Primer3 [63] and were synthesized by the University of Calgary Core DNA and Protein Services (Calgary, Alberta, Canada). Plasmids were introduced into *B. cenocepacia* by electroporation [64].

#### Construction of the K56-2ΔcepR mutant

An unmarked *cepR* mutant was constructed in K56-2 following the procedure outlined by Flannagan et al. [65]. Briefly, two regions of homology flanking *cepR* were amplified using primers F1-M1868-UP-EcoRI, R1-M1868-UP-Clal, F2-M1868-DW-Clal and R2-M1868-DW-Xbal. The amplified products were digested with Clal to remove an internal portion of *cepR* and ligated into pCR2.1TOPO, giving rise to plasmid TPCR2.1::H12. Plasmid TPCR2.1::H12 was digested with XbaI and EcoRI and the fragment was inserted into pGPI-SceI, giving rise to mutagenesis plasmid pGPI-SceI::H12. pGPI-SceI::H12 was introduced into *B. cenocepacia* by conjugation. A single crossover event in K56-2 was confirmed by PCR in Tp resistant clones. To these clones, pDAI-SceI was introduced by conjugation to obtain the double crossover event. The pDAI-SceI plasmid was resolved by curing the exconjugants in LB broth. PCR confirmed that the deletion had occurred.

#### RNA manipulations

*B. cenocepacia* was subcultured to obtain an initial optical density at 600 nm (OD<sub>600</sub>) of 0.02 and grown for the time indicated below for each experiment without selection. Total RNA was isolated using a RiboPure bacterial RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Streetsville, Ontario, Canada). DNase treatment was performed, and samples were confirmed by PCR using Taq polymerase (Invitrogen) to be free of DNA prior to cDNA synthesis.

#### Microarray sample preparation

Three independent RNA samples from *B. cenocepacia* strains grown for 16 h were used in microarray experiments. Gene expression profiles were generated using custom *B. cenocepacia* J2315 microarrays (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) [34, 66]. A reference pool of K56-2 cDNA was fluorescently labelled with Cy3 while the test cDNA samples (K56-2, K56-R2, K56-2cciR and K56-2cepRcciIR) were fluorescently labelled with Cy5. cDNA generation and labelling was performed using the CyScribe Post-Label-

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

Figure 5  
Hierarchical organization of the CepIR, CciIR and CepR2 quorum sensing systems and traits under their control in B. cenocepacia K56-2. Summary diagram of the regulatory interrelationship between CepIR and CciIR, and CciIR and CepR2. AHLs are required to activate CepR and CciR but not CepR2. All three regulators negatively control their own expression. The three QS systems positively and negatively influence gene expression. +, positive regulation; -, negative regulation.

ling kit (GE Healthcare, Wales) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Spike-in controls (Aglient) were included into the labelling procedure for quality control purposes. cDNA purification was performed by ethanol precipitation and the labelled cDNA was purified using a CyScribe GFX purification kit and eluted with water. Hybridization and washing of arrays was performed according to the two-colour microarray based gene expression analysis protocol (Agilent) with minor modifications where the 25× fragmentation buffer was omitted and the cDNA mix and 10× blocking agent were heat-denatured for 3 min at 98°C and cooled to room temperature before adding the hybridization buffer. Washing of microarrays was performed including acetonitrile as well as stabilization and

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

Table 5: Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study.

| Strain or plasmid | Description                                                                                   | Reference     |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| **Strains**       |                                                                                               |               |
| B. cenocepacia    |                                                                                               |               |
| K56-2             | CF isolate, BCESM +, Tc<sup>R</sup>                                                          | [70]          |
| K56-R2            | cepR::Tn5-OT182 derivative of K56-2, Tc<sup>R</sup>                                           | [14]          |
| K56-2ΔcepR        | ΔcepR derivative of K56-2                                                                     | This study    |
| K56-2cciR         | cciR::Tp derivative of K56-2, Tp<sup>R</sup>                                                  | [16]          |
| K56-2ccilR        | ΔccilR derivative of K56-2                                                                    | [16]          |
| K56-2cepRccilR    | cepR::Tp, ΔccilR derivative of K56-2, Tp<sup>R</sup>                                          | [16]          |
| E. coli           |                                                                                               |               |
| DH5α              | F-mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS-mcrBC) φ80lacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 recA1 endA1 araD139Δ(ara, leu)7697 galU galK λ-rpsL nupG | Invitrogen    |
| TOP10             | F-mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS-mcrBC) φ80lacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 recA1 araD139Δ(ara-leu)7697 galU galK rpsL (Str<sup>R</sup>) endA1 nupG λ- | Invitrogen    |
| SY327             | araD, Δ(lac pro) argE(Am) recA56 rif<sup>R</sup> nalAλpir                                     | [71]          |
| **Plasmids**      |                                                                                               |               |
| pGPI-Scel         | ori<sub>R6K</sub>, Tp<sup>R</sup>, mob<sup>+</sup>, carries I-Scel cut site                     | [65]          |
| pDAI-Scel         | pDAI7 carrying the I-Scel gene                                                                | [65]          |
| TPCR2.1::H12      | pCR2.1 TOPO containing amplified homologous regions flanking cepR                              | This study    |
| pGPI-Scel::H12    | Mutageneis plasmid pGPI-Scel with homologous regions flanking cepR                             | This study    |
| pAidA301          | aidA::lux transcriptional fusion constructed in pMS402 Km<sup>R</sup>Tp<sup>R</sup>           | [28]          |
| pAfcA             | afcA::lux transcriptional fusion constructed in pMS402 Km<sup>R</sup>Tp<sup>R</sup>           | This study    |

drying solution (Agilent). A G2565 BA microarray scanner and the scan control software (Agilent) were used. Scanning resolution was set to 5 μm and the scan region was adjusted to 61 × 21.6 mm. The extended dynamic range function was switched on with 100% and 10% photomultiplier gain settings. Images were analysed with the feature extraction software (Agilent). Labelling, hybridization and scanning were performed by the Mahenthiralingam Laboratory, Cardiff University, Wales.

### Microarray data analysis

Microarray data analysis was performed using GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software (Agilent). Initial data were preprocessed by employing the enhanced Agilent FE import method, and then per-spot and per-chip normalizations were performed for all arrays. Some variation was noted across the 16 arrays of the signal intensities of spike-in control genes (added prior to cDNA synthesis) and prelabeled control genes (added prior to hybridization) (data not shown). After filtering on flags (present/marginal versus absent), genes were selected on the basis of changes, for which a 2-fold cutoff was used for comparison. Subsequent to microarray analysis, certain genes were noted because they appeared to be in transcriptional units associated with differentially regulated genes.

### Cluster analysis and operon prediction

Microarray data was analyzed with Cluster [67] and visualized using Treeview to allow a visual comparison of expression levels for each gene in an operon. Operon prediction was performed by analysis of the *B. cenocepacia* J2315 genome at <http://www.burkholderia.com>[30]. Adjacent genes on the same coding strand with less than 300 bp intergenic space between them were arranged in putative operons.

### Quantitative RT-PCR

The sigma factor gene *sigE* [39] (previously termed *sigA* [18]) (BCAM0918) was used as a reference standard as described previously [18]. Expression of *sigE* was not significantly altered according to microarray analysis (data not shown). RT-PCR was performed using an iScript Select cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). For quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), quantification and melting curve analyses were performed with an iCycler and iQ SYBR green Supermix (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer's instructions. qRT-PCRs were performed in triplicate, and the data shown below represent data from at least two independent experiments. Relative expression values for each gene were calculated using the ΔΔC<sub>t</sub> equation [68].

### Transcriptional fusions to luxCDABE (lux)

The 371 bp *afcA* promoter region was amplified using primers AfcAPromfor1 and AfcAPromrev1 and cloned into the XhoI-BamHI site upstream of *lux* in pMS402 [69]. The *aidA* transcriptional fusion was previously described

### Microarray accession number

The entire microarray data set has been deposited in the ArrayExpress database <http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress> under accession number E-MEXP-2303.

[BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441)

[28]. Luminescence assays were carried out as previously described [18, 28]. The level of promoter activity is expressed below as the ratio of luminescence to turbidity (CPS/OD<sub>600</sub>).

### Authors' contributions

EPO prepared samples for microarray experiments and performed qRT-PCR experiments. EPO and PAS analyzed and interpreted microarray data. DFV constructed the unmarked mutant. EPO, DFV and RJM performed promoter::lux reporter experiments. EPO and PAS conceived and designed the experiments. EPO and PAS wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

### Additional material

#### Additional file 1
**Genes with increased or decreased expression in cepR, cciR or cepRcciR mutants compared to K56-2. Microarray analysis of selected genes showing differential expression in cepR, cciR or cepRcciR mutants compared to K56-2.**

Click here for file  
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-10-441-S1.DOC]

#### Additional file 2
**Oligonucleotide primers used in this study. Complete list of oligonucleotide primers used in this study.**

Click here for file  
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-10-441-S2.DOC]

### Acknowledgements

These studies were supported by research grants from the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics to PAS. EPO is the recipient of a CCFF fellowship and RJM was the recipient of an Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research Studentship. The authors thank Matthew Holden and Julian Parkhill for access to the *B. cenocepacia* J2315 sequence prior to publication and Leo Eberl for helpful discussions and sharing unpublished data. Microarray processing was provided by the Mahenthiralingam Laboratory, Cardiff University, Wales and initial data analysis by the Center for Bioinformatics of University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Audrey A. Plourde is acknowledged for excellent technical assistance. Donald E. Woods is acknowledged for supplying anti-flagellin antibodies and Cora Kooi for performing preliminary western blotting experiments.

### References

1. Vandamme P, Mahenthiralingam E, Holmes B, Coenye T, Hoste B, De Vos P, Henry D, Speert DP: Identification and population structure of *Burkholderia stabilis* sp. nov. (formerly *Burkholderia cepacia* genomovar IV). *J Clin Microbiol* 2000, **38(3):1042-1047**.
2. Vandamme P, Henry D, Coenye T, Nzula S, Vancanneyt M, LiPuma JJ, Speert DP, Govan JR, Mahenthiralingam E: *Burkholderia anthina* sp. nov. and *Burkholderia pyrrocinia*, two additional *Burkholderia cepacia* complex bacteria, may confound results of new molecular diagnostic tools. *FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol* 2002, **33(2):143-149**.
3. Vanlaere E, Lipuma JJ, Baldwin A, Henry D, De Brandt E, Mahenthiralingam E, Speert D, Dowson C, Vandamme P: *Burkholderia latens* sp. nov., *Burkholderia diffusa* sp. nov., *Burkholderia arboris* sp. nov., *Burkholderia seminalis* sp. nov. and *Burkholderia metallica* sp. nov., novel species within the *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. *Int J Syst Evol Microbiol* 2008, **58(Pt 7):1580-1590**.
4. Vermis K, Coenye T, LiPuma JJ, Mahenthiralingam E, Nelis HJ, Vandamme P: Proposal to accommodate *Burkholderia cepacia* genomovar VI as *Burkholderia dolosa* sp. nov. *Int J Syst Evol Microbiol* 2004, **54(Pt 3):689-691**.
5. Vandamme P, Holmes B, Coenye T, Goris J, Mahenthiralingam E, LiPuma JJ, Govan JR: *Burkholderia cenocepacia* sp. nov.--a new twist to an old story. *Res Microbiol* 2003, **154(2):91-96**.
6. Mahenthiralingam E, Baldwin A, Vandamme P: *Burkholderia cepacia* complex infection in patients with cystic fibrosis. *J Med Microbiol* 2002, **51(7):533-538**.
7. Saiman L, Siegel J: Infection control in cystic fibrosis. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 2004, **17(1):57-71**.
8. Isles A, Maclusky I, Corey M, Gold R, Prober C, Fleming P, Levison H: *Pseudomonas cepacia* infection in cystic fibrosis: an emerging problem. *J Pediatr* 1984, **104(2):206-210**.
9. Mahenthiralingam E, Urban TA, Goldberg JB: The multifarious, multireplicon *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. *Nat Rev Microbiol* 2005, **3(2):144-156**.
10. Venturi V, Friscina A, Bertani I, Devescovi G, Aguilar C: Quorum sensing in the *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. *Res Microbiol* 2004, **155(4):238-244**.
11. Waters CM, Bassler BL: Quorum sensing: cell-to-cell communication in bacteria. *Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol* 2005, **21:319-346**.
12. Gotschlich A, Huber B, Geisenberger O, Togl A, Steidle A, Riedel K, Hill P, Tummler B, Vandamme P, Middleton B, et al.: Synthesis of multiple N-acylhomoserine lactones is wide-spread among the members of the *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. *Syst Appl Microbiol* 2001, **24(1):1-14**.
13. Baldwin A, Sokol PA, Parkhill J, Mahenthiralingam E: The *Burkholderia cepacia* epidemic strain marker is part of a novel genomic island encoding both virulence and metabolism-associated genes in *Burkholderia cenocepacia*. *Infect Immun* 2004, **72(3):1537-1547**.
14. Lewenza S, Conway B, Greenberg EP, Sokol PA: Quorum sensing in *Burkholderia cepacia*: identification of the LuxRI homologs CepRI. *J Bacteriol* 1999, **181(3):748-756**.
15. Lewenza S, Sokol PA: Regulation of ornibactin biosynthesis and N-acyl-L-homoserine lactone production by CepR in *Burkholderia cepacia*. *J Bacteriol* 2001, **183(7):2212-2218**.
16. Malott RJ, Baldwin A, Mahenthiralingam E, Sokol PA: Characterization of the cciIR Quorum-Sensing System in *Burkholderia cenocepacia*. *Infect Immun* 2005, **73(8):4982-4992**.
17. Weingart CL, White CE, Liu S, Chai Y, Cho H, Tsai CS, Wei Y, Delay NR, Gronquist MR, Eberhard A, et al.: Direct binding of the quorum sensing regulator CepR of *Burkholderia cenocepacia* to two target promoters in vitro. *Mol Microbiol* 2005, **57(2):452-467**.
18. Malott RJ, O'Grady EP, Toller J, Inhulsen S, Eberl L, Sokol PA: A *Burkholderia cenocepacia* orphan LuxR homolog is involved in quorum-sensing regulation. *J Bacteriol* 2009, **191(8):2447-2460**.
19. Kooi C, Subsin B, Chen R, Pohorelic B, Sokol PA: *Burkholderia cenocepacia* ZmpB is a broad-specificity zinc metalloprotease involved in virulence. *Infect Immun* 2006, **74(7):4083-4093**.
20. Sokol PA, Sajjan U, Visser MB, Gingues S, Forstner J, Kooi C: The CepIIR quorum-sensing system contributes to the virulence of *Burkholderia cenocepacia* respiratory infections. *Microbiology* 2003, **149(Pt 12):3649-3658**.
21. Huber B, Riedel K, Hentzer M, Heydorn A, Gotschlich A, Givskov M, Molin S, Eberl L: The cep quorum-sensing system of *Burkholderia cepacia* H111 controls biofilm formation and swarming motility. *Microbiology* 2001, **147(Pt 9):2517-2528**.
22. Uehlinger S, Schwager S, Bernier SP, Riedel K, Nguyen DT, Sokol PA, Eberl L: Identification of specific and universal virulence factors in *Burkholderia cenocepacia* strains by using multiple infection hosts. *Infect Immun* 2009, **77(9):4102-4110**.
23. Tomlin KL, Malott RJ, Ramage G, Storey DG, Sokol PA, Ceri H: Quorum-sensing mutations affect attachment and stability of *Burkholderia cenocepacia* biofilms. *Appl Environ Microbiol* 2005, **71(9):5208-5218**.

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

24. Aguilar C, Friscina A, Devescovi G, Kojic M, Venturi V: Identification of quorum-sensing-regulated genes of Burkholderia cepacia. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(21):6456-6462.

25. Huber B, Feldmann F, Kothe M, Vandamme P, Wopperer J, Riedel K, Eberl L: Identification of a novel virulence factor in Burkholderia cenocepacia H111 required for efficient slow killing of Caenorhabditis elegans. Infect Immun 2004, 72(12):7220-7230.

26. Riedel K, Arevalo-Ferro C, Reil G, Gorg A, Lottspeich F, Eberl L: Analysis of the quorum-sensing regulon of the opportunistic pathogen Burkholderia cepacia H111 by proteomics. Electrophoresis 2003, 24(4):740-750.

27. Subsin B, Chambers CE, Visser MB, Sokol PA: Identification of Genes Regulated by the cepIIR Quorum-Sensing System in Burkholderia cenocepacia by High-Throughput Screening of a Random Promoter Library. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:968-979.

28. Chambers CE, Lutter EI, Visser MB, Law PP, Sokol PA: Identification of potential CepR regulated genes using a cep box motif-based search of the Burkholderia cenocepacia genome. BMC microbiology 2006, 6:104.

29. Aubert DF, Flannagan RS, Valvano MA: A novel sensor kinase-response regulator hybrid controls biofilm formation and type VI secretion system activity in Burkholderia cenocepacia. Infect Immun 2008, 76(5):1979-1991.

30. Winsor GL, Khaira B, Van Rossum T, Lo R, Whiteside MD, Brinkman FS: The Burkholderia Genome Database: facilitating flexible queries and comparative analyses. Bioinformatics 2008, 24(23):2803-2804.

31. Drevinek P, Holden MT, Ge Z, Jones AM, Ketchell I, Gill RT, Mahenthiralingam E: Gene expression changes linked to antimicrobial resistance, oxidative stress, iron depletion and retained motility are observed when Burkholderia cenocepacia grows in cystic fibrosis sputum. BMC Infect Dis 2008, 8:121.

32. Jorgensen S, Skov KW, Diderichsen B: Cloning, sequence, and expression of a lipase gene from Pseudomonas cepacia: lipase production in heterologous hosts requires two Pseudomonas genes. J Bacteriol 1991, 173(2):559-567.

33. Lameignere E, Malinovska L, Slavikova M, Duchaud E, Mitchell EP, Varrot A, Sedo O, Imberty A, Wimmerova M: Structural basis for mannose recognition by a lectin from opportunistic bacteria Burkholderia cenocepacia. Biochem J 2008, 411(2):307-318.

34. Holden MT, Seth-Smith HM, Crossman LC, Sebaihia M, Bentley SD, Cerdeno-Tarraga AM, Thomson NR, Bason N, Quail MA, Sharp S, et al.: The genome of Burkholderia cenocepacia J an epidemic pathogen of cystic fibrosis patients. J Bacteriol 2015, 191(1):261-277.

35. Bernier SP, Nguyen DT, Sokol PA: A LysR-type transcriptional regulator in Burkholderia cenocepacia influences colony morphology and virulence. Infect Immun 2008, 76(1):38-47.

36. Kang Y, Carlson R, Tharpe W, Schell MA: Characterization of genes involved in biosynthesis of a novel antibiotic from Burkholderia cepacia BCII and their role in biological control of Rhizoctonia solani. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64(10):3939-3947.

37. Nair BM, Cheung KJ Jr, Griffith A, Burns JL: Salicylate induces an antibiotic efflux pump in Burkholderia cepacia complex genomovar III (B. cenocepacia). J Clin Invest 2004, 113(3):464-473.

38. Guglierame P, Pasca MR, De Rossi E, Buroni S, Arrigo P, Manina G, Riccardi G: Efflux pump genes of the resistance-nodulation-division family in Burkholderia cenocepacia genome. BMC Microbiol 2006, 6:66.

39. Menard A, de Los Santos PE, Graindorge A, Cournoyer B: Architecture of Burkholderia cepacia complex sigma70 gene family: evidence of alternative primary and clade-specific factors, and genomic instability. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:308.

40. Lefebre MD, Flannagan RS, Valvano MA: A minor catalase/peroxidase from Burkholderia cenocepacia is required for normal aconitase activity. Microbiology 2005, 151(Pt 6):1975-1985.

41. Winstanley C, Langille MG, Fothergill JL, Kukavica-Ibrulj I, Paradis-Bleau C, Sanschagrin F, Thomson NR, Winsor GL, Quail MA, Lennard N, et al.: Newly introduced genomic prophage islands are critical determinants of in vivo competitiveness in the Liverpool Epidemic Strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Genome Res 2009, 19(1):12-23.

42. Huber B, Riedel K, Kothe M, Givskov M, Molin S, Eberl L: Genetic analysis of functions involved in the late stages of biofilm development in Burkholderia cepacia H111. Mol Microbiol 2002, 46(2):411-426.

43. Lequette Y, Lee JH, Ledgham F, Lazdunski A, Greenberg EP: A distinct QscR regulon in the Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-sensing circuit. Journal of bacteriology 2006, 188(9):3365-3370.

44. Schuster M, Lostroh CP, Ogi T, Greenberg EP: Identification, timing, and signal specificity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-controlled genes: a transcriptome analysis. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(7):2066-2079.

45. Schuster M, Greenberg EP: Early activation of quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa reveals the architecture of a complex regulon. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:287.

46. Dekimpe V, Deziel E: Revisiting the quorum-sensing hierarchy in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: the transcriptional regulator RhlR regulates LasR-specific factors. Microbiology 2009, 155(Pt 3):712-723.

47. Ledgham F, Ventre I, Soscia C, Foglino M, Sturgis JN, Lazdunski A: Interactions of the quorum sensing regulator QscR: interaction with itself and the other regulators of Pseudomonas aeruginosa LasR and RhlR. Mol Microbiol 2003, 48(1):199-210.

48. Tampakaki AP, Fadouloglou VE, Gazi AD, Panopoulos NJ, Kokkinidis M: Conserved features of type III secretion. Cell Microbiol 2004, 6(9):805-816.

49. Kim J, Kang Y, Choi O, Jeong Y, Jeong JE, Lim JY, Kim M, Moon JS, Suga H, Hwang I: Regulation of polar flagellum genes is mediated by quorum sensing and FlhDC in Burkholderia glumae. Mol Microbiol 2007, 64(1):165-179.

50. Eberl L, Molin S, Givskov M: Surface motility of Serratia liquefaciens MG1. J Bacteriol 1999, 181(6):1703-1712.

51. Cornelis GR: The type III secretion injectosome. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4(11):811-825.

52. Yoder-Himes DR, Chain PS, Zhu Y, Wurtzel O, Rubin EM, Tiedje JM, Sorek R: Mapping the Burkholderia cenocepacia niche response via high-throughput sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(10):3976-3981.

53. Pearson JP, Van Delden C, Iglewski BH: Active efflux and diffusion are involved in transport of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cell-to-cell signals. J Bacteriol 1999, 181(4):1203-1210.

54. Chan YY, Bian HS, Tan TM, Mattmann ME, Geske GD, Igarashi J, Hatano T, Suga H, Blackwell HE, Chua KL: Control of quorum sensing by a Burkholderia pseudomallei multidrug efflux pump. J Bacteriol 2007, 189(11):4320-4324.

55. Neilands JB: Siderophores: structure and function of microbial iron transport compounds. J Biol Chem 1995, 270(45):26723-26726.

56. Ohman DE, Sadoff JC, Iglewski BH: Toxin A-deficient mutants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA103: isolation and characterization. Infect Immun 1980, 28(3):899-908.

57. Wagner VE, Bushnell D, Passador L, Brooks AI, Iglewski BH: Microarray analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-sensing regulons: effects of growth phase and environment. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(7):2080-2095.

58. Hassett DJ, Ma JF, Elkins JG, McDermott TR, Ochsner UA, West SE, Huang CT, Fredericks J, Burnett S, Stewart PS, et al.: Quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa controls expression of catalase and superoxide dismutase genes and mediates biofilm susceptibility to hydrogen peroxide. Mol Microbiol 1999, 34(5):1082-1093.

59. Lumjiaktase P, Diggle SP, Loprasert S, Tungpradabkul S, Daykin M, Camara M, Williams P, Kunakorn M: Quorum sensing regulates dpsA and the oxidative stress response in Burkholderia pseudomallei. Microbiology 2006, 152(Pt 12):3651-3659.

60. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor NY; 1989.

61. Ausubel F, Brent R, Kingston R, Moore D, Seidman J, Smith J, Struhl K: Current protocols in molecular biology. Volume 1. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; 1989.

62. Walsh PS, Metzger DA, Higuchi R: Chelex 100 as a medium for simple extraction of DNA for PCR-based typing from forensic material. Biotechniques 1991, 10(4):506-513.

63. Rozen S, Skaletsky H: Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist programmers. Methods Mol Biol 2000, 132:365-386.

64. Dennis JJ, Sokol PA: Electrotransformation of Pseudomonas. Methods Mol Biol 1995, 47:125-133.

BMC Genomics 2009, 10:441

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/441

65. Flannagan RS, Linn T, Valvano MA: A system for the construction of targeted unmarked gene deletions in the genus Burkholderia. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10(6):1652-1660.

66. Leiske DL, Karimpour-Fard A, Hume PS, Fairbanks BD, Gill RT: A comparison of alternative 60-mer probe designs in an in-situ synthesized oligonucleotide microarray. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:72.

67. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D: Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95(25):14863-14868.

68. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 2001, 25(4):402-408.

69. Duan K, Dammel C, Stein J, Rabin H, Surette MG: Modulation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa gene expression by host microflora through interspecies communication. Mol Microbiol 2003, 50(5):1477-1491.

70. Mahenthiralingam E, Coenye T, Chung JW, Speert DP, Govan JR, Taylor P, Vandamme P: Diagnostically and experimentally useful panel of strains from the Burkholderia cepacia complex. J Clin Microbiol 2000, 38(2):910-913.

71. Miller VL, Mekalanos JJ: A novel suicide vector and its use in construction of insertion mutations: osmoregulation of outer membrane proteins and virulence determinants in Vibrio cholerae requires toxR. J Bacteriol 1988, 170(6):2575-2583.


Publish with **BioMed Central** and every scientist can read your work free of charge

"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."

Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:

* available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
* peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
* cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
* yours — you keep the copyright

Submit your manuscript here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp
