
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**Current Opinion in**
**Plant Biology**

**Arabidopsis circadian clock and photoperiodism: time to think about location**

Takato Imaizumi

Plants possess a circadian clock that enables them to coordinate internal biological events with external daily changes. Recent studies in *Arabidopsis* revealed that tissue-specific clock components exist and that the clock network architecture also varies within different organs. These findings indicate that the makeup of circadian clock(s) within a plant is quite variable. Plants utilize the circadian clock to measure day-length changes for regulating seasonal responses, such as flowering. To ensure that flowering occurs under optimum conditions, the clock regulates diurnal CONSTANS (CO) expression. Subsequently, CO protein induces FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) expression which leads to flowering. It is emerging that both CO and FT expression are intricately controlled by groups of transcription factors with overlapping functions.

**Address**

Department of Biology, University of Washington, 24 Kincaid Hall, Box 351800, Seattle, WA 98195-1800, USA

**Corresponding author:** Imaizumi, Takato (<takato@u.washington.edu>)

---

**Current Opinion in Plant Biology** 2010, **13**:83–89

This review comes from a themed issue on Growth and Development Edited by Dominique C. Bergmann and Andrew J. Fleming Available online 14th October 2009 1369-5266/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI **10.1016/j.pbi.2009.09.007**

---

**Introduction**

In order to adapt to daily fluctuations in the surrounding environment, most organisms have acquired a circadian clock, a vital mechanism that regulates time-dependent biological events. Therefore, plants that are unable to synchronize internal events with external daily changes suffer a severe loss of environmental fitness [1]. The earth’s tilted rotational axis causes day length to vary throughout the year. These differences in length are especially dramatic at higher latitudes. Organisms have evolved ways of optimizing their behaviors and development to align with these changes. To anticipate seasonal variation, organisms measure alterations in day length using their circadian clocks and by sensing light and temperature conditions [2]. In many plants, changes in day length regulate the most important developmental transition, from a vegetative growth phase to a reproductive phase [2]. Our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of circadian clocks and day-length-dependent (photoperiodic) flowering time regulation has advanced very rapidly in recent years. Here I introduce recent findings regarding the circadian clock and day-length measurement mechanisms in *Arabidopsis thaliana*.

**Molecular circuit of the circadian clock**

Computational analyses predict that the *Arabidopsis* clock is composed of at least three interlocking loops [3,4] (*Figure 1*). In this model, morning-expressed CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1)/LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY) and PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR 7 (PRR7)/PRR9 comprise one loop, while evening-peaked TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1) and hypothetical clock component Y form another loop. The CCA1/LHY-PRR7/9 loop and the TOC1-Y loop are connected by the originally proposed negative feedback loop, which is formed by CCA1/LHY and TOC1 [5]. Most TOC1 proteins are degraded by the photoreceptor F-box protein ZEITLUPE (ZTL) before dawn [6,7]. Because TOC1 protein likely induces *CCA1* and *LHY* expression indirectly in the morning, TOC1 regulates *CCA1/LHY* expression via hypothetical component X [8]. Although this model does not contain all known clock components, it provides a testable framework of the plant circadian clock architecture.

It was proposed that a candidate for Y could be GIGANTEA (GI) protein [3,8]. However, GI by itself does not fulfill the entire role of Y, mainly due to the lack of a clear genetic connection in the transcriptional regulation between *GI* and *TOC1* [9,10] (*Figure 1*). On the other hand, GI protein increases the amplitude of the daily TOC1 protein oscillation by stabilizing ZTL protein [7]. Since GI enhances the peak expression of TOC1 protein, GI could still contribute a part of Y activity. Thus it is implied that multiple factors constitute Y activity, including GI.

**Closing the CCA1–TOC1 loop**

Because of the unknown molecular nature of TOC1 function, the mechanism by which TOC1 induces *CCA1* and *LHY* expression remained elusive until recently. CCA1 HIKING EXPEDITION (CHE), which is a TCP (TEOSINTE BRANCHED1, CYCLOIDEA, and PCF)-class transcription factor, functions as a TOC1-associated regulator of *CCA1* [11**]. TOC1 physically interacts with CHE, which acts as a transcriptional

repressor of *CCA1*, and both proteins associate with a similar *CCA1* promoter region. Reciprocally, CCA1 binds to the evening elements in the *CHE* promoter and inhibits its expression. In addition, *CHE* overexpression weakens the long period phenotype caused by elevated levels of *TOC1* expression. Although the molecular relationship between CHE and TOC1 in *CCA1* expression is not completely understood, these results indicate that TOC1 regulates *CCA1* expression in part by forming a complex with CHE, and that CHE and CCA1 form an additional feedback loop (Figure 1). Since CHE does not regulate *LHY* expression, and because *CCA1* is still expressed in *che* mutants, it is likely that other factors participate in the regulation of *CCA1* and *LHY* induction. As the identification of CHE partially closes the CCA1/LHY–TOC1–X loop, X activity (like Y activity) seems to comprise multiple proteins.

In addition to CHE, several new components that function within or adjacent to the circadian oscillator(s) have been identified within the last two years. These include FIONA1 (FIO1) [12], XAP5 CIRCADIAN TIME-KEEPER (XCT) [13], LIGHT-REGULATED WD1 (LWD1), and LWD2 [14]. Although the mechanisms by which these proteins affect circadian rhythms remain unknown, plants harboring mutations in these genes have altered period length and different clock-associated physiological responses, such as flowering time regulation and photomorphogenesis. These results further confirm the importance of proper daily time-keeping mechanisms in the regulation of physiological responses. The next challenges regarding these newly identified clock factors are to understand their molecular roles within the currently proposed circadian clock circuits and to elucidate the molecular connection between the circadian oscillator and the physiological processes it controls.

### Structural plasticity of the clock circuit

A previous report has suggested that plants may have different circadian clocks in their aerial parts than in their roots [15]. A recent report provided molecular evidence that in certain tissues not all clock components participate in forming a functional clock, even though they are expressed in the same cells. In mature roots grown in light-tight boxes, genes in the CCA1/LHY–PRR7/PRR9 loop oscillate diurnally. However, evening-expressed clock genes such as *TOC1*, which have the evening elements (=CCA1/LHY binding sites) in the promoters, are expressed at similar levels throughout the day in the roots when the whole plants were incubated under constant light conditions [16**]. Under these conditions, the timing of the peak expression of *CCA1*, *LHY*, *PRR7*, and *PRR9* is different between the aerial parts and roots. In addition, the *toc1* mutation does not affect period length in the roots, but causes short-period phenotype in the shoots, indicating that TOC1 does not participate in period-length regulation in the mature roots [16**]. Since

the *toc1* mutant roots from young seedlings show the short-period phenotype [15], the degree of TOC1 involvement in the root clock could possibly be age-dependent. Interestingly, in the *prr9 prr7* mutant roots, *TOC1* shows circadian oscillation [16**]. These results suggest that the uncoupled evening-phased loop can be connected to the morning-phased loop under certain circumstances. Two different clock-regulated genes, both expressed in the same tissues but with one having a morning peak and the other an afternoon peak, responded to temperature shifts differently [17]. On the basis of current observations, the two clock outputs might be regulated by different transcriptional loops (Figure 1), which under some conditions are uncoupled from each other. Moreover, a photosynthesis-related signal, possibly sucrose, might entrain the root clock [16**]. As photosynthesis activity is regulated by the circadian clock [1], this result indicates the presence of a mechanism that couples circadian clocks between different organs.

#### Tissue-specific circadian clock

Many circadian clock output genes that control various physiological events are expressed in specific tissues or cells. For instance, the expression of clock-regulated genes that are involved in photoperiod measurement is often restricted in vasculature tissues (Figure 1), while the expression of the well-known clock output gene, CHLOROPHYLL A/B-BINDING PROTEIN 2 (*CAB2*, also known as *LHCB1*I), largely occurs in leaf mesophyll cells. However, it was uncertain whether plants possessed tissue-specific clock(s) to regulate tissue-specific signaling pathways. Recent findings suggest that the expression of some clock components is indeed tissue specific. The evening-expressed clock gene *PRR3* is mainly expressed in aerial vascular tissues [18**]. Both PRR3 and TOC1 proteins are highly phosphorylated at night and the phosphorylation enhances the direct interaction between PRR3 and TOC1 [19]. This interaction, which may primarily occur in vascular tissues, protects TOC1 protein from ZTL-dependent degradation [18**]. This explains the stronger circadian clock phenotype in the vascular tissues compared to the mesophyll cells of *prr3* mutants [18**]. Spatial expression pattern analysis revealed that *PRR9* might also be strongly expressed in the vascular tissues [18**], implying that the *prr9* mutant would also show a stronger phenotype if circadian rhythms in vascular tissues were analyzed. These studies suggest that the circadian clocks in vascular cells and cells in the rest of the leaf may consist of different components. Notably, the core day-length-sensing mechanism regulating flowering time resides in leaf phloem [20]. Also, phloem and xylem are essential for daily transport of sugar, water, and minerals. Thus, plants may need specific sets of clock proteins in the vasculature to precisely coordinate the daily traffic of solute transport as well as seasonal measurement.

Arabidopsis circadian clock and photoperiodism Imaizumi 85

# Photoperiodic flowering regulation

Plants defective in the day-length-sensing mechanism cannot properly time flowering in the natural environment [21]. Circadian clock regulation of *CONSTANS* (*CO*) gene expression and light-dependent regulation of *CO* protein stability are important components in the monitoring of changes in day length [20]. This biphasic regulation of *CO* ensures that its target, *FLOWERING LOCUS T* (*FT*), is induced specifically in long days. *FT* protein is synthesized in the leaf vasculature and then translocated to the shoot apical meristem, where it interacts with the bZip transcription factor FD to initiate the

transcriptional cascade of floral transition [22,23]. Recent evidence indicates that FT protein is a major part of the long-sought floral inducer ‘florigen’ [24]. There are several recent reviews that focus on the florigen molecule [25–27]. Here I summarize new insights into the molecular mechanisms by which plants measure day-length changes in leaves (Figure 1).

## Circadian clock-dependent CO regulation

The circadian clock regulates *CO* transcription partly by degrading *CO* repressors at a specific time of day in long days (Figure 2). CYCLING DOF FACTOR1 (CDF1) is

---

**Figure 1**

A model for the circadian clock and the photoperiodic flowering pathway in *Arabidopsis*. The most recently proposed clock architecture comprises three feedback loops (depicted in three different colors within the pale green circle that indicates the circadian clock). In the computational model CCA1 and LHY were treated as one functional unit, rather than two different proteins. Recent studies show that CCA1 and LHY form a functional unit by dimerization *in vivo* [62,63]. The CCA1/LHY–PRR7/9 loop is the only one that oscillates in mature roots under constant light condition [16]. Several known clock components are not in the diagram due to their undetermined positions in the circuit. The diagram that is outside the pale green circle area denotes the clock-regulated photoperiodic pathway. Oval symbols depict proteins and overlapping ovals indicate protein complexes. Thick solid lines denote direct physical interactions, while thin solid lines denote genetic interactions. The dotted lines depict transcription and translation. The leaf cartoon indicates gene products that may be expressed mainly in leaf vascular tissues, based on studies of promoter-driven β-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter lines. The proteins that are directly involved in *CO* and *FT* gene expression and have gene and/or protein expression that is regulated by the circadian clock are shown with the clock cartoon symbol. The expression of genes which lack published gene or protein expression data under constant light conditions was analyzed using the publicly available microarray data at the DIURNAL project website [84]. Note that only a subset of the HAP genes shows daily oscillation in expression. All components in this diagram are likely expressed in the vasculature; therefore, this diagram may depict the connections between the circadian clock and photoperiodic flowering pathways in vascular tissues.

---

www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2010, 13:83–89

one of these $CO$ repressors [28]. Multiple morning-phased Dof transcription factors, which are homologous to CDF1, are also involved in the repression of $CO$ [29**]. Overexpression of $CDF2$, $CDF3$, and $CDF5$ in phloem causes late flowering in long days. In the $cdf1 cdf2 cdf3 cdf5$ quadruple mutant, daytime $CO$ expression level is elevated throughout the day and the mutant no longer responds to changes in day length. This indicates that $CDF1$, $CDF2$, $CDF3$, and $CDF5$ redundantly repress $CO$ expression during the day.

In the afternoons of long days, $CDF1$ expression is strongly repressed by PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 [30]. At the same time, $CDF1$ and $CDF2$ proteins are degraded by the GI and FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX 1(FKF1) complex [29**,31]. FKF1, a ZTL homolog, is a photoreceptor that possesses ubiquitin ligase activity [28,32]. The interaction between FKF1 and GI is induced by blue light, which is perceived by FKF1 [31] (Figure 2).

At night, GI is degraded via the E3 ubiquitin ligase CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS 1 (COP1) [33*]. The COP1–GI interaction requires EARLY FLOWERING 3(ELF3), a circadian gating factor [34], which functions as an adaptor protein in-between [33*] (Figure 2). FIO1, LWD1, and LWD2 seem to be involved in the suppression of $CO$ in the dark, although it is not certain whether these proteins by themselves directly influence $CO$ transcription [12,14]. These results clearly demonstrate that plants utilize multiple circadian-regulated factors to precisely control the diurnal $CO$ expression pattern.

### FT transcriptional regulation

We are obtaining more evidence that various clock-regulated components act coordinately to regulate $FT$ expression throughout the day and also throughout plant development (Figure 1). Once $CO$ transcript is expressed in the afternoon in long days, CO protein is stabilized by phytochrome (phy) and cryptochrome (cry) photoreceptor signals to ensure induction of $FT$ [35]. In the dark, CO protein is degraded by the SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1 (SPA1)-COP1 complex [36–38]. Cryptochrome regulates flowering time via other mechanisms than control of CO stability as well. Cry2 binds to the CRYPTO-CHROME-INTERACTING BASIC-HELIX-LOOP-HELIX 1 (CIB1) transcription factor under blue light. CIB1 binds to the $FT$ promoter and $CIB1$ overexpression elevates the $FT$ expression level without affecting the $CO$ expression pattern [39*]. Thus, cry2 regulates $FT$ expression through both CIB1 and CO. CO may induce $FT$ by forming a DNA binding complex with HEME ACTIVATOR PROTEIN (HAP) proteins [40,41]. The CO homolog CONSTANS-LIKE 5 (COL5) may also participate in $FT$ induction. $COL5$ overexpression increases $FT$ expression without changing $CO$ expression and induces early flowering in short days [42].

Many transcription factors, such as TEMPRANILLO 1 (TEM1), TEM2, TARGET OF EAT1 (TOE1), TOE2, SCHLAFMÜTZE (SMZ), SCHNARCHZAPFEN (SNZ), SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), and FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), all seem to function as *FT* repressors [43–47]. TEM1 and TEM2, both of which belong to the RAV (Related to ABI3/VP1) transcription factors, bind to the *FT* promoter [43]. During seedling growth, as *TEM1* expression levels decrease, *FT* expression levels increase. The spatial expression patterns of *TEM1* change throughout leaf development. *TEM1* is expressed evenly in young leaves. As leaves grow, expression gradually decreases from the proximal part of the leaves toward the periphery [43]. *APETALA2* (*AP2*), and the AP2-related genes *TOE1*, *TOE2*, *TOE3*, *SMZ*, and *SNZ* transcripts are all targets of microRNA172 (miR172); *TOE1*, *TOE2*, *SMZ*, and *SNZ* redundantly repress *FT* [45,48,49]. Among these, at least SMZ directly associates with *FT* chromatin [45]. In addition, GI regulates miR172 expression, which increases in long days [44]. FLC and SVP MADS-box transcription factors form a heterodimer that directly represses *FT* expression in leaves [46,47]. CCA1 and LHY decrease SVP protein stability, possibly through protein–protein interaction via ELF3 under continuous light conditions [50,51].

In addition to these transcription factors, chromatin-remodeling factors are also involved in *FT* repression. The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components mediate histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation on the *FT* chromatin region to maintain repression of *FT* expression and prevent precocious flowering [52]. In sum, we have now identified many regulators that affect *FT* expression. It will be fascinating to decipher how exactly these various transcription factors developmentally orchestrate *FT* expression in time and space.

### Circadian clock regulation of diurnal growth and metabolism

The circadian clock controls not only seasonal development but also daily growth and metabolism. When seedlings are grown under daily light–dark cycles, hypocotyl growth mainly occurs around dawn [53]. This diurnal growth pattern is regulated by the interaction between light signaling and the circadian clock [53]. Diurnal growth is in part attributed to the clock regulation of *PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4)* and *PIF5* transcription and their protein stability [53,54]. A study using natural phenotypic variation also led to the identification of the TANDEM ZINC KNUCKLE/PLU3 (TZP) protein that affects diurnal growth [55]. TZP expression oscillates with a morning peak and TZP regulates the expression of auxin-related genes, which possibly contribute to morning-specific growth. In addition, the results of genome-scale gene expression analyses imply that the timing of diurnal stem growth likely correlates with the increase in transcription of various hormonal synthesis

and signal transduction pathways around dawn [56,57]. Recently, a direct molecular connection linking the light and gibberellin (GA) pathways to regulation of stem growth was elucidated. DELLA proteins, repressors of the GA pathway, repress the transcriptional activity of PIF3 and PIF4. This repression is released by GA-mediated DELLA protein degradation [58,59]. Therefore, the time-dependent degradation of DELLA proteins may participate in dawn-specific growth mechanisms.

More broadly, metabolomic analysis reveals that the PRRs may represent the link between the circadian clock and coordinated daily changes in metabolism. In the *prr5 prr7 prr9* triple mutant, the amounts of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates and abscisic acid (ABA) are elevated, suggesting that these PRRs have output function in mitochondrial and chloroplastic metabolism [60]. PRR5, PRR7, and PRR9 proteins also mediate metabolic changes accompanied with cold-stress, salt-stress, and drought-stress responses [61].

#### Conclusions and perspective

The molecular clock architecture in plants is more diverse and flexible than previously thought. The presence of multiple circadian clocks had been predicted in several reports, and it is emerging that the molecular makeup of plant circadian clocks varies in specific tissues. In addition, as we saw in the case of the root-specific clock, the network architecture of the circadian clock seems to be rather plastic. Thus, in the future, an area of great interest will be the composition of the clocks in specific organs, tissues, and even cells. This will enable us to more accurately understand the molecular connections that allow the circadian clock to regulate many physiological responses.

In the regulatory pathway of photoperiodic flowering, there is already strong evidence for multiple layers of functionally redundant factors in the regulation of *CO* and *FT* transcription. One of our challenges in the near future will be to understand the complex mechanisms by which these factors coordinate to regulate seasonal flowering response. Also, it would be intriguing to note how much similarity there is in the molecular levels of the clock and photoperiodic pathways between various plant species.

#### Acknowledgements

I thank Drs Stacey Harmer, Eva Farré, and Marcelo Yanovsky for critical reading of the manuscript. I apologize to colleagues whose work was not cited due to space constraints. Preparation of this review was supported by the National Institute of Health (R01GM079712).

#### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Dodd AN, Salathia N, Hall A, Kévei E, Tóth R, Nagy F, Hibberd JM, Millar AJ, Webb AA: Plant circadian clocks increase

photosynthesis, growth, survival, and competitive advantage. Science 2005, 309:630-633.

2. Thomas B, Vince-Prue D (Eds): Photoperiodism in Plants. Academic Press; 1996.

3. Locke JC, Kozma-Bognár L, Gould PD, Fehér B, Kevei E, Nagy F, Turner MS, Hall A, Millar AJ: Experimental validation of a predicted feedback loop in the multi-oscillator clock of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Mol Syst Biol 2006, 2:59.

4. Zeilinger MN, Farré EM, Taylor SR, Kay SA, Doyle FJ III: A novel computational model of the circadian clock in *Arabidopsis* that incorporates PRR7 and PRR9. Mol Syst Biol 2006, 2:58.

5. Alabadi D, Oyama T, Yanovsky MJ, Harmon FG, Más P, Kay SA: Reciprocal regulation between TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 within the *Arabidopsis* circadian clock. Science 2001, 293:880-883.

6. Más P, Kim WY, Somers DE, Kay SA: Targeted degradation of TOC1 by ZTL modulates circadian function in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Nature 2003, 426:567-570.

7. Kim WY, Fujiwara S, Suh SS, Kim J, Kim Y, Han L, David K, Putterill J, Nam HG, Somers DE: ZEITLUPE is a circadian photoreceptor stabilized by GIGANTEA in blue light. Nature 2007, 449:356-360.

8. Locke JC, Southern MM, Kozma-Bognár L, Hibberd V, Brown PE, Turner MS, Millar AJ: Extension of a genetic network model by iterative experimentation and mathematical analysis. Mol Syst Biol 2005, 1:0013.

9. Martin-Tryon EL, Kreps JA, Harmer SL: GIGANTEA acts in blue light signaling and has biochemically separable roles in circadian clock and flowering time regulation. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:473-486.

10. Kawamura H, Ito S, Yamashino T, Niwa Y, Nakamichi N, Mizuno T: Characterization of genetic links between two clock-associated genes, GI and PRR5 in the current clock model of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 2008, 72:2770-2774.

11. Pruneda-Paz JL, Breton G, Para A, Kay SA: A functional genomics approach reveals CHE as a component of the *Arabidopsis* circadian clock. Science 2009, 323:1481-1485.
This paper shows that TOC1 binds to transcription factor CHE to regulate CCA1 expression, and describes the first direct molecular mechanism of TOC1-dependent transcriptional regulation.

12. Kim J, Kim Y, Yeom M, Kim JH, Nam HG: FIONA1 is essential for regulating period length in the *Arabidopsis* circadian clock. Plant Cell 2008, 20:307-319.

13. Martin-Tryon EL, Harmer SL: XAP5 CIRCADIAN TIMEKEEPER coordinates light signals for proper timing of photomorphogenesis and the circadian clock in *Arabidopsis*. Plant Cell 2008, 20:1244-1259.

14. Wu JF, Wang Y, Wu SH: Two new clock proteins, LWD1 and LWD2, regulate *Arabidopsis* photoperiodic flowering. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:948-959.

15. Thain SC, Murtas G, Lynn JR, McGrath RB, Millar AJ: The circadian clock that controls gene expression in *Arabidopsis* is tissue specific. Plant Physiol 2002, 130:102-110.

16. James AB, Monreal JA, Nimmo GA, Kelly CL, Herzyk P, Jenkins GI, Nimmo HG: The circadian clock in *Arabidopsis* roots is a simplified slave version of the clock in shoots. Science 2008, 322:1832-1835.
The authors showed evidence that the plant clock architecture is quite plastic, that the root and shoot have different clock compositions, and that the morning-phased loop and the evening-phased loop could be uncoupled.

17. Michael TP, Salome PA, McClung CR: Two *Arabidopsis* circadian oscillators can be distinguished by differential temperature sensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:6878-6883.

18. Para A, Farré EM, Imaizumi T, Pruneda-Paz JL, Harmon FG, Kay SA: PRR3 is a vascular regulator of TOC1 stability in the *Arabidopsis* circadian clock. Plant Cell 2007, 19:3462-3473.
This paper shows direct evidence that some clock components are tissue specific at molecular levels. PRR3 likely protects TOC1 proteins from ZTL-dependent degradation in vascular tissues.

19. Fujiwara S, Wang L, Han L, Suh SS, Salome PA, McClung CR, Somers DE: Post-translational regulation of the *Arabidopsis* circadian clock through selective proteolysis and phosphorylation of pseudo-response regulator proteins. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:23073-23083.

20. Kobayashi Y, Weigel D: Move on up, it's time for change — mobile signals controlling photoperiod-dependent flowering. Genes Dev 2007, 21:2371-2384.

21. Wilczek AM, Roe JL, Knapp MC, Cooper MD, Lopez-Gallego C, Martin LJ, Muir CD, Sim S, Walker A, Anderson J et al.: Effects of genetic perturbation on seasonal life history plasticity. Science 2009, 323:930-934.
This paper nicely demonstrated how mutants in various flowering pathways (photoperiod, vernalization, and autonomous pathways) affect the growth and timing of flowering under natural environments.

22. Wigge PA, Kim MC, Jaeger KE, Busch W, Schmid M, Lohmann JU, Weigel D: Integration of spatial and temporal information during floral induction in *Arabidopsis*. Science 2005, 309:1056-1059.

23. Abe M, Kobayashi Y, Yamamoto S, Daimon Y, Yamaguchi A, Ikeda Y, Ichinoki H, Notaguchi M, Goto K, Araki T: FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from the floral pathway integrator FT at the shoot apex. Science 2005, 309:1052-1056.

24. Corbesier L, Vincent C, Jang S, Fornara F, Fan Q, Searle I, Giakountis A, Farrona S, Gissot L, Turnbull C et al.: FT protein movement contributes to long-distance signaling in floral induction of *Arabidopsis*. Science 2007, 316:1030-1033.

25. Turck F, Fornara F, Coupland G: Regulation and identity of florigen: FLOWERING LOCUS T moves center stage. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2008, 59:573-594.

26. Zeevaart JA: Leaf-produced floral signals. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008, 11:541-547.

27. Giakountis A, Coupland G: Phloem transport of flowering signals. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008, 11:687-694.

28. Imaizumi T, Schultz TF, Harmon FG, Ho LA, Kay SA: FKF1 F-box protein mediates cyclic degradation of a repressor of CONSTANS in *Arabidopsis*. Science 2005, 309:293-297.

29. Fornara F, Panigrahi KC, Gissot L, Sauerbrunn N, Rühl M, Jarillo JA, Coupland G: *Arabidopsis* DOF transcription factors act redundantly to reduce CONSTANS expression and are essential for a photoperiodic flowering response. Dev Cell 2009, 17:75-86.
This paper provides evidence that a number of circadian-regulated Dof factors, which seem to have redundant function with CDF1, are involved in the regulation of CO expression.

30. Nakamichi N, Kita M, Niimura K, Ito S, Yamashino T, Mizoguchi T, Mizuno T: *Arabidopsis* clock-associated pseudo-response regulators PRR9, PRR7 and PRR5 coordinately and positively regulate flowering time through the canonical CONSTANS-dependent photoperiodic pathway. Plant Cell Physiol 2007, 48:822-832.

31. Sawa M, Nusinow DA, Kay SA, Imaizumi T: FKF1 and GIGANTEA complex formation is required for day-length measurement in *Arabidopsis*. Science 2007, 318:261-265.

32. Imaizumi T, Tran HG, Swartz TE, Briggs WR, Kay SA: FKF1 is essential for photoperiodic-specific light signalling in *Arabidopsis*. Nature 2003, 426:302-306.

33. Yu JW, Rubio V, Lee NY, Bai S, Lee SY, Kim SS, Liu L, Zhang Y, Irigoyen ML, Sullivan JA et al.: COP1 and ELF3 control circadian function and photoperiodic flowering by regulating GI stability. Mol Cell 2008, 32:617-630.
The authors showed that COP1 likely forms a complex with ELF3 and GI to regulate the stability of these proteins for the circadian clock and flowering expression. This paper reports that COP1 is involved in not only CO protein regulation but also ELF3 and GI protein regulation to control flowering.

34. McWatters HG, Bastow RM, Hall A, Millar AJ: The ELF3 zeitnehmer regulates light signalling to the circadian clock. Nature 2000, 408:716-720.

35. Valverde F, Mouradov A, Soppe W, Ravenscroft D, Samach A, Coupland G: Photoreceptor regulation of CONSTANS protein in photoperiodic flowering. *Science* 2004, **303**:1003-1006.

36. Laubinger S, Marchal V, Gentilhomme J, Wenkel S, Adrian J, Jang S, Kulajta C, Braun H, Coupland G, Hoecker U: *Arabidopsis* SPA proteins regulate photoperiodic flowering and interact with the floral inducer CONSTANS to regulate its stability. *Development* 2006, **133**:3213-3222.

37. Liu LJ, Zhang YC, Li QH, Sang Y, Mao J, Lian HL, Wang L, Yang HQ: COP1-mediated ubiquitination of CONSTANS is implicated in cryptochrome regulation of flowering in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Cell* 2008, **20**:292-306.

38. Jang S, Marchal V, Panigrahi KC, Wenkel S, Soppe W, Deng XW, Valverde F, Coupland G: *Arabidopsis* COP1 shapes the temporal pattern of CO accumulation conferring a photoperiodic flowering response. *EMBO J* 2008, **27**:1277-1288.

39. Liu H, Yu X, Li K, Klejnot J, Yang H, Lisiero D, Lin C: Photoexcited CRY2 interacts with CIB1 to regulate transcription and floral initiation in *Arabidopsis*. *Science* 2008, **322**:1535-1539.

This paper reports that cryptochrome directly binds to the transcription factor to regulate FT expression. This paper shows an additional cryptochrome-dependent regulation of photoperiodic flowering time, other than controlling CO protein stability.

40. Wenkel S, Turck F, Singer K, Gissot L, Le Gourrierec J, Samach A, Coupland G: CONSTANS and the CCAAT box binding complex share a functionally important domain and interact to regulate flowering of *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Cell* 2006, **18**:2971-2984.

41. Kumimoto RW, Adam L, Hymus GJ, Repetti PP, Reuber TL, Marion CM, Hempel FD, Ratcliffe OJ: The nuclear factor Y subunits NF-YB2 and NF-YB3 play additive roles in the promotion of flowering by inductive long-day photoperiods in *Arabidopsis*. *Planta* 2008, **228**:709-723.

42. Hassidim M, Harir Y, Yakir E, Kron I, Green RM: Over-expression of CONSTANS-LIKE 5 can induce flowering in short-day grown *Arabidopsis*. *Planta* 2009, **230**:481-491.

43. Castillejo C, Pelaz S: The balance between CONSTANS and TEMPRANILLO activities determines FT expression to trigger flowering. *Curr Biol* 2008, **18**:1338-1343.

44. Jung JH, Seo YH, Seo PJ, Reyes JL, Yun J, Chua NH, Park CM: The GIGANTEA-regulated microRNA172 mediates photoperiodic flowering independent of CONSTANS in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Cell* 2007, **19**:2736-2748.

45. Mathieu J, Yant LJ, Mürdter F, Küttner F, Schmid M: Repression of flowering by the miR172 target SMZ. *PLoS Biol* 2009, **7**:e1000148.

46. Searle I, He Y, Turck F, Vincent C, Fornara F, Kröber S, Amasino RA, Coupland G: The transcription factor FLC confers a flowering response to vernalization by repressing meristem competence and systemic signaling in *Arabidopsis*. *Genes Dev* 2006, **20**:898-912.

47. Li D, Liu C, Shen L, Wu Y, Chen H, Robertson M, Helliwell CA, Ito T, Meyerowitz E, Yu H: A repressor complex governs the integration of flowering signals in *Arabidopsis*. *Dev Cell* 2008, **15**:110-120.

48. Aukerman MJ, Sakai H: Regulation of flowering time and floral organ identity by a MicroRNA and its APETALA2-like target genes. *Plant Cell* 2003, **15**:2730-2741.

49. Schmid M, Uhlenhaut NH, Godard F, Demar M, Bressan R, Weigel D, Lohmann JU: Dissection of floral induction pathways using global expression analysis. *Development* 2003, **130**:6001-6012.

50. Fujiwara S, Oda A, Yoshida R, Niinuma K, Miyata K, Tomozoe Y, Tajima T, Nakagawa M, Hayashi K, Coupland G et al.: Circadian clock proteins LHY and CCA1 regulate SVP protein accumulation to control flowering in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Cell* 2008, **20**:2960-2971.

51. Yoshida R, Fekih R, Fujiwara S, Oda A, Miyata K, Tomozoe Y, Nakagawa M, Niinuma K, Hayashi K, Ezura H et al.: Possible role of EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) in clock-dependent floral regulation by SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP) in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *New Phytol* 2009.

52. Jiang D, Wang Y, Wang Y, He Y: Repression of FLOWERING LOCUS C and FLOWERING LOCUS T by the *Arabidopsis* polycomb repressive complex 2 components. *PLoS One* 2008, **3**:e3404.

53. Nozue K, Covington MF, Duek PD, Lorrain S, Fankhauser C, Harmer SL, Maloof JN: Rhythmic growth explained by coincidence between internal and external cues. *Nature* 2007, **448**:358-361.

This paper describes how diurnal growth is regulated by the combinatorial effects of light and the circadian clock.

54. Niwa Y, Yamashino T, Mizuno T: The circadian clock regulates the photoperiodic response of hypocotyl elongation through a coincidence mechanism in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Plant Cell Physiol* 2009, **50**:838-854.

55. Loudet O, Michael TP, Burger BT, Le Metté C, Mockler TC, Weigel D, Chory J: A zinc knuckle protein that negatively controls morning-specific growth in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2008, **105**:17193-17198.

56. Covington MF, Maloof JN, Straume M, Kay SA, Harmer SL: Global transcriptome analysis reveals circadian regulation of key pathways in plant growth and development. *Genome Biol* 2008, **9**:R130.

57. Michael TP, Breton G, Hazen SP, Priest H, Mockler TC, Kay SA, Chory J: A morning-specific phytohormone gene expression program underlying rhythmic plant growth. *PLoS Biol* 2008, **6**:e225.

58. Feng S, Martinez C, Gusmaroli G, Wang Y, Zhou J, Wang F, Chen L, Yu L, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Kircher S et al.: Coordinated regulation of *Arabidopsis thaliana* development by light and gibberellins. *Nature* 2008, **451**:475-479.

59. de Lucas M, Daviere JM, Rodriguez-Falcon M, Pontin M, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Lorrain S, Fankhauser C, Blazquez MA, Titarenko E, Prat S: A molecular framework for light and gibberellin control of cell elongation. *Nature* 2008, **451**:480-484.

60. Fukushima A, Kusano M, Nakamichi N, Kobayashi M, Hayashi N, Sakakibara H, Mizuno T, Saito K: Impact of clock-associated *Arabidopsis* pseudo-response regulators in metabolic coordination. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2009, **106**:7251-7256.

By comprehensive metabolomic analysis using two strong arrhythmic clock mutants, the authors showed that the clock components, PRR5, PRR7, and PRR9, play important roles in regulation of daily changes in metabolism.

61. Nakamichi N, Kusano M, Fukushima A, Kita M, Ito S, Yamashino T, Saito K, Sakakibara H, Mizuno T: Transcript profiling of an *Arabidopsis* PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR arrhythmic triple mutant reveals a role for the circadian clock in cold stress response. *Plant Cell Physiol* 2009, **50**:447-462.

62. Lu SX, Knowles SM, Andronis C, Ong MS, Tobin EM: CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL function synergistically in the circadian clock of *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol* 2009, **150**:834-843.

63. Yakir E, Hilman D, Kron I, Hassidim M, Melamed-Book N, Green RM: Posttranslational regulation of CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 in the circadian oscillator of *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol* 2009, **150**:844-857.

64. Mockler TC, Michael TP, Priest HD, Shen R, Sullivan CM, Givan SA, McEntee C, Kay SA, Chory J: The DIURNAL project: DIURNAL and circadian expression profiling, model-based pattern matching, and promoter analysis. *Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol* 2007, **72**:353-363.
