
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**Herding Hippos: regulating growth in flies and man**

Caroline Badouel${}^{1,*}$, Ankush Garg${}^{1,*}$ and Helen McNeill${}^{1,2}$

Control of cell number requires the coordinate regulation of cell proliferation and cell death. Studies in both the fly and mouse have identified the Hippo kinase pathway as a key signaling pathway that controls cell proliferation and apoptosis. Several studies have implicated the Hippo pathway in a variety of cancers. Recent studies have also revealed a role for the Hippo pathway in the control of cell fate decisions during development. In this review, we will cover the current model of Hippo signaling in development. We will explore the differences between the Hippo pathway in invertebrates and mammals, and focus on recent advances in understanding how this conserved pathway is regulated.

**Addresses**

${}^{1}$ Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital, Canada  
${}^{2}$ Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 600 University Ave, Toronto, Canada M5G 1X5  

* Co-first authors.

Corresponding author: McNeill, Helen (mcneill@lunenfeld.ca)

---

**Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2009, 21:837–843**

This review comes from a themed issue on  
Cell division, growth and death  
Edited by Angelika Amon and Mike Tyers  

Available online 19th October 2009  
0955-0674/$ – see front matter  
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
DOI 10.1016/j.ceb.2009.09.010

The Hippo kinase pathway is a newly described, highly conserved growth regulatory pathway, which has a crucial role in controlling proliferation and apoptosis in both invertebrates and vertebrates. This pathway was discovered in *Drosophila* because of the large hyperplastic overgrowths seen in Hippo pathway mutants, suggesting a key role in the regulation of organ size. Recent work has illuminated how the pathway is regulated, and revealed that the Hippo pathway also plays important roles in the control of differentiation. In this review, we discuss the functions and regulations of the Hippo pathway in *Drosophila* and mammals, with a focus on advances in the past two years.

### Drosophila Hippo pathway

The Hippo kinase pathway in *Drosophila* is named after the Sterile 20-like kinase Hippo (Hpo), which forms a complex with the WW-repeat scaffolding protein Salvador (Sav) to phosphorylate and activate the DBF family kinase Warts (Wts) [1–6] (Figure 1). This phosphorylation allows Wts, in association with the highly conserved mob as tumor-suppressor (Mats) protein to phosphorylate and inhibit Yorkie (Yki), a transcriptional coactivator [7–10,11]. Loss of *hpo*, *wts*, *sav* or *mats* leads to dramatic tissue overgrowth, while loss of *yki* reduces tissue growth (reviewed in [12]). Yki is a non-DNA binding coactivator and has so far only been shown to bind to the transcription factor Scalloped (Sd) [13–16]. Sd promotes Yki transport into the nucleus allowing the Yki/Sd complex to bind DNA [16]. The phosphorylation of Yki by Wts inhibits Yki nuclear localization [17], thereby preventing the transcription of genes that promote cell proliferation (such as *cyclin E* and the microRNA *bantam*), and prevent apoptosis (the *Drosophila* inhibitor of apoptosis 1 (*diap-1*)) [9,18,19]. Recently two new Yki targets have been identified: the glypicans *dally* and *dally-like* (*dlp*) [20]. Glypicans are involved in morphogen propagation, and may provide a link between the Hippo pathway and the regulation of morphogen activity during development.

### Mammalian Hippo pathway

The core components of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway are well conserved, and have been shown to regulate growth and to function as tumor-suppressors in mammals. Notably, the mammalian sterile 20-like kinases 1 and 2 (MST1 and 2, Hippo homologs) phosphorylate the adapter proteins SAV (also called WW45) and MOB1 (a Mats homolog), and the kinases LATS 1 and 2 (Wts homologs) [11,21–23]. MST2, like Hpo, can increase LATS1/2 activity via phosphorylation in its kinase activation loop [22]. MST1/2 phosphorylation of MOB1 leads to increased affinity of MOB1 for LATS1, and an increase in LATS1 activity. This suggests that, like Mats, MOB1 is an important adapter for LATS activation [23,24]. The confirmation of a conserved pathway was established with the findings that the mammalian Hippo cascade leads to the inhibition of two Yki orthologs, Yes-associated protein (YAP) and the transcriptional coactivator with PDZ binding motifs (TAZ) [11,17,25–29] (Figure 2).

YAP and TAZ have been shown to bind to several transcription activators such as TEADs, Runx, ErbB-4 and p73 [30–32]. TEADs, which are homologs of *Drosophila* Sd, appear to be the main YAP/TAZ transcriptional activators and are essential to YAP/TAZ oncogenic properties [33–37]. There are four human TEADs, which appear semi-redundant, as only TEAD1/2 double mutant mice are lethal and show proliferation defects similar to YAP mutants [38]. Interestingly, even though analysis of YAP or TAZ transcriptional targets revealed cell proliferation and antiapoptotic factors, they failed to detect

838 Cell division, growth and death

Figure 1

Model of Hippo regulation in *Drosophila*. Activation of the Hippo pathway involves a series of phosphorylation events that ultimately ends with Warts (Wts) phosphorylating Yorkie (Yki). Phosphorylation of Yki on Ser168 introduces a 14-3-3 binding site restricting Yki to the cytoplasm. Yki can also be inhibited from entering the nucleus by binding to Expanded (Ex). When Yki is not inhibited by the Hpo pathway it can bind to the cofactor Scalloped (Sd) and enter the nucleus where it is able to induce the transcription of genes required to promote cell growth and inhibit apoptosis. Activation of the Hippo pathway can also be affected by Dachs, which binds to Wts and promotes its degradation. Dachs activity is regulated by Approximated (app) and the cadherin Fat. Ex, Merlin and Fat can activate the Hippo pathway. Binding to Dachsous (Ds) promotes phosphorylation of the intercellular domain of Fat through the kinase Dco, thereby activating Fat.

Cyclin E as a potential target [11**,28,37], suggesting that the genes regulated by YAP/TAZ/TEADs in mammals might be different from *Drosophila*.

### Role of the mammalian Hippo pathway

Recent evidence suggests that YAP can function as an oncogene or a proapoptotic factor, depending on cellular context. Initial support for YAP as an oncogene comes from the demonstration that YAP is a candidate oncogene for the chromosome 11q22 amplicon, which is observed in several human cancers [39,40]. Moreover, YAP expression in *Drosophila* mimics the effect of its homolog Yki and leads to an increase in growth and a decrease in apoptosis [11**,17**,34]. Overexpression of YAP in different cell lines is able to induce epithelial–mesenchymal transitions (EMT) as well as growth factor and anchorage-independent proliferation [27,28,35,39]. The oncogenic properties of YAP are also seen *in vivo*. Overexpression of YAP in the mouse liver leads to a dramatic but reversible increase in organ size and appearance of tumors [11**]. Finally, overexpression of YAP leads to an expansion of the undifferentiated progenitor cells in the intestinal crypt, and in the neural tube is involved in the expansion of neural progenitor population [41,42].

Despite accumulated evidence demonstrating that YAP is an oncogene, several studies have shown that YAP, in association with p73, a p53 family member transcription factor, has proapoptotic activities ([43] and reviewed in [44]). This tumor-suppressor activity has been found to be induced by DNA damage, and can be inhibited by the phosphorylation of YAP by AKT on the S127 site which is also phosphorylated by LATS [31,45,46]. Consistent with this is the surprise finding that YAP was implicated as a tumor-suppressor in breast cancer [47]. However the role of AKT is controversial, as some groups have shown LATS, but not AKT, is the main kinase responsible for YAP phosphorylation/inhibition [11**,17**].

Supporting the dual functions of YAP are the observations that the Hippo pathway can regulate both the oncogenic and proapoptotic activities of YAP. The fact that YAP mutants defective for LATS phosphorylation consistently show more transforming activity than wild-type YAP, supports the role of the Hippo pathway in suppressing YAP oncogenic activity [11**,28,34,35]. Furthermore, expression of LATS and MST can inhibit the YAP EMT phenotype [28]. This is consistent with the fact that several components of the mammalian pathway, such as LATS1, MOB, and SAV have been described as tumor-suppressors [4,7,48,49]. Conversely, studies that showed that MST/LATS phosphorylation of YAP leads to an inhibition of the YAP–p73 complex support the idea that the Hippo pathway might also regulate the proapoptotic

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2009, 21:837–843 www.sciencedirect.com

Figure 2

Dachsous 1,2
Fat4 ?
Cell-Cell
Contact

MST
WW45
LATS
MOB
14-3-3
YAP
TAZ
YAP
TEAD

Growth &
Differentiation

TAZ
TEAD

pro-apoptotic
p73
YAP

DNA Damage

Current Opinion in Cell Biology

Regulation of the Hippo pathway in mammals. Similar to the invertebrate cascade, a series of phosphorylation events via MST and LATS ultimately leads to the phosphorylation of YAP and TAZ. Both YAP and TAZ can bind to the TEAD transcription factors and activate the transcription of genes required to promote cell growth. YAP has also been shown to bind to p73, and the p73/YAP complex promotes transcription of proapoptotic genes. There is some evidence to suggest that AKT can inhibit the p73/YAP complex from activating transcription of these genes. In vertebrates, cell-cell contact has been shown to activate the Hpo pathway. Fat4 and Ds1/2 are potential upstream regulators for this function.

function of YAP [50,51]. These discordant results suggest that the Hippo pathway can have different outputs depending on the cell context.

Although less is known about the YAP paralog, TAZ, mounting evidence shows that it shares YAP oncogenic activity [29,36,37,52]. Notably, like YAP, TAZ is able to transform cell lines, and knock down of TAZ in a breast cancer cell line can reduce tumorigenesis [29,36]. Interestingly, TAZ has also been involved in human stem cells renewal, through interaction with SMAD2/3 and the TGFB pathway [53].

Yki, YAP, and TAZ regulation

Proper regulation of Yki, YAP, and TAZ requires several different amino acids to be phosphorylated by the Wts/LATS kinases. Perhaps the most important is Yki Ser168 (corresponding to YAP S127 and TAZ S89), which creates a 14-3-3 binding site that restricts the cotranscriptional activators to the cytoplasm [10,11**,17**,27,28,54,55]. 14-3-3 proteins bind to phosphoproteins and anchor them in the cytoplasm [56]. In addition to Ser168, Wts can also phosphorylate Yki at Ser111 and Ser250 [55]. Despite the fact the phosphorylation of Ser111 and Ser250 does not create a consensus 14-3-3 binding site, they still influence the cellular localization of Yki. Yki also appears to be phosphorylated independently of the Wts kinase at two other Serine residues: Ser 169 and Ser 172. The phosphorylation of these two Serines reduces Wts-dependent phosphorylation at Ser168 and leads to Yki hyperactivation [55]. Phosphorylation of YAP can also influence the preferred binding partners of YAP. In the presence of DNA damage, C-Abl has been shown to phosphorylate Yap1 Tyr357. Phosphorylation of Tyr357 alters the Yap1 binding partner from Runx to p73, thereby promoting the proapoptotic properties of Yap [57,58].

Hippo pathway regulation

The upstream elements of the Hippo pathway are still unclear, however recent studies in *Drosophila* have identified a number of transmembrane or cortical proteins that could link an extracellular signal to the cytoplasmic Hippo pathway.

The first upstream regulators identified were the cortical FERM domain containing proteins Expanded (Ex) and Merlin (Mer). These studies suggested that Ex and Mer act together to regulate the Hippo pathway [59]. However, comparable mutant Hpo core component overgrowth phenotypes are only seen when both *mer* and *ex* are mutated. Further work has shown Ex predominantly regulates proliferation while Mer regulates apoptosis, suggesting Ex and Mer act in parallel and differentially regulate the Hippo pathway [60]. This idea has been

www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2009, 21:837–843

reinforced with the identification of the transmembrane protein Fat as an upstream regulator of the Hippo pathway that act through Ex but not Mer [61–63]. The protocadherin Fat is known to control both planar cell polarity and growth (reviewed in [64]). As a transmembrane protein, Fat constitutes the first potential receptor linking the extracellular environment to the Hippo pathway. In *fat* mutants, Ex is not properly localized to the subapical membrane, suggesting the cellular localization of Ex is important in Hippo pathway activation [61–63]. However, how Ex transduces the signal is still unclear. Genetic data indicate that Ex is able to act independently of Hippo [65]. Supporting this idea is the recent observation that Ex can directly bind to Yki leading to a restriction of Yki to the cytoplasm [66]. However, this observation does not exclude a requirement of the Hippo pathway proteins as Fat and Ex could act as platform proteins where the Hippo components assemble. Interestingly, the importance of proteins localization in the activation of the mammalian Hippo pathway is suggested by the fact that LATS1 has been shown to be activated by MOB at the membrane and that MST is activated if artificially sent to the membrane [24,67,68].

Fat also appears to regulate the Hippo pathway independently of Ex and Hpo, through the inhibition of the unconventional myosin Dachs. Although Fat has not been shown to directly interact with Dachs, both Fat and Dachs localize to the apical cell junctions. The Dachs protein is able to bind to Wts and promote Wts degradation [65,69,70]. Approximated is a newly described DHHC palmitoyltransferase which regulates Fat signaling, likely by regulating Dachs localization and activity [71].

Last but not least is the question of how Fat is activated. The extracellular domain of Fat is known to interact with another atypical cadherin Dachsous (Ds). This interaction regulates Fat activity in PCP (reviewed in [72]). *ds* mutant also exhibits a mild overgrowth phenotype suggesting that it might be a positive regulator of Fat in Hippo pathway activation [73]. The Golgi kinase Four-jointed (Fj) also influences Fat activity [74–76]. Interestingly, Ds and Fj are expressed in a complementary gradient pattern in *Drosophila* imaginal discs. Gradients are conventionally thought of as directing patterning. However, juxtaposing levels of Ds or Fj are able to induce cell proliferation specifically at overexpression or loss of function clone borders [77**,78**]. One model that might explain this effect is that the juxtaposing levels of Ds or Fj preferentially promote Fat activation only on one side of the cell. This asymmetric activation could allow a pool of nonphosphorylated Yki to accumulate on the other side of the cell, leading to induction of growth promoting genes ([77**] and reviewed in [79]).

How Ds activates Fat is still unclear, however very recent studies suggest that Ds may regulate Fat activity through

another growth regulator: discs overgrown (*dco*). Dco is a kinase that is able to bind and phosphorylate Fat [80*,81*]. Fat can form dimers, potentially recruiting Dco to promote transphosphorylation of Fat. Since Ds recruits Fat to junction, increasing its local concentration, the binding of Ds to Fat may facilitate dimerization. This would lead to increased phosphorylation of Fat, thus enabling Fat to inhibit growth. How the phosphorylated form of Fat controls Hippo activity is still unknown.

In addition to Fat, there are other regulators of the Hpo pathway. For example Mer is known to influence the activity of the Hippo pathway but how this is accomplished is unknown. There are probably other yet to be identified regulators of the Hippo pathway as several studies have shown a role of the core Hippo pathway, independent from Fat and Ex activation, in the control of cell proliferation in the ovaries [82–85].

### The Hippo pathway in cell differentiation and tissue patterning

Several recent reports have shown that in addition to restricting cell proliferation and promoting cell death, the Hippo kinase pathway is also involved in differentiation. Hpo and Wts have been shown to interact with Polycomb group genes to regulate the maintenance of sensory neurons dendrites [86]. In the eye, Wts has been shown to play a role in determining the class of rhodopsin the R8 photoreceptor cells express [87]. Perhaps, even more interesting is that the Hippo kinase pathway may be able to direct differentiation based on the location of a cell within a developing tissue. Cell culture work has shown that high cell density can activate the Hippo pathway, and shuttle YAP into the cytoplasm, suggesting a role of YAP and the Hippo pathway in contact inhibition [17**,29]. In the mouse embryo trophectoderm (TE), Yap is located in the nucleus in the outer cells, but in the high density inner cell mass, presumably through contact inhibition, Yap is phosphorylated by the Hippo kinase pathway and localized to the cytoplasm. In the TE, nuclear localized YAP is able to bind TEAD4 and induce expression of Cdx2 and trophoblast fate [88*]. These observations suggest that YAP and the Hippo pathway may be able to interpret cell contact cues, and accordingly activate different developmental pathways.

Recent data has shown a surprising interplay between the Hippo pathway and morphogens. Morphogens are secreted molecules that are able to activate genes in a concentration-dependent manner. The dispersal of morphogens is dependent on many different factors, one of which is by the glypicans Dally and Dally-like (Dlp). The levels of Dally and Dlp can have profound effects on the size of a tissue. In the haltere the Hox gene Ubx is able to suppress *dally* and *dlp*, leading to a dramatic change in tissue size [89]. Suppression of the Hippo pathway (or activation of Yki) can lead to the upregulation of *dally* and

dlp [20]. The regulation of these glypicans may be another way the Hippo pathway can influence the size of a tissue. Interestingly, the morphogen Dpp, can influence the expression of fj and ds [77**], and hence Hippo activity, suggesting complicated feedback loops are at play during the control of organ size *in vivo*.

# Where is the Hippo herd headed?

Remarkable progress has been made in the last few years in delineating the Hippo pathway, however many important questions remain unanswered. Are TEAD transcription factors the only partners for YAP/Yki in the regulation of growth? How do upstream components of the Hippo pathway such as Fat, Expanded and Merlin communicate to the core Hippo pathway, and how their activity is controlled? The Hippo kinase pathway has been implicated in organ size control — but how does the organ ‘know’ what size it is — and then control Hippo activation?

Even more questions emerge as the roles of the Hippo pathway outside of developmental growth control are considered. How is Hippo activity communicated into differentiation decisions? How are the apoptotic versus oncogenic activities of YAP/Yki regulated *in vivo*? What are the upstream inputs for the regulation of Hippo activity in contact inhibition? Remarkable progress has been made in elucidating the components of the Hippo pathway in the past few years, resulting in a better understanding of how this pathway is regulated, and the many ways this pathway can be deployed during development. This rapid pace is likely to continue as more people become fascinated by the question of how this conserved pathway is regulated to control organ size and differentiation during normal development, and how misregulation of this pathway leads to diseases such as cancer.

## References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Tao W, Zhang S, Turenchalk GS, Stewart RA, St John MA, Chen W, Xu T: Human homologue of the *Drosophila melanogaster* lats tumour suppressor modulates CDC2 activity. *Nat Genet* 1999, 21:177-181.
2. Harvey KF, Pfleger CM, Hariharan IK: The *Drosophila* Mst ortholog, hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. *Cell* 2003, 114:457-467.
3. Pantalacci S, Tapon N, Leopold P: The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in *Drosophila*. *Nat Cell Biol* 2003, 5:921-927.
4. Tapon N, Harvey KF, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Schiripo TA, Haber DA, Hariharan IK: Salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in *Drosophila* and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. *Cell* 2002, 110:467-478.
5. Udai RS, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Tao C, Halder G: Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. *Nat Cell Biol* 2003, 5:914-920.
6. Wu S, Huang J, Dong J, Pan D: Hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. *Cell* 2003, 114:445-456.
7. Lai ZC, Wei X, Shimizu T, Ramos E, Rohrbaugh M, Nikolaidis N, Ho LL, Li Y: Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. *Cell* 2005, 120:675-685.
8. Wei X, Shimizu T, Lai ZC: Mob as tumor suppressor is activated by Hippo kinase for growth inhibition in *Drosophila*. *EMBO J* 2007, 26:1772-1781.
9. Huang J, Wu S, Barrera J, Matthews K, Pan D: The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the *Drosophila* Homolog of YAP. *Cell* 2005, 122:421-434.
10. Oh H, Irvine KD: In vivo regulation of Yorkie phosphorylation and localization. *Development* 2008, 135:1081-1088.
11. Dong J, Feldmann G, Huang J, Wu S, Zhang N, Comerford SA, Gayyed MF, Anders RA, Maitra A, Pan D: Elucidation of a universal size-control mechanism in *Drosophila* and mammals. *Cell* 2007, 130:1120-1133. This study showed that Yki phosphorylation by the Hippo pathway leads to Yki inhibition by restricting it to the cytoplasm. Furthermore, they were able to show that YAP, regulates organ size in the mouse liver.
12. Reddy BV, Irvine KD: The Fat and Warts signaling pathways: new insights into their regulation, mechanism and conservation. *Development* 2008, 135:2827-2838.
13. Bandura JL, Edgar BA: Yorkie and Scalloped: partners in growth activation. *Dev Cell* 2008, 14:315-316.
14. Goulev Y, Fauny JD, Gonzalez-Marti B, Flagiello D, Silber J, Zider A: SCALLOPED interacts with YORKIE, the nuclear effector of the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway in *Drosophila*. *Curr Biol* 2008, 18:435-441.
15. Wu S, Liu Y, Zheng Y, Dong J, Pan D: The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the Hippo growth-regulatory pathway. *Dev Cell* 2008, 14:388-398.
16. Zhang L, Ren F, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Wang B, Jiang J: The TEAD/TEF family of transcription factor Scalloped mediates Hippo signaling in organ size control. *Dev Cell* 2008, 14:377-387.
17. Zhao B, Wei X, Li W, Udai RS, Yang Q, Kim J, Xie J, Ikenoue T, Yu J, Li L *et al.*: Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. *Genes Dev* 2007, 21:2747-2761. The authors demonstrated that YAP is involved in cell contact inhibition. The study showed that cell density triggers YAP inhibition through Hippo pathway activation.
18. Nolo R, Morrison CM, Tao C, Zhang X, Halder G: The bantam microRNA is a target of the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway. *Curr Biol* 2006, 16:1895-1904.
19. Thompson BJ, Cohen SM: The Hippo pathway regulates the bantam microRNA to control cell proliferation and apoptosis in *Drosophila*. *Cell* 2006, 126:767-774.
20. Baena-Lopez LA, Rodriguez I, Baonza A: The tumor suppressor genes dachsous and fat modulate different signalling pathways by regulating dally and dally-like. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2008, 105:9645-9650.
21. Callus BA, Verhagen AM, Vaux DL: Association of mammalian sterile twenty kinases, Mst1 and Mst2, with hSalvador via C-terminal coiled-coil domains, leads to its stabilization and phosphorylation. *FEBS J* 2006, 273:4264-4276.
22. Chan EH, Nousiainen M, Chalamalasetty RB, Schafer A, Nigg EA, Siljje HH: The Ste20-like kinase Mst2 activates the human large tumor suppressor kinase Lats1. *Oncogene* 2005, 24:2076-2086.
23. Praskova M, Xia F, Avruch J: MOBKL1A/MOBKL1B phosphorylation by MST1 and MST2 inhibits cell proliferation. *Curr Biol* 2008, 18:311-321.
24. Hergovich A, Schmitz D, Hemmings BA: The human tumour suppressor LATS1 is activated by human MOB1 at the membrane. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2006, 345:50-58.

25. Sudol M: Yes-associated protein (YAP65) is a proline-rich phosphoprotein that binds to the SH3 domain of the Yes proto-oncogene product. Oncogene 1994, 9:2145-2152.

26. Kanai F, Marignani PA, Sarbassova D, Yagi R, Hall RA, Donowitz M, Hisaminato A, Fujiwara T, Ito Y, Cantley LC et al.: TAZ: a novel transcriptional co-activator regulated by interactions with 14-3-3 and PDZ domain proteins. EMBO J 2000, 19:6778-6791.

27. Zhang J, Smolen GA, Haber DA: Negative regulation of YAP by LATS1 underscores evolutionary conservation of the Drosophila Hippo pathway. Cancer Res 2008, 68:2789-2794.

28. Hao Y, Chun A, Cheung K, Rashidi B, Yang X: Tumor suppressor LATS1 is a negative regulator of oncogene YAP. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:5496-5509.

29. Lei QY, Zhang H, Zhao B, Zha ZY, Bai F, Pei XH, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Guan KL: TAZ promotes cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the hippo pathway. Mol Cell Biol 2008, 28:2426-2436.

30. Yagi R, Chen LF, Shigesada K, Murakami Y, Ito Y: A WW domain-containing yes-associated protein (YAP) is a novel transcriptional co-activator. EMBO J 1999, 18:2551-2562.

31. Strano S, Munarriz E, Rossi M, Castagnoli L, Shaul Y, Sacchi A, Oren M, Sudol M, Cesareni G, Blandino G: Physical interaction with Yes-associated protein enhances p73 transcriptional activity. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:15164-15173.

32. Vassilev A, Kaneko KJ, Shu H, Zhao Y, DePamphilis ML: TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm. Genes Dev 2001, 15:1229-1241.

33. Ota M, Sasaki H: Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling. Development 2008, 135:4059-4069.

34. Zhao B, Kim J, Ye X, Lai ZC, Guan KL: Both TEAD-binding and WW domains are required for the growth stimulation and oncogenic transformation activity of yes-associated protein. Cancer Res 2009, 69:1089-1098.

35. Zhao B, Ye X, Yu J, Li L, Li W, Li S, Yu J, Lin JD, Wang CY, Chinnaiyan AM et al.: TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control. Genes Dev 2008, 22:1962-1971.

36. Chan SW, Lim CJ, Guo K, Ng CP, Lee I, Hunziker W, Zeng Q, Hong W: A role for TAZ in migration, invasion, and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 2008, 68:2592-2598.

37. Zhang H, Liu CY, Zha ZY, Zhao B, Yao J, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Lei QY, Guan KL: TEAD transcription factors mediate the function of TAZ in cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:13355-13362.

38. Sawada A, Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H: Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of cell proliferation and survival. Mol Cell Biol 2008, 28:3177-3189.

39. Overholtzer M, Zhang J, Smolen GA, Muir B, Li W, Sgroi DC, Deng CX, Brugge JS, Haber DA: Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:12405-12410.

40. Zender L, Spector MS, Xue W, Flemming P, Cordon-Cardo C, Silke J, Fan ST, Luk JM, Wigler M, Hannon GJ et al.: Identification and validation of oncogenes in liver cancer using an integrative oncogenomic approach. Cell 2006, 125:1253-1267.

41. Camargo FD, Gokhale S, Johnnidis JB, Fu D, Bell GW, Jaenisch R, Brummelkamp TR: YAP1 increases organ size and expands undifferentiated progenitor cells. Curr Biol 2007, 17:2054-2060.

42. Cao X, Pfaff SL, Gage FH: YAP regulates neural progenitor cell number via the TEA domain transcription factor. Genes Dev 2008, 22:3320-3334.

43. Lapi E, Di Agostino S, Donzelli S, Gal H, Domany E, Rechavi G, Pandolfi PP, Givol D, Strano S, Lu X et al.: PML, YAP, and p73 are components of a proapoptotic autoregulatory feedback loop. Mol Cell 2008, 32:803-814.

44. Downward J, Basu S: YAP and p73: a complex affair. Mol Cell 2008, 32:749-750.

45. Basu S, Totty NF, Irwin MS, Sudol M, Downward J: Akt phosphorylates the Yes-associated protein, YAP, to induce interaction with 14-3-3 and attenuation of p73-mediated apoptosis. Mol Cell 2003, 11:11-23.

46. Strano S, Monti O, Pediconi N, Baccarini A, Fontemaggi G, Lapi E, Mantovani F, Damalas A, Citro G, Sacchi A et al.: The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein drives p73 gene-target specificity in response to DNA Damage. Mol Cell 2005, 18:447-459.

47. Yuan M, Tomlinson V, Lara R, Holliday D, Chelala C, Harada T, Gangeswaran R, Manson-Bishop C, Smith P, Danovi SA et al.: Yes-associated protein (YAP) functions as a tumor suppressor in breast. Cell Death Differ 2008, 15:1752-1759.

48. Lee JH, Kim TS, Yang TH, Koo BK, Oh SP, Lee KP, Oh HJ, Lee SH, Kong YY, Kim JM et al.: A crucial role of WW45 in developing epithelial tissues in the mouse. EMBO J 2008, 27:1231-1242.

49. St John MA, Tao W, Fei X, Fukumoto R, Carcangiu ML, Brownstein DG, Parlow AF, McGrath J, Xu T: Mice deficient of Lats1 develop soft-tissue sarcomas, ovarian tumours and pituitary dysfunction. Nat Genet 1999, 21:182-186.

50. Matallanas D, Romano D, Yee K, Meissl K, Kucerova L, Piazolla D, Baccarini M, Vass JK, Kolch W, O'Neill E: RASSF1A elicits apoptosis through an MST2 pathway directing proapoptotic transcription by the p73 tumor suppressor protein. Mol Cell 2007, 27:962-975.

51. Oka T, Mazack V, Sudol M: Mst2 and Lats kinases regulate apoptotic function of Yes kinase-associated protein (YAP). J Biol Chem 2008, 283:27534-27546.

52. Chan SW, Lim CJ, Loo LS, Chong YF, Huang C, Hong W: Teads mediate nuclear retention of taz to promote oncogenic transformation. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:14347-14358.

53. Varelas X, Sakuma R, Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Peerani R, Rao BM, Dembowy J, Yaffe MB, Zandstra PW, Wrana JL: TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem-cell self-renewal. Nat Cell Biol 2008, 10:837-848.

54. Zhao B, Lei QY, Guan KL: The Hippo-YAP pathway: new connections between regulation of organ size and cancer. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008, 20:638-646.

55. Oh H, Irvine KD: In vivo analysis of Yorkie phosphorylation sites. Oncogene 2009, 28:1916-1927.

56. Mackintosh C: Dynamic interactions between 14-3-3 proteins and phosphoproteins regulate diverse cellular processes. Biochem J 2004, 381:329-342.

57. Levy D, Reuven N, Shaul Y: A regulatory circuit controlling Itch-mediated p73 degradation by Runx. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:27462-27468.

58. Levy D, Adamovich Y, Reuven N, Shaul Y: Yap1 phosphorylation by c-Abl is a critical step in selective activation of proapoptotic genes in response to DNA damage. Mol Cell 2008, 29:350-361.

59. Hamaratoglu F, Willecke M, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Hyun E, Tao C, Jafar-Nejad H, Halder G: The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. Nat Cell Biol 2006, 8:27-36.

60. Pellock BJ, Buff E, White K, Hariharan IK: The Drosophila tumor suppressors Expanded and Merlin differentially regulate cell cycle exit, apoptosis, and Wingless signaling. Dev Biol 2007, 304:102-115.

61. Bennett FC, Harvey KF: Fat cadherin modulates organ size in Drosophila via the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling pathway. Curr Biol 2006, 16:2101-2110.

62. Silva E, Tsatskis Y, Gardano L, Tapon N, McNeill H: The tumor-suppressor gene fat controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the hippo signaling pathway. *Curr Biol* 2006, 16:2081-2089.

63. Willecke M, Hamaratoglu F, Kango-Singh M, Udan R, Chen CL, Tao C, Zhang X, Halder G: The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. *Curr Biol* 2006, 16:2090-2100.

64. Sopko R, McNeill H: The skinny on Fat: an enormous cadherin that regulates cell adhesion, tissue growth, and planar cell polarity. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 2009, 21:717-723.

65. Cho E, Feng Y, Rauskolb C, Maitra S, Fehon R, Irvine KD: Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. *Nat Genet* 2006, 38:1142-1150.

66. Badouel C, Gardano L, Amin N, Garg A, Rosenfeld R, Le Bihan T, McNeill H: The FERM-domain protein Expanded regulates Hippo pathway activity via direct interactions with the transcriptional activator Yorkie. *Dev Cell* 2009, 16:411-420.
This study demonstrated that Ex is able to directly bind to Yki and inhibit its activity, suggesting that Yki can be regulated independently of the Hpo/Wts kinases.

67. Khokhlatchev A, Rabizadeh S, Xavier R, Nedwidek M, Chen T, Zhang XF, Seed B, Avruch J: Identification of a novel Ras-regulated proapoptotic pathway. *Curr Biol* 2002, 12:253-265.

68. Praskova M, Khoklatchev A, Ortiz-Vega S, Avruch J: Regulation of the MST1 kinase by autophosphorylation, by the growth inhibitory proteins, RASSF1 and NORE1, and by Ras. *Biochem J* 2004, 381:453-462.

69. Feng Y, Irvine KD: Fat and expanded act in parallel to regulate growth through warts. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2007, 104:20362-20367.

70. Mao Y, Rauskolb C, Cho E, Hu WL, Hayter H, Minihan G, Katz FN, Irvine KD: Dachs: an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth, affinity and gene expression in Drosophila. *Development* 2006, 133:2539-2551.

71. Matakatsu H, Blair SS: The DHHC palmitoyltransferase approximated regulates Fat signaling and Dachs localization and activity. *Curr Biol* 2008, 18:1390-1395.

72. Saburi S, McNeill H: Organising cells into tissues: new roles for cell adhesion molecules in planar cell polarity. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 2005, 17:482-488.

73. Matakatsu H, Blair SS: Separating the adhesive and signaling functions of the Fat and Dachsous protocadherins. *Development* 2006, 133:2315-2324.

74. Cho E, Irvine KD: Action of fat, four-jointed, dachsous and dachs in distal-to-proximal wing signaling. *Development* 2004, 131:4489-4500.

75. Simon MA: Planar cell polarity in the Drosophila eye is directed by graded Four-jointed and Dachsous expression. *Development* 2004, 131:6175-6184.

76. Ishikawa HO, Takeuchi H, Haltiwanger RS, Irvine KD: Four-jointed is a Golgi kinase that phosphorylates a subset of cadherin domains. *Science* 2008, 321:401-404.

77. Rogulja D, Rauskolb C, Irvine KD: Morphogen control of wing growth through the Fat signaling pathway. *Dev Cell* 2008, 15:309-321.

See annotation to Ref. [78**].

78. Willecke M, Hamaratoglu F, Sansores-Garcia L, Tao C, Halder G:
• Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2008, 105:14897-14902.
Ref. [77**] and [78**] show that the Fat regulators, Fj and Ds, have an effect on growth that is dependent on Hippo pathway. By artificially changing the Fj/Ds levels between cells they were able to activate growth, suggesting that the Fj/Ds gradient is responsible for growth regulation and Hippo pathway activation.

79. Lawrence PA, Struhl G, Casal J: Do the protocadherins Fat and Dachsous link up to determine both planar cell polarity and the dimensions of organs? *Nat Cell Biol* 2008, 10:1379-1382.

80. Sopko R, Silva E, Clayton L, Gardano L, Barrios-Rodiles M, Wrana J, Varelas X, Arbowzova NI, Shaw S, Saburi S et al.: Phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor fat is regulated by its ligand Dachsous and the kinase discs overgrown. *Curr Biol* 2009, 19:1112-1117.
See annotation to Ref. [81*].

81. Feng Y, Irvine KD: Processing and phosphorylation of the Fat receptor. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2009, 106:11989-11994.
Ref. [80*] and [81*] show the kinase Dco can bind to Fat and is responsible for Fat intracellular domain phosphorylation. The authors also showed that this phosphorylation is dependent on Ds.

82. Polesello C, Tapon N: Salvador-warts-hippo signaling promotes Drosophila posterior follicle cell maturation downstream of notch. *Curr Biol* 2007, 17:1864-1870.

83. Meignin C, Alvarez-Garcia I, Davis I, Palacios IM: The salvador-warts-hippo pathway is required for epithelial proliferation and axis specification in Drosophila. *Curr Biol* 2007, 17:1871-1878.

84. Reichmann V: Developmental biology: hippo promotes posterior patterning by preventing proliferation. *Curr Biol* 2007, 17:R1006-R1008.

85. Yu J, Poulton J, Huang YC, Deng WM: The hippo pathway promotes Notch signaling in regulation of cell differentiation, proliferation, and oocyte polarity. *PLoS ONE* 2008, 3:pe1761.

86. Parrish JZ, Emoto K, Jan LY, Jan YN: Polycomb genes interact with the tumor suppressor genes hippo and warts in the maintenance of Drosophila sensory neuron dendrites. *Genes Dev* 2007, 21:956-972.

87. Mikeladze-Dvali T, Wernet MF, Pistillo D, Mazzoni EO, Teleman AA, Chen YW, Cohen S, Desplan C: The growth regulators warts/lats and melted interact in a bistable loop to specify opposite fates in Drosophila R8 photoreceptors. *Cell* 2005, 122:775-787.

88. Nishioka N, Inoue K, Adachi K, Kiyonari H, Ota M, Ralston A, Yabuta N, Hirahara S, Stephenson RO, Ogonuki N et al.: The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass. *Dev Cell* 2009, 16:398-410.
The authors show that YAP/TEAD4 can regulate cell fate in early mice embryos. Furthermore, they demonstrate that this process is dependent on Lats and involves cell contact inhibition.

89. Crickmore MA, Mann RS: Hox control of morphogen mobility and organ development through regulation of glypican expression. *Development* 2007, 134:327-334.
