
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Jan. 1991, p. 6–15

0021-9193/91/010006-10$02.00/0

Copyright © 1991, American Society for Microbiology

---

**Cloning and Characterization of Plasmid-Encoded Genes for the Degradation of 1,2-Dichloro-, 1,4-Dichloro-, and 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene of *Pseudomonas* sp. Strain P51**

JAN ROELOF VAN DER MEER,* ALEX R. W. VAN NEERVEN, ECOO J. DE VRIES, WILLEM M. DE VOS, AND ALEXANDER J. B. ZEHNDER

Department of Microbiology, Wageningen Agricultural University, H. van Suchtelenweg 4, 6703 CT Wageningen, The Netherlands

Received 1 May 1990/Accepted 5 October 1990

---

*Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 is able to use 1,2-dichlorobenzene, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, and 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as sole carbon and energy sources. Two gene clusters involved in the degradation of these compounds were identified on a catabolic plasmid, pP51, with a size of 110 kb by using hybridization. They were further characterized by cloning in *Escherichia coli*, *Pseudomonas putida* KT2442, and *Alcaligenes eutrophus* JMP222. Expression studies in these organisms showed that the upper-pathway genes (*tcbA* and *tcbB*) code for the conversion of 1,2-dichlorobenzene and 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene to 3,4-dichlorocatechol and 3,4,6-trichlorocatechol, respectively, by means of a dioxygenase system and a dehydrogenase. The lower-pathway genes have the order *tcbC-tcbD-tcbE* and encode a catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II, a cycloisomerase II, and a hydrolase II, respectively. The combined action of these enzymes degrades 3,4-dichlorocatechol and 3,4,6-trichlorocatechol to a chloromalylacetic acid. The release of one chlorine atom from 3,4-dichlorocatechol takes place during lactonization of 2,3-dichloromuconic acid.

In recent years, several bacteria have been isolated that were able to degrade chlorinated aromatic compounds, such as chlorinated benzoic acids, chlorinated phenols (27, 39), and even chlorinated benzenes and chlorinated biphenyls (12, 24). Bacteria able to use chlorinated benzenes as sole carbon and energy substrates (15, 25, 30, 35) were found to oxidize the chlorinated benzene to a chlorocatechol by the action of a dioxygenase enzyme and a dehydrogenase. The chlorocatechol could then be degraded via a pathway similar to the one described for 3-chlorobenzoate metabolism in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13, i.e., ring cleavage by a catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II enzyme, lactonization by a cycloisomerase II, and hydrolysis by a hydrolase II, yielding chloromalylacetic acid (7, 8, 27–29). These enzymes were shown to have higher affinity toward chlorinated substrates than did their counterparts in benzoate metabolism. Chloromalylacetic acid would then be converted further by the enzyme maleylacetate reductase to yield β-ketoadipate. One chlorine atom is thought to be released from the aromatic ring during lactonization (28).

The genetic information encoding metabolic pathways for xenobiotic compounds in bacteria often resides on catabolic plasmids (3, 19, 41). In the case of chlorinated aromatic compounds, gene clusters have been described that code for the conversion of chlorinated catechols, such as *tfdCDEF*, present on plasmid pJP4 (6, 13, 14, 26), and *clcABD*, present on plasmid pAC27 (4, 10). Furthermore, genes have been identified and characterized that encode the conversion of chlorinated benzoic acids (38, 39) and chlorinated biphenyls (12, 24).

In this report, we describe the cloning and genetic characterization of two gene clusters encoding the degradation of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (1,2,4-TCB), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (1,2-DCB), and 1,4-dichlorobenzene (1,4-DCB) of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51, which was isolated previously (37). To our knowledge, strain P51 is the first organism described to degrade 1,2,4-TCB as well as 1,2- and 1,4-DCB (37). The genetic and biochemical characterization of this catabolic pathway offers a unique possibility to study the evolution of new metabolic routes and the adaptation of microorganisms to xenobiotic substrates.

---

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bacterial strains, plasmids, and culture conditions. The bacterial strains and plasmids used are listed in Table 1. *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 was grown in Z3 minimal medium at 30°C as previously described (37). 1,2,4-TCB was added as liquid at 400 μl (3.2 mmol) per liter of culture medium. The solubility of 1,2,4-TCB in water was estimated by gas chromatography (GC) analysis to be 83 μM. When cells were grown on 1,2-DCB or 1,4-DCB, 3.5 mmol of these compounds was dissolved in 20 ml of heptamethylnonane (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Mo.), which was then added as organic phase to 1 liter of culture volume. Cultures used for enzyme activity measurements were grown to late exponential phase on 1,2,4-TCB or, when uninduced, on 10 mM succinate. *Alcaligenes eutrophus* JMP222 and *Pseudomonas putida* KT2442 were grown routinely at 30°C on LB (22). When tested for enzyme activity, *A. eutrophus* JMP222 harboring plasmid pTCB1 was grown on 10 mM succinate and induced with 1 mM 3-chlorobenzoate as described by Don et al. (6). *P. putida* KT2442 strains harboring plasmid pTCB1, pTCB39, or pTCB13 were cultivated to late exponential phase in 50 ml of M9 medium containing either 10 mM succinate or 10 mM 3-chlorobenzoate as the carbon source supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics. *Escherichia coli* strains were cultivated on LB at 37°C. When tested for enzyme activity, strains were grown in 50 ml of LB plus ampicillin to an \(A_{620}\) of 1.0. For detection of chlorobenzene dioxygenase activity in *E. coli*, media were supplemented with 10 mM succinate and 10 mM 3-chlorobenzoate.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics$^a$ | Source or reference |
|-------------------|----------------------------|---------------------|
| **Bacterial strains** |  |  |
| *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 | Tcb<sup>+</sup> Dcb<sup>+</sup> |  |
| *Escherichia coli* |  |  |
| DH5α | F<sup>−</sup> lacZΔM15 recA1 hsdR17 supE44 Δ(lacZYA-argF) | Bethesda Research Laboratories |
| HB101 | recA13 leuB6 proA2 thi-1 hsdR hsdM Sm<sup>r</sup> | S. Harayama |
| *Pseudomonas putida* KT2442 | P. putida mt-2, hsdR1 hsdM<sup>+</sup> Rif<sup>r</sup> | 11 |
| *Alcaligenes eutrophus* JMP222 | 2,4-D<sup>−</sup> 3CB<sup>−</sup> Sm<sup>r</sup> | 6 |
| **Plasmids** |  |  |
| pP51 | 110-kb native plasmid of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 | This work |
| pUC18 | Ap<sup>r</sup> | 40 |
| pUC19 | Ap<sup>r</sup> | 40 |
| pKT230 | Km<sup>r</sup> Sm<sup>r</sup> | 1 |
| pRK2013 | ColE1::pRK2 Tra<sup>+</sup> Km<sup>r</sup> | 5 |
| pCBA3 | pKT230 carrying the 1.6-kb Xhol fragment of pJP4 containing tfdC; Sm<sup>r</sup> | J. R. van der Meer |
| p261.39 | pBR322 carrying a putative benzene dioxygenase gene from *Moraxella* sp. strain RST 67-1; Ap<sup>r</sup> | H. G. Rast |
| pTCB1 | pKT230 carrying the 13-kb SstI fragment of pP51; Km<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB13 | pKT230 carrying the 2.3-kb Xhol fragment of pP51; Sm<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB39 | ClaI deletion derivative of pTCB1; Km<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB42 | pUC18 carrying the 4.5-kb SstI-ClaI fragment of pTCB45; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB43 | pUC19 carrying the 3.1-kb PstI fragment of pTCB42; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB44 | Orientation opposite that of pTCB43; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB45 | pUC19 carrying the 13-kb SstI fragment of pTCB1; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB48 | pUC18 carrying the 1.7-kb PstI-HindIII fragment of pTCB43; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB51 | pUC18 carrying the 1.3-kb PstI-Xhol fragment of pTCB48; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB51Δ | Derivative of pTCB51 in which the BamHI site was removed; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB60 | pUC18 carrying the 12-kb HindIII fragment of pP51; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB62 | pUC18 carrying the 5.2-kb EcoRI-KpnI fragment of pTCB45; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB63 | pUC18 carrying the 2.5-kb EcoRI-SalI fragment of pTCB43; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB64 | pUC18 carrying the 3.8-kb EcoRI-PstI fragment of pTCB45; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB64Δ4 | Derivative of pTCB64 in which the 4th SalI site was removed; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB69 | pUC18 carrying a 6.3-kb Sau3AI partial fragment of pTCB60; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB70 | pUC18 carrying a 6.8-kb Sau3AI partial fragment of pTCB60; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB71 | pUC19 carrying the 4.9-kb Xhol-EcoRI fragment of pTCB60; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB72 | pUC19 carrying the 5.8-kb Xhol-BamHI fragment of pTCB60; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |
| pTCB73 | pUC18 carrying the 5.8-kb Xhol-BamHI fragment of pTCB60; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This work |

$^a$ Abbreviations: Tcb<sup>+</sup>, growth on 1,2,4-TCB; Dcb<sup>+</sup>, growth on 1,2-DCB; Sm, streptomycin; Rif, rifampin; r, resistance; 2,4-D<sup>−</sup>, no growth on 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid; 3CB<sup>−</sup>, no growth on 3-chlorobenzoate; Ap, ampicillin; Km, kanamycin.

either *A. eutrophus* JMP222 or *P. putida* KT2442, using a triparental mating with *E. coli* HB101(pRK2013) as the helper strain (5).

Resting-cell and enzyme assays. Conversion of 1,2-DCB and 1,2,4-TCB by resting cells of *E. coli* was determined as follows. *E. coli* DH5α(pTCB69) was grown in 500 ml of LB plus ampicillin to an \( A_{620} \) of 1.5 and harvested by centrifugation for 10 min at 6,000 rpm and 4°C in a Sorvall GSA rotor. Cells were washed twice with 25 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) and resuspended to make a final volume of 50 ml. Glass vials of 37 ml were filled with 1 ml of cell suspension to which either 8 ml of 25 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) and 1 ml of a saturated solution of 1,2-DCB in the same buffer or 9 ml of a saturated solution of 1,2,4-TCB in 25 mM phosphate buffer was added. The concentration of 1,2-DCB in this saturated solution was estimated to be 75 mg/liter (0.5 mM), and that of 1,2,4-TCB was estimated to be 30 mg/liter (166 μM). Vials were closed with Viton stoppers (Iso-versinic; Rubber B.V., Hilversum, The Netherlands) to prevent loss of the chlorinated benzenes during the course of the experiment. Cells were incubated at 37°C in a shaking water bath. For each time point, three vials were analyzed for chlorobenzene concentration, and in three other vials the concentration of chlorocatechol was determined. Samples for chlorocatechol production were centrifuged and the supernatants were stored at −20°C until analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).

Cultures used for enzyme assays were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice in 50 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0), or in 25 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) when tested for chloride release, resuspended in a final volume of 3 ml, and subsequently disrupted in a miniature French pressure cell (Aminco, Inc., Silver Spring, Md.) in the case of *E. coli* and *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51. *P. putida* and *A. eutrophus* strains were broken by sonication six times for 15 s each time at 50 W and 0°C (Vibracell; Sonic Materials Inc., Danbury, Conn.). The crude extract was cleared by centrifugation at 19,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C in a Sorvall SS34 rotor. The supernatant after centrifugation is referred to as the cell extract. Protein content of the cell extract was determined according to Bradford (2).

Enzymatic activities of catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II and hydrolase II were determined as described by Dorn and Knackmuss (7, 8) and Schmidt et al. (28, 29).

Cycloisomerase II activity was measured by a modified procedure, monitoring the disappearance of 2-chloromuconic acid upon addition of cell extract by HPLC analysis. The enzyme assay consisted of 0.66 ml of 40 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0), 0.30 ml of 0.3 mM 2-chloromuconic acid (dissolved in 25 mM Tris hydrochloride [pH 8.0]), 10 μl of 100 mM MnCl₂, and 30 μl of cell extract (approximately 100 μg of protein) (31).

Enzymes of the chlorocatechol pathway were further analyzed in cell extracts of *E. coli* strains by monitoring the conversion of 3,4-dichlorocatechol (3,4-DCC) and appearance of transformation products. These assays were performed by incubating 0.96 ml of 40 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0), 30 μl of cell extract, and 10 μl of 10 mM 3,4-DCC at 30°C. Reactions were monitored by spectral analysis on a double-beam spectrophotometer (model 25; Beckman Instruments Inc., Fullerton, Calif.). Chloride release was measured in a similar reaction mixture except that chloride-free 25 mM sodium-potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) was used instead of Tris hydrochloride. Reactions were monitored spectrophotometrically. When no more changes occurred, 0.8 ml of the reaction mixture was analyzed for Cl⁻.

Chemical analysis. Chlorinated catechols and their transformation products were analyzed on an LKB model 2150 HPLC (LKB, Bromma, Sweden) equipped with a UV detector (LKB 2158 Uvicord SD) and a rapid spectral detector (LKB model 2140). Transformation products of chlorocatechols were analyzed by using a Hibar 10-μm LiChroSorb RP-8 column (E. Merck, Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany) with 30% acetonitrile and 70% 20 mM phosphoric acid as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min.

Formation of 3,4-DCC from 1,2-DCB and of 3,4,6-trichlorocatechol (3,4,6-TCC) from 1,2,4-TCB was analyzed by using a Chromospher C-8 column (Chrompack, Middelburg, The Netherlands) operated at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min with a mobile phase of 50% acetonitrile and 50% 20 mM phosphoric acid.

Chlorobenzene concentrations were measured by GC as described by Van der Meer et al. (37). Chloride concentrations in media and enzyme reactions were analyzed as described by Schraa et al. (30).

Chemicals. 3-Chlorocatechol, 3,4-DCC, 2-chloro-*cis*-muconate, and *cis*-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-4-olide were kind gifts from W. Reineke, Wuppertal, Federal Republic of Germany. 3,4,6-TCC was synthesized from 2,4,5-trichlorophenol and was a gift from Gineke van Bergen of the Department of Organic Chemistry, Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

---

**RESULTS**

Degradation of 1,2,4-TCB by strain P51. The complete conversion by *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 of 1,2,4-TCB, 1,2-DCB, and 1,4-DCB simultaneously is shown in Fig. 1. Growth resulted in the concomitant release of 3 mol of chloride per mol of 1,2,4-TCB and 2 mol of chloride per mol of 1,2- and 1,4-DCB into the medium. Strain P51 showed a slight preference for 1,2-DCB rather than 1,4-DCB and 1,2,4-TCB. 1,3-DCB was also shown to be converted by strain P51 in soil columns (37) but could not be used as the sole carbon and energy source in liquid culture. The only additional aromatic substrates that were found to be used as carbon and energy sources were toluene, monochlorobenzene, and 4-chlorophenol.

Cultures grown on 1,2,4-TCB appeared to contain elevated levels of a catechol 1,2-dioxygenase activity specific for chlorinated substrates such as 3-chlorocatechol (Table 2).

Degradation of 1,2,4-TCB is plasmid encoded in strain P51. After several transfers in nonselective media, it was observed that the ability of strain P51 to grow on 1,2,4-TCB as the sole carbon and energy source was lost irreversibly (results not shown). From cultures of strain P51 that were cultivated on 1,2,4-TCB, a catabolic plasmid of 110 kb could be isolated by CsCl-ethidium bromide gradient centrifugation. This plasmid was found to be absent in strains that could no longer grow on 1,2,4-TCB. In addition, total DNA of those cured strains did not hybridize with pP51 DNA probes (results not shown). A physical map of plasmid pP51 was constructed by using the enzymes KpnI, HpaI, HindIII, XhoI, and BamHI (Fig. 2).

Transfer of plasmid pP51 could not be shown in direct plate mating experiments with recipient strains such as *P. putida* KT2442, *A. eutrophus* JMP222, or plasmid-free strains of P51 (results not shown), possibly because of poor growth on agar plates containing 1,2,4-TCB as the sole

FIG. 1. Growth of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 on 1,2,4-TCB, 1,2-DCB, and 1,4-DCB simultaneously present in the culture medium. Symbols: ●, concentration of 1,2-DCB, 1,4-DCB, or 1,2,4- TCB as determined by GC analysis; ○, chloride concentration; ■, $A_{620}$.

carbon source (supplied as vapor) and consequently a weak counterselection of the recipients.

Cloning of the lower-pathway genes encoding chlorocatechol metabolism. To locate the genes involved in degradation of 1,2,4-TCB, we hybridized pP51 DNA to a 1.6-kb XhoI fragment of plasmid pJP4, containing the catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II gene *tfdC* from *A. eutrophus* JMP134 (6, 13, 26). The results (Fig. 3A) showed that a 13-kb SstI fragment of pP51 hybridized under stringent washing conditions. This fragment was subsequently cloned in *E. coli* by using the broad-host-range vector pKT230 (1). The resulting plasmid, pTCB1, was mobilized into the plasmid-free recipient strains *A. eutrophus* JMP222 (6) and *P. putida* KT2442. The KT2442 transconjugant harboring pTCB1 was found to be able to grow on 3-chlorobenzoate as the sole carbon and energy source, whereas the parent strain KT2442 was unable to do so. High catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activities were detected in *P. putida* KT2442(pTCB1) when this strain was cultivated

FIG. 2. Physical map of the catabolic plasmid pP51 from *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51. Capital letters indicate the order of the generated restriction enzyme fragments according to size. The size of the total plasmid was estimated to be 110 kb. Shown are the two gene clusters that were cloned and characterized in this study: (i) the upper-pathway genes *tcbA* and *tcbB*, which are located on the Hind B fragment of plasmid pP51, and (ii) the genes *tcbC*, *tcbD*, and *tcbE* of the lower or catechol pathway, which are located on the 13-kb SstI fragment of pP51. Arrows in the gene clusters show the deduced orientations of the genes. Dotted lines (e.g., at XhoI-I) indicate possible ambiguity in locating the fragment.

on 3-chlorobenzoate (Table 2). This strain was found not to degrade 1,2,4-TCB or 1,2-DCB. Both orientations of the 13-kb SstI fragment in pKT230 appeared to be functional in *A. eutrophus* as well as *P. putida* (results not shown), which suggests that expression signals from pP51 can be recognized in both recipient strains.

When a ClaI deletion derivative of pTCB1 was constructed, the ability to degrade 3-chlorobenzoate appeared to be lost (pTCB39; Fig. 4A). A smaller construct, pTCB13, did not confer growth on 3-chlorobenzoate in strain KT2442. These results indicate that pP51 encodes a catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity and a functional pathway for degradation of chlorinated catechols.

TABLE 2. Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase activities in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 and in *A. eutrophus* and *P. putida* strains

| Strain                  | Plasmid   | Growth substrate       | Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase activity$^a$ |
|-------------------------|-----------|------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                         |           |                        | Catechol                             | 3-Chlorocatechol |
| *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 | pP51     | 1,2,4-TCB              | 79.5                                 | 139.1            |
|                         | pP51      | Succinate              | 40.0                                 | 4.4              |
| *A. eutrophus* JMP222   | pTCB1     | Succinate + 3-CBa$^b$  | 265.0                                | 0.0              |
| *P. putida* KT2442      | pKT230    | Succinate + 3-CBa      | 430.2                                | 17.6             |
|                         | pTCB1     | Succinate              | 0.0                                  | 0.0              |
|                         | pTCB1     | Succinate              | 3.3                                  | 10.0             |
|                         | pTCB1     | 3-CBa                  | 185.2                                | 170.1            |

$^a$ Activity in cell extracts, expressed as nanomoles of muconic acid per milligram of protein per minute. 3-Chlorocatechol was used as a specific substrate for catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II.

$^b$ 3-CBa, 3-Chlorobenzoate.

FIG. 3. (A) Hybridization of pP51 DNA with the 1.6-kb Xhol fragment of pJP4, containing the catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II gene *tfdC*. Lanes: a, λ DNA, HindIII; b, pP51, Xhol; c, pP51, SstI; d, pTCB45, Xhol; e, pTCB45, SstI; f, pJP4, SstI; g, pCBA3, Xhol. The arrow indicates the 13-kb SstI fragment of pP51. Sizes on the left are indicated in kilobases. (B) Hybridization of pP51 DNA with the 2-kb PstI fragment of plasmid p261.39, containing part of the benzene dioxygenase gene of Moraxella sp. strain RST 67-1 (26a). Lanes: a, λ DNA, HindIII; b, plasmid p261.39, PstI; c, pTCB60, HindIII; d, pTCB60, Xhol; e, pP51, Xhol; f, pP51, HindIII. A weak cross-hybridization was also detected between the pUC vector bands and the pBR322-based plasmid p261.39. The arrow shows the 12-kb Hind B fragment of plasmid pP51.

Identification and location of the lower-pathway genes *tcbC*, *tcbD*, and *tcbE*. To characterize this pathway further, we cloned various pP51 fragments of pTCB1 in *E. coli*, using pUC18 and pUC19. The constructs used for analyzing the lower-pathway genes are shown in Fig. 4B. When the 13-kb SstI fragment from pTCB1 was cloned into pUC18 in both directions, only one orientation (pTCB45) was found to give very low catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity (Table 3). A similar level of low activity was detected in subclone pTCB42. Further hybridization studies with the *tfdC* gene from pJP4 showed hybridization with two small SalI fragments (Fig. 4B). Deletion derivatives of pTCB45 that started at either the EcoRI or PstI site upstream of the SalI fragments were found to give higher catechol 1,2-dioxygenase activities in cell extracts than did pTCB45 or pTCB42. Clones constructed in the other orientation, such as pTCB44, exhibited no enzyme activity. This finding indicated that in *E. coli*, the catechol 1,2-dioxygenase gene was under the control of a vector-located promoter and suggested the orientation of the gene as indicated in Fig. 4B. The catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity was completely absent in *E. coli* harboring pTCB51Δ. In this plasmid, the unique BamHI site of pTCB51 was removed by digestion with BamHI, filling in of the 3′ recessed ends with Klenow polymerase, and religation of the plasmid, thereby causing a frameshift mutation. This result showed that we had localized the catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II gene from pP51. This gene was designated *tcbC*.

The chlorocatechol pathway was studied in more detail by measuring activities of the other known pathway enzymes (6, 21, 27–29) in *E. coli* (Fig. 4 and Table 3). Cycloisomerase II activity was found in cell extracts of *E. coli* containing pTCB63, pTCB43, pTCB64, or pTCB62 at low levels ranging from 0.3 to 4.3 nmol/mg of protein per min. Since no activity of this enzyme could be detected in *E. coli* strains harboring pTCB51 and pTCB48, it is very likely that in those plasmids the cycloisomerase gene of pP51 was interrupted. These experiments located the gene encoding a cycloisomerase II, which was named *tcbD* (Fig. 4B).

Hydrolase II activity measured in *E. coli* cell extracts was higher than cycloisomerase II or catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity, in the range of 25 to 30 nmol/mg of protein per min. Activity was detected only in constructs pTCB64 and pTCB62. This gene was designated *tcbE* (Fig. 4B).

To locate *tcbE*, we constructed a frameshift mutation in the SalI site present between the deduced locations of *tcbD* and *tcbE*. Therefore, pTCB64 was partially digested with SalI, filled with Klenow polymerase, and religated (Fig. 4B). *E. coli*(pTCB64Δ4) retained all of the enzyme activities that were also found to be present in *E. coli* harboring pTCB64. Furthermore, we did not observe other conversion steps after incubation with 3,4-DCC (see below). This finding indicated, however, that the hydrolase gene *tcbE* is not located adjacent to the cycloisomerase gene *tcbD* but downstream from the SalI site. The overall deduced gene order was found to be *tcbC-tcbD-tcbE* (Fig. 4B).

To test whether the cloned fragments also coded for a maleylacetate reductase, we measured the activity of this enzyme as described by Oltmanns et al. (25), using the product of *cis*-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-4-olide after hydrolysis at pH 12 as a substrate (26b). However, none of the *E. coli* strains tested showed maleylacetate reductase activity (results not shown).

Conversion reactions of 3,4-DCC. Four types of products were formed during incubation of 3,4-DCC with cell extracts of the various *E. coli* strains (Fig. 5). Clones pTCB51 and pTCB48 contained only catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity (Table 3) and accumulated one product. This product I was stable at pH 8.0 during the course of the incubation experiments (2 h), as observed in the spectrophotometric assay. At this pH, the spectrum of product I showed the features of a muconic acid (15, 28, 31), which in this case would be 2,3-dichloro-*cis*,*cis*-muconic acid, with an absorption maximum at 268 nm (Fig. 5A). When injected into an HPLC, the

VOL. 173, 1991

CHLOROBENZENE GENES OF PLASMID pP51 11

TABLE 3. Enzyme activities of chlorocatechol pathway enzymes in *E. coli* strains

| Plasmid | Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II | Cycloisomerase II | Hydrolase II | Chloride release ($\mu$mol)$^b$ |
|---------|-----------------------------|-------------------|--------------|----------------------------------|
| pTCB51  | 6.2                         | 0.0               | 0.0          | ND$^c$                          |
| pTCB51$\Delta$ | 0.0                      | ND                | ND           | ND                              |
| pTCB48  | 5.5                         | 0.0               | 0.0          | 0.00                            |
| pTCB63  | 5.8                         | 2.8               | 0.0          | 0.09                            |
| pTCB43  | 7.7                         | 4.3               | 0.0          | 0.10                            |
| pTCB64  | 9.5                         | 1.2               | 25.5         | 0.06                            |
| pTCB62  | 11.0                        | 0.3               | 27.8         | 0.08                            |
| pTCB45  | 0.4                         | ND                | ND           | ND                              |
| pTCB42  | 0.2                         | ND                | ND           | ND                              |
| pTCB44  | 0.0                         | ND                | ND           | ND                              |
| pTCB64$\Delta$4 | 6.3                     | 11.7              | 4.5          | 0.11                            |

$^a$ Expressed as follows: for catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II, nanomoles of muconic acid per milligram of protein per minute, using 3-chlorocatechol as the substrate; for cycloisomerase II, nanomoles of 2-chloromuconate converted per milligram of protein per minute; for hydrolase II, nanomoles of cis-4-carboxymethylene-but-2-en-4-olide converted per milligram of protein per minute.

$^b$ Expressed as the total amount of chloride formed per milliliter of assay medium after the reaction was complete.

$^c$ ND. Not determined.

FIG. 4. (A) Cloning of DNA fragments of pP51 in *P. putida* and *A. eutrophus*, using the broad-host-range vector pKT230. $\square$, pP51 fragments that when ligated into pKT230 form the plasmids indicated on the left. Restriction sites of relevant enzymes are shown on the pP51 fragments. pTCB1 contains the 13-kb SstI fragment of pP51 cloned into the unique SstI site present in the Sm' gene of pKT230. pTCB39 was derived from pTCB1 by deleting a 5.8-kb ClaI fragment (-- --). pTCB13 contains the XhoI M fragment of pP51. At the right are shown the phenotypes of *P. putida* KT2442 harboring these plasmids. +, Growth on 3-chlorobenzoate (3CBa); –, no growth. (B) Cloning of pP51 DNA fragments in *E. coli*, using pUC18 and pUC19. Relevant restriction sites of the pP51 DNA fragments used for cloning are shown for the 13-kb SstI fragment and in more detail in the enlarged fragment (-- --). Each plasmid listed on the left was subcloned from pTCB45 and contains the fragment indicated by the horizontal bar. The location and direction of the lac promoter present on pUC18 or pUC19 are indicated by an arrow. The two small SalI fragments of pP51 hybridizing with the pJP4 fragment containing *tfdC* (results not shown) are shown (■) in the detailed physical map of pTCB45. pTCB51$\Delta$ and pTCB64$\Delta$4 were derived from pTCB51 and pTCB64, respectively. The order and locations of the genes for chlorocatechol degradation as derived from the cloning and expression studies are shown: *tcbC*, catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II; *tcbD*, cycloisomerase II; *tcbE*, hydrolase II. Expression of the genes in *E. coli* is shown on the right. CO, Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II activity; CY, cycloisomerase II activity; HY, hydrolase II activity. +, Activity; –, no activity.

Compound was unstable and two peaks with different retention times (7.2 and 8.3 min) were found.

*E. coli* harboring pTCB63 and pTCB43 converted 3,4-DCC first to product I and subsequently to product II (8.7 min) as a result of the activity of the cycloisomerase II (Fig. 5B). This compound was not stable at pH 8.0, but its adsorption maximum at 295 nm slowly changed to 252 nm (retention time of product III on HPLC, 3.8 min). The product after cycloisomerization would be 5-chloro-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-4-olide (15). Product IV was observed with use of clones pTCB64, pTCB64$\Delta$4, and pTCB62 (Fig. 5C). Upon incubation of 3,4-DCC, product I was formed first, followed by product II and then product IV, which was found to be stable in the reaction mixture. The absorption maximum at pH 8.0 was 242 nm, but with HPLC (retention time, 7.1 min) we detected a different spectrum with the highest absorption at 190 nm, suggesting that this compound was a maleylacetate (in this case 5-chloromaleylacetate), which decarboxylated under acidic conditions to yield chloroacetyl acrylic acid (15). During the conversion of product I to product IV, we could detect only product II, which suggests that product III is a nonenzymatically formed compound.

Chloride release was analyzed in cell extracts incubated with 3,4-DCC (Table 3). Cell extracts of *E. coli* harboring pTCB51 or pTCB48 did not show chloride release with 3,4-DCC, whereas those of *E. coli* harboring pTCB63, pTCB43, pTCB64, pTCB64$\Delta$4, or pTCB62 showed the release of a maximum of 0.1 $\mu$mol of chloride after incubation with 0.1 $\mu$mol of 3,4-DCC.

Cloning and location of the upper-pathway genes *tcbA* and *tcbB*. To detect the genes encoding the conversion of 1,2,4-TCB to the corresponding chlorinated catechol, we probed for the presence of a benzene dioxygenase gene. The benzene dioxygenase gene was obtained from *Moraxella* sp. strain RST 67-1 and had been cloned previously (26a). We could detect a weak hybridization signal in pP51 plasmid DNA with the *Moraxella* probe under stringent washing conditions (Fig. 3B). Since the hybridization was limited to the HindIII fragment of pP51 (Fig. 2), this fragment was cloned into pUC18, resulting in pTCB60 (Fig. 6). From pTCB60 we constructed a plasmid bank, using partial digestion with Sau3AI. Fragments ranging from 5 to 6 kb were recovered from an agarose gel after digestion, ligated with pUC18 digested with BamHI, and transformed into *E. coli*. To test the expression of the benzene dioxygenase gene, transformants were selected on LB containing 1 mM indole (9, 36). Among 2,000 transformants, we detected two colo-

FIG. 5. Conversion reactions of 3,4-DCC. Shown are UV spectra of the products accumulating in the spectrophotometric assay when *E. coli* cell extracts harboring plasmid pTCB48, pTCB63, pTCB43, pTCB64, pTCB64Δ4, or pTCB62 were incubated with 3,4-DCC. Symbols: ---, UV spectrum of 3,4-DCC; ----, product I accumulating upon incubation with *E. coli* cell extract harboring pTCB48 (A), product II after incubation with *E. coli* cell extract harboring plasmid pTCB63 or pTCB43 (B), and product IV after incubation with *E. coli* cell extract harboring plasmid pTCB64, pTCB64Δ4, or pTCB62 (C); ···, intermediate spectra during transformation of 3,4-DCC to the final product, as recorded every 10 min. The UV spectrum of product III, arising after the spontaneous conversion of product II, is not shown.

nies that turned blue. Plasmid DNA was isolated from these clones (pTCB69 and pTCB70), and the inserts were aligned with that of pTCB60 by restriction mapping (Fig. 6). *E. coli* strains harboring deletion derivatives constructed from pTCB60, such as pTCB71 and pTCB72, that contained

![Diagram]

FIG. 6. Cloning of pP51 DNA fragments containing the upper-pathway genes *tcbA* and *tcbB* in *E. coli*, using pUC18 and pUC19. pP51 fragments (□) form the plasmids indicated on the left when ligated with pUC18 or pUC19. The relevant restriction sites of pP51 used for cloning are indicated. The location and direction of the vector-located *lac* promoter are shown by an arrow. pTCB60 contains the 12-kb *Hind* B fragment of pP51. pTCB69 and pTCB70 were obtained by partial digestion of pTCB60 with *Sau*3AI and selection on indole media as indicated in the text. The extent of indigo formation by *E. coli* strains harboring these plasmids as judged from coloration on indole-containing agar plates is shown on the right. ++, Strong blue color; +, brownish color; –, no coloration visible.

DISCUSSION

Pathway for 1,2,4-TCB degradation. *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 was found to be able to completely mineralize 1,2,4-TCB and 1,2- and 1,4-DCB, a property not previously reported to occur within one microorganism. The metabolic pathway of 1,2,4-TCB degradation in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 was studied in detail by cloning two gene clusters that are involved in this pathway and analyzing their func-

FIG. 7. Conversion of 1,2-DCB and 1,2,4-TCB to 3,4-DCC and 3,4,6-TCC, respectively, by resting-cell suspensions of *E. coli* harboring pTCB69. Shown are concentrations of 1,2-DCB (●) and 1,2,4-TCB (■) measured in cell suspensions (——) and in controls without bacterial cells added (---) by using GC analysis during the time course of the incubation (2 h) and concentration of 3,4-DCC (○) and 3,4,6-TCC (□) measured in cell suspensions by using HPLC analysis. Each error bar indicates the standard deviation of a mean value of three independent samples. No formation of chlorinated catechols was detected in controls with chlorinated benzenes but without cells added or in controls without chlorinated benzenes but with cells added. No formation of chlorinated catechols was detected when *E. coli* without recombinant plasmid was incubated with 1,2-DCB or 1,2,4-TCB (results not shown).

FIG. 8. Proposed pathways for the degradation of 1,2,4-TCB, 1,2-DCB, and 1,4-DCB by *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51. The structural genes located on plasmid pP51 encoding the intermediate conversion steps are indicated (see text). A, *tcbA* (dioxygenase); B, *tcbB* (dehydrogenase); C, *tcbC* (catechol 1,2-dioxygenase II); D, *tcbD* (cycloisomerase II); E, *tcbE* (hydrolase II). Further metabolism of chloromalylacetic acid is probably chromosomally encoded (21, 27) and is indicated by the dashed arrow. (Cl), Proposed position of the residual chlorine atom of 1,2,4-TCB. Absolute stereochemical assignments are not intended.

The tolune dioxygenase from *P. putida* F1 was reported to oxidize 1,2-DCB to 3,4-DCC (4la). It is conceivable that a tolune dioxygenase was recruited in the DCB/TCB pathway of strain P51 to function as the first conversion step.

The chlorinated catechols formed from dichlorobenzenes and 1,2,4-TCB were shown to be subsequently degraded through a pathway similar to the archetype described for *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13 by Knackmuss et al. (7, 8, 27–29). Only one chlorine atom is released from 3,4-DCC after cycloisomerization, probably finally yielding 5-chloromaleylacetate. This view is in agreement with the pathways for 3,4-DCC degradation proposed by Haigler et al. (15), for 3-chlorocatechol proposed by Schmidt et al. (29), and for 3,5-dichlorocatechol (31).

Organization of the *tcb* clusters. The degradation pathway for 1,2,4-TCB consists of two gene clusters that were shown to be present on a catabolic plasmid of 110 kb. The upper-pathway genes, tentatively designated *tcbA* and *tcbB*, were studied only as a cluster. However, subcloning experiments showed that for proper functioning the region cannot be shortened to less than approximately 5 kb (as in plasmid pTCB71), which suggests that the gene cluster contains more than two genes. This would be in agreement with the findings for other dioxygenases, which are multicomponent enzyme

functions primarily in *E. coli*, as well as in *A. eutrophus* and *P. putida*. As a working model, we used a pathway for degradation of 1,2,4-TCB similar to that described for 1,2-DCB by Haigler et al. (15) and for 1,4-DCB by Schraa and co-workers (30) and Spain and Nishino (35). A schematic representation of the pathway is shown in Fig. 8. We propose two steps in which 1,2,4-TCB (or 1,2-DCB and 1,4-DCB) is transformed to the corresponding chlorinated catechol. The first reaction is thought to be an oxidation performed by a dioxygenase enzyme complex. This dioxygenase complex involved in DCB and TCB degradation will also convert indole to indigo, as was reported for the naphthalene dioxygenase by Ensley et al. (9). Similar dioxygenases were also described for oxidation of tolune in *P. putida* F1 (42) and in *P. putida* NCIB 11767 (36), oxidation of naphthalene (41) and xylenes (20), and oxidation of chlorinated biphenyls (24). The second step in the conversion would then necessarily be a dehydrogenase reaction, yielding the chlorinated catechol. We have obtained no evidence for release of chloride during the first two transformation steps, as was proposed by Markus et al. (23) and Schweizer et al. (32) in the case of 4-chlorophenylacetate and recently for the oxidation of 1,2,3,4-tetrachlorobenzene (38a). At present, it is unclear whether the first chlorobenzene dioxygenase complex is also involved in conversion of tolune in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51. Degradation of 1,4-DCB and tolune simultaneously was observed for *Pseudomonas* sp. strain JS6 (16). Furthermore,

systems. In the case of the *nah*, *xyl*, and *tod* gene clusters, the dioxygenase genes were found to consist of four genes, followed by the gene encoding the dehydrogenase, and were approximately 4 kb in size (20, 41, 42).

Separated from this gene cluster by approximately 4 kb are the genes *tcbC*, *tcbD*, and *tcbE*, encoding the catechol or lower pathway. Analysis of subclones of this gene cluster showed that the orientation of *tcbCD* and *tcbE* is opposite that of the upper-pathway genes *tcbA* and *tcbB*. The lower pathway is organized similarly to the other chlorocatechol-oxidizing pathways *clcABD* (10) and *tfdCDEF* (6, 13, 14, 26). These pathways differ in the presence of an extra open reading frame, which is located between the *clcB* and *clcD* genes of plasmid pAC27 (10) but absent from the *tfd* operon (14, 26). Furthermore, a functional counterpart of the gene *tfdF* was not found in the *clc* cluster, although a region with close DNA homology to *tfdF* was detected directly downstream of *clcD* (26). Gene *tfdF* is proposed to encode a trans-dienelactone isomerase, converting trans-chlorobutenolide to cis-chlorobutenolide, which was shown to be the substrate for the hydrolase II (31). Consequently, this proposed enzyme activity would be a necessary step in the degradation of 3,5-dichlorocatechol (6, 26, 31). However, this isomerization reaction apparently does not take place during conversion of 3-chlorocatechol. This was reported by Knackmuss and co-workers (29), who showed that the intermediate product of the cycloisomerization of chloromuconate is spontaneously transformed and that both trans- and cis-butenolide are substrates for the hydrolase II. We have found that the *tcbE* gene is not adjacent to *tcbD* (Fig. 4), which allows an additional gene to be located in between *tcbD* and *tcbE*. Introduction of a mutation in this intergenic region did not affect the overall enzyme activities. A *tfdF*-like gene may be located downstream of *tcbE*, but we found no difference in enzyme activities in clones extending in this region (such as pTCB62) compared with the activity pTCB64. This observation suggests that no additional function is required for the transformation of 3,4-DCC to chloromalylacetate.

In conclusion, the abilities to degrade dichlorobenzenes and 1,2,4-TCB are unique in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51. The finding that the genes for degradation of these compounds are clustered in two separate regions on a catabolic plasmid and their similarity to other known catabolic operons could imply that they originated from different sources and were acquired successfully by strain P51. The genetic and biochemical results for DCB and TCB degradation in strain P51 presented here will allow a detailed comparison of the TCB pathway with other known catabolic pathways in order to provide more information on the process of genetic adaptation to xenobiotic substrates in microorganisms.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank K. N. Timmis for the opportunity given to J. R. van der Meer to work for 9 months in his laboratory, supported by a short-term EMBO fellowship. We also thank Walter Reineke for helpful discussions and the generous gift of intermediates in chlorocatechol metabolism, Fernando Rojo and Gosse Schraa for stimulating discussions, and Nees Slotboom for artwork. We gratefully acknowledge the gift of a benzene dioxygenase gene probe from H. G. Rast, Bayer AG.

This work was supported by a grant from the Netherlands Integrated Soil Research Programme.

### REFERENCES

1. Bagdasarian, M., R. Lurz, B. Ruckert, F. C. H. Franklin, M. M. Bagdasarian, and K. N. Timmis. 1981. Specific-purpose plasmid cloning vectors. II. Broad host range, high copy number, RSF1010-derived vectors and a host-vector system for gene cloning in *Pseudomonas*. Gene 16:237–247.
2. Bradford, M. M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantification of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem. 72:248–254.
3. Burlage, R. S., S. W. Hooper, and G. S. Sayler. 1989. The TOL (pWWO) catabolic plasmid. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 55:1323–1328.
4. Chatterjee, D. K., and A. M. Chakrabarty. 1984. Restriction mapping of a chlorobenzoate degradative plasmid and molecular cloning of the degradative genes. Gene 27:173–181.
5. Ditta, G., S. Stanfield, D. Corbin, and D. Helinski. 1980. Broad host range DNA cloning system for gram-negative bacteria: construction of a gene bank of *Rhizobium meliloti*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77:7347–7351.
6. Don, R. H., A. J. Weightman, H.-J. Knackmuss, and K. N. Timmis. 1985. Transposon mutagenesis and cloning analysis of the pathways for degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and 3-chlorobenzoate in *Alcaligenes eutrophus* JMP134(pJP4). J. Bacteriol. 161:85–90.
7. Dorn, E., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1978. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Two catechol 1,2-dioxygenases from a 3-chlorobenzoate-grown *Pseudomonad*. Biochem. J. 174:73–84.
8. Dorn, E., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1978. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Substituent effects on 1,2-dioxygenation of catechol. Biochem. J. 174:85–94.
9. Ensley, B. D., B. J. Ratzkin, T. D. Osslund, M. J. Simon, L. P. Wackett, and D. T. Gibson. 1983. Expression of naphthalene oxidation genes in *Escherichia coli* results in the biosynthesis of indigo. Science 222:167–169.
10. Frantz, B., and A. M. Chakrabarty. 1987. Organization and nucleotide sequence determination of a gene cluster involved in 3-chlorocatechol degradation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84:4460–4464.
11. Franklin, F. C. H., M. Bagdasarian, M. M. B. Bagdasarian, and K. N. Timmis. 1981. Molecular and functional analysis of the TOL plasmid pWWO from *Pseudomonas putida* and cloning of genes for the entire regulated ring-cleavage pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78:7458–7462.
12. Furukawa, K., and T. Miyazaki. 1986. Cloning of a gene cluster encoding biphenyl and chlorobiphenyl degradation in *Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes*. J. Bacteriol. 166:392–398.
13. Ghosal, D., and I.-S. You. 1988. Nucleotide homology and organization of chlorocatechol oxidation genes of plasmids pJP4 and pAC27. Mol. Gen. Genet. 211:113–120.
14. Ghosal, D., and I.-S. You. 1989. Operon structure and nucleotide homology of the chlorocatechol oxidation genes of plasmids pAC27 and pJP4. Gene 83:225–232.
15. Haigler, B. E., S. F. Nishino, and J. C. Spain. 1988. Degradation of 1,2-dichlorobenzene by a *Pseudomonas* sp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54:294–301.
16. Haigler, B. E., and J. C. Spain. 1989. Degradation of *p*-chlorotoluene by a mutant of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain JS6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 55:372–379.
17. Hanahan, D. 1983. Studies on transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmids. J. Mol. Biol. 166:557–580.
18. Hansen, J. B., and R. H. Olsen. 1978. Isolation of large bacterial plasmids and characterization of the P2 incompatibility group plasmids pMG1 and pMG5. J. Bacteriol. 135:227–238.
19. Harayama, S., and R. H. Don. 1985. Catabolic plasmids: their analysis and utilization in the manipulation of bacterial metabolic activities, p. 283–307. In J. K. Setlow and A. Hollaender (ed.), Genetic engineering: principles and methods, vol. 7. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York.
20. Harayama, S., M. Rekik, and K. N. Timmis. 1986. Genetic analysis of a relaxed substrate specificity aromatic ring dioxygenase, toluate 1,2-dioxygenase, encoded by TOL plasmid pWWO of *Pseudomonas putida*. Mol. Gen. Genet. 202:226–234.
21. Kukor, J. J., R. H. Olsen, and J.-S. Siak. 1989. Recruitment of a chromosomally encoded maleylacetate reductase for degrada-

tion of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid by plasmid pJP4. J. Bacteriol. 171:3385–3390.

22. Maniatis, T., E. F. Fritsch, and J. Sambrook. 1982. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

23. Markus, A., D. Krekel, and F. Lingens. 1986. Purification and some properties of component A of the 4-chlorophenylacetate 3,4-dioxygenase from *Pseudomonas* species strain CBS. J. Biol. Chem. 261:12883–12888.

24. Mondello, F. J. 1989. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of *Pseudomonas* strain LB400 genes encoding polychlorinated biphenyl degradation. J. Bacteriol. 177:1725–1732.

25. Oltmanns, R. H., H. G. Rast, and W. Reineke. 1988. Degradation of 1,4-dichlorobenzene by enriched and constructed bacteria. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 28:609–616.

26. Perkins, E. J., M. P. Gordon, O. Caceres, and P. F. Lurquin. 1990. Organization and sequence analysis of the 2,4-dichlorophenol hydroxylase and dichlorocatechol oxidative operons of plasmid pJP4. J. Bacteriol. 172:2351–2359.

26a. Rast, H. G. Personal communication.

26b. Reineke, W. Personal communication.

27. Reineke, W., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1988. Microbial degradation of haloaromatics. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 42:263–287.

28. Schmidt, E., and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1980. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Conversion of chlorinated muconic acids into maleoylactic acid. Biochem. J. 192:339–347.

29. Schmidt, E., G. Remberg, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 1980. Chemical structure and biodegradability of halogenated aromatic compounds. Halogenated muconic acids as intermediates. Biochem. J. 192:331–337.

30. Schraa, G., M. L. Boone, M. S. M. Jetten, A. R. W. van Neerven, P. J. Colberg, and A. J. B. Zehnder. 1986. Degradation of 1,4-dichlorobenzene by *Alcaligenes* sp. strain A175. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 52:1374–1381.

31. Schwien, U., E. Schmidt, H.-J. Knackmuss, and W. Reineke. 1988. Degradation of chlorosubstituted aromatic compounds by *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13: fate of 3,5-dichlorocatechol. Arch. Microbiol. 150:78–84.

32. Schweizer, D., A. Markus, M. Seez, H. H. Ruf, and F. Lingens. 1987. Purification and some properties of component B of the

4-chlorophenylacetate 3,4-dioxygenase from *Pseudomonas* species strain CBS3. J. Biol. Chem. 262:9340–9346.

33. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Pühler. 1983. Vector plasmids for in vivo and in vitro manipulations of Gram-negative bacteria, p. 98–106. In A. Pühler (ed.), Molecular genetics of the bacteria-plant interaction. Springer-Verlag KG, Heidelberg.

34. Southern, E. M. 1975. Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Mol. Biol. 98:503–517.

35. Spain, J. C., and S. F. Nishino. 1987. Degradation of 1,4-dichlorobenzene by a *Pseudomonas* sp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53:1010–1019.

36. Stephens, G. M., J. M. Sidebotham, N. H. Mann, and H. Dalton. 1989. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of the toluene dioxygenase gene from *Pseudomonas putida* NCIB11767. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 57:295–300.

37. van der Meer, J. R., W. Roelofsen, G. Schraa, and A. J. B. Zehnder. 1987. Degradation of low concentrations of dichlorobenzenes and 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene by *Pseudomonas* sp. strain P51 in nonsterile soil columns. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 45:333–341.

38. Weisshaar, M.-P., F. C. H. Franklin, and W. Reineke. 1987. Molecular cloning and expression of the 3-chlorobenzoate-degrading genes from *Pseudomonas* sp. strain B13. J. Bacteriol. 169:394–402.

38a. Wittich, R.-M., P. Sander, and P. Fortnagel. 1989. Abstr. Annu. Meet. Germ. Soc. Microbiol. VAAM, P243, p. 100.

39. Wyndham, R. C., R. K. Singh, and N. A. Straus. 1988. Catabolic instability, plasmid gene deletion and recombination in *Alcaligenes* sp. BR60. Arch. Microbiol. 150:237–243.

40. Yanish-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33:103–119.

41. Yen, K.-M., and C. M. Serdar. 1988. Genetics of naphthalene catabolism in *Pseudomonads*. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 15:247–268.

41a. Zylstra, G. J., S. Chauhan, and D. T. Gibson. 1989. Abstr. Annu. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. K-61, p. 225.

42. Zylstra, G. J., W. R. McCombie, D. T. Gibson, and B. A. Finette. 1988. Toluene degradation by *Pseudomonas putida* F1: genetic organization of the *tod* operon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54:1498–1503.
