
GLUCOCORTICOIDs AND MOOD

# CRH Signaling

## Molecular Specificity for Drug Targeting in the CNS

### Damian Refojo and Florian Holsboer

#### Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany

There is an urgent need to generate new drugs or improve existing ones in the pharmacology of mood disorders. The corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) system is closely involved in the development and course of depression, and drugs targeting this system arguably offer hope to improve the current tools for drug treatment of depression. Recent clinical studies in depressed patients showed that CRHR1 antagonists improve clinical symptoms of anxiety and depression and reduce stress hormone release following psychosocial stress. These effects of CRHR1 antagonists were not associated with reduced secretory capacity of corticotrophic cells because of CRH receptor abundance at the pituitary level, which contrasts with CRH receptors in the brain. This is in accordance with previous studies showing that CRH injections into the mouse brain activate MAPK pathways in a brain region-specific manner pointing toward differences in signaling pathways beyond the receptor level. We will highlight this and discuss how these brain area-specific differences may offer opportunities for drug discovery. An additional puzzle in the search of new targets for depression is the lack of *bona fide* animal models helping to discover the antidepressants that are not monoamine based. We recently developed a conditional mouse model that overexpresses CRH in a spatio-temporal-regulated fashion and permits to dissect precisely the contribution of different brain areas to the CRH-dependent behaviors. Recent findings obtained with this mouse model and its usefulness in the context of the CRH-dependent, region-specific changes in depression will be discussed.

**Key words:** depression; anxiety; mood disorders; HPA axis; mouse models; CRH; CRHR1; ERK; MAPK; stress; behavior; forced swim test; stress-coping behavior

---

### Introduction

All approved drugs for depression act primarily upon the brain's monoamine system. Although the last generation of drugs has improved side-effect profiles, they exhibit essentially the same effectiveness rates and have side effects that may compound compliance. The biggest problem remains the delay until onset of action and the fact that most patients fail to fully remit within 8–11 weeks, while around 30% remain refractory.

Among many reasons for the lack of major innovation in drug discovery and development is risk-averseness of the pharmaceutical industry, in which the annual antidepressant market accounts for 20 billion USD. But also, academic research has failed to so far identify novel mechanisms of action, perhaps because it has been too neuron-centric, ignoring glia as a target. In addition, human genetic studies so far have not provided a clear picture of how drugs could work through target structures different from monoamines. Finally, once drugs become more specific, it would be pertinent to identify the right drug for the right patient. Once the field moves into tailored antidepressants, not only genotypes but also biomarkers are needed.

---

Address for correspondence: Prof. Dr. Dr. Florian Holsboer, Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 2-10, 80804 Munich, Germany. Voice: +49 (0)89 30622-220; fax: +49 (0)89 30622-483. holsboer@mpipsykl.mpg.de

Glucocorticoids and Mood: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1179: 106–119 (2009). doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04983.x © 2009 New York Academy of Sciences.

Currently, the only pathway representing an alternative to monoamine-based drugs, which has advanced to clinical development at large scale, is based upon stress physiology.⁷⁻¹⁰ Acute stress has been described as a strong risk factor for triggering the onset of depression,⁹,¹¹ and different chronic stress paradigms in rodents develop behavioral endpoints that recapitulate many of the endophenotypes of human depression.

In this sense, a time window during early development lifespan seems to play a role in establishing the stress vulnerability threshold. Early childhood trauma, such as abuse, maltreatment, neglect or parental loss, increases the risk of suicidality and is highly associated with depressive episodes or chronic depression later during adulthood.¹²⁻¹⁴ The exact mechanisms underlying the effects of early life-adverse experiences remains to be elucidated. However, maternal separation paradigms or low maternal care models in rodents have shown that these early traumatic experiences produce long-lasting changes on emotional behavior.¹⁵ Anxiety-like behavior, anhedonia and cognition associated with hyper-reactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and changes in the expression of limbic corticosteroid receptors have been reported.¹⁵⁻¹⁷ Although mainly correlative, these findings clearly indicate the close relationship between stress and mood disorders, highlighting the importance of understanding the basic mechanisms by which stress influences the onset and relapse of depressive episodes.

nucleus (PVN), which drive activation of the HPA axis, resulting in secretion of corticotropin (ACTH) and corticosterone (in rodents) or cortisol (in humans). But besides the hypothalamus, CRH is widely distributed throughout the CNS,¹⁸ where it acts as a neuroregulator¹⁹ in extra-hypothalamic circuits integrating complex responses to stress and controlling numerous behaviors, such as anxiety, arousal, locomotor activity, sexual behavior, sleep, and memory formation.²⁰⁻²³

CRH exerts its actions by means of two subtypes of CRH receptors (CRHR1 and CRHR2), which present with different expression patterns throughout the brain.²⁴,²⁵ CRHR1 is expressed at different levels in neocortical areas, hippocampus, basolateral amygdala, ventral tegmental area, pontine gray, lateral dorsal tegmentum, pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, and anterior pituitary.²⁵⁻²⁷ CRHR2 has been detected in more discrete brain regions, including the lateral septum, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, ventromedial hypothalamus, medial and cortical nuclei of the amygdala, dorsal raphe, and nucleus of the solitary tract; in the pituitary the CRHR2 is present in primates but not in rodents.²⁵ CRH is a high-affinity ligand for CRHR1 and binds poorly to the CRHR2, for which other ligands, such as urocortin (UCN) have stronger affinity.²⁸⁻³⁰

Several investigations have identified a role of CRHR1 in stress-related disorders. As mentioned, central administration of CRH (a ligand with 15 times higher affinity for CRHR1 over CRHR2) induces different emotional responses related to affective disorders: less time spent in inner squares in the open field test³¹ increased grooming and anhedonia,³²,³³ enhanced novelty-induced suppression of feeding,³⁴ and reduced exploratory behavior.³⁵ These changes were directly attributed to CRH since many of them could not be reversed by hypophysectomy or blockade of the HPA axis. In addition, many of these changes in emotional behavior, either induced by stress or central CRH injections, can be blocked

### CRH Receptors: First Step Toward Specificity

Changes in internal homeostasis or external environmental threats are conveyed to the central nervous system (CNS) by neurochemical pathways and are in part integrated at the hypothalamic level. There, the stimulus activates corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) neurosecretory neurons of the paraventricular

by co-administration of specific CRHR1 antagonists.²⁰

The consistent findings demonstrating that CRHR1 mediates defensive and anxiogenic behavior have been strongly supported by mouse genetic studies. CRHR1 knockout mice exhibit reduced anxiety-related behavior and an impaired basal and stress-induced HPA axis response.³⁶, 37 A mouse model in which a CRHR1 gene deletion was restricted to the forebrain was particularly informative, as the CRHR1 at pituitary remained fully functional, thus avoiding that central CRH/CRHR1 effects are confounded by a muted HPA axis.³⁸

The role of CRHR2 in anxiety-like behavior is ambiguous. Both anxiogenic and anxiolytic-like effects after CRHR2 activation or gene deletion have been reported.³⁹⁻⁴³ A predominant assumption is that CRHR2 facilitates recovery of stress-dampening initial CRHR1-mediated stress activation. More studies should be conducted in order to elucidate the role of CRHR2 in anxiety-and depression-like behavior in rodents.

Beyond preclinical studies, many clinical research reports further sustain the role of the central CRH/CRHR1 system in depression. The cerebrospinal fluid of patients suffering from depression contains elevated CRH levels.⁴⁴ In depressed suicide victims, reduced CRH binding in the prefrontal cortex⁴⁵ and increased CRH mRNA expression in hypothalamus, frontal cortex, and monoaminergic brainstem nuclei has been reported.⁴⁶⁻⁴⁸ In addition, a blunted ACTH response to CRH exogenously administrated has been demonstrated, suggesting desensitized CRH receptors secondary to hypothalamic CRH hypersecretion.⁴⁹, 50

The important role of the HPA system centrally driven by CRH and other neuropeptides as a causative factor among many depressives has been derived from clinical studies. These show unanimously that among those patients who present with abnormal neuroendocrine HPA tests results, a favorable clinical outcome is predicted by normalization of

the HPA probe. In turn, those patients who have clinically responded but maintain aberrant HPA function are likely to relapse into a new episode.⁵¹ Moreover, antidepressants were shown to increase the negative feedback capacity of the HPA system by increasing the number and improving the function of corticosteroid receptors, resulting in changes of brain neuropeptide composition, including increase of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. All of these findings have been resumed in the corticosteroid receptor hypothesis of depression.⁸ According to this hypothesis, impaired corticosteroid receptor-mediated signaling results in high and long-lasting production of CRH and arginine-vasopressin (AVP), whose dysregulation increases the vulnerability to stress, thus facilitating the onset or relapse of depressive episodes.⁸ The CRH/AVP hypersecretion from the median eminence increases the circulating levels of glucocorticoids (GCs), which are also able to induce behavioral changes, including depression-like symptoms.⁷ Consequently, both the neuropeptides and the corticosteroids are potential targets for drug discovery, and several receptor antagonists blocking the actions of GCs, AVP, and CRH are currently under development.²⁸

Most effort has been directed toward CRHR1, and a large number of small compounds targeting CRHR1 in order to limit CRH-elicted psychopathology have been developed.⁵² Whereas some clinical trials are still in progress, three investigations have been published so far, reporting important clinical effects induced by the compounds NBI-30775/RS121919 and NBI-34041, both initially developed by Neurocrine Biosciences (San Diego, CA). In an open-label trial designed as a safety and tolerability study, 20 depressive patients were treated with two escalating dose regimens (5–40 mg/day and 40–80 mg/day of NBI-30775/RS121919) over a 30-day period. Both treatments ameliorated anxiety as well as depressive symptoms evaluated with HAM-A and HAM-D scales. The higher doses showed greater improvement,

and the effect size after a treatment period of 29 days was equivalent to that obtained with paroxetine.53,54 Of particular interest was the observed clinical worsening following drug discontinuation. Additionally, NBI-30775/RS121919 improved sleep disturbances and cognitive symptoms and also reduced suicidal ideation.52 Clinical chemistry and hematological studies as well as electroencephalography and electrocardiography failed to evidence any adverse effect.55 Interestingly, the drug did not change ACTH and cortisol secretion neither under basal nor after CRH elicited conditions. This ensures that even if a dose of an antagonist is administered that is able to block central CRHR1, there are still enough remaining receptors at the pituitary level to sustain normal HPA functioning. Despite this promising outcome, the compound was discontinued because liver enzyme elevations occurred in two control subjects after administration of much higher doses than necessary to occupy CRHR1 receptors in the brain.

Recently, a second trial was conducted with the nonpeptide antagonist NBI-34041.56 The goal of the study was to evaluate the efficacy of the compound upon the stress hormone response after psychosocial stress. For that purpose the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) was applied after 9 days of treatment, and plasma ACTH and cortisol levels were evaluated as indicators of stress response. ACTH and cortisol responses to stress were significantly reduced in the group treated with the compound. Again, the drug did not affect basal or CRH-induced hormone plasma levels and showed similar safety profiles of those presented by NBI-30775/RS121919.

Considering that stress is one of the major triggers for the onset and relapse of depressive episodes, the stress muting profiles shown by these drugs assign them to prevent stress-induced clinical conditions. This hypothesis is in agreement with the aforementioned reports showing that the normalization of previously unbalanced HPA axis activity precedes the resolution of depressive symp-

toms.51 One major issue is how to identify patients with stress-related disease who would benefit from CRHR1 antagonists. In contrast to monoamine- or aminoacid-based medications, CRHR1 antagonists will work only among those individuals who secrete excessive CRH in relevant brain areas. While interventions on monoamines and aminoacids (e.g., GABA) will always result in a pharmacological effect because there is a continuous activity of these neurotransmitters, CRH receptor antagonists will only have effects once CRH is hypersecreted. This is more likely to occur in severe rather than moderate clinical conditions. Studies from Hokfelt and co-workers have shown the difference in neurotransmitter versus neuropeptide release: only the latter is prominent exclusively under challenging conditions.57 Therefore, biomarkers that identify individuals with elevated central CRH secretions would be needed. Otherwise, the field will see clinical studies where less severely ill patients are treated with CRHR1 antagonists. Because only a fraction of those cases exhibit central CRH hypersecretion, it is foreseeable that the CRHR1 antagonist will not deliver beneficial overall results. Another important issue is that CRHR1 occupancy in the brain must be documented before any conclusion regarding clinical efficacy is demonstrated.

## Conditional CRH Overexpressing Mice: Moving Specificity toward Animal Models

A major puzzle in the search for new targets for depression is the lack of bona fide animal models since all existing ones rely on the exposure of healthy animals to different stress paradigms validated for the responsiveness to monoamine-based antidepressants. This implies that for the development of drugs acting via novel mechanisms, new animal models should be designed. Genetically engineered mice might address this problem, thereby

providing more accurate models to dissect genetic influences on behavior in basic psychiatric research. 58, 59

Taking all of this information into consideration, genetic manipulations leading to permanent CRH overexpression in the CNS would arguably offer a reliable *in vivo* system to model specific CRH-related behavioral endpoints resembling human endophenotypes of depression. In addition, such an animal model would also be suitable for pharmacological validation of new CRHR1-related drugs in preclinical studies.

Two CRH overexpressing transgenic mouse lines have been established in the past, expressing CRH either under the control of the broadly active methallothionein promoter (MTI-CRH-OE) 60 or the CNS-restricted Thy-1.2 promoter (Thy-CRH-OE). 61 In both cases CRH overexpression resulted in elevated GC levels and Cushing-like symptoms. As mentioned, GCs are known to influence anxiety-related behavior. 7, 62 Therefore, the behavioral phenotype of these animals may result from CRH overexpression itself or, alternatively, from increased GC levels. To circumvent this problem, we developed a mouse model that permits conditional CRH overexpression in the absence of marked neuroendocrine disturbances. Transgenic mouse lines conditionally overexpressing CRH were generated by combining the knockin of the murine CRH cDNA into the ROSA 26 (R26) locus with the versatile Cre/loxP system (Fig. 1). 63 This conditional mouse model enables us to overexpress CRH in a spatio-temporally regulated fashion. CNS-restricted CRH overexpression, achieved by breeding with nestin-cre mice (CRH-COE Nestin), did not alter the basal status of the HPA axis but resulted in a stress-induced, gender-specific HPA axis hyperactivity (present in male but not female mice), reflected by elevated plasma ACTH and corticosterone levels after restraint stress. 63 The nestin promoter is also expressed in the hypothalamus including the PVN, and consequently, an increased expression of CRH would be expected to result in high corticos-

terone levels in mice. However, adaptive mechanisms occur at the hypothalamic level, resulting in significantly downregulated basal levels of endogenous CRH, keeping the total CRH levels constant. This explains the normal levels of HPA axis hormones in these animals at baseline.

The evaluation of immobility (behavioral despair) in the Porsolt forced swim test (FST) used after drug administration is highly predictive for clinically effective monoamine-targeting antidepressants. 64 However, the FST additionally involves a strong component of stress-coping behavior, arousal, and alertness. Thus, under nonpharmacological conditions this test would have high etiological and construct validity if analyzed under the scope of arousal and active-stress coping strategies; both behavioral parameters also depend upon catecholaminergic neurotransmission.

In this context, CRH-COE Nestin mice showed an increased active stress-coping behavior in the forced swim (FST) and tail suspension test (TST); an effect that was blocked by pretreatment with the CRHR1 antagonist DMP 696. In addition, stress-mediated activation of the endogenous CRH system prior to the application of the forced swim decreases immobility in control but not in CRHR1 knockout mice. 63 In accordance with these findings, acute intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injections of CRH or cortagine (a potent CRHR1 agonist) decrease immobility as well. 65

Restricting CRH overexpression to principal neurons in forebrain structures and GABAergic interneurons by differential breeding with specific cre lines (Fig. 1) failed to affect the stress-coping behavior in the FST, suggesting that more caudal brain regions may be responsible for the observed behavioral phenotype. Accordingly, the forced swim-induced neuronal activation in the locus coeruleus was strongly enhanced in CRH-COE Nestin mice, and the pharmacological blockade of catecholamine synthesis reversed the FST phenotype in these animals, further suggesting a noradrenaline involvement. 63 Interestingly, CRH injections

Refojo & Holsboer: Specificity of CRH Actions in the Brain

A

R26<sup>flop CRH</sup>  
R26 Prom  
STOP  
Crh  
IRES  
LacZ  

Cre  

CRH transcription blocked  

R26<sup>CRH</sup>  
R26 Prom  
Crh  
IRES  
LacZ  

CRH transcription deblocked  

B  

Nestin-Cre  
X  
=  
CRH-COE<sup>Nes</sup>  

R26<sup>flop CRH</sup>  
CamK2a-Cre  
X  
=  
CRH-COE<sup>Cam</sup>  

Dlx-Cre  
X  
=  
CRH-COE<sup>Dlx</sup>  

WT  

Figure 1. Generation of conditional CRH overexpressing mouse lines. (A) A CRH-IRES-LacZ construct was knocked into the ubiquitously active ROSA26 locus. To prevent expression of CRH and LacZ in the absence of Cre recombinase, a transcriptional stop cassette flanked by two loxP sites was inserted between the ROSA26 promoter (R26 Prom) and the CRH-IRES-LacZ construct. By using homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells, the R26<sup>flopCRH</sup> mouse line was generated. (B) To achieve overexpression of CRH in the whole CNS, this floxed mouse line (R26<sup>flopCRH</sup>) was bred to a Nestin-Cre transgenic line. After Cre-mediated excision of the stop cassette, CRH and LacZ are overexpressed in the whole CNS of the new line generated (CRH-COE<sup>Nes</sup>). Breeding the R26<sup>flopCRH</sup> to the CamK2α-Cre mouse line resulted in a new line (CRH-COE<sup>Cam</sup>) specifically overexpressing CRH in principal neurons of the forebrain. To restrict CRH overexpression to GABAergic interneurons, the R26<sup>flopCRH</sup> mouse was bred to Dlx-Cre mice.

into the locus coeruleus reproduced the effect shown by CRH-OE animals in the FST.⁶⁶

Apparently, CRH and antidepressant drugs have opposite roles in depression. However, CRH and antidepressants increase monoamine neurotransmission and both reduce immobility in the Porsolt FST. The complexity of this disease cannot be elucidated as long as overly reductionistic models are used.

The conditional CRH-OE mice offer an opportunity to determine the contribution of new target genes upon CRH-sensitive pathways involved in the transition from physiological to pathological stress response, a crucial event in the development of affective disorders. In addition, CRH-COE mice represent a robust genetic model for testing new candidate drugs for treatment of chronic stress-related disorders, particularly CRHR1 antagonists.

### CRHR1 Mediated Signaling: Molecular Specificity beyond Receptor

CRH exerts its actions through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) belonging to the class B GPCR family of neuropeptide receptors. As mentioned, two receptor subtypes of the CRH family have been isolated: CRHR1 and CRHR2. Besides CRH, three other CRH-related peptides—UCN I, stresscopin-related peptide (SCP)/UCN II, and stresscopin (SCP)/UCN III—were isolated. While CRH binds preferentially to CRHR1, UCN II and UCN III have a strong affinity for CRHR2 and a very poor affinity for CRHR1, and UCN I binds with similar affinities to both receptors.²¹, ²⁸–³⁰, ⁶⁷

In the corticotroph cell line AtT 20, a cellular model for studying CRH-dependent signaling, CRH activates via cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent cascades, the transcription factors CREB, c-fos, and Nur77, which finally drive the transcription of the POMC gene.²⁹, ⁶⁸–⁷¹ In addition, CRH activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) via

a PKA CamKII-dependent pathway, which also activates Nur77 transcriptional activity (Fig. 2).⁷²

In the brain, ERK1 and ERK2 are widely expressed, although they show some differences in their expression patterns.⁷³ Acute restraint stress increases ERK2 phosphorylation in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex,⁷⁴, ⁷⁵ and pharmacological manipulations of the ERK pathway affect different parameters in anxiety and stress-coping behavioral tests.⁷⁴, ⁷⁶–⁷⁸

Also CHO cells, stably expressing CRHR1, show a PKA-mediated ERK1/2 activation after treatment with CRH and UCN I.⁷⁹ Nevertheless, the CRHR1-dependent activation of ERKs is not a necessary step in every cell because, for instance, in HEK 293 cells, CRH was ineffective in triggering ERK activation.⁸⁰ Additionally, the three-dimensional structure of the cellular contacts could also be an important factor in the sensitivity to CRH in neuronal tissue. In hippocampal or cerebellar primary cell cultures where the cells are dissociated and cultured in monolayers, CRH does not trigger ERK activation; but when the ligand is applied to hippocampal or cerebral organotypic brain slices where the normal interaction among cells is maintained, a significant ERK activation is observed.⁸², ⁸³ These results clearly indicate that the cellular context crucially determines the final outcome of CRH-dependent signaling, further underlining the importance of studying CRHR1-downstream pathways, such as mitogen-activate protein kinases (MAPKs), under physiological conditions *in vivo*.

Therefore, we conducted functional *in vivo* experiments in wild-type mice and in mice carrying a CRHR1 deletion in the anterior forebrain, including limbic structures.⁸⁴

CRH was injected i.c.v. in undisturbed freely moving mice, and ERK1/2 activation was evaluated by immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy using phospho-specific (anti-P-ERK1/2) antibodies. The acute administration of CRH induced a limbic-specific ERK activation pattern restricted to the hippocampus and amygdala.⁸⁴ In the hippocampal formation,

Refojo & Holsboer: Specificity of CRH Actions in the Brain

Ca²⁺
AC
Ca²⁺
cAMP
PKA
Ca²⁺
CAMKII
Rap-1
B-Raf
MEK1/2
ERK1/2
Nur77
CREB
P
c-fos
CREB
c-Fos
POMC
NurRE
AP1

Figure 2. CRHR1 downstream signaling pathways. The binding of the CRHR1 by CRH activates PKA, which triggers two main transduction pathways: one of these depends on calcium entry and involves CAMKII activity; the other pathway is calcium independent. Downstream PKA, the MAPK pathway can be activated by CRH by calcium-dependent and -independent mechanisms and involves Rap-1, B-Raf, MEK, and ERK1/2 activities. ERK1/2 are able to phosphorylate the orphan transcription factor Nur77, increasing its transcriptional activity. PKA can additionally activate the transcription factor CREB and induce the expression of the immediate-early gene c-fos in a process that also requires calcium influx. These transcription factors are critical mediators of many neuronal functions. In corticotrophs, a common cellular model to study CRH-dependent signaling, these transcription factors specifically regulate POMC expression.

only pyramidal cells of CA1 and CA3 were activated whereas the dentate gyrus, a structure that contains both CRHR1 and CRHR2, was lacking activation underlining the specificity of CRH-elicted activation pattern. In the amygdala, only the basolateral complex (BLA) became activated by the peptide while all of the other amygdaloid nuclei remained unchanged (Fig. 3). These structures are known to be involved in learning and memory, stress-related behaviors and sensory processing of multimodal stimuli. We found no activation of ERK1/2 in other CRH-targeted structures, such as the hypothalamus and the central nucleus of the amygdala, which are involved in the processing of ascending visceral information and neuroendocrine autonomic response to stress.³⁴

The fact that CRH injections trigger such a specific activation pattern even though ERK1/2 kinases and CRH receptors are widely expressed throughout the brain²⁴,²⁵,⁷³

Figure 3. CRH induces a region-specific ERK activation pattern in the brain *in vivo*. Saline or CRH was injected i.c.v. into brains of mice, and ERK1/2 activation was evaluated by immunohistochemistry using phospho-specific antibodies against P-ERK1/2. The analysis, performed by confocal microscopy, revealed a limbic-specific CRHR1-dependent increase of P-ERK1/2 (green staining) in the CA1 and CA3 region of the hippocampus as well as in the basolateral amygdala. The control staining with propidium iodide (red staining) indicates that cellularity of the compared brain sections is similar. (In color in Annals online.)

suggests that a region-specific molecular and functional link between the CRH receptors and downstream MAPKs may be present only on those brain structures. These results are in accordance with recent experiments showing that CRH is able to exert different actions on different synaptic circuits.¹⁹

Conditional knockout mice carrying a forebrain-specific deficiency of CRHR1 did not show CRH-mediated phosphorylation of ERK in the hippocampus and basolateral amygdala, further underscoring the role of CRHR1 in mediating the effects of CRH on limbic activation of MAPKs. As mentioned above, the conditional CRHR1 knockout mice offer an advantage to conserve the pituitary expression of CRHR1, thus leaving the HPA axis unaffected. This is a critical feature of this mouse line because MAPKs are known targets of corticosteroids, and excessive corticosteroid secretion could obscure the interpretation of the results.

In summary, CRH via CRHR1 activates ERK1/2 in limbic structures closely related to learning and memory, environmental information processing and behavioral aspects of stress but not in other structures, such as the hypothalamus or the central amygdala involved in autonomic and neuroendocrine adaptation to stress. These results suggest that ERK kinases could also be linked to the effects of CRH in chronic stress-related disorders. The effects of the ERK pathway on several anxiety- and depression-related behavioral parameters have been analyzed, but a clear picture of its role remains to be elucidated. Experiments with pharmacological inhibitors of the ERK

pathway have shown opposite results in tests used to evaluate anxiety, such as fear conditioning, fear startle response, and elevated plus maze.⁷⁴,⁸⁵,⁸⁶ The peripheral administration of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MEK) inhibitors has been reported to decrease,⁷⁶ increase,⁷⁷ and not to affect⁷⁸ immobility in the FST in rodents. The source of these discrepancies remains unclear, but recent experiments demonstrate that the temporal dimension may be fundamental to understand the fine-tuned role of ERK1/2 in mood disorders. Whereas acute injections of a MEK inhibitor strongly reduced immobility and increased escape latency in learned helplessness models, subacute administration had the opposite effect.⁷⁷ Thus, CRH-activated ERK kinases could not only have different roles on different brain structures, but could also change over the time. The use of new mutant mouse models, such as the conditional CRH-OE mice, will shed light on the role of ERK1/2 mediating chronic effects of CRH.

The specific signaling response of different cells following receptor activation in particular situations provides the basis for identifying targets that, although pleiotropic and widely distributed throughout the brain (as CRHR1 and ERK1/2), might act together to trigger specific brain circuits that are relevant for development and course of stress-related disorders, such as anxiety and depression.

onists described above underscore this concept. Despite the presence of CRHR1 in both pituitary and brain, the CRHR1 antagonists NBI-30775/RS121919 and NBI-34041 showed selective brain-specific actions since central CRHR1 blockade produced antidepressant effects whereas pituitary CRHR1 remained functionally intact as evidenced by normal stress hormones levels.

This points toward the benefits of region-specific differences influencing ligand efficacy. At the molecular level, several steps at pre-receptor (presence of proteases and binding proteins and transporters); receptor (receptor density, differential glycosylation, localization on lipid rafts and interaction with other membrane partners); and postreceptor level (desensitization and uncoupling from downstream signaling cascades) may explain the specific actions in the CNS exerted by drugs targeting type I CRH receptors, which are broadly expressed throughout the body.

The search for increasingly specific drugs is not only a demanding task for chemical drug design but also for molecular cell biology. The latter will provide the necessary insight of how specific synthetic molecules acting on the same cell membrane-located receptor exert effects on different signaling cascades. These differences vary according to temporal and spatial context and underline the requirement for biomarkers that identify the individual patient who might potentially benefit from such a highly specific treatment modality.

### The Use of the CRH System to Approach Stress-related Drug Discovery in Depression and Anxiety

The approach outlined here aims at a much more specific mechanism than contrasting those activated by monoamine-based antidepressants. It is of note, however, that the described specificity of CRH agents results from complex interactions among many different components of the stress system. The recent clinical trials of CRHR1 antag-

### Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

### References

1. Berton, O. & E.J. Nestler. 2006. New approaches to antidepressant drug discovery: beyond monoamines. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* **7**: 137–151.
2. Mathew, S.J., H.K. Manji & D.S. Charney. 2008. Novel drugs and therapeutic targets for severe mood disorders. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **33**: 2080–2092.

3. Hennings, J.M., T. Owashi, E.B. Binder, *et al.* 2008. Clinical characteristics and treatment outcome in a representative sample of depressed inpatients—Findings from the Munich Antidepressant Response Signature (MARS) project. *J. Psychiatr. Res.* **443**: 215–229.

4. Rush, A.J., M.H. Trivedi, S.R. Wisniewski, *et al.* 2006. Acute and longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several treatment steps: a STAR*D report. *Am. J. Psychiatry* **163**: 1905–1917.

5. Trivedi, M.H., A.J. Rush, S.R. Wisniewski, *et al.* 2006. Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using measurement-based care in STAR*D: implications for clinical practice. *Am. J. Psychiatry* **163**: 28–40.

6. Holsboer, F. 2008. How can we realize the promise of personalized antidepressant medicines? *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* **9**: 638–646.

7. de Kloet, E.R., M. Joëls & F. Holsboer. 2005. Stress and the brain: from adaptation to disease. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* **6**: 463–475.

8. Holsboer, F. 2000. The corticosteroid receptor hypothesis of depression. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **23**: 477–501.

9. Heim, C., D.J. Newport, T. Mletzko, *et al.* 2008. The link between childhood trauma and depression: insights from HPA axis studies in humans. *Psychoneuroendocrinology* **33**: 693–710.

10. Pittenger, C. & R.S. Duman. 2008. Stress, depression, and neuroplasticity: a convergence of mechanisms. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **33**: 88–109.

11. Hammen, C., J. Davila, G. Brown, *et al.* 1992. Psychiatric history and stress: predictors of severity of unipolar depression. *J. Abnorm. Psychol.* **101**: 45–52.

12. Brown, G.W. & P. Moran. 1994. Clinical and psychosocial origins of chronic depressive episodes. I: a community survey. *Br. J. Psychiatry* **165**: 447–456.

13. Agid, O., B. Shapira, J. Zislin, *et al.* 1999. Environment and vulnerability to major psychiatric illness: a case control study of early parental loss in major depression, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. *Mol. Psychiatry* **4**: 163–172.

14. Edwards, V.J., G.W. Holden, V.J. Felitti, *et al.* 2003. Relationship between multiple forms of childhood maltreatment and adult mental health in community respondents: results from the adverse childhood experiences study. *Am. J. Psychiatry* **160**: 1453–1460.

15. Meaney, M.J. 2001. Maternal care, gene expression, and the transmission of individual differences in stress reactivity across generations. *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* **24**: 1161–1192.

16. Liu, D., J. Diorio, B. Tannenbaum, *et al.* 1997. Maternal care, hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors, and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to stress. *Science* **277**: 1659–1662.

17. Plotsky, P.M., K.V. Thrivikraman, C.B. Nemeroff, *et al.* 2005. Long-term consequences of neonatal rearing on central corticotropin-releasing factor systems in adult male rat offspring. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **30**: 2192–2204.

18. Swanson, L.W., P.E. Sawchenko, J. Rivier, *et al.* 1983. Organization of ovine corticotropin-releasing factor immunoreactive cells and fibers in the rat brain: an immunohistochemical study. *Neuroendocrinology* **36**: 165–186.

19. Gallagher, J.P., L.F. Orozco-Cabal, J. Liu, *et al.* 2008. Synaptic physiology of central CRH system. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **583**: 215–225.

20. Steckler, T. & F. Holsboer. 1999. Corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor subtypes and emotion. *Biol. Psychiatry* **46**: 1480–1508.

21. Bale, T.L. & W.W. Vale. 2004. CRF and CRF receptors: role in stress responsivity and other behaviors. *Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.* **44**: 525–557.

22. Heinrichs, S.C. & G.F. Koob. 2004. Corticotropin-releasing factor in brain: a role in activation, arousal, and affect regulation. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **311**: 427–440.

23. Korosi, A. & T.Z. Baram. 2008. The central corticotropin releasing factor system during development and adulthood. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **583**: 204–214.

24. Bittencourt, J.C. & P.E. Sawchenko. 2000. Do centrally administered neuropeptides access cognate receptors?: an analysis in the central corticotropin-releasing factor system. *J. Neurosci.* **20**: 1142–1156.

25. Van, P.K., V. Viau, J.C. Bittencourt, *et al.* 2000. Distribution of mRNAs encoding CRF receptors in brain and pituitary of rat and mouse. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **428**: 191–212.

26. Potter, E., S. Sutton, C. Donaldson, *et al.* 1994. Distribution of corticotropin releasing factor receptor mRNA expression in the rat brain and pituitary. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **91**: 8777–8781.

27. Sanchez, M.M., L.J. Young, P.M. Plotsky, *et al.* 1999. Autoradiographic and in situ hybridization localization of corticotropin-releasing factor 1 and 2 receptors in nonhuman primate brain. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **408**: 365–377.

28. Grigoriadis, D.E. 2005. The corticotropin-releasing factor receptor: a novel target for the treatment of depression and anxiety-related disorders. *Expert Opin. Ther. Targets.* **9**: 651–684.

29. Hauger, R.L., V. Risbrough, O. Brauns, *et al.* 2006. Corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) receptor signaling in the central nervous system: new molecular targets. *CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets.* **5**: 453–479.

30. Reul, J.M. & F. Holsboer. 2002. Corticotropin-releasing factor receptors 1 and 2 in anxiety and depression. *Curr. Opin. Pharmacol.* **2**: 23–33.

31. Sutton, R.E., G.F. Koob, M.M. Le, *et al.* 1982. Corticotropin releasing factor produces behavioural activation in rats. *Nature* **297**: 331–333.

32. Dunn, A.J., C.W. Berridge, Y.I. Lai, *et al.* 1987. CRF-induced excessive grooming behavior in rats and mice. *Peptides* **8**: 841–844.

33. Heinrichs, S.C., K.T. Britton & G.F. Koob. 1991. Both conditioned taste preference and aversion induced by corticotropin-releasing factor. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* **40**: 717–721.

34. Britton, D.R., G.F. Koob, J. Rivier, *et al.* 1982. Intraventricular corticotropin releasing factor enhances behavioral effects of novelty. *Life Sci.* **31**: 363–367.

35. Berridge, C.W. & A.J. Dunn. 1989. CRF and restraint-stress decrease exploratory behavior in hypophysectomized mice. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* **34**: 517–519.

36. Timpl, P., R. Spanagel, I. Sillaber, *et al.* 1998. Impaired stress response and reduced anxiety in mice lacking a functional corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor. *Nat. Genet.* **19**: 162–166.

37. Smith, G.W., J.M. Aubry, F. Dellu, *et al.* 1998. Corticotropin releasing factor receptor 1-deficient mice display decreased anxiety, impaired stress response, and aberrant neuroendocrine development. *Neuron* **20**: 1093–1102.

38. Muller, M.B., S. Zimmermann, I. Sillaber, *et al.* 2003. Limbic corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 mediates anxiety-related behavior and hormonal adaptation to stress. *Nat. Neurosci.* **6**: 1100–1107.

39. Bale, T.L., A. Contarino, G.W. Smith, *et al.* 2000. Mice deficient for corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2 display anxiety-like behaviour and are hypersensitive to stress. *Nat. Genet.* **24**: 410–414.

40. Kishimoto, T., J. Radulovic, M. Radulovic, *et al.* 2000. Deletion of crhr2 reveals an anxiolytic role for corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2. *Nat. Genet.* **24**: 415–419.

41. Coste, S.C., R.A. Kesterson, K.A. Heldwein, *et al.* 2000. Abnormal adaptations to stress and impaired cardiovascular function in mice lacking corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2. *Nat. Genet.* **24**: 403–409.

42. Hammack, S.E., M.J. Schmid, M.L. LoPresti, *et al.* 2003. Corticotropin releasing hormone type 2 receptors in the dorsal raphe nucleus mediate the behavioral consequences of uncontrollable stress. *J. Neurosci.* **23**: 1019–1025.

43. Bakshi, V.P., S. Smith-Roe, S.M. Newman, *et al.* 2002. Reduction of stress-induced behavior by antagonism of corticotropin-releasing hormone 2 (CRH2) receptors in lateral septum or CRH1 receptors in amygdala. *J. Neurosci.* **22**: 2926–2935.

44. Nemeroff, C.B., E. Widerlov, G. Bissette, *et al.* 1984. Elevated concentrations of CSF corticotropin-releasing factor-like immunoreactivity in depressed patients. *Science* **226**: 1342–1344.

45. Nemeroff, C.B., M.J. Owens, G. Bissette, *et al.* 1988. Reduced corticotropin releasing factor binding sites in the frontal cortex of suicide victims. *Arch. Gen. Psychiatry* **45**: 577–579.

46. Raadsheer, F.C., W.J. Hoogendijk, F.C. Stam, *et al.* 1994. Increased numbers of corticotropin-releasing hormone expressing neurons in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus of depressed patients. *Neuroendocrinology* **60**: 436–444.

47. Merali, Z., L. Du, P. Hrdina, *et al.* 2004. Dysregulation in the suicide brain: mRNA expression of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptors and GABA(A) receptor subunits in frontal cortical brain region. *J. Neurosci.* **24**: 1478–1485.

48. Austin, M.C., J.E. Janosky & H.A. Murphy. 2003. Increased corticotropin-releasing hormone immunoreactivity in monoamine-containing pontine nuclei of depressed suicide men. *Mol. Psychiatry* **8**: 324–332.

49. Holsboer, F., U. von Bardeleben, A. Gerken, *et al.* 1984. Blunted corticotropin and normal cortisol response to human corticotropin-releasing factor in depression. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **311**: 1127.

50. Gold, P.W., G. Chrousos, C. Kellner, *et al.* 1984. Psychiatric implications of basic and clinical studies with corticotropin-releasing factor. *Am. J. Psychiatry* **141**: 619–627.

51. Ising, M., S. Horstmann, S. Kloiber, *et al.* 2007. Combined dexamethasone/corticotropin releasing hormone test predicts treatment response in major depression—a potential biomarker? *Biol. Psychiatry* **62**: 47–54.

52. Holsboer, F. & M. Ising. 2008. Central CRH system in depression and anxiety-evidence from clinical studies with CRH1 receptor antagonists. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **583**: 350–357.

53. Nickel, T., A. Sonntag, J. Schill, *et al.* 2003. Clinical and neurobiological effects of tianeptine and paroxetine in major depression. *J. Clin. Psychopharmacol.* **23**: 155–168.

54. Zobel, A.W., T. Nickel, H.E. Kunzel, *et al.* 2000. Effects of the high-affinity corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 antagonist R121919 in major depression: the first 20 patients treated. *J. Psychiatr. Res.* **34**: 171–181.

55. Kunzel, H.E., A.W. Zobel, T. Nickel, *et al.* 2003. Treatment of depression with the CRH-1-receptor antagonist R121919: endocrine changes and side effects. *J. Psychiatr. Res.* **37**: 525–533.

56. Ising, M., U.S. Zimmermann, H.E. Kunzel, *et al.* 2007. High-affinity CRF1 receptor antagonist NBI-34041: preclinical and clinical data suggest safety and

efficacy in attenuating elevated stress response. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **32**: 1941–1949.

57. Hokfelt, T. 1991. Neuropeptides in perspective: the last ten years. *Neuron* **7**: 867–879.

58. Deussing, J.M. & W. Wurst. 2005. Dissecting the genetic effect of the CRH system on anxiety and stress-related behaviour. *C. R. Biol.* **328**: 199–212.

59. Brandt, C.S. & S.M. Dymecki. 2004. Talking about a revolution: the impact of site specific recombinases on genetic analyses in mice. *Dev. Cell* **6**: 7–28.

60. Stenzel-Poore, M.P., V.A. Cameron, J. Vaughan, *et al.* 1992. Development of Cushing's syndrome in corticotropin-releasing factor transgenic mice. *Endocrinology* **130**: 3378–3386.

61. Groenink, L., T. Pattij, J.R. De, *et al.* 2003. 5-HT1A receptor knockout mice and mice overexpressing corticotropin-releasing hormone in models of anxiety. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **463**: 185–197.

62. Tronche, F., C. Kellendonk, O. Kretz, *et al.* 1999. Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the nervous system results in reduced anxiety. *Nat. Genet.* **23**: 99–103.

63. Lu, A., M.A. Steiner, N. Whittle, *et al.* 2008. Conditional mouse mutants highlight mechanisms of corticotropin-releasing hormone effects on stress-coping behavior. *Mol. Psychiatry* **13**: 1028–1042.

64. Porsolt, R.D., A. Bertin & M. Jalfre. 1977. Behavioral despair in mice: a primary screening test for antidepressants. *Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Ther.* **229**: 327–336.

65. Todorovic, C., O. Jahn, H. Tezval, *et al.* 2005. The role of CRF receptors in anxiety and depression: implications of the novel CRF1 agonist cortagine. *Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.* **29**: 1323–1333.

66. Butler, P.D., J.M. Weiss, J.C. Stout, *et al.* 1990. Corticotropin-releasing factor produces fear-enhancing and behavioral activating effects following infusion into the locus coeruleus. *J. Neurosci.* **10**: 176–183.

67. Hillhouse, E.W. & D.K. Grammatopoulos. 2006. The molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of the biological activity of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptors: implications for physiology and pathophysiology. *Endocr. Rev.* **27**: 260–286.

68. Arzt, E. & F. Holsboer. 2006. CRF signaling: molecular specificity for drug targeting in the CNS. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* **27**: 531–538.

69. Philips, A., S. Lesage, R. Gingras, *et al.* 1997. Novel dimeric Nur77 signaling mechanism in endocrine and lymphoid cells. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **17**: 5946–5951.

70. Boutillier, A.L., C. Gaiddon, D. Lorang, *et al.* 1998. Transcriptional activation of the proopiomelanocortin gene by cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein. *Pituitary* **1**: 33–43.

71. Boutillier, A.L., P. Sassone-Corsi & J.P. Loeffler. 1991. The protooncogene c-fos is induced by corticotropin-

releasing factor and stimulates proopiomelanocortin gene transcription in pituitary cells. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **5**: 1301–1310.

72. Kovalovsky, D., D. Refojo, A.C. Liberman, *et al.* 2002. Activation and induction of NUR77/NURR1 in corticotrophs by CRH/cAMP: involvement of calcium, protein kinase A, and MAPK pathways. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **16**: 1638–1651.

73. Di Benedetto, B., C. Hitz, S.M. Holter, *et al.* 2007. Differential mRNA distribution of components of the ERK/MAPK signalling cascade in the adult mouse brain. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **500**: 542–556.

74. Ailing, F., L. Fan, S. Li, *et al.* 2008. Role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signal transduction pathway in anxiety. *J. Psychiatr. Res.* **43**: 55–63.

75. Meller, E., C. Shen, T.A. Nikolao, *et al.* 2003. Region-specific effects of acute and repeated restraint stress on the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. *Brain Res.* **979**: 57–64.

76. Einat, H., P. Yuan, T.D. Gould, *et al.* 2003. The role of the extracellular signal regulated kinase signaling pathway in mood modulation. *J. Neurosci.* **23**: 7311–7316.

77. Duman, C.H., L. Schlesinger, M. Kodama, *et al.* 2007. A role for MAP kinase signaling in behavioral models of depression and antidepressant treatment. *Biol. Psychiatry* **61**: 661–670.

78. Tronson, N.C., C. Schrick, A. Fischer, *et al.* 2008. Regulatory mechanisms of fear extinction and depression-like behavior. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **33**: 1570–1583.

79. Brar, B.K., A. Chen, M.H. Perrin, *et al.* 2004. Specificity and regulation of extracellularly regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation through corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) receptors 1 and 2beta by the CRF/urocortin family of peptides. *Endocrinology* **145**: 1718–1729.

80. Grammatopoulos, D.K., H.S. Randeva, M.A. Levine, *et al.* 2000. Urocortin, but not corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway in human pregnant myometrium: an effect mediated via R1alpha and R2beta CRH receptor subtypes and stimulation of Gqproteins. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **14**: 2076–2091.

81. Bayatti, N., J. Zschocke & C. Behl. 2003. Brain region-specific neuroprotective action and signaling of corticotropin-releasing hormone in primary neurons. *Endocrinology* **144**: 4051–4060.

82. Elliott-Hunt, C.R., J. Kazlauskaite, G.J. Wilde, *et al.* 2002. Potential signalling pathways underlying corticotrophin-releasing hormone-mediated neuroprotection from excitotoxicity in rat hippocampus. *J. Neurochem.* **80**: 416–425.

Refojo & Holsboer: Specificity of CRH Actions in the Brain

83. Swinny, J.D., F. Metzger, J. Ijkema-Paassen, *et al.* 2004. Corticotropin-releasing factor and urocortin differentially modulate rat Purkinje cell dendritic out- growth and differentiation in vitro. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **19**: 1749–1758.

84. Refojo, D., C. Echenique, M.B. Muller, *et al.* 2005. Corticotropin-releasing hormone activates ERK1/2 MAPK in specific brain areas. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**: 6183–6188.

85. Di Benedetto, B., M. Kallnik, D.M. Weisenhorn, *et al.* 2009. Activation of ERK/MAPK in the lateral amygdala of the mouse is required for acquisition of a fear- potentiated startle response. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **34**: 356–366.

86. Fischer, A., M. Radulovic, C. Schrick, *et al.* 2007. Hippocampal Mek/Erk signaling mediates extinction of contextual freezing behavior. *Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.* **87**: 149–158.
