
JACS
COMMUNICATIONS

Published on Web 12/17/2009

# Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Generate Natural Structural Diversity in Carbapenem Antibiotics

Micah J. Bodner, Ryan M. Phelan, Michael F. Freeman, Rongfeng Li, and Craig A. Townsend*

Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218

Received August 29, 2009; E-mail: ctownsend@jhu.edu

Carbapenem antibiotics are of clinical importance because of their high potency, broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity, and resistance to most β-lactamases.¹ Thienamycin (1) (Figure 1), the most potent natural member of this family, co-occurs in *Streptomyces cattleya* with four carbapenems that are distinguished by their C-2/C-6 substituents.² There are more than 50 known carbapenam/ems metabolites, many of which are differentiated only by the oxidation state of their C-2/C-6 substituents. The C-6 ethyl side chain of 1 is derived by C₁-donations from methionine³⁴ and can be methyl, ethyl, or isopropyl, which can be saturated, unsaturated, hydroxylated, or sulfated. Recent work has established that coenzyme A is successively truncated by three enzymes encoded by the thienamycin gene cluster to give the C-2 cysteamine moiety.⁵ This side chain can be pantetheine, but is generally cysteamine, which can be N-acetylated or N-propionylated, desaturated and further oxidized to the sulfoxide, or cleaved and oxidized in a stepwise fashion to the sulfonic acid. These carbapenem metabolites comprise a natural combinatorial library whose structural modifications temper the high intrinsic hydrolytic instability of the carbapenem nucleus, as well as affect the antimicrobial spectrum and β-lactamase resistance of each family member.¹ Some of the higher oxidation state carbapenems have either enhanced antibiotic activity or increased β-lactamase resistance, and so, in the broad context of carbapenem biosynthesis, the origin of this oxidative diversity is of particular interest.

have been postulated to catalyze steps in thienamycin biosynthesis analogous to the coupled C-5 epimerization and C-2/C-3 desaturation of (2S,5S)-carbapenam (11) to (5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylate (13) catalyzed by CarC.¹¹ To discern their roles in thienamycin biosynthesis, ThnG and ThnQ were analyzed for carbapenem-oxidizing activity, as well as for the ability to catalyze C-5 epimerization and coupled or uncoupled C-2/C-3 desaturation of carbapenams/ems.

The envisioned experiments required carbapenam/ems varying in stereochemical configuration at C-6 as well as C-2/C-6 oxidation state/substitution pattern to serve as substrates and reference standards. Two methods were employed to establish the C-6 substituent and C-5/C-6 configuration by synthesizing precursor azetidinones. The first method provided the *trans* (3S,4R)-configuration by alkylating the enolate of an azetidinone derived from L-aspartic acid.¹² The second method employed a catalytic asymmetric azetidinone-forming reaction that produced either enantiomer of the *cis* 3,4-disubstituted azetidinones with independent control of the carbapenem C-8 stereocenter.¹³ These compounds could be used as precursors of *cis* or *trans* carbapenems. Azetidinones were converted to carbapenems by the Merck method, which allowed various C-2 groups to be introduced.¹⁴,¹⁵ The intermediate 2-oxo-carbapenams in this route can be reduced and directed to the preparation of carbapenams bearing thioether substituents at C-2 (Figure 1c).⁵ Carbapenam thioethers 14–17, (2S,5S)-carbapenam (11), (2S,5R)-carbapenam (12),¹⁶ and 5-*epi*-PS-5 (6) were synthesized to test ThnG and ThnQ for coupled or uncoupled carbapenam ring epimerization and desaturation. PS-5 (5) was synthesized to test for side chain oxidation activity, because the acetylated cysteamyl side chain is more stable than the unacetylated deshydroxy thienamycin (10). PS-7 (7), PS-7 sulfoxide (9), PS-5 sulfoxide (8), *N*-acetyl thienamycin (2), and the diastereomeric mixture (8S,R)-*N*-acetyl thienamycin (4) were synthesized as additional substrates and reference standards.

Thienamycin biosynthetic cluster genes *thnG* and *thnQ* were cloned from genomic DNA and inserted into pET29b each bearing a C-terminal His₆-tag. The recombinant proteins were overproduced in *E. coli* Rosetta2(DE3) and purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography. *In vitro* reactions in MOPS, pH 7.0, containing Fe(NH₄)₂(SO₄)₂, α-KG, ascorbate, the subject carbapenam/em, and either ThnG or ThnQ were incubated and analyzed by HPLC for the formation of new product(s).¹⁷,¹⁸ Clear outcomes were observed for both ThnG- and ThnQ-catalyzed reactions with PS-5 (5) (Figure 2 and Supporting Information). The products were immediately identifiable as carbapenems by their unique chromophores (*λ*~max~ = 290–320 nm). ThnQ produced a single new product more polar than 5, while ThnG produced two products, one with a shorter retention time and one with a longer retention time than that of 5. ESI mass spectrometric analysis of the new product (*m/z* = 313.05) in the ThnQ-catalyzed reaction established that a single oxygen had been incorporated. Its identity was determined by

**Figure 1.** (a) Representative carbapenems. (b) The CarC-catalyzed reaction. (c) Carbapenam thioethers synthesized in this study.

The variability of the carbapenem side chain oxidation state as well as the discovery of a mutant strain⁶ of *Streptomyces cattleya* that produced deshydroxy thienamycin (10) instead of thienamycin (1) led us to believe that the thienamycin gene cluster⁷ encoded one or more enzyme(s) capable of oxidizing the C-2/C-6 moieties of carbapenems. Protein sequence analysis of ThnG and ThnQ indicated that each enzyme contained the Hx(D/E)xₙH motif characteristic of nonheme Fe(II)/α-ketoglutarate (α-KG)-dependent dioxygenases, and these seemed promising candidates.⁸ However, ThnG and ThnQ are in the same family as CarC encoded by the (5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylate (13) gene cluster in *Pectobacterium carotovorum*.⁹,¹⁰ Despite low homology to CarC, ThnG and ThnQ

respectively, of carbapenem substrates. No evidence was found that they catalyze coupled or uncoupled C-5 epimerization and/or C-2/ C-3 desaturation in the carbapenam/ems tested. On these bases it appears that the latter two reactions rely on other proteins encoded by the thienamycin gene cluster that are distinct from the nonheme iron oxygenases like CarC, key to the biosynthesis of (5R)-carbpenem-3-carboxylate (13).^{10,11,21} Oxidative modifications of the C-2 and C-6 side chains of carbapenems are major determinants of their antimicrobial spectrum and β-lactamase resistance. These activities strongly suggest that the known carbapenems produced by *S. cattleya* arise from ThnG and ThnQ oxidation of a common biosynthetic precursor and that much of the structural diversity exemplified by this class of antibiotics likely derives from orthologues present in other carbapenem producers. Knowledge of these oxidative relationships will more sharply refine further biosynthetic investigations of this antibiotic family.

**Acknowledgment.** We thank K. A. Moshos for carbapenams and Nitrocefin and the NIH (AI014937) for financial support.

**Supporting Information Available:** Experimental procedures, HPLC comparisons, and compound characterizations. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

**References**

(1) Bonfiglio, G.; Russo, G.; Nicoletti, G. *Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs* 2002, **11** (4), 529–544.

(2) Wilson, K. E.; Kempf, A. J.; Liesch, J. M.; Arison, B. H. *J. Antibiot.* 1983, **36** (9), 1109–1117.

(3) Houck, D. R.; Kobayashi, K.; Williamson, J. M.; Floss, H. G. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 1986, **108** (17), 5365–5366.

(4) Williamson, J. M.; Inamine, E.; Wilson, K. E.; Douglas, A. W.; Liesch, J. M.; Albersschonberg, G. *J. Biol. Chem.* 1985, **260** (8), 4637–4647.

(5) Freeman, M. F.; Moshos, K. A.; Bodner, M. J.; Li, R. F.; Townsend, C. A. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 2008, **105** (32), 11128–11133.

(6) Rosi, D.; Drozd, M. L.; Kuhrt, M. F.; Terminiello, L.; Came, P. E.; Daum, S. J. *J. Antibiot.* 1981, **34** (3), 341–343.

(7) Nunez, L. E.; Mendez, C.; Brana, A. F.; Blanco, G.; Salas, J. A. *Chem. Biol.* 2003, **10** (4), 301–311.

(8) Hausinger, R. P. *Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol.* 2004, **39** (1), 21–68.

(9) McGowan, S. J.; Sebaiia, M.; Porter, L. E.; Stewart, G. S. A. B.; Williams, P.; Bycroft, B. W.; Salmond, G. P. C. *Mol. Microbiol.* 1996, **22** (3), 415–426.

(10) Li, R. F.; Stapon, A.; Blanchfield, J. T.; Townsend, C. A. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 2000, **122** (38), 9296–9297.

(11) Hamed, R. B.; Batchalar, E. T.; Mecinovic, J.; Claridge, T. D. W.; Schofield, C. J. *ChemBioChem* 2009, **10** (2), 246–250.

(12) Reider, P. J.; Grabowski, E. J. *J. Tetrahedron Lett.* 1982, **23** (22), 2293–2296.

(13) Bodner, M. J.; Phelan, R. M.; Townsend, C. A. *Org. Lett.* 2009, **11** (16), 3606–3609.

(14) Salzmann, T. N.; Ratcliffe, R. W.; Christensen, B. G.; Bouffard, F. A. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 1980, **102** (19), 6161–6163.

(15) Ueda, Y.; Roberge, G.; Vinet, V. *Can. J. Chem.* 1984, **62** (12), 2936–2940.

(16) Stapon, A.; Li, R. F.; Townsend, C. A. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 2003, **125** (51), 15746–15747.

(17) Salowe, S. P.; Marsh, E. N.; Townsend, C. A. *Biochemistry* 1990, **29** (27), 6499–6508.

(18) Decristoforo, G. *Anal. Chim. Acta* 1984, **163** (SEP), 25–33.

(19) Sykes, R. B.; Wells, J. S. *J. Antibiot.* 1985, **38** (1), 119–121.

(20) Gerratana, B.; Stapon, A.; Townsend, C. A. *Biochemistry* 2003, **42** (25), 7836–7847.

(21) Stapon, A.; Li, R. F.; Townsend, C. A. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 2003, **125** (28), 8486–8493.
