
REVIEW ARTICLE

# Extracellular signals that define distinct and coexisting cell fates in Bacillus subtilis

Daniel López & Roberto Kolter

Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

---

**Correspondence:** Daniel López, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Armenise building, Room 219, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Tel.: +1 617 432 1776; fax: +1 617 738 7664; e-mail: daniel_lopez@hms.harvard.edu

Received 21 September 2009; revised 17 November 2009; accepted 18 November 2009. Final version published online 16 December 2009.

DOI:10.1111/j.1574-6976.2009.00199.x

Editor: Keith Chater

Keywords: signaling; cell differentiation; *Bacillus subtilis*; development and quorum sensing.

---

## Abstract

The soil-dwelling bacterium *Bacillus subtilis* differentiates into distinct subpopulations of specialized cells that coexist within highly structured communities. The coordination and interplay between these cell types requires extensive extracellular communication driven mostly by sensing self-generated secreted signals. These extracellular signals activate a set of sensor kinases, which respond by phosphorylating three major regulatory proteins, Spo0A, DegU and ComA. Each phosphorylated regulator triggers a specific differentiation program while at the same time repressing other differentiation programs. This allows a cell to differentiate in response to a specific cue, even in the presence of other, possibly conflicting, signals. The sensor kinases involved respond to an eclectic group of extracellular signals, such as quorum-sensing molecules, natural products, temperature, pH or scarcity of nutrients. This article reviews the cascades of cell differentiation pathways that are triggered by sensing extracellular signals. We also present a tentative developmental model in which the diverse cell types sequentially differentiate to achieve the proper development of the bacterial community.

implies the presence of a variety of extracellular signals. Furthermore, each subpopulation must have the ability to sense one particular signal and discard the rest. For this purpose, *B. subtilis* possesses at least three different master regulators Spo0A, DegU and ComA that coordinate the activation and regulation of the developmental programs that result in distinct cell types (Veening et al., 2008a, b; Lopez et al., 2009a–d). A simplified scheme of this regulation is presented in Fig. 1. The phosphorylated form of each master regulator activates the expression of a subset of genes required for the differentiation into a specific cell lineage, while it might also cause inhibition of the other developmental cascades, as is discussed in the following sections.

Here, we review the extracellular signals that have been described thus far that trigger differentiation pathways in *B. subtilis*. These signals lead to the phosphorylation of the master regulators Spo0A, DegU and ComA, resulting in their active forms Spo0A~P, DegU~P and ComA~P. The active forms of the master regulators activate their respective developmental pathways only in a fraction of cells within the culture, which causes the formation of the distinct subpopulations that are present in the multicellular communities. While some of the bimodal systems provide subpopulations

---

## Introduction

Bacterial communities thrive in their natural habitats as a result of their ability to perceive environmental changes and respond accordingly. To do this, bacteria have evolved complex sensing systems to monitor fluctuations in external cues. These cues might be environmental, such as temperature changes or starvation, but they can be derived from neighboring microorganisms in the form of secreted small-molecule natural products. These molecules serve as signals to activate distinct pathways and trigger changes in gene expression that allow bacteria to adapt to new scenarios. If the signaling molecules are self-produced, this process is generally referred to as quorum sensing (Camilli & Bassler, 2006).

To add to the complexity, some organisms are capable of differentiating into subpopulations of phenotypically distinct, but genetically identical cells. These subpopulations of cells produce or respond to different signals and serve distinct functions within the community. For example, the soil bacterium *Bacillus subtilis* responds to different environmental cues by differentiating into subpopulations of specialized cell types. The coexistence of numerous cell types

Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works
FEMS Microbiol Rev 34 (2010) 134–149

Extracellular signaling in *Bacillus subtilis*

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the distinct cell types that differentiate in the communities of *Bacillus subtilis*. Each cell type has been caricaturized, considering its most representative attribute. All the cell types were classified into subgroups, according to the master regulator that triggers their differentiation. Arrows indicate the process of differentiation. The master regulator involved is presented in blue. Notice that motile cells do not require the activation of any master regulator for their differentiation. The subpopulation of cells subjected to the action of the cannibalism toxins, labeled as dead cells, is also represented, and yet they cannot be considered strictly as a differentiated cell type.

that improve the prospects for long-term survival of the organism, others provide more immediate benefits to the entire community via their effects on extracellular biology. Importantly, in addition to responding to self-produced signals, these systems can widely sense natural products that are produced by other soil bacteria. We propose that this confers a selective advantage to *B. subtilis* by allowing cells to recognize the presence of neighbors that share its ecological niche.

### Cell differentiation in *B. subtilis*

The logical concept that all cells surrounded by a homogeneously distributed signal would respond equally to the signal was displaced by the observation of distinct subpopulations of cells in dispersed cultures. This was initially seen in *B. subtilis* during the process of sporulation. Nutrient depletion led to the formation of dormant endospores in only a fraction of cells under conditions which starvation should have been sensed equally by the entire cell community (Freese, 1972; Chung *et al.*, 1994). Subsequently, facilitated by recent advances in studying gene expression at the single-cell level (such as fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry), other developmental pathways were reported to be expressed in only subpopulations of cells. One of the first examples to be analyzed in detail was the heterogeneous expression of competence within a population of *B. subtilis* (Smits *et al.*, 2005). Other developmental processes including motility (Kearns & Losick, 2005) and

extracellular matrix production (Chai *et al.*, 2008) have now been reported to express this type of bimodality.

The process whereby only a fraction of the cells in a dispersed population differentiates is referred to as ‘bimodality’, due to the bimodal distribution of gene expression in which a genetically identical population bifurcates (Dubnau & Losick, 2006). Bimodality can occur when a regulatory protein activates a certain subset of genes, including its own gene expression. This positive feedback loop promotes an exponential activation of the regulon once a certain expression level of the regulator is achieved. Cells that reach this level will activate the regulon while cells that do not reach the required level will remain inactive. This type of regulation results in two distinct subpopulations of genetically identical cells that express different patterns of genes (Veenig *et al.*, 2008a,b), leading to subpopulations of distinct cell types (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). Of course, however, the size of the subpopulation that expresses any set of genes in a bimodal fashion can be considerably influenced by the environmental conditions and signaling molecules.

Related to this issue, one of the earliest examples of bimodality in bacteria was reported to be activated by the presence in the medium of a small molecule, which acts as an inducer. The expression of the *lac* operon (*lacZ*, *lacY*, and *lacA*, which codes for a β-galactosidase, a lactose permease and a transacetylase, respectively), responsible for lactose catabolism in *Escherichia coli* (Jacob & Monod, 1961), followed a bimodal pattern of expression in response to the presence of certain inducers such as the well-studied isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside. Novick and Weiner demonstrated that at near-saturated concentrations of the inducing molecule of the *lac* operon, the bacterial culture presents two discrete populations of induced and noninduced bacteria. This was termed ‘all-or-none induction’ (Novick & Weiner, 1957). The presence of the inducing molecule stochastically triggers the expression of the *lac* operon in individual cells, which leads to an increase in the production of the permease LacY in that cells, resulting in an increase of the cytoplasmic concentration of the inducing molecule (Tolker-Nielsen *et al.*, 1998). This causes a positive feedback loop, which triggers a full induction expression of the *lac* operon as soon as the inducer is sensed (Casadesus & D’Ari, 2002; Dubnau & Losick, 2006).

This mechanism of bimodality is thought to confer an evolutionary advantage in a bacterial community because it promotes division of labor among its members by simultaneously expressing many developmental features with a minimal cost of energy (Shapiro, 1998; Kearns, 2008). For instance, production of the extracellular matrix, which is essential for biofilm formation, is carried out by a subpopulation of specialized cells in *B. subtilis* (Chai *et al.*, 2008). However, the whole community benefits from the presence of the extracellular matrix, because all of the cells are encased

Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works

the distinct genetic pathways that lead to cell differentiation. This regulatory network is subject to extracellular regulation that is mediated by the input of several specific external signals. These signals modulate the regulatory network in order to favor the representation of certain subpopulations of cells in response to varying extracellular conditions.

# Regulatory networks that trigger differentiation in *B. subtilis*

The developmental pathways that lead to the differentiation of the numerous coexisting subpopulations in *B. subtilis* are triggered by the phosphorylation of three master regulators: DegU, ComA and Spo0A. Each regulator activates the expression of a specific subset of genes necessary for cells to differentiate into a specific fate. For instance, phosphorylation of DegU (DegU~P) leads to expression of the machinery responsible for the production and secretion of proteases, resulting in the differentiation of the subpopulation of miners (Verhamme *et al.*, 2007). Similarly, phosphorylation of ComA (ComA~P) induces the pathway towards surfactin production (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a,b), which differentiates the subpopulation of surfactin-producing cells (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). Additionally, a fraction of the surfactin producers undergoes a secondary process of cell differentiation to become competent cells (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a,b; Hamoen *et al.*, 1995). Finally, phosphorylation of Spo0A (Spo0A~P) activates the cascades towards matrix production and cannibalism when there are low levels of phosphorylated protein in the cell, and when there are high levels of Spo0A~P, the sporulation genes are induced (Hamon & Lazazzera, 2001; Gonzalez-Pastor *et al.*, 2003; Fujita *et al.*, 2005).

Activation of these master regulators by phosphorylation is mediated by the action of distinct sensor kinases. The cytoplasmic kinase DegS phosphorylates DegU (Msadek *et al.*, 1990; Dahl *et al.*, 1991). Activation of DegS results in an increase of cells specialized as miners to the detriment of motile cells (Amati *et al.*, 2004; Verhamme *et al.*, 2007). The membrane kinase ComP phosphorylates ComA (Weinrauch *et al.*, 1990), which leads to the differentiation of surfactin producer and competent cells. Spo0A is phosphorylated by the action of five different kinases, KinA, B, C, D and E (LeDeaux *et al.*, 1995; Jiang *et al.*, 2000a,b). KinA and B are necessary for sporulation while KinC, D and E are important for matrix production and biofilm formation (Perego *et al.*, 1989; Burbulys *et al.*, 1991; Trach & Hoch, 1993; Hamon & Lazazzera, 2001; Kobayashi *et al.*, 2008; Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

The action of the master regulators is also controlled by dephosphorylation, which counteracts the action of the kinases. Dephosphorylation is driven by 11 inhibitory proteins termed Rap (response-regulator aspartyl-phosphate

Fig. 2. Communities of *Bacillus subtilis* are formed by several cell types. (a) Photograph of a biofilm of *B.* *subtilis* at 72 h of growth in the biofilm-inducing medium minimal salt glycerol glutamate medium. Scale bar = 1 mm. (b–d) The bacterial community encased within the biofilm differentiates into distinct subpopulations of specialized cells. The figure shows three panels illustrating the technique used to distinguish these distinct cell types. (b) Biofilms of *B.* *subtilis* were fixed and used for thin sectioning. This panel shows a schematic representation of a thin section of a biofilm. (c) Micrograph from a thin section of a biofilm. The strain used to form the biofilm was double labeled with two transcriptional fusions, reporting for the subpopulation of motile cells (blue) and sporulating cells (orange) The differential distribution of gene expression and subpopulations of cells across the section of the biofilm are clearly observed. (d) Micrograph from a thin section of a biofilm from a double-labeled strain with two transcriptional fusions reporting for the subpopulation of matrix producers (red) and sporulating cells (green). Again, the differential distribution of gene expression indicates the presence of different subpopulation of cells within the biofilm. Scale bars = 50 μm. Micrographs of thin sections are credited to Vlamakis *et al.* (2008).

within the matrix in mature biofilms (Vlamakis *et al.*, 2008) (Fig. 2). Similarly, only a portion of the population produces and secretes proteases that degrade extracellular proteins into small peptides. We refer to this subpopulation of protease producers as ‘miners’. Although only some cells produce the proteases, the small peptides released serve as food for the entire community (Veening *et al.*, 2008a,b).

The existence of subpopulations within the community requires a sophisticated regulatory network to coordinate

phosphatases), which, directly or indirectly, accelerate the dephosphorylation of the phosphorylated version of the respective master regulator. Some of these phosphatases also block the activation of the master regulator by binding to the master regulator and interfering with DNA binding (RapC, F and G) (Lazazzera, 2001; McQuade *et al.*, 2001; Auchtung *et al.*, 2006).

For example, RapA, B and E indirectly inhibit the phosphorylation of Spo0A via dephosphorylation of Spo0F, a member of the phosphorelay cascade that provides phosphorylation to Spo0A (Grossman, 1995; Perego *et al.*, 1996; Jiang *et al.*, 2000a,b; Perego & Brannigan, 2001; Ishikawa *et al.*, 2002). Also, RapJ has been reported to influence Spo0A activity. RapJ overproduction affected the expression of 39 operons, 20 of them known to be regulated by Spo0A (Auchtung *et al.*, 2006). The Rap proteins that inhibit ComA~P activity are RapC, F, G, H and K (Solomon *et al.*, 1996; Lazazzera *et al.*, 1997; Bongiorni *et al.*, 2005; Auchtung *et al.*, 2006; Hayashi *et al.*, 2006). RapG and H were shown to negatively affect the phosphorylation of DegU. The expression of genes positively regulated by DegU~P was enhanced when the respective *rap* genes were disrupted (Ogura *et al.*, 2003; Hayashi *et al.*, 2006). Also, RapG and H were shown to inhibit the expression of some ComA-activated genes possibly in a manner similar to their repression of DegU~P-regulated genes (Hayashi *et al.*, 2006).

An exception is that differentiation into motile cells is not dependent on the activation of any one of the three master regulators. The subpopulation of motile cells arises when the master regulators are inactive, at early time points. Consistent with this, motile cells form a large portion of the population at 24 h of growth in the biofilm-inducing minimal salt glycerol glutamate medium. After 24 h, the population shifts to comprise predominantly matrix producers, most of which eventually enter sporulation (Vlamakis *et al.*, 2008). Differentiation of miners follows the same pattern because activation of exoprotease production inhibits motility (Verhamme *et al.*, 2007). Taken together, the above information allows us to speculate that the differentiation of motile cells could be an initial step in cell differentiation, which does not require the activation of any of the three major regulators, but only the presence of nutrients to expand the community. At later time points, when extracellular signals are secreted and induce phosphorylation of Spo0A, ComA and DegU, other subpopulations of cells arise, likely derived from the motile population. Evidence of the subpopulation of motile cells differentiating to give rise to a new subpopulation of matrix-producing cells was shown by Vlamakis *et al.* (2008), who used double-labeled strains to simultaneously monitor motility (using P<sub>hag</sub>–*cfp* transcriptional fusion) and matrix production (using P<sub>yqxM</sub>–*yfp* transcriptional fusion) within the same cells. Furthermore, Vlamakis *et al.* (2008) showed that in biofilms grown more

than 24 h, the motile cells inactivate motility in favor of inducing matrix-producing genes (Vlamakis *et al.*, 2008). This result supports the hypothesis that the population of motile cells can differentiate into many subpopulations with different gene expressions and functional roles.

### Extracellular signaling promotes sporulation

Spores are metabolically inactive cells that compartmentalize DNA and essential proteins to allow germination once conditions have improved (Piggot & Hilbert, 2004). *Bacillus subtilis* sporulates in response to environmentally harsh conditions such as nutrient or oxygen deprivation. It is believed that *B. subtilis* senses starvation by measuring the intracellular concentration of key metabolites, such as ATP, GTP or charged tRNAs needed to build proteins. When the cytoplasmic concentration of these effectors decreases abruptly, it stimulates the activation of the master regulator Spo0A~P. High levels of Spo0A~P activate the expression of genes required for sporulation (Kudoh *et al.*, 1984; Fujita *et al.*, 2005).

The cytoplasmic sensor kinase KinA, the most important kinase in *B. subtilis*, responds to starvation by phosphorylating the master regulator Spo0A~P and inducing the process of sporulation. KinA possesses three distinct PAS–PAC sensor domains (PAS-A, PAS-B and PAS-C). PAS domains have been proposed to monitor changes in light, redox potential, oxygen, small ligands and intracellular energy level (Taylor & Zhulin, 1999). Hence, KinA might use these PAS sensor domains to sense fluctuations in the cytoplasmic concentration of the key metabolites to induce sporulation. This hypothesis remains to be tested, as the signals sensed by the PAS domains of KinA are unknown. While it is known that ATP binds to the sensor domain PAS-A, it might not serve as a signal but rather as a phosphate source for the phosphorylation of the kinase (Stephenson & Hoch, 2001). In addition, it was recently demonstrated that this PAS-A sensor domain is not required to induce the kinase activity of KinA *in vivo* (Eswaramoorthy *et al.*, 2009), supporting that the binding of ATP to the domain might not constitute a signal.

A second line of response to starvation is the DNA-binding repressor CodY, which monitors the intracellular levels of GTP. In excess of nutrients, GTP is produced at high levels. GTP binds and activates the repressor CodY, which inhibits the expression of the *spo0A* gene. Consequently, depletion of GTP during starvation causes the inactivation of CodY, thus licensing cells to initiate sporulation by allowing *spo0A* transcription (Ratnayake-Lecamwasam *et al.*, 2001; Handke *et al.*, 2008).

The decrease in intracellular energy levels caused by the scarcity of nutrients also affects the synthesis of amino acids required to build the proteins. Under these conditions,

Box 1. Production of the alarmone ppGpp in response to starvation

Starvation is perceived intracellularly by monitoring the decrease of energy for the synthesis of the amino acids needed to charge the tRNAs. When uncharged tRNAs bind the A site of the ribosome, protein cannot be synthesized from mRNA. This situation leads the ribosome-associated protein RelA to use the energy (GTP) assigned for protein formation to produce guanosine pentaphosphate or tetraphosphate [(p)ppGpp], a so-called alarmone (Haseltine & Block, 1973). RelA synthesizes the alarmone due to its pyrophosphokinase activity. RelA transfers the pyrophosphoryl group from ATP or GTP to the 3′ OH of the ribose of either GTP or GDP nucleotides, producing the active form of the alarmone. The reaction consumes high amounts of ATP and GTP (Smith et al., 1980; Sonenshein, 2007). Thus, it is unclear whether the stringent response triggered by the alarmone is due to the action of the molecule itself or due to the decrease of energy caused by its production. Several studies in *E. coli* strongly suggest that ppGpp acts as a signaling molecule (Aizenman et al., 1996; Engelberg-Kulka et al., 1998; Kolodkin-Gal & Engelberg-Kulka, 2006). Whether this is the case for sporulation in *B. subtilis* remains to be elucidated.

is in fact the case for the soil-dwelling microorganism *Myxococcus xanthus*, which forms multicellular aggregates termed fruiting bodies, within which cells differentiate into stress-resistant spores (Konovalova et al., 2009). In *M. xanthus*, amino acid deprivation leads to the accumulation of ppGpp that drives cells to the development of fruiting bodies and thus the formation of spores (Manoil & Kaiser, 1980a,b). Consistent with this, a blockage in the synthesis of ppGpp leads to a defect in fruiting body formation (Harris et al., 1998). Moreover, ectopic expression of the *relA* gene from *E. coli* in *M. xanthus* restores the production of ppGpp and triggers early initiation of fruiting body formation, even in the absence of amino acid starvation (Singer & Kaiser, 1995). These findings indicate that the accumulation of ppGpp is necessary and sufficient to initiate the *M. xanthus* developmental cycle. Likewise, in sporulating soil-dwelling actinomycete genus *Streptomyces*, numerous studies have demonstrated a strong relationship between the production of ppGpp, sporulation and antibiotic production (Hesketh et al., 2007; Ryu et al., 2007).

However, *B. subtilis* can also sporulate in response to other extracellular cues that are not related to nutrient deprivation. For instance, the membrane sensor kinase KinB induces sporulation when bound to the membrane-associated lipoprotein KapB (kinase-associated protein B); yet, the precise signal that triggers the formation of the complex KinB–KapB remains to be elucidated (Trach & Hoch, 1993; Dartois et al., 1996; Dartois et al., 1997). Sporulation is also controlled in a quorum-sensing-dependent manner. *Bacillus subtilis* secretes a pentapeptide, PhrA. When the extracellular concentration of PhrA increases, the peptide is imported into the cell and binds to the phosphatase RapA. The interaction between PhrA and RapA inhibits the activity of the phosphatase, which indirectly targets the master regulator Spo0A∼P (Perego & Hoch, 1996; Perego & Brannigan, 2001). Hence, inhibition of RapA by the formation of the PhrA–RapA complex stabilizes the active form of Spo0A∼P and favors sporulation (Perego et al., 1994). This PhrA–RapA quorum-sensing system works redundantly with other similar systems such as PhrC–RapB and PhrE–RapE. All function to stabilize the phosphorylated form of the master regulator Spo0A. Thus, each of these extracellular peptides favors sporulation (Perego, 2001; Pottathil & Lazazzera, 2003; Stephenson et al., 2003).

Finally, sporulation in *B. subtilis* can also be triggered in response to natural products derived from other soil microorganisms. For instance, the soil genus *Streptomyces* produces a plethora of antimicrobials, some of which act against *Bacillus* species. As both these bacteria live in the soil, it is plausible that *B. subtilis* might have developed a ‘tune sensing’ mechanism to recognize the presence of *Streptomyces*, by detecting its secondary metabolites. Among these are decoyinine or angustmycins, both GMP synthase

Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works

inhibitors that decrease the intracellular energy levels in *B.* subtilis by inhibition of GTP synthesis. Thus, in the presence of decoyinine, *B.* subtilis senses a decrease in energy availability and triggers sporulation (Mitani *et al.*, 1977). Sporulation preserves *B.* subtilis in a dormant state until the other possible antimicrobials produced by Streptomyces have dissipated and *B.* subtilis can grow again.

### Extracellular signaling promotes matrix production: an example of paracrine signaling in a bacterium

Under certain conditions, *B.* subtilis forms multicellular aggregates known as biofilms (Branda *et al.*, 2001). The hallmark of biofilm formation is the production of an extracellular matrix that holds cells together (Branda *et al.*, 2005; Aguilar *et al.*, 2007). Matrix-producing cells specialize to express the protein machinery to secrete the two main components of the matrix: the extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) and the structural matrix-associated protein TasA. Expression of both EPS and TasA is simultaneously triggered by low levels of Spo0A~P (Hamon & Lazazzera, 2001; Branda *et al.*, 2004).

Low levels of Spo0A~P in the cell are reached by the action of two membrane-bound sensor histidine kinases: KinC and D (Hamon & Lazazzera, 2001; Kobayashi *et al.*, 2008). KinD is a canonical membrane kinase with two transmembrane segments connected by a 211 amino acid extracellular sensing domain that is presumably involved in signal recognition and binding to a specific extracellular signal. Given the molecular structure of the kinase, it seems feasible that this kinase might serve to sense a specific extracellular small molecule, such as a peptide or a carbohydrate, via direct binding to the large extracellular sensing domain. Unfortunately, the nature of the signal and the mechanism of kinase activation remain to be elucidated. In contrast to KinD, the membrane kinase KinC harbors two transmembrane segments with no extracellular sensor domain. Instead, KinC has a PAS–PAC sensor domain in the cytoplasmic region of the kinase. We recently described that the PAS–PAC sensor domain of KinC somehow senses the leakage of cytoplasmic potassium cations. Diverse small molecules that are able to form pores in the membrane of the bacterium can induce this potassium leakage. This triggers the phosphorylation of Spo0A~P, which leads to matrix production (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

Because of the nature of the stimulus, the various small molecules identified that induce matrix production via KinC differ vastly in their molecular structure. The only property they share is their ability to cause potassium leakage by making pores in the membrane of *B.* subtilis. Among these molecules are the macrolide polyenes nystatin and amphotericin as well as the peptide antibiotics gramicidin and valinomycin, which are all produced by soil-dwelling bacteria. However, perhaps the most important small molecule described to trigger matrix production via KinC is the self-generated lipopeptide, surfactin (Arima *et al.*, 1968; Kluge *et al.*, 1988; Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). Once produced, surfactin causes the leakage of potassium with the formation of pores in the membrane (Sheppard *et al.*, 1991), and that is sensed as an autoinducer signal to trigger the subpopulation of matrix producers to differentiate. Recognizing the mode of action of a signaling molecule rather than its structure is a remarkable strategy to allow promiscuous sensing of a large number of signals. This mechanism allows *B.* subtilis to respond not only to self-produced molecules but also to natural products secreted by other soil-dwelling organisms.

The production of the quorum-sensing molecule surfactin is tightly regulated by another quorum-sensing pathway that ultimately controls ComA phosphorylation (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a, b) (see Box 2). This sequential quorum-sensing system might serve as a timing mechanism to regulate the activation of diverse metabolic pathways sequentially during the course of development. The initiation of the sequence starts with the production of the peptide pheromone ComX. ComX is sensed by the membrane kinase ComP that

---

**Box 2. Production of the quorum-sensing molecules ComX and Surfactin**

While the two quorum-sensing signals responsible for triggering paracrine signaling in *B.* subtilis, ComX and surfactin, share some similarities in their molecular structure, they are synthesized in a very different fashion. The 11 amino acid pheromone ComX derives from the cleavage of a 55 amino acid precursor, which is the translational product of the gene *comX*. This processed peptide is then prenylated on a Trp residue and secreted into the extracellular milieu (Magnuson *et al.*, 1994; Grossman, 1995; Gibbs, 2005; Okada *et al.*, 2008). The precise mechanism of how the pheromone ComX is processed is unclear. However, there are reports implicating the protein ComQ in this process. ComQ shares a similarity to the proteins related to isoprenoid synthesis and condensation and thus it is likely that ComQ may be involved in the prenylation of the pheromone (Bacon Schneider *et al.*, 2002; Karatas *et al.*, 2003).

In contrast to ComX, the synthesis of surfactin is very well known. Surfactin production is via a nonribosomal peptide synthetase machinery termed SrfAA–AB–AC–AD (henceforth Srf). In this process, multidomain enzymes coordinately catalyze several of the reactions needed to synthesize surfactin (Kluge *et al.*, 1988; Koglin *et al.*, 2008). Activation of the Srf modules requires the action of a phosphopantetheinyl transferase termed Sfp. Sfp transfers a phosphopantetheinyl group to each module to bind and transfer the growing peptide from one module to the other (Quadri *et al.*, 1998; Reuter *et al.*, 1999). Interestingly, the commonly used laboratory strains of *B.* subtilis contain an *sfp* mutation and thus cannot generate surfactin. In addition, similar to the secretion of the pheromone ComX, the mechanism by which surfactin is secreted into the extracellular space is still unknown.

phosphorylates the response regulator ComA. ComA~P activates the expression of the operon responsible for surfactin production (Magnuson *et al.*, 1994). Only after ComX is sensed and surfactin is produced can surfactin go on to trigger matrix production via activation of KinC (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

Most likely, the activation of ComA is subject to some sort of bimodal regulation because only a subpopulation of cells sense ComX and becomes surfactin producers (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). Furthermore, the subpopulation of surfactin producers is different from the subpopulation of cells that respond to surfactin (matrix producers). Therefore, surfactin acts as a unidirectional signal in which one population produces the molecule and another population responds to it by producing extracellular matrix (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d) (see Fig. 3). This mechanism adds more sophistication to the previous concept of ‘quorum sensing’

or ‘autocrine’, where all cells are physiologically similar and thus able to produce the signal and respond to it (Fuqua *et al.*, 1994; Camilli & Bassler, 2006). In the case of surfactin, the signaling can be referred to as paracrine signaling because there is a producing cell that is distinct from the nearby cell that can sense the signal (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

Paracrine signaling is a new concept in bacterial cell–cell communication. This led us to speculate about additional functions of other extracellular signaling mechanisms in bacteria and their possible roles in sensing more than simply population density. For instance, one direct consequence of having multiple extracellular signaling molecules, where the synthesis of one depends on the prior synthesis of the other (like the mechanism of paracrine signaling of *B. subtilis*), is to generate a sequential timing device, in which a cascade of developmental changes are triggered in response to the presence and concentration of different signaling molecules. In that case, the paracrine signaling system of *B. subtilis* can be compared with other autocrine quorum-sensing signaling systems described previously in bacteria. For example, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* possesses two interrelated acyl-homoserine lactone quorum-sensing signaling systems. These systems, the LasR–LasI system and the RhlR–RhlI system, are global regulators of the expression of a large number of genes involved in diverse developmental processes. The analysis of quorum-induced genes suggests that the gene expression is sequential and time-dependent (certain genes are activated early in growth, most genes are activated during the transition and some genes are activated at the stationary phase) (Schuster *et al.*, 2003). Quite recently, it has been reported that the production of the extracellular signal, *p*-coumaroyl-homoserinelactone, that activates the quorum-sensing system in *Rhodopseudomonas palustris* was dependent on the presence of coumaric acid in the medium (Schaefer *et al.*, 2008). In this case, the sequential activation of the quorum-sensing system relies on the presence of an environmental small molecule (coumaric acid) derived from the degradation of lignin polymers that constitute the plant material. This possibly represents a time-dependent mechanism to respond to the presence of lignin in the soil.

---

**Extracellular signaling promotes competence**

Competence is a developmental state in which cells become capable of uptaking external DNA (Dubnau, 1991, 1999). This process is thought to promote genetic variability among the bacterial community. *Bacillus subtilis* possesses the genetic cascade to induce competence in its genome; however, the process is initiated in only a small subpopulation of cells (Avery, 2005). The proportion of competent cells strongly depends on the strain as well as the

Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works

environmental conditions. The domesticated 168 strain produces a relatively large subpopulation of competent cells, probably as a consequence of the fact that competence was a selected trait (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a,b; D'Souza *et al.*, 1994; Hamoen *et al.*, 1995; Smits *et al.*, 2005; Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

The genetic cascade that induces competence in *B. subtilis* initiates with the same pathway as surfactin production. When the pheromone ComX is sensed by ComP, it activates the transcriptional regulator ComA by phosphorylation. As described above, ComA~P triggers the expression of the surfactin operon *srfAA-AD* (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a,b). The expression of the surfactin operon *srfAA-AD* in this specific subpopulation also results in the expression of a small ORF embedded within the *srfAA-AD* operon termed *comS*. The product of this ORF, the intracellular ComS peptide, indirectly activates a second regulator ComK, which is ultimately necessary for competence in *B. subtilis* (Nakano *et al.*, 1991a,b; D'Souza *et al.*, 1994; Magnuson *et al.*, 1994; van Sinderen *et al.*, 1995). All surfactin-producing cells are licensed to become competent cells, as all of them produce ComS. However, the activation of ComK is subject to a bimodal regulation (Smits *et al.*, 2005), which allows only a fraction of surfactin-producing cells to differentiate into competent cells.

Activation of both competence and surfactin production shares the same extracellular signal, the pheromone ComX. It is worth mentioning that the amino acid sequence of ComX shows a polymorphism between numerous strains of *B. subtilis*. Quite interestingly, the extracellular recognition domain of the kinase ComP accurately recognizes the pheromone that belongs specifically to each strain, rejecting the other variants (Tran *et al.*, 2000; Tortosa *et al.*, 2001; Ansaldi *et al.*, 2002). This restrictive system of extracellular signaling allows *B. subtilis* to tightly control differentiation and trigger competence only in the presence of compatible strains. In this way, the recipient strain has ensured the genetic variability via acquisition of genomic alterations (point mutations, insertion, deletions or gene replacements) without compromising the integrity of the community by acquiring genes that might be detrimental.

*Bacillus subtilis* counteracts the extreme selectivity in recognizing the pheromone ComX with a more promiscuous extracellular signaling system driven by the quorum-sensing pentapeptide competence and sporulation stimulation factor (CSF, also known as PhrC; see Box 3). CSF is secreted into the extracellular milieu and when concentrations are high enough, it is imported. Once inside the cells, CSF binds to and inhibits the phosphatase RapC. RapC functions to dephosphorylate the active form of the transcriptional regulator ComA (Lazazzera *et al.*, 1997, 1999). Thus, the internalization of CSF inhibits RapC and stabilizes the active form of the master regulator ComA~P. The quorum-

---

**Box 3. Production of the quorum-sensing peptide PhrC**

The Phr signaling pentapeptides are secreted by *B. subtilis* to control diverse metabolic processes in a quorum-sensing manner. Although much is known about the mechanism of action of these quorum-sensing peptides, relatively little is known about how the peptides are processed into mature signaling molecules.

Of the known Phr peptides, PhrC (or CSF) is the best characterized. CSF is derived from Pre-PhrC, a 40 amino acid precursor encoded by *phrC* (Lazazzera *et al.*, 1999). The precursor Pre-PhrC has an N-terminal signal sequence for its export, presumably using a Sec-dependent export pathway (Stephenson *et al.*, 2003). Once it is secreted, the precursor peptide is processed by the action of several serine proteases associated with the cell envelope (subtilisin, Epr and Vpr). The action of these exoproteases releases the last five residues of the precursor Pre-PhrC (sequence, ERGMT) as the active form of the CSF (Lanigan-Gerdes *et al.*, 2007, 2008). This pentapeptide molecule accumulates extracellularly until the concentration is high enough to be imported via the Opp membrane-associated oligopeptide permease (Lazazzera *et al.*, 1997).

---

sensing molecule CSF is a conserved signaling peptide, and yet it is broadly recognized as a competence extracellular signal in the genus *Bacillus* (Pottathil *et al.*, 2008).

The pathway to the induction of competence in *B. subtilis* is remarkably similar to the pathway presented in the gram-positive pathogen *Streptococcus pneumoniae* (Claverys *et al.*, 2006). In both cases, the genetic cascade of competence is activated by a small peptide pheromone via activation of a two-component regulatory system (Stock *et al.*, 2000). It is worth mentioning that, although the activation of competence in *S. pneumoniae* was one of the first examples of bacterial quorum-sensing systems to be described (Havarstein *et al.*, 1996; Morrison, 1997; Alloing *et al.*, 1998), it is still controversial. Traditionally, the term ‘quorum sensing’ refers to the production of an ‘autoinducer’ molecule that accumulates extracellularly to certain concentrations before triggering gene expression changes (Camilli & Bassler, 2006; Ng & Bassler, 2009). In contrast to this term, the induction of competence in *B. subtilis* and *S. pneumoniae* seems to be concentration independent, and for this reason, the term ‘pheromones’ has been used for these signaling peptides.

However, the *B. subtilis* and *S. pneumoniae* systems differ in several ways. For instance, *S. pneumoniae* competence is inhibited when the stationary phase is reached, in contrast to *B. subtilis*, where competence is initiated during the stationary phase (Grossman, 1995; Claverys & Havarstein, 2002; Hamoen *et al.*, 2003). Additionally, the competence system in *S. pneumoniae* is activated in the presence of small concentrations of antimicrobials such as mitomycin C and aminoglycoside and quinolone antibiotics (Prudhomme *et al.*, 2006). These results support the hypothesis that competence in *S. pneumoniae* is a general stress response probably to counteract DNA damage (Claverys *et al.*, 2006).
In B. subtilis, the failure of mitomycin C to induce competence suggested that activation of competence for DNA-repair purposes did not occur in this bacterial model (Redfield, 1993).

### Extracellular signaling promotes cannibalism

Bacillus subtilis responds to nutrient depletion by sporulating. However, sporulation is a time- and energy-consuming process into which cells do not enter lightly. In order to delay the commitment to initiate sporulation under nutrient-limited conditions, *B. subtilis* differentiates a subpopulation of specialized cells termed cannibals. Cannibal cells secrete two peptide toxins, Skf and Sdp, while at the same time expressing the immunity machinery to resist the action of these toxins. The toxins kill their sensitive siblings in a process termed cannibalism because the dead cells can be used as food to temporarily overcome the nutritional limitation and delay the onset of sporulation (Gonzalez-Pastor *et al.*, 2003; Ellermeier *et al.*, 2006; Claverys & Havarstein, 2007).

The expression of the Skf and Sdp toxins is positively regulated by the transcriptional regulator Spo0A, when the cell has low levels of Spo0A~P (Fujita *et al.*, 2005). Spo0A~P directly induces the expression of the operon responsible for Skf production (*skfA–H*) and indirectly, by repressing the repressor AbrB, induces the expression of the operon responsible for Sdp production (*sdpABC*). Because both cannibalism and matrix production are triggered by low levels of Spo0A~P, the expression of cannibalism and matrix production have been reported to occur in the same subpopulation of cells. This subpopulation specializes to produce the extracellular matrix required for biofilm formation at the same time that the cannibalism toxins and the immunity to the action of the toxins are expressed. Additionally, as described for matrix production, the differentiation of cannibal cells is also triggered by the quorum-sensing signal surfactin (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d).

Because only cells that have achieved high enough levels of Spo0A~P express the cannibalism genes, any cells that do not have Spo0A~P will be sensitive to the toxins and lyse. The nutrients released by these lysed cells are used to promote the growth of the matrix producers/cannibals, because those are the only cells immune to the action of the cannibalism toxins. In this way, the representation of matrix producers within the community increases, allowing them to thrive at the expense of the rest of the cell types (sporulation is delayed and the other cell types are killed).

Cannibalism might resemble other programmed cell death (PCD) mechanisms that eliminate cell types no longer required for the development of the community (Engelberg-Kulka *et al.*, 2006). For instance, the formation of fruiting bodies in *M. xanthus* requires a coordinated PCD mechanism to kill a portion of cells before the differentiation of myxospores (Nariya & Inouye, 2008). In *S. pneumoniae*, PCD is exhibited in the population of competent cells. They kill noncompetent siblings present in the same niche (Guiral *et al.*, 2005; Claverys *et al.*, 2007). Interestingly, PCD in *S. pneumoniae* is triggered by excess of nutrients rather than starvation, arguing in favor of other functions besides nutrient release that are associated with PCD in bacteria. The antimicrobial action of the toxins promotes the survival of a sustainable subpopulation in all the examples above while eliminating other subpopulations that are no longer required (Lewis, 2000; Claverys & Havarstein, 2007). Based on this idea, an additional role for PCD in *B. subtilis* bacteria would be to promote the growth of the subpopulation of matrix producers and boost the production of extracellular matrix.

Cannibalism in *B. subtilis* may also play a role in relation to the paracrine signaling system we described above that regulates the differentiation of matrix producers/cannibals (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). The subpopulation of cells that produce surfactin (the molecule responsible for the differentiation of matrix producers/cannibals) will also benefit from cannibalism. Because a fraction of surfactin producers will ultimately differentiate into competent cells, they might take up the DNA released when cells are killed by the cannibalism toxins (Fig. 3). Interestingly, we predict that competent cells might become immune to the cannibalism toxins by entering into a state of semi-dormancy termed the K-state. This state is similar to persister cells described in other organisms, as cells in the K-state are resistant to the action of antibiotics (Berka *et al.*, 2002; Maamar & Dubnau, 2005; Leisner *et al.*, 2007).

Not only is *B. subtilis* susceptible to the cannibalism toxins that it produces but also other organisms produce extracellular cationic antimicrobial peptides, which may be similar to the cannibalism toxins and that could mimic cannibalism in *B. subtilis*. This is indeed the case for the antimicrobial nisin and probably other similar antimicrobials found in natural habitats (Lopez *et al.*, 2009a–d). Much like what was observed for the cannibalism toxins, treatment of *B. subtilis* with nisin preferentially kills cells that have not yet expressed the cannibalism toxins, allowing the subpopulation of matrix producers/cannibals to thrive. The ultimate result is a stronger biofilm that secretes an arsenal of toxins to kill neighboring bacteria that may be competing for the same resources. Consistent with this, it has been reported that *B. subtilis* preferentially uses the Skf and Sdp cannibalism toxins to kill other bacteria rather than itself, when it has been grown in mixed cultures (Lin *et al.*, 2001; Nandy *et al.*, 2007). Future investigations should address the possible role of the cannibalism toxins in multispecies biofilms such as those that are likely to be found in nature.
Extracellular signaling in *Bacillus subtilis*

### Extracellular signaling promotes exoprotease production

A key feature in the natural behavior of *B. subtilis* is the ability to secrete degradative enzymes into the extracellular milieu. Exoproteases such as subtilisin (encoded by *aprE*), bacillopeptidase (encoded by *bpr*) or the polysaccharide-degrading exoenzyme levansucrase (encoded by *sacB*) are some examples of the secreted enzymes that degrade exogenous proteins and polysaccharides into smaller molecules that can be assimilated by the cells (Msadek *et al.*, 1990; Msadek, 1999). Secretion of the degradative enzymes occurs from the specialization of a subpopulation of cells we have designated as ‘miners’, because they work by breaking down large biopolymers into small molecules to be consumed by the community (Veening *et al.*, 2008a,b).

The differentiation of cells into miners is initiated by phosphorylation of the transcriptional regulator DegU. DegU~P activates exoprotease production while simultaneously inhibiting motility (Kunst *et al.*, 1994; Amati *et al.*, 2004; Kobayashi, 2007; Verhamme *et al.*, 2007). Phosphorylation of DegU is controlled by the cytoplasmic sensor kinase DegS (Dahl *et al.*, 1991). DegS responds to external stimuli such as carbon, phosphate or amino acid starvation (Kunst & Rapoport, 1995). Thus, amino acid starvation causes the differentiation of the miners, which break extracellular proteins and provide amino acids to the cells. The mechanism of how DegS senses amino acid starvation is not understood, but it probably senses key metabolites in a manner similar to what we described for sporulation. For instance, a scarcity of amino acids causes a blockage of protein synthesis, triggering the production of ppGpp (Sonenshein, 2007). Consistent with this, the ppGpp alarmone and the gene *relA* that is responsible for its synthesis have been reported to positively regulate the expression of the exoprotease genes. Yet, other processes of regulation need to be taken into consideration to explain a possible regulatory effect of ppGpp in the transcription of *degU* (Hata *et al.*, 2001).

In addition to the production of exoproteases in response to stress, an increase in the concentration of extracellular salts also drives *B. subtilis* to induce the production of exoproteases. This effect has been reported to be dependent on the two-component signaling system DegS–U, as described previously for other environmental stresses, such as amino acid starvation (Kunst & Rapoport, 1995; Dartois *et al.*, 1998). Moreover, the increase in the concentration of extracellular salt seems to be a widespread signal for different genera of bacteria to trigger exoprotease production (Foucaud-Scheunemann & Poquet, 2003; Wonderling *et al.*, 2004; Gabdrakhmanova *et al.*, 2005).

In addition to amino acid starvation, protein synthesis can also be inhibited by the presence of sublethal concentrations of small molecules that affect the integrity of the ribosome. Lincomycin, erythromycin and chloramphenicol are some examples of antimicrobials that target the function of the ribosome. When the ribosome is targeted by these antimicrobials, there is an inhibition of ppGpp production and a subsequent decrease in the expression of genes responsible for exoprotease production (Arai *et al.*, 2003). Alternatively, inhibition of protein synthesis caused by the action of lincomycin might increase the concentration of cytoplasmic amino acids and in this way repress the pathway to the differentiation of miners.

Exoprotease production is also regulated by a quorum-sensing mechanism driven by the secretion of the pentapeptide PhrG. Once extracellular PhrG reaches high concentrations, it is imported into the cells and binds and inhibits the phosphatase RapG. Inhibition of RapG releases the master regulator DegU from the phosphatase activity of RapG and so DegU~P accumulates and allows exoprotease production (Ogura *et al.*, 2003).

In addition to regulating exoprotease production, it has also been reported that the activation of the master regulator DegU affects other developmental processes, such as matrix production. The interconnection is probably via DegU~P-dependent expression of two DegU-regulated genes identified recently. These genes encode for a putative membrane-bound lipoprotein (YvcA) and a secreted protein (YuaB), but the role of these two proteins in the process of biofilm formation is still unknown (Murray *et al.*, 2009; Verhamme *et al.*, 2009).

### Overall picture

Differentiation of distinct cell types in *B. subtilis* is necessary for the proper development of the bacterial community. This differentiation is regulated, at least partially, by sensing several extracellular signals. Most of these signals are produced by *B. subtilis* itself. Secretion and sensing of these extracellular signals might regulate the timing of development in concordance with the surroundings. In this manner, the production of extracellular signals and the consequent differentiation of cells can be classified into three sequential steps in development as we have illustrated in Fig. 4. The first step would be a stage of exponential growth, in which a large portion of the community would differentiate into motile cells. At this point, the concentrations of the quorum-sensing signals ComX and surfactin are insufficient to trigger the differentiation of other cell types. In the next step, cells are entering the stationary phase, and ComX triggers the differentiation of surfactin producers and competent cells. Once surfactin is produced, it is sensed by other cells, which respond by differentiating into matrix producers/cannibals. These subpopulations are physiologically distinct from the initial population of motile cells. Thus, as they

CSF from other  
Bacillus species  

Nystatin  
Amphotericin  
Valinomycin  
Gramicidin  

Nisin  

ComX  

Surfactin  

Skf Sdp  

Nutrients  

Lincomycin  
Erythromycin  
Chloramphenicol  

DNA  

ppGpp  

ATP/GTP  

Decoyinine  



Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the overall process of cell differentiation in *Bacillus subtilis*. The scheme shows the differentiation process for all the cell types so far described to occur in multicellular communities of *B. subtilis*. The signals involved in the differentiation of the subpopulations are represented and their actions are marked with an arrow. Because cannibals are described to be the same subpopulation as matrix producers, both cell types are represented with an equal sign. Other extracellular signals derived from different microorganisms that participate in the signaling mechanism to cell differentiation in *B. subtilis* are represented in blue.



arise, the proportion of motile cells decreases. Finally, in the last step of the development, nutrients are exhausted and the production of secondary messengers such as ppGpp, along with other starvation-related signals, would trigger sporulation in some cells as well as a subpopulation of exoprotease-producing miners.

To ensure that the timing of the development is appropriate for the particular environmental conditions, this cell differentiation program is also capable of sensing other small molecules produced by diverse soil organisms. As shown in Fig. 4, different natural products secreted from a large variety of organisms can induce the activation of the three master regulators that control differentiation of the distinct cell types described in this review. This is an efficient mechanism for *B. subtilis* to adapt its development to a particular environmental niche in which other microorganisms coexist.


### References

Aguilar C, Vlamakis H, Losick R & Kolter R (2007) Thinking about *Bacillus subtilis* as a multicellular organism. *Curr Opin Microbiol* 10: 638–643.

Aizenman E, Engelberg-Kulka H & Glaser G (1996) An *Escherichia coli* chromosomal ‘addiction module’ regulated by guanosine [corrected] 3′,5′-bispyrophosphate: a model for programmed bacterial cell death. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 93: 6059–6063.

Alloing G, Martin B, Granadel C & Claverys JP (1998) Development of competence in *Streptococcus pneumoniae*: pheromone autoinduction and control of quorum sensing by the oligopeptide permease. *Mol Microbiol* 29: 75–83.

Amati G, Bisicchia P & Galizzi A (2004) DegU-P represses expression of the motility *fla-che* operon in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 186: 6003–6014.

Ansaldi M, Marolt D, Stebe T, Mandic-Mulec I & Dubnau D (2002) Specific activation of the *Bacillus* quorum-sensing systems by isoprenylated pheromone variants. *Mol Microbiol* 44: 1561–1573.

Arai A, Kawachi E, Hata M, Ogura M & Tanaka T (2003) Inhibition of *Bacillus subtilis aprE* expression by lincomycin at the posttranscriptional level through inhibition of ppGpp synthesis. *J Biochem* 134: 691–697.

Arima K, Kakinuma A & Tamura G (1968) Surfactin, a crystalline peptide lipid surfactant produced by *Bacillus subtilis*: isolation, characterization and its inhibition of fibrin clot formation. *Biochem Bioph Res Co* 31: 488–494.

Artsimovitch I, Patlan V, Sekine S *et al.* (2004) Structural basis for transcription regulation by alarmone ppGpp. *Cell* 117: 299–310.

Auchtung JM, Lee CA & Grossman AD (2006) Modulation of the ComA-dependent quorum response in *Bacillus subtilis* by multiple Rap proteins and Phr peptides. *J Bacteriol* 188: 5273–5285.

Avery SV (2005) Cell individuality: the bistability of competence development. *Trends Microbiol* 13: 459–462.


Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies  
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works

Bacon Schneider K, Palmer TM & Grossman AD (2002) Characterization of comQ and comX, two genes required for production of ComX pheromone in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 184: 410–419.

Bennett HJ, Pearce DM, Glenn S et al. (2007) Characterization of relA and codY mutants of Listeria monocytogenes: identification of the CodY regulon and its role in virulence. Mol Microbiol 63: 1453–1467.

Berka RM, Hahn J, Albano M et al. (2002) Microarray analysis of the Bacillus subtilis K-state: genome-wide expression changes dependent on ComK. Mol Microbiol 43: 1331–1345.

Bongiorni C, Ishikawa S, Stephenson S, Ogasawara N & Perego M (2005) Synergistic regulation of competence development in Bacillus subtilis by two Rap–Phr systems. J Bacteriol 187: 4353–4361.

Branda SS, Gonzalez-Pastor JE, Ben-Yehuda S, Losick R & Kolter R (2001) Fruiting body formation by Bacillus subtilis. P Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 11621–11626.

Branda SS, Gonzalez-Pastor JE, Dervyn E, Ehrlich SD, Losick R & Kolter R (2004) Genes involved in formation of structured multicellular communities by Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 186: 3970–3979.

Branda SS, Vik S, Friedman L & Kolter R (2005) Biofilms: the matrix revisited. Trends Microbiol 13: 20–26.

Burbulys D, Trach KA & Hoch JA (1991) Initiation of sporulation in B. subtilis is controlled by a multicomponent phosphorelay. Cell 64: 545–552.

Camilli A & Bassler BL (2006) Bacterial small-molecule signaling pathways. Science 311: 1113–1116.

Casadesus J & D’Ari R (2002) Memory in bacteria and phage. Bioessays 24: 512–518.

Chai Y, Chu F, Kolter R & Losick R (2008) Bistability and biofilm formation in Bacillus subtilis. Mol Microbiol 67: 254–263.

Chung JD, Stephanopoulos G, Ireton K & Grossman AD (1994) Gene expression in single cells of Bacillus subtilis: evidence that a threshold mechanism controls the initiation of sporulation. J Bacteriol 176: 1977–1984.

Claverys JP & Havarstein LS (2002) Extracellular-peptide control of competence for genetic transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Front Biosci 7: d1798–d1814.

Claverys JP & Havarstein LS (2007) Cannibalism and fratricide: mechanisms and raisons d’etre. Nat Rev Microbiol 5: 219–229.

Claverys JP, Prudhomme M & Martin B (2006) Induction of competence regulons as a general response to stress in gram-positive bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 60: 451–475.

Claverys JP, Martin B & Havarstein LS (2007) Competence-induced fratricide in streptococci. Mol Microbiol 64: 1423–1433.

Dahl MK, Msadek T, Kunst F & Rapoport G (1991) Mutational analysis of the Bacillus subtilis DegU regulator and its phosphorylation by the DegS protein kinase. J Bacteriol 173: 2539–2547.

Dartois V, Djavakhishvili T & Hoch JA (1996) Identification of a membrane protein involved in activation of the KinB pathway to sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 178: 1178–1186.


Dartois V, Djavakhishvili T & Hoch JA (1997) KapB is a lipoprotein required for KinB signal transduction and activation of the phosphorelay to sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Mol Microbiol 26: 1097–1108.

Dartois V, Debarbouille M, Kunst F & Rapoport G (1998) Characterization of a novel member of the DegS–DegU regulon affected by salt stress in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 180: 1855–1861.

D’Souza C, Nakano MM & Zuber P (1994) Identification of comS, a gene of the srfA operon that regulates the establishment of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. P Natl Acad Sci USA 91: 9397–9401.

Dubnau D (1991) Genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. Microbiol Rev 55: 395–424.

Dubnau D (1999) DNA uptake in bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 53: 217–244.

Dubnau D & Losick R (2006) Bistability in bacteria. Mol Microbiol 61: 564–572.

Ellermeier CD, Hobbs EC, Gonzalez-Pastor JE & Losick R (2006) A three-protein signaling pathway governing immunity to a bacterial cannibalism toxin. Cell 124: 549–559.

Engelberg-Kulka H, Reches M, Narasimhan S, Schoulaker-Schwarz R, Klemes Y, Aizenman E & Glaser G (1998) rexB of bacteriophage lambda is an anti-cell death gene. P Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 15481–15486.

Engelberg-Kulka H, Amitai S, Kolodkin-Gal I & Hazan R (2006) Bacterial programmed cell death and multicellular behavior in bacteria. PLoS Genet 2: e135.

Eswaramoorthy P, Guo T & Fujita M (2009) In vivo domain-based functional analysis of the major sporulation sensor kinase, KinA, in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 191: 5358–5368.

Eymann C, Homuth G, Scharf C & Hecker M (2002) Bacillus subtilis functional genomics: global characterization of the stringent response by proteome and transcriptome analysis. J Bacteriol 184: 2500–2520.

Ferullo DJ & Lovett ST (2008) The stringent response and cell cycle arrest in Escherichia coli. PLoS Genet 4: e1000300.

Foucaud-Scheunemann C & Poquet I (2003) HtrA is a key factor in the response to specific stress conditions in Lactococcus lactis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 224: 53–59.

Freese E (1972) Sporulation of bacilli, a model of cellular differentiation. Curr Top Dev Biol 7: 85–124.

Fujita M, Gonzalez-Pastor JE & Losick R (2005) High- and low-threshold genes in the Spo0A regulon of Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 187: 1357–1368.

Fuqua WC, Winans SC & Greenberg EP (1994) Quorum sensing in bacteria: the LuxR–LuxI family of cell density-responsive transcriptional regulators. J Bacteriol 176: 269–275.

Gabdrakhmanova L, Vishniakov I, Sharipova M, Balaban N, Kostrov S & Leshchinskaya I (2005) Salt stress induction of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis in Bacillus intermedius. Microbiol Res 160: 233–242.

Gibbs RA (2005) Trp modification signals a quorum. Nat Chem Biol 1: 7–8.

Gonzalez-Pastor JE, Hobbs EC & Losick R (2003) Cannibalism by sporulating bacteria. *Science* 301: 510–513.

Grossman AD (1995) Genetic networks controlling the initiation of sporulation and the development of genetic competence in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Annu Rev Genet* 29: 477–508.

Guiral S, Mitchell TJ, Martin B & Claverys JP (2005) Competence-programmed predation of noncompetent cells in the human pathogen *Streptococcus pneumoniae*: genetic requirements. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 8710–8715.

Hamoen LW, Eshuis H, Jongbloed J, Venema G & van Sinderen D (1995) A small gene, designated *comS*, located within the coding region of the fourth amino acid-activation domain of *srfA*, is required for competence development in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 15: 55–63.

Hamoen LW, Venema G & Kuipers OP (2003) Controlling competence in *Bacillus subtilis*: shared use of regulators. *Microbiology* 149: 9–17.

Hamon MA & Lazazzera BA (2001) The sporulation transcription factor Spo0A is required for biofilm development in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 42: 1199–1209.

Handke LD, Shivers RP & Sonenshein AL (2008) Interaction of *Bacillus subtilis* CodY with GTP. *J Bacteriol* 190: 798–806.

Harris BZ, Kaiser D & Singer M (1998) The guanosine nucleotide (p)ppGpp initiates development and A-factor production in *Myxococcus xanthus*. *Gene Dev* 12: 1022–1035.

Haseltine WA & Block R (1973) Synthesis of guanosine tetra- and pentaphosphate requires the presence of a codon-specific, uncharged transfer ribonucleic acid in the acceptor site of ribosomes. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 70: 1564–1568.

Hata M, Ogura M & Tanaka T (2001) Involvement of stringent factor RelA in expression of the alkaline protease gene *aprE* in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 183: 4648–4651.

Havarstein LS, Gaustad P, Nes IF & Morrison DA (1996) Identification of the streptococcal competence-pheromone receptor. *Mol Microbiol* 21: 863–869.

Hayashi K, Kensuke T, Kobayashi K, Ogasawara N & Ogura M (2006) *Bacillus subtilis* RghR (YvaN) represses rapG and rapH, which encode inhibitors of expression of the *srfA* operon. *Mol Microbiol* 59: 1714–1729.

Hesketh A, Chen WJ, Ryding J, Chang S & Bibb M (2007) The global role of ppGpp synthesis in morphological differentiation and antibiotic production in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). *Genome Biol* 8: R161.

Inaoka T & Ochi K (2002) RelA protein is involved in induction of genetic competence in certain *Bacillus subtilis* strains by moderating the level of intracellular GTP. *J Bacteriol* 184: 3923–3930.

Ishikawa S, Core L & Perego M (2002) Biochemical characterization of aspartyl phosphate phosphatase interaction with a phosphorylated response regulator and its inhibition by a pentapeptide. *J Biol Chem* 277: 20483–20489.

Jacob F & Monod J (1961) Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins. *J Mol Biol* 3: 318–356.


Jiang M, Grau R & Perego M (2000a) Differential processing of propeptide inhibitors of Rap phosphatases in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 182: 303–310.

Jiang M, Shao W, Perego M & Hoch JA (2000b) Multiple histidine kinases regulate entry into stationary phase and sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 38: 535–542.

Karatas AY, Cetin S & Ozcengiz G (2003) The effects of insertional mutations in *comQ, comP, srfA, spo0H, spo0A* and *abrB* genes on bacilysin biosynthesis in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1626: 51–56.

Kearns DB (2008) Division of labour during *Bacillus subtilis* biofilm formation. *Mol Microbiol* 67: 229–231.

Kearns DB & Losick R (2005) Cell population heterogeneity during growth of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Gene Dev* 19: 3083–3094.

Kluge B, Vater J, Salnikow J & Eckart K (1988) Studies on the biosynthesis of surfactin, a lipopeptide antibiotic from *Bacillus subtilis* ATCC 21332. *FEBS Lett* 231: 107–110.

Kobayashi K (2007) Gradual activation of the response regulator DegU controls serial expression of genes for flagellum formation and biofilm formation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 66: 395–409.

Kobayashi K, Kuwana R & Takamatsu H (2008) *kinA* mRNA is missing a stop codon in the undomesticated *Bacillus subtilis* strain ATCC 6051. *Microbiology* 154: 54–63.

Koglin A, Lohr F, Bernhard F *et al.* (2008) Structural basis for the selectivity of the external thioesterase of the surfactin synthetase. *Nature* 454: 907–911.

Kolodkin-Gal I & Engelberg-Kulka H (2006) Induction of *Escherichia coli* chromosomal *mazEF* by stressful conditions causes an irreversible loss of viability. *J Bacteriol* 188: 3420–3423.

Konovalova A, Petters T & Sogaard-Andersen L (2009) Extracellular biology of *Myxococcus xanthus*. *FEMS Microb Rev*. DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2009.00194.x.

Kudoh J, Ikeuchi T & Kurahashi K (1984) Identification of the sporulation gene *spoOA* product of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Biochem Bioph Res Co* 122: 1104–1109.

Kunst F & Rapoport G (1995) Salt stress is an environmental signal affecting degradative enzyme synthesis in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 177: 2403–2407.

Kunst F, Msadek T, Bignon J & Rapoport G (1994) The DegS/DegU and ComP/ComA two-component systems are part of a network controlling degradative enzyme synthesis and competence in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Res Microbiol* 145: 393–402.

Lanigan-Gerdes S, Dooley AN, Faull KF & Lazazzera BA (2007) Identification of subtilisin, Epr and Vpr as enzymes that produce CSF, an extracellular signalling peptide of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 65: 1321–1333.

Lanigan-Gerdes S, Briceno G, Dooley AN, Faull KF & Lazazzera BA (2008) Identification of residues important for cleavage of the extracellular signaling peptide CSF of *Bacillus subtilis* from its precursor protein. *J Bacteriol* 190: 6668–6675.

Lazazzera BA (2001) The intracellular function of extracellular signaling peptides. *Peptides* 22: 1519–1527.

Lazazzera BA, Solomon JM & Grossman AD (1997) An exported peptide functions intracellularly to contribute to cell density signaling in *B. subtilis*. *Cell* 89: 917–925.

Lazazzera BA, Kurtser IG, McQuade RS & Grossman AD (1999) An autoregulatory circuit affecting peptide signaling in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 181: 5193–5200.

LeDeaux JR, Yu N & Grossman AD (1995) Different roles for KinA, KinB, and KinC in the initiation of sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 177: 861–863.

Leisner M, Stingl K, Radler JO & Maier B (2007) Basal expression rate of comK sets a ‘switching-window’ into the K-state of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 63: 1806–1816.

Lewis K (2000) Programmed death in bacteria. *Microbiol Mol Biol R* 64: 503–514.

Lin D, Qu LJ, Gu H & Chen Z (2001) A 3.1-kb genomic fragment of *Bacillus subtilis* encodes the protein inhibiting growth of *Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae*. *J Appl Microbiol* 91: 1044–1050.

Lopez D, Fischbach MA, Chu F, Losick R & Kolter R (2009a) Structurally diverse natural products that cause potassium leakage trigger multicellularity in *Bacillus subtilis*. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 106: 280–285.

Lopez D, Vlamakis H & Kolter R (2009b) Generation of multiple cell types in *Bacillus subtilis*. *FEMS Microbiol Rev* 33: 152–163.

Lopez D, Vlamakis H, Losick R & Kolter R (2009c) Paracrine signaling in a bacterium. *Gene Dev* 23: 1631–1638.

Lopez D, Vlamakis H, Losick R & Kolter R (2009d) Cannibalism enhances biofilm development in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 74: 609–618.

Maamar H & Dubnau D (2005) Bistability in the *Bacillus subtilis* K-state (competence) system requires a positive feedback loop. *Mol Microbiol* 56: 615–624.

Magnuson R, Solomon J & Grossman AD (1994) Biochemical and genetic characterization of a competence pheromone from *B. subtilis*. *Cell* 77: 207–216.

Manganelli R (2007) Polyphosphate and stress response in mycobacteria. *Mol Microbiol* 65: 258–260.

Manoil C & Kaiser D (1980a) Accumulation of guanosine tetraphosphate and guanosine pentaphosphate in *Myxococcus xanthus* during starvation and myxospore formation. *J Bacteriol* 141: 297–304.

Manoil C & Kaiser D (1980b) Guanosine pentaphosphate and guanosine tetraphosphate accumulation and induction of *Myxococcus xanthus* fruiting body development. *J Bacteriol* 141: 305–315.

McQuade RS, Comella N & Grossman AD (2001) Control of a family of phosphatase regulatory genes (phr) by the alternate sigma factor sigma-H of *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 183: 4905–4909.

Mitani T, Heinze JE & Freese E (1977) Induction of sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis* by decoyinine or hadacidin. *Biochem Bioph Res Co* 77: 1118–1125.

Morrison DA (1997) Streptococcal competence for genetic transformation: regulation by peptide pheromones. *Microb Drug Resist* 3: 27–37.


Msadek T (1999) When the going gets tough: survival strategies and environmental signaling networks in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Trends Microbiol* 7: 201–207.

Msadek T, Kunst F, Henner D, Klier A, Rapoport G & Dedonder R (1990) Signal transduction pathway controlling synthesis of a class of degradative enzymes in *Bacillus subtilis*: expression of the regulatory genes and analysis of mutations in *degS* and *degU*. *J Bacteriol* 172: 824–834.

Murray EJ, Kiley TB & Stanley-Wall NR (2009) A pivotal role for the response regulator DegU in controlling multicellular behaviour. *Microbiology* 155: 1–8.

Nakano MM, Magnuson R, Myers A, Curry J, Grossman AD & Zuber P (1991a) *srfA* is an operon required for surfactin production, competence development, and efficient sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 173: 1770–1778.

Nakano MM, Xia LA & Zuber P (1991b) Transcription initiation region of the *srfA* operon, which is controlled by the *comP-comA* signal transduction system in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 173: 5487–5493.

Nandy SK, Bapat PM & Venkatesh KV (2007) Sporulating bacteria prefers predation to cannibalism in mixed cultures. *FEBS Lett* 581: 151–156.

Nariya H & Inouye M (2008) MazF, an mRNA interferase, mediates programmed cell death during multicellular *Myxococcus* development. *Cell* 132: 55–66.

Ng WL & Bassler BL (2009) Bacterial quorum-sensing network architectures. *Annu Rev Genet* 43: 197–222.

Nishino T, Gallant J, Shalit P, Palmer L & Wehr T (1979) Regulatory nucleotides involved in the Rel function of *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 140: 671–679.

Novick A & Weiner M (1957) Enzyme Induction as an all-or-none phenomenon. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 43: 553–566.

Ochi K, Kandala JC & Freese E (1981) Initiation of *Bacillus subtilis* sporulation by the stringent response to partial amino acid deprivation. *J Biol Chem* 256: 6866–6875.

Ochi K, Kandala J & Freese E (1982) Evidence that *Bacillus subtilis* sporulation induced by the stringent response is caused by the decrease in GTP or GDP. *J Bacteriol* 151: 1062–1065.

Ogura M, Shimane K, Asai K, Ogasawara N & Tanaka T (2003) Binding of response regulator DegU to the *aprE* promoter is inhibited by RapG, which is counteracted by extracellular PhrG in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 49: 1685–1697.

Okada M, Yamaguchi H, Sato I, Tsuji F, Dubnau D & Sakagami Y (2008) Chemical structure of posttranslational modification with a farnesyl group on tryptophan. *Biosci Biotech Bioch* 72: 914–918.

Perego M (2001) A new family of aspartyl phosphate phosphatases targeting the sporulation transcription factor Spo0A of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 42: 133–143.

Perego M & Brannigan JA (2001) Pentapeptide regulation of aspartyl-phosphate phosphatases. *Peptides* 22: 1541–1547.

Perego M & Hoch JA (1996) Cell–cell communication regulates the effects of protein aspartate phosphatases on the phosphorelay controlling development in *Bacillus subtilis*. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 93: 1549–1553.

Perego M, Cole SP, Burbulys D, Trach K & Hoch JA (1989) Characterization of the gene for a protein kinase which phosphorylates the sporulation-regulatory proteins Spo0A and Spo0F of *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 171: 6187–6196.

Perego M, Hanstein C, Welsh KM, Djavakhishvili T, Glaser P & Hoch JA (1994) Multiple protein-aspartate phosphatases provide a mechanism for the integration of diverse signals in the control of development in *B. subtilis*. *Cell* 79: 1047–1055.

Perego M, Glaser P & Hoch JA (1996) Aspartyl-phosphate phosphatases deactivate the response regulator components of the sporulation signal transduction system in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 19: 1151–1157.

Piggot PJ & Hilbert DW (2004) Sporulation of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Curr Opin Microbiol* 7: 579–586.

Potrykus K & Cashel M (2008) (p)ppGpp: still magical? *Annu Rev Microbiol* 62: 35–51.

Pottathil M & Lazazzera BA (2003) The extracellular Phr peptide-Rap phosphatase signaling circuit of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Front Biosci* 8: d32–d45.

Pottathil M, Jung A & Lazazzera BA (2008) CSF, a species-specific extracellular signaling peptide for communication among strains of *Bacillus subtilis* and *Bacillus mojavensis*. *J Bacteriol* 190: 4095–4099.

Prudhomme M, Attaiech L, Sanchez G, Martin B & Claverys JP (2006) Antibiotic stress induces genetic transformability in the human pathogen *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. *Science* 313: 89–92.

Quadri LE, Weinreb PH, Lei M, Nakano MM, Zuber P & Walsh CT (1998) Characterization of Sfp, a *Bacillus subtilis* phosphopantetheinyl transferase for peptidyl carrier protein domains in peptide synthetases. *Biochemistry* 37: 1585–1595.

Ratnayake-Lecamwasam M, Serror P, Wong KW & Sonenshein AL (2001) *Bacillus subtilis* CodY represses early-stationary-phase genes by sensing GTP levels. *Gene Dev* 15: 1093–1103.

Redfield RJ (1993) Evolution of natural transformation: testing the DNA repair hypothesis in *Bacillus subtilis* and *Haemophilus influenzae*. *Genetics* 133: 755–761.

Reuter K, Mofid MR, Marahiel MA & Ficner R (1999) Crystal structure of the surfactin synthetase-activating enzyme sfp: a prototype of the 4′-phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily. *EMBO J* 18: 6823–6831.

Ryu YG, Kim ES, Kim DW, Kim SK & Lee KJ (2007) Differential stringent responses of *Streptomyces coelicolor* M600 to starvation of specific nutrients. *J Microbiol Biotechnol* 17: 305–312.

Schaefer AL, Greenberg EP, Oliver CM et al. (2008) A new class of homoserine lactone quorum-sensing signals. *Nature* 454: 595–599.

Schuster M, Lostroh CP, Ogi T & Greenberg EP (2003) Identification, timing, and signal specificity of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* quorum-controlled genes: a transcriptome analysis. *J Bacteriol* 185: 2066–2079.

Serror P & Sonenshein AL (1996) CodY is required for nutritional repression of *Bacillus subtilis* genetic competence. *J Bacteriol* 178: 5910–5915.


Shapiro JA (1998) Thinking about bacterial populations as multicellular organisms. *Annu Rev Microbiol* 52: 81–104.

Sheppard JD, Jumarié C, Cooper DG & Laprade R (1991) Ionic channels induced by surfactin in planar lipid bilayer membranes. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1064: 13–23.

Singer M & Kaiser D (1995) Ectopic production of guanosine penta- and tetraphosphate can initiate early developmental gene expression in *Myxococcus xanthus*. *Gene Dev* 9: 1633–1644.

Smith I, Paress P, Cabane K & Dubnau E (1980) Genetics and physiology of the rel system of *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Gen Genet* 178: 271–279.

Smits WK, Eschevins CC, Susanna KA, Bron S, Kuipers OP & Hamoen LW (2005) Stripping *Bacillus*: ComK auto-stimulation is responsible for the bistable response ;in competence development. *Mol Microbiol* 56: 604–614.

Solomon JM, Lazazzera BA & Grossman AD (1996) Purification and characterization of an extracellular peptide factor that affects two different developmental pathways in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Gene Dev* 10: 2014–2024.

Sonenshein AL (2007) Control of key metabolic intersections in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Nat Rev Microbiol* 5: 917–927.

Stephenson K & Hoch JA (2001) PAS-A domain of phosphorelay sensor kinase A: a catalytic ATP-binding domain involved in the initiation of development in *Bacillus subtilis*. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 98: 15251–15256.

Stephenson S, Mueller C, Jiang M & Perego M (2003) Molecular analysis of Phr peptide processing in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 185: 4861–4871.

Stock AM, Robinson VL & Goudreau PN (2000) Two-component signal transduction. *Annu Rev Biochem* 69: 183–215.

Taylor BL & Zhulin IB (1999) PAS domains: internal sensors of oxygen, redox potential, and light. *Microbiol Mol Biol R* 63: 479–506.

Tojo S, Satomura T, Kumamoto K, Hirooka K & Fujita Y (2008) Molecular mechanisms underlying the positive stringent response of the *Bacillus subtilis* ilv-leu operon, involved in the biosynthesis of branched-chain amino acids. *J Bacteriol* 190: 6134–6147.

Tolker-Nielsen T, Holmström K, Boe L & Molin S (1998) Non-genetic population heterogeneity studied by in situ polymerase chain reaction. *Mol Microbiol* 27: 1099–1105.

Tortosa P, Logsdon L, Kraigher B, Itoh Y, Mandic-Mulec I & Dubnau D (2001) Specificity and genetic polymorphism of the *Bacillus* competence quorum-sensing system. *J Bacteriol* 183: 451–460.

Trach KA & Hoch JA (1993) Multisensory activation of the phosphorelay initiating sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*: identification and sequence of the protein kinase of the alternate pathway. *Mol Microbiol* 8: 69–79.

Tran LS, Nagai T & Itoh Y (2000) Divergent structure of the ComQXPA quorum-sensing components: molecular basis of strain-specific communication mechanism in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol Microbiol* 37: 1159–1171.

van Sinderen D, Luttinger A, Kong L, Dubnau D, Venema G & Hamoen L (1995) comK encodes the competence

Journal compilation © 2009 Federation of European Microbiological Societies
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. No claim to original US government works

transcription factor, the key regulatory protein for competence development in *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol Microbiol 15: 455–462.

Veening JW, Igoshin OA, Eijlander RT, Nijland R, Hamoen LW & Kuipers OP (2008a) Transient heterogeneity in extracellular protease production by *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol Syst Biol 4: 184.

Veening JW, Smits WK & Kuipers OP (2008b) Bistability, epigenetics, and bet-hedging in bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 62: 193–210.

Verhamme DT, Kiley TB & Stanley-Wall NR (2007) DegU coordinates multicellular behaviour exhibited by *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol Microbiol 65: 554–568.

Verhamme DT, Murray EJ & Stanley-Wall NR (2009) DegU and Spo0A jointly control transcription of two loci required for

complex colony development by *Bacillus subtilis*. J Bacteriol 191: 100–108.

Vlamakis H, Aguilar C, Losick R & Kolter R (2008) Control of cell fate by the formation of an architecturally complex bacterial community. Gene Dev 22: 945–953.

Weirauch Y, Penchev R, Dubnau E, Smith I & Dubnau D (1990) A *Bacillus subtilis* regulatory gene product for genetic competence and sporulation resembles sensor protein members of the bacterial two-component signal-transduction systems. Gene Dev 4: 860–872.

Wonderling LD, Wilkinson BJ & Bayles DO (2004) The *htrA* (*degP*) gene of *Listeria monocytogenes* 10403S is essential for optimal growth under stress conditions. Appl Environ Microb 70: 1935–1943.
