
Molecular Cell
Article

FANCM Connects the Genome Instability Disorders Bloom’s Syndrome and Fanconi Anemia

Andrew J. Deans¹ and Stephen C. West¹,*

1 London Research Institute, Cancer Research UK, Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms EN6 3LD, UK
* Correspondence: stephen.west@cancer.org.uk
DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.12.006

### SUMMARY

Fanconi Anemia (FA) and Bloom’s Syndrome (BS) are genetic disorders characterized by overlapping phenotypes, including aberrant DNA repair and cancer predisposition. Here, we show that the FANCM gene product, FANCM protein, links FA and BS by acting as a protein anchor and bridge that targets key components of the FA and BS pathways to stalled replication forks, thus linking multiple components that are necessary for efficient DNA repair. Two highly conserved protein:protein interaction motifs in FANCM, designated MM1 and MM2, were identified. MM1 interacts with the FA core complex by binding to FANCF, whereas MM2 interacts with RM1 and topoisomerase IIIα, components of the BS complex. The MM1 and MM2 motifs were independently required to activate the FA and BS pathways. Moreover, a common phenotype of BS and FA cells—an elevated frequency of sister chromatid exchanges—was due to a loss of interaction of the two complexes through FANCM.

### INTRODUCTION

The effective repair of DNA damage, caused by exogenous agents or during DNA replication, confers protection from malignant transformation. Several genetic disorders that perturb the repair of DNA damage result in elevated cancer predisposition. One such disorder is a rare multigenic syndrome known as Fanconi Anemia (FA), which is characterized by subfertility, congenital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow failure, and elevated risk of hematological and squamous cell cancers. Cells from FA patients show a characteristic cellular sensitivity to agents that induce DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) suggestive of a defect in DNA repair.

FA is genetically heterogeneous, and individuals with the disease have been classified into 13 complementation groups: FA-A, -B, -C, -D1, -D2, -E, -F, -G, -I, -J, -L, -M, and -N. The causal genes have been identified and shown to act in a common signaling/repair pathway (Alpi and Patel, 2009; Niedernhofer et al., 2005). Eight of the gene products (FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCL, and FANCM) comprise the FA “core” complex, which contains ubiquitin ligase activity. The presence of DNA damage or stalled replication forks during S phase activates the core complex to monoubiquitylate FANCD2 and FANCI, leading to their retention in chromatin foci (Garcia-Higuera et al., 2001; Smogorzewska et al., 2007). These foci colocalize with downstream components of the repair pathway, FANCD1 (BRCA2), FANCN (PALB2), and FANCJ (BRIP). Whereas homozygous mutation of FANCD1, FANCN, or FANCJ results in FA, heterozygous mutations have been linked to familial breast and ovarian cancer predisposition, highlighting the role of this DNA repair pathway in tumor suppression (Niedernhofer et al., 2005).

Bloom’s Syndrome (BS) is a closely related monogenic disorder characterized by immunodeficiency, stunted growth, reduced fertility, and elevated occurrence of hematological and solid tumors. BS is caused by mutation of the BLM gene that encodes a 159 kDa RecQ family DNA helicase that exists in a nuclear complex with topoisomerase IIIα, RMI1, and RMI2 (Karow et al., 1997; Wu et al., 2000; Xu et al., 2008). BLM plays important roles in homologous recombinational repair, promoting the resection of DNA double-strand breaks (Gravel et al., 2008), the inhibition of RAD51-dependent strand invasion (Bugreev et al., 2007), and the dissolution of Holliday junction recombination intermediates (Wu et al., 2006; Wu and Hickson, 2003). The Bloom’s complex also catalyzes replication fork regression, a reaction that may be important for the repair of forks stalled at DNA crosslinks (Ralf et al., 2006). After treatment of cells with ICL-inducing agents, the Bloom’s complex associates with the FA core complex to form a 1.5–2 MDa supercomplex termed BRAFT (Meetei et al., 2003), suggesting that the overlapping phenotypes of FA and BS may be due to a failure in BRAFT assembly and activity.

How the BRAFT complex is activated by ICLs is poorly understood. However, FANCM is of particular interest because it is the only FA core complex protein that has an intrinsic DNA-binding activity and specificity for substrates that resemble stalled replication forks. FANCM is a member of the XPF family and contains an N-terminal DEAH domain required for DNA translocase and branch migration activities and a degenerate C-terminal ERCC4 “nuclease” domain that binds to branched DNA structures in vitro (Ciccia et al., 2008). The N terminus of FANCM is required to mediate the actions of HCLK2 in the G2/M checkpoint, independently of the FA core complex (Collis et al., 2008). FANCM obtains stability and specificity through heterodimeric interactions with another ERCC4 domain-containing protein, FAAP24 (Ciccia et al., 2007). The interaction of FANCM:FAAP24 with branched DNA molecules in vitro mimics how the complex might recognize stalled replication forks in vivo. Because depletion of FANCM or FAAP24 leads to reduced
FANCD2 monoubiquitylation, it has been suggested that FANCM:FAAP24 is the anchor that recruits the core complex to sites of DNA damage encountered during S phase (Niedernhofer, 2007).

In this work, we show that FANCM mediates the association of both the FA and Bloom’s complexes at sites of ICL damage. Moreover, we find that FANCM independently recruits the FA and Bloom’s complexes to nuclear foci through distinct protein:protein interaction motifs. In the absence of FANCM, FA and Bloom’s complexes fail to associate, and FANCD2 and BLM localization is impaired after ICL damage. The biological implications caused by the failure to associate are significant for ICL sensitivity and the suppression of sister chromatid exchanges—a characteristic of many FA or BS cells. We show that FANCM acts as the link between Fanconi Anemia and Bloom’s Syndrome and that the biological and clinical implications of this link are likely to be important in relation to the phenotypes associated with these genetic disorders.

**RESULTS**

### Identification of Conserved FANCM Domains that Interact with the FA or Bloom’s Complexes

The BRAFT complex contains proteins of the Fanconi Anemia core and Bloom’s Syndrome complexes (Meetei et al., 2003). To determine whether FANCM interacts directly with the FA and Bloom’s components within BRAFT and to determine the domains of FANCM that are necessary for these interactions, we subdivided FANCM into six fragments, each of which was N terminally Flag tagged and expressed in human cells. The Flag tag was then used to immunoprecipitate each fragment from cell-free extracts, and the resulting pull-downs were probed by western blotting for the presence of FA and BS proteins (Figure 1A, lanes C–H). The fragments used were chosen on the basis of their conservation, as indicated in a heat map alignment of the vertebrate homologs of FANCM (Figures 1B and 1C). In this alignment, we identified three potential motifs exhibiting high evolutionary conservation, which we have named MM1, MM2, and MM3 (FANCM motifs 1–3).

As observed with FANCM immunoprecipitates of endogenous proteins, components of the FA core complex (FANCA, FANCE, and FANCF) and the Bloom’s complex (BLM, RMI1, RMI2, and TopoIIα) copurified from extracts prepared from cells expressing full-length Flag-FANCM, but not from mock-transfected cells (Figure 1A, lanes A and B). The FANCM-interacting proteins, HCLK2 and FAAP24 (Ciccia et al., 2007; Collis et al., 2008), immunoprecipitated with full-length Flag-FANCM and with the fragments FANCM<sup>1–422</sup> and FANCM<sup>1651–2048</sup>, respectively (Figure 1A, lanes B, C, and H). We also found that the FA core proteins (represented by FANCA, FANCE, and FANCF) interacted specifically with FANCM<sup>687–1104</sup> (Figure 1A, lane E), whereas proteins of the Bloom’s complex (BLM, RMI1/2, TopoIIα) interacted only with the FANCM fragment FANCM<sup>1027–1362</sup> (Figure 1A, lane F). The FANCM fragments showed the same binding affinity as the full-length protein. These associations therefore define distinct interaction regions within FANCM.

Although the evolutionary conservation of the sequence between FANCM residues 687–1362 is lower (34.5% identity between human and opossum) than for the N- and C-terminal 600 amino acids of the protein (74.4% and 55.2%, respectively) (Figure 1B), it was intriguing that this region contained the highly conserved MM1 and MM2 motifs (80% and 64%, respectively). We therefore determined whether these conserved motifs contributed to interactions with the FA and Bloom’s complexes. To do this, we made deletions in full-length Flag-FANCM (Figure 1D), removing one or both conserved motifs. We found that a large internal deletion of residues 647–1501 reduced interactions with FA and BS proteins without affecting FAAP24 interactions (Figure 1D, compare lanes B and C), whereas deletion of the MM1 motif (Δ826–967 or Δ943–1004) alone led to reduced associations with the FA complex without affecting interactions with BS proteins (Figure 1D, lanes D and E). Conversely, deletion of the MM2 motif between residues 1219 and 1251 resulted in a protein with normal levels of interaction with the FA core complex, whereas interactions with the Bloom’s complex were completely abrogated (Figure 1D, lane f). We also found that deletion of the heterodimerization domain necessary for FANCM:FAAP24 interaction did not affect the association of FANCM with the FA core or Bloom’s complex (Figure 1D, lane G).

The FANCM-MM2 motif is highly conserved over only 28 amino acids (Figure S1A available online), leading us to determine whether this region alone is capable of interaction with the Bloom’s complex. We therefore performed streptavidin pull-downs from 293 extracts using a biotinylated 34 aa MM2 peptide (corresponding to FANCM<sup>1218–1251</sup>) or a nonspecific peptide (TRF4, corresponding to part of BRCA2 protein) and found that the MM2 peptide alone was capable of interaction with the Bloom’s complex (Figure 1F, lane E). No interactions were observed with the nonspecific probe (Figure 1F, lane F). Similar experiments with a peptide corresponding to the MM1 motif were unsuccessful, suggesting that this motif may be part of a larger domain structure.

The MM2 motif is highly acidic and contains four conserved phenylalanine residues (Figure S1A). A helix plot indicates that the phenylalanines may align on one face of an α helix, whereas acidic residues align on another (Figure S1B). To determine whether either of these represented the protein interaction face, we generated mutant derivatives of the Flag-FANCM<sup>1027–1362</sup> fragment in which positive charges were introduced at the conserved DDE sequence (1242DDE > KKR mutant) or in which two of the phenylalanines were substituted with alanine (FANCM<sup>F1232A/F1236A</sup> mutant). Both mutants exhibited greatly reduced binding to the Bloom’s complex, as indicated by Flag-affinity pull-down experiments, confirming that charge or helix-distorting mutations disrupt the interaction motif (Figure S1C). Together, these results demonstrate that two internal regions of high conservation within the FANCM protein, which we have named MM1 and MM2, are important for mediating independent interactions of FANCM with the FA and Bloom’s complexes, respectively.

### FANCM Interacts with FANCF of the FA Core Complex and with RMI1 and Topoisomerase IIIα of the Bloom’s Complex

The FA and BS complexes contain several proteins of unknown function. We therefore identified which proteins in these
Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

A Flag IP/elution

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 1. Distinct Motifs in FANCM Promote Interactions with the FA and BS Complexes

(A) Flag-affinity immunoprecipitations were carried out using extracts from 293 cells transfected with Flag-FANCM or the FANCM fragments indicated in (C). The indicated proteins were detected by western blotting.

(B) Heat map of FANCM conservation among vertebrate homologs, performed using MUSCLE alignment and Jalview. The degree of conservation of individual residues is indicated by height (clustalX consensus) and color (BLOSUM62 score; yellow, high; brown, low). Black line indicates 30 residue moving average of consensus.

(C) Flag-FANCM fragments used in (A) are indicated. The conserved MM1, MM2, and MM3 domains are boxed.

(D) Schematic indicating the FANCM deletion mutants.

(E) The Flag-FANCM-deletion mutants were immunoprecipitated as indicated in (A).

(F) Extracts from 293 cells were incubated with biotinylated MM2 or control peptide TRF4 (BRCA2) or no peptide, and streptavidin pull-downs were performed. The input (lane A), flowthrough (lanes B–D), and elution (lanes E–G) are shown following western blotting with the indicated antibodies.

See also Figure S1.

complexes were responsible for interaction with FANCM. To detect direct protein:protein interactions, we overexpressed recombinant GST-FANCM<sup>687–1104</sup> or GST-FANCM<sup>1027–1362</sup> in *E. coli* and mixed glutathione-purified eluates with rabbit reticulocyte extracts in which <sup>35</sup>S-labeled recombinant FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, or FANCL and BLM, TopoIIα, RMI1, or RMI2 had been produced by T7 transcription/translation (Figure 2A). Using glutathione bead pull-downs, we identified direct interactions between FANCM<sup>687–1104</sup> and FANCF and between FANCM<sup>1027–1362</sup> and two components of the Bloom’s complex: RMI1 and TopoIIα (Figure 2A,

lanes F, K, and M, bottom). These interactions were confirmed with recombinant proteins produced using prokaryotic or insect expression systems (Figure S2).

The interaction of FANCF with FANCM was also confirmed by FANCF-Flag pull-downs from 293 cell-free extracts (Figure 2C). Previous studies identified three functional regions in FANCF (Figure 2B): an N-terminal domain (NTD), a C-terminal domain (CTD), and an internal domain with significant homology to the bacterial RNA-binding protein ROM (Kowal et al., 2007; Léveillé et al., 2004). To determine which region mediated interactions with FANCM, we made several FANCF-Flag deletion constructs

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

Figure 2. FANCM Binds Components of the FA and Bloom’s Complexes

(A) ${}^{35}$S-labeled FANCA/B/C/E/F/G/L or BLM/RMI1/RMI2/Topoll$\alpha$ or luciferase (control) inputs were incubated with the indicated GST fusion bait protein, followed by glutathione pull-down and elution. The complexes were subjected to SDS-PAGE, and radiolabeled proteins were detected by autoradiography.

(B) Schematic of the FANCF-Flag deletion mutants showing conserved regions and previously characterized interaction sites. The FANCM interaction site determined in (C) is shown.

(C) Flag-affinity immunoprecipitation from 293 cells transfected with FANCF-Flag or the deletion mutants indicated in (B). Proteins were identified by western blotting.

(D) Schematic of the Flag-RMI1 deletion mutants showing conserved regions and previously characterized interaction sites. The FANCM interaction site determined in (E) is shown.

(E) Flag-affinity immunoprecipitation from 293 cells transfected with Flag-RMI1 or the fragments indicated in (D).

See also Figure S2.

and expressed these in 293 cells. Subsequent Flag-affinity pull-downs showed that the FANCF-FANCM interaction was reduced in mutants deleted for any of the three domains but completely abrogated when the N-terminal 158 amino acids of FANCF were deleted, showing that the NTD is required for direct interaction of FANCF and FANCM (Figures 2B and 2C, mutant B).

The interactions of RMI1 and FANCM were defined in a similar experiment. RMI1 contains two OB-fold domains that do not appear to mediate DNA binding and instead may be important for protein:protein interactions (Xu et al., 2008). When various Flag-RMI1 mutants were generated (Figure 2D), we found that deletion of OB1 led to the destabilization of RMI1 and, as a consequence, observed little binding to BLM, Topoll$\alpha$, RMI2, or FANCM (Figure 2E, mutants A and B). Deletion of the OB2 domain, however, had no adverse effect on the stability of RMI1 or its interaction with Topoll$\alpha$ or BLM but resulted in the complete loss of RMI1's ability to interact with FANCM or RMI2 (Figure 2E, mutants D, E, and F). Moreover, we found that a fragment of Flag-RMI1 containing only the OB2 domain (RMI1${}^{485–625}$) could be stably expressed in 293 cells and interacted with FANCM to the same level as the wild-type protein (Figures 2D and 2E, mutant G).

From these results, we conclude that FANCM binds directly to the N terminus of FANCF of the FA core complex and to Topoll$\alpha$ and the C-terminal OB-fold of RMI1 in the BS complex. Importantly, these results provide our first insights into the FANCM interaction partners contained within the FA and BS complexes.

FANCM Links the FA and Bloom’s Complexes

The ability of FANCM to interact independently with the FA and BS complexes indicates that it may provide the “bridge” that links these two genome instability disorders. To determine whether this is the case, we compared FA/BS complexes present in wild-type and FANCM knockdown cells by FANCF-Flag immunoprecipitation. To do this, FANCF-Flag was expressed in a stable FANCM siRNA${}^{\text{mir}}$ cell line in which the

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

The MM1 and MM2 Domains of FANCM Are Required for MMC Resistance

Depletion of FANCM using transient siRNA, as also observed with other FA proteins, results in a loss of FANCD2 ubiquitylation, FANCD2 focus formation, and a marked sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents such as mitomycin C (Figure 4) (Ciccia et al., 2007; Meetei et al., 2005; Mosedale et al., 2005). To determine whether the MM1 and MM2 domains, necessary for interactions with the FA and Bloom’s complexes, respectively, are essential for these functions, we stably expressed ectopic FANCM proteins in the 293-FANCM-siRNA<sup>mir</sup> cell line. The ectopic FANCM contained a siRNA-resistant “wobble” mutation and was integrated by FLP-mediated recombination into a single FRT site of the cellular genome (Figure 4A). Using these cells, expression of wild-type Flag-FANCM rescued the MMC sensitivity (Figure 4B), defects in FANCD2 ubiquitylation (Figure 4C, lane F), and the formation of FANCD2 foci (Figure 4D) resulting from endogenous FANCM depletion. In contrast, constructs in which MM1 was deleted (FANCM-ΔMM1), MM2 was deleted (FANCM-ΔMM2), or both were deleted (FANCM-ΔMM1/2) failed to rescue the MMC sensitivity observed in the FANCM knockdown (Figure 4B). These results show that cellular resistance to MMC requires the interaction of FANCM with both the FA and Bloom’s complexes.

Analysis of the ubiquitylation status of FANCD2 revealed that the MM1 domain was required for FANCD2 ubiquitylation (Figure 4C, lane J) and for the formation of FANCD2 foci (Figures 4D and 4E) and that the C-terminal DNA-binding region was also important (Figure 4C, lane N). These results provide in vivo evidence that FANCM provides an anchor for the FA core complex through interactions mediated by the MM1 motif and that, without normal FANCD2 ubiquitylation, these cells are MMC sensitive. In contrast, FANCM-defective cells complemented with FANCM-ΔMM2 exhibited normal levels of FANCD2 ubiquitylation (Figure 4C, lane L) and FANCD2 foci after MMC or ionizing radiation (Figures 4D and 4E). Thus, FANCD2 monoubiquitylation occurs independently of the interaction of FANCM with the Bloom’s complex. It requires interaction only with the FA core complex.

Because the FANCM-ΔMM2 mutant protein rescues FANCD2 ubiquitylation/foci, but not MMC sensitivity, we were concerned that this might be due to the presence of lower expression of the Flag-FANCM-ΔMM2 protein compared with Flag-FANCM, as determined by western blotting (Figure 4C, compare lanes K and L with E and F), although the levels of Flag-FANCM-ΔMM2 are comparable to those of the endogenous protein (Figure 4C, lanes A and B). As all of the FRT-Flag-FANCM constructs integrate into the same genomic locus, all mutants should be transcribed at the same rates, suggesting that the FANCM-ΔMM2 protein may be less stable or more susceptible to degradation. To overcome this issue, we analyzed cells that expressed a mutant version of FANCM, FANCM<sup>F1232A/F1236A</sup>, that fails to interact with the Bloom’s complex (Figure S1C) and yet is expressed at levels similar to wild-type protein in our complementation system (Figure S3B). FANCM knockdown cells expressing FANCM<sup>F1232A/F1236A</sup> remained sensitive to MMC, confirming our observations showing that the interaction of FANCM with the Bloom’s complex is required for ICL repair (Figure S3C). Taken together, these results confirm that the role of FANCM in ICL repair is through at least two independent

Figure 3. FANCM Binds Independently to the FA and Bloom’s Complexes and Provides a Link between the Complexes

(A) FANCF-Flag was expressed in 293, control-siRNA, or FANCM-siRNA cells, followed by Flag pull-down and western blotting.

(B and C) Immunoprecipitation with FANCM (M) or control antibodies (IgG) from wild-type, BS, or FA patient-derived extracts, followed by western blotting.

levels of endogenous FANCM were reduced to ~10% of normal levels (Collis et al., 2008), followed by Flag affinity purification (Figure 3A, lanes A–D). In contrast to the control siRNA<sup>mir</sup> or parental cell lines, downregulation of FANCM resulted in failure to detect any components of the Bloom’s complex in the FANCF pull-down (Figure 3A, lane h). In contrast, FANCF-Flag retained its interactions with FANCA and FANCE, confirming previous observations showing that the assembly of the FA core complex is FANCM independent (Kim et al., 2008). The elimination of FA/BS associations by downregulation of FANCM shows that FANCM provides the bridge between the FA and Bloom’s complexes.

To determine whether the interaction of FANCM with FA or BS complexes was perturbed in a pathogenic setting, endogenous FANCM was immunoprecipitated from FA or BS patient cell lines. We found that FANCM bound normally to FANCA in BLM defective cells and, most interestingly, that FANCM retained its interaction with Topollα and RMI1 when BLM was deleted by homozygous mutation (Figure 3B, lane D). Similarly, when FANCM was pulled down from extracts derived from FA-A, FA-E, FA-F, or FA-G patient cell lines (Figures 3B, lane F, and 3C, lanes B–D), we found that it remained associated with Bloom’s complex (Figure 3C, lane F). These results demonstrate that FANCM binds independently to the FA core complex and to the Bloom’s complex and is required for the interaction of these two complexes in human cells.

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

Figure 4. The MM1 Motif Is Required for FANCD2 Ubiquitylation, Foci Formation, and MMC Resistance

(A) Schematic diagram showing the constructs used to complement FANCM-depleted cells. The site of siRNA targeting and position of the wobble mutation (wob) in FANCM are indicated.

(B) MMC survival curves of control, FANCM-siRNA knockdown, and complemented cell lines, as measured by the sulforhodamine B assay. Each point represents the average of three independent experiments plated in quadruplicate (± SD).

(C) Control siRNA or stable FANCM-siRNA cells, or complemented cell lines, were either untreated or treated with 40 ng/ml MMC. After 7 hr growth, cells were harvested and extracts analyzed by western blotting for FANCD2 and FANCM. The ratio of FANCD2-L (ubiquitylated form) to FAND2-S (unmodified) is shown. Cells complemented with FANCM-ΔMM1, FANCM-ΔMM2, or FANCM-ΔMM1/2 or FANCM-ΔC are indicated.

(D) Representative images of cells costained with anti-FANCD2 (red) and anti-γH2AX (green) antibodies, showing the formation of nuclear foci after damaging treatment.

(E) Average values for the formation of FANCD2 foci in complemented cell lines 12 hr after treatment with 40 ng/ml MMC or 4 hr post 5 gray ionizing radiation. See also Figure S3.

processes, requiring activation of both the FA and the BS pathways.

FANCM Is Required for Formation of BLM Nuclear Foci after Treatment with Replication Stalling Agents, but Not Ionizing Radiation

One explanation for the observed MMC sensitivity in FANCM-ΔMM2 or FANCM<sup>F1232A/F1236A</sup> cells is that the interaction of FANCM with the Bloom’s complex is necessary for the correct localization of BLM to sites of ICL damage encountered by the replication fork. Without such targeting, the cell will exhibit ICL sensitivity due to a defect in Bloom’s rather than FA. BLM nuclear foci form after MMC treatment or ionizing radiation (Pichierri et al., 2004; Wu et al., 2001), so we used this as an assay to measure activation of the Bloom’s pathway. The majority of BLM foci colocalize with γH2AX foci in 293 cells treated with a variety of damaging agents (Figure 5A, panels i–iv; > 90% of BLM foci correspond to γH2AX foci, but < 30% of γH2AX foci are BLM positive). The formation of BLM foci after replication fork inhibition was found to be FANCM dependent, as they

948 Molecular Cell 36, 943–953, December 24, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

Figure 5. BLM Localization to Nuclear Foci Is FANCM Dependent after Treatment with Agents that Stall DNA Replication

(A) Immunofluorescence staining for BLM foci in control siRNA (panels i–iv) and FANCM-siRNA stable cell lines (panels v–viii) after treatment with mitomycin C, camptothecin, or ionizing radiation. The percentages of foci scoring positive for more than five BLM foci/nucleus (out of a total of 200 scored nuclei) are indicated.

(B) Dual immunofluorescent staining for BLM (green) and γH2AX (red). FANCM-siRNA cell lines were complemented with the indicated siRNA-resistant Flag-FANCM expression vectors. Scoring was carried out as in (A).

were not observed in 293-FANCM siRNA mir cells treated with camptothecin, an agent that stalls replication by inhibition of topoisomerase I, or after MMC treatment (Figure 5A, panels v–vii). In contrast, FANCM was not required for the recruitment of BLM to damage foci following IR (Figure 5A, panel viii). From these data, we suggest that FANCM is a specific anchor for the Bloom’s complex in the context of a stalled replication fork rather than DNA lesions per se.

To determine whether direct interactions between FANCM and the Bloom’s complex were required for the formation of BLM foci at stalled replication forks caused by ICLs, we used cells expressing the FANCM-ΔMM2 or FANCM F1232A/F1236A proteins. We found that neither mutant protein could rescue the formation of BLM foci, confirming that FANCM is also an anchor for the recruitment of BLM protein to ICL-associated foci (Figure 5B, panels iii–iv). Importantly, FANCM-ΔMM1, which interacts with the BS complex but fails to rescue FANCD2 mono-ubiquitylation and the formation of FANCD2 foci, was almost fully competent in rescuing the formation of BLM foci (Figure 5B, panel ii). These results highlight a separation of function in the recruitment of the Bloom’s and FA complexes by FANCM in the MM1 and MM2 mutants.

SCE Suppression Requires the Interaction of FANCM with Bloom’s and FA Core Complexes

Cell lines derived from individuals with BS exhibit an elevated frequency of sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs), a characteristic that is also observed in murine and chicken FANCM knockout cells (Bakker et al., 2009; Mosedale et al., 2005). Increased SCE formation was observed in 293-FANCM-siRNA mir cells and was significantly elevated by treatment with a low dose (10 ng/ml) of MMC (Figure 6). The increased SCE phenotype was rescued by stable expression of siRNA-resistant FANCM protein, but not by FANCM-ΔMM2 or FANCM F1232A/F1236A that fail to interact with the Bloom’s complex (Figure 6C). The observed 2- to 3-fold elevated frequency in SCE formation is equivalent to that seen following depletion of BLM or RMI1 (Yin et al., 2005) and in the recently described FANCM knockout mouse (Bakker et al., 2009). These results indicate that the recruitment of the Bloom’s complex by FANCM to DNA damage sites (presumably stalled replication forks) is important for the suppression of SCEs. Furthermore, we found that expression of the FANCM-ΔMM1 protein also failed to rescue SCE formation, despite having close to normal levels of BLM foci (Figure 6C). This surprising result suggests that a coordinated recruitment of the FA and Bloom’s complexes by FANCM to sites of ICL damage is required to prevent the formation of sister chromatid exchanges.

DISCUSSION

There is strong clinical and biochemical evidence suggesting that the Fanconi Anemia and Bloom’s Syndrome proteins act in a common repair/signaling pathway that responds to replication-blocking lesions. In this work, we provide the first evidence that FANCM provides an anchor for both the Fanconi core complex and the Bloom’s complex in cells damaged by inter-strand crosslinking agents. We identified two highly conserved protein:protein interaction motifs in FANCM (MM1 and MM2) that allow it to physically link the FA core complex and the Bloom’s complex. Using an in vivo complementation system that permits the analysis of separation of function FANCM mutants, we found that the FA and BS complexes bind independently to FANCM, but not with each other, in the absence of

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

Figure 6. Targeting of the FA and Bloom’s Complexes by FANCM Is Required to Suppress SCE Formation

(A and B) Representative mitotic spreads of MMC-treated 293 control siRNA or FANCM-siRNA cell lines stained to reveal SCEs (pink arrows).

(C) SCEs were scored for 60 mitotic spreads for each cell line in the presence or absence of 10 ng/ml MMC. Each point represents the total number of SCEs in a single mitotic spread, and black bars indicate the average value for all spreads. **p > 0.001** compared to control siRNA, determined using the Mann-Whitney test. n.s., not significant.

silencing has been observed in multiple human tumor types (Taniguchi et al., 2003). Combined with the previous findings, we suggest that FANCF may be a central adaptor for assembly of the FA core complex.

Because the recruitment of the FA core complex to chromatin depends on FANCM and varies during the cell cycle (Mi and Kupfer, 2005), it is possible that the MM1 region of FANCM, which contains the FANCF interaction domain, could also play a role in the regulation of the FA pathway. In this regard, it is important to note that the MM1 region contains multiple potential ATM/ATR, CDK, and Chk1 phosphorylation sites, as well as the DSGYNS site, which was recently shown to be required for the regulated degradation of FANCM and release of the core complex from chromatin (Kee et al., 2009).

Our studies have shown that FANCM targets the BLM helicase to nuclear foci after treatment of cells with camptothecin or MMC, whereas BLM foci are FANCM independent when damage is induced by ionizing radiation. Targeting by FANCM is dependent upon a direct interaction between the MM2 domain and the Bloom’s complex, mediated via RMI1 and TopoIIIα. We find that FANCM binds to the same region of RMI1 as the recently identified RMI2 protein (Xu et al., 2008), although these interactions are not thought to be competitive, as antibodies raised against FANCM immunoprecipitate both RMI1 and RMI2. Of interest, FANCM interacts with RMI1/2 and TopoIIIα even in the absence of BLM, suggesting that a FANCM:RMI:TopoIIIα complex could exist as a distinct complex within the cell. In this manner, regulated recruitment of BLM to nuclear foci is likely to be mediated by its interaction with the N terminus of RMI1. Consistent with this proposal, RMI1 depletion leads to a loss of BLM foci (Yin et al., 2005). However, a specific role for a FANCM:RMI:TopoIIIα complex cannot be ruled out, and the FANCM-ΔMM2 mutant may provide an invaluable tool for further analysis.

The targeting of BLM to stalled replication forks by FANCM, as indicated in Figure 7, could explain the elevated frequency of sister chromatid exchanges observed in BLM-, RMI1-, or FANCM-deficient cells. FANCM possesses intrinsic DNA branch migration activity on four-way junctions (Gari et al., 2008b) but is not required for homologous recombination repair (HRR) of

FANCM. Loss of the MM1 or MM2 interaction domains of FANCM led to ICL sensitivity and an elevated frequency of SCEs, phenotypes common to both BS and FA cells. A model of FANCM-mediated protein:protein and protein:DNA interactions in relation to replication fork stalling at a site of ICL damage is shown in Figure 7.

Previous studies have indicated that FANCM:FAAP24 is the anchor for the recruitment and activation of the FA core complex leading to the ubiquitylation of FANCD2/I (Ciccia et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2008; Meetei et al., 2005; Mosedale et al., 2005). We have further defined the mechanism of this anchor function: FANCF of the Fanconi core complex directly binds to the MM1 motif of FANCM. Previous findings indicated that pull-downs of FANCM contain stoichiometric amounts of FANCF, FANCC, and FANCE, whereas other FA core proteins are present at lower levels (Ciccia et al., 2007). Thus, FANCM could first bind the FANCC/E/F subcomplex that exists in nuclear fractions (Léveillé et al., 2004; Medhurst et al., 2006), prior to assembly of the full FA complex. FANCF is an interesting component of the FA core complex, as it appears to be a mediator protein that can interact independently with different subcomplexes. It has been shown that N-terminal deletions in FANCF abrogate its interaction with FANCC and FANCE and that C-terminal deletions perturb interactions with FANCA and FANCG (Kowal et al., 2007; Léveillé et al., 2004). Here, we have shown that an N-terminal region of FANCF is required for interaction with FANCM. Highlighting the importance of this region for FANCF function, an N-terminal deletion mutant of FANCF is unable to rescue FANCD2 ubiquitylation and MMC resistance in a FA-F patient cell line (Léveillé et al., 2004). Furthermore, somatic loss of FANCF by genetic

950 Molecular Cell 36, 943–953, December 24, 2009 © 2009 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell

FANCM Connects Fanconi Anemia with Bloom’s Syndrome

dent after treatment with MMC or camptothecin, but not after ionizing radiation treatment that can directly induce DSB formation. This difference may reflect a distinct role for FANCM in targeting BLM to single-ended DSBs (such as would arise by replication fork cleavage) as opposed to double-ended DSB sites that form by IR-induced strand breakage.

Bloom’s complex could be involved in DSB resection prior to the initiation of HRR and/or in the dissolution of double Holliday junctions that may be formed in subsequent reactions. Indeed, FANCM may play a particularly important role in facilitating Holliday junction dissolution by BLM following replication fork demise, as dissolution provides an important mechanism for suppression of SCE formation. Without correct targeting of BLM by FANCM, four-way junctions would be resolved by the actions of MUS81/EME1 or GEN1, both of which exhibit Holliday junction cleavage activity in vitro (Ip et al., 2008). Resolution by these nucleases, however, leads to both crossover and noncrossover formation and, as a consequence, would result in an elevated level of SCE formation, as observed after FANCM or BLM inactivation.

The association of the FA and BS complexes by FANCM explains many of the shared phenotypes of Fanconi Anemia and Bloom’s Syndrome. However, there are clearly significant differences between the two diseases, so it is likely that the FA core complex and the Bloom’s complex also exhibit independent functions. Indeed, there is evidence that the FA proteins exist in multiple cellular subfractions that may have independent functions (Medhurst et al., 2006; Wilson et al., 2008). Conversely, FA proteins do not appear to be involved in other BLM-mediated actions such as DNA end resection. As such, the interplay of the FA complex with Bloom’s complex, mediated through the actions of FANCM, is likely to be restricted to a subset of DNA repair reactions such as those that take place at replication forks stalled at sites of DNA damage.

The strength of the approach used in the present work is that we have identified how the FA and BS complexes interact and have been able to separate the two pathways in what is essentially a genetically defined model. At the very least, FANCM is an important scaffold protein that functions in a variety of repair reactions. For example, it (1) contains translocase domains for movement along dsDNA (Gari et al., 2008b; Meetei et al., 2005), (2) specifically interacts with and remodels replication fork structures (Ciccia et al., 2007; Gari et al., 2008a), (3) is involved in activation of the ATR-dependent checkpoint response through interaction with the PI3-kinase regulator HCLK2 (Collis et al., 2008), (4) facilitates the ubiquitylation of FANCD2 by the FA core complex (Meetei et al., 2005), and as shown in the present work, it (5) assembles the FA and Bloom’s complexes and suppresses sister chromatid exchanges. Further understanding of how these interactions and reactions are regulated should provide a more complete understanding of the molecular basis of FA and BS.

Figure 7. Model for FANCM-Mediated Targeting of Multiple Repair Pathways to Sites of ICL Damage

Translocation of FANCM along DNA or during fork reversal is promoted by the ATPase activity of the DEAH domain in the N terminus, which also interacts with HCLK2 and mediates ATR signaling and the cell-cycle checkpoint. Recognition of replication fork stalled at ICL damage occurs through the C-terminal domain of FANCM that requires dimerization with FAAP24. The FANCM-MM1 domain targets the FA core complex to chromatin through direct interaction with FANCF of the FA core complex, allowing FANCD2/I monoubiquitylation by FANCL. The MM2 domain targets the Bloom’s complex to chromatin through interactions with RMI1 and Topollα. The FA and Bloom’s interactions, mediated by FANCM, are independent and result in an association of the two distinct repair complexes at sites of DNA damage.

I-Scel-induced DNA double-strand breaks (Mosedale et al., 2005). A direct role for FANCM in homologous recombination is, therefore, unlikely. FANCM can, however, promote the regression of replication fork structures into a four-way junction in vitro, indicating that the preferred in vivo DNA substrate may be a replication fork stalled by DNA damage (Gari et al., 2008a). Of interest, BLM also promotes fork regression (Ralf et al., 2006), consistent with a concerted mode of action for FANCM and BLM on stalled forks. One possibility is that FANCM could partially regress a stalled fork by initiating the annealing of the nascent leading and lagging strands but, in addition, facilitates the recruitment of BLM, a highly processive DNA helicase that, coupled with the decatenation activity of Topollα, could allow more extensive fork regression. The increased number of spontaneous γH2AX foci observed in FANCM- or BLM-defective cells would be consistent with high levels of replication fork collapse and suggests that fork regression provides a major mechanism of replication fork stabilization (Bernstein et al., 2009; Collis et al., 2008; Rao et al., 2007).

An alternate proposal is that FANCM targets the FA core proteins to sites of ICL damage to activate signaling pathways, whereas the Bloom’s complex is targeted in order to promote the downstream steps of repair after ICL excision. Models of ICL repair have suggested that the stalled replication fork is cut such that the leading strand is released, or “unhooked,” from the ICL, generating a dsDNA break (Niedernhofer et al., 2005). We show that the formation of BLM foci is FANCM dependent after treatment with MMC or camptothecin, but not after ionizing radiation treatment that can directly induce DSB formation. This difference may reflect a distinct role for FANCM in targeting BLM to single-ended DSBs (such as would arise by replication fork cleavage) as opposed to double-ended DSB sites that form by IR-induced strand breakage.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Cell Culture, siRNA, and Drug Treatments

293, 293-FLPin, U2OS, and the SV40-immortalized fibroblast lines GM00637 (WT), GM08505 (BLM), and GM06914 (FA-A) were maintained in DMEM + 10%

Molecular Cell 36, 943–953, December 24, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.
FBS at 37°C. EBV-immortalized lymphoblast cell lines HSC-72 (WT), EUFA-410 (FA-E), EUFA-698 (FA-F), EUFA-143 (FA-G), and VU-120 (FA-D2) were grown in RPMI + 15% FBS at 37°C. Generation of the stable FANCM siRNA cell line using an Expression Arrest siRNA clone (ID V2HS_203688, Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) and the 293-FLPin complementation system for expression of siRNA-resistant mutants has been described ([Collis et al., 2008]). Transient transfections were performed using FuGene HD and were analyzed after 40–48 hr. Unless stated otherwise, immunofluorescence analysis or cell extract preparation for western analysis were performed on cells harvested 12 hr after treatment with a DNA-damaging agent. Survival assays were performed in 96-well plates and were measured 72 hr after drug exposure using the sulforhodamine B assay ([Skehan et al., 1990]).

### Vectors

The six overlapping FANCM fragments were generated by PCR cloning into pDONR221 using the Gateway system (Invitrogen). RMI1, RMI2, topoisomerase IIIα, and FANCA/B/C/E/F/G and L were cloned using the Gateway system from HeLa cDNA or commercial vectors. Internal deletion mutants of FANCM, FANCF, and RMI1 were generated by inverse PCR using phosphorylated 18–21 base pair-flanking oligonucleotides, followed by ligation. Sequences were then transferred to the expression vectors pDEST17 (TnT expression), pDEST15 (N-terminal GST-tag), or pDEST/FRT/3 × Flag (mammalian expression).

### Sister Chromatid Exchange Assay

SCE assays were performed as previously described ([Bayani and Squire, 2005]) with cells cultured in 5 μg/ml BrdU for 40 hr followed by 1 hr in 0.1 μg/ml colcemid. MMC (10 ng/ml) was added 20 hr prior to cell harvest where indicated. Exchanges that were obviously due to “flipping” at the centrosome were omitted from quantitation. SCEs were scoring on 60 metaphases for each genotype/treatment. All quantification was carried out blind.

### Cell Extractions, Immunoprecipitations, and Western Blotting

For IPs, cells were lysed for 2 hr at 4°C in buffer K100 (50 mM KPO₄ [pH 7.5], 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM MgCl₂, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM NaF, complete protease inhibitor) containing 50 U/ml benzonase (Promega). The NaCl concentration was increased to 250 mM, and the lysates were cleared at 16,000 × g for 30 min. The supernatant was taken and used for immunoprecipitation with 1 μg of α-FANCM (Abcam ab35620) antibody and 20 μl of protein G sepharose (GE Healthcare) or 20 μl α-Flag M2 agarose (Sigma). After 3 hr mixing, beads were washed four times with K250 and once with 50 mM NH₄(CO₃)₂ and were eluted with 500 mM NH₄OH (pH 11.0), 0.5 mM EDTA. Samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 1× LDS loading buffer (Invitrogen). Western blotting was performed using the following primary antibodies: α-FANCM (M3882) and α-FANCA (A5300) from the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund (Oregon), α-RMI1 (B01) from Abnova, α-BLM (C-18) from Santa Cruz, α-FANCD2 (NB100-182) from Abcam, and the following previously described antibodies: α-FANCF ([Léveillé et al., 2004]), α-TopoIIα ([Wu et al., 2000]), α-RMI2 ([Xu et al., 2008]), α-FANCE ([Pace et al., 2002]), and α-FAAP24 ([Ciccia et al., 2007]). HRP-coupled α-mouse, α-goat, or protein A were used as secondary antibodies.

### In Vitro Pull-Downs of ³⁵S-Labeled Proteins

GST-tagged FANCM fragments were produced as previously described ([Ciccia et al., 2007]) using pDEST15-GSTFANCM⁶⁸⁷⁻¹¹⁰⁴ or pDEST15-GSTFANCM¹⁰²⁷⁻¹³⁶². ³⁵S-labeled proteins were generated using the TNT Quick Coupled T7 Transcription/Translation System (Promega). 10 μl of TNT product was incubated for 4 hr at 4°C in K150 buffer with 100 ng GST-tagged protein, 15 μl of GST-sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads, and 1 mg/ml BSA in a 100 μl reaction. Beads were washed five times with K150 and resuspended once in LDS loading buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by autoradiography.

Biotinylated peptides and streptavidin pull-downs were performed as previously described ([Thorslund et al., 2007]). The sequence of the MM2 peptide was: Bio-EDIFDCSRDLFSVTFDLGFCSPDSDDEILEHHTSD. TRF4 peptide corresponds to a region of BRCA2 ([Esashi et al., 2005]).

### Immunofluorescence Staining

Cells were grown in 8-well chamber slides precoated with 2.5 μg/ml polyethyleneimine, treated as indicated, and then fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature followed by ice-cold methanol for 1 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 5 min and stained as described ([Deans et al., 2006]). The following primary antibodies were used: α-FANCD2 (Novus NB100-182, diluted 1:1000), α-γH2AX (Upstate Biotechnology JBW301, 1:1000), and α-BLM (Santa Cruz C-18, 1:40). Secondary antibodies

(α-mouse, α-goat, or α-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488/555; diluted 1:1000) were purchased from Molecular Probes.

### SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

Supplemental Data include three figures and can be found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/molecular-cell/supplemental/S1097-2765(09)00910-1.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Cell Services and Peptide Synthesis core facilities at CRUK for their help and members of our laboratory for discussions and reagents. We also thank Rachel Coulthard, Neil McDonald, Simon Boulton, and Spencer Collis (LRI); Ian Hickson (Oxford University); Yilun Liu (Yale University); K.J. Patel (LMB Cambridge); Johan de Winter (VU Medical Center); and the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund (Oregon) for kindly providing advice and reagents. A.J.D. is a recipient of a C.J. Martin postdoctoral fellowship from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (Reg key: 448334). This work was supported by Cancer Research UK, the EU IP6 Consortium on DNA Repair, the Breast Cancer Campaign, the Louis-Jeantet Foundation, and the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund.

Received: July 29, 2009  
Revised: September 27, 2009  
Accepted: November 20, 2009  
Published: December 24, 2009  

### REFERENCES

Alpi, A.F., and Patel, K.J. (2009). Monoubiquitylation in the Fanconi anemia DNA damage response pathway. DNA Repair (Amst.) 8, 430–435.

Bakker, S.T., van de Vrugt, H.J., Rooimans, M.A., Oostra, A.B., Steltenpool, J., Delzenne-Goette, E., van der Wal, A., van der Valk, M., Joenje, H., te Riele, H., and de Winter, J.P. (2009). Fancm-deficient mice reveal unique features of Fanconi anemia complementation group M. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18, 3484–3495.

Bayani, J., and Squire, J.A. (2005). Sister chromatid exchange. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 22, Unit 22.

Bernstein, K.A., Shor, E., Sunjevaric, I., Fumasoni, M., Burgess, R.C., Foiani, M., Branzei, D., and Rothstein, R. (2009). Sgs1 function in the repair of DNA replication intermediates is separable from its role in homologous recombinational repair. EMBO J. 28, 915–925.

Bugreev, D.V., Yu, X., Egelman, E.H., and Mazin, A.V. (2007). Novel pro- and anti-recombination activities of the Bloom’s syndrome helicase. Genes Dev. 21, 3085–3094.

Ciccia, A., Ling, C., Coulthard, R., Yan, Z., Xue, Y., Meetei, A.R., Laghmani, H., Joenje, H., McDonald, N., de Winter, J.P., et al. (2007). Identification of FAAP24, a Fanconi anemia core complex protein that interacts with FANCM. Mol. Cell 25, 331–343.

Ciccia, A., McDonald, N., and West, S.C. (2008). Structural and functional relationships of the XPF/MUS81 family of proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 77, 259–287.

Collis, S.J., Ciccia, A., Deans, A.J., Horejsí, Z., Martin, J.S., Maslen, S.L., Skehel, J.M., Elledge, S.J., West, S.C., and Boulton, S.J. (2008). FANCM and FAAP24 function in ATR-mediated checkpoint signaling independently of the Fanconi anemia core complex. Mol. Cell 32, 313–324.

Deans, A.J., Khanna, K.K., McNees, C.J., Mercurio, C., Heierhorst, J., and McArthur, G.A. (2006). Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 functions in normal DNA

952 Molecular Cell 36, 943–953, December 24, 2009 © 2009 Elsevier Inc.
repair and is a therapeutic target in BRCA1-deficient cancers. Cancer Res. 66, 8219–8226.

Esashi, F., Christ, N., Gannon, J., Liu, Y., Hunt, T., Jasin, M., and West, S.C. (2005). CDK-dependent phosphorylation of BRCA2 as a regulatory mechanism for recombinational repair. Nature 434, 598–604.

Garcia-Higuera, I., Taniguchi, T., Ganesan, S., Meyn, M.S., Timmers, C., Hejna, J., Grompe, M., and D’Andrea, A.D. (2001). Interaction of the Fanconi anemia proteins and BRCA1 in a common pathway. Mol. Cell 7, 249–262.

Gari, K., Décaillot, C., Delannoy, M., Wu, L., and Constantinou, A. (2008a). Remodeling of DNA replication structures by the branch point translocase FANCM. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16107–16112.

Gari, K., Décaillot, C., Stasiak, A.Z., Stasiak, A., and Constantinou, A. (2008b). The Fanconi anemia protein FANCM can promote branch migration of Holliday junctions and replication forks. Mol. Cell 29, 141–148.

Gravel, S., Chapman, J.R., Magill, C., and Jackson, S.P. (2008). DNA helicases Sgs1 and BLM promote DNA double-strand break resection. Genes Dev. 22, 2767–2772.

Ip, S.C.Y., Rass, U., Blanco, M.G., Flynn, H.R., Skehel, J.M., and West, S.C. (2008). Identification of Holliday junction resolvases from humans and yeast. Nature 456, 357–361.

Karow, J.K., Chakraverty, R.K., and Hickson, I.D. (1997). The Bloom’s syndrome gene product is a 3′-5′ DNA helicase. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 30611–30614.

Kee, Y., Kim, J.M., D’Andrea, A.D., and D’Andrea, A. (2009). Regulated degradation of FANCM in the Fanconi anemia pathway during mitosis. Genes Dev. 23, 555–560.

Kim, J.M., Kee, Y., Gurtan, A.M., and D’Andrea, A.D. (2008). Cell cycle-dependent chromatin loading of the Fanconi anemia core complex by FANCM/FAAP24. Blood 111, 5215–5222.

Kowal, P., Gurtan, A.M., Stuckert, P., D’Andrea, A.D., and Ellenberger, T. (2007). Structural determinants of human FANCF protein that function in the assembly of a DNA damage signaling complex. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 2047–2055.

Léveillé, F., Blom, E., Medhurst, A.L., Bier, P., Laghmani, H., Johnson, M., Rooimans, M.A., Sobeck, A., Waisfisz, Q., Arwert, F., et al. (2004). The Fanconi anemia gene product FANCF is a flexible adaptor protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 39421–39430.

Medhurst, A.L., Laghmani, e.H., Steltenpool, J., Ferrer, M., Fontaine, C., de Groot, J., Rooimans, M.A., Scheper, R.J., Meetei, A.R., Wang, W., et al. (2006). Evidence for subcomplexes in the Fanconi anemia pathway. Blood 108, 2072–2080.

Meetei, A.R., Medhurst, A.L., Ling, C., Xue, Y.T., Singh, T.R., Bier, P., Steltenpool, J., Stone, S., Dokal, I., Mathew, C.G., et al. (2005). A human ortholog of archaeal DNA repair protein Hef is defective in Fanconi anemia complementation group M. Nat. Genet. 37, 958–963.

Meetei, A.R., Sechi, S., Wallisch, M., Yang, D.F., Young, M.K., Joenje, H., Hoatlin, M.E., and Wang, W.D. (2003). A multiprotein nuclear complex connects Fanconi anemia and Bloom syndrome. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 3417–3426.

Mi, J., and Kupfer, G.M. (2005). The Fanconi anemia core complex associates with chromatin during S phase. Blood 105, 759–766.

Mosedale, G., Niedzwiedz, W., Alpi, A., Perrina, F., Pereira-Leal, J.B., Johnson, M., Langevin, F., Pace, P., and Patel, K.J. (2005). The vertebrate Hef ortholog is a component of the Fanconi anemia tumor-suppressor pathway. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12, 763–771.

Niedernhofer, L.J. (2007). The Fanconi anemia signalosome anchor. Mol. Cell 25, 487–490.

Niedernhofer, L.J., Lalai, A.S., and Hoeijmakers, J.H.J. (2005). Fanconi anemia (cross)linked to DNA repair. Cell 123, 1191–1198.

Pace, P., Johnson, M., Tan, W.M., Mosedale, G., Sng, C., Hoatlin, M., de Winter, J., Joenje, H., Gergely, F., and Patel, K.J. (2002). FANCE: the link between Fanconi anaemia complex assembly and activity. EMBO J. 21, 3414–3423.

Pichierri, P., Franchitto, A., and Rosselli, F. (2004). BLM and the FANC proteins collaborate in a common pathway in response to stalled replication forks. EMBO J. 23, 3154–3163.

Ralf, C., Hickson, I.D., and Wu, L. (2006). The Bloom’s syndrome helicase can promote the regression of a model replication fork. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 22839–22846.

Rao, V.A., Conti, C., Guirouilh-Barbat, J., Nakamura, A., Miao, Z.H., Davies, S.L., Saccá, B., Hickson, I.D., Bensimon, A., and Pommier, Y. (2007). Endogenous γ-H2AX-ATM-Chk2 checkpoint activation in Bloom’s syndrome helicase deficient cells is related to DNA replication arrested forks. Mol. Cancer Res. 5, 713–724.

Skehan, P., Storeng, R., Scudiero, D., Monks, A., McMahon, J., Vistica, D., Warren, J.T., Bokesch, H., Kenney, S., and Boyd, M.R. (1990). New colorimetric cytotoxicity assay for anticancer-drug screening. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 82, 1107–1112.

Smogorzewska, A., Matsuoka, S., Vinciguerra, P., McDonald, E.R., III, Hurov, K.E., Luo, J., Ballif, B.A., Gygi, S.P., Hofmann, K., D’Andrea, A.D., and Elledge, S.J. (2007). Identification of the FANCI protein, a monoubiquitinated FANCD2 paralog required for DNA repair. Cell 129, 289–301.

Taniguchi, T., Tischkowitz, M., Ameziane, N., Hodgson, S.V., Mathew, C.G., Joenje, H., Mok, S.C., and D’Andrea, A.D. (2003). Disruption of the Fanconi anemia-BRCA pathway in cisplatin-sensitive ovarian tumors. Nat. Med. 9, 568–574.

Thorslund, T., Esashi, F., and West, S.C. (2007). Interactions between human BRCA2 protein and the meiosis-specific recombinase DMC1. EMBO J. 26, 2915–2922.

Wilson, J.B., Yamamoto, K., Marriott, A.S., Hussain, S., Sung, P., Hoatlin, M.E., Mathew, C.G., Takata, M., Thompson, L.H., Kupfer, G.M., and Jones, N.J. (2008). FANCG promotes formation of a newly identified protein complex containing BRCA2, FANCD2 and XRCC3. Oncogene 27, 3641–3652.

Wu, L., Bachrati, C.Z., Ou, J., Xu, C., Yin, J.H., Chang, M., Wang, W., Li, L., Brown, G.W., and Hickson, I.D. (2006). BLAP75/RMI1 promotes the BLM-dependent dissolution of homologous recombination intermediates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 4068–4073.

Wu, L., Davies, S.L., Levitt, N.C., and Hickson, I.D. (2001). Potential role for the BLM helicase in recombinational repair via a conserved interaction with RAD51. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 19375–19381.

Wu, L., Davies, S.L., North, P.S., Goulaouic, H., Riou, J.F., Turley, H., Gatter, K.C., and Hickson, I.D. (2000). The Bloom’s syndrome gene product interacts with topoisomerase III. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 9636–9644.

Wu, L., and Hickson, I.D. (2003). The Bloom’s syndrome helicase suppresses crossing over during homologous recombination. Nature 426, 870–874.

Xu, D., Guo, R., Sobeck, A., Bachrati, C.Z., Yang, J., Enomoto, T., Brown, G.W., Hoatlin, M.E., Hickson, I.D., and Wang, W.D. (2008). RMI, a new OB-fold complex essential for Bloom syndrome protein to maintain genome stability. Genes Dev. 22, 2843–2855.

Yin, J., Sobeck, A., Xu, C., Meetei, A.R., Hoatlin, M., Li, L., and Wang, W. (2005). BLAP75, an essential component of Bloom’s syndrome protein complexes that maintain genome integrity. EMBO J. 24, 1465–1476.
