
Blood Purif 2010;29:130–136
DOI: 10.1159/000245639

**The Gut: The Forgotten Organ in Uremia?**

Eva Schepers · Griet Glorieux · Raymond Vanholder

Nephrology Section, University Hospital, Gent, Belgium

---

### Key Words
Gut · Uremia · Uremic retention solutes · p-Cresol

---

### Abstract
Part of the uremic retention solutes are generated in the intestine, but this option is rarely discussed in the literature. In this publication, we describe consecutively the role of the intestine in generating uremic retention solutes, the pathophysiological importance of the generated solutes and therapeutic options that are inspired by this knowledge. Apart from its role as a route via which uremic toxins or their precursors enter the body, the intestine also acts as an active player by presenting more precursors for fermentation due to disturbances in assimilation caused by uremia, followed by alterations in further processing related to changes in the composition of the fermenting flora. Many of the toxins generated or introduced into the body via the intestine (advanced glycation end products, indoles, phenols) play an active role in vascular damage. Intestinal therapeutic interventions that could help decrease solute concentration are restriction of dietary intake, however at the expense of increasing the risk of malnutrition, rerouting of intestinal metabolism by administration of prebiotics or probiotics and/or the administration of active sorbents such as AST-120 (Kremezin®).

---

### Introduction
When the glomerular filtration rate decreases, the concentration of retained solutes [1] depends on the interference between removal, which in most cases is decreased, and a variable degree of generation [2] (fig. 1). A substantial part of this generation process is regulated in the intestine. In spite of its importance, this option is rarely taken into account in reviews of uremic toxicity and/or in the development of therapies.

---

### Pathophysiological Elements
Uremic solute generation per se is ruled by several mechanisms (fig. 1): endogenous production by often endocrine processes without interference of intestinal absorption as is the case for most peptides; for the purines uric acid or xanthine, intestinal absorption plays a role only after excessive intake of nutrients containing large amounts of nucleotides as precursors (i.e. organ meat, sweetbread); intake of exogenous toxins via the gastrointestinal tract as food components which remain entirely or partially unaffected by digestion (e.g. advanced glycation end products, AGEs); intake of exogenous products via the gastrointestinal tract, digestion in the intestine and uptake of the digested end product followed by further metabolic modification in the body; if the absorbed compound is not further modified by metabolism and since it is conceivable that the digested end product is a

---

© 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel  
0253–5068/10/0292–0130$26.00/0  

Accessible online at: www.karger.com/bpu  

R. Vanholder  
Nephrology Section, Department of Internal Medicine  
University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185  
BE–9000 Gent (Belgium)  
Tel. +32 9332 4525, Fax +32 9332 4599, E-Mail raymond.vanholder@ugent.be  

KARGER  
Fax +41 61 306 12 34  
E-Mail karger@karger.ch  
www.karger.com

Fig. 1. Different mechanisms for the generation of uremic toxins: a = endogenous production without any interference of the intestine; b = gastrointestinal ingestion and immediate intestinal uptake of the compound as such; c = gastrointestinal ingestion followed by digestion and uptake; d = gastrointestinal ingestion followed by digestion, uptake and finally metabolic modification in the body; e = ingestion, digestion, intestinal transformation, uptake and then additional modification in the body; f = ingestion, digestion, intestinal transformation and uptake without further metabolic modification in the body; ↑ = increased versus normal; = = unmodified versus normal; ↓ = decreased versus normal; in uremia, depending on the molecule and the metabolic condition of the patient, the three options are possible for generation.

nutrient (e.g. amino acids), it is generally not noxious as such; it becomes only a toxin upon further modification (e.g. some of the guanidine compounds); intake of exogenous products via the gastrointestinal tract, digestion in the intestine followed by metabolic transformation by the intestinal enzymes or bacteria into toxins, only then uptake of this product and often further metabolic modification in the body (e.g. phenols and indoles).

Sources of these uremic toxins might not only be pure nutrients, but also food preservatives (benzoic acid generating phenols) [3], flavor correctors (pennyroyal oil generating p-cresol) [4], environmental toxins (toluene generating phenol) [5], alternative therapeutic agents or psychedelic drugs (menthofuran generating p-cresol) [6].

In addition, the concentration of uremic solutes in the gut may also be influenced by excretion into the intestine, e.g. by the gall bladder. A further contributing factor is a shift in the composition of the intestinal flora due to the uremic condition, favoring overgrowth of bacteria producing toxic compounds (fig. 2) [7]. Metabolism of peptides and proteins by anaerobic germs (putrefaction) generates phenols and indoles [8]. When those microbes are killed, a decrease in fecal and urinary excretion of phenolic and aromatic substances ensues [9]. In addition,

changes in assimilation (digestion plus absorption) of proteins make more substrate available for fermentation [10, 11], as illustrated by the higher daily urinary p-cresol excretion in subjects with a glomerular filtration rate of <30 ml/min compared to those with ≥60 ml/min [11]. This results in a higher generation rate in chronic kidney disease than in normal subjects, even if the patients with renal failure are neither catabolic nor anabolic.

Some compounds might be neither metabolized nor absorbed, so that they ultimately leave the intestinal tract unmodified; this is the case with resistant starches, cellulose or gums. Such compounds can of course have no direct biological or toxic impact, but they can still affect toxicity indirectly by modifying the constitution or function of the intestinal flora (see section below on therapeutic options).

### Examples of Intestinally Generated Uremic Toxins

#### Advanced Glycation End Products
AGEs are typically retained in older subjects, diabetics and patients with kidney failure. In diabetes, a large part of the generation of AGEs is attributed to the glycation of proteins, peptides and amino acids due to excess glucose.

Fig. 2. Fermentation processes under normal conditions (A) and in uremia (B). A Under normal conditions, compounds (e.g. proteins) are ingested and digested (e.g. to amino acids; black dots); these compounds are partially absorbed via the small intestine; the rest moves to the large intestine where they come into contact with the intestinal flora (open squares), which transforms the molecules into other compounds (e.g. p-cresol; open circles); part of these are absorbed as well. B In uremia, digestion is the same but absorption of the primary molecules (black dots) is hampered so that more substrate enters the large intestine, where also a larger amount of transforming bacteria are present (open squares); the result is more generation of end product (open circles) of which also more is absorbed.

Other sources are posttranslational modifications due to microinflammation and oxidation which play a role in diabetics, uremics as well as in the elderly.

The third major source of AGEs are food products which have been processed by heating [12]. Several studies have demonstrated that nutritional ingestion of AGEs increases their concentration, both in nondiabetics [13] and in diabetics [13, 14].

More importantly, those studies also showed that nutritional AGEs conveyed some of the deleterious physiological effects of these compounds such as inflammation [12] or endothelial dysfunction [13].

### Phenols

Intestinal fermentation of the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine generates p-cresol, phenol [15] and very likely also phenylacetic acid as well as other phenols.

For a long time it has been thought that after its generation p-cresol was absorbed as such by the intestine and then distributed over the body, since upon analysis the molecule was found in serum of subjects with normal and disturbed renal function [16]. Only recently has it become clear that after its absorption, p-cresol is conjugated in the intestinal wall to p-cresylsulfate as well as to p-cresylglucuronide, while what remains of p-cresol after transfer into the portal vein is modified further on to p-cresylglucuronate in the liver, leaving very little or no remnant p-cresol present in the body (fig. 3). Although no similar data about conjugation of other phenols is available, it is conceivable that some of these (e.g. phenol itself) may be conjugated as well.

The reason why p-cresol was considered for a long time as a major phenolic compound in the body is attributable to an artifact created by the preparation of the samples for analysis. Until a few years ago, virtually all determination methods used deproteinization by acidification as a first step, causing hydrolysis of the p-cresol conjugates. Deproteinization without acidification left p-cresylsulfate intact, with virtually no detectable p-cresol [17].

#### Indoles

Similar to phenol, indole is generated by the bacterial flora, now with tryptophan as the mother compound. The main indole detected in uremics is indoxylsulfate, but this sulfated conjugate resists acidic hydrolysis, in contrast to p-cresylsulfate.

The phenolic and indolic conjugates are not necessarily generated by the same metabolic process, as suggested by the diverging metabolic behavior of the two compounds under identical clinical conditions [18].

Fig. 3. Metabolic pathways involved in the transformation of tyrosine to p-cresylsulfate and p-cresylglucuronide.

Biological Impact

Although it is not the intention to present an in-depth review of the biological impact of the discussed compounds, a brief summary of their potential toxicity will allow the reader to realize that influencing concentration, e.g., by changing intestinal generation or absorption, might have clinical benefits.

Advanced Glycation End Products

AGEs have been associated with inflammation, oxidation, leukocyte stimulation, and endothelial dysfunction [12, 13, 19]. Many early in vitro studies showing those effects have, however, been performed with artificially prepared AGEs [20] of which it was uncertain whether they were structurally related to the compounds retained in uremia. More recently, also the proinflammatory impact of AGEs present in dialysis patients has been demonstrated [19].

Up to now only a limited number of studies has addressed the relation between AGE concentration and outcome. One study paradoxically found the best outcomes in the group with the highest AGE concentration, possibly pointing to an overriding effect of nutritional status which at the same time improves survival and supplies extra AGEs [21]. Other studies demonstrated a direct correlation between mortality and concentration of low-molecular-weight AGEs [22] and skin autofluorescence, a presumed indicator of skin AGE content [23].

Table 1. Intestinal approaches to decrease supplementation of toxin

| Method                     | Target molecule               | Outcome                          |
|----------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Diet                       | AGEs, phenol, indoles        | decrease concentration           |
| Prebiotics                 |                              |                                  |
| - Gum arabic fiber         | urea                        | decrease concentration           |
| - Oligofructose-enriched inulin | p-cresol                  | decrease concentration           |
| - Lactulose                | p-cresol                    | decrease concentration           |
| - Resistant starch         | phenol                      | decrease concentration           |
| Probiotics                 |                              |                                  |
| - Urease-positive bacteria | urea                        | decrease concentration           |
| - Lactobacillus            | urea, p-cresol              | decrease concentration           |
| - Bifidobacterium          | p-cresol                    | decrease concentration           |
| - Lactic acid bacteria     | p-cresol, phenols indoles   | decrease concentration           |
| Sorbents                   |                              |                                  |
| - AST-120                  | p-cresol, indoles           | survival; preservation of renal function |

---

Phenols  
$p$-Cresylsulfate has a proinflammatory impact on monocytes and lymphocytes [24]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only study as of today demonstrating a biological impact for this compound.

Several observational studies show a relationship between $p$-cresol and overall mortality [25], cardiovascular disease [26], infectious complications [27] and uremic symptoms [28]. As all these data were obtained with analytical methodology applying acidification, it is conceivable that those findings on $p$-cresol can be extrapolated to the real main retention product, $p$-cresylsulfate. Interventional trials showing a positive impact of decreasing concentration of phenols are not available.

In contrast to $p$-cresylsulfate, the mother compound $p$-cresol is a strong inhibitor of leukocyte response [24, 29]. Although it is unlikely that $p$-cresol exerts this effect on the immune cells throughout the body, because of the absence of direct contact, such an immunosuppressive effect might be at play in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue, which is very likely in more direct contact with the intestinal content, and an important element in shaping the immune response within the rest of the body [8].

(Kremezin®) has been associated with a postponement of the start of dialysis [35] and, if applied before the start of dialysis, with better outcomes once dialysis was undertaken [36]. Although controlled, these studies have been performed in small populations so that they need confirmation.

In summary, the set of uremic toxins selected for this discussion are all characterized by in vivo and/or in vitro toxicity to the cardiovascular system, one of the main clinical problems haunting the uremic population today [37]. Evidence is not solid enough, however, to allow firm recommendations about the necessity of their removal.

### Therapeutic Possibilities

Therapeutic modalities (table 1) implicating intestinal factors should especially be considered in view of the difficult removal of the relevant compounds even with the most efficient dialysis therapies [38, 39].

#### Type of Therapy

Restriction of the dietary intake of AGEs results in a decrease in concentration [14]. If this intervention results in less dietary protein intake, it may however result in malnutrition. Also intestinal generation of phenols and indoles is dependent on dietary protein intake [40, 41]. Since proteins are almost the only source of these molecules, the threat of malnutrition, if one intervenes via dietary protein restriction, is even more likely here.

Therefore, it seems more appealing to change generation via other strategies. A first option aims at modifying

Indoles  
A host of in vitro and in vivo animal studies point to indoxylsulfate as causing inflammation [30], endothelial dysfunction [31] and disturbances of bone metabolism [32]. In addition, it has repeatedly been associated with loss of residual renal function [33], by itself a factor with strong impact on outcome [34]. Inhibition of intestinal absorption of indoxylsulfate by the sorbent AST-120
the intestinal flora to refrain generation of toxins, either by prebiotics [42–45], which are nondigestible compounds beneficially modifying the composition and/or function of the intestinal flora, or by probiotics, which are bacteria administered as food components or supplements providing specific benefits themselves [7, 43, 44, 46–48].

Finally, oral sorbents may be administered to bind solutes and prevent their intestinal absorption. To the best of our knowledge, AST-120 (Kremezin®) is the only therapeutic sorbent of the solutes under discussion, with an impact on outcome parameters shown in a number of studies [35, 36]. Especially the absorptive capacity of AST-120 on indoxylsulfate has been emphasized, although also *p*-cresol is absorbed [49].

### Target Molecules

Several studies aim at reducing urea alone [42, 47, 48]. In as far as urea per se is a relatively inert uremic solute, strategies aimed only at urea removal [47, 48] are less appealing than therapies reducing total nitrogen load, including urea [42]; the latter approach supposedly affects toxicity more globally and less selectively.

Several approaches directly reduce *p*-cresol [7, 43, 44], phenol [7, 45] and/or indoxylsulfate [7].

### Outcomes

All studies with probiotics and prebiotics evaluate the impact on solute concentration in serum or on their fecal or urinary excretion, which should be considered only as surrogate endpoints. All studies mentioned above show a decrease in concentration [7, 42–48]. The studies with AST-120 obviously affect the concentration of indoxyl-

sulfate and *p*-cresol [49, 50] but show in a few publications also an impact on the timing of the start of dialysis [35] and on survival [36] as hard(er) endpoints; however, data are not convincing enough to allow definite conclusions.

#### Hemodialysis versus Peritoneal Dialysis

While removal of *p*-cresol and indoxylsulfate is markedly higher with hemodialysis than with peritoneal dialysis [18, 51, 52], serum concentration in peritoneal dialysis patients is paradoxically low [51–53]. These discrepancies cannot be explained by differences in protein intake so that other causes should be considered; some of these may be related to the intestine: intestinal blood losses, laxative use, digestive transit or intake of binding agents such as phosphate binders or potassium-binding resins [51]. These data suggest that uremic toxin supplementation may differ based on intestinal factors, even if no direct intervention via diet, probiotics or prebiotics has taken place.

### Conclusions

The intestine is a major source of uremic toxin generation and/or uptake. Some of the toxins involved (AGEs, phenols, indoles) have a substantial biological impact. Many of these effects are related to vascular damage. Administration of prebiotics and probiotics as well as of sorbents (AST-120) decreases their concentration. Studies showing that such a decrease has a positive impact on outcome are, however, scarce and need confirmation.

### References

1. Vanholder R, De Smet R, Glorieux G, et al: Review on uremic toxins: classification, concentration, and interindividual variability. Kidney Int 2003;63:1934–1943.
2. Vanholder RC, Ringoir SM: Adequacy of dialysis: a critical analysis. Kidney Int 1992;42: 540–558.
3. Martin AK: The origin of urinary aromatic compounds excreted by ruminants. 3. The metabolism of phenolic compounds to simple phenols. Br J Nutr 1982;48:497–507.
4. Vanholder R, De Smet R, Lesaffer G: *p*-Cresol: a toxin revealing many neglected but relevant aspects of uraemic toxicity. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1999;14:2813–2815.
5. Hanioka H, Hamamura M, Kakino K, et al: Dog liver microsomal P450 enzyme-mediated toluene biotransformation. Xenobiotica 1995;25:1207–1217.
6. Madyastha KM, Raj CP: Evidence for the formation of a known toxin, *p*-cresol, from menthofuran. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991;177:440–446.
7. Hida M, Aiba Y, Sawamura S, Suzuki N, Satoh T, Koga Y: Inhibition of the accumulation of uremic toxins in the blood and their precursors in the feces after oral administration of lebenin, a lactic acid bacteria preparation, to uremic patients undergoing hemodialysis. Nephron 1996;74:349–355.
8. Guarner F, Malagelada JR: Gut flora in health and disease. Lancet 2003;361:512–519.
9. Yokoyama MT, Tabori C, Miller ER, Hogberg MG: The effects of antibiotics in the weanling pig diet on growth and the excretion of volatile phenolic and aromatic bacterial metabolites. Am J Clin Nutr 1982;35: 1417–1424.
10. Bammens B, Evenepoel P, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y: Impairment of small intestinal protein assimilation in patients with end-stage renal disease: extending the malnutrition-inflammation-atherosclerosis concept. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1536–1543.
11. Bammens B, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y, Evenepoel P: Evidence for impaired assimilation of protein in chronic renal failure. Kidney Int 2003;64:2196–2203.
12 Uribarri J, Cai W, Sandu O, Peppa M, Goldberg T, Vlassara H: Diet-derived advanced glycation end products are major contributors to the body’s AGE pool and induce inflammation in healthy subjects. Ann NY Acad Sci 2005;1043:461–466.

13 Uribarri J, Stirban A, Sander D, et al: Single oral challenge by advanced glycation end products acutely impairs endothelial function in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2579–2582.

14 Koschinsky T, He CJ, Mitsuhashi T, et al: Orally absorbed reactive glycation products (glycotoxins): an environmental risk factor in diabetic nephropathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:6474–6479.

15 Bone E, Tamm A, Hill M: The production of urinary phenols by gut bacteria and their possible role in the causation of large bowel cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 1976;29:1448–1454.

16 De Smet R, David F, Sandra P, et al: A sensitive HPLC method for the quantification of free and total p-cresol in patients with chronic renal failure. Clin Chim Acta 1998;278:1–21.

17 Martinez AW, Recht NS, Hostetter TH, Meyer TW: Removal of p-cresol sulfate by hemodialysis. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005;16:3430–3436.

18 Pham NM, Recht NS, Hostetter TH, Meyer TW: Removal of the protein-bound solutes indican and p-cresol sulfate by peritoneal dialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008;3:85–90.

19 Glorieux G, Helling R, Henle T, et al: In vitro evidence for immune activating effect of specific AGE structures retained in uremia. Kidney Int 2004;66:1873–1880.

20 Witko-Sarsat V, Friedlander M, Nguyen KT, et al: Advanced oxidation protein products as novel mediators of inflammation and monocyte activation in chronic renal failure. J Immunol 1998;161:2524–2532.

21 Schwedler SB, Metzger T, Schinzel R, Warner C: Advanced glycation end products and mortality in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 2002;62:301–310.

22 Roberts MA, Thomas MC, Fernando D, Macmillan N, Power DA, Ierino FL: Low molecular weight advanced glycation end products predict mortality in asymptomatic patients receiving chronic haemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006;21:1611–1617.

23 Meerwaldt R, Lutgers HL, Links TP, et al: Skin autofluorescence is a strong predictor of cardiac mortality in diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007;30:107–112.

24 Schepers E, Meert N, Glorieux G, Goeman J, Van der EyckenJ, Vanholder R: p-Cresylsulfate, the main in vivo metabolite of p-cresol, activates leucocyte free radical production. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2007;22:592–596.

25 Bammens B, Evenepoel P, Keuleers H, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y: Free serum concentrations of the protein-bound retention solute p-cresol predict mortality in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 2006;69:1081–1087.

26 Meijers BK, Bammens B, De Moor B, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y, Evenepoel P: Free p-cresol is associated with cardiovascular disease in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 2008;73:1174–1180.

27 De Smet R, Van Kaer J, Van Vlem B, et al: Toxicity of free p-cresol: a prospective and cross-sectional analysis. Clin Chem 2003;49:470–478.

28 Bammens B, Evenepoel P, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y: Removal of middle molecules and protein-bound solutes by peritoneal dialysis and relation with uremic symptoms. Kidney Int 2003;64:2238–2243.

29 Vanholder R, De Smet R, Waterloos MA, et al: Mechanisms of uremic inhibition of phagocyte reactive species production: characterization of the role of p-cresol. Kidney Int 1995;47:510–517.

30 Motojima M, Hosokawa A, Yamato H, Muraki T, Yoshioka T: Uremic toxins of organic anions up-regulate PAI-1 expression by induction of NF-kappaB and free radical in proximal tubular cells. Kidney Int 2003;63:1671–1680.

31 Dou L, Bertrand E, Cerini C, et al: The uremic solutes p-cresol and indoxylsulfate inhibit endothelial proliferation and wound repair. Kidney Int 2004;65:442–451.

32 Nii-Kono T, Iwasaki Y, Uchida M, et al: Indoxylsulfate induces skeletal resistance to parathyroid hormone in cultured osteoblastic cells. Kidney Int 2007;71:738–743.

33 Motojima M, Nishijima F, Ikoma M, et al: Role for ‘uremic toxin’ in the progressive loss of intact nephrons in chronic renal failure. Kidney Int 1991;40:461–469.

34 Perl J, Bargman JM: The importance of residual kidney function for patients on dialysis: a critical review. Am J Kidney Dis 2009;53:1068–1081.

35 Ueda H, Shibahara N, Takagi S, Inoue T, Kat suoka Y: AST-120, an oral adsorbent, delays the initiation of dialysis in patients with chronic kidney diseases. Ther Apher Dial 2007;11:189–195.

36 Ueda H, Shibahara N, Takagi S, Inoue T, Kat suoka Y: AST-120 treatment in pre-dialysis period affects the prognosis in patients on hemodialysis. Ren Fail 2008;30:856–860.

37 Vanholder R, Massy Z, Argiles A, Spasovski G, Verbeke F, Lameire N: Chronic kidney disease as cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005;20:1048–1056.

38 Meert N, Eloot S, Waterloos MA, et al: Effective removal of protein-bound uraemic solutes by different convective strategies: a prospective trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009;24:562–570.

39 Lesaffer G, De Smet R, Lameire N, Dhondt A, Duym P, Vanholder R: Intradialytic removal of protein-bound uraemic toxins: role of solute characteristics and of dialyser membrane. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2000;15:50–57.

40 Geypens B, Claus D, Evenepoel P, et al: Influence of dietary protein supplements on the formation of bacterial metabolites in the colon. Gut 1997;41:70–76.

41 Ling WH, Hanninen O: Shifting from a conventional diet to an uncooked vegan diet reversibly alters fecal hydrolytic activities in humans. J Nutr 1992;122:924–930.

42 Bliss DZ, Stein TP, Schleifer CR, Settle RG: Supplementation with gum arabic fiber increases fecal nitrogen excretion and lowers serum urea nitrogen concentration in chronic renal failure patients consuming a low-protein diet. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;63:392–398.

43 De Preter, V, Vanhoutte T, Huys G, et al: Effects of *Lactobacillus casei* Shirota, *Bifidobacterium breve*, and oligofructose-enriched inulin on colonic nitrogen-protein metabolism in healthy humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2007;292:G358–G368.

44 De Preter V, Coopmans T, Rutgeerts P, Verbeke K: Influence of long-term administration of lactulose and *Saccharomyces boulardii* on the colonic generation of phenolic compounds in healthy human subjects. J Am Coll Nutr 2006;25:541–549.

45 Birkett A, Muir J, Phillips J, Jones G, O’Dea K: Resistant starch lowers fecal concentrations of ammonia and phenols in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;63:766–772.

46 Taki K, Takayama F, Niwa T: Beneficial effects of *Bifidobacteria* in a gastroresistant seamless capsule on hyperhomocysteinemia in hemodialysis patients. J Ren Nutr 2005;15:77–80.

47 Ranganathan N, Patel BG, Ranganathan P, et al: In vitro and in vivo assessment of intraintestinal bacteriotherapy in chronic kidney disease. ASAIO J 2006;52:70–79.

48 Chow KM, Liu ZC, Prakash S, Chang TM: Free and microencapsulated *Lactobacillus* and effects of metabolic induction on urea removal. Artif Cells Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol 2003;31:425–434.

49 Niwa T, Ise M, Miyazaki T, Meada K: Suppressive effect of an oral sorbent on the accumulation of p-cresol in the serum of experimental uremic rats. Nephron 1993;65:82–87.

50 Schulman G, Agarwal R, Acharya M, Berl T, Blumenthal S, Kopyt N: A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of AST-120 (Kremezin) in patients with moderate to severe CKD. Am J Kidney Dis 2006;47:565–577.

51 Vanholder R, Meert N, Van Biesen W, et al: Why do patients on peritoneal dialysis have low blood levels of protein-bound solutes? Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 2009;5:130–131.

52 Evenepoel P, Bammens B, Verbeke K, Vanrenterghem Y: Superior dialytic clearance of beta(2)-microglobulin and p-cresol by high-flux hemodialysis as compared to peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int 2006;70:794–799.

53 Lameire N, Vanholder R, De Smet R: Uremic toxins and peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int Suppl 2001;78:S292–S297.
