
TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES 115(1), 118–130 (2010)  
doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfq028  
Advance Access publication January 27, 2010  

# Long-term Nicotine Exposure-Induced Chemoresistance Is Mediated by Activation of Stat3 and Downregulation of ERK1/2 via nAChR and Beta-Adrenoceptors in Human Bladder Cancer Cells

Rong-Jane Chen,* Yuan-Soon Ho,† How-Ran Guo,* and Ying-Jan Wang*,1  

*Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, National Cheng Kung University Medical College, Tainan, Taiwan 70428; and †School of Medical Technology and Biotechnology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan  

1 To whom correspondence should be addressed at Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, National Cheng Kung University Medical College, 138 Sheng-Li Road, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Fax: (+886) 6-275-2484. E-mail: yjwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Received January 18, 2010; accepted January 22, 2010

---

Previous reports suggested that bladder cancer patients who continue to smoke while receiving chemotherapy have poorer outcomes than their nonsmoking counterparts. Nicotine, the major addictive compound in cigarette smoke, is known to induce chemoresistance in some cancer cells. Chemoresistance has been linked to the activation of Stat3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription). The objective of this study was to identify the role of Stat3 in chemoresistance induced by nicotine in human bladder cancer cell line, T24 cells. Chemoresistant T24 cells were established by persistent nicotine treatment. Apoptosis and cell cycle parameters were analyzed by Annexin V staining, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase degradation, caspase activity, and propidium iodide staining. Signal transduction mediating the chemoresistance was detected by Western blotting and small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection. We provide evidence for the first time that nicotine strongly activated Stat3, leading to Cyclin D1 overexpression, cell cycle perturbations, and chemoresistance. Furthermore, nicotine mobilized Stat3 signaling, resulting in the loss of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) activation and reduced chemosensitivity via nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and β-adrenoceptors. Inhibition of Stat3 by siRNA or a specific inhibitor restored chemosensitivity in T24 cells. Stat3 could be the major target for increasing chemosensitivity in patients who develop chemoresistance during chemotherapy, and avoidance of cigarette smoking or nicotine-based treatments may increase the efficacy of chemotherapy.

Key Words: nicotine; chemoresistance; Stat3; ERK1/2; nAChR; β-AR.

---

Smoking is considered to be one of the most important risk factor for urinary bladder cancer (UBC), the fifth most common human neoplasm (Zeegers et al., 2000). Most of the deaths from bladder cancer are due to advanced unresectable disease, which is resistant to chemotherapy (Dreicer, 2001). A number of studies have shown that bladder cancer patients who smoke while receiving treatment for their malignancies have poorer outcomes compared with their nonsmoking counterparts. For instance, bladder cancer patients with superficial transitional cell carcinoma who continue to smoke tend to have faster recurrences than those who quit smoking (median time to recurrence of 8.9 vs. 13 months, respectively) (Fleshner et al., 1999). In Chen’s study, the 3-year recurrence-free survival (95% confidence interval) of smokers, nonsmokers, ex-smokers, and quitters were 45% (32–56%), 57% (43–70%), 62% (47–73%), and 70% (53–81%), respectively, which indicated a shorter recurrence-free survival in those who continued to smoke. They concluded that continued smokers have a 2.2-fold greater risk of bladder cancer recurrence than quitters (Chen et al., 2007). These studies suggest that cigarette smoking may exert a protective factor against drug-induced cytotoxicity and further imply a survival mechanism in the maintenance of chemoresistance in these cells. However, very little is known about the mechanism by which cigarette smoke enhances chemoresistance.

It has been suggested that nicotine, the major component in cigarette smoke originally thought to be only responsible for tobacco addiction, also alters some cellular functions, such as activation of mitogenic pathways, angiogenesis, and cell growth in many cell types (Arredondo et al., 2006; Mousa and Mousa, 2006). Nicotine acts its biological function mainly through the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) (Schuller et al., 2003), β-adrenoceptors (β-AR) (Shin et al., 2007), or EGF receptor (Laag et al., 2006). Additionally, nicotine has been shown to inhibit apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis factor, UV (ultraviolet radiation) light, or chemotherapeutic drugs such as cisplatin, vinblastine, paclitaxel, and doxorubicin in a variety of cancer cells (Wright et al., 1993; Xu et al., 2007). The antiapoptotic activity of nicotine is known to be regulated by multiple signaling proteins, such as Bcl-2, nuclear factor-κB, Bax, Bad, active human protein kinases (AKT), and survivin (Jin et al., 2004b; Tsurutani et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2007). These studies indicate that exposure to nicotine may result in chemoresistance and decreased efficiency of cancer therapies.

© The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology. All rights reserved.  
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

ROLE OF NICOTINE INDUCES CHEMORESISTANCE

Tumor cells often respond to chemotherapy by engaging protective mechanisms and survival signaling, which can antagonize the chemotherapy (Mayo and Baldwin, 2000). Furthermore, apoptosis inhibition is necessary to provide cancer cells with the ability to survive in a stressful environment; it has been proposed that oncogenes provide cancer cells with intrinsic resistance. Chemoresistance in several types of cancer has been linked to the activation of Stat3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription), and upregulation of Stat3 directly confers a drug-resistant phenotype (Barre et al., 2007). For example, recent studies have demonstrated that paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines show an abnormal increase of Stat3 activity and that RNAi-mediated downregulation of the transcription factor reduces paclitaxel resistance (Duan et al., 2006). Stat3 can also inhibit cell cycle arrest and senescence through upregulation of Cyclin D1 and downregulation of p21WAF1 protein expression (Barre et al., 2003). Taken together, these studies indicate that Stat3 confers on cancer cells an enhanced ability to survive from genotoxic treatments and thus may be a predictive marker of drug resistance. Inhibition of the Stat3 pathway in several models of human malignancies induces growth arrest, apoptosis, and chemosensitivity (Duan et al., 2007).

Enhancement of the expression of survival proteins and prevention of cell cycle arrest implied that Stat3 may be involved in drug resistance in bladder cancer therapies and that the chemoresistance induced by nicotine in bladder tumors could trigger this process. Studying the mechanisms of cigarette smoke-induced chemoresistance may explain how cancer cells gain a survival advantage to combat chemotherapeutic agent-induced cytotoxicity and could also be helpful for the design of improved therapeutic strategies for enhancing chemosensitivity in bladder cancer patients who continue to smoke. The following were the focus of this study: (1) chemosensitivity of control cells and chemoresistance by long-term nicotine treatment in bladder cancer cells, (2) constitutive activation of Stat3 leading to Cyclin D1 overexpression was correlated with chemoresistance induced by nicotine, (3) effects of Stat3 inhibitor AG490 and Stat3 small interfering RNA (siRNA) on the reversal of chemoresistance, and (4) the role of α7-, α4/β2-nAChR, and β-AR on Stat3 activation, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) downregulation, and protective effects in response to anticancer agents.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Materials

Nicotine, nonspecific nicotinic receptor inhibitor hexomethonium bromide, nonselective antagonist for beta-adrenergic receptors, propranolol, ERK1/2 inhibitor U0126, JAK2/Stat3 inhibitor AG490, α7-subunit inhibitor methyllycaconitine (MLA), α4/β2 subunit inhibitor α-lobeline (Lob), cisplatin, and paclitaxel were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc. (St Louis, MO). Antibodies against Cyclin D1, Cyclin A, Cyclin B, proliferation cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), phospho-cdc2, Bcl-2, Bax, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), ERK1/2, Stat3, phospho-ERK1/2, phospho-Stat3 Ser727, phospho-Stat3 Tyr-705, glycerdehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA)

Cell Culture and Pharmacological Treatments

T24 bladder epithelial cancer cell line, immortalized human uroepithelial cells SV-HUC-1, human lung cancer cell line A549, and immortalized human lung epithelial cells Beas2B were purchased from ATCC. Human UBC cell line UB47 was a kind gift of Dr Hsiao-Sheng Liu (National Cheng Kung Medical College, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan). T24 cells were maintained in 10-cm² dishes in McCoy 5A medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Inc); UB47 cells were grown in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium 1640 (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD); SV-HUC-1, A549, and Beas2B cells were maintained in Dulbecco/Vogt Modified Eagle’s minimal essential medium (Life Technologies, Inc.). All culture medium were supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies, Inc.), and 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (HyClone, South Logan, UT). For the generation of chemoresistance clones, T24 cells were grown in the presence of 1μM of nicotine for 20, 40, 60, and 80 passages. Control cells were cultured in parallel with the treated cells and passaged for every 2 days. Control T24 cells and p80 nicotine-treated T24 cell were used for chemosensitivity comparisons and for studying the mechanism of nicotine-induced chemoresistance in this study.

Determination of Cell Viability

Trypan blue exclusion assay. Cells were cultured in 96-well plates at a density of 2 × 10³ cells per well for 24 h for 5 days. Cell numbers were counted every day after staining with 0.5% trypan blue using a cell counting chamber.

MTT assay. Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at a density of 8 × 10³ cells per well for overnight. After removing the medium, 100 μl of serum-free medium containing antitumor agents were added for 72 h. Then, 100 μl of MTT was added to the wells, and the plate was incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The medium was removed, and 100 μl of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was added to the wells. Absorbance was measured using an ELISA plate reader at 570 nm.

Assessment of Apoptosis

Annexin V staining assay. One of the early characteristics of apoptosis is the rapid translocation and accumulation of the membrane phospholipids phosphatidylserine from the cytoplasmic interface to the extracellular surface. Cells were trypsinized, washed with 1× PBS, centrifuged, and resuspend in 1× Annexin V binding buffer (10mM Hepes, pH7.4; 0.14M NaCl; and 2.5 mM CaCl₂) containing 5 μl Annexin V-FITC (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) at room temperature for 15 min. Additional 400 μl of 1× binding buffer was added to stop the reaction, and the percentage of Annexin V-positive cells were measured by FACScan (Becton Dickinson)

Flow cytometry analysis. The percentages of cells below the G₁ peak (subG₀/G₁ fraction) and the distribution of cell cycle were evaluated by propidium iodide staining and analyzed by FACScan (Becton Dickinson) with WinMDI software programs.

Caspase activity assay. The activity caspase-3 was quantified by means of the Caspase Fluorometric Assay Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cell extracts were incubated with caspase substrate for 1 h at 37°C. Caspase-specific peptides that are conjugated to the fluorescent reporter molecule 7-amino-4-trifluoromethyl coumarin (AFC) were then added to the reaction and incubation for 1 h. The cleavage of peptide by caspase released free AFC that can be quantified using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (400-nm excitation and 505-nm emission).

Western Blot Analysis

The isolation of total cellular lysates, immunoprecipitation, gel electrophoresis, and immunoblotting were performed, according to the methods described previously (Lee et al., 2003). Immunoreactive proteins were visualized with the

enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (PerkinElmer Life Science, Inc., MA) and BioMax LightFilm (Eastman Kodak Company, New Heaven, CT), according to the manufacturer's instructions.

**Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay**

Nuclear extracts were performed according to Trombino *et al.* (2004). DNA probes were biotin-labeled using a biotin 3′ end-labeling kit (PIERCE Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Double-stranded labeled DNA oligonucleotides encompassing the Stat3 consensus oligonucleotides (GATCCCTTCTGG-GAATTCCTAGATC) (Protech Technology Enterprise Co., Ltd., TaoYuan, Taiwan) were used for a binding reaction. The DNA-binding activities of Stat3 were evaluated using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay kit (PIERCE Biotechnology), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Ten micrograms of nuclear extracts was subjected to denaturing 4% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and developed.

**Transfection of the Constitutively Active Form Stat3C Plasmid and Stat3 siRNA**

The constitutively active form of Stat3 (Stat3C) plasmid was kindly provided by Dr Hsiao-Sheng Liu (National Cheng Kung Medical College, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan). Stat3C can bind DNA and activate transcription without a specific stimulation. T24 cells were transfected with 1.5 μg/ml of Stat3C plasmid and then cells were treated with cisplatin or paclitaxel for 48 h. The siRNAs targeting Stat3 used in this study were purchased from Ambion Inc. (Austin, TX). The siRNA sequences targeting human Stat3 used in this study were as follows: sense: 5′-GGAUCUAGAA-CAGAAAAUGt-3′ and antisense: 5′-CAUUUUCUGUUCUAGAUCCTG-3′. Nic-T24 cells were transiently transfected with Stat3 siRNA (50nM) by electroporation using a MicroPorator (Digital Bio Technology, Suwon, Korea) under condition of 1350 V and 20 ms, according to the manufacture’s instruction.

**Determination of Noradrenaline Level**

T24 and Nic-T24 cells were plated in a 12-well plate at a density of \(2 \times 10^4\) per well. Cells were pretreated with the α7-subunit inhibitor methyllycaconitine (MLA) at 200μM, the α4/β2-subunit inhibitor α-lobeline (Lob) at 200μM, or the β-adrenoceptor inhibitor propranolol (Prop) at 10μM for an hour. Nic-T24 cells were then treated with 1μM nicotine for 24 h. Supernatants were collected to determine the concentration of noradrenaline. The noradrenaline level was detected using the Noradrenaline ELISA Kit (Immuno-Biological Laboratories, Hamburg, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

**Statistical Analysis**

Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Experimental data were analyzed using the Student’s t-test. Differences were considered to be statistically significant when the p value was less than 0.05.

---

**RESULTS**

**Growth Properties of T24 Cells with Long-term Nicotine Exposure**

In this study, we developed long-term nicotine exposure models in T24 bladder cancer cells. T24 cells were exposed to 1μM nicotine for 20, 40, 60, and 80 passages (referred to as p20, p40, p60, and p80 Nic-T24 cells). Figure 1A shows that nicotine-treated T24 cells have a markedly higher time-dependent proliferation rate compared with the control cells. The percentage of subG₀/G₁ phase cells in control increased significantly in a time-dependent manner under serum-free condition. In contrast, at the same time point, nicotine-treated T24 cells displayed a significantly lower increase in the percentage of subG₀/G₁ phase cells (Fig. 1B) and a concomitant increase in the percentage of G₀/G₁ phase cells (Fig. 1C). Among the nicotine-treated T24 cells, p80 Nic-T24 cells, which were exposed to nicotine for the longest time period, exhibited the highest cell proliferation rate, the percentage of cells in G₀/G₁ phase, and the lowest increased in the percentage of subG₀/G₁ cells at 24, 48, and 72 h compared with the control and other nicotine-treated T24 cells. These results indicate that long-term nicotine exposure disrupts serum withdrawal-mediated apoptosis, leading to continuous cell cycle progression. We then assessed expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins. Figure 1D shows that Cyclin D1 and PCNA expression was increased with increasing exposure periods of T24 cells to nicotine. P80 Nic-T24 cells increased Cyclin D1 expression by 2.1-fold compared with control T24 cells.

**Long-term Nicotine Treatment Induces Higher Chemoresistance in Nic-T24 Cells**

Cyclin D1 is associated with enhanced resistance to apoptosis induced by anticancer agents (Biliran *et al.*, 2005). To investigate the effect of long-term nicotine treatment on apoptosis, control T24 cells (Con) and p80 Nic-T24 cells (Nic) were treated with increasing concentrations of cisplatin (Cis) or paclitaxel (Tax) for 72 h. Cell viability of the Con group was significantly inhibited by 50% at 5μM cisplatin compared with 19% in the Nic group. Similarly, treated with paclitaxel resulted in a dose-dependent growth inhibition in the Con group but with decreased paclitaxel sensitivity in the Nic group (Fig. 2A). In addition, Con groups treated with Cis and Tax showed a significantly higher percentage of Annexin V staining (22% by Cis treatment and 18.1% by Tax treatment) compared with Nic groups (13.5% by Cis treatment and 9.8% by Tax treatment) (Fig. 2B). Caspase activity assay revealed that the caspase-3 activity increased by about threefold in Con groups, whereas only increased slightly in Nic groups after antitumor agents application (Fig. 2C). Furthermore, treatment of Con groups with antitumor agents showed cleavage of the DNA repair enzyme PARP. Cleaved PARP was reduced in cisplatin-treated Nic groups and was not observed in paclitaxel-treated Nic groups. Moreover, a high Bax/Bcl-2 ratio can be correlated with apoptotic cell death, while a low Bax/Bcl-2 ratio may represent a prosurvival profile (Perlman *et al.*, 1999). Figure 2D shows that the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio was increased in Con groups (2.97-fold by Cis treatment and 1.4-fold by Tax treatment), whereas a lower Bax/Bcl-2 ratio was observed in Nic groups.

We then investigated whether the decreased chemosensitivity in the Nic groups was associated with perturbations in the cell cycle. Nic groups displayed a significant increase in percentage of cells in G₀/G₁ phase in response to antitumor agents compared to Con groups (Fig. 2E). Western blot analysis confirmed that the Nic groups maintained an increased expression of Cyclin D1, Cyclin A, and Cyclin B proteins after

ROLE OF NICOTINE INDUCES CHEMORESISTANCE

FIG. 1. Persistent exposure to nicotine increases cell proliferation, perturbs cell cycle progression, and upregulates Cyclin D1 and PCNA expression. (A) Control (Con), p20, p40, p60, and p80 nicotine-treated T24 cells were seeded in 96-well plates in 10% serum medium for the indicated times. Cell proliferation rates were measured by the trypan blue exclusion assay. Distribution of cells in subG₀/G₁ (B) and G₀/G₁ (C) phases were analyzed by flow cytometry after propidium iodide staining. Data are represented as means ± SD of three independent experiments; *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups. (D) After the treatment, cell lysates were isolated and immunoblotted with anti-Cyclin D1 and anti-PCNA antibodies. The membrane was probed with anti-α-tubulin to confirm equal loading of proteins.

treatment with antitumor agents, whereas the expression levels of these cell cycle regulatory proteins decreased in the Con groups (Fig. 2F). These data indicate that persistent exposure to nicotine may inhibit apoptosis then trigger chemoresistance in bladder cancer cells.

**Overactivation of Stat3 and Downregulation of ERK1/2 in Chemoresistant Nic-p80 Cells**

Our recent study indicated that Stat3 and ERK1/2 activation was associated with Cyclin D1 overexpression and was linked to nicotine exposure (Chen et al., 2008). The constitutive activation of Stat3 may contribute to the survival advantage of cancer cells and acquired drug resistance to chemotherapy. Thus, we further examine the activation of Stat3 and ERK1/2 in response to long-term nicotine exposure. Exposure of Con groups exposed to antitumor agents for 48 h resulted in ERK1/2 activation but Stat3 inhibition, by comparison, Stat3 phosphorylation was increased, but ERK1/2 activation was inhibited in Nic groups. Consistent with the Western blot results, the Stat3 DNA-binding activity was strongly induced in Nic groups by antitumor agent treatment compared with Con groups (Fig. 3B). We conclude that chemoresistance in the Nic groups could be mediated by inducing the Stat3 signaling pathway and reducing ERK1/2 activity.

In order to clarify that nicotine-induced Sta3 activation is not limited in T24 bladder cancer cells, normal human lung epithelial cells Beas2B, human lung cancer cells A549, immortalized human uroepithelial cells SV-HUC-1, and human bladder cancer cells UB47 were treated with 1μM nicotine for 15, 30, 60, and 120 min. Figures 3C–F showed that nicotine increased the phosphorylation of Stat3 in four cell lines, whereas ERK1/2 activation was only observed in A549 and UB47 cells. We suggested that Stat3 could be the major target for nicotine exposure and may play important roles in proliferation, chemoresistance, or antiapoptosis in response to nicotine.

**ERK1/2 Activation Mediates Apoptotic Cell Death Induced by Antitumor Agents**

Previous studies indicated that cell death induced by cisplatin is ERK1/2 dependent; inhibition of ERK1/2 activation reduced the chemosensitivity of cancer cells (Lu and Cederbaum, 2007). ERK1/2-specific inhibitor U0126 was used to determine whether ERK1/2 activity is needed for antitumor agent-induced apoptosis. Pretreatment with U0126 in Con groups effectively attenuated antitumor agent–induced ERK1/2 activation but did not affect Stat3 phosphorylation (Fig. 4C) and resulted in a decrease in the percentage of subG₀/G₁ cells in Cis- and Tax-treated groups by 20 and 12%, respectively (Fig. 4A). Cell cycle

FIG. 2. Effects of persistent nicotine exposure on chemoresistance. (A) Control (Con) and p80 nicotine-treated T24 cells (Nic) were seeded in 96-well plates treated with 5μM cisplatin (Cis) or 10nM paclitaxel (Tax) under serum-free condition for 72 h. Cell viability was measured by the MTT assay. Following DMSO, serum deprivation (SF), Cis, or Tax treatment, Con and Nic groups were collected and subjected to the following apoptotic assays: (B) Annexin V staining as a specific apoptosis marker; (C) caspase-3 activities; and (D) Western blotting for PARP, Bax, and Bcl-2 expression by using specific antibodies. The intensities of Bax and Bcl-2 bands were quantified by densitometry and expressed as Bax/Bcl-2 ratios. (E) Distribution of cells in G₀/G₁ phase was analyzed by a flow cytometer. (F) Cell lysates were subjected to the SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and probed with anti-Cyclin D1, -Cyclin A, and -Cyclin B antibodies. Equal protein loading was determined by an anti-GAPDH antibody. Data are represented as means ± SD of three independent experiments; *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups.

distribution was also affected: most of the cells remained in G₀/G₁ phase after ERK1/2 inhibition (Fig. 4B). The results suggested that long-term nicotine-treated T24 cells inhibited ERK1/2 activation could result in chemoresistance.

Role of Stat3 in Chemoresistance in T24 Cells

We further investigate whether inhibition of Stat3 activity could reverse chemosensitivity in Nic groups. By transfection with Stat3 siRNA in Nic-T24 cells (Nic + si Stat3), the Stat3 protein levels were reduced by 30% and phosphorylated Stat3 was reduced by 50%, in comparison to Nic-T24 cells (Fig. 5A). Consistently, the Nic + si Stat3 groups exhibited higher levels of apoptosis upon antitumor agent treatments compared with Nic groups, as evidenced by the decrease of cell viability (Fig. 5B) and increased number of cells in subG₀/G₁ phase (Fig. 5C). To further confirm the role of Stat3 in chemoresistance, we examined whether downregulation of Stat3 activity by the

ROLE OF NICOTINE INDUCES CHEMORESISTANCE

(A)

| DMSO | SF | Cis | Tax |
|------|----|-----|-----|
| p-Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| p-ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |

(B)

Stat3 DNA binding activity

| DMSO | SF | Cis | Tax |
|------|----|-----|-----|
|  |  |  |  |

(C) SV-HUC-1

Nicotine
0 15 30 60 120 (min)

| pStat3 |  |  |  |  |
|--------|---|---|---|---|
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| pERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |

(D) UB47

Nicotine
0 15 30 60 120 (min)

| pStat3 |  |  |  |  |
|--------|---|---|---|---|
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| pERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |

(E) Beas2B

Nicotine
0 15 30 60 120 (min)

| pStat3 |  |  |  |  |
|--------|---|---|---|---|
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| pERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |

(F) A549

Nicotine
0 15 30 60 120 (min)

| pStat3 |  |  |  |  |
|--------|---|---|---|---|
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |
| pERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |

FIG. 3. Stat3 but not ERK1/2 activity is increased by persistent exposure to nicotine. (A) Control (C) and nicotine-treated p80 T24 cells (N) were treated with DMSO, serum deprivation (SF), 10µM cisplatin (Cis), or 2nM paclitaxel (Tax) for 48 h. Expressions of pStat3, Stat3, pERK1/2, and ERK1/2 were determined by Western blotting. Equal protein loading was determined by anti-GAPDH antibody. (B) After the same treatment, Stat3 DNA–binding activity was assessed using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay as described in ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ section. (C) SV-HUC-1 cells, (D) UB47 cells, (E) Beas2B cells, and (F) A549 cells were treated with nicotine 1µM under serum-free condition for 0, 15, 30, 60, and 120 min. Phosphorylated ERK1/2, ERK1/2, Stat3 Ser727, and Stat3 were determined by immunoblotting with specific antibodies.

JAK2/Stat3 inhibitor AG490 enhanced susceptibility to antitumor agent-induced apoptosis. Figure 5D shows that pretreatment with AG490 followed by antitumor agents induced a significant increase in apoptotic cells compared to Nic groups without AG490 pretreatment. We also found that Stat3 inhibition by Stat3 siRNA or AG490 reduced Cyclin D1 expression, indicating that Cyclin D1 expression requires the Stat3 activation and is necessary for chemoresistance in Nic groups (Figs. 5E and 5F). Interestingly, we found a correlation may exist between Stat3 activation and ERK1/2 inhibition after long-term nicotine treatment. Pretreatment with AG490 or Stat3 siRNA restored the ERK1/2 activation, indicating that nicotine-induced inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation could be mediated by Stat3 activation (Figs. 5E and 5F).

Previous findings prompted us to study the effect of constitutively active Stat3 on chemoresistance in response to chemotherapeutic agents. Transient transfection of Stat3C plasmid into wild-type T24 cells resulted in increased phosphorylation of Stat3 and reduced ERK1/2 phosphorylation compared with control T24 cells (Fig. 5G). In addition, increased expression of Cyclin D1 was observed in T24 cells transfected with Stat3C. Cell viability increased about twofold in Stat3C-transfected T24 cells compared with control T24 cells after treatment with cisplatin or paclitaxel (Fig. 5H). These results confirmed that overexpression and/or constitutive activation of Stat3 could desensitize T24 cells to apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents.

Activation of Stat3 and Deregulation of ERK1/2 after Long-term Nicotine Exposure Are Mediated by nAChR and β-AR

We have previously indicated that nicotine activates Stat3, leading to Cyclin D1 expression and cell proliferation through

CHEN ET AL.

cells. The nonspecific nAChR antagonist hexamethonium bromide (Hexa), α4/β2-specific inhibitor α-lobeline (L), α7-selective antagonist methyllycaonitine (MLA), and nonspecific β-AR antagonist propranolol (Prop) were used to confirm which receptors upregulate Stat3 and induce chemoresistance. The results indicate that the α4/β2-specific inhibitor and β-AR antagonist inhibited Stat3 activation, BCl-2 expression (Figs. 6B–D), and cell viability (Figs. 6E and 6F), whereas the α7-selective antagonist methyllycaonitine (MLA) did not. These results indicate that Stat3 activation and chemoresistance by long-term nicotine stimulation involves the action of α4/β2 nAChR, and β-AR in Nic-T24 cells.

Nicotine was found to evoke noradrenaline or adrenaline release through nAChR (Al-Wadei and Schuller, 2009), and in turn, these hormones stimulate human cancer cells growth and metastasis (Shin *et al.*, 2007; Sood *et al.*, 2006). Our previous study showed that nicotine did not induce the release of adrenaline (Chen *et al.*, 2008). However, it is possible that nicotine could induce noradrenaline to stimulate tumor cell growth. Figure 6G shows that nicotine induced the release of noradrenaline, which was inhibited by α4/β2-nAChR and β-AR antagonist but was not affected by α7-nAChR antagonist. Our results further confirm that α4/β2-nAChR and β-AR act upstream of Stat3, cell growth, noradrenaline release, and chemoresistance in long-term nicotine-stimulated human bladder cancer cells.

DISCUSSION

Bladder cancer patients who continue smoking tend to develop chemoresistance compared with patients quit smoking before treatment (Fleshner *et al.*, 1999). The molecular mechanisms of cigarette smoke-induced chemoresistance in bladder cancer remain to be identified. Nicotine is the major component in cigarette smoke and can be detected in the urine of smokers. Previous studies have shown that nicotine inhibits apoptosis and induces chemoresistance in many cancer cells. Thus, we hypothesize that long-term exposure to nicotine in bladder cancer cells could be the leading cause of chemoresistance. To fully understand the potential chemoresistant properties of nicotine, we analyzed various signaling pathways in response to persistent nicotine exposure and its subsequent effects on apoptosis inhibition and cell cycle regulatory events in T24 cells.

Herein, we provide evidence for the first time that overactivation of Stat3 but fails to activate ERK1/2 activity (and downregulation of ERK1/2) contribute to chemoresistance in response to long-term nicotine exposure in bladder cancer cells. Previous studies indicated that ERK1/2 activation is generally considered a survival signaling pathway; however, many evidences exist that the ERK1/2 pathway mediates apoptosis induced by different stimuli in different tissues. Wang *et al.* (2000) showed that ERK1/2 activation is the single most important factor for cisplatin-induced apoptosis. In human

FIG. 4. Effects of U0126 pretreatment on the percentage of subG₀/G₁ (A) and G₀/G₁ (B) observed following 48-h exposure to 5μM Cis or 2nM Tax analyzed by flow cytometry and the expression of pERK1/2, ERK1/2, pStat3, Stat3, and Cyclin D1 levels determined by Western blotting (C). Means ± SD of three independent experiments; *p* < 0.05 compared with Con groups.

α4/β2-, α7-nAChR, and β-AR (Chen *et al.*, 2008). Chronic exposure to nicotine has been reported to upregulate several classes of neuronal nAChRs in a long-lasting manner (Kawai and Berg, 2001). Our results also confirmed that α4- and α7-nAChR subunits were upregulated after long-term exposure to nicotine (Fig. 6A). It is not clear whether nAChRs upregulation is involved in Stat3 activation and chemoresistance in Nic-T24

ROLE OF NICOTINE INDUCES CHEMORESISTANCE

(A)

| C | N | N+Si |
| --- | --- | --- |
| p-Stat3 |  |  |
| Stat3 |  |  |
| p-ERK1/2 |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |
| Cyclin D1 |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |

(B)

Viability (%)

| Con | Nic | Nic+si-Stat3 |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

(C)

subG0/G1 (%)

| Con | Nic | Nic+siStat3 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SF |  |  |
| Cis 10 μM |  |  |
| Tax 2 nM |  |  |

(D)

subG0/G1 (%)

| Con | Nic | Nic+AG490 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SF |  |  |
| Cis 10 μM |  |  |
| Tax 2 nM |  |  |

(E)

Cisplatin          Paclitaxel

| C | N | N+Si | C | N | N+Si |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| p-Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| p-ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cyclin D1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |  |

(F)

Cisplatin          Paclitaxel

| C | N | N+AG | C | N | N+AG |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| p-Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| p-ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cyclin D1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |  |

(G)

Cisplatin          Paclitaxel

| C | N | Stat3C | C | N | Stat3C |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| p-Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Stat3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| p-ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| ERK1/2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Cylin D1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| GAPDH |  |  |  |  |  |

(H)

Viability (%)

| Con | Nic | Con+Stat3C |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

FIG. 5. Effects of Stat3 inhibition on cell viability and apoptosis induced by antitumor agents. (A) Nic-T24 cells were transfected with Stat3 siRNA (50nM); incubated for 24-h posttransfection; and Stat3, ERK1/2, pStat3, pERK1/2, and Cyclin D1 expression were determined by Western blotting. (B) Cell viability of Con, Nic, and Nic+ si Stat3 groups after treated with 5μM Cis or 10nM Tax were measured by the MTT assay. (C) The percentage of subG₀/G₁ were detected either transfected with Stat3 siRNA or (D) pretreatment with 15μM AG490 followed by treated with antitumor agents for 48 h. *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups; #p < 0.05 compared with Nic groups. (E) ERK1/2, Stat3, pERK1/2, pStat3, and Cyclin D1 expressions were determined by Western blotting in Nic-T24 cells transfected with 50nM Stat3 siRNA for 24 h or (F) pretreated with 15μM AG490 for 1 h and then treated with 10μM cisplatin or 2nM paclitaxel for a further 48 h under serum-free condition. (G) T24 cells were transfected with Stat3C plasmid (1.5 μg) (Stat3C), incubated for 24-h posttransfection, and Stat3, ERK1/2, pStat3, pERK1/2, and Cyclin D1 expression were determined by Western blotting. Equal protein loading was determined by an anti-GAPDH antibody. (H) Cell viability of Con, Nic, and Con + Stat3C groups after treated with 5μM Cis or 10nM Tax were measured by the MTT assay. *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups.

FIG. 6. Involvement of nAChR and β-AR in the Stat3 activation and ERK1/2 downregulation in Nic-T24 cells. (A) The expression of α4-, β2-, and α7-nAChRs in T24 and Nic-T24 cells was detected by specific antibodies. (B) Nic-T24 cells were starved and treated with inhibitors nAChR antagonist; hexamethonium bromide (Hexa) 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4mM (MLA, M); or (C) nonspecific β-AR antagonist, propranolol (Prop) 10, 25, and 50μM for 120 min. (D) Nic-T24 cells were pretreated with α7-nAChR inhibitor MLA (M) 200μM or α4-nAChR antagonist Lobeline (L) 200μM for 1 h followed by cisplatin (Cis 10μM) or paclitaxel (Tax 10nM) for 48 h. Protein expression was detected by Western blotting using anti-ERK1/2, pERK1/2, pStat3, Stat3, or BCl-2 antibodies, and (E) Cell viability was then measured by the MTT assay. *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups; #p < 0.05 compared with Nic groups. (F) Pretreatment with propranolol (Prop) 10μM increased drug sensitivity in both T24 and Nic-t24 cells. *p < 0.05 compared with groups in the absence of Prop; (G) pretreatment with propranolol (P) 10μM or α4-nAChR antagonist Lobeline (L) 200μM reduced the release of noradrenaline. *p < 0.05 compared with Con groups; #p < 0.05 compared with Nic groups.

cervical carcinoma SiHa and hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells, suppression of ERK1/2 signal pathway by mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal regulated kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 resulted in an increase in cisplatin resistance (Yeh et al., 2002). Consistent with these findings, we found that ERK1/2 activation and subsequent apoptosis were observed in control T24 cells but not in chemoresistant Nic-T24 cells after antitumor agent treatment. Inhibited ERK1/2 phosphorylation by U0126 effectively reduced anticancer agent-induced apoptosis and increased G₀/G₁ arrest (Fig. 4). The results provide the evidence that Nic-T24 cells with lower ERK1/2 activity were prone to stay in G₀/G₁ phase rather than undergo apoptosis in response to antitumor agents.

Stat3 pathway is one of the major prosurvival signal transduction pathways linked to chemoresistance in various cancer cell lines. We provide evidence that nicotine-treated cancer cells exhibit stronger prosurvival signaling through Stat3 activation, which leads to cell survival in response to antitumor agents. We also found that Stat3C-transfected cells had elevated cell viability compared with T24 cells after treatment with cisplatin or paclitaxel (Fig. 5H). Thus, overactivation of Stat3 may stimulate cell cycle progression and provide protection against apoptosis. Indeed, Stat3 promotes uncontrolled cell growth and survival through deregulation of the expression of cell cycle genes, including Cyclin D1 (Kobayashi et al., 2006). Overexpression of Cyclin D1 in

human cancer cell lines have been shown to perturb cell cycle progression leading to resistance to chemotherapy (Kornmann *et al.*, 1999) Our results also demonstrated that bladder cancer cells can gain a survival advantage after chronic exposure to nicotine. For instance, upon serum starvation, p80 Nic-T24 with Cyclin D1 overexpression consistently displayed shorter doubling times and a higher proliferation rate, suggesting that nicotine treatment renders T24 cells less dependent on growth factors. Through activation of Stat3 and Cyclin D1, Nic-T24 cells were prone to enter into G₀/G₁ phase rather than apoptosis after treatment with antitumor agents compared with control groups. In the present study, disrupting the Stat3 oncogenic pathway with either a JAK2/Stat3 inhibitor or an Stat3 siRNA resulted in inhibition of Cyclin D1 expression, cell proliferation, and restored the sensitivity antitumor agents. These finding suggest that elevated Stat3 activation from long-term nicotine treatment could trigger subsequent Cyclin D1 overexpression and contribute to chemoresistance in Nic-T24 bladder cancer cells by maintaining cell cycle progression and attenuating drug-induced apoptosis.

Duan *et al.* (2006) reported that the Stat3 pathway is often overexpressed and activated in many paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells compared to cell lines that are paclitaxel naïve. Stat3 inhibition increased paclitaxel-induced apoptosis even in the paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells (Duan *et al.*, 2006). Introduction of antisense Stat3, Stat3 decoy DNA, or a dominant-negative Stat3 into human tumor cells with constitutively activated Stat3 leads to apoptosis (Boehm *et al.*, 2008; Leong *et al.*, 2003). These results reveal that Stat3 inhibition is an effective strategy for enhancing chemosensitivity. However, both Stat3 siRNA and AG490 could not completely reverse chemosensitivity in response to chemotherapeutic agents (Fig. 5C), indicating that other mechanisms may also be involved in chemoresistance in nicotine-treated T24 cell. For instance, the AKT pathway (Xu *et al.*, 2007) or AKT/protein kinase C (PKC) pathways (Jin *et al.*, 2004a) may be required for the antiapoptotic effects of nicotine. Further work is necessary to show that the disruption of Stat3 alone or in combination with other pathways such as AKT pathway could be a potential strategy for increasing chemosensitivity in bladder cancer therapy.

We found that treatment with Stat3 siRNA or AG490 induced cell death and ERK1/2 activation in response to antitumor agents in Nic-treated T24 cells, indicating the essential role of Stat3 in the suppression of ERK1/2 activity. Several studies suggested a negative regulation between the Stat3 and Src-homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase/ERK pathways (Ernst and Jenkins, 2004). For example, Arany *et al.* found that pretreatment with AG490 or direct inhibition of Stat3 via a dominant-negative mutant restored ERK1/2 activation. They suggested that Stat3 may compete with the binding site of growth factors and thus terminate ERK1/2 activation. The other possibility is that Stat3-mediated activation of SOCS3 can inhibit growth factor receptor activation leading to ERK inactivation

(Xia *et al.*, 2002). Based on these studies, it is possible that Stat3 overactivation in Nic-T24 cells increases SOCS3 activation, leading to the suppression of ERK1/2 activation. Impaired induction of the ERK1/2 pathway in Nic-T24 cells becomes highly susceptible to Stat3-dependent suppression of apoptosis and concomitant induction of proliferation. Thus, inhibition of Stat3 activation by AG490 or siRNA restored ERK1/2 activation and chemosensitivity in Nic-T24 cells.

In this study, we found that α4- and α7-nAChR subunits were upregulated in response to chronic exposure to nicotine. A previous study indicated that α7-nAChR is the primary receptor that mediates proliferation and antiapoptosis effects of nicotine in cancer cells. Nevertheless, α3/β4- or α4/β2-nAChR might also be important for these processes (Chen *et al.*, 2008; Marrero and Bencherif, 2009; West *et al.*, 2003). Our results show that long-term nicotine stimulation-induced Stat3 activation and ERK1/2 downregulation were effectively inhibited by α-lobeline (α4/β2-specific inhibitor) (Fig. 6), indicating that the chemoresistance induced by nicotine could be mediated by α4/β2-nAChR and not by α7-nAChR. Thus, we suggest that chronic nicotine exposure results in a α4/β2-nAChR-Stat3-Cyclin D1 prosurvival and antiapoptosis cascade in bladder cancer cells.

In addition to nAChRs, nicotine has been reported to promote the growth of cancer cells through the engagement of signaling pathways mediated by another receptor, β-adrenoceptor. Jin *et al.* (2004a) indicated that low-dose nicotine (1μM) is able to induce cell survival through Bad phosphorylation mediated by β-adrenoceptor. Antagonists for β-AR inhibit the development of pulmonary adenocarcinoma induced by 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) (Schuller *et al.*, 2000), reversed the stimulatory action of nicotine on PKC, ERK1/2 activation, and COX-2 expression together with gastric cancer cell proliferation (Shin *et al.*, 2007). These studies demonstrate that adrenoceptors may play a role in nicotine-mediated signaling. Consistently, we found that nicotine induced activation of Stat3, and the release of noradrenaline was blocked by pretreatment with the β-adrenoceptor antagonist propranolol (Figs. 6D and 6E), indicating a direct role of nicotine on β-adrenoceptor. Nicotine is also reported to transactivate β-adrenoceptor by releasing adrenaline or noradrenaline to stimulate the growth of colon cancer cells (Al-Wadei and Schuller, 2009). Some studies have indicated that synthesis of noradrenaline is mediated by nAChRs, such as α7-nAChR, β2-nAChR, or α2-nAChR (Al-Wadei and Schuller, 2009; Wong *et al.*, 2007). These reports are in accord with our study that nicotine may also transactivate β-adrenoceptor through the release of noradrenaline. Our results suggest that α4/β2-nAChR plays a more important role in chemoresistance and regulation of noradrenaline levels than α7-nAChR (Fig. 6).

In conclusion, as shown in Figure 7, persistent nicotine-induced chemoresistance in bladder cancer cells could occur via three processes: (1) increased release of noradrenaline through α4/β2-nAChR and may transactivate β-adrenoceptor;

CHEN ET AL.

Nicotine

Hexamethonium bromide
Lobeline
α4/β2
nAChRs
noradrenaline
β-AR
Propanolol

U0126
pERK1/2 activation
G0/G1 arrest
Loss of chemosensitivity
Inhibit apoptosis induced by serum deprivation, cisplatin and paclitaxel
Chemoresistance

Stat3 siRNA, AG490
pStat3 S727
Stat3 transcriptional
activity ↑
Cyclin D1 protein expression
Cell cycle progression

Stat3C

FIG. 7. A model of chemoresistance by persistent nicotine exposure in T24 bladder cancer cells. Antitumor agents cause moderate ERK1/2 activation, apoptotic cell death, caspase-3 activation, and low activation of Stat3 in T24 cells. However, persistent nicotine exposure induces chemoresistance through three processes: (1) increased release of noradrenaline through α4/β2-nAChR and may transactivate β-adrenoceptor; (2) activation of Stat3 via α4/β2-nAChR and β-adrenoceptor leading to Cyclin D1 overexpression, perturbation of cell cycle progression, and inhibition of apoptosis induced by antitumor agents; and (3) inhibition of ERK1/2 activation and subsequent reduction in sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. Inhibition of α4/β2-nAChR and β-AR by antagonists reduced Stat3 activity and reversed ERK1/2 activation. Inhibition of Stat3 activation by siRNA or the specific inhibitor AG490 restored chemosensitivity in T24 cells.

(2) activation of Stat3 via α4/β2-nAChR and β-adrenoceptor, leading to Cyclin D1 overexpression, perturbation of cell cycle progression, and inhibition of apoptosis induced by antitumor agents; and (3) inhibition of ERK1/2 activation and subsequently reduction in sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first evidence of long-term nicotine treatment inducing chemoresistance through overactivation of Stat3 leading to inhibition of ERK1/2 activation via α4/β2-nAChR and β-AR. It is noteworthy that nicotine-mediated inhibition of cell death may not only occur in the failure of chemotherapy but may also help to explain the poor prognostic value of bladder cancer patients who continued cigarette smoking during chemotherapy. Most importantly, we also provide evidence that Stat3 aberrant activation could be due to long-term exposure to environmental toxicants, such as nicotine. Our study had given rise to these considerations for clinical bladder cancer therapy: (1) Avoidance of cigarette smoking or nicotine-based treatment may increase the efficacy of chemotherapy. (2) α4/β2-nAChR, β-AR, and their downstream Stat3 could be the target for increasing chemosensitivity in bladder cancer patients who develop chemoresistance during chemotherapy.

FUNDING

National Science Council (NSC 95-2314-B-006-095-MY3).

REFERENCES

Al-Wadei, H. A., and Schuller, H. M. (2009). Nicotinic receptor-associated modulation of stimulatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in NNK-induced adenocarcinoma of the lungs and pancreas. *J. Pathol.* 218, 437–445.

Arredondo, J., Chernyavsky, A. I., Jolkovsky, D. L., Pinkerton, K. E., and Grando, S. A. (2006). Receptor-mediated tobacco toxicity: cooperation of

the Ras/Raf-1/MEK1/ERK and JAK-2/STAT-3 pathways downstream of alpha7 nicotinic receptor in oral keratinocytes. *FASEB J.* 20, 2093–2101.

Barre, B., Avril, S., and Coqueret, O. (2003). Opposite regulation of myc and p21waf1 transcription by STAT3 proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 2990–2996.

Barre, B., Vigneron, A., Perkins, N., Roninson, I. B., Gamelin, E., and Coqueret, O. (2007). The STAT3 oncogene as a predictive marker of drug resistance. *Trends Mol. Med.* 13, 4–11.

Biliran, H., Jr, Wang, Y., Banerjee, S., Xu, H., Heng, H., Thakur, A., Bollig, A., Sarkar, F. H., and Liao, J. D. (2005). Overexpression of cyclin D1 promotes tumor cell growth and confers resistance to cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in an elastase-myc transgene-expressing pancreatic tumor cell line. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 11, 6075–6086.

Boehm, A. L., Sen, M., Seethala, R., Gooding, W. E., Freilino, M., Wong, S. M. Y., Wang, S., Johnson, D. E., and Grandis, J. R. (2008). Combined targeting of epidermal growth factor receptor, signal transducer and activator of transcription-3, and Bcl-X(L) enhances antitumor effects in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 73, 1632–1642.

Chen, C.-H., Shun, C.-T., Huang, K.-H., Huang, C.-Y., Tsai, Y.-C., Yu, H.-J., and Pu, Y.-S. (2007). Stopping smoking might reduce tumour recurrence in nonmuscle-invasive bladder cancer. *BJU Int.* 100, 281–286; discussion 286.

Chen, R. J., Ho, Y. S., Guo, H. R., and Wang, Y. J. (2008). Rapid activation of Stat3 and ERK1/2 by nicotine modulates cell proliferation in human bladder cancer cells. *Toxicol. Sci.* 104, 283–293.

Dreicer, R. (2001). Locally advanced and metastatic bladder cancer. *Curr. Treat. Options Oncol.* 2, 431–436.

Duan, Z., Bradner, J., Greenberg, E., Mazitschek, R., Foster, R., Mahoney, J., and Seiden, M. V. (2007). 8-benzyl-4-oxo-8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]oct-2-ene-6,7-dicarboxylic acid (SD-1008), a novel janus kinase 2 inhibitor, increases chemotherapy sensitivity in human ovarian cancer cells. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 72, 1137–1145.

Duan, Z., Foster, R., Bell, D. A., Mahoney, J., Wolak, K., Vaidya, A., Hampel, C., Lee, H., and Seiden, M. V. (2006). Signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 pathway activation in drug-resistant ovarian cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 12, 5055–5063.

Ernst, M., and Jenkins, B. J. (2004). Acquiring signalling specificity from the cytokine receptor gp130. *Trends Genet.* 20, 23–32.

Fleshner, N., Garland, J., Moadel, A., Herr, H., Ostroff, J., Trambert, R., O’Sullivan, M., and Russo, P. (1999). Influence of smoking status on the disease-related outcomes of patients with tobacco-associated superficial transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. *Cancer* 86, 2337–2345.

Jin, Z., Gao, F., Flagg, T., and Deng, X. (2004a). Nicotine induces multi-site phosphorylation of Bad in association with suppression of apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 23837–23844.

Jin, Z., Gao, F., Flagg, T., and Deng, X. (2004b). Tobacco-specific nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone promotes functional cooperation of Bcl2 and c-Myc through phosphorylation in regulating cell survival and proliferation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 40209–40219.

Kawai, H., and Berg, D. K. (2001). Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors containing alpha 7 subunits on rat cortical neurons do not undergo long-lasting inactivation even when up-regulated by chronic nicotine exposure. *J. Neurochem.* 78, 1367–1378.

Kobayashi, S., Shimamura, T., Monti, S., Steidl, U., Hetherington, C. J., Lowell, A. M., Golub, T., Meyerson, M., Tenen, D. G., Shapiro, G. I., *et al.* (2006). Transcriptional profiling identifies cyclin D1 as a critical downstream effector of mutant epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. *Cancer Res.* 66, 11389–11398.

Kommann, M., Danenberg, K. D., Arber, N., Beger, H. G., Danenberg, P. V., and Korc, M. (1999). Inhibition of cyclin D1 expression in human pancreatic cancer cells is associated with increased chemosensitivity and decreased expression of multiple chemoresistance genes. *Cancer Res.* 59, 3505–3511.

Laag, E., Majidi, M., Cekanova, M., Masi, T., Takahashi, T., and Schuller, H. (2006). NNK activates ERK1/2 and CREB/ATF-1 via beta-1-AR and EGFR signaling in human lung adenocarcinoma and small airway epithelial cells. *Int. J. Cancer* 119, 1547–1552.

Lee, W. S., Chen, R. J., Wang, Y. J., Tseng, H., Jeng, J. H., Lin, S. Y., Liang, Y. C., Chen, C. H., Lin, C. H., Lin, J. K., *et al.* (2003). In vitro and in vivo studies of the anticancer action of terbinafine in human cancer cell lines: G0/G1 p53-associated cell cycle arrest. *Int. J. Cancer* 106, 125–137.

Leong, P. L., Andrews, G. A., Johnson, D. E., Dyer, K. F., Xi, S., Mai, J. C., Robbins, P. D., Gadiparthi, S., Burke, N. A., Watkins, S. F., *et al.* (2003). Targeted inhibition of Stat3 with a decoy oligonucleotide abrogates head and neck cancer cell growth. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 100, 4138–4143.

Lu, Y., and Cederbaum, A. (2007). The mode of cisplatin-induced cell death in CYP2E1-overexpressing HepG2 cells: modulation by ERK, ROS, glutathione, and thioredoxin. *Free Radic. Biol. Med.* 43, 1061–1075.

Marrero, M. B., and Bencherif, M. (2009). Convergence of alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-activated pathways for anti-apoptosis and anti-inflammation: central role for JAK2 activation of STAT3 and NF-kappaB. *Brain Res.* 1256, 1–7.

Mayo, M. W., and Baldwin, A. S. (2000). The transcription factor NF-kappaB: control of oncogenesis and cancer therapy resistance. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* 1470, M55–M62.

Mousa, S., and Mousa, S. A. (2006). Cellular and molecular mechanisms of nicotine’s pro-angiogenesis activity and its potential impact on cancer. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 97, 1370–1378.

Perlman, H., Zhang, X., Chen, M. W., Walsh, K., and Buttyan, R. (1999). An elevated bax/bcl-2 ratio corresponds with the onset of prostate epithelial cell apoptosis. *Cell Death Differ.* 6, 48–54.

Schuller, H. M., Plummer, H. K., 3rd, and Jull, B. A. (2003). Receptor-mediated effects of nicotine and its nitrosated derivative NNK on pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. *Anat. Rec.* 270, 51–58.

Schuller, H. M., Porter, B., and Riechert, A. (2000). Beta-adrenergic modulation of NNK-induced lung carcinogenesis in hamsters. *J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.* 126, 624–630.

Shin, V. Y., Wu, W. K., Chu, K. M., Koo, M. W., Wong, H. P., Lam, E. K., Tai, E. K., and Cho, C. H. (2007). Functional role of beta-adrenergic receptors in the mitogenic action of nicotine on gastric cancer cells. *Toxicol. Sci.* 96, 21–29.

Sood, A. K., Bhatty, R., Kamat, A. A., Landen, C. N., Han, L., Thaker, P. H., Li, Y., Gershenson, D. M., Lutgendorf, S., and Cole, S. W. (2006). Stress hormone-mediated invasion of ovarian cancer cells. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 12, 369–375.

Trombino, S., Cesario, A., Margaritora, S., Granone, P., Motta, G., Falugi, C., and Russo, P. (2004). Alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors affect growth regulation of human mesothelioma cells: role of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. *Cancer Res.* 64, 135–145.

Tsurutani, J., Castillo, S. S., Brognard, J., Granville, C. A., Zhang, C., Gills, J. J., Sayyah, J., and Dennis, P. A. (2005). Tobacco components stimulate Akt-dependent proliferation and NFkappaB-dependent survival in lung cancer cells. *Carcinogenesis* 26, 1182–1195.

Wang, X., Martindale, J. L., and Holbrook, N. J. (2000). Requirement for ERK activation in cisplatin-induced apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 39435–39443.

West, K. A., Brognard, J., Clark, A. S., Linnoila, I. R., Yang, X., Swain, S. M., Harris, C., Belinsky, S., and Dennis, P. A. (2003). Rapid Akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells [see comment]. *J. Clin. Invest.* 111, 81–90.

Wong, H. P., Yu, L., Lam, E. K., Tai, E. K., Wu, W. K., and Cho, C. H. (2007). Nicotine promotes cell proliferation via alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor

and catecholamine-synthesizing enzymes-mediated pathway in human colon
adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells. *Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.* **221**, 261–267.

Wright, S. C., Zhong, J., Zheng, H., and Larrick, J. W. (1993). Nicotine
inhibition of apoptosis suggests a role in tumor promotion. *FASEB J.* **7**,
1045–1051.

Xia, L., Wang, L., Chung, A. S., Ivanov, S. S., Ling, M. Y., Dragoi, A. M.,
Platt, A., Gilmer, T. M., Fu, X. Y., and Chin, Y. E. (2002). Identification
of both positive and negative domains within the epidermal growth
factor receptor COOH-terminal region for signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**,
30716–30723.

Xu, J., Huang, H., Pan, C., Zhang, B., Liu, X., and Zhang, L. (2007). Nicotine
inhibits apoptosis induced by cisplatin in human oral cancer cells. *Int. J. Oral
Maxillofac. Surg.* **36**, 739–744.

Yeh, P. Y., Chuang, S. E., Yeh, K. H., Song, Y. C., Ea, C. K., and Cheng, A. L.
(2002). Increase of the resistance of human cervical carcinoma cells to
cisplatin by inhibition of the MEK to ERK signaling pathway partly via
enhancement of anticancer drug-induced NF kappa B activation. *Biochem.
Pharmacol.* **63**, 1423–1430.

Zeegers, M. P., Tan, F. E., Dorant, E., and van Den Brandt, P. A. (2000). The
impact of characteristics of cigarette smoking on urinary tract cancer risk:
a meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies. *Cancer* **89**, 630–639.
