
World Journal of Gastroenterology

Online Submissions: http://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327office  
wjj@wjgnet.com  
doi:10.3748/wjg.v16.i5.531  

World J Gastroenterol 2010 February 7; 16(5): 531-537  
ISSN 1007-9327 (print)  
© 2010 Baishideng. All rights reserved.

---

**MicroRNAs, development of Barrett’s esophagus, and progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma**

Cameron M Smith, David I Watson, Michael Z Michael, Damian J Hussey

---

Cameron M Smith, David I Watson, Damian J Hussey, Department of Surgery, Flinders University, Room 3D211, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia  
Michael Z Michael, Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia  

**Author contributions:** Smith CM reviewed and summarized aspects of the literature that formed the basis of the manuscript; Smith CM, Watson DI, Michael MZ, Hussey DJ (all authors) contributed to conceptual design of the manuscript and data interpretation; all authors also contributed to drafting of the article and provided critical analysis of the discussed literature; all authors gave final approval of the submitted manuscript.  

**Correspondence to:** David I Watson, Professor, MBBS, MD, FRACS, Head, Department of Surgery, Flinders University, Room 3D211, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia. david.watson@flinders.edu.au  
Telephone: +61-8-82046086 Fax: +61-8-82046130  

Received: October 29, 2009 Revised: December 22, 2009  
Accepted: December 29, 2009  
Published online: February 7, 2010  

---

**Key words:** Barrett's esophagus; MicroRNA; Esophageal adenocarcinoma; Transdifferentiation; Tumour suppressor  

**Peer reviewer:** Robert J Korst, MD, Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Room M404, 525 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10032, United States  

Smith CM, Watson DI, Michael MZ, Hussey DJ. MicroRNAs, development of Barrett's esophagus, and progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma. World J Gastroenterol 2010; 16(5): 531-537 Available from: URL: http://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327/full/v16/i5/531.htm DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i5.531  

---

**INTRODUCTION**

Barrett's esophagus is characterized by a metaplastic transition whereby a columnar-lined epithelium with intestinal metaplasia arises within the squamous epithelium of the distal esophagus [1,2]. The development of Barrett's esophagus appears to be a protective action, initiated in response to the esophagus being continually exposed to chronic gastroesophageal reflux [3,4]. The clinical significance of Barrett's esophagus lies with the increased risk for cancer development, as it can progress through varying grades of dysplasia to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Barrett's esophagus is the principle identifiable precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma. The prevalence of esophageal adenocarcinoma has been increasing significantly in Western countries, and it has a poor prognosis, with the overall 5-year survival remaining less than 20% [5,6].

Due to the increased prevalence of esophageal adenocarcinoma, the precursor lesion, Barrett's esophagus, has come under the spotlight. Although a number of alterations in gene expression have been identified in its progression to cancer, the current sequence of molecular events that drive the development of Barrett's esophagus, and its subsequent progression to cancer, remains un-

---

**Abstract**

Barrett's esophagus is a premalignant condition caused by gastroesophageal reflux. Once developed, it can progress through varying grades of dysplasia to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Whilst it is well accepted that Barrett's esophagus is caused by gastroesophageal reflux, the molecular mechanisms of its pathogenesis and progression to cancer remain unclear. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short segments of RNA that have been shown to control the expression of many human genes. They have been implicated in most cellular processes, and the role of miRNAs in disease development is becoming increasingly evident. Understanding altered miRNA expression is likely to help unravel the molecular mechanisms that underpin the development of Barrett's esophagus and its progression to cancer.

© 2010 Baishideng. All rights reserved.

Smith CM et al. miRNAs, Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

clear^[4]^. Great interest surrounds the identification of early molecular changes which contribute to the pathogenesis of Barrett’s esophagus, as these may present opportunities for therapeutic development, or new strategies for the prevention of esophageal adenocarcinoma. Of particular interest is the relatively newly identified class of molecules known as microRNAs (miRNAs), and the potential roles they play in the development of Barrett’s esophagus and adenocarcinoma.

---

### miRNAs

miRNAs are approximately 21 nucleotide long, non-coding segments of RNA that act to regulate gene expression^[7]^. Since their initial discovery in *Caenorhabditis elegans* in 1993, an enormous body of research has been published, implicating miRNAs in almost every cellular process investigated^[7,8]^. Both miRNA biogenesis and miRNA regulation of protein synthesis have been reviewed extensively^[7,9-12]^. In short, miRNA biogenesis begins with primary miRNAs (pri-miRs, inactive form), which are either transcribed by RNA polymerase II or are excised as portions of introns^[9,12]^. Pri-miRs are processed in the nucleus by Drosha ribonuclease and the resultant precursor-miRNA (pre-miR) is then exported to the cytoplasm^[9,12,13]^. In the cytoplasm, Dicer ribonuclease processes the pre-miR and a single RNA strand is transferred to an argonaute protein within the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) complex^[9,12]^. The mature (active) miRNA-RISC complex targets complementary mRNA transcripts to repress translation^[9,10]^.

---

### THE ROLE OF miRNAs IN BARRETT’S ESOPHAGUS DEVELOPMENT

Key areas of interest for miRNAs in Barrett’s esophagus include their involvement in transdifferentiation and its links with the development of columnar metaplasia, and also cancer development within Barrett’s esophagus. miRNAs are useful biomarkers for tumor classification, and their expression pattern may have a role to play in the early detection of cancer development^[14,15]^.

#### Can the developing esophagus provide insight?

To understand where miRNAs may fit into the development of Barrett’s esophagus, it is important to consider how the normal esophagus develops and also how developmental mechanisms may drive pathogenesis. The esophagus begins to form during week four of embryonic development, with the formation of the foregut^[16]^. However, it is not until week five that the foregut can be visually divided into esophagus, stomach and duodenum^[17]^. Development of the esophageal lumen begins in weeks seven and eight, when the epithelium begins to proliferate, and by week 10 the lumen is enclosed and lined with a ciliated epithelium^[16]^. In the fourth month of gestation, the ciliated epithelium begins to be replaced by a squamous epithelium. Residual islands of ciliated epithelia remain, and these give rise to esophageal glands^[16]^.

It is interesting that the human embryonic esophagus is initially lined with a columnar epithelium, which is then replaced by a stratified squamous epithelium^[16]^. A reversal of normal developmental mechanisms is observed in Barrett’s esophagus where a columnar epithelium with intestinal metaplasia arises in the squamous-lined esophagus. Transdifferentiation involves a change from one differentiated cell type to another, occurring as metaplasia, resulting in a change in cell fate or a switch in phenotype^[18]^. The columnar-squamous transition that occurs in the developing esophagus is likely to result from a transdifferentiation event, as it is not dependent on cell division. In addition, some epithelial cells express both squamous and columnar markers during the transition period^[19]^. Although these two criteria are not a requirement for transdifferentiation, they do suggest that the epithelium is not being replaced with new epigenetically distinct cells. Therefore, gene expression profiles can be initiated to drive a squamous or columnar phenotype in the esophagus. As miRNAs function by regulating gene expression^[20]^, it is likely that miRNAs are involved in directing gene expression in esophageal development, and they may contribute to the development of the columnar-lined epithelium which colonizes the luminal surface of the esophagus in Barrett’s esophagus.

#### miRNAs can directly regulate transdifferentiation

What drives the formation of a columnar-lined epithelium with intestinal metaplasia in the esophagus? It is known that Barrett’s esophagus is caused by chronic exposure of the esophagus to gastroesophageal reflux. Chang *et al.*^[21]^ showed that squamous epithelium exposed to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) drove a sequence of events, beginning with the removal of surface squamous epithelia, which allowed for the esophageal sub-mucosal glands to access the luminal surface. The evidence implicating miRNAs in transdifferentiation/metaplasia is limited. However, a study by Tsonis *et al.*^[22]^ implicated the let-7 miRNA family in regulating dedifferentiation (a critical event in transdifferentiation) in the lens and inner ear hair cell regeneration. In alveolar epithelial cells, miR-375 has been shown to regulate transdifferentiation via the Wnt/β-catenin pathway^[23]^. Finally, the miR-200 family and miR-205 have been implicated in driving epithelial to mesenchymal transdifferentiation, a crucial event in tumor metastasis^[24]^. These studies provide further evidence that fluctuations in miRNA expression play crucial roles in directing transdifferentiation.

ATRA interacts with retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptors (RXR) to mediate the suspected transdifferentiation response observed in the study by Chang *et al.*^[21]^. Importantly, lithocholic acid (LCA), a component of gastroesophageal refluxate, has been shown to interact with human RXR-β^[25]^, providing evidence that ATRA exposure is relevant to the conditions

Smith CM *et al.* miRNAs, Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

miRNA expression acts to establish the required gene expression that allows progenitor cells to differentiate to a columnar phenotype. The role of miRNAs in driving differentiation is well established. An excellent example of this is miR-203, a miRNA down-regulated in Barrett’s esophagus [30, 31].

### miR-203 and squamous epithelia

miR-203 has been implicated in driving terminal differentiation in skin epithelial cells [32]. The luminal surface of the esophagus is continually replaced by cells that migrate from the basal layer [33]. Once these basal cells become suprabasal, proliferative capacity is lost and terminal differentiation is initiated [32]. Suprabasal cells in the esophagus undergo terminal squamous differentiation to maintain a stratified squamous epithelium [33]. In skin epithelia, miR-203 has been shown to target and repress the transcription factor p63 [32, 34]. p63 plays a crucial role in maintaining stem cells in stratified squamous epithelium [32, 35]. miR-203-directed repression of p63 acts to repress a cell's proliferative capacity and induce cell cycle exit [32, 34]. It is therefore likely that induction of miR-203 expression is a crucial checkpoint required for terminal squamous differentiation. Whether miR-203 expression is linked with replenishment of the esophageal epithelium is unclear, although miR-203 expression is lost in Barrett’s esophagus, and therefore it is likely that the miR-203-directed mechanism of epithelial replacement is lost in this tissue.

---

### miRNAs AND BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS: CLINICAL INSIGHTS

Increasing evidence supports the application of knowledge about miRNAs to clinical settings. Recent publications have shown that miRNA expression patterns can be used as prognostic and pathogenic markers of numerous disease states, and can predict response to therapeutic strategies and outcomes from clinical procedures [36–40]. One clinically relevant example in carcinogenesis involves miR-21. miR-21 is reported to be upregulated in a number of different solid tumors, and increased expression correlates with poor prognosis [38]. In the context of Barrett’s esophagus, miR-196a expression has been shown to correlate with different disease states in the Barrett’s metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence [39]. Currently, Barrett’s esophagus is the principle identifiable precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma and, therefore, miR-196a expression may provide a valuable tool in early cancer detection. Standard clinical management of Barrett’s esophagus involves continual endoscopic surveillance. Surveillance efficacy has been the topic of much scrutiny and a less invasive, more cost-effective patient management strategy is highly sought after [41, 42]. Such an alternative management strategy could be one in which miRNA expression profiling may play a major role.

---

### MAINTAINING A SPECIALIZED COLUMNAR EPITHELIUM

Whether miRNAs directly alter the gene expression profile in esophageal cells, thereby directing the development of a columnar epithelium with intestinal metaplasia, is unclear. Although the initial development of Barrett’s esophagus may occur via transdifferentiation, it must be maintained. The sustained presence of the columnar epithelium suggests a continual gene expression profile is established in progenitor cells. It is possible that aberrant

WJG | www.wjgnet.com 533 February 7, 2010 | Volume 16 | Issue 5 |

Smith CM et al. miRNAs, Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

---

### miRNAs AND CANCER DEVELOPMENT

Aberrant miRNA expression has been linked with the development and progression of almost all cancers studied to date. The influence of miRNAs in the regulation and control of crucial cellular processes, including signaling, proliferation, apoptosis, motility and angiogenesis, has implicated a number of miRNAs in cancer development and progression [43]. Functional studies of miRNAs in cancer development have identified miRNAs acting as both oncogenes (e.g., miR17-92 cluster) and tumor suppressors (let-7) [44–46]. Forced expression of the miR17-92 cluster in mice leads to the accelerated development of B-cell lymphoma [45]. Also, the miR17-92 cluster is over-expressed in lung cancer, and this is associated with an increase in cellular proliferation [45, 47]. Let-7 acts as a tumor suppressor through negative regulation of Ras [44, 46]. In lung cancer, decreased let-7 expression results in increased cellular proliferation [46]. Also, increased let-7 expression *in vivo* has been shown to inhibit lung cancer cell xenograft growth in mice [48].

#### Tumor profiling and classification

Advances in the ability to profile different aspects of tumorigenesis have led to the rapid identification of differentially expressed miRNAs in cancer [49]. Different miRNA expression profiles are observed for normal and tumorogenic tissues [49], where miRNA expression is generally down-regulated in tumor compared with normal samples [15]. Studies of miRNA expression in cancer have identified miRNA tumor profiles which can be used to classify different tumor subtypes [10, 15]. Studies have also constructed miRNA expression profiles that can identify tumor origin [15]. This is particularly useful in the classification of poorly differentiated tumors.

---

### CURRENT KNOWLEDGE OF miRNAs IN BARRETT’S ESOPHAGUS AND ESOPHAGEAL ADENOCARCINOMA

Recent reports describe altered miRNA expression in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Initial work performed by Feber *et al.* [50] identified miRNA alterations in these conditions. This study [50] provided preliminary evidence for using miRNAs in the identification of patients at risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma development. Since then, several publications have described miRNA expression in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma [31, 39, 51, 52]. In a further study, our laboratory performed miRNA microarray and q-PCR analysis of miRNA expression in squamous esophageal epithelia, normal gastric epithelia, Barrett’s esophagus with intestinal metaplasia and esophageal adenocarcinoma [30]. Our analysis identified miRNAs differentially regulated in Barrett’s esophagus development and its subsequent progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma. miRNAs with differential expression patterns included miR-21, miR-143, miR-145, miR-194, miR-203, miR-205 and miR-215. With respect to Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma, current literature regarding miRNA expression allows for speculation about the potential molecular consequences of the aberrant miRNA expression identified in our study.

#### The oncomiR, miR-21

Our group’s research has shown that miR-21 expression is up-regulated in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma, compared with squamous esophageal epithelia. This finding is in accord with other publications where miR-21 has been shown to be up-regulated in various solid tumors [38]. Elevated miR-21 has been implicated in many cellular processes required for neoplastic development and progression. Elevations in miR-21 have been shown to promote survival in myeloma cells [53], confer apoptotic resistance in prostate cancer cells [54], increase cell proliferation, migration and invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma cells [55], and increase invasion and metastasis in colorectal cancer cells [56]. Also, reduced miR-21 expression has been shown to reduce proliferation in MCF7 breast cancer cells and tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model [57], reduce anchorage-independent colony formation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells [58], and reduce invasion, intravasation and metastatic capacity of colon cancer cells [56]. It is possible that the observed up-regulation of miR-21 in esophageal adenocarcinoma may either provide a selective advantage to cells within a metaplastic columnar epithelium, increasing the chance for neoplastic development, or confer on esophageal adenocarcinoma similar molecular traits to those reported in the literature.

#### Dual roles for miR-194

miR-194 is up-regulated in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma [30]. miR-194 expression is regulated by HNF-1a, a transcription factor induced in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma [59]. A study by Hino *et al.* [59] also showed that miR-194 expression is induced during intestinal epithelial cell differentiation. Furthermore, miR-194 expression is induced in metastatic pancreatic cell lines [60]. Taken together, these results could suggest that elevated miR-194 may be contributing to intestinal differentiation observed in Barrett’s esophagus, and may also contribute to the molecular phenotype required for tumor metastasis.

#### miRNAs as tumor suppressors

miR-143, miR-145 and miR-215 are down-regulated in esophageal adenocarcinoma [30]. Similar alterations are observed in other expression profiling studies. miR-143, 145 and 215 are all down-regulated in colonic adenocarcinoma [61, 62]. miR-143 and 145 have been shown to be down-regulated in gastric cancer [63] and miR-145 has been shown to be down-regulated in lung cancer [64]. More specific roles for miR-143, 145, and 215 in carcinogenesis have been elucidated. miR-143 has been

Smith CM *et al.* miRNAs, Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

shown to target the *KRAS* oncogene, suppressing colorectal cancer cell growth *via* inhibition of *KRAS* translation<sup>[65]</sup>. Therefore, loss of miR-143 expression in esophageal adenocarcinoma could result in a loss of *KRAS* regulation contributing to neoplastic development. Also, miR-143 up-regulation in Jurkat T cells has been linked with the regulation of FAS-mediated apoptosis<sup>[66]</sup>. miR-145 has also been implicated in regulating apoptosis *via* a negative feedback loop involving TP53, and also *via* translational inhibition of RTKN in breast cancer cell lines<sup>[67,68]</sup>. Furthermore, miR-143 and miR-145 expression are induced by p53 in response to DNA damage<sup>[69]</sup>. Therefore, the loss of both miR-143 and miR-145 in the progression of Barrett’s esophagus to esophageal adenocarcinoma may alter the cell’s ability to direct the appropriate apoptotic responses.

miR-215 expression is induced by p53, and it acts in cooperation with miR-192 to regulate cell cycle events through their ability to induce cell cycle arrest<sup>[61,70]</sup>. Loss of miR-215 expression causes a reduction in the ability of cells to regulate proliferation, a key neoplastic attribute. It is therefore possible that miR-143, 145 and 215 may act as tumor suppressors, with loss of expression contributing to the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

---

### CONCLUSION

It is now clear that altered regulation of miRNA expression results in numerous cellular consequences. Functional studies of miRNAs, which drive different disease states including neoplastic progression, are increasing in number. This literature is matched by an increase in studies evaluating miRNA expression in the clinical setting as a possible prognostic and diagnostic marker, with miRNA analysis of blood samples providing exciting potential for new avenues in disease diagnosis<sup>[71]</sup>. Although miRNA research in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma is in its early stages, increasing evidence allows for speculation about the potential roles of miRNAs in the development of Barrett’s esophagus and its progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma.

---

### REFERENCES

1. Jenkins GJ, Doak SH, Parry JM, D'Souza FR, Griffiths AP, Baxter JN. Genetic pathways involved in the progression of Barrett's metaplasia to adenocarcinoma. *Br J Surg* 2002; 89: 824-837
2. Shaheen NJ, Richter JE. Barrett's oesophagus. *Lancet* 2009; 373: 850-861
3. Gillen P, Keeling P, Byrne PJ, Healy M, O'Moore RR, Hennessy TP. Implication of duodenogastric reflux in the pathogenesis of Barrett's oesophagus. *Br J Surg* 1988; 75: 540-543
4. Souza RF, Krishnan K, Spechler SJ. Acid, bile, and CDX: the ABCs of making Barrett's metaplasia. *Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol* 2008; 295: G211-G218
5. Devesa SS, Blot WJ, Fraumeni JF Jr. Changing patterns in the incidence of esophageal and gastric carcinoma in the United States. *Cancer* 1998; 83: 2049-2053
6. Parker SL, Tong T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics,

7. Pillai RS, Bhattacharyya SN, Filipowicz W. Repression of protein synthesis by miRNAs: how many mechanisms? *Trends Cell Biol* 2007; 17: 118-126
8. Lee RC, Feinbaum RL, Ambros V. The C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14. *Cell* 1993; 75: 843-854
9. Filipowicz W, Bhattacharyya SN, Sonenberg N. Mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation by microRNAs: are the answers in sight? *Nat Rev Genet* 2008; 9: 102-114
10. Papagiannakopoulos T, Kosik KS. MicroRNAs: regulators of oncogenesis and stemness. *BMC Med* 2008; 6: 15
11. Tomari Y, Zamore PD. Perspective: machines for RNAi. *Genes Dev* 2005; 19: 517-529
12. Wijnhoven BP, Michael MZ, Watson DI. MicroRNAs and cancer. *Br J Surg* 2007; 94: 23-30
13. Davis BN, Hilyard AC, Lagna G, Hata A. SMAD proteins control DROSHA-mediated microRNA maturation. *Nature* 2008; 454: 56-61
14. Caldas C, Brenton JD. Sizing up miRNAs as cancer genes. *Nat Med* 2005; 11: 712-714
15. Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra E, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, Downing JR, Jacks T, Horvitz HR, Golub TR. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. *Nature* 2005; 435: 834-838
16. Kuo B, Urma D. Esophagus - anatomy and development. *GI Motility online* 2006. Available from: URL: http://www.nature.com/gimo/contents/pt1/full/gimo6.html
17. Larsen WJ. Development of the Gastrointestinal Tract. In: Sherman LS, Potter SS, Scott WJ, editors. Human Embryology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Churchill Livingstone, 2001: 235-263
18. Slack JM. Metaplasia and transdifferentiation: from pure biology to the clinic. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* 2007; 8: 369-378
19. Yu WY, Slack JM, Tosh D. Conversion of columnar to stratified squamous epithelium in the developing mouse oesophagus. *Dev Biol* 2005; 284: 157-170
20. Zhao Y, Srivastava D. A developmental view of microRNA function. *Trends Biochem Sci* 2007; 32: 189-197
21. Chang CL, Lao-Sirieix P, Save V, De La Cueva Mendez G, Laskey R, Fitzgerald RC. Retinoic acid-induced glandular differentiation of the oesophagus. *Gut* 2007; 56: 906-917
22. Tsonis PA, Call MK, Grogg MW, Sartor MA, Taylor RR, Forge A, Fyffe R, Goldenberg R, Cowper-Sal-lari R, Tomlinson CR. MicroRNAs and regeneration: Let-7 members as potential regulators of dedifferentiation in lens and inner ear hair cell regeneration of the adult newt. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2007; 362: 940-945
23. Wang Y, Bhaskaran M, Zhang H, Gou Y, Chintagari NR, Liu L. MicroRNA-375 Regulates Alveolar Epithelial Cell Trans-Differentiation through the Wnt/β-catenin Pathway. *FASEB J* 2009; 23: 997.6
24. Gregory PA, Bert AG, Paterson EL, Barry SC, Tsykin A, Farshid G, Vadas MA, Khew-Goodall Y, Goodall GJ. The miR-200 family and miR-205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal transition by targeting ZEB1 and SIP1. *Nat Cell Biol* 2008; 10: 593-601
25. Radominska-Pandya A, Chen G. Photoaffinity labeling of human retinoid X receptor beta (RXRbeta) with 9-cis-retinoic acid: identification of phytanolic acid, docosahexaenoic acid, and lithocholic acid as ligands for RXRbeta. *Biochemistry* 2002; 41: 4883-4890
26. Brabender J, Lord RV, Metzger R, Park J, Salonga D, Danenberg KD, Hölscher AH, Danenberg PV, Schneider PM. Role of retinoid X receptor mRNA expression in Barrett's esophagus. *J Gastrointest Surg* 2004; 8: 413-422
27. Houle M, Prinos P, Iulianella A, Bouchard N, Lohnes D. Retinoic acid regulation of Cdx1: an indirect mechanism for

Smith CM et al. miRNAs, Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

28 Kong J, Nakagawa H, Isariyawongse BK, Funakoshi S, Silberg DG, Rustgi AK, Lynch JP. Induction of intestinalization in human esophageal keratinocytes is a multistep process. Carcinogenesis 2009; 30: 122-130

29 Bracken CP, Gregory PA, Kolesnikoff N, Bert AG, Wang J, Shannon MF, Goodall GJ. A double-negative feedback loop between ZEB1-SIP1 and the microRNA-200 family regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Cancer Res 2008; 68: 7846-7854

30 Watson DI, Wijnhoven BPL, Michael MZ, Mayne GC, Hussey DJ. MicroRNA expression profiles in Barrett's Oesophagus. ANZ J Surg 2007; 77: A45

31 Kan T, Sato F, Ito T, Matsumura N, David S, Cheng Y, Agarwal R, Paun BC, Jin Z, Olaru AV, Selaru FM, Hamilton JP, Yang J, Abraham JM, Mori Y, Meltzer SJ. The miR-106b-25 polycistron, activated by genomic amplification, functions as an oncogene by suppressing p21 and Bim. Gastroenterology 2009; 136: 1689-1700

32 Yi R, Poy MN, Stoffel M, Fuchs E. A skin microRNA promotes differentiation by repressing 'stemness'. Nature 2008; 452: 225-229

33 Seery JP. Stem cells of the oesophageal epithelium. J Cell Sci 2002; 115: 1783-1789

34 Lena AM, Shalom-Feuerstein R, Rivetti di Val Cervo P, Aberdam D, Knight RA, Melino G, Candi E. miR-203 represses 'stemness' by repressing DeltaNp63. Cell Death Differ 2008; 15: 1187-1195

35 Senoo M, Pinto F, Crum CP, McKeon F. p63 Is essential for the proliferative potential of stem cells in stratified epithelia. Cell 2007; 129: 523-536

36 Yan LX, Huang XF, Shao Q, Huang MY, Deng L, Wu QL, Zeng YX, Shao JY. MicroRNA miR-21 overexpression in human breast cancer is associated with advanced clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and patient poor prognosis. RNA 2008; 14: 2348-2360

37 Schetter AJ, Leung SY, Sohn JJ, Zanetti KA, Bowman ED, Yanaihara N, Yuen ST, Chan TL, Kwong DL, Au GK, Liu CG, Calin GA, Croce CM, Harris CC. MicroRNA expression profiles associated with prognosis and therapeutic outcome in colon adenocarcinoma. JAMA 2008; 299: 425-436

38 Krichevsky AM, Gabriely G. miR-21: a small multi-faceted RNA. J Cell Mol Med 2009; 13: 39-53

39 Maru DM, Singh RR, Hannah C, Albarracin CT, Li YX, Abraham R, Romans AM, Yao H, Luthra MG, Anandasa-bapathy S, Swisher SG, Hofstetter WL, Rashid A, Luthra R. MicroRNA-196a is a potential marker of progression during Barrett's metaplasia-dysplasia-invasive adenocarcinoma sequence in esophagus. Am J Pathol 2009; 174: 1940-1948

40 Childs G, Fazzari M, Kung G, Kawachi N, Brandwein-Gensler M, McLemore M, Chen Q, Burk RD, Smith RV, Prystowsky MB, Belbin TJ, Schlecht NF. Low-level expression of microRNAs let-7d and miR-205 are prognostic markers of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 2009; 174: 736-745

41 Armstrong D. Should patients with Barrett's oesophagus be kept under surveillance? The case for. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2008; 22: 721-739

42 Sharma P, Sidorenko EI. Are screening and surveillance for Barrett's oesophagus really worthwhile? Gut 2005; 54 Suppl 1: i27-i32

43 Shi XB, Tepper CG, deVere White RW. Cancerous miRNAs and their regulation. Cell Cycle 2008; 7: 1529-1538

44 Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res 1989; 49: 4682-4689

45 He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D, Goodson S, Powers S, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Hannon GJ, Hammond SM. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene. Nature 2005; 435: 828-833

46 Johnson SM, Grosshans H, Shingara J, Byrom M, Jarvis R, Cheng A, Labourier E, Reinert KL, Brown D, Slack FJ. RAS is regulated by the let-7 microRNA family. Cell 2005; 120: 635-647

47 Hayashita Y, Osada H, Tatematsu Y, Yamada H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Yatabe Y, Kawahara K, Sekido Y, Takahashi T. A polycistronic microRNA cluster, miR-17-92, is overexpressed in human lung cancers and enhances cell proliferation. Cancer Res 2005; 65: 9628-9632

48 Esquela-Kerscher A, Trang P, Wiggins JF, Patrawala L, Cheng A, Ford L, Weidhaas JB, Brown D, Bader AG, Slack FJ. The let-7 microRNA reduces tumor growth in mouse models of lung cancer. Cell Cycle 2008; 7: 759-764

49 Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, Prueitt RL, Yanaihara N, Lanza G, Scarpa A, Vecchione A, Negrini M, Harris CC, Croce CM. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 2257-2261

50 Feber A, Xi L, Luketich JD, Pennathur A, Landreneau RJ, Wu M, Swanson SJ, Godfrey TE, Litle VR. MicroRNA expression profiles of esophageal cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2008; 135: 255-260; discussion 260

51 Yang H, Gu J, Wang KK, Zhang W, Xing J, Chen Z, Ajani JA, Wu X. MicroRNA expression signatures in Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15: 5744-5752

52 Mathé EA, Nguyen GH, Bowman ED, Zhao Y, Budhu A, Schetter AJ, Braun R, Reimers M, Kumamoto K, Hughes D, Altorki NK, Casson AG, Liu CG, Wang XW, Yanaihara N, Hagiwara N, Dannenberg AJ, Miyashita M, Croce CM, Harris CC. MicroRNA expression in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus: associations with survival. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15: 6192-6200

53 Löffler D, Brocke-Heidrich K, Pfeifer G, Stocsits C, Hackermüller J, Kretzschmar AK, Burger R, Gramatzki M, Blumert C, Bauer K, Cvijic H, Ullmann AK, Stadler PF, Horn F. Interleukin-6 dependent survival of multiple myeloma cells involves the Stat3-mediated induction of microRNA-21 through a highly conserved enhancer. Blood 2007; 110: 1330-1333

54 Li T, Li D, Sha J, Sun P, Huang Y. MicroRNA-21 directly targets MARCKS and promotes apoptosis resistance and invasion in prostate cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009; 383: 280-285

55 Meng F, Henson R, Wehbe-Janek H, Ghoshal K, Jacob ST, Patel T. MicroRNA-21 regulates expression of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in human hepatocellular cancer. Gastroenterology 2007; 133: 647-658

56 Asangani IA, Rasheed SA, Nikolova DA, Leupold JH, Colburn NH, Post S, Allgayer H. MicroRNA-21 (miR-21) post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer. Oncogene 2008; 27: 2128-2136

57 Si ML, Zhu S, Wu H, Lu Z, Wu F, Mo YY. miR-21-mediated tumor growth. Oncogene 2007; 26: 2799-2803

58 Connolly E, Melegari M, Landgraf P, Tchaikovskaya T, Tennant BC, Slagle BL, Rogler LE, Zavolan M, Tuschl T, Rogler CE. Elevated expression of the miR-17-92 polycistron and miR-21 in hepatitis-associated hepatocellular carcinoma contributes to the malignant phenotype. Am J Pathol 2008; 173: 856-864

59 Hino K, Tsuchiya K, Fukao T, Kiga K, Okamoto R, Kanai T, Watanabe M. Inducible expression of microRNA-194 is regulated by HNF-1alpha during intestinal epithelial cell differentiation. RNA 2008; 14: 1433-1442

60 Mees ST, Mardin WA, Wendel C, Baeumer N, Willscher E, Senninger N, Schleicher C, Colombo-Benkemann M, Haier J. EP300--a miRNA-regulated metastasis suppressor gene in ductal adenocarcinomas of the pancreas. Int J Cancer 2010;

Smith CM et al. miRNAs, Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma

126: 114-124

61 Braun CJ, Zhang X, Savelyeva I, Wolff S, Moll UM, Schepeler T, Ørntoft TF, Andersen CL, Dobbelstein M. p53-responsive microRNAs 192 and 215 are capable of inducing cell cycle arrest. *Cancer Res* 2008; **68**: 10094-10104

62 Michael MZ, O'Connor SM, van Holst Pellekaan NG, Young GP, James RJ. Reduced accumulation of specific microRNAs in colorectal neoplasia. *Mol Cancer Res* 2003; **1**: 882-891

63 Takagi T, Iio A, Nakagawa Y, Naoe T, Tanigawa N, Akao Y. Decreased expression of microRNA-143 and -145 in human gastric cancers. *Oncology* 2009; **77**: 12-21

64 Liu X, Sempere LF, Galimberti F, Freemantle SJ, Black C, Dragnev KH, Ma Y, Fiering S, Memoli V, Li H, DiRenzo J, Korc M, Cole CN, Bak M, Kauppinen S, Dmitrovsky E. Uncovering growth-suppressive MicroRNAs in lung cancer. *Clin Cancer Res* 2009; **15**: 1177-1183

65 Chen X, Guo X, Zhang H, Xiang Y, Chen J, Yin Y, Cai X, Wang K, Wang G, Ba Y, Zhu L, Wang J, Yang R, Zhang Y, Ren Z, Zen K, Zhang J, Zhang CY. Role of miR-143 targeting KRAS in colorectal tumorigenesis. *Oncogene* 2009; **28**: 1385-1392

66 Akao Y, Nakagawa Y, Iio A, Naoe T. Role of microRNA-143 in Fas-mediated apoptosis in human T-cell leukemia Jurkat cells. *Leuk Res* 2009; **33**: 1530-1538

67 Spizzo R, Nicoloso MS, Lupini L, Lu Y, Fogarty J, Rossi S, Zagatti B, Fabbri M, Veronese A, Liu X, Davuluri R, Croce CM, Mills G, Negrini M, Calin GA. miR-145 participates with TP53 in a death-promoting regulatory loop and targets estrogen receptor-alpha in human breast cancer cells. *Cell Death Differ* 2010; **17**: 246-254

68 Wang S, Bian C, Yang Z, Bo Y, Li J, Zeng L, Zhou H, Zhao RC. miR-145 inhibits breast cancer cell growth through RTKN. *Int J Oncol* 2009; **34**: 1461-1466

69 Suzuki HI, Yamagata K, Sugimoto K, Iwamoto T, Kato S, Miyazono K. Modulation of microRNA processing by p53. *Nature* 2009; **460**: 529-533

70 Georges SA, Biery MC, Kim SY, Schelter JM, Guo J, Chang AN, Jackson AL, Carleton MO, Linsley PS, Cleary MA, Chau BN. Coordinated regulation of cell cycle transcripts by p53-inducible microRNAs, miR-192 and miR-215. *Cancer Res* 2008; **68**: 10105-10112

71 Keller A, Leidinger P, Borries A, Wendschlag A, Wuchterpfennig F, Scheffler M, Huwer H, Lenhof HP, Meese E. miRNAs in lung cancer - studying complex fingerprints in patient's blood cells by microarray experiments. *BMC Cancer* 2009; **9**: 353

S-Editor Tian L   L-Editor Logan S   E-Editor Zheng XM
