
IUBMB Life, 62(3): 176–182, March 2010

# Critical Review

## Dietary Zinc Absorption: A Play of Zips and ZnTs in the Gut

### Xiaoxi Wang and Bing Zhou*

State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

---

### Summary

Studies on dietary zinc absorption are of fundamental nutritional significance, owing to the ubiquity of zinc in biological processes and the severe outcomes of zinc deficiency in humans. Insights into the molecular basis of dietary zinc absorption have advanced in recent years through functional characterization of zinc transporters in cell culture, immunohistochemical studies on rodent intestine and analysis of gene knockout mice. Zinc transporters with manifested expression in enterocytes include ZnT1, ZnT2, ZnT4, ZnT5, ZnT6, ZnT7, Zip4, and Zip5. Among them, ZIP4, the gene responsible for Acrodermatitis enteropathica, an inherited human zinc deficiency, mediates dietary zinc uptake into enterocytes across the apical membrane, while ZnT1 is involved in zinc efflux from enterocytes across the basolateral membrane into circulation. The intracellular trafficking pathways for zinc retention and movement between apical and basolateral sides of the enterocytes have yet to be defined. The utilization of Drosophila model in elucidating molecular mechanisms of dietary zinc absorption is also discussed in this review.

© 2010 IUBMB

IUBMB Life, 62(3): 176–182, 2010

---

### Keywords

dietary zinc absorption; enterocytes; apical membrane; basolateral membrane; Zip; ZnT.

---

### INTRODUCTION

The biological significance of zinc can be appreciated given that proteins with zinc-binding domains are estimated at 3–10% of the human proteome (1). Zinc is utilized by numerous enzymes and other proteins as a catalytic or structural component and accordingly contributes to a variety of fundamental biological processes (2, 3).

Zinc homeostasis is tightly regulated at both the cellular and organismal levels (4, 5). Mechanisms to maintain body zinc balance are largely efficient, but chronic low zinc intakes, physiological, and pathological stimuli or genetic defects could disturb this balance and cause abnormalities of fast-turnover tissues and compromised immune and neuronal functions (2, 6).

The gastrointestinal system is central to systemic zinc homeostasis because it serves as the interface of zinc exchange between the organism and environment. Dietary zinc is primarily absorbed in the small intestine and discharged from the body via pancreatic and intestinal excretions (5, 7). Zinc uptake in the intestine exhibits both unsaturable and saturable kinetics, and the latter suggests a carrier-mediated process (8, 9). Our understanding of mammalian zinc transport at the molecular level was initiated by the identification of ZnT1 and rapidly enriched through the studies of a series of zinc transporters in cell culture, rodent models, and diseases linked to their deficiency (10, 11). Briefly, mammalian zinc transporters largely fall into two conserved families, the ZnT (SLC30) family and the ZIP (Zrt- and Irt-like protein, SLC39) family. Members of the ZnT family mediate zinc efflux or sequestration into organelles/vesicles, whereas those of the ZIP family transport extracellular or organellar/vesicular zinc into cytoplasm (10, 11).

Dietary zinc enters the polarized enterocytes through the apical membrane and is released at the basolateral side into circulation. The presence of a variety of zinc transporters in enterocytes has been manifested at the protein level, which includes ZnT1, ZnT2, ZnT4, ZnT5, ZnT6, ZnT7, Zip4, and Zip5 (12–16). This review summarizes our present knowledge of enterocyte-expressed zinc transporters in terms of their coordinated functions in the aforementioned trans-epithelial movement of zinc.

---

### ZINC UPTAKE ACROSS THE APICAL MEMBRANE INTO ENTEROCYTES

Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is an autosomal recessive human disorder of zinc malabsorption. Patients suffering from AE display classic symptoms of zinc deficiency including dermatitis, diarrhea, growth retardation, immune dysfunctions, and occasionally, neuropsychological disturbances, which could be

---

Received 2 October 2009; accepted 12 November 2009  
Address correspondence to: Bing Zhou, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. Tel: +86 10 62795322. Fax: +86 10 62772253. E-mail: zhoubing@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

ISSN 1521-6543 print / ISSN 1521-6551 online  
DOI: 10.1002/iub.291

ameliorated by oral zinc supplementation (17, 18). Human ZIP4 has been identified as the gene responsible for AE (19, 20). Further characterizations found that Zip4 mRNA was abundantly expressed throughout the small intestine tract in both human and mice (15, 19, 20). The expression of mouse Zip4 was highly responsive to dietary zinc, exhibiting up-regulation under zinc deficiency and down-regulation under increased zinc concentration at the mRNA level (15). Immunohistochemistry localized mouse Zip4 to the apical membrane of the enterocytes and, in zinc-replete conditions, Zip4 protein was largely internalized and degraded (15, 19, 21). In cultured cells, Zip4 mediated zinc influx with high specificity and saturable kinetics (15). The aforementioned evidence strongly supports the role of Zip4 in zinc uptake into enterocytes across the apical membrane.

Homozygous Zip4 knockout mice died during early embryogenesis. More than 40% of the heterozygotes were dead or born with morphological abnormalities, which were exacerbated by zinc deficiency and ameliorated by zinc supplement (22). In visceral yolk sac Zip4 was distributed on the apical side of visceral endoderm cells, suggesting a role in maternal zinc transport to the fetus (15).

Recent studies have provided insights into the mechanisms of zinc-responsive ZIP4 regulation. It was reported that zinc status had little effect on transcription of Zip4 but rather regulated mRNA stability both in cultured Hepa cells and mouse intestine (21). In contrast, a recent study found that Krüppel-like factor 4 bound to Zip4 promoter and its knockdown impaired Zip4 induction by zinc depletion in a mouse intestinal epithelial cell line (23). At the protein level, apart from endocytosis stimulated by low micromolar zinc (24), ubiquitination and degradation of ZIP4 were observed under higher zinc levels (25). While during prolonged zinc deficiency, the extracellular amino-terminal domain of Zip4 underwent proteolytic cleavage while the remaining part accumulated at the plasma membrane (26).

or lamina propria (12, 14). Furthermore, ZnT1 was distributed predominantly on the basolateral membrane of the enterocytes (12, 14). Intracellular punctate localization of ZnT1 was also found in the enterocytes but its physiological significance remains undetermined (13). Dietary zinc supplementation induced both ZnT1 mRNA and protein levels whereas zinc deficiency did not significantly affect ZnT1 expression in rat small intestines (12, 31). It has been shown that MTF-1 binds to the metal-responsive elements in ZnT1 promoter and mediates its regulation in response to zinc (32).

Znt1 knockout in mice resulted in early embryonic lethality at a similar stage to that of Zip4−/− embryos. Heterozygote Zntl knockout mice developed normally but displayed higher risk of conceiving abnormal embryos under dietary zinc deficiency (33). Tissue-specific inactivation of Znt1 or Zip4 in intestinal epithelium is needed to avoid the early lethality and to further characterize their in vivo functions in dietary zinc absorption.

Inspiringly, a recent study in Drosophila provided the genetic evidence for the participation of ZnT1 in dietary zinc absorption (34), which will be discussed later in this review.

## INTRACELLULAR ZINC TRAFFICKING IN ENTEROCYTES

The intracellular trafficking of zinc from the apical cytoplasm to the basolateral cytoplasm of the enterocytes remains largely uncharacterized. Another question of great interest is to unveil other putative pathways utilized by the enterocytes to release zinc into circulation, For example, vesicles-mediated exocytosis, in addition to direct pumping across the basolateral membrane. A variety of intracellular zinc transporters are found to be expressed in enterocytes and our current understanding of their functions in dietary zinc absorption is described in this part (Fig. 1, Table 1). The contribution of metallothionein to intracellular zinc trafficking is also briefly reviewed here. In addition, zinc can be released from intracellular storage in response to stimuli, as evidenced by oxidizing agents-induced zinc liberation from metallothionein (35), zinc release from the perinuclear region including the endoplasmic reticulum induced by IgE receptor crosslinking (36), and zinc mobilization from the mitochondrial pool by depolarization or rapid calcium entry (37).

### Zinc Release from Enterocytes into Circulation

To reach the bloodstream for systemic supply, zinc ions must be released from the basolateral side of the polarized enterocytes. The molecular basis underlying this process was proposed to be ZnT1, which directly mediates zinc efflux across the basolateral membrane. Supporting evidence in mammalian systems largely came from functional analysis at the cellular level and immunolocalization studies. In mammalian cell culture, ZnT1 was localized primarily on the plasma membrane and it mediated zinc export to reduce intracellular zinc levels (27, 28). The anatomical and subcellular distribution of endogenous ZnT1 was also in good correlation with a role in dietary zinc absorption. Rodent ZnT1 was most abundant in the proximal small intestine (12, 14), the primary site for zinc absorption (29, 30). Intensive ZnT1 expression was detected in absorptive epithelial cells in the villus, in contrast to weak or undetectable expression in mucos-secreting goblet cells, cells in the crypts

### Zinc Transporters in the Golgi Apparatus

ZnT7. ZnT7 was reported to be predominantly located in the Golgi apparatus and its overexpression led to the accumulation of chelatable zinc in this organelle (38). ZnT7 is also required for the activity of alkaline phosphate, suggesting zinc in the Golgi lumen is incorporated into zinc-requiring secretory and membrane-bound enzymes (39, 40). The expression pattern of ZnT7 suggests a role in dietary zinc absorption. First, ZnT7 protein was restricted to lung and small intestine despite the ubiquitous expression of its transcripts (38). Second, cytoplasm-

together caused reduced $^{65}$Zn accumulation (41). Overall, the role of ZnT7 in zinc homeostasis needs to be further clarified.

**ZnT5.** ZnT5 was expressed in mouse small intestine epithelium, exhibiting a similar immunostaining pattern with that of ZnT7 in duodenum and jejunum (14). The antibody used was against a ZnT5 variant A-specific peptide. Like ZnT7, ZnT5A transported zinc into Golgi and contributed to the activity of zinc-requiring enzymes (39, 42, 43). It is possible that ZnT5A and ZnT7 execute partially overlapping functions in intestinal zinc homeostasis. Unlike typical ZnT members, the smaller variant ZnT5B mediated bidirectional zinc transport as manifested by enhanced zinc influx and efflux in ZnT5B-expressing Xenopus oocytes (44). Immunolocalization of ZnT5 (with an antibody unable to distinguish between variant A and B) to the apical membrane of enterocytes was reported in human small intestine (45); however, its physiological significance is obscure. Znt5-null mice displayed poor growth, osteopenia, and male-specific fatal bradycardias. Nevertheless, their serum zinc levels were normal (46).

**ZnT6.** It was reported that ZnT6 formed a heteromeric complex with ZnT5A to activate zinc-requiring enzymes in the secretory pathway (40). Upon elevated zinc concentrations, ZnT6 exhibited translocation from the Golgi apparatus to periphery vesicles (47). ZnT6 was detected on the apical membrane as well as intracellularly in absorptive epithelial cells of mouse jejunum, cecum, and colon (14). ZnT6 may function in zinc excretion from enterocytes into lumen via exocytosis.

**Zip7, Zip9, and Zip13.** Zip7 (KE4) was localized in the Golgi apparatus and antagonized zinc accumulation in Golgi caused by ZnT7 overexpression (48). It was proposed that Zip7 transports zinc out of the Golgi apparatus to increase cytoplasmic zinc levels (48, 49). Zip7 mRNA was ubiquitously expressed in human and mouse tissues including small intestine, whereas the tissue distribution of this protein was not characterized (48, 49). Recent studies have revealed two other Golgi-residing Zip transporters, Zip9 and Zip13 (50, 51). No information was available regarding their expression in small intestine. Zip13-deficient mice showed defects in bone, teeth, and connective tissues but exhibited normal serum zinc levels (51).

**Zinc Transporters in Vesicles**

**ZnT4.** Mutation in Znt4 underlies the inherited zinc deficiency “lethal milk (lm)” in mice (52). Pups fostered by homozygous lm dams died in neonatal life (53). lm dams produced zinc-deficient milk due to impaired zinc sequestration into milk-secreting vesicles, where Znt4 was localized (54–56). In cell types other than the mammary epithelium, ZnT4 has been localized to endosomal compartments or trans-Golgi network and intracellular vesicles (47, 57).

ZINC TRANSPORTERS IN DIETARY ZINC ABSORPTION

Table 1  
Mammalian zinc transporters with manifested expression in intestinal absorptive cells  

| Zinc transporter | Subcellular localization | Anatomical distribution along the intestinal tract | Consequence of mutation |
|------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Zip family       |                          |                                                   |                         |
| Zip4             | Apical membrane of the enterocytes | Small intestine, colon | AE; Embryonic lethal in knockout mice |
| Zip5             | Basolateral membrane of the enterocytes | Small intestine, colon | Not available |
| ZnT family       |                          |                                                   |                         |
| ZnT1             | Basolateral membrane of the enterocytes, vesicles | Abundant in proximal small intestine, cecum | Embryonic lethal in knockout mice |
| ZnT2             | Vesicles                 | Duodenum, in villus but not in crypt cells        | Zinc-deficient milk in some women |
| ZnT4             | TGN, vesicles, endosomes | Restricted to the villus instead of the crypts, abundant in the large intestine | Zinc-deficient milk in lm mice |
| ZnT5             | Golgi apparatus (variant A), apical membrane of the enterocytes | Mainly in duodenum and jejunum | Poor growth, osteopenia, male-specific bradycardias in knockout mice |
| ZnT6             | TGN, apical membrane of the enterocytes | Jejunum, the large intestine | Not available |
| ZnT7             | Golgi apparatus          | The entire intestinal tract, most abundant in the small intestine | Poor appetite, reduced body weight gain, low adiposity in knockout mice |

Abbreviations: TGN: trans-Golgi network; AE: acrodermatitis enteropathica; lm: lethal milk.

Although the exact mechanism remains a mystery, several pieces of evidence indicate that ZnT4 may participate in dietary zinc absorption. First, lm mice suckled on wild type dams exhibited normal zinc homeostasis until 8 months of age, when they began to exhibit signs of zinc deficiency including alopecia, dermatitis, and premature sterility (58, 59). Second, ZnT4 expression in rodent small intestine was restricted to epithelium of the villus compared to the crypts (14, 57), and the immunolocalization of ZnT4 in enterocytes was primarily basolateral in growing rats (57). Third, lm mice exhibited decreased level of Zip4 transcripts and induction of metallothionein in jejunum, indicating increased cytoplasmic zinc levels (59). Finally, ZnT4 translocated from Golgi to peripheral vesicles upon elevated zinc concentrations in the medium (47), and in cultured fibroblasts, a fraction of ZnT4 was detected on the plasma membrane (60). It was therefore proposed that ZnT4 promotes zinc secretion into the bloodstream via exocytosis. The zinc transport activity of ZnT4 has been proved by its virtue to rescue the zinc sensitivity of zrc1 yeast (52), but there is no solid evidence supporting ZnT4-mediated zinc secretion in cell types other than the breast epithelium (13, 52, 56). The contribution of ZnT4 to dietary zinc absorption could be limited considering zinc homeostasis appeared normal in young lm mice (58), and notably, a recent immunohistochemical study in young adult mice pointed out that ZnT4 expression in the proximal intestine is rather weak, compared to that in the colon and rectum (14).

ZnT2. ZnT2 mRNA has been detected in small intestine, which is suppressed to barely detectable levels by zinc deficiency and induced by zinc repletion (31). In rat duodenum, ZnT2 was localized to vesicles on the apical side of the enterocytes and was not detected in crypts or lamina propria (13). In cell culture, ZnT2 sequestered zinc into endosome/lysosome-like vesicles (61). ZnT2 might be involved in a storage or excretion mechanism in enterocytes with high zinc influx. Mutations in ZNT2 have been found in some patients with zinc-deficient milk (62).

Chaperones in Cytoplasm for Zinc Delivery

Intracellular zinc is largely bound to proteins or sequestered in organelles, leaving the cytoplasmic labile zinc at very low levels (63). Although it is well characterized in copper homeostasis (64), how the intracellular process of zinc trafficking, particularly in cytoplasm, happens to remain largely unknown. Is it mediated by free diffusion or a specific set of chaperones? There are some indications suggesting that metallothioneins may play roles in helping zinc delivery to zinc-requiring enzymes. Metallothionein binds zinc in two separate clusters
with different affinities and serves a dual role in zinc detoxification and also zinc reserve as a bioavailable pool. The function of metallothionein as a zinc donor has been documented for several zinc metalloproteins (35), however, the viability of metallothionein knockout mice suggests the presence of other pathways for zinc incorporation into essential apoproteins (65). Despite prominent expression in the intestine, the role of metallothionein in dietary zinc absorption remains to be elucidated. It was even shown that after an oral gavage of zinc on metallothionein knockout and transgenic mice, the rise in serum zinc was inversely related to metallothionein protein levels (66).

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors apologize to authors whose works are not cited here due to space limitation. Xiaona Tang provided technical help in the artwork. Our research was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (#2005CB522503). Bing Zhou is a recipient of the National Outstanding Youth Grant (#30688001) from the National Scientific Foundation of China.

### REFERENCES

1. Andreini, C., Banci, L., Bertini, I., and Rosato, A. (2006) Counting the zinc-proteins encoded in the human genome. *J. Proteome. Res.* **5**, 196–201.
2. Vallee, B. L. and Falchuk, K. H. (1993) The biochemical basis of zinc physiology. *Physiol. Rev.* **73**, 79–118.
3. MacDonald, R. S. (2000) The role of zinc in growth and cell proliferation. *J. Nutr.* **130**, 1500S–1508S.
4. Murakami, M. and Hirano, T. (2008) Intracellular zinc homeostasis and zinc signaling. *Cancer Sci.* **99**, 1515–1522.
5. King, J. C., Shames, D. M., and Woodhouse, L. R. (2000) Zinc homeostasis in humans. *J. Nutr.* **130**, 1360S–1366S.
6. Hambidge, M. (2000) Human zinc deficiency. *J. Nutr.* **130**, 1344S–1349S.
7. Krebs, N. F. (2000) Overview of zinc absorption and excretion in the human gastrointestinal tract. *J. Nutr.* **130**, 1374S–1377S.
8. Steel, L. and Cousins, R. J. (1985) Kinetics of zinc absorption by luminally and vascularly perfused rat intestine. *Am. J. Physiol.* **248**, G46–G53.
9. Ford, D. (2004) Intestinal and placental zinc transport pathways. *Proc. Nutr. Soc.* **63**, 21–29.
10. Liuzzi, J. P. and Cousins, R. J. (2004) Mammalian zinc transporters. *Annu. Rev. Nutr.* **24**, 151–172.
11. Lichten, L. A. and Cousins, R. J. (2009) Mammalian zinc transporters: nutritional and physiologic regulation. *Annu. Rev. Nutr.* **29**, 153–176.
12. McMahon, R. J. and Cousins, R. J. (1998) Regulation of the zinc transporter ZnT-1 by dietary zinc. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 4841–4846.
13. Liuzzi, J. P., Bobo, J. A., Cui, L., McMahon, R. J., and Cousins, R. J. (2003) Zinc transporters 1, 2 and 4 are differentially expressed and localized in rats during pregnancy and lactation. *J. Nutr.* **133**, 342–351.
14. Yu, Y. Y., Kirschke, C. P., and Huang, L. (2007) Immunohistochemical analysis of ZnT1, 4, 5, 6, and 7 in the mouse gastrointestinal tract. *J. Histochem. Cytochem.* **55**, 223–234.
15. Dufner-Beattie, J., Wang, F., Kuo, Y. M., Gitschier, J., Eide, D., and Andrews, G. K. (2003) The acrodermatitis enteropathica gene ZIP4 encodes a tissue-specific, zinc-regulated zinc transporter in mice. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 33474–33481.
16. Dufner-Beattie, J., Kuo, Y. M., Gitschier, J., and Andrews, G. K. (2004) The adaptive response to dietary zinc in mice involves the differential cellular localization and zinc regulation of the zinc transporters ZIP4 and ZIP5. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 49082–49090.
17. Aggett, P. J. (1983) Acrodermatitis enteropathica. *J. Inherit. Metab. Dis.* **6**, 39–43.
18. Moynahan, E. J. (1974) Letter: acrodermatitis enteropathica: a lethal inherited human zinc-deficiency disorder. *Lancet* **2**, 399–400.

### OTHER ZINC TRANSPORTERS INVOLVED IN INTESTINAL ZINC HOMEOSTASIS

Zip5 was localized on the basolateral membrane of enterocytes and was internalized and degraded during dietary zinc deficiency (16, 21). Combining its manifested activity in zinc influx (67), it was suggested that Zip5 transports zinc from bloodstream into enterocytes for ultimate excretion into the intestinal lumen under zinc-replete conditions.

Abundant Zip14 mRNA was found in duodenum and jejunum (68). Zip14 mediated influx of $Zn^{2+}$ and $Fe^{2+}$ (68) and was proposed to account for hypozincemia of inflammation (69) and hepatic loading of nontransferrin bound iron (68). However, in another report, Zip14 was reported to mediate $Cd^{2+}$ uptake, which was inhibited by $Zn^{2+}$, $Mn^{2+}$, and $Cu^{2+}$ but not by $Fe^{2+}$ or $Fe^{3+}$ (70). The significance of Zip14 in intestinal zinc homeostasis waits to be determined.

### DROSOPHILA AS A MODEL TO STUDY DIETARY ZINC ABSORPTION

We recently reported the use of Drosophila model in elucidating the molecular basis of zinc efflux across the basolateral membrane of enterocytes (34). It was shown that ubiquitous or gut-specific knockdown of Drosophila $ZnT1$ resulted in growth retardation and developmental arrest under zinc deficiency, which could be complemented by human $ZnT1$. Endogenous dZnT1 resides on the basolateral membrane of the enterocytes and mediates zinc efflux for systemic supply. Thus the mechanism for zinc release from enterocytes into circulation appeared largely conserved between Drosophila and mammals. In addition, we recently identified a Drosophila zinc transporter of the Zip family, which resides on the apical membrane of the enterocytes and is required for dietary zinc absorption (our unpublished results).

Six members of the ZnT family and eight numbers of the ZIP family are found in the Drosophila proteome, displaying homology to mammalian zinc transporters localized to the plasma membrane or intracellular compartments. Knockout of Zip4 or Znt1 leads to early embryonic lethality in mice, while in Drosophila, it is readily accessible to selectively modulate or inactivate zinc transporters in various tissues including the gut using the RNAi strategy and UAS/GAL4 system (34). Drosophila melanogaster could therefore serve as a tractable model to study how an array of zinc transporters functions in concert to fulfill dietary zinc absorption, and to a wider scope, the systemic zinc homeostasis.
19. Wang, K., Zhou, B., Kuo, Y. M., Zemansky, J., and Gitschier, J. (2002) A novel member of a zinc transporter family is defective in acrodermatitis enteropathica. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **71**, 66–73.

20. Kury, S., Dreno, B., Bezieau, S., Giraudet, S., Kharfi, M., Kamoun, R., and Moisan, J. P. (2002) Identification of SLC39A4, a gene involved in acrodermatitis enteropathica. *Nat. Genet.* **31**, 239–240.

21. Weaver, B. P., Dufner-Beattie, J., Kambe, T., and Andrews, G. K. (2007) Novel zinc-responsive post-transcriptional mechanisms reciprocally regulate expression of the mouse Slc39a4 and Slc39a5 zinc transporters (Zip4 and Zip5). *Biol. Chem.* **388**, 1301–1312.

22. Dufner-Beattie, J., Weaver, B. P., Geiser, J., Bilgen, M., Larson, M., Xu, W., and Andrews, G. K. (2007) The mouse acrodermatitis enteropathica gene Slc39a4 (Zip4) is essential for early development and heterozygosity causes hypersensitivity to zinc deficiency. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **16**, 1391–1399.

23. Liuzzi, J. P., Guo, L., Chang, S. M., and Cousins, R. J. (2009) Krüppel-like factor 4 regulates adaptive expression of the zinc transporter Zip4 in mouse small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* **296**, G517–G523.

24. Kim, B. E., Wang, F., Dufner-Beattie, J., Andrews, G. K., Eide, D. J., and Petris, M. J. (2004) Zn2+-stimulated endocytosis of the mZIP4 zinc transporter regulates its location at the plasma membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 4523–4530.

25. Mao, X., Kim, B. E., Wang, F., Eide, D. J., and Petris, M. J. (2007) A histidine-rich cluster mediates the ubiquitination and degradation of the human zinc transporter, hZIP4, and protects against zinc cytotoxicity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 6992–7000.

26. Kambe, T. and Andrews, G. K. (2009) Novel proteolytic processing of the ectodomain of the zinc transporter ZIP4 (SLC39A4) during zinc deficiency is inhibited by acrodermatitis enteropathica mutations. *Mol. Cell.* **29**, 129–139.

27. Palmiter, R. D. and Findley, S. D. (1995) Cloning and functional characterization of a mammalian zinc transporter that confers resistance to zinc. *EMBO J.* **14**, 639–649.

28. Kim, A. H., Sheline, C. T., Tian, M., Higashi, T., McMahon, R. J., Cousins, R. J., and Choi, D. W. (2000) L-type Ca(2+) channel-mediated Zn(2+) toxicity and modulation by ZnT-1 in PC12 cells. *Brain Res.* **886**, 99–107.

29. Vancampen, D. R. and Mitchell, E. A. (1965) Absorption of Cu-64, Zn-65, Mo-99, and Fe-59 from ligated segments of the rat gastrointestinal tract. *J. Nutr.* **86**, 120–124.

30. Lee, H. H., Prasad, A. S., Brewer, G. J., and Owyang, C. (1989) Zinc absorption in human small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol.* **256**, G87–G91.

31. Liuzzi, J. P., Blanchard, R. K., and Cousins, R. J. (2001) Differential regulation of zinc transporter 1, 2, and 4 mRNA expression by dietary zinc in rats. *J. Nutr.* **131**, 46–52.

32. Langmade, S. J., Ravindra, R., Daniels, P. J., and Andrews, G. K. (2000) The transcription factor MTF-1 mediates metal regulation of the mouse ZnT1 gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 34803–34809.

33. Andrews, G. K., Wang, H., Dey, S. K., and Palmiter, R. D. (2004) Mouse zinc transporter 1 gene provides an essential function during early embryonic development. *Genesis* **40**, 74–81.

34. Wang, X., Wu, Y., and Zhou, B. (2009) Dietary zinc absorption is mediated by ZnT1 i. *Drosophila melanogaster*. *FASEB J.* **23**, 2650–2661.

35. Bell, S. G. and Vallee, B. L. (2009) The metallothionein/thionein system: an oxidoreductive metabolic zinc link. *Chembiochem* **10**, 55–62.

36. Yamasaki, S., Sakata-Sogawa, K., Hasegawa, A., Suzuki, T., Kabu, K., Sato, E., Kurosaki, T., Yamashita, S., Tokunaga, M., Nishida, K., and Hirano, T. (2007) Zinc is a novel intracellular second messenger. *J. Cell. Biol.* **177**, 637–645.

37. Sensi, S. L., Ton-That, D., Sullivan, P. G., Jonas, E. A., Gee, K. R., Kaczmarek, L. K., and Weiss, J. H. (2003) Modulation of mitochondrial function by endogenous Zn2+ pools. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 6157–6162.

38. Kirschke, C. P. and Huang, L. (2003) ZnT7, a novel mammalian zinc transporter, accumulates zinc in the Golgi apparatus. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 4096–4102.

39. Suzuki, T., Ishihara, K., Migaki, H., Matsuura, W., Kohda, A., Okumura, K., Nagao, M., Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y., and Kambe, T. (2005) Zinc transporters, ZnT5 and ZnT7, are required for the activation of alkaline phosphatases, zinc-requiring enzymes that are glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored to the cytoplasmic membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 637–643.

40. Suzuki, T., Ishihara, K., Migaki, H., Nagao, M., Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y., and Kambe, T. (2005) Two different zinc transport complexes of cation diffusion facilitator proteins localized in the secretory pathway operate to activate alkaline phosphatases in vertebrate cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 30956–30962.

41. Huang, L., Yu, Y. Y., Kirschke, C. P., Gertz, E. R., and Lloyd, K. K. (2007) Znt7 (Slc30a7)-deficient mice display reduced body zinc status and body fat accumulation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 37053–37063.

42. Kambe, T., Narita, H., Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y., Hirose, J., Amano, T., Sugiura, N., Sasaki, R., Mori, K., Iwanaga, T., and Nagao, M. (2002) Cloning and characterization of a novel mammalian zinc transporter, zinc transporter 5, abundantly expressed in pancreatic beta cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 19049–19055.

43. Jackson, K. A., Helston, R. M., McKay, J. A., O’Neill, E. D., Mathers, J. C., and Ford, D. (2007) Splice variants of the human zinc transporter ZnT5 (SLC30A5) are differentially localized and regulated by zinc through transcription and mRNA stability. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 10423–10431.

44. Valentine, R. A., Jackson, K. A., Christie, G. R., Mathers, J. C., Taylor, P. M., and Ford, D. (2007) ZnT5 variant B is a bidirectional zinc transporter and mediates zinc uptake in human intestinal Caco-2 cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 14389–14393.

45. Cragg, R. A., Phillips, S. R., Piper, J. M., Varma, J. S., Campbell, F. C., Mathers, J. C., and Ford, D. (2005) Homeostatic regulation of zinc transporters in the human small intestine by dietary zinc supplementation. *Gut* **54**, 469–478.

46. Inoue, K., Matsuda, K., Itoh, M., Kawaguchi, H., Tomoike, H., Aoyagi, T., Nagai, R., Hori, M., Nakamura, Y., and Tanaka, T. (2002) Osteopenia and male-specific sudden cardiac death in mice lacking a zinc transporter gene, Znt5. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **11**, 1775–1784.

47. Huang, L., Kirschke, C. P., and Gitschier, J. (2002) Functional characterization of a novel mammalian zinc transporter, ZnT6. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 26389–26395.

48. Huang, L., Kirschke, C. P., Zhang, Y., and Yu, Y. Y. (2005) The ZIP7 gene (Slc39a7) encodes a zinc transporter involved in zinc homeostasis of the Golgi apparatus. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 15456–15463.

49. Taylor, K. M., Morgan, H. E., Johnson, A., and Nicholson, R. I. (2004) Structure-function analysis of HKE4, a member of the new LIV-1 subfamily of zinc transporters. *Biochem. J.* **377**, 131–139.

50. Matsuura, W., Yamazaki, T., Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y., Masuda, S., Nagao, M., Andrews, G. K., and Kambe, T. (2009) SLC39A9 (ZIP9) regulates zinc homeostasis in the secretory pathway: characterization of the ZIP subfamily I protein in vertebrate cells. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.* **73**, 1142–1148.

51. Fukada, T., Civic, N., Furuichi, T., Shimoda, S., Mishima, K., Higashiyama, H., Idaira, Y., Asada, Y., Kitamura, H., Yamasaki, S., Hojyo, S., Nakayama, M., Ohara, O., Koseki, H., Dos Santos, H. G., Bonafe, L., Ha-Vinh, R., Zankl, A., Unger, S., Kraenzlin, M. E., Beckmann, J. S., Saito, I., Rivolta, C., Ikegawa, S., Superti-Furga, A., and Hirano, T. (2008) The zinc transporter SLC39A13/ZIP13 is required for connective tissue development; its involvement in BMP/TGF-beta signaling pathways. *PLoS One* **3**, e3642.

52. Huang, L. and Gitschier, J. (1997) A novel gene involved in zinc transport is deficient in the lethal milk mouse. *Nat. Genet.* **17**, 292–297.

53. Piletz, J. E. and Ganschow, R. E. (1978) Zinc deficiency in murine milk underlies expression of the lethal milk (lm) mutation. *Science* **199**, 181–183.

54. Ackland, M. L. and Mercer, J. F. (1992) The murine mutation, lethal milk, results in production of zinc-deficient milk. *J. Nutr.* **122**, 1214–1218.

55. Lee, D. Y., Shay, N. F., and Cousins, R. J. (1992) Altered zinc metabolism occurs in murine lethal milk syndrome. *J. Nutr.* **122**, 2233–2238.

56. Michalczyk, A. A., Allen, J., Blomeley, R. C., and Ackland, M. L. (2002) Constitutive expression of hZnT4 zinc transporter in human breast epithelial cells. *Biochem. J.* **364**, 105–113.

57. Murgia, C., Vespignani, I., Cerase, J., Nobili, F., and Perozzi, G. (1999) Cloning, expression, and vesicular localization of zinc transporter Dri 27/ZnT4 in intestinal tissue and cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* **277**, G1231–G1239.

58. Erway, L. C. and Grider, A. Jr. (1984) Zinc metabolism in lethal-milk mice. Otolith, lactation, and aging effects. *J. Hered.* **75**, 480–484.

59. Murgia, C., Vespignani, I., Rami, R., and Perozzi, G. (2006) The Znt4 mutation in lethal milk mice affects intestinal zinc homeostasis through the expression of other Zn transporters. *Genes Nutr.* **1**, 61–70.

60. Henshall, S. M., Afar, D. E., Rasiah, K. K., Horvath, L. G., Gish, K., Caras, I., Ramakrishnan, V., Wong, M., Jeffry, U., Kench, J. G., Quinn, D. I., Turner, J. J., Delprado, W., Lee, C. S., Golovsky, D., Brenner, P. C., O’Neill, G. F., Kooner, R., Stricker, P. D., Grygiel, J. J., Mack, D. H., and Sutherland, R. L. (2003) Expression of the zinc transporter ZnT4 is decreased in the progression from early prostate disease to invasive prostate cancer. *Oncogene* **22**, 6005–6012.

61. Palmiter, R. D., Cole, T. B., and Findley, S. D. (1996) ZnT-2, a mammalian protein that confers resistance to zinc by facilitating vesicular sequestration. *EMBO J.* **15**, 1784–1791.

62. Chowanadisai, W., Lonnerdal, B., and Kelleher, S. L. (2006) Identification of a mutation in SLC30A2 (ZnT-2) in women with low milk zinc concentration that results in transient neonatal zinc deficiency. *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 39699–39707.

63. Eide, D. J. (2006) Zinc transporters and the cellular trafficking of zinc. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* **1763**, 711–722.

64. Kim, B. E., Nevitt, T., and Thiele, D. J. (2008) Mechanisms for copper acquisition, distribution and regulation. *Nat. Chem. Biol.* **4**, 176–185.

65. Masters, B. A., Kelly, E. J., Quaife, C. J., Brinster, R. L., and Palmiter, R. D. (1994) Targeted disruption of metallothionein I and II genes increases sensitivity to cadmium. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 584–588.

66. Davis, S. R., McMahon, R. J., and Cousins, R. J. (1998) Metallothionein knockout and transgenic mice exhibit altered intestinal processing of zinc with uniform zinc-dependent zinc transporter-1 expression. *J. Nutr.* **128**, 825–831.

67. Wang, F., Kim, B. E., Petris, M. J., and Eide, D. J. (2004) The mammalian Zip5 protein is a zinc transporter that localizes to the basolateral surface of polarized cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 51433–51441.

68. Liuzzi, J. P., Aydemir, F., Nam, H., Knutson, M. D., and Cousins, R. J. (2006) Zip14 (Slc39a14) mediates non-transferrin-bound iron uptake into cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 13612–13617.

69. Liuzzi, J. P., Lichten, L. A., Rivera, S., Blanchard, R. K., Aydemir, T. B., Knutson, M. D., Ganz, T., and Cousins, R. J. (2005) Interleukin-6 regulates the zinc transporter Zip14 in liver and contributes to the hypozincemia of the acute-phase response. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 6843–6848.

70. Girijashanker, K., He, L., Soleimani, M., Reed, J. M., Li, H., Liu, Z., Wang, B., Dalton, T. P., and Nebert, D. W. (2008) Slc39a14 gene encodes ZIP14, a metal/bicarbonate symporter: similarities to the ZIP8 transporter. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **73**, 1413–1423.
