
Review

Impact of prolactin receptor isoforms on reproduction

Nadine Binart${}^{1,2}$, Anne Bachelot${}^{1,3,4}$ and Justine Bouilly${}^{1,2}$

1 Inserm, U845, 75015 Paris, France  
2 Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, 75015 Paris, France  
3 APHP, Department of Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, Centre de référence des Maladies Endocriniennes rares de la croissance, Paris, France  
4 Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France  

Prolactin is a hormone involved in growth, development, reproduction, metabolism, water and electrolyte balance, brain and behavior, and immunoregulation. Its actions on reproductive processes represent the largest group of functions identified for this hormone. Besides the classic long form of the prolactin receptor, many short form receptors have been identified in rodents and human tissues. Mouse mutagenesis studies have offered insight into the biology of the prolactin family, providing compelling evidence that different isoforms have independent biological activity. The possibility that short forms mediate cell proliferation is important for a variety of tissues including mammary glands and ovarian follicles. This review summarizes the current knowledge about prolactin signaling and its role in reproduction through either long or short isoform receptors.

### Actions of prolactin

Prolactin (PRL) is a polypeptide hormone originally identified by its ability to stimulate mammary gland development and lactation. More than 300 separate actions have been reported in various vertebrates, including effects on water and salt balance, growth and development, endocrinology and metabolism, brain and behavior, reproduction, and immune regulation and protection [1]. Although there is evidence indicating that PRL acts as an autocrine, paracrine and endocrine progression factor for mammary carcinoma in rodents and human [2,3], its actions on reproductive processes represent the largest group of functions identified [1]. Recently, a broad range of prolactin actions in the brain have been described [4]. The range of neuroendocrine functions influenced by prolactin includes activation of hypothalamic dopaminergic neurons to control its own secretion, suppression of fertility, stimulation of maternal behavior [5], suppression of the stress response, stimulation of myelination in the central nervous system and generation of new neurons in the olfactory bulb [6]. Prolactin is widely considered an adaptive hormone, and there have been attempts to rationalize why a single hormone exerts such a range of diverse and seemingly unrelated neuroendocrine functions.

Sites of synthesis and control of prolactin secretion

PRL is produced predominantly by the lactotropic cells of the anterior pituitary gland. However, it is also generated in extrapituitary sites such as immune, decidual, mammary, epithelial and fat cells [7–9]. Its secretion is under dual regulation by hypothalamic hormones via the pituitary portal circulation [4,10]. The predominant regulatory signal is the inhibition of prolactin secretion by the neurotransmitter, dopamine. Evidence suggests that prolactin secretion is regulated by three populations of hypothalamic dopaminergic systems [11]: the tuberoinfundibular, tuberohypophyseal and periventricular hypophysial dopaminergic neurons. The stimulatory signal for prolactin secretion can be mediated by other factors including thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). Chronic increases in 17β-estradiol also stimulate prolactin secretion, both through actions on the pituitary gland and through hypothalamic mechanisms [12].

### Signaling pathways activated by PRL through long and short forms

The biological effects of prolactin are mediated by its interaction with PRL receptor (PRLR), a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily [1,2]. The hormone in its tertiary structure is composed of a bundle of four antiparallel α-helices [13] and uses a conserved, single-pass transmembrane receptor classified as a cytokine type 1 receptor. The receptor is devoid of intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity but can be phosphorylated by associated proteins.

PRLRs are present in nearly all organs and tissues. Although the *PRLR* gene is unique in each species, alternative splicing generates its different isoforms, which are identical in their extracellular domains but differ in the lengths and sequences of their intracellular domains [1,14–17]. PRLRs are composed of an extracellular domain required for ligand binding, a single transmembrane region, and an intracellular domain containing a region of membrane-proximal homology to other cytokine receptors. The cytoplasmic domain of cytokine receptors displays more restricted sequence similarity than does the extracellular domain. Two regions (box 1 and box 2) are relatively conserved. Box 1 is a membrane-proximal region composed of 8 amino acids very rich in prolines and hydrophobic residues, and is assumed to adopt the consensus folding specifically recognized by transducing molecules. The second consensus region, box 2, is much less conserved.

Review

Box 1. PRL family

There is compelling evidence suggesting that the PRL family contributes to the regulation of pregnancy-dependent adaptations to physiological stressors. The ancestral *Prl* gene behaves as an evolutionary template for the generation of new genes. Initially, the family was thought to comprise PRL, growth hormone (GH) and placental lactogens only, but has been expanded to include PRL-like proteins (PLP), PRL-related proteins (PRP), proliferins and proliferin-related protein, exhibiting variable degrees of sequence homologies [79]. Knowledge about the PRL family grows as the genomes of different species are sequenced and characterized. Expanded PRL gene families have been identified in the mouse, rat and cow, but not in human and dog. The different members of the huge PRL/GH/PL family are expressed mainly in the pituitary, the uteroplacental compartment and other extrapituitary sites.

and consists of a succession of hydrophobic, negatively charged residues, followed by positively charged residues. Whereas box 1 is conserved in all membrane PRLR isoforms, box 2 is not found in short isoforms.

The initial event in PRL signaling is the binding of one prolactin molecule to two cell surface receptor monomers, leading to their dimerization and subsequent activation. This model was based on studies with growth hormone receptor, but very recent studies revealed that predimerization of growth hormone receptor occurs *in vivo* in the absence of ligand [18], and that the ligand activates a preformed dimer by inducing rotational torque through the transmembrane domain. A number of studies from independent laboratories have looked at PRLR dimeriza-

tion, with conflicting results; one study demonstrated that the extracellular domain of recombinant soluble PRLR does not predimerize but rather forms an unstable homodimer upon PRL binding [19], whereas another reported that full-length PRLR failed to show fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) in the absence of ligand [20]. Another study demonstrated a lack of bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) signaling between homodimers and heterodimers of long and short forms in the absence of ligand [21]. Nevertheless, a recent article indicated that homo- and heterodimers of hPRLR are constitutively present, and that the hormone acts on the preformed long form homodimer to induce the active signal transduction configuration [22]. These results could be explained in part by differences in both the nature of the constructs and the sensitivity of the BRET/FRET approaches [21,22]. Biochemical techniques demonstrated ligand-independent dimerization of transfected and endogenous PRLR [23].

Taken together, these data corroborate ligand-independent dimerization of cytokine receptors, where the addition of ligand seems to bind a preformed dimer and initiate conformational changes leading to receptor activation. What enables the receptor to modify its conformation after ligand binding to activate the Janus kinases remains to be determined.

At the protein level, the long PRLR isoform (long-R) and several short PRLR isoforms (short-R) have been detected. The PRLR exists as seven recognized isoforms in human,

Long isoform                                                                 Short isoform

Membrane

PRL

JAK2

Stat5

SOCS

Steroid

receptor

Target genes

Nucleus

Elk

Foxo3a

Galt promoter

Differentiation

Proliferation

TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism

Figure 1. Major signaling cascades triggered by long and short PRLR isoforms. Ligand-induced activation of the PRLR triggers several signaling cascades. The main pathway involves the tyrosine kinase Jak2, which in turn activates two members of the Stat family, Stat5a and Stat5b. The MAPK pathway is another important cascade activated by the PRLR. It involves the Shc/Grb2/Sos/Ras/Raf intermediaries upstream to MAPK kinases. The recruitment of PI3K leads to the production of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) from phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-tdisphosphate (PIP2). As a negative regulator of PI3K, the phosphatase PTEN converts PIP3 to PIP2 and Akt is recruited to PIP3. Activation of other signaling pathways has been reported; among these, Src kinases are known to play an important role in proliferation.

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism Vol. 21 No. 6

four in mouse (but only two short forms have been identified as proteins) and three in rat, and all of these isoforms have different signaling properties. Although the signaling pathway downstream of the long-R has been well characterized, little is known about PRL actions mediated by short-R. Acting through the long-R, PRL activates many kinases including Jak2/Stat [24], Src kinase [2,25], phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT [26], mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) [1] and Nek3-vav2-Rac1 pathways [27] (Figure 1). These signaling events induce several PRL-responsive genes such as those involved in cell proliferation [cyclin D1 and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein] and differentiation [28,29]. The interaction of PRLR with these kinases or with other proteins involved in positive and negative regulation of signaling (e.g. adapters, phosphatases, suppressor of cytokine signaling), has been mapped to identified regions of the cytoplasmic domain. For example, the tyrosine residues in the C-terminal part of the long receptor form contribute to the engagement and phosphorylation of Stat5 by Jak2 [30].

The role of prolactin in the mammary gland is largely the result of activity of the long-R. Most of what we know about PRL receptor signaling comes from analysis of the long isoform, for which the best studied pathway is activation of Jak/Stat. Although it has been proposed that short-R isoforms behave either as dominant negatives by inhibiting the function of the long-R [31–34], or as positive regulators in mammary gland [35], the mechanisms by which PRL signals through short-R isoforms remains obscure. However, we do know that PRL cannot activate Jak2/Stat5 through the short-R, but can activate pathways including MAPK and PI3K pathways (Figure 1). In addition, soluble receptor isoforms containing the extracellular domain have been identified in humans, but not in rodents [36].

### Expression of different PRLR isoforms

Expression of the various receptor isoforms varies during development and as a function of the stage of the estrous cycle, pregnancy and lactation in rodents. The long-R is strongly expressed in the ovary, adrenal, kidney, mammary gland, small intestine, choroid plexus and pancreas, but other organs (e.g. liver), also express high levels of the short-R. However, because of the broad distribution of PRLR, it is difficult to propose a general overview of its expression regulation [1]. The various PRLR isoforms exhibit different signaling properties; for example, the short-R is not tyrosine phosphorylated, which prevents it from interacting directly with SH2-containing proteins such as Stat factors. It is also interesting to note that heterodimerization of different PRLR isoforms produces inactive complexes that might also be physiologically significant because PRL target cells usually express more than a single PRLR isoform. In wild-type animals, both long and short isoforms of PRLR are expressed in the ovaries, and their ratio varies with the estrous cycle [37]. These findings suggest that co-expression of both receptors is important for ovarian follicular development. Indeed, long-R is expressed at much higher levels than short-R in the growing follicles [38] and this might prevent

signaling through short-R. Signaling through the short-R does not activate the JAK/Stat in vivo but leads to severe downregulation of Sp1 expression, DNA binding activity and nuclear localization, events that appear to involve the calmodulin-dependent protein kinase pathway. These data demonstrate that the short-R activates a signaling pathway distinct from that of the long-R [39].

#### Phenotypic characterization of mouse models

A large body of literature attests that lactogenic hormones [40] including placental lactogens and prolactin (Box 1) play roles in rodent reproductive function. One of the best established functions of PRL in reproductive function in rodents is its key role in maintaining the ovarian corpus luteum (CL) and progesterone production through the long-R, because this form is predominantly expressed [41,42]. Several key functions for PRL have been clarified from studies of transgenic and knockout model mice; however, it should be noted that no long-R knockout mouse model is currently available.

##### Phenotype of PRLR⁻/⁻ mice

PRL⁻/⁻ [43] and PRLR⁻/⁻ [44] female mice on a mixed 129Sv/C57Bl6 background were first described as completely infertile, and the same observation was confirmed later on a pure background [45]. After mating with males of established fertility, no litters were produced even though each female mated repeatedly at regular intervals. PRLR⁻/⁻ ovaries in both backgrounds are normal and there are no differences in either follicular development or ovulation and fertilization rate compared with wild-type animals [45]. Together, these observations led to the conclusion that PRL is essential for CL function [43,46,47]. The CL plays a central role in pregnancy maintenance, by synthesizing the steroid progesterone [41]. Activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor (LH-R) in follicular cells by the preovulatory LH surge causes ovulation and rapidly initiates a program of terminal differentiation of the ovulated follicle into a CL through a process termed luteinization. One of the most important changes during luteinization is alteration in the cellular responsiveness to external signals, allowing luteal cells to respond to a new set of hormones, the most important being PRL and LH. Luteinization and CL formation do take place in the absence of PRLR; however, 2 days after mating, PRLR⁻/⁻ mice exhibited corpora lutea that were undergoing regression and displaying strong DNA cleavage, associated with low vascularization and absence of sufficient progesterone to support implantation and subsequent placental development and maintenance [45]. This was due to the absence of downregulation by PRL of 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20α-HSD), which is responsible for progesterone catabolism. The CL is the main source of progesterone production in rodents, and it was found that progesterone administration rescues pre-implantation embryo development and implantation in PRLR⁻/⁻ females [48]. The PRLR is thus a key component regulating ovarian function and governing the regulation of progesterone secretion and indeed, PRL triggers an early signal that induces the survival and steroidogenic capacity of the CL.

Review

One of the most important changes during luteinization is the alteration in the cellular responsiveness to external signals allowing luteal cells to respond to a new set of hormones, including LH. The expression of the LH-R increases after luteinization and becomes abundant in the CL. This upregulation of LH-R during CL formation has been shown to be due to PRL both *in vivo* [49, 50] and *in vitro* [51, 52]. In rodents, semi-circadian surges of PRL secretion are induced by cervical stimuli, which are believed to be responsible for the conversion of the CL to the corpus luteum of pregnancy (CLP), leading to increase in the lifespan of this gland and its capacity to secrete sufficient amount of progesterone to maintain pregnancy [53, 54]. This conversion is thought to involve distinct luteotropic effects of PRL: upregulation of LH receptor expression and progesterone secretion [55], and repression of 20α-HSD [51].

To determine whether LHR stimulation and progesterone production are independent events both mediated by PRL or whether progesterone production depends solely on high levels of LHR expression and LH stimulation, we studied the luteal expression of LHR and steroidogenesis in PRLR⁻/⁻ mice treated with human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). We found that LH/hCG stimulates expression of its cognate receptor in the CL and the expression of enzymes involved in steroidogenesis in the absence of PRL signaling. However, it does not prevent 20α-HSD expression, maintain progesterone levels, or rescue the fertility of PRLR⁻/⁻ mice [56].

To better appreciate the molecular mechanisms underlying maintenance of the CL, we performed a series of mRNA expression profiling experiments using microarrays. This approach revealed several novel candidate genes with pivotal roles in ovarian function, many of which are involved in the proliferation/differentiation pathway and in vascularization, known to be crucial for CL development and maintenance [41]. One of these PRL target genes is vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, also known as cadherin 5 (Figure 2). This is of considerable interest, as the development of the CL is crucially dependent on angiogenesis [57]. The downregulation of VE-cadherin in the absence of PRL signaling could explain the low vascularization of the CL observed in PRLR⁻/⁻ mice.

Components of the Wingless-Int/Frizzled (Wnt/Fzd) signaling pathways, including Fzd4, are particularly increased in CL. We identified secreted Frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP-4) as a potential target of PRL in the CL. This factor might be important after ovulation for remodeling and differentiation of the CL cells; therefore, its downregulation in the absence of PRL could then contribute to the null phenotype.

Two other genes [p27 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (*Pten*)] were identified as LH targets in the CL. These were markedly stimulated in the CL of PRLR⁻/⁻ mice by *in vivo* treatment with hCG. The cyclin-dependent kinases inhibitor p27<sup>Kip1</sup> was previously shown to be stimulated by LH during luteinization and markedly increased in terminally differentiated luteal cells. *Pten* encodes a protein that is a member of the tyrosine phosphatase family, a PI3-phosphatase, which plays an important role in cell proliferation, cell survival and apoptosis. It inhibits cell cycle progression by downregulating cyclin D1,

---

**Figure 2. Simplified view of PRLR isoforms signaling in ovary. (a) The long isoform activates target genes such as LHR, VE-cadherin and sFRP-4, and represses 20α-HSD, whereas (b) the short isoform downregulates both transcription factors FOXO3a and SP-1, and the enzyme Galt-1.**

and activates pro-apoptotic molecules through Akt-dependent and independent pathways [58]. PTEN inactivates PI3K-dependent signaling including that of Akt [59]. *Pten* expression increases during terminal follicular growth in the sheep, and upregulates the activity of the p27 promoter [60]. This increased expression of *Pten* in large preovulatory ovine follicles suggests that it is induced by LH, corroborating the data showing an increase in *Pten* expression with low doses of hCG in the CL of PRLR⁻/⁻ mice. PTEN is likely to play an important role in CL maintenance and function.

Phenotype of mice with over-expression of one short isoform of the PRLR (PRLR⁻/⁻ short-R mice)

Whereas PRL regulation of CL is thought to be through activation of the long-R, the effect of short-R activation on ovarian development is not known. To examine the putative role of the short-R *in vivo*, we generated PRLR⁻/⁻ female mice that express only the PR-1 short isoform [61]. PRLR⁻/⁻ short-R mice treated with hCG produce a significantly greater number of oocytes during ovulation

than do either PRLR$^{-/-}$ or wild-type mice. The number of secondary, pre-antral and antral follicles is markedly increased in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R ovaries, indicating that premature follicular development occurs at an earlier age in these females. Severe follicular death begins at 4 weeks of age, and histological examination shows follicular death with disorganization of mural granulosa cells and lack of cumulus in oocytes. This phenotype is not seen in PRLR$^{-/-}$ mice. From the age of 5 months, the PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R ovaries are almost completely depleted of functional follicles; this probably reflects widespread follicular initiation followed by follicular cell death. Therefore, PRL signaling through short-R profoundly affects follicular survival and causes severe follicular impairment leading to premature ovarian failure (POF) [61] (Figure 2). Numerous mutant mouse models have been established for studying ovarian development [62]; these models have provided clues about what molecules might be involved in the development of POF in humans. We describe a new mouse model that could be useful to study POF, as the vast majority of cases of POF are idiopathic.

Both PRLR$^{-/-}$ and PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R females ovulate and form CL during pregnancy, but regression of these CLs is seen within 2.5 days, and pregnancy cannot be sustained [56]. Implantation of progesterone pellets in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R females allowed a partial rescue of embryos [48,61]. Because similar expression of both the long and short isoforms is found in CL [38,63], a role for short-R on CL was suggested. However, the inability of the short-R to rescue the CL in pregnant PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R females clearly establishes a key role for long-R in the maintenance by PRL of a functional and progesterone-producing CL.

In addition, high PRL levels were found in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R females compared with wild-type females, similar to that observed in PRLR$^{-/-}$ females [48]). This indicates that the short form cannot mediate the feedback effect or overcome the absence of the long form. Thus, through long-R, PRL downregulates its own synthesis and/or secretion at the hypothalamic and/or pituitary level [64].

**Signaling molecules regulated through the short PRLR isoform**

PRL signals through the short-R in the ovary and actively regulates expression of several genes identified by microarray analysis [61]. Interestingly, Galt, whose mutation induces galactosemia [65], is downregulated in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R ovaries. In fact, Galt expression is completely abolished in ovaries of PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R females, in contrast to their PRLR$^{-/-}$ littermates (Figure 2).

The mouse Galt promoter sequence contains 16 putative forkhead transcription factor sites, five of them being FOXO3 sites that might regulate Galt transcription. Galt participates in the metabolism of galactose to glucose [66] and is strongly expressed in ovaries and liver, the major sites of expression for this enzyme [67]. Classic galactosemia is an autosomal recessive disorder that results from profound impairment of galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, the second enzyme in the pathway of galactose metabolism. Accumulation of galactose-1-phosphate is thought to inhibit enzymes involved in glucose metabolism, leading to deficient glycosylation reactions and a

decrease in energy production in ovarian cells [67]. In women, either mutations in Galt or a deficiency in enzyme activity causes galactosemia associated with POF [65]. Young women with this disease are fertile early in life but become sterile in their late 20s, displaying ovaries formed by interstitial cells and devoid of follicles, similar to those seen in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R mice.

Interestingly, short-R activation downregulates both FOXO3 and Galt, two molecules crucial for normal ovarian development [65,68,69] (Figure 2). The negative regulation of FOXO3-Galt by PRL through short-R provides a mechanism that mediates the development of the acute ovarian defect displayed in PRLR$^{-/-}$ short-R transgenic females and also provides a link to the similar POF displayed by the Foxo3$^{-/-}$ mice and by women with Galt mutations [61].

**Prolactin and reproductive medicine in women**

In normal individuals, circulating serum prolactin is thought to reflect almost entirely pituitary PRL secretion [10]; however, it is possible that other, extrapituitary sources also contribute to local tissue PRL levels.

Unlike in rodents, the role of PRL in human ovarian function is unclear, in large part because no disruptive mutations of human PRL or the human PRLR have been identified. Moreover, the increase in prolactin levels observed in pathological hyperprolactinaemia results in inhibition of gonadotropin-releasing hormone release from the hypothalamus and subsequent inhibition of LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)-dependent gonadal function [70,71], leading to inhibition of ovarian function. The direct effect of PRL on ovaries is then impossible to study.

Furthermore, no study has yet compared the distribution of PRLR in human ovaries with that in murine ovaries, or examined the PRL signalling pathway in human tissue. A recent and elegant review summarized what we can learn about humans from rodent studies on prolactin in the reproductive cycle, pregnancy and fetal development, and mammary gland [72]. There is no evidence that PRL is luteotropic in the human CL; instead, pituitary LH supports luteal development and steroidogenesis during the menstrual cycle. In women, hCG secretion by the embryonic trophoblast serves a function analogous to PRL in sustaining the CL during early pregnancy [73], and both PRL and the PRLR are expressed in the luteinized human ovary [74,75], with PRL acting as a survival factor in granulosa cells [76]. POF is a common cause of infertility and premature aging in women, with an estimated incidence of 1% [77]. The vast majority of cases of POF are ‘idiopathic’, but the possibility that POF results from a mutation in long-R is intriguing and deserves further investigation. Nevertheless, despite clear evidence of PRLR involvement in folliculogenesis in mice, we were unable to find any PRLR mutations associated with non-syndromic POF in nearly 100 women (unpublished data). Further studies involving a larger number of patients will be interesting, including screening for mutations in all exons of the PRLR gene. Because activation of short-R by PRL represses FOXO3 and Galt in murine ovarian cells, and FOXO3 stimulates Galt transcriptional activity, there

might be links between POF seen in mice expressing short-R, in mice with foxo3 gene deletions, and in women with Galt mutations.

### Concluding remarks

The studies described in this review confirm and extend the data of Das and Vonderhaar [78], who demonstrated a mitogenic response *in vitro* to the PRL short-R. Whether these results are a result of different intrinsic activities of the various short forms of the PRLR or to different model systems used, they are clearly worthy of further investigation. Although it is not yet clear how PRL signals in the human ovary, signalling pathways induced by prolactin through its short-R should be an interesting avenue for research. Such studies might provide greater insight into the normal processes of ovarian development and function, and the causes of ovarian dysfunction.

### Acknowledgements

We thank M. Freemark for helpful comments and would like to acknowledge current and former members of our laboratory for their valuable contributions and discussions. This work was supported by the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale and Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale.

### References

1. Bole-Feysot, C. *et al.* (1998) Prolactin and its receptor: actions, signal transduction pathways and phenotypes observed in prolactin receptor knockout mice. *Endocr. Rev.* 19, 225–268
2. Clevenger, C.V. *et al.* (2003) The role of prolactin in mammary carcinoma. *Endocr. Rev.* 24, 1–27
3. Clevenger, C.V. *et al.* (2009) New mechanisms for PRLr action in breast cancer. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* 20, 223–229
4. Grattan, D.R. *et al.* (2008) Prolactin: a pleiotropic neuroendocrine hormone. *J. Neuroendocrinol.* 20, 752–763
5. Lucas, B.K. *et al.* (1998) Null mutation of prolactin receptor gene produces a defect in maternal behavior. *Endocrinology* 139, 4102–4107
6. Shingo, T. *et al.* (2003) Pregnancy-stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female forebrain mediated by prolactin. *Science* 299, 117–120
7. Ben-Jonathan, N. *et al.* (1996) Extrapituitary prolactin: distribution, regulation, functions, and clinical aspects. *Endocr. Rev.* 17, 639–669
8. Prigent-Tessier, A. *et al.* (1999) Rat decidual prolactin. Identification, molecular cloning, and characterization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 37982–37989
9. Hugo, E.R. *et al.* (2006) LS14: a novel human adipocyte cell line that produces prolactin. *Endocrinology* 147, 306–313
10. Freeman, M.E. *et al.* (2000) Prolactin: structure, function, and regulation of secretion. *Physiol. Rev.* 80, 1523–1631
11. Demaria, J.E. *et al.* (1999) Prolactin activates all three populations of hypothalamic dopaminergic neurons in ovariectomized rats. *Brain Res.* 837, 236–241
12. Palm, I.F. *et al.* (2001) Control of the estradiol-induced prolactin surge by the suprachiasmatic nucleus. *Endocrinology* 142, 2296–2302
13. Kossiakoff, A.A. (2004) The structural basis for biological signaling, regulation, and specificity in the growth hormone-prolactin system of hormones and receptors. *Adv. Protein Chem.* 68, 147–169
14. Davis, J.A. *et al.* (1989) Expression of multiple forms of the prolactin receptor. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 3, 674–680
15. Kline, J.B. *et al.* (1999) Functional characterization of the intermediate isoform of the human prolactin receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 35461–35468
16. Hu, Z.Z. *et al.* (2001) Isolation and characterization of two novel forms of the human prolactin receptor generated by alternative splicing of a newly identified exon 11. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 41086–41094
17. Trott, J.F. *et al.* (2004) Multiple new isoforms of the human prolactin receptor gene. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* 554, 495–499
18. Brown, R.J. *et al.* (2005) Model for growth hormone receptor activation based on subunit rotation within a receptor dimer. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 12, 814–821

19 Gertler, A. *et al.* (1996) Real-time kinetic measurements of the interactions between lactogenic hormones and prolactin-receptor extracellular domains from several species support the model of hormone-induced transient receptor dimerization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 24482–24491
20 Biener, E. *et al.* (2003) Ovine placental lactogen-induced heterodimerization of ovine growth hormone and prolactin receptors in living cells is demonstrated by fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy and leads to prolonged phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1 and STAT3. *Endocrinology* 144, 3532–3540
21 Tan, D. *et al.* (2005) Unmodified prolactin (PRL) and S179D PRL-initiated bioluminescence resonance energy transfer between homo- and hetero-pairs of long and short human PRL receptors in living human cells. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 19, 1291–1303
22 Qazi, A.M. *et al.* (2006) Ligand-independent homo- and heterodimerization of human prolactin receptor variants: inhibitory action of the short forms by heterodimerization. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 8, 1912–1923
23 Gadd, S.L. *et al.* (2006) Ligand-Independent dimerization of the human prolactin receptor isoforms: functional implications. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 11, 2734–2746
24 Goffin, V. *et al.* (2002) Prolactin: the new biology of an old hormone. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 64, 47–67
25 Swaminathan, G. *et al.* (2008) Regulation of prolactin receptor levels and activity in breast cancer. *J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia.* 13, 81–91
26 Berlanga, J.J. *et al.* (1997) Prolactin activates tyrosyl phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 2050–2052
27 Clevenger, C.V. (2004) Roles and regulation of stat family transcription factors in human breast cancer. *Am. J. Pathol.* 165, 1449–1460
28 Brockman, J.L. *et al.* (2002) PRL activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the Jak2/Stat pathway. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 16, 774–784
29 Ali, S. *et al.* (1996) PTP1D is a positive regulator of the prolactin signal leading to b-casein promoter activation. *EMBO J.* 15, 135–142
30 Pezet, A. *et al.* (1997) Tyrosine docking sites of the rat prolactin receptor required for association and activation of Stat5. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 25043–25050
31 Lesueur, L. *et al.* (1991) Comparison of long and short forms of the prolactin receptor on prolactin induced milk protein gene transcription. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 88, 824–828
32 Berlanga, J.J. *et al.* (1997) The short form of the prolactin receptor silences prolactin induction of the b-casein gene promoter. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 11, 1449–1457
33 Perrot-Applanat, M. *et al.* (1997) Dominant negative and cooperative effects of mutant forms of prolactin receptor. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 11, 1020–1032
34 Saunier, E. *et al.* (2003) Targeted expression of the dominant-negative prolactin receptor in the mammary gland of transgenic mice results in impaired lactation. *Endocrinology* 144, 2669–2675
35 Binart, N. *et al.* (2003) A short form of the prolactin receptor is able to rescue mammopoiesis in heterozygous prolactin receptor mice. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 17, 1066–1074
36 Kline, J.B. *et al.* (2001) Identification and characterization of the prolactin-binding protein in human serum and milk. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 24760–24766
37 Nagano, M. *et al.* (1994) Tissue distribution and regulation of rat prolactin receptor gene expression: quantitative analysis by polymerase chain reaction. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 13337–13345
38 Russell, D.L. *et al.* (1999) Differentiation-dependent prolactin responsiveness and stat (signal transducers and activators of transcription) signaling in rat ovarian cells. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 13, 2049–2064
39 Devi, Y.S. *et al.* (2009) Regulation of transcription factors and repression of Sp1 by prolactin signaling through the short isoform of its cognate receptor. *Endocrinology* 150, 3327–3335
40 Soares, M.J. *et al.* (2007) The prolactin family: effectors of pregnancy-dependent adaptations. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* 18, 114–121
41 Stocco, C. *et al.* (2007) The molecular control of corpus luteum formation, function and regression. *Endocr. Rev.* 28, 117–149
42 Risk, M. and Gibori, G. (2001) Mechanisms of luteal cell regulation by prolactin. In *Prolactin* (Horseman, N.D., ed.), pp. 265–295, Kluwer Academic Publishers

Review

43 Horseman, N.D. *et al.* (1997) Defective mammopoiesis, but normal hematopoiesis, in mice with a targeted disruption of the prolactin gene. *EMBO J.* 16, 6926–6935

44 Ormandy, C.J. *et al.* (1997) Null mutation of the prolactin receptor gene produces multiple reproductive defects in the mouse. *Genes Dev.* 11, 167–178

45 Grosdemouge, I. *et al.* (2003) Effects of deletion of the prolactin receptor on ovarian gene expression. *Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol.* 1, 1–12

46 Bachelot, A. *et al.* (2005) Corpus luteum development: lessons from genetic models in mice. *Curr. Top. Dev. Biol.* 68, 49–84

47 Bachelot, A. *et al.* (2007) Reproductive role of prolactin. *Reproduction.* 133, 361–369

48 Binart, N. *et al.* (2000) Rescue of preimplantatory egg development and embryo implantation in prolactin receptor-deficient mice after progesterone administration. *Endocrinology* 141, 2691–2697

49 Gafvels, M. *et al.* (1992) Prolactin stimulates the expression of luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid in the rat corpus luteum and rescues early pregnancy from bromocriptine-induced abortion. *Biol. Reprod.* 47, 534–540

50 Segaloff, D.L. *et al.* (1990) Hormonal regulation of luteinizing hormone/ chorionic gonadotropin receptor mRNA in rat ovarian cells during follicular development and luteinization. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 4, 1856–1865

51 Albarracin, C.T. *et al.* (1994) Identification of a major prolactin- regulated protein as 20 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: coordinate regulation of its activity, protein content, and messenger ribonucleic acid expression. *Endocrinology* 134, 2453–2460

52 Piquette, G.N. *et al.* (1991) Regulation of luteinizing hormone receptor messenger ribonucleic acid levels by gonadotropins, growth factors, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone in cultured rat granulosa cells. *Endocrinology* 128, 2449–2456

53 Gunnet, J.W. *et al.* (1983) The mating-induced release of prolactin: A unique neuroendocrine response. *Endocr. Rev.* 4, 44–61

54 Gunnet, J.W. *et al.* (1984) Hypothalamic regulation of mating-induced prolactin release. Effect of electrical stimulation of the medial preoptic area in conscious female rats. *Neuroendocrinology* 38, 12–16

55 Gibori, G. *et al.* (1978) Dissociation of two distinct luteotropic effects of prolactin: regulation of luteinizing hormone-receptor content and progesterone secretion during pregnancy. *Endocrinology* 102, 767–774

56 Bachelot, A. *et al.* (2009) Prolactin independent rescue of mouse corpus luteum life span: identification of prolactin and luteinizing hormone target genes. *Am. J. Physiol Endocrinol. Metab.* 297, E676–E684

57 Neeman, M. *et al.* (1997) Regulation of angiogenesis by hypoxic stress: from solid tumours to the ovarian follicle. *Int. J. Exp. Pathol.* 78, 57–70

58 Weng, L. *et al.* (2001) PTEN induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest through phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt-dependent and -independent pathways. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 10, 237–242

59 Leslie, N.R. *et al.* (2004) PTEN function: how normal cells control it and tumour cells lose it. *Biochem. J.* 382, 1–11

60 Froment, P. *et al.* (2005) PTEN expression in ovine granulosa cells increases during terminal follicular growth. *FEBS Lett.* 579, 2376–2382

61 Halperin, J. *et al.* (2008) Prolactin signaling through the short form of its receptor represses forkhead transcription factor FOXO3 and its target gene Galt causing a severe ovarian defect. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 22, 513–522

62 Jagarlamudi, K. *et al.* (2010) Genetically modified mouse models for premature ovarian failure (POF). *Mol. Cell Endocrinol.* 315, 1–10

63 Telleria, C.M. *et al.* (1997) The different forms of the prolactin receptor in the rat corpus luteum: developmental expression and hormonal regulation in pregnancy. *Endocrinology* 138, 4812–4820

64 Schuff, K.G. *et al.* (2002) Lack of prolactin receptor signaling in mice results in lactotroph proliferation and prolactinomas by dopamine- dependent and -independent mechanisms. *J. Clin. Invest.* 110, 973–983

65 Forges, T. *et al.* (2006) Pathophysiology of impaired ovarian function in galactosaemia. *Hum. Reprod. Update.* 12, 573–584

66 Onuma, H. *et al.* (2006) Correlation between FOXO1a (FKHR) and FOXO3a (FKHRL1) binding and the inhibition of basal glucose-6- phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription by insulin. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 20, 2831–2847

67 Liu, G. *et al.* (2000) Galactose metabolism and ovarian toxicity. *Reprod. Toxicol.* 14, 377–384

68 Castrillon, D.H. *et al.* (2003) Suppression of ovarian follicle activation in mice by the transcription factor Foxo3a. *Science* 301, 215–218

69 Hosaka, T. *et al.* (2004) Disruption of forkhead transcription factor (FOXO) family members in mice reveals their functional diversification. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 101, 2975–2980

70 Zinaman, M.J. *et al.* (1995) Pulsatile GnRH stimulates normal cyclic ovarian function in amenorrheic lactating postpartum women. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 80, 2088–2093

71 Bouchard, P. *et al.* (1985) Gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulsatile administration restores luteinizing hormone pulsatility and normal testosterone levels in males with hyperprolactinemia. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 60, 258–262

72 Ben Jonathan, N. *et al.* (2008) What can we learn from rodents about prolactin in humans? *Endocr. Rev.* 29, 1–41

73 Devoto, L. *et al.* (2009) Human corpus luteum physiology and the luteal-phase dysfunction associated with ovarian stimulation. *Reprod. Biomed. Online* 18 (Suppl 2), 19–24

74 Schwarzler, P. *et al.* (1997) Prolactin gene expression and prolactin protein in premenopausal and postmenopausal human ovaries. *Fertil. Steril.* 68, 696–701

75 Vlahos, N.P. *et al.* (2001) Prolactin receptor gene expression and immunolocalization of the prolactin receptor in human luteinized granulosa cells. *Mol. Hum. Reprod.* 7, 1033–1038

76 Perks, C.M. *et al.* (2003) Prolactin acts as a potent survival factor against C2-ceramide-induced apoptosis in human granulosa cells. *Hum. Reprod.* 18, 2672–2677

77 Beck-Peccoz, P. *et al.* (2006) Premature ovarian failure. *Orphanet. J. Rare. Dis.* 1:9, 1–5

78 Das, R. *et al.* (1995) Transduction of prolactin’s (PRL) growth signal through both long and short forms of the PRL receptor. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 9, 1750–1759

79 Soares, M. J. (2004) The prolactin and growth hormone families: pregnancy-specific hormones/cytokines at the maternal-fetal interface. *Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol.* 2: 51, 1–15
