
# Angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis

Zoltán Szekanecz${}^{a}$, Timea Besenyei${}^{a}$, Ágnes Szentpétery${}^{a}$ and Alisa E. Koch${}^{b,c}$

**Purpose of review**

Angiogenesis is the formation of new capillaries from pre-existing vessels, whereas vasculogenesis is de-novo capillary formation from endothelial precursor cells (EPCs). Current understanding of the role of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and possibilities of therapeutic intervention should be summarized.

**Recent findings**

There have been many recent studies on the role of the hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)–vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)–angiopoietin axis in angiogenesis associated with RA. The role of additional growth factors, chemokines, cytokines, matrix components and adhesion molecules has been further characterized. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) may link inflammation, angiogenesis and atherosclerosis. Junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) and focal adhesion kinases (FAKs) have recently been implicated in inflammatory angiogenesis. Novel information regarding the role of serum amyloid A (SAA) and sphingosine kinase has become available. Most of these angiogenic factors have recently been targeted using various techniques and arthritis models. Whereas angiogenesis is abundant in RA, there is defective EPC function and vasculogenesis leading to atherosclerosis and vascular disease in arthritis. Treatment with EPCs already under investigation in vascular diseases may also be attempted in RA.

**Summary**

Targeting angiogenesis and restoration of vasculogenesis may be beneficial for the therapy and outcome of RA.

**Keywords**

angiogenesis, angiotasis, rheumatoid arthritis, therapy, vasculogenesis

Curr Opin Rheumatol 22:299–306  
© 2010 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
1040-8711

---

**Introduction**

Angiogenesis is the outgrowth and proliferation of new capillaries from pre-existing vessels, whereas vasculogenesis is new vessel formation from endothelial precursor cells (EPCs). The basic concept of angiogenesis and its relevance for the clinic were first proposed by the late Judah Folkman [1]. As described in many recent reviews, increased angiogenesis has been associated with various inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [2–14], whereas decreased number and impaired function of EPCs leading to defective vasculogenesis was described in RA [12,15*,16–18]. Soluble and cell surface-bound angiogenic mediators including growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, proteases and others are abundantly produced in the RA synovium [2,7,10,12,19] (Table 1). Exogenously administered inhibitors of these mediators, as well as endogenous, naturally produced angiostatic molecules down-regulate neovascularization; thus, these agents may be used to control synovial inflammation, as well as tumor metastases [7,10,12,19]. Indeed, many angiostatic compounds have been first tried in the treatment of cancer and some of them, primarily inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), have also been tested in animal models of or human arthritis [4,7,19,20]. Some biologics, such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) blockers, may also suppress angiogenesis and, in addition, they may restore EPC numbers, function and thus impaired vasculogenesis [17,21,22]. Here we review recent advances in angiogenesis and vasculogenesis research in relation to RA. Some of these data may have relevance for other inflammatory rheumatic conditions. We also discuss the potential of therapy targeting angiogenesis in arthritis (Table 1).

---

**Abnormal vessel morphology and function associated with angiogenesis**

Vessels undergoing angiogenesis may exert distinct vascular patterns, as well as instability in various types of arthritis. In an earlier study, synovial angiogenesis in psoriatic arthritis was associated with the predominance of tortuous, bushy vessels, whereas vessels in RA had mainly straight, branching morphology [23]. The same

DOI:10.1097/BOR.0b013e328337c95a

1040-8711 © 2010 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

300 Rheumatoid arthritis

Table 1 Some angiogenesis-related mediators in RA^a

| Mediator                     | Targeting                                                                 |
|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| VEGF                         | VEGF and VEGF-R inhibitors                                               |
|                              | Anti-VEGF-R1 antibody                                                    |
|                              | Anti-VEGF-R1 peptide GNQWFI siRNA, chetomin, BP-1                        |
| HIF-1 and HIF-2              | Pioglitazone, rosiglitazone                                              |
| PPARγ, PPARβ/δ               |                                                                          |
| FGF-2                        |                                                                          |
| TGF-β                        |                                                                          |
| CTGF                         |                                                                          |
| PDGF                         | Imatinib mesylate                                                       |
| PIGF                         | GNQWFI hexapeptide                                                      |
| SDF-1/CXCL12                 | Bicyclam/AMD 3100                                                       |
| MIP-3α/CCL20                 | Angiostatin, endostatin                                                 |
| αVβ3 integrin-ITGAV          |                                                                          |
| FAK                          |                                                                          |
| JAMs                         |                                                                          |
| Mast cell integrins          | Salbutamol, cromolyn                                                    |
| MMPs                         |                                                                          |
| TNF-α                        | Infliximab                                                              |
| IL-6                         | Tocilizumab                                                            |
| MIF                          |                                                                          |
| SAA                          |                                                                          |
| Sphingosine-1-phosphate      | CL2                                                                    |
| Others                       | PPI-2458 (fumagillin analogue)                                           |
|                              | Clarithromycin                                                          |
|                              | 2-ME                                                                   |
|                              | Chinese, Korean compounds                                                |

^a^ See text for abbreviations and references.

stimuli VEGF and that of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2, MMP-8 and MMP-9 [32, 34].

The degree of oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation has been assessed in arthritic patients in relation to in-vivo hypoxia, disease activity and markers of angiogenesis. Hypoxia and VEGF release were correlated with lipid peroxidation. Hypoxia-related lipid peroxidation was also correlated with disease activity indicated by DAS 28 [30]. When hypoxia was assessed in relation to synovial inflammatory cells and mediators, low oxygen tension was correlated with macroscopic synovitis, the amount of synovial CD3⁺ T cells, CD68⁺ macrophages, as well as with significantly higher levels of synovial fluid TNF-α, IL-1β, interferon-γ and the macrophage inflammatory protein 3α (MIP-3α)/CCL 20 chemokine [31].

In a recent study, RA synovial and normal dermal fibroblasts were engrafted into immunodeficient mice. Inflammatory, in comparison to normal, fibroblasts significantly enhanced myeloid cell recruitment and angiogenesis. Neovascularization was mediated by HIF-1α and VEGF but not by SDF-1/CXCL12 [35*].

HIF-1 and HIF-2 are strongly expressed in the RA synovium [29, 32, 33]. However, hypoxia may also act via HIF-independent regulatory pathways including the peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs). For example, after an ischemic insult, PPARγ and PPARγ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) induce VEGF production and the reconstitution of capillaries [36*]. The PPARγ ligands rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, currently used to treat diabetes, inhibit angiogenesis induced by VEGF, as well as fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) [37**]. In addition to PPARγ, endothelial PPARβ/δ has also been implicated in endothelial proliferation and angiogenesis [38].

---

Mainstream: the hypoxia-VEGF-angiopoietin-Tie2 system

As first described 15 years ago, VEGF may be of outstanding importance in angiogenesis associated with RA [25], as well as in malignancies [4, 26]. Very recently, serum VEGF levels were correlated with higher wrist synovial Doppler ultrasound signals in RA [27]. These observations led to the use of various VEGF inhibitors including antibodies to VEGF and VEGF receptors (VEGF-R), soluble VEGF-R, VEGF-Trap, VEGF tyrosine kinase inhibitors in arthritis, as well as in cancer trials [4, 7, 10, 19, 26].

Vascular endothelial growth factor is induced by hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factors 1 and 2 (HIF-1, HIF-2) in RA [3, 28–33]. Significant hypoxia is characteristic of RA joints [28].

Very recently, the stimulatory effect of hypoxia on the angiogenic drive of RA synovial fibroblasts has been demonstrated. Fibroblast migration into collagen was associated with increased angiogenesis demonstrated in vitro, as well as high expression of the angiogenic

Other growth factors in angiogenesis

Vascular endothelial growth factor, FGF-2, transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and many other growth factors have been implicated in synovial angiogenesis [10, 39*, 40, 41]. Growth factors, such as FGF-2, interact with several endothelial surface proteins including integrins, proteoglycans and tyrosine kinase receptors during angiogenesis. Furthermore, there is an interaction between FGF-2, tissue-infiltrating leukocytes and proinflammatory chemokines during inflammatory neovascularization [42]. There is also cross-talk between TGF-β and CTGF in arthritis and angiogenesis [41].

Recently, the role of placenta growth factor (PIGF) in RA and inflammatory angiogenesis has been postulated. PIGF, like VEGF, binds to the flt-1/VEGF-R1 receptor.
There is abundant expression of PIGF in the synovial tissue of mice with CIA [39*].

---

### Chemokines, chemokine receptors and angiogenesis

The angiogenic nature of most CXC chemokines has been associated with the glutamyl-leucyl-arginyl (ELR) amino acid motif within their structure [43]. As very recently reviewed, a number of CXC and CC chemokines induce angiogenesis in RA [44].

It seems that stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1)/CXCL12 may play a significant role in RA-associated angiogenesis despite the fact that this chemokine lacks the ELR motif [44–46]. SDF-1/CXCL12 is a major mediator of lymphocyte accumulation and lymphoid neogenesis in the RA synovium [45,46]. Hypoxia also stimulates SDF-1/CXCL12 release by RA synovial fibroblasts [45]. As tissue SDF-1/CXCL12 expression may have prognostic value in certain tumors [47], it may also become a marker of synovial inflammation and angiogenesis.

---

### Extracellular matrix components, adhesion receptors and proteases

The synovial infiltration of inflammatory leukocytes, as well as synovial angiogenesis, involves extracellular matrix macromolecules, cellular adhesion receptors and matrix-degrading proteases [1,10,12,48,49]. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is an angiostatic extracellular matrix component naturally produced within the RA synovium [10,41,50]. A TSP-1-TGF-β-CTGF axis has been identified. This axis may play a role in atherogenesis, RA, as well as RA-associated cardiovascular disease. TSP-1 activates TGF-β that leads to a further up-regulation of CTGF [41]. TSP-1, TGF-β and CTGF have all been implicated in inflammatory synovitis and angiogenesis [10,41,51,52].

Apart from several other adhesion receptors, the αvβ3 integrin seems to be of significant importance in synovial angiogenesis [53]. The αv subunit of this integrin is encoded by the ITGAV gene. A significant genetic association has been postulated between the ITGAV rs3738919-C allele and RA in the European Caucasian population [54,55]. Very recently, the role of this ITGAV allele in angiogenesis has been further analyzed in four Caucasian sample sets. The genetic association could not be confirmed in New Zealand and Oxford (UK) sample sets suggesting that the link between ITGAV gene polymorphism and RA may rather be limited [56].

Focal adhesion kinases (FAK) are involved in αvβ3 integrin signaling. FAKs have been detected in the RA

Angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis Szekanecz et al. 301

synovium suggesting their role in synovial inflammation and angiogenesis [57].

That mast cells are also involved in integrin-dependent angiogenesis and joint destruction has been recently established. Mast cell silencing with salbutamol or cromolyn prevented αvβ3 integrin activation and angiogenesis in mice [58].

Junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) including JAM-A, JAM-B and JAM-C have also been implicated in the adhesive processes underlying RA, as well as in synovial angiogenesis [59,60].

Matrix metalloproteinases promote angiogenesis by synovial matrix degradation [10,11,34,61]. The role of hypoxia in MMP production has been described above [34].

---

### Proinflammatory and angiogenic cytokines

Proinflammatory cytokines may exert direct angiogenic activity or may act indirectly via VEGF-dependent pathways [10,62]. In addition to TNF-α, interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, IL-15, IL-17, IL-18, oncostatin M, granulocyte (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors (GM-CSF) have been implicated in synovial angiogenesis [10,62]. Monocyte migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has recently drawn a lot of attention [63]. MIF has been implicated in angiogenesis, as well as atherosclerosis, a major cause of death in RA patients [63,64]. MIF is primarily produced by synovial macrophages and it acts via the induction of VEGF, IL-8/CXCL8 and protease release by RA synovial fibroblasts [63–65].

---

### Other angiogenic mediators

Among several other angiogenic mediators not mentioned above, serum amyloid A (SAA), an important acute-phase reactant, has also been implicated in arthritis and angiogenesis. SAA acts via the formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1). Interaction of SAA with FPRL1 stimulates endothelial cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis, as well as synovitis [66,67]. It has been reported that SAA in part acts via the induction of MIP-3α/CCL20 chemokine production by RA synovial fibroblasts [68*]. MIP-3α/CCL20, as well as its receptor, CCR6, have been implicated in RA-associated inflammation and angiogenesis [44,69].

Recently, sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) has been implicated in inflammation and angiogenesis [70,71]. Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK-1) mediates the production of S1P. SK-1 gene transfected human endothelial cells exerted increased migratory capacity and capillary tube

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
formation. SK-1 also promoted neutrophil–endothelial adhesion. Increased S1P levels were observed in RA compared with osteoarthritic synovial fluids. Thus, SK-1 and S1P may have significant pro-inflammatory and angiogenic effects in RA [71].

---

### Further advances in angiostatic therapy

Regarding targeting of the hypoxia-HIF-VEGF-angiopoietin system, an anti-VEGF-R1 antibody has been tried in the murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model. This antibody suppressed arthritis including clinical scores, leukocyte infiltration and the number of CD31+ endothelial cells in this rodent model [72**].

Several small molecule VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors including vatalanib, sunitinib malate, sorafenib, vandetanib (ZD6474), cediranib (AZD2171), axitinib (AG013736), KRN-951 and CEP-7055 have been developed [4,7,19,26,73]. Among these protein kinase inhibitors, vatalanib inhibited knee arthritis in rabbits [73].

As described above, PPARγ is involved in angiogenesis mediated by hypoxia but independent of HIFs. The PPARγ agonist pioglitazone improved joint and skin symptoms in patients with psoriatic arthritis [74].

There have been recent attempts to target HIF-1 signaling in inflammatory bowel disease [75] and recently in arthritis [33,35**,76**]. RA synovial fibroblasts enhanced myeloid cell recruitment and angiogenesis into synovial tissues engrafted into immunodeficient mice. In this model, targeting HIF-1α expression by either siRNA or by the small molecule inhibitor chetomin significantly reduced these events [35*]. The synthetic benzophenone analog, BP-1, a HIF-1α inhibitor, ameliorated adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in rats [76**].

Regarding targeting of other growth factors mentioned above, an anti-flt-1/VEGF-R1 hexapeptide, GNQWFI abrogated PIGF-induced angiogenesis, cytokine production and the development of murine arthritis [39*].

Imatinib mesylate has been currently used to treat hematologic malignancies. Moreover, this compound is a specific inhibitor of PDGF receptor activation [77]. PDGF is also involved in synovial angiogenesis underlying RA [10,40]. In RA, imatinib mesylate inhibited the proliferation of synovial fibroblasts and thus pannus formation [77]. In the CIA model, imatinib mesylate also inhibited the development of arthritis [78].

Chemokine and chemokine receptor blockade may also inhibit angiogenesis. Bicyclam, also known as AMD3100, a highly selective antagonist of SDF-1/CXCL4 inhibited endothelial cell proliferation and migration [79].

As described above, anticytokine therapy, in addition to other modes of action, may suppress angiogenesis in arthritis. For example, TNF-α blockade by infliximab reduced synovial VEGF, angiopoietin 1, Tie2 expression, as well as vascularity within the RA synovium [80,81]. IL-6 is also an angiogenic mediator [10]. The anti-IL-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab, which has recently been approved for the treatment of RA, decreased serum levels of VEGF [82].

The role of TSP-1 in RA and angiogenesis is described above [50]. In a recent study [50], a TSP-1-derived peptide suppressed synovial inflammation and angiogenesis in a rat arthritis model.

Some antibiotic derivatives also inhibit the release of VEGF and other angiogenic mediators and thus neovascularization [10,83,84]. Targeted therapy with the fumagillin analog PPI-2458 effectively suppressed inflammation and joint damage in experimental arthritis [85,86*]. In a recent study [86*], PPI-2458 administered orally, intravenously or subcutaneously to rats with CIA effectively attenuated synovitis and radiographic progression in comparison to vehicle control. As this compound was not found to be immunosuppressive in various assays, its antiarthritic action may be linked to angiostasis. Also recently, clarithromycin was more effective than placebo in a 6-month study of 81 early RA patients [87].

Angiostatin, a fragment of plasminogen, endostatin, a fragment of type XIII collagen and their derivatives block αvβ3 integrin-dependent angiogenesis [7,19,88]. It has been recently found that endostatin induced synovial fibroblast apoptosis in the rat AIA model [89].

The angiostatic effects of 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME) were suggested many years ago [90]. As has been described recently, 2-ME blocks neovascularization via VEGF and FGF-dependent mechanisms. Furthermore, 2-ME attenuated CIA and AIA in rats [91*,92*]. Very recently, the anti-inflammatory and angiostatic effects of 2-ME were confirmed in the new murine anticollagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) model. 2-ME dose-dependently decreased arthritis scores, synovial inflammation, cartilage degradation and bone resorption. Moreover, 2-ME suppressed synovial neovascularization. These effects were attributed to decreased production of TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-17, VEGF and FGF-2 [93].

The role of S1P and SK-1 in angiogenesis has been discussed above [70,71]. Chemical lead 2 (CL2) is a non-S1P analog antagonist of S1P1, also known as endothelial differentiation gene 1 (Edg-1). Edg-1 is a member of the S1P receptor family. CL2 inhibited tube formation in endothelial cultures. It also suppressed VEGF-induced

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
angiogenesis in the rabbit cornea model and attenuated
arthritis in the CAIA model [70].

Some compounds in traditional Chinese medicine
may also have antiangiogenic effects in arthritis. Very
recently, scopolin, a coumarin derivative found in the
stems of *Erycibe obtusifolia* Benth was tested for angi-
static and antiarthritic effects in the rat AIA model.
Scopolin injected intraperitoneally reduced paw swelling
and arthritis scores and reversed body weight loss in the
rats. This antiarthritic effect was accompanied by the
suppression of synovial tissue VEGF, bFGF and IL-6
expression, as well as reduced angiogenesis [94].

Celastrol, an active ingredient of *Tripterygium wilfordii*,
also known as ‘Thunder God Vine’, has been widely used
to treat RA in China. In a recent study [95], celastrol
exerted antiangiogenic effects in the chick chorioallan-
toic membrane and the Matrigel plug assays. Celastrol
also inhibited endothelial cell migration, as well as
VEGF-R1 and VEGFR2 expression.

In a Korean study, the flavonol-rich fraction of *Rhus*
*verniciflua* Stokes (RVHxR) and its active ingredient,
fisetin inhibited the proliferation and cytokine pro-
duction of RA synovial fibroblasts, as well as VEGF
release. RVHxR and fisetin acted via the inhibition of
ERK and JNK phosphorylation [96].

---

### Recent advances about synovial
vasculogenesis

Endothelial precursor cells have been described within
the population of blood stem cells. EPCs express both
hematopoietic markers, such as CD34 and CD133, as well
as VEGF-R2/Flk-1 and the SDF-1/CXCL12 receptor
CXCR4 [17,18,97]. Under normal conditions, EPCs
become mobilized from the bone marrow and they
differentiate into mature endothelial cells [16,18].

In RA, synovial EPCs also differentiate into endothelial
cells; however, there is a relative deficiency of EPCs in
RA, as well as in vascular diseases leading to defective
vasculogenesis and revascularization after tissue injury
[17,18,98,99]. In RA, there is an α<sub>4</sub>β<sub>1</sub> integrin-mediated
recruitment of EPCs from the blood into the synovium
[16]; thus, depletion of EPCs from the circulation indeed
leads to impaired vasculogenesis in RA [18]. EPC
depletion in RA has been associated with the defective
synthesis of nitric oxide, as well as with impaired nitric
oxide-dependent EPC mobilization. Serum levels of
asymmetric dimethyl-L-arginine (ADMA), an endogen-
ous inhibitor of nitric oxide synthesis, are elevated in
RA, which may explain this feature [100]. Defective
vasculogenesis may correlate with disease activity as
the amount of EPCs in patients with active RA was

significantly lower than that in patients with inactive
disease [17].

Among chemokines, SDF-1/CXCL12 plays a major role
in EPC recruitment to developing or injured tissues
[45,101]. Most EPCs express the CXCR4 chemokine
receptor and migrate in response to its ligand, SDF-1/
CXCL12 [45]. SDF-1/CXCL12 induces the revasculari-
zation of ischemic tissues, such as the myocardium in
coronary disease or the arthritic synovium [45,102].
Thus, SDF-1/CXCL12 may serve as a ‘molecular hub’
that modulates vasculogenesis, as well as angiogenesis
[45].

Among other regulators of vasculogenesis, IL-6 stimu-
lates EPC migration and Matrigel tube formation [103].
CCN1, an angiogenic factor, promotes the adhesion and
migration of EPCs. This involves numerous integrins
including α<sub>V</sub>β<sub>3</sub> [104]. E-selectin has recently been impli-
cated in EPC recruitment and soluble E-selectin
reversed impaired vasculogenesis in an ischemic limb
model [105]. Thus, some angiogenic mediators may also
stimulate vasculogenesis. Despite the abundant pro-
duction of vasculogenic and angiogenic chemokines,
cytokines and adhesion receptors, vasculogenesis is still
impaired in RA [17,18].

Accelerated atherosclerosis and increased cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality have been associated with RA
[106,107]. Apart from traditional Framingham risk factors
and RA-associated inflammatory components, the deple-
tion of circulating EPCs and defective vasculogenesis
may also be linked to atherosclerosis in RA [99,108,109].
Endothelial dysfunction indicated by impaired flow-
mediated vasodilation correlated with lower numbers
and abnormal function of circulating EPCs [17,99]. Thus,
the loss of EPCs in the circulation of RA patients may link
synovial inflammation and increased cardiovascular mor-
bidity and mortality.

---

### Restoration of diminished vasculogenesis:
therapeutic options

As an indirect approach, therapies that increase circulat-
ing EPC numbers may themselves improve vasculogen-
esis. For example, corticosteroid and anti-TNF-α therapy
in RA resulted in the restoration of circulating EPC levels
and function [17,21]. There have been reports that some
biologics may increase the overall survival [110] and
decrease atherosclerosis in RA [111]. In a recent cohort,
RA patients treated with anti-TNF biologics did not have
a lower incidence of myocardial infarction in comparison
to classical DMARD-treated patients. However, the
risk of infarction was significantly reduced in biologic-
responder patients compared with nonresponders [111].
Certainly, anti-TNF agents, apart from stimulating EPC

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
mobilization, exert multiple other effects that lead to the improvement of vascular disease in arthritis.

Direct infusion of EPCs may be used for the induction of neovascularization in therapeutic trials in certain vascular and inflammatory diseases associated with insufficient EPC number or function [98,112]. In the future, EPCs may be used to restore defective vasculogenesis in inflammatory diseases, such as RA.

---

### Conclusion

In this review, we discussed the putative role of intensive synovial angiogenesis and defective vasculogenesis in RA. Several soluble and cell surface-bound mediators of angiogenesis including VEGF and other growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, extracellular matrix constituents, cell adhesion molecules, proteases and others have been described in relation to synovitis. When describing the action of the most relevant angiogenic mediators we also presented therapeutic strategies that may suppress the production of these mediators and thus attenuate synovial angiogenesis, as well as inflammation. On the contrary, impaired vasculogenesis associated with low numbers of EPCs may lead to atherosclerosis and vascular disease in RA. Restoration of defective EPC function and vasculogenesis may help to prevent cardiovascular disease in RA.

---

### Acknowledgements

The work was supported by NIH grants AR-048267 (A.E.K.), the William D. Robinson, M.D. and Frederick G.L. Huetwell Endowed Professorship (A.E.K.), Funds from the Veterans’ Administration (A.E.K.); and grant No T048541 from the National Scientific Research Fund (OTKA) (Z.S.).

---

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- • of special interest
- •• of outstanding interest

Additional references related to this topic can also be found in the Current World Literature section in this issue (p. 354).

1. Folkman J, Klagsbrun M. Angiogenic factors. Science 1987; 235:442–447.
2. Colville-Nash PR, Scott DL. Angiogenesis and rheumatoid arthritis: pathogenic and therapeutic implications. Ann Rheum Dis 1992; 51:919–925.
3. Fearon U, Veale DJ. Angiogenesis in arthritis: methodological and analytical details. Methods Mol Med 2007; 135:343–357.
4. Kiselyov A, Balakin KV, Tkachenko SE. VEGF/VEGFR signalling as a target for inhibiting angiogenesis. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2007; 16:83–107.
5. Koch AE. Review: angiogenesis: implications for rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1998; 41:951–962.
6. Koch AE, Distler O. Vasculopathy and disordered angiogenesis in selected rheumatic diseases: rheumatoid arthritis and systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9 (Suppl 2):S3.
7. Lainer-Carr D, Brahn E. Angiogenesis inhibition as a therapeutic approach for inflammatory synovitis. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2007; 3:434–442.
8. Paleolog EM. The vasculature in rheumatoid arthritis: cause or consequence? Int J Exp Pathol 2009; 90:249–261.

9. Paleolog EM. Angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res 2002; 4 (Suppl 3):S81–S90.
10. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE. Mechanisms of disease: angiogenesis in inflammatory diseases. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2007; 3:635–643.
11. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE. Macrophages and their products in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2007; 19:289–295.
12. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE. Vascular involvement in rheumatic diseases: ‘vascular rheumatology’. Arthritis Res Ther 2008; 10:224.
13. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE. Angiogenesis and its targeting in rheumatoid arthritis. Vascul Pharmacol 2009.
14. Szekanecz Z, Besenyei T, Paragh G, Koch AE. Angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. Autoimmunity 2009; 42:563–573.
15. Avouac J, Uzan G, Kahan A, *et al.* Endothelial progenitor cells and rheumatic disorders. Joint Bone Spine 2008; 75:131–137. A very informative recent review on RA-associated vasculogenesis and EPC functions.
16. Silverman MD, Haas CS, Rad AM, *et al.* The role of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1/very late activation antigen 4 in endothelial progenitor cell recruitment to rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56: 1817–1826.
17. Grisar J, Aletaha D, Steiner CW, *et al.* Endothelial progenitor cells in active rheumatoid arthritis: effects of tumour necrosis factor and glucocorticoid therapy. Ann Rheum Dis 2007; 66:1284–1288.
18. Paleolog E. It’s all in the blood: circulating endothelial progenitor cells link synovial vascularity with cardiovascular mortality in rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis Res Ther 2005; 7:270–272.
19. Veale DJ, Fearon U. Inhibition of angiogenic pathways in rheumatoid arthritis: potential for therapeutic targeting. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2006; 20:941–947.
20. Schoettler N, Brahn E. Angiogenesis inhibitors for the treatment of chronic autoimmune inflammatory arthritis. Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2009; 10:425–433.
21. Ablin JN, Boguslavski V, Aloush V, *et al.* Effect of anti-TNFalpha treatment on circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) in rheumatoid arthritis. Life Sci 2006; 79:2364–2369.
22. Kerekes G, Soltesz P, Der H, *et al.* Effects of biologics on vascular function and atherosclerosis associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009; 1173:814–821.
23. Reece RJ, Canete JD, Parsons WJ, *et al.* Distinct vascular patterns of early synovitis in psoriatic, reactive, and rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1999; 42:1481–1484.
24. Kennedy A, Ng CT, Biniecka M, *et al.* Angiogenesis and blood vessel stability in inflammatory arthritis. Arthritis Rheum (in press).
25. Koch AE, Harlow LA, Haines GK, *et al.* Vascular endothelial growth factor. A cytokine modulating endothelial function in rheumatoid arthritis. J Immunol 1994; 152:4149–4156.
26. Shibuya M. Vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent and -independent regulation of angiogenesis. BMB Rep 2008; 41:278–286.
27. Kurosaka D, Hirai K, Nishioka M, *et al.* Correlation between synovial blood flow signals and serum vascular endothelial growth factor levels in patients with refractory rheumatoid arthritis. Mod Rheumatol 2009; 19:187–191.
28. Taylor PC, Sivakumar B. Hypoxia and angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2005; 17:293–298.
29. Giatromanolaki A, Sivridis E, Maltezos E, *et al.* Upregulated hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha and -2alpha pathway in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2003; 5:R193–R201.
30. Biniecka M, Kennedy A, Fearon U, *et al.* Oxidative damage in synovial tissue is associated with in vivo hypoxic status in the arthritic joint. Ann Rheum Dis 2009 [Epub ahead of print].
31. Ng CT, Biniecka M, Kennedy A, *et al.* Synovial tissue hypoxia and inflammation in vivo. Ann Rheum Dis
32. Muz B, Khan MN, Kiriakidis S, Paleolog EM. Hypoxia. The role of hypoxia and HIF-dependent signalling events in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2009; 11:201.
33. Westra J, Molema G, Kallenberg CG. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 as regulator of angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis: therapeutic implications. Curr Med Chem 2009.
34. Akhavani MA, Madden L, Buysschaert I, *et al.* Hypoxia upregulates angiogenesis and synovial cell migration in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2009; 11:R64.

---

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

35 del Rey MJ, Izquierdo E, Caja S, *et al.* Human inflammatory synovial fibroblasts induce enhanced myeloid cell recruitment and angiogenesis through a hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1alpha/vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated pathway in immunodeficient mice. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60:2926–2934.

A very interesting study showing that human RA synoviocytes utilize the hypoxia-HIF-VEGF pathway to induce leukocyte recruitment. Thus, angiogenesis and inflammation are directly linked.

36 Arany Z, Foo SY, Ma Y, *et al.* HIF-independent regulation of VEGF and angiogenesis by the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1alpha. Nature 2008; 451:1008–1012.

In this study authors show that VEGF can be regulated independently of hypoxia and HIF. This alternative pathway involves PPARγ-mediated mechanisms.

37 Aljada A, O'Connor L, Fu YY, Mousa SA. PPAR gamma ligands, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, inhibit bFGF- and VEGF-mediated angiogenesis. Angiogenesis 2008; 11:361–367.

One of the very first studies implicating that glitazones currently used in diabetes therapy may also be used to target angiogenesis.

38 Piqueras L, Reynolds AR, Hodivala-Dilke KM, *et al.* Activation of PPARbeta/delta induces endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2007; 27:63–69.

39 Yoo SA, Yoon HJ, Kim HS, *et al.* Role of placenta growth factor and its receptor flt-1 in rheumatoid inflammation: a link between angiogenesis and inflammation. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60:345–354.

The first study on the involvement of PIGF in RA.

40 Colville-Nash PR, Willoughby DA. Growth factors in angiogenesis: current interest and therapeutic potential. Mol Med Today 1997; 3:14–23.

41 Rico MC, Rough JJ, Del Carpio-Cano FE, *et al.* The axis of thrombospondin-1, transforming growth factor beta and connective tissue growth factor: an emerging therapeutic target in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Vasc Pharmacol.

42 Presta M, Andres G, Leali D, *et al.* Inflammatory cells and chemokines sustain FGF2-induced angiogenesis. Eur Cytokine Netw 2009; 20:39–50.

43 Strieter RM, Polverini PJ, Kunkel SL, *et al.* The functional role of the ELR motif in CXC chemokine-mediated angiogenesis. J Biol Chem 1995; 270:27348–27357.

44 Szekanecz Z, Pakozdi A, Szentpetery A, *et al.* Chemokines and angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. Front Biosci (Elite Ed) 2009; 1:44–51.

45 Petit I, Jin D, Rafii S. The SDF-1-CXCR4 signaling pathway: a molecular hub modulating neo-angiogenesis. Trends Immunol 2007; 28:299–307.

46 Pablos JL, Santiago B, Galindo M, *et al.* Synoviocyte-derived CXCL12 is displayed on endothelium and induces angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. J Immunol 2003; 170:2147–2152.

47 Calatozzolo C, Maderna E, Pollo B, *et al.* Prognostic value of CXCL12 expression in 40 low-grade oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas. Cancer Biol Ther 2006; 5:827–832.

48 Agarwal SK, Brenner MB. Role of adhesion molecules in synovial inflammation. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2006; 18:268–276.

49 Jakobsson L, Claesson-Welsh L. Vascular basement membrane components in angiogenesis—an act of balance. ScientificWorldJournal 2008; 8:1246–1249.

50 Rico MC, Castaneda JL, Manns JM, *et al.* Amelioration of inflammation, angiogenesis and CTGF expression in an arthritis model by a TSP1-derived peptide treatment. J Cell Physiol 2007; 211:504–512.

51 Koch AE, Szekanecz Z, Friedman J, *et al.* Effects of thrombospondin-1 on disease course and angiogenesis in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1998; 86:199–208.

52 Szekanecz Z, Haines GK, Harlow LA, *et al.* Increased synovial expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta receptor endoglin and TGF-beta 1 in rheumatoid arthritis: possible interactions in the pathogenesis of the disease. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1995; 76:187–194.

53 Brooks PC, Clark RA, Cheresh DA. Requirement of vascular integrin alpha v beta 3 for angiogenesis. Science 1994; 264:569–571.

54 Jacq L, Garnier S, Dieude P, *et al.* The ITGAV rs3738919-C allele is associated with rheumatoid arthritis in the European Caucasian population: a family-based study. Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9:R63.

55 Ahnert P, Kirsten H. Association of ITGAV supports a role of angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9:108.

56 Hollis-Moffatt JE, Rowley KA, Phipps-Green AJ, *et al.* The ITGAV rs3738919 variant and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis in four Caucasian sample sets. Arthritis Res Ther 2009; 11:R152.

57 Shahrara S, Castro-Rueda HP, Haines GK, Koch AE. Differential expression of the FAK family kinases in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis synovial tissues. Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9:R112.


58 Kneilling M, Hultner L, Pichler BJ, *et al.* Targeted mast cell silencing protects against joint destruction and angiogenesis in experimental arthritis in mice. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56:1806–1816.

59 Naik TU, Naik MU, Naik UP. Junctional adhesion molecules in angiogenesis. Front Biosci 2008; 13:258–262.

60 Rabquer BJ, Pakozdi A, Michel JE, *et al.* Junctional adhesion molecule C mediates leukocyte adhesion to rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Arthritis Rheum 2008; 58:3020–3029.

61 Brown PD. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors. Angiogenesis 1998; 1:142–154.

62 Brennan F, Beech J. Update on cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2007; 19:296–301.

63 Morand EF, Leech M, Bernhagen J. MIF: a new cytokine link between rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006; 5:399–410.

64 Amin MA, Volpert OV, Woods JM, *et al.* Migration inhibitory factor mediates angiogenesis via mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol kinase. Circ Res 2003; 93:321–329.

65 Pakozdi A, Amin MA, Haas CS, *et al.* Macrophage migration inhibitory factor: a mediator of matrix metalloproteinase-2 production in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2006; 8:R132.

66 Lee MS, Yoo SA, Cho CS, *et al.* Serum amyloid A binding to formyl peptide receptor-like 1 induces synovial hyperplasia and angiogenesis. J Immunol 2006; 177:5585–5594.

67 Mullan RH, Bresnihan B, Golden-Mason L, *et al.* Acute-phase serum amyloid A stimulation of angiogenesis, leukocyte recruitment, and matrix degradation in rheumatoid arthritis through an NF-kappaB-dependent signal transduction pathway. Arthritis Rheum 2006; 54:105–114.

68 Migita K, Koga T, Torigoshi T, *et al.* Serum amyloid A protein stimulates CCL20 production in rheumatoid synoviocytes. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2009; 48:741–747.

This study shows a novel role for SAA, an acute phase reactant, as an inducer of chemokine production in RA.

69 Ruth JH, Shahrara S, Park CC, *et al.* Role of macrophage inflammatory protein-3alpha and its ligand CCR6 in rheumatoid arthritis. Lab Invest 2003; 83:579–588.

70 Yonesu K, Kawase Y, Inoue T, *et al.* Involvement of sphingosine-1-phosphate and S1P1 in angiogenesis: analyses using a new S1P1 antagonist of nonsphingosine-1-phosphate analog. Biochem Pharmacol 2009; 77: 1011–1020.

71 Limaye V, Xia P, Hahn C, *et al.* Chronic increases in sphingosine kinase-1 activity induce a pro-inflammatory, pro-angiogenic phenotype in endothelial cells. Cell Mol Biol Lett 2009.

72 Choi ST, Kim JH, Seok JY, *et al.* Therapeutic effect of antivascular endothelial growth factor receptor I antibody in the established collagen-induced arthritis mouse model. Clin Rheumatol 2009; 28:333–337.

In this preclinical study an anti-VEGFR antibody suppressed arthritis in a murine model.

73 Grosios K, Wood J, Esser R, *et al.* Angiogenesis inhibition by the novel VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, PTK787/ZK222584, causes significant antiarthritic effects in models of rheumatoid arthritis. Inflamm Res 2004; 53:133–142.

74 Bongartz T, Coras B, Vogt T, *et al.* Treatment of active psoriatic arthritis with the PPARgamma ligand pioglitazone: an open-label pilot study. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2005; 44:126–129.

75 Hirota SA, Beck PL, MacDonald JA. Targeting hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) signaling in therapeutics: implications for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov 2009; 3:1–16.

76 Shankar J, Thippegowda PB, Kanum SA. Inhibition of HIF-1alpha activity by BP-1 ameliorates adjuvant induced arthritis in rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009; 387:223–228.

This study describes the discovery of BP-1, a new small molecule HIF-1 inhibitor and its possible therapeutic effects in arthritis.

77 Kameda H, Ishigami H, Suzuki M, *et al.* Imatinib mesylate inhibits proliferation of rheumatoid synovial fibroblast-like cells and phosphorylation of Gab adapter proteins activated by platelet-derived growth factor. Clin Exp Immunol 2006; 144:335–341.

78 Koyama K, Hatsushika K, Ando T, *et al.* Imatinib mesylate both prevents and treats the arthritis induced by type II collagen antibody in mice. Mod Rheumatol 2007; 17:306–310.

79 Yin Y, Huang L, Zhao X, *et al.* AMD3100 mobilizes endothelial progenitor cells in mice, but inhibits its biological functions by blocking an autocrine/paracrine regulatory loop of stromal cell derived factor-1 in vitro. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2007; 50:61–67.

306 Rheumatoid arthritis

80 Markham T, Mullan R, Golden-Mason L, *et al.* Resolution of endothelial activation and down-regulation of Tie2 receptor in psoriatic skin after infliximab therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006; 54:1003–1012.

81 Goedkoop AY, Kraan MC, Picavet DI, *et al.* Deactivation of endothelium and reduction in angiogenesis in psoriatic skin and synovium by low dose infliximab therapy in combination with stable methotrexate therapy: a prospective single-centre study. Arthritis Res Ther 2004; 6:R326–R334.

82 Nakahara H, Nishimoto N. Antiinterleukin-6 receptor antibody therapy in rheumatic diseases. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets 2006; 6:373–381.

83 Ingber D, Fujita T, Kishimoto S, *et al.* Synthetic analogues of fumagillin that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumour growth. Nature 1990; 348:555–557.

84 Sapadin AN, Fleischmajer R. Tetracyclines: nonantibiotic properties and their clinical implications. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006; 54:258–265.

85 Hannig G, Bernier SG, Hoyt JG, *et al.* Suppression of inflammation and structural damage in experimental arthritis through molecular targeted therapy with PPI-2458. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56:850–860.

86 Brahn E, Schoettler N, Lee S, Banquerigo ML. Involution of collagen-induced arthritis with an angiogenesis inhibitor, PPI-2458. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2009; 329:615–624. A new preclinical study on the antiarthritic effects of the fumagillin analog PPI-2458.

87 Ogrendik M. Effects of clarithromycin in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Curr Med Res Opin 2007; 23:515–522.

88 Yue L, Shen YX, Feng LJ, *et al.* Blockage of the formation of new blood vessels by recombinant human endostatin contributes to the regression of rat adjuvant arthritis. Eur J Pharmacol 2007; 567:166–170.

89 Huang XY, Chen FH, Li J, *et al.* Mechanism of fibroblast-like synoviocyte apoptosis induced by recombinant human endostatin in rats with adjuvant arthritis. Anat Rec (Hoboken) 2008; 291:1029–1037.

90 Mabjeesh NJ, Escuin D, LaVallee TM, *et al.* 2ME2 inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis by disrupting microtubules and dysregulating HIF. Cancer Cell 2003; 3:363–375.

91 Brahn E, Banquerigo ML, Lee JK, *et al.* An angiogenesis inhibitor, 2-methoxyestradiol, involutes rat collagen-induced arthritis and suppresses gene expression of synovial vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor. J Rheumatol 2008; 35:2119–2128. A very recent study on the potent angiostatic and anti-inflammatory effects of 2-ME in arthritis.

92 Issekutz AC, Sapru K. Modulation of adjuvant arthritis in the rat by 2-methoxyestradiol: an effect independent of an antiangiogenic action. Int Immunopharmacol 2008; 8:708–716. Another recent key study on the effects of 2-ME in arthritis.

93 Plum SM, Park EJ, Strawn SJ, *et al.* Disease modifying and antiangiogenic activity of 2-methoxyestradiol in a murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2009; 10:46.

94 Pan R, Dai Y, Gao X, Xia Y. Scopolin isolated from *Erycibe obtusifolia* Benth stems suppresses adjuvant-induced rat arthritis by inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. Int Immunopharmacol 2009 [Epub ahead of print].

95 Zhou YX, Huang YL. Antiangiogenic effect of celastrol on the growth of human glioma: an in vitro and in vivo study. Chin Med J (Engl) 2009; 122:1666–1673.

96 Lee JD, Huh JE, Jeon G, *et al.* Flavonol-rich RVHxR from *Rhus verniciflua* Stokes and its major compound fisetin inhibits inflammation-related cytokines and angiogenic factor in rheumatoid arthritic fibroblast-like synovial cells and in vivo models. Int Immunopharmacol 2009; 9:268–276.

97 Peichev M, Naiyer AJ, Pereira D, *et al.* Expression of VEGFR-2 and AC133 by circulating human CD34(+) cells identifies a population of functional endothelial precursors. Blood 2000; 95:952–958.

98 Freedman SB, Isner JM. Therapeutic angiogenesis for ischemic cardiovascular disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2001; 33:379–393.

99 Herbrig K, Haensel S, Oelschlaegel U, *et al.* Endothelial dysfunction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis is associated with a reduced number and impaired function of endothelial progenitor cells. Ann Rheum Dis 2006; 65:157–163.

100 Surdacki A, Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Wloch A, *et al.* Plasma asymmetric dimethylarginine is related to anticitrullinated protein antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis of short duration. Metabolism 2009; 58:316–318.

101 Yamaguchi J, Kusano KF, Masuo O, *et al.* Stromal cell-derived factor-1 effects on ex vivo expanded endothelial progenitor cell recruitment for ischemic neovascularization. Circulation 2003; 107:1322–1328.

102 Wojakowski W, Tendera M, Michalowska A, *et al.* Mobilization of CD34/CXCR4+, CD34/CD117+, c-met+ stem cells, and mononuclear cells expressing early cardiac, muscle, and endothelial markers into peripheral blood in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 2004; 110:3213–3220.

103 Fan Y, Ye J, Shen F, *et al.* Interleukin-6 stimulates circulating blood-derived endothelial progenitor cell angiogenesis in vitro. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2008; 28:90–98. An interesting study showing that IL-6 promotes vasculogenesis.

104 Grote K, Salguero G, Ballmaier M, *et al.* The angiogenic factor CCN1 promotes adhesion and migration of circulating CD34+ progenitor cells: potential role in angiogenesis and endothelial regeneration. Blood 2007; 110:877–885.

105 Oh IY, Yoon CH, Hur J, *et al.* Involvement of E-selectin in recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells and angiogenesis in ischemic muscle. Blood 2007; 110:3891–3899.

106 Sherer Y, Shoenfeld Y. Mechanisms of disease: atherosclerosis in autoimmune diseases. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2006; 2:99–106.

107 Szekanecz Z, Kerekes G, Der H, *et al.* Accelerated atherosclerosis in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007; 1108:349–358.

108 Akhavani MA, Larsen H, Paleolog E. Circulating endothelial progenitor cells as a link between synovial vascularity and cardiovascular mortality in rheumatoid arthritis. Scand J Rheumatol 2007; 36:83–90.

109 Pakozdi A, Besenyei T, Paragh G, *et al.* Endothelial progenitor cells in arthritis-associated vasculogenesis and atherosclerosis. Joint Bone Spine 2009 [Epub ahead of print].

110 Jacobsson LT, Turesson C, Gulfe A, *et al.* Treatment with tumor necrosis factor blockers is associated with a lower incidence of first cardiovascular events in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2005; 32:1213–1218.

111 Dixon WG, Watson KD, Lunt M, *et al.* Reduction in the incidence of myocardial infarction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis who respond to antitumor necrosis factor alpha therapy: results from the British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56:2905–2912.

112 Asahara T, Murohara T, Sullivan A, *et al.* Isolation of putative progenitor endothelial cells for angiogenesis. Science 1997; 275:964–967.
