
Vol 464 | 29 April 2010 | doi:10.1038/nature08991

ARTICLES

# Adiponectin and AdipoR1 regulate PGC-1α and mitochondria by Ca²⁺ and AMPK/SIRT1

Masato Iwabu¹,²*, Toshimasa Yamauchi¹,²*, Miki Okada-Iwabu¹,²*, Koji Sato⁶, Tatsuro Nakagawa⁷, Masaaki Funata¹, Mamiko Yamaguchi¹, Shigeyuki Namiki³, Ryo Nakayama¹, Mitsuhisa Tabata⁸, Hitomi Ogata⁹, Naoto Kubota¹, Iseki Takamoto¹, Yukiko K. Hayashi¹⁰, Naoko Yamauchi⁴, Hironori Waki¹, Masashi Fukayama⁴, Ichizo Nishino¹⁰, Kumpei Tokuyama⁹, Kohjiro Ueki¹, Yuichi Oike⁸, Satoshi Ishii⁵, Kenzo Hirose³, Takao Shimizu⁵, Kazushige Touhara⁶,⁷ & Takashi Kadowaki¹

Adiponectin is an anti-diabetic adipokine. Its receptors possess a seven-transmembrane topology with the amino terminus located intracellularly, which is the opposite of G-protein-coupled receptors. Here we provide evidence that adiponectin induces extracellular Ca²⁺ influx by adiponectin receptor 1 (AdipoR1), which was necessary for subsequent activation of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase β (CaMKKβ), AMPK and SIRT1, increased expression and decreased acetylation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α), and increased mitochondria in myocytes. Moreover, muscle-specific disruption of AdipoR1 suppressed the adiponectin-mediated increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration, and decreased the activation of CaMKK, AMPK and SIRT1 by adiponectin. Suppression of AdipoR1 also resulted in decreased PGC-1α expression and deacetylation, decreased mitochondrial content and enzymes, decreased oxidative type I myofibres, and decreased oxidative stress-detoxifying enzymes in skeletal muscle, which were associated with insulin resistance and decreased exercise endurance. Decreased levels of adiponectin and AdipoR1 in obesity may have causal roles in mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance seen in diabetes.

Adiponectin (encoded by *Adipoq*)¹⁻⁴ is an anti-diabetic and anti-atherogenic adipokine. Plasma adiponectin levels are decreased in obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes⁵. Administration of adiponectin has been shown to cause glucose-lowering effects and ameliorate insulin resistance in mice⁶⁻⁸. Conversely, adiponectin-deficient mice exhibit insulin resistance and diabetes⁹,¹⁰. This insulin-sensitizing effect of adiponectin seems to be mediated by an increase in fatty acid oxidation by activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)¹¹⁻¹³ and also by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α (PPARα)¹⁴,¹⁵.

We previously reported the cloning of complementary DNAs encoding adiponectin receptors 1 and 2 (*Adipor1* and *Adipor2*) by expression cloning¹⁶. AdipoR1 is abundantly expressed in skeletal muscle and liver, whereas AdipoR2 is predominantly expressed in the liver. Both receptors are predicted to contain seven-transmembrane domains¹⁶, but to be structurally and functionally distinct from G-protein-coupled receptors¹⁷⁻¹⁹. Adiponectin receptors may thus be thought to comprise a new receptor family.

We previously showed using *Adipor1* and/or *Adipor2* knockout mice that AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 act as the major receptors for adiponectin *in vivo*, and have important roles in the regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism, inflammation and oxidative stress *in vivo*²⁰. Moreover, in the liver, AdipoR1 activated AMPK pathways and AdipoR2 activated PPARα pathways²⁰. Therefore, identification of the ‘missing link’ between adiponectin receptors and adiponectin-activated key molecules is an important next step towards our understanding of the actions of adiponectin.

Insulin resistance has been reported to be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction²¹. However, the exact cause of mitochondrial dysfunction has yet to be ascertained. To clarify whether decreased adiponectin/AdipoR1 signalling could be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, we analysed muscle-specific *Adipor1*-knockout (muscle-R1KO) mice, and attempted to determine the signalling mechanisms by which adiponectin/AdipoR1 would exert their biological effects.

## Decreased PGC-1α and mitochondria in muscle-R1KO

Muscle-R1KO mice showed decreased phosphorylation of AMPK (Fig. 1a). Moreover, the administration of adiponectin increased the phosphorylation of AMPK in the muscle of control littermates but not in those of muscle-R1KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 1a), whereas adiponectin increased the phosphorylation of AMPK in the liver of both genotypes (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Muscle-R1KO mice also exhibited decreased molecules involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, such as PGC-1α²², at both messenger RNA (*Ppargc1a*) (Fig. 1b) and protein levels (Fig. 1c). Adiponectin increased the expression levels of *Ppargc1a* in muscles of control littermates but not in those of muscle-R1KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 1c).

Muscle-R1KO mice showed decreases in molecules involved in mitochondrial biogenesis such as oestrogen-related receptor α (*Esrra*)²³, molecules involved in transcription such as nuclear respiratory factor 1 (*Nrf1*), and molecules involved in mitochondrial DNA replication/translation such as mitochondrial transcription factor A (*Tfam*)

---

¹Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, ²Department of Integrated Molecular Science on Metabolic Diseases, 22nd Century Medical and Research Center, ³Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, ⁴Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, ⁵Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. ⁶Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan. ⁷Department of Integrated Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8562, Japan. ⁸Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. ⁹Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan. ¹⁰Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.  
*These authors contributed equally to this work.*

©2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

ARTICLES

(Fig. 1b). Moreover, the expression levels of several oxidative phosphorylation and other mitochondrial genes were significantly reduced in muscle-R1KO mice, including cytochrome c (Cycs), and cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (mt-Co2) (Fig. 1b). Furthermore, muscle-R1KO mice had a decreased mitochondrial DNA content (Fig. 1d).

Mitochondrial function was assessed by measuring the enzymatic activities of Cox (Supplementary Fig. 2a) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Staining of soleus muscle sections revealed a lower number of Cox- and SDH-positive muscle fibres and a decreased intensity of Cox and SDH staining in muscle-R1KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b).

### Decreased type I fibres and exercise capacity in muscle-R1KO

Muscle-R1KO mice had decreased molecules involved in type I fibre²⁴ differentiation myocyte enhancer factor 2C (Mef2c)²⁵ (Fig. 1b) as well as the type I fibre marker troponin I (slow) (Fig. 1e). In contrast, muscle-R1KO mice had almost the same expression levels of MHCIa, MHCIIx and MHCIIb as those seen in control mice (Supplementary Fig. 2c–e), indicating a reduction in oxidative, high endurance fibres in muscle-R1KO mice. These findings were consistent with the histological analysis performed (Fig. 1f, g). In soleus muscle of muscle-R1KO mice, type I fibres were reduced by 20% (Fig. 1g).

To study the effect of Adipor1 ablation on skeletal muscle function in intact animals, we challenged control and muscle-R1KO mice with involuntary physical-exercise-assessed muscle endurance by treadmill running. Muscle endurance was significantly lower for muscle-R1KO mice than control mice (Fig. 1h).

We next examined the expression of metabolic genes and found that molecules involved in fatty-acid oxidation, such as medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (Acadm), were significantly decreased in muscle-R1KO mice (Fig. 1b), which was associated with decreased β oxidation (Fig. 1i) and increased triglyceride content (Fig. 1j) in skeletal muscle.

Muscle-R1KO mice exhibited decreased expression levels of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic oxidative-stress-detoxifying genes such as manganese superoxide dismutase (Sod2) (Fig. 1b) and catalase (Cat) (Fig. 1b), respectively, and increased oxidative stress such as thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) (Fig. 1k) in muscle.

Expression of the insulin-sensitive glucose transporter 4 (Slc2a4) was reduced in muscle-R1KO mice (Fig. 1b).

### Insulin resistance in muscle-R1KO mice

Plasma glucose and insulin levels after glucose administration were significantly higher in muscle-R1KO mice than in control mice (Fig. 2a, b). The capacities of muscle-R1KO mice to regulate plasma glucose levels after a bolus of insulin were significantly decreased as compared with control mice (Fig. 2c).

We performed a hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp experiment. Disruption of Adipor1 in muscle did not significantly alter endogenous glucose production, whereas it significantly decreased the glucose disposal rate and the glucose infusion rate, indicating decreased insulin sensitivity in muscle (Fig. 2d–f).

In agreement with the data obtained from the hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamps, decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 (Fig. 2g) and decreased phosphorylation of Ser 473 in Akt (Fig. 2h) stimulated with insulin in skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice were found, which seemed to be associated with increased phosphorylation of S6K1 (Fig. 2i) and JNK (Fig. 2j). Ser 302 in mice IRS-1 has been reported to be phosphorylated by JNK²⁶, and the phosphorylation of Ser 636/639 has been reported to be mediated by mTOR and S6K1 pathways²⁷, both of which would result in inhibition of insulin signalling. The amounts of Ser 302 and Ser 636/639 phosphorylation in IRS-1 were increased in skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice (Fig. 2k, l).

### CaMKKβ is required for adiponectin/AdipoR1-induced PGC-1α

We next investigated the molecular mechanisms by which muscle-R1KO mice exhibited these phenotypes described earlier. Incubation of C2C12 myocytes with 30 μg ml⁻¹ adiponectin increased mitochondrial DNA content (Fig. 3a). AMPK activity is dependent on the phosphorylation of AMPKα(Thr 172) in its activation loop by AMPK kinases (AMPKKs)¹³,²⁸. LKB1 and CaMKKβ are known to be two major AMPKKs present in a variety of tissues and cells¹³,²⁹,³⁰. Suppression of AdipoR1 or CaMKKβ, or both AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 or PGC-1α expression by each specific short interfering RNA (siRNA) (Supplementary Fig. 3a–e) markedly reduced the increases in mitochondrial DNA content induced by adiponectin (Fig. 3a). In contrast, the suppression of AdipoR2 expression by

Figure 1 | Decreased mitochondria, oxidative type I myofibres and exercise capacity in skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice.
a–k, Phosphorylation and amount of AMPK (a), Ppargc1a, Esrra, Nrf1, Tfam, Cycs, mt-Co2, Mef2c, Acadm, Sod2, Cat and Slc2a4 mRNA levels (b), PGC-1α protein levels (c), mitochondrial content as assessed by mitochondrial DNA copy number (d), amounts of troponin I (slow) protein (e), ATPase (pH 4.3 for type I fibres) staining of soleus muscles (scale bars, 100 µm) (f), quantification of type I fibres (g) based on fibre-type analyses (f), exercise endurance (h), β oxidation (i), triglyceride content (j), and TBARS (k) in skeletal muscle (a–g, i–k) obtained from control or muscle-R1KO after 5 h fasting. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. n = 5–12, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 compared to control mice.

NATURE | Vol 464 | 29 April 2010

**Figure 2 | Mechanisms of abnormal glucose and insulin homeostasis in muscle-R1KO mice.**

a–f, Plasma glucose (a, c) and plasma insulin (b) during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) (1.5 g glucose per kg body weight) (a, b) or during an insulin tolerance test (ITT) (0.25 U insulin per kg body weight) (c), endogenous glucose production (EGP) (d), rates of glucose disposal (Rd) (e) and glucose infusion rate (GIR) (f) during a hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp study in control and muscle-R1KO mice.

g–l, Phosphorylation of tyrosine (pTyr) (g), Ser 302 (k) and Ser 636/639 (l) in IRS-1, phosphorylation and amount of Akt (h), S6K1 (i) and JNK (j) in skeletal muscle treated with or without insulin (0.3 U per kg body weight) for 7.5 min in control and muscle-R1KO mice after 5 h fasting. IB, immunoblot; IP, immunoprecipitate. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. $n = 6–15$ from 3–5 independent experiments, $*P < 0.05$ and $**P < 0.01$ compared to control or as indicated. NS, not significant.

specific siRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3f) failed to significantly reduce mitochondrial biogenesis induced by adiponectin (Fig. 3a).

Suppression of AdipoR1 or CaMKKβ expression by each specific siRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b) greatly reduced the increase in PGC-1α expression induced by adiponectin (Fig. 3b). Interestingly, the suppression of AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 expression by each specific siRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3c, d) failed to significantly reduce PGC-1α expression induced by adiponectin (Fig. 3b), suggesting that PGC-1α expression was induced by adiponectin via an AdipoR1- and CaMKKβ-dependent yet AMPK-independent pathway.

PGC-1α has been reported to be activated by AMPK via phosphorylation³¹ and by deacetylation through SIRT1 activation³². We next addressed the possibility that AMPK activated by adiponectin and AdipoR1 could regulate PGC-1α activities. Treatment of C2C12 myocytes with adiponectin decreased PGC-1α acetylation after 2 h of treatment (Fig. 3c). Suppression of AdipoR1 or both AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 or SIRT1 expression by each specific siRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3a, c, d, g) largely abrogated the decrease in PGC-1α acetylation induced by adiponectin (Fig. 3c). The PGC-1α-2A mutant lacking the two AMPK phosphorylation sites³¹ showed markedly reduced PGC-1α deacetylation and mitochondrial biogenesis with adiponectin (Fig. 3d, e).

Adiponectin failed to induce mitochondrial biogenesis further in the C2C12 myocytes expressing PGC-1α-R13 in which 13 of the potential lysine acetylation sites were mutated into arginine³² (Fig. 3f). Because the capacity for undergoing acetylation is impaired in the PGC-1α-R13 mutant, these data are consistent with the dependence of adiponectin on SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of PGC-1α in activating PGC-1α.

SIRT1 deacetylase activity has been reported to be driven by NAD⁺ levels³²,³³. Adiponectin increased the NAD⁺/NADH ratio in C2C12 myocytes (Fig. 3g). Muscle-R1KO mice also showed increased PGC-1α acetylation (Fig. 3h) and decreased the NAD⁺/NADH ratio stimulated with adiponectin (Fig. 3i) *in vivo*. These data indicated that the total activity as assessed by multiplying expression and deacetylation of PGC-1α is markedly reduced in muscle-R1KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 4).

**Adiponectin induces Ca²⁺ influx by AdipoR1**

Interestingly, treatment of C2C12 myocytes with adiponectin resulted in an increase in the intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration measured by fura-2-based fluorescent imaging (Fig. 4a). C2C12 myocytes showed responses to adiponectin in a dose-dependent manner (data not shown). Removal of extracellular free Ca²⁺ by EGTA almost completely abolished the adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ response (Fig. 4a), whereas EGTA had no effect on the ATP-induced intracellular Ca²⁺ release (data not shown). Suppression of AdipoR1 expression using a specific siRNA (Fig. 4b) largely reduced the calcium response of C2C12 myocytes to adiponectin (Fig. 4c, d). These results indicate that the influx of extracellular Ca²⁺ after adiponectin treatment of C2C12 myocytes is mediated by AdipoR1.

To study further the importance of AdipoR1 for adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ response in the gain-of-function experiments, we expressed AdipoR1 in Xenopus laevis oocytes (Fig. 4e). The increase in intracellular calcium levels stimulated with adiponectin was detected by monitoring Ca²⁺-activated Cl⁻ currents in AdipoR1 complementary-RNA-injected oocytes (Fig. 4f, g). The responses were not observed in control oocytes (Fig. 4g). We studied the effect of removal of extracellular free Ca²⁺ by EGTA on the Ca²⁺-activated Cl⁻ current response to adiponectin of Xenopus oocytes expressing AdipoR1. We found that the removal of extracellular free Ca²⁺ by EGTA almost completely abolished the Ca²⁺-activated Cl⁻ current response to adiponectin of Xenopus oocytes expressing AdipoR1 (Fig. 4g), indicating that these responses were dependent on extracellular Ca²⁺.

**Adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ influx is important for its actions**

Incubation of C2C12 myocytes with adiponectin increased the phosphorylation of the AMPK α-subunit at Thr 172, and EGTA partially suppressed adiponectin-induced increased AMPK phosphorylation (Fig. 5a). As expected, EGTA almost completely abolished ionomycin-dependent phosphorylation of AMPK, whereas EGTA had no effect on 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-D-riboside (AICAR)-induced phosphorylation of AMPK in C2C12 myocytes (Fig. 5a).

Suppression of CaMKKβ or LKB1 expression by each specific siRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3b, h) significantly reduced the increases in

ARTICLES

Figure 3 | Adiponectin/AdipoR1 increase PGC-1α expression and activity, and mitochondrial biogenesis in C2C12 myocytes.

a–i, Mitochondrial content as assessed by mitochondrial DNA copy number (a, e, f), *Ppargc1a* mRNA levels (b), acetyl-lysine (Ac-Lys) levels checked on PGC-1α or Flag immunoprecipitates (c, d, h), NAD⁺/NADH ratio (g, i) in C2C12 myocytes treated with adiponectin for the times indicated (g), in C2C12 myocytes transfected with the indicated siRNA duplex (a–c), in C2C12 myocytes transfected with the wild-type or the 2A mutant form of PGC-1α (d, e) or the R13 mutant form of PGC-1α (f) treated with 10 μg ml⁻¹ adiponectin for 48 h (a, e, f) or for 1.5 h (b) or 2 h (c, d), or in skeletal muscle from control or muscle-R1KO mice treated with or without adiponectin (h, i). The supernatant was blotted against GAPDH as an input control (c, d, h). C2C12 myocytes were used after myogenic differentiation in all experiments. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. n = 5–10, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 compared to control or unrelated siRNA or as indicated.

phosphorylation of AMPK induced by adiponectin (Fig. 5b). Although the AMPK inhibitor AraA only tended to reduce adiponectin-induced PGC-1α expression, Ca²⁺ removal by EGTA or inhibition of CaMKKβ with its selective inhibitor STO-609 (ref. 34) effectively and almost completely abolished increased PGC-1α expression stimulated with adiponectin in C2C12 myocytes (Fig. 5c), as removal of extracellular Ca²⁺ effectively abolishes the Ca²⁺ signal evoked by adiponectin (Fig. 4a).

Finally, we examined whether adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ influxes into skeletal muscle might be impaired in muscle-R1KO mice through *in vivo* imaging³⁵,³⁶. We found that whereas treatment of soleus muscle with adiponectin resulted in an increase in the intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration as measured by fura-2-based fluorescent imaging in control mice, muscle-R1KO mice almost completely abrogated the calcium response of soleus muscle to adiponectin (Fig. 5d–f), consistent with the observation that adiponectin significantly increased the phosphorylation of CaMKI³⁷,³⁸, an intracellular substrate of CaMKKβ, by AdipoR1 in skeletal muscle *in vivo* (Supplementary Fig. 5).

We also attempted to examine whether simultaneous activation of Ca²⁺ signalling and AMPK/SIRT1 pathways by exercise, independent of AdipoR1, could rescue phenotype in muscle-R1KO mice. Two weeks of exercise significantly ameliorated insulin resistance, and increased mitochondrial content and function such as citrate synthase activities in muscles of muscle-R1KO mice (Fig. 6a–d).

### Discussion

Here we provide evidence that muscle-R1KO mice exhibit decreased mitochondrial content and enzymes. PGC-1α is a key regulator of mitochondrial content and function. Expression of PGC-1α has been reported to be modulated in several physiological contexts, for example, in skeletal muscle in response to exercise partly by increased Ca²⁺ signalling via molecules such as CaMK and CREB³⁹. Activities of PGC-1α have also been reported to be modulated by several kinds of PGC-1α modifications, such as phosphorylation by AMPK³¹ and deacetylation by AMPK and SIRT1³². AMPK and SIRT1 could also be activated by exercise. We have demonstrated that muscle-R1KO mice exhibit decreased PGC-1α expression as well as decreased deacetylation of PGC-1α. Consistent with this, adiponectin induced Ca²⁺ influx by AdipoR1, thereby activating CaMKKβ, which led to increased PGC-1α expression. Moreover, adiponectin/AdipoR1 activated AMPK and SIRT1, thereby inducing PGC-1α deacetylation. These data indicated that adiponectin and AdipoR1 stimulate increases in both the expression and activation of PGC-1α, in a similar fashion to exercise (Fig. 6e).

Although the degree of decreased PGC-1α expression was approximately 40% in muscle-R1KO mice, the extent of decreased mitochondrial biogenesis and decreased exercise endurance were comparable to those observed in muscle-specific PGC-1α-knockout mice⁴⁰, which may be explained by the finding that adiponectin and AdipoR1 increase not only PGC-1α expression but also PGC-1α activity (Fig. 6e).

Importantly, decreases in the expression of AdipoR1 and PGC-1α and mitochondrial DNA content were also observed in type 2 diabetic patients⁴¹ and individuals at increased risk of developing diabetes owing to their family history⁴², as well as in obese diabetic *db/db* mice (Supplementary Fig. 6a–c). These data indicate that decreased

NATURE | Vol 464 | 29 April 2010

ARTICLES

**Figure 4 | Adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ influx by AdipoR1 in C2C12 myocytes and Xenopus oocytes.**

a, Pseudocoloured images of changes in fura-2 before and after 1 min stimulation with adiponectin (30 μg ml⁻¹). Red corresponds to the greatest response. The bottom trace demonstrates the average calcium response of C2C12 myocytes to 1-min stimulation with adiponectin along with application of 5 mM EGTA (black bar). The shaded region around the trace represents s.e.m.

b–d, *Adipor1* mRNA levels (b), fura-2 calcium response (c) and their magnitude (d) of C2C12 myocytes transfected with unrelated siRNA duplex or AdipoR1 siRNA duplex to stimulation with 30 μg ml⁻¹ adiponectin for 1 min.

e–g, The amounts of AdipoR1 protein (e), representative Ca²⁺-activated Cl⁻ current traces (f) before (left) and after (right) 30-s application of adiponectin, and their magnitude (g) in Xenopus oocytes injected with or without *Adipor1* cRNA in response to adiponectin (30 μg ml⁻¹), and with or without application of 5 mM EGTA with depolarizing pulses of +100 mV. [Ca²⁺]i and [Ca²⁺]e, intracellular and external Ca²⁺ concentration, respectively. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. n = 6–14, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 compared to unrelated siRNA cells or control cells or as indicated.


**Figure 5 | Adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ influx is required for CaMKK and AMPK activation and PGC-1α expression.**

a, b, Phosphorylation and amount of AMPK in C2C12 myocytes preincubated for 20 min with or without 5 mM EGTA and then treated for 5 min with adiponectin (30 μg ml⁻¹) or ionomycin (1 μM), or for 1 h with AICAR (1 mM) (a), or C2C12 myocytes transfected with the indicated siRNA duplex and then treated with 30 μg ml⁻¹ adiponectin for 5 min (b).

c, Amount of *Pparγ1a* mRNA in C2C12 myocytes preincubated for 1 h with AraA (0.5 mM) or for 6 h with STO-609 (1 μg ml⁻¹) or for 20 min with EGTA (5 mM), and then treated for 1.5 h with or without adiponectin (10 μg ml⁻¹).

d, Representative pseudocoloured images of changes in the fura-2 calcium response before and after 5 min stimulation with adiponectin (30 μg ml⁻¹) in a soleus muscle from control mice (top) and muscle-R1KO mice (bottom). Red corresponds to the greatest response. Scale bars, 100 μm.

e, Trace demonstrates the calcium response of soleus muscle in the fields presented in d. Adiponectin was applied during the indicated period.

f, The magnitude of fura-2 calcium response signals by 160-s adiponectin stimulation to soleus muscles. ΔF ratio indicates the change in the fluorescence ratio after adiponectin application. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. n = 5–10, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 compared to control or unrelated siRNA cells or as indicated.

ARTICLES

Figure 6 | The effect of exercise on muscle-R1KO mice. a–d, The insulin resistance index (a), area under the curves (AUC) of plasma glucose levels during the ITT (b), mitochondrial content as assessed by mitochondrial DNA copy number (c), and citrate synthase (CS) enzyme activity (d) in skeletal muscle of control and muscle-R1KO mice after 2 weeks exercise. The results are expressed as the percentage of the value in control littermates (a, b). e, Scheme illustrating the signal transduction of adiponectin/AdipoR1 in muscle cells. Both CaMKKβ and LKB1 are necessary for adiponectin-induced full AMPK activation. AMPK and SIRT1 are required for adiponectin/AdipoR1-induced PGC-1α activation. CaMKKβ activation by adiponectin-induced Ca²⁺ influx via AdipoR1 is required for adiponectin/AdipoR1 in pathophysiological conditions such as obesity may have causal roles in the development of PGC-1α dysregulation and mitochondrial dysfunction.

In skeletal muscle AdipoR1 regulated insulin sensitivity by several mechanisms (Supplementary Fig. 7). First is the activation of S6K1, which has been reported to be able to cause insulin resistance by increased phosphorylation of Ser 636/639 in IRS-1 (ref. 27). S6K1 is crucially inhibited by AMPK⁴³. In skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice, AMPK activation was reduced, whereas activation of S6K1 and phosphorylation of Ser 636/639 in IRS-1 were indeed increased. Second is the increased oxidative stress, which has been causally linked to insulin resistance⁴⁴ by increased phosphorylation of Ser 302 in IRS-1 through JNK activation²⁶. Several oxidative stress detoxification genes are crucially regulated by AMPK and PGC-1α⁴⁵, and the expression levels of these genes such as *Sod2* and *Cat* were reduced, which was associated with increased TBARS in skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice. Third is the increased triglyceride content, which has been associated with insulin resistance by increased phosphorylation of Ser 302 in IRS-1 through JNK activation²⁶. Molecules involved in fatty-acid oxidation are crucially regulated by AMPK and PGC-1α, and the expression levels of these genes such as *Mcad* were reduced, which was associated with increased triglyceride content in skeletal muscle of muscle-R1KO mice. Consistent with increased TBARS and triglyceride content, JNK activation and phosphorylation of Ser 302 in IRS-1 were indeed increased.

Exercise has been reported to have beneficial effects on longevity and lifestyle-related diseases, and at the same time to activate Ca²⁺, AMPK, SIRT1 and PGC-1α pathways³⁹. In this study, we clearly demonstrated that adiponectin and AdipoR1 regulate PGC-1α and mitochondria via Ca²⁺ and AMPK/SIRT1. Therefore, agonism of AdipoR1 as well as strategies to increase AdipoR1 in muscle could be exercise-mimetics.

induced increased PGC-1α expression. PGC-1α is required for mitochondrial biogenesis stimulated with adiponectin/AdipoR1. From these data, we conclude that adiponectin and AdipoR1 increase PGC-1α expression and activity by Ca²⁺ signalling and by AMPK and SIRT1, leading to increased mitochondrial biogenesis. We focused on the molecules that we have obtained direct evidence by both gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments *in vitro* and *in vivo*, except for CaMK, which has already been reported to increase PGC-1α expression by other researchers³⁹. AC, acetylation. All values are presented as mean ± s.e.m. *n* = 5–8, \**P* < 0.05 and \*\**P* < 0.01 compared to control mice or as indicated.

In conclusion, AdipoR1 has a crucial role in the physiological and pathophysiological significance of adiponectin in muscle, and is involved in the regulation of Ca²⁺ signalling, PGC-1α expression and activation, mitochondrial function and oxidative stress, glucose and lipid metabolism, and exercise endurance. This study suggests that agonism of AdipoR1, as well as strategies to increase AdipoR1 in muscle, may be logical approaches to providing a new treatment modality for mitochondrial dysfunction, insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes linked to obesity.

### METHODS SUMMARY

**Mice.** Mice were 8–10 weeks of age at the time of the experiment. The animal care and use procedures were approved by the Animal Care Committee of the University of Tokyo.

**Measurement of exercise capacity in muscle-R1KO mice.** The treadmill exercise test regimen was 15 m min⁻¹ for 20 min. Exercise endurance was assessed by dividing 20 min by the number of times a mouse was unable to avoid electrical shocks.

**Studies with C2C12 cells.** Induction of myogenic differentiation was carried out according to a method described previously¹¹. By day 5, the cells had differentiated into multinucleated contracting myocytes. C2C12 myocytes were used after myogenic differentiation in all experiments.

**Plasmids.** The plasmids encoding PGC-1α and the PGC-1α-2A mutant were generous gifts from B. M. Spiegelman, and have all been described previously³¹. The plasmids encoding for the PGC-1α-R13 mutant were generous gifts from P. Puigserver, and have all been described previously³².

**Statistical analysis.** Results are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Differences between two groups were assessed using unpaired two-tailed *t*-tests. Data involving more than two groups were assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA).

Received 12 August 2009; accepted 11 March 2010.  
Published online 31 March 2010.

1. Scherer, P. E., Williams, S., Fogliano, M., Baldini, G. & Lodish, H. F. A novel serum protein similar to C1q, produced exclusively in adipocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 26746–26749 (1995).

2. Hu, E., Liang, P. & Spiegelman, B. M. AdipoQ is a novel adipose-specific gene dysregulated in obesity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 10697–10703 (1996).
3. Maeda, K. *et al.* cDNA cloning and expression of a novel adipose specific collagen-like factor, apM1 (AdiPose Most abundant Gene transcript 1). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 221, 286–289 (1996).
4. Nakano, Y., Tobe, T., Choi-Miura, N.-H., Mazda, T. & Tomita, M. Isolation and characterization of GBP28, a novel gelatin-binding protein purified from human plasma. *J. Biochem.* 120, 803–812 (1996).
5. Hotta, K. *et al.* Plasma concentrations of a novel, adipose-specific protein, adiponectin, in type 2 diabetic patients. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* 20, 1595–1599 (2000).
6. Fruebis, J. *et al.* Proteolytic cleavage product of 30-kDa adipocyte complement-related protein increases fatty acid oxidation in muscle and causes weight loss in mice. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 98, 2005–2010 (2001).
7. Yamauchi, T. *et al.* The fat-derived hormone adiponectin reverses insulin resistance associated with both lipoatrophy and obesity. *Nature Med.* 7, 941–946 (2001).
8. Berg, A. H., Combs, T. P., Du, X., Brownlee, M. & Scherer, P. E. The adipocyte-secreted protein Acrp30 enhances hepatic insulin action. *Nature Med.* 7, 947–953 (2001).
9. Kubota, N. *et al.* Disruption of adiponectin causes insulin resistance and neointimal formation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 25863–25866 (2002).
10. Maeda, N. *et al.* Diet-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking adiponectin/ACRP30. *Nature Med.* 8, 731–737 (2002).
11. Yamauchi, T. *et al.* Adiponectin stimulates glucose utilization and fatty-acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase. *Nature Med.* 8, 1288–1295 (2002).
12. Tomas, E. *et al.* Enhanced muscle fat oxidation and glucose transport by ACRP30 globular domain: acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibition and AMP-activated protein kinase activation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 99, 16309–16313 (2002).
13. Kahn, B. B., Alquier, T., Carling, D. & Hardie, D. G. AMP-activated protein kinase: ancient energy gauge provides clues to modern understanding of metabolism. *Cell Metab.* 1, 15–25 (2005).
14. Kersten, S., Desvergne, B. & Wahli, W. Roles of PPARs in health and disease. *Nature* 405, 421–424 (2000).
15. Yamauchi, T. *et al.* Globular adiponectin protected ob/ob mice from diabetes and apoE deficient mice from atherosclerosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 2461–2468 (2003).
16. Yamauchi, T. *et al.* Cloning of adiponectin receptors that mediate antidiabetic metabolic effects. *Nature* 423, 762–769 (2003).
17. Wess, J. G-protein-coupled receptors: molecular mechanisms involved in receptor activation and selectivity of G-protein recognition. *FASEB J.* 11, 346–354 (1997).
18. Yokomizo, T., Izumi, T., Chang, K., Takuwa, Y. & Shimizu, T. A. G-protein-coupled receptor for leukotriene B4 that mediates chemotaxis. *Nature* 387, 620–624 (1997).
19. Scheer, A., Fanelli, F., Costa, T., De Benedetti, P. G. & Cotecchia, S. Constitutively active mutants of the α1B-adrenergic receptor: role of highly conserved polar amino acids in receptor activation. *EMBO J.* 15, 3566–3578 (1996).
20. Yamauchi, T. *et al.* Targeted disruption of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 causes abrogation of adiponectin binding and metabolic actions. *Nature Med.* 13, 332–339 (2007).
21. Petersen, K. F. *et al.* Impaired mitochondrial activity in the insulin-resistant offspring of patients with type 2 diabetes. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 350, 664–671 (2004).
22. Wu, Z. *et al.* Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1. *Cell* 98, 115–124 (1999).
23. Mootha, V. K. *et al.* Errα and Gabpa/b specify PGC-1α-dependent oxidative phosphorylation gene expression that is altered in diabetic muscle. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 6570–6575 (2004).
24. Berchtold, M. W. *et al.* Calcium ion in skeletal muscle: its crucial role for muscle function, plasticity, and disease. *Physiol. Rev.* 80, 1215–1265 (2000).
25. Wu, H. *et al.* MEF2 responds to multiple calcium-regulated signals in the control of skeletal muscle fiber type. *EMBO J.* 19, 1963–1973 (2000).
26. Hotamisligil, G. S. Inflammation and metabolic disorders. *Nature* 444, 860–867 (2006).
27. Um, S. H. *et al.* Absence of S6K1 protects against age- and diet-induced obesity while enhancing insulin sensitivity. *Nature* 431, 200–205 (2004).
28. Hawley, S. A. *et al.* Characterization of the AMP-activated protein kinase kinase from rat liver and identification of threonine 172 as the major site at which it phosphorylates AMP-activated protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 27879–27887 (1996).
29. Hawley, S. A. *et al.* Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase β is an alternative upstream kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. *Cell Metab.* 2, 9–19 (2005).
30. Woods, A. *et al.* Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-β acts upstream of AMP-activated protein kinase in mammalian cells. *Cell Metab.* 2, 21–33 (2005).
31. Jäger, S., Handschin, C., St-Pierre, J. & Spiegelman, B. M. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) action in skeletal muscle via direct phosphorylation of PGC-1α. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 104, 12017–12022 (2007).
32. Rodgers, J. T. *et al.* Nutrient control of glucose homeostasis through a complex of PGC-1α and SIRT1. *Nature* 434, 113–118 (2005).
33. Guarente, L. Sirtuins as potential targets for metabolic syndrome. *Nature* 444, 868–874 (2006).
34. Tokumitsu, H. *et al.* STO-609, a specific inhibitor of the Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 15813–15818 (2002).
35. Tóth, A. *et al.* Quantitative assessment of [Ca²⁺] levels in rat skeletal muscle *in vivo*. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* 275, H1652–H1662 (1998).
36. Shkryl, V. M. & Shirokova, N. Transfer and tunneling of Ca²⁺ from sarcoplasmic reticulum to mitochondria in skeletal muscle. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 1547–1554 (2006).
37. Anderson, K. A. *et al.* Components of a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase cascade. Molecular cloning, functional characterization and cellular localization of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase beta. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 31880–31889 (1998).
38. Soderling, T. R. The Ca-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase cascade. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 24, 232–236 (1999).
39. Handschin, C. & Spiegelman, B. M. The role of exercise and PGC1α in inflammation and chronic disease. *Nature* 454, 463–469 (2008).
40. Handschin, C. *et al.* Skeletal muscle fiber-type switching, exercise intolerance, and myopathy in PGC-1α muscle-specific knock-out animals. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 30014–30021 (2007).
41. Mootha, V. K. *et al.* PGC-1α-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. *Nature Genet.* 34, 267–273 (2003).
42. Patti, M. E. *et al.* Coordinated reduction of genes of oxidative metabolism in humans with insulin resistance and diabetes: Potential role of PGC1 and NRF1. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 8466–8471 (2003).
43. Wang, C. *et al.* Adiponectin sensitizes insulin signaling by reducing p70 S6 kinase-mediated serine phosphorylation of IRS-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 7991–7996 (2007).
44. Houstis, N., Rosen, E. D. & Lander, E. S. Reactive oxygen species have a causal role in multiple forms of insulin resistance. *Nature* 440, 944–948 (2006).
45. St-Pierre, J. *et al.* Suppression of reactive oxygen species and neurodegeneration by the PGC-1 transcriptional coactivators. *Cell* 127, 397–408 (2006).

Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Acknowledgements We thank B. M. Spiegelman for critical discussions and reading of the manuscript; T. Yokomizo for discussion and support; A. Tsuchida, K. Hara, Y. Hada, Y. Nio, T. Maki, T. Takazawa, Y. Iwata, M. Kobayashi, S. Kawamoto, K. Kobayashi, K. Hirota, Y. Shiomi, T. Mitsumatsu, L. Hirose, Y. Sea, M. Nakamura and K. Take for technical help and support; and S. Suzuki, K. Miyata, C. Ueda, A. Itoh and A. Okano for technical assistance. This work was supported by Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research (S) (20229008) (to T.K.), (B) (20390254) (to T.Y.), Targeted Proteins Research Program (to T.K.), the Global COE Research Program (to T.K.) and Translational Systems Biology and Medicine Initiative (to T.K.) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

Author Contributions M.I., M.O.-I., T.Y., K.S., T.N., M.F., M.Y., S.N., R.N., M.T., H.O., N.K., I.T., Y.K.H. and N.Y. performed experiments. T.K. and T.Y. conceived and supervised the study. K.T., T.S. and K.H. supervised the study. T.Y., T.K., M.I. and M.O-I. wrote the paper. All authors interpreted data.

Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.K. (kadowaki-3im@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp) or T.Y. (tyamau-tky@umin.net).
