
LETTERS

# NINJA connects the co-repressor TOPLESS to jasmonate signalling

Laurens Pauwels${}^{1,2*}$, Gemma Fernández Barbero${}^{3*}$, Jan Geerinck${}^{1,2*}$, Sofie Tillerman${}^{1,2}$, Wim Grunewald${}^{1,2,5}$, Amparo Cuéllar Pérez${}^{1,2}$, José Manuel Chico${}^{3}$, Robin Vanden Bossche${}^{1,2}$, Jared Sewell${}^{6}$, Eduardo Gil${}^{4}$, Gloria García-Casado${}^{4}$, Erwin Witters${}^{7,8}$, Dirk Inzé${}^{1,2}$, Jeff A. Long${}^{6}$, Geert De Jaeger${}^{1,2}$, Roberto Solano${}^{3,4}$ & Alain Goossens${}^{1,2}$

Jasmonoyl-isoleucine (JA-Ile) is a plant hormone that regulates a broad array of plant defence and developmental processes ${}^{1-5}$. JA-Ile-responsive gene expression is regulated by the transcriptional activator MYC2 that interacts physically with the jasmonate ZIM-domain (JAZ) repressor proteins. On perception of JA-Ile, JAZ proteins are degraded and JA-Ile-dependent gene expression is activated ${}^{6,7}$. The molecular mechanisms by which JAZ proteins repress gene expression remain unknown. Here we show that the *Arabidopsis* JAZ proteins recruit the Groucho/Tup1-type co-repressor TOPLESS (TPL) ${}^{8}$ and TPL-related proteins (TPRs) through a previously uncharacterized adaptor protein, designated Novel Interactor of JAZ (NINJA). NINJA acts as a transcriptional repressor whose activity is mediated by a functional TPL-binding EAR repression motif. Accordingly, both NINJA and TPL proteins function as negative regulators of jasmonate responses. Our results point to TPL proteins as general co-repressors that affect multiple signalling pathways through the interaction with specific adaptor proteins. This new insight reveals how stress-related and growth-related signalling cascades use common molecular mechanisms to regulate gene expression in plants.

JA-Ile signal transduction is controlled by a Skp1/Cullin/F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase whose F-box subunit is encoded by CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1 (COI1) ${}^{9}$. Recently, the JAZ proteins have been identified as the targets of SCF${}^{\text{COI1}}$ (refs 6, 7). In the presence of (+)-7-iso-JA-L-Ile, the endogenous bioactive hormone, JAZ proteins interact with COI1 and are subsequently degraded by the 26S proteasome ${}^{6,7,10,11}$. In an unelicited state, JAZ proteins bind the transcription factor MYC2 and inactivate its function ${}^{6}$. Hormone-triggered removal of JAZ proteins releases MYC2, enabling the transcriptional activator to regulate the expression of early jasmonate-responsive genes, including the JAZ genes ${}^{6,7,12,13}$.

Here, tandem affinity purification (TAP) was applied to isolate the core jasmonate signalling module and to find new JAZ interactors. We used a recently established TAP technology platform that allows the efficient isolation and identification of protein complexes from *Arabidopsis* cells ${}^{14}$. For the simultaneous visualization of the dynamics of JAZ complex assembly, TAP was performed with cell cultures elicited or not with jasmonic acid (JA). Because JAZ degradation on treatment with JA has been reported to be very rapid ${}^{15}$, we first investigated JAZ degradation kinetics in our model system. A cycloheximide chase experiment revealed an estimated half-life of 1.4 min for a JAZ1–firefly luciferase (fLUC) fusion protein on treatment with JA (Supplementary Fig. 1). Next, JAZ1 was carboxy-terminally fused to a TAP tag and expressed under a cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter in *Arabidopsis* cells. To avoid full degradation of the tagged bait, cell cultures producing JAZ1–TAP were harvested 1 min after treatment with JA. Several proteins already shown to interact with JAZ1 were identified (Fig. 1a), validating the approach (for the mass-spectrometry-driven identification of candidate interactors; see Supplementary Table 1). First, JAZ1 formed a complex with JAZ12, matching the reported dimerization of JAZ proteins ${}^{16,17}$. Second, interaction of JAZ1 with MYC3, a close relative to MYC2, was observed. Last, COI1 occurred in a complex with JAZ1, but only in the presence of JA, showing that TAP is applicable for the identification of ligand-mediated protein–protein interactions.

We focused on an uncharacterized protein isolated in the TAP analysis (Fig. 1a), hereafter designated NINJA, and encoded by the locus At4g28910. NINJA is related to the ABI-FIVE BINDING PROTEIN (AFP) family, which consists of four members in *Arabidopsis* ${}^{18}$. Whereas abscisic acid (ABA) induces the expression of AFP genes in *Arabidopsis* seedlings ${}^{18}$, NINJA expression is induced by methyl jasmonate (MeJA) within 1 h and for at least 12 h after elicitation (Supplementary Fig. 2). This pattern corresponds to that of the previously identified NINJA homologue of tobacco (*Nicotiana tabacum*) in a screen for MeJA-inducible transcripts ${}^{19}$.

In parallel, we performed yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) library screens with JAZ2 and JAZ3 as baits, and both identified NINJA as a direct interactor. Systematic Y2H analysis of the specificity of NINJA for JAZ proteins revealed interactions with most JAZ proteins; the exceptions were JAZ7 and JAZ8 (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Furthermore, other ZIM-domain proteins, containing the TIFY (TIF[F/Y]XG) motif and belonging to the group II TIFY proteins ${}^{20}$, such as PEAPOD 1 (PPD1), PPD2 and TIFY8, interacted with NINJA (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Additionally, we checked whether AFP proteins could bind JAZ proteins, but neither AFP2 nor AFP3 interacted with JAZ1 (Supplementary Fig. 4b), suggesting the specificity of JAZ proteins for NINJA.

Besides the TIFY motif, JAZ proteins have a C-terminal conserved Jas domain, which is involved in the interaction with both MYC2 and COI1 (refs 6, 11, 21). Y2H with a JAZ1 deletion series revealed that NINJA was only capable of binding JAZ1 fragments containing the TIFY motif. Moreover, a 39-amino-acid fragment holding the conserved TIFY motif was sufficient for the binding of NINJA (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 4c). Consistently, NINJA did not interact

1 Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Technologiepark 927, B-9052 Gent, Belgium. ${}^{2}$Department of Plant Biotechnology and Genetics, Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, B-9052 Gent, Belgium. ${}^{3}$Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, ${}^{4}$Genomics Unit, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología-CSIC, Campus Universidad Autónoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain. ${}^{5}$Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Gent, Belgium. ${}^{6}$Plant Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. ${}^{7}$Department of Biology, EBT-CEPROMA, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B-2020 Antwerpen, Belgium. ${}^{8}$Flemish Institute for Technological Research VITO-MANT, Boeretang 200, B-2400 Mol, Belgium. *These authors contributed equally to this work.

NATURE|Vol 464|1 April 2010

Knockout T-DNA insertion lines for NINJA were not available from the *Arabidopsis* database (http://www.arabidopsis.org). We therefore generated transgenic *Arabidopsis* lines expressing full-length NINJA or NINJA hairpin RNA-mediated interference (RNAi) constructs, both under control of the CaMV 35S promoter (Supplementary Fig. 6a, b). NINJA overexpression significantly decreased JA sensitivity, as reflected by an impaired inhibition of root growth in the transgenic plants (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 2). An *in vitro* degradation experiment with extracts from NINJA overexpression lines showed that this phenotype could not be explained by protection of JAZ proteins from degradation (Supplementary Fig. 7), which could account for the phenotype caused by truncated JAZ3 proteins in the *jai3* mutant⁶. Conversely, NINJA knockdown lines showed a derepressed response to JA. Microarray analysis revealed that, even without exogenous hormone treatment, NINJA knockdown lines overexpressed many known early jasmonate-responsive genes (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Table 3). This effect was even more prominent when plants were treated with the JA-Ile mimic coronatine (Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Table 4). Consistently, a slight increase in JA-mediated inhibition of root growth was observed in NINJA knockdown lines (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 2). Taken together, these results indicate that NINJA functions as a negative regulator of jasmonate signalling.

To investigate NINJA function in JA signalling, we set up a new TAP experiment with NINJA as bait. NINJA was present in a complex with the Groucho/Tup1-type co-repressor TPL and its homologues TPR2 and TPR3, independently of JA elicitation (Supplementary Table 5). Furthermore, MYC3 and the group II TIFY proteins JAZ12 and PPD2 were also identified, confirming the previous interaction data (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Figs 3 and 4).

TPL interacts directly with the amino-terminal ethylene-responsive element binding factor-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif of the AUX/IAA protein IAA12 (ref. 8). The EAR motif is a hallmark of transcriptional repressors and is encountered in most AUX/IAA proteins²². Correspondingly, scanning of the NINJA amino-acid sequence revealed an EAR motif in domain A (Supplementary Fig. 9), suggesting a direct interaction between the EAR protein NINJA and TPL, a hypothesis that was confirmed by Y2H and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 10). Removal of domain A did not affect the interaction with JAZ1 (Fig. 1c) but abolished that with TPL; this also occurred when three Leu residues were mutated to Ala in the NINJA EAR motif (mEAR; Fig. 3a). Moreover, domain A of NINJA was sufficient for the interaction with TPL (Fig. 3a). The association of TPL with the JAZ protein complex

with a JAZ1 protein fusion lacking the TIFYAG sequence (residues 128–133; Δtify) (Fig. 1b). Pull-down experiments with JAZ–maltose-binding protein (JAZ–MBP) fusion proteins and extracts of transgenic plants expressing NINJA fused to green fluorescent protein (NINJA–GFP) confirmed the Y2H observations. NINJA was pulled down by all JAZ–MBP fusion proteins except JAZ7, JAZ11 and JAZ12 (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Moreover, by using JAZ3 derivatives, only the fragment containing the TIFY motif (JAZ3ΔC) was able to pull down NINJA–GFP (Supplementary Fig. 3b). NINJA–GFP did not interact with NINJA–MBP, COI1–MBP or MYC2–MBP in these pull-down experiments (Supplementary Fig. 3b).

NINJA and all AFP proteins are characterized by three conserved protein domains designated A, B and C. Functionality has been described only for the C domain, which has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for binding of the AFP proteins with the bZIP transcription factor ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 5 (ABI5)¹⁸. A deletion series of NINJA was constructed (Fig. 1c) and tested for JAZ1 interaction, showing that the C domain of NINJA was responsible and sufficient for JAZ protein interaction. Finally, the 39-residue protein fragment harbouring the TIFY motif of JAZ1 interacted directly with the C domain of NINJA (Supplementary Fig. 4d).

Analysis of seedlings producing a C-terminal GFP fusion with NINJA revealed a clear nuclear localization for NINJA (Supplementary Fig. 5), as had already been shown for both AFP and JAZ proteins⁶,⁷,¹⁵,¹⁸. Furthermore, NINJA–GFP levels remained constant for 3 h after treatment with jasmonate, whereas a JAZ1–GFP fusion was nearly undetectable only 5 min after the application of jasmonate (Supplementary Fig. 5), suggesting that, unlike JAZ proteins, the stability of NINJA is unaffected by jasmonates.

Figure 1 | NINJA interacts with JAZ proteins. **a**, Gel separation of proteins co-purified with JAZ1-TAP from *Arabidopsis* cells, after mock treatment (−JA) or elicitation (+JA). Arrows mark the positions of proteins identified by MS. Lane M shows molecular mass markers. **b, c**, NINJA-interacting and JAZ-interacting protein domains in Y2H assays. Drawings represent JAZ1, NINJA and derivatives. Numbers indicate terminal amino-acid residues. Transformed yeasts were spotted in 10-fold and 100-fold dilutions on control medium (−2) or selective medium (−3). Controls are empty vectors. AD, activation domain. **b**, Interaction of NINJA with the TIFY motif of JAZ1. **c**, Interaction of JAZ1 with the C domain of NINJA.

Figure 2 | NINJA negatively regulates JA signalling. **a**, Phenotypes of transgenic NINJA overexpression (*NINJA*⁰ᴱ) and NINJA knockdown (*NINJA*ᴷᴰ) *Arabidopsis* lines. Average primary root lengths of 9-day-old seedlings germinated on control medium, or on 10 or 50 μM JA are shown. Data are means ± s.e.m. for *n* ≥ 18 (two asterisks, *P* ≤ 0.01; three asterisks, *P* ≤ 0.001, genotype × treatment; see Supplementary Table 2). **b**, Upregulation of MeJA-responsive genes in NINJA knockdown plants. Heat maps, generated by Expression Browser software (http://bbc.botany.utoronto.ca), represent MeJA-modulated expression over time (in hours) of genes significantly induced in NINJA knockdown plants. The scale bar indicates log fold change.

LETTERS

NATURE | Vol 464 | 1 April 2010

**Figure 3 | NINJA interacts with TPL and functions as a transcriptional repressor.**  
a, NINJA-interacting and TPL-interacting protein domains in a Y2H assay. Drawings represent TPL, NINJA and derivatives. Y2H analysis was performed as in Fig. 1. b, JA phenotype of *tpl-1*. Root growth analysis was performed as in Fig. 2a. Ler, Landsberg *erecta*. c, d, Transactivation activity in tobacco protoplasts transfected with a PUAS–fluc reporter construct, effector constructs fused or not with GAL4DBD, and a P35S-rLUC normalization construct. Data in c and d are means ± s.e.m. relative to the reference (black bar) for *n* = 8 (two asterisks, *P* ≤ 0.01; three asterisks, *P* ≤ 0.001; analysis of variance, Dunnett’s post-hoc test). c, Functionality of the NINJA EAR repression motif. d, MYC2 activity is repressed by NINJA.

was further supported by phenotypic analysis of the *tpl-1* mutant²³, which showed hypersensitivity to JA (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 2). Taken together, these results indicate that NINJA connects the JAZ proteins with the TPL co-repressors.

Considering the association with TPL, we assessed the transcriptional repressor capacity of NINJA. First, a protein fusion of NINJA with the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of GAL4 could repress the basal activity of a promoter containing upstream activation sequence (PUAS) elements in tobacco protoplasts (Fig. 3c). Second, a NINJA fragment containing the EAR motif, but lacking a JAZ interaction domain, was sufficient for repression. Conversely, deletion of the domain A or mutation of three conserved Leu residues in the EAR motif abolished the repression capacity of NINJA (mEAR; Fig. 3c). Third, the transcriptional activation of the PUAS by a DBD–MYC2 fusion protein could be counteracted by co-expression with NINJA (Fig. 3d). Taken together, these results establish NINJA as a transcriptional repressor of jasmonate responses.

Our findings expand the parallelism between the auxin and jasmonate signalling pathways: the hormones (indole-3-acetic acid and (+)-7-iso-JA-L-Ile, respectively) are perceived by F-box proteins (TIR1 and COI1, respectively) that target repressor proteins (AUX/IAA and JAZ, respectively) for rapid degradation by the 26S proteasome, which finally releases the transcription factors (ARFs and MYCs, respectively) that activate the downstream hormone responses²⁴,²⁵ (Fig. 4). We show that transcriptional repression in jasmonate signalling is mediated as in auxin signalling, by a protein containing an EAR repression motif that recruits the TPL co-repressors to the complex⁸ (Fig. 4). However, in jasmonate signalling the EAR motif is not present on the SCF degradation targets but on a separate, stable protein, namely NINJA. In this manner, extra features might have been added to the complex, allowing crosstalk with other hormone signalling pathways in the cell and fine-tuning of the jasmonate response.

The TIFY motif of JAZ proteins is necessary and sufficient for binding to the NINJA–TPL repressor complex, corresponding to the essential role of this domain in the repression of jasmonate signalling by JAZ10.4 (ref. 17). The TIFY motif is also necessary for the dimerization of JAZ proteins¹⁶,¹⁷. Future research should reveal whether binding of NINJA and JAZ proteins to the TIFY motif can occur simultaneously and how this dual functionality shapes the repressor activity of the JAZ proteins. The TIFY motif is also present in ZIM-domain proteins, such as PPD1, PPD2 and TIFY8, that are

**Figure 4 | Model for a general function of TPL proteins in plant hormone signalling.**  
a, In the absence of jasmonates, basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) MYC factors interact with the Jas domain of JAZ proteins that interact through their TIFY motif with domain C of NINJA. The EAR motif of NINJA is essential for interaction with the TPL co-repressors. b, In the presence of (+)-7-iso-JA-L-Ile, JAZ proteins interact with the ubiquitin ligase SCFCOI¹, leading to proteosomal JAZ degradation and subsequent release of the NINJA–TPL complex from the MYC factors and activation of jasmonate-responsive gene expression. c, Jasmonate and auxin pathways are built on similar signalling modules. d, NINJA interacts with other group II TIFY proteins, which might be recruited by as yet unknown transcription factors. e, Interaction of the NINJA-related AFP proteins with ABI5 and TPL to regulate responses to ABA.

not inducible by jasmonates but that nonetheless interact with NINJA (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Because the phenotypes associated with the PPD proteins do not seem to be related to jasmonate signalling²⁶, NINJA might have more functions than mediating jasmonate-responsive gene expression (Fig. 4d). The EAR motif of NINJA, as well as that of the AUX/IAA proteins, is responsible for the interaction with TPL proteins. This motif is also conserved among all NINJA-related AFP proteins, involved in ABA signalling¹⁸ (Fig. 4e), which indicates a possible implication of TPL proteins in multiple signalling pathways, a hypothesis supported by Y2H analysis that demonstrated the direct interaction of AFP proteins and TPL (Supplementary Fig. 4e). Thus, TPL proteins emerge as general co-repressors in plants that are recruited to different signalling pathways by specific adaptor proteins, such as AUX/IAA proteins (for auxin), AFP proteins (for ABA) and the complex NINJA–JAZ (for jasmonate).

### METHODS SUMMARY

**Generation of DNA constructs.** Standard molecular biology protocols and Gateway (Invitrogen) technology were followed to obtain expression clones.

**Tandem Affinity Purification.** *Arabidopsis* cell suspension cultures (PSB-D) were transformed as described previously with baits fused to the Protein G/streptavidin-binding peptide (GS)-TAP tag¹⁴,²⁷. TAP was performed as described²⁷, with modifications. Peptide fragments were analysed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time-of-flight/time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) mass spectrometry.

**Generation of transgenic and mutant *Arabidopsis* plants.** Homozygous transgenic *Arabidopsis* T3 plants overexpressing or silencing NINJA were generated by floral dip²⁸.

**Protoplast assays.** Transient expression assays in tobacco protoplasts were performed as described previously¹³,²⁹, with modifications.

Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Received 15 July 2009; accepted 13 January 2010.

1. Browse, J. Jasmonate passes muster: A receptor and targets for the defense hormone. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 60, 183–205 (2009).

2. Kazan, K. & Manners, J. M. Jasmonate signaling: toward an integrated view. *Plant Physiol.* **146**, 1459–1468 (2008).
3. Wasternack, C. Jasmonates: an update on biosynthesis, signal transduction and action in plant stress response, growth and development. *Ann. Bot. (Lond.)* **100**, 681–697 (2007).
4. Browse, J. & Howe, G. A. New weapons and a rapid response against insect attack. *Plant Physiol.* **146**, 832–838 (2008).
5. Pauwels, L., Inzé, D. & Goossens, A. Jasmonate-inducible gene: what does it mean? *Trends Plant Sci.* **14**, 87–91 (2009).
6. Chini, A. *et al.* The JAZ family of repressors is the missing link in jasmonate signalling. *Nature* **448**, 666–671 (2007).
7. Thines, B. *et al.* JAZ repressor proteins are targets of the SCF<sup>COI1</sup> complex during jasmonate signalling. *Nature* **448**, 661–665 (2007).
8. Szemenyei, H., Hannon, M. & Long, J. A. TOPLESS mediates auxin-dependent transcriptional repression during Arabidopsis embryogenesis. *Science* **319**, 1384–1386 (2008).
9. Devoto, A. *et al.* COI1 links jasmonate signalling and fertility to the SCF ubiquitin-ligase complex in Arabidopsis. *Plant J.* **32**, 457–466 (2002).
10. Fonseca, S. *et al.* (+)-7-iso-Jasmonoyl-L-isoleucine is the endogenous bioactive jasmonate. *Nature Chem. Biol.* **5**, 344–350 (2009).
11. Katsir, L., Schilmiller, A. L., Staswick, P. E., He, S. Y. & Howe, G. A. COI1 is a critical component of a receptor for jasmonate and the bacterial virulence factor coronatine. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 7100–7105 (2008).
12. Lorenzo, O., Chico, J. M., Sánchez-Serrano, J. J. & Solano, R. JASMONATE-INSENSITIVE1 encodes a MYC transcription factor essential to discriminate between different jasmonate-regulated defense responses in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* **16**, 1938–1950 (2004).
13. Pauwels, L. *et al.* Mapping methyl jasmonate-mediated transcriptional reprogramming of metabolism and cell cycle progression in cultured Arabidopsis cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 1380–1385 (2008).
14. Van Leene, J., Witters, E., Inzé, D. & De Jaeger, G. Boosting tandem affinity purification of plant protein complexes. *Trends Plant Sci.* **13**, 517–520 (2008).
15. Grunewald, W. *et al.* Expression of the Arabidopsis jasmonate signalling repressor JAZ1/TIFY10A is stimulated by auxin. *EMBO Rep.* **10**, 923–928 (2009).
16. Chini, A., Fonseca, S., Chico, J. M., Fernández-Calvo, P. & Solano, R. The ZIM domain mediates homo- and heteromeric interactions between Arabidopsis JAZ proteins. *Plant J.* **59**, 77–87 (2009).
17. Chung, H. S. & Howe, G. A. A critical role for the TIFY motif in repression of jasmonate signaling by a stabilized splice variant of the JASMONATE ZIM-domain protein JAZ10 in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* **21**, 131–145 (2009).
18. Garcia, M. E., Lynch, T., Peeters, J., Snowden, C. & Finkelstein, R. A small plant-specific protein family of ABI five binding proteins (AFPs) regulates stress response in germinating Arabidopsis seeds and seedlings. *Plant Mol. Biol.* **67**, 643–658 (2008).
19. Goossens, A. *et al.* A functional genomics approach toward the understanding of secondary metabolism in plant cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 8595–8600 (2003).
20. Vanholme, B., Grunewald, W., Bateman, A., Kohchi, T. & Gheysen, G. The tify family previously known as ZIM. *Trends Plant Sci.* **12**, 239–244 (2007).

21. Yan, Y. *et al.* A downstream mediator in the growth repression limb of the jasmonate pathway. *Plant Cell* **19**, 2470–2483 (2007).
22. Kazan, K. Negative regulation of defence and stress genes by EAR-motif-containing repressors. *Trends Plant Sci.* **11**, 109–112 (2006).
23. Long, J. A., Woody, S., Poethig, S., Meyerowitz, E. M. & Barton, M. K. Transformation of shoots into roots in Arabidopsis embryos mutant at the TOPLESS locus. *Development* **129**, 2297–2306 (2002).
24. Chico, J. M., Chini, A., Fonseca, S. & Solano, R. JAZ repressors set the rhythm in jasmonate signaling. *Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.* **11**, 486–494 (2008).
25. Gray, W. M., Kepinski, S., Rouse, D., Leyser, O. & Estelle, M. Auxin regulates SCFTIR1-dependent degradation of AUX/IAA proteins. *Nature* **414**, 271–276 (2001).
26. White, D. W. R. PEAPOD regulates lamina size and curvature in Arabidopsis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 13238–13243 (2006).
27. Van Leene, J. *et al.* A tandem affinity purification-based technology platform to study the cell cycle interactome in Arabidopsis thaliana. *Mol. Cell. Proteomics* **6**, 1226–1238 (2007).
28. Clough, S. J. & Bent, A. F. Floral dip: a simplified method for Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana. *Plant J.* **16**, 735–743 (1998).
29. De Sutter, V. *et al.* Exploration of jasmonate signalling via automated and standardized transient expression assays in tobacco cells. *Plant J.* **44**, 1065–1076 (2005).

**Supplementary Information** is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

**Acknowledgements** We thank F. Lammertyn and all colleagues of the Functional Proteomics group at VIB and Ecophysiology-Biochemistry-Toxicology, Centre for Proteome Analysis and Mass Spectrometry (EBT-CEPROMA) at Antwerp University for technical assistance; M. I. Puga and J. Paz-Ares for providing the prey cDNA library for Y2H screens; V. Storme for help with statistical analysis; J. Van Leene and M. Karimi for discussions; and M. De Cock for help in preparing the manuscript. This work was supported by the Research Foundation-Flanders (predoctoral fellowship to L.P.), the Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology in Flanders ('Generisch Basisonderzoek aan de Universiteiten', and predoctoral fellowships to S.T. and J.G.), the Special Research Fund of Ghent University (postdoctoral fellowship to W.G.), the National Institutes of Health (to J.L.) and the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología and the Comunidad de Madrid (to R.S.).

**Author Contributions** L.P., G.F.B., J.G., S.T., W.G., A.C.P., J.M.C., R.V.B., J.S., E.G., G.G.-C. and J.A.L. performed experiments and analysed the results. L.P., W.G., E.W., J.A.L., G.D.J., R.S. and A.G. planned experiments and analyses. L.P., D.I., J.A.L., R.S. and A.G. wrote the manuscript. All authors commented on the results and the manuscript.

**Author Information** The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative accession number for NINJA is At4g28910. All microarray data are deposited in GEO under accession numbers GSM484805 to GSM484812. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.G. (alain.goossens@psb.vib-ugent.be).

doi:10.1038/nature08854

**METHODS**

Constructs. Gateway pENTRY vectors were obtained from ABRC (www.arabidopsis.org). Alternatively, open reading frames (ORFs) were amplified from a cDNA template with Platinum Taq High Fidelity (Invitrogen) and equipped with Gateway attB sites. Deletion and mutant gene variants were constructed with the GeneTailor Site-Directed Mutagenesis system (Invitrogen). The structure and sequence of all used destination vectors were as described ${}^{30,31}$ and are accessible on line at http://www.psb.ugent.be/gateway/ or otherwise referenced.

Cell suspension cultivation, transformation and JA treatment. *Arabidopsis* cell suspension cultures (PSB-D) were maintained and transformed as described previously ${}^{27}$ without callus selection. Stably transformed cell cultures were scaled up and harvested 6 days after subculturing. Cells were mock-treated or elicited with $100 \mu \mathrm{M}$ JA (Duchefa).

Protein degradation assays. The entry clones pEN-L4-2-R1, containing the pCaMV 35S promoter, pEN-R2-fLUC-L3 and pEN-L1-JAZ1-L2 were recombined by MultiSite Gateway LR reaction with pKCTAP as destination vector. Transformed cell cultures were grown for several weeks in the absence of kanamycin and for one week after subculturing before the protein degradation assays. For cycloheximide chase experiments, $200 \mu \mathrm{g} \mathrm{ml}^{-1}$ cycloheximide (Sigma) dissolved in dimethylsulphoxide with or without $100 \mu \mathrm{M}$ JA (Duchefa) was added to the cells, which were subsequently harvested at multiple time points by vacuum filtration. Proteins were extracted as described ${}^{32}$. GFP fluorescence was used to normalize variations in protein extraction. Half-life was calculated as described ${}^{33}$, with modifications. For each sample individually, the ratio of fLUC activity to GFP fluorescence ($l / g$) was divided by an average $l / g$ value for the control samples (that is, the first time point without JA) to generate a normalized $l / g$ value. For graphic presentation, the natural logarithm of the normalized $l / g$ value was determined and plotted as a function of time. A linear best-fit line, $y = mx + c$, was calculated with linear regression in which $y$ is $\ln (\text { normalized } l / g)$, $m$ the slope, $x$ the time and $c$ the intercept to determine the half-life with $y = \ln (0.5)$.

In vitro degradation of JAZ proteins after incubation with cellular extracts from wild-type or NINJA-overexpressing plants was performed as described ${}^{6}$. In brief, JAZ3 protein was obtained and labelled by in vitro translation with TNT wheatgerm extract systems (Promega) in the presence of ${}^{[35} \mathrm{~S}]$methionine. Labelled JAZ3 was incubated at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for different durations with plant extracts ($100 \mathrm{mg}$ of total protein extract in $50 \mathrm{mM}$ Tris-HCl pH 7.0, $5 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{MgCl}_{2}, 5 \mathrm{mM}$ ATP and $50 \mu \mathrm{g} \mu \mathrm{l}^{-1}$ ubiquitin) with or without the proteasome-specific inhibitor MG132 ($200 \mu \mathrm{M}$) or JA ($50 \mu \mathrm{M}$). The reaction was stopped with loading buffer at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ and run on protein gels under denaturing conditions. Quantification of the gels and image analysis were performed on a PhosphorImager and with ImageJ.

Tandem affinity purification. Purifications were performed as described ${}^{27}$ with the following modifications. Before centrifugation, crude protein extracts were treated with $3747.8 \mathrm{U}$ of DNase I (AppliChem) per $10 \mathrm{ml}$ of extraction buffer for $1 \mathrm{~h}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ under gentle rotation. A soluble protein fraction was obtained by centrifuging twice at $36,900 \mathrm{~g}$ for $20 \mathrm{~min}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. The GS-TAP tag was used, which had been reported to be superior in this system ${}^{14}$, supplemented with Gateway recombination sites by PCR by means of pCeMM CTAP(SG) (GenBank accession number EF467048) as template and recombined to pEN-R2-GStag-L3. The entry clones pEN-L4-2-R1, containing the CaMV 35S promoter, pEN-R2-GStag-L3 with a GS-TAP tag and an entry clone with the ORF were recombined by MultiSite Gateway LR reaction with pKCTAP as destination vector. Peptide fragments were analysed with a 4800 Plus MALDI–TOF/TOF Analyser (Applied Biosystems) and the corresponding proteins were identified with a local database search engine (Mascot 2.1; Matrix Science) and the TAIR 8.0 database ${}^{34}$. About 40 TAP experiments, mock or with either $\beta$-glucuronidase (GUS), GFP or only the tag as baits were performed to assess the experimental background. Peptides that led to the identification of the preys were only found back in the data output of the TAP experiments with the respective bait(s).

Yeast two-hybrid assay. Gateway-compatible variants of pGAD424 and pGBT9 were used as destination vectors. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain PJ69-4A was co-transformed with a bait and a prey plasmid and selected on SD-Leu-Trp agar medium. pGAD424 and pGBT9 vectors not carrying a Gateway cassette were used as controls. Three individual transformants were grown for 1 day in liquid culture, dropped in several dilutions on SD-Leu-Trp-His and allowed to grow for 2 days at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. Alternatively, when mentioned, Gateway-compatible vectors pGADT7 and pGBK7 were used and co-transformed into the yeast strain AH109.

Yeast two-hybrid screen. JAZ2 and JAZ3 sequences were PCR amplified with the Expand High Fidelity PCR system (Roche) from plasmid templates provided by TAIR as described ${}^{6}$. PCR products were digested with EcoRI and PstI and cloned into EcoRI–PstI digested pGBKT7 (with GAL4 DNA-binding domain; Clontech) and the constructs were sequence-verified. The pGBKT7-JAZ2 and pGBKT7-JAZ3 plasmids were used as baits and transformed into yeast strain Y187. The prey cDNA library, from *Arabidopsis* seedlings (12 days old) grown on P$_1$-starved medium, was prepared in the plasmid pGADT7 and in yeast mating strain AH109 following BD Matchmaker Library Construction (version PR32047; Clontech; M.I. Puga and J. Paz-Ares, personal communication). Bait (Y187) and prey (AH109) were mated by growing $50 \mathrm{ml}$ of bait and $500 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of prey overnight on $2 \times$ YPDA medium at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. Yeast diploids were selected by plating at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for 4 days on minimal medium SD lacking His, Leu, Trp and adenine and supplemented with $20 \mathrm{mM}$ 3-aminotriazole. Respectively 67 and 38 clones containing putative interacting preys were initially selected for JAZ2 and JAZ3 baits and then confirmed, sequenced and retransformed into yeast strain AH109 to verify true positives.

Protein extracts and pull-down assays. Ten-day-old *Arabidopsis* seedlings were ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in extraction buffer containing $50 \mathrm{mM}$ Tris-HCl pH 7.4, $80 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{NaCl}, 10 \%$ glycerol, $0.1 \%$ Tween 20, $1 \mathrm{mM}$ dithiothreitol, $1 \mathrm{mM}$ phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride, $50 \mu \mathrm{M}$ MG132 (Sigma), and Complete protease inhibitor (Roche). After centrifugation ($16,000 \mathrm{~g}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$), the supernatant was collected. For in vivo pull-down experiments, $6 \mu \mathrm{g}$ of resin-bound MBP fusion protein was added to $1 \mathrm{mg}$ of total protein extract and incubated for $1 \mathrm{~h}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. After washing, samples were digested with $1 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of factor Xa (New England Biolabs), loaded on SDS–PAGE gels, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and incubated with monoclonal anti-GFP antibodies (Sigma).

Bimolecular fluorescence complementation. In planta protein interactions were investigated with bimolecular fluorescence complementation in a tobacco transient expression system as described ${}^{8}$.

Generation of transgenic plants. For subcellular localizations, pEN-L1-NINJA-L2 was recombined with pK7FWG2, yielding a C-terminal GFP fusion. For NINJA overexpression and knockdown, the pGWB5 (Invitrogen) and pAGRIKOLA ${}^{35}$ (NASC N245138) vectors were used, respectively. All destination vectors were transformed to the Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain C58C1Rif ${}^{R}$ (pMP90). Plants were transformed with the floral dip method ${}^{28}$ and transgenic lines were selected as described ${}^{36}$. Expression analysis was performed as described ${}^{15,37}$.

Confocal imaging. For GFP imaging, T1 seedlings were selected on kanamycin-containing Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium. Roots were incubated briefly in propidium iodide ($3 \mathrm{mg} \mathrm{l}^{-1}$), washed and subsequently mounted in Milli-Q water (Millipore) and imaged with a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope.

Analysis of transgenic and mutant *Arabidopsis* plants. For phenotypic analysis, wild-type Columbia-0, NINJA overexpression and NINJA knockdown transgenic plants, wild-type Landsberg *erecta* and mutant *tpl-1* plants were germinated on Johnson’s medium with increasing concentrations of JA and grown at $21^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ under a 16-h light/8-h dark cycle. Root length was measured 9 days after germination. For statistical analysis, data were natural-log transformed to achieve homoscedacity. Subsequently, a general linear model was fitted with the mixed procedure from SAS (v. 9.2): $\log (\text { root length }) = \mu + G + T + G * T$, where $G$ is the fixed genotype effect, $T$ the fixed treatment effect and $G * T$ the genotype × treatment interaction effect. The estimate function was used to estimate the interaction effects. False Discovery Rate (FDR) multiple testing was performed to adjust the $P$ values.

Expression analysis. Microarray data of 7-day-old *Arabidopsis* seedlings treated with MeJA and ABA were obtained from AtGenExpress ${}^{38}$. Raw expression data were processed and statistically analysed as described ${}^{13}$. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis was performed as described ${}^{15}$. For MeJA time-course analysis, wild-type Col-0 seedlings were grown for 7 days on MS medium and transferred to medium containing $25 \mu \mathrm{M}$ MeJA (Duchefa). For microarray analysis, three independent NINJA knockdown lines were grown for 6 days on MS medium, transferred to soil and grown for a further 3 weeks. Subsequently, plants were treated or not for $6 \mathrm{~h}$ with $0.5 \mu \mathrm{M}$ coronatine. Knockdown lines were pooled and four biological replicates were independently hybridized per transcriptomic comparison. RNA amplification and labelling were performed basically as described ${}^{37}$. Hybridization was performed on Agilent *Arabidopsis* Oligo Microarrays v4 (catalogue number 021169) in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. Images from Cy3 and Hyper5 channels were equilibrated and captured with a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon) and spots were quantified with GenPix software (Axon). The statistical significance of the results was evaluated by the non-parametric algorithm ‘Rank Products’ ${}^{39}$ and available as ‘RankProd’ package at Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org) ${}^{40}$. This method detects genes that are consistently high-ranked in several replicated experiments independently of their numerical intensities. The results are provided in the form of $P$ values defined as the probability that a given gene is ranked in the observed position by chance. Genes with an FDR-corrected $P$ less than 0.05
and a fold change of more than 2 or less than $-2$ were selected for further investigation.

**Transient expression assays.** Transient expression assays were performed as described previously ${ }^{13,29}$. Protoplasts were prepared from a Bright Yellow-2 tobacco cell culture and co-transfected with a reporter plasmid containing the fLUC reporter gene driven by a promoter containing five GAL4-binding sites ${ }^{41}$, a normalization construct expressing *Renilla* luciferase (rLUC) under control of the 35S promoter ${ }^{29}$ and effector constructs. Effector constructs were made by Gateway LR cloning with p2GW7 for overexpression. GAL4DBD fusions were created by combining pEN-L4-2-R1 (35S promoter), pEN-R2-GAL4DBD-L3 and an entry clone holding the ORF combined by MultiSite Gateway LR reaction with pm43GW7 as destination vector. Alternatively, for MYC2, the p2GAL4DBGW6 destination vector was used ${ }^{13}$. For each experiment, 2 $\mu$g of each plasmid was used unless mentioned otherwise. In the latter case, total effector amount was equalized in each experiment with p2GW7-GUS mock effector plasmid. After transfection, protoplasts were incubated overnight and then lysed; fLUC and rLUC activities were determined with the Dual-Luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). Variations in transfection efficiency and technical error were corrected by normalization of fLUC by rLUC activities. For statistical analysis, a general linear model was performed with the General Linear Model procedure of SAS (v. 9.2). Dunnett’s method was used for multiple comparisons with the indicated reference group.

30. Karimi, M., Inzé, D. & Depicker, A. GATEWAY ${ }^{\mathrm{TM}}$ vectors for Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation. *Trends Plant Sci.* **7**, 193–195 (2002).

31. Karimi, M., Depicker, A. & Hilson, P. Recombinational cloning with plant Gateway vectors. *Plant Physiol.* **145**, 1144–1154 (2007).

32. Salmon, J., Ramos, J. & Callis, J. Degradation of the auxin response factor ARF1. *Plant J.* **54**, 118–128 (2008).

33. Dreher, K. A., Brown, J., Saw, R. E. & Callis, J. The *Arabidopsis* Aux/IAA protein family has diversified in degradation and auxin responsiveness. *Plant Cell* **18**, 699–714 (2006).

34. Swarbreck, D. *et al*. The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): gene structure and function annotation. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **36**, D1009–D1014 (2008).

35. Hilson, P. *et al*. Versatile gene-specific sequence tags for *Arabidopsis* functional genomics: transcript profiling and reverse genetics applications. *Genome Res.* **14**, 2176–2189 (2004).

36. Harrison, S. J. *et al*. A rapid and robust method of identifying transformed *Arabidopsis thaliana* seedlings following floral dip transformation. *Plant Methods* **2**, 19.1–19.7 (2006).

37. Adie, B. A. T. *et al*. ABA is an essential signal for plant resistance to pathogens affecting JA biosynthesis and the activation of defenses in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Cell* **19**, 1665–1681 (2007).

38. Goda, H. *et al*. The AtGenExpress hormone and chemical treatment data set: experimental design, data evaluation, model data analysis and data access. *Plant J.* **55**, 526–542 (2008).

39. Breitling, R., Armengaud, P., Amtmann, A. & Herzyk, P. Rank products: a simple, yet powerful, new method to detect differentially regulated genes in replicated microarray experiments. *FEBS Lett.* **573**, 83–92 (2004).

40. Hong, F. *et al*. RankProd: a bioconductor package for detecting differentially expressed genes in meta-analysis. *Bioinformatics* **22**, 2825–2827 (2006).

41. Ohta, M., Ohme-Takagi, M. & Shinshi, H. Three ethylene-responsive transcription factors in tobacco with distinct transactivation functions. *Plant J.* **22**, 29–38 (2000).