
REVIEW

# The Hippo–YAP pathway in organ size control and tumorigenesis: an updated version

**Bin Zhao,**¹ **Li Li,**¹ **Quying Lei,**² **and Kun-Liang Guan**¹,³

¹Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA;  
²Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, and Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China

The Hippo signaling pathway is gaining recognition as an important player in both organ size control and tumorigenesis, which are physiological and pathological processes that share common cellular signaling mechanisms. Upon activation by stimuli such as high cell density in cell culture, the Hippo pathway kinase cascade phosphorylates and inhibits the Yes-associated protein (YAP)/TAZ transcription coactivators representing the major signaling output of the pathway. Altered gene expression resulting from YAP/TAZ inhibition affects cell number by repressing cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis, thereby limiting organ size. Recent studies have provided new insights into the Hippo signaling pathway, elucidating novel phosphorylation-dependent and independent mechanisms of YAP/Yki inhibition by the Hippo pathway, new Hippo pathway components, novel YAP target transcription factors and target genes, and the three-dimensional structure of the YAP-TEAD complex, and providing further evidence for the involvement of YAP and the Hippo pathway in tumorigenesis.

The Hippo pathway was named after the *Drosophila* Hippo kinase that was discovered using this approach. Components of the Hippo pathway are highly conserved in mammals (Fig. 1). Later genetic and biochemical studies gradually shaped the current working model, in which the mammalian Mst1/2 kinase (Hippo homolog), complexed with a scaffold protein, Sav1, phosphorylates and activates the Lats1/2 kinase. Lats1/2 is also activated by another scaffold protein, Mob1 (Fig. 2). These four proteins are often referred to as the core components of the Hippo pathway. At the upstream, several components have been implicated by *Drosophila* genetic studies, including Merlin (Mer), Expanded (Ex), and Fat (Bennett and Harvey 2006; Cho et al. 2006; Hamaratoglu et al. 2006; Silva et al. 2006; Willecke et al. 2006; Tyler and Baker 2007). Lats1/2 kinase directly phosphorylates and inactivates a transcription coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) (Zhao et al. 2007; Hao et al. 2008) and the YAP paralog transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) (Lei et al. 2008). Functions of YAP in organ size regulation and tumorigenesis have been confirmed in mammals, using transgenic mouse models (Camargo et al. 2007; Dong et al. 2007). In this review, we briefly summarize the overall picture of the Hippo pathway in *Drosophila* and mammals, highlighting important new discoveries in the last 2 years regarding the regulation and function of the Hippo pathway and YAP/TAZ.

Precise control of cell number is an essential function of multicellular organisms under physiological conditions such as development and organ regeneration. Impairment of this function leads to human diseases such as cancer. Signaling pathways communicating extra- and intracellular cues to gene transcription are at the center stage of cell number regulation. In the past decade, a new signaling pathway, the Hippo pathway, has been shown to have a critical role in controlling organ size by regulating both cell proliferation and apoptosis (for review, see Zhao et al. 2008a; Kango-Singh and Singh 2009). Many components of the Hippo pathway were discovered initially by *Drosophila* mosaic genetic screens, due to a strong overgrowth phenotype shared by these mutants (Justice et al. 1995; Xu et al. 1995; Kango-Singh et al. 2002; Tapon et al. 2002; Harvey et al. 2003; Pantalacci et al. 2003; Wu et al. 2003).

**Keywords:** Hippo; YAP; phosphorylation; cancer; organ size

³Corresponding author.  
E-MAIL kuguan@ucsd.edu; FAX (858) 534-7628.  
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1909210.

## The *Drosophila* Hippo pathway

The *Drosophila* genetic mosaic screen is a powerful tool in discovering tumor suppressors, such as the first Hippo pathway component, *wts* (Justice et al. 1995; Xu et al. 1995). *wts* encodes a nuclear Dbf-2-related (NDR) family protein kinase. Mutation of *wts* leads to robust tissue overgrowth without affecting cell fate determination. *sav* (*shar-pei*) encoding a WW domain-containing protein and *hippo* (*hpo*) encoding a STE20 family protein kinase are two other Hippo pathway components identified in a similar fashion to that of *wts* (Kango-Singh et al. 2002; Tapon et al. 2002; Harvey et al. 2003; Jia et al. 2003; Pantalacci et al. 2003; Udan et al. 2003; Wu et al. 2003).

Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on February 12, 2015 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

The Hippo–YAP pathway updated

D.m. Fat
- CA
- 33 extra CA repeats
- EGF EGF EGF
- LamG
- Cleavage
- LamG
- TM
- P
- 5147 aa

D.m. Kibra
- WW WW
- C2
- 1288 aa

D.m. Ex
- FERM
- PPXY PPXY
- PPXY
- 1427 aa

Mer
- FERM
- S518
- 595 aa

RASSF1A
- C1
- RA
- SARAH
- 340 aa

Mst1
- Kinase domain
- Caspase cleavage NES
- T183
- SARAH
- 487 aa

Sav1
- potential dimerization
- FERM binding
- WW WW
- SARAH
- 383 aa

Lats1
- UBA
- PPXY
- Mob1 binding
- HM
- Kinase domain
- S909
- T1079
- 1130 aa

Mob1
- Potential Myristoylation site
- T12,35
- 216 aa

YAP
- TEAD binding
- SH3 binding
- Transactivation
- PDZ binding
- P-rich
- S61 S109,127 S164
- WW
- C-C
- S381,384,387,Y391
- PPPP
- 488 aa

TAZ
- TEAD binding
- Transactivation
- PDZ binding
- S66,89,117
- WW
- C-C
- S311
- 400 aa

D.m. Yki
- Sd binding
- S111
- S168
- S250
- WW
- WW
- YAP binding
- 417 aa

TEAD1
- TEA
- 412 aa

Figure 1. Domain organization and key modifications of the Hippo pathway components. The illustrations are drawn in scale unless indicated otherwise. Human sequences are drawn unless indicated by *D.m.*, which stands for *Drosophila* sequences. (CA) Cadherin repeats; (EGF) EGF-like domain; (LamG) Laminin G domain; (TM) transmembrane region; (WW) WW domain; (C2) C2 domain; (FERM) FERM domain; (C1) C1 domain; (RA) Ras association domain; (SARAH) SARAH domain; (UBA) ubiquitin-associated domain; (PPXY) PPXY motif; (HM) hydrophobic motif; (P-rich) proline-rich domain; (C-C) coiled-coil domain; (TEA) TEA DNA-binding domain.

*Drosophila* Fat is processed into two fragments (Feng and Irvine 2009; Sopko et al. 2009). The approximate cleavage site is indicated. Fat cytoplasmic domain is phosphorylated by Dco (Feng and Irvine 2009; Sopko et al. 2009). Mer is phosphorylated by PAK1/2 on S518, which affects Mer conformation and inactivates Mer as a tumor suppressor (Rong et al. 2004). Mst1 activation loop autophosphorylation (T183) is essential for its kinase activity. Caspase cleavage, as indicated, activates Mst1 (Graves et al. 1998). Lats1 is activated by autophosphorylation on the activation loop (S909), and phosphorylation by Mst1/2 on the hydrophobic motif (T1079) (Chan et al. 2005). Mob1 is phosphorylated by Mst1/2 on T12 and T35, and this phosphorylation stimulates its interaction with Lats1/2 (Praskova et al. 2008). Sav1 is also phosphorylated by Mst1/2 on an unidentified site (Callus et al. 2006). YAP/TAZ/Yki is phosphorylated by Lats1/2 on S61, S109, S127, S164, and S381 (TAZ S66, S89, S117, S311, Yki S111, S168, and S250) in the HXRXXS motifs (Zhao et al. 2007; Lei et al. 2008; Oh and Irvine 2008). S127 phosphorylation induces 14–3–3 binding and cytoplasmic retention (Zhao et al. 2007). S381 phosphorylation primes CK1δ/ε phosphorylation of S384, and S387 finally leads to SCF<sup>β-TRCP</sup>-mediated ubiquitination and degradation (Zhao et al. 2010). YAP is also phosphorylated by c-Abl on Y391 (Levy et al. 2008).

Hpo interacts directly with Sav and promotes Sav and Wts phosphorylation (Wu et al. 2003). Subsequently, *mats* mutations were shown to phenocopy other Hippo pathway component mutations. The Mats protein interacts physically with Wts as an activating subunit (Lai et al. 2005; Wei et al. 2007; Shimizu et al. 2008). Mats is also phosphorylated by Hpo, resulting in increased interaction with Wts. These observations have established the core components of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway, showing the Hpo kinase—in association with Sav—phosphorylating and activating the Wts kinase–Mats complex (Fig. 2).

Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on February 12, 2015 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

Zhao et al.

**Drosophila**

- **Fat**
- **Lft**
- **Ds**
- **Dco**
- **Mer**
- **Ex**
- **Kibra**
- **Hpo**
- **Sav**
- **Mats**
- **Wts**
- **Yki**
- **Yki**
- **Yki**
- **Sd**
- **Hth**
- **Tsh**
- **Yki**
- **cycE, diap1, ex**
- **bantam**
- **Cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis**

**Mammals**

- **?**
- **FRMD6?**
- **Mer**
- **RASSF**
- **Mst1/2**
- **Sav1**
- **Mob1**
- **Lats1/2**
- **?**
- **YAP/TAZ**
- **CK1δ/ε**
- **SCFβ-TRCP**
- **YAP/TAZ**
- **TEAD**
- **CTGF, Gli2, ?**
- **AREG**
- **YAP/TAZ**
- **Smad1/5/8**
- **Smad2/3**
- **TGF-β target genes**
- **BMP target genes**
- **Cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis**

**Figure 2. Models of the Hippo pathway in Drosophila and mammals.** In *Drosophila*, Fat protocadherin may initiate the Hippo pathway signal in response to Ds binding, and is modulated by binding of Lft and phosphorylation by Dco (Feng and Irvine 2009; Mao et al. 2009; Sopko et al. 2009). Fat may inhibit a nonconventional myosin Dachs, which represses Wts protein levels (Cho et al. 2006). Fat may also activate Ex with an unknown mechanism (Bennett and Harvey 2006; Silva et al. 2006; Willecke et al. 2006; Tyler and Baker 2007). Mer and Ex also activate the Hippo pathway (Hamaratoglu et al. 2006). They may form a complex with Hpo and Sav (Yu et al. 2010). Kibra interacts with both Mer and Ex, and may also be in the complex (Yu et al. 2010). Hpo kinase interacts with and phosphorylates a scaffold protein, Sav (Wu et al. 2003). Together, they phosphorylate and activate Wts kinase and its associated protein, Mats (Lai et al. 2005). Wts phosphorylates a transcription coactivator, Yki, on three sites (Oh and Irvine 2009). Phosphorylation of Yki S168 induces 14–3–3 binding and cytoplasmic retention.

(Dong et al. 2007). Yki may also be retained in the cytoplasm by physical interaction with Ex, Wts, and Hpo (Badouel et al. 2009; H Oh et al. 2009). When Yki is relieved from inhibition and gets into the nucleus, it binds and activates a transcription factor, Sd, to induce *cycE, diap1*, and *ex* expression (Goulev et al. 2008; Wu et al. 2008; L Zhang et al. 2008). Yki induces *bantam* microRNA through Hth and Tsh (Peng et al. 2009). In mammals, functional significance of Fat and Ex homologs are not clear. However, Mer may still activate the Hippo pathway (Yokoyama et al. 2008). RASSEF, a subgroup of Ras effector proteins, may also activate Mst1/2 (Hpo homolog) (Oh et al. 2006). Relationships between Hpo, Sav, Wts, and Mats are basically conserved in mammalian Mst1/2, Sav1 (Sav homolog), Lats1/2 (Wts homolog), and Mob (Mats homolog). Lats1/2 phosphorylates YAP on five conserved HXRXXS motifs (four on TAZ) (Zhao et al. 2007). Dependent on cell context, there may exist another YAP kinase in response to Mst1/2 and another Lats1/2 kinase (Zhou et al. 2009). S127 (S89 in TAZ) phosphorylation-dependent 14–3–3 binding and cytoplasmic retention are conserved in YAP/TAZ (Zhao et al. 2007; Lei et al. 2008). YAP is also inhibited by S381 phosphorylation, which primes CK1δ/ε phosphorylation of S384, and S387 finally leads to SCF<sup>β-TRCP</sup>-mediated ubiquitination and degradation (Zhao et al. 2010). Sd homologs, TEADs, are major YAP target transcription factors. They mediate expression of CTGF, Gli2, and many other target genes (Zhao et al. 2008b). AREG is induced by YAP through an unidentified transcription factor (J Zhang et al. 2009). YAP and TAZ also bind Smad1 and Smad2/3 to activate expression of TGF-β and BMP target genes, respectively, to maintain stem cell pluripotency (Varelas et al. 2008; Alarcon et al. 2009).

These pioneering studies converge on one special feature of the Hippo pathway: It not only functions to inhibit cell proliferation, but also to promote apoptosis (Edgar 2006). This function is achieved at least in part by transcriptional activation of *cycE, diap1* (for review, see Edgar 2006), and *bantam* microRNA (Nolo et al. 2006; Thompson and Cohen 2006). Therefore, like many other signaling pathways, the Hippo pathway regulates a transcription program. The missing transcriptional link was identified to be Yki (YAP homolog) transcription coactivator using Wts as bait in yeast two-hybrid (Huang et al. 2005). Yki regulates transcription of the Hippo pathway target genes, and its overexpression phenocopies the loss of Hippo pathway components. A biochemical study showed that Wts directly phosphorylates Yki and leads to Yki cytoplasmic retention and inactivation (Dong et al. 2007).

The Yki transcription coactivator possesses no DNA-binding activity. Therefore, a key question was the identification of target transcription factors that mediate Yki activity. Clues from mammalian YAP-interacting TEAD family transcription factors and reported Yki yeast two-hybrid data led to the identification of Scalloped (Sd), a critical regulator of proliferation and survival of wing imaginal disc cells and the *Drosophila* TEAD homolog, as a direct Yki target transcription factor mediating Yki-induced gene expression and overgrowth phenotype (Goulev et al. 2008; Wu et al. 2008; L Zhang et al. 2008; Zhao et al. 2008b). Therefore, Sd is the first DNA-binding factor identified to mediate the Hippo pathway effects in *Drosophila*.

A search for mutations with similar phenotypes to Hippo pathway defects yielded the discoveries of Mer and Ex, two FERM domain-containing cytoskeleton-related proteins that act upstream of the Hippo pathway core components (Fig. 2; Hamaratoglu et al. 2006). While the double mutant of *mer* and *ex* mimics mutation of other Hippo pathway components, the *mer* or *ex* single mutation had only a weak effect on inducing extra interommatidial cells, a common phenotype in Hippo pathway mutants. It was shown later that Mer and Ex may have different contributions to the phenotypes observed, where *mer* mutant clones showed defects in apoptosis and *ex* mutant clones showed impaired cell cycle exit (Pellock et al. 2007). However, the biochemical mechanisms of Hippo pathway regulation by Mer and Ex remain unclear, possibly including an indirect effect on receptor

**GENES & DEVELOPMENT**

endocytosis (Maitra et al. 2006). Interestingly, a recent study identified a FERM domain-binding consensus motif in Sav, which likely mediates direct interaction with the FERM domain of Mer (Yu et al. 2010). Moreover, Ex has also been shown to coimmunoprecipitate with both Hpo and Sav (Yu et al. 2010). Thus, Mer/Ex may activate Hpo/Sav via direct interaction.

Kibra, a protein known to interact with Mer and Ex, was identified as a new component of the Hippo pathway (Baumgartner et al. 2010; Genevet et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2010). *kibra* mutations share similar phenotypes to mutated components of the Hippo pathway in both oocyte polarity and notch signaling defects in posterior follicle cells. More importantly, *kibra* mutations generate extra interommatidial cells, a signature phenotype of Hippo pathway mutations. This phenotype is weak, analogous to that of *mer* or *ex* mutations. However, when a *kibra* mutation was combined with either a *mer* or *ex* mutation, a strong overgrowth phenotype similar to that of a *mer/ex* double mutant was observed. Epistatic analysis shows that *kibra* is upstream of *hpo* and *sav*, and its overexpression increases Hpo, Wts, and Yki phosphorylation. In mammalian cells, overexpression of the *kibra* homolog also potently induces Lats1/2 phosphorylation. These data suggest a role for *kibra* acting upstream of the hippo pathway. It has not been determined whether Kibra indeed functions by mediating or increasing Mer/Ex interaction with Hpo/Sav. Another remaining question is whether Kibra relays some upstream signals to the hippo pathway.

Several studies have identified a regulatory role for Fat protocadherin, a member of the hyperplastic group of *Drosophila* tumor suppressors, upstream of the Hippo pathway (Bennett and Harvey 2006; Cho et al. 2006; Silva et al. 2006; Willecke et al. 2006; Tyler and Baker 2007). Fat is a cell surface molecule with multiple cadherin repeats in an enormous extracellular domain that may serve as a receptor for the Hippo pathway (Figs. 1, 2). *fat* mutants resemble *ex* mutants, both of which have a mild overgrowth phenotype. Notably, removing one copy of *yki* dramatically suppresses the *fat* mutant overgrowth phenotype. Two mechanisms have been suggested for Fat in activation of the Hippo pathway. Fat may regulate Ex protein level and localization (Bennett and Harvey 2006; Silva et al. 2006; Willecke et al. 2006; Tyler and Baker 2007), or control the abundance of Wts through Dachs (Fig. 2; Cho et al. 2006; Feng and Irvine 2007). Interestingly, it has also been reported that Fat activation by Dachsous (Ds), another protocadherin, might be responsible for the effect of Dpp gradient on cell proliferation (Rogulja et al. 2008). Furthermore, Fat and Four-jointed, a transmembrane kinase, form a complementary gradient that might be important for the regulation of the Hippo pathway (Willecke et al. 2008). Moreover, Lowfat (Lft), a known Fat- and Ds-interacting cytosolic protein, has been shown to regulate Fat and Ds protein levels and genetically interact with Fat to control wing development (Mao et al. 2009). Simultaneous knockdown of Ds and Lft cause a wing disc overgrowth, although mutation of *lft* itself exerts only weak phenotype in the wing.


The Hippo-YAP pathway updated

Whether *Ift* modulates Hippo pathway signaling remains to be determined.

### The mammalian Hippo pathway

Components of the Hippo pathway are highly conserved from *Drosophila* to mammals, including Mst1/2 (Hpo homolog); Sav1 (Sav homolog); Lats1/2 (Wts homolog); Mob1 (Mats homolog); YAP and its paralog, TAZ (also called WWTR1, both are Yki homologs); Mer (also called NF2, Mer homolog); and, to a lesser degree, FRMD6 (Ex homolog) and Fat4 (Fat homolog) (Fig. 1). More strikingly, human YAP, Lats1, Mst2, and Mob1 can functionally rescue the corresponding *Drosophila* mutants in vivo, suggesting a functional conservation of these genes (for review, see Edgar 2006).

Most studies of Mst1/2 have been done in the context of apoptosis. It has been shown to be activated by caspase-dependent cleavage (Graves et al. 1998), dimerization, autophosphorylation (Lee and Yonehara 2002), and RASSF (Khokhlatchev et al. 2002; Praskova et al. 2004; Oh et al. 2006), and inhibited by the proto-oncogene product Raf-1 (O'Neill et al. 2004). Recently, Mst1/2 was reported to partially colocalize with actin cytoskeleton, disruption of which leads to mild activation of the kinase (Densham et al. 2009). Mst1 and Mst2 double knockout in liver largely abolished YAP phosphorylation, and induced an enlarged liver phenotype strikingly similar to YAP overexpression (Zhou et al. 2009; Lu et al. 2010; Song et al. 2010). However, the effect of Mst1 and Mst2 ablation on organ size is more dramatic in some organs, such as liver and stomach, than in others, such as kidney and limb, which do not show an increase in size (Song et al. 2010). This is possibly due to an organ-specific contribution of impaired cell differentiation versus cell number on the overall size of the organ. Furthermore, the function of Mst1/2 in the Hippo pathway is likely to be cell context-dependent, since Mst1/2 are not required for Lats1/2 phosphorylation and cell density-induced YAP nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells (Zhou et al. 2009), or YAP phosphorylation in early embryos (S Oh et al. 2009).

Sav1 is an adaptor protein that interacts with Mst1/2 through the SARAH domains in both proteins. Sav1 can also be phosphorylated by Mst1/2 (Callus et al. 2006). Recently, Sav1 was shown to be required for Mst1 activation and translocation to the nucleus upon keratinocyte differentiation (Lee et al. 2008). Sav1 homozygous deletion is embryonic-lethal, exhibiting hyperplasia and immature differentiation in epithelium, while heterozygous mice are prone to tumorigenesis (Lee et al. 2008). Conditional ablation of Sav1 in liver leads to liver size enlargement and tumor formation (Lu et al. 2010). Surprisingly, Lats1/2 and YAP phosphorylation are not affected, suggesting that Sav1 is not absolutely required for Lats1/2 activation and may limit liver growth by other mechanisms.

Current data suggest that the hydrophobic motif of Lats1/2 is phosphorylated by Mst1/2, and the activation loop is autophosphorylated (Fig. 2; Chan et al. 2005).

Zhao et al.

Lats1-deficient mice develop soft tissue sarcoma and ovarian tumors (St John et al. 1999), and Lats2-null mice are embryonic-lethal (McPherson et al. 2004; Yabuta et al. 2007). Lats1/2 has been shown to phosphorylate YAP/TAZ in vitro and in cell culture (Zhao et al. 2007; Hao et al. 2008; Lei et al. 2008). However, some studies suggest that the function of Lats1/2 in YAP inhibition is cell type-dependent. In MCF10A cells, overexpression of Lats1 but not Lats2 was shown to inhibit YAP-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration, and anchorage-independent growth (J Zhang et al. 2008). However, in Lats1-null MEF cells, YAP phosphorylation is not significantly affected (B Zhao and K-L Guan, unpubl.). In HeLa cells, simultaneous knockdown of Lats1 and Lats2 is required for an efficient inhibition of YAP phosphorylation. Controversial results have been reported on the requirement of Mst1/2 in liver for Lats1/2 phosphorylation, although YAP phosphorylation is reduced in both cases (Zhou et al. 2009; Lu et al. 2010). The possibility of YAP phosphorylation by a Mst1/2-regulated kinase distinct from Lats1/2 is supported by fractionation experiments showing that a Lats1/2-independent kinase phosphorylates YAP (Zhou et al. 2009). The possibility that the other NDR family members, NDR1/2, act as candidate kinases for YAP is dampened by the fact that NDR1/2 do not interact with YAP in vitro and do not seem to induce YAP phosphorylation in cell culture when overexpressed (Hao et al. 2008). Therefore, Lats1/2 are likely the major kinases responsible for YAP phosphorylation and inhibition; however, other kinases may also phosphorylate YAP on S127. Lats2 itself is also regulated by oncogenic microRNA miR-372 and miR-373 (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Cho et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009). It will be interesting to test if YAP/TAZ actually mediate the oncogenic activity of these microRNAs.

MOBKL1A/MOBKL1B (highly homologous and collectively referred to as Mob1 below) are the only human Mob proteins that interact strongly with Lats1/2 (Chow et al. 2010). Mob1 is phosphorylated by Mst1/2 (Fig. 2), which enhances the interaction between Mob1 and Lats1/2 (Praskova et al. 2008). However, the mechanism of Mob1 inducing Lats1/2 activation is not fully understood. It has been shown that artificial targeting of Mob1 to plasma membrane induces Lats1 membrane localization and activation (Hergovich et al. 2006). Consistently, *Drosophila* Mats has been reported to localize to plasma membrane, and the constitutively membrane-localized form of Mats, but not the wild-type protein, inhibits tissue overgrowth when overexpressed in vivo (Ho et al. 2009). However, membrane localization of endogenous mammalian Mob1 has not been confirmed, and it is not clear if Mob1/Mats membrane localization is regulated. Mob1 can activate NDR2 in vitro in the presence of Mst3 without affecting NDR2 hydrophobic motif phosphorylation (Stegert et al. 2005), suggesting an additional mechanism of NDR activation by Mob, possibly by relieving an autoinhibitory binding. It is not clear whether such a mechanism also applies to Lats1/2 activation.

Mer, acting upstream of the Hippo pathway, has been shown to regulate YAP localization and inhibit YAP activity in cell culture (Zhao et al. 2007). In NF2-deficient glioma and mesothelioma cells, Mer re-expression induces Mst1/2 and Lats1/2 phosphorylation as well as YAP phosphorylation, further supporting a role of Mer in activating the Hippo pathway (Lau et al. 2008; Yokoyama et al. 2008). The mechanism of how Mer regulates this pathway remains unresolved. Functional conservation of other upstream components in mammalian cells, such as FRMD6 and Fat4, is less clear. In zebrafish, knockdown of a cell junction protein, Scribble, was shown to intensify the cyst-promoting phenotype of Fat1 depletion (Skouloudaki et al. 2009). Scribble was also shown to interact physically with Fat1 and inhibit YAP nuclear localization and activity. However, whether scribble affects hippo pathway activity requires further investigation.

YAP/TAZ are the major downstream effectors of the Hippo pathway. YAP and TAZ mRNA is expressed in a wide range of tissues, except peripheral blood leukocytes (Kanai et al. 2000; Komuro et al. 2003). YAP-null mice die at embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5), with defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and body axis elongation (Morin-Kensicki et al. 2006). TAZ knock-out mice are viable and are predisposed to glomerulocytic kidney disease and pulmonary disease (Hossain et al. 2007; Tian et al. 2007; Makita et al. 2008). YAP has an N-terminal proline-rich domain, a TEAD-binding region, two WW domains (or one in the YAP1 splicing variant), an SH3-binding motif, a coiled-coil domain, a transcription activation domain, and a C-terminal PDZ-binding motif (Fig. 1). TAZ has a similar domain organization, although it lacks the proline-rich domain, the second WW domain, and the SH3-binding motif. Without a DNA-binding domain, YAP/TAZ have to work through target transcription factors. Under physiological conditions, the TEAD family proteins serve as key transcription factor targets of YAP/TAZ and mediate their functions (Zhao et al. 2008b; H Zhang et al. 2009).

The *cycE*, *diap1*, and *bantam* genes are directly induced by Yki and contribute to tissue overgrowth. However, the situation in mammalian cells is not identical. CycE is not induced by YAP in mammalian cells, while Birc5 and Birc2, two Diap1 homologs, are induced depending on cellular context (Dong et al. 2007; Zhao et al. 2007; Hao et al. 2008). Bantam, which encodes a microRNA, is not conserved in the human genome, and a functional counterpart has not been identified yet. However, other proteins—including many cytokines such as CTGF, BDNF, and FGF1—are up-regulated by YAP (Zhao et al. 2007; Hao et al. 2008). CTGF has been shown to be a direct target gene induced by YAP–TEAD, and to play a role in YAP-induced proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. In a recent report, amphiregulin (AREG), an EGF family member, was also identified as a target gene of YAP (J Zhang et al. 2009). The induction of AREG by YAP is only observed under EGF starvation conditions. However, the AREG promoter does not contain a TEAD-binding element, and the transcription factor mediating AREG induction remains elusive (Fig. 2). Interestingly, AREG was shown to be the factor in medium conditioned by active YAP-overexpressing cells mediating a

non-cell-autonomous growth-promoting effect on MCF10A
cells. However, the main function of the Hippo pathway
and YAP seems to be cell-autonomous in vivo.

### Phosphorylation-dependent inhibition
of YAP by the Hippo pathway

YAP is directly phosphorylated by Lats1/2 on five HXRXXS
consensus motifs (Zhao et al. 2010). Three of the sites are
conserved in Yki and are shown to be phosphorylated (Oh
and Irvine 2009). Phosphorylation of YAP S127 and the
corresponding site in Yki or TAZ generates a 14-3-3-
binding site that leads to YAP/TAZ/Yki cytoplasmic re-
tention through 14-3-3 binding, and their spatial separa-
tion from nuclear target transcription factors and target
gene promoters (Zhao et al. 2007; Lei et al. 2008; Oh and
Irvine 2008). The involvement of 14-3-3 in *Drosophila* Yki
inhibition was confirmed recently by RNAi and genetic
mutation, which enhanced Yki nuclear localization and
activity in vivo (Ren et al. 2009). This Hippo pathway-
dependent nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation of YAP, orig-
inally observed in cell culture, has also been suggested
to be responsible for the cytoplasmic translocation of
YAP in inner cell mass during mouse embryo development
(Nishioka et al. 2009). Mutation of the S127 residue ac-
tivates YAP. However, further mutations of the other four
serine residues in the HXRXXS motifs boost YAP activity
even more (Zhao et al. 2007). Furthermore, the YAP-5SA
mutant can potently transform NIH-3T3 cells, whereas
YAP-S127A cannot (Zhao et al. 2009). These observations
support the idea that the other Lats1/2 phosphorylation
sites in YAP are also important for its regulation.
Indeed, later experiments showed that the presence of
either S127 or S381 is sufficient to suppress the oncogenic
potential of YAP-5SA mutant (Zhao et al. 2010). More-
over, double mutation of S127A and S381A is sufficient
to turn on transforming activity of YAP. These results
demonstrate that Lats1/2 phosphorylation on S127 and
S381 are key events for YAP inhibition. We reported re-
cently that phosphorylation on YAP S381 primes subse-
quent phosphorylation by another kinase, possibly casein
kinase 1 (CK1δ/ε), activating a phosphodegron and caus-
ing the recruitment of β-TRCP E3 ubiquitin ligase leading
to YAP polyubiquitination and degradation (Zhao et al.
2010). This mechanism of YAP destabilization provides
a possibility of long-term YAP inactivation and is impli-
cated in YAP inhibition upon cell contact inhibition. In-
creased YAP phosphorylation at high cell density is ac-
companied by YAP destabilization, which can be blocked
by mutation of both S127 and S381. Interestingly, YAP
S381A mutation is sufficient to block ubiquitination. Therefore, the requirement of both S127 and S381 muta-
tion for YAP stabilization also suggests that there might
be a ubiquitination-independent but S127-dependent
mechanism of YAP degradation. The Hippo pathway-
dependent destabilization of YAP is supported by the
recent observation of increased YAP protein levels ac-
companying decreased YAP phosphorylation in Mst1/2
double-knockout mice liver (Song et al. 2010). The
phosphodegron is also conserved in TAZ, and modulates

The Hippo-YAP pathway updated

TAZ stability in a manner similar to YAP (Q Lei and K-L
Guan, unpubl.).

However, a similar mechanism may not be applicable
to Yki because the phosphodegron is not conserved. Notably, *discs overgrown* (*dco*), the *Drosophila* homolog
of CK1δ/ε, has been shown by genetic epistatic analysis to
be involved in the Hippo pathway upstream of Dachs
(Cho et al. 2006). Recently, Dco has also been shown to
phosphorylate Fat, although the effect of this phosphor-
ylation on the Hippo pathway activity has not been
clarified (Feng and Irvine 2009; Sopko et al. 2009). How-
ever, the effect of CK1δ/ε on YAP phosphorylation
appears to be direct, supporting CK1δ/ε as a new player in
the Hippo-YAP pathway. YAP Y391 residue is in close
proximity to the phosphodegron and is phosphorylated by
c-Abl in response to DNA damage, resulting in YAP
stabilization (Levy et al. 2008). It is not clear if Y391
phosphorylation stabilizes YAP through modulation of
S381 phosphorylation-mediated YAP degradation. The
proposed mechanism also raises an interesting analogy
between YAP and another oncogenic transcription coac-
tivator, β-catenin, as β-catenin is similarly degraded by a
phosphodegron and β-TRCP (Liu et al. 2002).
Yki is phosphorylated by Wts on S168 (YAP S127
counterpart), as well as S111 and S250. Similar to YAP,
S168 phosphorylation plays a major role in the cytoplas-
mic localization and inhibition of Yki (Oh and Irvine
2008). Phosphorylation of S111 and S250 also inhibits Yki
activity, and the Yki S111/250A mutant promotes *Dro-
sophila* eye overgrowth more potently than wild-type Yki
(Ren et al. 2009). Yki S111/250A appears to be more
nuclear-localized than the wild-type Yki, although the
effect is less dramatic than Yki S168A (Ren et al. 2009).
Therefore, S111/250 phosphorylation may also regulate
Yki subcellular localization through an elusive mecha-
nism. 14-3-3 binding and a direct sequester by Ex are
apparently not involved (Ren et al. 2009). It is clear that
the Hippo pathway-dependent phosphorylation inhibits
YAP/TAZ/Yki through multiple mechanisms.

#### Inhibition of Yki by Hippo pathway components
via direct physical interaction

An interesting phenomenon in the Hippo pathway is the
abundance of protein-protein interactions, such as those
mediated by WW domains that bind PPXY motifs (Fig. 1).
The functions of WW domains in YAP regulation are
controversial. They have been shown to positively mediate
YAP function, and mutation of the WW domains attenu-
ated YAP activity in promoting cell proliferation and
oncogenic transformation in NIH-3T3 cell culture and
diminished the ability of YAP/Yki to promote tissue over-
growth in *Drosophila* in vivo (X Zhang et al. 2009; Zhao
et al. 2009). However, in other cells, such as MCF10A, WW
domains were shown to promote cell proliferation or
inhibit cell transformation (X Zhang et al. 2009; Zhao
et al. 2009). This discrepancy might be due to the in-
teraction of WW domains with multiple binding partners,
such as transcription factors in nucleus or inhibitory pro-
teins in cytoplasm.

The WW domains in YAP have long been suggested to interact with Lats1/2 (Hao et al. 2008; Oka et al. 2008). However, the WW domain mutant YAP can still be inhibited by Lats2, indicating they are not required for YAP phosphorylation by Lats2 (Zhao et al. 2009). The WW domain in Yki has been shown recently to interact with the PPXY motifs in Ex, Wts, and Hpo. Such interactions may inhibit Yki by sequestering it in cytoplasm (Badouel et al. 2009; H Oh et al. 2009), adding another layer of complexity to Yki regulation. However, one concern from these studies is that most experiments were performed with overexpressed proteins, which may create nonphysiological interactions. Even if the WW domain indeed inhibits Yki by interacting with PPXY-containing proteins, the Wts-induced phosphorylation-dependent inhibition would play a more prominent role in Yki inhibition. This is supported by the finding that, in 14-3-3 knockdown *Drosophila* wing discs, Hippo pathway components are unable to hold Yki in the cytoplasm by physical interaction (Ren et al. 2009). This suggests that 14-3-3-dependent translocation of phosphorylated Yki is responsible for sequestering a large fraction of Yki in the cytoplasm.

TEAD C-terminal domain forms a globular structure with a β-sandwich fold surrounded by four α-helices on one side. The YAP N-terminal domain wraps around TEAD, forming extensive interactions. Of particular interest are the two residues that have been implicated previously in YAP–TEAD binding based on biochemical studies. Mutation of S94 in YAP or mutation of Y406 in TEAD1 disrupts the YAP–TEAD interaction and abolishes YAP-induced gene expression (Zhao et al. 2008b). TEAD1 Y406H mutation is associated with a human genetic disease, Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (Fosdal et al. 2004). The three-dimensional structure shows clearly that S94 directly forms a hydrogen bond with TEAD1 Y406 (Chen et al. 2010; Li et al. 2010). The YAP–TEAD complex structure provides a beautiful biochemical explanation of the disrupted interaction between YAP and TEAD1 by YAP S94 or TEAD1 Y406 mutations, and reveals the molecular basis for TEAD1 mutation in Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy. Given that a small region of YAP makes a critical contribution to the YAP–TEAD complex formation, it will be interesting to test if small peptides could be designed to target the conserved interfaces and to inhibit YAP–TEAD function in vivo. Such inhibitors would have potential therapeutic application for cancers with high YAP activity.

### YAP--TEAD structure

As a transcription coactivator, YAP is brought to gene promoters by target transcription factors. Recent biochemical and genetic studies established a key role of the TEAD family transcription factors in mediating the biological activity of YAP/TAZ (Zhao et al. 2008b; H Zhang et al. 2009), and their *Drosophila* homolog Sd in mediating the functions of Yki (Goulev et al. 2008; Wu et al. 2008; L Zhang et al. 2008). In mammalian cells, it has been reported that as high as 75% of purified TEAD2 is in association with YAP (Vassilev et al. 2001). A screen of a human transcription factor library also identified TEADs as the targets that are most potently activated by YAP (Zhao et al. 2008b). Knockdown of TEADs or disruption of YAP–TEAD interaction blunts the regulation of the majority of YAP-dependent genes and largely diminishes the activity of YAP in promoting cell proliferation, oncogenic transformation, and EMT (Zhao et al. 2008b). Conversely, when TEAD was fused with VP16 transactivation domain, it produced a gene expression profile similar to that activated by YAP (Ota and Sasaki 2008). In addition, the phenotype of TEAD1/TEAD2 double-knockout mice resembles YAP knockout mice with decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis (Sawada et al. 2008). These discoveries were supported by studies indicating that *sd* interacts genetically with *yki* and is required for *yki*-induced target gene expression in vivo (Goulev et al. 2008; Wu et al. 2008; L Zhang et al. 2008).

The three-dimensional structures of human YAP–TEAD1 complex and mouse YAP–TEAD4 complex have been solved recently (Chen et al. 2010; Li et al. 2010). Both structures contain only the TEAD-binding domain of YAP and the YAP-binding domain of TEAD. Nevertheless, the complex structures provide important insights into the molecular basis of YAP–TEAD interaction.

### New transcription factor targets of YAP/Yki

In most tissues, there is at least one TEAD expressed (Kaneko et al. 1997), supporting a ubiquitous role of YAP–TEAD transcription complex in cell proliferation and survival. Other YAP target transcription factor partners—including RUNX, ErbB4 cytoplasmic domain, and p73 (Yagi et al. 1999; Strano et al. 2001; Komuro et al. 2003; Omerovic et al. 2004)—interact mainly with YAP via their PPXY motifs, although none of them has been shown to mediate the growth-promoting function of YAP. A recent report identified Smad1 in the BMP signaling pathway as a new transcription factor interacting with the YAP WW domains (Alarcon et al. 2009). This interaction is also conserved in *Drosophila* Yki and the Smad1 homolog Mad. Importantly, phosphorylation of the linker region of Smad1 following BMP stimulation significantly increases the interaction with YAP, and mutation of the phosphorylation sites decreases their interaction. YAP has also been shown to mediate BMP target gene expression in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, which relies on BMP signal for pluripotency maintenance (Alarcon et al. 2009). Therefore, this regulated interaction of Smad1 and YAP could possibly mediate the cross-talk between the BMP and the Hippo signaling pathways.

The above work is reminiscent of a previous report indicating the requirement of TAZ in maintaining Smad2/3 nuclear localization and target gene expression in response to TGF-β signaling (Varelas et al. 2008). Knockdown of TAZ not only impairs TGF-β-induced gene expression, but also induces human stem cell differentiation, which relies on TGF-β signaling for maintenance of pluripotency. It is noteworthy that TAZ binds to Smad2/3 through the coiled-coil region instead of the

WW domain. Thus, the regulations of YAP and TAZ interaction with Smads are different. Intriguingly, the effect of YAP or TAZ knockdown is not compensated by the presence of the other, indicating the physiological differences between YAP and TAZ. One possible explanation is that YAP and TAZ have different expression patterns in human and mouse stem cells. Alternatively, YAP and TAZ are functionally distinct, but respond specifically to BMP and TGF-β, respectively. However, both the WW domains and the coiled-coil domain are conserved in YAP and TAZ. It is therefore unclear how they achieve specific binding with certain Smads.

In *Drosophila*, Yki shows a broader expression pattern than Sd (Campbell et al. 1992), and *yki* mutant cells have more dramatic growth defects than *sd* mutant cells (Huang et al. 2005; Wu et al. 2008), suggesting other transcription factors also mediate Yki function. This speculation is supported by the observation that the Sd-binding-defective Yki mutant elicits a reduced but still obvious overgrowth in *Drosophila* eyes and wings (Zhao et al. 2008b). In a recent report, Homothorax (Hth), a TALE homeodomain transcription factor, and Teashirt (Tsh), a zinc finger transcription factor, were shown to mediate part of Yki activity in promoting tissue overgrowth by inducing *bantam* microRNA (Peng et al. 2009). Hth and Tsh form a physical complex, and have been studied mostly in the context of patterning and morphogenesis. Hth and Tsh are required for cell survival and proliferation in the progenitor domain of the eye imaginal disc anterior to the morphogenetic furrow (MF). However, the growth of Hth and Tsh overexpression clones in the anterior disc was largely inhibited by Yki mutation. On the other hand, mutation of Hth also abolished Wts mutation or Yki overexpression-induced clone expansion specifically in the anterior compartment (Peng et al. 2009). Therefore, there is a codependent relationship between the Hippo pathway and Hth/Tsh in inducing proliferation in the *Drosophila* eye progenitor domain. Hth and Tsh stimulate the promoter activity of *bantam* microRNA. *bantam* expression partially rescues the phenotype of *hth* mutation, while *bantam* mutation represses Hth and Tsh overexpression-induced overgrowth. Finally, Hth and Yki are shown to interact with each other and bind to a short DNA sequence 14 kb upstream of the *bantam* gene, suggesting that they may directly activate *bantam* expression.

The relationship between Hth/Tsh and Sd or possibly other Yki target transcription factors remains an interesting question. In the eye disc, Hth/Tsh and Sd expression is restricted to anterior and posterior to the MF, respectively, and may therefore function in different cells. Glass multimer reporter (GMR) specifically drives gene expression posterior to the MF in *Drosophila* eye discs. Intriguingly, when Yki overexpression was driven by GMR, mutation of *bantam* still attenuated the effect of Yki (Nolo et al. 2006; Thompson and Cohen 2006). Similarly, the effect of Hippo overexpression by GMR could also be rescued by simultaneous expression of *bantam* (Nolo et al. 2006; Thompson and Cohen 2006). These observations indicate that other transcription factors could regulate *bantam* expression

posterior to the MF, where Hth/Tsh are not expressed. There are two mammalian homologs of Hth (Meis1 and Meis2), and three Tsh homologs (Tsh1/2/3). Although mouse Tsh1/2/3 share low sequence homology with the *Drosophila* Tsh, they have been shown to compensate for developmental defects due to Tsh loss in *Drosophila* (Manfroid et al. 2004). More studies are needed to examine the function of Hth and Tsh mammalian homologs in mediating YAP/TAZ function.

### YAP and the Hippo pathway in cancer

The Hippo pathway was initially defined as a tumor suppressor pathway in *Drosophila*. The best-characterized human tumor suppressor gene in the Hippo pathway is the neurofibromatosis tumor suppressor NF2 (*Mer*). An NF2 mutation is present in one out of 25,000 individuals, half of which is due to de novo mutation and the other half to germline inheritance. Patients with NF2 mutations develop lesions in the nervous system, eyes, and skin, with a close to 100% penetrance by the age of 60 (Asthagiri et al. 2009). Although mutations of other Hippo pathway components in human cancers are understudied, compelling evidence supports a role of this pathway in human tumorigenesis. Mutations of Sav1 and Mob1 have been observed in a human renal carcinoma cell line (ACHN) and melanomas, respectively (Tapon et al. 2002; Lai et al. 2005). Attenuated expression of Mob1 has been observed in colorectal cancer tissue compared with matched normal samples (Kosaka et al. 2007). In a retroviral tumorigenesis study in mice, Mob1 has also been shown to be one of the genes with multiple insertions, indicating a potential tumor suppressor role (Uren et al. 2008). Down-regulation of Lats1/2 has been reported in human sarcomas, ovarian carcinomas, aggressive breast cancers, astrocytomas, retinoblastomas, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Hisaoka et al. 2002; Jimenez-Velasco et al. 2005; Chakraborty et al. 2007). In some cases, this attenuated Lats1/2 expression was attributed to promoter hypermethylation (Takahashi et al. 2005; Jiang et al. 2006). Decreased Mst1/2 expression has been observed in human soft tissue sarcomas and colorectal cancers (Minoo et al. 2007; Seidel et al. 2007). Importantly, genetic studies in mice have unequivocally demonstrated Mst1/2 as tumor suppressors. The germline *Mst1⁻/⁻Mst2⁺/⁻* mice mainly developed hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) due to *Mst2* loss of heterozygosity (Zhou et al. 2009). Moreover, tissue-specific ablation of both *Mst1* and *Mst2* in liver leads to massive HCC (Zhou et al. 2009; Lu et al. 2010; Song et al. 2010). Knockdown of YAP reversed the transformed phenotype of HCC-derived cells from these mice (Zhou et al. 2009). Strikingly, 70% of human HCC samples examined show markedly reduced Mst1/2 activity, as determined by Mob phosphorylation, and most are also confirmed by loss of the cleaved, presumably active form of Mst1 (Zhou et al. 2009). It is worth noting that in all but three of those samples with attenuated Mst1/2 activity, YAP phosphorylation is also decreased.

As the major downstream effector of the Hippo pathway, it is not surprising that YAP functions as an oncogene.

Zhao et al.

YAP gene locus is known to be amplified in human cancers, including intracranial ependymomas, oral squamous cell carcinomas, and medulloblastomas (Baldwin et al. 2005; Snijders et al. 2005; Modena et al. 2006; Fernandez et al. 2009). More interestingly, two reports identified YAP as a driving oncogene in human HCC and breast cancer 11q22 amplicons (Overholtzer et al. 2006; Zender et al. 2006). Consistently, elevated YAP expression and nuclear localization have been observed in multiple types of human cancers, including liver cancers, colon cancers, ovarian cancers, lung cancers, and prostate cancers. (Zender et al. 2006; Dong et al. 2007; Zhao et al. 2007; Steinhardt et al. 2008). Recently, by analyzing 177 pairs of HCC and matched normal samples with complete clinical records, YAP was determined to be an independent prognostic marker for overall survival and disease-free survival for HCC patients (Xu et al. 2009). At this moment, the data are still insufficient to delineate the tissue specificity and frequency of Hippo pathway components and YAP mutations/alterations in human cancers. However, current data indicate that dysregulation of the Hippo pathway and YAP plays a role in tumorigenesis, at least in HCC. This might be due to tissue-specific function of the Hippo pathway, or simply because more studies of this pathway have been performed in liver tissues. YAP is also reported to have proapoptotic activity by coactivation of p73 (Strano et al. 2005; Matallanas et al. 2007; Oka et al. 2008), and was proposed to be a breast tumor suppressor (Yuan et al. 2008). This might be cell context-specific, and needs to be supported further by in vivo genetic study. In addition, TAZ has been shown to be overexpressed in ~20% of breast cancer samples (Chan et al. 2008).

A recent study also identified YAP and TEAD1 overexpression in Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt-dependent medulloblastomas, which were believed to arise from cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs) (Fernandez et al. 2009). Treatment of CGNPs with Shh was shown to induce YAP transcription, stabilization, and nuclear localization. YAP, together with TEAD1, may also directly induce expression of Gli2, a downstream effector of Shh signaling. In medulloblastoma mouse models with abnormal Shh signaling, YAP and TEAD1 levels were consistently elevated in tumors. Also, YAP expression was strikingly high in perivascular cells, which are believed to have cancer stem cell properties (Fernandez et al. 2009). These high-YAP-expressing cells also express CD15, a marker of medulloblastoma tumor-propagating cells. Considering the function of YAP in preventing mouse ES cell differentiation, it is tempting to hypothesize that YAP may also function in maintaining cancer stem cells in certain tumors. In support of this hypothesis, Mst1 and Mst2 ablation in liver is also shown to induce abundant accumulation of adult liver stem cells, termed oval cells, in periductal regions (Lu et al. 2010).

Future perspectives

The rapid progress of the Hippo pathway research in the last several years has built a road map of this pathway and its role in physiological organ size control and patholog-

ical tumorigenesis. However, the picture is still not complete, and many key questions remain to be addressed. At the top of the list are: Which upstream signals trigger the Hippo pathway, and which receptors detect these signals? Related to this is the question of how the Hippo pathway senses organ size. Other important questions include the biochemical mechanism of Mst1/2/Sav1 activation by upstream components. The extent to which the Hippo pathway varies in terms of cell context and the new components involved have yet to be determined. In addition, other transcription factors and target genes mediating YAP/TAZ/Yki function remain to be identified. Furthermore, it has not been fully elucidated how the Hippo pathway and YAP/TAZ are deregulated in human cancer. Finally, there awaits the challenge of developing an inhibitor of YAP/TAZ for potential therapeutic use against cancer.

Acknowledgments

We apologize for the many important contributions to the Hippo pathway field that could not be cited due to space constraints. We thank Karen Tumaneng, Jean Guan, and Dr. Ryan Russell for critical reading of the manuscript. This work is supported by grants from the NIH (CA132809 and GM62694 to K.-L.G.), National High Technology Research and Development Program of China Grant 2006AA02A308, State Key Development Program for Basic Research of China Grant 2009CB918401, National Natural Science Foundation of China Grants 30600112 and 30871255, Shanghai key project Grants 08JC1400800 and 09JC1402300, and the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project B110 (Q.L.).

References

Alarcon C, Zaromytidou AI, Xi Q, Gao S, Yu J, Fujisawa S, Barlas A, Miller AN, Manova-Todorova K, Macias MJ, et al. 2009. Nuclear CDKs drive Smad transcriptional activation and turnover in BMP and TGF-β pathways. *Cell* **139**: 757–769.

Asthagiri AR, Parry DM, Butman JA, Kim HJ, Tsilou ET, Zhuang Z, Lonser RR. 2009. Neurofibromatosis type 2. *Lancet* **373**: 1974–1986.

Badouel C, Gardano L, Amin N, Garg A, Rosenfeld R, Le Bihan T, McNeill H. 2009. The FERM-domain protein Expanded regulates Hippo pathway activity via direct interactions with the transcriptional activator Yorkie. *Dev Cell* **16**: 411–420.

Baldwin C, Garnis C, Zhang L, Rosin MP, Lam WL. 2005. Multiple microalterations detected at high frequency in oral cancer. *Cancer Res* **65**: 7561–7567.

Baumgartner R, Poernbacher I, Buser N, Hafen E, Stocker H. 2010. The WW domain protein Kibra acts upstream of hippo in *Drosophila*. *Dev Cell* **18**: 309–316.

Bennett FC, Harvey KF. 2006. Fat cadherin modulates organ size in *Drosophila* via the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling pathway. *Curr Biol* **16**: 2101–2110.

Callus BA, Verhagen AM, Vaux DL. 2006. Association of mammalian sterile twenty kinases, Mst1 and Mst2, with hSalvador via C-terminal coiled-coil domains, leads to its stabilization and phosphorylation. *FEBS J* **273**: 4264–4276.

Camargo FD, Gokhale S, Johnnidis JB, Fu D, Bell GW, Jaenisch R, Brummelkamp TR. 2007. YAP1 increases organ size and expands undifferentiated progenitor cells. *Curr Biol* **17**: 2054–2060.

Campbell S, Inamdar M, Rodrigues V, Raghavan V, Palazzolo M, Chovnick A. 1992. The scalloped gene encodes a novel,

Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on February 12, 2015 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

The Hippo-YAP pathway updated

evolutionarily conserved transcription factor required for sensory organ differentiation in *Drosophila*. *Genes & Dev* 6: 367–379.

Chakraborty S, Khare S, Dorairaj SK, Prabhakaran VC, Prakash DR, Kumar A. 2007. Identification of genes associated with tumorigenesis of retinoblastoma by microarray analysis. *Genomics* 90: 344–353.

Chan EH, Nousiainen M, Chalamalasetty RB, Schafer A, Nigg EA, Sillje HH. 2005. The Ste20-like kinase Mst2 activates the human large tumor suppressor kinase Lats1. *Oncogene* 24: 2076–2086.

Chan SW, Lim CJ, Guo K, Ng CP, Lee I, Hunziker W, Zeng Q, Hong W. 2008. A role for TAZ in migration, invasion, and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells. *Cancer Res* 68: 2592–2598.

Chen L, Chan SW, Zhang X, Walsh M, Lim CJ, Hong W, Song H. 2010. Structural basis of YAP recognition by TEAD4 in the hippo pathway. *Genes & Dev* 24: 290–300.

Cho E, Feng Y, Rauskolb C, Maitra S, Fehon R, Irvine KD. 2006. Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. *Nat Genet* 38: 1142–1150.

Cho WJ, Shin JM, Kim JS, Lee MR, Hong KS, Lee JH, Koo KH, Park JW, Kim KS. 2009. miR-372 regulates cell cycle and apoptosis of ags human gastric cancer cell line through direct regulation of LATS2. *Mol Cells* 28: 521–527.

Chow A, Hao Y, Yang X. 2010. Molecular characterization of human homologs of yeast MOB1. *Int J Cancer* 126: 2079–2089.

Densham RM, O'Neill E, Munro J, König I, Anderson K, Kolch W, Olson MF. 2009. MST kinases monitor actin cytoskeletal integrity and signal via c-Jun N-terminal kinase stress-activated kinase to regulate p21Waf1/Cip1 stability. *Mol Cell Biol* 29: 6380–6390.

Dong J, Feldmann G, Huang J, Wu S, Zhang N, Comerford SA, Gayyed MF, Anders RA, Maitra A, Pan D. 2007. Elucidation of a universal size-control mechanism in *Drosophila* and mammals. *Cell* 130: 1120–1133.

Edgar BA. 2006. From cell structure to transcription: Hippo forges a new path. *Cell* 124: 267–273.

Feng Y, Irvine KD. 2007. Fat and expanded act in parallel to regulate growth through warts. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 104: 20362–20367.

Feng Y, Irvine KD. 2009. Processing and phosphorylation of the Fat receptor. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 106: 11989–11994.

Fernandez LA, Northcott PA, Dalton J, Fraga C, Ellison D, Angers S, Taylor MD, Kenney AM. 2009. YAP1 is amplified and up-regulated in hedgehog-associated medulloblastomas and mediates Sonic hedgehog-driven neural precursor proliferation. *Genes & Dev* 23: 2729–2741.

Fossdal R, Jonasson F, Kristjansdottir GT, Kong A, Stefansson H, Gosh S, Gulcher JR, Stefansson K. 2004. A novel TEAD1 mutation is the causative allele in Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (helicoid peripapillary chorioretinal degeneration). *Hum Mol Genet* 13: 975–981.

Genevet A, Wehr MC, Brain R, Thompson BJ, Tapon N. 2010. Kibra is a regulator of the salvador/warts/hippo signaling network. *Dev Cell* 18: 300–308.

Goulev Y, Fauny JD, Gonzalez-Marti B, Flagiello D, Silber J, Zider A. 2008. SCALLOPED interacts with YORKIE, the nuclear effector of the Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway in *Drosophila*. *Curr Biol* 18: 435–441.

Graves JD, Gotoh Y, Draves KE, Ambrose D, Han DK, Wright M, Chernoff J, Clark EA, Krebs EG. 1998. Caspase-mediated activation and induction of apoptosis by the mammalian Ste20-like kinase Mst1. *EMBO J* 17: 2224–2234.

Hamaratoglu F, Willecke M, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Hyun E, Tao C, Jafar-Nejad H, Halder G. 2006. The tumour-suppressor

genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. *Nat Cell Biol* 8: 27–36.

Hao Y, Chun A, Cheung K, Rashidi B, Yang X. 2008. Tumor suppressor LATS1 is a negative regulator of oncogene YAP. *J Biol Chem* 283: 5496–5509.

Harvey KF, Pfleger CM, Hariharan IK. 2003. The *Drosophila* Mst ortholog, hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. *Cell* 114: 457–467.

Hergovich A, Schmitz D, Hemmings BA. 2006. The human tumour suppressor LATS1 is activated by human MOB1 at the membrane. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 345: 50–58.

Hisaoka M, Tanaka A, Hashimoto H. 2002. Molecular alterations of h-warts/LATS1 tumor suppressor in human soft tissue sarcoma. *Lab Invest* 82: 1427–1435.

Ho LL, Wei X, Shimizu T, Lai ZC. 2009. Mob as tumor suppressor is activated at the cell membrane to control tissue growth and organ size in *Drosophila*. *Dev Biol* 337: 274–283.

Hossain Z, Ali SM, Ko HL, Xu J, Ng CP, Guo K, Qi Z, Ponniah S, Hong W, Hunziker W. 2007. Glomerulocystic kidney disease in mice with a targeted inactivation of Wwtr1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 104: 1631–1636.

Huang J, Wu S, Barrera J, Matthews K, Pan D. 2005. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the *Drosophila* homolog of YAP. *Cell* 122: 421–434.

Jia J, Zhang W, Wang B, Trinko R, Jiang J. 2003. The *Drosophila* Ste20 family kinase dMST functions as a tumor suppressor by restricting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. *Genes & Dev* 17: 2514–2519.

Jiang Z, Li X, Hu J, Zhou W, Jiang Y, Li G, Lu D. 2006. Promoter hypermethylation-mediated down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 in human astrocytoma. *Neurosci Res* 56: 450–458.

Jimenez-Velasco A, Roman-Gomez J, Agirre X, Barrios M, Navarro G, Vazquez I, Prosper F, Torres A, Heiniger A. 2005. Downregulation of the large tumor suppressor 2 (LATS2/KPM) gene is associated with poor prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. *Leukemia* 19: 2347–2350.

Justice RW, Zilian O, Woods DF, Noll M, Bryant PJ. 1995. The *Drosophila* tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. *Genes & Dev* 9: 534–546.

Kanai F, Marignani PA, Sarbassova D, Yagi R, Hall RA, Donowitz M, Hisaminato A, Fujiwara T, Ito Y, Cantley LC, et al. 2000. TAZ: A novel transcriptional co-activator regulated by interactions with 14-3-3 and PDZ domain proteins. *EMBO J* 19: 6778–6791.

Kaneko KJ, Cullinan EB, Latham KE, DePamphilis ML. 1997. Transcription factor mTEAD-2 is selectively expressed at the beginning of zygotic gene expression in the mouse. *Development* 124: 1963–1973.

Kango-Singh M, Singh A. 2009. Regulation of organ size: Insights from the *Drosophila* Hippo signaling pathway. *Dev Dyn* 238: 1627–1637.

Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Tao C, Verstreken P, Hiesinger PR, Bellen HJ, Halder G. 2002. Shar-pei mediates cell proliferation arrest during imaginal disc growth in *Drosophila*. *Development* 129: 5719–5730.

Khokhlatchev A, Rabizadeh S, Xavier R, Nedwidek M, Chen T, Zhang XF, Seed B, Avruch J. 2002. Identification of a novel Ras-regulated proapoptotic pathway. *Curr Biol* 12: 253–265.

Komuro A, Nagai M, Navin NE, Sudol M. 2003. WW domain-containing protein YAP associates with ErbB-4 and acts as a co-transcriptional activator for the carboxyl-terminal

fragment of ErbB-4 that translocates to the nucleus. *J Biol Chem* **278**: 33334–33341.

Kosaka Y, Mimori K, Tanaka F, Inoue H, Watanabe M, Mori M. 2007. Clinical significance of the loss of MATS1 mRNA expression in colorectal cancer. *Int J Oncol* **31**: 333–338.

Lai ZC, Wei X, Shimizu T, Ramos E, Rohrbaugh M, Nikolaidis N, Ho LL, Li Y. 2005. Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. *Cell* **120**: 675–685.

Lau YK, Murray LB, Houshmandi SS, Xu Y, Gutmann DH, Yu Q. 2008. Merlin is a potent inhibitor of glioma growth. *Cancer Res* **68**: 5733–5742.

Lee KK, Yonehara S. 2002. Phosphorylation and dimerization regulate nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of mammalian STE20-like kinase (MST). *J Biol Chem* **277**: 12351–12358.

Lee JH, Kim TS, Yang TH, Koo BK, Oh SP, Lee KP, Oh HJ, Lee SH, Kong YY, Kim JM, et al. 2008. A crucial role of WW45 in developing epithelial tissues in the mouse. *EMBO J* **27**: 1231–1242.

Lee KH, Goan YG, Hsiao M, Lee CH, Jian SH, Lin JT, Chen YL, Lu PJ. 2009. MicroRNA-373 (miR-373) post-transcriptionally regulates large tumor suppressor, homolog 2 (LATS2) and stimulates proliferation in human esophageal cancer. *Exp Cell Res* **315**: 2529–2538.

Lei QY, Zhang H, Zhao B, Zha ZY, Bai F, Pei XH, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Guan KL. 2008. TAZ promotes cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the hippo pathway. *Mol Cell Biol* **28**: 2426–2436.

Levy D, Adamovich Y, Reuven N, Shaul Y. 2008. Yap1 phosphorylation by c-Abl is a critical step in selective activation of proapoptotic genes in response to DNA damage. *Mol Cell* **29**: 350–361.

Li Z, Zhao B, Wang P, Chen F, Dong Z, Yang H, Guan KL, Xu Y. 2010. Structural insights into the YAP and TEAD complex. *Genes & Dev* **24**: 235–240.

Liu C, Li Y, Semenov M, Han C, Baeg GH, Tan Y, Zhang Z, Lin X, He X. 2002. Control of β-catenin phosphorylation/degradation by a dual-kinase mechanism. *Cell* **108**: 837–847.

Lu L, Li Y, Kim SM, Bossuyt W, Liu P, Qiu Q, Wang Y, Halder G, Finegold MJ, Lee JS, et al. 2010. Hippo signaling is a potent in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* **107**: 1437–1442.

Maitra S, Kulikauskas RM, Gavilan H, Fehon RG. 2006. The tumor suppressors Merlin and Expanded function cooperatively to modulate receptor endocytosis and signaling. *Curr Biol* **16**: 702–709.

Makita R, Uchijima Y, Nishiyama K, Amano T, Chen Q, Takeuchi T, Mitani A, Nagase T, Yatomi Y, Aburatani H, et al. 2008. Multiple renal cysts, urinary concentration defects, and pulmonary emphysematous changes in mice lacking TAZ. *Am J Physiol Renal Physiol* **294**: F542–F553. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00201.2007.

Manfroid I, Caubit X, Kerridge S, Fasano L. 2004. Three putative murine Teashirt orthologues specify trunk structures in Drosophila in the same way as the Drosophila teashirt gene. *Development* **131**: 1065–1073.

Mao Y, Kucuk B, Irvine KD. 2009. *Drosophila* lowfat, a novel modulator of Fat signaling. *Development* **136**: 3223–3233.

Matallanas D, Romano D, Yee K, Meissl K, Kucerova L, Piazolla D, Baccarini M, Vass JK, Kolch W, O'Neill E. 2007. RASSF1A elicits apoptosis through an MST2 pathway directing proapoptotic transcription by the p73 tumor suppressor protein. *Mol Cell* **27**: 962–975.

McPherson JP, Tamblyn L, Elia A, Migon E, Shehabeldin A, Matysiak-Zablocki E, Lemmers B, Salmena L, Hakem A, Fish J, et al. 2004. Lats2/Kpm is required for embryonic develop-

ment, proliferation control and genomic integrity. *EMBO J* **23**: 3677–3688.

Minoo P, Zlobec I, Baker K, Tornillo L, Terracciano L, Jass JR, Lugli A. 2007. Prognostic significance of mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 1 in colorectal cancer. *Mod Pathol* **20**: 331–338.

Modena P, Lualdi E, Facchinetti F, Veltman J, Reid JF, Minardi S, Janssen I, Giangaspero F, Forni M, Finocchiaro G, et al. 2006. Identification of tumor-specific molecular signatures in intracranial ependymoma and association with clinical characteristics. *J Clin Oncol* **24**: 5223–5233.

Morin-Kensicki EM, Boone BN, Howell M, Stonebraker JR, Teed J, Alb JG, Magnuson TR, O'Neal W, Milgram SL. 2006. Defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and embryonic axis elongation in mice with targeted disruption of Yap65. *Mol Cell Biol* **26**: 77–87.

Nishioka N, Inoue K, Adachi K, Kiyonari H, Ota M, Ralston A, Yabuta N, Hirahara S, Stephenson RO, Ogonuki N, et al. 2009. The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass. *Dev Cell* **16**: 398–410.

Nolo R, Morrison CM, Tao C, Zhang X, Halder G. 2006. The bantam microRNA is a target of the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway. *Curr Biol* **16**: 1895–1904.

O'Neill E, Rushworth L, Baccarini M, Kolch W. 2004. Role of the kinase MST2 in suppression of apoptosis by the proto-oncogene product Raf-1. *Science* **306**: 2267–2270.

Oh H, Irvine KD. 2008. In vivo regulation of Yorkie phosphorylation and localization. *Development* **135**: 1081–1088.

Oh H, Irvine KD. 2009. In vivo analysis of Yorkie phosphorylation sites. *Oncogene* **28**: 1916–1927.

Oh HJ, Lee KK, Song SJ, Jin MS, Song MS, Lee JH, Im CR, Lee JO, Yonehara S, Lim DS. 2006. Role of the tumor suppressor RASSF1A in Mst1-mediated apoptosis. *Cancer Res* **66**: 2562–2569.

Oh H, Reddy BV, Irvine KD. 2009. Phosphorylation-independent repression of Yorkie in Fat-Hippo signaling. *Dev Biol* **335**: 188–197.

Oh S, Lee D, Kim T, Kim TS, Oh HJ, Hwang CY, Kong YY, Kwon KS, Lim DS. 2009. Crucial role for Mst1 and Mst2 kinases in early embryonic development of the mouse. *Mol Cell Biol* **29**: 6309–6320.

Oka T, Mazack V, Sudol M. 2008. Mst2 and Lats kinases regulate apoptotic function of Yes kinase-associated protein (YAP). *J Biol Chem* **283**: 27534–27546.

Omerovic J, Puggioni EM, Napoletano S, Visco V, Fraioli R, Frati L, Gulino A, Alimandi M. 2004. Ligand-regulated association of ErbB-4 to the transcriptional co-activator YAP65 controls transcription at the nuclear level. *Exp Cell Res* **294**: 469–479.

Ota M, Sasaki H. 2008. Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling. *Development* **135**: 4059–4069.

Overholtzer M, Zhang J, Smolen GA, Muir B, Li W, Sgroi DC, Deng CX, Brugge JS, Haber DA. 2006. Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* **103**: 12405–12410.

Pantalacci S, Tapon N, Leopold P. 2003. The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in *Drosophila*. *Nat Cell Biol* **5**: 921–927.

Pellock BJ, Buff E, White K, Hariharan IK. 2007. The *Drosophila* tumor suppressors Expanded and Merlin differentially regulate cell cycle exit, apoptosis, and Wingless signaling. *Dev Biol* **304**: 102–115.

Peng HW, Slattery M, Mann RS. 2009. Transcription factor choice in the Hippo signaling pathway: Homothorax and yorkie regulation of the microRNA bantam in the progenitor

domain of the *Drosophila* eye imaginal disc. *Genes & Dev* 23: 2307–2319.

Praskova M, Khoklatchev A, Ortiz-Vega S, Avruch J. 2004. Regulation of the MST1 kinase by autophosphorylation, by the growth inhibitory proteins, RASSF1 and NORE1, and by Ras. *Biochem J* 381: 453–462.

Praskova M, Xia F, Avruch J. 2008. MOBKL1A/MOBKL1B phosphorylation by MST1 and MST2 inhibits cell proliferation. *Curr Biol* 18: 311–321.

Ren F, Zhang L, Jiang J. 2009. Hippo signaling regulates Yorkie nuclear localization and activity through 14-3-3 dependent and independent mechanisms. *Dev Biol* 337: 303–312.

Rogulja D, Rauskolb C, Irvine KD. 2008. Morphogen control of wing growth through the Fat signaling pathway. *Dev Cell* 15: 309–321.

Rong R, Surace EI, Haipek CA, Gutmann DH, Ye K. 2004. Serine 518 phosphorylation modulates merlin intramolecular association and binding to critical effectors important for NF2 growth suppression. *Oncogene* 23: 8447–8454.

Sawada A, Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H. 2008. Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of cell proliferation and survival. *Mol Cell Biol* 28: 3177–3189.

Seidel C, Schagdarsurengin U, Blumke K, Wurl P, Pfeifer GP, Hauptmann S, Taubert H, Dammann R. 2007. Frequent hypermethylation of MST1 and MST2 in soft tissue sarcoma. *Mol Carcinog* 46: 865–871.

Shimizu T, Ho LL, Lai ZC. 2008. The mob as tumor suppressor gene is essential for early development and regulates tissue growth in *Drosophila*. *Genetics* 178: 957–965.

Silva E, Tsatskis Y, Gardano L, Tapon N, McNeill H. 2006. The tumor-suppressor gene fat controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the hippo signaling pathway. *Curr Biol* 16: 2081–2089.

Skouloudaki K, Puetz M, Simons M, Courbard JR, Boehlke C, Hartleben B, Engel C, Moeller MJ, Englert C, Bollig F, et al. 2009. Scribble participates in Hippo signaling and is required for normal zebrafish pronephros development. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 106: 8579–8584.

Snijders AM, Schmidt BL, Fridlyand J, Dekker N, Pinkel D, Jordan RC, Albertson DG. 2005. Rare amplicons implicate frequent deregulation of cell fate specification pathways in oral squamous cell carcinoma. *Oncogene* 24: 4232–4242.

Song H, Mak KK, Topol L, Yun K, Hu J, Garrett L, Chen Y, Park O, Chang J, Simpson RM, et al. 2010. Mammalian Mst1 and Mst2 kinases play essential roles in organ size control and tumor suppression. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 107: 1431–1436.

Sopko R, Silva E, Clayton L, Gardano L, Barrios-Rodiles M, Wrana J, Varelas X, Arbouzova NI, Shaw S, Saburi S, et al. 2009. Phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor fat is regulated by its ligand Dachsous and the kinase discs overgrown. *Curr Biol* 19: 1112–1117.

St John MA, Tao W, Fei X, Fukumoto R, Carcangiu ML, Brownstein DG, Parlow AF, McGrath J, Xu T. 1999. Mice deficient of Lats1 develop soft-tissue sarcomas, ovarian tumours and pituitary dysfunction. *Nat Genet* 21: 182–186.

Stegert MR, Hergovich A, Tamaskovic R, Bichsel SJ, Hemmings BA. 2005. Regulation of NDR protein kinase by hydrophobic motif phosphorylation mediated by the mammalian Ste20-like kinase MST3. *Mol Cell Biol* 25: 11019–11029.

Steinhardt AA, Gayyed MF, Klein AP, Dong J, Maitra A, Pan D, Montgomery EA, Anders RA. 2008. Expression of Yes-associated protein in common solid tumors. *Hum Pathol* 39: 1582–1589.

Strano S, Munarriz E, Rossi M, Castagnoli L, Shaul Y, Sacchi A, Oren M, Sudol M, Cesareni G, Blandino G. 2001. Physical

interaction with Yes-associated protein enhances p73 transcriptional activity. *J Biol Chem* 276: 15164–15173.

Strano S, Monti O, Pediconi N, Baccarini A, Fontemaggi G, Lapi E, Mantovani F, Damalas A, Citro G, Sacchi A, et al. 2005. The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein drives p73 gene-target specificity in response to DNA damage. *Mol Cell* 18: 447–459.

Takahashi Y, Miyoshi Y, Takahata C, Irahara N, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y, Noguchi S. 2005. Down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers. *Clin Cancer Res* 11: 1380–1385.

Tapon N, Harvey KF, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Schiripo TA, Haber DA, Hariharan IK. 2002. salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in *Drosophila* and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. *Cell* 110: 467–478.

Thompson BJ, Cohen SM. 2006. The Hippo pathway regulates the bantam microRNA to control cell proliferation and apoptosis in *Drosophila*. *Cell* 126: 767–774.

Tian Y, Kolb R, Hong JH, Carroll J, Li D, You J, Bronson R, Yaffe MB, Zhou J, Benjamin T. 2007. TAZ promotes PC2 degradation through a SCFβ-Trcp E3 ligase complex. *Mol Cell Biol* 27: 6383–6395.

Tyler DM, Baker NE. 2007. Expanded and fat regulate growth and differentiation in the *Drosophila* eye through multiple signaling pathways. *Dev Biol* 305: 187–201.

Udan RS, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Tao C, Halder G. 2003. Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. *Nat Cell Biol* 5: 914–920.

Uren AG, Kool J, Matentzoglu K, de Ridder J, Mattison J, van Uitert M, Lagcher W, Sie D, Tanger E, Cox T, et al. 2008. Large-scale mutagenesis in p19(ARF)- and p53-deficient mice identifies cancer genes and their collaborative networks. *Cell* 133: 727–741.

Varelas X, Sakuma R, Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Peerani R, Rao BM, Dembowy J, Yaffe MB, Zandstra PW, Wrana JL. 2008. TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem-cell self-renewal. *Nat Cell Biol* 10: 837–848.

Vassilev A, Kaneko KJ, Shu H, Zhao Y, DePamphilis ML. 2001. TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm. *Genes & Dev* 15: 1229–1241.

Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. 2006. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. *Cell* 124: 1169–1181.

Wei X, Shimizu T, Lai ZC. 2007. Mob as tumor suppressor is activated by Hippo kinase for growth inhibition in *Drosophila*. *EMBO J* 26: 1772–1781.

Willecke M, Hamaratoglu F, Kango-Singh M, Udan R, Chen CL, Tao C, Zhang X, Halder G. 2006. The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. *Curr Biol* 16: 2090–2100.

Willecke M, Hamaratoglu F, Sansores-Garcia L, Tao C, Halder G. 2008. Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci* 105: 14897–14902.

Wu S, Huang J, Dong J, Pan D. 2003. hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. *Cell* 114: 445–456.

Wu S, Liu Y, Zheng Y, Dong J, Pan D. 2008. The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the Hippo growth-regulatory pathway. *Dev Cell* 14: 388–398.

Zhao et al.

Xu T, Wang W, Zhang S, Stewart RA, Yu W. 1995. Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: The *Drosophila* lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase. *Development* 121: 1053–1063.

Xu MZ, Yao TJ, Lee NP, Ng IO, Chan YT, Zender L, Lowe SW, Poon RT, Luk JM. 2009. Yes-associated protein is an independent prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma. *Cancer* 115: 4576–4585.

Yabuta N, Okada N, Ito A, Hosomi T, Nishihara S, Sasayama Y, Fujimori A, Okuzaki D, Zhao H, Ikawa M, et al. 2007. Lats2 is an essential mitotic regulator required for the coordination of cell division. *J Biol Chem* 282: 19259–19271.

Yagi R, Chen LF, Shigesada K, Murakami Y, Ito Y. 1999. A WW domain-containing yes-associated protein (YAP) is a novel transcriptional co-activator. *EMBO J* 18: 2551–2562.

Yokoyama T, Osada H, Murakami H, Tatematsu Y, Taniguchi T, Kondo Y, Yatabe Y, Hasegawa Y, Shimokata K, Horio Y, et al. 2008. YAP1 is involved in mesothelioma development and negatively regulated by Merlin through phosphorylation. *Carcinogenesis* 29: 2139–2146.

Yu J, Zheng Y, Dong J, Klusza S, Deng WM, Pan D. 2010. Kibra functions as a tumor suppressor protein that regulates hippo signaling in conjunction with Merlin and expanded. *Dev Cell* 18: 288–299.

Yuan M, Tomlinson V, Lara R, Holliday D, Chelala C, Harada T, Gangeswaran R, Manson-Bishop C, Smith P, Danovi SA, et al. 2008. Yes-associated protein (YAP) functions as a tumor suppressor in breast. *Cell Death Differ* 15: 1752–1759.

Zender L, Spector MS, Xue W, Flemming P, Cordon-Cardo C, Silke J, Fan ST, Luk JM, Wigler M, Hannon GJ, et al. 2006. Identification and validation of oncogenes in liver cancer using an integrative oncogenic approach. *Cell* 125: 1253–1267.

Zhang J, Smolen GA, Haber DA. 2008. Negative regulation of YAP by LATS1 underscores evolutionary conservation of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway. *Cancer Res* 68: 2789–2794.

Zhang L, Ren F, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Wang B, Jiang J. 2008. The TEAD/TEF family of transcription factor Scalloped mediates Hippo signaling in organ size control. *Dev Cell* 14: 377–387.

Zhang H, Liu CY, Zha ZY, Zhao B, Yao J, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Lei QY, Guan KL. 2009. TEAD transcription factors mediate the function of TAZ in cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. *J Biol Chem* 284: 13355–13362.

Zhang J, Ji JY, Yu M, Overholtzer M, Smolen GA, Wang R, Brugge JS, Dyson NJ, Haber DA. 2009. YAP-dependent induction of amphiregulin identifies a non-cell-autonomous component of the Hippo pathway. *Nat Cell Biol* 11: 1444–1450.

Zhang X, Milton CC, Humbert PO, Harvey KF. 2009. Transcriptional output of the Salvador/warts/hippo pathway is controlled in distinct fashions in *Drosophila melanogaster* and mammalian cell lines. *Cancer Res* 69: 6033–6041.

Zhao B, Wei X, Li W, Udan RS, Yang Q, Kim J, Xie J, Ikenoue T, Yu J, Li L, et al. 2007. Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. *Genes & Dev* 21: 2747–2761.

Zhao B, Lei QY, Guan KL. 2008a. The Hippo-YAP pathway: New connections between regulation of organ size and cancer. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 20: 638–646.

Zhao B, Ye X, Yu J, Li L, Li W, Li S, Lin JD, Wang CY, Chinnaiyan AM, Lai ZC, et al. 2008b. TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control. *Genes & Dev* 22: 1962–1971.

Zhao B, Kim J, Ye X, Lai ZC, Guan KL. 2009. Both TEAD-binding and WW domains are required for the growth stimulation and oncogenic transformation activity of yes-associated protein. *Cancer Res* 69: 1089–1098.

Zhao B, Li L, Tumaneng K, Wang CY, Guan KL. 2010. A coordinated phosphorylation by Lats and CK1 regulates YAP stability through SCF(β-TRCP). *Genes & Dev* 24: 72–85.

Zhou D, Conrad C, Xia F, Park JS, Payer B, Yin Y, Lauwers GY, Thasler W, Lee JT, Avruch J, et al. 2009. Mst1 and Mst2 maintain hepatocyte quiescence and suppress hepatocellular carcinoma development through inactivation of the Yap1 oncogene. *Cancer Cell* 16: 425–438.

Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on February 12, 2015 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

The Hippo–YAP pathway in organ size control and tumorigenesis: an updated version

Bin Zhao, Li Li, Qunying Lei, et al.

Genes Dev. 2010 24: 862-874

Access the most recent version at doi:10.1101/gad.1909210

---

**References**  
This article cites 131 articles, 54 of which can be accessed free at:  
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/24/9/862.full.html#ref-list-1

**Email Alerting Service**  
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top right corner of the article or [click here](http://genesdev.cshlp.org/cgi/alerts).

---

**Topic Collections**  
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections  
Cancer and Disease Models (140 articles)  
Signal Transduction (101 articles)

---

To subscribe to Genes & Development go to:  
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/subscriptions

Copyright © 2010 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
