
Seminars in Immunology 22 (2010) 303–309

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Seminars in Immunology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ysmim

Review

The TCR-mediated signaling pathways that control the direction of helper T cell differentiation

Toshinori Nakayama*, Masakatsu Yamashita

Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:
Th1
Th2
Th17
iTreg
TCR signaling
Functional differentiation

ABSTRACT

In the periphery, upon antigen recognition by αβTCR, naïve CD4 T cells undergo functional differentiation and acquire the ability to produce a specific set of cytokines. At least four Th cell subsets, i.e., Th1, Th2, Th17 and iTreg cells have so far been identified and the differentiation of each subset is driven by distinct cytokine sets. Antigen recognition by TCR and the activation of the TCR-mediated signaling pathways that follows, however, are most critical for initiating Th cell differentiation. This review focuses on the TCR signal strength and the TCR-mediated signaling pathways that control the differentiation into these four Th cell subsets.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

After antigen recognition by TCR, naïve CD4 T cells undergo clonal expansion and differentiate into functionally polarized helper T (Th) cell subsets. At least four distinct Th subsets, i.e., Th1, Th2, Th17 and iTreg cells have been identified [1–5]. The direction of functional Th cell differentiation depends on the cytokines present in the priming environment. Naïve CD4 T cells stimulated with antigens differentiate into Th1 cells in the presence of IL-12 and IFNγ [6,7], whereas IL-4 plays an important role for Th2 cell differentiation [8,9]. The activation of downstream signaling molecules of these cytokine receptors, such as STAT4/STAT1 [10–13] or STAT6 [14–16] are required for differentiation into either Th1 or Th2 cells, respectively. Recently, TGFβ was shown to co-operate with IL-6 to induce Th17 cell differentiation [17–19], while TGFβ plus IL-2 induced the generation of iTreg cells [20,21]. Several master transcription factors for differentiation into Th1, Th2, Th17, iTreg cells have been identified; T cell-specific T-box transcription factor (T-bet) [22], GATA3 [23,24], retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORγt) [25] and Foxp3 [26], respectively.

In addition to appropriate cytokines, antigen recognition by TCR and events triggered by this interaction is most critical for achieving the functional differentiation of all these Th subsets. More specifically, various TCR-mediated signal transduction pathways

Abbreviations: APC, antigen presenting cells; dnCN, dominant-negative calcineurin; dnRas, dominant-negative Ras; TCR, T cell receptor; Th, helper T; Tg, transgenic; Treg, T regulatory.
* Corresponding author at: Department of Immunology (H3), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
Tel.: +81 43 226 2200; fax: +81 43 227 1498.
E-mail address: tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp (T. Nakayama).

are activated in naïve CD4 T cells after antigen recognition [27–29]. This review focuses on: (i) the TCR signal strength and the outcome of Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation, and (ii) the role of the TCR-mediated signal transduction pathways or signaling molecules that control the direction of Th cell differentiation.

2. The effect of antigen dosage and signal strength on the differentiation into Th1 and Th2 cell subsets

In addition to cytokines such as IL-12, IFNγ and IL-4, the generation of Th1 and Th2 cells is also controlled by the antigen dosage and overall TCR-mediated signal strength induced in naïve CD4 T cells. More than a decade ago, Bottomly and co-workers [30,31] used moth cytochrome c peptide and antigen-specific αβTCR Tg CD4 T cells, and demonstrated that low antigen doses induced early IL-4 in naïve CD4 T cells and thus preferentially induced Th2 cell generation. Paul and co-workers [32] also reported that the early IL-4 production from naïve CD4T cells was induced by low antigen doses which appeared to be GATA3-dependent. Independently, O'Garra and co-workers [33] used DO11.10 αβTCR Tg CD4 T cells and a broad range of antigenic peptide, and demonstrated that Th2 cell development was observed at very high doses and very low doses of antigenic peptides, whereas midrange peptide doses directed the development of Th1 cells. Burstein and Abbas [34] reported that high-dose aqueous protein antigens induced tolerance in Th1 cells, but not in Th2 cells, and thus it appears that high-dose antigens favored enhanced Th2 responses. We used highly purified naïve CD4 T cells and immobilized anti-TCR mAb, and reported a stronger stimulation with higher anti-TCR mAb concentrations in the presence of IL-4 in vitro induced an increased Th2 cell differentiation but with a decreased Th1 cell differentiation [35,36]. Similar results were observed even when DO11.10 αβTCR Tg CD4 T cells and

1044-5323/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.smim.2010.04.010

induce the developing Th2 cells themselves to accelerate both polarization and proliferation. This IL-4 may also induce other surrounding naive CD4 T cells to undergo Th2 cell differentiation. These autocrine and paracrine IL-4 circuits may function efficiently if high-dose antigen is provided. In contrast, although IFNγ influences the magnitude of Th1 cell differentiation, IL-12 plays an important role in the initiation of Th1 cells [47]. Since IL-12 is not produced by either naive CD4 or developing Th1 cells, no such enhanced circuit would occur during Th1 cell differentiation. Therefore, Th2 cells would dominate over Th1 cells at the high-doses of antigen. Interestingly, if naïve CD4 T cells are cultured in the presence of both IL-4 and IL-12, they differentiate preferentially into Th2 cells (T.N. and M.Y., unpublished observation) [48].

A high concentration of antigenic peptides is required for the production of Th2 cytokines in effector Th2 cells. The TCR and CD4 are efficiently recruited to lipid rafts in Th1 cells, but not in Th2 cells offering an explanation for the decreased ability of Th2 cells to respond to low-affinity peptide stimulation [43]. The functional significance of the expression levels of CD4 was demonstrated by the experiment with the restoration of high-level expression of CD4 in Th2 cells using a retrovirus gene transfer system [44]. Therefore, particularly in the case of in vivo experimental systems, Th2 responses appear to be induced more efficiently if a large amount of antigens is available.

### 3. Effect of the affinity of antigens and signal strength on the generation of Treg (regulatory T) cells

More recently, low-affinity antigenic peptides have been shown to induce a significant expansion of CD4⁺Foxp3⁺ Treg cells, whereas high-affinity antigenic peptides favored the expansion of Foxp3⁻neg Th cells [49]. The inverse correlation of Foxp3 expression and Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling has been reported. Similarly, the premature termination of TCR signaling and the inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway conferred Foxp3 expression and Treg-like gene expression profiles [50]. Continued TCR signaling and constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway antagonize the expression of Foxp3. In addition, the inhibition of calcineurin by FK506 resulted in the inhibition of the proliferation of conventional T cells, but FK506 less efficiently inhibited the proliferation of Treg cells [51]. Therefore, the activation levels of calcineurin appear to control the proliferation of Treg cells and their numbers.

### 4. Role of the TCR-mediated signal transduction pathways in Th cell differentiation

After antigen recognition by TCR, the TCR/CD3 complex initiates the activation of various signal transduction pathways. The most proximal biochemical event is the tyrosine phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) of four components of the TCR/CD3 complex, i.e., CD3γ, CD3δ, CD3ε and TCR-ζ [27–29]. The src family tyrosine kinases including Lck play an important role in the tyrosine phosphorylation of ITAMs. Then, the Zap70 syk family kinase is recruited to the phosphorylated ITAMs through the SH2 domains of ZAP70. The recruited ZAP70 is then phosphorylated and activated by surrounding Lck tyrosine kinase, thus leading to the phosphorylation of LAT molecules. Following these proximal events, the activation of various distinct signaling pathways is initiated, including (i) the Ras/ERK MAPK cascade, (ii) the Ca/calcineurin/NF-AT pathway, and (iii) the PKC/NF-κB pathway (Fig. 2).

We summarize the experimental results that have addressed the role of each signaling pathway or signaling molecules in the Th cell differentiation and Th responses noted below. Interestingly,

T. Nakayama, M. Yamashita / Seminars in Immunology 22 (2010) 303–309

APC

MHC

αβTCR

CD4

LAT

PIP2

PI3K

IP3

PLC γ1

Gads

SLP-76

ZAP70

Lck

Grb2

Vav

SAP

PKCθ

CARMA1

BCL10

MALT1

Ras

Raf-1

MEK

ERK

NF-κB

AKT

[Ca²⁺]i

Ca/CaM

mTOR

CN

NF-AT

JNK

p38

AP-1

Transcription

DNA

Nucleus

CD4 T cell

Fig. 2. Major signal transduction pathways downstream of TCR and their roles in Th cell differentiation. The references addressing each molecule in Th cell differentiation are indicated. See text in detail.

the loss-of-function of various signaling molecules tended to lead to the defects in Th2 cell differentiation while leaving Th1 cell differentiation intact although some exceptions have been reported. Therefore, the most of these loss-of-function experiments addressing the role of each signaling pathway may fit within Range B as shown in Fig. 1.

### 4.1. Lck

We reported that strong Lck kinase activity is required for the efficient generation of Th2 cells [35]. Dominant-negative Lck Tg mice showed impaired Th2 cell differentiation while leaving Th1 cell differentiation intact. It is known that as much as 50% of Lck protein is constitutively associated with the CD4 cytoplasmic domain. Reiner and co-workers [52] demonstrated a critical role of the cytoplasmic domain of CD4 for Th2 cell differentiation. The blockade of CD4/MHC class II interaction by peptides resulted in the inhibition of Th2 responses more efficiently than of Th1 responses [53]. In polarized Th2 cells, the expression levels of CD4 are lower in comparison to Th1 cells, and a decreased CD4 expression resulted in suboptimal TCR-induced phosphorylation and reduced Ca²⁺ signaling [44]. These results are also consistent with the notion that weak TCR stimulation may not efficiently activate Lck and thus favor Th1 cell differentiation, whereas strong stimulation may sufficiently activate Lck to induce Th2 cell differentiation.

### 4.2. LAT

Gene manipulated mice with mutations of critical tyrosine residues (Y136 and Y132) of LAT showed a severe defect in the development of T cells, and the few remaining T cells caused a spontaneous Th2-like allergic inflammation [54,55]. In MHC class II-deficient mice, a similar spontaneous allergic phenotype accompanied with a severe defect in the CD4 T cell development was observed. The remaining T cells in these animals did not show normal antigen-specific Th2 cell responses [56]. Therefore, the Th2 phenotype observed in these CD4 T cell deficient mice appears

to be unrelated to the strength of the activation of the specific signaling pathways, but more likely due to the secondary effects of the lymphopenic environment, such as abnormal homeostatic proliferation.

#### 4.3. The MAPK cascade

In mammals, there are three distinct MAPK pathways, ERK, JNK and p38MAPK. We previously reported that the activation of the ERK/MAPK cascade was required for Th2 cell differentiation [37]. The inhibition of this cascade by an inhibitor or dominant-negative Ras resulted in impaired Th2 cell differentiation with an increased Th1 cell generation even in the presence of a sufficient amount of exogenous IL-4 (Fig. 3). These results indicate that the inhibition of the activation of the ERK/MAPK cascade induced a shift from Th2 to Th1 fate. This shift has been confirmed in vivo using a Th2-driven murine model of asthma [57]. In addition, we more recently found that ERK controls the level of GATA3 protein post-transcriptionally in Th2 cells through the inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation pathway [58]. Interestingly, the activation of the ERK induced increased ribosomal components in Th2 cells to accommodate the production of Th2 cytokines [59]. In contrast, Jorritsma et al. [42] reported that the sustained activation of ERK induced by a high-affinity peptide in naïve CD4 T cells led to Th1 cell differentiation, which can be switched to Th2 differentiation when the activation of ERK was reduced. They suggest that the strong activation of ERK resulted in the down-regulation of IL-4 expression by altering the composition of AP1 complex in naïve CD4 T cells. Thus, the activation of ERK appears to be an important regulator of Th2 cell differentiation and functions at multiple levels. Th1 cell differentiation and Th1 cytokine production are dependent on other MAPK pathways, including JNK and p38, respectively [60,61]. p38 MAPK has also been shown to promote IL-5 expression through the phosphorylation of GATA3 protein [62]. Thus, p38 MAPK appears to be involved in both the Th1 and Th2 responses.

T. Nakayama, M. Yamashita / Seminars in Immunology 22 (2010) 303–309

Fig. 3. Decreased activation of Ras and MEK in the ERK/MAKP cascade resulted in decreased Th2 cell differentiation and increased Th1 cell differentiation. Naïve CD4 T cells from normal C57BL/6 mice (control) and dominant-negative Ras Tg mice under the control of Lck distal promoter (dnRas) were stimulated with immobilized anti-TCR mAb in the presence of IL-4, and 5 days later, the cultured cells were harvested and subjected to the cytoplasmic staining with anti-IL-4 and anti-IFNγ. A specific inhibitor for MEK (PD98059) was added to the control C57BL/6 CD4 T cell culture (+MEK inhibitor). The percentages of the cells present in each quadrant are indicated [37].

### 4.4. The Ca/calcineurin/NF-AT pathway

Ca²⁺/calcineurin signaling has been reported to play a crucial role in Th cell differentiation. We reported that the inhibition of the calcineurin activity by a specific inhibitor FK506 or by the over-expression of dominant-negative calcineurin Aα chains resulted in the impaired proliferative responses of both Th1 and Th2 cells, although, the inhibition of Th2 cell differentiation was more prominent than Th1 cells [36]. Therefore, when the activity of calcineurin was inhibited, the generation of Th2 cells was affected more profoundly in comparison to Th1 cells (Fig. 4). In this analysis, we identified that the TCR-induced activation of calcineurin modified the IL-4R signaling complex. Efficient calcineurin activation upregulated Jak3 expression and induced both the physical and functional associations of STAT5 with IL-4 receptors. The inhibition of IL-4-induced STAT5 activation resulted in a diminished IL-4-induced proliferation of Th2 cells. This study highlights the crosstalk that exists between the TCR-mediated signaling pathway and the cytokine mediated signaling pathway during Th cell differentiation. In addition, Scheinman and Avni [63] reported that the TCR-mediated activation of NF-AT1 is involved in the transcriptional regulation of the GATA3 expression in both naïve and differentiated Th2 cells. Thus, GATA3 is a common target of the IL-4- and TCR-mediated signaling pathways.

reported [71]. CARMA1 (caspase recruitment domain-containing MAGUK protein 1) is a scaffolding protein, which is thought to link PKCθ to NF-κB [72]. This molecule is also required for the induction of the Th2 responses *in vivo*. CARMA1-deficient mice exhibit impaired Th2 cell-mediated allergic airway inflammation [73]. Signaling lymphocyte activation molecules (SLAM) associated protein (SAP), was shown to activate PKCθ and promote Th2 cell differentiation. SAP-deficient T cells showed impaired TCR-induced GATA3 activation and subsequent Th2 cell differentiation, and increased Th1 cell generation [74–76]. SLAM-deficient CD4 T cells exhibited a similar defect in Th2 cell differentiation [77]. SAP promotes the recruitment of PKCθ to the contact site, which is enhanced by the engagement of SLAM. The TCR-induced phosphorylation of Bcl10 and the NF-κB1/p50 nuclear translocation were both decreased in SAP-deficient CD4 T cells. Thus, SLAM, SAP, PKCθ, Bcl10 and CARMA1 are all required for the induction of Th2 cell differentiation through the activation NF-κB and resulting positive regulation of GATA3 expression.

### 4.6. TEC family tyrosine kinases

ITK is a member of the TEC family of non-receptor tyrosine kinase and plays a key role in the activation of PLCγ1 (Fig. 2). Therefore ITK-deficient T cells show a defect in the activation of the MAPK signaling pathway, the calcium influx and NF-AT [78]. ITK-deficient mice exhibited defects in the Th2 responses [79–81]. Using IL-4 reporter mice, ITK was found to be dispensable for early IL-4 expression during Th2 cell differentiation, however, it was critical for the IL-4 production in Th2 effector cells [82]. Another TEC family kinase, RLK/Txk, is preferentially expressed in Th1 cells in comparison to Th2 cells [83]. Although RLK mRNA is rapidly down-regulated after TCR stimulation, it is re-expressed in Th1 cells but not in Th2 cells [81]. In human T cells, the overexpression of RLK resulted in the increased production of IFNγ without affecting either the IL-2 or IL-4 production [84]. RLK has been reported to localize in the nucleus after receiving TCR-mediated stimulation, and it may control the transcription of the IFNγ gene [85]. It, therefore, remains to be elucidated whether the activation of RLK promotes Th1 cell differentiation, in addition to enhancing the production of IFNγ in Th1 cells. More recently, ITK was shown to be required for IL-17A production but not for IL-17F production [86]. ITK-dependent activation of NF-AT regulates IL-17A transcription in Th17 cells. The

### 4.5. The PKC/NF-κB pathway

NF-κB appears to be a critical transcription factor that regulates Th2 cell differentiation. NF-κB p50 subunit-deficient mice were unable to induce OVA-induced airway inflammation [64]. The lack of inflammation was not due to defects in T cell priming, T cell proliferation, or the overexpression of important cell adhesion molecules, but rather it was due to the impaired induction of GATA3. We reported that the CD28-mediated activation of NF-κB was required for efficient Th2 cell differentiation [65] and the chromatin remodeling of the IL-5 gene locus [66].

PKCθ is a key component of the T cell immunological synapse whose activity is required for the activation of AP-1, NF-AT and NF-κB [67,68]. Th2 cell-mediated immune responses were markedly impaired in PKCθ-deficient mice, whereas the Th1 immune responses developed normally [69,70]. More recently, the role of PKCθ in Th17 cell-dependent immune responses was

T. Nakayama, M. Yamashita / Seminars in Immunology 22 (2010) 303–309

Fig. 4. Decreased activation of calcineurin resulted in decreased Th2 cell differentiation. Naïve CD4 T cells from normal C57BL/6 mice (control) and dominant-negative calcineurin Tg mice (dnCN) were stimulated with immobilized anti-TCR mAb in the presence of IL-4, and 5 days later, the cultured cells were harvested and then were subjected to the cytoplasmic staining with anti-IL-4 and anti-IFNγ. A specific inhibitor for calcineurin (FK506) was added to the control C57BL/6 CD4 T cell culture (+CN inhibitor). The percentages of the cells present in each quadrant are indicated [36].

expression of RORγt, which is the master regulator of Th17 cells, did not decrease in ITK-deficient Th17 cells. Taken together, the TEC family tyrosine kinases play important roles in various processes including the induction of the Th1, Th2 and Th17 responses (Fig. 4).

### 5. Concluding remarks

At least two distinct processes are required for the induction of each Th response, namely the TCR-mediated Th differentiation process and the TCR-induced Th cytokine expression process. The former represents the chromatin remodeling of the Th cytokine gene loci, while the latter involves the activation of specific transcription factors to induce the transcription of appropriate cytokines. Both of them are consequences of the TCR-mediated signaling events. Therefore, some signaling molecule downstream of TCR may only play a role in the former process, while others may be involved in only the latter process, but collectively they are required for the Th responses. In evaluating the experimental results, particularly those observed in the in vivo analysis, it will be necessary to clearly elucidate whether a given interesting molecule is involved in either process or both.

Essential for understanding CD4 T cell-mediated immunity will be a complete definition of the role of each signaling molecule in Th cell differentiation. This is becoming quite important from a clinical point of view because various inhibitors have been used clinically, and many other inhibitors can be expected to be developed in the near future. Since the direction of the generation of Th cell subsets is dependent on the overall signal strength, critical awareness is necessary for any inhibitors that modify the CD4 T cell-dependent immune responses in human patients. The effects of the inhibitors may depend on the dose of inhibitors, the duration of the intake, and also on the individual patients themselves.

### Acknowledgements

The authors thank Drs. Ralph Kubo and Sho Yamasaki for valuable discussion and comments during the preparation of the manuscript. This work was supported by Global COE Program (Global Center for Education and Research in Immune System Regulation and Treatment) and City Area Program (Kazusa/Chiba Area)

MEXT (Japan), and by grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (Japan) (Grants-in-Aid: for Scientific Research on Priority Areas #17016010, #20060003; Scientific Research (B) #21390147, Scientific Research (C) #20590485, Special Coordination Funds for Promoting Science and Technology, and Cancer Translational Research Project), the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (Japan).

### References

[1] Reiner SL. Development in motion: helper T cells at work. Cell 2007;129:33–6.

[2] Paul WE, Seder RA. Lymphocyte responses and cytokines. Cell 1994;76:241–51.

[3] Mosmann TR, Coffman RL. TH1 and TH2 cells: different patterns of lymphokine secretion lead to different functional properties. Annu Rev Immunol 1989;7:145–73.

[4] Dong C. TH17 cells in development: an updated view of their molecular identity and genetic programming. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:337–48.

[5] Curotto de Lafaille MA, Lafaille JJ. Natural and adaptive foxp3+ regulatory T cells: more of the same or a division of labor? Immunity 2009;30:626–35.

[6] Seder RA, Gazzinelli R, Sher A, Paul WE. Interleukin 12 acts directly on CD4+ T cells to enhance priming for interferon gamma production and diminishes interleukin 4 inhibition of such priming. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:10188–92.

[7] Guler ML, Gorham JD, Hsieh CS, Mackey AJ, Steen RG, Dietrich WF, et al. Genetic susceptibility to Leishmania: IL-12 responsiveness in TH1 cell development. Science 1996;271:984–7.

[8] Hsieh CS, Heimberger AB, Gold JS, O'Garra A, Murphy KM. Differential regulation of T helper phenotype development by interleukins 4 and 10 in an alpha beta T-cell-receptor transgenic system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:6065–9.

[9] Le Gros G, Ben-Sasson SZ, Seder R, Finkelman FD, Paul WE. Generation of interleukin 4 (IL-4)-producing cells in vivo and in vitro: IL-2 and IL-4 are required for in vitro generation of IL-4-producing cells. J Exp Med 1990;172:921–9.

[10] Thierfelder WE, van Deursen JM, Yamamoto K, Tripp RA, Sarawar SR, Carson RT, et al. Requirement for Stat4 in interleukin-12-mediated responses of natural killer and T cells. Nature 1996;382:171–4.

[11] Kaplan MH, Sun YL, Hoey T, Grusby MJ. Impaired IL-12 responses and enhanced development of Th2 cells in Stat4-deficient mice. Nature 1996;382:174–7.

[12] Afkarian M, Sedy JR, Yang J, Jacobson NG, Cereb N, Yang SY, et al. T-bet is a STAT1-induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naive CD4+ T cells. Nat Immunol 2002;3:549–57.

[13] Lighvani AA, Frucht DM, Jankovic D, Yamane H, Aliberti J, Hissong BD, et al. T-bet is rapidly induced by interferon-gamma in lymphoid and myeloid cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:15137–42.

[14] Takeda K, Tanaka T, Shi W, Matsumoto M, Minami M, Kashiiwamura S, et al. Essential role of Stat6 in IL-4 signalling. Nature 1996;380:627–30.

[15] Shimoda K, van Deursen J, Sangster MY, Sarawar SR, Carson RT, Tripp RA, et al. Lack of IL-4-induced Th2 response and IgE class switching in mice with disrupted Stat6 gene. Nature 1996;380:630–3.

[16] Kaplan MH, Schindler U, Smiley ST, Grusby MJ. Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for development of Th2 cells. Immunity 1996;4:313–9.

[17] Mangan PR, Harrington LE, O'Quinn DB, Helms WS, Bullard DC, Elson CO, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta induces development of the T(H)17 lineage. Nature 2006;441:231–4.
[18] Veldhoen M, Hocking RJ, Atkins CJ, Locksley RM, Stockinger B. TGFbeta in the context of an inflammatory cytokine milieu supports de novo differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells. Immunity 2006;24:179–89.
[19] Korn T, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK. IL-17 and Th17 cells. Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:485–517.
[20] Chen W, Jin W, Hardegen N, Lei KJ, Li L, Marinos N, et al. Conversion of peripheral CD4+CD25– naive T cells to CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells by TGF-beta induction of transcription factor Foxp3. J Exp Med 2003;198:1875–86.
[21] Yu A, Malek TR. Selective availability of IL-2 is a major determinant controlling the production of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T regulatory cells. J Immunol 2006;177:5115–21.
[22] Szabo SJ, Sullivan BM, Stemmann C, Satoskar AR, Sleckman BP, Glimcher LH. Distinct effects of T-bet in TH1 lineage commitment and IFN-gamma production in CD4 and CD8 T cells. Science 2002;295:338–42.
[23] Zheng W, Flavell RA. The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells. Cell 1997;89:587–96.
[24] Zhang DH, Cohn L, Ray P, Bottomly K, Ray A. Transcription factor GATA-3 is differentially expressed in murine Th1 and Th2 cells and controls Th2-specific expression of the interleukin-5 gene. J Biol Chem 1997;272:21597–603.
[25] Ivanov II, McKenzie BS, Zhou L, Tadokoro CE, Lepelley A, Lafaille JJ, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 2006;126:1121–33.
[26] Sakaguchi S, Ono M, Setoguchi R, Yagi H, Hori S, Fehervari Z, et al. Foxp3+CD25+ CD4+ natural regulatory T cells in dominant self-tolerance and autoimmune disease. Immunol Rev 2006;212:8–27.
[27] Iwashima M. Kinetic perspectives of T cell antigen receptor signaling. A two-tier model for T cell full activation. Immunol Rev 2003;191:196–210.
[28] Guy CS, Vignali DA. Organization of proximal signal initiation at the TCR:CD3 complex. Immunol Rev 2009;232:7–21.
[29] Smith-Garvin JE, Koretzky GA, Jordan MS. T cell activation. Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:591–619.
[30] Constant S, Pfeiffer C, Woodard A, Pasqualini T, Bottomly K. Extent of T cell receptor ligation can determine the functional differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells. J Exp Med 1995;182:1591–6.
[31] Constant SL, Bottomly K. Induction of Th1 and Th2 CD4+ T cell responses: the alternative approaches. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:297–322.
[32] Yamane H, Zhu J, Paul WE. Independent roles for IL-2 and GATA-3 in stimulating naive CD4+ T cells to generate a Th2-inducing cytokine environment. J Exp Med 2005;202:793–804.
[33] Hosken NA, Shibuya K, Heath AW, Murphy KM, O'Garra A. The effect of antigen dose on CD4+ T helper cell phenotype development in a T cell receptor-alpha beta-transgenic model. J Exp Med 1995;182:1579–84.
[34] Burstein HJ, Abbas AK. In vivo role of interleukin 4 in T cell tolerance induced by aqueous protein antigen. J Exp Med 1993;177:457–63.
[35] Yamashita M, Hashimoto K, Kimura M, Kubo M, Tada T, Nakayama T. Requirement for p56(lck) tyrosine kinase activation in Th subset differentiation. Int Immunol 1998;10:577–91.
[36] Yamashita M, Katsumata M, Iwashima M, Kimura M, Shimizu C, Kamata T, et al. T cell receptor-induced calcineurin activation regulates T helper type 2 cell development by modifying the interleukin 4 receptor signaling complex. J Exp Med 2000;191:1869–79.
[37] Yamashita M, Kimura M, Kubo M, Shimizu C, Tada T, Perlmutter RM, et al. T cell antigen receptor-mediated activation of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway controls interleukin 4 receptor function and type-2 helper T cell differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:1024–9.
[38] Bluestone JA. New perspectives of CD28-B7-mediated T cell costimulation. Immunity 1995;2:555–9.
[39] Thompson CB. Distinct roles for the costimulatory ligands B7-1 and B7-2 in T helper cell differentiation? Cell 1995;81:979–82.
[40] Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A. Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes. Nature 1996;383:787–93.
[41] Tao X, Grant C, Constant S, Bottomly K. Induction of IL-4-producing CD4+ T cells by antigenic peptides altered for TCR binding. J Immunol 1997;158:4237–44.
[42] Jorritsma PJ, Brogdon JL, Bottomly K. Role of TCR-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation in the regulation of early IL-4 expression in naive CD4+ T cells. J Immunol 2003;170:2427–34.
[43] Balamuth F, Leitenberg D, Unternaehrer J, Mellman I, Bottomly K. Distinct patterns of membrane microdomain partitioning in Th1 and Th2 cells. Immunity 2001;15:729–38.
[44] Itoh Y, Wang Z, Ishida H, Eichelberg K, Fujimoto N, Makino J, et al. Decreased CD4 expression by polarized Thelper 2 cells contributes to suboptimal TCR-induced phosphorylation and reduced Ca2+ signaling. Eur J Immunol 2005;35:3187–95.
[45] Bretschier PA, Wei G, Menon JN, Bielefeldt-Ohmann H. Establishment of stable, cell-mediated immunity that makes “susceptible” mice resistant to Leishmania major. Science 1992;257:539–42.
[46] Bancroft AJ, Else KJ, Grencis RK. Low-level infection with Trichuris muris significantly affects the polarization of the CD4 response. Eur J Immunol 1994;24:3113–8.
[47] Magram J, Connaughton SE, Warrior RR, Carvajal DM, Wu CY, Ferrante J, et al. IL-12-deficient mice are defective in IFN gamma production and type 1 cytokine responses. Immunity 1996;4:471–81.
[48] Perez VL, Lederer JA, Lichtman AH, Abbas AK. Stability of Th1 and Th2 populations. Int Immunol 1995;7:869–75.
[49] Turner MS, Kane LP, Morel PA. Dominant role of antigen dose in CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cell induction and expansion. J Immunol 2009;183:4895–903.
[50] Sauer S, Bruno L, Hertweck A, Finlay D, Leleu M, Spivakov M, et al. T cell receptor signaling controls Foxp3 expression via PI3K, Akt, and mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:7797–802.
[51] Kogina K, Shoda H, Yamaguchi Y, Tsuno NH, Takahashi K, Fujio K, et al. Tacrolimus differentially regulates the proliferation of conventional and regulatory CD4(+) T cells. Mol Cells 2009;28:125–30.
[52] Brown DR, Moskowitz NH, Killeen N, Reiner SL. A role for CD4 in peripheral T cell differentiation. J Exp Med 1997;186:101–7.
[53] Shen X, Hu B, McPhie P, Wu X, Fox A, Germain RN, et al. Peptides corresponding to CD4-interacting regions of murine MHC class II molecules modulate immune responses of CD4+ T lymphocytes in vitro and in vivo. J Immunol 1996;157:87–100.
[54] Aguado E, Richelme S, Nunez-Cruz S, Miazek A, Mura AM, Richelme M, et al. Induction of T helper type 2 immunity by a point mutation in the LAT adaptor. Science 2002;296:2036–40.
[55] Sommers CL, Park CS, Lee J, Feng C, Fuller CL, Grinberg A, et al. A LAT mutation that inhibits T cell development yet induces lymphoproliferation. Science 2002;296:2040–3.
[56] McCoy KD, Harris NL, Diener P, Hatak S, Odermatt B, Hangartner L, et al. Natural IgE production in the absence of MHC Class II cognate help. Immunity 2006;24:329–39.
[57] Shibata Y, Kamata T, Kimura M, Yamashita M, Wang CR, Murata K, et al. Ras activation in T cells determines the development of antigen-induced airway hyperresponsiveness and eosinophilic inflammation. J Immunol 2002;169:2134–40.
[58] Yamashita M, Shinnakasu R, Asou H, Kimura M, Hasegawa A, Hashimoto K, et al. Ras-ERK MAPK cascade regulates GATA3 stability and Th2 differentiation through ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. J Biol Chem 2005;280:29409–19.
[59] Asmal M, Colgan J, Naef F, Yu B, Lee Y, Magnasco M, et al. Production of ribosome components in effector CD4+ T cells is accelerated by TCR stimulation and coordinated by ERK-MAPK. Immunity 2003;19:535–48.
[60] Dong C, Yang DD, Wysk M, Whitmarsh AJ, Davis RJ, Flavell RA. Defective T cell differentiation in the absence of Jnk1. Science 1998;282:2092–5.
[61] Rincon M, Enslen H, Raingeaud J, Recht M, Zapton T, Su MS, et al. Interferon-gamma expression by Th1 effector T cells mediated by the p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway. Embo J 1998;17:2817–29.
[62] Maneechotesuwan K, Xin Y, Ito K, Jazrawi E, Lee KY, Usmani OS, et al. Regulation of Th2 cytokine genes by p38 MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of GATA-3. J Immunol 2007;178:2491–8.
[63] Scheinman EJ, Avni O. Transcriptional regulation of GATA3 in T helper cells by the integrated activities of transcription factors downstream of the interleukin-4 receptor and T cell receptor. J Biol Chem 2009;284:3037–48.
[64] Das J, Chen CH, Yang L, Cohn L, Ray P, Ray A. A critical role for NF-kappa B in GATA3 expression and TH2 differentiation in allergic airway inflammation. Nat Immunol 2001;2:45–50.
[65] Kubo M, Yamashita M, Abe R, Tada T, Okumura K, Ransom JT, et al. CD28 costimulation accelerates IL-4 receptor sensitivity and IL-4-mediated Th2 differentiation. J Immunol 1999;163:2432–42.
[66] Inami M, Yamashita M, Tenda Y, Hasegawa A, Kimura M, Hashimoto K, et al. CD28 costimulation controls histone hyperacetylation of the interleukin 5 gene locus in developing th2 cells. J Biol Chem 2004;279:23123–33.
[67] Altman A, Isakov N, Baier G. Protein kinase C theta: a new essential superstar on the T-cell stage. Immunol Today 2000;21:567–73.
[68] Sun Z, Arendt CW, Ellmeier W, Schaeffer EM, Sunshine MJ, Gandhi L, et al. PKC-theta is required for TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation in mature but not immature T lymphocytes. Nature 2000;404:402–7.
[69] Marsland BJ, Soos TJ, Spath G, Littman DR, Kopf M. Protein kinase C theta is critical for the development of in vivo T helper (Th)2 cell but not Th1 cell responses. J Exp Med 2004;200:181–9.
[70] Salek-Ardakani S, So T, Halteman BS, Altman A, Croft M. Differential regulation of Th2 and Th1 lung inflammatory responses by protein kinase C theta. J Immunol 2004;173:6440–7.
[71] Tan SL, Zhao J, Bi C, Chen XC, Hepburn DL, Wang J, et al. Resistance to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and impaired IL-17 production in protein kinase C theta-deficient mice. J Immunol 2006;176:2872–9.
[72] Wang D, You Y, Case SM, McAllister-Lucas LM, Wang L, DiStefano PS, et al. A requirement for CARMA1 in TCR-induced NF-kappa B activation. Nat Immunol 2002;3:830–5.
[73] Medoff BD, Seed B, Jackobek R, Zora J, Yang Y, Luster AD, et al. CARMA1 is critical for the development of allergic airway inflammation in a murine model of asthma. J Immunol 2006;176:7272–7.
[74] Wu C, Nguyen KB, Pien GC, Wang N, Gullo C, Howie D, et al. SAP controls T cell responses to virus and terminal differentiation of TH2 cells. Nat Immunol 2001;2:410–4.
[75] Czar MJ, Kersh EN, Mijares LA, Lanier G, Lewis J, Yap G, et al. Altered lymphocyte responses and cytokine production in mice deficient in the X-linked lymphoproliferative disease gene SH2D1A/DSHP/SAP. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:7449–54.
[76] Cannons JL, Yu LJ, Hill B, Mijares LA, Dombroski D, Nichols KE, et al. SAP regulates T(H)2 differentiation and PKC-theta-mediated activation of NF-kappaB1. Immunity 2004;21:693–706.
[77] Wang N, Satoiskar A, Faubion W, Howie D, Okamoto S, Feske S, et al. The cell surface receptor SLAM controls T cell and macrophage functions. J Exp Med 2004;199:1255–64.

[78] Berg LJ, Finkelstein LD, Lucas JA, Schwartzberg PL. Tec family kinases in T lymphocyte development and function. Annu Rev Immunol 2005;23:549–600.

[79] Fowell DJ, Shinkai K, Liao XC, Beebe AM, Coffman RL, Littman DR, et al. Impaired NFATc translocation and failure of Th2 development in Itk-deficient CD4+ T cells. Immunity 1999;11:399–409.

[80] Mueller C, August A. Attenuation of immunological symptoms of allergic asthma in mice lacking the tyrosine kinase ITK. J Immunol 2003;170:5056–63.

[81] Miller AT, Wilcox HM, Lai Z, Berg LJ. Signaling through Itk promotes T helper 2 differentiation via negative regulation of T-bet. Immunity 2004;21:67–80.

[82] Au-Yeung BB, Katzman SD, Fowell DJ. Cutting edge: Itk-dependent signals required for CD4+ T cells to exert, but not gain, Th2 effector function. J Immunol 2006;176:3895–9.

[83] Hu Q, Davidson D, Schwartzberg PL, Macchiarini F, Lenardo MJ, Bluestone JA, et al. Identification of Rlk, a novel protein tyrosine kinase with predominant expression in the T cell lineage. J Biol Chem 1995;270:1928–34.

[84] Kashiwakura J, Suzuki N, Nagafuchi H, Takeno M, Takeba Y, Shimoyama Y, et al. Txk, a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase of the Tec family, is expressed in T helper type 1 cells and regulates interferon gamma production in human T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1999;190:1147–54.

[85] Takeba Y, Nagafuchi H, Takeno M, Kashiwakura J, Suzuki N. Txk, a member of nonreceptor tyrosine kinase of Tec family, acts as a Th1 cell-specific transcription factor and regulates IFN-gamma gene transcription. J Immunol 2002;168:2365–70.

[86] Gomez-Rodriguez J, Sahu N, Handon R, Davidson TS, Anderson SM, Kirby MR, et al. Differential expression of interleukin-17A and -17F is coupled to T cell receptor signaling via inducible T cell kinase. Immunity 2009;31:587–97.
