
# Cell-cell Interactions in Rheumatoid Arthritis Synovium

David A. Fox, MD${}^{a,*}$, Alison Gizinski, MD${}^{a}$, Rachel Morgan, BSc${}^{b}$, Steven K. Lundy, PhD${}^{b}$

**KEYWORDS**
- Synovial fibroblasts • T lymphocytes • B lymphocytes
- Antigen-presenting cells • Endothelial cells • Cytokines

Although the cause of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) remains unknown, insights into the pathogenesis of RA have been achieved by careful study of inflammatory, immune, and tissue-destructive processes that take place in synovial tissue. Successful approaches have included ex vivo analysis of RA synovium, experiments in animal model systems, and use of cultured cell lines, especially fibroblast-like synoviocytes, derived from patients’ synovial tissue. These insights have led to remarkable advances in the treatment of RA and other diseases, such as the use of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-blocking biologics.

None of the molecular targets of medications currently used in the treatment of RA are expressed uniquely in synovial tissue. Instead, all of them are of great importance in host defense as well. Recent research is revealing important molecules and pathways pertinent to joint inflammation and damage that may be less central to host defense compared with currently targeted molecules. A conceptual framework for such investigations is the realization that although RA synovium can display some features of an immune organ and is justifiably regarded as a tertiary lymphoid structure, it also contains cells that are distinct from those found in primary or secondary lymphoid tissue, namely, the intrinsic structural cells of the joint such as fibroblast-like synoviocytes.

---

Grant support: David Fox: NIH RO-1 AR38477; Alison Gizinski: American College of Rheumatology Research and Education Foundation; Rachel Morgan: Immunology Training Grant and Rackham Pre-doctoral Merit Fellowship; Steven Lundy: Arthritis Foundation Arthritis Investigator Award and NIH K Award.

${}^{a}$ Division of Rheumatology and Rheumatic Diseases Research Core Center, 3918 Taubman Center, 1500 East Medical Center Drive, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

${}^{b}$ Division of Rheumatology and Rheumatic Diseases Research Core Center, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: dfox@umich.edu

Rheum Dis Clin N Am 36 (2010) 311–323

doi:10.1016/j.rdc.2010.02.004

rheumatic.theclinics.com

0889-857X/10/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
It is clear that no one cell type explains the pathologic behavior of RA synovial tissue. It is the interactions between these cells that define the disease. The 3 most abundant cell populations in RA synovium are the monocyte/macrophage synoviocytes (type A), the fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) (type B), and T lymphocytes (which are strikingly heterogeneous). Other critically important cells of the RA synovium include B lymphocytes, plasma cells, dendritic cells, mast cells, endothelial cells, osteoclasts, and adjacent chondrocytes. These various cell types can interact in 2 general ways: first through secreted mediators, notably inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-17, and many others; and second through direct cell-cell contact that is mediated by cell surface receptors and ligands, including some membrane-anchored cytokines.

This article focuses on selected cell-cell interactions that may be important in the pathogenesis of RA. It is hoped that the relative molecular specificity of some of these interactions for events in the joint compared with the systemic immune response will provide more specific targets (Table 1) for a new generation of biologic and nonbiologic therapeutics.

## HOMOTYPIC AND AUTOCRINE INTERACTIONS OF FLS

### Cadherin-11

During the course of RA, the cells of the synovial lining undergo extensive hyperplasia to form the synovial pannus that invades and destroys cartilage and bone. Recent discoveries have highlighted a critical role for cadherin-11 in these events. Cadherin-11 has been identified as a strongly expressed intercellular adhesion molecule on human and mouse FLS. ${}^{1,2}$ Transfection of L cells with cadherin-11 led to the formation of sheet-like structures with an organization similar to that seen in synovial lining ${}^{1}$; furthermore, cadherin-11 localized to cell-to-cell junctions between FLS. ${}^{2}$ Joints in cadherin-11 null mice had an underdeveloped synovial lining and decreased extracellular matrix. ${}^{2}$ These data indicate that cadherin-11 plays a vital role in the formation of the synovial lining layer by mediating FLS/FLS connections.

Cadherin-11 staining correlated strongly with cellular infiltration of macrophages and T lymphocytes in RA synovium. ${}^{3}$ Cadherin-11 staining also correlated with erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level although not as strongly. ${}^{3}$ Cadherin-11 expression in synovium is not specific to RA, because cadherin-11 staining on synovial biopsies was similar in inflamed joints from RA, osteoarthritis (OA), and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). ${}^{3}$ There was also a positive correlation between cadherin-11 staining of lung tissue from patients with RA-associated interstitial pneumonia (IP) and CD4${}^{+}$ T-cell infiltration of the lung. ${}^{3}$ Cadherin-11 null mice showed an average of 50% reduction in clinical arthritis activity in the K/BxN serum transfer model. ${}^{2}$

| **Table 1**                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Important cell-cell interactions in RA synovium**                         |

| **Cell Types**       | **Potential New Molecular Targets**                   |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| FLS-FLS              | Cadherin-11, fractalkine                             |
| FLS-T                | B7-H3, IL-15                                        |
| T-APC                | OX40, CCL20, IL-7                                   |
| B-T                  | CXCL13, ICOS, OX40, BAFF                            |
| B-FLS                | BAFF, osteopontin                                   |
| Leucocyte-endothelial| Le${\gamma}$/H                                       |

Please see text for explanation of abbreviations.Cadherin-11 has been explored as a possible therapeutic target using the same mouse serum transfer model. Cadherin-11-Fc and an anticadherin-11 mAb ameliorated clinical arthritis when administered with arthritogenic serum.² More significant for potential treatment of human disease, anticadherin-11 mAb ameliorated established arthritis in a modified K/BxN serum transfer model.²

### Fractalkine and its Receptor

Fractalkine (FKN) is a potent chemotactic and adhesion molecule that is found in increased levels in RA synovium. RA FLS secrete FKN and express its receptor, CX₃CR1.⁴ Soluble FKN induced proliferation of FLS that was blocked by addition of anti-CX₃CR1.⁵ Even in the absence of sFKN, the antibody was able to decrease FLS proliferation, revealing an autocrine growth loop.⁵ FKN also induced migration of RA FLS and caused significant reorganization of F-actin within FLS.⁴ It is likely that FKN could act in an autocrine fashion to aid in pannus invasion of the bone and cartilage through FLS growth and migration.

### FLS/T CELL INTERACTIONS

In RA, FLS and other cells produce chemokines that attract T cells to the joint. FLS and T cells then interact in the synovium through secreted factors and direct cell-to-cell interactions, resulting in activation of both cell types. FLS proliferate when cocultured with CD4⁺ T cells, especially when RA T cells are used.⁵

Synovial T cells in RA patients include an expanded population of CD4⁺CD28⁻ cells and this subset of cells in particular greatly enhances FLS proliferation. CD4⁺CD28⁻ cells, which are sometimes considered to be senescent, aberrantly express CX₃CR1, and anti-CX₃CR1 decreases the FLS growth-promoting activity of these cells without a significant effect on CD4⁺CD28⁺ T cells.⁵ Stimulation of CD4⁺CD28⁻ T cells by FKN through CX₃CR1 increases TNFα production, and TNFα can then act on FLS to increase growth, FKN secretion, and CX₃CR1 expression.⁴,⁵ These data suggest an important relationship between TNFα and FKN/CX₃CR1 in FLS/T cell interactions in the RA joint, in which production and action of these molecules occur in linked paracrine and autocrine loops involving T cells and FLS.

### IL-15

IL-15 is constitutively expressed on FLS and is a potent T-cell growth factor that can cause activation/proliferation of effector T cells (Teff) and regulatory T cells (Treg) in T-cell/FLS cocultures.⁶ Moreover, IL-15 can decrease apoptosis of various cell types including FLS and T cells.⁷,⁸ The IL-15 receptor is a trimer (IL-15Rα,β,γc) and subunits of IL-15R are expressed by various cell types, including FLS and T cells.⁷ IL-15 can function as a secreted or membrane-bound cytokine, with signaling similar to other cytokines through the full trimeric IL-15R, or through dimeric IL-15Rβγc receptor (cis presentation).⁷ IL-15 can also signal through a unique trans signaling form, in which distinct subunits of IL-15R are expressed on the surface of interacting cells. IL-15 can be recycled by the cell and presented on the cell surface by IL-15Rα, a pathway that allows for persistence of an IL-15 signal even when soluble IL-15 is no longer available.⁷ In cultures containing Teff and Treg cocultured with RA FLS, proliferation and function of both T cell subsets were stimulated, with a net proinflammatory effect. These effects were not observed when OA FLS or dermal fibroblasts were used and were dependent on cell-to-cell contact. Neutralizing IL-15 during T-cell/FLS cocultures significantly attenuated the proliferation of Teff and Treg, Teff production of TNFα and IFNγ, and Treg inhibition of Teff.⁶ The overall proinflammatory effect of
IL-15 makes it a potential target for RA therapy. A proof-of-concept study has been conducted using a human immunoglobulin (Ig)G1 anti-IL-15 monoclonal antibody in RA. This antibody suppressed effects of IL-15 in vitro, and showed meaningful efficacy in phase I and II trials. ${}^{8}$

### FLS as Antigen-presenting Cells

FLS can also act as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the initiation of T-lymphocyte responses. For example, FLS induced secretion of IL-2 by class II MHC-restricted CD4${}^{+}$ T-cell hybridomas specific for arthritogenic autoantigens, specifically human cartilage gp-39 (HC gp-39) and human type II collagen (CII). ${}^{9}$ The T-cell hybridomas in these experiments were developed from HLA-DR4 transgenic mice, and therefore respond to peptide antigens that are loaded onto and presented by HLA-DR4. Activation of the hybridomas required reexpression of class II on the FLS, which occurs in vivo in RA and is reinduced in vitro by IFN${}_{\gamma}$. The T-cell response to peptide antigen presented by FLS was exquisitely MHC-restricted, identical to experiments in which professional APCs were used, ${}^{9}$ and blocking antibodies to human class II MHC or murine CD4 prevented IL-2 production. Because T-cell hybridomas do not require a second signal to respond to peptide antigen, this system was not useful for defining potential costimulatory ligands on FLS. FLS do not express the classic APC costimulatory molecules CD80 or CD86 (B7-1, B7-2) at functionally relevant levels. ${}^{10}$

### B7-H3

Of the molecules that belong to the B7 family, B7-H3 is expressed strongly and constitutively on FLS in vitro. ${}^{10}$ Moreover, immunostaining of RA synovium showed broad B7-H3 expression nearly identical in distribution to the FLS marker cadherin-11. Dual-color immunohistochemical analysis showed CD3${}^{+}$ T cells in close proximity to FLS expressing B7-H3. ${}^{10}$ Furthermore, in coculture experiments, B7-H3 localized to the contact point between FLS and cytokine-activated T cells (Tck) or during FLS presentation of superantigen to T cells. ${}^{10}$ Previous studies had indicated that B7-H3 can have either stimulatory or inhibitory effects on T cells, and results with FLS/T-cell cocultures were consistent with a dual role for B7-H3. RNAi knockdown of B7-H3 in FLS decreased production of TNF${}_{\alpha}$, IFN${}_{\gamma}$, and IL-2 by cocultured Tck but increased production of these cytokines by resting T cells. ${}^{10}$ The T-cell ligand or ligands for B7-H3 have not yet been defined. B7-H3, in contrast to B7-1 and B7-2, is expressed on human solid tumors, ${}^{11}$ in part controlled by the microRNA miR-29. ${}^{12}$ In early-phase human clinical trials, the B7-H3–specific mAb 8H9 was reported to prolong survival in patients with solid tumors and central nervous system metastasis. ${}^{12}$ Further trials of anti-B7-H3 in cancer could yield safety information pertinent to consideration of therapeutic trials of this antibody in RA.

### T CELLS AND APCs IN THE RA SYNOVIUM

The following sections highlight examples of selected cytokine-mediated and cognate cell-cell contact-driven interactions between T cells and synovial APCs that are current or potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of RA. Interruption of T-cell costimulation between T cells and APCs in the synovium is a worthwhile approach given the clinical success of blocking T-cell costimulation with CTLA-4Ig in RA. Resting T cells require at least 2 signals to differentiate into effector T cells: the first signal through engagement of the T-cell antigen receptor by the antigen-MHC complex on the APC, and the second signal by engagement of costimulatory molecules such as CD28, on T cells by ligands such as CD80/86 on APCs. Effector
T-cell differentiation leads to the expression of additional surface molecules. These inducible structures may have stimulatory (ICOS, OX40) or inhibitory (CTLA-4) potential.

## CTLA-4 and Indoleamine Dioxygenase

CD28 is the prototypic T-cell receptor (TCR) for costimulatory signals. The ligation of CD28 by CD80/86 (B7-1 and B7-2) sends activating signals into the T cell and the APC. CTLA-4 (CD152) is up-regulated on activated T cells and binds to the CD28 ligands CD80/86. The ligation of CD80/86 by CTLA-4 sends inhibitory signals directly into the T cell. The ligation of CD80/86 by CTLA-4 can also deliver regulatory signals to the APC. The interaction of CD80/86 with CTLA-4 leads to the induction of indoleamine dioxygenase (IDO) in APCs. ${}^{13}$ IDO is believed to be critical in inducing anergy in T cells, because IDO depletes tryptophan that is necessary for T-cell activation. Blocking the activity of IDO in a mouse model of arthritis led to increased severity of arthritis and accumulation of Th1 and Th17 cells in the inflamed joints. ${}^{14,15}$ Conversely, administration of L-kynurenine, a metabolite of L-tryptophan, resulted in amelioration of arthritis. These findings suggest manipulation of tryptophan degradation as a therapeutic target in RA. ${}^{15}$

## OX40/OX40L

OX40 (CD134) is predominantly expressed on activated CD4 and CD8 T cells following stimulation via TCR and CD28. Proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1, IL-2, and TNF$\alpha$ can further augment the expression of OX40. The ligand of OX40 and OX40L (CD252) is expressed on APCs including dendritic cells, B cells, and macrophages. ${}^{16}$ OX40L is induced on APCs after stimulation via CD40. ${}^{17}$ There is bidirectional activation of T cells and APCs via the OX40/OX40L pathway. Stimulation of OX40 on T cells induces proliferation and cytokine secretion, and signaling via OX40L into APCs induces the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines by APCs. ${}^{17}$

In RA, there is increased expression of OX40 on peripheral blood CD4 T cells with a trend toward a positive correlation with serum C-reactive protein levels. ${}^{18}$ OX40 is expressed on CD4- and CD8-positive synovial T cells, more so on CD4-positive T cells, and levels of expression correlate with disease activity. ${}^{19-21}$ OX40 and OX40L expressing cells are also present in the RA synovium. ${}^{19}$ Although there is increased expression of OX40 and OX40L in the RA synovium, the role of OX40/OX40L in mediating immune events in RA is unclear. However, preclinical studies in animal models blocking the interaction of OX40/OX40L have shown promise. ${}^{19}$

## CCL20

Chemokines mediate inflammatory responses by stimulating the recruitment of leukocytes. The chemokine CCL20 (MIP-3$\alpha$) and its receptor CCR6 play a role in the migration of different cell types to the RA synovium. CCL20 is a CC-chemokine expressed on macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes. CCR6, the receptor for CCL20, is expressed on Th17 cells, immature dendritic cells, and B cells. CCL20 is chemotactic for Th17 cells and dendritic cells, which express CCR6. Th17 cells secrete CCL20 and recruit other CCR6-expressing Th17 cells to the site of Th17 cell-mediated damage. ${}^{22}$ Increased levels of CCL20 have been observed in the synovial fluid of RA patients compared with OA patients, and protein concentrations of CCL20 are increased in the peripheral blood of patients with RA. ${}^{23,24}$ Expression of CCL20 is induced in FLS by the synergistic interaction of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF$\alpha$, IL-1$\beta$ and IL-17, and cytokine-stimulated FLS can recruit mononuclear cells in a CCL20/CC6-dependent manner. ${}^{25,26}$ The results suggest that CCL20 producedby FLS recruits monocytes and Th17 T cells to the synovium and is an important chemokine in the pathogenesis of RA. Moreover, blockade of CCL20 binding to CCR6 with a neutralizing antibody was effective in treating arthritis in a T-cell transfer model in mice.²² Further supporting the role of CCL20 as an important chemokine in RA, a recent study demonstrated that treatment with infliximab, etanercept, or tocilizumab reduced serum levels of CCL20 in patients with RA.²⁷

## IL-7

IL-7 is a member of the IL-2 family. IL-7 is associated with endothelial cells, FLS, and macrophages in the RA synovium and colocalizes with deposits of extracellular matrix collagen IV.²⁸ IL-7R is composed of IL-7Rα and IL-2Rγ and is expressed on CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells, NK T cells, and monocytes. IL-7 levels are increased in RA compared with OA synovial fluid. Serum IL-7 levels correlate with disease activity in RA.²⁹ In RA patients who are poor responders to anti-TNF therapy, persistently increased serum levels of IL-7 are seen.²⁹ Moreover, reduced levels of serum IL-7 were observed in patients with early RA treated with methotrexate, and the reduction correlated with disease suppression.²⁹

Within RA synovial biopsies, samples with lymphoid follicles demonstrated consistent IL-7 staining, and gene expression analysis of RA synovial samples revealed increased expression of genes involved in IL-7 signal transduction.²⁸ IL-7 may be responsible for generation of tertiary lymphoid follicles observed in RA synovium, because IL-7 is known to be crucial for the development of lymphoid tissue. Enhanced expression of IL-7Rα and IL-7 in patients with RA may contribute to joint inflammation by activating T cells, B cells, and macrophages because treatment with soluble human IL-7Rα inhibited IL-7R–mediated immune activation in vitro.³⁰ These research findings suggest that IL-7 and its receptor are potential targets for immune modulation in RA therapy.

## B-CELL INTERACTIONS WITH SYNOVIAL T CELLS

Recent successes of therapeutic interventions using B-cell–depleting reagents have highlighted the importance of B cells in the pathogenesis of RA.³¹ These current therapies, which target CD20-positive B cells, and several others that are in the pipeline that target other B-cell markers, are designed to eliminate or disrupt the activation of a large percentage of the entire population of B cells. Although effective as treatment for RA in the short-term, each of these reagents has the potential to have long-term deleterious effects on the immune response to common infectious microorganisms. Therefore, it is desirable to continue pursuing B-cell–directed treatments that are more specific to the pathogenic subset of B cells that mediate joint inflammation. The following is a summary of some recently recognized cell-cell interactions involving synovial B cells that point to emerging potential targets of interest.

### Germinal Centers in RA Synovium

It has been established that structures resembling lymph node germinal centers can be found in the inflamed synovium of a subset of RA patients. The recently described expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) within these ectopic germinal centers supports the hypothesis that maturation of the antibody response through somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination could occur within the RA synovium.³² This study went on to show that germinal centers remained functionally active following implantation of RA synovial tissue in SCID mice.³² Analysis of a panel of cytokines and chemokines that are believed to contribute to germinal center formation showed correlations between the presence of germinal centers and TNFα,
lymphotoxin-β, APRIL, and B-lymphocyte chemoattractant (BLC, CXCL13). Another study by the same researchers demonstrated that mononuclear cells from RA synovium had 400-fold higher expression of CXCL13 than cells isolated from the peripheral blood of the same patients.³³ Most synovial CXCL13 was produced by CD45RO⁺/CD4⁺/CD3⁺ T lymphocytes, suggesting that this T-cell subset was of an activated phenotype. Further analysis of surface markers on these T cells suggested a phenotype that was distinct from T follicular helper cells found in other lymphoid structures. Although systemic blockade of CXCL13 or its receptor CXCR5 may be expected to interrupt T cell–B cell interactions that are important to host defenses, the findings concerning CXCL13 expression within the RA synovium open the possibility of intra-articular immune therapy directed at CXCL13/CXCR5 or other contributors to germinal center formation. Localized neutralization of other cytokines or cytokine receptors involved in germinal center formation including lymphotoxin, IL-21, APRIL, and B-cell–activating factor (BAFF) may also provide therapeutic benefit in some patients.

### ICOS and Its Ligand

As described earlier, B cells constitute an important APC population for T-lymphocyte activation. Therapies directed at OX40/OX40L, CD80, and CD86 are expected to act on B-cell antigen presentation as well as dendritic cells and macrophages. Another notable interaction between CD4⁺ T helper cells and B cells that has gained interest recently is that of T-cell-expressed inducible costimulator (ICOS, CD278) with its ligand on B cells, B7RP-1 (ICOS-L, CD275). These molecules are also involved in the formation of germinal centers and are critical to the initiation and further development of antigen-specific antibody responses. Disruption of interactions between ICOS and its ligand has been shown to diminish arthritis incidence and severity in 2 independent studies.³⁴,³⁵ In the latter study, treatment with a blocking antibody decreased the number of T follicular helper cells and germinal center B cells in the draining lymph nodes and spleens of mice in the collagen-induced arthritis model. This led to an overall reduction in T-cell cytokine production and titers of anticollegen antibodies in the serum. ICOS/ICOS-L blockade was also effective in the NZB/NZW F₁ model of lupus nephritis. As described earlier for CXCL13, systemic blockade of ICOS/ICOS-L interactions may not prove to be desirable because of adverse side effects, but local inhibition of ICOS/ICOS-L in the synovium may be a viable treatment option.

### Regulatory B Cells and NK T Cells

Not all interactions between B cells and T cells result in increased disease pathogenesis in arthritis. Regulatory B cells that express IL-10 have been studied for many years, but have recently gained prominence through the demonstration that they have unique surface markers (CD1dhiCD5⁺) and may represent a subset of B cells distinct from those that are pathogenic in autoimmune diseases.³⁶ The high expression of CD1d by these regulatory B cells suggests that they may present antigens to invariant NK T cells. The role of NK T cells in arthritis has been controversial with almost an equal number of articles suggesting a pathogenic or suppressive phenotype.³⁷ The conflicting roles of NK T cells in arthritis might be explained by differences in the B-cell populations that are presenting antigen to them. A recent study has demonstrated the increased presence of invariant NK T cells with regulatory phenotype following depletion of B cells with anti-CD20 therapy.³⁸ This study suggests a novel mechanism contributing to the success of B-cell depletion therapy, and demonstrates the potential efficacy of targeting the interaction of B cells with iNK T cells.

B-CELL INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER SYNOVIAL CELL POPULATIONS

Although B-cell interactions with T cells in the RA synovium may present important and obvious targets for future therapy, it is critical to understand that signaling between B cells and other synovial cell populations may also contribute to joint pathology.

### BAFF

A recent study has shown that BAFF is expressed on the cell surface of RA FLS but not on OA FLS.³⁹ This RA FLS-associated BAFF acted as a first signal for the transcription of recombinase-activating genes (RAG) in B cells that are involved in maturation of the antibody response. RAG expression in B cells cocultured with RA FLS was blocked by interference with BAFF gene translation or by neutralization of IL-6. Forced expression of membrane-associated BAFF in OA FLS did not result in RAG gene transcription unless IL-6 was also present in the coculture. These results highlight that RA FLS can have a direct effect on B-cell activation through the combined expression of cell surface BAFF and IL-6. Evidence for the importance of local synovial BAFF expression to the pathogenesis of arthritis comes from a study in which intra-articular injection of a lentiviral vector containing a BAFF-silencing reagent provided long-term protection from joint inflammation in the collagen-induced arthritis model.⁴⁰ This protective effect of BAFF gene silencing within the joint was accompanied by decreases in production of anticol-lagen antibodies and IL-17 by cells of the joint and draining lymph node, but not in the spleen of treated mice. This study demonstrates another potential approach to localized treatment of arthritic inflammation.

### Osteopontin

Another notable interaction between RA FLS and B cells that may contribute to joint inflammation was found to be associated with the expression of an RA-associated iso-form of osteopontin (OPN).⁴¹ This larger form of OPN was preferentially detected in RA FLS on Western blot analysis, and was found to form a unique macrocomplex with fibrinogen on the cell surface of RA FLS. Cocultures of purified B cells with OPN-fibrinogen complex-positive FLS led to increased expression of IL-6, an effect that was blocked by specific inhibition of OPN production. Immunohistochemistry of RA synovial tissue demonstrated the colocalization of OPN, IL-6, and B cells to highly inflamed areas of the joint.

### RANK-L on B Cells

Provocative new data suggest that B cells can express the receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANK-L).⁴² The expression of RANK-L in the synovium drives differentiation of osteoclasts that mediate the erosion of bone in RA. The study by Han and colleagues⁴² demonstrated that RANK-L expression was stimulated on rat splenic B cells by culture with the inactivated bacterium, *Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans*, a pathogenic microbe associated with human periodontal disease. Purified splenic B cells from rats infected with *A. actinomycetemcomitans* stimulated a reporter cell line to differentiate toward osteoclasts.⁴² Thus, oral infection has systemic effects on RANK-L expression by B cells and may be a partial explanation of the association between RA and periodontal disease. Although the expression of RANK-L by synovial B cells has not yet been reported, it will be interesting to determine whether B cells contribute to RA tissue damage through this mechanism, and what local or systemic signals might be involved in B cell expression of RANK-L.

LEUCOCYTE-ENDOTHELIAL INTERACTIONS IN RA SYNOVIUM

Cell migration into inflammatory lesions is a tightly regulated and complex process that involves adhesion receptors on leucocytes and vascular endothelial cells, multiple chemokines, and retention signals within target tissues. Space does not permit a comprehensive description of the extensive knowledge concerning these processes in RA synovium; they have been recently reviewed elsewhere.⁴³ Relevant adhesion molecules include selectins, integrins, and members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily.⁴³ These molecules are also used in various combinations in leucocyte efflux into nonsynovial tissues, but it seems likely that in some respects, the synovial vasculature and the cell homing mechanisms to synovium are unique.

### Neutrophil Recruitment

Intravital microscopy has emerged as an elegant technique for assessing leucocyte ingress into synovium, at least in animal model systems.⁴⁴ Such studies have revealed an unexpected prominence of neutrophil versus lymphocyte recruitment that, in RA, could be reflected by the cell composition of synovial fluid more than synovial tissue. In the mouse model of proteoglycan-induced arthritis, neutrophil expression of CD44 and CD62L (L-selectin) is crucial for entry into the joint.⁴⁵ In human RA, in vitro studies suggest that FLS control neutrophil recruitment indirectly through their influence on endothelial cells.⁴⁶ Coculture of endothelial cells with RA FLS but not RA dermal fibroblasts markedly augmented adherence of neutrophils to the endothelial cells, a process that depended on IL-6 production by the FLS. A role for FLS IL-6 was also identified in a similar coculture system that measured lymphocyte recruitment by endothelial cells.⁴⁷ In these experiments, OA FLS and RA FLS behaved similarly, but FLS from injured but otherwise normal joints or dermal fibroblasts inhibited lymphocyte-endothelial adhesion. Although limited by the use of umbilical vein rather than synovial microvascular endothelial cells, these interesting studies provide striking evidence for a role of FLS in the control of endothelial cell function.

### Permeability of the Synovial Vasculature

Ingress of leucocytes into synovium may also be facilitated by unique permeability properties of the synovial microvasculature that have been revealed by experiments in a murine immune-complex model of acute joint inflammation that is induced by serum transfer (as described earlier). Intravital microscopy was used to show that joints destined to become inflamed developed a unique degree of vascular leakage on systemic administration of arthritogenic sera or even nonarthritogenic immune complexes, through a process dependent on mast cells and vasoactive amines.⁴⁸ Such studies may point to hitherto unappreciated physiologic functions of normal synovium, and explain the high propensity for systemic inflammatory processes to target the joints. The relationship of this model system to chronic arthritis, particularly RA, is still difficult to define.

### Blood Vessel Growth in RA Synovium

Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis are distinct but related events that occur in RA synovium.⁴³ Vasculogenesis, the de novo formation of blood vessels from circulating endothelial cell precursors (EPCs), is believed to occur in RA synovium and in corresponding animal models.⁴³,⁴⁹ Coculture studies have implicated cell-cell contact between RA EPCs and RA FLS, mediated by binding of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) to the integrin VLA-4, as critical to such interactions, which could retain EPCs in synovial tissue long enough to allow

vasculogenesis to occur.⁴⁹ New blood vessel formation in RA synovium also depends on TNF and can be reversed by TNF blockade.⁵⁰ TNF and other proinflammatory cytokines can induce molecules that are involved in angiogenesis, leucocyte-endothelial adhesion, or both. One example is the group of molecules termed Le^y/H (identified by a carbohydrate-binding antibody termed 4A11) or its analog H-2 g.⁵¹ These molecules not only promote angiogenesis and expression of adhesion ligands by endothelial cells, but also stimulate monocyte migration. This latter effect was observed in vitro and in vivo in assays of monocyte recruitment to human RA synovial tissues implanted into SCID mice.⁵¹

**Lymphocyte Egress**

Little is known about the control of lymphocyte egress versus retention in RA synovium. It is possible that some current treatment approaches, such as TNF blockade, do stimulate cell egress, although this is difficult to prove. Some data exist to suggest that expression of chemokine receptors on T lymphocytes is altered on entry into RA synovium, and that chemokine gradients in synovial lymphatics, endothelium, and stromal cells are distorted to discourage lymphocyte egress.⁵² Readjustment of these gradients to deplete synovial tissue of inflammatory cells is a particularly compelling approach to resolving joint inflammation.

**SUMMARY**

Analysis of cell-cell interactions in RA synovium is providing a vivid and detailed understanding of RA pathogenesis. Current biologic and nonbiologic therapies are likely to be already targeting some of these interactions in ways that are still poorly understood. Several new possibilities for more targeted therapies have been identified based on interactions that are unique, or uniquely important, in the inflamed joint.

**REFERENCES**

1. Valencia X, Higgins JM, Kiener HP, et al. Cadherin-11 provides specific cellular adhesion between fibroblast-like synoviocytes. J Exp Med 2004;200:1673.
2. Lee DM, Kiener HP, Agarwal SK, et al. Cadherin-11 in synovial lining formation and pathology in arthritis. Science 2007;315:1006.
3. Vandooren B, Cantaert T, ter Borg M, et al. Tumor necrosis factor alpha drives cadherin 11 expression in rheumatoid inflammation. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:3051.
4. Volin MV, Huynh N, Klosowska K, et al. Fractalkine is a novel chemoattractant for rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocyte signaling through MAP kinases and Akt. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:2512.
5. Sawai H, Park YW, He X, et al. Fractalkine mediates Tcell-dependent proliferation of synovial fibroblasts in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:3215.
6. Benito-Miguel M, Garcia-Carmona Y, Balsa A, et al. A dual action of rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblast IL-15 expression on the equilibrium between CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells and CD4+CD25− responder T cells. J Immunol 2009;183:8268.
7. Dubois S, Mariner J, Waldmann TA, et al. IL-15Ralpha recycles and presents IL-15 in trans to neighboring cells. Immunity 2002;17:537.
8. Baslund B, Tvede N, Danneskiold-Samsoe B, et al. Targeting interleukin-15 in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a proof-of-concept study. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52:2686.

9. Tran CN, Davis MJ, Tesmer LA, et al. Presentation of arthritogenic peptide to antigen-specific T cells by fibroblast-like synoviocytes. Arthritis Rheum 2007; 56: 1497.
10. Tran CN, Thacker SG, Louie DM, et al. Interactions of T cells with fibroblast-like synoviocytes: role of the B7 family costimulatory ligand B7-H3. J Immunol 2008; 180: 2989.
11. Modak S, Kramer K, Gultekin SH, et al. Monoclonal antibody 8H9 targets a novel cell surface antigen expressed by a wide spectrum of human solid tumors. Cancer Res 2001; 61: 4048.
12. Xu H, Cheung IY, Guo HF, et al. MicroRNA miR-29 modulates expression of immunoinhibitory molecule B7-H3: potential implications for immune based therapy of human solid tumors. Cancer Res 2009; 69: 6275.
13. Munn DH, Sharma MD, Mellor AL. Ligation of B7-1/B7-2 by human CD4+ T cells triggers indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity in dendritic cells. J Immunol 2004; 172: 4100.
14. Szanto S, Koreny T, Mikecz K, et al. Inhibition of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-mediated tryptophan catabolism accelerates collagen-induced arthritis in mice. Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9: R50.
15. Criado G, Simelyte E, Inglis JJ, et al. Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase-mediated tryptophan catabolism regulates accumulation of Th1/Th17 cells in the joint in collagen-induced arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60: 1342.
16. Zola H, editor. Leucocyte and stromal cell molecules: the CD markers. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley-Liss; 2007. p. 412.
17. Ohshima Y, Tanaka Y, Tozawa H, et al. Expression and function of OX40 ligand on human dendritic cells. J Immunol 1997; 159: 3838.
18. Brugnoni D, Bettinardi A, Malacarne F, et al. CD134/OX40 expression by synovial fluid CD4+ T lymphocytes in chronic synovitis. Br J Rheumatol 1998; 37: 584.
19. Yoshioka T, Nakajima A, Akiba H, et al. Contribution of OX40/OX40 ligand interaction to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Eur J Immunol 2000; 30: 2815.
20. Giacomelli R, Passacantando A, Perricone R, et al. T lymphocytes in the synovial fluid of patients with active rheumatoid arthritis display CD134-OX40 surface antigen. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2001; 19: 317.
21. Passacantando A, Parzanese I, Rascente M, et al. Synovial fluid OX40T lymphocytes of patients with rheumatoid arthritis display a Th2/Th0 polarization. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2006; 19: 499.
22. Hirota K, Yoshitomi H, Hashimoto M, et al. Preferential recruitment of CCR6-expressing Th17 cells to inflamed joints via CCL20 in rheumatoid arthritis and its animal model. J Exp Med 2007; 204: 2803.
23. Ruth JH, Shahrara S, Park CC, et al. Role of macrophage inflammatory protein-3alpha and its ligand CCR6 in rheumatoid arthritis. Lab Invest 2003; 83: 579.
24. Kageyama Y, Ichikawa T, Nagafusa T, et al. Etanercept reduces the serum levels of interleukin-23 and macrophage inflammatory protein-3 alpha in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatol Int 2007; 28: 137.
25. Chabaud M, Page G, Miossec P. Enhancing effect of IL-1, IL-17, and TNF-alpha on macrophage inflammatory protein-3 alpha production in rheumatoid arthritis: regulation by soluble receptors and Th2 cytokines. J Immunol 2001; 167: 6015.
26. Tanida S, Yoshitomi H, Nishitani K, et al. CCL20 produced in the cytokine network of rheumatoid arthritis recruits CCR6+ mononuclear cells and enhances the production of IL-6. Cytokine 2009; 47: 112.


27. Kawashiri SY, Kawakami A, Iwamoto N, et al. Proinflammatory cytokines synergistically enhance the production of chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20) from rheumatoid fibroblast-like synovial cells in vitro and serum CCL20 is reduced in vivo by biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. J Rheumatol 2009; 36:2397.

28. Timmer TC, Baltus B, Vondenhoff M, et al. Inflammation and ectopic lymphoid structures in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissues dissected by genomics technology: identification of the interleukin-7 signaling pathway in tissues with lymphoid neogenesis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:2492.

29. van Roon JA, Jacobs K, Verstappen S, et al. Reduction of serum interleukin 7 levels upon methotrexate therapy in early rheumatoid arthritis correlates with disease suppression. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67:1054.

30. Hartgring SA, van Roon JA, Wenting-van Wijk M, et al. Elevated expression of interleukin-7 receptor in inflamed joints mediates interleukin-7-induced immune activation in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:2595.

31. Levesque MC. Translational mini-review series on B cell-directed therapies: recent advances in B cell-directed biological therapies for autoimmune disorders. Clin Exp Immunol 2009;157:198.

32. Humby F, Bombardieri M, Manzo A, et al. Ectopic lymphoid structures support ongoing production of class-switched autoantibodies in rheumatoid synovium. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1.

33. Manzo A, Vitolo B, Humby F, et al. Mature antigen-experienced T helper cells synthesize and secrete the B cell chemoattractant CXCL13 in the inflammatory environment of the rheumatoid joint. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:3377.

34. Iwai H, Kozono Y, Hirose S, et al. Amelioration of collagen-induced arthritis by blockade of inducible costimulator-B7 homologous protein costimulation. J Immunol 2002;169:4332.

35. Hu YL, Metz DP, Chung J, et al. B7RP-1 blockade ameliorates autoimmunity through regulation of follicular helper T cells. J Immunol 2009;182:1421.

36. Matsushita T, Yanaba K, Bouaziz JD, et al. Regulatory B cells inhibit EAE initiation in mice while other B cells promote disease progression. J Clin Invest 2008;118: 3420.

37. Coppieters K, Dewint P, Van Beneden K, et al. NKT cells: manipulable managers of joint inflammation. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2007;46:565.

38. Parietti V, Chifflot H, Sibilia J, et al. Rituximab treatment overcomes reduction of regulatory iNKT cells in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Immunol 2009;134:331–9.

39. Rochas C, Hillion S, Saraux A, et al. Transmembrane BAFF from rheumatoid synoviocytes requires interleukin-6 to induce the expression of recombination-activating gene in B lymphocytes. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:1261.

40. Lai Kwan Lam Q, King Hung Ko O, Zheng BJ, et al. Local BAFF gene silencing suppresses Th17-cell generation and ameliorates autoimmune arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:14993.

41. Take Y, Nakata K, Hashimoto J, et al. Specifically modified osteopontin in rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes supports interaction with B cells and enhances production of interleukin-6. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:3591.

42. Han X, Lin X, Seliger AR, et al. Expression of receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand by B cells in response to oral bacteria. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2009;24:190.

43. Szekanecz Z, Koch AE. Vascular involvement in rheumatic diseases: ‘vascular rheumatology’. Arthritis Res Ther 2008;10:224.

44. Gal I, Bajnok E, Szanto S, et al. Visualization and in situ analysis of leukocyte trafficking into the ankle joint in a systemic murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52:3269.
45. Sarraj B, Ludanyi K, Glant TT, et al. Expression of CD44 and L-selectin in the innate immune system is required for severe joint inflammation in the proteoglycan-induced murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. J Immunol 1932;177:2006.
46. Lally F, Smith E, Filer A, et al. A novel mechanism of neutrophil recruitment in a coculture model of the rheumatoid synovium. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52:3460.
47. McGettrick HM, Smith E, Filer A, et al. Fibroblasts from different sites may promote or inhibit recruitment of flowing lymphocytes by endothelial cells. Eur J Immunol 2009;39:113.
48. Binstadt BA, Patel PR, Alencar H, et al. Particularities of the vasculature can promote the organ specificity of autoimmune attack. Nat Immunol 2006;7:284.
49. Silverman MD, Haas CS, Rad AM, et al. The role of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1/very late activation antigen 4 in endothelial progenitor cell recruitment to rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:1817.
50. Izquierdo E, Canete JD, Celis R, et al. Immature blood vessels in rheumatoid synovium are selectively depleted in response to anti-TNF therapy. PLoS One 2009;4:e8131.
51. Amin MA, Ruth JH, Haas CS, et al. H-2g, a glucose analog of blood group H antigen, mediates mononuclear cell recruitment via Src and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:689.
52. Burman A, Haworth O, Hardie DL, et al. A chemokine-dependent stromal induction mechanism for aberrant lymphocyte accumulation and compromised lymphatic return in rheumatoid arthritis. J Immunol 2005;174:1693.
