
Polyketide synthase chemistry does not direct biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediynes

Geoff P. Horsman${}^{a,1}$, Yihua Chen${}^{a,1}$, Jon S. Thorson${}^{a,b}$, and Ben Shen${}^{a,b,c,2}$

${}^{a}$Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, ${}^{b}$National Cooperative Drug Discovery Group, and ${}^{c}$Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705

Edited by Jerrold Meinwald, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, and approved May 17, 2010 (received for review March 16, 2010)

Enediynes are potent antitumor antibiotics that are classified as 9- or 10-membered according to the size of the enediyne core structure. However, almost nothing is known about enediyne core biosynthesis, and the determinants of 9- versus 10-membered enediyne core biosynthetic divergence remain elusive. Previous work identified enediyne-specific polyketide synthases (PKSEs) that can be phylogenetically distinguished as being involved in 9- versus 10-membered enediyne biosynthesis, suggesting that biosynthetic divergence might originate from differing PKSE chemistries. Recent in vitro studies have identified several compounds produced by the PKSE and associated thioesterase (TE), but condition-dependent product profiles make it difficult to ascertain a true catalytic difference between 9- and 10-membered PKSE-TE systems. Here we report that PKSE chemistry does not direct 9- versus 10-membered enediyne core biosynthetic divergence as revealed by comparing the products from three 9-membered and two 10-membered PKSE-TE systems under identical conditions using robust in vivo assays. Three independent experiments support a common catalytic function for 9- and 10-membered PKSEs by the production of a heptaene metabolite from: $(i)$ all five cognate PKSE-TE pairs in *Escherichia coli*; $(ii)$ the C-1027 and calicheamicin cognate PKSE-TEs in *Streptomyces lividans* K4-114; and $(iii)$ selected native producers of both 9- and 10-membered enediynes. Furthermore, PKSEs and TEs from different 9- and 10-membered enediyne biosynthetic machineries are freely interchangeable, revealing that 9- versus 10-membered enediyne core biosynthetic divergence occurs beyond the PKSE-TE level. These findings establish a starting point for determining the origins of this biosynthetic divergence.

biosynthesis | C-1027 | thioesterase

Enediyne natural products are some of the most potent antitumor antibiotics discovered (1), and neocarzinostatin (NCS) and calicheamicin (CAL) enjoy clinical success in Japan (2) and the United States (3), respectively. While their unique mechanism of action (4, 5) and extraordinary biological activity generate interest among clinicians, the unusual molecular architecture of the enediynes motivates elucidation of the biosynthetic logic directing their assembly. Most structurally remarkable is the enediyne core, which is composed of two acetylenic groups conjugated by a double bond within either a 9- or 10-membered ring (Fig. 1A). Enediyne biosynthesis has been studied most extensively for the 9-membered enediyne C-1027, revealing a convergent process in which several peripheral moieties are appended to the enediyne core (6). Indeed, recent elucidation of peripheral pathway biochemistry has enabled rational design of novel enediyne analogs possessing altered biological activities (7, 8). However, despite rapid progress toward understanding peripheral moiety construction, the biosynthesis of the enediyne core structure remains a mystery.

The enediynes are classified according to the enediyne core ring size as either 9- or 10-membered, and how these two classes biosynthetically diverge is an intriguing question. Several biosynthetic gene clusters for both 9- and 10-membered enediynes have been sequenced, as exemplified by C-1027 (9), NCS (10), and maduropeptin (MDP) (11) for the 9-membered enediynes and CAL (12) and dynemicin (DYN) (13) for the 10-membered enediynes, respectively (Fig. 1A). Common to all clusters is a five gene cassette (Fig. 1B, black) that encodes a unique enediyne-specific iterative type I polyketide synthase (PKSE), a thioesterase (TE), and three additional genes of unknown function. The PKSE generates an enediyne core precursor from iterative condensation of malonyl-CoA (9); the high sequence identities (41–68%, Table S1) and identical domain organization among PKSEs (Fig. S1) suggest a common catalytic function and product. These data have inspired speculation that PKSEs from both classes generate an early common intermediate, which is directed to divergent fates by the action of 9- or 10-membered-specific accessory enzymes (Fig. 2A) (14). This hypothesis is consistent with the identification of 6–7 additional genes adjacent to the core cassette that are common only among the 9-membered gene clusters (Fig. 1B, gray). However, phylogenetic analysis of PKSEs reveals that they group into two clades according to enediyne core ring size. This ability to distinguish 9- versus 10-membered PKSEs led to a predictive familial classification model for new enediyne-encoding genes (14) and suggests that a possible catalytic difference between the two PKSE families may be responsible for generating the respective core structures.

Indeed, recent evidence for a functional distinction between 9- and 10-membered PKSEs is consistent with PKSE-directed biosynthetic divergence of the two enediyne families (Fig. 2B). For instance, we previously reported that NcsE and SgcE—the PKSEs involved in the biosynthesis of the 9-membered enediynes NCS and C-1027, respectively—produced heptaene (1) when co-expressed with their associated TEs, NcsE10 and SgcE10 (15, 16). In contrast, Liang and coworkers observed methyl hexaenone (2) as the major product of the in vitro combination of CalE8 and CalE7, the PKSE-TE pair from the 10-membered enediyne CAL (17). This apparently inefficient keto-reduction, or “ketoeductase (KR) skipping,” by CalE8 in the final round of iterative chain extension was therefore proposed as the first point of biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediyne cores (Fig. 2B).

However, subsequent reports using in vitro methods to decipher functional differences between 9- and 10-membered PKSEs reveal more complex behavior. For example, Townsend and coworkers detected 1, 2, and several truncated polyketides from in

Author contributions: G.P.H., Y.C., and B.S. designed research; G.P.H. and Y.C. performed research; G.P.H., Y.C., and B.S. analyzed data; J.T. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; and G.P.H., Y.C., and B.S. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

$^{1}$G.P.H. and Y.C. contributed equally to this work.

$^{2}$To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: bshen@pharmacy.wisc.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/ doi:10.1073/pnas.1003442107/--DCSupplemental.

A

C-1027

Neocarzinostatin (NCS)

Maduropeptin (MDP)

Calicheamicin (CAL)

Dynemicin (DYN)

Esperamicin (ESP)

B

C-1027 — E1 → E2 → E3 → E4 → E5 → E6 → E7 → R2 → R1 → E8 → E9 → E10 → E11

NCS — E1 → E2 → E3 → E4 → E5 → E6 → E7 → R5 → R6 → E8 → E9 → E11

MDP — E2 → E3 → E4 → E5 → E6 → E7 → R2 → R1 → E8 → E9 → M → E11

CAL — R7 → U15 → U14 → T3 → E8 → E6 → U13 → U12 → S7 → E5 → U11 → E4 → R6

DYN — Orf13 → U15 → U14 → T3 → E8 → E7 → S6 → U8 → U6 → R2 → R3 → U21 → U20

Fig. 1. Selected 9- and 10-membered enediynes whose biosynthetic gene clusters have been sequenced. (A) Chemical structures of the 9- (C-1027, NCS, and MDP) and 10-membered (CAL, DYN, and ESP) enediynes with the enediyne core structures shown in bold. (B) Regions of enediyne gene clusters encoding enediyne core-biosynthesis with genes common among both 9- and 10-membered enediynes shown in black and genes common only among the 9-membered enediynes shown in gray. The pksE genes for 9- and 10-membered systems are named $E$ and $E8$, respectively, while TE genes are named $E10$ and $E7$, respectively.

vitro analysis of CalE8 and CalE7, indicating partial KR function in the final round of chain extension by CalE8 (dashed line in Fig. 2B). The variety of products was interpreted to be a consequence of PKSE catalysis occurring in the absence of required accessory proteins and suggested that the apparent catalytic difference between 9- and 10-membered PKSEs may be an artifact of assay conditions (18). Indeed, by optimizing in vitro reaction conditions, Liang and coworkers variably observed 1, 2, and an unknown compound as major products from 10-membered (CAL and DYN) and 9-membered (C-1027) PKSE-TE systems (19). Although the assay could be modified to yield 1 as the major product from each system, the condition-dependent product profiles of in vitro PKSE-TE systems caution against interpreting a common catalytic function for all PKSEs and motivate further study using more reproducible methods.

The difficulties with in vitro experimental systems for PKSE studies contrast sharply with our previously reported in vivo system, in which expression of pksE-TE from either the C-1027 or NCS biosynthetic machineries in either Escherichia coli or Streptomyces consistently provided 1 as the only major product (15). The apparent advantage of in vivo methods may reflect the difficulty of reconstituting the large multifunctional PKSE megaenzyme in vitro in the absence of the mild and regenerative conditions of the cell in vivo. We therefore elected to extend the use of in vivo systems to compare 9- and 10-membered PKSEs with the intent of more faithfully reproducing the conditions presented to the biosynthetic machinery in the native producers.

We herein report that PKSE chemistry does not direct 9-versus 10-membered enediyne core biosynthetic divergence (Fig. 2A) by comparing the products from three 9- (C-1027, NCS, MDP) and two 10-membered (CAL, DYN) PKSE-TE systems under identical conditions using robust in vivo assays. Three independent experiments support a common catalytic function for 9- and 10-membered PKSEs by the production of 1 from: (i) all five cognate PKSE-TE pairs in E. coli; (ii) the SgcE-SgcE10 and CalE8-CalE7 cognate pairs in Streptomyces lividans K4-114; and (iii) selected native producers of both 9- and 10-membered enediynes. Finally, as a first step toward investigating the possible role of protein-protein interactions in directing biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediynes, we demonstrated no pathway-specific fidelity of the PKSE-TE interaction. These findings set the stage to further search for the origins of biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediynes.

### Results and Discussion

The first step toward comparing 9- and 10-membered PKSEs was to prepare compatible E. coli constructs for coexpressing pksE and TE from each of the five sequenced enediyne gene clusters: C-1027 (sgcE-sgcE10), NCS (ncsE-ncsE10), MDP (mdpE-mdpE10), CAL (calE8-calE7), and DYN (dynE8-dynE7) ([Table S2](#tableS2)). Coexpression of each cognate pair in a 50 mL E. coli culture and HPLC analysis of the concentrated acetone extract revealed that 1 was the only major product from each of the five PKSE-TE systems (Fig. 3A, I–V). This compound was readily identified to be 1.

A

Common PKSE chemistry with accessory enzyme-directed pathway divergence

B

Divergent PKSE chemistries

Fig. 2. Two proposed origins of biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediynes. (A) Common PKSE chemistry based on current in vivo studies: All PKSEs generate a common intermediate, which is processed by respective pathway-specific enzymes to furnish different core structures. (B) Divergent PKSE chemistry based on previous in vitro studies: The phylogenetically related class of 9-membered PKSEs generate 1 via a β-hydroxy thioester, while the 10-membered PKSEs may stall at the final round of iterative keto-reduction to yield 2 as a major product.

by its distinctive absorption spectrum (Fig. S2) and expected mass of 198.1 and confirmed to be identical to the previously characterized authentic standard (15). Productions of 1 by either the 9- or 10-membered PKSE-TE systems under the conditions examined are very similar as exemplified by the estimated yields of 1 at 1.3 ± 0.5 mg/L for CalE8-CalE7 and 2.8 ± 1.0 mg/L for MdpE-MdpE10, respectively. Production was abolished when: (i) the TE was excluded (Fig. 3A, VI) or (ii) a ketosynthase-inactivated SgcE-C211A enzyme (15) was used (SgcE KS°, Fig. 3A, VII), showing that production is both TE- and PKSE-dependent. Taken together, the in vivo data demonstrates a common catalytic function for all PKSEs, implying that 9- versus 10-membered enediyne pathway divergence is dictated by accessory enzymes, as previously proposed (14, 18).

Having successfully established a common chemistry for 9- and 10-membered PKSE-TE systems in E. coli, we then showed that 1 is also produced by PKSE-TE expression in Streptomyces lividans K4-114 (20), a host more closely related to the enediyne native producers. Due to the condition-dependent product profile observed using in vitro systems (17–19, 21), we reasoned that the in vivo PKSE-TE chemistry may also be host-dependent, and we therefore sought to examine production in a host other than E. coli. Cognate PKSE-TE constructs for C-1027 (sgcE-sgcE10) and CAL (calE8-calE7) were prepared (Table S2), and expression of each construct in S. lividans K4-114 yielded 1 (Fig. 3B, I and II). This result further demonstrates a common chemistry catalyzed by both 9- and 10-membered PKSE-TE pairs in a host possessing cellular conditions that are presumably more representative of the native producer strains.

Finally, a common PKSE-TE chemistry was ultimately verified by the production of 1 in selected native producers of both 9- and

Horsman et al.
PNAS | June 22, 2010 | vol. 107 | no. 25 | 11333

Fig. 3. HPLC chromatograms with UV detection at 370 nm showing production of 1 from selected: (A) recombinant *E. coli* strains coexpressing cognate *pksE-TE* pairs; (B) recombinant *S. lividans* K4-114 strains coexpressing cognate and mismatched *pksE-TE* pairs; (C) native enediyne producers (I) *S. globisporus* C-1027, (II) Δ*sgeE* mutant SB1005, (III) SB1011 (SB1005 complemented by expressing *sgeE* in trans), (IV) Δ*sgeF* mutant SB1010, (V) *S. neocarzinostaticus* ATCC 15944, (VI) *M. echinospora* ssp. *calichensis*, and (VII) *A. verrucospora* ATCC 39334; and (D) recombinant *E. coli* strains coexpressing mismatched *pksE-TE* pairs.

that both PKSEs (14) and TEs appear to phylogenetically cluster according to enediyne structural class (Fig. S4). Although Liang and coworkers showed that SgcE10 could substitute for CalE7 to similarly liberate 2 from CalE8 (21), the combinatorial flexibility afforded by our five PKSE and five TE constructs enables a more thorough examination of pathway-specific effects by the convenient coexpression of any PKSE-TE combination. Significantly, all five TEs were freely interchangeable with all five PKSEs to yield 1 from all 20 possible mismatched PKSE-TE combinations in *E. coli* (Fig. S2), as exemplified by representative chromatograms in Fig. 3D. We then verified this result in a different host, *S. lividans* K4-114 (20), to ensure that any pathway-specific effects were not host-dependent. Specifically, we prepared constructs of *sgcE-calE7* and *calE8-sgcE10* (Table S2) for expression in *S. lividans* K4-114 and observed the production of 1 in both cases (Fig. 3B, III and IV). The interchangeability of TEs between 9- and 10-membered PKSE-TE systems clearly rules out the possibility that pathway-specific divergence originates from the PKSE-TE interaction and further supports a unified view of PKSE catalysis.

In summary, we have presented definitive evidence that PKSE chemistry does not direct 9- versus 10-membered enediyne core divergence. We instead envision a universal PKSE-bound intermediate that is modified by pathway-specific accessory enzymes en route to formation of the 9- or 10-membered enediyne core structures (Fig. 2A). Thus, the phylogenetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered PKSEs may reflect enediyne core-specific protein-protein interactions between the PKSE and corresponding accessory enzymes. This hypothesis is consistent with our earlier observation that only the 9-membered *pksE* genes, but not *calE8*, could restore C-1027 or NCS production in *pksE* null mutants (15). As an important first step toward elucidating pathway-directing interactions between PKSEs and accessory enzymes, we demonstrated the production of 1 by all possible PKSE-TE combinations. This PKSE-TE promiscuity establishes that biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediyne cores requires more than just these two enzymes. Our findings now provide a starting point from which to search for the origins of this divergence.

The present study raises additional questions and possibilities with respect to the reproducible production of 1 from a wide variety of host systems. The high yields from the native producers raises interesting questions regarding the biological relevance of this compound. For example, *S. globisporus* C-1027 produces ~14 mg/L of 1 and ~1 mg/L of C-1027 chromophore (9), which corresponds to successful C-1027 production in only about 1 of every 70 enzyme turnovers. Finally, the apparent ubiquity of 1 in all enediyne producers provides a convenient phenotypic screen to identify new enediyne-producing organisms, complementing the genotypic screenings we have reported previously (14, 23).

### Methods

#### General
Oligonucleotide synthesis and DNA sequencing was performed by the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center. PCR was performed using Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and 3′ A-overhangs were added with Taq polymerase from Invitrogen for 10 min at 72 °C prior to subcloning into the pGEM-T Easy vector from Promega (Madison, WI). Mass spectrometry
was performed using electron impact ionization on a Waters (Micromass) AutoSpec mass spectrometer (Milford, MA). Strains, plasmids, primers, detailed procedures for making the *pksE* and *TE* expression constructs, sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis of PKSEs and TEs, and HPLC analyses of 1 and bioassays for enediyne production are summarized in Tables S1, S2, and S3 and Figs. S1, S2, S3, and S4 and provided in the online supporting information.

### Coexpression of *pksE-TE* Constructs in *E. coli*
Various combinations of *pksE*- and *TE*-containing plasmids (Table S2) were cotransformed into *E. coli* BL21(DE3) and plated on LB agar plates containing the appropriate combination of two antibiotics for selection. Single colonies were picked and grown overnight at 37°C in LB and then transferred to 50 mL LB cultures supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics. The cultures were grown at 37°C until the optical density at 600 nm (OD~600~) reached ~0.2, at which point the cultures were transferred to 18°C incubators until they reached OD~600~ ~0.4 and then supplemented with 0.1 mM IPTG to induce gene expression. The cultures were then incubated for an additional 2 d prior to harvest.

### Expression of *pksE-TE* Constructs in *S. lividans* K4-114
Various combinations of *pksE*- and *TE*-containing plasmids (Table S2) were introduced into *S. lividans* K4-114 by protoplast transformation according to standard protocols (24). Single colonies of the resultant recombinant strains were used to inoculate 5 mL cultures of MYME medium supplemented with 10 μg/mL thiostrepton and incubated at 30°C for ~5 days, and 1 mL of each starter culture was then used to inoculate a 50 mL culture, which was in turn incubated at 30°C for ~5–10 days.

### Production, Extraction, and HPLC Analysis of Heptaene (1) from Native Enediyne Producers
*S. globisporus* strains were cultured in A9 medium using a two-step fermentation for C-1027 production as described previously (22). *S. carzinostaticus* ATCC 15944, *M. echinospora* ssp. *calichensis*, and *A. verrucospora* ATCC 39334 were cultured as previously described for NCS (10),

CAL (25), and ESP (26) production, respectively. After 3 to 5 d fermentation, the culture was centrifuged to collect the cell pellet. The supernatant was adjusted to pH 4.0 using 1 M HCl and centrifuged again. The resulting precipitate was combined with the cell pellet and extracted with acetone. The acetone extracts were subjected to HPLC as described below. Bioassays against *Micrococcus luteus* ATCC 9431 to detect enediyne production were performed as described previously (Fig. S3) (27).

#### Extraction and HPLC Analysis of Heptaene (1) from Recombinant Strains Coexpressing *pksE-TE*
Each 50 mL culture of the *E. coli* or *S. lividans* recombinant strains coexpressing *pksE-TE* was acidified to pH ~3 and centrifuged to pellet the cells. The cell pellet was then resuspended in 20 mL acetone by vortexing. The acetone extract was centrifuged to pellet the cell debris, and the supernatant was rotary evaporated to a volume of 1 mL, of which 100 μL was subjected to HPLC analysis. HPLC was carried out on a Varian HPLC system equipped with Prostar 210 pumps, a photodiode array detector, and an Alltech Altima C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm, Grace Davison Discovery Sciences, Deerfield, IL) using mobile phases A (water, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and B (methanol, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). A gradient elution program was employed as follows: 60–100% B (0–15 min), 100% B (15–35 min), 100–60% B (35–35.5 min), 60% B (35.5–40 min). The identity of 1 produced from the recombinant strains or the native enediyne producers was established by comparing its UV-Vis spectrum, mass spectrum, and HPLC retention time with a previously characterized authentic standard of 1 (15).

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Y. Li, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (Beijing), and the Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, for support in obtaining the MS data. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health Grants CA78747 and CA113297 (to B.S.) and CA84374 (to J.S.T.). G.P.H. is a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada postdoctoral fellow.

1. Wang X-W, Xie H (1999) C-1027. Antineoplastic antibiotic. *Drug Future* 24:847–852.
2. Maeda H (2001) SMANCS and polymer-conjugated macromolecular drugs: Advantages in cancer chemotherapy. *Adv Drug Deliver Rev* 46:169–185.
3. Sievers EL, Linenberger M (2001) Mylotarg: Antibody-targeted chemotherapy comes of age. *Curr Opin Oncol* 13:522–527.
4. Nicolaou KC, Dai W-M (1991) Chemistry and biology of the enediyne anticancer antibiotics. *Angew Chem Int Ed Engl* 30:1387–1416.
5. Galm U, et al. (2005) Antitumor antibiotics: Bleomycin, enediynes, and mitomycin. *Chem Rev* 105:739–758.
6. Van Lanen SG, Shen B (2008) Biosynthesis of enediyne antitumor antibiotics. *Curr Top Med Chem* 8:448–459.
7. Kennedy DR, et al. (2007) Single chemical modifications of the C-1027 enediyne core, a radiomimetic antitumor drug, affect both drug potency and the role of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated in cellular responses to DNA double-strand breaks. *Cancer Res* 67:773–781.
8. Kennedy DR, Ju J, Shen B, Beerman TA (2007) Designer enediynes generate DNA breaks, interstrand cross-links, or both, with concomitant changes in the regulation of DNA damage responses. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 104:17632–17637.
9. Liu W, Christenson SD, Standage S, Shen B (2002) Biosynthesis of the enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027. *Science* 297:1170–1173.
10. Liu W, et al. (2005) The neocarzinostatin biosynthetic gene cluster from *Streptomyces carzinostaticus* ATCC 15944 involving two iterative type I polyketide synthases. *Chem Biol* 12:293–302.
11. Van Lanen SG, Oh TJ, Liu W, Wendt-Pienkowski E, Shen B (2007) Characterization of the maduropeptin biosynthetic gene cluster from *Actinomadura madurae* ATCC 39144 supporting a unifying paradigm for enediyne biosynthesis. *J Am Chem Soc* 129:13082–13094.
12. Ahlert J, et al. (2002) The calicheamicin gene cluster and its iterative type I enediyne PKS. *Science* 297:1173–1176.
13. Gao Q, Thorson JS (2008) The biosynthetic genes encoding for the production of the dynemicin enediyne core in *Micromonospora chersina* ATCC 53710. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 282:105–114.
14. Liu W, et al. (2003) Rapid PCR amplification of minimal enediyne polyketide synthase cassettes leads to a predictive familial classification model. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 100:11959–11963.
15. Zhang J, et al. (2008) A phosphopantetheinylating polyketide synthase producing a linear polyene to initiate enediyne antitumor antibiotic biosynthesis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 105:1460–1465.
16. Horsman GP, Van Lanen SG, Shen B (2009) Iterative type I polyketide synthases for enediyne core biosynthesis. *Methods Enzymol* 459:97–112.
17. Kong R, et al. (2008) Characterization of a carbonyl-conjugated polyene precursor in 10-membered enediyne biosynthesis. *J Am Chem Soc* 130:8142–8143.
18. Belecki K, Crawford JM, Townsend CA (2009) Production of octaketide polyenes by the calicheamicin polyketide synthase CalE8: Implications for the biosynthesis of enediyne core structures. *J Am Chem Soc* 131:12564–12566.
19. Sun HH, et al. (2009) Products of the iterative polyketide synthases in 9-and 10-membered enediyne biosynthesis. *Chem Commun* 7399–7401.
20. Ziermann R, Betlach MC (1999) Recombinant polyketide synthesis in *Streptomyces*: Engineering of improved host strains. *Biotechniques* 26:106–110.
21. Kotaka M, et al. (2009) Structure and catalytic mechanism of the thioesterase CalE7 in enediyne biosynthesis. *J Biol Chem* 284:15739–15749.
22. Lin SJ, Horsman GP, Chen YH, Li WL, Shen B (2009) Characterization of the SgcF epoxide hydrolase supporting an (R)-vicinal diol intermediate for enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027 biosynthesis. *J Am Chem Soc* 131:16410–16417.
23. Zazopoulos E, et al. (2003) A genomics-guided approach for discovering and expressing cryptic metabolic pathways. *Nat Biotechnol* 21:187–190.
24. Kieser T, Bibb MJ, Buttner MM, Chater KF, Hopwood DA (2000) *Practical Streptomyces Genetics* (The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK).
25. Maiese WM, et al. (1989) Calicheamicins, a novel family of antitumor antibiotics: Taxonomy, fermentation and biological properties. *J Antibiot* 42:558–563.
26. Lam KS, et al. (1993) Biosynthesis of esperamicin A1, an enediyne antitumor antibiotic. *J Am Chem Soc* 115:12340–12345.
27. Liu W, Shen B (2000) Genes for production of the enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027 in *Streptomyces globisporus* are clustered with the *cagA* gene that encodes the C-1027 appoprotein. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 44:382–392.