
PERSPECTIVES

SCIENCE AND SOCIETY

The changing face of rheumatoid arthritis: sustained remission for all?

John D. Isaacs

Abstract | Earlier diagnosis and treatment, plus biological therapies, have transformed the outlook for many patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In the future, new biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic response will further improve outcomes. Additionally, preclinical diagnosis and tolerogenic therapies could provide sustained remission for some individuals, although ethical and societal challenges must also be addressed before rheumatoid arthritis becomes ‘yesterday’s disease’.

Rheumatoid arthritis affects 580,000 people in the United Kingdom, with a further 26,000 people developing the disease annually¹. Similar prevalence and incidence figures apply to most developed countries. Over the past decade, new treatment paradigms and therapeutic approaches have transformed the disease from a chronic, disabling condition, frequently requiring palliative measures, to a potentially curable illness wherein sufferers retain their independence, quality of life and contribution to society². However, despite this dramatic turnaround in outlook, several scientific, societal and ethical issues must be resolved before rheumatoid arthritis becomes a disease of the past. These encompass the need for early recognition, the ability to provide a firm diagnosis and prognosis in the earliest disease stages and the ability to optimize treatment for the individual patient.

In this article, I review the changing face of rheumatoid arthritis treatment, the need for biomarkers to guide ever earlier diagnosis and treatment and attempt to predict the future approaches for the management of rheumatoid arthritis. My main focus is the societal implications of these changes, rather than the underpinning science, which has recently been reviewed elsewhere³.

The consequences of rheumatoid arthritis

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the synovium, a delicate membrane that lines the non-weight-bearing surfaces of the joint⁴. In rheumatoid arthritis, the synovium becomes infiltrated with chronic inflammatory cells (FIG. 1). The resident fibroblasts adopt a ‘quasi-malignant’ phenotype with upregulation of oncogenes, inhibition of apoptosis and secretion of cytokines, chemokines and enzymes that reinforce the inflammation and catalyse joint destruction. The resulting ‘pannus’ acquires the ability to invade and destroy adjacent articular cartilage⁵. Activation of osteoclasts in peri-articular bone leads to resorption and ‘erosions’, a radiologically detectable hallmark of the disease⁶. Similar processes affect the synovium that lines the tendon sheaths, resulting in tendon weakness and rupture, which are responsible for the characteristic deformities of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis can also involve organs such as the lungs, leading to inflammation and fibrosis, and the systemic effects of rheumatoid arthritis include osteoporosis, anaemia and profound fatigue. Serious collateral damage takes the form of premature atherosclerosis, which accounts for much of the reduced lifespan of patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis as a consequence of heart attacks and strokes⁷.

Up to a third of patients with rheumatoid arthritis stop working within 2 years of disease onset as a consequence of these dramatic changes⁸. Decreased physical function initially reflects joint inflammation itself but, beyond the first few years, physical impairment correlates more closely with joint damage. Because damage is irreversible, this functional loss is permanent and associated with a reduced quality of life. In addition to heart attacks and strokes, patients with rheumatoid arthritis also suffer frequent infections, a consequence of both the disease itself and the drugs used to treat it. Other iatrogenic complications include peptic ulcer disease, bone marrow suppression and liver damage. In short, rheumatoid arthritis is a devastating disease that affects the whole individual, reducing their contribution to society, destroying their quality of life and shortening their lifespan. In the UK, the estimated costs of rheumatoid arthritis include £560 million a year in healthcare costs plus £1.8 billion in sick leave and work-related disability¹. Until the disease is eradicated, there remains a substantial unmet personal and societal need.

Heterogeneity and biomarkers

Few clinically useful biomarkers exist for rheumatoid arthritis in terms of diagnosis, prognosis or treatment response (BOX 1). It is a polygenic disease, probably with various environmental triggers⁹ (FIG. 2). Symptoms can develop at different rates and in different joints, from 16 years of age to old age. There are also several disease mimics, particularly post-infectious syndromes such as reactive arthritis but also other chronic joint diseases with a lesser propensity to cause rapid damage. The discovery of autoantibodies against citrullinated peptide antigens (anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs)) has improved diagnostic accuracy for ‘seropositive’ rheumatoid arthritis patients (approximately two thirds of patients produce these autoantibodies) but a substantial proportion of patients who eventually develop rheumatoid arthritis cannot be diagnosed at symptom onset¹⁰. The disease of these individuals is labelled ‘undifferentiated arthritis’ until further disease progression allows it to be distinguished from other types of inflammatory arthritis.

Among patients with definite early rheumatoid arthritis there is a range of disease outcomes, from relatively benign disease to aggressive disease, in which

PERSPECTIVES

Myeloid DC
Co-stimulation, IL-6, IL-12, IL-23, TGFβ and TNF
T cell
Macrophage
IL-15
IFNγ, TNF and IL-17
IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17, TNF and RANKL
Osteoclast
Differentiation and maturation

Co-stimulation, IL-4 and IL-5
IL-6, IL-10, TNF and LTβ
Follicular DC
B cell
APRIL and BLYS
Autoantibodies
LTβ and TNF
Synovial fibroblast
Chemokines, cathepsins, GM-CSF, MMP1, MMP3, IL-1β and IL-6
T cell

Figure 1 | The pathology of rheumatoid arthritis. In rheumatoid arthritis, the synovial membrane becomes infiltrated with various inflammatory cell types, which synergize to cause joint destruction. It is clear that T cells are important, as evidenced by the genes associated with rheumatoid arthritis⁵⁶ (see FIG. 2). In particular, Thelper 17 (Th17) cells may orchestrate synovitis and damage through interactions with dendritic cells, macrophages and B cells⁵⁷. By contrast, the function of regulatory T cells seems to be impaired in rheumatoid arthritis⁵⁸ (not shown). Macrophages are also key players and their presence correlates with symptoms, perhaps caused by secretion of crucial pro-inflammatory mediators⁵⁹. The success of B cell-specific antibody therapy attests to the importance of B cells in rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis. In addition to autoantibody secretion, B cells present antigen to T cells and stimulate synovial fibroblasts through the secretion of cytokines such as lymphotoxin-β (LTβ) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF). In some patients, well-formed lymphoid follicles are present in the synovium, suggesting local antigen presentation occurs, whereas, in other patients, B cells are present in aggregates or scattered more diffusely⁶⁰. Synovial fibroblasts are key players in joint damage through the secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and cathepsins. Initially, they are activated by the inflammatory microenvironment but subsequently take on a semi-autonomous, ‘quasi-malignant’ phenotype⁶¹. Bone damage is caused by the convergence of several signals on osteoclast precursors in the subchondral bone, inducing their differentiation and maturation⁶². Important cells that are omitted from this figure include synovial mast cells and plasma cells. APRIL, a proliferation-inducing ligand; BLYS, B lymphocyte stimulator; DC, dendritic cell; GM-CSF, granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFNγ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand; TGFβ, transforming growth factor-β.

relieved symptoms but did not prevent cartilage and bone damage. The identification of damage by x-ray triggered the prescription of disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), such as gold, penicillamine, hydroxychloroquine, sulphalazine and methotrexate. To a greater or lesser degree these drugs retarded (but didn’t prevent) joint damage. A characteristic feature of rheumatoid arthritis is that even highly effective drugs tend to lose their benefit with time, and a succession of DMARDs would be prescribed until there was none left to try. The third and final tier of treatment involved cytotoxic chemotherapy with drugs such as azathioprine and cyclophosphamide, or experimental approaches such as thoracic duct drainage. Glucocorticoids were the mainstay of treatment in long-standing rheumatoid arthritis, although their potent anti-inflammatory benefits were counterbalanced by numerous metabolic and immunosuppressive side effects¹¹.

During the 1980s and 1990s, with the recognition that joint damage was irreversible, DMARDs (usually sulphalazine or methotrexate) were prescribed earlier in disease¹². Failure of a DMARD signalled its replacement or addition (‘step-up’ combination therapy) of an alternative drug. However, several clinical trials showed that control of effective inflammation during early rheumatoid arthritis minimized subsequent joint damage and destruction, apparently transforming the disease to a milder phenotype. Because DMARDs take many weeks to work and the response of the patient is unpredictable, this ‘window of opportunity’ led to the use of ‘step-down’ therapy. To avoid missing the ‘window’, several drugs were initiated at diagnosis, including temporary glucocorticoids¹³⁻¹⁵. Once inflammation was suppressed, drug doses could be tapered.

The development of robust measures of disease activity, such as the disease activity score using 28 joints (DAS28), has resulted in modified strategies whereby treatment is adjusted to maintain a target level of disease activity, usually remission or low disease activity (treatment-to-target strategies)¹⁶. Clinical trials of different strategies have confirmed that initial combination therapy controls disease more rapidly, with reduced x-ray-detectable damage in the medium term. Physical function is well preserved in the short term, regardless of the exact strategy adopted, emphasizing the importance of tight disease control in optimizing outcomes¹⁷,¹⁸.

x-ray-detectable damage appears within months of diagnosis. The production of autoantibodies, particularly ACPAs, tends to be associated with more aggressive disease but this is by no means inevitable, and other prognostic markers are similarly nonspecific. Consequently, most patients cannot be given an accurate prognosis at disease onset with respect to ultimate joint damage.

Currently we cannot predict which patients will respond well to particular anti-rheumatic therapies. Therefore, each patient is managed according to a predetermined treatment algorithm until inflammation is adequately controlled (see below). Even with modern treatment approaches, some patients will experience significant delay until their disease is brought under optimal control, when first-line drugs fail to provide relief.

### The changing face of treatment

The traditional management of rheumatoid arthritis adopted the so-called pyramid approach. Initial symptoms were managed with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which

The development of biological therapies heralded one of the most dramatic changes in outlook for patients with established rheumatoid arthritis. New pathogenic insights, alongside the monoclonal antibody revolution, led to the licensing of a succession of biological therapies that target specific aspects of the disease process. Following the advent of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) blockade in the early 1990s, B cell depletion, co-stimulation blockade and interleukin-6 receptor blockade have each offered new, ‘targeted’ approaches to therapy (BOX 2). These drugs effectively control the symptoms (such as pain and joint stiffness) and signs (such as joint swelling) of rheumatoid arthritis, even in patients with advanced disease. Of particular importance, they substantially retard and frequently halt joint damage. Nonetheless, up to 50% of patients with established rheumatoid arthritis do not respond to these drugs, and only a small proportion achieves complete remission of disease activity¹⁹.

Initially, biological therapies were reserved for patients who had failed all conventional DMARDs, but their potency, and in particular, their ability to arrest joint damage led to clinical trials in early rheumatoid arthritis with remission rates as high as 50%²⁰. However, these drugs are orders of magnitude more expensive than conventional DMARDs and their side effect profiles include serious and opportunistic infections. Furthermore, ~30% of patients with early rheumatoid arthritis achieve low disease activity with methotrexate alone²¹,²².

### Early biologicals for all?

Until clinically useful biomarkers of diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic response are identified, some rheumatoid arthritis patients will accrue early joint damage and downstream disability. Recent studies have attempted to determine the ‘disability equivalent’ of a ‘quantum’ of x-ray-detectable damage and suggest that all damage matters²³. Furthermore, several studies suggest that, for a given level of disease activity, more damage will accrue with traditional DMARDs than with biological therapy²⁴.

This has strengthened calls for the use of biological therapies in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. Studies of such strategies indicate that a proportion of patients can discontinue the biological therapy within a year or two, maintaining disease remission on traditional DMARDs or perhaps not requiring further treatment

---

**Box 1 | Current rheumatoid arthritis biomarkers and gaps in knowledge**

#### Diagnostic biomarkers
- Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs) and rheumatoid factor.
- Gaps: biomarkers needed for ‘seronegative’ rheumatoid arthritis.

#### Prognostic biomarkers
- Serological markers: ACPA and rheumatoid factor.
- Genetic markers: shared epitope (related to ACPA generation) and sulphoxidation status⁵⁵.
- Radiological markers: joint damage due to rheumatoid arthritis at first presentation.
- Other markers: high C-reactive protein (CRP) levels at presentation.
- Gaps: lack of sensitivity and specificity.

#### Treatment-response biomarkers
- Autoantibodies: seropositive patients may be more likely to respond to rituximab (Rituxan/ Mabthera; Genentech/Roche/Biogen Idec) and less likely to respond to tumour necrosis factor (TNF) blockade⁶⁵.
- Other potential biomarkers (transcriptional profiles, synovial biomarkers and multi-protein arrays) have been studied in a small number of patients.
- Gaps: none of these biomarkers has been validated or replicated. Most are associated with a degree of response, rather than a response versus lack of response; for example, at present there are no predictors for primary non-responsiveness to TNF-specific antibodies. Synovial biomarkers of mechanistic interest have been identified but they are currently unlikely to be broadly useful in the clinic because few medical units routinely carry out synovial biopsies.

#### Remission biomarkers
- Lack of synovitis as determined by imaging (musculoskeletal ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging).
- Limitations: requires infrastructure; disease may flare when treatment is stopped despite lack of synovitis.

#### Tolerance biomarkers
- None identified in autoimmune disease.
- Gaps: essential to develop or monitor tolerogenic therapies. May also be useful for monitoring disease tapering for patients in remission.

---

at all²⁵. Counter-arguments focus on the costs of such an approach and the fact that a proportion of patients will be over-treated and exposed unnecessarily to the side effects of biological drugs.

Control of rheumatoid arthritis in its early stages is associated with long-term financial savings, in terms of future drug therapy and a reduced need for in-patient rehabilitation and orthopaedic surgery on damaged joints²⁶. Continued employment also can offset the up-front costs, depending on the type of economic modelling used²⁷. Furthermore, patients with well-controlled rheumatoid arthritis suffer fewer infections than those with active disease, potentially offsetting the risks associated with the early use of biological therapies. In addition, rapid and effective control of inflammation should minimize the incidence of premature heart disease and stroke, with additional substantial cost savings. Therefore, the universal use of step-down biological therapy in early rheumatoid arthritis has several attractive features but remains highly controversial.

---

‘Pre-rheumatoid arthritis’

It has been shown repeatedly that the time to first treatment influences the ultimate outcome for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Consistent with the ‘window of opportunity’, patients who present to a rheumatologist and receive treatment within weeks of symptom onset have better long-term outcomes than those that experience treatment delay²⁸. Furthermore, studies are now starting to address whether the treatment of undifferentiated arthritis prevents, or delays the progression to, rheumatoid arthritis. For example, administration of methotrexate to patients with undifferentiated arthritis delayed progression to rheumatoid arthritis, at least in those who have ACPAs, and the developing disease seemed less aggressive in those individuals²⁹. Co-stimulation blockade also decreased autoantibody titres and, possibly, x-ray-detectable damage at this stage of disease³⁰. In type 1 diabetes, a related autoimmune disease, administration of CD3-specific monoclonal antibody therapy at disease onset has been shown to delay progression of disease for at least 18 months,

PERSPECTIVES

| Genotype |  | Tolerance breakdown Biomarkers: ACPA and rheumatoid factor | Additional environmental factors: Infection? Trauma? Stress? | Subclinical inflammation Biomarkers: ↑ CRP, circulating cytokines and chemokines | Inevitable progression? ≤ 5 years | Synovitis in single or multiple joints Biomarkers: subclinical synovitis in other joints (arthroscopy and imaging) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HLADRB1 PTPN22 CTLA4 STAT4 TRAF1–C5 PAD14 FCRL3 OLIG3–AIP3 TNF–AIP3 | ↑ Smoking ↑ Caffeine? ↑ Obesity? ↓ Mediterranean diet ↓ Anti-oxidants ↓ Alcohol? ↓ Oestrogens? |  |  |  |  |  |

May take up to 15 years

Figure 2 | The aetiology of rheumatoid arthritis and timelines of disease onset. Several genetic susceptibility loci have now been associated with rheumatoid arthritis<sup>56</sup>. HLADRB1 remains the strongest, but other genes are associated with several different autoimmune diseases. Some of these (such as protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) and cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4)) are immunoregulatory, emphasizing a primary disruption of immune regulation in families with autoimmunity. Cigarette smoking is strongly associated with seropositive (but not seronegative) rheumatoid arthritis. Several studies support a gene–environment interaction, whereby smoking triggers the production of anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs) in individuals who carry the ‘shared epitope’<sup>63</sup>. Evidence associating caffeine consumption and obesity with rheumatoid arthritis is less consistent<sup>41</sup>. A ‘Mediterranean’ diet and diets rich in fruit and vegetables seem to protect against rheumatoid arthritis, possibly through a beneficial effect of olive and fish oils, and antioxidants, respectively. Alcohol may also protect<sup>64</sup>, but evidence for a protective effect of oestrogens is inconsistent. Retrospective studies show the presence of rheumatoid factor and/or ACPA for up to 15 years before clinical rheumatoid arthritis. Levels of acute phase proteins, cytokines and chemokines start to increase during the final few years before the disease presents. The trigger (or triggers) for this period of gradually increasing inflammation that culminates in clinical rheumatoid arthritis has not been identified but, anecdotally, patients report infections, trauma and stress as preceding factors. At disease presentation, joint imaging will show inflammation in joints that are not yet symptomatic.

The delay to treatment has a profound effect on the burden of rheumatoid arthritis to both the individual and society. At present in the UK, approximately 10% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis commence treatment within 3 months of symptom onset. Doubling that proportion to 20% should become cost-neutral to the UK National Health Services (NHS) after 9 years, in addition to productivity gains for the economy<sup>1</sup>. The factors responsible for treatment delay (the current median time is 9 months from first symptoms) reflect either patient delay in reporting symptoms to their general practitioner (GP), or GP delay in referral to secondary care<sup>33</sup>. In the UK, the second of these is being effectively addressed by appropriate GP education and rapid-access early arthritis clinics, and it is now the patient delay that most threatens an optimal outcome<sup>34</sup>. A public awareness campaign may address this but, because musculoskeletal pain is so ubiquitous and the presentation of rheumatoid arthritis so variable, the message must be carefully worded. In the US, the balance between patient and GP or internist delay varies by centre and geographical location, but managed care regulations may also discourage referral to a rheumatologist, potentially delaying treatment.

Serum samples from individuals who ultimately develop rheumatoid arthritis clearly show that immune tolerance may be broken many years before clinical disease presentation. Thus, autoantibodies may be present in blood samples collected ten years or more before diagnosis, with a subsequent increase in the expression levels of C-reactive protein and other pro-inflammatory mediators<sup>35–39</sup>. Arthroscopic

Box 2 | Current biological therapies for rheumatoid arthritis

**Tumour necrosis factor antagonists**

- Infliximab (Remicade; Centocor/Merck) is a chimeric monoclonal antibody that neutralizes tumour necrosis factor (TNF) by binding to soluble and cell surface TNF. It is administered by intravenous infusion every 8 weeks following loading doses.
- Etanercept (Enbrel; Amgen/Pfizer) is a recombinant dimeric fusion protein of the extracellular domain of the p75 subunit of the TNF receptor and the hinge, C<sub>H</sub>2 and C<sub>H</sub>3 region of human IgG1. It neutralizes TNF by binding to cell surface TNF with lower affinity than monoclonal antibodies. It is administered by weekly subcutaneous injection.
- Adalimumab (Humira/Trudexa; Abbott) is a fully human monoclonal antibody that neutralizes soluble TNF and binds to cell surface TNF. It is administered by subcutaneous injection every other week.
- Golimumab (Simponi; Centocor) is a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds soluble and cell surface TNF. It is administered by monthly subcutaneous injection.
- Certolizumab pegol (Cimzia; UCB) is a humanized Fab′ fragment of a humanized TNF-specific monoclonal antibody that is conjugated to polyethylene glycol (PEGylated). It neutralizes TNF by binding to soluble and cell surface TNF. It is administered by subcutaneous injection every other week following a loading dose.

**B cell-specific therapy**

- Rituximab (Rituxan/Mabthera; Genentech/Roche/Biogen Idec) is a chimeric monoclonal antibody that binds to CD20 and lyses CD20-expressing target cells. It is administered as a course of two intravenous infusions, which can be repeated according to disease activity (usually approximately every 6 months).

**Co-stimulation blockade**

- Abatacept (Orencia; Bristol-Myers Squibb) is a fusion protein of the extracellular domain of cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4) and a modified hinge, C<sub>H</sub>2 and C<sub>H</sub>3 region of human IgG1. It competes with CD28 for binding to the co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86, thereby inhibiting T cell activation. It is administered by monthly intravenous infusion after loading doses.

**Interleukin-6 receptor-specific therapy**

- Tocilizumab (Actemra/RoActemra; Chugai/Roche) is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to soluble and cell surface interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor, thereby inhibiting IL-6 receptor signalling. It is administered by monthly intravenous infusion.

studies have also shown synovitis in clinically ‘silent’ joints at disease presentation⁴⁰. So, even if individuals are encouraged to report early symptoms, the crucial time period for restoring immune tolerance may be missed because it may be during the asymptomatic, preclinical disease stage.

If it were possible to identify individuals with ‘pre-rheumatoid arthritis’, several exciting possibilities would ensue. These include simple measures such as lifestyle advice, incorporating smoking cessation and healthy eating, although there is currently no evidence that modifying these rheumatoid arthritis risk factors would protect from disease development⁴¹. Very early intervention with DMARDs or biological therapies recapitulates earlier arguments concerning early rheumatoid arthritis but, in preclinical disease, milder drugs could be effective. Recently, a brief intervention with glucocorticoids was shown to reduce autoantibody levels but did not inhibit progression to rheumatoid arthritis⁴². A particularly attractive option might be approaches such as the induction of mucosal tolerance using a mixture of joint antigens; although thus far not effective in established rheumatoid arthritis, this is potentially a safe and effective way to stop the developing disease in its tracks⁴³.

Because the heritability of rheumatoid arthritis is less than that of type 1 diabetes, screening family members would identify just a small proportion of those in the earliest disease stages. Population screening for ACPA would identify a proportion of those destined to develop seropositive rheumatoid arthritis but miss seronegative disease and those in whom autoantibodies develop later⁴⁴. Genetic screening for polymorphisms strongly associated with rheumatoid arthritis such as HLA-DRB1 shared epitope alleles, and the Cys1858Thr single nucleotide polymorphism in protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) could be incorporated into a ‘risk equation’ with serological and demographical factors. However, such an approach would require robust validation, as well as substantial debate around the associated ethical issues. The accuracy would not be 100%, but the potential risk identified would be life long, providing a cohort of at-risk but healthy individuals.

Furthermore, even therapies that seem safe, such as mucosal tolerance induction, may not be risk free. The lack of *in vitro* models of rheumatoid arthritis immunopathology that enable risk prediction and

---

**Strong family history or population screening**

↓

**Autoantibodies Genetics Lifestyle**

↓

**High-risk group**

↓

**Lifestyle modification**

→ **Annual imaging**

← **Intervention such as mucosal tolerance**

---

**Early synovitis**

↓

**Biomarker assessment, including imaging for: Diagnosis Prognosis Treatment response**

↓

**Appropriate pharmacological intervention aiming for remission**

↓

**Biomarker assessment for: Remission Drug tapering Tolerance?**

---

Figure 3 | The future pathway for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Individuals presenting with joint pain will undergo joint imaging and will be tested for a range of biomarkers (red boxes). If rheumatoid arthritis is confirmed they will receive biomarker-guided treatment to ensure rapid and safe efficacy. Management will follow ‘treatment-to-target’ principles, aiming for disease remission. Imaging may be used to confirm the lack of synovitis. At this stage, further biomarkers will guide the tapering of therapy, to avoid subsequent disease flares during the attainment of ‘drug-free remission’ in some patients. Individuals with a strong family history of rheumatoid arthritis, or in whom screening has revealed a strong genetic predisposition with or without anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs) (blue boxes) may choose to modify their lifestyles. They may also choose to receive a ‘tolerogenic’ intervention such as mucosal exposure to collagen or other joint autoantigens. Such therapy may be monitored using biomarkers of tolerance induction and followed by annual imaging. Others may simply choose to undergo annual imaging of hands and feet (the most common target joints for rheumatoid arthritis). If such screening reveals early synovitis then they will follow the synovitis pathway outlined above.

animal models that provide an accurate risk assessment for human therapy are limiting in this regard; therefore, the optimal way forward may not be obvious⁴⁵.

**Imaging rheumatoid arthritis**

New imaging approaches are providing novel insights into rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis, while also providing a window to early and preclinical disease. Similar to arthroscopy, ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in early rheumatoid arthritis often reveals subclinical inflammation in apparently unaffected joints and may also provide sensitive prognostic indicators⁴⁶⁻⁵⁰. MRI is expensive and requires substantial infrastructure, but musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSUS) is becoming widely adopted by rheumatologists as a routine adjunct to clinical examination. In early-arthritis clinics, MSUS provides a useful diagnostic aid and could provide a means of screening individuals at high risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, perhaps annually. In this way, intervention could be targeted at patients with objective, albeit asymptomatic, evidence of early inflammatory joint disease.

---

**The future patient pathway**

So, how might rheumatoid arthritis management look in the future (FIG. 3)? Recent-onset joint symptoms and objective synovitis should trigger a screen for diagnostic, prognostic and treatment-response biomarkers. These parameters, along with imaging findings, will inform the most appropriate treatment plan. Patients with good prognosis rheumatoid arthritis and appropriate treatment-response biomarkers may receive methotrexate and expect an excellent outcome. Others may require immediate biological therapy. In most patients, the symptoms will come under rapid control, at which stage additional biomarkers may inform the decision of whether treatment could be tapered or stopped altogether. Currently, ~40% of patients in remission experience disease flare after therapy withdrawal but biomarkers of true disease remission versus drug-induced disease suppression should facilitate targeted therapy reduction⁵¹,⁵².

Population screening may allow the identification of individuals at high risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. After appropriate counselling, such individuals could be offered lifestyle advice and perhaps

PERSPECTIVES

Box 3 | Therapeutically relevant research areas in rheumatoid arthritis
- Improved markers of ‘pre-rheumatoid arthritis’ — early identification of ‘at risk’ individuals, enabling ‘preventative’ studies.
- Window of opportunity — what is the pathological correlate (or correlates)?
- Therapeutic ‘escape’ — what underlies loss of therapeutic response? Is it similar to tumour ‘escape’ in malignancy?
- Methotrexate — identification of mode of action and efficacy biomarkers, to optimize therapy with this ‘anchor’ drug and develop related compounds.
- Biomarkers of diagnosis to enable rapid diagnosis.
- Biomarkers of prognosis to assist targeted treatment.
- Biomarkers of therapeutic response to optimize choice of therapy.
- Biomarkers of true remission (imaging and blood) to assist with therapy tapering.
- Biomarkers of tolerance induction to indicate possible withdrawal of therapy.

specific therapies, including mucosal tolerance approaches, with the hope of permanent disease remission. Alternatively, such patients may undergo further annual screening with imaging. The identification of synovitis could then trigger prescription of drugs such as hydroxychloroquine, or a brief course of glucocorticoids, in an attempt to delay or prevent progression to rheumatoid arthritis<sup>53,54</sup>. Clearly this area is ripe for research and these suggestions are highly speculative.

Compared to current management, economical resources should be invested in the early and preclinical stages of rheumatoid arthritis, including screening strategies and biomarkers, and away from palliative measures, including joint surgery. Our success target for patients with rheumatoid arthritis should be ‘normal health’, and the development of disability should be a signal of management failure. To achieve this early, aggressive, remission-inducing treatment, potentially incorporating tolerance-inducing strategies, will become the norm. Earlier in this article I referred to the ‘quasi-malignant’ phenotype of rheumatoid arthritis. Our quest for managing earlier disease, and our evolving treatment strategies using drug combinations, have now strong parallels with oncological paradigms.

### Conclusions

Rheumatoid arthritis provides a model for potentially reversible autoimmunity — which, if inadequately treated, causes joint damage, long term disability, impaired quality of life, decreased lifespan and a large societal burden. Over the past 20 years, earlier treatment and the use of biological therapies has greatly improved patient outlook but there still remains a large unmet patient need. Even earlier treatment will make a substantial difference. However, scientific advances in terms of biomarker evaluation and preclinical disease identification could lead to a step change in prognosis. There also remain several fascinating questions around rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis, the answers to which could also improve outcomes (BOX 3).

John D. Isaacs is at the Institute of Cellular Medicine, Musculoskeletal Research Group, Newcastle University Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.  
e-mail: j.d.isaacs@ncl.ac.uk  
doi:10.1078/nri2804

1. The National Audit Office. Sevices for people with rheumatoid arthritis [online] (2009).
2. Strand, V., Kimberly, R. & Isaacs, J. D. Biologic therapies in rheumatology: lessons learned, future directions. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. **6**, 75–92 (2007).
3. Cooles, F. A. H. & Isaacs, J. D. Treating to re-establish tolerance in inflammatory arthritis — lessons from other diseases. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol. (in the press).
4. Pratt, A. G., Isaacs, J. D. & Mattey, D. L. Current concepts in the pathogenesis of early rheumatoid arthritis. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol **23**, 37–48 (2009).
5. Chang, S. K., Gu, Z. & Brenner, M. B. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes in inflammatory arthritis pathology: the emerging role of cadherin-11. Immunol. Rev. **233**, 256–266 (2010).
6. Walsh, N. C. & Gravallese, E. M. Bone remodeling in rheumatic disease: a question of balance. Immunol. Rev. **233**, 301–312 (2010).
7. Gabriel, S. E. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in rheumatoid arthritis. Am. J. Med. **121**, S9–S14 (2008).
8. The National Institute for Healthcare and Clinical Excellence. Rheumatoid arthritis [online] (2009).
9. Klareskog, L., Catrina, A. I. & Paget, S. Rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet **373**, 659–72 (2009).
10. Pruijn, G. J., Wiik, A. & van Venrooij, W. J. The use of citrullinated peptides and proteins for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. **12**, 203 (2010).
11. Hoes, J. N., Jacobs, J. W., Verstappen, S. M., Bijlsma, J. W. & Van der Heijden, G. J. Adverse events of low- to medium-dose oral glucocorticoids in inflammatory diseases: a meta-analysis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **68**, 1833–1838 (2009).
12. Fries, J. F. Current treatment paradigms in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) **39**, S30–S35 (2000).
13. Mottonen, T. *et al.* Comparison of combination therapy with single-drug therapy in early rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised trial. FIN-RACo trial group. Lancet **353**, 1568–1573 (1999).
14. Landewe, R. B. *et al.* COBRA combination therapy in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis: long-term structural benefits of a brief intervention. Arthritis Rheum. **46**, 347–356 (2002).
15. Rantalaiho, V. *et al.* The good initial response to therapy with a combination of traditional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs is sustained over time: the eleven-year results of the Finnish rheumatoid arthritis combination therapy trial. Arthritis Rheum. **60**, 1222–1231 (2009).
16. van der Heijde, D. M., van ’t Hof, M., van Riel, P. L. & van de Putte, L. B. Development of a disease activity score based on judgment in clinical practice by rheumatologists. J. Rheumatol. **20**, 579–581 (1993).
17. Grigor, C. *et al.* Effect of a treatment strategy of tight control for rheumatoid arthritis (the TICORA study): a single-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet **364**, 263–269 (2004).
18. Goekoop-Ruiterman, Y. P. *et al.* Comparison of treatment strategies in early rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized trial. Ann. Intern. Med. **146**, 406–415 (2007).
19. van Vollenhoven, R. F. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: state of the art 2009. Nature Rev. Rheumatol. **5**, 531–541 (2009).
20. Emery, P. *et al.* Comparison of methotrexate monotherapy with a combination of methotrexate and etanercept in active, early, moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis (COMET): a randomised, double-blind, parallel treatment trial. Lancet **372**, 375–382 (2008).
21. van der Kooij, S. M. *et al.* Limited efficacy of conventional DMARDs after initial methotrexate failure in patients with recent onset rheumatoid arthritis treated according to the disease activity score. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **66**, 1356–1362 (2007).
22. van Vollenhoven, R. F. *et al.* Addition of infliximab compared with addition of sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine to methotrexate in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (Swefot trial): 1-year results of a randomised trial. Lancet **374**, 459–466 (2009).
23. Smolen, J. S., Aletaha, D., Grisar, J. C., Stamm, T. A. & Sharp, J. T. Estimation of a numerical value for joint damage-related physical disability in rheumatoid arthritis clinical trials. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **69**, 1058–1064 (2009).
24. Aletaha, D. *et al.* Rheumatoid arthritis joint progression in sustained remission is determined by disease activity levels preceding the period of radiographic assessment. Arthritis Rheum. **60**, 1242–1249 (2009).
25. Quinn, M. *et al.* Very early treatment with infliximab in addition to methotrexate in early, poor-prognosis rheumatoid arthritis reduces magnetic resonance imaging evidence of synovitis and damage, with sustained benefit after infliximab withdrawal: results from a twelve-month randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **52**, 27–35 (2005).
26. da Silva, E., Doran, M. F., Crowson, C. S., O’Fallon, W. M. & Matteson, E. L. Declining use of orthopedic surgery in patients with rheumatoid arthritis? Results of a long-term, population-based assessment. Arthritis Rheum. **49**, 216–220 (2003).
27. van den Hout, W. B. *et al.* Cost-utility analysis of treatment strategies in patients with recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **61**, 291–299 (2009).
28. van der Kooij, S. M. *et al.* Drug-free remission, functioning and radiographic damage after 4 years of response-driven treatment in patients with recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **68**, 914–921 (2009).
29. van Dongen, H. *et al.* Efficacy of methotrexate treatment in patients with probable rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **56**, 1424–1432 (2007).
30. Emery, P. *et al.* Impact of T-cell costimulation modulation in patients with undifferentiated inflammatory arthritis or very early rheumatoid arthritis: a clinical and imaging study of abatacept (the ADJUST trial). Ann. Rheum. Dis. **69**, 510–516 (2010).
31. Keymeulen, B. *et al.* Insulin needs after CD3-antibody therapy in new-onset type 1 diabetes. New Engl. J. Med. **352**, 2598–2608 (2005).
32. Isaacs, J. D. T cell immunomodulation-the Holy Grail of therapeutic tolerance. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. **7**, 418–425 (2007).

610 | AUGUST 2010 | VOLUME 10

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

33. Feldman, D. E. *et al.* Delay in consultation with specialists for persons with suspected new-onset rheumatoid arthritis: a population-based study. *Arthritis Rheum.* **57**, 1419–1425 (2007).

34. Kumar, K. *et al.* Delay in presentation to primary care physicians is the main reason why patients with rheumatoid arthritis are seen late by rheumatologists. *Rheumatology (Oxford)* **46**, 1438–1440 (2007).

35. Nielsen, M. M. *et al.* Specific autoantibodies precede the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis: a study of serial measurements in blood donors. *Arthritis Rheum.* **50**, 380–386 (2004).

36. Nielsen, M. M. *et al.* Increased levels of C-reactive protein in serum from blood donors before the onset of rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* **50**, 2423–2427 (2004).

37. Jorgensen, K. T. *et al.* Cytokines, autoantibodies and viral antibodies in premorbid and postdiagnostic sera from patients with rheumatoid arthritis: case-control study nested in a cohort of Norwegian blood donors. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **67**, 860–866 (2008).

38. Karlson, E. W. *et al.* Biomarkers of inflammation and development of rheumatoid arthritis in women from two prospective cohort studies. *Arthritis Rheum.* **60**, 641–652 (2009).

39. Kokkonen, H. *et al.* Up-regulation of cytokines and chemokines predates the onset of rheumatoid arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* **62**, 383–391 (2010).

40. Kraan, M. C. *et al.* Asymptomatic synovitis precedes clinically manifest arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* **41**, 1481–1488 (1998).

41. Oliver, J. E. & Silman, A. J. What epidemiology has told us about risk factors and aetiopathogenesis in rheumatic diseases. *Arthritis Res. Ther.* **11**, 223 (2009).

42. Bos, W. H., Dijkmans, B. A., Boers, M., van de Stadt, R. J. & van Schaardenburg, D. Effect of dexamethasone on autoantibody levels and arthritis development in patients with arthralgia: a randomised trial. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **69**, 571–574 (2010).

43. Landewé, R. B. *et al.* Intranasal administration of recombinant human cartilage glycoprotein-39 as a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis: a Phase II, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel group dose-finding trial. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* 23 Sep 2009 (doi:10.1136/ard.2009.117234).

44. Bos, W. H. *et al.* Arthritis development in patients with arthralgia is strongly associated with anti-citrullinated protein antibody status: a prospective cohort study. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **69**, 490–494 (2010).

45. Bykerk, V. P. & Hazes, J. M. When does rheumatoid arthritis start and can it be stopped before it does? *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **69**, 473–475 (2010).

46. Wakefield, R. J. *et al.* Should oligoarthritis be reclassified? Ultrasound reveals a high prevalence of subclinical disease. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **63**, 382–385 (2004).

47. Sheane, B. J., Beddy, P., O'Connor, M., Miller, S. & Cunnane, G. Targeted ultrasound of the fifth metatarsophalangeal joint in an early inflammatory arthritis cohort. *Arthritis Rheum.* **61**, 1004–1008 (2009).

48. Tamai, M. *et al.* A prediction rule for disease outcome in patients with undifferentiated arthritis using magnetic resonance imaging of the wrists and finger joints and serologic autoantibodies. *Arthritis Rheum.* **61**, 772–778 (2009).

49. Haavardsholm, E. A., Boyesen, P., Ostergaard, M., Schildvold, A. & Kvien, T. K. Magnetic resonance imaging findings in 84 patients with early rheumatoid arthritis: bone marrow oedema predicts erosive progression. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **67**, 794–800 (2008).

50. Hetland, M. L. *et al.* MRI bone oedema is the strongest predictor of subsequent radiographic progression in early rheumatoid arthritis. Results from a 2-year randomised controlled trial (CIMESTRA). *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **68**, 384–390 (2009).

51. ten Wolde, S. *et al.* Randomised placebo-controlled study of stopping second-line drugs in rheumatoid arthritis. *Lancet* **347**, 347–352 (1996).

52. Burgoyne, C. H. *et al.* Abnormal T cell differentiation persists in patients with rheumatoid arthritis in clinical remission and predicts relapse. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **67**, 750–757 (2008).

53. Verstappen, S. M. *et al.* The beneficial effects of a 3 week course of intramuscular glucocorticoid injections in patients with very early inflammatory polyarthritis: Results of the STIVEA trial. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **69**, 503–509 (2009).

54. Machold, K. P. *et al.* The Stop Arthritis Very Early (SAVE) trial, an international multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial on glucocorticoids in very early arthritis. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **69**, 495–502 (2010).

55. Emery, P., Bradley, H., Arthur, V., Tunn, E. & Waring, R. Genetic factors influencing the outcome of early arthritis--the role of sulfoxidation status. *Br. J. Rheumatol.* **31**, 449–451 (1992).

56. Barton, A. & Worthington, J. Genetic susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis: an emerging picture. *Arthritis Rheum.* **61**, 1441–1446 (2009).

57. Miossec, P., Korn, T. & Kuchroo, V. K. Interleukin-17 and type 17 helper T cells. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **361**, 888–898 (2009).

58. Ehrenstein, M. *et al.* Compromised function of regulatory T cells in rheumatoid arthritis and reversal by anti-TNF α therapy. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 277–285 (2004).

59. Hamilton, J. A. & Tak, P. P. The dynamics of macrophage lineage populations in inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. *Arthritis Rheum.* **60**, 1210–1221 (2009).

60. Manzo, A., Bombardieri, M., Humby, F. & Pitzalis, C. Secondary and ectopic lymphoid tissue responses in rheumatoid arthritis: from inflammation to autoimmunity and tissue damage/remodeling. *Immunol. Rev.* **233**, 267–285.

61. Aupperle, K. R. *et al.* Regulation of synoviocyte proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion by the p53 tumor suppressor gene. *Am. J. Pathol.* **152**, 1091–1098 (1998).

62. Takayanagi, H. Osteoimmunology and the effects of the immune system on bone. *Nature Rev. Rheumatol.* **5**, 667–676 (2009).

63. Kallberg, H. *et al.* Gene-gene and gene-environment interactions involving HLA-DRB1, PTPN22, and smoking in two subsets of rheumatoid arthritis. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **80**, 867–875 (2007).

64. Kallberg, H. *et al.* Alcohol consumption is associated with decreased risk of rheumatoid arthritis: results from two Scandinavian case-control studies. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **68**, 222–227 (2009).

65. Isaacs, J. D. *et al.* Autoantibody-positive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients (pts) have enhanced clinical response to rituximab (RTX) when compared with seronegative patients. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **68** (Suppl. 3), 442 (2009).

Competing interests statement

The author declares competing financial interests: see Web version for details.

FURTHER INFORMATION

John D. Isaacs’s homepage: [http://www.ncl.ac.uk/biomedicine/research/groups/profile/j.d.isaacs](http://www.ncl.ac.uk/biomedicine/research/groups/profile/j.d.isaacs)

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
