
ARTICLE
PUBLISHED ONLINE: 8 AUGUST 2010 | DOI: 10.1038/NCHEMBIO.420

**Biotin synthesis begins by hijacking the fatty acid synthetic pathway**

Steven Lin${}^{1}$, Ryan E Hanson${}^{1}$ & John E Cronan${}^{1,2*}$

Although biotin is an essential enzyme cofactor found in all three domains of life, our knowledge of its biosynthesis remains fragmentary. Most of the carbon atoms of biotin are derived from pimelic acid, a seven-carbon dicarboxylic acid, but the mechanism whereby this intermediate is assembled remains unknown. Genetic analysis in *Escherichia coli* identified only two genes of unknown function required for pimelate synthesis, *bioC* and *bioH*. We report *in vivo* and *in vitro* evidence that the pimeloyl moiety is synthesized by a modified fatty acid synthetic pathway in which the ω-carboxyl group of a malonyl-thioester is methylated by BioC, which allows recognition of this atypical substrate by the fatty acid synthetic enzymes. The malonyl-thioester methyl ester enters fatty acid synthesis as the primer and undergoes two reiterations of the fatty acid elongation cycle to give pimeloyl-ACP and methanol by BioH.

Biotin (also known as vitamin H) is a covalently bound enzyme cofactor required by all forms of life. Although biotin was discovered over 70 years ago and is an essential nutrient for animals, its detailed biosynthetic pathway is not completely understood in any organism${}^{1,2}$. Biotin consists of two fused heterocyclic rings plus a valeric acid side chain (Fig. 1). The late steps of the pathway are responsible for assembly of the rings, whereas the early steps are concerned with the synthesis of pimelic acid, a seven-carbon dicarboxylic acid. The origins of the biotin carbon atoms in *E. coli* are known from ${}^{13}$C NMR analysis of products labeled *in vivo*${}^{3,4}$. The C3, C5 and C7 carbons (Fig. 1) are derived from C1 of acetate, whereas C2 of acetate contributes the C2, C4 and C6 carbons. The labeling pattern indicates that the pimeloyl moiety is formed by head-to-tail incorporation of three intact acetate units, as is the case in fatty acid (or polyketide) synthesis with CO${}_{2}$ providing C1. As the biotin C1 and C7 atoms show different labeling patterns, free pimelic acid (a symmetrical molecule) cannot be an intermediate. Hence, the pimeloyl moiety must be assembled with one of the carboxyl groups covalently linked. This is likely via a thioester, as pimeloyl-CoA is thought to be the activated form of pimelic acid${}^{1,2}$.

The conundrum is how to assemble a seven-carbon dicarboxylic acid in *E. coli*. Genetic analyses implicate only two genes, *bioC* and *bioH*, in pimeloyl moiety synthesis, but neither gene product appears able to play a direct role in assembling the carbon chain${}^{5-7}$. BioC is annotated on the basis of amino acid sequence as an S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase, whereas BioH has been shown to have esterase activity on short- and medium-chain acyl $p$-nitrophenyl esters${}^{8-9}$ and on the methyl ester of dimethylbutyryl-S-methyl mercaptopropionate${}^{10}$. The BioC annotation was especially puzzling because all of the pimeloyl moiety carbon atoms are derived from acetate and CO${}_{2}$ (refs. 3,4). The remaining *bio* genes encode enzymes that function late in the pathway, and thus it seemed that assembly of the pimeloyl moiety must require additional enzymes belonging to another biosynthetic pathway that are somehow assisted in this task by BioC and BioH. In 1963, a pathway was proposed in which pimeloyl-CoA synthesis could be formed by the enzymes of fatty acid synthesis${}^{11}$. The proposal was that three malonyl-CoA molecules would be condensed with the primer malonyl moiety retaining the carboxyl group introduced by acetyl-CoA carboxylase fixation of CO${}_{2}$. The other two malonyl-CoA molecules would lose their free carboxyl groups in the course of the two decarboxylative Claisen reactions required to give the C7 dicarboxylate, a scheme consistent with the ${}^{13}$C labeling studies and the precedent of type III polyketide synthases${}^{12,13}$. However, in fatty acid synthesis the growing chains are attached to an acyl carrier protein (ACP) rather than CoA, and unlike polyketide synthesis, in which the keto groups are either retained or consumed in rearrangements of the carbon chain (for example, cyclization), pimelate synthesis requires that the keto groups be converted to methylene groups. Although the enzymes of fatty acid synthesis could in principle perform this conversion, it seemed most unlikely that the fatty acid synthetic enzymes could accept substrates having a carboxyl group in place of the usual terminal methyl group because the fatty acid synthetic enzymes sequester the growing fatty acyl chains in strongly hydrophobic tunnels or clefts${}^{14}$. It occurred to us that BioC and BioH could circumvent this conundrum.

In our model (Fig. 1), the role of BioC is to convert the free carboxyl group of a malonyl-thioester to its methyl ester by transfer of a methyl group from SAM. Methylation would both cancel the charge of the carboxyl group and provide a methyl carbon to mimic the methyl ends of normal fatty acyl chains. The esterified malonyl-thioester would enter the fatty acid synthetic pathway as in the 1963 proposal${}^{11}$. Two reiterations of the elongation cycle would produce pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester. BioH would then cleave the methyl ester to give pimeloyl-ACP, which BioF would use to make 7-keto-8-aminopelargonic acid (KAPA), the first intermediate in biotin ring assembly. In this scenario, introduction of the methyl ester disguises the biotin synthetic intermediates such that they become substrates for the fatty acid synthetic pathway. When synthesis of the pimeloyl moiety is complete and disguise is no longer needed, the methyl group is removed to free the carboxyl group that will eventually be used to attach biotin to its cognate metabolic enzymes${}^{15}$. We report that the monomethyl esters of malonic, glutaric and pimelic acid allow growth of a $\Delta bioC$ strain in the absence of biotin but fail to allow growth of $\Delta bioC \Delta bioH$ strains. An *in vitro* system was developed in which dialyzed cell extracts converted malonyl-CoA to dethiobiotin (DTB, the last intermediate of the pathway), which allowed the precursor

---

${}^{1}$Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA. ${}^{2}$Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA.  
*e-mail: j-cronan@life.uiuc.edu*

682 | NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 6 | SEPTEMBER 2010 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | DOI: 10.1038/NCHEMBIO.420 | ARTICLE

Enter fatty acid synthesis

CoA (or ACP) + CO₂  
Malonyl-ACP  
Condensation by FabH  

Malonyl-CoA (or ACP)  
methyl ester  

SAH  
SAM  
BioC  

Malonyl-CoA (or ACP)  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—CoA  

H₃CO  
O  
|  
S—
which precursors are required for DTB synthesis, show that SAM is required for KAPA synthesis and demonstrate that the methyl group is required for elongation of the C5 species.

DTB synthesis was determined by bioassay with *E. coli* strain ER90 (ΔbioF bioC bioD), which carries an insertion-deletion mutation within bioF that also inactivates the downstream genes, bioC and bioD, by transcriptional polarity<sup>5,20</sup>. Hence, strain ER90 is defective in synthesis of KAPA, DAPA and DTB but proficient in conversion of DTB to biotin<sup>20</sup>. Detection by bioassay was required because biotin synthesis is an extremely low-capacity biosynthetic pathway (*E. coli* requires only about 100 biotin molecules per cell). In the bioassay, which can reliably detect 1 pmol of DTB (Fig. 2a), the test solution diffuses from a filter disk into biotin-free minimal-medium agar seeded with an appropriate DTB (or biotin)-requiring *E. coli* strain. If growth proceeds, a redox indicator becomes reduced and forms a bright red, insoluble deposit whose area is proportional to the concentration of the biotin pathway intermediate<sup>21</sup>.

DTB synthesis was achieved upon supplementation of extracts of a wild-type strain with the cofactors (malonyl-CoA, NADPH and ACP) required for *in vitro* fatty acid synthesis<sup>22</sup> plus those required for the late steps of the biotin synthetic pathway (*L*-alanine, ATP and SAM). In contrast, parallel assays of extracts of ΔbioC, ΔbioH or ΔbioA strains produced no detectable DTB (Figs. 2 and 3). DTB synthesis was observed when malonyl-CoA was added to the reaction, whereas the structurally related compounds acetyl-CoA, succinyl-CoA and malonate were inactive (Fig. 2b). The requirements for DTB synthesis were then examined in extracts of the ΔbioC strain STL96 (Fig. 2c). The extracts were inactive, but activity was restored upon addition of BioC purified from inclusion bodies and refolded into a soluble form (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Results). NADPH was required in addition to malonyl-CoA, and thus two essential components of the fatty acid synthetic pathway were required for DTB synthesis (Fig. 2c). Omission of ACP from the reaction reduced but did not abolish DTB synthesis, probably because of residual ACP in the extracts. As expected, DTB synthesis also required ATP and SAM, the respective substrates of BioD and BioA (Fig. 2c). In the absence of BioC, pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester (synthesized using *V. harveyi* AasS, Supplementary Figs. 1 and 4) was converted to DTB (Fig. 2c). Bypass of the BioC requirement was also observed when malonyl-ACP methyl ester and glutaryl-ACP methyl ester were used as substrates (Supplementary Fig. 1). However, unlike with pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester, DTB synthesis from these substrates required the presence of malonyl-CoA (Supplementary Fig. 1). In agreement with the *in vivo* results (Supplementary Fig. 2), the methyl esters of succinyl-ACP, adipyl-ACP, suberyl-ACP and azelayl-ACP lacked activity *in vitro* (Supplementary Fig. 1).

**The methyl ester moiety is essential for chain elongation**

We postulated that methylation of the ω-carboxyl group of the malonyl thioester was catalyzed by BioC and was essential for accessing the fatty acid elongation cycle enzymes. To test this hypothesis, the assay was modified to specifically probe whether or not KAPA synthesis requires SAM. The *in vitro* KAPA assay used malonyl-CoA as the starting substrate, as well as an extract from the ΔbioA strain STL112. Because KAPA cannot be converted to DAPA in the absence of BioA, KAPA would accumulate in the reaction. KAPA was detected by bioassay using the ΔbioF strain STL115, which required KAPA (or a later intermediate) for growth. SAM was clearly required for *in vitro* KAPA synthesis (Fig. 3a). Moreover, the requirement for SAM was bypassed when pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester was added in place of malonyl-CoA (Fig. 3a).

To directly test whether or not the methyl ester was required for chain elongation by the fatty acid synthetic pathway, we synthesized glutaryl-ACP methyl ester using AasS and removed the ester group with BioH treatment to obtain glutaryl-ACP (Supplementary Fig. 4). Purified samples of glutaryl-ACP methyl

**Fatty acid synthesis-dependent DTB production *in vitro***

To further test the proposed pathway, we developed an *in vitro* system in which DTB synthesis was coupled to the fatty acid synthetic pathway. DTB (the last intermediate of the pathway) was assayed rather than biotin because BioB (biotin synthase), the last enzyme of the pathway, is a notoriously unstable and oxygen-sensitive protein that has not been demonstrated to be catalytic *in vitro*<sup>19</sup>. The *in vitro* system consisted of cell-free extracts of wild-type or Δbio strains that had been subjected to ammonium sulfate precipitation (in which ACP remains soluble) and then dialysis—manipulations designed to remove small molecules and deplete the extracts of ACP. The strains sometimes carried extra copies of the bio operon genes on a multicopy plasmid. The *in vitro* system allowed us to test

NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 6 | SEPTEMBER 2010 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology

**Figure 3 | SAM and the methyl ester moiety are both required for synthesis of the pimeloyl moiety.**

(a) KAPA synthesis in an extract lacking BioA with malonyl-CoA as substrate. The product was detected by bioassay on the ΔbioF strain STL115. When pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester was added, both SAM and malonyl-CoA were omitted.

(b) Requirement for the methyl ester moiety in conversion of glutaryl-ACP to DTB. The extract lacked BioC, and the bioassay was performed on strain ER90 (ΔbioF bioC bioD). Glutaryl-ACP methyl ester was added to the reactions assayed in the two left-hand quadrants, whereas the reactions of the two right-hand quadrants received glutaryl-ACP.

(c) The requirement for active BioH in conversion of pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester to DTB. The extract lacked BioH with pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester as the substrate, and the bioassay was performed using strain ER90. Either purified wild-type BioH or the mutant BioH S82A protein (which lacks the active site nucleophile) was added to 20 μg ml⁻¹. The reaction of the lower right quadrant lacked extract but contained both the wild-type and mutant BioH proteins.

ester and glutaryl-ACP were tested for the ability to support DTB synthesis in a ΔbioC extract. In the presence of glutaryl-ACP (which lacked the methyl ester moiety), no DTB was produced (Fig. 3b); in contrast, DTB was synthesized in the presence of glutaryl-ACP methyl ester, but only when malonyl-CoA was available for elongation (Fig. 3b). Therefore, the methyl ester moiety was essential for the conversion of the glutaryl moiety to DTB.

**DTB synthesis from pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester requires BioH**

Our *in vivo* results indicated that BioH activity was required for conversion of the pimeloyl methyl ester moiety to biotin (Supplementary Fig. 2). To explore this in more detail, we prepared a cell-free extract of the ΔbioH strain STL98 and found it unable to convert pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester to DTB unless

**Figure 4 | Inhibition of DTB synthesis by inhibitors of fatty acid synthesis and SAM-dependent methyltransferases.** The microbiocide triclosan or the antibiotics cerulenin, thiolutomycin and sinefungin were added to the *in vitro* DTB synthesis with either malonyl-CoA (○) or pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester (■) as substrate. The level of DTB produced was estimated on the basis of the area of the bioassay red zone and was standardized to the control reactions containing no inhibitor (100% DTB synthesis was approximately 30 pmol). The lack of inhibition seen when pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester was the substrate demonstrated that the amounts of inhibitor transferred to the assay disks were insufficient to inhibit growth of the bioassay strain ER90 (ΔbioF bioC bioD). Inhibition by triclosan was reduced when FabV, a triclosan resistant enoyl-ACP reductase, was added to 50 μg ml⁻¹ in the reaction (●). The protein synthesis inhibitor kanamycin was tested with malonyl-CoA as the substrate and gave no inhibition over the same range of concentrations. A bioassay plate showing the effects of thiolutomycin on DTB synthesis is given at the lower right of the figure.

it was supplemented with purified BioH (Fig. 3c). We synthesized various ω-carboxyl acyl-ACP esters and tested the ability of BioH *in vitro* to cleave the ester moieties of these substrates. BioH hydrolyzed the methyl, ethyl, propyl and butyl esters of pimeloyl-ACP (Supplementary Fig. 5), confirming our *in vivo* bypass assay results. BioH also readily hydrolyzed the methyl esters of adipyl-, pimeloyl-, suberyl- and azelayl-ACPs but failed to cleave malonyl-ACP methyl ester and succinyl-ACP methyl ester, whereas glutaryl-methyl ester seemed to be cleaved less efficiently (Supplementary Fig. 5). As a control, we expressed and purified a BioH S82A mutant protein. This protein was expected to be inactive because Ser82, identified in the BioH crystal structure⁹ as part of the catalytic triad, had been modified by reaction with phenylmethysulfonil fluoride, added as a proteolysis inhibitor. Because this inhibitor inhibits serine proteases and esterases by forming a covalent adduct with the active site nucleophile, there seemed little doubt that the S82A substitution would inactivate BioH. As expected, the mutant protein was inactive in the *in vitro* hydrolysis assay (Supplementary Fig. 5) and failed to support DTB synthesis in a ΔbioH extract (Fig. 3c).

Moreover, expression of BioH S82A in a ΔbioH strain failed to allow growth on biotin-free medium, whereas expression of wild-type BioH supported robust growth (Supplementary Fig. 6). These results, together with the biotin requirement of ΔbioH strains, indicate that the methyl ester moiety is specifically cleaved by BioH and not by other E. coli hydrolases.

### Fatty acid synthesis inhibitors block in vitro DTB synthesis

The proposed pimelate synthetic pathway was further tested by use of the antibiotics cerulenin and thiolactomycin and the microbiocide triclosan to block fatty acid synthesis in vitro (Fig. 4). Cerulenin inhibits the β-ketoacyl-ACP synthases FabB and FabF, whereas thiolactomycin inhibits FabB and FabF as well as the short-chain β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase, FabH²³. Triclosan inhibits FabI, the sole E. coli enoyl-ACP reductase²³. Addition of any of these three inhibitors severely reduced the levels of DTB synthesized from malonyl-CoA in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 4). Moreover, the effects of triclosan were shown to result from inhibition of FabI, as addition of purified Vibrio cholerae FabV, a naturally triclosan-resistant enoyl-ACP reductase²⁴, largely restored DTB synthesis to triclosan-treated extracts. The fatty acid synthesis inhibitors had no effect on DTB synthesis when pimelyl-ACP methyl ester was the substrate, indicating that their effects were due to inhibition of synthesis of the pimelyl moiety.

Sinefungin, a SAM analog and a potent inhibitor of SAM-dependent methyltransferases²⁵, also inhibited DTB synthesis when malonyl-CoA was the substrate. No inhibition was seen when pimelyl-ACP methyl ester was the substrate (Fig. 4), indicating that the blockage of DTB synthesis was not due to inhibition of BioA, the step later in the pathway in which SAM is used as an amino donor.

### DISCUSSION

The early steps of biotin synthesis in E. coli have long been an enigma. Indeed, more than 40 years after the discovery of the two genes implicated in this process, our data are the first to demonstrate that BioC precedes BioH in the pathway. It has been argued that BioH is not involved in pimelate synthesis²⁶ and also that it is intimately involved⁶. BioC and BioH were postulated⁶ to catalyze Claisen condensations and to transfer the pimelyl moiety from a BioC active-site thiol to CoA, respectively. A more recent proposal was that BioH would somehow condense CoA and pimelic acid to produce pimelyl-CoA, perhaps with the help of BioC⁹.

We have demonstrated that these hypotheses are incorrect and that the roles of BioC and BioH are to allow E. coli to synthesize pimelyl-ACP via the fatty acid synthetic pathway (Fig. 1). The pimelyl-ACP synthetic pathway differs from normal fatty acid synthesis in that the ω-carboxyl group of a malonyl-thioester is converted to its methyl ester by SAM-dependent methyl transfer catalyzed by BioC. We expect that the malonyl-thioester is malonyl-CoA because FabH, which uses acetyl-CoA rather than acetyl-ACP¹⁴,²³, seems likely to catalyze the first condensation. Moreover, E. coli FabH is known to accept propionyl-CoA, a reasonable analog of malonyl-CoA methyl ester, although it cannot accept bulkier branched-chain acyl-CoAs as substrates²⁷. However, we cannot presently determine whether the methyl acceptor is malonyl-CoA or malonyl-ACP (or both). This is because E. coli BioC (as well as the BioCs of Salmonella enterica, Pseudomonas putida, Bacillus cereus and Kurthia sp.) is an extremely recalcitrant protein. E. coli BioC invariably formed inclusion bodies under a wide range of expression conditions both in native form and as a fusion protein. Others have encountered the same problem with BioC²⁸. Although we have recovered traces of activity by refolding denatured BioC, the activities are too low to detect methyl transfer by direct means (for example, transfer of the methyl group from [methyl-³H]SAM). It should also be noted that native BioC might be an intrinsically poor catalyst. E. coli requires only trace quantities of biotin, and thus catalytic efficiency is not required of the biotin pathway enzymes. Indeed, the enzymes late in the pathway are notably poor catalysts (*k*~cat~ values of 0.1–0.01 s⁻¹). Moreover, a catalytically efficient BioC might well compromise synthesis of the fatty acids required for membrane lipids.

Methyl transfer to a carboxyl group is an unusual reaction for a SAM-dependent methyltransferase, and thus it is interesting that database searches using several BLAST algorithms indicate that the closest relative of BioC is a known carboxyl methyltransferase, the E. coli trans-aconitate methyltransferase (Tam), which converts trans-aconitate to its 6-methyl ester²⁹,³⁰. The E. coli Tam and BioC proteins align with 28% identity over their full lengths with only a few small gaps.

The pimelyl-ACP synthetic pathway also requires BioH. We believe that the physiological role of BioH is to remove the methyl group introduced by BioC when the pimelyl moiety is complete. If so, this would prevent further chain elongation to azelayl-ACP methyl ester, a physiologically useless product. However, we find that BioH is a rather promiscuous hydrolase that also cleaves various esters of pimelyl-ACP and the methyl esters of the C5 through C9 acyl-ACPs, although the thioester bonds of these substrates are not cleaved. Others report that BioH cleaves an ester¹⁰ and acyl *p*-nitrophenyl esters⁸,⁹. One possibility is that the specificity of BioH for pimelyl-ACP depends on acyl-ACP structure. Early work demonstrated that the first 6–8 carbon atoms of the acyl chain are sequestered from solvent by the protein³¹. This picture has been borne out by X-ray structures³² and molecular dynamics simulations³³ indicating that the protected carbon atoms reside within a hydrophobic tunnel formed by a bundle of four helices. Hence, the ester groups of the shorter intermediates would be largely or completely protected from BioH, and only upon chain elongation to the pimelyl moiety would the ester group become fully exposed to solvent and BioH.

We believe that pimelyl-ACP rather than pimelyl-CoA is the physiological substrate of BioF. Pimelyl-CoA was the first substrate tested by researchers, on the basis of a possible analogy to the synthesis of δ-aminolevulinic acid from glycine and succinyl-CoA and the ability of pimelate to bypass the biotin requirements of certain bacteria and fungi³⁴. However, pimelyl-CoA seems to have been the only acyl donor tested, and it is possible that it acts as a mimic of pimelyl-ACP or that the enzyme can accept either pimelyl-thioester. The suggestion that pimelyl-ACP is the physiological acyl donor for BioF is consistent with recent reports on the BioI of Bacillus subtilis, a bacterium that makes the pimelyl moiety by a mechanism entirely different from that of E. coli. BioI, which appears to be restricted to this organism and its close relatives, is a cytochrome P450 family member that binds long-chain acyl-ACPs both in vivo and in vitro and cleaves the acyl chains to generate pimelyl-ACP³⁵,³⁶. B. subtilis BioI functionally replaces both BioC and BioH in E. coli¹⁸, which argues strongly that pimelyl-ACP is a physiological BioF acyl donor and eliminates models in which BioH is involved in transfer of the pimelyl moiety from ACP to CoA.

It is of interest to note that the methyl ester used in pimelate synthesis and the protective groups used in organic synthesis share the property that both are removed upon completion of the synthesis. However, they are used oppositely, in that the methyl group facilitates desired reactions whereas protective groups prevent undesired reactions. As the type of enzymatic functions required for this new strategy are not uncommon, we suggest that other biosynthetic mysteries may also be solved by considering possible co-opting of core metabolic machinery.

### METHODS

Bacterial strains, plasmids and primers. Please see Supplementary Table 2.

Materials. The minimal medium was M9 (ref. 37) supplemented (final concentrations) with 0.2% (w/v) glucose, 0.1% (w/v) vitamin assay casamino acids
(Difco), 1 mM MgSO₄ and 1 μg ml⁻¹ thiamine, except when 0.2% (w/v) arabinose replaced glucose. Agar was added to 1.5% (w/v). Antibiotics were used at the following concentrations (in μg ml⁻¹): sodium ampicillin, 100; kanamycin sulfate, 50; chloramphenicol, 30. Assay buffer is 50 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. ACP (holo form) and AasS were prepared from strains DK574 and YFJ239, respectively, strictly according to the detailed protocols given previously^{16,39} The hexahistidine-tagged BioC, BioH and BioH S82A proteins were purified as described in Supplementary Methods.

Enzymatic synthesis of pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester. Synthesis of the monomethyl ester of pimelate is described in Supplementary Methods. Acyl-ACP synthesis and purification was adapted from the method of Jiang *et al.*^{16}. Briefly, the acylation reaction contained 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM MgCl₂, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, 2 mM ATP, 2 mM pimelate methyl ester, 100 μg ml⁻¹ ACP and 10 μg ml⁻¹ AasS. The reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. Pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester was purified by ion exchange chromatography using Vivapure D spin columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The reaction mixtures were loaded in binding buffer (25 mM 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid, pH 6, 10% (v/v) glycerol and 1 mM dithiothreitol) containing 100 mM LiCl, and the column was washed with binding buffer containing 250 mM LiCl. Pimeloyl-ACP was eluted in binding buffer containing 500 mM LiCl, desalted and analyzed in a conformationally sensitive electrophoretic mobility assay^{39} in 20% polyacrylamide gels containing 2.5 M urea at 130 V for 3 h (Supplementary Fig. 1). Glutaryl-ACP methyl ester and other acyl-ACPs were prepared by the same method. The molecular masses of the products were verified by mass spectrometry with MALDI-MS (Supplementary Fig. 4) at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory of University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The ACP products were dialyzed in 3,500–molecular weight cut-off membrane against 2 mM ammonium acetate at 4 °C for 15 h. Samples were mixed with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid as matrix, and analysis was performed using a Voyager-DE STR mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems) using a UV laser (337 nm N₂ laser). All measurements were made using the linear mode, and positive ions were recorded (Supplementary Fig. 4).

Preparation of ΔbioC cell-free extracts. Strain STL96 was grown at 37 °C to 0.8 OD at 600 nm in 250 ml of minimal medium containing 2 nM biotin. The cells were washed in M9 salts medium to remove biotin and subcultured into 1 liter of minimal medium at 37 °C for 5 h to derepress *bio* operon transcription by starvation for biotin. The cells were lysed in assay buffer by French Press treatment at 17,500 p.s.i. and then centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 min to obtain the soluble fraction of the cell extract. Ammonium sulfate was added slowly to 85% of saturation to the soluble cell extract in a beaker on ice under constant stirring until completely dissolved. This step was intended to remove small molecules and delete the extracts of ACP, which remains soluble in such ammonium sulfate solutions^{38}. The protein precipitant was collected by centrifugation at 10,000g and stored at –80 °C. The precipitant was solubilized before use by dialysis in 7,000–molecular weight cut-off membranes against assay buffer at 4 °C for 3 h to remove ammonium sulfate and any remaining small molecules. Extracts of the other deletion strains were prepared by the same procedure.

In vitro DTB synthesis. This assay allows *in vitro* conversion of ACP-bound substrate into DTB using enzymes in cell-free extracts. A 100-μl reaction in assay buffer contained 2.5 mg cell-free extract protein, 1 μmol MgCl₂, 0.5 μmol dithiothreitol, 0.01 μmol pyridoxal-5′-phosphate, 50 μg ACP, 2 μg BioC, 0.1 μmol L-alanine, 0.1 μmol KHCO₃, 0.1 μmol NADPH, 0.1 μmol ATP, 0.1 μmol glucose-6-phosphate and 0.1 μmol SAM. Malonyl-CoA was used at 0.2 μmol whereas pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester or another acyl-ACP substrate was added at 50 μg. The reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 3 h and quenched by immersion in boiling water for 10 min. DTB production was bioassayed as follows. Strain ER90 (ΔbioF bioC bioD) was grown in 5 ml of M9 minimal medium containing 2 nM biotin at 30 °C overnight. The cells were washed with M9 medium and subcultured in 100 ml of minimal medium at 37 °C for 5 h to starve the cells for biotin. The cells were collected by centrifugation, washed again in M9 medium and mixed into 150 ml of minimal agar containing the redox indicator 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (0.1%, w/v) to a final OD at 600 nm of approximately 0.1. Six millimeters of the mixture was poured into Petri dishes sectored with plastic walls to prevent cross-feeding. A 6-mm paper disk (BBL) was placed upon the agar, and the disk was spotted with 10 μl of a reaction to be tested. After incubation of the plates at 30 °C overnight, growth of strain ER90 was visualized as a red deposit of formazan. KAPA synthesis was performed using extracts of strain STL112, and the reaction product was bioassayed on strain STL115.

AasS-mediated bypass assay. The chemical structures and sources of dicarboxylates and derivatives used in this study are summarized in Supplementary Table 2. Strains STL32, STL33 and STL34 were constructed by transformation with pYFJ84. The strains were grown at 37 °C on minimal agar containing 0.1 mM of a dicarboxylate or a derivative plus 0.1 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside to induce AasS expression. Bypass of *bio* gene function was observed as growth in the absence of biotin. Avidin (0.1 units ml⁻¹, Calbiochem) was also added to

the medium to prevent cross-feeding and neutralize any biotin or DTB contamination. To verify the permeability of *E. coli* to pimelate, strain STL74 carrying a plasmid encoding *B. subtilis bioW* was streaked on M9 minimal agar supplemented with 0.1 mM of sodium pimelate and 0.2% (w/v) arabinose for induction (Supplementary Fig. 3).

Received 16 March 2010; accepted 9 July 2010; published online 8 August 2010

## References

1. Marquet, A., Bui, B.T.S. & Florentin, D. Biosynthesis of biotin and lipoic acid. in Vitamins and Hormones Vol. 61 (eds. G. Litwack & T. Begley) 51–101 (Academic Press, 2001).
2. Webb, M.E., Marquet, A., Mendel, R.R., Rebeille, F. & Smith, A.G. Elucidating biosynthetic pathways for vitamins and cofactors. Nat. Prod. Rep. **24**, 988–1008 (2007).
3. Ifuku, O. *et al.* Origin of the carbon atoms of biotin. Eur. J. Biochem. **220**, 585–591 (1994).
4. Sanyal, I., Lee, S.-L. & Flint, D.H. Biosynthesis of pimeloyl-CoA, a biotin precursor in *Escherichia coli*, follows a modified fatty acid synthesis pathway: ¹³C-labeling studies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **116**, 2637–2638 (1994).
5. Cleary, P.P. & Campbell, A. Deletion and complementation analysis of the biotin gene cluster of *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **112**, 830–839 (1972).
6. Lemoine, Y., Wach, A. & Jeltsch, J.M. To be free or not: the fate of pimelate in *Bacillus sphaericus* and in *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. **19**, 645–647 (1996).
7. Rolfe, B. & Eisenberg, M.A. Genetic and biochemical analysis of the biotin loci of *Escherichia coli* K-12. J. Bacteriol. **96**, 515–524 (1968).
8. Kwon, M.A., Kim, H.S., Oh, J.Y., Song, B.K. & Song, J.K. Gene cloning, expression, and characterization of a new carboxylesterase from I sp. SES-01: comparison with IBioHe enzyme. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. **19**, 147–154 (2009).
9. Sanishvili, R. *et al.* Integrating structure, bioinformatics, and enzymology to discover function. J. Biol. Chem. **278**, 26039–26045 (2003).
10. Xie, X., Wong, W.W. & Tang, Y. Improving simvastatin bioconversion in *Escherichia coli* by deletion of *bioH*. Metab. Eng. **9**, 379–386 (2007).
11. Lezius, A., Ringelmann, E. & Lynen, F. Zur biochemischen Funktion des Biotins. IV. Die Biosynthese des Biotins. Biochem. Z. **336**, 510–525 (1963).
12. Austin, M.B. *et al.* Crystal structure of a bacterial type III polyketide synthase and enzymatic control of reactive polyketide intermediates. J. Biol. Chem. **279**, 45162–45174 (2004).
13. Tseng, C.C., McLoughlin, S.M., Kelleher, N.L. & Walsh, C.T. Role of the active site cysteine of DpgA, a bacterial type III polyketide synthase. Biochemistry **43**, 970–980 (2004).
14. White, S.W., Zheng, J., Zhang, Y.M. & Rock, C.O. The structural biology of type II fatty acid biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. **74**, 791–831 (2005).
15. Chapman-Smith, A. & Cronan, J.E. Jr. The enzymatic biotinylation of proteins: a post-translational modification of exceptional specificity. Trends Biochem. Sci. **24**, 359–363 (1999).
16. Jiang, Y., Chan, C. & Cronan, J.E. The soluble acyl-acyl carrier protein synthetase of *Vibrio harveyi* B392 is a member of the medium chain Acyl-CoA synthetase family. Biochemistry **45**, 10008–10019 (2006).
17. Jiang, Y., Morgan-Kiss, R.M., Campbell, J.W., Chan, C.H. & Cronan, J.E. Expression of *Vibrio harveyi* acyl-ACP synthetase allows efficient entry of exogenous fatty acids into the *Escherichia coli* fatty acid and lipid A synthetic pathways. Biochemistry **49**, 718–726 (2010).
18. Bower, S. *et al.* Cloning, sequencing, and characterization of the *Bacillus subtilis* biotin biosynthetic operon. J. Bacteriol. **178**, 4122–4130 (1996).
19. Choi-Rhee, E. & Cronan, J.E. Biotin synthase is catalytic in vivo, but catalysis engenders destruction of the protein. Chem. Biol. **12**, 461–468 (2005).
20. Choi-Rhee, E. & Cronan, J.E. A nucleosidase required for in vivo function of the S-adenosyl-L-methionine radical enzyme, biotin synthase. Chem. Biol. **12**, 589–593 (2005).
21. del Campillo-Campbell, A., Dykhuizen, D. & Cleary, P.P. Enzymic reduction of D-biotin D-sulfoxide to D-biotin. Methods Enzymol. **62**, 379–385 (1979).
22. Lennarz, W.J., Light, R.J. & Bloch, K. A fatty acid synthetase from *E. coli*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **48**, 840–846 (1962).
23. Campbell, J.W. & Cronan, J.E. Bacterial fatty acid biosynthesis: targets for antibacterial drug discovery. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **55**, 305–332 (2001).
24. Massengo-Tiassé, R.P. & Cronan, J.E. *Vibrio cholerae* FabV defines a new class of enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase. J. Biol. Chem. **283**, 1308–1316 (2008).
25. Pugh, C.S., Borchardt, R.T. & Stone, H.O. Sinefungin, a potent inhibitor of virion mRNA(guanine-7-)-methyltransferase, mRNA(nucleoside-2′-)-methyltransferase, and viral multiplication. J. Biol. Chem. **253**, 4075–4077 (1978).
26. O’Regan, M. *et al.* Nucleotide sequence of the *bioH* gene of *Escherichia coli*. Nucleic Acids Res. **17**, 8004 (1989).
27. Choi, K.H., Heath, R.J. & Rock, C.O. β-Ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase III (FabH) is a determining factor in branched-chain fatty acid biosynthesis. J. Bacteriol. **182**, 365–370 (2000).
ARTICLE

NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY DOI: 10.1038/NCHEMBIO.420

28. Tomczyk, N.H. *et al.* Purification and characterisation of the BIOH protein from the biotin biosynthetic pathway. *FEBS Lett.* **513**, 299–304 (2002).

29. Cai, H. & Clarke, S. A novel methyltransferase catalyzes the methyl esterification of trans-aconitate in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 13470–13479 (1999).

30. Cai, H., Strouse, J., Dumlao, D., Jung, M.E. & Clarke, S. Distinct reactions catalyzed by bacterial and yeast trans-aconitate methyltransferases. *Biochemistry* **40**, 2210–2219 (2001).

31. Cronan, J.E. Jr. Molecular properties of short chain acyl thioesters of acyl carrier protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **257**, 5013–5017 (1982).

32. Roujeinikova, A. *et al.* Structural studies of fatty acyl-(acyl carrier protein) thioesters reveal a hydrophobic binding cavity that can expand to fit longer substrates. *J. Mol. Biol.* **365**, 135–145 (2007).

33. Chan, D.I., Stockner, T., Tieleman, D.P. & Vogel, H.J. Molecular dynamics simulations of the Apo-, Holo-, and acyl-forms of *Escherichia coli* acyl carrier protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **283**, 33620–33629 (2008).

34. Eisenberg, M.A. & Star, C. Synthesis of 7-oxo-8-aminopelargonic acid, a biotin vitamer, in cell-free extracts of *Escherichia coli* biotin auxotrophs. *J. Bacteriol.* **96**, 1291–1297 (1968).

35. Cryle, M.J. & Schlichting, I. Structural insights from a P450 carrier protein complex reveal how specificity is achieved in the P450 BioI ACP complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 15696–15701 (2008).

36. Stok, J.E. & De Voss, J. Expression, purification, and characterization of BioI: a carbon-carbon bond cleaving cytochrome P450 involved in biotin biosynthesis in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **384**, 351–360 (2000).

37. Miller, J. *A Short Course in Bacterial Genetics: A Laboratory Manual and Handbook for Escherichia coli and Related Bacteria* (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1992).

38. Rock, C.O. & Cronan, J.E. Jr. Acyl carrier protein from *Escherichia coli*. *Methods Enzymol.* **71**, 341–351 (1981).

39. Cronan, J.E. & Thomas, J. Bacterial fatty acid synthesis and its relationships with polyketide synthetic pathways. *Methods Enzymol.* **459**, 395–433 (2009).

### Acknowledgments

This work was supported by US National Institutes of Health grant AI15650 from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

### Author contributions

S.L., R.E.H. and J.E.C. performed experiments, and S.L. and J.E.C. designed experiments and wrote the manuscript.

### Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

### Additional information

Supplementary information is available online at http://www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology/. Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.E.C.
