
For reprint orders, please contact reprints@expert-reviews.com

**EXPERT REVIEWS**

# Genetic alterations of FGF receptors: an emerging field in clinical cancer diagnostics and therapeutics

Expert Rev. Anticancer Ther. 10(9), 1375–1379 (2010)

---

### Evaluation of: Turner N, Pearson A, Sharpe R et al. FGFR1 amplification drives endocrine therapy resistance and is a therapeutic target in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 70(5), 2085–2094 (2010).

FGF receptor (FGFR) family members are aberrantly activated during carcinogenesis due to gene amplification, chromosomal translocation and missense mutation. FGFR1 is preferentially amplified in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, whereas FGFR2 is amplified in triple-negative breast cancer and diffuse-type gastric cancer. Gene amplification of FGFRs results in ligand-independent FGFR signaling to RAS-ERK, PI3K-AKT and JAK-STAT cascades due to the overexpression of wild-type or C-terminally deleted FGFRs. Cediranib, TKI258, Ki23057, MK-2461 and brivanib are broad-range tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting FGFRs and other receptors. Clinical application of small-molecule FGFR inhibitors could improve the prognosis of FGFR-driven cancer patients. Diagnostic detection of tumors with FGFR genetic alterations in primary lesion, peritoneal effusion, pleural effusion and bone marrow is necessary to select patients for FGFR-targeted therapeutics.

---

### KEYWORDS: breast cancer • CXCR4 • epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition • gastric cancer • hedgehog • malignant pleural effusion • peritoneal dissemination • SNAI1 • WNT • ZEB2

---

### Summary of methods & results

Turner and colleagues recently re-evaluated the role of FGF receptor (FGFR) 1 in human breast cancer based on methodologies available in the 21st Century [1]. Turner's group investigated the copy number and expression of FGFR1 in human breast cancer by using chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, respectively, and confirmed preferential FGFR1 overexpression in primary breast cancer with FGFR1 gene amplification.

Among 40 breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-134, MFM223, JIMT-1, CAL120, S68 and SUM44 cells showed FGFR1 amplification and overexpression [1]. MFM223 cells showed co-amplification of FGFR2, while JIMT-1 cells showed co-amplification of ERBB2/HER2. Original MDA-MB-134 cells with low-frequency Gly12Arg KRAS mutations were sensitive to FGFR inhibitors and FGFR1 siRNA, whereas ATCC-derived MDA-MB-134 cells with heterozygous Gly12Arg KRAS mutations were resistant to FGFR1 siRNA [1]. The ATCC-derived MDA-MB-134 cells restored FGFR1 dependence based on the ERK signaling inhibition by using U0126. In addition to amplification bias introduced by bidirectional PCR for complementary RNA amplification using the TALPAT method, cell-line or sampling bias is the serious cause of artifact in quantitative biology or medicine in the year 2010 [2].

CAL120 cells with ligand-independent activation of FGFR-ERK and FGFR-AKT signaling cascades showed more malignant phenotype of anchorage independence compared with S68 and SUM44 cells with ligand-dependent FGFR signaling activation. Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive SUM44 cells were sensitive to 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) in the absence of FGF2, but were resistant to 4-OHT in the presence of FGF2 due to FGFR-ERK signaling activation. In addition, distant metastasis-free survival of ER-positive breast-cancer patients with FGFR1 overexpression was worse than

---

www.expert-reviews.com  
10.1586/ERA.10.128  
© 2010 Expert Reviews Ltd  
ISSN 1473-7140  
1375

those without $FGFR1$ overexpression. Based on these facts, Turner and colleagues claimed that amplification and overexpression of $FGFR1$ is associated with a poor prognosis of luminal B subtype of ER-positive breast cancer [1].

---

### Discussion

FGF1 (aFGF), FGF2 (bFGF), FGF3 (INT2), FGF4 (K-FGF), FGF5, FGF6, FGF7 (KGF), FGF8, FGF9, FGF10, FGF16, FGF17, FGF18, FGF19, FGF20, FGF21, FGF22 and FGF23 are secreted-type ligands of FGFRs, including FGFR1b, FGFR1c, FGFR2b, FGFR2c, FGFR3b, FGFR3c and FGFR4 [3–6]. FGFs associated with heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG), or Klotho-type coreceptors, induce dimerization and autophosphorylation of FGFRs. FGFR autophosphorylation occurs in a stepwise manner from a key tyrosine residue in an activation loop to other tyrosine residues at substrate-binding sites [7]. Activated FGFRs phosphorylate FRS2 for the GRB2-mediated activation of RAS-ERK and PI3K-AKT signaling cascades. Activated FGFRs also recruit phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ) for the catalysis of phosphatidylinositol diphosphate (PIP₂) to trigger inositol triphosphate (IP₃)-mediated Ca²⁺ release, and diacylglycerol (DAG)-mediated PKC, PKD or Ras-guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein activation. FGF signals induce a variety of responses, such as activation of RAS-ERK, PI3K-AKT, JAK-STAT, PKC and PKD signaling cascades, in a context-dependent manner.

Germ-line as well as somatic changes of FGFR family members are summarized in TABLE 1 [8–33]. Intronic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of $FGFR2$ are associated with increased risk of ER-positive breast cancer [17,34], while coding SNPs of $FGFR4$, leading to Gly388Arg amino acid substitution in the transmembrane domain, are reported to be associated with a worse prognosis in breast cancer, lung cancer and others [30,31]. The $FGFR1$ gene is amplified and overexpressed in ER-positive breast cancer [1] and ovarian cancer [9], whereas $FGFR2$ is amplified in triple-negative breast cancer [35] and diffuse-type gastric cancer [36]. Chromosomal translocation of $FGFR1$ and $FGFR3$ genes are typical genetic alterations in a subset of myeloproliferative syndrome [10] and multiple myeloma [24], respectively. In addition, missense mutations of $FGFR1$, $FGFR2$, $FGFR3$ and $FGFR4$ occur in human cancer (TABLE 1). Germ-line variations and somatic alterations of FGFR family members occur in various types of human cancer.

Breast cancer-associated $FGFR2$ SNPs within intron 2 result in transcriptional upregulation of $FGFR2$ in the mammary gland due to the creation of ER or RUNX binding sites [37,38]. $FGFR2$ gene amplification leads to hyperactivation of $FGFR2$ signaling cascades based on constitutive FRS2 phosphorylation in a ligand-independent manner, not only due to $FGFR2$ overexpression, but also due to C-terminal deletion of $FGFR2$ through exclusion of the last exon from the $FGFR2$ amplicon during the gene amplification process [36,39]. $FGFR1$ translocation in myeloproliferative syndrome fuses the tyrosine kinase domain of the $FGFR1$ gene to different gene partners, such as $ZMYM2$ (ZNF198) and $LRRFIP1$, which leads to aberrant activation of $FGFR1$ kinase due to the homodimerization of fusion gene products [10,40]. Missense mutations of FGFR family members around the third immunoglobulin-like

domain result in FGFR signaling activation due to the creation of an autocrine signaling loop, while those within the tyrosine kinase domain result in FGFR signaling activation due to the release of FGFRs from autoinhibition or the dysregulation of stepwise autophosphorylation [7,25,34]. FGFRs are aberrantly activated during carcinogenesis due to ectopic expression, overexpression or structural change caused by genetic alterations.

Turner and colleagues suggested that overexpression of $FGFR1$ itself could induce ligand-independent FGFR signaling activation in tumor cells [1]. Because genomic structures of amplicons are not homogeneous, minor copies of $FGFR1$ with C-terminal deletion or missense mutations could induce dominant positive effects over other copies of wild-type $FGFR1$. This point should be clarified by whole-genome sequencing of breast tumors with $FGFR1$ gene amplification.

$FGFR1$, $ERBB2$ and $FGFR2$ are preferentially amplified in ER-positive, HER2-positive and triple-negative types of breast cancer, respectively [1,35]. $ERBB2$ and $FGFR2$ are preferentially amplified in intestinal and diffuse types of gastric cancer, respectively [41]. The prognosis of diffuse-type gastric cancer is worse than that of intestinal-type gastric cancer owing to the increased potential for invasion and metastasis, manifested by recurrence after surgical operation due to residual tumors in recurrence niches, such as the peritoneal cavity and bone marrow. FGF signaling cascades cross-talk with WNT, Hedgehog, Notch and TGF-β/BMP signaling cascades to constitute the stem cell signaling network, which regulates the expression of stem cell markers, such as CXCR4 and NANOG, as well as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers, such as Snail (SNAI1) and ZEB2 (SIP1) [41–44]. Since the pattern of genetic alterations reflects scenarios of subtype-specific carcinogenesis, comparative analyses of triple-negative breast cancer and diffuse-type gastric cancer are necessary to develop diagnostics and therapeutics for these types of human cancer with worse prognosis.

---

### Expert commentary

Fibroblast growth factor receptors are ideal targets of cancer therapeutics, because FGF signaling cascades play a crucial role during carcinogenesis through regulation of cancer stem cells, cellular proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis [3–6]. PD173074 [45], cediranib (AZD2171) [46], tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) 258 (CHIR-258) [47], Ki23057 [48], MK-2461 [49] and brivanib [50] are small-molecule FGFR inhibitors. PD173074 is a pioneer compound developed as an FGFR-specific inhibitor in the 20th Century [45], while cediranib, TKI258, Ki23057, MK-2461 and brivanib are broad-range TKIs targeting FGFRs as well as other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), such as VEGF receptors (VEGFRs) and PDGF receptors (PDGFRs) [46–50]. Clinical application of small-molecule FGFR inhibitors could improve prognosis of FGFR-driven cancer patients.

---

### Five-year view

The selection of patients for FGFR-targeted therapeutics is the most important issue in this field. Malignant pleural effusion and peritoneal dissemination are serious conditions in advanced-stage

Genetic alterations of FGF receptors

Key Paper Evaluation

Table 1. Genetic variations and somatic mutations of FGF receptor family genes.

| FGFR gene | Cancer type                     | Germline or somatic | Genetic changes               | Ref. |
|-----------|---------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------|------|
| FGFR 1    | Breast cancer                   | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [8]  |
|           | Ovarian cancer                  | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [9]  |
|           | Myeloproliferative syndrome     | Somatic             | Chromosomal translocation      | [10] |
|           | Bladder cancer                  | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [11] |
|           | Glioblastoma                    | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [12] |
|           | Oral cancer                     | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [13] |
|           | Melanoma                        | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [14] |
|           | Rhabdomyosarcoma                | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [15] |
| FGFR 2    | Breast cancer                   | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [8]  |
|           | Somatic                         | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [16] |
|           | Gastric cancer                  | Germline            | Intronic regulatory SNPs       | [17] |
|           | Somatic                         | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [18] |
|           | Lung cancer                     | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [19] |
|           | Uterus cancer                   | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [20] |
|           | Melanoma                        | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [21] |
|           | Colorectal cancer               | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [22] |
| FGFR 3    | Multiple myeloma                | Somatic             | Chromosomal translocation      | [23] |
|           | Somatic                         | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [24] |
|           | Bladder cancer                  | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [25] |
|           | Cervical cancer                 | Somatic             | Gene amplification            | [26] |
|           | Colorectal cancer               | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [27] |
|           | Peripheral T-cell lymphoma      | Somatic             | Chromosomal translocation      | [28] |
|           | Oral cancer                     | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [29] |
|           | Testicular tumor                | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [30] |
| FGFR 4    | Breast cancer                   | Germline            | Missense coding SNP           | [31] |
|           | Lung cancer                     | Germline            | Missense coding SNP           | [32] |
|           | Somatic                         | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [33] |
|           | Rhabdomyosarcoma                | Somatic             | Missense mutation             | [34] |

FGFR: FGF receptor; SNP: Single-nucleotide polymorphism.

breast and gastric cancer patients, respectively. Since cancer cell lines with FGFR 2 gene amplification and overexpression are preferentially established from peritoneal dissemination of diffuse-type gastric cancer, it is predicted that the detection rate of tumor cells with copy number gain of FGFR family genes is higher in tumor cells within pleural or peritoneal effusion. FISH analyses are currently utilized for the detection of gene amplification of FGFR 1 and FGFR 2 in breast cancer, chromosomal translocation of FGFR 1 in myeloproliferative syndrome, and chromosomal translocation of FGFR 3 in multiple myeloma. FISH analyses on FGFR 1 and FGFR 2 in tumor cells obtained from pleural or peritoneal effusion could be utilized to select breast or gastric cancer patients for treatment with small-molecule FGFR inhibitors in the near future.

In addition, FISH analyses do not cover the whole spectrum of genetic changes in FGFR family genes because FGFR family members are aberrantly activated due to gene amplification, chromosomal translocation and missense mutation (TABLE 1). Therefore, diagnostic tools other than FISH should be developed for the detection of genetic alterations of FGFRs in various types of human cancer in the future.

Receptor tyrosine kinases other than FGFRs, such as EGF receptor, ERBB2, MET and ALK, are also hyperactivated in human cancers owing to genetic alterations. EGFR/ERBB2-targeted therapeutics is at the most advanced stage in the field of RTK-targeted therapeutics [51]. As tumors with KRAS mutations are refractory to EGFR/ERBB2-targeted therapeutics [52], it is necessary to screen genetic alterations of cancer-related genes encoding RTKs, as well as RTK signaling regulators for the positive and negative selection of patients. Based on the innovation in nucleotide sequencing and computation technologies, whole-genome sequencing of tumor cells in biopsied sample, pleural effusion or peritoneal effusion should emerge as a novel diagnostic platform for the optimization of RTK-targeted therapeutics in the era of personal genome sequencing.

Financial & competing interests disclosure

The author has no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.

Key Paper Evaluation
Katoh

### Key issues

- FGF receptor (FGFR) family members are aberrantly activated owing to gene amplification, chromosomal translocation and missense mutation during carcinogenesis.
- FGFR1 is preferentially amplified in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, whereas FGFR2 is amplified in triple-negative breast cancer and diffuse-type gastric cancer.
- Cediranib, TKI258, Ki23057, MK-2461 and brivanib are broad-range TKIs targeting FGFRs and other receptors.
- FISH analyses on FGFR1 and FGFR2 in tumor cells obtained from pleural or peritoneal effusion could be utilized to select breast or gastric cancer patients for treatment with small-molecule FGFR inhibitors in the near future.
- Whole-genome sequencing of tumor cells in biopsied sample, pleural effusion or peritoneal effusion should emerge as a novel diagnostic platform for the optimization of RTK-targeted therapeutics in the era of personal genome sequencing.

### References

1. Turner N, Pearson A, Sharpe R *et al.* FGFR1 amplification drives endocrine therapy resistance and is a therapeutic target in breast cancer. *Cancer Res.* 70(5), 2085–2094 (2010).
2. Katoh M. RNA technology targeted to the WNT signaling pathway. *Cancer Biol. Ther.* 7(2), 265–267 (2008).
3. Katoh M. WNT and FGF gene clusters. *Int. J. Oncol.* 21(6), 1269–1273 (2002).
4. Eswarakumar VP, Lax I, Schlessinger J. Cellular signaling by fibroblast growth factor receptors. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 16(2), 139–149 (2005).
5. Dailey L, Ambrosetti D, Mansukhani A, Basilico C. Mechanisms underlying differential responses to FGF signaling. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 16(2), 233–247 (2005).
6. Zhang X, Ibrahim OA, Olsen SK, Umemori H, Mohammadi M, Ornitz DM. Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth factor family. The complete mammalian FGF family. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281(23), 15694–15700 (2006).
7. Bae JH, Schlessinger J. Asymmetric tyrosine kinase arrangements in activation or autophosphorylation of receptor tyrosine kinases. *Mol. Cells* 29(5), 443–448 (2010).
8. Adnane J, Gaudray P, Dionne CA *et al.* BEK and FLG, two receptors to members of the FGF family, are amplified in subsets of human breast cancers. *Oncogene* 6, 659–663 (1991).
9. Theillet C, Adelaide J, Louason G *et al.* FGFR1 and PLAT genes and DNA amplification at 8p12 in breast and ovarian cancers. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* 7(4), 219–226 (1993).

10. Xiao S, Nalabolu SR, Aster JC *et al.* FGFR1 is fused with a novel zinc-finger gene, ZNF198, in the t(8;13) leukaemia/lymphoma syndrome. *Nat. Genet.* 18(1), 84–87 (1998).
11. Simon R, Richter J, Wagner U *et al.* High-throughput tissue microarray analysis of 3p25 (*RAF1*) and 8p12 (*FGFR1*) copy number alterations in urinary bladder cancer. *Cancer Res.* 61(11), 4514–4519 (2001).
12. Rand V, Huang J, Stockwell T *et al.* Sequence survey of receptor tyrosine kinases reveals mutations in glioblastomas. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 102(40), 14344–14349 (2005).
13. Freier K, Schwaenen C, Sticht C *et al.* Recurrent FGFR1 amplification and high FGFR1 protein expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). *Oral Oncol.* 43(1), 60–66 (2007).
14. Lin WM, Baker AC, Beroukhim R *et al.* Modeling genomic diversity and tumor dependency in malignant melanoma. *Cancer Res.* 68(3), 664–673 (2008).
15. Missiaglia E, Selfe J, Hamdi M *et al.* Genomic imbalances in rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines affect expression of genes frequently altered in primary tumors: an approach to identify candidate genes involved in tumor development. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* 48(6), 455–467 (2009).
16. Stephens P, Edkins S, Davies H *et al.* A screen of the complete protein kinase gene family identifies diverse patterns of somatic mutations in human breast cancer. *Nat. Genet.* 37(6), 590–592 (2005).
17. Easton DF, Pooley KA, Dunning AM *et al.* Genome-wide association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility loci. *Nature* 447(7148), 1087–1093 (2007).
18. Nakatani H, Sakamoto H, Yoshida T *et al.* Isolation of an amplified DNA sequence in stomach cancer. *Jpn. J. Cancer Res.* 81(8), 707–710 (1990).

19. Jang JH, Shin KH, Park JG. Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 genes associated with human gastric and colorectal cancers. *Cancer Res.* 61(9), 3541–3543 (2001).
20. Davies H, Hunter C, Smith R *et al.* Somatic mutations of the protein kinase gene family in human lung cancer. *Cancer Res.* 65(17), 7591–7595 (2005).
21. Pollock PM, Gartside MG, Dejeza LC *et al.* Frequent activating FGFR2 mutations in endometrial carcinomas parallel germline mutations associated with craniosynostosis and skeletal dysplasia syndromes. *Oncogene* 26(50), 7158–7162 (2007).
22. Gartside MG, Chen H, Ibrahim OA *et al.* Loss-of-function fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 mutations in melanoma. *Mol. Cancer Res.* 7(1), 41–54 (2009).
23. Camps J, Nguyen QT, Padilla-Nash HM *et al.* Integrative genomics reveals mechanisms of copy number alterations responsible for transcriptional deregulation in colorectal cancer. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* 48(11), 1002–1017 (2009).
24. Chesi M, Nardini E, Brents LA *et al.* Frequent translocation t(4;14) (p16.3;q32.3) in multiple myeloma is associated with increased expression and activating mutations of FGFR3. *Nat. Genet.* 16(3), 260–264 (1997).
25. Cappellen D, De Oliveira C, Ricol D *et al.* Frequent activating mutations of FGFR3 in human bladder and cervix carcinomas. *Nat. Genet.* 23(1), 18–20 (1999).
26. Nord H, Segersten U, Sandgren J *et al.* Focal amplifications are associated with high grade and recurrences in stage Ta bladder carcinoma. *Int. J. Cancer* 126(6), 1390–1402 (2010).

|  | Genetic alterations of FGF receptors | Key Paper Evaluation |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 27 | Yagasaki F, Wakao D, Yokoyama Y et al. Fusion of ETV6 to fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 in peripheral T-cell lymphoma with t(4;12)(p16;p13) chromosomal translocation. *Cancer Res.* 61(23), 8371–8374 (2001). |  |
| 28 | Zhang Y, Hiraishi Y, Wang H et al. Constitutive activating mutation of the FGFR3b in oral squamous cell carcinomas. *Int. J. Cancer* 117(1), 166–168 (2005). |  |
| 29 | Goriely A, Hansen RM, Taylor IB et al. Activating mutations in FGFR3 and HRAS reveal a shared genetic origin for congenital disorders and testicular tumors. *Nat. Genet.* 41(11), 1247–1252 (2009). |  |
| 30 | Bange J, Prechtl D, Cheburkin Y et al. Cancer progression and tumor cell motility are associated with the FGFR4 Arg388 allele. *Cancer Res.* 62(3), 840–847 (2002). |  |
| 31 | Spinola M, Leoni V, Pignatiello C et al. Functional FGFR4 Gly388Arg polymorphism predicts prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma patients. *J. Clin. Oncol.* 23(29), 7307–7311 (2005). |  |
| 32 | Marks JL, McLellan MD, Zakowski MF et al. Mutational analysis of EGFR and related signaling pathway genes in lung adenocarcinomas identifies a novel somatic kinase domain mutation in FGFR4. *PLoS One* 2(5), e426 (2007). |  |
| 33 | Taylor JG6th, Cheuk AT, Tsang PS et al. Identification of FGFR4-activating mutations in human rhabdomyosarcomas that promote metastasis in xenotransplanted models. *J. Clin. Invest.* 119(11), 3395–3407 (2009). |  |
| 34 | Katoh M. Cancer genomics and genetics of FGFR2. *Int. J. Oncol.* 33(2), 233–237 (2008). |  |
| 35 | Turner N, Lambros MB, Horlings HM et al. Integrative molecular profiling of triple negative breast cancers identifies amplicon drivers and potential therapeutic targets. *Oncogene* 29(14), 2013–2023 (2010). |  |
| 36 | Katoh M, Katoh M. FGFR2 and WDR11 are neighboring oncogene and tumor suppressor gene on human chromosome 10q26. *Int. J. Oncol.* 22(5), 1155–1159 (2003). |  |
| 37 | Meyer KB, Maia A-T, O'Reilly M et al. Allele-specific upregulation of FGFR2 increases susceptibility to breast cancer. *PLoS Biol.* 6, e108 (2008). |  |
| 38 | Katoh Y, Katoh M. FGFR2-related pathogenesis and FGFR2-targeted therapeutics. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* 23(3), 307–311 (2009). |  |
| 39 | Moffa AB, Tannheimer SL, Ethier SP. Transforming potential of alternatively spliced variants of FGFR2 in human mammary epithelial cells. *Mol. Cancer Res.* 2(11), 643–652 (2004). |  |
| 40 | Soler G, Nusbaum S, Varet B et al. LRRFIP1, a new FGFR1 partner gene associated with 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome. *Leukemia* 23(7), 1359–1361 (2009). |  |
| 41 | Katoh M. Dysregulation of stem cell signaling network due to germline mutation, SNP, *Helicobacter pylori* infection, epigenetic change, and genetic alteration in gastric cancer. *Cancer Biol. Ther.* 6(6), 832–839 (2007). |  |
| 42 | Katoh M, Katoh M. WNT signaling pathway and stem cell signaling network. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 13(14), 4042–4045 (2007). |  |
| 43 | Katoh Y, Katoh M. Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and miRNA. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* 22(2), 271–275 (2008). |  |
| 44 | Katoh M, Katoh M. Integrative genomic analyses of CXCR4: transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 based on TGFβ, Nodal, Activin signaling and POU5F1, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXH1, SOX17, and GFI1 transcription factors. *Int. J. Oncol.* 36(2), 415–420 (2010). |  |
| 45 | Mohammadi M, Fromm S, Hamby JM et al. Crystal structure of an angiogenesis inhibitor bound to the FGF receptor tyrosine kinase domain. *EMBO J.* 17(20), 5896–5904 (1998). |  |
| 46 | Wedge SR, Kendrew J, Hennequin LF et al. AZD2171: a highly potent, orally bioavailable, VEGFR2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor for the treatment of cancer. *Cancer Res.* 65(10), 4389–4400 (2005). |  |
| 47 | Trudel S, Li ZH, Wei E et al. CHIR-258, a novel, multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor for the potential treatment of t(4;14) multiple myeloma. *Blood* 105(7), 2941–2948 (2005). |  |
| 48 | Nakamura K, Yashiro M, Matsuoka T et al. A novel molecular targeting compound as FGFR2 phosphorylation inhibitor, Ki23057, for scirrhous gastric cancer. *Gastroenterology* 131(5), 1530–1541 (2006). |  |
| 49 | Pan BS, Chan GK, Chenard M et al. MK-2461, a novel multitargeted kinase inhibitor, preferentially inhibits the activated c-Met receptor. *Cancer Res.* 70(4), 1524–1533 (2010). |  |
| 50 | Bhide RS, Lombardo LJ, Hunt JT et al. The antiangiogenic activity in xenograft models of brivanib, a dual inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 kinases. *Mol. Cancer Ther.* 9(2), 369–378 (2010). |  |
| 51 | Wheeler DL, Dunn EF, Harari PM. Understanding resistance to EGFR inhibitors: impact on future treatment strategies. *Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol.* DOI:10.1038/nrclinonc.2010.97 (2010) (Epub ahead of print). |  |
| 52 | Pao W, Wang TY, Riely GJ et al. KRAS mutations and primary resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib. *PLoS Med.* 2(1), e17 (2005). |  |
