
The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 42 (2010) 1931–1935

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biocel

# Signalling networks in focus

## Neuronal networks of nicotine addiction

### Marcelo O. Ortells<sup>a</sup>, Hugo R. Arias<sup>b,*</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Morón – Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina  
<sup>b</sup> Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, USA

---

### ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**  
Received 1 April 2010  
Received in revised form 12 August 2010  
Accepted 30 August 2010  
Available online 15 September 2010  

**Keywords:**  
Nicotine dependence  
Smoking addiction  
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors  
Neuronal pathways  
Brain reward circuitry  

---

### ABSTRACT

Nicotine is the main psychoactive substance present in tobacco, targeting neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The main effects of nicotine associated with smoking are nicotinic receptor activation, desensitization, and upregulation, with the subsequent modulation of the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system. However, there is a lack of a comprehensive explanation of their roles that effectively makes clear how nicotine dependence might be established on those grounds. Receptor upregulation is an unusual effect for a drug of abuse, because theoretically this implies less need for drug consumption. Receptor upregulation and receptor desensitization are commonly viewed as opposite, homeostatic mechanisms. We here review the available information on smoking addiction, especially under a recently presented model of nicotine dependence. In this model both receptor upregulation and receptor desensitization are responsible for establishing a biochemical mechanism of nicotine dependence, which have an important role in starting and maintaining tobacco addiction.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

### 1. Introduction

According to the World Health Organization, tobacco (nicotine) addiction is a global health problem affecting one-third of the population. Around half of the smoking population dies from a smoking associated disease. Nicotine is so powerful that adolescent smokers already present the first symptoms of nicotine dependence such as withdrawal, craving, and relapse, within the first weeks of smoking (DiFranza, 2008). Several neuronal processes have been related to nicotine addiction. Albeit initially nicotine can activate nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), it can subsequently produce nAChR desensitization and upregulation. The combination of these pharmacological effects finally modulates the “brain reward circuitry”.

### 2. nAChR activation, desensitization, and upregulation

There are two prominent nAChR subtypes in the brain that can be discriminated by its high (e.g., α4β2) or low (e.g., α7) sensitivity to nicotine. After inhalation, a peak of ~0.3 μM nicotine can be attained in the brain (Picciotto et al., 2008), a concentration sufficient to activate nAChRs, while the accumulation during a smoking day is enough to produce nAChR desensitization. In addition to the classical desensitization process at high agonist concentrations, low agonist concentrations can induce desensitization even without nAChR activation, a process named “high-affinity desensitization” (Giniatullin et al., 2005).

The mechanism of nicotine-induced nAChR upregulation seems to be based on the chaperone-like activity of nicotine, stabilizing assembly intermediates and increasing the half-life of nAChRs (Kuryatov et al., 2005; Sallette et al., 2005). It was also proposed that desensitization triggers the process of nAChR upregulation (Fenster et al., 1999). Nicotine-induced nAChR upregulation of the most abundant receptor in the brain, α4β2, has been referred as a central mechanism somehow related to nicotine addiction (Buisson and Bertrand, 2002). Mice lacking the β2 subunit do not show upregulation of nicotine binding sites (McCallum et al., 2006).

This dual role of nicotine, activation and desensitization of nAChRs, has been described in the context of tobacco addiction (Picciotto et al., 2008). Upregulation by nicotine seems to be paradoxical (Wonnacott, 1990), because the number of receptors is increased in a sort of positive feedback, contrary to what is normally expected for a drug of abuse. One possible explanation, based on the evidence that nAChR upregulation is only produced after nAChR desensitization (Dani and Heinemann, 1996; Fenster et al., 1999), is that this increment is a homeostatic response to desensitization (Buisson and Bertrand, 2002; Dani et al., 2001). In contrast, others have proposed that desensitization might represent a cellular basis of nicotine tolerance (Laviolette and van der Kooy, 2004), especially in the presence of upregulation. These explanations have no direct relationship with a mechanism of nicotine dependence, rather they make emphasis on their independent roles as putative corrective mechanisms. Moreover, only one can represent a

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 623 572 3589; fax: +1 623 572 3550.  
E-mail address: harias@midwestern.edu (H.R. Arias).

1357-2725/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.biocel.2010.08.019

problem that the brain must compensate as these phenomena go in opposite directions.

3. Is nicotine-induced nAChR activation or inactivation the basis of nicotine dependence?

The initial and intrinsic biochemical basis of tobacco addiction should be found in the abnormal mechanisms that nicotine promotes on nAChRs (i.e., but not promoted by the normal neurotransmitter ACh). These mechanisms, according to a recent model of smoking addiction and nicotine dependence ([Ortells and Barrantes, 2010]), are not surprisingly nAChR upregulation and desensitization. The proposed biochemical mechanism gives a molecular basis to the habit-forming properties of nicotine, considering that desensitization and upregulation are not opposing homeostatic but compatible processes that effectively cause nicotine dependence. This model assumes that nicotine nAChR inactivation, but not activation, is essential for nicotine dependence.

Assuming that nAChR activation is the basis of nicotine dependence, exacerbation of nAChR activation by nicotine increases DA release in the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system, thus promoting all the rewarding mechanisms associated with addiction. However, nicotine also triggers desensitization which cancels what in principle here we assumed promotes addiction. Moreover, nicotine also promotes upregulation of nAChRs. Considering all these variables, we can generalize by stating that in a time span of several days the brain would develop an exacerbated capacity of nAChR response (positive feedback) when the receptors are not desensitized. If so, an immediate need for more nicotine would be lacking, as the normal concentration of the natural agonist ACh would be sufficient to elicit a response similar to the first nicotine stimulus. Under these circumstances only when upregulation is reversed, nicotine consumption might be eventually wanted, but not needed in a dependence way. That is, the assumption that nAChR activation by nicotine is the nucleus of the addiction process is logically inadequate.

The assumption that the nAChR inactivation by nicotine desensitization initiates the dependence mechanism and eventually addiction seems to be more likely. In this case, nAChR inactivation enhances DA release. A typical example would be the desensitization of nAChRs present on inhibitory GABAergic neurons. The logical consequence is that the upregulation that follows desensitization completes the mechanism of nicotine dependence. Effectively, upregulation makes more difficult to achieve rewarding because it strengthens the mechanisms that should be inactivated for that purpose. Consequently, upregulation promotes the need of higher or faster nicotine consumption. Therefore, in this hypothesis nicotine provokes both the rewarding stimulus (via desensitization) and the need for more nicotine consumption (via upregulation).

4. Nicotine activation of rewarding: disrupting a negative feedback mediated by α4β2 nAChRs

A central conclusion of the model is that in order to conciliate desensitization and upregulation as the bases of nicotine dependence, nicotine has to be able to elicit its rewarding properties by inactivation of nAChRs ([Ortells and Barrantes, 2010]). The model explicitly proposes that what desensitization inactivates is an inhibition mechanism of rewarding stimulus mediated by α4β2 nAChRs. This circuit of nicotine dependence is schematically shown in Fig. 1A. Starting with a physiological number of nAChRs, endogenous ACh normally stimulates all nAChR subtypes and activates or inhibits rewarding stimulus depending on the neuronal circuit.

The model distinguishes three basic neuronal processes related to rewarding: Long-Term Rewarding Activation (LTRA), Short-Term Rewarding Activation (STRA), and Long-Term Rewarding Inhibition (LTRI). An essential assumption is that the increase in DA release correlates with rewarding activation, while inhibition of DA release means rewarding inhibition.

According to the model, LTRA is associated with the glutamatergic system ([Mansvelder and McGehee, 2000]). Because ACh or nicotine activates an indirect complex system of DA release, the removal of these agonists does not cause an immediate stop of rewarding activation. Fig. 1B shows a diagrammatic representation of this and other neuronal systems described in this review.

STRA (Fig. 1B) is mediated by nAChRs present on cell bodies and terminals of DA neurons in the VTA. These nAChRs are of the α4β2-containing and α7 subtypes ([Klink et al., 2001; Champtiaux et al., 2003]), and when activated by ACh or nicotine promote the liberation of DA. Dopamine release stops as soon as ACh or nicotine is removed or nAChRs are desensitized.

LTRI is central to the model of nicotine dependence ([Ortells and Barrantes, 2010]). An example of LTRI is the GABAergic system involved in the regulation of DA release in the VTA. This system inhibits DA neurons (Fig. 1B), and is activated by α4β2 receptors ([Klink et al., 2001; Mansvelder et al., 2002]).

The activation of these systems by endogenous ACh is the normal physiological way. If these systems receive an acute exposure to nicotine (“disrupted path”), the same results are obtained but transitorily (Fig. 1A). As nicotine is not degraded as ACh, it remains for longer periods at low concentrations. After the normal recovery of nAChRs, the chronic exposure to the residual low nicotine concentration desensitizes preferentially α4β2 nAChRs ([Fenster et al., 1997]), the proposed subtype involved in rewarding inhibition. This provides a long-lasting rewarding stimulus not present in the normal path, because nicotine is abolishing the action of a LTRI path. Because low nicotine concentrations preferentially desensitize α4β2 nAChRs compared to other receptors, lets LTRA and STRA to remain active. The rewarding effects end when the inhibited α4β2 nAChRs are upregulated and exit the desensitized state after nicotine removal ([Kuryatov et al., 2005]). The result of having exposed these pathways to nicotine is that the smoker ends with an exacerbated (upregulated) rewarding inhibition system, even under normal conditions when nicotine is not longer present. The smoker faces two alternatives at this stage. Either to suffer the consequences of the abstinence symptoms until nAChRs are downregulated, interrupting the addiction process and eventually quitting smoking, or to consume more nicotine, rapidly disrupting by desensitization the exacerbated rewarding inhibitory system. This option has the unwanted consequence of a further and long-lasting α4β2 upregulation, favoring addiction. In short, under this new concept of nicotine dependence ([Ortells and Barrantes, 2010]), desensitization and upregulation are not viewed as regulatory mechanisms, but as abnormal consequences of nicotine exposure and necessary participants in starting and in the development of smoking addiction.

5. nAChR-induced modulation of the dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and GABAergic systems

The combined activation and desensitizing properties of nicotine finally modulate DA release in the mesocorticolimbic system, and thus, the rewarding properties of nicotine. This has been well documented and it is very important for the development of tobacco addiction ([Dani and De Biasi, 2001; Laviolette and van der Kooy, 2004; Wonnacott et al., 2005]). The mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system, the so called “brain reward circuitry”, is central to reinforcing behaviors, reward and the development of drug

M.O. Ortells, H.R. Arias / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 42 (2010) 1931–1935

(A)

Resting nAChRs

Basal Number

Normal Path
Disrupted Path
Endogenous ACh Release
nAChR Activation
LTRI
GL_Pr
α7
STRA
DA_So
α4-6β2
LTRI
α4β2
NORMAL
Acute Nicotine
nAChR Activation
LTRI
GL_Pr
α7
STRA
DA_So
α4-6β2
LTRI
α4β2
NORMAL
Desensitization
None
Partial
Full
LTRI
GL_Pr
α7
STRA
DA_So
α4-6β2
LTRI
α4β2
None
Partial
Full
Upregulation
Resting nAChRs
Basal
Amplified
Abstinence
Symptoms
LTRI
GL_Pr
α7
STRA
DA_So
α4-6β2
LTRI
α4β2
NORMAL
Enhanced
Smoking
Rewarding
Normal Path
Disrupted Path
Downregulation
Eventual Quitting
More Upregulation
Addiction

(B)

ACh

LTRI
Cholinergic
Glutamatergic
DA system
(Figure 2b)

STRA
Nic
Glu
LTRA
DA
GABA
Reward

ACh

LTRI
Cholinergic
GABAergic
DA system
(Figure 2a)

ACh
Muscarinic receptors
Glutamate receptors
α7 receptors
GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors
α4-6β2 receptors
Activation - Facilitation
α4β2 receptors
Inhibition
α4β2 after upregulation
Nic Nicotine

Fig. 1. (A) Mechanisms for the initiation of nicotine dependence. The desensitization-upregulation model distinguishes three neuronal processes related to rewarding: LTRA, Long-Term Rewarding Activation; STRA, Short-Term Rewarding Activation; LTRI, Long-Term Rewarding Inhibition. It assumes that an increase in DA release correlates with rewarding activation, while inhibition of DA release means rewarding inhibition. LTRA is associated with glutamatergic (GL) neuronal circuits, where nicotine increases the activity of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the VTA. This activation is mediated by presynaptic (Pr) α7 nAChRs on glutamatergic neurons, which facilitate their excitation. The target NMDA-type glutamate receptors are present on DA neurons cell bodies. This rewarding path is considered long-lasting because it is activated by ACh or nicotine indirectly (i.e., the removal of this agonist has no immediate consequences) and because α7 receptors are not desensitized by nicotine. STRA is mediated by somatic (So) nAChRs localized on DA neurons cell bodies in the VTA. The nAChRs types involved are less or not sensitive to nicotine desensitization (see text) and their activation enhances the release of DA. Dopamine release (and rewarding) stops in STRA as soon as ACh or nicotine is removed. The essential feature of LTRI is that is mediated by the α4β2 nAChR type, characterized for its high propensity to desensitization by nicotine. A well-documented example is the modulation of the GABAergic system. In a normal physiological path (left), a basal number of resting nAChRs of all types are stimulated by endogenous ACh. Depending on the neuronal circuit and subunits involved, ACh activates or inhibits rewarding stimulus. After an acute administration of nicotine, the normal functioning of the nicotinic cholinergic circuit is disrupted (right). Transitorily, the endogenous ACh and nicotine have the same effects. However, nicotine is not cleaved as ACh and consequently (solid arrows represent causal relationships) it remains for a longer period at low concentration (chronic state). At this low concentration nicotine has different consequences in the three neuronal processes. As α7 is not desensitized by nicotine, the effect on LTRA is a prolonged activation. Because STRA is not based on the α4β2 type, it is either continuously activated or only partially inhibited (dashed lines). LTRI, based on α4β2, is fully (solid line) inhibited by desensitization. The overall result at this stage is an exacerbation of the rewarding system by the three neuronal processes. However, desensitization of α4β2 in LTRI promotes their upregulation. Therefore, in the subsequent population of resting nAChRs, the α4β2 type increases its number (or changes its physiological state, see text) enhancing the inhibitory circuit. What follows depends on the smoker behavior. The easiest way to recover a normal rewarding level is to administer more nicotine (bottom right). However, this is a transient solution, as it also reinforces the disrupted path through a new cycle of α4β2 desensitization-upregulation, increasing rewarding inhibition. The alternative choice is to wait unpleasantly until α4β2 receptors downregulate to normal levels (bottom left). (B) Schematic representation of neuronal systems involved in nicotine addiction. This figure shows diagrammatically how DA release (rewarding) is modulated by neuronal circuits involved in nicotine addiction. Actual receptor neuronal localization and their modulatory relationships are represented (positive and negative feedbacks). Neuronal circuits described in subsequent Figures are indicated. LTRA: Long-Term Rewarding Activation; STRA: Short-Term Rewarding Activation; LTRI: Long-Term Rewarding Inhibition; ACh: cholinergic neuron; DA: dopaminergic neuron; GABA: GABAergic neuron. For other references see the inset.

abuse and dependence. This system comprises cell bodies from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and their projections to the nucleus accumbens (NAc). Drugs of abuse increase DA levels in the NAc, producing their behavioral effects (Dani, 2003). Nicotine concentrations that are obtained by smokers (Laviolette and van der Kooy, 2004) are sufficient to stimulate nAChRs in DA neurons in the VTA, with the concomitant increase of DA release in the NAc. The most important nAChRs expressed in the mesocorticolimbic pathway are α4α5β2 (with and without the α6 subunit) and α7 nAChRs in the VTA as well as α4β2 and α6β2β3 (with and without the α4 subunit) in the NAc (Klink et al., 2001; Champtiaux et al., 2003).

Systemic nicotine also increases the activity of DA neurons in the VTA via N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors located on the cell bodies from DA neurons (Mansvelder and McGeehee, 2000). This increase is mediated by α7 nAChRs present on the glutamatergic terminals, facilitating glutamate release (Schilström et al., 2000; Marchi et al., 2002).

Nicotine also activates transiently non-α7 nAChRs at the preterminal, somatic and dendritic regions of GABAergic neurons increasing inhibitory GABAergic inputs to DA neurons in the VTA. This initial effect fades away after nicotine-induced nAChR desensitization. In other words, nicotine can first inhibit DA release and then enhance (disinhibit) DA release by modulating GABAergic neurons.

6. Neuronal circuits compatible with the desensitization-upregulation hypothesis

There are several neuronal circuits matching the desensitization-upregulation hypothesis two of which are presented. Nicotine can disrupt these neuronal circuits simultaneously and therefore nicotine dependence can be initiated and reinforced in different brain regions.

6.1. Cholinergic-GABAergic-DA system

In the GABAergic neuronal circuit (see Figs. 1A and 2A), the inhibitory mechanism is the hyperpolarization of DA neurons by GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors. Although nicotine transiently enhances the inhibitory GABAergic transmission on DA neurons via α4β2 nAChR activation (thus reducing the liberation of DA), a longer rewarding stimulus follows via α4β2 nAChR desensitization (Mansvelder et al., 2002). This desensitization promotes an enhanced release of DA in the NAc. In spite that nAChRs on DA neurons can be also transiently activated (STRA) but subsequently inhibited, the long-lasting effects of canceling LTRI prevail. Many of nAChRs in DA neurons that compose a STRA circuit are of the α7 and α4β2-containing nAChR subtypes (Klink et al., 2001; Champtiaux et al., 2003). This means a null or a reduced desensitization promoted by

(A)                                                                 (B)
Resting nAChRs                                                        Resting nAChRs
Basal Number                                                          Basal Number

Normal Path                                                           Normal Path
Disrupted Path                                                        Disrupted Path

Endogenous ACh Release                                                Endogenous ACh Release
Acute Nicotine                                                        Acute Nicotine
nAChR Activation                                                      nAChR Activation
LTRA                                                                 LTRA
GL Pr                                                                GL Pr
α7                                                                   α7
DA So                                                                DA So
α4–6β2                                                               α4–6β2
STRA                                                                 STRA
α7                                                                  α7
GA So                                                                MC Pr
α4β2                                                                 NC Pr
LTRI                                                                 LTRI
GA So                                                                α4β2
α4β2                                                                 α4β2
NORMAL                                                               NORMAL
NORMAL

Desensitization                                                       Desensitization
None                                                                 None
None /                                                               None /
Partial                                                              Partial
Full                                                                 Full
LTRA                                                                 LTRA
GL Pr                                                                GL Pr
α7                                                                  α7
DA So                                                                DA So
α4–6β2                                                               α4–6β2
STRA                                                                 STRA
α4β2                                                                 α4β2
GA So                                                                MC Pr
α4β2                                                                 NC Pr
LTRI                                                                 LTRI
GA So                                                                α4β2
α4β2                                                                 α4β2
None                                                                 None
None /                                                               None /
Partial                                                              Partial
Full                                                                 Full

Upregulation                                                          Upregulation
Resting nAChRs                                                        Resting nAChRs
Basal                                                                 Basal
Amplified                                                            Amplified
Abstinence                                                           Abstinence
Symptoms                                                             Symptoms
LTRA                                                                 LTRA
GL Pr                                                                GL Pr
α7                                                                  α7
DA So                                                                DA So
α7                                                                  α7
α4–6β2                                                               α4–6β2
STRA                                                                 STRA
α4β2                                                                 α4β2
GA So                                                                MC Pr
α4β2                                                                 NC Pr
LTRI                                                                 LTRI
GA So                                                                α4β2
α4β2                                                                 α4β2
NORMAL                                                               NORMAL
Enhanced                                                             Enhanced
Smoking                                                              Smoking
Rewarding                                                            Rewarding

Normal Path                                                          Normal Path
Disrupted Path                                                       Disrupted Path
Downregulation                                                       Downregulation
Eventual Quitting                                                    Eventual Quitting
More Upregulation                                                    More Upregulation
Addiction                                                            Addiction

Fig. 2. (A) GABAergic neuronal circuit in nicotine dependence. As an example of the general LTRI of Fig. 1A, the inhibitory mechanism based on the GABAergic (GA) hyperpolarization of DA neurons is represented here. Nicotine transiently enhances the inhibitory GABAergic transmission on DA neurons via α4β2 activation (for abbreviations see Fig. 1A), but a long-term rewarding stimulus follows through α4β2 desensitization. However, the initial transient inhibition becomes stronger (hyperpolarization is enhanced) with each cycle of upregulation. (B) Glutamatergic neuronal circuit in nicotine dependence. A negative feedback on ACh release based on α4β2 receptors is the LTRI suppressed by nicotine in this neuronal circuit. This ACh release is involved in the activation of postsynaptic α7 receptors situated on glutamatergic neurons, which in turn facilitates DA release. Presynaptic regulation of ACh release is usually positive by nicotinic (NC) α4β2 receptors, and negative by muscarinic (MC) receptors. Muscarinic inhibition of ACh release is triggered by both, an activation of α4β2 receptors and by an overflow of ACh (which in turn is also facilitated by the activation of α4β2 receptors). The arrows within the boxes show the dual effect of the presynaptic α4β2 receptors. On one hand, they enhance ACh release and consequently they increase the simultaneous activation of α7 receptors on the glutamatergic postsynaptic side (indirect increase of DA release via facilitation of glutamatergic transmission). On the other hand, they allow a subsequent activation of the negative feedback mediated by the muscarinic receptors as a side effect of the increased ACh release (reduced activity of glutamatergic neurons, decrease of DA release). After an acute administration of nicotine, ACh release is highly enhanced if concomitant with an action potential, but also an early activation of the muscarinic inhibition is launched. Without an action potential, α4β2 receptors might induce the liberation of some ACh and activate α7 receptors on the glutamatergic neurons, without triggering muscarinic inhibition. As before, α7 are also directly activated by nicotine. Dashed lines indicate this conditional or reduced modulation. With chronic nicotine α4β2 receptors are desensitized, the positive feedback on ACh release and the overflow of this neurotransmitter are abolished, and consequently the negative feedback is not activated. The result of these events is a lower but continuous or prolonged activation of postsynaptic α7 receptors which facilitates glutamatergic and subsequently DA transmission. α4β2 upregulation promotes an enhanced modulation (bold arrows) that is asymmetrical in its consequences. Upregulated α4β2 receptors now trigger the muscarinic negative feedback faster, proportionally to their increased number and to the increased ACh overflow (see also the text). However, the enhanced activation of glutamatergic neurons is still limited by the number of postsynaptic α7, which are not upregulated. For other abbreviations and further explanations see Fig. 1A and the text.

nicotine because the β2 subunit is either not present or present in less proportion in these receptors. Experimental evidence shows that nAChRs on GABAergic neurons are upregulated, but not those on dopaminergic neurons (Nashmi et al., 2007).

During the period of α4β2 nAChR desensitization, α7 mediated LTRA circuits remain capable of nicotine and endogenous ACh activation (Mansvelder et al., 2002). However, upregulation of α4β2 nAChRs reinforces the inhibitory pathway. Thus, as a consequence of upregulation, a sustained and probably increased exposure to nicotine is needed not just to enhance but to maintain DA release within the normal levels. The easier decision for a smoker to alleviate the unpleasant symptoms of nicotine withdrawal is to smoke again, but subsequent exposures to nicotine reinforce this mechanism. In other words, a biochemical mechanism for the initial phase of tobacco addiction is established.

### 6.2. Cholinergic-glutamatergic-DA system

A second neuronal circuit compatible with the desensitization-upregulation hypothesis (Ortells and Barrantes, 2010) is the glutamatergic path involved in LTRA (Figs. 1B and 2B). Activation of α7 nAChRs by nicotine promotes dopaminergic activity via facilitation of glutamatergic pathways, but this fact alone does not explain nicotine dependence. In this model case the inhibitory mechanism which would be inactivated by nicotine, is a negative feedback on ACh release (LTRI). This mechanism which hinders the release of DA, is proposed to be situated in cholinergic fibers that activate α7 nAChRs on glutamatergic neurons (Ortells and Barrantes, 2010) (see Fig. 1B). It is known that presynaptic α4β2 (ionotropic) receptors normally have a positive feedback role on ACh release (Wilkie et al., 1996; Liang and Vizi, 1997; Grady et al., 2001; Arnold et al., 2003) while muscarinic (metabotropic) receptors are involved in a negative feedback (Mandl and Kiss, 2007). The muscarinic negative feedback seems to be activated only after an overflow of ACh release and to be mediated by activation of presynaptic α4β2 nAChRs (Liang and Vizi, 1997). When α4β2 nAChRs are desensitized by nicotine, the negative muscarinic feedback cannot start, but the activation of α7 nAChRs is still enhanced, resulting in an overflow of ACh. Without a negative feedback, the activation of the cholinergic fibers is still capable of producing a longer and continuous (tonic) activation of postsynaptic α7 nAChRs, which are not desensitized at low nicotine concentrations. In this neuronal circuit α7 nAChRs, which promote DA release, are not upregulated but also they are not desensitized by nicotine (Fig. 2B). The effect of the enhanced positive feedback on ACh release is not directly proportional to the level of α4β2 upregulation as it is limited to the activation of a “fixed” number of α7 nAChRs (dashed line in Fig. 2B). On the contrary, the enhanced negative feedback on ACh is directly proportional to the levels of presynaptic α4β2 nAChRs, which are upregulated, and of ACh release, which is highly increased. Thus, the higher the concentration of ACh the faster the onset time of

the negative feedback. In this system, with a large population of upregulated α4β2 nAChRs, the net effect of an action potential is a full but very short activation of postsynaptic α7 nAChRs, and a very fast and longer activation of the muscarinic negative feedback of ACh release. This reduction of DA release eventually ends when α4β2 nAChRs are downregulated. Smokers might reduce this time to avoid abstinence symptoms by means of nicotine consumption, neutralizing the upregulated α4β2 nAChRs *via* desensitization. This will in turn maintain in the long term a great proportion of α4β2 nAChRs in the upregulated state perpetuating nicotine use. In spite of the initial theoretical nature, there is experimental support for the proposed mixed nicotinic-muscarinic modulation of ACh release in a cholinergic system related to glutamatergic transmission (Zhang and Warren, 2002).

### 7. Conclusions

Nicotine addiction is established because this alkaloid first abolishes transitorily a mechanism that inhibits brain reward processes, but it enhances their actions after long-term use. These processes can be at the neuronal (e.g., the GABA system that regulates the dopamine neurons) and/or molecular levels (e.g., AChR desensitization, regulation of ACh release, etc.). The vicious circle starts when the smoker tries to “solve” the problem of the enhanced rewarding inhibitory system, which produces an unpleasant feeling when the smoker is not smoking, by using the same drug that started it. In doing so, the smoker gets a temporarily relieve, but worsening his/her addictive condition in the long term. On this basis, we may conclude that pharmacological therapies based on nicotine itself would not be possible, at least alone without the help of behavioral treatment. Pharmacological therapies should be based ideally on drugs that specifically inhibit, at least partially, the α4β2 nAChR without inducing its upregulation.

### Acknowledgments

This review was supported by grants from the CONICET, Argentina (to M.O.), and from the Office of Research and Sponsored Programs, Midwestern University (to H.R.A.).

### References

- Arnold HM, Nelson CL, Sarter M, Bruno JP. Sensitization of cortical acetylcholine release by repeated administration of nicotine in rats. Psychopharmacology 2003;165:346–58.
- Buisson B, Bertrand D. Nicotine addiction: the possible role of functional upregulation. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2002;23:130–6.
- Champtiaux N, Gotti C, Cordero-Erausquin M, David DJ, Przybylski C, Lena C, et al. Subunit composition of functional nicotinic receptors in dopaminergic neurons investigated with knock-out mice. J Neurosci 2003;23:7820–9.
- Dani JA. Roles of dopamine signaling in nicotine addiction. Mol Psychiatry 2003;8:255–6.
- Dani JA, De Biasi M. Cellular mechanisms of nicotine addiction. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2001;70:439–46.
- Dani JA, Heinemann S. Molecular and cellular aspects of nicotine abuse. Neuron 1996;16:905–8.
- Dani JA, Ji DY, Zhou FM. Synaptic plasticity and nicotine addiction. Neuron 2001;31:349–52.
- DiFranza JR. Hooked from the first cigarette. Sci Am 2008;298:82–7.
- Fenster CP, Rains MF, Noerager B, Quick MW, Lester RA. Influence of subunit composition on desensitization of neuronal acetylcholine receptors at low concentrations of nicotine. J Neurosci 1997;17:5747–59.
- Fenster CP, Whitworth TL, Sheffield EB, Quick MW, Lester RA. Upregulation of surface α4β2 nicotinic receptors is initiated by receptor desensitization after chronic exposure to nicotine. J Neurosci 1999;19:4804–14.
- Giniatullin R, Nistri A, Yakel JL. Desensitization of nicotinic ACh receptors: shaping cholinergic signaling. Trends Neurosci 2005;28:371–8.
- Grady SR, Meinerz NM, Cao J, Reynolds AM, Picciotto MR, Changeux JP, et al. Nicotinic agonists stimulate acetylcholine release from mouse interpeduncular nucleus: a function mediated by a different nAChR than dopamine release from striatum. J Neurochem 2001;76:258–68.
- Klink R, de Kerchove d’Exaerde A, Zoli M, Changeux JP. Molecular and physiological diversity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the midbrain dopaminergic nuclei. J Neurosci 2001;21:1452–63.
- Kuryatov A, Luo J, Cooper J, Lindstrom J. Nicotine acts as a pharmacological chaperone to up-regulate human α4β2 acetylcholine receptors. Mol Pharmacol 2005;68:1839–51.
- Laviolette SR, van der Kooy D. The neurobiology of nicotine addiction: Bridging the gap from molecules to behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 2004;5:55–65.
- Liang SD, Vizi ES. Positive feedback modulation of acetylcholine release from isolated rat superior cervical ganglion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1997;280:650–5.
- Mandl P, Kiss JP. Role of presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the regulation of gastrointestinal motility. Brain Res Bull 2007;72:194–200.
- Mansvelder HD, Keith JR, McGehee DS. Synaptic mechanisms underlie nicotine-induced excitability of brain reward areas. Neuron 2002;33:905–19.
- Mansvelder HD, McGehee DS. Long-term potentiation of excitatory inputs to brain reward areas by nicotine. Neuron 2000;27:349–57.
- Marchi M, Risso F, Viola C, Cavazzani P, Raiteri M. Direct evidence that release-stimulating α7* nicotinic cholinergic receptors are localized on human and rat brain glutamatergic axon terminals. J Neurochem 2002;80:1071–8.
- McCallum SE, Collins AC, Paylor R, Marks MJ. Deletion of the β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit alters development of tolerance to nicotine and eliminates receptor upregulation. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006;184:314–27.
- Nashmi R, Xiao C, Deshpande P, McKinney S, Grady SR, Whiteaker P, et al. Chronic nicotine cell specifically upregulates functional α4* nicotinic receptors: Basis for both tolerance in midbrain and enhanced long-term potentiation in perforant path. J Neurosci 2007;27:8202–18.
- Ortells MO, Barrantes GE. Tobacco addiction: a biochemical model of nicotine dependence. Med Hypotheses 2010;74:884–94.
- Picciotto MR, Addy NA, Mineur YS, Brunzell DH. It is not “either/or”: activation and desensitization of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors both contribute to behaviors related to nicotine addiction and mood. Progr Neurobiol 2008;84:329–42.
- Sallette J, Pons S, Devillers-Thiery A, Soudant M, Prado de Carvalho L, Changeux JP, et al. Nicotine upregulates its own receptors through enhanced intracellular maturation. Neuron 2005;46:595–607.
- Schilström B, Fagerquist MV, Zhang X, Hertel P, Panagis G, Nomikos GG, et al. Putative role of presynaptic α7* nicotinic receptors in nicotine stimulated increases of extracellular levels of glutamate and aspartate in the ventral tegmental area. Synapse 2000;38:375–83.
- Wilkie GI, Hutson P, Sullivan JP, Wonnacott S. Pharmacological characterization of a nicotinic autoreceptor in rat hippocampal synaptosomes. Neurochem Res 1996;21:1141–8.
- Wonnacott S. The paradox of nicotinic acetylcholine-receptor up-regulation by nicotine. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1990;11:216–9.
- Wonnacott S, Sidhpura N, Balfour DJK. Nicotine: from molecular mechanisms to behaviour. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2005;5:53–9.
- Zhang LM, Warren RA. Muscarinic and nicotinic presynaptic modulation of EPSCs in the nucleus accumbens during postnatal development. J Neurophysiol 2002;88:3315–30.
