
Drug Resistance Updates 13 (2010) 132–138

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Drug Resistance Updates

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/drug

# Resistance to polymyxins: Mechanisms, frequency and treatment options

Matthew E. Falagas ${ }^{a,b,c,*}$, Petros I. Rafailidis ${ }^{a,b}$, Dimitrios K. Matthaiou ${ }^{a,d}$

${ }^{a}$ Alfa Institute of Biomedical Sciences (AIBS), Athens, Greece  
${ }^{b}$ Department of Medicine, Henry Dunant Hospital, Athens, Greece  
${ }^{c}$ Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA  
${ }^{d}$ Department of Medicine, “G. Gennimatas” General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece

## ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**  
Received 27 April 2010  
Received in revised form 24 May 2010  
Accepted 24 May 2010  

**Keywords:**  
Colistin  
Multidrug-resistance  
Polymyxin  
Pandrug-resistance  
Fosfomycin  
Tigecycline  

## ABSTRACT

Polymyxins act by binding to lipid A moiety of the bacterial lipopolysaccharide and subsequently disintegrating the bacterial membranes. The most important mechanism of resistance includes modifications of the bacterial outer membrane structure, including lipopolysaccharide. Lipopolysaccharide modification is mostly mediated by PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory systems. These mechanisms exist with some differences in many gram-negative bacterial species. Resistance to polymyxins is generally less than 10%. In specific regions, such as the Mediterranean basin, Korea and Singapore, they tend to be higher. Heteroresistance to polymyxins is associated with exposure to polymyxins and especially suboptimal therapeutic dosage. Polymyxin combination regimens, tigecycline and fosfomycin may be useful options for the treatment of polymyxin-resistant gram-negative infections.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

Polymyxins include polymyxin B and colistin (polymyxin E), and are derivatives of the *Bacillus polymyxa* subspecies *colistinus*. They belong to a diverse group of natural antimicrobials found in eucariotic cells called cationic antimicrobial peptides. Structurally, they are decapeptides bound to a fatty acid chain. They consist of a seven-member cyclic ring of aminoacids with a tripeptide side chain. The side chain links to the lipidic part of the molecule. The heptapeptide ring is the same between the two polymyxins with the exception of a single aminoacid, which is phenylalalanine in polymyxin B and leucine in colistin ([Kwa et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.2007.05.002)).

Polymyxins were discovered in the late 1940’s and were widely used until the mid-1980’s when they were forsaken due to the reported adverse events, namely nephrotoxicity. They remained in clinical practice for the management of pseudomonal lung infections in patients with cystic fibrosis and in topical solutions with other antimicrobials for the treatment of ear or eye infections. They reappeared as an option for the management of gram-negative infections (administration by the intravenous, and/or nebulized or intrathecal route) for non-cystic fibrosis patients after the emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens and the subsequent restriction of possible alternatives ([Falagas and Kasiakou, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.2005.05.002)). Despite their relatively recent reintegration in clinical practice, resistance to polymyxins constitutes already an issue of significance.

Polymyxins are active against gram-negative pathogens including *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, *Acinetobacter baumannii*, *Klebsiella* spp., *Escherichia coli* and other enterobacteriaceae. However, there are species possessing intrinsic resistance, such as *Providencia* spp., *Neisseria* spp., *Proteus* spp., *Serratia marcescens* and *Burkholderia cepacia*. Polymyxins are not active against gram-positive bacteria nor against anaerobes.

## 2. Mechanism of action

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a structural component of the bacterial outer membrane consisting of O antigen, a core polysaccharide and lipid A, which anchors in the outer membrane ([Raetz and Whitfield, 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.2002.05.002)). It bears negative charge and confers to the integrity and stability of the bacterial outer membrane. Polymyxins, having positive charge, displace Mg²⁺ or Ca²⁺ and bind on lipid A component resulting in the destabilization and disruption of the outer and inner membranes ([Brown and Tsang, 1978](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.1978.05.002); [Clausell et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.2007.05.002); [Davis et al., 1971](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.1971.05.002); [Newton, 1956](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.1956.05.002); [Schindler and Osborn, 1979](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug.1979.05.002)). The most potent part of the polymyxin molecule is the hydrophobic lipid tail. Polymyxin nonapeptide, which is the acyl part remaining after the removal of the lipidic component, exerts antimicrobial properties though to a lesser extent. It has lesser affinity than the hydrophobic tail, but sensitizes bacteria to the

---

* Corresponding author at: Alfa Institute of Biomedical Sciences (AIBS), 9 Neapoleos Street, 15 123, Marousi, Greece. Tel.: +30 694 611 0000; fax: +30 210 683 9605.  
E-mail address: m.falagas@aibs.gr (M.E. Falagas).

1368-7646/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.drug.2010.05.002

M.E. Falagas et al. / Drug Resistance Updates 13 (2010) 132–138

Outer
membrane

Inner
membrane

L-Ara4N
Lipid A

ArnT
L-Ara4N

ArnE(?)
UDP-Ara4FN

ArnF(?)

ArnC
UDP-Ara4FN

+ Undecaprenyl-P

ArnA
UDP-AraN

ArnB
+ Glutamate
- α-ketoglutarate

UDP-Glucose
PmrE
UDP-GlcA
ArnA
UDP-4-keto-pyranose
-CO₂

Fig. 1. Biosynthesis of L-Ara4N and modification of lipid A.

effect of other antibiotics and human neutrophils (Rose et al., 2000; Tsubery et al., 2000; Warren et al., 1985).

### 3. Mechanisms of resistance

Gram-negative bacteria may develop resistance through mechanisms that are common for colistin and polymyxin B. The most important mechanism involves modifications of the bacterial outer membrane, mainly through the alteration of the LPS moiety (Kline et al., 2008; Raetz and Whitfield, 2002). However, further modifications of the bacterial outer membrane may confer to polymyxin resistance (Campos et al., 2004; Moore et al., 1984). Another mechanism includes the development of an efflux pump/potassium system found in Yersinia spp. (Bengoechea and Skurnik, 2000). Although no enzymatic mechanisms of resistance has been reported so far, strains of *B. polymyxia* are known to produce colistinase (Ito-Kagawa and Koyama, 1980).

The modification of the LPS occurs with the addition of 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose (LAra4N) to a phosphate group in lipid A. This addition causes an absolute increase in lipid A charge, thus lowering the affinity of positively charged polymyxins (Kline et al., 2008).

The biosynthesis of LAra4N (Fig. 1) depends on the genes of polymyxin resistance operon, formerly known as *pmr*, which has been renamed as *arn* (Reeves et al., 1996). This operon includes *pmrHFIJKLM* genes. First, UDP-glucose is dehydrogenated to UDP-glucuronic acid (UDP-GlcA) by PmrE dehydrogenase. UDP-GlcA is subsequently decarboxylated and transaminated by ArnA(PmrI) and ArnB(PmrH) to UDP-AraN (Gatzeva-Topalova et al., 2005a, 2004). UDP-Ara4N is formylated by ArnA to UDP-Ara4FN and transferred to the bacterial inner membrane by ArnC(PmrF). UDP-Ara4FN is deformylated and transferred from the inner to the outer bacterial membrane by mechanisms that are not fully understood, although ArnE(PmrM) and ArnF(PmrL) may have a role in the transportation of UDP-Ara4FN across the bacterial inner membrane (Yan et al., 2007). Finally, ArnT(PmrK) transfers LAra4N to lipid A (Gatzeva-Topalova et al., 2005b; Raetz and Whitfield, 2002). These genes were first studied in *S. enterica* serotype Typhimurium and *E. coli* (Gunn and Miller, 1996). However, similar pathways exist in other gram-negative bacteria, such as *P. aeruginosa*, *B. cepacia*, *Salmonella* spp., and *Yersinia pestis* (Breazeale et al., 2005).

The biosynthesis of LAra4N is mediated by PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory systems (Fig. 2). PmrB is a sensor cytoplasmic membrane-bound kinase with a histidine residue in its cytoplasmic domain. It is activated by high concentrations of Fe³⁺ or by low pH. Upon activation, it phosphorylates the aspartate residue of PmrA, which is a regulator protein of *arn* operon (McPhee et al., 2003). PhoQ is another sensor cytoplasmic membrane-spanning kinase, which is activated by low concentrations of Mg²⁺ or Ca²⁺ (Gunn and Miller, 1996; Moskowitz et al.,

low Mg²⁺
PhoQ

high Fe³⁺
PmrB

PhoP
PmrD
PmrA
PmrA
PhoP
pmrD
arn

Fig. 2. PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory systems (Figure adapted from Kato A et al. PNAS 2003;100:4706-4711©).

M.E. Falagas et al. / Drug Resistance Updates 13 (2010) 132–138

Table 1  
Summary of polymyxin resistance mechanisms.

| Resistance mechanism | Pathogen |
|----------------------|----------|
| Modification of lipopolysaccharide moiety of the bacterial outer membrane | E. coli–S. enterica serotype typhimurium among others |
| Efflux pump/potassium system | Y. pestis |
| Increased production of capsule polysaccharide of the bacterial outer membrane | K. pneumoniae |
| Increased levels of the outer membrane protein H1 | P. aeruginosa |
| Colistinase production | B. polymyxa |

In Europe, reports present variable resistance rates. Regarding A. baumannii, most reports present rates less than 6% (Garcia-Penuela et al., 2006; Gomez-Garces et al., 2009; Hejnar et al., 1999; Mezzatesta et al., 2008; Souli et al., 2006) with the exception of a report from Bulgaria presenting rates of 16.7% (Dobrewski et al., 2006). K. pneumoniae resistance rates were 17% in a Romanian study (Miftode et al., 2008), while studies from Greece report rates from 15.3% to 27.6% (Souli et al., 2006; Falagas et al., 2010a). However, in interpreting these relatively high resistance rates, one has to notice that they refer to multidrug-resistant or even pandrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria, for which very limited or no therapeutic options exist. The pathogen with the highest rate of resistance to colistin (40.2%) in European reports was P. aeruginosa in a study from Spain (Gomez-Garces et al., 2009).

African reports are scarce. Nigerian data report resistant rates for P. aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae of less than 10% (Iroha et al., 1998). However, there is a study from Zimbabwe reporting cumulative data for P. aeruginosa from two different hospitals reporting resistance rates of 53% (Igumbor et al., 2000). Data from Oceania and Pacific can be indirectly estimated from SENTRY studies and report very low resistance rates.

Most studies reporting data for P. aeruginosa in patients with cystic fibrosis come from Europe and vary notably. There are studies from Scotland reporting variable rates from 16% to 40% (MacKenzie et al., 2004; Milne and Gould, 2010). It is noteworthy that a report from the rest of the United Kingdom presents rates of only 3.1% (Pitt et al., 2003). Relevant reports from Germany present rates from 6.7% to 58.7% (Hogardt et al., 2004; Schulin, 2002). A study from Australia reporting susceptibilities of P. aeruginosa isolates under aerobic, anaerobic, and biofilm conditions presents resistance rates of 0%, 25% and 75%, respectively (Hill et al., 2005).

4. Worldwide antimicrobial susceptibility rates

Resistance to polymyxins varies in different parts of the world and in different settings. Typical settings in which polymyxins are widely used include patients with cystic fibrosis and patients admitted in the intensive care unit (ICU). The last two decades there have been numerous reports regarding polymyxin resistance rates. We concentrate on reports presenting relevant data for K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, and A. baumannii, excluding those presenting no resistance at all (Table 2). Reports presenting data for patients with cystic fibrosis are summarized in Table 3.

The most collective reports are those of SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance program that monitor resistance patterns of various pathogens gathered throughout the world on a regular basis. The reported resistance rates are less than 5% for P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp., and 6.7% for K. pneumoniae (Castanheira et al., 2008; Fedler et al., 2006; Gales et al., 2006; Gales et al., 2001; Jones et al., 2009; Mendes et al., 2009; Yau et al., 2009). Likewise the majority of the remaining reports present resistance rates ranging from virtually zero to 10%. However, there are also studies that report high resistance rates. It should be noted that these variations could exist due to differences in methodology. Some laboratories use disk diffusion, and polymyxins diffuse poorly due to the high molecular weight. Hence, one could underestimate resistance when using disk diffusion.

In North America, most reports come from the USA. Resistance rates for both P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii are less than 5.5% (Hawley et al., 2007; Keen et al., 2010; Landman et al., 2005; Manikal et al., 2000; Tam et al., 2010). However, studies of resistance in K. pneumoniae report higher rates from 9% to 27% (Bratu et al., 2005a, 2005b; Castanheira et al., in press) A study from Canada reports resistance rates of 4% for P. aeruginosa (Walkty et al., 2008). In South America, studies form Brazil and Chile report resistance rates of up to 9% for P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii (Cezario et al., 2009; Fica et al., 2007; Tognim et al., 2006).

In Asia, most studies report resistance rates less than 10% (Garcia-Penuela et al., 2006; Hussein et al., 2009; Lapteva et al., 1993; Lee et al., 2009; Punpanich et al., 2008; Sung et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2007). However, there are reports presenting alarmingly high rates of resistance. There are studies for P. aeruginosa from Singapore and India reporting rates of 33% and 38.3%, respectively (Tan et al., 2008; Tan and Ng, 2006; Varaiya et al., 2008). Studies for A. baumannii from Turkey and Korea report resistance rates of 27.5% and 27.9%, respectively (Eser et al., 2009; Ko et al., 2007). In the Korean study, further subgrouping according to rpoB gene sequences of the analyzed isolates yielded rates of up to 64.8% in one of the subgroups (Ko et al., 2007).

5. Heteroresistance

Heteroresistance may be defined as the emergence of resistance to a specific antibiotic by a subpopulation of an otherwise susceptible population to this antibiotic according to susceptibility testing (Falagas et al., 2008a). Heteroresistance to polymyxins was not reported until recently. Topical reports present data of heteroresistant A. baumannii strains from patients admitted to the ICU (Hernan et al., 2009; Li et al., 2006). Colistin use is known to be a risk factor for the isolation of colistin-resistant gram-negative bacteria (Matthaiou et al., 2008). Heteroresistant bacterial subpopulations, in particular, were found to be significantly higher among isolates recovered from patients who were previously treated with colistin (Hawley et al., 2008). Emergence of heteroresistance is associated with exposure to suboptimal polymyxin dosage. However, its clinical significance remains to be determined.

6. Treatment options for polymyxin-resistant gram-negative bacilli

The lack of options for the treatment of infections due to polymyxin-resistant gram-negative pathogens necessitates the pursuit of other solutions. Combination therapy of polymyxins with other antibiotics may be a feasible alternative. There are studies reporting encouraging data regarding the outcomes of patients with such infections after treatment with various combinations of colistin with other antibiotics (Falagas et al., 2005, 2008b). The most frequently used colistin combination was that with meropenem. Yet, imipenem/cilastatin and ampicillin/sulbactam were also administered in combination with colistin. A recent large cohort study of patients with multidrug-resistant gram-negative infections reported favourable outcomes in over 75% of the patients, when the therapeutic regimen included a combination

Table 2  
Studies reporting polymyxin resistance rates in various settings excluding patients with cystic fibrosis.

| Author (year)               | Country         | Agent       | Resistance (%) | Pathogen                          |
|----------------------------|-----------------|-------------|----------------|------------------------------------|
| Castanheira et al. (2010)   | USA             | PB          | 9.4            | Enterobacteriaceae                |
| Falagas et al. (2010a)      | Greece          | CS          | 27.6           | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Keen et al. (2010)          | USA             | CS          | 0.1            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
|                             |                 |             | 0.2            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Tam et al. (2010)           | USA             | PB-CS       | 0*-5.5#        | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Cezario et al. (2009)       | Brazil          | PB          | 5              | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Eser et al. (2009)          | Turkey          | CS          | 27.5           | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
|                             |                 |             |                | Acinetobacter lwoffii             |
| Gomez-Garces et al. (2009)  | Spain           | CS          | 40             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
|                             |                 |             | 1.2            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Hussein et al. (2009)       | Israel          | CS          | 4.5            | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Jones et al. (2009)         | SENTRY          | PB          | 0.5            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Lee et al. (2009)           | Taiwan          | CS          | 1              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Mendes et al. (2009)        | SENTRY          | Polymyxins  | 0.9            | Acinetobacters                    |
| Yau et al. (2009)           | SENTRY          | CS          | 3.3            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Castanheira et al. (2008)   | SENTRY          | PB          | 11.9           | Enterobacteriaceae                |
|                             |                 |             | 6.7            | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Mezzatesta et al. (2008)    | Italy           | CS          | 1              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Miftode et al. (2008)       | Romania         | CS          | 17             | Klebsiella s                     |
| Punpanich et al. (2008)     | Thailand        | CS          | 7.3            | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Tan et al. (2008)           | Singapore       | PB          | 33             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
|                             |                 |             | 1              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Varaiya et al. (2008)       | India           | CS          | 38.3           | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Walkty et al. (2008)        | Canada          | CS          | 4              | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Fica et al. (2007)          | Chile           | CS          | 9              | Acinetobacter baumannii-Pseudomonas aeruginosa |
| Hawley et al. (2007)        | USA             | PB-CS       | 1.4*-2.1#      | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Ko et al. (2007)            | Korea           | PB-CS       | 18.1*-27.9#    | Acinetobacter baumannii (total)   |
|                             |                 |             | 2.1*-7#        | Acinetobacter baumannii subgroup I |
|                             |                 |             | 38.9-64.8#     | Acinetobacter baumannii subgroup II |
|                             |                 |             | 13*-16.7#      | Acinetobacter baumannii subgroup III |
| Sung et al. (2007)          | Korea           | CS          | 9.1            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Yang et al. (2007)          | China           | PB          | 4.4            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
|                             |                 |             | 1.7            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Dobrewski et al. (2006)     | Bulgaria        | CS          | 16.7           | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Fedler et al. (2006)        | SENTRY          | PB          | 0.7            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Gales et al. (2006)         | SENTRY          | PB          | 1.1-2.9        | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
|                             |                 |             | 1.7-2.7        | Acinetobacters                    |
| Garcia-Penuela et al. (2006)| Spain-Hong Kong | CS          | 1.4-3.3        | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Souli et al. (2006)         | Greece          | CS          | 15.3           | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
|                             |                 |             | 3              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Tan et al. (2006)           | Singapore       | CS          | 33             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
|                             |                 |             | 6              | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Tognim et al. (2006)        | Brazil          | CS          | 3              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Bratu et al. (2005a)        | USA             | PB          | 27             | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Bratu et al. (2005b)        | USA             | PB          | 9              | Klebsiella pneumoniae             |
| Landman et al. (2005)       | USA             | PB          | 5              | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Gales et al. (2001)         | SENTRY          | PB-CS       | 5*-3.3#        | Acinetobacters                    |
| Igumbor et al. (2000)       | Zimbabwe        | PB          | 53             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Manikal et al. (2000)       | USA             | PB          | 1              | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Hejnar et al. (1999)        | Czech Republic  | CS          | 5.9            | Acinetobacter baumannii           |
| Iroha et al. (1998)         | Nigeria         | CS          | <10            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa-Klebsiella pneumoniae |
| Lapteva et al. (1993)       | Former USSR     | PB          | 7.1            | Enterobacteriaceae                |

CS: colistin; PB: polymyxin B, *: resistance to polymyxin B, #: resistance to colistin.

of colistin-meropenem or colistin-ampicillin/sulbactam (Falagas et al., 2010b).

Tigecycline is a novel antimicrobial and the first member of gly-cycline class, which are tetracycline derivatives. It has a wide spectrum of antimicrobial activity including gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. However, P. aeruginosa possesses intrinsic resistance to tigecycline (Zhanel et al., 2006). In addition, Proteae have also natural low-grade resistance to tigecycline. Recent studies report very good microbiological activity of tigecycline against Enterobacteriaceae, and K. pneumoniae in particular. It should be noted that according to EUCAST breakpoints many K. pneumoniae strains are intermediate to tigecycline. Clinical studies, although

Table 3  
Studies reporting polymyxin resistance rates in patients with cystic fibrosis.

| Author (year)               | Country   | Agent | Resistance (%) | Pathogen                          |
|----------------------------|-----------|-------|----------------|------------------------------------|
| Milne et al. (2010)         | Scotland  | CS    | 16             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Hill et al. (2005)          | Australia | CS    | 0 aerobic, 25 anaerobic, 75 biofilm | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Hogardt et al. (2004)       | Germany   | PB    | 6.7            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| MacKenzie et al. (2004)     | Scotland  | CS    | 40             | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Pitt et al. (2003)          | UK        | CS    | 3.1            | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |
| Schulin et al. (2002)       | Germany   | CS    | 58.2           | Pseudomonas aeruginosa            |

CS: Colistin; PB: Polymyxin B.
with a small patient sample, report favorable outcomes in almost 70% of patients with a carbapenem-resistant or ESBL-producing or multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae infection (Kelesidis et al., 2008). Relevant data of multidrug-resistant A. baumannii infections are scarce. Although tigecycline had good antimicrobial activity, depending on the breakpoints used, there are already studies reporting resistance. The majority of relevant data came from infections due to A. baumannii. Data from other species are even scarcer to allow meaningful conclusions regarding outcomes (Anthony et al., 2008; Karageorgopoulos et al., 2008; Schafer et al., 2007). Although it is a useful alternative, its large distribution volume, resulting in very low free serum concentrations of the drug, renders it inappropriate for the treatment of bloodstream infections. Thus, tigecycline should be used prudently, for specific infections.

Fosfomycin is an antibiotic to which interest has been renewed and could be a useful alternative, either in combination with other antibiotics or as monotherapy (keeping in mind its potential for emergence of resistance). It may be administered orally as tromethamine or calcium salt, or intravenously in a dosage of 50 mg/kg of body weight. However, the degree of enteral absorption of tromethamine salt is higher compared to calcium salt. Oral bioavailability of the two salts is 40% and 12% to 28%, respectively (Roussos et al., 2009). Until recently, it was mostly used for the treatment of urinary tract infections. However, it has been used for the treatment of critically-ill patients with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infections with promising results (Michalopoulos et al., 2010). Recent published data also suggest that fosfomycin may also have a role in the treatment of infections due to multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa (Falagas et al., 2009). One has to consider that Acinetobacter baumannii is resistant to fosfomycin (Falagas et al., 2008).

In vitro data showed an increased susceptibility to rifampicin, even at the lowest rifampicin concentration tested, for colistin-resistant A. baumannii. Interestingly, increased susceptibility was also noted for other antibiotics (teicoplanin, quinupristin-dalfopristin, fusidic acid) that are usually inactive against gram-negative bacteria. A likely explanation of the phenomenon may be that the alteration of the bacterial outer membrane of the colistin-resistant strains led to increased permeability to antibiotics that normally do not penetrate through gram-negative outer membrane. Colistin-resistance in A. baumannii strains seems to induce a biological cost with a decreased ability to form biofilms. The significance of these findings has to be evaluated further in clinical settings (Li et al., 2007).

## Conclusion

Polymyxins are old antibiotics that returned to clinical practice due to the lack of options for the treatment of multidrug-resistant gram-negative infections. They act by disrupting the bacterial membranes resulting in cellular death. The main mechanism of resistance is the modification of the bacterial outer membrane, which is mainly mediated by PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory systems. Resistance to polymyxins is generally less than 10%, but is higher in the Mediterranean and in South-East Asia. Heteroresistance to polymyxins is an emerging threat associated with exposure to suboptimal polymyxin dosage and with unknown clinical significance. Other options for the treatment of polymyxin-resistant gram-negative infections are polymyxin combination regimens, tigecycline and fosfomycin.

## References

Adams, M.D., Nickel, G.C., Bajaksouzian, S., Lavender, H., Murthy, A.R., Jacobs, M.R., Bonomo, R.A., 2009. Resistance to colistin in Acinetobacter baumannii associ- ated with mutations in the PmrAB two-component system. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53, 3628–3634.

Anthony, K.B., Fishman, N.O., Linkin, D.R., Gasink, L.B., Edelstein, P.H., Lautenbach, E., 2008. Clinical and microbiological outcomes of serious infections with multidrug-resistant gram-negative organisms treated with tigecycline. Clin. Infect Dis. 46, 567–570.

Bell, A., Hancock, R.E., 1989. Outer membrane protein H1 of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: purification of the protein and cloning and nucleotide sequence of the gene. J. Bacteriol. 171, 3211–3217.

Bengoechea, J.A., Skurnik, M., 2000. Temperature-regulated efflux pump/potassium antiporter system mediates resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides in Yersinia. Mol. Microbiol. 37, 67–80.

Bratu, S., Mooty, M., Nichani, S., Landman, D., Gullans, C., Pettinato, B., Karumudi, U., Tolaney, P., Quale, J., 2005a. Emergence of KPC-possessing *Klebsiella pneumoniae* in Brooklyn, New York: epidemiology and recommendations for detection. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49, 3018–3020.

Bratu, S., Tolaney, P., Karumudi, U., Quale, J., Mooty, M., Nichani, S., Landman, D., 2005b. Carbapenemase-producing *Klebsiella pneumoniae* in Brooklyn, NY: molecular epidemiology and in vitro activity of polymyxin B and other agents. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 56, 128–132.

Breazeale, S.D., Ribeiro, A.A., McClerren, A.L., Raetz, C.R., 2005. A formyltransferase required for polymyxin resistance in *Escherichia coli* and the modification of lipid A with 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose. Identification and function of UDP-4-deoxy-4-formamido-L-arabinose. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 14154–14167.

Brown, D.A., Tsang, J.C., 1978. Chemical and electrophoretic changes induced by polymyxin B on outer membrane components from *Serratia marcescens*. J. Antibiot (Tokyo) 31, 603–609.

Campos, M.A., Vargas, M.A., Regueiro, V., Llompart, C.M., Alberti, S., Bengoechea, J.A., 2004. Capsule polysaccharide mediates bacterial resistance to antimicrobial peptides. Infect Immun. 72, 7107–7114.

Castanheira, M., Sader, H.S., Deshpande, L.M., Fritsche, T.R., Jones, R.N., 2008. Antimicrobial activities of tigecycline and other broad-spectrum antimicrobials tested against serine carbapenemase- and metallo-beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae: report from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52, 570–573.

Castanheira, M., Sader, H.S., Jones, R.N., Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of KPC-producing or CTX-M-producing Enterobacteriaceae. Microb Drug Resist.

Cezario, R.C., Duarte De Morais, L., Ferreira, J.C., Costa-Pinto, R.M., da Costa Darini, A.L., Gontijo-Filho, P.P., 2009. Nosocomial outbreak by imipenem-resistant metallo-beta-lactamase-producing *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* in an adult intensive care unit in a Brazilian teaching hospital. Enferm Infect. Microbiol. Clin. 27, 269–274.

Clausell, A., Garcia-Subirats, M., Pujol, M., Busquets, M.A., Rabanal, F., Cajal, Y., 2007. Gram-negative outer and inner membrane models: insertion of cyclic cationic lipopeptides. J. Phys. Chem. B 111, 551–563.

Davis, S.D., Iannetta, A., Wedgwood, R.J., 1971. Activity of colistin against *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: inhibition by calcium. J. Infect. Dis. 124, 610–612.

Dobrewski, R., Savov, E., Bernards, A.T., van den Barselaar, M., Nordmann, P., van den Broek, P.J., Dijkshoorn, L., 2006. Genotypic diversity and antibiotic susceptibility of *Acinetobacter baumannii* isolates in a Bulgarian hospital. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 12, 1135–1137.

Eser, O.K., Ergin, A., Hascelik, G., 2009. Antimicrobial resistance and existence of metallo-beta-lactamase in *Acinetobacter* species isolated from adult patients. Mikrobiyol Bul. 43, 383–390.

Falagas, M.E., Bliziotis, I.A., Kasiakou, S.K., Samonis, G., Athanassopoulou, P., Michalopoulos, A., 2005. Outcome of infections due to pandrug-resistant (PDR) Gram-negative bacteria. BMC Infect. Dis. 5, 24.

Falagas, M.E., Kasiakou, S.K., 2005. Colistin: the revival of polymyxins for the management of multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacterial infections. Clin. Infect. Dis. 40, 1333–1341.

Falagas, M.E., Kastoris, A.C., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Rafailidis, P.I., 2009. Fosfomycin for the treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli: a systematic review of microbiological, animal and clinical studies. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 34, 111–120.

Falagas, M.E., Makris, G.C., Dimopoulos, G., Matthaiou, D.K., 2008a. Heteroresistance: a concern of increasing clinical significance? Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 14, 101–104.

Falagas, M.E., Maraki, S., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Kastoris, A.C., Mavromanolakis, E., Samonis, G., 2010a. Antimicrobial susceptibility of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) Enterobacteriaceae isolates to fosfomycin. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 35, 240–243.

Falagas, M.E., Rafailidis, P.I., Ioannidou, E., Alexiou, V.G., Matthaiou, D.K., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Kapaskelis, A., Nikita, D., Michalopoulos, A., 2010b. Colistin therapy for microbiologically documented multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacterial infections: a retrospective cohort study of 258 patients. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 35, 194–199.

Falagas, M.E., Rafailidis, P.I., Matthaiou, D.K., Virtzili, S., Nikita, D., Michalopoulos, A., 2008b. Pandrug-resistant *Klebsiella pneumoniae*, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and *Acinetobacter baumannii* infections: characteristics and outcome in a series of 28 patients. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 32, 450–454.

Falagas, M.E., Giannopoulou, K.P., Kokolakis, G.N., Rafailidis, P.I., 2008. Fosfomycin: use beyond urinary tract and gastrointestinal infections. Clin. Infect. Dis. 46, 1069–1077.

Fedler, K.A., Biedenbach, D.J., Jones, R.N., 2006. Assessment of pathogen frequency and resistance patterns among pediatric patient isolates: report from the 2004
SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program on 3 continents. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 56, 427–436.

Fica, C.A., Cespedes, J.I., Gompertz, G.M., Jalon, V.M., Sakurada, Z.A., Saez, L.E., 2007. Intravenous colistin in the treatment of infections due to pan-resistant Gram negative bacilli. Rev. Chilena Infectol. 24, 360–367.

Fu, W., Yang, F., Kang, X., Zhang, X., Li, Y., Xia, B., Jin, C., 2007. First structure of the polymyxin resistance proteins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 361, 1033–1037.

Gales, A.C., Jones, R.N., Sader, H.S., 2006. Global assessment of the antimicrobial activity of polymyxin B against 54 731 clinical isolates of Gram-negative bacilli: report from the SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance programme (2001–2004). Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 12, 315–321.

Gales, A.C., Reis, A.O., Jones, R.N., 2001. Contemporary assessment of antimicrobial susceptibility testing methods for polymyxin B and colistin: review of available interpretative criteria and quality control guidelines. J. Clin. Microbiol. 39, 183–190.

Garcia-Penuela, E., Aznar, E., Alarcon, T., Lopez-Brea, M., 2006. Susceptibility pattern of Acinetobacter baumannii clinical isolates in Madrid vs. Hong Kong. Rev. Esp Quimioter. 19, 45–50.

Gatzeva-Topalova, P.Z., May, A.P., Sousa, M.C., 2005a. Crystal structure and mechanism of the Escherichia coli ArnA (PmrI) transformylase domain. An enzyme for lipid A modification with 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose and polymyxin resistance. Biochemistry 44, 5328–5338.

Gatzeva-Topalova, P.Z., May, A.P., Sousa, M.C., 2004. Crystal structure of Escherichia coli ArnA (PmrI) decarboxylase domain. A key enzyme for lipid A modification with 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose and polymyxin resistance. Biochemistry 43, 13370–13379.

Gatzeva-Topalova, P.Z., May, A.P., Sousa, M.C., 2005b. Structure and mechanism of ArnA: conformational change implies ordered dehydrogenase mechanism in key enzyme for polymyxin resistance. Structure 13, 929–942.

Gomez-Garces, J.L., Aracil, B., Gil, Y., Burillo, A., 2009. Susceptibility of 228 non-fermenting gram-negative rods to tigecycline and six other antimicrobial drugs. J. Chemother. 21, 267–271.

Gunn, J.S., Miller, S.I., 1996. PhoP-PhoQ activates transcription of pmrAB, encoding a two-component regulatory system involved in Salmonella typhimurium antimicrobial peptide resistance. J. Bacteriol. 178, 6857–6864.

Hawley, J.S., Murray, C.K., Griffith, M.E., McElmeel, M.L., Fulcher, L.C., Hospenthal, D.R., Jorgensen, J.H., 2007. Susceptibility of acinetobacter strains isolated from deployed U.S. military personnel. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51, 376–378.

Hawley, J.S., Murray, C.K., Jorgensen, J.H., 2008. Colistin heteroresistance in acinetobacter and its association with previous colistin therapy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52, 351–352.

Hejnar, P., Kolar, M., Hajek, V., 1999. Characteristics of Acinetobacter strains (phenotype classification, antibiotic susceptibility and production of beta-lactamases) isolated from haemocultures from patients at the Teaching Hospital in Olomouc. Acta Univ. Palacki Olomuc Fac. Med. 142, 73–77.

Hernan, R.C., Karina, B., Gabriela, G., Marcela, N., Carlos, V., Angela, F., 2009. Selection of colistin-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii isolates in postneurosurgical meningitis in an intensive care unit with high presence of heteroresistance to colistin. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 65, 188–191.

Hill, D., Rose, B., Pajkos, A., Robinson, M., Bye, P., Bell, S., Elkins, M., Thompson, B., Macleod, C., Aaron, S.D., Harbour, C., 2005. Antibiotic susceptibilities of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates derived from patients with cystic fibrosis under aerobic, anaerobic, and biofilm conditions. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43, 5085–5090.

Hogardt, M., Schmoldt, S., Gotzfried, M., Adler, K., Heesemann, J., 2004. Pitfalls of polymyxin antimicrobial susceptibility testing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated from cystic fibrosis patients. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 54, 1057–1061.

Hussein, K., Sprecher, H., Mashiah, T., Oren, I., Kassis, I., Finkelstein, R., 2009. Carbapenem resistance among Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates: risk factors, molecular characteristics, and susceptibility patterns. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 30, 666–671.

Igumbor, E., Gwanzura, L., Chirara, M., Obi, C., Muza, D., 2000. Antibiotic sensitivity and plasmid profiles of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Cent. Afr. J. Med. 46, 296–300.

Iroha, E.O., Kesah, C.N., Egri-Okwaji, M.T., Odugbemi, T.O., 1998. Bacterial eye infection in neonates, a prospective study in a neonatal unit. West Afr. J. Med. 17, 168–172.

Ito-Kagawa, M., Koyama, Y., 1980. Selective cleavage of a peptide antibiotic, colistin by colistinase. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 33, 1551–1555.

Jones, R.N., Stilwell, M.G., Rhomberg, P.R., Sader, H.S., 2009. Antipseudomonal activity of piperacillin/tazobactam: more than a decade of experience from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (1997–2007). Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 65, 331–334.

Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Kelesidis, T., Kelesidis, I., Falagas, M.E., 2008. Tigecycline for the treatment of multidrug-resistant (including carbapenem-resistant) Acinetobacter infections: a review of the scientific evidence. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 62, 45–55.

Kato, A., Latifi, T., Groisman, E.A., 2003. Closing the loop: the PmrA/PmrB two-component system negatively controls expression of its posttranscriptional activator PmrD. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 4706–4711.

Keen 3rd, E.F., Robinson, B.J., Hospenthal, D.R., Aldous, W.K., Wolf, S.E., Chung, K.K., Murray, C.K., 2010. Prevalence of multidrug-resistant organisms recovered at a military burn center. Burns.

Kelesidis, T., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Kelesidis, I., Falagas, M.E., 2008. Tigecycline for the treatment of multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae: a systematic review of the evidence from microbiological and clinical studies. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 62, 895–904.

Kline, T., Trent, M.S., Stead, C.M., Lee, M.S., Sousa, M.C., Felise, H.B., Nguyen, H.V., Miller, S.I., 2008. Synthesis of and evaluation of lipid A modification by 4-substituted 4-deoxy arabinose analogs as potential inhibitors of bacterial polymyxin resistance. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 18, 1507–1510.

Ko, K.S., Suh, J.Y., Kwon, K.T., Jung, S.I., Park, K.H., Kang, C.I., Chung, D.R., Peck, K.R., Song, J.H., 2007. High rates of resistance to colistin and polymyxin B in subgroups of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from Korea. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 60, 1163–1167.

Kwa, A., Kasiakou, S.K., Tam, V.H., Falagas, M.E., 2007. Polymyxin B: similarities to and differences from colistin (polymyxin E). Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther. 5, 811–821.

Landman, D., Bratu, S., Alam, M., Quale, J., 2005. Citywide emergence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains with reduced susceptibility to polymyxin B. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 55, 954–957.

Lapteva, T.A., Bazhenov, L.G., Suiumova, A.S., Shabanova, N.G., 1993. Identification and sensitivity to antimicrobial drugs of enterobacteria isolated from patients with suppurative, inflammatory diseases. Antibiot. Khimioter. 38, 35–40.

Lee, Y.T., Huang, L.Y., Chiang, D.H., Chen, C.P., Chen, T.L., Wang, F.D., Fung, C.P., Siu, L.K., Cho, W.L., 2009. Differences in phenotypic and genotypic characteristics among imipenem-non-susceptible Acinetobacter isolates belonging to different genomic species in Taiwan. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 34, 580–584.

Li, J., Rayner, C.R., Nation, R.L., Owen, R.J., Spelman, D., Tan, K.E., Liolios, L., 2006. Heteroresistance to colistin in multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50, 2946–2950.

Li, J., Nation, R.L., Owen, R.J., Wong, S., Spelman, D., Franklin, C., 2007. Antibiograms of multidrug-resistant clinical Acinetobacter baumannii: promising therapeutic options for treatment of infection with colistin-resistant strains. Clin. Infect. Dis. 45, 594–598.

MacKenzie, F.M., Smith, S.V., Milne, K.E., Griffiths, K., Legge, J., Gould, I.M., 2004. Antibiograms of resistant Gram-negative bacteria from Scottish CF patients. J. Cyst. Fibros. 3, 151–157.

Manikal, V.M., Landman, D., Saurina, G., Oydna, E., Lal, H., Quale, J., 2000. Endemic carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter species in Brooklyn, New York: citywide prevalence, interinstitutional spread, and relation to antibiotic usage. Clin. Infect. Dis. 31, 101–106.

Matthaiou, D.K., Michalopoulos, A., Rafailidis, P.I., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Papaioannou, V., Ntani, G., Samonis, G., Falagas, M.E., 2008. Risk factors associated with the isolation of colistin-resistant gram-negative bacteria: a matched case-control study. Crit. Care Med. 36, 807–811.

McPhee, J.B., Lewenza, S., Hancock, R.E., 2003. Cationic antimicrobial peptides activate a two-component regulatory system, PmrA-PmrB, that regulates resistance to polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptides in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mol. Microbiol. 50, 205–217.

Mendes, R.E., Bell, J.M., Turnidge, J.D., Castanheira, M., Jones, R.N., 2009. Emergence and widespread dissemination of OXA-23, -24/40 and -58 carbapenemases among Acinetobacter s in Asia-Pacific nations: report from the SENTRY Surveillance Program. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 63, 55–59.

Mezzatesta, M.L., Trovato, G., Gona, F., Nicolosi, V.M., Nicolosi, D., Carattoli, A., Fadda, G., Nicoletti, G., Stefani, S., 2008. In vitro activity of tigecycline and comparators against carbapenem-susceptible and resistant Acinetobacter baumannii clinical isolates in Italy. Ann. Clin. Microbiol. Antimicrob. 7, 4.

Michalopoulos, A., Virtzili, S., Rafailidis, P., Chalevelakis, G., Damala, M., Falagas, M.E., 2010. Intravenous fosfomycin for the treatment of nosocomial infections caused by carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae in critically ill patients: a prospective evaluation. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 16, 184–186.

Miftode, E., Dorneanu, O., Leca, D., Teodor, A., Mihalache, D., Filip, O., Luca, V., 2008. Antimicrobial resistance profile of E. coli and Klebsiella s from urine in the Infectious Diseases Hospital Iasi. Rev. Med. Chir Soc. Med. Nat. Iasi. 112, 478–482.

Milne, K.E., Gould, I.M., 2010. Combination testing of multidrug-resistant cystic fibrosis isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: use of a new parameter, the susceptible breakpoint index. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 65, 82–90.

Moore, R.A., Chan, L., Hancock, R.E., 1984. Evidence for two distinct mechanisms of resistance to polymyxin B in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 26, 539–545.

Moskowitz, S.M., Ernst, R.K., Miller, S.I., 2004. PmrAB, a two-component regulatory system of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that modulates resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides and addition of aminoarabinose to lipid A. J. Bacteriol. 186, 575–579.

Newton, B.A., 1956. The properties and mode of action of the polymyxins. Bacteriol. Rev. 20, 14–27.

Nicas, T.I., Hancock, R.E., 1983. Alteration of susceptibility to EDTA, polymyxin B and gentamicin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa by divalent cation regulation of outer membrane protein H1. J. Gen. Microbiol. 129, 509–517.

Pamp, S.J., Gjermsen, M., Johansen, H.K., Tolker-Nielsen, T., 2008. Tolerance to the antimicrobial peptide colistin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms is linked to metabolically active cells, and depends on the pmr and mexAB-oprM genes. Mol. Microbiol. 68, 223–240.

Pitt, T.L., Sparrow, M., Warner, M., Stefanidou, M., 2003. Survey of resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from UK patients with cystic fibrosis to six commonly prescribed antimicrobial agents. Thorax 58, 794–796.

Punpanich, W., Tantichattanon, W., Wongwatcharapaiboon, S., Treeratweeraphong, V., 2008. In vitro susceptibility pattern of cephalosporin-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. J. Med. Assoc. Thai. 91 (Suppl 3), S21–27.

Raetz, C.R., Whitfield, C., 2002. Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 635–700.

Reeves, P.R., Hobbs, M., Valvano, M.A., Skurnik, M., Whitfield, C., Coplin, D., Kido, N., Klena, J., Maskell, D., Raetz, C.R., Rick, P.D., 1996. Bacterial polysaccharide synthesis and gene nomenclature. Trends Microbiol. 4, 495–503.

Rose, F., Heuer, K.U., Sibelius, U., Hombach-Klonisch, S., Kiss, L., Seeger, W., Griminger, F., 2000. Targeting lipopolysaccharides by the nontoxic polymyxin B nonapeptide sensitizes resistant *Escherichia coli* to the bactericidal effect of human neutrophils. J. Infect. Dis. 182, 191–199.

Roussos, N., Karageorgopoulos, D.E., Samonis, G., Falagas, M.E., 2009. Clinical significance of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of fosfomycin for the treatment of patients with systemic infections. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 34, 506–515.

Schafer, J.J., Goff, D.A., Stevenson, K.B., Mangino, J.E., 2007. Early experience with tigecycline for ventilator-associated pneumonia and bacteremia caused by multidrug-resistant *Acinetobacter baumannii*. Pharmacotherapy 27, 980–987.

Schindler, M., Osborn, M.J., 1979. Interaction of divalent cations and polymyxin B with lipopolysaccharide. Biochemistry 18, 4425–4430.

Schulin, T., 2002. In vitro activity of the aerosolized agents colistin and tobramycin and five intravenous agents against *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* isolated from cystic fibrosis patients in southwestern Germany. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 49, 403–406.

Souli, M., Kontopidou, F.V., Koratzanis, E., Antoniadou, A., Giannitsioti, E., Evangelopoulos, P., Kannavaki, S., Giamarellou, H., 2006. In vitro activity of tigecycline against multiple-drug-resistant, including pan-resistant, gram-negative and gram-positive clinical isolates from Greek hospitals. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50, 3166–3169.

Sung, H., Choi, S.J., Yoo, S., Kim, M.N., 2007. In vitro antimicrobial synergy against imipenem-resistant *Acinetobacter baumannii*. Korean J. Lab. Med. 27, 111–117.

Tam, V.H., Chang, K.T., Abdelraouf, K., Brioso, C.G., Ameka, M., McCaskey, L.A., Weston, J.S., Caeiro, J.P., Garey, K.W., 2010. Prevalence, resistance mechanisms, and susceptibility of multidrug-resistant bloodstream isolates of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54, 1160–1164.

Tan, T.Y., Hsu, L.Y., Koh, T.H., Ng, L.S., Tee, N.W., Krishnan, P., Lin, R.T., Jureen, R., 2008. Antibiotic resistance in gram-negative bacilli: a Singapore perspective. Ann. Acad. Med. Singapore 37, 819–825.

Tan, T.Y., Ng, S.Y., 2006. The in-vitro activity of colistin in gram-negative bacteria. Singapore Med. J. 47, 621–624.

Tognim, M.C., Gales, A.C., Penteado, A.P., Silbert, S., Sader, H.S., 2006. Dissemination of IMP-1 metallo-beta-lactamase-producing *Acinetobacter* species in a Brazilian teaching hospital. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 27, 742–747.

Tsubery, H., Ofek, I., Cohen, S., Fridkin, M., 2000. Structure-function studies of polymyxin B nonapeptide: implications to sensitization of gram-negative bacteria. J. Med. Chem. 43, 3085–3092.

Varaiya, A., Kulkarni, M., Bhalekar, P., Dogra, J., 2008. Incidence of metallo-beta-lactamase-producing *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* in diabetes and cancer patients. Indian J. Pathol. Microbiol. 51, 200–203.

Walkty, A., Decorby, M., Nichol, K., Mulvey, M.R., Hoban, D., Zhanel, G., 2008. Antimicrobial susceptibility of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* isolates obtained from patients in Canadian intensive care units as part of the Canadian National Intensive Care Unit study. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 61, 217–221.

Warren, H.S., Kania, S.A., Siber, G.R., 1985. Binding and neutralization of bacterial lipopolysaccharide by colistin nonapeptide. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 28, 107–112.

Winfield, M.D., Groisman, E.A., 2004. Phenotypic differences between *Salmonella* and *Escherichia coli* resulting from the disparate regulation of homologous genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17162–17167.

Winfield, M.D., Latifi, T., Groisman, E.A., 2005. Transcriptional regulation of the 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose biosynthetic genes in *Yersinia pestis*. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 14765–14772.

Yan, A., Guan, Z., Raetz, C.R., 2007. An undecaprenyl phosphate-aminoarabinose flip-flopase required for polymyxin resistance in *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 36077–36089.

Yang, Q.W., Xu, Y.C., Chen, M.J., Hu, Y.J., Ni, Y.X., Sun, J.Y., Yu, Y.S., Kong, H.S., He, L., Wu, W.Y., Ye, H.F., Yang, Y.M., Zhu, L.N., Guo, S.H., Ji, P., Zhu, Z.H., Ren, J.K., Zhang, L.X., Sun, Z.Y., Zhu, X.H., Tong, M.Q., Zhao, W.S., Mei, Y.N., Liu, Y., Zhang, Z.J., Duan, Q., Li, D., Liu, P.P., Wang, J., Han, L.X., Wang, H., Xie, X.L., 2007. Surveillance of antimicrobial resistance among nosocomial gram-negative pathogens from 15 teaching hospitals in China in 2005. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 87, 2753–2758.

Yau, W., Owen, R.J., Poudyal, A., Bell, J.M., Turnidge, J.D., Yu, H.H., Nation, R.L., Li, J., 2009. Colistin hetero-resistance in multidrug-resistant *Acinetobacter baumannii* clinical isolates from the Western Pacific region in the SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance programme. J. Infect. 58, 138–144.

Zhanel, G.G., Karlowsky, J.A., Rubinstein, E., Hoban, D.J., 2006. Tigecycline: a novel glycylcycline antibiotic. Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther. 4, 9–25.
