
Folia Microbiol. 55 (5), 508–514 (2010) http://www.biomed.cas.cz/mbu/folia/

# Innate Immunity to *Legionella* and Toll-like Receptors — review

**M. PALUSINSKA-SZYSZ, M. JANCZAREK**

Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University,  
20-033 Lublin, Poland  
fax +48 815 375 959  
e-mail marta.szysz@poczta.umcs.lublin.pl  

Received 26 January 2010  
Revised version 16 June 2010  

---

### ABSTRACT.
*Legionella* is a parasite of eukaryotic cells, able to survive and replicate in a wide range of protozoan hosts. It can also infect humans as an opportunistic pathogen, primarily by interaction with alveolar macrophages. These bacteria can cause life-threatening pneumonia, especially in immunocompromised individuals. However, most infections triggered by *Legionella* are cleared by an efficient host immune system. The protective immune responses against *Legionella* are complex and multifaceted, involving many components of the immune system. Recognition of such components as LPS, flagellum, and peptidoglycan of *L. pneumophila* by the TLRs, which orchestrates the innate immune responses to *Legionella*, plays an important role in activation of monocytes and alveolar macrophages and, thus, in inhibition of intracellular proliferation of bacteria. MyD88-dependent signaling pathways are important for host protection against *Legionella*.

---

### Abbreviation

| Birc1e | baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 1e |
| DC(s) | dendritic cell(s) |
| Dot/Icm | defect in organelle trafficking/intracellular multiplication |
| FLA | flagellin |
| HSP | heat shock protein |
| ICE | IL-1β-converting enzyme |
| IFN | interferon |
| IL | interleukin |
| Ipaf | ICE proteinase activating factor |
| KC | keratinocyte-derived cytokine |
| LPS | lipopolysaccharide |
| MP | macrophages |

| MHC | major histocompatibility complex |
| MIP-2 | macrophage inflammatory protein |
| MyD88 | myeloid differentiation primary intracellular response gene-88 |
| Naip5 | neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein 5 |
| NLR | nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (Nod)-like receptor |
| OmpS | outer membrane protein S |
| PAL | peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein |
| rPAL | recombinant PAL |
| TLR(s) | toll-like receptor(s) |
| TNF | tumor necrosis factor |

---

### CONTENTS

| 1 | Introduction | 508 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 2 | *Legionella* structures | 509 |
| 2.1 | Lipopolysaccharide | 509 |
| 2.1.1 | TLR4 | 509 |
| 2.1.2 | TLR2 | 510 |
| 2.1.3 | MyD88 | 510 |
| 2.2 | Flagellin | 511 |
| 2.3 | Peptidoglycan and other TLR9 ligands | 512 |
| 2.4 | Heat shock proteins | 512 |
| 3 | Conclusions | 512 |
| References | 512 |

---

### 1 INTRODUCTION

Bacteria belonging to the family *Legionellaceae* are aerobic G− rods associated with respiratory infections in humans. Ubiquitous in the natural environment, *Legionella* has been isolated from water, soil, mud and from a variety of man-made water sources, including components of internal plumbing systems, respiratory-therapy equipment, air conditioning systems, and whirlpools. The route of infection is most often by inhalation of aerosolized droplets containing these bacteria, leading to epidemic or clustered outbreaks. In addition to community-acquired cases, *Legionella* may be a major cause of nosocomial infections. Two distinct clinical and epidemiological syndromes are associated with *Legionella* species—Legionnaires’ disease and Pontiac fever, collectively known as legionellosis (Fields et al. 2002). Both conditions have been documented in adults and children. Pulmonary infection may be subclinical, or severe and life threatening, especially in immunocompromised patients, where the fatality rate can approach 50% (Pedro-Botet et al. 1998).

However, most infections caused by *Legionella* are cleared by an efficient host immune system, which is confirmed by the presence of anti-*Legionella* antibodies in the serum of healthy people (Rudbeck *et al.* 2009).

Humans infected with these bacteria develop both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses. In vitro studies with human monocytes showed that antibodies, in the presence of complement, promote the binding of *L. pneumophila* to monocytes but do not inhibit intracellular replication of the bacteria (Horwitz and Silverstein 1981). Opsonization of *L. pneumophila* with antibodies (specific for *L. pneumophila* LPS) led to a decrease in the viability of extracellular bacteria and to enhancement of their phagocytosis by phagocytic cells. Consequently, there was a significant decline in intrapulmonary growth of bacteria in mice (Brieland *et al.* 1996). Intravenous and intranasal infection of mice with *L. pneumophila* induces a specific antibody response (typical adaptive immune response), which is accelerated and strongly increased in secondary infection (Joller *et al.* 2007). However, humoral immune response plays a less significant role compared to cell-mediated immunity, which is recognized as the primary defense to *Legionella* infection (Susa *et al.* 1998).

Most of the 52 recognized *Legionella* species were isolated from environmental sources, but 21 of them were isolated from patients, suggesting their pathogenicity for people (Euzeby 2009). *Legionella* species associated with human disease, as well as some of these species which as yet have not been shown to cause of legionellosis, have the ability to infect and replicate within human monocytes, alveolar MP, epithelial cells and macrophage-like cell lines such as U937, HL-60 and Mono Mac (MM6) cells (Neumeister *et al.* 1997). After *Legionella* inhalation into the lower airways of the lungs, alveolar MP start to phagocytize the bacteria by either a conventional or coiling mechanism. The interaction between *Legionella* and MP, B lymphocytes, NK and immature DCs results in induction of host cell responses that activate the immune system. These cells represent a first line of defense against infection and represent innate immunity triggered by bacterial surface antigens. Immune responses in the lung are mediated by pattern recognition receptors that recognize pathogen-associated patterns (Medzhitov 2007). *Legionellae* contain a variety of antigens typical of those found in all G⁻ bacteria, including LPS (endotoxin), HSPs and membrane proteins, flagella and peptidoglycan (Dowling *et al.* 1992; Heuner and Steinert 2003; Hoffman *et al.* 1990; Zähringer 1995). Some of these components are recognized by TLRs, the stimulation of which leads to a cascade of events resulting in production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and expression of co-stimulatory molecules which recruit lymphocytes to the site of infection and induce activation of MP. However, the atypical *Legionella* attributes, such as the unusual LPS structure, flagellum, fastidious growth requirements and, first of all, capability of intracellular proliferation in immune cells designed to kill bacteria and of using them as their host cell, pose a unique challenge to the human immune system. Upon being phagocytosed, *L. pneumophila* evolves sophisticated mechanisms of host pathway modulation, which lead to the formation of a phagosome permissive for its multiplication. Crucially for the biogenesis and maintenance of the bacterial replicative vacuole, *L. pneumophila* uses the Dot/Icm type IV secretion system to translocate bacterial proteins into host cells. The coordinate actions of the bacterial effectors allow *L. pneumophila* to subvert innate immune responses and evade host destruction. This necessitates a specific immunological response to infection caused by *Legionella*.

## Legionella STRUCTURES

### 2.1 Lipopolysaccharide

LPS is a major constituent of the cell envelope in G⁻ bacteria which exerts pro-inflammatory activity and is responsible for many destructive effects of pulmonary infections. However, LPS of *L. pneumophila* is a weak inducer of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8) production by mononuclear cells, compared with enterobacterial LPS. The reduced endotoxicity was presumably a result of weak interaction of *L. pneumophila* LPS with the cell surface or soluble CD14 (Neumeister *et al.* 1998).

#### 2.1.1 TLR4

LPS of many G⁻ bacteria, including respiratory pathogens, is recognized by TLR4 which is expressed by both professional host defense (MP, DC) and structural (endothelial and epithelial) cells. As the principal signal-transducing molecule, TLR4 contributes significantly to the response to inhaled LPS and thus to clearing of lungs (Bals 2005). The study conducted on C3H/HeJ mice, which carry a single-point mutation at amino acid 712 (Pro→His) that destroys the function of TLR4, demonstrated that peritoneal MP of these mice were permissive for *L. pneumophila* (Yoshida 1991). Studies *in vivo* displayed that TLR4 did not affect bacterial growth in the lungs of mice which were infected with *Legionella* in the intranasal way (Letinga *et

al. 2002). LPS of *L. pneumophila* required TLR2 rather than TLR4 to elicit expression of CD14 in bone marrow granulocytes (Girard *et al.* 2003).

Not only purified LPS but also either viable or formaldehyde-killed *L. pneumophila* were able to activate bone marrow-derived DCs via TLR2 and this stimulation depended on CD14 in C3H/HeJ mice (Braedel-Ruoff *et al.* 2005). The involvement and importance of TLR2 for host resistance against the intracellular growth of *L. pneumophila* is corroborated by the fact that the production of IL-12, IL-10 and TNF-α was attenuated in TLR2-deficient MP and TLR2-deficient dendritic cells (Akamine *et al.* 2005). Mice MP lacking TLR2 molecule produced smaller amounts of IL-6, MIP-2 and KC, but contrary to the data mentioned above, a higher level of IL-12 was observed, compared to wild-type mice (Fuse *et al.* 2007). Chemokines MIP-2 and KC are critical in innate immunity by being responsible for rapid migration of leukocytes to the inflammatory site.

IL-12 plays a pivotal role in immunoregulation against *L. pneumophila* as a potent activator of innate IFN-γ producing cells, such as NK and NK T cells (Shinozawa *et al.* 2002). Endogenous INF-γ regulates *L. pneumophila* growth in MP. However, it is difficult to distinguish innate immunity from the adaptive one regarding mediator cytokines (Friedman *et al.* 2002). In the lungs of TLR2 deficient mice, impairment of chemokine production, including KC, and a decrease in inflammatory cell recruitment (especially neutrophils, which are assigned a critical role during *L. pneumophila* infection) were observed (Hawn *et al.* 2006; Tateda *et al.* 2001a,b).

A molecular basis of the switch from TLR4- to TLR2-mediated responses to *L. pneumophila* LPS was suggested by the experiments done with LPS isolated from *Bartonella henselae*. Its LPS did not interact with TLR2 but it reacted weakly with the TLR4 receptor. The conformation of its lipid A is very close to that of *L. pneumophila* LPS, because of presence of different long-chain fatty acids, but it differs in the ω-1-substituent, which is either 28:0(27-oxo) or 27:0(dioic) acid (Zähringer *et al.* 2004). The substituent (an oxo group at C₂₇) or a branch on the penultimate carbon of long-chain fatty acids presumably play a role in the unusual detection pattern of *L. pneumophila* LPS.

### 2.1.2 TLR2

Several lines of evidence highlight the role for both TLR2 and TLR4 in the host response to *L. pneumophila*; e.g., Rogers *et al.* (2007) demonstrated that murine DCs infected with *L. pneumophila* exhibited the expression of both surface receptors, TLR2 and TLR4. TLR4-mediated IL-12 production in murine DCs is stimulated with heat-killed *L. pneumophila* and the DC maturation stimulated by heat-killed, but not formaldehyde-killed or live *L. pneumophila* also depended on TLR4 signaling (Kikuchi *et al.* 2004). Genetic studies showed a relation between TLR4 polymorphisms and resistance to Legionnaires’ disease in humans (Hawn *et al.* 2005).

### 2.1.3 MyD88

In the case of *Legionella*, participation of MyD88 (the common adaptor molecule involved in the TLR signaling cascade) is suggested in lung clearance and prevention of pneumonia (Hawn *et al.* 2006). Indeed, absence of MyD88 resulted in a dramatic reduction in host resistance to *Legionella*, as shown in an aerosolized model of *L. pneumophila* pneumonia. MyD88-deficient mice were unable to produce TNF-α, IL-6, IFN-γ, KC and MIP-2, and in the histopathological analysis, they had decreased neutrophil counts in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. These mice succumbed of acute pulmonary infection accompanied by dissemination of bacteria to the lymph nodes and spleen. Interestingly, MyD88⁻/⁻ mice were able to eliminate avirulent *L. pneumophila* mutants, which are incapable of intracellular replication. Other studies demonstrated that the IL-12 p40 production was attenuated in bone marrow-derived MP of MyD88-deficient mice (Archer and Roy 2006). Since MyD88 is ascribed to play a key role in the innate immune response and TLR2 is one of the receptors involved in this response, Hawn *et al.* (2006) compared the cytokine response of MyD88- and TLR2-deficient mice, infected with *Legionella*. They showed that TLR2⁻/⁻ mice, in contrast to MyD88⁻/⁻, were able to produce reduced amounts of cytokines and to recruit neutrophils to the lung alveoli, which allowed partial clearance of bacteria from the lungs (Hawn *et al.* 2006; Archer and Roy 2006). These and other investigations directly indicated the existence of additional MyD88-dependent signaling pathways which were operational in TLR2-deficient mice and together with TLR2-mediated signaling and TLR2-independent pathways facilitated full protection against *L. pneumophila* (Hawn *et al.* 2006; Archer and Roy 2006).

2.2 Flagellin

Apart from its role in motility, FLA is a virulence-associated factor – a principal stimulant of pro-inflammatory cytokine production in lung epithelial cells, murine and human MP (Hawn et al. 2003; Heuner et al. 2002; Molofsky et al. 2005). FLA positively affects the establishment of infection by facilitating the encounter of the host cell as well as by enhancing the invasion capacity, without affecting adhesion or intracellular replication (Dietrich et al. 2001). FLA present in the flagellar structure of bacteria is detected by TLR5, while FLA delivered to the cytosol of *L. pneumophila*-infected MP via the Dot/Icm type IV secretion system is detected through the intracellular NLRs (Diez et al. 2003; Wright et al. 2003). Epidemiological studies on people infected with *L. pneumophila* during a flower show in the Netherlands showed that individuals who lacked TLR5 function were more susceptible to Legionnaires’ disease. Subsequent molecular analysis conducted in these patients explained that a mutation generating a stop codon at nucleotide 392 of the TLR5 gene resulted in a dysfunctional TLR5 protein, unable to recognize FLA (Hawn et al. 2003).

TLR5 mediated recognition of *L. pneumophila* by alveolar MP is involved in regulation of early recruitment of polymorphonuclear neutrophils and also in secretion of TNF-α, cytokine (IL-6) and chemokines (MIP-2 and KC) (Hawn et al. 2007). TLR5–FLA interactions also stimulated the expression of IL-8 in lung epithelial cell lines infected with *L. pneumophila* (Hawn et al. 2003). Interestingly, resistance to *Legionella* did not require MyD88, an essential adaptor for TLR5 signaling (Ren et al. 2006).

MP derived from various mouse strains (A/J, C57BL/6) are differentially permissive for intracellular growth of *L. pneumophila*. This difference in permissiveness is controlled by a single gene *Naip5* (also known as the *Birc1e*) located on chromosome 13 (Diez et al. 2003; Growney and Dietrich 2000; Wright et al. 2003). Losick et al. (2009) proposed that unique amino acid changes within the central domain of A/J Naip5 may be critical for restriction of *L. pneumophila* intracellular growth. Some papers indicated that Naip5 and Ipa(f) (the closest homolog of Naip) within mice cells mediated recognition of cytosolic *L. pneumophila* FLA, which led to rapid caspase-1-dependent cell death (Amer et al. 2006; Lightfield et al. 2008; Zamboni et al. 2006). Lightfield et al. (2008) have demonstrated that the C-terminal domain of the FLA protein is sufficient for this process. Mutants of *L. pneumophila* that do not express FLA were unable to activate caspase-1 during MP infection (Molofsky et al. 2005; Ren et al. 2006; Amer et al. 2006). Furthermore, caspase-7 was activated by *L. pneumophila* FLA downstream of caspase-1 and required the participation of the host sensors Ipa(f) and Naip5 (Akhter et al. 2009). Ipa(f) has also been shown to play an important role in *L. pneumophila* clearance through the regulation of phagosome maturation. *L. pneumophila*-containing phagosomes avoid fusion with the lysosome in Ipa(f) and caspase-1-deficient MP, thus facilitating bacterial replication (Amer et al. 2006). Lamkanfi et al. (2007) indicated a role of caspase-1 in mIpa(f) mediated *Legionella* growth restriction but independently of Naip5.

Although caspase-1 was not activated in response to *Legionella* in human MP (Santic et al. 2007), Vinzing et al. (2008) showed that the human orthologs of mNaip5 and mIpa(f) were involved in *L. pneumophila* FLA recognition and clearly restricted bacterial replication in human cells. Ipa(f) activates caspase-1, which proteolytically processes proIL-1β and proIL-18, promotes their secretion and subsequent induction of pro-inflammatory cell death, termed pyroptosis. However, addition of IL-1 and IL-18 to Ipa(f)-deficient MP did not affect *Legionella* replication, suggesting that production of these cytokines is not necessary for restriction of *Legionella* growth (Amer et al. 2006). In addition to Ipa(f), Zamboni et al. (2006) have shown that the adapter protein Asc was involved in regulating host processes mediated by caspase-1 after macrophage infection by *L. pneumophila*. Case et al. (2009) showed that Ipa(f) and Asc controlled independent pathways for caspase-1 activation which differed in functional outcomes. In one pathway, Ipa(f) and Naip5 flagellum-driven activation led to pore formation in the host cell and, consequently, to its lysis and inhibition of bacterial growth. The second pathway promoted caspase-1 activation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines but it did not result in cell lysis. Nonetheless, activation of caspase-1 through Asc during infection with *L. pneumophila* did not require FLA and was inhibited by a high extracellular potassium level (Case et al. 2009).

In contrast to *L. pneumophila* infection by *L. longbeachae* was independent of polymorphism in the *naip5* allele and *L. longbeachae* did not activate caspase-1 in A/J and C57BL/6 mice or human MP, despite flagellation (Asare et al. 2007). Furthermore, C57BL/6 mouse MP were permissive to motile species of *L. parisiensis* and *L. tucsonensis*. These strains did not induce pro-inflammatory cell death; however, their FLA transfected into the cytosol of MP triggered cell death and IL-1β secretion (Whitfield et al. 2010).

These results clearly demonstrate that both extracellular and cytoplasmic FLA are key determinants for immunologic surveillance and control of *L. pneumophila* infection.

2.3 Peptidoglycan and other TLR9 ligands

PAL of *Legionella* (a 19 kDa protein antigen localized in the outer membrane) induced PAL-specific B- and T-cell response in BALB/c mice immunized with either the rPAL or PAL encoded by plasmid DNA (*Yoon et al.* 2002). In *in vitro* study, rPAL stimulated MP to induce IL-6 and TNF-α production in a dose-dependent manner, mediated by TLR2 signaling. The rPAL treatment increased the cell surface expression of co-stimulation signals such as CD40, CD80, CD86 and MHC I/II molecules involved in antigen presentation in murine MP. Moreover, rPAL co-administered with the synthetic CpG-containing oligodeoxynucleotides, as a TLR9 agonist, induced synergistic production of IL-12p40 and IL-6 and enhanced expression of CD40, CD80, MHC II, compared to the rPAL alone (*Shim et al.* 2009). The PAL antigen which can be extracted from urine of patients with legionellosis, commonly present and highly conserved among *Legionella* species, may be potentially used as a vaccine against *Legionella* infections (*Kim et al.* 2003).

Other papers demonstrated the importance of TLR9 alone, which was activated by nonmethylated CpG motifs, in the generation of protective lung immunity and programming MP phenotype during infection with *L. pneumophila*. *Newton et al.* (2007) showed that TLR9 played an essential role for IL-12 production by MP and DC in response to incubation with *L. pneumophila* (*Newton et al.* 2007).

Alveolar MP of TLR9-deficient mice showed defects in phagocytosis of *L. pneumophila* and their DCs displayed reduced expression of type 1 cytokines and chemokines, including IFN-γ and 10/IP-10 (*Bhan et al.* 2008). Intratracheal administration of *L. pneumophila* to TLR9-deficient mice led to a significant increase in mortality compared to wild-type ones (*Bhan et al.* 2008).

2.4 Heat shock proteins

Other bacterial structural components, including HSPs and OmpS, participated in induction of immunological response to infections caused by *Legionella* (*Weeratna et al.* 1994). HSP60-kDa protein located in the periplasm which can be expressed on the surface of *L. pneumophila* was immunogenic for human reactive T lymphocytes in a mixed-lymphocyte proliferation assay (*Hoffman et al.* 1990). The purified HSP60 increased cellular steady-state levels of cytokine messages, including those for TNF-α, IFN-α and -β, IL-1, IL-6 as well as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (*Retzlaff et al.* 1994). This increase seems to occur through a cell-surface receptor system that involves a protein kinase C-dependent signaling pathway. HSP60 of *L. pneumophila* also induced IL-1 secretion by murine monocytes (*Retzlaff et al.* 1996). TLR4 receptor is involved in recognition of *Chlamydia pneumoniae* Hsp60; however, its participation in *Legionella* Hsp60 recognition has not been confirmed (*Bulut et al.* 2009).

3 CONCLUSIONS

In *Legionella* infection the main protective role is played by the cellular response, while the humoral immune response, which promotes only modest killing of bacteria in phagocytes, appears to have a secondary role.

TLRs are the key participants in cellular immunity. Various TLRs recognize bacterial components of *Legionella* spp. and initiate responses of mononuclear phagocytes, which constitutes an important link between the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system. MyD88-dependent signaling pathways are involved in *Legionella* activation of innate immune cells through TLRs, thus they are important for host protection against Legionnaires’ disease.

REFERENCES

AKAMINE M., HIGA F., ARAKAKI N., KAWAKAMI K., TAKEDA K., AKIRA S., SAITO A.: Differential roles of Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 in vitro responses of macrophages to *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect.Immun.* **73**, 352–361 (2005).

AKHTER A., GAVRILIN M.A., FRANTZ L., WASHINGTON S., DITTY C., LIMOLI D., DAY C., SARKAR A., NEWLAND C., BUTCHAR J., MARSH C., WEWERS M.D., TRIDANDAPANI S., KANNEGANTI T.D., AMER A.O.: Caspase-7 activation by the Nlrc4/ipaf inflammasome restricts *Legionella pneumophila* infection. *PLoS Pathog.* **5**, 1–13 (2009).

AMER A., FRANCHI L., KANNEGANTI T.D., BODY-MALAPEL M., OZOREN N., BRADY G., MESHINCHI S., JAGIRDAR R., GEWIRTZ A., AKIRA S., NUNEZ G.: Regulation of *Legionella* phagosome maturation and infection through flagellin and host Ipaf. *J.Biol. Chem.* **281**, 35217–35223 (2006).

ARCHER K.A., ROY C.R.: MyD88-dependent responses involving toll-like receptor 2 are important for protection and clearance of *Legionella pneumophila* in a mouse model of Legionnaires’ disease. *Infect.Immun.* **74**, 3325–3333 (2006).

ASARE R., SANTIC M., GOBIN I., DORIC M., SUTTLES J., GRAHAM J.E., PRICE C.D., ABU KWAIK Y.: Genetic susceptibility and caspase activation in mouse and human macrophages are distinct for *Legionella longbeachae* and *L. pneumophila*. *Infect.Immun.* **75**, 1933–1945 (2007).

BALS R.: Lipopolysaccharide and the lung: a story of love and hate. *Eur.Respir.J.* **25**, 776–777 (2005).

BHAN U., TRUJILLO G., LYN-KEW K., NEWSTEAD M.W., ZENG X., HOGABOAM C.M., KRIEG A.M., STANDIFORD T.: Toll-like receptor 9 regulates the lung macrophage phenotype and host immunity in murine pneumonia caused by *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect.Immun.* **76**, 2895–2904 (2008).

BRAEDEL-RUOFF S., FAIGLE M., HILF N., NEUMEISTER B., SCHILD H.: *Legionella pneumophila* mediated activation of dendritic cells involves CD14 and TLR2. *J.Endotoxin Res.* **11**, 89–96 (2005).

BRIELAND J.K., HEATH L.A., HUFFNAGLE G.B., REMICK D.G., MCCLAIN M.S., HURLEY M.C., KUNKEL R.K., FANTONE J.C., ENGLEBERG C.: Humoral immunity and regulation of intrapulmonary growth of *Legionella pneumophila* in the immunocompetent host. *J.Immunol.* **157**, 5002–5008 (1996).

BULUT Y., SHIMADA K., WONG M.H., CHEN S., GRAY P., ALSABEH R., DOHERTY T.R., CROTHER T.R., ARDITI M.: Chlamydial heat shock protein 60 induces acute pulmonary inflammation in mice via the Toll-like receptor 4- and MyD88-dependent pathway. *Infect.Immun.* **77**, 2683–2690 (2009).

CASE C.L., SHIN S., ROY C.R.: Asc and Ipaf inflammasomes direct distinct pathways for caspase-1 activation in response to *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect.Immun.* **77**, 1981–1991 (2009).

DIETRICH C., HEUNER K., BRAND B.C., HACKER J., STEINERT M.: Flagellum of *Legionella pneumophila* positively affects the early phase of infection of eukaryotic host cells. *Infect.Immun.* **69**, 2116–2122 (2001).

DIEZ E., LEE S.H., GAUTHIER S., YARAGHI Z., TREMBLAY M., VIDAL S., GROS P.: Bircle is the gene within the *lgnl* locus associated with resistance to *Legionella pneumophila*. *Nat.Genet.* **33**, 55–60 (2003).

DOWLING J.N., SAHA A.K., GLEW R.H.: Virulence factors of the family Legionellaceae. *Microbiol.Rev.* **56**, 32–60 (1992).

EUZEBY J.P.: List of bacterial names with standing in nomenclature: http://www.bacterio.cict.fr/ (2009).

FIELDS B.S., BENSON R.F., BESSER R.E.: *Legionella* and Legionnaires’ disease: 25 years of investigation. *Clin.Microbiol.Rev.* **15**, 506–526 (2002).

FRIEDMAN H., YAMAMOTO Y., KLEIN T.W.: *Legionella pneumophila* pathogenesis and immunity. *Semin.Pediatr.Infect.Dis.* **13**, 273–279 (2002).

FUSE E.T., TATEDA K., KIKUCHI Y., MATSUMOTO T., GONDAIRA F., AZUMA A., KUDOH S., STANDIFORD T.J., YAMAGUCHI K.: Role of Toll-like receptor 2 in recognition of *Legionella pneumophila* in a murine pneumonia model. *J.Med.Microbiol.* **56**, 305–312 (2007).

GIRARD R., PEDRON T., UEMATSU S., BALLOV V., CHIGNARD M., AKIRA S., CHABY R.: Lipopolysaccharides from *Legionella* and *Rhizobium* stimulate mouse bone marrow granulocytes via Toll-like receptor 2. *J.Cell Sci.* **116**, 293–302 (2003).

GROWNEY J.D., DIETRICH W.F.: High resolution genetic and physical map of the Lgnl interval in C57BL/6J implicates Naip2 or Naip5 in *Legionella pneumophila* pathogenesis. *Genome Res.* **10**, 1158–1171 (2000).

HAWN T.R., VERBON A., LETTINGA K.D., ZHAO L.P., LI S.S., LAWS R.J., SKERRETT S.J., BEUTLER B., SCHROEDER L., NACHMAN A., OZINSKY A., SMITH K.D., ADEREM A.: A common dominant TLR5 stop codon polymorphism abolishes flagellin signaling and is associated with susceptibility to Legionnaires’ disease. *J.Exp.Med.* **198**, 1563–1572 (2003).

HAWN T.R., VERBON A., JANER M., ZHAO L.P., BEUTLER B., ADEREM A.: Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms are associated with resistance to Legionnaires’ disease. *Proc.Nat.Acad.Sci.USA* **102**, 2487–2489 (2005).

HAWN T.R., SMITH K.D., ADEREM A., SKERRETT S.J.: Myeloid differentiation primary response gene (88)- and toll-like receptor 2-deficient mice are susceptible to infection with aerosolized *Legionella pneumophila*. *J.Infect.Dis.* **193**, 1693–1702 (2006).

HAWN T.R., BERRINGTON W.R., SMITH J.A., UEMATSU S., AKIRA S., ADEREM A., SMITH K.D., SKERRETT S.J.: Altered inflammatory responses in TLR5-deficient mice infected with *Legionella pneumophila*. *J.Immunol.* **179**, 6981–6987 (2007).

HEUNER K., DIETRICH C., SKIRWAN C., STEINERT M., HACKER J.: Influence of the alternative sigma(28) factor on virulence and flagellum expression of *Legionella pneumophila*. *Infect.Immun.* **70**, 1604–1608 (2002).

HEUNER K., STEINERT M.: The flagellum of *Legionella pneumophila* and its link to the expression of the virulent phenotype. *Internat.J.Med.Microbiol.* **293**, 133–143 (2003).

HOFFMAN P.S., HOUSTON L., BUTLER C.A.: *Legionella pneumophila htpAB* heat shock operon: nucleotide sequence and expression of the 60-kilodalton antigen *L. pneumophila*-infected HeLa cells. *Infect.Immun.* **58**, 3380–3387 (1990).

HORWITZ M.A., SILVERSTEIN S.C.: Interaction of the Legionnaires’ disease bacterium (*Legionella pneumophila*) with human phagocytes. II. Antibody promotes binding of *L. pneumophila* to monocytes but does not inhibit intracellular multiplication. *J.Exp.Med.* **153**, 398–406 (1981).

JOLLER N., SPORRI R., HILBI H., OXENIUS A.: Induction and protective role of antibodies in *L. pneumophila* infection. *Eur.J.Immunol.* **37**, 3414–3423 (2007).

KIKUCHI T., KOBAYASHI T., GOMI K., SUZUKI T., TOKUE Y., WATANABE A., NUKIWA T.: Dendritic cells pulsed with live and dead *Legionella pneumophila* elicit distinct immune responses. *J.Immunol.* **172**, 1727–1734 (2004).

KIM M.J., SOHN J.W., PARK D.W., PARK S.C., CHUN B.C.: Characterization of a lipoprotein common to *Legionella* species as a urinary broad-spectrum antigen for diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease. *J.Clin.Microbiol.* **41**, 2974–2979 (2003).

LAMKANFI M., AMER A., KANNEGANTI T.D., MUÑOZ-PLANILLO R., CHEN G., VAN DEN ABEELE P., FORTIER A., GROS P., NUNEZ G.: The Nod-like receptor family member Naip5/Bircle restricts *Legionella pneumophila* growth independently of caspase-1 activation. *J.Immunol.* **178**, 8022–8027 (2007).

LETTINGA K.D., FLORQUIN S., SPEELMAN P., VAN KETEL R., VAN DER POLL T., VERBON A.: Toll-like receptor 4 is not involved in host defense against pulmonary *Legionella pneumophila* infection in a mouse model. *J.Infect.Dis.* **186**, 570–573 (2002).

LIGHTFIELD K.L., PERSSON J., BRUBAKER S.W., WITTE C.E., VON MOLTKE J., DUNIPACE E.A., HENRY T., SUN Y.H., CADO D., DIETRICH W.F., MONACK D.M., TSOLIS R.M., VANCE R.E.: Critical role of Naip5 in inflammasome activation by a conserved C-terminal domain of flagellin. *Nat.Immunol.* **9**, 1171–1178 (2008).

LOSICK V.P., STEPHAN K., SMIRNOVA I.I., ISBERG R.R., POLTORAK A.: A hemidominant *Naip5* allele in mouse strain MOLF/Ei-derived macrophages restricts *Legionella pneumophila* intracellular growth. *Infect.Immun.* **77**, 196–204 (2009).

MEDZHITOV R.: Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the immune response. *Nature* **449**, 819–826 (2007).

MOLOFSKY A.B., SHERTRON-RAMA L.M., SWANSON M.S.: Components of the *Legionella pneumophila* flagellar regulon contribute to multiple virulence traits, including lysosome avoidance and macrophage death. *Infect.Immun.* **73**, 5720–5734 (2005).

NEUMEISTER B., SCHÖNIGER S., FAIGLE M., EICHNER M., DIETZ K.: Multiplication of different *Legionella* species in Mono Mac 6 and *Acanthamoeba castellanii*. Appl.Environ.Microbiol. **63**, 1219–1224 (1997).

NEUMEISTER B., FAIGLE M., SOMMER M., ZÄHRINGER U., STELTER F., MENZEL R., SCHÜTT C., NORTHOFF H.: Low endotoxic potential of *Legionella pneumophila* lipopolysaccharide due to failure of interaction with the monocyte lipopolysaccharide receptor CD14. Infect.Immun. **66**, 4151–4157 (1998).

NEWTON C.A., PERKINS I., WIDEN R.H., FRIEDMAN H., KLEIN T.W.: Role of toll-like receptor 9 in *Legionella pneumophila*-induced interleukin-12p40 production in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells and macrophages from permissive and nonpermissive mice. Infect.Immun. **75**, 146–151 (2007).

PEDRO-BOTET M.L., SABRIA-LEAL M., SOPENA N., MANTEROLA J.M., PADILLA E., DOMINGUEZ J., MORERA J., TUDELA P.: Role of immunosuppression in the evolution of Legionnaires' disease. Clin.Infect.Dis. **26**, 14–19 (1998).

REN T., ZAMBONI D.S., ROY C.R., DIETRICH W.F., VANCE R.E.: Flagellin-deficient *Legionella* mutants evade caspase-1 and Naip5-mediated macrophage immunity. PLoS Pathog. **2**, 175–183 (2006).

RETZLAFF C., YAMAMOTO Y., HOFFMAN P.S., FRIEDMAN H., KLEIN T.W.: Bacterial heat shock proteins directly induce cytokine mRNA and interleukin-1 secretion in macrophage cultures. Infect.Immun. **62**, 5689–5693 (1994).

RETZLAFF C., YAMAMOTO Y., OKUBO S., HOFFMAN P.S., FRIEDMAN H., KLEIN T.W.: *Legionella pneumophila*-heat shock protein induced increase of interleukin-1β mRNA involves protein kinase C signaling in macrophages. Immunology **89**, 281–288 (1996).

ROGERS J., HAKKI A., PERKINS I., NEWTON C., WIDEN R., BURDASH N., KLEIN T., FRIEDMAN H.: *Legionella pneumophila* infection up-regulates dendritic cell Toll-like receptor 2(TLR2)/TLR4 expression and key maturation markers. Infect.Immun. **75**, 3205–3208 (2007).

RUDBECK M., MOLBAK K., ULDUM S.A.: Dynamics of *Legionella* antibody levels during 1 year in a healthy population. Epidemiol. Infect. **137**, 1013–1018 (2009).

SANTIC M., ASARE R., DORIC M., ABU KWAIK Y.: Host-dependent trigger of caspases and apoptosis by *Legionella pneumophila*. Infect. Immun. **75**, 2903–2913 (2007).

SHIM H.K., KIM J.Y., KIM M.J., SIM H.S., PARK D.W., SOHN J.W., KIM M.J.: *Legionella* lipoprotein activates toll-like receptor 2 and induces cytokine production and expression of costimulatory molecules in peritoneal macrophages. Exp.Mol.Med. **41**, 687–694 (2009).

SHINOZAWA Y., MATSUMOTO T., UCHIDA K., TSUJIMOTO S., IWAKURA Y., YAMAGUCHI K.: Role of interferon-γ in inflammatory responses in murine respiratory infection with *Legionella pneumophila*. J.Med.Microbiol. **51**, 225–230 (2002).

SUSA M., TICAC B., RUKAVINA T., DORIC M., MARRE R.: *Legionella pneumophila* infection in intratracheally inoculated T cell-depleted or nondepleted A/J mice. J.Immunol. **160**, 316–321 (1998).

TATEDA K., MOORE T.A., DENG J.C., NEWSTEAD M.W., ZENG X., MATSUKAWA A., SWANSON M.S., YAMAGUCHI K., STANDIFORD T.J.: Early recruitment of neutrophils determines subsequent T₁/T₂ host responses in a murine model of *Legionella pneumophila* pneumonia. J.Immunol. **166**, 3355–3361 (2001a).

TATEDA K., MOORE T.A., NEWSTEAD M.W., TSAI W.C., ZENG X., DENG J.C., CHEN G., REDDY R., YAMAGUCHI K., STANDIFORD T.J.: Chemokine-dependent neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of *Legionella* pneumonia: potential role of neutrophils as immunoregulatory cells. Infect.Immun. **69**, 2017–2024 (2001b).

VINZING M., EITEL J., LIPPMANN J., HOCKE A.C., ZAHLTEN J., SLEVOGT H., DJE N’GUESSAN P., GÜNTHNER S., SCHMECK B., HIPPENSTIEL S., FLIEGER A., SUTTORP N., OPITZ B.J.: NAIP and Ipaf control *Legionella pneumophila* replication in human cells. J.Immunol. **180**, 6808–6815 (2008).

WEERATNA R., STAMLER D.A., EDELSTEIN P.H., RIPLEY M., MARRIE T., HOSKIN D., HOFFMAN P.S.: Human and guinea pig immune responses to *Legionella pneumophila* protein antigens OmpS and Hsp60. Infect.Immun. **62**, 3454–3462 (1994).

WHITFIELD N.N., BYRNE B.G., SWANSON M.S.: Mouse macrophages are permissive to motile *Legionella* species that fail to trigger pyroptosis. Infect.Immun. **78**, 423–432 (2010).

WRIGHT E.K., GOODART S.A., GROWNEY J.D., HADINOTO V., ENDRIZZI M.G., LONG E.M., SADIGH K., ABNEY A.L., BERNSTEIN-HANLEY I., DIETRICH W.F.: Naip5 affects host susceptibility to the intracellular pathogen *Legionella pneumophila*. Curr. Biol. **13**, 27–36 (2003).

YOON W.S., PARK S.H., PARK Y.K., PARK S.C., SIN J.I., KIM M.J.: Comparison of responses elicited by immunization with a *Legionella* species common lipoprotein delivered as naked DNA or recombinant protein. DNA Cell Biol. **21**, 99–107 (2002).

YOSHIDA S., GOTO Y., MIYAMOTO H., FUJIO H., MIZUGUCHI Y.: Association of *Lps* gene with natural resistance of mouse macrophages against *Legionella pneumophila*. FEMS Microbiol.Immunol. **4**, 51–56 (1991).

ZÄHRINGER U., KNIREL A.Y., LINDNER B., HELBIG J.H., SONESSON A., MARRE R., RIETSCHEL E.T.: The lipopolysaccharide of *Legionella pneumophila* serogroup 1 (strain Philadelphia 1): chemical structure and biological significance. Progr.Clin.Biol.Res. **392**, 113–139 (1995).

ZÄHRINGER U., LINDNER B., KNIREL A.Y., VAN DEN AKKER W.M., HIESTAND R., HEINE H., DEHIO C.: Structure and biological activity of the short-chain lipopolysaccharide from *Bartonella henselae* ATCC 49882T. J.Biol.Chem. **279**, 21046–21054 (2004).

ZAMBONI D.S., KOBAYASHI K.S., KOHLSDORF T., OGURA Y., LONG E.M., VANCE R.E., KUIDA K., MARIATHASAN S., DIXIT V.M., FLAVELL R.A., DIETRICH W.F., ROY C.R.: The BirAcle cytosolic pattern-recognition receptor contributes to the detection and control of *Legionella pneumophila* infection. Nat.Immunol. **7**, 318–325 (2006).
