
REVIEW ARTICLE

The Hippo Pathway in Biological Control and Cancer Development

SIEW WEE CHAN,$^{1}$ CHUN JYE LIM,$^{1}$ LIMING CHEN,$^{1}$ YAAN FUN CHONG,$^{1}$ CAIXIA HUANG,$^{1}$ HAIWEI SONG,$^{1,2}$ AND WANJIN HONG$^{1,3*}$

$^{1}$Cancer and Developmental Cell Biology Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Republic of Singapore  
$^{2}$Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore  
$^{3}$Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore  

The Hippo pathway is an evolutionarily conserved protein kinase cascade involved in regulating organ size in vivo and cell contact inhibition in vitro by governing cell proliferation and apoptosis. Deregulation of the Hippo pathway is linked to cancer development. Its first core kinase Warts was identified in *Drosophila* more than 15 years ago, but it gained much attention when other core components of the pathway were identified 8 years later. Major discoveries of the pathway were made during past several years. The core kinase components Hippo, Salvador, Warts, and Mats in the fly and Mst1/2, WW45, Lats1/2, and Mob1 in mammals phosphorylate and inactivate downstream transcriptional co-activators Yorkie in the fly, Yes-associated protein (YAP) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) in mammals, respectively. Phosphorylated Yorkie, YAP, and TAZ are sequestered in the cytoplasm by interaction with 14-3-3 proteins. Here we review recent progresses of this pathway by focusing on how these proteins communicate with each other and how loss of regulation results in cancers.

J. Cell. Physiol. 226: 928–939, 2011. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

The Hippo pathway controls organ size and contact inhibition by regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis. Most of the components of the Hippo pathway were discovered through *Drosophila* mosaic genetic screens for mutants which show tissue overgrowth phenotypes (Justice et al., 1995; Xu et al., 1995; Tapon et al., 2002; Harvey et al., 2003; Pantalacci et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2003). The first component of the Hippo pathway, Warts (Wts), was identified in 1995 (Justice et al., 1995; Xu et al., 1995). wts encodes a protein kinase of the nuclear Dbf-2-related (NDR) family and mutations in the wts gene lead to outgrowth phenotype in several epithelial tissues in *Drosophila*. Seven years later, in 2002, the second component of the Hippo pathway Salvador (Sav) was identified (Tapon et al., 2002). Sav mutations result in increased growth characterized by an increase in cell number by promoting cell proliferation and inhibiting cell death. In addition to this similar phenotype, Tapon and colleague linked Sav to Wts by showing Sav physically interacts with Wts, forming the basis for more discoveries in this exciting pathway. A year later, in 2003, four research groups have identified and brought in a new player, named Hippo (Hpo) because of the hippopotamus-like phenotype of the mutated body parts (Harvey et al., 2003; Pantalacci et al., 2003; Udan et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2003). Loss of Hpo results in tissue overgrowth, as seen in Wts and Sav mutants. Furthermore, Hpo binds to and phosphorylates Sav and this Hpo/Sav interaction promotes Wts phosphorylation. Two years later, another component of the Hippo pathway Mob as tumor suppressor (Mats) was identified (Lai et al., 2005). Mats associates with Wts and functions as an activating subunit of Wts. Mutations in Mats cause cell over-proliferation and tumor growth. In the same year, Yorkie (Yki) was identified to be the downstream target that is inactivated by the Hippo pathway (Huang et al., 2005). Yki is phosphorylated and inactivated by Wts. Moreover, overexpression of Yki drives tissue overgrowth. In the end of 2005, Merlin (Mer) and its related protein Expanded (Ex) were established as the upstream factors of the Hippo pathway (Hamaratoglu et al., 2006). Mer and Ex, both membrane-associated FERM (4.1/ezrin/radixin/moesin) domain-containing proteins, are required for

proliferation arrest and apoptosis in developing imaginal discs. Mutations in Mer and Ex cause tissue overgrowth. Besides that, Mer and Ex regulate Wts phosphorylation and Yki activity, and act genetically upstream of Hpo. In 2006, Fat (Ft) was defined to be an upstream regulator of the Hippo pathway (Bennett and Harvey, 2006; Cho et al., 2006; Silva et al., 2006; Willecke et al., 2006). Loss of Ft results in enhanced proliferation and shows similar phenotype as loss of Ex or the Hippo pathway core components. Genetically interacting with the Hippo pathway, Ft also regulates Wts phosphorylation and Yki activity. In 2008, Scalloped (Sd) was found to be required for Yki-induced target gene expression (Goulev et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2008b). Sd, a TEAD/TEF family of transcriptional factors, is a Yki-binding protein and the interaction of Sd and Yki is critical to mediate the transcriptional output of the Hippo pathway.

The Hippo pathway is conserved from fly to human. Human components of the Hippo pathway, YAP (ortholog of Yorkie), Large tumor suppressor 1 and 2 (Lats1/2; ortholog of Wts), mammalian STE-20 kinase 1 and 2 (Mst1/2; ortholog of Hpo) and Msp-one-binder (Mob1; ortholog of Mats), are able to functionally rescue the corresponding mutants in the fly. Deregulation of the Hippo pathway in the mammals often leads to tumorigenesis. Here we review the molecular mechanisms of the Hippo pathway and the cancers derived from the alterations of the Hippo pathway. A summary of the identification history of the Hippo pathway is shown in Figure 1.

Contract grant sponsor: Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR).

*Correspondence to: Wanjin Hong, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Republic of Singapore. E-mail: mcbhwj@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

Received 7 September 2010; Accepted 8 September 2010

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com), 13 October 2010. DOI: 10.1002/jcp.22435

© 2010 WILEY-LISS, INC.

HIPPO PATHWAY AND CANCER

Basically, the Hippo pathway can be divided into three interlinked parts: Hippo core kinase components, the downstream transcriptional machinery, and upstream regulatory components (Fig. 2).

### HIPPO CORE KINASE COMPONENTS

The Hippo core kinase cassette contains four members and they are the first to be discovered. There are two kinases, Hpo (Mst1/2) and Wts (Lats1/2) and two adaptor proteins, Sav (WW45) and Mats (Mob). Hpo and Wts are serine/threonine kinases, activated by phosphorylation and by association with Sav and Mats, respectively. Autophosphorylation activates Hpo, which in turn phosphorylates Sav, Wts, and Mats. Sav acts as scaffold protein for assembling Hpo and Wts and facilitates phosphorylation of Wts by Hpo. Mats enhances the activity of Wts and Hpo-phosphorylated Mats promotes its interaction with Wts. Activated Wts then phosphorylates and inactivates the downstream transcriptional co-activator Yki in the fly and YAP and TAZ in mammals. Phosphorylated Yki, YAP, and TAZ are sequestered in the cytoplasm by interaction with 14-3-3 proteins. When Yki is not inhibited by Hippo pathway and remains in the nucleus, it binds Sd and activates transcription of downstream genes like Diap, bantam, and cycE in the fly. In mammals, YAP and TAZ interact with Sd ortholog, TEAD1–4 (TEADs) and activate expression of genes such as CTGF, IGFBP3, ITGB2, Birc5/Survivin, Gli2, and Axl.

For YAP, there are two modes of regulation. One is YAP phosphorylation-dependent, the other is YAP phosphorylation-independent. In the phosphorylation-dependent manner, the core kinase cassette Lats1/2 phosphorylates YAP on five HXRXXS motifs. Phosphorylation of YAP on S127 results in translocation of YAP out of the nucleus and cytoplasmic sequestration by 14-3-3 proteins to inhibit YAP activity. The phosphorylation on S381 primes YAP to be subsequently phosphorylated by CKI delta/epsilon in a phosphodegron and these phosphorylations lead to ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation of YAP (Zhao et al., 2010). The YAP S127 (Yki S168, TAZ S89) phosphorylation creates a binding site for 14-3-3 proteins, the mechanistic basis for the inhibition by the Hippo core components (Basu et al., 2003; Dong et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2007; Oh and Irvine, 2009; Oh et al., 2009a). Although Yki S168 phosphorylation is the most critical site for 14-3-3 binding, phosphorylation on Yki S111 and S250 sites also influence Yki activity in vivo (Oh and Irvine, 2009). YAP is likely phosphorylated by Lats1/2 via direct interaction between WW-domain of YAP and PPxY motifs in Lats to target phosphorylation of YAP’s HXRXXS motifs (Zhao et al., 2007).

In the phosphorylation-independent mode, Yki is relocalized from the nucleus to cytoplasm via direct binding with Ex to abrogate Yki’s nuclear accumulation (Badouel et al., 2009). Yki phosphorylation on S168 is dispensable for Ex binding. The direct interaction between Yki and Ex is mediated by WW domains of Yki and PPxY motifs of Ex. Both WW domains in Yki C-terminal region are needed for efficient binding to Ex, and the three PPxY motifs in the C-terminal domain of Ex are critical for interaction with Yki WW domains. Independent of Hpo/Wts kinase phosphorylating Yki, Ex can regulate growth via directly inhibiting Yki to reduce the levels of Yki in the nucleus.

Besides the genetic and biochemical studies of the Hippo pathway, the three-dimensional structural studies of the

### DOWNSTREAM TRANSCRIPTIONAL MACHINERY

The downstream effector of Hippo pathway is transcriptional co-activator Yki in the fly and YAP and TAZ in the mammals. The transcription factor Sd in the fly and TEADs in the mammals are major interacting partners for the functional outcome.

---

**Fig. 1.** The historical outline of the identification of key components of the Hippo pathway and the major reports relating to its role and mechanism in cancer development.

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY

CHAN ET AL.

Apical membrane

Crumbs
Fat
Ds
Fat
Ds

Ex
Mer

Hpo
Sav

Wts
Mats

Yki
Yki

CycE
Diap1
Ex
Bantam

Wbp2?
Sd

Basolateral membrane

Drosophila

Apical membrane

Crb1-3?
Ft1-4
DCHS
1-2?

FRMD6?
NF2

Mst1/2
WW45
LATS1/2
Mob1

YAP
TAZ

YAP
TAZ

CTGF
Axl
Serpine1
Survivin

Wbp2?
TEADs

Basolateral membrane

Mammals

Fig. 2. The general organization of and working model for the Hippo pathway in Drosophila (left) and mammals (right). In the fly, the upstream regulators consist of both surface membrane proteins such as Fat, Ds, and Crumbs and submembrane proteins such as Ex, Mer, and Kibra. The Hippo core machinery consists of Hpo, Sav, Wts, and Mats, and the downstream effectors are Yki, and Sd. In the mammals, the structural conservation of surface proteins was noted as Crb1–3, Ft1–4, and DCHS1–2 display sequence homology with fly Crumbs, Fat, and Ds, respectively, but the functional conservation is yet to be established. For the submembrane upstream regulators, the functional conservation for NF2 was established in the mammals but the functional conservation for FRMD6 and Kibra (or WWC2/3) is yet to be established. Both structural and functional conservation was established in mammals for the Hippo core machinery (Mst1/2, WW45, Lats1/2, and Mob1) and downstream effectors (YAP, TAZ, and TEAD1–4). The working model is that the surface membrane proteins will sense cell contact and organ size and they are able to activate the assembly of the submembrane Ex–Kibra–Mer (or FRMD6–NF2–Kibra in the mammals) complex (Step 1), which will then recruit the Hippo core machinery onto the submembrane complex to form a multiprotein super complex (Step 2), leading finally to activation of Wts (Lats1/2 in mammals) protein kinase (Step 3). Activated Hippo kinase complex will phosphorylate effector Yki (YAP and TAZ in mammals) so that they are inactivated by cytoplasmic sequestration through interaction with 14-3-3 proteins (Step 4). Non-phosphorylated Yki (YAP and TAZ in mammals) shuttles between the cytoplasm and the nucleus and its interaction with Sd (TEAD1–4 in mammals) leads to nuclear retention and formation of transcriptional machinery that will drive target gene expression to promote cell proliferation and/or suppress apoptosis. Wbp2 is recently shown as a positive regulator of TAZ and YAP (Chan et al., in press), while receptor tyrosine kinase Axl is a downstream target of YAP for YAP-mediated oncogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (Xu et al., in press).

components of the Hippo pathway are providing further information of molecular mechanisms of regulation of the Hippo pathway. Although the structure of TEAD1 has been solved and reveals how TEAD1 binds DNA (Anbanandam et al., 2006), how TEADs and YAP interact with each other is resolved only recently for the three-dimensional structure of TEAD–YAP complexes (one for human TEAD1 complexed with human YAP while the other for mouse TEAD4 complexed with mouse YAP) (Chen et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010b). Both studies show the three-dimensional interaction between the C-terminal YAP-binding domains of TEAD in complex with the N-terminal TEAD-interacting domains of YAP. The crystal structure reveals that the N-terminal region of YAP is folded into two short helices with an extended loop containing the PXXΦP motif in between, while the C-terminal domain of TEAD4 adopts an immunoglobulin-like fold (Chen et al., 2010) (Fig. 3). Point mutations of TEAD4 indicate that the residues important for YAP interaction are required for TEAD4 transforming activity on soft agar assay. Mutagenesis reveals that the PXXFP motif of YAP, although making few contacts with TEAD4, is important for TEAD4 interaction as well as for the transforming activity (Chen et al., 2010). Crystal structure of the YAP-binding domain of human TEAD2 was also resolved and it similarly adopts an immunoglobulin-like beta-sandwich fold with two extra helix-turn-helix inserts. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies reveal that the N-terminal TEAD binding domain of YAP is natively unfolded and that TEAD binding causes localized conformational changes in YAP (Tian et al., 2010). For more complete understanding about the mechanistic aspects of YAP/TAZ–TEAD interaction for YAP/TAZ to activate TEAD transcription activity to regulate gene expression, it still requires the complex structure of full-length TEAD in complex with full-length YAP. Besides providing direct molecular mechanism, the structural data can also provide clues

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY

HIPPO PATHWAY AND CANCER

The FERM-domain proteins Ex and Mer have been shown to act upstream of Hippo pathway, but the mechanism remains unknown. Kibra was recently shown to be another upstream regulator of Hippo core machinery (Baumgartner et al., 2010; Genevet et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010). Kibra is a relatively large protein with over 1,288 residues for the fly protein and contains two WW domains in the N-terminus and a C2 domain near the center. C2 domain is implicated as a Ca²⁺-dependent membrane-targeting module found in many cellular proteins regulating signaling and membrane trafficking. Kibra was shown to interact with several proteins including Mer (Baumgartner et al., 2010; Genevet et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010), Ex (Genevet et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010), Wts (Genevet et al., 2010), and Hpo/Sav (Yu et al., 2010). These observations suggest that Kibra may act as a key membrane scaffolding protein which not only promotes the assembly of Ex–Kibra–Mer complex at the apical membrane but also may recruit Hpo–Sav and Wts–Sav onto the Ex–Kibra–Mer complex, leading to the effective activation of the Hippo core machinery due to the assembly of a multiple protein complex containing both upstream regulators as well as the Hippo core machinery. Due to the presence of C2 domain in Kibra, it is envisioned that it may also sense cellular signaling and may potentially interact with the lipid bilayer to strengthen membrane targeting and assembly of the (Ex–Kibra–Mer)–(Hpo–Sav)–(Wts–Sav) super complex for robust activation of the Hippo pathway. Human Kibra (also called WWCl) was identified based on its enriched expression in the kidney and brain (Kremerskoth et al., 2003). Overexpression of human Kibra in HEK293 caused increased phosphorylation of Lats1/2 (Yu et al., 2010). Furthermore, consistent with the interaction of human Kibra with neurofibromin 2 (NF2) (Genevet et al., 2010), phosphorylation of Lats1/2 can be synergistically enhanced by coexpression of human Kibra and NF2 (Yu et al., 2010). In addition to Kibra/WWCl, mammals contain two Kibra-homologous proteins (WWC2 and WWC3). WWC2 and WWC3 display around 53% and 46% sequence identity with Kibra, respectively. The sequence homology of Kibra, WWC2, and WWC3 with the fly Kibra is around 33%, 32%, and 28%, respectively. Whether, Kibra, WWC2, and WWC3 play independent and/or overlapping function in regulating the Hippo pathway will be interesting aspect for future study.

Ft is a transmembrane protein and is responsible for transducing growth signal to Ex to regulate hippo pathway to modulate organ size (Bennett and Harvey, 2006; Cho et al., 2006; Silva et al., 2006; Willecke et al., 2006). Ft colocalizes with Ex and is required for Ex membrane localization at apical junctions in vivo, while Ft does not affect the Mer localization (Bennett and Harvey, 2006; Cho et al., 2006; Silva et al., 2006). Ft and Mer is suggested to act in parallel in growth regulation (Willecke et al., 2006). The upstream of Mer in regulating hippo pathway is still unknown. Although Ds interacts with Ft and is regarded as the ligand of Ft, Ds, and Ft are suggested to act in parallel to regulate tissue size (Willecke et al., 2006). Ds is also able to interact with Wts to act as a scaffold to link Wts proteins that promote Wts proteolysis to inhibit the Hippo kinase cascade (Cho et al., 2006).

As a large apical membrane protein with a short cytoplasmic region, Crumbs (Crb) is a key regulator of epithelial cell polarity (Bulgakova and Knust, 2009). Three recent studies suggest that Crb is likely a regulator upstream of the Ex–Kibra–Mer complex (Grzeschik et al., 2010; Ling et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010). Overexpression (Grzeschik et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010) or mutation (Ling et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010) of Crb causes activation of Yki and upregulation of its downstream target genes. Mechanistically, the cytoplasmic region of Crb contains a FERM-binding motif (FBM) that is implicated in mediating direct interaction with Ex (Ling et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010) and careful analysis of Crb mutants

Fig. 3. The structural basis of YAP/TAZ interaction with TEADs. A: Examples of residues in YAP, TAZ, and Yki that are predicted to interact with TEADs and Sd, respectively, are listed (Chan et al., 2009; Li et al., 2010b). The importance of these residues in TEAD interaction and physiological function is demonstrated for S94 of human YAP (Zhao et al., 2008) and L31F32, W43R44, L48P49, and F52F53 of human TAZ (Chen et al., 2009). B: Examples of residues in mouse TEAD4, human TEAD1, TEAD2, TEAD3, TEAD4, and fly Sd that are predicted to interact with YAP, TAZ, and Yki are listed (Chen et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010b). The importance of these residues in interaction with YAP, TAZ, and/or Yki and their functional relevance is demonstrated for K290, W292, and Y422 of mouse TEAD4 (Chen et al., 2010) and human TEAD1 (Fossdal et al., 2004; Kitagawa, 2007). C: The crystal structure of mouse TEAD4 complexed with mouse YAP (Chen et al., 2010). The X-ray structure of the complex (Protein Data Bank (PDB) accession code 3JUA) was viewed with PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/). The mouse TEAD4 was shown in green with K290, W292, and Y422 involved in YAP interaction shown in red, whereas mouse YAP was shown in cyan with TEAD-interacting L53F54, M71, L76P77, and F80 shown in dark pink and S79 shown in blue.

for delineating the pathway. The solution structure of atypical WW2 domain of Sav shows that the WW2 domain of Sav forms a beta-clam-like homodimer (Ohnishi et al., 2007). The homodimerization of the atypical WW2 domain of Sav and the presence of the atypical WW2 domain in Kibra promotes the identification of heterodimerization between Sav and Kibra (Yu et al., 2010). Further structural study of single component and complex of various components of the Hippo pathway will provide valuable information to further illustrate the mechanistic basis of the hippo pathway.

UPSTREAM REGULATORY FACTORS

There are three branches of upstream regulators identified so far: the Ft-Dachsous (Ds) branch, the Ex–Kibra–Mer complex, and the apical–basal polarity proteins.
suggests that Crb is important for apical membrane localization of Ex in epithelial cells (Ling et al., 2010). These observations indicate an intriguing working model that Crb, by organizing the epithelial polarity and junctional complexes, is able to promote the apical membrane recruitment of Ex and likely to facilitate the formation of Ex–Kibra–Mer complex, which in turn will recruit Hpo–Sav and Wts–Mats complexes to the apical membrane, leading to the activation of the Hippo kinase core machinery to phosphorylate and inactivate Yki. Consistently, one (Crb3) of the three mammalian Crb homologues (Crb1–3) was shown to act as a tumor suppressor (Karp et al., 2008). Using in vivo selection for immortal baby mouse kidney epithelial cells to acquire tumorigenicity, loss of expression of Crb3 was associated with disruption of tight junction, apicobasal polarity, and contact-inhibited growth of the selected tumorigenic cells. Restoration of crb3 expression in the selected cells restored junctions, polarity, and contact inhibition while suppressing migration and metastasis. It will be interesting to examine whether the tumor suppressor function of Crb3 in these cells is mediated through the Hippo core machinery and YAP/TAZ activities.

### HIPPO PATHWAY AND CANCER

The components of the Hippo pathway are made up of tumor suppressors and oncogenes. The Hippo core components and upstream regulators are mostly involved in tumor suppressor function, whereas TAZ, YAP, and TEADs are mostly involved in oncogenic events. Deregulation of any one of them is expected to result in defects in cell growth and proliferation and ultimately lead to diseases especially cancers. The role of deregulated Hippo pathway in cancer development is supported by results obtained from various experimental approaches including genomics, biochemical analysis of human and mouse cancer samples, in vitro biochemical and functional assays, and genetic studies using knockout mice.

#### NF2

NF2, the human ortholog of Mer, is a known tumor suppressor. NF2 is structurally similar to members of the ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) family of proteins that are thought to link cytoskeletal components with surface proteins of the plasma membrane. In adults, NF2 is highly expressed in Schwann cells, meningeal cells, lens, and nerve. Located on chromosome 22q, NF2 gene mutations are associated with neurofibromatosis type II. Patients are predisposed to development of tumors of the nervous system (schwannomas, meningiomas, ependymomas, astrocytomas, and neurofibromas), peripheral neuropathy and ophthalmological lesions (cataracts, epiretinal membranes, and retinal hamartomas), and skin tumors (Rao, 2003; Asthagiri et al., 2009). As a tumor suppressor, NF2 has been implicated in diverse signaling pathways such as Rac1 GTPase, mTORC1, Akt, ErbB2/EGFR, and Src (McClatchey, 2007). More recent studies indicate that participation of NF2 in the Hippo pathway is part of its molecular mechanism of action in tumor suppression. In a study using human meningioma cell lines, NF2 loss was associated with loss of contact-dependent growth inhibition, enhanced anchorage-independent growth, and increased cell proliferation due to increased S-phase entry. In addition, NF2 loss in both meningioma cell lines and primary tumors resulted in increased YAP expression and nuclear localization. Most critically, siRNA-mediated knockdown of YAP in NF2-deficient meningioma cells suppressed cell proliferation and S-phase entry, suggesting that the proliferative role due to absence of NF2 is due to enhanced activity of YAP (Striedinger et al., 2008). Independently, genomics analysis of malignant pleural mesotheliomas (MPMs) has identified two cases with high-level amplification in the 11q22 locus which contains YAP1 gene. YAP was overexpressed in both cases. Functionally, knockdown of YAP1 suppressed growth of a mesothelioma cell line NCI-H290 with NF2 homozygous deletion, whereas YAP overexpression promoted the growth of MeT-5A, an immortalized mesothelial cell line. Importantly, reintroduction of NF2 into NCI-H290 cells induced phosphorylation at Ser127 of YAP, which was accompanied by its reduced nuclear localization. Mechanistically, immunoprecipitation and in vitro pull-down assays indicated a physical interaction between NF2 and YAP. This study suggests that NF2 interacts with YAP to promote its phosphorylation of Ser127 and cytoplasmic retention (Yokoyama et al., 2008). Using conditional knockout mice, Pan’s group (Zhang et al., 2010) shows recently that NF2 and YAP function antagonistically in liver development. Inactivation of NF2 leads to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and bile duct hamartoma and these phenotypes can be suppressed by heterozygous deletion of YAP, suggesting that NF2 functions largely through the inhibition of YAP in the liver. Two recent studies suggest that NF2 may engage other pathways to execute tumor suppressor function. One study shows that NF2 is able to suppress tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4 (DCAF1) in the nucleus (Li et al., 2010a). It was shown that the closed, growth-inhibitory form of NF2 accumulates in the nucleus, binds to CRL4 (DCAF1), and suppresses its activity. Depletion of DCAF1 blocks the pro-mitogenic effect of NF2 inactivation. Conversely, enforced expression of a NF2-insensitive mutant of DCAF1 counteracts the anti-mitogenic effect of NF2. Importantly, re-expression of NF2 and silencing of DCAF1 implement a similar transcriptional program. Of clinical relevance was the demonstration that tumor-derived mutations invariably disrupt NF2’s ability to interact with or inhibit CRL4 (DCAF1). Functionally, depletion of DCAF1 inhibits the hyperproliferation of Schwannoma cells from NF2 patients and suppresses the oncogenic potential of NF2-deficient tumor cell lines. Another study from McClatchey group shows that liver-specific deletion of NF2 in mouse leads to both cholangiocellular and HCC and this is due to aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) receptor rather than deregulation of the Hippo pathway (Benhamouche et al., 2010). These results suggest there may exist multiple mechanisms for NF2 to exhibit tumor suppressing function, one of which is via enhancing phosphorylation of Ser127 of YAP by the Hippo core machinery so that YAP is sequestered in the cytoplasm.

#### Mst1/2

There are a few groups reporting Mst1 and Mst2 gene deletions in mice (Oh et al., 2009b; Zhou et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2010; Song et al., 2010). Mst1 and Mst2 play a redundant role. Mice with deletion of either Mst1 or Mst2 develop normally. Only one copy of either one of them is enough for survival. Double deletion of both Mst1 and Mst2 lead to embryonic lethality at approximately embryonic day 8.5, with severe growth retardation and other failure (Oh et al., 2009b). Because of the early lethality of double knockout of Mst1 and Mst2, most of the works of Mst1 and Mst2 deletions were done in a tissue-specific manner in order to assess the role of Mst1 and Mst2 at later stages of development, particularly in regulating mammalian organ size. Post-natal or tissue-specific deletion of Mst1 and Mst2 in mice results in loss of S127 phosphorylation of YAP and its enhanced nuclear localization. Mst1/2 double knockout mice showed liver overgrowth and HCC (Zhou et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2010; Song et al., 2010). This is consistent with the phenotype of transgenic YAP overexpression, which results in liver overgrowth and cancer (Dong et al., 2007). Interestingly, the Mst1 and Mst2 are cleaved to shorter, active forms, which are absent in 30% of human HCC, and low YAP phosphorylation is

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGYalso observed in these HCC. The downstream kinase Lats1/2 phosphorylation is not affected in the Mst1/2 knockout mice and the inactivation of YAP in liver probably through kinases that are distinct from Lats1/2. Contact inhibition is not affected in Mst1/2 double knockout mice (Zhou et al., 2009). In the other two studies (Lu et al., 2010; Song et al., 2010), Mst1 and Mst2 were shown to play important roles in regulating/restricting the liver progenitor/stem cells, and thus this is possible one of the mechanisms regulated by Hippo pathway in inhibiting the production of stem/progenitor cells in mature liver. All these works show that inhibition of YAP by Mst1/2 is an important pathway for tumor suppression in the liver.

### WW45

Mice deficient in WW45 are embryonic lethal where many organs of the mutant embryos display hyperplasia (Lee et al., 2008). Unchecked proliferation and defects in terminal differentiation of WW45-depleted epithelial cells contribute to this hyperplasia phenotype. Mechanistically, WW45 is required for activation of Mst1 to translocate into the nucleus for recruiting and activating Lats1/2. Activated Lats1/2 then phosphorylates and inactivates YAP by targeting it for cytoplasmic localization, suggesting that WW45 is required for Mst1 signaling pathway to promote cell-cycle exit and terminal differentiation in developing epithelial tissues. Mice with liver-specific depletion of WW45 develop larger but functional liver with normal architecture. There is expansion of hepatic progenitor cells, and eventually hepatomas are developed (Lee et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2010). Interestingly, tumors developed in the WW45-deficient liver from two independent studies showed mixed pathology characteristics of HCC and cholangiocarcinoma (CC) and they seemed to originate from hepatic progenitor cells (also known as oval cells), but not hepatocytes. The numbers and proliferative capacity of oval cells are significantly increased in these mice, suggesting that WW45 has a role in repressing oval cell activation. Upregulation of nuclear YAP and its known target genes such as CTGF and survivin was observed in the oval cells, presumably accounting for their increased proliferative capacity and explanatory for the increased liver size and tumor development (Lee et al., 2010). WW45 may play a minor role in maintaining hepatocyte quiescence. Firstly, phosphorylation of YAP and Lats1/2 is not affected in hepatocytes lacking WW45. Secondly, the proliferative index is also similar between the hepatocytes from WW45−/− and wild type mice. Finally, the acute increase in liver size and tumor development as a result of high proliferation of hepatocytes, as shown in the cases of both YAP transgenic mice (Camargo et al., 2007; Dong et al., 2007) and Mst1/2 conditional knockout mice (Zhou et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2010), were not observed in the WW45-depleted liver. Taken together, these results indicate that WW45 plays a major role in regulating YAP in hepatic progenitor cells but not mature hepatocytes. The phenotype of the WW45-deficient mice is highly penetrative; with 74% of WW45+/− mice develop liver tumors. The surviving WW45−/− mice develop liver tumors and died earlier than did the heterozygous (Lee et al., 2010). WW45 maps to the chromosomal region 14q13–14q23, a locus that is subject to allelic loss in a variety of cancers, including renal cancers, ovarian cancers, and malignant mesothelioma. Two renal cancer cell lines, ACHN and 786-O, were found to have deletions involving WW45. One colon cancer cell line, HT15, has a heterozygous C to A mutation at nucleotide 554, resulting in a substitution of aspartic acid for alanine at codon 185 (Tapon et al., 2002). Whether WW45 is mutated in primary human cancers or whether downregulation/silencing of WW45 in human cancers is associated with progression and prognosis remain to be established.

#### Lats1/2

Gene knockout analysis in mice suggests that Lats1 is not essential for embryonic development but it is indispensable in the mammary gland development, as Lats1-deficient mice exhibit defects in breast development. Female mice display lack of macroscopic nipple formation and decreased amount of breast epithelial tissue. The Lats1 knockout mice also represent a model to study human reproductive dysfunction of isolated luteinizing hormone-hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and corpus luteum insufficiency because they lack proper follicular maturation and differentiation in ovaries. Other defects include infertility, growth retardation, endocrine dysfunction, hyperplastic changes in pituitary, and decreased serum hormone levels. Importantly, all Lats1−/− female mice develop ovarian stromal cell tumors by the age of 3 months and most of them develop soft-tissue sarcomas while metastasis were found in 14% of the mice. These mice are found to be highly sensitive to carcinogenic treatment (St John et al., 1999). In contrast to Lats1, Lats2-deficient mice is embryonic lethal and die before E12.5. Embryos and MEFs of Lats2−/− mice display suboptimal chromosomal segregation and genomic instability, events associated with tumor progression (McPherson et al., 2004). The embryos are smaller in size or developmentally delayed which could be due to proliferation defect as cyclin E level is decreased. However, Lats2−/− embryos displayed overgrowth in mesodermally derived tissues, and MEFs from these mice acquired growth advantages by overcoming contact inhibition.

Lats2 is regulated by oncogenic miR-372 and miR-373. miR-372 is overexpressed in AGS human gastric cancer cell line (Cho et al., 2009), testicular cancer cell lines (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), and colorectal cancer cells (Nakano et al., 2009). miR-373 expression level was inversely correlate with that of Lats2 in esophageal cancer cells and it is overexpressed in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patient samples (Lee et al., 2009). These results suggest that the downregulation of Lats2 might promote growth and tumor formation. Other findings also demonstrate that mammalian Lats1 functions as a tumor suppressor. For instance, methylation-dependent silencing of both Lats1 and Lats2 was significantly associated with biologically aggressive human breast cancers and malignant development of human astrocytoma (Takahashi et al., 2005; Jiang et al., 2006). Lats1 and Lats2 promoter regions are hypermethylated in human breast tumors and the mRNA levels of both Lats1 and Lats2 are accordingly reduced. The decreased expression of Lats1 or Lats2 mRNA was significantly associated with a large tumor size, high lymph node metastasis, and estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor negativity. Hypermethylation of the promoter regions of Lats1 and Lats2 likely plays an important role in the downregulation of their mRNA levels in breast cancers, and breast cancers with a decreased expression of Lats1 or Lats2 mRNA levels have a biologically aggressive phenotype (Lai et al., 2005; Takahashi et al., 2005). Lats2 is also shown to have decreased expression in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), a aggressive subtype of B-cell lymphomas (Hartmann et al., 2010).

#### Mob1

Mats is required to control cell proliferation and apoptosis in Drosophila (Lai et al., 2005), similar to the functions of Hpo, Sav, and Wts. However, Mats mutant showed stronger overgrowth phenotypes as compared to these other genes. As there is a lack of Mob1 knockout mouse model, it remains to be studied whether the mammalian orthologues has the stronger overgrowth phenotype as compared to other mammalian Hippo pathway molecules. Through a morpholino-based knockdown approach; however, Mats morphant cells were

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGYshown to exhibit growth advantage in chimeric embryos in Zebrafish, suggesting the role of Mats family genes in growth control is conserved in both invertebrates and vertebrates (Yuan et al., 2009). This has opened a new avenue to investigate Hippo pathway in Zebrafish. It has also been reported that there are seven human homologs of dMobl. Among them, only hMoblA and hMoblB bind to both LatsI and Lats2 (Chow et al., 2010). Overexpression of hMobl inhibits tumor cell proliferation and induces apoptosis, whereas knockdown of hMobl increases cell proliferation, showing that hMobl is indeed a putative tumor suppressor. The downregulation of MatsI has been observed in colorectal tumor tissue (Kosaka et al., 2007). Mats is found mutated in cDNA from human skin melanoma and mouse mammary gland carcinoma (Lai et al., 2005). Recently, expression of Mobkl2a and mobkl2b is reported to be reduced in MCL as well (Hartmann et al., 2010).

### YAP/TAZ

In a screen for copy-number changes in mouse mammary tumor, YAP is the only gene found in a small 350-bp amplicon from a region that is syntenic to a much larger locus amplified in human cancers at chromosome I lq22. Overexpression of human YAP induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suppression of apoptosis, growth factor-independent proliferation, and anchorage-independent growth in non-transformed mammary MCF10A epithelial cells (Overholtzer et al., 2006). In another study using mouse model of liver cancer initiated from progenitor cells harboring defined cancer-predisposing lesions, YAP, and clAPI are the candidate oncogenes in a recurrent amplification at chromosome 9qAl, the syntenic region of human chromosome I lq22. Both YAP and clAPI accelerated tumorigenesis and were required to sustain rapid growth of amplicon-containing tumors (Zender et al., 2006). YAP gene was also reported to be amplified and overexpressed in other human cancers such as oral SCC, primary intracranial ependymomas, MPMs, and oral cancer (Baldwin et al., 2005; Snijders et al., 2005; Modena et al., 2006; Yokoyama et al., 2008). Furthermore, YAP protein is overexpressed in a wide spectrum of human cancer cell lines and primary tumors, including lung, pancreatic, ovarian, hepatocellular, colorectal, and prostate carcinomas. Two distinct patterns of YAP distribution were observed in tumors, one with cytoplasmic labeling in conjunction with prominent nuclear accumulation, and the second with uniform cytoplasmic and nuclear staining without nuclear enrichment (Dong et al., 2007). There is strong and diffuse nuclear and cytoplasmic YAP expression in colonic adenocarcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, and ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma as compared to normal tissues of the colon, lung, and ovary (Steinhardt et al., 2008). Its overexpression in non-small-cell lung cancer may contribute to the disease progression and poor prognosis (Wang et al., 2010). YAP expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus is significantly increased in high-grade dysplasia and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus as well as gastric adenocarcinoma and metastatic gastric disease (Lam-Himlin et al., 2006; Steinhardt et al., 2008). YAP is also found overexpressed in HCC and is an independent prognostic marker in HCC (Dong et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2007) Upregulation of the YAP in human medulloblastomas with aberrant Shh signaling was observed. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) induces YAP nuclear distribution in cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs), which have been suggested as a cell of origin for certain medulloblastomas. YAP can drive CGNP proliferation and is found in cells of the perivascular niche, where proposed tumor-repopulating cells reside. Post-irradiation, YAP was found in newly growing tumor cells (Fernandez et al., 2009).

Functionally, transgenic overexpression of YAP in mouse liver led to greatly enhanced organ size due to increased cell proliferation and eventually led to HCC (Dong et al., 2007). YAP was also found to be enriched in stem and/or progenitor cells of the intestine and transgenic overexpression in the intestine led to dysplasia due to proliferation of the crypt stem/progenitor cells, which is correlated with increased levels of cyclin D and BclXL (Camargo et al., 2007). As mentioned, overexpression of YAP caused EMT, growth factor-independent growth, and oncogenesis (Overholtzer et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2008a, 2009b; Zhao et al., 2009). The transforming ability of YAP was shown to be suppressed by Hippo pathway through phosphorylation at several HXRXXS motifs with the motif harboring Ser127 being most crucial for cytoplasmic retention via interaction with 14-3-3 proteins (Zhao et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2008a). Mutation of Ser127 increased the transforming ability of YAP. TEADs were identified as the major transcriptional factors responsible for YAP to promote cell proliferation, EMT and oncogenesis (Zhao et al., 2008). Among genes induced by YAP, CTGF was firmly established as a direct target of YAP–TEAD complex as its promoter region contain several GGAATG motifs for binding of TEADs, and knockdown of CTGF partially impaired the oncogenic property of YAP (Zhao et al., 2008). Recently, amphiregulin (AREG) was identified as a major effector of YAP in conferring growth factor-independent growth (Zhang et al., 2009b).

In addition to promoting the stem/progenitor cell property in the intestine (Camargo et al., 2007), YAP is also implicated in stem cell property of neuroprogenitor cells (Cao et al., 2008) and embryonic stem (ES) cells (Lian et al., 2010). YAP is inactivated during ES cell differentiation and its level is elevated during induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell reprogramming. YAP binds directly to promoters of the genes known to induce stem cell pluripotency (Lian et al., 2010). These observations suggest that the ability of YAP to promote stem cell property is part of the mechanism responsible for its oncogenic behavior. Since EMT is also associated with stem cell property (Mani et al., 2008; Polyak and Weinberg, 2009), the ability of YAP to promote EMT is consistent with this hypothesis.

TAZ (WWTR1) was originally identified as a 14-3-3 binding protein (Kanai et al., 2000). It has been shown to act as a transcriptional co-activator modulating mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) differentiation (Hong et al., 2005). By co-activating Runx2-dependent gene transcription while repressing PPARgamma-dependent gene transcription, TAZ is able to promote MSCs to differentiate into osteoblasts and to suppress differentiation of MSCs to adipocytes. TAZ has also been implicated to regulate nuclear shuttling of Smads to regulate signaling pathway of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) (Varelas et al., 2008). It was shown that in response to TGF-beta stimulation, TAZ binds heteromeric Smad2/3–4 complexes to facilitate nuclear accumulation and recruitment onto TGF-beta response elements of Smad target genes. As such, TAZ is likely involved in self-renewal of ES cells and loss of TAZ leads to inhibition of TGF-beta signaling and differentiation of ES cells into a neuroectoderm lineage. In TAZ-silenced cells, Smad2/3–4 complexes fail to accumulate in the nucleus and activate transcription. The transcriptional co-factor ARC105 is implicated in this role of TAZ for nuclear translocation of Smad complexes. In a recent study (Liu et al., 2010), TAZ was shown to regulate expression of the EMT transcription factor ZEB1 to control retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cell proliferation and differentiation. ZEB1 expression is increased during RPE dedifferentiation, leading to cell proliferation and EMT. Interestingly, TAZ–TEAD1 translocation to the nucleus coincides with loss of cell–cell contact and onset of ZEB1 expression in the nucleus. Knockdown of TAZ by shRNA prevented the increased expression of ZEB1 and, in turn,

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
prevented proliferation and EMT. TAZ was shown to bind
to the ZEB1 promoter in vivo, suggesting that TAZ-TEAD
complex may directly induce ZEB1 transcription to promote
EMT and cell proliferation. TAZ may also function as a co-
activator of MyoD to promote expression of target genes of
MyoD to enhance myogenic differentiation (Jeong et al., 2010).
Interestingly, it was recently shown that the Hippo pathway
is able to restrict Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling by promoting
an interaction between TAZ and disheveled (DVL) in the
cytoplasm. TAZ inhibits the CKIdelta/epsilon-mediated
phosphorylation of DVL, thereby inhibiting Wnt/beta-Catenin
signaling. This study suggests that the cytoplasmic pool of TAZ
may function to regulate Wnt signaling (Varelas et al., 2010).

Studies from three independent laboratories have shown
that knockout of TAZ gene in mice results in major defect in the
kidney and lung (Hossain et al., 2007; Tian et al., 2007; Makita
et al., 2008). TAZ−/− mice developed renal cysts characteristic
of polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Cells lining the cysts of the
knockout mice were shown to have fewer and shorter primary
cilia. The loss of cilia integrity was recapitulated in a renal CD
epithelial cell line by TAZ knockdown, suggesting TAZ is critical
for the integrity of renal cilia to maintain the structural integrity
of the kidney (Hossain et al., 2007). In another study, the levels
of calcium-permeable cation channel protein polycystin 2 (PC2)
were shown to be increased in kidneys of TAZ−/− mice. TAZ
was suggested to interact with PC2 as well as beta-Trcp. In this
way, TAZ acts as bridging factor to link PC2 to the beta-Trcp of
SCF(beta-Trcp) E3 ubiquitin ligase pathway (Tian et al., 2007).
In addition to kidney cysts, another study also revealed a role
of TAZ in the lung (Makita et al., 2008). TAZ knockouts were
revealed to exhibit also defects in the lung characteristic of
pulmonary emphysema. Glis3 is recently shown to interact with
TAZ to maintain the normal development and architecture
of the kidney (Kang et al., 2009). Glis3 gene knockout mice
developed diabetes and PKD. Glis3 was shown to be localized
to the primary cilium and interact with TAZ. The P/LPXY motif
in the C terminus of Glis3 was implicated in the interaction with
TAZ (most likely the WW domain) and TAZ may act as a co-
activator of Glis3-mediated gene transcription. It was suggested
that localization to the primary cilium and interaction with TAZ
are key events of the Glis3 signaling pathway.

In our study aiming to identify novel proteins containing the
DSGXXS degron, which mediates phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, and proteosome degradation of beta-catenin,
IkappaB proteins, Emi1, Snail, and claspin, TAZ was identified to
be constitutively degraded by the proteosome (data not
published). Profiling TAZ protein expression in human cancer
cell lines revealed that its levels are higher in invasive breast
cancer cell lines such as Hs578t, BT549, and MDA-MB-231 cells
as compared to non-invasive MCF7 and ZR75.1 cells. Functional
analysis established that TAZ is able to promote cell migration
and invasion and is important for the transformed phenotype of
breast cancer cells (Chan et al., 2008). An independent study
also revealed that TAZ promotes cell proliferation and EMT.
Furthermore, TAZ is inactivated through phosphorylation by
the Hippo core machinery, primarily at S89A residue (Lei et al.,
2008). Overexpression of TAZ in immortalized mammary
epithelial MCF10A cells and NIH3T3 fibroblasts caused
oncogenesis as assessed by anchorage-independent growth in
soft agar. The oncogenic property of TAZ is greatly enhanced
when Ser89 is mutated into alanine. Mechanistically, TEADs
were identified as the transcriptional factors to mediate TAZ’s
property to promote cell proliferation, EMT, and oncogenesis.
TAZ physically interacts with TEADs and mutations of TAZ
residues that are important for interaction with TEADs
abolished the oncogenic property of TAZ and silencing
endogenous TEADs also inhibited the TAZ-driven
transformation (Chan et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009a; Chen
et al., 2010). Interestingly, it was also revealed that interaction
of TAZ with TEADs is important for TAZ to accumulate in the
nucleus, suggesting that TEADs may have a regulatory role in
TAZ subcellular distribution and function. Our recent analysis
suggests that Wbp2, which was originally identified as a YAP-
interacting protein containing several PPXY motif (Chen et al.,
1997), is involved in TAZ-mediated oncogenesis (Chan et al.,
in press). Of clinical relevance is the observation that increased
expression of TAZ was seen in about 20% breast cancer
samples (Chan et al., 2008). Furthermore, along with TEAD4,
the expression of TAZ transcript was increased in basal type
and triple negative breast cancers (Richardson et al., 2006; Han
et al., 2008). Table I shows the summary of YAP/TAZ functional
assays and their involvement in cancer development.


TABLE I. Functional assays of YAP/TAZ and/or their involvement in cancer development

| Gene     | Assay                     | Phenotype                                                                                   | Refs.                                                                 |
|----------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| YAP/TAZ  | Knockout mice             | TAZ knockout: defects in kidney and lung                                                    | Hossain et al. [2007], Tian et al. [2007], and Makita et al. [2008]   |
|          | Transgenic mice           | YAP knockout: developmental arrest around E8.5                                              | Morin-Kensicki et al. [2006]                                          |
|          |                           | Transgenic overexpression of YAP in mouse liver leads to tissue enlargement and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) | Dong et al. [2007]                                                   |
|          |                           | Transgenic overexpression in the intestine leads to dysplasia due to proliferation of the crypt stem/progenitor cells | Camargo et al. [2007]                                               |
|          | Cell culture (overexpression) | YAP induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suppression of apoptosis, growth factor-independent proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in MCF10A cells | Overholtzer et al. [2006]                                           |
|          |                           | TAZ protein expression is higher in human invasive breast cancer cell lines                    | Chan et al. [2008]                                                  |
|          |                           | Overexpression of TAZ in MCF10A cells and NIH3T3 cells results in anchorage-independent growth, cell proliferation and EMT | Lei et al. [2008] and Chan et al. [2009]                             |
| Cancer samples |                       | YAP is amplified and overexpressed in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), primary intracranial ependymonas, malignant mesotheliomas and oral cancer | Baldwin et al. [2005], Snijders et al. [2005], Modena et al. [2006], and Yokoyama et al. [2008] |
|          |                           | YAP is overexpressed in HCC                                                                 | Zhao et al. [2007] and Dong et al. [2007]                            |
|          |                           | Upregulation of YAP in medulloblastomas with aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling                 | Fernandez et al. [2009]                                             |
|          |                           | YAP is found in a small 350-bp amplicon syntenic to a much larger locus amplified in human cancers at chromosome 11q22 | Overholtzer et al. [2006]                                           |
|          |                           | YAP and clAPI accelerated tumorigenesis and are required to sustain rapid growth of amplicon-containing tumors | Zender et al. [2006]                                                |
|          |                           | TAZ is increased in expression in about 20% breast cancer samples                             | Chan et al. [2008]                                                  |
|          |                           | Along with TEAD4, TAZ transcript is increased in basal and triple negative breast cancers      | Richardson et al. [2006] and Han et al. [2008]                      |

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY

TEADS

Among the four TEADs proteins, TEAD1 and TEAD4 are more often associated with proliferation and cancer development. Firstly, proliferative role of TEAD1 was established by studies using gene knockout in mice and biochemical and cell biological approaches. TEAD1 gene knockout in mice led to embryonic lethality around embryonic days 11–12 (E11–E12) (Chen et al., 1994), suggesting that it is important for cell proliferation during normal development. Consistently, knockout of TEAD2 gene did not have major effect on development or growth as the knockout mice appear normal (Sawada et al., 2008). Although TEAD2 is not essential, absence of both TEAD1 and TEAD2 in double knockout mice had more severe impact on development as the TEAD1 (−/−)/TEAD2 (−/−) embryos died at earlier stage E9.5 with severe growth defects and morphological abnormalities. Reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis were observed in the embryos of the double knockouts (Sawada et al., 2008). These results suggest that TEAD1 and TEAD2 play overlapping role in proliferation with TEAD1 being the most important during development and growth. Cellular and biochemical studies also suggest that the proliferative role of TEAD1 is regulated by Hippo pathway through YAP distribution. This study also highlights that mechanism and downstream target genes of TEAD–YAP in cell proliferation may differ depending on the cell type (Ota and Sasaki, 2008). Secondly, mutation of TEAD1 that disrupted ability to interact with TAZ/YAP is associated with human disease characteristic of cell proliferation defect. Human Sveinsson’s chorioretinal atrophy (SCRA) (also referred to as helicoid peripapillary chorioretinal degeneration, atrophy areata, or circumpapillary dysgenesis) is an autosomal dominant eye disease, characterized by symmetrical lesions radiating from the optic disc involving the retina and the choroid. A human genetics study has identified a missense mutation (Y421H) of TEAD1 in all patients analyzed (Fossdal et al., 2004). Y421 is conserved in all members of TEAD family as well as in fly Scallop. The Y421H mutants of TEAD1 and TEAD4 are defective in interaction with YAP and TAZ (Kitagawa, 2007; Chen et al., 2010). The critical role of Y421 was also revealed in the X-ray structure of YAP–TEAD complexes as it makes direct interaction with Ser94 of YAP and S51 of TAZ (Chen et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010b). A recent study suggests that TEAD1 is preferentially expressed in the choroid and that the primary cellular origin of SCRA due to Y421 mutation is within the choroid (Tosi et al., 2009). Thirdly, in addition to these loss-of-functional studies, gain-of-functional evidence is available to support a critical and positive role of TEAD1 in cell proliferation and oncogenesis. TEAD1 overexpression is implicated in cell proliferation and/or cancer development. TEAD1, along with c-Cbl, was identified as a novel prostate basal cell marker that correlates with poor clinical outcome in prostate cancer. Using gene expression profiling approach to compare RNA isolated from basal and luminal cells of prostate cancers, TEAD1 and c-Cbl were among the genes whose expression are enriched in basal cells. Knockdown of TEAD1 expression using siRNA in PC3 prostate cells led to decreased cell growth. Significantly, analyses of prostate cancer tissue array established that increased protein levels of TEAD1 were associated with decreased patient survival (Knight et al., 2008). In addition, TEAD1 is implicated in overexpression of mesothelin (MSLN) in cancer (Hucl et al., 2007). Overexpression of MSLN is a diagnostically and therapeutically useful characteristic of pancreatic cancer but its mechanism of overexpression was not defined. In a promoter study, a MCAT element was identified in the promoter region of MSLN gene and was shown to be bound by TEAD1 both in vitro and in vivo. TEAD1 was necessary for MSLN protein overexpression as TEAD1 knockdown reduced MSLN expression. TEAD1 or other members of TEADs family may thus be major regulators of MSLN overexpression in pancreatic and other human cancers. As mentioned, CTGF is the best-characterized target gene of YAP/TAZ–TEAD complex (Kwon et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2008). Consistently, TEAD1 is implicated in CTGF overexpression in cells defective in TGF-beta signaling pathway. Although CTGF is induced by TGF-beta in diverse cell types, TGF-beta receptor-mediated signaling is often impaired in pancreatic cancers and cell lines, usually due to DPC4/Smad4 mutations which arise during the later stages of intraepithelial neoplastic progression. It was demonstrated that TEAD-binding cis element of CTGF promoter is essential for its promoter activity in pancreatic cancer cell lines.

TEAD4 is also implicated in developmental cell proliferation (Yagi et al., 2007). Its gene knockout led to a preimplantation lethal phenotype in mice. TEAD4−/− embryos do not express trophectoderm-specific genes, such as Cdx2, but do express inner cell mass (ICM)-specific genes, such as Oct4, resulting in the defective generation of trophoblast stem cells, trophectoderm or blastocoel cavities in TEAD4(−/−) morulae. However, TEAD4−/− embryos can produce ES cells, a derivative of ICM. Consistently, if the TEAD4 allele is not disrupted until after implantation, then TEAD4−/− embryos complete development, suggesting a specific role of TEAD4 in specification and proliferation of the trophectoderm lineage. The Hippo pathway was shown to regulate TEAD4 activity to specify outside cells of the preimplantation mouse embryo to form the trophectoderm because YAP is localized to the nuclei of outside cells due to lack of the activation of Hippo core components. However, in the inside cells of the preimplantation embryo, YAP is phosphorylated and sequestered in the cytoplasm by LATS due to cell contact (Nishioka et al., 2009). Functionally, TEAD4 overexpression alone in MCF10A and NIH3T3 exhibited noticeable transforming ability as assessed by anchorage-independent growth in soft agar (Chan et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2010). This raises the possibility that TEAD4 itself may act like an oncogene during cancer development. Supporting this conclusion is the observation that TEAD4 gene is amplified, and its transcript level is increased in several cancers, including basal-like breast cancer (Richardson et al., 2006; Adelaide et al., 2007; Han et al., 2008), testicular germ cell tumors (Almstrup et al., 2004; Skotheim et al., 2006), and serous Fallopian tube carcinoma (Nowee et al., 2007). The 12p13 chromosome region where the TEAD4 gene is located has been reported to be amplified in additional cancers such as glioblastoma multiforme and desmoplastic medulloblastoma (Weber et al., 1996; Ehrbrecht et al., 2006), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (Rodriguez et al., 2005), and head and neck SCC cell lines (Singh et al., 2001). It is envisioned that overexpressed TEAD4 in these cancers may engage endogenous TAZ and/or YAP as the transcriptional co-activators to mediate its oncogenic property. Consistent with this possibility is our preliminary observation that shRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous TAZ suppressed TEAD4-mediated transformation of MCF10A cells and that single residue mutation of TEAD4 that disrupted its interaction with TAZ and YAP abolished its transforming ability (Chen et al., 2010). Table 2 summarizes the functional assays of TEADs and their involvement in cancer development.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The Hippo pathway is emerging as one of the key signaling pathways regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis associated with normal development, stem cell behavior, and differentiation. Alterations and mutations of the Hippo pathway are increasingly associated with human diseases such as hypoplasia in SCRA and increased cell proliferation in diverse types of human cancers. While the mechanistic and molecular

HIPPO PATHWAY AND CANCER

TABLE 2. Functional assays of TEADs and/or their involvement in cancer development

| Gene    | Assay                          | Phenotype                                                                                   | Refs.                                                                 |
|---------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TEAD1   | Knockout mice                  | Embryonic lethality around E11–12                                                            | Chen et al. [1994]                                                   |
|         | Missense mutation (Y421H)      | Human Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (SCRA), an autosomal dominant eye disease                | Fossdal et al. [2004]                                                |
|         |                                | Y421H mutants of TEAD1 and TEAD4 are defective in interaction with YAP and TAZ                  | Kitagawa [2007] and Chen et al. [2010]                              |
|         | Cancer samples                 | Overexpression of TEAD1, along with c-Cbl, in prostate cancer Implicated in overexpression of Mesothelin in pancreatic cancer, characteristics of pancreatic cancer | Knight et al. [2008] Hucl et al. [2007]                             |
| TEAD2   | Knockout mice                  | Normal                                                                                      | Sawada et al. [2008]                                                |
| TEAD1 and TEAD2 | Knockout mice           | Died at E9.5 with severe growth defects and morphological abnormalities                       | Sawada et al. [2008]                                                |
| TEAD4   | Knockout mice                  | Preimplantation lethal                                                                      | Yagi et al. [2007]                                                  |
|         | Cell culture                   | Induce anchorage-independent growth that is dependent on YAP/TAZ interaction                    | Chan et al. [2009] and Chen et al. [2010]                           |
|         | Gene amplification             | Gene amplified and transcript level is increased in various cancers                           | Weber et al. [1996], Singh et al. [2001], Almstrup et al. [2004], Rodriguez et al. [2005], Richardson et al. [2006], Skotheim et al. [2006], Ehrbrecht et al. [2006], Adelaide et al. [2007], Nowee et al. [2007], and Han et al. [2008] |

aspects of the Hippo core machinery and YAP/TAZ-TEAD effector complex are clearly established, the molecular and mechanistic details of upstream regulators and how they regulate the Hippo core machinery during development and tissue homeostasis remain elusive. Microarray analysis showed the expression of diverse genes (up to hundreds or thousands) is altered in response to increased or decreased activity of TAZ, YAP, and/or TEAD, but few genes have been characterized to mediate the YAP/TAZ-TEAD functional outcome except for CTGF and Axl. Therefore, identification of direct downstream and most important target genes of the TAZ/YAP-TEAD complex will be important to have a clearer picture about the Hippo pathway. TAZ/YAP seems to interact with other transcriptional factors or signaling molecules (McNeill and Woodgett, 2010), and it is therefore important to delineate the cross-talks of Hippo pathway with other signaling pathways. It is apparent that increased TAZ/YAP-TEAD activity is associated with diverse human cancers and it remains to be explored whether this represents a possible therapeutic target to develop novel therapeutics to treat human cancers. Upon DNA damage, YAP is converted into a form that promotes apoptosis (Strano et al., 2005) and the Post-synaptic density, Discs large, Zonula occludens-I (PDZ)-binding motif of YAP is important for YAP to promote apoptosis of cells maintained at low concentration of serum (Oka and Sudol, 2009). It is therefore important to define other signaling pathways that impinge on YAP and TAZ. A recent study showing Jnk1 and Jnk2 acting as kinases that robustly phosphorylate YAP in vitro and in vivo is a good example of undefined territory of YAP/TAZ regulation (Tomlinson et al., 2010). The progresses made during past 5 years are impressive but more exciting findings and surprises are likely to come in the future.

**Acknowledgments**

This work was funded by Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR).

**Literature Cited**

Adelaide J, Finetti P, Bekhouche I, Repellini L, Geneix J, Sircoulomb F, Charafe-Jauffret E, Cervera N, Desplans J, Parzy D, Schoenmakers E, Viens P, Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D, Bertucci F, Chaffanet M. 2007. Integrated profiling of basal and luminal breast cancers. Cancer Res 67:11565–11575.

Almstrup K, Høei-Hansen CE, Wirkner U, Blake J, Schwager C, Ansorge W, Nielsen JE, Skakkebaek NE, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Leffers H. 2004. Embryonic stem cell-like features of testicular carcinoma in situ revealed by genome-wide gene expression profiling. Cancer Res 64:4736–4743.

Anbanandam A, Albarado DC, Nguyen CT, Halder G, Gao X, Veeraraghavan S. 2006. Insights into transcription enhancer factor I (TEF-I) activity from the solution structure of the TEA domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:17225–17230.

Grzeschik NA, Parsons LM, Allott ML, Harvey KF, Richardson HE. 2010. Lgl, aPKC, and Crumbs regulate the Salvador/Warts/Hippo pathway through two distinct mechanisms. Curr Biol 20:573–581.

Hamaratoglu F, Willecke M, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Hyun E, Tao C, Jafar-Nejad H, Halder G. 2006. The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. Nat Cell Biol 8:27–36.

Han W, Jung EM, Cho J, Lee JW, Hwang KT, Yang SJ, Kang JJ, Bae JY, Jeon YK, Park IA, Nicolau M, Jeffrey SS, Noh DY. 2008. DNA copy number alterations and expression of relevant genes in triple-negative breast cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 47:490–499.

Hartmann EM, Campo E, Wright G, Lenz G, Salaverria I, Jares P, Xiao W, Braziel RM, Rimsza LM, Chan WC, Weisenburger DD, Delabie J, Jaffe ES, Gascoyne RD, Dave SS, Mueller-Hermelink HK, Staudt LM, Ott G, Bea S, Rosenwald A. 2010. Pathway discovery in mantle cell lymphoma by integrated analysis of high-resolution gene expression and copy number profiling. Blood 116:953–961.

Harvey KF, Pfleger CM, Hariharan IK. 2003. The Drosophila Mst ortholog, hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. Cell 114:457–467.

Hong JH, Hwang ES, McManus MT, Amsterdam A, Tian Y, Kalmukova R, Mueller E, Benjamin T, Spiegelman BM, Sharp PA, Hopkins N, Yaffe MB. 2005. TAZ, a transcriptional modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. Science 309:1074–1078.

Hossain Z, Ali SM, Ko HL, Xu J, Ng CP, Guo K, Qi Z, Ponniah S, Hong W, Hunziker W. 2007. Glomerulocystic kidney disease in mice with a targeted inactivation of Wwtr1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:1631–1636.

Huang J, Wu S, Barrera J, Matthews K, Pan D. 2005. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the Drosophila Homolog of YAP. Cell 122:421–434.

Hucl T, Brody JR, Gallmeier E, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Farrance IK, Kern SE. 2007. High cancer-specific expression of mesothelin (MSLN) is attributable to an upstream enhancer containing a transcription enhancer factor dependent MCAT motif. Cancer Res 67:9055–9065.

Jeong H, Bae S, An SY, Byun MR, Hwang JH, Yaffe MB, Hong JH, Hwang ES. 2010. TAZ as a novel enhancer of MyoD-mediated myogenic differentiation. FASEB J. 24:3310–3320.

Jiang Z, Li X, Hu J, Zhou W, Jiang Y, Li G, Lu D. 2006. Promoter hypermethylation-mediated down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 in human astrocytoma. Neurosci Res 56:450–458.

Justice RW, Zilian O, Woods DF, Noll M, Bryant PJ. 1995. The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. Genes Dev 9:534–546.

Kanai F, Marignani PA, Sarbassova D, Yagi R, Hall RA, Donowitz M, Hisaminato A, Fujiwara T, Ito Y, Cantley LC, Yaffe MB. 2000. TAZ: A novel transcriptional co-activator regulated by interactions with 14-3-3 and PDZ domain proteins. EMBO J 19:6778–6791.

Kang HS, Beak JY, Kim YS, Herbert R, Jetten AM. 2009. Glis3 is associated with primary cilia and Wwtr1/TAZ and implicated in polycystic kidney disease. Mol Cell Biol 29:2556–2569.

Karp CM, Tan TT, Mathew R, Nelson D, Mukherjee C, Degenhardt K, Karantza-Wadsworth V, White E. 2008. Role of the polarity determinant crumbs in suppressing mammalian epithelial tumor progression. Cancer Res 68:4105–4115.

Kitagawa M. 2007. A Sveinsson’s chorioretinal atrophy-associated missense mutation in mouse Tead1 affects its interaction with the co-factors YAP and TAZ. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 361:1022–1026.

Knight JF, Shepherd CJ, Rizzo S, Brewer D, Jhavar S, Dodson AR, Cooper CS, Eeles R, Falconer A, Kovacs G, Garrett MD, Norman AR, Shipley J, Hudson DL. 2008. TEAD1 and c-Cbl are novel prostate basal cell markers that correlate with poor clinical outcome in prostate cancer. Br J Cancer 99:1849–1858.

Kosaka Y, Mimori K, Tanaka F, Inoue H, Watanabe M, Mori M. 2007. Clinical significance of the loss of MATS1 mRNA expression in colorectal cancer. Int J Oncol 31:333–338.

Kremerskothen J, Plaas C, Buther K, Finger I, Veltel S, Matanis T, Liedtke T, Barnekow A. 2003. Characterization of KIBRA, a novel WW domain-containing protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 300:862–867.

Kwon S, Munroe X, Crawley SC, Lee HY, Spong S, Bradham D, Gum JR, Jr., Sleisenger MH, Kim YS. 2007. Expression of connective tissue growth factor in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Int J Oncol 31:693–703.

Lai ZC, Wei X, Shimizu T, Ramos E, Rohrbaugh M, Nikolaidis N, Ho LL, Li Y. 2005. Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. Cell 120:675–685.

Lam-Himlin DM, Daniels JA, Gayyed MF, Dong J, Maitra A, Pan D, Montgomery EA, Anders RA. 2006. The hippo pathway in human upper gastrointestinal dysplasia and carcinoma: A novel oncogenic pathway. Int J Gastrointest Cancer 37:103–109.

Lee JH, Kim TS, Yang TH, Koo BK, Oh SP, Lee KP, Oh HJ, Lee SH, Kong YY, Kim JM, Lim DS. 2008. A crucial role of WW45 in developing epithelial tissues in the mouse. EMBO J 27:1231–1242.

Lee KH, Goan YG, Hsiao M, Lee CH, Jian SH, Lin JT, Chen YL, Lu PJ. 2009. MicroRNA-373 (miR-373) post-transcriptionally regulates large tumor suppressor, homolog 2 (LATS2) and stimulates proliferation in human esophageal cancer. Exp Cell Res 315:2529–2538.

Lee KP, Lee JH, Kim TS, Kim TH, Park HD, Byun JS, Kim MC, Jeong WI, Calvisi DF, Kim JM, Lim DS. 2010. The Hippo-Salvador pathway restrains hepatic oval cell proliferation, liver size, and liver tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:8248–8253.

Lei QY, Zhang H, Zhao B, Zha ZY, Bai F, Pei XH, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Guan KL. 2008. TAZ promotes cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the hippo pathway. Mol Cell Biol 28:2426–2436.

Li W, You L, Cooper J, Schiavon G, Pepe-Caprio A, Zhou L, Ishii R, Giovannini M, Hanemann CO, Long SB, Erdjument-Bromage H, Zhou P, Tempst P, Giancotti FG. 2010a. Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell 140:477–490.

Li Z, Zhao B, Wang P, Chen F, Dong Z, Yang H, Guan KL, Xu Y. 2010b. Structural insights into the YAP and TEAD complex. Genes Dev 24:235–240.

Lian I, Kim J, Okazawa H, Zhao J, Zhao B, Yu J, Chinnaiyan A, Israel MA, Goldstein LS, Abujarour R, Ding S, Guan KL. 2010. The role of YAP transcription coactivator in regulating stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. Genes Dev 24:1106–1118.

Ling C, Zheng Y, Yin F, Yu J, Huang J, Hong Y, Wu S, Pan D. 2010. The apical transmembrane protein Crumbs functions as a tumor suppressor that regulates Hippo signaling by binding to Expanded. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:10532–10537.

Liu Y, Xin Y, Ye F, Wang W, Lu Q, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC. 2010. Taz-tead1 links cell-cell contact to zeb1 expression, proliferation, and dedifferentiation in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 51:3372–3378.

Lu L, Li Y, Kim SM, Bossuyt W, Liu P, Qiu Q, Wang Y, Halder G, Finegold MJ, Lee JS, Johnson RL. 2010. Hippo signaling is a potent in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:1437–1442.

Makita R, Uchijima Y, Nishiyama K, Amano T, Chen Q, Takeuchi T, Mitani A, Nagase T, Yatomi Y, Aburatani H, Nakagawa O, Small EV, Cobo-Stark P, Igarashi P, Murakami M, Tominaga J, Sato T, Asano T, Kurihara Y, Kurihara H. 2008. Multiple renal cysts, urinary concentration defects, and pulmonary emphysematous changes in mice lacking TAZ. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 294:F542–F553.

Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA. 2008. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell 133:704–715.

McClatchey AI. 2007. Neurofibromatosis. Annu Rev Pathol 2:191–216.

McNeill H, Woodgett JR. 2010. When pathways collide: Collaboration and connivance among signalling proteins in development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11:404–413.

McPherson JP, Tamblyn L, Elia A, Migon E, Shehabeldin A, Matysiak-Zablocki E, Lemmers B, Salmena L, Hakem A, Fish J, Kassam F, Squire J, Bruneau BG, Hande MP, Hakem R. 2004. Lats2/Kpm is required for embryonic development, proliferation control and genomic integrity. EMBO J 23:3677–3688.

Modena P, Lualdi E, Facchinetti F, Veltman J, Reid JF, Minardi S, Janssen I, Giangaspero F, Forni M, Finocchiaro G, Genitori L, Giordano F, Riccardi R, Schoenmakers EF, Massimino M, Sozzi G. 2006. Identification of tumor-specific molecular signatures in intracranial ependymoma and association with clinical characteristics. J Clin Oncol 24:5223–5233.

Morin-Kensicki EM, Boone BN, Howell M, Stonebraker JR, Teed J, Alb JG, Magnuson TR, O’Neal W, Milgram SL. 2006. Defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and embryonic axis elongation in mice with targeted disruption of Yap65. Mol Cell Biol 26:77–87.

Nakano H, Miyazawa T, Kinoshita K, Yamada Y, Yoshida T. 2010. Functional screening identifies a microRNA, miR-491 that induces apoptosis by targeting Bcl-X(L) in colorectal cancer cells. Int J Cancer 127:1072–1080.

Nishioka N, Inoue K, Adachi K, Kiyonari H, Ota M, Ralston A, Yabuta N, Hirahara S, Stephenson RO, Ogonuki N, Makita R, Kurihara H, Morin-Kensicki EM, Nojima H, Rossant J, Nakao K, Niwa H, Sasaki H. 2009. The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass. Dev Cell 16:398–410.

Nowee ME, Snijders AM, Rockx DA, de Wit RM, Kosma VM, Hamalainen K, Schouten JP, Verheijen RH, van Diest PJ, Albertson DG, Dorsman JC. 2007. DNA profiling of primary serous ovarian and fallopian tube carcinomas with array comparative genomic hybridization and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. J Pathol 213:46–55.

Oh H, Irvine KD. 2009. In vivo analysis of Yorkie phosphorylation sites. Oncogene 28:1916–1927.

Oh H, Reddy BV, Irvine KD. 2009a. Phosphorylation-independent repression of Yorkie in Fat-Hippo signaling. Dev Biol 335:188–197.

Oh S, Lee D, Kim T, Kim TS, Oh HJ, Hwang CY, Kong YY, Kwon KS, Lim DS. 2009b. Crucial role for Mst1 and Mst2 kinases in early embryonic development of the mouse. Mol Cell Biol 29:6309–6320.

Ohnishi S, Guntert P, Koshiba S, Tomizawa T, Akasaka R, Tochio N, Sato M, Inoue M, Harada T, Watanabe S, Tanaka A, Shirouzu M, Kigawa T, Yokoyama S. 2007. Solution structure of an atypical WW domain in a novel beta-clam-like dimeric form. FEBS Lett 581:462–468.

Oka T, Sudol M. 2009. Nuclear localization and pro-apoptotic signaling of YAP2 require intact PDZ-binding motif. Genes Cells 14:607–615.

Ota M, Sasaki H. 2008. Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling. Development 135:4059–4069.

Overholtzer M, Zhang J, Smolen GA, Muir B, Li W, Sgroi DC, Deng CX, Brugge JS, Haber DA. 2006. Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:12405–12410.

Pantalacci S, Tapon N, Leopold P. 2003. The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in Drosophila. Nat Cell Biol 5:921–927.

Polyak K, Weinberg RA. 2009. Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states: Acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits. Nat Rev Cancer 9:265–273.

Rao JS. 2003. Molecular mechanisms of glioma invasiveness: The role of proteases. Nat Rev Cancer 3:489–501.

Richardson AL, Wang ZC, De Nicolo A, Lu X, Brown M, Miron A, Liao X, Iglehart JD, Livingston DM, Ganesan S. 2006. X chromosomal abnormalities in basal-like human breast cancer. Cancer Cell 9:121–132.

Robinson BS, Huang J, Hong Y, Moberg KH. 2010. Crumbs regulates Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling in Drosophila via the FERM-domain protein expanded. Curr Biol 20:582–590.

Rodriguez S, Khabir A, Keryer C, Perrot C, Drira M, Ghorbel Jlidi R, Bernheim A, Valent A, Busson P. 2005. Conventional and array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis of nasopharyngeal carcinomas from the Mediterranean area. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 157:140–147.

Sawada A, Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H. 2008. Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of cell proliferation and survival. Mol Cell Biol 28:3177–3189.

Silva E, Tsatskis Y, Gardano L, Tapon N, McNeill H. 2006. The tumor-suppressor gene fat controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the hippo signaling pathway. Curr Biol 16:2081–2089.

Singh B, Gogineni SK, Sacks PG, Shaha AR, Shah JP, Stoffel A, Rao PH. 2001. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and refinement of 3q amplification. Cancer Res 61:4506–4513.

Skottheim RI, Autio R, Lind GE, Kragerud SM, Andrews PW, Monni O, Kallioniemi O, Lothe RA. 2006. Novel genomic aberrations in testicular germ cell tumors by array-CGH, and associated gene expression changes. Cell Oncol 28:315–326.

Snijders AM, Schmidt BL, Fridlyand J, Dekker N, Pinkel D, Jordan RC, Albertson DG. 2005. Rare amplicons implicate frequent deregulation of cell fate specification pathways in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Oncogene 24:4232–4242.

Song H, Mak KK, Topol L, Yun K, Hu J, Garrett L, Chen Y, Park O, Chang J, Simpson RM, Wang CY, Gao B, Jiang J, Yang Y. 2010. Mammalian Mst1 and Mst2 kinases play essential roles in organ size control and tumor suppression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:1431–1436.

St John MA, Tao W, Fei X, Fukumoto R, Carcangiu ML, Brownstein DG, Parlow AF, McGrath J, Xu T. 1999. Mice deficient of Lats1 develop soft-tissue sarcomas, ovarian tumours and pituitary dysfunction. Nat Genet 21:182–186.

Steinhardt AA, Gayyed MF, Klein AP, Dong J, Maitra A, Pan D, Montgomery EA, Anders RA. 2008. Expression of Yes-associated protein in common solid tumors. Hum Pathol 39:1582–1589.

Strano S, Monti O, Pediconi N, Baccarini A, Fontemaggi G, Lapi E, Mantovani F, Damalas A, Citro G, Sacchi A, Del Sal G, Levrero M, Blandino G. 2005. The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein drives p73 gene-target specificity in response to DNA damage. Mol Cell 18:447–459.

Striedinger K, VandenBerg SR, Baia GS, McDermott MW, Gutmann DH, Lal A. 2008. The neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, regulates human meningioma cell growth by signaling through YAP. Neoplasia 10:1204–1212.

Takahashi Y, Miyoshi Y, Takahata C, Irahara N, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y, Noguchi S. 2005. Down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers. Clin Cancer Res 11:1380–1385.

Tapon N, Harvey KF, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Schiripo TA, Haber DA, Hariharan IK. 2002. Salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in *Drosophila* and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. Cell 110:467–478.

Tian Y, Kolb R, Hong JH, Carroll J, Li D, You J, Bronson R, Yaffe MB, Zhou J, Benjamin T. 2007. TAZ promotes PC2 degradation through a SCFbeta-Trcp E3 ligase complex. Mol Cell Biol 27:6383–6395.

Tian W, Yu J, Tomchick DR, Pan D, Luo X. 2010. Structural and functional analysis of the YAP-binding domain of human TEAD2. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:7293–7298.

Tomlinson V, Gudmundsdottir K, Luong P, Leung KY, Knebel A, Basu S. 2010. JNK phosphorylates Yes-associated protein (YAP) to regulate apoptosis. Cell Death Dis 1:e29.

Tosi J, Janisch KM, Wang NK, Kasanuki JM, Flynn JT, Lin CS, Tsang SH. 2009. Cellular and molecular origin of circumpapillary dysgenesis of the pigment epithelium. Ophthalmology 116:971–980.

Udan RS, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Tao C, Halder G. 2003. Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. Nat Cell Biol 5:914–920.

Varelas X, Sakuma R, Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Peerani R, Rao BM, Dembowy J, Yaffe MB, Zandstra PW, Wrana JL. 2008. TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem-cell self-renewal. Nat Cell Biol 10:837–848.

Varelas X, Miller BW, Sopko R, Song S, Gregorieff A, Fellouse FA, Sakuma R, Pawson T, Hunziker W, McNeill H, Wrana JL, Attisano L. 2010. The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt-beta-catenin signaling. Dev Cell 18:579–591.

Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, Zlotorynski E, Yamuta N, De Vita G, Nojima H, Looijenga LH, Agami R. 2006. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. Cell 124:1169–1181.

Wang Y, Dong Q, Zhang Q, Li Z, Wang E, Qiu X. 2010. Overexpression of yes-associated protein contributes to progression and poor prognosis of non-small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Sci 101:1279–1285.

Weber RG, Sabel M, Reifenberger J, Sommer C, Oberstrass J, Reifenberger G, Kiessling M, Cremer T. 1996. Characterization of genomic alterations associated with glioma progression by comparative genomic hybridization. Oncogene 13:983–994.

Willecke M, Hamaratoglu F, Kango-Singh M, Udan R, Chen CL, Tao C, Zhang X, Halder G. 2006. The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. Curr Biol 16:2090–2100.

Wu S, Huang J, Dong J, Pan D. 2003. hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. Cell 114:445–456.

Wu S, Liu Y, Zheng Y, Dong J, Pan D. 2008. The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the Hippo growth-regulatory pathway. Dev Cell 14:388–398.

Xu T, Wang W, Zhang S, Stewart RA, Yu W. 1995. Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: The *Drosophila* lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase. Development 121:1053–1063.

Xu MZ, Chan SW, Poon RT, Zender L, Lowe SW, Hong W, Luk JM. 2010. AXL receptor kinase is a mediator of YAP-dependent oncogenic functions in hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncogene in press.

---

Yagi R, Kohn MJ, Karavanova I, Kaneko KJ, Vullhorst D, DePamphilis ML, Buonanno A. 2007. Transcription factor TEAD4 specifies the trophectoderm lineage at the beginning of mammalian development. Development 134:3827–3836.

Yokoyama T, Osada H, Murakami H, Tatematsu Y, Taniguchi T, Kondo Y, Yatabe Y, Hasegawa Y, Shimokata K, Horio Y, Hida T, Sekido Y. 2008. YAP1 is involved in mesothelioma development and negatively regulated by Merlin through phosphorylation. Carcinogenesis 29:2139–2146.

Yu J, Zheng Y, Dong J, Klusza S, Deng WM, Pan D. 2010. Kibra functions as a tumor suppressor protein that regulates Hippo signaling in conjunction with Merlin and Expanded. Dev Cell 18:288–299.

Yuan Y, Lin S, Zhu Z, Zhang W, Lai ZC. 2009. The mob as tumor suppressor (matsI) gene is required for growth control in developing zebrafish embryos. Int J Dev Biol 53:525–533.

Zender L, Spector MS, Xue W, Flemming P, Cordon-Cardo C, Silke J, Fan ST, Luk JM, Wigler M, Hannon GJ, Mu D, Lucito R, Powers S, Lowe SW. 2006. Identification and validation of oncogenes in liver cancer using an integrative oncogenomic approach. Cell 125:1253–1267.

Zhang J, Smolen GA, Haber DA. 2008a. Negative regulation of YAP by LATS1 underscores evolutionary conservation of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway. Cancer Res 68:2789–2794.

Zhang L, Ren F, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Wang B, Jiang J. 2008b. The TEAD/TEF family of transcription factor Scalloped mediates Hippo signaling in organ size control. Dev Cell 14:377–387.

Zhang H, Liu CY, Zha ZY, Zhao B, Yao J, Zhao S, Xiong Y, Lei QY, Guan KL. 2009a. TEAD transcription factors mediate the function of TAZ in cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Biol Chem 284:13355–13362.

Zhang J, Ji JY, Yu M, Overholtzer M, Smolen GA, Wang R, Brugge JS, Dyson NJ, Haber DA. 2009b. YAP-dependent induction of amphiregulin identifies a non-cell-autonomous component of the Hippo pathway. Nat Cell Biol 11:1444–1450.

Zhang N, Bai H, David KK, Dong J, Zheng Y, Cai J, Giovannini M, Liu P, Anders RA, Pan D. 2010. The Merlin/NF2 tumor suppressor functions through the YAP oncoprotein to regulate tissue homeostasis in mammals. Dev Cell 19:27–38.

Zhao B, Wei X, Li W, Udan RS, Yang Q, Kim J, Xie J, Ikenoue T, Yu J, Li L, Zheng P, Ye K, Chinnaiyan A, Halder G, Lai ZC, Guan KL. 2007. Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. Genes Dev 21:2747–2761.

Zhao B, Ye X, Yu J, Li L, Li W, Li S, Yu J, Lin JD, Wang CY, Chinnaiyan AM, Lai ZC, Guan KL. 2008. TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control. Genes Dev 22:1962–1971.

Zhao B, Kim J, Ye X, Lai ZC, Guan KL. 2009. Both TEAD-binding and WW domains are required for the growth stimulation and oncogenic transformation activity of yes-associated protein. Cancer Res 69:1089–1098.

Zhao B, Li L, Tumaneng K, Wang CY, Guan KL. 2010. A coordinated phosphorylation by Lats and CKI regulates YAP stability through SCF(beta-TRCP). Genes Dev 24:72–85.

Zhou D, Conrad C, Xia F, Park JS, Payer B, Yin Y, Lauwers GY, Thasler W, Lee JT, Avruch J, Bardeesy N. 2009. Mst1 and Mst2 maintain hepatocyte quiescence and suppress hepatocellular carcinoma development through inactivation of the Yap1 oncogene. Cancer Cell 16:425–438.