
Regulation of Electroneutral NaCl Absorption by the Small Intestine

**Akira Kato**${}^{1,2}$ **and Michael F. Romero**${}^{2,3,4}$

${}^{1}$Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan; email: akirkato@bio.titech.ac.jp  
${}^{2}$Physiology & Biomedical Engineering, ${}^{3}$Nephrology & Hypertension, and ${}^{4}$O'Brien Urology Research Center, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905; email: romero.michael@mayo.edu  

Annu. Rev. Physiol. 2011. 73:261–81

First published online as a Review in Advance on November 5, 2010

The *Annual Review of Physiology* is online at physiol.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142244

Copyright © 2011 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

0066-4278/11/0315-0261$20.00

---

### Keywords
NHE, SLC26, NHERF, CFTR, neuroendocrine system

---

### Abstract
Na${}^{+}$ and Cl${}^{-}$ movement across the intestinal epithelium occurs by several interconnected mechanisms: $(a)$ nutrient-coupled Na${}^{+}$ absorption, $(b)$ electroneutral NaCl absorption, $(c)$ electrogenic Cl${}^{-}$ secretion by CFTR, and $(d)$ electrogenic Na${}^{+}$ absorption by ENaC. All these transport modes require a favorable electrochemical gradient maintained by the basolateral Na${}^{+}$/K${}^{+}$-ATPase, a Cl${}^{-}$ channel, and K${}^{+}$ channels. Electroneutral NaCl absorption is observed from the small intestine to the distal colon. This transport is mediated by apical Na${}^{+}$/H${}^{+}$ (NHE2/3) and Cl${}^{-}$/HCO${}_{3}^{-}$ (Slc26a3/a6 and others) exchangers that provide the major route of NaCl absorption. Electroneutral NaCl absorption and Cl${}^{-}$ secretion by CFTR are oppositely regulated by the autonomic nerve system, the immune system, and the endocrine system via PKA${\alpha}$, PKC${\alpha}$, cGKII, and/or SGK1. This integrated regulation requires the formation of macromolecular complexes, which are mediated by the NHERF family of scaffold proteins and involve internalization of NHE3. Through use of knockout mice and human mutations, a more detailed understanding of the integrated as well as subtle regulation of electroneutral NaCl absorption by the mammalian intestine has emerged.

# INTRODUCTION

The mammalian intestine is responsible for the digestion and absorption of ingested food. However, the secretion and absorption of electrolytes and fluid are also essential functions of the intestine, in particular of intestinal epithelial cells. In humans, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract secretes 8–10 liters day⁻¹ of fluid in the face of ingested food containing 1.5–2 liters day⁻¹ of fluid. Most fluid is (re)absorbed by the small intestine (~95%) and large intestine (~4%) of the GI tract. The small intestine secretes ~1 liter day⁻¹ and (re)absorbs ~6.5 liters day⁻¹, making it the major net fluid absorber. Because there is no active water movement in the human body, GI epithelial cells drive fluid movement through active movement of Na⁺ and Cl⁻ (discussed in this review) or HCO₃⁻ (beyond the scope of this review). In the intestine, there are four modes of Na⁺ and Cl⁻ movement: (a) nutrient-coupled Na⁺ absorption, (b) electroneutral NaCl absorption, (c) electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and (d) electrogenic Na⁺ absorption by the epithelial Na⁺ channel (ENaC). The four modes mentioned here are described in detail in the following paragraphs.

## Nutrient-Coupled Na⁺ Absorption

In the 1960s, transepithelial sugar and amino acid movement was measured using the short-circuit current technique (the Ussing chamber). These studies found that absorption is dependent on extracellular (luminal) Na⁺. This nutrient-coupled Na⁺ absorption is now explained by the function of Na⁺/glucose-linked transporters (SGLTs, also known as Slc5 proteins), several Na⁺/amino acid cotransporters (Slc6, Slc38, etc.), and Na⁺-coupled solute carriers (see http://www.bioparadigms.org/slc/menu.asp). The transepithelial Na⁺ movement generates a lumen-negative (mucosa-negative) transepithelial voltage facilitating paracellular Cl⁻ and fluid absorption. This absorption can be regulated by enterotoxins and

is thus also used as a route for therapeutically increasing Na⁺ absorption via oral rehydration.

## Electroneutral NaCl Absorption

During the 1960s to 1980s, short-circuit current studies also demonstrated that the small intestinal and proximal colonic mucosa has basal NaCl and fluid absorption in the absence of nutrients and is not associated with transepithelial currents (Figure 1a). These findings were in contrast to other modes of Na⁺ and Cl⁻ transport, all of which caused transepithelial currents. Therefore, this absorption mode is termed electroneutral NaCl absorption. These studies demonstrated that the coupled function of an apical Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger(s) and a Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger(s) mediates absorption, the details of which are highlighted in this review.

## Electrogenic Cl⁻ Secretion

When the intestinal mucosa (apical or luminal surface) is stimulated by agents that increase intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP), Ca²⁺, or cyclic GMP (cGMP), electroneutral NaCl absorption is inhibited, and Cl⁻ secretion is activated (1) (Figure 1b). Apical Cl⁻ channel CFTR mediates such secretion (2). The inside negative electric potential of epithelial cells provides the driving force to secrete Cl⁻. This movement generates a lumen-negative electrical difference that results in paracellular Na⁺ secretion, and CFTR-mediated electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion occurs in all regions of the small and large intestines.

## Electrogenic Na⁺ Absorption

Electrogenic Na⁺ absorption (3, 4), a rheogenic mode, is specific to the distal colon. Here the transepithelial electrical resistance is higher than that of other GI segments. Colonic transepithelial voltage (Vt) exceeds –20 mV. In the colon, luminal Na⁺ is much lower than in other segments and decreases in a proximal-to-distal manner. This lumen-negative

Figure 1

Mechanism of electroneutral NaCl absorption by intestinal epithelial cells. (a) Measurement of electroneutral NaCl absorption and cyclic AMP (cAMP)-stimulated, electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion. The basal (upper left) and cAMP-stimulated (upper right) transepithelial movement of Na⁺ and Cl⁻ by rabbit ileal mucosa (1.12-cm² exposed area) was measured by the short-circuit technique (using Ussing chambers). Mucosal → serosal [absorption (abs)] movement and serosal → mucosal [secretion (sec)] movement are both shown. Net ion flux is shown in the lower graph of panel $a$: Positive values indicate net absorption, and negative values indicate net secretion. Modified with permission from Field (69). (b) Molecules involved in electroneutral NaCl absorption. A Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger (NHE3) and anion exchangers (Slc26a3/6/9) mediate apical absorption of NaCl. Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase (NKA) and CLC-2 chloride channel mediate basolateral movement of NaCl. Metabolic CO₂ is the source of H⁺ and HCO₃⁻ ions via intracellular carbonic anhydrase II (CA) catalysis. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mediates electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion. (c) Direct or NHE-regulatory factor (NHERF)-mediated interaction between CFTR and transporters. Known interactive activation (+) and inhibition (-) are shown; the question mark denotes that whether the interaction is activating or inhibiting is unknown. R, R-region of CFTR; S, STAS (sulfate transporter antisigma domain) of Slc26s.

$V_t$ provides the thermodynamic driving force that allows the mucosa to absorb Na⁺ against a large Na⁺ concentration gradient. ENaC (5), which is regulated predominantly by aldosterone (6), mediates such Na⁺ absorption. In the early 1990s, two mammalian Na⁺/H⁺ exchangers, NHE2 (Slc9a2) and NHE3 (Slc9a3), were identified as molecules that are expressed predominantly in the apical membrane of intestinal and renal epithelium. At least two mammalian Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchangers, Slc26a3 [downregulated in adenoma (DRA)] and Slc26a6 [putative anion transporter-1 (PAT-1)], are highly expressed in the apical membrane of intestinal epithelium (Figure 1c). Investigators recently located Slc26a9, which is an nCl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger and Cl⁻ channel (7), at the apical membrane of the small intestine and colon (8). In the 2000s, knockout mice for $Nhe2$, $Nhe3$, $Slc26a3$, and $Slc26a6$ were studied, and their roles in vivo were analyzed. Initial analysis of $Slc26a9^{-/-}$

NHE: Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger  
Slc26a3: a Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger  
DRA: downregulated in adenoma

mice shows defective stomach acid secretion (9), but such mice have not been assessed for intestinal absorption phenotypes. In this review, we describe the function and the regulation of these transporters, particularly in relation to electroneutral NaCl absorption in the mammalian small intestine.

**MOLECULES INVOLVED IN ELECTRONEUTRAL NaCl ABSORPTION BY THE SMALL INTESTINE**

**NHE2 and NHE3: Na⁺/H⁺ Exchangers for Apical Na⁺ Absorption**

Na⁺/H⁺ exchange mediates luminal Na⁺ absorption by the small intestine. Two Na⁺/H⁺ exchangers, NHE2 (Slc9a2) and NHE3 (Slc9a3), are localized to the intestinal brush border membrane. Intestinal expression and function of NHE2 and NHE3 significantly overlap. Analyses of *Nhe2⁻/⁻* and *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice demonstrate that NHE3 is the dominant Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger in the small intestine.

Slc9 is a family of Na⁺/H⁺ exchangers that consists of eight membrane proteins (10, 11). NHE2 (12, 13) and NHE3 (14, 15) were first identified as NHE1 homologs, and their transcripts are highly expressed in the GI tract (stomach, small intestine, large intestine) and the kidney. In contrast to NHE1 at the basolateral membrane, NHE2 and NHE3 are found at the brush border (apical) membrane of the intestinal epithelium (jejunum, ileum, and colon) and at the renal tubule (proximal tubule and thick descending limb of Henle's loop). NHE2 and NHE3 activity has been studied by expressing the recombinant proteins in NHE-null cell lines (PS120 or SP-1). Both NHE2 and NHE3 mediate Na⁺/H⁺ exchange with a stoichiometry of 1Na⁺:1H⁺ (16). The inward Na⁺ gradient (low intracellular [Na⁺]) maintained by the basolateral Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase (NKA) provides the continuous driving force.

NHE3 is important for normal GI physiology. *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice have slight diarrhea,

mild acidosis, reduced blood pressure, and increased intestinal segment size and weight (17). The contents of the small intestine, cecum, and colon of *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice are somewhat alkaline (17). In the kidney, proximal tubule fluid and HCO₃⁻ absorption are significantly reduced in *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice (17). The *Nhe3⁻/⁻* jejunum exhibits reduced Na⁺ absorption (18). Apical membrane Na⁺/H⁺ exchange activity of jejunal, midvillous epithelium is decreased in *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice (19). In the colon of *Nhe3⁻/⁻* mice, ENaC and H⁺/K⁺-ATPase expression are upregulated. These alterations increase amiloride-inhibitable short-circuit current. Thus, electrogenic Na⁺ absorption by ENaC compensates for NHE3 loss of function (17). 3-Methylsulfonyl-4-piperidino benzoyl guanidine methanesulfonate (HOE-694) is an inhibitor of NHEs, with NHE2 IC₅₀ of 3–5 μM and NHE3 IC₅₀ of 650 μM. HOE-694 was used to quantify the contribution of NHE2 and NHE3 to rabbit ileal brush border NHE activity (20). Under basal conditions, both NHE2 and NHE3 contributed ~50% to the total NHE activity. In contrast, glucocorticoids stimulated only NHE3 activity (by 4.1 times) but not NHE2 activity. NHE3 can compensate for NHE2 intestinal function (21–23), but NHE2 cannot compensate for intestinal NHE3 function.

**Apical Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ Exchangers: Slc26 Proteins**

Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange mediates luminal Cl⁻ absorption by the small intestine. Thus far, two Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchangers have been localized to the intestinal brush border membrane. These Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchangers, Slc26a3 and Slc26a6, are not related to the band 3 Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchangers (AE1–3) but rather belong to the Slc26 family. Intestinal expression of Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 overlaps (24). Melvin et al. (25) were the first to show that a Slc26 protein, i.e., Slc26a3, functions as a Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger. Later, Slc26a6 was shown to function as an electrogenic Cl⁻/nHCO₃⁻ exchanger (26–29). Muallem’s group found the Slc26a3 is

also electrogenic and has the opposite coupling of Slc26a6 (27, 29). Recent analyses of Slc26a3-null (*Slc26a3*⁻/⁻) and Slc26a6-null (*Slc26a6*⁻/⁻) mice demonstrated that both transporters have significant roles in Cl⁻ absorption and HCO₃⁻ secretion by the intestine (19, 24, 30). Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 have significant roles in unstimulated HCO₃⁻ secretion by the duodenum, but Slc26a6 is more predominant. In contrast, Slc26a3 plays a more significant role during cAMP-stimulated duodenal HCO₃⁻ secretion. In the jejunum, Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 have significant roles in Cl⁻ absorption; however, here Slc26a3 is more abundant. Slc26a6 also plays significant roles in duodenal SO₄²⁻ absorption and oxalate excretion (26, 31–35). Finally, Slc26a3 is important for colonic Cl⁻ absorption (36, 37).

Slc26 is an anion transporter and composes a channel family with 10 gene members (8, 28, 35). Slc26 proteins transport monovalent anions [Cl⁻, iodide, formate, oxalate, hydroxyl ion (OH⁻), and HCO₃⁻] and divalent anions (SO₄²⁻ and oxalate) (38). *SLC26A3* was first identified in the colon, and its expression is downregulated in colonic adenomas (DRA) (39). The *SLC26A3* transcript is expressed in the intestine from the duodenum to the distal colon but is most abundant in the duodenum and the colon. Immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that Slc26a3 is localized to the apical membrane of enterocytes of surface and crypt in the colon (35, 36, 40) and the apical membrane of the pancreatic duct (41). When exogenously expressed in Xenopus oocytes and mammalian culture cells, Slc26a3 mediates electrogenic Cl⁻/nHCO₃⁻ and Cl⁻/nOH⁻ exchange with a stoichiometry of 2Cl⁻:1HCO₃⁻ (29).

SLC26A6 was first identified through database mining and named PAT-1 (42). Its anion transport activity was later established (26, 31, 43, 44). In contrast to *SLC26A3* mRNA (which is expressed mainly in the intestine), *SLC26A6* transcripts are expressed in the small intestine as well as the kidney, pancreas, heart, and placenta. In the intestine, Slc26a6 is most abundant in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, with lower expression in the colon. Immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that Slc26a6 is localized at the apical membrane of gastric parietal cells (45) and duodenal enterocytes (44), as well as the apical membrane of the renal proximal tubule (43, 46). When exogenously expressed in Xenopus oocytes and mammalian culture cells, Slc26a6 mediates electrogenic Cl⁻/nHCO₃⁻, Cl⁻/nOH⁻, Cl⁻/oxalate, and Cl⁻/SO₄²⁻ exchange, as well as electroneutral Cl⁻/formate and SO₄²⁻/oxalate exchange. The stoichiometry of Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange by Slc26a6 is 1Cl⁻:2HCO₃⁻ (29, 47), which is the opposite of the stoichiometry of such exchange by Slc26a3 (29). This coupling issue has been questioned by one research group that found electrogenic Cl⁻/oxalate²⁻ exchange for mouse Slc26a6 but electroneutral Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange for mouse Slc26a6 as well as human SLC26A6 (48).

In humans, recessive loss-of-function mutations in the *SLC26A3* gene result in severe congenital Cl⁻-losing diarrhea (CLD) (49). Because *SLC26A3* mutations cause CLD, this Slc26a3 exchanger is crucial for NaCl absorption in the colon. Accordingly, *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ mice exhibit high-chloride-content diarrhea (36). Apical Cl⁻/OH⁻ and Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange activity is significantly decreased in the colon of *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ mice, and luminal content is more acidic in the *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ colon. These observations also suggest that Slc26a3 is the major colonic Cl⁻/base exchanger (36). In addition to the colon, Cl⁻ absorption is essentially abolished in the jejunum of *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ mice (19). Basal Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange activity is also reduced by 30–40% in the *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ duodenum (50). Unstimulated and cAMP-stimulated HCO₃⁻ secretions in the *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ duodenum are reduced by ~55–60% and ~50%, respectively, in the duodenum of *Slc26a3*⁻/⁻ mice (51).

Slc26a6 knockout mice develop a high incidence of calcium oxalate urolithiasis (34). Duodenal oxalate efflux is significantly reduced in *Slc26a6*-null mice (32), which results in increased dietary oxalate absorption and increased oxalate concentration in plasma and

www.annualreviews.org • Regulation of Electroneutral NaCl Absorption by the Small Intestine 265

urine (34). In the $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ mouse duodenum, basal $HCO_3^-$ secretion and $Cl^-$ absorption are significantly decreased, yet cAMP-stimulated $HCO_3^-$ secretion is not altered compared with wild-type mice (32, 52). Basal $Cl^-/HCO_3^-$ exchange activity is reduced by 65–80% in the $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ duodenum; this reduction is more severe than that of $Slc26a3^{-/-}$ mice. In addition, $SO_4^{2-}/HCO_3^-$ exchange activity is almost abolished in the $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ duodenum. In the $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ jejunum, $Cl^-$ absorption seems decreased (30), but other work found that the reduction of jejunal $Cl^-$ absorption in $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ mice is much less than that of $Slc26a3^{-/-}$ mice (19). In isolated, microperfused renal tubules of $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ mice, apical $Cl^-/HCO_3^-$ exchanger activity is reduced (32).

The intestinal $Cl^-$ absorption deficiency in $Slc26a3^{-/-}$ mice is more severe than that of $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ mice, even though both Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 are highly expressed in the intestine and have high $Cl^-/HCO_3^-$ exchange activity in vitro. These results suggest that Slc26a3 can compensate for Slc26a6's role in intestinal $Cl^-$ absorption, whereas Slc26a6 cannot compensate for Slc26a3 in the small intestine or the colon in electronegenic NaCl absorption. Conversely, only $Slc26a6^{-/-}$ mice have defective duodenum $SO_4^{2-}$ and oxalate transport, suggesting that Slc26a3 cannot compensate for these functions. These mouse physiological results are not surprising because neither $SO_4^{2-}$ nor oxalate is a substrate for Slc26a3-mediated exchange (28).

Slc26a9 is another anion transporter in the GI tract (53) with functional multiplicity (Figure 1): It is an $nCl^-/HCO_3^-$ exchanger, a $Cl^-$ channel, and a $Na^+$/anion cotransporter (7). As for Slc26a3 and Slc26a6, Slc26a9 is also localized to the apical pole of epithelial cells (7, 47, 53, 54). Interaction with the R-region of CFTR and the Slc26-STAS domain stimulates the activity of Slc26a3/a6 (27) (Figure 1c). Interestingly, this same STAS/R-region interaction leads to inhibition of Slc26a9 activity (Figure 1c) (55). $Slc26a9^{-/-}$ mice have poor stomach acid secretion and loss of tubulovesicles in parietal cells (9). Although Slc26a9 is present in the small intestine (53), $Slc26a9^{-/-}$ mice do not have an obvious intestinal phenotype. This scenario makes sense, as Slc26a9 in the intestine is secondary to CFTR $Cl^-$ channels as well as Slc26a3/a6. Nonetheless, because Slc26a9 has opposite interaction regulation, Slc26a9 activity may be unchecked in the absence or misdirection of CFTR. This of course would affect the severity of intestinal cystic fibrosis phenotypes.

**Basolateral Transport**

Although apical transporters and channels in the intestine have been the subject of intense recent study, the basolateral (serosal, or blood-side) transporters and channels are equally important. That said, details of basolateral transport in NaCl absorption are limited. Figure 1a illustrates that once $Na^+$ and $Cl^-$ are apically absorbed, a functional combination of a $Cl^-$ channel (ClC-2) (56–59), NKA, and a $K^+$ channel (Kir 7.1) (60, 61) are the major players in the basolateral step. Moreover, ClC-2 is necessary (in the jejunum) to recover paracellular permeability (barrier function) after ischemia (62) and is associated at lateral membranes with villus and tight junction function (63). Clinically, lubiprostone (SPI-0211, a $Cl^-$ channel activator) is used to treat (reverse) constipation (64). Lubiprostone activates intestinal ClC-2 channels (65) but in some circumstances also requires CFTR function (66). The role of CFTR, however, is controversial (67). ClC-2 can be turned down by $\alpha_1$-adrenergic nerves (68). The $K^+$ channel (presumably Kir 7.1) is needed to recycle $K^+$ after the NKA exchanges $2K^+$ for $3Na^+$ to complete the NaCl blood-exit step (Figure 1a).

**REGULATION OF ION TRANSPORTERS IN EPITHELIAL CELLS**

In the epithelial cells of the small intestine and proximal colon, intracellular second messengers—cAMP, $Ca^{2+}$, and cGMP—regulate electroneutral NaCl absorption. All
these second messengers inhibit NHE3 at the apical (brush border) membrane. The same signals also regulate electrogenic Cl⁻ and fluid secretion; i.e., increased cAMP, cGMP, or Ca²⁺ activates CFTR on the apical membrane. These same signals [cAMP (69), Ca²⁺ (70), cGMP (71)] have no effect on glucose-coupled Na⁺ absorption. For example, glucocorticoids activate NHE3 via serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) (72, 73) as well as via Na⁺/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) (72). Mineralocorticoids have weaker effects on electroneutral NaCl absorption by the small intestine (74, 75) while effectively activating colonic Na⁺ absorption by NHE3 [proximal colon (74)] and ENaC [distal colon (6)].

### Regulation of NHE3 by cAMP, Ca²⁺, and cGMP

When the intestinal mucosa is stimulated by enterotoxins, neurotransmitters, or drugs, all of which increase intracellular cAMP (69, 76), Ca²⁺ (76–78), or cGMP (71), electroneutral NaCl absorption is inhibited, and electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion is activated. NHE3 is one of the main targets of these second messengers. These inhibitory mechanisms have been analyzed mainly in exogenous expression systems (mammalian culture) (for reviews, see References 10, 79, and 80) and knockout mice (81, 82). This inhibition requires both second messenger-activated protein kinases and the NHE-regulatory factor (NHERF) scaffold proteins. Cultured cells and mice lacking NHERF(s) do not show second messenger-mediated inhibition of NHE3. NHERF(s) mediates interaction among the C-terminal PDZ-binding motif of NHE3, other membrane proteins, cytoskeleton, protein kinases, etc. cAMP-mediated inhibition of NHE3 requires NHERF1 (NHERF), NHERF2 (E3KARP) (83), and NHERF3 (PDZK1) (81). Similarly, Ca²⁺-mediated inhibition of NHE3 requires NHERF2 (84, 85) and NHERF3 (81), but not NHERF1. NHE3 inhibition by cGMP requires NHERF2, but not NHERF1 or NHERF3 (81, 86). cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA)II, which anchors to NHERF1/2 via the cytoskeletal protein ezrin (also known as cytovillin or villin2), directly phosphorylating multiple serine residues in the cytoplasmic domain of NHE3 (83, 87). Ca²⁺ induces membrane localization of protein kinase C (PKC)α, which interacts with NHERF2 and α-actinin 4 (84, 85, 88) and phosphorylates NHE3 (89). cGMP activates cGMP-dependent protein kinase II (cGKII or PKGII), which interacts with NHERF2, yet it is not known if cGKII directly phosphorylates NHE3. In the renal proximal tubule (90) and in cultured Caco-2 cells (91), NHE3 is present in both apical membrane and clathrin-associated subapical endosomes, the latter of which constitute the major endocytic pathway. cAMP (92) and Ca²⁺ (91) stimulate NHE3 internalization in Caco-2 cells; this endocytic pathway requires synaptotagmin 1 and adaptor protein 2 (AP2) (92). In vitro, NHE3 phosphorylated by PKAα is still active (93). Thus, phosphorylation-mediated internalization of NHE3 seems to be the dominant mechanism for NHE3 inhibition by second messengers.

Conversely, activation of NHE3 occurs by decreased intracellular pH (pHi) or increased cellular metabolism (e.g., glucose transport and decreased pHi) (94). Ezrin controls this NHE3 activation by brush border translocation (95).

### Regulation of NHE3 and Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase by Glucocorticoid, SGK1, and PI3K

In small intestine epithelial cells, glucocorticoids activate electroneutral Na⁺ absorption (75), NKA (75), and SGLT1 (72, 96). The promoter of the rat *Nhe3* gene has binding sites for glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and is activated by glucocorticoids (97). NHE3 is also activated by glucocorticoids via SGK1 phosphorylation (73). Glucocorticoids activate SGK1 by inducing SGK1 gene expression (~20 min); this activation occurs through stimulation of PI3-kinase (PI3K) (6, 98, 99). PI3K synthesizes phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃] and PtdIns(3,4)P₂ and

**SGK1:** serum-and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1  
**SGLT1:** Na⁺/glucose cotransporter 1  
**NHE-regulatory factor (NHERF):** a PDZ-binding protein  
**PKC:** protein kinase C  
**Protein kinase A (PKA):** a cAMP-dependent protein kinase  
**cGK:** cGMP-dependent protein kinase  activates 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1), which directly phosphorylates SGK1 to activate it. NHE3 activation by SGK1 depends on the combined interaction of NHE3 and SGK1 with NHERF2 and then phosphorylation at S663 of NHE3 by SGK1 (73, 100). Analyses of *Sgk1*⁻/⁻ mice demonstrated that glucocorticoids enhance intestinal NHE3 and SGLT1 protein abundance at the brush border of wild-type mice but not that of *Sgk1*⁻/⁻ mice (72).

In the proximal colon, mineralocorticoids also activate NHE3 (6, 74). There is a differential effect of mineralocorticoids in small versus large intestine on NHE3 activation. This difference arises from the differential expression and activity of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-HSD2), which is required for mineralocorticoid function mediated by mineralocorticoid receptors (101).

### Regulation of Slc26a3/a6 by Second Messengers

Studies of isolated intestinal mucosa demonstrated that Cl⁻ influx is reduced and Cl⁻ efflux is increased after stimulation by enterotoxins or neurotransmitters via increased cAMP concentration ([cAMP]) (69, 76), increased Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]) (76–78), or increased cGMP concentration ([cGMP]) (71). Thus, these signals seem to inhibit Cl⁻ absorption, perhaps by Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 activating Cl⁻ secretion by CFTR (102). In contrast to NHE3 regulation, the inhibitory mechanism of Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 is poorly understood.

SLC26A3 has a C-terminal PDZ-binding motif, which can interact with the PDZ-2 domain of NHERF2 (103) as well as the PDZ-2/-3 domains of NHERF3 (104). In cultured cells, increased intracellular [Ca²⁺] (105, 106) and increased [cAMP] (106) inhibit exogenously expressed Slc26a3. Interestingly, this Slc26a3 inhibition does not occur after PMA (a PKC activator), suggesting that PKC does not mediate the inhibition of Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange (105). cAMP and Ca²⁺ cause internalization of Slc26a3 (similar to NHE3) in both cultured cells and intestinal mucosa (106), suggesting that internalization is a major pathway for regulating Slc26a3 expression and thus its apical Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange. The interactions of Slc26a6 and NHERFs have not been directly demonstrated. Nevertheless, SLC26A6 has no transport activity after removal of its C-terminal PDZ-binding motif (107, 108).

In contrast to the scenario with Slc26a3, PKC does regulate Slc26a6 activity (109). In HEK293 cells or in *Xenopus* oocytes, PKC seems to dissociate intracellular carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) from its binding site on Slc26a6 (109, 110). CAII catalyzes the reversible conversion between CO₂ and HCO₃⁻; this process supplies the HCO₃⁻ substrate to Slc26a6. Slc26a6 has a binding site for CAII, the deletion of which decreases Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange activity (110). Mechanistically, PKC activation reduces the Slc26a6/CAII association, resulting in reduced Slc26a6 activity in HEK293 cells (110). In *Xenopus* oocytes, PKCδ mediates PMA-induced Slc26a6 inhibition and internalization (109). CAII is also required for full Slc26a3 activity in HEK293 cells, but direct interaction with CAII does not stimulate Slc26a3 transport activity (111).

### Cross-Regulation of NHE3, SLC26s, and CFTR

In the small intestine, absorption of NaCl and nutrients is mediated mainly by villus cells, whereas secretion of fluid containing Cl⁻ and HCO₃⁻ is mediated mainly by crypt cells. These findings are the synthesis of immunohistochemical analyses demonstrating variable distribution of ion and nutrition transporters and channels (51, 112). At the same time, it is also believed that electroneutral NaCl absorption and electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion occur in the same cells where transporters form macromolecular complexes, which presumably allows the transporters to regulate and be regulated by each other. How can this occur?

At the brush border, NHERFs scaffold transporters/channels (NHEs, Slc26s, and CFTR), cytoskeletal molecules, and kinases, as
described above. Furthermore, several Slc26s associate directly with CFTR. For Slc26a3 and Slc26a6, phosphorylation of the CFTR R-region by PKA mediates this interaction, apparently allowing interaction with the Slc26-STAS domain (27, 102). When the two proteins are exogenously coexpressed, cAMP-mediated interaction activates the Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ and Cl⁻/OH⁻ exchange activities of SLC26s and the overall open probability of CFTR (27, 102). This model is developed for the fluid secretion of pancreatic duct cells, but a similar system may be present in the intestinal epithelium. Conversely, when Slc26a9-STAS and R-CFTR interact, Slc26a9 function is inhibited, and this interaction-mediated inhibition does not require phosphorylation (55).

Studies using jejunal mucosa of CFTR⁻/⁻ mice indicated that such mice lack not only cAMP-mediated Cl⁻ secretory activity but also cAMP-mediated inhibition of electroneutral NaCl absorption (113). These data suggest in vivo involvement of CFTR in the regulation of NHEs and Slc26s (4, 114). CFTR activation reduces the cell volume in the villus epithelium and induces cell shrinkage. Hypertonic medium (causing cell shrinkage) also inhibits electroneutral NaCl absorption (115). In contrast, inhibition of duodenal NHEs by certain inhibitors can stimulate CFTR and HCO₃⁻ secretion (112, 116). Cultured cells coexpressing NHE3, CFTR, and NHERF2 show inhibition of PKA-mediated CFTR activity, which depends on the interaction of NHE3 and NHERF2 (117).

Coexpression of Slc26a3 and NHE (NHE2 or NHE3) results in transport activation (106). In this system, anion inhibitors (e.g., DIDS and niflumic acid) block not only Slc26a3 activity but also NHE activity. Likewise, dimethylamiloride (an NHE inhibitor) blocks NHE2/3 activity as well as Slc26a3 activity.

Increased cellular cAMP is restored to basal levels by (a) hydrolysis of cAMP to 5′-AMP by phosphodiesterases (PDEs) or (b) cAMP efflux by MRP4 (ABCC4, an ABC transporter). MRP4 physically associates with CFTR via NHERF3 and thereby inhibits CFTR (118).

MRP4 may also control NHE3 activity by regulating local intracellular [cAMP].

**REGULATION OF EPITHELIAL NaCl ABSORPTION**

Epithelial absorption and secretion in the small intestine are regulated by the endocrine system, the autonomic nerve system, and the immune system (Figure 2). The intestine has many enteric nerves that form interconnected networks within the intestinal wall and project directly to the epithelium. Thus, both direct regulation and enteric nerve-mediated regulation of epithelial cell transport are operative.

Enteric nerves are composed of the myenteric plexus and the submucosal plexus, which can function even when disconnected from the central nerve system (119). Both enteric nerves and epithelial cells are regulated by sympathetic nerves (proabsorptive effect), parasympathetic nerves (secretory/antiabsorptive effect), the endocrine system and paracrine system (pro- and antiabsorptive effect), and immune system (secretory effect) (120–123). Although the mechanisms of enteric nerve-mediated regulation are not fully understood, the end result is mediated predominantly by norepinephrine (proabsorptive effect), somatostatin (proabsorptive effect), acetylcholine (secretory effect), and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) (secretory effect).

**Secretory Regulation by Neuroendocrine Systems (Acetylcholine, Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide, Substance P, 5-HT)**

Parasympathetic (cholinergic) neurons, cholinergic secretomotor neurons, and VIP secretomotor neurons mediate the secretory (antiabsorptive) neural effect. Acetylcholine and VIP inhibit electroneutral NaCl absorption and induce electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion in the small intestine epithelium. M₃ muscarinic receptors (which increase cellular [Ca²⁺]) and VIP receptors (which increase [cAMP]) on epithelial cells mediate this secretory effect (124).

Lumen

PKAα
PKCα
cGKII
NHE3
SGK1

5-HT
EC cell
GN, UGN
cGMP

nhe3

cAMP
Ca²⁺
Gs
Gs
Gq
Gi
Gi
GC
IFN-γ
PGE₂
VIP
ACh
NE
NPY PYY
SST
Fibroblast
Th1
Histamine
Mast cell
Immune
VIP
ACh
NE
Enteric nerve
S cell
D cell
Adrenal cortex
Endocrine
+ PGE₂
5-HT
NE
SST
EK
+
+
+
AI
5-HT
SP
ANP

Figure 2

Regulation of NHE3 by the endocrine system, the nervous system, and the immune system. Absorptive (antisecretory; red) and secretory (antiabsorptive; blue) signals are indicated. Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-OH-tryptamine or serotonin; AII, angiotensin II; ACh, acetylcholine or cholinergic neuron; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; cGKII, cGMP-dependent protein kinase II; EC, enterochromaffin cell; EK, enkephalin; GC, glucocorticoid; GN, guanylin; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; NE, norepinephrine or norepinephrinergic neuron; NHE3, Na⁺/K⁺ exchanger 3; NPY, neuropeptide Y; PGE₂, prostaglandin E₂; PKAα, cAMP-dependent protein kinase α; PKCα, protein kinase Cα; PYY, peptide YY; SGK1, serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated protein kinase 1; SP, substance P; SST, somatostatin; Th1, T helper cell type 1; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide or VIPergic neuron; UGN, uroguanylin.

Substance P is an 11-amino-acid peptide, and its receptor is neurokinin 1 receptor (NK1). Substance P is found in myenteric and submucosal neurons and has a secretory effect (125). A voltage-gated Na⁺ channel blocker, tetrodotoxin, largely inhibits this secretory effect, suggesting that secretomotor neurons mediate the effect. Both cholinergic and non-cholinergic secretomotor neurons are involved; NK1 mediates the cholinergic effect (125, 126).

Serotonin [also known as 5-OH-tryptamine (5-HT)] is secreted from both the enteric nerves in the myenteric plexus and enterochromaffin (EC) cells (127, 128), which sense luminal molecules (129). The antisecretive and prosecretory effect of 5-HT is mediated predominantly by cholinergic and VIP secretomotor neurons. In Caco-2 cells, the 5-HT₄ receptor mediates PKCα activation, inhibition of NHE activity, and reduction of NHE3 transcription (130). 5-HT also modifies the brush border architecture, which in turn reduces NHE3 function (131).

5-HT:
5-OH-tryptamine;
also known as
serotonin

270 Kato • Romero

Absorptive Regulation by  
Neuroendocrine Systems  
(Catecholamines, Somatostatin,  
Opioids)

Norepinephrine (secreted by the adrenal gland or sympathetic nerve termini) and other catecholamines increase electroneutral NaCl absorption and decrease electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion by intestinal mucosa. Catecholamines act at the α₂-adrenergic receptor (132) on epithelial cells (133). The α₂-adrenergic receptor couples with inhibitory G proteins Gᵢ₂ and Gᵢ₃ (134), which antagonize cAMP production. Additionally, second messenger-independent inhibition of Cl⁻ secretion by Gᵢ has been suggested for colonic epithelium (135). Catecholamines (through the α₂-adrenergic receptor) also elicit noradrenergic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) of VIP secretomotor neurons in the submucosal plexus (120, 136).

Somatostatin is a 14- or 28-amino-acid peptide secreted by extrinsic and intrinsic neurons of the intestinal myenteric and submucosal plexus, as well as by endocrine D cells in the epithelium throughout the gut (137, 138). Somatostatin analogs activate electroneutral NaCl absorption in the intestine. Secretory diarrhea caused by VIP-producing (Verner-Morrison syndrome) or serotonin-producing (carcinoid syndrome) tumors demonstrates an inhibitory effect of somatostatin (139). Somatostatin receptors (SSTR1 and SSTR3) are expressed in the epithelium as well as in enteric neurons of the submucosal and myenteric plexuses (140). SSTR2 is expressed in enteric neurons but not in epithelial cells (141). Somatostatin (via SSTR1/SSTR2) also elicits nonadrenergic IPSPs of VIP secretomotor neurons (120, 136).

Opioids (morphine, enkephalin) cause small intestine absorption (142, 143). The δ-opioid receptor is found in submucosal and myenteric neurons and mediates the inhibition of VIP secretomotor neurons by enkephalin. Prolonged morphine use results in stricture by stimulating NaCl absorption. Accordingly, enkephalinase is a drug target for diarrhea.

Neuropeptide Y is a 36-amino-acid peptide and is present in both myenteric and submucosal neurons (144, 145). In the submucosal plexus, neuropeptide Y is found in cholinergic and noncholinergic secretomotor neurons. Neuropeptide Y inhibits VIP-induced cAMP synthesis and Cl⁻ secretion, as well as prostaglandin-elicited Cl⁻ secretion. The absorptive (antisecretory) effect of neuropeptide Y is mediated by norepinephrine (α₂-adrenergic receptors) in the ileum (146), whereas neuropeptide Y–elicited absorption is mediated via Y₁ receptors in the human colonic epithelium (144).

Regulation by the Paracrine System  
and the Endocrine System

Guanylin and uroguanylin are 15–16-amino-acid peptides and are present in serotonin-positive EC cells of the small intestine (147). Luminal peptide secretion, stimulated by salt ingestion, elicits an increase in intracellular cGMP in epithelial cells via the apical receptor for guanylate cyclase C (GC-C) (148, 149).

Peptide YY (PYY) is a 36-amino-acid gut hormone that is released from endocrine L cells of the ileal mucosa following a meal. PYY shares sequence homologies and therefore also a receptor with NPY. Like NPY, PYY is absorptive (antisecretory) in the small intestine (145).

As mentioned above, glucocorticoids activate electroneutral NaCl absorption as well as nutrient-coupled Na⁺ absorption in the small intestine. Mineralocorticoids play a significant role in the stimulation of colonic Na⁺ absorption but have little effect on the regulation of small intestinal NaCl absorption. Low doses of angiotensin II (which acts at the AT₂ receptor) stimulate intestinal electroneutral NaCl absorption (150) indirectly via norepinephrine secretion by sympathetic nerves (151, 152). Angiotensin II also antagonizes the secretory effect of VIP (153).

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and its related peptides [B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP)] are a family of peptides that reduce blood pressure and induce natriuresis. Natriuretic peptides reduce intestinal NaCl and water

absorption and increase intestinal fluid content (154–157). This natriuretic action affects the jejunum but not the ileum in dog (155). ANP stimulates cGMP synthesis in cultured rat ileal cells via the guanylate cyclase A receptor (157, 158). The antiabsorptive effect of natriuretic peptide is inhibited by tetrodotoxin and an antagonist of 5-HT receptor, suggesting the mediation of enteric nerves (159). However, the intestinal role of natriuretic peptides is still controversial, and detailed regulatory mechanisms have not been completely clarified.

### Immune Regulation of Secretion

Mediators of enteric immune system also have secretory (antiabsorptive) effects on intestinal epithelium (160). Prostaglandin E₂ (PGE₂) increases electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion and inhibits electroneutral NaCl absorption (161). Because atropine or tetrodotoxin does not inhibit these effects (162), PGE₂ may directly induce intracellular cAMP to be activated by its receptors present in the plasma membrane of intestinal epithelium (163). PGE₂ is secreted by activated fibroblasts (164), and indomethacin inhibits such secretion (162).

Histamine, secreted by activated mast cells, elicits a short-circuit current in intestinal epithelium. Atropine or tetrodotoxin blocks this current in rat jejunum (162), suggesting the mediation of cholinergic enteric nerves. In the colon, the histamine H₁ receptor (which increases intracellular [Ca²⁺]) directly mediates secretion by the epithelial cells (165). Activated mast cells secrete 5-HT (162, 165), which can also cause epithelial secretion.

T cell activation inhibits intestinal Na⁺ absorption, increases Cl⁻ secretion, increases intestinal permeability, and causes diarrhea. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) mediate these T cell-elicted physiological changes. In mouse jejunum, TNF-α inhibits epithelial NHE3 (apically) and NKA (basolaterally) (166, 167), thereby decreasing transepithelial NaCl absorption. IFN-γ reduces the transcriptional activity of the *nhe3* gene in rat ileum and colon and in Caco-2/bbe cells (168), decreasing the number of NHE3 transporters and thus decreasing NaCl absorption. Finally, IFN-γ also reduces Slc26a3 and Slc26a6 expression in Caco-2 cells (169, 170), likely decreasing Cl⁻ uptake. Again, the net result is decreased intestinal NaCl absorption.

---

### SUMMARY POINTS

1. Electroneutral NaCl absorption by the small intestine is mediated by NHE2, NHE3, Slc26a3, Slc26a6, and Slc26a9 at the apical membrane and by NKA at the basolateral membrane of the small intestine. Physiological analyses of knockout mice demonstrate that facilitating electroneutral NaCl absorption is the dominant function of NHE3, Slc26a3, and Slc26a6 in the intestine.
   
2. Intracellular pH and intracellular \[HCO₃⁻\] control intestinal NaCl absorption directly (with H⁺ and HCO₃⁻ as substrates) and indirectly (through pH dependency of transporters and metabolic HCO₃⁻ production).
   
3. Direct interaction or NHERF-mediated interaction among NHE3, Slc26s, CFTR, and protein kinases regulates transport activities. Electroneutral NaCl absorption and electrogenic Cl⁻ secretion are oppositely controlled by intracellular cAMP, Ca²⁺, and cGMP.
   
4. The endocrine system, autonomic nerve system, and immune system can regulate epithelial NaCl transport function directly or indirectly via the enteric nervous system and transporter gene expression.

FUTURE ISSUES

1. Does control of the basolateral transporters and channels in the intestine involve merely a few key proteins, or is such control more complicated?
2. How does diet affect intestinal NaCl absorption? For example, can abundance of apical transport substrates (e.g., sulfate, oxalate) control efficacy of NaCl absorption?
3. What is the clinical effect of intestinal resection on NaCl absorption?
4. Does systemic acid-base status affect intestinal NaCl absorption?

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the members of the Romero (Case Western Reserve University and the Mayo Clinic) and Hirose (Tokyo Institute of Technology) groups for discussions and contribution to the original research discussed here. We apologize to colleagues whose work we were not able to cite due to space constraints. A.K. was supported by Ministry of Education, Culture, Sport, Science, and Technology of Japan (MEXT) Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research 14104002, 18059010, and 21770077 and by the Twenty-First Century and Global Center of Excellence Program of MEXT. M.F.R. is supported by NIH (DK056218, EY017732, P50-DK083007) and by the Mayo Clinic Center for Cell Signaling in Gastroenterology (P30-DK084567).

LITERATURE CITED

1. Barrett KE, Keely SJ. 2000. Chloride secretion by the intestinal epithelium: molecular basis and regulatory aspects. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 62:535–72
2. Riordan JR, Rommens JM, Kerem B, Alon N, Rozmahel R, et al. 1989. Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: cloning and characterization of complementary DNA. *Science* 245:1066–73
3. Turnamian SG, Binder HJ. 1989. Regulation of active sodium and potassium transport in the distal colon of the rat. Role of the aldosterone and glucocorticoid receptors. *J. Clin. Investig.* 84:1924–29
4. Kunzelmann K, Mall M. 2002. Electrolyte transport in the mammalian colon: mechanisms and implications for disease. *Physiol. Rev.* 82:245–89
5. Canessa CM, Schild L, Buell G, Thorens B, Gautschi I, et al. 1994. Amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na⁺ channel is made of three homologous subunits. *Nature* 367:463–67
6. Lang F, Bohmer C, Palmada M, Seebohm G, Strutz-Seebohm N, Vallon V. 2006. (Patho)physiological significance of the serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase isoforms. *Physiol. Rev.* 86:1151–78
7. Chang M-H, Plata C, Zandi-Nejad K, Sindic A, Sussman CR, et al. 2009. Slc26A9: anion exchanger, channel and Na⁺ transporter. *J. Membr. Biol.* 128:125–40
8. Sindic A, Mount DB, Plata C, Sussman CR, Romero MF. 2007. The rat Slc26a9 anion transporter is located in many epithelial tissues. *Pediatric. Pulmonol.* 42:283
9. Xu J, Song P, Miller ML, Borgese F, Barone S, et al. 2008. Deletion of the chloride transporter Slc26a9 causes loss of tubulovesicles in parietal cells and impairs acid secretion in the stomach. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.* USA 105:17955–60
10. Zachos NC, Tse M, Donowitz M. 2005. Molecular physiology of intestinal Na⁺/H⁺ exchange. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 67:411–43

11. Orlowski J, Grinstein S. 2004. Diversity of the mammalian sodium/proton exchanger SLC9 gene family. *Pflüg. Arch.* 447:549–65

12. Collins JF, Honda T, Knobel S, Bulus NM, Conary J, et al. 1993. Molecular cloning, sequencing, tissue distribution, and functional expression of a Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger (NHE-2). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90:3938–42

13. Tse CM, Levine SA, Yun CH, Montrose MH, Little PJ, et al. 1993. Cloning and expression of a rabbit cDNA encoding a serum-activated ethylisopropylamiloride-resistant epithelial Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger isoform (NHE-2). *J. Biol. Chem.* 268:11917–24

14. Tse CM, Brant SR, Walker MS, Pouyssegur J, Donowitz M. 1992. Cloning and sequencing of a rabbit cDNA encoding an intestinal and kidney-specific Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger isoform (NHE-3). *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:9340–46

15. Orlowski J, Kandasamy RA, Shull GE. 1992. Molecular cloning of putative members of the Na/H exchanger gene family. cDNA cloning, deduced amino acid sequence, and mRNA tissue expression of the rat Na/H exchanger NHE-1 and two structurally related proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:9331–39

16. Mahnensmith RL, Aronson PS. 1985. The plasma membrane sodium-hydrogen exchanger and its role in physiological and pathophysiological processes. *Circ. Res.* 56:773–88

17. Schultheis PJ, Clarke LL, Meneton P, Miller ML, Soleimani M, et al. 1998. Renal and intestinal absorptive defects in mice lacking the NHE3 Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger. *Nat. Genet.* 19:282–85

18. Gawenis LR, Stien X, Shull GE, Schultheis PJ, Woo AL, et al. 2002. Intestinal NaCl transport in NHE2 and NHE3 knockout mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 282:776–84

19. Walker NM, Simpson JE, Yen PF, Gill RK, Rigsby EV, et al. 2008. Down-regulated in adenoma Cl/HCO₃⁻ exchanger couples with Na/H exchanger 3 for NaCl absorption in murine small intestine. *Gastroenterology* 135:1645–53

20. Wormmeester L, Sanchez de Medina F, Kokke F, Tse CM, Khurana S, et al. 1998. Quantitative contribution of NHE2 and NHE3 to rabbit ileal brush-border Na⁺/H⁺ exchange. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 274:1261–72

21. Ledoussal C, Woo AL, Miller ML, Shull GE. 2001. Loss of the NHE2 Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger has no apparent effect on diarrheal state of NHE3-deficient mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 281:1385–96

22. Bachmann O, Riederer B, Rossmann H, Groos S, Schultheis PJ, et al. 2004. The Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger isoform 2 is the predominant NHE isoform in murine colonic crypts and its lack causes NHE3 upregulation. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 287:125–33

23. Guan Y, Dong J, Tackett L, Meyer JW, Shull GE, Montrose MH. 2006. NHE2 is the main apical NHE in mouse colonic crypts but an alternative Na⁺-dependent acid extrusion mechanism is upregulated in NHE2-null mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 291:689–99

24. Gawenis LR, Hut H, Bot AG, Shull GE, de Jonge HR, et al. 2004. Electroneutral sodium absorption and electrogenic anion secretion across murine small intestine are regulated in parallel. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 287:1140–49

25. Melvin JE, Park K, Richardson L, Schultheis PJ, Shull GE. 1999. Mouse down-regulated in adenoma (DRA) is an intestinal Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger and is up-regulated in colon of mice lacking the NHE3 Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:22855–61

26. Xie Q, Welch R, Mercado A, Romero MF, Mount DB. 2002. Molecular and functional characterization of the Slc26A6 anion exchanger, functional comparison to Slc26a1. *Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol.* 283:826–38

27. Ko SB, Scheynikov N, Choi JY, Luo X, Ishibashi K, et al. 2002. A molecular mechanism for aberrant CFTR-dependent HCO₃⁻ transport in cystic fibrosis. *EMBO J.* 21:5662–72

28. Mount DB, Romero MF. 2004. The SLC26 gene family of multifunctional anion exchangers. *Pflüg. Arch.* 447:710–21

29. Scheynikov N, Wang Y, Park M, Ko SB, Dorwart M, et al. 2006. Coupling modes and stoichiometry of Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange by Slc26a3 and Slc26a6. *J. Gen. Physiol.* 127:511–24

30. Seidler U, Rottinghaus I, Hillesheim J, Chen M, Riederer B, et al. 2008. Sodium and chloride absorptive defects in the small intestine in Slc26a6 null mice. *Pflüg. Arch.* 455:757–66

31. Jiang Z, Grichchenko II, Boron WF, Aronson PS. 2002. Specificity of anion exchange mediated by mouse Slc26a6. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:33963–67

32. Wang Z, Wang T, Petrovic S, Tuo B, Riederer B, et al. 2005. Renal and intestinal transport defects in Slc26a6-null mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 288:957–65

33. Freel RW, Hatch M, Green M, Soleimani M. 2006. Ileal oxalate absorption and urinary oxalate excretion are enhanced in Slc26a6 null mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 290:719–28

34. Jiang Z, Asplin JR, Evan AP, Rajendran VM, Velazquez H, et al. 2006. Calcium oxalate urolithiasis in mice lacking anion transporter Slc26a6. *Nat. Genet.* 38:474–78

35. Soleimani M. 2006. Expression, regulation and the role of SLC26 Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchangers in kidney and gastrointestinal tract. *Novartis Found. Symp.* 273:91–102

36. Schweinfest CW, Spyropoulos DD, Henderson KW, Kim JH, Chapman JM, et al. 2006. Slc26a3 (dra)-deficient mice display chloride-losing diarrhea, enhanced colonic proliferation, and distinct up-regulation of ion transporters in the colon. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:37962–71

37. Zhang GH, Zhu JX, Xue H, Fan J, Chen X, et al. 2007. Dopamine stimulates Cl⁻ absorption coupled with HCO₃⁻ secretion in rat late distal colon. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 570:188–95

38. Mount DB, Romero MF. 2004. The SLC26 gene family of multifunctional anion exchangers. *Pflüg. Arch.* 447:710–21

39. Schweinfest CW, Henderson KW, Suster S, Kondoh N, Papas TS. 1993. Identification of a colon mucosa gene that is down-regulated in colon adenomas and adenocarcinomas. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90:4166–70

40. Worrell RT, Best A, Crawford OR, Xu J, Soleimani M, Matthews JB. 2005. Apical ammonium inhibition of cAMP-stimulated secretion in T84 cells is bicarbonate dependent. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 289:768–78

41. Ishiguro H, Namkung W, Yamamoto A, Wang Z, Worrell RT, et al. 2007. Effect of Slc26a6 deletion on apical Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger activity and cAMP-stimulated bicarbonate secretion in pancreatic duct. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 292:447–55

42. Lohi H, Kujala M, Kerkela E, Saarialho-Kere U, Kestila M, Kere J. 2000. Mapping of five new putative anion transporter genes in human and characterization of SLC26A6, a candidate gene for pancreatic anion exchanger. *Genomics* 70:102–12

43. Knauf F, Yang CL, Thomson RB, Mentone SA, Giebisch G, Aronson PS. 2001. Identification of a chloride-formate exchanger expressed on the brush border membrane of renal proximal tubule cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:9425–30

44. Wang Z, Petrovic S, Mann E, Soleimani M. 2002. Identification of an apical Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger in the small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 282:573–79

45. Petrovic S, Wang Z, Ma L, Seidler U, Forte JG, et al. 2002. Colocalization of the apical Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchanger PAT1 and gastric H-K-ATPase in stomach parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 283:1207–16

46. Kujala M, Tienari J, Lohi H, Elomaa O, Sariola H, et al. 2005. SLC26A6 and SLC26A7 anion exchangers have a distinct distribution in human kidney. *Nephron. Exp. Nephrol.* 101:e50–58

47. Romero MF, Chang M-H, Plata C, Zandi-Nejad K, Broumand V, et al. 2006. Physiology of electronegenic SLC26 paralogs. *Novartis Found. Symp.* 273:126–47

48. Chernova MN, Jiang L, Friedman DJ, Darman RB, Lohi H, et al. 2005. Functional comparison of mouse slc26a6 anion exchanger with human SLC26A6 polypeptide variants: differences in anion selectivity, regulation, and electrogenicity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:8564–80

49. Hoglund P, Haila S, Socha J, Tomaszewski L, Saarialho-Kere U, et al. 1996. Mutations of the Down-regulated in adenoma (DRA) gene cause congenital chloride diarrhea. *Nat. Genet.* 14:316–19

50. Simpson JE, Gawenis LR, Walker NM, Boyle KT, Clarke LL. 2005. Chloride conductance of CFTR facilitates basal Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange in the villous epithelium of intact murine duodenum. *Am. J. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 288:1241–51

51. Walker NM, Simpson JE, Brazill JM, Gill RK, Dudeja PK, et al. 2009. Role of down-regulated in adenoma anion exchanger in HCO₃⁻ secretion across murine duodenum. *Gastroenterology* 136:893–901

52. Tuo B, Riederer B, Wang Z, Colledge WH, Soleimani M, Seidler U. 2006. Involvement of the anion exchanger SLC26A6 in prostaglandin E2- but not forskolin-stimulated duodenal HCO₃⁻ secretion. *Gastroenterology* 130:349–58

53. Sindic A, Plata C, Sussman CR, Chang M-H, Romero MF. 2006. Localization of Slc26a9 and role of the STAS domain. *FASEB J.* 20:839 (Abstr.)

54. Xu J, Henriksnas J, Barone S, Witte D, Shull GE, et al. 2005. SLC26A9 is expressed in gastric surface epithelial cells, mediates Cl⁻/HCO₃⁻ exchange and is inhibited by NH₄⁺. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 289:493–505

55. The first study to show that a Slc26-STAS/R-CFTR interaction can inhibit transport.

55. Chang M-H, Plata C, Sindić A, Ranatunga WK, Chen AP, et al. 2009. Slc26a9 is inhibited by the R-region of CFTR via the STAS domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284:28306–18

56. Lipecka J, Bali M, Thomas A, Fanen P, Edelman A, Fritsch J. 2002. Distribution of ClC-2 chloride channel in rat and human epithelial tissues. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 282:805–16

57. Mohammad-Panah R, Gyomorey K, Rommens J, Choudhury M, Li C, et al. 2001. ClC-2 contributes to native chloride secretion by a human intestinal cell line, Caco-2. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:8306–13

58. Joo NS, Clarke LL, Han BH, Forte LR, Kim HD. 1999. Cloning of ClC-2 chloride channel from murine duodenum and its presence in CFTR knockout mice. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1446:431–37

59. Pena-Munzenmayer G, Catalan M, Cornejo I, Figueroa CD, Melvin JE, et al. 2005. Basolateral localization of native ClC-2 chloride channels in absorptive intestinal epithelial cells and basolateral sorting encoded by a CBS-2 domain di-leucine motif. *J. Cell Sci.* 118:4243–52

60. Partiseti M, Collura V, Agnel M, Culouscou JM, Graham D. 1998. Cloning and characterization of a novel human inwardly rectifying potassium channel predominantly expressed in small intestine. *FEBS Lett.* 434:171–76

61. Nakamura N, Suzuki Y, Sakuta H, Ookata K, Kawahara K, Hirose S. 1999. Inwardly rectifying K⁺ channel Kir7.1 is highly expressed in thyroid follicular cells, intestinal epithelial cells and choroid plexus epithelial cells: implication for a functional coupling with Na⁺,K⁺-ATPase. *Biochem. J.* 342(Pt. 2):329–36

62. Nighot PK, Moeser AJ, Ryan KA, Ghashghaei T, Blikslager AT. 2009. ClC-2 is required for rapid restoration of epithelial tight junctions in ischemic-injured murine jejunum. *Exp. Cell Res.* 315:110–18

63. Nighot PK, Blikslager AT. 2010. ClC-2 regulates mucosal barrier function associated with structural changes to the villus and epithelial tight junction. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 299:449–56

64. Rivkin A, Chagan L. 2006. Lubiprostone: chloride channel activator for chronic constipation. *Clin. Ther.* 28:2008–21

65. Fei G, Raehal K, Liu S, Qu MH, Sun X, et al. 2010. Lubiprostone reverses the inhibitory action of morphine on intestinal secretion in guinea pig and mouse. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 334:333–40

66. Bijvelds MJ, Bot AG, Escher JC, De Jonge HR. 2009. Activation of intestinal Cl⁻ secretion by lubiprostone requires the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. *Gastroenterology* 137:976–85

67. Cuppoletti J, Malinowska DH, Tewari KP, Li QJ, Sherry AM, et al. 2004. SPI-0211 activates T84 cell chloride transport and recombinant human ClC-2 chloride currents. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 287:1173–83

68. Baglole CJ, Sigalet DL, Meddings JB. 2007. α₁-Adrenoceptors down-regulate ClC-2 chloride channels in epithelial cells from the acutely denervated jejunum. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 565:202–6

69. Early studies of electroneutral NaCl absorption using Ussing chambers.

69. Field M. 1971. Ion transport in rabbit ileal mucosa. II. Effects of cyclic 3′, 5′-AMP. *Am. J. Physiol.* 221:992–97

70. Donowitz M, Asarkof N. 1982. Calcium dependence of basal electrolyte transport in rabbit ileum. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 243:28–35

71. Guandalini S, Rao MC, Smith PL, Field M. 1982. cGMP modulation of ileal ion transport: in vitro effects of *Escherichia coli* heat-stable enterotoxin. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 243:36–41

72. Grahammer F, Henke G, Sandu C, Rexhepaj R, Hussain A, et al. 2006. Intestinal function of gene-targeted mice lacking serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 290:1114–23

73. Demonstrates the role of SGK1 in glucocorticoid-mediated activation of NHE3.

73. Yun CC, Chen Y, Lang F. 2002. Glucocorticoid activation of Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger isoform 3 revisited. The roles of SGK1 and NHERF2. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:7676–83

74. Cho JH, Musch MW, Bookstein CM, McSwine RL, Rabenau K, Chang EB. 1998. Aldosterone stimulates intestinal Na⁺ absorption in rats by increasing NHE3 expression of the proximal colon. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 274:586–94

75. Charney AN, Kinsey MD, Myers L, Gainnella RA, Gots RE. 1975. Na⁺-K⁺-activated adenosine triphosphatase and intestinal electrolyte transport. Effect of adrenal steroids. *J. Clin. Investig.* 56:653–60

76. Donowitz M, Welsh MJ. 1986. Ca²⁺ and cyclic AMP in regulation of intestinal Na, K, and Cl transport. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 48:135–50

77. Bolton JE, Field M. 1977. Ca ionophore-stimulated ion secretion in rabbit ileal mucosa: relation to actions of cyclic 3′,5′-AMP and carbamylcholine. *J. Membr. Biol.* 35:159–73

78. Donowitz M, Cohen ME, Gould M, Sharp GW. 1989. Elevated intracellular Ca²⁺ acts through protein kinase C to regulate rabbit ileal NaCl absorption. Evidence for sequential control by Ca²⁺/calmodulin and protein kinase C. *J. Clin. Investig.* 83:1953–62

79. He P, Yun CC. 2010. Mechanisms of the regulation of the intestinal Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger NHE3. *J. Biomed. Biotechnol.* 2010:238080

80. Donowitz M, Li X. 2007. Regulatory binding partners and complexes of NHE3. *Physiol. Rev.* 87:825–72

81. Cinar A, Chen M, Riederer B, Bachmann O, Wiemann M, et al. 2007. NHE3 inhibition by cAMP and Ca²⁺ is abolished in PDZ-domain protein PDZK1-deficient murine enterocytes. *J. Physiol.* 581:1235–46

82. Broere N, Chen M, Cinar A, Singh AK, Hillesheim J, et al. 2009. Defective jejunal and colonic salt absorption and altered Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger 3 (NHE3) activity in NHE regulatory factor 1 (NHERF1) adaptor protein-deficient mice. *Pflüg. Arch.* 457:1079–91

83. Yun CH, Oh S, Zizak M, Steplock D, Tsao S, et al. 1997. cAMP-mediated inhibition of the epithelial brush border Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, NHE3, requires an associated regulatory protein. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94:3010–15

84. Lee-Kwon W, Kim JH, Choi JW, Kawano K, Cha B, et al. 2003. Ca²⁺-dependent inhibition of NHE3 requires PKCα which binds to E3KARP to decrease surface NHE3 containing plasma membrane complexes. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 285:1527–36

85. Kim JH, Lee-Kwon W, Park JB, Ryu SH, Yun CH, Donowitz M. 2002. Ca²⁺-dependent inhibition of Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger 3 (NHE3) requires an NHE3-E3KARP-α-actinin-4 complex for oligomerization and endocytosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:23714–24

86. Cha B, Kim JH, Hut H, Hogema BM, Nadarja J, et al. 2005. cGMP inhibition of Na⁺/H⁺ antiporter 3 (NHE3) requires PDZ domain adapter NHERF2, a broad specificity protein kinase G-anchoring protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:16642–50

87. Lamprecht G, Weinman EJ, Yun CH. 1998. The role of NHERF and E3KARP in the cAMP-mediated inhibition of NHE3. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:29972–78

88. He P, Zhang H, Yun CC. 2008. IRBIT, inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) receptor-binding protein released with IP3, binds Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger NHE3 and activates NHE3 activity in response to calcium. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283:33544–53

89. Wiederkehr MR, Zhao H, Moe OW. 1999. Acute regulation of Na/H exchanger NHE3 activity by protein kinase C: role of NHE3 phosphorylation. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 276:1205–17

90. Chow CW, Khurana S, Woodside M, Grinstein S, Orlowski J. 1999. The epithelial Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, NHE3, is internalized through a clathrin-mediated pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:37551–58

91. Janecki AJ, Montrose MH, Zimniak P, Zweibaum A, Tse CM, et al. 1998. Subcellular redistribution is involved in acute regulation of the brush border Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger isoform 3 in human colon adenocarcinoma cell line Caco-2. Protein kinase C-mediated inhibition of the exchanger. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:8790–98

92. Musch MW, Arvans DL, Wang Y, Nakagawa Y, Solomaha E, Chang EB. 2010. Cyclic AMP-mediated endocytosis of intestinal epithelial NHE3 requires binding to synaptotagmin 1. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 298:203–11

93. Kocinsky HS, Dynia DW, Wang T, Aronson PS. 2007. NHE3 phosphorylation at serines 552 and 605 does not directly affect NHE3 activity. *Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol.* 293:212–18

94. Turner JR, Black ED. 2001. NHE3-dependent cytoplasmic alkalinization is triggered by Na⁺/glucose cotransport in intestinal epithelia. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 281:1533–41

95. Zhao H, Shiue H, Palkon S, Wang Y, Cullinan P, et al. 2004. Ezrin regulates NHE3 translocation and activation after Na<sup>+</sup>/glucose cotransport. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101:9485–90

96. Dieter M, Palmada M, Rajamanickam J, Aydin A, Busjahn A, et al. 2004. Regulation of glucose transporter SGLT1 by ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 and kinases SGK1, SGK3, and PKB. *Obes. Res.* 12:862–70

97. Kandasamy RA, Orlowski J. 1996. Genomic organization and glucocorticoid transcriptional activation of the rat Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchanger *Nhe3* gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:10551–59

98. Musch MW, Lucioni A, Chang EB. 2008. Aldosterone regulation of intestinal Na absorption involves SGK-mediated changes in NHE3 and Na<sup>+</sup> pump activity. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 295:909–19

99. Loffing J, Flores SY, Staub O. 2006. Sgk kinases and their role in epithelial transport. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 68:461–90

100. Wang D, Sun H, Lang F, Yun CC. 2005. Activation of NHE3 by dexamethasone requires phosphorylation of NHE3 at Ser663 by SGK1. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 289:802–10

101. Sheppard KE, Li KX, Autelitano DJ. 1999. Corticosteroid receptors and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoforms in rat intestinal epithelia. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 277:541–47

102. Ko SB, Zeng W, Dorwart MR, Luo X, Kim KH, et al. 2004. Gating of CFTR by the STAS domain of SLC 26 transporters. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 6:343–50

103. Lamprecht G, Heil A, Baisch S, Lin-Wu E, Yun CC, et al. 2002. The down regulated in adenoma (*dra*) gene product binds to the second PDZ domain of the NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein (E3KARP), potentially linking intestinal Cl<sup>-</sup>/HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> exchange to Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchange. *Biochemistry* 41:12336–42

104. Rossmann H, Jacob P, Baisch S, Hassoun R, Meier J, et al. 2005. The CFTR associated protein CAP70 interacts with the apical Cl<sup>-</sup>/HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> exchanger DRA in rabbit small intestinal mucosa. *Biochemistry* 44:4477–87

105. Lamprecht G, Hsieh CJ, Lissner S, Nold L, Heil A, et al. 2009. Intestinal anion exchanger down-regulated in adenoma (DRA) is inhibited by intracellular calcium. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284:19744–53

106. Musch MW, Arvans DL, Wu GD, Chang EB. 2009. Functional coupling of the downregulated in adenoma Cl<sup>-</sup>/base exchanger DRA and the apical Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchangers NHE2 and NHE3. *Am. J. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 296:202–10

107. Lohi H, Lamprecht G, Markovich D, Heil A, Kujala M, et al. 2003. Isoforms of SLC26A6 mediate anion transport and have functional PDZ interaction domains. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 284:769–79

108. Thomson RB, Wang T, Thomson BR, Tarrats L, Girardi A, et al. 2005. Role of PDZK1 in membrane expression of renal brush border ion exchangers. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 102:13331–36

109. Hassan HA, Mentone S, Karniski LP, Rajendran VM, Aronson PS. 2007. Regulation of anion exchanger Slc26a6 by protein kinase C. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 292:1485–92

110. Alvarez BV, Vilas GL, Casey JR. 2005. Metabolon disruption: a mechanism that regulates bicarbonate transport. *EMBO J.* 24:2499–511

111. Sterling D, Brown NJ, Supuran CT, Casey JR. 2002. The functional and physical relationship between the DRA bicarbonate transporter and carbonic anhydrase II. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 283:1522–29

112. Repishti M, Hogan DL, Pratha V, Davydova L, Donowitz M, et al. 2001. Human duodenal mucosal brush border Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchangers NHE2 and NHE3 alter net bicarbonate movement. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 281:159–63

113. Clarke LL, Harline MC. 1996. CFTR is required for cAMP inhibition of intestinal Na<sup>+</sup> absorption in a cystic fibrosis mouse model. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 270:259–67

114. Berschneider HM, Knowles MR, Azizkhan RG, Boucher RC, Tobey NA, et al. 1988. Altered intestinal chloride transport in cystic fibrosis. *FASEB J.* 2:2625–29

115. Gawenis LR, Franklin CL, Simpson JE, Palmer BA, Walker NM, et al. 2003. cAMP inhibition of murine intestinal Na/H exchange requires CFTR-mediated cell shrinkage of villus epithelium. *Gastroenterology* 125:1148–63

116. Furukawa O, Bi LC, Guth PH, Engel E, Hirokawa M, Kaunitz JD. 2004. NHE3 inhibition activates duodenal bicarbonate secretion in the rat. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 286:102–9

117. Favia M, Fanelli T, Bagorda A, Di Sole F, Reshkin SJ, et al. 2006. NHE3 inhibits PKA-dependent functional expression of CFTR by NHERF2 PDZ interactions. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 347:452–59

118. Li C, Krishnamurthy PC, Penmatsa H, Marrs KL, Wang XQ, et al. 2007. Spatiotemporal coupling of cAMP transporter to CFTR chloride channel function in the gut epithelia. *Cell* 131:940–51

119. Goyal RK, Hirano I. 1996. The enteric nervous system. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 334:1106–15

120. Cooke HJ. 1989. Role of the “little brain” in the gut in water and electrolyte homeostasis. *FASEB J.* 3:127–38

121. Vanner S, Macnaughton WK. 2004. Submucosal secretomotor and vasodilator reflexes. *Neurogastroenterol. Motil.* 16(Suppl. 1):39–43

122. Lundgren O, Svanvik J, Jivegard L. 1989. Enteric nervous system. I. Physiology and pathophysiology of the intestinal tract. *Dig. Dis. Sci.* 34:264–83

123. Furness JB. 2000. Types of neurons in the enteric nervous system. *J. Auton. Nerv. Syst.* 81:87–96

124. Cooke HJ. 2000. Neurotransmitters in neuronal reflexes regulating intestinal secretion. *Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.* 915:77–80

125. Cooke HJ. 1998. “Enteric tears”: chloride secretion and its neural regulation. *News Physiol. Sci.* 13:269–74

126. Keast JR, Furness JB, Costa M. 1985. Different substance P receptors are found on mucosal epithelial cells and submucous neurons of the guinea-pig small intestine. *Naunyn. Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol.* 329:382–87

127. Hansen MB, Witte AB. 2008. The role of serotonin in intestinal luminal sensing and secretion. *Acta Physiol.* 193:311–23

128. Spiller R. 2008. Serotonin and GI clinical disorders. *Neuropharmacology* 55:1072–80

129. Braun T, Voland P, Kunz L, Prinz C, Gratzl M. 2007. Enterochromaffin cells of the human gut: sensors for spices and odorants. *Gastroenterology* 132:1890–901

130. Gill RK, Saksena S, Tyagi S, Alrefai WA, Malakooti J, et al. 2005. Serotonin inhibits Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchange activity via 5-HT<sub>4</sub> receptors and activation of PKCα in human intestinal epithelial cells. *Gastroenterology* 128:962–74

131. Gill RK, Shen L, Turner JR, Saksena S, Alrefai WA, et al. 2008. Serotonin modifies cytoskeleton and brush-border membrane architecture in human intestinal epithelial cells. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 295:700–8

132. Chang EB, Field M, Miller RJ. 1982. Alpha 2-adrenergic receptor regulation of ion transport in rabbit ileum. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 242:237–42

133. Valet P, Senard JM, Devedjian JC, Planat V, Solomon R, et al. 1993. Characterization and distribution of alpha 2-adrenergic receptors in the human intestinal mucosa. *J. Clin. Investig.* 91:2049–57

134. Remaury A, Larrouy D, Daviaud D, Rouot B, Paris H. 1993. Coupling of the α<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptor to the inhibitory G-protein G<sub>i</sub> and adenylate cyclase in HT29 cells. *Biochem. J.* 292(Pt. 1):283–88

135. Lam RS, App EM, Nahirney D, Szkotak AJ, Vieira-Coelho MA, et al. 2003. Regulation of Cl<sup>−</sup> secretion by α<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptors in mouse colonic epithelium. *J. Physiol.* 548:475–84

136. Foong JP, Parry LJ, Gwynne RM, Bornstein JC. 2010. 5-HT<sub>1A</sub>, SST<sub>1</sub>, and SST<sub>2</sub> receptors mediate inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in the submucous plexus of the guinea pig ileum. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 298:384–94

137. Lewin MJ. 1992. The somatostatin receptor in the GI tract. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 54:455–68

138. Patel YC. 1999. Somatostatin and its receptor family. *Front. Neuroendocrinol.* 20:157–98

139. Arnold R, Wied M, Behr TH. 2002. Somatostatin analogues in the treatment of endocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. *Expert. Opin. Pharmacother.* 3:643–56

140. Schafer J, Meyerhof W. 1999. sst1 mRNA is the prominent somatostatin receptor mRNA in the rat gastrointestinal tract: reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and in situ-hybridization study. *Neuropeptides* 33:457–63

141. Allen JP, Canty AJ, Schulz S, Humphrey PP, Emson PC, Young HM. 2002. Identification of cells expressing somatostatin receptor 2 in the gastrointestinal tract of Sstr2 knockout/lacZ knockin mice. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 454:329–40

142. De Luca A, Coupar IM. 1996. Insights into opioid action in the intestinal tract. *Pharmacol. Ther.* 69:103–15

143. Sternini C, Patierno S, Selmer IS, Kirchgesner A. 2004. The opioid system in the gastrointestinal tract. *Neurogastroenterol. Motil.* 16(Suppl. 2):3–16

144. Cox HM. 2007. Neuropeptide Y receptors; antisecretory control of intestinal epithelial function. *Auton. Neurosci.* 133:76–85

145. Friel DD, Miller RJ, Walker MW. 1986. Neuropeptide Y: a powerful modulator of epithelial ion transport. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 88:425–31

146. Anthone GJ, Orandle MS, Wang BH, Yeo CJ. 1991. Neuropeptide Y-induced intestinal absorption: mediation by alpha 2-adrenergic receptors. *Surgery* 110:1132–38

147. Cetin Y, Kuhn M, Kulaksiz H, Adermann K, Bargsten G, et al. 1994. Enterochromaffin cells of the digestive system: cellular source of guanylin, a guanylate cyclase-activating peptide. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 91:2935–39

148. Sindic A, Schlatter E. 2006. Cellular effects of guanylin and uroguanylin. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* 17:607–16

149. Nakazato M. 2001. Guanylin family: new intestinal peptides regulating electrolyte and water homeostasis. *J. Gastroenterol.* 36:219–25

150. Jin XH, Wang ZQ, Siragy HM, Guerrant RL, Carey RM. 1998. Regulation of jejunal sodium and water absorption by angiotensin subtype receptors. *Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol.* 275:515–23

151. Paul M, Poyan Mehr A, Kreutz R. 2006. Physiology of local renin-angiotensin systems. *Physiol. Rev.* 86:747–803

152. Levens NR, Peach MJ, Carey RM. 1981. Interactions between angiotensin peptides and the sympathetic nervous system mediating intestinal sodium and water absorption in the rat. *J. Clin. Investig.* 67:1197–207

153. Bhaskar Rao M, O’Dorisio TM, Cataland S, George JM, Gaginella TS. 1984. Angiotensin II and norepinephrine antagonize the secretory effect of VIP in rat ileum and colon. *Peptides* 5:291–94

154. Gonzalez Bosc LV, Majowicz MP, Vidal NA. 2000. Effects of atrial natriuretic peptide in the gut. *Peptides* 21:875–87

155. Matsushita K, Nishida Y, Hosomi H, Tanaka S. 1991. Effects of atrial natriuretic peptide on water and NaCl absorption across the intestine. *Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol.* 260:6–12

156. Morita H, Hagiike M, Horiba T, Miyake K, Ohyama H, et al. 1992. Effects of brain natriuretic peptide and C-type natriuretic peptide infusion on urine flow and jejunal absorption in anesthetized dogs. *Jpn. J. Physiol.* 42:349–53

157. Sabbatini ME. 2009. Natriuretic peptides as regulatory mediators of secretory activity in the digestive system. *Regul. Pept.* 154:5–15

158. Crane MR, O’Hanley P, Waldman SA. 1990. Rat intestinal cell atrial natriuretic peptide receptor coupled to guanylate cyclase. *Gastroenterology* 99:125–31

159. Sharkey KA, Gall DG, MacNaughton WK. 1991. Distribution and function of brain natriuretic peptide in the stomach and small intestine of the rat. *Regul. Pept.* 34:61–70

160. Cooke HJ. 1994. Neuroimmune signaling in regulation of intestinal ion transport. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 266:167–78

161. Musch MW, Field M, Miller RJ, Stoff JS. 1987. Homologous desensitization to prostaglandins in rabbit ileum. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 252:120–27

162. Castro GA, Harari Y, Russell D. 1987. Mediators of anaphylaxis-induced ion transport changes in small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 253:540–48

163. Dey I, Lejeune M, Chadee K. 2006. Prostaglandin E₂ receptor distribution and function in the gastrointestinal tract. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 149:611–23

164. Berschneider HM, Powell DW. 1992. Fibroblasts modulate intestinal secretory responses to inflammatory mediators. *J. Clin. Investig.* 89:484–89

165. Cooke HJ, Wang YZ. 1994. H3 receptors: modulation of histamine-stimulated neural pathways influencing electrogenic ion transport in the guinea pig colon. *J. Auton. Nerv. Syst.* 50:201–7

166. Musch MW, Bookstein C, Rocha F, Lucioni A, Ren H, et al. 2002. Region-specific adaptation of apical Na/H exchangers after extensive proximal small bowel resection. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 283:975–85

167. Clayburgh DR, Musch MW, Leitges M, Fu YX, Turner JR. 2006. Coordinated epithelial NHE3 inhibition and barrier dysfunction are required for TNF-mediated diarrhea in vivo. *J. Clin. Investig.* 116:2682–94

168. Rocha F, Musch MW, Lishanskiy L, Bookstein C, Sugi K, et al. 2001. IFN-γ downregulates expression of Na⁺/H⁺ exchangers NHE2 and NHE3 in rat intestine and human Caco-2/bbe cells. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 280:1224–32

169. Saksena S, Dwivedi A, Singla A, Gill RK, Tyagi S, et al. 2008. Characterization of the 5′-flanking region and regulation of expression of human anion exchanger SLC26A6. *J. Cell Biochem.* 105:454–66

170. Saksena S, Singla A, Goyal S, Katyal S, Bansal N, et al. 2010. Mechanisms of transcriptional modulation of the human anion exchanger SLC26A3 gene expression by IFN-γ. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 298:159–66
