
Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 21 (2010) 413–423

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cytogfr

# IL-17 family member cytokines: Regulation and function in innate immunity

Joseph M. Reynolds ${ }^{a,1}$, Pornpimon Angkasekwinai ${ }^{b,1}$, Chen Dong ${ }^{a,c,*}$

${ }^{a}$ Department of Immunology and Center for Inflammation and Cancer, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA  
${ }^{b}$ Department of Medical Technology, Thammasat University, Klong-Luang, Pathumtani, Thailand  
${ }^{c}$ Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

## ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**  
Available online 11 November 2010  

**Keywords:**  
IL-17  
IL-17F  
IL-25  
Innate immunity  

## ABSTRACT

Recently, the IL-17 family member cytokines have become prominent subjects of investigation. IL-17 (IL-17A) is the best-described member of this family where its production has been mainly attributed to a specialized Thelper subset of the adaptive immune response termed Th17. However, recent research on this and other Th17 cytokines has revealed new sources and functions of IL-17 family members in the innate immune response. This review will highlight recent advances in the field of IL-17 family member cytokines and will predominately focus on the innate regulation and function of IL-17, IL-17F, and IL-25.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

## 1. Introduction

The IL-17 family of cytokines consists of six family members of varying homology and function: IL-17 (also called IL-17A), IL-17B, IL-17C, IL-17D, IL-17E (also called IL-25), and IL-17F. In general, these cytokines range from 20 to 30 kDa and incorporate four conserved C-terminal cysteine residues [1,2]. The cytokines IL-17 and IL-17F share the strongest homology, which is likely the reason why these mediators are thought to use similar signaling mechanisms in exerting their pro-inflammatory functions [1,3,4]. Little is known about the regulation and function of IL-17B and IL-17C; however, there is some evidence that these cytokines are also regulators of the inflammatory response as well [5–7]. IL-25 has the least homology with IL-17A, which may translate to its unique abilities in regulating allergy and T helper (Th) 2 responses [8–10]. A summary of the known sources and functions of the IL-17 family of cytokines is presented in Table 1.

The cytokines IL-17 and IL-17F have been associated with a distinct lineage of CD4+ T helper lymphocytes (Th) known as Th17 cells [11,12]. However, recent reports have strongly suggested that IL-17 and IL-17F expression is not strictly limited to Th17 cells or for that matter T cells at all. Additionally, the sources of IL-25 include both innate immune cells as well as cells from non-hematopoietic origins. Thus, this review will highlight recent developments in IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-25 biology, with a special emphasis on the innate sources and functions of these cytokines.

---

## 2. IL-17 and IL-17F

IL-17 has been extensively studied since its discovery in human peripheral blood [13,14]. The identification of IL-17 led to the unearthing of the specialized Th17 subset that was found to produce the cytokines IL-17 as well IL-17F [15–17]. Upon recognition of cognate ligands, naïve CD4+ helper T (Th) cells differentiate into various effector lineages that can be characterized by the induction of specialized transcription factors and their subsequent patterns of cytokine expression. Naïve Th cells, however, do not simply autonomously decide their fate; environmental signals present during the initial activation events instead determine their effector properties [18,19]. These environmental factors, produced by innate cells following host insult, are crucial for Th17 lineage commitment and maintenance and include transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ), IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-23 [17,20]. However, the hallmark of inflammation is the rapid production of pro-inflammatory factors that are vital in the recruitment and activation of infiltrating leukocytes with the overall goal of combating host insult [21]. Therefore, due to the known importance of IL-17 and IL-17F in the promotion of inflammation, there are likely many other sources of these cytokines, including the innate arm of immunity, which would provide a rapid means for IL-17 effector function.

### 2.1. The pro-inflammatory function of IL-17A and IL-17F

IL-17F was also discovered through homologous IL-17 sequence comparison in humans following the identification of IL-17 [4,22]. Both IL-17 and IL-17F readily form homodimers, however, there is evidence that suggests that an IL-17/IL-17F heterodimer forms as well, where IL-17, IL-17F, or IL-17/IL-17F bind to ubiquitously

---

* Corresponding author at: Department of Immunology and Center for Inflammation and Cancer, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.  
E-mail address: cdong@mdanderson.org (C. Dong).  
${ }^{1}$ Authors contributed equally to this work.

1359-6101/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2010.10.002

Table 1  
The IL-17 family member cytokines.

| Cytokine          | Receptor       | Source                                                                 | Known functions                                                                                          | Role in disease                                                                                              | References                     |
|-------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| IL-17A (IL-17)    | IL-17RA,       | CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,                                                | Induce pro-inflammatory cytokines                                                                       | Pro-inflammatory functions in host defense against extracellular bacteria, fungi, and possibly some viral infections and cancers. | [11,15,17,59, 146–148]        |
|                   | IL-17RC        | γδT cells, NKT cells, other innate cells                               | and chemokines in various target cells which promote inflammation and neutrophil recruitment           | Promotes inflammation associated with autoimmunity                                                             |                               |
| IL-17B            | IL-17RB        | Pancreas, gut, cartilage, neurons, embryonic limb buds                 | Stimulates TNFα and IL-1β from monocytes; stimulates chondrocyte proliferation                             | Associated with arthritis; bone fracture healing                                                              | [5,7,149–151]                  |
| IL-17C            | ?              | Prostate, kidney, psoriatic skin, pneumonia-infected lung             | Stimulates TNFα and IL-1β in THP-1 cells                                                                  | Expression correlates with arthritis and psoriasis; upregulated following pneumonia infection                      | [5–7,26,152]                   |
| IL-17D            | ?              | Nervous system, muscle, heart, adipose                                 | Stimulates IL-6, IL-8, and GM-CSF from endothelial cells                                                  | Reduced in psoriasis                                                                                         | [152,153]                      |
| IL-17E (IL-25)    | IL-17RB,       | Epithelial cells, myeloid cells, eosinophil, basophil, mast cells     | Induces Th2 cytokines in NBNT, monocytes and NKT cells; promotes Th2 differentiation, enhances Th9 differentiation | Promotion of type 2 helper responses in vivo, promotes allergic lung disease, important in host defense against parasites; possible roles in autoimmune inflammatory disorders | [8,9,114,118, 120,121,130]      |
|                   | IL-17RA        |                                                                      |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                              |                               |
| IL-17F            | IL-17RA,       | CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, γδT cells, epithelial cells and other innate cells | Induces pro-inflammatory mediator production in hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cells (less potent than IL-17A), involved in neutrophil recruitment, induces IP-10 from bronchial epithelial cells | Similar pro-inflammatory functions to IL-17; not as important as IL-17A in EAE; inhibitory in asthma and colitis; potent in psoriasis | [1,11,17,30, 50,154,155]       |
|                   | IL-17RC        |                                                                      |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                              |                               |

expressed receptors, IL-17RA, IL-17RC, or IL-17RA/IL-17RC, respectively [1,23–26]. The cytokines IL-17 and IL-17F employ the adaptors TRAF6 and Act1 in their signaling transduction pathways as well [27,28]. Both IL-17 and IL-17F readily activate innate and tissue resident cells, such as fibroblasts and epithelial cells, to induce the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (reviewed in [29]). Although somewhat redundant in function, research has shown that in some cases IL-17F is less potent compared to IL-17 in activating target cells to produce pro-inflammatory products [30]. Moreover, other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), have been shown to cooperate with IL-17 to synergistically enhance the inflammatory capacity of innate cells [31,32]. Overall, one of the major outcomes attributed to considerable IL-17 and IL-17F production is the recruitment and subsequent activation of neutrophils during inflammation [3].

In vivo, IL-17 and IL-17F perform a wide variety of immunoregulatory roles during infection. For example, IL-17 production is readily induced following infection with the extracellular bacterium, *Klebsiella pneumoniae* [33–35]. In humans, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* infection stimulates IL-17 and IL-17F production [36]. Blocking IL-17 during fungal infection, such as that observed in a model of *Pneumocystis carinii*, leads to exacerbated disease [37]. Taken together, these examples along with many other studies (extensively reviewed in [29]) demonstrate the importance of IL-17 and IL-17F in combating microbial infections, through the activation of innate cells as well as the recruitment of inflammatory leukocytes.

Besides infection, one of the most prominent roles associated with IL-17 and IL-17F production is in the regulation of autoimmunity, where dysregulation of Th17 and other IL-17-producing cells may lead to severe disease. During multiple sclerosis (MS), Th17 cells and their associated cytokines have been shown to be critical for lesion development and central nervous system (CNS) inflammation [15,38,39]. In contrast, the mouse model of human MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) still develops, albeit partially, in mice lacking IL-17 expression (reviewed in [29]). This evidence suggests that although IL-17 is important during EAE pathogenesis, it is not

the sole pro-inflammatory mediator contributing to CNS inflammation. Moreover, in models of rheumatoid arthritis, both IL-17 and IL-23 have been implicated in joint destruction [40–42]. Blocking IL-17 following arthritis induction results in a protective effect [43]. Furthermore, IL-17 deficiency results in a similar protection in other autoimmune inflammatory disease models, including colitis [44], and IL-17 and IL-23-producing cells have known roles in promoting psoriasis [45–48].

### 2.2. Differential regulation and function of IL-17A and IL-17F

Research into the differential regulation requirements for IL-17 and IL-17F to date has been minimal. However, there is one such report that suggests that inducible T cell kinase (Itk) expression, an important mediator for T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, is required for IL-17 induction [49]. Itk-deficient T cells had impaired ability to produce IL-17 but not IL-17F, even though Itk levels did not influence RORγ activity. Further analysis revealed that the promoter for IL-17 contained an NFATc1 binding site but the IL-17F promoter did not, providing mechanistic insight into this differential regulation. Thus, IL-17 and IL-17F are not always necessarily induced in the same manner, where further examination is needed to determine what other factors can regulate IL-17 or IL-17F-specific responses.

Although IL-17 and IL-17F are generally accepted to have redundant functions in promoting inflammation, there are a few prominent examples of differential functions of these highly related cytokines. In a seminal paper by our group, we examined many different aspects of IL-17 and IL-17F function [30]. For example, IL-17F, like IL-17, was able to induce inflammatory molecules from MEF cells in vitro, however IL-17F was not nearly as effective when MEF cells were stimulated at similar concentrations of IL-17 and IL-17F. In vivo, IL-17 was shown to be critical in the early priming phase of EAE, possibly through the regulation of IFNγ-producing cells, whereas IL-17F was almost dispensable. In an allergic airway inflammation model, IL-17-deficient animals, but not IL-17−/−, exhibited substantially decreased CXCL5 expression, which corresponded to reduced neutrophilia. Conversely, in a mouse model of asthma IL-17-deficient animals
exhibited a reduction of cellular infiltrates into the airways, most notably eosinophils. However, IL-17F-deficient mice exhibited the opposite phenotype; high levels of IL-5 and IL-13 in the airways were observed and subsequent eosinophil infiltration was greatly increased compared to wild-type and IL-17-deficient animals. Using the DSS-induced colitis model, our group also observed that IL-17-deficient mice had exacerbated disease compared to a milder phenotype in IL-17F–/– animals. Finally, human epidermal keratinocytes induced IL-8, a cytokine important for the development of psoriatic lesions, upon stimulation with IL-17F but not IL-17, suggesting a more prominent role for IL-17F in psoriasis [50, 51]. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that although these cytokines are somewhat redundant in promoting inflammation, these individual factors do in fact have unique effector functions depending on the environment and the nature of host insult.

### 3. IL-17 and IL-17F in innate immunity

As previously mentioned, the production of IL-17 and IL-17F has largely been attributed to specialized Th17 cells residing in the adaptive arm of immunity [17]. However, a vast array of exciting research performed in the past few years has concretely demonstrated that Th17 cells are just one of many sources of both IL-17 and IL-17F (Table 2). Not only do certain components of the innate immune response readily produce Th17 cytokines (IL-17, IL-17F, IL-22), they can be the predominate source of these cytokines in an assortment of disease settings. The most famous example of IL-17-producing innate cells to date is the innate-like γδ T cell, however, additional known IL-17 and IL-17F innate producers will be discussed as well.

#### 3.1. γδ T cells

The γδ T cells are a relatively specialized population, comprising 1–5% of the total lymphocyte fraction in humans and mice [52]. γδ T cells represent the first wave of T lymphocytes generated in ontogeny, where the presence of IL-7 in the thymus is crucial to their survival and expansion. Indeed, thymic precursors expressing high levels of IL-7 receptor are more likely to develop into γδ T cells. As fetal maturation proceeds, the number of γδ TCR-expressing cells remains constant as αβ TCR-expressing cells dramatically increase [52–54]. Traditionally, γδ T cells were thought to function in the innate immune response as a “first line of defense” against invading pathogens mainly due to their strategic localization in pockets of vulnerable tissues such as the gut, skin, and lungs. Additionally, γδ T cells express common αβ T cell scavenger receptors, Toll-like receptors (TLRs), and apoptosis-promoting molecules such as FasL and NKG2D [55]. However, γδ T cells do undergo VDJ gene rearrangements, a major facet of adaptive immunity. Thus, it is now widely believed that γδ T cells may function in the so-called “transitional response” at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity [52, 56–58].

##### 3.1.1. IL-17-producing γδ T cells: development and cytokine regulation

Recent studies have indeed shown that γδ T cells have the ability to produce both IL-17 and IL-17F [59]. However, for a while it was unclear if γδ T cells exhibited functional plasticity in cytokine production or were generally restricted to either being IL-17 or IFNγ producers. An important study recently published by Jensen et al. has helped clarify this issue [60]. The authors first demonstrated that the commitment towards IL-17 or IFNγ production was determined during the thymic selection process for γδ T cells. Cells that had previously interacted with antigen, the so-called “experienced cells”, demonstrated an IFNγ-producing phenotype. Conversely, naïve γδ T cells leaving the thymus were primarily IL-17 producers. Furthermore, IL-17- and IFNγ-producing γδ T cells also express the Th17 and Th1 transcriptional factors RORγ and T-bet, respectively [61, 62]. Another recent report demonstrated that during thymic selection, CD27+ γδ T cells exhibit high levels of T-bet and subsequently become IFNγ producers. In contrast, γδ T cells lacking CD27 expression had constitutive levels of RORγ and became IL-17-producing γδ T cells [62]. Finally, IL-17-producing γδ T cells exhibit high expression of CCR6, a common marker present on Th17 cells [63, 64]. Thus, γδ T cells are programmed to produce certain cytokines during development and can be easily identified based on certain IL-17-producing or IFNγ-producing markers.

Th17 cell differentiation and maintenance involves various cytokines, with known roles of IL-6, TGFβ, IL-1, IL-21, and IL-23 in this process [17, 20]. Thus, many researchers have questioned whether IL-17-producing γδ T cells are governed by a similar set of factors. Interestingly, IL-6 does not appear to be a critical factor for the development of IL-17- and IL-17F-producing γδ T cells (reviewed in [65]). In contrast, TGFβ was recently demonstrated to be a pivotal factor for the development of γδ T cells in the thymus [66]. The role of IL-23 in promoting IL-17 responses by γδ T cells is well established [59]. Indeed, IL-23 receptor expression is a hallmark of IL-17-producing γδ T cells [67]. Moreover, γδ T cells express IL-1 receptor, where treatment of this subset with a combination of IL-1 and IL-23 readily induces IL17 and IL-17F cytokine production in a TCR-independent manner [68]. IL-21 is an autocrine factor necessary for the maintenance of Th17 populations [69]. In the case of γδ T cells, IL-21 has been discovered to expand human γδ T cell populations [70, 71], and is also important for the development of IL-17-producing γδ T cells [69]. Finally, although IL-23 is sufficient to induce IL-17 production from γδ T

### Table 2  
**Sources of Th17-related cytokines in innate immunity.**

| Source            | Secreted cytokine(s)       | Induction signals          | Transcription factors | Role in disease                                                                 | References               |
|-------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| γδ T cell         | IL-17, IL-17F, IL-22       | IL-1, IL-23, TLRs, TGFβ    | RORγ, AhR             | Prominent during bacterial infection (i.e. Staphylococcus and Mycobacterium); potential roles in autoimmunity | [63–66, 68, 78, 79, 83] |
| LTi and LTi-like cells | IL-17, IL-17F, IL-22     | IL-23, TLR2                | RORγ, AhR             | Rapid IL-17 responses; specific pathogens?                                      | [89–92]                 |
| NK cells          | IL-17, IL-22               | IL-6                       | RORγ, AhR             | Toxoplasmosis                                                                   | [93–95]                 |
| NKT cells         | IL-17, IL17F?              | IL-23                      | RORγ                  | Rapid IL-17 responses, specific pathogens?                                      | [97, 156]               |
| Macrophages       | IL-17                      | Chitin                     | ?                     | Breast cancer, allergic inflammation                                            | [101–103]               |
| Paneth cells      | IL-17                      | TNFα + pattern recognition receptor | ?                     | Gut immunity                                                                    | [106]                   |
| Neutrophils       | IL-17                      | Pathogen product?          | ?                     | Ischemia-reperfusion injury; Bordetella pertussis infections                      | [108, 109]              |
| Epithelial cells  | IL-17F                     | Pathogen product?          | ?                     | Lung and colon immunity                                                         | [104, 110]              |
| Mast cells        | IL-17                      | TLR                        | RORγ                  | Arthritis                                                                       | [111]                   |
cells alone, a synergistic effect of inducing IL-17 production is observed when γδ T cells are treated with a combination of IL-23 plus TLR2 ligand [64]. Moreover, our group has shown that treatment of IL-23 enhances the expression of TLR2 on γδ T cells; whereas TLR2 but not IL-23 promotes proliferation of γδ T cells. Finally, both TLR2 and IL-23-deficient γδ T cells exhibit substantial defects in their ability to produce IL-17 in the periphery; however, both of these genes were not required for thymic development of IL-17-producing γδ T cell populations [72]. Therefore, IL-17-producing γδ T cells do in fact incorporate many of the Th17-polarizing/maintenance factors to regulate cytokine production, however, it appears that these cells are utilizing these cytokines in a different context (i.e. the direct induction of IL-17 and IL-17F).

Th17 cells have well-defined transcription factors that are utilized for lineage commitment and cytokine production, including RORγ, RORα, IRF-4, and AhR [73–75]. Consequently, research is now being directed to determine if IL-17-producing γδ T cells utilize some if not all of the same transcription factors. As previously mentioned, IL-17-producing γδ T cells do in fact utilize RORγ [61,68]. Furthermore, AhR is also enhanced in IL-17-producing γδ T cells when stimulated with IL-23 and TLR2 ligand [64]. Thus, there is some overlap in transcription factors utilized by Th17 and γδ T cells, however the relative contributions of other factors such as RORα and IRF-4 have yet to be determined. A comparison of Th and γδ T cell cytokine commitment is presented in Fig. 1.

### 3.1.2. IL-17-producing γδ T cells: importance in disease

γδ T cells are localized in mucosal tissues throughout the host to allow for the innate-like ability to rapidly produce immunoregulatory mediators, which is especially true of IL-17-producing γδ T cells [59]. In fact, it has been shown that γδ T cells are crucial regulators of early inflammation and the dominant source of IL-17 and IL-17F in many disease models. For example, two recent publications eloquently demonstrated that IL-17-producing γδ T cells were critical in the early stages of defense against *Listeria monocytogenes* infection [76,77]. γδ T cell-deficient mice were also found to have more severe skin lesions as a result of *Staphylococcus aureus* infection, and that the lack of IL-17 production normally associated with this subset was the primary cause for this phenotype [78]. Moreover, mouse models of *Mycobacterium* infection have demonstrated that not only are IL-17-producing γδ T cells crucial in host defense; they are also the primary source of IL-17 during these infections [79,80]. Finally, Shibata et al. published research that showed that in *Escherichia coli*-induced peritonitis, resident γδ T cells were responsible for rapid IL-17 induction and neutrophil recruitment in a TLR4-dependent manner [81]. Thus, this specialized subset of γδ T cells clearly plays a key role in the control of bacterial infection.

In addition to critical protective roles in the early response to infection, IL-17-producing γδ T cells may be critical for the development of autoimmune inflammatory disorders as well. Depletion of γδ T cells prior to EAE induction led to drastically

---

**Figure 1. Differentiation pathways of CD4+ T helper cells compared to IL-17- and IFNγ-producing γδ T cells. γδ T cells utilize many of the same cytokines and transcription factors as Th cells for the regulation of cytokine production. The primary difference between the development of cytokine-committed αβ and γδ T cells seems to be that this process occurs in the thymus in the case of γδ T cells compared to the periphery in CD4+ T helper cells.**

reduced EAE development and subsequent CNS inflammation [82]. Moreover, recent reports have demonstrated that IL-17-producing γδ T cells are found in the CNS tissues of EAE mice [68, 83]. Conversely, one must also consider the importance of the hallmark Th1 cytokine, IFNγ, in EAE pathogenesis. Wohler et al. have shown that IFNγ- and TNFα-producing γδ T cells are critical as well for full EAE development [84]. Although the function of IL-17-producing γδ T cells in inducing EAE is somewhat undetermined, this specialized subset has additionally been linked to other CNS-related inflammatory disorders. For example, during ischemic brain injury, γδ T cells are the predominant source of IL-17 following activation in an IL-23-dependent manner [85]. Finally, a recent study has shown the importance of IL-17 in experimental autoimmune uveitis, where IL-17-producing γδ T cells were key mediators in the activation of autoreactive IL-17-producing αβ T cells [86]. Overall, recent evidence has suggested a function of these innate IL-17 generators in autoimmunity, however further experimental validation is needed to fully understand the regulation and function of this subset.

### 3.2. Lymphoid tissue inducer cells

Fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells (LTi) are critical mediators for the development of lymphoid tissues (reviewed in [87]). Furthermore, LTi cells are related to certain types of natural killer (NK) cells in terms of development and surface molecule expression [88]. LTi-like cells are found in adult spleen and share many of the same characteristics as LTi cells. LTi-like cells express high levels of OX40 ligand and have previously been shown to be major producers of innate IL-22 [89]. LTi cells express RORγ as well and most likely rely on this transcription factor to induce innate IL-17 expression [90]. Additionally, LTi-like cells expressing IL-23R, AhR, and CCR6 will rapidly produce IL-17, IL-17F, and IL-22 in an innate capacity when stimulated with IL-23 along with the TLR2 ligand zymosan [91]. Therefore, as recently described for γδ T cells, a combination of innate-derived IL-23 with an innate-activation signal (TLR2) can lead to rapid IL-17 production in non-αβ T cells. However, other factors such as potential contributions of additional Th17-polarizing cytokines and transcription factors as well as the physiological relevance of IL-17 and IL-17F production in LTi and LTi-like cells needs to be further addressed.

### 3.3. Natural killer and natural killer T cells

NK cells are innate cells that function in two distinct capacities: (1) cytotoxic ability through granzyme and death receptor expression and (2) cytokine production to activate other immune cells. NK cells utilize both activating and inhibitory receptors to regulate their potent functions, where activating receptors recognize danger signals and inhibitory receptors recognize normal healthy conditions (reviewed in [92]). A role for NK cells in exhibiting certain Th17-like behaviors has previously been described. In certain situations NKP44+ NK cells produce high levels of innate IL-22 [93]. Additionally, NK cells can express high levels of the transcription factor RORγ [94]. Thus, it seems plausible that NK cells would be another innate source of IL-17 and IL-17F, especially considering their developmental similarity to LTi cells. However, only one report has demonstrated that NK cells have this potential. In a model of toxoplasmosis, NK cells were able to generate IL-17 through a mechanism that was dependent on IL-6 [95]. Thus, further assessments of NK cells as IL-17 producers are warranted.

Natural killer T cells (NKT) are class of T lymphocytes that express NK cells markers such as NK.1.1 and that recognize lipid antigens presented by antigen presenting cells on the CD1d molecule. NKT cells can be divided into different categories based on TCR expression and reactivity to the ligand α-galactosylceramide (αGalCer) (reviewed in [96]). Of particular importance are the invariant NKT cells (iNKT) that express a single restricted TCR receptor and are activated by αGalCer. These cells were also shown to produce IL-17 in an innate capacity following TCR ligation and IL-23 stimulation [97]. iNKT cells did not, however, require IL-6 to induce IL-17. Furthermore, CD4−/NK1.1+ NKT T cells were recently described as being the most potent IL-17 producers in certain situations compared to the CD4+ and NK1.1+ NKT subsets [98]. As in the case of other recently identified sources of innate IL-17, the factors regulating the production of IL-17 in NKT cells needs to be further examined. For example, IL-1 can induce NKT expansion [99] and NKT cells highly express the IL-21 receptor [100]. Thus, it would be interesting to examine if these cytokines can influence IL-17 production in NKT cells.

### 3.4. Macrophages

Macrophages have been shown in a few reports to produce IL-17 under special circumstances as well. However, the signaling pathways utilized by macrophages for the innate production of IL-17 remain largely unknown. One such example came from testing for the presence of IL-17 in human breast cancer tissues. The authors found that CD68-stained macrophages also stained positive for IL-17 by histology [101]. Moreover, in mice IL-17 production was demonstrated following chitin stimulation in a TLR2-dependent manner [102]. Likewise, Song et al. provided evidence suggesting that IL-17 production can be dominated by alveolar macrophages in a model of allergic inflammation [103]. However, a recent report has suggested that while IL-17F may be present in macrophages and other innate immune cells, IL-17 is mostly limited to T cells [104].

### 3.5. Additional innate sources of IL-17A and IL-17F

Paneth cells are granular epithelial cells that function in an innate capacity to produce antimicrobial products along with pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα (reviewed in [105]). Recently, Paneth cells were found to contain large intracellular stores of IL-17 that could be rapidly released following TNFα stimulation [106]. TLR5, an innate receptor recognizing bacterial flagella, was found to induce IL-17 from CD3−/CD127+ cells residing in the spleen and mucosa in a dendritic cell-dependent manner [107]. These cells may represent an LTi-like subset, as they are similar to LTi and NK cells but lack the expression of RORγ. Neutrophils, being a major recruitment target of IL-17 and IL-17F activation in innate cells, seem to be an unlikely source of IL-17. However, a recent paper that focused on a mouse model of ischemia-reperfusion injury suggests otherwise. IL-17-producing neutrophils are present within 3 h following injury and likely depend on IL-23 [108]. Additionally, Bordetella pertussis infection was shown to induce IL-17 production from infiltrating neutrophils, macrophages, and T lymphocytes [109]. Epithelial cells have been shown to be an innate source of IL-17F but not IL-17 in the lung and colon [104, 110]. Finally, mast cells were recently shown to be a dominant source of IL-17 in human arthritis; mast cells relied on RORγ and produced IL-17 following activation with pro-inflammatory cytokines or TLR signal [111]. Additional analysis of these cell types will further our understanding of the innate immune system and IL-17 production.

### 3.6. Innate mechanisms regulating Th17 cells

Although strictly members of the adaptive arm of immunity, CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes as well as B cells also express various members of the innate, evolutionary-conserved TLR family (reviewed in [112, 113]). Therefore, our group analyzed the direct

role of TLR signaling in Th17 maintenance and function [72]. We found that TLR2 was enhanced in the Th17 lineage compared to the Th1 and Th2 subsets. Ligation of TLR2 led to a costimulatory effect in polarizing Th17 cells as well promoting their expansion. In vivo, the lack of TLR2 expression directly on CD4+ T cells led to reduced Th17 generation and an almost complete protection from the development of EAE. Furthermore, we demonstrated that CD4+ T cells are likely activated by endogenous TLR2 ligands generated during the inflammatory process, which as of now are still undefined. Future studies should focus on other innate pathways that CD4+ T lymphocytes may utilize for IL-17 production, expanding our knowledge of direct innate regulation by molecules expressed by adaptive immune cells.

4. IL-17E (IL-25)

IL-25, a distinct cytokine in the IL-17 family, was originally identified on the basis of searching for sequence homology to the other IL-17 family members [10,114]. Seminal studies in renal carcinoma cell lines showed an effect of IL-25 in inducing the expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-8 through NF-κB activation [114,115]. However, additional studies in vivo indicated that IL-25 plays vital roles in regulating type-2 immune response [115]. While IL-17 and IL-17F induce neutrophila, participate in immunity against certain bacterial and fungal infections, and are involved in the pathogenesis of multiple autoimmune diseases; IL-25 promotes eosinophilia and appears to play important roles in Th2-mediated host defense against helminthic parasite infection as well as in exacerbating allergic airway diseases.

4.1. The expression and regulation of IL-25

IL-25 was initially reported to be derived from highly polarized Th2 cells [10], but later on it was found to be expressed by several cell types both in the hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic compartment. IL-25 mRNA was expressed by IgE-activated mast cells [116], alveolar macrophages [117], microglia [118], eosinophils [119,120], basophils [120], epithelial cells [121,122], and endothelial cells [123]. In the brain, IL-25 mRNA is constitutively expressed by mouse microglia and by brain capillary endothelial cells and its expression is involved in protection from inflammatory brain diseases such as MS [118,123]. In the gut, IL-25 can be found in the large intestine, in particular intestinal epithelial cells, and is involved in maintenance of intestinal homeostasis [122]. In the lung, IL-25 was induced in mouse models of allergic lung disease [124]. Our group has demonstrated that several allergens such as ragweed and fungal protease can induce IL-25 mRNA expression in lung epithelial cells [121]. Therefore, IL-25 plays important roles in the pathogenesis of allergic lung disease and the tissue expression of IL-25 contributes to immune responses against pathogens and controls local inflammation.

Although many reports provide insight into which cells produce IL-25, the mechanisms governing the expression of this cytokine remain unclear. IL-25 can be detected in intestinal epithelial cells from conventionally reared mice, however, IL-25 expression is absent in the germ-free mice [122], suggesting that signals from gut pathogens can induce IL-25 expression. In the airway, IL-25 in lung epithelial cells can be induced by protease allergens [121,125]. The induction of IL-25 by allergens was shown to be suppressed by Erk, JNK, and p38 inhibitors [125], suggesting that allergens can regulate the expression of IL-25 through the MAPK pathway. Furthermore, some airway epithelial cell-derived factors, such as matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7), have been shown to modulate IL-25 function in the airway during allergic asthma [126]. IL-25 can be cleaved by MMP7 at multiple sites and this processed IL-25 is better at inducing Th2 cytokine production

compared to native IL-25 [126]. Finally, viral infection was also found to induce the expression of IL-25 in lung tissue and that this IL-25 expression may contribute to virus-induced exacerbation of allergic asthma [127]. Thus, signals from pathogens themselves may be capable of regulating IL-25 expression.

4.2. IL-25 receptor and target cells

The receptor for IL-25 was identified based on homology searches for sequences related to the IL-17 receptor. The IL-25 receptor was found to be the same receptor for IL-17B (termed IL-17RB or EV127); however, IL-25 was found to have a higher binding affinity to IL-17RB compared to IL-17B [114,128,129]. Further studies by Rickel et al. found that the functional IL-25 receptor indeed requires not only IL-17RB but also IL-17RA, where mice deficient in either IL-17RA or IL-17RB did not respond to IL-25 [130]. Similar to the IL-17 receptor that requires a IL-17RA and IL-17RC complex, the interaction of both IL-17RA and IL-17RB is important for IL-25 activity. While IL-17 mainly functions on structural cells such as epithelial cells and fibroblasts to induce pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, IL-25 mostly targets hematopoietic cells and induces the production of Th2 cytokines. Both innate and adaptive immune cells are currently known to be potential targets for IL-25.

Several IL-25 innate immune cells, including monocytes [119,131] and NKT cells [132,133] were reported to express functional IL-17RB and IL-25 treatment of these cells induced Th2 cytokine production. In vivo, IL-25 treatment in Rag knockout mice induced Th2 cytokine production from undefined populations of non-T/non-B (NBNT) cells [10]. Recently, three groups independently identified a novel population of innate effector cells that are indeed IL-25 responders. These cells are responsible for the production of Th2 cytokines, in particular IL-13, during helminthic parasite infection and serve to mediate worm expulsion [134–136]. These innate IL-25 responder cells were named accordingly to investigator preference: nuocyte by Neill et al. [134], MPPtype2 cells by Saenz et al. [135], and ih2 cells by Price et al [136]. Whether these cells are the same population and function in other Th2-associated diseases remains unclear.

Not only can IL-25 target innate immune cells to produce Th2 cytokines, it also can direct naïve T helper cells towards Th2 commitment as well as augment the cytokine production of effector/memory Th2 cells [120,121]. IL-17RB mRNA was highly expressed in Th2 cells but not in Th1 and Th17 cells [121,137]. Treatment of naïve T cells with IL-25 promoted the differentiation of Th2 cells in an IL-4 and STAT-6 dependent manner, but had no effect on the polarization of Th1 and Th17 cells. Furthermore, our group demonstrated that IL-25 could augment c1 and JunB transcription factors during early T cell differentiation, possibly resulting in upregulation of initial IL-4 levels [121]. Moreover, the expression of IL-17RB can be detected in circulating human Th2 memory cells and further up-regulated in CD3/CD28-activated cells [120,138]. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) is known to activate dendritic cells to produce Th2-polarizing signals and TSLP-activated dendritic cells can direct the differentiation of Th2 cells [139]. In the presence of TSLP-activated dendritic cells, IL-17RB on Th2 memory cells was strongly induced and further IL-25 treatment enhanced their polarization and proliferation [120]. Moreover, Th9 cells, a recently identified T helper lineage that produces mainly IL-9, was also found to express IL-17RB [137]. Unlike Th2 cells, the differentiation of Th9 from naïve T cells is induced by TGF-β and IL-4 [140,141]. Th9 cells demonstrated the highest expression of IL-17RB compared to other Th subsets and treatment of IL-25 on differentiating Th9 cells enhanced their IL-9 and IL-10 production [137]. Enforced expression of IL-17RB by CD4+ T cells induced substantial production of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and

Table 3  
The role of IL-25 in disease.

| Disease                      | Evidence in human/mouse | Source of IL-25                          | IL-25 target cells                     | Role in disease                                                                 | References           |
|-----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Allergic rhinitis/asthma    | Human, mouse          | Epithelial cells, eosinophils, basophils, mast cells | Th2 cells, Th9 cells, NKT cells, monocytes | Induce Th2 cytokines, lung inflammation<br>Induce lung remodeling and AHR<br>Exacerbate diseases | [121, 125, 137, 144, 157] |
| Autoimmune disease (EAE)    | Mouse                 | Microglia, brain capillary endothelial cells | ?                                     | Induce Th2 cytokines, suppress Th17 cytokines, inhibit EAE development<br>Maintain blood brain barrier integrity | [118, 123]            |
| Colitis                     | Human, mouse          | ?                                          | CD14+ cells                           | Inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokines, protective role in colitis                                      | [158, 159]            |
| Helminth parasite infection | Mouse                 | ?                                          | NBNT cells                            | Induce Th2 cytokines<br>Induce worm clearance<br>Limit chronic inflammation                              | [8, 9, 134–136]       |

IL-9, implicating the involvement of IL-25 function in not only Th2 but also Th9 differentiation [137]. These data indicate that IL-25 may act on both innate responder cells and adaptive T helper cells to induce type-2 immunity.

### 4.3. Biological function of IL-25

IL-25 has been implicated in the regulation of type-2 immune responses. In vivo studies by IL-25 protein injection and in IL-25 transgenic mice showed the induction of eosinophilia and Th2 cytokine expression in several tissues [10, 142, 143]. There have been many reports on the pathogenic roles of IL-25 in Th2-based diseases, especially those pertaining to allergic lung. IL-25 is not only linked to allergic disease, but also plays a protective role in helminthic parasite infection. Additionally, IL-25 functions in the regulation of some autoimmune diseases, such as EAE. The known roles of IL-25 in disease are summarized in Table 3.

#### 4.3.1. Pathogenic roles of IL-25 in allergic lung diseases

Studies in both mice and humans have demonstrated the crucial roles of IL-25 in the pathogenesis of allergic lung diseases. Accordingly, the expression of IL-25 and IL-17RB has been detected in asthmatic lung tissues [120, 124]. In patients with allergic rhinitis, IL-25 and TSLP was found to be upregulated in nasal lavages [144]. Overexpression of IL-25 in the lung epithelium of mice induced epithelial cell hyperplasia, mucus hyper-secretion, airway infiltration of eosinophils and macrophages, and the upregulation of chemokines associated with type-2 immunity [121]. In contrast, IL-25 neutralization attenuated allergic inflammation with reduced eosinophils and CD4+ T cells in the airway [121]. Moreover, mice treated with anti-IL-25 exhibited less Th2 cytokine production in bronchoalveolar lavage and reduced OVA-specific Th2 cytokine production in splenocytes [121]. Likewise, IL-25-deficient mice showed significant attenuation of allergic inflammation, characterized by reductions in both Th2 and Th9 cytokines [137]. Indeed, IL-25 appears to be important for both the sensitization and the challenge phase of airway responses [145]. IL-25 blockade during the sensitization phase resulted in reduced levels of not only Th2 cytokines, but also goblet cell hyperplasia and serum IgE secretion [145]. More importantly, neutralizing IL-25 either in the sensitization or the challenge phase can prevent airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR) [145]. The induction of airway hyper-reactivity by IL-25 was dependent on IL-17RB-expressing NKT cells [132, 133]. Similarly, inhibition of the IL-25 and IL-17RB interaction through the use of soluble IL-17RB or an anti-IL-17RB in a mouse model of asthma resulted in reduced airway inflammation.

#### 4.3.2. Protective roles of IL-25 in helminthic parasite infection

Helminthes are parasites known to induce strong type-2 immune responses. Recent data indicate that IL-25 strongly contributes to protective immunity against intestinal helminthic infection. The role of IL-25 in helminthic parasite infection has been examined in two different models thus far. In a mouse model of Trichuriasis (whipworm infection), exogenous IL-25 treatment induced a protective Th2 response and worm expulsion in genetically susceptible mice [9]. In contrast, IL-25 knockout mice were unable to eradicate the infection. The mechanism by which IL-25 regulated worm protection in this model was shown to be lymphocyte dependent. During chronic infection with *Trichuris*, IL-25 was also able to ameliorate chronic inflammation and maintain mucosal integrity [9]. Likewise, in hookworm *Nippostrongylus brasiliensis* infection, IL-25 was shown to be involved in worm clearance [8]. In IL-25-deficient mice, this worm could not be expelled efficiently, which correlated with a significantly reduced level of type-2 cytokines [8]. Unlike whipworm infection, IL-25 seems to mediate worm expulsion independent of lymphocytes in *N. brasiliensis*-infected mice. IL-25 treated-Rag knockout mice were still able to eradicate the worm [8]. The mechanism of worm protection mediated by IL-25 in this mouse model was found to be dependent on NBNT cells [8]. More recent work has clearly demonstrated that NBNT cells are indeed the novel innate type-2 effector cells responsible for the IL-25 effect in *N. brasiliensis* infection [134–136]. These studies indicate the essential function of IL-25 in protection to helminthic parasite infection. Whether IL-25 plays roles in other helminthic parasite infections or utilizes a similar pathway(s) for protection remains unclear.

### 5. Summary and conclusions

Although traditionally thought of as adaptive responders, Th17-related cytokines (IL-17 and IL-17F) have various innate sources and function as rapidly produced pro-inflammatory mediators. Innate IL-17-producing cells also employ many of the cytokine and transcriptional regulators utilized by Th17 cells. Clearly, γδT cells

Stimuli

Mucosal epithelial cells
Mast cells
Basophils
Eosinophils
Alveolar Macrophages

IL-25

Innate effectors
- NBNT (nuocyte/MMPtype2/ih2)
- NKT cells
- Monocyte

Adaptive immune cells
- Naïve T helper cell
- Effector, memory Th2 cells
- Th9 cells

Type-2 immune responses

Pathogenic function
- Allergic asthma/rhinitis

Protective function
- Helminth parasite infection
- EAE and inflammatory bowel disease

Fig. 2. Many stimuli such as allergens or pathogens can induce several cell types to express IL-25. IL-25 functions on both innate effectors and adaptive T cells to promote type-2 immune responses. IL-25 plays pathogenic roles in allergic lung diseases and protective roles in helminth parasite infection and some organ-specific autoimmune diseases such as experimental encephalitis autoimmune disease (EAE) and colitis.

have been shown to have important immunological consequences as a function of their IL-17 production. However, further research needs to expand on the regulation of IL-17, IL-17F, and IL-22 in this cell type. Moreover, the relative contributions of IL-17 and IL-17F expression from NK cells, LTi cells, and other hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic lineages needs to be more thoroughly addressed to determine the physiological relevance of their innate IL-17 production. The unifying factors of innate IL-17 and IL-17F production in various cell types include ROR family expression, IL-23 reactivity, and possibly TLR-mediated activation.

Unlike IL-17 and IL-17F, IL-25 has unique functions in promoting type-2 immunity as well as inhibiting pro-inflammatory responses. IL-25, expressed by several innate immune cell types including mucosal epithelial cells, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells, is capable of inducing Th2 cytokines from both innate and adaptive IL-25 responders. IL-25 can target innate immune cells, including NKT cells, monocytes, and NBNT cells, which are recently identified novel innate effector cells that produce the initial Th2 cytokines during helminth parasite infection. IL-25 also can act on naïve T cells by promoting polarization toward the Th2 lineage and on memory/effecter Th2 cells by enhancing their Th2 cytokine production. Additionally, a novel T helper lineage, Th9 can also respond to IL-25, which functions in augmenting IL-9 production. The effect of IL-25 on multiple cells can thus result in dysregulated Th2 responses in asthma, protective immunity to helminth infection, and pathological suppression of autoimmune diseases (Fig. 2).

References

[1] Chang SH, Dong C. IL-17F: regulation, signaling and function in inflammation. Cytokine 2009;46:7–11.
[2] Moseley TA, Haudenschild DR, Rose L, Reddi AH. Interleukin-17 family and IL-17 receptors. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2003;14:155–74.
[3] Dong C. Differentiation and function of pro-inflammatory Th17 cells. Microbes Infect 2009;11:584–8.
[4] Hymowitz SG, Filvaroff EH, Yin JP, Lee J, Cai L, Risser P, et al. IL-17s adopt a cystine knot fold: structure and activity of a novel cytokine, IL-17F, and implications for receptor binding. Embo J 2001;20:5332–41.
[5] Yamaguchi Y, Fujio K, Shoda H, Okamoto A, Tsuno N, Takahashi NH, et al. IL-17B and IL-17C are associated with TNF-alpha production and contribute to the exacerbation of inflammatory arthritis. J Immunol 2007;179:7128–36.
[6] Wu Q, Martin RJ, Rino JG, Breed R, Torres RM, Chu HW. IL-23-dependent IL-17 production is essential in neutrophil recruitment and activity in mouse lung defense against respiratory *Mycoplasma pneumoniae* infection. Microbes Infect 2007;9:78–86.
[7] Li H, Chen J, Huang A, Stinson J, Huldens S, Foster J, et al. Cloning and characterization of IL-17B and IL-17C, two new members of the IL-17 cytokine family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:773–8.
[8] Fallon PG, Ballantyne SJ, Mangan NE, Barlow JL, Dasvarma A, Hewett DR, et al. Identification of an interleukin (IL)-25-dependent cell population that provides IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 at the onset of helminth expulsion. J Exp Med 2006;203:1105–16.
[9] Owyang AM, Zaph C, Wilson EH, Guild KJ, McClanahan T, Miller HR, et al. Interleukin 25 regulates type 2 cytokine-dependent immunity and limits chronic inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract. J Exp Med 2006;203:843–9.
[10] Fort MM, Cheung J, Yen D, Li J, Zarawski SM, Lo S, et al. IL-25 induces IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and Th2-associated pathologies in vivo. Immunity 2001;15:985–95.
[11] Dong C. Diversification of T-helper-cell lineages: finding the family root of IL-17-producing cells. Nat Rev Immunol 2006;6:329–34.
[12] Weaver CT, Harrington LE, Mangan PR, Gavrieli M, Murphy KM. Th17: an effector CD4 T cell lineage with regulatory T cell ties. Immunity 2006;24:677–88.
[13] Yao Z, Painter SL, Fanslow WC, Ulrich D, Macduff BM, Spriggs MK, et al. Human IL-17: a novel cytokine derived from T cells. J Immunol 1995;155:5483–6.
[14] Aarvak T, Chabaud M, Miossec P, Natvig JB. IL-17 is produced by some proinflammatory Th1/Th0 cells but not by Th2 cells. J Immunol 1999;162:1246–51.
[15] Park H, Li Z, Yang XO, Chang SH, Nurieva R, Wang YH, et al. A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by producing interleukin 17. Nat Immunol 2005;6:1133–41.
[16] Harrington LE, Hatton RD, Mangan PR, Turner H, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, et al. Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages. Nat Immunol 2005;6:1123–32.
[17] Dong C. TH17 cells in development: an updated view of their molecular identity and genetic programming. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:337–48.
[18] Dong C, Flavell RA. Cell fate decision: T-helper 1 and 2 subsets in immune responses. Arthritis Res 2000;2:179–88.
[19] Glimcher LH, Murphy KM. Lineage commitment in the immune system: the T helper lymphocyte grows up. Genes Dev 2000;14:1693–711.
[20] Chung Y, Chang SH, Martinez GJ, Yang XO, Nurieva R, Kang KS, et al. Critical regulation of early Th17 cell differentiation by interleukin-1 signaling. Immunity 2009;30:576–87.
[21] Akira S, Sato S. Toll-like receptors and their signaling mechanisms. Scand J Infect Dis 2003;35:555–62.
[22] Kawaguchi M, Onouchi LF, Li XD, Essayan DM, Schroeder J, Xiao HQ, et al. Identification of a novel cytokine, ML-1, and its expression in subjects with asthma. J Immunol 2001;167:4430–5.
[23] Wright JF, Guo Y, Quazi A, Luxenberg DP, Bennet F, Ross JF, et al. Identification of an interleukin 17F/17A heterodimer in activated human CD4+ T cells. J Biol Chem 2007;282:13447–55.
[24] Chang SH, Dong C. A novel heterodimeric cytokine consisting of IL-17 and IL-17F regulates inflammatory responses. Cell Res 2007;17:435–40.
[25] Kuestner RE, Taft DW, Haran A, Brandt CS, Brender T, Lum K, et al. Identification of the IL-17 receptor related molecule IL-17RC as the receptor for IL-17F. J Immunol 2007;179:5462–73.

[26] Gaffen SL. Structure and signalling in the IL-17 receptor family. Nat Rev Immunol 2009;9:556–67.

[27] Qian Y, Liu C, Hartupee J, Altuntas CZ, Gulen MF, Jane-Wit D, et al. The adaptor Act1 is required for interleukin 17-dependent signaling associated with autoimmune and inflammatory disease. Nat Immunol 2007;8:247–56.

[28] Chang SH, Park H, Dong C. Act1 adaptor protein is an immediate and essential signaling component of interleukin-17 receptor. J Biol Chem 2006;281:35603–7.

[29] Martinez GJ, Nurieva RI, Yang XO, Dong C. Regulation and function of proinflammatory TH17 cells. Ann NY Acad Sci 2008;1143:188–211.

[30] Yang XO, Chang SH, Park H, Nurieva R, Shah B, Acero L, et al. Regulation of inflammatory responses by IL-17F. J Exp Med 2008;205:1063–75.

[31] Ruddy MJ, Wong GC, Liu XK, Yamamoto H, Kasayamas S, Kirkwood KC, et al. Functional cooperation between interleukin-17 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha is mediated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family members. J Biol Chem 2004;279:2559–67.

[32] Shen F, Ruddy MJ, Plamondon P, Gaffen SL. Cytokines link osteoblasts and inflammation: microarray analysis of interleukin-17- and TNF-alpha-induced genes in bone cells. J Leukoc Biol 2005;77:388–99.

[33] Happel KI, Zheng M, Young E, Quinton LJ, Lockhart E, Ramsay AJ, et al. Cutting edge: roles of Toll-like receptor 4 and IL-23 in IL-17 expression in response to *Klebsiella pneumoniae* infection. J Immunol 2003;170:4432–6.

[34] Happel KI, Dubin PJ, Zheng M, Ghilardi N, Lockhart E, Quinton LJ, et al. Divergent roles of IL-23 and IL-12 in host defense against *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. J Exp Med 2005;202:761–9.

[35] Ye P, Rodriguez FH, Kanaly S, Stocking KL, Schurt J, Schwarzenberger P, et al. Requirement of interleukin 17 receptor signaling for lung CXC chemokine and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor expression, neutrophil recruitment, and host defense. J Exp Med 2001;194:519–27.

[36] Aujla SJ, Chan YR, Zheng M, Fei M, Askew DJ, Pociask DAs, et al. IL-22 mediates mucosal host defense against Gram-negative bacterial pneumonia. Nat Med 2008;14:275–81.

[37] Rudner XL, Happel KI, Young EA, Shellito JE. Interleukin-23 (IL-23)-IL-17 cytokine axis in murine *Pneumocystis carinii* infection. Infect Immun 2007;75:3055–61.

[38] Langrish CL, Chen Y, Blumenschein WM, Mattson J, Basham B, Sedgwick JD, et al. IL-23 drives a pathogenic T cell population that induces autoimmune inflammation. J Exp Med 2005;201:233–40.

[39] Cua DJ, Sherlock J, Chen Y, Murphy Ca, Joyce B, Seymour B, et al. Interleukin-23 rather than interleukin-12 is the critical cytokine for autoimmune inflammation of the brain. Nature 2003;421:744–8.

[40] Murphy CA, Langrish CL, Chen Y, Blumenschein W, McClanahan T, Kastelein RA, et al. Divergent pro- and antiinflammatory roles for IL-23 and IL-12 in joint autoimmune inflammation. J Exp Med 2003;198:1951–7.

[41] Nakae S, Nambu A, Sudo K, Iwakura Y. Suppression of immune induction of collagen-induced arthritis in IL-17-deficient mice. J Immunol 2003;171:6173–7.

[42] Nakae S, Saijo S, Horai R, Sudo K, Mori S, Iwakura Y. IL-17 production from activated T cells is required for the spontaneous development of destructive arthritis in mice deficient in IL-1 receptor antagonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:5986–90.

[43] Lubberts E, Koenders MI, Oppers-Walgreen B, van den Bersselaar L, Coenen-de Roo CJ, Joosten LA, et al. Treatment with a neutralizing anti-murine interleukin-17 antibody after the onset of collagen-induced arthritis reduces joint inflammation, cartilage destruction, and bone erosion. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:650–9.

[44] Zhang Z, Zheng M, Bindas J, Schwarzenberger P, Kolls JK. Critical role of IL-17 receptor signaling in acute TNBS-induced colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2006;12:382–8.

[45] Piskin G, Sylva-Steenland RM, Bos JD, Teunissen MB. In vitro and in situ expression of IL-23 by keratinocytes in healthy skin and psoriasis lesions: enhanced expression in psoriatic skin. J Immunol 2006;176:1908–15.

[46] Ma HL, Liang S, Li J, Napierta L, Brown T, Benoit S, et al. IL-22 is required for Th17 cell-mediated pathology in a mouse model of psoriasis-like skin inflammation. J Clin Invest 2008;118:597–607.

[47] Ma HL, Napierata L, Stedman N, Benoit S, Collins M, Nickerson-Nutter C, et al. Tumor necrosis factor alpha blockade exacerbates murine psoriasis-like disease by enhancing Th17 function and decreasing expansion of Treg cells. Arthritis Rheum 2010;62:430–40.

[48] Lowes MA, Kikuchi T, Fuentes-Duculan J, Cardinale I, Zaba LC, Haider AS, et al. Psoriasis vulgaris lesions contain discrete populations of Th1 and Th17T cells. J Invest Dermatol 2008;128:1207–11.

[49] Gomez-Rodriguez J, Sahu N, Handon R, Davidson TS, Anderson SM, Kirby MR, et al. Differential expression of interleukin-17A and -17F is coupled to T cell receptor signaling via inducible T cell kinase. Immunity 2009;31:587–97.

[50] Watanabe H, Kawaguchi M, Fujishima S, Ogura M, Matsukura S, Takeuchi H, et al. Functional characterization of IL-17F as a selective neutrophil attractant in psoriasis. J Invest Dermatol 2009;129:650–6.

[51] Fujishima S, Watanabe H, Kawaguchi M, Suzuki T, Matsukura S, Homma T, et al. Involvement of IL-17F via the induction of IL-6 in psoriasis. Arch Dermatol Res 2010.

[52] Chien YH, Bonneville M. Gamma delta T cell receptors. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006;63:2089–94.

[53] Moore TA, von Freeden-Jeffry U, Murray R, Zlotnik A. Inhibition of gamma delta T cell development and early thymocyte maturation in IL-7–/– mice. J Immunol 1996;157:2366–73.

[54] Xiong N, Raulet DH. Development and selection of gammadelta T cells. Immunol Rev 2007;215:15–31.

[55] De Rosa SC, Andrus JP, Perfetto SP, Mantovani JJ, Herzenberg LA, Roederer M. Ontogeny of gamma delta T cells in humans. J Immunol 2004;172:1637–45.

[56] Girardi M. Immunosurveillance and immunoregulation by gammadelta T cells. J Invest Dermatol 2006;126:25–31.

[57] Tough DF, Spent J. Lifespan of gamma/delta T cells. J Exp Med 1998;187:357–65.

[58] Born WK, Reardon CL, O’Brien RL. The function of gammadelta T cells in innate immunity. Curr Opin Immunol 2006;18:31–8.

[59] Roark CL, Simonian PL, Fontenot AP, Born WK, O’Brien RL. Gammadelta T cells: an important source of IL-17. Curr Opin Immunol 2008;20:353–7.

[60] Jensen KD, Su X, Shin S, Li L, Youssef S, Yamasaki S, et al. Thymic selection determines gammadelta T cell effector fate: antigen-naive cells make interleukin-17 and antigen-experienced cells make interferon gamma. Immunity 2008;29:90–100.

[61] Ivanov II, McKenzie BS, Zhou L, Tadokoro CE, Lepelley A, Lafaille JJ, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 2006;126:1121–33.

[62] Ribot JC, deBarros A, Pang DJ, Neves JF, Peperzak V, Roberts SJ, et al. CD27 is a thymic determinant of the balance between interferon-gamma- and interleukin 17-producing gammadelta T cell subsets. Nat Immunol 2009;10:427–36.

[63] Haas JD, Gonzalez FH, Schmitz S, Chennupati V, Fohse L, Kremmer E, et al. CCR6 and NK1.1 distinguish between IL-17A and IFN-gamma-producing gammadelta effector T cells. Eur J Immunol 2009;39:3488–97.

[64] Martin B, Hirota K, Cua DJ, Stockinger B, Veldhoen M. Interleukin-17-producing gammadelta T cells selectively expand in response to pathogen products and environmental signals. Immunity 2009;31:321–30.

[65] Cua DJ, Tato CM. Innate IL-17-producing cells: the sentinels of the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:479–89.

[66] Do JS, Fink PJ, Li L, Spolski R, Robinson J, Leonard WJ, et al. Cutting edge: spontaneous development of IL-17-producing gamma delta T cells in the thymus occurs via a TGF-beta 1-dependent mechanism. J Immunol 2010;184:1675–9.

[67] Riol-Blanco L, Lazarevic V, Awasthi A, Mitsdoerffer M, Wilson BS, Croxford A, et al. IL-23 receptor regulates unconventional IL-17-producing T cells that control bacterial infections. J Immunol 2010;184:1710–20.

[68] Sutton CE, Lalor SJ, Sweeney CM, Brereton CF, Lavelle EC, Mills KH. Interleukin-1 and IL-23 induce innate IL-17 production from gammadelta T cells, amplifying Th17 responses and autoimmunity. Immunity 2009;31:331–41.

[69] Nurieva R, Yang XO, Martinez G, Zhang Y, Panopoulos AD, Ma L, et al. Essential autocrine regulation by IL-21 in the generation of inflammatory T cells. Nature 2007;448:480–3.

[70] Eberl M, Engel R, Beck E, Jomaa H. Differentiation of human gamma-delta T cells towards distinct memory phenotypes. Cell Immunol 2002;218:1–6.

[71] Thedrez A, Harly C, Morice A, Salot S, Bonneville M, Scotet E. IL-21-mediated potentiation of antitumor cytolytic and proinflammatory responses of human V gamma 9V delta 2 T cells for adoptive immunotherapy. J Immunol 2009;182:3423–31.

[72] Reynolds JM, Pappu BP, Peng J, Martinez GJ, Zhang Y, Chung Y, et al. Toll-like receptor 2 signaling in CD4(+)T lymphocytes promotes Thelper 17 responses and regulates the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease. Immunity 2010;32:692–702.

[73] Yang XO, Pappu BP, Nurieva R, Akimzhanov A, Kang HS, Chung Y, et al. T helper 17 lineage differentiation is programmed by orphan nuclear receptors ROR alpha and ROR gamma. Immunity 2008;28:29–39.

[74] Brustle A, Heink S, Huber M, Rosenplanter P, Stadelman C, Yu P, et al. The development of inflammatory T(H)-17 cells requires interferon-regulatory factor 4. Nat Immunol 2007;8:958–66.

[75] Veldhoen M, Hirota K, Westendorf AM, Buer J, Dumoutier L, Renaud JC, et al. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links TH17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to environmental toxins. Nature 2008;453:106–9.

[76] Hamada S, Umemura M, Shiono T, Tanaka K, Yahagi A, Begum MD, et al. IL-17A produced by gammadelta T cells plays a critical role in innate immunity against *Listeria monocytogenes* infection in the liver. J Immunol 2008;181:3456–63.

[77] Meeks KD, Sieve AN, Kolls JK, Ghilardi N, Berg RE. IL-23 is required for protection against systemic infection with *Listeria monocytogenes*. J Immunol 2009;183:8026–34.

[78] Cho JS, Pietras EM, Garcia NC, Ramos RI, Farzam DM, Monroe HR, et al. IL-17 is essential for host defense against cutaneous *Staphylococcus aureus* infection in mice. J Clin Invest 2010;120:1762–73.

[79] Lockhart E, Green AM, Flynn JL. IL-17 production is dominated by gamma-delta T cells rather than CD4 T cells during *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* infection. J Immunol 2006;177:4662–9.

[80] Umemura M, Yahagi A, Hamada S, Begum MD, Watanabe H, Kawakami K, et al. IL-17-mediated regulation of innate and acquired immune response against pulmonary *Mycobacterium bovis* bacille Calmette-Guerin infection. J Immunol 2007;178:3786–96.

[81] Shibata K, Yamada H, Hara H, Kishihara K, Yoshikai Y. Resident Vdelta1+ gammadelta T cells control early infiltration of neutrophils after *Escherichia coli* infection via IL-17 production. J Immunol 2007;178:4466–72.

[82] Rajan AJ, Gao YL, Raine CS, Brosnan CF. A pathogenic role for gamma delta T cells in relapsing-remitting experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in the SJL mouse. J Immunol 1996;157:941–9.

[83] Lees JR, Iwakura Y, Russell JH. Host T cells are the main producers of IL-17 within the central nervous system during initiation of experimental autoim-

mune encephalomyelitis induced by adoptive transfer of Th1 cell lines. J Immunol 2008;180:8066–72.

[84] Wohler JE, Smith SS, Zinn KR, Bullard DC, Barnum SR. Gammadelta T cells in EAE: early trafficking events and cytokine requirements. Eur J Immunol 2009;39:1516–26.

[85] Shichita T, Sugiyama Y, Ooboshi H, Sugimori H, Nakagawa R, Takada I, et al. Pivotal role of cerebral interleukin-17-producing gammadeltaT cells in the delayed phase of ischemic brain injury. Nat Med 2009;15:946–50.

[86] Cui Y, Shao H, Lan C, Nian H, O'Brien RL, Born WK, et al. Major role of gamma delta T cells in the generation of IL-17+ uveitogenic T cells. J Immunol 2009;183:560–7.

[87] Kim MY, Kim KS, McConnell F, Lane P. Lymphoid tissue inducer cells: architects of CD4 immune responses in mice and men. Clin Exp Immunol 2009;157:20–6.

[88] Cupedo T, Crellin NK, Papazian N, Rombouts EJ, Weijer K, Grogan JL, et al. Human fetal lymphoid tissue-inducer cells are interleukin 17-producing precursors to RORC+ CD127+ natural killer-like cells. Nat Immunol 2009;10:66–74.

[89] Lane P, Kim MY, Withers D, Gaspal F, Bekiaris V, Desanti G, et al. Lymphoid tissue inducer cells in adaptive CD4 T cell dependent responses. Semin Immunol 2008;20:159–63.

[90] Eberl G, Marmon S, Sunshine MJ, Rennert PD, Choi Y, Littman DR. An essential function for the nuclear receptor RORgamma(t) in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nat Immunol 2004;5:64–73.

[91] Takatori H, Kanno Y, Watford WT, Tato CM, Weiss G, Ivanov II, et al. Lymphoid tissue inducer-like cells are an innate source of IL-17 and IL-22. J Exp Med 2009;206:35–41.

[92] Colonna M. Interleukin-22-producing natural killer cells and lymphoid tissue inducer-like cells in mucosal immunity. Immunity 2009;31:15–23.

[93] Cella M, Fuchs A, Vermi W, Facchetti F, Otero K, Lennerz JK, et al. A human natural killer cell subset provides an innate source of IL-22 for mucosal immunity. Nature 2009;457:722–5.

[94] Luci C, Reynders A, Ivanov II, Cognet C, Chiche L, Chasson L, et al. Influence of the transcription factor RORgammat on the development of NKp46+ cell populations in gut and skin. Nat Immunol 2009;10:75–82.

[95] Passos ST, Silver JS, O'Hara AC, Sehy D, Stumhofer JS, Hunter CA. IL-6 promotes NK cell production of IL-17 during toxoplasmosis. J Immunol 2010;184:1776–83.

[96] Bendelac A, Savage PB, Teyton L. The biology of NKT cells. Annu Rev Immunol 2007;25:297–336.

[97] Rachitskaya AV, Hansen AM, Horai R, Li Z, Villasmil R, Luger D, et al. Cutting edge: NKT cells constitutively express IL-23 receptor and RORgammat and rapidly produce IL-17 upon receptor ligation in an IL-6-independent fashion. J Immunol 2008;180:5167–71.

[98] Coquet JM, Chakravarti S, Kyparissoudis K, McNab FW, Pitt LA, McKenzie BS, et al. Diverse cytokine production by NKT cell subsets and identification of an IL-17-producing CD4-NK1.1-NKT cell population. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:11287–92.

[99] Brinster C, Shevach EM. Costimulatory effects of IL-1 on the expansion/ differentiation of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ and CD4+CD25+Foxp3-T cells. J Leukoc Biol 2008;84:480–7.

[100] Coquet JM, Kyparissoudis K, Pellicci DG, Besra G, Berzins SP, Smyth MJ, et al. IL-21 is produced by NKT cells and modulates NKT cell activation and cytokine production. J Immunol 2007;178:2827–34.

[101] Zhu X, Mulcahy LA, Mohammed RA, Lee AH, Franks HA, Kilpatrick L, et al. IL-17 expression by breast-cancer-associated macrophages: IL-17 promotes invasiveness of breast cancer cell lines. Breast Cancer Res 2008;10:R95.

[102] Da Silva CA, Hartl D, Liu W, Lee CG, Elias JA. TLR-2 and IL-17A in chitin-induced macrophage activation and acute inflammation. J Immunol 2008;181:4279–86.

[103] Song C, Luo L, Lei Z, Li B, Liang Z, Liu G, et al. IL-17-producing alveolar macrophages mediate allergic lung inflammation related to asthma. J Immunol 2008;181:6117–24.

[104] Ishigame H, Kakuta S, Nagai T, Kadoki M, Nambu A, Komiyama Y, et al. Differential roles of interleukin-17A and -17F in host defense against mucosal bacterial infection and allergic responses. Immunity 2009;30:108–19.

[105] Keshav S. Paneth cells: leukocyte-like mediators of innate immunity in the intestine. J Leukoc Biol 2006;80:500–8.

[106] Takahashi N, Vanlaere I, de Rycke R, Cauwels A, Joosten LA, Lubberts E, et al. IL-17 produced by Paneth cells drives TNF-induced shock. J Exp Med 2008;205:1755–61.

[107] Van Maele L, Carnoy C, Cayet D, Songhet P, Dumoutier L, Ferrero I, et al. TLR5 signaling stimulates the innate production of IL-17 and IL-22 by CD3(neg)CD127+ immune cells in spleen and mucosa. J Immunol 2010;185:1177–85.

[108] Li L, Huang L, Vergis AL, Ye H, Bajwa A, Narayan V, et al. IL-17 produced by neutrophils regulates IFN-gamma-mediated neutrophil migration in mouse kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Clin Invest 2010;120:331–42.

[109] Andreasen C, Powell DA, Carbonetti NH. Pertussis toxin stimulates IL-17 production in response to *Bordetella pertussis* infection in mice. PLoS One 2009;4:e7079.

[110] Suzuki S, Kokubu F, Kawaguchi M, Homma T, Odaka M, Watanabe S, et al. Expression of interleukin-17F in a mouse model of allergic asthma. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2007;143(Suppl. 1):89–94.

[111] Hueber AJ, Asquith DL, Miller AM, Reilly J, Kerr S, Leipe J, et al. Mast cells express IL-17A in rheumatoid arthritis synovium. J Immunol 2010;184:3336–40.


[112] MacLeod H, Wetzler LM. T cell activation by TLRs: a role for TLRs in the adaptive immune response. Sci STKE 2007;pe48.

[113] Pasare C, Medzhitov R. Control of B-cell responses by Toll-like receptors. Nature 2005;438:364–8.

[114] Lee J, Ho WH, Maruoka M, Corpuz RT, Baldwin DT, Foster JS, et al. IL-17E, a novel proinflammatory ligand for the IL-17 receptor homolog IL-17Rh1. J Biol Chem 2001;276:1660–4.

[115] Hurst SD, Muchamuel T, Gorman DM, Gilbert JM, Clifford T, Kwan S, et al. New IL-17 family members promote Th1 or Th2 responses in the lung: in vivo function of the novel cytokine IL-25. J Immunol 2002;169:443–53.

[116] Ikeda K, Nakajima H, Suzuki K, Kagami S, Hirose K, Suto A, et al. Mast cells produce interleukin-25 upon Fc epsilon RI-mediated activation. Blood 2003;101:3594–6.

[117] Kang CM, Jang AS, Ahn MH, Shin JA, Kim JH, Choi YS, et al. Interleukin-25 and interleukin-13 production by alveolar macrophages in response to particles. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2005;33:290–6.

[118] Kleinschek MA, Owyang AM, Joyce-Shaikh B, Langrish CL, Chen Y, Gorman DM, et al. IL-25 regulates Th17 function in autoimmune inflammation. J Exp Med 2007;204:161–70.

[119] Dolgachev V, Petersen BC, Budelsky AL, Berlin AA, Lukacs NW. Pulmonary IL-17E (IL-25) production and IL-17RB+ myeloid cell-derived Th2 cytokine production are dependent upon stem cell factor-induced responses during chronic allergic pulmonary disease. J Immunol 2009;183:5705–15.

[120] Wang YH, Angkasekwinai P, Lu N, Voo KS, Arima K, Hanabuchi S, et al. IL-25 augments type 2 immune responses by enhancing the expansion and functions of TSLP-DC activated Th2 memory cells. J Exp Med 2007;204:1837–47.

[121] Angkasekwinai P, Park H, Wang YH, Chang SH, Corry DB, Liu YJ, et al. Interleukin 25 promotes the initiation of proallergic type 2 responses. J Exp Med 2007;204:1509–17.

[122] Zaph C, Du Y, Saenz SA, Nair MG, Perrigue JG, Taylor BC, et al. Commensal-dependent expression of IL-25 regulates the IL-23-IL-17 axis in the intestine. J Exp Med 2008;205:2191–8.

[123] Sonobe Y, Takeuchi H, Kataoka K, Li H, Jin S, Mimuro M, et al. Interleukin-25 expressed by brain capillary endothelial cells maintains blood-brain barrier function in a protein kinase Cepsilon-dependent manner. J Biol Chem 2009;284:31834–42.

[124] Tamachi T, Maezawa Y, Ikeda K, Kagami S, Hatano M, Seto Y, et al. IL-25 enhances allergic airway inflammation by amplifying a TH2 cell-dependent pathway in mice. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118:606–14.

[125] Yu HS, Angkasekwinai P, Chang SH, Chung Y, Dong C. Protease allergens induce the expression of IL-25 via Erk and p38 MAPK pathway. J Korean Med Sci 2010;25:829–34.

[126] Goswami S, Angkasekwinai P, Shan M, Greenlee KJ, Barranco WT, Polikephad S, et al. Divergent functions for airway epithelial matrix metalloproteinase 7 and retinoic acid in experimental asthma. Nat Immunol 2009;10:496–503.

[127] Siegle JS, Hansbro N, Herbert C, Rosenberg HF, Domachowske JB, Asquith KL, et al. Early-life viral infection and allergen exposure interact to induce an asthmatic phenotype in mice. Respir Res 2010;11:14.

[128] Shi Y, Ullrich SJ, Zhang J, Connolly K, Grzegorzewski KJ, Barber MC, et al. A novel cytokine receptor-ligand pair. Identification, molecular characterization, and in vivo immunomodulatory activity. J Biol Chem 2000;275:19167–76.

[129] Tian E, Sawyer JR, Largaespada DA, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Shaughnessy Jr JD. Evi27 encodes a novel membrane protein with homology to the IL17 receptor. Oncogene 2000;19:2098–109.

[130] Rickel EA, Siegel LA, Yoon BR, Rottman JB, Kugler DG, Swart DA, et al. Identification of functional roles for both IL-17RB and IL-17RA in mediating IL-25-induced activities. J Immunol 2008;181:4299–310.

[131] Caruso R, Stolfi C, Sarra M, Rizzo A, Fantini MC, Pallone F, et al. Inhibition of monocyte-derived inflammatory cytokines by IL-25 occurs via p38 Map kinase-dependent induction of Socs-3. Blood 2009;113:3512–9.

[132] Terashima A, Watarai H, Inoue S, Sekine E, Nakagawa R, Hase K, et al. A novel subset of mouse NKT cells bearing the IL-17 receptor B responds to IL-25 and contributes to airway hyperreactivity. J Exp Med 2008;205:2727–33.

[133] Stock P, Lombardi V, Kohlrutz V, Akbari O. Induction of airway hyperreactivity by IL-25 is dependent on a subset of invariant NKT cells expressing IL-17RB. J Immunol 2009;182:5116–22.

[134] Neill DR, Wong SH, Bellosi A, Flynn RJ, Daly M, Langford TK, et al. Nuocytes represent a new innate effector leukocyte that mediates type-2 immunity. Nature 2010;464:1367–70.

[135] Saenz SA, Siracusa MC, Perrigue JG, Spencer SP, Urban JF, Tocker JE, et al. IL25 elicits a multipotent progenitor cell population that promotes T(H)2 cytokine responses. Nature 2010;464:1362–6.

[136] Price AE, Liang HE, Sullivan BM, Reinhardt RL, Eisley CJ, Erle DJ, et al. Systemically dispersed innate IL-13-expressing cells in type 2 immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:11489–94.

[137] Angkasekwinai P, Chang SH, Thapa M, Watarai H, Dong C. Regulation of IL-9 expression by IL-25 signaling. Nat Immunol 2010;11:250–6.

[138] Wang YH, Ito T, Homey B, Watanabe N, Martin R, Barnes CJ, et al. Maintenance and polarization of human TH2 central memory T cells by thymic stromal lymphopoietin-activated dendritic cells. Immunity 2006;24:827–38.

[139] Liu YJ. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin: master switch for allergic inflammation. J Exp Med 2006;203:269–73.

[140] Veldhoen M, Uyttenhove C, van Snick J, Helmby H, Westendorf A, Buer J, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta 'reprograms' the differentiation of T helper 2 cells and promotes an interleukin 9-producing subset. Nat Immunol 2008;9:1341–6.

[141] Dardalhon V, Awasthi A, Kwon H, Galileos G, Gao W, Sobel RA, et al. IL-4 inhibits TGF-beta-induced Foxp3+ T cells and, together with TGF-beta, generates IL-9+ IL-10+ Foxp3(−) effector T cells. Nat Immunol 2008;9:1347–55.

[142] Pan G, French D, Mao W, Maruoka M, Risser P, Lee J, et al. Forced expression of murine IL-17E induces growth retardation, jaundice, a Th2-biased response, and multiorgan inflammation in mice. J Immunol 2001;167:6559–67.

[143] Kim MR, Manoukian R, Yeh R, Silbiger SM, Danilenko DM, Scully S, et al. Transgenic overexpression of human IL-17E results in eosinophilia. B-lymphocyte hyperplasia, and altered antibody production. Blood 2002;100:2330–40.

[144] Xu G, Zhang L, Wang DY, Xu R, Liu Z, Han DM, et al. Opposing roles of IL-17A and IL-25 in the regulation of TSLP production in human nasal epithelial cells. Allergy 2010;65:581–9.

[145] Ballantyne SJ, Barlow JL, Jolin HE, Nath P, Williams AS, Chung KF, et al. Blocking IL-25 prevents airway hyperresponsiveness in allergic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:1324–31.

[146] Huber M, Heink S, Grothe H, Guralnik A, Reinhard K, Elflein K, et al. A Th17-like developmental process leads to CD8(+) Tc17 cells with reduced cytotoxic activity. Eur J Immunol 2009;39:1716–25.

[147] Hamada H, Garcia-Hernandez Mde L, Reome JB, Misra SK, Strutt TM, McKinstry KK, et al. Tc17, a unique subset of CD8 T cells that can protect against lethal influenza challenge. J Immunol 2009;182:3469–81.

[148] Martin-Orozco N, Muranski P, Chung Y, Yang XO, Yamazaki T, Lu S, et al. T helper 17 cells promote cytotoxic T cell activation in tumor immunity. Immunity 2009;31:787–98.

[149] You Z, DuRaine G, Tien JY, Lee C, Moseley TA, Reddi AH. Expression of interleukin-17B in mouse embryonic limb buds and regulation by BMP-7 and bFGF. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;326:624–31.

[150] Kokubu T, Haudenschild DR, Moseley TA, Rose L, Reddi AH. Immunolocalization of IL-17A, IL-17B, and their receptors in chondrocytes during fracture healing. J Histochem Cytochem 2008;56:89–95.

[151] Moore EE, Presnell S, Garrigues U, Guilbot A, LeGuern E, Smith D, et al. Expression of IL-17B in neurons and evaluation of its possible role in the chromosome 5q-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Neuromuscul Disord 2002;12:141–50.

[152] Johansen C, Usher PA, Kjellerup RB, Lundsgaard D, Iversen L, Kragballe K. Characterization of the interleukin-17 isoforms and receptors in lesional psoriatic skin. Br J Dermatol 2009;160:319–24.

[153] Starnes T, Broxmeyer HE, Robertson MJ, Hromas R. Cutting edge: IL-17D, a novel member of the IL-17 family, stimulates cytokine production and inhibits hemopoiesis. J Immunol 2002;169:642–6.

[154] Croxford AL, Kurschus FC, Waismann A. Cutting edge: an IL-17F-CreEYFP reporter mouse allows fate mapping of Th17 cells. J Immunol 2009;182:1237–41.

[155] Kawaguchi M, Kokubu F, Huang SK, Homma T, Odaka M, Watanabe S, et al. The IL-17F signaling pathway is involved in the induction of IFN-gamma-inducible protein 10 in bronchial epithelial cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:1408–14.

[156] Michel ML, Keller AC, Paget C, Fujio M, Trottein F, Savage BP, et al. Identification of an IL-17-producing NK1.1(neg) iNKT cell population involved in airway neutrophilia. J Exp Med 2007;204:995–1001.

[157] Wang YH, Angkasekwinai P, Lu N, Voo KS, Arima K, Hanabuchi S, et al. IL-25 augments type 2 immune responses by enhancing the expansion and functions of TSLP-DC-activated Th2 memory cells. J Exp Med 2007;204:1837–47.

[158] McHenga SS, Wang D, Li C, Shan F, Lu C. Inhibitory effect of recombinant IL-25 on the development of dextran sulfate sodium-induced experimental colitis in mice. Cell Mol Immunol 2008;5:425–31.

[159] Caruso R, Sarra M, Stolfi C, Rizzo A, Fina D, Fantini MC, et al. Interleukin-25 inhibits interleukin-12 production and Th1 cell-driven inflammation in the gut. Gastroenterology 2009;136:2270–9.

Dr. Joseph M. Reynolds is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. Joseph completed his graduate studies at the University of Louisville School of Medicine where he studied under Dr. Jill Sutelles. Dr. Reynolds currently works under the tutelage of Chen Dong where he has focused on both innate and adaptive aspects of IL-17-based responses during lung infection. In addition to various first and co-authored papers, Joseph has received a Dean’s citation for academic achievement and is currently a recipient of a T32 training fellowship from NCI and a loan repayment awardee from NIH.

Dr. Pornpimon Angkasekwinai is currently a faculty member at the Department of Medical Technology, Faculty of Allied Health Science, Thammasat University, PathumThani Thailand. She recently was awarded a Ph.D. at the University of Texas Graduate School and MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, U.S.A. She has received several awards, including the Vivian L. Smith Award for Outstanding Young Immunologists from MD Anderson, the strategic Training in Allergy Research Program Award from the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, and the Alfred G. Knudson, Jr. Outstanding Dissertation Award from the University of Texas and MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Dr. Chen Dong is a Professor of Immunology, the Olga and Harry Wiess Distinguished University Chair in Cancer Research, and the Director of the Center for Inflammation and Cancer at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. He did his graduate training at University of Alabama at Birmingham and his postdoctoral fellowship at Yale University. Chen Dong has been working on the mechanisms of T cell activation and function, with a focus on the cytokine and costimulatory molecule regulation of T cell lineage commitment and differentiation. His previous work led to the discovery of Th17 and Tfh cells as distinct lineage of helper T cell differentiation. He was recently awarded the American Association of Immunologists BD Biosciences Investigator Award for outstanding early-career research contributions to the field of immunology (2009), and is an Editorial Board Member of the Journal of Biological Chemistry and an Associate Editor of Journal of Immunology.
