
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 23 (2011) 335–347
DOI 10.3233/JAD-2010-101242
IOS Press

# Functional Interactions of Fibrillar and Oligomeric Amyloid-β with Alpha7 Nicotinic Receptors in Alzheimer’s Disease

Anna M. Lil
oligomeric Aβ impairs calcium homeostasis and alters long-term potentiation (LTP) [8–10]. A recent study reported that Aβ plaques may serve as reservoirs, releasing oligomers that in turn alter Ca²⁺ signaling and impair synaptic functions in closely located neurons. Furthermore, this study also suggested that oligomers are capable of inducing widespread global changes in surrounding neuronal networks [1
[35]. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated don-
key anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:2000 for 4G8
and 1:10,000 for NU-4) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
was added for 90 min and the blots were incubated with
ECL reagent and exposed to film (
All reactions were terminated by filtration through Whatman GF/C filters, presoaked with 0.3% polyethylenimine solution. The samples were washed three times with assay buffer before radioactivity was counted.

**Ca²⁺ measurements**

SH-SY5Y cells were plated onto glass cover slips and after 5 to 10 days of culture, the media was removed and replaced with Krebs-R
To measure Ca²⁺ responses following Aβ₁₋₄₀ exposure, SH-SY5Y cells were plated at 80–90% confluence in 96-well plates one day before experiments were performed. Cells were loaded with Fluo-3 and exposed to 10⁻¹⁰–10⁻⁵ M Aβ₁₋₄₀ and 10 μ
of Aβ₁₋₄₀. Thioflavin T fluorescence in samples with Aβ₁₋₄₀ and Aβ₁₋₄₂ in PC12 media was also assessed, and demonstrated that no fibrillization occurred during the conditions used (data not shown).

**Neuroprotective effects against fibrillar Aβ₁₋₄₀-induced toxicity in differentiated PC12 cells involve
cline or JN403. Pretreatment with 0.1, 1, and 10 μM varenicline significantly increased MTT reduction in Aβ-treated cells (Fig. 2B). Similarly, exposure of cells to 1 μM and 1 mM JN403 significantly increased the viability of cells exposed to fibrillar Aβ₁₋₄₀, indicating
able online: http://www.j-alz.com/issues/23/vol23-2.html#supplementarydata03).

**Oligomeric Aβ₁₋₄₀ interacts with selective nAChR subtypes as observed by modulation of [³H]epibatidine binding in human autopsy control brain**

The interaction of oligomeric Aβ₁₋₄₀ with nA
A.M. Lilja et al. / Amyloid-β Interactions with α7 nAChRs 343

**Activation of α7 nAChRs increases cytosolic \[Ca²⁺\] in SH-SY5Y cells**

The acute effects of varenicline on cellular calcium influx were studied by measurement of cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration (\[Ca²⁺\
Fig. 9. Illustration of the proposed interactions of different forms of Aβ with various cellular targets. A) Aβ plaques and Aβ oligomers may bind to presynaptic and postsynaptic α7 nAChRs, NMDAR and AMPAR, to cause an increased Ca²⁺ as well as endocytosis of NMDARs and AMPARs, leading to neuronal dysfunction
lar Aβ₁₋₄₂ and oligomeric Aβ₁₋₄₀ and Aβ₁₋₄₂ peptides do not significantly alter viability in these cells at physiological relevant (i.e., reflecting early AD) concentrations. The observation that fibrillar Aβ, not oligomeric Aβ, induced neurotoxicity in this model system was somewhat surprising. However, other groups have also reported
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council (Project no. 05817), the Karolinska Institutet Strategic Neuroscience Program Swedish Brain Power, the Brain Foundation, Gun and Bertil Stohnes Foundation, the Foundation for Old Servants, the Magnus Bergvalls Foundation, The Dementia Association (Demensfonden), The Lars Hierta Memorial Foundation
[24] Dougherty JJ, Wu J, Nichols RA (2003) Beta-amyloid regulation of presynaptic nicotinic receptors in rat hippocampus and neocortex. *J Neurosci* 23, 6740-6747.

[25] Coe JW, Brooks PR, Vetelino MG, Wirtz MC, Arnold EP,