
REVIEWS

MODELS OF CANCER

---

**Cell lineage and cell death: Caenorhabditis elegans and cancer research**

**Malia B. Potts**\* **and Scott Cameron**\*\*

Abstract | Cancer is a complex disease in which cells have circumvented normal restraints on tissue growth and have acquired complex abnormalities in their genomes, posing a considerable challenge to identifying the pathways and mechanisms that drive fundamental aspects of the malignant phenotype. Genetic analyses of the normal development of the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* have revealed evolutionarily conserved mechanisms through which individual cells establish their fates, and how they make and execute the decision to survive or undergo programmed cell death. The pathways identified through these studies have mammalian counterparts that are co-opted by malignant cells. Effective cancer drugs now target some of these pathways, and more are likely to be discovered.

In multicellular organisms, a remarkable array of specific cell types must be generated to build an animal, and the inappropriate survival or proliferation of an individual cell can ultimately be deleterious to the organism as a whole\[^1\]. Thus, mechanisms have evolved that precisely control cell fates and kill unwanted cells\[^2\]. The breakdown of these mechanisms can contribute to the development of cancer\[^3\].

Although cell fate decisions have long been appreciated as a part of normal development, the involvement of cell death in this process initially seemed intellectually unsatisfactory — death is on some level the breakdown of normality, so how could it be reproducible in a way that can be defined experimentally? And what might be the purpose of generating many cells the only apparent function of which is to die? In this Review, we describe how studies of cell lineage and programmed cell death in the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* have revealed basic mechanisms of cell death regulation that are important in human cancer, and how this research is contributing to the development of new approaches to cancer therapy.

together with classical and modern tools for the genetic analysis of living animals, is a unifying theme of research with this organism. The effects of discoveries made with this worm extend broadly in biology because many fundamental processes that control animal development are evolutionarily conserved.

In *C. elegans*, the term cell lineage refers to the pattern of divisions from the zygote to the adult, and also to the fates adopted by individual cells at each point in the lineage. Knowledge of this pattern allows the study of cell fate determination with unparalleled precision. The adult hermaphrodite has 959 somatic cells; therefore, mutants with an abnormal number of cells can be readily identified and the causes of the abnormality (lack of cell death or change in cell fate specification, for example) defined by simply following the cell divisions as the mutants develop on a microscope slide. Helpfully, mutants with cell lineage defects often also have obvious defects in function or morphology that are easier to recognize than an abnormal number of cell nuclei. Screens for additional mutants with similar or opposite morphological or functional defects have then been used to discover additional genes that drive or regulate the processes involved. Below, we discuss the results from such screens to discover the mechanism of programmed cell death and highlight accumulating evidence showing that the genes that control the death decision in single somatic cells of *C. elegans* are evolutionarily conserved and co-opted by malignant cells to ensure their survival.

*C. elegans* and cell lineage

It is remarkable that studying a 1 mm-long, transparent worm that is not susceptible to cancer has led to tremendous advances in our understanding of human diseases. A single defining aspect of *C. elegans* biology provided a foundation for these advances: its simple and essentially invariant cell lineage\[^4,5\]. This aspect of its biology,

---

*Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Biology, Division of Pediatric Haematology-Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.*

*Present address: Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Oncology Translational Medicine, 220 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.*

Correspondence to S.C.

e-mail: johnscott.cameron@novartis.com

doi:10.1038/nrc2984

Published online 2 December 2011; corrected online 25 February 2011

---

50 | JANUARY 2011 | VOLUME 11

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

At a glance

- The invariant nature of the development of cell lineages in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans has made it a useful model for understanding the mechanisms of cell lineage control and cell death.
- Many of the genes that regulate cell death and lineage development have homologues in mammals.
- Mapping cell lineage development in the nematode has been particularly informative for understanding the regulation of haematopoiesis in mammals, with many of the genes that regulate cell lineage being deregulated in leukaemia and lymphoma.
- Further understanding of the regulation of cell fate in C. elegans and mammals should identify new targets for anticancer drug development.

---

Programmed cell death

Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is crucially important in the genesis of cancer and in the success or failure of cancer therapy. Groundbreaking work using C. elegans helped to expose apoptosis as a genetically controlled process, and studies in C. elegans have continued to illuminate the identities and functions of the molecules involved, paving the way for the development and testing of new cancer therapeutics that are designed to induce apoptosis in cancer cells.

The focus on programmed cell death in cancer began with the important work of Kerr, Wyllie and Currie. Their remarkable 1972 paper described the hallmark morphological features of apoptotic cells and the importance of apoptosis in normal and malignant tissues. The authors recognized that tissue and tumour growth reflected an imbalance between the generation of new cells by mitosis and the loss of cells by apoptosis, and that cancer therapies such as radiation and chemotherapy drugs induced apoptosis. They speculated that apoptosis might be controlled in some manner by the genome, but the challenge of identifying the mechanisms that execute a process affecting a tiny proportion of cells in a tissue at any given time must have seemed daunting.

At about this time, John Sulston and Bob Horvitz in Sydney Brenner’s laboratory had begun describing the C. elegans cell lineage. They observed that certain cells were born, only to die shortly after birth, with an invariant morphology. Why and how do these deaths occur, and do mammalian lineages have similar deaths?

The role of death in cell lineage. Why bother with a cell division that generates two cells, one of which undergoes programmed cell death, rather than just generating the intended single cell? One possibility is that the process of division is necessary for the proper segregation of cell fate determinants. Another possibility is that this is an efficient mechanism that has not been selected against during evolution (FIG. 1). Programmed cell death is used to eliminate cells that adopt different fates in males and hermaphrodites, or that are needed in one part of the animal but not in another. Using programmed cell death in these ways allows a single cell lineage programme to operate in both sexes or in different parts of the animal with only minor modifications.

It is not yet possible to examine the cell lineages of mammalian cells with the precision that is available for C. elegans, but there are similarities in the mechanisms that underlie cell fate decisions, and it seems likely that mammalian lineages might use programmed cell death in ways similar to those described in C. elegans. Indeed, there are compelling examples of conserved mechanisms of cell lineage control between C. elegans and haematopoietic lineage factors, and apoptosis is a prominent and unexplained aspect of the initial attempts to follow mammalian haematopoietic lineages *in vitro*.

From early observations of cell death to mechanisms. The reproducible morphology and pattern of deaths in C. elegans provided a platform for sophisticated genetic screens that identified the molecules that are responsible for cell death. The identification and analysis of the genes discovered in these screens revealed a genetically encoded mechanism of cellular suicide (FIG. 2). Important discoveries included the demonstration that CED-3, a protease (more specifically, a caspase), and CED-4, which was later discovered to be conserved in mammals in the form of a scaffolding protein APAF1, functioned cell autonomously and were essential for cell death. CED-9 antagonized the functions of CED-3 and CED-4 to prevent cell death. The deaths of somatic cells are induced by egg-laying defective 1 (EGL-1), which was originally identified in screens for egg-laying-defective mutant worms. As discussed below, the transcriptional regulation of *egl-1* expression has turned out to be a crucial step for the cell death decision, and BH3-only proteins serve similar functions in humans. The identification of CED-9 as a homologue of BCL-2 has been cited as the ‘Aha!’ moment of discovery in the work on programmed cell death, as it suggested that the mechanism was evolutionarily conserved in animals. The conservation of this crucial function in cell death was supported by experiments in which human BCL-2 expression rescued the cell death phenotype that is evident in *ced-9* mutants. Moreover, because mutations affecting BCL-2 cause lymphoma by preventing the death of lymphocytes, it became obvious that defects in programmed cell death contributed to human disease. This was further underpinned by discovering that mice that are deficient for the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein-coding gene *Bad* develop lymphoma, and that mice that are deficient in *Bid* develop a myeloproliferative disorder that can progress to leukaemia. Thus, the genetic analysis of programmed cell death in C. elegans revealed the mechanism underlying a fundamental process of development that is abnormal in cancer cells.

Cell death in humans: elaborating on the simple elegance of the worm. Each of the four genes that constitutes the canonical, core pathway of programmed cell death in C. elegans has one or more homologous genes in mammals. In worms and mammals, cell death can be initiated by transcriptional activation of BH3-only genes, which activate the adaptor CED-4 or APAF1, and this is antagonized by the pro-survival Bcl-2 family members. CED-4 or APAF1 then participate in

the activation of the caspases, which cleave multiple targets to kill the cell²⁵. Despite the obvious homology between the human and nematode apoptosis pathways, some divergence is also apparent. In contrast to humans, cytochrome c is not required for the activation of nematode CED-3 by CED-4 in vitro, and CED-4 lacks the WD domain repeats that mediate interaction with cytochrome c in the apoptosome of mammals²⁶–²⁸. These and other data suggest that the mitochondrial release of cytochrome c is not part of cell killing in *C. elegans*. In a second important difference from humans, caspase inhibition by inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins is not apparently used as a mechanism of regulating programmed cell death in nematodes. In this regard *C. elegans* also differs from *Drosophila melanogaster*, which relies heavily on antagonism of IAP function rather than the generation of BH3-only proteins to initiate cell death²⁹,³⁰. Therefore, mammalian apoptotic pathways are

more complex than those of *C. elegans*, and it is important to note that the simple, sequential model in which programmed cell death is initiated by the transcription of *egl-1* in most cells of *C. elegans* is incomplete, as recent data suggest important roles for additional regulation downstream of *egl-1* transcription³¹–³³. An important area of current research is to understand how regulatory pathways that might impinge on the cell death pathway at multiple points interact to result in a consistent output of survival or programmed cell death.

### Transcription factors specify cell death

Just as the core apoptotic pathway is conserved from worms to humans, it is also clear that the regulatory pathways that control the cell death decision of individual cells of *C. elegans* are conserved in mammals. Moreover, these regulatory pathways are often deregulated in cancer cells to ensure their survival (FIG. 3; TABLE 1). This raises the intriguing possibility that transcriptional repression of apoptosis by lineage-specific transcription factors is a crucial function that is enabled by the mutation of specific tumour suppressors and proto-oncogenes.

ces genes and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. In genetic screens in *C. elegans* aimed at identifying genes that are involved in the regulation of programmed cell death in the serotonergic nervous system, some mutants were identified that affected the deaths of only a small number of cells. For example, *ces-1* gain-of-function mutations and *ces-2* loss-of-function mutations result in the survival of specific groups of cells in the pharynx³⁴. Other deaths occur normally in these mutants, and for this reason the genes involved were termed cell death specification (*ces*). These data suggest that the *ces* genes participate in the decision process that must precede the execution of death. Cloning of the *ces* genes revealed that they encode transcription factors: Ces-2 is the homologue of the PAR family bZIP protein hepatic leukaemia factor (HLF)³⁵, and *ces-1* is a homologue of SLUG, a zinc finger protein and Snail family member³⁶,³⁷. Given the central role of transcription in many cell fate decisions, this finding strengthens the idea that programmed cell death is a cell fate — little different from other cell fates. In NSM sister cells, *egl-1* transcription is controlled by competition between CES-1 (a repressor of transcription) and a heterodimeric helix-loop-helix 2 (HLH-2)-HLH-3 basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factor complex (an activator) for specific binding sites on the *egl-1* promoter³⁶,³⁷. CES-2 is a repressor that inhibits *ces-1* activity in the NSM sisters; the gain-of-function mutations in *ces-1* that cause NSM cell survival are promoter mutations that probably disrupt CES-2 binding to the *ces-1* promoter³⁶.

Some children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) have a chromosomal translocation that couples the DNA binding domain of HLF to the transcriptional activation domain of E2A, and brings the fusion gene under the control of the *E2A* promoter, which is expressed in lymphocytes³⁸–⁴⁰. How this fusion protein promoted leukaemia was unclear, but the discovery that

**Figure 1 | The role of programmed cell death in cell lineage.**

**a |** Cell death is often used to eliminate cells that are the non-essential spatial homologues of cells that are required in other parts of the body. For example, the individual cell lineages that generate the mature ventral nerve cord along the anterior-posterior body axis of *Caenorhabditis elegans* are very similar to one another, and programmed cell death is used to kill off cells that are not needed in certain body regions⁴. Specifically, six neurons generated by the P3-P8 lineages in the midregion of the ventral nerve cord regulate the laying of eggs through the vulva in the middle of the animal; the corresponding cells that are generated by the anterior and posterior lineages undergo programmed cell death⁴,¹²⁹ (arrows). Similarly, two cells in the posterior that undergo programmed cell death are analogous to more anterior neurons that survive and extend their axons posteriorly (arrows). Presumably, there is no purpose served in having posterior neurons extend posterior axons.

**b |** Often a sex-specific cell type is initially produced in both sexes but is induced to die specifically in the sex in which it is not needed. For example, the male-specific cephalic (CEM) neurons survive in males and undergo programmed cell death in hermaphrodites; the hermaphrodite-specific neurons (HSNs) survive in hermaphrodites and die in males, and this is controlled by *tra-1* (REFS 5,7). AMso, amphid socket cell; P, twelve postembryonic blast cells that give rise to ventral cord motorneurons; PHB, neuron type, phasmid; W, postembryonic neuroblast.

HLF was homologous to CES-2 suggested a detailed model, which was subsequently supported by an elegant series of papers^{38,41–43}: the fusion converts HLF from a repressor to an activator able to prevent cell death. Consistent with a function that was predicted by the analysis of ces-2, the E2A–HLF fusion maintains the transcription of the ces-1 homologue SLUG, which probably represses the transcription of the BH3-only gene PUMA (also known as BBC3), ensuring the survival of the malignant lymphoblasts^{38,41–43}. Therefore, genetic pathways that regulate programmed cell death or the survival of specific cells of C. elegans can be evolutionarily conserved and altered by mutation to promote the survival of human cancer cells. Inhibition of this pathway in the malignant cells can induce their death^{38}, suggesting that a better understanding of these pathways might be therapeutically useful.

As noted above, many divisions in the C. elegans lineage are asymmetric and generate one cell that survives and one cell that undergoes programmed cell death. Recent work has shown that the ces genes can couple asymmetric division and programmed cell death during the pharyngeal neurosecretory-motor (NSM) neuroblast divisions^{44}. When observing cell lineages in which a daughter cell dies, it is normally obvious during the division which cell will die — the dying cell is smaller than the sister cell that survives. The asymmetry in size of the newly generated NSM neurons and the NSM sisters is not a consequence of the death process, because the asymmetry is preserved in egl-1 mutants in which death is prevented. However, in ces-1 and ces-2 mutants this asymmetry is disrupted^{44}. Moreover, the axis of NSM neuroblast division is often abnormal in ces-2 and ces-1 mutants. The positioning of the mitotic spindle and the orientation of the division axis is closely linked to the fates established by the daughters of progenitor cells in mammals and model organisms^{45,46}, and defects in this process are also observed in malignant cells. Elucidating the mechanism through which the Ces proteins influence the asymmetric division of the NSM neuroblasts and a better understanding of how this is coupled to programmed cell death might suggest mechanisms through which malignant cells can self-renew.

tra-1 and GLI: cell fate and hedgehog signalling. tra-1 encodes a transcription factor that is the terminal, global regulator of sex determination in C. elegans, and it promotes hermaphrodite fates^{7,47}. Analysis of semi-dominant egl-1 mutations revealed promoter mutations that disrupt TRA-1 repression of egl-1 expression, leading to the inappropriate activation of egl-1 and the death of two neurons that are essential for egg laying in hermaphrodites, the hermaphrodite-specific neurons (HSNs)^{18}. tra-1 loss-of-function mutants are transformed to a male phenotype, with approximately one-third of cells in the animals adopting different fates^{4,48}. The discovery that TRA-1 directly regulates cell death as one of its many functions poses a considerable challenge for the recognition and analysis of genes that directly regulate programmed cell death decisions in C. elegans

Figure 2 | The programmed cell death pathway of C. elegans is evolutionarily conserved. The products of four genes are required for essentially all of the programmed cell deaths of somatic cells of Caenorhabditis elegans, and the pathway is evolutionarily conserved. Human cells typically have multiple family members of each protein class. There is added complexity in the apoptotic pathways of human cells that is not shown in the figure: these include the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria; the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins functioning as an additional inhibitor of caspase activity in addition to Bcl-2 family members; and the extrinsic and death receptor-mediated pathways serving as the primary mechanism of activating apoptosis in some circumstances. There is strong evidence that defects in apoptosis contribute to human cancer, including the loss of BH3 domain pro-apoptotic molecules, activation of Bcl-2 family anti-apoptotic molecules and defects in the upstream regulatory mechanisms that control the apoptosis cascade. For reasons that are unclear, the evidence is substantially weaker that mutations affecting APAF1 or the caspase genes contribute broadly to human cancers, suggesting that blocking apoptosis upstream of mitochondria offers a greater advantage during the evolution of a tumour.

and in human cancers, because an abnormality in cell death may be mistakenly presumed to be a secondary consequence of an altered cell fate.

In contrast to its pro-survival function in the HSN neurons, TRA-1 eliminates male-specific cephalic (CEM) neurons in the hermaphrodite through indirect activation of egl-1 and ced-3 (REFS 33,49,50) (FIG. 1). In the absence of TRA-1, the Bar homeodomain transcription factor CEH-30 is activated by UNC-86 (a POU domain transcription factor), LSR-1 (a leucyl-tRNA synthetase)

and UNC-132 (which has partial homology to PIM1 but lacks a kinase domain)³³. CEH-30 represses *egl-1* and *ced-3* through interaction with the general transcriptional repressor UNC-37 (a Groucho homologue) and promotes CEM survival in males⁴⁹. In hermaphrodites, TRA-1 represses *ceh-30*, causing derepression of *egl-1* and *ced-3* and death of the CEMs³³,⁴⁹,⁵⁰. The mechanisms through which CEH-30 represses *egl-1* and *ced-3* are not yet clear.

Notably, homologues of several of the anti-apoptotic genes identified from studies of CEM neurons in *C. elegans* have oncogenic properties in mammals. For example, the POU domain transcription factors contribute to oncogenesis in multiple cancers, including neuroepitheliomas, Ewing’s sarcomas, testicular germ cell tumours, melanomas and breast cancers⁵¹⁻⁵⁴. Overexpression of the leucyl-tRNA synthetase LARS1 has been shown to promote lung cancer cell growth and migration⁵⁵, and overexpression of Groucho homologues has been observed in multiple tumour types⁵⁶. PIM1 is a well-established oncogene, but whether *unc-132* shares functional similarities to PIM1 that are relevant to tumorigenesis remains to be determined³³,⁵⁷.

The human homologues of TRA-1 are the GLI oncogenic zinc finger transcription factors that respond to Hedgehog (Hh) signalling⁵⁸. Consistent with its role in normal embryonic development, recent data suggest that Hh functions non-cell autonomously in many cancers⁵⁹, and can promote the survival of cancer cells partly by affecting the transcriptional regulation of a Bcl-2 family member in tumour cells — as TRA-1 does in the HSN neurons in *C. elegans*. Stromal Hh signalling in the *Eμ-Myc* mouse model of B cell lymphoma activates GLI in the lymphoma cells and maintains expression of BCL-2, preventing apoptosis; inhibition of Hh signalling induces apoptosis⁶⁰. This mechanism might be conserved in human non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and multiple myeloma⁶⁰. In primary keratinocytes, GLI proteins directly regulate the transcription of *BCL2* (REFS 61,62). Together, these data suggest that the direct regulation of apoptosis is a conserved function of GLI family members that promotes the survival of cancer cells. It is not yet clear how many cancers depend on Hh activation of *BCL2* expression for their survival, or whether the Hh pathway inhibitors that are currently in clinical trials might kill cancer cells by interrupting this survival pathway.

### Oncoproteins and programmed cell death

Of the 13 genes that directly specify the cell death or survival of individual cells in *C. elegans*, at least nine are the homologues of human oncogenes (FIG. 3). These include Hox proteins; Hox cofactors, including a Trithorax group regulator that is required for Hox expression; a Pax family member protein, which directly regulates *ced-9*; and a Caudal homologue, which directly regulates transcription of *ced-3*. In each case there is initial evidence that the oncogenic forms of these transcription factors directly regulate cell survival in mammals. Moreover, for a Six family homeodomain protein that directly regulates *egl-1*, there is good evidence that human homologues are involved in cancer and regulate apoptosis, but the mechanisms involved that promote malignancy are unclear.

### Six family homeodomain

Genetic screens using animals in which cell type-specific reporters drive green fluorescent protein expression have been a powerful tool for identifying genes that regulate the survival of specific cell types. A recent screen using transgenic *C. elegans* worms that express a reporter gene for a single neuron, M4, identified a point mutation in a regulatory, non-coding region of *egl-1* that resulted in the survival of the M4 neuron⁶³. The mutation disrupted a predicted binding site for a Six family homeodomain transcription factor, CEH-34, suggesting that the site was required for the transcriptional activation of *egl-1* and the death of the M4 neuron. Indeed, loss-of-function mutations in *ceh-34* were also identified in the screen. CEH-34 directly regulates *egl-1* transcription in the M4 neurons as part of an evolutionarily conserved complex with the *eyes absent* homologue EYA-1. Several Six family members have been studied in human cancers and, as would be expected for transcription factors, their roles in promoting malignancy seem to be context dependent. These roles include the regulation of cell survival and cell death through mechanisms that have not yet been elucidated⁶⁴.

**Figure 3 |** Cell death is specified by transcription factors in *C. elegans*, and their human homologues are oncogenes. The transcription factors and pathways that determine cell death or survival are shown, as well as the locations of the cells that they affect. Only factors that directly control the transcription of the cell death pathway genes are included. The human homologues of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* genes are shown, with mammalian oncogenes in grey. HSN, hermaphrodite-specific neurons; NSM, pharyngeal neurosecretory-motor neurons; P, twelve postembryonic blast cells that give rise to ventral cord motorneurons; VC, ventral cord.

Table 1 | Human oncogenes homologous to the cell death specification genes of C. elegans

| C. elegans gene | Cell death role | Human homologue | Mutation type in cancer | Cancer type | Refs |
|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|--------------------------|-------------|------|
| ces-2           | Inhibit         | HLF             | Gain of function         | ALL         | 38,39,42,117,118 |
| tra-1           | Inhibit         | Gli             | Gain of function         | Many        | 119,120 |
| lin-39          | Inhibit         | Hox             | Gain of function         | ALL, AML and others | 99,112,121–124 |
| ceh-20          | Promote or inhibit | Pbx            | Gain of function         | ALL         | 99,112,121–124 |
| unc-62          | Inhibit         | Meis            | Overexpressed           | Leukaemia   | 99,112,121–124 |
| lin-59          | Inhibit         | MLL             | Gain of function         | ALL and AML | 99,112,121–124 |
| egl-38          | Inhibit         | Pax             | Gain of function         | Rhabdomyosarcoma | 125 |
| pal-1           | Promote         | Cdx             | Loss of function         | Gastrointestinal cancers | 126–128 |
| pal-1           | Promote         | Cdx             | Gain of function         | Leukaemia through Hox upregulation | 126–128 |

ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; Cdx, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor; C. elegans, Caenorhabditis elegans; Gli; glioma associated oncogene homologue; HLF, hepatic leukaemia factor; Hox, homeobox; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; Pax, paired box gene; Pbx, pre-B cell leukaemia transcription factor.

Hox genes. Like TRA-1 and GLI, Hox protein complexes have diverse roles in development that include the direct regulation of programmed cell death. A mutation affecting the Hox gene *lin-39* was the first one isolated in the genetic screens in *C. elegans* that led to the elucidation of the programmed cell death pathway²,⁶⁵. Consistent with its classical role in animal development, the Hox complex in *C. elegans* includes six genes that determine the pattern of cell fates along the body axis⁶⁵–⁷¹. The *lin-39* gene is required for the survival of six neurons in the mid-body of the animal⁶⁵, and the more posterior Hox gene *mab-5* is required for the deaths of two cells in the posterior⁶⁷. In *lin-39* mutants, the six neurons in the mid-body are homeotically transformed and adopt the fate of their more anterior and posterior sister cells, which undergo programmed cell death⁶⁵. But what is the mechanism responsible for this transformation? Hox proteins often function together with TALE family homeodomain cofactors, as this increases the DNA binding affinity and selectivity of Hox proteins. These TALE family members include CEH-20 and UNC-62 in *C. elegans* and their respective mammalian homologues, Pbx and Meis⁷²–⁷⁸. In the mid-body, LIN-39, CEH-20 and UNC-62 are all required for the repression of *egl-1* to ensure the survival of the six neurons; a LIN39–CEH-20 complex probably represses *egl-1* through multiple regulatory sites⁷⁹.

The death of the two cells in the posterior of the nematode occurs through a similar mechanism, which involves MAB-5 and CEH-20 — although with a curious twist. In the case of one of the two cells, a MAB-5–CEH-20 complex binds to a single site in the *egl-1* regulatory region to activate transcription and induce programmed cell death⁷⁴. Remarkably, the death of the second cell, which is also dependent on MAB-5 and CEH-20 for survival, is regulated indirectly through an unknown mechanism. This indicates that the survival or death of even very closely related cell types can be controlled through distinct mechanisms, and is a striking demonstration of the kinds of discoveries made possible by the known and essentially invariant lineage of *C. elegans*. It is not clear why two distinct mechanisms are required to regulate the death of these two similar cells.

Hox protein complexes can therefore activate or repress the transcription of a cell death gene to ensure the survival or programmed cell death of individual cells. For *lin-39* and *mab-5* this role is consistent with their specification of fates along the body axis by determining regional patterns of programmed cell death.

Abnormal activation of Hox genes is common in human leukaemias, and their role in normal and malignant haematopoiesis has been intensively studied. The *C. elegans* Trithorax group chromatin-modifying protein LIN-59 is required for Hox gene expression, similar to the MLL protein in human leukaemias⁷⁹ (BOX 1). Might the core cell death pathway genes be direct targets of Hox proteins in leukaemia cells? The *C. elegans* data, and similar data from *Drosophila*⁸⁰,⁸¹, indicate that the regulation of programmed cell death by Hox genes is context dependent — Hox genes are broadly expressed but only small numbers of cells are dependent on Hox function for their survival. There is some evidence that this context-dependent survival role might be conserved in human leukaemias. Inhibition of HOXA9 function in human leukaemia cells induces apoptosis specifically in leukaemias that harbour activating mutations in *MLL*⁸². The mechanism underlying this dependence has not yet been elucidated, but the model organism data suggest that direct repression of apoptotic pathway genes such as BH3 domain-encoding genes is a possibility.

*egl-38* and *Pax-2* regulate *ced-9* (*BCL2*). Two paired-box homeodomain transcription factors directly regulate apoptosis in *C. elegans*, *egl-38* and *pax-2* (REF. 32). Unlike the *ces*, *tra-1* and Hox genes, *egl-38* and *pax-2* ensure the survival of many cells in the developing animal, including somatic cells and developing germ cells. Moreover, *egl-38* and *pax-2* prevent programmed cell death by stimulating the transcription of the *BCL2* homologue *ced-9*, rather than by repressing *egl-1* (REF. 32).

Pax genes are subject to translocation and can become fused to Forkhead family genes by the t(2;13) and t(1;13) chromosomal translocations in childhood rhabdomyosarcoma. These fusion proteins inhibit programmed cell death in rhabdomyosarcoma cells through an unknown mechanism⁸³. Translocations involving Pax

genes and the immunoglobulin enhancer also occur in some non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas^{84–88}. Pax genes are broadly expressed in a large collection of tumour cell lines, including the NCI60 cell lines, and inhibition of individual Pax genes in many of these cell lines induces programmed cell death^{89}. How Pax expression prevents programmed cell death in these tumour lines is unknown, although direct stimulation of *BCL2L1* expression by PAX3 has been reported^{90}; this mechanism would be consistent with the pathway defined in *C. elegans*.

### Germline cell death and DNA damage

Germ cell development in *C. elegans* proceeds through regulated but stochastic proliferation and differentiation, rather than through the essentially invariant cell lineage that is characteristic of somatic cells. In a typical gonad, around 50% of the germ cells undergo programmed cell death in a process that is dependent on *ced-4* and *ced-3*, but not *egl-1* (REF. 91), and that relies on the pro-apoptotic activity of the RB pathway genes *lin-35*, *dpl-1*, *efl-1* and *efl-2* (REF. 92). DNA damage increases germ cell death in a dose-dependent manner and induces cell cycle arrest in the proliferating germ line, whereas somatic cells are profoundly resistant^{93}. Damage-induced germ cell death, in contrast to normal homeostatic germ cell death, is controlled by *egl-1*, a second BH3 domain-encoding gene *ced-13* and *ced-9*, and it also requires *ced-4* and *ced-3*. Furthermore, the TP53 homologue *cep-1* is required for damage-induced apoptosis, but not cell cycle arrest, in the germ line, as are *lin-35*, *dpl-1* and *efl-2* (REF. 92). Recent work has also revealed a new and surprising mechanism through which *HIF1A*, which encodes the α-subunit of the hypoxia-inducible factor, can inhibit apoptosis. The *HIF1A* homologue activates the expression of a tyrosinase in two head neurons, which act on the *C. elegans* germ line through *cep-1* to inhibit apoptosis^{94}. Thus, the *C. elegans* germ line is a simple but powerful genetic context in which conserved aspects of the DNA-damage response and

the TP53 and RB tumour suppressors can be studied, topics that are greatly important in cancer biology but that cannot be as easily addressed in the somatic tissues of *C. elegans*^{95}.

#### Looking forwards to improve cancer therapy

Elucidating the programmed cell death pathways of *C. elegans* has immensely improved our understanding of how current cancer therapy works and has paved the way for developing new therapeutic strategies. Unexpectedly, many of the lineage-specific regulatory pathways controlling cell viability in *C. elegans* are evolutionarily conserved in mammalian cell lineages and can be mutated in cells, resulting in aberrant survival. There seems to be a remarkable correlation between the transcriptional regulators of cell death in *C. elegans* and haematopoietic malignancies, including leukaemia. This may reflect the fairly extensive knowledge of the factors that control haematopoietic cell lineages, which are the best understood of the mammalian lineage programmes. Alternatively, transcriptional programmes directed by oncogenic transcription factors that are the products of chromosomal translocations often drive haematopoietic malignancies, and suppression of apoptosis by the fusion proteins may have a more important role in the development of blood cancers. The comparatively much more complex genomes of solid tumours has made it difficult to identify chromosomal translocations that contribute to malignancy, but new genomics methods are now identifying an increasing number of recurrent fusion proteins. As our knowledge of mammalian lineage programmes develops, it will be interesting to see whether they too have transcription factors that directly regulate apoptosis as one aspect of the control of cell fate, which we predict will be the case.

We are now in an exciting new era in which we are beginning to apply our knowledge of the biological pathways that control cell fate and programmed cell death to develop new cancer drugs. Looking forwards, we can anticipate the approval of therapies that directly target the apoptotic and cell fate pathways in human cancers. To effectively apply these new drugs we need to develop a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms that cancer cells depend on to avoid apoptosis and to promote self-renewal and proliferation; develop strategies for identifying tumours and patients with specific classes of defects in the pathways involved; and generate molecules that target pathway components to kill cancer cells. The sophisticated genomics technologies that are rapidly being developed indicate that we will soon know the mutations in each patient's tumour that alter cell fate and apoptosis to drive cancer formation and progression. Understanding which pathways are crucial for cancer cell survival will be aided by a clear understanding of how the corresponding pathways operate in model organisms, which offer a level of resolution not typically achievable in mammalian models, and are often the source of the most remarkable discoveries. Bringing these approaches together in well-designed clinical trials should begin to ‘turn the tide’ against cancer.

---

**Box 1 | Hox genes and cancer**

Hox function can be activated by chromosomal translocations, including those that directly affect individual Hox genes, Pbx family cofactors, or the Trithorax homologue MLL. MLL encodes a clinically important component of a chromatin-modifying complex that directly binds and activates Hox gene expression^{96–100}. Ten percent of adults and 70% of infants with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) or acute lymphocytic leukaemia (ALL) have translocations affecting *MLL*^{101–103}, and 2–5% of children or adults with ALL have translocations affecting *PBX1* (REFS 102, 104); direct activation of Hox genes by translocation also occurs but is less common. Leukaemias with increased Hox gene activity are considerably more difficult to cure^{101,105}. Individual Hox genes have defined roles in normal haematopoiesis, as revealed by gene disruptions in mice, although these experiments probably underestimate their importance because of compensatory changes in Hox gene expression in the knockout animals^{106–110}. Individual Hox genes also have defined roles in malignant haematopoiesis, and HOXA9 in particular mediates some of the essential properties of the leukaemic stem cell in MLL-dependent AML^{111–115}. The Pbx and Meis cofactors are probably essential for leukaemogenesis, as is the motif in the Hox proteins that mediates interaction with Pbx proteins^{112,116}, suggesting that complexes between these proteins regulate at least some genes that are crucial for the development of leukaemia.

1. White, K. *et al.* Genetic control of programmed cell death in *Drosophila*. Science **264**, 677–683 (1994).
2. Ellis, H. M. & Horvitz, H. R. Genetic control of programmed cell death in the nematode *C. elegans*. Cell **44**, 817–829 (1986). The discovery of *ced-3* and *ced-4* revealed for the first time the genetic control of programmed cell death.
3. Yin, C., Knudson, C. M., Korsmeyer, S. J. & Van Dyke, T. Bax suppresses tumorigenesis and stimulates apoptosis *in vivo*. Nature **385**, 637–640 (1997).
4. Sulston, J. E. & Horvitz, H. R. Post-embryonic cell lineages of the nematode, *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Dev. Biol. **56**, 110–156 (1977).
5. Sulston, J. E., Schierenberg, E., White, J. G. & Thomson, J. N. The embryonic cell lineage of the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Dev. Biol. **100**, 64–119 (1983). This and reference 4 began the technical and scientific milestone of defining the *C. elegans* lineages.
6. Kerr, J. F., Wyllie, A. H. & Currie, A. R. Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics. Br. J. Cancer **26**, 239–257 (1972).
7. Zarkower, D. Somatic sex determination. WormBook [online], http://www.wormbook.org/chapters/www_somaticsexdeterm/somaticsexdeterm.html (2007).
8. Cameron, S., Clark, S. G., McDermott, J. B., Aamodt, E. & Horvitz, H. R. PAG-3, a Zn-finger transcription factor, determines neuroblast fate in *C. elegans*. Development **129**, 1763–1774 (2002).
9. Jia, Y., Xie, G., McDermott, J. B. & Aamodt, E. The *C. elegans* gene pag-3 is homologous to the zinc finger proto-oncogene gfi-1. Development **124**, 2063–2073 (1997).
10. Hock, H. *et al.* Gfi-1 restricts proliferation and preserves functional integrity of haematopoietic stem cells. Nature **431**, 1002–1007 (2004).
11. Hock, H. *et al.* Intrinsic requirement for zinc finger transcription factor Gfi-1 in neutrophil differentiation. Immunity **18**, 109–120 (2003).
12. Saleque, S., Cameron, S. & Orkin, S. H. The zinc-finger proto-oncogene Gfi-1b is essential for development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. Genes Dev. **16**, 301–306 (2002).
13. Wu, M. *et al.* Imaging hematopoietic precursor division in real time. Cell Stem Cell **1**, 541–554 (2007).
14. Yuan, J., Shaham, S., Ledoux, S., Ellis, H. M. & Horvitz, H. R. The *C. elegans* cell death gene *ced-3* encodes a protein similar to mammalian interleukin-1 β-converting enzyme. Cell **75**, 641–652 (1993). The discovery that proteases now known as caspases were required for programmed cell death.
15. Yuan, J. Y. & Horvitz, H. R. The *Caenorhabditis elegans* genes *ced-3* and *ced-4* act cell autonomously to cause programmed cell death. Dev. Biol. **138**, 33–41 (1990).
16. Hengartner, M. O., Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. *Caenorhabditis elegans* gene *ced-9* protects cells from programmed cell death. Nature **356**, 494–499 (1992).
17. Hengartner, M. O. & Horvitz, H. R. *C. elegans* cell survival gene *ced-9* encodes a functional homolog of the mammalian proto-oncogene bcl-2. Cell **76**, 665–676 (1994).
18. Conradt, B. & Horvitz, H. R. The TRA-1A sex determination protein of *C. elegans* regulates sexually dimorphic cell deaths by repressing the *egl-1* cell death activator gene. Cell **98**, 317–327 (1999). The discovery of the mechanism through which cell death decisions are controlled for somatic cells.
19. Conradt, B. & Horvitz, H. R. The *C. elegans* protein EGL-1 is required for programmed cell death and interacts with the Bcl-2-like protein CED-9. Cell **93**, 519–529 (1998).
20. Horvitz, H. R. Worms, life, and death (Nobel lecture). Chembiochem **4**, 697–711 (2003).
21. Vaux, D. L., Weissman, I. L. & Kim, S. K. Prevention of programmed cell death in *Caenorhabditis elegans* by human bcl-2. Science **258**, 1955–1957 (1992).
22. Vaux, D. L., Cory, S. & Adams, J. M. Bcl-2 gene promotes haemopoietic cell survival and cooperates with c-myc to immortalize pre-B cells. Nature **335**, 440–442 (1988).
23. Zinkel, S. S. *et al.* Proapoptotic BID is required for myeloid homeostasis and tumor suppression. Genes Dev. **17**, 229–239 (2003).
24. Ranger, A. M. *et al.* Bad-deficient mice develop diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA **100**, 9324–9329 (2003).
25. Yan, N. *et al.* Structure of the CED-4-CED-9 complex provides insights into programmed cell death in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Nature **437**, 831–837 (2005).
26. Zou, H., Henzel, W. J., Liu, X., Lutschg, A. & Wang, X. Apaf-1, a human protein homologous to *C. elegans* CED-4, participates in cytochrome c-dependent activation of caspase-9. Cell **90**, 405–413 (1997).
27. Zou, H., Li, Y., Liu, X. & Wang, X. An APAF-1 cytochrome c multimeric complex is a functional apoptosome that activates procaspase-9. J. Biol. Chem. **274**, 11549–11556 (1999).
28. Oberst, A., Bender, C. & Green, D. R. Living with death: the evolution of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis in animals. Cell Death Differ. **15**, 1139–1146 (2008).
29. Orme, M. & Meier, P. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins in *Drosophila*: gatekeepers of death. Apoptosis **14**, 950–960 (2009).
30. Goyal, L. Cell death inhibition: keeping caspases in check. Cell **104**, 805–808 (2001).
31. Maurer, C. W., Chiorazzi, M. & Shaham, S. Timing of the onset of a developmental cell death is controlled by transcriptional induction of the *C. elegans ced-3* caspase-encoding gene. Development **134**, 1357–1368 (2007).
32. Park, D., Jia, H., Rajakumar, V. & Chamberlin, H. M. Pax2/5/8 proteins promote cell survival in *C. elegans*. Development **133**, 4193–4202 (2006).
33. Nehme, R. *et al.* Transcriptional upregulation of both egl-1 BH3-only and *ced-3* caspase is required for the death of the male-specific CEM neurons. Cell Death Differ. **17**, 1266–1276 (2010).
34. Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. Two *C. elegans* genes control the programmed deaths of specific cells in the pharynx. Development **112**, 591–603 (1991).
35. Metzstein, M. M., Hengartner, M. O., Tsung, N., Ellis, R. E. & Horvitz, H. R. Transcriptional regulator of programmed cell death encoded by *Caenorhabditis elegans* gene *ces-2*. Nature **382**, 545–547 (1996).
36. Metzstein, M. M. & Horvitz, H. R. The *C. elegans* cell death specification gene *ces-1* encodes a snail family zinc finger protein. Mol. Cell **4**, 309–319 (1999).
37. Thellmann, M., Hatzold, J. & Conradt, B. The Snail-like CES-1 protein of *C. elegans* can block the expression of the BH3-only cell-death activator gene *egl-1* by antagonizing the function of bHLH proteins. Development **130**, 4057–4071 (2003).
38. Inaba, T. *et al.* Reversal of apoptosis by the leukaemia-associated E2A-HLF chimaeric transcription factor. Nature **382**, 541–544 (1996). Together with reference 35, this paper demonstrated that the mechanisms that decide whether individual cells survive or die are conserved and abnormal in human cancers.
39. Inaba, T. *et al.* Fusion of the leucine zipper gene HLF to the E2A gene in human acute B-lineage leukemia. Science **257**, 531–534 (1992).
40. Hunger, S. P. *et al.* The t(1;19)(q23;p13) results in consistent fusion of E2A and PBX1 coding sequences in acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Blood **77**, 687–693 (1991).
41. Hemavathy, K., Guru, S. C., Harris, J., Chen, J. D. & Ip, Y. T. Human Slug is a repressor that localizes to sites of active transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. **20**, 5087–5095 (2000).
42. Inukai, T. *et al.* SLUG, a *ces-1*-related zinc finger transcription factor gene with antiapoptotic activity, is a downstream target of the E2A-HLF oncoprotein. Mol. Cell **4**, 343–352 (1999).
43. Wu, W. S. *et al.* Slug antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors by repressing puma. Cell **123**, 641–653 (2005).
44. Hatzold, J. & Conradt, B. Control of apoptosis by asymmetric cell division. PLoS Biol. **6**, e84 (2008).
45. Buchman, J. J. & Tsai, L. H. Spindle regulation in neural precursors of flies and mammals. Nature Rev. Neurosci. **8**, 89–100 (2007).
46. Neumuller, R. A. & Knoblich, J. A. Dividing cellular asymmetry: asymmetric cell division and its implications for stem cells and cancer. Genes Dev. **23**, 2675–2699 (2009).
47. Ellis, R. & Schedl, T. Sex determination in the germ line. WormBook [online], http://www.wormbook.org/chapters/www_sexgermline/sexgermline.html (2007).
48. Hodgkin, J. A. & Brenner, S. Mutations causing transformation of sexual phenotype in the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Genetics **86**, 275–287 (1977).
49. Peden, E., Kimberly, E., Gengyo-Ando, K., Mitani, S. & Xue, D. Control of sex-specific apoptosis in *C. elegans* by the BarH homeodomain protein CEH-30 and the transcriptional repressor UNC-37/Groucho. Genes Dev. **21**, 3195–3207 (2007).
50. Schwartz, H. T. & Horvitz, H. R. The *C. elegans* protein CEH-30 protects male-specific neurons from apoptosis independently of the Bcl-2 homolog CED-9. Genes Dev. **21**, 3181–3194 (2007).
51. Collum, R. G. *et al.* A novel POU homeodomain gene specifically expressed in cells of the developing mammalian nervous system. Nucleic Acids Res. **20**, 4919–4925 (1992).
52. Gidekel, S., Pizov, G., Bergman, Y. & Pikarsky, E. Oct-3/4 is a dose-dependent oncogenic fate determinant. Cancer Cell **4**, 361–370 (2003).
53. Budhram-Mahadeo, V. S. & Latchman, D. S. Targeting Brn-3b in breast cancer therapy. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets **10**, 15–25 (2006).
54. Eisen, T., Easty, D. J., Bennett, D. C. & Goding, C. R. The POU domain transcription factor Brn-2: elevated expression in malignant melanoma and regulation of melanocyte-specific gene expression. Oncogene **11**, 2157–2164 (1995).
55. Shin, S. H. *et al.* Implication of leucyl-tRNA synthetase 1 (LARS1) over-expression in growth and migration of lung cancer cells detected by siRNA targeted knock-down analysis. Exp. Mol. Med. **40**, 229–236 (2008).
56. Buscarlet, M. & Stifani, S. The ‘Marx’ of Groucho on development and disease. Trends Cell Biol. **17**, 353–361 (2007).
57. Shah, N. *et al.* Potential roles for the PIM1 kinase in human cancer - a molecular and therapeutic appraisal. Eur. J. Cancer **44**, 2144–2151 (2008).
58. Zarkower, D. & Hodgkin, J. Molecular analysis of the *C. elegans* sex-determining gene *tra-1*: a gene encoding two zinc finger proteins. Cell **70**, 237–249 (1992).
59. Yauch, R. L. *et al.* A paracrine requirement for hedgehog signalling in cancer. Nature **455**, 406–410 (2008).
60. Dierks, C. *et al.* Essential role of stromally induced hedgehog signaling in B-cell malignancies. Nature Med. **13**, 944–951 (2007).
61. Regl, G. *et al.* Activation of the BCL2 promoter in response to Hedgehog/GLI signal transduction is predominantly mediated by GLI2. Cancer Res. **64**, 7724–7731 (2004).
62. Bigelow, R. L. *et al.* Transcriptional regulation of bcl-2 mediated by the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway through gli-1. J. Biol. Chem. **279**, 1197–1205 (2004).
63. Hirose, T., Galvin, B. D. & Horvitz, H. R. Six and Eya promote apoptosis through direct transcriptional activation of the proapoptotic BH3-only gene *egl-1* in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA **107**, 15479–15484 (2010).
64. Christensen, K. L., Patrick, A. N., McCoy, E. L. & Ford, H. L. The six family of homeobox genes in development and cancer. Adv. Cancer Res. **101**, 93–126 (2008).
65. Clark, S. G., Chisholm, A. D. & Horvitz, H. R. Control of cell fates in the central body region of *C. elegans* by the homeobox gene *lin-39*. Cell **74**, 43–55 (1993).
66. Salser, S. J., Loer, C. M. & Kenyon, C. Multiple HOM-C gene interactions specify cell fates in the nematode central nervous system. Genes Dev. **7**, 1714–1724 (1993).
67. Kenyon, C. A gene involved in the development of the posterior body region of *C. elegans*. Cell **46**, 477–487 (1986).
68. Ferreira, H. B., Zhang, Y., Zhao, C. & Emmons, S. W. Patterning of *Caenorhabditis elegans* posterior structures by the Abdominal-B homolog, *egl-5*. Dev. Biol. **207**, 215–228 (1999).
69. Chisholm, A. Control of cell fate in the tail region of *C. elegans* by the gene *egl-5*. Development **111**, 921–932 (1991).
70. Brunschwig, K. *et al.* Anterior organization of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* embryo by the labial-like Hox gene *ceh-13*. Development **126**, 1537–1546 (1999).
71. Abboobaker, A. & Blaxter, M. Hox gene evolution in nematodes: novelty conserved. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. **13**, 593–598 (2003).
72. Chan, S. K., Jaffe, L., Capovilla, M., Botas, J. & Mann, R. S. The DNA binding specificity of ultrabithorax is modulated by cooperative interactions with extradenticle, another homeoprotein. Cell **78**, 603–615 (1994).
73. Liu, J. & Fire, A. Overlapping roles of two Hox genes and the exd ortholog *ceh-20* in diversification of the *C. elegans* postembryonic mesoderm. Development **127**, 5179–5190 (2000).

REVIEW S

74. Liu, H., Strauss, T. J., Potts, M. B. & Cameron, S. Direct regulation of egl-1 and of programmed cell death by the Hox protein MAB-5 and by CEH-20, a C. elegans homolog of Pbx1. *Development* **133**, 641–650 (2006).

75. Yang, L., Sym, M. & Kenyon, C. The roles of two C. elegans HOX co-factor orthologs in cell migration and vulva development. *Development* **132**, 1413–1428 (2005).

76. Streit, A. *et al.* Conserved regulation of the Caenorhabditis elegans labial/Hox1 gene ceh-13. *Dev. Biol.* **242**, 96–108 (2002).

77. Van Auken, K. *et al.* Roles of the Homothorax/Meis/ Prep homolog UNC-62 and the Exd/Pbx homologs CEH-20 and CEH-40 in C. elegans embryogenesis. *Development* **129**, 5255–5268 (2002).

78. Moens, C. B. & Selleri, L. Hox cofactors in vertebrate development. *Dev. Biol.* **291**, 193–206 (2006).

79. Potts, M. B., Wang, D. P. & Cameron, S. Trithorax, Hox, and TALE-class homeodomain proteins ensure cell survival through repression of the BH3-only gene egl-1. *Dev. Biol.* **329**, 374–385 (2009). This paper and references 65 and 74 describe the biology and mechanism of Hox regulation of cell death.

80. Lohmann, I., McGinnis, N., Bodmer, M. & McGinnis, W. The *Drosophila* Hox gene deformed sculpts head morphology via direct regulation of the apoptosis activator reaper. *Cell* **110**, 457–466 (2002).

81. Rogulja-Ortmann, A., Renner, S. & Technau, G. M. Antagonistic roles for Ultrabithorax and Antennapedia in regulating segment-specific apoptosis of differentiated motoneurons in the *Drosophila* embryonic central nervous system. *Development* **135**, 3435–3445 (2008).

82. Faber, J. *et al.* HOXA9 is required for survival in human MLL-rearranged acute leukemias. *Blood* **113**, 2375–2385 (2008).

83. Bernasconi, M., Remppis, A., Fredericks, W. J., Rauscher, F. J. & Schafer, B. W. Induction of apoptosis in rhabdomyosarcoma cells through down-regulation of PAX proteins. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 13164–13169 (1996).

84. Busslinger, M., Klix, N., Pfeffer, P., Graninger, P. G. & Kozmik, Z. Deregulation of PAX-5 by translocation of the Emu enhancer of the IgH locus adjacent to two alternative PAX-5 promoters in a diffuse large-cell lymphoma. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 6129–6134 (1996).

85. Davis, R. J. *et al.* Structural characterization of the FKHR gene and its rearrangement in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **4**, 2355–2362 (1995).

86. Epstein, J., Cai, J., Glaser, T., Jepeal, L. & Maas, R. Identification of a Pax paired domain recognition sequence and evidence for DNA-dependent conformational changes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 8355–8361 (1994).

87. Fredericks, W. J. *et al.* The PAX3-FKHR fusion protein created by the t(2;13) translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas is a more potent transcriptional activator than PAX3. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **15**, 1522–1535 (1995).

88. Shapiro, D. N., Sublett, J. E., Li, B., Downing, J. R. & Naeve, C. W. Fusion of PAX3 to a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors in human alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. *Cancer Res.* **53**, 5108–5112 (1993).

89. Muratovska, A., Zhou, C., He, S., Goodyer, P. & Eccles, M. R. Paired-Box genes are frequently expressed in cancer and often required for cancer cell survival. *Oncogene* **22**, 7989–7997 (2003).

90. Margue, C. M., Bernasconi, M., Barr, F. G. & Schafer, B. W. Transcriptional modulation of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL by the paired box transcription factors PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR. *Oncogene* **19**, 2921–2929 (2000).

91. Gumienny, T. L., Lambie, E., Hartwig, E., Horvitz, H. R. & Hengartner, M. O. Genetic control of programmed cell death in the *Caenorhabditis elegans* hermaphrodite germline. *Development* **126**, 1011–1022 (1999).

92. Schertel, C. & Conradt, B. C. *elegans* orthologs of components of the RB tumor suppressor complex have distinct pro-apoptotic functions. *Development* **134**, 3691–3701 (2007).

93. Stergiou, L. & Hengartner, M. O. Death and more: DNA damage response pathways in the nematode *C. elegans*. *Cell Death Differ.* **11**, 21–28 (2004).

94. Sendoi, A., Kohler, I., Fellmann, C., Lowe, S. W. & Hengartner, M. O. HIF-1 antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis through a secreted neuronal tyrosinase. *Nature* **465**, 577–583 (2010).

95. Reddien, P. W., Andersen, E. C., Huang, M. C. & Horvitz, H. R. DPL-1DP, LIN-35 Rb and EFL-1 E2F act with the MCD-1 zinc-finger protein to promote programmed cell death in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Genetics* **175**, 1719–1733 (2007).

96. Milne, T. A. *et al.* MLL targets SET domain methyltransferase activity to Hox gene promoters. *Mol. Cell* **10**, 1107–1117 (2002).

97. Rowley, J. D. The role of chromosome translocations in leukemogenesis. *Semin. Hematol.* **36**, 59–72 (1999).

98. Ernst, P., Wang, J. & Korsmeyer, S. J. The role of MLL in hematopoiesis and leukemia. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **9**, 282–287 (2002).

99. Krivtsov, A. V. & Armstrong, S. A. MLL translocations, histone modifications and leukaemia stem-cell development. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **7**, 823–833 (2007).

100. Armstrong, S. A. *et al.* MLL translocations specify a distinct gene expression profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. *Nature Genet.* **30**, 41–47 (2002).

101. Grimwade, D. *et al.* The importance of diagnostic cytogenetics on outcome in AML: analysis of 1,612 patients entered into the MRC AML 10 trial. The Medical Research Council Adult and Children’s Leukaemia Working Parties. *Blood* **92**, 2322–2333 (1998).

102. Moorman, A. V. *et al.* Karyotype is an independent prognostic factor in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): analysis of cytogenetic data from patients treated on the Medical Research Council (MRC) UKALLXII/Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 2993 trial. *Blood* **109**, 3189–3197 (2007).

103. Biondi, A., Cimino, G., Pieters, R. & Pui, C. H. Biological and therapeutic aspects of infant leukemia. *Blood* **96**, 24–33 (2000).

104. Pui, C. H., Relling, M. V. & Downing, J. R. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **350**, 1535–1548 (2004).

105. Mancini, M. *et al.* A comprehensive genetic classification of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): analysis of the GIMEMA 0496 protocol. *Blood* **105**, 3434–3441 (2005).

106. Bijl, J. *et al.* Analysis of HSC activity and compensatory Hox gene expression profile in Hoxb cluster mutant fetal liver cells. *Blood* **108**, 116–122 (2006).

107. Lawrence, H. J. *et al.* Mice bearing a targeted interruption of the homeobox gene HOXA9 have defects in myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid hematopoiesis. *Blood* **89**, 1922–1930 (1997).

108. Ko, K. H. *et al.* Hoxb3 deficiency impairs B lymphopoiesis in mouse bone marrow. *Exp. Hematol.* **35**, 465–475 (2007).

109. Magnusson, M., Brun, A. C., Lawrence, H. J. & Karlsson, S. Hoxa9/hoxb3/hoxb4 compound null mice display severe hematopoietic defects. *Exp. Hematol.* **35**, 1421–1428 (2007).

110. Brun, A. C. *et al.* Hoxb4-deficient mice undergo normal hematopoietic development but exhibit a mild proliferation defect in hematopoietic stem cells. *Blood* **103**, 4126–4133 (2004).

111. Krivtsov, A. V. *et al.* Transformation from committed progenitor to leukaemia stem cell initiated by MLL-AF9. *Nature* **442**, 818–822 (2006).

112. Wong, P., Iwasaki, M., Somervaille, T. C., So, C. W. & Cleary, M. L. Meis1 is an essential and rate-limiting regulator of MLL leukemia stem cell potential. *Genes Dev.* **21**, 2762–2774 (2007).

113. Somervaille, T. C. & Cleary, M. L. Identification and characterization of leukemia stem cells in murine MLL-AF9 acute myeloid leukemia. *Cancer Cell* **10**, 257–268 (2006).

114. Kumar, A. R. *et al.* Hoxa9 influences the phenotype but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 fusion gene leukemia. *Blood* **103**, 1823–1828 (2004).

115. Ayton, P. M. & Cleary, M. L. Transformation of myeloid progenitors by MLL oncoproteins is dependent on Hoxa7 and Hoxa9. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 2298–2307 (2003).

116. Schnabel, C. A., Jacobs, Y. & Cleary, M. L. HoxA9-mediated immortalization of myeloid progenitors requires functional interactions with TALE cofactors Pbx and Meis. *Oncogene* **19**, 608–616 (2000).

117. Hunger, S. P., Ohyashiki, K., Toyama, K. & Cleary, M. L. Hlf, a novel hepatic bZIP protein, shows altered DNA-binding properties following fusion to E2A in t(17;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia. *Genes Dev.* **6**, 1608–1620 (1992).

118. Seidel, M. G. & Look, A. T. E2A-HLF usurps control of evolutionarily conserved survival pathways. *Oncogene* **20**, 5718–5725 (2001).

119. Beachy, P. A., Karhadkar, S. S. & Berman, D. M. Tissue repair and stem cell renewal in carcinogenesis. *Nature* **432**, 324–331 (2004).

120. Curran, T. & Ng, J. M. Cancer: Hedgehog's other great trick. *Nature* **455**, 293–294 (2008).

121. Eklund, E. A. The role of HOX genes in malignant myeloid disease. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **14**, 85–89 (2007).

122. Argiropoulos, B., Yung, E. & Humphries, R. K. Unraveling the crucial roles of Meis1 in leukemogenesis and normal hematopoiesis. *Genes Dev.* **21**, 2845–2849 (2007).

123. Abramovich, C. & Humphries, R. K. Hox regulation of normal and leukemic hematopoietic stem cells. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **12**, 210–216 (2005).

124. Grier, D. G. *et al.* The pathophysiology of HOX genes and their role in cancer. *J. Pathol.* **205**, 154–171 (2005).

125. Mercado, G. E. & Barr, F. G. Fusions involving PAX and FOX genes in the molecular pathogenesis of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma: recent advances. *Curr. Mol. Med.* **7**, 47–61 (2007).

126. Colleypriest, B. J., Palmer, R. M., Ward, S. G. & Tosh, D. Cdx genes, inflammation and the pathogenesis of Barrett’s metaplasia. *Trends Mol. Med.* **15**, 313–322 (2009).

127. Bansal, D. *et al.* Cdx4 dysregulates Hox gene expression and generates acute myeloid leukemia alone and in cooperation with Meis1a in a murine model. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 16924–16929 (2006).

128. Guo, R. J., Suh, E. R. & Lynch, J. P. The role of Cdx proteins in intestinal development and cancer. *Cancer Biol. Ther.* **3**, 593–601 (2004).

129. Bany, I. A., Dong, M. Q. & Koelle, M. R. Genetic and cellular basis for acetylcholine inhibition of *Caenorhabditis elegans* egg-laying behavior. *J. Neurosci.* **23**, 8060–8069 (2003).

Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to acknowledge Matt Porteus, Jim Amatruda, John Abrams and Bob Horvitz for their contributions to the manuscript. S.C. would also like to particularly thank Matt and Jim for their friendship.

Competing interests statement  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

FURTHER INFORMATION  
WormAtlas: http://www.wormatlas.org/  
Wormbase: http://www.wormbase.org/  
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
