
ARTICLES

T-bet represses T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation by preventing Runx1-mediated activation of the gene encoding RORγt

Vanja Lazarevic<sup>1</sup>, Xi Chen<sup>1,6</sup>, Jae-Hyuck Shim<sup>1,6</sup>, Eun-Sook Hwang<sup>2</sup>, Eunjung Jang<sup>2</sup>, Alexandra N Bolm<sup>1</sup>, Mohamed Oukka<sup>3</sup>, Vijay K Kuchroo<sup>4</sup> & Laurie H Glimcher<sup>1,5</sup>

Overactive responses by interleukin 17 (IL-17)-producing helper T cells (T<sub>H</sub>17 cells) are tightly linked to the development of autoimmunity, yet the factors that negatively regulate the differentiation of this lineage remain unknown. Here we report that the transcription factor T-bet suppressed development of the T<sub>H</sub>17 cell lineage by inhibiting transcription of *Rorc* (which encodes the transcription factor RORγt). T-bet interacted with the transcription factor Runx1, and this interaction blocked Runx1-mediated transactivation of *Rorc*. T-bet Tyr304 was required for formation of the T-bet–Runx1 complex, for blockade of Runx1 activity and for inhibition of the T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation program. Our data reinforce the idea of master regulators that shape immune responses by simultaneously activating one genetic program while silencing the activity of competing regulators in a common progenitor cell.

The signals received during an infection trigger a strong adaptive immune response tailored to combat a particular class of pathogen. In the presence of cytokines produced by cells of innate immunity, naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells differentiate into a helper T cell subset with distinct functions and cytokine profile. Two main helper T cell subsets, T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2, were the first described<sup>1</sup>. T<sub>H</sub>1 cells, which secrete mainly interferon-γ (IFN-γ), are essential for immunity against intracellular microorganisms, whereas T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, which secrete interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, are important for protection against parasites and extracellular pathogens. A third subset of helper T cells, T<sub>H</sub>17, has also been described<sup>2–7</sup>. T<sub>H</sub>17 cells produce IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21 and IL-22, which protect the host against bacterial and fungal infections encountered at mucosal surfaces<sup>8</sup>. In mice, T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation is initiated by the combination of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and IL-6 or IL-21, which induces expression of the T<sub>H</sub>17 cell-specific transcription factor RORγt and the receptor for IL-23 (IL-23R)<sup>7,9–12</sup>. This acquisition of responsiveness to IL-23 is necessary for terminal differentiation of the T<sub>H</sub>17 cell lineage and for the maintenance of T<sub>H</sub>17 function *in vivo*<sup>13</sup>.

In general, lineage-specific transcription factors and cytokines can inhibit the differentiation of other helper T cell subsets. T-bet suppresses the generation of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells by blocking expression of the T<sub>H</sub>2-polarizing cytokine IL-4 and by interfering with the activity of the T<sub>H</sub>2-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3 (refs. 14,15). The results of several studies have indicated that T<sub>H</sub>17 responses are stronger in T-bet-deficient animals, although the mechanism underlying this phenomenon has not been described<sup>16–19</sup>. This raises the question of whether, analogous to its role in inhibiting the

T<sub>H</sub>2 pathway, T-bet also actively suppresses T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation. Furthermore, several studies have reported that the reprogramming of committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells and T<sub>H</sub>2 cells into effector cells with a T<sub>H</sub>17-T<sub>H</sub>1 or T<sub>H</sub>2-T<sub>H</sub>1 phenotype is driven by T-bet in response to inflammatory cytokines such as IL-12 and interferons<sup>20,21</sup>.

In this study we sought to determine whether T-bet has a regulatory role in the development of the T<sub>H</sub>17 lineage. Here we investigate the T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation of T-bet-deficient (*Tbx21*<sup>−/−</sup>) and wild-type CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells *in vitro* and *in vivo* during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). We found that T-bet had a negative effect on expression of the gene encoding RORγt (*Rorc*) and genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 cytokines. Ectopic expression of T-bet in naive helper T cell precursors or in committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells was sufficient to repress the expression of *Rorc* and genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 signature cytokines under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions. Mechanistic studies showed that interaction of T-bet with the transcription factor Runx1 via the T-bet residue Tyr304 was critical for blocking Runx1-mediated transactivation of the *Rorc* promoter and for inhibiting commitment to the T<sub>H</sub>17 lineage.

RESULTS

T-bet deficiency promotes IL-17A production *in vitro*

T-bet is a transcriptional activator of IFN-γ and is the key regulator of the T<sub>H</sub>1 differentiation program<sup>22</sup>. In addition to promoting the differentiation of naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells into the T<sub>H</sub>1 subset, T-bet actively suppresses development of the T<sub>H</sub>2 lineage<sup>14,15</sup>. To investigate whether T-bet expression has a similar antagonistic effect on the development of IL-17A-producing helper T cells, we cultured

---

1 Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  
2 College of Pharmacy, Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea.  
3 Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.  
4 Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  
5 Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, and the Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  
6 These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to V.L. (vlazarev@hsph.harvard.edu) or L.H.G. (lglimche@hsph.harvard.edu).

Received 1 June; accepted 12 November; published online 12 December 2010; doi:10.1038/ni.1969

Figure 1 T-bet deficiency promotes IL-17A production in vitro independently of IFN-γ.

(a) Flow cytometry of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻, *Ifng*⁻/⁻ and wild-type (WT) CD4⁺ T cells cultured for 5d in the presence of IL-2 (Tₕ0), IL-2, IL-12 and antibody to IL-4 (anti-IL-4; Tₕ1), or TGF-β, IL-6, anti-IL-4 and anti-IFN-γ with (Tₕ17+IL-23) or without (Tₕ17) subsequent IL-23 treatment, then stimulated for 4h with PMA and ionomycin, followed by intracellular cytokine staining with anti-IL-17A and anti-IFN-γ. Numbers in plots indicate percent IL-17A⁺IFN-γ⁻ cells (top left) or IL-17A⁻IFN-γ⁺ cells (bottom right).

(b) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of IL-17A in supernatants of cells differentiated and stimulated as in a.

(c) RT-PCR analysis of *Rorc* mRNA expression in *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type cells differentiated and stimulated as in a; results are presented in relative units (RU) relative to the expression of the housekeeping gene *Hprt1*. Data are representative of four independent experiments (a,b) or are from two independent experiments (c; mean and s.e.m. in b,c).

*Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type CD4⁺ T cells under nonskewing conditions or differentiated them into Tₕ1 cells or into Tₕ17 cells grown in the presence or absence of IL-23. As IFN-γ has a negative effect on the polarization of Tₕ17 cells and *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ T cells produce much less IFN-γ than do wild-type CD4⁺ T cells, we also tested IFN-γ-deficient (*Ifng*⁻/⁻) helper T cells to delineate effects of T-bet versus IFN-γ on Tₕ17 development. After differentiating *Tbx21*⁻/⁻, *Ifng*⁻/⁻ and wild-type cells for 5d in vitro under Tₕ0, Tₕ1 or Tₕ17 conditions or under Tₕ17 conditions with IL-23, we briefly stimulated them with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. We observed a higher percentage of IL-17A-producing cells in T-bet-deficient Tₕ0 and Tₕ1 cultures than in *Ifng*⁻/⁻ and wild-type cultures (Fig. 1a). Although we detected a similar percentage of IL-17A-producing cells under Tₕ17-polarizing conditions, more IL-17A was secreted by *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ helper T cells than by *Ifng*⁻/⁻ and wild-type helper T cells under all differentiating conditions (Fig. 1b). We did not observe a substantial difference among the helper T cell subsets in *Rorc* mRNA expression at 24h after activation (data not shown). However, the enhanced IL-17A production by *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ Tₕ0 and Tₕ1 cultures correlated with their twofold higher expression of *Rorc* mRNA after 5d of culture. In contrast, *Tbx21*⁻/⁻, *Ifng*⁻/⁻ and wild-type Tₕ17 cells had similar expression of *Rorc* mRNA (Fig. 1c). These results show that T-bet deficiency promotes the development of IL-17A-producing cells under all polarizing conditions independently of IFN-γ and suggest that T-bet-mediated effects on the generation of IL-17A-producing cells in vitro may be achieved through the transcriptional regulation of *Rorc* and/or *Il17a* in Tₕ0-Tₕ1 and Tₕ17 cells.

Tₕ17 responses in *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type mice during EAE

*Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice are protected from the development of EAE²³. When the results of that study²³ were first reported, Tₕ17 cells were yet to be discovered, and the resistance of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice to central nervous system (CNS)-specific autoimmune attack was ascribed to a polarization shift of CD4⁺ T cells from a pathogenic Tₕ1 response to a protective Tₕ2 response²³. Given the propensity of T-bet-deficient CD4⁺ T cells to develop into IL-17A-producing cells in vitro, we investigated whether *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice generate Tₕ17 responses during EAE, whose pathology is widely accepted to be dependent on Tₕ17 cells. To determine the types of cytokines produced by CNS-infiltrating CD4⁺ T cells, we stained intracellular cytokines in mononuclear cells isolated from the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type mice during the peak of disease (day 17 after immunization with a myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide of amino acids 35–55 (MOG(35–55)) plus complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA)). In wild-type mice, three different cytokine-producing populations entered the CNS: those that produced IFN-γ alone (most CD4⁺ T cells), those that produced only IL-17A and those that produced both cytokines (Fig. 2a). In contrast, in the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice, IL-17A-producing CD4⁺ T cells represented most of the cytokine-producing cells at day 17 after immunization (Fig. 2a). Consistent with the idea of role for T-bet in controlling expression of *Ifng*, there was a deficiency in IFN-γ-producing CD4⁺ T cells in the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice (Fig. 2a). Collectively, there was a shift in the Tₕ1-Tₕ17 balance in the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice during EAE characterized by a tendency toward the recruitment of Tₕ17 cells and a significantly lower frequency and absolute number of IFN-γ-producing CD4⁺ T cells (Fig. 2b). Moreover, CD4⁺ T cells isolated from the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice secreted significantly more IL-17A than did wild-type CD4⁺ T cells at day 17 after immunization (Fig. 2c). Thus, there was recruitment of IL-17A-secreting Tₕ17 cells into the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice.

IL-23R signaling drives the pathogenic potential of CNS-infiltrating Tₕ17 cells by promoting the expression of proinflammatory chemokines and by suppressing IL-10 expression⁴,²⁴. In addition, IL-23R signaling is essential for the terminal differentiation of Tₕ17 cells and their long-term survival¹³,²⁵. To address the role of T-bet in controlling IL-23R expression in Tₕ17 cells, we crossed reporter mice that express green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged IL-23R (IL-23R.GFP) onto a T-bet-deficient background. On day 17 after immunizing *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type IL-23R.GFP reporter mice with MOG(35–55) plus CFA, we isolated mononuclear cells from the draining lymph nodes, spleen and CNS and determined the percentage of IL-23R⁺ cells in the CD4⁺ population by flow cytometry. The *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice had higher percentage of IL-23⁺CD4⁺ cells in the lymph nodes and the CNS than did the control wild-type mice, whereas in spleen the frequency of IL-23⁺CD4⁺ T cells was similar (Fig. 2d). In addition, there was a significantly higher percentage of CD4⁺ cells expressing the Tₕ17-specific chemokine receptor CCR6 in the lymph nodes and CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice (Fig. 2d). We assessed the expression of genes encoding other Tₕ17 signature molecules in purified CD4⁺ T cells isolated from the CNS of *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ and wild-type mice during the disease peak and observed more transcripts of *Rorc*, *Il23r*, *Il17a* and *Il17f* in *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ CD4⁺ T cells, whereas the amount of *Il21* and *Il22* transcripts was more variable in *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ versus wild-type mice (Fig. 2e). The enhanced Tₕ17 response in *Tbx21*⁻/⁻ mice could have

Figure 2 T-bet deficiency promotes Th17 responses in the CNS during EAE. (a) Production of IL-17A and IFN-γ by CNS-infiltrating CD4+ lymphocytes on day 17 after immunization of *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type mice with MOG(35–55) plus CFA. Numbers in plots indicate percent positive cells in the CD4+ gate. (b) Quantification of IL-17A- and IFN-γ-producing CD4+ cells in the CNS of *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type mice on day 17 after immunization as in a. (c) ELISA of IL-17A and IFN-γ in purified CNS-infiltrating CD4+ T cells, normalized to 1 × 10^6 cells per ml. (d) Flow cytometry of cells from the lymph nodes (LN), spleen (Spl) and CNS of *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type IL-23R.GFP mice on day 17 after EAE induction as in a. Numbers in plots (above) indicate percent CD4+IL-23R.GFP+ cells (left group) or CD4+CCR6+ cells (right group) in the CD4+ gate (mean and s.e.m.); each symbol (below) represents an individual mouse and small horizontal lines indicate the mean. (e) Expression of genes encoding Th17 signature cytokines in CD4+ T cells purified from the CNS of *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type mice on day 17 after immunization as in a, then stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin before RNA extraction (cells pooled from four mice per group); results are presented relative to *Hprt1* expression. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.0001 (Student's t-test). Data are representative of three independent experiments (a) or are from three independent experiments (b–e; mean and s.e.m.) with three to four mice per group in each.

been intrinsic to the T cell or could have reflected differences in cytokine production by innate immune cells that could create a milieu more conducive to the polarization of Th17 cells in vivo. To differentiate between those two possibilities, we did functional analysis of CD4+ T cells in the CNS 14 d after EAE induction using cells from mice with and without T cell-specific deletion of loxP-flanked *Tbx21* alleles by Cre recombinase driven by the *Cd4* promoter (Supplementary Fig. 1). We found that T cell-specific deletion of T-bet resulted in an augmented Th17 response in the CNS during EAE, which suggested that this is a T cell-intrinsic phenomenon. Thus, a dominant Th17 response is generated in *Tbx21*−/− mice after immunization with MOG(35–55) plus CFA, which suggests that T-bet expression limits the magnitude of Th17 responses in the CNS during EAE.

**T-bet expression blocks Th17 differentiation**

The results reported above suggested that T-bet negatively regulates commitment to the Th17 lineage. To directly assess whether T-bet has a negative role in Th17 differentiation, we activated naive CD4+ T cells (CD62LhiCD25lo) under Th17-polarizing conditions. After 24 h, we transduced activated CD4+ cells with empty retrovirus or expressing GFP alone or retrovirus expressing GFP and T-bet in cultures containing Th17-skewing cytokines plus neutralizing antibodies to IL-4 and IFN-γ. After culturing cells for 5 d under Th17-polarizing conditions, we assessed the cytokine production of sorted GFP+ cells by intracellular cytokine staining. Transduction of either *Tbx21*−/− or wild-type naive CD4+ T cells with T-bet resulted in a much lower frequency of IL-17A-producing cells and a much greater frequency of cells producing both IFN-γ and IL-17A or IFN-γ alone (Fig. 3a). T-bet expression resulted in much lower expression of *Rorc*, RORγt target genes (*Il17a* and *Il17f*), *Il21* and *Il23r* (Fig. 3b). Although we observed no substantial difference between *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type Th17 cells in the amount of *Il22* transcripts, T-bet overexpression augmented *Il22* mRNA expression in both *Tbx21*−/− and wild-type Th17 cells (Fig. 3b). Ectopic expression of T-bet therefore prevents the differentiation of helper T cell precursors into Th17 cells under Th17-polarizing conditions by blocking expression of *Rorc* and, consequently, RORγt target genes.

In a separate series of experiments, we used a transgenic inducible T-bet expression system in which T-bet is induced in naive helper T cell precursors in response to treatment with doxycycline. We activated naive CD4+ T cells for 24 h under Th17-polarizing conditions. On day 2, we induced T-bet expression by administering 0.5 μg/ml of doxycycline in the presence or absence of neutralizing antibody to IFN-γ. We measured *Rorc* and *Tbx21* mRNA and RORγt and T-bet protein by real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis, respectively.

Figure 3 T-bet expression in naive helper T cell precursors and fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells inhibits the T<sub>H</sub>17 response. (a) Flow cytometry of the expression of IL-17A and IFN-γ by naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells transduced with empty retrovirus expressing GFP alone (EV-RV) or retrovirus expressing T-bet and GFP (T-bet–RV) under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions, then stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin, followed by intracellular cytokine staining of sorted GFP<sup>+</sup> cells. (b) Real-time PCR analysis of *Rorc*, *Il23r*, *Il17a*, *Il17f*, *Il21* and *Il22* mRNA in naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells transduced with empty or T-bet-expressing retrovirus under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions. (c) Expression of *Tbx21* and *Rorc* mRNA in cells obtained from *Tbx21<sup>−/−</sup>* mice transgenic for T-bet expression induced in response to doxycycline treatment, left untreated (−) or treated (+) with doxycycline (Dox), then activated under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions in the presence (+) or absence (−) of anti-IFN-γ (α-IFN-γ). (d) Immunoblot analysis (IB) of T-bet and RORγt in the cells in c, probed with anti-RORγt (α-RORγt) or anti-T-bet (α-T-bet). (e) Flow cytometry analysis of the expression of IL-17A and IFN-γ by fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells transduced with empty or T-bet-expressing retrovirus under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions, then stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin, followed by intracellular cytokine staining. (f) Real-time PCR analysis of genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 signature cytokines in fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells transduced with empty or T-bet-expressing retrovirus in the presence of T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing cytokines. Numbers in plots (a,e) indicate percent positive cells in each quadrant; gene or mRNA results (b,c,f) are presented relative to *Hprt1* expression (b,f) or expression of the housekeeping gene *Actb* (c). Data are representative of three independent experiments (mean and s.e.m. in b,c,f).

Induction of T-bet expression in transgenic helper T cell precursors by doxycycline treatment resulted in a much lower abundance of *Rorc* transcripts and RORγt protein under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions (Fig. 3c,d). We observed suppression of RORγt by T-bet even in the presence of neutralizing antibody to IFN-γ, which demonstrated that this mode of RORγt suppression is independent of IFN-γ.

T-bet can redirect fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>2 cells into the T<sub>H</sub>1 pathway<sup>22</sup>. To determine whether T-bet could similarly reprogram committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells, we differentiated naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells (CD62L<sup>hi</sup>CD25<sup>lo</sup>) under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions for 6 d, then reactivated *Tbx21<sup>−/−</sup>* and wild-type T<sub>H</sub>17 cells for 24 h and transduced them with empty retrovirus expressing GFP alone or retrovirus expressing GFP and T-bet under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions. We sorted GFP<sup>+</sup> cells 48 h after retroviral transduction and examined intracellular cytokines. We found 50% fewer IL-17A-producing cells and a greater frequency of IFN-γ-producing cells after transduction with T-bet-expressing retrovirus (Fig. 3e). Similar to the results reported above, enforced T-bet expression in fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells resulted in fewer transcripts of *Rorc*, *Il17a*, *Il17f*, *Il21* and *Il23r* and higher expression of *Il22* (Fig. 3f). These results indicate that ectopic expression of T-bet is sufficient to suppress expression of genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 signature cytokines in committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells even in the presence of T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing cytokines.

### T-bet inhibits Runx1 activity

Our results above supported the idea that the negative effect of T-bet on T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation could be mediated by inhibition of RORγt. To determine whether T-bet binds to the *Rorc* promoter, we did chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays of T-bet-bound chromatin from nuclear lysates of nonpolarized T<sub>H</sub>0

ARTICLES

Figure 4 T-bet blocks Runx1-mediated transactivation of the Rorc promoter. (a,b) ChIP analysis of the binding of T-bet to the Rorc promoter (numbers along horizontal axis correspond to Rorc at bottom left) in wild-type (WT (anti-T-bet)) and Tbx21⁻/⁻ (anti-T-bet) Tₕ0 cells (a) and differentiated Tₕ1 cells (b) after 6 h of stimulation with PMA and ionomycin, as well as in preimmune serum (WT (mock)); the Ifng and Il4 promoters (right) serve as positive and negative controls, respectively. Results are presented relative to input DNA. (c) Luciferase activity in HEK293 cells transfected with empty or Rorc firefly luciferase reporter (Rorc-luc; constructed from a 2-kb fragment of the mouse Rorc promoter), plus renilla luciferase reporter, along with increasing concentrations of Runx1 (wedges) in the presence or absence of T-bet; activity was normalized to that of renilla luciferase for transfection efficiency and is presented relative to that of cells transfected with empty vector, set as 1. (d) Luciferase activity in HEK293 cells transfected with the Rorc luciferase reporter and Runx1 in the presence or absence of increasing concentrations of T-bet (wedge), presented as in c. Data are representative of three experiments (a,b; mean ± s.e.m.) or three (c) and two (d) independent experiments (mean and s.e.m. of duplicate samples).

of Irf4 and Batf was similar in Tbx21⁻/⁻ and wild-type helper T cells, as determined by RT-PCR (Supplementary Fig. 2). It is unknown at present whether regulation of Rorc expression by IRF4 and BATF is mediated by direct binding of these transcription factors to the Rorc locus, but the binding sites for STAT3 in the Rorc and Il17a loci have been defined³³. To assess the binding of STAT3 to its target sequences in the Rorc and Il17a loci, we did ChIP of STAT3-bound chromatin from nuclear lysates of nonpolarized Tₕ0 and Tₕ17 cells. The binding of STAT3 to its target sites in the intergenic and intragenic regions of the Rorc locus and Il17a locus was similar in Tbx21⁻/⁻ and wild-type Tₕ0 and Tₕ17 cells (Supplementary Fig. 3). These data suggest that interference with the transcriptional activity of Runx1 is the likely mechanism by which T-bet blocks Rorc expression, but interference with STAT3 is not.

T-bet interacts with Runx1

To examine further the mechanism of T-bet-mediated repression of Rorc expression, we investigated whether T-bet interacted with

Runx1. First, we overexpressed T-bet with Myc-tagged Runx1, Runx2 or Runx3 in HEK293 cells and did coimmunoprecipitation experiments. T-bet interacted with both Runx1 and Runx3, but not with Runx2, in HEK293 cells (Fig. 5a). To determine in which helper T cell subset T-bet and Runx1 interact, we did immunoblot analysis of the expression of Runx1 and T-bet in unskewed Tₕ0 and differentiated Tₕ1 and Tₕ17 cells. We detected expression of T-bet and Runx1 in nonpolarized Tₕ0 cells (Fig. 5b). There was much lower expression of Runx1 in Tₕ1 cells differentiated in vitro and, conversely, much less T-bet in Tₕ17 cells differentiated in vitro (Fig. 5b). These data suggested that T-bet and Runx1 could interact in

Figure 5 Interaction of T-bet with Runx1. (a) Immunoprecipitation (IP; with anti-T-bet) of lysates of HEK293 cells transfected with various combinations of empty vector or expression vector for T-bet or Myc-tagged Runx1, Runx2 or Runx3 (above blot), followed by immunoblot analysis (IB) with anti-Myc or anti-T-bet. (b) Expression of Runx1 and T-bet protein in Tbx21⁻/⁻ and wild-type Tₕ0, Tₕ1 and Tₕ17 cells after 6 h of stimulation with PMA and ionomycin. (c) Immunoprecipitation (with control immunoglobulin G (IgG), anti-Runx1 or anti-T-bet) of lysates of Tbx21⁻/⁻ and wild-type Tₕ0 cells, followed by immunoblot analysis immunoprecipitates (top) or input protein (bottom) with anti-T-bet or anti-Runx1. IgH, additional loading control. (d) DNA-precipitation assay (DNA precip) and immunoblot analysis of HEK293 cells transfected with oligonucleotide containing wild-type Runx1- and T-bet-binding sites (WT oligo) or a mutated Runx1-binding site (R-mt oligo) or T-bet-binding site (T-mt oligo) at a site 2 kb upstream of Rorc exon 1, in the presence of Myc-tagged Runx1 or T-bet. Below, oligonucleotide sequence; underlining indicates binding sites. (e) DNA-precipitation assay and immunoblot analysis (top two blots) of HEK293 cells transfected with oligonucleotide with a wild-type or mutated Runx1-binding site (as in d), plus Myc-tagged Runx1, in the presence or absence of increasing doses of T-bet (wedge; 0.1, 0.5 and 1 μg). Bottom two blots, immunoblot analysis of input DNA (samples without precipitation). Data are representative of one to two independent experiments.

Figure 6 Runx1 overexpression restores IL-17A production in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells expressing T-bet. (a) Flow cytometry of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells transduced with various combinations of retrovirus expressing GFP, Thy-1.1, Runx1-GFP or T-bet-Thy-1.1 (above plots) within 24 h of activation, then cultured for 5 d under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions and stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin before intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17A. Numbers adjacent to outlined areas indicate percent IL-17A-producing cells in the GFP<sup>+</sup>Thy-1.1<sup>+</sup> gate. FSC, forward scatter. (b) Production of IL-17A and expression of *Il17a* and *Rorc* by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells transduced with various combinations of retroviruses as in a, then differentiated for 5 d under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions, followed by sorting of GFP<sup>+</sup>Thy-1.1<sup>+</sup> cells and stimulation for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin. (c) Flow cytometry of activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells transduced with various combinations of retrovirus expressing GFP, Thy-1.1, RORγt-GFP or T-bet-Thy-1.1 (above plots), then cultured for 5 d under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions and stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin before intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17A. (d) ELISA of IL-17A production and RT-PCR analysis of *Il17a* and *Rorc* mRNA transcripts of cells transduced under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions as described in c. Numbers adjacent to outlined areas (a,c) indicate percent IL-17A-producing cells in the GFP<sup>+</sup>Thy-1.1<sup>+</sup> gate; gene or mRNA expression (b,d) is presented relative to *Hprt1* expression. Data are representative of two independent experiments (error bars (b,d), s.e.m.).

nonpolarized T<sub>H</sub>0 cells in which both proteins were coexpressed. Indeed, Runx1-immunoprecipitation confirmed the presence of an endogenous T-bet-Runx1 interaction in nonpolarized wild-type T<sub>H</sub>0 cells but not in differentiated T<sub>H</sub>1 or T<sub>H</sub>17 cells (Fig. 5c and data not shown). We also confirmed interaction between T-bet and Runx1 in uncommitted T<sub>H</sub>0 cells in reverse coimmunoprecipitation assays (Fig. 5c). These data suggest that a functionally important interaction between T-bet and Runx1 most probably occurs in uncommitted helper T cells but not in fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>17 cells because of restrictive expression of Runx1 and T-bet, respectively, in those helper T cells.

On the basis of our luciferase data and coimmunoprecipitation results, we hypothesized that interaction between T-bet and Runx1 could block the binding of Runx1 to its consensus sites located 2 kb upstream of the *Rorc* exon 1. We detected binding of Runx1 to an oligonucleotide containing wild-type Runx1 target sequence but not to an oligonucleotide in which the Runx1 target sequence was mutated by a T-to-A substitution (Fig. 5d). T-bet bound to a wild-type oligonucleotide containing a T-bet-specific half-site but not to an oligonucleotide in which the T-bet half-site was mutated (Fig. 5d). After confirming that the binding of Runx1 and T-bet to the site 2 kb upstream of the *Rorc* exon 1 was sequence specific, we did a DNA-precipitation assay with the wild-type oligonucleotide and Runx1 in the presence or absence of increasing concentrations of T-bet. In the absence of T-bet, Runx1 bound strongly to the oligonucleotide containing the wild-type Runx1-binding site (Fig. 5e). Increasing concentrations of T-bet ablated the ability of Runx1 to bind to its target sequence in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 5e), which showed that interaction of T-bet with Runx1 interferes with the binding of Runx1 to its site 2 kb upstream of the *Rorc* exon 1.

### Runx1 reverses the effect of T-bet on T<sub>H</sub>17 polarization

Next we investigated whether Runx1 overexpression could block the inhibitory effects of T-bet on T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation. We transduced purified CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells with various combinations of retroviruses expressing GFP alone, Thy-1.1 alone, GFP-tagged Runx1 and/or T-bet-Thy-1.1. We grew the transduced cells for 5 d under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions, then sorted double-positive GFP<sup>+</sup>Thy-1.1<sup>+</sup> cells and assessed their T<sub>H</sub>17 commitment. Retroviral transduction of helper T cells with T-bet had a negative effect on T<sub>H</sub>17 commitment

under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions, whereas transduction of helper T cells with Runx1 augmented the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells (Fig. 6a,b). Overexpression of Runx1 reversed the inhibitory effect of T-bet and fully restored T<sub>H</sub>17 polarization in cells coexpressing Runx1 and T-bet. However, *Rorc* expression was only partially upregulated (Fig. 6b), which suggested that there may be additional mechanisms by which T-bet inhibits *Rorc* transcription in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells. Conversely, transduction of purified *Tbx21*<sup>-/-</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells with a retrovirus expressing dominant negative Runx1 during T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation reversed the effects of T-bet deficiency on IL-17A production by T<sub>H</sub>17 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4).

In addition to directly promoting *Rorc* expression, Runx1 also acts as a coactivator, and together with RORγt, it induces expression of *Il17a* and *Il17f*<sup>30</sup>. T-bet suppressed T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation by inhibiting *Rorc* expression (Fig. 3). However, it is possible that the interaction of T-bet with Runx1 serves to sequester this transcriptional coactivator and blocks the expression of genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 signature cytokines in this manner. To investigate that possibility, we sought to determine whether RORγt was able to restore a T<sub>H</sub>17 developmental program in helper T cells coexpressing T-bet and RORγt under T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions. Expression of RORγt independently of a T-bet transcriptional block (from retroviral long terminal repeat control elements) in developing T<sub>H</sub>17 cells was unable to fully reverse the T-bet-mediated inhibition of T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation (Fig. 6c,d). We were unable to coimmunoprecipitate T-bet and RORγt in HEK293 cells, which suggested that sequestration of RORγt from its target genes by T-bet is unlikely. These data demonstrate that in addition to inhibiting *Rorc* transcription, the interaction of T-bet with Runx1 depletes the pool of free Runx1 available for the formation of transcriptionally active Runx1-RORγt complexes in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells.

### T-bet Tyr304 is crucial for the suppression of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells

To investigate which amino acid residue is important for formation of the T-bet-Runx1 complex, we tested the ability of a series of T-bet mutants to interact with Runx1 in HEK293 cells. Two of these mutants with point substitution, T-bet(S508A) and T-bet(Y525F), have been shown before to be functionally important in the repression of *Il2* transcription in T<sub>H</sub>1 cells and in T<sub>H</sub>2 lineage suppression, respectively<sup>15,27</sup>. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that Runx1 interacted with the mutants T-bet(Y265F), T-bet(S508A)

ARTICLES

a
| T-bet | - | + | Y265F | Y304F | S508A | Y525F |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Myc-Runx1 | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| IP: α-T-bet |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| IB: α-Myc-Runx1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| IB: α-Myc-Runx1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| IB: α-T-bet |  |  |  |  |  |  |

b
|  | Runx1 | T-bet | T-bet(Y304F) | T-bet(Y525F) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | - | - | - | - |
|  | - | + | + | + |
|  | - | - | + | + |
|  | - | - | - | + |

c
| EV-RV | T-bet-RV | T-bet(Y304F)-RV | T-bet(Y525F)-RV |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 19 | 1.3 | 1.2 |
|  | 0.2 | 6.3 | 5.4 |
|  |  |  |  |
|  | 14 | 1.3 | 1.2 |
|  | 0.7 | 8.9 | 6.7 |

d
| EV-RV | T-bet(Y304F)-RV | T-bet-RV | T-bet(Y525F)-RV |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

e
| T-bet | T-bet(Y304F) |
| --- | --- |
| Oligo: WT | WT |
| DNA precip: | T-mt | T-mt |
| IB: α-Myc |  |  |
| IB: α-T-bet |  |  |
| IB: α-T-bet |  |  |

f
| Myc-Runx1: + | + | + | + |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| T-bet: WT | WT | WT | Y304F |
| Oligo: WT | R-mt | T-mt | WT |
| DNA precip: |  |  |  |
| IB: α-Myc |  |  |  |
| IB: α-T-bet |  |  |  |
| IB: α-Runx1 |  |  |  |
| IB: α-T-bet |  |  |  |
| Wt oligo: CATCTCTGTGGTTAACACATTCT |  |  |  |
| T-mt oligo: CATCTCTGTGGTTAACTCATTCT |  |  |  |
| WT oligo: CATCTCTGTGGTTAACACATTCT |  |  |  |
| R-mt oligo: CATCTCAGAGGATAACACATTCT |  |  |  |
| T-mt oligo: CATCTCTGTGGTTAACTCATTCT |  |  |  |

Figure 7 T-bet Tyr304 is essential for the interaction of T-bet with Runx1 and for inhibition of the T_H17 differentiation program.

(a) Interaction of Myc-tagged Runx1 with wild-type T-bet or T-bet point mutants (above lanes) in coimmunoprecipitation experiments in HEK293 cells. (b) Luciferase activity in HEK293 cells transfected with the *Rorc* luciferase reporter construct (as in Fig. 4c) in the presence or absence of Runx1, wild-type T-bet or T-bet(Y304F) or T-bet(Y525F) (below graph), assessed as in Figure 4c. (c) Flow cytometry analysis of the expression of IL-17A and IFN-γ by naive CD4⁺ T cells transduced with control (empty) retrovirus (EV-RV) or retrovirus encoding wild-type T-bet (T-bet-RV), T-bet(Y304F) (T-bet(Y304F)-RV) or T-bet(Y525F) (T-bet(Y525F)-RV) under T_H17-polarizing conditions. Numbers in plots indicate percent IL-17A⁺IFN-γ⁻ cells (top left) or IL-17A⁻IFN-γ⁺ cells (bottom right) in the CD4⁺ gate. (d) RT-PCR analysis of genes encoding T_H17 signature cytokines by CD4⁺ T cells transduced with as in c; results are presented relative to *Hprt1* expression. (e) DNA-precipitation assay and immunoblot analysis of HEK293 cells transfected with wild-type T-bet or T-bet(Y304F) in the presence of oligonucleotide containing a wild-type or mutated T-bet-binding site (as in Fig. 5d). (f) DNA-precipitation assay and immunoblot analysis of HEK293 cells transfected with Myc-tagged Runx1, wild-type T-bet or T-bet(Y304F) in the presence of oligonucleotide containing wild-type or mutated Runx1- or T-bet-binding sites (as in Fig. 5d), probed with anti-Myc and anti-T-bet. Data are representative of three independent experiments (a–d; mean and s.e.m. in b,d or one experiment (e,f).

and T-bet(Y525F) but not with the T-bet(Y304F) mutant (Fig. 7a). Furthermore, T-bet(Y304F) was unable to suppress Runx1 transcriptional activity in the luciferase assay described above (luciferase reporter ~2 kb upstream of *Rorc* exon 1; Fig. 7b), which suggested that T-bet Tyr304 may be important for the suppression of commitment to the T_H17 lineage. To clarify this, we activated sorted naive helper T cells for 24 h under T_H17-polarizing conditions and transduced them with control retrovirus or retrovirus encoding wild-type T-bet, T-bet(Y304F) or T-bet(Y525F) (control mutant). We cultured the transduced cells under T_H17-polarizing conditions for an additional 5 d and determined the frequency of IFN-γ- and IL-17-producing cells by intracellular cytokine staining. Wild-type T-bet and the T-bet(Y525F) control mutant suppressed T_H17 differentiation under T_H17-polarizing conditions. In contrast, the Y304F substitution abrogated the ability of T-bet to repress T_H17 lineage commitment (Fig. 7c). In contrast to wild-type T-bet and the T-bet(Y525F) mutant, T-bet(Y304F) was unable to suppress expression of *Rorc*, *Il17a*, *Il17f* and *Il23r* in developing T_H17 cells (Fig. 7d). These data indicate that T-bet Tyr304 is important for the formation of the T-bet–Runx1 complex, for the inhibition of Runx1 transcriptional activity and for the suppression of T_H17 lineage development.

In DNA-precipitation assays, the T-bet(Y304F) mutant failed to bind to the T-bet-binding site in the region 2 kb upstream of the *Rorc* exon 1 (Fig. 7e), which suggested that this residue is also important for the binding of T-bet to DNA. To delineate whether T-bet-mediated inhibition of Runx1 activity was dependent on binding to DNA or the T-bet–Runx1 (protein-protein) interaction, we investigated whether wild-type T-bet inhibited the binding of Runx1 to its target site; for this, we used oligonucleotides in which the T-bet-binding site was mutated. T-bet blocked the binding of Runx1 to the Runx1-specific sequence independently of the ability of T-bet to bind to

DISCUSSION

Lineage-specific transcription factors can both activate and repress differentiation programs. T-bet simultaneously promotes T_H1 differentiation and represses T_H2 differentiation³⁶. Although several studies have reported an enhanced T_H17 response in *Tbx21⁻/⁻* mice in various disease models¹⁶–¹⁹, no mechanistic explanation for this was provided. Here we have demonstrated that T-bet suppressed commitment to the T_H17 lineage by inhibiting transcription of the gene encoding the T_H17 cell-specific transcription factor RORγt and its target genes. T-bet did not directly repress the *Rorc* promoter. Instead, T-bet interacted with Runx1 and blocked Runx1-mediated transactivation of *Rorc*. Overexpression of Runx1 was sufficient to reverse the inhibitory effects of T-bet on IL-17A production by T_H17 cells. Furthermore, T-bet Tyr304 was crucial not only for formation of the T-bet–Runx1 complex but also for blocking Runx1 activity and inhibiting the T_H17 differentiation program. Thus, our data have identified a molecular mechanism to explain the exaggerated T_H17 responses observed in T-bet-deficient hosts.

In addition to activating a set of genes that promote the differentiation of helper T cells toward a specific lineage, a master regulator can also suppress the developmental program of the opposing T cell lineages³⁴. Among the helper T cell-specific transcription factors, T-bet seems to be particularly active in this. The ability of T-bet to negatively regulate T_H2 differentiation¹⁵,²², IL-2 production by T_H1 cells²⁷ and the production of tumor necrosis factor in
dendritic cells<sup>26</sup> prompted us to investigate the contribution of T-bet to regulation of the T<sub>H</sub>17 response. Our data have shown that T-bet deficiency resulted in an augmented T<sub>H</sub>17 response *in vitro* and *in vivo* during CNS inflammation in the EAE model of multiple sclerosis. Our results differ from those of published studies reporting that mice injected with T-bet-specific small interfering RNA have lower expression of IL-23R and lack T<sub>H</sub>17 cells after immunization with myelin basic protein plus CFA or after immunization with MOG(35–55) plus CFA<sup>35,36</sup>. We found instead that T<sub>H</sub>17 cells were present in the CNS of *Tbx21*<sup>−/−</sup> mice in greater numbers and had high expression of genes encoding T<sub>H</sub>17 signature cytokines after induction of EAE via MOG(35–55) plus CFA. The disparity between those studies<sup>35,36</sup> and our results here may arise from differences in experimental conditions, such as the use of T-bet-specific small interfering RNA rather than complete genetic deletion *in vivo*. In support of our results, one of the studies noted above also detected a greater frequency of myelin-specific T<sub>H</sub>17 cells in *Tbx21*<sup>−/−</sup> mice than wild-type mice after immunization with MOG(35–55) plus CFA<sup>36</sup>. Notably, despite their strong T<sub>H</sub>17 response, *Tbx21*<sup>−/−</sup> mice were largely protected from the development of EAE<sup>36</sup>. To explain that observation, we postulate that in the inflammatory milieu of the CNS, T-bet controls the expression of a newly identified set of genes important for the pathogenicity of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells but not for the development of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells. In support of that hypothesis, a study has reported that T-bet is expressed in IL-23-treated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells and that these T-bet-expressing T<sub>H</sub>17 cells are pathogenic during CNS inflammation, which indicates the important function of T-bet in a subset of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells<sup>37</sup>. Alternatively, the presence of both T<sub>H</sub>1 cells and T<sub>H</sub>17 cells might be required for CNS pathology. Finally, T-bet expression in other cell types might be important for driving disease development.

Here we focused on the function of T-bet in the commitment of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to the T<sub>H</sub>17 lineage. We found that T-bet overexpression in naive helper T cell precursors or committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells had a negative effect on *Rorc* transcription and consequently on the expression of RORγt target genes. In addition, we observed downregulation of *Il21* expression. T-bet suppresses IL-21 in T<sub>H</sub>1 cells by interacting with the transcription factor NFATc2, thus preventing NFATc2 from binding to the *Il21* promoter<sup>29</sup>. As IL-21 promotes IL-23R expression in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells<sup>10</sup>, T-bet-mediated suppression of *Il21* could also contribute to the lower expression of *Il23r* in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells after transduction with a retrovirus expressing T-bet. In contrast to the expression of *Rorc*, *Il17a*, *Il17f* and *Il23r*, which was suppressed by T-bet, *Il22* expression was augmented by ectopic expression of T-bet. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) controls IL-22 production by T<sub>H</sub>17 cells, as CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>H</sub>17 cells from AhR-deficient mice fail to produce IL-22 when exposed to AhR ligands<sup>38,39</sup>. Thus, it is plausible that T-bet expression has a synergistic effect on the AhR-mediated induction of IL-22.

We detected binding of endogenous T-bet at a region 2 kb upstream of the first *Rorc* exon in nonskewed and T<sub>H</sub>1 cells but not in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells. Notably, differentiation of helper T cells down the T<sub>H</sub>1 pathway resulted in much lower expression of Runx1. Conversely, culture of helper T cells in the presence of T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing cytokines resulted in suppression of the expression of T-bet protein. This was not unexpected, as TGF-β has a negative effect on T-bet expression, and IFN-γ, the most potent inducer of T-bet expression, is neutralized under *in vitro* T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions. Thus, the lack of binding of T-bet to the *Rorc* promoter in committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells could be explained by much lower expression of T-bet in this helper T cell subset.

We did not detect any substantial effect of T-bet overexpression on *Rorc* promoter activity in luciferase assays. Evidence that T-bet acts as a direct transcriptional repressor or can recruit corepressors to promoters is lacking at present. However, T-bet can exert a negative regulatory effect on gene expression by blocking the activity of competing transcription factors<sup>15,26,27</sup>. Understanding of the transcriptional regulation of *Rorc* is still incomplete. It has been reported that *Rorc* expression is much lower in *Irf4*<sup>−/−</sup> and *Stat3*<sup>−/−</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> cells<sup>31,40–42</sup>. Runx1 induces *Rorc* expression, and BATF is important for the maintenance of *Rorc* expression in stimulated T cells<sup>30,32</sup>. It is unknown at present whether regulation of *Rorc* expression by IRF4 and BATF is mediated by direct binding of these transcription factors to the *Rorc* locus, but the binding sites for STAT3 in the *Rorc* and *Il17a* loci have been identified<sup>33</sup>. The binding of STAT3 to both *Rorc* and *Il17a* was similar in *Tbx21*<sup>−/−</sup> and wild-type helper T cells. Hence, we focused on the transcriptional activity of Runx1, as we detected two Runx1 consensus sites in the proximity of the site for peak binding of T-bet, 2 kb upstream of the first exon of *Rorc*, as shown by ChIP.

On the basis of our protein-expression data and coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we propose that the functionally important interaction of T-bet and Runx1 occurs in uncommitted helper T cells. We mapped the function of T-bet in its interaction with Runx1, repression of Runx1 activity and suppression of the T<sub>H</sub>17 differentiation program to Tyr304. Our preliminary data indicated that this tyrosine residue was not phosphorylated and that the protein was stably expressed in HEK293 cells and primary T cells. In DNA-precipitation assays, the T-bet(Y304F) mutant failed to bind to DNA. Although Tyr304 was important for the interaction of T-bet with DNA, our results have indicated that this interaction was not essential for the ability of T-bet to block Runx1. Wild-type T-bet was still able to block the binding of Runx1 to its target site in a *Rorc* promoter bearing a mutated T-bet half-site. Thus, the T-bet–Runx1 (protein-protein) interaction is the main mechanism by which T-bet blocks Runx1 activity by sequestering Runx1 away from the *Rorc* promoter.

In both infectious and autoimmune diseases, T cell-mediated responses are characterized by the presence of cells coexpressing IL-17A and IFN-γ, the so-called ‘IFN-γ<sup>+</sup> T<sub>H</sub>17 cells’. T cell clones from mice immunized with a peptide of myelin basic protein are either T-bet<sup>+</sup>RORγt<sup>−</sup> or T-bet<sup>+</sup>RORγt<sup>+</sup> (ref. 28). T-bet<sup>+</sup>RORγt<sup>+</sup> cells are very responsive to exogenous cytokines such as IL-12 and IL-23, which influence the relative amounts of T-bet and RORγt and shift cytokine production toward IFN-γ or IL-17A, respectively<sup>28</sup>. The unstable phenotype of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells is not restricted to CNS-specific autoimmunity. Studies of IL-17F reporter mice in a transfer model of colitis have demonstrated that IFN-γ-producing CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells can emerge from T<sub>H</sub>17-committed cells during T cell-driven inflammation. This transition of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells into IFN-γ-producing cells is dependent on STAT4 and T-bet<sup>21</sup>. In the context of those findings, we are tempted to propose that this T-bet-mediated transition of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells into a ‘T<sub>H</sub>1-like’ subset is controlled partly by T-bet-mediated interference with the transcriptional activity of Runx1. Ectopic expression of T-bet in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells results in suppression of *Rorc*. However, in fully differentiated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells, which already express RORγt, T-bet could still interfere with transcriptional activity of RORγt by sequestering its coactivator, Runx1. Overexpression of Runx1 in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells overcame the inhibitory effect of T-bet and completely restored IL-17A production. Although Runx1 fully restored IL-17A production, *Rorc* expression was only slightly higher. These results indicate that there are additional mechanisms by which T-bet inhibits *Rorc* expression. One potential mechanism could be the induction of repressive epigenetic changes in the *Rorc* locus by IL-12 signaling.
which are dependent on STAT4 and T-bet^{43}. Thus, T-bet re-expression in T_H17 cells turns off Rorc expression through the sequestration of Runx1 and through the introduction of epigenetic changes that result in the expression of genes encoding T_H1 signature molecules and acquisition of the ‘T_H1-like’ phenotype by T_H17 cells.

### METHODS

Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/.

**Note:** Supplementary information is available on the Nature Immunology website.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank D. Kozoriz for help in cell sorting; W. Strober (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) for retroviral plasmids encoding Runx1 and dominant negative Runx1; S.L. Reiner (University of Pennsylvania) for mice with loxP-flanked *Tbx21* alleles; C.B. Wilson (The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation) for mice with expression of Cre recombinase driven by the *Cd4* promoter; and A.-H. Lee, T. Staton-Winslow, M. Greenblatt and M. Wein for critical review of the manuscript. Supported by the US National Institutes of Health (P01 NS038037), the Ragon Institute of MIT, MGH and Harvard (L.H.G.), the National Cancer Research Center (R15-2006-020 to E.S.H.) and the Cancer Research Institute (V.L.).

### AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

V.L. designed and did experiments and prepared the manuscript; X.C. did ChIP assays; J.-H.S. did DNA-precipitation and coimmunoprecipitation assays; E.-S.H. created T-bet mutant retroviral constructs; E.J. did doxycycline transgenic T cell experiments; M.O. generated IL-23R.GFP mice; V.K.K. contributed to discussions and manuscript preparation; A.N.B. provided technical assistance; and L.H.G. supervised the research, designed experiments and participated in preparing the manuscript.

### COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The authors declare competing financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/. Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintandpermissions/.

---

1. Mosmann, T.R., Cherwinski, H., Bond, M.W., Giedlin, M.A. & Coffman, R.L. Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins. *J. Immunol.* **136**, 2348–2357 (1986).
2. Aggarwal, S., Ghilardi, N., Xie, M.H., de Sauvage, F.J. & Gurney, A.L. Interleukin-23 promotes a distinct CD4 T cell activation state characterized by the production of interleukin-17. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 1910–1914 (2003).
3. Harrington, L.E. *et al.* Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**, 1123–1132 (2005).
4. Langrish, C.L. *et al.* IL-23 drives a pathogenic T cell population that induces autoimmune inflammation. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 233–240 (2005).
5. Mangan, P.R. *et al.* Transforming growth factor-β induces development of the T(H)17 lineage. *Nature* **441**, 231–234 (2006).
6. Park, H. *et al.* A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by producing interleukin 17. *Nat. Immunol.* **6**, 1133–1141 (2005).
7. Bettelli, E. *et al.* Reciprocal developmental pathways for the generation of pathogenic effector T_H17 and regulatory T cells. *Nature* **441**, 235–238 (2006).
8. Liang, S.C. *et al.* Interleukin (IL)-22 and IL-17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and cooperatively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 2271–2279 (2006).
9. Veldhoen, M., Hocking, R.J., Atkins, C.J., Locksley, R.M. & Stockinger, B. TGFβ in the context of an inflammatory cytokine milieu supports de novo differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells. *Immunity* **24**, 179–189 (2006).
10. Zhou, L. *et al.* IL-6 programs T_H17 cell differentiation by promoting sequential engagement of the IL-21 and IL-23 pathways. *Nat. Immunol.* **8**, 967–974 (2007).
11. Ivanov, I.I. *et al.* The orphan nuclear receptor RORγt directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. *Cell* **126**, 1121–1133 (2006).
12. Korn, T. *et al.* IL-21 initiates an alternative pathway to induce proinflammatory TH17 cells. *Nature* **448**, 484–487 (2007).
13. McGeachy, M.J. *et al.* The interleukin 23 receptor is essential for the terminal differentiation of interleukin 17-producing effector T helper cells *in vivo*. *Nat. Immunol.* **10**, 314–324 (2009).
14. Djuretic, I.M. *et al.* Transcription factors T-bet and Runx3 cooperate to activate *Ifng* and silence *Il4* in T helper type 1 cells. *Nat. Immunol.* **8**, 145–153 (2007).
15. Hwang, E.S., Szabo, S.J., Schwartzberg, P.L. & Glimcher, L.H. T helper cell fate specified by kinase-mediated interaction of T-bet with GATA-3. *Science* **307**, 430–433 (2005).
16. Burrell, B.E., Csencsits, K., Lu, G., Grabauskiene, S. & Bishop, D.K. CD8+ Th17 mediate costimulation blockade-resistant allograft rejection in T-bet-deficient mice. *J. Immunol.* **181**, 3906–3914 (2008).
17. Rangachari, M. *et al.* T-bet negatively regulates autoimmune myocarditis by suppressing local production of interleukin 17. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 2009–2019 (2006).
18. Yuan, X. *et al.* A novel role of CD4 Th17 cells in mediating cardiac allograft rejection and vasculopathy. *J. Exp. Med.* **205**, 3133–3144 (2008).
19. Guo, S., Cobb, D. & Smeltz, R.B. T-bet inhibits the in vivo differentiation of parasite-specific CD4+ Th17 cells in a T cell-intrinsic manner. *J. Immunol.* **182**, 6179–6186 (2009).
20. Hegazy, A.N. *et al.* Interferons direct Th2 cell reprogramming to generate a stable GATA-3+T-bet+ cell subset with combined Th2 and Th1 cell functions. *Immunity* **32**, 116–128 (2010).
21. Lee, Y.K. *et al.* Late developmental plasticity in the T helper 17 lineage. *Immunity* **30**, 92–107 (2009).
22. Szabo, S.J. *et al.* A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. *Cell* **100**, 655–669 (2000).
23. Bettelli, E. *et al.* Loss of T-bet, but not STAT1, prevents the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 79–87 (2004).
24. McGeachy, M.J. *et al.* TGF-beta and IL-6 drive the production of IL-17 and IL-10 by T cells and restrain T_H17 cell-mediated pathology. *Nat. Immunol.* **8**, 1390–1397 (2007).
25. Liu, X. *et al.* Crucial role of interleukin-7 in T helper type 17 survival and expansion in autoimmune disease. *Nat. Med.* **16**, 191–197 (2010).
26. Garrett, W.S. *et al.* Communicable ulcerative colitis induced by T-bet deficiency in the innate immune system. *Cell* **131**, 33–45 (2007).
27. Hwang, E.S., Hong, J.H. & Glimcher, L.H. IL-2 production in developing Th1 cells is regulated by heterodimerization of RelA and T-bet and requires T-bet serine residue 508. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 1289–1300 (2005).
28. Abromson-Leeman, S., Bronson, R.T. & Dorf, M.E. Encephalitogenic T cells that stably express both T-bet and RORγt consistently produce IFNγ but have a spectrum of IL-17 profiles. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **215**, 10–24 (2009).
29. Mehta, D.S., Wurster, A.L., Weinmann, A.S. & Grusby, M.J. NFATc2 and T-bet contribute to T-helper-cell-subset-specific regulation of IL-21 expression. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 2016–2021 (2005).
30. Zhang, F., Meng, G. & Strober, W. Interactions among the transcription factors Runx1, RORγt and Foxp3 regulate the differentiation of interleukin 17-producing T cells. *Nat. Immunol.* **9**, 1297–1306 (2008).
31. Brustle, A. *et al.* The development of inflammatory T_H17 cells requires interferon-regulatory factor 4. *Nat. Immunol.* **8**, 958–966 (2007).
32. Schraml, B.U. *et al.* The AP-1 transcription factor Batf controls T_H17 differentiation. *Nature* **460**, 405–409 (2009).
33. Durant, L. *et al.* Diverse targets of the transcription factor STAT3 contribute to T cell pathogenicity and homeostasis. *Immunity* **32**, 605–615 (2010).
34. Jenner, R.G. *et al.* The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 control alternative pathways of T-cell differentiation through a shared set of target genes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **106**, 17876–17881 (2009).
35. Gocke, A.R. *et al.* T-bet regulates the fate of Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes in autoimmunity. *J. Immunol.* **178**, 1341–1348 (2007).
36. Yang, Y. *et al.* T-bet is essential for encephalitogenicity of both Th1 and Th17 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **206**, 1549–1564 (2009).
37. Ghoreschi, K. *et al.* Generation of pathogenic T_H17 cells in the absence of TGF-β signalling. *Nature* **467**, 967–971 (2010).
38. Veldhoen, M. *et al.* The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links T_H17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to environmental toxins. *Nature* **453**, 106–109 (2008).
39. Veldhoen, M., Hirota, K., Christensen, J., O’Garra, A. & Stockinger, B. Natural agonists for aryl hydrocarbon receptor in culture medium are essential for optimal differentiation of Th17 T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **206**, 43–49 (2009).
40. Harris, T.J. *et al.* Cutting edge: An in vivo requirement for STAT3 signaling in TH17 development and TH17-dependent autoimmunity. *J. Immunol.* **179**, 4313–4317 (2007).
41. Liu, X., Lee, Y.S., Yu, C.R. & Egwuagu, C.E. Loss of STAT3 in CD4+ T cells prevents development of experimental autoimmune diseases. *J. Immunol.* **180**, 6070–6076 (2008).
42. Mathur, A.N. *et al.* Stat3 and Stat4 direct development of IL-17-secreting Th cells. *J. Immunol.* **178**, 4901–4907 (2007).
43. Mukasa, R. *et al.* Epigenetic instability of cytokine and transcription factor gene loci underlies plasticity of the T helper 17 cell lineage. *Immunity* **32**, 616–627 (2010).

ONLINE METHODS

Mice. $Tbx21^{-/-}$ mice and wild-type and $Tbx21^{-/-}$ IL-23R.GFP mice (all on a C57BL/6 background) were housed at Harvard School of Public Health and were handled in accordance with guidelines from the Center for Animal Resources and Comparative Medicine of Harvard Medical School. $Tbx21^{-/-}$ mice in which T-bet is induced in naive helper T cell precursors in response to treatment with doxycycline were housed at College of Pharmacy of Ewha Womans University. $Ifng^{-/-}$ mice were from Jackson Laboratories. Mice with loxP-flanked $Tbx21$ alleles and mice with expression of Cre recombinase driven by the $Cd4$ promoter were provided by S.L. Reiner and C.B. Wilson, respectively.

Plasmids. Constitutively active STAT3 (pRc-CMV STAT3-C) was from Addgene (submitted by J.E. Darnell)<sup>44</sup>. The retroviral plasmids pMCsIg-EV, pMCsIg-Runx1 and pMCsIg-Runx1-dominant negative were provided by W. Strober.

CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper differentiation *in vitro*. $Tbx21^{-/-}$, $Ifng^{-/-}$ and wild-type CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were stimulated for 48 h with anti-CD3 (2 μg/ml; 145-2C11; eBioscience) in the presence of irradiated splenocytes at a ratio of 5:1. CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were cultured under T<sub>H</sub>0 conditions (200 U/ml of human IL-2; National Cancer Institute Biological Resources Branch Preclinical Repository) or were differentiated into T<sub>H</sub>1 cells by culture for 5 d with human IL-2 (200 U/ml), mouse IL-12 (10 ng/ml; Peprotech) and anti-mouse IL-4 (10 μg/ml; 11B11; BioXCell) or into T<sub>H</sub>17 cells by culture for 5 d with human TGF-β (2 ng/ml; R&D Systems), mouse IL-6 (20 ng/ml; R&D Systems), anti-mouse IL-4 (10 μg/ml) and anti-mouse IFN-γ (10 μg/ml; XMG1.2; BioXCell). Cells differentiated under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions with IL-23 were cultured in the presence of human TGF-β, mouse IL-6, anti-IL-4 and anti-IFN-γ for the first 48 h of activation, then were cultured in the presence of IL-23 (10 ng/ml; R&D Systems).

Isolation and functional analysis of CNS mononuclear cells. EAE was induced in 8- to 10-week-old mice as described<sup>23</sup>. CNS-infiltrating cells were restimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin before intracellular cytokine staining with anti-IFN-γ and anti-IL-17A (TC11-18H10; BD Pharmingen). For ELISA and RT-PCR analysis, CNS-derived CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were purified with a CD4<sup>+</sup> T Cell Enrichment kit (negative selection; Stem Cell Technologies). Purified CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells (>95% purity) were pooled from four to five mice per group and cells were stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin. The RT-PCR primer sequences are in Supplementary Table 1.

Retroviral transduction. Naive (CD62L<sup>hi</sup>CD25<sup>lo</sup>) CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were transduced with retroviruses at 24 h after activation. Transduced cells were cultured for 5 d under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions, then sorted GFP<sup>+</sup> cells were tested for cytokine production after 4 h of stimulation with PMA and ionomycin. For transduction of committed T<sub>H</sub>17 cells, naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were cultured for 6 d under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions. T<sub>H</sub>17 cells were activated on plates coated with plate-bound anti-CD3 (145-2C11; eBioscience) and anti-CD28 (37.51; BD Pharmingen) and were transduced for 24 h with retrovirus under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions. Transduced cells were cultured for an additional 48 h under T<sub>H</sub>17 conditions. Sorted GFP<sup>+</sup> were stimulated for 4 h with PMA and ionomycin before functional analysis.

*In vitro* culture of doxycycline-inducible T-bet-transgenic T<sub>H</sub>17 cells. At 24 h after activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28, T-bet was induced in helper T cells by the addition of 0.5 μg/ml of doxycycline to the T<sub>H</sub>17 culture media. Then, 24 h after induction, lysates were analyzed by RT-PCR for expression of $Tbx21$ and $Rorc$. In addition, cells were analyzed by immunoblot with polyclonal anti-T-bet (9856; prepared in-house) and anti-RORγt (B2D; eBioscience).

ChIP. Naive cells were sorted from spleens and lymph nodes of $Tbx21^{-/-}$ and wild-type mice and were differentiated under T<sub>H</sub>0-, T<sub>H</sub>1- and T<sub>H</sub>17-polarizing conditions as described above. Differentiated helper T cells were analyzed by ChIP as described<sup>45</sup> after 6 h of stimulation with PMA and ionomycin, followed by real-time PCR for quantification of ChIP-enriched DNA (primers sets, Supplementary Table 2). The antibodies used for ChIP were polyclonal rabbit anti-T-bet and anti-STAT3 (C-20; Santa Cruz).

Luciferase assay. The mouse $Rorc$ promoter was cloned into the pGL3-Basic plasmid upstream of the firefly luciferase gene (Promega). For analysis of the effects of T-bet and Runx1 on the $Rorc$ promoter activity, HEK293 cells were transfected via FuGene (Roche) with the $Rorc$ luciferase reporter plasmid and increasing concentrations of empty pCDNA3.1 vector (control) or pCDNA3.1 expressing Runx1 or T-bet, plus the pRL-TK renilla luciferase plasmid (Promega). For analysis of the dose-dependent effect of T-bet on Runx1 activity, HEK293 cells were transfected with the $Rorc$ luciferase reporter plasmid, Runx1, increasing concentration of T-bet, and pRL-TK. Firefly and renilla luciferase activity was measured 48 h after transfection with the Dual-Luciferase system (Promega).

Coimmunoprecipitation. HEK293 cells were transiently transfected via FuGene (Roche) with wild-type T-bet or T-bet point mutants, Myc-Runx1 or empty vector. Then, 48 h after transfection, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors). For coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous Runx1 and T-bet, differentiated T<sub>H</sub>0, T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>17 cells (3 × 10<sup>8</sup> to 4 × 10<sup>8</sup>) were stimulated for 6 h with PMA and ionomycin, then were lysed in the lysis buffer described above. Whole-cell lysates were immunoprecipitated at 4 °C with polyclonal rabbit anti-Runx1 (ab23980; Abcam) or rabbit polyclonal IgG (ab27472; Abcam) and beads coupled to protein A-sepharose. Immune complexes were analyzed by immunoblot with polyclonal rabbit anti-T-bet. In the reverse-coimmunoprecipitation assay, T-bet was immunoprecipitated with polyclonal rabbit anti-T-bet (H-210; Santa Cruz), and separated immune complexes were analyzed by immunoblot with polyclonal rabbit anti-Runx1. To minimize interference in the detection of Runx1 or T-bet by the heavy chains of the anti-T-bet used for immunoprecipitation, a TrueBlot ULTRA kit (eBioscience) was used for analysis of the Runx1–T-bet interaction in this reverse assay.

DNA-binding assay. DNA binding was assayed as described<sup>46</sup>. HEK293 cells were transfected with expression plasmid for Myc-tagged Runx1 in the presence or absence of increasing concentrations of T-bet expression vector. Nuclear protein (150 μg) was incubated for 1 h at 4 °C with a 50-nucleotide biotinylated probe containing wild-type or mutated T-bet- or Runx1-binding sites (at a site 2 kb upstream of exon 1 of $Rorc$) plus streptavidin-agarose (Invitrogen) in binding buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 5% glycerol, 1 mg/ml of BSA and 20 μg/ml of poly(dI:dC), plus protease inhibitors). Streptavidin-beads were washed in binding buffer, and bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblot for overexpressed Myc-tagged Runx1 and T-bet.

44. Bromberg, J.F. *et al.* Stat3 as an oncogene. *Cell* **98**, 295–303 (1999).

45. Cawley, S. *et al.* Unbiased mapping of transcription factor binding sites along human chromosomes 21 and 22 points to widespread regulation of noncoding RNAs. *Cell* **116**, 499–509 (2004).

46. Jones, D.C. *et al.* Regulation of adult bone mass by the zinc finger adapter protein Schnurri-3. *Science* **312**, 1223–1227 (2006).
