
# Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain: biosynthetic mechanisms in the limelight

**Vincenzo Di Marzo**

Studies of the endocannabinoid system in the CNS have been mostly focused on endocannabinoid receptors and inactivating mechanisms. Until recently, very little was known about the role of biosynthetic enzymes in endocannabinoid signaling. New data from the recent development of pharmacological and genetic tools for the study of these enzymes point to their fundamental role in determining where and when endocannabinoids function, and raise the possibility of new intriguing and previously unsuspected concepts in the general strategy of endocannabinoid signaling. However, even with these new tools, the cross-talk between anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol biosynthesis makes it difficult to dissect one from the other, and data will need to be interpreted with this in mind.

The endocannabinoid system is defined as the as the ensemble of cannabinoid CB₁ and CB₂ receptors; their endogenous agonists, the 'endocannabinoids' anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG); and enzymes regulating endocannabinoid tissue levels. Anandamide and 2-AG are poorly soluble in the hydrophilic extracellular matrix¹,². Consequently, their actions in the brain (Fig. 1) are local and strictly dependent on the reciprocal localization of their production site and receptors². Biochemical routes potentially used by cells to produce anandamide and 2-AG were identified after the discovery of these two compounds as endogenous cannabinoid receptor agonists in the mid-1990s¹. However, some of the biosynthetic enzymes involved in these routes were cloned only in the mid-2000s, and tools for their investigation have become available only very recently. Although these tools have opened the door for exciting new hypotheses and discoveries, experimental discrepancies have already arisen, likely due to the existence of crossroads among endocannabinoid metabolic pathways (Supplementary Fig. 1). Consideration of these intricate connections is critical in interpreting data and moving toward resolving paradoxical findings.

## Anandamide biosynthesis

Anandamide is produced from a small family of membrane phospholipids, the N-arachidonoylphosphatidylethanolamines (NArPE). However, the precise pathway through which this conversion occurs is controversial, and at least four alternative routes, described in Supplementary Figure 1a and reviewed in ref. 2, were suggested to occur in brain homogenates, with enzymes identified (although not always characterized from the molecular point of view) for each route. N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine-specific phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD) directly converts NArPE into anandamide. α,β-Hydrolase-4 (ABHD4) and glycerophosphodiesterase-1 (GDE1) catalyze the conversion of NArPE into lyso-NArPE first, then glycerophospho-anandamide and, finally, anandamide. Formation of lyso-NArPE has also been suggested to occur through the action of a soluble phospholipase A₂, followed by direct conversion into anandamide by a lyso-phospholipase D. Finally, an as-yet-unidentified phospholipase C, followed by the action of phosphatases (such as protein tyrosine phosphatase N22 or SH2 domain-containing inositol phosphatase), converts NArPE first into phosphoanandamide and then anandamide². Of these four biosynthetic routes, only the first two and the last one were shown to occur in intact neuronal cells.

These biosynthetic pathways may be able to substitute for one another. Accordingly, *Napepld*⁻/⁻ mice, lacking NAPE-PLD, do not show decreased anandamide³. Thus, it may be necessary to either knock out more than one enzyme at once or analyze *Napepld*⁻/⁻ mouse embryo anandamide levels very early after conception to see a reduction in tissue abundance of this compound. The former approach has been tried, and brain homogenates of double *Gde1*⁻/⁻ *Napepld*⁻/⁻ mice, unlike those from single *Gde1*⁻/⁻ and *Napepld*⁻/⁻ mice, show complete loss of conversion of NArPE congeners, the N-acylphosphatidylethanolamines, to N-acylethanolamines such as anandamide⁴. However, intact neurons from these double-knockout mice are still capable of converting N-acylphosphatidylethanolamines to N-acylethanolamines, thus confirming the existence of more NAPE-converting enzymes operating *in situ*, and likely *in vivo*, but not in brain homogenates⁴. Interestingly, the lack of NArPE hydrolysis into anandamide in *Gde1*⁻/⁻ *Napepld*⁻/⁻ mouse brain homogenates resulted in a reduction of basal brain anandamide amounts only when the mice were treated with an inhibitor of fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), the major catabolic enzyme for anandamide and its congeners. This suggests that the baseline turnover of endocannabinoids might mask the detection of the role of biosynthetic enzymes in endocannabinoid production, at least in these mutated mice⁴. Indeed, ‘activity-dependent’ rather than basal levels of anandamide should be measured in anandamide biosynthetic enzyme knockout mice because triggers for biosynthesis, such as elevation of intracellular Ca²⁺, membrane depolarization or stimulation of metabotropic receptors²,⁵, should unmask the role of biosynthetic enzymes over that of metabolic enzymes in the control of endocannabinoid levels. Finally, any study in which a potential anandamide-biosynthesizing enzyme is inhibited, either pharmacologically or genetically, will have to take into account the possibility that this might reduce other

Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, CNR, Pozzuoli, Italy. Correspondence should be addressed to V.D. (vdimarzo@icmib.na.cnr.it).

Published online 27 December 2010; doi:10.1038/nn.2720

PERSPECTIVE

Figure 1 Endocannabinoid metabolism in synaptic plasticity and neuroinflammation.

(a) When their receptor is presynaptic (as is often the case of CB₁ receptors), signals produced postsynaptically might act retrogradely to reduce neurotransmitter release in a way that is either 'homosynaptic metabotropic-driven' (1) or 'depolarization-driven' (that is, DSE or DSI) (2). One such signal is 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), as its Ca²⁺-sensitive biosynthetic machinery, comprising phospholipase Cβ (PLCβ) and diacylglycerol lipase-α (DAGLα), is located on the somatodendritic membrane near metabotropic receptors (for example, mGluR1, mGluR5 or M1 receptors), Gq/11 and Homer-1, as well as inositol trisphosphate (InsP₃) receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum. In retrograde signaling, the enzyme responsible for inactivation of the signal ('inactivating enzyme 1') should be presynaptic, as is the case of monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) for 2-AG. In 'heterosynaptic metabotropic-driven' retrograde signaling (3), endocannabinoids act at synapses near (usually within 20 μm) those from whose activity they are generated.

(b) In some pyramidal neurons of the CA1 region of the hippocampus, anandamide acts as a 'tonic' (that is, driven by neither depolarization nor metabotropic receptor activation) retrograde inhibitor of the release of GABA from certain inhibitory interneurons (1). In this case, chronic inactivity of interneurons results, through an unknown mechanism, in upregulation of postsynaptic fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), enhanced degradation of anandamide and inhibition of this tonic neuromodulatory effect, with subsequent disinhibition of some neurons⁴⁶. 2-AG can also act on the same postsynaptic neuron by which it has been generated and inhibit the activity of the latter through postsynaptic CB₁ activation and subsequent stimulation of G protein– coupled inward rectifier K⁺ channels, leading to hyperpolarization. This mechanism, known as 'long-lasting somatodendritic slow self-inhibition' (2), is triggered by excessive postsynaptic activity²² and terminated by postsynaptic inactivating enzymes ('inactivating enzyme 2'), such as α,β-hydrolase-6 (ref. 20) or FAAH. It is not clear whether 2-AG involved in SSI is of extracellular or intracellular origin. Finally, via CB₂ receptors, endocannabinoids can downregulate astrocyte and microglial cell overactivation during neuroinflammatory disorders, thus protecting them (3). However, endocannabinoids might also attract macrophages and T-lymphocytes into the brain after disruption of the blood brain barrier and contribute to sustained neuroinflammation². Blue dots, neuromodulatory mediator (for example, 2-AG); yellow dots, excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters; dark blue dots, anandamide; green ovals, CB₂ receptors; solid arrows, activation or movement; broken arrows, inhibition or inactivation; large yellow circles, secretory vesicles.

N-acylethanolamines, some of which are inactive at cannabinoid receptors but interact with other targets in the brain, such as the transient receptor potential of vanilloid type-1 (TRPV1) channel or the peroxisome proliferator-activating receptor-α²,⁶.

Using two types of antiserum against NAPE-PLD, four groups have independently reported the localization of this enzyme in the brain. In the hippocampus, NAPE-PLD is found in axons innervating both the pyramidal cells of the CA1 region and the granule cells of the dentate gyrus⁷⁻⁹. In the cerebellum, NAPE-PLD is found in Purkinje neurons, both pre- and postsynaptically, and in the somata of molecular-layer basket cells⁹,¹⁰. Further, in the hippocampus, NAPE-PLD is localized to the intracellular membrane cisternae of axonal Ca²⁺ stores⁷, whereas the CB₁ receptor is found in the axonal plasma membrane. This subcellular distribution does not support, at least in this brain area, the role of NAPE-PLD in CB₁-mediated retrograde synaptic signaling, a widely established function of endocannabinoids, which requires that the biosynthesizing enzyme be located postsynaptically (Fig. 1a). Instead, the presence of this enzyme in glutamatergic terminals was linked by some⁷,⁹ to the activation by certain NAPE-PLD products, such as anandamide, oleylethanolamide and linoleoylethanolamide, of TRPV1 channels, which also have been localized to both glutamatergic terminals and somata receiving glutamatergic afferents⁶,⁹. NAPE-PLD products might act as intracellular messengers, possibly by regulating intracellular Ca²⁺ by activating the intracellular binding site on TRPV1 (ref. 5), or as anterograde modulators at postsynaptic CB₁ and/or TRPV1 receptors¹¹. The latter possibility is suggested also by the mostly postsynaptic localization of FAAH, the major catabolic enzyme for anandamide and N-acylethanolamines². However, this evidence does not contradict the participation of anandamide in retrograde signaling (see Fig. 1b). Ultrastructural studies of other enzymes potentially involved in the biosynthesis of this endocannabinoid, such as ABHD4 or GDE1, should be performed and the

results carefully considered before drawing any such conclusion. Perhaps even more importantly, we should attempt to exploit a key convergence point upstream of all proposed biosynthetic pathways of anandamide: synthesis of NArPE. These phospholipids originate from the transfer of arachidonate from the *sn*-1 position of phospholipids to the nitrogen atom of phosphatidylethanolamines by an as yet uncharacterized Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent acyltransferase. Therefore, efforts aiming at cloning this enzyme should be fostered, since its exact localization is likely to provide crucial information on anandamide function in the brain.

### 2-AG biosynthesis

Investigating the regulation of 2-AG production would seem to be much simpler, compared to that of anandamide. Although several potential pathways exist for the formation of the direct biosynthetic precursors for 2-AG, the *sn*-1-acyl-2-arachidonoylglycerols (AARg) (Supplementary Fig. 1b), they are mostly produced by phospholipase Cβ (PLCβ) acting on membrane phosphatidylinositols, and then converted to 2-AG by the action of either of two isoforms of the same enzyme, the *sn*-1-diacylglycerol lipases α and β (DAGLα and DAGLβ)<sup>12</sup>. However, this simplicity can be deceiving. This pathway does not expressly synthesize 2-AG targeting cannabinoid receptors but also produces pools of 2-AG that do not act as signals for cannabinoid receptors, and it is important in intracellular signaling involving diacylglycerols and PLCβ. Moreover, although 2-AG biosynthetic mechanisms may seem simpler than those of anandamide, 2-AG seems to have several degradation mechanisms (see below), in contrast to anandamide, which is inactivated through one single enzyme in rodents<sup>6</sup>.

DAGLα and DAGLβ are activated by glutathione and sensitive to Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Their pattern of expression closely follows that of CB<sub>1</sub> receptors, as they were described to be localized (i) in the developing brain in terminal axons where CB<sub>1</sub> and endocannabinoids had been previously suggested to regulate axon elongation in an autacoid manner; and (ii) in the adult brain, postsynaptically, possibly to mirror the presynaptic localization of CB<sub>1</sub> in this case and to allow a retrograde neuromodulatory action of 2-AG<sup>12</sup> (Fig. 1a). Two independent reports described, in pyramidal neurons of the Ammon's horn and Purkinje neurons of the cerebellum, the ultrastructural localization of DAGLα in somatodendritic compartments juxtaposed to CB<sub>1</sub>-expressing axons<sup>13,14</sup>. In Purkinje cells, DAGLα is located very near the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR1 (ref. 15), the activation of which had been shown previously to trigger endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde signaling (known as metabotropic-driven endocannabinoid release<sup>16</sup>) (Fig. 1a). Likewise, in principal neurons of the telencephalon, tiny clusters of PLCβ1 were distributed in somatodendritic compartments positioned close to metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR5, muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1 and DAGLα<sup>17</sup>. In the prelimbic layers 5/6 of the mouse prefrontal cortex, presynaptic CB<sub>1</sub> faces postsynaptic mGluR5 receptors localized in the same dendritic processes as DAGLα<sup>18</sup>. Thus, metabotropic receptor–driven and G<sub>q/11</sub> protein–mediated activation of PLCβ, release of AARg and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP<sub>3</sub>) and activation of InsP<sub>3</sub> receptor–mediated mobilization of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> lead to DAGLα activation and release of 2-AG, which then acts at the corresponding presynaptic CB<sub>1</sub> receptors as a retrograde mediator to inhibit neurotransmitter release. This is facilitated by the close proximity of G<sub>q/11</sub>, PLCβ3 and the InsP<sub>3</sub> receptor-1 to DAGLα in Purkinje cell somatodendritic compartments, together with Homer-1 (ref. 15), a molecular scaffold providing the spatial organization that regulates postsynaptic signaling cascades<sup>19</sup>. Of the several enzymes proposed to inactivate 2-AG, the presynaptic monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) is the one most likely to intervene in the termination of this retrograde signaling

(Fig. 1a). In fact, the other enzyme, α,β-hydrolase-6, which was recently established to control 2-AG levels in neurons and microglia, is predominantly located on postsynaptic sites<sup>20</sup>.

The postsynaptic localization of DAGLα and the fact that CB<sub>1</sub> is not exclusively presynaptic also allow 2-AG to act on the same neurons by which it is produced. An example of this is ‘long-lasting somatodendritic slow self-inhibition’ (SSI), a CB<sub>1</sub>-mediated mechanism through which neurons regulate their own activity. This is typically observed in some inhibitory interneurons of the somatosensory cortex, but was also found in excitatory neocortical pyramidal neurons<sup>21,22</sup> (Fig. 1b). In both cases, DAGLα inhibitors were used to show that 2-AG was the endocannabinoid involved.

#### Knocking out the DAGL

Several studies carried out with inhibitors of DAGLs strongly suggested the involvement of these enzymes in most short- and long-term forms of retrograde, endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity (Fig. 1a) but could not tease out the role of the α from that of the β isoform. The β isoform, however, is the less abundant form in the adult rodent brain and was thought less likely to be involved<sup>12</sup>. Conclusive evidence for the exclusive involvement of DAGLα in endocannabinoid-dependent synaptic plasticity has come recently, with the development of DAGLα (*Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup>) and DAGLβ (*Daglb*<sup>−/−</sup>) knockout mice. Two independent studies<sup>23,24</sup> reported that only the DAGLα knockout mice show strongly impaired, if not completely absent, depolarization-induced inhibition of inhibitory synaptic transmission (DSI) onto hippocampal pyramidal cells, striatal medium spiny neurons and Purkinje cells. These mutant mice also show strongly reduced depolarization-induced suppression of excitatory synaptic transmission (DSE) from parallel fibers and climbing fibers onto Purkinje cells. *Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, but not *Daglb*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, also show a lack of metabotropic-induced endocannabinoid retrograde signaling in the cerebellum and hippocampus as well as of long-term depression (LTD) of inhibitory neurotransmission in the CA1 pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus<sup>23</sup>. 2-AG concentrations are substantially reduced (>80% inhibition) in the brain overall and in specific brain areas of *Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, which confirms that this enzyme serves to determine basal brain 2-AG levels. Interestingly, however, both groups also found a significant reduction of basal brain anandamide levels in *Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup>, but not *Daglb*<sup>−/−</sup>, mice<sup>21,22</sup>. Only one study<sup>24</sup> found *Daglb*<sup>−/−</sup> mice to have slightly impaired brain 2-AG levels (~30% reduction), and reported that *Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup>, but not *Daglb*<sup>−/−</sup>, mice show reduced arachidonic acid levels. These latter data suggest that (i) anandamide might still participate in retrograde signaling; (ii) DAGLβ might also contribute to basal 2-AG biosynthesis; and (iii) DAGLα might indirectly contribute to basal anandamide biosynthesis, possibly through enhancement of arachidonic acid release. Although the authors provided no explanation for the finding of reduced anandamide levels in *Dagla*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, it is known that (i) basal 2-AG levels in the brain are ~200 times those of anandamide; (ii) 2-AG hydrolysis by MAGL contributes to determining free arachidonic acid levels, unlike anandamide hydrolysis<sup>25</sup>; (iii) arachidonic acid can be rapidly re-esterified into phospholipids; and (iv) decrease of arachidonic acid esterified to phospholipids can result in reduced brain anandamide levels<sup>26</sup>. Therefore, if 2-AG biosynthesis is reduced congenitally, so is free arachidonic acid, which eventually results in lower amounts of *sn*-1-arachidonoyl-2-acyl-phospholipids, the ultimate biosynthetic precursors for anandamide (Supplementary Fig. 1b). These observations suggest the existence a network of interactions between the biosynthetic pathways of the two main brain endocannabinoids. Notably, knocking out *Dagla* also erases the activity-dependent formation of 2-AG (induced by a combination

PERSPECTIVE

Table 1 Chemical structures, pharmacodynamic properties and selectivity of existing synthetic DAGL inhibitors, and studies reporting their successful use in vitro or in vivo

| Inhibitor | IC₅₀ in enzymatic assays with human recombinant enzymes | In vitro inhibition of: | In vivo inhibition of: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| RHC80267 | 50–100 μM versus DAGLα and DAGLβ¹² | • DSI in the cerebellar cortex³⁵<br>• Metabotropic-driven retrograde neuromodulation³⁶, 38, 39<br>• Oligodendrocyte maturation⁴⁷ | No data |
| Tetrahydrolipstatin | 60–1,000 nM versus DAGLα and DAGLβ¹², 30, 32 | • DSI or DSE in hippocampal and cerebellar neurons and in dopaminergic neurons of the VTA³⁴, 35<br>• Metabotropic-driven retrograde neuromodulation⁴¹<br>• SSI of layer 5 low-threshold spiking interneurons²¹, 40<br>• Oligodendrocyte maturation⁴⁷ | • Descending nociceptive pathways upon injection into the periaqueductal gray matter⁴⁸ |
| 0-3841 | 160 nM versus DAGLα³⁰ | • SSI of layer 5 low-threshold spiking interneurons²¹<br>• Endocannabinoid-mediated counteraction of GABA release from striatal medium spiny neurons⁴⁴ | • Descending nociceptive pathways upon injection into the periaqueductal gray matter⁴⁸ |
| 0-3640 | 500 nM versus DAGLα³⁰ | • DSE and endocannabinoid protection against ischemia of dopaminergic neurons of the VTA⁴⁹ | No data |
| 0-5596 | 100 nM versus DAGLα³¹ | No data | • Palatable food intake in mice³¹ |
| OMDM-188 | 16 nM versus DAGLα³² | • SSI of layer 5 low-threshold spiking interneurons⁴⁰ | No data |

Note that some of these compounds (such as, the fluorophosphonates) belong to potentially toxic chemical classes, whereas others (such as tetrahydrolipstatin and its analogs) might not easily cross the intestine. Furthermore, the selectivity of these compounds toward other serine hydrolases has been only partially investigated. A possible way to carry out selectivity studies in a thorough and systematic way is by using activity-based protein profiling, as recently shown by Hoover et al.⁵⁰. IC₅₀, half-maximum inhibitory concentration; DSE, depolarization induced suppression of excitatory neurotransmission; DSI, depolarization induced suppression of inhibitory neurotransmission; SSI, slow self-inhibition; VTA, ventral tegmental area.

of mGluR1 activation and depolarization), but not of anandamide, in cerebellar slices²³. This is in agreement with the previous finding²⁷ that kainate-induced biosynthesis of 2-AG, but not anandamide, is impaired in the hippocampus of Gq/₁₁ mice, which lack the metabotropic, DAGL-mediated component of 2-AG biosynthesis. Thus, basal and activity-dependent synthesis of anandamide and 2-AG are mediated by different pathways and might act differently in the brain.

The development of Dagla⁻/⁻ and Daglb⁻/⁻ mice also enabled confirmation of the role of 2-AG in functions other than retrograde signaling. These mutated mice seem to have no developmental defects²³, although more in-depth studies will be required to draw any conclusion as to the possible subtle effects of genetic DAGL deletion on brain development. However, DAGL knockouts do show reduced adult neurogenesis in both the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone²⁴. Interestingly, although genetic deletion of either DAGL isoform results in ~50% less cell proliferation in the hippocampus, only DAGLα seems to be important for neurogenesis in the subventricular zone²⁴. These data confirm and extend the important role previously described for both CB₁ and CB₂ receptors and DAGLα in neuronal stem cell differentiation and proliferation²⁸, 2⁹.

### First and second generation DAGL inhibitors

Before the development of mice in which one of the Dagl genes is inactivated, the role of the two DAGLs had been investigated by using small molecule inhibitors of these enzymes. Several studies using the first generation of DAGL blockers or newer, more potent inhibitors of DAGL (although they are not yet selective for either of the two isoforms³⁰–³²), together with inhibitors of FAAH and, more recently, MAGL, have suggested that 2-AG, rather than anandamide, is the primary actor in the retrograde control of LTD or other forms of associative synaptic plasticity (such as those triggered by metabotropic receptor activation) in several brain areas, as well as in SSI of inhibitory neurons of the somatosensory cortex²¹, 3³–3⁸ (Table 1). The advent of DAGL knockout mice has not rendered the use of pharmacological tools in studies of endocannabinoid function obsolete. Rather, DAGL inhibitors provide a critical counterpart, allowing the examination of acute versus congenital inhibition, thus avoiding the compensatory mechanisms that can occur in transgenic mice. For example, as discussed below, the comparison between data obtained with DAGL inhibitors and Dagla⁻/⁻ mice might suggest the existence of different pools of 2-AG mediating different types of synaptic plasticity.

Although conclusions of studies using DAGL inhibitors have been confirmed by studies using Dagla⁻/⁻ and Daglb⁻/⁻ mice, DSI in the hippocampus remains an exception. Because inhibition of MAGL, but not FAAH, prolongs DSI, it is thought that 2-AG mediates this phenomenon³³, 3⁵, 3⁷. However, pharmacological inhibition of DAGL by the inhibitor RHC80267 does not impair hippocampal DSI³⁸–⁴⁰, whereas it blocks LTD of inhibitory synapses in the same hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons³⁸, 3⁹. In addition, although extracellular application of another inhibitor, tetrahydrolipstatin, blocks hippocampal DSI³⁶, intracellular postsynaptic application of this compound does not⁴⁰, 4¹, although it effectively blocks other forms of hippocampal endocannabinoid signaling⁴¹. Finally, bath application of the new, ultrapotent DAGL inhibitor OMDM-188 (half-maximum inhibitory concentration 16 nM)³² does not affect hippocampal DSI at unitary synapses between cholecystokinin-expressing interneurons and CA1 pyramidal neurons, though it effectively blocks SSI⁴⁰.

Box 1 Some crucial future steps for fully understanding endocannabinoid biosynthesis

- Cloning the Ca²⁺-dependent acyl transferase, the enzyme catalyzing the biosynthesis of N-arachidonoylphosphatidylethanolamine and involved in all anandamide biosynthetic pathways yet proposed
- Electron microscopy studies with α,β-hydrolase-4 and glycerophosphodiesterase-1 to see whether their ultrastructural localization is compatible with a role of anandamide as retrograde signal at CB₁ receptors, or as a postsynaptic mediator at TRPV1 channels
- Assessing the possible role of α,β-hydrolase-6 in SSI to determine whether this postsynaptic enzyme regulates 2-AG levels in this form of neuromodulation
- Investigating whether FAAH inhibitors can restore DSI in Dagla⁻/⁻ mice, to assess whether anandamide can be involved in this short-term form of synaptic plasticity
- Comparing observations obtained in double Dagla⁻/⁻ Daglb⁻/⁻ mice with those upon treatment with the available DAGL inhibitors
- Developing isoform-selective DAGL blockers and selective inhibitors of anandamide biosynthetic enzymes
- Investigating the intracellular trafficking of de novo biosynthesized 2-AG using cell imaging experiments with endogenous pools of a fluorescently tagged, nonhydrolyzable 2-AG analog, formed immediately after its release from opportunistically modified biosynthetic precursors
- Investigating the presence of adiposomes in neurons and checking whether they are involved in storing de novo biosynthesized endocannabinoids
- Studying the effect of repeated postsynaptic stimulation on the sensitivity of DSI and LTD to DAGL inhibitors, to investigate the hypothesis of endocannabinoid stores

Thus, DAGL inhibitors seem to differentially affect distinct forms of synaptic inhibition in the hippocampus. Likewise, cerebellar DSE is only affected by DAGL inhibition under certain conditions, whereas cerebellar LTD is always blocked by DAGL inhibitors³⁵,³⁶,⁴². It is true that DSI and DSE are quite different from LTD or other forms of associative plasticity, inasmuch as they are triggered by postsynaptic depolarization and strong Ca²⁺ entry rather than by activation of postsynaptic metabotropic receptors, Gq/11 proteins, PLCβ, InsP₃ signaling and intracellular Ca²⁺ mobilization. Therefore, it is perhaps not so surprising that they do not show the same pharmacology, and it was initially hypothesized that 2-AG acting as the retrograde messenger for DSI and DSE is produced from putative non-DAGL-mediated mechanisms². But if this is the case, how can the recent results of experiments using Dagla⁻/⁻ mice, showing that this enzyme is necessary for hippocampal DSI and cerebellar DSE, be explained? Might anandamide participate in these forms of short-term synaptic plasticity? The results of experiments with FAAH inhibitors argue against this possibility³⁵. However, such inhibitors might instead restore DSI under conditions in which baseline DSI is negligible, such as in Dagla⁻/⁻ mice, where only anandamide is left to activate CB₁ receptors. Also, none of the DAGL inhibitors developed so far were designed to discriminate between the α and β isoforms of the enzyme. Thus, a more appropriate comparison between results obtained upon acute versus congenital DAGL blockade must await the development of either double Dagla Daglb knockout mice or isoform-selective inhibitors.

The discrepancies observed between the effects of Dagla knockout and DAGL inhibitors on hippocampal DSI might also be explained by differential effects of these two types of manipulations on de novo biosynthesized 2-AG ('on-demand' synthesis) or on the content of a putative 'pre-stored' 2-AG. Constitutive Dagla knockout is more likely to affect both pools, whereas acute pharmacological DAGLα inhibition would likely only reduce the amounts of de novo biosynthesized 2-AG. Accordingly, in neuroblastoma cells, only the elevation of 2-AG by a calcium ionophore is blocked by DAGLα inhibitors, which are instead ineffective at reducing baseline 2-AG¹²,³⁰⁻³². If depolarization-induced release of a putative preformed pool of 2-AG underlies hippocampal DSI⁴¹, and on-demand biosynthesis of endocannabinoids instead occurs during LTD and other forms of endocannabinoid-mediated associative plasticity, this would explain why Dagla knockout, but not pharmacological DAGL inhibition, affects the former type of synaptic plasticity.

A recent observation might indirectly suggest the existence of preformed pools of endocannabinoids, although not necessarily of 2-AG. Using a chemically modified, fluorescent form of anandamide, it was shown that intracellular lipid droplets, known as adiposomes, constitute a dynamic reservoir for the sequestration of extracellular anandamide⁴³. Using confocal microscopy and biochemical techniques, the authors found that FAAH is also spatially associated with adiposomes, and that cells with a larger adiposome compartment show enhanced catabolism of anandamide. Although these findings suggest that adiposomes may be important in the degradation of anandamide, it is possible that these organelles might be used also as a way to store preformed endocannabinoids and to release them extracellularly, perhaps by connecting with the plasma membrane, through a mechanism mirroring the one seemingly involved in the inactivation of anandamide⁴³. Evidence for the presence of adiposomes specifically in neurons, and for their participation in 2-AG sequestration, should therefore be sought.

There is also indirect evidence arguing instead for the involvement of DAGLα and on-demand biosynthesis of 2-AG in DSI. DAGLα is sensitive to high Ca²⁺ concentrations, such as those occurring after postsynaptic depolarization, and its overexpression in cells elevates ionomycin-induced, but not basal, 2-AG¹². In conclusion, studies aimed at directly investigating the intracellular trafficking of de novo biosynthesized 2-AG are clearly necessary. For example, strategies could be pursued allowing the identification, in cell imaging experiments, of endogenous pools of a fluorescently tagged, nonhydrolyzable 2-AG analog, formed immediately after its release from opportunistically modified phospholipid or AArG precursors previously incorporated into cells and still recognized as substrates by PLCβ1 and DAGLα. Furthermore, it would be interesting to check whether the sensitivity of various types of endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic signaling to DAGLα inhibitors changes after reiteration of the stimulus causing endocannabinoid release. In fact, repeated stimulation should lead to depletion of the putative stores of 2-AG and, therefore, restore sensitivity of endocannabinoid signaling (that is, in DSI or DSE) to DAGLα inhibition.

Conclusions: can we really dissect anandamide from 2-AG function Endocannabinoid biosynthesis has recently been thrust into the limelight by the development of selective pharmacological and genetic tools targeting biosynthetic enzymes. The development of Dagla⁻/⁻ and Daglb⁻/⁻ mice and of ever more potent and selective DAGL inhibitors will allow future studies to further distinguish the roles of 2-AG and anandamide in the CNS. These tools should be now complemented by the development of genetic and pharmacological tools that selectively impair anandamide biosynthesis. However, even with such tools, the cross-talk between anandamide and 2-AG biosynthesis makes it extremely difficult to cleanly dissect one from the other, and data will need to be interpreted with this in mind. Apart from the yet to be fully clarified, tonic positive influence of 2-AG biosynthesis on anandamide production suggested by data in Dagla⁻/⁻ mice²³,²⁴, recent studies have shown that elevation of anandamide levels might strongly affect 2-AG

PERSPECTIVE

signaling. Activation of postsynaptic TRPV1 channels by anandamide was shown to inhibit DAGLα activity in striatal medium spiny neurons and, hence, to counteract 2-AG-mediated, and mGluR5-triggered, retrograde inhibition of GABA release onto these neurons⁴⁴. This effect was suggested to be due to TRPV1-mediated depletion of glutathione, a compound previously found to stimulate the activity of DAGLα¹². Conversely, 2-AG in sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglion might, by activating CB₁ receptors, negatively or positively control the activity of TRPV1, and this in turn might be associated with modulation of anandamide biosynthesis⁶. Thus, neurons have developed mechanisms through which anandamide and 2-AG can reciprocally control their biosynthesis, possibly as a way of fine-tuning endocannabinoid tone. That these two mediators are not merely redundant agonists at the same receptors is strongly supported not only by the finding of their interconnected biosynthetic routes and of potential alternative targets for anandamide, but also by the recent demonstration, obtained by comparing the phenotypes of FAAH and MAGL knockout mice, that chronic elevation of anandamide and 2-AG produce profoundly different effects on endocannabinoid signaling and animal behavior⁴⁵. Future studies (see Box 1) with new or yet-to-be-developed tools targeting endocannabinoid biosynthesis should, therefore, be aimed at fully understanding why, unlike most signaling systems, at least two endogenous agonists, rather than just one, are required to regulate cannabinoid receptor activity in the brain.

Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Neuroscience website.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author thanks T. Bisogno and S. Petrosino for their help. Support from the US National Institutes of Health (grant DA-009789) is also acknowledged.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The author declares no competing financial interests.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience/.

Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/.

---

1. Devane, W.A. *et al.* Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. *Science* **258**, 1946–1949 (1992).
2. Di Marzo, V. Targeting the endocannabinoid system: to enhance or reduce? *Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.* **7**, 438–455 (2008).
3. Leung, D., Saghatelian, A., Simon, G.M. & Cravatt, B.F. Inactivation of N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D reveals multiple mechanisms for the biosynthesis of endocannabinoids. *Biochemistry* **45**, 4720–4726 (2006).
4. Simon, G.M. & Cravatt, B.F. Characterization of mice lacking candidate N-acyl ethanolamine biosynthetic enzymes provides evidence for multiple pathways that contribute to endocannabinoid production in vivo. *Mol. Biosyst.* **6**, 1411–1418 (2010).
5. van der Stelt, M. *et al.* Anandamide acts as an intracellular messenger amplifying Ca2+ influx via TRPV1 channels. *EMBO J.* **24**, 3026–3037 (2005).
6. Starowicz, K., Nigam, S. & Di Marzo, V. Biochemistry and pharmacology of endovanilloids. *Pharmacol. Ther.* **114**, 13–33 (2007).
7. Nyilas, R. *et al.* Enzymatic machinery for endocannabinoid biosynthesis associated with calcium stores in glutamatergic axon terminals. *J. Neurosci.* **28**, 1058–1063 (2008).
8. Egertová, M., Simon, G.M., Cravatt, B.F. & Elphick, M.R. Localization of N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD) expression in mouse brain: a new perspective on N-acylethanolamines as neural signaling molecules. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **506**, 604–615 (2008).
9. Cristino, L. *et al.* Immunohistochemical localization of anabolic and catabolic enzymes for anandamide and other putative endovanilloids in the hippocampus and cerebellar cortex of the mouse brain. *Neuroscience* **151**, 955–968 (2008).
10. Suárez, J. *et al.* Immunohistochemical description of the endogenous cannabinoid system in the rat cerebellum and functionally related nuclei. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **509**, 400–421 (2008).
11. Cristino, L. *et al.* Immunohistochemical localization of cannabinoid type 1 and vanilloid transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 receptors in the mouse brain. *Neuroscience* **139**, 1405–1415 (2006).

12. Bisogno, T. *et al.* Cloning of the first sn1-DAG lipases points to the spatial and temporal regulation of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. *J. Cell Biol.* **163**, 463–468 (2003).
13. Katona, I. *et al.* Molecular composition of the endocannabinoid system at glutamatergic synapses. *J. Neurosci.* **26**, 5628–5637 (2006).
14. Yoshida, T. *et al.* Localization of diacylglycerol lipase-α around postsynaptic spine suggests close proximity between production site of an endocannabinoid, 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol, and presynaptic cannabinoid CB₁ receptor. *J. Neurosci.* **26**, 4740–4751 (2006).
15. Nomura, S., Fukaya, M., Tsujioka, T., Wu, D. & Watanabe, M. Phospholipase Cβ3 is distributed in both somatodendritic and axonal compartments and localized around perisynapse and smooth endoplasmic reticulum in mouse Purkinje cell subsets. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **25**, 659–672 (2007).
16. Maejima, T. *et al.* Synaptically driven endocannabinoid release requires Ca²⁺-assisted metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 1 to phospholipase Cβ4 signaling cascade in the cerebellum. *J. Neurosci.* **25**, 6826–6835 (2005).
17. Fukaya, M. *et al.* Predominant expression of phospholipase Cbeta1 in telencephalic principal neurons and cerebellar interneurons, and its close association with related signaling molecules in somatodendritic neuronal elements. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **28**, 1744–1759 (2008).
18. Lafourcade, M. *et al.* Molecular components and functions of the endocannabinoid system in mouse prefrontal cortex. *PLoS ONE* **2**, e709 (2007).
19. Roloff, A.M., Anderson, G.R., Martemyanov, K.A. & Thayer, S.A. Homer 1a gates the induction mechanism for endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity. *J. Neurosci.* **30**, 3072–3081 (2010).
20. Marrs, W.R. *et al.* The serine hydrolase ABHD6 controls the accumulation and efficacy of 2-AG at cannabinoid receptors. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 951–957 (2010).
21. Marinelli, S. *et al.* The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol is responsible for the slow self-inhibition in neocortical interneurons. *J. Neurosci.* **28**, 13532–13541 (2008).
22. Marinelli, S., Pacioni, S., Cannich, A., Marsicano, G. & Bacci, A. Self-modulation of neocortical pyramidal neurons by endocannabinoids. *Nat. Neurosci.* **12**, 1488–1490 (2009).
23. Tanimura, A. *et al.* The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol produced by diacylglycerol lipase α mediates retrograde suppression of synaptic transmission. *Neuron* **65**, 320–327 (2010).
24. Gao, Y. *et al.* Loss of retrograde endocannabinoid signaling and reduced adult neurogenesis in diacylglycerol lipase knock-out mice. *J. Neurosci.* **30**, 2017–2024 (2010).
25. Nomura, D.K. *et al.* Monoacylglycerol lipase regulates 2-arachidonoylglycerol action and arachidonic acid levels. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **18**, 5875–5878 (2008).
26. D'Asti, E. *et al.* Maternal dietary fat determines metabolic profile and the magnitude of endocannabinoid inhibition of the stress response in neonatal rat offspring. *Endocrinology* **151**, 1685–1694 (2010).
27. Wetschureck, N. *et al.* Forebrain-specific inactivation of Gq/G11 family G proteins results in age-dependent epilepsy and impaired endocannabinoid formation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 5888–5894 (2006).
28. Harkany, T. *et al.* The emerging functions of endocannabinoid signaling during CNS development. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* **28**, 83–92 (2007).
29. Gonçalves, M.B. *et al.* A diacylglycerol lipase-CB2 cannabinoid pathway regulates adult subventricular zone neurogenesis in an age-dependent manner. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* **38**, 526–536 (2008).
30. Bisogno, T. *et al.* Development of the first potent and specific inhibitors of endocannabinoid biosynthesis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1761**, 205–212 (2006).
31. Bisogno, T. *et al.* Synthesis and pharmacological activity of a potent inhibitor of the biosynthesis of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. *ChemMedChem* **4**, 946–950 (2009).
32. Ortar, G. *et al.* Tetrahydrolipstatin analogues as modulators of endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol metabolism. *J. Med. Chem.* **51**, 6970–6979 (2008).
33. Straiker, A. *et al.* Monoacylglycerol lipase limits the duration of endocannabinoid-mediated depolarization-induced suppression of excitation in autaptic hippocampal neurons. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **76**, 1220–1227 (2009).
34. Melis, M. *et al.* Prefrontal cortex stimulation induces 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol-mediated suppression of excitation in dopamine neurons. *J. Neurosci.* **24**, 10707–10715 (2004).
35. Szabo, B. *et al.* Depolarization-induced retrograde synaptic inhibition in the mouse cerebellar cortex is mediated by 2-arachidonoylglycerol. *J. Physiol. (Lond.)* **577**, 263–280 (2006).
36. Hashimoto-dani, Y., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Maejima, T., Fukami, K. & Kano, M. Pharmacological evidence for the involvement of diacylglycerol lipase in depolarization-induced endocannabinoid release. *Neuropharmacology* **54**, 58–67 (2008).
37. Hashimoto-dani, Y., Ohno-Shosaku, T. & Kano, M. Presynaptic monoacylglycerol lipase activity determines basal endocannabinoid tone and terminates retrograde endocannabinoid signaling in the hippocampus. *J. Neurosci.* **27**, 1211–1219 (2007).
38. Chevaleyre, V. & Castillo, P.E. Heterosynaptic LTD of hippocampal GABAergic synapses: a novel role of endocannabinoids in regulating excitability. *Neuron* **38**, 461–472 (2003).
39. Edwards, D.A., Kim, J. & Alger, B.E. Multiple mechanisms of endocannabinoid response initiation in hippocampus. *J. Neurophysiol.* **95**, 67–75 (2006).

40. Min, R. *et al.* Diacylglycerol lipase is not involved in depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition at unitary inhibitory connections in mouse hippocampus. *J. Neurosci.* **30**, 2710–2715 (2010).

41. Edwards, D.A., Zhang, L. & Alger, B.E. Metaplastic control of the endocannabinoid system at inhibitory synapses in hippocampus. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 8142–8147 (2008).

42. Safo, P.K. & Regehr, W.G. Endocannabinoids control the induction of cerebellar LTD. *Neuron* **48**, 647–659 (2005).

43. Oddi, S. *et al.* Evidence for the intracellular accumulation of anandamide in adiposomes. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* **65**, 840–850 (2008).

44. Maccarrone, M. *et al.* Anandamide inhibits metabolism and physiological actions of 2-arachidonoylglycerol in the striatum. *Nat. Neurosci.* **11**, 152–159 (2008).

45. Schlosburg, J.E. *et al.* Chronic monoacylglycerol lipase blockade causes functional antagonism of the endocannabinoid system. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 1113–1119 (2010).

46. Kim, J. & Alger, B.E. Reduction in endocannabinoid tone is a homeostatic mechanism for specific inhibitory synapses. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 592–600 (2010).

47. Gomez, O. *et al.* The constitutive production of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol participates in oligodendrocyte differentiation. *Glia* **58**, 1913–1927 (2010).

48. Maione, S. *et al.* Elevation of endocannabinoid levels in the ventrolateral periaqueductal grey through inhibition of fatty acid amide hydrolase affects descending nociceptive pathways via both cannabinoid receptor type 1 and transient receptor potential vanilloid type-1 receptors. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **316**, 969–982 (2006).

49. Melis, M. *et al.* Protective activation of the endocannabinoid system during ischemia in dopamine neurons. *Neurobiol. Dis.* **24**, 15–27 (2006).

50. Hoover, H.S., Blankman, J.L., Niessen, S. & Cravatt, B.F. Selectivity of inhibitors of endocannabinoid biosynthesis evaluated by activity-based protein profiling. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **18**, 5838–5841 (2008).
