
A Methylaspartate Cycle in Haloarchaea  
Maria Khomyakova et al.  
Science 331, 334 (2011);  
DOI: 10.1126/science.1196544  

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by [clicking here](https://www.science.org/action/showCitFormats?doi=10.1126/science.1196544).

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines [here](https://www.science.org/about/policies/reprints-permissions).

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of November 12, 2012):

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html)

Supporting Online Material can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/01/18/331.6015.334.DC1.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/01/18/331.6015.334.DC1.html)

A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#related](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#related)

This article cites 25 articles, 12 of which can be accessed free:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#ref-list-1)

This article has been cited by 2 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#related-urls](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/331/6015/334.full.html#related-urls)

This article appears in the following subject collections:  
Microbiology  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/microbio](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/microbio)

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2011 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title *Science* is a registered trademark of AAAS.

RESEARCH

12. K. Schroder, J. Tschopp, *Cell* 140, 821 (2010).
13. F. Martinon, K. Burns, J. Tschopp, *Mol. Cell* 10, 417 (2002).
14. B. Faustin et al., *Mol. Cell* 25, 713 (2007).
15. J. M. Bruey et al., *Cell* 129, 45 (2007).
16. T. Tanabe et al., *EMBO J.* 23, 1587 (2004).
17. J. S. Damiano, V. Oliveira, K. Welsh, J. C. Reed, *Biochem. J.* 381, 213 (2004).
18. S. B. Hake et al., *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 7716 (2000).
19. L. C. Hsu et al., *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 105, 7803 (2008).
20. R. Sun et al., *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95, 10866 (1998).
21. J. L. Poyet et al., *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 28309 (2001).
22. C. Blasig et al., *J. Virol.* 71, 7963 (1997).
23. P. Monini et al., *Blood* 93, 4044 (1999).
24. J. Pauk et al., *N. Engl. J. Med.* 343, 1369 (2000).
25. T. Hlaing et al., *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 9230 (2001).
26. G. A. Manji et al., *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 11570 (2002).
27. J. P. Ting et al., *Immunity* 28, 285 (2008).
28. J. B. Johnston et al., *Immunity* 23, 587 (2005).
29. B. Damania, J. C. Alwine, *Genes Dev.* 10, 1369 (1996).

30. We thank S. Krall for assistance with tissue culture, Y. Matsuzawa for plasmid preparation, and D. Dittmer for proofreading. Supported by NIH grants DE018281 and CA096500, American Heart Association grant 0640041N, and a Burroughs Wellcome Fund grant (B.D.); NIH grants AI057157, AI077437, and CA156330 and the UNC University Cancer Research Fund (J.P.Y.T.); NIH grants AI56324 and AI191967 (J.C.R.); NIH training grants T32-AI007419 and T32-AI007001 (S.M.G.); the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America and NIH grant 5R21CA131645 (B.K.D.); and NIH grant F32-AI78735 (J.A.W.). B.D. is a Leukemia & Lymphoma Society Scholar and Burroughs Wellcome Fund Investigator in Infectious Disease. The NLRP1 and mutant NLRP1 expression plasmids as well as purified GST-NLRP1 protein were obtained from J.C.R. and require a material transfer agreement. The NLRP3, NOD1, NOD2, mutant NOD2, ASC, procaspase-1, and pro–Il-1β expression plasmids were obtained from J.P.Y.T. and also require a material transfer agreement. B.D., J.P.Y.T., and S.M.G. have filed a provisional patent on the KSHV Orf63 protein and/or any peptides derived from this protein in treatment for human disease.

Supporting Online Material  
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/331/6015/330/DC1  
Materials and Methods  
Figs. S1 to S13  

25 October 2010; accepted 20 December 2010  
10.1126/science.1199478


# A Methylaspartate Cycle in Haloarchaea

Maria Khomyakova,* Özlem Bükmez, Lorenz K. Thomas, Tobias J. Erb,† Ivan A. Berg‡

Access to novel ecological niches often requires adaptation of metabolic pathways to cope with new environments. For conversion to cellular building blocks, many substrates enter central carbon metabolism via acetyl–coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Until now, only two such pathways have been identified: the glyoxylate cycle and the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway. Prokaryotes in the haloarchaea use a third pathway by which acetyl-CoA is oxidized to glyoxylate via the key intermediate methylaspartate. Glyoxylate condensation with another acetyl-CoA molecule yields malate, the final assimilation product. This cycle combines reactions that originally belonged to different metabolic processes in different groups of prokaryotes, which suggests lateral gene transfer and evolutionary tinkering of acetate assimilation. Moreover, it requires elevated intracellular glutamate concentrations, as well as coupling carbon assimilation with nitrogen metabolism.

Many life forms exist under extreme physical or chemical conditions and have evolved unique adaptations that allow their cellular machinery to function in these habitats. Haloarchaea (Halobacteriaceae, also known as the halobacteria) represent a well-defined archaeal group adapted to growth at high salinity (3 to 5 M). Life in this harsh environment requires special mechanisms to avoid water loss by osmosis and to maintain steep ion concentration gradients across the cell membrane. Haloarchaea live in photic, (micro)oxic environments rich in organic nutrients; consequently, most haloarchaea are able to use light energy and can be cultivated on media containing organic compounds including amino acids like leucine and lysine, fatty acids, and alcohols (1). These substrates, as well as polyhydroxyalkanoates (haloarchaeal energy- and carbon-storage polymers), are metabolized through acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), which requires a reaction sequence (anaplerotic) for assimilation. Strict anaerobes use pyruvate synthase for this purpose; however, this enzyme does not operate under oxic conditions, and aerobic organisms require a dedicated pathway for acetyl-CoA assimilation. The classical example is the glyoxylate cycle, which bypasses the decarboxylation steps of the citric acid cycle. Another anaplerotic pathway is the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway, which has been suggested for *Protaminobacter rubrum* (now *Methylobacterium extorquens*) (28). However, *Methylobacterium* does not have glutamate mutase and methylaspartate ammonia-lyase genes (29) and uses the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway for acetyl-CoA assimilation (10, 11, 30).

---

**Fig. 1. Anaplerotic pathways of acetyl-CoA assimilation.** (A) The glyoxylate cycle and the citric acid cycle, (B) the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway, and (C) the proposed methylaspartate cycle. The key reactions of the anaplerotic pathways are shown in red. A pathway similar to the methylaspartate cycle has already been suggested for *Protaminobacter rubrum* (now *Methylobacterium extorquens*) (28). However, *Methylobacterium* does not have glutamate mutase and methylaspartate ammonia-lyase genes (29) and uses the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway for acetyl-CoA assimilation (10, 11, 30).

---

*Mikrobiologie, Fakultät Biologie, Universität Freiburg, Schänzlestrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.*

*Present address: Institute of Microbiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospect 60-letiya Oktyabrya 7/2, 117312 Moscow, Russia.*

†Present address: Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

‡To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ivan.berg@biologie.uni-freiburg.de
is the glyoxylate cycle (2). Its first key enzyme, isocitrate lyase (ICL), in cooperation with enzymes of the citric acid cycle, transforms acetyl-CoA into glyoxylate. The second key enzyme, malate synthase, condenses glyoxylate and a second acetyl-CoA molecule to yield malate, which can then be used as a starter molecule in biosynthesis (Fig. 1A).

Although some haloarchaea, e.g., *Haloferax volcanii*, use the glyoxylate cycle for acetate assimilation (3–8), many other species are capable of growing on acetate in the absence of ICL, e.g., *Haloarcula marismortui* (3, 7, 9). The only alternative to the glyoxylate cycle known so far is the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway (Fig. 1B) (10, 11). However, *H. marismortui* does not have the minimum set of genes required for an operating ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway (11), and activity of its key enzyme crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase could not be detected in extracts of acetate-grown cells (12). Therefore, *H. marismortui* must use a third strategy for acetate assimilation. Because it has genes encoding biotin-dependent carboxylases, we initially assumed that acetyl-CoA is assimilated by an incomplete 3-hydroxypropionate cycle (13), but acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity in cell extracts was very low, and essential enzymes for such a modified 3-hydroxypropionate cycle were also absent (Table 1).

To elucidate this unknown pathway, we compared the proteomes of acetate- and succinate-grown cells (fig. S1). Several proteins were identified that were up-regulated during growth on acetate (table S1). Notably, three proteins—methylaspartate ammonia-lyase, an enoyl-CoA hydratase of the *maoC* family, and a lyase of the CitE family—were encoded by the same gene cluster that also harbors genes for a coenzyme

B<sub>12</sub>-dependent glutamate mutase (Fig. 2B). These genes overlap or have intergenic regions that are too small to harbor a promoter, and a putative TATA box has been identified only upstream of the first gene of the cluster (fig. S2). Using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we showed that these genes are cotranscribed in acetate-grown cells (Fig. 2C), which indicates that they constitute a metabolic operon for acetate assimilation. Notably, another gene encoding a putative family III CoA transferase was located upstream of this operon and oriented in the opposite direction.

We hypothesized a pathway for acetate assimilation in *H. marismortui* (methylaspartate cycle), in which one molecule of acetyl-CoA is initially transformed into glutamate through reactions of the citric acid cycle and glutamate dehydrogenase (Fig. 1C). Glutamate is rearranged to methylaspartate, via enzymes of the identified acetate assimilation operon, with subsequent elimination of ammonia to yield mesaconate. The latter compound is activated to mesaconyl-CoA by CoA transfer, hydrated to β-methylmalyl-CoA, and split into propionyl-CoA and glyoxylate (Fig. 2A). Propionyl-CoA carboxylation leads to methylmalonyl-CoA and subsequently to the citric acid cycle intermediate succinyl-CoA, which closes the cycle, whereas glyoxylate condensation with another acetyl-CoA molecule yields the final assimilation product malate (Fig. 1C).

All enzyme activities of the proposed methylaspartate cycle were demonstrated in extracts of acetate-grown cells at levels sufficient to explain the observed growth rate. The key activities were down-regulated severalfold in succinate-grown cells (Table 1), which matched expectations from the proteome data. Only glutamate mutase activity was elusive; this enzyme is notoriously unstable and difficult to measure (14). Because methylaspartate ammonia-lyase acting on the product of this mutase was highly active and its gene is located in the same operon, glutamate mutase likely is also active during acetate assimilation (Fig. 2). Extracts of acetate-grown cells converted [1-<sup>14</sup>C]mesaconyl-CoA via [14C]β-methylmalyl-CoA to glyoxylate and [14C]propionyl-CoA at a specific rate of 14 nmol min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> protein (Fig. 3, A to D). Free mesaconate was similarly converted into propionyl-CoA and glyoxylate when succinyl-CoA was added as CoA donor (Fig. 3, E to H). This implies the presence of an active CoA transferase forming mesaconyl-CoA; we postulate that this enzyme is encoded by the putative family III CoA transferase gene located directly upstream of the acetate assimilation operon (Fig. 2). In contrast, no conversion was observed with succinate-grown cells or ICL-positive, acetategrown *H. volcanii*. The propionyl-CoA formed was further converted by cell extracts to succinyl-CoA via biotin-dependent propionyl-CoA carboxylase and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (Table 1). Propionyl-CoA carboxylation was completely inhibited by avidin, a specific inhibitor of biotin-dependent enzymes. Moreover, *H. marismortui* expressed a biotinylated protein during growth on acetate, as shown by biotin staining of cell extracts (fig. S3). Its mass matches the expected mass of RnAC0002 (67.5 kD), which contains a biotin carboxyl carrier domain.

To study the proteins involved in acetate assimilation, the putative β-methylmalyl-CoA lyase (rnAC0690) was heterologously overproduced in *Escherichia coli* and reconstituted to obtain active haloarchaeal protein (15, 16). Attempts to reconstitute the putative mesaconyl-CoA hydratase (rnAC0688) and the putative CoA transferase (rnAC0683) were unsuccessful. RnAC0690 catalyzed the reversible cleavage of β-methylmalyl-CoA to propionyl-CoA and glyoxylate, as well as the reversible cleavage of (S)-maly-CoA to acetyl-CoA and glyoxylate with some (S)-maly-CoA thioesterase activity (see supporting online text and table S2). It was noteworthy that *H. marismortui* encodes a paralog of RnAC0690 (RnAC1965, 36% sequence identity) that is similar to haloarchaeal malate synthase from *H. volcanii* (81% identity) (5). The recombinant RnAC1965 indeed had malate synthase activity; however, detailed studies surprisingly showed that this enzyme is in fact a bifunctional (S)-maly-CoA lyase/thioesterase, which catalyzes the malate synthase reaction in two steps. Similarly to the RnAC0690 reaction, acetyl-CoA is first condensed reversibly with glyoxylate to (S)-maly-CoA. In contrast to RnAC0690, RnAC1965 then effectively hydrolyzes (S)-maly-CoA to (S)-malate and CoA (fig. S4, table S3, and supporting online text). CoA ester hydrolysis was highly specific for (S)-maly-CoA; β-methylmalyl-CoA was not used. Such high substrate specificity of RnAC1965 may prevent formation of a possible dead-end product β-methylmalate

### Table 1. Enzyme activities in haloarchaea. The values are average values of at least three independent determinations. Note that the minimal in vivo activity of enzymes in the methylaspartate cycle required to explain the observed growth rate is 12.5 nmol min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> protein [for calculation, see (12)].

| Enzyme | **Haloarcula marismortui** | **Haloferax volcanii** |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Acetate | Succinate | Acetate |
| Citrate synthase | 190 ± 30 | 90 ± 10 | 600 ± 50 |
| Isocitrate dehydrogenase (NADP) | 680 ± 30 | 660 ± 40 | 360 ± 20 |
| Isocitrate lyase | <0.5 | <0.5 | 65 ± 20 |
| Malate synthase | 80 ± 15 | 4 ± 2 | 230 ± 10 |
| Crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase | <0.5 | <0.5 | <0.5 |
| Malonyl-CoA reductase | <0.5 | <0.5 | <0.5 |
| Glutamate dehydrogenase, NADP | 280 ± 40 | 310 ± 50 | 70 ± 15 |
| Methylaspartate ammonia-lyase | 260 ± 50 | <1 | <0.5 |
| Succinyl-CoA:mesaconate CoA-transferase | 13 ± 2 | 1 ± 0.5 | <0.5 |
| Mesaconyl-CoA hydratase (F/R)* | 50 ± 10/210 ± 30 | <0.5/<1 | <0.5 |
| β-Methylmalyl-CoA lyase (F/R)* | 50 ± 10/250 ± 40 | <0.5/3 ± 1 | 70 ± 20/180 ± 30** |
| Acetyl-CoA carboxylase | 3 ± 1 | 4 ± 2 | <1 |
| Propionyl-CoA carboxylase | 12 ± 2 | 9 ± 3 | 10 ± 2 |
| Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase | 14 ± 3 | 4 ± 1 | 7 ± 1 |

*F, reaction was measured in the forward direction; R, reaction was measured in the reverse direction; values are shown sequentially in the table.
**This activity is probably due to the β-methylmalyl-CoA lyase activity of haloarchaeal maly-CoA lyase/thioesterase (apparent malate synthase).
in vivo. Apparently, although both paralogs have similar substrates and (still) can catalyze the same reactions, each enzyme is clearly optimized to its respective function as “β-methylmalyl-CoA lyase” (RrnAC0690) or “apparent malate synthase” (RrnAC1965). This resembles the situation in *Rhodobacter sphaeroides*, where the malate synthase reaction also proceeds in two steps, catalyzed by two distinct, yet highly similar, enzymes (17).

A functioning methylaspartate cycle is expected to require high intracellular glutamate concentration, because the affinity for substrate (*K*<sub>m</sub>) of methylaspartate ammonia-lyase for methylaspartate in *H. marismortui* was determined as 26 ± 5 mM, and the equilibrium of the preceding glutamate mutase reaction is not on the side of the product methylaspartate (*K*<sub>m</sub> = 0.093 at 30°C) (18). Indeed, cytoplasmic glutamate concentration in acetate-grown *H. marismortui* cells was 35 ± 5 mM (compared with 6 ± 1 mM in acetate-grown, ICL-positive *H. volcanii*). The methylaspartate cycle may be regarded as a glutamate overflow mechanism. This feature is probably advantageous for a halophilic organism, because glutamate is a well-known osmolyte used by many halophiles (1, 7). Furthermore, it is the precursor for the intracellular antioxidant γ-glutamylcysteine (which is found in haloarchaea in the millimolar range) (19) and for extracellular poly-γ-glutamate also produced by some haloarchaea (20). Poly-γ-glutamate plays a role as a protectant compound for microorganisms living in harsh environments but also appears to serve as a storage compound for carbon, nitrogen, and energy (21). However, glutamate is also the universal donor for α-amino groups of amino acids, and its biosynthesis requires ammonium. Therefore, ammonium uptake may regulate

**Fig. 2.** Reactions and the genes and enzymes involved in key steps of the methylaspartate cycle, by which glutamate is converted to glyoxylate and propionyl-CoA. (A) Reactions and intermediates of the conversion. MamAB, glutamate mutase; Mal, methylaspartate ammonia-lyase; Mct, succinyl-CoA:mesaconate CoA-transferase; Mch, mesaconyl-CoA hydratase; McI, β-methylmalyl-CoA lyase; Succ-CoA, succinyl-CoA; Succ, succinate; Glu, glutamate; Masp, methylaspartate; Mes, mesaconate; MesCoA, mesaconyl-CoA; β-MMalCoA, β-methylmalyl-CoA; Glyox, glyoxylate; PropCoA, propionyl-CoA. (B) An overview of the genomic region of *H. marismortui* coding for the corresponding enzymes. The accession numbers are shown (rrnAC0###) (9). (C) Agarose gel analysis of PCR products amplified by RT-PCR. The results of the amplification are shown for genomic DNA (control) and for cDNA. The positive signal for cDNA means the presence of mRNA containing the corresponding (intergenic) fragment. Amplification of the intergenic region between the genes rrnAC0662 and rrnAC0663 was used to verify the complete removal of genomic DNA from the RNA preparation, because those genes are oriented in different directions. As a positive control, the intragenic region of constitutively expressed isocitrate dehydrogenase (ICDH, rrnAC3419) was amplified.

**Fig. 3.** Conversion of mesaconate and mesaconyl-CoA to propionyl-CoA and glyoxylate by cell extracts of acetate-grown *H. marismortui* analyzed by reversed-phase C<sub>18</sub> high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). (A to D) [1-<sup>14</sup>C]Mesaconyl-CoA conversion, immediately after addition of the extract (final concentration 4.3 mg protein ml<sup>−1</sup> in assay) (A) and after 2 min of incubation (B and C). Substrate and products were detected by measurement of ultraviolet absorbance at 260 nm (A and B) or <sup>14</sup>C by using flow-through scintillation counting (C). (D) Time course of mesaconyl-CoA consumption and product formation. (E to H) Mesoanate conversion to propionyl-CoA in the presence of succinyl-CoA visualized by measurement of absorbance at 260 nm, immediately after addition of the extract (final concentration 4.0 mg protein ml<sup>−1</sup> in assay) (E) and after 10 min of incubation (F). (G) Control without mesaconate after 10 min of incubation, and (H) time course of succinyl-CoA consumption and product formation. The rate of the mesaconyl-CoA conversion to propionyl-CoA and glyoxylate was 14 ± 3 nmol min<sup>−1</sup> mg<sup>−1</sup> protein, as measured by both propionyl-CoA formation (by means of HPLC) and glyoxylate detection with phenylhydrazine. The experiment was repeated three times using different amounts of cell extract to demonstrate a linear protein dependency of the reaction rate. For experimental details, see (12). MesCoA, mesaconyl-CoA; β-mm-CoA, β-methylmalyl-CoA; prop-CoA, propionyl-CoA; succ-CoA, succinyl-CoA.

ulate the methylaspartate cycle (see supporting online text).

Life in salt lakes is characterized by rare, ephemeral blooms of microorganisms (1), and under these circumstances, haloarchaea may accumulate substantial amounts of polyhydroxyalkanoate (22). Therefore, during starvation, having an anaplerotic acetyl-CoA assimilation pathway could be important for survival. In fact, most of the haloarchaeal genomes have genes for either the glyoxylate cycle (mostly clade II haloarchaea), the methylaspartate cycle (mostly clade I haloarchaea), or even both (for details, see figs. S5 and S6), which indicates their genetic potential to assimilate acetyl-CoA. As a proof of principle, we demonstrated characteristic reactions of the methylaspartate cycle in *Natrialba magadii* (clade I), but in contrast, key enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle were not detected (table S4).

Haloarchaea probably evolved from methanogens, whereupon they had to switch from a strictly anaerobic chemolithoautotrophic to an aerobic (photo)organoheterotrophic life-style (23, 24). This switch was accompanied by a massive gene gain from the Bacteria domain (23). Haloarchaea that use the glyoxylate cycle have presumably acquired its key enzyme, ICL, by lateral gene transfer (5). Likewise, all key enzymes of the proposed methylaspartate cycle were derived via lateral gene transfer from bacterial genomes, where they originally participated in completely different metabolic processes (see supporting online text and figs. S7 to S10). This suggests that evolutionary tinkering (25) of acetate assimilation has occurred in haloarchaea, by which the methylaspartate

---

**References and Notes**

1. A. Oren, *Halophilic Microorganisms and Their Environments* (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 2002).
2. H. L. Kornberg, H. A. Krebs, *Nature* **179**, 988 (1957).
3. A. Oren, P. Gurevich, *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **130**, 91 (1995).
4. J. A. Serrano, M. Camacho, M. J. Bonete, *FEBS Lett.* **434**, 13 (1998).
5. J. A. Serrano, M. J. Bonete, *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1520**, 154 (2001).
6. C. Bräsen, P. Schönheit, *Arch. Microbiol.* **175**, 360 (2001).
7. M. Falb *et al.*, *Extremophiles* **12**, 177 (2008).
8. M. J. Danson, H. J. Lamble, D. W. Hough, in *Archaea: Molecular and Cellular Biology*, R. Cavicchioli, Ed. (ASM Press, Washington, DC, 2007), pp. 260–287.
9. N. S. Baliga *et al.*, *Genome Res.* **14**, 2221 (2004).
10. T. J. Erb *et al.*, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **104**, 10631 (2007).
11. T. J. Erb, G. Fuchs, B. E. Alber, *Mol. Microbiol.* **73**, 992 (2009).
12. Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online.
13. J. Zarzycki, V. Brecht, M. Müller, G. Fuchs, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **106**, 21317 (2009).
14. W. Buckel, G. Bröker, H. Bothe, A. J. Pierik, B. T. Golding, in *Chemistry and Biochemistry of B₁₂*, R. Banerjee, Ed. (Wiley, New York, 1999), pp. 757–781.
15. H. Connaris, J. B. Chaudhuri, M. J. Danson, D. W. Hough, *Biotechnol. Bioeng.* **64**, 38 (1999).
16. U. Johnsen *et al.*, *J. Biol. Chem.* **284**, 27290 (2009).
17. T. J. Erb, L. Frerichs-Revermann, G. Fuchs, B. E. Alber, *J. Bacteriol.* **192**, 1249 (2010).
18. W. Buckel, S. L. Miller, *Eur. J. Biochem.* **164**, 565 (1987).
19. L. Malki *et al.*, *J. Bacteriol.* **191**, 5196 (2009).
20. F. F. Hezayen, B. H. A. Rehm, R. Eberhardt, A. Steinbüchel, *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* **54**, 319 (2000).
21. T. Candela, A. Fouet, *Mol. Microbiol.* **60**, 1091 (2006).
22. J. G. Lillo, F. Rodriguez-Valera, *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **56**, 2517 (1990).
23. S. P. Kennedy, W. V. Ng, S. L. Salzberg, L. Hood, S. DasSarma, *Genome Res.* **11**, 1641 (2001).
24. É. Bapteste, C. Brochier, Y. Boucher, *Archaea* **1**, 353 (2005).
25. F. Jacob, *Science* **196**, 1161 (1977).
26. J. E. Tuininga *et al.*, *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 21023 (1999).
27. M. Daugherty, V. Vonstein, R. Overbeek, A. Osterman, *J. Bacteriol.* **183**, 292 (2001).
28. S. Shimizu, S. Ueda, K. Sato, in *Microbial Growth on C₁ Compounds*, R. L. Crawford, R. S. Hanson, Eds. (American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC, 1984), pp. 113–117.
29. S. Vuilleumier *et al.*, *PLoS ONE* **4**, e5584 (2009).
30. R. Peyraud *et al.*, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **106**, 4846 (2009).
31. The authors thank G. Fuchs, Freiburg, for his constant support and the innumerable discussions and suggestions during this work and for his critical reading of the manuscript and N. Gad'on and C. Ebenau-Jehle, Freiburg, for growing cells and maintaining the laboratory. The work of M.K. was supported by the Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst. This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Evonik-Degussa GmbH.

---

**Supporting Online Material**

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/331/6015/334/DC1  
Materials and Methods  
SOM Text  
Figs. S1 to S10  
Tables S1 to S7  
References  

16 August 2010; accepted 30 November 2010  
10.1126/science.1196544

---

**Induction of Colonic Regulatory T Cells by Indigenous Clostridium Species**

Koji Atarashi,$^{1\ast}$ Takeshi Tanoue,$^{1\ast}$ Tatsuichiro Shima,$^{2}$ Akemi Imaoka,$^{2}$ Tomomi Kuwahara,$^{3}$ Yoshika Momose,$^{4}$ Genhong Cheng,$^{5}$ Sho Yamasaki,$^{6}$ Takashi Saito,$^{6}$ Yusuke Ohba,$^{7}$ Tadatsugu Taniguchi,$^{1}$ Kiyoshi Takeda,$^{8}$ Shohei Hori,$^{9}$ Ivaylo I. Ivanov,$^{10}$ Yoshinori Umesaki,$^{2}$ Kikuji Itoh,$^{4}$ Kenya Honda$^{1,11\dagger}$

CD4⁺ T regulatory cells (*Tregs*), which express the Foxp3 transcription factor, play a critical role in the maintenance of immune homeostasis. Here, we show that in mice, *Tregs* were most abundant in the colonic mucosa. The spore-forming component of indigenous intestinal microbiota, particularly clusters IV and XIVa of the genus *Clostridium*, promoted *Treg* cell accumulation. Colonization of mice by a defined mix of *Clostridium* strains provided an environment rich in transforming growth factor-β and affected Foxp3⁺ *Treg* number and function in the colon. Oral inoculation of *Clostridium* during the early life of conventionally reared mice resulted in resistance to colitis and systemic immunoglobulin E responses in adult mice, suggesting a new therapeutic approach to autoimmunity and allergy.

The mammalian gastrointestinal tract harbors numerous species of commensal bacteria that constitute the “microbiota.” The microbiota interacts with the host immune system, inducing the accumulation of several different lymphocyte populations at mucosal sites (1, 2). Recent reports have suggested that the induction of each lymphocyte subset may be regulated by a distinct component of the microbiota. For instance, segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) strongly induce intestinal T helper 17 (*Th*17) cells, which play a role in host resistance against intestinal pathogens and promote systemic autoimmunity (3–5).

---

**CD4⁺ regulatory T cells (*Tregs*) expressing the transcription factor forkhead box P3 (Foxp3)** are present at higher frequencies in the gut lamina propria (LP), particularly in the colon, than in other organs (6) (fig. S1). It has been

1Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. ²Yakult Central Institute for Microbiological Research, Tokyo 186-8650, Japan. ³Department of Molecular Bacteriology, Institute of Health Biosciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. ⁴Department of Veterinary Public Health, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan. ⁵Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. ⁶Laboratory for Cell Signaling, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. ⁷Laboratory of Pathophysiology and Signal Transduction, Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. ⁸Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. ⁹Research Unit for Immune Homeostasis, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. ¹⁰Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. ¹¹Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology (PRESTO), Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.  
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: kenya@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp
