
SCIENCE CHINA
Life Sciences

• REVIEWS •

January 2011 Vol.54 No.1: 68–74
doi:10.1007/s11427-010-4116-z

---

# Host cellular signaling induced by influenza virus

DAI XinXian${}^{1\dagger}$, ZHANG LiShu${}^{1\dagger*}$ & HONG Tao${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$College of Life Science & Bioengineering, School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China;  
${}^{2}$Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100052, China

Received March 20, 2010; accepted September 16, 2010

---

A wide range of host cellular signal transduction pathways can be stimulated by influenza virus infection. Some of these signal transduction pathways induce the host cell’s innate immune response against influenza virus, while others are essential for efficient influenza virus replication. This review examines the cellular signaling induced by influenza virus infection in host cells, including host pattern recognition receptor (PRR)-related signaling, protein kinase C (PKC), Raf/MEK/ERK and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling, and the corresponding effects on the host cell and/or virus, such as recognition of virus by the host cell, viral absorption and entry, viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) export, translation control of cellular and viral proteins, and virus-induced cell apoptosis. Research into influenza virus-induced cell signaling promotes a clearer understanding of influenza virus-host interactions and assists in the identification of novel antiviral targets and antiviral strategies.

**influenza virus, virus-host interaction, signal transduction**

---

Citation: Dai X X, Zhang L S, Hong T. Host cellular signaling induced by influenza virus. Sci China Life Sci, 2011, 54: 68–74, doi:10.1007/s11427-010-4116-z

---

Influenza, which causes thousands of deaths and huge economic losses every year, remains a significant public health problem worldwide. Influenza viruses exhibit high genetic variability. Rapidly generated virus variants can evade host acquired immunity against previously encountered strains. Large amounts of vaccines are produced to deal with seasonal influenza every year, but these vaccines cannot combat all influenza virus variants. It would be more problematic if there are newly emerging variants, such as the H1N1 variant that emerged in 2009. In influenza virus-infected cells, a series of signaling cascades can be stimulated at each stage of infection, some of which are important components of antiviral immunity, while others are essential for sufficient viral replication. Therefore, intracellular signaling cascades might be suitable targets for new antiviral strategies.

Generally, the signaling molecules in the host cell during viral infection can be classified into three groups: the receptors on the cell membrane, the adaptor molecules including kinases in the cytoplasm, and the transcription factors in the nucleus. During the infection of influenza virus, specific host receptors can recognize the viral proteins and/or genomic RNA and thus initiate a series of signal transductions. In this review we will discuss the main findings relating to the cellular signaling induced by influenza virus infection.

## 1 Recognition of viral components and innate immune signaling

### 1.1 Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-activated protein kinase (PKR) and downstream signaling

Protein kinase (PKR) which plays roles in the normal con-

---

† Contributed equally to this work  
* Corresponding author (email: lshzhang@bjtu.edu.cn)

© The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com  
life.scichina.com www.springer.com/scp

control of cell growth and differentiation was first discovered for its ability to phosphorylate translation initiation factor eIF2 [1]. PKR can be induced by interferon (IFN) and activated by dsRNA, cytokines, growth factors and stress signals. PKR is an important sentinel kinase for viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) [2]. Influenza dsRNA activates PKR and triggers antiviral responses. A recent study indicated that the ribonucleoprotein of influenza B virus can also activate PKR and induce cellular antiviral responses [3]. At the onset of viral infection, activated PKR phosphorylates eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2), which inhibits cellular and viral protein synthesis [4,5]. Using PKR-deficient mice, Balachandran *et al.* [6] showed that PKR prevents viral replication by concomitantly assisting in the production of autocrine IFN. This finding indicated that PKR is an essential component of innate immunity that acts early in host defense, prior to the onset of IFN counteraction and the acquired immune response. PKR is also involved in influenza virus-induced apoptosis. Influenza virus infection induces augmented Fas expression; accordingly, transfecting the mutant PKR suppresses the augmented Fas expression and increases cell resistance to death upon virus infection [7]. The inducible overexpression of functional PKR in murine fibroblasts sensitizes cells to apoptosis induced by influenza virus and cells expressing a dominant-negative variant of PKR are completely resistant to influenza virus-induced apoptosis [8]. The influenza virus NS1 protein can directly bind to dsRNA or PKR to block the activation of PKR and evade the cellular antiviral effects induced by it [9,10].

### 1.2 Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and downstream signaling

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are type I integral membrane glycoproteins and play crucial roles in early host defense against invading pathogens [11]. Currently, 11 members of the TLR family have been identified in mammals. TLR3/7/8, which are localized to the endosome membrane, are involved in viral pathogen recognition and the induction of type I IFNs [12]. TLR3 mediates dsRNA recognition and TLR7/8 mediates single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) recognition. The TLR family signaling cascades involve numerous downstream molecules, including MyD88, TAK1, TAB1, TAB2, TRAF6 and NF-κB [13,14]. In lung epithelial cells, the expression of TLR3 can be positively regulated by influenza A virus and dsRNA [15]. The TLR/TRIF pathway is essential for dsRNA and influenza A virus-induced NF-κB and IRF/ISRE activation [15]. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family members, especially Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK function importantly for antiviral immunity in influenza-infected cells. It has been shown that p38 MAPK and/or JNK are critical for the expression of several proinflammatory cytokines as well as apoptosis regulation [16–19]. Treatment with dsRNA and

Influenza A virus infection strongly upregulates the phosphorylation of three MAPK family members, JNK, p38, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2, and enhances interleukin (IL)-8 as well as RANTES production [18]. In infected MDCK cells, the accumulation of viral RNA strongly activates JNK, which correlates with the induction of AP-1-dependent gene expression. Blockage of JNK signaling results in the reduction of AP-1 activity and the impairment of IFN-β gene expression [19]. Recent studies found that the MAPK-activated kinase RSK2 also plays a role in the cellular antiviral responses. The knockdown of RSK2 enhanced viral polymerase activity, the production of influenza virus, and reduced the activity of NF-κB and β IFN-dependent promoters [20]. p38 MAPK and/or JNK are showed to be activated by viral RNA, but whether and how TLRs interact with them is still to be elucidated. Some *in vivo* experiments have shown that influenza virus infection upregulates TLR2 expression, but its function remains unclear [21,22]. TLR signaling can be negatively regulated by activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3) [23]. When challenged with a sublethal dose of PR8 influenza virus, ATF3-knock-out mice were found to be delayed in body weight recovery and showed higher titers of the serum neutralizing antibody against PR8 five months postinfection compared with wild-type mice.

#### 1.3 Retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like receptors (RLRs) and downstream signaling

The retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like receptors (RLRs) are another major receptor system for detecting RNA viruses. RLRs consist of three members: RIG-I, MDA5 and LGP2. RIG-I and MDA5 are important cytoplasmic viral RNA sensors that play important roles in antiviral innate immunity. RIG-I and MDA5 recognize different viral RNAs. Along with the adaptor protein MAVS, they induce the activation of IRF-3/7 and NF-κB, which leads to the induction of IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines [24–26]. RIG-I is considered the central regulator of influenza A virus-induced expression of antiviral cytokines in human lung epithelial cells [27]. The overexpression of *RIG-I* gene constructs leads to a dramatic enhancement of IFN-β promoter-driven transcription in influenza A virus-infected epithelial cells. Dominant-negative *RIG-I* gene constructs inhibit influenza A virus-induced IFN-β promoter activity. IFN-α and Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-α can enhance the expression of the components of RIG-I signaling pathways and enhance the expression of antiviral cytokines [28,29].

#### 1.4 Non-structural protein and the innate immune response

Influenza infection induces IFN gene expression and other innate immune responses, but influenza viruses have also evolved numerous strategies for evading host immunity.

Non-structural proteins play important roles in these processes.

Non-structural protein 1 (NS1), a viral antagonist of IFN expression and its downstream effects, is the most important non-structural protein of influenza virus [30]. NS1 binds to dsRNA and sequesters dsRNA from recognition by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) [9, 10, 31]. Furthermore, NS1 interferes with viral ssRNA that contains free 5′ triphosphate groups, a pattern recognized by PRRs [32]. It was also reported that NS1 affects viral RNA recognition by directly binding to RIG-I and suppresses IFN-β production consequently [33–35]. NS1 can also specifically block TRIM25-mediated RIG-I ubiquitination and repress RIG-I signaling [36]. In addition, NS1 can interact with the molecules involved in the transcription and translation of type I IFNs, repressing type I IFN production [37].

The PB1-F2 protein, another non-structural protein of influenza virus, has several functions in influenza virus infection. PB1-F2 can affect influenza virus-induced apoptosis. PB1-F2 localizes at the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes and mediates higher susceptibility to influenza virus-induced apoptosis [38]. PKC-mediated PB1-F2 phosphorylation enhances the induction of apoptosis in monocytes [39], which may be caused by the interaction of PB1-F2 with the mitochondrial membrane proteins ANT3 and VDAC1. This interaction leads to cytochrome C release via holes in the mitochondrial membrane [40]. PB1-F2 is important for the pathogenicity of influenza virus, as indicated by the results of previously reported animal experiments [41, 42]. PB1-F2 can upregulate the expression of cytokines in infected lungs. This upregulation may be induced by the interaction between PB1 and PB1-F2, which leads to high viral polymerase activity and viral RNA accumulation in the infected cells [43].

## Protein kinase C (PKC) and influenza virus entry

Protein kinase C (PKC) is part of a large family of serine/threonine kinases activated by many extracellular signals. PKCs are involved in a multitude of physiological processes [44]. The close relationship between PKC and sodium ion transport, important for maintaining the low pH in the endosome, has been confirmed by the findings of numerous studies [45–48]. PKC has also been shown to be critical for the entry of enveloped viruses (receptor-mediated endocytosis) [49]. Upon influenza virus infection, the hemagglutinin rapidly activates PKC [46, 50] and it has been shown that a specific inhibitor of PKC prevents influenza virus replication by inhibiting the entry of the virus [51]. Similar results have also been reported in cells expressing a phosphorylation-deficient form of PKC [52]. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that PKC plays an important role in influenza virus entry.

## The Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) export

The Raf/MEK/ERK signal transduction cascade belongs to the family of MAPK cascades. Raf/MEK/ERK signaling leads to stimulus-specific changes in gene expression, alterations in cell metabolism, or the induction of programmed cell death. Thus, Raf/MEK/ERK signaling controls cell differentiation and proliferation [53]. Ribonucleoprotein (RNP) formation and nuclear export are important steps in the life cycle of influenza virus. Influenza virus matrix protein and temperature both play important roles in these processes [54, 55]. Among the different signalings activated by influenza virus, Raf/MEK/ERK cascade is required for an efficient nuclear RNP export as indicated by several studies [56, 57]. Inhibition of Raf signaling results in nuclear retention of viral RNP and the concomitant inhibition of virus production [57]. Influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) membrane accumulation and its tight association with lipid-raft domain trigger the activation of MAPK cascades via PKC-α activation and RNP export [58]. HA membrane accumulation is enhanced by the higher polymerase activity of influenza virus, resulting in upregulation of the MAPK cascade and more efficient nuclear RNP-export, along with virus production [59].

## Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e (eIF4E) and viral protein translation

Influenza virus can efficiently shut off host cell protein synthesis and selectively translate viral RNA. The synthesis of viral mRNA is primed by short capped oligonucleotides which are scavenged from host pre-mRNAs [60, 61]. De-capped host mRNA would probably be more susceptible to degradation. The NS1 protein of influenza virus can also inhibit the nuclear export of host mRNA and the splicing of pre-mRNA [62, 63]. Sequences within the 5′ untranslated regions (UTRs) play a critical role in the selective translation of influenza viral mRNA [64]. The NS1 protein functions to increase the initiation rate of translation of viral mRNAs by interacting with the 5′-terminal conserved sequences of viral mRNAs [65–68]. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF) 4G I, a subunit of cap-binding complex eIF4F, and poly(A) binding protein 1 (PABP1) are identified to be cellular targets of NS1 that support the role of NS1 in protein translation [69, 70]. By binding to eIF4GI, NS1 recruits eIF4F to the 5′ UTR of viral mRNA and activates translation of viral mRNA. eIF4E which is another subunit of eIF4F is dephosphorylated during influenza infection. eIF4E dephosphorylation which may lead to a decrease of its cap-binding activity may contribute to the influenza viruses-induced inhibition of the cellular mRNA translation [71]. In virus-infected cells, activation of PKR, an inter-

feron-induced kinase, may induce global inhibition of
translation initiation through phosphorylation of the eIF2α.
To maintain a certain level of cellular protein translation,
influenza viruses utilize at least two strategies, involving
cellular p58IPK (Protein Kinase Inhibitor p58) and viral pro-
tein NS1, to block PKR activity [72, 73].

Influenza viruses carry out temporal regulation of their
own viral gene expression [74, 75]. Nucleoprotein (NP) and
NS1 protein are highly expressed at early times after infec-
tion, while HA, neuraminidase (NA) and matrix protein
(M1) are expressed mainly at late times after infection. It is
proposed that the translational efficiency of viral mRNA is
subjected to regulation and the 5' UTR of influenza virus
mRNAs may be important for this translation control.
However, the exact mechanisms have not been identified
[76].

### 5 Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway and viral infection

The activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
signaling is a hallmark of cell survival [77, 78], and plays
important roles in a wide range of physiological processes.
Recent studies found that PI3K/Akt signaling is a strategy
employed by viruses to slow down apoptosis and prolong
viral replication during acute and persistent infections [79].
In influenza A virus-infected cells, activation of PI3K is
mediated by the viral NS1 protein, which binds directly to
the p85β regulatory subunit and causes the PI3K-dependent
phosphorylation of Akt [80–84]. Akt directly phosphorylates
caspase 9, thereby inhibiting the activation of this apoptotic
protease. Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3β, another
apoptosis modulator, is also phosphorylated and inactivated
by Akt. Consequently, viral-induced apoptosis is suppressed
by activated Akt signaling [83, 85]. Akt signaling also pro-
tects influenza-infected cells from fast apoptosis through the
p53-dependent pathway. In influenza-infected CV-1 and
MDCK cells, nuclear accumulation and phosphorylation of
p53 show low constitutive levels at early time of infection,
whereas both are markedly elevated at the late infection
stage (17–20 h postinfection) [86]. The PI3K/Akt pathway
was recently reported to negatively regulate the JNK path-
way via ASK1, thereby inhibiting JNK-dependent, Bax-
mediated apoptosis during influenza A virus infection [87].
Besides promoting efficient viral replication by sup-
pressing apoptotic signaling, the PI3K/Akt pathway has
other important roles in influenza A virus propagation
[79, 88]. Before influenza A virus NS1 protein was found to
activate PI3K/Akt signaling, PI3K was reportedly activated
in response to dsRNA and mediated the activation of tran-
scription factor IFR-3. Blocking PI3K signaling has been
shown to impair the dimerization of IFR-3 and reduce
IRF-3-dependent promoter activity. Furthermore, PI3K

regulates an early step of viral entry [89]. In A549 cells, it
was reported that the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is acti-
vated independently of viral attachment and entry, and spe-
cific inhibitors of the PI3K/Akt pathway significantly sup-
press viral RNA synthesis and protein expression [90]. PI3K/Akt signaling includes many downstream effector
molecules associated with cell survival, proliferation, dif-
ferentiation, morphology and apoptosis. The suppressed
viral propagation caused by blocking PI3K/Akt signaling
may be a composite effect, and further studies focusing on
the downstream processes of the PI3K pathway are neces-
sary.

### 6 The complexity of the influenza virus-host interaction

Influenza virus-induced signaling involves a complex net-
work of signaling and effector molecules (Figure 1). Some
signaling pathways play multiple roles in viral infection.
NF-κB, generally considered a key transcription factor in
the production of type-I IFN and other antiviral cytokines
[6, 15, 91–95], has been identified as a prerequisite for in-
fluenza virus infection [96]. NF-κB signaling can regulate
influenza virus RNA synthesis. Knocking-down of p65
NF-κB molecule reduces influenza virus replication and
viral RNA synthesis [97]. In addition, the NF-κB-dependent
induction of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-induc-
ing ligand (TRAIL) and Fas/FasL is crucial for efficient
influenza virus propagation [98]. Similarly, the viral RNA
recognition receptor RIG-I, important for the production of
antiviral cytokines [28, 99–101], is also involved in the
SOCS1- and SOCS3-mediated negative regulation of the
innate immune response [102]. The RIG-I/MAVS signaling
pathway activates caspase-3, suggesting a role for this re-
ceptor beyond the innate cytokine response [103].

### 7 Conclusion

Influenza viruses afflict millions of people each year and
cause serious medical complications. Because of the high
genetic variability of influenza viruses, the development of
effective vaccines against pandemic influenza is still an
ongoing challenge. Some mutant influenza viruses are re-
sistant to conventional antiviral reagents. In recent years,
the highly pathogenic avian influenza A virus H5N1 and
influenza A virus H1N1 have presented new threats. In in-
fected cells, viral-induced signaling pathways are required
for effective antiviral responses or for sufficient viral repli-
cation. Receptor-mediated viral RNA recognition by the
host plays a central role in antiviral signaling responses. It
activates a series of kinases and important transcription
factors, as well as induces the expression of antiviral genes,

NA                                                                 HA

Viral RNA accumulation

NS1

NS1

TRIM25

PI3K

PKR

TLR3/7/8

RIG-I/MDA5

ASK1

M1

HA

NP

IKK

p65/p50

Akt

MEK

mTOR

GSK3β

Caspase3

ERK

TNF-α expression,

IL1

RANTES, TNF-α

P38

MKK3/6

MKK4/7

JNK

ATF-2

c-JUN

IFNβ, RANTES,

apoptosis regulation

IFNβ, cytokine,

apoptosis regulation

IFNβ, apoptosis regulation

Translation control Apoptosis regulation vRNP export

Direct activation Indirect activation Inhibition

Figure 1 Host cellular signaling induced by influenza virus. Akt, protein kinase B (PKB); ATF, activating transcription factor; ASK, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase; IkB, inhibitor of kB; IRF, interferon regulatory factor; MDA5, melanoma differentiation associated gene 5; MKK, mitogen-activated kinase kinase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; Raf, rapid accelerating fibrosarcoma; TBK, TANK-binding kinase; TRIM, tripartite motif.

including IFNs and other cytokines. Besides viral RNA, some viral proteins can also induce the innate immune response through antiviral signaling pathways. On the other hand, influenza virus takes advantage of cell signaling for its propagation at almost all stages of its life cycle. For example, activated PKC is required for viral entry. Raf/MEK/ERK signaling is essential for viral RNP export. The NS1 protein activates several signaling pathways to ensure efficient influenza virus replication, including the suppression of the innate immune response, the enhancement of viral RNA synthesis, increased viral protein expression and regulation of host cell apoptosis.

A persistent problem in viral-induced signaling research is the widespread use of tumor cell lines. Their changed physiological and biochemical properties may cause discrepancies between in vitro studies and in vivo studies. Influenza virus-induced signaling involves a complex network of different overlapping molecules and signal cascades. Research on a single molecule or pathway cannot, therefore, provide a comprehensive description of virus-host interactions. Combining genome, transcriptome and proteome research methods may prove helpful in obtaining a clearer understanding of virus-host interactions. Recently, two research groups have used large-scale RNAi screening to analyze these interactions, and got some important new discoveries [104,105]. Greater insight into viral-induced signaling will not only increase our understanding of the interaction between influenza viruses and host cells, but will also potentially provide novel antiviral therapeutic targets.

1. Proud C G. PKR: A new name and new roles. Trends Biochem Sci, 1995, 20: 241–246
2. Williams B R. PKR; a sentinel kinase for cellular stress. Oncogene, 1999, 18: 6112–6120
3. Dauber B, Martinez-Sobrido L, Schneider J, *et al*. Influenza B virus ribonucleoprotein is a potent activator of the antiviral kinase PKR. PLoS Pathog, 2009, 5: e1000473
4. Balachandran S, Barber G N. PKR in innate immunity, cancer, and viral oncolysis. Methods Mol Biol, 2007, 383: 277–301
5. Garcia M A, Meurs E F, Esteban M. The dsRNA protein kinase PKR: virus and cell control. Biochimie, 2007, 89: 799–811
6. Balachandran S, Roberts P C, Brown L E, *et al*. Essential role for the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase PKR in innate immunity to viral infection. Immunity, 2000, 13: 129–141
7. Takizawa T, Ohashi K, Nakanishi Y. Possible involvement of double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase in cell death by influenza virus infection. J Virol, 1996, 70: 8128–8132
8. Balachandran S, Roberts P C, Kipperman T, *et al*. Alpha/beta interferons potentiate virus-induced apoptosis through activation of the FADD/Caspase-8 death signaling pathway. J Virol, 2000, 74: 1513–1523
9. Li S, Min J Y, Krug R M, *et al*. Binding of the influenza A virus NS1 protein to PKR mediates the inhibition of its activation by either PACT or double-stranded RNA. Virology, 2006, 349: 13–21
10. Lu Y, Wambach M, Katze M G, *et al*. Binding of the influenza virus NS1 protein to double-stranded RNA inhibits the activation of the protein kinase that phosphorylates the eIF-2 translation initiation factor. Virology, 1995, 214: 222–228
11. Takeda K, Kaisho T, Akira S. Toll-like receptors. Annu Rev Immunol, 2003, 21: 335–376
12. Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol, 2004, 4: 499–511
13. Diebold S S, Kaisho T, Hemmi H, *et al*. Innate Antiviral responses by means of TLR7-Mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. Science, 2004, 303: 1529–1531
14. Lund J M, Alexopoulou L, Sato A, *et al*. Recognition of sin-

Dai XX, *et al.* Sci China Life Sci January (2011) Vol.54 No.1 73

15 Guillot L, Le Goffic R, Bloch S, *et al.* Involvement of toll-like receptor 3 in the immune response of lung epithelial cells to double-stranded RNA and influenza A virus. J Biol Chem, 2005, 280: 5571–5580

16 Lee D C, Cheung C Y, Law A H, *et al.* p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent hyperinduction of tumor necrosis factor alpha expression in response to avian influenza virus H5N1. J Virol, 2005, 79: 10147–10154

17 Maruoka S, Hashimoto S, Gon Y, *et al.* ASK1 regulates influenza virus infection-induced apoptotic cell death. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2003, 307: 870–876

18 Kujime K, Hashimoto S, Gon Y, *et al.* p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-jun-NH2-terminal kinase regulate RANTES production by influenza virus-infected human bronchial epithelial cells. J Immunol, 2000, 164: 3222–3228

19 Ludwig S, Ehrhardt C, Neumeier E R, *et al.* Influenza virus-induced AP-1-dependent gene expression requires activation of the JNK signaling pathway. J Biol Chem, 2001, 276: 10990–10998

20 Kakugawa S, Shimojima M, Goto H, *et al.* The MAPK-activated kinase RSK2 plays a role in innate immune responses to influenza virus infection. J Virol, 2009

21 Kajiya T, Orihara K, Hamasaki S, *et al.* Toll-like receptor 2 expression level on monocytes in patients with viral infections: Monitoring infection severity. J Infect, 2008, 57: 249–259

22 Lee R M, White M R, Hartshorn K L. Influenza a viruses upregulate neutrophil toll-like receptor 2 expression and function. Scand J Immunol, 2006, 63: 81–89

23 Whitmore M M, Iparraquire A, Kubelka L, *et al.* Negative regulation of TLR-signaling pathways by activating transcription factor-3. J Immunol, 2007, 179: 3622–3630

24 Barral P M, Sarkar D, Su Z-z, *et al.* Functions of the cytoplasmic RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA-5: Key regulators of innate immunity. Pharmacol Ther, 2009, 124: 219–234

25 Yoneyama M, Fujita T. RIG-I family RNA helicases: Cytoplasmic sensor for antiviral innate immunity. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev, 2007, 18: 545–551

26 Takeuchi O, Akira S. MDA5/RIG-I and virus recognition. Curr Opin Immunol, 2008, 20: 17–22

27 Le Goffic R, Pothlichet J, Vitour D, *et al.* Cutting edge: Influenza A virus activates TLR3-dependent inflammatory and RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses in human lung epithelial cells. J Immunol, 2007, 178: 3368–3372

28 Siren J, Imaizumi T, Sarkar D, *et al.* Retinoic acid inducible gene-I and mda-5 are involved in influenza A virus-induced expression of antiviral cytokines. Microbes Infect, 2006, 8: 2013–2020

29 Matikainen S, Siren J, Tissari J, *et al.* Tumor necrosis factor alpha enhances influenza A virus-induced expression of antiviral cytokines by activating RIG-I gene expression. J Virol, 2006, 80: 3515–3522

30 Hale B G, Randall R E, Ortin J, *et al.* The multifunctional NS1 protein of influenza A viruses. J Gen Virol, 2008, 89: 2359–2376

31 Talon J, Horvath C M, Polley R, *et al.* Activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 is inhibited by the influenza A virus NS1 protein. J Virol, 2000, 74: 7989–7996

32 Ehrhardt C, Seyer R, Hrincius E R, *et al.* Interplay between influenza A virus and the innate immune signaling. Microbes Infect, 2010, 12: 81–87

33 Guo Z, Chen L M, Zeng H, *et al.* NS1 protein of influenza A virus inhibits the function of intracytoplasmic pathogen sensor, RIG-I. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol, 2007, 36: 263–269

34 Mibayashi M, Martinez-Sobrido L, Loo Y M, *et al.* Inhibition of retinoic acid-inducible gene I-mediated induction of beta interferon by the NS1 protein of influenza A virus. J Virol, 2007, 81: 514–524

35 Opitz B, Rejaibi A, Dauber B, *et al.* IFNbeta induction by influenza A virus is mediated by RIG-I which is regulated by the viral NS1 protein. Cell Microbiol, 2007, 9: 930–938

36 Gack M U, Albrecht R A, Urano T, *et al.* Influenza A virus NS1 targets the ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 to evade recognition by the host viral RNA sensor RIG-I. Cell Host Microbe, 2009, 5: 439–449

37 Nemeroff M E, Barabino S M L, Li Y, *et al.* Influenza virus NS1

protein interacts with the cellular 30 kDa subunit of CPSF and inhibits 3' end formation of cellular pre-mRNAs. Mol Cell, 1998, 1: 991–1000

38 Conenello G M, Palese P. Influenza A virus PB1-F2: A small protein with a big punch. Cell Host Microbe, 2007, 2: 207–209

39 Mitzner D, Dudek S E, Studtrucker N, *et al.* Phosphorylation of the influenza A virus protein PB1-F2 by PKC is crucial for apoptosis promoting functions in monocytes. Cell Microbiol, 2009, 11: 1502–1516

40 Zamarin D, Garcia-Sastre A, Xiao X, *et al.* Influenza virus PB1-F2 protein induces cell death through mitochondrial ANT3 and VDAC1. PLoS Pathog, 2005, 1: e4

41 McAuley J L, Hornung F, Boyd K L, *et al.* Expression of the 1918 influenza A virus PB1-F2 enhances the pathogenesis of viral and secondary bacterial pneumonia. Cell Host Microbe, 2007, 2: 240–249

42 Zamarin D, Ortigoza M B, Palese P. Influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein contributes to viral pathogenesis in mice. J Virol, 2006, 80: 7976–7983

43 Mazur I, Wurzer W J, Ehrhardt C, *et al.* Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) blocks influenza virus propagation via its NF-kB-inhibiting activity. Cell Microbiol, 2007, 9: 1683–1694

44 Toker A. Signaling through protein kinase C. Front Biosci, 1998, 3: D1134–1147

45 Hoffmann H H, Palese P, Shaw M L. Modulation of influenza virus replication by alteration of sodium ion transport and protein kinase C activity. Antiviral Res, 2008, 80: 124–134

46 Kunzelmann K, Beesley A H, King N J, *et al.* Influenza virus inhibits amiloride-sensitive Na⁺ channels in respiratory epithelia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2000, 97: 10282–10287

47 Lazrak A, Iles K E, Liu G, *et al.* Influenza virus M2 protein inhibits epithelial sodium channels by increasing reactive oxygen species. FASEB J, 2009, 23: 3829–3842

48 Sieczkarski S B, Whittaker G R. Characterization of the host cell entry of filamentous influenza virus. Arch Virol, 2005, 150: 1783–1796

49 Constantinescu S N, Cernescu C D, Popescu L M. Effects of protein kinase C inhibitors on viral entry and infectivity. FEBS Lett, 1991, 292: 31–33

50 Arora D J, Gasse N. Influenza virus hemagglutinin stimulates the protein kinase C activity of human polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Arch Virol, 1998, 143: 2029–2037

51 Root C N, Wills E G, McNair L L, *et al.* Entry of influenza viruses into cells is inhibited by a highly specific protein kinase C inhibitor. J Gen Virol, 2000, 81: 2697–2705

52 Sieczkarski S B, Brown H A, Whittaker G R. Role of protein kinase C betaII in influenza virus entry via late endosomes. J Virol, 2003, 77: 460–469

53 Pleschka S. RNA viruses and the mitogenic Raf/MEK/ERK signal transduction cascade. Biol Chem, 2008, 389: 1273–1282

54 Huang X, Liu T, Muller J, *et al.* Effect of influenza virus matrix protein and viral RNA on ribonucleoprotein formation and nuclear export. Virology, 2001, 287: 405–416

55 Sakaguchi A, Hirayama E, Hiraki A, *et al.* Nuclear export of influenza viral ribonucleoprotein is temperature-dependently inhibited by dissociation of viral matrix protein. Virology, 2003, 306: 244–253

56 Ludwig S, Wolff T, Ehrhardt C, *et al.* MEK inhibition impairs influenza B virus propagation without emergence of resistant variants. FEBS Letters, 2004, 561: 37–43

57 Pleschka S, Wolff T, Ehrhardt C, *et al.* Influenza virus propagation is impaired by inhibition of the Raf/MEK/ERK signalling cascade. Nat Cell Biol, 2001, 3: 301–305

58 Marjuki H, Alam M I, Ehrhardt C, *et al.* Membrane accumulation of influenza A virus hemagglutinin triggers nuclear export of the viral genome via protein kinase Calpha-mediated activation of ERK signaling. J Biol Chem, 2006, 281: 16707–16715

59 Marjuki H, Yen H L, Franks J, *et al.* Higher polymerase activity of a human influenza virus enhances activation of the hemagglutinin-induced Raf/MEK/ERK signal cascade. Virol J, 2007, 4: 134

60 Beaton A R, Krug R M. Selected host cell capped RNA fragments prime influenza viral RNA transcription *in vivo*. Nucleic Acids Res,

1981, 9: 4423–4436

61 Krug R M. Priming of influenza viral RNA transcription by capped heterologous RNAs. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol, 1981, 93: 125–149

62 Chen Z, Li Y, Krug R M. Influenza A virus NS1 protein target poly(A)-binding protein II of the cellular 3[prime]-end processing machinery. EMBO J, 1999, 18: 2273–2283

63 Lu Y, Qian X Y, Krug R M. The influenza virus NS1 protein: a novel inhibitor of pre-mRNA splicing. Genes Dev, 1994, 8: 1817–1828

64 Garfinkel M S, Katze M G. Translational control by influenza virus. Selective translation is mediated by sequences within the viral mRNA 5'-untranslated region. J Biol Chem, 1993, 268: 22223–22226

65 de la Luna S, Fortes P, Beloso A, *et al.* Influenza virus NS1 protein enhances the rate of translation initiation of viral mRNAs. J Virol, 1995, 69: 2427–2433

66 Enami K, Sato T A, Nakada S, *et al.* Influenza virus NS1 protein stimulates translation of the M1 protein. J Virol, 1994, 68: 1432–1437

67 Katze M G, DeCorato D, Krug R M. Cellular mRNA translation is blocked at both initiation and elongation after infection by influenza virus or adenovirus. J Virol, 1986, 60: 1027–1039

68 Park Y W, Katze M G. Translational control by influenza virus. Identification of cis-acting sequences and trans-acting factors which may regulate selective viral mRNA translation. J Biol Chem, 1995, 270: 28433–28439

69 Aragon T, de la Luna S, Novoa I, *et al.* Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4GI is a cellular target for NS1 protein, a translational activator of influenza virus. Mol Cell Biol, 2000, 20: 6259–6268

70 Burgui I, Aragon T, Ortin J, *et al.* PABP1 and eIF4GI associate with influenza virus NS1 protein in viral mRNA translation initiation complexes. J Gen Virol, 2003, 84: 3263–3274

71 Feigenblum D, Schneider R J. Modification of eukaryotic initiation factor 4F during infection by influenza virus. J Virol, 1993, 67: 3027–3035

72 Katze M G. Regulation of the interferon-induced PKR: can viruses cope? Trends in Microbiology, 1995, 3: 75–78

73 Goodman A G, Smith J A, Balachandran S, *et al.* The cellular protein P58IPK regulates influenza virus mRNA translation and replication through a PKR-Mediated mechanism. J Virol, 2007, 81: 2221–2230

74 Hatada E, Hasegawa M, Mukai gawa J, *et al.* Control of influenza virus gene expression: quantitative analysis of each viral RNA species in infected cells. J Biochem, 1989, 105: 537–546

75 Shapiro G I, Gurney T, Jr Krug R M. Influenza virus gene expression: control mechanisms at early and late times of infection and nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of virus-specific RNAs. J Virol, 1987, 61: 764–773

76 Yamanaka K, Nagata K, Ishihama A. Temporal control for translation of influenza virus mRNAs. Arch Virol, 1991, 120: 33–42

77 Duronio V. The life of a cell: apoptosis regulation by the PI3K/PKB pathway. Biochem J, 2008, 415: 333–344

78 Franke T F, Hornik C P, Segev L, *et al.* PI3K/Akt and apoptosis: size matters. Oncogene, 2003, 22: 8983–8998

79 Ji W T, Liu H J. PI3K-Akt signaling and viral infection. Recent Pat Biotechnol, 2008, 2: 218–226

80 Hale B G, Batty I H, Downes C P, *et al.* Binding of influenza A virus NS1 protein to the inter-SH2 domain of p85 suggests a novel mechanism for phosphoinositide 3-kinase activation. J Biol Chem, 2008, 283: 1372–1380

81 Hale B G, Jackson D, Chen Y H, *et al.* Influenza A virus NS1 protein binds p85beta and activates phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2006, 103: 14194–14199

82 Hale B G, Randall R E. PI3K signalling during influenza A virus infections. Biochem Soc Trans, 2007, 35: 186–187

83 Shin Y K, Li Y, Liu Q, *et al.* SH3 binding motif 1 in influenza A virus NS1 protein is essential for PI3K/Akt signaling pathway activation. J Virol, 2007, 81: 12730–12739

84 Shin Y K, Liu Q, Tikoo S K, *et al.* Influenza A virus NS1 protein activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway by direct interaction with the p85 subunit of PI3K. J Gen Virol, 2007, 88: 13–18

85 Ehrhardt C, Wolff T, Pleschka S, *et al.* Influenza A virus NS1 protein activates the PI3K/Akt pathway to mediate antiapoptotic signaling responses. J Virol, 2007, 81: 3058–3067

86 Zhirnov O P, Klenk H D. Control of apoptosis in influenza virus-infected cells by up-regulation of Akt and p53 signaling. Apoptosis, 2007, 12: 1419–1432

87 Lu X Y, Masic A, Li Y, *et al.* The PI3K/Akt pathway inhibits influenza A virus-induced Bax-mediated apoptosis by negatively regulating the JNK pathway via ASK1. J Gen Virol, 2010, 91: 1439–1449

88 Ehrhardt C, Ludwig S. A new player in a deadly game: influenza viruses and the PI3K/Akt signalling pathway. Cell Microbiol, 2009, 11: 863–871

89 Ehrhardt C, Marjuki H, Wolff T, *et al.* Bivalent role of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) during influenza virus infection and host cell defence. Cell Microbiol, 2006, 8: 1336–1348

90 Shin Y K, Liu Q, Tikoo S K, *et al.* Effect of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway on influenza A virus propagation. J Gen Virol, 2007, 88: 942–950

91 Flory E, Kunz M, Scheller C, *et al.* Influenza virus-induced NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression is mediated by overexpression of viral proteins and involves oxidative radicals and activation of IkappaB kinase. J Biol Chem, 2000, 275: 8307–8314

92 Tenove r B R, Ng S L, Chua M A, *et al.* Multiple functions of the IKK-related kinase IKKepsilon in interferon-mediated antiviral immunity. Science, 2007, 315: 1274–1278

93 Pahl H L, Baeuerle P A. Expression of influenza virus hemagglutinin activates transcription factor NF-kappa B. J Virol, 1995, 69: 1480–1484

94 Gern J E, French D A, Grindle K A, *et al.* Double-stranded RNA induces the synthesis of specific chemokines by bronchial epithelial cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol, 2003, 28: 731–737

95 Severa M, Fitzgerald K A. TLR-mediated activation of type I IFN during antiviral immune responses: fighting the battle to win the war. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol, 2007, 316: 167–192

96 Nimmerjahn F, Dudziak D, Dirmeier U, *et al.* Active NF-kappaB signalling is a prerequisite for influenza virus infection. J Gen Virol, 2004, 85: 2347–2356

97 Kumar N, Xin Z T, Liang Y, *et al.* NF-kappaB signaling differentially regulates influenza virus RNA synthesis. J Virol, 2008, 82: 9880–9889

98 Wurzer W J, Ehrhardt C, Pleschka S, *et al.* NF-kappaB-dependent induction of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and Fas/FasL is crucial for efficient influenza virus propagation. J Biol Chem, 2004, 279: 30931–30937

99 Berghall H, Siren J, Sarkar D, *et al.* The interferon-inducible RNA helicase, mda-5, is involved in measles virus-induced expression of antiviral cytokines. Microbes Infection, 2006, 8: 2138–2144

100 Liu P, Jamaluddin M, Li K, *et al.* Retinoic acid-inducible gene I mediates early antiviral response and Toll-like receptor 3 expression in respiratory syncytial virus-infected airway epithelial cells. J Virol, 2007, 81: 1401–1411

101 Thompson A J, Locarnini S A. Toll-like receptors, RIG-I-like RNA helicases and the antiviral innate immune response. Immunol Cell Biol, 2007, 85: 435–445

102 Pothlichet J, Chignard M, Si-Tahar M. Cutting edge: innate immune response triggered by influenza A virus is negatively regulated by SOCS1 and SOCS3 through a RIG-I/IFNAR1-dependent pathway. J Immunol, 2008, 180: 2034–2038

103 Rintahaka J, Wiik D, Kovanen P E, *et al.* Cytosolic antiviral RNA recognition pathway activates caspases 1 and 3. J Immunol, 2008, 180: 1749–1757

104 Karlas A, Machuy N, Shin Y, *et al.* Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies human host factors crucial for influenza virus replication. Nature, 2010, 463: 818–822

105 König R, Stertz S, Zhou Y, *et al.* Human host factors required for influenza virus replication. Nature, 2010, 463: 813–817

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
