
ALCOHOLISM: CLINICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH

Molecular Pathogenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Helena Cornella, Clara Alsinet, and Augusto Villanueva

---

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the major causes of death among cirrhotic patients, being viral hepatitis and alcohol abuse, the main risk factors for its development. The introduction of highly sophisticated genomic technologies has spurred extensive research on the molecular pathogenesis of this devastating disease. Several signaling cascades have been consistently found dysregulated in HCC (e.g., WNT-β-catenin, PI3K/AKT/MTOR, RAS/MAPK, IGF, HGF/MET, VEGF, EGFR, and PDGF). In addition, there have been numerous molecular classifications proposed for this disease, what provides an additional hint about its genomic complexity. The importance of knowing the molecular drivers of HCC is underscored by the positive results of a molecular targeted agent, sorafenib, able to improve survival in patients with advanced disease. This review will briefly outline key concepts in alcohol-related hepatocarcinogenesis, and provide some insight regarding current trends in translating HCC genomics into clinical management of the disease.

Key Words: Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Signaling Pathways, Genomics, Molecular Targeted Therapies, Prognosis Prediction.

---

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA (HCC) is the third cause of cancer-related mortality, and it ranks sixth in terms of global incidence (Parkin et al., 2005). Its frequency has been steadily increasing in United States and Europe in the last decades, mainly due to a parallel increase in hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Cirrhosis is the foremost scenario for HCC development, being present in more than 80% of HCC patients (Llovet et al., 2003). In this context, the main risk factors for liver damage are chronic viral hepatitis (B or C), aflatoxin exposure, and prolonged heavy alcohol consumption (El Serag and Rudolph, 2007; Llovet et al., 2003). Through a synergistic effect, alcohol further enhances the risk of HCC development in patients with chronic liver disease of any etiology, but specially in HCV-related liver damage (Machida et al., 2009).

Regarding HCC management, only 30–40% of patients, those at initial stages, are eligible for potential curative treatments, such as surgical resection, transplantation or percutaneous ablation (Llovet et al., 2003). Patients at intermediate stages are candidates for loco-regional therapies (e.g., chemoembolization). Recently, a phase III randomized controlled trial (SHARP) showed that sorafenib, a molecular targeted agent with multikinase inhibition properties, was able to significantly increase survival in patients with advanced HCC (Llovet et al., 2008a), establishing a new standard of care. Despite this promising breakthrough, HCC patients still have dismal prognosis, being currently one of the major cause of death among cirrhotic patients. Nevertheless, the successful results of the SHARP trial underscore the need for a comprehensive understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of this devastating disease. This review will provide a brief summary of alcohol-related molecular pathogenesis of HCC, focusing on the impact of genomics and signaling pathways in prognosis prediction and treatment development in this disease.

---

HEPATOCARCINOGENESIS AND ALCOHOL

Several phenomena present in chronically damaged livers favor human hepatocarcinogenesis, most of them resulting from recurrent cycles of cellular proliferation, inflammation, and necrosis. These repetitive processes implicate different cell types, such as hepatocytes, endothelial, Kupffer and stellate cells, although robust data suggest the central role of the later in liver fibrosis and its transition to cirrhosis (Brenner et al., 2000; Friedman, 2008). Within this anomalous environment, certain clones of cells acquire proliferative and survival advantages, constituting dysplastic nodules, the histological substrate of HCC (Kojiro and Roskams, 2005). All these phases are determined by different genetic and epigenetic events (Farazi and DePinho, 2006), graphically summarized in Fig. 1 (e.g., point mutations, chromosomal rearrangements, genomic instability, etc.).

Heavy long-term alcohol intake, defined as ingestion of more than 50–70 g per day, is a well-known risk factor for developing cirrhosis and subsequently HCC (El Serag and Rudolph, 2007). Even though different parameters modify the risk of HCC development in alcohol-related liver disease

From the HCC Translational Research Laboratory, Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer Group (BCLC Group), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques Agust Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Liver Unit, CIBERehd. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Received for publication March 22, 2010; accepted May 25, 2010.

Reprint requests: Augusto Villanueva, MD, HCC Translational Laboratory, BCLC Group, Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic, CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, Villarroel, 170, 08036 Barcelona, Spain; Tel.: +34932279155; Fax: +34932275792; E-mail: augusto.villanueva@ciberehd.org

Copyright © 2011 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01406.x

Alcohol Clin Exp Res, Vol 35, No 5, 2011: pp 821–825

RISK FACTORS
HCV HBV Alcohol

Healthy Liver
Chronic
hepatitis
Cirrhotic Liver
Hepatocellular Carcinoma

MOLECULAR LESIONS
Genomic instability
Aberrant methylation
Accumulation of mutations

Fig. 1. Human hepatocarcinogenesis. Chronic liver damage (e.g., viral hepatitis, alcohol abuse) precedes hepatocellular carcinoma in most patients. It triggers a sequence of additive molecular events including gene dysregulation, mutation, and aberrant methylation, ultimately responsible for malignant cell transformation.

(e.g., duration of intake, age at onset, etc.), the total amount of alcohol drunk is still the strongest risk predictor (Donato et al., 2002). Alcohol alters liver structure and, specially, hepatocyte phenotype. During this process, oxidative stress plays a major role by accelerating telomere shortening and favoring oncogenic mutations (Farazi and DePinho, 2006). Chronic alcohol ingestion is also implicated in enhanced inflammation. Activated monocytes generate proinflammatory cytokines, what increase circulating endotoxin and activate Kupffer cells. These cells also produce chemokines (e.g., IL6 and prostaglandin E) that exert opposite effects on hepatocyte survival favoring the perpetuation of this deleterious cycle (McKillop and Schrum, 2009). Interestingly, a recent study conducted on 225 HCC patients treated with surgical resection found an enrichment of IL6 signaling in a gene signature generated in non-tumoral cirrhotic adjacent tissue able to identify patients with poor survival (Hoshida et al., 2008). Finally, oxidative stress also increases vasoconstriction and portal pressure reactivating angiogenesis, a hallmark in tumor maintenance (Gitto et al., 2009).

MOLECULAR CLASSIFICATION AND DYSREGULATED PATHWAYS IN HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA

HCC is a highly polymorphic disease at the genomic level (Table 1) (Lachenmayer et al., 2010; Villanueva et al., 2007). This complexity is partially explained by the different etiologies and the long pathogenic process behind its generation. Several signaling pathways have been found dysregulated in this disease (e.g., WNT-β-catenin, PI3K/AKT/MTOR, RAS/MAPK, IGF, HGF/MET, VEGF, EGFR and PDGF) thoroughly described elsewhere (Villanueva et al., 2007). Considering this complexity, different approaches have tried to generate a molecular classification of HCC aiming to provide a structured overview of the main molecular drivers of the disease. As will be discussed below, recent data suggest the role of molecular classes in prognosis prediction in HCC and, eventually, also in treatment planning.

Lee and colleagues (2004) proposed a 2-group molecular classification based on analysis of genome-wide expression data. Interestingly, patients belonging to one of those classes, cluster A, had significantly worse survival. Shortly after, the same authors refined their classification by identifying a subgroup of patients within cluster A whose gene expression significantly co-clustered with that from fetal hepatoblasts. These data suggested that a subgroup of tumors (<20%) could have a progenitor cell origin (Lee et al., 2006). A comprehensive analysis of a wide range of molecular data including gene expression, mutations, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and promoter methylation was the basis for the generation of another molecular classification that segregated HCC in 6 groups (G1–G6) (Boyault et al., 2007). Briefly, these classes included samples with activation of WNT pathway (G5–G6), AKT signaling (G2) and cell cycle (G1–G2–G3). Soon after, Chiang et al. proposed a molecular classification focusing on patients with HCV-related HCC (Chiang et al., 2008). Authors analyzed genome-wide copy number alterations and gene expression of 91 HCCs. Upon unsupervised classification through consensus hierarchical clustering, they identified five molecular sub-classes: CTNNB1, Proliferation, IFN-response, Poly 7, and an unannotated class. Additional molecular analyses conducted on the same samples (e.g., CTNNB1 mutations, activation of IGF and MTOR pathways, etc.) allowed further characterization of these subclasses, ultimately increasing their biological consistency. Similarly to previous reports, activation of WNT and Tyrosine Kinase Receptor (TKR) cascades were identified in 40–50% of samples, suggesting their potential leading role in HCC pathogenesis (Chiang et al., 2008). A recent study that included a meta-analysis of all published microarray studies in HCC identified common molecular subclasses, providing an integrated molecular picture of the disease (Hoshida et al., 2009).

Regarding signaling pathways, we will focus on those most frequently dysregulated in HCC, mainly WNT and TKR-related pathways. WNT signaling is implicated in proliferation, differentiation, embryogenesis and tumorigenesis (Thompson and Monga, 2007). In resting conditions, β-catenin is bound to

Gene          | Molecular function           | Mechanism                | Alteration            | Frequency (%)
------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------ | -------------------- | -------------
TP53          | Cell cycle                  | Mutation                | Loss of function     | 0-67        
              |                             | DNA copy number alteration | LOH                 |             
              |                             | Methylation             | Gain                 | 14          
              |                             | Expression              | Decreased            |             
CDKN2A (p16)  | Cell cycle                  | Mutation                | Loss of function     | 13          
              |                             | Methylation             | Gain                 | 56-83        
              |                             | Expression              | Decreased            |             
CCND1 (Cyclin D1) | Cell cycle                | DNA copy number alteration | Amplification       | 7           
              |                             | Expression              | Decreased            |             
RB1 (Retinoblastoma 1) | Cell cycle             | Mutation                | Gain of function     | 15          
              |                             | DNA copy number alteration | LOH                 |             
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
CTNNB1 (β-catenin) | Differentiation/Proliferation | Mutation              | Gain of function     | 0-44        
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
CDH1 (E-cadherin) | Differentiation/Proliferation | DNA copy number alteration | LOH                 |             
              |                             | Methylation             | Gain                 | 33-67        
              |                             | Expression              | Decreased            |             
MYC           | Differentiation/Proliferation | DNA copy number alteration | Amplification       |             
              |                             | Methylation             | Loss                 | 30          
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
PIK3CA        | Growth factor signaling     | Mutation                | Gain of function     | 0-35        
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
PTEN          | Growth factor signaling     | Mutation                | Loss of function     | 0-11        
              |                             | DNA copy number alteration | LOH                 |             
              |                             | Expression              | Decreased            |             
KRAS          | Growth factor signaling     | Mutation                | Gain of function     | 3-42        
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
IGF2          | Growth factor signaling     | Mutation                | Gain of function     | 12-44       
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             
VEGF          | Growth factor signaling     | DNA copy number alteration | Amplification       | 5           
              |                             | Expression              | Increased            |             

All these approaches point towards personalized therapies, a final step in molecular medicine.

Currently, prognosis prediction in HCC relies exclusively on clinical data. There are several proposed staging systems, being the Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) algorithm widely accepted by the scientific community (Llovet et al., 2008b). It is feasible that the vast amount of molecular information provided by last generation high-throughput genomic technologies will improve prognosis prediction in HCC (Villanueva et al., 2010). This is critical in those situations where clinical-based systems do not provide accurate predictions. For example, there is a subgroup of patients that dropout from the waiting list of liver transplantation due to rapid HCC progression despite being included in early tumoral stages. In addition, we need to identify biomarkers of response to molecular therapies. In these and other situations, genomic predictors will become extremely valuable tools.

Recent data sustain a dual concept for genomic prognosis prediction in HCC. These patients harbor two potential life-threatening conditions (e.g., cirrhosis and cancer), and hence, accurate genomic prognosis must include information coded in tumor and non-tumoral adjacent tissue. Several studies demonstrate the importance of both components in prognosis prediction (Budhu et al., 2006; Hoshida et al., 2008; Kurokawa et al., 2004; Minguez et al., 2008; Woo et al., 2008; Ye et al., 2003; Yoshioka et al., 2009) but none has yet conducted an integrative analysis of both. In addition, the weight of each prognosis component may be different depending on the clinical stage of the disease (Villanueva et al., 2010). For instance, in patients with very early tumors, genomic information from cirrhotic tissue may have more prognosis importance than in patients with very advanced disease, who will likely die due to progression of the cancer rather than to a complication of cirrhosis.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

Helena Cornellà is supported by a grant from Spanish National Health Institute (SAF-2007-61898). Clara Alsinet is supported by a grant of Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Augusto Villanueva is a recipient of a Sheila Sherlock fellowship (European Association for the Study of the Liver).

FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE

There are no financial disclosures relevant to this manuscript.

REFERENCES

Budhu A, Forgues M, Ye QH, Jia HL, He P, Zanetti KA, Kammula US, Chen Y, Qin LX, Tang ZY, Wang XW (2006) Prediction of venous metastases, recurrence, and prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma based on a unique immune response signature of the liver microenvironment. Cancer Cell 10:99–111.

Calvisi DF, Ladu S, Gorden A, Farina M, Conner EA, Lee JS, Factor VM, Thorgeirsson SS (2006) Ubiquitous activation of Ras and Jak/Stat pathways in human HCC. Gastroenterology 130:1117–1128.

Campbell JS, Hughes SD, Gilbertson DG, Palmer TE, Holdren MS, Haran AC, Odell MM, Bauer RL, Ren HP, Haugen HS, Yeh MM, Fausto N (2005) Platelet-derived growth factor C induces liver fibrosis, steatosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:3389–3394.

Chiang DY, Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, Peix J, Newell P, Minguez B, LeBlanc AC, Donovan DJ, Thung SN, Sole M, Tovar V, Alsinet C, Ramos AH, Barretina J, Roayaie S, Schwartz M, Waxman S, Bruix J, Mazzaferro V, Ligon AH, Najfeld V, Friedman SL, Sellers WR, Meyerson M, Llovet JM (2008) Focal gains of VEGFA and molecular classification of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 68:6779–6788.

Cui J, Zhou X, Liu Y, Tang Z, Romeih M (2003) Wnt signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of mutation and expression of beta-catenin, T-cell factor-4 and glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta genes. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 18:280–287.

Donato F, Tagger A, Gelatti U, Parrinello G, Boffetta P, Albertini A, Decarli A, Trevisi P, Ribero ML, Martelli C, Porru S, Nardi G (2002) Alcohol and hepatocellular carcinoma: the effect of lifetime intake and hepatitis virus infections in men and women. Am J Epidemiol 155:323–331.

El Serag HB, Rudolph KL (2007) Hepatocellular carcinoma: epidemiology and molecular carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology 132:2557–2576.

Farazi PA, DePinho RA (2006) Hepatocellular carcinoma pathogenesis: from genes to environment. Nat Rev Cancer 6:674–687.

Friedman SL (2008) Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis. Gastroenterology 134:1655–1669.

Gitto S, Micco L, Conti F, Andreone P, Bernardi M (2009) Alcohol and viral hepatitis: a mini-review. Dig Liver Dis 41:67–70.

Hanahan D, Weinberg RA (2000) The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57–70.

Hoshida Y, Nijman SM, Kobayashi M, Chan JA, Brunet JP, Chiang DY, Villanueva A, Newell P, Ikeda K, Hashimoto M, Watanabe G, Gabriel S, Friedman SL, Kumada H, Llovet JM, Golub TR (2009) Integrative transcriptome analysis reveals common molecular subclasses of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 69:7385–7392.

Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Kobayashi M, Peix J, Chiang DY, Camargo A, Gupta S, Moore J, Wrobel MJ, Lerner J, Reich M, Chan JA, Glickman JN, Ikeda K, Hashimoto M, Watanabe G, Daidone MG, Roayaie S, Schwartz M, Thung S, Salvesen HB, Gabriel S, Mazzaferro V, Bruix J, Friedman SL, Kumada H, Llovet JM, Golub TR (2008) Gene expression in fixed tissues and outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 359:1995–2004.

Kojiro M, Roskams T (2005) Early hepatocellular carcinoma and dysplastic nodules. Semin Liver Dis 25:133–142.

Kurokawa Y, Matoba R, Takemasa I, Nagano H, Dono K, Nakamori S, Umeshita K, Sakon M, Ueno N, Oba S, Ishii S, Kato K, Monden M (2004) Molecular-based prediction of early recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 41:284–291.

Lachenmayer A, Alsinet C, Chang CY, Llovet JM (2010) Molecular approaches to treatment of HCC. Digest Liver Dis 3:S264–S272.

Lee JS, Chu IS, Heo J, Calvisi DF, Sun Z, Roskams T, Durnez A, Demetris AJ, Thorgeirsson SS (2004) Classification and prediction of survival in hepatocellular carcinoma by gene expression profiling. Hepatology 40:667–676.

Lee JS, Heo J, Libbrecht L, Chu IS, Kaposi-Novak P, Calvisi DF, Mikaelyan A, Roberts LR, Demetris AJ, Sun Z, Nevens F, Roskams T, Thorgeirsson SS (2006) A novel prognostic subtype of human hepatocellular carcinoma derived from hepatic progenitor cells. Nat Med 12:410–416.

Llovet JM, Bruix J (2008) Molecular targeted therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 48:1312–1327.

Llovet JM, Burroughs A, Bruix J (2003) Hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet 362:1907–1917.

Llovet JM, Di Bisceglie AM, Bruix J, Kramer BS, Lencioni R, Zhu AX, Sherman M, Schwartz M, Lotze M, Talwalkar J, Gores GJ (2008b) Design and

Boyault S, Rickman DS, de Reynies A, Balabaud C, Rebouissou S, Jeannot E, Herault A, Saric J, Belghiti J, Franco D, Bioulac-Sage P, Laurent-Puig P, Zucman-Rossi J (2007) Transcriptome classification of HCC is related to gene alterations and to new therapeutic targets. Hepatology 45:42–52.

Brenner DA, Waterboer T, Choi SK, Lindquist JN, Stefanovic B, Burchardt E, Yamauchi M, Gillan A, Rippe RA (2000) New aspects of hepatic fibrosis. J Hepatol 32:32–38.

endpoints of clinical trials in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 100:698–711.

Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E, Blanc JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL, Forner A, Schwartz M, Porta C, Zeuzem S, Bolondi L, Greten TF, Galle PR, Seitz JF, Borbath I, Haussinger D, Giannaris T, Shan M, Moscovici M, Voliotis D, Bruix J (2008a) Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 359:378–390.

Machida K, Tsukamoto H, Mkrtchyan H, Duan L, Dynnyk A, Liu HM, Asahina K, Govindarajan S, Ray R, Ou JH, Seki E, Deshaies R, Miyake K, Lai MM (2009) Toll-like receptor 4 mediates synergism between alcohol and HCV in hepatic oncogenesis involving stem cell marker Nanog. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:1548–1553.

McKillop IH, Schrum LW (2009) Role of alcohol in liver carcinogenesis. Semin Liver Dis 29:222–232.

Minguez B, Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Toffanin S, Cabellos L, Newell P, Roayaie S, Schwartz M, Thung SN, Mazzaferro V, Bruix J, Friedman SL, Golub TR, Llovet JM (2008) Molecular gene signature to identify vascular invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 48(4):386A.

Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P (2005) Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin 55:74–108.

Semela D, Piguet AC, Kolev M, Schmitter K, Hlushchuk R, Djonov V, Stoupis C, Dufour JF (2007) Vascular remodeling and antitumoral effects of mTOR inhibition in a rat model of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 46:840–848.

Shtutman M, Zhurinsky J, Simcha I, Albanese C, D'Amico M, Pestell R, Ben Ze'ev A (1999) The cyclin D1 gene is a target of the beta-catenin/LEF-1 pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5522–5527.

Tavian D, De Petro G, Benetti A, Portolani N, Giulini SM, Barlati S (2000) u-PA and c-MET mRNA expression is co-ordinately enhanced while hepatocyte growth factor mRNA is down-regulated in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer 87:644–649.

Thompson MD, Monga SP (2007) WNT/beta-catenin signaling in liver health and disease. Hepatology 45:1298–1305.

Tovar V, Alsinet C, Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, Chiang DY, Sole M, Thung S, Moyano S, Toffanin S, Minguez B, Cabellos L, Peix J, Bruix J, Llovet JM (2010) IGF activation in a molecular subclass of hepatocellular carcinoma and pre-clinical efficacy of IGF-1R blockage. J Hepatol 52:550–559.

Villanueva A, Chiang DY, Newell P, Peix J, Thung S, Alsinet C, Tovar V, Roayaie S, Minguez B, Sole M, Battiston C, Van Laarhoven S, Fiel MI, Di Feo A, Hoshida Y, Yea S, Toffanin S, Ramos A, Martignetti JA, Mazzaferro V, Bruix J, Waxman S, Schwartz M, Meyerson M, Friedman SL, Llovet JM (2008) Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 135:1972–1983.

Villanueva A, Minguez B, Forner A, Reig M, Llovet JM (2010) Hepatocellular carcinoma: novel molecular approaches for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. Annu Rev Med 61:317–328.

Villanueva A, Newell P, Chiang DY, Friedman SL, Llovet JM (2007) Genomics and signaling pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis 27:55–76.

Woo HG, Park ES, Cheon JH, Kim JH, Lee JS, Park BJ, Kim W, Park SC, Chung YJ, Kim BG, Yoon JH, Lee HS, Kim CY, Yi NJ, Suh KS, Lee KU, Chu IS, Roskams T, Thorgeirsson SS, Kim YJ (2008) Gene expression-based recurrence prediction of hepatitis B virus-related human hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 14:2056–2064.

Ye QH, Qin LX, Forgues M, He P, Kim JW, Peng AC, Simon R, Li Y, Robles AI, Chen Y, Ma ZC, Wu ZQ, Ye SL, Liu YK, Tang ZY, Wang XW (2003) Predicting hepatitis B virus-positive metastatic hepatocellular carcinomas using gene expression profiling and supervised machine learning. Nat Med 9:416–423.

Yoshioka S, Takemasu I, Nagano H, Kittaka N, Noda T, Wada H, Kobayashi S, Marubashi S, Takeda Y, Umeshita K, Dono K, Matsubara K, Monden M (2009) Molecular prediction of early recurrence after resection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 45:881–889.
