
J. Biochem. 2011;149(4):361–379 doi:10.1093/jb/mvr021

**JB Review**

**Mammalian Hippo pathway: from development to cancer and beyond**

Received January 5, 2011; accepted February 1, 2011; published online February 15, 2011

Yijun Bao${}^{1,2}$, Yutaka Hata${}^{1,*}$, Mitsunobu Ikeda${}^{1}$ and Kanchanamala Withanage${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan and ${}^{2}$Department of Neurosurgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China

*Yutaka Hata, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. Tel: 81-3-5803-5164, Fax: 81-3-5803-0121, email: yuhammch@tmd.ac.jp

The Hippo pathway was discovered as a signal transduction pathway that regulates organ size in *Drosophila melanogaster*. It is composed of three components: cell surface upstream regulators including cell adhesion molecules and cell polarity complexes; a kinase cascade comprising two serine-threonine kinases with regulators and adaptors; and a downstream target, a transcription coactivator. The coactivator mediates the transcription of cell proliferation-promoting and anti-apoptotic genes. The pathway negatively regulates the coactivator to restrict cell proliferation and to promote cell death. Thus, the pathway prevents tissue overgrowth and tumourigenesis. The framework of the pathway is conserved in mammals. A dysfunction of the pathway is frequently detected in human cancers and correlates with a poor prognosis. Recent works indicated that the Hippo pathway plays an important role in tissue homeostasis through the regulation of stem cells, cell differentiation and tissue regeneration.

Keywords: apoptosis/cancer/kinase/regeneration/signal transduction.

Abbreviations: AMOT, angiomotin; AMOTL, AMOT-like; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia mutated; aPKC, atypical protein kinase C; App, approximated; ALL, acute lymphocytic leukaemia; ASPP, apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53; CDC, cell division cycle; DCO, discs overgrown; EBP50, Ezrin-radixin-moesin-binding phosphoprotein 50; EGF, epidermal growth factor; EMT, epithelial–mesenchymal transition; Fj, Four-jointed; FERM, 4.1 ezrin radixin moesin; FRMD6, FERM domain-containing protein 6; GTP, guanosine 5′-triphosphate; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; LATS, large tumour suppressor; Lgl, lethal giant larvae; MOAP, modulator of apoptosis; MOB, Mps one binder; MST, mammalian Ste20-like kinase; NDR, Nuclear Dbf2-related; Nf2, neurofibromin 2 in human and neurofibromatosis 2 in mouse; NHERF, Na${}^{+}$/H${}^{+}$ exchanger regulatory factor; NIMA, never in mitosis A; PML, promyelocytic leukaemia; RA, Ras-association; RASSF, Ras-association domain family; SARAH, Salvador/RASSF/Hippo; Shh, Sonic hedgehog; TAZ, Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif; TEAD, TEA domain family; TGF-$\beta$, transforming growth factor-$\beta$; TNF-$\alpha$, tumour necrosis factor-$\alpha$; Trc, tricorned; YAP, Yes-associated protein.

The Hippo pathway is a signalling pathway that regulates cell proliferation and cell death. It was originally discovered in *Drosophila melanogaster* as a pathway that determines organ size and of which mutations lead to tumourigenesis. The pathway is conserved and plays a role as a tumour suppressor in mammals. Disorders of the pathway are very frequently detected in human cancers. Its down-regulation correlates with the aggressive properties of cancer cells. The pathway regulates the self-renewal and differentiation of stem cells and progenitor cells. As the pathway cross-talks with other signalling such as Wnt, Notch and Sonic hedgehog (Shh), it influences various biological events and its dysfunction possibly underlies many human diseases besides cancer. Accordingly, the Hippo pathway now fascinates researchers. The number of related papers is rapidly increasing. The research progress is enormous. It is difficult to cover everything, so we briefly introduce and occasionally refer to the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway in order to discuss the complexity of the mammalian Hippo pathway, but the main subject of this review is the mammalian Hippo pathway. We do not go into the details of molecular structures and biochemical properties of components. We refer readers to the other recent reviews (1–7).

### Drosophila Hippo pathway

The studies of the pathway have been constantly fuelled by *Drosophila* genetics. Table I lists the currently identified components of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway (Fig. 1). First, Fat and Expanded were identified as genes that regulate cell proliferation, followed by Warts (8–11). Merlin was identified as a homologue of human Merlin/neurofibromin 2 (Nf2), which is responsible for neurofibromatosis type 2 (12). However, the term Hippo pathway was not coined until the discovery of Salvador (13, 14). Hippo was reported immediately after Salvador (15–19). The resemblance of the phenotypes led researchers to the idea that these genes function in the same pathway. The physical interactions of the gene products were also confirmed. Mats was identified as a general inhibitor of tissue growth and found to function with Warts (20). These four founding members (Hippo, Mats, Salvador and Warts) are called the core complex and form a kinase

Y. Bao et al.

Table I. Components of the Drosophila Hippo pathway

| Components of the Drosophila Hippo pathway (gene symbol) | Notes |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| Upstream regulators                                    |       |
| Fat/Dachsous complex                                   |       |
| Fat (ft)                                               | Protocadherin. |
| Dachsous (ds)                                          | Protocadherin. |
| Four-jointed (fj)                                      | Golgi kinase. Modulator of the interaction between Fat and Dachsous. |
| Lowfat (lft)                                           | Fat- and Dachsous-interacting protein. |
| Dachs (d)                                              | Unconventional myosin. Inhibitor of Warts. No corresponding homologue has been identified in mammals. |
| Approximated (app)                                     | DHHC palmitoyltransferase. |
| Discs overgrown (dco)                                  | Casein kinase. |
| Crumbs                                                 |       |
| Crumbs (crb)                                           | A component of the apical polarity complex (Crumbs/Patj/Stardust). |
| Kibra—Expanded—Merlin complex.                         |       |
| Kibra (kibra)                                          | WW domain-containing protein. |
| Expanded (ex)                                          | FERM domain-containing protein. Willin/FRMD6 is a candidate for the homologue in mammals. |
| Merlin (Mer)                                           | FERM domain-containing protein. Homologue of human Merlin/Nf2. |
| Core complex                                           |       |
| Hippo (hpo)                                            | Ste20-like kinase. Homologue of MST1 and MST2. |
| Salvador (sav)                                         | WW domain-containing adaptor. Homologue of Sav1 (WW45). |
| Mats (mats)                                            | Activator of Warts. Homologue of MOB1 and MOB2. |
| Warts (wts)                                            | Nuclear Dbf2-related kinase. Homologue of LATS1 and LATS2 (Kpm). |
| Downstream targets                                     |       |
| Yorkie (yki)                                           | Transcription coactivator. Homologue of YAP and TAZ (WWTR1). |
| Scalloped (sd)                                         | Transcriptional factor. Homologue of TEAD1–4. |
| Other related molecules                                |       |
| dRASSF (Rassf)                                         | Homologue of RASSF1–RASSF6. |
| dSTRIPAK (mts)                                         | Phosphatase. |
| djub (jub)                                             | LIM domain-containing protein. Homologue of Ajuba. |
| Atrophin (atro)                                        | Transcription repressor. |
| Lgl [l(2)gl]                                           | WD40 repeat containing protein. Component of the basal polarity complex (Lgl/Scrib/Dlg). |
| aPKC (aPKC)                                            | Component of the apical polarity complex (aPKC/Par3/Par6). |

Upstream regulators of the Drosophila Hippo pathway comprise Fat/Dachsous complexes, Crumbs, and Kibra—Expanded—Merlin complex. The core complex includes four founding members of the pathway (Hippo, Salvador, Mats and Warts). The downstream targets are Yorkie and Scalloped. The pathway is also regulated by other molecules such as dRASSF, dSTRIPAK, djub, Atrophin, Lgl and aPKC.

Mammalian Hippo pathway

extrinsic information from the neighbouring cells and the intrinsic information about the cell condition.

## Basal architecture of the mammalian Hippo pathway

Mammalian homologues have been identified for all components of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway except Dachs. Most of the core components had been identified and studied before the emergence of the Hippo pathway. Merlin was identified as the gene responsible for neurofibromatosis type 2 (59, 60). Its inhibitory role in cell proliferation and its biochemical properties including intramolecular interaction and cell density- and Rac-dependent phosphorylation have been analysed (61–63). Mammalian Ste20-like kinases (MST1 and MST2) were initially cloned as homologues of yeast Ste20 kinase and later purified as kinases that respond to cell stress (64, 65). Large tumour suppressor (LATS) 1 and LATS2 were cloned as homologues of *Drosophila* Warts, and their tumour suppressive properties were studied (66–68). Mps one binder (MOB) 1 was identified in the gene database as a homologue of yeast MOB1 and proposed to be a potential substrate of protein phosphatase 2A (69, 70). Yes-associated protein (YAP) was discovered as a protein that interacts with Yes tyrosine kinase (71). Interactions with various proteins such as Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF) 1/Ezrin-radixin-moesin-binding phosphoprotein (EBP) 50, p73, Runx1, Runx2, SMAD7, TEA domain family member (TEAD) 1–4, and ErbB4, have been reported (72). Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), a paralogue of YAP, was identified as a 14-3-3-interacting protein (73). The discovery of the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway prompted researchers to combine the mammalian homologues into one pathway based on these preceding studies. The rough draft of the mammalian Hippo pathway is as follows (Fig. 2, centre): Merlin activates the Hippo pathway at high cell density; MST kinases co-operate with MOB1 and Sav1, a homologue of Salvador, to activate LATS kinases, resulting in the phosphorylation of YAP/TAZ; and eventually, YAP/TAZ is recruited from the nucleus and YAP/TAZ-dependent transcription is shut off to stop cell proliferation and induce apoptosis.

## Unresolved upstream regulators of the mammalian Hippo pathway

In spite of the apparent similarities between the *Drosophila* and mammalian Hippo pathways, there are potential differences. The molecular link between upstream regulators and the core complex has not been clarified in mammals as well as in *Drosophila*. Willin/4.1 ezrin radixin moesin (FERM) domain-containing protein 6 (FRMD6) is regarded as an Expanded homologue, but its molecular structure is significantly different (74). Kibra binds Expanded, but mammalian Kibra does not bind Willin/FRMD6 (50). While Expanded binds Hippo, the interaction between Willin/FRMD6 and MST kinases has not been

Modes of unphosphorylated Merlin to inhibit growth

Receptors
CD44
EGF signaling

Regulators and effectors of MST
RASSF1A
Microtubule stabilization
Inhibition of APC complex
p53 up-regulation
and others

Canonical Hippo pathway
Activation of Hippo pathway
Unphosphorylated
Merlin
MST
YAP/TAZ
Cell cycle promoting and
anti-apoptotic gene transcription

Regulations of YAP activities
Interaction of YAP with Crumbs complex and other plasma-membrane proteins
such as NHERF1/EBP50
CRL4DCAF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase
Omi/HtrA2
LATS1
LIMK1
CDC20
LATS2
Mdm2
Aurora-A
Ajuba
Unidentified kinase
microRNAs
NDR
RASSF6-
dependent
apoptosis
FoxO
Canonical
Hippo pathway
Centrosomal
Regulation
Nek2A
Histone H2B
FoxO-dependent gene transcription
Survival gene transcription
Pro-apoptotic gene transcription
Pro-apoptotic gene transcription
ASPP1
p53
YAP
Akt
SCFβ-TrCP
S381
CK
Itch
p73
PML
c-Abl

Fig. 2 Mammalian Hippo pathway. The canonical Hippo pathway. A kinase cascade comprising MST and LATS phosphorylates YAP and TAZ. The phosphorylated YAP and TAZ bind to 14-3-3 (not shown) and are sequestered in the cytosol. YAP and TAZ are predisposed to mediate cell cycle promoting and anti-apoptotic gene transcription. The activation of the Hippo pathway results in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. CD44 is one of the candidates of upstream regulators of the mammalian Hippo pathway. For simplification, other components such as Sav1 and MOB1 are not depicted. Top left: Merlin inhibits cell growth via the activation of the Hippo pathway, the inhibition of EGF signalling, and the inhibition of CRL4 DCAF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase. Top right: MST phosphorylates not only the components of the Hippo pathway (MOB1, Sav1 and LATS) but also NDR, FoxO, Histone H2B, and Nek2A. Under the condition that the Hippo pathway is activated, all these substrates can also be phosphorylated. MST is negatively regulated by RASSF1A. RASSF6 and MST mutually inhibit each other. The Hippo pathway and RASSF6-dependent apoptosis are simultaneously activated. Bottom left: Pro-apoptotic aspect and regulation of YAP. In some cells, YAP mainly mediates p73-dependent pro-apoptotic gene transcription. c-Abl promotes the association of YAP with p73. PML recruits YAP to the nuclear body and stabilizes p73. The phosphorylation of YAP by LATS results in the degradation of YAP. The Crumbs complex interacts with YAP and sequesters it in the cytosol. Thus, Akt promotes cell survival, while YAP functions as a tumour suppressor. It regulates various molecules to regulate the cell cycle, apoptosis and the p53 level. ASPP1 is known to be a tumour suppressor. It interacts with plasma-membrane proteins such as NHERF1/EBP50. Bottom right: Regulation and targets of LATS1 and LATS2. LATS1 and LATS2 are oncogenic stress (not shown) induces the nuclear translocation of ASPP1 with LATS2, so that p53 is shifted from cell cycle regulating gene promoters to pro-apoptotic gene promoters. YAP competes with ASPP1 for the binding to LATS2. Cytosolic ASPP1 inhibits the phosphorylation of YAP by LATS1 and increases the nuclear YAP.
confirmed (49). The reintroduction of Merlin into Merlin-deficient Schwannoma cells induces apoptosis, but RNAi silencing of MST2 does not influence this apoptosis (75). Although the possibility that MST1 mediates apoptosis instead of MST2 has not been excluded, this observation suggests that Merlin does not function upstream of MST2. In *Drosophila*, Fat influences Warts activity through not only Expanded but also Dachs (36, 37). Mammals appear to have no Dachs homologue. *Drosophila* Fat is proteolytically processed, is phosphorylated by DCO in a Dachsous-dependent manner, and interacts with atrophin (39, 40, 42). Mammalian Fat4 and Dachsous1 organize the apical membrane (76). Fat4 is proposed to be a putative tumour suppressor (77). Therefore, Fat4 is likely to be a Fat homologue. Nevertheless, it has not yet been directly demonstrated that Fat4 is regulated in a similar manner to Fat at the molecular level. Mammals may have alternative upstream regulators. Merlin binds CD44, which is involved in contact inhibition (78, 79). CD44 is over-expressed in glioblastoma multiforme and the suppression of CD44 augments the response of Hippo signalling to H₂O₂ (80). CD44 is likely to be an integral component of the mammalian Hippo pathway. NHERF1/EBP50 is also a well-known binding partner of Merlin, and is an important player in cancer (81, 82). The interaction of Merlin with NHERF/EBP50 may be more relevant to the regulation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) signalling, which is one of the important functions of Merlin, than to the Hippo pathway (83). However, as YAP and TAZ interact with NHERF1/EBP50 and NHERF2, respectively, we may as well regard NHERF proteins as components of the mammalian Hippo pathway (73, 84). Thus, the mammalian Hippo pathway may have additional upstream regulators.

### Complexities of the mammalian Hippo pathway

The mammalian Hippo pathway is more complicated than the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway. One of the reasons for this complexity is that mammals have more than one paralogue for each *Drosophila* component. These paralogues sometimes play redundant roles but in most cases exhibit distinct properties. Second and more importantly, the components of the mammalian Hippo pathway undergo many molecular interactions, so they exert additional functions and are subject to additional regulation. For instance, the substrates of MST kinases include not only LATS kinases and MOB1, but also c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), histone H2B and FoxO, as discussed below (85, 86). All of them are implicated in apoptosis. LATS1 interacts with LIM domain kinase 1 to inhibit its kinase activity and thereby affects cytokinesis (87). It also binds mitochondrial serine protease Omi/HtrA2 to promote the protease activity (88, 89). Omi/HtrA2 controls cell proliferation through LATS1. If we define the final outputs of the Hippo pathway as the regulation of cell proliferation and cell death, it can be argued that

---

Mammalian Hippo pathway

these molecular interactions also mediate Hippo signalling. No matter how we demarcate the Hippo pathway, we need to consider that activation of the MST–LATS–YAP/TAZ axis is associated with parallel activation of other pathways, which co-operate with the canonical Hippo pathway. In the previous section, we discussed the potential difference from the *Drosophila* Hippo pathway in the upstream regulators. We will here discuss the divergent molecular interactions mediated by the components of the mammalian Hippo pathway that may add twists to the overview of the pathway (Fig. 2).

#### Merlin

Merlin is a FERM domain-containing protein (90–92) (Fig. 2, top left). Merlin is phosphorylated by p21-activated kinase at Ser518 and is dephosphorylated by myosin phosphatase MYPT1-PP1δ, which is inhibited by CPI-17 (93–95). Cadherin-based cell contact activates MYPT1-PP1δ and increases the unphosphorylated growth-inhibitory Merlin. The molecular mechanism underlying the contact inhibition has been intensively studied. In Merlin⁻/⁻ cells, EGF receptor activation and internalization are maintained even at high cell density (96). Similarly, in *Drosophila*, Merlin together with Expanded regulates endocytosis and signalling by receptors such as Notch (97). These findings suggest that Merlin mediates this contact inhibition through the control of membrane receptor distribution and signalling. After the rediscovery of Merlin as a Hippo pathway component, the effect of Merlin depletion on the Hippo pathway was studied. In one study, liver-specific Merlin⁻/⁻ mice exhibited extensive proliferation of hepatocytes and bile ducts, and developed hepatocellular carcinomas and bile duct hamartomas (98). The phosphorylation of YAP and LATS kinases was reduced and nuclear YAP increased. Cell over-proliferation and tumour growth were suppressed by loss of YAP. This study supports that YAP is a major effector of Merlin and that the Hippo pathway mediates the contact inhibition. However, in another study, Merlin⁻/⁻ liver exhibited progenitor cell expansion and did not show any alteration of YAP phosphorylation or localization (99). The knockdown of YAP did not recover the contact inhibition. Alternatively, an EGF receptor inhibitor blocked the over-proliferation of liver progenitors. The authors consider that the regulation of EGF signalling is the mechanism underlying the contact inhibition. A recent study revealed that growth-inhibitory unphosphorylated Merlin is translocated into the nucleus, where Merlin binds and inhibits E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4<sup>DCAF1</sup> to activate growth-inhibitory gene transcription (100). These three functions are not mutually exclusive. Once dephosphorylated, Merlin can act as a tumour suppressor through the up-regulation of the canonical Hippo pathway, the restriction of EGF signalling, and the inhibition of CRL4<sup>DCAF1</sup>.

#### MST1 and MST2

MST1 mediates apoptosis through cleavage, autophosphorylation and nuclear translocation (85, 86, 101–103) (Fig. 2, top right). MST2 is also
Y. Bao *et al.*

cleaved (102). Akt blocks the caspase-dependent cleavage through phosphorylation at Thr120 and Thr387 in MST1, and at Thr117 and Thr384 in MST2 (104–107). Thr387 of MST1 is dephosphorylated by PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 phosphatases (108). MST1 activates JNK, and this activation causes nuclear condensation (101, 109). MST1 phosphorylates histone H2B and H2AX directly or via JNK (110, 111). MST1-FoxO signalling is not simple. A study involving MST1−/− mice demonstrated that MST1-FoxO signalling augments the resistance to oxidative stress in T cells and promotes survival not apoptosis (112). However, in the prevailing view, MST1 induces the translocation of FoxO proteins and mediates FoxO-dependent apoptosis (113, 114). A recent paper reported that MST1 and MST2 phosphorylate never in mitosis A (NIMA) kinase, Nek2A, to recruit it to the centrosome, and to promote the phosphorylation of centrosomal linker proteins and centrosome splitting (115). As Sav1 also interacts with Nek2A and is necessary for the effect of MST kinases on Nek2A, this centrosomal function of MST kinases may also be relevant to the Hippo pathway. MST1 phosphorylates and inhibits Aurora-B (116). This inhibition promotes the stability of kinetochore-microtubule attachment and prevents chromosomal missegregation. P53 is phosphorylated by MST1 in the presence of death-associated protein 4 (117). MST1 directly inhibits Akt1, a pro-survival kinase (118). RCC1 is a newly identified substrate of MST1 and MST2 (119). The phosphorylation of RCC1 is enhanced by RASSF1A and results in the accumulation of guanosine 5′-triphosphate (GTP)-bound RAN. GTP-bound RAN is involved in the stabilization of microtubules. All these interactions and phosphorylations may be related to the tumour-suppressive function of MST kinases. Intriguingly, one paper reported that in MST1−/− MST2−/− liver, LATS1 and LATS2 are phosphorylated in the activation loop but the phosphorylation of YAP is reduced (120). These findings mean that LATS kinases can be phosphorylated by a kinase distinct from MST kinases, and more importantly, that MST kinases negatively regulate YAP independently of LATS kinases.

Upstream regulation of MST kinases is likewise manifold. Raf-1 prevents the dimerization and auto-phosphorylation of MST2 (121). RASSF1A releases MST2 from the inhibition by Raf-1 to induce apoptosis (122). Other RASSF proteins also modulate MST kinases, which we will discuss later. Akt promotes the interaction between MST2 and Raf-1, which means that the inhibition of cleavage is not the sole way for Akt to regulate MST2 (106). JNK, which is a substrate of MST1, phosphorylates MST1 at Ser82 and enhances its activity (123). In Drosophila, JNK functions upstream of Hippo, but in a different manner. Tissue damage activates Drosophila JNK in enterocytes, which increases nuclear Yorkie (124). Although, it has not been directly examined, it can be inferred that Drosophila JNK suppresses Hippo or that Drosophila JNK regulates Yorkie independently of Hippo. Drosophila JNK induces cytokine Unpaired to activate Jak/Stat signalling and to mediate tissue regeneration (125, 126).

---

**NDR1 and NDR2**

Drosophila Warts and mammalian LATS kinases belong to the Nuclear Dbf2-related (NDR) kinases, which are conserved from yeast, and play important roles in cell cycle regulation and cell proliferation (127) (Fig. 2, top right). Drosophila has an additional NDR kinase named Tricorned (Trc) (128). Trc is regulated by Hippo and Mats (129, 130). Even so, Trc is not considered to be a component of the Hippo pathway, because the Trc mutant shows different phenotypes from those of Hippo pathway mutants (128, 130). Mammals have two Trc homologues, NDR1 and NDR2, which are activated by MST kinases and MOB1. NDR1 and NDR2 mediate apoptosis downstream of MST1 and RASSF1A (131). NDR1 is involved in the regulation of centrosome and chromosome alignment (116, 132, 133). NDR1 knockout mice are predisposed to the development of T cell lymphomas (134). These findings suggest that NDR1 functions as a tumour suppressor through regulation of cell division and apoptosis. As NDR1 is activated by MST kinases and MOB1, upon activation of the Hippo pathway, NDR kinases are supposedly activated as well as LATS kinases, and contribute to apoptosis and cell cycle regulation.

---

**LATS1 and LATS2**

LATS1 and LATS2 negatively regulate cell division cycle (CDC) 2 and induce G2/M arrest (135–137) (Fig. 2, bottom right). LATS1 interacts with zyxin during mitosis, and this interaction is necessary for normal mitotic progression (138). A dysfunction of LATS1 induces mitotic delay and the development of tetraploidy (139). LATS2 has also been reported to induce G1/S arrest (140). Both are localized at the centrosome. The centrosomal localization of LATS2 is regulated by Aurora-A (141). LATS2 is associated with Ajuba and recruits γ-tubulin to centrosomes during mitosis (142). LATS2 binds Mdm2 and inhibits its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity to stabilize p53, which in turn up-regulates the transcription of LATS2 (143). Two papers have reported the implication of apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 (ASPP) 1 in the functions of LATS and YAP (144, 145). LATS2 phosphorylates cytoplasmic ASPP1 to induce nuclear translocation (144). In the nucleus, LATS2 and ASPP1 shift the binding of p53 to pro-apoptotic gene promoters from cell cycle regulating gene promoters. In the cytosol, YAP competes with ASPP1 for the interaction with LATS2 and prevents apoptosis. The second paper reported that cytoplasmic ASPP1 inhibits the phosphorylation of YAP and TAZ by LATS1, and increases nuclear YAP and TAZ to promote survival (145). The authors discuss the possibility that ASPP1 promotes apoptosis if YAP mediates pro-apoptotic gene transcription in the nucleus. In short, LATS kinases regulate the cell cycle and apoptosis not only through the phosphorylation of YAP but also in other ways. As described above, LATS1 and LATS2 are still phosphorylated in the activation loop in the absence of MST1 or MST2, suggesting that MST1 and MST2 are not the sole regulators of LATS kinases (120). Their expression levels are
regulated by microRNA-31, -372 and -373, and Heat Shock Protein 90 (146–148).

**RASSFs**

RASSFs are proteins with a Ras-association (RA) domain (149, 150) (Fig. 2, top right). The human genome contains 10 RASSF genes. RASSF1–RASSF6 have the RA domain in middle regions and the Salvador/RASSF/Hippo (SARAH) domain in C-terminal regions. The SARAH domain is a coiled-coil motif that mediates protein interactions. Sav1, MST1, MST2 and Nek20 have this domain. RASSF5 is better known as Norel. RASSF7–RASSF10 have the RA domain in N-terminal regions and lack the SARAH domain. RASSF1–RASSF6 correspond to DrosophiladRASSF. RASSF1 was identified as a gene encoded on chromosome 3p21, which shows allelic loss in lung cancer (151). It has two major isoforms: RASSF1A and RASSF1C. The suppression of RASSF1A by hypermethylation of CpG islands is quite often associated with human cancers. RASSF1A mutant mice are susceptible to carcinogens and irradiation (152, 153). These properties established RASSF1A as a tumour suppressor. Norel was identified as an Ras effector and implicated in Ras-dependent apoptosis (154, 155). The interaction of RASSF1 and Norel with MST1 has also been reported (156). The effect of RASSF1A and Norel on MST1 activity is controversial. RASSF1A and Norel seemingly inhibit the activity in vitro but stimulate it in vivo. RASSF1A mediates Fas-induced MST1-dependent apoptosis, which is associated with the activation of MST1 in vivo (157). The RASSF protein was accepted as an integral component of the Hippo pathway when the genetic and physical interaction of dRASSF with Hippo was demonstrated (52). dRASSF competes with Salvador for binding to Hippo and acts as a negative regulator of the pathway. Researchers have noticed, however, that dRASSF suppresses the overgrowth phenotype of the Hippo mutant lacking the SARAH domain but not of the kinase-dead Hippo mutant. This observation means that dRASSF has a tumour-suppressor function and paradoxically antagonizes the tumour suppressor Hippo pathway. In mammals, RASSF1A has been recognized as a part of the complex including MST2, Sav1 and LATS1 (158). The in vivo activation of MST2 by RASSF1A has been confirmed (122, 158). In response to DNA damage, RASSF1A is phosphorylated by ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) to activate MST2 and LATS1 (159). Thus, RASSF1A functions as an upstream activator and mediates Hippo-dependent apoptosis. As RASSF1A is a well-established tumour suppressor, this observation is comprehensible but is inconsistent with the report on dRASSF. We and others have studied RASSF6 that mediates apoptosis in various cells (160, 161). RASSF6 interacts with MST1 and MST2 through the C-terminal SARAH domain [(162), M. Ikeda’s unpublished results]. A C-terminal truncated mutant of RASSF6, which does not bind MST kinases, still promotes apoptosis. The knockdown of LATS1 or LATS2 does not affect RASSF6-induced apoptosis. These findings indicate that RASSF6

Mammalian Hippo pathway

mediates apoptosis independently of the Hippo pathway. The underlying mechanism is not yet clear enough, but RASSF6-induced apoptosis partially depends on modulator of apoptosis (MOAP) 1, which is also involved in RASSF1A-induced apoptosis (163, 164). MST2 blocks the interaction between RASSF6 and MOAP1, and inhibits RASSF6-mediated apoptosis. This inhibition does not require kinase activity. Conversely, RASSF6 suppresses the activity of MST2, possibly by inhibiting homo-oligomerization. Based on these data, we have proposed a new model. RASSF6 and MST2 form a complex and mutually inhibit their functions. Upon activation of MST2, RASSF6 is released from MST2 and then induces apoptosis. MST2, which is free of RASSF6, together with Sav1 activates LATS kinases. If dRASSF behaves like RASSF6, this scenario explains why dRASSF does not function as a tumour suppressor in the kinase-dead Hippo mutant. As RASSF6 is highly pro-apoptotic, the RASSF6-mediated process should significantly contribute to apoptosis under the condition that the Hippo pathway is activated.

Because of its importance as a tumour suppressor, RASSF1 has been intensively studied and diverse functions are attributed to it. RASSF1A stabilizes microtubules through various interactions (165, 166). RASSF1A–MST2–RAN complex is also involved in this stabilization (119). RASSF1A interacts with CDC20 and inhibits an anaphase-promoting complex (167). RASSF1A interacts with Aurora-A and Aurora-B, which are important for prometaphase progression and cytokinesis (168–170). RASSF1A promotes the self-ubiquitination of Mdm2 and activates the p53-dependent checkpoint (171). RASSF1A interacts with F-box protein Skp2 and is degraded by the SCF complex at the G1/S transition (172). RASSF1C, a splice variant of RASSF1A, is anchored by Daxx to a promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear body and is released when Daxx is degraded in response to DNA damage (173). RASSF1C is translocated to the cytosol and activates stress activated protein kinase/JNK. It is unclear whether or not these functions of RASSF1A and RASSF1C are relevant to the Hippo pathway. However, all these properties can contribute to the restriction of cell cycle and cell death.

**YAP and TAZ**

Mammals have two Yorkie homologues: YAP and TAZ (71, 174–176) (Fig. 2, bottom left). YAP and TAZ have similar molecular structures and share interacting proteins. However, YAP and TAZ are distinct in some aspects. The most remarkable difference is that YAP promotes pro-apoptotic gene transcription (177). In the central dogma, it is presumed that Yorkie or YAP mediates cell cycle-promoting and anti-apoptotic gene transcription and that the phosphorylation of Yorkie by Warts or YAP by LATS kinases turns off this transcription. However, this premise is too simple for YAP. WW domains are necessary for YAP to induce transformation in NIH3T3 cells, whereas the same domains show an inhibitory effect in MCF10A cells (178). YAP functions in a cell context-dependent manner. The keys are p73 and

367
Y. Bao *et al.*

Akt. In some cells, YAP is mainly localized in the cytosol and its recruitment to the cytosol depends on the phosphorylation by Akt, not LATS kinases (179). Likewise, in some cells, YAP mediates p73-dependent pro-apoptotic gene transcription. In these cells, the nuclear accumulation of YAP leads to apoptosis, while cytosolic sequestration results in cell survival. Indeed, YAP plays a tumour suppressive role in some cancers (180). In HCT116 or H1299 cells, PML interacts with YAP and recruits it to the nuclear bodies (181). Then, p73 is stabilized through sumoylation, so that p73-dependent transcription is up-regulated. As PML is a target of p73, a positive feedback loop exists here. Akt negatively regulates this PML transcriptional activation by sequestering YAP in the cytosol. In breast cancer MCF 7 cells, YAP forms a complex with LATS1 in the cytosol (122). RASSF1A releases YAP from LATS1, and facilitates the nuclear translocation and complex formation of YAP and p73. YAP competes with E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch for binding to p73, and promotes p73-dependent transcription and apoptosis (182). In H1299 cells, DNA damage induces the phosphorylation of YAP by c-Abl and the phosphorylated YAP strongly interacts with p73 (183). Neurons express a neuron-specific isoform of YAP, which mediates atypical neuronal death at least partially depending on p73 (184). Under all these conditions, YAP is predisposed to promote apoptosis and thus the naive idea that the Hippo pathway mediates apoptosis by down-regulating YAP is not valid.

The subcellular localization of YAP and TAZ is modulated through various protein interactions. Tight junction protein ZO-1 and its isoform, ZO-2, bind TAZ (185). ZO-2 also binds YAP (186). Unlike ZO-1, ZO-2 is localized in the nucleus and is involved in the nuclear localization of YAP. ZO-2 affects TAZ-mediated transcription. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed the co-immunoprecipitation of YAP and TAZ with the Crumbs complex comprising Pals1, Patj, MUPP1, Lin7c and Angiomotin (AMOT) (187). In Eph4 cells, when the cell density is high, the Crumbs complex is assembled at tight junctions, facilitates the phosphorylation of YAP and TAZ, and causes their accumulation in the cytosol. As the initial studies suggested, YAP and TAZ may be anchored to the plasma membrane via NHERF proteins. These molecular interactions as well as the binding to 14-3-3 can determine the subcellular localization of YAP and TAZ, and regulate their functions.

Moreover, the regulation of YAP and TAZ does not necessarily depend only on their subcellular localization. When LATS kinases phosphorylate YAP at Ser381, YAP is further phosphorylated by casein kinase 1 δ/ε, and targeted for ubiquitination by SCF<sup>β-TrCP</sup> and degradation (188). TAZ is also a substrate of SCF<sup>β-TrCP</sup> (189). Thus, YAP and TAZ are regulated through protein degradation.

It is clear that YAP and TAZ exhibit oncogenic activities and contribute to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), but it is not clear how they do it (190–192). The importance of TEAD-mediated transcription has been shown (193, 194). However, the targets of YAP and TAZ, which directly govern oncogenesis and EMT, are not clear enough. AXL receptor tyrosine kinase was recently identified as one of the targets of YAP and its implication in oncogenesis has been reported (195). Another paper reported the importance of Wbp2 in TAZ-mediated oncogenesis (196). In *Drosophila*, microRNA bantam is well known as a target of Yorkie. However, the target microRNAs of YAP and TAZ have not yet been reported.

### Cross-talk with other signalling

The Hippo pathway cross-talks with other signalling (197). In *Drosophila*, Yorkie up-regulates dMyc, while dMyc represses Yorkie (198, 199). Hippo signalling activates Notch signalling in posterior follicle cells and neuroepithelial cells (200–203). Yorkie induces cytokine-like ligand Unpaired and non-cell autonomously activates the Jak/Stat pathway. In mammals, YAP activation enhances Notch signalling and increases nuclear β-catenin (204). TAZ binds Dvl2 and inhibits its phosphorylation by casein kinases (205). As this interaction occurs in the cytoplasm, the Hippo pathway, which induces the cytosolic localization of TAZ, appears to antagonize the Wnt pathway. YAP binds SMAD1 and supports SMAD1-dependent transcription (206). In human embryonic stem cells, TAZ interacts with SMAD complexes and mediates transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signalling (207). The Crumbs complex interacts with YAP and TAZ, sequesters SMAD2/3 complexes, and suppresses TGF-β signalling (187). YAP is up-regulated in medulloblastomas with aberrant Shh signalling (208). Shh increases YAP expression and promotes its nuclear localization. YAP subsequently induces the expression of Gli2, which regulates Gli1. YAP induces amphiregulin and activates EGF receptor signalling in a non-cell autonomous manner (209). This cross-talk implies that disruption of the Hippo pathway can cause perturbation in many signal pathways and thereby result in broad spectrum consequences.

### Physiological functions of the Hippo pathway

#### Tissue development

The Hippo pathway plays a role at an early stage of development. During blastocyst formation, the Hippo pathway is activated in the inside cells through cell–cell contacts, but is inactive in the outside cells (210). Consequently, YAP is localized in the nucleus in the outside cells and induces the expression of trophectoderm regulators, while the inside cells do not express these regulators and adopt the inner cell mass fate. Homozygous knockout mice of Merlin, Fat4, Sav1, MST1/2 double, LATS1, LATS2 and YAP are embryonic lethal or die soon after birth, which underscores the importance of the Hippo pathway in development (120, 137, 211–217). FAT4<sup>-/-</sup> mice develop polycystic kidneys (212). Epithelial differentiation is impaired in Sav1<sup>-/-</sup> mice (213). YAP deletion in the liver causes hepatocyte death and abnormal bile ducts (98).

Loss of TAZ leads to polycystic kidneys and lung emphysema (218, 219).

**Organ size control and tumour suppressive role**

Animal models support the importance of the Hippo pathway in suppression of tumourigenesis. Merlin+/− mice develop malignant tumours including osteosarcomas, lymphomas, lung adenocarcinomas, hepatocellular carcinomas and fibrosarcomas (220). Conditional knockout of Merlin in Schwann cells causes schwannomas (221). MST1−/− mice and MST2−/− mice develop sarcomas and mammary tumours, respectively, but at a low frequency (120). Seventy-four percent of Sav1+/− mice have liver tumour (222). LATS1−/− mice have sarcomas and ovarian tumours (215). Liver-specific conditional knockout of MST1, MST2 and Sav1, and activation of YAP demonstrate that the Hippo pathway indeed regulates the organ size in mammals, and that its dysfunction leads to hepatomegaly and tumourigenesis (22, 120, 204, 222–224). Readers should refer to a recent review for detailed comparison of these animals (225).

The Hippo pathway is also important for heart size control and apoptosis. Dominant negative MST1 prevents apoptosis in a myocardial infarction model (226). Cardiac-specific expression of LATS2 reduces the size of ventricles (227). Dominant negative LATS2 causes cardiac hypertrophy and blocks MST1-induced apoptosis, supporting that LATS2 functions downstream of MST1. RASSF1A expression is reduced in the failing human heart (228). RASSF1A is up-regulated in response to pressure-overload and activates MST1 to induce cardiomyocyte apoptosis (229). The depletion of RASSF1A in mice enhances cardiac hypertrophy, while over-expression of RASSF1A increases apoptosis and exacerbates cardiac dysfunction under pressure overload. RASSF1A suppresses tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) production in cardiac fibroblasts and thereby prevents cardiac fibrosis.

**Cell differentiation**

Both YAP and TAZ are involved in the maintenance of stemness. YAP mostly inhibits differentiation, but TAZ induces some differentiation. YAP is expressed in the crypt compartment of the small intestine and in the ventricular zone progenitor cells in the mouse neural tube (204, 230). YAP activation expands progenitor cells and decreases differentiated cells. In mesenchymal stem cells, TAZ activates Runx2 to promote osteogenesis, and inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ to suppress adipogenesis (231). YAP has been experimentally shown to repress Runx2 gene transcription, but it is unknown whether or not YAP regulates Runx2 in mesenchymal stem cells (232). In myoblasts, TAZ activates MyoD-dependent gene transcription to promote myogenesis (233). In contrast, during C2C12 cell myogenesis, YAP is phosphorylated and recruited to the cytosol, implying that YAP-dependent transcription is turned off (234). The interaction of TAZ with SMAD complexes is necessary for self-renewal (207). TAZ depletion induces differentiation into neuroectoderm. YAP is necessary for the pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells and is inactivated during

Mammalian Hippo pathway

their differentiation (235). YAP facilitates the generation of iPS cells from mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

**Tissue regeneration**

The Hippo pathway plays a pivotal role in tissue regeneration. In *Drosophila*, when the intestine is under stress due to bacterial infection or bleomycin, the Hippo pathway is inactivated in enterocytes to activate Yorkie and increase Unpaired, which non-cell autonomously induces intestinal stem cell proliferation (236, 237). Yorkie activation has also been detected in intestinal stem cells. Similarly, YAP expression is increased in regenerating mouse intestinal crypts and YAP depletion impairs regeneration (238).

**Others**

There was no study that directly addressed whether or not and how the canonical Hippo pathway functions in hematopoietic cells. Lymphocytes express MST1 and RASSF proteins. MST1 interacts with RAPL, which is a short isoform of Norel and an effector of Rap1 GTPase, in lymphocytes (239). MST1 is activated downstream of Rap1 and RAPL, and is necessary for cell polarization and integrin LFA-1 clustering and adhesion (240). MST1−/− lymphocytes do not adhere firmly to high endothelial venules and lack efficient homing capacity. In MST1−/− mice, the egress of mature T cells from the thymus is impaired, and lymphocytes are reduced in the blood and peripheral lymphoid tissues (241). MST1 expression induces apoptosis in T cells, but paradoxically, in MST1−/− mice, apoptosis of T cells is enhanced, which may be due to the high activation of T cells (242).

**The Hippo pathway and human diseases**

**Cancer**

The importance of the Hippo pathway in cancer development is obvious. Mutations of Merlin cause neurofibromatosis type 2, an autosomal dominant multiple neoplasia syndrome. Mutations of Merlin are found in sporadic meningiomas and mesotheliomas (243, 244). RASSF1A and LATS2 are located on chromosomes 3p21.3 and 13q12.11, respectively. Deletion of both regions frequently occurs in human cancers. The RASSF1A promoter is frequently hypermethylated in various cancers (149, 150). The LATS1 and LATS2 promoters are hypermethylated in ~50% of breast cancers and 60–70% of astrocytomas (245, 246). Hypermethylation of the MST1 and MST2 promoters is detected in 37% and 20% of soft tissue sarcomas, respectively (247). The RASSF6 promoter is hypermethylated in >90% of childhood B cell acute lymphocytic leukaemia (ALL) and in 40% of T cell ALL (248). YAP is encoded on chromosome 11q22, whose amplification has been detected in various cancers (190). Activation of YAP or TAZ induces EMT in breast cancer cells and increases their invasiveness (190, 192, 193). Accordingly, the down-regulation of RASSF1A, LATS1 and LATS2, the reduced cytoplasmic expression of MST1, and the increased nuclear localization of YAP in cancer cells correlate with malignant properties and a poor prognosis (149, 246,

Y. Bao *et al.*

249–251). Most dysfunctions of the Hippo pathway components, except Merlin, are caused not by gene mutations but by epigenetic silencing. This indicates the possibility that the Hippo pathway function may be recovered by epigenetic intervention. As Hippo pathway disorders are common events in cancer and they correlate with a poor prognosis, the Hippo pathway is an important and attractive therapeutic target.

**Putative implications for other diseases**

The crucial roles of the Hippo pathway in the regulation of stem cells and progenitor cells indicate that dysfunctions of the pathway can cause various diseases besides cancer. Studies on the heart suggested that malfunction of the Hippo pathway leads to cardiac hypertrophy. The observation that both depletion and over-expression of RASS1A are detrimental for cardiac function corroborates that appropriate Hippo signalling is important for tissue homeostasis. To suppress tumours, the Hippo pathway should be active. However, hyperactivity of the Hippo pathway may increase tissue damage through excessive apoptosis and the prevention of tissue regeneration. The inactivation of TAZ by the Hippo pathway will inhibit osteogenesis and myogenesis. This means that over-activation of the Hippo pathway could cause osteoporosis and muscle atrophy. The suppression of TNF-α by RASSF1A in the heart is an intriguing observation. The down-regulation of RASSF1A predisposes tissues to an inflammatory response, and may facilitate atherosclerosis and insulin resistance. EMT in cancer cells causes metastasis, while EMT in epithelial cells causes fibrosis (252). As YAP and TAZ induce EMT, their activation may be involved in tissue fibrosis.

**Concluding remarks and future directions**

If we discuss only the canonical Hippo pathway, its framework is apparently simple and straightforward. It is a kinase cascade that is activated by the initial input from cell adhesion, cell polarity and cell stress, and transmits signals to restrict cell proliferation and induce apoptosis. The pathway explains the well-known contact inhibition and how damaged tissues are repaired. When some cells undergo apoptosis under stress or are removed mechanically, the neighbouring cells lose cell adhesion, which turns off the Hippo pathway. They start to proliferate and might produce cell proliferation-promoting signals to induce further cell proliferation non-cell autonomously. Proliferation will cease when all cells establish mature cell adhesion and tissues are repaired. However, to complete the whole process correctly, the Hippo pathway needs to be properly regulated at all stages. The Hippo pathway should be constitutively and mildly active to prevent overgrowth but avoid cell death under a static condition. The stimuli that damage tissues activate the Hippo pathway. The pathway is speculated to be more activated in more damaged cells. If the Hippo pathway overwhelms the cell-survival signals, the cells should die. On the other hand, the Hippo pathway must be suppressed in the

cells that have lost matured cell adhesion but escaped severe damages. Such cells proliferate to repair tissues. Finally, when tissue repair is completed, the Hippo pathway must be re-activated at the proper time. For simplification, we here consider only the case that differentiated cells proliferate. Tissues are composed of diverse cells. Regeneration is carried out by stem cells or progenitor cells. The Hippo pathway balances cell proliferation and differentiation. Moreover, as we have discussed above, the mammalian Hippo pathway is not necessarily canonical. All circumstances considered the Hippo pathway requires sophisticated and cell context-dependent regulation. In the current boom, new components and new molecular interactions are continuously being added to the pathway. New cross-talks with other signalling have been identified. Each component plays numerous roles and is multifaceted. The network of the Hippo pathway is expanding and intertwined. It has become more difficult to have an overview of the Hippo pathway. So far, our understanding mostly depends on the information obtained from knockout mice, knockdown cells and overexpression of wild-type or mutated components. We guess how the pathway normally functions based on the findings that were collected under extreme conditions. In order to understand the roles of the Hippo pathway in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis, it is essential to know what results from perturbation of the endogenous normal Hippo pathway in cells, tissues and animals. To this end, we need to have reagents that inhibit or stimulate the Hippo pathway. Such reagents will facilitate the future study in this field and lead to the development of new therapies for human diseases.

**Acknowledgements**

We thank the editor for giving us the opportunity to write this review. We are grateful especially for the lifting of the limitation to cite references. Even so, we have to apologize for not being able to mention all primary important research publications. During writing this manuscript, a new paper reported the interaction of YAP and TAZ with AMOT (253). In this article, the authors mainly studied AMOT-like protein (AMOTL) 2 among AMOT family and revealed that AMOTL2 functions as a tumour suppressor through promoting YAP phosphorylation and inhibiting YAP transcription activity. Together with the paper by Varelas *et al.* (187), this work indicates that AMOT family proteins are components of the mammalian Hippo pathway. Two other papers also reported the interaction of YAP or TAZ with AMOT family proteins (254, 255). Chan *et al.* reported that even Hippo refractory TAZ mutant is restricted by AMOT family proteins and argued that the regulation by AMOT family proteins is independent of Hippo pathway. We discussed only the *Drosophila* and mammalian Hippo pathways in this review. We note that several papers have been published on the Hippo pathway in other animals including chicken, frog, zebra fish and cricket.

**Funding**

This work was supported by research grants from the Ministry of Education, Sports, Science, and Technology (17081008) and from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (22790275, 22590267). Y.B. was supported by Japanese Government (Monbukagakusho) (MEXT) scholarship. K.W. was supported by TAKASE foundation scholarship.

Conflict of interest  
None declared.

# References

1. Pan, D. (2010) The Hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. *Dev. Cell* 19, 491–505
2. Zhao, B., Li, L., and Guan, K.L. (2010) Hippo signaling at a glance. *J. Cell Sci.* 123, 4001–4006
3. Zhao, B., Li, L., Lei, Q., and Guan, K.L. (2010) The Hippo-YAP pathway in organ size control and tumorigenesis: an updated version. *Genes Dev.* 24, 862–874
4. Grusche, F.A., Richardson, H.E., and Harvey, K.F. (2010) Upstream regulation of the hippo size control pathway. *Curr. Biol.* 20, R574–R582
5. Sudol, M. and Harvey, K.F. (2010) Modularity in the Hippo signaling pathway. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 35, 627–633
6. Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Chen, L., Chong, Y.F., Huang, C., Song, H., and Hong, W. (2010) The hippo pathway in biological control and cancer development. *J. Cell. Physiol.* 226, 928–939
7. Parsons, L.M., Grzeschik, N.A., Allott, M.L., and Richardson, H.E. (2010) Lgl/aPKC and Crb regulate the Salvador/warts/hippo pathway. *Fly* 4, 288–293
8. Mahoney, P.A., Weber, U., Onofrechuk, P., Biessmann, H., Bryant, P.J., and Goodman, C.S. (1991) The fat tumor suppressor gene in Drosophila encodes a novel member of the cadherin gene superfamily. *Cell* 67, 853–868
9. Boedigheimer, M. and Laughon, A. (1993) Expanded: A gene involved in the control of cell proliferation in imaginal discs. *Development* 118, 1291–1301
10. Xu, T., Wang, W., Zhang, S., Stewart, R.A., and Yu, W. (1995) Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase. *Development* 121, 1053–1063
11. Justice, R.W., Zilian, O., Woods, D.F., Noll, M., and Bryant, P.J. (1995) The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. *Genes Dev.* 9, 534–546
12. McCartney, B.M. and Fehon, R.G. (1996) Distinct cellular and subcellular patterns of expression imply distinct functions for the Drosophila homologues of moesin and the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor, merlin. *J. Cell Biol.* 133, 843–852
13. Tapon, N., Harvey, K.F., Bell, D.W., Wahrer, D.C., Schiripo, T.A., Haber, D.A., and Hariharan, I.K. (2002) salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in Drosophila and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. *Cell* 110, 467–478
14. Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Tao, C., Verstreken, P., Hiesinger, P.R., Bellen, H.J., and Halder, G. (2002) Shar-pei mediates cell proliferation arrest during imaginal disc growth in Drosophila. *Development* 129, 5719–5730
15. Harvey, K.F., Pfleger, C.M., and Hariharan, I.K. (2003) The Drosophila Mst ortholog, hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. *Cell* 114, 457–467
16. Wu, S., Huang, J., Dong, J., and Pan, D. (2003) hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. *Cell* 114, 445–456
17. Jia, J., Zhang, W., Wang, B., Trinko, R., and Jiang, J. (2003) The Drosophila Ste20 family kinase dMST

functions as a tumor suppressor by restricting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. *Genes Dev.* 17, 2514–2519
18. Udan, R.S., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Tao, C., and Halder, G. (2003) Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5, 914–920
19. Pantalacci, S., Tapon, N., and Léopold, P. (2003) The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in Drosophila. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5, 921–927
20. Lai, Z.C., Wei, X., Shimizu, T., Ramos, E., Rohrbaugh, M., Nikolaidis, N., Ho, L.L., and Li, Y. (2005) Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. *Cell* 120, 675–685
21. Huang, J., Wu, S., Barrera, J., Matthews, K., and Pan, D. (2005) The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the Drosophila homolog of YAP. *Cell* 122, 421–434
22. Dong, J., Feldmann, G., Huang, J., Wu, S., Zhang, N., Comerford, S.A., Gayyed, M.F., Anders, R.A., Maitra, A., and Pan, D. (2007) Elucidation of a universal size-control mechanism in Drosophila and mammals. *Cell* 130, 1120–1133
23. Wu, S., Liu, Y., Zheng, Y., Dong, J., and Pan, D. (2008) The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the Hippo growth-regulatory pathway. *Dev. Cell* 14, 388–398
24. Goulev, Y., Fauny, J.D., Gonzalez-Marti, B., Flagiello, D., Silber, J., and Zider, A. (2008) SCALLOPED interacts with YORKIE, the nuclear effector of the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway in Drosophila. *Curr. Biol.* 18, 435–441
25. Clark, H.F., Brentrup, D., Schneitz, K., Bieber, A., Goodman, C., and Noll, M. (1995) Dachsous encodes a member of the cadherin superfamily that controls imaginal disc morphogenesis in Drosophila. *Genes Dev.* 9, 1530–1542
26. Strutt, H. and Strutt, D. (2002) Nonautonomous planar polarity patterning in Drosophila: dishevelled-independent functions of frizzled. *Dev. Cell* 3, 851–863
27. Ma, D., Yang, C.H., McNeill, H., Simon, M.A., and Axelrod, J.D. (2003) Fidelity in planar cell polarity signaling. *Nature* 421, 543–547
28. Matakatsu, H. and Blair, S.S. (2004) Interactions between Fat and Dachsous and the regulation of planar cell polarity in the Drosophila wing. *Development* 131, 3785–3794
29. Silva, E., Tsatskis, Y., Gardano, L., Tapon, N., and McNeill, H. (2006) The tumor suppressor gene fat controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the hippo signaling pathway. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 2081–2089
30. Willecke, M., Hamaratoglu, F., Kango-Singh, M., Udan, R., Chen, C.L., Tao, C., Zhang, X., and Halder, G. (2006) The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 2090–2100
31. Benett, F.C. and Harvey, K.F. (2006) Fat cadherin modulates organ size in Drosophila via the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling pathway. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 2101–2110
32. Ishikawa, H.O., Takeuchi, H., Haltiwanger, R.S., and Irvine, K.D. (2008) Four-jointed is a Golgi kinase that phosphorylates a subset of cadherin domains. *Science* 321, 401–404
33. Willecke, M., Hamaratoglu, F., Sansores-Garcia, L., Tao, C., and Halder, G. (2008) Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo

signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 105, 14897–14902

34. Brittle, A.L., Repiso, A., Casal, J., Lawrence, P.A., and Strutt, D. (2010) Four-jointed modulates growth and planar polarity by reducing the affinity of dachsous for Fat. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 803–810

35. Simon, M.A., Xu, A., Ishikawa, H.O., and Irvine, K.D. (2010) Modulation of fat:dachsous binding by the cadherin domain kinase four-jointed. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 811–817

36. Cho, E., Feng, Y., Rauskolb, C., Maitra, S., Fehon, R., and Irvine, K.D. (2006) Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. *Nat. Genet.* 38, 1142–1150

37. Mao, Y., Rauskolb, C., Cho, E., Hu, W.L., Hayter, H., Minihan, G., Katz, F.N., and Irvine, K.D. (2006) Dachs: an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth, affinity and gene expression in Drosophila. *Development* 133, 2539–2551

38. Matakatsu, H. and Blair, S.S. (2008) The DHHC palmitoyltransferase approximated regulates Fat signaling and Dachs localization and activity. *Curr. Biol.* 18, 1390–1395

39. Sopko, R., Silva, E., Clayton, L., Gardano, L., Barrios-Rodiles, M., Wrana, J., Varelas, X., Arbouzova, N.I., Shaw, S., Saburi, S., Matakatsu, H., Blair, S., and McNeill, H. (2009) Phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor fat is regulated by its ligand Dachsous and the kinase discs overgrown. *Curr. Biol.* 19, 1112–1117

40. Feng, Y. and Irvine, K.D. (2009) Processing and phosphorylation of the Fat receptor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 106, 11989–11994

41. Mao, Y., Kucuk, B., and Irvine, K.D. (2009) Drosophila lowfat, a novel modulator of Fat signaling. *Development* 136, 3223–3233

42. Fanto, M., Clayton, L., Meredith, J., Hardiman, K., Charroux, B., Kerridge, S., and McNeill, H. (2003) The tumor-suppressor and cell adhesion molecule Fat controls planar polarity via physical interactions with Atrophin, a transcriptional co-repressor. *Development* 130, 763–774

43. Assémat, E., Bazellières, E., Pallesi-Pocachard, E., Le Bivic, A., and Massey-Harroche, D. (2008) Polarity complex proteins. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1778, 614–630

44. Ling, C., Zheng, Y., Yin, F., Yu, J., Huang, J., Hong, Y., Wu, S., and Pan, D. (2010) The apical transmembrane protein Crumbs functions as a tumor suppressor that regulates Hippo signaling by binding to Expanded. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107, 10532–10537

45. Robinson, B.S., Huang, J., Hong, Y., and Moberg, K.H. (2010) Crumbs regulates Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling in Drosophila via the FERM-domain protein Expanded. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 582–590

46. Chen, C.L., Gajewski, K.M., Hamaratoglu, F., Bossuyt, W., Sansores-Garcia, L., Tao, C., and Halder, G. (2010) The apical-basal cell polarity determinant Crumbs regulates Hippo signaling in Drosophila. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107, 15810–15815

47. Hamaratoglu, F., Willecke, M., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Hyun, E., Tao, C., Jafar-Nejad, H., and Halder, G. (2006) The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signaling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 8, 27–36

48. Feng, Y. and Irvine, K.D. (2007) Fat and expanded act in parallel to regulate growth through warts. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104, 20362–20367

49. Yu, J., Zheng, Y., Dong, J., Klusza, S., Deng, W.M., and Pan, D. (2010) Kibra functions as a tumor suppressor protein that regulates Hippo signaling in conjunction with Merlin and Expanded. *Dev. Cell* 18, 288–299

50. Genevet, A., Wehr, M.C., Brain, R., Thompson, B.J., and Tapon, N. (2010) Kibra is a regulator of the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling network. *Dev. Cell* 18, 300–308

51. Baumgartner, R., Poernbacher, I., Buser, N., Hafen, E., and Stocker, H. (2010) The WW domain protein Kibra acts upstream of Hippo in Drosophila. *Dev. Cell* 18, 309–316

52. Polesello, C., Huelsmann, S., Brown, N.H., and Tapon, N. (2006) The Drosophila RASSF homolog antagonizes the hippo pathway. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 2459–2465

53. Ribeiro, P.S., Josué, F., Wepf, A., Wehr, M.C., Rinner, O., Kelly, G., Tapon, N., and Gstaiger, M. (2010) Combined functional genomic and proteomic approaches identify a PP2A complex as a negative regulator of Hippo signaling. *Mol. Cell* 39, 521–534

54. Das Thakur, M., Feng, Y., Jagannathan, R., Seppa, M.J., Skeath, J.B., and Longmore, G.D. (2010) Ajuba LIM proteins are negative regulators of the Hippo signaling pathway. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 657–662

55. Grzeschik, N.A., Parsons, L.M., Allott, M.L., Harvey, K.F., and Richardson, H.E. (2010) Lgl, aPKC, and Crumbs regulate the Salvador/Warts/Hippo pathway through two distinct mechanisms. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 573–581

56. Hamaratoglu, F., Gajewski, K., Sansores-Garcia, L., Morrison, C., Tao, C., and Halder, G. (2009) The Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway regulates apical-domain size in parallel to tissue growth. *J. Cell Sci.* 122, 2351–2359

57. Genevet, A., Polesello, C., Blight, K., Robertson, F., Collinson, L.M., Pichaud, F., and Tapon, N. (2009) The Hippo pathway regulates apical-domain size independently of its growth-control function. *J. Cell Sci.* 122, 2360–2370

58. Colombani, J., Polesello, C., Josué, F., and Tapon, N. (2006) Dmp53 activates the Hippo pathway to promote cell death in response to DNA damage. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 1453–1458

59. Rouleau, G.A., Merel, P., Lutchman, M., Sanson, M., Zucman, J., Marineau, C., Hoang-Xuan, K., Demczuk, S., Desmaze, C., Plougastel, B., Plust, S.M., Lenoir, G., Bijlsma, E., Fashold, R., Dumaski, J., de Jong, P., Parry, D., Eldridge, R., Aurias, A., Delattre, O., and Thomas, G. (1993) Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein causes neurofibromatosis type 2. *Nature* 363, 515–521

60. Trofatter, J.A., MacCollin, M.M., Rutter, J.L., Murrell, J.R., Duyao, M.P., Parry, D.M., Eldridge, R., Kley, N., Menon, A.G., Pulaski, K., Haase, V.H., Ambrose, C.M., Munroe, D., Bove, C., Haines, J.L., Martuza, R.L., MacDonald, M.E., Seizinger, B.R., Short, M.P., Buckler, A.J., and Gusella, J.F. (1993) A novel moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. *Cell* 72, 791–800

61. Sherman, L., Xu, H.M., Geist, R.T., Saporito-Irwin, S., Howells, N., Ponta, H., Herrlich, P., and Gutmann, D.H. (1997) Interdomain binding mediates tumor growth suppression by the NF2 gene product. *Oncogene* 15, 2505–2509

62. Shaw, R.J., McClatchey, A.I., and Jacks, T. (1998) Regulation of the neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, merlin, by adhesion and growth arrest stimuli. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 7757–7764

63. Shaw, R.J., Paez, J.G., Curto, M., Yaktine, A., Pruitt, W.M., Saotome, I., O'Bryan, J.P., Gupta, V., Ratner, N., Der, C.J., Jacks, T., and McClatchey, A.I. (2001) The Nf2 tumor suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. *Dev. Cell* 1, 63–72

64. Creasy, C.L. and Chernoff, J. (1995) Cloning and characterization of a member of the MST subfamily of Ste20-like kinases. *Gene* 167, 303–306

65. Taylor, L.K., Wang, H.C., and Erikson, R.L. (1996) Newly identified stress-responsive protein kinases, Krs-1 and Krs-2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93, 10099–10104

66. Tao, W., Zhang, S., Turenchalk, G.S., Stewart, R.A., St John, M.A., Chen, W., and Xu, T. (1999) Human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster lats tumor suppressor modulates CDC2 activity. *Nat. Genet.* 21, 177–181

67. Yabuta, N., Fujii, T., Copeland, N.G., Gilbert, D.J., Jenkins, N.A., Nishiguchi, H., Endo, Y., Toji, S., Tanaka, H., Nishimune, Y., and Nojima, H. (2000) Structure, expression, and chromosome mapping of LATS2, a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor gene lats/warts. *Genomics* 63, 263–270

68. Hori, T., Takaori-Kondo, A., Kamikubo, Y., and Uchiyama, T. (2000) Molecular cloning of a novel human protein kinase, kpm, that is homologous to warts/lats, a Drosophila tumor suppressor. *Oncogene* 22, 3101–3109

69. Luca, F.C. and Winey, M. (1998) MOB1, an essential yeast gene required for completion of mitosis and maintenance of ploidy. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 9, 29–46

70. Moreno, C.S., Lane, W.S., and Pallas, D.C. (2001) A mammalian homolog of yeast MOB1 is both a member and a putative substrate of striatin family-protein phosphatase 2A complexes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 24253–24260

71. Sudol, M. (1994) Yes-associated protein (YAP65) is a proline-rich phosphoprotein that binds to the SH3 domain of the Yes proto-oncogene product. *Oncogene* 9, 2145–2152

72. Bertini, E., Oka, T., Sudol, M., Strano, S., and Blandino, G. (2009) YAP: at the crossroad between transformation and tumor suppression. *Cell Cycle* 8, 49–57

73. Kanai, F., Marignani, P.A., Sarbassova, D., Yagi, R., Hall, R.A., Donowitz, M., Hisaminato, A., Fujiwara, T., Ito, Y., Cantley, L.C., and Yaffe, M.B. (2000) TAZ: a novel transcriptional coactivator regulated by interactions with 14-3-3 and PDZ domain proteins. *EMBO J.* 19, 6778–6791

74. Gunn-Moore, F.J., Welsh, G.I., Herron, L.R., Brannigan, F., Venkateswarlu, K., Gillespie, S., Bradwein-Gensler, M., Madan, R., Tavaré, J.M., Brophy, P.J., Prystowsky, M.B., and Guild, S. (2005) A novel 4.1 ezrin radixin moesin (FERM)-containing protein ‘Willin’. *FEBS Lett.* 579, 5089–5094

75. Kilili, G.K. and Kyriakis, J.M. (2010) Mammalian Ste20-like kinase (Mst2) indirectly supports Raf-1/ERK pathway activity via maintenance of protein phosphatase-2A catalytic subunit levels and consequent suppression of inhibitory Raf-1 phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285, 15076–15087

76. Ishiuchi, T., Misaki, K., Yonemura, S., Takeichi, M., and Tanoue, T. (2009) Mammalian Fat and Dachsous cadherins regulate apical membrane organization in the embryonic cerebral cortex. *J. Cell Biol.* 185, 959–967

77. Qi, C., Zhu, Y.T., Hu, L., and Zhu, Y.J. (2009) Identification of Fat4 as a candidate tumor suppressor gene in breast cancers. *Int. J. Cancer* 124, 793–798

78. Sainio, M., Zhao, F., Heiska, L., Turunen, O., den Bakker, M., Zwarthoff, E., Lutchman, M., Rouleau, G.A., Jääskeläinen, J., Vaheri, A., and Carpén, O. (1997) Neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein colocalizes with ezrin and CD44 and associates with actin-containing cytoskeleton. *J. Cell Biol.* 110, 2249–2260

79. Morrison, H., Sherman, L.S., Legg, J., Banine, F., Isacke, C., Haipek, C.A., Gutmann, D.H., Ponta, H., and Herrlich, P. (2001) The NF2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth through interactions with CD44. *Genes Dev.* 15, 968–980

80. Xu, Y., Stamenkovic, I., and Yu, Q. (2010) CD44 attenuates activation of the hippo signaling pathway and is a prime therapeutic target for glioblastoma. *Cancer Res.* 70, 2455–2464

81. Murthy, A., Gonzalez-Agosti, C., Cordero, E., Pinney, D., Candia, C., Solomon, F., Gusella, J., and Ramesh, V. (1998) NHE-RF, a regulatory cofactor for Na⁺-H⁺ exchange, is a common interactor for merlin and ERM (MERM) proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 1273–1276

82. Volz, J.W., Weinman, E.J., and Shenolikar, S. (2001) Expanding the role of NHERF, a PDZ-domain containing protein adapter, to growth regulation. *Oncogene* 20, 6309–6314

83. Yi, C. and Kissil, J.L. (2010) Merlin in organ size control and tumorigenesis: Hippo versus EGFR? *Genes Dev.* 24, 1673–1679

84. Mohler, P.J., Kreda, S.M., Boucher, R.C., Sudol, M., Stutts, M.J., and Milgram, S.L. (1999) Yes-associated protein 65 localizes p62<sup>Yes</sup> to the apical compartment of airway epithelia by association with EBP50. *J. Cell Biol.* 147, 879–890

85. Radu, M. and Chernoff, J. (2009) The DeMSTification of mammalian Ste20 kinases. *Curr. Biol.* 19, R421–425

86. Ling, P., Lu, T.J., Yuan, C.J., and Lai, M.D. (2007) Biosignaling of mammalian Ste20-related kinases. *Cell Signal.* 20, 1237–1247

87. Yang, X., Yu, K., Hao, Y., Li, D.M., Stewart, R., Insogna, K.L., and Xu, T. (2004) LATS1 tumor suppressor affects cytokinesis by inhibiting LIMK1. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 6, 609–617

88. Kuninaka, S., Nomura, M., Hirota, T., Iida, S., Hara, T., Honda, S., Kunitoku, N., Sasayama, T., Arima, Y., Marumoto, T., Koja, K., Yonehara, S., and Saya, H. (2005) The tumor suppressor WARTS activates the Omi/HtrA2-dependent pathway of cell death. *Oncogene* 24, 5287–5298

89. Kuninaka, S., Iida, S.I., Hara, T., Nomura, M., Naoe, H., Morisaki, T., Nitta, M., Arima, Y., Mimori, T., Yonehara, S., and Saya, H. (2007) Serine protease Omi/HtrA2 targets WARTS kinase to control cell proliferation. *Oncogene* 26, 2395–2406

90. Okada, T., You, L., and Giancotti, F.G. (2007) Shedding light on Merlin’s wizardry. *Trends Cell Biol.* 17, 222–229

91. McClatchey, A.I. and Fehon, R.G. (2009) Merlin and the ERM proteins-regulators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex. *Trends Cell Biol.* 19, 198–206

92. Stamenkovic, I. and Yu, Q. (2010) Merlin, a “magic” linker between extracellular cues and intracellular signaling pathways that regulate cell motility, proliferation, and survival. *Curr. Protein Pept. Sci.* 11, 471–484

93. Xiao, G.H., Beeser, A., Chernoff, J., and Testa, J.R. (2002) p21-activated kinase links Rac/Cdc42 signaling to merlin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 883–886

Y. Bao et al.

94. Kissil, J.L., Johnson, K.C., Eckman, M.S., and Jacks, T. (2002) Merlin phosphorylation by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin localization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 10394–10399

95. Jin, H., Sperka, T., Herrlich, P., and Morrison, H. (2006) Tumorigenic transformation by CPI-17 through inhibition of a merlin phosphatase. *Nature* 442, 576–579

96. Curto, M., Cole, B.K., Lallemand, D., Liu, C.H., and McClatchey, A.I. (2007) Contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. *J. Cell Biol.* 177, 893–903

97. Maitra, S., Kulikauskas, R.M., Gavilan, H., and Fehon, R.G. (2006) The tumor suppressors Merlin and Expanded function cooperatively to modulate receptor endocytosis and signaling. *Curr. Biol.* 16, 702–709

98. Zhang, N., Bai, H., David, K.K., Dong, J., Zheng, Y., Cai, J., Giovannini, M., Liu, P., Anders, R.A., and Pan, D. (2010) The Merlin/NF2 tumor suppressor functions through the YAP oncoprotein to regulate tissue homeostasis in mammals. *Dev. Cell* 19, 27–38

99. Benhamouche, S., Curto, M., Saotome, I., Gladden, A.B., Liu, C.H., Giovannini, M., and McClatchey, A.I. (2010) Nf2/Merlin controls progenitor homeostasis and tumorigenesis in the liver. *Genes Dev.* 24, 1718–1730

100. Li, W., You, L., Cooper, J., Schiavon, G., Pepe-Caprio, A., Zhou, L., Ishii, R., Giovannini, M., Hanemann, C.O., Long, S.B., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Zhou, P., Tempst, P., and Giancotti, F.G. (2010) Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1 in the nucleus. *Cell* 140, 477–490

101. Graves, J.D., Gotoh, Y., Draves, K.E., Ambrose, D., Han, D.K., Wright, M., Chernoff, J., Clark, E.A., and Krebs, E.G. (1998) Caspase-mediated activation and induction of apoptosis by the mammalian Ste20-like kinase Mst1. *EMBO J.* 17, 2224–2234

102. Lee, K.K., Murakawa, M., Nishida, E., Tsubuki, S., Kawashima, S., Sakamaki, K., and Yonehara, S. (1998) Proteolytic activation of MST/Krs, STE20-related protein kinase, by caspase during apoptosis. *Oncogene* 16, 3029–3037

103. Ura, S., Masuyama, N., Graves, J.D., and Gotoh, Y. (2001) Caspase cleavage of MST1 promotes nuclear translocation and chromatin condensation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98, 10148–10153

104. Jang, S.W., Yang, S.J., Srinivasan, S., and Ye, K. (2007) Akt phosphorylates MstI and prevents its proteolytic activation, blocking FOXO3 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 30836–30844

105. Yuan, Z., Kim, D., Shu, S., Wu, J., Guo, J., Xiao, L., Kaneko, S., Coppola, D., and Cheng, J.Q. (2010) Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt inhibits MST1-mediated pro-apoptotic signaling through phosphorylation of threonine 120. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285, 3815–3824

106. Romano, D., Matallanas, D., Weitsman, G., Preisinger, C., Ng, T., and Kolch, W. (2010) Proapoptotic kinase MST2 coordinates signaling crosstalk between RASSF1A, Raf-1, and Akt. *Cancer Res.* 70, 1195–1203

107. Kim, D., Shu, S., Coppola, M.D., Kaneko, S., Yuan, Z.Q., and Cheng, J.Q. (2010) Regulation of proapoptotic mammalian ste20-like kinase MST2 by the IGF1-Akt pathway. *PLoS ONE* 5, e9616

108. Qiao, M., Wang, Y., Xu, X., Lu, J., Dong, Y., Tao, W., Stein, J., Stein, G.S., Iglehart, J.D., Shi, Q., and Pardee, A.B. (2010) Mst1 is an interacting protein that mediates PHLPPs' induced apoptosis. *Mol. Cell* 38, 512–523

109. Ura, S., Nishina, H., Gotoh, Y., and Katada, T. (2007) Activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway by MST1 is essential and sufficient for the induction of chromatin condensation during apoptosis. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 27, 5514–5522

110. Cheung, W.L., Ajiro, K., Samejima, K., Kloc, M., Cheung, P., Mizzen, C.A., Beeser, A., Etkin, L.D., Chernoff, J., Earnshaw, W.C., and Allis, C.D. (2003) Apoptotic phosphorylation of histone H2B is mediated by mammalian sterile twenty kinase. *Cell* 113, 507–517

111. Wen, W., Zhu, F., Zhang, J., Keum, Y.S., Zykova, T., Yao, K., Peng, C., Zheng, D., Cho, Y.Y., Ma, W.Y., Bode, A.M., and Dong, Z. (2010) MST1 promotes apoptosis through phosphorylation of histone H2AX. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285, 39108–39116

112. Choi, J., Oh, S., Lee, D., Oh, H.J., Park, J.Y., Lee, S.B., and Lim, D.S. (2009) Mst1-FoxO signaling protects naïve T lymphocytes from cellular oxidative stress in mice. *PLoS ONE* 4, e8011

113. Lehtinen, M.K., Yuan, Z., Boag, P.R., Yang, Y., Villén, J., Becker, E.B., DiBacco, S., de la Iglesia, N., Gygi, S., Blackwell, T.K., and Bonni, A. (2006) A conserved MST-FOXO signaling pathway mediates oxidative-stress responses and extends life span. *Cell* 125, 987–1001

114. Yuan, Z., Lehtinen, M.K., Merlo, P., Villén, J., Gygi, S., and Bonni, A. (2009) Regulation of neuronal cell death by MST1-FOXO1 signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284, 11285–11292

115. Mardin, B.R., Lange, C., Baxter, J.E., Hardy, T., Scholz, S.R., Fry, A.M., and Schiebel, E. (2010) Components of the Hippo pathway cooperate with Nek2 kinase to regulate centrosome disjunction. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 12, 1166–1176

116. Oh, H.J., Kim, M.J., Song, S.J., Kim, T., Lee, D., Kwon, S.H., Choi, E.J., and Lim, D.S. (2010) MST1 limits the kinase activity of aurora B to promote stable kinetochore-microtubule attachment. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 416–422

117. Lin, Y., Khokhlatchev, A., Figeys, D., and Avruch, J. (2002) Death-associated protein 4 binds MST1 and augments MST1-induced apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 47991–48001

118. Cinar, B., Fang, P.K., Lutchman, M., Di Vizio, D., Adam, R.M., Pavlova, N., Rubin, M.A., Yelick, P.C., and Freeman, M.R. (2007) The pro-apoptotic kinase Mst1 and its caspase cleavage products are direct inhibitors of Akt1. *EMBO J.* 26, 4523–4534

119. Dallol, A., Hesson, L.B., Matallanas, D., Cooper, W.N., O'Neill, E., Maher, E.R., Kolch, W., and Latif, F. (2009) RAN GTPase is a RASSF1A effector involved in controlling microtubule organization. *Curr. Biol.* 19, 1227–1232

120. Zhou, D., Conrad, C., Xia, F., Park, J.S., Payer, B., Yin, Y., Lauwers, G.Y., Thasler, W., Lee, J.T., Avruch, J., and Bardeesy, N. (2009) Mst1 and Mst2 maintain hepatocyte quiescence and suppress hepatocellular carcinoma development through inactivation of the Yap1 oncogene. *Cancer Cell* 16, 425–438

121. O'Neill, E., Rushworth, L., Baccarini, M., and Kolch, W. (2004) Role of the kinase MST2 in suppression of apoptosis by the proto-oncogene product Raf-1. *Science* 306, 2267–2270

122. Matallanas, D., Romano, D., Yee, K., Meissl, K., Kucerova, L., Piazolla, D., Baccarini, M., Vass, J.K., Kolch, W., and O'Neill, E. (2007) RASSF1A elicits apoptosis through an MST2 pathway directing proapoptotic transcription by the p73 tumor suppressor protein. *Mol. Cell* 27, 962–975

123. Bi, W., Xiao, L., Jia, Y., Wu, J., Xie, Q., Ren, J., Ji, G., and Yuan, Z. (2010) c-Jun N-terminal kinase enhances MST1-mediated pro-apoptotic signaling through phosphorylation at serine 82. *J. Biol. Chem.* **285**, 6259–6264

124. Staley, B.K. and Irvine, K.D. (2010) Warts and Yorkie mediate intestinal regeneration by influencing stem cell proliferation. *Curr. Biol.* **20**, 1580–1587

125. Jiang, H., Patel, P.H., Kohlmaier, A., Grenley, M.O., McEwen, D.G., and Edgar, B.A. (2009) Cytokine/Jak/Stat signaling mediates regeneration and homeostasis in the Drosophila midgut. *Cell* **137**, 1343–1355

126. Karpowicz, P., Perez, J., and Perrimon, N. (2010) The Hippo tumor suppressor pathway regulates intestinal stem cell regeneration. *Development* **137**, 4135–4145

127. Hergovich, A., Cornils, H., and Hemmings, B.A. (2008) Mammalian NDR protein kinases: from regulation to a role in centrosome duplication. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1784**, 3–15

128. Geng, W., He, B., Wang, M., and Adler, P.N. (2000) The tricornered gene, which is required for the integrity of epidermal cell extensions, encodes the Drosophila nuclear DBF2-related kinase. *Genetics* **156**, 1817–1828

129. He, Y., Emoto, K., Fang, X., Ren, N., Tian, X., Jan, Y.N., and Adler, P.N. (2005) Drosophila Mob family proteins interact with the related tricornered (Trc) and warts (Wts) kinases. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **16**, 4139–4152

130. Emoto, K., Parrish, J.Z., Jan, L.Y., and Jan, Y.N. (2006) The tumour suppressor Hippo acts with the NDR kinases in dendritic tiling and maintenance. *Nature* **443**, 210–213

131. Vichalkovski, A., Gresko, E., Cornils, H., Hergovich, A., Schmitz, D., and Hemmings, B.A. (2008) NDR kinase is activated by RASSF1A/MST1 in response to Fas receptor stimulation and promotes apoptosis. *Curr. Biol.* **18**, 1889–1895

132. Hergovich, A., Kohler, R.S., Schmitz, D., Vichalkovski, A., Cornils, H., and Hemmings, B.A. (2009) The MST1 and hMOB1 tumor suppressors control human centrosome duplication by regulating NDR kinase phosphorylation. *Curr. Biol.* **19**, 1692–1702

133. Chiba, S., Ikeda, M., Katsunuma, K., Ohashi, K., and Mizuno, K. (2009) MST2- and Furry-mediated activation of NDR1 kinase is critical for precise alignment of mitotic chromosomes. *Curr. Biol.* **19**, 675–681

134. Cornils, H., Stegert, M.R., Hergovich, A., Hynx, D., Schmitz, D., Dirnhofer, S., and Hemmings, B.A. (2010) Ablation of the kinase NDR1 predisposes mice to the development of T cell lymphoma. *Sci. Signal.* **3**, ra47

135. Yang, X., Li, D., Chen, W., and Xu, T. (2001) Human homologue of Drosophila lats, LATS1, negatively regulates growth by inducing G₂/M arrest or apoptosis. *Oncogene* **20**, 6516–6523

136. Xia, H., Qi, H., Li, Y., Pei, J., Barton, J., Blackstad, M., Xu, T., and Tao, W. (2002) LATS1 tumor suppressor regulates G2/M transition and apoptosis. *Oncogene* **21**, 1233–1241

137. Yabuta, N., Okada, N., Ito, A., Hosomi, T., Nishihara, S., Sasayama, Y., Fujimori, A., Okuzaki, D., Zhao, H., Ikawa, M., Okabe, M., and Nojima, H. (2007) Lats2 is an essential mitotic regulator required for the coordination of cell division. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 19259–19271

138. Hirota, T., Morisaki, T., Nishiyama, Y., Marumoto, T., Tada, K., Hara, T., Masuko, N., Inagaki, M., Hatakeyama, K., and Saya, H. (2000) Zyxin: a regulator of actin filament assembly, targets the mitotic apparatus by interacting with h-warts/LATS1 tumor suppressor. *J. Cell Biol.* **149**, 1073–1086

139. Iida, S., Hirota, T., Morisaki, T., Marumoto, T., Hara, T., Kuninaka, S., Honda, S., Kosai, K., Kawasuji, M., Pallas, D.C., and Saya, H. (2004) Tumor suppressor WARTS ensures genomic integrity by regulating both mitotic progression and G1 tetraploidy checkpoint function. *Oncogene* **23**, 5266–5274

140. Li, Y., Pei, J., Xia, H., Ke, H., Wang, H., and Tao, W. (2003) Lats2, a putative tumor suppressor, inhibits G1/S transition. *Oncogene* **22**, 4398–4405

141. Toji, S., Yabuta, N., Hosomi, T., Nishihara, S., Kobayashi, T., Suzuki, S., Tamai, K., and Nojima, H. (2004) The centrosomal protein Lats2 is a phosphorylation target of Aurora-A kinase. *Genes Cells* **9**, 383–397

142. Abe, Y., Ohsugi, M., Haraguchi, K., Fujimoto, J., and Yamamoto, T. (2006) LATS2-Ajuba complex regulates γ-tubulin recruitment to centrosomes and spindle organization during mitosis. *FEBS Lett.* **580**, 782–788

143. Aylon, Y., Michael, D., Shmueli, A., Yabuta, N., Nojima, H., and Oren, M. (2006) A positive feedback loop between the p53 and Lats2 tumor suppressors prevents tetraploidization. *Genes Dev.* **20**, 2687–2700

144. Aylon, Y., Ofir-Rosenfeld, Y., Yabuta, N., Lapi, E., Nojima, H., Lu, X., and Oren, M. (2010) The Lats2 tumor suppressor augments p53-mediated apoptosis by promoting the nuclear proapoptotic function of ASPP1. *Genes Dev.* **24**, 2420–2429

145. Vigneron, A.M., Ludwig, R.L., and Vousden, K.H. (2010) Cytoplasmic ASPP1 inhibits apoptosis through the control of YAP. *Genes Dev.* **24**, 2430–2439

146. Voorhoeve, P.M., le Sage, C., Schrier, M., Gillis, A.J., Stoop, H., Nagel, R., Liu, Y.P., van Duijse, J., Drost, J., Griekspoor, A., Zlotorynski, E., Yabuta, N., De Vita, G., Nojima, H., Looijenga, L.H., and Agami, R. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. *Cell* **124**, 1169–1181

147. Liu, X., Sempere, L.F., Ouyang, H., Memoli, V.A., Andrew, A.S., Luo, Y., Demidenko, E., Korc, M., Shi, W., Preis, M., Dragnev, K.H., Li, H., Direnzo, J., Bak, M., Freemantle, S.J., Kauppinen, S., and Dmitrovsky, E. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors. *J. Clin. Invest.* **120**, 1298–1309

148. Huntown, C.J., Nye, M.D., Geng, L., Peterson, K.L., Flatten, K.S., Haluska, P., Kaufmann, S.H., and Karnitz, L.M. (2010) Heat shock protein 90 inhibition depletes LATS1 and LATS2, two regulators of the mammalian Hippo tumor suppressor pathway. *Cancer Res.* **70**, 8642–8650

149. van der Weyden, L. and Adams, D.J. (2007) The Ras-association domain family (RASSF) members and their role in human tumourigenesis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1776**, 58–85

150. Richter, A.M., Pfeifer, G.P., and Dammann, R.H. (2009) The RASSF proteins in cancer; from epigenetic silencing to functional characterization. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1796**, 114–128

151. Dammann, R., Li, C., Yoon, J.H., Chin, P.L., Bates, S., and Pfeifer, G.P. (2000) Epigenetic inactivation of a RAS association domain family protein from the lung tumor suppressor locus 3p21.3. *Nat. Genet.* **25**, 315–319

152. Tommasi, S., Dammann, R., Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., Liu, L., Tsark, W.M., Wilczynski, S.P., Li, J., You, M., and Pfeifer, G.P. (2005) Tumor susceptibility of Rassfla knock-out mice. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 92–98

153. van der Weyden, L., Tachibana, K.K., Gonzalez, M.A., Adams, D.J., Ng, B.L., Petty, R., Venkitaraman, A.R., Arends, M.J., and Bradley, A. (2005) The RASSF1A

isoform of RASSF1 promotes microtubule stability and suppresses tumorigenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 8356–8367

154. Vavvas, D., Li, X., Avruch, J., and Zhang, X.F. (1998) Identification of Norel as a potential Ras effector. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 5439–5442

155. Khokhlatchev, A., Rabizadeh, S., Xavier, R., Nedwidek, M., Chen, T., Zhang, X.F., Seed, B., and Avruch, J. (2002) Identification of a novel Ras-regulated proapoptotic pathway. Curr. Biol. 12, 253–265

156. Praskova, M., Khoklatchev, A., Ortiz-Vega, S., and Avruch, J. (2004) Regulation of the MST1 kinase by autophosphorylation, by the growth inhibitory proteins, RASSF1 and NOREL, and by Ras. Biochem. J. 381, 453–462

157. Oh, H.J., Lee, K.K., Song, S.J., Jin, S.J., Song, M.S., Lee, J.H., Im, C.R., Lee, J.O., Yonehara, S., and Lim, D.S. (2006) Role of the tumor suppressor RASSF1A in Mst1-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res. 66, 2562–2569

158. Guo, C., Tommasi, S., Liu, L., Yee, J.K., Dammann, R., and Pfeifer, G.P. (2007) RASSF1A is part of a complex similar to the Drosophila Hippo/Salvador/Lats tumor-suppressor network. Curr. Biol. 17, 700–705

159. Hamilton, G., Yee, K.S., Scrace, S., and O'Neill, E. (2009) ATM regulates a RASSF1A-dependent DNA damage response. Curr. Biol. 19, 2020–2025

160. Ikeda, M., Hirabayashi, S., Fujiwara, N., Mori, H., Kawata, A., Iida, J., Bao, Y., Sato, Y., Iida, T., Sugimura, H., and Hata, Y. (2007) Ras-association domain family protein 6 induces apoptosis via both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent pathways. Exp. Cell Res. 313, 1484–1495

161. Allen, N.P., Donninger, H., Vos, M.D., Eckfeld, K., Hesson, L., Gordon, L., Birrer, M.J., Latif, F., and Clark, G.J. (2007) RASSF6 is a novel member of the RASSF family of tumor suppressors. Oncogene 26, 6203–6211

162. Ikeda, M., Kawata, A., Nishikawa, M., Tateishi, Y., Yamaguchi, M., Nakagawa, K., Hirabayashi, S., Bao, Y., Hidaka, S., Hirata, Y., and Hata, Y. (2009) Hippo pathway-dependent and -independent roles of RASSF6. Sci. Signal. 2, ra59

163. Baksh, S., Tommasi, S., Fenton, S., Yu, V.C., Martins, L.M., Pfeifer, G.P., Latif, F., Downward, J., and Neel, B.G. (2005) The tumor suppressor RASSF1A and MAP-1 link death receptor signaling to Bax conformational change and cell death. Mol. Cell 18, 637–650

164. Vos, M.D., Dallol, A., Eckfeld, K., Allen, N.P., Donninger, H., Hesson, L.B., Calvisi, D., Latif, F., and Clark, G.J. (2006) The RASSF1A tumor suppressor activates Bax via MOAP-1. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 4557–4563

165. Liu, L., Tommasi, S., Lee, D.H., Dammann, R., and Pfeifer, G.P. (2003) Control of microtubule stability by the RASSF1A tumor suppressor. Oncogene 22, 8125–8136

166. Dallol, A., Agathanggelou, A., Fenton, S.L., Ahmed-Choudhury, J., Hesson, L., Vos, M.D., Clark, G.J., Downward, J., Maher, E.R., and Latif, F. (2004) RASSF1A interacts with microtubule-associated proteins and modulates microtubule dynamics. Cancer Res. 64, 4112–4116

167. Song, M.S., Song, S.J., Ayad, N.G., Chang, J.S., Lee, J.H., Hong, H.K., Lee, H., Choi, N., Kim, J., Kim, H., Kim, J.W., Choi, E.J., Kirschner, M.W., and Lim, D.S. (2004) The tumour suppressor RASSF1A regulates mitosis by inhibiting the APC-Cdc20 complex. Nat. Cell Biol. 6, 129–137

168. Rong, R., Jiang, L.Y., Sheikh, M.S., and Huang, Y. (2007) Mitotic kinase Aurora-A phosphorylates RASSF1A and modulates RASSF1A-mediated microtubule interaction and M-phase cell cycle regulation. Oncogene 26, 7700–7708

169. Song, S.J., Song, M.S., Kim, S.J., Kim, S.Y., Kwon, S.H., Kim, J.G., Calvisi, D.F., Kang, D., and Lim, D.S. (2009) Aurora A regulates prometaphase progression by inhibiting the ability of RASSF1A to suppress APC-Cdc20 activity. Cancer Res. 69, 2314–2323

170. Song, S.J., Kim, S.J., Song, M.S., and Lim, D.S. (2009) Aurora B-mediated phosphorylation of RASSF1A maintains proper cytokinesis by recruiting Syntaxin16 to the midzone and midbody. Cancer Res. 69, 8540–8544

171. Song, M.S., Song, S.J., Kim, S.Y., Oh, H.J., and Lim, D.S. (2008) The tumour suppressor RASSF1A promotes MDM2 self-ubiquitination by disrupting the MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP complex. EMBO J. 27, 1863–1874

172. Song, M.S., Song, S.J., Kim, S.J., Nakayama, K., Nakayama, K.I., and Lim, D.S. (2008) Skp2 regulates the antiproliferative function of the tumor suppressor RASSF1A via ubiquitin-mediated degradation at the G1-S transition. Oncogene 27, 3176–3185

173. Kitagawa, D., Kajiho, H., Negishi, T., Ura, S., Watanabe, T., Wada, T., Ichijo, H., Katada, T., and Nishina, H. (2006) Release of RASSF1C from the nucleus by Daxx degradation links DNA damage and SAPK/JNK activation. EMBO J. 25, 3286–3297

174. Wang, K., Degerny, C., Xu, M., and Yang, X.J. (2009) YAP, TAZ, and Yorkie: a conserved family of signal-responsive transcriptional coregulators in animal development and human disease. Biochem. Cell Biol. 87, 77–91

175. Oh, H. and Irvine, K.D. (2010) Yorkie: the final destination of Hippo signaling. Trends Cell Biol. 20, 410–417

176. Hong, J.H. and Yaffe, M.B. (2006) TAZ: a beta-catenin-like molecule that regulates mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. Cell Cycle 5, 176–179

177. Downward, J. and Basu, S. (2008) YAP and p73: a complex affair. Mol. Cell 32, 749–750

178. Zhang, X., Milton, C.C., Humbert, P.O., and Harvey, K.H. (2009) Transcriptional output of the Salvador/warts/hippo pathway is controlled in distinct fashions in Drosophila melanogaster and mammalian cell lines. Cancer Res. 69, 6033–6041

179. Basu, S., Totty, N.F., Irwin, M.S., Sudol, M., and Downward, J. (2003) Akt phosphorylates the Yes-associated protein, YAP, to induce interaction with 14-3-3 and attenuation of p73-mediated apoptosis. Mol. Cell 11, 11–23

180. Yuan, M., Tomlinson, V., Lara, R., Holliday, D., Chelala, C., Harada, T., Gangeswaran, R., Manson-Bishop, C., Smith, P., Danovi, S.A., Pardo, O., Crook, T., Mein, C.A., Lemoine, N.R., Jones, L.J., and Basu, S. (2008) Yes-associated protein (YAP) functions as a tumor suppressor in breast. Cell Death Differ. 15, 1752–1759

181. Lapi, E., Di Agostino, S., Donzelli, S., Gal, H., Domany, E., Rechavi, G., Pandolfi, P.P., Givol, D., Strano, S., Lu, X., and Blandino, G. (2008) PML, YAP, and p73 are components of a proapoptotic autoregulatory feedback loop. Mol. Cell 32, 803–814

182. Levy, D., Adamovich, Y., Reuven, N., and Shaul, Y. (2007) The Yes-associated protein 1 stabilizes p73 by preventing Itch-mediated ubiquitination of p73. Cell Death Differ. 14, 743–751

183. Levy, D., Adamovich, Y., Reuven, N., and Shaul, Y. (2008) Yap1 phosphorylation by c-Abl is a critical step in selective activation of proapoptotic genes in response to DNA damage. *Mol. Cell* 29, 350–361

184. Hoshino, M., Qi, M.L., Yoshimura, N., Miyashita, T., Tagawa, K., Wada, Y., Enokido, Y., Marubuchi, S., Harjes, P., Arai, N., Oyanagi, K., Blandino, G., Sudol, M., Rich, T., Kanazawa, I., Wanker, E.E., Saitoe, M., and Okazawa, H. (2006) Transcriptional repression induces a slowly progressive atypical neuronal death associated with changes of YAP isoforms and p73. *J. Cell Biol.* 172, 589–604

185. Remue, E., Meerschaert, K., Oka, T., Boucherie, C., Vandekerckhove, J., Sudol, M., and Gettemans, J. (2010) TAZ interacts with zonula occludens-1 and -2 proteins in a PDZ-1 dependent manner. *FEBS Lett.* 584, 4175–4180

186. Oka, T., Remue, E., Meerschaert, K., Vanloo, B., Boucherie, C., Gfeller, D., Bader, G.D., Sidhu, S.S., Vandekerckhove, J., Gettemans, J., and Sudol, M. (2010) Functional complexes between YAP2 and ZO-2 are PDZ domain-dependent, and regulate YAP2 nuclear localization and signaling. *Biochem. J.* 432, 461–472

187. Varelas, X., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., Narimatsu, M., Weiss, A., Cockburn, K., Larsen, B.G., Rossant, J., and Wrana, J.L. (2010) The Crumbs complex couples cell density sensing to Hippo-dependent control of the TGF-β-SMAD pathway. *Dev. Cell* 19, 831–844

188. Zhao, B., Li, L., Tumaneng, K., Wang, C.Y., and Guan, K.L. (2010) A coordinated phosphorylation by Lats and CK1 regulates YAP stability through SCF<sup>β-TRCP</sup>. *Genes Dev.* 24, 72–85

189. Liu, C.Y., Zha, Z.Y., Zhou, X., Zhang, H., Huang, W., Zhao, D., Li, T., Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Hong, W., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., Lei, Q.Y., and Guan, K.L. (2010) The hippo tumor pathway promotes TAZ degradation by phosphorylating a phosphodegron and recruiting the SCF<sup>β-TrCP</sup> E3 ligase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285, 37159–37169

190. Overholtzer, M., Zhang, J., Smolen, G.A., Muir, B., Li, W., Sgroi, D.C., Deng, C.X., Brugge, J.S., and Haber, D.A. (2006) Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103, 12405–12410

191. Zhao, B., Wei, X., Li, W., Udai, R.S., Yang, Q., Kim, J., Xie, J., Ikenoue, T., Yu, J., Li, L., Zheng, P., Ye, K., Chinnaiyan, A., Halder, G., Lai, Z.C., and Guan, K.L. (2007) Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. *Genes Dev.* 21, 2747–2761

192. Lei, Q.Y., Zhang, H., Zhao, B., Zha, Z.Y., Bai, F., Pei, X.H., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., and Guan, K.L. (2008) TAZ promotes cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the hippo pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 28, 2426–2436

193. Zhao, B., Ye, X., Yu, J., Li, L., Li, W., Li, S., Yu, J., Lin, J.D., Wang, C.Y., Chinnaiyan, A.M., Lai, Z.C., and Guan, K.L. (2008) TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control. *Genes Dev.* 22, 1962–1971

194. Zhang, H., Liu, C.Y., Zha, Z.Y., Zhao, B., Yao, J., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., Lei, Q.Y., and Guan, K.L. (2009) TEAD transcription factors mediate the function of TAZ in cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284, 13355–13362

195. Xu, M.Z., Chan, S.W., Liu, A.M., Wong, K.F., Fan, S.T., Chen, J., Poon, R.T., Zender, L., Lowe, S.W., Hong, W., and Luk, J.M. (2011) AXL receptor kinase

is a mediator of YAP-dependent oncogenic functions in hepatocellular carcinoma. *Oncogene* 30, 1229–1240

196. Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Huang, C., Chong, Y.F., Gunaratne, H.J., Hogue, K.A., Blackstock, W.P., Harvey, K.F., and Hong, W. (2011) WW domain-mediated interaction with Wbp2 is important for the oncogenic property of TAZ. *Oncogene* 30, 600–610

197. McNeill, H. and Woodgett, J.R. (2010) When pathways collide: collaboration and connivance among signalling proteins in development. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.* 11, 404–413

198. Neto-Silva, R.M., de Beco, S., and Johnston, L.A. (2010) Evidence for a growth-stabilizing regulatory feedback mechanism between Myc and Yorkie, the Drosophila homolog of Yap. *Dev. Cell* 19, 507–520

199. Ziosi, M., Baena-López, L.A., Grifoni, D., Froldi, F., Pession, A., Garoia, F., Trotta, V., Bellosta, P., Cavicchi, S., and Pession, A. (2010) dMyc functions downstream of Yorkie to promote the supercompetitive behavior of hippo pathway mutant cells. *PLoS Genet.* 6, e1001140

200. Polesello, C. and Tapon, N. (2007) Salvador-warts-hippo signaling promotes Drosophila posterior follicle cell maturation downstream of notch. *Curr. Biol.* 17, 1864–1870

201. Meignin, C., Alvarez-Garcia, I., Davis, I., and Palacios, I.M. (2007) The salvador-warts-hippo pathway is required for epithelial proliferation and axis specification in Drosophila. *Curr. Biol.* 17, 1871–1878

202. Yu, J., Poulton, J., Huang, Y.C., and Deng, W.M. (2008) The hippo pathway promotes Notch signaling in regulation of cell differentiation, proliferation, and oocyte polarity. *PLoS ONE* 3, e1761

203. Reddy, B.V., Rauskolb, C., and Irvine, K.D. (2010) Influence of fat-hippo and notch signaling on the proliferation and differentiation of Drosophila optic neuroepithelia. *Development* 137, 2397–2408

204. Camargo, F.D., Gokhale, S., Johnnidis, J.B., Fu, D., Bell, G.W., Jaenisch, R., and Brummelkamp, T.R. (2007) YAP1 increases organ size and expands undifferentiated progenitor cells. *Curr. Biol.* 17, 2054–2060

205. Varelas, X., Miller, B.W., Sopko, R., Song, S., Gregorieff, A., Fellouse, F.A., Sakuma, R., Pawson, T., Hunziker, W., McNeill, H., Wrana, J.L., and Attisano, L. (2010) The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt/β-catenin signaling. *Dev. Cell* 18, 579–591

206. Alarcón, C., Zaromytidou, A.I., Xi, Q., Gao, S., Yu, J., Fujisawa, S., Barlas, A., Miller, A.N., Manova-Todorova, K., Macias, M.J., Sapkota, G., Pan, D., and Massagué, J. (2009) Nuclear CDKs drive Smad transcriptional activation and turnover in BMP and TGF-β pathways. *Cell* 139, 757–769

207. Varelas, X., Sakuma, R., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., Peerani, R., Rao, B.M., Dembowy, J., Yaffe, M.B., Zandstra, P.W., and Wrana, J.L. (2008) TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem-cell self-renewal. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 10, 837–848

208. Fernandez-L.A., Northcott, P.A., Dalton, J., Fraga, C., Ellison, D., Angers, S., Taylor, M.D., and Kenney, A.M. (2009) YAP1 is amplified and up-regulated in hedgehog-associated medulloblastomas and mediates Sonic hedgehog-driven neural precursor proliferation. *Genes Dev.* 23, 2729–2741

209. Zhang, J., Ji, J.Y., Yu, M., Overholtzer, M., Smolen, G.A., Wang, R., Brugge, J.S., Dyson, N.J., and Haber, D.A. (2009) YAP-dependent induction of amphiregulin identifies a non-cell-autonomous component of the Hippo pathway. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 11, 1444–1450

Y. Bao et al.

210. Nishioka, N., Inoue, K., Adachi, K., Kiyonari, H., Ota, M., Ralston, A., Yabuta, N., Hirahara, S., Stephenson, R.O., Ogonuki, N., Makita, R., Kurihara, H., Morin-Kensicki, E.M., Nojima, H., Rossant, J., Nakao, K., Niwa, H., and Sasaki, H. (2009) The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass. *Dev. Cell* 16, 398–410

211. McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Ramesh, V., Gusella, J.F., and Jacks, T. (1997) The Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is essential for extraembryonic development immediately prior to gastrulation. *Genes Dev.* 11, 1253–1265

212. Saburi, S., Hester, I., Fisher, E., Pontoglio, M., Eremina, V., Gessler, M., Quaggin, S.E., Harrison, R., Mount, R., and McNeill, H. (2008) Loss of Fat4 disrupts PCP signaling and oriented cell division and leads to cystic kidney disease. *Nat. Genet.* 40, 1010–1015

213. Lee, J.H., Kim, T.S., Yang, T.H., Koo, B.K., Oh, S.P., Lee, K.P., Oh, H.J., Lee, S.H., Kong, Y.Y., Kim, J.M., and Lim, D.S. (2008) A crucial role of WW45 in developing epithelial tissues in the mouse. *EMBO J.* 27, 1231–1242

214. Oh, S., Lee, D., Kim, T., Kim, T.S., Oh, H.J., Hwang, C.Y., Kong, Y.Y., Kwon, K.S., and Lim, D.S. (2009) Crucial role for Mst1 and Mst2 kinases in early embryonic development of the mouse. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 29, 6309–6320

215. St John, M.A., Tao, W., Fei, X., Fukumoto, R., Carcangiu, M.L., Brownstein, D.G., Parlow, A.F., McGrath, J., and Xu, T. (1999) Mice deficient of Lats1 develop soft-tissue sarcomas, ovarian tumours and pituitary dysfunction. *Nat. Genet.* 21, 182–186

216. McPherson, J.P., Tamblyn, L., Elia, A., Migon, E., Shehabeldin, A., Matysiak-Zablocki, E., Lemmers, B., Salmena, L., Hakem, A., Fish, J., Kassam, F., Squire, J., Bruneau, B.G., Hande, M.P., and Hakem, R. (2004) Lats2/Kpm is required for embryonic development, proliferation control and genomic integrity. *EMBO J.* 23, 3677–3688

217. Morin-Kensicki, E.M., Boone, B.N., Howell, M., Stonebraker, J.R., Teed, J., Alb, J.G., Magnuson, T.R., O'Neal, W., and Milgram, S.L. (2006) Defects of yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and embryonic axis elongation in mice with targeted disruption of Yap65. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 26, 77–87

218. Hossain, Z., Ali, S.M., Ko, H.L., Xu, J., Ng, C.P., Guo, K., Qi, Z., Ponniah, S., Hong, W., and Hunziker, W. (2007) Glomerulocystic kidney disease in mice with a targeted inactivation of Wwtr1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104, 1631–1636

219. Makita, R., Uchijima, Y., Nishiyama, K., Amano, T., Chen, Q., Takeuchi, T., Mitani, A., Nagase, T., Yatomi, Y., Aburatani, H., Nakagawa, O., Small, E.V., Cobostark, P., Igarashi, P., Murakami, M., Tominaga, J., Sato, T., Asano, T., Kurihara, Y., and Kurihara, H. (2008) Multiple renal cysts, urinary concentration defects, and pulmonary emphysematous changes in mice lacking TAZ. *Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol.* 294, F542–F553

220. McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Mercer, K., Crowley, D., Gusella, J.F., Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. (1998) Mice heterozygous for a mutation at the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus develop a range of highly metastatic tumors. *Genes Dev.* 12, 1121–1133

221. Giovannini, M., Robanus-Maandag, E., van der Valk, M., Niwa-Kawakita, M., Abramowski, V., Goutebroze, L., Woodruff, J.M., Berns, A., and Thomas, G. (2000) Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse

promotes manifestations of human neurofibromatosis type 2. *Genes Dev.* 14, 1617–1630

222. Lee, K.P., Lee, J.H., Kim, T.S., Kim, T.H., Park, H.D., Byun, J.S., Kim, M.C., Jeong, W.I., Calvisi, D.F., Kim, J.M., and Lim, D.S. (2010) The Hippo-Salvador pathway restrains hepatic oval cell proliferation, liver size, and liver tumorigenesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107, 8248–8253

223. Song, H., Mak, K.K., Topol, L., Yun, K., Hu, J., Garrett, L., Chen, Y., Park, O., Chang, J., Simpson, R.M., Wang, C.Y., Gao, B., Jiang, J., and Yang, Y. (2010) Mammalian Mst1 and Mst2 kinases play essential roles in organ size control and tumor suppression. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107, 1431–1436

224. Lu, L., Li, Y., Kim, S.M., Bossuyt, W., Liu, P., Qiu, Q., Wang, Y., Halder, G., Finegold, M.J., Lee, J.S., and Johnson, R.L. (2010) Hippo signaling is a potent in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107, 1437–1442

225. Avruch, J., Zhou, D., Pitamant, J., and Bardeesy, N. (2010) Mst1/2 signaling to Yap: gatekeeper for liver size and tumor development. *Br. J. Cancer* 104, 24–32

226. Odashima, M., Usui, S., Takagi, H., Hong, C., Liu, J., Yokota, M., and Sadoshima, J. (2007) Inhibition of endogenous Mst1 prevents apoptosis and cardiac dysfunction without affecting cardiac hypertrophy after myocardial infarction. *Circ. Res.* 100, 1344–1352

227. Matsui, Y., Nakano, N., Shao, D., Gao, S., Luo, W., Hong, C., Zhai, P., Holle, E., Yu, X., Yabuta, N., Tao, W., Wagner, T., Nojima, H., and Sadoshima, J. (2008) Lats2 is a negative regulator of myocyte size in the heart. *Circ. Res.* 103, 1309–1318

228. Oceandy, D., Pickard, A., Prehar, S., Zi, M., Mohamed, T.M., Stanley, P.J., Baudoin-Stanley, F., Nadif, R., Tommasi, S., Pfeifer, G.P., Armesilla, A.L., Cartwright, E.J., and Neyses, L. (2009) Tumor suppressor Ras-association domain family 1 isoform A is a novel regulator of cardiac hypertrophy. *Circulation* 120, 607–616

229. Del Re, D.P., Matsuda, T., Zhai, P., Gao, S., Clark, G.J., van der Weyden, L., and Sadoshima, J. (2010) Proapoptotic Rassf1A/Mst1 signaling in cardiac fibroblasts is protective against pressure overload in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* 120, 3555–3567

230. Cao, X., Pfaff, S.L., and Gage, F.H. (2008) YAP regulates neural progenitor cell number via the TEA domain transcription factor. *Genes Dev.* 22, 3320–3334

231. Hong, J.H., Hwang, E.S., McManus, M.T., Amsterdam, A., Tian, Y., Kalmukova, R., Mueller, E., Benjamin, T., Spiegelman, B.M., Sharp, P.A., Hopkins, N., and Yaffe, M.B. (2005) TAZ, a transcriptional modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. *Science* 309, 1074–1078

232. Zaidi, S.K., Sullivan, A.J., Medina, R., Ito, Y., van Wijnen, A.J., Stein, J.L., Lian, J.B., and Stein, G.S. (2004) Tyrosine phosphorylation controls Runx2-mediated subnuclear targeting of YAP to repress transcription. *EMBO J.* 23, 790–799

233. Jeong, H., Bae, S., An, S.Y., Byun, M.R., Hwang, J.H., Yaffe, M.B., Hong, J.H., and Hwang, E.S. (2010) TAZ as a novel enhancer of MyoD-mediated myogenic differentiation. *FASEB J.* 24, 3310–3320

234. Watt, K.I., Judson, R., Medlow, P., Reid, K., Kurth, T.B., Burniston, J.G., Ratkevicius, A., De Bari, C., and Wackerhage, H. (2010) Yap is a novel regulator of C2C12 myogenesis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 393, 619–624

235. Lian, I., Kim, J., Okazawa, H., Zhao, J., Zhao, B., Yu, J., Chinnaiyan, A., Israel, M.A., Goldstein, L.S., Abujarour, R., Ding, S., and Guan, K.L. (2010) The role of YAP transcription coactivator in regulating stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. *Genes Dev.* 24, 1106–1118

236. Staley, B.K and Irvine, K.D. (2010) Warts and Yorkie mediate intestinal regeneration by influencing stem cell proliferation. *Curr. Biol.* 20, 1580–1587

237. Shaw, R.L., Kohlmaier, A., Polesello, C., Veelken, C., Edgar, B.A., and Tapon, N. (2010) The Hippo pathway regulates intestinal stem cell proliferation during Drosophila adult midgut regeneration. *Development* 137, 4147–4158

238. Cai, J., Zhang, N., Zheng, Y., de Wilde, R.F., Maitra, A., and Pan, D. (2010) The Hippo signaling pathway restricts the oncogenic potential of an intestinal regeneration program. *Genes Dev.* 24, 2383–2388

239. Katagiri, K., Imamura, M., and Kinashi, T. (2006) Spatiotemporal regulation of the kinase Mst1 by binding protein RAPL is critical for lymphocyte polarity and adhesion. *Nat. Immunol.* 7, 919–928

240. Katagiri, K., Katakai, T., Ebisuno, Y., Ueda, Y., Okada, T., and Kinashi, T. (2009) Mst1 controls lymphocyte trafficking and interstitial motility within lymph nodes. *EMBO J.* 28, 1319–1331

241. Dong, Y., Du, X., Ye, J., Han, M., Xu, T., Zhuang, Y., and Tao, W. (2009) A cell-intrinsic role for Mst1 in regulating thymocyte egress. *J. Immunol.* 183, 3865–3872

242. Zhou, D., Medoff, B.D., Chen, L., Li, L., Zhang, X.F., Praskova, M., Liu, M., Landry, A., Blumberg, R.S., Boussiotis, V.A., Xavier, R., and Avruch, J. (2008) The Nore1B/Mst1 complex restrains antigen receptor-induced proliferation of naive T cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 195, 20321–20326

243. Hansson, C.M., Buckley, P.G., Grigelioniene, G., Piotrowski, A., Hellström, A.R., Mantripragada, K., Jarbo, C., Mathiesen, T., and Dumanski, J.P. (2007) Comprehensive genetic and epigenetic analysis of sporadic meningioma for macro-mutations on 22q and micro-mutations within NF2 locus. *BMC Genomics* 8, 16

244. Sekido, Y. (2010) Genomic abnormalities and signal transduction dysregulation in malignant mesothelioma cells. *Cancer Sci.* 101, 1–6

245. Jiang, Z., Li, X., Hu, J., Zhou, W., Jiang, Y., Li, G., and Lu, D. (2006) Promoter hypermethylation-mediated down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 in human astrocytoma. *Neurosci. Res.* 56, 450–458

246. Takahashi, Y., Miyoshi, Y., Takahara, C., Irahara, N., Taguchi, T., Tamaki, Y., and Noguchi, S. (2005) Down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 11, 1380–1385

247. Seidel, C., Schagdarsurengin, U., Blümke, K., Würl, P., Pfeifer, G.P., Hauptmann, S., Taubert, H., and Dammann, R. (2007) Frequent hypermethylation of MST1 and MST2 in soft tissue sarcoma. *Mol. Carcinog.* 46, 865–871

248. Hesson, L.B., Dunwell, T.L., Cooper, W.N., Catchpoole, D., Brini, A.T., Chiaramonte, R., Griffiths, M., Chalmers, A.D., Maher, E.R., and Latif, F. (2009) The novel RASSF6 and RASSF10 candidate tumour suppressor genes are frequently epigenetically inactivated in childhood leukaemias. *Mol. Cancer* 8, 42

249. Steinhardt, A.A., Gayyed, M.F., Klein, A.P., Dong, J., Maitra, A., Pan, D., Montgomery, E.A., and Anders, R.A. (2008) Expression of Yes-associated protein in common solid tumors. *Hum. Pathol.* 39, 1582–1589

250. Minoo, P., Zlobec, I., Baker, K., Tornillo, L., Terracciano, L., Jass, J.R., and Lugli, A. (2007) Prognostic significance of mammalian sterile20-like kinase 1 in colorectal cancer. *Mod. Pathol.* 20, 331–338

251. Xu, M.Z., Yao, T.J., Lee, N.P., Ng, I.O., Chan, Y.T., Zender, L., Lowe, S.W., Poon, R.T., and Luk, J.M. (2009) Yes-associated protein is an independent prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma. *Cancer* 115, 4576–4585

252. Kalluri, R. and Weinberg, R.A. (2009) The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. *J. Clin. Invest.* 119, 1420–1428

253. Zhao, B., Li, L., Lu, Q., Wang, L.H., Liu, C.Y., Lei, Q., and Guan, K.H. (2011) Angiomotin is a novel Hippo pathway component that inhibits YAP oncoprotein. *Genes Dev.* 25, 51–63

254. Wang, W., Huang, J., and Chen, J. (2011) Angiomotin-like proteins associate with and negatively regulate YAP1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 286, 4364–4370

255. Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Chong, Y.F., Pobbati, A.V., Huang, C., and Hong, W. (2011) Hippo pathway-independent restriction of TAZ and YAP by angiomotin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 286, 7018–7926
