
# Biosynthesis and degradation of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol

Natsuo Ueda,* Kazuhito Tsuboi, Toru Uyama, Taira Ohnishi  
Department of Biochemistry, Kagawa University School of Medicine, Miki, Kagawa, Japan

## Abstract.

2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) is a monoacylglycerol (MAG) molecule containing an esterified arachidonic acid chain at sn-2 position of the glycerol backbone. Together with structurally similar N-arachidonylethanolamine (anandamide), 2-AG has been extensively studied as an endogenous ligand of cannabinoid receptors (an endocannabinoid) in brain and other mammalian tissues. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that the endocannabinoid system, including the central-type cannabinoid receptor CB1 and 2-AG, is responsible for synaptic retrograde signaling in the central nervous system.

© 2010 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.  
Volume 37, Number 1, January/February 2011, Pages 1–7 • E-mail: nueda@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp

As 2-AG is rapidly formed from membrane phospholipids on cellular stimuli and degraded to arachidonic acid and glycerol, the enzymes catalyzing its biosynthesis and degradation are believed to play crucial roles in the regulation of its tissue levels. The major biosynthetic pathway appears to consist of sequential hydrolyses of inositol phospholipids via diacylglycerol (DAG) by β-type phospholipase C and DAG lipase, while MAG lipase is a principal enzyme in the degradation. In this short review, we will briefly outline rapid advances in enzymological research on the biosynthetic and degradative pathways of 2-AG.

Keywords: cannabinoid receptor, diacylglycerol lipase, monoacylglycerol lipase, phospholipase C

## 1. Introduction

Endocannabinoids represent small molecules, which exist in the brain and other animal tissues and act as agonists of cannabinoid receptors [1]. Cannabinoid receptors, belonging to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily, were originally cloned as receptor proteins specifically binding to cannabinoids, including Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol, the major psychoactive component of *Cannabis* (Fig. 1). While CB1 and CB2 are two cannabinoid receptors so far cloned [2,3], additional non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors binding to cannabinoids and/or endocannabinoids have been proposed [4]. CB1 is the central type of cannabinoid receptor abundantly expressed in the central nervous system and is involved in the control of movement, emotion, and memory. Psychiatric symptoms elicited by Marijuana are mostly attributed to nonphysiological activation of CB1 by cannabinoids. On the other hand, CB2 is the peripheral-type abundant in immune cells and blood cells and is related to the actions of cannabinoids/endocannabinoids in inflammation and immunity.

Although several lipid molecules containing a polyunsaturated acyl chain have been reported as endocannabinoids [5], only N-arachidonylethanolamine (anandamide) [6] and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) [7,8] are currently considered to be of physiological importance (Fig. 1). Moreover, several findings, such as its capability of acting as a full agonist and its abundance in the brain and other animal tissues, strongly suggest that 2-AG, rather than anandamide, is the true endogenous ligand for both CB1 and CB2 [9]. 2-AG contains an esterified arachidonic acid chain at sn-2 position of the glycerol backbone and is one of principal monoacylglycerol (MAG) species in animal tissues. Before the identification as an endocannabinoid, this molecule has been recognized only as an intermediate metabolite in the sequential breakdown of diacylglycerol (DAG) [10]. As one of the most striking physiological activities, 2-AG is produced in postsynaptic cells on depolarization or activation of Gq/11 protein-coupled receptors and released to the synaptic space. The released 2-AG then functions as a retrograde messenger by activating CB1 receptor expressed in presynaptic cells, resulting in the inhibition of calcium influx [11]. By this mechanism, the endocannabinoid system comprising 2-AG and CB1 causes transient and long-lasting suppression of the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic cells.

Endocannabinoids are not stored in cells but rapidly formed from membrane phospholipids on demand. Thus, biosynthetic and degradative routes of endocannabinoids

have attracted much attention since their discoveries. In addition, the involved enzymes are considered as promising targets for the development of therapeutic drugs [12]. Despite structural and functional similarities, 2-AG and anandamide are formed and degraded in totally different pathways. In this short review, we will briefly outline the biosynthesis and degradation of 2-AG (for the anandamide metabolism, see recent review articles [13–15]).

### 2. Biosynthetic Pathways of 2-AG

In various cell types, 2-AG is formed from arachidonic acid-containing membrane phospholipids in response to cellular stimuli. Among the proposed 2-AG-forming pathways, the phosphatidylinositol (PI)-phospholipase C (PLC)/DAG lipase [diglyceride lipase (DAGL)] pathway is probably the most important (Fig. 2). This pathway consists of hydrolysis by PLC of inositol phospholipids containing arachidonic acid at sn-2 position and further hydrolysis by DAGL of the resultant arachidonic acid-containing DAG. In fact, PI served as the most preferred phospholipid substrate for the 2-AG formation in brain [9]. Mammalian PLCs comprise β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, and η subtypes [16]. β Subtypes, consisting of four isoforms β1–β4, are distinguished from other subtypes by their activation by α subunit of Gq/11 protein. Each isoform is expressed in different brain areas and coexists with different Gq/11-coupled receptors [11]. PLCβ1 is coupled to the group I metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR5 and the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1, while PLCβ3 and β4 to mGluR1. By the analyses of mice lacking one of isoforms of PLCβ, it was shown that PLCβ1 and β4 were involved in the G protein-coupled receptor-triggered 2-AG formation in hippocampal neurons and cerebellar Purkinje cells, respectively [17,18]. Phosphatidic acid (PA) [19] and phosphatidylcholine [20] were also suggested to serve as precursor phospholipids in the formation of 2-AG via arachidonic acid-containing DAG.

In a second pathway, 2-AG may be produced by sequential hydrolyses of PI via lyso PI, which are catalyzed by PLA₂ and lyso PI-specific PLC (Fig. 2) [21]. Lyso PI-specific PLC was localized in synaptic plasma membranes of rat brain and was distinguished from the known PI-PLC [22]. Furthermore, endogenous arachidonic acid-containing lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) was detected in rat brain, and the brain homogenate rapidly converted this LPA molecule to 2-AG [23]. Therefore, the combination of LPA-generating enzymes and a phosphatase for LPA may constitute a third 2-AG-forming pathway (Fig. 2).

### 3. DAGL

Earlier studies showed the presence of an enzyme that selectively cleaves the sn-1 ester bond of 1,2-DAG in animal tissues [24,25]. Later, a DAG-hydrolyzing enzyme was purified from human platelets [26]. This enzyme was inhibited by sulfhydryl blockers, serine hydrolase inhibitors, and 1,6-bis(cyclohexyloximinocarbonylamino)hexane (RHC80267), while it was insensitive to Ca²⁺ and EDTA. As the molecular mass was estimated to be 33 kDa, the enzyme appears to be different from the following DAGLs with much higher molecular masses.

In 2003, human DAGL was cloned by homology screening with the aid of the sequence of a Penicillium DAGL and was found to exist as two closely related genes designated α and β [27]. The gene products were composed of 1,042 and 672 amino acids, respectively, and contained a lipase-3 motif, a serine lipase motif, and four putative transmembrane domains. When expressed in COS cells, the recombinant DAGLα protein was localized to the plasma membrane. Both α and β isoforms selectively hydrolyzed sn-1 position of DAG over its sn-2 position. The pH optimum was 7, and the Km values for DAG were 154.7 μM (α isoform) and 74.1 μM (β isoform). Although Ca²⁺ stimulated the activity, high concentrations (0.1 mM or higher) were required for its significant increase. RHC80267 and tetrahydrolipstatin (THL), known as DAGL inhibitors, inhibited both isoforms. DAGLα transcripts were expressed in various tissues of human and mouse tissues with high levels in the nervous system (human and mouse) and pancreas (human). Immunohistochemical studies using antibodies against α and β isoforms showed the same qualitative staining patterns for both isoforms in the brain. More interestingly, the immunostaining shifted from axonal tracts in the embryo to dendritic fields in the adults, suggesting a development-dependent change in the physiological roles of endocannabinoid signaling. Silencing of DAGLα by RNA interference indicated its contribution

Fig. 2. Biosynthetic pathways of 2-AG.

to the mGluR-dependent 2-AG formation in neuroblastoma cells [28]. DAGLα coexisted with Gq/11-coupled receptors, α subunit of Gq/11 protein, and PLCβ at particular synaptic and neuronal surface [11].

Recently, DAGLα-deficient and DAGLβ-deficient mice were respectively generated [29,30]. Both the mice were viable and appeared normal regarding their general appearances. DAGLα-deficient mice showed remarkable reduction in basal brain levels of 2-AG and lacked stimulus-induced elevation of the 2-AG levels. Consistent with these findings, Ca²⁺-dependent or Gq/11-coupled receptor-driven retrograde synaptic suppression was absent in the cerebellum, hippocampus, and striatum of DAGLα-deficient mice. In contrast, the brain of DAGLβ-deficient mice showed normal content of 2-AG and intact retrograde synaptic suppression. These results were in agreement with previous results with DAGL inhibitors and strongly suggested that 2-AG generated by DAGLα is responsible for retrograde suppression through CB1 receptor at central synapses [29]. In another report, brain 2-AG levels were reduced by ~80% in DAGLα-deficient mice and by 50% in DAGLβ-deficient mice, and DAGLα was revealed to play an essential role in the regulation of retrograde synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis in adult [30]. In liver, DAGLβ deficiency resulted in a 90% reduction of 2-AG, showing the importance of this isoform.

Although aforementioned RHC80267 and THL have been used as DAGL inhibitors to decrease endogenous levels of 2-AG, both compounds were not specific for DAGL but

inhibited a number of serine hydrolases coexisting in brain [31]. However, as each compound inhibited considerably different types of serine hydrolases, pharmacological effects shared by both compounds were thought to be a good evidence for DAGL-dependent events. O-3841 and O-5596 were reported to be potent and selective DAGL inhibitors [32,33]. However, O-3841 was later shown to inhibit many other serine hydrolases [31].

### 4. Degradation of 2-AG

The degradative pathways of 2-AG are shown in Fig. 3. The hydrolysis to arachidonic acid and glycerol is generally thought to be the major pathway. Although a large number of enzymes can catalyze the hydrolysis of MAGs, MAG lipase (monoglyceride lipase (MAGL)] is considered to play the most important role in the 2-AG degradation in brain [34]. Alternatively, a MAG kinase can catalyze the phosphorylation of 2-AG to generate 2-arachidonoyl-LPA [35,36], and MAG acyltransferase catalyzes the formation of DAG from 2-MAG and acyl-CoA [37]. Furthermore, the arachidonoyl moiety of 2-AG can be oxygenated by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and lipoxygenases, resulting in the formation of glyceryl prostaglandins or hydroperoxy derivatives of 2-AG, respectively [38,39]. Although physiological significance of the oxygenation pathways remains unclear, biological activities of glyceryl prostaglandins have been reported [39].

Fig. 3. Degradative pathways of 2-AG.

5. MAGL and Other  
MAG-Hydrolyzing Enzymes  

MAGL is a serine hydrolase well characterized as an enzyme that cleaves 2- and 1-MAGs, including 2-AG, into free fatty acids and glycerol [40]. The enzyme was first purified from rat adipose tissue in 1976 [41] and cloned from mouse adipocytes in 1997 [42]. The deduced sequences are 303 amino acids in length and contain the catalytic triad residues Ser-122 (in a GXSXG motif), Asp-239, and His-269. Its homologues were later cloned from human adipose tissue and rat brain and were found to show 84% and 92% identities with mouse MAGL at amino acid level, respectively [43, 44]. MAGL is a soluble protein that associates with membranes in a peripheral manner and is present in both soluble and particulate fractions when separated by centrifugation [40]. Recently, the tridimensional structure of human MAGL protein was elucidated by X-ray diffraction [45]. The protein crystallized as a dimer and was confirmed to belong to the α/β-hydrolase superfamily. The structure contained an apolar helix covering the active site, a wide and hydrophobic pocket for acyl binding and a hydrophilic cavity for the glycerol moiety of 2-AG. The aforementioned catalytic triad was directly verified. Cys-201 located near the catalytic site was identified as a crucial residue in the inhibition by N-arachidonylmaleimide, a sulfhydryl blocker. Despite rapidly growing knowledge on MAGL, the regulatory mechanism of MAGL activity is poorly understood [40].

MAGL mRNA was ubiquitously expressed in mouse tissues [42]. MAGL was also present throughout rat brain, with higher expression levels in cerebellum, cortex, and hippocampus; intermediate levels in thalamus and striatum; and lower levels in brain stem and hypothalamus [44]. The following findings suggest that MAGL is involved in the degradation of 2-AG acting as an endocannabinoid in the central nervous system [44]. First, immunohistochemical studies revealed the presynaptic localization of MAGL. Second, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of MAGL in rat cortical neurons attenuated N-methyl-D-aspartate/carbachol-induced 2-AG accumulation. Third, silencing of MAGL expression by RNA interference caused accumulation of a large amount of 2-AG in HeLa cells, and as analyzed by immunodepletion, MAGL accounted for at least 50% of the total 2-AG-hydrolyzing activity in soluble fractions of rat brain [46]. Fourth, as discussed below, administration of MAGL inhibitors into animals increased endogenous levels of 2-AG and caused cannabinimetic behavioral effects. Finally, a functional proteomic approach revealed that MAGL is responsible for ~85% of the 2-AG-hydrolyzing activity at pH 7.5 in mouse brain [34]. The remaining activity was mostly derived from two integral membrane proteins α/β-hydrolase domain-containing protein-6 (ABHD6) and ABHD12. While fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) can hydrolyze both anandamide and 2-AG at comparable rates [47], contribution of FAAH to the 2-AG hydrolysis was minor in the brain [34, 48]. On the other hand, mouse microglial cell line BV-2 did not express MAGL, and the 2-AG-hydrolyzing activities in the cell homogenates and intact cells were ascribed to the combination of FAAH and ABHD6 or ABHD6 alone, respectively [49, 50].

Specific MAGL inhibitors are useful probes to explore in vivo functions of endogenous 2-AG [40, 51, 52]. The inhibitors are also expected to serve as therapeutic drugs by enhancing endocannabinoid signaling. A large number of sulfhydryl blockers, including N-arachidonylemaleimide [53] and disulfiram [54], were reported as MAGL inhibitors [40]. Two naturally occurring terpenoids (pristimerin and euphol)

also inhibited MAGL by reversibly binding to cysteine residues [55]. In addition to nonspecific inhibition by classical serine hydrolase inhibitors, such as methyl arachidonyl fluorophosphonate and arachidonoyltrifluoromethyl ketone, recently developed serine hydrolase inhibitors, including URB602 [56, 57], LY2183240 [58], CAY10499 [59], OMDM169 (a THL derivative) [60], and JZL184 [61, 62], inhibited MAGL more selectively. With an IC₅₀ value of 6 nM, JZL184 was one of the most potent inhibitors so far reported and was highly selective for MAGL without inhibiting other enzymes including FAAH and ABHD6. When administered to mice, the compound increased endogenous brain level of 2-AG by eightfold but did not affect the anandamide level. The JZL184-treated mice exhibited CB₁-dependent symptoms including analgesia, hypothermia, and hypomotility. These results strongly suggested that endogenous 2-AG exerts cannabinoid activities and pointed to overlapping and unique roles by 2-AG and anandamide *in vivo* [61]. On the other hand, when fluorophosphonate reagents, which cause dual inhibition of MAGL and FAAH, were administered in mice, brain levels of both 2-AG and anandamide increased more than 10-fold, and endocannabinoid signaling was enhanced as demonstrated by full appearance of “tetrad of cannabinoid” (analgesia, hypomotility, hypothermia, and catalepsy) [63]. Furthermore, JZL195 was recently developed as a selective dual inhibitor for FAAH and MAGL with high potency (IC₅₀ values of 2 nM and 4 nM, respectively). Administration of this agent to mice exhibited various cannabinoid-like effects including marked analgesia and catalepsy as well as Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol-appropriate response in drug discrimination assay, which were completely blocked by pretreatment with the CB₁ antagonist rimonabant [64]. These results showed that dual inhibition of FAAH and MAGL mimicked treatment with a CB₁ receptor agonist.

Very recently, it was reported that repeated administration of JZL184 to mice, which maintained highly elevated levels of 2-AG in the brain, resulted in loss of analgesic responses and occurrence of cross tolerance to CB₁ agonists [65]. At the same time, MAGL-deficient mice were newly generated [65]. The brain of the mice exhibited ~90% reduction in 2-AG-hydrolyzing activity and about 10-fold elevation in 2-AG level. Importantly, the mice also exhibited the tolerance observed with mice chronically treated with JZL184. In agreement with these findings, downregulation and desensitization of brain CB₁ were observed. In contrast, prolonged blockage of FAAH did not cause such analgesic tolerance. Reductions in 2-AG-hydrolyzing activities and elevations in endogenous 2-AG levels were also seen in various peripheral tissues of MAGL-deficient mice (paw skin, spleen, heart, kidney, and liver), indicating a ubiquitous importance of this enzyme in the 2-AG degradation.

### Conclusions

In this short review, we briefly introduced rapid advances in research on the biosynthesis and degradation of 2-AG as a representative endocannabinoid. In the past decade, extensive studies revealed that DAGL and MAGL are major enzymes involved in the biosynthetic and degradative routes of 2-AG, respectively. Particularly, cDNA cloning of DAGL, elucidation of tridimensional structure of MAGL, development of potent and selective MAGL inhibitors, and analyses of mice lacking these enzymes should be noted. These and other results brought useful tools to confirm physiological importance of 2-AG as an endogenous CB₁ agonist in the central nervous system. However, roles of alternative pathways for the 2-AG formation and MAG-hydrolyzing enzymes other than MAGL are poorly understood. Different pathways and enzymes may be major players in the 2-AG metabolism in tissues other than brain. To answer these questions, further studies will be required.

---

### References

[1] Pacher, P., Bátkai, S., and Kunos, G. (2006) The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. *Pharmacol. Rev.* **58**, 389–462.

[2] Matsuda, L. A., Lolait, S. J., Brownstein, M. J., Young, A. C., and Bonner, T. I. (1990) Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. *Nature* **346**, 561–564.

[3] Munro, S., Thomas, K. L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993) Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. *Nature* **365**, 61–65.

[4] De Petrocellis, L. and Di Marzo, V. (2010) Non-CB₁, non-CB₂ receptors for endocannabinoids, plant cannabinoids, and synthetic cannabinimetics: focus on G-protein-coupled receptors and transient receptor potential channels. *J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol.* **5**, 103–121.

[5] Ueda, N., Okamoto, Y., and Tsuboi, K. (2005) Endocannabinoid-related enzymes as drug targets with special reference to N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine-hydrolyzing phospholipase D. *Curr. Med. Chem.* **12**, 1413–1422.

[6] Devane, W. A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Pertwee, R. G., Stevenson, L. A., Griffin, G., Gibson, D., Mandelbaum, A., Etinger, A., and Mechoulam, R. (1992) Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. *Science* **258**, 1946–1949.

[7] Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., Ligumsky, M., Kaminski, N. E., Schatz, A. R., Gopher, A., Almog, S., Martin, B. R., Compton, D. R., Pertwee, R. G., Griffin, G., Bayewitch, M., Barg, J., and Vogel, Z. (1995) Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride, present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **50**, 83–90.

[8] Sugiura, T., Kondo, S., Sukagawa, A., Nakane, S., Shinoda, A., Itoh, K., Yamashita, A., and Waku, K. (1995) 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: a possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand in brain. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **215**, 89–97.

[9] Sugiura, T., Kishimoto, S., Oka, S., and Gokoh, M. (2006) Biochemistry, pharmacology and physiology of 2-arachidonoylglycerol, an endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand. *Prog. Lipid Res.* **45**, 405–446.

[10] Prescott, S. M. and Majerus, P. W. (1983) Characterization of 1,2-diacylglycerol hydrolysis in human platelets. Demonstration of an arachidonoyl-monoacylglycerol intermediate. *J. Biol. Chem.* **258**, 764–769.

[11] Kano, M., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Hashimoto-Todani, Y., Uchigashima, M., and Watanabe, M. (2009) Endocannabinoid-mediated control of synaptic transmission. *Physiol. Rev.* **89**, 309–380.

[12] Di Marzo, V. (2008) Targeting the endocannabinoid system: to enhance or reduce? *Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.* **7**, 438–455.

[13] Ahn, K., McKinney, M. K., and Cravatt, B. F. (2008) Enzymatic pathways that regulate endocannabinoid signaling in the nervous system. *Chem. Rev.* **108**, 1687–1707.

[14] Ueda, N., Tsuboi, K., and Uyama, T. (2010) N-acylethanolamine metabolism with special reference to N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase (NAAA). *Prog. Lipid Res.* **49**, 299–315.

[15] Ueda, N., Tsuboi, K., and Uyama, T. (2010) Enzymological studies on the biosynthesis of *N*-acylethanolamines. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* **1801**, 1274–1285.

[16] Fukami, K., Inanobe, S., Kanemaru, K., and Nakamura, Y. (2010) Phospholipase C is a key enzyme regulating intracellular calcium and modulating the phosphoinositide balance. *Prog. Lipid Res.* **49**, 429–437.

[17] Hashimoto-dani, Y., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Tsubokawa, H., Ogata, H., Emoto, K., Maejima, T., Araishi, K., Shin, H. S., and Kano, M. (2005) Phospholipase Cβ serves as a coincidence detector through its Ca²⁺ dependency for triggering retrograde endocannabinoid signal. *Neuron* **45**, 257–268.

[18] Maejima, T., Oka, S., Hashimoto-dani, Y., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Aiba, A., Wu, D., Waku, K., Sugiura, T., and Kano, M. (2005) Synaptically driven endocannabinoid release requires Ca²⁺-assisted metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 1 to phospholipase Cβ4 signaling cascade in the cerebellum. *J. Neurosci.* **25**, 6826–6835.

[19] Bisogno, T., Melck, D., De Petrocellis, L., and Di Marzo, V. (1999) Phosphatidic acid as the biosynthetic precursor of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol in intact mouse neuroblastoma cells stimulated with ionomycin. *J. Neurochem.* **72**, 2113–2119.

[20] Oka, S., Yanagimoto, S., Ikeda, S., Gokoh, M., Kishimoto, S., Waku, K., Ishima, Y., and Sugiura, T. (2005) Evidence for the involvement of the cannabinoid CB2 receptor and its endogenous ligand 2-arachidonoylglycerol in 12-*O*-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced acute inflammation in mouse ear. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 18488–18497.

[21] Ueda, H., Kobayashi, T., Kishimoto, M., Tsutsumi, T., and Okuyama, H. (1993) A possible pathway of phosphoinositide metabolism through EDTA-insensitive phospholipase A₁ followed by lysophosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C in rat brain. *J. Neurochem.* **61**, 1874–1881.

[22] Tsutsumi, T., Kobayashi, T., Ueda, H., Yamauchi, E., Watanabe, S., and Okuyama, H. (1994) Lysophosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C in rat brain synaptic plasma membranes. *Neurochem. Res.* **19**, 399–406.

[23] Nakane, S., Oka, S., Arai, S., Waku, K., Ishima, Y., Tokumura, A., and Sugiura, T. (2002) 2-Arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate, an arachidonic acid-containing lysophosphatidic acid: occurrence and rapid enzymatic conversion to 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol, a cannabinoid receptor ligand, in rat brain. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **402**, 51–58.

[24] Okazaki, T., Sagawa, N., Okita, J. R., Bleasdale, J. E., MacDonald, P. C., and Johnston, J. M. (1981) Diacylglycerol metabolism and arachidonic acid release in human fetal membranes and decidua vera. *J. Biol. Chem.* **256**, 7316–7321.

[25] Chau, L. Y. and Tai, H. H. (1981) Release of arachidonate from diglyceride in human platelets requires the sequential action of a diglyceride lipase and a monoglyceride lipase. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **100**, 1688–1695.

[26] Moriyama, T., Urade, R., and Kito, M. (1999) Purification and characterization of diacylglycerol lipase from human platelets. *J. Biochem.* **125**, 1077–1085.

[27] Bisogno, T., Howell, F., Williams, G., Minassi, A., Cascio, M. G., Ligresti, A., Matias, I., Schiano-Moriello, A., Paul, P., Williams, E. J., Gandadharan, U., Hobbs, C., Di Marzo, V., and Doherty, P. (2003) Cloning of the first sn1-DAG lipases points to the spatial and temporal regulation of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. *J. Cell Biol.* **163**, 463–468.

[28] Jung, K. M., Astarita, G., Zhu, C., Wallace, M., Mackie, K., and Piomelli, D. (2007) A key role for diacylglycerol lipase-alpha in metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent endocannabinoid mobilization. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **72**, 612–621.

[29] Tanimura, A., Yamazaki, M., Hashimoto-dani, Y., Uchigashima, M., Kawata, S., Abe, M., Kita, Y., Hashimoto, K., Shimizu, T., Watanabe, M., Sakimura, K., and Kano, M. (2010) The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol produced by diacylglycerol lipase alpha mediates retrograde suppression of synaptic transmission. *Neuron* **65**, 320–327.

[30] Gao, Y., Vasilyev, D. V., Goncalves, M. B., Howell, F. V., Hobbs, C., Reisenberg, M., Shen, R., Zhang, M. Y., Strassle, B. W., Lu, P., Mark, L., Piesla, M. J., Deng, K., Kouranova, E. V., Ring, R. H., Whiteside, G. T., Bates, B., Walsh, F. S., Williams, G., Pangelos, M. N., Samad, T. A., and Doherty, P. (2010) Loss of retrograde endocannabinoid signaling and reduced adult neurogenesis in diacylglycerol lipase knock-out mice. *J. Neurosci.* **30**, 2017–2024.

[31] Hoover, H. S., Blankman, J. L., Niessen, S., and Cravatt, B. F. (2008) Selectivity of inhibitors of endocannabinoid biosynthesis evaluated by activity-based protein profiling. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **18**, 5838–5841.

[32] Bisogno, T., Cascio, M. G., Saha, B., Mahadevan, A., Urbani, P., Minassi, A., Appendino, G., Saturnino, C., Martin, B., Razdan, R., and Di Marzo, V. (2006) Development of the first potent and specific inhibitors of endocannabinoid biosynthesis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1761**, 205–212.

[33] Bisogno, T., Burston, J. J., Rai, R., Allarà, M., Saha, B., Mahadevan, A., Razdan, R. K., Wiley, J. L., and Di Marzo, V. (2009) Synthesis and pharmacological activity of a potent inhibitor of the biosynthesis of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. *ChemMedChem.* **4**, 946–950.

[34] Blankman, J. L., Simon, G. M., and Cravatt, B. F. (2007) A comprehensive profile of brain enzymes that hydrolyze the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. *Chem. Biol.* **14**, 1347–1356.

[35] Kanoh, H., Iwata, T., Ono, T., and Suzuki, T. (1986) Immunological characterization of *sn*-1,2-diacylglycerol and *sn*-2-monoacylglycerol kinase from pig brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **261**, 5597–5602.

[36] Shim, Y. H., Lin, C. H., and Strickland, K. P. (1989) The purification and properties of monoacylglycerol kinase from bovine brain. *Biochem. Cell Biol.* **67**, 233–241.

[37] Coleman, R. A. and Haynes, E. B. (1986) Monoacylglycerol acyltransferase. Evidence that the activities from rat intestine and suckling liver are tissue-specific isoenzymes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **261**, 224–228.

[38] Kozak, K. R. and Marnett, L. J. (2002) Oxidative metabolism of endocannabinoids. *Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids.* **66**, 211–220.

[39] Rouzer, C. A. and Marnett, L. J. (2008) Non-redundant functions of cyclooxygenases: oxygenation of endocannabinoids. *J. Biol. Chem.* **283**, 8065–8069.

[40] Labar, G., Wouters, J., and Lambert, D. M. (2010) A review on the monoacylglycerol lipase: at the interface between fat and endocannabinoid signaling. *Curr. Med. Chem.* **17**, 2588–2607.

[41] Tornqvist, H. and Belfrage, P. (1976) Purification and some properties of a monoacylglycerol-hydrolyzing enzyme of rat adipose tissue. *J. Biol. Chem.* **251**, 813–819.

[42] Karlsson, M., Contreras, J. A., Hellman, U., Tornqvist, H., and Holm, C. (1997) cDNA cloning, tissue distribution, and identification of the catalytic triad of monoglyceride lipase. Evolutionary relationship to esterases, lysophospholipases, and haloperoxidases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 27218–27223.

[43] Karlsson, M., Reue, K., Xia, Y. R., Lusis, A. J., Langin, D., Tornqvist, H., and Holm, C. (2001) Exon-intron organization and chromosomal localization of the mouse monoglyceride lipase gene. *Gene* **272**, 11–18.

[44] Dinh, T. P., Carpenter, D., Leslie, F. M., Freund, T. F., Katona, I., Sensi, S. L., Kathuria, S., and Piomelli, D. (2002) Brain monoglyceride lipase participating in endocannabinoid inactivation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 10819–10824; *Erratum* (2002) **99**, 13961.

[45] Labar, G., Bauvois, C., Borel, F., Ferrer, J. L., Wouters, J., and Lambert, D. M. (2010) Crystal structure of the human monoacylglycerol lipase, a key actor in endocannabinoid signaling. *ChemBioChem.* **11**, 218–227.

[46] Dinh, T. P., Kathuria, S., and Piomelli, D. (2004) RNA interference suggests a primary role for monoacylglycerol lipase in the degradation of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **66**, 1260–1264.

[47] Goparaju, S. K., Ueda, N., Yamaguchi, H., and Yamamoto, S. (1998) Anandamide amidohydrolase reacting with 2-arachidonoylglycerol, another cannabinoid receptor ligand. *FEBS Lett.* **422**, 69–73.

[48] Goparaju, S. K., Ueda, N., Taniguchi, K., and Yamamoto, S. (1999) Enzymes of porcine brain hydrolyzing 2-arachidonoylglycerol, an endogenous ligand of cannabinoid receptors. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **57**, 417–423.

[49] Muccioli, G. G., Xu, C., Odah, E., Cudaback, E., Cisneros, J. A., Lambert, D. M., López Rodríguez, M. L., Bajjalieh, S., and Stella, N. (2007) Identification of a novel endocannabinoid-hydrolyzing enzyme expressed by microglial cells. *J. Neurosci.* **27**, 2883–2889.

[50] Marrs, W. R., Blankman, J. L., Horne, E. A., Thomazeau, A., Lin, Y. H., Coy, J., Bodor, A. L., Muccioli, G. G., Hu, S. S., Woodruff, G., Fung, S., Lafourcade, M., Alexander, J. P., Long, J. Z., Li, W., Xu, C., Möller, T., Mackie, K., Manzoni, O. J., Cravatt, B. F., and Stella, N. (2010) The

serine hydrolase ABHD6 controls the accumulation and efficacy of 2-AG at cannabinoid receptors. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 951–957.

[51] Minkkilä, A., Saario, S., and Nevalainen, T. (2010) Discovery and development of endocannabinoid-hydrolyzing enzyme inhibitors. *Curr. Top. Med. Chem.* **10**, 828–858.

[52] Petrosino, S. and Di Marzo, V. (2010) FAAH and MAGL inhibitors: therapeutic opportunities from regulating endocannabinoid levels. *Curr. Opin. Investig. Drugs* **11**, 51–62.

[53] Saario, S. M., Salo, O. M., Nevalainen, T., Poso, A., Laitinen, J. T., Järvinen, T., and Niemi, R. (2005) Characterization of the sulfhydryl-sensitive site in the enzyme responsible for hydrolysis of 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol in rat cerebellar membranes. *Chem. Biol.* **12**, 649–656.

[54] Labar, G., Bauvois, C., Muccioli, G. G., Wouters, J., and Lambert, D. M. (2007) Disulfiram is an inhibitor of human purified monoacylglycerol lipase, the enzyme regulating 2-arachidonoylglycerol signaling. *ChemBioChem.* **8**, 1293–1297.

[55] King, A. R., Dotsey, E. Y., Lodola, A., Jung, K. M., Ghomian, A., Qiu, Y., Fu, J., Mor, M., and Piomelli, D. (2009) Discovery of potent and reversible monoacylglycerol lipase inhibitors. *Chem. Biol.* **16**, 1045–1052.

[56] Hohmann, A. G., Suplita, R. L., Bolton, N. M., Neely, M. H., Fegley, D., Mangieri, R., Krey, J. F., Walker, J. M., Holmes, P. V., Crystal, J. D., Duranti, A., Tontini, A., Mor, M., Tarzia, G., and Piomelli, D. (2005) An endocannabinoid mechanism for stress-induced analgesia. *Nature* **435**, 1108–1112.

[57] Vandevoorde, S., Jonsson, K.-O., Labar, G., Persson, E., Lambert, D. M., and Fowler, C. J. (2007) Lack of selectivity of URB602 for 2-oleoylglycerol compared to anandamide hydrolysis in vitro. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* **150**, 186–191.

[58] Alexander, J. P. and Cravatt, B. F. (2006) The putative endocannabinoid transport blocker LY2183240 is a potent inhibitor of FAAH and several other brain serine hydrolases. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **128**, 9699–9704.

[59] Muccioli, G. G., Labar, G., and Lambert, D. M. (2008) CAY10499, a novel monoglyceride lipase inhibitor evidenced by an expeditious MGL assay. *ChemBioChem.* **9**, 2704–2710.

[60] Bisogno, T., Ortar, G., Petrosino, S., Morera, E., Palazzo, E., Nalli, M., Maione, S., Di Marzo, V., and Endocannabinoid Research Group (2009) Development of a potent inhibitor of 2-arachidonoylglycerol hydrolysis with antinociceptive activity in vivo. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1791**, 53–60.

[61] Long, J. Z., Li, W., Booker, L., Burston, J. J., Kinsey, S. G., Schlosburg, J. E., Pavon, F. J., Serrano, A. M., Selley, D. E., Parsons, L. H., Lichtman, A. H., and Cravatt, B. F. (2009) Selective blockade of 2-arachidonoylglycerol hydrolysis produces cannabinoid behavioral effects. *Nat. Chem. Biol.* **5**, 37–44.

[62] Long, J. Z., Nomura, D. K., and Cravatt, B. F. (2009) Characterization of monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition reveals differences in central and peripheral endocannabinoid metabolism. *Chem. Biol.* **16**, 744–753.

[63] Nomura, D. K., Blankman, J. L., Simon, G. M., Fujioka, K., Issa, R. S., Ward, A. M., Cravatt, B. F., and Casida, J. E. (2008) Activation of the endocannabinoid system by organophosphorus nerve agents. *Nat. Chem. Biol.* **4**, 373–378.

[64] Long, J. Z., Nomura, D. K., Vann, R. E., Walentiny, D. M., Booker, L., Jin, X., Burston, J. J., Sim-Selley, L. J., Lichtman, A. H., Wiley, J. L., and Cravatt, B. F. (2009) Dual blockade of FAAH and MAGL identifies behavioral processes regulated by endocannabinoid crosstalk in vivo. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **106**, 20270–20275.

[65] Schlosburg, J. E., Blankman, J. L., Long, J. Z., Nomura, D. K., Pan, B., Kinsey, S. G., Nguyen, P. T., Ramesh, D., Booker, L., Burston, J. J., Thomas, E. A., Selley, D. E., Sim-Selley, L. J., Liu, Q. S., Lichtman, A. H., and Cravatt, B. F. (2010) Chronic monoacylglycerol lipase blockade causes functional antagonism of the endocannabinoid system. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 1113–1119.
