
Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

Molecular Pathways

Direct Effects of Type I Interferons on Cells of the Immune System

Sandra Hervas-Stubbs¹, Jose Luis Perez-Gracia², Ana Rouzaut³, Miguel F. Sanmamed¹,², Agnes Le Bon⁴,⁵, and Ignacio Melero¹,²

---

### Abstract

Type I interferons (IFN-I) are well-known inducers of tumor cell apoptosis and antiangiogenesis via signaling through a common receptor interferon alpha receptor (IFNAR). IFNAR induces the Janus activated kinase-signal transducer and activation of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway in most cells, along with other biochemical pathways that may differentially operate, depending on the responding cell subset, and jointly control a large collection of genes. IFNs-I were found to systemically activate natural killer (NK) cell activity. Recently, mouse experiments have shown that IFNs-I directly activate other cells of the immune system, such as antigen-presenting dendritic cells (DC) and CD4 and CD8 T cells. Signaling through the IFNAR in T cells is critical for the acquisition of effector functions. Cross-talk between IFNAR and the pathways turned on by other surface lymphocyte receptors has been described. Importantly, IFNs-I also increase antigen presentation of the tumor cells to be recognized by T lymphocytes. These IFN-driven immunostimulatory pathways offer opportunities to devise combinatorial immunotherapy strategies. *Clin Cancer Res*; 17(9); 2619–27. ©2011 AACR.

---

### Background

#### Types of interferon

Interferons (IFN) were discovered in 1957 by Isaacs and Lindenmann as soluble proteins able to inhibit virus replication in cell cultures (1). There are 3 types of IFNs: type I (IFN-I), type II (IFN-II), and type III (IFN-III; refs. 2, 3). IFNs belonging to all IFN classes are very important for fighting viral infection. In humans, IFNs-I include IFN-α subtypes, IFN-β, IFN-ε, IFN-κ, and IFN-ω (2). From an immunologic perspective, IFN-α and IFN-β are the main IFN-I subtypes of interest. Both are produced by almost every cell of the body in response to viral infection and share important antiviral properties. The IFN-α family is a multigenic group of highly homologous polypeptides encoded by more than 13 intronless genes in humans. IFN-β, in contrast, exists as a single gene in most species. IFN-γ is the only IFN-II. This cytokine does not have marked structural homology with IFNs-I and binds a different cell-surface receptor (IFNGR), also composed of 2 different subunits (IFNGR1 and IFNGR2; ref. 2). The recently classified IFN-III consists of 3 IFN-λ molecules (IFN-λ1, IFN-λ2, and IFN-λ3) and signals through a receptor complex consisting of interleukin-10 receptor 2 subunit (IL-10R2) and IL-28 receptor alpha subunit (IL-28Ra; ref. 3). It is well established that IFNs induce the expression of hundreds of genes, which mediate various biological responses. Some of these genes are regulated by the 3 classes of IFNs, whereas others are selectively regulated by distinct IFNs.

Although the role of IFN-II and IFN-III is very important in immune responses, IFN-II has not yet shown any clinical activity for human cancer treatment (4), and IFN-III is not currently developed for any indication (3). However, since the discovery of IFNs, the use of IFN-I in therapy has been very widespread. In fact, systemic injections of IFN-I are approved for the treatment of a variety of diseases, which include solid and hematologic malignancies, multiple sclerosis, and, above all, chronic viral hepatitis. In this review, we focus on the role of IFN-I as a direct immunostimulatory agent directly modifying functions of immune system cells and how these functions can be applied to better therapeutic strategies.

#### IFN-I signaling pathways

All types of IFN-I signal through a unique heterodimeric receptor, interferon alpha receptor (IFNAR), composed of 2 subunits, IFNAR1 and IFNAR2, which are expressed in most tissues (5). IFNAR1 knockout mice have not only confirmed the role this subunit plays in mediating the biological response to IFNs-I, but have also established the pleiotropic role that these IFNs play in regulating the host response to viral infections and in adaptive immunity (6–8).

Receptor occupancy rapidly triggers several signaling cascades (Fig. 1), which culminate in the transcriptional regulation of hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes (ISG). The

---

**Authors' Affiliation:**  
¹Division of Gene Therapy and Hepatology, Centre for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona,  
²Medical Oncology Department and Cell Therapy Unit, University Clinic, University of Navarra, and ³Division of Oncology, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; ⁴Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), and ⁵INSERM, U1016, Paris, France  

**Corresponding Author:** Ignacio Melero, CIMA and Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Navarra, Av. Pio XII, 57, 31008 Pamplona, Spain. Phone: 34-948194700; Fax: 34-948194717; E-mail: imelero@unav.es or msher-vas@unav.es  

**doi:** 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114  

©2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

Hervas-Stubbs et al.

---

### Type I IFNs signaling pathways

#### (A) JAK-STAT
IFN-$\alpha/\beta$

Tyk2  
JAK1  
STAT  

Homodimers  
STAT STAT  
STAT1, STAT3  
STAT4, STAT5  
STAT6  

Heterodimers  
STAT STAT  
STAT1/2,3,4 or 5  
STAT2/3  
STAT5/6  

IRF9  

Homodimers  
STAT STAT  

Heterodimers  
STAT STAT  

ISRE  
GAS  
GAS  

ISG15, IP-10,  
IRF-7, PKR,  
2'-5'-OAS,  
etc  

Regulated  
genes or  
functions  

#### (B) CRK  
IFN-$\alpha/\beta$  

STAT  
CRKL  
C3G  

STAT  
CRKL  

Rap1  

Proliferation  
Differentiation  
Survival  

#### (C) PI3K and NF$\kappa$B  
IFN-$\alpha/\beta$  

TRAF  
NIK  

STAT  
RS1/2  

PI3K $\rightarrow$ mTOR  
Inhibition of  
GSK-3/CDKN1A/  
CDKN1B  

IKK$\alpha$  
IKK$\beta$  

NF$\kappa$B  

Rel  

Regulation of expression of  
• GTP-binding protein  
• Ag processing/presentation protein  
Survival signals  

#### (D) MAPK  
TCR complex  
CD45 CD4/8  

$\delta\epsilon\epsilon\gamma$  

Lck  
Zap70  

SLP76  
LAT  

VAV  

Ras  

Raf1  

MEK1/2  

ERK1/2  

Fos  
Elk-1  
Sap-1  

MEF2  
MAPKAP  
Rsk  

Jun  
Elk-1  
NFAT  

Ets  
Elk-1  
ATF2  

NFAT  
SAP-1  
Stat1/3  

c-Myc  
P53  
SP1  

SMADs  

ISG15  
Histone acetylation  
Apoptosis  
Cellular growth  
Antiviral effect  
Growth inhibitory effects  
Hematopoietic suppressive signals  
Ser phosphorylation  
of STAT1  

---

© 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

**CCR Molecular Pathways**

---

**Figure 1.** Signaling pathways activated by the IFN-I receptor. Schematic of signaling pathways downstream of the IFNAR, emphasizing cross-talk with different signaling cascades, which depends on the identity and activation status of the cell responding to IFN-I. A, JAK-STAT signal pathway activated by IFNs-I. B, CRKL pathway. Upon JAK activation, CRKL associates with TYK2 and undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation. The activated form of CRKL forms a complex with STAT5, which also undergoes TYK2-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation. The CRKL-STAT5 complex translocates to the nucleus and binds specific GAS elements. C, PI3K and NF-$\kappa$B pathways. Phosphorylation of TYK2 and JAK1 results in activation of PI3K and AKT, which in turn mediates downstream activation of mTOR, inactivation of GSK-3, CDKN1A, and CDKN1B, and activation of IKK$\beta$, which results in activation of NF-$\kappa$B. IFNs-I also activate NF-$\kappa$B by an alternative pathway that involves the linkage of TRAFs, which results in activation of NF-$\kappa$B2. PI3K/AKT can also activate NF-$\kappa$B through an activation loop via PKC$\theta$. D, MAPK pathway. Activation of JAK results in tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav, which leads to the activation of several MAPKs such as p38, JNK, and ERK1/2. The different MAPKs activate different sets of transcription factors, such as Fos, ELK1, Sap-1, MEF2, MAPKAP, and Rsk (activated by p38); Jun, ELK1, NFAT, and ATF2 (activated by JNK); and NFAT, ETS, ELK1, MEF2, c-Myc, SAP-1, p53, SP1, and SMADs (activated by ERK1/2).

The first signaling pathway shown to be activated by IFNs-I was the Janus activated kinase-signal transducer and activation of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway (Fig. 1A; ref. 9), which is active in almost all cell types. IFNAR1 is constitutively associated with tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2), whereas IFNAR2 is associated with JAK1. Receptor binding results in trans-phosphorylation of JAK1 and TYK2. The activated JAKs then phosphorylate conserved tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic tails of the IFNAR. These phosphotyrosyl residues subsequently serve as docking sites for the recruitment of src-homology 2 (SH2)-containing signaling molecules, such as STAT1 and STAT2. Once at the receptor, the STAT proteins themselves become JAK substrates. STAT1 and STAT2 are both phosphorylated on a single tyrosine (Y701 for STAT1 and Y690 for STAT2). Once phosphorylated, STATs dimerize and move to the nucleus, where they associate with the IFN-regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) to form the ISG factor 3 (ISGF3) transcription factor complex, which binds to IFN-stimulated response elements.

Although STAT1 and STAT2 are the most important mediators of the response to IFNs-I, other STATs, namely STAT3 and STAT5, have been found to be phosphorylated (activated) by IFNs-I (Fig. 1A; refs. 10–13). STAT4 and STAT6 can also be activated by IFN-$\alpha$; however, this activation seems to be restricted to certain cell types, such as endothelial or lymphoid cells (14–17). Following

---

**Clin Cancer Res; 17(9) May 1, 2011**

**Clinical Cancer Research**

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on February 3, 2015. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

phosphorylation, activated STATs form homo- (STAT1,  
STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, and STAT6) or heterodimers  
(STAT1/2, STAT1/3, STAT1/4, STAT1/5, STAT2/3, and  
STAT5/6; refs. 10, 11, 18, 19), which translocate to the  
nucleus and bind other regulatory sequences known as  
IFN-γ-activated sites (GAS).  

Interestingly, distinct STATs have opposing biological  
effects. Thus, STAT3 stimulates growth, whereas on the  
contrary, STAT1 is a growth inhibitor. On the other hand,  
IFNs-I-mediated activation of STAT4 is required for IFN-γ  
production, whereas surprisingly, STAT1 negatively regu-  
lates the IFNs-I-dependent induction of IFN-γ (20). The  
relative abundance of these dimeric transcription factors,  
which may vary substantially depending on cell type and  
activation and/or differentiation state, is likely to have a  
major impact on the overall response to IFNs-I (21–23).  
Stimulation of the IFNAR/JAK/STAT1 pathway can also  
lead to the upregulation of the TAM receptor Axl, which  
accumulates at the cell surface where it physically associates  
with the IFNAR and usurps the IFNAR-STAT1 pathway by  
stimulating the transcription of suppressors of cytokine  
signaling (SOCS; refs. 24, 25). The SOCS proteins extin-  
guish IFN-I signaling in a negative feedback loop. For  
instance, SOCS1 directly interacts with JAKs blocking their  
catalytic activity, whereas SOCS3 seems to inhibit JAKs after  
gaining access by receptor binding. In addition, SOCS  
proteins interact with the cellular ubiquitination machin-  
ery through the SOCS-box region and may redirect asso-  
ciated proteins, such as JAKs or IFNAR chains, to  
proteasomal degradation. It has been shown that SOCS1  
knockout mice develop lupus-like disease symptoms (26)  
and that SOCS1 silencing enhances the antitumor activity  
of IFNs-I (27), suggesting that SOCS are key elements in  
keeping IFNs-I effects under control.

### Alternative signaling pathways and cross-talk with  
other receptors  

Evidence is accumulating that several other signaling  
elements and cascades are required for the generation of  
many of the responses to IFNs-I, such as the v-crk sarcoma  
virus CT10 oncogene homolog (avian)-like (CRKL) path-  
way, the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) path-  
way, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, and  
either the classical or the alternative NF-κB cascade  
(Fig. 1B-D; refs. 9, 28). Some of these pathways operate  
independently of the JAK-STAT, whereas others cooperate  
with STATs to tune the response to IFNs-I. Interestingly,  
MAPK, PI3K, and NF-κB pathways involve immunorecep-  
tor tyrosine-based activation motives used by classical  
immunoreceptors, suggesting a cross-talk among IFNAR  
and multiple receptors on immune system cells.

#### The PI3K and NF-κB pathways.  
Upon activation, TYK2  
and JAK1 phosphorylate insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1)  
and 2 (IRS2), which provide docking sites for the PI3K (9).  
STAT3 acts as an adapter to couple PI3K to the IFNAR1  
subunit. PI3K subsequently activates the serine-threonine  
kinase AKT, which in turn mediates downstream the acti-  
vation of mTOR and the inactivation of several proteins,  
such as glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) and cyclin  
dependent kinase inhibitors 1A and 1B (CDKN1A and  
CDKN1B), all of them involved in the control of cell  
division and proliferation. The AKT pathway also results  
in the activation of IkB kinase beta (IKKβ), which gives  
rise to NF-κB activation. IFNs-I also activate NF-κB by an  
alternative pathway, which involves the linkage of TNF  
receptor-associated factors (TRAF) to the activation of  
the NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK), which in turn results  
in activation of NF-κB2. This alternative pathway is  
strictly dependent on the activity of IKKα. In addition,  
PI3K/AKT can also activate NF-κB through an activation  
loop via protein kinase C zeta (PKCθ). Overall, NF-κB  
activated by IFNs-I regulates prosurvival signals and  
enhances the expression of several GTP-binding proteins  
as well as molecules involved in antigen processing and/  
or presentation.

#### The MAPK pathway.  
Activation of JAK results in tyro-  
sine phosphorylation of the guanine nucleotide exchange  
factor Vav, which leads to downstream activation of Rat  
sarcoma protein (Ras) and ras-related C3 botulinum toxin  
substrate 1 (Rac1), which subsequently leads to the activa-  
tion of several MAPKs: p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinases  
(JNK), and extracellular signal regulated kinases (ERK) 1  
and 2 (9). Vav can also activate PKCθ, leading to the  
activation of the NF-κB cascade. Several studies have shown  
that IFN-α-mediated activation of ERK1/2 in T lympho-  
cytes requires proteins involved in the T-cell receptor (TCR)  
early signaling complex, such as CD45, lymphocyte-speci-  
fic protein tyrosine kinase (Lck), Zeta-chain-associated  
protein kinase 70 (Zap70), SH2 domain-containing leu-  
kocyte protein of 76 kDa (SLP76), and Vav1, and possibly  
linker for activation of T cells (LAT), indicating cross-talk  
between pathways (29–31). Moreover, it has been shown  
recently that TCR deletion in Jurkat cells abrogated IFNAR-  
stimulated MAPK activity, whereas the canonical JAK-STAT  
pathway remained unaffected (31). A hypothetical path-  
way that involves all these molecules and results in Vav  
activation is depicted in Fig. 1D. The different MAPKs  
activate different sets of transcription factors. Importantly,  
p38 functions are essential for the antiviral and antileuke-  
mic properties of IFNs-I, it plays a role in the hematopoie-  
tic-suppressive signals and is required for the growth-  
inhibitory effects of IFNs-I observed in certain lymphocyte  
cultures. IFNs-I-activated ERK cascades regulate cellular  
growth, differentiation, and serine phosphorylation of  
STAT1. The search for biochemical signals to explain the  
effects of IFN-I on immune system cells is far from over.

### Effects of IFNs-I on cells of the immune system  

It has long been established that the main mechanism  
accounting for the efficacy of the IFN-I-based therapies was  
due to their direct effect on malignant or virus-infected  
cells. In fact, IFNs-I directly inhibit the proliferation of  
tumor and virus-infected cells and increase MHC class I  
expression, enhancing antigen recognition. Moreover,  
IFNs-I repress oncogene expression and induce that of  
tumor suppressor genes, which may contribute to the  


This Markdown output preserves the structure and content of the provided text without any additional formatting or changes.
inhibitory effects of IFN-I on malignant cells in conjunction with the antiangiogenic effects.

IFNs-I have also proven to be involved in immune system regulation (7, 8, 32). IFNs-I exert their effects on immune cells either directly, through IFNAR triggering, or indirectly (i) by the induction of chemokines, which allow the recruitment of immune cells to the site of infection; (ii) by the secretion of a second wave of cytokines, which could further regulate cell numbers and activities (as for example IL-15, which plays a critical role in proliferation and maintenance of NK cells and memory CD8 T cells; refs. 33, 34); or (iii) by the stimulation of other cell types critical for the activation of certain immune cells, such as DC for the activation of naïve T cells.

One of the earliest described immunoregulatory functions of IFNs-I was their ability to regulate NK functions (32). IFNs-I enhance the ability of NK cells to kill target cells and to produce IFN-γ by indirect and direct mechanisms (33, 35, 36). Furthermore, IFNs-I promote the accumulation and/or survival of proliferating NK cells by the IFN-I/STAT1-dependent induction of IL-15 (33). IFNs-I also enhance the production or secretion of other cytokines by the NK cell through the autocrine IFN-γ loop (37).

IFNs-I also affect monocyte and/or macrophage function and differentiation. Thus, IFNs-I markedly support the differentiation of monocytes into DC with high capacity for Ag presentation, stimulate macrophage antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, and positively or negatively regulate the production of various cytokines (e.g., TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, and IL-18) by macrophages (38). In addition, autocrine IFN-I is required for the enhancement of macrophage phagocytosis by macrophage colony-stimulating factor and IL-4 (39) and for the lipopolysaccharide-, virus-, and IFN-γ-induced oxidative burst through the generation of nitric oxide synthase 2.

The main function of DCs is to uptake and process antigens for presentation to T cells. DCs are a unique cell type able to prime naïve T cells and, therefore, are critical antigen presenting cells (APC). IFNs-I have multiple effects on DCs, affecting their differentiation, maturation, and migration. Thus, human monocytes cultured in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) + IFN-α/β, rather than the more commonly used combination of GM-CSF + IL-4, differentiate more rapidly into DCs, exhibiting the phenotype of partially mature DCs, while showing a strong capability to induce a primary human antibody response and CTL expansion when pulsed with antigen and injected into humanized severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice (40–42).

In vitro treatment of immature conventional DCs with IFN-α/β has been shown to upregulate surface expression of MHC class I, class II, CD40, CD80, CD86, and CD83 molecules in the human system (43–45), associated with a heightened capacity to induce CD8 T-cell responses. Accordingly, it has been observed in mice that IFN-α acting on DC plays a key role in achieving efficient cross-priming of antigen-specific CD8 T lymphocytes (7, 8, 32). IFNs-I also affect the ability of DC to secrete IL-12p70. Low concentrations of IFNs-I are essential for the optimal production of IL-12p70 (46), whereas higher levels of IFN-I suppress IL-12p40 expression, thus dampening IL-12p70 production (47).

A key requisite to initiate the adaptive immune response is the arrival of professional APC from infected tissue into lymph nodes. It has been shown that human DCs differentiated from monocytes in the presence of IFN-α exhibit upregulation of CC chemokine receptor type 7 (CCR7), correlating with an enhanced chemotactic response *in vitro* to CCR7 natural ligand (CCL19) and with strong migratory behavior in SCID mice (48). Interestingly, experiments in mice have also shown that IFN-α/β is required for plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) to migrate from the marginal zone into the T-cell area, where they form clusters (49). We have also recently shown that IFNs-I enhance the adhesion and extravasations of DCs across inflamed lymphatic endothelium in a lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1)- and very late antigen-4 (VLA4)-dependent fashion (50). IFNs-I may also favor the encounter between DCs and specific lymphocytes in lymph nodes by promoting lymphocyte trapping in lymph nodes upon downmodulation of sphingosine 1-phosphate (51).

IFNs-I have also been shown to potently enhance the primary antibody response to soluble antigen, stimulating the production of all subtypes of immunoglobulin G (IgG), and inducing long-lived antibody production and immunologic memory (8). Direct effects of IFN-α on DCs (8), B cells (52, 53), and CD4 T cells (53) all contribute to its adjuvant activities on humoral immune responses. Interestingly, a direct effect of IFNs-I on B cells seems to be crucial for the development of local humoral responses against viruses (54).

As mentioned above, CD4 T cells are direct targets of IFN-I in the enhancement of antibody responses (53). In humans, it has also been described that direct effects of IFN-I on naive CD4 T cells favor their differentiation into IFN-γ-secreting Th1-like T cells (55).

Several studies suggested that IFNs-I might exert a direct effect on CD8 T cells. Thus, it was reported that IFNs-I promote IFN-γ production by CD8 T cells in a STAT4-dependent manner (56) and promote survival of CD8 T cells from wild-type (WT) but not IFNAR-deficient (IFNAR⁻/⁻) mice (57). The definitive report showing that CD8 T cells represent direct targets of IFN-I-mediated stimulation *in vivo* came from Kolumam and colleagues (58). By adoptively transferring virus-specific naive CD8 T cells from IFNAR⁻/⁻ or IFNAR-sufficient mice into normal IFNAR WT hosts, IFNs-I were shown to act directly on murine CD8 T cells, allowing their clonal expansion and memory differentiation. Subsequent studies confirmed this work (59–61). Elegant experiments in mice by Curtisinger and colleagues (62) have shown that, in addition to signals via TCR (signal-1) and CD28 (signal-2), naïve CD8 T cells required a third signal to differentiate into effector cells. cDNA microarray analyses showed that IFN-α could regulate critical genes involved in CTL functions (63), providing evidence that IFNα promoted activation and

differentiation of CD8 T cells by sustaining the expression
of T-bet and Eomes through chromatin remodeling.
Recently, we have shown that IFN-α provides a strong
and direct signal to human CD8 T cells, thereby resulting
in upregulation of critical genes for cytotoxic T-cell activity
(cytolysis and IFN-γ secretion) and for the production of
chemokines that would cocontract other effector lympho-
cytes. IFN-α was absolutely critical in the case of human
naïve CD8 T cells for effector function acquisition (64). In
many instances, T cells may sense IFN-I before the cognate
antigen is actually presented to them. As a result of a
preexposure to IFN-I, CD8 T cells become preactivated
and acquire much faster effector functions upon antigen
recognition (65). This preactivation may reflect the upre-
gulation by IFN-I of several mRNAs in antigen-naive CD8 T
lymphocyte, albeit without changes in the expression of the
corresponding protein, unless antigen-specific activation
ensues (64).

### Clinical-Translational Advances

#### The contracting current indications of IFN-α as an
anticancer agent
IFN-α has received approval for treatment of several
neoplastic diseases (66). The most frequent indications
for IFN-α are chronic viral hepatitis. For the treatment of
these infectious conditions, stabilized forms of IFN-α have
been created by directed conjugation of polyethylene gly-
col, which, by increasing molecular weight, retards renal
clearance and, thereby, extends plasma concentrations with
sustained receptor occupancy (67). However, PEG-conju-
gated IFN is not widely used in oncology in the absence of
comparative clinical studies with the unconjugated form.
In oncology, the main indication of IFN-α is for patients
with resected stage II and III melanoma, in whom IFN-α
prolongs disease-free survival and shows a trend toward
increased overall survival (68). However, the advent of
CTLA-4 antagonist antibodies will very likely displace
the use of IFN-α for melanoma therapy (69).
Table 1 shows the spectrum of neoplastic diseases in which
IFN-α has been used. As shown, its role in cancer therapy is
steadily decreasing because of its limited efficacy and the
advent of new, more effective, and/or safer treatments.

#### Future perspectives
IFNs-I are powerful tools to directly and indirectly
modulate the functions of the immune system. Evolution
has shaped these cytokines as a key sign of alarm in case
of viral infection. The type of immune response that we
would like to induce and sustain against cancer antigens
is identical to the one we commonly observe upon acute
viral infections. Obviously, the effects of IFN-I are inte-
grated with many other key molecules that need to act in a
concerted fashion.
As described in Table 1, side effects of systemic long-
term treatments and lack of sufficiently high efficacy have
dampened the interest of IFN-α for clinical use in oncol-
ogy. However, we believe that IFN-α is likely to be more
efficacious when acting locally and intermittently at the
malignant tissue and tumor-draining lymph node than
when administered to achieve systemic bioavailability.
Local delivery can be achieved with pharmaceutical for-
mulations and gene therapy approaches (70). In our
opinion, the clinical use of recombinant IFN-α as a vaccine
adjuvant should be reconsidered and new investigations
carried out with an eye to clinical applications (71).
The rationale for using intermittent delivery arises from
observations indicating that IFN-I turns on signaling desen-
sitizing mechanisms (i.e., because of SOCS1 induction).
Intermittency at an optimized pace may help to avoid these
negative feedback mechanisms in the responding immune
cells. These ideas contrast with stabilized formulations,
such as the widely used polyethylene glycol-conjugated
IFN-α and fusion proteins with albumin that extend the
half-life of the cytokine.
It is of much interest that a gene expression signature
induced by IFN-I in melanoma lesions predicts benefit
from vaccines and may have a key role in recruiting
effector T cells to tumors by inducing chemokine genes
(72). IFN-α has been recently used in promising combi-
natorial immunotherapy approaches alongside DC vac-
cination for glioblastoma, precisely to promote T-cell
infiltration and DC activation (73). In this regard, using
endogenous IFN-I inducers instead of recombinant cyto-
kines may have advantages, because substances such as
the viral RNA analog poly I:C will also elicit other cyto-
kines that may act in concert with IFNs-I to enhance the
antitumor immune response.
Creative combination strategies are building on the
knowledge that IFN-α effects on the immune system
are likely to improve its therapeutic profile against malig-
nant diseases. For instance, combinations with immu-
nostimulatory monoclonal antibodies, IL-15, IL-12, and
IL-21, may hold much promise. Indeed, intratumoral
release of mouse IFN-α along with systemic treatment
with anti-CD137 mAb results in synergistic therapeutic
effects (74). Macrophages homing to tumor, transduced
to express IFN-α, exert therapeutic effects without the
systemic side effects (75). These studies suggest that local
delivery as opposed to systemic administration should be
tested. Of great importance is the notion that the che-
mokines induced by IFN-I (i.e., CXCL9, CXCL10) attract
activated lymphocytes, thereby calling more immune
cells to infiltrate the malignant focus.
When reflecting on the use of IFN-I for cancer, we must
think about reprogramming the tumor microenviron-
ment, frequently devoid of any stimulatory signals. Local
IFN-I release with concomitant irradiation and chemo-
therapy may help to turn some of the macroscopic tumor
lesions into immunogenic vaccines. Factors such as CpG
oligonucleotides or poly I:C that induce the release of
endogenous IFNs-I at a given tumor lesion (76) are
promising in this regard. These agents may constitute
an advantageous alternative because these agents also
induce an additional array of proinflammatory mediators
acting in synergy with IFNs-I.

Table 1. Contracting Indications of IFN-α for Malignant Conditions

| Indication       | Stage | Comment                                                                                   | Standard Current Therapy                                                                                          | Reference |
|------------------|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| Melanoma         | II/III| Prolongs disease-free survival and shows a trend toward increased overall survival.          | IFN-α is the standard option.                                                                                    | 68        |
|                  | IV    | Combination with IL2: Increased response rates but no survival improvement.                 | Chemotherapy. The advent of CTLA-4 antagonist antibody will displace the use of IFN-α for melanoma immunotherapy. | 77, 78    |
| RCC              | II/III| Two phase III trials showed negative results.                                              | Novel targeted agents such as sunitinib, temsirolimus, sorafenib, or everolimus have decreased the use of IFN-α to a minimum in both resectable and advanced RCC. | 79, 80    |
|                  | IV    | Widely studied as a single agent or in combination with IL-2, chemotherapy, or both: modest or negative results. |                                                                                                                  | 81        |
| Hairy cell leukemia |      | First treatment that showed clinical benefit in this disease. Recommended, in low dose, as a therapeutic option for maintenance therapy and as an alternative for frail patients. | Purine analogs are now considered standard treatment for this disease. | 82, 83    |
| Multiple myeloma |       | Extensively studied as maintenance treatment, as single treatment, or in combination with chemotherapy: slight efficacy. | Largely replaced by newer and more effective agents such as thalidomide, lenalidomide, or bortezomib. | 84        |
| CMS              | PV    | Optional treatment for cytoreduction (94.6% complete responses).                           | The mainstay of therapy remains repeated phlebotomy.                                                              | 85–87     |
|                  | ET    | Treatment of choice in women with childbearing potential and optional treatment in young patients resistant to hydroxyurea. | Hydroxyurea. Anagrelide.                                                                                         | 86        |
| CML              | PM    | Cytoreduction therapy. First-line therapy in combination with cytarabine: 71% clinical response rate and 39% major cytogenetic response rate. | Hydroxyurea. Thalidomide. Imatinib, in a phase III trial, has been superior in tolerability, complete hematologic and cytogenetic response rates, and progression-free survival. | 77        |
|                  |       |                                                                                           |                                                                                                                  | 88–92     |

(Continued on the following page)

Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

IFN-$\alpha$ on Immune Cells

Table 1. Contracting Indications of IFN-$\alpha$ for Malignant Conditions (cont'd)

| Indication           | Stage | Comment                                                                 | Standard Current Therapy                          | Reference |
|----------------------|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------|
|                      |       | In comparison with chemotherapy IFN$\alpha$ has been shown to be superior. | In imatinib resistance, IFN$\alpha$ has been precluded by the appearance of dasatinib. |           |
| Hemangioma           |       | Complicate hemangiomas that do not respond to steroids. Rate regression in 58% of the patients. | Steroids.                                           | 93        |
| AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma |       | Evidence for clinical activity.                                                                 | Liposomal anthracyclines are preferred as the first treatment option. | 94        |

PV, polycythemia vera; ET, essential thrombocythemia; PM, primary myelofibrosis; RCC, renal cell cancer; CMS, chronic myelo-proliferative syndrome; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia

In conclusion, the notion of key direct effects of IFNs-I on immune system cells and detailed knowledge on the elicited signaling pathways should help biomarker discovery to identify the small number of patients who could actually benefit from current treatments. More importantly, these ideas might change the way we use IFN-$\alpha$ for cancer therapy, suggesting new strategies and combinations with other agents.

### Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

I. Melero, A. Rouzaut, and S. Hervas-Stubbs receive laboratory reagents and research funding from Digna Biotech. I. Melero has acted as a consultant for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer Inc.

### Acknowledgments

We are grateful for continuous scientific collaboration on IFNs-I with Jesus Prieto, Esther Larrea, Jose I. Riezu-Boj, Iranzu Gonzalez, and Juan Ruiz.

### Grant Support

MEC/MCI (SAF2005–03131, SAF2008–03294, and TRA2009–0030), Departamento de Educación y Departamento de Salud (Beca Ortiz de Landázuri) del Gobierno de Navarra. Redes temáticas de investigación cooperativa RETIC (RD06/0020/0065), Fondo de investigación sanitaria (FIS PI060932), European commission VII framework program (ENCITE), Immunonet SUDOE. Fundación Mutua Madrileña, and "UTE for project FIMA". S. Hervas-Stubbs was supported by AECC and by MCI (RYC-2007–00928).

Received October 22, 2010; revised January 17, 2011; accepted January 17, 2011; published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011.

### References

1. Isaacs A, Lindenmann J. Virus interference. I. The interferon. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1957;147:258–67.
2. Pestka S, Krause CD, Walter MR. Interferons, interferon-like cytokines, and their receptors. Immunol Rev 2004;202:8–32.
3. Vilcek J. Novel interferons. Nat Immunol 2003;4:8–9.
4. Miller CH, Maher SG, Young HA. Clinical Use of Interferon-gamma. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009;1182:69–79.
5. de Weerd NA, Samarajiwa SA, Hertzog PJ. Type I interferon receptors: biochemistry and biological functions. J Biol Chem 2007;282:20053–7.
6. Hwang SY, Hertzog PJ, Holland KA, Sumarsono SH, Tymms MJ, Hamilton JA, et al. A null mutation in the gene encoding a type I interferon receptor component eliminates antiproliferative and antiviral responses to interferons alpha and beta and alters macrophage responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:11284–8.
7. Le Bon A, Etchart N, Rossmann C, Ashton M, Hou S, Gewert D, et al. Cross-priming of CD8+ T cells stimulated by virus-induced type I interferon. Nat Immunol 2003;4:1009–15.
8. Le Bon A, Schiavoni G, D'Agostino G, Gresser I, Belardelli F, Tough DF. Type I interferons potently enhance humoral immunity and can promote isotype switching by stimulating dendritic cells in vivo. Immunity 2001;14:461–70.
9. Platanias LC. Mechanisms of type-I- and type-II-interferon-mediated signalling. Nat Rev Immunol 2005;5:375–86.
10. Aaronson DS, Horvath CM. A road map for those who don't know JAK-STAT. Science 2002;296:1653–5.
11. Darnell JE Jr. STATs and gene regulation. Science 1997;277:1630–5.
12. Darnell JE Jr, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins. Science 1994;264:1415–21.
13. Meinke A, Barahmand-Pour F, Wöhrl S, Stoiber D, Decker T. Activation of different Stat5 isoforms contributes to cell-type-restricted signaling in response to interferons. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:6937–44.
14. Farrar JD, Smith JD, Murphy TL, Murphy KM. Recruitment of Stat4 to the human interferon-alpha/beta receptor requires activated Stat2. J Biol Chem 2000;275:2693–7.
15. Fasler-Kan E, Pansky A, Wiederkehr M, Battegay M, Heim MH. Interferon-alpha activates signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 and 6 in Daudi cells. Eur J Biochem 1998;254:514–9.
16. Matikainen S, Sareneva T, Ronni T, Lehtonen A, Koskinen PJ, Julkunen I. Interferon-alpha activates multiple STAT proteins and upregulates proliferation-associated IL-2Ralpha, c-myc, and pim-1 genes in human T cells. Blood 1999;93:1980–91.
17. Torpey N, Maher SE, Bothwell AL, Pober JS. Interferon alpha but not interleukin 12 activates STAT4 signaling in human vascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 2004;279:26789–96.
18. Parmar S, Platanias LC. Interferons: mechanisms of action and clinical applications. Curr Opin Oncol 2003;15:431–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Clin Cancer Res; 17(9) May 1, 2011 2625

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on February 3, 2015. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published Online First March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

Hervas-Stubbs et al.

---

19. Platanias LC, Fish EN. Signaling pathways activated by interferons. Exp Hematol 1999;27:1583–92.
20. Nguyen KB, Cousens LP, Doughty LA, Pien GC, Durbin JE, Biron CA. Interferon alpha/beta-mediated inhibition and promotion of interferon gamma: STAT1 resolves a paradox. Nat Immunol 2000;1:70–6.
21. Levy DE, Lee CK. What does Stat3 do? J Clin Invest 2002;109:1143–8.
22. Qing Y, Stark GR. Alternative activation of STAT1 and STAT3 in response to interferon-gamma. J Biol Chem 2004;279:41679–85.
23. Ramana CV, Kumar A, Enelow R. Stat1-independent induction of SOCS-3 by interferon-gamma is mediated by sustained activation of Stat3 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005;327:727–33.
24. Alexander WS. Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) in the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 2002;2:410–6.
25. Yoshimura A, Naka T, Kubo M. SOCS proteins, cytokine signalling and immune regulation. Nat Rev Immunol 2007;7:454–65.
26. Hanada T, Yoshida H, Kato S, Tanaka K, Masutani K, Tsukada J, et al. Suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 is essential for suppressing dendritic cell activation and systemic autoimmunity. Immunity 2003;19:437–50.
27. Zitzmann K, Brand S, De Toni EN, Baehs S, Göke B, Meinecke J, et al. SOCS1 silencing enhances antitumor activity of type I IFNs by regulating apoptosis in neuroendocrine tumor cells. Cancer Res 2007;67:5025–32.
28. Du Z, Wei L, Murti A, Pfeffer SR, Fan M, Yang CH, et al. Non-conventional signal transduction by type 1 interferons: the NF-kappaB pathway. J Cell Biochem 2007;102:1087–94.
29. Ahmed Z, Beeton CA, Williams MA, Clements D, Baldari CT, Ladbury JE. Distinct spatial and temporal distribution of ZAP70 and Lck following stimulation of interferon and T-cell receptors. J Mol Biol 2005;353:1001–10.
30. Petricoin EF 3rd, Ito S, Williams BL, Audet S, Stancato LF, Gamero A, et al. Antiproliferative action of interferon-alpha requires components of T-cell-receptor signalling. Nature 1997;390:629–32.
31. Stevens CN, Simeone AM, John S, Ahmed Z, Lucherini OM, Baldari CT, et al. T-cell receptor early signalling complex activation in response to interferon-alpha receptor stimulation. Biochem J 2010;428:429–37.
32. Trinchieri G, Santoli D. Anti-viral activity induced by culturing lymphocytes with tumor-derived or virus-transformed cells. Enhancement of human natural killer cell activity by interferon and antagonistic inhibition of susceptibility of target cells to lysis. J Exp Med 1978;147:1314–33.
33. Nguyen KB, Salazar-Mather TP, Dalod MY, Van Deusen JB, Wei XQ, Liew FY, et al. Coordinated and distinct roles for IFN-alpha beta, IL-12, and IL-15 regulation of NK cell responses to viral infection. J Immunol 2002;169:4279–87.
34. Zhang X, Sun S, Hwang I, Tough DF, Sprent J. Potent and selective stimulation of memory-phenotype CD8+ T cells in vivo by IL-15. Immunity 1998;8:591–9.
35. Lee CK, Rao DT, Gertner R, Gimeno R, Frey AB, Levy DE. Distinct requirements for IFNs and STAT1 in NK cell function. J Immunol 2000;165:3571–7.
36. Trinchieri G, Santoli D, Granato D, Perussia B. Antagonistic effects of interferons on the cytotoxicity mediated by natural killer cells. Fed Proc 1981;40:2705–10.
37. Ortaldo JR, Phillips W, Wasserman K, Herberman RB. Effects of metabolic inhibitors on spontaneous and interferon-boosted human natural killer cell activity. J Immunol 1980;125:1839–44.
38. Bogdan C, Mattner J, Schleicher U. The role of type I interferons in non-viral infections. Immunol Rev 2004;202:33–48.
39. Sampson LL, Heuser J, Brown EJ. Cytokine regulation of complement receptor-mediated ingestion by mouse peritoneal macrophages. M-CSF and IL-4 activate phagocytosis by a common mechanism requiring autostimulation by IFN-beta. J Immunol 1991;146:1005–13.
40. Lapenta C, Santini SM, Logozzi M, Spada M, Andreotti M, Di Pucchio T, et al. Potent immune response against HIV-1 and protection from virus challenge in hu-PBL-SCID mice immunized with inactivated virus-pulsed dendritic cells generated in the presence of IFN-alpha. J Exp Med 2003;198:361–7.
41. Santini SM, Lapenta C, Logozzi M, Parlato S, Spada M, Di Pucchio T, et al. Type I interferon as a powerful adjuvant for monocyte-derived dendritic cell development and activity in vitro and in Hu-PBL-SCID mice. J Exp Med 2000;191:1777–88.
42. Santodonato L, D'Agostino G, Nisini R, Mariotti S, Monque DM, Spada M, et al. Monocyte-derived dendritic cells generated after a short-term culture with IFN-alpha and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor stimulate a potent Epstein-Barr virus-specific CD8+ T cell response. J Immunol 2003;170:5195–202.
43. Gallucci S, Lolkema M, Matzinger P. Natural adjuvants: endogenous activators of dendritic cells. Nat Med 1999;5:1249–55.
44. Ito T, Amakawa R, Inaba M, Ikehara S, Inaba K, Fukuhara S. Differential regulation of human blood dendritic cell subsets by IFNs. J Immunol 2001;166:2961–9.
45. Montoya M, Schiavoni G, Mattei F, Gresser I, Belardelli F, Borrow P, et al. Type I interferons produced by dendritic cells promote their phenotypic and functional activation. Blood 2002;99:3263–71.
46. Gautier G, Humbert M, Deauvieau F, Scuiller M, Hiscott J, Bates EE, et al. A type I interferon autocrine-paracrine loop is involved in Toll-like receptor-induced interleukin-12p70 secretion by dendritic cells. J Exp Med 2005;201:1435–46.
47. Byrnes AA, Ma X, Cuomo P, Park K, Wahl L, Wolf SF, et al. Type I interferons and IL-12: convergence and cross-regulation among mediators of cellular immunity. Eur J Immunol 2001;31:2026–34.
48. Parlato S, Santini SM, Lapenta C, Di Pucchio T, Logozzi M, Spada M, et al. Expression of CCR-7, MIP-3beta, and Th-1 chemokines in type I IFN-induced monocyte-derived dendritic cells: importance for the rapid acquisition of potent migratory and functional activities. Blood 2001;98:3022–9.
49. Asselin-Paturel C, Boonstra A, Dalod M, Durand I, Yessaad N, Dezut-ter-Dambuyant C, et al. Mouse type I IFN-producing cells are immature APCs with plasmacytoid morphology. Nat Immunol 2001;2:1144–50.
50. Rouzaut A, Garasa S, Teijeira A, Gonzalez I, Martinez-Forero I, Larrea E, et al. Dendritic cells adhere to and transmigrate across lymphatic endothelium in response to IFN-a. Eur J Immunol 2010;40:3054–63.
51. Shiow LR, Rosen DB, Brdicková N, Xu Y, An J, Lanier LL, et al. CD69 acts downstream of interferon-alpha/beta to inhibit S1P1 and lymphocyte egress from lymphoid organs. Nature 2006;440:540–4.
52. Fink K, Lang KS, Manjarrez-Orduno N, Jun T, Senn BM, Holdener M, et al. Early type I interferon-mediated signals on B cells specifically enhance antiviral humoral responses. Eur J Immunol 2006;36:2094–105.
53. Le Bon A, Thompson C, Kamphuis E, Durand V, Rossmann C, Kalinke U, et al. Cutting edge: enhancement of antibody responses through direct stimulation of B and T cells by type I IFN. J Immunol 2006;176:2074–8.
54. Coro ES, Chang WL, Baumgarth N. Type I IFN receptor signals directly stimulate local B cells early following influenza virus infection. J Immunol 2006;176:4343–51.
55. Brinkmann V, Geiger T, Alkan S, Heusser CH. Interferon alpha increases the frequency of interferon gamma-producing human CD4+ T cells. J Exp Med 1993;178:1655–63.
56. Nguyen KB, Watford WT, Salomon R, Hofmann SR, Pien GC, Morinobu A, et al. Critical role for STAT4 activation by type 1 interferons in the interferon-gamma response to viral infection. Science 2002;297:2063–6.
57. Marrack P, Kappler J, Mitchell T. Type I interferons keep activated T cells alive. J Exp Med 1999;189:521–30.
58. Kolumam GA, Thomas S, Thompson LJ, Sprent J, Murali-Krishna K. Type I interferons act directly on CD8 T cells to allow clonal expansion and memory formation in response to viral infection. J Exp Med 2005;202:637–50.
59. Aichele P, Unsoeld H, Koschella M, Schweier O, Kalinke U, Vucikuja S. CD8 T cells specific for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus require type I IFN receptor for clonal expansion. J Immunol 2006;176:4525–9.
60. Le Bon A, Durand V, Kamphuis E, Thompson C, Bulfone-Paus S, Rossmann C, et al. Direct stimulation of T cells by type I IFN enhances the CD8+ T cell response during cross-priming. J Immunol 2006;176:4682–9.

---

2626 | Clin Cancer Res; 17(9) May 1, 2011 | Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](https://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on February 3, 2015. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

---

61. Thompson LJ, Kolumam GA, Thomas S, Murali-Krishna K. Innate inflammatory signals induced by various pathogens differentially dictate the IFN-I dependence of CD8 T cells for clonal expansion and memory formation. J Immunol 2006;177:1746–54.

62. Curtsinger JM, Valenzuela JO, Agarwal P, Lins D, Mescher MF, Type I. Type I IFNs provide a third signal to CD8 T cells to stimulate clonal expansion and differentiation. J Immunol 2005;174:4465–9.

63. Agarwal P, Raghavan A, Nandiwada SL, Curtsinger JM, Bohjanen PR, Mueller DL, et al. Gene regulation and chromatin remodeling by IL-12 and type I IFN in programming for CD8 T cell effector function and memory. J Immunol 2009;183:1695–704.

64. Hervas-Stubbs S, Riezú-Boj J-I, Gonzalez I, Mancheno U, Dubrot J, Azpilicueta A, et al. Effects of IFNa as a signal-3 cytokine on human naïve and antigen-experienced CD8 T-cells. Eur J Immunol 2010;40:3389–402.

65. Marshall HD, Prince AL, Berg LJ, Welsh RM. IFN-alpha beta and self-MHC divert CD8 T cells into a distinct differentiation pathway characterized by rapid acquisition of effector functions. J Immunol 2010;185:1419–28.

66. Kirkwood J. Cancer immunotherapy: the interferon-alpha experience. Semin Oncol 2002;29:18–26.

67. Wedemeyer H, Wiegand J, Cornberg M, Manns MP. Polyethylene glycol-interferon: current status in hepatitis C virus therapy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2002;17[Suppl 3]:S344–50.

68. Garbe C, Eigentler TK. Diagnosis and treatment of cutaneous melanoma: state of the art 2006. Melanoma Res 2007;17:117–27.

69. Hanley PJ, Cruz CR, Savoldo B, Leen AM, Stanojevic M, Khalil M, et al. Functionally active virus-specific T cells that target CMV, adenovirus, and EBV can be expanded from naive T-cell populations in cord blood and will target a range of viral epitopes. Blood 2009;114:1958–67.

70. Sterman DH, Recio A, Haas AR, Vachani A, Katz SI, Gillespie CT, et al. A phase I trial of repeated intrapleural adenoviral-mediated interferon-beta gene transfer for mesothelioma and metastatic pleural effusions. Mol Ther 2010;18:852–60.

71. Bracci L, La Sorsa V, Belardelli F, Proietti E. Type I interferons as vaccine adjuvants against infectious diseases and cancer. Expert Rev Vaccines 2008;7:373–81.

72. Harlin H, Meng Y, Peterson AC, Zha Y, Tretiakova M, Slingluff C, et al. Chemokine expression in melanoma metastases associated with CD8+ T-cell recruitment. Cancer Res 2009;69:3077–85.

73. Okada H, Kalinski P, Ueda R, Hoji A, Kohanbash G, Donegan TE, et al. Induction of CD8 T-cell responses against novel glioma-associated antigen peptides and clinical activity by vaccinations with alpha-type 1 polarized dendritic cells and polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid stabilized by lysine and carboxymethylcellulose in patients with recurrent malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:330–6.

74. Dubrot J, Palazón A, Alfaro C, Azpilikueta A, Ochoa MC, Rouzaut A, et al. Intratumoral injection of interferon-a and systemic delivery of agonist anti-CD137 monoclonal antibodies synergize for immunotherapy. Int J Cancer 2011;128:105–18.

75. De Palma M, Mazzieri R, Politi LS, Pucci F, Zonari E, Sitia G, et al. Tumor-targeted interferon-alpha delivery by Tie2-expressing monocytes inhibits tumor growth and metastasis. Cancer Cell 2008;14:299–311.

76. Brody JD, Ai WZ, Czerwinski DK, Torchia JA, Levy M, Advani RH, et al. In situ vaccination with a TLR9 agonist induces systemic lymphoma regression: a phase I/II study. J Clin Oncol 2010;28:4324–32.

77. Garbe C, Peris K, Hauschild A, Saiag P, Middleton M, Spatz A, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of melanoma: European consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline. Eur J Cancer 2010;46:270–83.

78. Hodi FS, O'Day SJ, McDermott DF, Weber RW, Sosman JA, Haanen JB, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 2010;363:711–23.

79. Messing EM, Manola J, Wilding G, Propert K, Fleischmann J, Crawford ED, et al. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group/Intergroup trial. Phase III study of interferon alfa-NL as adjuvant treatment for resectable renal cell carcinoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group/Intergroup trial. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:1214–22.

80. Pizzocaro G, Piva L, Colavita M, Ferri S, Artusi R, Boracchi P, et al. Interferon adjuvant to radical nephrectomy in Robson stages II and III renal cell carcinoma: a multicentric randomized study. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:425–31.

81. Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, Michaelson MD, Bukowski RM, Rixe O, et al. Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2007;356:115–24.

82. Quesada JR, Reuben J, Manning JT, Hersh EM, Guterman JU. Alpha interferon for induction of remission in hairy-cell leukemia. N Engl J Med 1984;310:15–8.

83. Alfaro C, Suarez N, Gonzalez A, Solano S, Erro L, Dubrot J, et al. Influence of bevacizumab, sunitinib and sorafenib as single agents or in combination on the inhibitory effects of VEGF on human dendritic cell differentiation from monocytes. Br J Cancer 2009;100:1111–9.

84. Kumar S. Multiple myeloma – current issues and controversies. Cancer Treat Rev 2010;36[Suppl 2]:S3–11.

85. Zhan H, Spivak JL. The diagnosis and management of polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis in the JAK2 V617F era. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol 2009;7:334–42.

86. Levine RL, Wadleigh M, Cools J, Ebert BL, Wernig G, Huntly BJ, et al. Activating mutation in the tyrosine kinase JAK2 in polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and myeloid metaplasia with myelofibrosis. Cancer Cell 2005;7:387–97.

87. Kiladjian JJ, Cassinat B, Turlure P, Cambier N, Roussel M, Bellucci S, et al. High molecular response rate of polycythemia vera patients treated with pegylated interferon alpha-2a. Blood 2006;108:2037–40.

88. Talpaz M, Kantarjian HM, McCredie KB, Keating MJ, Trujillo J, Guterman J. Clinical investigation of human alpha interferon in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1987;69:1280–8.

89. Baccarani M, Rosti G, de Vivo A, Bonifazi F, Russo D, Martinelli G, et al; Italian Cooperative Study Group on Myeloid Leukemia. A randomized study of interferon-alpha versus interferon-alpha and low-dose arabinosyl cytosine in chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 2002;99:1527–35.

90. Guilhot F, Chastang C, Michallet M, Guerci A, Harousseau JL, Maloisel F, et al; French Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Study Group. Interferon alfa-2b combined with cytarabine versus interferon alone in chronic myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:223–9.

91. Silver RT, Woolf SH, Hehlmann R, Appelbaum FR, Anderson J, Bennett C, et al. An evidence-based analysis of the effect of busulfan, hydroxyurea, interferon, and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in treating the chronic phase of chronic myeloid leukemia: developed for the American Society of Hematology. Blood 1999;94:1517–36.

92. O'Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, Gathmann I, Baccarani M, Cervantes F, et al. IRIS Investigators. Imatinib compared with interferon and low-dose cytarabine for newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 2003;348:994–1004.

93. Greinwald JH Jr, Burke DK, Bonthius DJ, Bauman NM, Smith RJ. An update on the treatment of hemangiomas in children with interferon alfa-2a. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;125:21–7.

94. Vanni T, Sprinz E, Machado MW, Santana RdeC, Fonseca BA, Schwartzmann G. Systemic treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma: current status and perspectives. Cancer Treat Rev 2006;32:445–55.


www.aacrjournals.org

Clin Cancer Res; 17(9) May 1, 2011 2627

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on February 3, 2015. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114

Clinical Cancer Research

Direct Effects of Type I Interferons on Cells of the Immune System

Sandra Hervas-Stubbs, Jose Luis Perez-Gracia, Ana Rouzaut, et al.

Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:2619-2627. Published OnlineFirst March 3, 2011.

| Updated version | Access the most recent version of this article at: doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1114 |
| --- | --- |

| Cited Articles | This article cites by 94 articles, 46 of which you can access for free at: [http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/9/2619.full.html#ref-list-1](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/9/2619.full.html#ref-list-1) |
| Citing articles | This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at: [http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/9/2619.full.html#related-urls](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/9/2619.full.html#related-urls) |

| E-mail alerts | Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal. |
| Reprints and Subscriptions | To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at [pubs@aacr.org](mailto:pubs@aacr.org). |
| Permissions | To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at [permissions@aacr.org](mailto:permissions@aacr.org). |

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 3, 2015. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.
