
Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Clinical Cancer Research

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Based Blockade: Applications of Molecular Targets for Cancer Therapy

Chih-Hsiung Wu, Chia-Hwa Lee and Yuan-Soon Ho

Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:3533-3541. Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011.

| Updated Version | Access the most recent version of this article at: doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434 |
| --- | --- |

| Cited Articles | This article cites 94 articles, 26 of which you can access for free at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/11/3533.full.html#ref-list-1 |
| Citing Articles | This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/17/11/3533.full.html#related-urls |

| E-mail alerts | Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal. |
| Reprints and Subscriptions | To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at pubs@aacr.org. |
| Permissions | To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at permissions@aacr.org. |

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 29, 2012  
Copyright © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Molecular Pathways

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Based Blockade: Applications of Molecular Targets for Cancer Therapy

Chih-Hsiung Wu${}^{1,3}$, Chia-Hwa Lee${}^{2}$, and Yuan-Soon Ho${}^{4,5,6}$

---

### Abstract

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) was first characterized in 1970 as a membrane receptor of a neurotransmitter and an ion channel. nAChRs have been shown to be involved in smoking-induced cancer formation in multiple types of human cancer cells. *In vitro* and *in vivo* animal studies have shown that homopentameric nAChR inhibitors, such as methyllycaconitine and α-Bgtx, can attenuate nicotine-induced proliferative, angiogenic, and metastatic effects in lung, colon, and bladder cancer cells. Recent publications have shown that α9-nAChR is important for breast cancer formation, and in many *in vivo* studies, α9-nAChR–specific antagonists (e.g., α-ImI, α-ImI, Vc1.1, RgIA, and It14a) produced an analgesic effect. Vc1.1 functions in a variety of animal pain models and currently has entered phase II clinical trials. For cancer therapy, natural compounds such as garcinol and EGCG have been found to block nicotine- and estrogen-induced breast cancer cell proliferation through inhibition of the α9-nAChR signaling pathway. A detailed investigation of the carcinogenic effects of nAChRs and their specific antagonists would enhance our understanding of their value as targets for clinical translation. Clin Cancer Res; 17(11); 3533–41. ©2011 AACR.

---

### Background

#### Biological functions of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors

On the basis of their ligand-binding properties, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChRs) are divided into two classes: (1) α-bungarotoxin (α-Bgtx)-binding nAChRs containing α7 or α9 subunits, which form homopentamers, and (2) α-Bgtx nonbinding nAChRs containing α2–α6 and β2–β4 subunits, which form heteromeric receptors with high affinities for receptor agonists such as acetylcholine and nicotine (1, 2). Each receptor subtype has distinct electrophysiological and pharmacological properties. For example, the α4β2-containing nAChRs have the highest nicotine-binding affinity in mammalian cells (3). Once α4β2 nAChRs are stimulated, dopamine is released in the brain reward pathway, resulting in smoking addiction. In addition, α7- and α9-nAChR receptors have unique properties pertaining to the regulation of signaling mechanisms found in sensory epithelia (α7-nAChR) and other non-neuronal (α9-nAChR) cell types. Homopentamers of α7-nAChR are the most investigated subtype and serve as important channels for Ca²⁺-dependent mechanisms, including activation of second messengers such as PKA, PKC, PI3K/Akt, and MAPK (Fig. 1) (4). These signaling pathways are closely correlated to the formation of several cancers; in particular, α7-nAChR is associated with lung (5), bladder (6), and colon cancers (7), and α9-nAChR is associated with breast cancer (8–10) (Fig. 1). Because of its functional diversity, the nAChR family offers abundant prospects for the design of novel therapies. Among other applications, nAChRs have been investigated as drug targets for nervous system disorders (11).

Homopentamers of α7-nAChR are known to desensitize rapidly, and their Ca²⁺/Na⁺ permeability ratio (12) is 4-fold higher than those of other nAChRs. nAChRs are ligand-gated cation channels, and different subtypes are known to be differentially permeable to calcium ions (Ca²⁺) (13). However, the role of nAChR-mediated calcium entry in nonneuronal cells is less understood. The calcium permeability of homomeric receptors is significantly higher than that of heteromeric nAChRs. In particular, the α7-nAChR subtype has one of the highest calcium permeabilities. The activation of this receptor can raise cytoplasmic calcium levels and trigger a series of calcium-dependent intracellular processes (14). nAChRs have been observed in various nonneuronal, nonexcitable cells, including cells from the bronchial epithelium, endothelial cells (ECs), keratinocytes, immune cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and cells from other tissue types. The presence of these receptors in nonneuronal cells seems to suggest that they have distinct functions beyond neurotransmission (15). Several studies have indicated that α7-nAChRs primarily mediate EC proliferation, invasion, and

---

**Authors' Affiliations:** ${}^{1}$Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, and ${}^{2}$Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine; ${}^{3}$Department of Surgery, Shuang Ho Hospital; ${}^{4}$School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology; ${}^{5}$Department of Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Medical University Hospital; and ${}^{6}$Center of Excellence for Cancer Research, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

**Corresponding Author:** Yuan-Soon Ho, School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing St., Taipei 110, Taiwan. Phone: 886-2-2736-1661 ext. 3327; Fax: 886-2-2739-3422; E-mail: hoyuansn@tmu.edu.tw

**doi:** 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

©2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Wu et al.

---

NNK  
Nicotine  
Acetylcholine  

E2  
E2  
E2  
ER  

α9 nAChR  

α7 nAChR  

Ca  

α4β2, α3β2  
α3β4 nAChR  

Ras  
PDK1  
p110  

Raf  
p85  

MEKK  

MAPK  
AKT  
RSK  

(Ser473)  

(Ser167)  

(Ser118) P  
(Ser104) P  
(Ser106) P  
ER  

PKA  
PKC  

VEGF  
βFGF  
MMPs  

CREB  

Angiogenesis  
Proliferation  

Ras  
p110  

Raf  
p85  

MEKK  

MAPK  
AKT  

AP1  
Myc  
XIAP  
Survivin  
NFκB  
mTOR  

Apoptosis  
Proliferation  

(Ser167) P  
(Ser118) P  
(Ser104/106) P  
ER  
VDR  
AP1  

Nucleus  

α9 nAChR  

VDR site  
AP1 site  

© 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

CCR Molecular Pathways

Figure 1. nAChR signal transduction. The nicotinic agonists at the top of the signaling cascades are listed in the order of their affinity for nAChRs. NNK and nicotine bind with highest affinity to the homopentameric nAChRs such as the α7 and α9 subunits, whereas acetylcholine and NNN seem to preferentially bind to heteropentameric nAChRs (α4β2, α3β2, or α3β4). In lung cancer cells and neuronal cells, the signaling pathways downstream of α7 and heteropentameric nAChRs promote proliferation and angiogenesis by mediating Ca²⁺-dependent activation of PKA, PKC, PI3K/Akt, and MAPK through the induction of the transcription factors NF-kB, AP1, CREB, and mTOR. On the other hand, nicotine inhibits apoptosis by activating survival factors such as Myc, XIAP, and survivin proteins. In this context, nicotine is also plays a proangiogenic role by releasing MMPs, VEGF, and βFGF from ECs and in the tumor microenvironment. However, in breast tumors, the α9 subunit is the most abundant nAChR, and downstream signaling pathways such as MAPK and PI3K/Akt can be activated through nicotine and E2 stimulation. The downstream transcription factors AP1 and VDR can bind the promoter region of α9-nAChR by activating the ER at Ser-167 and Ser-118, or at Ser-104/106 sites through the PI3K/Akt and MAPK pathways. These signal transduction cascades eventually form a strong positive feedback loop and result in tumor progression. N: nicotine; E2: estrogen.

angiogenesis (16–19). In addition, it was found that the presence of α7-nAChR inhibitors, such as methyllycaconitine (MLA) and α-Bgtx, can reverse the proangiogenic effects of nicotine (16, 17). However, it is important to note that both α-Bgtx and MLA bind with high affinity to α9-nAChR. Therefore, α9-nAChR may be partially involved in nicotine-induced proangiogenic effects (20). In particular, α7-nAChRs have been found to activate the MAP kinase, PI3-kinase/Akt, and NF-κB pathways, thereby mediating angiogenesis (16–18).

Molecular structure of nAChRs

AChRs are integral membrane proteins that respond to binding of acetylcholine (ACh), which is synthesized, stored, and finally released by cholinergic neurons (21). Like many other ligand-activated neurotransmitter receptors, AChRs are classified according to their pharmacological properties or their relative affinities for various molecules. Therefore, they can be divided into two major subtypes: (1) metabotropic muscarinic AChRs (mAChRs), which are found in vertebrate skeletal muscles, mediate

Clin Cancer Res; 17(11) June 1, 2011

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 29, 2012  
Copyright © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

neuromuscular transmission at the neuromuscular junction, and are particularly responsive to muscarine (22), and (2) ionotropic nAChRs, which are particularly responsive to nicotine and are found not only throughout the peripheral and central nervous systems but also in nonneuronal tissues (23). Both of these subtypes are activated by the endogenous neurotransmitter ACh and are expressed by both neuronal and nonneuronal cells throughout the body (24).

Previous studies showed that mAChRs are ligand-gated ion channel receptors that are primarily expressed in skeletal neuromuscular junctions and are composed of five subunits: two α1 subunits and one each of β1, δ, and γ (or ε, depending on the stage of development) (25). Only two types of mAChRs are constructed from this complex subunit pool: one is composed of α1, β1, δ, and γ subunits, and the other consists of α1, β1, δ, and ε subunits, both at ratios of 2:1:1:1. In contrast, nAChRs were originally cloned from a neuronal-like cell line and brain cDNA libraries. They are expressed throughout the nervous system and functionally increase neuronal excitability and facilitate synaptic transmission (26). nAChRs can form either homopentamers or heteropentamers containing 10 α-subunits (α1–α10), 4 non-α subunits (β1–β4), δ, γ, and ε. Of note, α8 has only been identified in avian libraries and has not been found in mammals (24). Expression of these nAChR subunits has been observed in many other cell types, including ECs, glial cells, immune cells, and keratinocytes, as well as in gastrointestinal, lung, bladder, colon, and breast tissues.

### nAChR-mediated signaling pathways

The first evidence that nAChRs regulate cancer growth was reported by Dr. H. M. Schuller in 1989 (27). Since then, various studies have described nAChRs as key molecules that act as central regulators of a complex network governing growth (5, 28), angiogenesis (29), metastasis (7), and apoptosis (30) during carcinogenesis in response to the tumor microenvironment. In addition, nAChRs stimulate intracellular signaling pathways in a cell-type-specific manner. Fig. 1 shows that nicotine-induced upregulation of growth factors (e.g., VEGF and βFGF) and their receptors is one of the major molecular mechanisms underlying the proangiogenic effects of nAChRs in several types of cancer cells (18, 29, 31). Most intriguingly, studies have shown that VEGF and βFGF-induced human microvascular EC migration requires nAChR activation, suggesting that nAChR and VEGF mediate distinct but interdependent pathways of angiogenesis (32). Furthermore, nicotine has been shown to induce activation of NF-κB through the MAP kinase p38 and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways, promoting the survival, proliferation, and angiogenesis of ECs (32). Another study showed that AKT survival signals play an important role in the nicotine-mediated carcinogenic process in human breast cancer cells (10).

A recent study showed that estrogen- and nicotine-induced α9-nAChR expression is transcriptionally regulated by the estrogen receptor (ER) through the PI3K/Akt or MAPK signaling machinery, which mediates phosphorylation of the ER at multiple sites (Fig. 1) (9). Phosphorylated ERs can also act indirectly by altering the activities of other transcription factors (e.g., Sp1, AP1, and NF-κB) at their cognate sites on DNA (33). Fig. 1 shows the potential transcription factor response elements in the promoter regions of α9-nAChR, including two activating protein 1 (AP1) sites and one vitamin D receptor (VDR) site, both of which are responsive to ER binding (34). Thus, the signaling pathways induced by nicotine and estrogen explain the effects of hormones and smoking on human breast cancer formation.

#### Smoking-induced cancer formation

Cigarette smoking has a strong etiological association with the development and progression of several types of cancers. In cigarette smoking, the nicotine-derived metabolic derivatives 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and N-nitrosonornicotine (NNN) have been proven to act as initiators of carcinogenesis, especially in lung, breast, and bladder cancers (5, 35–38). In contrast, nicotine is a demonstrated cocarcinogenic factor that promotes carcinogenesis in tobacco replacement therapies (39). However, the mechanisms of nicotine-mediated cell transformation are still uncertain.

##### Cell transformation induced by nicotine and its metabolic derivatives

The average plasma nicotine concentration of active smokers is 100 nM to 1 mM (40). The most potent cigarette smoke carcinogens are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and nicotine-specific metabolites such as NNK and NNN (41). Nicotine and NNK are considered to be carcinogens that react with DNA, and most reports have suggested that the chemical properties of the resulting DNA adducts can cause the diverse genetic changes known to exist in human cancers (35). Accordingly, nicotine and its derivatives can both promote (nicotine itself) and initiate (NNN and NNK) smoking-induced carcinogenesis. In a recent study, we showed that nicotine rapidly (in <30 min) binds to α9-nAChR in normal human breast epithelial (MCF-10A) cells at a physiologically relevant concentration (8 nM) that is below the average plasma concentration of nicotine in active smokers. Similar results were also observed in human small-cell lung cancer cells and pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells (42). These results suggest that apart from active cigarette smoking, passive exposure to smoke is still a hazardous source of nicotine. Several studies have shown NNK-triggered human breast epithelial cell transformation upon long-term (>1 mo) exposure to a low concentration of NNK (100 p.m.) (37). In addition, we recently showed that nicotine (10 μM) can induce transformation in normal breast epithelial cells (MCF-10A) upon forced expression of α9-nAChR (28). Another important concern is that nAChRs can be induced in response to nicotine, NNN, and NNK exposure, which produces a detrimental feedback effect on receptor-ligand binding signaling. Such results indicate that receptor-mediated effects may play an important role in

nicotine-induced carcinogenesis. Therefore, understanding nAChR-mediated mechanisms could aid in the design of novel cancer therapies.

**nAChR activation-mediated tumorigenesis.** Cell-type-specific oncogenesis occurs in response to different nAChR combinations. For example, high levels of α7-nAChR expression promote cancer cell proliferation and metastasis in lung, gastrointestinal, and bladder tissues through ERK and Akt signal transduction (43). Apart from α7-nAChRs, α4β2-nAChRs are evolutionarily the oldest heteromeric nAChR receptor and are predominantly expressed in mammalian brain and lung tissues (43). It has also been shown that the α4β2-nAChR subtype is crucial for mediating the effects of nicotine-induced dopamine release (44). These effects promote cigarette-smoking behavior through uncontrolled nicotine addiction and thus play a major role in disease progression (45). The α9-nAChR homopentamer was originally identified in hair cells of the inner ear, and is involved in synaptic transmission between efferent nerves and hair cells (46). α9-nAChR was found to have diverse functions in keratinocyte adhesion (47), immune response (48), neuropathic pain (49), and even breast cancer formation (28). The correlation between α9-nAChR mRNA expression level and disease outcome in breast tumor patients was evaluated in a recent study (28). In that study, 186 (67.3%) of 276 paired samples expressed α9-nAChR mRNA at higher levels (mean: 7.84-fold) in breast cancer than in surrounding normal tissue. The highest α9-nAChR mRNA expression levels were detected in smoking-related, advanced-stage breast cancer tissues. These observations led to the conclusion that nicotine binding to nAChRs may play a crucial role in human breast cancer formation.

**nAChR activation-mediated angiogenesis.** Angiogenesis is a complex combinatorial process that is regulated by a balance between pro- and antiangiogenic molecules (16–18). An imbalance between pro- and antiangiogenic factors can result in pathological situations involving either deficit conditions (e.g., inefficient healing and tissue ischemia) or excess angiogenesis (e.g., atherosclerotic plaque development, diabetic retinopathy, and cancer). Increasing evidence indicates that nicotine enhances the angiogenic response to inflammation (the disc angiogenesis model), ischemia (the femoral artery ligation model), atherosclerosis (ApoE-deficient mice), and neoplasia (the Lewis lung cancer model). These processes are mediated by nAChRs and may involve the production of nitric oxide, prostacyclin, βFGF, and/or VEGF (17, 50). These growth factors stimulate ECs in the existing vasculature to proliferate and then migrate through the tissue to form new endothelialized channels (51, 52). βFGF is known to be involved in nicotine-induced angiogenesis, in that antibodies against βFGF markedly prevent nicotine-induced angiogenesis (53), and inhibition of nicotinic receptors completely prevents the βFGF-mediated migration of ECs. Furthermore, nAChR-mediated stimulation of angiogenesis was found to be completely dependent on activation of the PI3K/Akt, MAPK, and NF-κB pathways, as shown by abrogation of network formation by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (53). In a further investigation, α7-nAChR knockout mice exhibited an attenuated angiogenic response to ischemia and inflammation, including a 27% abrogation of the angiogenic response. Of note, antagonists of nAChRs (e.g., mecamylamine and α-Bgtx) markedly attenuate VEGF-induced angiogenesis (17). Together, these findings indicate that an intricate interplay occurs between the proangiogenic factors VEGF and βFGF and the nAChR cholinergic pathway. Modulation of the activity of this pathway may represent a new therapeutic avenue for disorders characterized by inadequate or pathological angiogenesis.

**nAChR activation-mediated metastasis.** Cell invasion and metastasis are crucial processes in tumor development. Numerous factors, including growth factors, kinases, phosphatases, and extracellular matrix components, play a role in regulating this process. Many growth factors and their downstream effectors are aberrantly activated or overexpressed, contributing to growth deregulation in cancer. It has been reported that the addition of nicotine increases EGF receptor (EGFR) expression in lung, breast, gastric, and colon cells (54–57). After recruiting downstream effectors, growth-related receptors often exert their functions by organizing their downstream effectors to initiate signaling cascades in such pathways as PKC, PI3K/Akt, and MAPK. These signaling cascades affect various biological processes, including cell migration and cancer cell invasion (58, 59). Nicotine has been shown to induce the phosphorylation of multiple subtypes of calpains, resulting in enhanced cell migration and specifically lung cancer metastasis (60, 61). Emerging evidence shows that nicotine potently induces the secretion of multiple types of calpain from lung cancer cells, which promotes the cleavage of various substrates in the extracellular matrix and facilitates metastasis and tumor progression (62). Accordingly, nicotine-treated mice have shown markedly higher tumor recurrence (59.7%) than vehicle-treated mice (19.5%). Nicotine was also found to increase the metastasis of dorsally implanted Line-1 tumors to the lungs 9-fold. Treatment with α-Bgtx significantly inhibited nicotine-induced proliferation of Line-1 cells, suggesting that an nAChR subunit is mainly responsible for mediating the proliferative effect of nicotine. Another study also confirmed that NNK enhances the migration of HT29 and DLD-1 colon cancer cells through α7-nAChR-mediated down-regulation of the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and up-regulation of its transcriptional repressors Snail and ZEB1 (7). Interference with α7-nAChR protein expression or treatment with an α7-nAChR-specific inhibitor (MLA) can significantly attenuate α7-nAChR mediated NNK-enhanced colon cancer cell migration.

## Clinical-Translational Advances

### nAChRs are molecular targets for drug development

It is well documented that brain nAChRs participate in physiological functions such as attention, memory, and cognition. Clinical data also suggest their involvement in

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Targeted Cancer Therapy

Table 1. nAChR inhibitors with potential clinical applications for cancer therapy

| Compound                          | Primary indication       | Receptor    | Trial stage | References |
|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------|-------------|------------|
| Dihydro-$\beta$-erythroidine (DH$\beta$E) | Laboratory inhibitor   | $\alpha 4 \beta 2$ | –           | (71)       |
| Erysodine                         | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 4 \beta 2$ | –           | (72)       |
| $\alpha$-Conotoxin-MII            | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 3 \beta 2$ | –           | (75, 76)   |
| Mecamylamine (TRIDMAC, Inversine) | Depression hypertension  | $\alpha 3 \beta 4$ | Launched    | (85, 86)   |
| MLA                               | Anxiety                  | $\alpha 7$         | Phase III   | (78, 79)   |
| $n$-Bgtx                          | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 3 \beta 2$ | –           | (69, 70)   |
| $\alpha$-Bgtx                     | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 7 \alpha 9$ | –           | (80)       |
| It14a                             | Pain                     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (87, 88)   |
| $\alpha$-Iml, $\alpha$-ImlI      | Pain                     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (90, 91)   |
| $\alpha$-RglA                     | Pain                     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (50, 89)   |
| Vc1.1 (ACV1)                      | Pain                     | $\alpha 9$         | Phase II    | (92)       |
| Garcinol                          | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (8)        |
| Luteolin                          | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (10)       |
| Quercetin                         | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (10)       |
| EGCG                              | Laboratory inhibitor     | $\alpha 9$         | –           | (93)       |

the pathogenesis of several disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, and depression. On the basis of a variety of preclinical and (to a lesser extent) clinical models, it has been hypothesized that nAChRs may be a therapeutic target for studying the effects of L-form nicotine (63). In 2001, the crystal structure of the nAChR protein allowed its characterization as an ACh-binding protein (64). Currently, there are two rapidly developing fields of research involving nicotinic receptor target drugs. One field is focused on aiding drug discovery by bridging the gap between the assembly, activity, and conformational transitions of nicotinic receptors. The other field relies on the development of therapeutically applicable nicotinic receptor ligands that are either competitive (e.g., agonist and antagonist binding) or noncompetitive (e.g., allosteric ligand binding). The positions of noncompetitive (allosteric) ligand-binding sites on heteropentameric nAChRs differ in that the non-$\alpha$ neuronal subunit takes the place of the $\gamma$ or $\delta$ subunit. Competitive ligand-binding sites are formed at the interfaces between homopentameric neuronal $\alpha$ subunits ($\alpha 7$, $\alpha 8$, and $\alpha 9$ nAChRs) and between $\alpha$ ($\alpha 2–4$ or $\alpha 6$) and $\beta$ subunits ($\beta 2$ or $\beta 4$) in heteropentameric nAChRs (65).

Over the last few years, the availability of high-resolution X-ray crystal structures of nAChRs in their ligand-free and ligand-bound forms has greatly increased our knowledge of nAChR structure and function (66). However, the main difficulty in drug design is that at least 12 genes encode the neuronal nAChR subunits, and their gene products ($9 \alpha$ and $3 \beta$ subunits) assemble in various combinations, resulting in a broad diversity of pentamers with distinct pharmacological properties. Accordingly, successful treatment of pathological conditions that involve various neuronal subtypes requires the development of subtype-specific drugs. However, the majority of known nAChR ligands and designed drugs are not subtype-specific (11). Studies in preclinical models showed that nicotine can enhance wound healing via nAChR stimulation (18). Similar results have been obtained in several neurological diseases associated with aging and reduced angiogenesis. For example, decreased levels of nAChRs were detected in the cerebrovascular cells of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (67), suggesting that nicotine-based therapy may be appropriate for neurological disorders. However, another study showed that $\alpha 7$-nAChR agonists used for therapeutic revascularization after myocardial infarction may have proatherogenic activity (31). Additional studies should be done to assess the optimum balance of nAChR activity regulation in clinical patients.

nAChR antagonists as potential agents for molecular cancer therapy

Neurotoxins are commonly used to distinguish between nAChR subunit combinations (68). The neurotoxins lophotoxin, neosurugatoxin, and Bgtx (69, 70), and the alkaloids DH$\beta$E (71) and erysodine (72) are competitive nAChR antagonists that display selectivity for $\beta 2$-containing nAChRs, particularly the $\alpha 4 \beta 2$ subtype (73). Among these nAChRs, the $\alpha 7$-nAChRs are known to be overexpressed in small-cell lung carcinomas associated with smoking (74). Results from *in vitro* experiments suggest that malignant growth can be halted with the use of snake neurotoxins ($\alpha$-neurotoxins) or snail conotoxins ($\alpha$-conotoxins) (75, 76) because they are competitive antagonists of $\alpha 7$-nAChR (77). *In vivo* animal studies have further shown that $\alpha 7$-nAChR inhibitors, such as MLA (78, 79) and $\alpha$-Bgtx (80), can reverse the proangiogenic effects of nicotine and inhibit cancer cell growth (16, 17, 19, 81, 82). In a lung airway epithelial cell model (83), normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells were forced to transform by nicotine activation of Akt, altering their growth characteristics.

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Wu et al.

---

Dysregulated NHBE growth after nicotine administration is consistent with *in vivo* observations that active smokers have increased proliferative indices compared with former smokers. Protection from prolonged serum deprivation-induced apoptosis conferred by nicotine was found to be attenuatable by LY294002 or DHβE, and protection conferred by NNK was attenuatable by LY294002 or α-BTX. These studies show that in addition to promoting cellular survival and/or transformation, nicotine-induced nAChR activation or NNK-induced Akt signaling is required to diminish contact inhibition and reduce cellular dependence on exogenous growth factors and the extracellular matrix. The results also indicate that specific antagonists can decrease the high levels of α7-nAChR expression in human cancer cells. In addition to α7-nAChR-specific antagonists, α9-nAChR-specific antagonists reduce ascending afferent excitatory pain pathway signaling and have been shown to have analgesic effects in *in vivo* studies (50, 84). As shown in Table 1, several nicotinic antagonists have either launched or entered phase II clinical trials (85, 86). Unfortunately, most of these antagonists can also cause a variety of side effects resulting from the lack of nAChR subtype specificity. Among these α9-nAChR-specific antagonists (50, 87–91), Vc1.1 has been shown to have profound analgesic effects in a variety of animal pain models and is currently in phase II clinical trials (92). Vc1.1 may have off-label use against α9-nAChR-mediated cancer formation in the future.

**Interference with α9-nAChR expression as a novel strategy for drug development**

In a recent study, we showed that α9-nAChR was preferentially overexpressed in human breast tumor tissue in comparison with normal tissue (28). We transformed normal breast epithelial cells (MCF-10A) by long-term nicotine treatment (10 μM, >2 mo) together with forced expression of α9-nAChR using the Tet-inducible adenovirus system. The established α9-nAChR overexpressing cells (Tet-Off group) were transplanted into nude mice, resulting in increased tumor growth volume (2.33-fold) when compared with the control (Tet-On) group. Moreover, specific inhibition of α9-nAChR expression using RNA-interference (siRNA) or compounds derived from plants was previously found to concomitantly inhibit cancer cell growth, soft-agar colony formation, and tumor growth in SCID mice (8, 10, 93). Nicotine-induced breast cancer cell proliferation can be inhibited by garcinol (1 μM) derived from the edible fruit *Garcinia indica* through down-regulation of α9-nAChR and cyclin D3 expression (94). A combination of luteolin and quercetin (0.5 μM each) synergistically down-regulates α9-nAChR expression in human breast cancer cells (10). Another study revealed that the tea polyphenol (−)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG, 10 μM) attenuates estradiol (10 nM)- and nicotine (10 μM)-induced α9-nAChR protein expression in human breast cancer cells (93). This study further showed that combined treatment with EGCG profoundly inhibits \[^{3}H\]-Nic/α9-nAChR binding activity, resulting in reduced soft-agar colony formation (>50%) in MCF-7 breast cancer cells (93). Several other studies also showed that *in vivo* growth of lung and breast cancer cell lines with functional ERs is initiated by estradiol (1–10 nM) stimulation (9, 94–97). These results suggest that EGCG (or other natural compounds such as garcinol, luteolin, and quercetin) may be able to block smoking (nicotine)- or hormone (estradiol)-induced cancer cell proliferation by inhibiting the nAChR signaling pathway.

**Conclusion**

Over the past few years, the technique of high-resolution X-ray crystallography has revealed the structures and functions of nAChRs in both their ligand-free and ligand-bound forms. It has been shown that nAChRs are selectively overexpressed in a variety of cancers, such as lung cancer (α7-nAChR) and breast cancer (α9-nAChR). Studies have shown that inhibition of nAChR protein levels can significantly attenuate nicotine and NNK-induced cell proliferation in tumor models. Several nAChR-specific agonists and antagonists have been assessed in clinical trials for the treatment of various diseases (excluding cancer); however, a selective antagonist that could specifically target the overexpressed nAChR subtypes that appear in human cancer cells would provide a novel therapeutic strategy. The development of nAChR-specific antagonists for clinical translation is both timely and relevant, and it will enhance our understanding of the carcinogenic role of nAChRs.

Received January 4, 2011; revised February 25, 2011; accepted February 26, 2011; published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011.

---

**References**

1. Elgoyhen AB, Johnson DS, Boulter J, Vetter DE, Heinemann S. Alpha 9: an acetylcholine receptor with novel pharmacological properties expressed in rat cochlear hair cells. Cell 1994;79:705–15.
2. Lindstrom J. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in health and disease. Mol Neurobiol 1997;15:193–222.
3. Flores CM, DeCamp RM, Kilo S, Rogers SW, Hargreaves KM. Neuronal nicotinic receptor expression in sensory neurons of the rat trigeminal ganglion: demonstration of alpha3beta4, a novel subtype in the mammalian nervous system. J Neurosci 1996;16:7892–901.
4. Suzuki T, Hide I, Matsubara A, Hama C, Harada K, Miyano K, et al. Microglial alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors drive a phospho-
5. Ho YS, Chen CH, Wang YJ, Pestell RG, Albanese C, Chen RJ, et al. Tobacco-specific carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) induces cell proliferation in normal human bronchial epithelial cells through NFkappaB activation and cyclin D1 up-regulation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2005;205: 133–48.
6. Chen RJ, Ho YS, Guo HR, Wang YJ. Rapid activation of Stat3 and ERK1/2 by nicotine modulates cell proliferation in human bladder cancer cells. Toxicol Sci 2008;104:283–93.

---

3538 Clin Cancer Res; 17(11) June 1, 2011 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from [clincancerres.aacrjournals.org](http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org) on May 29, 2012  
Copyright © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Targeted Cancer Therapy

7. Wei PL, Chang YJ, Ho YS, Lee CH, Yang YY, An J, et al. Tobacco-specific carcinogen enhances colon cancer cell migration through alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Ann Surg 2009;249:978–85.

8. Chen CS, Lee CH, Hsieh CD, Ho CT, Pan MH, Huang CS, et al. Nicotine-induced human breast cancer cell proliferation attenuated by garcinol through down-regulation of the nicotinic receptor and cyclin D3 proteins. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2011;125:73–87.

9. Lee CH, Chang YC, Chen CS, Tu SH, Wang YJ, Chen LC, et al. Crosstalk between nicotine and estrogen-induced estrogen receptor activation induces alpha9-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expression in human breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010.

10. Shih YL, Liu HC, Chen CS, Hsu CH, Pan MH, Chang HW, et al. Combination treatment with luteolin and quercetin enhances antiproliferative effects in nicotine-treated MDA-MB-231 cells by downregulating nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. J Agric Food Chem 2010;58:235–41.

11. Arneric SP, Holladay M, Williams M. Neuronal nicotinic receptors: a perspective on two decades of drug discovery research. Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74:1092–101.

12. Broide RS, Leslie FM. The alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in neuronal plasticity. Mol Neurobiol 1999;20:1–16.

13. Fayuk D, Yakel JL. Dendritic Ca2+ signalling due to activation of alpha 7-containing nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in rat hippocampal neurons. J Physiol 2007;582:597–611.

14. Fucile S. Ca2+ permeability of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Cell Calcium 2004;35:1–8.

15. Minna JD. Nicotine exposure and bronchial epithelial cell nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expression in the pathogenesis of lung cancer. J Clin Invest 2003;111:31–3.

16. Heeschen C, Jang JJ, Weis M, Pathak A, Kaji S, Hu RS, et al. Nicotine stimulates angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth and atherosclerosis. Nat Med 2001;7:833–9.

17. Heeschen C, Weis M, Aicher A, Dimmeler S, Cooke JP. A novel angiogenic pathway mediated by non-neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. J Clin Invest 2002;110:527–36.

18. Cooke JP, Bitterman H. Nicotine and angiogenesis: a new paradigm for tobacco-related diseases. Ann Med 2004;36:33–40.

19. Dasgupta P, Kinkade R, Joshi B, Decook C, Haura E, Chellappan S. Nicotine inhibits apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs by up-regulating XIAP and survivin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:6332–7.

20. Egletton RD, Brown KC, Dasgupta P. Angiogenic activity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors: implications in tobacco-related vascular diseases. Pharmacol Ther 2009;121:205–23.

21. Changeux JP, Kasai M, Lee CY. Use of a snake venom toxin to characterize the cholinergic receptor protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1970;67:1241–7.

22. Ishii M, Kurachi Y. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Curr Pharm Des 2006;12:3573–81.

23. Changeux J, Edelstein SJ. Allosteric mechanisms in normal and pathological nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2001;11:369–77.

24. Dani JA, Bertrand D. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and nicotinic cholinergic mechanisms of the central nervous system. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2007;47:699–729.

25. Changeux JP, Bertrand D, Corringer PJ, Dehaene S, Edelstein S, Léna C, et al. Brain nicotinic receptors: structure and regulation, role in learning and reinforcement. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 1998;26:198–216.

26. McGeehee DS, Heath MJ, Gelber S, Devay P, Role LW. Nicotine enhancement of fast excitatory synaptic transmission in CNS by presynaptic receptors. Science 1995;269:1692–6.

27. Schuller HM. Cell type specific, receptor-mediated modulation of growth kinetics in human lung cancer cell lines by nicotine and tobacco-related nitrosamines. Biochem Pharmacol 1989;38:3439–42.

28. Lee CH, Huang CS, Chen CS, Tu SH, Wang YJ, Chang YJ, et al. Overexpression and activation of the alpha9-nicotinic receptor during tumorigenesis in human breast epithelial cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010;102:1322–35.

29. Cooke JP. Angiogenesis and the role of the endothelial nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Life Sci 2007;80:2347–51.

30. Paliwal A, Vaissière T, Krais A, Cuenin C, Cros MP, Zaridze D, et al. Aberrant DNA methylation links cancer susceptibility locus 15q25.1 to apoptotic regulation and lung cancer. Cancer Res 2010;70:2779–88.

31. Jain RK, Finn AV, Kolodgie FD, Gold HK, Virmani R. Antiangiogenic therapy for normalization of atherosclerotic plaque vasculature: a potential strategy for plaque stabilization. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med 2007;4:491–502.

32. Yu J, Huang NF, Wilson KD, Velotta JB, Huang M, Li Z, et al. nAChRs mediate human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells: proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e7040.

33. Glidewell-Kenney C, Weiss J, Lee EJ, Pillai S, Ishikawa T, Ariazi EA, et al. ERE-independent ERalpha target genes differentially expressed in human breast tumors. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2005;245:53–9.

34. Lustig LR, Peng H. Chromosome location and characterization of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha (alpha) 9 (CHRNA9) gene. Cytogenet Genome Res 2002;98:154–9.

35. Lin RK, Hsieh YS, Lin P, Hsu HS, Chen CY, Tang YA, et al. The tobacco-specific carcinogen NNK induces DNA methyltransferase 1 accumulation and tumor suppressor gene hypermethylation in mice and lung cancer patients. J Clin Invest 2010;120:521–32.

36. Hecht SS, Hoffmann D. Tobacco-specific nitrosamines, an important group of carcinogens in tobacco and tobacco smoke. Carcinogenesis 1988;9:875–84.

37. Mei J, Hu H, McEntee M, Plummer H 3rd, Song P, Wang HC. Transformation of non-cancerous human breast epithelial cell line MCF10A by the tobacco-specific carcinogen NNK. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2003;79:95–105.

38. Chen RJ, Ho YS, Guo HR, Wang YJ. Long-term nicotine exposure-induced chemoresistance is mediated by activation of Stat3 and downregulation of ERK1/2 via nAChR and beta-adrenoceptors in human bladder cancer cells. Toxicol Sci 2010;115:118–30.

39. Gemenzidis E, Bose A, Riaz AM, Chaplin T, Young BD, Ali M, et al. FOXM1 upregulation is an early event in human squamous cell carcinoma and it is enhanced by nicotine during malignant transformation. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e4849.

40. Sastry BV, Chance MB, Singh G, Horn JL, Janson VE. Distribution and retention of nicotine and its metabolite, cotinine, in the rat as a function of time. Pharmacology 1995;50:128–36.

41. Nishioka T, Guo J, Yamamoto D, Chen L, Huppi P, Chen CY. Nicotine, through upregulating pro-survival signaling, cooperates with NNK to promote transformation. J Cell Biochem 2010;109:152–61.

42. Schuller HM. Nitrosamines as nicotinic receptor ligands. Life Sci 2007;80:2274–80.

43. Davis R, Rizwani W, Banerjee S, Kovacs M, Haura E, Coppola D, et al. Nicotine promotes tumor growth and metastasis in mouse models of lung cancer. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e7524.

44. Cohen G, Han ZY, Grailhe R, Gallego J, Gaultier C, Changeux JP, et al. Beta 2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit modulates protective responses to stress: a receptor basis for sleep-disordered breathing after nicotine exposure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:13272–7.

45. Wüllner U, Gündisch D, Herzog H, Minnerop M, Joe A, Warnecke M, et al. Smoking upregulates alpha4beta2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the human brain. Neurosci Lett 2008;430:34–7.

46. Glowatzki E, Fuchs PA. Cholinergic synaptic inhibition of inner hair cells in the neonatal mammalian cochlea. Science 2000;288:2366–8.

47. Nguyen VT, Ndoye A, Grando SA. Novel human alpha9 acetylcholine receptor regulating keratinocyte adhesion is targeted by Pemphigus vulgaris autoimmunity. Am J Pathol 2000;157:1377–91.

48. Luebke AE, Maroni PD, Guth SM, Lysakowski A. Alpha-9 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor immunoreactivity in the rodent vestibular labyrinth. J Comp Neurol 2005;492:323–33.

49. Vincler M, Wittenauer S, Parker R, Ellison M, Olivera BM, McIntosh JM. Molecular mechanism for analgesia involving specific antagonism of alpha9alpha10 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:17880–4.

50. Kwon HM, Sangiorgi G, Ritman EL, McKenna C, Holmes DR Jr, Schwartz RS, et al. Enhanced coronary vasa vasorum neovascular-

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Wu et al.

---

ization in experimental hypercholesterolemia. J Clin Invest 1998; 101: 1551–6.

51. Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases. Nature 2000; 407: 249–57.

52. Pontieri FE, Tanda G, Orzi F, Di Chiara G. Effects of nicotine on the nucleus accumbens and similarity to those of addictive drugs. Nature 1996; 382: 255–7.

53. Mousa S, Mousa SA. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of nicotine's pro-angiogenesis activity and its potential impact on cancer. J Cell Biochem 2006; 97: 1370–8.

54. Li S, Zhao T, Xin H, Ye LH, Zhang X, Tanaka H, et al. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 7 subunit mediates migration of vascular smooth muscle cells toward nicotine. J Pharmacol Sci 2004; 94: 334–8.

55. Ye YN, Liu ES, Shin VY, Wu WK, Luo JC, Cho CH. Nicotine promoted colon cancer growth via epidermal growth factor receptor, c-Src, and 5-lipoxygenase-mediated signal pathway. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2004; 308: 66–72.

56. Carlisle DL, Liu X, Hopkins TM, Swick MC, Dhir R, Siegfried JM. Nicotine activates cell-signaling pathways through muscle-type and neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in non-small cell lung cancer cells. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2007; 20: 629–41.

57. Guo J, Ibaragi S, Zhu T, Luo LY, Hu GF, Huppi PS, et al. Nicotine promotes mammary tumor migration via a signaling cascade involving protein kinase C and CDC42. Cancer Res 2008; 68: 8473–81.

58. Horwitz AR, Parsons JT. Cell migration—movin’ on. Science 1999; 286: 1102–3.

59. Sahai E. Mechanisms of cancer cell invasion. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2005; 15: 87–96.

60. Xu L, Deng X. Protein kinase Ciota promotes nicotine-induced migration and invasion of cancer cells via phosphorylation of micro- and m-calpains. J Biol Chem 2006; 281: 4457–66.

61. Xu L, Deng X. Suppression of cancer cell migration and invasion by protein phosphatase 2A through dephosphorylation of mu- and m-calpains. J Biol Chem 2006; 281: 35567–75.

62. Song LJ, Pan LJ, Xu YM. [Cavernous nerve reconstruction to restore erectile function following radical prostatectomy]. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue 2006; 12: 939–42.

63. Andreasen JT, Henningsen K, Bate S, Christiansen S, Wiborg O. Nicotine reverses anhedonic-like response and cognitive impairment in the rat chronic mild stress model of depression: comparison with sertraline. J Psychopharmacol 2010 [Epub ahead of print].

64. Brejc K, van Dijk WJ, Klaassen RV, Schuurmans M, Van Der Oost J, Smit AB, et al. Crystal structure of an ACh-binding protein reveals the ligand-binding domain of nicotinic receptors. Nature 2001; 411: 269–76.

65. Hansen SB, Taylor P. Galanthamine and non-competitive inhibitor binding to ACh-binding protein: evidence for a binding site on non-alpha-subunit interfaces of heteromeric neuronal nicotinic receptors. J Mol Biol 2007; 369: 895–901.

66. Taly A, Corringer PJ, Guedin D, Lestage P, Changeux JP. Nicotinic receptors: allosteric transitions and therapeutic targets in the nervous system. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009; 8: 733–50.

67. Yu WF, Guan ZZ, Bogdanovic N, Nordberg A. High selective expression of alpha7 nicotinic receptors on astrocytes in the brains of patients with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease and patients carrying Swedish APP 670/671 mutation: a possible association with neuritic plaques. Exp Neurol 2005; 192: 215–25.

68. Luetje CW, Wada K, Rogers S, Abramson SN, Tsuji K, Heinemann S, et al. Neurotoxins distinguish between different neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit combinations. J Neurochem 1990; 55: 632–40.

69. Higgins LS, Berg DK. A desensitized form of neuronal acetylcholine receptor detected by 3H-nicotine binding on bovine adrenal chromaffin cells. J Neurosci 1988; 8: 1436–46.

70. Shen WX, Jobling P, Horn JP. The sensitivity of nicotinic synapses in bullfrog sympathetic ganglia to alpha-bungarotoxin and neuronal bungarotoxin. Br J Pharmacol 1994; 113: 898–902.

71. Davis JA, Gould TJ. The effects of DHBE and MLA on nicotine-induced enhancement of contextual fear conditioning in C57BL/6 mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006; 184: 345–52.

---

72. Cui L, Thuong PT, Fomum ZT, Oh WK. A new Erythrinan alkaloid from the seed of Erythrina addisoniae. Arch Pharm Res 2009; 32: 325–8.

73. Holladay MW, Dart MJ, Lynch JK. Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors as targets for drug discovery. J Med Chem 1997; 40: 4169–94.

74. Sciamanna MA, Griesmann GE, Williams CL, Lennon VA. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of muscle and neuronal (alpha 7) types coexpressed in a small cell lung carcinoma. J Neurochem 1997; 69: 2302–11.

75. Gotti C, Guiducci S, Tedesco V, Corbioli S, Zanetti L, Moretti M, et al. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway: primary role of ventral tegmental area alpha6beta2* receptors in mediating systemic nicotine effects on dopamine release, locomotion, and reinforcement. J Neurosci 2010; 30: 5311–25.

76. Ullian EM, McIntosh JM, Sargent PB. Rapid synaptic transmission in the avian ciliary ganglion is mediated by two distinct classes of nicotinic receptors. J Neurosci 1997; 17: 7210–9.

77. Sandall DW, Satkunanathan N, Keays DA, Polidano MA, Liping X, Pham V, et al. A novel alpha-conotoxin identified by gene sequencing is active in suppressing the vascular response to selective stimulation of sensory nerves in vivo. Biochemistry 2003; 42: 6904–11.

78. Matsumayashi H, Inoue A, Amano T, Seki T, Nakata Y, Sasa M, et al. Involvement of alpha7- and alpha4beta2-type postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in nicotine-induced excitation of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra: a patch clamp and single-cell PCR study using acutely dissociated nigral neurons. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2004; 129: 1–7.

79. Wang Y, Su DM, Wang RH, Liu Y, Wang H. Antinociceptive effects of choline against acute and inflammatory pain. Neuroscience 2005; 132: 49–56.

80. Uteshev VV, Meyer EM, Papke RL. Activation and inhibition of native neuronal alpha-bungarotoxin-sensitive nicotinic ACh receptors. Brain Res 2002; 948: 33–46.

81. Dasgupta P, Chellappan SP. Nicotine-mediated cell proliferation and angiogenesis: new twists to an old story. Cell Cycle 2006; 5: 2324–8.

82. Heeschen C, Weis M, Cooke JP. Nicotine promotes arteriogenesis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003; 41: 489–96.

83. West KA, Brognard J, Clark AS, Linnoila IR, Yang X, Swain SM, et al. Rapid Akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells. J Clin Invest 2003; 111: 81–90.

84. Gilbert SD, Clark TM, Flores CM. Antihyperalgesic activity of epibatidine in the formalin model of facial pain. Pain 2001; 89: 159–65.

85. Lippiello PM, Beaver JS, Gatto GJ, James JW, Jordan KG, Traina VM, et al. TC-5214 (S-(+)-mecamylamine): a neuronal nicotinic receptor modulator with antidepressant activity. CNS Neurosci Ther 2008; 14: 266–77.

86. Glover ED, Laflin MT, Schuh KJ, Schuh LM, Nides M, Christen AG, et al. A randomized, controlled trial to assess the efficacy and safety of a transdermal delivery system of nicotine/mecamylamine in cigarette smokers. Addiction 2007; 102: 795–802.

87. Sun D, Ren Z, Zeng X, You Y, Pan W, Zhou M, et al. Structure-function relationship of conotoxin It14a, a potential analgesic with low cytotoxicity. Peptides 2011; 32: 300–5.

88. Peng C, Tang S, Pi C, Liu J, Wang F, Wang L, et al. Discovery of a novel class of conotoxin from Conus litteratus, It14a, with a unique cysteine pattern. Peptides 2006; 27: 2174–81.

89. McIntosh JM, Plazas PV, Watkins M, Gomez-Casati ME, Olivera BM, Elgoyhen AB. A novel alpha-conotoxin, PelIA, cloned from Conus pergrandis, discriminates between rat alpha9alpha10 and alpha7 nicotinic cholinergic receptors. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 30107–12.

90. Ellison M, Feng ZP, Park AJ, Zhang X, Olivera BM, McIntosh JM, et al. Alpha-RglA, a novel conotoxin that blocks the alpha9alpha10 nAChR: structure and identification of key receptor-binding residues. J Mol Biol 2008; 377: 1216–27.

91. Ellison M, Gao F, Wang HL, Sine SM, McIntosh JM, Olivera BM. Alpha-conotoxins ImI and ImII target distinct regions of the human alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and distinguish human nicotinic receptor subtypes. Biochemistry 2004; 43: 16019–26.

---

3540 Clin Cancer Res; 17(11) June 1, 2011 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 29, 2012

Copyright © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research

Published OnlineFirst March 28, 2011; DOI:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2434

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Targeted Cancer Therapy

92. Livett BG, Sandall DW, Keays D, Down J, Gayler KR, Satkunanathan N, et al. Therapeutic applications of conotoxins that target the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Toxicon 2006;48:810–29.

93. Tu SH, Ku CY, Ho CT, Chen CS, Huang CS, Lee CH, et al. Tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits nicotine- and estrogen-induced alpha9-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor upregulation in human breast cancer cells. Mol Nutr Food Res 2010 [Epub ahead of print].

94. Jarzynka MJ, Guo P, Bar-Joseph I, Hu B, Cheng SY. Estradiol and nicotine exposure enhances A549 bronchioloalveolar carcinoma xenograft growth in mice through the stimulation of angiogenesis. Int J Oncol 2006;28:337–44.

95. Stabile LP, Davis AL, Gubish CT, Hopkins TM, Luketich JD, Christie N, et al. Human non-small cell lung tumors and cells derived from normal lung express both estrogen receptor alpha and beta and show biological responses to estrogen. Cancer Res 2002;62:2141–50.

96. Hershberger PA, Vasquez AC, Kanterewicz B, Land S, Siegfried JM, Nichols M. Regulation of endogenous gene expression in human non-small cell lung cancer cells by estrogen receptor ligands. Cancer Res 2005;65:1598–605.

97. Stabile LP, Lyker JS, Gubish CT, Zhang W, Grandis JR, Siegfried JM. Combined targeting of the estrogen receptor and the epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell lung cancer shows enhanced antiproliferative effects. Cancer Res 2005;65:1459–70.
