
Molecular Microbiology (2011) 80(6), 1420–1438

MicroReview

**Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli: even more subversive elements**

Alexander R. C. Wong,$^{1}$ Jaclyn S. Pearson$^{2}$, Michael D. Bright,$^{1}$ Diana Munera,$^{1}$ Keith S. Robinson,$^{1}$ Sau Fung Lee,$^{2}$ Gad Frankel$^{1}$ and Elizabeth L. Hartland$^{1*}$

$^{1}$Centre for Molecular Microbiology and Infection, Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

$^{2}$Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic. 3010, Australia.

---

### Summary

The human pathogens enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC and EHEC) share a unique mechanism of colonization that results from the concerted action of effector proteins translocated into the host cell by a type III secretion system (T3SS). EPEC and EHEC not only induce characteristic attaching and effacing (A/E) lesions, but also subvert multiple host cell signalling pathways during infection. Our understanding of the mechanisms by which A/E pathogens hijack host cell signalling has advanced dramatically in recent months with the identification of novel activities for many effectors. In addition to further characterization of established effectors (Tir, EspH and Map), new effectors have emerged as important mediators of virulence through activities such as mimicry of Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Map and EspM), inhibition of apoptosis (NleH and NleD), interference with inflammatory signalling pathways (NleB, NleC, NleE and NleH) and phagocytosis (EspF, EspH and EspJ). The findings have highlighted the multifunctional nature of the effectors and their ability to participate in redundant, synergistic or antagonistic relationships, acting in a co-ordinated spatial and temporal manner on different host organelles and cellular pathways during infection.

Accepted 5 April, 2011. *For correspondence. E-mail hartland@unimelb.edu.au; Tel. (+61) 3 8344 8041; Fax (+61) 3 9347 1540.*

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

---

### Introduction

Attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogens are a family of diarrhoeagenic pathogens that induce histopathological lesions, termed A/E lesions on the apical surface of host enterocytes (Fig. 1). This group includes the human pathogens enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) and enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* (EHEC), reviewed in (Nataro and Kaper, 1998; Robins-Browne and Hartland, 2002), and a number of animal pathogens such as the mouse-specific pathogen *Citrobacter rodentium* and rabbit-specific enteropathogenic *E. coli* (REPEC) (Barthold *et al.*, 1978; Schauer and Falkow, 1993; Robins-Browne *et al.*, 1994). EPEC is a cause of gastroenteritis in infants less than 2 years of age while EHEC causes bloody diarrhoea in children and the elderly. EHEC is distinguished from EPEC by the production of Shiga toxins that can cause severe kidney damage leading to the haemolytic uremic syndrome, a form of acute renal failure (Nataro and Kaper, 1998; Robins-Browne and Hartland, 2002). REPEC causes severe diarrhoea in susceptible animals, showing the same clinicopathological features, host, age and tissue specificity as strains of EPEC which infect humans (Robins-Browne *et al.*, 1994). By contrast, diarrhoea is not a strong feature of *C. rodentium* infection; rather *C. rodentium* causes mucosal hyperplasia where mortality results from secondary inflammatory responses and, in severe cases, rectal prolapse (Barthold *et al.*, 1978). These A/E pathogens all have distinct fimbrial and non-fimbrial adhesins that allow the bacteria to adhere to the gut surface to initiate A/E lesions.

Attaching and effacing lesions are a striking ultrastructural feature of infection where the bacteria adhere intimately to the host cell plasma membrane, destroy the enterocyte microvilli and induce cytoskeletal rearrangements beneath adherent bacteria, reviewed in (Frankel *et al.*, 1998). All A/E pathogens carry a pathogenicity island, the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) (Elliott *et al.*, 1998) (Fig. 1) that encodes gene regulators (Elliott *et al.*, 2000; Deng *et al.*, 2004), the adhesin, intimin (Jerse *et al.*, 1990), a type III secretion system (T3SS).

Fig. 1. Distinct histopathological lesions induced by attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogens.

A. Scanning electron micrograph of pedestals induced by adherent bacteria (arrows).

B. Transmission electron micrograph showing intestinal A/E lesions (arrow).

C. Diagram illustrating the genetic organization of the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) region from EPEC E2348/69.

(Jarvis et al., 1995; Elliott et al., 1998), chaperones (Abe et al., 1999; Elliott et al., 1999; Younis et al., 2010) and several secreted proteins, including the translocated intimin receptor, Tir (Kenny et al., 1997; Deibel et al., 1998; Elliott et al., 1999). Although there is some small variation among the LEE regions from different A/E pathogens, overall organization and gene content is highly conserved. Together with the T3SS apparatus itself, the secreted proteins, EspA, EspB and EspD form a translocon that is essential for protein secretion and the translocation of multiple LEE-encoded and non-LEE encoded effectors into the host cell (Knutton et al., 1998; Wachter et al., 1999; Hartland et al., 2000; Ide et al., 2001).

While the bacteria remain mostly extracellular in the lumen of the gut, the T3SS effectors of A/E pathogens access and manipulate the intracellular environment of host cells. The effectors subvert various host cell processes, which enable the bacteria to colonize, multiply and cause disease. A group of 21 core effectors, including all those encoded within LEE and a number of non-LEE

effectors, are shared by all A/E pathogens (Iguchi et al., 2009). However, the repertoire of the remaining non-LEE effectors varies widely in different EPEC and EHEC serotypes, suggesting that different isolates employ distinct, strain-specific infection strategies. Identifying and characterizing the biochemical functions of T3SS effectors and understanding how effector activity is co-ordinated is therefore critical to appreciating the molecular basis of host-pathogen interactions. The repertoire of EPEC/EHEC effectors, their localization, interacting partners and homologues are summarized in Table 1.

**Effector co-ordination: hierarchy of expression, secretion and translocation**

The complexity of the T3SS requires tight regulation to ensure functional spatial and temporal expression, secretion and translocation of the different components. Most of the LEE genes are organized in 5 operons (LEE1-5) (Fig. 1), expression of which is controlled through

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438

| Presence<sup>a</sup> | EHEC O157:H7 | EPEC O127:H6 | Subcellular localization | Homologues [BLASTp] | Cellular function | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| LEE encoded effectors |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| EspB | 1 | 1 | Cytosol, PM<sup>c</sup> | o-1-antitrypsin, o-catenin, Myosin-1c | Translocation pore component, AJ disruption, binds myosins to inhibit phagocytosis | (Kodama et al., 2002; Knappstein et al., 2004; Hamaguchi et al., 2008) |
| Tir | 1 | 1 | PM | 14-3-3tau, o-actin, cortactin, CK18, IQGAP1, IRTKS, IRSp53, Nck, PI3K, Talin, Vinculin | Receptor for the adhesion intimin, actin pedestal formation, downregulates Map-dependent filopodia formation, SGLT-1 inactivation | (Freeman et al., 2000; Goosney et al., 2000; Kenny et al., 2002; Gruenheid et al., 2001; Dean et al., 2004; Batchelor et al., 2006; Patel et al., 2006; Cantarelli et al., 2007; Brown et al., 2008; Berger et al., 2009; Nieto-Pelegrin and Martinez-Quiles, 2009; Sason et al., 2009; Selbach et al., 2009; Vingadassalom et al., 2009; Weiss et al., 2009) |
| EspF | 1 | 1 | Mitochondria, Cytosol, Nucleus, Tj<sup>d</sup>, Apical membrane, Lateral membrane | 14-3-3zeta, ABCF2, actin, Arp2, CK18, N-WASP, Profilin, SNX9, ZO-1/ZO-2 | Mitochondrial disruption, NHE3 inactivation, SGLT-1 inactivation, TJ disruption, disrupts nucleus, disrupts intermediate filaments, activates SNX9 to induce membrane remodelling, binds and activates N-WASP, inhibits P13K-dependent phagocytosis | (McNamara et al., 2001; Dean and Kenny, 2004; Viswanathan et al., Muza-Moons et al., 2004; Dean et al., 2006; 2010; Guttmann et al., 2006; Papatheodorou et al., 2006; Simpson et al., 2006; Marches et al., 2006; Quitard et al., 2007; Nougaryde et al., 2007; Alto et al., 2007; Hodges et al., 2008; Peralta-Ramirez et al., 2008; Thanabalasuriar et al., 2010a) |
| Map | 1 | 1 | Mitochondria | EBP50 (NHERF1), NHERF2, Cdc42 | Cdc42 GEF that induces transient filopodia formation, mitochondrial disruption, SGLT-1 inactivation, TJ disruption | (Dean and Kenny, 2004; Alto et al., 2006; Dean et al., 2006; Ma et al., 2006; Papatheodorou et al., 2006; Simpson et al., 2006; Huang et al., 2009; Martinez et al., 2010) |
| EspG | 2 | 1 | Cytosol, Golgi | Tubulin, Arf1/6, PAK1/2/3 | Disrupts microtubules, blocks ARF GTPase signalling and stimulates PAKs to inhibit endomembrane trafficking | (Matsuzawa et al., 2004; Hardwidge et al., 2005; Shaw et al., 2005; Tomson et al., 2005; Germaine and Spiller, 2011; Selyunin et al., 2011) |
| EspH | 1 | 1 | PM, Pedestal | DH-PH RhoGEFs | Blocks Rho GTPase signalling and FCyR-mediated phagocytosis, promotes actin pedestal length | (Tu et al., 2003; Dong et al., 2010) |
| EspZ | 1 | 1 | PM | CD98 | Enhances β1-integrin and FAK signalling to inhibit apoptosis and cellular cytotoxicity | (Shames et al., 2010) |
| Non-LEE encoded effectors |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| EspI/NleA | 1 | 1 | Golgi, PM | Syntrophin, Sec23/24, MALS3, PDZK11, SNX27, TCOF1, EBP50 (NHERF1), NHERF2, MAGI-3, SAP97, SAP102, PSD-95 | Inhibits COPII-dependent protein export from ER, TJ disruption | (Gruenheid et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2008; Thanabalasuriar et al., 2010a) |
| EspJ | 1 | 1 | Cytosol, Mitochondria | Unknown | Inhibits FCyR-mediated and CR3-mediated trans-phagocytosis | (Marches et al., 2008; Kurushima et al., 2010) |
| EspK | 0 | 1 | Unknown |  | HopF | Unknown | (Miyahara et al., 2009) |
| EspL | 3 (2) | 4 (1) | Pedestal |  | GogB OspD | Enhances F-actin bundling activity of Annexin 2 |  |

| Presence<sup>a</sup> | EHEC | Putative and known host binding partners/ substrates | Cellular function | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| T3SS effector | EPEC O127:H6 O157:H7 Sakai CR<sup>b</sup> ICC168 | Subcellular localization |  |  |
| EspM | 0 | 2 | Cytosol | RhoA GEF that induces stress fibre formation | (Arbeloa et al., 2008; 2010) |
| EspN | 0 | 1 | 3 (2) | Unknown | SARL_01330, SARL_01464, SeAg_B1500, CNF1 |
| EspO | 1 (1) | 2 | 1 | Unknown | Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) | Unknown | (Kim et al., 2009) |
| EspR | 0 | 4 (1) | 0 | Unknown | Unknown | Unknown |  |
| EspS | 0 | 0 | 1 | Unknown | Unknown | OspB | Unknown |  |
| EspT | 0 | 0 | 1 | Mitochondria | Unknown | IpgB, SopE | Activates Cdc42 and Rac1 that induces membrane ruffles and lamellipodia, promotes intracellular bacterial uptake via trigger mechanism | (Bulgín et al., 2009, 2010) |
| EspV | 0 | 1 (1) | 1 | Cytosol | Unknown | AvrA1 | Modulates cytoskeleton | (Arbeloa et al., 2011) |
| EspW | 0 | 1 | 0 | Unknown | Unknown | HopPmaA, HopW1 | Unknown | (Nadler et al., 2010; Newton et al., 2010) |
| EspX | 0 | 7 (1) | 1 | Unknown | Unknown | Sd1012_0237, SSON_0027 | Unknown | (Yen et al., 2010; Baruch et al., 2011; Mühlen et al., 2011; Pearson et al., 2011) |
| EspY | 0 | 5 (1) | 0 | Cytosol | Unknown | SopD | Metalloprotease that cleaves p65 (RelA), p50, c-Rel, IkB | Inhibits TNF-induced NF-kB activation (RelA), c-Rel, p50 and IkB to inhibit NF-kB activation |  |
| NleB | 3 (1) | 3 (1) | 2 (1) | Cytosol | Unknown | SseK AIP56 | Blocks IkB degradation to inhibit NF-kB activation | (Nadler et al., 2010; Newton et al., 2010; Vossenkamper et al., 2010) |
| NleC | 1 | 1 | 1 | Cytosol, Nucleus | Unknown | JNK | Metalloprotease that cleaves JNK to inhibit AP-1 activation | (Baruch et al., 2011) |
| NleD | 1 | 1 | 2 | Cytosol | Unknown | HopAP1, HopH1 | Unknown | (Wu et al., 2010) |
| NleE | 2 | 1 | 1 | Cytosol | Unknown | OspZ | U-box E3 ubiquitin ligase | (Gao et al., 2009; Hemrajani et al., 2010; Martinez et al., 2010; Royan et al., 2010; Wan et al., 2011) |
| NleF | 1 | 1 | 1 | Unknown | Unknown | None known UBE2D2 | Binds Bax-inhibitor 1 to block apoptosis, sequesters RPS3 to inhibit NF-kB signalling |  |
| NleG/NleI | 1 | 14 (5) | 5 (2) | Cytosol | Unknown | STY1076 | Enhances pedestal formation | (Cui et al., 2010; Jubelin et al., 2010; Morikawa et al., 2010) |
| NleH | 3 (1) | 2 | 1 | ER<sup>e</sup>, PM, Cytosol | Unknown | Bax-inhibitor 1, NHERF2, RPS3 | Inhibits CRL activity via NEDD8 deamidation to induce p21 and p27 accumulation and G(2)/G(1) cell cycle arrest |  |
| NleK | 0 | 0 | 1 | Unknown | Unknown | CHBP, Plu2515, Ypk19711, Pha4011 | NEDD8, Ubiquitin |  |
| Cif | 1 (1) | 0 | 0 | Nucleus | Unknown | STY1628 |  |
| Ibe | 0 | 0 | 0 | Cytosol | Unknown | IQGAP1 | OspB | Relieves N-WASP autoinhibition to trigger actin pedestal formation | (Buss et al., 2009) |
| TccP/EspFu | 0 | 2 (1) | 0 | Cytosol | Unknown | N-WASP, IRTKS, IRSp53, Cortactin | EspF |  |
| Total | 27 (6) | 62 (12) | 35 (6) |  |  |

a. Number of effector genes present in EPEC O127:H6 strain E2348/69, EHEC O157:H7 strain Sakai and C. rodentium strain ICC168 () indicates pseudogene.
b. Citrobacter rodentium.
c. PM, plasma membrane.
d. TJ, tight junction.
e. ER, endoplasmic reticulum.

1424 A. R. C. Wong et al.

complicated regulatory cascades involving cross-talk between bacterial, host and environmental factors (Hughes and Sperandio, 2008). The LEE-encoded regulator (Ler) is the main transcriptional regulator that by functioning as a repressor of LEE1 and activator of LEE2–LEE5 creates a negative feedback loop (Elliott *et al.*, 2000; Bustamante *et al.*, 2001; Berdichevsky *et al.*, 2005). The level of Ler within the bacterial cell is controlled by other transcriptional regulators that are activated in response to different environmental stimuli (Iyoda *et al.*, 2006; Russell *et al.*, 2007). Contact of EPEC/EHEC with host cells upregulates T3SS expression (Roe *et al.*, 2004; Brutinel and Yahr, 2008). Although the factors and mechanisms that mediate contact-dependent LEE gene expression are not clear, the fact that Hfq negatively regulates the T3SS of a variety of pathogens suggests that Hfq/sRNA complexes enable the bacterium to respond rapidly to changing environmental conditions such as interaction with the host plasma membrane (Shakhnovich *et al.*, 2009).

Upon cell contact the LEE-encoded translocators EspB and EspD are inserted into the plasma membrane of the host cell, forming a translocation pore (Hartland *et al.*, 2000; Daniell *et al.*, 2001; Ide *et al.*, 2001; Buttner and Bonas, 2002). The fact that EspB and EspD are required for the translocation of all the EPEC/EHEC effectors suggests a secretion hierarchy whereby translocators are directed to, and secreted by, the T3SS machinery prior to the effectors. T3SS substrates typically contain two secretion signals: a short (c. 20 amino acids) N-terminal motif and a chaperone-binding domain (Gauthier and Finlay, 2003; Ghosh, 2004). Importantly, the N-terminal secretion signal of effectors, as well as that of translocators, is both necessary and sufficient for the secretion and translocation of reporter proteins (Charpentier and Oswald, 2004; Munera *et al.*, 2010). Although it is unclear how the T3SS distinguishes between effectors and translocators, the LEE-encoded proteins SepD and SepL play a major role in this process. SepD and SepL form a complex at the bacterial inner membrane and may sense and respond to certain environmental signals such as low calcium (Creasey *et al.*, 2003; O’Connell *et al.*, 2004; Deng *et al.*, 2005). EPEC *sepD* and *sepL* mutants exhibit aberrant secretion profiles where translocators are absent and effectors are over-secreted. This suggests that the SepL/D complex functions as a checkpoint allowing translocation of effector proteins only once the translocon is fully assembled and functional (Deng *et al.*, 2005).

Translocation of different effectors into the host cell must also be tightly timed and co-ordinated. This is achieved at different levels, from the magnitude and timing of gene expression in the bacterial cell to a hierarchy of effector protein translocation. Indeed, real-time analysis of LEE-encoded effectors has revealed a distinct order of protein translocation (Mills *et al.*, 2008). Importantly, the concentration of the effectors within the bacterial cell, their interaction with intracellular chaperones and bacterial attachment to the host cell are all important parameters that regulate translocation efficiencies (Mills *et al.*, 2008). Moreover, since the activities of effectors can complement or antagonize each other, their spatial and temporal activity must also be controlled from within the host cells. Ubiquitination followed by proteasomal degradation (Kubori and Galan, 2003), protein phosphorylation (Kenny, 1999) and exploitation of scaffold proteins as intracellular distribution hubs (Martinez *et al.*, 2010) are a few examples by which bacterial pathogens co-ordinate spatial and temporal effector function in the host cell environment.

# Re-programming actin dynamics

## Tir-mediated actin polymerization and A/E lesion formation

Subversion of the host-cell actin cytoskeleton is central to the theme of T3SS-mediated virulence. EPEC/EHEC translocate the translocated intimin receptor (Tir) which, following integration into the plasma membrane, binds the bacterial outer membrane adhesin, intimin, through a surface exposed 55-amino-acid intimin binding domain (Kenny *et al.*, 1997; Hartland *et al.*, 1999; Kenny, 1999). In vitro studies have shown that Tir:intimin interaction results in Tir clustering and the initiation of downstream signalling events leading to the formation of actin-rich pedestals (Campellone *et al.*, 2004a). In EPEC, phosphorylation of Tir tyrosine residue 474 (*Y*~474~) by redundant host cell tyrosine kinases c-Fyn (Phillips *et al.*, 2004), Abl, Arg and Etk (Swimm *et al.*, 2004; Bommarius *et al.*, 2007) generates a binding site for the host cell adaptor protein Nck (Gruenheid *et al.*, 2001). Although it was originally believed that Nck then activates the neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP) to stimulate Arp2/3-mediated actin polymerization (Kenny, 1999; Gruenheid *et al.*, 2001) by binding to the proline-rich domain (PRD) (Rohatgi *et al.*, 2001), Lommel *et al.* have shown that in fact the PRD domain of N-WASP is dispensable for pedestal formation (Lommel *et al.*, 2001). Instead, another domain, the WASP-homology 1 (WH1) domain of N-WASP is essential for EPEC pedestal formation in vitro (Lommel *et al.*, 2001). WASP-interacting protein (WIP) (Ramesh *et al.*, 1997), a cytoskeletal protein that binds Nck and the WH1 domain of N-WASP (Fig. 2) (Anton *et al.*, 1998) has been proposed as the linker between Nck and N-WASP. However, dominant-negative WIP constructs do not abrogate pedestal formation (Lommel *et al.*, 2001). While the possible involvement of other unknown host cell adaptors or T3SS effectors cannot be excluded, our current understanding supports a model where the

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438

Actin Pedestal

EPEC EHEC

Filopodia

Membrane Ruffles/
Lamellipodia

Intimin

Tir

NPY

NPY<sub>454(EPEC)/458(EHEC)</sub>

WIP Nck

IRTKS/IRSp53

N-WASP

TccP/EspF<sub>u</sub>

N-WASP

Arp2/3

Arp2/3

EspT

Rac1

GDP

Rac1

GTP

IRS53

Abi1

WAVE2

Arp2/3

Invasion

EPEC

Intracellular Survival

Fig. 2. Diagram summarizing the effect of a subset of T3SS effectors from A/E pathogens on host cytoskeletal pathways and structures. See text for explanation. Green circles represent actin filaments.

Tir:Nck pathway recruits N-WASP via both WIP/WH1 and Nck/PRD interactions to synergistically trigger actin assembly, a process that is analogous to Vaccinia virus actin-based motility (Fig. 2) (Moreau et al., 2000; Zettl and Way, 2002; Weisswange et al., 2009).

EHEC Tir lacks Y<sub>474</sub>, and instead utilizes a conserved Asn-Pro-Tyr (NPY<sub>458</sub>) motif, which is also found in EPEC Tir as NPY<sub>454</sub>, to recruit the IRSp53/MIM proteins, IRTKS (Vingadassalom et al., 2009) and IRSp53 (Campellone and Leong, 2005; Brady et al., 2007; Weiss et al., 2009). The Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53 complex induces inefficient Nck-independent pedestal formation in EPEC (Campellone and Leong, 2005). This pathway is amplified in EHEC by the non-LEE effector TccP/EspF<sub>u</sub>, which contains an N-terminal secretion signal followed by multiple almost identical 47-amino-acid proline-rich repeats that bind IRTKS/IRSp53 (Vingadassalom et al., 2009) and the GTPase-binding domain (GBD) of N-WASP (Garmendia et al., 2004; Campellone et al., 2004b) (Fig. 2). Rather than mimicking Cdc42 activation, each TccP/EspF<sub>u</sub> repeat mimics an auto-inhibitory element within the GBD, thus competitively binding to the GBD to relieve N-WASP auto-inhibition, triggering actin polymerization via the Arp2/3 complex (Cheng et al., 2008; Sallee et al., 2008). While a minimum of 2 proline-rich repeat is required for pedestal formation, additional repeats act synergistically to enhance N-WASP activation and actin polymerization (Garmendia et al., 2006; Campellone et al., 2008). Interestingly, the Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53:TccP/EspF<sub>u</sub> pathway is also able to trigger Arp2/3-mediated actin polymerization independently of N-WASP (Vingadassalom et al., 2010), implying that additional host cell factors must also play a role in actin polymerization.

The Tir:Nck and Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53:TccP/EspF<sub>u</sub> pathways are conserved in EPEC belonging to lineage 1 and EHEC O157 respectively (Ogura et al., 2007; Whale et al., 2007). Somewhat unexpectedly, both pathways are active in most non-O157 EHEC strains and in EPEC strains belonging to lineage 2 as well as EPEC O119:H6 (Ogura et al., 2007; Whale et al., 2007), implying functional redundancy, reviewed in (Frankel and Phillips, 2008). Importantly, although Tir is essential for A/E lesion formation on mucosal surfaces and the pathways responsible for actin polymerization in cell lines *in vitro* appear to

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 80, 1420–1438

be under intense selective pressure, neither the Tir:Nck nor Tir:IRTKS/IRS$p53$:TccP/Esp$F_{\mathrm{u}}$ signalling complexes are necessary for A/E lesion formation or N-WASP recruitment during *C. rodentium* infection of mice (Crepin *et al.*, 2010), or EPEC infection of human intestinal *in vitro* organ cultures (IVOC) (Schuller *et al.*, 2007; Crepin *et al.*, 2010). In addition, TccP/Esp$F_{\mathrm{u}}$ contributes to colonization efficiency of EHEC in rabbits and gnotobiotic piglets, but is not essential for the development of A/E lesions (Ritchie *et al.*, 2008). Overall, these studies highlight the fact that our understanding of Tir-mediated actin signalling pathways *in vivo* is far from complete.

There is also increasing evidence that Tir-mediated actin signalling pathways are modulated by phosphoinositide (PI) metabolism, and this can be co-ordinated via additional Tir residues. Sason *et al.* (2009) revealed that EPEC Tir induces a shift from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)$P_2$] to phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate [PI(3,4,5)$P_3$] at the bacterial attachment site, and that this is dependent on the recruitment of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) via its phosphorylation of $Y_{454}$ (Sason *et al.*, 2009; Selbach *et al.*, 2009). Recent work by Smith *et al.* (2010) showed that Tir tyrosine residues $Y_{483}/Y_{511}$, which resemble immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs (ITIMs), recruit inositol-5-phosphatase SHIP2 to dephosphorylate PI(3,4,5)$P_3$ to make PI(3,4)$P_2$. Point mutations on $Y_{483}$/$Y_{511}$ or depletion of SHIP2 resulted in accumulation of PI(3,4,5)$P_3$, and a dramatic change in pedestal morphology to induce a ‘Medusa phenotype’ that is characterized by the formation of multiple irregular elongated pedestals under each bacterium (Smith *et al.*, 2010). Interestingly, EHEC possesses a similar ITIM, but does not recruit SHIP2 (Smith *et al.*, 2010). The role of phosphoinositide metabolism *in vivo* has also not been defined, and future work is warranted to further our understanding of the interplay between actin dynamics and membrane remodelling at the site of bacterial attachment.

found in less than 2% of EPEC and none of the EHEC strains tested (Arbeloa *et al.*, 2009). Map and EspM exhibit guanine exchange factor (GEF) activity towards Cdc42 (Huang *et al.*, 2009) and RhoA (Arbeloa *et al.*, 2010), respectively, thereby triggering formation of filopodia (Map) and stress fibres (EspM) (Alto *et al.*, 2006; Arbeloa *et al.*, 2008; Bulgin *et al.*, 2009). EspT activates both Cdc42 and Rac1 which trigger membrane ruffles and lamellipodia and EPEC-induced invasion (Bulgin *et al.*, 2009). By activating Cdc42, Map induces transient filopodia formation at bacterial attachment sites during the early stages of EPEC infection (Kenny *et al.*, 2002; Berger *et al.*, 2009). Filopodia retraction is dependent on Tir, either via a putative GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-like arginine finger motif (GLXR) present in the C-terminus, and/or by activation of Tir actin polymerization cascades (Kenny *et al.*, 2002; Berger *et al.*, 2009). The relevance of Map-mediated filopodia formation on cultured cells to *in vivo* infection is not yet known. The T3SS effector EspH is also implicated in modulating filopodia and pedestal dynamics. Deletion of *espH* results in prolonged filopodia formation concomitant with delayed pedestal formation, while overexpression of EspH results in pedestal elongation (Tu *et al.*, 2003). Recently, Dong *et al.* reported that EspH inactivates endogenous Dbl-homology and pleckstrinhomology (DH-PH) RhoGEFs by competitively binding to tandem DH-PH domains which inhibit Rho activation (Dong *et al.*, 2010). As bacterial GEFs do not share any sequence homology to DH-PH domains, and ectopic expression of EspH does not inhibit the activity of the translocated WxxxE EPEC/EHEC RhoGEFs (A.W., unpubl. data), it is tempting to speculate that EPEC/EHEC neutralizes endogenous RhoGEFs while injecting their own bacterial GEFs to hijack Rho GTPase signalling for the exclusive benefit of the pathogen.

EspT exemplifies this by utilizing the ‘trigger’ mechanism to promote EPEC invasion into non-phagocytic cells via Rac1-dependent membrane ruffle formation (Bulgin *et al.*, 2009). Intriguingly, internalized EPEC mobilizes Tir to the vacuolar membrane, forming intracellular actin-rich pedestals that contribute to intracellular bacterial survival (Bulgin *et al.*, 2009) (Fig. 2). EspT thus defines an invasive group of EPEC through its ability to manipulate Rho GTPase signalling pathways. EspV is the latest T3SS effector reported to modulate actin dynamics (Arbeloa *et al.*, 2011). *espV* is present in ~16% of EPEC and EHEC strains and expression of EspV in mammalian cells leads to drastic and unique morphological alterations, which are characterized by nuclear condensation, cell rounding and formation of actin-rich, dendrite-like projections (Arbeloa *et al.*, 2011). Thus, it appears that EspV modulates the actin cytoskeleton by a unique mechanism that is still undefined, and expands the activities of cytoskeleton-

Modulation of Rho GTPases

The recent characterization of the T3SS effectors, mitochondrial-associated protein (Map), EspM and EspT, has deepened our understanding of actin cytoskeletal manipulation by EPEC/EHEC beyond pedestal formation (Alto *et al.*, 2006; Bulgin *et al.*, 2010). Map, EspM and EspT belong to the WxxxE family of effectors also found in *Shigella* (IpgB1 and IpgB2) and *Salmonella* (SifA) (Alto *et al.*, 2006; Arbeloa *et al.*, 2008; Bulgin *et al.*, 2009). While carriage of *map* is completely conserved among EPEC and EHEC strains, a screen of ~1000 clinical and environmental isolates showed that *espM* is found in 50% of EPEC and EHEC strains while *espT* is
targeting T3SS effectors beyond Rho GTPase signalling and pedestal formation.

# Cross-talk between cytoskeletal networks

There is growing evidence of cross-talk between cytoskeletal networks other than actin during EPEC/EHEC infection. A prime example is the intermediate filaments CK8 and CK18, which are both recruited to the site of bacterial attachment (Batchelor *et al.*, 2004). Tir interacts with both CK18 (Batchelor *et al.*, 2004) and the 14-3-3tau isoform (Patel *et al.*, 2006), an adaptor protein that also binds CK18. Formation of the Tir:CK18:14-3-3tau complex is essential, as depletion of either CK18 or 14-3-3tau impaired pedestal formation (Batchelor *et al.*, 2004; Patel *et al.*, 2006). Interestingly, CK18 and the 14-3-3zeta isoform also bind EspF (Viswanathan *et al.*, 2004) and although EspF activates actin assembly, the functional significance of this is unknown (Alto *et al.*, 2007).

Another example of cross-talk is given by the effectors EspG/EspG2 which, along with the *Shigella* homologue VirA, belong to a class of proteins involved in localized microtubule disruption during infection (Yoshida *et al.*, 2002; Matsuzawa *et al.*, 2004; Hardwidge *et al.*, 2005; Shaw *et al.*, 2005; Tomson *et al.*, 2005). By destabilizing microtubules, EspG triggers the release of GEF-H1 into the cytosol, where it activates the RhoA-ROCK signalling pathway, resulting in the formation of actin stress fibres (Matsuzawa *et al.*, 2004). Intriguingly, EspG appears to possess a dual function where it forms a GTPase–kinase signalling complex with ARF1/6 and PAKs to regulate endomembrane trafficking (Germaine and Spiller, 2011; Selyunin *et al.*, 2011), demonstrating the extraordinary multi-functionality of T3SS effectors. In summary, our current understanding of EPEC/EHEC infection supports a model of cytoskeletal restructuring at the site of bacterial attachment where actin and intermediate filament components accumulate while microtubule components are depleted.

# Regulation of cell survival and apoptosis

During infection of intestinal epithelial cells, surface properties of EPEC/EHEC induce extrinsic apoptotic pathways (Abul-Milh *et al.*, 2001), while T3SS effectors such as EspF, Map and Cycle inhibitory factor (Cif) trigger intrinsic apoptotic pathways. EspF induces mitochondrial lysis, opens tight junctions and promotes degradation of anti-apoptotic proteins (McNamara *et al.*, 2001; Nougayrede and Donnenberg, 2004; Nougayrede *et al.*, 2007). Map disrupts tight junctions, triggers mitochondrial dysfunction and inactivates the sodium-dependent glucose co-transporter SGLT-1, affecting enterocyte fluid uptake (Kenny and Jepson, 2000; Dean and Kenny, 2004; Dean *et al.*, 2006; Ma *et al.*, 2006). Cif arrests the host cell cycle at G1/S and G2/M, inhibits protein ubiquitination and stabilizes cell cycle inhibitory proteins p21<sup>waf1</sup> and p27<sup>kip1</sup>, thereby inducing a delayed form of apoptosis (Marches *et al.*, 2003; Taieb *et al.*, 2006; Samba-Louaka *et al.*, 2008; 2009). Interestingly, although EPEC/EHEC-mediated cell death exhibits early-stage apoptosis (exposure of phosphatidylserine on the cell surface and DNA cleavage), late-stage apoptotic features (membrane blebbing, cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation) are not evident (Crane *et al.*, 1999; 2001; Hemrajani *et al.*, 2010).

The antagonism of pro-apoptotic effects by EPEC/EHEC is mediated by the translocation of anti-apoptotic effectors such as NleH and NleD. EPEC/EHEC harbour two NleH effectors, NleH1 and NleH2, which share a high degree of similarity, including a conserved kinase active site and a PDZ-binding motif that interacts with the PDZ domain of NHERF2 (Perna *et al.*, 2001; Hemrajani *et al.*, 2008; Gao *et al.*, 2009; Iguchi *et al.*, 2009; Martinez *et al.*, 2010; Petty *et al.*, 2010). Overexpression of NHERF2 appears to sequester NleH and hinder its anti-apoptotic capacity. Indeed, NHERF2 also binds the PDZ motifs of Espl and Map, suggesting that it acts as a cellular hub at the plasma membrane for effector distribution (Martinez *et al.*, 2010). Remarkably, both NleH effectors block multiple intrinsic apoptotic pathways, including cell death induced by the global kinase inhibitor staurosporine and *Clostridium difficile* toxin B (Hemrajani *et al.*, 2010; Robinson *et al.*, 2010). This ability appears to be largely due to the interaction of NleH1 and NleH2 with the anti-apoptotic protein, Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) (Hemrajani *et al.*, 2010) (BI-1 is reviewed in Robinson *et al.*, 2011) (Fig. 3). The NleH effectors therefore promote overall cell survival and inhibit enterocyte loss to promote sustained colonization by EPEC/EHEC.

Recently, NleD was described as a zinc metalloprotease that cleaves JNK, thereby compromising activity of the transcriptional regulator, AP-1, which regulates cell death, differentiation and proliferation (Baruch *et al.*, 2011). NleD-mediated cleavage of JNK influences inflammatory responses (see below), but also inhibits the pro-apoptotic activity of JNK. Thus, NleD may complement the activities of NleH to protect infected cells from the activation of pro-death pathways.

EspZ is an additional effector that promotes cell survival and maintenance of the epithelium. Infection of cell monolayers with an EPEC ΔespZ mutant results in strong cytotoxicity. EspZ interacts with the host cell protein CD98, which enhances β1-integrin and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signalling (Shames *et al.*, 2010). *In vivo*, *C. rodentium* ΔespZ mutants are severely attenuated exhibiting markedly reduced colonization (Deng *et al.*, 2004).

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438
PAMPs
IL-1β
TNF

EPEC/EHEC

TLRS
IL-1R1

MyD88
IRAK
TRAF6

NleB

TAB1/2
TAK

JNK, p38
NleD

AP-1
NleH1
RPS3

NleC
p65
p50

IkBa

NleE

IKK

Complex I

RIP
TRADD
TRAF2

FAK

EspZ
Map
EspF

CD98
β1-Integrin

Procaspace-8/10

Complex II

Apoptosis

NleH1/2
BI-1

ER

Mitochondrial
Disruption

TJ Disruption

Inflammatory Cytokines

Nucleus

Fig. 3. Diagram summarizing the effect of a subset of T3SS effectors from A/E pathogens on host cell signalling pathways, including inflammation and apoptosis. See text for explanation. TJ is tight junction, ER is endoplasmic reticulum.

Therefore, the role of EspZ may be to stabilize the epithelium during bacterial colonization, thereby reducing the cytotoxic effect of bacterial infection (Shames et al., 2010). Interestingly, the Shigella flexneri effector OspE, which shares homology with EPEC/EHEC EspO, has been shown to promote host cell adherence by interacting with integrin-linked kinase (ILK) to stabilize focal adhesions (Kim et al., 2009). In concert with the EPEC/EHEC anti-apoptotic effectors, effectors such as EspZ and EspO that promote cell adherence and epithelial integrity are emerging as fundamentally important in pathogenesis.

### Counteracting phagocytosis

Phagocytosis is the process by which cells of the immune system internalize and destroy bacteria and other targets. The best characterized phagocytic pathways are via the FCγ receptor (FCγR) or complement receptor (CR3), which mediate the phagocytosis of particles opsonized with immunoglobulin G (IgG) or the complement protein fragment C3bi respectively (Caron and Hall, 1998). Non-opsonized microorganisms can also be phagocytosed via diverse receptors including Toll like receptor 2 (TLR2) (Shen et al., 2010), the scavenger and mannose receptors (Zhang et al., 2005) and P2X7 (Gu et al., 2010). Infection of macrophages with EPEC/EHEC inhibits uptake of non-opsonized bacteria and IgG or C3bi-opsonized particles, suggesting that EPEC/EHEC infection paralyses general phagocytic mechanisms.

Although EspB plays a critical role as a component of the T3SS translocon, the effector itself is also translocated (Taylor et al., 1998). EspB targets myosin function by binding the actin binding domains of multiple myosin family members (izumi et al., 2007). Myosins are believed to provide force for phagosome closure during phagocytosis and multiple isoforms associate with phagocytic cups (Cox et al., 2002; Diakonova et al., 2002). EPEC expressing EspB lacking the myosin-binding domain lose their ability to inhibit their own uptake (izumi et al., 2007). Another effector considered to be indispensable for inhibiting the phagocytosis of non-opsonized bacteria is EspF. EPEC espF mutants are phagocytosed to
the same extent as EPEC lacking a functional T3SS (Quitard *et al.*, 2006; Marches *et al.*, 2008). While the mechanism of EspF inhibition of phagocytosis remains elusive, some functions can be inferred from EspF binding partners. The anti-phagocytic activity of EspF lies within the N-terminal 101 residues (Quitard *et al.*, 2006). Within this region are binding sites for actin, profilin and sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) (Alto *et al.*, 2007; Peralta-Ramirez *et al.*, 2008). The importance of actin for phagocytosis is well established, and profilin is an actin binding protein that is recruited to FCγR-mediated phagocytic cups (Coppolino *et al.*, 2001). However, EspF does not inhibit opsonophagocytosis (Marches *et al.*, 2008), which requires these host cell components, so these interactions are probably not key to the antiphagocytic mechanism of EspF. In fact, paradoxically, the interaction of EspF with SNX9 promotes the formation of membrane tubules, membrane remodelling and bacterial invasion of epithelial cells (Weflen *et al.*, 2010). Whether the EspF–SNX9 interaction inhibits uptake by phagocytes remains to be determined.

EspH has emerged recently as an inhibitor of phagocytosis, most likely mediated by its ability to bind and inhibit DH-PH domain-containing Rho GEFs (Dong *et al.*, 2010). Rho GTPases control cytoskeletal remodelling during phagocytosis and contribute to FCγR- and CR3-mediated uptake (Caron and Hall, 1998). EPEC *espH* mutants lose their ability to inhibit phagocytosis through the FCγR (Dong *et al.*, 2010). Uniquely, EspJ inhibits both FCγR and CR3-mediated pathways (Marches *et al.*, 2008). EPEC *espJ* mutants are unable to block opsonophagocytosis, although uptake of non-opsonized bacteria is still inhibited. The mechanism by which EspJ inhibits phagocytosis is unknown, and host interacting partners remain to be defined. While translocated EspJ localizes to mitochondria (Kurushima *et al.*, 2010), this does not preclude a role for EspJ at the phagocytic cup. For example, EspF mainly localizes to mitochondria, but also has a function at bacterial attachment sites (Quitard *et al.*, 2006). The apparent targeting of multiple uptake pathways suggests the anti-phagocytic effectors cooperate to exclude EPEC/EHEC from the intracellular environment in professional phagocytes. A key aspect of future work should address how the anti-phagocytic EPEC/EHEC effectors cooperate and whether they modulate the localization or activity of functionally similar host proteins.

### Disarming the inflammatory response

EPEC and EHEC infection ultimately results in the induction of an inflammatory response via host recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), most predominantly flagellin (Khan *et al.*, 2008; Schuller *et al.*, 2009). As a result, TLR signalling is initiated followed by activation of inflammatory signalling factors such as

nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB) reviewed in (Li and Verma, 2002). The most abundant form of activated NF-κB in mammalian tissues is a dimer of p50 and p65, which is held in an inactive form in the cytoplasm by a family of inhibitory proteins called inhibitors of NF-κB (IκB). Activation of NF-κB occurs upon phosphorylation of IκB by the IκB kinase complex (Iκκ), and the subsequent ubiquitination and degradation of IκB by the cell proteasome (Perkins, 2007). This releases the p65/p50 dimer which translocates to the nucleus and binds NF-κB consensus sites thereby activating the expression of multiple cytokine genes including *IL8*, encoding interleukin-8 (IL-8) (Li and Verma, 2002).

In the initial stages of infection, EPEC/EHEC inhibit inflammatory cytokine production and NF-κB activation (Sharma *et al.*, 2006; Ruchaud-Sparagano *et al.*, 2007; Nobe *et al.*, 2009). Recent work has demonstrated that EPEC encodes a set of effector proteins (NleE, NleB, NleC, NleD and NleH) that specifically target components of inflammatory signalling. The concerted activity of the effectors prevents host cells from mounting an effective inflammatory response (Nadler *et al.*, 2010; Newton *et al.*, 2010; Vossenkamper *et al.*, 2010; Yen *et al.*, 2010; Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Muehlen *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011)

NleE is a highly conserved 27 kDa effector of A/E pathogens that is shared by *Shigella* where it is termed OspZ (Zurawski *et al.*, 2008). NleE plays a key role in modulating the innate immune response during EPEC and EHEC infection by specifically blocking the translocation of activated NF-κB to the host cell nucleus, thereby causing a decrease in the expression and production of IL-8. This effect is seen in both epithelial cells and dendritic cells (Nadler *et al.*, 2010; Newton *et al.*, 2010; Vossenkamper *et al.*, 2010). Although the mechanism by which p65 nuclear translocation is blocked is not clear, NleE prevents IκB degradation in response to tumour necrosis factor α (TNF) or IL-1β suggesting that the effector targets components shared by these inflammatory signalling pathways. One proposed mechanism is that NleE prevents Iκκ phosphorylation, although a direct interaction is yet to be shown (Nadler *et al.*, 2010) (Fig. 3). A 6-amino-acid motif IDSYMK<sub>209–214</sub> is critical for the immunosuppressive function of NleE, but whether this motif is involved in direct interactions with NF-κB signalling factors is yet to be determined (Newton *et al.*, 2010).

The NleB family of effectors are found on two pathogenicity islands (IE6 and PP4) encoding genes for *nleB1* and *nleB2* respectively. NleB1 and NleB2 are 38 kDa proteins conserved across A/E pathogens, with the exception of *C. rodentium* which carries only a single copy of the gene (Kelly *et al.*, 2006; Petty *et al.*, 2010). NleB1 from EPEC appears as effective as NleE at inhibiting NF-κB activation in response to TNF but not IL-1β, suggesting that NleB1

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438and NleE act at different points in the NF-κB signalling pathway (Newton *et al.*, 2010) (Fig. 3). Similar to NleE, the mechanism by which NleB1 inhibits the TNF pathway is unknown. Given the high degree of similarity between NleB1 and NleB2 from EHEC and EPEC, it would be surprising if these effectors were not functionally conserved; however, this has not yet been investigated.

NleC was recently identified as an effector protease of EPEC and EHEC that cleaves and inactivates the NF-κB p65 subunit (Yen *et al.*, 2010; Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Muehlen *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011). Ectopically expressed NleC or NleC translocated by the T3SS degrade p65, p50 and c-Rel but not STAT1 or Erk, suggesting specificity for the Rel family of signalling components (Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011). NleC contains a consensus zinc metalloprotease motif ${}_{183}$HEIIH${}_{187}$ that is responsible for the proteolytic activity of the enzyme. Mutagenesis of the motif abrogates the ability of NleC to degrade p65 and p50 (Yen *et al.*, 2010; Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Muehlen *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011). NleC appears to follow the activity of NleE, as p65 degradation in HeLa cells by wild-type EPEC is not seen until 6 hours after infection (Pearson *et al.*, 2011). In addition, the activity of NleC appears to be largely in the nucleus where p65/p50 is translocated upon release from IκB (Baruch *et al.*, 2011) (Fig. 3). While infection with an EPEC Δ*nleC* mutant does not result in increased IL-8 production, presumably due to functional redundancy with NleE (Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011), infection with an EPEC Δ*nleEC* double mutant or an EPEC Δ*nleBEC* triple mutant results in significantly higher IL-8 production by host cells compared with infection with EPEC Δ*nleE* or EPEC Δ*nleBE* alone (Baruch *et al.*, 2011; Pearson *et al.*, 2011). Thus, NleC appears to complement the activities of NleE and NleB by eliminating unbound and activated p65/p50 that would positively influence target gene transcription. The apparent redundancy in function between NleE and NleC may also explain why previous reports have failed to find a strong phenotype associated with either an *nleE* or *nleC* mutant during *C. rodentium* infection of mice (Marches *et al.*, 2005; Kelly *et al.*, 2006; Wickham *et al.*, 2007). NleD also harbours a consensus zinc metalloprotease motif, ${}_{142}$HELLH${}_{146}$. The NleD protease effector specifically cleaves JNK and p38 MAP kinases, thereby inactivating the AP-1 transcription factor, which regulates multiple cell processes including, inflammation, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis (Baruch *et al.*, 2011). Infection with an EPEC *nleBECD* quadruple deletion mutant results in increased IL-8 production compared with an *nleBEC* triple mutant and this is partially restored upon complementation with *nleD* (Baruch *et al.*, 2011).

NleH1 and NleH2 have clear roles in inhibiting host cell apoptosis; however, these effectors also suppress NF-κB activation. The recently discovered non-Rel NF-κB subunit, RPS3, a KH domain protein that regulates NF-κB dependent transcription is a newly described binding partner of NleH (Wan *et al.*, 2007; 2011; Gao *et al.*, 2009). NleH1 but not NleH2 reduces the nuclear abundance of RPS3 with no effect on other NF-κB signalling factors. In fact, the N-terminal region of NleH1 is sufficient to perform this function (Gao *et al.*, 2009). The NleH effectors also share significant sequence similarity with the *Shigella* effector OspG, a Ser/Thr protein kinase which prevents ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of phospho-IκB and downstream activation of NF-κB (Kim *et al.*, 2005). Similar to OspG, NleH1 and NleH2 are autophosphorylated Ser/Thr protein kinases; however, their kinase activity is independent of their interaction with RPS3 (Gao *et al.*, 2009). NleH1 and NleH2 also suppress TNF-induced IκBα degradation by interfering with phospho-IκB ubiquitination, which is dependent on conserved lysine residues K159 and K169 in NleH1 and NleH2 from EPEC respectively (Royan *et al.*, 2010) (Fig. 3). Together, NleE, NleB, NleC, NleD and NleH implement a complex but co-ordinated attack on inflammatory signalling, which presumably allows the bacteria to establish infection and avoid immediate elimination by the host innate immune response.

### EPEC/EHEC-induced diarrhoea

The precise mechanisms by which EPEC and EHEC cause diarrhoea are elusive but the development of diarrhoea is closely related to bacterial load and disease probably results from a combination of factors, including microvillus effacement, dysregulated ion and glucose transport, inhibition of water absorption channels (aquaporins), disruption of epithelial tight junctions and inflammatory changes in the gut (reviewed in Viswanathan *et al.*, 2009). Several effector proteins have been implicated in the ability of EPEC and EHEC to alter ion transport in the gut and disrupt epithelial barrier function, including Map, EspF and EspG (Viswanathan *et al.*, 2009) and more recently EspM and Espl (Simovitch *et al.*, 2010; Thanabalasuriar *et al.*, 2010a). The effect of EPEC and EHEC on tight junctions and ion transport is probably the result of effector activity on diverse cellular processes such as protein secretion and membrane trafficking (Espl, EspG), cytoskeletal function (Map, EspM) and/or direct inhibition of ion transport (EspF) (Kim *et al.*, 2007; Hodges *et al.*, 2008; Simovitch *et al.*, 2010; Thanabalasuriar *et al.*, 2010a; Selyunin *et al.*, 2011). The mechanism of Espl-dependent disruption of tight junctions is likely related to the ability of Espl to bind Sec24 and inhibit COPII vesicle function and therefore protein secretion (Kim *et al.*, 2007; Lee *et al.*, 2008); however, the Espl PDZ-binding motif is dispensable for this activity (Thanabalasuriar *et al.*, 2010b).2010b). EspF-dependent diarrhoea has been attributed to the down regulation of sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 (NHE) activity which is independent of SNX9 binding or the role of EspF in apoptosis (Hodges *et al.*, 2008). Notably, few of the effector proteins have been studied *in vivo* using REPEC infection of rabbits, the most representative small animal model of A/E pathogen-induced diarrhoea (Robins-Browne *et al.*, 1994). Hence the combined activity of the effectors and their contribution to diarrhoea is incompletely understood and warrants further research using appropriate models of disease.

### Conclusions

Recent advances in characterizing the biochemical functions of T3SS effectors from A/E pathogens have revealed a highly evolved bacterium that exerts exquisite control over its host, targeting multiple pathways and structures in an organized and deliberate manner. While inflicting this co-ordinated assault, a subset of the effectors ensures that infected cells, and thus their associated bacteria, remain alive. This cellular protection is central to successful multiplication and colonization by the pathogen. Until recently, the biochemical functions of only a handful of T3SS effectors were known, mainly those involved in cytoskeletal reorganization and disruption of tight junctions. It is now evident that A/E pathogens are remarkably versatile pathogens that target numerous cell organelles and pathways to gain an advantage over the host. Diverse effector complements allow individual EPEC and EHEC strains to deploy varied infection strategies, enabling A/E pathogens to infect different tissues and hosts and survive in diverse environments and animal reservoirs. A/E pathogen-induced disease is thus the cumulative outcome of a repertoire of effector proteins that perturb different facets of host physiology.

### Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants awarded to E.L.H. from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and to G.F. from the Wellcome Trust and Medical Research Council (MRC). E.L.H. is supported by an Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship. J.S.P. is supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award.

### References

Abe, A., de Grado, M., Pfuetzner, R.A., Sanchez-Sanmartin, C., Devinney, R., Puente, J.L., *et al.* (1999) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* translocated intimin receptor, Tir, requires a specific chaperone for stable secretion. *Mol Microbiol* **33**: 1162–1175.

Abul-Milh, M., Wu, Y., Lau, B., Lingwood, C.A., and Barnett Foster, D. (2001) Induction of epithelial cell death including apoptosis by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* expressing bundle-forming pili. *Infect Immun* **69**: 7356–7364.

Alto, N.M., Shao, F., Lazar, C.S., Brost, R.L., Chua, G., Mattoo, S., *et al.* (2006) Identification of a bacterial type III effector family with G protein mimicry functions. *Cell* **124**: 133–145.

Alto, N.M., Weflen, A.W., Rardin, M.J., Yarar, D., Lazar, C.S., Tonikian, R., *et al.* (2007) The type III effector EspF coordinates membrane trafficking by the spatiotemporal activation of two eukaryotic signaling pathways. *J Cell Biol* **178**: 1265–1278.

Anton, I.M., Lu, W., Mayer, B.J., Ramesh, N., and Geha, R.S. (1998) The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-interacting protein (WIP) binds to the adaptor protein Nck. *J Biol Chem* **273**: 20992–20995.

Arbeloa, A., Bulgin, R.R., MacKenzie, G., Shaw, R.K., Pallen, M.J., Crepin, V.F., *et al.* (2008) Subversion of actin dynamics by EspM effectors of attaching and effacing bacterial pathogens. *Cell Microbiol* **10**: 1429–1441.

Arbeloa, A., Blanco, M., Moreira, F.C., Bulgin, R., Lopez, C., Dahbi, G., *et al.* (2009) Distribution of espM and espT among enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. *J Med Microbiol* **58**: 988–995.

Arbeloa, A., Garnett, J., Lillington, J., Bulgin, R.R., Berger, C.N., Lea, S.M., *et al.* (2010) EspM2 is a RhoA guanine nucleotide exchange factor. *Cell Microbiol* **12**: 654–664.

Arbeloa, A., Oates, C.V., Marches, O., Hartland, E.L., and Frankel, G. (2011) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* type III secretion effector EspV induces radical morphological changes in eukaryotic cells. *Infect Immun* **79**: 1067–1076.

Barthold, S.W., Coleman, G.L., Jacoby, R.O., Livestone, E.M., and Jonas, A.M. (1978) Transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia. *Vet Pathol* **15**: 223–236.

Baruch, K., Gur-Arie, L., Nadler, C., Koby, S., Yerushalmi, G., Ben-Neria, Y., *et al.* (2011) Metalloprotease type III effectors that specifically cleave JNK and NF-kappaB. *EMBO J* **30**: 221–231.

Batchelor, M., Guignot, J., Patel, A., Cummings, N., Cleary, J., Knutton, S., *et al.* (2004) Involvement of the intermediate filament protein cytokeratin-18 in actin pedestal formation during EPEC infection. *EMBO Rep* **5**: 219.

Berdichevsky, T., Friedberg, D., Nadler, C., Rokney, A., Oppenheim, A., and Rosenshine, I. (2005) Ler is a negative autoregulator of the LEE1 operon in enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* **187**: 349–357.

Berger, C.N., Crepin, V.F., Jepson, M.A., Arbeloa, A., and Frankel, G. (2009) The mechanisms used by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* to control filopodia dynamics. *Cell Microbiol* **11**: 309–322.

Bommarius, B., Maxwell, D., Swimm, A., Leung, S., Corbett, A., Bornmann, W., and Kalman, D. (2007) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir is an SH2/3 ligand that recruits and activates tyrosine kinases required for pedestal formation. *Mol Microbiol* **63**: 1748–1768.

Brady, M.J., Campellone, K.G., Ghildiyal, M., and Leong, J.M. (2007) Enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir proteins trigger a common Nck-independent actin assembly pathway. *Cell Microbiol* **9**: 2242–2253.

Brown, M.D., Bry, L., Li, Z., and Sacks, D.B. (2008) Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* is

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438
regulated by IQGAP1, calcium, and calmodulin. *J Biol Chem* 283: 35212–35222.

Brutinel, E.D., and Yahr, T.L. (2008) Control of gene expression by type III secretory activity. *Curr Opin Microbiol* 11: 128–133.

Bulgín, R., Arbeloa, A., Goulding, D., Dougan, G., Crepin, V.F., Raymond, B., and Frankel, G. (2009) The T3SS effector EspT defines a new category of invasive enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC) which form intracellular actin pedestals. *PLoS Pathog* 5: e1000683.

Bulgín, R., Raymond, B., Garnett, J.A., Frankel, G., Crepin, V.F., Berger, C.N., and Arbeloa, A. (2010) Bacterial guanine nucleotide exchange factors SopE-like and WxxxE effectors. *Infect Immun* 78: 1417–1425.

Buss, C., Müller, D., Rüter, C., Heusipp, G., and Schmidt, M.A. (2009) Identification and characterization of Ibe, a novel type III effector protein of A/E pathogens targeting human IQGAP1. *Cell Microbiol* 11: 661–677.

Bustamante, V.H., Santana, F.J., Calva, E., and Puente, J.L. (2001) Transcriptional regulation of type III secretion genes in enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*: Ler antagonizes H-NS-dependent repression. *Mol Microbiol* 39: 664–678.

Buttner, D., and Bonas, U. (2002) Port of entry – the type III secretion translocon. *Trends Microbiol* 10: 186–192.

Campellone, K.G., and Leong, J.M. (2005) Nck-independent actin assembly is mediated by two phosphorylated tyrosines within enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir. *Mol Microbiol* 56: 416–432.

Campellone, K.G., Rankin, S., Pawson, T., Kirschner, M.W., Tipper, D.J., and Leong, J.M. (2004a) Clustering of Nck by a 12-residue Tir phosphopeptide is sufficient to trigger localized actin assembly. *J Cell Biol* 164: 407–416.

Campellone, K.G., Robbins, D., and Leong, J.M. (2004b) EspFU is a translocated EHEC effector that interacts with Tir and N-WASP and promotes Nck-independent actin assembly. *Dev Cell* 7: 217–228.

Campellone, K.G., Cheng, H.C., Robbins, D., Siripala, A.D., McGhie, E.J., Hayward, R.D., *et al.* (2008) Repetitive N-WASP-binding elements of the enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* effector EspF(U) synergistically activate actin assembly. *PLoS Pathog* 4: e1000191.

CantarelI, V.V., Kodama, T., Nijstad, N., Abolghait, S.K., Nada, S., Okada, M., *et al.* (2007) Tyrosine phosphorylation controls cortactin binding to two enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* effectors: Tir and EspFu/TccP. *Cell Microbiol* 9: 1782–1795.

Caron, E., and Hall, A. (1998) Identification of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases. *Science* 282: 1717–1721.

Charpentier, X., and Oswald, E. (2004) Identification of the secretion and translocation domain of the enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* effector Cif, using TEM-1 beta-lactamase as a new fluorescence-based reporter. *J Bacteriol* 186: 5486–5495.

Cheng, H.C., Skehan, B.M., Campellone, K.G., Leong, J.M., and Rosen, M.K. (2008) Structural mechanism of WASP activation by the enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* effector EspF(U). *Nature* 454: 1009–1013.

Coppolino, M.G., Krause, M., Hagendorff, P., Monner, D.A., Trimble, W., Grinstein, S., *et al.* (2001) Evidence for a molecular complex consisting of Fyb/SLAP, SLP-76, Nck,

VASP and WASP that links the actin cytoskeleton to Fcgamma receptor signalling during phagocytosis. *J Cell Sci* 114: 4307–4318.

Cox, D., Berg, J.S., Cammer, M., Chinegwundoh, J.O., Dale, B.M., Cheney, R.E., and Greenberg, S. (2002) Myosin X is a downstream effector of PI(3)K during phagocytosis. *Nat Cell Biol* 4: 469–477.

Crane, J.K., Majumdar, S., and Pickhardt, D.F., 3rd (1999) Host cell death due to enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* has features of apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 67: 2575–2584.

Crane, J.K., McNamara, B.P., and Donnenberg, M.S. (2001) Role of EspF in host cell death induced by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Cell Microbiol* 3: 197–211.

Creasey, E.A., Delahay, R.M., Bishop, A.A., Shaw, R.K., Kenny, B., Knutton, S., and Frankel, G. (2003) CesT is a bivalent enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* chaperone required for translocation of both Tir and Map. *Mol Microbiol* 47: 209–221.

Crepin, V.F., Girard, F., Schuller, S., Phillips, A.D., Mousnier, A., and Frankel, G. (2010) Dissecting the role of the Tir:Nck and Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53 signalling pathways in vivo. *Mol Microbiol* 75: 308–323.

Cui, J., Yao, Q., Li, S., Ding, X., Lu, Q., Mao H., *et al.* (2010) Glutamine deamidation and dysfunction of ubiquitin/NEDD8 induced by a bacterial effector family. *Science* 329: 1215–1218.

Daniell, S.J., Takahashi, N., Wilson, R., Friedberg, D., RosenShine, I., Booy, F.P., *et al.* (2001) The filamentous type III secretion translocon of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Cell Microbiol* 3: 865–871.

Dean, P., and Kenny, B. (2004) Intestinal barrier dysfunction by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* is mediated by two effector molecules and a bacterial surface protein. *Mol Microbiol* 54: 665–675.

Dean, P., Maresca, M., Schuller, S., Phillips, A.D., and Kenny, B. (2006) Potent diarrheagenic mechanism mediated by the cooperative action of three enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*-injected effector proteins. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 103: 1876–1881.

Dean, P., Scott, J.A., Knox, A.A., Quitard, S., Watkins, N.J., and Kenny, B. (2010) The enteropathogenic *E. coli* effector EspF targets and disrupts the nucleolus by a process regulated by mitochondrial dysfunction. *PLoS Pathog* 6: e1000961.

Deibel, C., Kramer, S., Chakraborty, T., and Ebel, F. (1998) EspE, a novel secreted protein of attaching and effacing bacteria, is directly translocated into infected host cells, where it appears as a tyrosine-phosphorylated 90 kDa protein. *Mol Microbiol* 28: 463–474.

Deng, W., Puente, J.L., Gruenheid, S., Li, Y., Vallance, B.A., Vazquez, A., *et al.* (2004) Dissecting virulence: systematic and functional analyses of a pathogenicity island. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 101: 3597–3602.

Deng, W., Li, Y., Hardwidge, P.R., Frey, E.A., Pfuetzner, R.A., Lee, S., *et al.* (2005) Regulation of type III secretion hierarchy of translocators and effectors in attaching and effacing bacterial pathogens. *Infect Immun* 73: 2135–2146.

Diakonova, M., Bokoch, G., and Swanson, J.A. (2002) Dynamics of cytoskeletal proteins during Fcgamma receptor-mediated phagocytosis in macrophages. *Mol Biol Cell* 13: 402–411.

Dong, N., Liu, L., and Shao, F. (2010) A bacterial effector targets host DH-PH domain RhoGEFs and antagonizes macrophage phagocytosis. *EMBO J* 29: 1363–1376.

Elliott, S.J., Wainwright, L.A., McDaniel, T.K., Jarvis, K.G., Deng, Y.K., Lai, L.C., *et al.* (1998) The complete sequence of the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) from enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* E2348/69. *Mol Microbiol* 28: 1–4.

Elliott, S.J., Hutcheson, S.W., Dubois, M.S., Mellies, J.L., Wainwright, L.A., Batchelor, M., *et al.* (1999) Identification of CesT, a chaperone for the type III secretion of Tir in enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Mol Microbiol* 33: 1176–1189.

Elliott, S.J., Sperandio, V., Giron, J.A., Shin, S., Mellies, J.L., Wainwright, L., *et al.* (2000) The locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE)-encoded regulator controls expression of both LEE- and non-LEE-encoded virulence factors in enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. *Infect Immun* 68: 6115–6126.

Frankel, G., and Phillips, A.D. (2008) Attaching effacing *Escherichia coli* and paradigms of Tir-triggered actin polymerization: getting off the pedestal. *Cell Microbiol* 10: 549–556.

Frankel, G., Phillips, A.D., Rosenshine, I., Dougan, G., Kaper, J.B., and Knutton, S. (1998) Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*: more subversive elements. *Mol Microbiol* 30: 911–921.

Freeman, N.L., Zurawski, D.V., Chowrashi, P., Ayoob, J.C., Huang, L., Mittal, B., *et al.* (2000) Interaction of the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* protein, translocated intimin receptor (Tir), with focal adhesion proteins. *Cell Motil Cytoskeleton* 47: 307–318.

Gao, X., Wan, F., Mateo, K., Callegari, E., Wang, D., Deng, W., *et al.* (2009) Bacterial effector binding to ribosomal protein s3 subverts NF-kappaB function. *PLoS Pathog* 5: e1000708.

Garmendia, J., Phillips, A.D., Carlier, M.F., Chong, Y., Schuller, S., Marches, O., *et al.* (2004) TccP is an enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 type III effector protein that couples Tir to the actin-cytoskeleton. *Cell Microbiol* 6: 1167–1183.

Garmendia, J., Carlier, M.F., Egile, C., Didry, D., and Frankel, G. (2006) Characterization of TccP-mediated N-WASP activation during enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* infection. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 1444–1455.

Gauthier, A., and Finlay, B.B. (2003) Translocated intimin receptor and its chaperone interact with ATPase of the type III secretion apparatus of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 185: 6747–6755.

Germaine, K.L., and Spiller, B.W. (2011) Structural and functional studies indicate that the EPEC effector, EspG, directly binds p21-activated kinase. *Biochemistry* 50: 917–919.

Ghosh, P. (2004) Process of protein transport by the type III secretion system. *Microbiol Mol Biol Rev* 68: 771–795.

Goosney, D.L., DeVinney, R., Pfuetzner, R.A., Frey, E.A., Strynadka, N.C., and Finlay, B.B. (2000) Enteropathogenic *E. coli* translocated intimin receptor, Tir, interacts directly with alpha-actinin. *Curr Biol* 10: 735–738.

Gruenheid, S., DeVinney, R., Bladt, F., Goosney, D., Gelkop, S., Gish, G.D., *et al.* (2001) Enteropathogenic *E. coli* Tir

binds Nck to initiate actin pedestal formation in host cells. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 856–859.

Gruenheid, S., Sekirov, I., Thomas, N.A., Deng, W., O’Donnell, P., Goode, D., *et al.* (2004) Identification and characterization of NleA, a non-LEE-encoded type III translocated virulence factor of enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. *Mol Microbiol* 51: 1233–1249.

Gu, B.J., Saunders, B.M., Jursik, C., and Wiley, J.S. (2010) The P2X7-nonmuscle myosin membrane complex regulates phagocytosis of nonopsonized particles and bacteria by a pathway attenuated by extracellular ATP. *Blood* 115: 1621–1631.

Guttman, J.A., Li, Y., Wickham, M.E., Deng, W., Vogl, A.W., and Finlay, B.B. (2006) Attaching and effacing pathogen-induced tight junction disruption in vivo. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 634–645.

Hamaguchi, M., Hamada, D., Suzuki, K.N., Sakata, I., and Yanagihara, I. (2008) Molecular basis of actin reorganization promoted by binding of enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* EspB to alpha-catenin. *FEBS J* 275: 6260–6267.

Hardwidge, P.R., Deng, W., Vallance, B.A., Rodriguez-Escudero, I., Cid, V.J., Molina, M., and Finlay, B.B. (2005) Modulation of host cytoskeleton function by the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* and *Citrobacter rodentium* effector protein EspG. *Infect Immun* 73: 2586–2594.

Hartland, E.L., Batchelor, M., Delahay, R.M., Hale, C., Matthews, S., Dougan, G., *et al.* (1999) Binding of intimin from enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* to Tir and to host cells. *Mol Microbiol* 32: 151–158.

Hartland, E.L., Daniell, S.J., Delahay, R.M., Neves, B.C., Wallis, T., Shaw, R.K., *et al.* (2000) The type III protein translocation system of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* involves EspA-EspB protein interactions. *Mol Microbiol* 35: 1483–1492.

Hemrajani, C., Marches, O., Wiles, S., Girard, F., Dennis, A., Dziva, F., *et al.* (2008) Role of NleH, a type III secreted effector from attaching and effacing pathogens, in colonization of the bovine, ovine, and murine gut. *Infect Immun* 76: 4804–4813.

Hemrajani, C., Berger, C.N., Robinson, K.S., Marches, O., Mousnier, A., and Frankel, G. (2010) NleH effectors interact with Bax inhibitor-1 to block apoptosis during enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* infection. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 107: 3129–3134.

Hodges, K., Alto, N.M., Ramaswamy, K., Dudeja, P.K., and Hecht, G. (2008) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector protein EspF decreases sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 activity. *Cell Microbiol* 10: 1735–1745.

Huang, Z., Sutton, S.E., Wallenfang, A.J., Orchard, R.C., Wu, X., Feng, Y., *et al.* (2009) Structural insights into host GTPase isoform selection by a family of bacterial GEF mimics. *Nat Struct Mol Biol* 16: 853–860.

Hughes, D.T., and Sperandio, V. (2008) Inter-kingdom signaling: communication between bacteria and their hosts. *Nat Rev Microbiol* 6: 111–120.

Ide, T., Laarmann, S., Greune, L., Schillers, H., Oberleithner, H., and Schmidt, M.A. (2001) Characterization of translocation pores inserted into plasma membranes by type III-secreted Esp proteins of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Cell Microbiol* 3: 669–679.

Iguchi, A., Thomson, N.R., Ogura, Y., Saunders, D., Ooka, T.,

Henderson, I.R., *et al.* (2009) Complete genome sequence and comparative genome analysis of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli O127:H6 strain E2348/69. *J Bacteriol* 191: 347–354.

Izumi, Y., Sagara, H., Kabe, Y., Azuma, M., Kume, K., Ogawa, M., *et al.* (2007) The enteropathogenic *E. coli* effector EspB facilitates microvillus effacing and antiphagocytosis by inhibiting myosin function. *Cell Host Microbe* 2: 383–392.

Iyoda, S., Koizumi, N., Satou, H., Lu, Y., Saitoh, T., Ohnishi, M., and Watanabe, H. (2006) The GrlR-GrlA regulatory system coordinately controls the expression of flagellar and LEE-encoded type III protein secretion systems in enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 188: 5682–5692.

Jarvis, K.G., Giron, J.A., Jerse, A.E., McDaniel, T.K., Donnenberg, M.S., and Kaper, J.B. (1995) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* contains a putative type III secretion system necessary for the export of proteins involved in attaching and effacing lesion formation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 92: 7996–8000.

Jerse, A.E., Yu, J., Tall, B.D., and Kaper, J.B. (1990) A genetic locus of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* necessary for the production of attaching and effacing lesions on tissue culture cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 87: 7839–7843.

Jubelin, G., Taieb, F., Duda, D.M., Hsu, Y., Samba-Louaka, A., Nobe, R., *et al.* (2010) Pathogenic bacteria target NEDD8-conjugated cullins to hijack host-cell signaling pathways. *PLoS Pathog* 6: e1001128.

Kelly, M., Hart, E., Mundy, R., Marches, O., Wiles, S., Badea, L., *et al.* (2006) Essential role of the type III secretion system effector NleB in colonization of mice by *Citrobacter rodentium*. *Infect Immun* 74: 2328–2337.

Kenny, B. (1999) Phosphorylation of tyrosine 474 of the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) Tir receptor molecule is essential for actin nucleating activity and is preceded by additional host modifications. *Mol Microbiol* 31: 1229–1241.

Kenny, B., and Jepson, M. (2000) Targeting of an enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) effector protein to host mitochondria. *Cell Microbiol* 2: 579–590.

Kenny, B., DeVinney, R., Stein, M., Reinscheid, D.J., Frey, E.A., and Finlay, B.B. (1997) Enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC) transfers its receptor for intimate adherence into mammalian cells. *Cell* 91: 511–520.

Kenny, B., Ellis, S., Leard, A.D., Warawa, J., Mellor, H., and Jepson, M.A. (2002) Co-ordinate regulation of distinct host cell signalling pathways by multifunctional enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector molecules. *Mol Microbiol* 44: 1095–1107.

Khan, M.A., Bouzari, S., Ma, C., Rosenberger, C.M., Bergstrom, K.S., Gibson, D.L., *et al.* (2008) Flagellin-dependent and -independent inflammatory responses following infection by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* and *Citrobacter rodentium*. *Infect Immun* 76: 1410–1422.

Kim, D.W., Lenzen, G., Page, A.L., Legrain, P., Sansonetti, P.J., and Parsot, C. (2005) The *Shigella flexneri* effector OspG interferes with innate immune responses by targeting ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 102: 14046–14051.

Kim, J., Thanabalasuriar, A., Chaworth-Musters, T., Fromme, J.C., Frey, E.A., Lario, P.I., *et al.* (2007) The bacterial virulence factor NleA inhibits cellular protein secretion by disrupting mammalian COPII function. *Cell Host Microbe* 2: 160–171.

Kim, M., Ogawa, M., Fujita, Y., Yoshikawa, Y., Nagai, T., Koyama, T., *et al.* (2009) Bacteria hijack integrin-linked kinase to stabilize focal adhesions and block cell detachment. *Nature* 459: 578–582.

Knappstein, S., Ide, T., Schmidt, M.A., and Heusipp, G. (2004) Alpha 1-antitrypsin binds to and interferes with functionality of EspB from atypical and typical enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* strains. *Infect Immun* 72: 4344–4350.

Knutton, S., Rosenshine, I., Pallen, M.J., Nisan, I., Neves, B.C., Bain, C., *et al.* (1998) A novel EspA-associated surface organelle of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* involved in protein translocation into epithelial cells. *EMBO J* 17: 2166–2176.

Kodama, T., Akeda, Y., Kono, G., Takahashi, A., Imura, K., Iida, T., and Honda, T. (2002) The EspB protein of enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* interacts directly with alpha-catenin. *Cell Microbiol* 4: 213–222.

Kubori, T., and Galan, J.E. (2003) Temporal regulation of *Salmonella* virulence effector function by proteasome-dependent protein degradation. *Cell* 115: 333–342.

Kurushima, J., Nagai, T., Nagamatsu, K., and Abe, A. (2010) EspJ effector in enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* translocates into host mitochondria via an atypical mitochondrial targeting signal. *Microbiol Immunol* 54: 371–379.

Lee, S.F., Kelly, M., McAlistair, A., Luck, S.N., Garcia, E.L., Hall, R.A., *et al.* (2008) A C-terminal class I PDZ binding motif of EspL/NleA modulates the virulence of attaching and effacing *Escherichia coli* and *Citrobacter rodentium*. *Cell Microbiol* 10: 499–513.

Li, Q., and Verma, I.M. (2002) NF-kappaB regulation in the immune system. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2: 725–734.

Lommel, S., Benesch, S., Rottner, K., Franz, T., Wehland, J., and Kuhn, R. (2001) Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* and intracellular motility of *Shigella flexneri* are abolished in N-WASP-defective cells. *EMBO Rep* 2: 850–857.

Ma, C., Wickham, M.E., Guttman, J.A., Deng, W., Walker, J., Madsen, K.L., *et al.* (2006) *Citrobacter rodentium* infection causes both mitochondrial dysfunction and intestinal epithelial barrier disruption in vivo: role of mitochondrial associated protein (Map). *Cell Microbiol* 8: 1669–1686.

McNamara, B.P., Koutsouris, A., O’Connell, C.B., Nougayrede, J.P., Donnenberg, M.S., and Hecht, G. (2001) Translocated EspF protein from enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* disrupts host intestinal barrier function. *J Clin Invest* 107: 621–629.

Marches, O., Ledger, T.N., Boury, M., Ohara, M., Tu, X., Goffaux, F., *et al.* (2003) Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* deliver a novel effector called Cif, which blocks cell cycle G2/M transition. *Mol Microbiol* 50: 1553–1567.

Marches, O., Wiles, S., Dziva, F., Ragione, R.M.L., Schuller, S., Best, A., *et al.* (2005) Characterization of two non-locus of enterocyte effacement-encoded type III-translocated effectors, NleC and NleD, in attaching and effacing pathogens. *Infect Immun* 73: 8411–8417.

Marches, O., Batchelor, M., Shaw, R.K., Patel, A., Cummings, N., Nagai, T., *et al.* (2006) EspF of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* binds sorting nexin 9. *J Bacteriol* 188: 3110–3115.

Marches, O., Covarelli, V., Dahan, S., Cougoule, C., Bhatta, P., Frankel, G., and Caron, E. (2008) EspJ of enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* inhibits opsono-phagocytosis. *Cell Microbiol* 10: 1104–1115.

Martinez, E., Schroeder, G.N., Berger, C.N., Lee, S.F., Robinson, K.S., Badea, L., *et al.* (2010) Binding to Na(+) /H(+) exchanger regulatory factor 2 (NHERF2) affects trafficking and function of the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* type III secretion system effectors Map, EspI and NleH. *Cell Microbiol* 12: 1718–1731.

Matsuzawa, T., Kuwae, A., Yoshida, S., Sasakawa, C., and Abe, A. (2004) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* activates the RhoA signaling pathway via the stimulation of GEF-H1. *EMBO J* 23: 3570–3582.

Mills, E., Baruch, K., Charpentier, X., Kobi, S., and Rosen- shine, I. (2008) Real-time analysis of effector translocation by the type III secretion system of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Cell Host Microbe* 3: 104–113.

Miyahara, A., Nakanishi, N., Ooka, T., Hayashi, T., Sugimoto, N., and Tobe, T. (2009) Enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* effector EspL2 induces actin microfilament aggregation through annexin 2 activation. *Cell Microbiol* 11: 337–350.

Moreau, V., Frischknecht, F., Reckmann, I., Vincentelli, R., Rabut, G., Stewart, D., and Way, M. (2000) A complex of N-WASP and WIP integrates signalling cascades that lead to actin polymerization. *Nat Cell Biol* 2: 441–448.

Morikawa, H., Kim, M., Mimuro, H., Puginelli, C., Koyama, T., Nagai, S., *et al.* (2010) The bacterial effector Cif interferes with SCF ubiquitin ligase function by inhibiting deneddylation of Cullin1. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 401: 268–274.

Morita-Ishihara, T., Terajima, J., Watanabe, H., and Izumiya, H. (2009) Interaction between enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 EspFu and IRSp53 induces dynamic membrane remodeling in epithelial cells. *Jpn J Infect Dis* 62: 351–355.

Muehlen, S., Ruchaud-Sparagano, M.H., and Kenny, B. (2011) Proteasome-independent degradation of canonical NF{kappa}B complex components by the NleC protein of pathogenic *E.coli*. *J Biol Chem* 286: 5100–5107.

Munera, D., Crepin, V.F., Marches, O., and Frankel, G. (2010) N-terminal type III secretion signal of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* translocator proteins. *J Bacteriol* 192: 3534–3539.

Muza-Moons, M.M., Schneeberger, E.E., and Hecht, G.A. (2004) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* infection leads to appearance of aberrant tight junctions strands in the lateral membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. *Cell Microbiol* 6: 783–793.

Nadler, C., Baruch, K., Kobi, S., Mills, E., Haviv, G., Farago, M., *et al.* (2010) The Type III Secretion Effector NleE Inhibits NF-kappaB Activation. *PLoS Pathog* 6: e1000743.

Nataro, J.P., and Kaper, J.B. (1998) Diarrheagenic *Escherichia coli*. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 11: 142–201.

Newton, H.J., Pearson, J.S., Badea, L., Kelly, M., Lucas, M., Holloway, G., *et al.* (2010) The type III effectors NleE and NleB from enteropathogenic *E. coli* and OspZ from Shigella

block nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB p65. *PLoS Pathog* 6: e1000898.

Nieto-Pelegrin, E., and Martinez-Quiles, N. (2009) Distinct phosphorylation requirements regulate cortactin activation by TirEPEC and its binding to N-WASP. *Cell Commun Signal* 7: 11.

Nobe, R., Nougayrede, J.P., Taieb, F., Bardiau, M., Cassart, D., Navarro-Garcia, F., *et al.* (2009) Enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* serogroup O111 inhibits NF-{kappa}B-dependent innate responses in a manner independent of a type III secreted OspG orthologue. *Microbiology* 155: 3214–3225.

Nougayrede, J.P., and Donnenberg, M.S. (2004) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* EspF is targeted to mitochondria and is required to initiate the mitochondrial death pathway. *Cell Microbiol* 6: 1097–1111.

Nougayrede, J.P., Foster, G.H., and Donnenberg, M.S. (2007) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector EspF interacts with host protein Abcf2. *Cell Microbiol* 9: 680–693.

O’Connell, C.B., Creasey, E.A., Knutton, S., Elliott, S., Crowther, L.J., Luo, W., *et al.* (2004) SepL, a protein required for enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* type III translocation, interacts with secretion component SepD. *Mol Microbiol* 52: 1613–1625.

Ogura, Y., Ooka, T., Whale, A., Gar mendia, J., Beutin, L., Tennant, S., *et al.* (2007) TccP2 of O157:H7 and non-O157 enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* (EHEC): challenging the dogma of EHEC-induced actin polymerization. *Infect Immun* 75: 604–612.

Papatheodorou, P., Domanska, G., Oxle, M., Mathieu, J., Selchow, O., Kenny, B., and Rassow, J. (2006) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) Map effector is imported into the mitochondrial matrix by the TOM/Hsp70 system and alters organelle morphology. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 677–689.

Patel, A., Cummings, N., Batchelor, M., Hill, P.J., Dubois, T., Mellits, K.H., *et al.* (2006) Host protein interactions with enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC): 14-3-3tau binds Tir and has a role in EPEC-induced actin polymerization. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 55–71.

Pearson, J.S., Riedmaier, P., Marches, O., Frankel, G., and Hartland, E.L. (2011) A type III effector protease NleC from enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* targets NF-κB for degradation. *Mol Microbiol* 80: 219–230.

Peralta-Ramirez, J., Hernandez, J.M., Manning-Cela, R., Luna-Munoz, J., Garcia-Tovar, C., Nougayrede, J.P., *et al.* (2008) EspF Interacts with nucleation-promoting factors to recruit junctional proteins into pedestals for pedestal maturation and disruption of paracellular permeability. *Infect Immun* 76: 3854–3868.

Perkins, N.D. (2007) Integrating cell-signalling pathways with NF-kappaB and IKK function. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* 8: 49–62.

Perna, N.T., Plunkett, G., Burland, V., Mau, B., Glasner, J.D., Rose, D.J., *et al.* (2001) Genome sequence of enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. *Nature* 409: 529–533.

Petty, N.K., Bulgin, R., Crepin, V.F., Cerdeno-Tarraga, A.M., Schroeder, G.N., Quail, M.A., *et al.* (2010) The *Citrobacter rodentium* genome sequence reveals convergent evolution

with human pathogenic *Escherichia coli*. J Bacteriol 192: 525–538.

Phillips, N., Hayward, R.D., and Koronakis, V. (2004) Phosphorylation of the enteropathogenic *E. coli* receptor by the Src-family kinase c-Fyn triggers actin pedestal formation. Nat Cell Biol 6: 618–625.

Quitard, S., Dean, P., Maresca, M., and Kenny, B. (2006) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* EspF effector molecule inhibits PI-3 kinase-mediated uptake independently of mitochondrial targeting. Cell Microbiol 8: 972–981.

Ramesh, N., Anton, I.M., Hartwig, J.H., and Geha, R.S. (1997) WIP, a protein associated with wiskott-aldrich syndrome protein, induces actin polymerization and redistribution in lymphoid cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94: 14671–14676.

Ritchie, J.M., Brady, M.J., Riley, K.N., Ho, T.D., Campellone, K.G., Herman, I.M., *et al.* (2008) EspFU, a type III-translocated effector of actin assembly, fosters epithelial association and late-stage intestinal colonization by *E. coli* O157:H7. Cell Microbiol 10: 836–847.

Robins-Browne, R.M., and Hartland, E.L. (2002) *Escherichia coli* as a cause of diarrhea. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 17: 467–475.

Robins-Browne, R.M., Tokhi, A.M., Adams, L.M., Bennett-Wood, V., Moisidis, A.V., Krejany, E.O., and O’Gorman, L.E. (1994) Adherence characteristics of attaching and effacing strains of *Escherichia coli* from rabbits. Infect Immun 62: 1584–1592.

Robinson, K.S., Mousnier, A., Hemrajani, C., Fairweather, N., Berger, C.N., and Frankel, G. (2010) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector NleH inhibits apoptosis induced by Clostridium difficile toxin B. Microbiology 156: 1815–1823.

Robinson, K.S., Clements, A., Williams, A.C., Berger, C.N., and Frankel, G. (2011) Bax inhibitor 1 in apoptosis and disease. Oncogene (in press).

Roe, A.J., Naylor, S.W., Spears, K.J., Yull, H.M., Dransfield, T.A., Oxford, M., *et al.* (2004) Co-ordinate single-cell expression of LEE4- and LEE5-encoded proteins of *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. Mol Microbiol 54: 337–352.

Rohatgi, R., Nollau, P., Ho, H.Y., Kirschner, M.W., and Mayer, B.J. (2001) Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N-WASP-Arp2/3 pathway. J Biol Chem 276: 26448–26452.

Royan, S.V., Jones, R.M., Koutsouris, A., Roxas, J.L., Falzari, K., Weflen, A.W., *et al.* (2010) Enteropathogenic *E. coli* non-LEE encoded effectors NleH1 and NleH2 attenuate NF-kappaB activation. Mol Microbiol 78: 1232–1245.

Ruchaud-Sparagano, M.H., Maresca, M., and Kenny, B. (2007) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) inactivate innate immune responses prior to compromising epithelial barrier function. Cell Microbiol 9: 1909–1921.

Russell, R.M., Sharp, F.C., Rasko, D.A., and Sperandio, V. (2007) QseA and GrlR/GrlA regulation of the locus of enterocyte effacement genes in enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. J Bacteriol 189: 5387–5392.

Sallee, N.A., Rivera, G.M., Dueber, J.E., Vasilescu, D., Mullins, R.D., Mayer, B.J., and Lim, W.A. (2008) The pathogen protein EspF(U) hijacks actin polymerization using mimicry and multivalency. Nature 454: 1005–1008.

Samba-Louaka, A., Nougayrede, J.P., Watrin, C., Jubelin, G., Oswald, E., and Taieb, F. (2008) Bacterial cyclomodulin Cif

blocks the host cell cycle by stabilizing the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21 and p27. Cell Microbiol 10: 2496–2508.

Samba-Louaka, A., Nougayrede, J.P., Watrin, C., Oswald, E., and Taieb, F. (2009) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector Cif induces delayed apoptosis in epithelial cells. Infect Immun 77: 5471–5477.

Sason, H., Milgram, M., Weiss, A.M., Melamed-Book, N., Balla, T., Grinstein, S., *et al.* (2009) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* subverts phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate upon epithelial cell infection. Mol Biol Cell 20: 544–555.

Schauer, D.B., and Falkow, S. (1993) Attaching and effacing locus of a *Citrobacter freundii* biotype that causes transmissible murine colonic hyperplasia. Infect Immun 61: 2486–2492.

Schuller, S., Chong, Y., Lewin, J., Kenny, B., Frankel, G., and Phillips, A.D. (2007) Tir phosphorylation and Nck/N-WASP recruitment by enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* during ex vivo colonization of human intestinal mucosa is different to cell culture models. Cell Microbiol 9: 1352–1364.

Schuller, S., Lucas, M., Kaper, J.B., Giron, J.A., and Phillips, A.D. (2009) The ex vivo response of human intestinal mucosa to enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* infection. Cell Microbiol 11: 521–530.

Selbach, M., Paul, F.E., Brandt, S., Guye, P., Daumke, O., Backert, S., *et al.* (2009) Host cell interactome of tyrosine-phosphorylated bacterial proteins. Cell Host Microbe 5: 397–403.

Selyunin, A.S., Sutton, S.E., Weigele, B.A., Reddick, L.E., Orchard, R.C., Bresson, S.M., *et al.* (2011) The assembly of a GTPase-kinase signalling complex by a bacterial catalytic scaffold. Nature 469: 107–111.

Shakhnovich, E.A., Davis, B.M., and Waldor, M.K. (2009) Hfq negatively regulates type III secretion in EHEC and several other pathogens. Mol Microbiol 74: 347–363.

Shames, S.R., Deng, W., Guttman, J.A., de Hoog, C.L., Li, Y., Hardwidge, P.R., *et al.* (2010) The pathogenic *E. coli* type III effector EspZ interacts with host CD98 and facilitates host cell prosurvival signalling. Cell Microbiol 2: 1322–1339.

Sharma, R., Tesfay, S., Tomson, F.L., Kanteti, R.P., Viswanathan, V.K., and Hecht, G. (2006) Balance of bacterial pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators dictates net effect of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* on intestinal epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 290: G685–G694.

Shaw, R.K., Smollett, K., Cleary, J., Gar mendia, J., Straatman-Iwanowska, A., Frankel, G., and Knutton, S. (2005) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* type III effectors EspG and EspG2 disrupt the microtubule network of intestinal epithelial cells. Infect Immun 73: 4385–4390.

Shen, Y., Kawamura, I., Nomura, T., Tsuchiya, K., Hara, H., Dewamitta, S.R., *et al.* (2010) Toll-like receptor 2- and MyD88-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Rac1 activation facilitates the phagocytosis of *Listeria monocytogenes* by murine macrophages. Infect Immun 78: 2857–2867.

Simovitch, M., Sason, H., Cohen, S., Zahavi, E.E., Melamed-Book, N., Weiss, A., *et al.* (2010) EspM inhibits pedestal
formation by enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* and enteropathogenic *E. coli* and disrupts the architecture of a polarized epithelial monolayer. *Cell Microbiol* **12**: 489–505.

Simpson, N., Shaw, R., Crepin, V.F., Mundy, R., FitzGerald, A.J., Cummings, N., *et al.* (2006) The enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* type III secretion system effector Map binds EBP50/NHERF1: implication for cell signalling and diarrhoea. *Mol Microbiol* **60**: 349–363.

Smith, K., Humphreys, D., Hume, P.J., and Koronakis, V. (2010) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* recruits the cellular inositol phosphatase SHIP2 to regulate actin-pedestal formation. *Cell Host Microbe* **7**: 13–24.

Swimm, A., Bommarius, B., Li, Y., Cheng, D., Reeves, P., Sherman, M., *et al.* (2004) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* use redundant tyrosine kinases to form actin pedestals. *Mol Biol Cell* **15**: 3520–3529.

Taieb, F., Nougayrede, J.P., Watrin, C., Samba-Louaka, A., and Oswald, E. (2006) *Escherichia coli* cyclomodulin Cif induces G2 arrest of the host cell cycle without activation of the DNA-damage checkpoint-signalling pathway. *Cell Microbiol* **8**: 1910–1921.

Taylor, K.A., O’Connell, C.B., Luther, P.W., and Donnenberg, M.S. (1998) The EspB protein of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* is targeted to the cytoplasm of infected HeLa cells. *Infect Immun* **66**: 5501–5507.

Thanabalasuriar, A., Koutsouris, A., Weflen, A., Mimee, M., Hecht, G., and Gruenheid, S. (2010a) The bacterial virulence factor NleA is required for the disruption of intestinal tight junctions by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Cell Microbiol* **12**: 31–41.

Thanabalasuriar, A., Koutsouris, A., Hecht, G., and Gruenheid, S. (2010b) The bacterial virulence factor NleA’s involvement in intestinal tight junction disruption during enteropathogenic *E. coli* infection is independent of its putative PDZ binding domain. *Gut Microbes* **1**: 114–118.

Tomson, F.L., Viswanathan, V.K., Kanack, K.J., Kanteti, R.P., Straub, K.V., Menet, M., *et al.* (2005) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* EspG disrupts microtubules and in conjunction with Orf3 enhances perturbation of the tight junction barrier. *Mol Microbiol* **56**: 447–464.

Tu, X., Nisan, I., Yona, C., Hanski, E., and Rosenshine, I. (2003) EspH, a new cytoskeleton-modulating effector of enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Mol Microbiol* **47**: 595–606.

Vingadassalom, D., Kazlauskas, A., Skehan, B., Cheng, H.C., Magoun, L., Robbins, D., *et al.* (2009) Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate links the *E. coli* O157:H7 actin assembly effectors Tir and EspF(U) during pedestal formation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **106**: 6754–6759.

Vingadassalom, D., Campellone, K.G., Brady, M.J., Skehan, B., Battle, S.E., Robbins, D., *et al.* (2010) Enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* requires N-WASP for efficient type III translocation but not for EspFU-mediated actin pedestal formation. *PLoS Pathog* **6**: e1001056.

Viswanathan, V.K., Lukic, S., Koutsouris, A., Miao, R., Muza, M.M., and Hecht, G. (2004) Cytokeratin 18 interacts with the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* secreted protein F (EspF) and is redistributed after infection. *Cell Microbiol* **6**: 987–997.

Viswanathan, V.K., Hodges, K., and Hecht, G. (2009) Enteric

infection meets intestinal function: how bacterial pathogens cause diarrhoea. *Nat Rev Microbiol* **7**: 110–119.

Vossenkamper, A., Marches, O., Fairclough, P.D., Warnes, G., Stagg, A.J., Lindsay, J.O., *et al.* (2010) Inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling in human dendritic cells by the enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* effector protein NleE. *J Immunol* **185**: 4118–4127.

Wachter, C., Beinke, C., Mattes, M., and Schmidt, M.A. (1999) Insertion of EspD into epithelial target cell membranes by infecting enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Mol Microbiol* **31**: 1695–1707.

Wan, F., Anderson, D.E., Barnitz, R.A., Snow, A., Bidere, N., Zheng, L., *et al.* (2007) Ribosomal protein S3: a KH domain subunit in NF-kappaB complexes that mediates selective gene regulation. *Cell* **131**: 927–939.

Wan, F., Weaver, A., Gao, X., Bern, M., Hardwidge, P.R., and Lenardo, M.J. (2011) IKKbeta phosphorylation regulates RPS3 nuclear translocation and NF-kappaB function during infection with *Escherichia coli* strain O157:H7. *Nat Immunol* **12**: 335–343.

Weflen, A.W., Alto, N.M., Viswanathan, V.K., and Hecht, G. (2010) *E. coli* secreted protein F promotes EPEC invasion of intestinal epithelial cells via an SNX9-dependent mechanism. *Cell Microbiol* **12**: 919–929.

Weiss, S.M., Ladwein, M., Schmidt, D., Ehinger, J., Lommel, S., Stading, K., *et al.* (2009) IRSp53 links the enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* effectors Tir and EspFU for actin pedestal formation. *Cell Host Microbe* **5**: 244–258.

Weisswange, I., Newsome, T.P., Schleich, S., and Way, M. (2009) The rate of N-WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2/3-complex-dependent actin-based motility. *Nature* **458**: 87–91.

Whale, A.D., Hernandez, R.T., Ooka, T., Beutin, L., Schuller, S., Garmedia, J., *et al.* (2007) TccP2-mediated subversion of actin dynamics by EPEC 2 – a distinct evolutionary lineage of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiology* **153**: 1743–1755.

Wickham, M.E., Lupp, C., Vazquez, A., Mascarenhas, M., Coburn, B., Coombes, B.K., *et al.* (2007) *Citrobacter rodentium* virulence in mice associates with bacterial load and the type III effector NleE. *Microbes Infect* **9**: 400–407.

Wu, B., Skarina, T., Yee, A., Jobin, M.C., Dileo, R., Semesi, A., *et al.* (2010) NleG Type 3 effectors from enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* are U-Box E3 ubiquitin ligases. *PLoS Pathog* **6**: e1000960.

Yen, H., Ooka, T., Iguchi, A., Hayashi, T., Sugimoto, N., and Tobe, T. (2010) NleC, a type III secretion protease, compromises NF-kappaB activation by targeting p65/RelA. *PLoS Pathog* **6**: e1001231.

Yoshida, S., Katayama, E., Kuwae, A., Mimuro, H., Suzuki, T., and Sasakawa, C. (2002) *Shigella* deliver an effector protein to trigger host microtubule destabilization, which promotes Rac1 activity and efficient bacterial internalization. *EMBO J* **21**: 2923–2935.

Younis, R., Bingle, L.E., Rollauer, S., Munera, D., Busby, S.J., Johnson, S., *et al.* (2010) SepL resembles an aberrant effector in binding to a class 1 type III secretion chaperone and carrying an N-terminal secretion signal. *J Bacteriol* **192**: 6093–6098.

Zettl, M., and Way, M. (2002) The WH1 and EVH1 domains

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **80**, 1420–1438
of WASP and Ena/VASP family members bind distinct sequence motifs. *Curr Biol* **12**: 1617–1622.

Zhang, J., Zhu, J., Bu, X., Cushion, M., Kinane, T.B., Avraham, H., and Koziel, H. (2005) Cdc42 and RhoB activation are required for mannose receptor-mediated phagocytosis by human alveolar macrophages. *Mol Biol Cell* **16**: 824–834.

Zurawski, D.V., Mumy, K.L., Badea, L., Prentice, J.A., Hartland, E.L., McCormick, B.A., and Maurelli, A.T. (2008) The NleE/OspZ family of effector proteins is required for polymorphonuclear transepithelial migration, a characteristic shared by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* and *Shigella flexneri* infections. *Infect Immun* **76**: 369–379.
