
This article was downloaded by: [Oregon State University]
On: 26 December 2014, At: 23:00
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Cancer Biology & Therapy

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kcbt20

FoxO family members in cancer
Yuqing Zhang, Boyi Gan, Debra Liu & Ji-hye Paik
Published online: 15Aug 2011.

To cite this article: Yuqing Zhang, Boyi Gan, Debra Liu & Ji-hye Paik (2011) FoxO family members in cancer, Cancer Biology &
Therapy, 12:4, 253-259, DOI: 10.4161/cbt.12.4.15954
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cbt.12.4.15954

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor&Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor&Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor&Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Cancer Biology & Therapy 12:4, 253-259; August 15, 2011; © 2011 Landes Bioscience

# FoxO family members in cancer

Yuqing Zhang,$^{1}$ Boyi Gan,$^{2}$ Debra Liu$^{1}$ and Ji-hye Paik$^{1,*}$

$^{1}$Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; Weill Cornell Medical College; New York, NY USA; $^{2}$Department of Medical Oncology; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA USA

Keywords: FOXO, cancer, RTK-PI3K-AKT-mTORC1, feedback regulation, therapeutic resistance, tumor suppressor, homeostasis, survival

The PI3K-Akt-FoxO signaling pathway plays a central role in diverse physiological processes including cellular energy storage, growth and survival, among others. As an important effector of this pathway, FoxO is involved in versatile activities that protect organisms from stress and aging. Recent studies on mammalian FoxO have established a direct role for this transcription factor family in cellular proliferation, oxidative stress response and tumorigenesis. The review will focus on the recent developments pertaining to the function of FoxO as well as discuss the various contexts in which FoxO exerts distinct biological activity such as drug resistance and autophagy in cancer pathogenesis and therapy.

## PI3K-Akt-FoxO Axis

The mammalian FoxO family of transcription factors (FoxOs) have received much attention as downstream surrogates of insulin/IGF and other growth factor-activated receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway. Many studies reported to date support that this signaling pathway plays a critical role in linking extracellular growth factor stimulation to various cellular processes. Upon RTK activation, PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) at the plasma membrane.$^{1}$ Increased PIP3 leads to the activation of intracellular signaling pathways regulating cellular metabolism, proliferation, growth and survival and its action is antagonized by lipid phosphatase PTEN, a tumor suppressor.$^{2}$ Protein kinase AKT is recruited to the plasma membrane, where it is activated through phosphorylation by mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) (Ser$^{473}$) and PDK1 (Thr$^{308}$).$^{3,4}$ Activated AKT then causes cellular changes ranging from cell proliferation and survival, to growth and metabolism, via its many downstream effectors, including the Bad, caspases, NFκB, cell cycle regulators and GSK-3.$^{5}$ Among others, TSC-mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) module is the prime effector of the PI3K-AKT pathway, with TSC1/2 serving as a central node linking LKB1-AMPK and PI3K-AKT with mTORC1 (Fig. 1).$^{6-9}$ Aberrant activation of the PI3K pathway has been reported with various mutations and genetic changes. The activating mutations

of p110α (PIK3A), inactivation of PTEN or amplification of AKT have been identified in a variety of cancer types including ovarian, cervical, breast, brain, pancreatic and colorectal cancers.$^{10}$ Numerous studies demonstrated the effectiveness of blocking mTORC1 pathway to suppress cellular changes raised by RTK-PI3K pathway raising the question for the tumor suppressor role of FoxO arm in this pathway. A number of recent studies, however, demonstrated inactivating genetic changes and diminished expression of FoxO in several human cancers$^{11-13}$ supporting the tumor suppressor role of FoxOs in human cancers. Furthermore, the relevance of FoxOs in cancer and their roles in normal tissue homeostasis was demonstrated by a systematic evaluation of FoxO family function in mouse models in vivo.$^{14-16}$

The FoxO family of transcription factors belongs to an evolutionarily conserved transcription factor family. There are three highly homologous FoxO transcription factors (FoxO1 [FKHR], 3 [FKHRL1] and 4 [AFX]) and one less related, FoxO6, in mammals. The FoxOs bind to the consensus sequence, TTGTTTAC or BBTRTTTTD,$^{16-18}$ or interact with other transcription factors to regulate transcription of target genes.$^{19,20}$ Regulation of transcriptional activity of FoxOs is conferred by various posttranslational modifications and changes in their subcellular localization. FoxOs are typically inactivated by phosphorylation by a number of protein kinases (i.e., AKT, IKK, DYRK, SGK, CDK1) and subsequent sequestration in the cytosol.$^{21}$ Modifications including deacetylation (Sirt1) and ubiquitination (Skp2, Mdm2) also affect transcriptional activity of FoxOs. Hence multiple pathways converge on the regulation of FoxO targets.$^{22}$ Additionally, FoxOs have been linked to other cellular pathways, including the NFκB and TGFβ pathways. The IkB kinase has been shown to phosphorylate and inhibit the function of FoxO3 unveiling cross talk between PI3K and NFκB pathways.$^{23}$ In the context of TGFβ signaling, FoxOs associate with Smad to enhance transcription of targets involved in cell cycle inhibition and stress response.$^{24,25}$ Overall, FoxOs function to transduce survival and growth signals in response to extracellular stimuli. Specifically, either in the absence of growth factors or in the presence of stress stimuli, FoxOs translocate to the nucleus and regulate target gene expression.

## FoxOs—A Functionally Redundant Mammalian Tumor Suppressor Family

FoxO1, 3 and 4 genes were discovered at the chromosomal breakpoints found in human cancers and as a result, were initially

*Correspondence to: Ji-hye Paik; Email: jep2025@med.cornell.edu  
Submitted: 03/30/11; Accepted: 05/03/11  
DOI: 10.4161/cbt.12.4.15954

implicated in cancer. FoxO1 was found in pediatric alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas as chimeric proteins involving DNA-binding domains of PAX3 or PAX7, while FoxO3 and FoxO4 were found as fusion partners of MLL in acute myeloid leukemias.²⁶⁻²⁹ Notably subsequent studies testing the oncogenic potential of the chimeric allele did not faithfully recapitulate tumor phenotype and raised the possibility that actual cause of cancer is the disruption of functional FoxO alleles, implicating FoxOs as tumor suppressors.³⁰,³¹

The presence of more than one FoxO suggests several possibilities with regard to FoxO function in mammals; the FoxO members may have undergone diversification during evolution and each individual FoxO may have developed specific functional roles. The differential expression of FoxOs throughout different tissue compartments substantiates this idea. While all three FoxOs are broadly expressed with overlapping patterns, individual ones are enriched in certain tissue types—FoxO1 in adipose tissue and liver, FoxO3 in the brain, FoxO4 in skeletal muscle.¹⁸,³² Despite the tissue specificity there still exists functional redundancy among the FoxOs, with activation of all of the FoxOs resulting in a cumulative overall effect. In fact, functional redundancy and cooperative impacts of different FoxOs in vivo were revealed using a compound gene knockout approach. Initial studies reporting that single or double FoxO knockout mice did not produce a tumor-prone phenotype casted doubts on the many in vitro studies linking the FoxOs to key cancer signaling pathways.¹⁴⁻¹⁶,³³ Instead, broad somatic deletion of all three FoxOs in most adult tissues, exploiting conditional alleles, led to tissue-restricted tumor phenotypes with thymic lymphomas and hemangiomas.¹⁶ This observation negates the sole importance of mTORC1 pathway in PI3K dependent tumorigenesis and strongly suggests that the FoxO arm of the PI3K-AKT signaling network plays a role in cancer suppression in vivo.

## Roles in Cell Cycle Regulation and Apoptosis

Analysis of FoxO function in mammalian cell culture systems has reinforced the evolutionarily conserved role of FoxO in cell cycle regulation, survival and stress resistance. FoxOs block cell cycle entry in quiescent cells, an observation in concordance with their ability to upregulate cyclinG2³⁴ and pRB family p130.³⁵ FoxOs operate virtually at every cell cycle check point; enforced FoxO expression leads to G₁/S arrest, which is partially mediated by increased expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI) p27<sup>Kip</sup> and downregulation of cyclinD.³⁶,³⁷ Under different cellular contexts, FoxOs have been shown to induce other CKIs including p21<sup>Cip</sup>, p57, p15<sup>INK4b</sup> and p19<sup>INK4d</sup> thereby contributing to G₁/S arrest.²⁵,³⁸,³⁹ Moreover, FoxO activation can also cause a delay in the G₂/M transition and subsequently activates Gadd45a, a gene involved in DNA repair; a finding that supports FoxOs role in DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest and as a result, maintaining genomic stability.³³,⁴⁰

Active FoxOs promote apoptosis in a number of cell types by upregulating specific targets including Fas ligand,¹⁷,⁴¹,⁴² pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bim⁴³⁻⁴⁵ or TRAIL,⁴⁶ and downregulating the pro-survival factor BCL-x<sub>L</sub>, an outcome

mediated through the upregulation of the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6.⁴⁷

## Common Features with the Master Tumor Suppressor p53

Shared targets, regulation and cross-talk. FoxOs share a number of common characteristics with p53. First of all, their subcellular localization and transcriptional activities are regulated by post-translational modifications including phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination.²²,⁴⁸ Second, they are negative regulators of cell proliferation and regulate genes involved in stress resistance (PA26, GADD45a), cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (p21, FasL, Wip). Furthermore, both p53 and the FoxOs possess tissue and cellular context specificity with distinct regulation of targets.¹⁶,⁴⁹,⁵⁰ Their selective transactivation following damage or stress mutually result in unique tumor suppressive activity in specific tissue compartments. In addition to their parallel functions, evidence for p53 and FoxO cross talk within the tumor suppressor network is emerging. For example, expression of dominant-negative FoxO (dnFoxO) accelerates lymphomagenesis in Emu-myc model by attenuating Myc-induced apoptosis. In this model, dnFoxO alleviates the pressure on the loss of p53 heterozygosity presumably by decreasing FoxO-dependent p19<sup>ARF</sup> expression.⁵¹ On the contrary, a recent report on the genetic interaction between FoxO3-p53 in mice, demonstrated that the lack of FoxO3 does not alter tumor free survival of p53-deficient animals. In this model, p53 transcriptionally activates FoxO3 and together, they act within the same genetic pathway to suppress tumorigenesis.⁵² Moreover, FoxOs may have control over the subcellular localization of p53. There is evidence that FoxO3 activates the transcriptional activity-independent pro-apoptotic action of p53 by promoting nuclear export of p53 and following upregulation of PUMA and Bax. In the study, cytoplasmic accumulation of p53 is achieved by increasing its association with nuclear exporting machinery.⁵³

### Checkpoint for mTORC1 activation

Defective p53 and accompanying activation of mTORC1 signaling has been observed in a multitude of human cancers.⁵⁴⁻⁵⁶ FoxO and p53 share highly similar mechanisms to negatively affect mTOR activity with respect to their crosstalk in the PI3K pathway. An initial study demonstrated the role of the Sestrin-AMPK-TSC regulatory axis under transcriptional activation of p53 in genotoxic stress conditions.⁵⁷ This crosstalk is further reinforced by simultaneous involvement of p53 further upstream in the PTEN-mTORC1 pathway.⁵⁸ In both mechanisms, it is clear that p53 serves to suppress cellular growth and proliferation by inhibiting the PI3K-mTORC1 arm (Fig. 1) while, similarly, FoxOs inhibit mTORC1 by transcriptional activation of Sestrin3.⁵⁹,⁶⁰ In agreement with previous studies, the enzymatic activity of Sestrin is dispensable for the inhibitory activity indicating redox-potential-independent Sestrin functions in cellular signal transduction.⁵⁹ The role of FoxOs in these contexts might be identical to that of p53; they may serve as critical checkpoints in many cancer types where frequent mutation of p53 is observed.

Insulin  
Growth Factor  

RTKs  

PIP3  
PDK  

AKT  
PTEN  

IRS  
PI3K  

p53  

AKT  
TSC1/2  

mTORC1  
S6K  

mTORC2  
Rictor  

HIF1  
FoxO  

AMPK  
4EBP1  

Sestrin  

Apoptosis  
FasL, Bim,  
TRAIL, Bcl-6  

Autophagy  
BNIP3, Atg12,  
GABARAPL1  

Cell Cycle Regulation  
and DNA Repair  
Cyclin G2, p130, p27,  
p21, p57, p15, p19,  
Gadd45a, Cyclin D1  

Figure 1. RTK-PI3K-AKT-mTOR and FoxO pathway. The PI3K-PTEN-AKT regulatory axis and both mTOR and FoxO branches are critical regulators for cellular metabolism, apoptosis and proliferation. Upon RTK activation, increased PIP3 leads to the activation of AKT and phosphorylation of its numerous substrates including FoxO. In its active form, FoxO activates targets involved in cell cycle and apoptosis, inhibits HIF1 action and functionally interacts with p53. Both p53 and FoxO regulate mTORC1 by upregulating sestrins and AMPK. Elevation of Rictor by FoxO increases mTORC2 expression and activity, which in turn activates AKT.

Several studies have reported that FoxO functions as a major barrier to cellular transformation in mTORC1-activated cells. Predominant nuclear localization of FoxO1 in benign liver hemangioma of TSC2-null mice supports that inactivation of AKT by feedback regulation in the mTORC1-S6K-IRS axis resulting in activation of FoxO1, could suppress the development of aggressive hemangiosarcoma. Indeed, TSC2 deficiency in a Pten+/− background leads to lethal hemangiomas, wherein FoxO1 is excluded from the nucleus. Similarly, the checkpoint function of FoxOs is further highlighted by a recent study in renal cell carcinoma (RCC), where they reported that combined deletion of TSC1 and FoxOs lead to accelerated renal tumor progression. The premalignant polycystic kidney developed in TSC1-deficient mouse model is associated with hyper-activation of mTORC1-S6K and activation of FoxOs presumably mediated by AKT inactivation via feedback regulation. Mechanistically, FoxOs serve as a checkpoint that promotes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, and therefore, loss of FoxO allows for Myc-dependent progression of RCC. Once again, these findings highlight the tumor suppressor activity of FoxOs.

Role in Cellular Senescence

Cellular senescence has been considered as one of the mechanisms for in vivo tumor suppression in mammals. The role of FoxO in cellular senescence has been reported in oncogenic BRAF(V600E)-harboring melanoma cells, where ROS and JNK activate FoxO-dependent p21 expression and senescence. On the other hand, a number of reports suggest that moderate activation of FoxOs in fact repress cellular senescence by suppressing intracellular ROS level and p53 activation. Consensus is being generated on the common culprits driving cellular senescence. The hyper-activation of mTORC1 is one of such mechanisms that invoke a cellular checkpoint response. Upon mTORC1 hyper-activation, cells lose response to extracellular growth stimuli and undergo senescence. A recent report by Alimonti et al. further defined the PTEN-loss induced-senescence in prostate cancer cells. It is noteworthy that neither hyper-proliferation nor DNA damage response is required for cellular senescence response in this context. Instead, it is primarily mediated
through an mTORC1 activation-dependent p53 action.⁶⁸ As mentioned above, FoxOs antagonize mTORC1 activity and negatively regulate cell cycle progression during cellular stress. Given the regulatory circuit, the senescence-antagonizing feature of FoxO might be operative in many cell types.

### Interaction with HIF Pathway and Cellular Metabolism

Adaptive response to low oxygen levels, including re-wiring of the metabolic gear, is critical for cellular survival. Hypoxia plays a critical role in tumorigenesis including tumor angiogenesis, metastasis and resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. In cancer, many molecular pathways have been recognized to mediate hypoxia-induced responses. Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) is the master transcriptional regulator of the complex response to hypoxic stress and thus, is essential for tumor maintenance.⁶⁹ FoxOs interact with HIF at multiple levels as a downstream output of the PTEN tumor suppressor. FoxO interferes with HIF1α transcriptional activity via (1) titrating away p300 co-activator interaction with HIF1α on the target gene promoter,⁷⁰ (2) down-regulating HIF1α protein independent of VHL function⁷¹ and (3) upregulating Cited2, a CBP/p300-interacting transactivator 2. In this regulatory loop, hypoxia-induced FoxO-dependent Cited2 expression in turn inhibits p300 binding to HIF1 and blocks its transcriptional activity, leading to decreased target gene expression and downstream effectors.⁷² Given the role of HIF in aerobic glycolysis, cancer cell metabolism and survival, it is plausible that FoxOs would counteract the Warburg effect commonly seen in cancer cells by not only suppressing tumor formation, but also inhibiting tumor angiogenesis and metastasis.

### The Other Side of the Coin

It is counterintuitive to discuss the role of FoxOs in human cancer where RTK-PI3K-AKT signaling pathway, the master regulatory switch for FoxO, is invariably activated. However, FoxO is subject to numerous other posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation on various residues, ubiquitination and acetylation, that further change its activity upon extracellular stimuli and may also potentially override its AKT-dependency.²² Paradoxically, there have been reports describing uncommon activity of FoxOs. For example, FoxO1 is induced in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells and provides a protective role by regulating cellular redox potential and alleviating drug-induced cytotoxicity.⁷³ Furthermore, induction of the multi-drug resistant *ABCG1* gene and *PIK3CA*, a catalytic subunit of PI3K, by FoxO3 in doxorubicin treated leukemia cells is another example of FoxO3-mediated therapeutic resistance.⁷⁴,⁷⁵ Similarly, FoxO1-dependent expression of MDR1 was demonstrated in adriamycin-resistant breast cancer cells.⁷⁶ Whether these non-canonical activities are due to the survival or the homeostasis promoting function of FoxOs in a subset of cancer cells possessing high similarity with stem cells is an interesting question that warrants future investigation.

Indeed, the presence of leukemia initiating cells (LIC) in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) further supports the potentially unexpected role of FoxO in the cancer initiating cell population. In the syngenic mouse model of Bcr-Abl-induced CML, the lack of FoxO3 in LIC fails successive transfer. This is due to inhibition of TGFβ-FoxO pathway that is critical for survival and maintenance of LIC fraction. It is noteworthy that in this disease model, a combined therapy of Imanitib and Ly364947, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor and TGFβ inhibitor respectively, effectively depleted LIC by inhibition of both AKT and FoxO and improved overall survival.⁷⁷ Together, the importance of FoxO in promoting long-term fitness and survival of stem cells⁷⁸⁻⁸⁰ may have a parallel function in relatively quiescent initiating cell population of particular cancer types.

### Potential Role in Drug Resistance—Taking Care of Oxidative Stress and DNA Repair

Intracellular ROS has a pleiotropic effect on cellular physiology. As a second messenger of cellular signal transduction, low (physiological) levels of ROS promote cellular proliferation. In quiescent cell types including tissue stem cells, elevation of ROS promotes dysfunction and apoptosis depending on their tolerance. The best characterized function of the FoxO transcription factor is induction of anti-oxidant enzymes MnSOD and Catalase, thereby serving as a rheostat of the redox condition in resting cells.⁵³,⁵⁵,⁸¹ Given the critical role of FoxOs in coping with ROS, it is not surprising that more of the cellular redox regulatory components are subject to the regulation by FoxOs.⁸¹ This pro-homeostatic and protective role has variable functions depending on the cellular contexts. Numerous studies have demonstrated that inactivation of FoxO leads to intracellular ROS accumulation and induces proliferation of transformed cells while it suppresses long-term proliferative potential of normal stem cells.⁷⁸,⁷⁹ On the other hand, it is interesting to note that a recent study by Diehn et al. reported an unexpected role for FoxO in breast cancer stem cells (CSC). Elevation of FoxO1 along with a number of anti-oxidant gene expression was observed in radio-resistant subset of cancer stem cell population. By keeping ROS low, CSC increased resistance to oxidizing damage of therapeutics and potentially contributed to relapse and poor patient survival.⁸²

Oncogenic transformation frequently accompanies elevation of intracellular ROS and ensuing DNA damages. Efficient DNA repair mechanisms thus favor tumor cell survival, drug resistance and predict a poor prognosis for patients. Logically, targeting DNA repair machinery in combination with DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics would be effective in cancers with elevated ROS and DNA lesions. Notably, enhanced Chk2 expression and DNA repair efficiency has been demonstrated in the glioma initiating cell (GIC) subpopulation of brain tumors, leading to the relapse of the disease.⁸³ Since multiple studies have observed the role of FoxO proteins in DNA repair pathway, it is plausible that therapy-induced FoxO activation may facilitate DNA repair. Indeed, Tran et al. (2002) reported that FoxO3 activation in UV irradiated cells results in G₂/M arrest and GADD45a-dependent DNA repair.⁴⁰ Furthermore, FOXO3 physically interacts with ATM and promotes histone H2AX
nuclear foci formation, intra-S-phase or G₂/M cell cycle checkpoints and the repair of damaged DNA.⁸⁴ Along with the direct transcriptional activation of ATM by FoxO3 as reported, the role of FoxO3 in DNA repair might be important for genomic stability and cellular survival in general. It is interesting to note that cellular defects seen in FoxO3-deficient cells may be mediated partly through reduction in ATM expression and accumulation of ROS.⁸⁵ In this regard, the intrinsic function of FoxOs in ROS suppression and enhancing DNA repair paradoxically favors therapeutic resistance. Similar to other critical components of mammalian tumor suppressor network, inhibition of FoxOs may produce synthetic lethal interactions with other mutations that make cancer cells dependent on FoxO-mediated survival. Hence, the inherent function of FoxO in therapy-induced genotoxic stress is to detoxify and repair in order to promote the survival of cells. The pro-apoptotic function of FoxO commonly seen in diverse cellular context is likely to reflect an irreparable level of damage. Thus, an effective strategy to selectively activate this important function should benefit cancer therapy.

### Homeostatic Feedback Regulator

The feedback loop of RTK-PI3K-AKT-FoxO is noteworthy in understanding the cellular response to the inhibition of different components of this signaling pathway. A number of reports noted the hyper-activation of AKT when the activated mutant forms of FoxOs were introduced into various types of cells.³¹,⁵⁹,⁸⁶ Mechanistically, several indirect links have been forged to explain this tipped-off balance. Consensus is that FoxOs contribute to the intrinsic feedback regulation of PI3K-AKT signaling through transcriptional regulation of its targets involved in the upstream RTK and IRS input activity (Fig. 2). Apparently, this contradicts FoxO's role as a tumor suppressor, yet renders an explanation for the lack of epithelial origins of tumors found in FoxO knockout mice.¹⁶ An overall decrease in AKT activity in FoxO-deficient cells serves as a barrier to excessive cellular proliferation and transformation through multiple transcriptional targets. FoxOs implement a negative feedback loop and also maintain activity of survival pathways. Along the same lines, the contribution of FoxOs to the development of the acquired resistance to AKT inhibitor has been recently reported. AKT inhibitor (MK-2206) inhibits the mTORC1 arm of effectors but activates FoxO-dependent transcription of RTKs (HER3, IGF1R) and its multiple downstream signaling modules.⁸⁷ This alleviates S6K-mediated feedback inhibition on RTK signaling and increases RTK expression (Fig. 2). Together, FoxO contributes as a critical booster of RTK signaling in AKT-inhibited cells. Thus, the activation status of FoxOs in this context may serve as a reliable index to predict development of drug-resistance.

---

**Figure 2. Feedback regulation of the pathway. FoxO operates an important feedback loop by transcriptional regulation of RTK-(IRS)-AKT signaling in order to keep the survival pathway active. Activated FoxO inhibits mTORC1 by inducing Sestrin 3 and activates AKT by elevating Rictor in TSC WT cells. In TSC KO cells, constitutively active mTORC1 and S6K phosphorylates and inactivates IRS and Akt. This triggers the FoxO-mediated feedback response to restore RTK-(IRS)-AKT activity.**

---

### Autophagy-Dependent Cellular Survival During Energy Crisis

A growing number of reports support the function of FoxOs in cellular autophagy process. Initially highlighted as an important mediator of muscle disuse-induced atrophy process, FoxOs transcriptionally activate components of the lysosomal protein degradation pathway (LC3, BNIP3, Atg12, GABARAPL1) during autophagy response.⁸⁸ Autophagy is a critical process that contributes to cellular survival under nutrient deprivation.⁸⁹ Thus, inhibition of autophagy sensitizes cells to poor adaptability to extracellular changes. The role of autophagy in tumor suppression is yet to be defined but promising laboratory studies targeting the pathway showed its role in supporting tumor maintenance.⁹⁰,⁹¹ In particular, administration of Chloroquine to a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma bearing animal led to a decrease in tumor burden, proposing the potential for the therapeutic application of an FDA-approved drug in various human diseases where autophagy plays an important role. Mechanistically, failure to clear out defective mitochondria by macroautophagy in transformed cells jeopardizes cellular energy production and increased ROS and DNA damage. The functional significance of FoxO-mediated autophagy in tumor maintenance and survival upon metabolic stress warrants future investigation.

Conclusion

Currently, there are multiple drugs in trial that target the components of RTK-PI3K-AKT-mTORC1 pathway in different cancer types. With the increasing availability of mutation profiles from cancer patients, their responses to the therapeutics become more predictable. Given various biological activities of FoxOs reported to date, it may prove useful to define the precise role of FoxO-dependent cellular changes in specific cancer pathogenesis, particularly those associated with feedback regulation and cellular survival response. Such information will further rationally optimize current therapeutic regimens.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Ellison Medical Foundation (AG-NS-0646-10 to J.H.P.) and the Department of Defense (PC100356 to B.G.).

References

1. Toker A, Cantley LC. Signalling through the lipid products of phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase. Nature 1997; 387:673-6.
2. Cantley LC, Neel BG. New insights into tumor suppression: PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide-3-kinase/AKT pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:4240-5.
3. Alessi DR, James SR, Downes CP, Holmes AB, Gaffney PR, Reese CB, et al. Characterization of a 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase which phosphorylates and activates protein kinase Balpha. Curr Biol 1997; 7:261-9.
4. Sarbassov DD, Guertin DA, Ali SM, Sabatini DM. Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictor-mTOR complex. Science (New York, NY) 2005; 307:1098-101.
5. Manning BD, Cantley LC. AKT/PKB signaling: navigating downstream. Cell 2007; 129:1261-74.
6. Manning J, Beutler K, Knepper MA, Vehaskari VM. Upregulation of renal BSC1 and TSC in prenatally programmed hypertension. Am J Physiol 2002; 283:202-6.
7. Inoki K, Li Y, Zhu T, Wu J, Guan KL. TSC2 is phosphorylated and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. Nat Cell Biol 2002; 4:648-57.
8. Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to control cell growth and survival. Cell 2003; 115:577-90.
9. Corradetti MN, Inoki K, Bardeesy N, DePinho RA, Guan KL. Regulation of the TSC pathway by LKB1: evidence of a molecular link between tuberous sclerosis complex and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Genes Dev 2004; 18:1533-8.
10. Yuan TL, Cantley LC. PI3K pathway alterations in cancer: variations on a theme. Oncogene 2008; 27:5497-510.
11. Myatt SS, Wang J, Monteiro LJ, Christian M, Ho KK, Fusi L, et al. Definition of microRNAs that repress expression of the tumor suppressor gene FOXO1 in endometrial cancer. Cancer Res 70:367-77.
12. Dong XY, Chen C, Sun X, Guo P, Vessella RL, Wang RX, et al. FOXO1A is a candidate for the 13q14 tumor suppressor gene inhibiting androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2006; 66:6998-7006.
13. Cancer Genome Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature 2008; 455:1061-8.
14. Hosaka T, Biggs WH, 3rd, Tieu D, Boyer AD, Varkey NM, Cavenee WK, et al. Disruption of forkhead transcription factor (FOXO) family members in mice reveals their functional diversification. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101:2975-80.
15. Castrillon DH, Miao L, Kollipara R, Horner JW, DePinho RA. Suppression of ovarian follicle activation in mice by the transcription factor Foxo3a. Science 2003; 301:215-8.
16. Paik JH, Kollipara R, Chu G, Ji H, Xiao Y, Ding Z, et al. FoxOs are lineage-restricted redundant tumor suppressors and regulate endothelial cell homeostasis. Cell 2007; 128:309-23.
17. Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, et al. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. Cell 1999; 96:857-68.
18. Furuyama T, Nakazawa T, Nakano I, Mori N. Identification of the differential distribution patterns of mRNAs and consensus binding sequences for mouse DAF-16 homologues. Biochem J 2000; 349:629-34.
19. Ramaswamy S, Nakamura N, Sansal I, Bergeron L, Sellers WR. A novel mechanism of gene regulation and tumor suppression by the transcription factor FKHR. Cancer Cell 2002; 2:81-91.
20. van der Vos KE, Coffer PJ. FOXO-binding partners: it takes two to tango. Oncogene 2008; 27:2289-99.
21. Van Der Heide LP, Hoekman MF, Smidt MP. The ins and outs of FoxO shuttling: mechanisms of FoxO translocation and transcriptional regulation. Biochem J 2004; 380:297-309.
22. Calnan DR, Brunet A. The FoxO code. Oncogene 2008; 27:2276-88.
23. Hu MC, Lee DF, Xia W, Golfman LS, Ou-Yang F, Yang JY, et al. IkappaB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. Cell 2004; 117:225-37.
24. Gomis RR, Alarcon C, He W, Wang Q, Seoane J, Lash A, et al. A FoxO-Smad synexpression group in human keratinocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:12747-52.
25. Seoane J, Le HV, Shen L, Anderson SA, Massague J. Integration of Smad and forkhead pathways in the control of neuroepithelial and glioblastoma cell proliferation. Cell 2004; 117:211-23.
26. Corral J, Forster A, Thompson S, Lampert F, Kaneko Y, Slater R, et al. Acute leukemias of different lineages have similar MLL gene fusions encoding related chimeric proteins resulting from chromosomal translocation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90:8538-42.
27. Shapiro DN, Sublett JE, Li B, Valentine MB, Morris SW, Noll M. The gene for PAX7, a member of the paired-box-containing genes, is localized on human chromosome arm 1p36. Genomics 1993; 17:767-9.
28. Parry P, Wei Y, Evans G. Cloning and characterization of the t(X;11) breakpoint from a leukemic cell line identify a new member of the forkhead gene family. Genes Chromosomes Canc 1994; 11:79-84.
29. Hillion J, Le Coniat M, Jonveaux P, Berger R, Bernard OA. AF6q21, a novel partner of the MLL gene in t(6;11)(q21;q23), defines a forkhead transcriptional factor subfamily. Blood 1997; 90:3714-9.
30. Lagutina I, Conway SJ, Sublett J, Grosfeld GC. Pax3-FKHR knock-in mice show developmental aberrations but do not develop tumors. Mol Cell Biol 2002; 22:7204-16.
31. Accili D, Arden KC. FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism, differentiation and transformation. Cell 2004; 117:421-6.
32. Jacobs FM, van der Heide LP, Wijchers PJ, Burbach JP, Hoekman MF, Smidt MP. FoxO6, a novel member of the FoxO class of transcription factors with distinct shuttling dynamics. J Biol Chem 2003; 278:35959-67.
33. Furukawa-Hibi Y, Yoshida-Araki K, Ohta T, Ikeda K, Motoyama N. FOXO forkhead transcription factors induce G(2)-M checkpoint in response to oxidative stress. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:26729-32.
34. Martinez-Gac L, Marques M, Garcia Z, Campanero MR, Carrera AC. Control of cyclin G2 mRNA expression by forkhead transcription factors: novel mechanism for cell cycle control by phosphoinositide-3-kinase and forkhead. Mol Cell Biol 2004; 24:2181-9.
35. Kops GJ, Medema RH, Glassford J, Essers MA, Dijkers PF, Coffer PJ, et al. Control of cell cycle exit and entry by protein kinase B-regulated forkhead transcription factors. Mol Cell Biol 2002; 22:2025-36.
36. Medema RH, Kops GJ, Bos JL, Burgering BM. AFX-like Forkhead transcription factors mediate cell cycle regulation by Ras and PKB through p27kip1. Nature 2000; 404:782-7.
37. Schmidt M, Fernandez de Mattos S, van der Horst A, Klompmaker R, Kops GJ, Lam EW, et al. Cell cycle inhibition by FoxO forkhead transcription factors involves downregulation of cyclin D. Mol Cell Biol 2002; 22:7842-52.
38. Evans-Anderson HJ, Alfieri CM, Yutzey KE. Regulation of cardiomyocyte proliferation and myocardial growth during development by FOXO transcription factors. Circ Res 2008; 102:686-94.
39. Katayama K, Nakamura A, Sugimoto Y, Tsuruo T, Fujita N. FOXO transcription factor-dependent p15(INK4b) and p19(INK4d) expression. Oncogene 2008; 27:1677-86.
40. Tran H, Brunet A, Grenier JM, Datta SR, Furnace AJ Jr, DiStefano PS, et al. DNA repair pathway stimulated by the forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a through the Gadd45 protein. Science 2002; 296:530-4.
41. Siegel RM, Frederiksen JK, Zacharias DA, Chan FK, Johnson M, Lynch D, et al. Fas preassociation required for apoptosis signaling and dominant inhibition by pathogenic mutations. Science 2000; 288:2354-7.
42. Alvarez B, Martinez AC, Burgering BM, Carrera AC. Forkhead transcription factors contribute to execution of the mitotic programme in mammals. Nature 2001; 413:744-7.
43. Dijkers PF, Medema RH, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, Coffer PJ. Expression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bim is regulated by the forkhead transcription factor FKHR-L1. Curr Biol 2000; 10:1201-4.
44. Dijkers PF, Birkenkamp KU, Lam EW, Thomas NS, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, et al. FKHR-L1 can act as a critical effector of cell death induced by cytokine withdrawal: protein kinase B-enhanced cell survival through maintenance of mitochondrial integrity. J Cell Biol 2002; 156:531-42.
45. Stahl M, Dijkers PF, Kops GJ, Lens SM, Coffer PJ, Burgering BM, et al. The forkhead transcription factor FoxO regulates transcription of p27kip1 and Bim in response to IL-2. J Immunol 2002; 168:5024-31.
46. Modur V, Nagarajan R, Evers BM, Milbrandt J. FOXO proteins regulate tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand expression. Implications for PTEN mutation in prostate cancer. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:47928-37.
47. Tang TT, Dowbenko D, Jackson A, Toney L, Lewin DA, Dent AL, et al. The forkhead transcription factor AFX activates apoptosis by induction of the BCL-6 transcriptional repressor. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:14255-65.
48. Brenkman AB, de Keizer PL, van den Broek NJ, Jochemsen AG, Burgering BM. Mdm2 induces mono-ubiquitination of FOXO4. PloS One 2008; 3:2819.

49. Fei P, Bernhard EJ, El-Deiry WS. Tissue-specific induction of p53 targets in vivo. Cancer Res 2002; 62:7316-27.
50. El-Deiry WS. Transactivation of repair genes by BRCA1. Cancer Biol Ther 2002; 1:490-1.
51. Bouchard C, Lee S, Paulus-Hock V, Loddenkemper C, Eilers M, Schmitt CA. FoxO transcription factors suppress Myc-driven lymphomagenesis via direct activation of Arf. Genes Dev 2007; 21:2775-87.
52. Renault VM, Thekkat PU, Hoang KL, White JL, Brady CA, Kenzelmann Broz D, et al. The pro-longevity gene FoxO3 is a direct target of the p53 tumor suppressor. Oncogene 2011; 30:3207-2.
53. You H, Mak TW. Crosstalk between p53 and FOXO transcription factors. Cell Cycle 2005; 4:37-8.
54. Lee CH, Inoki K, Karbowniczek M, Petroulakis E, Sonenberg N, Henske EP, et al. Constitutive mTOR activation in TSC mutants sensitizes cells to energy starvation and genomic damage via p53. EMBO J 2007; 26:4812-23.
55. Molinolo AA, Hewitt SM, Amornphimoltham P, Keelawat S, Rangdaeng S, Meneses Garcia A, et al. Dissecting the Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin signaling network: emerging results from the head and neck cancer tissue array initiative. Clin Cancer Res 2007; 13:4964-73.
56. Levine AJ, Feng Z, Mak TW, You H, Jin S. Coordination and communication between the p53 and IGF-1-AKT-TOR signal transduction pathways. Genes Dev 2006; 20:267-75.
57. Budanov AV, Karin M. p53 target genes sestrin1 and sestrin2 connect genotoxic stress and mTOR signaling. Cell 2008; 134:451-60.
58. Cheung AM, Mak TW. PTEN in the haematopoietic system and its therapeutic indications. Trends Mol Med 2006; 12:503-5.
59. Chen CC, Jeon SM, Bhaskar PT, Nogueira V, Sundararajan D, Tonic I, et al. FoxOs inhibit mTORC1 and activate Akt by inducing the expression of Sestrin3 and Rictor. Dev Cell 18:592-604.
60. Lee JH, Budanov AV, Park EJ, Birse R, Kim TE, Perkins GA, et al. Sestrin as a feedback inhibitor of TOR that prevents age-related pathologies. Science 2010; 327:1223-8.
61. Manning BD, Logsdon MN, Lipovsky AI, Abbott D, Kwiatkowski DJ, Cantley LC. Feedback inhibition of Akt signaling limits the growth of tumors lacking Tsc2. Genes Dev 2005; 19:1773-8.
62. Gan B, Lim C, Chu G, Hua S, Ding Z, Collins M, et al. FoxOs enforce a progression checkpoint to constrain mTORC1-activated renal tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 18:472-84.
63. Collado M, Serrano M. The senescent side of tumor suppression. Cell Cycle 2005; 4:1722-4.
64. Campisi J. Suppressing cancer: the importance of being senescent. Science 2005; 309:886-7.
65. de Keizer PL, Packer LM, Szypowska AA, Riedl-Polderman PE, van den Broek NJ, de Bruin A, et al. Activation of forkhead box O transcription factors by oncogenic BRAF promotes p21cip1-dependent senescence. Cancer Res 70:8526-36.
66. Miyauchi H, Minamino T, Tateno K, Kunieda T, Toko H, Komuro I. Akt negatively regulates the in vitro lifespan of human endothelial cells via a p53/p21-dependent pathway. EMBO J 2004; 23:212-20.
67. Blagosklonny MV. Cell cycle arrest is not senescence. Aging 3:94-101.
68. Alimonti A, Nardella C, Chen Z, Clohessy JG, Carracedo A, Trotman LC, et al. A novel type of cellular senescence that can be enhanced in mouse models and human tumor xenografts to suppress prostate tumorigenesis. J Clin Invest 120:681-93.
69. Semenza GL. Defining the role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in cancer biology and therapeutics. Oncogene 29:625-34.
70. Emerling BM, Weinberg F, Liu JL, Mak TW, Chandel NS. PTEN regulates p300-dependent hypoxia-inducible factor 1 transcriptional activity through Forkhead transcription factor 3a (FOXO3a). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105:2622-7.
71. Tang TT, Lasky LA. The forkhead transcription factor FOXO4 induces the downregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha by a von Hippel-Lindau protein-independent mechanism. J Biol Chem 2003; 278:30125-35.
72. Bakker WJ, Harris IS, Mak TW. FOXO3a is activated in response to hypoxic stress and inhibits HIF1-induced apoptosis via regulation of CITED2. Mol Cell 2007; 28:941-53.
73. Goto T, Takano M. Transcriptional role of FOXO1 in drug resistance through antioxidant defense systems. Adv Exp Med Biol 2009; 665:171-9.
74. Hui RC, Francis RE, Guest SK, Costa JR, Gomes AR, Myatt SS, et al. Doxorubicin activates FOXO3a to induce the expression of multidrug resistance gene ABCB1 (MDR1) in K562 leukemic cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2008; 7:670-8.
75. Hui RC, Gomes AR, Constantinidou D, Costa JR, Karadedou CT, Fernandez de Mattos S, et al. The forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a increases phosphoinositide-3-kinase/Akt activity in drug-resistant leukemic cells through induction of PIK3CA expression. Mol Cell Biol 2008; 28:5886-98.
76. Han CY, Cho KB, Choi HS, Han HK, Kang KW. Role of FoxO1 activation in MDR1 expression in adriamycin-resistant breast cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 2008; 29:1837-44.
77. Naka K, Hoshii T, Muraguchi T, Tadokoro Y, Ooshio T, Kondo Y, et al. TGFbeta-FOXO signalling maintains leukaemia-initiating cells in chronic myeloid leukaemia. Nature 2010; 463:676-80.
78. Tothova Z, Kollipara R, Huntly BJ, Lee BH, Castrillon DH, Cullen DE, et al. FoxOs are critical mediators of hematopoietic stem cell resistance to physiologic oxidative stress. Cell 2007; 128:325-39.
79. Paik JH, Ding Z, Narurkar R, Ramkissoon S, Muller F, Kamoun WS, et al. FoxOs cooperatively regulate diverse pathways governing neural stem cell homeostasis. Cell Stem Cell 2009; 5:540-53.
80. Renault VM, Rafalski VA, Morgan AA, Salih DA, Brett JO, Webb AE, et al. FoxO3 regulates neural stem cell homeostasis. Cell Stem Cell 2009; 5:527-39.
81. Chiribau CB, Cheng L, Cucoranu IC, Yu YS, Clempus RE, Sorescu D. FOXO3A regulates peroxiredoxin III expression in human cardiac fibroblasts. J Biol Chem 2008; 283:8211-7.
82. Diehn M, Cho RW, Lobo NA, Kalisky T, Dorie MJ, Kulp AN, et al. Association of reactive oxygen species levels and radioresistance in cancer stem cells. Nature 2009; 458:780-3.
83. Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB, et al. Glioma stem cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA damage response. Nature 2006; 444:756-60.
84. Tsai WB, Chung YM, Takahashi Y, Xu Z, Hu MC. Functional interaction between FOXO3a and ATM regulates DNA damage response. Nat Cell Biol 2008; 10:460-7.
85. Yalcin S, Zhang X, Luciano JP, Mungamuri SK, Marinkovic D, Vercherat C, et al. Foxo3 is essential for the regulation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated and oxidative stress-mediated homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells. J Biol Chem 2008; 283:25692-705.
86. Ni YG, Wang N, Cao DJ, Sachan N, Morris DJ, Gerard RD, et al. FoxO transcription factors activate Akt and attenuate insulin signaling in heart by inhibiting protein phosphatases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104:20517-22.
87. Chandarlapaty S, Sawai A, Scaltriti M, Rodrik-Outmezguine V, Grbovic-Huezo O, Serra V, et al. AKT inhibition relieves feedback suppression of receptor tyrosine kinase expression and activity. Cancer Cell 2011; 19:58-71.
88. Zhao J, Brault JJ, Schild A, Cao P, Sandri M, Schiaffino S, et al. FoxO3 coordinately activates protein degradation by the autophagic/lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in atrophying muscle cells. Cell Metab 2007; 6:472-83.
89. White E. Role of the metabolic stress responses of apoptosis and autophagy in tumor suppression. Ernst Schering Found Symp Proc 2007; 23-34.
90. Guo JY, Chen HY, Mathew R, Fan J, Strohecker AM, Karsli-Uzunbas G, et al. Activated Ras requires autophagy to maintain oxidative metabolism and tumorigenesis. Genes Dev 2011; 25:460-70.
91. Yang S, Wang X, Contino G, Liesa M, Sahin E, Ying H, et al. Pancreatic cancers require autophagy for tumor growth. Genes Dev 2011; 25:717-29.
