
# RAGE-Dependent Activation of the Oncoprotein Pim1 Plays a Critical Role in Systemic Vascular Remodeling Processes

Jolyane Meloche, Roxane Paulin, Audrey Courboulin, Caroline Lambert, Marjorie Barrier, Pierre Bonnet, Malik Bisserier, Mélanie Roy, Mark A. Sussman, Mohsen Agharazii, Sébastien Bonnet

**Objective—** Vascular remodeling diseases (VRD) are mainly characterized by inflammation and a vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) proliferative and anti-apoptotic phenotype. Recently, the activation of the advanced glycation endproducts receptor (RAGE) has been shown to promote VSMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis in VRD in a signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3-dependent manner. Interestingly, we previously described in both cancer and VRD that the sustainability of this proliferative and antiapoptotic phenotype requires activation of the transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T-cells). In cancer, NFAT activation is dependent of the oncoprotein provirus integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (Pim1), which is regulated by STAT3 and activated in VRD. Therefore, we hypothesized that RAGE/STAT3 activation in VSMC activates Pim1, promoting NFAT and thus VSMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis.

**Methods/Results—** In vitro, freshly isolated human carotid VSMCs exposed to RAGE activator Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) for 48 hours had (1) activated STAT3 (increased P-STAT3/STAT3 ratio and P-STAT3 nuclear translocation); (2) increased STAT3-dependent Pim1 expression resulting in NFATc1 activation; and (3) increased Pim1/NFAT-dependent VSMC proliferation (PCNA, Ki67) and resistance to mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis (TMRM, Annexin V, TUNEL). Similarly to RAGE inhibition (small interfering RNA [siRNA]), Pim1, STAT3 and NFATc1 inhibition (siRNA) reversed these abnormalities in human carotid VSMC. Moreover, carotid artery VSMCs isolated from Pim1 knockout mice were resistant to CML-induced VSMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. In vivo, RAGE inhibition decreases STAT3/Pim1/NFAT activation, reversing vascular remodeling in the rat carotid artery-injured model.

**Conclusion—** RAGE activation accounts for many features of VRD including VSMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis by the activation of STAT3/Pim1/NFAT axis. Molecules aimed to inhibit RAGE could be of a great therapeutic interest for the treatment of VRD. (Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:2114-2124.)

**Key Words:** apoptosis ■ oncogenes ■ vascular biology ■ vascular muscle

---

Vascular remodeling disease (VRD) such as hypertension, atherosclerosis and postangioplasty restenosis are characterized by increased media wall thickness and neointimal formation. This histological remodeling has been attributed in part to an increase in vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and resistance to apoptosis.¹⁻³ This proliferative and antiapoptotic phenotype is mediated by a variety of growth factors (platelet derived growth factor), cytokines, and chemokines⁴⁻⁶ stimulating prosurvival factors like survivin, which by inhibiting apoptosis⁷ and promoting mitotic progression enhances neointimal formation.⁸ We recently described that the sustainability of this phenotype is due to the activation of the transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T-cell).¹,⁹ Once activated, NFAT promotes inflammation by stimulating cytokine production¹⁰ and VSMC proliferation by decreasing K⁺ channel,¹ such as Kv1.5, which promotes [Ca²⁺]i and apoptosis resistance, in part by increasing Bcl2 expression. This results in subsequent mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψm) hyperpolarization, and trapping of proapoptotic factors, such as cytochrome c, in the mitochondria.¹¹ The mechanisms accounting for NFAT activation in VRD remain undetermined.

Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are now recognized as bioactive circulating molecules able to enhance proliferative pathways through their receptor RAGE.¹² Circulating AGEs are particularly elevated in diabetic¹³ and hypertensive subjects¹⁴,¹⁵ and contribute to vascular remodeling processes associated with inflammation.¹⁶⁻¹⁸ Although

---

Received on: March 7, 2011; final version accepted on: May 31, 2011.
From the Department of Medicine (J.M., R.P., A.C., C.L., M.R., M.A., S.B.), Université Laval, Québec City, Canada; SDSU Heart Institute (M.A.S.), Biology Department, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA; LAB.P.ART (P.B.), Faculty of Medicine, University François Rabelais, Tours Cedex, France; Université Bordeaux Segalen (M.B.), Bordeaux Cedex, France.
J.M. and R.P. have contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to Dr Sébastien Bonnet, Centre de recherche de l’Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 10 rue McMahon, Québec, Qc, G1R 2J6 Canada. E-mail sebastien.bonnet@crhdq.ulaval.ca
© 2011 American Heart Association, Inc.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol is available at http://atvb.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.230573
Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org on June 19, 2015

Meloche et al RAGE/Pim1/NFAT Activation in Vascular Remodeling 2115

AGEs are part of a wide family of molecules, only a few have been characterized and identified in human tissues. These include Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML), pentosidine, pyr- raline, and immidazole,¹⁹ with only CML being able to increase RAGE signaling.¹⁷ Finally, because CML is the most commonly encountered AGE in vivo,²⁰ is present in athero- sclerotic lesions,²¹,²² and its binding to RAGE correlates with carotid artery diameter in normoglycemic patients,²³ we decided to focus our study on the role of CML/RAGE interaction in VRD.

Although RAGE activation in neointimal formation has been established,²⁴ the mechanism by which RAGE promotes VRD remains unknown. Recently, RAGE activation has been associated with an increase in signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 pathway.²⁵ STAT3 has been shown to be implicated in VSMC proliferation.²⁶–²⁸ In cancer, STAT3 promotes the expression of the Provirus integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (Pim1),²⁹ a proto- oncogene encoding a serine/threonine protein kinase.³⁰ Over- expression of Pim1 is linked to the development and progres- sion of several cancers by increasing cell proliferation/ survival and resistance to apoptosis.³¹–³³ Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that Pim1 could also be implicated in VRD.³⁴ Interestingly, Pim1 activation enhanced NFATc1–4 activity in rat PC12 cells and lymphoid cells.³⁵ Our team recently showed that the STAT3/Pim1/NFATc2 axis is re- sponsible for abnormal SMC proliferation in pulmonary arteries.²⁷ Thus, the RAGE-dependent activation of STAT3 in VSMCs could trigger Pim1/NFAT axis activation and pro- mote VRD.

The present study demonstrated, indeed, that RAGE acti- vation triggers STAT3 accounting for a Pim1-dependent NFAT activation promoting VSMC proliferation and resis- tance to apoptosis. Similarly to RAGE inhibition, Pim1 silencing prevented and reversed RAGE-dependent propro- liferative and antiapoptotic phenotype seen in cultured VSMCs stimulated by CML. In vivo, RAGE inhibition decreases STAT3/Pim1/NFAT activation preventing vascular remodeling in carotid artery postangioplasty.

### Methods

An expanded Methods section is available at http://atvb.ahajournals.org.

#### Cell Culture

Primary cultured human carotid artery smooth muscle cells (CASMCs) from 2 healthy donors were used (less passage 6), see the expanded supplemental Methods section. Mouse carotid artery smooth muscle cells were freshly isolated from Pim1 knockout (KO) mice and proper control littermates. Final concentration of 1 μg/mL of CML-bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as RAGE agonist, and NFAT competitor peptide, VIVIT, was used at 4 μmol/L. CASMCs were transfected by CaPO₄ precipitation with 20 nmol/L small interfering RNA (siRNA) oligonucleotides.

#### ELISA Assay

CML auto-antibody and direct CML ELISA assays (Circulex) were performed following manufacturer’s instructions. Serum antibodies anti-CML levels were studied in human subjects with history of cardiovascular disease (n=15) and controls (n=44). Cardiovascular disease was defined as history of coronary artery revascularization, myocardial infarction with abnormal wall motion by ultrasound, ischemic stroke, and symptomatic peripheral vascular disease. The

---

Table. Nε-(Carboxymethyl)lysine Levels in Controls and in Patients with Cardiovascular Disease

| Control (n=44) | CVD (n=15) | P Value |
|----------------|------------|---------|
| Age (years)    | 57±8       | 56±11   | ns      |
| Male (%)       | 68%        | 73%     | ns      |
| Albumin (g/L)  | 40.0±3.8   | 38.7±2.4| ns      |
| Ab anti-CML (ng/L) | 25.7±26.5 | 54.4±51.4 | 0.012  |
| CML-Albumin ratio (μg/g) | 0.64±0.64 | 1.43±1.43 | 0.007 |

Values are means ± SD; Bold values indicate P values showing differences between patients with and without cardiovascular diseases. CML indicates Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ns, not significant.

protocol was approved by the institutional review board and patients provided informed consent. No sex-based or racial/ethnic-based differences were present.

#### Whole Cell Patch Clamping

Whole cell patch clamping was performed on cells voltage-clamped at a holding potential of –70 mV. Currents were evoked by 200 ms test pulses from –70 to +70 mV with 20mV steps as previously described.¹ To quantify the effects of CML-BSA on voltage-gated K⁺ current (Kv), 4-aminopyridine 1 mmol/L (4-AP), a Kv channel blocker, was used.¹

#### Confocal Microscopy/ Immunofluorescence, Immunoblotting

Sections of carotids and human CASMCs were used for immunfluorescence staining (see the expanded supplemental Methods section).

#### Nuclear Translocation Assays

STAT3 and NFATc1 activity were estimated by the percentage of cells presenting a P-STAT3 or NFATc1 nuclear pattern.

#### Luciferase Assay

Cells were lysed, and luminescence was detected using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luminescence counts were standardized to protein content.

#### Carotid Artery (Balloon) Injury Model

Three groups of rats were studied. Sham operated and rats with angioplasty received either negative control siRNA (siSCRM) or siRAGE (both 10 μmol/L).

#### Statistics

Data are presented as mean ± SD with Mann-Whitney U test for human serum CML levels and mean ± SEM for all other studies. Normality of our data were assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. All our data were normally distributed (P>0.05). For comparison between 2 means, we used unpaired Student t-test and for comparison between more than 2 means, we used 1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer tests. Probability values less than 0.001 (***) , 0.01 (**), and 0.05 (*) were considered as statistically significant.

---

### Results

#### CML-Circulating Levels are Increased in Patient With Vascular Diseases

It was recently described that plasma CML levels are significantly higher in patients presenting an increased carotid diameter or an acute myocardial infarction.²³,³⁶ In order to extend these observations, we studied CML plasma levels in

Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org at NY UNIV MED CTR LIBR on June 19, 2015
a cohort of patients with cardiovascular disease as defined by  
a history of coronary artery revascularization (60%), ischemic  
stroke (20%), and symptomatic peripheral vascular disease  
(33%). Plasma levels of antibodies anti-CML were measured  
by ELISA assay.³⁷ There is a 52% increase (*P* = 0.012) in  
CML plasma levels in patients with cardiovascular diseases  
compared with control patients (Table). This result suggests  
that CML is implicated in many vascular dysfunctions; thus,  
a better understanding of its role may be of great therapeutic  
interest.

### CML Triggers STAT3 Activation Through a  
RAGE-Dependent Mechanism in CASMCs  

To determine whether CML triggers STAT3 activation,  
CASMCs were exposed to CML-BSA (1 μg.mL⁻¹) (dose  
previously used and shown to have biological effects³⁸) for  
15, 30, 60 minutes and 48 hours. After a 15-minute exposure,  
CML-BSA–treated cells showed a sustained 1.5-fold  
increase in STAT3 activation measured by immunoblots (ie,  
Y705-phosphorylated STAT3/total STAT3 ratio normalized  
to smooth muscle actin) compared with control CASMCs  
(*n* = 3, *P* < 0.05; Figure 1A). This finding was confirmed by a  
STAT3 nuclear translocation assay on CASMCs (Figure  
1B). CML-BSA increases the percentage of PY705-STAT3  
(green) colocalizing with the nucleus (blue) producing a yellow  
pattern (*n* = 50 CASMC/experiment for 4 experiments, *P* < 0.01;  
Supplemental Figure IA). To determine whether RAGE is  
implicated in the CML-BSA–dependent activation of  
STAT3, CASMCs were exposed to CML-BSA in presence  
of either RAGE siRNA or its control (siSCRM). RAGE  
inhibition reverses CML-BSA–dependent STAT3 activation  
(decreased PY705-STAT3/STAT3 ratio in immunoblots, *n* = 4, *P* < 0.05 and yellow staining in nuclear translocation assay, *n* = 50 CASMCs/experiment for 4 experiments, *P* < 0.05) compared with siSCRM (Figure 1B and Supplemental Figure IA).

### CML-BSA–Dependent STAT3 Activation Increases  
Pim1 and NFATc1  

Because STAT3 has been demonstrated as a putative regulator of the NFAT activator Pim1 in cancer cells,³⁹,⁴⁰ and as  
Pim1/NFAT is implicated in VRD,⁴¹ we measured whether  
the CML-BSA–dependent STAT3 activation in CASMCs  
increases Pim1-dependent NFATc1 (the NFAT isoform expressed in CASMC⁴²) expression and activation. Using both  
qRT-PCR and immunoblot, we demonstrated that CML-BSA  
significantly increases Pim1 and NFATc1 mRNA (300- and  
800-fold increase, *n* = 4, *P* < 0.001, respectively; Figure 1C)  
and protein levels (both 2.4-fold increase; *n* = 4, *P* < 0.05;  
Supplemental Figure IB). Interestingly, the timing of Pim1/  
NFAT protein activation occurs 30 minutes post-CML-BSA  
exposure, while STAT3 activation occurred within 15 minutes, suggesting, as in cancer, a possible implication of  
STAT3 in Pim1/NFAT regulation. This was confirmed by  
qRT-PCR, measuring Pim1 and NFATc1 mRNA levels in  
with RAGE and STAT3 siRNAs. Both siRAGE and  
siSTAT3 decreased Pim1 and NFATc1 expression compared with siSCRM (140- and 300-fold decrease, *n* = 4,  
*P* < 0.001, respectively; Figure 1C). (Note that RAGE,  

STAT3, and Pim1 siRNAs efficiencies were confirmed; see Supplemental Figure IIA, IIB, and IIC). NFATc1  
activation, measured by nuclear translocation and luciferase assays, confirmed this finding (*n* = 50 CASMC/  
experiment for 4 experiments, *P* < 0.001 and *n* = 5, *P* < 0.05, respectively; Figure 2A).  

Because the Akt/GSK3β pathway can also activate  
Pim1/NFAT in CASMC, we studied whether CML-BSA  
increases the Akt/GSK3β pathway. CML-BSA does not  
increase Akt expression or activation as measured by  
immunoblot (ie, PS473-Akt/Akt ratio, *n* = 3; Supplemental  
Figure IIIA).  

Finally, in addition to the NFAT axis, STAT3 is recognized as an activator of the prosurvival protein survivin, which is critical in the remodeling process of VRD.⁸,⁴³,⁴⁴ To determine whether CML-BSA–dependent activation of  
STAT3 triggers survivin in VRD, survivin expression was  
measured in CML-BSA–treated CASMCs in presence of  
either RAGE or STAT3 siRNA or their proper control.  
Both RAGE and STAT3 inhibition decreased survivin  
expression (*n* = 4, *P* < 0.01; Supplemental Figure IIIB).  

### CML-BSA Enhances CASMC Proliferation and  
Decreases Apoptosis Through a  
RAGE/Pim1/NFATc1-Dependent Mechanism  

We previously showed that NFATc1 activation in VRD accounts for the sustainability of the proliferative and antiapoptotic phenotype of CASMCs by decreasing whole cell K⁺ current, depolarizing CASMC membrane potential, and increasing \[Ca²⁺\]i and mitochondrial membrane potential (∆Ψm) hyperpolarization.¹ To determine whether these effects were mediated by the CML-BSA–dependent activation of Pim1/NFAT through RAGE, we measured K⁺ current (patch clamp) \[Ca²⁺\]i (FLUO3); proliferation (Ki67 and PCNA); ∆Ψm (TMRM); and apoptosis (TUNEL and annexinV) in CASMCs treated with CML-BSA in presence of either Pim1 siRNA, NFAT inhibitor (VIVIT) (VIVIT efficiency is shown in Supplemental Figure IID, and the control peptide is not shown in graph because it has no effect as previously described,⁴¹ Supplemental Figure IIE), siRAGE, or siSTAT3.  

Using whole cell patch clamping, we demonstrated that  
CML-BSA decreases voltage-gated K⁺ current (*n* = at least 7 per group, *P* < 0.05; Figure 2B cell capacity were not different between CASMCs and average around 30pF), which is restored when RAGE is inhibited. As shown in Supplemental Figure IVA, CML-BSA has less 4-AP-sensitive current than control or siRAGE-treated CASMCs (*n* = 5 per group, *P* < 0.05). Because 4-AP is a voltage-dependant potassium channel blocker, the current diminution is a consequence of a decrease of cell membrane potassium channels (Kv1.5, for example) which confirms our hypothesis because NFAT is responsible of diminution of K channels transcription.¹¹ Representative currents of each conditions are shown in Supplemental Figure IVB.  

Decrease of K⁺ current causes an increase of CASMCs \[Ca²⁺\]i (1.7-fold increase, *n* = 50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, *P* < 0.001; Figure 2B and Supplemental Figure IVA) which stimulates cell proliferation (25% increase, *n* = 50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, *P* < 0.001) (Ki67,  
Meloche et al RAGE/Pim1/NFAT Activation in Vascular Remodeling 2117

A CML promotes STAT3 activation

| Control | CML 15 min | CML 30 min | CML 1h | Control | CML 48h |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PY705-STAT3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| STAT3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| sm-actin |  |  |  |  |  |

P-STAT3/STAT3  
normalized to sm-actin  

| Fold of control |  |
| --- | --- |
| 2.5 | * |
| 2.0 | * |
| 1.5 | * |
| 1.0 |  |
| 0.5 |  |
| 0.0 |  |

Control  
CML-BSA 15 minutes  
CML-BSA 30 minutes  
CML-BSA 1h  
CML-BSA 48h  

B STAT3 activation is mediated by RAGE  

P-STAT3 nuclear translocation assay  

| %STAT3 positive cells |  |
| --- | --- |
| 15 | *** |
| 10 | ** |
| 5 |  |
| 0 |  |

Control  
CML-BSA  
siSCRN+CML-BSA  
siRAGE+CML-BSA  

PY705-STAT3  
STAT3  
sm-actin  

P-STAT3/STAT3  
normalized to sm-actin  

| Fold of control |  |
| --- | --- |
| 2.5 | **** |
| 2.0 |  |
| 1.5 |  |
| 1.0 |  |
| 0.5 |  |
| 0.0 |  |

Control  
CML-BSA  
siSCRN+CML-BSA  
siRAGE+CML-BSA  

C CML promotes Pim1 and NFATc1 expression  

Pim1 mRNA expression  

| 2ΔCt to 18S |  |
| --- | --- |
| 4000 | *** |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 50 |  |
| 40 |  |
| 30 |  |
| 20 | *** |
| 10 |  |
| 0 | *** |

NFATc1 mRNA expression  

| 2ΔCt to 18S |  |
| --- | --- |
| 10000 | *** |
| 9000 |  |
| 8000 |  |
| 7000 |  |
| 6000 |  |
| 5000 |  |
| 4000 |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |

Control  
CML-BSA  
siSCRN+CML-BSA  
siRAGE+CML-BSA  
siSTAT3+CML-BSA  

Figure 1. Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine-bovine serum albumin (CML-BSA) enhances advanced glycation endproducts receptor (RAGE) expression and promotes STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 axis. A, CML-BSA promotes STAT3 activation after only a 15-minutes exposition and its activation is maintained for 48 hours (1.5-fold activation; immunoblot, n=3, P<0.05). B, STAT3 activation is measured by nuclear translocation assay (n=50 CASMC/experiment for 4 experiments, P<0.01). CML-BSA induces a 80% increase in STAT3 activation and RAGE blockade (by siRNA 20 nmol/L) decreases the activation by 60%. We also confirmed that STAT3 activation was mediated by RAGE by immunoblot, showing that CML-BSA induces a 1.6-fold increase and RAGE blockade decreases STAT3 activation (n=4, P<0.01). C, CML-BSA triggers Pim1 and NFATc1 expression (800-fold increase; qRT-PCR, n=4, P<0.001). RAGE and STAT3 inhibition by siRNA induce a 150- and 300-fold decrease in Pim1 and NFATc1 expression, respectively (qRT-PCR).

Figure 2B and PCNA, Supplemental Figure IIIC). Pim1, NFATc1, RAGE, or STAT3 inhibition reversed these effects (at least 30% decrease) (n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, P<0.005) (Figure 2B and Supplemental Figure IIIC). The fact that either siPim1, VIVIT, siRAGE, or siSTAT3 normalized [Ca²⁺]i and proliferation in CML-BSA-treated CASMCs with the same efficiency, suggests that their effects are not additive and that indeed the calcium-dependent proliferation is mediated by the RAGE/STAT3/Pim1/NFAT axis.

CML-BSA significantly increased ΔΨm hyperpolarization (greater red staining) (Figure 2D). Once again, RAGE, STAT3, Pim1, and NFATc1 inhibition (siRNA and VIVIT peptide) normalized ΔΨm compared, respectively, to siSCRN (for RAGE, STAT3, and Pim1) and to CML-BSA–treated cells (for NFAT) (1.9-fold increase, n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, P<0.001) (Figure 2C). ΔΨm normalization by RAGE/STAT3/ NFAT inhibition reverses the resistance to serum starvation (0.1% FBS for 24 hours) induced apoptosis measured by AnnexinV and

2118 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol September 2011

A NFATc1 activation by CML is Pim1 dependent

NFATc1 nuclear translocation assay

Luciferase assay

B CML decreases cell current, promotes \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) and proliferation

I/V curve

Intracellular Calcium

Ki67

C CML inhibits apoptosis by hyperpolarizing \(\Delta\psi m\)

Control CML-BSA CML-BSA + VIVIT

TMRM

CML-BSA CML-BSA CML-BSA CML-BSA
+ siSCRM + siRAGE + siSTAT3 + siPim1

Mitochondria hyperpolarization

AnnexinV

Figure 2. Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine-bovine serum albumin (CML-BSA) enhances Pim1 and nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT)c1 expression and activation, which promotes cell proliferation and inhibits apoptosis in human carotid artery smooth muscle cells. A, CML-BSA also promotes NFATc1 activation, ie, translocation to the nucleus, through a RAGE/STAT3/Pim1-dependent mechanism (over 30% increase; immunofluorescence, n=50 CASMC/experiment for 4 experiments, \(P<0.001\)), also measured by luciferase assay (n=5, \(P<0.05\)). B, CML-BSA decreases K⁺ current (n=7 per group, \(P<0.01\)), which promotes intracellular calcium entry measured by FLUO3-AM by immunofluorescence (1.7-fold increase, n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, \(P<0.001\)), which enhances cell proliferation. Cell proliferation was measured by activation of proliferation factor Ki67 (25% increase, n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, \(P<0.001\)). To calculate the percentage of proliferation: cells positive for proliferation factors activated divided by total number of cell [visualized by 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)]. C, CML-BSA hyperpolarizes mitochondrial membrane potential measured by tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (1.9-fold increase, n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, \(P<0.001\) ) which blocks cell death. CML-BSA inhibits apoptosis in CASMCs put in 0.1% of fetal bovine serum to stimulate apoptosis in normal cells (starvation) (n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, \(P<0.05\)). Apoptosis was measured by calculating the percentage of positive AnnexinV cells, divided by total number of cell (visualized by DAPI). CML-BSA induced apoptosis resistance is mediated by RAGE/STAT3/Pim1/NFAT pathway, showed by an increase of apoptosis when either one of these effectors is blocked (by VIVIT 4 μmol/L or siRNA 20 nmol/L).

TUNEL (n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, \(P<0.05\)) (Figure 2C and Supplemental Figure IIID, respectively). This finding demonstrates that, as for proliferation, apoptosis resistance in CML-BSA–treated CASMCs is due to the activation of the RAGE/STAT3/NFAT axis.

Pim1 KO Mice Are Resistant to RAGE-Induced VSMC Proliferation and Resistance to Apoptosis

To demonstrate that RAGE-dependent VSMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis rely on Pim1/NFATc1 activation, we freshly isolated CASMCs from Pim1 KO mice and

Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org at NY UNIV MED CTR LIBR on June 19, 2015
littermate control mice. VSMCs were then exposed to CML-BSA for 48 hours. As in humans, in control VSMCs, CML-BSA triggers STAT3 activation, ie, P-STAT3 nuclear translocation (n=30 cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, \(P<0.001\); Supplemental Figure VA) in both wild type (WT) and Pim1 KO mice. CML-BSA also triggers a RAGE-dependent NFATc1 activation in Pim1 WT-CASMCs (nuclear translocation assay) (n=30 cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, \(P<0.05\) ) (Supplemental Figure VB) promoting calcium release and proliferation (n=30 CASMC/experiment for 3 experiments, \(P<0.05\); Supplemental Figure VC), as well as mitochondrial membrane hyperpolarization and resistance to apoptosis (n=30 CASMC/experiment for 3 experiments, \(P<0.05\); Supplemental Figure VD). In Pim1 KO-CASMC, CML-BSA failed to activate NFATc1 and to promote proliferation and resistance to apoptosis (Supplemental Figure V).

Taken together, these findings demonstrated that CML-BSA triggers NFATc1 expression through STAT3 and NFATc1 activation through Pim1. Lack of NFATc1 activation in Pim1 KO-CASMCs demonstrated that the RAGE-dependent proliferation and resistance to apoptosis in CML-BSA–stimulated CASMCs rely mainly on the Pim1/NFATc1 axis.

### CML-BSA Promotes the RAGE/STAT3/NFAT-Dependent Proproliferative and Antiapoptotic Phenotype Through the Activation of a Positive Feedback Loop Increasing RAGE Expression

RAGE expression is described in VRD as dependant of the amount of circulating CML. \({ }^{15,45}\) We confirmed this topic by studying RAGE mRNA level (qRT-PCR) in CASMCs exposed to increasing doses of CML-BSA. As shown in Figure 3A, CML-BSA promotes RAGE expression in a dose-dependent manner (n=4, \(P<0.01\) ). To elucidate the mechanism explaining how CML enhances RAGE expression, we measured RAGE protein expression in CASMCs exposed to CML-BSA for 15, 30, and 60 minutes. RAGE expression increases after 60 minutes of CML-BSA exposure (n=4, \(P<0.01\); Supplemental Figure IC). Considering that STAT3 is activated at 15 minutes (Figure 1A), NFAT at 60 minutes (Supplemental Figure IB), and that both STAT3 and NFAT are transcription factors, we speculated that either STAT3 or NFAT could be implicated in the regulation of RAGE at the transcriptional level. RAGE expression was measured in presence of siSTAT3 or NFAT inhibitor (VIVIT). STAT3 and NFATc1 inhibition decreased by 15-fold CML-BSA–dependent RAGE mRNA level. This suggests the effective NFATc1 implication in the transcriptional regulation of RAGE (n=4, \(P<0.001\); Figure 3A). Further experiments are required to elucidate the exact mechanisms and will be the purpose of a future study.

### RAGE Inhibition In Vivo Prevents Vascular Remodeling Processes Through the Inhibition of the Pim1/NFAT Axis

Vascular remodeling was observed before sacrifice using echography Doppler by measuring carotid wall thickness and internal diameter of the vessel. Injured rats treated with siRNA directed against RAGE showed less remodeling, ie, a thinner artery wall and a larger internal diameter of the vessel (n=5 per group, \(P<0.05\); Supplemental Figure VIA) compared with rats treated with a control siRNA. Animals were euthanized 14 days after injury. We confirmed that the injury increased the amount of CML-BSA in the carotid by Western blot (n=4, \(P<0.01\); Supplemental Figure VIB). Using H&E staining on harvested carotid, paraffin embedded, we measured neointimal cross-sectional area in control injured carotid arteries and injured carotids transfected with siSCRM (Figure 3B). As expected, injured carotids transfected with a siRNA directed against RAGE showed 55% less neointimal thickening (\(P<0.05\) ) as compared with siSCRM (n=5 rats per group; Figure 3B). In vivo, RAGE inhibition was confirmed at the RNA level by qRT-PCR and at the protein level by immunofluorescence (n=5 rats per group, \(P<0.05\) ) (Figure 3C). Immunofluorescent staining of smooth muscle actin (in green) indicates that neointimal formation is mainly constituted of smooth muscle cells, confirming the impact of the RAGE/STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 axis on SMC, which enhance their proliferation and progressive obstruction of the lumen. Triple staining with either NFATc1 or P-STAT3 (in red), α-smooth muscle actin (green) and 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) showed that STAT3 and NFATc1 activation are increased in CASMCs of siSCRM injured carotids (showed by the colocalization in yellow of P-STAT3/DAPI or NFATc1/DAPI) compared with sham. siRAGE injured carotids at the opposite showed a decreased NFATc1 and STAT3 activation compared with siSCRM treated ones (n=50 CASMC/rat, 5 rats per group, \(P<0.001\); Figure 4A), and the two proteins are mainly present in the cytosol. To confirm our hypothesis that NFATc1 activation is due to the presence of Pim1, we studied Pim1 expression by immunostaining and qRT-PCR. As expected, Pim1 was significantly increased in injured carotid arteries (saline or siSCRM) compare to sham, while Pim1 expression is decreased in siRAGE-treated rats compared with siSCRM (n=50 CASMC/rat, 5 rats per group, \(P<0.01\); Figure 4A and Supplemental Figure VIC). Immunostaining for Ki67 (in red), α-smooth muscle actin (green), and DAPI showed that carotids injury is associated in saline or control siRNA with a increase of CASMC proliferation compared with sham (measured by the the nuclear localization of Ki67) (n=50 CASMC/rat, 5 rats per group, \(P<0.01\); Figure 4B). In siRAGE injured carotids the proliferation rate of CASMCs is decreased compared with siSCRM-treated injured carotids, showing that interruption of proliferative signal progression by RAGE inhibition have a powerful nonproliferative effect on CASMCs in vivo, mainly by inhibiting the activation of the STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 axis. Furthermore, triple staining with TUNEL (in red), α-smooth muscle actin (green), and DAPI showed that siRAGE carotids presented significantly more apoptotic CASMCs than any other group (n=50 CASMC/rat, 5 rats per group, \(P<0.001\) ). These results suggest that localized RAGE inhibition decreases postinjury carotid artery remodeling in rats, mainly by inhibiting the STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 axis.
2120 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol September 2011

A CML enhances RAGE expression

RAGE mRNA expression

RAGE mRNA expression

B RAGE inhibition inhibits vascular remodeling

Vessel neointima

C Vascular injury enhances RAGE expression in the vascular wall

Figure 3. Enhanced advanced glycation endproducts receptor (RAGE) expression stimulates vascular remodeling. A, Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine-bovine serum albumin (CML-BSA) enhances RAGE expression in a dose-dependent manner (measured by qRT-PCR normalized with 18S; n=4, P<0.01). Furthermore, RAGE expression is enhanced through a positive feedback loop including STAT3 and nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) because their blockade (siSTAT3 20 nmol/L and VIVIT 4 μmol/L, respectively) reduces RAGE expression (qRT-PCR, n=4, P<0.001). B, After H&E staining, neointima cross-sectional areas were measured. RAGE blockade showed decreased neointima area compared with injured carotids (55% decrease, n=5 per group, P<0.05). C, RAGE expression is enhanced in the injured vascular wall and siRAGE efficiency are shown by immunofluorescence, which corresponds to RAGE protein expression (n=5 per group, P<0.001) and qRT-PCR (n=5 per group, P<0.05).

Discussion

We showed for the first time that RAGE activation in both humans' and rodents' CASMCs triggers the activation of the STAT3/Pim1/NFAT axis accounting for CASMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Moreover, using Pim1 KO mice we showed that the RAGE-dependent CASMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis rely on the activation of NFATc1 by Pim1, a mechanism also found in neoplastic processes.

As in cancer cells, Pim1/NFATc1 activation hyperpolarized mitochondrial membrane potential (suppressing CASMC apo-

Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org at NY UNIV MED CTR LIBR on June 19, 2015

Meloche et al RAGE/Pim1/NFAT Activation in Vascular Remodeling 2121

A RAGE inhibition in a rat carotid injury model decreases STAT3, Pim1 and NFATc1 activity

| Sham | Injured + saline | Injured + siSCRM | Injured + siRAGE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| P-STAT3 Sm-actin Colocali-zation |  |  |  |
| NFATc1 Sm-actin Colocali-zation |  |  |  |
| Pim1 Sm-actin |  |  |  |

B CML promotes proliferation in the vessel wall and RAGE inhibition decreases this effect and promotes apoptosis

| Sham | Injured + saline | Injured + siSCRM | Injured + siRAGE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Ki67 Sm-actin Colocali-zation |  |  |  |
| TUNEL Sm-actin Colocali-zation |  |  |  |

Figure 4. Nε-(carboxymethyl)lysine-bovine serum albumin (CML-BSA) injected in rats stimulates the STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 pathway and enhances vascular smooth muscle cells proliferation. A, CML-BSA promotes STAT3 activation through advanced glycation endproducts receptor (RAGE) in the vascular wall (immunofluorescence, n=5 rats per group, P<0.001). STAT3 activation correlates with nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) c1 activation (immunofluorescence, n=5 rats per group, P<0.001). Both STAT3 and NFAT are transcription factors and are present in the nucleus when activated. Thus, colocalization between either P-STAT3 or NFATc1 (red) and the nucleus blue, is showed by a yellow pattern, which is decreased when carotids were treated with RAGE siRNA. Pim1 expression is also enhanced in injured carotid and is inhibited when RAGE is blocked. Pim1 quantification was measured by fluorescence quantification (immunofluorescence, n=5 rats per group, P<0.01). B, RAGE/STAT3/Pim1/NFATc1 axis is responsible of cell proliferation, measured by Ki67 (immunofluorescence, n=5 rats per group, P<0.01). RAGE inhibition increases apoptosis in the vessel wall, measured by TUNEL (immunofluorescence, n=5 rats per group, P<0.01). For all staining, to calculate percentage of activation or proliferation, cells that had positive staining in nucleus were considered positive, which was divided by the total amount of cell (counted with DAPI). Again, yellow pattern shows colocalization between proliferation and apoptosis factors (red) and the nucleus (blue).

depolarizes ΔΨm. In vivo, we demonstrated that localized RAGE inhibition after 30 minutes of siRNA instillation prevented carotid artery postinjury remodeling in rats by decreasing the activation of Pim1/NFATc1 axis and thus decreasing CASMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Although this finding could be seen as methodologically surprising, such approach has shown similar results in the past as shown in

Lipskaia et al⁴⁷ confirming the translational potential of this intervention.

We are the first linking Pim1/NFATc1 activation to RAGE in CASMCs and vascular diseases. Previous studies have described the activation of the calcineurin/NFAT axis in cultured pig CASMCs in response to AGE.⁴⁸ Nonetheless, the mechanism accounting for NFAT activation (Pim1) and its

Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ at NY UNIV MED CTR LIBR on June 19, 2015

positive feedback loop enhancing RAGE expression in proliferative CASMCs (Figure 5). Although the exact mechanism by which NFAT increases RAGE remains to be established, several possibilities exist: (1) As NFAT is a transcription factor, it could directly bind the RAGE promoter and increase RAGE expression. Nonetheless, based on in silico analysis (UCSC gene browser database), no NFAT binding sites are present within the RAGE promoter region. (2) NFAT could indirectly activate RAGE by promoting other factors, eg, NFκB and HIF-1, which are increased in VRD and known to enhance RAGE expression by a direct interaction with RAGE promoter region.²⁴,²⁵,⁴⁵ Interestingly, recent studies in cancer have suggested the existence of positive cooperation (enhancing NFκB effects) between NFκB and NFATc1.⁵⁷ Nonetheless, more experiments are required to demonstrate such cooperation in VRD.

In addition to our studies, the role of RAGE in VRD has been previously described²⁴,²⁵,⁴⁵ along with the putative therapeutic benefit that RAGE inhibition might have. Nonetheless, we are the first group providing a complete mechanism (common to many other diseases like cancer and Alzheimer disease) explaining how a sustained activation of RAGE triggers vascular remodeling processes. We demonstrated that RAGE effects in VRD rely on Pim1 dependent activation of NFAT, which could explain many features seen in VRD including HIF-1 associated metabolic disorders and inflammation. Thus, we offer new therapeutic perspectives, not only for vascular diseases, but also possibly for other diseases sharing common features with VRD including cancer.

### Sources of Funding

This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; entitled “Experimental Therapies for Vascular Remodeling Diseases” to S.B.) and the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada (S.B.). Sébastien Bonnet holds a Canada Research Chair. Mohsen Agharazii holds a clinician-scientist scholarship from Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec (FRSQ). Jolyane Meloche is a recipient of a Summer Studentship Research Project Awards from The Canadian Hypertension Society and a Graduate Scholarship from La Société Québécoise d’Hypertension Artérielle (SQHA). Roxane Paulin also has a Graduate Scholarship from La Société Québécoise d’Hypertension Artérielle (SQHA).

### Disclosures

None.

### References

1. Bonnet S, Paulin R, Sutendra G, Dromparis P, Roy M, Watson KO, Nagendran J, Haromy A, Dyck JR, Michelakis ED. Dehydroepiandrosterone reverses systemic vascular remodeling through the inhibition of the Akt/GSK3-{beta}/NFAT axis. *Circulation*. 2009;120:1231–1240.
2. Lambert CM, Roy M, Robitaille GA, Richard DE, Bonnet S. HIF-1 inhibition decreases systemic vascular remodelling diseases by promoting apoptosis through a hexokinase 2-dependent mechanism. *Cardiovasc Res* 88:196–204.
3. Doran AC, Meller N, McNamara CA. Role of smooth muscle cells in the initiation and early progression of atherosclerosis. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 2008;28:812–819.
4. Libby P, Clinton SK. Cytokines as mediators of vascular pathology. *Nouv Rev Fr Hematol*. 1992;34 Suppl:S47–S53.
5. Schwartz LB, Radic ZS, O'Donohoe MK, Mikat EM, McCann RL, Hagen PO. Saphenous vein endothelium-dependent relaxation in patients with peripheral vascular disease. *Ann Vasc Surg*. 1992;6:425–432.

6. Ross JG, Hussey DH, Mayr NA, Davis CS. Acute and late reactions to radiation therapy in patients with collagen vascular diseases. *Cancer*. 1993;71:3744–3752.
7. Ambrosini G, Adida C, Altieri DC. A novel anti-apoptosis gene, survivin, expressed in cancer and lymphoma. *Nat Med*. 1997;3:917–921.
8. Blanc-Brude OP, Yu J, Simosa H, Conte MS, Sessa WC, Altieri DC. Inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin regulates vascular injury. *Nat Med*. 2002;8:987–994.
9. Bonnet S, Dumas-de-La-Roque E, Begueret H, Marthan R, Fayon M, Dos Santos P, Savineau JP, Baulieu EE. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) prevents and reverses chronic hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2003;100:9488–9493.
10. Rao A, Luo C, Hogan PG. Transcription factors of the NFAT family: regulation and function. *Annu Rev Immunol*. 1997;15:707–747.
11. Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J, Haromy A, Beaulieu C, Thompson R, Lee CT, Lopaschuk GD, Puttagunta L, Harry G, Hashimoto K, Porter CJ, Andrade MA, Thebaud B, Michelakis ED. A mitochondria-K+ channel axis is suppressed in cancer and its normalization promotes apoptosis and inhibits cancer growth. *Cancer Cell*. 2007;11:37–51.
12. Schmidt AM, Yan SD, Wautier JL, Stern D. Activation of receptor for advanced glycation end products: a mechanism for chronic vascular dysfunction in diabetic vasculopathy and atherosclerosis. *Circ Res*. 1999;84:489–497.
13. Ahmed KA, Muniandy S, Ismail IS. Role of N-(carboxymethyl)lysine in the development of ischemic heart disease in type 2 diabetes mellitus. *J Clin Biochem Nutr*. 2007;41:97–105.
14. McNulty M, Mahmud A, Feely J. Advanced glycation end-products and arterial stiffness in hypertension. *Am J Hypertens*. 2007;20:242–247.
15. Wautier MP, Massin P, Guillausseau PJ, Huijberts M, Levy B, Boulanger E, Laloi-Michelin M, Wautier JL. N(carboxymethyl)lysine as a biomarker for microvascular complications in type 2 diabetic patients. *Diabetes Metab*. 2003;29:44–52.
16. Zhang H, Park Y, Wu J, Chen X, Lee S, Yang J, Dellsperger KC, Zhang C. Role of TNF-alpha in vascular dysfunction. *Clin Sci (Lond)*. 2009;116:219–230.
17. Sparvero LJ, Asafu-Adjei D, Kang R, Tang D, Amin N, Im J, Rutledge R, Lin B, Amoscato AA, Zeh HJ, Lotze MT. RAGE (Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts), RAGE ligands, and their role in cancer and inflammation. *J Transl Med*. 2009;7:17.
18. Hudson BI, Bucciarelli LG, Wendt T, Sakaguchi T, Lalla E, Qu W, Lu Y, Lee L, Stern DM, Naka Y, Ramasamy R, Yan SD, Yan SF, D'Agati V, Schmidt AM. Blockade of receptor for advanced glycation endproducts: a new target for therapeutic intervention in diabetic complications and inflammatory disorders. *Arch Biochem Biophys*. 2003;419:80–88.
19. Rashid G, Benchetrit S, Fishman D, Bernheim J. Effect of advanced glycation end-products on gene expression and synthesis of TNF-alpha and endothelial nitric oxide synthase by endothelial cells. *Kidney Int*. 2004;66:1099–1106.
20. Ikeda K, Higashi T, Sano H, Jinnouchi Y, Yoshida M, Araki T, Ueda S, Horiuchi S. N (epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine protein adduct is a major immunological epitope in proteins modified with advanced glycation end products of the Maillard reaction. *Biochemistry*. 1996;35:8075–8083.
21. Schleicher ED, Wagner E, Nerlich AG. Increased accumulation of the glycoxidation product N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine in human tissues in diabetes and aging. *J Clin Invest*. 1997;99:457–468.
22. Sakata N, Imanaga Y, Meng J, Tachikawa Y, Takebayashi S, Nagai R, Horiuchi S, Itabe H, Takano T. Immunohistochemical localization of different epitopes of advanced glycation end products in human atherosclerotic lesions. *Atherosclerosis*. 1998;141:61–75.
23. Baumann M, Richart T, Sollinger D, Pelisek J, Roos M, Kouznetsova T, Eckstein HH, Heemann U, Staessen JA. Association between carotid diameter and the advanced glycation end product N-epsilon-carboxymethyllysine (CML). *Cardiovasc Diabetol*. 2009;8:45.
24. Zhou Z, Wang K, Penn MS, Marso SP, Lauer MA, Forudi F, Zhou X, Qu W, Lu Y, Stern DM, Schmidt AM, Lincoff AM, Topol EJ. Receptor for AGE (RAGE) mediates neointimal formation in response to arterial injury. *Circulation*. 2003;107:2238–2243.
25. Sakaguchi T, Yan SF, Yan SD, Belov D, Rong LL, Sousa M, Andrassy M, Marso SP, Duda S, Arnold B, Liliensiek B, Nawroth PP, Stern DM, Schmidt AM, Naka Y. Central role of RAGE-dependent neointimal expansion in arterial restenosis. *J Clin Invest*. 2003;111:959–972.
26. Grote K, Luchtefeld M, Schieffer B. JANUS under stress—role of JAK/STAT signaling pathway in vascular diseases. *Vasc Pharmacol*. 2005;43:357–363.
27. Paulin R, Courboulin A, Meloche J, Mainguy V, Dumas de la Roque E, Saksouk N, Cote J, Provencher S, Sussman MA, Bonnet S. Signal transducers and activators of transcription-3/pim1 axis plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of human pulmonary arterial hypertension. *Circulation* 123:1205–1215.
28. Courboulin A, Paulin R, Giguere NJ, Saksouk N, Perreault T, Meloche J, Paquet ER, Biardel S, Provencher S, Cote J, Simard MJ, Bonnet S. Role for miR-204 in human pulmonary arterial hypertension. *J Exp Med* 208:535–548.
29. Zemskova M, Sahakian E, Bashkirova S, Lilly M. The PIM1 kinase is a critical component of a survival pathway activated by docetaxel and promotes survival of docetaxel-treated prostate cancer cells. *J Biol Chem*. 2008;283:20635–20644.
30. Padma R, Nagarajan L. The human PIM-1 gene product is a protein serine kinase. *Cancer Res*. 1991;51:2486–2489.
31. Beier UH, Weise JB, Laudien M, Sauerwein H, Gorogh T. Overexpression of Pim-1 in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. *Int J Oncol*. 2007;30:1381–1387.
32. Chiang WF, Yen CY, Lin CN, Liaw GA, Chiu CT, Hsia YJ, Liu SY. Up-regulation of a serine-threonine kinase proto-oncogene Pim-1 in oral squamous cell carcinoma. *Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg*. 2006;35:740–745.
33. Cibull TL, Jones TD, Li L, Eble JN, Ann Baldridge L, Malott SR, Luo Y, Cheng L. Overexpression of Pim-1 during progression of prostatic adenocarcinoma. *J Clin Pathol*. 2006;59:285–288.
34. Katakami N, Kaneto H, Hao H, Umayahara Y, Fujitani Y, Sakamoto K, Gorogawa S, Yasuda T, Kawamori D, Kajimoto Y, Matsuhisa M, Yutani C, Hori M, Yamasaki Y. Role of pim-1 in smooth muscle cell proliferation. *J Biol Chem*. 2004;279:54742–54749.
35. Glazova M, Aho TL, Palmeshofer A, Murashov A, Scheinin M, Koskinen PJ. Pim-1 kinase enhances NFATc activity and neuroendocrine functions in PC12 cells. *Brain Res Mol Brain Res*. 2005;138:116–123.
36. Kralev S, Zimmerer E, Brueckmann M, Lang S, Kalsch T, Rippert A, Lin J, Borggrefe M, Hammes HP, Suselbeck T. Elevation of the glycoxidation product N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine in patients presenting with acute myocardial infarction. *Clin Chem Lab Med*. 2009;47:446–451.
37. Mitsuhashi T, Vlassara H, Foundas HW, Li YM. Standardizing the immunological measurement of advanced glycation endproducts using normal human serum. *J Immunol Methods*. 1997;207:79–88.
38. Kobayashi S, Nomura M, Nishioka T, Kikuchi M, Ishihara A, Nagai R, Hagino N. Overproduction of N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine-induced neovascularization in cultured choroidal explant of aged rat. *Biol Pharm Bull*. 2007;30:133–138.
39. Manukyan I, Galatioto J, Mascareno E, Bhaduri S, Siddiqui MA. Cross-talk between calcineurin/NFAT and Jak/STAT signalling induces cardioprotective alphaB-crystallin gene expression in response to hypertrophic stimuli. *J Cell Mol Med* 14:1707–1716.
40. Chen X, Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W, Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR, Leong B, Shahab A, Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK, Clarke ND, Wei CL, Ng HH. Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells. *Cell*. 2008;133:1106–1117.
41. Bonnet S, Rochefort G, Sutendra G, Archer SL, Haromy A, Webster L, Hashimoto K, Bonnet SN, Michelakis ED. The nuclear factor of activated T cells in pulmonary arterial hypertension can be therapeutically targeted. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2007;104:11418–11423.
42. Chow W, Hou G, Bendeck MP. Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta regulation of nuclear factor of activated T-cells isoform c1 in the vascular smooth muscle cell response to injury. *Exp Cell Res*. 2008;314:2919–2929.
43. Chen F, Xu Y, Luo Y, Zheng D, Song Y, Yu K, Li H, Zhang L, Zhong W, Ji Y. Down-regulation of Stat3 decreases invasion activity and induces apoptosis of human glioma cells. *J Mol Neurosci* 40:353–359.
44. Wang GJ, Sui XX, Simosa HF, Jain MK, Altieri DC, Conte MS. Regulation of vein graft hyperplasia by survivin, an inhibitor of apoptosis protein. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 2005;25:2081–2087.
45. Naka Y, Bucciarelli LG, Wendt T, Lee LK, Rong LL, Ramasamy R, Yan SF, Schmidt AM. RAGE axis: Animal models and novel insights into the vascular complications of diabetes. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 2004;24:1342–1349.
46. Hu XF, Li J, Vandervalk S, Wang Z, Magnuson NS, Xing PX. PIM-1-specific mAb suppresses human and mouse tumor growth by decreasing PIM-1 levels, reducing Akt phosphorylation, and activating apoptosis. *J Clin Invest*. 2009;119:362–375.

47. Lipskaia L, del Monte F, Capiod T, Yacoubi S, Hadri L, Hours M, Hajjar RJ, Lompre AM. Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase gene transfer reduces vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and neointima formation in the rat. *Circ Res.* 2005;97:488–495.

48. David KC, Scott RH, Nixon GF. Advanced glycation endproducts induce a proliferative response in vascular smooth muscle cells via altered calcium signaling. *Biochem Pharmacol.* 2008;76:1110–1120.

49. Cho HI, Son SM, Jin SM, Hong HS, Shin DH, Kim SJ, Huh K, Mook-Jung I. RAGE regulates BACE1 and Abeta generation via NFAT1 activation in Alzheimer's disease animal model. *FASEB J.* 2009;23: 2639–2649.

50. Warburg O. On respiratory impairment in cancer cells. *Science.* 1956; 124:269–270.

51. Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. *Science.* 1956;123:309–314.

52. McMurtry MS, Archer SL, Altieri DC, Bonnet S, Haromy A, Harry G, Puttagunta L, Michelakis ED. Gene therapy targeting survivin selectively induces pulmonary vascular apoptosis and reverses pulmonary arterial hypertension. *J Clin Invest.* 2005;115:1479–1491.

53. Brownlee M. Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complications. *Nature.* 2001;414:813–820.

54. Miyata T, Hori O, Zhang J, Yan SD, Ferran L, Ida Y, Schmidt AM. The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) is a central mediator of the interaction of AGE-beta2microglobulin with human mononuclear phagocytes via an oxidant-sensitive pathway. Implications for the pathogenesis of dialysis-related amyloidosis. *J Clin Invest.* 1996; 98:1088–1094.

55. Lambert CM, Roy M, Meloche J, Robitaille GA, Agharazii M, Richard DE, Bonnet S. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors as novel therapeutic tools for vascular remodeling diseases. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol.* 299:H995–H1001.

56. Nilsson LM, Sun ZW, Nilsson J, Nordstrom I, Chen YW, Molkentin JD, Wide-Swensson D, Hellstrand P, Lydrup ML, Gomez MF. Novel blocker of NFAT activation inhibits IL-6 production in human myometrial arteries and reduces vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.* 2007;292:C1167–C1178.

57. Xue J, Thippegowda PB, Hu G, Bachmaier K, Christman JW, Malik AB, Tiruppathi C. NF-kappaB regulates thrombin-induced ICAM-1 gene expression in cooperation with NFAT by binding to the intronic NF-kappaB site in the ICAM-1 gene. *Physiol Genomics.* 2009;38: 42–53.

# Supplemental Material

## SUPPLEMENTAL METHODS

### Cell culture
Human carotid artery smooth muscle cells (CASMC) isolated from 2 healthy donors (organ transplant patient) were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and 1% of an antibiotic-antimycotic mixture (GIBCO 15240, Invitrogen) and maintained in a humid atmosphere, at 37°C with 5% CO₂. Cells were used between passages 3 and 8 as previously described¹. Cells were transfected by CaPO₄ precipitation with 20 nM siRNA oligonucleotides. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, the cell medium was changed, and 48 h post-transfection, cells were treated as indicated. All siRNAs were obtained from Applied Biosystems. As a control oligonucleotide, ‘Silencer Negative Control #2 siRNA’ was used. Cells were treated with CML-BSA (Circulex) (1 μg/ml) for different time laps (15, 30, 60 minutes and 48 hours) before analysing.

### ELISA assay
CML auto-antibody and direct CML ELISA assays (Circulex) were performed following manufacturer’s instructions. Human plasmatic levels of CML-BSA were measured by anti-CML ELISA assay in a blind study was performed on 59 patients. In order to extend these observations, we studied CML plasma levels in a cohort of patients with cardiovascular disease as defined by a history of coronary artery revascularization (60%), ischemic stroke (20%) and symptomatic peripheral vascular disease (33%). Patients were recruited through the outpatient clinics of Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec – Hôtel Dieu de Québec Hospital. Blood samples were obtained between 8-10 AM after an overnight fast. The samples were immediately centrifuged and kept at -80°C until analysis. The protocol was approved by the institutional review board and patients provided informed consent.

### Confocal microscopy/Immunofluorescence
Rat carotid arteries were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Immunofluorescence was performed on 5 μm carotid slices. CASMC were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100. P-STAT3 (1/250), RAGE (1/250) antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling; NFATc1 (1/250) from Abcam. Alexa Fluor (1/1000) 488 and 594 were used as secondary antibodies. For proliferation measurements, PCNA antibodies (1/400) from DAKO and Ki67 antibodies (1/250) from Millipore were used. For apoptosis assays, TUNEL Apoptag kit from Millipore and AnnexinV from Clontech was performed following manufacturer’s instructions. FLUO3-AM and TMRM reagents were purchase from Invitrogen and applied at the concentration of 5μM on live cells. Nuclei were stained with diamidino-phenylindole (DAPI, DAKO Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA).

### Nuclear translocation assays
To measure the activity of transcription factors STAT3 and NFATc1, a ratio was calculated by dividing the amount of cells that had staining of P-STAT3 and NFATc1 in
the nucleus (colocalisation with DAPI) on the total amount of cells. Ratios were transformed into percentage for statistical analysis.

**Immunoblotting**

Twenty-five micrograms (25 μg) of protein were loaded on SDS-PAGE (8% wt/vol), and then transferred electrophoretically to PVDF membranes. After blocking, primary antibodies were used: RAGE (1:1000, Cell Signaling), phospho-Akt (1:1000, Cell Signaling), Akt (1:1000, Cell Signaling), phospho-STAT3 (1:1000, Cell Signaling), STAT3 (1:1000, Cell Signaling), NFATc1 (NFAT2, 1:1000, Abcam), Pim1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling) and α-smooth muscle actin (1:300, Santa Cruz). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were used (Promega). Expression was normalized to actin to correct for loading differences.

**Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction**

RNAs were isolated from CASMC with trizol. Reverse transcription was performed with the High capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit from Applied Biosystem. cDNA was used for quantitative RT-PCR Taqman. Taqman primers and probes were all purchased from Applied Biosystems and 18S were used as an internal control.

**Carotid artery (balloon) injury model**

Male Sprague Dawley (strain 001, Charles River) rats (350g) were used. Under anaesthesia (2% isoflurane), a neck incision was made. A 20 mm section of the left common carotid artery was isolated and temporarily occluded to prevent retrograde blood loss. After proximal arteriotomy, a 2F Fogarty embolectomy catheter was introduced to perform an antegrade balloon inflation along a 15 mm segment of the common carotid artery². The catheter, containing either siSCRM (10μM) or siRAGE (10μM) was maintained in place for 30 minutes to assure efficient transfection. The lumen was then flushed with heparinized saline, the arteriotomy was closed with 9-0 Prolene sutures and the perfusion was restored. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining was performed on carotid sections to measure vascular neointima cross-sectional area 14 days post injury (5 rats per group were studied).

**Statistics**

Data are presented as mean±SD with Mann Whitney U test for human serum CML levels and mean±SEM for all other studies. Normality of our data was assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. All our data were normally distributed (P>0.05). For comparison between 2 means, we used unpaired Student t test. For comparison between 2 means, we used 1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer tests. P values less than 0.001 (***) 0.01 (**) and 0.05 (*) were considered as statistically significant.
Supplemental References

1. Bonnet S, Paulin R, Sutendra G, Dromparis P, Roy M, Watson KO, Nagendran J, Haromy A, Dyck JR, Michelakis ED. Dehydroepiandrosterone reverses systemic vascular remodeling through the inhibition of the Akt/GSK3-{beta}/NFAT axis. *Circulation*. 2009;120:1231-1240.
2. Lambert CM, Roy M, Robitaille GA, Richard DE, Bonnet S. HIF-1 inhibition decreases systemic vascular remodelling diseases by promoting apoptosis through a hexokinase 2-dependent mechanism. *Cardiovasc Res*;88:196-204.

Supplemental Figure I

**A** CML increases STAT3 activation

| Control | CML-BSA | siSCRM + | siRAGE + |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Merged P-STAT3 (red)/ DAPI (blue) |  |  |  |
| Colocalization P-STAT3/DAPI (yellow) |  |  |  |

**B** CML increases NFATc1 and Pim1 expression

| Control | CML-BSA | CML-BSA | CML-BSA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Pim1 |  |  |  |
| sm-actin |  |  |  |
|  | 15 min | 30 min | 60 min |
|  | kDa | kDa | kDa |
|  | 37-47 | 37-47 | 37-47 |
|  | 43 | 43 | 43 |

| Control | CML-BSA | CML-BSA | CML-BSA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NFATc1 |  |  |  |
| sm-actin |  |  |  |
|  | 15 min | 30 min | 60 min |
|  | kDa | kDa | kDa |
|  | 105 | 105 | 105 |
|  | 43 | 43 | 43 |

**Pim1 normalized to sm-actin**

| Fold of control |
| --- |
| 0 |  |
| 1 |  |
| 2 |  |
| 3 |  |
| 4 |  |

**NFATc1 normalized to sm-actin**

| Fold of control |
| --- |
| 0 |  |
| 1 |  |
| 2 |  |
| 3 |  |
| 4 |  |

**C** RAGE expression is increased over time

| Control | CML-BSA | CML-BSA | CML-BSA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| RAGE |  |  |  |
| sm-actin |  |  |  |
|  | 15 min | 30 min | 60 min |
|  | kDa | kDa | kDa |
|  | 45 | 45 | 45 |
|  | 43 | 43 | 43 |

**RAGE normalized to sm-actin**

| Fold of control |
| --- |
| 0.0 |  |
| 0.5 |  |
| 1.0 |  |
| 1.5 |  |
| 2.0 |  |

Supplemental Figure II

**A RAGE siRNA efficiency in vitro**

RAGE normalized  
to sm-actin  

| Control | CML-BSA | siSCRM + CML-BSA | siRAGE + CML-BSA |
|---------|----------|-------------------|-------------------|
| RAGE    |          |                   |                   |
| sm-actin|          |                   |                   |

**B STAT3 siRNA efficiency**

STAT3 normalized to  
sm-actin  

| Control | CML-BSA | siSCRM + CML-BSA | siSTAT3 + CML-BSA |
|---------|----------|-------------------|-------------------|
| STAT3   |          |                   |                   |
| sm-actin|          |                   |                   |

**C Pim1 siRNA efficiency**  
Pim1 mRNA expression  

**D VIVIT efficiency**  
NFATc1 mRNA expression  

**E Control peptide does not have any effect**  
Ki67 positive cells  

| Control | CML-BSA | siSCRM + CML-BSA | siPim1 + CML-BSA |
|---------|----------|-------------------|-------------------|

| Control | CML-BSA | VIVIT + CML-BSA |
|---------|----------|-----------------|

| Control | CML-BSA | Control peptide + CML-BSA | VIVIT peptide + CML-BSA |
|---------|----------|---------------------------|--------------------------|

Supplemental Figure III

A  Akt is not enhanced by CML

P(Ser473)-Akt  
Control | CML-BSA 15 min | CML-BSA 30 min | CML-BSA 60 min  
---|---|---|---  
Akt  
sm-actin  

P-Akt/Akt normalized  
to sm-actin  

Fold of control  

B  CML enhances Survivin's expression  
Survivin mRNA expression  

C  CML enhances proliferation  
measured by PCNA  

D  CML inhibits apoptosis measured by TUNEL  

% TUNEL positive cells  


Supplemental Figure IV

A CML-BSA decreases 4-AP sensitive current and increases $[Ca^{2+}]_i$

**4-AP sensitive current (at 70mV)**

| Current (pA) |
|--------------|
| Control ($n=5$) |
| CML-BSA ($n=4$) |
| siRAGE+CML-BSA ($n=4$) |

Control | CML-BSA | CML-BSA + VIVIT
--------|---------|-----------------
CML-BSA + siSCRM | CML-BSA + siRAGE | CML-BSA + siSTAT3 | CML-BSA + siPim1

B Patch clamp representative currents

Baseline | 4-AP
--------|-----
Control | 
CML-BSA | 
siRAGE + CML-BSA | 

200pA
100ms

Supplemental Figure V

**A** STAT3 is activated in  
K.O. Pim1 mice  
P-STAT3 nuclear  
translocation assay  

**B** NFATc1 is not activated in  
K.O. Pim1 mice  
NFATc1nuclear  
translocation assay  

**C** K.O. Pim1 mice are resistant to CML-induced proliferation  

Intracellular Calcium  
Ki67  

**D** CML treated K.O. Pim1 mice are not resistant to apoptosis  

Mitochondria hyperpolarization  
AnnexinV  

Supplemental Figure VI

A  Vascular remodeling measured by echography

| Lumen diameter | Wall thickness |
|----------------|---------------|
| Internal diameter (mm) | Wall thickness (mm) |

B  CML-BSA is increased in injured carotid

CML-BSA normalized to sm-actin

C  Pim1 expression is decreased by RAGE inhibition

Pim1 mRNA expression

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE LEGEND

Supplemental figure I
(A) Representative immunofluorescences of P-STAT3 translocation assay. (B) Pim1 expression and NFATc1 protein activation occur 30 minutes post CML-BSA (1µg/mL) exposure measured by immunoblot (2.4 fold increase; n=4, p<0.05). Pim1 and NFAT activation are maintained through time, showed by a 2.75 fold increase after 1 hour. (C) CML-BSA induces a positive feedback loop, increasing RAGE expression over time. In fact, 30 minutes after CML-BSA exposition, RAGE expression is increased and increases more after 1 hour (1.8 fold increase; immunoblot, n=4, p<0.05).

Supplemental figure II
(A) RAGE siRNA efficiency is demonstrated by imunoblot. CML-BSA induces a 2 fold increase in RAGE expression and RAGE siRNA reduces its expression of 2.75 fold (n=3, p<0.01). (B) STAT3 siRNA efficiency is demonstrated by imunoblot. STAT3 total expression is usually constant, but when cells are treated with STAT3 siRNA, its expression is decreased (2.7 fold decrease, n=3, p<0.001). (C) Pim1 siRNA efficiency was measured by qRT-PCR as siPim1 causes a 300-fold decrease in Pim1 expression fold (n=3, p<0.001). (D) VIVIT, NFAT's inhibitor peptide, also decreases NFATc1 expression, showed by qRT-PCR, since NFATc1 autoregulates itself (n=3, p<0.01). (E) VIVIT peptide is used to block NFAT activation and we confirmed that the control peptide has no effect as cells treated with CML-BSA and cells treated with CML-BSA and the control peptide have the same proliferation rate (n=3).

Supplemental figure III
(A) NFATc1 activation by CML-BSA is not due to Akt pathway showed by immunoblot (n=3). P-Akt/Akt ratio does not change between cells treated with CML-BSA. Furthermore, this ratio is below the one found in control cells (not treated) (B) CML-BSA enhances Survivin expression through RAGE/STAT3 axis showed by qRT-PCR (n=3, p<0.01). Indeed, CML-BSA enhances Survivin expression by 175 fold and RAGE or STAT3 inhibition (by siRNA 20nM) decreases Survivin expression by at least 60 fold. (D) PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) is another method used to measure cell proliferation. CML-BSA induces an increase of 60% in proliferation (n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, p<0.001) and when RAGE (siRNA), STAT3 (siRNA) or NFAT (VIVIT 4µM) is blocked, proliferation is restored to normal rates (n=250, p<0.05). Proliferation ratio was calculated by dividing positive cells for PCNA (i.e. PCNA in the nucleus) by the total amount of cells (visualised by DAPI) by immunfluorescence. (E) TUNEL (Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) is another method to measure apoptosis and we demonstrated that CML-BSA inhibits apoptosis in CASMC (decrease of 25%) through a RAGE/STAT3/Pim1/NFAT pathway since their blockade restore apoptosis (n= n=50 CASMC/experiment for 5 experiments, p<0.05). Apoptosis ratio was measured by diving cells which had TUNEL staining (immunofluorescence) by the total amount of cells (DAPI).

Supplemental figure IV
(A) CML-BSA decreases 4-AP (1mM) sensitive current at 70mV ($n=3$, $p<0.05$), which corresponds to a decrease of voltage gated Kv channels. Decrease in Kv channels accounts for the increase of intracellular calcium, showed by FLUO3-AM. (B) Representative currents in different conditions using whole cell patch clamping.

## Supplemental figure V

(A) CML-BSA stimulates STAT3 activation measured by translocation assay ($n=30$ cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, $p<0.001$) in both wild type and Pim1 K.O. CASMC since STAT3 is upstream of Pim1. (B) Since Pim1 is responsible of NFATc1 activation, Pim1 K.O CASMC treated with CML-BSA (1 μg/mL) did not have activated NFATc1 ($n=30$ cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, $p<0.05$). (C) Wild type CASMC treated with CML-BSA have increase calcium, measured by FLUO3-AM ($n=30$ cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, $p<0.001$), and proliferation, measured by Ki67 and K.O Pim1 CASMC are resistant to CML-BSA-induced proliferation ($n=30$ cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, $p<0.001$). (D) Wild type CASMC treated with CML-BSA have hyperpolarised mitochondrial membrane, measured by TMRM ($n=30$ cells per condition per experiment for 3 experiments, $p<0.001$), and decrease apoptosis and K.O Pim1 CASMC are not resistant apoptosis, measured by AnnexinV ($n=100$, $p<0.05$).

## Supplemental figure VI

(A) By echography, we measured carotid lumen diameter and carotid wall thickness in rats with carotid injury, which had either siSCRM or siRAGE. We demonstrated that RAGE blockade increases lumen diameter ($n=5$ rats per group, $p<0.01$) and reduces wall thickness ($p<0.001$), which would result in restoring blood flow. (B) By western blot, we demonstrated an increase of CML-BSA in injured carotid ($n=4$, $p<0.01$). (C) Pim1 mRNA levels in carotid of the different groups were measured by qRT-PCR. Pim1 is increased in injured carotid and showed a 5-fold decreased when RAGE was blocked ($n=5$ per group; $p<0.01$).
Arteriosclerosis,  
Thrombosis, and  
Vascular Biology  

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION  

RAGE-Dependent Activation of the Oncoprotein Pim1 Plays a Critical Role in Systemic  
Vascular Remodeling Processes  

Jolyane Meloche, Roxane Paulin, Audrey Courboulin, Caroline Lambert, Marjorie Barrier,  
Pierre Bonnet, Malik Bisserier, Mélanie Roy, Mark A. Sussman, Mohsen Agharazii and  
Sébastien Bonnet  

Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:2114-2124; originally published online June 16, 2011;  
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.230573  

Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology is published by the American Heart Association, 7272  
Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231  
Copyright © 2011 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.  
Print ISSN: 1079-5642. Online ISSN: 1524-4636  

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the  
World Wide Web at:  
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/31/9/2114  

Data Supplement (unedited) at:  
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2011/06/16/ATVBAHA.111.230573.DC1.html  

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published  
in Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the  
Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for  
which permission is being requested is located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web  
page under Services. Further information about this process is available in the Permissions and Rights  
Question and Answer document.  

Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:  
http://www.lww.com/reprints  

Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology is online  
at:  
http://atvb.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/  

Downloaded from http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ at NY UNIV MED CTR LIBR on June 19, 2015
