
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Apr. 1990, p. 2194–2198

0021-9193/90/042194-05$02.00/0

Copyright © 1990, American Society for Microbiology

# Cloning and Nucleotide Sequence of *bisC*, the Structural Gene for Biotin Sulfoxide Reductase in *Escherichia coli*

**DOROTHY E. PIERSON† AND ALLAN CAMPBELL*  
Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305**

Received 11 October 1989/Accepted 8 January 1990

Clones of the *Escherichia coli bisC* locus have been isolated by complementing a *bisC* mutant for growth with *d*-biotin *d*-sulfoxide as a biotin source. The complementation properties of deletions and Tn5 insertions located the *bisC* gene to a 3.7-kilobase-pair (kbp) segment, 3.3 kbp of which has been sequenced. A single open reading frame of 2,178 bp, capable of encoding a polypeptide of molecular weight 80,905, was found. In vitro transcription of plasmids carrying the wild-type sequence and deletion and insertion mutants showed that BisC complementation correlated perfectly with production of a polypeptide whose measured molecular weight (79,000) does not differ significantly from 80,905.

The *Escherichia coli* protein biotin *d*-sulfoxide (BDS) reductase reduces a spontaneous oxidation product of biotin, BDS, back to biotin (8). Mutants that are unable to synthesize biotin can use BDS as their sole source of biotin (25). The BDS reductase protein, which is encoded by the *bisC* gene, requires the presence of both a small thioredoxinlike protein and a molybdenum cofactor for activity (8, 9). The thioredoxinlike protein has not been well characterized. On the other hand, the genes required for molybdenum cofactor production have been studied intensively. The cofactor is a pterin ring structure which is extremely oxygen labile (6, 19). The production of the pterin cofactor, the addition of molybdenum to this molecule, and the insertion of the molybdopterin into apomolybdoenzymes require the products of eight genes in *E. coli*: *chlA, B, D, E, F, G, M,* and *N* (10, 20, 36, 37). Cells with a mutation in any one of these genes have a pleiotropic phenotype. In addition to being unable to reduce BDS, they cannot utilize nitrate, trimethylamine-*N*-oxide, or dimethyl sulfoxide anaerobically as a terminal electron acceptor (2, 14, 38), they cannot use formate as an electron donor (5, 16), and, as their name implies, they are resistant to chlorate (14, 28, 29). Chlorate reduction appears to be catalyzed by several molybdoenzymes of *E. coli*, and only when all are inactivated do cells become resistant to chlorate (37).

The function of BDS reductase in *E. coli* is unknown. It may serve as a scavenger, allowing the cell to utilize BDS as a biotin source. Another possible role for this protein is to protect the cell from oxidation damage, as do superoxide dismutase and methionine sulfoxide reductase (3, 11, 13). BDS reductase may restore activity to enzymes that have been inactivated by the spontaneous oxidation of the biotin cofactor covalently bound to them.

A recombinant phage containing the *bisC* gene was isolated by M. Martin in our laboratory by selecting from a clone bank clones that allowed strains with a particular *bisC* point mutation to grow on minimal media containing BDS as the sole biotin source. A clone bank of the *E. coli* chromosome from the *bisC⁺ bio* deletion strain KS302 (Table 1) was prepared by inserting a *Sau3A* partial digest of bacterial chromosomal DNA prepared by the method of Redfield and Campbell (30) into a *BamHI* digest of the λ cloning vector λ1059 (21). *bisC⁺* clones were isolated from the bank by lytic complementation of the *bisC32* point mutation found in strain S1187 (Table 1) as follows. A 0.1-ml volume of a stationary culture of S1187 was mixed with the *E. coli* clone bank and plated in minimal A (26) soft agar on glucose minimal A plates containing 4 × 10⁻³ μg of BDS per ml and 0.007% triphenyltetrazolium chloride as an indicator dye. Feeding plaques were identified by a red halo that was formed by the growth of cells around the plaque due to release of biotin by cells lysed by bacteriophage containing *bisC32*-complementing sequences. Feeding plaques were picked and repurified twice. These phage were tested further for lytic complementation of another *bisC* allele, in strain S1130 (Table 1), which they complemented, and for the complementation of two *chl* gene mutations, *chlG21* and *chlE41*, which they failed to complement. A single positive clone containing an insert of 19.5 kilobase pairs (kbp) was used for all further studies. A partial restriction map of this clone, λ*bisC*, is shown in Fig. 1A. A 5.8-kbp internal *EcoRI-PstI* fragment of λ*bisC* was subcloned into plasmid pUC9 (39). This subclone, pBISC352, complemented all *bisC* alleles tested, including spontaneous temperature-sensitive mutations, nitrosoguanidine-induced mutations, Tn5 insertions, and Mu insertions.

To define the position of the *bisC* gene on pBISC352 and to determine its orientation, the clone was subjected to deletion and insertion analysis (Fig. 1B and C) Deletions constructed by subcloning different restriction fragments of pBISC352 into pUC9 were tested for complementation of the *bisC32* mutation. This deletion analysis places the gene on a 3.2-kbp *HincII-HindIII* fragment (Fig. 1A). The position of the *bisC* gene was further restricted by insertional mutagenesis with the two transposable elements Tn5 and Mu dI1681 (7, 12). Cells harboring pBISC352 were infected with the Tn5-containing phage λNK467 (Table 1) at a multiplicity of 5 and incubated at 30°C for 20 min to allow Tn5 to transpose from the phage to the plasmid and the chromosome. Plasmid DNA isolated from these cells by the boiling lysis method of Holmes and Quigley (18) was used to transform strain S1187 to ampicillin and kanamycin resistance by the calcium chloride transformation method (24), thus selecting for plasmids into which Tn5 had transposed. These transformants were then tested for growth on BDS. Cells that were lysogenic for Mu dI1681 phage (POI1681 [Table 1]) were

* Corresponding author.
† Present address: Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5402.

VOL. 172, 1990

**TABLE 1. Bacterial strains, plasmids, and phages used**

| Strain | Genotype | Origin or reference |
|--------|----------|---------------------|
| S1130  | F⁻ araD139 ΔlacU169 thi<br>rpsL Φ(bioA-lacZ)301 bisC | 4 |
| S1134  | F⁻ araD139 ΔlacU169 thi<br>rpsL Φ(bioA-lacZ)301<br>chlE41 | 4 |
| S1187  | F⁺ bioA24 bisC32 (λ imm⁴³⁴) | 8 |
| S1196  | F⁺ bioA24 chlG21 | Curing of S1177 (8) |
| S1312  | F⁻ araD139 ΔlacU169 thi<br>rpsL bioA24 (λ imm⁴³⁴)<br>zbh-428::Tn10 bisC8::Mu cts | Transduction to Tc⁺<br>of bisC::Mu cts mutant of A. del Campillo-Campbell |
| S1316  | F⁻ araD139 ΔlacU169 thi<br>rpsL bioA24 zbh-428::Tn10<br>bisC9::Mu cts | Same as for S1312 |
| KS302  | HfrH Δ(gal-bio) | 33 |
| POI1681 | araD139 araB::Mu cts Δlac<br>rpsL (Mu dl1681 [Km⁺]<br>ΔBamHIcts) | 12 |
| pUC9   | lac⁺ Ap⁺ | 39 |
| pDEPO  | Ap⁺ | 27 |
| M13mpl8,<br>mp19 | 40 |
| λ1059  |  | 21 |
| λNK467 | cI857 b221 rex::Tn5 Oam<br>Pam | N. Kleckner |

transformed (24) with pBISC352, and a Mu-transducing lysate was prepared from these cells by inducing the Mu prophage in a logarithmically growing culture at 43°C for 2.5 h. A bisC::Mu strain, S1312 (Table 1), was transduced (26) to resistance to ampicillin and kanamycin with this lysate. These transductants, which must harbor pBISC352 into which Mu dl1681 has transposed, were screened for growth on BDS. The positions of these insertions (Fig. 1C) suggest that the bisC gene occupies a maximum of 2.8 kbp of the original clone. There is a small region of overlap of complementing and noncomplementing insertions into the bisC clone. Since both of the noncomplementing Mu dl1681 insertions are in the same orientation relative to the bisC gene but the noncomplementing insertion is in the opposite orientation, this overlap is probably due to polarity effects of the insertion element in one orientation but not the other. This result suggests that these insertions are between the bisC promoter and the start of the bisC coding region.

The polypeptides produced by the original bisC gene clone, pBISC352, were identified both in vivo by maxicell analysis (31) of cells containing the clone (data not shown) and in vitro by transcription and translation (41) of plasmid DNA. These polypeptides were identified by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (23) of [³⁵S] methionine (Amersham)-labeled proteins prepared in an S30 extract (Amersham) used according to the instructions of the manufacturer with 3 μg of cesium chloride gradient-purified (24) plasmid DNA. Three polypeptides with molecular weights of 79,000, 34,000, and 22,000 (79K, 34K, and 22K polypeptides) were produced by this clone (Fig. 2). The 79K polypeptide was the sole polypeptide required for the BisC⁺ phenotype (Fig. 2). In experiments in which the products of the three Tn5 insertion mutants and the six deletion mutants which fail to complement bisC32 were produced by in vitro transcription or translation of purified DNA, the 34K and 22K polypeptides were produced but the 79K polypeptide was not (Fig. 2, lanes 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 14). More

FIG. 1. Location of the bisC gene on the bisC clone. (A) Restriction maps of the 19.5-kbp bacterial DNA insert in λbisC and of the 5.8-kbp subclone, pBISC352. The restriction enzymes used were PstI (P), HincII (I), PvulI (U), MluI (M), ClaI (C), StuI (S), PvuII (V), BstEII (T), EcoRV (R), BglII (B), HindIII (H), and EcoRI (E). The 1-kbp scale is for the pBISC352 map and the maps in panels B and C. (B) The fragments of bisC DNA present in several subclones of pBISC352 are aligned with the map of pBISC352 in panel A. The abilities of these subclones to complement the bisC32 allele are shown on the right. Some clones (+) complement the mutant for growth on BDS minimal plates, and other (−) do not. (C) Positions of Tn5 insertion are indicated above the line, and positions of Mu dl1681 insertions are indicated below the line; the map is aligned with the map of pBISC352 in panel A. Tn5 insertion clones were tested for the ability to complement the bisC32 mutation. Mu dl1681 insertion clones were tested for the ability to complement the bisC8::Mu mutation. Insertion clones that complement are indicated by a short line; those that do not are indicated by a long line.

important, the 34K polypeptide was not produced by one of the Tn5 insertion mutants that can complement the bisC32 mutation (lane 15), and the 22K polypeptide was not produced by a different complementing Tn5 insertion mutant (lane 4). The 79K polypeptide was produced, however, in these two insertion mutants and in two others that can complement the bisC32 mutation (lanes 12 and 13).

The fact that our cloned segment complements bisC mutations suggests (but does not prove) that the gene responsible for the complementation is really the bisC locus. To prove that it is, one of the bisC temperature-sensitive structural gene mutations isolated by del Campillo-Campbell and Campbell (8), bisC117(Ts) was cloned by using its ability to hybridize to the wild-type clone. The region containing the mutation was mapped to the interval between bp 1180 and 1780 on the wild-type bisC sequence map (see below and Fig. 3), which is within the open reading frame proposed here to be the BDS reductase coding region. The DNA sequence of this mutant from bp 1290 to 2050 was deter-

FIG. 2. Analysis of polypeptide products of deletion and Tn5 insertion mutations in the *bisC* clone expressed in a coupled in vitro transcription-translation system. Polypeptides labeled with \[^{35}S\]methionine were produced in an S30 extract of *E. coli* (41). These were then subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Autoradiograms of two gels are shown. The *bisC* fragments and insertion mutants tested in this system are indicated below the autoradiograms. Those marked with a plus sign complement the *bisC32* mutation and produce the 79K polypeptide. Those marked with a minus sign do not complement the *bisC32* mutation and do not produce the 79K polypeptide, although several do produce polypeptides of altered sizes. Lanes: —, no DNA; 1, pDEPO (27); 2, 5-kbp *PstI-HindIII bisC* fragment cloned into pDEPO; 3, 4.6-kbp *PstI-BglII bisC* fragment cloned into pDEPO; 4 and 5, Tn5 insertions in plasmid used in lane 2; 6, pUC9 (39); 7, 5-kbp *PstI-HindIII bisC* fragment cloned into pUC9; 8, *EcoRV-PvuII* internal deletion of plasmid used in lane 7; 9, *StuI-EcoRV* internal deletion of plasmid used in lane 7; 10, 3.9-kbp *PstI-EcoRV* fragment into pUC9; 12 through 15, Tn5 insertions in plasmid used in lane 7.

mined by the dideoxy sequencing method, and the sole change from the wild-type sequence was shown to be a G-to-T transversion at bp 1443 (data not shown). This base change results in a change from a methionine to an isoleucine codon in the BDS reductase protein. Additional evidence comes from Southern analysis of a Mu insertion (in S1316 [Table 1]) that has been mapped to the *bisC* locus by genetic means. By using probes representing different regions of the cloned gene, we have mapped the Mu insertion to the 0.3-kbp *BstEII-EcoRV* fragment in the center of the gene (Fig. 1). Sequences on either side of this region are still present in this strain (data not shown). Thus, two known *bisC* mutations map within the region proposed to be the *bisC* coding region.

The sequence of the 3.3 kbp of the 3.7-kbp *HincII-EcoRI* fragment containing the *bisC* gene was determined by the dideoxy chain termination method (32). M13mp18 and M13mp19 clones of this fragment were subjected to exonuclease III deletions from either end (17). This produced a complete sequence, including every base of 3.3 kbp of the 3.7-kbp fragment, a minimum of two times in each direction. The sequence of this 3.3 kbp is shown in Fig. 3. An open reading frame thought to correspond to the *bisC* coding region and capable of encoding a polypeptide with a predicted molecular weight of 80,905 is also shown in Fig. 3. The three noncomplementing Tn5 insertions and the six deletion mutants which do not produce the 79K polypeptide

in the in vitro transcription-translation system all map to this open reading frame. The sequence places the 5′-to-3′ orientation of the *bisC* gene from left to right on the map of Fig. 1A. An examination of the hydrophobicity of the predicted BisC open reading frame by the method of Kyte and Doolittle (22) suggests that the product is a soluble protein, which is consistent with the location of the enzyme in partially purified preparations (9; unpublished observations). The codon usage in the predicted open reading frame (data not shown) is typical of weakly expressed *E. coli* proteins (15). The 700-bp sequence upstream of the *bisC* coding region includes no sequences with appreciable homology to the consensus ribosome-binding site (34) and promoter of *E. coli* (35). Because of this, we have no reason to assume that the major initiation site for translation is at nucleotide 577 (as shown) rather than at the downstream ATG at nucleotide 643. The *bisC* gene appears to be expressed at a low rate in vivo. The *bisC* product, the 79K polypeptide, is expressed in vitro at rates much lower than those of the vector-borne gene product, the β-lactamase polypeptide, and indeed lower than those of the other two polypeptides produced by the cloned DNA (Fig. 2). This low level of expression may explain the difficulty in identifying sequences that match consensus sequences important for gene expression in *E. coli*.

The sequences of two other molybdoenzymes from *E. coli* show some similarities to that of *bisC* (1).

15 30 45 60 75 90
TAT CCC TGC GGG TTA CGC TAA CAC CAG TGC CGC GCA TTT TGT CGC GCA GTT CGC TTC CTG CAC ATC CAT GTA ATA ACC AAC GCC GCC
105 120 135 150 165 180
GCC CAG AGC TGC GCC TGC TGC GCC AAT CAG CGC GCC TTT ACC CGC ATC TTT CTT CGA AGA AGA GAG CGC ACC AAT ACC CGC GCC CAC
195 210 225 240 255 270
GAG AGA GCC CAG ACC TGC GCC GAT AGC AGA TTT ACC TGC TTC GCC TTC GCC GGT GTA AGG GTT AGT TGT GCA GCC AGA TAC CGC CAG AGC
285 300 315 330 345 360
GCC ACT CAC TAC GCC GCC AAT AAG ATA AAC ACG TTT CTT CAT TGT TAA TCC TTA ATA ACC TTT TTA TTC TTT GCC ACG GGT TCC GTG GCC
375 390 405 420 435 450
GGA GAT TAT GCC TGA ACA TGA AGA TTA TTC CTG GGA ATA CTC GGA AAT TTC TAA GTA ATA TTT AAC TGC TCA ATA CAT CTA ACC TTT
465 480 495 510 525 540
CAG GAG TCT TCG GTT TGG CCA ACT CAT CCT CAC GAT ATT CCC TTC TGA CTG CCC CCA TTG GGG GCC CAT GCT GTT TGA AAC CGA CGG CGA
555 570 585 600 615 630
AAC CGT GTT TAG CTG CGT GGC GCG TTA GCC ACA GGA ATG GAA AAC TCC TTC CAG AGC GCG GTT CGC GAC CAG GTT CAC AGC AAT ACG CGG
645 660 675 690 705 720
GTA CGA TTT CCA ATG GTG CGA AAA GGC TTT CTT GCG TCA CCG GAA AAC CGG CAA GCC ATT CGT GGG CAG GAT GAA TTT GTT CGC GTG AGT
Val Arg Phe Pro Met Val Arg Lys Phe Leu Ala Ser Pro Glu Asn Pro Gln Gly Ile Arg Gly Gln Asp Glu Phe Val Arg Val Ser
735 750 765 780 795 810
TGC GAT GAG GCC CTG GAT CTT ATT CAC CAA CAA CAT AAA CGC ATT CGT GAG GCT TAT GGT CCG GCA TCG GCC ATT TTT GCT GGT TCC TAC GGC
Trp Asp Glu Ala Leu Asp Leu His Gln Gln His Lys Arg Ile Arg Glu Ala Tyr Pro Ala Ser Ile Phe Ala Gly Ser Tyr Gly

825 840 855 870 885 900
TGC CGT TCA AAC GGC GTG CTG CAT AAG GCC TCG ACA TTA TTA CAA CGC TAT ATG GCC CTG GCA GGC GGT TAT ACC GGG CAT CTG GGG GAT
Trp Arg Ser Asn Gly Val Leu His Ala Ser Thr Leu Leu Gln Arg Tyr Met Ala Leu Ala Gly Gly Tyr Thr Gly His Leu Gly Asp

StuI
915 930 945 960 975 990
TAT TCG ACC GGC GCA CAG GCG ATC ATG CCG TAT GTC GTG GGT AGT GAA GTT TAT CAA CAG CAG ACC AGT TGG CGG CTG GTG CTG
Tyr Ser Thr Gly Ala Ala Gln Ala Ile Met Pro Tyr Val Val Gly Gly Ser Glu Val Tyr Gln Gln Gln Thr Ser Trp Pro Leu Val Leu
1005 1020 1035 1050 1065 1080
GAA CAT AGC GAT GTC GTC GTC CTG TGG ACT GCT AAC CCA CTC AAT ACC CTG AAA ATT GCC TGG AAT GCA TCC GAT GAG CAG GGG CTT TCT
Glu His Ser Asp Val Val Val Leu Trp Ser Ala Asn Pro Leu Asn Thr Leu Lys Ile Ala Trp Asn Ala Ser Asp Glu Gln Gly Leu Ser

NsiI
1095 1110 1125 1140 1155 1170
TAC TTT TCT GCA CTG CGT GAC AGC GGG AAA AAG CTG ATC TGC ATT GAT CCA ATG CGA TCG GAA ACC GTC GAT TTC TGC GAT AAA ATG
Tyr Phe Ser Ala Leu Arg Asp Ser Gly Lys Leu Ile Cys Ile Asp Pro Met Arg Ser Glu Thr Val Asp Phe Phe Gly Asp Lys Met

PvuI
1185 1200 1215 1230 1245 1260
GAG TGC GTG GCA CCG CAC ATG GGC ACC GAT GTT GCG CTG ATC CTG GGG ATC GCC CAT ACG CTG GTG GAA AAT GTT TGG CAC GAC GAA GCG
Glu Trp Val Ala Pro His Met Gly Thr Asp Val Ala Leu Met Leu Gly Ile Ala His Thr Leu Val Glu Asn Gly Trp His Asp Glu Ala
1275 1290 1305 1320 1335 1350
TTT CTG GCC CGT TGC ACC ACA GTT TAT GCC TTC GCC TCT TAT TTG CTG GGC GAG AGT GAC GGA ATA GCG AAA ACC GCC GAA TGG GCA
Phe Leu Ala Arg Cys Thr Thr Gly Tyr Ala Val Phe Ala Ser Tyr Leu Leu Gly Ser Asp Gly Ile Ala Lys Thr Ala Glu Trp Ala
1365 1380 1395 1410 1425 1440
GCA GAG ATT TGT GTT GCC GCA GCC AAA ATC CGC GAG CTG GCC GCT ATT TTC CAC CAA AAT ACC ATG CTG ATG GCA GGC TGC GGA
Ala Glu Ile Cys Val Gly Ala Ala Ile Arg Glu Leu Ala Ala Ile Phe His Gln Asn Thr Thr Met Leu Met Ala Gly Trp Gly
1455 1470 1485 1500 1515 1530
ATG CAG CGC CAA CAG TTT GTT GAG CAA AAA CAC TGG ATG ATC GTC ACG CTG GCA GCA ATG TTG GGG CAA ATC GCC ACA CCC GCC GGC GGT
Met Gln Arg Gln Gln Phe Gly Glu Gln Ala Val Glu ATC GTC ACC TCT GCC ACT TCT TTT GAG
Phe Gly Leu Ser Tyr His Phe Ala Asn Gly Gly Asn Pro Thr Arg Arg Ser Ala Val Leu Ser Ser Met Gln Gly Ser Leu Pro Gly Gly

BstEII
1635 1650 1665 1680 1695 1710
TGC GAT GCC GTG GAT AAA ATC CCT GTT GCC CGC ATT GTT GAA GCA CTG GAA AAC CCT GTT GGC GCA TAT CAA CAC AAC GTT ATG AAC CGA
Cys Asp Ala Val Asp Lys Ile Pro Val Ala Arg Ile Val Glu Ala Leu Glu Asn Pro Gly Ala Tyr Gln His Asn Gly Met Asn Arg
1735 1740 1755 1770 1785 1800
CAT TTC CCG GAT ATT CGT TTT ATC TGG TGC GCC GGT GCC AAC TTT ACT CAT CAT CAG GAT ACC AAT CGC CTG ATC CGT GCC TGG CAA
His Phe Pro Asp Ile Arg Phe Ile Trp Trp Ala Gly Gly Ala Ala Asn Phe Thr His His Gln Asn Asp Thr Asn Arg Leu Ile Arg Ala Trp Gln
1815 1830 1845 1860 1875 1890
AAA CCG GAG CTG GTG ATC TCT GAA TGC TCC TGC GCC GCA AAA CAC GCC GAT ATC GGT CTG CCT GCC ACT ACC TCT TTT GAG
Lys Pro Glu Leu Val Ile Ser Glu Cys Phe Trp Thr Ala Ala Ala Lys His Ala Asp Ile Val Leu Pro Ala Thr Thr Ser Phe Glu

EcoRV
1905 1920 1935 1950 1965 1980
CGT AAT GAT CTC ACC ATG ACC GTT GAT TAC AGT AAT CAG CAT CTG GTG CGG ATG AAG CAA GTG GTG CCC CCA CCC TAT GAA GCC CGT AAT
Arg Asn Asp Leu Thr Met Thr Gly Asp Tyr Ser Asn Gln His Leu Val Pro Met Lys Gln Val Val Pro Arg Tyr Glu Ala Arg Asn
1995 2010 2025 2040 2055 2070
GAT TTT GAT GTT GCC GAG TTA AGT GAA CGC TGG GAG AAG GCC GTT TAT GCA CGT TTT ACC GAA GGA AAA AGT GAG CTG CAA TGC CTG
Asp Phe Asp Val Phe Ala Glu Leu Ser Glu Arg Trp Glu Lys Gly Tyr Ala Arg Phe Thr Glu Gly Lys Ser Glu Leu Gln Trp Leu
2085 2100 2115 2130 2145 2160
GAA ACC TTT TAT AAC GTT GCC CGC GCA AGC CAG GTT GAA TTG CCC CCA TTT GCT GAG TTC TGG GCC AAC CAG TTA
Glu Thr Phe Tyr Asn Val Ala Arg Gln Arg Gly Ala Ser Gln Arg Gln Val Glu Leu Pro Pro Phe Ala Glu Phe Trp Gln Ala Asn Gln Leu
2175 2190 2205 2220 2235 2250
ATT GAG ATC CGG GAA AAC CCG GAC AGC CGG TTT ATT CGC TTC GCT GCA TTT TTG CCC CGA TCC GCC GCT GCC GAT CCC TTA AAA ACC CAG
Ile Glu Met Pro Glu Asn Pro Asp Ser Glu Arg Phe Ile Arg Phe Ala Ala Phe Leu Pro Arg Ser Ala Gly Asp Pro Leu Lys Thr Gln
2265 2280 2295 2310 2325 2340
CGC AAG ATT GAA ATC TTC TCA CAG CGT ATT GCC GAT TAC CGG GAT TCC GGC CAT CCA ATG TGG CGG GAG GAC GAA TGC
Arg Lys Ile Glu Ile Phe Ser Gln Arg Ile Ala Asp Tyr CGG GAT TCC GGC CAT CCA ATG TGG CGG GAG GAC GAA TGC
Arg Lys Ile Glu Ile Phe Ser Gln Arg Ile Ala Asp Tyr CGG GAT TCC GGC CAT CCA ATG TGG CGG GAG GAC GAA TGC

BstEII
2355 2370 2385 2400 2415 2430
CAG GCC AAT GCC GAA CCA GAA CAG TTG CAG GTA CTT TCT GCC CAT CCG GCC CAC CGC CTG CAC AGC CTG AAT TAC AGT TCT CTG CGC
Gln Gly Asn Ala Glu Pro Glu Gln Leu Gln Leu Val Leu Ser Ala His Pro Gly His Arg Cys Leu His Pro Ala His Arg Leu His Ser Gln Leu Asn Tyr Ser Ser Leu Arg

PvuII
2445 2460 2475 2490 2505 2520
GAA TTG TAC GCC GTG GCA AAT CGT GAG CCT GTC ACC ATT CAT CCT GAC GAT GCC GGC GGC ATA CAA GAT GGC GAT ACT GTT CGG
Glu Leu Tyr Ala Val Ala Ile Arg Glu Pro Val Thr Ile His Pro Asp Asp Ala Gln Glu Arg Gly Ile Glu Asp Gly Asp Thr Val Arg
2535 2550 2565 2580 2595 2610
TTG TGG AAC GCA CGC GGG CAA ATT CTT GCC GGA GCC GTC ATT AGC GAG GGA ATT AAA CCT GGC GTG ATT TGC ATT CAC GAA GGG GCA TGC
Leu Trp Asn Ala CGC GGG CAA ATT CTT GCC GGA GCC GTC ATT AGC GAG GGA ATT AAA CCT GGC GTG ATT TGC ATT CAC GAA GGG GCA TGC
Leu Trp Asn Ala CGC GGG CAA ATT CTT GCC GGA GCC GTC ATT AGC GAG GGA ATT AAA CCT GGC GTG ATT TGC ATT CAC GAA GGG GCA TGC
Pro Asp Leu Asp Leu Thr Ala Asp Gly Ile Cys Lys Asn Val Leu Thr Lys Asp Leu Pro Ser Ser Arg Leu Gly Met

BglII
2715 2730 2745 2760 2775 2790
GCT GTG CGG GTA ATA CGG CGC TGG CAT GGC TGG AAA AAT ACA ACG GTC CGG AAC TGA CAC TTA CAG CGT TTG AAC CAC CGG CCA GCT CAT
Ala Val Arg Val Ile Arg Arg Trp His Gly Trp Lys Asn Thr Thr Val CGG AAC TGA CAC TTA CAG CGT TTG AAC CAC CGG CCA GCT CAT
Ala Val Arg Val Ile Arg Arg Trp His Gly Trp Lys Asn Thr Thr Val CGG AAC TGA CAC TTA CAG CGT TTG AAC CAC CGG CCA GCT CAT
AAT CCA TGT GGG TAG TTG GGT TTC ATC TGC CCA TCA GCA ATC GTG ATG CTG TGC CTG GTA AAA ATT TAT CGC CGG TTG ATT
2895 2910 2925 2940 2955 2970
TTT TTG ATA AAC CTC CAG CAT GTG GGG ATG GCC CTG CTG CAC CGC CTT ACC AAT ACC GCC GCC CCT GAC GCC CTT CGG
Tyr Leu Ile Asn Leu Gln His Val Gly Met Ala Leu Leu His Arg Leu Thr Asn Thr Ala Ala Pro Asp Ala Pro Leu Arg

HindIII
3075 3090 3105 3120 3135 3150
GTT GCC AAG ATA GCC CGC ACC AGC GGA ATG CAG TCA GCC CAG TAA TTC GCT TTT ATA AAG GGA TGC CCC CAG GTT GTA CTT TCC AGC
3165 3180 3195 3210 3225 3240
CAC AGT TCG AGG ATC GCC GGG AGT TCT GGT GCT TCC CGA ATC ATG GTT TAT TTC CCG GAT AGC AAC AGC AGC CAA CCA CAT GAT
3255 3270 3285 3300 3315 3330
CAT TCA CCA GCC CAC ATG CCT GCA TAA AGG GAG CAG ATT GTG GTG CCG ACA AAC TTA AAA CCA CGT TTT TTC AGT GCC TTA GAT AGG
GCC TTC G

FIG. 3. Sequence of the *bisC* gene. The sequence of 3,336 bp within the 3.5-kbp *HincII* fragment containing the *bisC* gene is shown. The position and sequence of an open reading frame capable of encoding a polypeptide of 80,905 molecular weight are also shown.

We thank A. del Campillo-Campbell and M. Martin for strains and unpublished information.

This work was supported by Public Health Service grant AI08573 from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. D. E. Pierson was a recipient of a National Science Foundation graduate fellowship.

LITERATURE CITED

1. Bilous, P., S. T. Cole, W. F. Anderson, and J. H. Weiner. 1988. Nucleotide sequence of the *dmsABC* operon encoding the anaerobic dimethylsulphoxide reductase of *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. 2:785–795.
2. Bilous, P. T., and J. H. Weiner. 1985. Dimethyl sulfoxide reductase activity by anaerobically grown *Escherichia coli* HB101. J. Bacteriol. 162:1151–1155.
3. Brot, N., L. Weissbach, J. Werth, and H. Weissbach. 1981. Enzymatic reduction of protein-bound methionine sulfoxide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78:2155–2158.
4. Campbell, A., A. del Campillo-Campbell, and D. Barker. 1978. Repression of biotin biosynthesis in *Escherichia coli* during growth on biotin vitamers. J. Bacteriol. 135:90–98.
5. Casse, F. 1970. Mapping of the gene *chl-B* controlling membrane bound nitrate reductase and formic hydrogen-lyase activities in *Escherichia coli* K-12. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 39: 429–436.
6. Claassen, V. P., L. F. Oltmann, J. Van'T Riet, U. A. T. Brinkman, and A. H. Stouthamer. 1982. Purification of molybdenum cofactor and its fluorescent oxidation products. FEBS Lett. 142:133–137.
7. De Bruijn, F. J., and J. R. Lupski. 1984. The use of transposon Tn5 mutagenesis in the rapid generation of correlated physical and genetic maps of DNA segments cloned into multicopy plasmids—a review. Gene 27:131–149.
8. del Campillo-Campbell, A., and A. Campbell. 1982. Molybdenum cofactor requirement for biotin sulfoxide reduction in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 149:469–478.
9. del Campillo-Campbell, A., D. Dykhuizen, and P. P. Cleary. 1979. Enzymic reduction of d-biotin-d-sulfoxide to d-biotin. Methods Enzymol. 62:379–385.
10. Dubourdieu, M., E. Andrade, and J. Puig. 1976. Molybdenum and chlorate resistant mutants in *Escherichia coli* K12. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 70:766–773.
11. Ejiri, S.-I., H. Weissbach, and N. Brot. 1980. The purification of methionine sulfoxide reductase from *Escherichia coli*. Anal. Biochem. 102:393–398.
12. Engebrecht, J., K. Nealson, and M. Silverman. 1983. Bacterial bioluminescence: isolation and genetic analysis of functions from *Vibrio fischeri*. Cell 32:773–781.
13. Fridovich, I. 1974. Superoxide dismutases. Adv. Enzymol. 41:35–97.
14. Glaser, J. H., and J. A. DeMoss. 1972. Comparison of nitrate reductase mutants of *Escherichia coli* selected by alternative procedures. Mol. Gen. Genet. 116:1–10.
15. Grosjean, H., and W. Fiers. 1982. Preferential codon usage in prokaryotic genes: the optimal codon-anticodon interaction energy and the selective codon usage in efficiently expressed genes. Gene 18:199–209.
16. Haddock, B. A., and M. A. Mandrand-Berthelot. 1982. *Escherichia coli* formate-to-nitrate respiratory chain: genetic analysis. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 10:478–480.
17. Henikoff, S. 1984. Unidirectional digestion with exonuclease III creates targeted breakpoints for DNA sequencing. Gene 28: 351–359.
18. Holmes, D. S., and M. Quigley. 1981. A rapid boiling method for the preparation of bacterial plasmids. Anal. Biochem. 114: 193–197.
19. Johnson, J. L., B. E. Hainline, and K. V. Rajagopalan. 1980. Characterization of the molybdenum cofactor of sulfite oxidase, xanthine oxidase, and nitrate reductase. J. Biol. Chem. 255: 1783–1786.
20. Johnson, M. E., and K. V. Rajagopalan. 1987. Involvement of *chlA*, *E*, *M*, and *N* loci in *Escherichia coli* molybdopterin biosynthesis. J. Bacteriol. 169:117–125.
21. Karn, J., S. Brenner, J. Barnett, and G. Cesareni. 1980. Novel bacteriophage cloning vector. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77:5172–5176.
22. Kyte, J., and R. F. Doolittle. 1982. A simple method for displaying the hydrophobic character of a protein. J. Mol. Biol. 157:105–132.
23. Laemmli, U. K. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature (London) 227:680–685.
24. Maniatis, T., E. F. Fritsch, and J. Sambrook. 1982. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
25. Melville, D. B. 1954. Biotin sulfoxide. J. Biol. Chem. 208: 495–501.
26. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
27. Paluh, J. L., and C. Yanofsky. 1986. High level production and rapid purification of the *E. coli trp* repressor. Nucleic Acids Res. 14:7851–7860.
28. Puig, J., and E. Azoulay. 1967. Étude génétique et biochimique des mutants résistants au ClO₃⁻ (gènes *chlA*, *chlB*, *chlC*). C.R. Acad. Sci. 264:1916–1918.
29. Puig, J., E. Azoulay, and E. Pichinoty. 1967. Étude génétique d'une mutation à effet pleiotrope chez l'*Escherichia coli* K12. C.R. Acad. Sci. 264:1507–1509.
30. Redfield, R. J., and A. M. Campbell. 1984. Origin of cryptic lambda prophages in *Escherichia coli* K-12. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 49:199–206.
31. Sancar, A., A. M. Hack, and W. D. Rupp. 1979. Simple method for identification of plasmid-coded proteins. J. Bacteriol. 137: 692–693.
32. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5463–5467.
33. Shimada, K., R. A. Weisberg, and M. E. Gottesman. 1973. Prophage lambda at unusual chromosomal locations. II. Mutations induced by bacteriophage lambda in *Escherichia coli* K12. J. Mol. Biol. 80:297–314.
34. Shine, J., and L. Dalgarno. 1975. Determinant of cistron specificity in bacterial ribosomes. Nature (London) 254:34–38.
35. Siebenlist, U. 1979. Nucleotide sequence of the three major early promoters of bacteriophage T4. Nucleic Acids Res. 6:1895–1907.
36. Sperl, G. T., and J. A. DeMoss. 1975. *chlD* gene function in molybdate activation of nitrate reductase. J. Bacteriol. 122: 1230–1238.
37. Stewart, V., and C. H. MacGregor. 1982. Nitrate reductase in *Escherichia coli* K-12: involvement of *chlC*, *chlE*, and *chlG* loci. J. Bacteriol. 151:788–799.
38. Takagi, M., T. Tsuchiya, and M. Ishimoto. 1981. Proton translocation coupled to trimethylamine *N*-oxide reduction in anaerobically grown *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 148:762–768.
39. Vieira, J., and J. Messing. 1982. The pUC plasmids, an M13mp7-derived system for insertion mutagenesis and sequencing with synthetic universal primers. Gene 19:259–268.
40. Yanisch-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequence of the M13mpl8 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33:103–119.
41. Zubay, G. 1973. *In vitro* synthesis of protein in microbial systems. Annu. Rev. Genet. 7:267–287.
