
IUBMB *Life*, 63(9): 754–763, September 2011

# Critical Review

## Stress Signaling from the Endoplasmic Reticulum: A Central Player in the Pathogenesis of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

### Adam K. Walker${}^{1,2,3}$ and Julie D. Atkin${}^{1,2,3}$

${}^{1}$Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, Australia  
${}^{2}$Howard Florey Institute, Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Parkville, VIC, Australia  
${}^{3}$Centre for Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia  

---

### Summary

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by the misfolding and aggregation of distinct proteins in affected tissues, however, the pathogenic cause of disease remains unknown. Recent evidence indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a central role in ALS pathogenesis. ER stress activates the unfolded protein response (UPR), a homeostatic response to misfolded proteins. The UPR is initially protective by up-regulation of specific ER stress-regulated genes and inhibition of general protein translation. However, long-term ER stress leads to cell death via apoptotic signaling, thus providing a link to neurodegeneration. Activation of the UPR is one of the earliest events in affected motor neurons of transgenic rodent models expressing ALS-linked mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1). Recently, genetic manipulation of ER stress in several different SOD1 mouse models was shown to alter disease onset and progression, implicating an active role for the UPR in disease mechanisms. Furthermore, mutations to vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB), an ER transmembrane protein involved in ER stress regulation, also cause some cases of familial ALS. ER stress also occurs in spinal cord tissues of human sporadic ALS patients, and recent evidence suggests that perturbation of the ER could occur in ALS cases associated with TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43), fused in sarcoma (FUS) and valosin containing protein (VCP). Together these findings implicate ER stress as a potential upstream mechanism involved in both familial and sporadic forms of ALS.

© 2011 IUBMB  
IUBMB *Life*, 63(9): 754–763, 2011

---

### Keywords

endoplasmic reticulum stress; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; neurodegeneration; protein misfolding; unfolded protein response; apoptosis; motor neuron.

---

### INTRODUCTION

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is responsible for the native folding, post-translational modification and trafficking of many transmembrane and secretory proteins (1). The high rate of protein folding within the ER places a burden on the organelle, and prevention of protein misfolding is vital to maintain cellular function. Accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins within the ER causes ER stress, which is mitigated by a signaling mechanism known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). Activation of the UPR initially results in a decrease in general protein translation, specific up-regulation of UPR target genes such as those encoding ER chaperones, and an expansion of ER volume via increased lipid production (2). These are normal transitory physiological response mechanisms which by themselves are often sufficient to overcome short-term insult. However, if homeostasis is not restored, cell death is triggered via apoptotic signaling.

The preferential degeneration of specific subsets of neurons is a consistent feature in neurodegenerative diseases. One such disorder, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), primarily affects motor neurons of the spinal cord, brainstem and cortex (3). ALS is characterized by a sudden onset of muscle weakness, leading to progressive paralysis and death usually within 2–5 years of symptom onset (4). Although one pharmaceutical agent, riluzole, is widely used for ALS treatment, this drug affords only 2–3 months extension of life span (5). Understanding of the upstream pathogenic mechanisms involved in ALS remains incomplete, which greatly inhibits the design of effective targeted therapies (6).

The vast majority of ALS cases arise sporadically, however approximately 5–10% of all cases are familial (7). Until

---

Received 2 March 2011; accepted 24 May 2011  
Address correspondence to: Adam K. Walker, Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, Physical Sciences 3, Kingsbury Drive, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia. Tel: +613-9479-6565. Fax: +613-9479-2467. E-mail: adam.walker@latrobe.edu.au or Julie D. Atkin, Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, Physical Sciences 3, Kingsbury Drive, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia. Tel: +613-9479-5480. Fax: +613-9479-2467. E-mail: j.atkin@latrobe.edu.au

ISSN 1521-6543 print/ISSN 1521-6551 online  
DOI: 10.1002/iub.520

demonstrated to play a key early role in the pathogenesis of ALS (18–22). The variety of mechanisms implicated in disease indicates that motor neuron degeneration in ALS is likely the result of a cumulative set of upstream triggers which converge on a common pathogenic cascade, resulting in comparable downstream consequences. Dysfunction of the ER and activation of the UPR could form a central link in the pathogenesis of ALS.

# AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS

ALS is a devastating and invariably fatal neurodegenerative disease which principally manifests with disturbances in voluntary movement. As the disease progresses patients display increasing muscle weakness, atrophy and paralysis, and death occurs within several years of symptom onset from respiratory impairment (23). ALS results from degeneration of both upper and lower motor neurons of the brain, brainstem and spinal cord, and symptoms progress rapidly as degeneration spreads throughout affected areas of the nervous system (3, 24).

ALS has a mean age of onset of 55 to 65 years, and median survival from symptom onset is ~30 months in prospective population-based studies (4). However, considerable variability exists between patients, and 5 to 10% of patients survive longer than 10 years after the initial onset of symptoms (4). Due to the rapid disease progression and short survival time the lifetime risk of developing ALS has been estimated to be over 1 in 400 (25). The lifetime risk climbs with increasing age, and therefore, with an aging worldwide population, both the incidence and prevalence of ALS are likely to increase in the future (25, 26).

Although the majority of ALS cases are sporadic with no previous family history, 5–10% of ALS cases are inherited (7). Approximately 20% of familial cases, and 1–2% of all ALS cases, are caused by mutations in the gene encoding SOD1 (8, 7). SOD1 is a highly expressed antioxidant metalloenzyme which catalyses the degradation of superoxide radicals to dioxygen and hydrogen peroxide (27). SOD1 exists as an unusually stable homodimer, comprising two subunits which each contain one copper and one zinc binding site and one stabilizing intrasubunit disulphide bond (6, 27, 28). Over 140 different ALS-linked SOD1 mutations have now been identified (29). These are predominantly point mutations which cause single amino acid residue changes. However deletions, insertions and several truncation mutations are also associated with disease. Some SOD1 mutants (such as H46R and H48Q) have disrupted metal binding capacity and decreased catalytic activity. In contrast, some ALS-linked SOD1 mutants (such as A4V and G93A) retain wildtype metal binding levels and dismutase activity, and a range of enzymatic activity exists among mutants (27). In addition, the level of mutant SOD1 dismutase activity does not correlate with disease onset, severity or progression (30). These findings, together with the wide dispersal of mutations throughout the SOD1 primary and tertiary sequence, indicate that a loss of the normal enzymatic function of SOD1 is not the cause of motor neuron degeneration in ALS (30).

In common with other neurodegenerative disorders, one key feature of ALS is the accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins in affected tissues. Motor neurons of mutant SOD1 mice and human patients with SOD1 mutations contain large SOD1-immunoreactive inclusions which are visible by light microscopy (31). Furthermore, mutant SOD1 becomes insoluble and forms intracellular inclusions when expressed in mammalian cell culture (32). Recent evidence also indicates that oxidized, misfolded wildtype SOD1 is present in spinal cord tissues of sporadic ALS patients, suggesting that SOD1 may be involved in pathogenesis even in the absence of SOD1 mutations (33, 34).

In cases of sporadic and non-SOD1-linked familial ALS, TDP-43 was recently identified as the major constituent of neuronal and glial cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions (35, 36). TDP-43 is also C-terminally fragmented, hyperphosphorylated, ubiquitinated and insoluble in disease, and redistribution from the nucleus to the cytoplasm occurs in affected neurons. Over 30 mutations to the gene encoding TDP-43 have now been linked with ALS (37). Mutations in another nuclear DNA/RNA binding protein, FUS, have also recently been implicated in disease (14, 15). Similar to ALS cases linked with SOD1 or TDP-43 mutations in which aggregates of the disease-causative protein accumulate, patients with mutant FUS-linked ALS also develop FUS-immunoreactive intracellular inclusions in affected tissues (14, 15). These findings indicate that protein misfolding and aggregation are key features of disease.

Despite an increasing understanding of disease mechanisms and genetic factors involved in ALS, the pathogenic events which trigger neurodegeneration remain elusive. Recent evidence has identified induction of ER stress as a central and early process in ALS pathogenesis.

## ER STRESS AND THE UPR

The ER serves many important cellular functions, including folding and post-translational modification of transmembrane and secretory proteins, the synthesis of lipids, and the regulation of intracellular calcium levels (1). The ER also forms intimate associations with other organelles, including the nucleus, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus (38, 39). An increased burden of misfolded proteins within the ER causes stress and activates the UPR to maintain homeostasis (2). Cellular insults which lead to increased protein misfolding in the ER include changes in intracellular calcium levels, alterations in the redox state of the ER, nutrient deprivation, failure of post-translational modification and increases in secretory protein synthesis (40). Intrinsic ER changes, as well as disturbances of other pathways, including the Golgi, endosomal and vesicular transport pathways and mitochondrial-associated apoptosis, can also activate the UPR (41, 42).

ER stress activates three main pathways of the UPR, mediated by the ER transmembrane proteins inositol-requiring kinase 1 (IRE1), protein kinase RNA-activated (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) (Fig. 2)

Figure 2. ER stress and induction of the unfolded protein response in ALS. Release of BiP due to the accumulation of misfolded proteins leads to dimerization and autophosphorylation of IRE1 and PERK, and translocation to the Golgi and cleavage of ATF6, causing activation of each of these upstream ER stress sensors. ER stress is also affected by changes in the UPS, oxidative stress, ERAD, calcium dysregulation and autophagy, as indicated. Activation of IRE1, PERK and ATF6 leads to effects on a number of different processes, including induction of the UPR, up-regulation of chaperones and CHOP, activation of ERAD and autophagy and the antioxidant response. When ER stress is not resolved, cell death is triggered by downstream mechanisms including CHOP, JNK, activation of caspase-4 and mitochondrial apoptosis. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

(43–48). These ER stress sensors are maintained in an inactive state, at least in part, by interaction with the ER chaperone immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP) (49). BiP binds preferentially to misfolded proteins and when misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER, BiP is released from the ER stress sensors which then become activated (49). In addition, activation of ATF6 can be regulated by specific ATP-dependent dissociation of BiP, while IRE1 and PERK can be activated by direct interaction with misfolded proteins (2, 47, 50). Recent evidence indicates that IRE1 can also be activated by a direct interaction with pro-apoptotic BCL2-associated X protein (BAX), providing a direct link between mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis and the UPR (51).

Autophosphorylation and dimerization of IRE1 produces an active endoribonuclease which cleaves the mRNA of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) (52). The XBP1 protein produced from this spliced mRNA possesses an altered C-terminus, and is able to act as a strong transcription factor to up-regulate specific UPR-induced genes and increase phospholipid synthesis to expand the volume of the ER (2, 53, 54). Additionally, activated IRE1 interacts with tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-asso-

associated factor-2 (TRAF2), which activates the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway (44). Furthermore, IRE1 also mediates the rapid degradation of a subset of ER-targeted mRNAs, including those encoding plasma membrane and secretory proteins, which decreases the biosynthetic load on the ER (55).

Similar to IRE1, PERK is activated by autophosphorylation and dimerization. Activated PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit α (eIF2α), disrupting the eIF2-GTP-tRNAiMet complex which is required for translation initiation (56, 57). This effectively halts general protein translation. PERK activation also leads to the translation of selected mRNAs, including the mRNA encoding activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) (58, 59). Interestingly, three additional kinases are able to phosphorylate eIF2α in response to other environmental stressors, such that eIF2α phosphorylation is considered to be the trigger of a protective process termed the integrated stress response (60). In addition to ER stress-activated PERK (also known as eIF2α kinase 3), eIF2α is also phosphorylated by: heme-regulated inhibitor kinase (HRI/eIF2α kinase 1) in response to oxidative stress, heat shock and osmotic stress; PKR/eIF2α kinase 2 in response to viral double-stranded RNA; and general control non-derepressible-2 (GCN2/eIF2α kinase 4) in response to amino acid deprivation (61–64). Thus, the integrated stress response inhibits general protein translation initiation and increases translation of mRNAs containing an upstream open reading frame, such as that of ATF4, under various conditions of cellular stress.

Constitutive translocation of the ER stress sensor ATF6 from the ER to the Golgi is prevented by the binding of BiP, which masks a Golgi localization sequence in ATF6 (65). However, upon release from BiP, the Golgi localization sequence is revealed, and ATF6 is transported to the cis-Golgi compartment. Here, the cytosolic N-terminal basic leucine zipper domain of ATF6 is cleaved by Golgi-localized site-1 and site-2 proteases, and the cleaved ATF6 fragment is imported into the nucleus (66). In the nucleus, cleaved ATF6 acts as a transcription factor which stimulates transcription of specific genes with promoters containing ER stress response elements, including XBP1 (1, 52).

The initial phases of the UPR are protective against ER stress by up-regulation of chaperones such as BiP, glucose regulated protein 94, calreticulin, calnexin and protein disulphide isomerase (PDI) family members, which assist in protein folding. ER stress also stimulates the clearance of misfolded proteins from the ER by ER-associated degradation (ERAD), which involves retrotranslocation of unfolded proteins from the ER lumen to the cytoplasm where they can be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) (67, 68). Furthermore, both the IRE1 and PERK-mediated UPR pathways modulate macroautophagy, an important cellular mechanism for clearance of proteins and damaged organelles, via activation of JNK and XBP1 (20, 69).

If the UPR fails to resolve the ER stress and cellular homeostasis cannot be restored, cell death is triggered by activation of ER stress-specific caspases and pro-apoptotic proteins, and by cross-talk with the mitochondrial intrinsic apoptotic pathway (70). Differential temporal regulation of the three arms of the

UPR may be involved in cell death determination, and artificially prolonged IRE1 activation correlates with prolonged cell survival (71). One important contributor to ER stress-activated cell death is up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-homologous protein (CHOP), by activation of the PERK and ATF6 arms of the UPR (72). Additional pro-apoptotic responses include translocation of the BH3-only protein BCL-2 interacting mediator of cell death (BIM) to the ER membrane, and the up-regulation of BH3-only protein PUMA in response to ER stress to activate mitochondrial apoptosis (73, 74). Furthermore, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) interacts with IRE1 and activates the extrinsic ER stress apoptotic pathway and ER stress causes the proteolytic activation of human caspase-4 which leads to downstream caspase-9 and -3-dependent apoptosis (75, 76).

### ER STRESS IN SOD1-LINKED ALS

At least 13 transgenic mouse lines expressing different ALS-linked human SOD1 proteins, including enzymatically active and inactive mutants, and C-terminal truncation and metal-deficient mutants, have now been developed (10). These animals recapitulate many features of ALS and are therefore widely used models of disease. One of the first models developed, and still currently the most studied, is the high-copy number SOD1G93A transgenic mouse, which ubiquitously expresses 25 copies of the mutant human transgene (9, 77). These mice are phenotypically normal until 90–100 days of age, when a fine hind limb tremor develops followed by a rapidly-progressing neurodegenerative disease reminiscent of ALS (9, 77). Movement impairment begins with changes in gait caused by paresis of one or both of the hind limbs, followed by forelimb involvement. There is substantial weight loss due to loss of muscle bulk, and the mice are euthanized at ~134 days of age, when the hind limbs are completely paralyzed and movement is severely impaired (9, 77).

Up-regulation of BiP occurs in spinal motor neurons of pre-symptomatic transgenic SOD1H46R and SOD1L84V mice (78), and occurs specifically in the fast-fatigable motor neurons, which are most susceptible to disease in ALS, as early as postnatal day 5 in SOD1G93A mice (21). All three arms of the UPR are activated in the spinal cords of presymptomatic and disease-affected SOD1G93A transgenic mice (18, 19, 21, 79). Furthermore, cleaved ATF6, ATF4, and spliced Xbp1 are present at symptom onset and disease end stage in spinal cords, but not in the cerebella, of transgenic SOD1G93A and SOD1G85R mice (80).

The exact mechanism of ER stress activation by mutant SOD1 remains to be elucidated, given that SOD1 is conventionally regarded as a cytoplasmic protein. However, the ER chaperone PDI, which is up-regulated in disease, partially colocalizes with mutant SOD1 inclusions (18, 81), and the ER proteins PDI, BiP, GRP94, and calreticulin are present in the insoluble mutant SOD1-containing fraction from spinal cord lysates of SOD1G85R and SOD1G127X mice (82). In addition, BiP colocalizes with
SOD1-immunoreactive inclusions in spinal motor neurons of SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice (83), and coimmunoprecipitates with insoluble mutant SOD1 from the ER-containing fraction of SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mouse spinal cords (80). Mutant SOD1 has also been detected within the ER and microsomal fractions, and the ER is a potential site of increased mutant SOD1 aggregation (32, 84, 85). These studies suggest that misfolded mutant SOD1 is present within the ER lumen, which would therefore account for the activation of ER stress in SOD1-linked ALS. However, recent evidence indicates that mutant SOD1 activates the UPR from the cytoplasm by specific interaction with the cytoplasmic face of the ER transmembrane protein Derlin-1 (86). Derlin-1 is involved in retrotranslocation of misfolded proteins from the ER to the cytoplasm for degradation, and inactivation of Derlin-1 causes ER stress (87). Furthermore, both BiP and PDI are found in the cytoplasm, nucleus and extracellular space, suggesting that BiP and PDI could interact with mutant SOD1 in one or more of these locations independent of the ER (88, 89). Indeed, PDI is redistributed to poorly characterized ER-derived structures in response to expression of individual members of the reticulon family of proteins (90). Genetic ablation of reticulon-4A,B prevented PDI redistribution and accelerated disease in SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice, suggesting that relocation of PDI from the ER is protective against disease pathogenesis (90, 91).

Several transgenic mouse studies have now demonstrated an important role for ER stress in disease onset and progression in mutant SOD1 models. Over-expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice inhibited caspase-12 cleavage and extended animal survival (92). Similarly, deletion of the gene encoding Puma from SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice also decreased ER stress and delayed disease onset, although lifespan was not significantly extended in these animals (93). Deletion of Ask1 also prevented motor neuron loss and extended survival of mutant SOD1 transgenic mice (86). Additionally, genetic ablation of Xbp1 from SOD1<sup>G86R</sup> transgenic mice activated autophagy, resulting in a decrease in mutant SOD1 aggregation and an extension in the lifespan of female mutant SOD1 mice (20).

More recently, SOD1<sup>G85R</sup> mice with hemizygous deletion of PERK showed earlier onset of ER stress and had a shortened lifespan compared to SOD1<sup>G85R</sup>/PERK<sup>+/+</sup> controls (22). The negative effect of PERK deletion is potentially due to increased mutant SOD1 accumulation caused by the loss of PERK-mediated downregulation of general protein translation, indicating that some aspects of UPR induction are protective against disease (22). This is consistent with previous studies which demonstrated that long-term pharmacological inhibition of eIF2α dephosphorylation using the small molecule salubrinal delays disease and extends survival of SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice (21, 94). Together, these findings imply that PERK is a mediator of motor neuron survival in ALS. Salubrinal also decreases mutant SOD1 aggregation in cell culture, supporting the link between protein aggregation and ER stress induction in disease (81, 95). These results highlight the converse protective and pro-apoptotic functions of ER stress and suggest that selective targeting of individual arms of the UPR could be beneficial in ALS therapy.

### ER STRESS IN VAPB-LINKED ALS

Missense mutations in VAPB are linked to autosomal dominant classical ALS, slowly progressing atypical ALS or late-onset spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a motor neuron disease which affects lower motor neurons preferentially (96–99). VAPB is a widely expressed ER transmembrane protein which is involved in ER stress transduction, and is also important for neuronal synapse formation and microtubule transport (100).

The two ALS-linked VAPB mutants, P56S and T46I, show increased ubiquitination and insolubility in mammalian neuronal cell culture and in *Drosophila melanogaster* models of disease (98, 101). Mutant P56S VAPB inclusions are ER-derived and colocalize with a subset of ER proteins including PDI (100–102). In addition, over-expression of wildtype but not mutant VAPB activates IRE1 in motor neuron-like NSC34 cells, indicating a loss of function in the ALS-linked mutants (98, 103). However, studies in *D. melanogaster* indicate that mutant but not wildtype VAPB induces the UPR and causes morphological disruption to the ER (98, 101). Recently, it was suggested that mutant P56S VAPB potentiates ER stress-induced cell death by inhibiting or coaggregating with the endogenous wildtype protein, suggesting a dominant-negative mode of pathogenesis (98, 103). Interestingly, VAPB interacts with and inhibits activation of ATF6, and mutant P56S shows increased ATF6 inhibition compared to wildtype (104). These studies suggest that VAPB has a role in modulating ER stress, with differential effects on the IRE1 and ATF6 arms of the UPR.

The death of primary embryonic mouse motor neurons in culture by adeno-associated virus-mediated over-expression of wildtype and mutant VAPB is decreased by treatment with salubrinal (105). This VAPB-dependent cell death was triggered by calcium dysregulation, activation of calcium-dependent calpains and the ER stress-specific caspase-12, suggesting an active role for ER stress in motor neuron degeneration in VAPB-linked ALS (105).

Some features of human disease are recapitulated when mutant VAPB is expressed in *D. melanogaster*, including motor deficits, neuronal death and formation of inclusions also containing endogenous VAPB (106, 107). However, transgenic mice over-expressing moderate levels of either wildtype or mutant P56S VAPB do not develop an overt motor phenotype, even at 2 years of age (108). Nevertheless, mutant VAPB mice do develop cytoplasmic accumulation of TDP-43 similar to sporadic ALS patients and mutant TDP-43 cellular and animal models (108). Decreased levels of VAPB mRNA and protein have also been identified in both mutant SOD1 transgenic mice (100) and in human familial and sporadic ALS patients without VAPB mutations (100, 109).

### ER STRESS IN SPORADIC ALS

ER stress occurs in sporadic human ALS, as determined by analysis of post mortem spinal cord tissues (19, 110). This includes up-regulation of PDI, phosphorylation of eIF2α, and
activation of caspase-4 and CHOP (19, 110). In addition, BiP levels were significantly increased and the morphology of the ER disturbed in anterior horn motor neurons of sporadic ALS patients (111), and CHOP levels were increased in both motor neurons and surrounding glia in sporadic ALS tissue (112). Furthermore, PDI was increased in the cerebrospinal fluid of ALS patients, and was also colocalized with inclusions in spinal cord tissue (19). Fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus is a consistent feature in both ALS patients and in models of disease (113, 114, 79), and the finding that Golgi fragmentation is intimately associated with ER stress in neurons suggests that these two phenomena could be related in ALS (115).

ER stress is further implicated in ALS by cross-talk with other cellular pathways implicated in disease. UPR activation can increase the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through increased oxidative folding of misfolded proteins, leading to cellular damage and apoptosis (116, 117). Increased protein oxidation occurs in the spinal cord of human ALS patients, and excitotoxicity induces both oxidative and ER stress (110). Increased oxidative stress is also associated with an increase in reactive nitrogen species such as nitric oxide (NO), which can elicit ER stress by inhibiting PDI via aberrant S-nitrosylation of critical active site cysteine residues (118). S-nitrosylation of PDI occurs in the spinal cords of SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice and sporadic human ALS patients, and has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases (81, 118).

with VCP mutation (16). Mutations to VCP are also linked with another disease, inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia (124). These mutations alter TDP-43 subcellular localization in a disease-reminiscent manner and induce ER stress and cell death in cell culture (125). Whether ER stress induction occurs before or after redistribution of TDP-43, and whether there is a causal link between the two processes remains unknown. Interestingly, VCP is involved in ERAD by escorting ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for degradation by binding to Derlin-1 (87, 126). The association of Derlin-1 with activation of the UPR in mutant SOD1 cell and mouse models of ALS (86) suggests overlap in the pathogenic disease mechanisms triggered by VCP, TDP-43 and SOD1 related to ER stress and ERAD.

### CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

The early induction of ER stress in the most susceptible motor neurons in SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice (21), and the relationship of ER stress with other processes implicated in ALS, including oxidative stress, autophagy and mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis (20, 70, 110), all imply that ER stress is important in neurodegeneration in ALS. Furthermore, the evidence of UPR induction in sporadic disease and the links with other proteins implicated in ALS, including VAPB, TDP-43, FUS, and VCP, suggest that perturbation of the ER is a common and key feature in all forms of ALS, not just rare familial forms caused by mutant SOD1. The precise upstream cause of UPR induction in both mutant SOD1-linked and other forms of ALS remains to be ascertained, and whether ER stress is an upstream cause of disease processes remains unknown. One conundrum is how proteins which are not normally associated with the ER trigger ER stress. SOD1 is conventionally regarded as a cytoplasmic protein, and TDP-43 and FUS redistribute from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in disease. These data suggest that in ALS, ER stress may be triggered by cytoplasmic proteins, and the finding of the specific interaction of mutant SOD1 with Derlin-1 suggests one mechanism of direct induction of ER stress in disease (86). However, interference with other cellular processes, such as ER-Golgi transport and interactions with mitochondria, can also illicit ER stress, and may be involved in ALS (127, 128). Further investigation of the upstream triggers of ER stress in disease will shed light on the pathogenic mechanisms involved in ALS.

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Prof. Malcolm Horne (University of Melbourne) and members of the Atkin laboratory for helpful discussion. This work was supported by National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (project grant 454749 and program grant 236805), Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Association (USA), MND Research Institute of Australia, Bethlehem Griffiths Research Council, Henry H Roth Charitable Foundation Grant for MND Research, and Australian Rotary Health.

REFERENCES

1. Schroder, M. (2008) Endoplasmic reticulum stress responses. *Cell Mol. Life Sci.* 65, 862–894.
2. Ron, D. and Walter, P. (2007) Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 8, 519–529.
3. Brooks, B. R., Miller, R. G., Swash, M., and Munsat, T. L. (2000) El Escorial revisited: revised criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Other Motor Neuron Disord.* 1, 293–299.
4. Chio, A., Logroscino, G., Hardiman, O., Swingler, R., Mitchell, D., et al. (2009) Prognostic factors in ALS: A critical review. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler.* 10, 310–323.
5. Bensimon, G., Lacomblez, L., and Meininger, V. (1994) A controlled trial of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS/Riluzole Study Group. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 330, 585–591.
6. Bruijn, L. I., Miller, T. M., and Cleveland, D. W. (2004) Unraveling the mechanisms involved in motor neuron degeneration in ALS. *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* 27, 723–749.
7. Dion, P. A., Daoud, H., and Rouleau, G. A. (2009) Genetics of motor neuron disorders: new insights into pathogenic mechanisms. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 10, 769–782.
8. Rosen, D. R., Siddique, T., Patterson, D., Figlewicz, D. A., Sapp, P., et al. (1993) Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nature* 362, 59–62.
9. Gurney, M. E., Pu, H., Chiu, A. Y., Dal Canto, M. C., Polchow, C. Y., et al. (1994) Motor neuron degeneration in mice that express a human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase mutation. *Science* 264, 1772–1775.
10. Turner, B. J. and Talbot, K. (2008) Transgenics, toxicity and therapeutics in rodent models of mutant SOD1-mediated familial ALS. *Prog. Neurobiol.* 85, 94–134.
11. Gitcho, M. A., Baloh, R. H., Chakraverty, S., Mayo, K., Norton, J. B., et al. (2008) TDP-43 A315T mutation in familial motor neuron disease. *Ann. Neurol.* 63, 535–538.
12. Sreedharan, J., Blair, I. P., Tripathi, V. B., Hu, X., Vance, C., et al. (2008) TDP-43 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Science* 319, 1668–1672.
13. Yokoseki, A., Shiga, A., Tan, C. F., Tagawa, A., Kaneko, H., et al. (2008) TDP-43 mutation in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 63, 538–542.
14. Kwiatkowski, T. J., Jr., Bosco, D. A., Leclerc, A. L., Tamrazian, E., Vanderburg, C. R., et al. (2009) Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Science* 323, 1205–1208.
15. Vance, C., Rogelj, B., Hortobagyi, T., De Vos, K. J., Nishimura, A. L., et al. (2009) Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6. *Science* 323, 1208–1211.
16. Johnson, J. O., Mandrioli, J., Benatar, M., Abramzon, Y., Van Deerlin, V. M., et al. (2010) Exome sequencing reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS. *Neuron.* 68, 857–864.
17. Rothstein, J. D. (2009) Current hypotheses for the underlying biology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 65(Suppl 1), S3–S9.
18. Atkin, J. D., Farg, M. A., Turner, B. J., Tomas, D., Lysaght, J. A., et al. (2006) Induction of the unfolded protein response in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and association of protein-disulfide isomerase with superoxide dismutase 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 30152–30165.
19. Atkin, J. D., Farg, M. A., Walker, A. K., McLean, C., Tomas, D., and Horne, M. K. (2008) Endoplasmic reticulum stress and induction of the unfolded protein response in human sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 30, 400–407.
20. Hetz, C., Thielen, P., Matus, S., Nassif, M., Court, F., et al. (2009) XBP-1 deficiency in the nervous system protects against amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by increasing autophagy. *Genes Dev.* 23, 2294–2306.

21. Saxena, S., Cabuy, E., and Caroni, P. (2009) A role for motoneuron subtype-selective ER stress in disease manifestations of FALS mice. *Nat. Neurosci.* 12, 627–636.
22. Wang, L., Popko, B., and Roos, R. P. (2011) The unfolded protein response in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 20, 1008–1015.
23. Radunovic, A., Annane, D., Jewitt, K., and Mustfa, N. (2009) Mechanical ventilation for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease. *Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.* CD004427.
24. Ravits, J. M. and La Spada, A. R. (2009) ALS motor phenotype heterogeneity, focality, and spread: deconstructing motor neuron degeneration. *Neurology* 73, 805–811.
25. Johnston, C. A., Stanton, B. R., Turner, M. R., Gray, R., Blunt, A. H., et al. (2006) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in an urban setting: a population based study of inner city London. *J. Neurol.* 253, 1642–1643.
26. Worms, P. M. (2001) The epidemiology of motor neuron diseases: a review of recent studies. *J. Neurol. Sci.* 191, 3–9.
27. Silverstone Valentine, J., Doucette, P. A., and Zittin Potter, S. (2005) Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 74, 563–593.
28. Arnesano, F., Banci, L., Bertini, I., Martinelli, M., Furukawa, Y., and O’Halloran, T. V. (2004) The unusually stable quaternary structure of human Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase 1 is controlled by both metal occupancy and disulfide status. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 47998–48003.
29. Wroe, R., Wai-Ling Butler, A., Andersen, P. M., Powell, J. F., and Al-Chalabi, A. (2008) ALSOD: the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Online Database. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler.* 9, 249–250.
30. Cleveland, D. W. and Rothstein, J. D. (2001) From Charcot to Lou Gehrig: deciphering selective motor neuron death in ALS. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 2, 806–819.
31. Bruijn, L. I., Houseweart, M. K., Kato, S., Anderson, K. L., Anderson, S. D., et al. (1998) Aggregation and motor neuron toxicity of an ALS-linked SOD1 mutant independent from wild-type SOD1. *Science* 281, 1851–1854.
32. Turner, B. J., Atkin, J. D., Farg, M. A., Zang da, W., Rembach, A., et al. (2005) Impaired extracellular secretion of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 associates with neurotoxicity in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurosci.* 25, 108–117.
33. Bosco, D. A., Morfini, G., Karabacak, N. M., Song, Y., Gros-Louis, F., et al. (2010) Wild-type and mutant SOD1 share an aberrant conformation and a common pathogenic pathway in ALS. *Nat. Neurosci.* 13, 1396–1403.
34. Forsberg, K., Jonsson, P. A., Andersen, P. M., Bergemalm, D., Graffmo, K. S., et al. (2010) Novel antibodies reveal inclusions containing non-native SOD1 in sporadic ALS patients. *PLoS ONE* 5, e11552.
35. Arai, T., Hasegawa, M., Akiyama, H., Ikeda, K., Nonaka, T., et al. (2006) TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 351, 602–611.
36. Neumann, M., Sampathu, D. M., Kwong, L. K., Truax, A. C., Micsenyi, M. C., et al. (2006) Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Science* 314, 130–133.
37. Pesiridis, G. S., Lee, V. M., and Trojanowski, J. Q. (2009) Mutations in TDP-43 link glycine-rich domain functions to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 18, R156–R162.
38. Anderson, D. J. and Hetzer, M. W. (2008) Reshaping of the endoplasmic reticulum limits the rate for nuclear envelope formation. *J. Cell Biol.* 182, 911–924.
39. English, A. R., Zurek, N., and Voeltz, G. K. (2009) Peripheral ER structure and function. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 21, 596–602.
40. Rutkowski, D. T. and Kaufman, R. J. (2004) A trip to the ER: coping with stress. *Trends Cell Biol.* 14, 20–28.
41. Short, D. M., Heron, I. D., Birse-Archbold, J. L., Kerr, L. E., Sharkey, J., and McCulloch, J. (2007) Apoptosis induced by staurosporine alters chaperone and endoplasmic reticulum proteins: Identification by quantitative proteomics. *Proteomics* 7, 3085–3096.

42. Jonikas, M. C., Collins, S. R., Denic, V., Oh, E., Quan, E. M., et al. (2009) Comprehensive characterization of genes required for protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. *Science* 323, 1693–1697.

43. Haze, K., Yoshida, H., Yanagi, H., Yura, T., and Mori, K. (1999) Mammalian transcription factor ATF6 is synthesized as a transmembrane protein and activated by proteolysis in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 10, 3787–3799.

44. Urano, F., Wang, X., Bertolotti, A., Zhang, Y., Chung, P., et al. (2000) Coupling of stress in the ER to activation of JNK protein kinases by transmembrane protein kinase IRE1. *Science* 287, 664–666.

45. Ma, K., Vattem, K. M., and Wek, R. C. (2002) Dimerization and release of molecular chaperone inhibition facilitate activation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2 kinase in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 18728–18735.

46. Liu, C. Y., Xu, Z., and Kaufman, R. J. (2003) Structure and intermolecular interactions of the luminal dimerization domain of human IRE1alpha. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 17680–17687.

47. Shen, J., Snapp, E. L., Lippincott-Schwartz, J., and Prywes, R. (2005) Stable binding of ATF6 to BiP in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 25, 921–932.

48. Bernales, S., Papa, F. R., and Walter, P. (2006) Intracellular signaling by the unfolded protein response. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* 22, 487–508.

49. Bertolotti, A., Zhang, Y., Hendershot, L. M., Harding, H. P., and Ron, D. (2000) Dynamic interaction of BiP and ER stress transducers in the unfolded-protein response. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, 326–332.

50. Kimata, Y., Ishiwata-Kimata, Y., Ito, T., Hirata, A., Suzuki, T., et al. (2007) Two regulatory steps of ER-stress sensor Ire1 involving its cluster formation and interaction with unfolded proteins. *J. Cell Biol.* 179, 75–86.

51. Hetz, C., Bernasconi, P., Fisher, J., Lee, A. H., Bassik, M. C., et al. (2006) Proapoptotic BAX and BAK modulate the unfolded protein response by a direct interaction with IRE1alpha. *Science* 312, 572–576.

52. Yoshida, H., Matsui, T., Yamamoto, A., Okada, T., and Mori, K. (2001) XBP1 mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by IRE1 in response to ER stress to produce a highly active transcription factor. *Cell* 107, 881–891.

53. Tirasophon, W., Welihinda, A. A., and Kaufman, R. J. (1998) A stress response pathway from the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus requires a novel bifunctional protein kinase/endoribonuclease (Ire1p) in mammalian cells. *Genes Dev.* 12, 1812–1824.

54. Calfon, M., Zeng, H., Urano, F., Till, J. H., Hubbard, S. R., et al. (2002) IRE1 couples endoplasmic reticulum load to secretory capacity by processing the XBP-1 mRNA. *Nature* 415, 92–96.

55. Holllien, J. and Weissman, J. S. (2006) Decay of endoplasmic reticulum-localized mRNAs during the unfolded protein response. *Science* 313, 104–107.

56. Harding, H. P., Zhang, Y., and Ron, D. (1999) Protein translation and folding are coupled by an endoplasmic-reticulum-resident kinase. *Nature* 397, 271–274.

57. Scheuner, D., Song, B., McEwen, E., Liu, C., Laybutt, R., et al. (2001) Translational control is required for the unfolded protein response and in vivo glucose homeostasis. *Mol. Cell* 7, 1165–1176.

58. Harding, H. P., Zhang, Y., Bertolotti, A., Zeng, H., and Ron, D. (2000) Perk is essential for translational regulation and cell survival during the unfolded protein response. *Mol. Cell* 5, 897–904.

59. Lu, P. D., Harding, H. P., and Ron, D. (2004) Translation reinitiation at alternative open reading frames regulates gene expression in an integrated stress response. *J. Cell Biol.* 167, 27–33.

60. Harding, H. P., Zhang, Y., Zeng, H., Novoa, I., Lu, P. D., et al. (2003) An integrated stress response regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance to oxidative stress. *Mol. Cell* 11, 619–633.

61. Berry, M. J., Knutson, G. S., Lasky, S. R., Munemitsu, S. M., and Samuel, C. E. (1985) Mechanism of interferon action. Purification and substrate specificities of the double-stranded RNA-dependent protein

kinase from untreated and interferon-treated mouse fibroblasts. *J. Biol. Chem.* 260, 11240–11247.

62. Lu, L., Han, A. P., and Chen, J. J. (2001) Translation initiation control by heme-regulated eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha kinase in erythroid cells under cytoplasmic stresses. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 21, 7971–7980.

63. Dever, T. E. (2002) Gene-specific regulation by general translation factors. *Cell* 108, 545–556.

64. Raven, J. F. and Koromilas, A. E. (2008) PERK and PKR: old kinases learn new tricks. *Cell Cycle* 7, 1146–1150.

65. Shen, J., Chen, X., Hendershot, L., and Prywes, R. (2002) ER stress regulation of ATF6 localization by dissociation of BiP/GRP78 binding and unmasking of Golgi localization signals. *Dev. Cell* 3, 99–111.

66. Lee, K., Tirasophon, W., Shen, X., Michalak, M., Prywes, R., et al. (2002) IRE1-mediated unconventional mRNA splicing and S2P-mediated ATF6 cleavage merge to regulate XBP1 in signaling the unfolded protein response. *Genes Dev.* 16, 452–466.

67. Travers, K. J., Patil, C. K., Wodicka, L., Lockhart, D. J., Weissman, J. S., and Walter, P. (2000) Functional and genomic analyses reveal an essential coordination between the unfolded protein response and ER-associated degradation. *Cell* 101, 249–258.

68. Menendez-Benito, V., Verhoeft, L. G., Masucci, M. G., and Dantuma, N. P. (2005) Endoplasmic reticulum stress compromises the ubiquitin-proteasome system. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 14, 2787–2799.

69. Hoyer-Hansen, M. and Jaattela, M. (2007) Connecting endoplasmic reticulum stress to autophagy by unfolded protein response and calcium. *Cell Death Differ.* 14, 1576–1582.

70. Breckenridge, D. G., Germain, M., Mathai, J. P., Nguyen, M., and Shore, G. C. (2003) Regulation of apoptosis by endoplasmic reticulum pathways. *Oncogene.* 22, 8608–8618.

71. Lin, J. H., Li, H., Yasumura, D., Cohen, H. R., Zhang, C., et al. (2007) IRE1 signaling affects cell fate during the unfolded protein response. *Science* 318, 944–949.

72. Oyadomari, S. and Mori, M. (2004) Roles of CHOP/GADD153 in endoplasmic reticulum stress. *Cell Death Differ.* 11, 381–389.

73. Reimertz, C., Kogel, D., Rami, A., Chittenden, T., and Prehn, J. H. (2003) Gene expression during ER stress-induced apoptosis in neurons: induction of the BH3-only protein Bbc3/PUMA and activation of the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway. *J. Cell Biol.* 162, 587–597.

74. Puthalakath, H., O’Reilly, L. A., Gunn, P., Lee, L., Kelly, P. N., et al. (2007) ER stress triggers apoptosis by activating BH3-only protein Bim. *Cell* 129, 1337–1349.

75. Nishitoh, H., Matsuzawa, A., Tobiume, K., Saegusa, K., Takeda, K., et al. (2002) ASK1 is essential for endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced neuronal cell death triggered by expanded polyglutamine repeats. *Genes Dev.* 16, 1345–1355.

76. Yamamuro, A., Kishino, T., Ohshima, Y., Yoshioka, Y., Kimura, T., et al. (2011) Caspase-4 Directly Activates Caspase-9 in Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Apoptosis in SH-SY5Y Cells. *J. Pharmacol. Sci.* 115, 239–243.

77. Chiu, A. Y., Zhai, P., Dal Canto, M. C., Peters, T. M., Kwon, Y. W., et al. (1995) Age-dependent penetrance of disease in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Mol. Cell Neurosci.* 6, 349–362.

78. Tobisawa, S., Hozumi, Y., Arawaka, S., Koyama, S., Wada, M., et al. (2003) Mutant SOD1 linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, but not wild-type SOD1, induces ER stress in COS7 cells and transgenic mice. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 303, 496–503.

79. Turner, B. J. and Atkin, J. D. (2006) ER stress and UPR in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Curr. Mol. Med.* 6, 79–86.

80. Kikuchi, H., Almer, G., Yamashita, S., Guegan, C., Nagai, M., et al. (2006) Spinal cord endoplasmic reticulum stress associated with a microsomal accumulation of mutant superoxide dismutase-1 in an ALS model. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 103, 6025–6030.

81. Walker, A. K., Farg, M. A., Bye, C. R., McLean, C. A., Horne, M. K., and Atkin, J. D. (2010) Protein disulphide isomerase protects

against protein aggregation and is S-nitrosylated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Brain* **133**, 105–116.

82. Bergemalm, D., Forsberg, K., Srivastava, V., Graffmo, K. S., Andersen, P. M., et al. (2010) Superoxide dismutase-1 and other proteins in inclusions from transgenic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model mice. *J. Neurochem.* **114**, 408–418.

83. Wate, R., Ito, H., Zhang, J. H., Ohnishi, S., Nakano, S., and Kusaka, H. (2005) Expression of an endoplasmic reticulum-resident chaperone, glucose-regulated stress protein 78, in the spinal cord of a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Acta Neuropathol. (Berl).* **110**, 557–562.

84. Urushitani, M., Sik, A., Sakurai, T., Nukina, N., Takahashi, R., and Julien, J. P. (2006) Chromogranin-mediated secretion of mutant superoxide dismutase proteins linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nat. Neurosci.* **9**, 108–118.

85. Urushitani, M., Ezzi, S. A., Matsuo, A., Tooyama, I., and Julien, J. P. (2008) The endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi pathway is a target for translocation and aggregation of mutant superoxide dismutase linked to ALS. *FASEB J.* **22**, 2476–2487.

86. Nishitoh, H., Kadowaki, H., Nagai, A., Maruyama, T., Yokota, T., et al. (2008) ALS-linked mutant SOD1 induces ER stress- and ASK1-dependent motor neuron death by targeting Derlin-1. *Genes Dev.* **22**, 1451–1464.

87. Ye, Y., Shibata, Y., Yun, C., Ron, D., and Rapoport, T. A. (2004) A membrane protein complex mediates retro-translocation from the ER lumen into the cytosol. *Nature* **429**, 841–847.

88. Turano, C., Coppari, S., Altieri, F., and Ferraro, A. (2002) Proteins of the PDI family: unpredicted non-ER locations and functions. *J. Cell Physiol.* **193**, 154–163.

89. Ni, M., Zhang, Y., and Lee, A. S. (2011) Beyond the endoplasmic reticulum: atypical GRP78 in cell viability, signalling and therapeutic targeting. *Biochem. J.* **434**, 181–188.

90. Yang, Y. S., Harel, N. Y., and Strittmatter, S. M. (2009) Reticulon-4A (Nogo-A) redistributes protein disulfide isomerase to protect mice from SOD1-dependent amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurosci.* **29**, 13850–13859.

91. Walker, A. K. (2010) Protein disulfide isomerase and the endoplasmic reticulum in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurosci.* **30**, 3865–3867.

92. Wootz, H., Hansson, I., Korhonen, L., and Lindholm, D. (2006) XIAP decreases caspase-12 cleavage and calpain activity in spinal cord of ALS transgenic mice. *Exp. Cell Res.* **312**, 1890–1898.

93. Kieran, D., Woods, I., Villunger, A., Strasser, A., and Prehn, J. H. (2007) Deletion of the BH3-only protein puma protects motoneurons from ER stress-induced apoptosis and delays motoneuron loss in ALS mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 20606–20611.

94. Boyce, M., Bryant, K. F., Jousse, C., Long, K., Harding, H. P., et al. (2005) A selective inhibitor of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation protects cells from ER stress. *Science* **307**, 935–939.

95. Oh, Y. K., Shin, K. S., Yuan, J., and Kang, S. J. (2008) Superoxide dismutase 1 mutants related to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induce endoplasmic stress in neuro2a cells. *J. Neurochem.* **104**, 993–1005.

96. Nishimura, A. L., Mitne-Neto, M., Silva, H. C., Richieri-Costa, A., Middleton, S., et al. (2004) A mutation in the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB causes late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **75**, 822–831.

97. Nishimura, A. L., Al-Chalabi, A., and Zatz, M. (2005) A common founder for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 8 (ALS8) in the Brazilian population. *Hum. Genet.* **118**, 499–500.

98. Chen, H. J., Anagnostou, G., Chai, A., Withers, J., Morris, A., et al. (2010) Characterization of the properties of a novel mutation in VAPB in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* **285**, 40266–40281.

99. Funke, A. D., Esser, M., Kruttgen, A., Weis, J., Mitne-Neto, M., et al. (2010) The p.P56S mutation in the VAPB gene is not due to a single founder: the first European case. *Clin. Genet.* **77**, 302–303.

100. Teuling, E., Ahmed, S., Haasdijk, E., Demmers, J., Steinmetz, M. O., et al. (2007) Motor neuron disease-associated mutant vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein (VAP) B recruits wild-type VAPs into endoplasmic reticulum-derived tubular aggregates. *J. Neurosci.* **27**, 9801–9815.

101. Tsuda, H., Han, S. M., Yang, Y., Tong, C., Lin, Y. Q., et al. (2008) The amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 8 protein VAPB is cleaved, secreted, and acts as a ligand for Eph receptors. *Cell* **133**, 963–977.

102. Fasana, E., Fossati, M., Ruggiano, A., Brambillasca, S., Hoogenraad, C. C., et al. (2010) A VAPB mutant linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis generates a novel form of organized smooth endoplasmic reticulum. *FASEB J.* **24**, 1419–1430.

103. Kanekura, K., Nishimoto, I., Aiso, S., and Matsuoka, M. (2006) Characterization of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked P56S mutation of vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB/ALS8). *J. Biol. Chem.* **281**, 30223–30233.

104. Gkogkas, C., Middleton, S., Kremer, A. M., Wardrope, C., Hannah, M., et al. (2008) VAPB interacts with and modulates the activity of ATF6. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **17**, 1517–1526.

105. Langou, K., Moumen, A., Pellegrino, C., Aebischer, J., Medina, I., et al. (2010) AAV-mediated expression of wild-type and ALS-linked mutant VAPB selectively triggers death of motoneurons through a Ca2+-dependent ER-associated pathway. *J. Neurochem.* **114**, 795–809.

106. Chai, A., Withers, J., Koh, Y. H., Parry, K., Bao, H., et al. (2008) hVAPB, the causative gene of a heterogeneous group of motor neuron diseases in humans, is functionally interchangeable with its *Drosophila* homologue DVAP-33A at the neuromuscular junction. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **17**, 266–280.

107. Ratnaparkhi, A., Lawless, G. M., Schweizer, F. E., Golshani, P., and Jackson, G. R. (2008) A *Drosophila* model of ALS: human ALS-associated mutation in VAP33A suggests a dominant negative mechanism. *PLoS ONE* **3**, e2334.

108. Tudor, E. L., Galtrey, C. M., Perkinton, M. S., Lau, K. F., De Vos, K. J., et al. (2010) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant vesicle-associated membrane protein-B transgenic mice develop TAR-DNA-binding protein-43 pathology. *Neuroscience* **167**, 774–785.

109. Anagnostou, G., Akbar, M. T., Paul, P., Angelinetta, C., Steiner, T. J., and de Belleroche, J. (2010) Vesicle associated membrane protein B (VAPB) is decreased in ALS spinal cord. *Neurobiol. Aging* **31**, 969–985.

110. Ilieva, E. V., Ayala, V., Jove, M., Dalfo, E., Cacabelos, D., et al. (2007) Oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress interplay in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Brain* **130**, 3111–3123.

111. Sasaki, S. (2010) Endoplasmic reticulum stress in motor neurons of the spinal cord in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.* **69**, 346–355.

112. Ito, Y., Yamada, M., Tanaka, H., Aida, K., Tsuruma, K., et al. (2009) Involvement of CHOP, an ER-stress apoptotic mediator, in both human sporadic ALS and ALS model mice. *Neurobiol. Dis.* **36**, 470–476.

113. Gonatas, N. K., Stieber, A., Mourelatos, Z., Chen, Y., Gonatas, J. O., et al. (1992) Fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus of motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Am. J. Pathol.* **140**, 731–737.

114. Stieber, A., Gonatas, J. O., Collard, J., Meier, J., Julien, J., et al. (2000) The neuronal Golgi apparatus is fragmented in transgenic mice expressing a mutant human SOD1, but not in mice expressing the human NF-H gene. *J. Neurosci.* **173**, 63–72.

115. Nakagomi, S., Barsoum, M. J., Bossy-Wetzel, E., Sutterlin, C., Malhotra, V., and Lipton, S. A. (2008) A Golgi fragmentation pathway in neurodegeneration. *Neurobiol. Dis.* **29**, 221–231.

116. Atlante, A., Calissano, P., Bobba, A., Giannattasio, S., Marra, E., and Passarella, S. (2001) Glutamate neurotoxicity, oxidative stress and mitochondria. *FEBS Lett.* **497**, 1–5.

117. Haynes, C. M., Titus, E. A., and Cooper, A. A. (2004) Degradation of misfolded proteins prevents ER-derived oxidative stress and cell death. *Mol. Cell* **15**, 767–776.

118. Uehara, T. (2007) Accumulation of misfolded protein through nitrosative stress linked to neurodegenerative disorders. *Antioxid. Redox Signal* **9**, 597–601.

119. Sasaki, S., Takeda, T., Shibata, N., and Kobayashi, M. (2010) Alterations in subcellular localization of TDP-43 immunoreactivity in the anterior horns in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurosci. Lett.* 478, 72–76.

120. Huang, E. J., Zhang, J., Geser, F., Trojanowski, J. Q., Strober, J. B., et al. (2010) Extensive FUS-immunoreactive pathology in juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with basophilic inclusions. *Brain Pathol.* 20, 1069–1076.

121. Sato, T., Takeuchi, S., Saito, A., Ding, W., Bamba, H., et al. (2009) Axonal ligation induces transient redistribution of TDP-43 in brainstem motor neurons. *Neuroscience* 164, 1565–1578.

122. Suzuki, H., Lee, K., and Matsuoka, M. (2011) TDP-43-induced death is associated with altered regulation of BIM and BCL-XL and attenuated by caspase-mediated TDP-43 cleavage. *J. Biol. Chem.* 286, 13171–13183.

123. Tateishi, T., Hokonohara, T., Yamasaki, R., Miura, S., Kikuchi, H., et al. (2010) Multiple system degeneration with basophilic inclusions in Japanese ALS patients with FUS mutation. *Acta Neuropathol.* 119, 355–364

124. Watts, G. D., Wymer, J., Kovach, M. J., Mehta, S. G., Mumm, S., et al. (2004) Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein. *Nat. Genet.* 36, 377–381.

125. Gitcho, M. A., Strider, J., Carter, D., Taylor-Reinwald, L., Forman, M. S., et al. (2009) VCP mutations causing frontotemporal lobar degeneration disrupt localization of TDP-43 and induce cell death. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284, 12384–12398.

126. Rabinovich, E., Kerem, A., Frohlich, K. U., Diamant, N., and Bar-Nun, S. (2002) AAA-ATPase p97/Cdc48p, a cytosolic chaperone required for endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 22, 626–634.

127. Hayashi, T. and Su, T. P. (2007) Sigma-1 receptor chaperones at the ER-mitochondrion interface regulate Ca(2+) signaling and cell survival. *Cell* 131, 596–610.

128. Preston, A. M., Gurisik, E., Bartley, C., Laybutt, D. R., and Biden, T. J. (2009) Reduced endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-to-Golgi protein trafficking contributes to ER stress in lipotoxic mouse beta cells by promoting protein overload. *Diabetologia.* 52, 2369–2373.
