
REVIEW

The G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPER in health and disease

Eric R. Prossnitz and Matthias Barton

Abstract | Estrogens mediate profound effects throughout the body and regulate physiological and pathological processes in both women and men. The low prevalence of many diseases in premenopausal women is attributed to the presence of 17β-estradiol, the predominant and most potent endogenous estrogen. In addition to endogenous estrogens, several man-made and plant-derived molecules, such as bisphenol A and genistein, also exhibit estrogenic activity. Traditionally, the actions of 17β-estradiol are ascribed to two nuclear estrogen receptors (ERs), ERα and ERβ, which function as ligand-activated transcription factors. However, 17β-estradiol also mediates rapid signaling events via pathways that involve transmembrane ERs, such as G-protein-coupled ER 1 (GPER; formerly known as GPR30). In the past 10 years, GPER has been implicated in both rapid signaling and transcriptional regulation. With the discovery of GPER-selective ligands that can selectively modulate GPER function *in vitro* and in preclinical studies and with the use of *Gper* knockout mice, many more potential roles for GPER are being elucidated. This Review highlights the physiological roles of GPER in the reproductive, nervous, endocrine, immune and cardiovascular systems, as well as its pathological roles in a diverse array of disorders including cancer, for which GPER is emerging as a novel therapeutic target and prognostic indicator.

Prossnitz, E. R. & Barton, M. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. **7**, 715–726 (2011); published online 16 August 2011; doi:10.1038/nrendo.2011.122

Introduction
17β-Estradiol is commonly recognized as the predominant female sex hormone, with a critical role in the development of the female reproductive organs and secondary sex characteristics. However, this hormone is also essential for reproductive development and function in males.¹ In addition to the reproductive system, 17β-estradiol has important physiological roles in almost every other area of the body, including the nervous, immune, vascular, muscular, skeletal and endocrine systems. As expected, disruptions in 17β-estradiol signaling, therefore, contribute to multiple disorders, including cancer, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, osteoporosis, cognitive and behavioral alterations, neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic disorders (such as obesity and diabetes mellitus) and immune disorders.² Our understanding of the widespread physiological effects of 17β-estradiol is complicated by the existence of several types of estrogen receptors (ERs) and multiple modes of cellular signaling mechanisms that span time frames from seconds to hours, or even days.³⁴ The pathophysiological mechanisms involving ERs are further complicated by a diverse array of 17β-estradiol-mimicking compounds, both synthetic and plant-derived, to which humans are increasingly exposed.⁵

In this Review, we provide a brief overview of estrogen signaling and describe the discovery and characterization of its receptors, with particular emphasis on G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER). We will also discuss

---

Competing interests
E. R. Prossnitz declares US patent number 7,875,721.
M. Barton declares no competing interests.

---

Estrogen receptors
ERα and ERβ
The first and best described 17β-estradiol receptor, now called ERα, was identified in the rat uterus in the 1960s.⁶⁷ The second, less well-characterized receptor, ERβ, was identified in the rat prostate in 1996.⁸ These highly homologous receptors function as ligand-activated nuclear transcription factors that bind *cis*-acting estrogen response elements in the promoter and enhancer regions of hormonally regulated genes.⁹ Both ERα and ERβ, encoded by the genes *ESR1* and *ESR2*, respectively, are soluble receptors that can shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus, but are found predominantly in the nucleus (only ~5% of these receptors are present in the cytoplasm).⁴ Highly divergent and sometimes opposing functions for the two receptors have been reported in studies of *Esr1* knockout and *Esr2* knockout mice, which lack the murine ERα and ERβ protein, respectively.¹⁰ In addition to their effects on gene expression (that is, their genomic effects), these ERs are also associated with rapid cellular signaling (termed non-genomic effects) that are thought to be mediated primarily by membrane-associated forms of these receptors.¹¹

Although multiple modes of action were suggested for ERs as early as the 1960s,¹²⁻¹⁴ not all effects of 17β-estradiol, particularly the rapid and membrane-associated signaling

---

Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA (E. R. Prossnitz).
Molecular Internal Medicine, University of Zürich, LTK Y44 G22, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland (M. Barton).

---

Correspondence to:
E. R. Prossnitz eprossnitz@salud.unm.edu

---

NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY
VOLUME 7 | DECEMBER 2011 | 715

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Key points

- Estrogen has critical nonreproductive roles in health, including beneficial effects on the skeletal, nervous, endocrine, immune and cardiovascular systems, as well as on many diseases and cancers
- The estrogen receptors (ERs) include ERα, ERβ and G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER); their expression and signaling mechanisms are complex and potentially exhibit redundant, independent, synergistic and/or antagonistic actions
- Estrogenic compounds (selective ER modulators, ER antagonists, selective ER downregulators, phytoestrogens and xenoestrogens) have multifaceted effects on all types of ERs with receptor-specific pharmacological profiles
- GPER-selective agonists, such as G-1, mediate many salutary effects of estrogen in various tissues and organs with only minor reproductive effects
- GPER represents an important diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic target; development of GPER-selective agonists and antagonists could contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases

events, could be attributed to ERα and ERβ.¹⁵ In some cases, antagonists of these receptors could not block certain rapid signaling events, which led to the prediction that alternative membrane-bound ERs also existed.¹⁶ Interestingly, most of the 17β-estradiol-mediated rapid signaling events are associated with G protein signaling or growth factor-mediated pathways.

### GPER

A study in 2000 reported that rapid 17β-estradiol-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) was dependent on the expression of an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor with seven transmembrane domains.¹⁷ This receptor, then known as GPR30, was cloned by several groups in the late 1990s.¹⁸⁻²³ Following this initial report, other studies described 17β-estradiol-mediated, GPR30-dependent, generation of cAMP²⁴ and expression of Bcl-2,²⁵ nerve growth factor²⁶ and cyclin D2.²⁷ Furthermore, other researchers described GPR30-mediated expression of c-Fos²⁸ and an interaction between the effects of progesterin and GPR30 expression.²⁹⁻³¹ Two studies published in 2005 described binding of 17β-estradiol to GPR30 in GPR30-transfected COS7 and HEK293 cells, as well as various breast cancer cell lines.³²,³³ Together, these results suggested that GPR30 was a 17β-estradiol-binding receptor, which led to its designation as G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in 2007. GPER is now known to be expressed in numerous tissues,³⁴ and research into its functions has substantially increased.

### Estrogen receptor ligands

#### GPER unselective ligands

Natural endogenous estrogens, predominantly 17β-estradiol, are the primary ligands of ERs. 17β-estradiol is synthesized mainly in the ovaries, although it is also produced at many sites throughout the body, including the breast, brain, adipose tissue and the arterial wall, where it might have specialized local effects.³⁵ The 17β-estradiol-based steroids estradiol (a GPER antagonist at high concentrations³⁶), estrone and estrone sulfate can also modulate biological functions, although their specific actions are less clear than those of 17β-estradiol.³⁷ Plasma concentrations of 17β-estradiol in premenopausal women are ~0.2–1.0 nmol/l, although it increases by many 100-fold during pregnancy. Local concentrations in specific tissues can be much higher than the plasma values, for example in breast tissue (by 10–20-fold)³⁸ or in the placenta at term (~12 μmol/l).³⁹ The hydrophobic nature of these steroids allows them to diffuse passively through cell membranes and reach their intracellular targets, the ERs.⁴⁰

A large variety of natural and man-made chemicals also have estrogenic activity (Figure 1).⁵ Estrogenic compounds synthesized by plants (phytoestrogens) include flavonoids, such as coumestans and isoflavones.⁴¹ Synthetic estrogenic compounds (known as xenoestrogens, environmental estrogens or endocrine disruptors) include many pesticides, herbicides and plastic monomers.⁵ Their widespread use results in chronic low-level exposure to these compounds in humans.⁴² Although the majority of phytoestrogens and xenoestrogens are believed to exert their physiological effects through modulation of ERα and ERβ,⁴³ many of these compounds also activate GPER, including the soy isoflavone genistein, for which serum concentrations up to 500 nmol/l have been measured;⁴⁴ nonylphenol; the pesticides dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE); bisphenols,⁴⁵ such as bisphenol A (Figure 1), which promotes testicular seminoma cell proliferation;⁴⁶ the herbicide atrazine;⁴⁷ and possibly equol, a nonsteroidal equine estrogen found in premarin⁴⁸ that is formed by human gut bacteria as a metabolite of the isoflavone, daidzein.⁴⁹

Synthetic 17β-estradiol mimetics are also used extensively in clinical and therapeutic applications. For example, 17α-ethynylestradiol is the predominant estrogen used in female contraceptives. Drugs, such as tamoxifen (Figure 1) and raloxifene, which are used in treatments for breast cancer and osteoporosis,² act as ER agonists in some tissues and ER antagonists in others, which led to their designation as selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs).⁵⁰ By contrast, fulvestrant (Figure 1) is a ‘pure’ ER antagonist that causes ER degradation and/or downregulation, which led to its designation as a selective estrogen receptor downregulator (SERD).⁵¹ However, some members of SERMs and SERDs can also act as GPER agonists,¹⁷,³³ which complicates the interpretation of the mechanisms of their action and the receptors involved in both physiological and disease conditions.⁵²

### GPER-selective ligands

Research into the specific activities of GPER has been aided by the discovery of GPER-selective agents. Since the identification of the first GPER-selective agonist G-1 in 2006, a number of reports have examined the disease-related or health-promoting effects associated with GPER activation. Importantly, studies using G-1 (Figure 1) at concentrations as high as 1–10 μmol/l showed no notable activity of this agent towards ERα in terms of activating or inhibiting rapid signaling events,³³ estrogen response element-mediated transcription⁵³,⁵⁴ or ERα downregulation.⁵³ Furthermore, G-1 had no binding activity on 25 other G-protein-coupled receptors⁵⁵ or in *Gper* knockout mice,⁵⁶⁻⁵⁸ which provided evidence that G-1 is a ligand highly selective for GPER.

Figure 1 | Structures of selective and nonselective estrogen receptor ligands. Compounds shown include the three major physiological forms of estrogen (17β-estradiol, estrone and estriol); the anticancer agent tamoxifen and its active metabolite 4-hydroxytamoxifen (which is both a selective estrogen receptor modulator and an agonist for GPER); fulvestrant, a selective estrogen receptor downregulator and agonist for GPER; diethylstilbestrol, a nonselective GPER agonist; the phytoestrogens genistein and coumestrol; and the xenoestrogen bisphenol A. Also shown are G-1 (a selective GPER agonist) and G15 (a selective GPER antagonist).

In 2009, the GPER-selective antagonist G15 (Figure 1) was identified, followed by G36, a more selective GPER antagonist than G15, identified in 2011. G15 has a similar structure to G-1, and is effective in inhibiting all G-1-mediated effects tested to date, as well as many 17β-estradiol-mediated effects. The core structures of G-1, G15 and G36 have been used to generate several radioactively labeled agents that can be used for imaging and potential treatment of GPER-expressing tumors *in vivo*.

### GPER signaling

Although ERα and ERβ are accepted as the predominant nuclear receptors involved in the genomic effects of estrogen, evidence also indicates that rapid modulation of cell-signaling pathways occurs via a subpopulation of ERs located at the plasma membrane (Figure 2), which has fueled the speculation about a role of GPER. The localization of GPER, however, seems to be predominantly intracellular, consistent with reports that describe the constitutive internalization of plasma membrane GPER.

Signaling through GPER occurs via transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and involves nonreceptor tyrosine kinases of the Src family. In this mechanism, which is now also accepted for other G-protein-coupled receptors, stimulation of GPER activates metalloproteinases and induces the release of heparin-binding EGF, which binds and activates EGFR, leading to activation of downstream signaling molecules, such as ERK1/2. Moreover, 17β-estradiol-mediated activation of GPER stimulates production of cAMP, intracellular calcium mobilization and PI3K activation (Figure 2). Further research in human breast cancer cells suggests that sphingosine kinase and integrin αβ are intermediates in 17β-estradiol-mediated EGFR trans-activation; the latter study suggesting a role for GPER in fibronectin assembly.

In addition to the above-mentioned rapid signaling events, GPER also regulates transcriptional activity, albeit indirectly, by activating signaling mechanisms that involve cAMP, ERK and PI3K (Figure 2). The genes regulated by GPER include FOS, which encodes c-Fos, a protein that forms a heterodimer with various other proteins to form the transcription factor AP-1. In turn, these signaling pathways also activate other transcription factors, such as steriodogenic factor 1, which induce expression of additional genes.

### GPER in physiology and disease

#### Reproductive system

The role of 17β-estradiol is best defined in the reproductive system, where this hormone regulates uterine and mammary development and function. Although roles

uterine imbibition of water, and proliferation, through inhibition of ERK1/2 in the stroma and via phosphorylation of serine 118 in ERα. These data suggest that GPER regulates uterine proliferation, independently of ERα, but via a mechanism that might involve crosstalk with the 17β-estradiol–ERα pathway.

In addition to effects on the mammalian uterus, GPER is also involved in the regulation of meiotic arrest in oocytes of the Atlantic croaker and zebra fish. In vitro, 17β-estradiol and G-1 reduced both spontaneous and progestin-induced oocyte maturation in both Atlantic croaker and zebra fish, whereas knockdown of GPER or blockade of GPER with G15 prevented the inhibitory effects of 17β-estradiol, which occur via an EGFR-dependent pathway. Furthermore, GPER (mRNA and protein) expression in granulosa and theca cells of the hamster ovary is regulated by gonadotropins and the estrous cycle, and in this tissue, GPER regulates the 17β-estradiol-mediated stimulation of primordial follicle formation. In ex vivo studies of human myometrium, GPER enhances contractile responses to oxytocin, which suggests a role for GPER in uterine contractility during labor. Moreover, ERα, ERβ and GPER regulate the proliferative and apoptotic pathways involved in spermatogenesis during male reproductive development. Overall, the roles of GPER in the reproductive system are complex and require further investigation, particularly in humans.

**Nervous system and neuroendocrinology**

The effects of 17β-estradiol in the central and peripheral nervous system include maintenance of homeostasis, regulation of synaptic plasticity and cognition, neuroprotection and modulation of pain sensation. Although many of these effects might involve ERα and ERβ, increasing evidence indicates that GPER has multiple roles in 17β-estradiol-mediated neurological functions. GPER (mRNA and protein) expression have been detected throughout the central (Figure 3) and peripheral nervous system of male and female rodents, including in the hippocampus, hypothalamus and midbrain, as well as the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia. However, conflicting results showing *Gper* expression in small arterial surface vessels and pericytes in the brain also exist. Both ERα and GPER activate the ERK1/2 pathway in trigeminal ganglion neurons and increase allodynia, indicating a role for these two ERs in temporomandibular disorder and migraine. Furthermore, in rats, G-1 depolarizes spinal cord neurons, stimulates mechanical hyperalgesia via protein kinase Cξ and mediates visceral hypersensitivity in the absence of inflammation.

17β-Estradiol has many beneficial effects on the brain, including reduction of neuronal loss following stroke, increase in neuronal connectivity and improvement of cognitive performance. GPER has been implicated in 17β-estradiol-mediated effects on cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain, which suggests that this ER might be an important regulator of cognitive function, particularly in women after menopause. In studies that used immortalized hippocampal cell lines, GPER (along with ERα)

**Figure 2 | Nongenomic and genomic estrogen signaling pathways.** Endogenous estrogens including 17β-estradiol are nonselective activators of the three known ERs, ERα, ERβ and GPER. 17β-Estradiol activates nuclear ERs, inducing receptor dimerization and binding of receptor dimers to the promoters of target genes. Alternatively, activated ERs modulate the function of other classes of TFs through protein–protein interactions. Subpopulations of ERs at the plasma membrane activated by E2 interact with adaptor proteins (adaptor) and signaling molecules such as c-Src, which mediates rapid signaling via PI3K–Akt and MAPK pathways. E2, or selective agonists such as G-1, or selective estrogen receptor downregulators, such as fulvestrant, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as tamoxifen, also activate GPER, which is predominantly localized intracellularly. GPER activation stimulates cAMP production, calcium mobilization and c-Src, which activates MMPs. These MMPs cleave pro-HB-EGF, releasing free HB-EGF that transactivates EGFR, which in turn activates MAPK and PI3K–Akt pathways that can induce additional rapid (nongenomic) effects (X), or genomic effects regulating gene transcription. E2-mediated transcriptional regulation may involve phosphorylation (P) of ER or other TFs that may directly interact with ER, or bind independently of ER within the promoters of target genes. Abbreviations: E2, 17β-estradiol; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ER, estrogen receptor; GPER, G-protein-coupled ER; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; pro-HB-EGF, pro-heparin-binding-epidermal growth factor; TF, transcription factor.

for GPER are implicated in almost every system of the body (Figure 3), conflicting observations have been published particularly in the reproductive system. No clear developmental or functional defects occur in the reproductive organs of *Gper* knockout mice, whereas *Esr1* knockout mice display multiple reproductive defects. Furthermore, in wild-type mice treated with G-1, no change was detected in ductal growth or end bud formation in mammary glands, and no uterine imbibition of water, or proliferative response in the mammary gland or endometrium was observed. However, in another study, G-1 treatment in mice stimulated uterine epithelial proliferation by approximately threefold, compared with a ~15-fold increase in proliferation observed with 17β-estradiol. Importantly, blocking GPER with G15 reduced the 17β-estradiol-mediated proliferative response by ~50%, which suggests that GPER, in part, contributes to this response. Surprisingly, high concentrations of G-1 (1,000-fold greater than those needed to observe a proliferative effect) reduce both 17β-estradiol-mediated

Central nervous system  
Brain: Neuroendocrine function  
Depression, stroke, multiple sclerosis  

Cardiovascular system  
Heart: Cardiomyocyte growth, inhibition of apoptosis, cardiomyocyte contractility  
Vasculature: Vasodilation, nitric oxide release, inhibition of proliferation in vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells, inhibition of endothelial cell apoptosis  
Ischemia-reperfusion injury after myocardial infarction, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertensive cardiomyopathy, arterial hypertension, vascular disease  

Endocrine system  
Pancreas: Insulin secretion, β-cell survival  
Obesity, insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus  

Immune system  
Thymus: T-cell differentiation and/or regulation, T-cell development  
Macrophages: Inhibition of inflammation  
Inflammation, autoimmunity, thymic atrophy (17β-estradiol-dependent)  

Reproductive system  
Mammary gland: Development  
Ovaries: Oocyte maturation  
Uterus: Endometrial cell growth, myometrial contraction  
Breast cancer, ovarian carcinoma, endometrial cancer, uterine carcinosarcoma  

Renal system  
Kidney  
Proteinuric renal disease  

Musculoskeletal system  
Chondrocyte differentiation, bone growth, bone trabecularization  
Osteoporosis, arthritis  

Figure 3 | Involvement of G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) action in regulation of physiological responses and disease. GPER is implicated in neuroendocrine and cerebral functions, immune cell function, endocrine regulation and metabolism, cardiovascular and kidney function, and reproductive functions. In addition, studies using experimental models of disease and/or human tissue suggest roles for GPER in diseases (shown in red), such as diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, proteinuric renal disease, osteoporosis, arthritis, immune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, and cancer. Collectively, these studies suggest the therapeutic potential of regulating GPER activity as a novel approach for the treatment of these conditions.

was implicated in the protective effects of 17β-estradiol against glutamate-induced injury,63 although in cortical neurons G-1 did not have any effect.101 However, in vivo studies showed that G-1 treatment replicates the effects of 17β-estradiol in promoting neuronal survival following global ischemia in the brain.102,103 Altogether, these results suggest that GPER agonists might represent a new therapeutic approach for stroke and chronic neurodegenerative diseases.104

In the brain, G-1 (like 17β-estradiol) attenuates serotonin receptor signaling in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and reduces responses to oxytocin and adrenocorticotropic hormone, which suggests that GPER might have a role in mood disorders.105 Furthermore, G-1 exhibited antidepressant properties in a mouse model of depression, where it reproduced the effects of 17β-estradiol, which were inhibited by the GPER-selective antagonist G15.59 In primates, GPER contributes

to 17β-estradiol-mediated regulation of luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone neurons, which maintain gonadal function and fertility.106 This effect probably also involves additional mechanisms.107 However, whereas GPER activation promoted short-latency prolactin secretion, G-1 did not affect the 17β-estradiol-mediated negative feedback inhibition of either luteinizing hormone secretion or lordosis behavior in rats.108 Studies with Esr1 knockout mice showed that ERα is required for 17β-estradiol-regulated positive feedback control of hypothalamic gonadotropin release,109 which suggests that the actions of GPER are complex and possibly also require the presence of ERα.

Immune system  
17β-estradiol displays multiple effects in the regulation of immune responses, including the development of T cells,110 autoimmune disease111,112 and inhibition
of inflammation. ${ }^{111}$ Studies in $E s r 1$ knockout and $G p e r$ knockout mice have shown that GPER, along with ER $\alpha$, contributes to $17 \beta$-estradiol-induced thymic atrophy; ${ }^{84}$ ER $\alpha$ mediated the early blockage of thymocyte development, whereas GPER mediated thymocyte apoptosis. Furthermore, in $G p e r$ knockout mice engineered to express the prokaryotic $l a c Z$ gene under control of the murine $G p e r$ promoter, numbers of L-selectin-expressing T cells decreased, consistent with an altered production of these T cells in the thymus. ${ }^{81}$ By contrast, other studies using $G p e r$ knockout mice did not find any difference in $17 \beta$-estradiol-induced thymic atrophy, ${ }^{113}$ nor in $17 \beta$-estradiol-dependent protective effects on arthritis or bone loss in a model of postmenopausal rheumatoid arthritis. ${ }^{114}$ These findings suggest complex roles for $17 \beta$-estradiol and GPER in the immune system (Figure 3).

Estrogens are increasingly receiving attention as potential anti-inflammatory agents for the treatment of autoimmune diseases, particularly multiple sclerosis. ${ }^{112}$ In a mouse model of multiple sclerosis—experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)—knockout of $G p e r$ interfered with the protective role of $17 \beta$-estradiol. ${ }^{56}$ In two studies, treatment with G-1 reproduced the ability of $17 \beta$-estradiol to protect against the functional and histological manifestations of EAE through enhancing the immunosuppressive activity of CD4 ${ }^{+} F o x p 3^{+}$ T cells, resulting in upregulation of programmed cell death ${ }^{56}$ and inhibition of inflammatory cytokine production by macrophages. ${ }^{55}$ These findings suggest that GPER mediates the protective role of $17 \beta$-estradiol in multiple sclerosis.

Although the protective effects of G-1 against EAE were absent in $G p e r$ knockout mice, $17 \beta$-estradiol-mediated effects were partially retained, suggesting that ER $\alpha$ and GPER can activate independent, yet overlapping, mechanisms. Further research showed that the therapeutic effect of ethynylestradiol in established EAE was mediated via GPER, but not via ER $\alpha$, and possibly involved production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. ${ }^{115}$ Another study showed that G-1 treatment elicits de novo production of IL-10 in T helper type 17 polarized cells, in vitro as well as in vivo, via an ERK1/2-dependent pathway. ${ }^{116}$ Thus, the immunomodulatory effects of G-1, mediated by activation of GPER, indicate that GPER agonists might have novel clinical applications in chronic inflammatory diseases.

### Cardiovascular system

Endogenous $17 \beta$-estradiol is implicated in sex-specific differences observed in arterial hypertension and cardiovascular disease, ${ }^{117,119}$ as the cessation of $17 \beta$-estradiol production following menopause accelerates these conditions. ${ }^{117}$ However, the cellular mechanisms and signaling pathways conferring the protective effect of $17 \beta$-estradiol are only partially understood. ${ }^{120}$ Although ER $\alpha$ and ER $\beta$ are implicated in cardiovascular protection mediated by $17 \beta$-estradiol, a protective effect of this hormone is also seen in the absence of both receptors. ${ }^{121-123}$ These observations provided the initial evidence for the existence of alternative receptors, such as GPER, and signaling pathways involved in $17 \beta$-estradiol-mediated regulation of cardiovascular function.

GPER (mRNA and protein) is expressed in murine ${ }^{82}$ and human myocardium, ${ }^{124}$ as well as in cultured cardiomyocytes. ${ }^{125}$ $17 \beta$-Estradiol-mediated inhibition of calcium influx and contraction in murine cardiomyocytes is independent of ER $\alpha$ and ER $\beta,{ }^{121}$ and deletion of $G p e r$ leads to left ventricular dilatation and elevation of end-diastolic pressure in male, but not female, mice. ${ }^{126}$ In patients with myocardial infarction, ischemia–reperfusion injury after reopening of the occluded coronary artery is a critical determinant of outcome and complications, such as arrhythmia and heart failure. ${ }^{127,128}$ Myocardial hypoxia resulting from infarction ${ }^{129}$ is an important stimulus that upregulates GPER (mRNA and protein) expression in cardiomyocytes. ${ }^{125}$ Several groups have independently demonstrated that G-1 treatment after myocardial infarction led to reduced reperfusion-related injury and infarct size and improved contractile function in structurally normal hearts from rodents of both sexes. ${ }^{124,127,130-132}$ Similar benefits were also obtained for G-1 treatment in cerebrovascular occlusion-related reperfusion injury in animal models of stroke. ${ }^{102,133}$ Under these conditions, activation of GPER by G-1 resulted in reduced myocardial expression of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1 $\beta$, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor), ${ }^{132}$ increased activation of Akt, ${ }^{134}$ Erk1/2, ${ }^{130,134}$ increased phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) ${ }^{134}$ and decreased mitochondrial permeability. ${ }^{131}$ Some of these cardioprotective effects were blocked by an inhibitor of PI3K. ${ }^{134}$

GPER protein is expressed in human endothelial ${ }^{23,135}$ and smooth muscle cells, ${ }^{58,136}$ as well as in intact arteries (Figure 3). ${ }^{136}$ Expression of GPER in macrophages, ${ }^{137}$ which contribute to atherogenesis, also suggests a functional role for GPER in atherosclerosis and the associated inflammation. In human endothelial cells, activation of GPER (but not of ER $\alpha$ ) ${ }^{138}$ inhibits cell proliferation, ${ }^{135}$ indicating an antiangiogenic role for this ER. In human and rat vascular smooth muscle cells, activation of GPER by either G-1 ${ }^{58,139}$ or raloxifene ${ }^{140}$ stimulates the ERK1/2 pathway and inhibits proliferation, similarly to the effect of ER $\alpha$ activation in these cells. ${ }^{140}$ These findings are in keeping with the antiproliferative effects of $17 \beta$-estradiol on vascular smooth muscle cells from $E s r 1$ and $E s r 2$ double-knockout mice. ${ }^{122}$ Moreover, the GPER agonists G-1, ${ }^{58,61,142,143}$ genistein ${ }^{144}$ and fulvestrant ${ }^{142}$ (Figure 1) cause vasodilation in human, porcine and rodent arteries, whereas this effect is blocked by the GPER antagonist G15 ${ }^{61}$ and is absent in $G p e r$-deficient mice. ${ }^{58}$

Elevated vascular resistance is a key feature of arterial hypertension. ${ }^{119}$ $G p e r$-deficient mice exhibit a normal mean arterial blood pressure that does not change with age. ${ }^{82}$ Infusion of the GPER agonist G-1 markedly lowers blood pressure in normotensive ${ }^{58}$ and hypertensive rats. ${ }^{61,145,146}$ In rats with hypertensive cardiomyopathy, G-1 treatment ameliorates diastolic dysfunction, reduces cardiac hypertrophy and decreases the size of cardiomyocytes. ${ }^{145}$ This effect is probably mediated through direct vasodilatory actions of G-1 ${ }^{58,143,147}$ or $17 \beta$-estradiol, as this hormone also has vasodilatory effects (which are derived at least inpart from GPER, as they are blocked by the GPER antagonist G15).<sup>61</sup> Vasodilatory actions of G-1 involve both nitric oxide-dependent and nitric oxide-independent pathways and have been observed in human, pig and rat arteries.<sup>58,61,143,146</sup> Phosphorylation of eNOS as a result of GPER activation might contribute to this response.<sup>49,134</sup> At least some of the vasoprotective effects mediated by GPER are probably the result of interference with endothelial cell dysfunction—a vascular abnormality common to hypertension and coronary artery disease.<sup>118,148</sup>

Altogether, these data indicate a central regulatory role for GPER in cardiovascular function and suggest that GPER agonists have potential roles in the treatment of vascular and myocardial disease in both men and women.

### Renal system

Endogenous 17β-estradiol is also implicated in the sex-specific differences in renal disease.<sup>117</sup> GPER is expressed at high levels in renal tubules,<sup>95</sup> as well as in renal epithelial cells (Figure 3).<sup>68</sup> In humans, the *GPER* locus is associated with low-renin hypertension,<sup>149</sup> which leads to kidney injury and vascular dysfunction (the latter abnormality is ameliorated by G-1 treatment).<sup>146</sup> Endothelial cell dysfunction is also present in animals with glomerulosclerosis, which leads to proteinuria due to loss of glomerular filter function. In hypertensive rats, GPER activation reduces proteinuria and improves creatinine clearance despite continued hypertension.<sup>150</sup> These findings suggest a renoprotective role for GPER agonists in hypertensive nephropathy.

### Pancreatic function and glucose metabolism

The increased prevalence of obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus after menopause indicates a protective role for endogenous 17β-estradiol in premenopausal women.<sup>151,152</sup> These protective effects are largely attributed to signaling via nuclear ERα,<sup>153,154</sup> as its deletion results in obesity and insulin resistance.<sup>151,155</sup> However, other forms of ERα signaling are also involved in metabolic diseases;<sup>154,156</sup> for example, insulin secretion mediated by 17β-estradiol occurs through rapid signaling via membrane-bound ERs.<sup>157–159</sup> Although ERα and ERβ individually affect insulin action,<sup>151,155</sup> mice deficient in GPER develop insulin resistance and obesity in a sex-dependent manner.<sup>58,82,160</sup> GPER activation also has anti-inflammatory properties in pancreatic islets through attenuating the effects of proinflammatory cytokines<sup>161</sup> that are important for maintenance of metabolic function (Figure 3).<sup>162</sup> The protective, antidiabetic effects of 17β-estradiol in islet cells seem to involve activation of both membrane-bound ERα and GPER<sup>57,163,164</sup> and might also be induced by GPER agonists, such as genistein.<sup>165</sup>

GPER is expressed in whole adipose tissue in humans and rodents,<sup>58,166</sup> as well as in the human liver,<sup>18–20,22,23</sup> key target organs of insulin resistance.<sup>162</sup> However, the role of GPER in 17β-estradiol-mediated metabolic protection is not clearly defined. GPER is expressed in the pancreatic islets of mice<sup>57,82,161,163,164</sup> and humans,<sup>163</sup> and in female mice it maintains normal metabolic function.<sup>82</sup> GPER deficiency results in a reduction in insulin secretion (stimulated by 17β-estradiol, G-1 and glucose) from the pancreas without affecting the morphology of pancreatic β-cells, which suggests that GPER has a key role in maintaining the metabolic functions of insulin in mice<sup>82,167</sup> and humans.<sup>168</sup> Furthermore, the protective effect of 17β-estradiol on survival of pancreatic β-cells in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes mellitus is absent in GPER-deficient animals.<sup>57</sup> Whether GPER contributes to peripheral insulin resistance is currently not known. However, expression of GPER has been reported in human skeletal muscle,<sup>56,81,161,163</sup> and is unaffected by menopause.<sup>169</sup>

#### Bone growth and chondrocyte metabolism

Bone and articular cartilage are hormone-sensitive tissues,<sup>170</sup> and serum 17β-estradiol levels inversely correlate with the risk of hip fracture in both women and men.<sup>171</sup> Perhaps the best evidence of a role for endogenous 17β-estradiol in overall bone health and formation of trabecular bone in particular is the postmenopausal onset of osteoporosis. The bone-preserving effects of estrogen therapy, especially with SERMs,<sup>172</sup> which act as GPER agonists, indirectly suggest a role for GPER in bone metabolism (Figure 3). Endogenous 17β-estradiol also plays an important role in bone metabolism in men, since lack of 17β-estradiol owing to aromatase deficiency<sup>173</sup> or mutations in *ESR1*<sup>174</sup> in men lead to osteopenia, enhanced bone remodeling through increased bone resorption and osteoclast activity and suppression of bone growth-plate closure.<sup>175</sup> Although part of this effect is mediated through ERα and ERβ,<sup>172</sup> several avenues of research now suggest a role for GPER in bone and cartilage metabolism. In bone, GPER is expressed in osteocytes, osteoclasts and osteoblasts,<sup>176,177</sup> and is also detected in chondrocytes,<sup>176,178</sup> the differentiation of which is regulated by GPER.<sup>178</sup> In addition, GPER also controls bone growth, as illustrated by several models of GPER deficiency, albeit in a sex-dependent manner (Figure 3). *Gper* deficiency inhibits bone growth in female mice;<sup>82</sup> similar results were reported in ovariectomized, estrogen-treated animals,<sup>113</sup> suggesting a role for GPER in estrogen-induced bone growth and development. By contrast, GPER-deficient male mice show increased femur size, BMD, trabecularization and cortical bone thickness.<sup>160</sup> Tamoxifen, a GPER agonist, decreases tibia length independently from ERα or ERβ.<sup>52</sup> Although *in vitro* studies and clinical trials with SERMs show beneficial effects on bone structure in postmenopausal women,<sup>172</sup> the role of GPER in bone and chondrocyte metabolism in humans is still not clear and warrants further study.

#### GPER in cancer growth and metastasis

17β-Estradiol is a critical mediator of breast carcinogenesis and is involved in a number of other hormone-sensitive cancers. Normal breast tissue is highly sensitive to 17β-estradiol, which stimulates proliferation of this tissue during puberty, the menstrual cycle and pregnancy; thus, the majority of breast cancers are highly responsive to 17β-estradiol and utilize 17β-estradiol signaling pathways in cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.<sup>179</sup> This understanding has led to the development of various
cancer therapies that target 17β-estradiol signaling, the most widely used of which is tamoxifen.¹⁸⁰ Antiestrogen therapy has been extended to include SERDs (such as fulvestrant), aromatase inhibitors (for postmenopausal women) and other SERMs (such as raloxifene).⁵⁰ Many of these agents, particularly tamoxifen and fulvestrant, are also GPER agonists and have complex physiological and therapeutic actions. For example, long-term 17β-estradiol deprivation in the weakly metastatic human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 increased expression of GPER,¹⁸¹ whereas tamoxifen treatment of these cells stimulated proliferation via GPER-mediated transactivation of EGFR.¹⁸²

GPER protein is expressed in ~50% of all breast cancers (Figure 3), regardless of their ER status,¹⁸³ although conflicting results have been reported regarding co-expression of GPER and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2).¹⁸³⁻¹⁸⁵ Nevertheless, in general, GPER protein expression in breast cancers correlates with clinical and pathological biomarkers of poor outcome. High levels of GPER protein expression in samples of human breast cancers also correlate with increased tumor size and metastasis.¹⁸³ Importantly, in patients treated only with tamoxifen, GPER protein expression was increased and survival was markedly reduced in patients with initial GPER-positive tumors, suggesting that patients with breast cancer who have high GPER protein expression should not be treated with tamoxifen alone.¹⁸⁶ In addition, GPER is widely expressed in cancer cell lines and primary tumors of the breast,¹⁷,¹⁸,³³,¹⁸⁷ endometrium,¹³⁸⁻¹⁹⁰ ovaries,⁶³,⁵³,¹⁹¹ thyroid,¹⁹⁰ lung,¹⁹² prostate,¹⁹³ testicular germ cells¹⁹⁴ and the brain (E. R. Prossnitz, unpublished work). In cell lines of thyroid, ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers, stimulation of GPER with 17β-estradiol⁵³,¹⁹⁰,¹⁹⁵ or other estrogenic compounds, such as atrazine,⁴⁷ genistein,¹⁹⁰ bisphenol A⁴⁶,¹⁹⁶ or tamoxifen¹⁹⁵ activates a signaling mechanism that typically promotes proliferation, although inhibition of proliferation has also been reported.⁷³ In particular, genistein can stimulate MCF-7 cell growth via induction of acid ceramidase, which occurs through a GPER-dependent mechanism.¹⁹⁷ In endometrial cancer¹⁹⁸ and ovarian cancer,¹⁹⁹ high levels of GPER expression also predict poor survival, whereas among postpubertal testicular germ cell tumors, GPER was highly expressed in intratubular germ cell tumors, seminomas and embryonal carcinomas, with little expression in teratomas.¹⁹⁴

Importantly, treatment of the ERα-negative human breast cancer cell line SKBr3 with 17β-estradiol or tamoxifen increased the expression of several transcription regulators (including c-Fos) and cytokines (particularly connective tissue growth factor, which promotes cancer cell proliferation and migration).²⁰⁰ These data indicate that tamoxifen treatment might have a cancer-promoting effect through GPER. In support of this view, endometrial GPER protein expression also correlated with tamoxifen-induced uterine pathology, including bleeding and abnormal endometrial thickening,²⁰¹ which correlates with an increased incidence of endometrial cancer.²⁰²

The overall role of GPER in breast cancer progression is complex. In addition to the effects on epithelial cells,

GPER is implicated in 17β-estradiol-mediated activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts, which promote tumor cell proliferation and metastasis through direct association of GPER with chromatin.²⁰³ GPER expression was induced in breast cancer cells under hypoxic conditions, which also suggests a cancer-promoting role for this ER, including a role in hypoxia-induced angiogenesis.¹²⁵ However, G-1 inhibits endothelial cell proliferation, which indirectly suggests that GPER activity also interferes with angiogenesis.¹³⁵ Despite these conflicting data on the role of GPER in cancer, targeting its activity represents an important new approach for cancer therapy.

## Conclusions

The salutary effects of estrogens are well-established in many diseases, and selective activation of GPER by G-1, phytoestrogens, SERDS or SERMS can reproduce the beneficial effects of 17β-estradiol. The pace of research into the physiological and pathological functions of GPER has been accelerating over the past 5 years, and potential roles for GPER have now been identified in almost every system of the body. Thus, GPER-selective agents that mimic the beneficial effects of 17β-estradiol without its associated feminizing or other adverse effects could represent an important new family of drugs.

In addition, GPER-specific antagonists could be developed as important additions to the armamentarium of drugs used to treat estrogen-sensitive cancers and other diseases in which estrogen signaling is important. In this regard, the potential contribution of GPER-mediated signaling to the effects of existing clinically approved drugs, such as tamoxifen and fulvestrant, must be considered. GPER-mediated effects should also be taken into account in the future development of SERMs and SERDs. In addition, further research is required to determine to what extent the physiological effects of 17β-estradiol involve GPER signaling and the precise roles of non-selective estrogen receptor ligands in health and disease. The co-dependent, redundant and independent aspects of 17β-estradiol signaling through ERα, ERβ and GPER are likely to be very complex and specific to particular cell types, tissues, ligands and diseases. The data available to date nevertheless pose interesting questions about the therapeutic potential of specifically targeting GPER in disease.

### Review criteria

A search for original articles was performed in PubMed. The search terms used included “GPER”, “GPR30”, “estrogen”, “rapid signaling”, “SERM”, “reproduction”, “immune”, “vascular”, “nervous”, “metabolism”, “bone” and “cancer” with no restriction on the publication year, language or article type. Additional abstracts were also identified by searching Google Scholar using similar keywords. Reference lists within identified papers were also searched. The authors would like to apologize to their colleagues whose work they could not include due to space restrictions.

1. Hess, R. A. Estrogen in the adult male reproductive tract: a review. *Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol.* **1**, 52 (2003).
2. Deroo, B. J. & Korach, K. S. Estrogen receptors and human disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* **116**, 561–570 (2006).
3. Prossnitz, E. R. *et al.* Estrogen signaling through the transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptor GPR30. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* **70**, 165–190 (2008).
4. Edwards, D. P. Regulation of signal transduction pathways by estrogen and progesterone. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* **67**, 335–376 (2005).
5. Lorand, T., Vigh, E. & Garai, J. Hormonal action of plant derived and anthropogenic non-steroidal estrogenic compounds: phytoestrogens and xenoestrogens. *Curr. Med. Chem.* **17**, 3542–3574 (2010).
6. Talwar, G. P., Segal, S. J., Evans, A. & Davidson, O. W. The binding of estradiol in the uterus: A mechanism for depression of RNA synthesis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **52**, 1059–1066 (1964).
7. Soloff, M. S. & Szego, C. M. Purification of estradiol receptor from rat uterus and blockade of its estrogen-binding function by specific antibody. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **34**, 141–147 (1969).
8. Kuiper, G. G., Enmark, E., Pelto-Huikko, M., Nilsson, S. & Gustafsson, J. A. Cloning of a novel receptor expressed in rat prostate and ovary. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 5925–5930 (1996).
9. Carroll, J. S. & Brown, M. Estrogen receptor target gene: an evolving concept. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **20**, 1707–1714 (2006).
10. Hewitt, S. C. & Korach, K. S. Oestrogen receptor knockout mice: roles for oestrogen receptors α and β in reproductive tissues. *Reproduction* **125**, 143–149 (2003).
11. Hammes, S. R. & Levin, E. R. Extracellular steroid receptors: nature and actions. *Endocr. Rev.* **28**, 726–741 (2007).
12. Pietras, R. J. & Szego, C. M. Endometrial cell calcium and oestrogen action. *Nature* **253**, 357–359 (1975).
13. Pietras, R. J. & Szego, C. M. Specific binding sites for oestrogen at the outer surfaces of isolated endometrial cells. *Nature* **265**, 69–72 (1977).
14. Szego, C. M. & Davis, J. S. Adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate in rat uterus: acute elevation by estrogen. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **58**, 1711–1718 (1967).
15. Wehling, M. Looking beyond the dogma of genomic steroid action: insights and facts of the 1990s. *J. Mol. Med.* **73**, 439–447 (1995).
16. Wehling, M. Specific, nongenomic actions of steroid hormones. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* **59**, 365–393 (1997).
17. Filardo, E. J., Quinn, J. A., Bland, K. I. & Frackelton, A. R. Jr. Estrogen-induced activation of Erk1 and Erk2 requires the G-protein-coupled receptor homolog, GPR30, and occurs via trans-activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor through release of HB-EGF. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **14**, 1649–1660 (2000).
18. Carmeci, C., Thompson, D. A., Ring, H. Z., Francke, U. & Weigel, R. J. Identification of a gene (GPR30) with homology to the G-protein-coupled receptor superfamily associated with estrogen receptor expression in breast cancer. *Genomics* **45**, 607–617 (1997).
19. Feng, Y. & Gregor, P. Cloning of a novel member of the G-protein-coupled receptor family related to peptide receptors. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **231**, 651–654 (1997).
20. Kvingedal, A. M. & Smeland, E. B. A novel putative G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in lung, heart and lymphoid tissue. *FEBS Lett.* **407**, 59–62 (1997).
21. O'Dowd, B. F. *et al.* Discovery of three novel G-protein-coupled receptor genes. *Genomics* **47**, 310–313 (1998).
22. Owman, C., Blay, P., Nilsson, C. & Lolait, S. J. Cloning of human cDNA encoding a novel heptahelix receptor expressed in Burkitt's lymphoma and widely distributed in brain and peripheral tissues. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **228**, 285–292 (1996).
23. Takada, Y., Kato, C., Kondo, S., Korenaga, R. & Ando, J. Cloning of cDNAs encoding G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in human endothelial cells exposed to fluid shear stress. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **240**, 737–741 (1997).
24. Filardo, E. J., Quinn, J. A., Frackelton, A. R. Jr & Bland, K. I. Estrogen action via the G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR30: stimulation of adenyl cyclase and cAMP-mediated attenuation of the epidermal growth factor receptor-to-MAPK signaling axis. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **16**, 70–84 (2002).
25. Kanda, N. & Watanabe, S. 17β-estradiol inhibits oxidative stress-induced apoptosis in keratinocytes by promoting Bcl-2 expression. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **121**, 1500–1509 (2003).
26. Kanda, N. & Watanabe, S. 17β-estradiol enhances the production of nerve growth factor in THP-1-derived macrophages or peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **121**, 771–780 (2003).
27. Kanda, N. & Watanabe, S. 17β-estradiol stimulates the growth of human keratinocytes by inducing cyclin D2 expression. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **123**, 319–328 (2004).
28. Maggiolini, M. *et al.* The G-protein-coupled receptor GPR30 mediates c-fos up-regulation by 17β-estradiol and phytoestrogens in breast cancer cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 27008–27016 (2004).
29. Ahola, T. M., Alkio, N., Manninen, T. & Ylikomi, T. Progestin and G-protein-coupled receptor 30 inhibit mitogen-activated protein kinase activity in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. *Endocrinology* **143**, 4620–4626 (2002).
30. Ahola, T. M., Manninen, T., Alkio, N. & Ylikomi, T. G-protein-coupled receptor 30 is critical for a progestin-induced growth inhibition in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. *Endocrinology* **143**, 3376–3384 (2002).
31. Ahola, T. M. *et al.* Progestin upregulates G-protein-coupled receptor 30 in breast cancer cells. *Eur. J. Biochem.* **269**, 2485–2490 (2002).
32. Thomas, P., Pang, Y., Filardo, E. J. & Dong, J. Identity of an estrogen membrane receptor coupled to a G protein in human breast cancer cells. *Endocrinology* **146**, 624–632 (2005).
33. Revankar, C. M., Cimino, D. F., Sklar, L. A., Arterburn, J. B. & Prossnitz, E. R. A transmembrane intracellular estrogen receptor mediates rapid cell signaling. *Science* **307**, 1625–1630 (2005).
34. Olde, B. & Leeb-Lundberg, L. M. GPR30/GPER1: searching for a role in estrogen physiology. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* **20**, 409–416 (2009).
35. Boon, W. C., Chow, J. D. & Simpson, E. R. The multiple roles of estrogens and the enzyme aromatase. *Prog. Brain Res.* **181**, 209–232 (2010).
36. Lappano, R. *et al.* Estriol acts as a GPR30 antagonist in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cells. *Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.* **320**, 162–170 (2010).
37. Pasqualini, J. R., Gelly, C., Nguyen, B. L. & Vella, C. Importance of estrogen sulfates in breast cancer. *J. Steroid Biochem.* **34**, 155–163 (1989).
38. Geisler, J. Breast cancer tissue estrogens and their manipulation with aromatase inhibitors and inactivators. *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **86**, 245–253 (2003).
39. Diczfalusky, E. & Mancuso, S. in *Foetus and Placenta* (eds. Klopper, A. & Diczfalusky, E) (Blackwell, Oxford, 1969).
40. Muller, R. E., Johnston, T. C., Traish, A. M. & Wotiz, H. H. Studies on the mechanism of estradiol uptake by rat uterine cells and on estradiol binding to uterine plasma membranes. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* **117**, 401–421 (1979).
41. Ososki, A. L. & Kennelly, E. J. Phytoestrogens: a review of the present state of research. *Phytother. Res.* **17**, 845–869 (2003).
42. Starek, A. Estrogens and organochlorine xenoestrogens and breast cancer risk. *Int. J. Occup. Med. Environ. Health* **16**, 113–124 (2003).
43. Singleton, D. W. & Khan, S. A. Xenoestrogen exposure and mechanisms of endocrine disruption. *Front. Biosci.* **8**, s110–s118 (2003).
44. Morton, M. S., Arisaka, O., Miyake, N., Morgan, L. D. & Evans, B. A. Phytoestrogen concentrations in serum from Japanese men and women over forty years of age. *J. Nutr.* **132**, 3168–3171 (2002).
45. Thomas, P. & Dong, J. Binding and activation of the seven-transmembrane estrogen receptor GPR30 by environmental estrogens: a potential novel mechanism of endocrine disruption. *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **102**, 175–179 (2006).
46. Chevalier, N., Bouskine, A. & Fenichel, P. Bisphenol A promotes testicular seminoma cell proliferation through GPER, the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor. *Int. J. Cancer* doi:10.1002/ijc.25972.
47. Albanito, L. *et al.* G-protein-coupled receptor 30 and estrogen receptor α are involved in the proliferative effects induced by atrazine in ovarian cancer cells. *Environ. Health Perspect.* **116**, 1648–1655 (2008).
48. Setchell, K. D. & Clerici, C. Equol: history, chemistry, and formation. *J. Nutr.* **140**, 1355S–1362S (2010).
49. Rowlands, D. J., Chapple, S., Siow, R. C. & Mann, G. E. Equol-stimulated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species activate endothelial nitric oxide synthase and redox signaling in endothelial cells: Roles for F-actin and GPR30. *Hypertension* **57**, 833–840 (2011).
50. Jordan, V. C. SERMs: meeting the promise of multifunctional medicines. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **99**, 350–356 (2007).
51. Orlando, L. *et al.* Molecularly targeted endocrine therapies for breast cancer. *Cancer Treat. Rev.* **36** (Suppl. 3), S67–S71 (2011).
52. Fitts, J. M., Klein, R. M. & Powers, C. A. Tamoxifen regulation of bone growth and endocrine function in the ovariectomized rat: Discrimination of responses involving ERα/ERβ, GPER or ERRgamma using fulvestrant (ICI 182, 780). *J. Pharm. Exp. Ther.* **338**, 246–254 (2011).
53. Albanito, L. *et al.* G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) mediates gene expression changes and growth response to 17β-estradiol and selective GPR30 ligand G-1 in ovarian cancer cells. *Cancer Res.* **67**, 1859–1866 (2007).
54. Dennis, M. K. *et al.* Identification of a GPER/GPR30 antagonist with improved estrogen receptor counterselectivity. *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.07.002.
55. Blasko, E. *et al.* Beneficial role of the GPR30 agonist G-1 in an animal model of multiple sclerosis. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **214**, 67–77 (2009).
56. Wang, C. *et al.* Membrane estrogen receptor regulates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis through up-regulation of

programmed death 1. J. Immunol. 182, 3294–3303 (2009).

57. Liu, S. *et al.* Importance of extranuclear estrogen receptor α and membrane G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor in pancreatic islet survival. Diabetes 58, 2292–2302 (2009).

58. Haas, E. *et al.* Regulatory role of G-protein- coupled estrogen receptor for vascular function and obesity. Circ. Res. 104, 288–291 (2009).

59. Dennis, M. K. *et al.* In vivo effects of a GPR30 antagonist. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5, 421–427 (2009).

60. Jenei-Lanzl, Z. *et al.* Estradiol inhibits chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells via nonclassic signaling. Arthritis Rheum. 62, 1088–1096 (2011).

61. Lindsey, S. H., Carver, K. A., Prossnitz, E. R. & Chappell, M. C. Vasodilation in response to the GPR30 agonist G-1 is not different from estradiol in the mRen2.Lewis female rat. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 57, 598–603 (2011).

62. Peyton, C. & Thomas, P. Involvement of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in estrogen inhibition of oocyte maturation mediated through the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) in zebrafish (Danio rerio). Biol. Reprod. 85, 42–50 (2011).

63. Gingerich, S. *et al.* Estrogen receptor α and G-protein-coupled receptor 30 mediate the neuroprotective effects of 17β-estradiol in novel murine hippocampal cell models. Neuroscience 170, 54–66 (2010).

64. Nayak, T. *et al.* Influence of charge on cell permeability and tumor imaging of GPR30-targeted 111in-labeled non-steroidal imaging agents. ACS Chem. Biol. 5, 681–690 (2010).

65. Ramesh, C. *et al.* Synthesis and characterization of iodinated tetrahydroquinolines targeting the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPR30. J. Med. Chem. 53, 1004–1014 (2010).

66. Levin, E. R. Minireview: extranuclear steroid receptors: roles in modulation of cell functions. Mol. Endocrinol. 25, 377–384 (2011).

67. Otto, C. *et al.* GPR30 localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and is not activated by estradiol. Endocrinology 149, 4846–4856 (2008).

68. Sanden, C. *et al.* G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1/G-protein-coupled receptor 30 localizes in the plasma membrane and traffics intracellularly on cytokeratin intermediate filaments. Mol. Pharmacol. 79, 400–410 (2011).

69. Cheng, S. B., Graeber, C. T., Quinn, J. A. & Filardo, E. J. Retrograde transport of the transmembrane estrogen receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30/GPER) from the plasma membrane towards the nucleus. Steroids 76, 892–896 (2011).

70. Bhola, N. E. & Grandis, J. R. Crosstalk between G-protein-coupled receptors and epidermal growth factor receptor in cancer. Front. Biosci. 13, 1857–1865 (2008).

71. Prenzel, N. *et al.* EGF receptor transactivation by G-protein-coupled receptors requires metalloproteinase cleavage of proHB-EGF. Nature 402, 884–888 (1999).

72. Edwin, F. *et al.* A historical perspective of the EGF receptor and related systems. Methods Mol. Biol. 327, 1–24 (2006).

73. Ariazi, E. A. *et al.* The G-protein-coupled receptor GPR30 inhibits proliferation of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 70, 1184–1194 (2010).

74. Brailoiu, E. *et al.* Distribution and characterization of estrogen receptor G-protein-coupled receptor 30 in the rat central nervous system. J. Endocrinol. 193, 311–321 (2007).

75. Sukocheva, O. *et al.* Estrogen transactivates EGFR via the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor

Edg-3: the role of sphingosine kinase-1. J. Cell Biol. 173, 301–310 (2006).

76. Quinn, J. A. *et al.* Coordinate regulation of estrogen-mediated fibronectin matrix assembly and epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation by the G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR30. Mol. Endocrinol. 23, 1052–1064 (2009).

77. Meyer, M. R., Haas, E., Prossnitz, E. R. & Barton, M. Non-genomic regulation of vascular cell function and growth by estrogen. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 308, 9–16 (2009).

78. Lin, B. C. *et al.* Stimulating the GPR30 estrogen receptor with a novel tamoxifen analogue activates SF-1 and promotes endometrial cell proliferation. Cancer Res. 69, 5415–5423 (2009).

79. Maggiolini, M. & Picard, D. The unfolding stories of GPR30, a new membrane-bound estrogen receptor. J. Endocrinol. 204, 105–114 (2010).

80. Prossnitz, E. R. & Maggiolini, M. Mechanisms of estrogen signaling and gene expression via GPR30. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 308, 32–38 (2009).

81. Isensee, J. *et al.* Expression pattern of G-protein-coupled receptor 30 in LacZ reporter mice. Endocrinology 150, 1722–1730 (2009).

82. Martensson, U. E. *et al.* Deletion of the G-protein-coupled receptor 30 impairs glucose tolerance, reduces bone growth, increases blood pressure, and eliminates estradiol-stimulated insulin release in female mice. Endocrinology 150, 687–698 (2009).

83. Otto, C. *et al.* GPR30 does not mediate estrogenic responses in reproductive organs in mice. Biol. Reprod. 80, 34–41 (2009).

84. Wang, C. *et al.* GPR30 contributes to estrogen-induced thymic atrophy. Mol. Endocrinol. 22, 636–648 (2008).

85. Hewitt, S. C., Harrell, J. C. & Korach, K. S. Lessons in estrogen biology from knockout and transgenic animals. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 67, 285–308 (2005).

86. Gao, F., Ma, X., Ostmann, A. B. & Das, S. K. GPR30 activation opposes estrogen-dependent uterine growth via inhibition of stromal ERK1/2 and estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) phosphorylation signals. Endocrinology 152, 1434–1447 (2011).

87. Pang, Y., Dong, J. & Thomas, P. Estrogen signaling characteristics of Atlantic croaker G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) and evidence it is involved in maintenance of oocyte meiotic arrest. Endocrinology 149, 3410–3426 (2008).

88. Wang, C., Prossnitz, E. R. & Roy, S. K. Expression of GPR30 in the hamster ovary: differential regulation by gonadotropins and steroid hormones. Endocrinology 148, 4853–4864 (2007).

89. Wang, C., Prossnitz, E. R. & Roy, S. K. G-protein-coupled receptor 30 expression is required for estrogen stimulation of primordial follicle formation in the hamster ovary. Endocrinology 149, 4452–4461 (2008).

90. Maiti, K. *et al.* G-1-activated membrane estrogen receptors mediate increased contractility of the human myometrium. Endocrinology 152, 2448–2455 (2011).

91. Chimento, A. *et al.* GPER and ESRs are expressed in rat round spermatids and mediate estrogen-dependent rapid pathways modulating expression of cyclin B1 and Bax. Int. J. Androl. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01100.x.

92. Chimento, A. *et al.* 17β-estradiol activates rapid signaling pathways involved in rat pachytene spermatocytes apoptosis through GPR30 and ERα. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 320, 136–144 (2010).

93. Sirianni, R. *et al.* The novel estrogen receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 30, mediates the proliferative effects induced by 17β-estradiol on mouse spermatogonial GC-1 cell line. Endocrinology 149, 5043–5051 (2008).

94. Dun, S. L. *et al.* Expression of estrogen receptor GPR30 in the rat spinal cord and in autonomic and sensory ganglia. J. Neurosci. Res. 87, 1610–1619 (2009).

95. Hazell, G. G. *et al.* Localisation of GPR30, a novel G-protein-coupled oestrogen receptor, suggests multiple functions in rodent brain and peripheral tissues. J. Endocrinol. 202, 223–236 (2009).

96. Liverman, C. S., Brown, J. W., Sandhir, R., McCasron, K. E. & Berman, N. E. Role of the oestrogen receptors GPR30 and ERα in peripheral sensitization: relevance to trigeminal pain disorders in women. Cephalalgia 29, 729–741 (2009).

97. Kuhn, J. *et al.* GPR30 estrogen receptor agonists induce mechanical hyperalgesia in the rat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 1700–1709 (2008).

98. Lu, C. L. *et al.* Estrogen rapidly modulates 5-hydroxytryptophan-induced visceral hypersensitivity via GPR30 in rats.

99. Hammond, R. & Gibbs, R. B. GPR30 is positioned to mediate estrogen effects on basal forebrain cholinergic neurons and cognitive performance. Brain Res. 16, 53–60 (2011).

100. Hammond, R., Nelson, D. & Gibbs, R. B. GPR30 co-localizes with cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain and enhances potassium-stimulated acetylcholine release in the hippocampus.

101. Bryant, D. N. & Dorsa, D. M. Roles of estrogen receptors α and β in sexually dimorphic neuroprotection against glutamate toxicity. Neuroscience 170, 1261–1269 (2010).

102. Lebesgue, D. *et al.* Acute administration of non-classical estrogen receptor agonists attenuates ischemia-induced hippocampal neuron loss in middle-aged female rats. Plos ONE 5, e8642 (2010).

103. Lebesgue, D., Chevaleyre, V., Zukin, R. S. & Etgen, A. M. Estradiol rescues neurons from global ischemia-induced cell death: multiple cellular pathways of neuroprotection. Steroids 74, 555–561 (2009).

104. Etgen, A. M., Jover-Mengual, T. & Suzanne Zukin, R. Neuroprotective actions of estradiol and novel estrogen analogs in ischemia: Translational implications. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 32, 336–352 (2011).

105. Xu, H. *et al.* Extra-nuclear estrogen receptor GPR30 regulates serotonin function in rat hypothalamus. Neuroscience 158, 1599–1607 (2009).

106. Noel, S. D., Keen, K. L., Baumann, D. I., Filardo, E. J. & Terasawa, E. Involvement of G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) in rapid action of estrogen in primate LHRH neurons. Mol. Endocrinol. 23, 349–359 (2009).

107. Terasawa, E., Noel, S. D. & Keen, K. L. Rapid action of oestrogen in luteinising hormone-releasing hormone neurones: the role of GPR30. J. Neuroendocrinol. 21, 316–321 (2009).

108. Lebesgue, D., Reyna-Neyra, A., Huang, X. & Etgen, A. M. GPR30 differentially regulates short latency responses of luteinising hormone and prolactin secretion to oestradiol. J. Neuroendocrinol. 21, 743–752 (2009).

109. Wintermantel, T. M. *et al.* Definition of estrogen receptor pathway critical for estrogen positive feedback to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons and fertility. Neuron 52, 271–280 (2006).

110. Pernis, A. B. Estrogen and CD4+ T cells. *Curr. Opin. Rheumatol.* **19**, 414–420 (2007).

111. Straub, R. H. The complex role of estrogens in inflammation. *Endocr. Rev.* **28**, 521–574 (2007).

112. Niino, M., Hirotani, M., Fukazawa, T., Kikuchi, S. & Sasaki, H. Estrogens as potential therapeutic agents in multiple sclerosis. *Cent. Nerv. Syst. Agents Med. Chem.* **9**, 87–94 (2009).

113. Windahl, S. H. *et al.* The role of the G-protein-coupled receptor GPR30 in the effects of estrogen in ovariectomized mice. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* **296**, E490–E496 (2009).

114. Engdahl, C. *et al.* Amelioration of collagen-induced arthritis and immune-associated bone loss through signaling via estrogen receptor α, and not estrogen receptor β or G-protein-coupled receptor 30. *Arthritis Rheum.* **62**, 524–533 (2010).

115. Yates, M. A., Li, Y., Chlebeck, P.J. & Offner, H. GPR30, but not estrogen receptor α, is crucial in the treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by oral ethinyl estradiol. *BMC Immunol.* **11**, 20 (2010).

116. Brunsing, R. L. & Prossnitz, E. R. Induction of interleukin-10 in the T helper type 17 effector population by the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) agonist G-1. *Immunol.* doi:10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03471.x.

117. Meyer, M. R., Haas, E. & Barton, M. Gender differences of cardiovascular disease: new perspectives for estrogen receptor signaling. *Hypertension* **47**, 1019–1026 (2006).

118. Sandberg, K. Mechanisms underlying sex differences in progressive renal disease. *Gend. Med.* **5**, 10–23 (2008).

119. Barton, M. & Meyer, M. R. Postmenopausal hypertension: mechanisms and therapy. *Hypertension* **54**, 11–18 (2009).

120. Meyer, M. R., Haas, E. & Barton, M. Need for research on estrogen receptor function: importance for postmenopausal hormone therapy and atherosclerosis. *Gend. Med.* **5** (Suppl. A), S19–S33 (2008).

121. Ullrich, N. D., Krust, A., Collins, P. & MacLeod, K. T. Genomic deletion of estrogen receptors ERα and ERβ does not alter estrogen-mediated inhibition of Ca2+ influx and contraction in murine cardiomyocytes. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* **294**, H2421–H2427 (2008).

122. Karas, R. H. *et al.* Effects of estrogen on the vascular injury response in estrogen receptor α, β (double) knockout mice. *Circ. Res.* **89**, 534–539 (2001).

123. Villablanca, A. C. *et al.* 17β-estradiol prevents early-stage atherosclerosis in estrogen receptor α-deficient female mice. *J. Cardiovasc. Transl. Res.* **2**, 289–299 (2009).

124. Patel, V. H. *et al.* G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 expression in rat and human heart: Protective role during ischaemic stress. *Int. J. Mol. Med.* **26**, 193–199 (2010).

125. Recchia, A. G. *et al.* The G-protein-coupled receptor 30 is up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) in breast cancer cells and cardiomyocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 10773–10782 (2011).

126. Delbeck, M. *et al.* Impaired left-ventricular cardiac function in male GPR30-deficient mice. *Mol. Med. Report.* **4**, 37–40 (2010).

127. Deschamps, A. M., Murphy, E. & Sun, J. Estrogen receptor activation and cardioprotection in ischemia reperfusion injury. *Trends Cardiovasc. Med.* **20**, 73–78 (2011).

128. Buja, L. M. & Weerasinghe, P. Unresolved issues in myocardial reperfusion injury. *Cardiovasc. Pathol.* **19**, 29–35 (2010).

129. Downey, J. M. & Cohen, M. V. Why do we still not have cardioprotective drugs? *Circ. J.* **73**, 1171–1177 (2009).

130. Deschamps, A. M. & Murphy, E. Activation of a novel estrogen receptor, GPER, is cardioprotective in male and female rats. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* **297**, H1806–H1813 (2009).

131. Bopassa, J. C., Eghbali, M., Toro, L. & Stefani, E. A novel estrogen receptor GPER inhibits mitochondria permeability transition pore opening and protects the heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* **298**, H16–H23 (2010).

132. Weil, B. R. *et al.* Signaling via GPR30 protects the myocardium from ischemia/reperfusion injury. *Surgery* **148**, 436–443 (2010).

133. Zhang, B. *et al.* Estradiol and G-1 reduce infarct size and improve immunosuppression after experimental stroke. *J. Immunol.* **184**, 4087–4094 (2010).

134. Filice, E. *et al.* A new membrane G-protein-coupled receptor (GPR30) is involved in the cardiac effects of 17β-estradiol in the male rat. *J. Physiol. Pharmacol.* **60**, 3–10 (2009).

135. Holm, A., Baldetorp, B., Olde, B., Leeb-Lundberg, L. M. & Nilsson, B. O. The GPER1 agonist G-1 attenuates endothelial cell proliferation by inhibiting DNA synthesis and accumulating cells in the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle. *J. Vasc. Res.* **48**, 327–335 (2011).

136. Haas, E. *et al.* Differential effects of 17β-estradiol on function and expression of estrogen receptor α, estrogen receptor β, and GPR30 in arteries and veins of patients with atherosclerosis. *Hypertension* **49**, 1358–1363 (2007).

137. Rettew, J. A., McCall, S. H. T. & Marriott, I. GPR30/GPER1 mediates rapid decreases in TLR4 expression on murine macrophages. *Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.* **328**, 87–92 (2010).

138. Morales, D. E. *et al.* Estrogen promotes angiogenic activity in human umbilical vein endothelial cells *in vitro* and in a murine model. *Circulation* **91**, 755–763 (1995).

139. Ding, Q., Gros, R., Limbird, L. E., Chorazyczewski, J. & Feldman, R. D. Estradiol-mediated ERK phosphorylation and apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle cells requires GPR30. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* **297**, C1178–C1187 (2009).

140. Takahashi, K. *et al.* Both estrogen and raloxifene cause G1 arrest of vascular smooth muscle cells. *J. Endocrinol.* **178**, 319–329 (2003).

141. Pare, G. *et al.* Estrogen receptor α mediates the protective effects of estrogen against vascular injury. *Circ. Res.* **90**, 1087–1092 (2002).

142. Meyer, M. R., Baretella, O., Prossnitz, E. R. & Barton, M. Dilatation of epicardial coronary arteries by the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor agonists G-1 and ICI 182, 780. *Pharmacology* **86**, 58–64 (2010).

143. Broughton, B. R., Miller, A. A. & Sobey, C. G. Endothelium-dependent relaxation by G-protein-coupled receptor 30 agonists in rat carotid arteries. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.* **298**, H1055–H1061 (2010).

144. Mishra, S. K. *et al.* Endothelium-dependent relaxation of rat aorta and main pulmonary artery by the phytoestrogens genistein and daidzein. *Cardiovasc. Res.* **46**, 539–546 (2000).

145. Jessup, J. A., Lindsey, S. H., Wang, H., Chappell, M. C. & Groban, L. Attenuation of salt-induced cardiac remodeling and diastolic dysfunction by the GPER agonist G-1 in female mRen2.Lewis rats. *Plos ONE* **5**, e15433 (2011).

146. Lindsey, S. H., Cohen, J. A., Brosnihan, K. B., Gallagher, P. E. & Chappell, M. C. Chronic treatment with the G-protein-coupled receptor 30 agonist G-1 decreases blood pressure in ovariectomized mRen2.Lewis rats. *Endocrinology* **150**, 3753–3758 (2009).

147. Lindsey, S. H. & Chappell, M. C. GPR30 activation in salt-sensitive mRen2.Lewis females induces beneficial effects independent of alterations in blood pressure *FASEB J.* (Meeting Abstract Supplement) 1017.18 (2009).

148. Vanhoutte, P.M., Shimokawa, H., Tang, E. H. & Feletou, M. Endothelial dysfunction and vascular disease. *Acta Physiol. (Oxf.)* **196**, 193–222 (2009).

149. Lafferty, A. R. *et al.* A novel genetic locus for low renin hypertension: familial hyperaldosteronism type II maps to chromosome 7 (7p22). *J. Med. Genet.* **37**, 831–835 (2000).

150. Gilliam-Davis, S., Cohen, J. A., Lindsey, S. H., Yamaleyeva, L. & Chappell, M. C. The estrogen receptor GPR30 is renoprotective in diabetic hypertensive female rats. *Hypertension* **56**, e50-e166 (2010).

151. Meyer, M. R., Clegg, D. J., Prossnitz, E. R. & Barton, M. Obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes: sex differences and role of oestrogen receptors. *Acta Physiol. (Oxf.)* doi:10.1111/j.1748-1716.2010.02237.x.

152. Meyer, M. R. & Barton, M. ERα, ERβ, and GPER: Novel aspects of estrogen receptor signaling in atherosclerosis. *Cardiovasc. Res.* **83**, 605–610 (2009).

153. Mendelsohn, M. E. & Karas, R. H. Molecular and cellular basis of cardiovascular gender differences. *Science* **308**, 1583–1587 (2005).

154. Wu, Q., Chambliss, K., Umetani, M., Mineo, C. & Shaul, P.W. Non-nuclear estrogen receptor signaling in endothelium. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 14737–14743 (2011).

155. Faulds, M. H., Zhao, C., Dahlman-Wright, K. & Gustafsson, J. A. Regulation of metabolism by estrogen signaling. *J. Endocrinol.* doi:10.1530/JOE-11-0044.

156. Chambliss, K. L. *et al.* Non-nuclear estrogen receptor α signaling promotes cardiovascular protection but not uterine or breast cancer growth in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* **120**, 2319–2330 (2010).

157. Nadal, A., Alonso-Magdalena, P., Soriano, S., Ropero, A. B. & Quesada, I. The role of oestrogens in the adaptation of islets to insulin resistance. *J. Physiol.* **587**, 5031–5037 (2009).

158. Nadal, A. *et al.* Rapid insulinotropic effect of 17β-estradiol via a plasma membrane receptor. *FASEB J.* **12**, 1341–1348 (1998).

159. Ropero, A. B., Soria, B. & Nadal, A. A nonclassical estrogen membrane receptor triggers rapid differential actions in the endocrine pancreas. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **16**, 497–505 (2002).

160. Ford, J. *et al.* GPR30 deficiency causes increased bone mass, mineralization, and growth plate proliferative activity in male mice. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* **26**, 298–307 (2011).

161. Balhuizen, A., Kumar, R., Amisten, S., Lundquist, I. & Salehi, A. Activation of G-protein-coupled receptor 30 modulates hormone secretion and counteracts cytokine-induced apoptosis in pancreatic islets of female mice. *Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.* **320**, 16–24 (2010).

162. Shoelson, S. E., Lee, J. & Goldfine, A. B. Inflammation and insulin resistance. *J. Clin. Invest.* **116**, 1793–1801 (2006).

163. Liu, S. & Mauvais-Jarvis, F. Rapid, nongenomic estrogen actions protect pancreatic islet survival. *Islets* **1**, 273–275 (2009).

REVIEWs

164. Liu, S. & Mauvais-Jarvis, F. Minireview: Estrogenic protection of β-cell failure in metabolic diseases. *Endocrinology* **151**, 859–864 (2010).

165. Fu, Z. *et al.* Genistein induces pancreatic β-cell proliferation through activation of multiple signaling pathways and prevents insulin-deficient diabetes in mice. *Endocrinology* **151**, 3026–3037 (2010).

166. Hugo, E. R. *et al.* Bisphenol A at environmentally relevant doses inhibits adiponectin release from human adipose tissue explants and adipocytes. *Environ. Health Perspect.* **116**, 1642–1647 (2008).

167. Sharma, G. & Prossnitz, E. R. Mechanisms of estrogen-induced insulin secretion by the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPR30/ GPER in pancreatic β cells. *Endocrinology* **152**, 3030–3039 (2011).

168. Kumar, R., Balhuizen, A., Amisten, S., Lundquist, I. & Salehi, A. Insulinotropic and antidiabetic effects of 17β-estradiol and the GPR30 agonist G-1 on human pancreatic islets. *Endocrinology* **152**, 2568–2579 (2011).

169. Pollanen, E. *et al.* Differential influence of peripheral and systemic sex steroids on skeletal muscle quality in pre- and postmenopausal women. *Aging Cell* **10**, 650–660 (2011).

170. Weise, M. *et al.* Effects of estrogen on growth plate senescence and epiphyseal fusion. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 6871–6876 (2001).

171. Ohlsson, C. & Vandenput, L. The role of estrogens for male bone health. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **160**, 883–889 (2009).

172. Khosla, S. Update on estrogens and the skeleton. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **95**, 3569–3577 (2010).

173. Carani, C. *et al.* Effect of testosterone and estradiol in a man with aromatase deficiency. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **337**, 91–95 (1997).

174. Smith, E. P. *et al.* Impact on bone of an estrogen receptor α gene loss of function mutation. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **93**, 3088–3096 (2008).

175. Smith, E. P. *et al.* Estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in the estrogen-receptor gene in a man. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **331**, 1056–1061 (1994).

176. Chagin, A. S. & Savendahl, L. GPR30 estrogen receptor expression in the growth plate declines as puberty progresses. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **92**, 4873–4877 (2007).

177. Heino, T. J., Chagin, A. S. & Savendahl, L. The novel estrogen receptor G-protein-coupled receptor 30 is expressed in human bone. *J. Endocrinol.* **197**, R1–R6 (2008).

178. Jenei-Lanzl, Z. *et al.* Estradiol inhibits chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells via nonclassic signaling. *Arthritis Rheum.* **62**, 1088–1096 (2010).

179. Cordera, F. & Jordan, V. C. Steroid receptors and their role in the biology and control of breast cancer growth. *Semin. Oncol.* **33**, 631–641 (2006).

180. Sengupta, S. & Jordan, V. C. Selective estrogen modulators as an anticancer tool: mechanisms of efficiency and resistance. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* **630**, 206–219 (2008).

181. Jordan, C. V. *et al.* Exploiting the apoptotic actions of oestrogen to reverse antihormonal drug resistance in oestrogen receptor positive breast cancer patients. *Breast* **16** (Suppl. 2), S105–S113 (2007).

182. Ignatov, A., Ignatov, T., Roessner, A., Costa, S. D. & Kalinski, T. Role of GPR30 in the mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer MCF-7 cells. *Breast Cancer Res. Treat.* **123**, 87–96 (2010).

183. Filardo, E. J. *et al.* Distribution of GPR30, a seven membrane-spanning estrogen receptor, in primary breast cancer and its association with clinicopathologic determinants of tumor progression. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **12**, 6359–6366 (2006).

184. Tu, G., Hu, D., Yang, G. & Yu, T. The correlation between GPR30 and clinicopathologic variables in breast carcinomas. *Technol. Cancer Res. Treat* **8**, 231–234 (2009).

185. Liu, Q., Li, J. G., Zheng, X. Y., Jin, F. & Dong, H. T. Expression of CD133, PAX2, ESA, and GPR30 in invasive ductal breast carcinomas. *Chin. Med. J.* **122**, 2763–2769 (2009).

186. Ignatov, A. *et al.* G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPR30 and tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. *Breast Cancer Res. Treat.* **128**, 457–466 (2011).

187. Albanito, L. *et al.* Epidermal growth factor induces G-protein-coupled receptor 30 expression in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cells. *Endocrinology* **149**, 3799–3808 (2008).

188. He, Y. Y., Cai, B., Yang, Y. X., Liu, X. L. & Wan, X. P. Estrogenic G-protein-coupled receptor 30 signaling is involved in regulation of endometrial carcinoma by promoting proliferation, invasion potential, and interleukin-6 secretion via the MEK/ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. *Cancer Sci.* **100**, 1051–1061 (2009).

189. Leblanc, K. *et al.* Effects of 4-hydroxytamoxifen, raloxifene and ICI 182 780 on survival of uterine cancer cell lines in the presence and absence of exogenous estrogens. *Int. J. Oncol.* **30**, 477–487 (2007).

190. Vivacqua, A. *et al.* 17β-estradiol, genistein and 4-hydroxytamoxifen induce the proliferation of thyroid cancer cells through the G-protein- coupled receptor GPR30. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **70**, 1414–1423 (2006).

191. Henic, E., Noskova, V., Hoyer-Hansen, G., Hansson, S. & Casslen, B. Estradiol attenuates EGF-induced rapid uPAR mobilization and cell migration via the G-protein-coupled receptor 30 in ovarian cancer cells. *Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer* **19**, 214–222 (2009).

192. Siegfried, J. M., Hershberger, P. A. & Stabile, L. P. Estrogen receptor signaling in lung cancer. *Seminars in Oncology* **36**, 524–531 (2009).

193. Chan, Q. K. *et al.* Activation of GPR30 inhibits the growth of prostate cancer cells through sustained activation of Erk1/2, c-jun/ c-fos-dependent upregulation of p21, and induction of G2 cell-cycle arrest. *Cell Death Differ.* **17**, 1511–1523 (2010).

194. Franco, R. *et al.* GPR30 is over-expressed in post puberal testicular germ cell tumors. *Cancer Biol. Ther.* **11**, 609–613 (2011).

195. Vivacqua, A. *et al.* The G-protein-coupled receptor GPR30 mediates the proliferative effects induced by 17β-estradiol and hydroxytamoxifen in endometrial cancer cells. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **20**, 631–646 (2006).

196. Dong, S., Terasaka, S. & Kiyama, R. Bisphenol A induces a rapid activation of Erk1/2 through GPR30 in human breast cancer cells. *Environ. Pollut.* **159**, 212–218 (2011).

197. Lucki, N. C. & Sewer, M. B. Genistein stimulates MCF-7 breast cancer cell growth by inducing acid ceramidase (ASAH1) gene expression. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 19399–19409 (2011).

198. Smith, H. O. *et al.* GPR30: a novel indicator of poor survival for endometrial carcinoma. *Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol.* **196**, e1–e11 (2007).

199. Smith, H. O. *et al.* GPR30 predicts poor survival for ovarian cancer. *Gynecol. Oncol.* **114**, 465–471 (2009).

200. Pandey, D. P. *et al.* Estrogenic GPR30 signalling induces proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells through CTGF. *EMBO J.* **28**, 523–532 (2009).

201. Ignatov, T. *et al.* Role of GPR30 in endometrial pathology after tamoxifen for breast cancer. *Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol.* **203**, e9–e16 (2011).

202. van Leeuwen, F. E. *et al.* Risk of endometrial cancer after tamoxifen treatment of breast cancer. *Lancet* **343**, 448–452 (1994).

203. Madeo, A. & Maggiolini, M. Nuclear alternate estrogen receptor GPR30 mediates 17β-estradiol-induced gene expression and migration in breast cancer-associated fibroblasts. *Cancer Res.* **70**, 6036–6046 (2010).

Acknowledgments

E. R. Prossnitzis supported by grants CA116662, CA118743 and CA127731 from the NIH. M. Barton is supported by grants 3,200-108,528/1 and K-33K0-122,504/1 from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF).

Author contributions

Both authors contributed equally to all aspects of this manuscript.
