
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 301: E1065–E1069, 2011.
First published September 20, 2011; doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00426.2011.

NEW INVESTIGATOR AWARD

Signal integration at the level of ion channel and exocytotic function in pancreatic β-cells

Patrick E. MacDonald

*Department of Pharmacology and Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada*

Submitted 16 August 2011; accepted in final form 18 September 2011

MacDonald PE. Signal integration at the level of ion channel and exocytotic function in pancreatic β-cells. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 301: E1065–E1069, 2011. First published September 20, 2011; doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00426.2011.—Whole body energy balance is ensured by the exquisite control of insulin secretion, the dysregulation of which has serious consequences. Although a great deal has been learned about the control of insulin secretion from pancreatic β-cells in the past 30 years, there remains much to be understood about the molecular mechanisms and interactions that underlie the precise control of this process. Numerous molecular interactions at the plasma membrane mediate the excitatory and amplifying events involved in insulin secretion; this includes interactions between ion channels, signal transduction machinery, and exocytotic proteins. The present Perspectives article considers evidence that key membrane and membrane-associated proteins essential to insulin secretion are regulated in concert as a functional unit, ensuring an integrated excitatory and exocytotic response to the signals that control insulin secretion.

regulated together as a functional complex. Considered in this context is the “excitosome”: the complex of ion channels and exocytotic proteins mediating downstream events in insulin secretion.

**The Secretory Mechanism**

Some of the key mechanisms controlling insulin secretion are presented in Fig. 1A and have been reviewed extensively (13, 21, 22, 27, 42, 55, 62). The main points can be summarized as follows. A rise in plasma glucose leads to increased metabolism and an elevated cytoplasmic ATP/ADP ratio. This closes ATP-sensitive K⁺ (KATP) channels, leading to β-cell depolarization, action potential firing, activation of voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channels (VDCCs), and Ca²⁺ entry that triggers insulin granule exocytosis. β-Cell electrical activity is limited by the activation of voltage-dependent K⁺ (Kv) channels, notably the Kv2.1 isoform, which mediate action potential repolarization. Superimposed on this, the triggering pathway, are one or more amplifying pathways that enhance secretion by promoting insulin granule recruitment to, and “priming” at, the plasma membrane. These include the receptor-mediated generation of cAMP and other signals and metabolic mediators such as NADPH (12, 21, 29, 38, 42). Candidates for acute regulatory points controlling secretion per se likely include 1) key metabolic pathways within the mitochondria, 2) the interaction of granules with, and activity of, the translocation machinery, and 3) the molecular interactions of secretory machinery at the plasma membrane exocytic sites that are the focus of the present perspective. Indeed, the plasma membrane is a key site of action of many signals that control insulin secretion.

**What Defines the Exocytotic Machinery?**

Following their biogenesis, insulin granules are trafficked to the cell periphery along microtubules (56). There, remodeling of the cortical actin network promotes translocation of granules to the plasma membrane (62). Once at the plasma membrane, insulin granules physically “dock” to the membrane through interaction of the vesicular and target-soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (v- and t-SNARE) proteins (Fig. 1B). SNARE proteins, together with a Ca²⁺ sensor, constitute the “minimum machinery” for the Ca²⁺-dependent exocytosis of insulin (33). In the β-cell, these are represented by VAMP-2, syntaxin 1A/4, SNAP-25, and synaptotagmin VII/IX; this has been reviewed extensively (13, 17, 23, 30). Following a glucose-stimulated rise in intracellular Ca²⁺, it is the SNARE proteins that mediate exocytosis by promoting the fusion of the opposing vesicular and plasma membranes.

While the SNARE machinery represents the minimum requirement for the Ca²⁺-dependent exocytosis, the machinery impact—

INSULIN IS SECRETED IN A REGULATED MANNER from β-cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans in response to increased blood glucose following a meal. However, this statement belies the complexity of the processes regulating insulin release, which is also impacted by a plethora of neuronal, hormonal, autocrine, and nutrient signals. Many of the various factors stimulating or modulating insulin secretion have been well studied, such as glucose-dependent oxidative phosphorylation and metabolic signal generation (38) or glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor-mediated cAMP production (40) among several others. It is therefore important to understand how these diverse signals regulate the machinery that controls insulin secretion and how the control of multiple effector targets results in the precise regulation of secretion.

Why is it necessary for a signal, be it metabolic or receptor mediated, to target a plethora of effectors to achieve its intended result, in this case increased insulin secretion? The view, as it stands, is complex and fragmented. There are, for example, at least 10 (indeed, a bare minimum) identified effectors of GLP-1-induced insulin secretion (40). How do these effectors interact? Are they dependent on each other? One could ask whether the many separable targets affecting insulin secretion are in fact representative of a few key “effector complexes” regulated by these signals. The present Perspective hypothesizes that at least some of the presumed metabolic and signaling targets at the plasma membrane are

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: P. E. MacDonald, Alberta Diabetes Institute, Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2E1 (e-mail: pmacdonald@ualberta.ca).

http://www.ajpendo.org 0193-1849/11 Copyright © 2011 the American Physiological Society E1065

Perspectives

E1066 SIGNAL INTEGRATION AND EXOCYTOTIC FUNCTION IN B-CELLS

**Ion Channels**

A diverse complement of ion channels is critical to pancreatic β-cell function (20, 54). More than a decade ago, it was recognized that SNARE proteins can interact with, and regulate, VDCCs (63). This was demonstrated to position β-cell secretory granules in close proximity to the sites of Ca²⁺ entry (3, 5, 64), allowing rapid local delivery of the Ca²⁺ signal for exocytosis (termed the “excitosome”). Other ion channels involved in insulin secretion also interact with and are regulated by SNARE proteins. For example, syntaxin 1A interacts with the nucleotide-binding domains of the K<sub>ATP</sub> channel sulfonylurea receptor and modulates the regulatory effects of ADP (9, 32, 49). Syntaxin 1A also alters the gating and trafficking of Kv1.1 (16) and Kv2.1 (34, 35) by binding at the channels’ COOH terminus. Similarly, VAMP2 (37) and SNAP-25 (45) inhibit the Kv2.1 channel by binding to its NH₂ terminus. While there are several caveats, (i.e., the use of overexpression and exogenous peptides of incompletely defined specificity), there is nonetheless ample evidence to suggest the regulation of ion channels by SNARE proteins. Future studies examining transgenic animal models and new approaches (FRET or single molecule imaging, for example) may be expected to provide further clarity regarding the specificity and physiological significance of SNARE-ion channel interactions. These findings have been interpreted in the context of SNARE-dependent tuning of excitation, whereby channel function and electrical activity are modulated depending on the status of SNARE interactions during vesicle docking and release (36).

However, recent work from Ilana Lotan’s group demonstrates that at least one of these interactions (specifically the syntaxin 1A-Kv2.1 interaction) facilitates exocytosis per se, independently of the actual ion conducting capacity of the channel (14, 57, 58). Additionally, Kv2.1 may not be the only channel to directly influence exocytosis (39), given recent reports that TRP-M channels modulate insulin secretion under conditions where they are unlikely to have any role in electrical or Ca²⁺ responses (6, 61). The mechanism by which ion channels may directly regulate exocytic function is far from clear. The positive effect of Kv2.1 on exocytosis is suggested to involve the facilitation of secretory granule recruitment to the plasma membrane, possibly through the stabilization of t-SNARE complexes (15). A potential role for Kv2.1 in physically transducing membrane potential changes to the exocytic machinery has also been proposed (48). Thus, it is pertinent to ask: is there a reciprocal relationship between β-cell ion channels and exocytosis such that these are regulated in concert, to the extent that the regulation of excitation and exocytosis becomes inseparable?

**Do Signals Control the Ion Channel-SNARE Complex to Simultaneously Affect Ion Channel and Exocytic Function?**

The formation and status of the excitosome complex may be regulated by many signals that control insulin secretion (Fig. 2). For example the GLP-1 receptor, which binds and regulates Kv2.1 (46), increases β-cell electrical and exocytic responses in concert (19). Arachidonic acid produced by the phospholipase A₂ (PLA₂) family of enzymes has a similar dual effect to both augment β-cell exocytosis (31) and inhibit Kv2.1 currents (28), consistent with a positive insulinotropic role for iPLA₂β

ing insulin secretion at the exocytic site is much more vast. In reality, the exocytic site consists of, and/or is influenced by, many interacting proteins. These include SNARE-interacting proteins like Munc18 (7), signaling proteins including the small G proteins (18, 62), cytoskeletal proteins such as actin filaments (62), and ion channels such as the VDCCs and Kv channels (13, 36). As such, this diverse range of proteins constitutes a regulatory complex, and control of the interaction between these players may prove to be an important determinant of insulin secretion.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 301 • DECEMBER 2011 • www.ajpendo.org

SIGNAL INTEGRATION AND EXOCYTOTIC FUNCTION IN B-CELLS

Fig. 2. Hypothetical model for the parallel regulation of exocytosis and ion channel function through the modulation of SNARE-channel complexes. The interaction of ion channels such as VDCCs and K⁺ channels (Kv2.1) with exocytic SNARE proteins (including SNAP-25 and syntaxin 1A) regulates channel function and conversely controls exocytic capacity. Several signals known to affect insulin secretion (including GLP-1 receptor signaling, SUMOylation, and NADPH) have demonstrated effects on both exocytosis per se and ion channel activity. The hypothesis here is that these parallel effects result from modulation of the SNARE-channel complex (often termed the “excitosome”).

shown in transgenic mice (2) and in human islets (50). It seems possible, then, that the function of any one protein, such as an ion channel, may be altered as a consequence of modulating the excitosome-exocytic complex per se. Here, I provide evidence from work by our group and others on the regulation of Kv2.1 channel activity and exocytic function in pancreatic β-cells to suggest that these are controlled in parallel. Indeed, this may suggest the control of a larger exocytic-ion channel complex to affect secretion.

Metabolic regulation of ion channels and exocytic efficacy. We (43) previously showed that increased NADPH, a candidate metabolic coupling factor, augments Kv2.1 inactivation and reduces the β-cell repolarizing K⁺ current. This was proposed to enhance insulin secretion (47) and possibly be involved in the β-cell response to metabolic amplifying signals (24, 29, 38). However, inhibition of Kv2.1 seems an unlikely mechanism for metabolic amplification, since subplasma membrane Ca²⁺ is unaffected by the amplifying pathway (52). In any case, the metabolic amplification of insulin secretion occurs under conditions where Kv channel activity will have little effect on β-cell electrical responses (i.e., in the presence of high KCl and diazoxide, where the cells are held in a depolarized state). So why does NADPH regulate Kv2.1 channels in β-cells?

Renström and colleagues (25, 53) have demonstrated the direct facilitation of insulin exocytosis by NADPH. An effect of NADPH on the very distal events in insulin secretion such as granule docking and/or priming is consistent with the view that metabolic amplification occurs downstream of Ca²⁺ entry (52). One can hypothesize that NADPH enhances exocytosis in part by altering the interaction of SNARE proteins with ion channels, including Kv2.1. This seems plausible, given that Kv channels, including those in human and rodent islets, bind NADPH (1, 8) and that NADPH and syntaxin 1A overlap in their mechanism for the inhibition of Kv2.1. Both cause a leftward shift in the voltage dependence of channel inactivation (34, 35, 43). Thus, while NADPH inhibition of Kv2.1 channels is unlikely in itself to mediate the amplifying effects of glucose

on insulin secretion, this observation is not necessarily unrelated to metabolic amplification. Indeed, although there is not yet any direct experimental evidence, this may be indicative of the control of a larger complex to effect the facilitation of insulin exocytosis.

Similarly, work by Kakei’s group (65, 66) has demonstrated the regulation of Kv2.1 currents by the metabolic generation of ATP. This is suggested to either up- or downregulate channel activity, depending on the membrane potential examined (66). This work, interpreted in a purely excitatory sense, suggests that metabolic regulation of Kv2.1 contributes to the physiological regulation of β-cell electrical and Ca²⁺ responses to glucose. However, it could be asked whether the effects of glucose on Kv2.1 current are perhaps secondary to the modulation of an exocytic channel-SNARE complex, particularly since the priming of secretory granules for release is also dependent on the metabolic generation of ATP (42, 55).

SUMOylation and the regulation of ion channels/exocytosis. Kv2.1 in human β-cells can be inhibited by SUMO1 (10). This has recently been shown to occur through a direct SUMOylation of Lys⁴⁷⁰ in the channel COOH terminus (51). We assumed that inhibition of Kv2.1 by SUMOylation would increase insulin secretion on the basis of known effects of Kv2.1 inhibition to enhance electrical activity, Ca²⁺ responses, and insulin secretion (26, 41, 44, 60). Instead, SUMOylation inhibits glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from mouse and human islets and has no effect on islet Ca²⁺ responses to glucose (11). This results from a direct inhibition of Ca²⁺-dependent insulin exocytosis. While we have attributed the exocytic effect in part to SUMOylation of the exocytic Ca²⁺ sensor synaptotagmin VII (11), it is relevant to ask: are the effects of SUMOylation on Kv2.1 activity and exocytic function mutually exclusive?

Indeed, we find that several SUMO1-associated proteins are pulled down with Kv2.1, including syntaxin 1A (unpublished observations). Furthermore, the Kv2.1 SUMOylation site (51) is located within the Cla domain of the channel deemed critical for syntaxin 1A binding (58) and which our recent work demonstrates is required for Ca²⁺-dependent insulin exocytosis from human β-cells (Dai et al., unpublished observation). It will be interesting to determine whether the SUMOylation status of the channel alters its interaction with syntaxin 1A. Again, while direct evidence is lacking, we can hypothesize that this contributes to the regulation of exocytosis per se by SUMO1 and that effects on Kv2.1 activity occur in parallel to modulation of the excitosome complex.

Concluding Remarks

The interactions controlling insulin exocytosis at the plasma membrane and their regulation are complicated. Beyond the SNARE machinery, many interacting adaptor and signaling molecules regulate exocytosis. This complex would comprise not only SNAREs and ion channels (i.e., the excitosome) but also receptors and signal integrators [such as snapin (59)]. But is such a complex consistent with the spatial constraints of the exocytotic site? How dynamic are the interactions expected to be [syntaxin itself is remarkably dynamic in its association with the exocytotic site (4)]? Future work should examine these questions and whether the various excitosome complex interactions (such as Kv2.1-syntaxin 1A) contribute to the

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 301 • DECEMBER 2011 • www.ajpendo.org

regulation of insulin secretion by various metabolic and receptor mediated signals.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

I thank the members of my lab and our collaborators whose work contributed to the ideas presented in this paper.

**GRANTS**

Funding is provided by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), and the Canadian Diabetes Association (CDA). P. E. MacDonald holds a scholarship from Alberta Innovates-Health Solutions (AI-HS) and the Canada Research Chair in Islet Biology.

**DISCLOSURES**

No conflicts of interest are reported by the author.

**REFERENCES**

1. Bahring R, Milligan CJ, Vardanyan V, Engeland B, Young BA, Dannenberg J, Waldschutz R, Edwards JP, Wray D, Pongs O. Coupling of voltage-dependent potassium channel inactivation and oxidoreductase active site of Kvβ subunits. *J Biol Chem* 276: 22923–22929, 2001.
2. Bao S, Jacobson DA, Wohltmann M, Bohrer A, Jin W, Philipson LH, Turk J. Glucose homeostasis, insulin secretion, and islet phospholipids in mice that overexpress iPLA₂β in pancreatic β-cells and in iPLA2β-null mice. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 294: E217–E229, 2008.
3. Barg S, Eliasson L, Renstrom E, Rorsman P. A subset of 50 secretory granules in close contact with L-type Ca²⁺ channels accounts for first-phase insulin secretion in mouse beta-cells. *Diabetes* 51, Suppl 1: S74–82, 2002.
4. Barg S, Knowles MK, Chen X, Midorikawa M, Almers W. Syntaxin clusters assemble reversibly at sites of secretory granules in live cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 107: 20804–20809, 2010.
5. Barg S, Ma X, Eliasson L, Galvanovskis J, Gopel SO, Obermuller S, Platzer J, Renstrom E, Trus M, Atlas D, Striessnig J, Rorsman P. Fast exocytosis with few Ca²⁺ channels in insulin-secreting mouse pancreatic B cells. *Biophys J* 81: 3308–3323, 2001.
6. Brixel LR, Monteilh-Zoller MK, Ingenbrandt CS, Fleig A, Penner R, Enklaar T, Zabel BU, Prawitt D. TRPM5 regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. *Pflügers Arch* 460: 69–76, 2010.
7. Brunger AT. Structure and function of SNARE and SNARE-interacting proteins. *Q Rev Biophys* 38: 1–47, 2005.
8. Chouinard SW, Lu F, Ganetzky B, Macdonald MJ. Evidence for voltage-gated potassium channel beta-subunits with oxidoreductase motifs in human and rodent pancreatic beta cells. *Receptors Channels* 7: 237–243, 2000.
9. Cui N, Kang Y, He Y, Leung YM, Xie H, Pasyk EA, Gao X, Sheu L, Hansen JB, Wahl P, Tsushima RG, Gaisano HY. H3 domain of syntaxin 1A inhibits K<sub>ATP</sub> channels by its actions on the sulfonylurea receptor 1 nucleotide-binding folds-1 and -2. *J Biol Chem* 279: 53259–53265, 2004.
10. Dai XQ, Kolic J, Marchi P, Sipione S, MacDonald PE. SUMOylation regulates Kv2.1 and modulates pancreatic β-cell excitability. *J Cell Sci* 15: 775–779, 2009.
11. Dai XQ, Plummer G, Casimir M, Kang Y, Hajmrle C, Gaisano H, Manning-Fox J, MacDonald PE. SUMOylation regulates insulin exocytosis downstream of secretory granule docking in rodents and humans. *Diabetes* 60: 838–847 2011.
12. Deeney JT, Prentki M, Corkey BE. Metabolic control of beta-cell function. *Semin Cell Dev Biol* 11: 267–275, 2000.
13. Eliasson L, Abdulkader F, Braun M, Galvanovskis J, Hoppa MB, Rorsman P. Novel aspects of the molecular mechanisms controlling insulin secretion. *J Physiol* 586: 3313–3324, 2008.
14. Feinschreiber L, Singer-Lahat D, Ashery U, Lotan I. Voltage-gated potassium channel as a facilitator of exocytosis. *Ann NY Acad Sci* 1152: 87–92, 2009.
15. Feinschreiber L, Singer-Lahat D, Friedrich R, Matti U, Sheinin A, Yizhar O, Nachman R, Chikvashvili D, Rettig J, Ashery U, Lotan I. Non-conducting function of the Kv2.1 channel enables it to recruit vesicles for release in neuroendocrine and nerve cells. *J Cell Sci* 123: 1940–1947, 2010.
16. Fili O, Michaelevski I, Bledi Y, Chikvashvili D, Singer-Lahat D, Boshwitz H, Linial M, Lotan I. Direct interaction of a brain voltage-gated K⁺ channel with syntaxin 1A: functional impact on channel gating. *J Neurosci* 21: 1964–1974, 2001.
17. Gauthier BR, Wollheim CB. Synaptotagmins bind calcium to release insulin. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 295: E1279–E1286, 2008.
18. Goehring AS, Pedroja BS, Hinke SA, Langeberg LK, Scott JD. MyRIP anchors protein kinase A to the exocyst complex. *J Biol Chem* 282: 33155–33167, 2007.
19. Gromada J, Ding WG, Barg S, Renstrom E, Rorsman P. Multisite regulation of insulin secretion by cAMP-increasing agonists: evidence that glucagon-like peptide 1 and glucagon act via distinct receptors. *Pflügers Arch* 434: 515–524, 1997.
20. Henquin JC. Regulation of insulin release by ionic and electrical events in B cells. *Horm Res* 27: 168–178, 1987.
21. Henquin JC. Regulation of insulin secretion: a matter of phase control and amplitude modulation. *Diabetologia* 52: 739–751, 2009.
22. Henquin JC, Ravier MA, Nenquin M, Jonas JC, Gilon P. Hierarchy of the beta-cell signals controlling insulin secretion. *Eur J Clin Invest* 33: 742–750, 2003.
23. Hou JC, Min L, Pessin JE. Insulin granule biogenesis, trafficking and exocytosis. *Vitam Horm* 80: 473–506, 2009.
24. Huypens P, Pillai R, Sheinin T, Schaefer S, Huang M, Odegaard ML, Ronnebaum SM, Wettig SD, Joseph JW. The dicarboxylate carrier plays a role in mitochondrial malate transport and in the regulation of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from rat pancreatic beta cells. *Diabetologia* 54: 135–145.
25. Ivarsson R, Quintens R, Dejonghe S, Tsukamoto K, in ’t Veld P, Renstrom E, Schuit FC. Redox control of exocytosis: regulatory role of NADPH, thioredoxin, and glutaredoxin. *Diabetes* 54: 2132–2142, 2005.
26. Jacobson DA, Kuznetsov A, Lopez JP, Kash S, Ammala CE, Philipson LH. Kv2.1 ablation alters glucose-induced islet electrical activity, enhancing insulin secretion. *Cell Metab* 6: 229–235, 2007.
27. Jacobson DA, Philipson LH. Action potentials and insulin secretion: new insights into the role of Kv channels. *Diabetes Obes Metab* 9, Suppl 2: 89–98, 2007.
28. Jacobson DA, Weber CR, Bao S, Turk J, Philipson LH. Modulation of the pancreatic islet beta-cell-delayed rectifier potassium channel Kv2.1 by the polyunsaturated fatty acid arachidonate. *J Biol Chem* 282: 7442–7449, 2007.
29. Jensen MV, Joseph JW, Ronnebaum SM, Burgess SC, Sherry AD, Newgard CB. Metabolic cycling in control of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 295: E1287–E1297, 2008.
30. Jewell JL, Oh E, Thurmond DC. Exocytosis mechanisms underlying insulin release and glucose uptake: conserved roles for Munc18c and syntaxin 4. *Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol* 298: R517–R531, 2010.
31. Juhl K, Hoy M, Olsen HL, Bokvist K, Efanova AM, Hoffmann EK, Gromada J. cPLA2α-evoked formation of arachidonic acid and lysophospholipids is required for exocytosis in mouse pancreatic β-cells. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 285: E73–E81, 2003.
32. Kang Y, Leung YM, Manning-Fox JE, Xia F, Xie H, Sheu L, Tsushima RG, Light PE, Gaisano HY. Syntaxin-1A inhibits cardiac K<sub>ATP</sub> channels by its actions on nucleotide binding folds 1 and 2 of sulfonylurea receptor 2A. *J Biol Chem* 279: 47125–47131, 2004.
33. Lang T, Jahn R. Core proteins of the secretory machinery. *Handb Exp Pharmacol* 107–127, 2008.
34. Leung YM, Kang Y, Gao X, Xia F, Xie H, Sheu L, Tsuk S, Lotan I, Tsushima RG, Gaisano HY. Syntaxin 1A binds to the cytoplasmic C terminus of Kv2.1 to regulate channel gating and trafficking. *J Biol Chem* 278: 17532–17538, 2003.
35. Leung YM, Kang Y, Xia F, Sheu L, Gao X, Xie H, Tsushima RG, Gaisano HY. Open form of syntaxin-1A is a more potent inhibitor than wild-type syntaxin-1A of Kv2.1 channels. *Biochem J* 387: 195–202, 2005.
36. Leung YM, Kwan EP, Ng B, Kang Y, Gaisano HY. SNAREing voltage-gated K⁺ and ATP-sensitive K⁺ channels: tuning β-cell excitability with syntaxin-1A and other exocytic proteins. *Endocr Rev* 28: 653–663, 2007.
37. Lvov A, Chikvashvili D, Michaelevski I, Lotan I. VAMP2 interacts directly with the N terminus of Kv2.1 to enhance channel inactivation. *Pflügers Arch* 456: 1121–1136, 2008.

SIGNAL INTEGRATION AND EXOCYTOTIC FUNCTION IN B-CELLS

38. MacDonald MJ, Fahien LA, Brown LJ, Hasan NM, Buss JD, Kendrick MA. Perspective: emerging evidence for signaling roles of mitochondrial anaplerotic products in insulin secretion. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 288: E1–E15, 2005.

39. MacDonald PE. TRP-ing down the path to insulin secretion. *Diabetes* 60: 28–29, 2011.

40. MacDonald PE, El-Kholy W, Riedel MJ, Salapatek AM, Light PE, Wheeler MB. The multiple actions of GLP-1 on the process of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. *Diabetes* 51, *Suppl 3*: S434–S442, 2002.

41. MacDonald PE, Ha XF, Wang J, Smukler SR, Sun AM, Gaisano HY, Salapatek AM, Backx PH, Wheeler MB. Members of the Kv1 and Kv2 voltage-dependent K⁺ channel families regulate insulin secretion. *Mol Endocrinol* 15: 1423–1435, 2001.

42. MacDonald PE, Joseph JW, Rorsman P. Glucose-sensing mechanisms in pancreatic β-cells. *Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci* 360: 2211–2225, 2005.

43. MacDonald PE, Salapatek AM, Wheeler MB. Temperature and redox state dependence of native Kv2.1 currents in rat pancreatic β-cells. *J Physiol* 546: 647–653, 2003.

44. MacDonald PE, Sewing S, Wang J, Joseph JW, Smukler SR, Sakellaropoulos G, Saleh MC, Chan CB, Tsushima RG, Salapatek AM, Wheeler MB. Inhibition of Kv2.1 voltage-dependent K⁺ channels in pancreatic β-cells enhances glucose-dependent insulin secretion. *J Biol Chem* 277: 44938–44945, 2002.

45. MacDonald PE, Wang G, Tsuk S, Dodo C, Kang Y, Tang L, Wheeler MB, Cattral MS, Lakey JR, Salapatek AM, Lotan I, Gaisano HY. Synaptosome-associated protein of 25 kilodaltons modulates Kv2.1 voltage-dependent K⁺ channels in neuroendocrine islet β-cells through an interaction with the channel N terminus. *Mol Endocrinol* 16: 2452–2461, 2002.

46. MacDonald PE, Wang X, Xia F, El-kholy W, Targonsky ED, Tsushima RG, Wheeler MB. Antagonism of rat β-cell voltage-dependent K⁺ currents by exendin 4 requires dual activation of the cAMP/protein kinase A and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathways. *J Biol Chem* 278: 52446–52453, 2003.

47. MacDonald PE, Wheeler MB. Voltage-dependent K⁺ channels in pancreatic beta cells: role, regulation and potential as therapeutic targets. *Diabetologia* 46: 1046–1062, 2003.

48. Mohapatra DP, Vacher H, Trimmer JS. The surprising catch of a voltage-gated potassium channel in a neuronal SNARE. *Sci STKE* 2007: pe37, 2007.

49. Pasyk EA, Kang Y, Huang X, Cui N, Sheu L, Gaisano HY. Syntaxin-1A binds the nucleotide-binding folds of sulphonylurea receptor 1 to regulate the KATP channel. *J Biol Chem* 279: 4234–4240, 2004.

50. Persaud SJ, Muller D, Belin VD, Kitsou-Mylona I, Asare-Anane H, Papadimitriou A, Burns CJ, Huang GC, Amiel SA, Jones PM. The role of arachidonic acid and its metabolites in insulin secretion from human islets of langerhans. *Diabetes* 56: 197–203, 2007.

51. Plant LD, Dowdell EJ, Dementieva IS, Marks JD, Goldstein SA. SUMO modification of cell surface Kv2.1 potassium channels regulates the activity of rat hippocampal neurons. *J Gen Physiol* 137: 441–454, 2011.

52. Ravier MA, Cheng-Xue R, Palmer AE, Henquin JC, Gilon P. Subplasmalemmal Ca²⁺ measurements in mouse pancreatic beta cells support the existence of an amplifying effect of glucose on insulin secretion. *Diabetologia* 53: 1947–1957, 2010.

53. Reinbothe TM, Ivarsson R, Li DQ, Niazi O, Jing X, Zhang E, Stenson L, Bryborn U, Renstrom E. Glutaredoxin-1 mediates NADPH-dependent stimulation of calcium-dependent insulin secretion. *Mol Endocrinol* 23: 893–900, 2009.

54. Rorsman P. The pancreatic beta-cell as a fuel sensor: an electrophysiologist’s viewpoint. *Diabetologia* 40: 487–495, 1997.

55. Rorsman P, Renstrom E. Insulin granule dynamics in pancreatic beta cells. *Diabetologia* 46: 1029–1045, 2003.

56. Rutter GA, Hill EV. Insulin vesicle release: walk, kiss, pause . . . then run. *Physiology (Bethesda)* 21: 189–196, 2006.

57. Singer-Lahat D, Chikvashvili D, Lotan I. Direct interaction of endogenous Kv channels with syntaxin enhances exocytosis by neuroendocrine cells. *PLoS One* 3: e1381, 2008.

58. Singer-Lahat D, Sheinin A, Chikvashvili D, Tsuk S, Greitzer D, Friedrich R, Feinschreiber L, Ashery U, Benveniste M, Levitan ES, Lotan I. K⁺ channel facilitation of exocytosis by dynamic interaction with syntaxin. *J Neurosci* 27: 1651–1658, 2007.

59. Song WJ, Seshadri M, Ashraf U, Mdluli T, Mondal P, Keil M, Azevedo M, Kirschner LS, Stratakis CA, Hussain MA. Snapin mediates incretin action and augments glucose-dependent insulin secretion. *Cell Metab* 13: 308–319, 2011.

60. Tamarina NA, Kuznetsov A, Fridlyand LE, Philipson LH. Delayed rectifier (Kv2.1) regulation of pancreatic β-cell calcium responses to glucose: inhibitor specificity and modeling. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 289: E578–E585, 2005.

61. Uchida K, Dezaki K, Damdindorj B, Inada H, Shiuchi T, Mori Y, Yada T, Minokoshi Y, Tominaga M. Lack of TRPM2 impaired insulin secretion and glucose metabolism in mice. *Diabetes* 60: 119–126, 2011.

62. Wang Z, Thurmond DC. Mechanisms of biphasic insulin-granule exocytosis—roles of the cytoskeleton, small GTPases and SNARE proteins. *J Cell Sci* 122: 893–903, 2009.

63. Wiser O, Bennett MK, Atlas D. Functional interaction of syntaxin and SNAP-25 with voltage-sensitive L- and N-type Ca²⁺ channels. *EMBO J* 15: 4100–4110, 1996.

64. Wiser O, Trus M, Hernandez A, Renstrom E, Barg S, Rorsman P, Atlas D. The voltage sensitive Lc-type Ca²⁺ channel is functionally coupled to the exocytotic machinery. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 248–253, 1999.

65. Yoshida M, Dezaki K, Yamato S, Aoki A, Sugawara H, Toyoshima H, Ishikawa SE, Kawakami M, Nakata M, Yada T, Kakei M. Regulation of voltage-gated K⁺ channels by glucose metabolism in pancreatic β-cells. *FEBS Lett* 583: 2225–2230, 2009.

66. Yoshida M, Nakata M, Yamato S, Dezaki K, Sugawara H, Ishikawa SE, Kawakami M, Yada T, Kakei M. Voltage-dependent metabolic regulation of Kv2.1 channels in pancreatic β-cells. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 396: 304–309, 2010.

Copyright of American Journal of Physiology: Endocrinology & Metabolism is the property of American Physiological Society and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
