
This article was downloaded by: [University of California, San Diego]
On: 05 June 2015, At: 11:46
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

---

**Virulence**

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kvir20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kvir20)

The influenza A virus protein PB1-F2
Zsuzsanna T. Varga & Peter Palese
Published online: 01 Nov 2011.

---

To cite this article: Zsuzsanna T. Varga & Peter Palese (2011) The influenza A virus protein PB1-F2, Virulence, 2:6, 542-546, DOI: 10.4161/viru.2.6.17812

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/viru.2.6.17812](http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/viru.2.6.17812)

---

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Versions of published Taylor & Francis and Routledge Open articles and Taylor & Francis and Routledge Open Select articles posted to institutional or subject repositories or any other third-party website are without warranty from Taylor & Francis of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Any opinions and views expressed in this article are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor & Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

It is essential that you check the license status of any given Open and Open Select article to confirm conditions of access and use.

Virulence 2:6, 542-546; November/December 2011; © 2011 Landes Bioscience

# The influenza A virus protein PB1-F2

## Killing two birds with one stone?

**Zsuzsanna T. Varga**¹ and **Peter Palese**¹,²,*  

**Department of** ¹Microbiology and ²Medicine; Mount Sinai School of Medicine; New York, NY USA

### Key words:
PB1-F2, PB1-F2 N66S, influenza virus, interferon antagonism, MAVS, antiviral signaling, apoptosis, pathogenicity

### Abbreviations:
ANT3, adenine nucleotide translocator 3; ATF, activating transcription factor; CARD, caspase activation and recruitment domain; IFN, interferon; IKKε, IkB kinase ε; IRF, interferon regulatory transcription factor; ISG, interferon-stimulated gene; JAK, Janus kinase; MAVS, mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein; MDA-5, melanoma differentiation-associated gene-5; NDV, Newcastle disease virus; NFκB, nuclear factor κB; NLR, Nod-like receptor; PTPC, permeability-transition pore complex; RIG-I, retinoic acid inducible gene-I; RLH, RIG-I-like RNA helicase receptor; STAT, signal transduction and activator of transcription; TBK1, TANK-binding kinase 1; TNFα, tumor-necrosis factor α; TLR, toll-like receptor; TRAIL, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand; TRIF, TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β; VDAC1, voltage-dependent anion channel 1

---

Submitted: 07/29/11  
Revised: 08/17/11  
Accepted: 08/18/11  

http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/viru.2.6.17812  

*Correspondence to: Peter Palese;  
Email: peter.palese@mssm.edu*

---

**Addendum to:** Varga ZT, Ramos I, Hai R, Schmolke M, García-Sastre A, Fernandez-Sesma A, et al. The influenza virus protein PB1-F2 inhibits the induction of type I interferon at the level of the MAVS adaptor protein. PLoS Pathog 2011; 7:1002067; PMID: 21695240; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1002067.

---

### Introduction

PB1-F2 is a 90 amino acid protein that is expressed from the +1 open reading frame in the PB1 gene of some influenza A viruses. The PB1-F2 protein has been shown to contribute to viral pathogenicity, but the molecular mechanisms for mediating virulence have been unclear. Previous reports demonstrate that PB1-F2 promotes cell death, causes immunopathology and increases pro-inflammatory responses. Our group has identified a single point mutation from asparagine (N) to serine (S) at position 66 in the PB1-F2 protein that dramatically increases the virulence of highly pathogenic avian H5N1 influenza viruses and of the 1918 pandemic strain. In search for the mechanism by which PB1-F2 N66S increases pathogenicity, we have identified and characterized a novel function of PB1-F2, i.e., interferon antagonism, both in vitro and in the mouse model. Here, we discuss a hypothesis for a possible molecular link between the pro-apoptotic and anti-interferon functions of PB1-F2.

Influenza is a global health concern due to its potential to cause pandemics with significant death rates and socio-economic costs. The pandemics that occurred in 1918, 1957 and 1968 were all caused by influenza viruses that express the pathogenicity factor PB1-F2. PB1-F2 is the smallest known influenza virus protein and is encoded by the +1 alternate open reading frame in the PB1 gene of some influenza A virus strains. Since its identification in 2001 by Chen et al., several groups have proposed mechanisms by which the PB1-F2 protein contributes to influenza virus pathogenicity. It was shown that PB1-F2 has pro-apoptotic activity in vitro by interacting with the mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1) and the adenine nucleotide translocator 3 (ANT3) proteins.¹ Furthermore, PB1-F2 was suggested to induce cell death specifically in immune cells²,³ in a strain-specific manner.⁴ Other studies demonstrated that PB1-F2 can induce inflammatory responses resulting in immune cell infiltration, increased cytokine levels and tissue damage in the lung of infected mice.⁴⁻⁸ The pro-inflammatory property of PB1-F2 is thought to promote secondary bacterial infections which caused substantial morbidity during the 1918 pandemic.⁷ A report by Mazur et al. describes an interaction of PB1-F2 with the PB1 polymerase protein in the nucleus, which leads to an increased polymerase activity in vitro.⁹ This interaction, however, does not appear to contribute to influenza virus pathogenesis in a mouse model.¹⁰ It is surprising that such a small protein as PB1-F2 can carry out multiple functions. Here, we will discuss a possible link between the pro-apoptotic and interferon antagonistic properties of PB1-F2.

### PB1-F2 Has Anti-Interferon Activity

We have previously identified a crucial residue in the PB1-F2 protein that is associated with increased virulence of highly pathogenic avian H5N1 influenza viruses and of the 1918 pandemic strain.⁵ Specifically, we found that a serine (S) at

of IFN when triggered by TRIF, an adaptor protein mediating TLR-mediated IFN production.¹ Collectively, we identified and characterized a novel function for PB1-F2, which is its IFN antagonism, and demonstrated that the anti-IFN activity of PB1-F2 is exerted at the level of the MAVS adaptor protein.

# The Antiviral Innate Immune Response

The innate immune response is the first line of defense against viral infections. It is mediated through the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs), Nod-like receptors (NLRs) and the RIG-I-like RNA helicase receptors (RLHs) retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene-5 (MDA-5). Upon recognition of characteristic pathogen-associated patterns, the TLRs and RLHs induce the production of type I IFN,¹⁵ which binds to specific receptors and thus upregulates antiviral genes through the JAK/STAT pathway in an autocrine or paracrine manner. The mitochondria play an essential role in the antiviral IFN response since MAVS mediates RIG-I and MDA-5 triggered IFN production. Once activated, RIG-I and MDA-5 interact with MAVS via their CARD domains leading to the phosphorylation and activation of IRFs by TBK1 and IKKe. The IRFs then translocate to the nucleus to drive the expression of type I IFN in combination with the NFκB and ATF/c-Jun transcription factors (Fig. 1). It is unclear how MAVS propagates the signal for the IFN production pathway. Some reports indicate that MAVS undergoes a re-organization in the mitochondrial membrane into distinct punctate structures¹⁶ and re-arranges from a higher- to a lower-order complex upon activation.¹⁷ It has also been suggested that MAVS can self-oligomerize via its transmembrane domain¹⁸ and even form prion-like agglomerates.¹⁹ Furthermore, a recent report by Koshiba et al. shows the importance of an intact mitochondrial membrane potential for MAVS-mediated IFN production.²⁰

How does PB1-F2 affect MAVS-dependent IFN production? Preliminary data from our laboratory suggest that

**Figure 1. The anti-interferon activity of PB1-F2.** Upon recognition of viral RNA species, RIG-I interacts with and activates MAVS. This leads to the activation of TBK1 and IKKe which phosphorylate IRFs. The IRF transcription factor complex then translocates to the nucleus to mediate the transcription of type I IFN genes (together with NFκB and ATF/c-Jun, not shown here). Our recent study shows that PB1-F2 inhibits the induction of type I IFN at the level of the MAVS adaptor protein. Please note: schematic is not to scale.

position 66 in the PB1-F2 protein dramatically increases influenza virus pathogenicity compared with isogenic viruses with an asparagine (N) at this position.⁵ In search for the molecular mechanism by which PB1-F2 N66S increases virulence, we performed microarray analyses on lung homogenates and found an early suppression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in mice infected with a PB1-F2 N66S expressing virus.⁶ In our most recent work, we performed in vitro assays to further characterize the newly identified anti-interferon (IFN) activity of PB1-F2.¹¹ We found that the N66S point mutation increases the interferon antagonist function of the PB1-F2 protein in an in vitro transfection system, when expressed from a Newcastle disease virus (NDV) vector and in the context of viral infection. Furthermore, we showed that the anti-IFN activity of PB1-F2 is mediated via its C-terminal region which has previously been shown to also have pro-apoptotic activity¹ and that PB1-F2 exerts

its anti-IFN function in both immune and epithelial cells.

Influenza viruses express another non-structural protein besides PB1-F2, namely NS1, which has a well-characterized IFN antagonist function.¹²⁻¹⁴ We thus examined the relationship between PB1-F2 and the NS1 proteins in regards to their IFN antagonism function and observed that PB1-F2 N66S in combination with NS1 inhibits the IFN response more efficiently than NS1 alone.¹¹ In addition, PB1-F2 N66S expressed from a virus with an NS1 protein, which is crippled in its ability to suppress the antiviral IFN response, significantly reduces the induction of IFN compared with PB1-F2 WT.¹¹ Using an IFNβ reporter assay with different stimuli, we found that PB1-F2 affects the induction of IFN at the level of the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein (Fig. 1) and immunofluorescence studies showed a co-localization of PB1-F2 with MAVS at the mitochondria.¹¹ Of note, PB1-F2 does not affect the induction

PB1-F2 binds to MAVS, with the N66S mutation contributing to an increased interaction affinity. It would be interesting to investigate whether the interaction of PB1-F2 with MAVS affects the ability of MAVS to form complexes with other proteins, or if PB1-F2 interferes with MAVS self-oligomerization and rearrangement. Another possibility would be that PB1-F2 disrupts MAVS-dependent IFN production by disturbing the mitochondrial membrane potential.

## The Pro-Apoptotic Function of PB1-F2

Apoptosis can be initiated through an extrinsic or intrinsic pathway. The extrinsic apoptosis cascade is mediated through so-called death receptors while the intrinsic or mitochondrial apoptosis pathway is triggered by cell damage. Initiation of the intrinsic cell death pathway leads to the permeabilization of the mitochondrial membrane. This can occur through Bcl-2 family members or the formation of the permeability-transition pore complex (PTPC). The PTPC mainly consists of the adenine nucleotide translocase 3 (ANT3) in the inner membrane, and the voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1) in the outer mitochondrial membrane. The permeabilization of the mitochondrial membrane leads to the efflux of apoptogenic molecules, such as cytochrome c, which activate the caspase cascade. The extrinsic and intrinsic cell death pathways merge into a common effector molecule, caspase 3, which executes the death sentence. Based on previous findings, PB1-F2 can induce apoptosis via two mechanisms: (1) by interacting with VDAC1 and ANT3 to promote the formation of the PTPC (Fig. 2A) and (2) by forming pores via self-oligomerization (Fig. 2B).

The role of apoptosis during influenza virus infection is controversial. Several reports indicate that cell death is a type of host defense mechanism which is antagonized by the NS1 protein through activation of the pro-survival Akt pathway. Conversely, other reports show that influenza virus can exploit the apoptosis pathways for efficient replication. Specifically, it was found that caspase 3 activity and mediators of the extrinsic

apoptosis pathway, namely TRAIL and Fas/FasL, are needed for efficient viral propagation.

### MAVS: Molecular Bridge between the Antiviral IFN Response and Mitochondrial Cell Death?

Mitochondria are essential organelles of the cells. They function as “energy factories,” mediate antiviral responses and regulate cell death. Viruses have evolved mechanisms to modulate these mitochondrial functions for their lifecycle.

Understanding how viruses can subvert these processes can give insights into the organization of cellular pathways. Viral proteins with multifunctional properties such as the influenza A virus protein PB1-F2 may provide insights into the cross-talks between cellular signaling cascades. It is fascinating that a small protein such as PB1-F2 can exert several functions, i.e., the induction of apoptosis and the inhibition of the antiviral IFN response (among other possible functions). These two activities may be performed independently of each other, but it is equally possible that PB1-F2 unravels a molecular

Figure 2. PB1-F2 promotes mitochondrial apoptosis. (A) PB1-F2 can associate with ANT3 and VDAC1 in the inner and outer mitochondrial membrane, respectively, to induce the efflux of cytochrome c (cyto c), which further downstream leads to the activation of caspases. (B) PB1-F2 can also self-oligomerize to form pores in the mitochondrial membrane. Please note: schematic is not to scale.

would then be available for the formation
of permeability pores with other proteins
such as ANT3 to release apoptogenic molecules into the cytoplasm. In parallel, the
interaction of PB1-F2 with VDAC1 and
ANT3 would promote the pore formation
that can be enhanced in response to exogenous stimuli such as TNFα.

The extent of the pro-apoptotic and
anti-IFN effects of PB1-F2 is likely to be
cell type-dependent. It is possible that the
expression of PB1-F2 varies in immune
and epithelial cells and that the expression
patterns of the target proteins of PB1-F2
are different so that some cells may be
more sensitive to the pro-apoptotic effect
than others. To create an optimal environment for viral replication, it is plausible
that PB1-F2 decreases the antiviral IFN
production in both epithelial and immune
cells. Epithelial cells are the primary target
cells for replication so it would be undesirable to kill these cell types. Instead,
PB1-F2 may specifically promote and
accelerate cell death in immune cells to
evade the detection of the virus by the
immune system. Also, it is possible that
the conformation, subcellular localization
and post-translational modification
of PB1-F2 play a role in the execution of
its functions.

It will be important to identify the residues that mediate the different functions
of PB1-F2 in order to determine if these
functions are linked or executed separately
from each other. Also, it has been established that there is great strain variance in
PB1-F2 mediated functions, so it would
be interesting to examine if the degree of
apoptosis induction or IFN suppression
can be linked to a viral pathogenicity phenotype. Additionally, a better understanding of the molecular function of PB1-F2
in avian species is needed in view of the
high conservation rate of the PB1-F2 open
reading frame in avian influenza virus isolates. In recent years, novel hypotheses on
the molecular mechanism by which PB1-
F2 contributes to pathogenesis have come
forward and in the future it will be a challenge to connect all findings into one comprehensive model.

Acknowledgments

Work on the PB1-F2 protein in the laboratory of Dr. Peter Palese is supported

Figure 3. Model for the molecular bridge of the pro-apoptotic and anti-interferon functions of
PB1-F2. MAVS is an important mediator of the type I IFN production pathway. It has also been
shown that MAVS has a negative regulatory effect on VDAC1-mediated apoptosis. PB1-F2 affects
MAVS-mediated IFN production by possibly binding to MAVS, which may have two effects: (1) the
inhibition of the type I IFN response and (2) the lifting of the inhibitory effect of MAVS on VDAC1-
mediated cell death. Please see text for further details and discussion. Please note: drawing is not
to scale.

bridge between the mitochondrial cell
death pathway and MAVS-dependent
IFN production.

Since both the antiviral and the apoptosis pathways are mediated through the
mitochondria, the question arises whether
there is a crosstalk between these cellular
processes at the level of the MAVS adaptor
protein. A tight control of the cell
death pathway in regards to IFN production would be desirable since it would be
unfavorable for an infected cell to induce
apoptosis pre-maturely, i.e., before antiviral proteins could be successfully produced
and secreted. Interestingly, a recent report
indicates a negative regulatory role of
MAVS in VDAC1-mediated cell death. The results of the study suggest that MAVS
interacts with VDAC1 at the outer mitochondrial membrane via its proline-rich
domain and thus inhibits the formation of
the VDAC1-containing pore complex that
would lead to the efflux of cytochrome c
to initiate apoptosis. Of note, a pro-apoptotic function for MAVS has also been
described which is executed via different
mechanisms. Overall, the function of
MAVS in the regulation of apoptosis is
more complex than previously thought.

The Multifunctional Influenza A
Virus Protein PB1-F2:
Are its Functions Linked?

PB1-F2 has been shown to localize to mitochondria via its mitochondrial localization
sequence in the C-terminus. It has been
demonstrated to self-oligomerize to form
pores in the mitochondrial membrane and it can also interact with VDAC1 and
ANT3 to promote apoptosis. In addition, PB1-F2 inhibits MAVS-mediated
IFN production, possibly by binding to
the MAVS adaptor protein. We hypothesize that the interaction of PB1-F2 with
MAVS has two effects: (1) the decrease in
IFN production and (2) the promotion of
VDAC1-mediated cell death (Fig. 3). This
way, influenza virus can “kill” two undesired cellular processes, i.e., IFN production and inhibition of apoptosis by MAVS,
with one protein, PB1-F2. Based on the
previously described findings by Xu et al.
and preliminary data from our laboratory,
we propose that PB1-F2 disrupts the interaction between MAVS and VDAC1, thus
lifting the inhibitory effect of MAVS on
VDAC1 (Fig. 3). In the absence of the negative regulatory action of MAVS, VDAC1

www.landesbioscience.com
Virulence
545

by the NIAID grant P01AI058113 and
the Center of Research in Influenza
Pathogenesis (CRIP, NIAID contract
HHSN266200700010C). We would like
to thank Natalie Pica and Irina Margine
for helpful discussions.

References

1. Zamarin D, Garcia-Sastre A, Xiao X, Wang R, Palese P. Influenza virus PB1-F2 protein induces cell death through mitochondrial ANT3 and VDAC1. PLoS Pathog 2005; 1:4; PMID: 16201016; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0010004.
2. Chen W, Calvo PA, Malide D, Gibbs J, Schubert U, Bacik I, et al. A novel influenza A virus mitochondrial protein that induces cell death. Nat Med 2001; 7:1306-12; PMID: 11726970; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm1201-306.
3. Zamarin D, Ortigoza MB, Palese P. Influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein contributes to viral pathogenesis in mice. J Virol 2006; 80:7976-83; PMID: 16873254; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00415-06.
4. McAuley JL, Chipuk JE, Boyd KL, Van De Velde N, Green DR, McCullers JA. PB1-F2 proteins from H5N1 and 20 century pandemic influenza viruses cause immunopathology. PLoS Pathog 2010; 6:1001014; PMID: 20661425; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1001014.
5. Conenello GM, Zamarin D, Perrone LA, Tumpey T, Palese P. A single mutation in the PB1-F2 of H5N1 (HK/97) and 1918 influenza A viruses contributes to increased virulence. PLoS Pathog 2007; 3:1414-21; PMID: 17922571; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0030141.
6. Conenello GM, Tisoncik JR, Rosenzweig E, Varga ZT, Palese P, Katze MG. A single N66S mutation in the PB1-F2 protein of influenza A virus increases virulence by inhibiting the early interferon response in vivo. J Virol 2011; 85:652-62; PMID: 21084483; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01987-10.
7. McAuley JL, Hornung F, Boyd KL, Smith AM, McKeon R, Bennink J, et al. Expression of the 1918 influenza A virus PB1-F2 enhances the pathogenesis of viral and secondary bacterial pneumonia. Cell Host Microbe 2007; 2:240-9; PMID: 18005742; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2007.09.001.
8. Hai R, Schmolke M, Varga ZT, Manicassamy B, Wang TT, Belser JA, et al. PB1-F2 expression by the 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus has minimal impact on virulence in animal models. J Virol 2010; 84:4442-50; PMID: 20181699; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02717-09.
9. Mazur I, Anhlan D, Mitzner D, Wixler L, Schubert U, Ludwig S. The proapoptotic influenza A virus protein PB1-F2 regulates viral polymerase activity by interaction with the PB1 protein. Cell Microbiol 2008; 10:1140-52; PMID: 18182088; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01116.x.
10. McAuley JL, Zhang K, McCullers JA. The effects of influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein on polymerase activity are strain specific and do not impact pathogenesis. J Virol 2010; 84:558-64; PMID: 19828614; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01785-09.
11. Varga ZT, Ramos I, Hai R, Garcia-Sastre A, Fernandez-Sesma A, Palese P. The influenza virus protein PB1-F2 inhibits the induction of type I interferon at the level of the MAVS adaptor protein. PLoS Pathog 2011; 7:1002067; PMID: 21695240; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1002067.
12. Garcia-Sastre A, Egorov A, Matassov D, Brandt S, Levy DE, Durbin JE, et al. Influenza A virus lacking the NS1 gene replicates in interferon-deficient systems. Virology 1998; 252:324-30; PMID: 9878611; http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/viro.1998.9508.
13. Kochs G, Garcia-Sastre A, Martinez-Sobrido L. Multiple anti-interferon actions of the influenza A virus NS1 protein. J Virol 2007; 81:7011-21; PMID: 17442719; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02581-06.
14. Hale BG, Randall RE, Ortin J, Jackson D. The multifunctional NS1 protein of influenza A viruses. J Gen Virol 2008; 89:2359-76; PMID: 18796704; http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/vir.0.2008/004606-0.
15. Baum A, Garcia-Sastre A. Differential recognition of viral RNA by RIG-I. Virulence 2011; 2:166-9; PMID: 21422808; http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/viru.2.2.15481.
16. Onoguchi K, Onomoto K, Takamatsu S, Jogi M, Takemura A, Morimoto S, et al. Virus-infection or 5'ppp-RNA activates antiviral signal through redistribution of IPS-1 mediated by MFN1. PLoS Pathog 2010; 6:1001012; PMID: 20661427; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1001012.
17. Yasukawa K, Oshiumi H, Takeda M, Ishihara N, Yanagi Y, Seya T, et al. Mitofusin 2 inhibits mitochondrial antiviral signaling. Sci Signal 2009; 2:47; PMID: 19690333; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2000287.
18. Tang ED, Wang CY. MAVS self-association mediates antiviral innate immune signaling. J Virol 2009; 83:3420-8; PMID: 19193783; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02623-08.
19. Hou F, Sun L, Zheng H, Skaug B, Jiang QX, Chen ZJ. MAVS forms functional prion-like aggregates to activate and propagate antiviral innate immune response. Cell 2011; 146:448-61; PMID: 21782231; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.041.
20. Koshiba T, Yasukawa K, Yanagi Y, Kawabata S. Mitochondrial membrane potential is required for MAVS-mediated antiviral signaling. Sci Signal 2011; 4:7; PMID: 21285412; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2001147.
21. Zhirnov OP, Konakova TE, Wolff T, Klank HD. NS1 protein of influenza A virus downregulates apoptosis. J Virol 2002; 76:1617-25; PMID: 11799156; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.76.4.1617-25.2002.
22. Zhirnov OP, Klank HD. Control of apoptosis in influenza virus-infected cells by upregulation of Akt and p53 signaling. Apoptosis 2007; 12:1419-32; PMID: 17468837; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10495-007-0071-y.
23. Wurzer WJ, Planz O, Ehrhardt C, Giner M, Silberzahn T, Pleschka S, et al. Caspase 3 activation is essential for efficient influenza virus propagation. EMBO J 2003; 22:2717-28; PMID: 12773387; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg279.
24. Wurzer WJ, Ehrhardt C, Pleschka S, Berberich-Siebelt F, Wolff T, Walczak H, et al. NF-kappaB-dependent induction of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and Fas/FasL is crucial for efficient influenza virus propagation. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:30931-7; PMID: 15143063; http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M403258200.
25. Xu Y, Zhong H, Shi W. MAVS protects cells from apoptosis by negatively regulating VDAC1. Mol Cell Biochem 2011; In press; PMID: 21110072.
26. Chattopadhyay S, Marques JT, Yamashita M, Peters KL, Smith K, Desai A, et al. Viral apoptosis is induced by IRF-3-mediated activation of Bax. EMBO J 2010; 29:1762-73; PMID: 20360684; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.50.
27. Lei Y, Moore CB, Liesman RM, O'Connor BP, Bergstralh DT, Chen ZJ, et al. MAVS-mediated apoptosis and its inhibition by viral proteins. PLoS ONE 2009; 4:5466; PMID: 19404494; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005466.
28. Li HM, Fujikura D, Harada T, Uehara J, Kawai T, Akira S, et al. IPS-1 is crucial for DAP3-mediated anoikis induction by caspase-8 activation. Cell Death Differ 2009; 16:1615-21; PMID: 19644511; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2009.77.
29. Gibbs JS, Malide D, Hornung F, Bennink JR, Yewdell JW. The influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein targets the inner mitochondrial membrane via a predicted basic amphipathic helix that disrupts mitochondrial function. J Virol 2003; 77:7214-24; PMID: 12805420; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JVI.77.13.7214-24.2003.
30. Bruns K, Studtrucker N, Sharma A, Fossen T, Mitzner D, Eissmann A, et al. Structural characterization and oligomerization of PB1-F2, a pro-apoptotic influenza A virus protein. J Biol Chem 2007; 282:353-63; PMID: 17052982; http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M606494200.
