
The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

**The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biocel

---

**Review**

**Transcription factors and coactivators controlling nutrient and hormonal regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis**

Sarawut Jitrapakdee*

Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand

---

**ARTICLE INFO**

Article history:

- Received 5 August 2011
- Received in revised form 30 September 2011
- Accepted 4 October 2011
- Available online 8 October 2011

Keywords:
- Coactivator
- Gluconeogenesis
- Liver
- Metabolism
- Transcription factor

---

**ABSTRACT**

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is a major pathway that maintains normal plasma glucose levels during prolonged starvation. The aim of this review is to provide insights into the integration of transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenic enzyme genes in response to nutritional and hormonal changes. The roles of transcription factors/co-regulators in response to those factors will be discussed. Overall, glucagon and glucocorticoids are positive regulators of gluconeogenesis. Glucagon, via cAMP, promotes the interaction of cAMP-responsive binding protein with CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 2 which facilitates its binding to cAMP-responsive elements (CREs). The response to glucocorticoids is mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor that binds to glucocorticoid responsive elements (GREs) in the promoters of gluconeogenic genes. These CREs and GREs may be arranged as distinct elements or combined to form a “unit” to ensure the maximal transcriptional response to these hormones. The hepatocyte nuclear factors, forkhead O box, and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α can also synergistically increase transcription of gluconeogenic genes. Surtuin 1, an energy sensor can also modify the transcriptional activity of some of these transcription factors. In contrast, insulin secreted during fed conditions acts to repress transcription of gluconeogenic enzymes. This is achieved via activation of Akt/PKB and the consequent disruption of interactions between certain transcription factors/coactivators and their positive response elements in the promoters of those genes. Hypothalamic signaling via the insulin/leptin axis also regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis. Mice lacking the above transcription factors/coactivators show impaired gluconeogenesis, indicating their essential roles in the control of this vital metabolic process.

© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

**Contents**

1. Introduction ..... 34
2. Gluconeogenesis ..... 34
   2.1. Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) ..... 34
   2.2. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) ..... 34
   2.3. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) ..... 34
   2.4. Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) ..... 35
3. Transcription factors controlling gluconeogenesis ..... 35
   3.1. cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB) ..... 35
   3.2. Forkhead O box 1 (FoxO1) ..... 38

---

**Abbreviations:** Akt/PKB, acutely transforming retrovirus AKT8 in rodent T cell lymphoma/protein kinase B; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; CBP, CREB-binding protein; C/EBP, CCAAT enhancer binding protein; CNS, central nervous system; CREB, cAMP-responsive binding protein; CRE, cAMP-responsive element; CRU, cAMP-responsive unit; CRC2/TORC2, CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 2; DAX-1, dosage-sensitive sex reversal adrenal hypoplasia congenital critical region on the X chromosome gene 1; DUSP4, dual specificity protein phosphatase 4; EGR1, early growth response 1; FBPase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase; FoxO, forkhead O box; G6Pase, glucose-6-phosphatase; GCN5, histone acetyltransferase GCN5; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; GREs, glucocorticoid responsive elements; GRU, glucocorticoid responsive unit; HNF, hepatocyte nuclear factor; NR4A1, nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 1; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; PGC1α, PPARγ coactivator 1α; PFK2/FBPase2, phosphofructokinase 2/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase; PKA, protein kinase A; PKC1/λ, protein kinase C 1/λ; SHP, small heterodimer partner; SIK2, serine/threonine-protein kinase SIK2; SIRT1, NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-1; SRC-1, steroid receptor coactivator 1; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.

* Tel.: +66 2 201 5458; fax: +66 2 354 7174.
E-mail address: scsji@mahidol.ac.th

1357-2725/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.biocel.2011.10.001

S. Jitrapakdee / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

| 3.3. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) | 39 |
| --- | --- |
| 3.4. Glucocorticoid receptor: tight control with tissue-specific transcription factors | 39 |
| 3.5. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α) | 40 |
| 3.6. CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) | 41 |
| 4. Regulation of gluconeogenesis via brain action | 41 |
| 5. Hepatic gluconeogenesis is a target of an anti-diabetic drug | 42 |
| 6. Conclusion and future directions | 42 |
| Acknowledgements | 43 |
| References | 43 |

---

### 1. Introduction

Glucose homeostasis is tightly regulated to meet energy demands during the starvation/feeding cycle in animals. Although fat and protein can be mobilized from adipose tissue and muscle, respectively, to supply energy for various organs during prolonged starvation, red blood cells and the brain primarily rely on glucose as their fuel source. During fed conditions, insulin is secreted from pancreatic β-cells in response to the elevated level of plasma glucose. Pancreatic β-cells possess the machinery that senses the rapid increase in plasma glucose during the postprandial period. This machinery includes the expression of glucokinase, high rates of anaplerosis and pyruvate cycling, and an abundance of ATP-sensitive potassium channels which provide “coupling factors” that trigger insulin exocytosis (Maechler and Wollheim, 2001). Binding of insulin to its receptor on the plasma membrane of target cells, i.e., muscle, adipose tissue and liver, results in the rapid uptake of glucose into these cells (Saltiel and Kahn, 2001). In skeletal muscle, glucose is stored as glycogen through glycogenesis, while in adipose tissue glucose is converted to triglycerides through de novo fatty acid synthesis (Fig. 1). In the liver, insulin inhibits glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis while stimulating glycolysis and the synthesis of glycogen and triglycerides (Saltiel and Kahn, 2001). Therefore, the outcome of insulin action is the reduction of plasma glucose levels in the body. During starvation (Fig. 1), when the level of glucose is low, pancreatic α-cells secrete glucagon which stimulates the mobilization of fat from the adipose tissue to the skeletal muscle for β-oxidation. In the liver, glucagon and glucocorticoids stimulate glycogenolysis to supply glucose to red blood cells and the brain while the long term effect of these hormones is the stimulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis (Jiang and Zhang, 2003) (Fig. 1).

### 2. Gluconeogenesis

Gluconeogenesis is the formation of glucose from non-carbohydrate precursors, namely, pyruvate, lactate, glycerol and glucogenic amino acids (Fig. 2). This biochemical pathway occurs principally in the liver and is essential for survival during prolonged starvation. It also plays a major role in the disposal of lactate and the maintenance of glucose during exercise (Corssmit et al., 2001). Gluconeogenesis requires four additional enzymes which bypass the three irreversible reactions catalyzed by the glycolytic enzymes pyruvate kinase, phosphofructokinase and hexokinase. These four gluconeogenic enzymes are pyruvate carboxylase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and glucose-6-phosphatase.

#### 2.1. Pyruvate carboxylase (PC)

PC catalyzes the first committed step of gluconeogenesis by converting pyruvate (derived from alanine via alanine aminotransferase or from lactate via lactate dehydrogenase) to oxaloacetate (Utter and Keech, 1960). Oxaloacetate is then converted to phosphoenolpyruvate by mitochondrial or cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (see Section 2.2). PC from most sources is allosterically activated by acetyl-CoA (Scrutton et al., 1965). PC also plays non-gluconeogenic roles including lipogenesis and glyceroneogenesis in white adipose tissue (Reshef et al., 2003), glutamate synthesis in astrocytes (Hertz et al., 1999) and glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic β-cells (Hasan et al., 2008) (for review see Jitrapakdee et al., 2006, 2008).

In rat and mouse, the PC gene is regulated by two alternative promoters (Jitrapakdee et al., 1997, 2001), while in bovine (Hazelton et al., 2008a) and human (Wang et al., 2008) PC gene is regulated by three promoters. The use of alternative promoters results in the production of alternative transcripts with different 5′-untranslated regions (Jitrapakdee et al., 1997, 2001). In rat and bovine, these mRNA variants possess different translational efficiencies, possibly through the tendency to form secondary structures at their 5′-untranslated regions which obstruct ribosome entry (Jitrapakdee et al., 1998; Hazelton et al., 2008b). In rat, the proximal promoter is activated under gluconeogenic and lipogenic conditions (in the liver and adipose, respectively), while the distal promoter is activated during glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic β-cells (Jitrapakdee et al., 1998). In contrast, the physiological role of three alternative promoters of the PC gene in bovine (White et al., 2011a,b) and human (Wang et al., 2008) is not clearly understood.

#### 2.2. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)

PEPCK catalyzes the GTP-dependent conversion of oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate (Hanson and Reshef, 1997). There are two forms of PEPCK, cytosolic and mitochondrial, which are encoded by two different nuclear genes (Hanson and Reshef, 1997). Mitochondrial PEPCK readily converts the oxaloacetate formed in the mitochondria to phosphoenolpyruvate. In order for oxaloacetate to enter the cytosol where it is a substrate for cytosolic PEPCK, it is first converted to malate by mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase. Malate is then exported to the cytosol where it is converted back to oxaloacetate by cytosolic malate dehydrogenase (Fig. 2). Mitochondrial PEPCK is proposed to support gluconeogenesis from lactate while cytosolic PEPCK is proposed to support gluconeogenesis from glucogenic amino acids (Hanson and Reshef, 1997). Unlike most metabolic enzymes, PEPCK is not subject to allosteric or other post-translational regulation but is instead multi-hormonally controlled at the transcriptional level as evidenced by the presence of insulin-, glucocorticoid receptor-, cAMP- and thyroid hormone-responsive elements in its promoter (Hanson and Reshef, 1997; Yang et al., 2009a,b). In contrast to the cytosolic PEPCK, the transcriptional regulation of mitochondrial PEPCK is largely unknown.

#### 2.3. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase)

FBPase catalyzes the Mg²⁺-dependent hydrolysis of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to fructose-6-phosphate. Two isoforms of FBPase, FBPase-1 and FBPase-2, have been identified and each is encoded by separate genes. The function of FBPase-2, which is expressed in

S. Jitrapakdee / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

A Feeding
B Starvation

pancreas
brain
pancreas
brain

insulin
glucagon

De novo fat
synthesis
adipocyte
glycolysis
glycogenesis
De novo fat
synthesis
+ +
glycogenesis
myocyte
RBC
FFA
adipocyte
myocyte
RBC
glycerol
amino acid
lactate
gluconeogenesis
glycogenolysis
+
glucose
glucose

Fig. 1. Hormonal regulation of fuel during starvation and feeding. (A) Elevated levels of glucose during the postprandial period stimulate insulin release from pancreatic β-cells. Once it reaches its target tissues, insulin stimulates glycolysis and glycogenesis in muscle and liver while inhibiting glycogenolysis and hepatic gluconeogenesis to prevent hyperglycemia. Insulin also stimulates de novo fatty acid synthesis in liver and adipose tissue. The mobilization of triglycerides from liver to adipose tissue is also stimulated by insulin. (B) During starvation, pancreatic α-cells release glucagon in response to low levels of glucose. Glucagon stimulates fat mobilization from adipose tissue to skeletal muscle for β-oxidation to release energy. Glycerol released from lipolysis, amino acids from muscle protein breakdown, and lactate generated from muscle and red blood cells (RBCs) are transported through the circulation to the liver where they serve as substrates for gluconeogenesis. Glucagon stimulates short-term production of glucose via glycogenolysis while it also stimulates long-term production of glucose via gluconeogenesis. The glucose produced by these two pathways provides fuel for RBCs and the brain. FFA, free fatty acids; RBC, red blood cell; TG, triglycerides. Yellow hexagons, glucose; white circles, triglycerides (TG); pink circles, insulin; green circles, glucagon.

muscle, is largely unknown. FBPase-1 is mainly expressed in the liver and is allosterically inhibited by fructose-2,6-bisphosphate which is produced by the bifunctional enzyme phosphofructokinase 2/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFK2/FBPase2) (O'Brien and Granner, 1996). Although the promoter and enhancer regions of the FBPase-1 gene have been cloned, limited information is available regarding the cis-acting elements that mediate transcriptional regulation of this enzyme under various physiological conditions (El-Maghraibi et al., 1991; Herzog et al., 2000).

2.4. Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase)

The G6Pase enzyme system comprises G6Pase, the glucose-6-phosphate transporter (T1), the glucose transporter (T2) and the inorganic phosphate transporter (T3), all of which are endoplasmic reticulum (ER) bound (Mithieux, 1997). The glucose-6-phosphate transporter functions in transporting glucose-6-phosphate from the cytosol to the ER. G6Pase catalyzes the Mg²⁺-dependent hydrolysis of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose and inorganic phosphate in what is the terminal step of gluconeogenesis. Glucose is then transported across the ER and plasma membranes through the glucose T2 transporter and the GLUT2 transporter, respectively, and released into the circulation. G6Pase is expressed predominantly in the liver and kidney but is also expressed at a much lower level in the intestines. Like PEPCK, G6Pase is regulated at the transcriptional level but not post-translationally. The G6Pase promoter contains multiple binding sites for hormonally responsive transcription factors/coactivators (Hutton and O'Brien, 2009).

Regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis can be controlled via pre-and post-translational mechanisms. Post-translational controls include the regulation of substrate supply and allosteric regulation of enzyme activity, while pre-translational control is achieved through transcription factor mediated activation and repression of genes encoding gluconeogenic enzymes (Corssmit et al., 2001; Klover and Mooney, 2004). The expression of mRNAs encoding these various transcription factors and their activities are controlled by insulin and glucagon which explain how gluconeogenesis is hormonally regulated. Binding sites for multiple transcription factors have been identified in the promoter/enhancer regions of genes encoding gluconeogenic enzymes, suggesting the cooperative interaction of transcription factors during the starvation-induced increase in gluconeogenic gene expression.

3. Transcription factors controlling gluconeogenesis

3.1. cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB)

CREB is a helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factor that is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues and activated during prolonged starvation (Mayr and Montminy, 2001). During the starvation period, pancreatic α-cells release glucagon in response to low levels of plasma glucose. Once it reaches

S. Jitrapakdee / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

Glucose  
G6Pase  
HK  
Glucose-6-P  
Fructose-6-P  
FBPase-1  
PFK  
Fructose-1,6-P  
G3P  
DHAP  
glycerol  
PEPCK-C  
TG  
FFA  
protein  
breakdown  
alanine  
ALT  
pyruvate  
LDH  
lactate  
PK  
PC  
PDH  
oxaloacetate  
MDH  
malate  
oxaloacetate  
citrate  
CS  
α-ketoglutarate  
IDH  
succinyl-CoA  
fumarate  
SDH  
succinate  

Fig. 2. Gluconeogenic/glycolytic pathways and TCA cycle. Lactate and alanine, the products of anaerobic glycolysis and protein breakdown, respectively are converted to pyruvate which is then carboxylated by PC to oxaloacetate. Oxaloacetate is then converted to malate by mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase (MDH) in the TCA cycle. Malate exits mitochondria to the cytoplasm where it is oxidized to oxaloacetate by cytosolic NAD-dependent MDH. Malate is finally converted to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) by PEPCK-C. The multi-step conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to glucose proceeds via reversal of the reactions of glycolysis but requires the gluconeogenic enzymes, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase-1) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), to bypass the irreversible glycolytic reactions catalyzed by phosphofructokinase (PFK) and hexokinase (HK). The glycerol obtained from the hydrolysis of triglycerides (TG) can also enter the gluconeogenic pathway via conversion to dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DHAP). ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CS, citrate synthase; G3P, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; IDH, isocitrate dehydrogenase; α-KDH, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; PK, pyruvate kinase; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase. Gluconeogenic enzymes (purple) and glycolytic enzymes (red) are highlighted.

the hepatocytes, glucagon binds its cognate trimeric G-protein coupled receptor and causes GDP/GTP exchange. This in turn stimulates the activity of the adjacent membrane bound adenyl cyclase to catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP. The rise in intracellular cAMP stimulates the dissociation of the catalytic and regulatory subunits of protein kinase A (PKA) (Authier and Desbuquois, 2008). The catalytic subunit of PKA can then enter the nucleus where it phosphorylates CREB at Ser133 and converts it into the transcriptionally active form. Phospho-CREB is then able to bind to the cAMP-responsive element (CRE), TGACGTCA, located in the promoter of its target genes (Mayr and Montminy, 2001) (Fig. 3A). However, CREB alone cannot produce the maximal effect on transcriptional activation of its target genes – it requires the binding of its coactivator, CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 2 (CRTC2/TORC2). CRTC2/TORC2 has been shown to be a key regulator of glucose homeostasis during fasting (Koo et al., 2005). During fasting CRTC2/TORC2 is localized exclusively in the nucleus where it binds to phospho-CREB and enhances transcription of gluconeogenic genes (Fig. 3). However, when the level of insulin is high, CRTC2/TORC2 undergoes rapid phosphorylation by serine/threonine-protein kinase SIK2 (Dentin et al., 2007) which results in its sequestration in the cytoplasm via interaction with 14-3-3 protein. This extra-nuclear localization of phospho-CRTC2/TORC2 disrupts the transcriptional activity of CREB and results in transcriptional repression of gluconeogenic genes. In addition to phosphorylation, CRTC2/TORC2 activity is also modulated by glycosylation. Exposure of hepatocytes to high concentrations of glucose or glucosamine (an intermediate in the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway) promotes O-glycosylation of CRTC2/TORC2 (Dentin et al., 2008). O-glycosylation at Ser70 and Ser171 by O-glycosyl transferase prevents phosphorylation of these two residues by SIK2, which in turn disrupts interaction of CRTC2/TORC2 with 14-3-3 proteins and promotes CRTC2/TORC2 to remain in the nucleus and stimulate transcription of the G6Pase

S. Jitrapakdee / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

A

STARVATION

glucocorticoid
cytosol
ATP → cAMP → PKA
nucleus
PGC1α-Ac
GR
FoxO-Ac
Sirt1
pCREB
CRCT2
Sirt1
FoxO
G-protein
IR
AktxPKB
GPCR
CREB
PCREB
CRCT2
CRCT2
HNF1α
GR
IRS-A
GRE
IRS-B
CRE1
CRE2
HNF3β/HNF6
HNF3γ
HNF3γ
HNF4α
(-271/-225) (-221/-209) (-180/-166) (-198/-159) (-161/-152) (-136/-129) (-117/-106) (-91/-85) (-81/-75) (-72/-66) (-76/-64)
G6Pase
PGC1α
FoxO
HNF4α
HNF4α
AF1
AF2/IRE
GRE
COUP TF
C/EBP α/β
C/EBP α/β
HNF6
C/EBP α/β
pCREB
dAF2
dAF1
AF1
AF2
AF3
C/EBP
C/EBP
HNF6
C/EBP
CRE
(-1356) (-993) (-455/-431) (-420/-403) (-395/-349) (-327/-321) (-286/-270) (-260/-252) (-259/-246) (-250/-234) (-92/-82)
PEPCK
CRCT2
pCREB
SRC1 C/EBP α
CRE
(-1639/-1631)
PC

B

FED

insulin
cytosol
nucleus
SIK2
FoxO
CRCT2
CRCT2P
CREB
SHP1
SHP1
SHP1
DAX1
PGC1α
HNF1α
nGRE
IRS-A
GRE
IRS-B
CRE1
CRE2
HNF3β/HNF6
HNF3γ
HNF3γ
HNF4α
(-271/-225) (-221/-209) (-180/-166) (-198/-159) (-161/-152) (-136/-129) (-117/-106) (-91/-85) (-81/-75) (-72/-66) (-76/-64)
G6Pase
COUP TF
C/EBP α/β
C/EBP α/β
HNF6
C/EBP α/β
dAF2
dAF1
AF1
AF2
AF3
C/EBP
C/EBP
HNF6
C/EBP
CRE
(-1356) (-993) (-455/-431) (-420/-403) (-395/-349) (-327/-321) (-286/-270) (-260/-252) (-259/-246) (-250/-234) (-92/-82)
PEPCK
SRC1 C/EBP α
CRE
(-1639/-1631)
PC

Fig. 3. Transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenic enzymes, G6Pase, PEPCK and PC in liver. (A) During starvation, glucocorticoids and glucagon are released from the adrenal glands and α-cells of the pancreas, respectively, in response to the hypoglycemic condition. Glucocorticoids bind the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the binary complex is translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus where it binds to glucocorticoid responsive elements (GREs) in the promoters of mouse G6Pase and rat PEPCK genes. In the PC promoter region, C/EBPα interacts with coactivator SRC-1 and activates transcription of the mouse PC gene ([Louet et al., 2010]). Binding of glucagon to its cognate G-protein coupled receptor stimulates activity of adenyl cyclase (AC) which converts ATP to cAMP. The cAMP in turn stimulates protein kinase A(PKA) to phosphorylate the
gene. This modification is proposed to be a factor in the development of type 2 diabetes (Dentin et al., 2008).

Recent work has also shown that there is a coactivator switch controlling CRTC2/TORC2 activity (Liu et al., 2008). Within 6 h of exposure to cAMP, CRTC2/TORC2 in hepatocytes is acetylated by histone acetyltransferase p300 and rendered resistant to ubiquitination. However, when the cAMP level is low, another coactivator – the NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) – deacetylates CRTC2/TORC2 and thereby promotes its degradation (Liu et al., 2008). cAMP has been shown to directly or indirectly increase the abundance of PC, PEPCK, FBPass-1 and G6Pase mRNAs via the CRE/CREB axis in several hepatocyte cell lines.

Glucagon and cAMP increase PC mRNA levels in HepG2 cells (Thonpho et al., 2010), however, this stimulatory effect occurs rather slowly compared to other gluconeogenic enzymes (i.e., the maximal effect is observed 72 h after exposure). The CRE located at −1639/−1631 in the gluconeogenic/lipogenic promoter of the mouse PC gene binds CREB *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Thonpho et al., 2010). cAMP sharply increases PEPCK expression in hepatocytes within the first few hours of exposure and the maximum is reached by 24 h (Lamers et al., 1982; Chrapkiewicz et al., 1982). The CRE unit identified in the rat PEPCK promoter is complicated (Fig. 3). It comprises one CRE located at −92/−82 providing the binding site for CREB; three copies of the CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) binding site for C/EBPα or C/EBPβ; and one AP-1 binding site located at −330/−230 (Quinn et al., 1988; Roesler, 2000; Park et al., 1993). These elements are required for the maximum response to cAMP.

Two CREs (CRE1, −161/−152 and CRE2, −136/−129) have been identified in the promoter of the human G6Pase gene (Lin et al., 1997; Schmoll et al., 1999; Thiel et al., 2005). These two regions are required for cAMP-mediated transcriptional activation of a chimeric reporter gene in HepG2 and H4IIE hepatocyte cell lines. Two similarly located CREs were later identified in the mouse G6Pase gene (Streeper et al., 2000). Consistent with the presence of CREs in the promoters of PC, PEPCK and G6Pase genes, Herzig et al. (2001) showed that transgenic mice carrying a dominant negative mutant of CREB display impaired gluconeogenesis concomitant with down-regulation of the mRNAs of these enzymes in hepatocytes. Disruption of the CRTC2/TORC2 gene in mice also markedly decreases the expression of PC, PEPCK and G6Pase mRNAs and results in the reduction of hepatic glucose production (Koo et al., 2005; Le Lay et al., 2009).

Unlike other gluconeogenic enzymes, cAMP does not induce expression of the FBPass-1 gene directly but instead exerts its effect through the up-regulation of a nuclear receptor, NR4A1 (Pei et al., 2006). Ectopic expression of NR4A1 in primary mouse hepatocytes increases expression of the FBPass-1 gene. Similarly, adenovirus mediated expression of NR4A1 in mouse liver increases expression of FBPass-1 concomitant with increased hepatic gluconeogenesis. Furthermore, overexpression of a dominant negative NR4A1 mutant in mouse hepatocytes decreases cAMP-mediated transcriptional induction of endogenous NR4A1 expression (Pei et al., 2006). Ectopic expression of this NR4A1 mutant in the livers of type 2 diabetic mice reduces FBPass-1 gene expression, concomitant with lowered levels of plasma glucose, indicating that NR4A1 controls plasma glucose via FBPass-1 expression (Pei et al., 2006). Although the above data clearly indicate that the FBPass-1 gene is a target of NR4A1, the NR4A1-responsive element in the FBPass-1 promoter is unknown. A putative NR4A1-response element located at −3031 relative to the transcription start site has been identified bioinformatically (Pei et al., 2006), but remains to be validated.

### 3.2. Forkhead O box 1 (FoxO1)

The forkhead O box (FoxO) proteins are members of the forkhead (Fox) family of transcription factors. FoxO regulates various biological and metabolic processes including cell proliferation, longevity, energy expenditure and intermediary metabolism (Barthel et al., 2005; Nakae et al., 2008). The FoxO family comprises four members – FoxO1, FoxO3, FoxO4 and FoxO6 – with FoxO1 being the predominant isoform that regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis (Quinn and Yeagley, 2005). The FoxO proteins share a C-terminal transactivation domain and a common N-terminal forkhead domain (also known as the “winged helix” domain) that recognizes a DNA motif referred to as the insulin-responsive element (IRE). FoxO also binds several transcriptional coactivators including CREB-binding protein (CBP), C/EBPα and PGC1α. These interactions are required for the cooperative association with other transcription factors at the promoters of target genes (Barthel et al., 2005). FoxO proteins are also subject to post-translational modification by acetylation and phosphorylation. Acetylation of FoxO at Lys242, Lys245 and Lys246 by CBP/p300 reduces its ability to bind the promoters of its target genes (Matsuzaki et al., 2005); this modification is enhanced when insulin levels are high (Perrot and Rechler, 2005). Interestingly, acetylation increases FoxO’s sensitivity to phosphorylation by Akt/PKB at Ser253 (Matsuzaki et al., 2005). Phosphorylation of FoxO at Ser253, Ser316 and Thr24 promotes binding of 14-3-3 and results in its cytoplasmic sequestration (Hannenhalli and Kaestner, 2009; Daitoku et al., 2011). Conversely, during fasting when insulin levels are low, the Akt/PKB phosphorylation signal is attenuated and FoxO1 is deacetylated by SIRT1 (Brunet et al., 2004; Daitoku et al., 2004; Frescas et al., 2005). These modifications result in the nuclear retention of FoxO1 and enhanced transcriptional activation of PEPCK and G6Pase genes (Fig. 3). Similar to CRTC2/TORC2, O-glycosylation of FoxO1 converts it into a transcriptionally active form which is responsible for the overexpression of PEPCK and G6Pase (Housley et al., 2008).

The mouse G6Pase gene promoter contains two IREs (IRS-A and IRS-B) which form the insulin response unit (IRU). IRS-A is located between nucleotides −221 and −209 while IRS-B is located between −198 and −159 (Fig. 2). IRS-B is absolutely required for insulin-mediated suppression of G6Pase while IRS-A acts as an accessory element that enhances the action of insulin and is recognized by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) (Streeper et al., 1997, 1998). IRS-B is composed of three copies of a T(G/A)TTT motif, designated IRS1-3, which bind FoxO1 with different affinities. Only IRS1 and IRS2 are required for the insulin response (Vander Kooi et al., 2003). Overexpression of FoxO1 promotes its binding to IRS-B and results in transcriptional activation of the G6Pase gene (Vander Kooi et al., 2003; Schmoll et al., 2000). This interaction is disrupted by insulin and overexpression of Akt/PKB, resulting in transcriptional repression of G6Pase (Schmoll et al., 2000). Insulin also inhibits cAMP/dexamethasone-induced G6Pase expression (Schmoll et al., 2000). Although gluconeogenesis also occurs in the kidney cortex, the inhibitory effect of insulin on G6Pase expression is not observed in this tissue due to the limited expression of FoxO1 (Nakae et al., 2001). IRS-B, arranged similarly to that of the mouse gene described above, is also present in the human G6Pase gene (Ayala et al., 1999).

An early study demonstrated that FoxO1 interacts with the IRE (TGTTT) located at −416/−407 in the promoter of the rat PEPCK gene (Durham et al., 1999). This IRE is located within the glucocorticoid accessory unit (see Section 3.4). A PEPCK reporter gene study performed in the rat hepatocyte cell line H4IIE revealed that overexpression of FoxO1 increases PEPCK promoter activity and this stimulatory effect is repressed by insulin (Hall et al., 2000). A later study showed that overexpression of FoxO1 in H4IIE cells increases G6Pase but not PEPCK gene expression (Barthel et al., 2001). Although this cell culture model reveals an uncertain role for FoxO1 in the transcriptional regulation of the PEPCK gene, several studies using mouse models have demonstrated that FoxO1 indeed regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis through both PEPCK and G6Pase.
Transgenic mice carrying a dominant negative FoxO1 mutant in the liver show an 80% reduction in hepatic G6Pase mRNA and a 50% reduction in PEPCK mRNA concomitant with impaired fasting and non-fasting glucose levels (Altomonte et al., 2003). Ectopic expression of this FoxO1 mutant in the livers of db/db mice, which display increased G6Pase and PEPCK expression and increased fasting glucose levels, results in the reduction of G6Pase and PEPCK expression and the lowering of fasting glucose (Altomonte et al., 2003). Similarly, antisense mediated FoxO1 knockout mice display reduced expression of G6Pase and PEPCK mRNAs by 65% and 50%, respectively, as well as decreased hepatic gluconeogenesis (Samuel et al., 2006). Administration of FoxO1 antisense oligonucleotides to the livers of diet-induced obese mice also reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis (Samuel et al., 2006). Matsumoto et al. (2007) showed that liver-specific FoxO1 knockout mice have impaired cAMP-mediated transcriptional induction of G6Pase and PEPCK expression. Furthermore, crossing of the FoxO1 knockout mouse with the insulin receptor (IR) knockout rescues the impaired fasting blood glucose observed in the IR knockout. This strongly indicates that insulin regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis via FoxO1 activity (Matsumoto et al., 2007). Consistent with these findings, mice overexpressing a constitutively active form of FoxO1 display increased PEPCK expression and hepatic gluconeogenesis (Zhang et al., 2006).

### 3.3. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs)

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are liver enriched transcription factors that control liver development and regulate hepatocyte specific expression of genes in adults. There are four HNF subfamilies whose prototypes are HNF1 (homeodomain family), HNF3 (forkhead family), HNF4 (orphan nuclear receptor family) and HNF6 (onecut family) (Costa et al., 2003). All four have been implicated in the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Mutations of HNF4α and HNF1 disrupt glucose homeostasis, causing a specific form of diabetes known as maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): MODY1 and MODY3, respectively (Bell and Polonsky, 2001).

The HNF1 binding site on the G6Pase promoter was first identified by a gel-shift assay and transactivation study (Lin et al., 1997). It was later found that this HNF1α binding site (referred to as IRS-A) acts as an accessory element within the insulin responsive unit (IRU) of the G6Pase promoter (see Section 3.2). Binding of HNF1 to this accessory site was required for maximal insulin-mediated repression of a G6Pase reporter gene (Streeper et al., 1998). HNF1α binding to its cognate binding site (-205/-155) in the PEPCK promoter appears to be involved in its transcriptional regulation in the kidney, especially during metabolic acidosis, but not in the liver (Cassuto et al., 1997, 2003).

In the G6Pase gene promoter, Lin et al. (1997) identified five binding sites for HNF3γ located at -180/-174, -139/-133, -91/-85, -81/-75 and -72/-66. However, only the latter three sites were found to be essential for both basal promoter activity and HNF3γ-induced expression of G6Pase (Lin et al., 1997). Although HNF3γ appears to bind these sites and regulates G6Pase transcription, the expression of the G6Pase gene is not impaired in the hepatocytes of HNF3γ knockout mice. This is likely due to compensation by HNF3α and/or HNF3β in the liver (Kaestner et al., 1998).

The essential role of HNF4α in controlling gluconeogenesis has been demonstrated using liver-specific HNF4α knockout mice whose livers show markedly reduced PEPCK and G6Pase expression (Rhee et al., 2003). HNF4α and HNF3β are also necessary for efficient glucocorticoid-induced expression of the PEPCK gene (see Section 3.4). An HNF4 binding site is located at -76/-64 in the promoter of the mouse G6Pase gene (Boustead et al., 2003) whereas four additional HNF4α binding sites, -718/-713, -672/-667, -511/-516 and +9/+15, are present in the promoter

of the rat G6Pase gene (Rajas et al., 2002). For the PEPCK gene, a single HNF4α binding site has been identified at -455/-431 in its promoter region (Hall et al., 1995).

HNF6 binding sites were identified at -114/-99 and -259/-246 in the promoters of G6Pase and PEPCK genes, respectively. HNF4α and HNF6 are both required for PKA-mediated induction of G6Pase expression. Deletion of the HNF6 binding site (-114/-99) abolished PKA-mediated transcriptional induction of a mouse G6Pase promoter reporter gene (Streeper et al., 2001). Similarly, deletion of any of the HNF4α binding sites located at -672/-667, -76/-64 or +9/+15 in the rat G6Pase promoter, abolished PKA-mediated induction of that reporter gene (Gautier-Stein et al., 2005). It appears that these binding sites for HNF4α provide a tissue-specific platform that is tightly associated with the cAMP-responsive unit (CRU). Both tissue-specific binding sites and the CRU must be present to mediate the PKA response (Gautier-Stein et al., 2005).

The transcriptional activity of HNFs can also be modulated by repressor and corepressor proteins, namely, the small heterodimer partner (SHP) and the dosage-sensitive sex reversal adrenal hypoplasia congenital critical region on the X chromosome gene 1 (DAX-1). Both SHP and DAX-1 are atypical nuclear receptors that lack the classical DNA binding domain but contain the nuclear receptor binding domain at the N-terminus and the ligand binding domain at the C-terminus (Bavner et al., 2005). The bona fide ligands for SHP and DAX-1 are, however, unknown. It appears that these two proteins function as corepressors rather than transcription factors. Both SHP1 and DAX-1 are expressed in several tissues, including the liver, and their expression is reciprocal with that of the gluconeogenic enzymes, that is, their expression is high in the fed condition when plasma insulin is high (Nedumaran et al., 2009). SHP interferes with the binding of HNF3 and HNF6 to their cognate sequences in the promoters of G6Pase and PEPCK genes, and thereby represses transcription of those genes (Kim et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2008). Similarly, SHP inhibits HNF4α-mediated transcription by interfering with its interaction with the transcriptional coactivator CBP (Yamagata et al., 2004). In contrast, DAX-1 interferes with HNF4α binding to G6Pase and PEPCK gene promoters by competing for binding to PGC1α, and thereby inhibits PEPCK and G6Pase expression during fasting (Nedumaran et al., 2009). Adenovirus mediated overexpression of DAX-1 in mice and isolated primary hepatocytes prevents cAMP-induced expression of PEPCK and G6Pase genes in parallel with reduced hepatic gluconeogenesis.

With regard to FBPase-1, HNF4α is capable of transactivating a FBPase-1 promoter reporter construct in HepG2 cells (Yamagata et al., 2004). Similar to PEPCK and G6Pase genes, SHP represses HNF4α-mediated transactivation of the FBPase-1 promoter in these cells possibly by disrupting HNF4α-coactivator complexes (Yamagata et al., 2004).

### 3.4. Glucocorticoid receptor: tight control with tissue-specific transcription factors

Glucocorticoids have long been known to stimulate hepatic gluconeogenesis. These steroid hormones acutely stimulate transcription of PEPCK and G6Pase genes, but not PC and FBPase-1 genes. In general, glucocorticoids exert their stimulatory effects by binding to the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Once bound, the glucocorticoid-GR complex is translocated to the nucleus where it binds to the glucocorticoid responsive elements (GREs) in target genes. The consensus GRE is (T/G)GTACnnnTGTTCT (Schoneveld et al., 2004). In the promoters of the PEPCK and G6Pase genes, the GRE is complex. Their GREs appear to be surrounded by tissue-specific or cAMP-responsive accessory binding sites which combine to form the glucocorticoid responsive unit (GRU) (see Fig. 2).

In the G6Pase gene promoter, the proximal GRU is composed of three GRE sites (-180/-166) flanked upstream by the HNF1α

binding site (IRS-A, –221/–209) and the IRE (IRS-B, –198/–159), and downstream by two CREs (CRE1, –161/–152 and CRE2, –136/–129) and binding sites for HNF3β (–117/–106) and HNF4α (–64/–76) (Vander Kooi et al., 2005). Mutation of any one of the three GREs resulted in 50–75% loss of glucocorticoid-stimulated induction of a chimeric GP6ase reporter. Similarly, mutation of any of the accessory factor binding sites resulted in a 40–75% reduction in the reporter gene activity. Interestingly, the distal region of the promoter (i.e., –271 to –225) contains a negative GRU comprising a negative GRE and negative accessory factor binding sites that confer glucocorticoid-mediated inhibition of G6Pase promoter activity (Vander Kooi et al., 2005).

The GRU in the PEPCK gene promoter is as complicated as that of the G6Pase gene. The PEPCK GRU consists of two distantly situated GRUs: the proximal GRU and the distal GRU. The proximal GRU, located at –455/–321, consists of two GREs (GR1 and GR2 at –395/–349) flanked by accessory factor binding sites AF1 (–455/–431) and AF2 (–420/–403) (Imai et al., 1990) at the 5′ end, and AF3 (–327/–321) (Scott et al., 1996) and CRE (–92/–82) (Imai et al., 1993) at the 3′ end. The chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF) and HNF4α bind to AF1 (Hall et al., 1992; 1995) and AF3 (Scott et al., 1996), while HNF3β preferentially binds AF2 (Wang et al., 1996, 1999). Mutations of GR1 and GR2 caused a marked reduction in glucocorticoid-mediated transcription of a chimeric PEPCK reporter. With GR1 and GR2 intact, mutations of the accessory factor binding sites also caused significant reductions (50–75%) in expression from the PEPCK reporter (Imai et al., 1990, 1993; Scott et al., 1996). These studies indicate cooperation between GR and accessory factors in glucocorticoid-mediated PEPCK gene induction. The positioning of AF1 and AF2 appears to be specific, as swapping these two sites in this GRU reduced the maximal response of the PEPCK reporter gene (Wang et al., 1999). Binding of glucocorticoid receptors to GR1 and GR2 was also greatly facilitated by binding of HNF4α and HNF3β to AF1 and AF2, respectively (Stafford et al., 2001). Ectopic expression of an HNF3β mutant lacking its C-terminal activation domain reduces basal and glucocorticoid-induced expression of the PEPCK gene (Vallet et al., 1995; Wang et al., 2000). Recently, two additional accessory factor binding sites, termed dAF1 (–993) and dAF2 (–1356), were identified by Reshef’s group (Cassuto et al., 2005). These dAF1 and dAF2 sites provide binding sites for HNF4α and FoxO1, respectively, and were shown to function cooperatively with the proximal GRU to promote maximal glucocorticoid-mediated induction of the PEPCK gene (Cassuto et al., 2005). Cassuto et al. (2005) also found that binding of FoxO1, rather than HNF3β, to AF2 is responsible for glucocorticoid-mediated induction of PEPCK. This is consistent with a previous report (Wolfrum et al., 2004).

### 3.5. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α)

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α) was first identified as the transcriptional coactivator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ). PGC-1α consists of four domains, from N- to C-terminus: the transactivation domain which also possesses the nuclear hormone receptor interacting motif; the repression domain which contains phosphorylation sites; the RNA processing domain; and the RNA polymerase interacting domain (Puigserver and Spiegelman, 2003). Although PGC1α plays an important role in mitochondrial biogenesis, β-oxidation, and adaptive thermogenesis in skeletal muscle and brown adipose tissue, it is also involved in the regulation of glucose homeostasis (Puigserver and Spiegelman, 2003). Similar to FoxO, acetylation is a key post-translational modification that regulates the transcriptional activity of PGC1α. Acetylation of PGC1α

by coactivators possessing acetylase activity, including CBP/p300 and GCN5, reduces its transcriptional activity, while deacetylation by SIRT1 increases its activity (Rodgers et al., 2008).

In mice, starvation rapidly induces PGC1α expression in the liver concomitantly with up-regulation of PEPCK and G6Pase expression (Yoon et al., 2001; Rodgers et al., 2005). The rise in PGC1α levels is also correlated with increased activity of SIRT1, which is stimulated by the high concentrations of NAD⁺ and pyruvate associated with periods of starvation (Nemoto et al., 2005; Rodgers et al., 2005). Disruption of the SIRT1 gene in the mouse liver concomitantly reduces gluconeogenic gene expression and impairs glucose homeostasis (Rodgers and Puigserver, 2007). Furthermore, SIRT1 knockdown in the liver lowers diabetes-induced excessive hepatic gluconeogenesis (Erion et al., 2009), indicating the critical role of SIRT1 in the regulation of PGC1α during fasting and the development of diabetes. Ectopic expression of PGC1α in mouse hepatocytes results in increased expression of PEPCK, FBPase-1 and G6Pase mRNAs in parallel with increased hepatic gluconeogenesis, suggesting a role for PGC1α in the regulation of hepatic glucose production (Yoon et al., 2001; Puigserver et al., 2003). While cAMP and dexamethasone increase PGC1α expression, insulin inhibits its expression as demonstrated in three mouse models: (i) mice with streptozotocin-induced β-cell loss, (ii) genetically obese (ob/ob) mice and, (iii) liver-specific insulin receptor knockout mice, all of which show overexpression of PGC-1α and increased expression of PEPCK (Yoon et al., 2001). In a later study, Puigserver et al. (2003) showed that the inhibitory effect of insulin on PGC1α is in fact mediated by the counter hormone glucagon: PGC1α mRNA levels were unaltered in mice subjected to hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps.

Puigserver et al. (2003) proposed that insulin regulates PGC1α through the modulation of FoxO1 activity. PGC1α has been shown to physically interact with FoxO1 and synergistically activate G6Pase promoter activity (Puigserver et al., 2003). When insulin is present, it stimulates a signal transduction cascade leading to phosphorylation and activation of Akt/PKB. This in turn results in the phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of FoxO1, thus inhibiting PEPCK and G6Pase expression (Puigserver et al., 2003). However, Schilling et al. (2006) re-evaluated the PGC-1α/FoxO1 interaction hypothesis. They showed that FoxO1 is not required for synergistic activation of the G6Pase gene by PGC-1α since deletions of all possible FoxO binding sites in the G6Pase promoter did not eliminate this synergistic action. Deletion of the HNF4α binding site, however, dramatically reduced the synergistic effect of PGC-1α on transcriptional activation of the G6Pase promoter (Boustedt et al., 2003; Schilling et al., 2006). This argues against the previous conclusion that PGC-1α regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis via an interaction with FoxO1. By showing that PGC-1α fails to induce G6Pase and PEPCK gene expression during fasting conditions in HNF4α knockout mice, Rhee et al. (2003) confirmed that the interaction of PGC1α with HNF4α is required for the induction of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Although the *bona fide* interaction partner of PGC-1α in the control of glucose homeostasis is still debated, Li et al. (2007) demonstrated that Akt/PKB phosphorylates Ser570 of PGC-1α and thereby converts it into a transcriptionally inactive form that is unable to interact with either FoxO1 or HNF4α. In contrast, PGC1α has been shown to interact with the glucocorticoid receptor to enhance PEPCK gene expression (Yoon et al., 2001).

Although global disruption of PGC1α in several mouse models does not affect the expression of genes encoding gluconeogenic enzymes (Lin et al., 2004; Leone et al., 2005; Burgess et al., 2006), suppression of PGC1α by siRNA in hepatocytes (Koo et al., 2004) or by liver-specific ablation in mice has been shown to impair fasting induced expression of PEPCK and G6Pase genes (Handschin et al., 2005). These latter studies provide evidence of a critical role for PGC1α in controlling fasting-induced gluconeogenesis.

There are conflicting reports regarding PGC1α regulation of FBPas-1 gene expression. Yoon et al. (2001) have shown that adenovirus mediated expression of PGC1α in primary mouse hepatocytes increases both basal and dexamethasone-induced expression of FBPase-1. In contrast, Pei et al. (2006) reported that neither ectopic expression nor suppression of PGC1α in primary hepatocytes affects endogenous levels of FBPase-1 mRNA. These conflicting results may result from different titers of the adenoviruses carrying the PGC1α gene used to infect the primary hepatocytes in these two studies.

### 3.6. CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)

CCAAT enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) are liver enriched transcription factors that function as central regulators of energy production. There are four C/EBP subtypes: C/EBPα, C/EBPβ, C/EBPδ and C/EBPε (Ramji and Foka, 2002). All four isoforms share a common N-terminal basic region and a leucine zipper DNA binding domain that recognizes specific DNA sequences in the promoters of their target genes (Ramji and Foka, 2002). C/EBPs regulate PEPCK gene transcription in a liver-specific manner by binding to three specific sites upstream of the CRE. In fact, these three C/EBP binding sites (-286/-270, -260/-252 and -250/-234) and the downstream CRE (-92/-82) form the structure known as the cAMP-responsive unit (CRU) in the PEPCK promoter (Park et al., 1990). Both CRE and C/EBPα binding sites are required for cAMP-mediated induction of PEPCK gene expression as deletion of either CRE or any one of the C/EBP binding sites abolished cAMP-induced expression of a chimeric PEPCK reporter gene (Liu et al., 1991). Transactivation studies and DNase I footprint analyses of the PEPCK promoter's CRU revealed that not only CREB, but also C/EBPα and C/EBPβ, can bind to the CRE and mediate the response to cAMP, suggesting that CREB and C/EBPs can be functionally substituted during cAMP-induced expression of the PEPCK gene (Park et al., 1990, 1993; Roesler et al., 1998). C/EBPα and C/EBPβ also bind the three C/EBP binding sites on the PEPCK promoter (Park et al., 1993). The alternative binding of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ to these C/EBP binding sites could influence the degree of responsiveness of the PEPCK gene to cAMP (Roesler, 2000). Although the above experiments point to a functional redundancy between C/EBPα and C/EBPβ, deletion of either results in profound effects on gluconeogenesis. The C/EBPα knockout mice have undetectable levels of liver PEPCK mRNA and die within a few hours of birth due to severe hypoglycemia (Wang et al., 1995). While not lethal, the conditional knockout of C/EBPα in the livers of adult mice also results in strongly reduced PEPCK mRNA expression (Lee et al., 1997). In another conditional knockout model, disruption of the C/EBPα gene in the liver, spleen, adipose, pancreas, lung and kidney produces hypoglycemic mice with severely reduced levels of hepatic PEPCK and G6Pase mRNAs (Yang et al., 2005). Despite the markedly reduced basal levels of PEPCK and G6Pase mRNAs, cAMP is still capable of stimulating the expression of both genes in this mouse model. This result indicates that C/EBPα is required for expression of the PEPCK gene under basal conditions but not for cAMP-mediated induction of this gene. These knockout mice die about a month after ablation of the C/EBPα gene due to hypoglycemia, hypophagia, lipodystrophy and other complications (Yang et al., 2005). In the db/db mouse, in which PEPCK mRNA expression is up-regulated, knocking down the level of C/EBP in the liver results in a reduction of PEPCK and G6Pase mRNA expression in parallel with reduced hepatic glucose production (Qiao et al., 2006). Similar to C/EBPα knockout mice, C/EBPβ ablated mice have a very low level of PEPCK mRNA expression and die within a few hours of birth due to severe hypoglycemia (Croniger et al., 1997, 2001). Taken together these observations indicate that C/EBPα and C/EBPβ are critical for postnatal gluconeogenesis.

Steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1, also known as nuclear receptor coactivator 1, NCOA1), a transcriptional coactivator, has recently been shown to regulate transcription of gluconeogenic genes. SRC-1 ablated mice are hypoglycemic secondary to a defect in hepatic gluconeogenesis caused by down-regulation of FBPase-1 and PC but not G6Pase and PEPCK genes (Louet et al., 2010). Despite unaltered PEPCK expression in the intact animal, the isolated hepatocytes of SRC-1 knockout mice show markedly reduced PEPCK mRNA, suggesting that hormonal effects may mask the transcriptional regulation of this gene by SRC-1. SRC-1 interacts with C/EBPα and modulates transcription of the PC gene and this is thought to be a key mechanism to control hepatic gluconeogenesis during periods of prolonged fasting (Louet et al., 2010). Although a transactivation study and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that C/EBPα and SRC-1 interact within the first 600 nucleotides proximal to the transcription start site of the mouse PC gene, the precise binding site of C/EBPα in this enhancer region remains to be determined (Louet et al., 2010). The molecular mechanism by which SRC-1 regulates FBPase-1 expression likewise awaits further study (Louet et al., 2010).

In summary, signaling through glucagon during starvation results in the increased levels of cAMP which stimulates PKA activity and thereby promotes phosphorylation of CREB. Phospho-CREB interacts with CRTC2/TORC2 and binds to the CRE in the promoters of gluconeogenic enzyme genes. CREB also binds to the promoter of the PGC1α gene and stimulates its transcription. As the level of SIRT1 protein and activity are also increased during this period, PGC1α is deacetylated and in turn interacts with FoxO1 and HNF4α to enhance transcription of gluconeogenic genes. Furthermore, high glucocorticoid concentrations during starvation promote transcription of gluconeogenic genes via binding of the GR to GRE’s in their promoter regions. This GR-mediated transcription also requires various HNFs to maximize transcriptional activation of gluconeogenic genes. In contrast, during feeding when the insulin level is high, the attenuation of PKA signaling combines with high protein phosphatase 1 activity to promote the dephosphorylation and transcriptional inactivation of CREB. Insulin signaling through Akt/PKB drives the phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of CRTC2/TORC2 and FoxO1. The nuclear exclusion of CRTC2/TORC2 results in the transcriptional attenuation of the PGC1α gene and thereby limits PGC1α protein abundance. High levels of insulin also decrease the abundance and activity of SIRT1, and therefore, promote conversion of PGC1α into a transcriptionally inactive (i.e., deacetylated) form. These events lead to the transcriptional repression of gluconeogenic genes and the suppression of hepatic glucose production.

### 4. Regulation of gluconeogenesis via brain action

The central nervous system (CNS) has an integral role in the regulation of glucose homeostasis. Studies have shown that insulin signaling in the hypothalamus plays an important role in the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis (Demuro and Silvana, 2006; Sandoval et al., 2009). Mice carrying insulin receptors specifically disrupted in the brain are hyperglycemic and do not suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis during hyperinsulinemic clamp (Brüning et al., 2000). Obici et al. (2002) showed that in the presence of fixed and basal concentrations of plasma insulin, infusion of insulin into the hypothalamus (third cerebral ventricle) suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis, while infusion of inhibitors of insulin signaling blocks this inhibitory effect of insulin in rats. This effect is mediated through the activation of K<sub>ATP</sub>-sensitive potassium channels – rats infused with K<sub>ATP</sub>-sensitive potassium channel blockers and mice lacking the SUR1 subunit of the K<sub>ATP</sub> channel are resistant to the central insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic

gluconeogenesis (Pocai et al., 2005a). Interestingly, inhibition of carnitine palmitoyl transferase I in the brain shows a similar inhibitory effect on hepatic gluconeogenesis and is accompanied by reduced expression of PEPCK and G6Pase genes (Pocai et al., 2005b). The precise mechanism of communication between the hypothalamus and liver is unclear, but it certainly requires efferent signals from the brain to liver (Pocai et al., 2005a, b). Inoue et al. (2006) showed that suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis by centrally administrated insulin involves the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), which has previously been shown to inhibit PEPCK expression (Inoue et al., 2004). Infusion of insulin into the cerebral ventricle in mice induces phosphorylation of STAT3 in the liver and results in decreases in PEPCK expression and hepatic glucose production. This inhibitory effect on gluconeogenesis mediated by insulin action in the brain is eliminated in liver-specific STAT3 knockout mice, confirming the role of STAT3 as a hepatic effector of brain-insulin action (Inoue et al., 2006).

Leptin is an adipocyte derived hormone with important regulatory roles in energy homeostasis. Among the more established actions of leptin is the regulation of food intake via the stimulation and suppression of the hypothalamic anorexigenic and orexigenic neurons, respectively (Cheung et al., 1997; Rossi et al., 1998). This effect is mediated by the binding of leptin to the leptin receptor (LRb) on these neurons, and the subsequent activation of the JAK2/STAT3 signal transduction pathway (Vaisse et al., 1996; Banks et al., 2000). Hypothalamic leptin signaling is also implicated in the control of hepatic gluconeogenesis (Cohen et al., 1996; Rossetti et al., 1997; Raman et al., 2003; Toyoshima et al., 2005). CNS-administration of leptin to MKR mice, a model of T2DM caused by defective insulin signaling in the skeletal muscle, normalizes plasma glucose and reduces the expression of the G6Pase gene, mimicking the insulin effect (Toyoshima et al., 2005). German et al. (2009) reported a similar response to the restoration of leptin signaling in another model of T2DM, the LR-deficient Koletsky (fa<sup>k</sup>/fa<sup>k</sup>) rat. Adenovirus-mediated expression of the LR in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus of these rats promotes insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis and reduced G6Pase and PEPCK gene expression. The precise mechanism for this leptin-mediated enhancement of hepatic insulin action is still unclear; however, increased signal transduction through PI3K in the liver appears to play a role (German et al., 2009). Interestingly, the effects of leptin on hepatic gluconeogenesis appear to differ between normal and diabetic animals. In contrast to the studies described above, systemic or intracerebroventricular administration of leptin to normal rats during hyperinsulinemic clamp increases PEPCK gene expression and the rate of hepatic gluconeogenesis, but due to a compensatory increase in the rate of glycogenolysis, does not affect overall hepatic glucose production (Rossetti et al., 1997; Liu et al., 1998). The molecular mechanism by which leptin exerts its stimulatory effect on hepatic gluconeogenesis in these animals is not clearly understood, although the activations of β3-adrenergic and α-MSH receptors (melanocortin receptor 3 or 4) in the hypothalamus have been reported to recap- ture the above results (Liu et al., 1998; Gutiérrez-Juárez et al., 2004). Progress in this area is all but assured as the potential for leptin-based therapies in the treatment of diabetes continues to be explored.

of the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), multiple pharmacological interventions have been developed with the aim of improving glycemic control and slowing disease progression. These efforts have been paid off by the recent studies which explain the mechanism of action of the anti-diabetic drug, metformin. Although it has been known for quite some time that it stimulates phosphorylation of the cellular sensor kinase AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), the molecular mechanism by which metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis was unknown until recently. Shaw et al. (2005) reported that metformin, acting via AMPK, disrupts the interaction between CREB and CRTC2/TORC2, and thereby prevents binding of the CREB–CRTC2/TORC2 complex to the promoters of PEPCK and G6Pase genes (Shaw et al., 2005; He et al., 2009).

He et al. (2009) later reported that metformin regulates the CREB-binding protein (CBP), another component of the CREB transcription complex, through AMPK phosphorylation. Phosphorylated AMPK activates protein kinase C 1/λ (PKC1/λ) which subsequently phosphorylates CREB at Ser436 and results in the dissociation of CREB–CBP–CRTC2/TORC2 complexes. This in turn results in transcriptional repression of gluconeogenesis. Metformin also acts through SHP to interfere with binding of HNF4 and FoxO to their binding sites in the promoters of G6Pase and PEPCK genes (Kim et al., 2008). Furthermore, Berasi et al. (2006) showed that metformin-induced AMPK phosphorylation stimulates expression of early growth response 1 (EGR1), a transcription factor required to turn on expression of the dual specificity protein phosphatase 4 (DUSP4) gene. DUSP4 is known to regulate p38 MAP kinase, which regulates CREB phosphorylation via PKA activation. Caton et al. (2010) recently identified SIRT1 and histone acetyltransferase GCN5 (also know as KAT2A) as new targets of metformin action in hepatocytes. Under normal circumstances, CRTC2/TORC2 activity is promoted by acetylation whereas deacetylation inactivates its transcriptional activity. Hepatocytes treated with metformin are induced to express SIRT1, an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase, which thereby eliminates their ability to activate transcription of gluco- neogenic genes. Metformin also increases the expression of the acetyltransferase GCN5. Acetylation of PGC1α by GCN5 converts it to an inactive form and thereby inhibits transcription of the PEPCK gene.

Although the above studies convincingly show that metformin suppresses gluconeogenesis via the CREB–CRTC2/TORC2 axis, this idea has recently been re-examined (Foretz et al., 2010). Foretz et al. (2010) have shown that suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis is not eliminated in AMPK ablated mice. They have also shown that inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis by metformin is operated independently of the AMPK pathway via a decrease in hepatic energy state.

6. Conclusion and future directions

The recent studies summarized in this review have greatly advanced our understanding of the transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenesis by various hormones including insulin, glucagon, glucocorticoids and leptin. Insulin and glucagon modulate the transcriptional activities of FoxO, CREB, CRTC2/TORC2, PGC1α and acetylases/deacetylases which in turn cooperate with C/EBPs and HNFs to regulate expression of gluconeogenic genes during the fasting/feeding cycle. As uncontrolled hepatic glucose production is a hallmark of T2DM, identification of key transcriptional regulators that turn these genes on and off will aid the development of drugs able to inhibit episodic increases in hepatic glucose in patients with this disorder. Although there are growing data on the identification of transcription factors that control transcription of PEPCK and G6Pase genes, limited information is available regarding

5. Hepatic gluconeogenesis is a target of an anti-diabetic drug

Immense efforts have gone into unraveling the transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenesis as this biochemical process is critical for maintaining fuel homeostasis. Based on current understandings

regulation of PC and FBPase-1 genes. Progress in the development of new anti-diabetic drugs will require additional insights into the transcriptional regulation of these two enzymes. Importantly, although the transcriptional studies of gluconeogenesis are both satisfying and thrilling, they raise new questions about the relative contribution of each gluconeogenic enzyme to overall gluconeogenesis. **Burgess et al. (2007)** recently reported the surprising observation that PEPCK-deficient mice show only a 40% reduction in gluconeogenic flux despite a 90% reduction in PEPCK protein. A more recent study has also shown that fasting hyperglycemia is not associated with overexpression of PEPCK and G6Pase in patients with poorly controlled T2DM (**Samuel et al., 2009**). The authors also pointed out that PC and FBPase-1, rather than PEPCK and G6Pase, may contribute to the regulation of gluconeogenesis based on the fact that both PC and FBPase-1 are both allosterically regulated. Several earlier studies performing flux and metabolomic analyses also reported that PC rather than PEPCK is a rate-limiting step in controlling overall hepatic gluconeogenesis (**Groen et al., 1986; Argaud et al., 1991; Yang et al., 2006**). These recent pharmacological inventions also indicate that inhibitors of FBPase1 are potential drugs for inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis in patients with T2DM (**Dang et al., 2011; Yoshida et al., 2011; Hebeisen et al., 2011**). These observations challenge the long held paradigm that PEPCK and G6Pase are the most important gluconeogenic enzymes and highlight the importance of looking at the roles and regulation of the lesser studied PC and FBPase-1 in hepatic gluconeogenesis.

### Acknowledgements

Research in S. Jitrapakdee’s laboratory is supported by the Thailand Research Fund (BRG548002), the Commission of Higher Education and the Faculty of Science, Mahidol University. The author thanks Professor John Wallace and Clair Alvino for critical reading of the manuscript.

### References

Altomonte J, Richter A, Harbaran S, Suriawinata J, Nakae J, Thung SN, et al. Inhibition of Foxo1 function is associated with improved fasting glycemia in diabetic mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2003;285:E718–28.

Argaud D, Halimi S, Catelloni F, Leverve XM. Inhibition of gluconeogenesis in isolated rat hepatocytes after chronic treatment with phenobarbital. Biochem J 1991;280:663–9.

Authier F, Desbuquois B. Glucagon receptors. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65:1880–99.

Ayala J, Streeper R, Desgrosellier J, Durham S, Suwanichkul A, Svitek C, et al. Conservation of an insulin response unit between mouse and human glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene promoters: transcription factor FKHR binds the insulin response sequence. Diabetes 1999;48:1885–9.

Banks AS, Davis SM, Bates SH, Myers Jr MG. Activation of downstream signals by the long form of the leptin receptor. J Biol Chem 2000;275:14563–72.

Barthel A, Schmoll D, Kruger KD, Bahrenberg G, Walther R, Roth RA, et al. Differential regulation of endogenous glucose-6-phosphatase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression by the forkhead transcription factor FKHR in H4IIE-hepatoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001;285:897–902.

Barthel A, Schmoll D, Unterman TG. FoxO proteins in insulin action and metabolism. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2005;16:183–9.

Bavner A, Sanyal S, Gustafsson JA, Treuter E. Transcriptional corepression by SHP: molecular mechanisms and physiological consequences. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2005;16:478–88.

Bell GI, Polonsky KS. Diabetes mellitus and genetically programmed defects in β-cell function. Nature 2001;414:788–91.

Berasi SP, Huard C, Li D, Shih HH, Sun Y, Zhong W, et al. Inhibition of gluconeogenesis through transcriptional activation of EGR1 and DUSP4 by AMP-activated kinase. J Biol Chem 2006;281:27167–77.

Boustead JN, Stadelmaier BT, Eeds AM, Wiebe PO, Svitek CA, Oeser JK, et al. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha mediates the stimulatory effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1 alpha (PGC-1α) on glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription in H4IIE cells. Biochem J 2003;369:17–22.

Brunet A, Sweeney LB, Sturgill JF, Chua KF, Greer PL, Lin Y, et al. Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase. Science 2004;303:2011–5.

Brüning JC, Gautam D, Burks DJ, Gillette J, Schubert M, Orban PC, et al. Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. Science 2000;289:2122–5.

Burgess SC, Leone TC, Wende AR, Croce MA, Chen Z, Sherry AD, et al. Diminished hepatic gluconeogenesis via defects in tricarboxylic acid cycle flux in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator-1 (PGC-1)-deficient mice. J Biol Chem 2006;281:19000–8.

Burgess SC, He TT, Yan Z, Lindner J, Sherry AD, Malloy CR, et al. Cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase does not solely control the rate of hepatic gluconeogenesis in the intact mouse liver. Cell Metab 2007;5:313–20.

Cassuto H, Olswang Y, Livoff AF, Nechushtan H, Hanson RW, Reshef L. Involvement of HNF-1 in the regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression in the kidney. FEBS Lett 1997;412:597–602.

Cassuto H, Olswang Y, Heinemann S, Sabbagh K, Hanson RW, Reshef L. The transcriptional regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene in the kidney requires the HNF-1 binding site of the gene. Gene 2003;318:177–84.

Cassuto H, Kochan K, Chakravarty K, Cohen H, Blum B, Olswang Y, et al. Glucocorticoids regulate transcription of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in the liver via an extended glucocorticoid regulatory unit. J Biol Chem 2005;280:33873–84.

Caton PW, Nayuni NK, Kieswich J, Khan NQ, Yaqoob MM, Corder R. Metformin suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis through induction of SIRT1 and GCN5. J Endocrinol 2010;205:97–106.

Cheung CC, Clifton DK, Steiner RA. Proopiomelanocortin neurons are direct targets for leptin in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology 1997;138:4489–92.

Chrapkiewicz N, Beale E, Granner D. Induction of the messenger ribonucleic acid coding for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in H4-II-E cells. Evidence for a nuclear effect of cyclic AMP. J Biol Chem 1982;257:14428–32.

Cohen B, Novick D, Rubinstein M. Modulation of insulin activities by leptin. Science 1996;274:1185–8.

Corssmit E, Romijn J, Sauerwein H. Review article: regulation of glucose production with special attention to nonclassical regulatory mechanisms: a review. Metabolism 2001;50:742–55.

Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV, Holterman AXL, Wang X. Transcription factors in liver development, differentiation, and regeneration. Hepatology 2003;38:1331–47.

Croniger C, Trus M, Lysek-Stupp K, Cohen H, Liu Y, Darlington GJ, et al. Role of the isoforms of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein in the initiation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) gene transcription at birth. J Biol Chem 1997;272:26306–12.

Croniger CM, Millward C, Yang J, Kawai Y, Arinze IJ, Liu S, et al. Mice with a deletion in the gene for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein have an attenuated response to cAMP and impaired carbohydrate metabolism. J Biol Chem 2001;276:629–38.

Dang Q, Liu Y, Cashion DK, Kasibhatla SR, Jiang T, Taplin F, et al. Discovery of a series of phosphonic acid-containing thiazoles and orally bioavailable diamide prodrugs that lower glucose in diabetic animals through inhibition of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. J Med Chem 2011;54:153–65.

Daitoku H, Hatta M, Matsuzaki H, Aratani S, Ohshima T, Miyagishi M, et al. Silent information regulator 2 potentiates FoxO1-mediated transcription through its deacetylase activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:10042–7.

Daitoku H, Sakamaki J, Fukamizu A. Regulation of FoxO transcription factors by acetylation and protein-protein interaction. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011;1813:1954–60.

Demuro G, Silvana O. Central nervous system and control of endogenous glucose production. Curr Diab Rep 2006;6:1988–93.

Dentin R, Liu Y, Koo SH, Hedrick S, Vargas T, Heredia J, et al. Insulin modulates gluconeogenesis by inhibition of the coactivator TORC2. Nature 2007;449:366–9.

Dentin R, Hedrick R, Xie J, Montminy M. Hepatic glucose sensing via the CREB coactivator CRTC2. Science 2008;319:1402–5.

Durham SK, Suwanichkul A, Scheimann AO, Yee D, Jackson JG, Barr FG, et al. FKHR binds the insulin response element in the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 promoter. Endocrinology 1999;140:3140–6.

El-Maghrabi MR, Lange A, Kümmel L, Pilkis S. The rat fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase gene. Structure and regulation of expression. J Biol Chem 1991;266:2115–20.

Erion DM, Yonemitsu S, Nie Y, Nagai Y, Gillum MP, Hsiao JJ, et al. SirT1 knockdown in liver decreases basal hepatic glucose production and increases hepatic insulin responsiveness in diabetic rats. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:11288–93.

Foretz M, Hébrard S, Leclerc J, Zarrinpashneh E, Soty M, Mithieux G, et al. Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis in mice independently of the LKB1/AMPK pathway via a decrease in hepatic energy state. J Clin Invest 2010;120:2355–69.

Frescas D, Valenti L, Accili D. Nuclear trapping of the forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 via Sirt-dependent deacetylation promotes expression of gluconeogenic genes. J Biol Chem 2005;280:20589–95.

Gautier-Stein A, Mithieux G, Rajas F. A distal region involving hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α and CAAT/enhancer binding protein markedly potentiates the protein kinase A stimulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase promoter. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:163–74.

German J, Kim F, Schwartz GJ, Havel PJ, Rhodes CJ, Schwartz MW, et al. Hypothalamic leptin signaling regulates hepatic insulin sensitivity via a neurocircuit involving the vagus nerve. Endocrinology 2009;150:4502–11.

Groen AK, van Roermund CW, Vervoorn RC, Tager JM. Control of gluconeogenesis in rat liver cells. Flux control coefficients of the enzyme in gluconeogenic pathway in the absence and presence of glucagon. Biochem J 1986;237:379–89.

Gutiérrez-Juárez R, Obici S, Rossetti L. Melanocortin-independent effects of leptin on hepatic glucose fluxes. J Biol Chem 2004;279:49704–15.

Hall RK, Scott DK, Noisin EL, Lucas PC, Granner DK. Activation of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene retinoic acid response element is dependent on a retinoic acid receptor/coregulator complex. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:5527–35.

Hall RK, Sladek FM, Granner DK. The orphan receptors COUP-TF and HNF-4 serve as accessory factors required for induction of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene transcription by glucocorticoids. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:412–6.

Hall RK, Yamasaki T, Kucera T, Waltner-Law M, O’Brien R, Granner DK. Regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-1 gene expression by insulin. J Biol Chem 2000;275:30169–75.

Handschin C, Lin J, Rhee J, Peyer AK, Chin S, Wu PH, et al. Nutritional regulation of hepatic heme biosynthesis and porphyria through PGC-1 [alpha]. Cell 2005;122:505–15.

Hannenhalli S, Kaestner KH. The evolution of Fox genes and their role in development and disease. Nat Rev Genet 2009;10:233–40.

Hanson RW, Reshef L. Regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) gene expression. Ann Rev Biochem 1997;66:581–611.

Hasan NM, Longacre MJ, Stoker SW, Boonsaen T, Jitrapakdee S, Kendrick MA, et al. Impaired anaplerosis and insulin secretion in insulinoma cells caused by siRNA-mediated suppression of pyruvate carboxylase. J Biol Chem 2008;283:28048–59.

Hazelton SR, Spurlock DM, Bidwell CA, Donkin SS. Cloning the genomic sequence and identification of promoter regions of bovine pyruvate carboxylase. J Dairy Sci 2008a;91:91–9.

Hazelton SR, Koser SL, Bidwell CA, Donkin SS. Translational efficiency of bovine pyruvate carboxylase 5′-untranslated region messenger ribonucleic acid variants. J Anim Sci 2008b;86:3401–8.

He L, Sabet A, Djedjos S, Miller R, Sun X, Hussain MA, et al. Metformin and insulin suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis through phosphorylation of CREB binding protein. Cell 2009;137:635–46.

Hebeisen P, Haap W, Kuhn B, Mohr P, Wessel HP, Zutter U, et al. Orally active aminopyridines as inhibitors of tetrameric fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2011;21:3237–42.

Hertz L, Dringen R, Schousboe A, Robinson SR. Astrocytes: glutamate producers for neurons. J Neurosci Res 1999;57:417–28.

Herzig S, Long F, Jhala US, Hedrick S, Quinn R, Bauer A, et al. CREB regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis through the coactivator PGC-1. Nature 2001;413:179–83.

Herzog B, Waltner-Law M, Scott DK, Eschrich K, Granner DK. Characterization of the human liver fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase gene promoter. Biochem J 2000;351:385–92.

Housley MP, Rodgers JT, Udeshi ND, Kelly TJ, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, et al. O-GlcNAC regulates FoxO activation in response to glucose. J Biol Chem 2008;283:16283–92.

Hutton JC, O’Brien RM. Glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene family. J Biol Chem 2009;284:29241–5.

Imai E, Stromstedt PE, Quinn PJ, Carlstedt-Duke J, Gustafsson JA, Granner DK. Characterization of a complex glucocorticoid response unit in the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene. Mol Cell Biol 1990;10:4712–9.

Imai E, Miner JN, Mitchell JA, Yamamoto KR, Granner DK. Glucocorticoid receptor-cAMP response element-binding protein interaction and the response of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene to glucocorticoids. J Biol Chem 1993;268:5353–6.

Inoue H, Ogawa W, Ozaki M, Haga S, Matsumoto M, Furukawa K, et al. Role of STAT-3 in regulation of hepatic gluconeogenic genes and carbohydrate metabolism in vivo. Nat Med 2004;10:168–74.

Inoue H, Ogawa W, Asakawa A, Okamoto Y, Nishizawa A, Matsumoto M, et al. Role of hepatic STAT3 in brain-insulin action on hepatic glucose production. Cell Metab 2006;3:267–75.

Jiang G, Zhang BB. Glucagon and regulation of glucose metabolism. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2003;284:E671–8.

Jitrapakdee S, Booker GW, Cassady AI, Wallace JC. The rat pyruvate carboxylase gene structure: alternate promoters generate multiple transcripts with the 5′-end heterogeneity. J Biol Chem 1997;272:20520–8.

Jitrapakdee S, Gong Q, MacDonald MJ, Wallace JC. Regulation of rat pyruvate carboxylase gene expression by alternate promoters during development, in genetically obese rats and in insulin-secreting cells. J Biol Chem 1998;273:34422–8.

Jitrapakdee S, Petchamphai N, Sunyakumthorn P, Wallace JC, Boonsaeng V. Structural and promoter regions of the murine pyruvate carboxylase gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001;287:411–7.

Jitrapakdee S, Vidal-Puig A, Wallace JC. Anaplerotic roles of pyruvate carboxylase in mammalian tissues. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006;63:843–54.

Jitrapakdee S, Maurice MS, Rayment I, Cleland WW, Wallace JC, Attwood PV. Structure, mechanism and regulation of pyruvate carboxylase. Biochem J 2008;413:369–87.

Kaestner KH, Hiemisch H, Schutz G. Targeted disruption of the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma results in reduced transcription of hepatocyte-specific genes. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:4245–51.

Kim JY, Kim HJ, Kim KT, Park YY, Seong HA, Park KC, et al. Orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner represses hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/Foxa transactivation via inhibition of its DNA binding. Mol Endocrinol 2004;18:2880.

Kim YD, Park KG, Lee YS, Park YY, Kim DK, Nedumaran B, et al. Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis through AMP-activated protein kinase-dependent regulation of the orphan nuclear receptor SHP. Diabetes 2008;57:306–14.

Klover PJ, Mooney RA. Hepatocytes: critical for glucose homeostasis. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2004;36:753–8.

Koo SH, Satoh H, Herzig S, Lee CH, Hedrick S, Kulkarni R, et al. PGC-1 promotes insulin resistance in liver through PPAR-α-dependent induction of TRB-3. Nat Med 2004;10:530–4.

Koo SH, Flechner L, Qi L, Zhang X, Screaton RA, Jeffries S, et al. The CREB coactivator TORC2 is a key regulator of fasting glucose metabolism. Nature 2005;437:1109–11.

Lamers WH, Hanson RW, Meisner HM. cAMP stimulates transcription of the gene for cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in rat liver nuclei. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:5137–41.

Le Lay J, Tuteja G, White P, Dhir R, Ahima R, Kaestner KH. CRTC2 (TORC2) contributes to the transcriptional response to fasting in the liver but is not required for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab 2009;10:55–62.

Lee Y, Kim D, Kim Y, Park K, Shong M, Seong H, et al. Orphan nuclear receptor SHP interacts with and represses hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 (HNF-6) transcription. Biochem J 2008;413:559–69.

Lee YH, Sauer B, Johnson PF, Gonzalez FJ. Disruption of the c/ebp alpha gene in adult mouse liver. Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:6014–22.

Leone TC, Lehman JJ, Finck BN, Schaeffer PJ, Wende AR, Boudina S, et al. PGC-1 deficiency causes multi-system energy metabolic derangements: muscle dysfunction, abnormal weight control and hepatic steatosis. PLoS Biol 2005;3:e101.

Li X, Monks B, Ge Q, Birnbaum MJ. Akt/PKB regulates hepatic metabolism by directly inhibiting PGC-1α transcription coactivator. Nature 2007;447:1012–6.

Lin B, Morris DW, Chou JY. The role of HNF1, HNF3, and cyclic AMP in glucose-6-phosphatase gene activation. Biochemistry 1997;36:14096–106.

Lin J, Wu PH, Tarr PT, Lindenberg KS, St-Pierre J, Zhang C, et al. Defects in adaptive energy metabolism with CNS-linked hyperactivity in PGC-1α null mice. Cell 2004;119:121–35.

Liu JS, Park EA, Gurney AL, Roesler WJ, Hanson RW. Cyclic AMP induction of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) gene transcription is mediated by multiple promoter elements. J Biol Chem 1991;266:19095–102.

Liu L, Karkanias GB, Morales JC, Hawkins M, Barzilai N, Wang J, et al. Intracerebroventricular leptin regulates hepatic but not peripheral glucose fluxes. J Biol Chem 1998;47:31160–7.

Liu Y, Dentin R, Chen D, Hedrick S, Ravnskjaer K, Schenk S, et al. A fasting inducible switch modulates gluconeogenesis via activator/coactivator exchange. Nature 2008;456:269–73.

Louet JF, Chopra AR, Sagen JV, An J, York B, Tannour-Louet M, et al. The coactivator SRC-1 is an essential coordinator of hepatic glucose production. Cell Metab 2010;12:606–18.

Maechler P, Wollheim CB. Mitochondrial function in normal and diabetic β-cells. Nature 2001;414:807–12.

Matsumoto M, Pocai A, Rossetti L, DePinho RA, Accili D. Impaired regulation of hepatic glucose production in mice lacking the forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 in liver. Cell Metab 2007;6:208–16.

Matsuzaki H, Daitoku H, Hatta M, Aoyama H, Yoshimochi K, Fukamizu A. Acetylation of FoxO1 alters its DNA-binding ability and sensitivity to phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:11278–83.

Mayr B, Montminy M. Transcriptional regulation by the phosphorylation-dependent factor CREB. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001;2:599–609.

Mithieux G. New knowledge regarding glucose-6 phosphatase gene and protein and their roles in the regulation of glucose metabolism. Eur J Endocrinol 1997;136:137–45.

Nakae J, Kitamura T, Silver DL, Accili D. The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 (Fkhr) confers insulin sensitivity onto glucose-6-phosphatase expression. J Clin Invest 2001;108:1359–78.

Nakae J, Oki M, Cao Y. The FoxO transcription factors and metabolic regulation. FEBS Lett 2008;582:54–67.

Nedumaran B, Hong S, Xie YB, Kim YH, Seo WY, Lee MW, et al. DAX-1 acts as a novel corepressor of orphan nuclear receptor HNF4 and negatively regulates gluconeogenic enzyme gene expression. J Biol Chem 2009;284:27511–23.

Nemoto S, Ferguson MM, Finkel T. SIRT1 functionally interacts with the metabolic regulator and transcriptional coactivator PGC-1α. J Biol Chem 2005;280:16456–60.

Obici S, Zhang BB, Karkanias G, Rossetti L. Hypothalamic insulin signaling is required for inhibition of glucose production. Nat Med 2002;8:1376–82.

O’Brien RM, Granner DK. Regulation of gene expression by insulin. Physiol Rev 1996;76:1109–61.

Park EA, Roesler W, Liu J, Klemm D, Gurney A, Thatcher J, et al. The role of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein in the transcriptional regulation of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP). Mol Cell Biol 1990;10:6264–72.

Park EA, Gurney A, Nizielski S, Hakimi P, Cao Z, Moorman A, et al. Relative roles of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta and cAMP regulatory element-binding protein in controlling transcription of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP). J Biol Chem 1993;268:613–9.

Pei L, Waki H, Vaitheesvaran B, Wilpitz DC, Kurland JJ, Tontonoz P. NR4A orphan nuclear receptors are transcriptional regulators of hepatic glucose metabolism. Nat Med 2006;12:1048–55.

Perrot V, Rechler MM. The coactivator p300 directly acetylates the forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 and stimulates FoxO1-induced transcription. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:2283–98.

Pocai A, Obici S, Schwartz GJ, Rossetti L. A brain-liver circuit regulates glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab 2005a;1:53–61.

Pocai A, Lam TK, Gutierrez-Juarez R, Obici S, Schwartz GJ, Bryan J, et al. Hypothalamic KATP channels control hepatic glucose production. Nature 2005b;434:1026–31.

Puigserver P, Rhee J, Donovan J, Walkey C, Yoon J, Oriente F, et al. Insulin-regulated hepatic gluconeogenesis through FOXO1-PGC-1α interaction. Nature 2003;423:550–5.

S. Jitrapakdee / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 44 (2012) 33–45

Puigserver P, Spiegelman BM. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-coactivator 1 (PGC-1): transcriptional coactivator and metabolic regulator. Endocr Rev 2003;24:78–90.

Qiao L, MacLean PS, You H, Schaack J, Shao J. Knocking down liver CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein by adenovirus-transduced silent interfering ribonucleic acid improves hepatic gluconeogenesis and lipid homeostasis in db/db mice. Endocrinology 2006;147:3060–9.

Quinn PG, Wong TW, Magnuson MA, Shabb JB, Granner DK. Identification of basal and cyclic AMP regulatory elements in the promoter of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene. Mol Cell Biol 1988;8:3467–75.

Quinn PG, Yeagley D. Insulin regulation of PEPCK gene expression: a model for rapid and reversible modulation. Curr Drug Targets 2005;5:423–37.

Rajas F, Gautier A, Bady I, Montano S, Mithieux G. Polyunsaturated fatty acyl coenzyme A suppress the glucose-6-phosphatase promoter activity by modulating the DNA binding of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4. J Biol Chem 2002;277:15736–44.

Raman P, Donkin SS, Spurlock ME. Regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism by leptin in pig and rat primary hepatocyte cultures. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2003;286:R206–16.

Ramji DP, Foka P. CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins: structure, function and regulation. Biochem J 2002;365:561–75.

Reshef L, Olswang Y, Cassuto H, Blum B, Croniger CM, Kalhan SC. Glyceroneogenesis and the triglyceride/fatty acid cycle. J Biol Chem 2003;278:30413–6.

Rhee J, Inoue Y, Yoon JC, Puigserver P, Fan M, Gonzalez FJ, et al. Regulation of hepatic fasting response by PPAR coactivator-1 (PGC-1): requirement for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 in gluconeogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:4012–7.

Rodgers JT, Lerin C, Haas W, Gygi S, Spiegelman BM, Puigserver P. Nutrient control of glucose homeostasis through a complex of PGC-α and SIRT1. Nature 2005;43:113–8.

Rodgers JT, Puigserver P. Fasting-dependent glucose and lipid metabolic response through hepatic sirtuin 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:12861–6.

Rodgers JT, Lerin C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Puigserver P. Metabolic regulations through the PGC1α and SIRT1 pathways. FEBS Lett 2008;582:46–53.

Roesler WJ. What is a cAMP response unit? Mol Cell Endocrinol 2000;162:1–7.

Roesler WJ, Park EA, McFie PJ. Characterization of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein as a cyclic AMP-responsive nuclear regulator. J Biol Chem 1998;273:14950–7.

Rossetti L, Massillon D, Barzilai N, Vugin P, Chen W, Hawkins M, et al. Short term effects of leptin on hepatic gluconeogenesis and in vivo insulin action. J Biol Chem 1997;44:27758–63.

Rossi M, Kim MS, Morgan DG, Small CJ, Edwards CM, et al. A C-terminal fragment of Agouti-related protein increases feeding and antagonizes the effect of alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone in vivo. Endocrinology 1998;139:4428–31.

Saltiel AR, Kahn CR. Insulin signalling and the regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism. Nature 2001;414:799–806.

Samuel VT, Choi CS, Phillips TG, Romanelli AJ, Geisler JG, Bhanot S, et al. Targeting foxo1 in mice using antisense oligonucleotide improves hepatic and peripheral insulin action. Diabetes 2006;55:2042–50.

Samuel VT, Beddow SA, Iwasaki T, Zhang XM, Chu X, Still CD, et al. Fasting hyperglycemia is not associated with increased expression of PEPCK or G6Pc in patients with type 2 diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:12121–6.

Sandoval DA, Obici S, Seeley RJ. Targeting the CNS to treat type 2 diabetes. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009;8:386–98.

Schilling MM, Oeser JK, Boustead JN, Flemming BP, O’Brien RM. Gluconeogenesis: re-evaluating the FOXO1–PGC-1 connection. Nature 2006;443:E10–1.

Schmoll D, Wasner C, Hinds CJ, Allan BB, Walther R, Burchell A. Identification of a cAMP response element within the glucose-6-phosphatase hydrolytic subunit gene promoter which is involved in the transcriptional regulation by cAMP and glucocorticoids in H4IIE hepatoma cells. Biochem J 1999;338:457–63.

Schmoll D, Walker KS, Alessi DR, Gremler R, Burchell A, Guo S, et al. Regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase gene expression by protein kinase B and the forkhead transcription factor FKHR. J Biol Chem 2000;275:36324–33.

Shoneveld OJLM, Gaemers IC, Lamers WH. Mechanisms of glucocorticoid signalling. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1680:114–28.

Scott DK, Mitchell JA, Granner DK. The orphan receptor COUP-TF binds to a third glucocorticoid accessory factor element within the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene promoter. J Biol Chem 1996;271:31909–14.

Scrutton MC, Keech DB, Utter MF. Pyruvate carboxylase. IV. Partial reactions and the locus of activation by acetyl-coenzyme A. J Biol Chem 1965;240:574–81.

Shaw RJ, Lamia KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N, DePinho RA, et al. The kinase LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of metformin. Science 2005;310:1642–6.

Stafford JM, Wilkinson JC, Beechem JM, Granner DK. Accessory factors facilitate the binding of glucocorticoid receptor to the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene promoter. J Biol Chem 2001;276:39885–91.

Streeter RS, Svitek CA, Chapman S, Greenbaum LE, Taub R, O’Brien RM. A multicomponent insulin response sequence mediates a strong repression of mouse glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription by insulin. J Biol Chem 1997;272:11698–701.

Streeter RS, Eaton EM, Ebert DH, Chapman SC, Svitek CA, O’Brien RM. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 acts as an accessory factor to enhance the inhibitory action of insulin on mouse glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:9208–13.

Streeter RS, Svitek CA, Goldman JK, O’Brien RM. Differential role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 in the regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription by cAMP in liver- and kidney-derived cell lines. J Biol Chem 2000;275:12108–18.

Streeter RS, Hornbuckle LA, Svitek CA, Goldman JK, Oeser JK, O’Brien RM. Protein kinase A phosphorylates hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 and stimulates glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription. J Biol Chem 2001;276:19111–8.

Thiel G, Al Sarraj J, Stefano L. cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) activates transcription via two distinct genetic elements of the human glucose-6-phosphatase gene. BMC Mol Biol 2005;6:2.

Thonpho A, Sereeruk C, Rojvirat P, Jitrapakdee S. Identification of the cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE) that mediates transcriptional regulation of the pyruvate carboxylase gene in HepG2 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010;393:714–9.

Toyoshima Y, Gavrilova O, Yakar S, Jou W, Pack S, Asghar Z, et al. Leptin improves insulin resistance and hyperglycemia in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. Endocrinology 2005;146:4024–35.

Utter MF, Keech DB. Formation of oxaloacetate from pyruvate and carbon dioxide. J Biol Chem 1960;235:17–8.

Vallet V, Antoine B, Chafey P, Vandewalle A, Kahn A. Overproduction of a truncated hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 protein inhibits expression of liver-specific genes in hepatoma cells. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:5453–60.

Vander Kooi BT, Streeter RS, Svitek CA, Oeser JK, Powell DR, O’Brien RM. The three insulin response sequences in the glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene promoter are functionally distinct. J Biol Chem 2003;278:11782–93.

Vander Kooi BT, Onuma H, Oeser JK, Svitek CA, Allen SR, Vander Kooi CW, et al. The glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene promoter contains both positive and negative glucocorticoid response elements. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:3001–22.

Vaisse C, Halaas JL, Horvath CM, Darnell Jr JE, Stoffel M, Friedman JM. Leptin activation of Stat3 in the hypothalamus of wild-type and ob/ob mice but not db/db mice. Nat Genet 1996;14:95–7.

Wang D, Yang H, De Braganca KC, Lu J, Shih LY, Briones P, et al. The molecular basis of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: mosaicism correlates with prolonged survival. Mol Genet Metab 2008;95:31–8.

Wang JC, Stromstedt PE, O’Brien RM, Granner DK. Hepatic nuclear factor 3 is an accessory factor required for the stimulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene transcription by glucocorticoids. Mol Endocrinol 1996;10:794–800.

Wang JC, Stromstedt PE, Sugiyama T, Granner DK. The phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene glucocorticoid response unit: identification of the functional domains of accessory factors HNF3β (hepatic nuclear factor-3β) and HNF4 and the necessity of proper alignment of their cognate binding sites. Mol Endocrinol 1999;13:604–18.

Wang JC, Stafford JM, Scott DK, Sutherland C, Granner DK. The molecular physiology of hepatic nuclear factor 3 in the regulation of gluconeogenesis. J Biol Chem 2000;275:14717–21.

Wang ND, Finegold MJ, Bradley A, Ou CN, Abdelsayed SV, Wilde MD, et al. Impaired energy homeostasis in C/EBP alpha knockout mice. Science 1995;269:1108–12.

White HM, Koser SL, Donkin SS. Bovine pyruvate carboxylase 5′ untranslated region variant expression during transition to lactation and feed restriction in dairy cows. J Anim Sci 2011a:1881–92.

White HM, Koser SL, Donkin SS. Characterization of bovine pyruvate carboxylase promoter 1 responsiveness to serum from control and feed-restricted cows. J Anim Sci 2011b;89:1763–8.

Wolfrum C, Asilmaz E, Luca E, Friedman JM, Stoffel M. Foxa2 regulates lipid metabolism and ketogenesis in the liver during fasting and in diabetes. Nature 2004;432:1027–32.

Yamagata K, Daitoku H, Shimamoto Y, Matsuzaki H, Hirota K, Ishida J, et al. Bile acids regulate gluconeogenic gene expression via small heterodimer partner-mediated repression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and Foxo1. J Biol Chem 2004;279:23158–65.

Yang J, Croniger CM, Lekstrom-Himes J, Zhang P, Fenyes M, Tenen DG, et al. Metabolic response of mice to a postnatal ablation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein. J Biol Chem 2005;280:38689–99.

Yang J, Kalhan SC, Hanson RW. What is the metabolic role of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase? J Biol Chem 2009a;284:27025–9.

Yang J, Reshef L, Cassuto H, Aleman G, Hanson RW. Aspects of the control of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene transcription. J Biol Chem 2009b;284:27031–5.

Yang L, Kasumov T, Yu L, Jobbins KA, David F, Previs SF, et al. Metabolomic assays of the concentration and mass isotopomer distribution of gluconeogenic and citric acid cycle intermediates. Metabolomics 2006;2:85–94.

Yoon JC, Puigserver P, Chen G, Donovan J, Wu Z, Rhee J, et al. Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis through the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1. Nature 2001;413:131–8.

Yoshida T, Okuno A, Takahashi K, Ogawa J, Hagisawa Y, Kanda S, et al. Contributions of hepatic gluconeogenesis suppression and compensative glycogenolysis on the glucose-lowering effect of CS-917, a fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase inhibitor, in non-obese type 2 diabetes Goto-Kakizaki rats. J Pharmacol Sci 2011;115:329–35.

Zhang W, Patil S, Chauhan B, Guo S, Powell DR, Le J, et al. FoxO1 regulates multiple metabolic pathways in the liver. J Biol Chem 2006;281:10105–17.
