
The Breast 20 (2011) S3, S42–S49

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Breast

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/brst

Original Article

Biological mechanisms and clinical implications of endocrine resistance in breast cancer

Mario Giuliano<sup>a</sup>, Rachel Schiff<sup>a,b,c,d,*</sup>, C. Kent Osborne<sup>a,b,c,d</sup>, Meghana V. Trivedi<sup>a,e</sup>

<sup>a</sup>Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, <sup>b</sup>Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, <sup>c</sup>Margaret M. and Albert B. Alkek Department of Medicine, <sup>d</sup>Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, <sup>e</sup>Department of Clinical Sciences and Administration, University of Houston, College of Pharmacy, Houston, TX, USA

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:
Breast cancer
Estrogen receptor
Endocrine resistance
Receptor tyrosine kinases
Crosstalk
ER plasticity
Combination therapy

SUMMARY

Endocrine therapy represents the first and most efficacious targeted treatment for women with estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer. In the last four decades several hormonal agents have been successfully introduced in clinical practice as both palliative therapy for advanced disease and adjuvant treatment for prevention of tumor relapse. Nevertheless, the intrinsic and acquired resistance occurs in a significant proportion of patients, limiting the efficacy of endocrine treatments. Several molecular mechanisms have been proposed to be responsible for endocrine resistance. Loss of ER expression, altered activity of ER coregulators, deregulation of apoptosis and cell cycle signaling, and hyperactive receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and stress/cell kinase pathways can collectively orchestrate the development and sustenance of pharmacologic resistance to endocrine therapy. Preclinical and clinical evidence documents the plasticity in ER expression levels and signaling. As such, ER can either drive gene transcription and tumor progression directly or crosstalk with alternate RTK and cellular kinase signaling pathways, resulting in modulation of its own expression levels and transcriptional program. For this reason a therapeutic approach based on the combination of agents targeting both ER and RTK signaling represents a promising strategy to be tested. Among many RTKs, EGFR, HER2, and PI3K have been found to be viable targets for the combination therapy strategy, at least in the preclinical setting. However, early results from clinical trials testing combination strategies have been discordant, suggesting the need for better approaches to simultaneously inhibit multiple escape pathways and to select the patients who may benefit the most from these strategies.

© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction

Approximately 70% of breast cancers express estrogen receptor (ER).<sup>1</sup> ER-positive (ER+) breast cancer is typically associated with lower proliferation rate and grade, positivity for progesterone receptor (PR) expression, less frequent amplification/over-expression of Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), metastases to soft tissue and bone, and lower probability of disease recurrence.<sup>2</sup> Recent gene expression profile studies have shown high heterogeneity within ER+ breast cancer with the identification of two distinct molecular subtypes characterized by different prognostic and biological features: ER+ luminal A and ER+ luminal B tumors.<sup>3</sup> Luminal A breast cancer is characterized by high expression of ER and classic ER-dependent genes, lower proliferation rate, less aggressive tumor behavior, and higher responsiveness to endocrine therapy. In contrast, the luminal B subtype is associated with relatively lower expression of ER and ER-

* Corresponding author. Rachel Schiff, Ph.D., Lester & Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, BCM660, Houston, TX 77030, USA Tel.: +1 (713) 798 1671. E-mail address: rschiff@bcm.edu (R. Schiff).

related genes, higher proliferation rate, more aggressiveness, and lower endocrine sensitivity.<sup>4</sup>

There are primarily three classes of agents that are used to treat ER+ breast cancer: selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs, e.g. tamoxifen); estrogen synthesis inhibitors (e.g. aromatase inhibitors (AIs) such as anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane); and selective estrogen receptor down-regulators (SERDs, e.g. fulvestrant). Tamoxifen has represented for more than 3 decades the most successful targeted treatment available for ER+ breast cancer.<sup>5</sup> However, almost 50% of patients with metastatic disease do not respond to first line treatment with tamoxifen (de novo resistance); furthermore, a significant percentage of initial responders eventually relapse despite an initial response (acquired resistance).<sup>6</sup> Moreover, acquired and de novo resistance cause tumor relapse in many early breast cancer patients who receive tamoxifen as an adjuvant therapy. AIs, which impede tumor growth by inhibiting synthesis of the estrogen ligand, have shown to be superior to tamoxifen in both adjuvant and metastatic settings.<sup>7,8</sup> Nevertheless, in patients with metastatic disease the response rate to these compounds is only slightly higher than to tamoxifen, and both de novo and acquired resistance to AIs also occur.<sup>9</sup> As a novel

0960-9776/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

M. Giuliano et al./The Breast 20 (2011) S42–S49

Stress  
Treatment  
Cytokines  
Hypoxia  
OS/ROS  

Integrins  

Plasma membrane  

Nucleus  

ER  
CoA  
transcription  

EREs  

Proliferation  
Survival  
Invasion  

ER  
CoA  
AP-1  
transcription  

AP-1/SP-1  

Cytoplasm  

RTKs  

HB-EGF  

MMPs  

JNK  
p38  

FAK  

Ras  
MAPK  

PI3K  
AKT  

ER  
G-Protein  

Src  

ER  
CoA  

Fig. 1. Estrogen receptor signaling and its blockade in breast cancer. A. Nuclear Genomic pathway. Binding of estrogen (E) to estrogen receptors (ER) causes conformational changes in the nuclear ER, which then binds to promoter/enhancer regions of target genes either directly at estrogen response elements (EREs) [classical nuclear genomic pathway, (1)] or indirectly via binding to other transcription factors, such as AP-1 or SP-1, at their cognate DNA-binding sites [non-classical nuclear genomic pathway, 2]. Estrogen-bound ER typically recruits coactivators (CoA) to facilitate gene transcription of genes encoding growth factors, receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), and others involved in cell proliferation, survival, and invasion. B. Non-nuclear/Non-genomic pathway. ER functioning as G-protein coupled receptor on the plasma membrane activates matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) leading to release of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF), which activates EGFR and its downstream signaling pathway (3). Extra-nuclear ER also can interact with various signaling molecules (e.g. Src) and coactivators (4) as well as receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) such as Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor 2 (HER2), EGF Receptor (EGFR), and Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF1R) (5). Interaction with these signaling molecules activates downstream kinase pathways (e.g. Ras-p42/44 MAPK and PI3K-AKT), which in turn phosphorylate ER and other transcription factors and coregulators leading to gene expression on EREs and on response elements of other transcription factors (e.g., AP-1 and SP-1). Stress-related kinases (6) and members of the integrin family (7) can also activate downstream kinases (e.g. focal adhesion kinases (FAK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 MAPK) that can further influence ER signaling by phosphorylation of ER and its coregulators. Nuclear genomic pathways are usually inhibited by tamoxifen (T), aromatase inhibitors (Al), and fulvestrant (F). On the other hand, non-nuclear non-genomic pathways are mostly blocked by Al and F, but can be activated by tamoxifen. Hyper-activation of these various signaling elements and transcriptional components can all modulate ER expression and activity leading to endocrine resistance.

type of ER antagonist and SERD, fulvestrant has been shown to delay the emergence of acquired resistance compared with tamoxifen in several pre-clinical studies. However, in various clinical trials fulvestrant has not shown superior effectiveness to either tamoxifen or Al.

In the last 20 years many efforts have been made to understand the mechanisms responsible for endocrine resistance and to identify novel therapeutic strategies to prevent and overcome its development. The aim of this review is to summarize the current knowledge and highlight some of the key recent findings on the mechanisms of endocrine resistance and their multiplicity in breast cancer.

### ER action and signaling

There are two different forms of ER encoded by distinct genes: ERα, which plays a crucial role in breast cancer initiation and progression, and ERβ, whose function in breast cancer is still debated. Recent evidence indicates that ERβ functions as an antagonist of ERα, impairing the ability of estrogen to stimulate proliferation. Interestingly, reduced levels of ERβ protein are associated with resistance to tamoxifen treatment. In this review, we use “ER” to indicate “ERα”, if not otherwise specified.

Table 1  
Mechanisms of endocrine resistance  

| Resistance pathway                          | Mechanism                                                                                   | Reference(s) |
|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| ER expression and activity loss             | Mutations                                                                                  | 27           |
|                                            | Gene regulation                                                                             | 28           |
|                                            | Post-transcriptional modifications (e.g. splice variants, mRNA stability)                  | 17, 29       |
|                                            | Post-translational modifications                                                            | 30           |
| Transcriptional machinery of ER            | Down-regulation of co-repressors (e.g. NCoR)                                                 | 31           |
|                                            | Over-expression of co-activators (e.g. AIB1)                                                 | 22, 32       |
|                                            | Increased expression of transcriptional factors (e.g. AP-1, SP-1, NFkB)                      | 33, 34       |
| Cross-talk between ER and RTKs             | EGF/EGFR                                                                                    | 35–37        |
|                                            | HER2                                                                                        | 37–39        |
|                                            | IGF1R                                                                                      | 40, 41       |
|                                            | PI3Ks/Akt                                                                                   | 41–45        |
|                                            | p44/42 MAPK                                                                                 | 46, 47       |
|                                            | Stress-induced kinases (JNK, p38 MAPK)                                                       | 48           |
| Cell cycle regulators                      | Over-expression of positive regulators (e.g. MYC and cyclins E1 and D1)                       | 49           |
|                                            | Reduced expression of negative regulators (e.g. p21 and p27)                                 | 50, 51       |
|                                            | Over-expression of anti-apoptotic molecules (e.g. BCL-XL)                                    | 52           |
|                                            | Reduced expression of pro-apoptotic molecules (e.g. BCL2-interacting killer and caspase 9)   | 52           |

ER: estrogen receptor; AIB1: amplified in breast 1; NCoR: nuclear receptor corepressor; AP1: activator protein 1; SP-1: specificity protein 1; NFkB: nuclear factor-kB; EGF: epidermal growth factor; EGFR: epidermal growth factor receptor; HER2: human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; IGF1R: insulin growth factor 1 receptor; PI3Ks: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases; MAPK: mitogen activated protein kinase; JNK: c-Jun N-terminal kinase; BCL-XL: B-cell lymphoma-extra large; BCL2: B-cell lymphoma 2.

genomic pathways¹⁶ (Fig. 1). This activity is mediated either by the traditional ER or by a short spliced/translational variant localized near or at the plasma membrane.¹⁷ First, in response to estrogen binding, ER can directly or indirectly, via G-protein activation, interact with and/or activate several growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) such as HER2, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) and with their signal transduction intermediates.¹⁸,¹⁹ This interaction activates RTK signaling and its downstream kinases (e.g. p42/44 MAPK and AKT). Second, ER can also trigger a signaling cascade that involves c-Src and other coactivators. Third, stress induced kinases and integrin signaling also can influence ER signaling by phosphorylation of ER and its coregulators.²⁰,²¹ RTK pathways and genomic or non-genomic ER signaling are not mutually exclusive; they interact with each other in a bidirectional crosstalk, which represents one of the most important mechanisms of endocrine resistance, detailed in subsequent sections.

### Mechanism of action of endocrine treatment

There are two main strategies to block ER signaling in breast cancer: (1) inhibition of estrogen action via ER antagonism (by SERMs and SERDs) and (2) reduction in estrogen levels (by AIs or by a surgical or pharmacological ovarian suppression in postmenopausal and premenopausal patients, respectively). SERMs, such as tamoxifen, competitively inhibit estrogen binding to ER and stimulate a distinct receptor conformation leading to association of ER mainly with corepressor complexes rather than coactivators, and subsequent termination of estrogen-activated gene transcription.⁵ These agents have mixed agonist/antagonist activity and may either stimulate or antagonize ER function and activate different genes depending on the cell or tissue type.¹⁵ Moreover, tamoxifen can stimulate rather than inhibit ER non-nuclear non-genomic pathways²² (Fig. 1). Similarly to SERMs, SERDs (e.g. fulvestrant) compete with estrogen for binding with ER. In addition, these drugs also block receptor dimerization, and induce degradation of

### Mechanisms of endocrine resistance

In the recent years several mechanisms of resistance to endocrine therapy have been recognized (Table 1). In the following sections, we will describe the principal pathways responsible for endocrine resistance as distinct mechanisms, although it is now clear that multiple mechanisms orchestrate in concert to develop and sustain pharmacologic resistance to endocrine therapy in breast cancer patients.

#### ER levels, mutation, and post-transcriptional variants

To date, ER expression represents the most important biomarker to predict response to endocrine treatment. Therefore, any variation in the ER at the gene or protein level contributes to endocrine resistance and to the development of a more aggressive phenotype. ER loss over time in the tumor occurs in approximately 20% of patients treated with endocrine therapy.⁴⁸,⁵³ Down-regulation or complete loss of ER may occur at multiple levels and by several
mechanisms. ER expression is thought to primarily be controlled by epigenetic and post-transcriptional mechanisms, and not at the genomic level. Loss of heterozygosity in the ER gene locus does not seem to play an important role in the decrease of ER expression.²⁸ Moreover, ER mutations occur in less than 1% of ER+ tumors and only a few point mutations have been identified in human patient samples from a variety of disease states.²⁷ On the other hand, a large number of naturally occurring splice variants of both ERα and ERβ have been identified in normal and cancerous tissues. The expression of the ER splicing short variant ERα36 has been recently implicated in reducing endocrine response.¹⁷ Moreover, regulation of the ER mRNA stability by specific microRNAs (e.g. miR-206) represents a novel mechanism responsible for ER loss.²⁹ ER levels and function are also regulated by post-translational modifications (e.g. phosphorylation, methylation and ubiquitination), which alter interactions of ER with its co-regulators and consequently contribute to endocrine resistance.³⁰ In case of ER loss or down-regulation, alternative survival pathways may assume the driving role in tumor progression.⁵⁴ On the other hand, altered ER expression and signaling may occur due to hyperactive RTK signaling such as EGFR and HER2, stress-related kinases, or microenvironment factors, changing the sensitivity to endocrine therapy, as discussed below.³⁵,⁴²,⁵⁵

### ER and transcription machinery

ER exerts its action on gene expression by associating with a group of regulatory proteins that form the transcription initiation complex.¹⁴ Therefore, changes in the proteins that form this transcription initiation complex with ER greatly influence effectiveness of endocrine therapy. First, expression of ER corepressors and coactivators directly controls the equilibrium between agonist versus antagonist effects of SERMs. Pre-clinical and clinical evidence suggests that over-expression or increased phosphorylation of ER coactivator AIB1 (also called SRC3 or NCoA3) is associated with tamoxifen resistance.²²,³² On the other hand, down-regulation of corepressor NCoR has been documented in tamoxifen-refractory experimental tumors.³¹ Second, increased activity of transcriptional factors such as AP-1, SP-1 and NFκB, which are critical for mediating ER signaling in the non-classical nuclear genomic pathway (Fig. 1), is also associated with endocrine resistance.³³,³⁴ More recently, the introduction of a new research technology, which combines chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with high throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), has identified a complex network of coregulators and their genome-wide DNA binding sites, also known as the cistrome.⁵⁶ Moreover, the study of ER global cistromes has provided evidence that under overactive RTK signaling, ER can be recruited to different genomic binding sites in a ligand-independent manner or even in the presence of SERMs.³⁶,⁵⁶ This supports the hypothesis that ER may shift from its classic genomic activity to a new transcriptional program which is greatly influenced by RTK signaling as discussed below.

### Cross-talk with RTKs and their downstream pathways

RTKs and their downstream signaling pathways can alternatively stimulate cancer growth either in concert with ER signaling or by bypassing it. These pathways can also directly negate or overcome the inhibitory effects of endocrine therapy by modulating ER activity (Fig. 1). It has been shown that increased expression of EGFR, HER2, and IGF1R in breast cancer cell lines causes tamoxifen resistance.⁴⁰,⁴³,⁴⁴ Moreover, cumulative clinical evidence suggests that HER2 and/or EGFR over-expression is associated with a poorer outcome in tamoxifen-treated patients.³⁷,³⁸ In some cases, the deregulation of these signaling pathways is the result of over-expression/amplification of RTKs or their ligands. In other

cases, genetic or epigenetic modifications of signal transduction intermediates, such as activating mutations in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks), loss of heterozygosity or methylation of the tumor suppressor PTEN, and activation of Akt, represent the leading cause of excessive RTK signaling.⁴⁰,⁵⁷

A bidirectional crosstalk between ER and RTK signaling has been demonstrated to cause endocrine resistance. ER, via both its non-nuclear and nuclear activities, can up-regulate growth factor RTK signaling (Fig. 1). Simultaneously, several RTK pathways can modulate both genomic and non-genomic activities of ER and its ligand dependency. Specifically, ER and its coregulator proteins can be phosphorylated by several growth factor-dependent and stress-related intracellular kinases, including p44/42 MAPK, PI3K/Akt, p90rsk, or p38 MAPK. This phosphorylation leads to activation of ER in a ligand-independent manner or in the presence of anti-estrogens, which may switch the ER transcriptional program from classical to a non-classical nuclear genomic pathway.⁴⁵–⁴⁷ An example of this switch is reduced PR gene expression due to increased signaling of RTKs and their downstream PI3K/Akt cascade.⁴¹ Interestingly, ER+/PR− breast tumors in patients are more likely to over-express HER2.³⁹ Therefore, it is likely that the loss of classic ER target genes (e.g. PR, caveolin-1, IGF1R), which is a typical characteristic of the luminal B subtype, is caused by changes in ER levels and genomic activity exerted by RTK pathways and can represent a surrogate marker of increased RTK signaling. In support of this hypothesis of ER plasticity, our group recently showed that a PI3K signature score developed at both transcriptional and proteomic levels was significantly associated with ER and PR expression in ER+ breast cancer patients. Specifically, hyper-activation of PI3K signaling in human tumors was correlated with a reduction of ER and ER-target gene expression. Furthermore we observed that PI3K signature scores were higher in luminal B compared to luminal A tumors. Finally we found that treatment of different breast cancer cell lines with the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ-235 significantly increased the expression of ER and ER-inducible target genes, demonstrating the possibility of restoring endocrine sensitivity by inhibition of the PI3K pathway.⁴² Similarly, downregulation of ER expression and transcriptional activity was also documented upon activation of the p44/42 MAPK pathway.⁵⁵

The crucial role of ER signaling in hormone-refractory tumor growth has been further investigated by Lupien et al., who recently showed that after stimulation of breast cancer cells with epidermal growth factor (EGF), ER genomic cistromes were completely distinct from those induced by estrogen, and this alternative genomic activity of ER depended on the transcriptional factor AP-1.³⁶ Importantly, numerous genes regulated by the EGF-induced ER cistrome were over-expressed in HER2+ breast cancers. In the same study, fulvestrant was able to reverse the EGF-induced gene expression, suggesting a substantial dependence of the EGF response on ER. Collectively, these observations provide additional evidence that ER activity, when modified by exaggerated RTK signaling, may still contribute to tumor growth at the time of endocrine resistance.

### Cell cycle and apoptosis regulators

Preclinical studies and clinical evidence suggest that the activity of both positive and negative cell cycle regulators impacts tumor sensitivity to endocrine treatment.⁵⁸ In particular, over-expression of the positive regulators MYC and cyclins E1 and D1 determines endocrine resistance, either by activating cyclin-dependent kinases critical for G1 phase or by relieving the inhibitory effects of the negative cell cycle regulators p21 and p27.⁴⁹ On the other hand, reduced expression, stability, or activity of p21 and p27, as well as inactivation of the tumor suppressor RB, are associated with resistance to tamoxifen.⁵⁰,⁵¹ This scenario can be initiatedby activation of RTKs and their downstream signaling pathways, by modulating transcription factors, microRNAs, or protein phosphorylation. Moreover, over-expression of anti-apoptotic molecules (e.g. BCL-XL) and reduced expression of pro-apoptotic molecules (e.g. BCL2-interacting killer and caspase 9) can also modulate anti-estrogen-mediated apoptosis.⁵² Similarly to cell cycle regulators, the activity of these apoptotic/survival molecules can be modulated by RTK and transcription factor signaling, such as activation of NFκB.³⁴

### Clinical strategies to overcome endocrine resistance

As described in the previous paragraphs, preclinical and clinical evidence supports the hypothesis that cancer cells can overcome the inhibitory effects of endocrine therapy either by using RTKs as the dominant survival pathway or by modifying ER activity through bidirectional RTK–ER crosstalk. Targeted therapy against only one pathway likely will result in resistance to therapy due to compensation or crosstalk with the other pathway.³⁰,³⁵,⁴⁸,⁵⁴ For e.g. expression of all three HER family members (EGFR, HER2, and HER3) have shown to be predictive for early relapse in ER+ breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen as an adjuvant treatment.⁵⁹ When tamoxifen was compared to AIs in ER+ breast cancer in the neoadjuvant setting, EGFR/HER2 over-expression predicted relatively low response rates to the SERM and high response rates to AIs.⁶⁰,⁶¹ However, a later report documented a sustained rate of ER-independent proliferation in the HER2+ tumors after a clinical response to neoadjuvant letrozole,⁶² suggesting early development of resistance in these tumors. Importantly, in fact, in three independent randomized trials in the adjuvant setting, this differential benefit from AIs vs. tamoxifen in HER2+ tumors was not confirmed.⁶³⁻⁶⁵ In these studies, quantitative expression of ER, PR, and/or HER2 status did not predict differential relative benefit from AIs, as it was first anticipated.⁶³⁻⁶⁵ One plausible explanation is that deregulated RTK pathways induce ligand-independent ER signaling and consequently cause a more global endocrine resistance, with reduced sensitivity to both SERMs and estrogen deprivation therapy with AIs. In this scenario, ER plays a critical role in promoting hormone-refractory tumor growth in a process that involves non-classical genomic as well as non-genomic pathways. Hence, we can anticipate that a complete antagonism and down-regulation of ER with SERDs would better block both its estrogen-dependent and independent as well as RTK-stimulated activities to prevent endocrine resistance. In support of this, a subset of endocrine resistant tumors is still responsive to SERD treatment with fulvestrant.⁶⁶ Furthermore, fulvestrant provides clinical benefit in HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer patients.⁶⁷ However, clinical data from independent phase II trials and a randomized phase III study suggest only modest efficacy of fulvestrant as a second- and/or third-line treatment in advanced breast cancer patients.¹⁰ Whether this is related to its poor bioavailability and incomplete downregulation of ER is not known, but more effective SERDs would be interesting to study.

It has been proposed that a more promising strategy to prevent or overcome endocrine resistance in ER+ breast cancer is to combine different targeted treatments to effectively block both ER and RTK signaling. Significant effort has been made to evaluate the efficacy of RTK-targeted therapies in combination with endocrine treatment. The results of the phase III TAnDEM (Trastuzumab and Anastrozole Directed Against ER-Positive HER2-Positive Mammary Carcinoma) trial, which randomized metastatic breast cancer patients to anastrozole alone or in combination with trastuzumab showed a better progression-free survival (PFS) for the combination although there was no advantage in the overall survival, and the outcome for both arms was relatively poor compared to historic trastuzumab plus chemotherapy.⁶⁸

---

Supported by the preclinical evidence that EGFR activation contributes to acquired endocrine resistance, several trials have assessed the combination of endocrine treatments with the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib (Table 2).³⁵ Particularly, a “proof-of-principle” phase II trial, randomizing hormone receptor positive metastatic breast cancer patients to receive tamoxifen alone or in combination with gefitinib, has shown a numerical advantage in PFS for the combination. Similar results were observed in a second randomized Phase II study using anastrozole plus gefitinib.⁷² These studies support further studies to evaluate EGFR blockade as a strategy to enhance endocrine responsiveness and also major efforts in selecting the appropriate patients to be treated with combination therapy.⁷¹ A large phase III trial comparing letrozole with and without the dual tyrosine kinase (EGFR/HER2) inhibitor lapatinib in patients with ER+ metastatic breast cancer showed a better efficacy for the combination, which was confined primarily to the HER2+ subset and, in a retrospective analysis, also to patients with lower ER levels.⁷⁰

Combinations of endocrine therapies with drugs targeting relevant downstream signaling pathways have also been attempted (Table 2). Farnesyl transferase inhibitors (tipifarnib) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) antagonists (everolimus, temsirolimus) represent novel drugs under investigation. Recently, a randomized phase II trial evaluating letrozole alone or in the combination with everolimus has reported significantly increased efficacy for the combination.⁸⁰ However, overall results from clinical trials are somewhat disappointing, highlighting the complexity of the resistance process and the need to improve selection of patients for the appropriate biological intervention. It may be that several escape pathways need to be inhibited simultaneously for optimal effects.

---

### Conclusions

The introduction of new hormonal agents and regimens in the last decades has markedly improved the outcome of ER+ breast cancer patients. However, resistance to even the most effective endocrine regimens is a major clinical concern. The development of resistance to endocrine therapy is the result of complex processes involving multiple mechanisms and escape pathways, and therapeutic blockade of estrogen signaling as the exclusive therapeutic strategy may eventually result in treatment failure. Loss of ER, which may be mediated by the activation of RTK pathways, represents one of the most important causes of endocrine resistance. Nevertheless, ER may still play a crucial role in hormone-refractory tumor growth. Specifically, ER can act in a ligand-independent fashion, and replace its classic genomic activity with a new transcriptional program, which is greatly influenced by RTK and other kinase pathways. As a result, the most promising strategy to prevent and/or overcome endocrine resistance might be to combine hormonal agents with drugs targeting several effectors of RTK and stress-related pathways, in the attempt to block all the possible tumor survival escapes. Ongoing and future clinical trials with appropriate patient selection, based on re-biopsy of recurrent lesions, will provide evidence for optimizing individualized therapeutic regimens combining endocrine therapy with one or more pathway-targeted agents to treat ER+ breast cancer in the most effective manner.

---

### Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by NCI grants P50 CA58183 (Breast Cancer SPORE) and P01 CA30195, and the SU2C Breast Cancer Program.
Table 2  
Major published clinical trials evaluating the combination of endocrine agents with various RTK-targeting therapies

| Target pathway and trial characteristics                                                                 | Clinical design                     | Main results                                                                                   | Reference(s) |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| **Metastatic disease**                                                                                 |                                      |                                                                                               |              |
| HER2                                                                                                   | Single arm phase II; 1st or 2nd line; n = 33 | TRAS+LET                                                                                      | PR 26%; SD 26% | 69         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase III; ≥ 1st line; n = 207 | ANA vs. ANA+TRAS                                                                               | PFS HR 0.63, P = 0.0016 (favoring combination) | 68         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase III; 1st line; overall population n = 1286; HER2+ n = 219; HER2- n = 952; HER2 missing n = 115 | LET vs. LET+LAP                                                                                | HER2+ population: PFS HR 0.71, P = 0.019 (favoring combination)a<br>HER2-: PFS HR 0.90, P = 0.188 (favoring combination) | 70         |
| EGFR                                                                                                   | Randomized phase II; 1st line; n = 207 (TAM-refractory) + 84 (AI-refractory) | TAM vs. TAM+GEF                                                                               | HR 0.84, P = 0.314 (favoring combination in TAM refractory only) | 71         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase II; 1st line; n = 93   | ANA vs. ANA+GEF                                                                               | PFS HR 0.55 (favoring combination) | 72         |
| Farnesyl transferase                                                                                    | Single arm phase II; n = 20; previous TAM | TAM+TIP                                                                                       | CBR 50% | 73         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase II; n = 120; previous TAM | LET vs. LET+TIP                                                                               | CBR 62% (LET) vs. 49% (LET+TIP) | 74         |
| mTOR                                                                                                   | Randomized phase II; n = 92; > 1st line | LET vs. LET+TEM 10mg daily vs.<br>LET+TEM 30mg daily intermittent | CBR 79% (LET) vs. 82% (LET+TEM 10) vs.<br>83% (LET+TEM 30) | 75         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase II; n = 111; after prior AIs | TAM vs. TAM+EVE                                                                               | TTP 4.5mo (TAM) vs 8.5mo (TAM+EVE); P = 0.008 | 76         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase III; n = 992          | LET vs. LET+TEM                                                                                | PFS 9.2mo (LET) vs. 9.2mo (LET+TEM) | 77         |
| **Neoadjuvant setting**                                                                                |                                      |                                                                                               |              |
| EGFR                                                                                                   | Randomized phase II; n = 206          | ANA vs. ANA+GEF                                                                               | ORR 61% (ANA) vs 48% (ANA+GEF); P = 0.067 | 78         |
|                                                                                                        | Randomized phase II; n = 56           | ANA vs. ANA+GEF                                                                               | ORR 50% (ANA) vs 54% (ANA+GEF) | 79         |
| mTOR                                                                                                   | Randomized phase II; n = 270          | LET vs. LET+EVE                                                                               | Clinical ORR 59% (LET) vs. 68% (LET+EVE);<br>P = 0.062b | 80         |

TRAS: trastuzumab; LET: letrozole; PR: partial response; SD: stable disease; ANA: anastrozole; PFS: progression-free survival; HR: hazard ratio; LET: letrozole; LAP: lapatinib; TAM: tamoxifen; GEF: gefitinib; FUL: fulvestrant; TIP: tipifarnib; CBR: clinical benefit rate; TEM: temsirolimus; Al: aromatase inhibitors; EVE: everolimus; ORR: overall response rate. Where available, P values are indicated.

a Primary end-point: PFS in HER2-positive population (n = 219).  
b Statistically significant at the preplanned, one-sided, alpha = 0.1 level.

---

### Conflict of interest statement
R. Schiff: Research support: AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, GSK. M. Giuliano, C.K. Osborne and M.V. Trivedi have no conflict of interest to declare.

---

### References
1. Clark GM, Osborne CK, McGuire WL. Correlations between estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and patient characteristics in human breast cancer. *J Clin Oncol* 1984;2(10):1102–9.
2. Wenger CR, Beardslee S, Owens MA, Pounds G, Oldaker T, Vendely P, et al. DNA ploidy, S-phase, and steroid receptors in more than 127,000 breast cancer patients. *Breast Cancer Res Treat* 1993;28(1):9–20.
3. Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn M, Jeffrey SS, Rees CA, et al. Molecular portraits of human breast tumours. *Nature* 2000;406(6797):747–52.
4. Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, Aas T, Geisler S, Johnsen H, et al. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses with clinical implications. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001;98(19):10869–10874.
5. Osborne CK. Tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer. *N Engl J Med* 1998;339(22):1609–18.
6. Ring A, Dowsett M. Mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance. *Endocr Relat Cancer* 2004;11(4):643–58.
7. Gibson L, Lawrence D, Dawson C, Bliss J. Aromatase inhibitors for treatment of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2009(4):CD003370.
8. Sanchez-Munoz A, Ribelles N, Alba E. Optimal adjuvant hormonal therapy in postmenopausal women with hormone-receptor-positive early breast cancer: have we answered the question? *Clin Transl Oncol* 2009;12(9):614–20.
9. Brodie AH, Sabinis GJ. Adaptive changes result in activation of alternate signaling pathways and acquisition of resistance to aromatase inhibitors. *Clin Cancer Res* 2011;17(13):4208–13.
10. Johnston SJ, Cheung KL. Fulvestrant – a novel endocrine therapy for breast cancer. *Curr Med Chem* 2010;17(10):902–14.
11. Valachis A, Mauri D, Polyzos NP, Mavroudis D, Georgoulia V, Casazza G. Fulvestrant in the treatment of advanced breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. *Crit Rev Oncol Hematol* 2010;73(3):220–7.
12. Osborne CK, Schiff R, Fuqua SA, Shou J. Estrogen receptor: current understanding of its activation and modulation. *Clin Cancer Res* 2001;7(Suppl):4338s4342s; discussion 4411s4412s.
13. Hopp TA, Weiss HL, Parra IS, Cui Y, Osborne CK, Fuqua SA. Low levels of estrogen receptor beta protein predict resistance to tamoxifen therapy in breast cancer. *Clin Cancer Res* 2004;10(22):7490–9.
14. McKenna NJ, Lanz RB, O'Malley BW. Nuclear receptor coregulators: cellular and molecular biology. *Endocr Rev* 1999;20(3):321–44.
15. Kushner PJ, Agard DA, Greene GL, Scanlan TS, Shiau AK, Uht RM, et al. Estrogen receptor pathways to AP-1. *J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol* 2000;74(5):311–7.
16. Nemere I, Pietras RJ, Blackmore PF. Membrane receptors for steroid hormones: signal transduction and physiological significance. *J Cell Biochem* 2003;88(3):438–45.
17. Shi L, Dong B, Li Z, Lu Y, Ouyang T, Li J, et al. Expression of ER-alpha 36, a novel variant of estrogen receptor alpha, and resistance to tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer. *J Clin Oncol* 2009;27(21):3423–9.
18. Chung YL, Sheu ML, Yang SC, Lin CH, Yen SH. Resistance to tamoxifen-induced

apoptosis is associated with direct interaction between Her2/neu and cell
membrane estrogen receptor in breast cancer. Int J Cancer 2002;97(3):306–12.
19. Kahlert S, Nuedling S, van Eickels M, Vetter H, Meyer R, Grohe C. Estrogen
receptor alpha rapidly activates the IGF-1 receptor pathway. J Biol Chem
2000;275(24):18447–18453.
20. Lee H, Bai W. Regulation of estrogen receptor nuclear export by ligand-
induced and p38-mediated receptor phosphorylation. Mol Cell Biol 2002;22(16):
5835–45.
21. Pontiggia O, Rodriguez V, Fabris V, Raffo D, Bumaschny V, Fiszman G, et al.
Establishment of an in vitro estrogen-dependent mouse mammary tumor
model: a new tool to understand estrogen responsiveness and development
of tamoxifen resistance in the context of stromal-epithelial interactions. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2009;116(2):247–55.
22. Shou J, Massarweh S, Osborne CK, Wakeling AE, Ali S, Weiss H, et al. Mechanisms
of tamoxifen resistance: increased estrogen receptor-HER2/neu cross-talk in
ER/HER2-positive breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96(12):926–35.
23. Osborne CK, Coronado-Heinsohn EB, Hilsenbeck SG, McCue BL, Wakeling AE,
McClelland RA, et al. Comparison of the effects of a pure steroidal antiestrogen
with those of tamoxifen in a model of human breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87(10):746–50.
24. Lake DE, Hudis C. Aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer: an update. Cancer
Control 2002;9(6):490–8.
25. Goel S, Sharma R, Hamilton A, Beith J. LHRH agonists for adjuvant therapy
of early breast cancer in premenopausal women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2009(4):CD004562.
26. Gnant M, Mlineritsch B, Schippinger W, Luschin-Ebengreuth G, Postlberger S,
Menzel C, et al. Endocrine therapy plus zoledronic acid in premenopausal breast
cancer. N Engl J Med 2009;360(7):679–91.
27. Herynk MH, Fuqua SA. Estrogen receptor mutations in human disease. Endocr
Rev 2004;25(6):869–98.
28. Iwase H, Greenman JM, Barnes DM, Bobrow L, Hodgson S, Mathew CG. Loss
of heterozygosity of the oestrogen receptor gene in breast cancer. Br J Cancer
1995;71(3):448–50.
29. Adams BD, Furneaux H, White BA. The micro-ribonucleic acid (miRNA) miR-
206 targets the human estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and represses ERalpha
messenger RNA and protein expression in breast cancer cell lines. Mol Endocrinol
2007;21(5):1132–47.
30. Gururaj AE, Rayala SK, Vadlamudi RK, Kumar R. Novel mechanisms of resistance
to endocrine therapy: genomic and nongenomic considerations. Clin Cancer Res
2006;12(3 Pt 2):1001s–1007s.
31. Lavinsky RM, Jepsen K, Heinzel T, Torchia J, Mullen TM, Schiff R, et al. Diverse
signaling pathways modulate nuclear receptor recruitment of N-CoR and SMRT
complexes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95(6):2920–5.
32. Osborne CK, Bardou V, Hopp TA, Chamness GC, Hilsenbeck SG, Fuqua SA,
et al. Role of the estrogen receptor coactivator AIB1 (SRC-3) and HER-2/neu
in tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2003;95(5):353–61.
33. Schiff R, Reddy P, Ahotupa M, Coronado-Heinsohn E, Grim M, Hilsenbeck SG,
et al. Oxidative stress and AP-1 activity in tamoxifen-resistant breast tumors in
vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92(23):1926–34.
34. Zhou Y, Yau C, Gray JW, Chew K, Dairkee SH, Moore DH, et al. Enhanced NF
kappa B and AP-1 transcriptional activity associated with antiestrogen resistant
breast cancer. BMC Cancer 2007;7:59.
35. Massarweh S, Osborne CK, Creighton CJ, Qin L, Tsimelzon A, Huang S, et al.
Tamoxifen resistance in breast tumors is driven by growth factor receptor
signaling with repression of classic estrogen receptor genomic function. Cancer
Res 2008;68(3):826–33.
36. Lupien M, Meyer CA, Bailey ST, Eeckhoute J, Cook J, Westerling T, et al. Growth
factor stimulation induces a distinct ER(alpha) cistrome underlying breast cancer
endocrine resistance. Genes Dev 2010;24(19):2219–27.
37. Arpino G, Green SJ, Allred DC, Lew D, Martino S, Osborne CK, et al. HER-2
amplification, HER-1 expression, and tamoxifen response in estrogen receptor-
positive metastatic breast cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Clin
Cancer Res 2004;10(17):5670–6.
38. De Laurentiis M, Arpino G, Massarelli E, Ruggiero A, Carlomagno C, Ciardiello F,
et al. A meta-analysis on the interaction between HER-2 expression and response
to endocrine treatment in advanced breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11(13):
4741–8.
39. Konecny G, Pauletti G, Pegram M, Untch M, Dandekar S, Aguilar Z, et al.
Quantitative association between HER-2/neu and steroid hormone receptors
in hormone receptor-positive primary breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
2003;95(2):142–53.
40. Miller TW, Perez-Torres M, Narasanna A, Guix M, Stal O, Perez-Tenorio G,
et al. Loss of Phosphatase and Tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10
engages ErbB3 and insulin-like growth factor-I receptor signaling to promote
antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer. Cancer Res 2009;69(10):4192–201.
41. Cui X, Zhang P, Deng W, Oesterreich S, Lu Y, Mills GB, et al. Insulin-like growth
factor-I inhibits progesterone receptor expression in breast cancer cells via the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin pathway:
progesterone receptor as a potential indicator of growth factor activity in breast
cancer. Mol Endocrinol 2003;17(4):575–88.
42. Creighton CJ, Fu X, Hennessy BT, Casa AJ, Zhang Y, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, et al.
Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling reveals a link between the PI3K pathway
and lower estrogen-receptor (ER) levels and activity in ER+ breast cancer. Breast
Cancer Res 2010;12(3):R40.
43. deGraffenried LA, Friedrichs WE, Russell DH, Donzis EJ, Middleton AK, Silva JM,
et al. Inhibition of mTOR activity restores tamoxifen response in breast cancer
cells with aberrant Akt activity. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10(23):8059–67.
44. DeGraffenried LA, Friedrichs WE, Fulcher L, Fernandes G, Silva JM, Peralba JM,
et al. Eicosapentaenoic acid restores tamoxifen sensitivity in breast cancer cells
with high Akt activity. Ann Oncol 2003;14(7):1051–6.
45. Campbell RA, Bhat-Nakshatri P, Patel NM, Constantinidou D, Ali S, Nakshatri H.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT-mediated activation of estrogen receptor
alpha: a new model for anti-estrogen resistance. J Biol Chem 2001;276(13):
9817–24.
46. Bunone G, Briand PA, Miksicek RJ, Picard D. Activation of the unliganded
estrogen receptor by EGF involves the MAP kinase pathway and direct
phosphorylation. EMBO J 1996;15(9):2174–83.
47. Kato S, Endoh H, Masuhiro Y, Kitamoto T, Uchiyama S, Sasaki H, et al. Activation
of the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein
kinase. Science 1995;270(5241):1491–4.
48. Gutierrez MC, Detre S, Johnston S, Mohsin SK, Shou J, Allred DC, et al. Molecular
changes in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: relationship between
estrogen receptor, HER-2, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Clin Oncol
2005;23(11):2469–76.
49. Butt AJ, McNeil CM, Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL. Downstream targets of growth
factor and oestrogen signalling and endocrine resistance: the potential roles of
c-Myc, cyclin D1 and cyclin E. Endocr Relat Cancer 2005;12(Suppl 1):S47–59.
50. Chu IM, Hengst L, Slingerland JM. The Cdk inhibitor p27 in human cancer:
prognostic potential and relevance to anticancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer
2008;8(4):253–67.
51. Perez-Tenorio G, Berglund F, Esguerra Merca A, Nordenskjold B, Rutqvist LE,
Skoog L, et al. Cytoplasmic p21WAF1/CIP1 correlates with Akt activation and
poor response to tamoxifen in breast cancer. Int J Oncol 2006;28(5):1031–42.
52. Kumar R, Mandal M, Lipton A, Harvey H, Thompson CB. Overexpression of HER2
modulates bcl-2, bcl-XL, and tamoxifen-induced apoptosis in human MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2(7):1215–9.
53. Encarnacion CA, Ciocca DR, McGuire WL, Clark GM, Fuqua SA, Osborne CK.
Measurement of steroid hormone receptors in breast cancer patients on
tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1993;26(3):237–46.
54. Lopez-Tarruella S, Schiff R. The dynamics of estrogen receptor status in breast
cancer: re-shaping the paradigm. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13(23):6921–5.
55. Bayliss J, Hilger A, Vishnu P, Diehl K, El-Ashry D. Reversal of the estrogen receptor
negative phenotype in breast cancer and restoration of antiestrogen response.
Clin Cancer Res 2007;13(23):7029–36.
56. Carroll JS, Meyer CA, Song J, Li W, Geistlinger TR, Beekhout J, et al. Genome-wide
analysis of estrogen receptor binding sites. Nat Genet 2006;38(11):1289–97.
57. Arpino G, Wiechmann L, Osborne CK, Schiff R. Crosstalk between the estrogen
receptor and the HER tyrosine kinase receptor family: molecular mechanism and
clinical implications for endocrine therapy resistance. Endocr Rev 2008;29(2):
217–33.
58. Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL. Biological determinants of endocrine resistance in
breast cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9(9):631–43.
59. Tovey S, Dunne B, Witton CJ, Forsyth A, Cooke TG, Bartlett JM. Can molecular
markers predict when to implement treatment with aromatase inhibitors in
invasive breast cancer? Clin Cancer Res 2005;11(13):4835–42.
60. Ellis MJ, Coop A, Singh B, Mauriac L, Llobombert-Cussac A, Janicke F, et al. Letrozole
is more effective neoadjuvant endocrine therapy than tamoxifen for ErbB-1-
and/or ErbB-2-positive, estrogen receptor-positive primary breast cancer:
evidence from a phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 2001;19(18):3808–16.
61. Smith IE, Dowsett M, Ebbs SR, Dixon JM, Skene A, Blohmer JU, et al. Neoadjuvant
treatment of postmenopausal breast cancer with anastrozole, tamoxifen, or
both in combination: the Immediate Preoperative Anastrozole, Tamoxifen, or
Combined with Tamoxifen (IMPACT) multicenter double-blind randomized trial.
J Clin Oncol 2005;23(22):5108–16.
62. Ellis MJ, Tao Y, Young O, White S, Proia AD, Murray J, et al. Estrogen-independent
proliferation is present in estrogen-receptor HER2-positive primary breast
cancer after neoadjuvant letrozole. J Clin Oncol 2006;24(19):3019–25.
63. Dowsett M, Allred C, Knox J, Quinn E, Salter J, Wale C, et al. Relationship
between quantitative estrogen and progesterone receptor expression and
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) status with recurrence
in the Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination trial. J Clin Oncol
2008;26(7):1059–65.
64. Viale G, Regan MM, Dell'Orto P, Mastropasqua MG, Maiorano E, Rasmussen BB,
et al. Which patients benefit most from adjuvant aromatase inhibitors? Results
using a composite measure of prognostic risk in the BIG 1-98 randomized trial.
Ann Oncol 2011 [Epub ahead of print].
65. Bartlett JM, Brookes CL, Robson T, van de Velde CJ, Billingham LJ, Campbell FM,
et al. Estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor as predictive biomarkers of
response to endocrine therapy: a prospectively powered pathology study in the
Tamoxifen and Exemestane Adjuvant Multinational (TEAM) trial. J Clin Oncol
2011;29(12):1531–8.

66. Howell A, DeFriend D, Robertson J, Blamey R, Walton P. Response to a specific antioestrogen (ICI 182780) in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. *Lancet* 1995; **345**(8941):29–30.

67. Robertson JF, Steger GG, Neven P, Barni S, Gieseking F, Nole F, et al. Activity of fulvestrant in HER2-overexpressing advanced breast cancer. *Ann Oncol* 2010; **21**(6):1246–53.

68. Kaufman B, Mackey JR, Clemens MR, Bapsy PP, Vaid A, Wardley A, et al. Trastuzumab plus anastrozole versus anastrozole alone for the treatment of postmenopausal women with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive, hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer: results from the randomized phase III TAnDEM study. *J Clin Oncol* 2009; **27**(33):5529–37.

69. Marcom PK, Isaacs C, Harris L, Wong ZW, Kommarreddy A, Novielli N, et al. The combination of letrozole and trastuzumab as first or second-line biological therapy produces durable responses in a subset of HER2 positive and ER positive advanced breast cancers. *Breast Cancer Res Treat* 2007; **102**(1):43–9.

70. Johnston S, Pippen J, Jr., Pivot X, Lichinitser M, Sadeghi S, Dieras V, et al. Lapatinib combined with letrozole versus letrozole and placebo as first-line therapy for postmenopausal hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer. *J Clin Oncol* 2009; **27**(33):5538–46.

71. Osborne CK, Neven P, Dirix LY, Mackey JR, Robert J, Underhill C, et al. Gefitinib or placebo in combination with tamoxifen in patients with hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer: a randomized phase II study. *Clin Cancer Res* 2011; **17**(5):1147–59.

72. Cristofanilli M, Valero V, Mangalik A, Royce M, Rabinowitz I, Arena FP, et al. Phase II, randomized trial to compare anastrozole combined with gefitinib or placebo in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer. *Clin Cancer Res* 2010; **16**(6):1904–14.

73. Dalenc F, Doisneau-Sixou SF, Allal BC, Marsili S, Lauwers-Cances V, Chaoui K, et al. Tipifarnib plus tamoxifen in tamoxifen-resistant metastatic breast cancer: a negative phase II and screening of potential therapeutic markers by proteomic analysis. *Clin Cancer Res* 2010; **16**(4):1264–71.

74. Johnston SR, Semiglazov VF, Manikhas GM, Spaeth D, Romieu G, Dodwell DJ, et al. A phase II, randomized, blinded study of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib combined with letrozole in the treatment of advanced breast cancer after antiestrogen therapy. *Breast Cancer Res Treat* 2008; **110**(2):327–35.

75. Carpenter JT, Roché H, Campone M, Colomer R, Jagiello-Gruszfeld A, Moore L, et al. Randomized 3-arm, phase 2 study of temsirolimus (CCI-779) in combination with letrozole in postmenopausal women with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer. ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings, *J Clin Oncol* 2005; **23**(16S) Part I of II (June 1 Supplement): 564.

76. Bachelot T, Bourgier C, Cropet C, Guastalla J-P, Ferrero J-M, Leger-Falandry C, et al. TAMRAD: a GINECO randomized phase II trial of everolimus in combination with tamoxifen versus tamoxifen alone in patients (pts) with hormone-receptor positive, HER2 negative metastatic breast cancer (MBC) with prior exposure to aromatase inhibitors (AI). *Proceedings 2010 San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium* 2010: Abstract S1-6.

77. Chow LWC, Sun SY, Jassem J, Baselga J, Hayes DF, Wolff AC, et al. Phase 3 study of temsirolimus with letrozole or letrozole alone in postmenopausal women with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer. *Breast Cancer Res Treat* 2006; **97**(Suppl 1): Abstract 6091.

78. Smith IE, Walsh G, Skene A, Llombart A, Mayordomo JL, Detre S, et al. A phase II placebo-controlled trial of neoadjuvant anastrozole alone or with gefitinib in early breast cancer. *J Clin Oncol* 2007; **25**(25):3816–22.

79. Polychronis A, Sinnett HD, Hadjiminas D, Singhal H, Mansi JL, Shivapatham D, et al. Preoperative gefitinib versus gefitinib and anastrozole in postmenopausal patients with oestrogen-receptor positive and epidermal-growth-factor-receptor-positive primary breast cancer: a double-blind placebo-controlled phase II randomised trial. *Lancet Oncol* 2005; **6**(6):383–91.

80. Baselga J, Semiglazov V, van Dam P, Manikhas A, Bellet M, Mayordomo J, et al. Phase II randomized study of neoadjuvant everolimus plus letrozole compared with placebo plus letrozole in patients with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. *J Clin Oncol* 2009; **27**(16):2630–7.
