
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Genetics and Genomics 38 (2011) 471–481

Hippo signaling: A hub of growth control, tumor suppression and pluripotency maintenance

Mengxin Yin, Lei Zhang*

State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China

Received 4 August 2011; revised 2 September 2011; accepted 12 September 2011

---

### Abstract

The molecular mechanisms of organ size control and regulation remain one of the major unsolved mysteries of development biology. Almost a decade ago, the discovery of the Hippo signaling pathway in *Drosophila* shed some light on this puzzling issue. The Hippo signaling pathway is highly conserved in both invertebrates and vertebrates, and plays critical roles in animal development. It controls organ size and growth by inhibiting cell proliferation and by promoting apoptosis. Malfunction of the Hippo signaling pathway leads to cancer development and tumorigenesis. Although the core of the signaling pathway is well understood, the upstream inputs and downstream transcriptional regulation are still obscure to us. In this review, we summarize the current understanding of the mechanism and the function of the Hippo signaling pathway and compare its differences between flies and mammals. We underline the crosstalk between the Hippo signaling pathway and other signaling pathways, and the possible roles of the Hippo pathway in stem cell proliferation and self-renewal.

**Keywords:** Cell signaling; Crosstalk; Development; *Drosophila*; Hippo; Organ size control; Stem cell; Tumorigenesis

---

### 1. Introduction

The mechanisms by which organ size is controlled during development have long been a mystery. The size of an organ can be affected by individual cell size, total cell number, and the amount of extracellular matrix and fluid it contains (*Conlon and Raff*, 1999). In response to both global and local stimuli, the size of the cell is controlled by insulin/TOR signaling pathways, which sense and respond to the global energy state of the organ (*Brogiolo et al.*, 2001; *Martin and Hall*, 2005). In addition to this, the Hippo signaling pathway limits organ size by regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis. It is an evolutionarily conserved tumor-suppressor signaling pathway despite its complexity in mammals. Generally, there are mainly three interlinked parts in this pathway: the Hippo core kinase cascade, the upstream regulatory components, and the downstream nuclear proteins. Defects in the core and some of the upstream components of the pathway lead to robust organ overgrowth and link to numerous cancers (*Table 1*) (*Zhang et al.*, 2009c; *Pan*, 2010). Recent studies indicate that the Hippo pathway is involved in crosstalk with other growth regulatory signaling pathways to regulate different sets of downstream target genes in a tissue-specific manner and in turn suppressing tumorigenesis, balancing homeostasis, and maintaining stem cell pluripotency. In this review, we summarize the most important findings about the Hippo signaling pathway, including its components, possible regulation mechanisms and functions in regulating organ size (*Fig. 1*), and highlight the interplay of Hippo signaling pathway with other important signaling pathways and its emerging roles in proliferative control in stem cells.

### 2. Core kinase cascade in the Hippo signaling pathway

Most of the core components of the Hippo signaling pathway were discovered in *Drosophila melanogaster* via genetic screens for tumor suppressor genes (*Justice et al.*, 1995; *Xu et al.*, 1995; *Tapon et al.*, 2002; *Harvey et al.*, 2003;

* Corresponding author. Tel: +86 21 5492 1336.
E-mail address: rayzhang@sibs.ac.cn (L. Zhang).

1673-8527/$ - see front matter Copyright © 2011, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Genetics Society of China. Published by Elsevier Limited and Science Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.jgg.2011.09.009

Table 1  
Hippo signaling pathway components and regulators in Drosophila and mammals.

| Drosophila | Mammals | Conserved domain and motifs | References |
|------------|---------|-----------------------------|------------|
| The core kinase cascade |  |  |  |
| Hippo | MST1-2 | Ste20 Ser/Thr kinase and SARAH domains | Cinar et al., 2007; Minoo et al., 2007; Seidel et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2010; Song et al., 2010 |
| Salvador | Sav1/WW45 | WW and SARAH domain | Tapon et al., 2002 |
| Warts | LATS1-2 | NDR Ser/Thr kinase domain and PPxY motif | Takahashi et al., 2005; Jiang et al., 2006 |
| Mats | Mob1-2, MOBKL1A-B | Mob1/phoein domain | Lai et al., 2005; Kosaka et al., 2007; Sasaki et al., 2007 |
| Yorkie | YAP, TAZ | WW and TEAD-binding domain | Overholtzer et al., 2006; Dong et al., 2007; Lei et al., 2008; Steinhardt et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2008b; Xu et al., 2009 |

| Fat branch of upstream regulatory inputs |  |  |  |
| Fat | Fat1-3, Fat4/Fat-j | Calcium-binding EGF-like domain, Laminin G domain and Cadherin repeat domain |  |
| Dachsous | Dchs1-2 | Cadherin repeat domain |  |
| Four-jointed | Fjx1 | Golgi Ser/Thr kinase domain |  |
| Discs overgrown | CK1δ, CK1ε | Ser/Thr kinase domain |  |
| Lowfat | Lix, Lix1L | Unknown |  |
| Dachs | ? | Myosin motor domain |  |
| Approximated | ZDHHC14 | DHHC zinc finger domain |  |
| Zyx102EF | Zyxin | LIM-domain |  |

| Upstream apical complex |  |  |  |
| Expanded | Willin/FRMD6 | FERM N-terminal domain and Pleckstrin homology-like domain |  |
| Merlin | NF2/Merlin | FERM domain | Asthagiri et al., 2009 |
| Kibra | KIBRA/WWC1-2 | WW and C2 domain |  |

| Apical-basal polarity proteins |  |  |  |
| Crumbs | Crb1-3 | EGF-like and Laminin G domain, PDZ and FERM-binding motifs |  |
| Lethal giant larvae | Lgl1-2 | LLGL2 domain |  |
| aPKC | aPKCλ, aPKCζ | Ser/Thr kinase domain, PB1 domain and Protein kinase C conserved region 1 (C1) |  |

| Other antagonists and Yki/YAP/TAZ regulators |  |  |  |
| dRASSF | RASSF | Ras-association and SARAH domain | Hesson et al., 2009; Richter et al., 2009 |
| dSTRIPAK PP2A | STRIPAK PP2A | PP2A Ser/Thr phosphatase complex |  |
| dJub | Ajuba, LIMD1, WTIP | LIM-domain |  |
| Myopic | HD-PTP | Br01-like domain, protein-interacting V-domain, protein tyrosine phosphatases domain |  |

| Downstream modulators |  |  |  |
| Scalloped | TEAD1/4 | TEA/ATTS and Yki/YAP binding domain |  |
| Wbp2 | Wbp-2 | WW-domain ligand protein GRAM domain |  |

Defects or dysfunctions of some Hippo pathway members have been linked to cancers and tumorigenesis, and several references of accumulating evidences for those related components are shown in the last column. Question mark denotes unknown homolog. Several unique mammalian Hippo signaling components or regulators are not included in this table, such as AMOT and ZO-2.

M. Yin, L. Zhang / Journal of Genetics and Genomics 38 (2011) 471–481

Fig. 1. A sketch diagram of the Hippo signaling pathway in *Drosophila melanogaster*. Arrowed or blunted ends indicate activation/enhancement or inhibition. Dashed lines represent the biochemical regulation mechanisms that remain unclear. TFs: transcription factors.

The core kinase cascade is highly conserved in mammals. Similar to the core pathway in *Drosophila*, the phosphorylation of YAP/TAZ on multiple HxRxxS motifs via kinases MST1/2 (Hpo homologs) and LATS1/2 (Wts homologs) in association with their adaptors, Sav (also called WW45) and MOB1 (a Mats homolog), leads to the binding of YAP/TAZ to 14-3-3 phosphopeptide binding proteins and the suppression of YAP/TAZ activities in mammals (Chan et al., 2005; Callus et al., 2006; Hergovich et al., 2006; Lei et al., 2008; Praskova et al., 2008). Phosphorylation at Yki Ser168/YAP Ser127/TAZ Ser89, leading to the formation of 14-3-3 binding site, is crucial in regulating cytoplasmic-nuclear translocation of Yki/YAP/TAZ (Dong et al., 2007; Oh and Irvine, 2008; Zhao et al., 2008a; Ren et al., 2010). In spite of the conservation of the core Hippo kinase cascade between flies and mammals, the mammalian Hippo signaling pathway appears to be much more complex and functions in a tissue-specific fashion, supported by studies of transgenic and knockout mice (Pan, 2010; Halder and Johnson, 2011). Studies in mouse models of several cancers and in human cancer sample or cell lines also confirmed and highlighted an important role of the Hippo pathway in tumorigenesis (References shown in Table 1).

3. Upstream regulatory components of the Hippo signaling pathway

Over the past several years, a growing number of proteins that regulate the core kinase cascade and Yki were identified. According to their physical interactions and functions, upstream regulatory components can be clustered into different branches.

3.1. Fat branch of upstream regulatory inputs

The fact that Fat (Ft) is involved in the upstream regulation of the Hippo signaling pathway has been uncovered by several research groups in 2006 (Bennett and Harvey, 2006; Silva et al., 2006; Willecke et al., 2006). It is a transmembrane receptor and acts as a non-classic cadherin that controls organ

growth, planar cell polarity (PCP) and proximal–distal patterning (Yang et al., 2002; Casal et al., 2006). The function of Ft is mediated by its ligand Dachsous (Ds), which is also an atypical cadherin, in a ligand-concentration independent manner. The Golgi kinase Four-jointed (Fj) modulates the binding of the extracellular domains of Ft and Ds via phosphorylation (Ishikawa et al., 2008). It promotes the Ft–Ds interaction by phosphorylating Ft, while attenuates the binding affinity of Ds for Ft by phosphorylating Ds (Brittle et al., 2010; Simon et al., 2010). Ft activity is affected by Ds and Fj and depends on the steepness of their gradients in adjacent cells. Differences in expression levels of Ds or Fj in neighboring cells suppress the activity of Hippo pathway, and induce the expression of the downstream Hippo pathway target genes (Willecke et al., 2008). The intracellular domain of Ft could also be phosphorylated by the casein kinase Discs overgrown (Dco) upon Ds binding, which boosts Ft activation (Feng and Irvine, 2009; Sopko et al., 2009). Cytoplasmic protein Low-fat (Lft) stabilizes Ft and Ds in a post-transcriptional fashion via the binding to intracellular domains of both proteins, and regulates sub-apical localization of Ft (Mao et al., 2009). Unconventional myosin Dachs has been demonstrated to function as a negative regulator downstream of Ft and transduces Ft signal to the core components of the Hippo pathway, Wts (Cho et al., 2006; Mao et al., 2006; Feng and Irvine, 2007). When Ft is inactive, the membrane localization and activity of Dachs is regulated by the palmitoyltransferase Approximated (App) with unidentified binding partner of Dachs (Matakatsu and Blair, 2008). Upon Ft regulation, Dachs binds Zyx, a *Drosophila* homolog of the vertebrate Zyxin (Renfranz et al., 2003), and in turn might lead to conformational change of Zyx, enabling the association of Zyx and Wts through LIM-domain of Zyx (Rauskolb et al., 2011). This association presumably causes the reduction of the levels of the inactive Wts (Rauskolb et al., 2011); therefore, Zyx acts as a negative regulator of the Hippo pathway.

Currently, several Ft regulation mechanisms in the Hippo signaling pathway have been explored: influencing Wts stability via inhibition of Dachs and Zyx (Cho et al., 2006; Rauskolb et al., 2011); promoting cell proliferation depending on the gradients of Ds and Fj by either the polar coordinate model, in which the different levels of Ds and Fj are used by cells to compare their positional information and thus affects their proliferation, or the feed-forward model (Zecca and Struhl, 2010), which is specific for the *Drosophila* wing (Halder and Johnson, 2011); or regulating the subcellular localization and protein level of Expanded (Ex) (Bennett and Harvey, 2006). However, the mechanism of how Ft signals through the phosphorylated intracellular domains of itself and Ds to downstream effectors in the Hippo pathway remains obscure.

In mammals, Ft, Ds and Fj homologs, Ft1-4, Dchs1-2 and Fjx1, do exist; however, their connections between Hippo signaling pathway components of the Ft branch have yet been clearly explored though their roles in planar cell polarity signaling have been confirmed to be conserved (Rock et al., 2005; Saburi et al., 2008; Ishiuchi et al., 2009; Mao et al.,

2011). Recently, the requirements for Dchs1–Fat4 signaling, which function as a ligand–receptor pair, during mammalian development are identified by characterizing *Dchs1* mutant mouse and by comparing with *Fat4* mutant mice (Mao et al., 2011). However, the role of homologs of downstream components of Ft signaling branch in mammalian Hippo pathway, Casein kinase 1 (CK1, Dco homolog), Limb expression 1 and Limb expression 1-like (Lix/Lix1L, Lft homolog), has not been proved, despite the fact that CK1δ/ε has been shown to be involved in YAP/TAZ degradation as described above. It has been only reported that these homologs can interact with Fat4, and LIX1L may functionally replace Lft in *Drosophila* Schneider 2 (S2) cells (Mao et al., 2009; Sopko et al., 2009; Grusche et al., 2010). Surprisingly, no evidence has been shown that the homolog of Dachs is contained in the mammalian genome.

### 3.2. The Expanded/Kibra/Merlin complex

Another key branch of upstream regulatory module is the Expanded/Merlin/Kibra complex (Ex/Mer/Kibra). Ex as well as Mer is the FERM (four-point one/ezrin/radixin/moesin) domain-containing protein. Upon the binding of WW domain containing protein Kibra to these two proteins, the complex may possibly recruit the core Hippo pathway proteins to the apical membrane for activation (Baumgartner et al., 2010; Genevet et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010). Noteworthy, Ex/Mer/Kibra associates with Hpo, Sav and Wts at multiple sites (Ex bound Hpo, Mer bound Sav, and Kibra bound Sav and Wts), with unknown requirements. It is still unclear how they are involved in the regulation of Hippo pathway; however, they may function together as an apical scaffold to promote cytoplasmic retention of Yki (Baumgartner et al., 2010; Genevet et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2010). Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase (PI4KIIIα) is found to be required for Mer localization and Hippo signaling in the ovarian follicle cells, of which precise function needs further investigation (Yan et al., 2011). Additionally, it is reported that overexpression of Ex can down-regulate Yki activity via direct WW domain–PPxY interaction, which sequesters Yki from the nucleus independently of its phosphorylation status (Badouel et al., 2009; Oh and Irvine, 2009). However, whether such phosphorylation-independent regulation also exists under physiological conditions and what effect it may bring to the Hippo signaling pathway need further investigation.

Comparing with the Ft branch of upstream regulation in mammals, more is known about the roles of Ex/Mer/KIBRA branch in regulating the Hippo pathway. The most intensively studied mammalian Hippo upstream regulator Neurofibromatosis type II (NF2)/Mer (Mer homolog) is thought to be involved in transducing regulatory signals from cell-surface receptor (e.g., CD44) or adherens junctions to the core Hippo components during contact inhibition. Unlike that it has been linked to a wide range of pathways and cellular functions, no direct relative evidence of how it functions in Hippo signaling has been shown (Pan, 2010). Whether and how KIBRA is involved in the mammalian Hippo pathway is not clear;

however, it could associate with and activate LATS1/2 by enhancing the phosphorylation on their hydrophobic motif to regulate the Hippo signaling activity. The binding between KIBRA and LATS2 appears to prevent proteasome degradation of LATS2 by inhibiting its ubiquitination, and interestingly, an evolutionary conservation of KIBRA as a transcriptional target of the Hippo signaling pathway also has been suggested (Xiao et al., 2011). Recently, it has been reported that the direct interaction of PPxY domain of angiomotin (AMOT) family proteins and WW domains of YAP or PDZ-binding motif of TAZ leads to repression of YAP/TAZ activity. In this scenario, AMOT functions as the C-terminus of *Drosophila* Ex in mammals and independently of the core kinase cascade (Chan et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2011). Later, the mammalian homolog of Ex, willin/Ex1/FRMD6, which lacks the C-terminal conserved PPxY motifs of Ex, has been reported to function as an upstream component of mammalian Hippo pathway by phosphorylating YAP Ser127 and activating the core Hippo pathway kinase cassette together with other mammalian Hippo pathway members, such as Mer (Angus et al., 2011). These findings may suggest that the Ex may split into two during evolution. It may open the window a little bit to understand how evolutionary changes and differences lead to the complexity and tissue-specificity in mammalian Hippo pathway, and therefore, broadens our minds to identify novel mammalian Hippo pathway components and address their roles.

### 3.3. Apical-basal polarity proteins are involved in the Hippo signaling pathway

Several apico-basal cell polarity proteins have been reported to modulate the Hippo pathway activity. The transmembrane apical-basal polarity determinant Crumbs (Crb) directly interacts with and recruits Ex to the plasma membrane. Ex binds to the juxtamembrane FERM-binding motif of Crb, whereas other polarity factors bind to a PDZ-binding motif of Crb. Both the intracellular domain and the extracellular domain of Crb on neighboring cells are necessary for the recruitment of Ex (Chen et al., 2010; Ling et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010). Intriguingly, either mutation or overexpression of Crb leads to increase in Yki activity. Crb overexpression leads to abnormal organ overgrowth via mislocalization and reduced expression of Ex. In comparison, accumulation of Ex in *Crb* mutants may not be sufficient to activate the Hippo pathway or repress Yki directly (Chen et al., 2010; Grzeschik et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010). Although the roles of mammalian Crb family proteins, which share conservation with the intracellular domain of *Drosophila* Crb, in cell polarity were addressed several years ago (Bazellieres et al., 2009), only until recently a research group reported that Crb polarity complex interacts with YAP/TAZ and promotes their phosphorylation in response to cell density information, and also suppresses TGF-β-SMAD signaling (Varelas et al., 2010a).

By contrast, another two polarity proteins, the *Drosophila* neoplastic tumor suppressor Lethal giant larvae (Lgl) and the apical polarity regulator atypical protein kinase C (aPKC)

regulate the Hippo pathway by a distinct route comparing to Crb. Lgl, which is a part of Lgl-Scrib(Scribble)-Dlg(Discs large) complex, can modulate Hippo activity. The depletion of Lgl could trigger the expression of downstream Hippo pathway targets. Similarly, overexpression of aPKC also results in upregulation of Hippo pathway target genes. In addition, Lgl depletion or aPKC activation leads to mis-localization of Hpo and the *Drosophila* Ras-associated domain family protein (dRASSF) (Grzeschik et al., 2010). Although the molecular mechanisms of how Lgl links to Hpo are poorly understood (Grzeschik et al., 2010), it has been suggested that depletion of Lgl and Dlg or activation of aPKC activates Yki through Jun kinase signaling in compensatory cell proliferation and disc regeneration (Sun and Irvine, 2011).

#### 3.4. Other Hippo signaling antagonists and Yki/YAP/TAZ regulators

dRASSF binds to Hpo *via* a carboxyl-terminal Sav/Rassf/Hippo (SARAH) domain in a Wts-competing fashion to negatively regulate the Hippo pathway, and it may also disrupt the phosphorylation of Hpo at Thr195 in the activation loop (Scheel and Hofmann, 2003; Polesello et al., 2006). Also, negative reciprocal regulation of the protein levels of RASSF and Sav by each other was observed. Notably, dual roles of dRASSF in growth regulation were uncovered, as it also performs as a growth suppressor that is possibly dependent of Ras signaling (Polesello et al., 2006). Opposite to dRASSF function, most mammalian RASSF homologs are identified to activate Mst1/2 partially due to SARAH domain-mediated heterodimerization with Mst1/2, except that RASSF6 has been reported to inhibit Mst2, though the understanding of their functions is limited (Avruch et al., 2009; Richter et al., 2009; Grusche et al., 2010). Coincident with dRASSF, the *Drosophila* Striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (dSTRIPAK) protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex was identified as a negative regulator of Hippo signaling by combined proteomic and RNAi screening approaches. It is possibly involved in dephosphorylation of Hpo upon recruitment to dRASSF (Ribeiro et al., 2010). Another class of antagonists of the Hippo signaling pathway is *Drosophila* Jub and mammalian Ajuba LIM proteins (Ajuba, LIMD1 and WTIP) which physically interact with Wts/Lats and Sav/Sav1 in *Drosophila* and mammalian cells leading to the inhibition of Hippo signaling activity (Das Thakur et al., 2010). NPHP4 directly interacts with LATS to abrogate the interaction of LATS and YAP/TAZ, which abolishes 14-3-3 binding and enhances TAZ/YAP transcriptional activity (Habbig et al., 2011). ITCH, a HECT class E3 ubiquitin ligase, has been identified as a unique negative regulator of LATS1. It can form complex with LATS1 through its WW domains and the PPxY motifs of LATS1, and can regulate the stability of LATS1 by polyubiquitination through the 26S proteasome pathway (Ho et al., 2011; Salah et al., 2011).

Myopic (Mop), the *Drosophila* homolog of the candidate tumor suppressor and endosomal regulator His-domain protein tyrosine phosphatase (HD-PTP), was identified as an inhibitor
of Yki in developing tissues by a screen for conditional growth suppressor genes. It controls Yki endosomal association and protein level by physically interacting with Yki in endosomes, and acts downstream of Wts ultimately influencing the expression of a subset of Yki target genes, excluding *diap1* (Gilbert et al., 2011). α-catenin, an adherens junction component and a tumor suppressor, promotes YAP1 cytoplasmic localization and inhibits YAP1 activity by interacting with YAP1/14-3-3 complex to stabilize the complex and/or inhibit the access of PP2A phosphatase (Schlegelmilch et al., 2011; Silvis et al., 2011). The functions of myopic and α-catenin are analogous to those of Ex and AMOT in direct regulation of Yki/YAP/TAZ. Another YAP regulator, zona occludens-2 (ZO-2) has been identified to play contrary role to angiomotin-like-1 on pro-apoptotic function of YAP. It binds to YAP via PDZ-binding motif of YAP, which promotes nuclear import and pro-apoptotic function of YAP (Oka et al., 2010, 2011). Cytoplasmic apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 (ASPP) can block the YAP–LATS1 interaction to enhance the nuclear accumulation of YAP/TAZ and the YAP/TAZ-dependent transcriptional regulation (Vigneron et al., 2010). The activity of TAZ can also be regulated by PP1A, which increases TAZ nuclear localization, and ASPP2, which facilitates TAZ-PP1A interaction via TAZ dephosphorylation at Ser89 and Ser311 (Liu et al., 2011). Moreover, despite the conserved YAP/TAZ inactivation via cytoplasmic retention, an additional YAP/TAZ inactivation mode is through proteasomal degradation. Upon YAP/TAZ phosphorylation by the kinase LATS on all five consensus HxRxxS motifs including Ser381 and subsequently by CK1δ/ε, SCF (β-transducin repeat-containing proteins) E3 ubiquitin ligase is recruited for the degradation of YAP/TAZ (Zhao et al., 2010).

### 3.5. Mechanotransduction/cell tension modulates the Hippo pathway

It has been reported by two research groups that the Hippo pathway activity is affected by the modulation of the apical level of filamentous actin (F-action) through actin-capping proteins in both flies and mammals. High level of F-actin accumulation inhibits the Hippo signaling, whereas active Hippo signaling also blocks F-actin accumulation via a partial Yki-independent mechanism. However, the precise mechanism of how Hippo pathway activation and apical F-actin levels link together remains to be determined (Fernandez et al., 2011; Richardson, 2011; Sansores-Garcia et al., 2011). YAP/TAZ are identified as sensors of cytoskeletal tension and mediators of mechanical signals exerted by extracellular matrix rigidity and cell shape instructed by the cellular microenvironment. This regulation requires Rho GTPase activity and the tension of the actomyosin cytoskeleton, but is independent of the core kinase cascade of the Hippo pathway (Dupont et al., 2011). E-cadherin, acting as an upstream cell-surface regulator, directly stimulates the Hippo signaling pathway in response to contact inhibition to control proliferation and the subcellular localization of YAP (Kim et al., 2011).

Based on the current understanding of the upstream regulation mechanism, different branches of the upstream regulation inputs interfere with each other to interpret cell–cell contact and cell tension information (Fig. 1). However, how each upstream branch of the Hippo pathway contributes to organ size control and what are the exact mechanisms by which upstream regulatory proteins activate the Hippo pathway by responding to different signaling inputs remain unclear.

## 4. Downstream regulation and targets of the Hippo signaling pathway

Biological outcomes of the Hippo signaling are growth suppression, induced apoptosis and cell fate determination, which result from cell-type dependent transcriptional outputs. In *Drosophila*, Yki accumulates into the nucleus without repression by the Hippo signaling, and then associates with transcription factors to promote proliferation and inhibit apoptosis. The first reported binding partner of Yki is the TEAD/TEF family transcription factor Scalloped (Sd) which contains DNA-binding domain in its N-terminus, binds Yki at its C-terminal part, and in turn promotes the expression of the cell death inhibitor *diap1* (Goulev et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2008). Later, it has been demonstrated that DNA-binding transcription factors, Homothorax (Hth) and Teashirt (Tsh), can also bind with Yki to upregulate microRNA *bantam* in the progenitor domain of the *Drosophila* eye imaginal disc (Peng et al., 2009). In another study, a Smad family DNA-binding transcription factor, Mad, was identified to interact with Yki and also promote the expression of microRNA *bantam* (Oh and Irvine, 2011). Furthermore, the *Drosophila* homolog of WW domain binding protein 2 (Wbp2) has been reported to cooperate with Yki and enhance the transcriptional coactivator properties of Yki (Zhang et al., 2011). Activated Yki not only drives the expression of genes that play a role in cell proliferation or survival, such as *diap1*, the microRNA *bantam*, cyclin *E* (*cycE*) and *E2F1*, but also enhances the expression of several upstream regulators of the Hippo pathway, including Kibra, Ex, Crb and Fj, to form a negative feedback loop (Pan, 2010). Last but not least, Yki also promotes the expression of some genes, such as *wg* and *ser*, which are involved in the crosstalk with other pathways (discussed below) (Rogulja et al., 2008).

In mammals, both YAP and TAZ can interact with TEAD1/4 (mammalian Sd homolog) which is thought to be the major mediator of YAP/TAZ function (Ota and Sasaki, 2008; Zhao et al., 2008b; Chan et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009a), Wbp2 (Chen et al., 1997, 2010; Chan et al., 2011) and the Runt family member Runx2 (Yagi et al., 1999; Hong et al., 2005). In addition, several other transcription factors have been reported to be the binding partner of TAZ, such as thyroid transcription factor-1, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ), Tbx5, Pax3, and Smad2/3/4 (Park et al., 2004; Hong et al., 2005; Murakami et al., 2005; Murakami et al., 2006; Varelas et al., 2008). A great number of genes that respond to anti-apoptosis proliferation, CTGF, *AREG*, *BIRC5-2*, *FGF*, and *GLI-2*, can be activated via the
association of YAP/TAZ with their binding partners mentioned above to promote cell growth and inhibit apoptosis (Dong et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2009a, 2009b). Notably, upon c-Abl regulated phosphorylation at Y357 under certain conditions like DNA damage, YAP interacts with p73 and activates the transcription of pro-apoptotic genes as a tumor suppressor; however, this process is attenuated by Akt phosphorylation of YAP at Ser127 (Strano et al., 2001, 2005; Levy et al., 2008).

### 5. Crosstalk between Hippo signaling and other signaling pathways

As mentioned above, several downstream targets of Yki as well as YAP/TAZ could respond to other signaling pathways, and also several Hippo signaling components are found to participate in other signaling pathways. A co-dependent regulatory relationship of Myc, a conserved growth-promoting transcription factor and Yki has been reported. Myc has been identified as a target gene of the Hippo pathway, and its transcription is upregulated by activated Yki with different binding partners. Conversely, it can function as a negative regulator of Yki through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms (Neto-Silva et al., 2010). In another study, it is suggested that YAP1 is a Sonic hedgehog (Shh) effector. Shh, the major regulatory pathway of cell differentiation, tissue polarity and cell proliferation, induces YAP1 expression and promotes YAP1 nuclear localization in cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs) and in turn YAP1 promotes the proliferation of CGNPs (Fernandez et al., 2009). Furthermore, the association of cytoplasmic-localized TAZ and dishevelled (DVL) in the cytoplasm disrupts the phosphorylation of DVL by CK1δ/ε, resulting in the restriction of Wnt/β-catenin signaling (Varelas et al., 2010b). In response to the CDK8/9 mediated phosphorylation of the linker region of the transcription complex whose formation is mediated by the activated Smad, YAP binds to the activated Smad via its WW domains. As Smad is activated by TGF-β and BMP receptor kinases, this binding is believed to be involved in the Smad-dependent transcription which responds to TGF-β/BMP signaling, an important signaling pathway in morphogenesis and tumorigenesis, and the nuclear sequestration of Smad. It has been shown that in response to cell density-mediated formation of polarity complexes, like Crumbs polarity complex, through the regulation of phosphorylation of YAP/TAZ and their binding with Smad, the suppression of TGF-β signaling has been observed (Alarcon et al., 2009; Varelas et al., 2010a). In addition, several morphogens, such as Wg and Dpp, have been proven to control the expression of Hippo upstream components (Rogulja et al., 2008), while by controlling the expression of morphogen like Wg and Ser (Notch pathway ligand) or the heparin sulphate proteoglycans Dally and Dally-like, Yki can modulate morphogen signaling (Baena-Lopez et al., 2008). More recently, Jun kinase signaling is identified to be the activity modulator of the Hippo pathway in wing discs, highlighting a possible crosstalk between these two signaling pathways (Sun and Irvine, 2011). To sum up, these results uncover a function of Hippo pathway components in regulating other signaling pathways, and suggest that the Hippo pathway may function as a mediator to coordinate physiological cues and multiple signals from different signaling pathways to control cell proliferation and apoptosis.

### 6. Roles in stem cell proliferation and regeneration

Considering that Hippo signaling output is integrated with other growth-controlling pathways that are involved in stem cell self-renewal and proliferation, Hippo signaling pathway may have important roles in stem cell proliferation. Loss of Hippo signaling activity in either midgut precursor cells or epithelial cells stimulates *Drosophila* intestine stem cell (ISC) proliferation by promoting the expression of JAK-STAT and EGFR signaling pathway activator. Also, Wts and Yki facilitate the regeneration in response to tissue damage or activation of the damage-sensing Jun kinase pathway (Karpowicz et al., 2010; Shaw et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2010; Sun and Irvine, 2011). It has been observed that the level of YAP significantly increased during dextran sodium sulphate induced crypts regeneration (Cai et al., 2010), and also has been reported that YAP and its cofactor TEAD are involved in maintaining embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency and basal epidermal progenitors and regulating morphogenesis (Lian et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2011). These observations may establish a critical role of YAP in stem cell self-renewal and proliferation.

### 7. Concluding remarks

Over the past decade, remarkable progress has been made in delineating the Hippo signaling pathway. In recent years, the focus of this research field has been shifted from identifying the composition of the Hippo pathway and defining its roles in developmental growth control to delineating the whole signaling network of growth control by emphasizing the interplay of Hippo signaling pathway with other signaling pathways and establishing the communication path of how Hpo activity affects stem cell regeneration decisions. Recently, an unexpected role in postmitotic neuronal homeostasis of the Hippo pathway was revealed. This function has an impact upon autophagy and is independent of the function on proliferation and cell polarity (Calamita and Fanto, 2011; Napoletano et al., 2011). As the roles for the Hippo pathway become more complex, our knowledge about the detailed regulation mechanisms of the Hippo pathway remains incomplete. Although recent findings suggest that cell polarity and cell adhesion proteins can regulate the Hippo pathway, it will be important to define the precise mechanisms of how the primary signals or physiological cues activate the Hippo pathway and how this information is interpreted by the pathway to control tissue growth. Furthermore, the importance of evolutionary variations of the Hippo pathway and tissue-specific expression pattern awaits delineation. Hopefully, the answers to these questions could advance our understanding of how Hippo pathway together with other pathways controls

tissue growth during development and how dysfunctions of them drive cancers and other diseases.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 30971646), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program No. 2010CB912100), the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (No. 2011CB915502) and the “Strategic Priority Research Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDA01010406). L.Z. is the scholar of the Hundred Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

# References

Alarcon, C., Zaromytidou, A.I., Xi, Q., Gao, S., Yu, J., Fujisawa, S., Barlas, A., Miller, A.N., Manova-Todorova, K., Macias, M.J., Sapkota, G., Pan, D., Massague, J., 2009. Nuclear CDKs drive Smad transcriptional activation and turnover in BMP and TGF-β pathways. Cell 139, 757–769.

Angus, L., Moleirinho, S., Herron, L., Sinha, A., Zhang, X., Niestrata, M., Dholakia, K., Prystowsky, M.B., Harvey, K.F., Reynolds, P.A., Gunn-Moore, F.J., 2011. Willin/FRMD6 expression activates the Hippo signaling pathway kinases in mammals and antagonizes oncogenic YAP. Oncogene. doi:10.1038/onc.2011.224.

Asthagiri, A.R., Parry, D.M., Butman, J.A., Kim, H.J., Tsilou, E.T., Zhuang, Z., Lonser, R.R., 2009. Neurofibromatosis type 2. Lancet 373, 1974–1986.

Avruch, J., Xavier, R., Bardeesy, N., Zhang, X.F., Praskova, M., Zhou, D., Xia, F., 2009. Rassf family of tumor suppressor polypeptides. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 11001–11005.

Badouel, C., Gardano, L., Amin, N., Garg, A., Rosenfeld, R., Le Bihan, T., McNeill, H., 2009. The FERM-domain protein Expanded regulates Hippo pathway activity via direct interactions with the transcriptional activator Yorkie. Dev. Cell 16, 411–420.

Baena-Lopez, L.A., Rodriguez, I., Baonza, A., 2008. The tumor suppressor genes *dachsous* and *fat* modulate different signalling pathways by regulating dally and dally-like. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 9645–9650.

Baumgartner, R., Poernbacher, I., Buser, N., Hafen, E., Stocker, H., 2010. The WW domain protein Kibra acts upstream of Hippo in *Drosophila*. Dev. Cell 18, 309–316.

Bazellieres, E., Assemat, E., Arsanto, J.P., Le Bivic, A., Massey-Harroche, D., 2009. Crumbs proteins in epithelial morphogenesis. Front. Biosci. 14, 2149–2169.

Bennett, F.C., Harvey, K.F., 2006. Fat cadherin modulates organ size in *Drosophila* via the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling pathway. Curr. Biol. 16, 2101–2110.

Brittle, A.L., Repiso, A., Casal, J., Lawrence, P.A., Strutt, D., 2010. Four-jointed modulates growth and planar polarity by reducing the affinity of dachsous for fat. Curr. Biol. 20, 803–810.

Brogiolo, W., Stocker, H., Ikeya, T., Rintelen, F., Fernandez, R., Hafen, E., 2001. An evolutionarily conserved function of the *Drosophila* insulin receptor and insulin-like peptides in growth control. Curr. Biol. 11, 213–221.

Cai, J., Zhang, N., Zheng, Y., de Wilde, R.F., Maitra, A., Pan, D., 2010. The Hippo signaling pathway restricts the oncogenic potential of an intestinal regeneration program. Genes Dev. 24, 2383–2388.

Calamita, P., Fanto, M., 2011. Slimming down fat makes neuropathic Hippo: the Fat/Hippo tumor suppressor pathway protects adult neurons through regulation of autophagy. Autophagy 7, 907–909.

Callus, B.A., Verhagen, A.M., Vaux, D.L., 2006. Association of mammalian sterile twenty kinases, Mst1 and Mst2, with hSalvador via C-terminal coiled-coil domains, leads to its stabilization and phosphorylation. FEBS J. 273, 4264–4276.

Casal, J., Lawrence, P.A., Struhl, G., 2006. Two separate molecular systems, Dachsous/Fat and Starry night/Frizzled, act independently to confer planar cell polarity. Development 133, 4561–4572.

Chan, E.H., Nousiainen, M., Chalamalasetty, R.B., Schafer, A., Nigg, E.A., Sillje, H.H., 2005. The Ste20-like kinase Mst2 activates the human large tumor suppressor kinase Lats1. Oncogene 24, 2076–2086.

Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Loo, L.S., Chong, Y.F., Huang, C., Hong, W., 2009. TEADs mediate nuclear retention of TAZ to promote oncogenic transformation. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 14347–14358.

Chan, S.W., Lim, C.J., Huang, C., Chong, Y.F., Gunaratne, H.J., Hogue, K.A., Blackstock, W.P., Harvey, K.F., Hong, W., 2011. WW domain-mediated interaction with Wbp2 is important for the oncogenic property of TAZ. Oncogene 30, 600–610.

Chen, C.L., Gajewski, K.M., Hamaratoglu, F., Bossuyt, W., Sansores-Garcia, L., Tao, C., Halder, G., 2010. The apical-basal cell polarity determinant Crumbs regulates Hippo signaling in *Drosophila*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 15810–15815.

Chen, H.I., Einbond, A., Kwak, S.J., Linn, H., Koepf, E., Peterson, S., Kelly, J.W., Sudol, M., 1997. Characterization of the WW domain of human yes-associated protein and its polyproline-containing ligands. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 17070–17077.

Cho, E., Feng, Y., Rauskolb, C., Maitra, S., Fehon, R., Irvine, K.D., 2006. Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. Nat. Genet. 38, 1142–1150.

Cinar, B., Fang, P.K., Lutchman, M., Di Vizio, D., Adam, R.M., Pavlova, N., Rubin, M.A., Yelick, P.C., Freeman, M.R., 2007. The pro-apoptotic kinase Mst1 and its caspase cleavage products are direct inhibitors of Akt1. EMBO J. 26, 4523–4534.

Conlon, I., Raff, M., 1999. Size control in animal development. Cell 96, 235–244.

Das Thakur, M., Feng, Y., Jagannathan, R., Seppa, M.J., Skeath, J.B., Longmore, G.D., 2010. Ajuba LIM proteins are negative regulators of the Hippo signaling pathway. Curr. Biol. 20, 657–662.

Dong, J., Feldmann, G., Huang, J., Wu, S., Zhang, N., Comerford, S.A., Gayyed, M.F., Anders, R.A., Maitra, A., Pan, D., 2007. Elucidation of a universal size-control mechanism in *Drosophila* and mammals. Cell 130, 1120–1133.

Dupont, S., Morsut, L., Aragona, M., Enzo, E., Giulitti, S., Cordenonsi, M., Zanconato, F., Le Digabel, J., Forcato, M., Bicciato, S., Elvassore, N., Piccolo, S., 2011. Role of YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction. Nature 474, 179–183.

Feng, Y., Irvine, K.D., 2007. Fat and expanded act in parallel to regulate growth through warts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 20362–20367.

Feng, Y., Irvine, K.D., 2009. Processing and phosphorylation of the Fat receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 11989–11994.

Fernandez, B.G., Gaspar, P., Bras-Pereira, C., Jezowska, B., Rebelo, S.R., Janody, F., 2011. Actin-capping protein and the Hippo pathway regulate F-actin and tissue growth in *Drosophila*. Development 138, 2337–2346.

Fernandez, L.A., Northcott, P.A., Dalton, J., Fraga, C., Ellison, D., Angers, S., Taylor, M.D., Kenney, A.M., 2009. YAP1 is amplified and up-regulated in hedgehog-associated medulloblastomas and mediates Sonic hedgehog-driven neural precursor proliferation. Genes Dev. 23, 2729–2741.

Genevet, A., Wehr, M.C., Brain, R., Thompson, B.J., Tapon, N., 2010. Kibra is a regulator of the Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling network. Dev. Cell 18, 300–308.

Gilbert, M.M., Tipping, M., Veraksa, A., Moberg, K.H., 2011. A screen for conditional growth suppressor genes identifies the *Drosophila* homolog of HD-PTP as a regulator of the oncoprotein Yorkie. Dev. Cell 20, 700–712.

Goulev, Y., Fauny, J.D., Gonzalez-Marti, B., Flagiello, D., Silber, J., Zider, A., 2008. SCALLOPED interacts with YORKIE, the nuclear effector of the Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway in *Drosophila*. Curr. Biol. 18, 435–441.

Gruschke, F.A., Richardson, H.E., Harvey, K.F., 2010. Upstream regulation of the Hippo size control pathway. Curr. Biol. 20, R574–582.

Grzeschik, N.A., Parsons, L.M., Allott, M.L., Harvey, K.F., Richardson, H.E., Habbig, S., Bartram, M.P., Muller, R.U., Schwarz, R., Andriopoulos, N., Chen, S., Sagmuller, J.G., Hoehne, M., Burst, V., Liebau, M.C.,

Reinhardt, H.C., Benzing, T., Schermer, B., 2011. NPHP4, a cilia-associated protein, negatively regulates the Hippo pathway. J. Cell Biol. 193, 633–642.

Halder, G., Johnson, R.L., 2011. Hippo signaling: growth control and beyond. Development 138, 9–22.

Harvey, K.F., Pfleger, C.M., Hariharan, I.K., 2003. The Drosophila Mst ortholog, Hippo, restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis. Cell 114, 457–467.

Hergovich, A., Schmitz, D., Hemmings, B.A., 2006. The human tumour suppressor LATS1 is activated by human MOB1 at the membrane. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 345, 50–58.

Hesson, L.B., Dunwell, T.L., Cooper, W.N., Catchpoole, D., Brini, A.T., Chiaramonte, R., Griffiths, M., Chalmers, A.D., Maher, E.R., Latif, F., 2009. The novel RASSF6 and RASSF10 candidate tumour suppressor genes are frequently epigenetically inactivated in childhood leukaemias. Mol. Cancer 8, 42.

Ho, K.C., Zhou, Z., She, Y.M., Chun, A., Cyr, T.D., Yang, X., 2011. Itch E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates large tumor suppressor 1 stability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 4870–4875 [corrected].

Hong, J.H., Hwang, E.S., McManus, M.T., Amsterdam, A., Tian, Y., Kalmukova, R., Mueller, E., Benjamin, T., Spiegelman, B.M., Sharp, P.A., Hopkins, N., Yaffe, M.B., 2005. TAZ, a transcriptional modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. Science 309, 1074–1078.

Huang, J., Wu, S., Barrera, J., Matthews, K., Pan, D., 2005. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the Drosophila Homolog of YAP. Cell 122, 421–434.

Ishikawa, H.O., Takeuchi, H., Haltiwanger, R.S., Irvine, K.D., 2008. Four-jointed is a Golgi kinase that phosphorylates a subset of cadherin domains. Science 321, 401–404.

Ishiuchi, T., Misaki, K., Yonemura, S., Takeichi, M., Tanoue, T., 2009. Mammalian Fat and Dachsous cadherins regulate apical membrane organization in the embryonic cerebral cortex. J. Cell. Biol. 185, 959–967.

Jia, J., Zhang, W., Wang, B., Trinko, R., Jiang, J., 2003. The Drosophila Ste20 family kinase dMST functions as a tumor suppressor by restricting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. Genes Dev. 17, 2514–2519.

Jiang, Z., Li, X., Hu, J., Zhou, W., Jiang, Y., Li, G., Lu, D., 2006. Promoter hypermethylation-mediated down-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 in human astrocytoma. Neurosci. Res. 56, 450–458.

Justice, R.W., Zilian, O., Woods, D.F., Noll, M., Bryant, P.J., 1995. The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. Genes Dev. 9, 534–546.

Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Tao, C., Verstreken, P., Hiesinger, P.R., Bellen, H.J., Halder, G., 2002. Shar-pei mediates cell proliferation arrest during imaginal disc growth in Drosophila. Development 129, 5719–5730.

Karpowicz, P., Perez, J., Perrimon, N., 2010. The Hippo tumor suppressor pathway regulates intestinal stem cell regeneration. Development 137, 4135–4145.

Kim, N.G., Koh, E., Chen, X., Gumbiner, B.M., 2011. E-cadherin mediates contact inhibition of proliferation through Hippo signaling-pathway components. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11930–11935.

Kosaka, Y., Mimori, K., Tanaka, F., Inoue, H., Watanabe, M., Mori, M., 2007. Clinical significance of the loss of MATS1 mRNA expression in colorectal cancer. Int. J. Oncol. 31, 333–338.

Lai, Z.C., Wei, X., Shimizu, T., Ramos, E., Rohrbaugh, M., Nikolaidis, N., Ho, L.L., Li, Y., 2005. Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor, mats. Cell 120, 675–685.

Lee, K.P., Lee, J.H., Kim, T.S., Kim, T.H., Park, H.D., Byun, J.S., Kim, M.C., Jeong, W.I., Calvisi, D.F., Kim, J.M., Lim, D.S., 2010. The Hippo-Salvador pathway restrains hepatic oval cell proliferation, liver size, and liver tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 8248–8253.

Lei, Q.Y., Zhang, H., Zhao, B., Zha, Z.Y., Bai, F., Pei, X.H., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., Guan, K.L., 2008. TAZ promotes cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the Hippo pathway. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 2426–2436.

Levy, D., Adamovich, Y., Reuven, N., Shaul, Y., 2008. Yap1 phosphorylation by c-Abl is a critical step in selective activation of proapoptotic genes in response to DNA damage. Mol. Cell 29, 350–361.

Lian, I., Kim, J., Okazawa, H., Zhao, J., Zhao, B., Yu, J., Chinnaiyan, A., Israel, M.A., Goldstein, L.S., Abujarour, R., Ding, S., Guan, K.L., 2010. The role of YAP transcription coactivator in regulating stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. Genes Dev. 24, 1106–1118.

Ling, C., Zheng, Y., Yin, F., Yu, J., Huang, J., Hong, Y., Wu, S., Pan, D., 2010. The apical transmembrane protein Crumbs functions as a tumor suppressor that regulates Hippo signaling by binding to Expanded. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 10532–10537.

Liu, C.Y., Lv, X., Li, T., Xu, Y., Zhou, X., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., Lei, Q.Y., Guan, K.L., 2011. PP1 cooperates with ASPP2 to dephosphorylate and activate TAZ. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 5558–5566.

Lu, L., Li, Y., Kim, S.M., Bossuyt, W., Liu, P., Qiu, Q., Wang, Y., Halder, G., Finegold, M.J., Lee, J.S., Johnson, R.L., 2010. Hippo signaling is a potent in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 1437–1442.

Mao, Y., Kucuk, B., Irvine, K.D., 2009. Drosophila lowfat, a novel modulator of Fat signaling. Development 136, 3223–3233.

Mao, Y., Rauskolb, C., Cho, E., Hu, W.L., Hayter, H., Minihan, G., Katz, F.N., Irvine, K.D., 2006. Dachs: an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth, affinity and gene expression in Drosophila. Development 133, 2539–2551.

Mao, Y., Mulvaney, J., Zakaria, S., Yu, T., Morgan, K.M., Allen, S., Basson, M.A., Francis-West, P., Irvine, K.D., 2011. Characterization of a Dchs1 mutant mouse reveals requirements for Dchs1-Fat4 signaling during mammalian development. Development 138, 947–957.

Martin, D.E., Hall, M.N., 2005. The expanding TOR signaling network. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 17, 158–166.

Matakatsu, H., Blair, S.S., 2008. The DHHC palmitoyltransferase approximated regulates Fat signaling and Dachs localization and activity. Curr. Biol. 18, 1390–1395.

Minoo, P., Zlobec, I., Baker, K., Tornillo, L., Terracciano, L., Jass, J.R., Lugli, A., 2007. Prognostic significance of mammalian sterile20-like kinase 1 in colorectal cancer. Mod. Pathol. 20, 331–338.

Murakami, M., Nakagawa, M., Olson, E.N., Nakagawa, O., 2005. A WW domain protein TAZ is a critical coactivator for TBX5, a transcription factor implicated in Holt-Oram syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 18034–18039.

Murakami, M., Tominaga, J., Makita, R., Uchijima, Y., Kurihara, Y., Nakagawa, O., Asano, T., Kurihara, H., 2006. Transcriptional activity of Pax3 is co-activated by TAZ. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 339, 533–539.

Napoletano, F., Occhi, S., Calamita, P., Volpi, V., Blanc, E., Charroux, B., Royet, J., Fanto, M., 2011. Polyglutamine Atrophin provokes neurodegeneration in Drosophila by repressing fat. EMBO J. 30, 945–958.

Neto-Silva, R.M., de Beco, S., Johnston, L.A., 2010. Evidence for a growth-stabilizing regulatory feedback mechanism between Myc and Yorkie, the Drosophila homolog of Yap. Dev. Cell 19, 507–520.

Oh, H., Irvine, K.D., 2008. In vivo regulation of Yorkie phosphorylation and localization. Development 135, 1081–1088.

Oh, H., Irvine, K.D., 2009. In vivo analysis of Yorkie phosphorylation sites. Oncogene 28, 1916–1927.

Oh, H., Irvine, K.D., 2011. Cooperative regulation of growth by Yorkie and Mad through bantam. Dev. Cell 20, 109–122.

Ota, M., Sasaki, H., 2008. Mammalian Tead proteins regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as transcriptional mediators of Hippo signaling. Development 135, 4059–4069.

Oka, T., Schmitt, A.P., Sudol, M., 2011. Opposing roles of angiomotin-like-1 and zona occludens-2 on pro-apoptotic function of YAP. Oncogene. doi:10.1038/onc.2011.216.

Oka, T., Remue, E., Meerschaert, K., Vanloo, B., Boucherie, C., Gfeller, D., Bader, G.D., Sidhu, S.S., Vandekerckhove, J., Gettemans, J., Sudol, M., 2010. Functional complexes between YAP2 and ZO-2 are PDZ domain-dependent, and regulate YAP2 nuclear localization and signalling. Biochem. J. 432, 461–472.

Overholtzer, M., Zhang, J., Smolen, G.A., Muir, B., Li, W., Sgroi, D.C., Deng, C.X., Brugge, J.S., Haber, D.A., 2006. Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate oncogene on the chromosome 11q22 amplicon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 12405–12410.

Pan, D., 2010. The Hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. Dev. Cell 19, 491–505.

Pantalacci, S., Tapon, N., Leopold, P., 2003. The Salvador partner Hippo promotes apoptosis and cell-cycle exit in *Drosophila*. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 921–927.

Park, K.S., Whitsett, J.A., Di Palma, T., Hong, J.H., Yaffe, M.B., Zannini, M., 2004. TAZ interacts with TTF-1 and regulates expression of surfactant protein-C. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 17384–17390.

Peng, H.W., Slattery, M., Mann, R.S., 2009. Transcription factor choice in the Hippo signaling pathway: homothorax and Yorkie regulation of the microRNA *bantam* in the progenitor domain of the *Drosophila* eye imaginal disc. Genes Dev. 23, 2307–2319.

Polesello, C., Huelsmann, S., Brown, N.H., Tapon, N., 2006. The *Drosophila* RASSF homolog antagonizes the Hippo pathway. Curr. Biol. 16, 2459–2465.

Praskova, M., Xia, F., Avruch, J., 2008. MOBKL1A/MOBKL1B phosphorylation by MST1 and MST2 inhibits cell proliferation. Curr. Biol. 18, 311–321.

Rauskolb, C., Pan, G., Reddy, B.V., Oh, H., Irvine, K.D., 2011. Zyxin links fat signaling to the Hippo pathway. PLoS Biol. 9, e1000624.

Ren, F., Zhang, L., Jiang, J., 2010. Hippo signaling regulates Yorkie nuclear localization and activity through 14-3-3 dependent and independent mechanisms. Dev. Biol. 337, 303–312.

Renfranz, P.J., Siegrist, S.E., Stronach, B.E., Macalma, T., Beckerle, M.C., 2003. Molecular and phylogenetic characterization of Zyx102, a *Drosophila* orthologue of the zyxin family that interacts with *Drosophila* Enabled. Gene 305, 13–26.

Ribeiro, P.S., Josue, F., Wepf, A., Wehr, M.C., Rinner, O., Kelly, G., Tapon, N., Gstaiger, M., 2010. Combined functional genomic and proteomic approaches identify a PP2A complex as a negative regulator of Hippo signaling. Mol. Cell 39, 521–534.

Richardson, H.E., 2011. Actin up for Hippo. EMBO J. 30, 2307–2309.

Richter, A.M., Pfeifer, G.P., Dammann, R.H., 2009. The RASSF proteins in cancer; from epigenetic silencing to functional characterization. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1796, 114–128.

Robinson, B.S., Huang, J., Hong, Y., Moberg, K.H., 2010. Crumbs regulates Salvador/Warts/Hippo signaling in *Drosophila* via the FERM-domain protein Expanded. Curr. Biol. 20, 582–590.

Rock, R., Schrauth, S., Gessler, M., 2005. Expression of mouse dchs1, fjx1, and fat-j suggests conservation of the planar cell polarity pathway identified in *Drosophila*. Dev. Dyn. 234, 747–755.

Rogulja, D., Rauskolb, C., Irvine, K.D., 2008. Morphogen control of wing growth through the Fat signaling pathway. Dev. Cell 15, 309–321.

Saburi, S., Hester, I., Fischer, E., Pontoglio, M., Eremina, V., Gessler, M., Quaggin, S.E., Harrison, R., Mount, R., McNeill, H., 2008. Loss of Fat4 disrupts PCP signaling and oriented cell division and leads to cystic kidney disease. Nat. Genet. 40, 1010–1015.

Salah, Z., Melino, G., Aqeilan, R.I., 2011. Negative regulation of the Hippo pathway by E3 ubiquitin ligase ITCH is sufficient to promote tumorigenicity. Cancer Res. 71, 2010–2020.

Sansores-Garcia, L., Bossuyt, W., Wada, K., Yonemura, S., Tao, C., Sasaki, H., Halder, G., 2011. Modulating F-actin organization induces organ growth by affecting the Hippo pathway. EMBO J. 30, 2325–2335.

Sasaki, H., Kawano, O., Endo, K., Suzuki, E., Yukiue, H., Kobayashi, Y., Yano, M., Fujii, Y., 2007. Human MOB1 expression in non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin. Lung Cancer 8, 273–276.

Scheel, H., Hofmann, K., 2003. A novel interaction motif, SARAH, connects three classes of tumor suppressor. Curr. Biol. 13, R899–R900.

Schlegelmilch, K., Mohseni, M., Kirak, O., Pruszak, J., Rodriguez, J.R., Zhou, D., Kreger, B.T., Vasioukhin, V., Avruch, J., Brummelkamp, T.R., Camargo, F.D., 2011. Yap1 acts downstream of alpha-catenin to control epidermal proliferation. Cell 144, 782–795.

Seidel, C., Schagdarsurengin, U., Blumke, K., Wurl, P., Pfeifer, G.P., Hauptmann, S., Taubert, H., Dammann, R., 2007. Frequent hypermethylation of MST1 and MST2 in soft tissue sarcoma. Mol. Carcinog. 46, 865–871.

Shaw, R.L., Kohlmaier, A., Polesello, C., Veelken, C., Edgar, B.A., Tapon, N., 2010. The Hippo pathway regulates intestinal stem cell proliferation during *Drosophila* adult midgut regeneration. Development 137, 4147–4158.

Silva, E., Tsatskis, Y., Gardano, L., Tapon, N., McNeill, H., 2006. The tumor-suppressor gene *fat* controls tissue growth upstream of expanded in the Hippo signaling pathway. Curr. Biol. 16, 2081–2089.

Silvis, M.R., Kreger, B.T., Lien, W.H., Klezovitch, O., Rudakova, G.M., Camargo, F.D., Lantz, D.M., Seykora, J.T., Vasioukhin, V., 2011. Alpha-catenin is a tumor suppressor that controls cell accumulation by regulating the localization and activity of the transcriptional coactivator Yap1. Sci. Signal. 4, ra33.

Simon, M.A., Xu, A., Ishikawa, H.O., Irvine, K.D., 2010. Modulation of *fat*: dachsous binding by the cadherin domain kinase four-jointed. Curr. Biol. 20, 811–817.

Song, H., Mak, K.K., Topol, L., Yun, K., Hu, J., Garrett, L., Chen, Y., Park, O., Chang, J., Simpson, R.M., Wang, C.Y., Gao, B., Jiang, J., Yang, Y., 2010. Mammalian Mst1 and Mst2 kinases play essential roles in organ size control and tumor suppression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 1431–1436.

Sopko, R., Silva, E., Clayton, L., Gardano, L., Barrios-Rodiles, M., Wrana, J., Varelas, X., Arbouzova, N.I., Shaw, S., Saburi, S., Matakatsu, H., Blair, S., McNeill, H., 2009. Phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor fat is regulated by its ligand Dachsous and the kinase discs overgrown. Curr. Biol. 19, 1112–1117.

Steinhardt, A.A., Gayyed, M.F., Klein, A.P., Dong, J., Maitra, A., Pan, D., Montgomery, E.A., Anders, R.A., 2008. Expression of Yes-associated protein in common solid tumors. Hum. Pathol. 39, 1582–1589.

Strano, S., Munarriz, E., Rossi, M., Castagnoli, L., Shaul, Y., Sacchi, A., Oren, M., Sudol, M., Cesareni, G., Blandino, G., 2001. Physical interaction with Yes-associated protein enhances p73 transcriptional activity. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 15164–15173.

Strano, S., Monti, O., Pediconi, N., Baccarini, A., Fontemaggi, G., Lapi, E., Mantovani, F., Damalas, A., Citro, G., Sacchi, A., Del Sal, G., Levrero, M., Blandino, G., 2005. The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein drives *p73* gene-target specificity in response to DNA damage. Mol. Cell 18, 447–459.

Sun, G., Irvine, K.D., 2011. Regulation of Hippo signaling by Jun kinase signaling during compensatory cell proliferation and regeneration, and in neoplastic tumors. Dev. Biol. 350, 139–151.

Takahashi, Y., Miyoshi, Y., Takahata, C., Irahara, N., Taguchi, T., Tamaki, Y., Noguchi, S., 2005. Down-regulation of *LATS1* and *LATS2* mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancers. Clin. Cancer Res. 11, 1380–1385.

Tapon, N., Harvey, K.F., Bell, D.W., Wahrer, D.C., Schiripo, T.A., Haber, D.A., Hariharan, I.K., 2002. salvador promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in *Drosophila* and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. Cell 110, 467–478.

Udan, R.S., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Tao, C., Halder, G., 2003. Hippo promotes proliferation arrest and apoptosis in the Salvador/Warts pathway. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 914–920.

Varelas, X., Sakuma, R., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., Peerani, R., Rao, B.M., Dembowy, J., Yaffe, M.B., Zandstra, P.W., Wrana, J.L., 2008. TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem-cell self-renewal. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 837–848.

Varelas, X., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., Narimatsu, M., Weiss, A., Cockburn, K., Larsen, B.G., Rossant, J., Wrana, J.L., 2010a. The Crumbs complex couples cell density sensing to Hippo-dependent control of the TGF-β-SMAD pathway. Dev. Cell 19, 831–844.

Varelas, X., Miller, B.W., Sopko, R., Song, S., Gregorieff, A., Fellouse, F.A., Sakuma, R., Pawson, T., Hunziker, W., McNeill, H., Wrana, J.L., Attisano, L., 2010b. The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Dev. Cell 18, 579–591.

Vigneron, A.M., Ludwig, R.L., Vousden, K.H., 2010. Cytoplasmic ASPP1 inhibits apoptosis through the control of YAP. Genes Dev. 24, 2430–2439.

Wang, W., Huang, J., Chen, J., 2011. Angiomotin-like proteins associate with and negatively regulate YAP1. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 4364–4370.

Willecke, M., Hamaratoglu, F., Sansores-Garcia, L., Tao, C., Halder, G., 2008. Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 14897–14902.

Willecke, M., Hamaratoglu, F., Kango-Singh, M., Udan, R., Chen, C.L., Tao, C., Zhang, X., Halder, G., 2006. The fat cadherin acts through the hippo tumor-suppressor pathway to regulate tissue size. Curr. Biol. 16, 2090–2100.

Wu, S., Huang, J., Dong, J., Pan, D., 2003. Hippo encodes a Ste-20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts. Cell 114, 445–456.

Wu, S., Liu, Y., Zheng, Y., Dong, J., Pan, D., 2008. The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the Hippo growth-regulatory pathway. Dev. Cell 14, 388–398.

Xiao, L., Chen, Y., Ji, M., Dong, J., 2011. KIBRA regulates Hippo signaling activity via interactions with large tumor suppressor kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 7788–7796.

Xu, M.Z., Yao, T.J., Lee, N.P., Ng, I.O., Chan, Y.T., Zender, L., Lowe, S.W., Poon, R.T., Luk, J.M., 2009. Yes-associated protein is an independent prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 115, 4576–4585.

Xu, T., Wang, W., Zhang, S., Stewart, R.A., Yu, W., 1995. Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the *Drosophila* lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase. Development 121, 1053–1063.

Yagi, R., Chen, L.F., Shigesada, K., Murakami, Y., Ito, Y., 1999. A WW domain-containing yes-associated protein (YAP) is a novel transcriptional co-activator. EMBO J. 18, 2551–2562.

Yan, Y., Denef, N., Tang, C., Schupbach, T., 2011. *Drosophila* PI4KIIIalpha is required in follicle cells for oocyte polarization and Hippo signaling. Development 138, 1697–1703.

Yang, C.H., Axelrod, J.D., Simon, M.A., 2002. Regulation of Frizzled by fat-like cadherins during planar polarity signaling in the *Drosophila* compound eye. Cell 108, 675–688.

Yu, J., Zheng, Y., Dong, J., Klusza, S., Deng, W.M., Pan, D., 2010. Kibra functions as a tumor suppressor protein that regulates Hippo signaling in conjunction with Merlin and Expanded. Dev. Cell 18, 288–299.

Zecca, M., Struhl, G., 2010. A feed-forward circuit linking wingless, fat-dachsous signaling, and the warts-hippo pathway to *Drosophila* wing growth. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000386.

Zhang, H., Pasolli, H.A., Fuchs, E., 2011. Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional coactivator functions in balancing growth and differentiation in skin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 2270–2275.

Zhang, H., Liu, C.Y., Zha, Z.Y., Zhao, B., Yao, J., Zhao, S., Xiong, Y., Lei, Q.Y., Guan, K.L., 2009a. TEAD transcription factors mediate the function of TAZ in cell growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 13355–13362.

Zhang, J., Ji, J.Y., Yu, M., Overholtzer, M., Smolen, G.A., Wang, R., Brugge, J.S., Dyson, N.J., Haber, D.A., 2009b. YAP-dependent induction of amphiregulin identifies a non-cell-autonomous component of the Hippo pathway. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 1444–1450.

Zhang, L., Yue, T., Jiang, J., 2009c. Hippo signaling pathway and organ size control. Fly (Austin) 3, 68–73.

Zhang, L., Ren, F., Zhang, Q., Chen, Y., Wang, B., Jiang, J., 2008. The TEAD/TEF family of transcription factor Scalloped mediates Hippo signaling in organ size control. Dev. Cell 14, 377–387.

Zhao, B., Lei, Q.Y., Guan, K.L., 2008a. The Hippo-YAP pathway: new connections between regulation of organ size and cancer. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 20, 638–646.

Zhao, B., Ye, X., Yu, J., Li, L., Li, W., Li, S., Lin, J.D., Wang, C.Y., Chinnaiyan, A.M., Lai, Z.C., Guan, K.L., 2008b. TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and growth control. Genes Dev. 22, 1962–1971.

Zhao, B., Li, L., Tumaneng, K., Wang, C.Y., Guan, K.L., 2010. A coordinated phosphorylation by Lats and CKI regulates YAP stability through SCF(β-TRCP). Genes Dev. 24, 72–85.

Zhao, B., Li, L., Lu, Q., Wang, L.H., Liu, C.Y., Lei, Q., Guan, K.L., 2011. Angiomotin is a novel Hippo pathway component that inhibits YAP oncoprotein. Genes Dev. 25, 51–63.

Zhao, B., Wei, X., Li, W., Udan, R.S., Yang, Q., Kim, J., Xie, J., Ikenoue, T., Yu, J., Li, L., Zheng, P., Ye, K., Chinnaiyan, A., Halder, G., Lai, Z.C., Guan, K.L., 2007. Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. Genes Dev. 21, 2747–2761.
