
REVIEW

FOCUS ON VASCULAR DISEASE

Atherosclerosis: current pathogenesis and therapeutic options

Christian Weber${}^{1-3}$ & Heidi Noels${}^{4}$

Coronary artery disease (CAD) arising from atherosclerosis is a leading cause of death and morbidity worldwide. The underlying pathogenesis involves an imbalanced lipid metabolism and a maladaptive immune response entailing a chronic inflammation of the arterial wall. The disturbed equilibrium of lipid accumulation, immune responses and their clearance is shaped by leukocyte trafficking and homeostasis governed by chemokines and their receptors. New pro- and anti-inflammatory pathways linking lipid and inflammation biology have been discovered, and genetic profiling studies have unveiled variations involved in human CAD. The growing understanding of the inflammatory processes and mediators has uncovered an intriguing diversity of targetable mechanisms that can be exploited to complement lipid-lowering therapies. Here we aim to systematically survey recently identified molecular mechanisms, translational developments and clinical strategies for targeting lipid-related inflammation in atherosclerosis and CAD.

Atherosclerosis gives rise to cerebrovascular disease and CAD through a slowly progressing lesion formation and luminal narrowing of arteries. Upon plaque rupture and thrombosis, these most common forms of cardiovascular disease manifest as acute coronary syndrome (ACS), myocardial infarction or stroke. The underlying pathology is characterized by a chronic inflammatory process of the arterial wall that occurs at predilection sites with disturbed laminar flow, such as branch points${}^{1}$. It is initiated by endothelial dysfunction and structural alterations, including the absence of a confluent luminal elastin layer and the exposure of proteoglycans${}^{2}$, which permit subendothelial accumulation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL). Elevated levels of circulating cholesterol transported by apolipoprotein B100 (ApoB100)-containing LDL promote atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease${}^{3}$. ApoB100 binding to negatively charged extracellular matrix proteoglycans leads to retention of LDL particles in the intima, where they are susceptible to oxidative modification by reactive oxygen species or enzymes such as myeloperoxidase or lipoxygenases released from inflammatory cells. Oxidized lipids and LDL (oxLDL) trigger the expression of adhesion molecules and the secretion of chemokines by endothelial cells, which, together with the deposition of platelet-derived chemokines, drive intimal immune cell infiltration. Early ‘fatty-streak’ lesions consist of T cells and monocyte-derived macrophage-like foam cells loaded with lipids. Successive accumulation of apoptotic cells, debris and cholesterol crystals forms a necrotic core. Fibroatheromatous plaques are covered by a fibrous cap composed of collagen and smooth muscle cells (SMCs), which are replaced by macrophages in the thinning inflamed caps that are prone to rupture. The ‘shoulder’ regions are heavily infiltrated by T cells and mast cells, which produce enzymes and proinflammatory mediators, contributing to adventitial inflammation of advanced plaques${}^{4}$.

Hypercholesterolemic apolipoprotein E-deficient ($Apo{e}^{-/-}$) or LDL receptor-deficient ($Ldlr^{-/-}$) mice are frequently used to study mechanisms of disease initiation and progression but are less suitable for investigations of advanced stages, such as plaque rupture or thrombosis, which continue to rely on histopathological and clinical studies${}^{3-5}$. Given the undisputed limitations of studying atherosclerosis in mice, one needs to apply caution when extrapolating mechanisms or therapeutic options to human disease, unless reproducible cross-species studies are implemented for validation.

The atherosclerosis field is so vast that attempts to comprehensively cover all aspects will be futile. Whereas the roles of monocytes${}^{6}$, macrophages${}^{1}$ and innate versus adaptive immunity${}^{3}$ have been extensively discussed, this review focuses on new aspects of monocyte and macrophage recruitment and on hitherto less appreciated cellular players, namely neutrophils and dendritic cell (DC) subtypes. It further aims to scrutinize the intriguing diversity of lipid-related proinflammatory and atheroprotective pathways affecting the disease equilibrium, to review genetic variants contributing to atherosclerosis and to discuss clinical applications of targeting inflammation in atherosclerosis and CAD.

Chemokines in atherogenic cell recruitment and homeostasis

Atherogenic recruitment of leukocytes involves a sequence of rolling, firm adhesion, lateral migration and transendothelial diapedesis

${}^{1}$Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. ${}^{2}$Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany. ${}^{3}$Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, The Netherlands. ${}^{4}$Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Correspondence should be addressed to C.W. (christian.weber@med.uni-muenchen.de).

Published online 7 November 2011; doi:10.1038/nm.2538

Figure 1 Role of chemokines and their receptors in atherogenesis. Leukocyte recruitment involves their rolling, firm adhesion, lateral migration and transendothelial diapedesis, controlled by chemokines. Whereas soluble chemokines mediate direct leukocyte recruitment, chemokines immobilized on the surface of activated endothelial cells (ECs) through glycosaminoglycan (GAG) trigger leukocyte arrest through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which activate leukocyte integrins. Cell-dependent and lesion-stage-dependent usage of chemokines and their receptors<sup>12</sup> show the robustness and complexity of the chemokine system, providing a signature combination of chemokines in each stage to attract specific leukocyte subsets. The combined action of chemokines in leukocyte recruitment can result in synergistic effects, as for the CCL5-CXCL4 heteromer<sup>23</sup>. Whether chemokines can also mediate cell egress from atherosclerotic lesions remains unclear<sup>27</sup> and could be inherent to the aortic transplantation model studied<sup>26,28</sup>. Some chemokines and their receptors are involved in cell homeostasis, such as CX3CL1 and CX3CR1 (ref. 24) and CCL17 (ref. 25) in monocyte and T<sub>reg</sub> cell homeostasis, respectively. Interference with chemokine functions increasingly gains attention in cardiovascular drug research (blue boxes)<sup>7</sup>. Blocking chemokines (or their receptors) with small-molecule antagonists or antibodies or modulation of chemokine affinity for receptors or of GAG binding can reduce chemokine signaling. Tailored manipulation of heterophilic chemokine interactions may even be more promising, as it can leave normal physiological and immunological functions intact. SELPLG, selectin P ligand; SELP, selectin P; SELE, selectin E; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1.

and is controlled by chemokines, which are chemotactic cytokines classified according to their conserved cysteines, and their correspondingly categorized G protein-coupled receptors. The various leukocytes recruited during the inflammatory cascade encompass neutrophils, monocytes and T cells, but also B cells, DCs and mast cells<sup>5</sup>. Considering the diversity of these cell subsets and their functions, the abundance in the chemokine system has been perceived to confer robustness and specificity<sup>7</sup>. At a site of inflammation, particular leukocyte subsets may be recruited by a signature combination of chemokines engaging in heterophilic interactions, facilitated by a local repertoire of proteoglycans with differential binding affinities for chemokines<sup>7</sup>. Studies using gene-deficient mice and antagonists have generated valuable insights into chemokine ligand-receptor axes and their specific and combined contributions to atherogenesis<sup>7</sup>.

Specific functions and combined interference. The possibility of disrupting complementary chemokine functions has been explored along the paradigm of sequential monocyte mobilization and influx (Fig. 1). In mice, classical Ly6C<sup>high</sup> cells dominate hyperlipidemia-induced monocytosis and employ the chemokine receptors CCR2, CCR5 and CX3CR1, to invade plaques, where they differentiate into macrophages, whereas entry of patrolling Ly6C<sup>low</sup> monocytes occurs less frequently and seems to rely on CCR5 (refs. 8, 9). Genetic deletion of CCL2 and CX3CR1, or CCR2 and CX3CL1 decreases atherosclerosis compared with single deficiencies in these proteins, which is attributable to both attenuated hyperlipidemia-associated blood monocytosis and reduced macrophage accumulation<sup>10,11</sup>. The CCL5 receptor antagonist Met-RANTES has been shown to further lower circulating monocyte counts, almost fully protecting against atherosclerosis<sup>10</sup>. Thus, combined blockade of chemokine receptors seems more effective than single blockade or deficiency, but the different rate-limiting contributions to individual steps of mobilization, recruitment and homeostasis, and the specific atherogenic functions of monocyte subsets, remain to be clarified.

Temporal patterns of chemokine expression and function at distinct stages of atherogenesis have been addressed<sup>12</sup> (Fig. 1). Genetic deletion of CCR2 in mice did not prevent early lesion formation in the abdominal aorta but rather limited late-stage plaque formation and monocyte infiltration in the aortic root<sup>12,13</sup>. In contrast, mouse CXCR3 deficiency primarily delayed early atherosclerosis by attenuating recruitment of T helper 1 (T<sub>H</sub>1) T cells, while increasing the number of regulatory T cells (T<sub>reg</sub> cells)<sup>13</sup> within the lesion. The atheroprotective role of FoxP3<sup>+</sup>T<sub>reg</sub> cells producing anti-inflammatory interleukin-10 (IL-10) and transforming growth factor-β has been established by transfer experiments<sup>3</sup>, and shifting T cell responses in favor of T<sub>reg</sub> cells has been achieved by disrupting the CXCR3-CXCL10 axis<sup>14,15</sup>. The lack of the CCL5 receptor CCR5 in somatic or blood cells reduced plaque formation in mice at later stages, upregulated systemic IL-10 and downregulated interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which reflects an attenuated T<sub>H</sub>1-type response. This is in contrast to deficiency of CCR1, the other major CCL5 receptor, and indicates that CCR5 deficiency is protective by modulating the immune balance rather than limiting cell influx<sup>16,17</sup>.

The combined action of chemokines in leukocyte recruitment is illustrated by CCL5 and CXCL4 (Fig. 1), which are deposited by platelets or platelet-derived microparticles during their transient P-selectin-mediated interactions on inflamed endothelium, where they promote atherogenic monocyte arrest<sup>18,19</sup>. This event was linked to lesion formation, which is exacerbated by repetitive injections of activated platelets<sup>18</sup> but inhibited by genetic deletion of CXCL4 or

treatment with Met-RANTES^{20,21}. Interestingly, CXCL4 amplifies CCL5-triggered monocyte arrest^{22}, and inhibition of this synergism by blocking CCL5-CXCL4 heteromerization reduces atherogenesis in hyperlipidemic mice^{23}.

Role in homeostasis and regression. Aside from the functions of chemokines in recruitment, the absence of CX3CR1 or CX3CL1 has been shown to reduce Ly6C^low^ blood monocyte levels under steady-state and inflammatory conditions, which could be rescued by expression of antiapoptotic Bcl2, indicating that this axis confers essential survival signals^{24}. Enforced survival of monocytes, plaque phagocytes and foam cells restored atherogenesis in Cx3cr1^-/-^ mice, emphasizing homeostatic functions of this axis in atherosclerosis. Conversely, deficiency or antibody blockade of DC-derived CCL17 in hyperlipidemic mice reduced atheroprogression by expanding T~reg~ cells, whereas CCL17 expression in DCs restricted T~reg~ cell maintenance to promote atherosclerosis^{25}, identifying CCL17 as a central regulator of T~reg~ cell homeostasis (Fig. 1).

A role of chemokines in plaque regression is insufficiently characterized because of the lack of proper models. Plaque regression has been accomplished by transplantation of diseased aortas into normolipidemic mice, revealing an upregulation of CCR7. Blocking antibodies to CCR7 ligands inhibited regression, implicating CCR7-driven cell egress as an underlying mechanism^{26}. However, in a model of virus-mediated Apoe gene transfer, no involvement of CCR7 was evident, and reduced mononuclear cell influx combined with apoptosis, rather than cell emigration, was held responsible for plaque regression—may thus be related to the aortic transplantation model^{28} (Fig. 1). Indeed, somatic CCR7 deficiency reduced atherosclerosis in Ldlr^-/-^ mice by impairing CCR7-dependent T cell priming and recirculation between inflamed lesions and secondary lymphoid organs^{29}. Notably, neutralizing the noncanonical chemokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) caused regression of established lesions, probably because of its CXCR2 and CXCR4 agonist effect, which promoted macrophage and T-cell infiltration^{30}. The identification of mediators of cell influx into advanced lesions will be crucial to open avenues for a causative treatment of atherosclerosis.

Neutrophils: initiators of innate immunity in atherogenesis

In the arterial wall, defense against pathogenic damage requires a rigorous sentinel system of endothelium, patrolling monocytes, resident macrophages and DCs and involves pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) sensing damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to mount an innate immune response^{31}. Recent evidence has emerged to suggest an important role for neutrophils in the initial phase of atherosclerosis in mice. Early neutrophil inflammatory signals trigger intimal recruitment of monocytes, which differentiate into macrophages and internalize native and modified LDL, leading to foam cell formation. Macrophages can amplify LDL modification, promote vulnerability of advanced plaques through secretion of cytokines, proteases or procoagulant factors, undergo apoptosis and, when not effectively cleared, contribute to necrotic core formation.

Innate immune signaling by modified LDL and atherogens. As they differentiate, macrophages upregulate scavenger receptors (such as SR-A/B and CD36), which are multifunctional PRRs, clearing cell debris, recognizing oxidation-specific epitopes and also internalizing modified LDL. In addition, endothelial cells, lesional macrophages and DCs express diverse Toll-like receptors (TLRs), another type of PRR mediating inflammatory activation. Like pathogen-derived endotoxins, modified LDL can trigger TLR2 and TLR4 signaling through CD36 (refs. 32, 33), whereas genetic deletion of TLR2, TLR4 or the TLR signaling adaptor MyD88 reduces atherosclerosis^{32}. By analogy to pathogen pattern recognition, patrolling monocytes or tissue-resident cells monitor and recognize ‘alarm signals’, including modified lipids or components expelled by damaged cells. High-mobility group box-1 protein (HMGB1), a chromatin protein from necrotic cells, induces macrophage synthesis of cytokines and chemokines promoting neutrophil recruitment through interactions of complexes formed by HMGB1 and DAMPs, such as endotoxin or single-stranded DNA, with the canonical HMGB1 receptor RAGE or TLRs 2, 4 and 9 in a Myd88- and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)-dependent pathway^{31} (Fig. 2). Notably, HMGB1 neutralization reduces diet-induced atherosclerosis in mice^{34}. Hence, atherogens and pathogens may use a similar immune receptor repertoire.

Neutrophils: emerging players in atherosclerosis. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils) have been detected in aortic fatty-streak lesions of primates and have been correlated with CAD incidence and severity^{5}; however, convincing evidence for a proatherogenic role of neutrophils has been elusive until recently. Neutrophils and their mediators have been detected in human and mouse atherosclerotic lesions^{5,35,36}. Although mice have a myeloid-biased immune system compared to humans, neutrophils represent about 2% of lesional leukocytes and accumulate in regions with high monocyte density in mice^{36}. Neutrophils use the CCL5 receptors CCR1 and CCR5 for entering atherosclerotic plaques, compared to a restricted use of CCR2 and CXCR2 for peripheral venous recruitment^{37}. A disturbed lipid balance facilitates their recruitment to lesions, as shown in bone marrow ABC transporter-deficient mice, which showed defective cholesterol efflux, increased TLR signaling and inflammatory gene expression, and marked neutrophil infiltration upon peripheral inflammatory signals^{38}. Notably, hyperlipidemia triggers neutrophilia by stimulating granulopoiesis and bone marrow egress, involving elevated CXCL1 plasma levels, and the amount of circulating neutrophils closely correlates with plaque size^{37}. Disrupting the CXCR4-CXCL12 axis increases peripheral neutrophil counts with immature forms and aggravates lesion formation, whereas neutrophil depletion predominantly reduces early plaque size^{35,37}, indicating a functional role of neutrophils in murine atherosclerosis.

Role in onset, progression and resolution of inflammation. During extravasation, neutrophils sequentially release preformed granule proteins (Fig. 2). For instance, cationic azurocidin is deposited on the endothelium, triggering monocyte arrest and upregulating endothelial adhesion molecules^{31}, and cathepsin G and LL-37 (also known as CAMP) attract monocytes by activating formyl-peptide receptors. Notably, neutrophil depletion specifically decreases classical monocyte recruitment in mice, an effect rescued by neutrophil-secreted LL-37 and azurocidin^{39}. In the vascular wall, oxLDL may induce neutrophil transmigration and degranulation, which may then trigger rapid recruitment of classical monocytes usually present in hyperlipidemia-induced atherosclerosis. As short-lived cells, neutrophils rapidly become apoptotic, also in the intima^{35}, releasing a cocktail of ‘find-me’ and ‘eat-me’ signals to attract monocytes/macrophages for scavenging^{31}. Among resolution signals released

Figure 2 Neutrophils as crucial players in atherogenesis. Hyperlipidemia increases the number of circulating neutrophils, which are recruited into atherosclerotic lesions through specific chemokine receptors³⁷. Macrophage activation through atherogenic lipids³³, a disturbed intracellular lipid balance⁸² and DNA released from apoptotic cells can trigger release of cytokines and neutrophil-attracting chemokines. OxLDL may induce neutrophil transmigration and release of inflammatory reactive oxygen species (ROS) and granule proteins, which trigger monocyte recruitment and extravasation directly or indirectly through upregulation of adhesion molecules on endothelial cells. Apoptotic neutrophils sustain monocyte recruitment through various find-me and eat-me signals³¹. Furthermore, NET formation upon neutrophil activation⁴² and neutrophil protease-mediated proteolysis of the tissue factor pathway inhibitor⁴⁴ could promote atheroprogression and thrombus growth, respectively. Altogether, neutrophils could provide a chronic inflammatory trigger sustaining atherogenesis, despite their ability to provide resolution signals³¹ that may trigger antiatherogenic TLR3 signaling⁴⁰. ssDNA, single stranded-DNA; RAGE, receptor for advanced glycosylation end products.

by damaged neutrophils to resolve inflammation, RNA may enhance TLR3 signaling to delay inflammatory lesion formation, as evident by increased atherosclerosis in TLR3-deficient *Apoε⁻/⁻* mice⁴⁰ (Fig. 2).

Neutrophils as chronic atherogenic triggers? It will be crucial to identify determinants that lead to chronic inflammation in atherosclerosis. Notably, intimal macrophages undergo apoptosis, become necrotic during progressive atherosclerosis and finally coalesce into the necrotic core of vulnerable plaques, probably owing to defective phagocytic clearance (efferocytosis) of apoptotic cells overstraining the efferocytic mediators MFG-E8, Clq and MerTK⁴¹. Furthermore, neutrophils activated through TLRs, Fc receptors or cytokine receptors can release nuclear content (DNA fibers, chromatin) that forms a scaffold containing antimicrobial proteins, such as LL-37, termed neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)⁴² (Fig. 2). Given the prominent role of CXCR2 as a proatherogenic receptor on both monocytes and neutrophils¹², the fact that LL-37 can act as a CXCR2 ligand⁴³ indicates that NET formation involving LL-37 may participate in chronic atherogenesis. A link between neutrophils and coagulation has been provided by evidence that neutrophil serine proteases along with externalized nucleosomes promote intra-vascular thrombus growth *in vivo* by enhancing tissue factor– and factor XII–dependent coagulation through proteolysis of the tissue factor pathway inhibitor⁴⁴ (Fig. 2). Without a pathogen challenge, the continued presence of neutrophils in advanced plaques may thus contribute to large-vessel thrombosis as a trigger for myocardial infarction and stroke.

Dendritic cells at the cross-roads to adaptive immunity

The importance of antigen-specific immune responses in atherogenesis is widely acknowledged³. By sensing atherogenic danger signals and antigen internalization, DCs may be ideally positioned at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity and may be instrumental for orchestrating a switch from tolerance to adaptive immunity activation⁵.

T cells and B cells as effectors in atherogenesis. Atherosclerotic plaques feature a clonal expansion of memory-effector T cells, which indicate an antigen-specific reaction, and can also confer lesion formation upon reconstitutive transfer³. Moreover, activation of CD8⁺ T cells against an SMC-expressed artificial antigen exacerbates atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice⁴⁵. *Ldlr⁻/⁻* mice deficient in the major Tₕ1-differentiating transcription factor T-bet show a reduced lesion size⁴⁶, indicating that atheroprogression is driven by a Tₕ1-type response and its signature cytokines IFN-γ, IL-12 and IL-18 (ref. 3). Conversely, numerous studies have established atheroprotective effects mediated by T<sub>reg</sub> cell subsets and their products transforming growth factor-β and IL-10 (ref. 3), which can be induced by administration of exogenous immune modulators or oral CD3-specific antibody⁴⁷,⁴⁸. In contrast, data for Tₕ2 and Tₕ17 cells are less conclusive and partially contradictory³.

Immunization studies have mostly focused on modified LDL and neoepitopes generated by oxidation; however, vaccination with native LDL and its peptides has also proved successful⁴⁹. The standing hypothesis that LDL-reactive T cells are eliminated by thymic negative selection has been challenged by findings that immunization against an ApoB100-recognizing T cell receptor diminished antigen-specific T cell responses and atherosclerosis⁵⁰. This indicates the pathogenic character of native LDL-reactive T cells and may be explained by minimal LDL modifications or incomplete tolerance to autoantigens, which under normal conditions may be controlled by peripheral mechanisms.

Regarding B cells, bone marrow B cell deficiency or splenectomy aggravates atherosclerosis in mice, whereas splenic B cell transfer mediates protection in splenectomized recipients³. Accordingly, deficiency in bone marrow IL-5, a cytokine that expands natural B-1 cells, increases atherosclerosis and reduces oxLDL-reactive IgM levels⁵¹. Although oxLDL-specific IgG titers correlate with CAD⁵², oxLDL-specific IgM titers are associated with atheroprotection⁴⁹, which—like regression—can be conferred by recombinant antibodies to oxLDL in mice⁵³. Notably, depletion of conventional

REVIEW

Figure 3 DCs at the crossroads of adaptive immunity. DCs may be ideally positioned at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity, translating innate damage signals, such as oxLDL, into an enhanced adaptive immune response. Resident intimal CD11c+ DCs are present in atherosclerotic-prone regions of healthy vessels^{56-58} through CX3CR1-related mechanisms^{60}, and CD11c+ DC numbers increase upon lesion formation and progression^{25,59}. Mainly Ly6C^low but also Ly6C^high monocytes^{9} give rise to CD11c+ cells in lesions, and GM-CSF may induce DC proliferation in the intima^{62,63}. Although diverse combinations of surface markers have been used to identify lesional DCs, a true distinction between macrophages and DCs remains difficult because of their plasticity. Lesional DCs take up lipids, produce proinflammatory cytokines and polarize CD4+ T cells to atherogenic T_H1 responses, all contributing to their proatherogenic character. In advanced plaques, CCL17+ DCs limit T_reg cell expansion and exert local immune-regulatory functions by recruiting and activating CD4+ T cells^{25}. Moreover, pDCs and pDC-derived IFN-α can be found in advanced plaques, where they control cytotoxic T cell effector functions by stimulating naive CD4+ T cells to express IFN-γ and TRAIL^{69} and trigger antigen-presenting cells to produce proinflammatory mediators^{68}. TRAIL, tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand.

B-2 cells ameliorates atherosclerosis, whereas transfer of B-2 but not B-1 cells promotes atherosclerosis, confirming subset-specific effects^{54,55}.

From lipid homeostasis to antigen sensing: DC versatility. DCs are a heterogeneous population that includes conventional DCs (cDCs) subdivided into lymphoid-tissue-resident or migratory subtypes, plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and inflammatory DCs, which are not found in steady states^{5}. Although DCs are bona fide antigen-presenting cells, they can also engulf lipids, sharing phenotypic and functional features with macrophages. The exact distinction between macrophages and DCs thus remains controversial and confounded by their plasticity. A DC-based network is detectable in the intima of healthy human arteries^{56,58} and in the aorta of CD11c-EYFP reporter mice, where they represent 0.5% of aortic cells and mainly localize to atherosclerosis-prone regions^{57,58}. Mature DCs further accumulate during atheroprogression and cluster with T cells in the shoulder and rupture-prone plaque regions^{5,25,59} (Fig. 3).

During low-grade chronic inflammation, vascular DCs accumulate by recruitment of blood-borne—probably Ly6C^low—monocyte precursors through a process involving CX3CR1 (refs. 24,57,60). Accordingly, Ly6C^low monocytes express CD11c in severe hyperlipidemia, promoting atherosclerosis and intimal accumulation of CD11c+ monocytes and macrophages^{61}. The preferentially recruited Ly6C^high monocytes can also give rise to CD11c+ DCs, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) can drive lesional DC content and plaque growth, probably through stimulating intimal DC proliferation^{62,63} (Fig. 3). Resident intimal CD11c+ DCs accumulate lipids^{64}, which can occur through SR-mediated internalization or capturing of circulating lipoproteins with luminal dendrites. Notably, dyslipidemia activates DCs to inhibit their migration to lymph nodes for peripheral sequestration^{65}. Prolonging the DC lifespan by human Bcl2 expression resulted in increased cDC numbers and reduced plasma cholesterol levels, whereas short-term depletion of DCs in Apoe^-/- mice increased hypercholesterolemia^{66}. This implicates cDCs in cholesterol homeostasis and proatherogenic effects, as illustrated by their depletion^{64} and reduced intimal aortic CX3CR1+ DCs numbers and lesion size in Cx3cr1^-/- mice^{60}.

But DCs also control early atherogenic immune activation (Fig. 3). In bioengineered arteries, endotoxin-activated adventitial myeloid DCs stimulate autologous CD4+ T cells to produce IFN-γ and infiltrate the arterial wall, breaking T cell tolerance to self antigens and initiating inflammation^{67}. Similarly, aortic CD11c+ DCs can trigger antigen-specific T cell proliferation, corroborating that intimal DCs can internalize antigen to specifically prime T cell responses^{25,58}. In advanced plaques, CCL17 expression by mature DCs restricts T_reg cell expansion and sustains atherosclerosis, identifying the control of T_reg cell homeostasis as an effector mechanism of CCL17+ DCs in atherogenesis^{25}. Moreover, CCL17+ DCs can interact with CD4+ T cells in atherosclerotic arteries, indicative of local immune-regulatory functions^{25}.

pDCs, which are a phenotypically distinct DC subtype secreting type I IFNs after TLR7 or TLR9 stimulation^{5}, cluster with myeloid DCs in atherosclerotic shoulder regions^{68} (Fig. 3). pDC-derived IFN-α correlates with plaque instability and can regulate cytotoxic T cell effector functions by stimulating naive CD4+ T cells to express IFN-γ and TRAIL, enabling them to kill vascular SMCs^{69}. Moreover, pDCs act as inflammatory amplifiers, as antigen-presenting cells respond to IFN-α by producing proinflammatory mediators^{68}. Sensing of microbial pathogens by pDCs may link atherosclerosis to infectious burden, explaining plaque vulnerability during acute infections^{69}. Likewise, nucleotides or DNA released from necrotic or apoptotic cells in plaques may activate pDCs through TLR7 and TLR9. Hence, pDC may translate innate damage signals into an enhanced adaptive immune response.

Atherogenic signature inflammatory mediators

Unleashed inflammatory signaling pathways may be attractive targets for controlling atherosclerosis. As important myeloid effector cytokines, type I IFNs have been implicated in atherogenesis. Treatment of atherosclerosis-prone mice with IFN-β increases lesion size, macrophage content and CCL5 plasma levels, whereas myeloid deficiency of IFNAR1, the receptor for type I IFNs, attenuates

atherogenesis, macrophage accumulation and necrotic core formation<sup>70</sup>. Signaling through IFN-β–IFNAR1–signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) triggers CCL5 production by macrophages, increasing CCR5-mediated monocyte recruitment<sup>70</sup>. This explains a correlation between upregulated type I IFN signaling and CCL5 expression in advanced human lesions<sup>70</sup>.

Human atherosclerotic lesions, especially of advanced stage, show an upregulation of MIF in macrophages and endothelial cells, which express MIF in response to oxLDL. Multiple mouse studies have confirmed the atheropressive function of MIF, which is probably linked to its versatile proinflammatory properties at crucial checkpoints in atherogenesis, such as endothelial cell activation, monocyte recruitment, macrophage and foam cell formation, SMC migration and extracellular matrix destabilization<sup>71</sup>. True regression of atherosclerotic lesions in mice receiving MIF-specific antibody suggests MIF as a promising drug target<sup>30,71</sup>.

Co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory signaling molecules fine-tune immune reactions by regulating inflammatory phenotypes and responses of T cells and antigen-presenting cells. The B7-CD28 and TNF-TNF receptor families have been implicated in different stages of atherogenesis, either in a stimulatory or an inhibitory way<sup>72</sup>. Unraveling the complex cell type- and stage-specific interplay of co-regulatory pathways may offer interesting therapeutic options<sup>72</sup>. For the prominent co-stimulatory dyad CD40-CD40L, both receptor and ligand are expressed by lesional cell types and highly upregulated in advanced human plaques<sup>73</sup>. Mouse studies have revealed a plaque-destabilizing function for CD40-CD40L signaling, attributable to the induction of multiple inflammatory factors<sup>73</sup>. Notably, repeated injection of CD40L-deficient platelets specifically implicated platelet CD40L in atherogenesis by mediating proinflammatory leukocyte-platelet interactions and T<sub>reg</sub> cell homeostasis without compromising

systemic immune responses or inducing hemorrhage<sup>74</sup>. Thus, cell- or pathway-specific interventions in CD40-CD40L signaling<sup>75</sup> hold promise as cardiovascular therapeutics.

### Linking lipids and inflammation in atherogenesis

Foam cell formation involves phagocytosis of matrix-retained lipoproteins and fluid-phase pinocytosis of aggregated lipoproteins by macrophages<sup>1</sup>, but substantial evidence also suggests that oxidative modification of subendothelially accumulated LDL triggers the inflammatory process underlying atherosclerosis. Precisely how oxLDL and associated lipids instigate the atherogenic process remains intensively investigated, but an ill alliance of various pathways is emerging.

#### Scavenger receptors, TLRs and endoplasmic reticulum stress in macrophages

Although SR-A and CD36 mediate the majority of modified LDL uptake by macrophages *in vitro*, their genetic deletion has yielded varying effects on mouse atherosclerosis, possibly reflecting differences in the genetic background, regional context or inflammatory features studied<sup>76</sup>. Combined deficiency of SR-A and CD36 in Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> mice has implicated these receptors in atheroprogression, by inducing proinflammatory gene expression and macrophage apoptosis, rather than foam cell formation<sup>77</sup>. TLR4 and TLR6 cooperate with CD36 in this inflammatory response of macrophages to atherogenic lipids; that is, oxLDL sequestered by CD36 induces intracellular CD36-TLR4-TLR6 heteromerization, activating NF-κB and chemokine expression<sup>78</sup> and explaining the proatherogenic effects of TLR4 (ref. 32). Accordingly, a sustained oxidative burst and apoptosis elicited by atherogenic lipids in macrophages with continuous endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress<sup>33</sup> through combined signaling of CD36 with TLR2-TLR6 may similarly occur in human or mouse lesional macrophages with intracellular accumulation of free cholesterol<sup>41</sup> (Fig. 4).

---

**Figure 4** Lipid mediators affect inflammation and atherogenesis through diverse signaling pathways. OxLDL binds CD36, inducing intracellular CD36-TLR4-TLR6 heterotrimerization, which activates NF-κB and chemokine expression by lesional macrophages<sup>78</sup>. Atherogenic lipid mediators, such as oxLDL, oxidized phospholipids and lipoproteins and fatty acids, also trigger NADPH oxidase activation through a CD36-TLR2-TLR6 pathway, resulting in a sustained oxidative burst and apoptosis of ER-stressed cholesterol-overloaded foam cells<sup>33</sup>. Furthermore, an intracellular excess of free cholesterol, for example due to defective cholesterol efflux by ABC transporters, can modify receptor presentation and signaling by increasing lipid raft formation, which in hematopoietic stem cells induces myeloproliferation due to enhanced IL-3 and GM-CSF-signaling<sup>83</sup>. Also, intracellular cholesterol crystals can exert proatherogenic effects by stimulating IL-1β production by macrophages through NLRP3 inflammasome activation<sup>85,86</sup>. Lipids can also affect endothelial cell functions—the phospholipase Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> hydrolyzes oxLDL-associated phospholipids into oxidized fatty acids and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), and the derivative lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) triggers endothelial cells to secrete and present CXCL1 for monocyte adhesion<sup>92</sup>. Thus, oxLDL and associated lipids act on diverse cell types to instigate inflammation and proatherogenic processes. CASP1, caspase 1.

Defective efferocytosis of apoptotic cells then causes secondary necrosis. A link between ER stress, apoptosis of macrophages or other cells and necrotic core formation has been confirmed in mice with somatic deficiency in the ER stress effector CHOP<sup>79</sup>.

Although antioxidant therapies in humans have failed to protect against cardiovascular disease, these findings pinpoint specific mitigation of lipotoxic ER stress and the resulting oxidative burst as potential strategies. It is therefore important to unravel the molecular mechanisms and signaling routes employed by ER stress to promote atherogenesis<sup>80</sup>. In this context, fatty acid binding protein-4 (aP2) has been identified as a regulator of macrophage ER stress responses to lipids. Blocking aP2 function mitigates lipotoxic ER stress by reactivating *de novo* lipogenesis and lipid desaturation, mainly through LXRα, increasing bioactive lipid production and reducing macrophage apoptosis and atherogenesis<sup>81</sup>.

Reverse cholesterol transport and myeloproliferation. Besides inducing ER stress in macrophages, intracellular free cholesterol can also integrate into cellular membrane lipid rafts. Defective cholesterol efflux due to deficiency of the ABC transporters ABCA1 and ABCG1 (ref. 82) can enhance cholesterol-rich raft formation in hematopoietic stem cells, increasing surface expression of the common IL-3 and GM-CSF receptor β-subunit, which, in turn, increases IL-3– and GM-CSF–triggered downstream signaling and myeloproliferation<sup>83</sup> (Fig. 4). Mice with ABCA1- and ABCG1-deficient bone marrow showed accelerated atherosclerosis<sup>82</sup>, whereas myeloproliferation and atherosclerosis were reversed by promoting cellular cholesterol efflux to HDL and in ApoA-1–transgenic mice with increased HDL levels<sup>83</sup>. The inverse relationship between HDL and leukocytosis/atherogenesis confirms human correlation studies<sup>5</sup>, identifies suppression of myeloproliferation as an HDL-mediated anti-atherogenic mechanism and points to HDL as an attractive therapeutic beyond its cholesterol efflux-promoting capacity. The discovery of molecules promoting cholesterol efflux could extend such options. For example, defective sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor signaling in macrophages—shifting the balance from oxLDL uptake to reverse cholesterol transport—decreases atherogenesis<sup>84</sup>.

Inflammasome activation by cholesterol crystals. An intriguing finding is the presence of small cholesterol crystals in human and mouse atherosclerotic lesions<sup>85,86</sup>. The crystals appear simultaneously with lesional macrophages, accumulate in subendothelial and necrotic areas and promote atherogenesis by activating the NLRP3 inflammasome, a PRR platform mediating IL-1β secretion (via caspase-1) and neutrophil recruitment<sup>85,86</sup> (Fig. 4). Unlike *Ldlr*<sup>−/−</sup> mice with bone marrow deficiency of NLRP3, ASC or IL-1α/β, *Apoe*<sup>−/−</sup> mice lacking NLRP3, ASC or caspase-1 were not protected against lesion progression or infiltration<sup>87</sup>. This discrepancy may be due to genetic background differences, irradiation, protective functions in non-bone marrow-derived cells, or minor contributions of the NLRP3 inflammasome and a more prominent calpain-mediated IL-1α generation in hyperlipidemic *Apoe*<sup>−/−</sup> mice. Thus, interference with cholesterol crystal formation or inflammasome activation may be a therapeutic strategy for preventing atherogenesis under defined conditions. Whether cholesterol crystals precede monocyte recruitment or accompany macrophages as intracellular passengers, as well as the molecular mechanisms underlying inflammasome activity in human disease, remain to be elucidated.

Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> and lysophosphatidic acid. The lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub>) primarily acts on oxLDL to generate proinflammatory mediators such as lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) and oxidized nonesterified fatty acids. Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> is highly expressed in human vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions, and increased Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> activity correlates with proatherogenic lipids and cardiovascular risk in humans<sup>88</sup>. Selective inhibition of Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> with darapladib reduces development of complex CAD in swine, limiting LPC content, lesions with an unstable phenotype and inflammatory gene expression<sup>89</sup>. Recent evidence showing that oxidized phospholipids are primarily cleared through transport rather than Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> (ref. 90) indicates that adverse effects of Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> inhibition by affecting oxidized phospholipid degradation are unlikely. Likewise, the LPC derivative lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) has been implicated in atherogenesis, given the increased LPA levels in plaques and serum upon hypercholesterolemia and its involvement in activation of and interactions between endothelial cells, monocytes and platelets<sup>91</sup>. Notably, unsaturated LPA promotes macrophage accumulation and lesion progression in atherosclerosis-prone mice, whereas combined LPAR1 and LPAR3 receptor blockade reduces foam cell content and atherogenesis<sup>92</sup>. The effects on macrophage populations could be explained by binding of unsaturated LPA to endothelial LPAR1 and LPAR3, inducing secretion and surface immobilization of CXCL1 to mediate arterial monocyte adhesion<sup>92</sup> (Fig. 4).

In conclusion, lipid mediators, including phospholipids, cholesterol, fatty acids and lipoproteins, affect inflammation and atherogenesis through diverse pathways. Unraveling these mechanisms at the molecular level could catalyze the development of innovative cardiovascular disease therapeutics. The identification of new players involved in lipid metabolism through large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of lipid- and lipoprotein-level-correlated genetic variants<sup>93</sup> should accelerate this process.

### Genetic and metabolic profiling studies

To complement traditional risk factors, such as hyperlipidemia and hypertension, a search for genetic variants linked with cardiovascular disease has flourished, and GWASs have created an enormous wealth of data on susceptibility loci (Table 1)<sup>94–99</sup>. But not all associations reported have been independently replicated, and it remains unclear whether ‘multilocus cardiovascular disease genetic risk scores’ based on GWAS-identified chromosomal loci have predictive abilities better than traditional risk factors<sup>96</sup>. Nonetheless, characterization of cardiovascular disease-associated loci<sup>99</sup> should provide new insight in the molecular mechanisms driving atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease and open new avenues for cardiovascular drug research.

### New risk alleles for CAD

The strongest genetic effect on CAD and myocardial infarction is carried by locus 9p21.3 (ref. 94, 97), which contains several coding genes (*CDKN2A*, *CDKN2B* and *MTAP*) and an antisense noncoding RNA (*CDKN2B-AS*, also known as *ANRIL*) that alters gene regulation<sup>94</sup>. The risk alleles of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs10811656 and rs10757278 were found to disrupt a STAT1 binding site and affect signaling by IFN-γ<sup>99</sup>, a complex regulator of atherosclerosis. Another example is locus 10q11.21, wherein two SNPs rs1746048(C/C) and rs501120(T/T) have been associated with increased CAD and myocardial infarction risk<sup>94,95,97</sup>. The risk alleles of these SNPs, approximately 80 kb downstream of the chemokine gene *CXCL12*, correlated with increased *CXCL12* plasma levels, suggesting *CXCL12* as a proatherogenic molecule<sup>100</sup>. But other studies suggest an atheroprotective function for *CXCL12* on the basis of the association of reduced *CXCL12* plasma levels with unstable angina<sup>101</sup> and CAD risk allele rs501120T/T<sup>102</sup>. Thus, the precise

Table 1 Selection of CAD-and myocardial infarction (MI)-associated loci identified by GWAS

| Locus | Candidate gene(s) Located within or adjacent to this locus | SNP | Risk allele | Risk allele frequency (%) (European ancestry) | Disease association | SNP effect | References |
|-------|--------------------------------------------------------|-----|------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|------------|
| 1p13.3 | SORT1 | rs599839 | A | 77-78 | CAD+MI | Increased LDL cholesterol level | 94,97 |
|       |       | rs646776 | T | 79-81 | CAD+MI |             | 95,98^a^ |
| 1p32.3 | PCSK9 | rs11206510 | T | 81-84 | MI |             | 95^a^ |
| 1q41 | MIA3 | rs3008621 | G | 72 | CAD+MI |             | 94,96 |
|       |       | rs17465637 | C | 72-75 | MI |             | 95,97^a^ |
| 2q33.1 | WDR12, ALSC2R13 | rs6725887 | C | 14-15 | CAD |             | 94,97^a^ |
| 3q22.3 | MRAS | rs9818870 | T | 10-15 | CAD |             | 94^a^ |
|       |       | rs2306374 | C | 18 | CAD |             | 97 |
| 6p24.1 | PHACTR1 | rs12526453 | C | 65-67 | CAD+MI |             | 94,95,97 |
|       |       | rs9349379 | C | 44 | CAD |             | 96 |
| 6q25.3 | LPA | rs3798220 | C | 1-2 | CAD+MI |             | 96,97 |
| 6q26-27 | SLC22A3, LPAL2, LPA | rs2048327, rs3127599 | CTTG, CCTC | 18 | CAD+MI | Increased Lp(a) level | 94 |
|        |      | rs7767084, rs10755578 |      |      |      |      |      |
| 9p21.3^b^ | MTAP, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, CDKN2B-AS(or ANRIL) | rs1333049 | C | 52 | CAD+MI |             | 94 |
|         |      | rs10738610 | C | 48 | CAD+MI |             | 94 |
|         |      | rs4977574 | G | 43-56 | CAD+MI |             | 95-97 |
|         |      | rs10757278 | G | 46 | CAD+MI | Disrupted STAT1 binding site | 99 |
| 10q11.21 | CXCL12 | rs501120 | T | 84 | CAD+MI |             | 94 |
|         |      | rs1746048 | C | 84-87 | CAD+MI |             | 95,97^a^ |
| 12q24 | SH2B3 | rs11065987 | G | 34 | CAD |             | 94 |
| 12q24.12 | SH2B3 | rs3184504 | T | 40 | MI |             | 94,96 |
| 12q24.3 | HNF1A, C12orf43 | rs2259816 | T | 36 | CAD |             | 94^a^ |
| 19p13.2 | LDLR | rs1122608 | G | 75-79 | CAD+MI |             | 94-96 |
| 21q22.11 | SLC5A3, MRPS6, KCNE2 | rs9982601 | T | 13-15 | CAD+MI |             | 94-97 |

^a^ Significant association with CAD or MI was not confirmed in reference 96. ^b^ Strongest association with CAD and MI of all loci.

Table 2 Established, emerging and new experimental concepts in the treatment of cardiovascular disease

| Compound or method | Mechanism | Status or outcome | References |
|--------------------|-----------|-------------------|------------|
| **Established therapies** |  |  |  |
| Statins, for example, atorvastatin and rosvastatin | Inhibit cholesterol synthesis, anti-inflammatory | Primary and secondary prevention | 108–110 |
| Nicotinic acid (niacin) | Inhibits fat breakdown in adipose tissue and increases HDL cholesterol, anti-inflammatory | Secondary prevention | 111, 112 |
| Aspirin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor | Inhibit platelet aggregation | Secondary prevention | 113, 114 |
| β-blockers | Antihypertensive | Secondary prevention | 115 |
| Renin-angiotensin system inhibitors | Antihypertensive | Secondary prevention | 116 |

| **Emerging therapeutic approaches** |  |  |  |
| HDL mimetics, for example, apoA1-Milano | Promote cholesterol efflux, anti-inflammatory | Clinical phase 1 and 2 | 117, 118 |
| Darapladib (selective Lp-PLA₂ inhibitor) | Decreases atherogenic lipid production | Clinical phase 3 | 89, 119 |
| IL-1ra (IL-1 receptor antagonist) |  | Clinical phase 2 | 126 |
| Methotrexate | Immunosuppressive | Clinical phase 3 | 126 |

| **Pitfalls** |  | Adverse side effects |  |
| Thiazolidinediones (PPAR agonists) | Anti-inflammatory | Increased risk of heart failure and MI | 120–123 |
| Rimonabant (cannabinoid type-1 receptor antagonist) | Reduces appetite | Depressive effects—discontinued | 124 |
| Torcetrapib (CETP inhibitor) | Inhibits cholesterol transport from HDL to LDL | Raised systolic blood pressure—discontinued | 125 |
| Possible alternatives: anacetrapib (CETP inhibitor) |  | Clinical phase 3 (DEFINE study) |  |
| Dalcetrapib (CETP inhibitor) |  | Clinical phase 2 |  |

| **Novel experimental strategies** |  |  |  |
| Blocking the CD40-TRAF6 interaction site |  | Limits atherosclerosis of unstable phenotype in mice | 75 |
| Blocking MIF receptor binding |  | Induces lesion stabilization and regression in mice | 30, 127, 128 |
| Maraviroc (CCR5 antagonist) | Blocking CCR5 | Approved for US and European markets for HIV treatment | 7 |
| MLN 1202 (CCR2-specific antibody) | Blocking CCR2 | Clinical phase 2 | 129 |
| Nonagonistic CCL2-competing mutant PA508 | Nonagonistic plus increased proteoglycan affinity | Attenuates lesion formation in mice | 130 |
| Dominant-negative CCL5 mutant [44AANA47] | Creates dimers devoid of proteoglycan binding | Attenuates lesion formation in mice | 131 |
| Mkey (ct-2009) | Disrupts CCL5-CXCL4 heteromerization | Attenuates lesion formation in mice | 23 |
| Immunization | Protective antibody generation, Treg cell induction | Can attenuate lesion formation in mice | 45, 132–135 |
| CCL17 inhibition | Supports Treg cell homeostasis | Attenuates lesion formation in mice | 25 |

correlates with lowering of LDL cholesterol. Mechanistically, statins exert a pleiotropy of anti-inflammatory actions, improve endothelial function and reduce plaque lipids and thrombogenicity, thereby limiting and stabilizing atherosclerotic plaques<sup>108</sup>. Aggressive lipid lowering by high-dose atorvastatin decreased high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) serum levels and entailed regression of atheromas, as monitored by intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)<sup>109</sup>. The clinical benefit is extended to primary prevention in patients with LDL cholesterol levels < 130 mg/dl but elevated hs-CRP, where rosuvastatin significantly reduces major cardiovascular event rates, with reductions in both LDL cholesterol (< 70 mg/dl) and hsCRP indicative of successful treatment<sup>110</sup>. In ACS, aggressive statin therapy also lowered the incidence of primary endpoints including myocardial infarction, with the most substantial benefit in patients with declines in both LDL cholesterol and CRP<sup>108</sup>. In statin-treated patients with low HDL cholesterol, shifting the lipid balance in favor of HDL cholesterol by extended release of nicotinic acid (niacin) has been exploited to achieve regression of carotid intima-media thickness, although this is probably owing to anti-inflammatory effects through the niacin receptor GPR109A in immune cells rather than to the lipid-modifying effects of niacin<sup>111, 112</sup>.

Platelet inhibition with aspirin has proved an enduring pillar for secondary prevention in patients with ACS, a benefit enhanced by other antiplatelet agents, such as clopidogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor<sup>113</sup>. However, its limited suitability for primary prevention of atheroproliferation is probably related to the atherogenic effects of the platelet secretome, which remain unaltered, as aspirin primarily interferes with aggregation<sup>114</sup>. Furthermore, IVUS trials suggest that antihypertensive beta blockers lower mortality from myocardial infarction and delay atheroprogression<sup>115</sup>. Likewise, interference with the renin-angiotensin system improves endothelial function and reduces coronary event rates disproportionately to lower blood pressure, supporting direct atheroprotective effects<sup>116</sup>.

Emerging therapeutic approaches. Artificial HDL-like apolipoprotein A1 complexes (apoA1-Milano) hold promise in mediating regression of CAD<sup>117</sup>. Some peptide-based HDL mimetics promote cholesterol efflux by avidly binding oxidized lipids, exert anti-inflammatory
properties, and, based on early human studies with orally available forms, may harbor additive benefit in statin-treated patients<sup>118</sup>. After encouraging results in swine<sup>89</sup>, the selective Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> inhibitor darapladib failed to decrease plaque deformability but prevented expansion of the necrotic core size that reflects plaque vulnerability in patients with CAD<sup>119</sup>. A potential benefit of darapladib on coronary atherosclerosis should be established in a phase 3 trial that is currently under way.

Other examples illustrate inherent pitfalls of cardiovascular drug development. Although plaque-stabilizing effects of the antidiabetic PPAR agonists thiazolidinediones have been reported in nondiabetic individuals<sup>120</sup>, conflicting evidence has warranted restrictions in their use. Addition of rosiglitazone to glucose-lowering therapy failed to reduce cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes and, even worse, raised the risk of heart failure<sup>121</sup>, and a meta-analysis of randomized trials further revealed an increased risk for myocardial infarction<sup>122</sup>. Likewise, pioglitazone, despite lowering cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes, has been linked to serious heart failure<sup>123</sup>. Off-target effects or ambiguous results have discouraged other developments. The selective cannabinoid type-1 receptor antagonist rimonabant failed to delay progression of CAD in obese individuals with metabolic syndrome and caused psychiatric adverse effects<sup>124</sup>. Although the cholesterol ester transport protein (CETP) inhibitor torcetrapib induced regression of coronary atherosclerosis at the highest HDL-cholesterol levels achieved, it also showed aldosterone-related adverse effects<sup>125</sup>. This may explain a lack of benefit in the full study cohort but still suggests that CETP inhibitors without off-target activity, for example, anacetrapib or dalcetrapib, may halt plaque progression. In addition, better insights into the relation between HDL-particle content and beneficial function are necessary. These examples underscore a need for ongoing identification and validation of alternative targets and drug candidates. Studies using currently available anti-inflammatory treatment regimens for atherothrombosis, such as IL-1 receptor antagonism or immunosuppressive methotrexate, are currently under way<sup>126</sup>.

mutant PA508, which has increased proteoglycan affinity, and the dominant-negative CCL5 mutant [44AANA47], which creates dimers devoid of proteoglycan binding, attenuated lesion formation in mice<sup>7,130,131</sup>. As chemokines are an integral part of the immune system, blocking these constituents carries a risk of unwanted side effects. Tailored manipulation of heterophilic chemokine interactions introduces a promising alternative that leaves normal physiological, immunological functions intact. Disrupting CCL5-CXCL4 heterodimerization with the cyclized peptide MKEY selectively inhibited heteromer-mediated enhancement of atherogenic monocyte recruitment and atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice without affecting other CCL5-related functions or compromising immune responses and host defense<sup>23</sup>. Assessing toxicological screening and validating the effectiveness of these drugs will require vigorous testing in clinical settings. Exploiting the chemokine interactome for context-specific interference may apply to other predicted atherogenic interactions<sup>7</sup>.

Using adaptive immunity to control immune responses sustaining atherogenic inflammation—immunization with LDL, oxLDL, heat shock proteins or ApoB100 fragments can reduce atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic animals—implicates vaccination as an approach to prevent or mitigate disease<sup>49</sup>. Whereas the best antigen and study population for vaccination remains unclear, antigen-pulsed DCs have been explored as an adjuvant strategy. Repetitive injection with lipopolysaccharide-matured DCs pulsed with SMC-derived artificial self antigen or aldehyde-modified LDL aggravated atherosclerosis during high-fat diet<sup>45,132</sup>. In contrast, injecting lipopolysaccharide-matured DCs pulsed with oxLDL before high-fat diet favored more stable plaque formation<sup>133</sup>, and single administration of tolerogenic IL-10-exposed, ApoB100-pulsed DCs before high-fat diet attenuated atherosclerosis in human ApoB100-transgenic mice<sup>134</sup>. In addition, mucosal immunization with an ApoB100 peptide was associated with antigen-specific T<sub>reg</sub> cell generation and reduced cellular immunity to ApoB100 (refs. 134, 135). These conflicting results can be reconciled by the concept that the degree of hyperlipidemia, timing of application and local tolerogenic milieu may shape functional phenotypes of endogenous or transferred DCs. In this context, short-circuiting the restraining effect of mature CCL17<sup>+</sup> DCs on T<sub>reg</sub> cell homeostasis through CCL17 inhibition<sup>25</sup> may help to create a regulatory IL-10-biased environment to improve tolerogenic DC therapy or disrupt DC-orchestrated vicious circles.

In summary, established drugs, such as niacin, owing to improved formulations or combination with a prostaglandin D1 receptor antagonist to reduce flushing, could regain attention, whereas emerging compounds such as CETP or Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub> inhibitors could be further refined and tested in large-scale trials<sup>4</sup> with a focus on excluding deleterious off-target effects. New strategies, including peptides targeting the chemokine interactome and vaccination, are emerging, but they will have to overcome translational challenges, such as specificity and efficacy. Clearly, more animal studies of established and unstable atherosclerosis are warranted for extrapolation to human disease before evaluation of new drug candidates in clinical trials.

### Conclusions and perspectives

The response-to-injury hypothesis of Russell Ross introduced that monocyte-endothelial interactions giving rise to foam cells and growth factor-induced SMC proliferation trigger lesion formation. Pervasion of the atherogenic process has been considerably refined by the appreciation of subendothelial ApoB-lipoprotein retention, the role of macrophage-, neutrophil-, T cell- and DC-driven pathways,
and the identification of signals, such as chemotactic cytokines, regulating the lesional recruitment and homeostasis of inflammatory cells. Close links between lipid and inflammation biology continue to emerge as the pathogenic interface, as illustrated by the role of ABC transporters and ApoE in hematopoietic cell proliferation, the cholesterol crystal-induced inflammasome activation or the additional unexpected players unearthed by the gold-mining efforts of genome-wide and metabolic profiling studies. As for the chemokine interactome, these findings could offer an abundance of highly specific targeting options, which may further benefit from nanoparticle-based systems for imaging-guided and local delivery.

Drug development to treat atherosclerosis requires stringent evaluation of effectiveness, which—given the enormous toll of clinical endpoint studies beyond lipid lowering—has to rely on surrogate markers. Although a variety of soluble, imaging or functional biomarkers is available, their predictability in phase 2 for atherosclerosis outcomes in phase 3 studies remains limited. Hence, new biomarkers should be developed to complement existing ones, or multiple biomarkers should be combined in an integrated approach. Associated drawbacks notwithstanding, GWASs and transcriptional, proteomic and metabolic profiling may facilitate this search, with the ultimate goal to model ‘multimarker CAD scores’ with a higher predictive ability than established biomarkers.

There is an urgent need for improved imaging techniques, as current modalities (IVUS, carotid intima-media thickness, quantitative coronary angiography, computed tomography) provide only quantitative and partial morphological data of atherosclerotic lesions, and they are often invasive and associated with ionizing irradiation. However, as cellular and molecular composition better reflects lesion pathology compared to size, highly advanced imaging techniques, namely high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging and positron-emission tomography, will be required. The development of new molecular imaging probes with specific biological functions could add new dimensions to plaque imaging, including monitoring the activation of endothelial cells and macrophages. If successful, this will be of tremendous value for drug development and testing efficacy, allowing for detailed mechanistic insights into therapeutic effects at early stages, as well as for imaging-based clinical outcome studies.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (FOR809), the European Research Council and Fondation Leducq. We sincerely apologize to all scientists whose important contributions to the field could not be cited due to space limitations.

### COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The authors declare competing financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/naturemedicine/.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemedicine/. Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/reprints/index.html.

1. Moore, K.J. & Tabas, I. Macrophages in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. *Cell* **145**, 341–355 (2011).
2. Kwon, G.P., Schroeder, J.L., Amar, M.J., Remaley, A.T. & Balaban, R.S. Contribution of macromolecular structure to the retention of low-density lipoprotein at arterial branch points. *Circulation* **117**, 2919–2927 (2008).
3. Hansson, G.K. & Hermansson, A. The immune system in atherosclerosis. *Nat. Immunol.* **12**, 204–212 (2011).
4. Ylä-Herttuala, S. *et al*. Stabilisation of atherosclerotic plaques. Position Paper of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Working Group of Atherosclerosis and Vascular Biology. *Thromb. Haemost.* **106**, 1–19 (2011).
5. Weber, C., Zernecke, A. & Libby, P. The multifaceted contributions of leukocyte subsets to atherosclerosis: lessons from mouse models. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **8**, 802–815 (2008).
6. Woollard, K.J. & Geissmann, F. Monocytes in atherosclerosis: subsets and functions. *Nat. Rev. Cardiol.* **7**, 77–86 (2010).
7. Koenen, R.R. & Weber, C. Therapeutic targeting of chemokine interactions in atherosclerosis. *Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.* **9**, 141–153 (2010).
8. Swirski, F.K. *et al*. Ly-6Chi monocytes dominate hypercholesterolemia-associated monocytosis and give rise to macrophages in atheromata. *J. Clin. Invest.* **117**, 195–205 (2007).
9. Tacke, F. *et al*. Monocyte subsets differentially employ CCR2, CCR5 and CX3CR1 to accumulate within atherosclerotic plaques. *J. Clin. Invest.* **117**, 185–194 (2007).
10. Combadière, C. *et al*. Combined inhibition of CCL2, CX3CR1, and CCR5 abrogates Ly6Chi and Ly6Clo monocytopsis and almost abolishes atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic mice. *Circulation* **117**, 1649–1657 (2008).
11. Saederup, N., Chan, L., Lira, S.A. & Charo, I.F. Fractalkine deficiency markedly reduces macrophage accumulation and atherosclerotic lesion formation in *Ccr2−/−* mice: evidence for independent chemokine functions in atherogenesis. *Circulation* **117**, 1642–1648 (2008).
12. Zernecke, A. & Weber, C. Chemokines in the vascular inflammatory response of atherosclerosis. *Cardiovasc. Res.* **86**, 192–201 (2010).
13. Veillard, N.R. *et al*. Differential influence of chemokine receptors CCR2 and CXCR3 in development of atherosclerosis *in vivo*. *Circulation* **112**, 870–878 (2005).
14. Heller, E.A. *et al*. Chemokine CXCL10 promotes atherogenesis by modulating the local balance of effector and regulatory T cells. *Circulation* **113**, 2301–2312 (2006).
15. van Wanrooij, E.J. *et al*. CXCR3 antagonist NBI-74330 attenuates atherosclerotic plaque formation in LDL receptor-deficient mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **28**, 251–257 (2008).
16. Potteaux, S. *et al*. Role of bone marrow-derived CC-chemokine receptor 5 in the development of atherosclerosis of low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **26**, 1858–1863 (2006).
17. Brauersreuther, V. *et al*. Ccr5 but not Ccr1 deficiency reduces development of diet-induced atherosclerosis in mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **27**, 373–379 (2007).
18. Huo, Y. *et al*. Circulating activated platelets exacerbate atherosclerosis in mice deficient in apolipoprotein E. *Nat. Med.* **9**, 61–67 (2003).
19. Mause, S.F., von Hundelshausen, P., Zernecke, A., Koenen, R.R. & Weber, C. Platelet microparticles: a transcellular delivery system for RANTES promoting monocyte recruitment on endothelium. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **25**, 1512–1518 (2005).
20. Veillard, N.R. *et al*. Antagonism of RANTES receptors reduces atherosclerotic plaque formation in mice. *Circ. Res.* **94**, 253–261 (2004).
21. Sachais, B.S. *et al*. Elimination of platelet factor 4 (PF4) from platelets reduces atherosclerosis in C57BL/6 and *Apoε−/−* mice. *Thromb. Haemost.* **98**, 1108–1113 (2007).
22. von Hundelshausen, P. *et al*. Heterophilic interactions of platelet factor 4 and RANTES promote monocyte arrest on endothelium. *Blood* **105**, 924–930 (2005).
23. Koenen, R.R. *et al*. Disrupting functional interactions between platelet chemokines inhibits atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice. *Nat. Med.* **15**, 97–103 (2009).
24. Landsman, L. *et al*. CX3CR1 is required for monocyte homeostasis and atherogenesis by promoting cell survival. *Blood* **113**, 963–972 (2009).
25. Weber, C. *et al*. CCL17-expressing dendritic cells drive atherosclerosis by restraining regulatory T cell homeostasis in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* **121**, 2898–2910 (2011).
26. Trogan, E. *et al*. Gene expression changes in foam cells and the role of chemokine receptor CCR7 during atherosclerosis regression in ApoE-deficient mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 3781–3786 (2006).
27. Potteaux, S. *et al*. Suppressed monocyte recruitment drives macrophage removal from atherosclerotic plaques of *Apoε−/−* mice during disease regression. *J. Clin. Invest.* **121**, 2025–2036 (2011).
28. Feig, J.E. *et al*. LXR promotes the maximal egress of monocyte-derived cells from mouse aortic plaques during atherosclerosis regression. *J. Clin. Invest.* **120**, 4415–4424 (2010).
29. Luchtefeld, M. *et al*. Chemokine receptor 7 knockout attenuates atherosclerotic plaque development. *Circulation* **122**, 1621–1628 (2010).
30. Bernhagen, J. *et al*. MIF is a noncognate ligand of CXC chemokine receptors in inflammatory and atherogenic cell recruitment. *Nat. Med.* **13**, 587–596 (2007).
31. Soehnlein, O. & Lindbom, L. Phagocyte partnership during the onset and resolution of inflammation. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **10**, 427–439 (2010).
32. Curtiss, L.K. & Tobias, P.S. Emerging role of Toll-like receptors in atherosclerosis. *J. Lipid Res.* **50** (suppl.), S340–S345 (2009).
33. Seimon, T.A. *et al*. Atherogenic lipids and lipoproteins trigger CD36-TLR2-dependent apoptosis in macrophages undergoing endoplasmic reticulum stress. *Cell Metab.* **12**, 467–482 (2010).
34. Kanellakis, P. *et al*. High-mobility group box protein 1 neutralization reduces development of diet-induced atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **31**, 313–319 (2011).
35. Zernecke, A. *et al*. Protective role of CXC receptor 4/CXC ligand 12 unveils the importance of neutrophils in atherosclerosis. *Circ. Res.* **102**, 209–217 (2008).
36. Rotzius, P. *et al*. Distinct infiltration of neutrophils in lesion shoulders in *Apoε−/−* mice. *Am. J. Pathol.* **177**, 493–500 (2010).

37. Drechsler, M., Megens, R.T., van Zandvoort, M., Weber, C. & Soehnlein, O. Hyperlipidemia-triggered neutrophilia promotes early atherosclerosis. *Circulation* **122**, 1837–1845 (2010).

38. Yvan-Charvet, L. *et al.* Increased inflammatory gene expression in ABC transporter-deficient macrophages: free cholesterol accumulation, increased signaling via Toll-like receptors and neutrophil infiltration of atherosclerotic lesions. *Circulation* **118**, 1837–1847 (2008).

39. Soehnlein, O. *et al.* Neutrophil secretion products pave the way for inflammatory monocytes. *Blood* **112**, 1461–1471 (2008).

40. Cole, J.E. *et al.* Unexpected protective role for Toll-like receptor 3 in the arterial wall. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 2372–2377 (2011).

41. Tabas, I. Macrophage death and defective inflammation resolution in atherosclerosis. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **10**, 36–46 (2010).

42. Papayannopoulos, V. & Zychlinsky, A. NETs: a new strategy for using old weapons. *Trends Immunol.* **30**, 513–521 (2009).

43. Zhang, Z. *et al.* Evidence that cathelicidin peptide LL-37 may act as a functional ligand for CXCR2 on human neutrophils. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **39**, 3181–3194 (2009).

44. Massberg, S. *et al.* Reciprocal coupling of coagulation and innate immunity via neutrophil serine proteases. *Nat. Med.* **16**, 887–896 (2010).

45. Ludewig, B. *et al.* Linking immune-mediated arterial inflammation and cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis in a transgenic mouse model. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 12752–12757 (2000).

46. Buono, C. *et al.* T-bet deficiency reduces atherosclerosis and alters plaque antigen-specific immune responses. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 1596–1601 (2005).

47. Ait-Oufella, H. *et al.* Measles virus nucleoprotein induces a regulatory immune response and reduces atherosclerosis in mice. *Circulation* **116**, 1707–1713 (2007).

48. Sasaki, N. *et al.* Oral anti-CD3 antibody treatment induces regulatory T cells and inhibits the development of atherosclerosis in mice. *Circulation* **120**, 1996–2005 (2009).

49. Nilsson, J., Hansson, G.K. & Shah, P.K. Immunomodulation of atherosclerosis: implications for vaccine development. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **25**, 18–28 (2005).

50. Hermansson, A. *et al.* Inhibition of T cell response to native low-density lipoprotein reduces atherosclerosis. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 1081–1093 (2010).

51. Binder, C.J. *et al.* IL-5 links adaptive and natural immunity specific for epitopes of oxidized LDL and protects from atherosclerosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* **114**, 427–437 (2004).

52. Tsimikas, S. *et al.* Relationship of IgG and IgM autoantibodies to oxidized low density lipoprotein with coronary artery disease and cardiovascular events. *J. Lipid Res.* **48**, 425–433 (2007).

53. Schiopu, A. *et al.* Recombinant antibodies to an oxidized low-density lipoprotein epitope induce rapid regression of atherosclerosis in apobec-1−/low-density lipoprotein receptor−/− mice. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* **50**, 2313–2318 (2007).

54. Kyaw, T. *et al.* Conventional B2 B cell depletion ameliorates whereas its adoptive transfer aggravates atherosclerosis. *J. Immunol.* **185**, 4410–4419 (2010).

55. Ait-Oufella, H. *et al.* B cell depletion reduces the development of atherosclerosis in mice. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 1579–1587 (2010).

56. Millonig, G. *et al.* Network of vascular-associated dendritic cells in intima of healthy young individuals. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **21**, 503–508 (2001).

57. Jongstra-Bilen, J. *et al.* Low-grade chronic inflammation in regions of the normal mouse arterial intima predisposed to atherosclerosis. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 2073–2083 (2006).

58. Choi, J.H. *et al.* Identification of antigen-presenting dendritic cells in mouse aorta and cardiac valves. *J. Exp. Med.* **206**, 497–505 (2009).

59. Galkina, E. *et al.* Lymphocyte recruitment into the aortic wall before and during development of atherosclerosis is partially L-selectin dependent. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 1273–1282 (2006).

60. Liu, P. *et al.* CX3CR1 deficiency impairs dendritic cell accumulation in arterial intima and reduces atherosclerotic burden. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **28**, 243–250 (2008).

61. Wu, H. *et al.* Functional role of CD11c+ monocytes in atherogenesis associated with hypercholesterolemia. *Circulation* **119**, 2708–2717 (2009).

62. Shaposhnik, Z., Wang, X., Weinstein, M., Bennett, B.J. & Lusis, A.J. Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor regulates dendritic cell content of atherosclerotic lesions. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **27**, 621–627 (2007).

63. Zhu, S.N., Chen, M., Jongstra-Bilen, J. & Cybulsky, M.I. GM-CSF regulates intimal cell proliferation in nascent atherosclerotic lesions. *J. Exp. Med.* **206**, 2141–2149 (2009).

64. Paulson, K.E. *et al.* Resident intimal dendritic cells accumulate lipid and contribute to the initiation of atherosclerosis. *Circ. Res.* **106**, 383–390 (2010).

65. Angeli, V. *et al.* Dyslipidemia associated with atherosclerotic disease systemically alters dendritic cell mobilization. *Immunity* **21**, 561–574 (2004).

66. Gautier, E.L. *et al.* Conventional dendritic cells at the crossroads between immunity and cholesterol homeostasis in atherosclerosis. *Circulation* **119**, 2367–2375 (2009).

67. Han, J.W. *et al.* Vessel wall-embedded dendritic cells induce T cell autoreactivity and initiate vascular inflammation. *Circ. Res.* **102**, 546–553 (2008).

68. Niessner, A. *et al.* Synergistic proinflammatory effects of the antiviral cytokine interferon-alpha and Toll-like receptor 4 ligands in the atherosclerotic plaque. *Circulation* **116**, 2043–2052 (2007).

69. Niessner, A. *et al.* Pathogen-sensing plasmacytoid dendritic cells stimulate cytotoxic T cell function in the atherosclerotic plaque through interferon-α. *Circulation* **114**, 2482–2489 (2006).

70. Goossens, P. *et al.* Myeloid type I interferon signaling promotes atherosclerosis by stimulating macrophage recruitment to lesions. *Cell Metab.* **12**, 142–153 (2010).

71. Noels, H., Bernhagen, J. & Weber, C. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor: a noncanonical chemokine important in atherosclerosis. *Trends Cardiovasc. Med.* **19**, 76–86 (2009).

72. Gotsman, I., Sharpe, A.H. & Lichtman, A.H. T cell costimulation and coinhibition in atherosclerosis. *Circ. Res.* **103**, 1220–1231 (2008).

73. Lievens, D., Eijgelaar, W.J., Biessen, E.A., Daemen, M.J. & Lutgens, E. The multi-functionality of CD40L and its receptor CD40 in atherosclerosis. *Thromb. Haemost.* **102**, 206–214 (2009).

74. Lievens, D. *et al.* Platelet CD40L mediates thrombotic and inflammatory processes in atherosclerosis. *Blood* **116**, 4317–4327 (2010).

75. Lutgens, E. *et al.* Deficient CD40-TRAF6 signaling in leukocytes prevents atherosclerosis by skewing the immune response toward an anti-inflammatory profile. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 391–404 (2010).

76. Greaves, D.R. & Gordon, S. The macrophage scavenger receptor at 30 years of age: current knowledge and future challenges. *J. Lipid Res.* **50** (suppl.), S282–S286 (2009).

77. Manning-Tobin, J.J. *et al.* Loss of SR-A and CD36 activity reduces atherosclerotic lesion complexity without abrogating foam cell formation in hyperlipidemic mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **29**, 19–26 (2009).

78. Stewart, C.R. *et al.* CD36 ligands promote sterile inflammation through assembly of a Toll-like receptor 4 and 6 heterodimer. *Nat. Immunol.* **11**, 155–161 (2010).

79. Thorp, E. *et al.* Reduced apoptosis and plaque necrosis in advanced atherosclerotic lesions of Apoe−/− and Ldlr−/− mice lacking CHOP. *Cell Metab.* **9**, 474–481 (2009).

80. Hotamisligil, G.S. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and atherosclerosis. *Nat. Med.* **16**, 396–399 (2010).

81. Erbay, E. *et al.* Reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress through a macrophage lipid chaperone alleviates atherosclerosis. *Nat. Med.* **15**, 1383–1391 (2009).

82. Yvan-Charvet, L. *et al.* Combined deficiency of ABCA1 and ABCG1 promotes foam cell accumulation and accelerates atherosclerosis in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* **117**, 3900–3908 (2007).

83. Yvan-Charvet, L. *et al.* ATP-binding cassette transporters and HDL suppress hematopoietic stem cell proliferation. *Science* **328**, 1689–1693 (2010).

84. Wang, F. *et al.* Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor-2 deficiency leads to inhibition of macrophage proinflammatory activities and atherosclerosis in apoE-deficient mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* **120**, 3979–3995 (2010).

85. Duewell, P. *et al.* NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for atherogenesis and activated by cholesterol crystals. *Nature* **464**, 1357–1361 (2010).

86. Rajamäki, K. *et al.* Cholesterol crystals activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in human macrophages: a novel link between cholesterol metabolism and inflammation. *PLoS ONE* **5**, e11765 (2010).

87. Menu, P. *et al.* Atherosclerosis in ApoE-deficient mice progresses independently of the NLRP3 inflammasome. *Cell Death Dis.* **2**, e137 (2011).

88. Epps, K.C. & Wilensky, R.L. Lp-PLA—a novel risk factor for high-risk coronary and carotid artery disease. *J. Intern. Med.* **269**, 94–106 (2011).

89. Wilensky, R.L. *et al.* Inhibition of lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 reduces complex coronary atherosclerotic plaque development. *Nat. Med.* **14**, 1059–1066 (2008).

90. Liu, J. *et al.* Circulating platelet-activating factor is primarily cleared by transport, not intravascular hydrolysis by lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2/ PAF acetylhydrolase. *Circ. Res.* **108**, 469–477 (2011).

91. Siess, W. *et al.* Lysosphosphatidic acid mediates the rapid activation of platelets and endothelial cells by mildly oxidized low density lipoprotein and accumulates in human atherosclerotic lesions. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 6931–6936 (1999).

92. Zhou, Z. *et al.* Lipoprotein-derived lysophosphatidic acid promotes atherosclerosis by releasing CXCL1 from the endothelium. *Cell Metab.* **13**, 592–600 (2011).

93. Teslovich, T.M. *et al.* Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood lipids. *Nature* **466**, 707–713 (2010).

94. Schunkert, H., Erdmann, J. & Samani, N.J. Genetics of myocardial infarction: a progress report. *Eur. Heart J.* **31**, 918–925 (2010).

95. Kathiresan, S. *et al.* Genome-wide association of early-onset myocardial infarction with single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variants. *Nat. Genet.* **41**, 334–341 (2009).

96. Ripatti, S. *et al.* A multilocus genetic risk score for coronary heart disease: case-control and prospective cohort analyses. *Lancet* **376**, 1393–1400 (2010).

97. Schunkert, H. *et al.* Large-scale association analysis identifies 13 new susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease. *Nat. Genet.* **43**, 333–338 (2011).

98. Coronary Artery Disease (C4D) Genetics Consortium. A genome-wide association study in Europeans and South Asians identifies five new loci for coronary artery disease. *Nat. Genet.* **43**, 339–344 (2011).

99. Harismendy, O. *et al.* 9p21 DNA variants associated with coronary artery disease impair interferon-gamma signalling response. *Nature* **470**, 264–268 (2011).

100. Mehta, N.N. *et al.* The novel atherosclerosis locus at 10q11 regulates plasma CXCL12 levels. *Eur. Heart J.* **32**, 963–971 (2011).

101. Damás, J.K. *et al.* Stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha in unstable angina: potential antiinflammatory and matrix-stabilizing effects. *Circulation* **106**, 36–42 (2002).

102. Kiechl, S. *et al.* Coronary artery disease-related genetic variant on chromosome 10q11 is associated with carotid intima-media thickness and atherosclerosis. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **30**, 2678–2683 (2010).

103. Zernecke, A. *et al.* Delivery of microRNA-126 by apoptotic bodies induces CXCL12-dependent vascular protection. *Sci. Signal.* **2**, ra81 (2009).

104. Harris, T.A., Yamakuchi, M., Ferlito, M., Mendell, J.T. & Lowenstein, C.J. MicroRNA-126 regulates endothelial expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 1516–1521 (2008).

105. Fichtlscherer, S. *et al.* Circulating microRNAs in patients with coronary artery disease. *Circ. Res.* **107**, 677–684 (2010).

106. Wang, Z. *et al.* Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. *Nature* **472**, 57–63 (2011).

107. Andraws, R., Berger, J.S. & Brown, D.L. Effects of antibiotic therapy on outcomes of patients with coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. *J. Am. Med. Assoc.* **293**, 2641–2647 (2005).

108. Ray, K.K. & Cannon, C.P. The potential relevance of the multiple lipid-independent (pleiotropic) effects of statins in the management of acute coronary syndromes. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* **46**, 1425–1433 (2005).

109. Nissen, S.E. Effect of intensive lipid lowering on progression of coronary atherosclerosis: evidence for an early benefit from the Reversal of Atherosclerosis with Aggressive Lipid Lowering (REVERSAL) trial. *Am. J. Cardiol.* **96**, 61F–68F (2005).

110. Ridker, P.M. *et al.* Reduction in C-reactive protein and LDL cholesterol and cardiovascular event rates after initiation of rosuvastatin: a prospective study of the JUPITER trial. *Lancet* **373**, 1175–1182 (2009).

111. Taylor, A.J. *et al.* Extended-release niacin or ezetimibe and carotid intima-media thickness. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **361**, 2113–2122 (2009).

112. Lukasova, M., Malaval, C., Gille, A., Kero, J. & Offermanns, S. Nicotinic acid inhibits progression of atherosclerosis in mice through its receptor GPR109A expressed by immune cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* **121**, 1163–1173 (2011).

113. Wallentin, L. *et al.* Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **361**, 1045–1057 (2009).

114. von Hundelshausen, P. & Weber, C. Platelets as immune cells: bridging inflammation and cardiovascular disease. *Circ. Res.* **100**, 27–40 (2007).

115. Sipahi, I. *et al.* Beta-blockers and progression of coronary atherosclerosis: pooled analysis of 4 intravascular ultrasonography trials. *Ann. Intern. Med.* **147**, 10–18 (2007).

116. Yusuf, S. *et al.* Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **358**, 1547–1559 (2008).

117. Nissen, S.E. *et al.* Effect of recombinant ApoA-I Milano on coronary atherosclerosis in patients with acute coronary syndromes: a randomized controlled trial. *J. Am. Med. Assoc.* **290**, 2292–2300 (2003).

118. Navab, M. *et al.* Structure and function of HDL mimetics. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **30**, 164–168 (2010).

119. Serruys, P.W. *et al.* Effects of the direct lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2) inhibitor darapladib on human coronary atherosclerotic plaque. *Circulation* **118**, 1172–1182 (2008).

120. Jandeleit-Dahm, K.A., Calkin, A., Tikellis, C. & Thomas, M. Direct antiatherosclerotic effects of PPAR agonists. *Curr. Opin. Lipidol.* **20**, 24–29 (2009).

121. Home, P.D. *et al.* Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes in oral agent combination therapy for type 2 diabetes (RECORD): a multicentre, randomised, open-label trial. *Lancet* **373**, 2125–2135 (2009).

122. Nissen, S.E. & Wolski, K. Rosiglitazone revisited: an updated meta-analysis of risk for myocardial infarction and cardiovascular mortality. *Arch. Intern. Med.* **170**, 1191–1201 (2010).

123. Lincoff, A.M., Wolski, K., Nicholls, S.J. & Nissen, S.E. Pioglitazone and risk of cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. *J. Am. Med. Assoc.* **298**, 1180–1188 (2007).

124. Nissen, S.E. *et al.* Effect of rimonabant on progression of atherosclerosis in patients with abdominal obesity and coronary artery disease: the STRADIVARIUS randomized controlled trial. *J. Am. Med. Assoc.* **299**, 1547–1560 (2008).

125. Nicholls, S.J., Tuzcu, E.M., Brennan, D.M., Tardif, J.C. & Nissen, S.E. Cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibition, high-density lipoprotein raising, and progression of coronary atherosclerosis: insights from ILLUSTRATE (Investigation of Lipid Level Management Using Coronary Ultrasound to Assess Reduction of Atherosclerosis by CETP Inhibition and HDL Elevation). *Circulation* **118**, 2506–2514 (2008).

126. Klingenberg, R. & Hansson, G.K. Treating inflammation in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: emerging therapies. *Eur. Heart J.* **30**, 2838–2844 (2009).

127. Weber, C. *et al.* Structural determinants of MIF functions in CXCR2-mediated inflammatory and atherogenic leukocyte recruitment. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 16278–16283 (2008).

128. Kraemer, S. *et al.* MIF-chemokine receptor interactions in atherogenesis are dependent on an N-loop-based 2-site binding mechanism. *FASEB J.* **25**, 894–906 (2011).

129. Gilbert, J. *et al.* Effect of CC chemokine receptor 2 CCR2 blockade on serum C-reactive protein in individuals at atherosclerotic risk and with a single nucleotide polymorphism of the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 promoter region. *Am. J. Cardiol.* **107**, 906–911 (2011).

130. Liehn, E.A. *et al.* A new monocyte chemotactic protein-1/chemokine CC motif ligand-2 competitor limiting neointima formation and myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* **56**, 1847–1857 (2010).

131. Brauersreuther, V. *et al.* A novel RANTES antagonist prevents progression of established atherosclerotic lesions in mice. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **28**, 1090–1096 (2008).

132. Hjerpe, C., Johansson, D., Hermansson, A., Hansson, G.K. & Zhou, X. Dendritic cells pulsed with malondialdehyde modified low density lipoprotein aggravate atherosclerosis in Apoe⁻/⁻ mice. *Atherosclerosis* **209**, 436–441 (2010).

133. Habets, K.L. *et al.* Vaccination using oxidized low-density lipoprotein-pulsed dendritic cells reduces atherosclerosis in LDL receptor-deficient mice. *Cardiovasc. Res.* **85**, 622–630 (2010).

134. Hermansson, A. *et al.* Immunotherapy with tolerogenic apolipoprotein B-100-loaded dendritic cells attenuates atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic mice. *Circulation* **123**, 1083–1091 (2011).

135. Klingenberg, R. *et al.* Intranasal immunization with an apolipoprotein B-100 fusion protein induces antigen-specific regulatory T cells and reduces atherosclerosis. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **30**, 946–952 (2010).
