
# Sorting nexins provide diversity for retromer-dependent trafficking events

**Peter J. Cullen and Hendrik C. Korswagen**

Sorting nexins are a large family of evolutionarily conserved phosphoinositide-binding proteins that have fundamental roles in orchestrating cargo sorting through the membranous maze that is the endosomal network. One ancient group of complexes that contain sorting nexins is the retromer. Here we discuss how retromer complexes regulate endosomal sorting, and describe how this is generating exciting new insight into the central role played by endosomal sorting in development and homeostasis of normal tissues.

The endosomal network comprises a series of interconnected membranous compartments that begin at the plasma membrane at sites where cargo is internalized through endocytosis¹. Internalized cargo enters the early endosome, an endomembrane compartment enriched in phosphatidylinositol-3-monophosphate (PtdIns(3)P) and morphologically characterized by vacuolar and tubular subdomains². Early endosomes initiate cargo sorting into two distinct pathways: endolysosomal degradation, one major function of which is to downregulate signalling receptors; and cargo recycling, which consists of a collection of distinct retrieval pathways that recycle cargo, such as nutrient-sensing receptors, away from degradation (Fig. 1a). Although a great deal is known about the mechanistic details of cargo sorting into the endolysosomal degradative pathway and the central role of PtdIns(3)P (ref. 3), a mechanistic understanding of how cargo is retrieved from lysosomal degradation is only now beginning to emerge⁴,⁵.

As with a number of membrane-trafficking events, retrieval is orchestrated through the assembly of coat complexes, which function to recognize and concentrate specific cargo, drive membrane remodelling and elicit scission to form a cargo-enriched carrier⁶. One family of PtdIns(3)P-binding proteins that have emerging roles as coat complexes in multiple endosomal retrieval pathways are the evolutionarily conserved sorting nexins (SNXs)²,⁷. In particular, much of our insight into how these proteins regulate retrieval, and how this basic aspect of cell biology impinges on organism development, has stemmed from the study of the retromer complex.

## Retromer

The primary role of retromer is to select cargo proteins for retrograde endosome-to-Golgi transport (Table 1). In yeast, retromer is classically considered a multi-protein complex formed by association of two subcomplexes: a stable trimer of Vps26, Vps29 and Vps35, and a membrane-bound heterodimer of the SNX proteins Vps5 and Vps17 (ref. 8; Fig. 1b). The Vps26–Vps29–Vps35 trimer is termed the cargo-selective adaptor, as Vps35 directly binds to sorting motifs present in the cytoplasmic domains of cargo proteins, whereas the SNX heterodimer is called the membrane-deforming subcomplex as it induces and/or stabilizes the formation of membrane tubules. Interwoven with these events, retromer recruits additional proteins that aid further cargo capture and packaging⁹,¹⁰, as well as accessory proteins that regulate maturation and scission of the retromer tubules¹¹⁻¹⁵. Retromer therefore shares a number of similarities with archetypal coat complexes such as COPI, COPII and clathrin coats⁶: it is an evolutionarily conserved, multi-protein assembly designed to select cargo, drive membrane remodelling and elicit carrier scission.

### Membrane remodelling — the SNX-BAR subcomplex

In metazoans, gene duplication at the vertebrate ancestor has resulted in two Vps5 orthologues, SNX1 and SNX2, whereas duplication of Vps17 in the metazoan ancestor has resulted in SNX5, SNX6 and possibly SNX32 (refs 16,17; Fig. 1b). These SNX proteins are members of the SNX-BAR subfamily as they contain two membrane-binding modules: a membrane-curvature-sensing BAR (Bin/amphiphysin/Rvs) domain, and a phosphoinositide-binding PX (phox homology) domain. The PX domain in SNX1 and SNX2 associates with the endosomal phosphoinositides PtdIns(3)P and phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(3,5)P₂)¹⁸. For BAR domains the ability to sense membrane curvature arises on dimerization, which results in formation of a positively charged crescent-shaped surface that through electrostatic interactions binds to membranes of positive curvature¹⁹. Dimerization of retromer SNX-BAR proteins follows a simple rule: one Vps5 equivalent dimerizes with one Vps17 equivalent²⁰; however, eukaryotic lineages between Amoebozoa and Excavata, which lack a Vps17 equivalent, seem to rely on Vps5 homodimerization¹⁷. In combining the membrane-binding affinities of the PX and BAR domains, retromer SNX-BAR proteins use an avidity-

---

Peter J. Cullen is at the Henry Wellcome Integrated Signalling Laboratories, School of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University Walk, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TD, UK. Hendrik C. Korswagen is at the Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.  
e-mail: pete.cullen@bristol.ac.uk or r.korswagen@hubrecht.eu

**NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOLUME 14 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2012**  
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEW

FOCUS ON MEMBRANE DYNAMICS

a

b

Yeast SNX-BAR-retromer

Cargo-selective
adapter

Membrane deformation
subcomplex

Cytosol

Endosomal
lumen

Cargo for retrieval

Mammalian SNX-BAR-retromer

Cargo-selective
adapter

Membrane deformation
subcomplex

Cytosol

Endosomal
lumen

Cargo for retrieval

c

Mammalian SNX3-retromer

Cytosol

Endosomal
lumen

Cargo for retrieval

Phosphoinositides
- PtdIns(4,5)P₂
- PtdIns(4)P
- PtdIns(3)P
- PtdIns(3,5)P₂

Receptors and ligand
- TfR
- EGFR
- CI-MPR

Figure 1 Sorting itineraries in the mammalian endosomal network and the distinct SNX-BAR-retromer and SNX3-retromer complexes. (a) Internalized cargo destined for degradation, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), are first sorted into intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) and by a process of endosomal maturation arrive in late endosomes/multivesicular bodies (MVBs). Fusion of MVBs with the lysosomal compartment brings about degradation of cargo associated with ILVs. In contrast, retrieval from the degradative pathway of, for example the nutrient sensing Transferrin receptor (TfR), occurs back to the plasma membrane via fast or slow recycling routes, while retrieval of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) occurs

back to the trans-Golgi network (TGN). The latter route, often referred to as retrograde transport, comprises a number of distinct pathways, which include those dependent on Rab9- and SNX-BAR-retromer. Enrichment of different phosphoinositides within compartments that make up the endosomal network is shown, including the early endosomal PtdIns(3)P. (b) The distinct cargo-selective and membrane deformation subcomplexes that together form the yeast and mammalian SNX-BAR-retromers. The mammalian genome contains two VPS26 genes. (c) The evolutionarily conserved mammalian SNX3-retromer complex. Gene duplication has resulted in two orthologues of *C. elegans* snx-3, SNX3 and SNX12.

based system to sense high-curvature subdomains of the PtdIns(3)P-/ PtdIns(3,5)P₂-enriched endosomal network.

Besides sensing membrane curvature, certain BAR domains are capable of inducing membrane remodelling leading to membrane tubulation. Both SNX1 and SNX2 are predicted to contain amphipathic helices amino-terminal to their BAR domains (typical of N-BAR domains). For N-BARs, the amphipathic helix forms in the cytosol-lipid interface leading to the formation of surface tension between leaflets of the bilayer. The membrane accommodates this tension by generating positive curvature (that is, bends into the cytosol), which is stabilized by the curvature-sensing properties of the BAR domain. As the effective membrane-bound concentration of the BAR domain increases, it is argued that local membrane remodelling is translated into a global re-sculpturing by self-assembly of the BAR-domain-containing protein into a higher-ordered helical array. A model therefore emerges in which retromer SNX-BAR

proteins switch between curvature-sensing and curvature-inducing modes, and in doing so drive the formation of endosomal tubules. That retromer SNX-BARs can induce vesicle-to-tubule transitions in vitro and in vivo is entirely consistent with this model, as are data showing that tubules generated in an in vitro reconstitution assay have diameters comparable to those observed for SNX-BAR-retromer tubules using in vivo 3D electron tomography (30-55 nm versus 20-50 nm, respectively). It should be stressed, however, that it remains to be determined if the physiological concentration of retromer SNX-BAR proteins corresponds to the specific concentration range required for switching between curvature-sensing and curvature-inducing modes.

Cargo selection — the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex

The VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex is a highly conserved protein assembly that originated before the last eukaryotic common

Table 1 Identified retromer cargo proteins

| Process                                                                 | Mechanism                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Refs          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Cargo sorting of intracellular receptors including Vps 10, MPRs, DMT 1-II, sortilin, SorLA, AtVSR 1/AtELP, in various organisms | Retrieval of the receptors from endosomes-to-TGN.Described tripeptide sorting motifs through which VPS 35 associates with cargo being:WLM(CI-MPR); FLV(sortilin); YLL(DMT 1-II)                                                                 | 34-36, 97, 98, 105, 106 |
| Transcytosis of polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (plgR) and its ligand, polymeric IgA                                              | Retrieval of internalized plgR-plgA, thus allowing for its transport to the opposite plasma membrane                                                                                                                                               | 100            |
| Maintenance at the plasma membrane of the reductive iron transporter, Fet 3-Ftr 1, under low iron conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae | Retrieval of internalised transporter to the TGN mediated in conjunction with the adaptor Grd 19(also known as Snx 3)                                                                                                                              | 9              |
| Termination of cyclic AMP by internalized parathyroid hormone receptor (PTHr)                                                     | Retrieval of PTHr from endosomes-to-TGN                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 38             |
| Recycling of β2-adrenoreceptor                                                                                                  | Retrieval of internalized receptor directly to the plasma membrane in conjunction with the adaptor SNX 27                                                                                                                                        | 10             |
| Cell polarity and organ initiation mediated by the phytohormone auxin, and plant growth and senescence in vegetative organs in Arabidopsis thaliana                                                | Retrieval and polarized delivery of the auxin efflux carrier, PIN. Transport of proteins to protein storage vacuoles (PSVs)                                                                                                                      | 99, 101, 107, 108 |
| Secretion of Wnt morphogens and generation of Wnt gradients during development                                                    | SNX 3-retromer regulated retrieval of the Wnt receptor/chaperone, Wntless, from endosomes-to-TGN to allow for further rounds of Wnt secretion                                                                                                       | 16, 41-43, 73-77, 82, 83 |
| Endocytic trafficking, signalling and tumour suppression in Drosophila melanogaster                                                 | Inhibition of Rac1-dependent actin polymerization                                                                                                                                                                                             | 109            |
| Apoptotic cell clearance in C.elegans                                                                                           | Retrieval of internalized phagocytic receptor, CED-1, back to cell surface                                                                                                                                                                     | 37, 110        |
| Maintaining apico-basal polarity and integrity of epithelial tissues in D.melanogaster                                              | Retrieval of the apical determinant Crumbs from endosomes                                                                                                                                                                                     | 39, 119        |
| Neurodegenerative disease                                                                                                       | Retrieval of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), its sorting receptor (SorLA) or its processing peptidase (β-and γ-secretase). Link with late onset Alzheimer's disease.VPS 35 mutation, Asp620Asn, associated with late onset Parkinson's disease | 106, 111-115   |
| Trafficking of pathogens (Salmonella, Herpesvirus saimiri), and toxins (for example, Shiga toxin).                                 | Retrieval of membrane and cargo from Salmonella-containing vacuole.Endosomes-to-TGN transport of internalized toxins. VPS 35 target of HVS Tip protein, which by inhibiting retromer contributes to efficient T cell transformation. | 102-104, 117.  |
| Type 2 Diabetes                                                                                                                 | Genome-wide association study identified variants in VPS26A in South Asians.                                                                                                                                                                 | 118.           |
| Mitochondria to peroxisome transport                                                                                            | Association with mitochondrial-anchored protein ligase, MAPL.                                                                                                                                                                                 | 116.           |

SNX-BAR-retromer and SNX 3-retromer regulate a wide variety of cellular functions based primarily, but not solely, on their ability to regulate retrograde endosome-to-TGN transport. Of great interest is a growing appreciation of how retromer complexes regulate organism development and homeostasis and, equally, how defects in retromer function lead to human disease. Adapted from ref. 120.

ancestor 17.The core component is VPS 35, which forms an extended horseshoe-shaped α-helical solenoid onto which VPS 26 and VPS 29 independently associate at either distal end 31, 32.Interaction with the cytoplasmic domains of cargo proteins is of low affinity and for the majority of cargoes no strong consensus-binding motif has been described 33-43 (Table 1). The VPS 26-VPS 29-VPS 35 adaptor itself lacks any recognizable membrane-binding motifs, being associated with endosomes through interaction with the GTP-loaded form of Rab 7(refs 14, 44, 45; see below for discussion of an additional mechanism for membrane targeting of VPS 26-VPS 29-VPS 35). Binding to Rab 7 presumably restricts the diffusion of the VPS 26-VPS 29-VPS 35 adaptor allowing the on-rate of cargo binding to increase, favouring a more stable cargo-bound nucleation complex, while the GTP-dependency incorporates timing into the nucleation event.Moreover, as the VPS 26-VPS 29-VPS 35 adaptor also interacts with the Rab GTPase-activating protein(GAP) TBC1D 5(ref.14), fine-tuning of the Rab7GTPase cycle may regulate the assembly and turnover of the nucleation complex.Indeed, a similar role for Arf1-GTP, Sar1-GTP, and their respective GAP proteins ARFGAP 1

and Sec 23 in controlling the dynamics of COPI and COPII coats is a well-established concept 6. For SNX-BAR-retromer, little is know about the regulation of cargo capture; does it rely on chance encounters governed by random diffusion and low-affinity interactions (that is, a stochastic event) or does it incorporate a 'pre-nucleation' priming of cargo that may enhance avidity and generate cooperativity in cargo recognition 47? Indeed, it has been proposed that clathrin and a variety of clathrin adaptors and binding proteins, for example, Hrs, epsinR and RME-8, function to cluster retromer cargo on the endosomal surface before SNX-BAR-retromer-mediated sorting (see ref. 47 for an extensive review of the interface between clathrin and SNX-BAR-retromer). Finally, it is important to consider how non-SNX-BAR-retromer cargoes are excluded from packaging into the forming tubular profiles.Here, the interwoven aspects of cargo capture/packaging and membrane remodelling may combine to exclude unwanted proteins.Efficient packing of captured cargo may limit the membrane environment available for non-specific integral membrane proteins, while the geometrical shape of the tubular profile reduces lateral diffusion into and out of the forming carrier.

REVIEW

FOCUS ON MEMBRANE DYNAMICS

Cargo proteins
- VPS29
- VPS35
- VPS26

GTP-Rab7
GDP-Rab7
SNX-BAR dimer
Scission proteins

Cargo adaptor protein
Filamentous actin
WASH complex
Motor protein
Microtubule

Accessory proteins

Cytosol
Endosome lumen

Activation and cargo capture
Nucleation complex
Membrane remodelling
Scission
Transport

Figure 2 A proposed pathway for SNX-BAR-retromer-mediated sorting.

Activation and cargo capture is initiated by association of the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex to early-to-late endosomes through interaction with the GTP-loaded form of Rab7, thus forming the nucleation complex. Not depicted are the possible roles of clathrin and various clathrin-adaptors and binding proteins in cargo clustering before formation of the nucleation complex⁴⁷. Incorporation of other cargo into the nucleation complex is achieved through specific cargo adaptors, and the SNX-BAR dimer enters the nucleation complex either by direct binding from the cytosol and/or lateral movement on the early-to-late endosomal surface. This increases the effective concentration of retromer SNX-BARs resulting in their switch to curvature-inducing mode to re-model the membrane into tubular profiles. An area of concentrated VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 and SNX-BAR-binding sites is therefore formed, onto which accessory proteins are sequestered, leading to further re-modelling of the maturing tubular profile. Generation of opposing forces through actin polymerization and motor activity aids carrier scission through either line tension and/or mechano-enzymatic fission possibly catalysed by dynamin-II and/or EHD1. Uncoating of the isolated carrier, possibly requiring ATP hydrolysis and/or Rab7–GTP hydrolysis, occurs either immediately after scission or on tethering to the recipient compartment. See text for more details.

### Additional cargo-specific adaptors

The repertoire of retromer cargoes is expanding with the identification of cargo-specific adaptors that mediate recycling by piggy-backing onto the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway. In yeast, recycling of the Fet3p–Ftr1p reductive iron transporter requires recognition of the cytoplasmic domain of Ftr1p by the SNX Grd19p (also known as Snx3p)⁹. Grd19p physically associates with SNX-BAR-retromer allowing recycling of Fet3p–Ftr1p back to the plasma membrane via the Golgi apparatus⁹ (Fig. 3b). Moreover, two novel WD-40 domain proteins, Ere1 and Ere2 (endosomal recycling proteins), also seem to function as adaptors for SNX-BAR-retromer-mediated sorting: Ere1 interacts with the arginine transporter Can1 to regulate its recycling via the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway⁴⁸. In mammalian cells, SNX27, a PDZ-domain-containing SNX, interacts with the carboxy-terminal PDZ ligand of the β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR), and by doing so acts as an adaptor for recycling of this receptor through SNX-BAR-retromer-decorated tubules¹⁰. Interestingly, SNX27 associates with SNX-BAR-retromer through binding to the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homologue (WASH) complex¹⁰ and, furthermore, mediates recycling of β2AR through a direct Rab4-dependent endosome-to-plasma membrane pathway rather than via the trans-Golgi network (TGN)¹⁰,⁴⁹. SNX27 also associates with, and regulates the endosomal sorting of other PDZ-ligand-containing transmembrane-spanning proteins: 5-hydroxytryptamine type 4 receptor (5-HT4R)⁵⁰; the G protein-gated inward rectifying potassium (GIRK, also known as Kir3) channels⁵¹,⁵², and the NMDA (N-Methyl-D-aspartate) receptor subunit NR2C⁵³. Whether recycling is mediated through the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway, and if this is via the TGN or directly back to the plasma membrane, remains to be established.

### Accessory proteins for SNX-BAR-retromer

In addition to cargo-specific adaptors the area of concentrated VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 and SNX-BAR binding sites function to recruit a number of accessory proteins that stabilize further tubule growth and ultimately drive tubule scission. Among these is EHD1, a member of the carboxy-terminal Eps15 homology domain (EHD) family¹¹. These proteins have similarities to dynamin GTPases⁵⁷, being capable of assembling into oligomeric structures, inducing liposome tubulation *in vitro*, and hydrolysing ATP (not GTP)⁵⁸. Binding of EHD1 to SNX-BAR-retromer is sub-stoichiometric and is required to stabilize tubule formation possibly by assisting further sculpturing of the maturing tubule¹¹. In addition, given the similarity to dynamin, it is tempting to speculate that ATP hydrolysis may induce conformation changes that lead to scission of SNX-BAR-retromer tubules⁵⁷. EHD proteins also associate with proteins containing the tripeptide NPF motif and so EHD1 may recruit additional proteins required for further cargo capture and/or processing of the SNX-BAR-retromer tubules⁵⁸.

FOCUS ON MEMBRANE DYNAMICS

REVIEW

a

- SNX3
- Rab7-GTP
- VPS26, -29, -35
- SNX-BAR
- Receptors and ligand
- Wntless
- CI-MPR

SNX3-retromer

Early endosome

Maturation

Rab5-to-Rab7 switch

Late endosome/MVB

Lysosome

Hybrid organelle

b

- Snx3p
- Fet3p-Ftr1p
- Vps26, -29, -35
- SNX-BAR (Vps5, Vps17)

Golgi

Rab7-GTP
VPS26, -29, -35

Figure 3 Spatial segregation model to account for differential cargo sorting through SNX3-retromer and SNX-BAR-retromer pathways. (a) A model based on spatial segregation to describe differential sorting of Wntless and CI-MPR by SNX3-retromer and SNX-BAR-retromer complexes, respectively. Briefly, Wntless bound to Wnt morphogens is secreted to the cell surface where release of Wnt establishes short- and long-range morphogenic gradients. Internalized Wntless initially enters the early endosome where it engages the SNX3-retromer for retrieval back to the TGN. In contrast, CI-MPR bound to newly synthesized hydrolase enzymes exits the TGN and is principally trafficked directly to the endosomal network, entering at a stage of maturation downstream of SNX3-retromer. The acidic environment of this compartment leads to dissociation of the hydrolases, allowing retrieval of the CI-MPR via the tubular SNX-BAR-retromer. It is important to note that this model does not suggest exclusive transport of Wntless and CI-MPR through the SNX3-retromer and SNX-BAR-retromer pathway respectively. It simply reflects that steady-state transport of these cargoes seems to be dependent on specific retromer complexes. (b) As discussed in the text, in yeast recycling of Fet3p–Ftr1p requires recognition of the cytoplasmic domain of Ftr1p by Grd19p (also known as Snx3p)⁹. Grd19p physically associates with the SNX-BAR-retromer thereby allowing recycling of Fet3p–Ftr1p⁹. The function of SNX3 in Wntless retrieval and Wnt secretion is therefore fundamentally different to the role of Grd19p.

For a number of coat complexes, further membrane re-modelling, including the efficiency of membrane scission, are intricately linked with the underlying actin and microtubule cytoskeleton⁵⁹,⁶⁰. This is also the case with the SNX-BAR-retromer where the Vps17 orthologues SNX5 and SNX6 associate with the p150glued component of dynactin and hence couple to the minus-end-directed microtubule motor dynein¹⁵,⁶¹.

Interestingly, uncoupling from the dynein motor leads to extended SNX-BAR-retromer tubules through an apparent decrease in the efficiency of tubule scission¹⁵. More recently, the association of VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 to the WASH complex has established a link with actin polymerization¹²,¹³. WASH is a member of the WASP family that regulates the actin nucleating properties of the Arp2/3 complex⁵⁹. WASH is found

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2012

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
associated with a regulatory complex composed of FAM21, SWIP, strumpellin and CCDC53 (refs 12,62), and interacts with the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex through binding of VPS35 to FAM21, with additional interactions between VPS35 and SNX1/SNX2 to WASH and FAM21 further stabilizing the association<sup>12,13</sup>. Knockdown of WASH leads to the formation of elongated SNX-BAR-retromer tubules that align along microtubules, presumably because of the association with the dynactin–dynein motor complex<sup>12</sup>. Again this phenotype seems to arise from a decrease in the efficiency of tubule scission<sup>12,62</sup>. Importantly, the WASH complex associates with the scission factor dynamin-II, and CAPZ, a capping protein for the barbed ends of actin filaments that by promoting branching leads to the generation of longitudinal force<sup>12,62,63</sup>. The SNX-BAR-retromer therefore assembles two opposing force-generating systems: a motor-dependent pulling force on the tubule and a pushing force on the endosomal vacuole generated by a localized burst of actin polymerization<sup>15,62</sup>. These forces seem to combine to increase membrane tension thereby enhancing the efficiency of membrane scission elicited by either line tension formed by lipid phase separation or by constriction/ twisting mediated by dynamin-II and possibly EHD1 (ref. 64).

Once the coated tubular carrier has been generated, for fusion with the recipient compartment the carrier must undergo uncoating. For COPII this requires the GAP activity of Sec23, with an analogous function being achieved by recruitment of ARFGAP1 during biogenesis of COPI transport carriers<sup>65</sup>. Binding of VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 to TBC1D5 may therefore perform a similar function in the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway<sup>14</sup>. In addition, a role for phosphoinositide turnover cannot be excluded, and the need for ATP hydrolysis to destabilize the high avidity nature of the coat complex and reprime components for further rounds of coat assembly.

### Pathway progression

The preceding discussion has focused on individual processes that are classic elements of coat complexes (Fig. 2). How are these separate events coordinated to achieve pathway progression? By their very nature, coat complexes are characterized by low-affinity interactions and the SNX-BAR-retromer is no exception<sup>66,67</sup>. In a pathway defined by low-affinity interactions, many individual steps are dependent on the integration of the affinities from a series of interactions to generate the required avidity for progression from one step to another<sup>68</sup>. This builds into the pathway dynamic instability, as progression is dependent on the required number of nucleating cargo-bound VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptors, and the correct level of membrane remodelling SNX-BAR subcomplexes and other accessory proteins. In turn this leads to proofreading, where pathway progression can be checked at various steps and aborted if the necessary affinities (that is, interactions) are not in place<sup>69</sup>. Although we currently lack a great deal of basic information, for example quantified affinities and a truly detailed network view of protein–protein and protein–lipid interactions required for SNX-BAR-retromer function, it would be very surprising if this pathway did not conform to an avidity-based system for pathway progression that includes a series of defined checkpoints.

SNX-BAR-retromer does not however conform to all aspects of a classic coat complex. For example, unlike conventional coats, SNX-BAR-retromer does not form an electron-dense layer on membranes<sup>21</sup>. Moreover, for a number of coats the subunits that stabilize membrane deformation, such as clathrin and Sec13–Sec3, do not themselves interact directly with the membrane. For example, clathrin coats are formed by sequential layering, with first the adaptors binding the membrane and forming the cargo-bound nucleation complex, followed by the binding and assembly of clathrin<sup>70</sup>. This ensures coordination of membrane deformation with cargo sorting, and avoids membrane remodelling in the absence of cargo. In contrast, retromer SNX-BARs have their own mode of membrane association entirely independent of the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor<sup>17</sup>. How does SNX-BAR-retromer avoid the formation of unwanted endosomal tubules devoid of enriched cargo? One potential answer lies with the low affinity of the interaction between the SNX-BAR subcomplex and the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor<sup>67</sup>. If the SNX-BAR dimer preferentially associates with the cargo-bound VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor, then the elevation in the effective concentration of the membrane remodelling complex would be coordinated with cargo selection, consistent with the low-affinity interactions required for pathway progression. Indeed, SNX-BAR-retromer tubulation occurs with the greatest frequency at the Rab5-to-Rab7 early-to-late endosomal switch<sup>30,45</sup>. What advantages arise from having a membrane re-modelling coat component directly binding to membranes? One possibility is an increased level of regulation, which may stem from the mutually exclusive binding to PtdIns(3)P versus PtdIns(3,5)P<sub>2</sub>. Hence, PtdIns(3,5)P<sub>2</sub> switching may constitute an additional point of regulation for the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway<sup>71,72</sup>, at least in higher organisms.

#### Unexpected surprises: Retromer-mediated sorting of Wntless

An interesting aspect of defining the mechanistic details of SNX-BAR-retromer has been the insight obtained into the interface between endosomal retrieval and developmental biology (Table 1). This is particularly evident with the regulation of Wnt signalling. The seven-transmembrane-domain protein Wntless<sup>41–43,73–77</sup>, which binds to Wnts (lipid-modified glycoproteins with roles in development, adult tissue homeostasis and disease<sup>78</sup>), is a cargo for the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor (Table 1). Wntless is required for the transport of Wnts from the Golgi apparatus to the cell surface, where their release generates short- and long-range morphogenic gradients<sup>79–81</sup>. Continuous Wnt secretion is needed to maintain these gradients and is achieved through Wntless undergoing endocytosis before VPS26–VPS29–VPS35-mediated retrieval back to the TGN<sup>73–77,82,83</sup>. Disruption of VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 results in inefficient retrieval of Wntless and mis-sorting into the lysosomal degradation pathway<sup>73–77</sup>. The resultant loss of Wntless manifests as a strong defect in Wnt secretion, failure of gradient formation and a loss of signalling to Wnt-receiving cells<sup>73–77</sup>.

Unexpectedly, in *Caenorhabditis elegans snx-1* (orthologue of mammalian SNX1/SNX2) and *snx-6* (orthologue of mammalian SNX5/SNX6/SNX32) are not required for VPS26–VPS29–VPS35-dependent retrieval of Wntless; identical data has also been obtained in *Drosophila*<sup>16</sup>. Importantly, C. elegans express a functional SNX-BAR-retromer as sorting of the CED-1 phagocytic receptor is dependent on the SNX-BAR-retromer complex<sup>16,37</sup>. Intriguingly, a separate C. elegans SNX, encoded by the *snx-3* gene, is required for several Wnt-specific processes<sup>16</sup>. SNX3 lacks a carboxy-terminal BAR domain and only contains one recognized domain, the SNX PX domain<sup>2</sup>. In a predicted *snx-3*-null mutant the range and penetrance of Wnt-dependent phenotypes are similar to those observed in VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 mutants<sup>16</sup>. Moreover, the formation of Wnt morphogenic gradients in both C. elegans (EGL-20) and *Drosophila* (Wg) are strongly reduced in mutant *snx-3* strains<sup>16</sup>. As
with the loss of the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptors, the Wnt phenotypes observed on loss of *snx-3* arise from increased lysosomal-mediated degradation of Wntless and decreased secretion of Wnt morphogens<sup>16</sup>. Indeed, the Wnt-signalling phenotype of the *C. elegans snx-3* mutant is fully rescued by overexpression of Wntless<sup>16</sup>. Knockdown of SNX3 expression in mammalian cells also leads to a decrease in steady-state levels of Wntless, further establishing the evolutionarily conserved function of SNX3 in the regulation of Wnt secretion<sup>16</sup>.

### The SNX3–retromer complex

SNX3 is an established PtdIns(3)P-binding protein<sup>84</sup>. As the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35-dependent sorting of Wntless is dependent on this phosphoinositide, SNX3 is an attractive candidate for linking PtdIns(3)P to the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35-dependent sorting of Wntless. Indeed, the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex is found associated with immunoprecipitates of SNX3, and, moreover, in *in vitro* assays recombinant SNX3 directly binds to the recombinant VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor<sup>16</sup>. These data therefore establish that besides the SNX-BAR-retromer containing dimers of SNX1 or SNX2 with either SNX5, SNX6 or SNX32 (Fig. 1b), there is a second evolutionarily conserved retromer complex formed by the direct association of the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor with SNX3, which does not contain a BAR domain (ref. 16; Fig. 1c). It is the latter, SNX3-retromer, that regulates endosome-to-TGN retrieval of Wntless. In addition, as SNX3 is important in targeting the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 subcomplex to an early endosomal compartment<sup>16</sup>, at least two independent mechanisms have evolved for the endosomal association of the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor: binding to Rab7-GTP for association to endosomes undergoing early-to-late endosomal transition<sup>14,45</sup>, and association to SNX3 for targeting to early endosomes<sup>16</sup>.

The identification of SNX3 and SNX-BAR-retromers raises a number of interesting questions of which perhaps the most intriguing is: in sharing a common cargo adaptor how do two distinct retromers function to differentially sort endosomal cargo? As discussed above, in mammalian cells SNX3 and the SNX-BAR-retromer SNX proteins seem spatially separated along the endosomal maturation pathway<sup>16</sup>. Although there is some overlap between their distributions, SNX3 is principally associated with early endosomes, whereas the SNX-BAR-retromer functions at endosomes undergoing early-to-late endosome transition<sup>16,84,85</sup>. It can therefore be argued that endocytosed Wntless initially enters the SNX3-retromer-labelled early endosome, where binding to the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor initiates endosome-to-TGN retrieval (Fig. 3a). In the absence of SNX3, internalized Wntless follows one of two routes: mis-sorting into intraluminal vesicles and hence lysosomal degradation, or retrieval back to the TGN via the SNX-BAR-retromer. In the absence of SNX3 the steady-state level of Wntless is defined by the relative flux through these pathways. As Wntless levels are greatly reduced on loss of SNX3, the lysosomal degradative pathway seems to dominate<sup>16</sup>. Thus, although some internalized Wntless may be retrieved by the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway<sup>86</sup>, in the absence of SNX3 this is insufficient to maintain the necessary level of Wnt secretion required to establish and maintain the morphogenic gradient for normal development.

Clearly another important issue relates to how SNX3-retromer coordinates cargo selection with membrane remodelling to form a cargo-enriched carrier. As SNX3 lacks a BAR domain, tubular-based sorting may not be a characteristic of this pathway. Indeed, Wntless seems to exit

the SNX3-labelled early endosome via small SNX3-decorated vesicular carriers that are labelled with clathrin<sup>16,87</sup>. This would be consistent with the proposed association of clathrin to SNX3, although the direct versus indirect nature of this interaction remains unclear<sup>16,87</sup>. SNX3-retromer and SNX-BAR-retromer therefore sort their respective cargoes through two morphologically distinct carriers.

Returning to issues relating to pathway progression, precise control of the level of PtdIns(3)P is vital for efficient SNX3-retromer mediated retrieval of Wntless in *C. elegans* and *Drosophila*. MTM-6 and MTM-9 are two PtdIns(3)P 3-phosphatases of the myotubularin family that form a complex and regulate Wntless trafficking<sup>88,89</sup>. Mutation of *mtm-6* leads to a defect in Wntless recycling through an excess of PtdIns(3)P that results in a more pronounced association of SNX3 with endosomes and a reduction of Wntless levels through lysosomal degradation<sup>88</sup>. These data suggest that with elevated levels of PtdIns(3)P the dynamic exchange of SNX3 between cytosolic and membrane-bound forms is perturbed to an extent that adversely affects pathway progression. Indeed, partially knocking down expression of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase VPS-34 in *mtm-6* mutants, and hence lowering the excess level of PtdIns(3)P, partially restores the Wntless trafficking phenotype (that is, pathway progression)<sup>88</sup>. Alongside emerging evidence that VPS-34 may reside in complexes with specific myotubularins<sup>90,91</sup>, this suggests that tight regulation of PtdIns-to-PtdIns(3)P switching may be an important aspect of SNX3-retromer function.

Finally, in identifying the SNX3-retromer it becomes important to reassess those cargoes whose sorting has been described to be VPS26–VPS29–VPS35-dependent (Table 1), to determine whether their retrieval is mediated through SNX3-retromer, SNX-BAR-retromer or a combination of both pathways (that is, like the Grd19p/Snx3p SNX-BAR retromer in yeast (Fig. 3b)). In so doing the validity of the spatial segregation model will be tested, as will issues relating to the influence cargo binding has on the SNX complex to which the VPS26–VPS29–VPS35 adaptor associates.

#### Looking ahead: The possibility of other SNX coat complexes.

The precedent set by the function of SNXs in SNX-BAR-retromer and SNX3-retromer has placed greater emphasis on the importance of the SNX components in defining separate endosomal retrieval pathways that function through morphologically distinct carriers. With emerging evidence that specific SNXs also function as adaptors for cargo recruitment into the SNX-BAR-retromer pathway (for example, SNX27 and possibly SNX17 (refs 9,10), and evidence that retromer SNX-BARs can themselves interact with cargo should not be excluded<sup>92</sup>), the central role of this evolutionarily conserved protein family in endosomal sorting seems even more complex than first envisaged<sup>7</sup>. Establishing the credentials of other SNX-BAR and SNX-PX proteins as potential coat components will certainly lead to new insights into the mechanistic basis and complexities of endosomal sorting<sup>93–95</sup>. In turn, by enhancing the molecular understanding of this fundamental aspect of cell biology we will undoubtedly obtain greater insight into the exciting link between endosomal sorting, development and human disease.

#### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are indebted to J. van Weering for figures. We thank G. Banting, D. Billadeau, M. Harterink, W. Hong, J. Hurley, M. Lorenowicz, I. McGough, S. Munro, M. Seaman, F. Steinberg, D. Stephens, J. van Weering and L. Weismann for thought-provoking discussions. Work in the authors’ laboratories are supported by the Wellcome Trust (089928/Z/09/Z and 085743 to P.J.C.) and the Dutch Cancer Society (HUBR 2008-4114) and a NWO VIDI fellowship (016.076.317 to H.C.K.).

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOLUME 14 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2012

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEW

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.

1. Mayor, S. & Pagano, R. E. Pathways of clathrin-independent endocytosis. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **8**, 603–612 (2007).
2. Cullen, P. J. Endosomal sorting and signalling: an emerging role for sorting nexins. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **9**, 574–582 (2008).
3. Hurley, J. H. & Hanson, P. I. Membrane budding and scission by the ESCRT machinery: it's all in the neck. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **11**, 556–566 (2010).
4. Johannes, L. & Popoff, V. Tracing the retrograde route in protein trafficking. *Cell* **135**, 1175–1187 (2008).
5. Grant, B. D. & Donaldson, J. G. Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **10**, 597–608 (2009).
6. Pucadyil, T. J. & Schmid, S. L. Conserved functions of membrane active GTPases in coated vesicle formation. *Science* **325**, 1217–1220 (2009).
7. Carlton, J., Bujny, M., Rutherford, A. & Cullen, P. Sorting nexins—unifying trends and new perspectives. *Traffic* **6**, 75–82 (2005).
8. Attar, N. & Cullen, P. J. The retromer complex. *Adv. Enzyme Regul.* **50**, 216–236 (2009).
9. Strochlic, T. I., Setty, T. G., Sitaram, A. & Burd, C. G. Grd19/Snx3p functions as a cargo-specific adapter for retromer-dependent endocytic recycling. *J. Cell Biol.* **177**, 115–125 (2007).
10. Temkin, P. *et al*. SNX27 mediates retromer tubule entry and endosome-to-plasma membrane trafficking of signalling receptors. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **13**, 717–723 (2011).
11. Gokool, S., Tattersall, D. & Seaman, M. N. EHD1 interacts with retromer to stabilize SNX1 tubules and facilitate endosome-to-Golgi retrieval. *Traffic* **8**, 1873–1886 (2007).
12. Gomez, T. S. & Billadeau, D. D. A FAM21-containing WASH complex regulates retromer-dependent sorting. *Dev. Cell* **17**, 699–711 (2009).
13. Harbour, M. E. *et al*. The cargo-selective retromer complex is a recruiting hub for protein complexes that regulate endosomal tubule dynamics. *J. Cell Sci.* **123**, 3703–3717 (2010).
14. Seaman, M. N., Harbour, M. E., Tattersall, D., Read, E. & Bright, N. Membrane recruitment of the cargo-selective retromer subcomplex is catalysed by the small GTPase Rab7 and inhibited by the Rab-GAP TBC1D5. *J. Cell Sci.* **122**, 2371–2382 (2009).
15. Wassmer, T. *et al*. The retromer coat complex coordinates endosomal sorting and dynein-mediated transport, with carrier recognition by the trans-Golgi network. *Dev. Cell* **17**, 110–122 (2009).
16. Harterink, M. *et al*. A SNX3-dependent retromer pathway mediates retrograde transport of the Wnt sorting receptor Wntless and is required for Wnt secretion. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **13**, 914–923 (2011).
17. Koumandou, V. L. *et al*. Evolutionary reconstruction of the retromer complex and its function in *Trypanosoma brucei*. *J. Cell. Sci.* **124**, 1496–1509 (2011).
18. Cozier, G. E. *et al*. The phox homology (PX) domain-dependent, 3-phosphoinositide-mediated association of sorting nexin-1 with an early sorting endosomal compartment is required for its ability to regulate epidermal growth factor receptor degradation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 48730–48736 (2002).
19. Peter, B. J. *et al*. BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature: the amphiphysin BAR structure. *Science* **303**, 495–499 (2004).
20. van Weering, J. R., Verkade, P. & Cullen, P. J. SNX-BAR proteins in phosphoinositide-mediated, tubular-based endosomal sorting. *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* **21**, 371–380 (2009).
21. Carlton, J. *et al*. Sorting nexin-1 mediates tubular endosome-to-TGN transport through coincidence sensing of high-curvature membranes and 3-phosphoinositides. *Curr. Biol.* **14**, 1791–1800 (2004).
22. Carlton, J. G. *et al*. Sorting nexin-2 is associated with tubular elements of the early endosome, but is not essential for retromer-mediated endosome-to-TGN transport. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 4527–4539 (2005).
23. Frost, A., Unger, V. M. & De Camilli, P. The BAR domain superfamily: membrane-molding macromolecules. *Cell* **137**, 191–196 (2009).
24. Bhatia, V. K. *et al*. Amphipathic motifs in BAR domains are essential for membrane curvature sensing. *EMBO J.* **28**, 3303–3314 (2009).
25. Roux, A. *et al*. Membrane curvature controls dynamin polymerization. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 4141–4146 (2010).
26. Pylypenko, O., Lundmark, R., Rasmuson, E., Carlsson, S. R. & Rak, A. The PX-BAR membrane-remodeling unit of sorting nexin 9. *EMBO J.* **26**, 4788–4800 (2007).
27. Shimada, A. *et al*. Curved EFC/F-BAR-domain dimers are joined end to end into a filament for membrane invagination in endocytosis. *Cell* **129**, 761–772 (2007).
28. van Weering, J. R. *et al*. Intracellular membrane traffic at high resolution. *Methods Cell Biol.* **96**, 619–648 (2010).
29. Kurten, R. C. *et al*. Self-assembly and binding of a sorting nexin to sorting endosomes. *J. Cell Sci.* **114**, 1743–1756 (2001).
30. Mari, M. *et al*. SNX1 defines an early endosomal recycling exit for sortilin and mannose 6-phosphate receptors. *Traffic* **9**, 380–393 (2008).
31. Norwood, S. J. *et al*. Assembly and solution structure of the core retromer protein complex. *Traffic* **12**, 56–71 (2011).
32. Hierro, A. *et al*. Functional architecture of the retromer cargo-recognition complex. *Nature* **449**, 1063–1067 (2007).
33. Nothwehr, S. F., Ha, S. A. & Bruinsma, P. Sorting of yeast membrane proteins into an endosome-to-Golgi pathway involves direct interaction of their cytosolic domains with Vps35p. *J. Cell Biol.* **151**, 297–310 (2000).
34. Arighi, C. N., Hartnell, L. M., Aguilar, R. C., Haft, C. R. & Bonifacino, J. S. Role of the mammalian retromer in sorting of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. *J. Cell Biol.* **165**, 123–133 (2004).

35. Seaman, M. N. Identification of a novel conserved sorting motif required for retromer-mediated endosome-to-TGN retrieval. *J. Cell Sci.* **120**, 2378–2389 (2007).
36. Tabuchi, M., Yanatori, I., Kawai, Y. & Kishi, F. Retromer-mediated direct sorting is required for proper endosomal recycling of the mammalian iron transporter DMT1. *J. Cell Sci.* **123**, 756–766 (2010).
37. Chen, D. *et al*. Retromer is required for apoptotic cell clearance by phagocytic receptor recycling. *Science* **327**, 1261–1264 (2010).
38. Feinstein, T. N. *et al*. Retromer terminates the generation of cAMP by internalized PTH receptors. *Nat. Chem. Biol.* **7**, 278–284 (2011).
39. Pocha, S. M., Wassmer, T., Niehage, C., Hoflack, B. & Knust, E. Retromer controls epithelial cell polarity by trafficking the apical determinant Crumbs. *Curr. Biol.* **21**, 1111–1117 (2011).
40. Shi, H., Rojas, R., Bonifacino, J. S. & Hurley, J. H. The retromer subunit Vps26 has an arrestin fold and binds Vps35 through its C-terminal domain. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **13**, 540–548 (2006).
41. Banziger, C. *et al*. Wntless, a conserved membrane protein dedicated to the secretion of Wnt proteins from signaling cells. *Cell* **125**, 509–522 (2006).
42. Bartscherer, K., Pelte, N., Ingelfinger, D. & Boutros, M. Secretion of Wnt ligands requires Evi, a conserved transmembrane protein. *Cell* **125**, 523–533 (2006).
43. Goodman, R. M. *et al*. Sprinter: a novel transmembrane protein required for Wg secretion and signaling. *Development* **133**, 4901–4911 (2006).
44. Balderhaar, H. J. *et al*. The Rab GTPase Ypt7 is linked to retromer-mediated receptor recycling and fusion at the yeast late endosome. *J. Cell Sci.* **123**, 4085–4094 (2010).
45. Rojas, R. *et al*. Regulation of retromer recruitment to endosomes by sequential action of Rab5 and Rab7. *J. Cell Biol.* **183**, 513–526 (2008).
46. Mukhopadhyay, A., Pan, X., Lambright, D. G. & Tissenbaum, H. A. An endocytic pathway as a target of tubby for regulation of fat storage. *EMBO Rep.* **8**, 931–938 (2007).
47. McGough, I. J. & Cullen, P. J. Recent advances in retromer biology. *Traffic* **12**, 963–973 (2011).
48. Shi, Y., Stefan, C. J., Rue, S. M., Teis, D. & Emr, S. D. Two novel WD40 domain-containing proteins, Ere1 and Ere2, function in the retromer-mediated endosomal recycling pathway. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **22**, 4093–4107 (2011).
49. Lauffer, B. E. *et al*. SNX27 mediates PDZ-directed sorting from endosomes to the plasma membrane. *J. Cell Biol.* **190**, 565–574 (2010).
50. Joubert, L. *et al*. New sorting nexin (SNX27) and NHERF specifically interact with the 5-HT4a receptor splice variant: roles in receptor targeting. *J. Cell Sci.* **117**, 5367–5379 (2004).
51. Balana, B. *et al*. Mechanism underlying selective regulation of G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channels by the psychostimulant-sensitive sorting nexin 27. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 5831–5836 (2011).
52. Lunn, M. L. *et al*. A unique sorting nexin regulates trafficking of potassium channels via a PDZ domain interaction. *Nat. Neurosci.* **10**, 1249–1259 (2007).
53. Cai, L., Loo, L. S., Atlashkin, V., Hanson, B. J. & Hong, W. Deficiency of sorting nexin 27 (SNX27) leads to growth retardation and elevated levels of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2C (NR2C). *Mol. Cell Biol.* **31**, 1734–1747 (2011).
54. Lee, J. *et al*. Adaptor protein sorting nexin 17 regulates amyloid precursor protein trafficking and processing in the early endosomes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **283**, 11501–11508 (2008).
55. Stockinger, W. *et al*. The PX-domain protein SNX17 interacts with members of the LDL receptor family and modulates endocytosis of the LDL receptor. *EMBO J.* **21**, 4259–4267 (2002).
56. van Kerkhof, P. *et al*. Sorting nexin 17 facilitates LRP recycling in the early endosome. *EMBO J.* **24**, 2851–2861 (2005).
57. Daumke, O. *et al*. Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling. *Nature* **449**, 923–927 (2007).
58. Naslavsky, N. & Caplan, S. EHD proteins: key conductors of endocytic transport. *Trends Cell Biol.* **21**, 122–131 (2011).
59. Campellone, K. G. & Welch, M. D. A nucleator arms race: cellular control of actin assembly. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **11**, 237–251 (2010).
60. Soldati, T. & Schliwa, M. Powering membrane traffic in endocytosis and recycling. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **7**, 897–908 (2006).
61. Hong, Z. *et al*. The retromer component SNX6 interacts with dynactin p150(Glued) and mediates endosome-to-TGN transport. *Cell Res.* **19**, 1334–1349 (2009).
62. Derivery, E. *et al*. The Arp2/3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex. *Dev. Cell* **17**, 712–723 (2009).
63. Jia, D. *et al*. WASH and WAVE actin regulators of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) family are controlled by analogous structurally related complexes. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 10442–10447 (2010).
64. Lenz, M., Morlot, S. & Roux, A. Mechanical requirements for membrane fission: common facts from various examples. *FEBS Lett.* **583**, 3839–3846 (2009).
65. McMahon, H. T. & Mills, I. G. COP and clathrin-coated vesicle budding: different pathways, common approaches. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **16**, 379–391 (2004).
66. Collins, B. M. *et al*. Structure of Vps26B and mapping of its interaction with the retromer protein complex. *Traffic* **9**, 366–379 (2008).
67. Swarbrick, J. D. *et al*. VPS29 is not an active metallo-phosphatase but is a rigid scaffold required for retromer interaction with accessory proteins. *PLoS One* **6**, e20420 (2011).
68. Schmid, E. M. & McMahon, H. T. Integrating molecular and network biology to decode endocytosis. *Nature* **448**, 883–888 (2007).
69. Loerke, D. *et al*. Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin-coated pit maturation. *PLoS Biol.* **7**, e57 (2009).
70. Traub, L. M. Regarding the amazing choreography of clathrin coats. *PLoS Biol.* **9**, e1001037 (2011).

71. Dove, S. K., Dong, K., Kobayashi, T., Williams, F. K. & Michell, R. H. Phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate and Fab1p/PIKfyve underPPIn endo-lysosome function. *Biochem. J.* **419**, 1–13 (2009).

72. Rutherford, A. C. *et al.* The mammalian phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate 5-kinase (PIKfyve) regulates endosome-to-TGN retrograde transport. *J. Cell Sci.* **119**, 3944–3957 (2006).

73. Belenkaya, T. Y. *et al.* The retromer complex influences Wnt secretion by recycling Wntless from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 120–131 (2008).

74. Franch-Marro, X. *et al.* Wingless secretion requires endosome-to-Golgi retrieval of Wntless/Evi/Sprinter by the retromer complex. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **10**, 170–177 (2008).

75. Pan, C. L. *et al.* *C. elegans* AP-2 and retromer control Wnt signaling by regulating mig-14/Wntless. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 132–139 (2008).

76. Port, F. *et al.* Wingless secretion promotes and requires retromer-dependent cycling of Wntless. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **10**, 178–185 (2008).

77. Yang, P. T. *et al.* Wnt signaling requires retromer-dependent recycling of MIG-14/ Wntless in Wnt-producing cells. *Dev. Cell* **14**, 140–147 (2008).

78. Clevers, H. Wnt/β-catenin signaling in development and disease. *Cell* **127**, 469–480 (2006).

79. Hausmann, G., Banziger, C. & Basler, K. Helping Wingless take flight: how WNT proteins are secreted. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **8**, 331–336 (2007).

80. Lorenowicz, M. J. & Korswagen, H. C. Sailing with the Wnt: Charting the Wnt processing and secretion route. *Exp. Cell Res.* **315**, 2683–2689 (2009).

81. Port, F. & Basler, K. Wnt trafficking: new insights into Wnt maturation, secretion and spreading. *Traffic* **11**, 1265–1271 (2010).

82. Coudreuse, D. Y., Roel, G., Betist, M. C., Destree, O. & Korswagen, H. C. Wnt gradient formation requires retromer function in Wnt-producing cells. *Science* **312**, 921–924 (2006).

83. Prasad, B. C. & Clark, S. G. Wnt signaling establishes anteroposterior neuronal polarity and requires retromer in *C. elegans*. *Development* **133**, 1757–1766 (2006).

84. Xu, Y., Hortsman, H., Seet, L., Wong, S. H. & Hong, W. SNX3 regulates endosomal function through its PX-domain-mediated interaction with PtdIns(3)P. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **3**, 658–666 (2001).

85. van Weering, J. R., Verkade, P. & Cullen, P. J. SNX-BAR-mediated endosome tubulation is coordinated with endosome maturation. *Traffic* http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01297.x (2011).

86. Shi, A. *et al.* Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer-mediated endosome to Golgi retrograde transport by the J-domain protein RME-8. *EMBO J.* **28**, 3290–3302 (2009).

87. Skanland, S. S., Walchli, S., Brech, A. & Sandvig, K. SNX4 in complex with clathrin and dynein: implications for endosome movement. *PLoS One* **4**, e5935 (2009).

88. Silhankova, M., Port, F., Harterink, M., Basler, K. & Korswagen, H. C. Wnt signalling requires MTM-6 and MTM-9 myotubularin lipid-phosphatase function in Wnt-producing cells. *EMBO J.* **29**, 4094–4105 (2010).

89. Xue, Y. *et al.* Genetic analysis of the myotubularin family of phosphatases in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 34380–34386 (2003).

90. Cao, C., Backer, J. M., Laporte, J., Bedrick, E. J. & Wandinger-Ness, A. Sequential actions of myotubularin lipid phosphatases regulate endosomal PI(3)P and growth factor receptor trafficking. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **19**, 3334–3346 (2008).

91. Cao, C., Laporte, J., Backer, J. M., Wandinger-Ness, A. & Stein, M. P. Myotubularin lipid phosphatase binds the hVPS15/hVPS34 lipid kinase complex on endosomes. *Traffic* **8**, 1052–1067 (2007).

92. Heydorn, A. *et al.* A library of 7TM receptor C-terminal tails. Interactions with the proposed post-endocytic sorting proteins ERM-binidng phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50), N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), sorting nexin-1 (SNX1), and G protein-coupled receptor-associated sorting protein (GASP). *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 54291–54303 (2004).

93. Dyve, A. B., Bergan, J., Utskarpen, A. & Sandvig, K. Sorting nexin 8 regulates endosome-to-Golgi transport. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* **390**, 109–114 (2009).

94. Traer, C. J. *et al.* SNX4 coordinates endosomal sorting of TfnR with dynein-mediated transport into the endocytic recycling compartment. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **9**, 1370–1380 (2007).

95. Wassmer, T. *et al.* A loss-of-function screen reveals SNX5 and SNX6 as potential components of the mammalian retromer. *J. Cell Sci.* **120**, 45–54 (2007).

96. Saftig, P. & Klumperman, J. Lysosome biogenesis and lysosomal membrane proteins: trafficking meets function. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **10**, 623–635 (2009).

97. Seaman, M. N. Cargo-selective endosomal sorting for retrieval to the Golgi requires retromer. *J. Cell Biol.* **165**, 111–122 (2004).

98. Seaman, M. N., McCaffery, J. M. & Emr, S. D. A membrane coat complex essential for endosome-to-Golgi retrograde transport in yeast. *J. Cell Biol.* **142**, 665–681 (1998).

99. Oliviussen, P. *et al.* Plant retromer, localized to the prevacuolar compartment and microvesicles in *Arabidopsis*, may interact with vacuolar sorting receptors. *Plant Cell* **18**, 1239–1252 (2006).

100. Verges, M. *et al.* The mammalian retromer regulates transcytosis of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **6**, 763–769 (2004).

101. Jaillais, Y. *et al.* The retromer protein VPS29 links cell polarity and organ initiation in plants. *Cell* **130**, 1057–1070 (2007).

102. Bujny, M. V., Popoff, V., Johannes, L. & Cullen, P. J. The retromer component sorting nexin-1 is required for efficient retrograde transport of Shiga toxin from early endosome to the trans-Golgi network. *J. Cell Sci.* **120**, 2010–2021 (2007).

103. Popoff, V. *et al.* The retromer complex and clathrin define an early endosomal retrograde exit site. *J. Cell Sci.* **120**, 2022–2031 (2007).

104. Bujny, M. V. *et al.* Sorting nexin-1 defines an early phase of *Salmonella*-containing vacuole-remodeling during *Salmonella* infection. *J. Cell Sci.* **121**, 2027–2036 (2008).

105. Nielsen, M. S. *et al.* Sorting by the cytoplasmic domain of the amyloid precursor protein binding receptor SorLA. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **27**, 6842–6851 (2007).

106. Rogaeva, E. *et al.* The neuronal sortilin-related receptor SORL1 is genetically associated with Alzheimer disease. *Nat. Genet.* **39**, 168–177 (2007).

107. Kleine-Vehn, J. *et al.* Differential degradation of PIN2 auxin efflux carrier by retromer-dependent vacuolar targeting. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 17812–17817 (2008).

108. Yamazaki, M. *et al.* *Arabidopsis* VPS35, a retromer component, is required for vacuolar protein sorting and involved in plant growth and leaf senescence. *Plant Cell Physiol.* **49**, 142–156 (2008).

109. Korolchuk, V. I. *et al.* *Drosophila* Vps35 function is necessary for normal endocytic trafficking and actin cytoskeleton organisation. *J. Cell Sci.* **120**, 4367–4376 (2007).

110. Lu, N., Shen, Q., Mahoney, T. R., Liu, X. & Zhou, Z. Three sorting nexins drive the degradation of apoptotic cells in response to PtdIns(3)P signaling. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **22**, 354–374 (2011).

111. Muhammad, A. *et al.* Retromer deficiency observed in Alzheimer’s disease causes hippocampal dysfunction, neurodegeneration, and Aβ accumulation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 7327–7332 (2008).

112. Vieira, S. I. *et al.* Retrieval of the Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein from the endosome to the TGN is S655 phosphorylation state-dependent and retromer-mediated. *Mol. Neurodegener.* **5**, 40 (2010).

113. Sullivan, C. P. *et al.* Retromer disruption promotes amyloidogenic APP processing. *Neurobiol. Dis.* **43**, 338–345 (2011).

114. Zimprich, A. *et al.* A mutation in VPS35, encoding a subunit of the retromer complex, causes late-onset Parkinson disease. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **89**, 168–175 (2011).

115. Vilarino-Guell, C. *et al.* VPS35 mutations in Parkinson disease. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **89**, 162–167 (2011).

116. Braschi, E. *et al.* Vps35 mediates vesicle transport between the mitochondria and peroxisomes. *Curr. Biol.* **20**, 1310–1315 (2010).

117. Kingston, D. *et al.* Inhibition of retromer activity by *Herpesvirus saimiri* Tip leads to CD4 downregulation and efficient T cell transformation. *J. Virol.* **85**, 10627–10638 (2011).

118. Kooner, S. J. *et al.* Genome-wide association study in individuals of South Asian ancestry identifies six new type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci. *Nat. Genet.* **43**, 984–989 (2011).

119. Zhou, B., Wu, Y. & Lin, X. Retromer regulates apical-basal polarity through recycling crumbs. *Dev. Biol.* **360**, 87–95 (2011).

120. Bonifacino, J. S. & Hurley, J. H. Retromer. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **20**, 427–436 (2008).
